MELANESIAN 

ANTHBOPOLOGrY  AND  FOLK-LOBE 

CODR1NGTON 


SToitbffrt 
HENRY  FROWDE 


Oxford  University  Press  Warehouse 
Amen  Corner,  E.C. 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2015 


https://archive.org/details/b21936171 


THE  MELANESIANS 


STUDIES  IN  THEIR 


ANTHROPOLOGY  AND  FOLK-LORE 


BY 


R  H.  CODRINGTON,  D.D. 

LATE  OP  THE  MELANESIAN  MISSION 
SOMETIME  FELLOW  OF  WADHAM  COLLEGE,  OXFORD 
AUTHOR  OF  'THE  MELANESIAN  LANGUAGES 1 


With.  Illustrations 


Oxford 

AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS 
1891 

[All  rights  reserved] 


Ojforb 

PRINTED   AT   THE    CLARENDON  PRESS 

BY  HORACE  HART,  PRINTER  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY 


PBEFACE. 


It  has  been  my  endeavour  in  the  following  pages  to 
bring  together  the  results  of  such  observations  as  many 
years'  acquaintance  with  Melanesian  people  has  enabled 
me  to  make.  I  had  once  hoped  tc-  have  been  able  to  give 
something  more  like  a  full  account  of  the  beliefs  and 
practices  of  the  natives  of  those  islands  concerning  which 
I  have  had  the  opportunity  of  collecting  information ;  but 
my  stay  upon  my  last  return  to  the  Melanesian  Mission 
was  too  short  for  this,  and  I  have  now  to  put  forth  what  I 
know  to  be  very  incomplete. 

My  observations  and  enquiries  were  carried  on,  and  my 
notes  were  made,  in  the  years  from  1863,  when  I  first 
visited  the  islands,  to  1887,  when  I  left  the  Mission  ;  partly 
in  the  Melanesian  Islands,  but  mostly  in  Norfolk  Island, 
where  natives  of  many  of  these  islands  have  for  many 
years  been  brought  together  for  instruction.  Twice  durino- 
this  period  I  made  with  natives  of  the  various  islands  a 
systematic  enquiry  into  the  religious  beliefs  and  practices  of 
the  Melanesians,  and  the  social  regulations  and  conditions 
prevailing  among  them.  On  the  first  occasion  I  had,  as  re- 
gards the  Banks'  Islands,  the  very  valuable  assistance  of  a 
native  who  was  a  grown  youth  before  his  people  had  been 
at  all  affected  by  intercourse  with  Europeans  or  had  heard 
any  Christian  teaching— the  Rev.  George  Sarawia,  the  first, 


vi 


Preface. 


and  now  for  many  years  the  leader,  of  the  native  clergy  of 
that  group.  The  results  of  these  first  enquiries  appeared 
briefly  in  the  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute  of 
February,  1881  ;  and  these  were  carefully  reviewed  by  me 
during  my  last  stay  in  Norfolk  Island  in  1866  and  1867. 
I  was  so  fortunate  then  as  to  meet  there  several  old  friends 
and  pupils  who  had  come  down,  for  their  health's  sake  and 
for  other  reasons,  after  a  residence  as  teachers  among  their 
own  people.  They  had  been  living  in  their  various  islands 
in  a  position  and  at  an  age  which  would  make  them  ac- 
quainted with  the  views  and  habits  of  their  countrymen, 
and  they  were  able,  and,  I  believe,  entirely  willing,  to  com- 
municate freely  what  they  knew.  It  happened  thus  that  I 
was  able  to  go  through  the  subjects  which  are  treated  of  in 
this  book  with  native  instructors  from  the  Solomon  Islands, 
the  Banks'  Islands,  and  the  Northern  New  Hebrides ;  with 
Marsden  Manekalea  from  Ysabel,  Benjamin  Bele  from 
Florida,  Joseph  Wate  from  Saa,  Walter  Woser  from  Motlav, 
Arthur  Arudulewari  from  Aurora,  Lewis  Tariliu  from 
Pentecost,  Martin  Tangabe  from  Lepers'  Island  ;  every  one 
of  them,  in  my  opinion,  a  competent  and  trustworthy  witness, 
though  all  were  not  equally  intelligent. 

It  has  been  my  purpose  to  set  forth  as  much  as  possible 
what  natives  say  about  themselves,  not  wbat  Europeans 
say  about  them,.  For  this  reason,  though  the  results  of  my 
own  personal  observations  are  given,  I  have  refrained  from 
asking  or  recording,  except  in  a  few  instances  where 
acknowledgment  is  made,  the  information  which  my 
colleagues  in  the  Mission  would  have  abundantly  and 
willingly  imparted.  No  one  can  be  more  sensible  than 
myself  of  the  incompleteness  and  insufficiency  of  what  I 
venture  to  publish  ;  I  know  that  I  must  have  made  many 
mistakes  and  missed  much  that  I  might  have  learnt.  I 
have  felt  the  truth  of  what  Mr.  Fison,  late  missionary  in 


Preface. 


vn 


Fiji,  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for  much  instruction,  has 
written:  'When  a  European  has  been  living  for  two  or 
three  years  among  savages  he  is  sure  to  be  fully  convinced 
that  he  knows  all  about  them  ;  when  he  has  been  ten  years 
or  so  amongst  them,  if  he  be  an  observant  man,  he  finds 
that  he  knows  very  little  about  them,  and  so  begins  to 
learn.'  My  own  time  of  learning  has  been  all  too  short. 
I  have  endeavoured  as  far  as  possible  to  give  the  natives' 
account  of  themselves  by  giving  what  I  took  down  from 
their  Hps  and  translating  what  they  wrote  themselves.  It 
is  likely  that  under  the  circumstances  of  such  enquiries 
much  of  the  worst  side  of  native  life  may  be  out  of  sight, 
and  the  view  given  seem  generally  more  favourable  than 
might  be  expected  ;  if  it  be  so,  I  shall  not  regret  it. 

I  should  have  been  glad  if  space  had  allowed  me  to  treat 
at  greater  length  the  subject  of  the  native  Arts  of  Life,  and 
to  have  given  more  of  the  Tales,  which  throw  so  much 
light  upon  native  life  and  thought.  The  comparison  of  the 
Melanesian  languages,  customs,  beliefs,  and  arts,  with  those 
of  the  islands  of  the  Pacific  and  Indian  Oceans,  will  fix  the 
ethnological  place  of  the  Melanesian  people  while  it  aids 
the  general  study  of  mankind. 

In  conclusion,  this  book,  though  written  by  a  missionary, 
with  his  full  share  of  the  prejudices  and  predilections 
belonging  to  missionaries,  is  not  meant  to  have  what  is 
generally  understood  to  be  a  missionary  character ;  but  the 
writer  is  persuaded  that  one  of  the  first  duties  of  a  mis- 
sionary is  to  try  to  understand  the  people  among  whom  he 
works,  and  to  this  end  he  hopes  that  he  may  have  con- 
tributed something  that  may  help. 


Wadhurst  : 
March  12,  1891. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

INTRODUCTORY. 

Groups  of  Melanesian  Islands.  Connexion  East  and  West.  Discovery. 
Spanish,  French,  English  Discoverers.  Names  of  Islands,  native  and 
geographical.  Identification.  Condition  on  discovery.  Native  view  of 
discoverers.  Geology.  Voloanos.  Coral.  Reef  Islands.  Lakes.  Water- 
falls.   Zoology.  pp.  1-19 


CHAPTER  II. 

SOCIAL  REGULATIONS.     DIVISIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE. 
KINSHIP  AND  MARRIAGE  CONNEXION. 

Ethnology,  Origin.  Division  of  people  into  Exogamous  Classes,  or  Kin- 
dreds, with  Succession  through  the  Mother.  No  Tribes.  Exception  in 
Eastern  Solomon  Islands.  Intercourse  of  sexes  regulated  and  restricted. 
Incest.  Guest-wives.  Division  into  two  Kins.  Banks' Islands;  Families, 
Adoption.  New  Hebrides.  Question  of  Communal  marriage.  Testi- 
mony of  language.  Nearness  of  blood.  Plural  Divisions,  Florida, 
Bugotu.  Abomination,  buto.  Totems.  Custom  at  Ulawa.  Shifting 
predominance  of  Florida  kema.  Relation  of  Bister's  son  and  mother's 
brother.  Banks'  Island  System  of  Relationship,  in  Kinship,  Family,  by 
Marriage.  Pedigree  of  Mota  family.  Step-father.  Terms  of  relation- 
ship in  Florida.  System  where  descent  follows  the  Father.  Reserve. 
Avoidance,  in  Banks'  Islands.    Disuse  of  Names  as  words.  New 

Hebrides  .... 

 2°--15 


X 


Contents. 


CHAPTER  in. 

SOCIAIi  REGULATIONS.  CHIEFS. 

Chiefs  recognised  by  visitors.  Their  Power  in  Solomon  Islands,  Banks' 
Islands,  and  New  Hebrides.  Absence  of  History  and  Tradition 
Remarkable  exception  at  Saa.  Origin  of  that  settlement.  Chiefs  there 
Hereditary  element.  Chiefs  in  Florida;  in  Banks'  Islands  Alterna- 
tion of  predominance  in  Kindreds.  Chiefs  in  New  Hebrides  Lepers' 
Island        .  >  f 

 4r'-.^ 

CHAPTER  IV. 

PROPERTY  AND  INHERITANCE. 

General  agreement  as  to  Property  and  Succession.  Divisions  of  Land 
Bush,  Gardens,  Town.  Sale  of  Land.  Property  in  Fruit-trees.  Tendency 
to  succession  of  son  to  father.  Solomon  Islands,  Florida.  Land  and 
Personal  property.  Banks'  Islands,  Redemption  of  father's  land,  Sale 
of  land,  Wills.    New  Hebrides,  Pentecost  Island,  Lepers' Island  '    .  59-68 


CHAPTER  V. 

SECRET  SOCIETIES  AND  MYSTERIES. 

Wide  extent  of  Secret  Societies  in  Melanesia.  Difference  from  Austra- 
lian Mysteries;  no  'Making  young  men."  Social  importance.  Exclu- 
sion of  women.  Conspicuous  feature  in  native  life.  Banks'  Islands 
Tamate,  'Ghosts';  masks;  badges;  lodges.  Salacjoro  ;  hats;  mysterious 
sounds  ;  admission  ;  seclusion  of  neophytes  ;  license.  Smaller  Societies. 
Qatu  ;  dance  ;  initiation.  New  Hebrides,  Aurora  Island.  Handiwork 
of 'ghosts.'  Native  account  of  Initiations.  Dances.  Pentecost  Island. 
The  Qefa.  Solomon  Islands,  Florida.  Matambala ;  origin;  native 
account ;  downfall  of  the  Mystery  (jo 


CHAPTER  VI. 

SOCIETIES.  CLUBS. 

Presence  of  these  Societies  conspicuous  in  Torres  Islands,  Banks'  Islands, 
and  New  Hebrides.  The  Qamal,  club-house;  the  Club,  the  Suqe. 
Ranks.  Social  importance.  Banks'  Islands,  Mota.  Images  ;  hats.  Santa 
Maria,  Torres  Islands.  Admission  and  advance  in  rank  ;  Method  and 
forms.  Feasts;  dress.  Women's  Club.  Kolekole;  decorations.  Charms; 
Feast  of  deliverance.  New  Hebrides,  Aurora,  Lepers'  Island.  Ranks 
and  titles.    Pentecost  Island  ........  101-im 


Contents. 


XI 


CHAPTEK  VII. 

RELIGION. 

Difficulty  of  the  subject.  Language  of  Natives  and  Europeans.  Manu  ; 
stones  ;  charms.  Spirits  and  Ghosts  distinguished  by  natives.  Differ- 
ence between  religion  of  Eastern  and  Western  Melanesia.  Misuse  of 
terms  ;  '  god  '  and  '  devil.'  Banks'  Islands,  Spirits,  vui.  Solomon  Is- 
lands, tindalo,  Ghosts  of  worship.    Example  of  Ganindo.    Prayers  and 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

SACRIFICES. 

Offerings  at  meals  to  the  Dead.  Difference  between  Sacrifices  in  Eastern 
and  Western  Melanesia.  Solomon  Islands  ;  Sacrifice  to  ghosts  ;  example 
at  San  C'ristoval.  Florida  sacrifices,  public  and  private;  first-fruits; 
for  war ;  for  crops.  Human  sacrifices.  Seven  sacrifices  at  Saa.  San 
Cristoval;  Substitution.  Santa  Cruz.  Banks'  Islands;  Offerings  to 
Spirits  at  stones  ;  with  money.  Familiar  spirits.  New  Hebrides,  Aurora, 
Pentecost,  Lepers'  Island,  Ambrym  128-144 

CHAPTER  IX. 

PRAYERS. 

Prayers  and  Invocations.  To  Ghosts  in  Solomon  Islands,  Florida,  San 
Cristoval,  Saa.  To  Spirits  in  Banks'  Islands,  Motlav,  Mota.  Invocations 
at  sea.    New  Hebrides  145-149 

CHAPTER  X. 

SPIRITS. 

Little  prominence  of  belief  in  Spirits  in  Solomon  Islands.  Kahausibware. 
Banks'  Islands,  vui.  Native  conceptions  ;  two  orders  of  spirits.  Nopitu. 
Qat ;  Creation.  Story  and  adventures  of  Qat ;  Marawa,  Qasavara.  Story 
of  flood.  Santa  Cruz.  New  Hebrides.  Tagaro  and  Supwe  ;  Creation  ; 
Winged  women.    Changeling  spirits  150-172 

CHAPTER  XI. 

SACRED  PLACES  AND  THINGS. 

Images  not  idols.  Stones.  Solomon  Islands,  Places  of  sepulture  sacred  ; 
Shrines.  Other  sacred  places,  Streams.  Florida,  Bugotu.  Sharks,  snakes, 
frigate-birds,  crocodiles.  Banks'  Islands  and  New  Hebrides;  Stones, 
heaps,  streams  and  pools,  trees,  sharks,  snakes,  changeling  snakes,  king- 
fi9hers  .......  173-190 


xu 


Contents. 


CHAPTER,  XII. 

MAGIC. 

Mana,  and  equivalent  terms.  Native  belief  in  magic,  (i)  Sickness- 
causes.  Solomon  Islands.  Treatment  with  charms  ;  medicine.  Ghosts 
fighting;  Sea-ghosts.  Santa  Cruz.  Banks"  Islands.  New  Hebrides 
(2)  Weather:  weather  doctoring ;  Banks' Islands,  charms.  (,)  Witch 
craft:  fragments  of  food;  bones;  < ghost-shooter ■ ;  Metamorphosis. 
4   Dreams  :  dreamers.    (5)  Prophecy  :  possession  by  ghosts ;  prophets. 

"'eth0dS  in  S°lomon  Islands  and  B^ks'  Islands 
(7    Ordeals.    (8)  Poison.    (9)  Tapu,  taboo :  Curses ;  Oaths  .       .  101-21; 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

POSSESSION.     INTEBCOUBSE  WITH  GHOSTS. 

Madness  believed  to  be  possession  by  Spirits  or  Ghosts.  Other  forms  of 
possession.  Omens.  Vampires.  Tricks  played  by  ghosts  on  men ;  by 
men  with  ghosts.     Form  of  possession  in  Torres  Islands.  Tricks. 


Sneezing 


21S-227 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

BIETH.     CHILDHOOD.     MAEBIAGE.  ■ 

Couvade;  abortion;  infanticide;  twins.  Birth.  Weaning;  nose-boring; 
clothing.  Eeserve.  Separation  of  sexes.  Initiation  at  Saa.  Circumcision;' 
tattoo.  Intercourse  of  sexes ;  harlots.  Betrothal  and  Marriage.  Adul- 
tery. Divorce.  Levirate.  Widowhood ;  mourning.  Polygamy,  Poly- 
andfy   •       .       .     '.  22S-246 


CHAPTER  XV. 

DEATH.     BUBIAL.     AETEE  DEATH. 

Death.  Soul  called  shadow.  Native  words  translated  soul,  in  Florida, 
Banks'  Islands,  New  Hebrides.  Ghosts,  two  classes.  Burial  customs  in 
Florida  and  Bugotu.  Hades;  ship  and  bridge  of  the  dead.  San  Cris- 
toval,  Sea-ghosts.  Saa,  ghosts;  Hades;  burial;  relics;  memorials. 
Santa  Cruz.  Torres  Islands.  Banks'  Islands.  Panoi.  Origin  of  death  ; 
burial ;  driving  away  ghost ;  funeral  feasts  ;  death-days ;  state  of  the 
dead  ;  judgment.  Descents  to  Panoi.  Aurora.  Journey  of  the  dead  ; 
funeral;  death-meals.  Lepers'  Island.  Origin  of  death;  burial; 
Hades.    Pentecost  Island.    Burying  alive  247-^8^ 


Contents. 


xm 


CHAPTEE  XVI. 

ABTS  OF  LIFE. 

Outrigger-canoes  ;  plank-built  canoes  ;  voyages ;  trade.  Houses :  dwel- 
ling-houses ;  canoe-houses ;  pile-houses  ;  tree-houses ;  forts ;  stone- 
buildings.  Cultivations.  Weapons.  Fighting.  Bows  ;  slings  ;  poisoned 
arrows.  Shell  and  stone  implements  ;  pottery;  stone-boiling.  Fishing: 
hooks ;  floats ;  nets ;  kites  ;  traps.  Food ;  Cookery.  Native  cloth  ;  Dress. 
Money :  mat-money ;  feather-money ;  shell-money  ;  money-lending. 
Decorative  Arts,  in  Solomon  Islands,  Santa  Cruz,  Banks'  Islands  .  2907331 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

DANCES.     MUSIC.  GAMES. 

Dances.    Songs.    Drums ;  pipes  ;  stringed  instrument ;  Jllolian  flute. 
Games.    Toys  :  kites  ;  bull-roarer  ;  rattles   332~342 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

MISCELLANEOUS. 

Cannibalism.  Head-taking.  Castaways.  Slaves.  Burning  alive.  Sun ; 
moon  ;  stars  ;  eclipses.  Months  and  Seasons.  Narcotics.  Counting  ; 
Measures.    Salutations.    Wild  men   343-355 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

STOEIES. 

I.  Animal  Stories. — 1.  Heron  and  Turtle.  2.  Three  Fish.  3.  Rat  and 
Rail.    4.  Birds'  Voyage.    5.  Shark  and  Snake.    6.  Hen  and  Chickens. 

II.  Myths,  Tales  of  Origins. — 1.  Kamakajaku.  2.  Samuku.  3.  The 
Mim.  4.  Muesarava.  5.  Tagaro's  Departure.  6.  How  Tagaro  made 
the  Sea.  7.  How  Tagaro  found  Fish.  8.  How  the  old  Woman  made 
the  Sea.  III.  Wonder  Tales.— 1.  Dilingavuv.  2.  Story  of  an  Eel. 
3.  Molgon  and  Molwor.  4.  Ghost-wife.  5.  Ganviviris.  6.  The  Little 
Orphan.  7.  The  Woman  and  Eel.  8.  The  Little  Owl.  9.  The  Winged 
Wife.  10.  Taso.  11.  Betawerai.  12.  Basi  and  Dovaowari.  13.  Dei- 
tari.  14.  Tarkeke.  15.  The  Woman  and  Ghost.  16.  Tagaro  the 
Little.    17.  Merambuto  and  Tagaro  3g( 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Frontispiece.  Stone  buildings  at  Gaua,  Santa  Maria,  Banks'  Islands 
From  a  sketch  by  the  Author. 

1.  Map  and  Elevation  of  Mota.    Sugarloaf  Island,  Banks*  Islands  15 

2.  Masked  Figure  from  New  Caledonia  70 

From  a  photograph. 

3.  Masked  Figure  of  a  Banks'  Islands  Tamate  73 

From  a  photograph  by  the  Author. 

4.  Tamate  at  Valuwa.    Saddle  Island,  Banks'  Islands        ...  78 

From  a  sketch  by  the  Author. 

5,  6.  Tamate  Hats  or  Masks.    Banks'  Islands  79 

From  sketches  by  the  Author. 

7.  Masked  Figures  at  Aurora  Island,  New  Hebrides    ....  91 

From  a  photograph  by  Rev.  C.  Bice. 

8.  Lano  Hats  or  Masks.    Banks'  Islands  104 

From  a  drawing  by  a  native. 

9.  Malo-saru  Dancing  Dress.    Banks'  Islands     .       .       .       .  .108 

From  a  specimen  in  the  British  Museum. 

10.  A  Sea-ghost  shooting  a  man  fishing,  at  Saa,  Solomon  Islands    .       .  197 

From  a  drawing  by  a  native. 

11.  A  Sea-ghost.    San  Cristoval,  Solomon  Islands  259 

From  a  drawing  by  a  native. 

12.  A  New  Hebrides  Canoe  291 

From  a  sketch  by  the  Author. 

13.  A  Mota  Canoe.    Banks'  Islands  .292 

From  a  photograph  by  the  Author. 

14.  A  Santa  Cruz  Canoe  293 

From  a  sketch  by  the  Author. 

15.  Spear-rest  in  a  Florida  Canoe.    Solomon  Islands     .       .       .       •  »95 

From  a  sketch  by  the  Author. 


List  of  Illustrations.  xv 


PACK 


1 6.  Figure-head  of  a  Florida  Canoe  .296 

From  a  sketch  by  the  Author. 

17.  A  House  at  Tega.    Ysabel,  Solomon  Islands  3°° 

From  a  sketch  by  the  Author. 

18.  Shafts  of  Arrows.    Santa  Maria,  Banks' Islands      .       .       .       •  311 

Dratvn  from  specimens  in  the  Author's  collection  by  Rev. 
H.  3.  Minchin. 

19.  Shell  Adze  from  Torres  Islands,  in  the  Author's  collection      .       .  312 

Drawn  by  Rev.  H.  2T.  Minchin. 

20.  Shell  tool  from  Santa  Cruz,  in  the  Author's  collection  ;  to  be  turned 

either  way,  and  used  as  adze  or  axe  3*3 

Brawn  by  Rev.  H.  H.  Minchin. 

21.  Shell  Adze  from  Lepers'  Island,  New  Hebrides,  in  the  Author's 

collection     .       .       .       .       ...       .       .       •       •       •  3*4 

Drawn  by  Rev.  H.  S.  Minchin. 

22.  Stone  Adze  from  San  Cristoval,  Solomon  Islands,  in  the  Blackmore 

Museum,  Salisbury     .       .       .       .       .       .       ■       •  •3I4 

23.  Breadfruit  Chopper  from  Mota,  Banks'  Islands,  in  the  Blackmore 

Museum,  Salisbury      .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .       •  3J5 

24.  Shell  Adze  from  Mota,  Banks'  Islands,  in  the  Blackmore  Museum, 

Salisbury     .       .       .  .       .       .       .       .       •  3I5 

25.  Float  for  catching  Flying-fish,  from  Santa  Cruz,  in  the  Blackmore 

Museum,  Salisbury      .       .       .  •     .       .       .       .       .       •  31? 

26.  Float  for  catching  Flying-fish,  from  Malanta,  Solomon  Islands,  in  the 

Author's  collection       .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .       •  3l7 

Dratvn  by  Rev.  H.  IT.  Minchin. 

27.  Sketch  by  the  Author  showing  the  Dress  of  Men  and  Women  at 

Bellona  Island,  Solomon  Islands  .       .       .       .       .       .  .322 

28.  Lime-box  from  Ysabel,  Solomon  Islands,  in  the  Author's  collection  .  328 

Draion  by  Rev.  H.  H.  Minchin. 

29.  Incised  and  whitened  pattern  on  a  Cocoa-nut  Water-bottle  from 

Ysabel,  in  the  Author's  collection        .       .       .       .       .       .  328 

From  a  rubbing. 

30.  Incised  patterns  of  two  Banks'  Islands  Ear-ornaments 

31.  Incised  ornament  cut  by  A.  Arudulewari  of  Aurora  Island,  New 

Hebrides  ........... 

Drawn  by  Rev.  H.  H.  Minchin. 

32.  Incised  and  whitened  ornament  from  Ysabel,  Solomon  Islands 

From  a  rubbing. 

33.  Drums  at  Ambrym,  New  Hebrides  

From  a  photograph  by  Capi.  Acland,  R.N. 


329 
33° 
331 
337 


NOTE. 

The  orthography  in  use  in  the  various  native  languages  is  not  generally 
here  employed  in  native  words,  but  it  occasionally  appears.  In  such  cases  it 
is  enough  to  observe  that  i  =  mb,  d  =  nd,  n  is  ng,  g  is  ngg,  and  that  g  and  q 
represent  peculiar  sounds.  Excuse  must  be  offered  for  the  very  ill-looking 
ngg,  representing  the  ng  in  'finger';  a  sound  so  distinct  from  the  ng  in 
'  singer'  that  it  is  impossible  to  use,  as  in  English,  the  same  symbol  for  both. 
It  is  necessary  to  note  that  ng  here  always  stands  as  ng  in  'singer.' 


Codi-iruftana  MelaTtesuxn,  Studies. 


Clarendon,  -Press.  Oxford. 


CHAPTER  I. 


INTRODUCTORY. 

Theee  are  four  groups  of  islands,  within  that  region  of  the 
Western  Pacific  to  which  the  name  of  Melanesia  has  been 
given,  that  form  a  curved  belt  following  roughly  the  outline 
of  the  Australian  coast,  at  a  general  distance  of  some  fifteen 
hundred  miles,  and  turning  away  from  the  important  outlying 
Archipelago  of  Fiji ;  these  are  the  Solomon  Islands,  the 
Santa  Cruz  group,  the  Banks'  Islands  and  New  Hebrides, 
and  New  Caledonia  with  the  Loyalty  Islands.  There  is 
an  undoubted  connexion  of  race,  language  and  customs 
among  the  people  who  inhabit  these  groups ;  a  connexion 
which  further  extends  itself  throughout  what  is  called 
Melanesia  to  New  Guinea  westwards,  and  eastwards  to  Fiji. 
The  distinction  between  the  Melanesian  people  of  these  groups 
and  the  Polynesians  eastwards  of  Fiji  is  clearly  marked  and 
recognised,  for  the  line  which  separates  Melanesian  from 
Polynesian  falls  between  Fiji  and  Tonga.  No  such  line  can 
be  drawn  to  mark  such  a  boundary  to  the  west  till  the 
Asiatic  continent  itself  is  reached.  From  the  Polynesian 
islands  of  the  East  Pacific  on  the  one  side,  and  from  the 
Asiatic  islands  of  the  Malay  Archipelago  on  the  other, 
two  currents  of  influence  have  poured  and  are  pouring  into 
Melanesia,  the  former  much  more  modern  and  direct,  the 
latter  ancient  and  broken  in  its  course.  Upon  these  currents 
float  respectively  the  kava  root  and  the  betel-nut.  The  use 
of  the  betel  is  common  to  India,  China,  and  the  Melanesian 
islands  as  far  to  the  east  as  Tikopia ;  the  Polynesian  kava 
has  established  itself  in  the  New  Hebrides,  and  is  a  novelty 
in  some  of  the  Banks'  Islands ;  it  has  not  been  carried  across 

B 


2  Introductory.  [-CH> 

the  boundary  of  the  betel-nut  by  the  Polynesian  settlers 
in  the  Reef  Islands  of  Santa  Cruz.  The  present  work  is 
not  concerned  at  all  with  one  of  the  four  groups  above 
mentioned,  that  of  New  Caledonia  and  the  Loyalty  Islands, 
nor  with  the  larger  southern  members  of  the  New  Hebrides 
group  ;  its  view  is  confined,  except  for  occasional  illustration, 
to  the  Solomon  Islands,  Ysabel,  Florida,  Savo,  Guadalcanal1, 
Malanta,  San  Cristoval,  Ulawa,  to  the  Santa  Cruz  group,  the 
Banks'  and  Torres  Islands,  and  three  of  the  northern  New 
Hebrides,  Aurora,  Pentecost  and  Lepers'  Islands.  Within  this 
field  are  contained  certain  islands  inhabited  by  Polynesian 
colonists  from  the  East  who  still  retain  their  Polynesian 
speech.  Such  are  Nupani,  Pileni,  Nukapu,  and  other  reef 
islands  of  the  Swallow  group,  where  the  physical  character- 
istics of  the  Polynesian  people  may  possibly  be  traced,  but 
certainly  are  not  conspicuous,  having  been  lost  by  mixture 
with  neighbouring  Melanesians.  In  Eennell  Island  and  Bellona 
Island,  southern  members  of  the  Solomon  group,  the  people 
are  physically  Polynesian  ;  a  lad  from  Bellona,  who  was  in 
New  Zealand  with  Bishop  Patteson,  was  in  name  (Te  Km), 
colour,  tattoo,  and  speech  very  much  a  Maori.  Men  from  the 
Polynesian  settlements  on  Mae  and  Fate  in  the  New  Hebrides 
have  found  the  language  of  Ontong  Java  like  their  own. 

The  discovery  of  these  islands  was  prolonged  through 
three  centuries,  and  carried  on  by  Spanish,  French  and 
English  voyagers.  The  Spaniards  found  the  Solomon  Islands, 
Santa  Cruz,  the  Banks'  Islands,  and  the  northern  New 
Hebrides  ;  the  French  added  much  later  to  the  discoveries  in 
these  groups ;  the  English  found,  under  Captain  Cook,  the 
principal  islands  of  the  New  Hebrides  and  New  Caledonia, 
and  have  filled  in  the  charts.  The  Dutch  discovered  Fiji. 
The  earliest,  and  certainly  most  interesting,  discoveries  were 
those  of  the  Spaniards  ;  of  Mendana  in  his  two  voyages 
of  1567  and  1595,  and  of  Quiros  and  Torres  in  1606 a. 

1  Dr.  Guppy,  in  his  Solomon  Islands  and  their  Natives,  has  discussed  these 
discoveries  at  length  with  special  reference  to  the  Journal  of  Gallego.  By  the 
kindness  of  Mr.  Woodford  I  have  read  the  narrative  of  Cotoira.    In  both  the 


Discoveries.  3 

Mendana,  despatched  by  the  Viceroy  of  Peru,  reached  in 
1567  the  first  Melanesian  land  seen  by  Europeans,  the  great 
island  which  he  named  Santa  Ysabel  de  la  Estrella,  and  from 
thence  the  voyagers  under  his  command  discovered  further 
and  named  the  large  islands  Malaita,  Guadalcanal,  San 
Cristoval,  and  the  lesser  islands,  Sesarga,  which  is  Savo, 
Florida  with  its  islets,  Ulawa,  and  the  small  islands  near 
San  Cristoval.  To  these  he  gave  the  name  of  the  Solomon 
Islands,  to  mark  his  conjecture,  or  to  suggest  the  belief,  that 
he  had  discovered  the  source  of  the  riches  of  Solomon.  In 
his  second  voyage  of  1595,  undertaken  for  the  purpose  of 
colonizing  the  Solomon  Islands,  Mendana  discovered  Santa 
Cruz,  and  attempted  to  form  a  settlement  there  ;  an  attempt 
abandoned  after  two  months,  in  consequence  of  his  death  and 
the  sickness  of  the  remnant  of  his  crews.  Quiros  had  been 
with  Mendana,  and  was  allowed  in  1606  to  carry  out  a 
project  he  had  been  continually  urging  of  recovering  and 
colonizing  the  Solomon  group.  Fortune  however  made  him 
the  discoverer  of  the  New  Hebrides,  when  he  believed  himself 
to  have  reached  the  great  Austral  Continent,  in  the  island 
which  still  bears  the  name  he  gave  it  of  Espiritu  Santo. 
The  first  Melanesian  islands  however  that  he  saw  were  those 
now  known  as  the  Banks'  Islands,  one  of  which,  Santa  Maria, 
retains  the  name  he  gave  it :  Torres,  after  parting  from  Quiros, 
saw  and  named  the  Torres  Islands.  After  an  interval  of  more 
than  a  century  and  a  half,  the  French  voyager  Bougainville, 
in  1768,  added  Pentecost,  Lepers'  Island,  and  Malikolo  to  the 
discovery  of  Quiros,  naming  the  group  the  Great  Cyclades, 
and  found  the  great  islands  of  Choiseul  and  Bougainville 
beyond  those  discovered  in  the  first  voyage  of  Mendana. 

Polynesian  word  Te  Ariki,  the  Chief,  in  the  form  Taurique,  is  given  as  the 
designation  of  the  chiefs  in  Ysabel,  where  it  is  now  entirely  out  of  place.  This 
is  the  less  easy  of  explanation,  as  the  other  native  words  given  appear  to  be 
those  now  in  use.  I  may  add  that  I  have  discussed  the  accounts  of  Mendana's 
discoveries,  as  related  in  Burney's  and  Dalrymple's  collections,  with  natives  of 
the  Solomon  and  Santa  Cruz  Islands  ;  but  unfortunately  my  notes  on  this 
subject  have  been  lost. 


B  2 


4  Introductory.  [CHi 

In  the  next  year  Surville  passed  through  the  same  group  ; 
the  disastrous  voyage  of  La  Perouse  ended  at  Vanikoro  in 
1785.  The  southern  islands  of  the  group,  which  have  since 
preserved  the  name  he  gave  of  the  New  Hebrides,  were 
discovered  by  Cook  in  his  second  great  voyage  in  1774,  and 
after  these  New  Caledonia  and  the  Loyalty  Islands.  Bligh,  in 
his  wonderful  boat  voyage  after  the  mutiny  of  the  Bounty, 
passed  through  and  named  the  islands  of  the"  Banks'  group. 

The  names  given  by  the  Spaniards  to  the  Solomon  and  Santa 
Cruz  groups,  and  to  the  islands  of  Ysabel,  Florida,  Guadal- 
canal-, San  Cristoval,  Santa  Anna  and  Santa  Catalina,  to 
Espiritu  Santo  in  the  New  Hebrides  and  Santa  Maria  in  the 
Banks'  Islands,  have  maintained  themselves;  some  of  the 
French  names  have  disappeared ;  some,  Aurora,  Pentecost  or 
Whitsuntide,  Star  Island,  Gulf  Island  (for  Ugi),  have  taken 
an  English  form.    To  some  islands  no  new  names  have  been 
given,  native  names,  or  what  were  supposed  to  be  such,  having 
been  supplied  by  the  natives,  such  as  Ambrym,  Api,  Mallicollo  ; 
in  some  cases  the  native  name,  or  what  was  taken  for  it,  as 
Malaita,  has  prevailed  over  the  name  given  by  the  discoverer. 
To  ascertain  the  native  name,  and  the  proper  orthography  of 
the  native  name,  of  an  island  is  a  matter  of  difficulty  to 
a  visitor.    Large  islands  seldom  have  a  name ;  an  enquirer 
pointing  to  the  island  as  a  whole,  is  given  the  name  of  the 
district  or  village  to  which  he  points,  or  perhaps  that  of  some 
islet  between  him  and  the  mainland  ;  or  he  may  take  the 
name  of  a  man  for  that  of  a  place  \  Of  the  islands  discovered 

1  The  island  of  San  Cristoval  has  been  called  Bauro  by  Europeans, 
not  by  natives,  from  the  name  of  a  part  of  it.  A  village  on  that  island 
is  marked  on  the  Admiralty  chart  with  the  name  of  its  chief.  The  island 
of  Florida  and  its  language  has  got  the  name  of  Anutha,  and  Anudha, 
from  an  islet  between  Mboli  and  Ravu.  Bishop  Patteson,  on  his  visit  in 
1862,  was  given  by  a  native  boy  on  board  the  name,  in  the  form  Anudha, 
of  the  islet  Anuha,  and  took  it  for  the  name  of  the  whole  island.  Melanesians 
who  could  not  pronounce  th  called  it  Anuta ;  Banks'  Islanders,  taking  the 
first  syllable  to  be  the  preposition  '  at,'  commonly  used  with  names  of  places, 
call  it  Nuta,  and  Nut.  The  large  island  of  Ysabel  may  be  seen  in  some  maps 
marked  Mahaga,  from  a  single  village  in  Bugotu,  the  language  of  which  was 
made  known  by  Bishop  Patteson. 


j]  Discoveries.  5 

by  Mendana  in  his  first  voyage,  Ysabel,  Guadalcanal-,  and 
San  Cristoval  have  no  native  names,  though  names  of  parts 
are  often  taken  to  designate  the  whole  ;  the  second  of  these, 
so  far  as  is  known  to  them,  is  called  Gera  by  natives  of  south- 
east Malanta  and  San  Cristoval ;  and  the  latter  has  become 
known  as  Bauro,  from  its  most  conspicuous  part.  It  is  strange 
that  the  large  island  which  has  somehow  got  the  name  of 
Malanta  has  a  native  name,  at  any  rate  all  along  the  west  side, 
Mala  or  Mara.  The  native  name  of  Florida  is  Nggela,  the 
same  word  as  Gera  ;  and  the  island  is  known  in  Mala  Masiki 
as  *  beyond  Gela,'  Savo  is  no  doubt  the  island  called  Sesarga 
by  the  Spaniards,  who  heard  the  name  Sabo,  and  misplaced 
it.  The  native  Ulawa,  heard  by  the  Spaniards  as  Uraba, 
has  lost  the  Spanish  name  of  La  Treguada,  and  retains 
on  the  charts  Surville's  Contrariete.  The  native  name  of 
Santa  Cruz,  the  discovery  of  Mendana's  second  voyage,  is 
Ndeni,  from  which  the  Nitendi  of  the  charts  has  probably 
been  derived  \ 

The  discovery  of  the  Banks'  Islands  and  New  Hebrides  by 
Quiros  was  preceded  by  a  visit  to  Taumako,  where  he  obtained 
information  concerning  some  sixty  islands  known  to  the  native 
voyagers.  Nearly  all  of  these  probably  are  the  small  islands 
inhabited,  like  Taumako,  by  people  of  the  Polynesian  race, 

1  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  Gallego's  Florida  is  a  part  of  the  Nggela  of 
the  natives,  and  probably  Buena  Vista  is  Vatilau.  San  Dimas,  San  German, 
Guadalupe,  have  been  shewn  by  Mr.  Woodford  to  be  parts  of  Florida  as  they 
shew  from  the  sea,  not  as  the  island  is  divided  by  unseen  channels.  The  native 
names  of  the  lesser  islands  near  San  Cristoval  are,  Ugi  for  Gulf  Island,  the 
Spanish  San  Juan  ;  'Olu  Malau,  the  Three  Malau,  for  Three  Sisters,  Las  Tres 
Marias  ;  Owa-raha,  GreatOwa,  for  SantaAna,  and  Owa-rii,  Little  Owa.for  Santa 
Catalina.  It  is  remarkable  how  much  more  accurate  Gallego's  Aguare  is  than 
the  Yoriki  of  the  charts  or  the  Orika  given  by  Dr.  Guppy.  Gallego's  Hapa 
may  represent  Owa,  though  not  so  well  as  Oo-ah  or  Oa.  TJraba  is  really 
nearer  the  native  Ulawa  than  Ulaua,  the  native  tongue,  like  the  Spanish, 
readily  interchanging  1  and  v,  w  and  b.  How  Mr.  Brenchley  got  "Ulakua 
cannot  be  explained,  nor  why  a  new  form  Ulava  is  introduced.  A  correct 
native  name,  it  may  be  said,  is  rarely  to  be  obtained  from  a  trader;  the  early 
sea-going  visitors  make  the  form  which  is  to  stand  for  the  native  name,  and 
hand  it  on.  The  only  security  is  the  writing  of  a  native  who  knows. 


6  Introductory.  rCH 

who  are  great  voyagers  at  the  present  day,  and  are  easily  dis- 
tinguished by  then-  Polynesian  tongue,  though  where  they  lie 
near  larger  elands  of  Melanesian  population,  the  appearance  of 
Polynesians  has  been  lost  \  Many  of  these  islands  are  easily 
identified,  and  lie  away  from  the  New  Hebrides  \  but  Quiros 
was  led  by  his  information  to  look  for  the  large  country 
of  which  he  was  m  search  towards  the  south,  and  he  thought 
he  found  it  in  what  he  named  Tierra  Austral  del  Espiritu 
Santo.  This  island,  now  commonly  known  as  Santo,  has  the 
native  name  of  Marina.  This  was  not  the  first  land  of  the 
New  Hebrides  seen  by  Quiros  ;  after  having  apparently  seen 
the  light  of  a  volcano  in  the  night,  he  found  himself  in  the 
morning  in  view  of  three  islands,  one  the  present  Aurora  of 
the  New  Hebrides,  and  two  belonging  to  the  Banks'  Islands, 
the  volcanic  cone,  Merlav,  called  by  him  Nuestra  Senora  de  la 

1  I  have  myself  witnessed  the  arrival  of  eleven  canoes  from  Tikopia  among 
the  Banks'  Islands.  The  men  said  they  had  come  to  see  the  islands,  and 
were  hospitably  received.  One  was  shot  at  Ureparapara,  and  they  departed. 
Shortly  before  this  a  canoe  from  Tikopia  had  been  driven  by  the  wind  to  Mota, 
and  the  men  in  her  most  kindly  treated,  and  the  same  thing  had  happened 
before  and  has  happened  since.  The  difference  in  size,  manner,  language  and 
dress  between  the  Tikopians  and  Banks'  Islanders  was  conspicuous.  The  true 
name  is  pretty  certainly  Chikopia,  since  the  Mota  people  learnt  Sikopia  from 
their  visitors ;  two  Fijian  islands  are  Cikobia  =  Tliikombia. 

2  Chicayana  is  Sikaiana,  Stewart  Island;  Guaytopo  is  Waitupu,  Tracy  Island, 
of  the  Ellice  group  ;  Taukalo  is  Tokelau  ;  Nupani  andPileni  are  Reef  Islands  of 
Santa  Cruz ;  Manicolo  no  doubt  stands  for  Vanikoi  o.  Bishop  Patteson  in  1866 
found  that  the  Eeef  Islanders  of  Santa  Cruz  visited  Taumako  and  Tikopia.  It 
is  excusable  at  sight  to  take  the  Pouro  of  Quiros  for  Bauro  in  San  Cristoval, 
but  in  my  opinion  the  attempted  identification  must  completely  fail.  In 
the  first  place,  Pouro  and  Bauro  are  far  from  being  the  same  in  sound  when  the 
confusion  of  English  spelling  is  got  rid  of ;  Quiros  would  never  write  ou  for  au. 
Secondly,  Bauro  is  not  and  never  was  the  native  name  of  San  Cristoval ;  it  is 
a  name  picked  up  by  Europeans,  I  believe  by  Bishop  Selwyn  of  New  Zealand, 
and  adopted  for  European  convenience.  Gallego  calls,  and  properly,  a  part 
only  of  the  island  Paubro.  Thirdly,  arrows  with  points  in  form  of  a  knife 
(a  fair  description  of  some  Lepers'  Island  arrows)  are  wholly  out  of  place  in 
the  Solomon  Islands.  Fourthly,  the  certain  identifications  of  the  islands 
named  do  not  lead  in  that  direction.  In  the  same  way,  when  it  is  understood 
that  the  name  of  the  island  in  the  Malay  Archipelago  is  Buru,  in  Dutch 
spelling  Boeroe,  there  can  remain  very  little  ground  for  identifying  it  with 
either  Bauro  or  Bulotu,  in  French  spelling  Bourotou. 


j  -j  Discoveries.  7 

Luz,  and  Santa  Maria.  After  having  visited  the  latter, 
he  made  his  way  to  a  larger  island  seen  to  the  southward, 
and  remained  a  month  in  the  great  bay  of  SS.  Philip  and  James 
in  Espiritu  Santo.  Merlav  was  renamed  Pie  de  1' Etoile 
by  Bougainville,  and  is  now  Star  Island.  The  eight  islands  of 
the  Banks'  group  are :  (i )  Star  Island,  Merlav ;  (2)  Sainte  Claire, 
Merig  ;  (3)  Santa  Maria,  Gaua  ;  (4)  Sugarloaf  Island,  Mota  ; 
(5)  Great  Banks'  Island,  Vanua  Lava  ;  (6)  Saddle  Island ;  (7) 
Bligh  Island,  Ureparapara ;  and  (8)  Rowa  \  One  of  these,  named 
Saddle  Island  by  Bligh,  has  no  native  name  as  a  whole ;  another, 
the  Beef  Island  of  Rowa,  has  no  geographical  name.  The 
Torres  group  consists  of  four  islands,  Hiw,  Tegua,  Lo,  and  Tog, 
and  is  now  known  as  Vava  ;  there  is  no  native  name  to 
the  group.  The  native  names  of  the  three  islands  which 
with  Espiritu  Santo  make  up  the  northern  New  Hebrides  are, 
Maewo,  Aurora  Island  ;  Araga,  Pentecost  Island  ;  and  Omba, 
Lepers'  Island.  The  two  latter  names  present  a  difficulty,  and 

1  Quiros  named  seven  islands  before  he  reached  Espiritu  Santo :  San 
Eaymnndo,  Los  Portales  de  Belen,  La  Vergel,  Las  Lagrimas  de  San  Pedro, 
El  Pilar  de  Zaragoza,  Santa  Maria,  and  Nuestra  Sefiora  de  la  Luz.  The  two 
latter  alone  are  known.  Bligh  named  Ureparapara  after  himself,  Saddle  Island 
and  Sugarloaf  Island  (probably  the  Pillar  of  Quiros)  after  natural  features,  and 
Great  Banks'  Island,  with  the  whole  group,  after  Sir  Joseph  Banks.  Besides  the 
geographical  names,  these  islands  have  mostly  three  sets  of  names.  An  island 
has  its  name  in  the  local  form  and  in  the  Mota  form,  which  has  come  into  use 
through  the  employment  of  the  Mota  tongue  as  a  common  language  in  the 
Melanesian  Mission.  Thus  Vanua  Lava,  Gaua,  Ureparapara,  Meralava, 
are  the  Mota  forms  of  Vono  Lav,  Gog,  Norbarbar,  Merlav.  Another  set 
of  names  was  used  by  natives  when  sailing  between  the  islands,  with  a 
view  of  concealing  their  course  from  unseen  enemies ;  Mota  was  Ure-hor, 
the  place  full  of  dried  bread-fruit ;  Ureparapara,  full  of  slopes,  was  Ure-us,  full 
of  bows,  Meralava,  Ure-Jcere,  full  of  clubs,  the  best  bows  and  clubs  being 
got  there  ;  others  were  named  after  the  food  and  other  natural  productions 
thought  to  characterise  them.  Misspelt  and  then  misread,  the  rock  Vat  Ganai 
has  become  in  maps  the  island  Vatu  Rhandi ;  by  a  misreading  of  Gaua,  Santa 
Maria,  which  is  to  its  native  inhabitants  Gog,  got  with  traders  the  name  of  Ganna. 
The  Torres  group  has  got  the  name  of  Vava,  with  the  preposition  'at'  Avava, 
Ababa,  from  a  part  of  one  of  the  islands  which  Ureparapara  people  used 
to  visit.  Traders  have  fixed  on  Tog  the  name  of  Pukapuka,  originally 
unknown  among  the  natives.  The  Mota  name  for  Lepers'  Island,  Opa,  for 
Omba,  has  become  well  known. 


o 

Introductory.  j-CH 

bring  in  a  point  of  much  interest.  In  the  native  name  of 
Pentecost  a  1S  really  the  preposition  « at ' ;  Omba  with  the  same 

^TV n  ChartS  "  A°ba  5  *  W0U,d  be  — ble 
therefore  to  write  Baga  as  well  as  Omba,  but  custom  in  these 

matters  must  be  allowed  to  prevail.    The  interest  of  the 
point  lies  m  the  connexion  shewn  by  the  common  use  of 
this  preposition  m  place-names  between  Melanesia,  the  Malay 
Archipelago  and  Madagascar.    Ethnological  and  historical 
questions  are  inseparable  from  the  consideration  of  place- 
names  ;  for  example,  the  questions  whether  the  Bauro  of 
the  Solomon  Islands  is  the  same  with  the  Bouro,  properly 
Bum  near  the  Moluccas,  or  whether  Futuna  of  the  New 
Hebrides  is  named  after  Futuna,  Home's  Island.    About  one 
thing  however  there  ought  to  be  no  disagreement;  however 
dimcult  it  may  be  to  ascertain  a  native  name  and  its  ortho- 
graphy, European  names  should  be  written  in  the  language 
to  which  they  belong ;  San  Cristoval,  or  Cristobal,  not 
Chnstoval ;  Espiritu  Santo,  not  Spirito  Santo  or  St.  Esprit  • 
and  where  French  names  are  retained,  Contraries  Island  and 
Cape  Zele'e. 

Between  the  time  of  the  discovery  of  the  Solomon  Islands 
by  Mendana  and  the.  time  in  which  the  visits  of  whalers, 
traders  and  missionaries  have  become  frequent,  within  the 
last  thirty  or  forty  years,  very  little  if  anything  at  all  was 
done  by  Europeans  to  influence  the  character  of  native  life. 
It  is  very  interesting  therefore  to  enquire  in  what  particulars 
the  Spaniards'  account  of  what  they  discovered  differs  from 
what  would  be  recorded  by  recent  visitors.    The  place-names 
mentioned,  with  less  error  than  is  common  now,  are  those  still 
in  use,  Malaita  for  Mala,  Uraba  for  Ulawa,  Paubro  for  Bauro, 
Aguare  for  Owarii.    The  names  of  persons  mentioned  are  such 
as  are  now  in  use ;  one  of  the  few  words  not  names  to 
be  found  in  Gallego's  narrative,  benau,  panale,  panay,  is  clearly 
pana,  a  kind  of  yam  with  prickles  on  the  vines.  In  three  points 
it  may  be  observed  that  Gallego  reports  what  would  not 
have  been  lately  seen.    The  natives  are  represented  as  at- 
tacking the  Spaniards  with  bows  and  arrows  everywhere, 


ji  Discoveries.  9 

except  at  San  Cristoval,  where  darts  are  mentioned  ;  in  recent 
times  a  voyager  would  not  have  found  bows  and  arrows 
the  usual  weapon,  but  spears,  except  at  Malanta.  Gallego 
reports  open  cannibalism  at  Ysabel  and  Florida,  whereas 
no  modern  visitor  would  have  seen  it  except  at  San  Cristoval. 
Nakedness  is  said  by  Gallego  to  have  been  complete,  a  point 
in  which  Figueroa  differs  from  him,  and  complete  nakedness 
would  not  have  been  found  of  late  years  anywhere  but  in 
Malanta.  The  probable  conclusion  is  that,  making  allowance 
for  lapses  of  memory  on  one  side  and  exaggeration  of  fact  on 
the  other,  the  people,  language,  customs  and  condition  of  the 
people  in  the  Solomon  Islands  have  not  changed  since 
Mendana's  discovery  of  1567 

The  account  of  the  visit  of  Mendana  to  Santa  Cruz  in 
1595  and  of  the  Spanish  attempt  to  form  a  settlement  is 
ample  and  detailed  ;  and  it  was  remarked  by  Bishop  Patteson, 
who  was  probably  the  first  European  after  Mendana's  party  to 
go  about  the  native  villages,  that  what  he  observed  corre- 
sponded closely  with  the  Spanish  record.  It  is  only  within  the 
last  ten  years  that,  by  the  courage  and  enterprise  of  the  present 
Missionary  Bishop  John  Selwyn,  the  island  of  Santa  Cruz  has 
again  become  open  to  friendly,  and  unhappily  also  to  mis- 
chievous, approach.  The  present  writer  has  gone  through 
the  account  of  Mendana's  visit  with  natives  of  Santa  Cruz, 
whose  comments  were  certainly  interesting.  One  point  may 
be  mentioned  ;  the  Spaniards,  failing  to  get  the  people  of  the 
main  island  to  learn  their  language,  sent  to  kidnap,  after 
the  fashion  which  from  the  beginning  seems  to  have  been 
natural  to  European  visitors,  some  boys  from  the  neighbouring 
Beef  Islands,  whom  they  had  observed  to  be  more  intelligent 

1  Mr.  Woodford,  in  Further  Explorations  in  the  Solomon  Islands,  has 
brought  forward  information  from  the  Journal  of  Catoira,  chief  purser  of 
Mendana's  fleet.  From  this  it  appears  that  the  use  of  the  betel-nut  was 
already  established.  Another  native  word,  na  mbolo,  a  pig,  also  occurs. 
Much  may  be  learnt  as  to  the  present  condition  of  the  Solomon  Islanders 
from  Mr.  Woodford's  Naturalist  among  the  Headhunted,  as  well  as  from 
Dr.  Guppy's  book ;  but  there  is  no  picture  of  native  life  So  good  as  that  given 
in  '  Percy  Porno.' 


IO  Introductory.  [CH. 

than  those  of  Santa  Cruz.  When  this  was  related  to  a 
mixed  group  of  Santa  Cruz  and  Reef  Island  boys  at  Norfolk 
Island,  it  was  at  once  declared  that  the  Spaniards  were  quite 
right,  that  the  Santa  Cruz  people  now  think  the  Reef  Island  boys 
sharper  than  their  own  ;  because  it  is  the  custom  of  their 
fathers  to  take  thern  with  them  on  their  voyages,  which 
Santa  Cruz  men  do  not  do.  The  very  short  stay  of  the 
Spaniards,  soon  assuming  hostile  relations,  cannot  be  thought 
to  have  affected  native  life  at  all;  the  looms  with  which 
they  weave  their  mats,  their  fowls,  common  till  lately  to  other 
islands  with  them,  and  many  other  things  in  which  a 
difference  has  been  observed,  are  mentioned  in  the  Spanish 
narrative.  There  is  nothing  in  the  account  of  the  discoveries 
of  Quiros  in  the  Banks'  Islands  and  New  Hebrides  to  shew 
any  difference  between  the  condition  of  the  native  people 
then  and  in  the  later  times,  when  they  have  become  well 
known  to  Europeans ;  but  it  may  be  observed  that  the 
Spaniards  began  to  kidnap,  doubtless  with  good  intentions, 
and  to  recognise  the  '  devil '  of  the  natives. 

In  the  interval  between  the  discoveries  of  Mendana  and 
Quiros  and  the  visits  of  whalers  and  missionaries  in  the 
present  century,  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  all 
memory  and  tradition  of  white  men  had  died  away  in  the 
Solomon  Islands  and  Santa  Cruz  1 ;  Europeans  appeared  again 
as  perfect  strangers.  We  are  able  therefore  to  conjecture 
how  the  first  explorers  appeared  to  the  natives,  when  we  know 
how  we  have  ourselves  appeared.    To  the  old  voyagers,  as 

1  Bishop  Selwyn  of  New  Zealand  began  his  missionary  voyages  in  1849, 
and  visited  the  Solomon  Islands  in  1850  ;  he  landed  on  sixty  islands  in  1857, 
in  which  year  the  Banks'  Islands  became  well  known  to  him.  In  1861  Bishop 
Patteson,  in  H.  M.  S.  Cordelia,  became  acquainted  with  Florida  and  Ysabel, 
the  yearly  visits  of  the  Melanesian  Mission  having  before  stopped  short  at 
Guadalcanal  From  that  year  forward  the  work  of  the  Mission  has  been 
regularly  carried  on  within  the  limits  of  Ysabel  to  the  west,  and  Mae, 
later  Pentecost,  to  the  south.  When  the  present  writer  made  his  first  voyage 
in  the  Mission  vessel,  the  Southern  Cross,  in  1863,  Bishop  Patteson  w  as 
generally  conversant  with  the  people  and  the  languages  of  the  islands  from 
New  Zealand  to  Ysabel. 


Xi  -j  Discoveries.  1 1 

to  later  discoverers,  it  was  a  matter  of  course  that  hitherto 
unknown  countries  should  be  found,  and  that  they  should  be 
inhabited  by  men  unlike  themselves;  but  to  the  natives 
it  was  a  strange  thing-  that  there  should  be  any  men  unlike 
themselves,  or  any  unknown  land  for  them  to  come  from. 
There  are  still  natives  in  these  islands  who  remember  when  a 
white  man  was  first  seen,  and  what  he  was  taken  to  be.  In 
the  Banks'  Islands,  for  example,  the  natives  believed  the  world 
to  consist  of  their  own  group,  with  the  Torres  Islands,  the  three 
or  four  northern  New  Hebrides,  and  perhaps  Tikopia,  round 
which  the  ocean  spread  till  it  was  shut  in  by  the  foundations 
of  the  sky.  The  first  vessels  they  remember  to  have  seen 
were  whalers,  which  they  did  not  believe  to  come  from  any 
country  in  the  world  ;  they  were  indeed  quite  sure  that  they 
did  not,  but  must  have  been  made  out  at  sea,  because  they 
knew  that  no  men  in  the  world  had  such  vessels.  In  the 
same  way  they  were  sure  that  the  voyagers  were  not  men  ;  if 
they  were  they  would  be  black.  What  were  they  then? 
They  were  ghosts,  and  being  ghosts,  of  necessity  those  of  men 
who  had  lived  in  the  world.  When  Mr.  Patteson  first  landed 
at  Mota,  the  Mission  party  having  been  seen  in  the  previous 
year  at  Vanua  Lava,  there  was  a  division  of  opinion  among 
the  natives ;  some  said  that  the  brothers  of  Qat  had  returned, 
certain  supernatural  beings  of  whom  stories  are  told ;  others 
maintained  that  they  were  ghosts.  Mr.  Patteson  retired  from 
the  heat  and  crowd  into  an  empty  house,  the  owner  of  which 
had  lately  died ;  this  settled  the  question,  he  was  the  ghost 
of  the  late  householder,  and  knew  his  home.  A  very  short 
acquaintance  with  white  visitors  shews  that  they  are  not 
ghosts,  but  certainly  does  not  shew  that  they  are  men ; 
the  conjecture  then  is  that  they  are  beings  of  another  order, 
spirits  or  demons,  powerful  no  doubt,  but  mischievous.  A 
ghost  would  be  received  in  a  peaceful  and  respectful  manner, 
as  European  visitors  have  always  in  the  first  instance  been 
received  ;  a  being  not  a  living  man  or  ghost  has  wonderful 
things  with  him  to  see  and  to  procure,  but  he  probably  brings 
disease  and  disaster.    To  the  question  why  the  Santa  Cruz 


12  Introductory.  j-CH 

people  shot  at  Bishop  Pattern's  party  in  1864,  when,  as 
far  as  can  be  known,  they  had  not  as  yet  any  injuries  from 
white  men  to  avenge,  the  natives  have  replied  that  their 
elder  men  said  that  these  strange  beings  would  bring  nothing 
but  harm,  and  that  it  was  well  to  drive  them  away;  and  as 
to  shooting  at  them,  they  were  not  men,  and  the  arrows  could 
not  do  them  much  harm.    It  is  sad  to  think  how  generally 
the  elder  men  have,  from  their  own  point  of  view  at  least, 
been  right ;  iron,  tobacco,  calico,  a  wider  knowledge  of  the 
world,  have  not  compensated  native  people  for  new  diseases 
and  the  weakening  of  social  bonds  \    White  visitors  have  not 
meant  to  do  the  natives  wrong,  but  they  have  in  fact  harmed 
them,  and  have  not  earned  moral  respect  at  any  rate  generally 
from  them.    Europeans  have  from  the  beginning  of  inter- 
course with  Melanesian  natives  kidnapped  them,  and  have 
persuaded  themselves  that  they  were  doing  them  a  service 
by  bringing  them  into  what  is  called  contact  with  civilization  ; 
the  natives  have  from  the  first  resented  the  kidnapping  of  their 
sons,  and  their  sons,  however  much  they  may  have  wished  to 
go  away  and  have  rejoiced  in  what  they  have  learnt  and 
acquired,  will  hardly  be  said  by  any  impartial  observer  to  have 
done  any  good  when  they  have  returned  ;  although  indeed  to 
some  people  the  power  of  speaking  a  little  'pigeon  English,'  for 
their  convenience,  seems  to  be  a  great  improvement  to  a  native. 

To  a  voyager  among  these  Melanesian  islands  who  has 
no  special  geological  learning  the  generally  volcanic  character 


1  I  believe  there  is  no  doubt  that  dysentery  was  unknown  in  the  islands 
till  natives  returned  from  residence  with  Europeans.  When  the  Nukapu 
men,  whose  kidnapping  was  the  immediate  cause  of  the  death  of  Bishop 
Patteson,  escaped  from  Fiji  and  made  their  way  to  their  native  island, 
dysentery,  before  unknown,  broke  out  there.  The  absence  of  a  native  name 
for  this  and  other  diseases,  is  to  some  extent  at  least  a  proof  of  recent  in- 
troduction. Within  my  own  recollection  syphilis,  or  the  venereal  disease 
which  was  taken  for  it,  was  unknown  in  the  islands  visited  by  the  Mela- 
nesian Mission,  except  at  San  Cristoval,  where  alone  intercourse  with  whalers 
and  traders  had  been  considerable.  It  has  lately  become  widely  known, 
and  it  is  certain  that  it  has  been  brought  back  by  returned  '  labourers,'  male 
and  female. 


i.]  Geology.  1 3 

of  them  cannot  fail  to  be  apparent.  The  lofty  land  of  Guadal- 
canar,  rising  to  a  height  of  8000  feet,  and  the  high  mountains 
of  Espiritu  Santo  and  New  Caledonia,  may  be  thought  by 
him  to  have  some  other  origin  ;  but  he  cannot  miss  the  still 
active  volcanos,  or  fail  to  observe  that  many  islands  have  the 
shape  of  those  that  are  active  in  a  more  or  less  perfect  or 
ruinous  condition.  The  vast  cone  of  Lopevi  in  the  New 
Hebrides  rises  to  an  apparent  point  at  the  height  of  5000  feet, 
and  has  been  seen  to  cast  out  smoke  and  ashes.  Tinakula,  as 
it  is  called,  near  Santa  Cruz,  the  native  name  of  which  is 
Tamami,  is  a  well-formed  cone  3000  feet  high.  When  Men- 
dana  was  attempting  his  settlement  in  1595,  the  point  of  the 
cone  was  blown  away;  the  volcano  is  now  very  active,  throwing 
out  glowing  masses  of  lava,  which  roll  down  into  the  sea. 
The  enormous  crater  of  Ambrym,  at  the  height  of  3500  feet, 
is  the  centre  of  vast  rugged  fields  of  lava,  hitherto  unapproach- 
able ;  round  this  main  mass  of  the  volcano  there  rise  lateral 
cones  no  longer  active,  forest-covered  to  their  peaks,  and 
affording*  perhaps  the  most  beautiful  of  Melanesian  landscapes. 
When  the  Solomon  Islands  were  discovered  Savo  was  active. 
Some  years  ago  an  eruption  was  expected  by  the  natives, 
because  the  old  people  remembered  or  had  been  told  of 
considerable  activity  some  fifty  years  before  ;  rumblings  were 
then  heard  and  smoke  was  seen  at  Florida :  the  steaming 
pool  and  hot  stream  flowing  from  it  are  often  visited.  In  the 
Banks'  Islands,  Vanua  Lava  is  always  steaming  from  its 
sulphur  springs.  Great  lateral  cones  on  the  north  and  east  of 
this  island  are  now  extinct,  but  the  streams  which  rise  in  the 
central  mass  run  warm  and  stinking  to  the  sea,  and  powder 
the  rocks  with  sulphur.  In  Santa  Maria  above  Lakona  there 
are  steaming  vents  on  the  ridge  of  the  ancient  crater  now 
filled  by  a  lake,  and  on  the  hill  Garat,  which  has  been  thrown 
up  within  it,  there  is  a  group  of  hot  pools,  sulphurous 
jets,  and  basins  of  boiling  mud  within  the  encircling  ridge,  from 
which  hot  streams  pour  down  into  the  lake  1.     Bligh  Island, 

1  Any  volcanic  vent,  from  an  active  crater  to  a  dead  solfatara,  is  in  the 
Banks'  Islands  a  vuro.    Three  of  those  near  Lakona  have  names,  one,  a  deep 


T4  Introductory.  rCH 

UT?PT  """^  examPle  ^  the  type  of  Amsterdam 
or  St.  Paul  s  Island  in  the  Indian  Ocean ;  the  sea  enters  the 
ancient  crater,  on  the  ridge  of  which,  rising  to  nearly  2000  feet 
is  a  steaming  vent.  Star  Island,  Meralava,  is  a  massive  cone 
nsmg  so  steeply  to  a  height  of  3000  feet,  that  it  surprises 
strangers  that  it  should  be  inhabited.  From  below  the  cone 
appears  to  terminate  in  a  cup  with  a  broken  lip,  but  Bishop 
Selwyn  and  Mr.  Palmer,  who  reached  the  top  in  1881  found 
a  more  recent  crater,  which  no  doubt  was  active  when  Quiros 
discovered  the  island  :  there  is  now  no  recollection  of  activity  1. 
In  the  New  Hebrides,  volcanic  action  has  not  yet  exhausted 
itself  on  Lepers'  Island  ;  it  is  probable  that  besides  the  very 
conspicuous  volcanos  of  Ambrym,  Lopevi,  and  Yazur  on 
Tanna,  there  are  many  solfataras  and  fumaroles  as  yet  un- 
noticed in  this  group. 

All  these  volcanic  islands,  whether  still  in  active  operation, 
or  stiU  fuming  with  latent  fires,  or  long  ago  extinct,  have 
dead  and  living  coral  round  their  base.  The  greater  number 
of  the  islands  lie  in  a  ruined  mass,  in  contrast  to  the  cones  of 
Lopevi  and  Tinakula  ;  in  some  the  volcanic  form  is  hidden  or 

pool  sluggishly  bubbling  and  steaming,  is  the  Old  Woman  ;  another  briskly 
active  is  the  Stranger's  Wonder ;  another,  the  New  Vuro,  though  evidently 
not  very  recent,  is  very  active  and  noisy.  In  the  largest  pool,  some  twenty  feet 
across,  two  jets  of  steam  raise  the  water  to  the  height  of  a  couple  of  feet,  and 
after  rain  very  much  higher.  When  I  was  there  in  1875  a  new  vent  had  been 
lately  opened  by  an  earthquake. 

1  Some  years  ago  a  native  lad  from  Mota  told  me  that  he  with  a  companion 
had  mounted  to  this  crater.  They  found  at  the  top  a  bare  stretch  of  stones, 
and  within  the  crater  a  lake  of  black  water,  covered  with  a  thick  black  cloud ; 
a  heavy  darkness  filled  the  place,  a  huge  bird  soared  round  their  heads,  awe 
and  horror  fell  upon  them,  and  they  turned  and  fled.  It  is  easy  to  talk 
lightly  about  native  superstitions.  Mr.  Palmer  thus  describes  the  crater. 
'  We  could  see  nothing  at  first,  as  a  cloud  was  over,  but  presently  it  lifted,  and 
we  saw  a  large  deep  crater  with  splendid  precipitous  sides,  in  some  places 
fully  three  hundred  feet  high.  There  is  a  small  pool  of  water  at  the  bottom, 
and  rather  on  one  side  a  second  perfectly  round  crater,  which  we  also  deter- 
mined to  look  into.  We  descended  through  trees  and  mosses ;  I  was  much 
interested  in  finding  the  tutu  of  New  Zealand  (coriaria  sarmentora),  which  I 
have  never  seen  anywhere  else  in  these  islands  ;  the  second  crater  goes  down 
to  a  point,  where  the  trees  and  ferns  are  of  better  growth.' 


j  -j  Volcanos.  1 5 

confused,  in  others  lateral  cones  and  craters  plainly  shew 
themselves ;  a  dense  forest  growth  generally  covers  all  from 
base  to  summit.    All  alike  have  coral  forming  a  certain  pro- 


MOTA. 

portion  of  their  mass,  the  rock  of  coral  formation  varying 
with  its  age.  Elevated  terraces  of  coral  appear  in  Futuna  and 
the  Loyalty  Islands.  The  figure  of  Mota,  in  the  Banks' 
Islands,  shews  the  primary  cone  with  a  shoulder  of  later 


*6  Introductory.  reH; 

discharges  standing  upon  a  broad  coral  base  uplifted  some  200 
feet  above  the  sea.  On  this  raised  surface  lie  blocks  of  volcanic 
stone,  while  the  ravines  cut  deep  through  it  by  the  torrents 
from  above  expose  to  view  the  madrepore  and  other  corals  of 
which  it  is  composed ;  on  the  beach  water-worn  fragments  of 
both  coral  and  volcanic  rock  lie  among  the  living  coral. 
In  the  Torres  Islands  terraces  formed  by  successive  upheavals 
are  conspicuous  ;  nothing  is  seen  but  coral ;  in  one  of  the 
islands,  at  least,  the  natives  have  to  dig  for  volcanic  stone 
that  will  bear  heat  for  their  ovens.  In  the  Banks'  Islands  it 
may  be  said  that  the  land  is  being  elevated  ;  a  patch  between 
Mota  and  Motalava  has  become  much  more  shallow  in  the 
last  few  years. 

Florida  in  the  Solomon  group  is  divided  into  three  parts  by 
two  channels  called  utuha,  and  calls  to  mind  the  mainland  of 
the  Aru  Islands,  as  described  in  Mr.  Wallace's  Malay  Archi- 
pelago. Though  the  northernmost  channel  is  pretty  wide,  the 
island  in  its  native  name,  Nggela,  and  in  native  conception,  is 
one,  and  neither  of  the  three  parts  has  a  name  of  its  own.  A 
similar  channel  divides  Mala  masiki  from  Mala  paina,  little 
from  great  Malanta.  In  Florida,  over  the  wider  channel 
which  is  called  from  this  utuha  ta  na  vula  the  Moon  Channel, 
there  is  a  cliff  white  as  chalk.  In  the  Banks'  Islands  small 
barren  patches,  rea,  of  coarse  grass  here  and  there  appear ; 
in  Florida  large  barren  spaces  of  this  kind  are  conspicuous,  as 
they  are  on  the  opposite  slopes  of  Guadalcanar,  and  change 
the  aspect  of  the  landscape  to  the  eyes  of  one  who  comes  from 
the  forest-covered  islands  to  the  East l. 


1  The  islands  may  be  roughly  classified  according  to  the  use  of  stone  or  shell 
implements  in  them.  In  the  Banks'  Islands,  Torres  Islands,  and  Santa  Cruz, 
they  had  only  shell  adzes,  and  used  obsidian  flakes  for  cutting  and  scraping. 
In  the  Solomon  Islands,  except  in  Rennell  and  Bellona,  and  the  New  Hebrides, 
the  implements  were  of  stone,  and  flakes  of  chert  were  used  ;  but  in  the  latter 
group  on  Lepers'  Island,  where  the  volcanic  force  is  not  yet  exhausted,  shell 
was  the  ancient  use.  Stone  adzes  in  my  possession  from  the  Solomon  Islands 
are  of  Andesite,  a  basaltic  lava,  from  Florida  compact  andesite,  from  Ulawa 
altered  andesite  ;  from  the  New  Hebrides,  one  from  Ambrym  is  Gabbro, 
one  from  Pentecost  is  Bastite  serpentine. 


i.]  Reef  Islands.  ■  Lakes.    Zoology.  1  7 

Whether  there  are  in  this  part  of  Melanesia  any  atolls 
properly  so  called  may  he  ,&  question.  There  are  lagoon 
islands  of  two  kinds.  The  Reef  Islands  of  the  Santa  Cruz 
group  show  flat  patches  of  sand  and  coral  resting  on  the  reefs ; 
such  a  one  is  Nukapu,  where  the  lagoon  is  two  miles  across. 
The  Matema  group,  part  of  the  same  Swallow  group,  consists 
of  several  sand  islets  resting  on  the  edge  of  a  very  large 
and  irregular  reef ;  two  of  the  islets,  which  are  only  separated 
at  high  tide,  are  very  characteristically  inhabited,  Nufilole  by 
a  score  or  two  of  Melanesians,  and  Fenua  loa,  as  the  name 
imports,  by  Polynesian  colonists  from,  the  East.  On  the  other 
hand,  Rowa  in  the  Banks'  group  consists  of  five  tiny  islets  on 
the  bight  of  an  irregular  reef  five  miles  long,  the  principal 
islet  being  formed  upon  a  jagged  point  of  volcanic  rock, 
to  all  appearance  a  fragment  of  the  edge  of  a  sunken  crater. 

The  Tas  in  the  middle  of  Santa  Maria  in  the  Banks'  Islands 
is  the  only  lake  of  considerable  size  known  in  Melanesia. 
It  is  about  five  miles  long,  occupying  the  hollow  of  the 
ancient  crater,  into  which  the  steaming  hill  Garat  has  been 
intruded;  the  waters  pour  out  in  a  magnificent  waterfall. 
There  is  a  much  smaller  lake  in  Vanua  Lava  which  feeds 
two  fine  cascades,  and  another  on  Lepers'  Island  with  a 
volcanic  vent  upon  its  edge.  Bishop  Selwyn  in  1888  found 
the  lake  at  Tikopia  covered  with  large  water-lilies ;  the  Tas 
of  Santa  Maria  will  surely  reward  its  first  scientific  visitor. 

A  few  words  may  be  ventured  on  the  natural  history  of  this 
part  of  Melanesia.  The  cuscus  common  in  the  Solomon  Islands 
does  not  reach  to  Santa  Cruz;  it  is  believed  to  exist  in 
Espiritu  Santo,  where  Quiros  reported  that  there  were  goats. 
The  white  cockatoo,  abundant  in  the  Solomon  Islands  generally, 
does  not  pass  the  two  straits  that  separate  respectively  Guadal- 
canal- and  San  Cristoval,  Malanta  and  Ulawa ;  but  while 
Ulawa  does  not  strike  the  unlearned  visitor  as  different  in  its 
zoology  from  Malanta,  the  birds  of  San  Cristoval  seem  few  and 
strange.  Frogs  stop  short  of  Santa  Cruz,  abundant  as  they 
are  in  the  Solomons.  A  remarkable  megapod  is  found  in  all 
the  groups,  if  not  of  more  than  one  species  at  any  rate  with 

C 


I°  Introductory.  [CHt 

different  habits.  At  Savo,  where  without  any  attempt  at 
domestication  they  have  become  private  property,  they  lay  in  a 
carefully  divided  and  appropriated  patch  of  sand,  and  come  out  of 
the  bush,  as  the  natives  say,  twice  a  day  to  lay  and  look  after 
their  eggs.  In  the  Banks'  Islands  and  the  New  Hebrides 
they  lay  their  eggs  in  the  hollow  of  a  decayed  tree  or  in  a 
heap  of  rubbish  they  have  scratched  together.  In  the  Banks' 
Islands  these  birds  are  called  malau,  as  they  are  maleo  in 
Celebes1.  The  native  breed  of  fowls  still  abounds  iu  Santa 
Cruz  ;  the  imported  fowls  seem  to  have  destroyed  and  replaced 
them  in  all  the  more  commonly  visited  places,  though  they 
were  common  thirty  years  ago2.  Crocodiles  are  abundant  in 
the  Solomon  Islands  and  Santa  Cruz  ;  they  are  sometimes  seen 
in  the  Banks'  Islands,  and  one  was  lately  killed  in  the  Torres 
Islands ;  they  are  known  and  named  in  the  Northern  New 
Hebrides.  The  name  throughout  is  the  same,  vua  or  via,  the 
Malay  luaya,  Malagasy  voay.  The  natives  of  Ysabel  maintain 
that  they  have  four  eyes,  two  for  clear  water,  and  two  for 
mud.  Snakes  are  not  everywhere  abundant ;  at  Mota  in  the 
Banks'  Islands  there  are  no  land  snakes,  and  the  natives 
maintain  that  if  imported  they  will  not  live ;  in  Vanua  Lava 
and  Saddle  Island  of  the  same  group,  those  that  live  among 
the  root-stems  of  the  huge  banyan-trees  are  said  to  attain  an 
enormous  size.  The  eels  in  the  Tas  of  Santa  Maria  are  some- 
times more  than  thirty  inches  in  girth.  It  is  tantalizing  to 
those  who  suffer  so  much  from  mosquitos  in  the  islands  now  to 
know  that  Mendana,  who  was  two  months  at  Santa  Cruz, 

1  Mr.  Wallace  remarks  of  tlie  maleo  of  Celebes,  that  tlie  difference  between 
the  sexes  is  so  slight  that  it  is  not  always  possible  to  distinguish  it  without 
dissection.  At  Savo  it  is  asserted  that  there  is  no  distinction  of  sex,  all  are 
hens  ;  ara  rnua  pufaia  na  tanotanoclika,  they  know  no  sexual  impropriety. 

2  The  rapidity  with  which  imported  fowls  have  replaced  the  indigenous 
breed  is  remarkable.  I  have  no  recollection  myself  of  having  seen  native 
fowls,  out  of  Santa  Cruz,  except  in  Lepers'  Island  and  Florida.  Mr.  Woodford 
remarks,  as  a  proof  how  little  native  tradition  can  be  depended  on,  that 
natives  assured  him  that  there  were  no  fowls  in  the  Solomons  until  white  men 
came.  They  meant,  no  doubt,  fowls  of  the  kind  before  tliem.  I  am  not  aware 
that  any  new  name  has  come  in  anywhere  in  the  Solomon  Islands,  as  kokoh  has 
in  the  Banks'  Islands,  for  the  new  fowlB. 


x.]  Zoology.  19 

and  Quiros,  who  lay  a  month  in  the  great  bay  of  Espiritu 
Santo,  both  declare  that  in  their  time  there  were  no 
mosquitos,  but  it  is  probably  the  small  house  fly  that  is 
meant.  The  variety  of  the  mosquitos  of  the  present  time  is 
interesting  with  all  the  suffering  they  bring ;  in  Mota  there 
is  but  one  kind,  which  bites  only  in  the  daylight;  in  Vanua 
Lava,  in  the  rainy  season,  they  drive  the  natives  to  bury  them- 
selves in  the  sea-sand  for  sleep.  The  same  name  for  the 
mosquito  prevails  from  the  Asiatic  continent  to  Fiji ;  and  the 
odious  blow-fly  carries  the  same  name  and  habits  through  all 
the  islands.  Dr.  Guppy  commends  the  habits  of  the  Birgus 
latro  to  the  attention  of  residents  in  the  Pacific  Ocean.  The 
account  of  it  in  Hazlewood's  Fiji  Dictionary  describes  how 
the  itgavule  climbs  cocoanut-trees,  pierces  and  drinks  the  young 
nuts,  husks  and  breaks  the  old  nuts  and  eats  the  meat;  how  it 
is  taken  by  tying  grass  round  the  tree  it  has  ascended,  so  that 
when  descending  backwards  it  reaches  as  it  believes  the 
ground,  and  loosing  its  hold  on  the  tree  it  falls  and  is  stunned  ; 
how  it  throws  earth  and  stones  into  the  face  of  its  pursuers. 
The  same  crab  or  lobster  is  called  ngair  in  the  Banks'  Islands, 
where  the  natives  assert  that  when  it  seizes  anything,  such  as 
a  man's  hand,  with  the  left  and  smaller  claw,  it  holds  till 
sundown;  on  which  account  that  claw  has  the  name  of 
sundown,  loaroro.  They  say  also  that  when  a  ngair  drops  a 
cocoanut  from  the  tree  upon  a  stone  to  break  it,  he  will  only 
eat  it  if  it  is  broken  smooth ;  if  the  fracture  is  jagged  he  will 
not  touch  it.  The  Wango  people  of  San  Cristoval  go  beyond 
probable  fact  when  they  relate  that  on  moonlight  nights  they 
paddle  over  to  the  little  island  Bin,  and  quietly  creeping  up  the 
beach  find  these  crabs  occupied  in  a  dance,  two  large  and  old 
ones  m  the  centre,  beating  time  with  one  claw  upon  the  other, 
and  the  rest  circling  round  and.  waving  their  claws  as  the 
dancing  natives  wave  their  clubs  ;  so  surprised  they  are  taken 
m  great  numbers 1. 

1  The  natives  do  not  believe  in  the  existence  of  anthropoid  apes.  They 
be heve  in  the  existence  of  wild  men,  and  Europeans  for  many  years  past  have 
interpreted  this  belief  to  imply  the  existence  of  apes.    See  Chafer  xSi 


CHAPTER  II. 


SOCIAL  EEGULATIONS.    DIVISIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE. 
KINSHIP  AND  MARKIAGE  CONNEXION. 

There  will  be  no  attempt  made  here  to  deal  with,  the 
Ethnology  of  Melanesia.  The  origin  of  the  Melanesian 
people,  in  their  various  seats  and  in  their  various  divisions, 
may  be  taken  to  be  unknown  ;  as  they  themselves  apparently 
have  no  traditions  and  no  opinions  about  the  matter,  and  in 
the  stories  which  pass  among  them  represent  themselves  to 
have  been  created  where  they  are.  The  variety  of  their 
languages,  and  to  a  much  less  extent  of  their  arts  and 
customs,  shews  that  they  have  not  come  in  one  body  into 
the  islands  they  now  inhabit ;  an  examination  of  their  lan- 
guages discovers  a  very  considerable  underlying  sameness ; 
and  the  present  book  may  be  taken  perhaps  as  an  evidence 
of  a  large  general  resemblance  in  the  religious  beliefs  and 
practices,  the  customs  and  ways  of  life,  which  prevail  in  the 
islands  which  are  here  embraced  in  a  common  view.  As 
knowledge  extends  and  detailed  information  is  brought  in 
from  all  sides,  a  connexion  will  no  doubt  be  traced  with 
regions  beyond  Melanesia ;  the  loom,  for  example,  peculiar 
to  Santa  Cruz  alone  among  the  islands  here  treated  of,  may 
connect  the  people  of  that  group  with  those  of  the  Caroline 
Islands;  many  things  in  common  between  Fiji  and  Mada- 
gascar besides  language  may  bring  those  countries  and  much 
that  lies  between  them  into  whatever  ethnographic  province 
the  latter  is  held  to  belong  to ;  but  to  endeavour  to  trace 
such  connexion  is  beyond  the  present  purpose,  which  is 
confined  to  the  exhibition  of  the  Melanesian  people  as  they 


Exogamous  Divisions. 


2  I 


now  appear.  There  are  not  wanting-  some  myths  of  origin, 
over  and  above  the  stories  of  creation  told  of  Koevasi,  Qat,  or 
Tagar.  It  is  said  at  Saa  for  example,  in  Mara  Masiki,  that 
men  sprung  spontaneously  from  a  sugar-cane  of  a  particular 
sort,  to/iu  nunu :  two  knots  began  to  shoot,  and  the  cane  below 
each  shoot  burst  asunder ;  from  one  came  out  a  man,  and  from 
the  other  a  woman,  the  parents  of  mankind.  It  is  of  more 
consequence  to  observe  the  meaning  of  the  words  by  which 
the  people  of  the  various  islands  describe  themselves  as  men. 
It  is  said  sometimes  that  people  discovered  in  isolation  from 
others  call  themselves  merely  '  men,'  without  a  name  for  their 
race  or  nation,  as  if  they  thought  themselves  the  only  men  in 
the  world.  In  Melanesia,  when  natives  were  first  asked  who 
they  were,  they  answered  '  men,'  meaning  that  they  were  not 
demons  or  ghosts,  but  living  men  ;  and  they  did  so  because 
they  did  not  believe  their  visitors  to  be  men,  but  ghosts  them- 
selves, or  demons,  or  spirits  belonging  to  the  sea. 

In  the  native  view  of  mankind,  almost  everywhere  in  the 
islands  which  are  here  under  consideration,  nothing  seems 
more  fundamental  than  the  division  of  the  people  into  two  or 
more  classes,  which  are  exogamous,  and  in  which  descent  is 
counted  through  the  mother.  This  seems  to  stand  foremost 
as  the  native  looks  out  upon  his  fellow  men ;  the  knowledge 
of  it  forms  probably  the  first  social  conception  which  shapes 
itself  in  the  mind  of  the  young  Melanesian  of  either  sex,  and 
it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  this  division  is  the  foundation 
on  which  the  fabric  of  native  society  is  built  up.  There  are 
no  Tribes  among  the  natives ;  if  the  word  tribe  is  to  be  ap- 
plied as  it  is  to  the  Maori  people  of  New  Zealand,  or  as  it  is 
used  in  Fiji.  No  portion  of  territory,  however  small,  can  be 
said  to  belong  to  any  one  of  tbese  divisions  ;  no  single  family 
of  natives  can  fail  to  consist  of  members  of  more  than  one 
division;  both  divisions  where  there  are  two,  and  all  the 
divisions  where  there  are  more  than  two,  are  intermixed  in 
habitation  and  in  property;  whatever  political  organization 
can  be  found  can  never  be  described  as  that  of  a  tribe  grouped 
round  its  hereditary  or  elective  chief.    It  is  probably  true 


22  Social  Regulations.  rCH< 

that  in  every  account  of  Melanesian  affairs  given  to  the  world 
tribes  are  spoken  of ;  but  a  belief  that  every  savage  people  is 
made  up  of  tribes  is  part  of  the  mental  equipment  of  a  civilized 
visitor;  when  one  reads  of  the  'coast  tribes'  or  the  'bush 
tribes/  nothing  more  is  meant  than  the  people  who  inhabit 
the  coast  or  the  inland  part  of  some  island. 

There  is,  however,  one  very  remarkable  exception  to  this 
general  rule  of  division  in  the  Solomon  Islands ;  it  is  not 
to  be  found  in  Ulawa,  Ugi,  and  parts  of  San  Cristoval, 
Malanta,  and  Guadalcanal  a  district  in  which  the  languages 
also  form  a  group  by  themselves,  and  in  which  a  difference  in 
the  decorative  art  of  the  people,  and  in  the  appearance  of  the 
people  themselves,  thoroughly  Melanesian  as  they  are,  can 
hardly  escape  notice.  In  this  region,  the  boundaries  of  which 
are  at  present  unknown,  there  is  no  division  of  the  people  into 
kindreds  as  elsewhere,  and  descent  follows  the  father.  This  is 
so  strange  that  to  myself  it  seemed  for  a  time  incredible,  and 
nothing  but  the  repeated  declarations  of  a  native  who  is  well 
acquainted  with  the  division  which  prevails  in  other  groups 
of  islands,  was  sufficient  to  fix  it  with  me  as  an  ascertained 
fact.  The  particular  or  local  causes  which  have  brought  about 
this  exceptional  state  of  things  are  unknown  ;  the  fact  of  the 
exception  is  a  valuable  one  to  note  l. 

Speaking  generally,  it  may  be  said  that  to  a  Melanesian 
man  all  women,  of  his  own  generation  at  least,  are  either 
sisters  or  wives,  to  the  Melanesian  woman  all  men  are  either 
brothers  or  husbands.  An  excellent  illustration  of  this  is 
given  in  the  story  of  Taso  from  Aurora  in  the  New  Hebrides, 
in  which  Qatu  discovers  and  brings  to  his  wife  twin  boys, 
children  of  his  dead  sister :  his  wife  asks,  '  Are  these  my 
children  or  my  husbands  ?  '  and  Qatu  answers, '  Your  husbands 
to  be  sure,  they  are  my  sister's  children.'  In  that  island 
there  are  two  divisions  of  the  people  ;  Qatu  and  his  wife  could 
not  be  of  the  same,  Qatu  and  his  sister  and  her  children  must 
be  of  the  same  ;  the  boys  therefore  were  possible  husbands  of 

1  '  Descent  is  still  uterine  in  some  parts  of  Fiji ;  most  of  the  tribes, 
however,  have  advanced  to  agnatic  descent.' — Ttev.  L.  Fison. 


a  j  Restriction  of  Intercourse.  23 

Qatu's  wife,  but  had  they  belonged  to  the  other  division  their 
age  would  have  made  her  count  them  her  children  rather  than 
her  brothers.  It  must  not  be  understood  that  a  Melanesian 
regards  all  women  who  are  not  of  his  own  division  as  in  fact 
his  wives,  or  conceives  himself  to  have  rights  which  he  may 
exercise  in  regard  to  those  women  of  them  who  are  unmarried  ; 
but  the  women  who  may  be  his  wives  by  marriage,  and  those 
who  cannot  possibly  be  so,  stand  in  a  widely  different  relation 
to  him  ;  and  it  may  be  added  that  all  women  who  may  become 
wives  in  marriage  and  are  not  yet  appropriated,  are  to  a  certain 
extent  looked  upon  by  those  who  may  be  their  husbands  as  open 
to  a  more  or  less  legitimate  intercourse.  In  fact  appropriation 
of  particular  women  to  their  own  husbands,  though  established 
by  every  sanction  of  native  custom,  has  by  no  means  so  strong 
a  hold  in  native  society,  nor  in  all  probability  anything  like 
so  deep  a  foundation  in  the  history  of  the  native  people,  as 
the  severance  of  either  sex  by  divisions  which  most  strictly 
limit  the  intercourse  of  men  and  women  to  those  of  the  section 
or  sections  to  which  they  do  not  themselves  belong.  Two 
proofs  or  exemplifications  of  this  are  conspicuous.  (1)  There  is 
probably  no  place  in  which  the  common  opinion  of  Melanesians 
approves  the  intercourse  of  unmarried  youths  and  girls  as  a 
thing  good  in  itself,  though  it  allows  it  as  a  thing  to  be 
expected  and  to  be  excused ;  but  intercourse  within  the  limit 
which  restrains  from  marriage,  where  two  members  of  the 
same  division  are  concerned,  is  a  crime,  is  incest.  In  Florida 
in  old  times  the  man  would  have  been  killed,  and  the  woman 
made  a  harlot ;  now  that  the  severity  of  ancient  manners  is 
relaxed,  money  and  pigs  can  condone  the  offence,  but  much 
more  than  is  exacted  if  a  man  is  found  sinning  with  one  who 
might  possibly  have  become  his  wife.  In  the  Banks'  Islands, 
where  the  divisions  of  the  people  are  two,  if  it  became  known 
that  two  members  of  one  of  them  had  been  guilty  of  this  dis- 
graceful crime,  as  they  considered  it,  the  people  of  the  other 
division  would  come  and  destroy  the  gardens  of  those  who 
belonged  to  that  in  which  the  offence  had  been  committed, 
and  these  would  make  no  resistance  nor  complaint.    It  was 


2  4  Social  Regulations.  [CH, 

the  same  in  Lepers'  Island  ;  where  the  offending-  man  had  also 
to  make  large  payment  to  the  near  relatives  of  the  woman 
with  whom  he  had  offended,  so  as  to  appease  their  anger,  and 
'fence  against'  the  fault.  Cases  of  incest  of  this  kind  were 
always  rare  in  all  the  islands,  so  strong  was  the  feeling  against 
intercourse  within  the  kin.  (2)  The  feeling  on  the  other  hand 
that  the  intercourse  of  the  sexes  was  natural  where  the  man 
and  woman  belonged  to  different  divisions,  was  shewn  by  that 
feature  of  native  hospitality  which  provided  a  guest  with  a 
temporary  wife.  That  this  is  done  now  or  has  lately  been 
done  is  readily  denied  in  the  Solomon  and  Banks'  Islands,  but 
is  not  denied  in  the  Northern  New  Hebrides ;  there  can  be 
little  doubt  that  it  was  common  everywhere.  But  the  woman 
supplied  to  the  guest  was  of  necessity  one  who  might  have 
been  his  wife  ;  the  companionship  of  one  of  his  own  kin  never 
could  be  allowed. 

It  will  be  convenient  in  the  more  particular  treatment  of 
this  subject,  to  take  examples  first  from  the  Banks'  Islands  and 
Northern  New  Hebrides,  where  the  people  are  divided  into  two 
kins,  and  then  from  the  Solomon  Islands,  where  the  divisions 
are  more  than  two.  The  same  two  divisions  run  through  the 
Banks'  Islands,  with  the  Torres  Islands  and  the  Northern  New 
Hebrides.  A  Banks'  islander  wherever  he  goes  in  his  own 
group  knows  his  own  kin,  and  if  he  passes  to  Aurora  in  the  New 
Hebrides  he  finds  the  same.  The  Aurora  men  know  well 
who  are  their  kin  in  Pentecost  and  Lepers'  Island  ;  the  Lepers' 
islanders  know  theirs  in  Espiritu  Santo.  Strange,  therefore, 
as  the  language  is  to  a  Mota  man  in  Pentecost,  or  to  a  Lepers' 
islander  in  Motalava,  each  is  at  home  in  a  way  which  would  be 
impossible  to  him  in  the  Solomon  Islands1.  In  neither  the 
Banks'  Islands  nor  the  New  Hebrides  is  there  a  name  to  dis- 
tinguish the  division  or  kindred ;  nor  is  there  any  badge  or 
emblem  belonging  to  either ;  in  their  small  communities 
every  neighbour  is  well  known.    Each  of  the  divisions  is  in 


1  A  Lepers'  Island  youth  staying  at  Motn  was  delivered  from  some  little 
difficulty  with  the  remark,  0  tanun  we  wia  gai,  gate  tanun  ta  Qauro,  He  is 
a  man  of  the  right  sort,  not  a  Solomon  islander. 


ii.]     Banks  Islands.    Divisions,    Adoption.  25 

Mota  called  a  veve,  in  Motlav  vev,  a  word  which,  in  itself 
sio-nifies  division.  Those'  who  are  of  one  veve  are  said  to  be 
tavala  ima  to  the  others,  that  is  'of  the  other  side  of  the  house.' 
A  woman  who  marries  does  not  come  over  to  her  husband's 
side  of  the  house  ;  she  is  said  to  be  ape  mateima,  '  at  the  door,' 
the  doors  being-  at  the  ends  of  the  native  houses  ;  nor  does  the 
husband  go  over  to  the  wife's  side  ;  the  children  belong  to  the 
mother's  side.  All  of  the  same  '  side  of  the  house '  are  sogoi  to 
one  another.  Hence  a  man's  children  are  not  his  sogoi,  his 
kindred  ;  his  nearest  relations  are  his  sister's  children.  There 
is  no  account  seriously  given  of  the  origin  of  the  two  divisions 
in  the  Banks'  Islands.  Within  the  two  veve  there  are  certain 
families  among  the  Banks'  Island  people,  the  members  of 
which  have  a  certain  family  pride,  and  endeavour  to  keep  up 
by  intermarriage  the  family  connexion.  The  best  known  of 
these  is  the  Lo  Sepere  family,  from  the  place  of  that  name  in 
Vanua  Lava,  where  Qat  is  believed  to  have  lived 1.  Adoption 
is  common,  and  has  no  particular  significance.  Childless 
parents  naturally  adopt  a  child  of  kin  to  the  wife,  so  that  the 
adopted  child  occupies  the  position  of  one  born  in  the  house ; 
but  if,  as  sometimes  happens,  an  orphan  child  from  the 
husband's  kin  is  adopted  out  of  pity,  it  is  brought  up  as  of  kin 
to  the  wife,  and  care  is  taken  to  conceal  the  fact  of  adoption. 
When  the  child  grows  up  and  by  some  chance  finds  out  that 
he  has  been  brought  up  on  the  wrong-  '  side  of  the  house/  he 
will  leave  his  foster  parents,  and  go  and  live  with  his  own 
sogoi.  Much  grief  and  bitterness  is  caused  by  such  a  dis- 
covery. 

In  Aurora,  Maewo,  the  nearest  of  the  New  Hebrides  to  the 
Banks'  Islands,  with  one  of  which,  Merlav,  there  is  a  good 
deal  of  communication,  the  members  of  the  two  divisions 

1  The  Lo  Sepere  family  of  Vanua  Lava  is  the  same  with  the  Tupueviga  of 
Gaua  and  the  Anamele  of  Mota.  On  the  other  side  of  the  house  the  Tapulia 
of  Gaua  and  Merlav  are  counted  the  same  with  three  groups  at  Mota,  viz.  Alo 
Gapmaras  of  Takelvarea,  the  Wotawota  of  Maligo,  and  the  Liwotuqe  of  Gatava 
These  family  groups  lie  within  the  veve,  but  do  not  take  in  all  the  veve  :  neither 
side  of  the  house  is  exhaustively  divided  into  family  groups 


26 


Social  Regulations. 


[ch. 


speak  of  one  another  as  1  of  the  other  side,'  ta  tavuluna  ;  and 
they  have  a  story  that  the  first  woman,  a  cowry  shell  that 
turned  into  a  woman,  called  the  men  to  her  and  divided  them 
into  her  hushands  and  her  brothers,  fathers  and  maternal 
uncles,  according  to  the  present  arrangements.  The  presence 
of  families  within  the  kin  in  this  island  is  very  remarkable. 
There  are  several  in  the  northern  part  of  the  island,  mostly 
named  from  the  places  where  they  are  formed.  There  is  one, 
however,  named  from  the  octopus,  wirita,  belonging  originally 
to  Bugita,  a  place  upon  the  shore.  The  connexion  between 
this  family  and  the  octopus  is  obscure ;  they  have  no  notion 
of  descent  from  the  wirita,  and  eat  it  as  freely  as  other  natives  ; 
but  if  a  man  of  another  family  desired  to  get  wirita  for  food, 
he  would  take  with  him  one  of  the  wirita  family  to  stand  on 
the  beach  at  Bugita,  and  cry  out,  '  So-and-so  wants  wirita ' ; 
then  plenty  would  be  taken.  It  seems  rather  as  though  the 
residence  of  this  family  where  wirita  are  abundant,  and  where 
the  beach  would  naturally  be  their  preserve  for  fishing,  had 
given  rise  to  a  belief  in  a  connexion  and  to  a  name.  Another 
family  named  '  At  the  Wotaga,'  from  their  home  near  a 
certain  fruit  tree,  would  not  bring  up  a  light-coloured  child ; 
if  such  a  one  were  among  them  they  thought  that  they  would 
die1. 

In  Araga,  Pentecost  Island,  though  irregular  intercourse 
between  members  of  the  same  kin  is  punished  by  the  de- 
struction of  the  gardens  of  the  offending  side  by  the  members 
of  the  other,  yet  marriages  within  the  kin  are  not- unknown. 
Those  who  contract  them  are  despised,  and  even  abhorred, 
but  money  and  pigs  having  been  given  and  received,  the 
marriage  stands.  In  Lepers'  Island,  Omba,  the  two  divisions 
are  called  '  bunches  of  fruit,'  wai  vung,  as  if  all  the  members 
hang  on  the  same  stalk.  Their  story  is  that  when  Tagar  first 
made  men  he  made  two,  both  male,  and  then  one  of  these 

1  To  these  lesser  divisions  or  family  groups  my  informant  (A.  Arudulewari) 
gives  the  name  of  veve,  as  to  the  two  great  kindreds.  For  example,  he  and 
Walter  Gao  are  of  the  Wirita  family,  Tarisuluana  is  of  the  Ta  Wongi,  a  place 
now  deserted ;  Vile  is  Ta  Lau  of  the  beach,  Tilegi  of  Suwumea. 


ii.]  Question  of  Communal  Marriage.  27 

took  a  tuber  of  qevu,  a  kind  of  yam,  and  threw  it  at  the  other, 
who  at  once  turned  into  a  woman,  and  cried  with  a  loud 
voice  that  many  men  should  die  because  of  women.  This 
woman  had  two  daughters,  who  fell  out ;  and  from  one  of 
these  sprang  one  waivung,  and  from  the  second  the  other. 
In  case  of  the  adoption  of  a  child  by  a  foster-mother  who  is  of 
the  other  '  bunch,'  the  secret  of  the  kindred  is  carefully  kept ; 
the  true  state  of  the  case  is  never  mentioned  by  those  who 
know  it,  until  the  time  for  marriage  comes.  This  is  done  out 
of  consideration  for  the  feelings  of  the  adopting  parents ;  but 
the  repugnance  to  marriage  within  the  kin  is  too  great  to 
allow  of  permanent  concealment. 

The  system  of  the  division  of  the  people  into  strictly 
exogamous  kins  is  no  doubt  best  seen  and  considered  where 
the  division  is  simple  and  separates  the  whole  population  on 
the  one  '  side  of  the  house '  and  the  other.  Two  questions 
may  here  therefore  be  suitably  raised ;  the  first,  whether  in 
this  division  there  are  traces  of  a  communal  system  of  marriage  ; 
the  second,  whether  the  system  is  sufficient  to  prevent  that 
which  it  seems  intended  or  maintained  in  order  to  prevent, 
namely,  the  marriage  of  persons  too  closely  allied  in  blood. 
In  regard  to  the  first  question  it  must  be  said,  on  the  one 
hand,  that  the  people  have  no  memory  of  a  time  when  all  the 
women  of  one  side  were  in  fact  common  wives  to  the  men  of 
the  other  side,  and  that  there  is  no  occasion  on  which  the 
women  become  common  to  the  men  who  are  not  of  their 
kin.  The  license  of  a  gathering  at  a  feast  is  confessed  to  be 
great,  but  it  is  disorderly  and  illegitimate,  and  is  not  defended 
on  the  ground  of  prescription.  If  a  great  man  making  a  feast 
gives  it  to  be  understood  that  he  will  not  allow  the  harmony 
of  the  gathering  to  be  spoilt  by  jealous  quarrelling  about 
women,  it  is  taken  as  a  festive  concession  ;  if  he  gives  out  that 
people  are  to  behave  well,  they  know  that  any  one  who  takes 
liberties  will  have  to  answer  for  it,  not  only,  as  on  ordinary 
occasions,  to  the  injured  husband,  but  to  the  powerful  master 
of  the  feast.  The  stories  also  of  the  creation  of  mankind, 
and  particularly  of  woman,  represent  individual  marriage. 


28 


Social  Regulations. 


[CH. 


When  Qat  wove  Iro  Lei  with  pliant  rods  and  made  her  live,  it 
was  to  be  his  own  wife  ;  his  brothers  tried  to  carry  her  off  for 
themselves,  one  woman  among  eleven  of  them,  but  they  are 
said  to  be  stealing-  her,  not  claiming  a  right.    When  he 
made  men,  male  and  female,  he  assigned  to  each  man  his 
wife.    On  the  other  side  is  to  be  set  the  testimony,  the  strong 
testimony,  of  words.    This  is  given  by  the  plural  form  in 
which  the  terms  for  1  mother '  and  '  husband '  or  '  wife '  are 
expressed.    In  the  Mota  language  the  form  is  very  clear ; 
ra  is  the  plural  prefix ;  the  division,  side,  or  kin,  is  the  veve, 
and  mother  is  ra  veve ;  soai  is  a  member,  as  of  a  body,  or  a 
component  part  of  a  house  or  of  a  tree,  and  ra  soai  is  either 
husband  or  wife.    To  interpret  ra  as  a  prefix  of  dignity  is 
forbidden  by  the  full  consciousness  of  the  natives  themselves 
that  it  expresses  plurality.    The  kin  is  the  veve,  a  child's 
mother  is  '  they  of  the  kin,'  his  kindred.    A  man's  kindred 
are  not  called  his  veve  because  they  are  his  mother's  people ; 
she  is  called  his  veve,  in  the  plural,  his  kindred,  as  if  she  were 
the  representative  of  the  kin ;  as  if  he  were  not  the  child  of 
the  particular  woman  who  bore  him,  but  of  the  whole  kindred 
for  whom  she  brought  him  into  the  world.    By  a  parallel  use 
to  this  a  plural  form  is  given  to  the  Mota  word  for  child, 
reremera,  with  a  doubled  plural  sign  ;  a  single  boy  is  called  not 
'  child '  but  '  children,'  as  if  his  individuality  were  not  dis- 
tinguished from  the  common  offspring  of  his  veve.    The  same 
plural  prefix  is  found  in  other  Banks'  Island  words  meaning 
mother ;  rave  in  Santa  Maria,  retne  in  Vanua  Lava,  rente  in 
Torres  Islands.    The  mother  is  called  raialu  in  Whitsuntide, 
tm&rata/iiffi  in  Lepers'  Island,  that  is  the  sisters,  the  sisterhood, 
because  she  represents  the  sister  members  of  the  waivung  who 
are  the  mothers  generally  of  the  children.    Similarly  the  one 
word  used  for  husband  or  wife  has  the  plural  form.    In  Mota 
a  man  does  not  call  his  wife  a  member  of  him,  a  component 
part  of  him,  but  his  members,  his  component  parts  ;  and  so  a 
wife  speaks  of  her  husband.    It  is  not  that  the  man  and  his 
wife  make  up  a  composite  body  between  them,  but  that  the 
men  on  the  one  side  and  the  women  on  the  other  make  up  a 


ii.]      Testimony  of  Words.    Agnatic  Descent.  29 

composite  married  body.  The  Mota  people  know  that  the 
word  they  use  means  this ;  it  was  owned  to  myself  with  a 
blush  that  it  was  so,  with  a  Melanesian  blush,  and  a  protesta- 
tion that  the  word  did  not  represent  a  fact.  The  word  used 
in  Motlav,  part  of  Saddle  Island,  gives  hardly  the  less  con- 
firmation to  this  interpretation  of  the  Mota  word  because  it 
has  not  a  plural  form  ;  in  Motlav  ignige  has  the  same  meaning 
with  the  Mota  soai ;  a  man  says  of  his  leg  or  his  arm  ignih, 
my  membei',  one  of  my  members,  and  he  calls  also  his  wife 
ignik,  while  she  calls  him  the  same. 

As  concerns  the  second  point  in  question,  it  is  apparent  that 
the  strict  rule  of  exogamy  as  regards  the  kin  leaves  marriage 
open  to  those  who  are  very  near  in  blood  ;  for  a  man  is  not  of 
kin  to  his  own  children,  and  a  man  is  not  of  kin  to  his 
brother's  children.  But  although  it  is  the  intermarriage  of 
sogoi,  members  of  the  same  veve,  that  is  strictly  forbidden, 
and  the  descent  is  always  counted  by  the  mother,  yet  the 
blood  connexion  with  the  father  and  the  father's  near  relations 
is  never  out  of  sight.  Consequently  the  marriage  of  those 
who  are  near  in  blood,  though  they  are  not  sogoi  and  may 
lawfully  marry,  is  discountenanced.  In  Mota,  for  example, 
the  children  of  a  brother  and  sister  are  thought  too  near  to 
marry.  The  brother  and  sister  are  both  of  one  veve,  A,  as 
children  of  one  mother ;  the  children  of  the  sister  are  of  her 
veve,  A ;  the  brother's  children  are  of  the  veve  B,  following 
their  mother,  who  must  needs  be  of  the  other  side  of  the 
house.  It  appears  then  that  the  two  cousins,  children  of  a 
brother  and  sister,  are  not  sogoi,  one  being  A  and  the  other  B, 
and  that  they  can  marry.  But  they  will  not ;  the  match 
will  not  be  made  ;  if  they  married  they  would  be  said  to  '  go 
wrong1.'  It  will  be  seen  that  the  succession  to  property 
shews  the  same  tendency,  perhaps  a  recent  tendency,  to  the 
recognition  of  agnatic  descent. 

Florida,  and  the  parts  of  the  Solomon  Islands  adjacent  to  it, 
afford  an  example  of  the  division  of  the  people  into  more  than 
two  exogamous  kindreds.    In  Florida  these  divisions  are  six, 

1  As  in  the  caae  of  Dudley  and  Agnes  in  the  Mota  pedigree  further  on. 


3Q 


Social  Regulations. 


[ch. 


called  kema,  and  each  has  its  distinguishing-  name.  These 
are  the  Nggaombata,  the  Manukama  or  Honggokama,  the 
Honggokiki,  the  Kakau,  the  Himbo,  and  the  Lahi.  But 
these  six  kema  no  doubt  represent  a  much  simpler  original 
division ;  for  two  of  them  have  local  names,  of  Nggaombata 
in  Guadalcanal1,  and  Himbo,  the  Simbo  somewhat  indefinitely 
placed  among  the  islands  to  the  west,  from  whence  these  two 
kema  are  known  to  have  come.  The  Nggaombata  and  the 
Himbo,  perhaps  only  as  strangers,  go  together  ;  and  the  Lahi, 
a  small  division,  are  said  to  be  so  closely  connected  with  Himbo 
that  the  members  cannot  intermarry.  Whether  Honggokama 
and  Manukama  are  names  of  one  kema,  or  of  two  divisions 
into  which  the  one  is  separating,  is  a  question.  The  Honggo- 
kama and  the  Honggo-kiki,  the  great  and  the  little,  are  plainly 
parts  of  one  original.  It  is  not  the  case  in  Florida  that  an 
originally  double  division  has  simply  split  and  split  again ; 
but  the  settlement  of  foreigners  has  so  complicated  the 
arrangement  that  few  natives  profess  to  be  able  to  follow  it 1. 
Yet  the  foreigners  have  undoubtedly  brought  with  them  a 
distinct  sense  of  kinship  with  one  or  other  of  the  local  kema. 
The  strict  rule  of  exogamy  is  not  a  sufficient  limit  to  the 
right  of  marriage ;  here  also,  as  in  the  eastern  islands,  it  is 
supplemented  by  a  strong  public  opinion  as  to  what  is  right. 
A  remarkable  instance  of  this  occurred  a  few  years  ago,  when 
Takua,  a  considerable  chief,  took  to  himself  the  daughter 
of  one  of  his  wives.  The  girl  was  not,  of  course,  of  his  own 
kema,  and  so  far  he  was  within  his  right,  but  the  sense  of 
decency  and  propriety  of  the  people  was  outraged,  and  the  man's 
influence  as  a  chief  was  much  diminished.  In  Bugotu  of  Ysabel 
there  are  three  vinahuhu :  Dhonggokama,  Vihuvunagi,  and  Poso- 


1  This  is  illustrated  by  the  case  of  Alfred  Lombu,  who,  returning  from 
Norfolk  Island  in  search  of  a  wife,  proposed  for  a  daughter  of  Takua,  the  chief 
of  Mboli.  The  girl  was  not  of  the  same  kema  in  name  with  Lombu,  and  he 
maintained  that  he  was  not  aware  that  his  kema  and  hers  were  in  fact  the 
same;  but  Takua  imposed  upon  him  a  heavy  fine,  seeing  an  opportunity  for 
possessing  himself  of  the  money  accumulated  for  the  marriage,  and  professing 
great  indignation  at  the  outrage  on  propriety. 


n,]  Florida  and  Bugotu.  31 

mogo,  not  one  of  which  now  corresponds  exactly  with  either  of 
the  Florida  kema.  But  the  Dhonggokama,  they  say,  is  the  same 
as  the  ancient  kema  which  has  split  into  the  Honggokama 
and  Honggokiki  in  Florida ;  and  the  other  two  may  be  well 
believed  to  be  themselves  the  divided  other  member  of  the 
original  pair.  The  meaning  of  the  names  of  three  of  the 
Florida  kema,  besides  the  two  that  are  local,  are  known ; 
Honggo  is  cat's-cradle,  Manukama  is  an  eagle,  Kakau  is  a 
crab.  It  is  evident  that  when  the  divisions  of  a  people  mul- 
tiply names  must  be  given  them  ;  where  there  are  two  '  sides  of 
the  bouse'  no  name  is  needed  for  either,  but  when  a  man  may 
have  wives  and  children  of  three  or  four  kindreds  not  his  own, 
a  name  for  each  kin  is  necessary  to  maintain  the  matriarchal 
system  of  descent  through  the  mother. 

It  adds  veiy  much  to  the  distinction  between  these  kema, 
that  each  has  some  one  or  more  buto  from  which  its  members 
must  keep  clear,  abstain  from  eating,  approaching,  or  beholding 
it 1.  One  of  the  very  first  lessons  learnt  by  a  Florida  child  is 
what  is  its  buto,  its  abomination,  to  eat  or  touch  or  see  which 
would  be  a  dreadful  thing.  In  one  case,  and  in  one  case  only, 
this  buto  is  the  living  creature  from  which  the  kema  takes  its 
name ;  the  Kakau  kin  may  not  eat  the  Kakau  crab.  The 
Nggaombata  may  not  eat  the  giant  clam ;  the  Labi  may  not 
eat  of  a  white  pig  ;  the  Manukama  ra&y  not  eat  the  pigeon  ; 
the  Kakau,  besides  their  eponymous  crab,  may  not  eat  the 
parrot  Trichoglossus  Massena.  The  Manukama  are  at  liberty 
to  eat  the  bird  from  which  they  take  their  name.  If  the 
question  be  put  to  any  member  of  these  kema  he  will  probably 
answer  that  his  buto  is  his  ancestor;  a  Manukama  will  say 
that  the  pigeon  he  does  not  eat  is  his  ancestor;  but  an 
intelligent  native,  describing  this  native  custom,  writes : — 
'  This  is  the  explanation  of  the  buto.  We  believe  these  iindalo 
(the  object  of  worship  in  each  kema)  to  have  been  once  living 
men,  and  something  that  was  with  them,  or  with  which  they 
had  to  do,  has  become  a  thing  forbidden,  tambu,  and  abominable, 

1  Thus  in  '  Percy  Pomo '  a  man  is  horrified  at  seeing  blue  trousers,  the 
colour  of  some  part  of  the  inside  of  the  shark,  which  was  his  buto. 


3 2  Social  Regulations.  [CH( 

buto,  to  those  to  whom  the  tmdah  belongs.'  He  gives  the 
example  of  the  clam  of  the  Nggaombata.  The  ghost,  tindalo, 
of  a  famous  ancient  member  of  that  kema,  named  Polika, 
haunted  a  beach  opposite  Mage,  and  a  large  snake,  poli,  was 
believed  to  represent  him  there.  The  Nggaombata  could  not 
approach  that  beach,  Polika  was  their  buio1.  On  another 
beach  where  they  catch  fish  wherewith  to  sacrifice  to  Polika 
is  a  ffima,  a  clam,  which  they  call  Polika,  and  used  to  believe 
to  be  in  some  way  Polika ;  hence  the  gima  in  their  buto. 

There  will  occur  at  once  the  question  whether  in  this  we  do 
not  find  totems.  But  it  must  be  asked  where  are  the  totems? 
in  the  living  creatures  after  which  two  of  the  divisions  are 
named,  or  in  those  creatures  which  the  members  of  the  several 
divisions  may  not  eat  ?  It  is  true  that  the  Kakau  kindred 
may  not  eat  the  crab  kakau  ;  but  the  Manukama  may  eat 
the  bird  manukama.  If  there  be  a  totem  then  it  must  be 
found  in  the  buto ;  in  the  pigeon  of  the  Manukama  and  the 
giant  clam  of  the  Nggaobata,  which  are  said  to  be  ancestors. 
But  it  must  be  observed  that  the  thing  which  it  is  abominable 
to  eat  is  never  believed  to  be  the  ancestor,  certainly  never  the 
eponymous  ancestor,  of  the  clan  ;  it  is  said  to  represent  some 
famous  former  member  of  the  clan,  one  of  a  generation  beyond 
that  of  the  fathers  of  the  present  member  of  it,  a  kukua.  The 
thing  so  far  represents  him  that  disrespect  to  it  is  disrespect 
to  him.  The  most  probable  explanation  of  these  buto  may 
indeed  throw  light  upon  the  origin  of  totems  elsewhere,  but 
can  hardly  give  totems  a  home  in  the  Solomon  Islands.  The 
buto  of  each  kema  is  probably  comparatively  recent  in  Florida ; 
it  has  been  introduced  at  Bugotu  within  the  memory  of  living 
men.  It  is  in  all  probability  a  form  of  the  custom  which 
prevails  in  Ulawa,  another  of  the  Solomon  Islands.  It  was 
observed  with  surprise  when  a  Mission  school  was  established 


1  2Va  butodira  Gaobata  na  tidalo  eni,  That  ghost  is  the  buto  of  the 
Nggaombata.  The  origin  of  the  prohibition  is  respect  for  Polika  ;  those  of  his 
"kema  would  not  intrude  upon  the  beach  he  haunted,  nor  would  they  eat  the 
clam,  because  the  clam  on  the  reef  represented  him.  They  have  now  looked 
in  vain  for  the  snake. 


II.] 


Florida  Divisions. 


33 


in  that  island,  that  the  people  of  the  .place  would  not  eat 
bananas,  and  had  ceased  to  plant  the  tree.  It  was  found 
that  the  origin  of  this  restraint  was  recent  and  well  re- 
membered ;  a  man  of  much  influence  had  at  his  death  not 
long-  ago  prohibited  the  eating  of  bananas  after  his  decease, 
saying  that  he  would  be  in  the  banana.  The  elder  natives 
would  still  give  his  name  and  say,  '  We  cannot  eat  So-and- 
So.'  When  a  few  years  had  passed,  if  the  restriction  had 
held  its  ground,  they  would  have  said,  'We  must  not  eat 
our  ancestor.'  This  represents  what  is  not  uncommon  also 
in  Malanta  near  Ulawa,  where,  as  in  Florida  also,  a  man 
will  often  declare  that  after  death  he  will  be  seen  as  a 
shark. 

These  divisions,  kema,  are  not  political  divisions 1.  It  is  not, 
as  in  the  Banks'  Islands  where  every  house  must  needs  contain 
members  of  both  divisions,  that  every  kema  will  be  represented 
in  every  village,  for  one  or  two  of  the  smaller  may  have  no 
member  there  ;  but  every  man's  wife,  or  wives,  and  all  his 
children,  must  needs  be  of  a  kema  different  from  his  own,  and 
every  village  must  have  its  population  mixed.  The  property 
of  the  members  of  each  kema  is  intermixed  with  that  of  the 
others.  In  a  considerable  village  the  principal  chief  is  the 
head  of  the  kema  which  predominates  there,  and  he  exercises 
his  authority  over  all,  while  the  principal  men  of  the  less 
numerous  kema  are  lesser  chiefs.  It  is  evident  that  the  pre- 
dominance of  any  kema  cannot  be  permanent.  A  chiefs  sons 
are  none  of  them  of  his  own  kin  ;  and,  as  will  be  shewn,  he 
passes  on  what  he  can  of  his  property  and  authority  to  them. 
If  then  in  a  certain  district  one  kindred  is  now  most  numerous, 
m  the  next  generation  it  cannot  be  so,  for  the  children  of 
those  now  most  numerous  will  be  naturally  many  more  in 

1  When  some  outrage  on  white  men  has  been  committed  the  'tribe'  is 
supposed  responsible;  but  any  party  of  natives  concerned  is  sure  to  be 
made  up  of  members  of  both  veve  or  several  Tcema,  and  some  of  these  prob- 
ably do  not  belong  to  the  place  where  the  outrage  is  committed.  Of  the  five 
natives  who  cut  off  the  boat  at  Mandoliana  in  1880,  only  two  were  of  the  same 
kema,  and  only  one  was  at  home  at  Gaeta. 

D 


1 


34  Divisions  of  the  People.  [CH. 

number,  and  will  none  of  them  be  of  kin  to  their  fathers. 
Thus  it  was  that  twenty  years  ago  the  Nggaombata  was  the 
dominant  hema  in  Florida,  and  to  be  a  great  chief  it  was  said 
that  a  man  must  be  Nggaombata  ;  but  now  the  Manukama 
are  rising  into  the  chief  place,  and  supply  the  chiefs  in  many 
districts  of  the  island. 

The  system  by  which  the  Melanesian  people  are  thus  divided 
into  exogamous  groups  in  which  descent  follows  the  mother, 
receives  of  course  the  name  of  a  Matriarchal  system ;  but  it 
must  be  understood  that  the  mother  is  in  no  way  the  head  of 
the  family.  The  house  of  the  family  is  the  father's,  the 
garden  is  his,  the  rule  and  government  are  his  ;  it  is  into  the 
father's  house  that  the  young  bridegroom  takes  his  wife,  if 
he  has  not  one  ready  of  his  own.  The  closest  relationship, 
however,  according  to  native  notions,  is  that  which  exists 
between  the  sister's  son  and  the  mother's  brother,  because  the 
mother  who  transmits  the  kinship  is  not  able  to  render  the 
service  which  a  man  can  give.  A  man's  sons  are  not  of  his 
own  kin,  though  he  acts  a  father's  part  to  them ;  but  the  tie 
between  his  sister's  children  and  himself  has  the  strength  of 
the  traditional  bond  of  all  native  society,  that  of  kinship 
through  the  mother.  The  youth  as  he  begins  to  feel  social 
wants,  over  and  above  the  food  and  shelter  that  his  father 
p-ives  him,  looks  to  his  mother's  brother  as  the  male  re- 
presentative  of  his  kin.  It  is  well  known  that  in  Fiji  the 
vasu,  the  sister's  son,  has  extraordinary  rights  with  his 
maternal  uncle.  The  corresponding  right  is  much  less  con- 
spicuous and  important  than  this  in  the  Melanesian  Islands 
west  of  Fiji ;  but  it  is  a  matter  of  course  that  the  nephew 
should  look  to  his  mother's  brother  for  help  of  every  kind, 
and  that  the  uncle  should  look  upon  his  sister's  son  as  his 
special  care ;  the  closeness  of  this  relation  is  fundamental. 
The  connexion  of  kinship  through  the  mother  with  the  great 
exogamous  group,  and  that  of  blood  through  the  father  with 
his  family,  thus  stand  in  clear  recognition,  and  to  a  certain 
extent  necessarily  conflict  one  with  another.  The  connexion 
caused  by  marriage  between  members  of  the  groups  and 


h.]  Banks  Island  System.  35 

families  is  a  third  relation  equally  felt  and  expressed  in  words. 
The  terms  therefore  in  which  the  various  degrees  of  relation- 
ship are  conveyed  fall  into  three  classes ;  the  first  of  the  kin- 
ship through  the  mother,  the  second  of  the  family  generally 
on  father's  and  mother's  side,  the  third  those  following  on 
marriage. 

A  complete  view  of  the  system  of  relationship  with  the 
terms  that  express  it,  in  any  one  native  field  in  Melanesia, 
cannot  indeed  be  taken  to  shew  what  everywhere  prevails, 
but  as  giving  a  representative  example  is  very  valuable  ;  the 
Mota  system,  which  may  well  stand  for  that  of  the  Banks' 
group,  can  perhaps  be  shewn  completely  and  exactly. 

(1)  It  has  been  said  that  all  the  members  of  each  of  the  two 
t  exogamous  divisions  of  the  people  are  sogoi,  that  is  of  kin,  to 

one  another ;  the  only  other  relation  belonging  to  this  kinship 
is  that  between  the  maternal  uncle  and  his  sister's  children, 
male  and  female,  expressed  in  the  terms  maraui  and  vanangol. 
The  uncle  is  maraui  to  his  sister's  child,  the  nephew  or  niece 
is  vanaiujoi  to  the  mother's  brother ;  but  the  nephew  is  also 
called  maraui  to  his  uncle.  The  relation  passes  on  to  the 
second  generation  ;  the  children  of  a  man's  sister's  daughters 
are  his  vanangoi,  they  are  still  of  his  kin ;  but  his  sister's  son's 
children  are  of  the  other  veve,  the  special  tie  of  kindred  is 
broken  ;  they  are  called  his  children,  being  brought  up  to  stand 
in  the  same  generation  with  their  parents.  A  man's  sister's 
child,  his  vanangoi,  stands  as  if  in  the  same  generation  with 
himself. 

(2)  Putting  aside  connexion  by  marriage,  and  the  special 
relation  of  the  maraui  and  vanangoi,  which  follows  upon  the 
passing  of  kindred  through  the  mother,  relationship  generally 
can  be  arranged  in  four  successive  stages  of  generation  ;  the 
grandparents,  the  parents,  the  children,  the  grandchildren. 
Take  the  present  generation,  tarangiu,  of  young  married  men 
and  women ;  they  are  brothers  and  sisters ;  the  generation 
above  them  are  their  fathers  and  mothers  ;  the  generation  be- 
low them  are  their  children  ;  the  generation  below  that  will  be 
their  grandchildren,  to  whom  again  all  who  come  before  their 

D  2 


36         Kinship  and  Marriage  Connexion.  [ch. 

parents  are  grandparents  and  ancestors.    The  terms  tamai 
and  veve  must  be  translated  by  father  and  mother,  and  are 
used  generally  to  all  of  the  same  generation  with  the  parents 
who  are  '  near '  and  belong  to  the  family  connexion.    A  child, 
son  or  daughter,  is  nalui;   grandparent  and  grandchild, 
ancestor  and  descendant,  is  tupui1.    The  terms  equivalent  to 
brother  and  sister  are  used  on  a  different  principle  from  that 
with  which  we  are  familiar,  and  according  to  which  the  sex  of 
the  person  referred  to  determines  the  use  of  the  word.  In 
Melanesia,  as  elsewhere,  one  word  describes  the  relationship 
of  persons  of  the  same  sex,  and  the  other  word  describes  the 
relationship  of  persons  of  different  sexes.    Men  are  tasiu  to 
men,  and  women  tasiu  to  women ;  men  are  tutuai  to  women, 
and  women  tutuai  to  men.     There  is  a  further  difference, 
the  sex  being  the  same,  the  elder  man  or  woman  is  tugui  to 
the  younger,  the  younger  man  or  woman  is  tasiu  to  the  elder ; 
but  tasiu  is  the  prevailing  use.    It  may  be  observed  in  this 
system  of  terms  of  relationship  that  all  of  one  generation, 
within  the  family  connexion,  are  called  fathers  and  mothers  of 
all  the  children  who  form  the  generation  below  tbem  ;  a  man's 
brothers  are  called  fathers  of  his  children,  a  woman's  sisters 
are  called  mothers  of  her  children  ;  a  father's  brothers  call  his 
children  theirs,  a  mother's  sisters  call  her  children  theirs. 
Upon  this  it  has  to  be  remarked  that  this  wide  use  of  the 
terms  father  and  mother  does  not  at  all  signify  any  looseness 
in  the  actual  view  of  proper  paternity  and  maternity;  they 
are  content  with  one  word  for  father  and  uncle,  for  mother 
and  aunt,  when  the  special  relation  of  the  kinship  of  the 
mother's  brother  does  not  come  in ;  but  the  one  who  speaks 
has  no  confusion  as  to  paternity  in  his  mind,  and  will  correct 
a  misconception  with  the  explanation,  'my  own  child,  tur 

1  It  may  be  observed  that  the  principal  terms  of  relationship  are  generally 
the  same,  not  only  in  the  Melanesian  islands  here  in  view,  but  throughout  the 
languages  with  which  the  Melanesian  languages  -are  connected  ;  mother  being 
an  exception.  Common  words  however  are  not  always  used  in  the  same  appli- 
cation, as  the  Florida  tubw  is  no  doubt  the  Mota  tupu. 


iji  A  Mota  Family.  37 

natuk ;  his  real  father,  tur  tamana ;  iur  tasina,  his  brother  not 
his  cousin1.' 

(3)  A  general  term  qaliga  embraces  all  of  the  other  side  of 
the  house  who  have  been  brought  near  by  marriage,  fathers- 
in-law,  mothers-in-law,  sons-  and  daughters-in-law,  and  all 
their  brothers  and  sisters.  A  man  and  his  wife's  brother  call 
one  another  wulus,  and  a  woman  and  her  husband's  sister  call 
one  another  walu  ;  but  the  man  is  also  called  walu  ;  and  both 
terms  are  extended  to  the  cousins  of  the  husband  or  wife.  A 
woman  does  not  call  her  husband's  brother  her  brother-in-law  ; 
she  is  nothing  to  him,  though  her  children,  being  his  brother's 
children,  are  called  his.  A  man  calls  his  daughter-in-law 
tawarig.  There  is,  moreover,  a  term  of  marriage  relation  to 
which  no  equivalent  exists  in  English  ;  parents  whose  children 
have  intermarried  call  one  another  gasala,  which  may  be  trans- 
lated fellow- wayfarers. 

A  genealogical  table  or  pedigree  of  a  Mota  family  (see  p.  38) 
will  supply  examples  of  the  various  relationships  subsisting, 
and  make  clear  the  application  of  the  various  terms.  The 
two  veve,  the  two  sides  of  the  house,  are  distinguished  by  the 
letters  A  and  JB  for  males,  a  and  b  for  females.  All  A  and  a, 
B  and  I,  are  sogoi  respectively,  as  belonging  to  the  same  side 
of  the  house ;  and  as  besides  they  are  '  near '  to  one  another  by 
blood,  they  will  call  one  another  tasiu  and  tutuai  when  the 
relationship  strictly  conveyed  by  those  words  is  absent.  The 
prefix  Ro  marks  a  feminine  name.  The  points  in  the  pedigree 
marked  with  asterisks  recpiire  some  explanation,  but  are 
almost  entirely  covered  by  the  principle  that  a  man's  sister's 
son,  his  vanangoi,  takes  his  place  in  the  family  on  the  same 

1  Before  the  native  use  is  well  understood  it  is  certainly  perplexing  and 
misleading.  As  an  example,  a  boy  named  Tarioda  came  from  Araga  to  Norfolk 
Island.  Eemembering  a  youth  of  the  same  name  from  the  same  island,  I 
enquired  if  he  had  anything  to  do  with  him  ;  the  boy  answered  that  he  was  hi 
father,  and  that  he  had  seen  him  and  knew  him,  meaning  that  he  was  a  cousin 
of  his  father's.  Such  an  answer  might  well  be  the  ground  of  a  statement  that 
paternity  was  very  little  thought  of  in  the  New  Hebrides.  English  people 
probably  had  perfectly  clear  conceptions  about  family  ties  before  they  used  the 
words  uncle,  aunt,  cousin,  nephew  and  niece. 


O 
i—i 

P 
Pm 

O 


□ 

O 


5<? 


o 
I 

r  "2. 

33 


1^ 


I- 


3 
Ph 

/-—•>. 

CO 


_fl  m 


-B  « 

O  N 


02 

O 
« 

II- 


3  ■ 
Eh 


11  a 

$  a 

3 

S 


'  Eh- 


a 


1-1 
11- 

a 

o 

pq 


s 

o' 

c3 

E-t 


-H 


•rj  ^ 


[CH. 


■a 

*  a  * 


10 


§..1  §l 

laic 


O      H  M 


2s  43 
5  '8 


3  a 


s  -IS    b  -a 


33 


d 

a 

PH 


1  -s  2 

» 

S 

[ami 

£  £  is 
ess 

1 

.3 

jfl 

.2 

-2 

m 

O 

a 

>> 

d 

u 

iwal 

5 

Joh: 

uwal 

as 
& 

O 

s 

R 

0 
0 

1 

0 

a 

& 

Pi 

s 

0 

n 

n  i  A  Mota  Family.  39 

level  with  his  uncle,  maraui,  as  if  in  the  place  of  his  mother. 
Thus  Leveveg  is  in  fact  great-uncle  to  John  and  Agnes,  but 
counts  as  uncle  only  because  they  are  grandchildren  of  his 
sister.  The  grandchildren  of  his  brother  are  his  grandchildren, 
tupui,  that  is  his  great-nephews  and  nieces.  For  the  same 
reason  Leveveg,  who  is  in  fact  maternal  great-uncle  to  Dudley, 
counts  as  his  maternal  uncle,  maraui,  Dudley  ascending  into 
his  mother's  place.  So  Pantutun  is  first  cousin  to  the  mothers 
of  Tavrowar  and  Mowur,  and,  being  of  the  generation  above 
them,  would  be  called  father  or  uncle,  tamai,  and  they  his 
children,  if  it  were  not  that  he  is  cousin  to  their  mothers 
through  his  mother,  whose  place  therefore  he  takes  on  the 
second  ascending  step,  and  becomes  tupui,  great-uncle.  Thus 
he  is  father,  tamai,  that  is  uncle,  to  his  first  cousins  Arisqoe 
and  Marostuwale  ;  and  his  sister  Maututun  is  their  mother  or 
aunt ;  because  he  ascends  into  his  mother's  place,  who  was 
their  father's  sister.  The  same  rule  makes  Dudley  father  or 
uncle  properly  to  his  first  cousins  John  and  Agnes,  though,  as 
they  are  of  the  same  generation  and  older  than  himself,  he 
calls  them  improperly  brother  and  sister :  improperly,  because 
they  are  not  his  sogoi,  and  he  could  in  strictness,  though  not 
with  public  approval,  marry  Agnes.  It  is  still  more  remark- 
able that  J ohn  is  properly  father  or  uncle  to  his  second  cousins 
Tavrowar  and  Mowur,  who  are  much  older  than  himself ;  but 
his  father  Pantutun  is  their  great-uncle,  tupui,  and  he  is  there- 
fore their  uncle,  tamai,  or  as  it  naturally  sounds  to  us  their 
father 1.  The  case  of  Matevagqoe  and  Ro  Tapermaro  is  distinct 
from  this :  he  married  her  brother's  daughter,  and  to  do  that 
must  have  been  of  her  side  of  the  house,  her  sogoi.  If  it  had 
been  her  sister's  daughter,  she  and  her  niece's  husband  would 
be  qaliga  ;  but  that  cannot  be  between  sogoi,  so  they  call  them- 
selves cousins,  brother  and  sister. 

The  pedigree  here  exhibited  does  not  shew  the  polygamy 

1  It  sometimes  happens  that  a  boy  is  in  this  way  '  father  '  to  one  old  enough 
to  be  his  natural  father,  or  '  grandfather,'  tupui,  to  one  of  his  own  age.  When 
it  is  so  the  formal  relationship  is  practically  merged  in  the  general  tasiu, 
brotherhood. 


40         Kinship  and  Marriage  Connexion.  [cH. 

the  terms  of  relationship  would  not  undergo  some  change  in 
such  a  case ;  whether,  for  example,  the  sons  of  the  same  fother 
by  two  mo  hers  would  not  be  distinguished  from  the  sons  of 
the  same  father  and  mother.    The  answer  is  that  no  difference 
is  made     A  man  s  wives,  if  he  should  have  many,  must  all  be 
W  o  the  same  side  of  the  house,  calling  one  another  sisters, 
and  calling  each  the  other's  children  hers,  whether  they  were 
married  to  the  same  man  or  had  different  husbands.  This 
does  not  however  shut  out  altogether  the  relationship  of 
step-father  and  mother.    A  man  who  has  a  son  by  one  of  his 
wives  who  is  dead,  does  not  bring  in  a  step-mother  to  the  boy 
li  he  adds  another  to  his  living  wives ;  the  woman  would 
come  m  as  another  mother,  and  the  boy  would  take  no  notice. 
J3ut  if  a  woman  with  children  loses  her  husband,  and  becomes 
the  wife  of  a  man  who  is  not  <  near '  to  her  previous  husband, 
being  of  course  sogoi  but  with  no  recent  blood  relation  the 
man  will  come  in  as  step-father,  and  the  term  uwr,  successor, 
is  applied  to  him,  the  connexion  being  called  mur-gae,  bond  of 
succession.    A  looser  connexion  than  this  is  enough  to  make 
an  usur;  as  when  a  boy's  father  has  bad  a  wife,  not  the 
mother  of  the  boy,  who  after  becoming  a  widow  marries 
another  man;  the  boy  will  take  liberties  with  the  man  as 
having  come  into  his  father's  place;  he  will  take  yams  from 
his  garden.    When  a  step-father  sneezes  the  step-son  will  cry 
out,  Maiia  revereve  gam  o  sulafe!  a  sneeze  to  draw  out  a  worm 
for  you !  the  notion  being  that  the  former  husband  has  a 
certain  grudge  against  his  successor,  and  sends  a  worm  from  a 
point  of  land  on  which  p-hosts  conp-res-ate. 

VV  here,  as  in  Florida  and  the  neighbouring  parts  of  the 
Solomon  Islands,  the  divisions  of  the  people  are  three,  four,  or 
six,  and  where  a  man  may  have  a  wife  or  wives  from  any  one 
of  them  but  his  own,  it  would  seem  likely  to  be  more  difficult 
to  keep  accurate  count  of  the  various  degrees  of  relationship 
in  which  people  stand  to  one  another ;  and  it  is  probable  that, 
though  the  native  system  is  precise  in  following  eveiy  step 
and  connexion,  the  people  do  in  fact  content  themselves  com- 


i !.-]  Florida  Terms.  4T 

monly  with  general  terms.  The  special  relation  of  the  sister's 
son  to  his  mother's  brother  is  of  course  conspicuous  ;  each  calls 
the  other  tumbu;  and  this  term  is  applied  also  to  the  father's 
mother's  brother  by  his  grand-nephew,  and  by  the  great-uncle 
to  his  sister's  grandchild.  In  a  generation  of  members  of  the 
same  kema  all  of  them  call  one  another  hogo  in  the  same  sex, 
and,  with  more  or  less  attention  to  nearness  of  blood,  brothers 
and  sisters ;  that  is  to  say,  an  elder  brother  or  sister  is  tuga  to 
one  of  the  same  sex,  and  a  younger  brother  or  sister  is  tah, 
while  a  brother  or  sister  is  vavine  to  one  of  the  other  sex. 
With  the  exception  of  the  mother's  brother,  the  blood  rela- 
tions of  the  ascending  generation  are  all  father  and  mother, 
tama  and  Una.  In  the  generation  above,  with  the  exception 
of  the  father's  mother's  brother  aforesaid,  who  is  tumbu,  all 
male  and  female  are  JcuJcua.  In  descending  a  man's  sons  and 
daughters,  and  his  brother's  and  cousin's  children,  are  dale, 
distinguished  as  dale  mane  and  dale  vaivine,  according  to  sex, 
a  man's  sister's  child  being  tumbu ;  and  in  the  same  way  a 
woman's  children  and  her  sister's  and  female  cousin's  children 
and  her  husband's  brother's  and  sister's  children  are  all  her 
children,  dale  mane  male,  dale  vaivine  female.  Descending  to 
the  next  generation,  all  are  again  kukua  to  their  grandparents 
and  great  uncles  and  aunts,  and  all  above  them  ;  except  that, 
as  aforesaid,  the  relation  of  tumbu  subsists  between  a  great- 
nephew  and  his  father's  mother's  brother.  Husband  and  wife 
are  tau.  A  father-  or  mother-in-law,  and  son-  or  daughter-in- 
law,  is  vungo,  the  term  being  applied  widely  to  persons  con- 
nected by  marriage  who  are  not  of  the  same  generation. 
Brothers-  and  sisters-in-law,  and  generally  persons  of  the  same 
generation  connected  by  marriage,  are  iva  to  one  another  \ 

It  would  seem  that  the  absence  of  exogamous  divisions  of 
the  population  in  that  region  of  the  Solomon  Islands  in  which 
descent  follows  the  father  (namely,  in  Malanta,  about  Cape 
Zelee,  in  Ulawa,  and  in  San  Cristoval),  must  make  the  system 

1  The  word  mam,  which  is  used  for  'namesake,'  is  also  used  as  a  term' 
of  family  relationship.  Unfortunately  the  full  list  of  Florida  terms  made  by 
me  many  years  ago  lacks  a  key. 


42         Kinship  and  Marriage  Connexion.  [CH. 

of  family  relationship  very  different  there  from  that  which 
has  been  described  as  prevailing-  in  the  Banks'  Islands  and  in 
Florida.    To  a  very  considerable  extent  no  doubt  this  is  so ; 
but  it  is  improbable  that  the  peculiar  closeness  of  relation 
between  a  man  and  his  sister's  son  should  entirely  fail  to  ap- 
pear.   Of  this  I  have  little  evidence  to  offer  1 ;  the  families  are 
formed  upon  the  father,  and  tbe  only  restriction  upon  marriage 
is  nearness  in  blood.   To  whatever  extent,  however,  it  may  be 
that  descent  through  the  father  removes  that  characteristic 
feature  of  the  Melanesian  family  system  which  appears  in  the 
relation  between  the  maternal  uncle  and  his  sister's  child,  it  is 
certain  that  the  main  structure  is  the  same  as  elsewhere  ;  that  is 
to  say,  that  no  terms  corresponding  to  uncle  and  aunt,  nephew 
and  niece,  or  cousin  exist.    All  on  the  same  level  are  brothers 
and  sisters,  if  children  of  brothers  and  sisters  or  of  cousins ; 
they  look  upon  the  children  of  brothers,  sisters  and  cousins 
as  their  children,  and  the  children  call  them  all  fathers  and 
mothers ;  the  ancestors  above  father  and  mother,  and  the 
descendants  in  the  second  and  lower  generations,  are  all  united 
under  one  general  term,  which  covers  ancestry  and  posterity 
alike.    At  Wango  in  San  Cristoval,  where  owing  to  immo- 
rality and  infanticide  the  population  has  been  kept  up  by  the 
adoption  of  children  from  the  bush,  adopted  children  take  the 
position  in  the  family  which  would  have  been  theirs  if  they 
had  been  born  in  it ;  although  no  blood  relationship  exists,  they 
cannot  marry  those  who  are  near  through  the  adoptive  father. 
These  children  appear  to  be  by  traders  called  slaves  because  they 
are  bought ;  the  people  themselves  call  them  their  children. 

The  subject  of  marriage  relations  is  incomplete  without  notice 
of  the  reserve  so  remarkably  exercised  towards  the  persons 
and  names  of  those  who  have  become  connected  by  marriage. 
This  is  conspicuous  in  the  Banks'  Islands,  and  makes  but 
little  show  in  the  Solomon  Islands.    In  Lepers'  Island,  a 

1  From  Rev.  R.  B.  Comins  I  learn  that  at  Wango  and  Fagani  in  San 
Cristoval  the  term  for  the  relation  between  the  maternal  uncle  and  his  sister's 
child  is  mau.  The  terms  iha,  ifa,  hungo,  fungo,  are  the  Florida  iva  and 
vungo ;  'ama,  Hna,  'cm,  are  tama,  Una,  taki. 


Hi]  Reserve  and  Avoidance.  43 

singular  reserve  is  strongly  shewn,  as  it  is  in  Fiji,  by  brothers 
and  sisters,  and  also  by  mothers  and  sons ;  but  this  reserve, 
though  its  existence  and  its  cause  may  well  throw  light  upon 
that  exercised  between  those  connected  by  marriage,  has  no 
proper  place  here.  In  Florida,  in  the  Solomon  Islands,  there 
is  no  difficulty  about  meeting,  or  mentioning  the  name  of, 
father-  or  mother-in-law,  or  any  of  a  wife's  kindred,  and  no 
extraordinary  marks  of  respect  are  shewn.  It  is  the  same  at 
Saa.  The  extraordinary  separation  of  the  sexes  in  Santa 
Cruz  and  the  neighbouring  islands,  however  instructive  to 
observe  in  this  connexion,  does  not  follow  on  relation  by 
marriage.  In  the  Banks'  Islands  the  rules  of  avoidance  and 
reserve  are  very  strict  and  minute.  As  regards  the  avoidance 
of  the  person,  a  man  will  not  come  near  his  wife's  mother ; 
the  avoidance  is  mutual ;  if  the  two  chance  to  meet  in  a  path, 
the  woman  will  step  out  of  it  and  stand  with  her  back  turned 
till  he  has  gone  by,  or  perhaps  if  it  be  more  convenient  he 
will  move  out  of  the  way.  At  Vanua  Lava,  in  Port  Patteson, 
a  man  would  not  follow  his  mother-in-law  along  the  beach, 
nor  she  him,  until  the  tide  had  washed  out  the  footsteps  of  the 
first  traveller  from  the  sand.  At  the  same  time  a  man  and  his 
mother-in-law  will  talk  at  a  distance.  A  man  does  not  avoid 
his  father-in-law,  nor  a  woman  hers.  A  man  does  not  avoid 
his  wife's  brother,  but  will  not  sleep  with  him ;  he  does  not 
avoid  his  son's  wife,  or  his  own  wife's  sister.  Boys  and  girls 
who  are  engaged  generally  avoid  one  another,  but  through 
shyness,  not  by  rule.  Where  the  persons  above  mentioned  do 
not  avoid  one  another,  they  are  careful  to  shew  respect  in  not 
laldng  anything  from  above  the  head  or  stepping  over  the 
legs  of  a  father-in-law  or  wife's  brother.  It  is  disrespectful 
at  all  times  for  a  young  man  to  take  anything  from  above  an 
elder  man's  head,  for  there  is  something  naturally  sacred, 
rongo,  about  the  head,  and  no  one  will  take  the  liberty  of 
stepping  over  the  legs  of  any  but  a  brother  or  intimate  friend. 
To  avoid  the  mention  of  a  name  shews  a  lower  degree  of 
respect  than  to  avoid  a  person.  A  man  who  sits  and  talks 
with  his  'wife's  father  will  not  mention  his  name,  much  less  his 


44         Kinship  and  Marriage  Connexion.  [cH. 

wife's  mother's  name  ;  a  man  will  not  name  his  wife's  brother 
but  he  will  name  his  wife's  sister,  she  is  nothing  to  him.  A 
woman  will  not  name,  but  does  not  avoid,  her  husband's 
lather ;  she  will  on  no  account  name  her  daughter's  husband, 
iwo  people  whose  children  have  intermarried,  who  - are  gasala, 
will  not  name  each  other.    The  reserve  with  regard  to  the 
name  extends  to  the  use  of  it,  or  of  any  part  of  it,  in  common 
conversation.    A  man  on  one  occasion  spoke  to  me  of  his 
house  as  a  shed,  and  when  that  was  not  understood,  went  and 
touched  it  with  his  hand  to  shew  what  he  meant  j  a  difficulty 
being  still  made,  he  looked  round  to  be  sure  that  no  one  was 
near  and  whispered,  not  the  name  of  his  son's  wife,  but  the 
respectful  substitute  for  her  name,  amen  Mulegona,  she  who 
was  with  his  son,  and  whose  name  was  Tawurima,  Hind-house  K 
Thus,  referring  to  the  Mota  pedigree  given  on  page  38,  Leve- 
veg  could  not  use  the  common  words  mate,  to  die,  or  qoe, 
pig,  because  of  his  son-in-law  Matevagqoe ;  Virsal  could  not  use 
the  common  words  panei,  hand,  or  tutun,  hot,  because  of  his 
wife's  brother's  name,  or  even  the  numeral  tuwale,  one,  because 
of  his  wife's  cousin's  name.    To  meet  the  difficulty  caused  by 
this  limitation  of  vocabulary,  a  word  may  be  used  improperly 
like  paito,  shed,  for  ima,  house  ;  or  a  knife  may  be  called  a 
cutter  and  a  bow  a  shooter ;  but  there  is  a  stock  of  words  kept 
in  use  for  this  very  purpose,  to  use  which  instead  of  the  common 
words  is  called  to  un.    Thus  the  %n  words  used  in  the  cases 
mentioned  above  would  be  karwae  for  qoe,  saproro  for  mate, 
lima  for  panei,  val  for  tuwale2.    This  avoidance  of  the  person 
and  of  the  name  is  ascribed  by  the  natives  themselves  to  a 
feeling  of  shyness  and  respect,  a  certain  inward  trembling 

1  The  word  amain,  with  him,  is  used  not  only  for  a  wife's  name  but  in  place 
of  '  his  wife ' ;  nan  amaia  toa,  then  said  his  wife.  In  the  case  referred  to, 
Tawurima,  the  name  of  the  daughter-in-law,  contains  the  word  ima,  house. 
The  father  of  Tawurima,  again,  could  not  use  the  common  word  for  to  go,  mule, 
because  it  is  part  of  her  husband's  name,  Mulegona. 

2  These  un  words  are  particularly  valuable,  because  they  often  shew  a 
connexion  with  other  languages  which  does  not  appear  in  more  common  words. 
Words  are  not  invented  for  this  purpose  ;  words  are  taken  which  lie 
comparatively  unused  in  the  language. 


ii.]  Reserve  in  the  Netv  Hebrides.  45 

which  they  say  prevents  their  mentioning-  their  own  names 
also ;  to  hlurt  out  a  name  is  to  take  a  liberty,  to  avoid  the  use 
of  it  shews  delicate  respect,  and  one  will  extend  this  respect 
to  more  distant  connexions  rather  than  apply  it  too  narrowly. 
A  native  when  asked  the  name  of  some  other,  will  often  turn 
to  some  bystander  who  answers  for  him,  and  the  explanation 
is  given  in  the  one  word  qaliga.  Respect  is  also  shewn  in 
Mota  by  using  a  dual  pronoun  in  addressing  or  speaking  of 
a  single  person ;  '  Where  are  you  two  going  ? '  is  asked  of 
a  qaliga,  as  if  both  husband  and  wife  were  present. 

In  the  New  Hebrides  the  practice  is  much  the  same. 
In  Lepers'  Island  a  man  speaks  to  his  mother-in-law,  and 
she  to  him,  but  they  will  not  come  near  ;  when  he  speaks  to 
her  she  turns  away.  A  mother-in-law  or  father-in-law  does 
not  mind  using  the  name  of  daughter's  husband  or  son's 
wife  in  speaking  of  them  to  others,  but  cannot  use  it  in 
addressing  them.  When  a  woman  calls  to  her  son-in-law  she 
addresses  him  as  mim,  you  in  the  plural ;  when  she  sends 
a  message  to  him  she  says,  using  his  name,  '  They  want 
Tanga  to  go  to  them/  that  is,  'I  want  Tanga  to  come  to  me.' 
A  daughter-in-law  does  not  avoid  her  husband's  father,  a 
man  sends  his  wife  with  messages  to  his  father.  A  man  will 
not  speak  at  all  the  name  of  his  wife's  brother ;  speaking  of 
him  he  says,  'my  brother-in-law,'  speaking  to  him  he  says, 
'you'  in  the  plural ;  if  he  meets  him  in  the  path  he  turns 
aside,  and  asks  'Where  are  you  (plural)  going?'  In  this  case 
only  it  appears  that  the  name  is  never  spoken ;  the  reserve 
among  connexions  by  marriage  is  much  less  marked  than  that 
between  brother  and  sister.  No  one  will  step  across  the  legs 
of  another,  or  take  anything  from  over  his  head,  especially 
a  brother's  ;  that  is  thought  a  serious  piece  of  disrespect.  In 
the  neighbouring  island  of  Araga,  Pentecost,  the  intercourse 
of  fathers-  and  mothers-in-law  with  their  daughter's  husband 
or  son's  wife  is  very  little  restricted;  the  chief,  if  not  the 
only,  reserve  in  speaking  is  exercised  by  engaged  couples 
before  the  giving  of  property  for  the  girl  is  complete  ;  this  is 
called  lalag. 


CHAPTER  III. 


SOCIAL  REGULATIONS.  CHIEFS. 

It  has  been  shewn  that  the  social  structure  in  these  Mela- 
nesian  islands  is  not  tribal,  and  it  will  have  been  observed 
therefore  that  there  can  be  no  political  structure  held  together 
by  the  power  of  tribal  chiefs  ;  but  chiefs  exist,  and  still  have 
in  most  islands  important  place  and  power,  though  never 
perhaps  so  much  importance  iu  the  native  view  as  they  have 
in  the  eyes  of  European  visitors,  who  carry  with  them  the 
persuasion  that  savage  people  are  always  ruled  by  chiefs.  A 
trader  or  other  visitor  looks  for  a  chief,  and  finds  such  a  one 
as  he  expects  ;  a  very  insignificant  person  in  this  way  comes 
to  be  called,  and  to  call  himself,  the  king  of  his  island,  and 
his  consideration  among  his  own  people  is  of  course  enor- 
mously enhanced  by  what  white  people  make  of  him.  The 
practice  moreover  of  the  commanders  of  ships  of  war  by  which 
local  chiefs  are  held  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  their  people, 
and  are  treated  as  if  they  had  considerable  power,  undoubtedly 
increases  their  importance,  nor  can  that  result  be  regretted. 
As  a  matter  of  fact  the  power  of  chiefs  has  hitherto  rested 
upon  the  belief  in  their  supernatural  power  derived  from  the 
spirits  or  ghosts  with  which  they  had  intercourse.    As  this 
belief  has  failed,  in  the  Banks'  Islands  for  example  some  time 
ago,  the  position  of  a  chief  has  tended  to  become  obscure  ;  and 
as  this  belief  is  now  being  generally  undermined  a  new  kind 
of  chief  must  needs  arise,  unless  a  time  of  anarchy  is  to  begin. 
It  will  be  well  probably  at  the  outset  to  give  the  account  of  a 
chief's  power  and  government  in  the  Solomon  Islands,  the 
Banks'  Islands,  and  the  New  Hebrides,  as  supplied  by  natives 


Power  of  Chiefs, 


47 


of  those  groups  respectively,  who  well  knew  what  they  were 
speaking  about.  A  Florida  Vunagi  kept  order  in  his  place, 
directed  the  common  operations  and  industries,  represented 
his  people  with  strangers,  presided  at  sacrifices  and  led  in  war. 
He  inflicted  fines,  and  would  order  any  one  to  be  put  to  death. 
At  Saa  in  Malanta  the  chief,  Maelaha,  is  such  by  virtue  of 
descent,  a  remarkable  difference  existing  in  many  points 
between  this  people  and  Melanesians  generally;  the  people 
work  in  his  gardens,  plant  for  him,  build  a  house  or  canoe  for 
him  at  his  word.  He  inflicts  fines,  and  can  oider  a  man  to  be 
put  to  death.  At  Banks'  Islands  the  Tavusmele  or  Etvusmel 
in  former  days  kept  order,  gave  commands  about  the  common 
concerns  of  the  place,  arranged  difficulties  with  neighbouring 
villages,  could  order  an  offender  (one  for  example  who  had  be- 
witched or  poisoned  another)  to  be  put  to  death,  or  to  pay  a 
fine  of  pigs.  In  Lepers'  Island  the  RataJdgi  commands  or 
forbids  in  such  matters  as  fishing,  voyaging,  and  building ; 
he  can  order  an  offender  to  be  shot  or  clubbed,  or  to  give 
a  fine  of  pigs.  In  each  of  these  cases  it  may  be  added  that 
the  chief  has  with  him  young  men  who  have  attached  them- 
selves to  him  and  cany  out  his  commands,  and  that  the 
chief  has  no  more  property  in  or  dominion  over  land  than 
another  man.  Further  details  as  to  the  position  and  power  of 
chiefs  in  the  various  islands  will  be  hereafter  given. 

A  point  of  difference  between  the  Polynesian  and  Mela- 
nesian  sections  of  the  Pacific  peoples  is  the  conspicuous 
j>resence  in  the  former,  and  the  no  less  conspicuous  absence 
in  the  latter,  of  native  history  and  tradition.  In  the 
Melanesian  islands,  with  one  notable  exception,  the  enquirer 
seeks  in  vain  for  antiquity;  the  memory  of  the  past  perishes 
quickly  where  all  things  soon  pass  away,  where  every  building 
soon  decays,  where  life  is  short,  and  no  marked  change  of 
seasons  makes  people  count  by  longer  measures  of  time  than 
months.  "While  any  one  lives  who  remembers  some  famous 
man  of  the  past  his  fame  lingers,  but  it  dies  with  the  personal 
remembrance ;  a  man's  ancestry  goes  back  so  far  as  living 
memory  extends ;  historical  tradition  can  hardly  be  said  to 


4^  Social  Regulations.  [CH. 

exist.    It  is  true  that  in  Motlav,  part  of  Saddle  Island  in 
the  Banks'  group,  the  people  who  now  live  in  the  islet  of  Ra 
and  the  coast  opposite  know  where  their  families  came  from, 
from  neighbouring  islands,  Mota,  Vanua  Lava,  or  from  other 
parts  of  Saddle  Island ;  but  it  was  only  lately  they  say  that 
they  came  to  live  where  they  are.   "in  Araga,  Pentecost 
Island  of  the  New  Hebrides,  they  shew  their  original  seat  at 
Atabulu,  a  village  still  remaining  and  held  in  high  respect. 
But  the  little  history  that  remains,  and  is  vouched  for  by  a 
multitude  of  sepulchral  stones,  is  lost  in  the  legend  attaching 
to  a  sacred  stone,  of  winged  shape,  lying  in  the  village  place. 
It  is  called  Vingaga,  Flyer  with  webbed  wings,  and  represents 
one  Vingaga,  who  came  floating  in  a  canoe  to  shore  and 
founded  that  town.    People,  ata,  collected  and  abode  with  him, 
lulw,  after  a  time  he  flew  back  to  heaven.    Ancient  house 
sites,  raised  perhaps  a  yard  above  the  ground,  are  to  be  seen  at 
Atabulu,  and  at  Anwalu  near  by,  with  stones  over  the  graves 
of  forgotten  chiefs.    In  Maewo  great  heaps  of  stones  mark  the 
graves  of  great  men  of  old  times,  such  as  none  have  been  of 
late.    In  Motlav,  near  a  famous  and  enormous  nat%  tree,  is  a 
house-mound  five  feet  high,  where  no  habitations  are  now, 
and  men  say  that  it  came  down  from  his  ancestors  to  the  last 
man  whose  house  stood  on  it ;  and  this  is  but  a  single  known 
representative  of  the  yav%  of  a  Fiji  family  of  rank1.  The 
remarkable  exception  to  this  absence  of  history  or  tradition  is 
found  at  Saa  in  Malanta,  and  is  so  remarkable  and  characteristic 
of  native  life  that  the  story  must  be  told  at  length.    The  larger 
and  principal  part  of  the  present  inhabitants  of  Saa  ani  menu 
came  from  Saa  haalu,  inland  not  very  far  off,  eleven  generations 
ago.    The  migration  took  place  under  the  following  circum- 
stances.   There  were  four  brothers  at  the  ancient  Saa,  of  whom 
the  eldest  was  the  chief ;  two  were  named  Pau-ulo,  the  eldest 
Pauulo  paina,  the  great,  the  second  Pauulo  oou,  the  champion  ; 

1  Mr,  Fison  writes,  '  The  higher  the  house-mound,  the  higher  its  occupant's 
rank :  sa  cere  na  nodra  yarn,  their  house-mound  is  high,  is  still  used  to  express 
that  a  family  is  of  high  rank.'  The  yavu  is  described  as  the  ancestral  town-lot 
on  which  the  house  is  built. 


III.] 


History  of  Saa. 


49 


the  two  younger  had  the  same  name,  Ro  Ute  seu  oo'u1. 
The  chief  was  a  quiet  man;  the  two  youngest,  aided  by  the 
second,  were  always  fighting  and  damaging  their  neighbours' 
property;  all  Pauulo  Paina's  money  was  spent  in  paying 
compensation  for  their  injuries  and  in  making  peace,  and  he 
told  them  he  must  leave  them  and  go  away.  The  neighbouring 
people,  however,  determined  to  make  an  end  of  their  trouble  ; 
they  collected,  and  began  to  surround  the  village  of  Saa  as 
nig-ht  fell.  Before  their  circle  was  complete  the  Saa  people 
learnt  their  danger,  gathered  their  women  and  children,  and 
escaped  unseen  and  unheard  in  the  darkness,  carrying  with 
them  three  drums,  which  remained  at  the  present  Saa  within 
the  memory  of  old  men  yet  alive.  But  when  they  were  clear 
of  the  enemy  and  safe  outside  their  line,  they  remembered 
that  a  bunch  of  areca-nuts  from  which  Pauulo  Paina  had 
already  taken  some  to  chew  with  his  betel  leaves,  and  which 
would  furnish  means  to  the  enemy  of  working  his  death 
with  charms,  was  left  behind.  The  two  Ute  agreed  that 
one  of  them,  if  he  died  for  it,  must  go  for  the  nuts  to  save  the 
elder  brother,  and  the  younger  of  the  two  took  on  himself  the 
danger  because  he  was  the  younger.  The  circle  was  now 
closed  round  the  village,  but  it  was  still  dark,  and  the  enemy 
knowing  nothing  of  the  escape  sat  waiting  for  the  dawn  to 
make  their  onset.  The  young  Ute  took  his  seat  among  them 
as  one  of  their  party,  and  after  a  while  said  to  them  that  he 
would  steal  in  and  see  whether  the  Saa  people  were  safe  in 
their  houses  and  could  be  surprised.  Thus  he  passed  through 
to  the  empty  village,  climbed  the  palm  with  a  rope  round  his 
feet,  gathered  all  the  nuts  remaining  on  the  tree,  and  as  he 
came  down  so  twisted  the  stem  that  when  his  feet  touched 
the  ground  it  split  into  four,  and  fell  with  a  crash  upon  the 
house.  The  enemy  hearing  the  sound  thought  that  the  Saa 
people  were  not  yet  all  asleep,  and  sat  still  ;^Ute  managed  to 
pass  through  them  unperceived  with  his  nuts,  and  joined  his 
friends.    Thus  they  escaped  and  descended  towards  the  coast ; 

1  The  two  having  the  same  name  were  the  'Bonito-gutter  champions  ' ;  the 
Saa  oo'u  being  the  Mota  wowui,  a  fine  fellow,  a  favourite,  a  hero. 

E 


5°  Chiefs.  [cHt 

and  when  they  came  to  a  fork  where  the  path  divided  Pauulo 
Pama  made  a  speech,  saying  that  no  fighters,  bullies,  thieves 
or  wizards  were  to  follow  him.    One  party  then  branched  off 
with  Pauulo  Oou ;  and  lower  down  a  second  separation  was 
made,  so  that  in  the  end  three  settlements  were  formed  of 
people  who  counted  themselves  of  kin.    The  inhabitants  of 
what  is  now  Saa  ani  menu  received  the  fugitives  with  Pauulo 
Paina,  and  his  descendants  in  the  male  line  have  ever  since 
been  the  hereditary  chiefs  \    The  descendants  of  the  old  in- 
habitants are  now  but  few  and  of  the  lower  orders,  but  they 
are  still  the  owners  of  the  land.    It  has  never  occurred  to  the 
Saa  immigrants  to  dispossess  them ;  the  new-comers  remain, 
eyen  the  chiefs,  landless  men,  except  so  far  as  a  little  has  been 
given  to  them  and  a  little  sold;  they  have  always  been 
allowed  what  they  wanted  for  their  gardens,  and  have  been  con- 
tent.   When  the  move  was  made  there  was  no  great  difference 
m  speech,  and  there  is  none  now  in  words;  but  the  older 
race  speak  very  slowly,  and  may  be  distinguished  now  by  that 
slow  habit  of  speech. 

There  are  then  at  Saa,  and  at  the  other  two  settlements 
founded  by  the  refugees  from  the  ancient  Saa,  a  family  of 
chiefs  with  a  history,  and  with  descent  in  the  male  line.  All 
of  that  family  are  born  in  a  certain  sense  chiefs,  the  eldest  son 
succeeding  to  the  position  of  his  father  as  principal  chief 
unless  he  be  judged  incompetent.  If  he  turns  out  a  bad, 
vicious  man  he  loses  respect  and  power,  and  his  brother  in- 
sensibly replaces  him.  Sometimes  a  man  will  retire  because 
he  knows  his  own  unfitness2.    The  chief's  power  therefore 

1  The  eleven  generations  from  Pauulo  to  the  present  chiefs  are  kept  in  mind 
by  the  invocation  of  their  successive  names  in  sacrifices. 

2  At  the  time  of  writing  the  above  there  were  three  chiefs  of  high  rank  at 
Saa  :  the  ostensible  and  acting  chief  was  Dorawewe,  but  he  is  only  the  third 
son  of  his  father,  the  late  head  chief.  The  son  and  heir  of  the  eldest  son  was  not 
yet  grown  up ;  respect  was  paid  to  him  for  his  birth,  but  he  had  little  power,  and 
the  less  because  his  character  was  bad  and  he  went  after  women,  and  so  did 
not  gain  personal  respect.  Watehaaodo,  uncle  on  the  mother's  side  to  the  young 
man,  and  himself  of  the  chief's  family,  was  guardian  to  him,  and  thence  was  an 
important  man.    It  should  be  observed  that  thus  the  particularly  close  relation 


m.]  Hereditary  Element.  5 1 

at  Saa  comes  from  his  birth  and  personal  qualities,  not  from  his 
intimacy  with  supernatural  beings  and  his  magical  know- 
ledge ;  he  may  have  these,  and  is  in  fact  pretty  sure  to 
have  them,  but  if  one,  like  Dorawewe  now,  sacrifices  for 
the  family,  it  is  not  as  chief,  but  because  he  has  had  the 
knowledge  how  to  do  it  passed  on  to  him.  In  the  same  way 
the  chief  curses  in  the  name  of  a  lid  a,  powerful  ghost,  for- 
bidding something  to  be  done  under  the  penalty  of  death, 
taboos,  because  of  his  ancestral  connexion  with  that  lid  a. 
Pie  inherits  wealth  from  his  father,  and  adds  to  it  by  the  fines 
he  imposes  and  by  the  gifts  of  the  people ;  but  no  wealth  or 
success  in  war  could  make  a  man  a  chief  at  Saa  if  not  born  of 
the  chief's  family 1. 

The  hereditary  element  is  not  absent  in  the  succession  of 
chiefs  in  other  islands,  though  it  is  by  no  means  so  operative 
as  it  appears  to  be.  A  story  hereafter  to  be  narrated  illustrates 
the  manner  in  which  a  man  becomes  a  chief  in  Santa  Cruz. 
The  most  conspicuous  chief  in  Florida  at  the  time  and  in  the 
place  in  which  Europeans  became  acquainted  with  that  island 
was  Takua  of  Boli,  whose  position  it  may  be  safely  said  was 
never  so  exalted  in  the  eyes  of  the  natives  as  in  the  eyes  of  their 
visitors.  He  was  not  a  native  of  Florida  but  of  Mala,  and  his 
greatness  rested  in  its  origin  on  a  victory  in  which  as  a  young 
man  he  tock  a  principal  part,  when  a  confederation  of  enemies 
attacked  the  people  of  Ta  na  ihu  in  Florida,  where  he  was  then 
staying.  His  reputation  for  mana,  spiritual  power,  was  then 
established ;  and  from  that,  as  a  member  of  a  powerful  family 
of  the  Nggaombata,  with  his  brothers  Sauvui  and  Dikea,  his 

of  the  mother's  brother  to  his  nephew  maintains  itself  where  the  system  has 
become  patriarchal. 

1  The  word  used  to  designate  a  chief  in  Malanta,  Ulawa,  and  San  Cristoval, 
ma'eraha,  ma'elaha,  means  literally  great  death  or  war,  and  shews  that  to  the 
native  mmd  a  chief  is  a  warrior.  It  is  customary  both  at  Saa  and  in  Arosi, 
San  Cristoval,  to  adopt  by  purchase  into  the  chiefs  family  a  boy  who  promises 
to  be  a  stout  warrior,  and  to  bring  him  up  to  be  the  fighting  man  and  champion 
of  the  town.  Such  a  one  I  remember  to  have  seen  at  Ubuna  in  Arosi,  a  dwarf 
whom  his  purchasers  had  taken  to  be  a  remarkably  strong  and  sturdy  child' 
when  he  was  really  a  boy  much  older  than  they  thought.  He  turned  out  to  be  a 
maeraha  indeed  who  scorned  to  use  a  shorter  spear  than  full-grown  men. 

E  2 


5 2  Chiefs.  [CH, 

influence  increased.  Thus  according  to  a  native  account  of  the 
matter  « the  origin  of  the  power  of  chiefs,  vimagi,  lies  entirely 
in  the  belief  that  they  have  communication  with  powerful 
ghosts,  tindalo,  and  have  that  mana  whereby  they  are  able  to 
bring  the  power  of  the  tindalo  to  bear.'  A  chief  would  convey 
his  knowledge  of  the  way  to  approach  and  to  use  the  power 
of  the  tindalo  to  his  son,  his  nephew,  his  grandson,  to  whom 
also  he  bequeathed  as  far  as  he  could  his  possessions.  Thus  he 
was  able  to  pass  on  his  power  to  a  chosen  successor  among  his 
relations,  and  a  semblance  of  hereditary  succession  appeared. 
A  man's  position  being  in  this  way  obtained,  his  own  character 
and  success  enhanced  it,  weakness  and  failure  lost  it.  Public 
opinion  supported  him  in  his  claim  for  a  general  obedience, 
besides  the  dread  universally  felt  of  the  tindalo  power  behind 
him.  Thus  if  he  imposed  a  fine,  it  was  paid  because  his 
authority  to  impose  it  was  recognized,  and  because  it  was 
firmly  believed  that  he  could  bring  calamity  and  sickness  upon 
those  who  resisted  him ;  as  soon  as  any  considerable  number 
of  his  people  began  to  disbelieve  in  his  tindalo  his  power  to  fine 
was  shaken.  But  a  chief  had  around  him  a  band  of  retainers, 
young  men  mostly,  from  different  parts  of  the  island  some  of 
them,  of  various  hma,  who  hung  about  him,  living  in  his 
canoe-house,  where  they  were  always  ready  to  do  his  bidding. 
These  fought  beside  him  and  for  him,  executed  his  orders  for 
punishment  or  rapine,  got  a  share  of  his  wealth,  and  did  all 
they  could  to  please  him  and  grow  great  and  wealthy  with 
him.  They  would  marry  and  settle  round  him  if  strangers 
in  the  place  ;  and  thus  a  chief  and  his  retainers  would  be  by 
no  means  always  the  representatives  of  the  people  among 
whom  they  ruled,  and  who  sometimes  have  suffered  for  their 
misdeeds 1.  The  influence  of  a  chief,  if  his  band  of  retainers 
is  large,  and  the  district  in  which  he  rules  is  populous,  extends 
widely  in  the  island ;  his  brother  chiefs  aid  him,  and,  for  a 
consideration,  carry  out  his  wishes  2.    The  power  to  impose  a 

1  Julian  A  venal,  not  Fergus  McIvor,  represents  such  a  Melanesian  chief. 

2  Some  years  ago  the  captain  of  one  of  Her  Majesty's  ships  laid  upon  Takua 
of  Mboli  the  duty  of  apprehending  a  certain  offender,  and  keeping  him  a 


111.] 


Chiefs  in  Florida. 


53 


fine  was  an  active  one  ;  a  chief  forbids  under  penalty  of  a 
fine,  which  is  a  form  of  taboo ;  he  orders  one  who  has  done 
wrong  or  has  offended  him  to  pay  a  certain  sum  of  money  to 
him.  Thus  Takua  imposed  a  heavy  fine  on  the  man  who  had 
proposed  to  marry  within  the  prohibited  degrees,  and  the 
offender  had  to  hire  an  advocate  to  state  his  case  discreetly, 
apologize,  and  beg  off  a  part  of  the  fine.  The  chief  sends 
women  or  boys  to  fetch  the  fine  he  has  imposed  ;  these  sit  at 
the  man's  door  and  dae,  dun  him  by  their  presence  and 
demands,  till  he  pays.  If  he  refuses,  the  chief  sends  his 
retainers  to  destroy  and  carry  away  his  property.  It  is  evident 
that  a  chief  of  sense,  energy  and  good  feeling,  will  use  his 
power  on  the  whole  to  the  great  advantage  of  the  people  :  but 
a  bad  use  of  a  chiefs  power  is  naturally  common,  in  oppression, 
seizing  land  and  property,  increasing  his  stock  of  heads,  and 
gaining  a  terrible  reputation.  For  example,  a  man  who  had 
a  private  enemy  would  give  money  to  a  chief  to  have  him 
killed,  as  one  did  not  long  ago  to  Dikea  ;  Dikea  would  send 
one  of  his  young  men  to  kill  him.  But  sometimes  the  man 
would  know  his  clanger  and  send  more  money  to  the  chief  to 
save  his  life.  Dikea  would  take  both  sums  and  do  as  he 
pleased. 

The  power  of  a  chief  naturally  diminished  in  old  age,  from 
inactivity,  parsimony,  and  loss  of  reputation  ;  and,  to  the  credit 
of  the  people,  also  if,  like  Takua  when  he  took  the  daughter  of 
one  who  was  already  his  wife,  he  did  what  was  held  by  them 
to  be  wrong.  In  any  case  some  one  was  ready,  it  might  be  by 
degrees,  to  take  the  place  of  one  whose  force  was  waning.  A 
chief  expecting  his  death  prepared  his  son,  nephew,  or  chosen 

prisoner  till  his  return;  so  at  least  the  captain's  orders  were  interpreted  to  the 
chief.  Takua  complained ;  he  could  have  him  killed  easily,  he  said,  it  would 
cost  him  but  a  trifle  to  get  that  done,  but  to  catch  a  man  and  keep  him  for  ten 
months  would  be  very  difficult  and  very  expensive.  Things  are  now  changed 
at  Florida.  Dikea  of  Eavu  accused  two  men  of  taking  fragments  of  his  food 
to  charm  him ;  they  fled  to  Olevuga ;  Dikea  sent  money  to  Lipa,  chief  of  that 
place,  to  have  them  killed;  Lipa  sent  it  back.  Dikea  then  sent  money  to 
Tambukoru  of  Honggo,  asking  him  to  attack  Olevuga;  that  chief  refused,  but 
kept  the  money. 


54  Chiefs.  [CHi 

successor,  by  imparting  to  him  his  twidalo  knowledge  ;  but  this 
could  not  always  be  done,  or  the  choice  made  might  not  be 
acceptable.  The  people  then  would  choose  for  themselves,  and 
make  over  the  dead  chief's  property  to  their-  chosen  head. 
Sometimes  a  man  would  assert  himself  and  claim  to  be  chief, 
on  the  ground  that  the  late  chief  had  designated  him,  or 
because  he  had  already  a  considerable  following  (belonging 
perhaps  to  an  increasing  kema,  as  the  dead  chief  to  a  de- 
creasing  one),  or  boldly  standing  forth  and  crying  out  to  the 
people  that  he  was  chief.  Without  a  chief  a  village  would  be 
broken  up  1. 

The  very  great  part  played  in  the  native  life  of  the  Banks' 
Islands  by  the  secret  societies  hereafter  to  be  described,  the 
Suqe  and  Tamate,  has  always  obscured  the  appearance  of 'such 
power  as  a  chief  would  be  expected  to  exercise.  Any  man 
whose  influence  was  conspicuous  was  certainly  high  in  these 
societies,  and  it  would  be  wholly  inconsistent  with  the  social 
habits  of  the  people  that  a  man  whose  place  in  the  Suqe  was 
insignificant  should  have  any  considerable  power.  Hence 
chiefs  as  such  have  hardly  been  recognized  by  the  missionaries 
engaged  in  this  group,  though  traders  have  found  chiefs  and 
kings.  When  Mala  many  years  ago  forbade  the  use  of  bows, 
it  was  taken  to  be  done  by  the  power  he  had  in  all  the  societies 


1  Some  years  ago  Lipa,  the  chief  of  Olevuga,  was  carried  off  as  '  labour ' 
to  Queensland,  and  the  chiefless  place  was  in  confusion  ;  but  Dikea  of  Kavu  in 
the  neighbourhood,  one  of  the  same  Nggaombata  family,  sent  directions 
to  Olevuga  that  the  people  should  choose  their  chief,  and  then  came  over  with 
his  party,  and  took  Kosapau,  whom  they  had  chosen,  by  the  hand,  putting  him 
forward  as  their  chief.  The  people  then  knew  that  he  would  be  supported,  and 
obeyed  him.  But  Lipa  came  back  after  a  time,  and  Kosapau  quietly  took  the  second 
place.  When  Kalekona  of  Gaeta  died  there  was  no  one  to  succeed  him ;  the 
chiefs  of  the  other  districts,  his  cousins,  came  to  get  their  share  of  the  property, 
and  were  hospitably  entertained  ;  but  the  chiefs  of  Honggo,  Liukolilia  and 
Tambukoru,  of  the  Manukama  kema,  would  have  attacked  the  Gaeta  people  in 
their  headless  state,  if  Charles  Snpimbuana,  the  Christian  teacher,  himself  a 
Manukama,  had  not  got  pigs  and  money  together  and  bought  them  off.  With- 
out a  chief  the  Gaeta  people  would  have  dispersed  ;  no  Christian  could  be  a  chief 
of  the  ancient  sort,  and  the  Christian  teachers  had  all  agreed  among  themselves 
that  they  would  take  no  place  of  such  authority. 


mi  Chiefs  in  Banks  Islands.  55 

in  Vanua  Lava  and  Mota.  Still  there  was  a  name  meaning- 
chief,  etvusmel,  tamsmele,  and  a  native  of  Motlav  who  resided 
some  weeks  in  Florida,  in  the  district  where  Takua  was  counted 
a  great  chief,  bears  witness  that  he  saw  no  great  difference 
between  that  vunagi  and  the  etvusmel  of  his  own  home  \  The 
succession  of  the  Etvusmel  is  declared  by  him  to  have  been 
from  father  to  son,  as  far  as  can  be  remembered,  an  important 
point  to  notice  where  descent  in  family  goes  by  the  mother ;  and 
it  is  said  that  the  chief  was  always  of  the  great  clan  or  kin, 
the  veve  liiooa,  an  expression  which  also  requires  explanation. 
The  explanation  is  that  in  practice,  as  in  the  devolution  of 
property  and  in  the  handing  on  of  religious  and  magic  rites, 
a  man  always  put  as  far  as  he  could  his  son  into  his  own  place, 
and  a  rich  and  powerful  man  would  secure  a  high  place  in  the 
Suqe  for  his  son  in  very  early  years  ;  thus  the  great  man's 
son  would  succeed  to  his  place,  and  become  to  some  extent  an 
hereditary  chief.  The  father  and  the  son  would  always  be  of 
different  sides  of  the  house ;  and,  as  at  Florida  the  chiefs  were 
generally  of  the  Jcema  which  happened  to  be  most  numerous 
at  the  time,  so  in  the  Banks'  Islands,  where  the  divisions  are 
but  two,  and  each  of  them  in  alternate  generations  more 
numerous  than  the  other,  the  chief  man  was  regularly  found 
on  the  most  powerful  side  of  the  house.  Thus  it  can  be  said 
that  the  succession  of  Etvusmel  at  Motlav  has  been  from 
father  to  son  as  long  as  can  be  remembered,  and  will  so  con- 
tinue, thongh  with  lessened  consequence.  Besides  those  who 
were  really  chiefs  many  men  were  called  *  great  men,'  and  had 
considerable  influence  in  their  villages,  men  who  had  been 

1  The  name  no  doubt  refers  to  the  rank  obtained  in  the  Suqe  club  by 
killing  pigs  ;  Ta  vus  mele  is  the  man  who  kills  for  the  mele.  Even  now  when 
the  population  of  Motlav  is  Christian,  they  still  among  themselves  cull  Stephen 
Etvusmel  at  Losalav,  and  Abraham  at  Melwo,  'o  ml  we  toga  alalanrara,  fa 
gate  no'm  mam  tama  toe  tuai,  the  people  remain  under  those  two,  but  do  not 
regard  them  with  the  same  respect  as  in  old  days.'  At  Losalav  the  former 
Etvusmel,  Molovlad,  left  a  son  who  is  now  under  Stephen ;  and  when  the  latter 
dies  this  John  Semfcnmbok  will  succeed.  So  they  agree  among  themselves  now, 
on  the  ground  that  he  is  the  son  of  the  late  chief,  high  in  the  Suqe  club,  and  o: 
the  side  of  the  house  that  now  predominates,  i.e.  of  the  veve  liwoa. 


56  Chiefs.  [ch. 

valiant  and  successful  in  war,  and  were  high  in  the  Suqe  ;  that 
is  to  say,  men  who  were  known  to  have  mana,  for  a  man's 
charms  and  amulets  made  him  the  great  warrior,  and  his 
charms  and  stones  made  his  pigs  and  yams  to  multiply,  so  that 
he  could  buy  his  steps  in  the  society.  The  cleanliness  and  order 
of  a  Banks'  Island  village  are  not  now  what  they  were,  since 
the  authority  of  the  {  great  men '  has  been  diminished  by  the 
increasing  enlightenment  of  the  young  people. 

In  the  Northern  New  Hebrides  the  position  of  a  chief  is 
more  conspicuous;  though  perhaps  only  because  those  who 
first  made  themselves  acquainted  with  those  islands  have 
always  taken  them  to  be  very  important  people.  A  man  high 
in  the  Suqe,  or  a  successful  leader  in  war,  had  authority  in 
his  village  in  the  northern  part  of  Aurora,  but  seems  to  have 
had  no  designation  as  a  chief.  In  Araga,  Pentecost  Island, 
and  in  Omba,  Lepers'  Island,  the  remarkable  designation  of  a 
chief  is  Ratahigi.  the  word  which  stands  for  '  mother '  in 
those  islands,  and  is  no  doubt  identical  with  the  Mota  miasm, 
brothers.  The  probable  origin  of  the  use  of  a  word  meaning 
brotherhood  or  sisterhood  as  the  name  for  the  mother  has 
been  already  suggested  (page  28)  ;  the  use  of  it  to  designate 
a  chief  seems  certainly  to  point  to  the  fact  that  the  chief 
is  looked  upon  as  the  representative  of  the  brotherhood,  of  the 
kin.  As  has  been  pointed  out,  where  there  are  two  kindreds, 
and  the  son  is  not  of  the  father's  kin,  it  is  natural  that  each 
kindred  should  preponderate  in  influence,  because  more  in 
number,  alternately,  and  that  as  son  succeeds  father,  one 
of  this  kindred  and  the  other  of  that,  each  in  his  turn  should 
belong  to  the  kin  which  is  in  his  time  the  great  one.  Hence 
they  say  that  chiefs  are  hereditary,  father  being  succeeded  by 
son,  or  uncle  by  sister's  son,  in  a  general  way  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  though  not  always  nor  by  rule.  The  son  does  not  inherit 
chieftainship,  but  he  inherits,  if  his  father  can  manage  it, 
what  gives  him  chieftainship,  his  father's  mana,  his  charms, 
magic  songs,  stones  and  apparatus,  his  knowledge  of  the  way 
to  approach  spiritual  beings,  as  well  as  his  property.  The 
present  chief  will  teach  his  son  his  knowledge  of  supernatural 


mi  Chiefs  in  New  Hebrides.  57 

things,  and  hand  over  his  means  for  using  it ;  he  will  buy  him 
up  high  in  the  Suqe  society,  and  give  him  and  leave  him 
property;  so  the  younger  man  is  ready  to  take  the  place  of 
chief  when  his  father  dies  or  fails  through  age.    If  a  man 
has  no  son  competent  he  may  take  his  nephew ;  sometimes, 
the  son  perhaps  being  too  young,  a  chief's  brother  will 
succeed  him  ;  sometimes  a  man  will  set  himself  up  when  no 
successor  is  acknowledged,  or  the  people  will  choose  some  one 
to   lead  them.     Some  years  ago   Mairuru,   the  chief  of 
Walurigi,  was  a  very  great  man  ;  he  sent  his  son,  a  young 
boy,  to  be  educated  at  Norfolk  Island,  and  it  was  at  once 
understood  that  a  Christian  education  which  shut  out  belief 
and  practice  of  mana,  shut  him  out  from  succession  as  a  chief. 
If  this  son  had  settled  in  his  father's  village  before  the  old 
man's  death,  he  would  no  doubt  have  succeeded  to  some  of  his 
property  and  some  of  his  consideration,  but  he  was  absent. 
When  Mairuru  died  without  an  apparent  successor,  a  certain 
man  attempted  to  take  his  place  ;   he  went  into  the  late 
chief's  sacred  haunt,  his  tauten,  in  which  he  used  to  have  his 
intercourse  with  the  wui,  spirits,  and  he  declared  that  he 
heard  some  one  whistle  to  him  there.    He  told  the  people 
also  that  afterwards  in  the  night  he  felt  something  come 
upon  his  breast,  which  he  took  in  his  hands,  and  found  to  be 
a  stone  in  shape  like  the  distinguishing  part  of  a  valued  kind 
of  pig 1 :  then  Mairuru,  he  said,  himself  appeared  to  him  and 
gave  him  the  mana,  the  magic  chant,  with  which  he  was  to 
work  the  stone  for  producing  abundance  of  those  pigs.  When 
he  showed  the  stone  the  people  believed  his  story ;  but  in  the 
event  nothing  came  of  his  mana,  and  Mairuru  had  no  suc- 
cessor.   It  appears,  therefore,  that  in  Lepers'  Island  and  in 
Araga,  as  elsewhere,  the  real  ground  on  which  the  power  of 
a  chief  rests  is  that  of  belief  in  the  mana  he  possesses,  with 

1  In  certain  breeds  of  pigs  in  the  Banks'  Islands  and  New  Hebrides,  which 
are  much  valued  on  this  account,  there  occur  individual  females  which  simulate 
the  male  sex.  These  are  in  the  Banks'  Islands  ratoe ;  they  furnish  the  finest 
tusks.  Dr.  Shortland  has  observed  that  the  word  rawe  haB  in  the  Maori  of 
New  Zealand  a  sense  which  accounts  for  its  application  to  these  pigs. 


5 8  Chiefs. 

which  also  the  wealth  he  has  inherited  with  it,  and  all  his 
success  m  life,  are  connected.  The  power  of  such  a  man  is 
exercised  directly  over  the  people  of  his  own  village,  and  if 
his  reputation  for  mam  spreads  ahroad,  he  will  have  a  wide 
influence  in  his  island  and  even  beyond  it ;  young-  men  from 
other  parts,  as  well  as  the  youths  of  his  village,  will  come  and 
live  in  his  gamali,  his  Suqe  club-house,  and  will  carry  out  his 
orders  even  to  the  punishment  of  death  in  peace,  and  fight 
for  him  in  war. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


PEOPERTY  AND  INHERITANCE. 

Ijj  the  character  of  property  and  in  the  laws  of  succession 
to  property,  there  is  hardly  any  difference  to  be  found  in  the 
Melanesian  islands  with  which  we  are  concerned ;  in  all  it 
may  be  said  that  property  is  in  land  and  in  personal  posses- 
sions ;  that  there  is  a  certain  distinction  between  land  which 
has  been  inherited  and  that  which  has  been  reclaimed  from 
the  waste ;  that  there  is  no  strictly  communal  property  in 
land ;  and  that  with  landed  and  personal  property  alike,  the 
original  right  of  succession  is  with  the  sister's  children, 
except  where,  besides  the  very  exceptional  case  of  Saa,  there 
comes  in  the  succession  of  children  to  the  property  which 
their  father  has  acquired  for  himself. 

The  land  may  be  considered  everywhere  to  be  divided  into 
three  parts:  (i)  the  Town  lots;  (2)  the  Garden  ground;  (3) 
the  Bush.  In  Florida,  (1)  Na  Komu,  (2)  Na  Malanga,  (3)  Na 
Leiao  ;  in  Santa  Cruz,  (1)  Matalia,  (2)  Nabalo,  (3)  Nabanogabo  ; 
in  Mota,  (1)  0  Vanua,  (2)  0  Utag,  (3)  0  Mot;  in  Lepers' 
Island,  (1)  A  Vanve,  (2)  A  Labute,  (3)  A  Labnte  virogi,  which 
in  Araga  are  (1)  Yanaa,  (2)  Lolgae,  (3)  Ute  vono ;  and  these 
correspond  to  the  Yavu,  the  Qele,  the  Veikau  of  Fiji 1.  Of 

1  Land  tenure  in  Fiji  has  been  described  by  the  Rev.  Lorimer  Fison  in  a 
Paper  printed  in  the  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute,  February, 
1881,  and  briefly  as  follows  :  '  The  tenure  of  land  is  distinctly  tribal,  and  the 
title  is  vested  in  all  the  full-born  members  of  the  tribe.  The  land  is  of  three 
kinds  :  the  yaou  or  town  lot,  the  qele  (iitjyele)  or  arable  land,  and  the  veikau 


6o  Property  and  Inheritance.  [CH. 

these  three  divisions  of  the  land,  the  hush,  the  uncleared 
forest,  is  not  property;  nor,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  do  the 
natives  fix  any  limit  up  to  which  they  consider  the  bush 
to  belong-  to  the  particular  district  or  group  of  villages  in 
which  they  live,  although  probably  they  would  resent  the 
felling  of  trees  too  near  their  own  grounds.  The  gardens 
and  the  sites  of  the  villages  are  all  held  in  property,  and 
pass  by  inheritance;  so  that  every  part  has  its  owner  for 
the  time,  who  possesses  it  as  his  share  of  the  family  property, 
but  who  can  by  no  means  alienate  it  as  if  it  were  simply 
his  own.  The  chiefs,  however  powerful  in  some  places  they 
may  be,  have  no  more  property  in  the  land  or  more  right 
over  it  in  any  of  the  islands  than  other  men;  they  often 
use  their  power  tyrannically  to  drive  away  the  owners  of 
gardens  which  they  covet,  and  they  are  very  willing  to  meet 
the  common  European  belief  that  a  chief  is  the  owner  of 
the  soil,  by  taking  a  price  for  land  which  is  not  theirs  to  sell ; 
but  the  ownership  of  every  piece  is  remembered  and  will  be 
asserted  when  occasion  offers.  The  remarkable  case  of  the 
landless  chiefs  at  Saa  (page  50)  shews  how  fixed  is  the  right 
of  property  in  land.  Before  the  coming  of  Europeans  the 
sale  of  land  was,  at  least  at  Saa,  not  unknown,  but  was  at 
any  rate  uncommon  ;  of  late,  especially  in  the  New  Hebrides, 
much  land  has  been  sold  to  Europeans,  some  honestly  and 
effectively,  some  by  transactions  in  which  the  title  of  the  vendor 
has  been  nothing  but  his  willingness  to  receive  some  calico 
and  guns.  In  a  true  sale  the  consent  of  all  who  have  an 
interest  in  the  property  must  be  had,  and  the  exact  boundary 
of  each  parcel  of  land  defined ;  then  the  value  of  each  piece 
and  of  each  fruit-tree  has  to  be  ascertained,  and  the  claim  of 

or  forest.  The  veikau  is  common  to  all  members  of  a  community,  but  the  yavu 
and  the  qele  are  divided  and  subdivided.  Each  owner,  however,  holds  for  the 
household  to  which  he  belongs,  the  household  holds  for  the  clan,  the  clan  for 
the  tribe,  the  tribe  for  the  community,  and  the  community  for  posterity.  Each 
generation  has  the  usufruct  only,  and  cannot  alienate  the  land.  The  chiefs 
have  overridden  this  rule,  but  most  unjustly.'  This  will  stand  for  the 
islands  west  of  Fiji,  with  the  important  difference  made  by  the  absence  of 
tribes. 


iv  n  Land  and  Trees.  b 1 

every  single  individual  discussed  and  satisfied.  A  fruit-tree 
planted  on  another's  land,  with  his  consent,  remains  the  pro- 
perty of  the  planter  and  of  his  heirs  \  It  is  important  also  to 
observe  that  the  property,  whether  in  the  villages  or  in  the 
gardens,  does  not  lie  in  large  divisions  corresponding  to  the 
divisions  of  the  people  for  marriage  purposes  into  two  or  more 
kins  or  clans,  the  Jcema  of  Florida,  the  veve  of  Mota,  the  wai 
vung  of  Lepers'  Island ;  but  all  are  intermixed.  It  is  probable 
enough  that  iu  the  original  formation  of  each  settlement  the 
several  divisions  of  the  people  worked  together  to  make 
their  gardens ;  as  it  is,  families  have  formed  themselves 
within  the  divisions,  the  land  is  held  by  families,  sons  work 
in  their  fathers'  gardens  who  are  not  their  kin  ;  there  cannot 
be  a  family,  or  married  couple,  in  which  two  kindreds  at  least 
have  not  a  share. 

It  is  remarkable  indeed  how  precisely  alike  in  the  Solomon 
Islands,  the  Banks'  Islands,  and  the  New  Hebrides,  the 
character  of  property  in  land  reclaimed  from  the  bush  asserts 
itself  to  be ;  and  how  the  same  effect  has  been  produced  of 
introducing  or  strengthening  the  tendency  towards  the 
succession  of  the  son  to  his  father's  property,  in  place  of  the 
right  of  succession  through  the  mother.  This  will  be  shewn, 
together  with  the  very  general  agreement  in  the  whole 
character  of  landed  property  and  succession  to  it,  as  the 
subject  is  treated  in  some  detail  with  examples  taken  from 
the  several  groups,  beginning  with  Florida  in  the  Solomon 
Islands,  and  passing  eastwards  through  Santa  Cruz  and  the 
Banks'  Islands  to  the  New  Hebrides. 

In  Florida  the  house  sites  in  the  komu,  like  the  gardens  of 
the  matanga,  are  hereditary  property;  and,  though  there  do 

1  In  Fiji,  '  Fruit-trees  are  often  held  by  persons  who  do  not  own  the  land  ; 
but  there  is  a  curious  distinction  here.  The  property  in  this  case  is  rather  in 
the  fruit  than  in  the  tree,  and  is  therefore  not  considered  to  be  in  the  land. 
You  may  take  the  fruit,  but  you  must  not  cut  down  the  tree  without  the 
landowner's  permission.  A  remarkable  distinction  was  made  by  one  of  my 
Fijian  informants.  He  who  has  a  tree  on  another  man's  land  may  cut  it  down 
and  take  it  away ;  his  axe  does  not  touch  the  soil ;  but  he  may  not  dig  the  tree 
up  by  the  roots,  for  his  digging-stick  would  turn  up  the  soil.'— Eev.  L.  Fison. 


62  Property  and  Inheritance.  [CH. 

nob  appear  to  be  any  ancient  village  sites  now  occupied,  the 
old  sites  are  well  remembered  and  their  proprietors  known. 
Members  of  the  various  kema  dwelling  intermixed  on  their 
property  in  the  village  have  their  gardens  intermixed  in  the 
matanga.  It  happens  naturally,  as  a  village  is  not  inhabited 
by  a  local  tribe,  that  some  of  the  villagers  have  no  property 
of  their  own  in  the  village  or  in  the  neighbouring  garden 
gTounds,  in  which  ease  their  neighbours  accommodate  them 
with  what  they  want.  The  matanga  property  is  never  ab- 
solutely in  the  individual  but  in  the  kema,  being  looked  upon 
as  having  been  cleared  originally  by  the  kema ;  portions  are 
occupied  in  hereditary  succession  by  families  within  the  kema, 
by  an  original  agreement  which  now  has  come  to  be  a 
right.  These  ancient  family  lands  pass  of  right  to  members  of 
the  same  kema,  ordinarily  the  sister's  children.  The  whole 
matanga  near  a  town  is  seldom  under  cultivation  at  the  same 
time ;  some  may  pass,  if  the  place  is  deserted,  entirely  into 
bush  again,  but  is  never  strictly  leiao,  for  its  character  is 
remembered.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  a  prosperous  village  a 
man,  and  his  sons  working  with  him,  will  often  clear  a  piece 
of  bush  land  and  make  it  matanga.  This  then  passes  to  his 
sons  without  question,  being  held  to  be  his  own,  and  so  long 
as  it.  is  clearly  remembered  how  the  land  was  acquired  it 
passes  from  father  to  son ;  but  after  a  time  the  character  of 
the  property  may  be  forgotten,  and  the  nephews  of  a  deceased 
proprietor  will  claim  it  from  his  sons  and  be  supported  by 
their  kema ;  serious  quarrels  arise  in  this  way.  A  chief, 
vunagi,  differs  in  no  way  from  another  man  in  his  right  to 
property  in  komu  and  matanga  1.  If  a  man  plants  a  cocoa- 
nut-tree,  an  areca  palm-tree,  or  other  useful  tree  on  a?  friend's 
ground,  the  tree  goes  to  the  planter's  son,  and  if  the  land- 
owner continues  friendly  will  pass  on  without  dispute.  A 

1  Dikea  the  chief  at  Ravu  drove  away  Logana  and  his  family  from  that  place 
on  the  pretext  that  Logana's  brother-in-law  had  set  fire  to  his  canoe-house,  but 
really  to  get  possession  of  Logana's  matanga,  which  was  large  and  good.  The 
dispossessed  family  at  Olevuga  keep  their  eyes  on  the  property,  waiting  for 
Dikea's  death  to  claim  it. 


IVl]  Personal  Property.  63 

man  also  can  plant  in  his  own  matanga  fruit-trees  expressly 
declared  to  be  the  property  of  his  sons;  at  his  death  the 
ground  will  pass  to  his  nephews,  his  own  kin,  but  his  sons 
will  own  the  trees.  Florida  people  are  very  reckless  however 
about  destroying  fruit-trees. 

The  succession  to  personal  property  in  Florida  is  known  to 
be  originally  with  the  members  of  the  kema,  the  kin  of  the 
deceased.  These  will  assemble  after  a  death,  and  if  the 
deceased  be  not  very  rich,  will  eat  up  his  pigs  and  his  food. 
A  chief  will  sometimes  take  what  he  likes,  but  has  no  right 
to  do  it.  A  man  before  his  death  will  direct  that  his  canoe  is 
to  go  to  his  son,  and  he  will  receive  it ;  otherwise  son  and 
nephew  will  each  claim,  and  the  stronger  will  get  it.  A  rich 
man's  money  is  divided  among  brothers,  nephews,  and,  if  they 
can  get  any,  his  sons,  a  fruitful  source  of  quarrels  ;  but  a  man's 
wife,  in  prospect  of  his  death,  would  hide  a  good  deal  of  his 
money,  and  when  the  crowd  assembled  for  the  division  of  the 
inheritance  had  dispersed,  would  bring  it  out  for  herself  and 
her  sons.  Chiefs'  used  to  hide  their  money  and  valuable 
property  and  tambu,  taboo,  the  place ;  now,  when  the  fear  of 
the  tambu  is  gone,  the  young  people  search  for  these  hoards 
and  take  what  they  find.  These  Florida  customs  may  be 
taken  as  representing  those  of  the  surrounding  islands  of  the 
Solomon  group.  In  Saa  and  its  neighbourhood  property  of 
course  descends  entirely  in  the  patriarchal  line.  In  Santa 
Cruz  a  man's  nephews  regularly  succeed  to  his  property, 
in  land,  pigs,  money  and  other  things  ;  but  the  sons  also  in 
some  cases  succeed.  A  man  there  also  has  property  in  trees 
which  are  not  on  his  own  ground. 

In  the  Banks'  Islands  also  the  town  land,  the  vanua,  and 
the  garden  grounds,  the  utag,  are  so  far  private  property  that 
the  owner  can  be  found  for  each  piece ;  the  owner  being  the 
one  who  has  for  his  life  the  possession  of  the  portion  of  the 
family  land  which  he  has  inherited  ;  the  lands  and  houses  of 
the  two  veve  are  intermingled ;  the  succession  to  the  land  is 
rightly  with  the  sister's  children.  Here  also  the  uiag  is  dis- 
tinguished into  the  ancient  hereditary  cultivated  ground,  and 


64  Property  and  Inheritance.  [CH. 

that  which  has  been  reclaimed  from  the  moi,  the  uncleared 
forest,  by  the  present  owner  or  his  recent  predecessors.  In 
the  first  case  the  nephews  on  their  mother's  side  of  the 
previous  proprietor  occupy  the  ground,  each  taking  the 
piece  he  wishes  for  his  own  garden,  and  all  having  col- 
lectively a  property  in  the  whole.  The  land  of  the  other 
character  passes  to  the  children  of  the  man  who  has  cleared 
the  forest  from  it ;  his  kin  have  no  claim  to  it.  The  children 
divide  it  into  separate  lots,  and  do  not  in  any  way  hold  the 
property  in  common;  the  eldest  son  will  take  the  oldest 
plantation,  and  the  youngest  will  have  the  latest  which  has 
not  yet  borne  its  crop  \  Here  the  patriarchal  succession  is 
fixed ;  in  the  other  case  it  is  coming  in  and  has  a  recognized 
footing.  It  is  common  to  make  arrangements  by  which  a 
man's  children  succeed  him  with  the  consent  of  the  heirs  at 
law.  For  example,  when  Woser's  father  died,  who  had  held 
an  utag  at  Motlav  in  common  inheritance  with  his  brother, 
Woser  gave  a  pig  to  his  uncle,  and  he  thereupon  relinquished 
his  claim  to  half  the  property  in  the  garden  ground,  which  he 
did  not  use.  The  heir  of  the  deceased,  and  the  heir  also  in 
prospect  of  the  deceased's  brother,  was  the  son  of  their  sister ; 
and  to  him  Woser  gave  money  to  quiet  his  claim.  Upon  this 
Woser,  with  his  two  brothers  and  two  sisters,  entered  upon  the 
Vttag  as  if  they  had  inherited  it ;  that  is,  they  occupied  it  by  a 
common  property  in  the  whole  and  with  a  particular  occu- 
pation of  separate  gardens.  If  a  similar  transaction  were 
to  follow  upon  the  death  of  tfcese  present  owners,  who  are  not 
of  their  father's  kin,  the  land  would  go  to  their  children  who 
will  be  not  of  their  kin  but  of  their  mother's ;  the  property 
will  thus  revert  to  the  veve  to  which  it  belongs.  Sometimes 
a  man  before  his  death  begs  his  brother  not  to  disturb  his  son 
in  his  garden  ;  he  agrees,  and  the  son  takes  his  father's  place  ; 

1  There  is  no  right  of  primogeniture.  Daughters  inherit  of  right  equally  with 
sons,  but  in  fact  they  rather  transmit  the  inheritance  to  their  children.  So  in 
Fiji, '  Daughters  can  scarcely  be  said  to  inherit  land.  Land  is  given  toith  them 
at  their  marriage,  but  it  is  not  given  to  them.  If  they  hold  it  at  all  it  is  only 
a  means  of  transmitting  the  land  to  their  children.' — Eev.  L.  Fison. 


iv.]  Redemption.     Trees.    Houses.  65 

but  the  father  was  there  of  right,  and  the  son  has  strictly  no 
right;  he  therefore  gives  money  to  the  natural  heirs,  his 
father's  sister's  children.  In  order  to  make  a  transaction  of 
this  kind  secure,  the  son  will  put  the  money  for  the  redemption 
of  the  garden  upon  his  father's  corpse  when  he  is  laid  out  for 
burial ;  the  nephews  and  heirs  of  tbe  deceased  take  the  money 
from  their  dead  maraul  in  the  presence  of  the  assembled  people, 
and  never  can  deny  that  they  have  given  up  their  right  K  If 
a  man's  children  at  his  death  are  not  rich  enough  to  redeem 
the  whole  iitag  they  redeem  a  part.  It  is  a  part  of  the 
acknowledgment  of  the  right  of  the  sister's  children,  and  a 
part  of  the  satisfaction  for  it,  that  fruits  and  other  produce  are 
allowed  them  for  a  time  out  of  the  garden  ;  for  these  are  the 
labour  of  the  deceased,  whose  heirs  his  nephews  and  nieces  of 
his  own  kin  are ;  the  products  of  the  new  owner's  work  will 
not  be  claimed.  Property  in  trees  is  distinct  from  that  in 
land,  and  goes  to  the  planter's  children.  In  case  therefore  of 
a  sale  of  land  there  is  much  variety  in  the  title  to  the  parcels 
of  ground  and  in  the  ownership  of  the  fruit-trees,  the  know- 
ledge of  which  is  most  minute  and  accurate.  The  exact 
limits  of  each  bit  of  property  are  known,  and  the  value  of  the 
right  to  be  extinguished  is  discussed  and  settled  by  common 
consent 2. 

.  The  town  lots  in  the  vanua,  the  house  sites,  tano  ima,  are  held 
in  the  same  way.  When  a  young  man  makes  his  own  home 
he  builds  on  the  property  of  his  kin,  his  mother's  or  his 
maternal  uncle's.    It  happens  naturally  that  the  elder  sons 

1  A  pig  has  been  seen  delivered  from  the  hand  of  a  dead  man  at  his  funeral, 
probably  with  the  same  intention. 

2  Many  years  ago  I  completed  the  purchase  of  a  piece  of  ground  for  a  school 
at  Navqoe  in  Mota,  and  found  the  rights,  and  the  limits  and  value  of  the  rights, 
of  every  man  and  woman  concerned  acknowledged  and  denned  in  a  surprising 
manner.  Each  parcel  of  the  land  was  known  by  boundaries  drawn  from  tree 
to  tree.  The  year  before  the  purchase  of  another  piece  of  ground  for  a  similar 
purpose  had  been  supposed  to  be  completed,  but  when  payment  was  being  made 
at  Navqoe  the  owner  of  a  fruit-tree  on  the  other  ground  put  in  his  claim,  which 
he  had  before  omitted  to  make.  He  was  accompanied  by  the  owner  of  the 
ground  on  which  the  tree  stood,  who  testified  that  the  claim  was  good,  for  the 
claimant's  grandfather  had  planted  it. 

F 


66  Property  and  Inheritance.  rCH. 

have  left  their  father's  house  on  marriage  before  his  death,  or 
do  so  successively  after  his  death;  the  youngest  son  then 
remains  with  his  mother  and  keeps  the  house.  In  a  village 
which  is  flourishing  a  new  house  is  built  on  an  old  site, 
which  therefore  rises  in  time  into  something  of  a  mound  ;  but 
villages  are  seldom  permanent.  When  a  new  village  is  begun 
it  may  occupy  an  ancient  site  of  late  unused,  in  which  case 
the  property  in  the  town  lots  is  well  remembered,  or  it  may 
be  a  new  occupation  of  ground  for  building.  The  vanua  at 
Losalav  in  Motlav  has  been  formed  round  a  house  built  by  the 
great-uncle  of  Woser,  who  gave  two  raw e  pigs  to  the  owner 
of  the  utag  for  the  ground,  and  thus  became  the  landlord ; 
his  daughter  afterwards,  though  she  received  nothing  in  the 
way  of  rent,  was  treated  with  respect  by  the  householders 
because  they  were  not  on  property  of  their  own. 

Personal  property— the  pigs  which  are  so  much  valued,  the 
money,  canoes,  ornaments,  weapons,  and  the  various  imple- 
ments used  in  native  life — goes  to  the  children  generally ;  but 
the  right  of  the  sister's  children  is  still  maintained.  When  a 
man  dies  his  brothers  and  kinsmen,  soffoi,  will  come  and  carry 
off  his  pigs  unless  the  children  buy  them  off;  but  if  a  man 
before  his  death  makes  a  sort  of  testament,  vatavata  varvamanau, 
declaring  that  he  gives  his  property  to  his  children  and 
distributing  it,  they  will  not  be  disturbed  in  their  inheritance. 
A  great  man  often  buried  quantities  of  money,  which  was 
never  found.  In  Lakona,  part  of  Santa  Maria,  'a  man  will 
hide  some  of  his  money ;  then  if  he  have  a  good  son  who  helps 
him  well  in  his  garden  or  always  gives  him  food,  the  father 
will  make  his  hoard  known  to  him,  that  it  may  be  his  ;  if  not 
it  is  gone  for  ever.'  In  that  place  a  man's  money  at  his  death 
is  carefully  distributed  in  short  lengths  among  his  children 
and  his  kinsmen,  and  his  pigs  are  distributed  in  the  same 
way ;  the  children  give  money  and  pigs  to  the  kinsmen  that 
they  may  keep  his  personal  belongings,  and  his  land  and  fruit- 
trees,  which  are  then  completely  given  up.  In  the  case  of  the 
death  of  a  native  in  some  place  in  which  he  has  settled  as 
a  stranger,  or  where  he  has  been  on  a  visit,  his  kinsmen,  and 


ivn  New  Hebrides.  67 

especially  his  sister's  son,  have  a  right  to  go  and  take  what  he 
may  have  left  behind  him  ;  but  this  is  generally  compounded 
for  by  a  sum  of  money,  tulag,  after  receiving  which  no  further 
claim  can  be  made.  There  is  no  doubt  very  often  in  such  a 
case  a  suspicion  or  accusation  of  poisoning  or  witchcraft  as  the 
cause  of  death,  for  which  compensation  is  demanded  \ 

In  the  New  Hebrides  the  ancient  succession  of  the  sister's 
son  to  his  uncle's  property  appears  to  be  strongly  maintained 
in  Araga,  Pentecost  Island,  where  the  nephew  succeeds  to  the 
house,  the  garden,  and  the  pigs  of  his  uncle,  and  the  son  takes 
nothing  except  what  his  father  has  given  him  in  his  lifetime  ; 
and  even  if  a  man  makes  a  garden  for  himself  out  of  the  bush 
it  must  go  to  his  sister's  son.  It  is  very  different,  however,  in 
Lepers'  Island,  where  the  right  of  the  sister's  son  seems  to  be 
barely  recognized,  and  the  property  in  the  villages  and  in  the 
gardens  is  held  by  individuals  as  their  own,  not  as  belonging 
to  the  waivung.  The  town  lots  are  fenced  round,  so  that  the 
houses  stand  in  enclosures.  A  man's  son  succeeds  to  his  house 
property,  but  will  not  live  in  the  house  so  long  as  his  mother 
and  sisters  are  there,  on  account  of  those  restrictions  upon 
intercourse  which  have  been  already  mentioned.  Houses  are 
renewed  in  the  same  place,  but  not  always  on  the  same  site, 
and  villages  are  often  shifted,  the  property  in  the  ground 
being  borne  in  mind.  A  man's  garden-ground,  labtite,  goes  to 
his  sons,  who  arrange  the  division  of  it  among  themselves, 
unless  their  father  has  expressed  his  will  about  it  before  his 
death.  Women  do  not  succeed  to  land,  but  have  a  right  to  a 
share  in  the  produce  of  their  father's  gardens,  which  indeed 
their  brothers  are  considered  to  hold  partly  for  them.  A  man 
can  make  himself  a  new  garden  out  of  the  unappropriated 
ground  fit  for  gardens,  the  labute  virogi, — loose,  not  tied  up, — 

1  For  example,  Wete's  son  had  gone  over  from  Merlav  to  Merig,  and  there  he 
died,  having  been  charmed  by  means  of  a  fragment  of  his  food  at  the  instigation 
of  a  man  whose  wife  is  Wete's  sister.  So  on  the  return  of  the  party,  when  the 
cause  of  death  comes  out,  Wete  shoots  his  sister  with  his  gun,  because  her 
husband  had  been  the  cause  of  the  death  of  his  son.  The  whole  transaction  is 
looked  upon  as  a  matter  of  course  (the  woman  not  being  much  hurt)  ;  Wete  is 
on  the  best  of  terms  with  his  neighbours  and  relations. 


68 


Property  and  Inheritance. 


and  there  cannot  be  any  difference  between  this  and  his  here- 
ditary property.  Gardens  are  all  fenced.  Fruit-trees  planted  on 
another  man's  land  remain  the  property  of  the  planter  and  his 
heirs.  It  is  in  the  succession  to  a  man's  personal  property 
that  the  rights  of  kinship  assert  themselves.  On  a  man's 
death  his  sons  distribute  his  pigs,  money,  and  other  possessions, 
among  those  of  his  waimng,  a  choice  pig  and  a  larger  share  of 
other  things  being  given  to  the  sister's  son,  because  his  special 
relationship  is  much  regarded.  A  man,  however,  will  make 
his  will,  expressing  his  wishes  as  to  the  disposition  of  his 
property  before  his  death.  The  succession  to  property  is  a 
fruitful  source  of  quarrels,  and  it  is  natural  that  opportunity 
should  prevail  over  acknowledged  right  when  the  heirs  are  out 
of  the  way. 

There  appears  upon  the  whole  a  remarkable  tendency 
throughout  these  islands  of  Melanesia  towards  the  substitution 
of  a  man's  own  children  for  his  sister's  children,  and  others  of 
his  kin,  in  succession  to  his  property;  and  this  appears  to 
begin  where  the  property  is  the  produce  of  the  man's  own 
industry,  with  the  assistance  in  most  cases  of  his  sons,  as  in 
gardens  newly  cleared  from  the  forest,  in  his  money,  his  pigs, 
and  his  canoes.  The  original  right  of  a  man's  own  kin,  and 
especially  his  sister's  sons,  to  be  his  heirs  not  only  to  the 
hereditary  lands  which  have  come  down  in  the  kin  but  to 
personal  property,  is  yet  strongly  maintained,  even  at  Lepers' 
Island,  where  the  advance  towards  the  patriarchal  system  has 
been  so  considerable.  It  is  probable  that  even  at  Saa  some- 
thing still  survives  of  what  must  have  been  the  original  custom 
of  the  ancestors  of  that  people,  as  well  as  of  the  rest  of  the 
Melanesians.  It  is  evident  that  the  newer  form  of  succession 
depends  upon  the  assertion  of  paternity ;  and  as  it  arises  some- 
times on  the  occupation  of  new  ground,  it  may  be  thought  to 
be  strengthened  by  the  formation  of  new  settlements  after  the 
family  has  established  itself  within  the  kin. 


CHAPTER  V. 


SECEET  SOCIETIES  AND  MYSTERIES. 

There  is  certainly  nothing  more  characteristic  of  Molane- 
sian  life  than  the  presence  of  Societies  which  celehrate 
Mysteries  strictly  concealed  from  the  uninitiated  and  from  all 
females.  A  dress,  with  a  mask  or  hat,  disguises  the  members 
if  they  appear  in  open  day;  they  have  strange  cries  and 
sounds  by  which  they  make  their  presence  known  when 
they  are  unseen.  In  some  cases,  as  in  Florida  and  Aurora, 
they  make  a  public  show  of  a  piece  of  the  handiwork  of  the 
ghosts  with  whom  it  is  pretended  that  they  have  been  as- 
sociating. Such  societies  are  the  Dukduk  of  New  Britain 
described  by  Mr.  Brown  and  Mr.  Romilly,  the  Matambala  of 
Florida,  the  Tamate  of  the  Banks'  Islands,  the  tiatu  of  the 
Northern  New  Hebrides.  A  photograph  from  New  Caledonia 
shews  a  figure  which  can  hardly  be  distinguished  from  that 
of  a  tamate  from  the  Banks'  Islands,  and  Mr.  Romilly  mentions 
an  institution  like  the  Dukduk  in  New  Guinea.  It  is  plain, 
therefore,  that  this  institution  extends  very  widely  through 
Melanesia,  and  the  Nanga  of  Fiji,  though  in  some  respects 
different,  cannot  be  thought  to  be  entirely  distinct  from  it ; 
yet  it  is  remarkable  that  nothing  of  the  sort  has  as  yet  been 
found  in  Santa  Cruz,  or  in  the  Solomon  Islands  east  of 
Florida  \ 

1  Of  the  two  large  islands  of  Guadalcanar  and  Malanta,  only  a  very  small 
part  has  come  under  observation.  The  Santa  Cruz  people  do  not  seem  to  be 
closely  connected  with  the  Solomon  islanders.    When  it  is  remembered  that  the 


70  Secret  Societies  and  Mysteries.  [CH. 

The  Florida  mysteries  were  believed  to  have  been  brought 
from  Ysabel,  where  nothing  of  the  kind  has  as  yet  been 

observed.  This  belief,  how- 
ever, serves  to  point  to  a 
connexion  with  the  Dukduk 
of  New  Britain,  in  the  name 
of  which  a  further  connexion 
may  probably  be  found.  In 
all  these  societies  the  ghosts 
of  the  dead  were  supposed 
to  be  present ;  in  the  Banks' 
Islands  their  name  is  'The 
Ghosts ; '  in  Santa  Cruz  a 
ghost  is  chtka;  in  Florida 
one  method  of  consulting- 
the  ghosts  of  the  dead  is 
paludulca.  It  is  very  likely 
therefore  that  in  New 
Britain  the  Dukduk  are  also 
'The  Ghosts.' 

One  very  important  point 
of  difference  separates  these 
from  the  bora  of  Australia, 
in  which  the  grown  youth 
of  the  tribe  are  'made  young  men,'  and  have  imparted  to 
them  some  knowledge  of  the  religious  beliefs  and  practices 
of  the  elders.  Grown  men  and  infants,  married  and  un- 
married, are  equally  admitted  to  the  societies  of  Florida 
and  the  New  Hebrides  ;  and  if  in  the  Banks'  Islands  it 
is  not  customary  to  admit  boys  very  young,  there  is  cer- 
tainly no  limit  of  age  as  regards  admission.  It  is  no 
doubt  the  case  that  where  these  societies  flourish,  a  youth 
who  has  not  become  a  member  of  one  of  them  does  not 
take  a  position  of  full  social  equality  with  the  young  men 

Nanga  appears  to  be  limited  to  a  part  only  of  Viti  Levn  in  Fiji,  and  for  a  long- 
time escaped  notice  there,  it  is  reasonable  to  look  for  the  discovery  of  many 
secret  societies  in  Melanesia  which  have  not  jet  been  observed. 


New  Caledonia  Masker. 


v.]  Absence  of  Religious  Character.  71 

who  are  members;  and  also  that  such  a  young  man  has 
probably  no  wife.  Such  a  young  man  has  not  been  able  to 
meet  the  expense  of  initiation  or  of  matrimony ;  his  friends, 
from  carelessness  or  poverty,  have  let  him  grow  up  without 
making  proper  provision  for  him ;  he  remains  uninitiated  and 
unmarried  from  the  same  cause  ;  but  initiation  is  by  no  means 
a  preliminary  step  to  matrimony.  It  is  difficult,  in  view  of 
the  strict  secrecy  and  solemnity  of  the  mysteries,  to  believe 
that  there  is  no  knowledge  imparted  in  initiation  of  a  religious 
character.  The  outer  world  of  women  and  children,  and  the 
uninitiated,  matawonoioono, — whose  eyes  were  closed, — undoubt- 
edly believed  that  the  initiated  entered  into  association  with 
the  ghosts  of  the  dead  ;  the  strange  cries  and  awful  sounds 
that  proceeded  from  the  sacred  and  unapproachable  lodge  of 
the  association,  or  from  the  forest  when  the  members  of  it 
were  abroad,  were  more  than  human  in  their  ears ;  the  figures 
that  appeared  were  not  those  of  men.  An  accident  would  no 
doubt  sometimes  make  it  plain  that  it  was  a  man,  some  one 
well  known  and  recognized,  who  was  figuring  as  a  ghost ; 
but  then  his  disguise  was  not  the  work  of  mortal  hands  ;  and 
the  shrewd  conjecture  that  all  the  rest  were  as  much  men  and 
neighbours  as  the  one  whose  fall  revealed  him  might  be 
entertained,  but  would  be  dangerous  to  express.  It  was  only 
when  the  neophyte  was  admitted  into  the  mysterious  pre- 
cincts that  he  found  only  his  daily  companions  there,  and 
learnt  that  there  was  nothing  to  be  imparted  to  him  except 
the  knowledge  how  the  sounds  were  produced,  how  the 
dresses  and  decorations  were  made,  and  in  some  cases  a  song 
and  dance.  There  was  no  secret  article  of  belief  made  known, 
and  no  secret  form  of  worship  practised.  The  ordinary  forms 
of  prayer  and  sacrifice  were  performed  as  elsewhere,  though 
here  in  connexion  with  these  mysteries.  There  were  no  forms 
of  worship  peculiar  to  the  society,  and  no  objects  of  worship 
of  a  kind  unknown  to  those  without. 

It  is  remarkable  also  that,  as  far  as  I  have  been  able  to 
ascertain,  there  is  nothing  or  veiy  little  that  is  obscene,  or 
more  objectionable  from  a  moral  point  of  view  than  imposture 


7 2  Secret  Societies  and  Mysteries.  [CH. 

combined  with  a  certain  amount  of  tyranny  and  intimidation. 
In  some  places  the  neophytes  had  to  endure  hardships  or  even 
tortures,  which  were  absent,  however,  in  the  Banks'  Islands, 
where  these  societies  are  very  numerous.  The  property  of 
the  uninitiated  was  plundered,  and  themselves  beaten  and 
oppressed  when  the  mysteries  were  at  work  ;  all  order  and 
industry  were  upset.  At  the  same  time  hideous  and  obscene 
orgies  were  absent ;  a  native  convert  to  Christianity  might  go 
into  his  lodge  and  find  nothing  there  to  offend  him  that  he 
djxl  not  find  in  the  village ;  an  European  visitor  might  go  in 
and  find  nothing  more  mysterious  to  be  revealed  to  him  than 
the  hats  and  dresses  and  the  appliances  for  producing  the 
unearthly  sounds. 

The  Fijian  nanga  as  described  by  Mr.  Fison  and  Mr.  Joske, 
to  which  the  presence  of  women  gives  at  once  a  different 
character,  must  be  taken  as  representing  these  secret  societies 
in  that  group,  and  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  direct  connexion 
in  origin  between  this  and  those  that  flourish  in  the  islands 
further  to  the  west.  The  institution  in  Fiji,  however,  is  so 
little  conspicuous  in  the  life  of  the  people,  probably  because  so 
limited  in  distribution,  that  it  escaped  for  many  years  the 
observation  of  Mr.  Fison  himself.  In  the  Banks'  Islands 
the  tamate  would  very  soon  call  for  notice.  If  no  special 
celebration  of  the  mysteries  were  being  carried  on,  a  visitor 
would  soon  become  aware  that  there  were  near  every  village 
retreats  frequented  by  most  of  his  native  companions,  and 
unapproachable  by  some.  The  members  of  the  societies  would 
be  proud  to  shew  him  these  retreats  and  the  wonderful  works 
of  art  they  contained.  Very  few  days  would  pass  without  the 
appearance  of  some  masked  figures,  or  the  sound  of  some 
strange  noise  or  cry.  In  that  group  the  number  of  these 
societies  is  surprising ;  some  very  insignificant,  local,  or 
recently  started  by  individuals  ;  some  select  and  respected ; 
one  found  everywhere,  the  principal  and  apparently  original 
institution  of  the  kind.  In  the  Northern  New  Hebrides 
this  Great  Tamate  of  the  Banks'  Islands  is  not  found,  but 
others  of  the  same  character  appear.    I  have  seen  a  mask  and 


v.-j  .  Extent  and  Distribtdion.  73 

a  secret  lodge  as  far  south  as  Ambrym.  The  figure  in  the 
photograph  from  New  Caledonia  is  so  nearly  identical  with 
that  of  a  tamate  of  the  Banks'  Islands,  that  the  identity  of  the 
institution  may  be  conjectured,  or  at  any  rate  a  connexion 


must  be  taken  to  exist.  Between  the  Banks'  Islands  and 
Florida  the  interval  is  considerable  ;  but  scholars  from  Florida, 
on  their  way  to  Norfolk  Island  many  years  ago,  recognized 
their  own  matabala  in  the  salagoro  of  Mota,  to  which  as 
strangers  they  were  freely  admitted.  The  result  of  their 
admission  was  fatal  to  the  mystery  in  either  institution.  A 
Florida  boy  who  had  seen  what  the  Mota  salagoro  was  and 
contained,  knew  very  well  what  sort  of  mysteries  those  were  at 
home  into  which  he  had  not  yet  been  initiated,  and  he  ceased 


74  Secret  Societies  and  Mysteries.  rCH. 

to  believe  in  their  supernatural  character.  The  uninitiated 
boys  from  the  Banks'  Islands  heard  in  Norfolk  Island  from 
their  Florida  schoolfellows  what  they  had  seen,  and  the 
sacredness  of  the  salagoro  was  lost  for  them.  The  secret  was 
out  many  years  ago,  though  in  Florida  the  power  of  the 
mysteries  was  maintained  till  Christianity  prevailed  in  the 
only  part  of  the  island  in  which  the  institution  had  a  seat. 

In  the  Banks'  Islands  the  tamate  has  survived  the  introduction 
of  Christianity.  All  belief  in  the  supernatural  character  of 
the  associations  has  long  disappeared,  all  women  and  children 
know  that  the  tamate  are  men  dressed  in  disguises  made  by 
themselves,  and  that  the  sounds  and  cries  are  naturally 
produced.  But  these  societies  had  so  important  a  place  in  the 
social  arrangements  of  the  people  that  they  have  held  their 
ground  as  clubs.  It  is  not  only  in  the  Banks'  Islands  that 
secrecy  and  a  costume  have  their  attractions.  The  secrecy  of 
the  lodges  is  still  maintained,  the  salagoro  is  unapproachable 
by  women  and  the  uninitiated,  the  neophyte  has  still  to  go 
through  his  time  of  probation  and  seclusion,  and  the  authority 
of  the  society  is  maintained  by  too  much  of  the  high-handed 
tyranny  of  old  times1.  In  truth,  the  social  power  of  these 
societies  was  too  great  to  be  readily  dissolved,  and  in  the 

1  It  was  a  matter  of  principle  with  Bishop  Patteson  not  to  interfere 
in  an  arbitrary  manner  with  the  institutions  of  the  people,  but  to  leave 
it  to  their  own  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  and  their  own  knowledge  of 
the  character  of  what  they  did,  to  condemn  or  to  tolerate  what  their  growing 
enlightenment  would  call  into  question.  So  there  arose  among  his  early  pupils 
the  doubt  whether  it  would  be  right  for  them  as  Christians  to  continue  members 
of  the  tamate  societies,  to  seek  for  admission  into  them,  and  frequent  their 
lodges.  The  bishop  put  it  to  them  that  they  should  enquire  and  consult  among 
themselves  about  the  real  character  of  the  societies  ;  did  they  offer  worship  and 
prayer  to  ghosts  or  spirits  ;  were  they  required  to  take  part  in  anything  indecent 
or  atrocious  ;  did  membership  involve  any  profession  of  belief  or  practice  of 
superstition  peculiar  to  the  members  ?  After  consultation  they  reported  to  him 
that  they  could  not  discover  anything  wrong  in  itself,  except  the  pretence  of 
association  with  ghosts,  which  had  already  ceased  to  be  serious,  and  the  beating 
and  robbing  of  the  uninitiated,  which  it  was  quite  possible  for  them  to  refuse 
to  take  part  in  and  to  oppose.  The  bishop  therefore  would  not  condemn  the 
societies,  and  in  the  Banks'  Islands  they  continue  to  exist,  and  indeed  to 
flourish  more  than  it  is  at  all  desirable  that  they  should. 


>vi  Banks  Islands.  75 

absence  of  any  strong  political  organization  the  importance  of 
the  position  of  a  member  of  the  largest  and  most  exclusive  of 
the  societies  has  been  considerable.  Many  years  ago  I  well 
remember  how  in  the  early  morning  of  one  day  in  the  island  of 
Mota  a  strange  cry  was  heard  repeated  from  every  quarter, 
shrill,  prolonged  and  unmistakeable.  It  was  the  cry  of  the 
tamate ;  the  members  of  the  Great  Tamate  were  all  out  and  in 
possession  of  the  island ;  o  vanua  we  gona,  the  country  was  in 
occupation,  no  one  could  go  about,  everything  of  the  business 
of  ordinary  life  was  at  a  standstill  till  the  tamate  should  be 
satisfied.  Upon  enquiry  we  were  told  that  in  the  evening 
before  a  man  in  anger  had  taken  up  his  bow.  In  accordance 
with  the  teaching  of  Bishop  Patteson,  and  with  the  authority 
of  the  great  man  of  the  island,  the  society  of  the  Great  Tamate 
had  forbidden  the  use  of  the  bow  and  arrow  in  private  quarrels 
under  penalty  of  a  fine  to  them.  On  this  occasion  the  man 
who  had  been  guilty  of  the  offence  hastened  to  atone  for  it 
with  a  pig,  and  all  was  quiet  again.  It  is  not  surprising  that 
membership  in  so  powerful  a  society  should  be  valued  and  not 
readily  resigned. 

I.  The  Banks  Islands. — The  Banks'  Islands,  with  the* 
neighbouring  Torres  group,  are  undoubtedly  the  chief  seat  of 
these  societies,  which  are  there  universally  called  '  The  Ghosts,' 
o  tamate,  netmet.  In  the  Torres  Islands  alone  there  are  a 
hundred  of  them,  and  every  man  belongs  to  four  or  five.  The 
chief  society,  the  tamate  liwoa  of  Mota,  is  present  everywhere, 
though  in  some  places  it  is  not  so  important  as  some  more 
exclusive  one  of  local  origin.  Another  association  is  distin- 
guished by  its  peculiar  dance,  and  differs  from  the  others  in 
having  no  permanent  lodge  or  club-house;  this,  the  Qat, 
is  found  in  all  the  Banks'  Islands,  but  not  in  the  Torres 
Islands.  All  these  tamate  associations  have  as  their  particular 
badge  a  leaf  or  a  flower.  The  very  numerous  and  well-marked 
varieties  of  the  croton,  which  all  have  their  native  names, 
furnish  the  leaves ;  the  flowers  are  those  of  the  many  varieties 
of  hibiscus,  all  also  named.  To  stick  flowers  in  the  hair,  roit, 
is  very  common  ;  it  is  the  particular  part  of  the  head  which  is 


76  Secret  Societies  and  Mysteries.  [CH. 

ornamented  by  the  particular  flower  that  marks  the  member 
of  the  tomato.  To  assume  the  badge  without  being  a  member 
of  a  tamate  is  an  offence  against  the  society,  to  be  punished 
according  to  the  power  and  position  of  the  society  offended. 
In  the  Torres  Islands,  for  example,  one  of  the  three  great 
tamate  societies  is  Nipir,  and  its  badge  is  a  hibiscus  flower  worn 
over  the  forehead.  If  any  one  not  a  member  should  be  seen 
with  this  flower  thus  worn,  a  bunch  of  flowers  and  leaves 
is  set  up  in  a  public  place  by  the  society,  and  the  offender 
knows  that  he  must  forfeit  a  pig.  He  brings  his  pig,  ties  it 
in  the  open  space  in  the  middle  -of  his  village,  and  stands  by 
it ;  one  of  the  society  then  beats  him  for  his  presumption,  and 
after  that  he  has  to  go  through  the  regular  initiation  with  the 
payment  of  the  entrance  fees. 

The  origin  of  these  societies  in  the  Banks'  Islands  has  no 
light  thrown  upon  it,  as  in  Florida,  by  tradition,  and  must  be 
presumed  therefore  to  belong  to  no  recent  times.  There  is  a 
story  that  a  woman  received  from  a  ghost,  whom  she  saw  in  a 
tree,  an  image  with  the  hat  and  cloak  of  a  tamate,  and  that 
she  kept  this  hidden  behind  a  partition  in  her  house.  It 
became  known  that  she  had  something  wonderful  concealed, 
and  she  admitted  men  on  payment  to  a  private  view.  When 
those  who  had  partaken  of  the  secret  became  numerous  enough 
they  took  it  out  of  the  woman's  hands,  made  a  lodge  for 
themselves,  were  taught  by  the  image,  which  was  all  the 
while  itself  a  ghost,  how  to  make  the  dress,  and  thus  set  up 
the  first  tamate  association,  with  the  strictest  exclusion  of 
all  women  ever  afterwards.  From  this  story  nothing  can  be 
learnt  concerning  the  origin  of  so  widely  spread  an  institution. 
The  multitude  of  minor  associations,  generally  named  after 
birds,  are  however  mostly  local,  and  may  be  thought  to  be 
modern.  Any  one  might  start  a  new  society,  and  gather  round 
him  his  co-founders,  taking  any  object  that  might  strike  their 
fancy  as  the  ground  and  symbol  of  their  association.  A 
visitor  to  Norfolk  Island  having  seen  there  a  bird  that  was 
strange  to  him,  established  on  his  return  to  Mota  a  society 
called  1  the  Norfolk  Island  Bird.'    Some  such  new  foundations 


v.]  Banks  Islands.    Lodges.  77 

will  succeed  and  flourish,  some  will  fail ;  but  the  whole  number 
in  the  Banks'  Islands  and  the  Torres  Islands  must  be  very 
great.  Three  or  four  may  be  common  to  all  the  group,  some 
few  common  to  two  or  more  islands,  the  rest  more  or  less 
closely  localized.  Some  are  exclusive  with  heavy  entrance 
payments,  and  are  used  by  elder  men  of  good  position ;  some 
are  cheap  and  easy  of  entrance.  I  think  it  probable  that 
where  the  Great  Tamate  is  powerful,  all  the  members  of  the 
other  societies  belong  also  to  that  and  work  together  with  it, 
except  the  younger  members  of  the  least  important,  the 
seclusion  of  which  is  comparatively  little  respected. 

The  lodge  or  secret  resort  of  the  Great  Tamate  is  the  mlagoro, 
established  in  some  secluded  place,  generally  amidst  lofty  trees, 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  every  considerable  village  or  group  of 
villages.  The  path  to  it  is  marked  where  it  diverges  from  the 
public  path  by  bright  orange-coloured  fruits  stuck  on  reeds, 
bunches  of  flowers,  fronds  of  cycas,  and  the  customary  soloi, 
taboo  marks,  forbidding  entrance.  These  are  repeated  at 
intervals  till  the  winding  path  comes  out  into  the  open  space 
in  which  the  building  stands.  Such  marks  are  quite  sufficient 
to  prevent  intrusion,  because  they  represent  the  whole  force  of 
the  association,  not  because  they  rest  on  any  specially  religious 
sanction.  The  whole  place  is  not  sacred,  rongo,  it  is  set  apart, 
tapu,  by  a  sufficient  authority.  No  woman  or  uninitiated 
person  would  think  of  approaching ;  foreigners  are  admitted 
without  difficulty ;  that  is  to  say,  those  who  do  not  belong  to 
those  neighbouring  islands  in  which  the  society  is  known  to 
have  a  place,  Solomon  islanders  for  example.  If  nothing-  in  the 
way  of  initiation  or  particular  celebration  should  be  going  on, 
the  visitor  will  find  only  a  few  members  in  the  place ;  some  who 
use  it  as  a  club  for  their  meals,  some  whose  business  it  is  as 
newly-admitted  members  to  prepare  the  meals,  keep  the  place 
swept,  and  remain  within  for  a  fixed  number  of  days.  Very 
likely  a  cocoa-nut  will  be  pointed  out  as  representing  some  one 
whose  personal  attendance  has  been  excused.  The  hats  and 
dresses  worn  at  the  last  dance  or  public  demonstration  may  be 
inspected.    The  hats  are  really  ingenious,  and  when  new  are 


78  Secret  Societies  and  Mysteries.  rCH. 

handsome.  They  are  made  of  bark,  painted  with  such 
vegetable  preparations  as  it  is  a  secret  of  the  fraternity  to 
compound,  and  adorned  in  bands  and  in  rings  round  the  eyes 
on  either  side  with  the  scarlet  seeds  of  the  abrus  precatorius. 
The  hats  receive  the  whole  head,  and  come  down  upon  the 


shoulders,  where  they  meet  the  cloak  with  a  fringe  of  cycas 
leaves.  The  sbape  of  the  hats  is  very  various ;  some  have  a 
strange  resemblance  to  the  cocked  hats  of  naval  officers,  and 
it  has  been  naturally  supposed  that  the  pattern  has  been  taken 
from  them.    But  it  is  very  unlikely  that  a  naval  officer  has 


v-j  Bands'  Islands.    Hats.  79 

ever  been  seen  in  a  cocked  hat  in  the  Banks'  Islands,  and  the 
masks  of  that  shape  were  certainly  seen  when  masks  were  first 
seen  there  by  Europeans  \    Besides  these  hats  the  house  of 


Banks'  Islands  Tamate. 


the  salagoro  will  not  be  found  to  contain  anything  more  than 
the  usual  appliances  for  cooking- :  a  certain  disappointment  is 
probably  experienced  by  every  one  who  first  penetrates  into 
the  mysterious  precincts.    There  is  one  object,  however,  which 

1  It  is  true  that  when  white  men  were  seen  with  hats  they  were  supposed  by 
the  natives  to  wear  what  corresponded  to  their  own  masks.    The  native  name  for 


80  Secret  Societies  and  Mysteries.  [CH. 

is  not,  or  but  lately  was  not,  so  readily  made  known.  This  is 
the  apparatus  by  which  the  peculiar,  and  certainly  very 
impressive,  sound  is  made,  which  was  believed  by  the  outsiders 
to  be  the  cry  or  voice  of  the  ghosts.  This  is  a  flat,  smooth  stone, 
on  which  the  butt-end  of  the  stalk  of  a  fan  of  palm  is  rubbed. 
The  vibration  of  the  fan  produces  an  extraordinary  sound, 
which  can  be  modulated  in  strength  and  tone  at  the  will  of 
the  performer,  and  which  proceeding  in  the  stillness  of  day- 
break from  the  mysterious  recesses  of  the  salacjoro,  may  well 
have  carried  with  it  the  assurance  of  a  supernatural  presence 
and  power.  The  origin  of  this  contrivance  is  thus  narrated. 
Two  members  of  the  Great  Tamate  in  Vanua  Lava  going 
together  along  the  shore  heard  a  strange  and  unearthly  sound 
as  they  approached  a  point  of  land,  the  usual  haunt  of  ghosts. 
They  found  this  to  be  produced  by  an  old  woman  sitting  on 
the  beach  and  rubbing  down  shells  for  money  upon  a  stone, 
who  was  contriving  to  do  her  work  and  at  the  same  time 
shelter  herself  from  the  sun,  by  using  the  handle  of  her 
palmleaf  umbrella  for  the  stick  which  holds  the  shell.  The 
men  perceived  the  value  of  the  discovery  for  the  purpose 
of  their  mysteries,  ran  in  upon  the  woman  and  killed  her, 
and  carried  off  the  stone  and  her  umbrella.  This  apparatus 
does  the  work  which  the  'bull-roarer,'  too  wrell  known  in 
the  Banks'  Islands  to  be  used  in  mysteries,  performs  else- 
where. 

To  obtain  admission  into  any  of  these  societies  is  to  tiro. 
Before  admission  can  be  obtained  to  the  Great  Tamate,  the 
candidate  or  his  friends  has  to  usnr  with  a  pig  of  the  valued 
kind  called  rawe ;  and  there  is  also  a  period  of  fasting  to  be 
gone  through.  When  he  is  admitted  he  is  brought  into  the 
salagoro,  and  deposits  money  at  the  successive  stages  of  his 
advance,  marked  by  the  soloi  beside  the  path  till  he  comes 

a  mask  worn  in  one  of  these  societies  is  the  same  as  that  given  to  the  society 
itself,  tamate,  a  ghost ;  and  tamate  has  long  been  established  as  the  name  of 
any  European  hat  or  cap.  Hence  it  is  natural  rather  to  speak  of  these  disguises 
as  hats  than  as  masks,  and  useful  perhaps  to  do  so,  to  distinguish  them  from  the 
masks  to  cover  the  face  which  are  in  use  elsewhere. 


v.]  Banks  Island  'Tamate'  81 

into  the  house.  He  has  then  to  goto,  remain  secluded,  so  many 
days  before  he  can  go  back  into  his  village,  and  after  that 
has  to  serve  so  many  days  more  in  the  preparation  of  the 
daily  oven.  The  number  of  days  of  seclusion  and  of  at- 
tendance, and  the  amount  of  the  admission  fees,  vary  with 
the  dignity  of  the  society1.  In  Ureparapara,  where  the 
Great  Tamate  is  not  of  much  importance,  there  are  three  chief 
societies,  Ni  Pir,  No  Vov,  Ne  Menmenclol,  into  which  the  ad- 
mission is  difficult ;  the  new  member  has  to  goto  for  a  hundred 

1  Mr.  Palmer  thus  describes  the  initiation  of  children  at  Pek  in  Vanua 
Lava.  *  A  number  of  children  were  about  to  enter  the  Salagoro,  which  was  the 
cause  of  the  gathering.  We  passed  through  a  tall  screen  of  cocoa-nut  leaves 
some  twenty  feet  high,  made  so  as  to  hide  the  precincts  of  the  Salagoro  from 
the  uninitiated.  In  the  courtyard  of  the  village  there  was  a  group  of  children, 
some  babies  earned  in  their  fathers'  arms,  all  boys ;  these  were  the  candidates 
for  admission  into  the  Salagoro.  We  waited  for  a  short  time,  when  some  one 
gave  a  signal,  and  one  of  the  men  gave  a  long,  loud  cry  with  all  the  strength  of 
his  lungs,  and  then  came  rushing  from  a  path  inland  a  curious  figure  I  had 
seen  dressing  up  for  the  occasion.  This  was  the  tamate  tvasawasa  (the  harmless 
ghost)  who  was  to  conduct  the  children  into  the  Salagoro.  He  came  along  with 
a  light,  springy  step,  with  two  white  rods  in  his  hands,  which  he  danced  up 
and  down.  All  you  saw  of  the  man  were  his  two  legs.  On  his  head  was 
a  curious  kind  of  hat  or  tamate ;  it  is  a  mask  with  holes  or  slits  in  it, 
through  which  he  saw ;  long  fringes  made  of  cocoa-nut  leaves  blanched 
covered  his  body  entirely,  and  formed  a  kind  of  Inverness  cape,  through  which 
his  hands  protruded.  A  singular  effect  is  given  to  the  figure  by  the  peculiar 
high  trotting  action  with  which  he  rushes  about,  his  leafy  coat  flying  about  him 
with  a  rustling  noise.  He  came  leaping  into  the  tinesara  over  a  stone  wall 
with  a  springy  bound,  and  danced  round  and  round  the  group  in  the  middle ; 
and  then  all  at  once  with  a  shout  rushed  into  the  midst  of  them,  and  beat  his 
two  white  wands  together  till  they  were  broken  to  shreds  over  the  heads  of 
the  group.  One  little  fellow  got  frightened  and  rushed  away,  but  he  soon  was 
brought  back  again.  Then  the  tamate  retired  into  the  enclosure,  and  the  group 
filed  off  in  a  procession  round  the  tinesara,  where  a  number  of  pigs  were  tied 
to  stakes.  The  pigs  got  a  smack  from  each  child  ;  then  they  all  went  in  single 
file  into  the  tall  enclosure.  As  we  watched  them,  the  same  little  fellow  who 
was  frightened  before  rushed  back  out  of  the  screen,  and  after  hiding  himself 
for  a  moment  jumped  up  and  rushed  away  into  the  bush,  amidst  a  roar  of 
laughter.  I  heard  afterwards  that  he  ran  away  home,  a  distance  of  some  five 
or  six  miles.  This  was  only  the  preliminary  ceremony.  These  children  will 
have  to  remain  in  the  enclosure  forty  or  fifty  days,  till  all  the  money  and 
pigs  are  paid  for  the  privilege  of  belonging  to  this  club.'— Island  Voyage 
1879. 

Gr 


82  Secret  Societies  and  Mysteries.  [Ch. 

days,  and  after  that  to  attend  to  the  oven  for  another  hundred 
days.  During  his  first  hundred  days  he  does  not  wash,  and 
gets  so  dirty  that  when  he  comes  out  he  is  not  recognized ; 
so  dirty  is  he,  they  say,  that  he  cannot  be  seen.  In  this 
island  the  Great  Tamate,  though  it  retains  the  name,  has  not 
even  a  salagoro ;  a  chamber  for  initiation  is  made  in  the 
gamal,  the  house  of  the  Suqe  Club  ;  the  entrance  payment 
is  small,  and  infants  are  admitted.  In  the  Banks'  Islands 
also  the  lesser  societies  have  no  salagoro,  whether  they  be 
exclusive  like  the  Oviovi  or  insignificant  like  the  Meretang; 
the  lodge  is  the  sara.  From  all  the  lodges  equally  women, 
and  the  uninitiated,  the  matawonowono  who  have  their  eyes 
closed,  are  strictly  excluded.  "Women  will  venture  to  stand 
near  the  entrance  to  the  retreats  of  the  lesser  clubs,  which 
are  often  very  little  secluded  from  the  public  road ;  but 
the  salagoro  of  the  Great  Tamate  and  the  sara  of  the  im- 
portant societies  are  very  carefully  respected.  The  croton 
leaves  which  are  the  badge  of  each  are  well  known ;  a 
member  of  any  one  will  mark  with  such  a  leaf  the  fruit- 
trees  or  garden  that  he  wishes  to  reserve  for  a  particular 
use,  and  the  prohibition  will  be  observed  ;  he  has  behind 
him  the  whole  tamate  \  with  whom  an  offender  would  have 
to  deal. 

For  the  greater  part  of  the  year  the  salagoro  or  the  sara  is 
used  as  a  kind  of  club  ;  the  newly  admitted  members  have  the 
duty  of  preparing  a  daily  meal,  which  attracts  some  who  have 
no  other  engagement ;  it  affords  a  convenient  and  somewhat 
distinguished  resort  in  the  heat  of  the  day.  The  European 
visitor  will  be  likely  to  find  there  any  man  he  wishes  to  see ; 
he  will  find  a  meal  there  himself  when  he  desires  it ;  a  yam 
from  the  salagoro  oven  will  be  sent  to  him  as  a  compliment, 
of  which  no  one  will  venture  to  partake  whose  eyes  are  still 
unopened.    From  time  to  time  the  members  rouse  themselves 

.  i  Order  is  kept  in  the  same  way  among  themselves.  If  any  one  has  made 
a  disturbance  in  the  salagoro,  a  makomako,  bunch  of  leaves,  is  set  out,  and 
the  culprit  has  to  put  money  upon  it,  to  tape  fforo  o  mahomaJco,  make  his 
atonement. 


v-]  Banks  Island  'Tamate!  83 

into  activity,  with  a  view  to  bring-  themselves  into  evidence, 
to  attract  recruits,  to  impress  the  people  with  a  sense  of  then- 
importance,  and  to  enjoy  a  festival.  Then  they  begin  to  make 
new  masks  and  dresses  within  their  lodge,  and  the  solemn 
sound  of  the  linge  iamate  warns  all  without  that  the  mysteries 
have  begun.  The  country  is  said  to  be  close,  0  vanua  we  gona, 
no  one  can  venture  along  the  paths  without  the  risk  of  being 
beaten  by  the  tamaie.  They  assume  the  greatest  license  in 
carrying  off  all  they  want,  robbing  gardens  and  stripping 
fruit-trees  for  their  feast,  and  then  any  one  will  suffer  who 
has  spoken  or  acted  without  due  respect  to  the  society.  The 
ghosts  in  their  disguise  will  rush  into  the  villages,  chasing  the 
terrified  women  and  children,  and  beating  any  whom  they  can 
catch  ;  the  disadvantage  of  remaining  outside  as  mafawonowono 
is  made  apparent  \  Many  of  the  lesser  societies,  composed  of 
those  who  are  members  also  of  the  Great  Tamate,  whose  power 
is  at  their  back,  practise  the  same  tyranny;  but  there  are 
some  that  do  not  terrify  or  beat,  but  come  out  to  show  their 
finely  and  daDce.  A  pretty  and  pleasant  scene  it  is  when  two 
or  three  figures  dance  forth  into  the  sunshine  of  the  village 
place ;  their  heads  concealed  in  masks  in  shape  like  the  cowls 
of  Italian  becchini,  coming  down  in  a  point  upon  the  breast, 
and  with  round  eyes  painted  on  the  sides,  white,  and  glisten- 
ing with  scarlet  seeds  and  the  fresh  green  of  the  cycas  fronds ; 
their  bodies  hidden  in  golden  brown  cloaks  of  sago  leaves  ; 

1  The  smaller  societies  make  their  appearance  with  less  pretence.  '  On  my 
way  home  I  met  a  wild  and  grotesque-looking  party  of  men  ;  they  belonged  to 
a  tamate  society,  and  they  had  been  to  pull  a  house  to  pieces  in  order  to  compel 
the  owner,  or  his  son  perhaps,  to  join  them.  They  were  adorned  with  hibiscus 
flowers  and  croton  leaves,  their  faces  smudged  with  charcoal,  and  a  leaf  in  the 
month,  each  carrying  a  stick.  Two  or  three  of  these  had  on  a  tamate,  a  hat  and 
mask,  with  a  long  fringe  of  leaves  reaching  down  to  the  heels.'  'At  this  time 
of  the  year,  when  they  are  baking  bread-fruit,  some  of  the  young  men  dress  up 
in  a  mask  and  put  on  a  dress  of  dried  banana  leaves,  tied  round  the  neck  and 
reaching  to  the  ground,  and  they  dance  along  with  a  rustling  noise  from  the  dry 
leaves.  They  either  talk  gibberish  or  else  in  one  of  the  neighbouring  dialects. 
The  women  and  children  are  supposed  to  be  frightened  of  them,  but  they  often 
give  them  their  dried  bread-fruit.'  These  are  the  Qasa.— Eev.  J.  Palmer's 
Journals,  Island  Voyage,  1877,  1883. 

G  3 


84  Secret  Societies  and  Mysteries.  [ch. 

each  holding-  in  either  hand  a  cycas  frond  as  a  martyr  in  a 
picture  holds  his  palm.  The  women  and  the  little  children 
crowd  around  full  of  admiration  mixed  with  awe ;  '  these  are 
good  tamate,  they  never  beat  or  chase  us.'  In  Ureparapara  it 
is  not  the  custom  to  beat  the  outsiders,  but  they  are  not 
slack  in  insisting-  on  their  rules.  When  an  initiation  into 
their  menmendol  is  going  on  there  must  be  no  smoke  of  fire ; 
if  smoke  is  seen  anywhere,  their  sagilo,  a  bunch  of  their 
flowers  and  leaves,  is  set  up,  and  a  pig  must  be  given  for  the 
offence. 

In  the  part  of  the  New  Hebrides  which  closely  adjoins  the 
Banks'  Islands  these  tamate  societies  are  not  so  common  as  in 
those  islands ;  but  there  are  in  Aurora,  Araga  (Pentecost 
Island),  and  Ambrym,  mysterious  associations  which  have  a 
retreat  unapproachable  by  the  uninitiated,  and  a  mask  and 
dress.  In  the  southern  parts  of  Araga  there  is  said  to  be  what 
is  called  a  tamate,  but  information  fails  concerning  it ;  in 
Ambrym  I  have  been  taken  into  a  secret  place  and  shown  a 
mask  fashioned  upon  a  skull  and  furnished  with  a  wig  of  hair, 
and  moreover  decorated  with  the  tusks  of  a  boar.  At  any 
rate  the  Araga  tamate  is  different  from  the  Qeta  to  be  hereafter 
described. 

Different  from  these  tamate  societies  in  the  Banks'  Islands 
in  having  no  permanent  place  of  resort,  and  yet  closely  resem- 
bling them  in  all  the  most  important  characteristics,  is  the 
institution  of  the  Qat,  common  to  all  the  group.  The  great 
distinction  of  this,  however,  is  the  dance.  The  tamate  will 
prepare  and  execute  most  elaborate  performances  of  the  dances 
of  their  islands,  but  the  Qat  itself  is  danced.  For  the  initia- 
tion, whenever  a  sufficient  number  of  candidates  are  forth- 
coming, an  enclosure  in  a  retired  place  is  made  by  a  fence  of 
reeds,  the  two  ends  of  which  overlap  to  make  an  entrance,  the 
shark's  mouth  as  it  is  called,  through  which  it  is  impossible 
to  look.  Here  the  neophytes  remain,  unwashed  and  blackened 
with  ashes,  for  an  appointed  time,  learning  the  dance  and  the 
song  by  which  the  steps  of  the  dance  are  regulated.  To 
obtain  admission  is,  as  with  the  tamate,  to  tiro,  and  money 


v-j  Banks  Island  'Qatu.'  85 

has  to  be  paid  ;  children  too  young  to  dance  have  the  money 
paid  for  them  and  enter ;  when  they  are  big  enough  they  go 
in  again  to  learn  the  dance.  Nothing  can  better  represent  to 
a  visitor  the  scene  of  an  initiation  into  religious  mysteries  than 
the  jealously  guarded  enclosure  from  which  in  the  dead  of 
night  strange  sounds  and  loud  calls  proceed,  and  the  name  of 
which  associates  it  with  Qat,  who  may  be  taken  for  the  god 
whom  they  worship  r.  But  the  name  Qat  refers  to  the  hats 
and  not  to  the  vui ;  and  enquiry  does  not  discover  any 
religious  meaning  in  the  initiation.  The  neophytes  learn  a 
dance  difficult  of  execution  and  requiring  much  practice,  not 
because  of  a  complicated  figure,  but  from  the  rapidity  and 
aecuracy  with  which  the  steps  are  stamped.  The  steps,  as  in 
other  dances,  follow  a  song,  and  the  tapping  of  a  bamboo. 
The  Mota  song  is  as  follows :  Veve  !  la  us  mae,  na  ven  toa,  to 
salsal,  to  salsal,  Vevae,  la  us  mae,  na  ven  toa  ;  '  Mother !  bring 
a  bow  hither,  that  I  may  shoot  a  fowl,  a  flying  fowl ;  Mother, 
bring  a  bow  hither,  that  I  may  shoot  a  fowl.'  The  same  with 
slight  verbal  change  is  what  is  used  in  Santa  Maria,  and  no 
doubt  in  the  other  islands  also.  As  they  dance  this  song  is 
silently  followed,  or  sung  in  a  low  voice.  There  are  other 
songs  learnt  and  sung  in  the  nin  which  are  not  known  to  the 
uninitiated  :  I  have  one  from  Gaua  in  Santa  Maria,  beginning 
'  Oh !  make  the  fire  and  blow  it  into  flame,  we  will  finish 
covering  in  our  oven,'  and  having  nothing  in  it  which  might 
not  be  found  in  other  songs.  It  may  perhaps  be  thought  that 
the  simple  words  of  the  song  with  which  the  Qat  is  danced  veil 
some  mysterious  meaning ;  the  initiated  declare  that  it  does 
not.  When  the  appointed  time  is  come  the  newly  instructed 
dancers  and  the  initiated  come  forth  with  lofty  hats  upon 
their  heads.  These  hats,  in  which  the  Qat  was  no  doubt 
originally  danced,  answer  to  the  masks  of  the  lamate,  but  are 

1  Thus  Bishop  Patteson  described  his  first  acquaintance  with,  the  Qatu  at 
Mota.  On  that  occasion  a  small  boy  was  detected  looking  into  the  enclosure 
from  a  tree  into  which  he  had  climbed ;  he  was  seized  and  taken  inside  ;  by 
way  of  punishment  he  was  covered  witli  the  leaves  of  the  kalato  nettle-tree 
and  he  was  compelled  to  join  the  neophytes. 


86  Secret  Societies  and  Mysteries.  rpH. 

high  and  pointed,  resting  on  the  shoulders ;  they  are  now  so 
tall  that  they  require  guy  ropes  on  either  side  to  support 
them,  and  it  is  impossible  to  wear  them  and  dance.  The  Qat 
dance  is  wonderful  indeed.  The  open  space  in  the  middle  of 
a  village  on  a  moonlight  night  is  lined  with  the  spectators  j 
the  loud  report  of  bursting  bladders  is  heard  from  the  wood 
around  ;  one  after  another  the  performers,  with  a  surprisingly 
rapid  stamping  motion  of  the  feet,  enter  upon  the  ground,  and 
come  to  an  equally  surprising  sudden  halt ;  the  leader  carries 
a  length  of  bamboo  made  into  a  drum,  with  which  he  directs 
and  controls  the  dance;  the  rest  carry  in  their  hands  their 
bows.  When  the  dancers  are  numerous  and  expert  the  weight 
and  accuracy  with  which  they  beat  the  ground  is  wonderful ; 
the  island  seems  to  shake  beneath  their  feet.  In  Santa  Maria, 
whether  at  Gaua  or  at  Lakoua,  the  Qat  is  more  elaborate 
and  difficult  than  in  Mota  or  Motalava ;  boys  at  Norfolk 
Island  will  never  undertake  it.  A  practice  of  three  or  four 
months  is  needed  for  this  before  newly-initiated  performers 
can  venture  to  come  out  and  dance.  In  former  times,  when 
the  newly-taught  dancers  made  their  first  appearance,  the  old 
members  past  their  dancing  days  from  far  and  near  would 
gather  round  with  their  bows  in  their  hands  and  jealously 
watch  the  steps ;  if  they  saw  an  error  they  would  shoot ; 
and  if  any  one  were  hit  the  blame  was  laid  on  the  faulty 
dancer;  there  was  no  quarrel  with  the  shooter  and  no  com- 
pensation to  be  made. 

II.  The  New  Hebrides.  In  the  Northern  New  Hebrides  the 
Qatib,  with  other  institutions  of  the  same  kind,  has  its  place 
in  Maewo,  Omba,  and  Araga.  In  Omba,  Lepers'  Island,  I  know 
no  more  than  that  there  is  a  Qatu,  the  hats  for  which  are  made 
in  the  shape  of  a  shark  ;  from  the  other  two  islands  information 
is  abundant.  In  Maewo,  Aurora,  there  is  more  than  one  Qatu, 
but  one,  the  Qattt  lata,  is  the  chief.  In  all  these  there  is 
initiation  with  trial  of  endurance  by  torments  and  hardships, 
but  there  is  no  secret  imparted  beyond  the  knowledge  of  the 
song  and  dance  and  the  making  of  the  decorations.  For  the 
initiation  an  enclosure  is  made  with  reeds  near  a  group  of 


v.]  New  Hebrides  lQatu!  87 

villages;  into  these  the  neophytes  are  gathered,  and  here 
they  remain  unwashed  and  with  very  little  food  and  water 
till  the  appointed  time  has  expired,  which  may  be  thirty 
days.  During  this  time  they  learn  a  dance,  and  songs,  but 
they  do  not,  as  in  the  Banks'  Islands,  follow  a  song  as  they 
dance.  Little  boys  are  not  initiated,  because  they  could  not 
endure  the  hardships  and  tortures  to  be  gone  through  ;  but 
they  can  enter  by  proxy;  a  man  already  initiated  will  go 
through  a  formal  initiation  for  them.  There  is  no  limit  of 
age,  no  period  of  life  to  which  initiation  is  more  appropriate 
than  another ;  it  is  a  matter  of  payment,  of  giving  pigs,  which 
a  wealthy  man  will  give  for  his  son  or  brother  ;  an  infant  and 
a  grown-up  man  are  equally  admitted.  The  mark  of  a  member 
of  the  Qatu  is  the  flower  of  the  nalnal,  a  scitamineous  plant, 
which  no  outsider  is  allowed  to  wear.  Those  who  enter  these 
societies  assume  a  new  name,  which  however  does  not,  as  in 
the  neighbouring  island,  supersede  the  old  one.  They  become 
Tari,  or  Yula  ;  the  young  men,  Tileg  and  Gao,  though  com- 
monly so  called,  are  Tari-koli  and  Vula-ngoda  in  the  Qaiu. 
While  the  initiation  is  going  on,  if  women  assemble,  as  they 
do,  to  hear  the  singing  in  the  enclosure  where  the  neophytes 
are  being  taught,  it  is  an  allowed  custom  for  men  to  carry 
them  off  and  ravish  them.  For  a  woman  to  see  the  newly 
initiated  until  they  have  returned  to  ordinary  life  is  a  mortal 
offence.  They  come  out  black  with  dirt  and  soot,  and  are  not 
to  be  seen  till  they  have  washed.  Not  long  ago  a  girl  from 
the  Uta,  inland,  saw  by  accident  this  washing.  She  fled  to 
Tanoriki,  where  the  Mission  school  is,  for  refuge,  but  they 
could  not  protect  her.  The  Uta  people  sent  for  her  and  she 
went,  knowing  that  she  could  not  fail  to  die,  and  they  buried 
her,  unresisting,  alive. 

The  great  secret  of  the  society  is  the  making  of  the  Qaiu, 
from  which  the  name  is  taken,  and  which  corresponds  to  the 
qatu  hats  of  the  Banks'  Islands,  being  in  fact  itself  a  hat  or 
mask.  It  is  made  of  tree-fern  trunks  ;  a  pointed  upright 
part,  large  enough  for  a  man  to  get  within  and  carry  it,  and  a 
cross-piece  pointed  at  the  ends.   This  cross  is  daubed  with  the 


88  Secret  Societies  and  Mysteries.  rCH. 

white  grated  root  of  caladium,  and  painted  with  pigments  only 
known  within  the  society.  The  pointed  top  is  adorned  with  a 
tuft  of  draeama  leaves  ;  the  ends  are  connected  and  kept  firm 
by  sticks  ornamented  with  sag-o-palm  frondlets ;  two  large 
eyes  are  painted  on  the  front ;  the  back  is  covered  with  the 
hairy  plexus  from  the  sago  fronds.  When  completed,  and  the 
day  appointed  comes,  a  man  within  it  carries  this  forth  with 
three  other  men  supporting  it ;  in  old  days  it  was  believed  by 
outsiders  to  be  the  work  of  ghosts.  The  correspondence 
between  this  and  the  tinclalo  work  of  the  Florida  Matambala 
is  as  remarkable  as  it  is  complete. 

An  account  of  his  initiation  into  the  chief  Qatu,  that  called 
Qatu  ta  Gobio,  was  written  for  me  by  a  native  youth  while  his 
memory  was  fresh  on  the  subject.  He  was  probably  sixteen 
years  old  when  with  two  others  he  passed  through  what  he 
thus  relates. 

'  Father,  let  me  tell  you  how  I  went  into  the  Qatu.  I  did 
not  know  what  it  was  when  my  brother  said  to  me,  Now  you 
are  to  go  into  the  Qatu.  Then  I  went,  and  there  was  a  very 
great  crowd  in  the  place  where  they  were  celebrating  the  Qatu. 
Then  my  brother  asked  me,  Are  you  strong?  and  I  answered 
him  and  said,  All  right !  If  I  should  die,  all  right !  After 
that  I  went  where  there  was  a  building,  a  gamal,  put  up  for 
the  purpose  not  far  from  the  village ;  my  malo  (dress)  and 
ornaments  were  taken  off,  and  I  went  inside.  The  gamal  was 
narrow,  low,  and  very  long,  and  they  had  placed  inside  it  two 
rows  of  kalato  leaves  (of  the  nettle-tree)  sprinkled  with  salt- 
water, which  met  together  about  a  yard  from  the  ground. 
And  I  bent  my  knees  and  I  ran  into  it.  And  that  thing,  the 
kalato,  that  they  had  put  in  the  gamal,  bites  exceedingly,  and 
they  had  heated  the  salt-water  before  they  poured  it  on  the 
leaves,  not  stalks,  nothing  but  leaves,  and  they  bite  exceed- 
ingly. Then  when  I  came  out  from  that  thing  I  cried  as 
I  never  did  before  or  since,  and  nearly  fainted  with  pain ;  and 
I  neither  ate  nor  drank  water,  but  did  nothing  but  cry  for 
two  days,  and  then  I  ate  food.  And  the  pig  (one  of  his 
brother's  which  had  been  given  as  an  entrance  fee)  they 


v.]         New  Hebrides.    A^trora  Island.  89 

cooked  in  an  oven ;  and  they  gave  me  some  before  it  was 
done,  and  I  ate  it.  After  that  I  was  thirsty,  and  they  made'a 
very  small  hole  in  the  ground  by  stamping  with  the  heel  and 
poured  cocoa-nut  juice  into  it,  and  I  drank.  And  they  dashed  . 
water  over  me,  which  caused  great  pain.  And  the  food  that 
they  gave  me  was  extremely  bad.  When  I  was  hungry  they 
roasted  a  caladium  root  over  the  fire  and  gave  it  me  underdone  ; 
and  they  trod  my  food  into  the  ashes  ;  and  the  water  they 
poured  on  the  ground,  and  then  I  drank  the  water.  And  if  I 
had  refused  they  would  have  beaten  me  to  death  ;  but  I  did 
not  refuse,  and  I  ate  that  food  which  they  made  so  very  bad 
for  me.  For  my  mashed  food  they  mashed  it  on  the  ground  ; 
and  they  grated  bananas  that  were  not  full  grown  to  make 
loko,  and  stirred  it  together  with  dung  ;  but  we"  three  did  not 
quite  eat  up  tbat  loko  that  they  made.  Then  we  had  to  take 
up  live  embers  in  our  hands  ;  they  stood  round  us  with  guns, 
and  we  laid  hold  on  that  burning  fire  ;  they  commanded  us  to 
do  it,  and  we  laid  hold  of  that  fire.  And  we  lay  down  on  the 
ground  and  they  trod  upon  us ;  they  all  ran  over  us,  one  of 
them  taking  the  lead,  and  when  he  had  stamped  on  us  as 
he  ran  they  all  stamped  on  us.  After  that,  when  we  rose 
from  the  ground,  one  man  took  a  bow  and  pretended  to 
shoot  us.  And  we  did  not  sit  properly  down,  but  lay  down 
on  the  ground  to  eat  our  food,  and  our  water  also  we  lay 
down  and  drank.  And  with  regard  to  that  Qatu  it  is  of 
tree-fern  put  together  like  planks,  and  we  grated  the  qeta 
(caladium)  and  made  the  Qatu  with  it.  And  in  the  night 
after  that  we  danced,  and  next  morning  we  danced  for  the 
first  time  the  Qatu  dance ;  and  after  we  had  been  thirty 
days  in  that  gamal  we  killed  a  pig,  and  then  went  back 
into  the  village  and  stayed  in  the  gamal  and  cooked  that  pig. 
And  if  one  wishes  to  stay  forty  days  in  that  gamal  (i.  e.  of 
initiation)  he  then  comes  out ;  but  that  nettle  will  not  soon 
leave  him.' 

Not  satisfied  with  this  experience,  the  same  youth  was 
afterwards  admitted  into  another  society  in  the  way  which  he 
thus  describes.    '  Father,  here  again  is  another  Qatu  which 


9°  Secret  Societies  and  Mysteries.  rCH. 

we  call  the  Taputae,  and  exceedingly  bad  it  is.  It  is  well 
that  I  should  tell  you  the  story  of  what  they  did  to  me. 
It  was  thus.  They  dug-  a  deep  hole,  but  not  very  deep,  and 
brought  a  great  quantity  of  dung  and  put  it  in  the  hole,  till 
it  was  full  of  that  very  nasty  dung ;  and  they  also  poured 
water  into  the  hole  so  that  a  man  could  sink  in  it.  That 
hole  was  not  like  the  well  here,  but  it  was  dug  like  the  drain 
by  the  kumara  house  beside  the  road  ;  such  it  was,  and  I 
got  into  it;  and  this  body  of  mine  was  all  dung,  and  my 
hair  also  was  all  dung  ;  and  there  was  a  man  who  poured  a 
great  quantity  of  dung  over  me.  Then  I  got  out,  and 
washed  myself  in  good  water.  But  those  others,  grown  up 
men,  did  not  get  into  that;  they  did  nothing  but  cry. 
Then  some  went  away,  and  we  danced  in  the  night  till  morn- 
ing, and  then  we  danced  the  Qatu  dance.  After  that  we 
killed  a  pig.  And  the  women  cannot  eat  that  pig,  nor  can 
some  men,  because  they  have  not  yet  been  initiated;  and 
that  pig  is  all  eaten  up  at  once,  none  of  it  will  be  put  by,  it 
will  be  eaten  quite  up.' 

He  adds  that  the  bark  of  the  varu,  an  hibiscus,  is  beaten 
out  white  for  the  decoration  of  this  Qatu,  and  that  the 
initiated  will  take  a  bit  of  this  bark,  catch  a  fish  for  it,  and 
burn  the  bark  as  he  cooks  the  fish,  thinking  that  he  will 
thereby  obtain  mana,  magical  power,  for  catching  that  kind 
of  fish.  If  as  he  carries  this  bark  he  meets  an  outsider  in 
the  path  who  sees  it,  he  will  either  kill  him  on  the  spot,  or  else 
he  will  take  a  pig  from  him,  and  the  members  of  the  Qat  will 
agree  to  eat  the  pig  and  let  him  live. 

There  is  in  the  same  island  another  institution  of  the  same 
character  called  the  Welu.  In  this  the  neophyte  lies  down 
on  his  face  in  a  hole  in  the  ground  cut  exactly  to  his  shape, 
and  lighted  cocoa-nut  fronds  are  cast  upon  his  back.  He 
cannot  move,  and  he  will  not  cry.  The  scars  remain  upon 
his  back — the  mark  of  membership.  While  initiation  into 
this  is  going  on  there  are  certain  trials  or  games.  A  bundle 
of  sticks  is  tied  with  a  band  of  some  creeper,  and  one  of  the 
neophytes  cuts  at  it  with  an  axe.    If  he  severs  it  with  one 


v.]  New  Hebrides.    Aurora  Island.  91 

stroke  his  party  score  a  gain ;  if  he  fails  the  initiated  fall 
upon  the  others  and  they  fight.  The  two  parties  also  play 
the  '  tug  of  war  '  with  a  large  creeper  ;  if  the  neophytes  pull 
the  others  over  they  go  the  sooner  out  of  the  enclosure  ;  if 
the  others  prevail  they  have  to  wait. 

There  are  two  things  here  which  call  for  remark.  The 
expression  '  dancing  the  Qat/  and  the  fact  that  each  mystery 
has  its  own  dance,  to  learn  which  is  the  chief  part  of  the 


Masked  Dancers  at  Aurora. 


initiation,  recall  the  dances  of  the  Greek  mysteries,  and  the 
African  Bushman's  use  of  '  dance  '  as  equivalent  to  '  mystery.' 
(Lang's  Custom  and  Myth.)  But  it  appears  certain  that  in 
these  Qatu  and  Welu  there  is  no  secret  knowledge  conveyed, 
no  esoteric  religious  instruction  given,  no  mystery  but  the 
construction  of  the  Qatu  figure  and  the  manner  of  the  Qatu 
dance.  In  the  second  place  the  question  arises,  why,  if  no 
other  advantage  is  to  he  gained  than  the  position  of  an 
initiated  member,  natives  are  willing  to  pay  the  entrance 


92  Secret  Societies  and  Mysteries.  [CH. 

fees  and  suffer  as  they  do.  But  as  it  is  certain  that  there  is 
no  1  making-  of  young-  men,'  and  that  initiation  is  not  a  step 
to  matrimony,  so  it  is  equally  certain  that  the  social  position 
of  a  native  depends  very  much  upon  his  memhership  of  the 
most  important  of  these  clubs  ;  an  outsider  could  never  be 
a  person  of  consequence  ;  a  man  of  good  social  position 
would  think  it  his  duty  to  secure  the  same  position  for 
his  son  by  entering  him  early  in  the  clubs  to  which  he 
himself  belonged.  To  receive  a  new  member  with  trials  of 
his  endurance,  to  let  him  rise  into  equality  only  through 
pain  and  contumely,  has  been,  and  may  still  be,  the  way  of 
Universities  and  Schools ;  and  there  is  no  reason  why  the 
attraction  of  a  mysterious  secret  which  draws  civilized  men 
should  not  work  upon  the  savage.  The  native  neophyte 
also  expected  before  his  initiation  that  he  really  should 
join  in  company  with  the  ghosts  of  the  departed;  when 
he  was  illuminated  he  enjoyed  the  deception  of  those  who 
followed  him,  and  was  well  satisfied  to  eat  their  pigs  and 
take  their  money. 

In  the  island  of  Araga,  Pentecost  or  Whitsuntide,  im- 
mediately south  of  Aurora,  the  institution  is  called  the  Qeta. 
I  have  the  description  of  it  from  one  who  was  made  a  member 
as  an  infant,  but  has  seen  all  the  proceedings  of  late  years. 
The  rites  are  celebrated  at  uncertain  intervals,  whenever  there 
are  a  sufficient  number  of  candidates  forthcoming  from  a  group 
of  villages  ;  at  intervals  perhaps  of  six  or  ten  years.  Some 
great  man  (or  two  or  three  of  them  together)  presides  and 
manages  the  arrangements,  and  teaches  the  songs  and  dance ; 
the  Qeta  is  said  to  be  his  or  theirs.  The  scene  of  the  meeting- 
is  some  nte  gogona,  a  place  on  which  tapu  has  been  laid. 
Many  small  houses  are  built  there,  in  which  the  boys  live 
during  the  first  part  of  their  seclusion.  Boys  of  all  ages  are 
initiated,  generally  about  the  time  of  putting  on  the  malo,  the 
dress  worn  by  men  ;  all  are  initiated  sooner  or  later,  none 
grow  up  without  it;  to  put  on  the  malo  and  to  enter  the 
Qeta  are  necessary  steps  in  life.  The  entrance  payment  is 
a  mat  given  by  the  father,  or  guardian,  one  for  each  boy. 


v.]         New  Hebrides.    Pentecost  Island.  93 

When  the  day  appointed  for  the  Qeta  comes,  all  the  initiated 
assemhle  at  the  place,  and  the  women  keep  away.  There  is  no 
enclosure,  but  when  the  ceremony  begins  a  stick  is  laid  upon 
the  ground  as  a  mark  of  entrance,  and  two  companies  of  the 
initiated  stand  singing  within  the  mark  with  a  space  between 
them.  The  boy  who  enters  steps  over  the  stick,  and  as  he 
does  so,  if  he  has  already  a  malo,  they  break  unexpectedly  his 
girdle  string ;  the  malo  falls  and  he  enters  naked.  If  the  boy 
is  too  young  to  walk,  he  is  carried  over  by  his  father  or  the 
friend  who  pays  for  him.  The  boys  do  not  remain  naked 
during  the  whole  time  of  their  seclusion,  a  fresh  malo  is  given 
to  each  of  them.  My  informant,  himself  initiated  in  his 
father's  arms,  began  his  story  by  saying  that  the  Qeta  was 
exceedingly  bad.  Being  desired  at  the  end  of  it  to  point  out 
what  there  was  exceedingly  bad  in  the  whole  proceeding  he 
referred  to  this,  to  expose  a  boy  naked  who  had  the  malo  was 
very  bad  indeed.  When  entered  the  neophytes  stay  in  the 
houses,  except  when  they  come  out  to  eat  and  sing  and  dance ; 
they  have  their  bodies  blackened  with  charcoal,  and  wear  no 
ornaments.  There  are  long  rows  of  seats  made  on  which  the 
boys  sit  to  eat ;  the  initiated  feed  them,  giving  each  a  bite, 
and  the  boys  get  nothing  else  to  eat,  though  the  initiated 
bring  in  food  for  themselves  and  eat  it  privately.  The  boys 
are  taught  a  dance  and  song,  singing  aloud  and  dancing* 
round  the  seats.  The  meaning  of  the  song  is  trifling  ;  its  use 
is  to  mark  the  steps  of  the  dance.  There  is  absolutely  no 
secret,  or  any  other  knowledge  communicated  than  that  of 
the  song  and  dance,  and  nothing  else  in  the  way  of  initiation. 
The  time  of  seclusion  is  uncertain.  After  the  first  three  days 
the  greater  number  of  the  initiated  go  away ;  food  runs  short, 
though  the  boys  have  very  small  bites ;  they  begin  to  scatter 
a  little,  not  going  into  the  villages,  but  living  in  little  houses 
near  the  gardens,  the  men  looking  after  and  feeding  each 
household  of  boys.  The  whole  time  of  seclusion  lasts  about 
five  months,  that  is  to  say  that  yams  are  planted  when  it 
begins  and  the  harvest  is  waited  for.  In  the  later  time  the 
restriction  as  to  food  is  easier,  but  no  fish  or  shell-fish  is 


94  Secret  Societies  and  Mysteries.  [CH. 

allowed  ;  the  beach  is  made  gogona)  unapproachable,  on  their 
behalf ;  no  one  can  go  there  to  gather  shell-fish.  During  the 
whole  time  of  seclusion  the  boys  are  not  allowed  to  wash,  and 
their  bodies  have  become  quite  black.  The  conclusion,  there- 
fore, of  the  whole  thing  is  that  when  the  first  yams  are  dug 
they  assemble  in  one  body  and  go  down  to  the  beach  to  wash 
and  eat.  The  women  then  come  and  look  at  them.  After 
this  they  return  to  their  villages,  and  having  become  tari, 
they  assume  a  name  with  that  prefix,  Tariliu,  Tarisuluana. 
In  all  there  appears  to  be  no  thought  of  intercourse  with 
ghosts  or  spirits ;  but  no  doubt  the  master  of  the  qeta  makes 
his  prayers  and  offerings  for  success. 

III.  Solomon  Islands.  From  the  New  Hebrides  to  Florida 
in  the  Solomon  Islands  is  a  long  step,  but  in  the  Matambala 
appears  very  plainly  another  form  of  the  Qatu.  The  seat  of 
it  is  a  district  of  Florida  called  Belaga,  where  alone  the  rites 
were  celebrated,  men  from  the  other  districts  coming  to  be 
initiated  there.  The  origin  of  the  institution  is  ascribed  to 
one  Siko,  who  came  from  Bugotu  in  Ysabel.  To  him  sacrifices 
were  made  in  their  assemblies  by  a  succession  of  men  who  had 
received  the  office  till  the  year  1883,  when  the  last  embraced 
Christianity,  and  the  Matambala  came  to  an  end.  The  mys- 
teries were  celebrated  at  irregular  intervals  of  six  or  ten  years, 
but  the  initiated  formed  a  permanent  body,  and  a  certain  part 
of  the  beach  at  Belaga  with  the  forest  behind  it  was  always 
tambu,  so  that  no  uninitiated  person  might  enter  the  precincts, 
and  no  woman  might  pass  along  the  beach.  Within  this 
sacred  region  there  were  twelve  vunid/ta  sanctuaries,  and  in 
each  one  a  sacred  vovoho  house  was  built ;  but  the  two  vunutha 
at  Materago  and  at  Volotha  were  far  more  important  than  the 
rest,  and  the  houses  built  there  so  sacred  that  no  man  entered 
them  nor  even  approached  them  ;  there  were  images  in  them 
of  birds  and  fish,  crocodiles  and  sharks,  the  sun  and  moon,  and 
men.  The  building  of  these  two  houses  was  the  beginning 
of  the  chief  part  of  the  proceedings.  In  all  that  they  did 
they  supposed  themselves  to  be  following  the  course  of  Siko's 
actions. 


Solomon  Islands.  Florida. 


95 


I  have  a  written  account  of  the  proceedings  sent  from  Belaga 
by  an  old  friend  and  pupil  of  mine,  and  explained  to  me  in 
all  particulars  in  Norfolk  Island  by  a  native  of  a  neighbouring- 
district,  who  remembered  his  own  initiation  perfectly  well. 
I  have  also  been  furnished  by  Bishop  Selwyn  with  the  account 
given  to  him  at  Belaga,  the  seat  of  the  Matambala,  by  initiated 
men.  It  is  not  easy  in  all  points  to  connect  the  two  accounts, 
and  some  of  the  particulars  are  described  with  unnecessary 
minuteness,  but  the  general  course  and  character  of  the 
proceedings  are  plain1.  The  month  in  which  the  whole 
begins  is  that  in  which  the  eanarium  almonds  become  ripe, 
and  the  higo,  the  gathering  of  the  first-fruits,  hereafter  to  be 
described,  is  the  first  step  in  the  ceremonial.  The  cracking  of 
the  nuts  begins  at  Gole  and  goes  through  the  twelve  places  to 
Buthinigai.  The  women  and  children  set  baskets  in  rows 
along  the  road  when  the  new  moon  of  h'igo  is  seen,  and  the 
men  gather  the  almonds  from  morning  till  nightfall,  and  fill 
the  baskets  with  them.  The  next  moon  is  the  moon  of 
sweeping,  and  they  sweep  the  paths  from  Gole  to  Buthinigai, 
signifying  that  the  paths  are  now  reserved  for  the  Matambala. 
Then  follows  the  time  of  the  close  tambn,  when  the  whole 
district  becomes  sacred,  and  the  Teimbelaga,  when  they  all 
assemble  at  Materago  to  see  the  sasale  dance  of  Siko  in  the 
night. 

On  the  following  morning  the  Matambala,  those  already 

1  The  native  account  begins,  '  The  Story  of  Siko  who  began  it,  a  man  from 
over  sea.  Siko  was  a  man  of  former  times,  a  countryman  of  Bugotu.  And 
Doriki  and  he  separated  ;  the  reason  of  their  separation  was  that  Siko  should 
not  be  chief,  said  Doriki,  and  Doriki  should  not  be  chief,  said  Siko  ;  and  Doriki 
got  the  upper  hand,  so  that  Siko  fled  secretly,  and  made  his  way  hither 
to  Belaga ;  he  first  came  ashore  down  at  Siota,  and'  he  liked  the  place  there, 
but  he  looked  back  and  still  could  see  to  Bugotu,  so  he  put  again  into  his 
canoe  his  men  and  property,  and  came  along  to  Materago,  where  he  could  no 
longer  see  to  Bugotu,  and  so  there  he  dwelt.  After  that  he  divided  them  (the 
men  with  him)  to  twelve  villages,  to  Gole,  Vunavutu,  Salesapa,  Talabuga, 
Materago,  Nagokama,  Taiegu,  Balotoga,  Tangadala,  Volotha,  Mavealu', 
Buthinigai ;  and  he  said  to  them,  Let  us  do  things  as  we  did  at  Bugotu,  said 
he  to  them.  And  he  chose  them  to  be  chiefs  in  those  villages,'- their  names 
being  given,  one  to  each  village. 


96  Secret  Societies  and  Mysteries.  [ch. 

initiated,  go  down  to  occupy  houses  that  have  been  built  upon 
the  beach,  and  remain  there  till  the  proceedings  are  over.  The 
initiated  from  each  village  take  with  them  their  friends  who 
are  to  be  admitted,  but  do  not  yet  let  them  enter  the  vmutha, 
the  sanctuary  in  the  bush,  where  they  themselves  are  occupied 
in  making  the  structures  of  bamboo  which  are  called  the 
tindalo,  the  ghosts.  These  were  of  several  forms.  One  called 
the  Voi  was  described  to  the  Bishop  as  a  screen  some  ten  feet 
long  by  nine  high,  made  of  bark  painted  and  ornamented,  and 
carried  out  by  several  men  behind  it  into  the  open,  where  it 
could  be  seen  by  the  women,  children,  and  uninitiated,  who 
firmly  believed  it  to  be  not  so  much  the  handiwork  of  ghosts 
as  an  appearance  of  the  ghosts  themselves.  Another,  the 
Koitaba-vunutha,  was  so  large  that  eighty  or  a  hundred  men 
inside  it  carried  it  down  to  the  beach,  where  the  outside 
population  gazed  at  it.  There  was  another  instrument,  the 
Kuku,  a  wooden  club  with  a  bird's  head.  One  of  the  first  pro- 
ceedings of  the  Matambala  men  after  the  paths  were  swept, 
and  the  country  was  made  close,  was  to  cut  down  tall  bamboos 
for  these  structures,  tie  them  in  bundles,  and  lay  them  in  the 
sun  to  dry.  '  After  a  while  they  brought  these  down  to  the 
vunutha,  and  added  length  to  length  till  they  were  extremely 
long  ;  and  then  they  took  vines  and  sago  spathes  and  fastened 
them  to  the  bamboos  which  they  had  prepared ;  and  then 
they  took  coleus  and  turmeric  ;  the  coleus  they  chewed  for  the 
juice  and  squeezed  wild  oranges  to  mix  with  it  and  make  it 
red ;  and  the  turmeric  they  pounded  in  a  wooden  pot.  Then 
they  painted  with  these  things  the  sago  spathes  that  they  had 
fastened  on  to  the  bamboos,  variegated  and  dazzling,  very 
fearful  for  us  to  behold.'  The  tindalo  figures,  of  which  thirty 
or  forty  were  made  in  one  place,  must  have  resembled  the 
Qatu  masks  or  hats  of  the  Banks'  Islands,  though  they  were 
very  much  higher ;  for  like  them  they  were  conical  in  shape, 
and  were  moved  by  men  inside  them.  'And  when  all  was 
finished  they  appointed  their  day  for  the  spectacle ;  and  all 
the  women  and  boys  came  out  in  the  evening  and  viewed  the 
tindalo,  and  all  the  men  in  the  vumttha  held  up  and  brought 


Florida  '  Matambala! 


97 


down  the  iindalo  images  to  the  heach  ;  and  all  the  women  and. 
the  hoys  thought  that  they  were  nothing  but  ghosts,  because 
they  did.  not  know  how  they  were  made.  After  that  they 
appointed  again  the  day  after  the  morrow  for  the  show,  and 
when  that  day  came  the  women  again  came  out  into  the  open 
for  the  spectacle.  And  when  the  show  made  in  that  way 
was  over,  the  men  took  the  tinclalo  images  back  into  the 
VunutAa,  and  burnt  up  with  fire  all  those  images.  When  that 
was  done,  all  the  men  came  back  to  their  villages  from 
the  vunutha.  And  it  was  not  possible  to  make  known  to 
women  and  boys  things  of  this  kind  ;  but  at  length,  when  this 
Gospel  reached  us,  then  it  came  out,  so  that  all  the  women 
and  the  boys  and  the  uninitiated  understood  all  about  things 
of  this  kind.' 

The  uninitiated  were  called  ielegai,  the  neophytes  the  new 
Matambala.  As  in  the  Banks'  Islands  and  the  New  Hebrides, 
there  was  no  knowledge  communicated,  except  of  the  fact  that 
whatever  was  done  was  the  work  of  men  and  not  of  g-hosts, 
which  was  no  doubt  a  surprising  revelation.  Still,  however,  we 
may  be  sure  that  the  Matambala,  new  and  old,  firmly  believed 
that  the  art  of  making  the  images  and  the  course  of  all  their 
proceedings  had  been  taught  by  Siko,  now  a  tindalo,  and  that 
they  wrere  guided  and  enabled  by  the  supernatural  assistance  of 
Siko  and  his  companions,  now  tindalo,  and  by  the  ghosts  also  of 
their  eminent  predecessors  in  the  Matambala,  all  of  whom  as 
well  as  Siko  were  invoked  with  sacrifices.  But  there  was  no 
esoteric  doctrine  taught,  nor  any  secret  imparted  beyond  that  of 
the  making  of  the  images.  On  this  point  the  witness  of  the 
initiated  is  as  clear  in  Florida  as  in  the  Banks'  Islands  and  the 
New  Hebrides.  A  certain  rite,  or  mark,  of  initiation  there 
was ;  the  candidate  clasped  a  tree,  and  was  touched  in  six 
places  with  a  fire-stick  on  shoulders,  loins,  and  buttocks. 
When  thus  branded  they  were  told  that  they  were  now  Siko's 
men,  or  Siko's  messengers.  In  admission  to  these  mysteries, 
also,  there  was  no  limit  of  age,  and  no  time  of  life  more  ap- 
propriate than  another.  Grown-up  men  were  admitted,  who 
generally  came  from  other  parts  of  the  island;  at  Belaga 

H 


98  Secret  Societies  and  Mysteries.  [cH. 

and  the  immediate  neighbourhood  the  boys  were  initiated 
whenever  the  ceremonies  took  place.  Young-  children,  even 
sucklings,  were  made  Matambala  ;  for  the  latter  they  would  go 
into  the  villa  ges  and  beg*  milk  from  the  women,  since  the 
infants  could  not  come  out  of  the  sacred  preeints  and  the 
w  omen  could  not  go  in  ;  they  were  branded  with  the  slender 
midribs  of  the  leaflets  of  the  cocoa-nut.  Nothing  was  paid  for 
entrance  to  the  Matambala,  The  initiation  of  the  new  members 
was  not  performed  till  they  had  been  some  time  living  in  the 
houses  on  the  beach,  while  the  mysterious  figures  were  being 
constructed  in  the  secret  places  in  the  wood ;  it  was  part  of 
their  preparation  that  they  should  be  frightened  by  the  bird- 
headed  clubs,  the  kuku,  and  they  were  threatened  with  death 
if  they  revealed  the  secrets.  Altogether  they  remained  away 
from  their  homes  three  months. 

During  the  whole  of  this  time  the  Matambala,  under  cover  of 
the  terror  of  their  pretended  association  with  ghosts,  and 
taking  advantage  of  the  closing  of  the  paths,  were  playing 
tricks  and  robbing  in  all  the  country  round.  They  would 
come  as  far  as  to  Gaeta  to  steal  pigs  to  sacrifice  to  Siko  ;  they 
would  cut  down  trees  to  fall  across  the  roads,  and  no  one 
dared  remove  them ;  they  woidd  pull  down  cocoa-nut  palms 
and  big  trees  with  ropes  in  the  night  as  a  proof  that  the 
ghosts  were  abroad,  for  no  mere  man  could  be  supposed  so 
strong  as  to  overthrow  them.  From  time  to  time  they 
sacrificed  to  Siko.  More  than  once  also  they  made  their 
appearance  in  the  villages.  :  When  the  bamboos  have  been 
cut  down,  they  appoint  a  three  days'  space  for  the  going  up 
inland  of  the  ghosts  (that  is,  of  the  Matambala),  and  when  the 
three  days'  space  is  past,  then  about  the  time  of  the  clock 
striking  ten  at  night  the  ghosts  go  up.  And  all  the  women 
in  the  villages  have  been  making  tutu  and  gola  (mashes  of  food) 
since  morning.  And  when  the  night  has  come  the  men  of  the 
Matambala  down  at  the  beach  take  htiro  (bull-roarers),  and 
seesee  (bundles  of  cocoa-nut  fronds  to  beat  over  a  stick),  and  go 
up  inland  with  them  and  approach  the  village  ;  and  they  beat 
the  seesee  and  whirl  the  buro,  and  come  into  the  village ;  and 


Florida  '  Matambala! 


99 


they  whistle  and  cluck,  and  all  the  women  in  the  village  shut 
fast  their  houses  and  are  much  afraid,  because  they  think  that 
they  are  surely  ghosts  ;  and  they  take  the  tutu  and  the  gola, 
and  give  it  to  the  ghosts  outside.  Then  all  the  men  cry 
mbuembue,  and  go  down  hack  again  to  the  shore.  After  that, 
again,  they  fix  their  day  for  the  going  up  of  the  ghosts,  and 
they  fix  the  fourth  day;  and  when  the  fourth  day  has  come, 
and  it  is  nig-ht,  then  they  take  again  as  before  the  seesee  and 
the  buro,  and  go  out  again,  and  go  and  beat  the  seesee  and 
whirl  the  buro,  and  whistle  and  cluck ;  and  again  they  give 
them  the  tutu  and  soisombi  mixed  with  almonds  ;  and  then  all 
the  men  cry  mbuembue,  and  go  down  again  to  the  beach.'  The 
women  prepared  small  holes  in  the  wall  of  the  house,  through 
which  to  push  out  the  food  to  the  Matambala,  a  contrivance  to 
prevent  them  from  feeling  the  hands  of  the  men.  When  the 
women  hear  the  whistle  they  ask, '  Who  are  you,  are  you  Siko  ? ' 
and  the  man  whistles  in  answer  and  takes  the  food.  Great 
care  was  taken  lest  the  men  should  be  seen  when  the  ghosts 
were  believed  to  be  about,  and  the  Matambala  were  covered,  as 
elsewhere,  with  a  cloak  of  leaves ;  but  in  the  daytime  they 
went  among  the  women,  gave  notice  of  what  the  ghosts  were 
going  to  do,  and  called  attention  to  what  had  been  done  by 
them. 

The  downfall  of  this  superstition  and  imposture  has  been 
complete.  It  had  long  been  undermined  by  the  free  admission 
of  Florida  boys  and  young  men  into  the  salagoro  of  the  Banks' 
Islands,  and  the  knowledge  acquired  there  of  what  ghost 
mysteries  really  were.  No  Matambala  celebration  had  taken 
place  for  some  years ;  all  the  young  people  knew  how  the 
thing  was  done,  though  the  elders  did  not  give  up  their  belief 
m  Siko,  or  the  notion  that  there  was  something  supernatural 
about  it.  At  length,  as  said  before,  the  man  who  knew  how 
to  sacrifice  to  Siko  became  a  Christian,  the  sacred  precincts 
were  explored,  bull-roarers  became  the  playthings  of  the  boys, 
and  the  old  men  sat  and  wept  over  the  profanation  and  their 
loss  of  power  and  privilege  1. 

1  '  I  was  sorry  one  day  to  hear  that  a  lot  of  Gaeta  young  men  had  been 

H  % 


ioo         Secret  Societies  and  Mysteries. 

I  know  of  no  other  Matambala  or  similar  institution  in  the 
Solomon  Islands  ;  but  in  Malanta  and  Ulawa  there  is  a  period 
of  seclusion  for  a  boy  as  he  grows  up,  which  to  a  Banks' 
islander  appears  to  be  an  entrance  into  the  salarjoro. 

chaffing  some  old  fellows  who  came  from  Materago  to  such  an  extent  that  they 
sat  down  and  cried  bitterly.'  Journal  of  Rev.  A.  Penny,  under  whose  teaching 
the  downfall  of  the  mysteries  was  brought  about. 


CHAPTEE  VI. 


SOCIETIES.  CLUBS. 


In  every  village  and  group  of  houses  in  the  Torres  Islands, 
the  Banks'  Islands,  and  the  Northern  New  Hebrides,  is  con- 
spicuous a  building  which  does  not  appear  to  be  a  dwelling- 
house.  In  a  populous  village  of  the  Banks'  Islands  it  is  very 
long  and  low,  -with  entrances  at  intervals  along  the  sides 
below  the  wall-plate,  with  stone  seats  or  a  stone  platform  at 
the  main  entrances  at  either  end,  and  low  stone  walls  planted 
with  dracaenas  and  crotons  near  the  same,  with  the  jawbones 
of  pigs  and  backbones  of  fish  hanging  under  the  eaves ;  and 
very  often  the  clatter  of  pounding  sticks  in  wooden  vessels  and 
white  clouds  of  steam  make  known  the  preparation  of  a  meal. 
This  is  a  gamal.  The  same  name,  and  a  building  of  the  same 
general  character,  with  some  difference  of  form,  is  to  be  found 
in  the  New  Hebrides  as  far  south  as  the  Shepherd  Islands  at 
least.  What  are  called  '  Chiefs'  houses '  in  New  Caledonia 
probably  represent  the  same.  In  some  of  the  Banks'  Islands, 
again,  a  visitor  on  entering  a  village  would  see  one  or  more 
platforms  squarely  built  up  of  stones,  with  high,  pointed 
little  edifices  upon  them,  open  in  the  front  like  shrines,  the 
embers  of  a  fire  below,  and  above  an  image  grotesquely  shaped 
in  human  form.  Pie  would  naturally  take  these  for  shrines 
of  idols  with  the  altars  of  sacrifices  to  them  ;  but  these  also 
are  gamal ;  the  little  edifice  is  the  eating-place  of  a  man  of 
rank  ;  the  fire  has  cooked  his  food,  which  none  but  he  in  that 
place  can  eat,  and  the  image  is  the  emblem  of  his  degree. 
In  another  island  of  the  same  group  a  gamal  maybe  seen  with 


102  Societies  or  Clubs.  [CH. 

one  end  newly  built  and  loftier  than  the  rest,  or  else  with  one 
end  in  ruin  while  the  rest  ig  in  good  repair  and  full  occupation. 
Here  again  there  is  a  man,  perhaps  two  or  three,  lately  raised 
to  a  new  degree,  for  whom  a  special  eating-place  has  been 
prepared ;  or  the  men  of  high  degree  have  all  died  out  from 
the  village,  and  no  one  of  lower  rank  can  enter  into  their 
place.  Within,  these  long  buildings  are  found  to  be  divided 
across  by  log  fences,  the  tingtingiav,  the  fire-boundaries  ;  each 
division  contains  its  oven,  with  the  appliances  for  cookery 
around ;  log  pillows  and  mats  complete  the  furniture.  The 
gamal  is  a  club-house,  and  the  club  is  called  the  Suqe 
in  the  islands  where  I  have  any  considerable  acquaintance 
with  it. 

In  all  the  Melanesian  groups  it  is  the  rule  that  there  is  in 
every  village  a  building  of  public  character,  where  the  men 
eat  and  spend  their  time,  the  young  men  sleep,  strangers  are 
entertained  ;  where  as  in  the  Solomon  Islands  the  canoes  are 
kept ;  where  images  are  seen,  and  from  which  women  are 
generally  excluded;  the  hlala  of  Florida,  the  olia  of  San 
Cristoval,  the  madai  of  Santa  Cruz,  the  tambu  house  of  traders, 
the  lure  of  Fiji  ;  and  all  these  no  doubt  correspond  to  the 
balai  and  other  public  halls  of  the  Malay  Archipelago. 
But  these  are  not  club-houses,  as  are  the  gamal  houses  of  the 
Suqe,  which  serve  indeed  to  a  considerable  extent  for  public 
purposes,  because  almost  every  man  is  a  member  of  the  club, 
but  are  in  fact  the  homes  of  a  society  in  which  every  one  has 
his  place  according  to  his  rank  in  the  society. 

The  name  Suqe  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  Wui,  the  super- 
natural personage,  Supwe  of  the  New  Hebrides,  but  it  is 
doubtful  whether  any  connexion  between  the  two  really 
exists ;  for  in  the  Banks'  Islands,  where  the  society  is  in 
great  vigour,  there  is  no  Yui  Suqe  known,  and  in  Whitsun- 
tide of  the  New  Hebrides,  where  the  Wui  Supwe  is  recognized, 
the  society  has  another  name.  Nothing  is  known  of  the 
origin  of  the  club.  It  is  not  connected  with  the  secret 
societies  of  the  ghosts,  and  is  not  a  secret  society  of  the  same 
kind.    The  club-house  is  in  the  open,  and  every  one,  except 


VI.-j  Banks  Islands  '  Suqe.'  103 

when  new  members  are  admitted,  can  see  what  is  going-  on, 
though  women  are  most  strictly  excluded.  It  is  a  social,  not 
at  all  a  religious,  institution  ;  yet,  inasmuch  as  religious 
practices  enter  into  the  common  life  of  the  people,  and  all 
success  and  advance  in  life  is  believed  to  be  due  to  mana, 
supernatural  influence,  the  aid  of  unseen  powers  is  sought  for 
by  fasting,  sacrifices,  and  prayers,  in  order  to  mount  to  the 
successive  degrees  of  the  society.  To  rise  from  step  to  step 
money  is  wanted,  and  food  and  pigs ;  no  one  can  get  these 
unless  he  has  mana  for  it ;  therefore  as  mana  gets  a  man  on 
in  the  Suqe,  so  every  one  bigh  in  the  Suae  is  certainly  a  man 
with  mana,  and  a  man  of  authority,  a  great  man,  one  who  may 
be  called  a  chief,  whom  traders  may  call  a  king.  A  man  who 
has  got  to  the  very  top  and  emerged,  me  wot,  is  a  very  great 
man  indeed  ;  he  has  the  title  of  Wetuka,  as  if  he  had  reached 
the  sky ;  he  is  of  a  rank  which  very  few  have  attained,  and 
without  his  consent,  to  be  obtained  by  substantial  payment, 
no  one  can  be  advanced  at  all.  In  the  Banks'  Island  stories 
the  poor  lad  or  orphan  who  becomes  the  fortunate  Youth 
rises  to  greatness  by  the  Suqe  ;  he  takes  the  highest  grade  in 
this  instead  of  marrying  the  king's  daughter.  In  the  absence 
of  any  more  directly  political  arrangements  among  the  people, 
it  is  plain  that  a  valuable  bond  of  society  is  furnished  by  the 
Suqe,  in  which  the  male  population  generally  is  united,  and  in 
which  a  considerable  power  of  control  is  vested  in  the  elder 
and  richer  men,  who  can  admit  or  reject  candidates  for  the 
higher  ranks  as  they  think  fit.  The  great  mass  of  the  natives 
never  rise  above  the  middle  rank,  many  never  arrive  at  that ; 
but  almost  all,  for  the  exceptions  are  very  rare,  are  brought 
while  still  boj's  into  the  society.  A  man  who  has  never 
entered  has  the  nickname  of  a  lusa,  a  kind  of  flying  fox  which 
does  not  gather  with  the  flocks  of  the  common  sort.  At 
entrance  and  at  every  successive  step  money  has  to  be  paid  to 
those  who  have  already  attained  it,  and  a  feast  more  or  less 
costly  given  according  to  the  rank  to  be  attained.  Hence, 
while  hardly  any  lad  is  so  friendless  as  not  to  enter  the 
lowest  division,  hardly  any  live  to  rise  to  the  highest  place  ; 


104 


Societies  or  Clubs. 


[CH. 


unless  indeed  they  have  entered  very  young,  have  had  their 
early  steps  bought  for  them,  and  have  been  very  prosperous 
in  their  undertakings.  The  higher  steps  are  occasion  of  large 
popular  gatherings  and  feasts,  with  songs  and  dances,  and 
come  near  to  the  holekoU  hereafter  to  be  described ;  there  are 
hats  also  and  images  appropriated  to  these  highest  ranks. 


Native  dkawing  op  'lano'  hats. 

The  number  of  ovens  and  ranks  varies  in  different  islands ; 
the  people  of  each  think  their  own  Svqe  the  correct  one  ;  but 
all  acknowledge  the  value  of  the  resjiective  ranks,  though  they 
may  be  attained  under  very  various  conditions. 

In  the  Banks'  Islands  the  Suqe  of  Mota  has  many  steps 
and  ovens,  all  av-tapug.   Beginning  with  the  lowest :  (1)  Eur- 


vi.]  Banks  Islands  '  Suqe.'  105. 

won,  (2)  Avrig,  (3)  Qat  tagiav,  (4)  Avtagataga,  (5)  Luwaiav,  (6) 
Tamasuria,  (7)  Tavasuqe,  (8)  Tavasuqelava,  (9)  Kerepue,  (jo)  J/<?&, 
(11)  Zfe%,  (12)  (13)  Poroporolara,  (14)  Wometeloa,  (15) 

//V/^m,  (16)  Wesukut,  (17)  Wetaur-o-meligo,  (18)  Tiqangwono. 
The  lowest  are  commonly  skipped  over  or  taken  together  ;  on 
the  other  hand,  there  are  three  degrees  under  the  eleventh 
name,  and  two  under  the  twelfth.  Some  of  the  names  cany  a 
meaning  with  them:  avrig,  the  little  fire;  hereptie,  the  bottom 
of  the  bamboo  water-carrier ;  mele,  the  cycas,  which  has  a  certain 
sanctity;  poroporolava,  great  joking  ;  wometeloa,  the  face  of  the 
sun  ;  wetaur-o-meligo,  catches  the  clouds ;  liqangivono,  shoots  and 
completes.  The  lano  wears  a  very  tall  conical  hat,  like  that  of 
the  Qal,  but  sometimes  forked ;  the  poroporolava  has  an  image 
of  a  man  ringed  black  and  white ;  the  wometeloa  an  image  of 
a  man  carrying  on  his  head  with  outstretched  arms  a  disk 
representing  the  firmament,  with  heavenly  bodies  painted  on 
it.  These  images  are  carried  about  at  the  feast  which  cele- 
brates the  step  in  rank,  and  are  afterwards  set  up  in  the  little 
gamal  in  which  the  great  man  cooks  his  food  ;  the  hat  is 
worn  by  the  new  lano  at  the  feast  he  makes,  and  is  afterwards 
to  be  seen  leaning  against  the  gamal.  At  Gaua  in  Santa 
Maria  the  ovens  are  not  so  many;  boys  begin  high-  up,  so 
that  a  Gaua  boy  often  ranks  with  a  gray-haired  Mota  man. 
Those  who  reach  the  higher  ranks  build  a  gamal  on  a  lofty 
platform  of  stones  for  every  oven  or  step,  for  which  at  Mota 
they  are  content  to  raise  the  gamal  end.  In  the  Torres 
Islands,  or  at  least  in  one  of  them,  there  are  only  seven  ovens 
and  degrees  of  ranks  in  the  Huqa,  as  the  Suqe  is  there  called, 
and  in  the  gamal,  the  first  being  the  avlav,  big  fire,  which 
is  rather  on  the  threshold  of  the  gamal  than  in  it.  Young 
boys  do  not  enter  into  the  club  there.  In  all  these  islands 
the  distinction  between  each  successive  stage  is  strictly 
marked ;  any  one  stepping  over  the  boundary  to  the  oven 
above  him  would  be  trampled  to  death  by  those  on  whom  he 
had  intruded. 

The  way  of  entering  the  Suqe  and  making  further  advances 
in  it  is  fixed  and  elaborate.    The  candidate  must  have  in  the 


Io6  Societies  or  Clubs.  [cH, 

first  place  his  introducer,  a  boy's  mother's  brother  by  rights 
whose  good-will  some  months  before  must  be  secured  by  the 
present  of  a  pig,  which  is  made  over  formally  to  him  with  a 
slap  upon  its  back.  Having  undertaken  to  make  the  mqe  for 
bis  candidate,  the  patron  makes  a  feast  for  him  with  a  dance, 
decorating  the  village  square  with  male  pandanus  flowers,  and 
setting  out  money  for  him  ;  the  partakers  of  the  feast,  in- 
cluding the  candidate,  make  him  a  present  of  a  little  money, 
and  he  makes  a  return  present  to  them  ;  they  vene,  shoot,  and 
be  sar,  compensates.  For  the  lowest  grade  in  Mota  the'v«w 
money  is  only  half  a  fathom,  returned  with  a  full  fathom  ;  for 
the  higher  grades  very  much  money  is  required,  and  some- 
times money  fails  and  pigs  are  brought  in.  A  boy  who  has 
no  property  of  his  own  is  supplied  by  his  father  or  some 
friend  with  what  is  necessary  for  engaging  the  patronage  of 
bis  uncle,  upon  whom  the  expense  chiefly  falls.  In  the  higher 
grades  the  candidate  for  advance  still  has  his  patron,  but  the 
expenses  fall  upon  himself,  aided  by  his  friends  with  gifts, 
mategae,  of  pigs  and  money;  his  wife's  father  is  expected  to 
be  liberal  in  this.  The  candidate  makes  a  return  to  the 
patron  as  liberally  as  he  can  for  all  that  he  has  done  in  his 
behalf.  The  formal  entrance  into  the  society,  or  into  a  higher 
grade  in  it,  has  two  parts.  When  the  time  comes,  a  day 
having  been  appointed  and  made  known,  the  women  leave  the 
village  before  nightfall,  and  the  members  meet  in  the  gamal. 
The  candidate  goes  into  the  division  in  which  is  the  fire  and 
oven  to  which  he  is  to  belong.  His  patron  breaks  the  string 
of  some  money  and  sheds  it  into  a  basket ;  the  others  put  on 
the  money  a  garland  of  bamboo  leaves  in  the  lower  degrees, 
of  cycas  leaves  for  the  w.ele,  cycas,  rank  and  all  above  it. 
This  is  to  soso  makomako,  to  fill  the  garland.  The  new 
member  then  sits,  and  some  one  who  is  chosen  .for  his  fluency 
of  speech  discourses  to  him,  tells  him  that  it  is  his  duty  to 
work  for  his  oven  and  not  to  complain  if  his  duties  are  hard. 
They  then  give  him  a  bit  of  an  almond,  and  each  member 
takes  a  bit  in  his  hand ;  they  all  hold  the  almond  to  their 
lips,  and  at  a  certain  word  they  negneg,  eat  together.  The 


VL]  Banks'  Islands  '  Suae.'  107 

word  is  only  this,  '  I  give  you  food  from  my  fire.'    Then  the 
money  in  the  basket  is  distributed ;  they  me  maJcomako,  pull 
apart  the  garland.    The  gana  tapug,  the  ceremonial  eating,  is 
thus  finished  in  the  night ;  next  morning,  nowadays,  comes 
the  tool  tapug,  the  buying  of  the  suqe ;  in  former  days  an 
interval  of  ten  days  came  in.    The  new  member  now  breaks 
his  money  strings,  touches  the  food  of  various  kinds  that  he 
has  provided,  which  he  could  not  do  before  for  he  had  been 
fasting  for  some  days,  and  distributes  his  money  and  food  to 
every  fire-place  in  the  gamal.    A  general  feast  follows.  He 
himself  has  to  goto,  to  remain  in  the  gamal  and  eat  only  from 
his  av  tapug,  his  suqe  fire,  for  so  many  clays  according  to  his 
rank ;  for  the  middle  ranks  five  days  or  ten,  for  the  highest 
ranks  many  more.    The  feast  made  at  the  entrance  to  a 
higher  rank  is  a  public  one,  the  distinction  between  the  food 
cooked  in  the  ceremonial  fire,  the  av  tapug,  and  the  rest 
being  carefully  preserved.    Where,  as  in  the  highest  ranks, 
there  are  but  few  present  who  can  eat  from  the  oven  newly 
reached,  food  from  it  is  sent  to  a  distance  to  men  of  the  same 
rank.    The  pigs  also,  the  chief  provision  and  mark  of  an 
abundant  hospitality,  are  not  killed  and  consumed  at  the 
feast ;  they  are  sent  off  to  different  quarters,  with  a  slap  from 
the  newly-raised  member  of  the  club,  by  whom  or  in  behalf 
of  whom  they  have  been  given,  and  sometimes  with  a 
ceremonial  representation  of  being  killed.    For  the  lower 
ranks,  or  in  a  wealthy  family  where  it  is  a  matter  of  course 
that  a  boy  should  have  his  steps  bought  for  him,  the  feast  is 
a  merry-making  of  the  neighbours ;  crowds  flock  to  the  great 
feasts  and  dances  which  are  made  when  the  highest  steps  are 
taken,  and  when  the  new  man  desires  to  make  the  most  of  his 
social  elevation.  There  was  a  dress,  malo-sarw, used  only  on  such 
an  occasion,  now  no  longer  to  be  seen  ;  a  kind  of  cape,  in 
four  oblong  parts,  beautifully  made  in  coloured  matting,  the 
highest  product  of  Banks'  Island  art.    The  candidate  for  such 
steps  would  not  be  seen  for  many  days  before,  being  confined 
in  an  inner  chamber  in  the  gamal,  and  fasting  there.    On  such 
an  occasion,  moreover,  logs  of  a  tree  called  paMo  are  brought 


io8 


Societies  or  Clubs. 


[ch. 


out,  which  are  supposed  to  be  heavy  with  the  ghostly  power 
which  they  contain  and  symbolize,  that  mana  without  which 
nothing-  important  can  succeed.    The  incidents  of  one  of 


'Malo-sauu'  dancing  deess. 

these  feasts  are  thus  described :  '  Seven  palako  logs  dressed  in 
cycas  leaves  and  flowers  were  brought  in  on  the  shoulders  of 
men  of  rank,  who  walked  as  if  the  weight  was  heavy  on 


vi.]  Banks  Islands  '  Sttqe!  109 

them.  Then,  preceded  by  a  man  carrying-  aloft  in  a  dish  the 
money  paid  for  the  palaho  by  the  g-iver  of  the  feast,  the 
bearers  danced  round  with  them  as  if  with  burdened  steps. 
A  drum  was  beating-  all  the  time,  and  singing-  going-  on. 
The  newly-advanced  giver  of  the  feast  danced  out  and  round, 
kicking  up  his  heels  behind  him,  and  carrying  a  palm-leaf 
umbrella  before  his  face,  because  of  his  modesty,  they  said,  in 
his  new  position.  Then  a  man  of  high  position  in  the  Suqe 
pranced  forth  and  made  a  speech.  The  correct  thing  seems  to 
be  to  pant  a  good  deal,  as  other  people  cough,  to  disguise  a 
want  of  eloquence ;  it  shews  that  the  orator  is  a  man  of  sub- 
stance, well  fed  and  short-winded.  He  trotted  backwards  and 
forwards  before  the  palakos,  with  his  new  messmate  at  bis 
heels  modestly  covering  his  face.  His  speech  was  interpreted 
as  to  this  effect :  "  This  man  has  had  difficulty  in  getting  into 
this  position  ;  be  has  been  a  long  while  about  it,  but  we  have 
now  let  him  in.  He  has  spent  a  great  deal  of  money  on 
these  palakos  and  decorations,  and  he  gives  many  pigs  ;  he 
does  the  thing  very  handsomely."  Then  the  pigs  were 
brought  out  one  by  one  and  smacked  by  the  giver  of  the 
feast,  as  he  handed  them  over  to  another  great  man  who 
decided  where  they  were  to  go.  There  were  four  or  five  great 
fat  beasts,  each  with  his  own  name,  and  several  more  of  lesser 
dignity.  As  each  pig  was  smacked,  three  other  great  men 
blew  a  loud  blast  on  conch -shells.  Then  the  new  man  laid 
out  his  money  on  the  ground,  and  the  conchs  were  blown 
again.  The  last  act  of  the  ceremony  was  the  appearance  of 
another  great  man  with  a  bow  and  arrows.  He  and  the 
modest  host,  with  his  palm-leaf  over  his  face,  capered  about  for 
a  while,  and  then  he  made  his  speech  to  this  effect :  "  The 
man  who  undertook  to  introduce  this  new  member  to  his 
present  position  is  dead ;  but  I  have  taken  him  up  instead. 
He  has  done  handsomely— pigs,  money,  and  everything  that 
is  right."  Then  he  rushed  at  the  biggest  pig,  whose  name 
was  Puss,  and  shot  him  with  two  arrows,  much  to  his  disgust. 
This  was  only  a  form  of  killing  the  pig,  for  the  arrows  were 
quite  light  ones.    After  this  the  host  himself  made  a  little 


1 IO  Societies  or  Clubs.  [CH. 

speech.  I  could  not  hear  what  he  said ;  he  had  not  been 
allowed  to  eat  for  five  days,  and  was  weak ;  but  I  was  told 
that  it  was  to  the  effect  that  some  people  had  said  the  money 
was  not  enough,  and  now  here  was  some  more.' 

Though  women  are  completely  excluded  from  the  Suqe  of 
the  men,  they  have  something  of  the  sort  among  them- 
selves, which  is  called  improperly  by  the  same  name.  They 
admit  to  grades  of  honour  on  payment  of  money  and  making 
of  a  feast,  and  so  become  tavine  motar,  women  of  distinction. 
By  their  Suqe  they  become  rich  in  money,  with  which  to 
help  their  husbands  in  their  steps  in  rank,  and  they  plant 
their  own  gardens  for  the  feasts.  Thus  they  advance  to  be 
tattooed,  to  wear  shell  bracelets,  to  put  on  an  ornamented 
pari,  the  woman's  scanty  garment,  to  decorate  their  faces 
with  red  earth,  in  all  which  glories  the  tavine  worawora,  the 
common  woman,  can  have  no  share.  But  this  is  in  the  way 
of  kolehole  rather  than  of  suqe ;  two  things  which  become-  so 
connected  in  the  higher  ranks  of  men  that  an  account  of  one 
is  incomplete  without  an  explanation  of  the  other. 

A  kolehole  is  a  feast  with  dancing  and  singing  made  in 
connexion  with  a  certain  object,  and  giving  a  certain  rank 
marked  by  its  appropriate  ornament.  A  man  makes  such  a 
feast  for  himself,  or  for  his  son  or  nephew.  When  one  has 
reached  the  highest  place  in  the  Suqe,  he  can  still  advance 
in  the  world  by  kolehole;  and  he  often  accompanies  with 
these  his  regular  progress  in  Suqe  rank.  The  story  of  the  Little 
Orphan  exhibits  in  a  succession  of  these  festivals  a  picture 
of  native  grandeur  and  success.  When  a  man  builds  a  new 
house  he  will  hole  it,  and  a  nule,  a  grotesque  image,  will 
remain  as  a  memorial  at  the  door.  When  a  new  gamal  for 
the  Suqe  is  built,  or  when  a  man  adds  a  compartment  for  the 
oven  to  which  he  has  lately  risen  or  is  to  rise,  there  is  a 
kole-gamal.  A  stone  is  brought  up  from  the  beach  and  placed 
near  the  gamal,  or  a  wona,  a  platform  of  stones,  is  built  up, 
and  a  feast  is  made  to  kole  it.  The  maker  of  the  feast,  or 
the  youth  in  whose  honour  it  is  made,  dances  on  the  stone, 
and  can  wear  upon  his  ankle  afterwards  a  welajiuj),  an  orna- 


vi.]  Banks  Islands  '  Szcqe,'  '  Kolekole!         i  r  i 

ment  of  the  fine  feathers  from  near  the  eyes  of  fowls,  dyed 
crimson  and  woven  into  a  string,  and  the  stone  remains 
as  a  memorial.    A  kolekole  ngere  qoe  gives  the  right  to  wear 
a  necklace  of  weiapup,  and  the  hero  of  the  occasion  dances 
in  a  hat.    Another  kind  gives  the  right  to  wear  a  pig's  tail 
in  the  hair ;  I  have  seen  a  man  at  Maewo  with  five  and 
twenty.    If  a  man  had  a  wonderful  or  rare  thing  in  his 
possession,  brought  from  foreign  parts  perhaps,  as  a  white 
cockatoo  from  the  Solomon  Islands,  he  might  hole  this ;  or 
more  probably  he  would  take  advantage  of  another  man's 
feast,  and  dance  about  exhibiting  it.    Orators  mounted  on  the 
gamal  roof,  or  on  the  new-built  house,  would  harangue  the 
crowd,  setting  forth  the  virtues  of  the  giver  of  the  feast ; 
others  would  go  about  with  baskets  of  his  money  proclaim- 
ing his  liberality;  the  decorated  palako  logs  heavy  with 
mana  would  be  carried  in ;  pigs  would  be  dismissed  to  distant 
villages  with  a  smack  from  the  giver ;  crowds  from  all  parts 
assembled  ;  dancers  and  drummers  exerted  themselves  in  view 
of  the  morrow's  payment ;  women  competed  with  new  songs 
for  a  prize  and  honour.    It  was  a  great  thing  for  a  man  to 
have  a  large  assemblage  at  his  feast,  and  a  great  satisfaction 
to  his  enemy  to  prevent  it ;  each  would  therefore  use  charms 
to  further  his  purpose.    A  man  would  rub  the  leaves  of  a 
scented  ginger-plant,  or  a  strong-smelling  erythrina,  in  his 
hands  overnight  and  hang  them  over  the  fire  ;  he  would  chop 
the  twigs  and  leaves,  singing  over  them  a  charm ;  he  would 
chew  and  puff  all  night  to  get  mana;  in  the  morning  he 
would  blow  his  shell  trumpet  to  spread  abroad  the  influence 
of  his  leaves,  which  would  avitt,  draw  a  multitude  to  the  feast. 
A  counteracting  charm  from  the  adversary  would  make  men 
feel  disinclined  to  go.    Another  decoration  to  be  obtained  by 
giving  a  dance  and  feast  is  the  urai  non  Qat  of  Mota,  noran 
Qat  of  the  Torres  Islands,  where  perhaps  it  is  now  most 
practised,  the  head  anointing  of  Qat.    The  head  is  smeared 
over  with  a  mixture  of  a  certain  dust  from  a  tree  with  the 
juice  of  coleus  leaves  and  native  oranges  and  salt  water,  which 
makes  a  brilliant  red  colour.    There  is  another  preparation  of 


1 1 2  Societies  or  Clubs.  rCH, 

yellow  colour.  The  Fui  Ro  Som  in  the  Story  of  Ganviviris, 
when  she  made  her  appearance  with  all  the  ornaments  that 
money  could  procure  the  right  to  wear,  was  thus  adorned. 

A  feast  of  the  same  kind  is  held  to  commemorate  a  deliver- 
ance, a  V ovo  feast ;  when  the  famine  and  misery  following-  on 
a  disastrous  hurricane  had  passed  away  at  Mota,  and  food  was 
once  more  abundant,  then  they  celebrated  a  Vovo  feast ;  such 
a  feast  was  made  by  a  native  of  the  same  island  w  hen  he  had 
quite  recovered  from  a  slight  wound  received  at  Santa  Cruz  ; 
he  danced  about  exhibiting  his  hat  with  the  arrow  through  it. 

In  the  northern  part  of  Maewo,  Aurora,  in  the  New 
Hebrides,  the  Suqe  is  now  nearly  extinct ;  the  old  members 
use  the  gamal  as  a  convenient  resort,  but  no  one  cares  fox- 
admission.  The  reason  for  this  in  a  great  measure  is  that 
a  place  in  the  Suqe  was  in  old  times  valued  for  the  advantages 
it  carried  with  it  after  death.  A  native  wrote  that '  the-reason 
for  Suqe  is  this,  that  hereafter  when  a  man  comes  to  die,  his 
soul  may  remain  in  happiness  in  that  place  Panoi  ;  but  if  any 
one  should  die  who  has  not  killed  a  pig,  his  soul  will  just  stay 
on  a  tree,  hanging  for  ever  on  it  like  a  flying  fox.  On  this 
account  no  man  likes  his  son  to  remain  without  anything 
being  done ;  it  is  a  matter  of  the  first  importance  for  him 
that  he  should  get  many  pigs  and  seek  money  (i.  e.  mats),  so 
that  hereafter  when  all  is  prepared  he  may  give  that  money 
to  those  who  have  already  killed  pigs,  and  that  he  may  be  all 
right.'  Consequently,  on  the  birth  of  a  son  a  man  s  first  care 
was  to  give  a  pig  in  his  name  to  make  a  beginning  of  Suqe 
for  him.  But  a  place  in  the  Suqe  carried  with  it  here  also  the 
same  rank  and  consideration  as  in  the  Banks'  Islands  :  among' 
children  even,  one  whose  father  had  not  given  a  pig  for  his 
admission  would  be  despised ;  and  when  a  man  had  killed  his 
pigs  properly  afterwards  on  his  own  account  his  position  in 
society  was  secured.  '  He  can  adorn  himself  with  pigs'  tusks, 
and  with  that  white  shell-money  that  we  have,  and  with  the 
leaves  of  trees  most  thought  of,  croton  and  dracasna  or  cycas, 
and  he  thinks  to  himself,  Now  I  am  clear  of  trouble,  there  is 
nothing  that  weighs  upon  me  now.'    My  friend  adds  that 


vi.]  New  Hebrides.    Lepers  Island.  113 

'  there  are  some  now  who  have  perceived  that  there  is  no 
truth  in  this  ;  and  these  things  they  say  are  the  deceits  and 
vanities  of  the  world.' 

In  Omba,  Lepers'  Island,  the  Huqe  is  in  full  vigour  ;  a 
gamali  is  a  necessity  for  a  man  to  eat  in,  if  there  be  but 
a  single  dwelling-house.  There  are  not  many  ranks  and 
ovens  ;  a  Lepers'  Island  gamali  appears  to  a  visitor  from  the 
Banks'  Islands  short  and  lofty.  There  are  but  four  ranks  in 
the  society,  and  therefore  but  four  divisions,  diringi,  in  the 
gamali ;  the  lowest  the  toa,  the  fowl ;  the  second  moli ;  the 
third  levusi,  meaning  many;  the  highest  vire,  which  means 
having  fruited  or  flowered.  But  there  are  more  ovens  than 
one  for  each  rank,  and  the  member  has  to  eat  his  way  up 
through  them  before  he  can  pass  to  the  next  division.  So 
there  are  in  one  gamali  five  ovens  for  moli,  and  two  for  levusi. 
When  a  man  has  reached  the  highest  rank  of  vire  he  can  go 
on  with  it,  making  another  feast  and  taking  another  name  as 
often  as  he  pleases,  becoming  every  time  a  greater  man.  The 
lowest  step  does  not  confer  a  title,  but  a  new  name  is  assumed 
with  the  higher  ranks,  shewing  the  rank.  These  names, 
however,  are  not  commonly  used  ;  no  one,  for  example,  calls 
Tangamben  Molimbembe,  Mob-butterfly,  the  name  belonging 
to  his  Moli  rank  ;  but  the  number  of  names  is  great  which 
belong  to  a  man  who  has  passed  through  all  ranks  and  become 
many  times  a  Vire.  Age  has  nothing  to  do  with  entrance 
into  the  society,  or  with  rising  in  the  ranks  ;  it  is  merely  a 
matter  of  giving  pigs  and  mats,  which  serve  for  money. 
There  is  nothing  whatever  of  initiation  ;  all  males,  except  very 
little  boys,  are  members  and  eat  in  the  gamali.  Their  friends 
help  the  boys  at  first ;  but  it  is  the  great  aim  of  all  to  rise 
and  gain  social  position.  A  boy  has  a  fowl,  toa,  given  him  to 
start  in  life,  and  a  fowl  buys  him  his  first  step,  the  toa ;  his 
fowls  multiply,  and  he  changes  some  of  them  for  a  young 
sow;  so  his  property  increases,  and  as  he  grows  richer  he 
desires  to  take  each  further  step.  The  higher  ranks  of  the 
Huqe  give  much  power  and  authority,  because  those  who  have 
reached  them  can  always  keep  back  those  who  wish  to  rise, 

1 


!I4  Societies  or  Clubs.  [CH. 

and  the  good-will  of  each  one  of  them  has  to  he  secured. 
There  is  less  strictness  than  in  the  Banks'  Islands  in  the  rule 
which  keeps  each  man  to  his  own  oven  ;  one  can  descend 
from  his  own  ahove  and  eat  in  a  lower  division,  and  if  one 
should  encroach  on  the  place  ahove  him  he  would  suffer  only 
a  fine  of  pigs.  There  is  the  same  system  of  entrance  as  in  the 
Banks'  Islands,  hy  which  a  patron  introduces  the  new  memher 
and  makes  his  hiqe  for  him,  gifts  which  are  to  a  considerable 
extent  reciprocal.  The  patron  is  properly  one  of  the  same 
family  division,  the  uncle  on  the  mother's  side,  or  the  brother. 
Thus,  in  the  case  of  a  boy  whose  rich  father  bought  him  up  at 
once  in  early  childhood  to  the  rank  of  moli,  the  first  step  was 
to  give  a  pig  to  the  members  of  the  boy's  waivtmg,  as  an 
acknowledgment  that  he  was  intruding  on  their  province, 
that  the  patriarchal  was  intruding  on  the  matriarchal  system. 
Afterwards  his  father  gave  him  a  pig,  with  which  a  feast  was 
made  in  his  name,  and  each  person  who  took  a  piece  of  the 
pig  gave  a  mat  in  return  ;  the  man  who  took  the  head  gave 
a  mat  a  hundred  fathoms  long.  Of  these  mats  the  boy  gave 
his  father  fifty  in  return  for  the  pig.  Then  he  gave  mats,  or 
they  were  given  in  his  name,  to  the  moli  whom  he  was  to  join  ; 
and  when  he  first  went  to  eat  at  their  oven  they  made  a 
little  feast  for  him.  His  friends  on  his  mother's  side  gave  in 
his  name  a  pig  to  his  father,  and  made  him  a  feast. 

At  Whitsuntide  Island,  Araga,  the  word  Loli  takes  the 
place  of  Suqe,  but  the  thing  is  the  same.  All  the  male 
population  are  in  fact  members  of  the  society ;  wherever 
there  is  a  dwelling-house,  there  is  also  a  gamal.  The  divisions 
with  the  ovens,  matan  gabi,  are  twelve;  (i)  ma  lavggelu, 
the  stage  of  youth;  (2)  gabi  I'm  hangvtilu,  the  oven  of  ten 
tusks ;  (3)  ma  votu ;  (4)  gabi  rara,  the  oven  of  the  ery- 
thrina  leaf,  which  is  the  badge  of  the  rank ;  (5)  icorla,  the 
stone- wall  seat  by  the  front  of  the  gamal,  on  which  no 
one  below  this  rank  may  sit.  These  five  are  the  inferior 
steps  which  fathers  see  that  their  boys  take  as  soon  as 
possible,  and  as  quickly  as  they  can  afford  to  buy  them  up. 
Though  the  lowest  is  nominally  that  of  grown  youths,  no 


vi.]      New  Hebrides.     Whitsuntide  Island.  115 

child  is  too  young  to  be  admitted  for  whom  the  father,  or 
more  properly  the  mother's  brother,  provides  the  entrance 
payments  and  presents  of  pigs  and  mats.  Here,  too,  though 
in  principle  the  mother's  kin  should  take  charge  of  the  boy's 
advancement,  the  father  in  practice  generally  makes  it  his 
own  business.  The  sixth  step,  moli,  is  the  first  that  is 
important ;  the  youth  takes  the  great  loli,  ma  loli  gaivua,  and 
assumes  a  name  with  the  prefix  Moli.  There  are  three  steps 
of  moli.  The  ninth  rank  is  udu,  the  tenth  nggarae,  the  eleventh 
livnsi,  the  last  vira.  The  patron,  or  father,  of  the  new  moli 
gives  him  when  he  attains  that  rank  some  of  that  white  and 
beautiful  shell-money,  which,  however,  is  not  used  as  money, 
but  is  much  valued  for  ornament.  This  is  worth  many  pigs, 
and  is  worn  on  the  arm  or  wrist  in  the  string,  or  woven 
into  an  armlet.  These  family  jewels  remain  as  heirlooms,  and 
are  made  up  afresh  for  the  successive  wearers.  Internal 
discipline  is  severe ;  one  who  should  intrude  into  the  division 
of  the  gamal  above  his  own  would  be  clubbed  or  shot.  To  rise 
to  the  higher  moli  and  the  steps  beyond  is  the  ambition  of 
every  young  man,  and  his  friends  are  bound  to  help  him  ;  for 
this  sacrifices  are  made,  and  mana  sought  from  Tagar.  For 
gaining  new  steps  in  rank  many  pigs  are  wanted,  many  mats, 
abundant  supplies  of  food ;  such  things  come  to  the  man 
supernaturally,  he  must  have  mana.  The  Vira  is  seldom 
reached ;  the  man  of  that  rank,  like  Viradoro  now,  is  in  fact 
the  chief ;  he  has  great  mana  and  the  favour  of  Tagar,  or  he 
could  not  have  risen  to  be  what  he  is ;  his  authority  is  para- 
mount in  the  Loli,  for  none  can  rise  without  his  consent,  and 
every  one  is  a  member  of  the  society  and  hopes  to  rise ;  he 
has  been  fortunate  in  war,  or  he  would  not  have  survived ; 
he  comes  of  a  family  of  rich  and  leading  men  who  bought  his 
first  steps  when  he  was  a  child,  and  by  whose  wealth  he  has 
bought  the  higher ;  he  is  the  great  man,  the  Eatahigi. 


I  a 


CHAPTER  VII. 


EELIGION. 


The  religion  of  the  Melanesians  is  the  expression  of  their 
conception  of  the  supernatural,  and  embraces  a  very  wide  range 
of  beliefs  and  practices,  the  limits  of  which  it  would  be  very 
difficult  to  define.  It  is  equally  difficult  to  ascertain  with 
precision  what  these  beliefs  are.  The  ideas  of  the  natives  are 
not  clear  upon  many  points,  they  are  not  accustomed  to  present 
them  in  any  systematic  form  among  themselves.  An  observer 
who  should  set  himself  the  task  of  making  systematic  enquiries, 
must  find  himself  baffled  at  the  outset  by  the  multiplicity  of 
the  languages  with  which  he  has  to  deal.  Suppose  him  to 
have  as  a  medium  of  communication  a  language  which  he  and 
those  from  whom  he  seeks  information  can  use  freely  for  the 
ordinary  purposes  of  life,  he  finds  that  to  fail  when  he  seeks 
to  know  what  is  the  real  meaning  of  those  expressions  which 
his  informant  must  needs  use  in  his  own  tongue,  because  he 
knows  no  equivalent  for  them  in  the  common  language  which 
is  employed.  Or  if  he  gives  what  he  supposes  to  be  an  equi- 
valent, it  will  often  happen  that  he  and  the  enquirer  do  not 
understand  that  word  in  the  same  sense.  A  missionary  has 
his  own  difficulty  in  the  fact  that  very  much  of  his  com- 
munication is  with  the  young,  who  do  not  themselves  know 
and  understand  very  much  of  what  their  elders  believe  and 
practice.  Converts  are  disposed  to  blacken  generally  and 
indiscriminately  their  own  former  state,  and  with  greater  zeal 
the  present  practices  of  others.  There  are  some  things  tbey 
are  really  ashamed  to  speak  of ;  and  there  are  others  which 


Difficulties. 


117 


they  think  they  ought  to  consider  wrong,  because  they  are 
associated  in  their  memory  with  what  they  know  to  be  really 
bad.  Many  a  native  Christian  will  roundly  condemn  native 
songs  and  dances,  who,  when  questions  begin  to  clear  his 
mind,  acknowledges  that  some  dances  are  quite  innocent, 
explains  that  none  that  he  knows  have  any  religious  significance 
whatever,  says  that  many  songs  also  have  nothing  whatever  bad 
in  them,  and  writes  out  one  or  two  as  examples.  Natives  who 
are  still  heathen  will  speak  with  reserve  of  what  still  retains 
with  them  a  sacred  character,  and  a  considerate  missionary  will 
respect  such  reserve  ;  if  he  should  not  respect  it  the  native  may 
very  likely  fail  in  his  respect  for  him,  and  amuse  himself  at  his 
expense.  Few  missionaries  have  time  to  make  systematic 
enquiries  ;  if  they  do,  they  are  likely  to  make  them  too  soon, 
and  for  the  whole  of  their  after-career  make  whatever  they 
observe  fit  into  their  early  scheme  of  the  native  religion. 
Often  missionaries,  it  is  to  be  feared,  so  manage  it  that  neither 
they  nor  the  first  generation  of  their  converts  really  know 
what  the  old  religion  of  the  native  people  was.  There  is 
always  with  missionaries  the  difficulty  of  language ;  a  man 
may  speak  a  native  language  every  day  for  years  and  have 
reason  to  believe  he  speaks  it  well,  but  it  will  argue  ill  for  his 
real  acquaintance  with  it  if  he  does  not  find  out  that  he  makes 
mistakes.  Resident  traders,  if  observant,  are  free  from  some 
of  a  missionary's  difficulties ;  but  they  have  their  own.  The 
'pigeon  English,'  which  is  sure  to  come  in,  carries  its  own 
deceits  ;  '  plenty  devil '  serves  to  convey  much  information  ;  a 
chief's  grave  is  '  devil  stones,'  the  dancing  ground  of  a  village 
is  a  'devil  ground,'  the  drums  are  idols,  a  dancing  club  is 
a 'devil  stick1.'    The  most  intelligent  travellers  and  naval 

1  It  may  be  asserted  with  confidence  that  a  belief  in  a  devil,  that  is  of  an 
evil  spirit,  has  no  place  -whatever  in  the  native  Melanesian  mind.  The  word 
has  certainly  not  been  introduced  in  the  Solomon  or  Banks'  Islands  by 
missionaries,  who  in  those  groups  have  never  used  the  word  devil.  Yet  most 
unfortunately  it  has  come  to  pass  that  the  religious  beliefs  of  European  traders 
have  been  conveyed  to  the  natives  in  the  word  '  devil,'  which  they  use  without 
knowing  what  it  means.  It  is  much  to  be  wished  that  educated  Europeans 
would  not  use  the  word  so  loosely  as  they  do. 


lI°  Religion.  [CH. 

officers  pass  their  short  period  of  observation  in  this  atmosphere 
ot  confusion.  Besides,  every  one,  missionary  and  visitor,  carries 
with  him  some  preconceived  ideas;  he  expects  to  see  idols, 
and  he  sees  them ;  images  are  labelled  idols  in  museums  whose 
makers  carved  them  for  amusement;  a  Solomon  islander 
fashions  the  head  of  his  lime-box  stick  into  a  grotesque  figure, 
and  it  becomes  the  subject  of  a  woodcut  as  '  a  Solomon  Island 
god.'  It  is  extremely  difficult  for  any  one  to  begin  enquiries 
without  some  prepossessions,  which,  even  if  he  can  com- 
municate with  the  natives  in  their  own  language,  affect  his 
conception  of  the  meaning  of  the  answers  he  receives.  The 
questions  he  puts  guide  the  native  to  the  answer  he  thinks 
he  ought  to  give.  The  native,  with  very  vague  beliefs  and 
notions  floating  in  cloudy  solution  in  his  mind,  finds  in  the 
questions  of  the  European  a  thread  on  which  these  will  preci- 
pitate themselves,  and,  without  any  intention  to  deceive, 
avails  himself  of  the  opportunity  to  clear  his  own  mind  while 
he  satisfies  the  questioner. 

Some  such  statement  as  this  of  the  difficulties  in  the  way 
of  a  certain  knowledge  of  the  subject  is  a  necessary  intro- 
duction to  the  account  which  is  given  here  of  the  religion 
of  the  Melanesians  ;  and  it  is  desirable  that  the  writer  should 
disclaim  pretension  to  accuracy  or  completeness.  The  general 
view  which  is  presented  must  be  taken  with  the  particular 
examples  of  Melanesian  belief  and  customs  in  matters  of 
religion  which  follow. 

(i)  The  Melanesian  mind  is  entirely  possessed  by  the  belief 
in  a  supernatural  power  or  influence,  called  almost  universally 
mana x.    This  is  what  works  to  effect  everything  which  is 

1  Professor  Max  Miiller,  in  Ms  Hibbert  Lectures  of  1878,  did  me  the  honour 
of  quoting  the  following  words  from  a  letter.  '  The  religion  of  the  Melanesians 
consists,  as  far  as  belief  goes,  in  the  persuasion  that  there  is  a  supernatural 
power  about  belonging  to  the  region  of  the  unseen ;  and,  as  far  as  practice  goes, 
in  the  use  of  means  of  getting  this  power  turned  to  their  own  benefit.  The 
notion  of  a  Supreme  Being  is  altogether  foreign  to  them,  or  indeed  of  any  being 
occupying  a  very  elevated  place  in  their  world.  .  .  There  is  a  belief  in  a  force 
altogether  distinct  from  physical  power,  which  acts  in  all  lands  of  ways  for 
good  and  evil,  and  which  it  is  of  the  greatest  advantage  to  possess  or  control. 


vn.]  lMana:  119 

beyond  the  ordinary  power  of  men,  outside  the  common 
processes  of  nature ;  it  is  present  in  the  atmosphere  of  life, 
attaches  itself  to  persons  and  to  things,  and  is  manifested 
by  results  which  can  only  be  ascribed  to  its  operation. 
When  one  has  got  it  he  can  use  it  and  direct  it,  but  its 
force  may  break  forth  at  some  new  point ;  the  presence  of  it 
is  ascertained  by  proof.  A  man  comes  by  chance  upon  a 
stone  which  takes  his  fancy ;  its  shape  is  singular,  it  is  like 
something,  it  is  certainly  not  a  common  stone,  there  must  be 
mana  in  it.  So  he  argues  with  himself,  and  he  puts  it  to  the 
proof;  he  lays  it  at  the  root  of  a  tree  to  the  fruit  of  which  it 
has  a  certain  resemblance,  or  he  buries  it  in  the  ground  when 
he  plants  his  garden ;  an  abundant  crop  on  the  tree  or  in  the 
garden  shews  that  he  is  right,  the  stone  is  mana  1,  has  that 
power  in  it.  Having  that  power  it  is  a  vehicle  to  convey 
mana  to  other  stones.  In  the  same  way  certain  forms  of 
words,  generally  in  the  form  of  a  song,  have  power  for  certain 
purposes  ;  a  charm  of  words  is  called  a  mana.  But  this  power, 
though  itself  impersonal,  is  always  connected  with  some  person 
who  directs  it ;  all  spirits  have  it,  ghosts  generally,  some  men. 
If  a  stone  is  found  to  have  a  supernatural  power,  it  is  because 
a  spirit  has  associated  itself  with  it ;  a  dead  man's  bone  has 


This  is  Mana.  The  word  is  common  I  believe  to  the  whole  Pacific,  and  people 
have  tried  very  hard  to  describe  what  it  is  in  different  regions.  I  think  I  know 
what  our  people  mean  by  it,  and  that  meaning  seems  to  me  to  cover  all  that  I 
hear  about  it  elsewhere.  It  is  a  power  or  influence,  not  physical,  and  in  a  way 
supernatural ;  but  it  shews  itself  in  physical  force,  or  in  any  kind  of  power  or 
excellence  which  a  man  possesses.  This  Mana  is  not  fixed  in  anything,  and 
can  be  conveyed  in  almost  anything  ;  but  spirits,  whether  disembodied  souls  or 
supernatural  beings,  have  it  and  can  impart  it ;  and  it  essentially  belongs  to 
personal  beings  to  originate  it,  though  it  may  act  through  the  medium  of  water, 
or  a  stone,  or  a  bone.  All  Melanesian  religion  consists,  in  fact,  in  getting  this 
Mana  for  one's  self,  or  getting  it  used  for  one's  benefit — all  religion,  that  is,  as 
far  as  religious  practices  go,  prayers  and  sacrifices.' 

1  The  word  mana  is  both  a  noun  substantive  and  a  verb  ;  a  transitive  form 
of  the  verb,  manag,  manahi,  manangi,  means  to  impart  mana,  or  to  influence 
with  it.  An  object  in  which  mana  resides,  and  a  spirit  which  naturally  has 
mana,  is  said  to  be  mana,  with  the  use  of  the  verb ;  a  man  has  mana,  but 
cannot  properly  be  said  to  be  mana. 


120  Religion.  rCHi 

with  it  mana,  because  the  ghost  is  with  the  bone  ;  a  man  may 
have  so  close  a  connexion  with  a  spirit  or  ghost  that  he  has 
mana  m  himself  also,  and  can  so  direct  it  as  to  effect  what  he 
desires ;  a  charm  is  powerful  because  the  name  of  a  spirit  or 
ghost  expressed  in  the  form  of  words  brings  into  it  the  power 
which  the  ghost  or  spirit  exercises  through  it.    Thus  all 
conspicuous  success  is  a  proof  that  a  man  has  mana ;  his 
influence  depends  on  the  impression  made  on  the  people's 
mind  that  he  has  it ;  he  becomes  a  chief  by  virtue  of  it. 
Hence  a  man's  power,  though  political  or  social  in  its  cha- 
racter, is  his  mana  ;  the  word  is  naturally  used  in  accordance 
with  the  native  conception  of  the  character  of  all  power  and 
influence  as  supernatural.    If  a  man  has  been  successful  in 
fighting,  it  has  not  been  his  natural  strength  of  arm,  quickness 
of  eye,  or  readiness  of  resource  that  has  won  success ;  he  has 
certainly  got  the  mana  of  a  spirit  or  of  some  deceased  warrior 
to  empower  him,  conveyed  in  an  amulet  of  a  stone  round  his 
neck,  or  a  tuft  of  leaves  in  his  belt,  in  a  tooth  hung  upon  a 
finger  of  his  bow  hand,  or  in  the  form  of  words  with  which  he 
brings  supernatural  assistance  to  his  side.    If  a  man's  pigs 
multiply,  and  his  gardens  are  productive,  it  is  not  because  he 
is  industrious  and  looks  after  his  property,  but  because  of  the 
stones  full  of  mana  for  pigs  and  yams  that  he  possesses.  Of 
course  a  yam  naturally  grows  when  planted,  that  is  well 
known,  but  it  will  not  be  very  large  unless  mana  comes  into 
play;  a  canoe  will  not  be  swift  unless  mana  be  brought  to 
bear  upon  it,  a  net  will  not  catch  many  fish,  nor  an  arrow 
inflict  a  mortal  wound. 

(2)  The  Melanesians  believe  in  the  existence  of  beinffs 
personal,  intelligent,  full  of  mana,  with  a  certain  bodily  form 
which  is  visible  but  not  fleshly  like  the  bodies  of  men.  These 
they  think  to  be  more  or  less  actively  concerned  in  the 
affairs  of  men,  and  they  invoke  and  otherwise  approach  them. 
These  may  be  called  spirits ;  but  it  is  most  important  to 
distinguish  between  spirits  who  are  beings  of  an  order 
higher  than  mankind,  and  the  disembodied  spirits  of  men, 
which  have  become  in  the  vulgar  sense  of  the  word  ghosts. 


TO.]  Spirits  and  Ghosts.  121 

From  the  neg-lect  of  this  distinction  great  confusion  and 
misunderstanding  arises ;  and  it  is  much  to  be  desired  that 
missionaries  at  any  rate  would  carefully  observe  the  dis- 
tinction.   Any  personal  object  of  worship  among  natives  in 
all  parts  of  the  world  is  taken  by  the  European  observer 
to  be  a  spirit  or  a  god,  or.  a  devil;  but  among  Melanesians 
at  any  rate  it  is  very  common  to  invoke  departed  relatives 
and  friends,  and  to  use  religious  rites  addressed  to  them.  A 
man  therefore  who  is  approaching  with  some  rite  his  dead 
father,  whose  spirit  he  believes  to  be  existing  and  pleased 
with  his  pious  action,  is  thought  to  be  worshipping  a  false 
god  or  deceiving  spirit,  and  very  probably  is  told  that  the 
being  he  worships  does  not  exist.    The  perplexed  native 
hears  with  one  ear  that  tbere  is  no  such  thing  as  that 
departed  spirit  of  a  man  which  he  venerates  as  a  ghost  but 
his  instructor  takes  to  be  a  god,  and  with  the  other  that  the 
soul  never  dies,  and  that  his  own  spiritual  interests  are  para- 
mount and  eternal.    They  themselves  make  a  clear  distinction 
between  the  existing,  conscious,  powerful,  disembodied  spirits 
of  the  dead,  and  other  spiritual  beings  that  never  have  been 
men  at  all.    It  is  true  that  the  two  orders  of  beings  get 
confused  in  native  language  and  thought,  but  their  confu- 
sion begins  at  one  end  and  the  confusion  of  their  visitors 
at  another ;  they  think  so  much  and  constantly  of  ghosts 
that  they  speak  of  beings  who  were  never  men  as  ghosts  ; 
Europeans  take  the  spirits  of  the  lately  dead  for  gods ;  less 
educated  Europeans  call  them  roundly  devils.    All  Mela- 
nesians, as  far  as  my  acquaintance  with  them  extends,  believe 
in  the  existence  both  of  spirits  that  never  were  men,  and  of 
ghosts  which  are  the  disembodied  souls  of  men  deceased :  to 
preserve  as  far  as  possible  this  distinction,  the  supernatural 
beings  that  were  never  in  a  human  body  are  here  called 
spirits,  men's  spirits  that  have  left  the  body  are  called  ghosts1. 

1  The  Melanesian  Mission,  under  the  guidance  of  Bishop  Patteson,  has  used 
in  all  the  islands  the  English  word  God.  He  considered  the  enormous  difficulty, 
if  not  impossibility,  of  finding  an  adequate  native  expression  in  any  one 
language,  and  further  the  very  narrow  limits  within  which  such  a  word  if  it 


122  Religion.  [CH. 

There  is,  however,  a  very  remarkable  difference  between  the 
natives  of  the  New  Hebrides  and  Banks'  Islands  to  the  east, 
and  the  natives  of  the  Solomon  Islands  to  the  west ;  the 
direction  of  the  religious  ideas  and  practices  of  the  former  is 
towards  spirits  rather  than  ghosts,  the  latter  pay  very  little 
attention  to  spirits  and  address  themselves  almost  wholly  to 
ghosts.  This  goes  with  a  much  greater  development  of  a 
sacrificial  system  in  the  west  than  in  the  east;  and  goes 
along  also  with  a  certain  advance  in  the  arts  of  life.  Enough  is 
hardly  known  of  the  Santa  Cruz  people,  who  lie  between,  to 
speak  with  certainty,  bat  they  appear  to  range  themselves,  as 
they  rather  do  geographically,  on  the  side  of  the  Solomon 
Islands.  In  Fiji  it  is  the  established  custom  to  call  the  objects 
of  the  old  worship  gods ;  but  Mr.  Fison  was  1  inclined  to 
think  all  the  spiritual  beings  of  Fiji,  including  the  gods,  simply 
the  Mota  tamate?  i.e.  ghosts;  and  the  words  of  Mr.  Hazel- 
wood,  quoted  by  Mr.  Brenchley  (Cruise  of  the  Curagoa,  p.  i8t), 
confirm  this  view.  Tuikilakila  told  one  of  the  first  mission- 
aries how  he  proposed  to  treat  him.  '  If  you  die  first,'  said  he, 
'  I  shall  make  you  my  god.'  And  the  same  Tuikilakila  would 
sometimes  say  of  himself,  '  I  am  a  god.'  It  is  added  that  he 
believed  it  too ;  and  his  belief  was  surely  correct.  For  it 
should  be  observed  that  the  chief  never  said  he  was  or  should 
be  a  god,  in  English,  but  that  he  was  or  should  be  a  kalon, 
in  Fijian,  and  a  kalou  he  no  doubt  became ;  that  is  to  say,  on 
his  decease  his  departed  spirit  was  invoked  and  worshipped 
as  he  knew  it  would  be.  He  used  no  verb  '  am'  or '  shall  be ' ; 
said  only  '  I  a  kalou'  In  Fiji  also  this  worship  of  the  dead, 
rather  than  of  beings  that  never  were  in  the  flesh,  accom- 
panies a  more  considerable  advance  in  the  arts  of  life  than  is. 
found  in,  for  example,  the  Banks'  Islands.  It  is  plain  that 
the  natives  of  the  southern  islands  of  the  New  Hebrides, 
though  they  are  said  to  worship  '  gods,'  believe  in  the 
existence  and  power  of  spirits  other  than  the  disembodied 

could  be  found  must  be  used,  since  the  languages  are  at  least  as  many  as  the 
islands.  It  is  difficult  to  convey  by  description  the  ideas  which  ought  to  attach 
to  the  new  word,  but  at  least  nothing  erroneous  is  connoted  by  it. 


vii.]  Misttse  of  Terms.    Spirits.  123 

spirits  of  the  dead,  as  well  as  of  the  ghosts  of  men.  When  a 
missionary  visitor  to  Anaiteum  reported  that  the  people  '  lived 
under  the  most  abject  bondage  to  their  Natmases,'  and  called 
these  'gods,'  he  was  evidently  speaking  of  the  ghosts,  the 
Natmat  of  the  Banks'  Islands,  for  the  word  is  no  doubt  the 
same.  The  belief  in  other  spirits  not  ghosts  of  the  dead, 
appears  equally  clear  in  the  account  given  of  the  sacred  stones 
and  places,  which  correspond  to  those  of  the  northern  islands 
of  the  same  group,  and  in  the  '  minor  deities '  said  to  be  the 
progeny  of  Nugerain,  and  called  '  gods  of  the  sea,  of  the  land, 
of  mountains  and  valleys,'  who  represent  the  wui  of  Lepers' 
Island  and  Araga.  There  does  not  appear  to  be  anywhere 
in  Melanesia  a  belief  in  a  spirit  which  animates  any  natural 
object,  a  tree,  waterfall,  storm  or  rock,  so  as  to  be  to  it 
what  the  soul  is  believed  to  be  to  the  body  of  a  man. 
Europeans  it  is  true  speak  of  the  spirits  of  the  sea  or  of  the 
storm  or  of  the  forest ;  but  the  native  idea  which  they 
represent  is  that  ghosts  haunt  the  sea  and  the  forest,  having 
power  to  raise  storms  and  to  strike  a  traveller  with  disease, 
or  that  supernatural  beings  never  men  do  the  same.  It 
may  be  said,  then,  that  Melanesian  religion  divides  the  people 
into  two  groups ;  one,  where,  with  an  accompanying  belief  in 
spirits  never  men,  worship  is  directed  to  the  ghosts  of  the 
dead,  as  in  the  Solomon  Islands  ;  the  other,  where  both  ghosts 
and  spirits  have  an  important  place,  but  the  spirits  have  more 
worship  than  the  ghosts,  as  is  the  case  in  the  New  Hebrides 
and  in  the  Banks'  Islands. 

(3)  In  the  Banks'  Islands  a  spirit  is  called  a  vui,  and  is 
thus  described  by  a  native  who  was  exhorted  to  give  as  far  as 
possible  the  original  notion  conveyed  among  the  old  people  by 
the  word,  and  gave  his  definition  after  considerable  re- 
flection : — '  What  is  a  vui  ?  It  lives,  thinks,  has  more 
intelligence  than  a  man ;  knows  things  which  are  secret 
without  seeing ;  is  supernaturally  powerful  with  mana  ;  has 
no  form  to  be  seen  ;  has  no  soul,  "because  itself  is  like  a  soul.' 
But  though  the  true  conception  of  a  vui  represents  it  as  in- 
corporeal, the  stories  about  the  vui  who  have  names  treat 


1 2  4  Religion.  [CH> 

them  as  if  they  were  men  possessed  of  supernatural  power. 
The  umi  of  the  Northern  New  Hebrides  are  the  same.  In 
the  Solomon  Islands  it  is  difficult  to  get  any  definition  of  a 
spirit  except  that  there  are  beings  which  were  never  men, 
and  have  not  the  bodily  nature  of  a  man.  In  San  Cristoval 
such  a  being  is  called  Figona  or  EVona.  Such  was  Kahausi- 
bware,  a  female,  and  a  snake.  The  name  hi'ona  is  known  in 
Malanta  also,  but  used  with  no  very  clear  application ;  they 
believe  there  also  in  ureM,  not  living  men,  nor  the  ghosts  of 
dead  men,  that  haunt  big  trees  in  the  forest  and  snatch 
away  the  souls  of  men.  These  are  seen  like  ghosts,  but  are 
not  sacrificed  to  or  invoked.  The  name  vigona  is  known  also 
at  Florida,  and  is  applied  to  beings  whose  power  exercises 
itself  in  storms,  rain,  drought,  calms,  and  in  the  growth  of 
food ;  but  these  the  natives  decline  to  admit  to  be  simple 
spirits,  thinking  they  must  once  have  been  men  ;  and  doubt- 
less some'  so  called  were  men  not  long  ago.  One  being  only 
is  asserted  there  to  be  superhuman,  never  alive  with  a  mere 
human  life,  and  therefore  not  now  a  ghost;  one  that  now 
receives  no  worship,  but  is  the  subject  of  stories  only,  without 
any  religious  consideration.  This  is  Koevasi,  a  female.  How 
she  came  into  existence  no  one  knows  ;  she  made  things  of  all 
kinds  ;  she  became  herself  the  mother  of  a  woman  from  whom 
the  people  of  the  island  descend.  She  was  the  author  of  death 
by  resuming  her  cast-off  skin  ;  she  was  the  originator  of  the 
varying  dialects  of  the  islands  round ;  for  having  started  on 
a  voyage  she  was  seized  with  ague,  and  shook  so  much  that 
her  utterance  was  confused.  Wherever  she  landed  the  people 
caught  from  her  an  almost  unintelligible  speech.  The  chill 
of  this  ague  remains  in  the  river  Kakambona  in  Laudari, 
Guadalcanal' ;  Koevasi  washed  in  it,  and  the  water  is  now  so 
cold  that  to  wade  into  it  makes  one  ill. 

These  spirits,  such  as  they  are,  have  no  position  in  the 
religion  of  the  Solomon  Islands  ;  the  ghosts,  the  disembodied 
spirits  of  the  dead,  are  objects  of  worship ;  the  tindalo  of 
Florida,  tidaclho  of  Ysabel,  tiuda'o  of  Guadalcanal',  lid  a  of  Saa, 
'ataro  of  San  Cristoval.  But  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  every 


vii.]  Ghosts  of  Worship.    Example.  125 

ghost  becomes  an  object  of  worship.  A  man  in  danger  may 
call  upon  his  father,  his  grandfather,  or  his  uncle  ;  his  near- 
ness of  kin  is  sufficient  ground  for  it.  The  ghost  who  is  to 
be  worshipped  is  the  spirit  of  a  man  who  in  his  lifetime  had 
mana  in  him  ;  the  souls  of  common  men  are  the  common  herd 
of  ghosts,  nobodies  alike  before  and  after  death.  The  super- 
natural power  abiding  in  the  powerful  living  man  abides  in 
his  ghost  after  death,  with  increased  vigour  and  more  ease  of 
movement.  After  his  death,  therefore,  it  is  expected  that  he 
should  begin  to  work,  and  some  one  will  come  forward  and  claim 
particular  acquaintance  with  the  ghost ;  if  his  power  should 
shew  itself,  his  position  is  assured  as  one  worthy  to  be  in- 
voked, and  to  receive  offerings,  till  his  cultus  gives  way 
before  the  rising  importance  of  one  newly  dead,  and  the 
sacred  place  where  his  shrine  once  stood  and  his  relics  were 
preserved  is  the  only  memorial  of  him  that  remains;  if  no 
proof  of  his  activity  appears,  he  sinks  into  oblivion  at  once. 
An  admirable  example  of  the  establishment  of  the  worship 
of  a  tindalo  in  Florida  is  given  in  the  story  of  Ganindo, 
for  which  I  am  indebted  to  Bishop  Selwyn.  There  was  a 
gathering  of  men  at  Honggo  to  go  on  a  head-hunting 
expedition  under  the  leading  of  Kulanikama  the  chief 
(himself  afterwards  a  ghost  of  worship),  and  Ganindo  was 
then-  great  fighting  man.  They  went  to  attack  Gaeta,  and 
Lumba  of  Gaeta  shot  Ganindo  near  the  collar-bone  with  an 
arrow.  Having  failed  in  their  purpose  they  returned  to 
Honggo,  and  said  they,  'our  friend  is  dead.'  But  as  he  still 
lived  they  took  him  over  to  Nggaombata  in  Guadalcanal-, 
brought  him  back  again,  and  put  him  on  the  hill  Bonipari, 
where  he  died  and  was  buried.  Then  they  took  his  head, 
wove  a  basket  for  it,  and  built  a  house  for  it,  and  they  said  he 
was  a  tindalo.  '  Let  us  go  and  take  heads,'  said  they ;  so  they 
made  an  expedition.  As  they  went  they  ceased  paddling  in  a 
quiet  place  and  waited  till  they  felt  their  canoe  rock  under 
them  ;  then  said  they,  '  Here  is  a  tindalo*  To  find  out  who 
he  was  they  called  the  names  of  lindalos,  and  when  they 
called  the  name  of  Ganindo  the  canoe  shook  again.    In  the 


1 26 


Religion. 


[CH. 


same  way  they  learnt  what  village  they  were  to  attack. 
Returning-  successful,  they  threw  a  spear  into  the  roof  of 
Ganindo's  house,  blew  conchs,  and  danced  around  it  crying, 
« Our  Undalo  is  strong  to  kill.'  Then  they  sacrificed  to  him, 
fish  and  food.  Then  they  built  him  a  new  house,  and  made 
four  images  for  the  four  corners,  one  of  Ganindo  himself,  two 
of  his  sisters,  and  another.  Then,  when  eight  men  bad 
carried  up  the  ridge  covering  for  the  house,  eight  men 
translated  the  relics  to  the  shrine.  One  carried  the  bones 
of  Ganindo,  another  his  betel-nuts,  another  his  Hme-box, 
another  his  shell  trumpet.  They  all  went  in  crouching,  as  if 
under  a  heavy  weight 1,  and  singing  slowly, '  Ma-i-i,  ma-i-i,  ka 
saka  tua,  hither,  hither,  let  us  lift  the  leg ; '  the  eight  legs 
were  lifted  together,  and  again  they  chanted  'ma-i-i,  ma-i-i,' 
and  at  the  last  mai  the  eight  legs  went  down  together.  With 
this  solemn  procession  the  relics  were  set  upon  a  bamboo 
platform,  and  sacrifices  to  the  new  keramo  were  begun ;  by 
Nisi  first,  then  by  Satani,  then  by  Begoni,  the  last,  at  whose 
death  some  four  years  ago  the  sacrifices  ceased,  and  the  shrine 
fell  to  ruin  before  the  advance  of  Christian  teaching.  To  the 
natives  of  Florida  this  Ganindo  was  a  Undalo,  a  ghost  of 
worship,  a  keramo,  a  ghost  powerful  for  war ;  he  would  be 
spoken  of  now  by  some  Europeans  as  a  god,  by  others  as  a 
devil,  and  the  pigeon-English  speaking  natives  now,  who 
think  that  'devil'  is  the  English  for  Undalo,  would  use  the 
same  word.  The  belief  in  Florida  and  the  neighbouring  parts 
is  fixed  that  every  Undalo  was  once  a  man ;  yet  some  whose 
names  are  known  to  every  one,  Daula  and  Hauri,  associated 
respectively  with  the  frigate-bird  and  the  shark,  have  passed 
far  away  from  any  historical  remembrance;  Daula,  indeed, 
under  the  name  of  Kaula  2,  is  venerated  at  Ulawa.  Some 
also  of  the  keramo,  the  Undalo  of  fighting,  are  known  in 
Florida  not  to  have  been  men  of  the  island,  but  famous 
warriors  of  the  western  islands,  where  inana  they  think  is 

1  The  weight  of  mana,  as  in  the  palaho  logs,  page  108. 

2  As  the  Florida  dale,  child,  is  in  Ulawa  kale,  and  Wango  'ataro  is  Saa 
'alcalo. 


vii.]  Prayers  and  Offerings.  127 

stronger  ;  who  have  only  been  known,  and  that  of  late  years, 
in  Florida  in  their  spiritual  state  and  power,  but  never  in 
human  form.  At  any  rate  the  objects  of  religious  worship 
are  all  tindalo  ;  and  every  tindalo  was  once  a  man. 

(4)  Taking  the  islands  of  Melanesia,  as  many  of  them  as 
come  here  into  view,  as  a  whole,  it  is  found  that  Prayers 
and  Offerings  are  made  everywhere  to  spirits,  to  ghosts,  or  to 
both.  The  prayers  axe  perhaps  in  some  cases  constraining 
charms,  are  certainly  often  forms  of  words  believed  to  be  ac- 
ceptable to  the  being  addressed,  and  known  only  to  those  who 
have  special  access  to  him.  But  there  are  also  natural  calls 
for  help  in  danger  and  distress.  The  offerings  or  sacrifices, 
whether  made  to  spirits  or  to  ghosts,  and  differing  a  good 
deal  in  eastern  and  western  islands,  have  various  motives. 
Some  are  propitiatory,  substituting  an  animal  for  the  person 
who  has  offended  ;  some  deprecatory;  some  are  offered  to  con- 
ciliate and  gratify  with  a  view  to  gain ;  some  only  to  shew 
proper  attention  and  respect  or  even  affection  ;  but  the  notion 
of  propitiation  is  not  at  all  commonly  present.  There  is  no 
priestly  order,  and  no  persons  who  can  properly  be  called 
priests.  Any  man  can  have  access  to  some  object  of  worship, 
and  most  men  in  fact  do  have  it,  either  by  discovery  of  their 
own  or  by  knowledge  imparted  to  them  by  those  who  have 
before  employed  it.  If  the  object  of  worship,  as  in  some  sacri- 
fices, is  one  common  to  the  members  of  a  community,  the  man 
who  knows  how  to  approach  that  object  is  in  a  way  their  priest 
and  sacrifices  for  them  all ;  but  it  is  in  respect  of  that  par- 
ticular function  only  that  he  has  a  sacred  character ;  and  it  is 
very  much  by  virtue  of  that  function  that  a  man  is  a  chief,  and 
not  at  all  because  he  is  chief  that  he  performs  the  sacrifice. 
Women  and  children  generally  are  excluded  from  religious 
rites.  In  close  connexion  with  religious  observances  come 
the  various  practices  of  magic  and  witchcraft,  of  doctoring 
and  weather-doctoring;  for  all  is  done  by  the  aid  of  ghosts 
and  spirits. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


SACRIFICES. 


The  simplest  and  most  common  sacrificial  act  is  that  of 
throwing-  a  small  portion  of  food  to  the  dead  ;  this  is  prohably 
a  universal  practice  in  Melanesia.  A  fragment  of  food  ready 
to  be  eaten,  of  yam,  a  leaf  of  mallow,  a  bit  of  betel-nut,  is 
thrown  aside,  and,  where  they  drink  kava,  a  libation  is  made 
of  a  few  drops,  as  the  share  of  departed  friends,  or  as  a 
memorial  of  them  with  which  they  will  be  gratified.  This  is 
done  perhaps  with  the  calling  of  the  name  of  some  one 
recently  deceased  or  particularly  in  remembrance  at  the  time, 
or  else  with  a  general  regard  to  the  ghosts  of  former  members 
of  the  community.  It  is  hardly  thought  that  this  becomes  in 
fact  the  food  of  the  departed,  but  somehow  it  is  to  their 
advantage,  at  any  rate  it  pleases  them.  At  the  same  time 
the  living  friends  like  to  feel  and  shew  remembrance  of  the 
dead  who  have  sat  with  them  around  the  oven  ;  and  it  is  an 
opportunity  of  getting  help  from  ghostly  power,  for  which 
prayer  is  made.  In  the  New  Hebrides  and  Banks'  Islands 
this  domestic  rite  has  not,  so  far  as  my  knowledge  goes, 
developed  into  any  formal  sacrifice,  as  it  has  in  the  Solomon 
Islands ;  for  it  may  be  surely  thought  that  the  sacrifices  of 
the  latter  islands  have  had  their  origin  in  such  offerings  to 
the  dead.  To  place  food  on  a  burial-place  or  before  some 
memorial  image  is  common  ;  and  to  do  this  is  to  offer  a  kind 
of  sacrifice,  even  if  as  in  Santa  Cruz  the  offering  is  soon  taken 
away  and  eaten.  But  the  natives  do  not  call  either  of  these 
offerings  a  sacrifice,  do  not  use  for  either  the  words  for  which 


Solomon  Island  Sacrifice. 


129 


in  English  no  other  translation  can  be  found.  The  sacrifices, 
in  the  more  restricted  sense,  of  the  Solomon  Islands 'are 
widely  different  from  those  of  the  New  Hebrides  and  Banks' 
Islands ;  in  the  western  islands  the  offering's  are  made  to 
ghosts,  and  consumed  by  fire  as  well  as  eaten ;  in  the  eastern 
islands  they  are  made  to  spirits,  and  there  is  no  sacrificiab. 
fire  or  meal.  In  the  former  nothing-  is  offered  but  food,  in 
the  latter  money  has  a  conspicuous  place. 

(1)  A  Solomon  Island  sacrifice  has  been  excellently  de- 
scribed by  a  native  of  San  Cristoval.  '  In  my  country,'  he 
wrote,  1  they  think  that  ghosts  are  many,  very  many  indeed, 
some  very  powerful,  and  some  not.  There  is  one  who  is 
principal  in  war ;  this  one  is  truly  mighty  and  strong,  When 
our  people  wish  to  fight  with  any  other  place,  the  chief  men 
of  the  village  and  the  sacrificers  and  the  old  men,  and  the 
elder  and  younger  men,  assemble  in  the  place  sacred  to  this 
ghost ;  and  his  name  is  Harumae.  "When  they  are  thus 
assembled  to  sacrifice,  the  chief  sacrificer  goes  and  takes  a 
pig ;  and  if  it  be  not  a  barrow  pig  they  would  not  sacrifice  it 
to  that  ghost,  he  would  reject  it  and  not  eat  of  it.  The  pig 
is  killed  (it  is  strangled),  not  by  the  chief  sacrificer,  but  by 
those  whom  he  chooses  to  assist,  near  the  sacred  place.  Then 
they  cut  it  up  ;  they  take  great  care  of  the  blood  lest  it  should 
fall  upon  the  ground;  they  bring  a  bowl  and  set  the  pig 
in  it,  and  when  they  cut  it  up  the  blood  runs  down  into  it. 
When  the  cutting  up  is  finished,  the  chief  sacrificer  takes  a 
bit  of  flesh  from  the  pig,  and  he  takes  a  cocoa-nut  shell  and 
dips  up  some  of  the  blood.  Then  he  takes  the  blood  and 
the  bit  of  flesh  and  enters  into  the  house  (the  shrine),  and 
calls  that  ghost  and  says,  "  Harumae !  Chief  in  war !  we 
sacrifice  to  you  with  this  pig,  that  you  may  help  us  to  smite 
that  place  ;  and  whatsoever  we  shall  carry  away  shall  be  your 
property,  and  we  also  will  be  yours."  Then  he  burns  the  bit 
of  flesh  in  a  fire  upon  a  stone,  and  pours  down  the  blood  upon 
the  fire.  Then  the  fire  blazes  greatly  upwards  to  the  roof, 
and  the  house  is  full  of  the  smell  of  pig,  a  sign  that  the 
ghost  has  heard.    But  when  the  sacrificer  went  in  he  did  not 

K 


I3°  Sacrifices,  rCH< 

go  boldly,  but  with  awe  ;  and  this  is  the  sign  of  it ;  as  he 
goes  into  the  holy  house  he  puts  away  his  bag,  and  washes 
his  hands  thoroughly,  to  shew  that  the  ghost  shall  not 
reject  him  with  disgust ;  just  as  when  you  go  into  the  really 
Holy  House  you  take  off  your  hat  from  your  head,  a  sign  that 
you  reverence  the  true  Spirit.'  The  pig  was  afterwards  eaten 
by  the  worshippers.  To  sacrifice  in  this  way  is  called  hoasi, 
the  ghost  to  whom  the  sacrifice  is  made  'ataro.  It  should 
be  observed  that  Harumae  had  not  been  dead  many  years 
when  this  account  was  written,  the  elder  men  remembered 
him  alive  ;  nor  was  he  a  great  fighting  man,  but  a  kind  and 
generous  man,  thought  to  have  much  mana.  His  shrine  was 
a  small  house  in  the  village,  in  which  relics  of  him  were  kept. 
No  one  since  his  time  had  died  whom  the  people  thought 
worthy  of  such  worship ;  had  it  been  so  Harumae  would  have 
been  neglected. 

In  Florida,  as  has  been  said,  the  objects  of  worship  are 
tindalo,  to  whom  the  food  consumed  in  the  fire  is  offered  as 
their  portion.  Some  are  commonly  known  by  name,  others 
are  known  only  to  one  man  and  another  who  has  found  out 
or  been  taught  how  to  approach  them,  and  calls  each  tindalo 
his  own,  nagana.  We  are  concerned  here  with  sacrifices  ;  public, 
as  offered  to  a  -well-known  tindalo,  powerful  in  such  things  as 
concern  the  general  well-being ;  and  private,  offered  by  indi- 
viduals to  the  tindalo  of  whom  they  have  particular  knowledge 1. 
In  every  village  there  was  the  tindalo  accepted  at  the  time, 
and  the  chief  was  the  sacrificer.  He  had  received  from  his 
predecessor  the  knowledge  how  to  '  throw '  the  sacrifice  to  this 
tindalo,  and  he  imparted  this  knowledge  to  his  son  or  nephew, 
whom  he  designed  to  leave  as  his  successor.  The  place  of 
sacrifice  was  near  the  village,  an  ancient  one  or  newly  made, 
according  to  the  time  in  which  this  tindalo  had  been  in  vogue, 
an  enclosure  with  a  little  house  or  shrine  in  which  relics  were 

1  The  word  for  which  *  sacrifice '  is  used  as  equivalent  is  in  Florida  sukagi, 
in  Bugotu  of  Ysabel  liavugagi.  The  sacrificer  sacrifices  with  the  offering  to  the 
tindalo  in  or  at  the  place  of  sacrifice,  na  mane  sukagi  te  nia  sukagi  na  hanu 
vania  na  tindalo  ta  na  malei  ni  sukagi. 


V1II>]  Florida  Sacrifice.  1 3 1 

preserved.  When  a  public  sacrifice  was  performed  the  people 
of  the  place  assembled,  boys  but  not  women  being-  present, 
near  but  not  in  the  sacred  place.  Food  is  prepared,  but  not 
eaten  till  the  sacrifice  has  been  offered.  The  sacrificer  alone 
enters  the  sacred  place  or  shrine,  and  takes  to  it  his  son,  or  the 
person  he  has  instructed.  He  makes  a  fire  of  small  sticks, 
muttering  words  of  mana,  but  he  must  not  blow  it.  He  takes 
some  of  the  prepared  food  in  a  basket  lined  with  dracaena 
leaves  and  others  peculiar  to  this  tiudalo,  some  mash  of  yam 
or  something  of  that  kind ;  part  of  this  he  throws  upon  the 
fire,  calling  the  name  of  the  tindalo,  and  the  names  of  others 
with  it ;  he  tells  him  to  take  his  food,  and  makes  petition  for 
whatever  is  desired.  The  fire  blazes  up,  a  favourable  sign  that 
the  tindalo  are  present  and  blow  the  fire ;  the  bit  of  food  is 
consumed1.  What  remains  the  sacrificer  takes  back  to  the 
assembly  and  eats,  giving  some  of  it  to  his  assistant.  Then 
the  people  receive  from  him  their  portions  of  the  food  prepared, 
and  eat  it  or  take  it  away.  While  the  sacrificing  is  going  on 
there  is  a  solemn  silence.  If  a  pig  is  killed  on  the  occasion, 
the  heart  in  Florida,  at  Bugotu  the  gullet,  is  burnt  upon  the 
sacrificial  fire.  One  tiudalo  commonly  known,  whose  worship 
is  not  local,  is  Manoga.  At  sacrifices  offered  to  him  little  boys 
are  present,  and  sometimes  even  women  partake  of  the  sacri- 
ficial food.  '  He  who  throws  the  sacrifice  when  he  invokes 
this  tindalo  heaves  the  offering  round  about,  and  calls  him  ; 
first  to  the  east,  where  rises  the  sun,  saying,  If  thou  dwellest  in 
the  east,  where  rises  the  sun,  Manoga!  come  hither  and  eat 
thy  tutu  mash !  Then  turning  he  lifts  it  towards  where  sets 
the  sun,  and  says,  If  thou  dwellest  in  the  west,  where  sets  the 
sun,  Manoga  !  come  hither  and  eat  thy  tutu !  There  is  not  a 
quarter  towards  which  he  does  not  lift  it  up.  And  when  he 
has  finished  lifting  it  he  says.  If  thou  dwellest  in  heaven  above, 
Manoga !  come  hither  and  eat  thy  kitu  !  If  thou  dwellest  in 
Buru  or  Hagetolu,  the  Pleiades  or  Orion's  belt ;  if  below  in 

1  It  is  denied  that  the  food  has  a  spirit,  tarunga,  corresponding  to  the 
tarunga  which  is  the  soul  of  a  man ;  but  the  food  offered  is  tarungaga  (with 
the  adjectival  termination),  'has  a  spiritual  character.' 

K  a 


1 3 2  Sacrifices.  [CH> 

Turivatu ;  if  in  the  distant  sea ;  if  on  high  in  the  sun,  or  in 
the  moon  ;  if  thou  dwellest  inland  or  by  the  shore,  Manoga ! 
come  hither  and  eat  thy  tutu ! '  This  Manoga  belongs  parti- 
cularly to  the  Manukama  or  Lahi  division  of  the  Florida  people, 
each  division,  kema,  having  a  tindalo  whom  they  worship  as 
peculiarly  their  own,  and  whom  they  vaguely  call  their 
ancestor ;  Polika  of  the  Nggaomhata,  Barego  of  the  Kakau, 
Kuma  of  the  Honggokama,  Sisiro  of  the  Himbo,  Tindalo  tarn  Ln, 
whose  personal  name  is  not  known,  of  the  Honggokiki.  As 
these  divisions  are  intermixed  in  the  villages,  though  one  is 
generally  more  largely  represented  in  any  one  of  them  than 
the  others,  sacrifices  are  offered  in  each  village  or  group  of 
villages  to  each  of  these  tindalo  of  the  divisions ;  and  the 
sacrificer  is  the  man  who  knows  the  particular  leaves  and 
creepers  and  species  of  dracaena,  and  ginger  and  shavings  of  a 
tree,  and  words  of  mana  with  which  the  tindalo  is  approached, 
knowledge  which  he  has  received  from  his  predecessors.  The 
sacrificer  then  of  the  dominant  family  division  of  the  place  is 
in  fact  the  ostensible  chief,  the  sacrificers  of  the  less  numerous 
divisions  are  minor  chiefs.  "With  the  worship  of  these  tindalo 
of  larger  and  wider  cultus  is  combined  by  the  sacrificer  that  of 
lesser  and  more  private  keramo  of  fighting  whom  he  knows. 
The  local  tindalo  at  the  time  in  vogue,  such  as  Ganindo, 
occupies  a  middle  place  hetween  the  general  and  particular 
objects  of  sacrificial  worship.  There  are  also  the  tindalo  known 
to  every  one,  who  are  particularly  powerful  in  certain  spheres, 
as  Daula  in  the  sea,  and  Pelu,  one  of  the  vigona,  in  gardens, 
and  Hauri  in  fighting ;  but  only  those  who  know  the  proper 
way  to  approach  them  can  sacrifice  to  them  before  a  voyage  or 
planting  or  a  fight. 

There  were  two  general  sacrifices  in  the  year,  in  which  the 
people  of  a  village  took  part.  The  first,  the  Ugo,  was  when 
the  canarium  nut,  ngali,  so  much  used  in  native  cookery, 
was  ripe 1.  None  could  be  eaten  till  the  sacrifice  of  the  first- 
fruits  was  offered.    The  knowledge  of  the  way  to  do  this,  and 

1  This  sacrifice  is  described  by  Mr.  Woodford  (p.  26).  In  that  part  of 
Guadalcanar,  where  I  is  dropped  in  many  words,  tindalo  becomes  tindao. 


vm.]  Florida  First-fruits.    Private  Sacrifices.  133 

the  consequent  authority  to  open  the  season,  was  handed  down 
with  the  knowledge  of  the  tindalo  concerned.  The  man  who 
has  the  knowledge  ohserves  the  time,  and  some  day  in  the 
early  morning  he  is  heard  to  shout.  He  climbs  a  tree,  gets 
some  nuts,  cracks  them,  eats,  and  puts  some  on  the  stones  in 
his  sacred  place  for  the  tindalo.  Then  the  people  generally 
can  gather  for  themselves ;  the  chief  sacrifices  with  food  in 
Avhich  the  new  nuts  are  mixed  on  the  stones  of  the  village 
sanctuary;  each  man  who  has  a  tindalo  does  the  same  in  his 
own  sacred  place.  About  two  months  after  this  there  is 
another  general  sacrifice  called  the  sukagi  karango,  when  the 
food  generally  has  been  dug ;  a  man  who  digs  up  his  yams,  or 
gets  in  whatever  harvest  he  has,  makes  his  private  sacrifice 
besides.    At  the  general  sacrifice  pig  or  fish  is  offered. 

The  private  sacrifices  of  individuals  are  offered  in  the  same 
way.  A  man  has  gained  for  himself,  or  had  imparted  to  him, 
the  knowledge  of  the  leaves  and  bark  and  vines  that  some 
tindalo  delights  in,  and  with  these  he  approaches  him  in  the 
sacred  place,  vunut/ia,  which  is  his  own,  and  offers  to  him  to 
keep  himself  in  favour  or  to  obtain  something  from  him. 
There  he  invokes  his  familiar  tindalo,  joining  with  him  some 
others,  and  offers  in  the  fire  his  bit  of  food.  A  man  will 
commonly  have  his  keramo,  a  tindalo  of  killing,  who  will  help 
him  in  fighting  or  in  slaying  his  private  enemy.  He  will 
pull  up  his  ginger-plant,  and  judge  from  the  ease  with  which 
it  comes  out  of  the  earth  whether  he  shall  succeed  or  not ;  he 
will  make  his  sacrifice,  and  with  the  ginger  and  leaves  on 
his  shield  and  in  his  belt  and  right  armlet  will  go  to  fight. 
He  curses  his  enemy  by  his  keramo,  '  Siria  eats  thee,  and  I 
shall  slay  thee  ; '  and  if  he  kills  him,  he  cries,  '  Thine  is  this 
man,  Siria !  and  do  thou  give  me  mana.'  Manslaughter 
without  the  help  of  a  tindalo  would  be  dangerous  to  the 
manslayer  ;  the  slain  man's  ghost  would  have  power  over  him 
unless  the  mana  of  the  keramo,  a  stronger  ghost,  were  on  his 
side.  In  case  of  failure  the  ghostly  power  on  the  enemy's 
side  has  been  shewn  to  have  the  greater  strength.  A  man 
must  needs  have  his  keramo,  even  if  he  had  to  buy  one ;  if 


*34  Sacrifices.  rCB> 

what  his  father  or  uncle  taught  and  gave  him  did  not  succeed 
he  tried  another.    A  relic  of  the  keramo  (himself  but  lately  a 
fighting  man),  a  tooth  or  some  hair  in  a  little  bag,  was  hung 
round  the  neck ;  or  the  contents  of  the  bag  might  be  only  a 
stone.    These  amulets,  bomboso,  were  kept  in  the  house,  and 
were  called  a  man's  keramo,  just  as  relics  were  called  tm&alo. 
The  vtgona,  as  has  been  said,  have  influence  over  weather  and 
in  gardens.    If  a  man  himself  knows  one  he  can  operate  for 
himself,  otherwise  he  pays  a  mane  nggehe  vigona  to  do  it  for  him. 
Such  a  one  goes  into  the  middle  of  the  garden  with  mashed 
food  in  the  palm  of  his  left  hand,  and  he  strikes  it  with  his 
right  hand  as  he  calls  on  his  vigona  to  come  and  eat.  He 
says,  '  This  produce  thou  shalt  eat ;  give  mana  to  this  garden, 
that  food  may  be  good  and  plentiful.5    He  digs  holes  at  the 
four  corners,  and  buries  the  leaves  proper  to  his  vigona,  to  give 
ghostly  power  to  the  garden,  that  it  may  be  fruitful  and  to 
guard  it ;  stones  are  used  for  the  same  purpose.    As  the  yams, 
or  pana,  grow  they  are  twined  with  the  special  creeper  and 
fastened  with  the  wood  which  the  vigona  loves.   These  tindalo 
of  the  gardens  must  not  be  offended  by  the  entrance  of  men 
who  have  eaten  pig's  flesh  or  fish,  or  the  flesh  of  the  Jcandora 
cuscus,  or  shell-fish ;  three  or  four  days  after  they  have  eaten 
such  things  they  may  approach,  the  food  offensive  to  the  vigona 
'having  left  their  stomachs  the  crop  will  not  be  hurt.  When 
the  yam  vines  are  being  trained  the  men  sleep  near  the 
gardens,  and  never  approach  their  wives ;  should  they  do  so 
and  tread  the  garden  it  would  be  spoilt.  The  man  who  has  his. 
own  vigona  can  bring  his  power  to  bear  in  doing  damage 
to  another  man's  garden,  being  either  moved  by,  his  own 
grudge  or  paid  to  do  it ;  backed  by  his  own  vigona  he  offends 
the  vigona  of  the  garden  he  designs  to  spoil  by  laying  putrid 
things  there.    If  after  this  the  crop  is  good,  the  first  vigona 
has  been  shewn  to  be  stronger  than  the  other.    The  names  of 
sixteen  of  these  vigona  are  generally  known.    "When  the  crop 
is  dug  a  portion  of  the  fruits  is  burnt  in  sacrifice  to  the  one 
concerned. 

Human  sacrifices  were  occasionally  made ;  but  there  was  no 


vmi  Human  Sacrifices.  1 35 

sacrificial  feast  upon  the  flesh  as  when  a  pig  was  offered  ;  only 
little  hits  were  eaten  by  those  who  desired  to  get  fighting 
mana,  by  young  men,  and  by  elders  for  a.  special  purpose. 
Such  sacrifices  were  thought  more  effectual  than  others,  and 
advantage  was  taken  of  a  crime,  or  imputed  crime,  to  take  a 
life  and. offer  the  man  to  some  tindalo.  So  within  the  memory 
of  men  still  young,  Dikea,  the  chief  of  Ravu,  condemned  one 
Gisukokovilo  to  death  for  stealing  tobacco,  and  the  grown  lads 
of  Handika  ate  bits  of  him  cooked  in  the  sacrificial  fire.  The 
same  Dikea  offered  a  human  sacrifice  in  the  year  1886.  Two 
calamities  had  fallen  upon  Dikea.  One  of  his  wives  proved 
false,  and  he  sent  her  away,  vowing  that  she  should  not  return 
till  he  had  sacrificed  to  Hauri.  Also  his  son  had  died,  and  he 
made  a  vow  that  he  would  kill  a  man  for  him.  Some  thought 
that  he  would  kill  a  man  to  bury  with  the  boy,  but  he  did  not. 
He  dug  up  his  buried  son  that  he  might  see  him  once  more  ; 
and  again,  according  to  the  common  practice,  he  took  up  his 
skull  and  set  it  in  his  sacred  place.  It  was  widely  known 
that  Dikea  had  made  his  vow,  and  that  he  would  pay  well  for 
some  one  to  kill.  The  Savo  people  had  bought  a  captive  boy 
in  Guadalcanal-,  lame  and  nearly  blind,  and  him  they  brought 
and  sold  to  Dikea  for  twenty  coils  of  money.  The  boy,  igno- 
rant of  the  language,  did  not  know  his  fate.  Dikea,  laying  his 
hand  on  the  victim's  breast,  cried  '  Hauri !  here  is  a  man  for 
you,'  and  his  followers  killed  him  with  clubs  and  axes.  His 
head  was  taken  to  set  up  with  Dikea's'  collection  of  skulls,  his 
legs  were  sent  away  to  make  known  what  had  been  done,  but 
none  of  him  was  eaten  :  '  So  Dikea  sacrificed  to  Hauri  with 
that  boy.'  In  Bugotu  of  Ysabel  the  sacrifices,  havugagi,  are 
the  same  with  those  of  Florida ;  only  the  dwellers  along  the 
coast  sacrificed  human  victims,  and  this  practice  they  said,  as 
in  Florida,  had  come  to  them  from  further  west.  When  the 
head  of  an  enemy  killed  in  a  fight  was  brought  in  triumph, 
bits  were  cut  off  and  burnt  in  sacrifice.  A  captive  would  be 
taken  to  the  sacred  place,  the  burial-place  of  the  tindatho  to 
whom  the  sacrifice  was  to  be  made,  and  there  bound  hand  and 
foot.  Then  the  men  of  the  place,  following  the  chief  who  led  the 


136  Sacrifices.  rCIfj 

sacrifice,  each  beat  him  on  the  breast  with  their  hands,  calling 
on  the  tmdatho,  and  giving-  him  the  victim.   This  was  enough 
sometimes  to  cause  death,  otherwise  they  cut  his  throat.'  Then 
the  sacnficer  burnt  a  bit  in  the  fire  for  the.  Undatho.    Did  the 
men  assembled  eat  of  the  sacrifice  ?    Bera,  the  principal  chief, 
•at  any  rate  used  to  do  so  till  Wadrokal  went  there  as  a  teacher  • 
he  would  cook  an  arm  in  the  oven  and  eat  it,  havino-  first 
sacrificed  with  a  portion.    Only  six  yearsago  Soga  at  Mang- 
gotu  sacrificed  a.  man.    He  accused  some  Bogota  visitors  of 
charming  one  of  his  own  friends  to  death  ;  eight  of  them  he 
killed,  bot  one  he  boond  and  took  to  the  place  where  his 
friend  was  buried;  there  he  offered  him  to  the  ghost,  now  a 
Undatho,  of  the  man  supposed  to  have  been  bewitched;  but 
he  did  not  eat  of  the  sacrifice.    In  these,  however,  and  in  the 
lesser  sacrifices,  there  is  not  commonly  present  the  notion 
of  propitiation,  nor  perhaps  of  substitution.    When,  as  in 
the  case  of  Dikea,  misfortune  is  supposed  to  have  followed  on 
some  offence,  the   offended  tindalo   is  propitiated  by  the 
sacrifice,  and  this  is  done  in  case  of  sickness.    But  generally 
the  object  is^  rather  to  gain  the  favour  and  to  retain  the  good 
will  of  the  disembodied  spirit. 

In  Saa,  near  Cape  Zelee  in  Malanta,  there  is  found  in  some 
sacrifices  a  distinct  substitution  of  the  victim  for  the  person  on 
whose  behalf  the  offering  is  made.  The  ghost  of  some  departed 
warrior  or  otherwise  powerful  man  becomes  a  lid  a  ;  that  of  a 
warrior,  if  on  experiment  he  is  found  to  act,  is  like  the  keramo 
of  Florida,  a  ghost  of  battle  or  of  killing,  lio'a  ni  ma'e.  The 
names  of  many,  as  of  recent  chiefs,  are  generally  known,  but 
some  are  known  only  to  those  who  have  learnt  the  means  of 
access  to  them.  There  is  no  one  word  used  for  sacrificing ; 
there  are  seven  rites  which  an  edocated  native  of  the  place 
classes  with  the  sacrifices  of  other  islands.  (1)  The  simplest 
is  called  Tau  taha,  as  when  one  returning  from  a  voyage  puts 
food  to  the  case  containing  the  relics  of  his  father,  as  did 
Ara'ana.  In  the  course  of  a  voyage  also,  when  landing  on  an 
uninhabited  islet,  they  will  throw  food  and  call  on  father, 
grandfather,  and  other  deceased  friends,  and  in  any  danger 


yHIt-i  Seven  Sacrifices  at  Saa.  137 

will  do  the  same.  Three  other  sacrifices  have  much  in 
common,  and  it  depends  on  .the  person  called  in  and  consulted 
to  determine  which  shall  be  used.  (2)  One  is  called  'tmu  qo, 
this  iSj  burning  a  pig".  This  is  offered  in  case  of  sickness,  or 
when  the  failure  of  a  garden  crop  shews  that  some  lida  has 
been  offended.  A  man  known  to  be  able  to  sacrifice  is  called 
in,  and  is  ready  to  say  that  he  knows  what  lida  has  caused 
the  mischief.  To  him  is  sent  a  small  pig,  which  is  to  take 
the  place  of  the  person  whom  the  ghost  lid  a  is  plaguing  ;  and 
he  takes  it  to  the  sacred  place  of  that  lid  a  somewhere  under 
a  tree,  strangles  it,  and  burns  it  whole  in  a  fire  kindled  on 
the  sacred  stones  or  on  the  ground.  He  burns  with  it  also 
grated  yam  and  cocoa-nut  mixed  with  fish  ;  and  then  he 
stands  and  calls  with  a  loud  voice  on  the  lida  of  the  place, 
and  with  him  he  calls  the  names  of  all  the  ghosts  of  his  family, 
his  ancestors,  and  all  who  are  deceased,  down  even  to  children 
and  to  women,  and  he  names  the  giver  of  the  pig  for  the  food 
of  these  lida.  A  bit  of  the  mixed  food  he  leaves  unburnt, 
wraps  it  in  a  dracsena  leaf,  and  puts  it  by  the  relic  case  of  the 
man  to  whose  ghost  he  has  been  sacrificing.  He  is  rewarded 
for  his  services  by  a  present  of  food.  (3)  Another  is  called 
toto  'akalo,  clearing  the  soul.  It  is  performed  in  the  house  of 
the  sacrificer,  who  cooks  a  little  pig  or  a  dog,  and  cites  the 
names  of  the  lida  who  are  causing  the  trouble,  calling  upon 
them  to  toto,  clear  away  the  mischief,  whether  sickness,  charm, 
or  curse,  and  to  make  the  afflicted  party  clean.  Then  he  takes 
the  pig  out  and  throws  it  into  the  sea,  or  sets  it  on  a  stone  in  the 
sacred  place  of  the  lida  he  has  addressed  ;  '  he  will  not  put  it 
in  a  common  place ;  it  is  holy,  it  has  taken  away  the  mischief, 
it  has  made  clean.'  (4)  The  third  of  these  is  called  toto  ejia 
hanua,  clearing  well  the  place,  and  is  performed  in  the  house 
of  the  sick  person  for  whose  benefit  it  is  offered.  They  cook  a 
pig  or  dog  in  the  oven,  cut  it  up,  and  lay  all  the  parts  in 
order.  Then  the  sacrificer  comes  and  sits  at  the  head,  and 
calls  all  the  names  of  the  dead  members  of  the  family  of  the 
lida  in  order  downwards,  saying,  '  Help,  deliver  this  man,  cut 
short  the  line  that  has  bound  him.'    Then  the  pig  is  eaten  by 


*38  Sacrifices.  rCH> 

all  present,  except  the  women;  nothing  is  burnt.  The 
remaining-  sacrifices  are  those  of  first-fruits.  (5)  When  the 
yams  are  ripe  they  fetch  some  from  each  garden  to  offer  to 
the  lio'a.  All  the  family  who  consider  a  certain  line  of 
ancestors  to  be  the  lio'a  with  whom  they  are  concerned  in  this 
matter  assemble,  without  the  women,  at  the  sacred  place 
belonging  to  them.  One  goes  into  the  sacred  place  with 
a  yam,  and  cries  with  a  loud  voice  to  the  lio'a,  'This  is 
yours  to  eat,'  and  puts  the  yam  by  the  skull  which  is  in  the 
place.  The  others  call  quietly  upon  the  names  of  all  the 
ancestors  and  give  their  yams,  very  many  in  number,  because 
one  from  each  garden  is  given  to  each  lio'a.  They  add  also 
awalosi,  the  edible  flower  of  a  reed.  This  offering  of  first-fruits 
is  made  in  the  early  morning.  If  any  one  has  in  his  house  a 
relic,  head,  bones,  or  hair,  he  takes  back  a  yam  to  set  beside  it. 

(6)  First-fruits  of  flying  fish.  These  fish,  like  the  bonito, 
require  a  certain  supernatural  power  to  catch  them ;  it  is  not 
every  canoe  that  goes  after  flying  fish.  When  the  season 
comes  the  men  get  their  floats  ready,  and  the  women  go  into 
the  gardens  to  dig  new  yams  and  make  grated  food.  The  men 
then  get  a  few  flying  fish,  and  sacrifice  with  them.  Some 
lio'a  are  sharks,  and  to  them  the  first-fruits  are  offered.  Some 
have  sacred  places  ashore  with  figures  of  sharks  set  up,  before 
which  cooked  flying  fish  are  laid  ;  some  ghost-sharks  have  no 
place  on  shore,  and  to  them  the  fish  are  taken  out  to  sea,  their 
names  are  called,  and  the  fish  shred  to  them  for  their  food. 

(7)  The  new  canarium  almonds  cannot  be  eaten  till  the  first- 
fruits  have  been  offered  to  the  lio'a,  and  a  similar  offerine-  is 
made  of  the  dried  almonds  before  they  are  eaten,  with  added 
flying-fish. 

A  sacrifice  in  San  Cristoval  has  been  already  described.  In 
case  of  sickness,  where  a  certain  malignant  ghost  named  Tapia 
is  believed  to  have  seized  on  a  man's  soul  and  bound  it  to  a 
banyan- tree,  a  sacrifice  of  substitution  is  offered.  The  man 
who  has  access  to  Tapia  is  employed  to  intercede  ;  he  takes  a 
pig  or  fish  to  the  sacred  place  and  offers  it,  saying,  '  This  is  for 
you  to  eat  in  place  of  that  man ;  eat  this,  don't  kill  him ' ;  and 


vni.]  Santa  Crttz  Sacrifices.  139 

he  is  then  able  to  loose  and  take  back  the  sick  man's  soul  so 
that  he  may  recover. 

At  Santa  Cruz,  when  a  man  of  consideration  dies,  his  ghost 
becomes  a  dnka.  A  stock  of  wood  is  set  up  in  his  house 
to  represent  him.  This  remains,  and  is  from  time  to  time 
renewed,  until  after  a  time  the  man  is  forgotten,  or  the  stock 
is  neglected  by  the  transference  of  attention  to  some  newer 
and  more  successful  dnka.  When  the  stock  is  first  put  up,  a 
pig  is  killed,  and  the  two  strips  of  flesh  from  along  the  back- 
bone inside  are  put  before  the  stock  as  food  for  the  duka 
represented.  These  do  not  stay  long,  but  are  taken  away  and 
eaten.  When  the  stocks  are  renewed  the  same  is  done  again; 
and  from  time  to  time  offerings  of  food  are  made  to  the  duka 
before  the  stock,  laid  there  for  a  time,  and  then  taken  up  and 
eaten.  In  case  of  danger  at  sea,  a  duka  is  called  by  name,  a  man's 
father  or  a  deceased  chief,  or  a  certain  Lata  who  is  not  remem- 
bered as  a  man,  and  a  bit  of  food  is  thrown  out ;  '  This  is  for 
you  to  eat.'  Betel-nuts  are  placed  on  sacred  stones  for  the 
duka.  When  a  garden  is  planted  they  spread  feather-money 
and  red  native  cloth  round  it  for  the  duka,  and  take  it  away 
again.  A  patient  who  has  recovered  from  sickness  under  the 
treatment  of  a  native  doctor  gives  a  pig  for  the  duka  concerned 
in  the  cure  ;  and  when  a  pig  is  killed  a  bit  of  meat  is  placed 
before  the  stock  that  represents  him.  Offerings  of  first-fruits 
of  yams  are  made  in  the  same  way,  in  the  form  of  mash  or 
pudding.  The  economical  offerings  of  Santa  Cruz  may  be 
explained  by  the  belief  that  the  dnka,  themselves  immaterial, 
have  taken  the  immaterial  substance  of  their  gifts  ;  the  gross 
material  therefore  may  be  taken  by  fleshly  men. 

(3)  The  character  of  what  may  be  called  sacrifices  in  the 
Banks'  Islands  and  Northern  New  Hebrides  differs  very  much 
from  that  of  the  sacrifices  of  the  Solomon  Islands  in  two 
respects ;  the  offerings  are  as  a  rule  made  to  spirits  and  not  to 
ghosts,  and  there  is  no  use  of  fire  to  consume  what  is  offered. 
It  is  true  that  fragments  of  food  are  thrown  for  the  ghosts  of 
the  lately  deceased  ;  by  an  action  no  doubt  closely  connected 
with  the  sacrifices  of  the  western  islands,  but  not  with  the 


1 4°  Sacrifices.  rCH# 

notion  of  a  sacrifice  as  these  more  eastern  people  understand  it. 
In  the  use  of  the  word  in  the  Banks'  Islands  which  has  heen 
taken  as  equivalent  to  < sacrifice,'  viz.  oloolo,  it  is  important  to 
observe  that  the  word  is  not  employed  in  reference  to  the 
spirit  to  whom  the  offering  is  made,  but  to  the  man  himself 
who  presents  the  offering-  to  the  spirit  \  which  is  the  same 
thing  as  to  say  that  the  word  oloolo  does  not  exactly  mean  to 
sacrifice.  Still  there  is  a  sacrificial  offering,  and  it  is  a  means 
of  propitiating  a  spirit  after  an  offence,  as  well  as  a  means  of 
obtaining  what  is  desired.  Food  also  is  by  no  means  commonly 
the  thing  offered ;  in  the  Banks'  Islands  perhaps  nothing  but 
native  money  is  the  offering. 

The  spirits  who  are  approached  with  these  offerings  are 
almost  always  connected  with  stones  on  which  the  offerings 
are  made.  Such  stones  have  some  of  them  been  sacred  to 
some  spirit  from  ancient  times,  and  the  knowledge  of  the 
way  to  approach  the  spirit  who  is  connected  with  them  has 
been  handed  down  to  the  man  who  now  possesses  it.  But 
any  man  may  find  a  stone  for  himself,  the  shape  of  which 
strikes  his  fancy,  or  some  other  object,  an  octopus  in  his  hole, 
a  shark,  a  snake,  an  eel,  which  seems  to  him  something  unusual, 
and  therefore  connected  with  a  spirit.  He  gets  money  and 
scatters  it  about  the  stone,  or  on  the  place  where  he  has  seen 
the  object  of  his  fancy;  then  he  goes  home  to  sleep.  He 
dreams  that  some  one  takes  him  to  a  place  and  shews  him  the 
pigs  or  money  he  is  to  have  because  of  his  connexion  with  the 
thing  that  he  has  found.  This  thing  in  the  Banks'  Islands 
becomes  his  tano-oloolo,  the  place  of  his  offering,  the  object  in 
regard  to  which  offering  is  made  to  obtain  pigs  or  money. 
His  neighbours  begin  to  know  that  he  has  it,  and  that  his 
increasing  wealth  has  its  origin  there ;  they  come  to  him 
therefore  and  obtain  through  him  the  good  offices  of  the  spirit 
he  has  come  to  know.  He  hands  down  the  knowledge  of  this 
to  his  son  or  nephew.    If  a  man  is  sick  he  gives  another  who 

1  A  man  is  said  to  oloolo  with  the  money  to  the  man  who  knows  the  stone  ;  the 
latter  is  said  to  oloolo  on  the  stone  on  behalf  of  the  former,  the  former  to  oloolo 
to  the  latter  in  regard  to  the  stone ;  neither  is  said  to  oloolo  to  the  vui  spirit. 


vin.]  Banks  Islands  Sacrifices.  141 

is  known  to  have  a  stone  of  power —the  spirit  connected  with 
which  it  is  suggested  that  he  has  offended,— a  short  string 
of  money,  and  a  bit  of  the  pepper  root,  gea,  that  is  used  for 
kava ;  the  sick  man  is  said  to  oloolo  to  the  possessor  of  the 
stone.  The  latter  takes  the  things  offered  to  his  sacred  place 
and  throws  them  down,  saying,  'Let  So-and-So  recover.' 
When  the  sick  man  recovers  he  pays  a  fee.  If  a  man  desires 
to  get  the  benefit  of  the  stone,  or  whatever  it  is,  known  to 
another,  with  a  view  to  increase  of  money,  pigs  or  food,  or 
success  in  fighting,  the  possessor  of  the  stone  will  take  him  to 
his  sacred  place,  where  probably  there  are  many  stones,  each 
good  for  its  own  purpose.  The  applicant  will  supply  money, 
perhaps  a  hundred  strings  a  few  inches  long.  The  introducer 
will  shew  him  one  stone  and  say,  '  This  is  a  big  yam,'  and  the 
worshipper  puts  money  down.  Of  another  he  says  it  is  a  boar, 
of  another  that  it  is  a  pig  with  tusks,  and  money  is  put  down. 
The  notion  is  that  the  spirit,  mi,  attached  to  the  stone  likes 
the  money,  which  is  allowed  to  remain  upon  or  by  the  stone. 
In  case  the  oloolo,  the  sacrifice,  succeeds,  the  man  benefited 
pays  the  man  to  whom  the  stones  and  spirits  belong.  If 
a  man  goes  to  sacrifice  for  success  in  fighting,  he  takes  great 
care  lest  nothing  sharp  should  prick  or  scratch  him,  or  a  stone 
bruise  him ;  in  the  one  case  he  would  be  shot,  in  the  other  he 
would  be  clubbed. 

Some  of  these  objects  of  sacrificial  worship  are  well  known, 
but  can  only  be  approached  by  the  person  to  whom  the 
right  of  access  to  them  has  been  handed  down  ;  there  must 
be  between  the  worshipper  who  desires  advantage  and  the 
spirit  who  bestows  it  not  only  the  medium  of  the  stone, 
or  whatever  other  material  object  the  spirit  is  connected 
with,  but  also  the  man  who  through  the  stone  has  got  a 
personal  acquaintance  with  the  spirit.  In  Vanua  Lava,  at 
Sarewoana  near  Alo  Sepere,  the  legendary  home  of  Qat,  there 
is  still  the  stump  of  a  tree  which  Qat  cut  down  for  his  canoe,  an 
aged  stump  with  young  shoots  springing  from  it ;  men  who  are 
cutting  a  canoe  make  sacrifices  at  this  stump,  throwing  down 
money  there  that  their  canoe  may  be  swift  and  strong  and  never 


*42  Sacrifices.  rCH> 

wrecked.    It  does  not  appear  that  any  one  comes  between  the 
offerer  and  Qat  in  this,  perhaps  because  Qat  is  known  to  every 
one.    There  is  no  doubt  often  a  sacrifice,  oloolo,  made  in  the 
way  of  propitiation  ;  but  a  vui  is  not  a  malignant  spirit  that 
will  do  harm  unless  propitiated.    If  a  man  has  heedlessly  gone 
into  a  sacred  place  and  is  afraid  that  he  has  offended  the  spirit 
belonging  to  it,  he  will  make  his  offering  to  the  man  whose 
sacred  place  it  is,  that  he  may  appease  the  spirit ;  and  in  the 
case  of  sickness  there  is  always  the  presumption  that  some 
spirit  has  been  offended.    A  man  whose  familiar  spirit  is 
associated  with  a  snake,  an  eel,  owl,  crab  or  some  such 
creature,  visits  it  and  makes  his  offerings  to  keep  in  favour 
with  it,  or  to  obtain  its  favour  for  some  one  from  whom  he 
receives  money  for  an  offering.    They  say  that  a  man  who  has 
a  mae,  an  amphibious  snake  to  which  a  certain  awful  character 
belongs,  as  his  familiar,  goes  to  the  sacred  place  it  haunts  and 
calls  it  till  it  comes.    He  sits  down  and  the  snake  crawls  over 
him,  putting  its  tongue  into  his  mouth,  which  he  sucks. 
He  scatters  money  for  the  spirit,  for  he  does  not  offer  to  the 
snake  but  to  the  spirit,  vui,  that  is  with  the  snake  and  mani- 
fested in  it.    He  does  not  invoke  or  pray  to  the  spirit,  but  he 
may  pray  to  the  ghosts  of  his  predecessors  in  this  particular 
mystery.    "When  a  man  visits  his  familiar  in  this  way  no  one 
else  is  present,  and  the  doubt  has  occurred  to  the  native  people 
whether  there  be  a  snake  at  all.    It  is  certain  that  when 
a  man  has  died  who  has  been  in  the  habit  of  receiving  money 
to  offer  to  the  snake,  and  another  who  has  received  instructions 
from  him  as  his  successor  has  gone  to  reopen  so  profitable  a 
connexion,  the  creature  has  not  been  found ;  but  then  it  is 
also  concluded  that  the  man  and  the  snake  die  together. 
Money  in  this  same  way  of  sacrifice,  if  so  it  can  be  called, 
is  scattered  in  a  deep  hole  in  a  stream,  or  in  a  pool  among 
the  rocks  upon  the  beach  ;  wherever  some  impressive  touch  of 
natural  awe  comes  upon  the  native  mind  it  apprehends  the 
presence  of  some  haunting  vui,  and  is  moved  to  an  act  of 
worship ;  but  it  is  not  to  the  stone  or  stream  or  tree,  or  to  the 
spirit  of  it,  that  the  offering  is  made ;  the  vui  is  a  person  as  a 


VIII.] 


New  Hebrides  Sacrifices. 


H3 


man  is,  and  its  presence  makes  the  place  sacred.  The  number  of 
men  who  in  old  times  had  a  sacred  place  with  a  familiar  spirit 
of  their  own  was  large,  probably  most  of  the  grown-up  men 
had  one;  there  was  no  priestly  order,  no  sacred  buildings, 
nothing  to  make  a  public  show. 

In  the  Northern  New  Hebrides,  spirits  are  approached  very 
commonly  at  stones,  and  offerings  are  made  to  them  upon  the 
stones,  to  secure  their  favour  or  to  reconcile  them  if  offended. 
This  is  all  the  sacrifice  there  appears  to  be  at  Maewo, 
Aurora  Island  ;  they  use  no  word  that  can  be  translated 
'  sacrifice/  unless  it  be  turegi,  which  means  to  lay  an  offering 
upon  a  stone.  A  certain  offering,  however,  is  made  to  a  ghost; 
if  a  man's  pig  is  lost  he  will  go  to  the  grave  of  a  kinsman, 
put  on  the  stones  above  it,  qaru,  a  tuft  of  dracsena  or  croton 
leaves,  and  say,  £  Get  me  back  my  pig.'  The  ghost  will  drive 
the  pig  back  into  the  village.  To  offer  thus  is  malai  o  qaru. 
At  Whitsuntide,  Araga,  there  are  stones  connected  with  spirits 
in  sacred  places  which  are  known  only  to  those  who'  have 
discovered  them,  or  have  been  introduced  into  acquaintance 
with  the  spirits  by  their  predecessors.  At  these  stones  sacrifices 
are  made.  A  young  man  wishes  to  get  on  in  the  Loli  Society, 
to  become  rich,  to  live  to  be  old,  the  main  object  being  to  be 
a  great  man  in  the  Loli.  Such  a  person  makes  his  offering  of 
a  pig  or  mats  to  the  man  who  is  acquainted  with  the  spirit, 
ma  dugu  hoe  lalainia;  for  they  say,  as  in  the  Banks'  Islands, 
that  the  offering  is  not  made  to  the  spirit,  but  to  the  man  who 
knows  him.  This  go-between  keeps  the  pig  for  himself.  He 
goes  to  the  sacred  place  taking  the  suppliant  with  him  ;  then 
he  mutters  to  Tagaro  the  spirit,  '  This  man  has  given  us  two 
a  pig,  let  him  be  great,  let  him  be  a  full-grown  man.'  After 
this  the  supplicant  can  go  and  make  his  requests  in  the  sacred 
place  by  himself.  Sometimes  a  very  young  cocoa-nut  is  broken 
and  the  juice  poured  over  his  head  as  a  sign  that  he  is  ad- 
mitted. They  also  put  such  a  young  cocoa-nut  on  the  stone  as 
an  offering.  Such  sacrifices  are  made  for  sunshine,  rain,  and 
abundant  crops.  Offerings  also  are  made  to  the  ghosts  of 
powerful  men  recently  deceased,  either  at  their  graves  or 


144 


Sacrifices. 


where  they  are  supposed  to  haunt.  Men  who  know  these 
and  have  access  to  them,  take  mats,  food,  pigs,  living  or 
cooked,  into  the  sacred  place  and  leave  them  there.  At 
Lepers'  Island  they  clrwju  to  the  men  who  have  access  to 
spirits,  wui,  in  connexion  with  stones,  giving  money  and  pigs 
to  them  for  their  intercession  ;  but  offerings  are  not  com- 
monly made  directly  to  wui,  or  to  ghosts  either.  Offerings 
are  made  at  sea  near  certain  dangerous  rocks  ;  a  tuft  of  pig's 
hair  or  a  fowl's  feather  from  the  cargo,  or  a  bit  of  food,  is 
thrown  into  the  sea  for  Tagaro,  that  he  may  give  a  safe  pas- 
sage to  the  canoe.  Bishop  Patteson  noted  in  the  course  of  his 
last  voyage,  that  at  Ambrym  it  was  the  practice  for  great 
men  to  burn  a  pig  entirely,  without  any  accompanying  prayer, 
in  their  Suqe,  with  the  view  of  obtaining  mana.  This  must  be 
looked  upon  as  a  sacrificial  act. 

Note. — The  sacrifices  of  the  Solomon  Islands  may  well  be  traced  to  the 
desire  of  making  the  deceased  still  sharers  of  the  common  meal ;  what  is  offered 
and  burnt  is  common  food.  The  further  step  of  begging  the  offended  ghost  to 
take  all  and  spare  the  sick  is  taken  at  Saa  and  San  Cristoval.  It  should  be 
remarked  that  there  is  nothing  whatever  to  connect  these  sacrifices  with  the 
huto  (page  32),  which,  if  anything,  may  be  taken  for  a  totem.  To  connect  the 
offering  of  money,  in  the  Banks'  Islands,  to  a  spirit  who  is  never  the  ghost  of 
a  man,  nor  at  all  the  animating  spirit  of  a  natural  object,  with  the  sharing  of 
the  common  meal  with  the  deceased,  is  much  more  difficult.  If  there  be  a 
Melanesian  sacrifice  to  a  god  it  is  to  a  vui.  To  offer  money  is  apparently  to 
give  what  man  most  values,  and  what  the  spirit  also  loves. 


CHAPTEE  IX. 

PEAYERS. 

A  Melanesia^  native  in  danger,  difficulty  and  distress,  will 
naturally  call  upon  the  beings  in  whose  power  to  help  him  he 
believes.    He  will  upon  occasion  do  this  with  exclamations 
which  express  his  feelings.     This  from  his  point  of  view 
would  not  be  prayer,  because  it  has  no  formal  character. 
There   are  also  songs,    incantations,    charms,  which  have 
power  in  them  by  virtue  of  the  names  or  words  contained  in 
them.    These  are  not  addressed  directly  to  the  beings  whose 
power  they  bring  to  bear,  and  would  not  be  called  prayers. 
There  are  besides  invocations  which  may  be  called  prayers, 
that  is  formal  addresses  to  beg  for  succour  or  for  aid.    But  it 
is  certainly  very  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  find  in  any 
Melanesian  language  a  word  which  directly  translates  the 
word  prayer,  so  closely  does  the  notion  of  efficacy  cling  to 
the  form  employed.    Addresses  which  may  be  called  prayers 
m  the  Solomon  Islands  are  of  course  made  to  the  beings  to 
whom  they  look  there  for  other  than  human  aid,  to  the  tindalo, 
ghosts  now  powerful  of  men  deceased.    The  invocations  used 
at  sacrifices  are  prayers  ;  and  those  may  properly  be  so  called 
which  are  used  at  sea.    Thus  at  Florida  to  Daula,  a  tindalo 
generally  known  and  connected  with  the  frigate-bird  -  'Do 
thou  draw  the  canoe,  that  it  may  reach  the  land  ;  speed  my 
canoe  grandfather,  that  I  may  quickly  reach  the  shore  whither 
I  am  bound.    Do  thou,  Daula,  lighten  the  canoe,  that  it  may 
quickly  gam  the  land,  and  rise  upon  the  shore.'    They  invoke 
also  Bagea  as  their  grandfather ;  the  word  bagea  meaning 


J46  Prayers.  [CH> 

shark,  and  any  tindalo  that  has  takexj  up  its  ahode  in  a  shark, 
or  is  represented  by  one,  being  called  Bagea.  They  call  also 
upon  their  immediate  forefathers  when  in  danger  on  the 
sea  ;  one  on  his  grandfather,  another  on  his  father,  another 
on  some  dead  friend;  calling  them  with  reverence,  and 
saying,  '  Save  us  on  the  deep,  save  us  from  the  tempest, 
bring  us  to  the  shore.'  Daula  is  invoked  to  aid  in  fishing : 
'If  thou  art  powerful,  mana,  O  Daula,  put  a  fish  or  two 
into  this  net  and  let  them  die  there.'  After  a  good  catch 
he  is  praised :  '  Powerful,  mana,  is  the  tindalo  of  the  net.' 
They  rub  fishing-lines  with  the  leaves  appropriated  to  such  a 
tindalo.  In  San  Cristoval  the  'ataro  ghosts  are  applied  to  for 
help  in  battle,  in  sickness,  and  for  good  crops ;  but  lihungai, 
the  word  they  use,  conveys  rather  the  notion  of  charm  than  of 
prayer ;  the  formula  is  handed  down  from  father  to  son,  or  is 
taught  for  a  consideration.  So  at  Saa  a  man  who  has  no 
special  connexion  with  a  l/o'a  ghost  will,  in  danger  at  sea, 
call  on  his  father  or  grandfather  ;  but  one  who  knows  some 
particular  lid  a  uses  some  particular  form  of  words  he  has  leamt 
in  which  power  over  the  elements  resides,  and  when  he  has 
done  that,  calls  on  the  man  now  dead  who  introduced  him  to 
the  lio'a  and  taught  him  the  incantation,  and  after  that  again 
upon  his  father  and  his  grandfather. 

The  tataro  of  the  Banks'  Islands,  which  may  be  called  a 
prayer,  is  stiictly  an  invocation  of  the  dead,  and  is  no  doubt 
so  called  because  the  form  begins  with  the  word  tataro,  which 
certainly  is  the  'ataro  of  San  Cristoval,  that  is  a  ghost  of 
power.  The  Banks'  islanders  are  clear  that  tataro  is  properly 
made  only  to  the  dead  ;  yet  the  spirits,  vui,  Qat  and  Marawa 
are  addressed  in  the  same  way.  A  man  in  danger  on  the  sea 
will  call  on  deceased  friends,  particularly  on  one  who  has  been 
in  life  a  good  sailor ;  but  if  he  only  cries  out  as  he  might  in 
common  life  that  is  no  tataro,  which  must  be  a  form  of  words. 
The  use  of  tataro  in  Motlav  is  thus  described.  A  man  is  sick, 
and  the  cause  of  his  sickness  is  suggested  to  be  an  offence 
against  some  sacred  place  near  which  he  remembers  himself 
to  have  intruded.    Then  the  man  to  whom  the  sacred  place 


ix,]  Banks  Island  Prayers.  147 

belongs  will,  for  payment,  go  and  tataro  for  him  there 
morning  and  evening.  He  calls  aloud  the  name  of  the  sick  man, 
and  listens  for  an  answering  sound,  the  cry  of  a  kingfisher  or 
of  some  other  bird  ;  if  he  hears  a  sound  he  calls  '  Come  back  ' 
to  the  life  or  soul  of  tbe  sick  man,  runs  back  to  the  house 
where  he  lies,  and  cries  '  He  will  live,'  meaning  that  he  brings 
back  the  life.  If  it  happens  that  on  his  way  to  the  sacred 
place  a  lizard  runs  up  upon  him,  it  is  enough,  he  has  the  life 
and  goes  back  with  it.  If  a  man  who  has  a  stone  is  going  to 
it  to  offer,  oloolo,  upon  it,  and  he  sees  a  rat,  crab,  iguana,  or 
lizard  on  the  way,  he  scatters  a  little  loose  money  for  it,  and 
says  a  tataro  that  he  knows.  When  the  oven  is  opened  for  a 
meal,  one  of  the  men  will  break  off  a  bit  of  food  and  throw  it 
against  the  side  wall  of  the  house  with  a  tataro.  In  the  same 
way  when  water  is  poured  into  the  oven  to  make  the  steam, 
there  is  a  tataro  used  against  an  enemy,  or  to  g'et  rain  or 
sunshine.  Some  Mota  forms  are  as  follows.  On  opening  an 
oven,  when  a  leaf  of  cooked  mallow  is  thrown  for  some  dead 
person  :  '  Tataro — this  is  a  lucky  bit  for  your  eating  ;  they 
who  have  charmed  your  food,  have  clubbed  you  (as  the  case  may 
be),  take  hold  of  their  hands,  drag  them  away  to  hell,  let  them 
be  dead.'  If  after  this  the  man  at  whom  it  was  directed  is 
heard  to  have  met  with  an  accident,  '  Oh  ho  ! '  says  the  other, 
'  my  curse  in  eating  has  worked  upon  him,  he  is  dead.'  "When 
water  is  poured  into  the  oven  :  '  Tataro— pour  it  on  the  head 
of  him  down  there  who  has  laid  plots  against  me,  has  clubbed 
me,  has  shot  me,  has  stolen  this  thing  of  mine  (as  the  case 
may  be),  he  shall  die  V  On  making  a  libation  of  kava  before 
drinking:  ' Tataro— Grandfather !  this  is  your  lucky  drop  of 
kava  ;  let  boars  come  in  to  me  ;  let  rawe  come  in  to  me ;  the 
money  I  have  spent  let  it  come  back  to  me,  the  food  that  is 
gone  let  it  come  back  hither  to  the  house  of  you  and  me.' 

1  'Prayer  in  Fiji  generally  concluded  with  malignant  requests  as  to  the 
enemy.  "  Let  us  live,  and  let  those  that  speak  evil  of  us  perish.  Let  the 
enemy  be  clubbed,  swept  away,  uttery  destroyed,  piled  in  heaps.  Let  their 
teeth  be  broken.  May  they  fall  headlong  into  a  pit.  Let  us  live,  and  let  our 
enemies  perish." ' — Eev.  L.  Pison. 

L  % 


J4-8  Prayers.  rCH> 

On  starting  on  a  voyage  :  <  Tataro— Vjicle !  Father !  plenty 
of  boars  for  you,  plenty  of  rawe,  plenty  of  money ;  kava  for 
your  drinking,  lucky  food  for  your  eating  in  the  canoe  ;  I 
pray  you  with  this,  look  down  upon  me,  let  me  go  on  a  safe 
sea.'  Or  when  the  canoe  labours  with  a  heavy  freight  ■ 
'Take  off  your  burden  from  us,  that  we  may  speed  on  a  safe 
sea.'  Another  was  used  over  the  oven  in  the  gamal  of  the 
Suqe  club,  the  hole  in  which  the  fire  is  made :  '  Grandfather ! 
may  it  be— Father !  my  Uncle !  my  Greatuncle !  we  two  will 
go  on  with  a  hundred  fathom  of  money  of  yours ;  look  down 
upon  us  two,  do  not  look  unfavourably  upon  us  two  ;  let 
money  abound  to  us  two,  boars,  rawe,  food  ;  let  our  suqe  go  on 
to  the  end  ;  let  not  our  outrigger  be  broken  ;  you  sit  and  look 
after  us  two  ;  let  us  two  go  on  well,  with  no  unfavourable 
looks  upon  us ;  let  us  two  come  straight  on  in  the  hole  of  us 
three,  in  the  hot  suqe  hole  of  us  three,  let  the  suqe  come 
forth  and  advance.'  There  is  no  difference  between  these  and 
the  invocations  of  the  spirits,  vuir  Qat  and  Marawa,  except 
that  these  latter  which  follow,  not  being  addressed  to  the 
dead,  are  not  properly  tataro.  These  three  were  used  at  sea  : 
1  Qate  !  you  and  Marawa,  cover  over  with  your  hand  the  blow- 
hole from  me,  that  I  may  come  into  a  quiet  landing-place ; 
let  it  calm  well  down  away  from  me.  Let  the  canoe  of  you 
and  me  go  up  in  a  quiet  landing-place.'  '  Qate !  Marawo  ! 
look  down  upon  me,  prepare  the  sea  of  you  and  me,  that  I 
may  go  on  a  safe  sea.  Beat  down  the  head  of  the  waves  from 
me,  let  the  tide  rip  sink  down  away  from  me,  beat  it  down 
level  that  it  may  go  down  and  roll  away,  and  I  may  come 
into  a  quiet  landing-place.'  '  Qate !  Marawo  !  may  it  be — 
let  the  canoe  of  you  and  me  turn  into  a  whale,  a  flying-fish, 
an  eagle  ;  let  it  leap  on  and  on  over  the  waves,  let  it  go,  let 
it  pass  out  to  my  land.'  In  answer  to  such  prayers  as  these 
it  was  supposed  that  Qat  and  Marawa  would  come  and  hold 
fast  the  mast  and  rigging  of  the  canoe,  preserve  it  from 
danger,  and  speed  it  on  its  course. 

In  the  Northern  New  Hebrides,  in  Aurora,  they  use  the 
same  word  tataro  for  a  form  of  words  used  for  example  in 


txn  New  Hebrides.  149 

a  storm  at  sea,  a  spell  that  works  by  the  supernatural  power 
residing  in  the  words  and  in  the  names  of  the  spirits 
mentioned.  When  in  distress  and  danger  they  call  to  a  dead 
father  or  friend,  '  Take  care  of  your  canoe  and  mine,'  it  is  a 
cry,  not  a  tataro.  The  word  is  also  used  in  Whitsuntide  and 
Lepers'  Island,  and  with  probably  the  same  limited  applica- 
tion in  strict  native  usage. 


CHAPTER  X. 


SPIRITS. 


Beings  of  a  more  or  less  distinctly  spiritual  nature,  who 
at  any  rate  never  were  men,  have  their  place  in  the  beliefs  and 
in  the  stones  of  the  Banks'  Islands  and  the  New  Hebrides 
very  much  more  than  in  the  Solomon  Islands.  Koevasi, 
already  mentioned,  in  Florida  and  Kahausibware  in  San  Cris- 
toval  belong  to  the  latter  group,  and  may  well  be  supposed 
to  be  the  same  personage  under  different  names.  Both  were 
never  human,  yet  in  some  way  originators  of  the  human 
race ;  both  were  female,  both  subjects  of  stories,  not  objects  of 
worship.  Kahausibware  was  a  Hi'ona,  a  being  of  super- 
human character,  dwelling  on  the  mountain  of  Bauro,  the 
central  mass  of  San  Cristoval,  in  the  time  of  the  infancy 
of  the  human  race.  She  was  a  snake  in  outward  form. 
There  was  in  the  same  place  a  woman,  a  human  being,  the 
offspring  in  some  way  of  Kahausibware.  In  those  days  all 
the  fruits  of  the  earth  grew  without  labour,  and  all  was  of  the 
best ;  it  was  Kahausibware  who  made  men,  pigs,  and  other 
animals,  cocoa-nuts,  fruit-trees,  and  all  the  food  with  which  the 
island  is  now  furnished,  and  death  had  not  yet  appeared.  The 
woman  one  day  went  to  her  work,  and  left  her  infant  in  the 
house  in  charge  of  the  spirit  snake,  who  was  so  much  annoyed 
by  the  screaming  of  the  child  that  she  coiled  herself  round  it 
and  strangled  it.  The  mother  came  in  while  the  folds  of  the 
serpent's  body  were  still  wound  round  her  child,  and  seizing 
an  axe  she  began  to  chop  the  snake  to  pieces.  As  she 
chopped  it  asunder  the  parts  came  together  again  ;  but  the 


Solomon  Islands.    Banks  Islands.  151 


snake  at  last  could  bear  it  no  longer,  and  cried  out  weeping, 
<I  go,  and  who  will  help  you  now?'  She  made  her  way 
down  to  the  sea  accordingly,  and  her  track  became  a  water- 
course. Leaving  the  island,  she  swam  across  first  to  Ugi,  but 
from  thence  she  could  see  the  Bauro  mountain ;  she  went  'on 
further  to  Ulawa,  and  thence  again  to  the  south-east  end  of 
Malanta,  but  even  there  in  clear  weather  she  could  see  her 
former  home.  She  crossed  therefore  to  Marau,  the  south-east 
part  of  Guadalcanal'  nearest  to  San  Cristoval,  where  the  view 
of  the  mountain  of  Bauro  is  shut  off  by  the  nearer  hills ;  there 
she  rests  till  the  present  day.  Since  her  departure  all  things 
in  San  Cristoval  have  deteriorated.  Snakes  upon  the  Bauro 
mountain  are  venerated  as  the  progeny  or  representatives  of 
Kahausibware  ;  but  they  are  simple  snakes,  and  she  was  a 
Hi'ona,  or  Figona. 

In  the  Banks'  Islands  and  in  the  Northern  New  Hebrides 
the  purely  spiritual  beings  who  are  incorporeal  are  innumer- 
able and  unnamed.  These  are  they  whose  representative  form 
is  generally  a  stone,  who  haunt  the  places  that  are  sacred 
because  of  their  presence,  and  who  connect  themselves  with 
certain  snakes,  owls,  sharks,  and  other  creatures.  There  is  in 
these  things  a  medium  of  communication  with  them,  and 
they  are  powerful  to  assist  those  who  can  approach  them,  and 
also  to  injure  men,  though  they  are  not  of  a  malignant  nature. 
They  are  certainly  believed  to  have  no  body;  yet  it  is 
impossible  for  the  natives  to  conceive  of  them  as  entirely 
without  form.  Men,  therefore,  have  declared  that  they  have 
seen  something,  indistinct,  with  no  definite  outline,  grey  like 
dust,  vanishing  as  soon  as  it  was  looked  at,  near  a  stone,  and 
this  must  have  been  a  spirit,  vui,  wtd.  But  the  same  word  is 
used  to  describe  beings  who  are  corporeal,  and  individually 
known  and  named.  The  natives  will  deny  that  these  have 
bodies  as  men  have,  and  assert  that  they  are  of  the  same 
nature  as  those  which  are  incorporeal ;  but  yet  in  the  stories 
that  are  told  about  them  they  figure  as  men,  though  possessed 
of  powers  which  men  can  never  have.  Consistency  can 
hardly  be  expected  ;  the  native  mind  indeed  aims  high  when 


152  Spirits.  [ch< 

it  conceives  a  being  which  lives  and  thinks  and  knows  and 
has  power  m  nature,  without  a  gross  body  or  even  form ;  but 
it  fails  when  it  comes  to  deal  with  an  individual  being  of  such 
a  nature.  Hence  the  stories  represent  a  vui  like  a  man  with 
larger  powers  •  a  native  seeing  some  new  and  wonderful 
foreign  work  will  cry  'A  vui  made  it!',  and  receiving  home 
a  boy  grown  up  m  absence  cries  <  Me  vnigai!  He's  a  vui  to 
be  sure ! 

It  is  remarkable  again  that  of  these  superhuman  beings 
who  are  called  vm  or  wui  in  the  Banks'  Islands  and  New 
Hebrides,  and  whose  actions  are  like  those  of  men,  there  seem 
to  be  two  kinds  or  orders.    Qat  in  the  Banks'  Islands  stories 
and  Tagaro  m  the  New  Hebrides  stories  move  like  heroes  or 
demigods  amidst  a  lesser  folk  of  dwarfs  and  trolls  as  full  of 
mysterious  magic  power  as  they  are,  but  comparatively  rude 
and  easily  deceived.    These  lingered  in  the  islands  when  Qat 
and  his  brothers  and  Tagaro  and  his  brothers  left  them  •  they 
have  been  seen  of  late  in  human  form,  smaller  than  the  native 
people,  darker,  and  with  long  straight  hair.    Marawa,  the 
friend  of  Qat,  was  one  of  these.    A  man  living  in  Vanua 
Lava  but  a  few  years  ago,  named  Manlepei,  going  to  the 
river  side  in  early  morning,  saw  a  little  man  with  lone 
hanging  hair,  and  followed  him  up  the  valley  in  which  the 
river  runs,  till  they  came  to  a  narrow  gorge  closed  by  a  rock. 
The  vui  rapped  upon  this  with  his  hand,  and  it  opened  to  him  ; 
and  as  Manlepei  followed  close  behind,  it  shut  again  upon 
them  both.    They  were  in  a  cave  which  was  the  vui's  house. 
He  said  that  he  was  Marawa,  and  that  he  would  appear  again 
to  the  man  if  he  would  go  back  to  the  village  and  bring  him 
money.    Manlepei  prospered  ever  after  through  Marawa's 
aid,  and  he  made  no  secret  of  the  source  of  his  prosperity;  he 
was  always  ready  to  receive  money  from  his  neighbours  on 
Marawa's  behalf,  and  to  procure  for  them  a  share  in  his  good 
will.    It  is  not  long  either  since  a  female  vui  with  a  child 
was  seen  in  Saddle  Island,  close  to  the  house  of  a  man  who 
had  often  found  a  fine  yam  laid  for  him  on  the  seat  beside 
his  door,  and  had  observed  that  his  money-bag  was  still  full 


x.]  Banks  Islands.    'Nopitu.'  153 

after  he  had  paid  a  debt.  There  was  a  woman  living-  a.  few 
years  ago  in  Mota  whose  father  was  a  vui.  Popular  stories 
shewed  how  these  beings  were  believed  to  be  at  hand  in  the 
affairs  of  men.  A  woman  working  in  her  garden  heard  a 
voice  from  the  fruit  of  a  gourd  asking  her  for  food  ;  when  she 
pulled  up  a  ealadium  or  dug  a  yam  another  immediately  came 
into  its  place ;  but  when  she  listened  to  another  vui  playing- 
on  his  panpipe,  the  first  in  his  jealousy  conveyed  away  the 
garden  and  all.  In  these  stories,  and  no  doubt  in  common 
belief,  there  was  a  certain  confusion  between  these  spirits  and 
ghosts  of  the  departed. 

Some  mi,  spiritual  beings,  yet  in  some  way  corporeal, 
figure  strangely  in  the  stories  of  Mota  as  Nopitu,  and  of 
Motlav,  in  another  form  of  the  same  word,  as  Dembit.  There 
is  often  a  difficulty  in  understanding  what  is  told  about  them, 
because  the  name  Nopitu  is  given  both  to  the  spirit  and  to 
the  person  possessed  by  the  spirit,  who  performs  wonders  by 
the  power  and  in  the  name  of  the  Nopitu  who  possesses  him. 
Such  a  one  would  call  himself  Nopitu;  rather,  speaking  of 
himself,  will  say  not  '  1/  but  '  we  two,'  meaning  the  Nopitu 
in  him  and  himself,  or  '  we '  when  he  is  possessed  by  many. 
He  would  dance  at  a  festival,  such  as  a  kolekole,  as  no  man  not 
possessed  by  a  Nopitu  could  dance.    He  would  scratch  him- 
self, his  arm  or  his  head,  and  new  money  not  yet  strung  would 
fall  from  his  fingers ;  Vetpepewu  told  me  that  he  had  seen 
money  fall  from  a  Nopitu  at  a  JcoMole—hags  full.  One  would 
shake  himself  on  a  mat  and  unstrung  money  would  pour 
down  into  it.  He  would  take  a  cocoa-nut  to  drink,  and  the  by- 
standers would  hear  money  pouring  out  instead  of  the  liquor, 
and  rattling  against  his  teeth,  and  he  would  spit  it  up  upon 
the  ground.    Tursal  has  seen  at  Mota  a  woman  vomit  native 
money— a  Nopitu  possessed  by  such  a  spirit.    To  obtain  the 
favour  of  the  Nopitu  men  would  offer,  oloolo,  as  at  a  sacrifice, 
to  the  man  possessed  ;  would  give  him  a  red  yam  and  almonds  ; 
he  would  eat  the  yam  raw,  and  be  heard  crunching-  money 
with  his  teeth.    If  a  young  cocoa-nut  was  offered  he  would 
open  the  eye  and  drink,  and  then  give  it  back  full  of  money. 


154  Spirits.  [CH 

But  a  Nopitu  would  also  manifest  itself  in  a  different  manner 
A  party  would  be  sitting-  round  an  evening  fire,  and  one  of 
them  would  hear  a  voice  as  if  proceeding  from  his  thigh, 
saying,  <  Here  am  I,  give  me  some  food,  I  am  hungry.'  He 
would  roast  a  little  red  yam,  and  when  it  was  done  fold  it  in 
the  corner  of  the  mat  on  which  he  was  sitting.    In  a  little 
while  it  would  be  gone,  and  then  the  Nopitu  would  begin  to 
talk  and  sing  in  a  voice  so  small  and  clear  and  sweet,  that 
once  heard  it  never  could  be  forgotten ;  but  it  sang  the  or- 
dinary Mota  songs,  while  the  men  drummed  an  accompaniment 
for  it.    Then  it  would  say,  <  I  am  going ; '  they  would  call 
it,  and  it  was  gone.    Then  a  woman  would  feel  it  come 
to  her,   and  sit  upon  her  knee;   she  would  hear  it  cry 
'Mother!  Mother!'    She  would  know  it,  and  carry  it  in 
a  mat  upon  her  back  like  an  infant.    Sometimes  a  woman 
would  hear  a  Nopitu  say  '  Mother,  I  am  coming  to  you,'  and 
she  would  feel  the  spirit  entering  into  her,  and  it  would  be 
born  afterwards  as  an  ordinary  child.    Such  a  one,  named 
Rongoloa,  was  not  long  ago  still  living  at  Motlav.  The 
Nopitu,  like  other  spirits,  were  the  familiars  only  of  those 
who  knew  them,  and  these  were  often  women.    If  a  man 
wished  to  know  and  become  known  to  a  Nopitu,  he  gave 
money  to  some  woman  who  knew  those  spirits,  and  then  one 
would  come  to  him. 

The  place  of  Qat  in  the  popular  beliefs  of  the  Banks'  Islands 
was  so  high  and  so  conspicuous  that  when  the  people  first 
became  known  to  Europeans  it  was  supposed  that  he  was  their 
god,  the  supreme  creator  of  men  and  pigs  and  food.  It  is 
certain  that  he  was  believed  to  have  made  things  in  another 
sense  from  that  in  which  men  could  be  said  to  make  them. 
To  the  present  day  a  mother  chides  a  sleepy,  fractious  child,  or 
one  crying  with  hunger,  with  the  words,  '  Do  you  think  you 
are  going  to  die  ?  Don't  you  know  that  Qat  made  you  so  ? ' 
If  a  pig  comes  indoors  to  sleep  in  bad  weather,  the  man  who 
drives  it  out  says  to  it,  '  Qat  made  you  to  stay  outside.' 
These  are  not  serious  sayings ;  but  it  was  believed  that  Qat 
had  made  some  creatures  and  fixed  the  natural  condition  of 


x#j  Banks  Islands.    Qat.  155 

things  in  the  world.  The  regular  courses  of  the  seasons  are 
ascribed  to  him,  the  calm  months  from  September  to  December, 
when  the  wi,  Palolo  sea- worm,  comes,  the  yearly  blow,  and  the 
high  tide  in  the  month  wotgoro ;  but  irregular  rains,  winds 
and  calms  are  put  to  the  account  of  the  men  who  could  influ- 
ence other  vui  spirits  so  as  to  produce  them.  The  name  of  Qat 
is  given  also  to  remarkable  objects  and  effects  in  nature  ;  when 
fish  die  in  the  sea  from  excessive  heat  of  the  sun,  Qat  is  said 
to  have  poisoned  them  ;  a  kind  of  fungus  is  his  basket,  a  fungia 
coral  is  his  dish,  the  sulphur  at  the  volcanic  vents  in  Vanua 
Lava  is  his  sauce,  a  beam  of  light  shining  through  the  roof  in 
the  dusty  air  is  his  spear;  and  the  flying  shadow  of  a  solitary 
cloud  over  the  sea  is  the  shadow  of  Qat.  "With  all  this  it  is 
impossible  to  take  Qat  very  seriously  or  to  allow  him  divine 
rank.  He  is  certainly  not  the  lord  of  spirits.  He  is  the  hero 
of  story-tellers,  the  ideal  character  of  a  good-natured  people 
who  profoundly  believe  in  magic  and  greatly  admire  adroitness 
and  success  in  the  use  of  it  ;  Qat  himself  is  good-natured, 
only  playfully  mischievous,  and  thoroughly  enjoys  the  exercise 
of  his  wonderful  powers1.  "When  he  is  said  to  create  he  is 
adding  only  to  the  furniture  of  the  world  in  which  he  was 
born,  where  there  were  already  houses  and  canoes,  weapons, 
ornaments,  products  of  cultivated  gardens  and  of  such  arts  of 
life  as  the  natives  possessed  when  they  were  first  visited 
by  Europeans.  It  is  difficult  for  the  story-tellers  to  keep  him 
distinct  from  ordinary  men,  though  they  always  insist  that 
he  was  a  mi ;  and  though  he  certainly  never  was  a  man,  the 
people  of  the  place  where  he  was  born  in  Vanua  Lava,  Alo 
Sepere,  claim  him  as  their  ancestor. 

It  would  be  in  vain  to  look  for  a  connected  history  of  Qat 
from  his  birth  to  his  disappearance ;  he  is  the  central  figure  of 
a  cycle  of  stories  which  vary  in  different  parts  of  the  islands 
of  the  Banks'  group.     All  agree  that  he  was  born  in  Vanua 

1  One  can  hardly  help  observing  the  absence  of  obscenity  and  ferocity  from 
these  stories.  Obscene  tales,  or  parts  of  tales,  no  doubt  are  told  where  they 
are  acceptable,  but  they  do  not  make  any  considerable  part  of  the  commonly 
repeated  legend. 


156  Spirits.  [CH_ 

Lava,,  and  that  finally  he  departed  from  the  world.  There 
are  no  doubt  many  of  his  feats  and  adventures  which  the 
natives  have  kept  to  themselves.  The  story  which  follows 
is  translated,  with  additions  from  other  sources,  from  the 
Mota  of  the  late  native  Deacon  Edward  Wogale,  himself 
of  the  Sepere  stock. 

The  Story  of  Qat.    Qat  was  not  without  a  beginning, 
but  he  had  a  mother  whose  name  was  Qatgoro  (otherwise 
Iro  Ul),  and  this  mother  was  a  stone  that  burst  asunder  and 
brought  him  forth.    He  had  no  father,  and  he  was  born  on 
the  road.    He  grew  up  and  talked  at  once.     He  asked  his 
mother  what  his  name  was,  saying  that  if  he  had  a  father  or 
an  uncle  on  his  mother's  side,  one  of  them  would  name  him  ; 
then  he  gave  himself  the  name  of  Qat.    He  had  brothers 
also.    The  first  was  Tangaro  Gilagilak,  Tangaro  the  Wise, 
who  understood  all  things,  and  could  instruct  the  rest; 
the  second  was  Tangaro  Loloqong,  Tangaro  the  Fool,  who 
was  ignorant  of  everything,  and  behaved  like  a  fool;  the 
others  were  Tangaro  Siria,  Tangaro  Nolas,  Tangaro  Nokalato, 
Tangaro  Noav,  Tangaro  Nopatau,  Tangaro  Noau,  Tangaro 
Nomatig,  Tangaro  Novunue1,  Tangaro  Novlog ;   eleven  of 
them,  all  Tangaro,  twelve  in  all  with  Qat.    The  names  of  the 
last  nine  are  made  up  of  the  names  of  the  leaves  of  trees  and 
plants,  Nettle-leaf,  Bread-fruit-leaf,  Bamboo-leaf,  Cocoa-nut- 
leaf,  Umbrella-palm-leaf,  added  to  Tangaro,  which  is  no 
doubt  the  same  with  the  Tagaro  of  the  New  Hebrides  and 
the  Tangaroa  of  the  Polynesians.    These  all  grew  up  as  soon 
as  they  were  born,  and  they  took  up  their  abode  in  the  village 
Alo  Sepere,  where  their  mother,  turned  into  a  stone,  may  yet 
be  seen.    There  Qat  began  to  make  things,  men,  pigs,  trees, 
rocks,  as  the  fancy  took  him.    But  when  he  had  made  all 
sorts  of  things  he  still  knew  not  how  to  make  night,  and  the 
daytime  was  always  light.    Then  said  his  brothers  to  him, 
'  Hallo !  Qat,  this  is  not  at  all  pleasant,  here  is  nothing  but 
day;  can't  you  do  something  for  us ? '   Then,  seeking  what  he 
could  do  with  the  daylight,  he  heard  that  there  was  night  at 
Vava,  in  the  Torres  Islands ;  so  he  took  a  pig  and  tied  it,  and 


X.] 


Story  of  Qat. 


157 


put  it  into  his  canoe,  and  sailed  over  to  Vava,  where  he 
bought  night,  qong,  from  I  Qong,  Night,  who  lived  there. 
Others  say  that  he  paddled  to  the  foot  of  the  sky,  to  buy 
night  from  Night,  and  that"  Night  blackened  his  eyebrows, 
and  showed  him  sleep  that  evening,  and  taught  him  in  the 
moraine-  how  to  make  the  dawn.  Qat  returned  to  his  brothers 
with  the  knowledge  of  night,  and  with  a  fowl  and  other 
birds,  to  give  notice  of  the  time  for  the  return  of  light.  So 
he  bade  them  prepare  themselves  bed-places  ;  and  they  jtlatted 
cocoa-nut  fronds  and  spread  them  in  the  house.  Then  for  the 
first  time  they  saw  the  sun  moving  and  sinking  to  the  west, 
and  called  out  to  Qat  that  it  was  crawling  away.  'It  will 
soon  be  gone,'  said  he  ;  '  and  if  you  see  a  change  on  the  face  of 
the  earth,  that  is  night.'  Then  he  let  go  the  night.  '  What 
is  this  coming  out  of  the  sea,'  they  cried,  '  and  covering  the 
shy  ?  '  '  That  is  night,'  said  he  ;  '  sit  down  on  both  sides  of 
the  house,  and  when  you  feel  something  in  your  eyes,  lie  down 
and  be  quiet.'  Presently  it  was  dark,  and  their  eyes  began  to 
blink.  «  Qat !  Qat !  what  is  this  ?  shall  we  die  ?  '  '  Shut 
your  eyes,'  said  he  ;  '  this  is  it,  go  to  sleep.'  When  night  had 
lasted  long  enough  the  cock  began  to  crow  and  the  birds  to 
twitter  ;  Qat  took  a  piece  of  red  obsidian  and  cut  the  night 
with  it 1 ;  the  light  over  which  the  night  had  spread  itself 
shone  forth  again,  and  Qat's  brothers  awoke.  After  this  he 
occupied  himself  again  in  making  things. 

According  to  the  story  told  at  Lakona,  in  Santa  Maria,  Qat 
and  Marawa  (another  vui  who  here  corresponds  to  the  Supwe 
of  Maewo  and  Araga)  dwelt  in  their  place  at  Matan,  near  to 
the  mountain  Garat,  where  the  volcanic  fires  still  smoulder. 
They  two  made  men  in  this  way.  Qat  cut  wood  of  dracama- 
trees  into  shape;  he  formed  legs,  arms,  trunks,  heads,  and 
added  ears  and  eyes  ;  then  he  fitted  part  to  part,  and  six  days 
he  worked  about  it.  After  this  he  fixed  the  time  of  six  days 
for  them  to  come  to  life.    Three  days  he  hid  them  away,  and 

1  Hence  the  expressions,  0  maran  me  teve,  the  morning  has  cut,  and  o  mera 
U  lamasag,  the  dawn  strikes  upon  the  sky,  mera  being  a  common  word 
for  red. 


1 5  Spirits.  [-CH> 

three  days  he  worked  to  give  them  life.  He  brought  them 
forth  and  set  them  up  before  his  face;  then  he  danced  to 
them  and  saw  that  they  moved  a  little ;  he  beat  the  drum  for 
them,  and  saw  that  they  moved  more  than  before.  Thus  he 
beguiled  them  into  life,  so  that  they  could  stand  of  themselves. 
Then  he  divided  them,  setting  each  male  by  himself  and  giving 
him  a  female,  and  he  called  the  two  husband  and  wife.  Three 
women  he  made,  and  three  men.  But  Marawa  made  his  of 
another  tree,  the  tavisoviso ;  he  worked  at  them  six  days  also, 
and  set  them  up,  and  beat  the  drum  for  them,  and  gave  them 
life  as  Qat  had  done  for  his.  But  when  he  saw  them  move 
he  dug  a  pit,  covered  the  bottom  of  it  with  cocoa-nut  fronds, 
and  buried  his  men  and  women  in  it  for  six  days.  Then  when 
he  scraped  off  the  earth  with  his  hands  to  view  them,  he  found 
them  all  rotten  and  stinking  ;  and  this  was  the  origin  of  death 
among  men. 

According  to  the  story  as  told  in  Mota,  Qat  made  men  and 
pigs  at  first  in  the  same  form,  but  on  his  brothers  remonstrating 
with  him  on  the  sameness  of  his  creatures,  he  beat  down  the 
pigs  to  go  on  all  fours  and  made  men  walk  upright.  Man 
was  made  of  clay,  the  red  clay  from  the  marshy  riverside  at 
Vanua  Lava.  The  first  woman  was  Iro  Vilgale.  Qat  took  rods 
and  rings  of  supple  twigs  and  fashioned  her  as  they  make 
the  tall  hats  for  the  qatu,  binding  on  the  rings  to  the  rods,  and 
covering  all  over  with  the  spathes  of  sago-palms  :  hence  her 
name  from  vil  to  bind,  and  gale  -to  deceive.  When  all  was 
finished  he  saw  a  smile,  and  then  he  knew  that  she  was  a 
living  woman. 

Qat  had,  however,  a  wife,  a  female  vui,  Iro  Lei  by  name,  but 
he  had  no  children.  His  brothers,  who  had  no  wives  of  their 
own,  envied  him  the  possession  of  the  beautiful  Ro  Lei,  as  well 
as- of  his  excellent  canoe,  and  were  always  conspiring  to  get 
both  into  their  own  hands.  When  his  work  of  creation  was 
completed,  Qat  proposed  to  his  brothers  that  they  should  cut 
canoes  for  themselves,  and  they  began  to  work,  each  choosing 
a  different  kind  of  tree.  Qat  cut  down  a  large  tree  well 
suited  for  a  canoe,  and  worked  secretly  every  day,  but  made  no 


X.] 


Story  of  Qat. 


159 


progress  in  his  work ;  every  day  when  he  returned  to  work  he 
found  the  wood  that  he  had  chopped  away  replaced,  and  the 
tree  made  solid  again.    At  length  one  evening  when  he  had 
finished  his  day's  work  he  lay  down  to  watch,  making  himself 
small,  and  covering  himself  with  a  large  chip  which  he  drew 
away  from  the  rest  and  hid.    Presently  he  saw  a  little  old 
man  with  long  white  hair  creep  out  of  the  ground  and  begin 
to  replace  the  chips,  each  in  the  place  from  which  it  had 
been  cut,  till  the  tree  trunk  was  almost  whole  again.  But 
there  was  one  defective  place  to  which  the  chip  belonged 
which  Qat  had  hidden,  and  the  old  man  began  to  search  for  it, 
and  Qat  watched.    After  a  while  he  saw  it  and  advanced  to 
take  it ;  but  Qat  leapt  up  from  under  it,  lifting  up  his  shell 
axe  to  cut  him  down.    But  Marawa,  the  spider,  another  very 
powerful  vtd,  for  this  was  he,  entreated  Qat,  '  Ah,  friend,  don't 
kill  me,  and  I  will  make  your  canoe  all  right  again  ; '  and  he 
worked  at  it,  and  soon  finished  it  with  his  nails 1.  When 
all  the  canoes  were  finished,  Qat  bade  his  brothers  launch 
their  own,  and  as  each  was  launched  he  lifted  his  hand,  and 
one  by  one  they  sank.    Then  Qat  and  Marawa  appeared  in 
the  one  that  they  had  made,  paddling  swiftly  about,  to  the 
astonishment  of  the  brothers,  who  had  not  known  that  Qat  had 
even  begun  to  work.    Having  amused  himself  with  their 
mortification,  he  recovered  their  canoes  for  them  in  the  night. 
After  this  his  brothers  tried  with  many  deceits  to  destroy  Qat, 
so  that  they  might  possess  themselves  of  his  wife  and  his 
canoe.    One  day  they  took  him  to  the  hole  of  a  land  crab 
under  a  stone,  which  they  had  already  so  prepared  by  digging 
under  it  that  it  was  ready  to  topple  over  upon  him.  Qat 
crawled  into  the  hole  and  began  to  dig  for  the  crab ;  his 
brothers  tipped  over  the  stone  upon  him,  and,  thinking'  him 
crushed  to  death,  ran  off  to  seize  Ro  Lei  and  the  canoe.  But 
Qat  called  on  Marawa  by  name, 1  Marawa !  take  me  round  about 
to  Ho  Lei,'  and  by  the  time  that  his  brothers  reached  the 

1  Hence,  when  iron  was  seen  in  the  form  of  nails,  it  was  called  at  Mofca 
Marawa  s  finger-nails,  pis  Marawa,  and  pismaraica  is  now  a  widely  accepted 
name  for  nails. 


160  [CH. 

JSTjSr  On  Qa^°  th6il'  V  the  side 

oi  his  wife     On  another  occasion  they  cut  half  through  the 

Wh!n  h  ^  !1  ^ '  T"  Praded  ^  t0  *°  °Ut  fOT  ^  nuts 
When  he  fell  as  the  branch  broke,  and  as  they  thought  was 

k  lied  Marawa  again  saved  him  ;  and  when  they  ran  to  seize 

Qatlfh  ^  iff  Mm  ^  HS  head  "P-  ^  P 

Qat  was_  himself  always  ready  to  play  tricks  on  his  brothers 

but  not  in  malice.    One  moonlight  night  he  induced  them  to 
go  and  shoot  flying  foxes,  and  as  they  were  going  covered 
himself  with  boards,  and  flew  up  into  a  pandanus  tree  and  hung 
there  like  a  bat.    His  brothers  saw  him,  shot  at  him,  and  hit 
him     He  spat  out  blood  upon  the  ground,  and  they,  making 
sure  that  he  was  wounded,  mounted  one  after  another  into  the 
tree  to  take  the  bat.    As  each  one  shot  and  climbed  after  him 
he  flew  off,  and  returned  to  hang  again.    When  all  had  shot 
and  climbed  up  he  flew  home,  took  out  the  arrows  which  had 
stuck  into  his  covering  of  boards,  and  hung  them  up  in  the 
gamal.    When  his  brothers  returned  he  asked  them  what  sport 
they  had ;  and  when  they  told  how  they  had  shot  and  hit  a 
wonderful  bat,  he  made  them  look  at  the  arrows  and  judo>e 
whose  they  were.    Iro  Lei  took  her  part  in  these  tricks.  One 
day  when  Qat  and  his  brothers  were  sailing  in  their  canoes 
they  saw  a  woman  on  a  point  of  rock,  who  called  each  of  them 
as  he  came  near  to  come  and  have  some  of  her  food.    Each  as 
he  drew  near  and  saw  that  she  was  an  old  woman  rejected  her 
offer ;  but  Qat  came  up  and  took  her  into  his  canoe.  They 
had  rejected  his  much-coveted  wife,  for  this  was  Ro  Lei 
in  disguise. 

Again  they  consulted  how  they  might  destroy  him,  and 
determined  to  entrap  him  while  snaring  birds.  They  prepared 
each  one  for  himself  his  place  in  a  nutmeg-tree,  each  in  suc- 
cession further  and  further  from  the  village,  and  the  tree  for 
Qat  much  further  away  than  all.  Then  they  took  Qat  out 
and  shewed  him  his  place.  Qat  mounted  into  his  tree,  and  as 
soon  as  he  was  busy  with  his  snares  his  brother  nearest  to 
him  descended  from  his  own  place,  ran  beneath  the  tree 
where  Qat  was  sitting,  and  said,  '  My  nutmeg,  swell ! '  The 


X.] 


Adventures  of  Qat. 


161 


nutmeg-tree  instantly  grew  so  large  in  the  trunk  that  Qat's 
arms  could  never  clasp  it,  and  all  its  boughs  and  branches 
equally  swelled  out.    But  Qat  did  not  at  first  discover  this, 
because  he  was  busy  setting  his  snares  ;  his  brother  who  had 
laid  the  spell  upon  the  nutmeg-tree  ran  back,  collecting  the 
others  as  he  went  into  the  village  ;  they  seized  and  carried 
off  Ro  Lei,  dragged  down  the  canoe  into  the  sea,  and  paddled 
off  at  once.    The  island  had  already  sunk  out  of  their  sight 
when  they  blew  their  shell  trumpet  to  let  Qat  know  that  they 
were  gone.    When  he  heard  it  he  knew  what  had  happened, 
and  would  have  followed  them,  but  the  size  of  the  swelled 
branches  of  the  nutmeg-tree  made  it  impossible  for  him  to 
descend;  he  tried  and  tried  in  vain,  and  then  lifted  up  his 
voice  and  wept.    His  friend  Marawa,  the  Spider,  heard  his 
cries,  and  came  to  ask  him  what  was  the  matter.    '  I  can't  ffet 
down,'  said  he  ;  'my  brothers  have  played  me  this  trick.' 
'  Down  with  you,'  said  Marawa,  whose  hair  was  exceedingly 
long  and  loose  ;  and  he  sent  up  his  hair  to  Qat,  who  de- 
scended by  it  and  ran  into  the  village.    There  he  found  the 
rollers  of  his  canoe  alone  remaining,  and  sought  his  wife  in 
vain,  for  his  brothers  had  taken  off  his  wife  and  his  canoe  to 
be  their  own.   Then  Qat  went  inside  his  house,  and  took  his 
cock's-tail  plume,  and  his  string  of  the  smallest  shell-money, 
his  red  earth,  and  his  shell  hatchet,  and  asked  his  mother  for 
his  banana  fruit.  <  They  have  plucked  them  all,'  she  answered, 
'  except  these  little  ones  at  the  end  of  the  bunch.'    '  Pluck 
them  all  off,'  said  Qat.    Then  he  took  a  cocoa-nut-shell  bottle 
and  stowed  all  his  things  and  his  food  within  it,  made  him- 
self small  and  took  his  seat  within  it,  and  bade  his  mother 
count  three  waves,  and  at  the  fourth  small  wave  to  throw  it 
into  the  sea.    So  Qat  floated  on  and  on  in  the  bottle  till  he 
came  up  to  the  canoe  in  which  his  brothers  were,  for  they  had 
not  yet  reached  land.    Then  he  floated  along  before  the  bow 
of  the  canoe,  and  where  he  drifted  they  were  forced  to  follow. 
By-and-by  he  took  one  of  his  bananas  and  ate  it,  and  threw 
the  skin  into  the  sea  where  the  canoe  would  come  along. 
His  brothers  saw  it,  and  remarked  that  it  was  like  thote 

M 


J62  Spirits.  [CH> 

bananas  of  Qat's  that  they  had  taken  ;  they  enquired  among 
themselves  who  had  been  eating-  a  banana,  and  when  all  denied, 
Tangaro  the  Wise  spoke  out :  '  You  fellows,'  said  he,  '  it  is 
Qat  who  has  eaten  this  banana,  and  has  thrown  the  skin  of 
it  here  for  us,  to  give  us  notice  that  he  is  not  dead,  but  that  he 
has  escaped  and  is  following  us.'    But  the  rest  of  them  would 
not  listen  to  him,  declaring  that  Qat  was  dead.    The  same 
happened  again  when  he  threw  out  for  them  another  banana 
skin.    After  this  they  saw  the  bottle  itself  in  which  Qat  was 
floating,  close  up  to  the  canoe,  and  one  of  them  took  it  up, 
thinking  that  it  was  a  good  cocoa-nut,  but  when  he  smelt  it 
and  found  the  smell  bad,  he  threw  it  away  again.   This  they 
did  one  after  another,  except  Tangaro  the  Wise,  who  did  not 
happen  to  observe  it.    Then  Qat  floated  quickly  to  the  shore 
of  Maewo,  and  emerged  from  his  bottle ;  he  colours  his  hair 
with  the  red  earth,  binds  his  small  shell-money  round  his 
head,  sticks  his  cock's-tail  plume  in  his  hair,  takes  his  seat  on 
the  top  of  a  male  pandanus-tree  on  the  beach,  and  there  he 
sits  and  waits  for  his  brothers  to  come  to  land  who  were  still 
in  the  canoe.    Presently  they  came  through  the  reef  and  up 
to  the  shore,  and  then  they  looked  up  and  saw  him  sitting 
in  the  pandanus,  and  enquired  one  of  another  who  it  was 
sitting  up  there.    '  It  is  Qat,'  said  Tangaro  the  Wise  ;  but 
his  brothers  argued  that  he  could  not  have  made  his  way 
thither,  seeing  that  he  was  already  dead.    '  That  is  Qat,  and 
no  mistake,'  said  Tangaro  the  Wise  ;  for  he  knew  better  than 
his  brothers  about  this  and  all  other  things.   So  they  brought 
their  canoe  to  land,  but  had  no  need  to  haul  it  up,  for  Qat 
made  the  rocks  to  rise  and  bear  it  high  and  dry.    Qat  leaped 
down  upon  them  with  his  axe,  and  hewed  the  canoe  to  pieces 
for  them  with  this  song, — '  Chop,  chop  the  canoe ;  whose 
canoe  is  it  ?  Marawa's  canoe.    My  brothers  tricked  me  about 
twisting  a  string — swell  nutmeg-tree — and  draw  the  snare. 
I  had  one  canoe,  my  canoe  slipped  off  from  me.'    So  he 
chopped  the  canoe  to  pieces  before  their  face.    After  this  he 
made  friends  with  them,  and  bade  them  live  in  harmony 
together. 


X.] 


Adventures  of  Qat. 


163 


Another  remarkable  series  of  adventures  were  Qat's  en- 
counters with  Qasavara.    This  was  a  vui,  very  strong-,  a  great 
fighter,  tyrant  and  cannibal,  who  dwelt  in  the  island  which 
was  the  home  of  Qat  and  his  brothers.    One  day  the  brothers 
went  to  bathe,  and  found  floating  down  the  stream  a  fruit  of 
the  Tahitian  chestnut,  a  make.    The  others  took  it  up  one 
after  another  and  rejected  it,  thinking  it  was  not  good,  but 
Qat  took  it  and  found  it  good,  and  gave  it  to  his  mother  to 
cook.    Each  of  the  brothers  as  he  returned  from  bathing  went 
to  their  mother  for  food.    She  had  nothing  but  Qat's  make, 
and  they  each  took  a  bit  of  it ;  Tangaro  the  Fool  finished  it. 
Qat  sent  them  to  get  some  more.,  and  following  up  the  stream 
clown  which  this  fruit  had  floated  they  came  upon  the  tree. 
They  climbed  upon  it  to  gather  the  chestnuts,  and  Tangaro 
the  Fool  dropped  one  upon  the  house  of  Qasavara,  over  which 
the  branches  hung.    Out  came  the  ogre  in  a  rage,  seized  and 
killed  the  brothers,  and  put  them  in  his  food-chest.  Qat 
waited  five  days,  then  took  his  bow  and  arrows  and  shell 
hatchet  and  went  in  search.    Following  the  stream  he  found 
the  tree,  and  divining  what  had  happened,  brought  out 
Qasavara  by  dropping  a  make  on  his  house.    They  fought,  and 
Qat  killed  Qasavara  ;  then,  searching  for  his  brothers,  he  found 
their  bones  in  the  food-chest.    He  revived  them  by  blowing 
through  a  reed  into  their  mouths,  and  bidding  them,  if  they 
were  his  brothers,  laugh.    Another  adventure  not  very  con- 
sistent with  this  is  thus  narrated.    Qasavara  falling  in  with 
Qat  and  his  brothers  invited  them  to  his  village,  and  made  a 
fire  m  his  oven  for  them.    When  it  was  evening  he  told  them 
that  they  were  to  sleep  by  themselves  in  his  gamal;  but  they 
knowing  that  they  would  be  killed,  were  exceedingly  afraid. 
iMght  fell  and  they  were  very  sleepy,  and  Qat  called  them  to 
come  to  bed.    He  rapped  asunder  with  his  knuckles  one  of 
the  rafters  of  the  gamal,  and  they  all  got  inside  and  slept 
In  the  middle  of  the  night  Qasavara  and  his  men  took  clubs 
and  bows  and  came  to  kill  Qat's  party,  but  not  finding  them 
in  the  sleeping  places  went  back  disappointed.    At  the 
approach  of  day  the  cock  crew,  and  Qat  awoke  his  brothers, 

M  2 


l64  Spirits.  [CH. 

bidding  them  crawl  out  at  once,  lest  they  should  he  seen 
leaving  the  rafter  by  daylight.    So  they  came  out;  and 
when  it  was  clear  day  Qasavara  and  his  men  running  to  the 
gamal  found  Qat  and  his  brothers  chatting  together.    '  Where 
did  you  sleep  ?  '  asked  they.    All  of  them  answered  that  they 
had  slept  in  the  place  appointed  for  them ;  but  Tangaro  the 
Fool  cried  out,  'We  slept  in  this  rafter  here/  to  the  great 
indignation  of  his  brothers.    Qasavara's  party  again  as  the 
night  drew  on  took  counsel  how  they  might  kill  them  in  the 
rafter;   but  that  night  Qat  rapped  a  side  post  with  his 
knuckles,  it  opened  and  they  slept  within  it.  Qasavara's 
party  came  in  the  night  and  smashed  the  rafter,  found  no 
one  there,  and  again  retired.    Next  morning  again  they 
came  into  the  gamal  and  found  Qat  and  his  brothers  sitting 
unconcerned;    and  again  Tangaro  the  Fool  confessed  they 
had  been  sleeping  in  the  side  post.    Next  night  again  Qat 
opened  the  great  main  post  and  they  slept  in  it,  and  again 
Qasavara  came  and  smashed  the  side  post,  and  found  no  one 
there.    Tangaro  the  Fool  again  made  known  their  retreat, 
though  he  had  been  warned  and  scolded  by  his  brothers. 
Qasavara  now  determined  to  try  another  course,  and  to  kill 
them  as  they  were  sitting  at  a  feast ;  that  night  Qat  opened 
the  ridge  pole  with  a  rap  and  they  all  slept  in  it.  Knowing 
what  was  intended,  Qat  made  his  preparations  to  save  his 
brothers  by  planting  a  casuarina-tree  ;  and  he  gave  them  his 
instructions  what  they  were  to  do.    '  When  they  are  getting 
the  food  ready,'  he  said, '  wash  your  hands  with  the  salt-water 
in  the  bamboo  water- vessels  till  they  are  empty ;  and  then 
when  they  are  looking  for  salt-water,  and  wanting  some  one 
to  go  and  fill  the  vessels,  two  of  you  are  to  offer  to  go ;  and 
two  are  to  go  at  once ;  and  when  you  get  some  way  off  smash 
the  bamboo  vessels  on  the  ground,  and  climb  up  into  the 
casuarina-tree.    All  of  you  are  to  do  this.'    They  all  agreed, 
and  did  as  they  were  bid.    Then,  when  the  oven  was  all 
covered  in,  Qasavara's  men  cried  out  '  Hallo !  there  is  no  salt- 
water !  who  will  fetch  some  ? '    '  We  two,'  said  two  of  Qat's 
brothers ;  and  they  went,  and  smashed  the  water- Aressels  and 


x.]  Qat  and  Qasavara.  165 

climbed  into  the  casuarina-tree.  Qasavara's  men  waited  for 
them  till  they  were  tired,  and  then  asked  some  others  to  go ; 
two  more  of  Qat's  brothers  went,  and  smashed  the  vessels 
and  climbed  into  the  tree.  So  it  went  on  till  all  his  brothers 
were  in  the  tree,  and  Qat  alone  was  left  beside  the  oven  with 
Qasavara  and  his  men.  Then  as  they  opened  the  oven  Qat 
sat  with  a  large  handful  of  food-bags  beside  the  oven,  and  as 
they  were  taking  out  the  food  Qasavara  struck  at  Qat  with 
his  club  and  missed  him.  Qat  leapt  away  from  him  to  the 
other  side  of  the  oven,  and  taking  up  food  from  within  it 
cried,  '  This  for  my  brother,  this  for  my  mate,'  and  stowed 
it  in  the  bags.  Qasavara  leapt  across  after  him,  struck 
at  him  and  missed  him  again ;  and  Qat  again  jumped 
across,  took  up  food  with  the  same  cry,  and  stowed  it  in 
his  bags.  So  it  went  on  till  all  the  food  in  the  oven  was 
taken,  and  all  the  bags  were  full.  Then  Qat  rose  and  ran 
to  his  brothers,  and  Qasavara  after  him,  hitting  at  him  with 
his  club  and  missing  him  as  he  ran,  chasing  him  till  he 
reached  his  brothers.  Then  Qat  jumped  away  from  him  into 
the  tree,  and  Qasavara  climbed  after  him.  Qat's  brothers 
were  gathered  together  on  the  tree  top,  and  Qat  climbed  to 
them,  and  there  they  sat  still,  for  they  could  climb  no 
higher.  Then  Qasavara  climbed  close  to  them,  and  stretched 
out  his  club  at  arm's  length  to  strike  them ;  but  Qat  cried 
out  '  My  casuarina,  lengthen  ! '  So  the  casuarina  elongated 
itself  between  Qat's  party  and  Qasavara,  and  left  him  far 
below.  But  Qasavara  climbed  after  them  asrain,  and  ae-ain 
came  close  to  them ;  and  again  Qat  cried,  '  Lengthen,  my 
casuarina!'  and  again  the  tree  lengthening  itself  carried  Qat 
and  his  brothers  away  from  Qasavara.  So  it  went  on  till  the 
tree  top  reached  the  sky.  Then  said  Qat,  '  Bend  clown,  my 
casuarina ! '  and  the  tree  bent  its  top  clown  to  Tatgan,  and  they 
all  one  after  another  got  down  to  the  ground  there,  and  Qat 
the  last  of  them.  And  as  he  reached  the  ground  he  held  fast 
on  to  the  top  of  the  casuarina  and  waited  before  letting  it  go  ; 
and  Qasavara  followed  down  after  them  and  reached  the  end. 
Then  cried  Qat,  « Now  I  revenge  myself.'    '  Ah,  Qat ! '  cried 


[CH. 

Qasavara  <  do  me  no  harm;  take  me  kindly  for  one  of  your 
household  and  I  will  work  for  you/  <  No,  indeed/  said  Qat 
hut  I  will  revenge  myself  for  the  mischief  you  have  done  me/' 
So  he  le  go  the  tip  of  the  casuarina-tree,  and  the  tree  sprang 
hack  and  flipped  off  Qasavara,  and  his  head  knocked  against 
he  sky,  and  he  fell  hack  upon  the  earth  ;  and  there  he  lay  at 
length  upon  h1S  face,  and  turned  into  a  stone.  And  now  they 
offer  sacrifices  at  that  stone  for  valour;  if  any  one  desires  to 
he  valiant  and  strong  in  fighting,  he  offers  at  that  stone, 
which  they  say  is  Qasavara  \ 

The  stone  apparently  is  not  at  Tatgan  in  Vanua  Lava,  where 
it  should  he  ;  so  they  say  it  is  in  Gaua;  but  it  is  agreed  that 
Uat  and  his  brothers  took  up  their  abode  at  Tatgan.    It  was 
however,  from  Gaua  that  the  story  makes  Qat  to  have  taken 
his  departure  from  the  world.    Where  now  in  the  centre  of 
that  island  is  the  great  lake,  the  Tas,  there  was  formerly  a 
great  plain  covered  with  forest.    Qat  cut  himself  a  large  canoe 
there  out  of  one  of  the  largest  trees.    While  making  it  he  was 
often  ridiculed  by  his  brothers,  and  asked  how  he  would  ever 
get  so  large  a  canoe  to  the  sea,    He  answered  always  that  they 
would  see  by-and-by.    When  the  canoe  was  finished  he  took 
inside  it  his  wife  and  brothers,  collected  the  living  creatures 
of  the  island,  even  those  so  small  as  ants,  and  shut  himself 
with  them  inside  the  canoe,  to  which  he  had  made  a  covering. 
Then  came  a  deluge  of  rain  ;  the  great  hollow  of  the  island 
became  full  of  water,  which  burst  through  the  surrounding  hills 
where  now  descends  the  great  waterfall  of  Gaua.  The'canoe 
tore  a  channel  for  itself  out  into  the  sea  and  disappeared. 
The  people  believed  that  the  best  of  everything  was  taken  from 
the  islands  when  Qat  so  left  them,  and  they  looked  forward  to 
his  return.    When  for  the  first  time  Bishop  Patteson  and  his 
companions  went  ashore  at  Mota,  some  of  the  natives  now 
living  remember  that  it  was  said  that  Qat  and  his  brothers 
were  returned.   Some  years  after  that  a  small  trading  vessel  ran 

1  As  Qasavara  fell  from  heaven  the  women  in  their  fright  held  their  hands 
above  their  heads,  but  the  men  held  theirs  before  their  breasts ;  consequently 
from  that  time  forth  men  grow  bald  and  the  breasts  of  women  protrude. 


x.-j  Santa  Crtiz.    Duka.  167 

on  the  reef  at  Gaua,  and  was  lost,  The  old  people,  seeing  her 
apparently  standing  in  to  the  channel  of  the  waterfall  stream, 
cried  out  that  Qat  was  come  again,  and  that  his  canoe  knew 
her  own  way  home.  It  is  likely  now  that  the  story  will  be 
told  of  eight  persons  in  the  canoe ;  but  it  is  certain  that  the 
story  is  older  than  any  knowledge  of  Noah's  ark  among  the 
people. 

It  is  very  probable  that  Lata,  who  is  said  by  the  people  01 
Santa  Cruz  to  have  made  men  and  animals,  is  regarded  by 
them  as  Qat  was  regarded  by  the  people  of  the  Banks' 
Islands  ;  and  Tinota  is  a  duka  of  the  same  kind  with  Lata. 
A  story  which  is  told  of  Natei,  now  the  chief  man  at  Nelua  in 
Santa  Cruz,  shews  a  belief  also  in  such  beings  as  the  Banks' 
islanders  believed  to  dwell  with  them  in  their  islands,  and 
called  mi  The  story  is  doubtless  much  older  than  Natei,  as 
the  similar  story  of  Manlepei  in  Vanua  Lava  was  doubtless 
told  of  some  other  man,  and  by  some  other  man  of  himself, 
long  before  his  time.  The  present  younger  generation  at 
Santa  Cruz  seeing  Natei  a  great  man,  and  taking  it  of  course 
that  his  greatness  came  by  supernatural  assistance,  tell  this 
story  of  him.  When  he  was  a  young  man,  they  say,  he  was 
following  the  upward  course  of  a  narrow  valley  looking  for 
birds  to  make  feather-money,  and  advanced  far  inland  into  the 
forest.  A  person  met  him  and  asked  him  who  he  was,  and  he 
answered  that  he  was  a  man.  To  Natei's  like  enquiry  the 
same  answer  was  made.  This  person  then  took  him  by  a  very 
good  path  up  the  valley,  which  narrowed  into  a  ravine.  This 
opened  again  into  a  space  in  which  were  good  gardens  and  a 
village.  The  people  there  enquired  of  Natei  where  he  lived, 
and  promised  him  that  they  would  visit  him  at  Nelua  in  five 
days  ;  then  he  returned.  Five  days  after  the  people  of  Nelua 
saw  some  people  coming  to  their  village,  whom  they  took  to 
be  men  from  some  inland  place,  and  enquiring  for  Natei.  His 
house  was  shewn  to  them  and  they  entered  it,  and  were  never 
seen  again.  When  he  arrived  and  went  into  his  house  he 
found  it  hung  round  with  feather-money  brought  to  him  by 
his  visitors.    It  was  known  then  that  these  were  not  mere 


168  Spirits.  [CH. 

men,  and  it  was  remembered  that  they  had  long,  straight  hair. 
After  this  people  would  give  Natei  money  and  other  things 
to  obtain  the  favour  of  his  friends,  with  whom  he  still  kept  L 
communication,  and  from  that  time  he  has  thriven  and  risen 
in  the  world. 

The  nearest  of  the  Banks'  Islands  to  the  New  Hebrides  is 
Merlav,  Star  Island,  and  there  Qat  and  his  brothers  are  the 
subjects  of  the  stories  common  in  the  rest  of  the  croup  The 
northernmost  of  the  New  Hebrides  and  nearest  to  Merlav  is 
Maewo,  Aurora,  and  there  Qat,  though  not  unknown,  is  not 
recognised  as  a  spirit,  but  Tagaro  takes  his  place.    Qatu  they 
said  was  a  great  man  of  old  times,  very  high  in  the  suqe,  as 
men  used  to  be  and  are  no  longer  now.    But  Tagaro  was  a 
wm.    Of  any  wui  the  belief  in  Maewo  was  that  he  had  no 
bodily  form ;  any  old  man  there  would  so  describe  one.  Yet 
the  stories  of  Tagaro,  who  was  a  wui,  deal  with  him  as  the 
stories  of  the  Banks'  Islands  deal  with  Qat.    Of  the  brothers 
of  Tagaro  nothing  is  to  be  told,  but  his  companion  was  Suqe- 
matua,  who  in  all  things  was  contrary  to  him.    Tagaro  wanted 
everything  to  be  good,  and  would  have  no  pain  or  suffering ; 
Suqe-matua  would  have  all  things  bad.    When  Tagaro  made 
things,  he  or  Suqe-matua  tossed  them  up  into  the  air;  what 
Tagaro  caught  is  good  for  food,  what  he  missed  is  worthless. 
Tagaro  lived  at  Mambarambara,  and  particularly  at  Hombio, 
not  far  from  Tanoriki.    He  was  not  born  there,  but  there  he 
lived,  made  his  canoe,  built  his  house  and  his  gamal,  and 
created  and  raised  his  food.    His  life  was  full  of  wonders  ;  his 
cocoa-nuts  increased  as  he  ate  them ;  dry  nuts  out  of  which 
he  scooped  the  meat  filled  up  again.    Finally  Tagaro  became 
angry  because  some  one  stole  his  pig,  and  went  off  to  Mamalu, 
no  one  knows  where ;  he  turned  the  island  upside  down,  and 
went  off  eastwards  in  his  canoe  from  the  east  coast  of  the 
island,  taking  with  him  the  best  of  everything,  and  never  to 
return.    He  put  out  the  fire,  but  threw  back  a  fire-stick ;  his 
shell  trumpet  lies  on  the  beach  in  the  form  of  a  rock  ;  Lepers' 
Island  is  his  canoe.    His  place  at  Hombio  is  very  sacred ;  his 
yams  still  remain  there,  and  trail  over  a  ffamal  called  the  gamal 


• 


x.]  New  Hebrides.    Tagaro.  169 

dam,  the  yam  gamal.    There  is  also  one  wui,  Gaviga,  and  some 
say  another,  who  rules  over  the  dead;  but  the  multitude  of  the 
purely  spiritual,  incorporeal  beings  that  are  called  wui  belong 
to  the  sacred  stones.    In  Araga,  Whitsuntide  Island,  imme- 
diately south  of  Maewo,  Tagaro  has  ten  brothers,  besides  Suqe, 
who  accompanies  and  thwarts  him.    Tagaro  came  down  from 
heaven,  made  men  and  other  things,  and  went  back  again  to 
heaven.    Suqe  belonged  to  the  earth ;  his  head  was  forked, 
therefore  he  had  two  thoughts  in  it.    Whatever  Tagaro  did  or 
made  was  right,  Suqe  was  always  wrong ;  he  would  have  men 
die  only  for  five  clays ;  he  wanted  to  have  six  nights  to  one  day ; 
he  planted  the  scooped  meat  of  the  yam,  not  the  rind.  Tagaro 
sent  him  to  a  place  where  is  a  bottomless  chasm,  somewhere 
inland  in  Araga,  where  he  rules  over  the  ghosts  of  the  dead. 
Tagaro  when  on  earth,  though  a  wui,  had  a  human  form,  with 
superhuman  power.    He  made  the  plain  country  by  treading 
the  ground  with  his  feet ;  where  he  did  not  tread  are  the  hills. 
He  had  no  wife  or  children  of  his  own  kind,  but  he  became 
the  father  of  a  boy  on  earth.   The  boy  kept  asking  his  mother 
who  his  father  was,  and  was  told  that  he  was  in  heaven.  Then 
he  must  needs  go  to  heaven  to  see  his  father,  and  his  mother 
made  him  a  bow  and  an  arrow  of  an  ere,  a  flowering  reed.  He 
shot  up  and  hit  the  sky ;  his  ere  turned  into  something  like  the 
aerial  root  of  a  banyan,  up  which  the  two  climbed  to  heaven. 
There  they  found  Tagaro  sitting  in  a  salite-tvee,  and  fashioning 
images  of  himself  out  of  the  fruit.    One  of  these  he  threw  to 
the  boy,  who  took  it  to  his  mother.    She  recognised  the 
features,  and  told  the  boy  it  was  his  father.   Tagaro  consented 
to  go  back  with  them ;  but  as  he  descended  he  cut  the  line 
above  them  and  below  himself,  and  went  back  to  heaven, 
while  they  came  down  to  Atambulu,  the  original  seat  of  men 
in  that  island. 

There  are  also  many  wui,  all  connected  with  stones  and 
sacred  places,  whose  names  are  only  known  to  those  who  have 
access  to  them.  These  also  may  be  seen,  in  rain  or.  towards 
nightfall,  and  they  give  men  food.  When  they  appear  they 
have  long  hair,  sometimes  long  nails,  and  wear  an  old  malo 


I7°  Spirits.  '  [CH. 

waist-cloth.  But  these  appear  to  be  confused  with  the  wild 
mountain features  in  human  form,  of  whom  tales  are  told  in 
all  the  islands;  for  one  that  Tapera  saw  not  long  ao-o  was  a 
Sarivanua  of  the  hills,  standing-  in  the  rain  by  a  banyan-tree 
with  bananas  in  his  hand.  He  was  like  a  man  with  small 
legs  ;  when  spoken  to  he  did  not  answer,  and  when  struck 
he  did  not  feel.  The  multitude  of  wm,  whose  stones  and 
haunts  are  sacred,  are  unknown  by  name,  and  have  no  form 
of  body. 

In  Omba,  Lepers'  Island,  a  spirit,  mi,  is  thus  defined :  spirits 
are  immortal ;  have  bodies,  but  invisible  ;  are  like  men,  but  do 
not  eat  and  drink,  and  can  be  seen  only  by  the  dead.  But 
there  are  others  also  that  appear  in  bodily  shape.    Some  are 
known  by  name,  of  whom  the  most  remarkable  are  Nggelevu, 
who  presides  over  the  dead,  and  Tagaro  and  his  brothers  or 
companions.    Suqe  is  not  known  in  all  parts  of  the  island  ; 
his  place  is  perhaps  supplied  by  Tagaro-lawua,  who  answers  also 
to  Tangaro-loloqong  in  the  Banks'  Island  stories.    It  was 
Tagaro  who  made  fruit-trees,  food,  pigs,  and  lastly  men,  and 
he  is  still  invisibly  active  in  human  affairs,  and  therefore 
invoked  in  sickness  and  all  difficulties.    Tagaro-lawua,  the 
Big,  was  a  boaster  and  incapable ;  Tagaro-mbiti,  the  Little, 
was  exceedingly  knowing  and  powerful ;  if  Tagaro  is  spoken 
of  it  is  Tagaro-mbiti  who  is  meant.    As  Qat  is  represented  by 
Tagaro-mbiti,  so  Merambuto,  also  a  vui,  answers  to  Qasavara. 
He,  like  the  other,  tried  to  catch  Tagaro's  party  by  night  and 
kill  them,  but  Tagaro  made  them  all  sleep  in  a  shell.  Next 
morning  Tagaro-lawua  let  out  the  secret,  and  Tagaro-mbiti 
made  them  sleep  elsewhere.    All  the  stones  that  are  sacred  are 
connected  with  Tagaro,  though  other  spirits  also  are  concerned  ; 
all  charms  have  their  power  from  the  name  of  Tagaro  in  them. 
There  are  besides,  as  in  the  neighbouring  islands,  spiritual 
beings,  vui,  not  of  the  same  order  as  Tagaro.    They  are  super- 
human in  nature  and  in  power,  and  they  can  be  seen.  There 
is  a  man  still  living  who  one  day  followed  his  two  wives  dow  n 
to  the  beach,  and  noticed  there  that  some  cocoa-nuts  had  been 
stolen  from  a  heap  he  had  made.    Following  footsteps  he 


x.]  Lepers  Island.    Tagaro-mbiti.  171 

found  two  female  vui,  who  said  they  were  hungry.  He 
promised  them  food  and  brought  it  to  them — four  baskets-full. 
One  of  the  women  was  beautiful,  the  other  full  of  sores. 
They  asked  him  which  he  would  have,  and  he  answered  that 
he  would  take  them  both.    Thereupon  each  gave  him  a  stone 
full  of  mana,  one  to  get  him  ten  barrow-pigs,  the  other  for  ten 
sows  ;  and  they  promised  always  to  help  him  to  get  pigs,  that 
he  might  mount  to  greatness  in  the  Suqe.    These  women 
were  vui,  whose  power  lay  in  pigs ;  nevertheless,  to  this  day, 
when  the  man's  wives  go  down  to  the  beach  for  their  fishing, 
they  find  fish  caught  and  lying  ready  for  them.    It  is  well 
worthy  of  notice  that  Merambuto  and  his  fellows  are  represented 
not  only  as  to  a  certain  extent  mischievous  and  unfriendly,  but 
also  easily  deceived  and  ignorant.    This  appears  clearly  in  the 
story  of  Merambuto  and  Tagaro-mbiti  in  the  tree,  where 
Merambuto  did  not  know  and  dreaded  as  something1  unknown 
the  conch-shell  trumpet,  as  a  Motlav  story  also  represents  a 
vui  as  afraid  of  the  sound  of  a  drum.    On  the  side  of  Lepers' 
Island  which  is  nearest  to  Araga  the  story  of  Suqe  is  told,  and 
he  is  represented  as  always  in  the  wrong,  though  he  shares 
the  work  of  creation  with  Tagaro.    They  two  made  the  land, 
and  the  things  upon  it ;  when  they  made  the  trees  the  fruit 
of  Tagaro's  was  good  for  food,  but  Suqe's  bitter ;  when  they 
made  men,  Tagaro  said  they  should  walk  upright  on  two  legs, 
Suqe  that  they  should  go  like  pigs  ;  Suqe  wanted  to  have  men 
sleep  in  the  trunks  of  sago-palms,  Tagaro  said  that  they 
should  work  and  dwell  in  houses ;  so  they  always  disagreed, 
and  the  word  of  Tagaro  stood.    It  was  Tagaro  also  who  went 
to  Maewo  and  brought  back  night  in  a  shell.    When  he  let 
it  out  and  darkness  crept  over  the  sky,  men  wept  and  beat 
their  houses.    Tagaro  is  represented  also  as  the  father  of  ten 
sons,  of  whom  Tagaro-mbiti,  the  Little,  was  the  last,  and 
exceedingly  small.    His  brothers  went  out  to  work,  but  he 
stayed  at  home  with  a  sore  on  his  leg.    They  planted  the 
leaves  of  the  edible  caladium,  the  top  shoot  of  the  banana,  the 
vine  of  the  yam  ;  but  when  they  were  gone  he  took  the  crown 
of  the  caladium,  the  suckers  of  the  banana,  the  rind  of  the  yam, 


l72  Spirits. 

and  planted  them.  His  brothers  scolded  him  for  idleness,  not 
knowing  what  he  had  done  ;  but  when  the  season  came  round 
and  they  had  nothing  to  eat,  he  shewed  them  his  garden  full 
ol  abundant  food.  It  was  Tagaro  also  (but  Qatu  in  the 
Maewo  story)  who  married  the  winged  woman-a  Banewono- 
wono  or  Vmmara,  Web-wing  or  Dove-skin-from  heaven.  This 
was  not  exactly  a  spirit,  vui,  but  one  of  a  party  of  women  with 
webbed  wings  like  those  of  bats.  These  women  flew  down 
from  heaven  to  bathe,  and  Tagaro  watched  them.  He  saw 
them  take  off  their  wings,  stole  one  pair,  and  hid  them  at  the 
foot  of  the  main  pillar  of  his  house.  He  then  returned  and 
found  all  fled  but  the  wingless  one,  and  he  took  her  to  his 
house  and  presented  her  to  his  mother  as  his  wife.  After 
a  time  Tagaro  took  her  to  weed  his  garden,  when  the  yams 
were  not  yet  ripe,  and  as  she  weeded  and  touched  the  yam 
vines,  ripe  tubers  came  into  her  hand.  Tagaro's  brothers 
thought  she  was  digging  the  yams  before  their  time  and 
scolded  her ;  she  went  into  the  house  and  sat  weeping  at  the 
foot  of  the  pillar,  and  as  she  wept  her  tears  fell,  and  wearing 
away  the  earth  pattered  down  upon  her  wings.  She  heard 
the  sound,  took  up  her  wings,  and  flew  back  to  heaven. 

Beings  called  Tavogivogi  must  be  classed  as  spirits  :  they 
are  certainly  not  human  beings,  and  correspond  to  the 
mysterious  snakes  called  mae,  which  in  neighbouring  islands 
are  believed  to  assume  the  form  of  men.  A  Tavogivogi  is 
not  thought  ever  to  have  the  appearance  of  a  snake ;  one  of 
them  appears  in  the  form  of  a  youth  or  woman,  in  order  to 
entice  one  of  the  opposite  sex,  and  the  young  man  or  woman 
who  yields  to  the  seduction  dies.  There  is  no  outward  siffn 
of  the  real  character  of  the  Tavogivogi,  but  the  test  is  to 
ask  the  name  of  a  tree,  and  a  wrong  answer  will  shew  that 
there  is  deceit.  Successful  or  not  the  Tavogivogi  suddenly 
disappears,  '  like  a  bird,'  but  in  the  form  of  a  bird  or  other 
creature.  The  young  man  goes  home  and  sickens;  he  re- 
members the  sudden  disappearance,  knows  what  has  befallen 
him,  and  never  recovers.  The  name  means  '  changeling,'  from 
the  word,  in  the  Banks'  Islands  wog,  to  change  the  form. 


I- 


CHAPTEE  XI. 

SACRED  PLACES  AND  THINGS. 

It  is  almost  certain  that  idols  find  no  place  in  the  account 
which  I  now  proceed  to  give  of  sacred  places  and  objects  as 
I  am  acquainted  with  them  in  Melanesia.  It  is  true  that  the 
word  is  commonly  enough  used  to  describe  any  kind  of  image 
of  native  workmanship,  whether  there  be  really  something  of 
a  sacred  character  attached  to  it,  or  none  whatever.  The 
people  of  San  Cristoval,  Ugi,  and  Ulawa  were  conspicuous 
for  their  fondness  for  carving  and  the  skill  with  which  they 
worked  ;  a  man  among  them  would  amuse  himself  by  shaping 
a  soft  stone  or  bit  of  wood  into  a  figure  of  a  man  or  bird,  or 
fish,  as  well  as  in  carving  by  way  of  decoration  what  he  made 
for  use.  I  have  seen  at  Fagani  (Ha'ani)  in  San  Cristoval 
a  remarkably  clever  group  over  the  apex  of  a  gable,  which 
represented  a  man  climbing  up  to  shoot  an  opossum,  and  the 
animal  looking  down  upon  him  from  the  top  of  the  pole  in 
the  most  natural  attitude.  This  would  hardly  be  taken  for 
an  idol,  but  is  as  much  an  idol  as  many  figures  which  have 
found  their  way  into  museums  as  such.  The  canoe-houses, 
common  halls,  public-houses,  called  in  those  parts  oka,  were 
full  of  carvings  in  the  constructive  as  well  as  decorative  parts. 
Some  of  these,  the  posts  for  example  which  support  the  ridge- 
pole and  purlins,  are  often  figures  of  men,  who  would-be 
loosely  called  ancestors  by  the  principal  people  of  the  village, 
and  these  would  be  treated  with  respect ;  sometimes  food  and 
betel-nuts  would  be  seen  laid  before  them.  But  these  had  no 
sacred  character,  further  than  that  they  were  memorials  of 


1 74  Sacred  Places  and  Things.  [CH. 

deceased  great  men,  whose  ghosts  visiting  their  accustomed 
abodes  would  be  pleased  at  marks  of  memory  and  affection, 
and  irritated  by  disrespect.  There  was  no  notion  of  the 
ghost  of  the  dead  taking  up  his  abode  in  the  image,  nor  was 
the  image  supposed  to  have  any  supernatural  efficacy  in  itself. 
In  any  oka  in  Malanta  may  be  seen  an  image  of  a  shark,  a 
sword-fish,  or  a  bonito,  before  which  portions  of  food  are 
placed  ;  and  these  figures  will  be  said  to  be  fathers,  grand- 
fathers, ancestors  of  those  who  thus  respect  them.  These 
are  indeed  receptacles  of  the  dead,  not  of  their  spirits,  but  of 
their  mortal  remains  or  relics  ;  such  cannot  be  called  idols. 
Although  too  they  sometimes  make  other  images  and  give 
the  names  of  the  dead  to  them  by  way  of  remembrance,  they 
do  not  pray  or  sacrifice  at  such  images,  nor  are  they  thought 
holy.  In  Florida  a  rudely-shaped  image  of  a  man  might 
often  have  been  seen  in  a  sacred  place  near  a  village  or  by  the 
sea-shore,  with  cocoa-nuts  tied  to  it  or  food  laid  at  its  feet ; 
this  would  be  a  tindalo,  an  image  representing  some  powerful 
man  deceased ;  the  food  would  be  for  him  to  eat ;  the  image  was 
sacred.  That  is  to  say,  the  image  was  a  memorial  of  some 
tindalo,  and  was  not  thought  to  have  power  in  itself,  or  to  be 
inhabited  by  the  ghost  of  the  departed.  Images  representing 
a  tindalo  were  also  cut  on  the  posts  of  the  canoe-houses,  mere 
memorials  not  much  regarded,  and  approached  without  respect. 

The  stocks  set  up  in  Santa  Cruz  to  represent  the  dead  are 
the  simplest  of  memorials.  In  the  Banks'  Islands  tree-fern 
trunks  cut  into  very  rude  figures  of  men  were  often  seen— 
memorials  made  at  funeral  feasts,  having  really  no  sacred 
character  at  all.  In  the  same  islands  the  images  carried 
about  at  the  Suqe  feasts,  and  afterwards  set  up  in  the  eating- 
places  proper  to  the  rank  they  represent,  may  well  be  taken 
for  idols  by  those  who  are  not  acquainted  with  their  meaning ; 
and  so  indeed  may  the  figure,  the  nule,  into  which  the  post 
of  a  house  is  cut,  the  building  of  which  is  celebrated  by  a 
Mekole.  In  the  New  Hebrides,  at  Ambrym,  images  of  the 
dead  whose  death-feasts  are  to  be  celebrated  are  very  elabo- 
rately prepared,  not  with  any  attempt  at  representing  the 


XI. 


Images  not  Idols.  Stones. 


175 


figure  of  the  particular  deceased,  but  in  conventional  form  ; 
sometimes  carved  out  of  tree-fern  trunks,  sometimes  fashioned 
with  wickerwork  and  sago  spathes,  and  painted  and  adorned. 
Some  shut  up  from  common  view  by  bamboo  screens  may 
probably  belong  to  secret  societies.  In  the  same  island  drums 
are  set  up  for  funeral  feasts  with  fantastic  faces  cut  upon 
them,  and  these  remain  as  in  a  manner  images  of  the  deceased, 
taken  by  visitors  for  idols  or  devil-drums.  In  the  neighbour- 
ing islands  similar  images  are  made. 

Sacred  places  have  almost  always  stones  in  them ;  it  is 
impossible  to  treat  separately  sacred  places  and  sacred  stones. 
But  whereas  some  places  are  sacred  because  stones  are  there, 
the  stones  seen  in  other  places  have  been  taken  there  as  part 
of  the  furniture  of  a  sacred  place.  Some  places  also  and 
stones  may  be  said  to  have  the  origin  of  their  sacredness  in 
graves  or  relics  of  the  dead,  and  so  have  had  their  character 
given  them  by  men ;  while  others  are  sacred  because  the 
stones  are  there,  the  stones  being  sacred  because  associated 
with  a  spirit.  It  is  well  here  to  recall  the  distinction  which 
seems  so  important  between  ghosts,  the  disembodied  spirits 
of  men  deceased,  and  spirits,  of  another  order  from  the  souls 
of  men,  which  have  never  been  connected  with  a  human 
body ;  and  to  remember  that,  speaking  generally,  the  religion 
of  the  Solomon  Islands  is  concerned  with  ghosts,  that  of  the 
Banks'  Islands  and  New  Hebrides  with  spirits. 

The  sacred  places  and  objects  of  the  Solomon  Islands 
shall  be  first  described  ;  and  first  of  all  those  which  belong  to 
sepulture.  In  Florida  a  sacred  place  is  called  vunuha. 
These  places  are  sometimes  in  the  village,  in  which  case  they 
are  fenced  round  lest  they  should  be  rashly  trodden  upon, 
sometimes  in  the  garden-ground,  sometimes  in  the  bush.  A 
vunuha  is  sacred  to  a  tinclalo,  ghost  of  power,  and  sacrifices 
are  offered  to  the  tinclalo  in  it.  In  some  cases  the  vunuha 
is  the  burial-place  of  the  man  who  has  become  tinclalo,  in 
others  his  relics  have  been  translated  there ;  in  some  cases 
there  is  a  shrine,  and  in  some  an  image.  There  are  generally 
if  not  always  stones  in  such  a  sacred  place  ;  some  stone  lying 


I 76  Sacred  Places  and  Things.  [CH. 

naturally  there  has  struck  the  fancy  of  the  man  who  began  the 
cultus  of  the  tinclalo ;  he  thinks  it  a  likely  place  for  the  ghost 
to  haunt,  and  other  smaller  stones,  and  shells  called  peopeo, 
are  added.  When  a  vunuha  has  been  established  everything 
within  it  is  sacred,  tambu,  and  belongs  to  the  tinclalo.  If  a 
tree  growing  in  one  were  to  fall  across  a  path  no  one  would 
step  over  it.  In  entering  a  vunuha  a  man  who  knows  the 
tinclalo  and  sacrifices  goes  first,  those  who  go  with  him 
treading  in  his  footsteps ;  in  going  out  no  one  will  look  back, 
lest  his  soul  should  stay  behind.  No  one  would  pass  a  vunuha 
when  the  sun  was  so  low  as  to  cast  his  shadow  into  it ;  the 
ghost  would  draw  it  from  him.  If  there  were  a  shrine  in  a 
vunuha,  only  the  sacrificer  would  enter  it.  Within  it  were  the 
weapons  and  other  properties  used  by  the  object  of  worship 
when  alive,  some  said  to  be  of  great  antiquity  \  The  school- 
boys now  have  broken  down  the  shrines  and  pelted  the  images, 
and  the  teachers  have  carried  off  the  weapons.  Dikea,  a  chief 
at  Eavu,  had  ten  vunuha  of  his  own,  one  close  to  a  garden  that 
he  wanted  to  enlarge.  He  was  afraid  to  desecrate  the  sacred 
place  himself  lest  the  tinclalo  should  do  him  mischief;  he 
therefore  sent  for  Gura  and  Kerekere,  two  young  Christian 
teachers,  to  do  it  for  him,  because  they  would  not  be  afraid. 
They  took  their  scholars  and  went,  the  other  boys  not 
venturing  near.  They  found  in  the  vunuha  one  large  stone 
in  its  natural  bed,  with  smaller  stones,  peopeo  shells,  and  leaves 
of  ginger  round  it,  all  of  which  they  threw  about.  The  two 
tinclalo  to  whom  the  place  was  sacred,  Koli  and  Kukui, 
appeared  afterwards  in  dreams  to  the  heathen  men,  and 
threatened  the  desecrators ;  Dikea  waited  till  it  was  clear 
that  they  were  none  the  worse,  and  then  enlarged  his  garden. 

At  Saa  in  Malanta  all  burying-places  where  common 
people  are  interred  are  so  far  sacred  that  no  one  will  go  there 

1  The  vunuha  of  Pelosule  at  Olevuga  contained  an  image  thought  to  he  of 
great  antiquity ;  a  club  sent  to  me  from  it  is  of  a  form  never  now  seen  in  use.  I 
have  an  adze  taken  from  the  vunuha  of  Murini  at  Belaga,  on  which  the  soot 
from  sacrificial  fires  remains.  The  Rev.  A.  Penny  has  some  tinclalo  relics 
believed  by  the  natives  to  be  very  ancient. 


xi.]    Solomon  Islands.    Shrines.    Sanctuaries.  177 


without  due  cause ;  but  those  places  where  the  remains  of 
people  of  rank  are  deposited,  where  sacrifices  are  offered,  and 
which  may  be  called  family  sanctuaries,  are  regarded'  with 
very  great  respect.    Some  of  these  are  very  ancient,  the  lio'a, 
or  powerful  ghost,  who  is  worshipped  there,  being  a  remote 
ancestor.    It  sometimes  happens  that  the  man  who  has 
offered  the  sacrifice  in  such  a  place  dies  without  having  fully 
instructed  his  son  in  the  proper  chant  of  invocation  with 
which  the  lio'a  ought  to  be  approached.    The  young  man  who 
succeeds  him  is  then  afraid  to  go  there  often,  and  begins  a 
new  place,  taking  some  ashes  from  the  old  sacrificial  fire-place 
to  start  the  new  sanctuary.    It  is  not  common  in  that  part  of 
Malanta  to  build  shrines  for  relics,  but  it  is  sometimes  done 
when  the  oka,  canoe-house,  is  full.    Such  shrines  are  common 
in  San  Cristoval  in  the  villages,  and  in  the  sacred  places 
where  great  men  have  been  buried.    To  trespass  on  these 
sacred  places  would  be  always  likely  to  rouse  the  anger  of  the 
ghosts,  some  of  whom  besides  are  known  to  be  of  a  malignant 
disposition.    Such  a  one  is  Tapia,  whose  haunt  is  at  the 
mouth  of  a  river  near  Ha'ani,  and  sacrifice  to  whom  has 
been  already  described. 

There  are  sacred  places,  however,  in  the  Solomon  Islands 
which  are  not  places  of  sepulture,  though  none  probably  the 
sacredness  of  which  does  not  depend  on  the  presence  of  a 
ghost.  In  Florida  the  appearance  of  something  wonderful 
will  cause  any  place  to  become  a  vunuha,  the  wonder  being 
an  evidence  of  the  ghostly  presence.  Tor  example,  a  man 
planted  in  the  bush  near  Olevuga  some  cocoa-nut  and  almond- 
trees,  and  not  long  after  died.  There  then  appeared  among 
the  trees  a  white  kandora,  cuscus,  a  great  rarity.  This  was 
assumed  to  be  the  appearance  of  the  dead  man,  now  a  tindalo 
and  was  called  by  his  name.  The  place  became  a  vunuha  ;  no 
one  would  gather  the  cocoa-nuts  and  almonds  till  two  younc 
Christian  men  of  late  have  taken  the  sacred  place  and  tree! 
for  a  garden.  Through  this  same  part  of  the  forest  ran  a 
stream  full  of  eels  (which  Olevuga  people  will  not  eat),  amonc 
them  one  so  large  that  it  was  thought  to  be  a  tindalo,  the 


N 


1 7^  Sacred  Places  and  Things.  [Ch. 

abode  or  representative  of  some  one  dead;  no  one  would 
bathe  in  that  stream  or  drink  from  it,  except  one  pool  in  its 
course  which  for  convenience  was  not  considered  sacred.  In 
Boli  also  there  was  a  sacred  pool  with  a  tmdalo  eel.  In 
Bugotu,  in  Ysabel,  is  a  pool  which  is  the  abode  of  a  ghost  of 
ancient  times,  and  into  which  scraps  of  any  person's  food  are 
thrown  whom  his  enemies  wish  to  charm.  If  the  food  is 
quickly  devoured  by  the  fish,  which  are  abundant  in  the  pool, 
the  man  will  die  ;  if  otherwise,  the  man  who  knows  the  place 
and  the  ghost  reports  that  the  tmdalo  is  unwilling  to  do 
harm,  his  own  friendly  intervention  having  been  probably 
paid  for  by  the  one  who  knows  that  his  life  is  aimed  at.  To 
obtain  good  crops  food  is  laid  on  stones  in  these  sacred  places, 
and  for  success  in  fishing  fragments  of  cooked  fish ;  money 
also  is  laid  upon  them  in  small  quantities,  the  proprietor,  so 
to  speak,  of  the  vumiha,  who  is  acquainted  with  the  ghost,  in 
each  case  offering  on  behalf  of  those  who  desire  the  good 
offices  of  the  tmdalo.  Stones  have  thus  a  considerable  place 
among  the  sacred  objects  of  the  Solomon  Islands,  though  not 
a  very  conspicuous  place,  wherever  their  situation  or  something 
in  their  appearance  has  associated  them  with  some  powerful 
ghost.  Those  that  are  in  open  places  are  so  far  treated  with 
reverence  that  no  one  will  go  too  near  them,  much  less  sit  or 
tread  upon  them,  while  those  in  secret  sacred  places  become 
in  a  way  altars  for  sacrifice.  But  as  in  time  the  ghosts 
become  superseded  by  later  successors,  there  remains  but  a 
vague  respectful  feeling  towards  these  stones.  Small  sacred 
stones  acquire  a  redoubled  efficacy  as  they  take  their  place 
among  the  relics  and  implements  of  the  deceased  man  of 
power,  now  himself  become  a  ghost  of  power ;  his  sacrifices 
had  been  wont  to  reach  the  tindalo  whose  presence  was 
secured  to  him  by  that  stone,  and  now  the  presumed  attach- 
ment of  his  ghost  to  the  same  gives  credit  and  efficacy  to  the 
sacrifices  offered  near  it  or  upon  it  to  himself. 

Living  sacred  objects  in  the  Solomon  Islands  are  chiefly 
sharks,  alligators,  snakes,  bonitos,  and  frigate-birds.  Snakes 
which  haunt  a  sacred  place  are  themselves  sacred,  as  belonging 


xi.]       Solomon  Islands.    Snakes.    Sharks.       1 79 

to  or  serving  as  an  embodiment  of  the  ghost ;  there  was  one 
in  Savo,  to  look  upon  which  caused  death.    •In  San  Cristoval 
there  is  a  special  reverence  for  snakes  as  representatives  of 
the  spirit-snake  Kahausibware.    Sharks  are   in  all  these 
islands  very  often  thoug-ht  to  be  the  abode  of  ghosts,  as  men 
will  before  their  death  announce  that  they  will  appear  as 
sharks,  and  afterwards  any  shark  remarkable  for  size  or  colour 
which  is  observed  to  haunt  a  certain  shore  or  rock  is  taken  to 
be  some  one's  ghost,  and  the  name  of  the  deceased  is  given  to  it. 
Such  a  one  was  Sautahimatawa  at  Ulawa,  a  dreaded  man- 
eater  to  which  offerings  of  porpoise  teeth  were  made.    At  Saa 
certain  food,  such  as  cocoa-nuts  from  certain  trees,  is  reserved 
to  feed  such  a  ghost-shark,  and  there  are  certain  men  of 
whom  it  is  known  that  after  death  they  will  be  in  sharks, 
and  who  therefore  are  allowed  to  eat  such  food  in  the  sacred 
place.    Other  men  will  join  themselves  to  their  company;  a 
man  will  speak  as  with  the  voice  of  a  shark  -lid a  in  him,  and 
say,  'give  me  to  eat  of  that  food.'    Such  a  man,  if  it  appears 
that  he  is  really  saJca,  possessed  of  supernatural  power,  will 
after  his  death  be  counted  himself  as  a  ahaxUio'a ;  but  it  is 
possible  that  he  may  fail.    In  Saa  and  in  Ulawa  if  a  sacred 
shark  had  attempted  to  seize  a  man  and  he  had  escaped,  the 
people  would  be  so  much  afraid  of  the  shark's  anger  that 
they  would  throw  the  man  back  into  the  sea  to  be  drowned. 
These  sharks  also  were  thoug-ht  to  aid  in  catching  the  bonito, 
for  taking  which  supernatural  power  was  necessary.  There 
was  not  long  ago  near  Makira  in  San  Cristoval  a  shark  very 
much  respected,  and  fed  with  pig's  flesh ;  it  was  believed  to 
have  grown  so  large  within  a  circle  of  rocks  in  which  it  lived 
that  it  was  no  longer  able  to  pass  through  the  narrow 
entrance.     Sharks  are  very  commonly  believed  to  be  the 
abode  of  ghosts  in  Florida  and  Ysabel,  and  in  Savo,  where  they 
are  particularly  numerous ;  hence,  though  all  sharks  are  not 
venerated  there  is  no  living  creature  so  commonly  held  sacred 
as  a  shark,  and  the  tinclalo  of  the  shark,  lagea,  seem  even  to 
form  a  class  of  powerful  supernatural  beings.    In  Savo  not  W 
ago  Lodo  had  a  shark  that  he  used  to  feed,  and  to  which  he  used 

N  % 


1 80  Sacred  Places  and  Things.  [CH. 

to  sacrifice.  He  swam  out  to  it  with  food,  called  it  by  its 
name,  and  it  came  to  him.  He  had  received  his  association 
with  this  shark  from  his  ancestors,  in  the  same  way  in  which 
the  connexion  with  other  ghosts  on  shore  and  the  knowledge 
of  them  was  handed  down  from  generation  to  generation ;  for 
this  shark  was  a  tindalo.  There  was  the  same  association 
with  alligators  ;  a  chief  of  Bugotu  within  my  memory  had 
such  a  connexion  with  one,  in  which  his  son  at  Norfolk 
Island  thoroughly  believed.  There  was  a  story  current  also 
of  an  alligator  which  would  come  out  of  the  sea  and  make 
itself  at  home  in  the  Florida  village  in  which  the  man  whose 
ghost  was  in  it  had  lived ;  it  was  called  by  his  name,  and 
though  there  was  one  man  who  had  a  special  connexion  with 
it  and  was  said  to  own  it,  it  was  friendly  with  all,  and  would 
let  children  ride  upon  its  back ;  but  it  must  be  confessed  that 
though  its  existence  was  everywhere  asserted,  the  village 
where  it  could  be  seen  was  never  ascertained.  A  lizard  seen 
to  frequent  a  house  after  a  death  was  taken  to  be  the  ghost 
returning  to  his  old  home.  The  sacred  character  of  the 
frigate-bird  is  certain  ;  the  figure  of  it,  however  conventional, 
is  the  most  common  ornament  employed  in  the  Solomon 
Islands,  and  is  even  cut  upon  the  hands  of  the  Bugotu  people  ; 
the  oath  by  its  name  of  daula  is  solemn  and  binding  in 
Florida,  where  Daula  is  a  tindalo  ;  as  the  laiula  it  is  sacred  at 
Ulawa ;  just  as  many  ghosts  take  up  their  abode  in  sharks, 
many  also  and  powerful  to  aid  at  sea  are  those  which  abide  in 
these  birds.  The  ginger-plant  has  a  certain  sacred  character 
in  Florida  and  the  neighbouring  islands  ;  and  so  have  besides 
the  various  objects,  living  and  inanimate,  from  which  the 
respective  divisions  of  the  people  refrain  as  a  matter  of 
religious  obligation. 

In  Santa  Cruz  there  are  stones  about  which  stories  are  told 
connecting  them  with  the  dvka,  whether  ghosts  or  other 
spirits,  which  are  the  objects  of  worship ;  and  on  these  betel- 
nuts  are  placed  as  offerings.  Passing  eastwards  to  the  Banks' 
Islands  and  the  New  Hebrides,  a  region  is  reached  in  which 
religion  concerns  itself  chiefly  with  spirits  that  never  were 


xi.]  Banks  Islands  and  New  Hebrides.  Stones.  18 1 


embodied  in  men,  and  in  which  therefore  sacred  places  and 
objects  are  generally  such  because  of  their  connexion  with 
spirits.    Burial-places  are  certainly  held  in  respect,  especially 
the  graves  of  men  of  importance  in  their  time  ;  a  certain 
sacredness  attaches  to  all  belonging  to  the  dead  ;  but  it  is  to 
the  presence  of  a  spirit,  mi,  that  the  special  quality  of  most 
sacred  places  and  objects  belongs.    In  the  Banks'  Islands  the 
difference  between  a  naturally  sacred  character  and  that  which 
follows  upon  an  authoritative  separation  from  common  uses  is 
marked  by  the  use  of  two  words,  rongo  and  tajm  or  tambu, 
(recognised  in  English  as  taboo,)  corresponding  with  which  in 
the  New  Hebrides  are  sajmga  and  gogona.   A  naturally  sacred, 
rongo,  scqmga,  character  is  given  by  the  presence  of  a  spirit,  or 
association  with  one ;  and  in  by  far  the  greater  number  of 
instances  it  is  found  that  a  spirit  is  associated  with  a  stone. 
In  the  Banks'  Islands  a  man  would  happen  upon  a  boulder  of 
volcanic  or  coral  rock,  and  would  be  struck  with  a  belief  that 
a  spirit  was  connected  with  it.    The  stone  then  was  rongo,  and 
the  place  in  which  it  lay  was  rongo  ;  the  man  constituted  him- 
self the  master  of  the  sanctuary;  it  was  his  marana  within 
which  none  but  himself,  or  those  brought  in  by  him,  could 
come.    Some  stones  are  known  to  all,  and  are  of  more  common 
access.    At  Losalav  in  Saddle  Island  there  is  near  the  beach 
a  natural  ring  of  stones  which  has  been  from  time  immemorial 
a  sacred  place.    The  people  call  the  ring  a  fence,  the  space 
within  it  a  garden,  and  the  stones  that  he  within  yam,  banana, 
kava  pepper,  and  other  roots  and  fruits  commonly  planted 
by  them.     These  stones  were  used  for  offerings  of  money 
and  sweet-smelling  leaves,  in  the  belief  that  the  plants  corre- 
sponding to  the  stones  would  flourish  and  abound.  The 
character  and  influence  of  the  spirit  connected  with  any  sacred 
stone  was  judged  by  the  shape  of  the  stone.    If  a  man  came 
upon  a  large  stone  with  a  number  of  small  ones  beneath  it, 
lying  like  a  sow  among  her  litter,  he  was  sure  that  to  offer 
money  upon  it  would  bring  him  pigs.    Such  a  stone  is  Bo 
Tortoros  at  Mota ;  another  Merina  found  and  named  from  its 
shape  the  Pig ;  his  wealth  in  pigs  resulted  from  his  discovery. 


1 82  Sacred  Places  and  Things.  [cH. 

A  stone  with  little  disks  upon  it,  a  block  of  ancient  coral  was 
good  to  bring  m  money ;  any  fanciful  interpretation  of  a  mark 
on  a  stone  or  of  its  shape  was  enough  to  give  a  character  to 
the  stone  and  to  the  spirit  associated  with  it ;  the  stone  would 
not  have  that  mark  or  shape  without  a  reason.  Many  of  these 
stones  had  names  of  their  own,  as  above,  as  Puglava,  <  much 
money  out  at  interest/  at  Luwai,  and  as  more  than  one'  named 
simply  Money.  The  spirits  belonging  to  these  stones  are 
nameless;  their  connexion  each  with  its  own  stone  is  not 
clearly  denned  ;  the  stone,  they  say,  is  not  the  body  of  the 
spirit,  nor  is  the  spirit  like  the  soul  of  the  stone,  for  a  stone 
certainly  has  no  soul ;  they  say  that  the  spirit  is  at  the  stone, 
o  vm  ape  vain,  or  near  the  stone,  and  it  is  the  spirit*  not  the 
stone  that  acts.  Some  of  these  stones  have  an  ancient 
established  sanctity;  only  the  few  who  know  how  to  approach 
the  spirit  will  visit  them  for  sacrifice,  all  others  pass  by  with 
awe,  and  will  not  tread  the  sacred  ground  about  them.  If  by 
some  mishap  one  finds  that  he  has  intruded  on  a  sacred  place, 
he  hastens  to  engage  the  services  of  the  man  who  knows  the 
stone,  to  make  an  offering  to  the  spirit,  lest  he  should  suffer 
from  accident  or  sickness.  There  are  some  stones  that  have  a 
sinister  reputation,  as  those  near  which  an  accident  has  hap- 
pened ;  and  there  are  some  upon  which  it  is  dangerous  for  a  man's 
shadow  to  fall ;  it  is  well  to  make  offerings  upon  these,  to  keep 
the  spirit  in  good  humour.  A  stone  which  is  good  for  success 
in  fighting  is  also  likely  to  do  harm  if  not  treated  with  due 
observance  ;  some  stones  have  the  name  of  galaqar,  as  though 
they  would  spring  up  like  a  trap  upon  the  trespasser.  Large 
stones  as  they  naturally  lie  have  a  high  place  among  the  sacred 
objects  of  the  New  Hebrides.  In  Aurora  some  of  these  are 
believed  to  have  been  produced  in  the  ancient  time  of  universal 
darkness,  qong  tali,  when,  if  two  men  were  sitting  at  all  apart, 
a  stone  would  grow  up  out  of  the  ground  between  them  ;  such 
are  to  be  seen  in  the  forest  now,  tall  as  a  house  and  of  strange 
shapes.  These  have  no  names,  as  some  others  have  had  from 
ancient  times  ;  the  common  name  for  all  sacred  stones  is  matin. 
Some  are  vui  who  have  turned  into  stones  ;  some  in  the  sea  are 


XI,]  New  Hebrides.    Stones.  183 

men  of  old  time  turned  into  stones  ;  some  never  were  anything 
but  stones,  but  have  a  mi  connected  with  them  ;  some  stones 
above  the  waterfall  are  called  the  '  dwellers  in  the  land,'  the 
native  people  of  the  stream,  and  these  have  all  their  names. 
They  have  much  spiritual  power,  for  they  are  in  a  way  the 
bodily  presentment  of  the  spirits  to  whom  the  stream  belongs. 
When  men  go  eel-fishing,  they  secure  success  by  offering  a  bit 
of  the  first  they  catch  upon  the  appropriate  stone.  Sacred 
stones  of  all  kinds  have  spiritual  power,  mam,  as  belonging  to 
spirits,  in  various  degrees  and  to  be  obtained  for  various 
purposes.  Some  cause  sickness  of  the  soul,  some  have  great 
power  in  a  charm,  when  a  bit  taken  with  a  prayer  is  pounded 
up  with  a  fragment  of  the  person's  food  to  whom  mischief  is 
to  be  wrought.  Sometimes  in  Aurora  a  stone  is  smeared  with 
red  earth ;  in  Pentecost  and  Lepers'  Island  one  is  anointed 
with  the  juice  of  a  young  cocoa-nut.  In  the  last-named 
island  no  other  offerings  are  made  on  stones  ;  men  go  to  them 
in  the  sacred  places  in  the  forest  and  call  upon  Tagaro.  There 
are  also  stones  in  the  sea  near  Lepers'  Island  which  belong  to 
spirits,  and  which  people  in  canoes  will  not  approach  lest 
sharks  should  eat  them. 

The  stones  hitherto  referred  to  are  stones  as  they  naturally 
lie,  the  presence  of  which,  because  of  their  association  with  a 
spirit,  makes  the  ground  about  them  a  holy  place,  a  tano  rongo, 
or  ute  sapuga.  But  small  stones  that  could  be  carried  about 
had  an  active  part  in  the  native  life  of  the  Banks'  Islands  and 
the  New  Hebrides.  The  following  are  examples  from  the 
Banks'  group.  No  garden  was  planted  without  stones  buried 
in  the  ground  to  ensure  a  crop.  A  piece  of  Astraea  coral-stone 
water- worn  on  the  beach  often  bears  a  surprising  likeness  to  a 
bread-fruit.  A  man  who  should  find  one  of  these  would  try 
its  powers  by  laying  it  at  the  root  of  a  tree  of  his  own,  and  a 
good  crop  would  prove  its  connexion  with  a  spirit  good  for 
bread-fruit.  The  happy  owner  would  then  for  a  consideration 
take  stones  of  less  marked  character  from  other  men,  and  let 
them  lie  near  his,  till  the  mana  in  his  stone  should  be  imparted 
to  theirs.    Likeness  to  other  fruits  or  tubers  would  be  the 


J84  Sacred  Places  and  Things.  rCH< 

ground  of  a  belief  in  similar  powers.    Stones  were  much  used 
by  weather-doctors.    To  make  sunshine  it  might  be  enough 
only  to  smear  a  standing  stone  with  red  earth;  but  it  was 
very  effectual  to  wind  about  a  very  round  stone,  a  vat  loa 
sunstone,  with  red  braid,  and  stick  it  with  owls'  feathers  to 
represent  rays,  singing  in  a  low  voice  the  proper  spell  and 
then  to  hang  it  on  some  high  tree,  a  banyan  or  a  casuarina  in 
a  sacred  place.    The  stone  to  represent  the  sun  might  also  be 
kid  upon  the  ground  with  a  circle  of  white  rods  radiating 
from  it  for  its  beams.    There  are  stones  of  a  remarkably  W 
shape  called  in  the  Banks'  Islands  tamate  gangan,  that  is 
<  eating  ghost';  these  are  so  powerful  from  the  presence  with 
them  Of  a  ghost,  not  of  a  spirit,  that  if  a  man's  shadow  fall  on 
one  it  will  draw  out  his  soul  from  him,  so  that  he  wiU  die. 
Such  stones  therefore  are  set  in  a  house  to  guard  it ;  any  one 
sent  to  his  house  by  the  owner  in  his  absence  will  call  out 
his  sender's  name,  lest  the  ghost  should  think  he  has  bad 
intentions  and  do  him  a  mischief.    Other  stones,  also  con- 
nected with  ghosts,  have  such  power  that  when  the  owner  of 
one  puts  it  under  his  pillow  and  dreams  of  another  man,  that 
man  will  die.    One  who  has  such  a  stone  is  paid  by  an  enemy 
to  destroy  a  man  in  this  way,  and  '  dreams  him  to  an  end,'  U 
qore  mot.   These  stones  are  exceptional  as  deriving  their  power 
from  the  dead.    Some  again  are  called  tangaroa,  a  name  no 
doubt  the  same  with  that  of  the  brothers  of  Qat.    These  a 
man  would  carry  with  him  in  a  bag,  or  hang  up  in  his  house. 
If  one  went  into  a  house  where  these  stones  were  hanging  and 
meddled  with  the  property  of  the  owner,  and  after  a  while  an 
accident  were  to  befall  him,  it  would  be  said  that  the  tangaroa 
had  done  it.    Others,  called  tarunglea  and  varamrlea,  were 
swung  about  in  an  invaded  place  to  take  away  the  courage  of 
the  invaders.    Others  were  hung  as  amulets,  soasoa,  about  a 
man's  neck  to  keep  him  safe  in  danger;  others,  again,  would 
straighten  the  aim  and  strengthen  the  arm  to  shoot.  There 
were  others  that  women  would  take  with  them  to  bed  in 
hopes  of  children.    The  stones  on  which,  or  with  reference  to 
which,  sacrifices  are  made  are  by  no  means  always  such  as 


XI.] 


Sacred  Stones.  Heaps. 


185 


naturally  lie  m  situ,  but  are  small,  and  may  be  lost.  In  such 
a  case  the  owner  of  the  stone,  knowing-  that  ghosts  have 
hidden  it,  cries  to  them  and  they  restore  it ;  although  such  a 
iano-oloolo  is  such  by  virtue  of  its  association  not  with  ghosts 
but  spirits. 

Lepers'  Island  may  supply  examples  of  the  use  of  portable 
stones  in  the  Northern  New  Hebrides.  Besides  those  which 
lie  naturally  in  the  bush,  in  the  tauten,  the  sacred  spot  in 
which  Tagaro  is  invoked,  there  are  sacred  stones  which  have 
more  or  less  mana,  and  are  effective  for  various  purposes.  Some 
are  hung  up  in  bags  in  the  house.  Some  of  these  are  in- 
herited from  ancient  times,  and  some  are  new ;  some  are  good 
in  fighting,  some  will  produce  food,  some  will  cause  a  failure 
of  crop ;  none  will  cause  a  large  general  crop  for  the  year 
(that  must  be  done  by  forms  of  words),  and  none  are  good  for 
fishing.  None  are  used  in  planting  a  garden;  in  that  the 
juice  of  a  young  cocoa-nut  is  sprinkled  with  charms  upon  the 
ground,  and  the  shells  are  set  up  at  the  sides.  Each  stone  has 
its  appropriate  charm  with  Tagaro' s  name,  sung  over  it  when 
it  is  put  to  use. 

Though  the  superstitious  regard  for  stones  is  so  commonly 
shew-n,  and  the  superstitious  uses  of  them  are  so  multifarious, 
there  are  yet  practices  with  regard  to  them  in  which  the  na- 
tives deny  that  there  is  any  superstitious  or  religious  meaning 
and  intent,  natural  as  it  is  that  an  observer  should  suppose  it. 
Such  is  the  practice  of  throwing  stones  upon  a  heap  by  the 
way-side.  Such  a  heap  is  to  be  seen  at  Valuwa  in  Saddle 
Island ;  each  travelling  stranger  as  he  arrives  casts  his  stone 
upon  it.  The  natives  declare  that  their  notion  is  that  days 
accumulate  like  stones ;  a  man  as  he  adds  his  stone  to  the 
heap  '  puts  his  day  upon  it.'  At  Pun  in  the  same  island  is  a 
heap  of  fruits  of  various  trees  ;  a  stranger  as  he  comes  gathers 
any  fruit  by  the  wayside  and  adds  it  to  the  heap.  In  each 
case  it  is  a  custom  of  the  place  ;  the  people  there  like  it  to  be 
kept  up,  because  the  heaps  shew  how  many  visitors  they  have 
Between  Valuwa  and  Motlav  the  path  runs  between  two  large 
stones;  travellers  going  from  Motlav  to  Valuwa  kick  the 


1 86  Sacred  Places  and  Things.  [CH. 

stone  to  the  right  as  they  pass,  and  say,  '  Let  Valuwa  be  near 
and  Motlav  far ; '  travellers  to  Motlav  kick  the  other  stone 
and  say,  '  Let  Motlav  be  near  and  Valuwa  afar.'  This  again 
is  an  old  custom,  not  seriously  thought  of.  Another  custom 
common  to  the  Banks'  and  Solomon  Islands  is  that  of  throwing 
sticks,  leaves,  or  stones  upon  a  heap  at  a  place  of  steep  descent, 
or  where  a  difficult  path  begins.  They  'throw  away  their 
fatigue  ; '  they  certainly  do  not  acknowledge  that  they  make 
a  prayer  or  offering x. 

Streams,  or  rather  pools  in  streams,  are  sacred  in  the  Banks' 
Islands  by  reason  of  the  presence  of  a  spirit.  There  is  at 
Valuwa  a  deep  hole  into  which  no  one  dares  to  look  ;  if  the 
reflection  of  a  man  s  face  should  fall  upon  the  surface  of  the 
water  he  would  die  ;  the  spirit  would  lay  hold  upon  his  life  by 
means  of  it.  Trees  are  sacred  in  a  sacred  place ;  a  banyan 
often  harbours  in  the  labyrinth  of  its  stems  and  roots  a  sacred 
snake,  that  is,  a  spirit,  and  is  therefore  itself  sacred.  There 
are,  however,  two  trees  which  have  a  certain  inherent  sacredness 
of  their  own,  the  casuarina,  am,  and  the  cycas,  mele.  Nothing 
can  be  more  weird  and  ghostly  than  an  aged  casuarina  standing 
alone  on  a  wind-beaten  beach  or  rising  on  a  lofty  cliff,  with 
bare  grey  stem  and  shadowless  foliage,  never  without  a  voice 
whispering  in  a  calm  or  shrieking  in  a  breeze.  The  presence 
of  one  of  these  trees  gives  a  certain  sanctity  and  awfulness  to 
a  place ;  hence  to  translate  the  word  '  sanctuary '  the  best 

1  Many  years  ago  I  observed  beside  a  path  in  a  wood  in  Norfolk  Island  a 
little  heap  of  sticks  evidently  thrown  thereby  Melanesian  boys  passing  on  their 
way  to  fish  at  the  foot  of  steep  cliffs  of  difficult  descent.  I  enquired  of  my 
companions,  who  smiled  and  did  not  answer.  Long  after,  having  read  Mr. 
Forbes'  Naturalist's  Wanderings  in  the  Eastern  Archipelago,  I  put  the  question 
again  to  boys  from  the  Banks'  Islands  and  from  Florida.  Both  gave  the  same 
account,  that  it  was  done  to  ensure  a  safe  descent  in  that  place,  and  that  it  was 
common  in  their  islands  ;  both  declared  that  there  was  no  thought  of  sacrifice 
or  offering,  and  no  prayer,  only,  if  anything  was  said,  the  words  '  There  goes 
my  fatigue.'  Mr.  Forbes  mentions  a  similar  practice  twice,  once  in  Sumatra 
(p.  166),  where  the  porters  placed  handfuls  of  leaves  on  a  stone  and  prayed  for 
a  dry  day  and  good  luck  ;  and  again  in  Timor  (p.  481),  where  at  the  commence- 
ment of  a  steep  and  precipitous  descent  the  natives  laid  leaves  and  twigs  on  a 
mound  '  to  ensure  a  safe  descent.' 


XI.] 


Trees.    Sharks.  Snakes. 


187 


Mota  word  is  tano-aruaru,  place  of  casuarinas.  The  cycas  is 
also  sacred,  rongo,  but  it  is  cut  down  without  hesitation  by  the 
natives  if  it  be  in  the  way.  Crotons  and  dracssnas  have  a 
certain  sacredness  in  connexion  with  the  dead.  In  Aiaga, 
Pentecost  Island,  there  is  a  strange  belief  that  the  cycas-tree 
turns  into  a  young-  man  or  woman,  like  the  snake  to  be  here- 
after mentioned  ;  only  the  ear  remains  unchanged,  it  shews  a 
leaflet  of  the  tree. 

The  living  creatures  which  are  most  commonly  held  sacred 
in  the  Banks'  Islands  and  New  Hebrides  are  sharks  and 
snakes ;  all  kingfishers  have  at  least  something  of  a  sacred 
character,  and  some  owls,  crabs,  lizards,  eels,  and  such  things 
as  haunt  a  place  sacred  because  of  the  presence  of  a  spirit.  In 
the  Banks'  Islands  a  shark  may  be  a  tangaroa,  a  sort  of  familiar 
spirit,  or  the  abode  of  one.  Some  years  ago  Manurwar,  son 
of  Mala,  the  chief  man  in  Vanua  Lava,  had  such  a  shark,  for 
which  he  had  given  money  to  a  Maewo  man  to  send  it  to 
him.  It  was  very  tame,  and  would  come  up  to  him  when  he 
went  down  to  the  beach  at  Nawono,  and  follow  along  in  the 
surf  as  he  walked  along  the  shore.  Tursal,  my  informant,  had 
himself  seen  it  do  this.  This  corresponds  with  what  has 
been  above  related  of  Lodo  and  his  shark  at  Savo  ;  and  the 
difference  is  instructive  that  in  the  Banks'  Islands  the  shark 
was  a  spirit  and  in  the  Solomon  Islands  it  was  a  ghost.  In 
the  New  Hebrides  some  men  have  the  power,  as  the  natives 
believe,  of  changing  themselves  into  sharks,  as  may  be  seen  in 
the  story  of  Tarkeke.  A  great  deal  of  superstition  is  con- 
nected with  snakes,  not  only  because  one  is  sure  to  be  seen 
about  a  sacred  place,  but  because  the  reptile  is  often  thought 
to  be  otherwise  connected  with  a  vui,  spirit,  to  have  a  spirit 
near  it.  In  Mota  there  are  no  land-snakes;  in  the  other 
islands  of  the  Banks'  group  some  of  enormous  size  are  said  to 
live  in  banyan-trees,  and  are  held  sacred.  At  Valuwa  there 
are  snakes  which  strangers  are  not  allowed  to  see,  lest  some 
misfortune  should  follow.  Ordinary  snakes  are  killed.  Those 
that  are  held  sacred  are  not  fed  or  worshipped,  but  such  as  are 
the  familiars  of  individuals  who  know  them  receive  sacrifices. 


1 88  Sacred  Places  and  Things.  rCH, 

In  the  New  Hebrides  snakes  are  perhaps  more  regarded  than 
m  the  Banks'  Islands.  A  native  of  Pentecost  Island,  if  he 
sees  one  in  a  sacred  place  or  in  a  house,  will  think  that  there 
is  some  reason  for  its  appearing  to  him ;  he  will  pour  over 
himself  the  juice  of  a  young  cocoa-nut,  and  ever  afterwards 
expect  to  find  the  world  go  well  with  him  through  the 
influence  of  the  spirit,  or  it  may  be  of  the  ghost,  associated 
with  the  reptile.  In  Lepers'  Island  if  a  snake  haunts  a  man's 
house,  more  particularly  if  it  be  a  great  man's  house,  they  are 
persuaded  that  it  is  a  spirit ;  it  is  gogona,  not  to  be  lightly  ap- 
proached ;  it  brings  good  luck  to  the  house,  and  makes  the 
owner  rise  in  the  huqe  society.  The  house  itself  is  treated 
with  respect ;  no  one  will  throw  a  stone  at  it,  or  mount  upon 
it;  the  snake  would  resent  such  disrespect  and  make  the 
offender  ill. 

There  is  an  amphibious  sea-snake  marked  with  bands  of 
dark  and  light  colour,  which  in  the  Banks'  Islands  and  New 
Hebrides  is  always  more  or  less  dreaded  whenever  it  is  seen. 
In  these  islands  it  is  generally  called  mae,  and  it  is  this  kind 
of  snake  which  becomes  the  familiar  spirit  of  those  who  have, 
or  profess  to  have,  intercourse  with  it.  In  Araga,  Pentecost, 
every  mae  is  believed  to  have  the  supernatural  power  oimana  ; 
one  will  do  harm  to  men  by  taking  away  bits  of  their  food  into 
a  sacred  place,  upon  which  their  lips  will  swell  and  their  bodies 
break  out  with  ulcers.  Some  men  turn  into  these  snakes, 
and  these  snakes  again  turn  into  men.  A  mae  does  not  behave 
like  an  ordinary  snake  ;  it  shews  that  it  is  something  different, 
for  example,  by  washing  its  young.  In  a  certain  gamal,  club- 
house, in  Araga,  is  a  hollow  piece  of  the  wood  of  a  certain  tree 
they  call  bugo,  in  which  is  water.  In  the  night  a  mother  mae 
used  to  come  and  wash  her  young  one  in  this  water  ;  the 
people  sleeping  there  used  to  hear  it  cry  and  knew  what  it 
was.  They  made  a  pipe  to  imitate  the  cry  exactly,  and  use 
it  now.  The  belief  is  most  strong  in  all  these  islands  that 
this  snake  turns  itself  into  a  young  man  or  woman,  generally 
into  a  young  woman,  to  tempt  one  of  the  opposite  sex ;  to 
yield  to  the  temptation  causes  death. 


xi.]  Changeling  Snakes.  189 

It  is  possible  to  discover  the  deceit,  but  the  discovery  is 
often  made  too  late.    In  Araga  the  changed  mae  may  be 
known  by  the  skin  under  the  neck,  which  remains  unchanged. 
It  was  only  lately  that  a  youth  died  at  Vathuqe  in  that 
island  who  had  been  enticed  by  a  changeling  girl ;  he  saw 
her  neck  and  came  back  and  told  his  people ;  they  tried  the 
proper  remedy  of  smoke  in  vain.    There  is  another  test  used 
in  that  island  ;  the  suspected  temptress  is  induced  to  sit  upon 
a  nettle-tree,  and  is  convicted  by  her  ignorance  of  its  character. 
In  the  Banks'  Islands  a  young  man,  as  one  has  related  his 
experience  to  myself,  coming  back  from  his  fishing  on  the 
rocks  towards  sunset,  will  see  a  girl  with  her  head  bedecked 
with  flowers  beckoning  to  him  from  the  slope  of  the  cliff  up 
which  his  path  is  leading  him  ;  he  recognizes  the  countenance 
of  some  girl  of  his  own  or  a  neighbouring  village  ;  he  stands 
and  hesitates,  and  thinks  she  must  be  a  mae;  he  looks  more 
closely,  and  observes  that  her  elbows  and  knees  bend  the 
wrong  way;  this  reveals  her  true  character,  and  he  flies.  If 
a  young  man  can  strike  the  temptress  with  a  dracaena  leaf  she 
turns  into  her  own  shape  and  glides  away  a  snake.    At  Gaua, 
Santa  Maria,  a  man  met  one  of  these  standing  or  variegated 
snakes,  as  they  call  them,  mae  tiratira,  valeleas,  on  the  beach 
at  night  in  the  form  of  a  woman  of  the  place.    Seeing  by  hex- 
reversed  joints  what  she  was,  he  offered  to  go  to  the  village 
and  bring  her  money.    When  he  returned  he  found  her  wait- 
ing for  him.  in  her  proper  form  as  a  mae ;  he  scattered  money 
upon  her  back,  and  she  went  off  with  it  into  the  sea.  More 
lately  in  the  same  place  a  young  man  just  returned  from 
'labour'  in  Queensland,  saw  one  of  these  in  the  form  of  a 
young  married  woman  of  his  village.    She  turned  into  the 
stalk  of  a  creeper,  as  in  that  island  it  is  believed  that  these 
creatures  do.    It  is  believed  also  that  if  the  man  can  cut  the 
creeper  short  he  will  live  ;  this  young  man  accordingly  broke 
this  vine  off  short  and  got  safe  home.    But  since  that  time 
there  has  been  something  in  the  night  disturbing  those  who 
sleep  in  the  same  club-house  with  him,  and  he  has  confessed 
that  it  is  this  snake-woman  who  comes  to  him  in  the  nia-ht ; 


1 90  Sacred  Places  and  Things. 

and  all  believe  him.  Sometimes  a  young-  man  will  run  home  at 
night  and  lose  his  senses  ;  they  are  sure  that  he  has  been  with 
a  mae.  Sometimes  one  will  come  in  and  lie  down  and  sicken  ; 
they  press  him,  and  he  confesses  what  he  has  done  and  seen, 
and  then  he  dies.  Nothing"  seems  to  be  more  fixed  in  the 
minds  of  natives,  even  those  who  have  some  education,  than 
the  persuasion  that  all  this  is  true. 

The  sacred  character  of  the  kingfisher  is  remarkable,  and 
the  reason  of  it  hard  to  find.  In  San  Cristoval  a  kingfisher 
pecks  the  head  of  the  lately  separated  soul  which  has  not  yet 
realized  its  condition,  and  it  sinks  into  a  ghost ;  the  natives 
therefore  kill  it,  but  young  ones  spring-  up  from  the  blood  of 
every  one  they  kill.  In  the  Banks'  Islands  every  kingfisher, 
siffo,  is  sacred,  rongo  ;  a  spirit  is  connecbed  with  it ;  not  one  is 
ever  killed  or  eaten.  It  is  a  singular  thing-  that  they  make 
halcyon  days  ;  it  is  the  name  of  the  kingfisher  that  carries  the 
magic  power  in  the  charm  for  sunshine,  for  the -s^o  is  thought 
to  control  storms  and  rain,  and  the  charm  calls  on  it  to  eat 
the  rising  waves  and  make  a  calm.  They  declare  that  there 
are  kingfishers  at  sea  as  well  as  on  land,  some  of  a  species  only 
seen  at  sea  away  from  land.  If  a  man  going  out  on  a  journey 
hears  a  kingfisher  cry,  he  thinks  it  is  angry  and  forbids  his 
going ;  he  therefore  sings  a  charm  :  '  Tacjar  we  me-e,  nelehet 
ni  van  harbar,  ne  lee  toe  ni  ver  gor  nangek  me-e  !  Good  luck  to 
me,  let  mischief  pass  beside  me,  let  good  hap  come  round 
before  my  face  1 ! ' 


1  In  prose  Mota  '  Togara  icia  raa,  0  lea  we  tatas  ni  van  parapara,  0  lea  we 
toia  ni  viro  goro  nanagoh  ma.' 


CHAPTEE  XII. 


MAGIC. 

That  invisible  power  which,  is  believed  by  the  natives  to 
cause  all  such  effects  as  transcend  their  conception  of  the 
regular  course  of  nature,  and  to  reside  in  spiritual  beings, 
whether  in  the  spiritual  part  of  living  men  or  in  the  ghosts 
of  the  dead,  being  imparted  by  them  to  their  names  and  to 
various  things  that  belong  to  them,  such  as  stones,  snakes, 
and  indeed  objects  of  all  sorts,  is  that  generally  known  as 
nana.  Without  some  understanding  of  this  it  is  impossible 
to  understand  the  religious  beliefs  and  practices  of  the  Mela- 
nesians;  and  this  again  is  the  active  force  in  all  they  do  and 
believe  to  be  done  in  magic,  white  or  black.  By  means  of 
this  men  are  able  to  control  or  direct  the  forces  of  nature,  to 
make  rain  or  sunshine,  wind  or  calm,  to  cause  sickness  or  re- 
move it,  to  know  what  is  far  off  in  time  and  space,  to  bring 
good  luck  and  prosperity,  or  to  blast  and  curse.  No  man,  how- 
ever, has  this  power  of  his  own  ;  all  that  he  does  is  done  by 
the  aid  of  personal  beings,  ghosts  or  spirits  ;  he  cannot  be  said, 
as  a  spirit  can,  to  be  mana  himself,  using  the  word  to  express 
a  quality ;  he  can  be  said  to  have  mana,  it  may  be  said  to  be 
with  him,  the  word  being  used  as  a  substantive.  In  the  New 
Hebrides,  the  Banks'  Islands,  the  Solomon  Islands  about 
Florida,  as  in  New  Zealand  and  many  of  the  Pacific  Islands, 
the  word  in  use  is  mana.  In  Santa  Cruz  a  different  word,' 
malele,  is  used,  which  bears  however  the  same  meaning' 
At  Saa  in  Malanta  all  persons  and  things  in  which  this 
supernatural  power  resides  are  said  to  be  saka,  that  is,  hot. 
Ghosts  that  are  powerful  are  saka  ;  a  man  who  has  know- 


192  Magic.  [CH. 

ledge  of  the  things  which  have  spiritual  power  is  himself 
saka  ;  one  who  knows  a  charm  which  is  saka  mutters  it 
over  water,  saru'e,  and  makes  the  water  '  hot,'  ha  arnica.  The 
people  of  Mala  Masiki,  the  lesser  part  of  the  island,  which 
is  cut  in  two  not  far  from  its  south-eastern  end  by  a  narrow 
channel,  think  that  the  men  of  the  larger  part,  Mala  Paina, 
are  very  saka.  If  one  of  these  visiting  the  Saa  people 
points  with  his  finger,  suisui,  there  is  danger  of  death  or 
calamity;  if  one  of  them  spits  on  a  man  he  dies  at  once. 
By  whatever  name  it  is  called,  it  is  the  belief  in  this  super- 
natural power,  and  in  the  efficacy  of  the  various  means  by 
which  spirits  and  ghosts  can  be  induced  to  exercise  it  for  the 
benefit  of  men,  that  is  the  foundation  of  the  rites  and  practices 
which  can  be  called  religious  ;  and  it  is  from  the  same  belief 
that  everything  which  may  be  called  Magic  and  Witchcraft 
draws  its  origin.  Wizards,  doctors,  weather-mongers,  prophets, 
diviners,  dreamers,  all  alike,  everywhere  in  the  islands,  work 
by  this  power.  There  are  many  of  these  who  may  be  said  to 
exercise  their  art  as  a  profession  ;  they  get  their  property  and 
influence  in  this  way.  Every  considerable  village  or  settle- 
ment is  sure  to  have  some  one  who  can  control  the  weather  and 
the  waves,  some  one  who  knows  how  to  treat  sickness,  some 
one  who  can  work  mischief  with  various  charms.  There  may 
be  one  whose  skill  extends  to  all  these  branches  ;  but  generally 
one  man  knows  how  to  do  one  thing  and  one  another.  This 
various  knowledge  is  handed  down  from  father  to  son,  from 
uncle  to  sister's  son,  in  the  same  way  as  is  the  knowledge  of 
the  rites  and  methods  of  sacrifice  and  prayer ;  and  very  often 
the  same  man  who  knows  the  sacrifice  knows  also  the  making 
of  the  weather,  and  of  charms  for  many  purposes  besides. 
But  as  there  is  no  order  of  priests,  there  is  also  no  order  of 
magicians  or  medicine-men.  Almost  every  man  of  considera- 
tion knows  how  to  approach  some  ghost  or  spirit,  and  has 
some  secret  of  occult  practices.  Knowledge  of  either  kind  can 
be  bought,  if  the  possessor  chooses  to  impart  it  to  any  other 
than  the  heirs  of  whatever  he  has  besides. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  those  who  exercise  these  arts  really 


XII.] 


Native  Belief  in  Charms. 


193 


believe  in  the  power  of  them  as  much  as  the  people  on  whose 
behalf  they  exercise  them.     In  some  cases  there  is  conscious 
deceit,  such  as  has  been  many  times  confessed  by  those  who 
have  become  Christians.  A  young  woman  of  my  acquaintance 
in  the  Banks'  Islands  had  a  reputation  for  power  of  healing- 
toothache  by  a  charm  which  had  been  taught  her  by  an 
aged  relative  deceased.    She  would  lay  a  certain  leaf  rolled 
up  with  certain  muttered  words  upon  the  part  inflamed  ;  and 
when  in  course  of  time  the  pain  subsided,  she  would  take  out 
and  unfold  the  leaf,  and  shew  within  it  the  little  white  maggot 
that  was  the  cause  of  the  trouble.    When  Christian  teaching 
began  in  the  island  she  made  no  difficulty  about  disclosing 
the  secret,  and  all  laughed  over  it  together.    It  is  likely 
enough  also  that  a  weather-doctor  observed  for  himself,  and 
was  taught  by  his  predecessor  to  observe,  the  signs  of  change 
and  steadiness  in  weather,  and  brought  his  charms  to  work  or 
kept  them  back  according  to  his  observations.    But  the  means 
he  used  seemed  to  him  to  be  so  naturally  effective,  and  had 
been  so  often  followed  by  the  results  at  which  they  were 
aimed,  that  he  seriously  believed  in  them  ;  and  if  sometimes 
they  failed  conspicuously,  as  when  at  Ysabel  the  weather- 
doctor's  own  house  was  blown  down  by  a  storm  on  the.  very 
day  on  which  he  had  warranted  a  calm,  there  was  also  the  ex- 
planation that  another  counter-charm  had  been  at  work  and 
had  been  stronger.    Such  a  supposition  tended  to  confirm 
much  more  than  to  weaken  the  belief  in  the  power  of  weather- 
doctors.    It  is  not  only  in  Melanesian  islands  that  whatever 
confirms  a  belief  is  accepted  and  whatever  makes  against  it  is 
not  weighed.    Those  who  practised  the  various  kinds  of  magic 
did  believe  very  much  in  their  own  art. 

Though  those  who  practise  these  various  arts  cannot  be 
separated  into  various  classes  or  orders,  or  even  regarded  as 
an  order  by  themselves,  inasmuch  as  they  are  mixed  among 
the  population,  and  practise  as  they  know  some  more  some 
fewer  arts,  it  will  be  almost  necessary  to  classify  their 
practices.  These  may  be  arranged  under  the  heads  of  Sick- 
ness, Weather,  Witchcraft,  Dreams,  Prophecy  and  Divination, 


0 


194  Magic.  [CH. 

Ordeals,  Poison,  Curses.  In  all  these  whatever  is  done  is 
helieved  to  be  effected  by  the  mana  of  spirits  and  ghosts, 
acting  through  various  media,  and  brought  to  bear  by  secret 
forms  of  words  to  which  the  power  to  work  is  given  by  the 
names  of  the  spirits  or  ghosts,  or  of  the  living  or  lifeless 
things  to  which  this  mysterious  influence  is  attached. 

(i)  Sickness.  Any  sickness  that  is  serious  is  believed  to  be 
brought  about  by  ghosts  or  spirits  ;  common  complaints  such 
as  fever  and  ague  are  taken  as  coming  in  the  course  of  nature. 
To  say  that  savages  are  never  ill  without  supposing  a  super- 
natural cause  is  not  true  of  Melanesians  ;  they  make  up  their 
minds  as  the  sickness  comes  whether  it  is  natural  or  not,  and 
the  more  important  the  individual  who  is  sick,  the  more  likely 
his  sickness  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  anger  of  a  ghost  whom  he 
has  offended,  or  to  witchcraft.  No  great  man  would  like  to 
be  told  that  he  was  ill  by  natural  weakness  or  decay.  The 
sickness  is  almost  always  believed  to  be  caused  by  a  ghost,  not 
by  a  spirit.  It  happens,  indeed,  as  in  the  New  Hebrides,  where 
spirits  are  the  chief  objects  of  religious  regard,  that  a  man 
knows  that  he  has  trespassed  on  a  sacred  place  belonging  to 
some  spirit,  or  has  an  ill-wisher  who  has  a  spirit  for  a  helper, 
and  supposes  therefore  when  he  is  ill  that  a  spirit  has  brought 
his  sickness  on  him.  Bat  generally  it  is  to  the  ghosts  of  the 
dead  that  sickness  is  ascribed  in  the  eastern  islands  as  well  as 
in  the  western  ;  recourse  is  had  to  them  for  aid  in  causing  and 
removing  sickness ;  and  ghosts  are  believed  to  inflict  sickness 
not  only  because  some  offence,  such  as  a  trespass,  has  been 
committed  against  them,  or  because  one  familiar  with  them 
has  sought  their  aid  with  sacrifice  and  spells,  but  because  there 
is  a  certain  malignity  in  the  feeling  of  all  ghosts  towards  the 
living,  who  offend  them  by  being  alive.  All  human  powers 
which  are  not  merely  bodily  are  believed  to  be  enhanced  by 
death  ;  the  ghost  therefore  of  an  ill-conditioned  powerful  man 
is  naturally  thought  ready  to  use  his  increased  powers  of 
mischief. 

Thus  in  Florida  it  is  a  tindaZo,  that  is,  a  ghost  of  power, 
that  causes  illness ;  it  is  a  matter  of  conjecture  which  of  the 


xn.]  Florida.    Sickness.  195 

known  tindalos  it  may  be.    Sometimes  a  person  has  reason  to 
think,  or  fancies,  that  he  has  offended  his  dead  father,  uncle, 
or  brother.    In  that  case  no  special  intercessor  is  required  ; 
the  patient  himself  or  one  of  the  family  will  sacrifice,  and  beg 
the  tindalo  to  take  the  sickness  away;  it  is  a  family  affair. 
Sometimes  a  sick  man  thinks  it  is  his  own  familiar  tindalo, 
and  leaves  his  house  to  avoid  him.    If  the  cause  of  sickness  is 
a  matter  of  conjecture,  a  mane  kisu,  one  who  understands  these 
things,  a  doctor,  is  called  in.    He  will  say  that  he  knows  the 
offended  ghost ;  if  it  be  a  child  he  will  say  that  it  has  trod  in 
the  sacred  place,  vunuha,  of  some  tindalo  whom  he  calls  his  own  ; 
or  else  the  parents  will  guess  or  enquire  where  the  child  has 
been,  and  will  send  for  the  mane  kisu  who  has  influence  with 
the  tindalo  of  that  place.    The  doctor  called  in  will  bind  upon 
the  patient  the  leaves  belonging  to  his  tindalo,  will  chew 
ginger  and  blow  into  the  patient's  ears  and  on  that  part  of  the 
skull  which  is  soft  in  infants,  will  call  on  the  name  of  the 
tindalo,  and  beg  him  to  remove  the  sickness.    When  he  makes 
his  request,  speaking  in  a  low  voice,  he  is  said  to  kokoe 
liulivuti,  to  speak,  as  the  word  is  now  used,  in  prayer.    If  the 
sickness  continues,  another  tindalo  or  another  mane  kisu  is  tried. 
If  no  conjecture  can  be  made  as  to  the  ghost  probably  offended, 
any  mane  kisu,  for  a  fee  in  money,  will  undertake  to  get  his 
own  tindalo,  who  must  know,  to  intercede  with  the  one  who  is 
doing  the  mischief.    In  some  cases  it  may  be  a  likely  guess 
that  some  one  who  has  ill-will  towards  the  sufferer  has  set  his 
tindalo  to  afflict,  as  they  say  to  eat,  the  patient ;  he  then  may 
take  money  to  call  off  the  eating  ghost.    If  he  will  not  do  this, 
another  more  powerful  tindalo  may  be  engaged  through 
another  mane  kisu,  who  will  prevail  over  the  original  assailant 
and  drive  him  off.    While  these  remedies  are  being  tried  the 
patient  either  recovers  or  dies  ;  if  he  recovers,  the  doctor  under 
whose  treatment  he  began  to  mend  has  the  credit  and  good 
payment ;  if  he  dies,  the  power  of  the  tindalo  that  has  prevailed 
throughout  is  established.    There  is  also  mixed  with  this 
treatment  something  like  the  use  of  medicine,  the  effect  of 
which,  however,  is  always  supposed  to  depend  upon  the  tindalo 

o  % 


196  Magic.  [CH. 

engaged.  The  mane  klsu  knows  certain  herbs,  and  warms  them 
in  a  cocoa-nut  shell  over  the  fire ;  the  steam  applied  to  the 
patient  drives  away  the  pain  or  the  disease.  For  cough 
an  infusion  is  drunk,  the  leaves  being  thrown  away.  The 
doctors  also  practise  massage,  kneading,  squeezing,  and  rubbing 
the  body  and  limbs  of  the  patient.  In  Ysabel  (and  no  doubt 
also  in  Florida)  the  doctor  called  in  will  discover  the  tindatho 
who  causes  the  complaint  he  has  to  treat,  by  suspending  a 
stone  or  heavy  ornament  at  the  end  of  a  string  which  he  holds 
in  his  hand,  and  calling  over  the  names  of  the  lately  deceased  ; 
when  the  name  of  him  who  causes  the  disease  is  called  the 
stone  swings  in  answer.  Then  it  remains  to  ask  what  shall  be 
given  to  appease  the  anger  of  the  ghost — a  mash  of  yams, 
a  fish,  a  pig,  a  man.  The  answer  is  given  in  the  same  way; 
whatever  is  desired  is  offered  on  the  dead  man's  grave,  and  the 
sickness  goes. 

In  Wango  in  San  Cristoval  the  natives  not  long  ago  believed 
that  the  ghosts,  there  called  'adaro,  actually  fought  with  one 
another  over  the  sick  with  spears.  A  man  would  have  a 
grudge  against  another,  and  pay  a  wizard  to  bring  an  'adaro  to 
'  eat '  him,  to  do  him  mischief.  It  would  become  known  that 
he  had  given  a  pig,  as  it  might  be,  to  that  wizard,  and  the 
man  whose  life  was  aimed  at,  or  his  friends,  would  go  to 
another  wizard,  and  by  a  larger  fee  secure  as  they  hoped  a 
stronger  'adaro  for  their  side.  The  two  ghosts  would  fight  it 
out,  or  probably  more  than  one  would  be  engaged  on  either 
side  ;  the  man  would  sicken,  die,  or  keep  his  health,  according 
to  the  issue  of  the  unseen  battle.  Ghosts  that  haunt  the  sea 
are  believed  to  shoot  men  on  the  reefs  or  in  canoes  with  fish 
darted  at  them  invisibly ;  or  if,  as  often  happens,  a  flying-fish 
or  gar-fish  springs  from  the  waves  and  strikes  a  man,  they  say 
that  an  'adaro  shoots  it ;  it  is  no  common  fish,  the  man  will  die. 
Sick  persons  are  commonly  treated  with  ginger  and  other 
roots  and  leaves,  and  with  water  over  which  a  charm  has  been 
muttered  to  give  it  healing  power  from  an  'adaro. 

In  Santa  Cruz  the  cause  of  sickness  is  an  offended  duka, 
ghost  or  spirit,  and  the  doctor  called  in  is  a  mendeka,  a  man 


xii.]      Treatment  of  Sickness  in  Santa  Cruz.  197 

with  whom  is  the  malete,  which  corresponds  to  the  more 
common  mana,  and  who  has  a  duka  belonging  to  himself;  for 
example,  at  Neula,  where  Neobla  is  the  duka  in  vogue,  they 
always  send  for  Neobla's  mendeka.  The  doctor  comes  and  sits 
by  the  sick  person,  expecting  the  coming  of  the  duka  to  him. 
Presently  he  cries  with  a  loud  voice  that  he  is  come,  and  then 
he  gives  the  reason,  supplied  him  by  the  duka,  why  the  man 
is  sick,  and  directs  what  satisfaction  is  to  be  made.  The 
doctor  always  receives  a  fee.    If  the  patient  dies,  the  reason 


Man  fishing  shot  by  a  sea- ghost.    Native  deawing. 


given  is  that  some  other  duka  with  whom  the  doctor  is  not  on 
good  terms  has  been  at  work ;  if  he  recovers  he  gives  a  pig 
for  the  duka,  and  a  bit  of  it  is  put  before  the  stock  which 
represents  him.  Sometimes  an  offended  duka  will  shoot  a 
man,  and  the  mendeka  will  extract  the  arrow-head,  working  it 
down  from  above  into  the  sick  man's  foot  with  sweet  herbs 
and  cocoa-nut  juice,  singing  in  a  low  voice  and  muttering  his 
charms,  and  finally  bringing  out  a  splinter  of  tree-fern  wood 
from  the  sole.  Sometimes  very  bitter  juice  squeezed  out  of 
certain  leaves  is  given  to  the  patient  to  drink,  sometimes  the 


198 


Magic. 


[en. 


treatment  of  a  local  pain  is  to  squeeze  leaves  and  herbs  upon 
the  part ;  but  it  is  the  malete,  and  not  the  natural  property  of 
these  medicines,  that  works  the  cure. 

In  the  Banks'  Islands  the  gismana  practised  the  same  arts 
with  his  brethren  of  the  west 1.  He  worked  the  cause  of  pain 
and  disease  downwards,  and  extracted  it ;  he  stroked  the  seat  of 
pain  and  spat ;  he  sucked  out  or  bit  out  from  the  seat  of  pain 
a  fragment  of  wood,  bone,  or  leaf ;  for  swellings  he  chewed 
certain  herbs  and  leaves  and  blew,  pztpsag,  upon  the  place  ;  he 
used  fomentations  and  poultices  of  mallow  leaves,  for  example, 
with  some  knowledge  of  the  healing  and  soothing  properties 
in  them  ;  he  gave  the  patient  to  drink  water  from  a  hollow  in 
a  sacred  stone,  or  water  in  which  stones  full  of  mana  for  this 
purpose  had  been  laid,  from  which  probably  European  medicine 
came  to  be  called  pei  mana  ;  and  all  was  done  by  virtue  of  the 
mana  conveyed  in  the  charms  sung  over  the  remedy  employed, 
songs  which  were  themselves  called  mana,  or  in  the  muttered 
words,  toosag,  which  took  the  disease  away.  Women  had  a 
share  in  the  practice  of  this  art ;  some  of  them  knew  the 
charms  by  which  the  soul  of  a  sick  child  which  a  ghost  was 
drawing  away  could  be  recalled,  and  the  ghost  driven  off;  the 
woman  blowing  on  the  child's  eyes  and  calling  the  name  of 
the  attacking  ghost.  The  gismana  by  no  means  confined 
himself  to  the  care  of  the  sick,  all  ways  of  working  by  means 
of  mafia  were  in  his  line  of  practice  ;  women,  however,  did  not 

1  '  One  of  our  native  mission  agents  in  Fiji  assured  me  very  earnestly  that  he 
had  the  power  of  expelling  disease-causing  spirits,  and  he  gave  me  a  minute 
description  of  his  treatment.  He  passed  his  hands  over  the  patient's  body  till 
he  detected  the  spirit  by  a  peculiar  fluttering  sensation  in  his  finger  ends.  He 
then  endeavoured  to  bring  it  down  to  one  of  the  extremities,  a  foot  or  hand. 
Much  patience  and  care  were  required,  because  these  spirits  are  very  cunning, 
and  will  double  back  and  hide  themselves  in  the  trunk  of  the  body  if  you 
give  them  a  chance.  "  And  even,"  he  said,  "  when  you  have  got  the  demon 
into  a  leg  or  an  arm  which  you  can  grasp  with  your  fingers,  you  must  take  care 
or  he  will  escape  you.  He  will  lodge  in  the  joints,  and  hide  himself  among  the 
bones.  Hard  indeed  it  is  to  get  him  out  of  a  joint !  But  when  you  have  drawn 
him  down  to  a  finger  or  a  toe,  you  must  pull  him  out  with  a  sudden  jerk,  and 
throw  him  far  away,  and  blow  after  him  lest  lie  should  return."  ' — Eev.  L. 
Fison. 


xn.]     Sickness  in  New  Hebrides.     Weather.  199 

practise  harmful  arts  1.  In  the  New  Hebrides  the  healing  of 
the  sick  belongs  in  Aurora  to  the  gismana,  in  Lepers'  Island 
to  the  tangaloe  ngovo,  in  Pentecost  to  the  mafa  tawaga,  to  those, 
that  is  to  say,  who  have  the  knowledge  of  the  songs  and 
charms,  believed  to  have  come  down  from  Tagaro  himself,  by 
which  nana  is  conveyed  and  applied.  In  Aurora  those  who 
dream  have  the  larger  practice.  In  Pentecost  and  Lepers' 
Island  the  juice  of  a  very  young  cocoa-nut,  on  which  the  doctor 
has  blown,  with  a  charm  muttered  or  sung,  is  drunk  by  the 
patient  or  rubbed  upon  him,  and  water,  with  mana  imparted 
to  it  in  the  same  way,  is  also  used.  Sickness  is  generally 
supposed  to  be  caused  by  ghosts,  but  as  the  sacred  places  and 
objects  which  may  be  profaned  or  lightly  used  belong  to  spirits, 
these  are  believed  often  to  be  angry,  and  to  inflict  pain  and 
disease.  The  power  of  a  spirit  is  also  brought  by  a  charm  or 
curse  to  harm  a  man  ;  it  is  natural,  therefore,  that  in  the  treat- 
ment of  the  sick  recourse  should  be  had  to  spirits,  and  above 
all  to  Tagaro,  rather  than  to  ghosts.  The  name  of  Tagaro 
controls  both  ghosts  and  spirits.  In  Pentecost  the  doctor  will 
forbid  some  kind  of  food  to  the  patient,  and  when  he  recovers 
bring  him  some  of  it  to  eat  as  a  proof  that  he  is  well.  In  both 
islands  women  know  how  to  relieve  pain.  In  Pentecost  the 
women  use  leaves  as  poultices,  and  when  they  take  them  off 
profess  to  take  away  with  them  the  cause  of  pain — a  snake,  a 
lizard,  something  from  the  beach ;  '  but,'  says  a  native  who 
has  undergone  the  treatment,  '  no  one  sees  the  thing  but  the 
women,  and  the  pain  remains.'  In  Lepers'  Island  the  female 
practitioner  rubs  the  patient  downwards  with  a  bunch  of  leaves, 
such  as  she  knows  to  have  the  proper  qualities,  singing  and 
muttering  her  charms.  She  will  work  one  day  upon  the  head, 
and  go  on  working  downwards  day  by  day,  squeezing-  and 

1  '  They  have  a  nice  woman  or  two  on  the  island  (Mota)  who  are  credited 
with  a  knowledge  of  bone-setting.  One  is  a  sensible  woman,  an  old  friend  of 
mine,  so  I  went  for  her  and  set  her  to  work.  She  pokes  and  pulls  about,  and 
manages  to  get  the  bone  into  its  place.' — Rev.  J.  Palmer.  The  extreme 
dislike  of  natives,  of  the  Banks'  Islands  at  least,  to  washing  when  they  are 
sick  does  not  seem  to  have  any  superstitious  origin ;  they  dread  a  chill. 


200  Magic. 


[CH. 

rubbing  and  drawing-  down  the  cause  of  pain,  till  she  produces 
at  last  in  her  bunch  of  leaves  a  stone  or  a  bone,  or  the  bit  of 
food  perhaps  by  which  the  patient  has  been  bewitched.  In 
Pentecost  if  a  man  is  delirious  they  say  a  mae,  that  snake  of 
mysterious  nature,  is  in  his  stomach.  A  doctor  will  then 
breathe  his  charm  into  a  dry  cocoa-nut  husk  which  he  has  set 
on  fire  ;  the  patient  sits  over  the  smoke,  and  the  snake,  which 
is  a  ghost  or  spirit,  is  driven  out. 

(a)  Weather.  In  all  these  islands  it  is  believed  that  spirits 
and  ghosts  have  power  over  the  weather ;  it  follows,  therefore, 
that  the  men  who  have  familiar  intercourse  with  spirits  and 
ghosts  are  believed  to  be  able  to  move  them  to  interfere  for 
wind  or  calm,  sunshine  or  rain,  as  may  be  desired.  The 
spirits  and  ghosts  also  have  imparted  power  to  forms  of  words, 
stones,  leaves,  and  other  things,  which  therefore  of  themselves 
affect  the  weather ;  and  there  is  also  a  certain  natural  con- 
gruity  between  some  of  these  things  and  the  effect  they 
produce,  which  seems  to  make  them  suitable  vehicles  of  power. 
The  men,  therefore,  who  have  and  know  these  things  have 
with  them  mana  which  they  can  use  to  benefit  or  to  afflict 
friends  and  enemies,  and  to  turn  either  way  as  it  is  made 
worth  their  while  to  turn  it.  There  are  everywhere,  therefore, 
in  these  islands  weather-doctors  or  weather-mongers  who  can 
control  the  aerial  powers,  and  are  willing  to  supply  wind, 
calm,  rain,  sunshine,  famine,  and  abundance  at  a  price.  These 
were  generally  also  masters  of  other  charms  than  those  which 
affect  the  weather,  some  knew  one  weather  charm  and  some 
another ;  but  there  were  generally  in  a  community  enough 
for  all  requirements.  Their  arts  once  secret  are  now  pretty 
well  known.  In  Florida  the  mane  vggelie  vigona,  when  a  calm 
was  wanted,  tied  together  the  leaves  appropriate  to  his  vigona 
and  bid  them  in  the  hollow  of  a  tree  where  water  was,  calline* 
upon  the  vigona  spirit  with  the  proper  charm.  This  process 
would  bring  down  rain  to  make  the  calm.  If  sunshine  was 
required  he  tied  the  appropriate  leaves  and  creeper-vines  to 
the  end  of  a  bamboo,  and  held  them  over  a  fire.  He  fanned 
the  fire  with  a  song  to  give  mana  to  the  fire,  and  the  fire  gave 


XII.] 


Weather  Doctors. 


201 


mana  to  the  leaves.  Then  he  climbed  a  tree  and  fastened  the 
bamboo. to  the  topmost  branch  ;  as  the  wind  blew  about  the 
flexible  bamboo  the  mana  was  cast  abroad,  and  the  sun  shone 
out.  To  stop  sunshine  ginger-leaves  were  bound  tight  to- 
gether with  others  and  kept  in  the  wizard's  bag. 

In  the  seafaring-  life  of  the  Solomon  Islands  the  maker  of 
calms  is  a  valuable  citizen.  The  Santa  Cruz  people  also  are 
great  voyagers,  and  their  mendeka  wizards  control  the  weather 
on  their  expeditions,  taking  with  them  the  stock  which 
represents  their  dnka,  and  setting  it  up  in  the  cabin  on  the 
stage  of  the  canoe.  The  presence  of  his  familiar  dnka  being 
thus  secured,  the  weather-doctor  will  undertake  to  provide  fair 
wind  or  calm.  In  the  same  island  to  get  sunshine  the  wizard 
puts  up  some  burnt  wood  into  a  tree  ;  to  get  rain  he  throws 
down  water  at  the  foot  of  the  stock  of  Tinota,  an  ancient 
dnka  ;  to  make  wind  he  waves  the  branch  of  the  tree  which 
has  this  power  ;  in  each  case  he  chants  the  appropriate  charm. 

The  same  things  were  done  and  similar  methods  followed  in 
the  Banks'  Islands  with  the  mana  songs' and  mana  stones 1.  The 
art  is  the  same  iu  the  New  Hebrides.  To  get  rain  the  Aurora 
gismana  puts  a  tuft  of  leaves  which  are  mana  for  the  purpose 
into  the  hollow  of  a  stone,  and  upon  this  some  branches  of  the 
piper  methysticum,  used  for  kava,  pounded  and  crushed ;  to 
these  he  adds  the  one  of  his  collection  of  stones  which  has  mana 
for  rain;  all  is  done  with  the  singing  of  charms  with  Tagaro's 
name,  and  the  whole  is  covered  over.  The  mass  ferments, 
and  steam  charged  with  mana  goes  up  and  makes  clouds  and 
rain.  It  will  not  do  to  pound  the  pepper  too  hard,  lest  the 
wind  should  blow  too  strong.  This  pepper  is  very  powerful 
also  for  weather-making  in  Lepers'  Island.  To  make  a  hot 
sun,  the  wizards  hold  branches  of  the  plant,  which  they  have 

1  As  above,  page  184.  'There  was  a  large  shell  filled  with  earth,  and  a 
rounded  oblong  stone  standing  up  in  it,  covered  with  red  ochre,  the  whole  thing 
surrounded  by  sticks,  a  sort  of  fence  with  a  creeper  twined  in  and  out 
I  innocently  asked  my  friend  what  this  was  ;  "  Me  ml  goro  0  lan  nan  wa  vus" 
he  answered,  "  the  wind  is  fenced  or  bound  round,  lest  it  blow  hard."  I  asked 
whether  the  wind  would  not  blow  hard,  and  he  answered  "  No,  not  while  that 
lasts.    When  it  rots  then  it  can  blow  again."  '—Rev.  J.  Palmer. 


202  Magic,  [en. 

already  filled  with  mana  by  charms  sung-  over  them,  over  the 
fire  in  a  house ;  as  they  wilt,  dry  up  and  burn,  so  will  the  land. 
To  make  a  famine  they  hang-  cocoa-nut  fronds,  yams,  and  other 
food  over  the  fire  with  the  pepper  branches.  For  rain  they  take 
plants  which  have  much  juice  in  them,  and  leaves  and  stalks 
of  the  via,  the  gigantic  caladium,  and  crush  them  all  together 
with  songs  to  give  them  mana  ;  then  all  is  put  into  a  basket, 
and  hidden  in  the  hollow  of  a  tree  where  water  lies.  To  make 
a  calm,  leaves  of  a  reed  which  is  very  light  indeed,  or  pepper 
stalks,  are  cut  in  lengths  and  hung  up  in  a  tree.  All  the 
charms  have  their  power  because  of  Tagaro's  name  in  them. 

Together  with  weather-charms  may  be  classed  those  used 
in  the  Banks'  Islands  to  assist  a  sow  in  her  first  bitter  of 
pigs:  such  as  beating  her  back  with  branches  of  a  pepper 
closely  resembling  that  used  for  kava,  strewing  the  blossoms  of 
the  wotaga,  Barringtonia,  upon  her  back,  laying  cocoa-nut 
fronds  on  her,  breaking  a  bamboo  water-vessel  over  her  back  so 
that  the  salt-water  may  run  over  her,  hanging  a  bag  full  of 
native  almonds  above  her  head  ;  all  being  done  with  the  ap- 
propriate form  of  words.  Nets  also  used  for  the  first  time  are 
charmed  with  leaves  and  the  song  mana  for  the  purpose.  In 
Lepers'  Island  when  a  large  new  canoe  is  finished,  and  is  for  the 
first  time  to  be  used,  a  very  young  cocoa-nut  is  made  mana  with 
a  song  which  bids  the  canoe  be  swift,  successful  in  trading,  and 
victorious  in  fighting,  and  it  is  then  put  on  the  outrigger. 
Then  they  make  a  short  trial  of  the  new  canoe,  and  afterwards 
start  with  the  conch  trumpet  and  store  of  mats  to  trade  for 
pigs.  It  would  be  hard  indeed  to  draw  a  limit  to  the  use  of 
charms  which,  substantially  the  same  in  character  with  these, 
assist  those  who  know  them  or  pay  for  them,  or  else  injur  ■  or 
obstruct  their  enemies.  In  prospect  of  a  fight,  for  example, 
besides  his  amulets  and  stones,  a  man  in  the  Banks'  Islands 
would  strengthen  his  hand  to  shoot  and  kill  by  drinking  an 
infusion  of  very  bitter  herbs  and  bark  ;  and  by  chewing  other 
leaves  and  puffing  forth  their  magic  influence  would  dis- 
hearten an  approaching  enemy. 

(3)  Witchcraft.    The  wizards  who  cure  diseases  are  very 


xii.]  Witchcraft.    'Garata.'  203 

often  the  same  men  who  cause  them,  the  mam  derived  from 
spirits  and  ghosts  being  in  both  cases  the  agent  employed ; 
but  it  often  happens  that  the  darker  secrets  of  the  magic  art 
are  possessed  and  practised  only  by  those  whose  power  lies  in 
doing  harm,  and  who  are  resorted  to  when  it  is  desired  to 
bring  evil  upon  an  enemy.  Their  secrets,  like  others  con- 
nected with  mana,  are  passed  down  from  one  generation  to 
another,  and  may  be  bought.  The  most  common  working  of 
this  malignant  witchcraft  is  that,  so  commpn  among  savages, 
in  which  a  fragment  of  food,  bit  of  hair  or  nail,  or  anything 
closely  connected  with  the  person  to  be  injured,  is  the  medium 
through  which  the  power  of  the  ghost  or  spirit  is  brought  to 
bear.  Some  relic  such  as  a  bone  of  the  dead  person  whose 
ghost  is  set  to  work  is,  if  not  necessary,  very  desirable  for 
bringing  his  power  into  the  charm  ;  and  a  stone  may  have 
its  mana  for  doing  mischief.  What  is  needed  is  the  bringing 
together  of  the  man  who  is  to  be  injured  and  the  spirit  or 
ghost  who  is  to  injure  him  ;  this  can  be  done  when  some- 
thing which  pertains  to  the  man's  person  can  be  used,  such  as 
a  hair,  a  nail,  a  leaf  with  which  he  has  wiped  the  perspiration 
from  his  face,  and  with  equal  effect  when  a  fragment  of  the 
food  which  has  passed  into  the  man  forms  the  link  of  union. 
Hence  in  Florida  when  a  scrap  from  a  man's  meal  could  be 
secreted  and  thrown  into  the  vunuha  haunted  by  the  tindalo 
ghost,  the  man  would  certainly  be  ill;  and  in  the  New 
Hebrides  when  the  mae  snake  carried  away  a  fragment  of 
food  into  the  place  sacred  to  a  spirit,  the  man  who  had  eaten 
of  the  food  would  sicken  as  the  fragment  decayed.  It  was 
for  this  reason  a  constant  care  to  prevent  anything  that 
might  be  used  in  witchcraft  from  falling  into  the  hands  of 
ill-wishers  ;  it  was  the  regular  practice  to  hide  hair  and  nail- 
parings,  and  to  give  the  remains  of  food  most  carefully  to  the 
pigs1.    In  the  Banks'  Islands  the  fragment  of  food,  or  what- 

1  There  is  little  doubt  that  the  common  practice  of  retiring  into  the  sea  or  a 
river  has  its  origin  in  the  belief  that  water  is  a  bar  to  the  use  of  excrement  in 
charms.  It  is  remarkable  that  at  Mota,  where  clefts  in  rocks  are  used,  no 
doubt  also  for  security,  the  word  used  is  tas,  which  means  sea. 


204  Magic.  [CH. 

ever  it  may  be,  by  which  a  man  is  charmed  is  called  garata  ; 
this  was  made  up  by  the  wizard  with  a  bit  of  human  bone! 
and  smeared  with  a  magic  decoction  in  which  it  would  rot 
away.  Or  the  garata  would  be  burnt,  and  while  it  was 
burning  the  wizard  sang  his  charm;  as  the  garata  was 
consumed,  the  wizard  burning  it  by  degrees  day  after  day, 
the  man  from  whom  it  came  sickened,  and  would  die,  the 
ghost  of  the  man  whose  bone  was  burning  would  take  away 
his  life.  If  then  .any  man  who  knows  he  has  an  enemy  has 
reason  himself  to  think  that  something  has  been  taken  from 
him,  or  his  friends  hear  that  a  garata  from  him  is  in  some 
wizard's  hands,  he  or  they  will  give  money  to  get  the 
fragment  back ;  and  the  enemy  again  and  his  friends  will 
give  more  to  secure  the  continuance  of  the  charm.  In  Aurora 
the  fragment  of  food  is  made  up  with  certain  leaves  ;  as  these 
rot  and  stink  the  man  dies.  In  Lepers'  Island  the  garata  is 
boiled,  together  with  certain  magical  substances,  in  a  clam 
shell  with  charms  which  call  on  Tagaro.  It  is  evident  that 
no  one  who  intends  to  bring  mischief  to  a  man  by  a  fragment 
of  his  food  will  partake  of  that  food  himself,  because  by  doing 
so  he  would  bring  the  mischief  also  on  himself.  Hence  a 
native  offering  even  a  single  banana  to  a  visitor  will  bite  the 
end  of  it  before  he  gives  it,  and  a  European  giving  medicine 
to  a  sick  native  gives  confidence  by  taking  a  little  first 
himself1. 

Another  charm  is  common  to  both  eastern  and  western 
islands,  which  is  called  in  the  Banks'  Islands  talamatai.  A 
bit  of  human  bone,  a  fragment  of  coral,  a  splinter  of  wood,  or 
of  an  arrow  by  which  a  man  has  died,  is  bound  up  with  the 
leaves  which  have  mana  for  the  purpose,  with  the  mana  song ; 
by  this  means  the  power  of  the  ghost  is  bound  into  the 
charm,  and  the  talamatai  is  secretly  planted  in  the  path  along 

1  '  He  (Soga  in  Bugotu)  was  quite  willing  to  try  (quinine  and  brandy),  so  I 
proceeded  to  mix  it  solemnly  before  them  all.  Then  ensued  a  curious  scene. 
"  Taste  it,"  said  Hugo.  This  I  did,  and  be  followed  suit,  and  tben  all  Soga's 
people  had  a  little  sip  served  out  in  a  shell.  This  was  to  show  there  was  no 
harm  in  the  medicine.'— Bishop  Selwyn. 


XII.] 


'Ghost-shooter! 


205 


which  the  person  at  whom  the  charm  is  aimed  must  pass,  so 
that  the  virtue  of  it  may  spring  out  and  strike  him  with 
disease.  The  tying  and  binding  tight  of  the  talamatai  while 
the  charm  is  chanted  is  what  gives  the  magic  power,  and  if 
the  fibre  to  make  the  string  is  rolled  in  making  it  upon  the 
skull  of  a  former  practiser  of  the  art,  its  efficacy  will  be  the 
greater 1.  The  talamatai  was  made  but  lately  in  Valuwa  in 
Saddle  Island;  but  the  wizard  who  tied  the  last  brought 
out  all  his  magic  apparatus  before  the  people  of  his  village 
and  smashed  it  with  an  axe.  In  Lepers'  Island  the  same 
thing  is  called  rango. 

Another  remarkable  engine  of  mischief  is  called  in  the 
Banks'  Islands  tamatetiqa,  ghost-shooter.  Since  this  is  used 
also  in  Florida  it  may  be  supposed  to  be  common  to  all  these 
islands.  A  bit  of  bamboo  is  stuffed  with  leaves,  a  dead  man's 
bone,  and  other  magical  ingredients,  the  proper  mana  song 
being  chanted  over  it.  Pasting  in  the  Banks'  Islands,  but  not 
apparently  in  the  Solomon  Islands,  adds  power  to  this  and 
other  charms.  The  man  who  has  made  or  bought  one  of  these 
holds  it  in  his  hand,  with  the  open  end  of  the  bamboo 
covered  with  his  thumb,  till  he  sees  his  enemy ;  then  he  lets 
out  the  magic  influence  and  shoots  his  man.  Some  years  ago 
in  Mota  a  man  named  Isvitag  waiting  with  his  ghost-shooter 
in  his  hand  for  the  man  he  meant  to  shoot,  let  fly  too  soon, 
just  as  a  woman  with  a  child  upon  her  hip  stepped  across  the 
path.  It  was  his  sister's  child,  his  nearest  of  kin,  and  he  was 
sure  he  had  hit  it  full.  To  save  it  he  put  the  contents  of  the 
bamboo  into  water,  to  prevent  inflammation  of  the  invisible 
wound,  and  the  child  took  no  hurt.  A  striking  story  was  told 
me  by  Edwin  Sakalraw  of  Ara  of  what  he  saw  himself.  A 
man  in  that  islet  was  known  to  have  prepared  a  tamatetiqa, 
and  had  declared  his  intention  of  shooting  his  enemy  with  it 
at  an  approaching  feast  ;  but  he  would  not  tell  who  it  was 
that  he  meant  to  kill,  lest  some  friend  of  his  should  buy  back 
the  power  of  the  charm  from  the  wizard  who  had  prepared  it. 

1  According  to  the  Mota  expression  they  bind,  we  vil,  a  talamatai,  and  pour, 
we  wv.ro,  over  a  garata. 


206  Magic.  [CH. 

To  add  force  to  the  ghostly  discharge  he  fasted  so  many  days 
before  the  feast  began  that  when  the  day  arrived  he  was  too 
weak  to  walk.  When  the  people  had  assembled,  he  had 
himself  carried  out  and  set  down  at  the  edge  of  the  open 
space  where  the  dancing  would  go  on.  All  the  men  there 
knew  that  there  was  one  of  them  he  meant  to  shoot ;  no  one 
knew  whether  it  was  himself.  There  he  sat  as  the  dancers 
rapidly  passed  him  circling  round,  a  fearful  object,  black  with 
dirt  and  wasted  to  a  skeleton  with  fasting,  his  iamatdiqa 
within  his  closed  fingers  stopped  with  his  thumb,  his  trembling 
arm  stretched  out,  and  his  bleared  eyes  watching  for  his  enemy. 
Every  man  trembled  inwardly  as  he  danced  by  him,  and  the 
attention  of  the  whole  crowd  was  fixed  on  him.  After  a  while, 
bewildered  and  dazed  with  his  own  weakness,  the  rapid  move- 
ments of  the  dancers,  and  the  noise,  he  mistook  his  man  ;  he 
raised  his  arm  and  lifted  his  thumb.  The  man  he  aimed  at 
fell  at  once  upon  the  ground,  and  the  dancers  stopped.  Then 
he  saw  that  he  had  failed,  and  that  the  wrong  man  was  hit, 
and  his  distress  was  great ;  but  the  man  who  had  fallen  and 
was  ready  to  expire,  when  he  was  made  to  understand  that  no 
harm  was  meant  him,  took  courage  again  to  live,  and  presently 
revived.  No  doubt  he  would  have  died  if  the  mistake  had 
not  been  known. 

There  is  a  strange  method  of  magical  attack  used  at  Savo, 
and  known  at  Florida,  called  vele,  a  word  which  means  to 
pinch.  The  man  who  has  the  secret  of  this  takes  in  a  bag 
upon  his  back  the  leaves  and  other  things  in  which  mana  for 
this  purpose  resides,  and  seeks  to  find  the  man  alone  he  goes 
to  injure.  When  he  finds  him,  he  seizes  him,  bites  his  neck, 
stuffs  the  magic  leaves  down  his  throat,  and  knocks  him  on 
the  head  with  an  axe,  but  not  so  as  to  kill  him.  He  then 
leaves  the  man,  who  goes  home,  relates  what  has  happened,  and 
dies  after  two  days.  If  the  attack  is  made  in  the  night,  the  man 
cannot  tell  who  his  assailant  was ;  but  the  vele  is  used  also  in 
broad  daylight,  and  the  assailant  does  not  conceal  himself,  but 
tells  his  name  and  bids  his  victim  make  it  known.  As  he  goes 
home  the  charm  makes  him  forget  it.    A  strong  man  will  not 


XII.] 


Metamorphosis.  Dreams. 


207 


be  attacked  in  this  way.  The  same  thing  is  done  in  Guadal- 
canal*, and  the  people  of  Saa  at  the  extremity  of  Malanta  hear 
of  it  at  Marau  Sound  by  the  name  of  /tele.  At  Lepers'  Island, 
in  the  New  Hebrides,  the  vequa  very  much  resembles  this. 
The  wizard  overcomes  his  victim  with  his  charms,  so  that  the 
man  cannot  distinctly  see  him  or  defend  himself ;  then  he 
shoots  him  with  a  little  bow  and  arrow  made  of  some  charmed 
material,  and  strikes  him  with  the  arrow.  The  man  does  not 
know  what  is  done  to  him,  but  he  goes  home,  falls  ill,  and 
dies ;  he  can  remember  nothing  to  tell  his  friends,  but  they 
see  the  wound  in  his  head  where  he  was  struck,  and  in  his 
side  where  he  was  shot,  and  know  what  has  happened 
to  him. 

The  practice  of  magic  arts  for  mischief  is  in  the  Banks' 
Islands  and  in  Lepers'  Island  called  gaqaleva,  and  is  always 
dreaded  in  case  of  sickness.  In  Lepers'  Island  the  wizards 
who  practise  it  are  believed  to  have  the  power  of  changing 
their  shape.  The  friends  of  any  one  suffering  from  sickness 
are  always  afraid  lest  the  wizard  who  has  caused  the  disease 
should  come  in  some  form,  as  of  a  blow-fly,  and  strike  the 
patient ;  they  sit  with  him  therefore  and  use  counter-charms 
to  guard  him,  and  drive  carefully  away  all  flies,  lest  his  enemy 
should  come  in  that  form.  Some  men  by  gaqaleva  can  turn 
into  a  shark  and  eat  an  enemy,  or  more  commonly  some  one 
whom  his  enemy  has  hired  the  wizard  to  destroy.  The  story  of 
Tarkeke  shews  this  belief  in  Aurora  also,  where,  as  in  Lepers' 
Island  and  in  Pentecost,  magicians  turn  into  eagles  and  owls 
as  well  as  sharks.  This  power  is  not  always  used  for  malicious 
ends,  as  was  shewn  by  Molitavile  at  Lepers'  Island.  A  vessel 
'  recruiting  labour/  called  by  the  natives  a  1  thief-ship,'  had 
carried  away  some  people  from  the  island,  and  their  friends 
were  very  anxious  to  know  what  had  become  of  them.  Moli- 
tavile, who  had  the  power  of  changing  his  form,  undertook 
to  turn  himself  into  an  eagle  and  fly  after  the  vessel.  He 
told  all  the  people  of  the  village  in  the  first  place  to  keep 
away  from  that  side  of  the  open  space  between  the  houses 
from  whence  he  would  take  his  flight.    Then  be  entered 


2°b  Magic.  [CH. 

into  a  house  decorated  with  cocoa-nut  fronds,  and  they 
saw  no  more  ;  but  they  knew  that  he  drank  the  kava  he 
had  prepared,  and  then  lay  down  till  his  soul  went  out 
of  hirn  in  the  form  of  a  bird  and  followed  the  ship.  After 
a  while  he  emerged  from  the  house,  and  told  the  people 
that  all  who  had  been  carried  away  were  well  but  one, 
who  was  dead.  Long-  afterwards,  when  some  of  those  who 
were  then  on  board  returned,  they  said  that  he  had  brought 
back  the  truth,  one  of  them  by  that  time  had  died. 

(4)  Breams.  The  native  belief  as  to  the  nature  of  dreams, 
and  as  to  the  part  played  by  the  soul  of  men  in  dreams, 
is  a  subject  of  enquiry  which  belongs  rather  to  the  general 
question  as  to  the  conceptions  the  people  have  of  the  nature  of 
the  soul  itself  and  of  human  life  ;  but  the  use  of  dreaming  as 
a  branch  of  the  practice  of  magic  comes  appropriately  into 
view  in  this  place.  In  Maewo,  Aurora,  in  the  New  Hebrides, 
the  dreaming-man,  tatua  qoreqore,  who  may  be  also  in  other 
ways  a  gismana  in  his  use  of  supernatural  power,  is  in  request 
in  cases  of  sickness.  In  an  ordinary  case,  when  it  is  supposed 
that  a  ghost  is  the  cause  of  the  complaint,  the  friends  of  the 
sick  man  send  for  the  professional  dreamer  and  give  him  now 
tobacco,  as  formerly  they  gave  mats,  to  find  out  what  ghost 
has  been  offended,  and  to  make  it  up  with  him.  He  sleeps, 
and  in  his  dream  goes  to  the  place  where  the  sick  man  has 
been  working ;  there  he  meets  some  one,  like  an  old  man  it  is 
likely,  of  small  size,  who  really  is  a  ghost,  and  he  learns  from 
him  what  is  his  name.  The  ghost  tells  him  that  the  sick  man 
as  he  was  working  has  encroached  upon  his  ground,  the  place 
he  haunts  as  his  own,  and  that  to  punish  him  he  has  taken 
away  his  soul  and  impounded  it  in  a  magic  fence  in  the  garden. 
The  dreamer  begs  for  the  return  of  the  soul,  and  asks  pardon 
on  behalf  of  the  sick  man,  who  meant  no  disrespect ;  the  ghost 
pulls  up  the  fence  in  which  the  soul  is  enclosed,  and  lets  it  out ; 
the  man  of  course  recovers.  These  dreamers  are  able  also  to 
visit  Malanga,  an  abode  of  the  dead.  Sometimes  if  a  child  is 
sick  it  is  supposed  that  there  is  some  one  in  Malanga  drawing 
away  its  soul.    The  conjecture  is  that  the  soul  of  the  infant  is 


xii.]  Prophecy.  209 

in  fact  that  of  some  one  who  has  died  and  gone  to  Malanga, 
but  has  afterwards  desired  to  come  back  to  earth,  and  has  been 
born  as  the  infant  that  now  is  sick ;  and,  moreover,  that  the 
mother  in  Malanga,  not  wishing  to  lose  the  society  of  her 
child  there,  is  drawing  back  the  re-born  infant's  soul.  The 
dreamer  having  received  his  fee  goes  in  a  dream  to  Malanga, 
and  intercedes  with  the  mother  there  ;  he  gets  back  the  soul, 
and  tbe  child  recovers.    In  Saa  also  in  the  Solomon  Islands, 
if  a  child  starts  in  its  sleep  it  is  believed  that  some  ghost  is 
snatching  away  what  must  be  called  in  translation  its  shadow. 
A  wizard  doctor  undertakes  to  go  in  sleep  and  bring  it  back ; 
he  dreams  and  goes  ;  if  those  who  have  taken  the  '  shadow  '  let 
him  take  it  back  the  child  recovers,  but  if  the  child  dies  the 
dreamer  reports  that  they  would  not  let  him  come  near  them. 
In  the  same  place  when  a  thing  is  lost  a  wizard  is  engaged  to 
find  it  in  a  dream.    In  Lepers'  Island  in  case  of  theft  or  of  any 
hidden  crime  some  wizard  who  understands  how  to  do  it  drinks 
/cava,  and  so  throws  himself  into  a  magic  sleep.    When  he 
wakes  he  declares  that  he  has  seen  the  culprit  and  gives  his 


name. 


(5)  Prophecy.    The  knowledge  of  future  events  is  believed 
to  be  conveyed  to  the  people  by  a  spirit  or  a  ghost  speaking 
with  the  voice  of  a  man,  one  of  the  wizards,  who  is  himself 
unconscious  while  he  speaks.    In  Florida  the  men  of  a  village 
would  be  sitting  in  their  Mala,  canoe-house,  and  discussing 
some  undertaking,  an  expedition  probably  to  attack  some 
unsuspecting  village.    One  among  them,  known  to  have  his 
own  tinda/o  ghost  of  prophecy,  would  sneeze  and  begin  to 
shake,  a  sign  that  the  tinclalo  had  entered  into  him  ;  his  eyes 
would  glare,  his  limbs  twist,  his  whole  body  be  convulsed, 
foam  would  burst  from  his  lips ;  then  a  voice,  not  his  own,' 
would  be  heard  in  his  throat,  allowing  or  disapproving  of  what 
was  proposed.    Such  a  man  used  no  means  of  bringing  on  the 
ghost ;  it  came  upon  him,  as  he  believed  himself,  at  its  own  will, 
its  nana  overpowered  him,  and  when  it  departed  it  left  him 
quite  exhausted.    Still  a  man  to  whom  this  happened,  when 
he  had  a  reputation  as  a  prophet,  would  be  employed  to  assist 

p 


2io  Magic.  [c„. 

in'the  council  and  make  that  a  branch  of  his  profession  as  a 
wizard.  The  description  of  prophecy  given  in  San  Cristoval 
is  identical  with  the  foregoing.  In  Saa,  men  who  are  possessed 
with  a  lid  a  prophesy  of  things  to  come.  In  Lepers'  Island 
it  is  believed  that  the  spirit  Tagaro  puts  his  power  as  a  spirit 
into  a  man,  manag,  so  that  he  speaks  what  otherwise  he  could 
not,  in  the  way  of  foretelling  things  to  come,  as  well  as  of 
making  known  what  is  concealed.  These  prophets  are  con- 
sulted when  a  new  gamali,  the  house  of  the  Suqe  Society, 
is  to  be  built,  to  know  if  there  will  be  peace  or  war ;  because 
a  number  of  people  assemble  for  such  a  purpose,  and  if  there  is 
danger  of  fighting  they  will  not  leave  their  homes. 

(6)  Divination.  There  are  many  methods  by  which  ghosts 
and  spirits  are  believed  to  make  known  to  men  who  use  them 
the  secret  things  which  the  unassisted  human  intelligence 
•could  not  find  out ;  and  some  of  these  hardly  need  perhaps  the 
intervention  of  a  wizard.  These  methods  of  divination  differ 
very  little  in  the  various  islands.  In  the  Solomon  Islands, 
in  Florida  for  instance,  when  an  expedition  has  started  in  a 
fleet  of  canoes,  there  is  sometimes  a  hesitation  whether  they 
shall  proceed,  or  a  question  in  what  direction  they  shall  go. 
A  mane  kisu  divines ;  he  declares  that  he  has  felt  a  tindalo 
.come  on  board,  for  one  side  of  the  canoe  has  been  pressed  down ; 
he  asks  therefore  the  question,  '  Shall  we  go  ?  shall  we  go 
there  ? '  If  the  canoe  rocks  the  answer  is  in  the  affirmative,  if 
it  lies  steady  it  is  negative.  When  a  man  is  sick  and  it  is 
desired  to  know  what  tindalo  is  eating  him,  the  mane  kisu  who 
knows  how  to  divine  by  paludnka .  is  sent  for.  He  comes, 
bringing  some  one  with  him  to  assist,  and  the  two  sit  down, 
the  wizard  in  front,  the  assistant  at  his  back,  and  they  hold  a 
stick  or  bamboo  by  the  two  ends.  The  wizard  begins  to  slap 
with  one  hand  the  end  of  the  bamboo  he  holds,  calling  one 
after  another  the  names  of  men  not  veiy  long  deceased  ;  when 
he  names  the  one  who  is  afflicting  the  sick  man  the  stick  of 
itself  becomes  violently  agitated.  Another  method  of  divina- 
tion is  called  gogondo.  The  operator  who  knows  this  art  takes 
leaves  of  the  dracaana  equal  in  number  to  the  tindalo  ghosts  he 


XII.  J 


Divination. 


2  I  I 


knows,  and  with  them  other  leaves,  vines  of  creepers,  and  bark 
belono'ina-  to  each  tindalo.  in  which  the  mana  of  each  resides. 
With  these  he  goes  to  the  place  sacred  to  his  gogondo,  and  the 
people  interested  assemble.    Then  he  ties  the  leaves  to  his 
own  body,  and  begins  to  split  each  dracaena  leaf  down  the 
middle.    Each  leaf  answers  to  a  tindalo,  and  if  a  leaf  splits 
crooked  it  is  the  tindalo  answering  to  it  that  is  eating  the 
sick  man.    The  same  gogondo  is  used  to  see  whether  a  sick 
man  will  live  or  die  ;  if  the  leaf  representing  the  patient 
splits  clean  he  will  recover,  if  crooked  he  will  die.    In  Motlav 
and  the  other  Banks'  Islands  they  divined  by  means  of  a  bam- 
.   boo  into  which  a  ghost  had  entered,  and  which  pointed  of 
itself  to  the  thief  or  other  culprit  to  be  discovered.   A  common 
method  of  divination  in  the  Banks'  Islands  is  called  so  ilo,  and 
is  used  to  enquire  where  a  lost  person  or  thing  is  to  be  found, 
who  is  the  thief,  whether  an  absent  friend  is  alive  or  dead. 
The  hands  are  lifted  over  the  head  and  rubbed  together  with 
a  magic  song  calling  on  a  ghost.    The  sign  is  given  by  the 
cracking  of  the  joints ;  when  the  question  is  of  life  or  death, 
if  the  thumbs  or  shoulders  crack  the  man  still  lives,  if  the 
elbows  crack  he  is  dead.    So  if  a  man  sneezes  he  will  so  ilo  to 
know  who  it  is  that  curses  him  ;  he  revolves  his  fists  one  over 
the  other  and  then  throws  out  his  arms  ;  the  revolving  is  the 
question,  and  the  answer  is  given  as  he  asks,  '  Is  it  So-and- 
So  ? '  and  his  elbows  crack.    Another  method  of  divination  was 
occasionally  in  use  at  Motlav  in  the  same  group.    After  a 
burial  they  would  take  a  bag  and  put  make,  Tahitian  chestnut, 
and  scraped  banana  into  it.    Then  a  new  bamboo  some  ten  feet 
long  was  fitted  to  the  bag  and  tied  with  one  end  in  the  mouth 
of  it,  and  the  bag  was  laid  upon  the  grave,  the  men  engaged 
in  the  affair  holding  the  bamboo  in  their  hands.    The  names 
of  the  recently  dead  were  then  called,  and  the  men  holding 
the  bamboo  felt  the  bag  become  heavy  with  the  entrance  of 
the  ghost,  which  then  went  up  from  the  bag  into  the  hollow  of 
the  bamboo.    The  bamboo  and  its  contents  being  carried  into 
the  village,  the  names  of  dead  men  were  called  over  to  find  out 
whose  ghost  it  was :  when  wrong  names  were  called  the  free 

p  % 


212  Magic.  [CH. 

end  of  the  bamboo  moved  from  side  to  side  while  the  other 
was  held  tight,  at  the  right  name  the  end  moved  briskly 
round  and  round.  Then  questions  were  put  to  the  enclosed 
ghost,  '  Who  stole  such  a  thing  ?  Who  was  guilty  in  such  a 
ease  ?  '  The  bamboo  pointed  of  itself  at  the  culprit  if  present, 
or  made  signs  as  before  when  names  were  called.  This  bam- 
boo they  say  would  run  about  with  a  man  who  had  it  lying 
only  on  the  palms  of  his  hands  ;  but,  it  is  remarked  by  my 
native  informant,  though  it  moved  in  men's  hands  it  never 
moved  when  no  one  touched  it. 

(7)  Ordeals.  To  clear  or  to  convict  a  man  accused  of  guilt 
there  are  ordeals  managed  by  men  with  whom  the  magic  in- 
struments, and  the  knowledge  of  the  charms  by  which  they 
can  be  used,  remain.  There  are  several  ordeals  used  at  Saa 
which  may  stand  as  examples  from  the  Solomon  Islands.  One 
is  called  the  dan  /ten,  stone  working,  the  knowledge  of  the 
use  of  which  is  passed  down  from  man  to  man  with  the  magic 
stone  which  is  employed.  An  accused  person  goes  to  the  man 
who  has  the  stone  and  engages  him  to  undergo  the  ordeal. 
The  people  assemble  and  the  accused  denies  the  charge,  and 
he  submits  to  the  ordeal  through  his  compurgator.  The 
latter  heats  the  stone  and  throws  it  from  hand  to  hand  ;  if 
his  hands  are  not  burnt  the  accused  is  pronounced  innocent, 
and  pays  a  porpoise-tooth  fee.  There  is  much  preparation 
with  a  very  young  cocoa-nut,  the  flower  of  sugar-cane  and 
chanted  charms  to  make  the  proceeding  saka,  hot,  with  super- 
natural power.  It  is  probable  that  sometimes  the  accusers 
make  their  preparations  also  with  a  bribe.  Another  consists 
in  the  application  of  a  lighted  bundle  of  cocoa-nut  fronds  to 
the  legs  of  the  accused,  who  stands  up  for  it  or  is  tied  between 
two  posts.  This  is  done  with  charms  by  the  man  who  manages 
it,  and  also  gets  his  fee.  In  another  the  accused  swallows  a 
charmed  stone  heated  by  the  wizard  employed,  and  is  innocent 
if  he  takes  no  harm.  In  a  fourth  the  accused  eats  a  bit  of  a 
cocoa-nut  which  has  been  made  very  saka  for  the  purpose, 
and  broken  in  pieces  ;  if  he  is  guilty  he  falls  afterwards  from 
a  tree  or  some  other  accident  befalls  him,  or  he  pines  away. 


xii.]  Ordeals.    Poison.  213 

Another  method  is  to  take  almonds  from  a  sacred  place  and 
mash  them  with  a  charm  ;  the  accused  eats  and  is  judged 
guilty  if  he  is  the  worse  for  it.    There  is  again  a  very  ancient 
spear  at  Saa,  very  saka,  full  of  magic  power,  called  usu,  dog, 
because  it  has  clogs'  teeth  upon  it.    This  is  placed  on  the 
head  of  the  accused  and  he  says,  '  If  I  did  the  thing,  may  I 
die  with  this  spear  ; '  if  he  is  guilty  he  sickens  and  dies  with 
the  power  of  the  spear.    There  is  also  a  very  sacred  song, 
very  saka.    The  wizard  who  knows  it  sings  it,  and  the  ac- 
cused man  says,  '  Well,  that  song  is  for  me ;  if  I  did  that  let 
me  and  my  children  suffer.'    Finally,  there  is  the  alligator 
ordeal,  used  in  the  passage  between  Mala  Paina  and  Mala 
Masiki,  where  the  reptiles  are  very  numerous.    A  man  ac- 
cused of  serious  crime  is  taken  there ;  the  wizard  who  manages 
the  ordeal  calls  the  alligators  with  his  charms,  and  the  accused 
who  is  confident  in  his  innocence  and  in  the  wizard's  power 
dares  to  swim  across.    No  one  will  hold  him  guilty  if  he 
escapes.    In  this  ordeal  also  it  is  sometimes  not  the  accused, 
but  the  man  who  knows  the  charm  who  submits  himself  to 
the  test.    In  Lepers'  Island  a  man  to  prove  his  innocence 
will  submit  to  be  shot  at  with  arrows  ;  if  he  be  hit  he  is  of 
course  guilty  ;  if  he  be  innocent,  Tagaro  will  protect  him,  just 
as  he  protects  in  fighting  any  young  man  whom  he  preserves 
that  he  may  be  prosperous  and  great.    The  favour  of  Tagaro 
in  either  case  is  sought  for  with  the  appropriate  charm. 

(8)  Poison.  To  the  best  of  my  knowledge  the  Melanesian 
people  were  not  acquainted  with  the  use  of  any  substance 
which,  when  taken  with  food  or  drink,  would  be  injurious  by 
its  natural  properties,  until  they  learnt  the  use  of  arsenic  from 
Queensland.  Returned  'labourers'  brought  that  back  with 
them,  and  used  it  with  fatal  effect  in  the  same  way  in  which 
native  poisoners  used  their  own  magical  preparations,  by 
mixing  it  in  food ;  and  it  is  more  than  probable  that  the 
certain  and  fatal  effect  was  believed  then  to  be  due  to  the 
powerful  magical  and  not  natural  powers  with  which  it  was 
endued.  At  any  rate,  if  what  native  magicians  employed  in 
poisoning  food  had  any  naturally  noxious  qualities  (which  is 


2  14  Magic.  [CH. 

not  denied),  it  was  not  any  naturally  noxious  property  which 
was  expected  to  produce  the  injurious  result;  nor  when 
mischief  followed  was  it  ascribed  to  the  natural  quality  of 
what  had  been  administered  ;  the  magic  charms  had  in  native 
belief  the  power  of  poisoning-,  and  communicated  it  to  the 
preparation  which  was  mixed  with  the  food.  No  doubt  the 
materials  over  which  the  poison  charm  was  sung-  were  such  as 
seemed  to  have  a  certain  congruity  with  the  effect  to  be 
produced.  The  secrets  of  poison-making  have  not  become 
known ;  but  in  Florida  it  is  believed  by  the  people  that  the 
liver  of  a  black  snake  dried  in  the  sun  or  over  a  fire  was  the 
chief  ingredient  in  the  poisons  which  were  used  there.  There 
were  certain  persons  who  knew  the  art,  and  were  hired  to 
poison  with  maomao,  made  with  the  mana  power  of  the  tindalo 
ghost  belonging  to  the  sorcerer  employed,  and  mixed  in  the 
food  of  the  man  whose  life  was  aimed  at.  The  Savo  people 
were  great  poisoners ;  Florida  men  who  visited  them  were 
careful  what  they  ate.  The  effect  of  the  poison  was  that  one 
who  had  taken  it  fell  sick,  vomited,  and  afterwards  died. 
The  practice  of  this  art  was  dangerous  to  the  poisoner  ;  a 
known  poisoner  was  put  to  death  in  Florida,  and  so  were 
many  innocent  persons  suspected  or  accused.  In  the  Banks' 
Islands  to  poison  was  to  vangan  pal,  to  feed  by  stealth.  The 
Ureparapara  people  in  that  group  had  the  repute  of  being 
poisoners,  others  would  get  poison  from  thence ;  in  Mota  no 
one  knew  the  art.  In  Lepers'  Island  poison  is  called,  by  a 
parallel  expression,  aruwana  ;  all  that  I  have  learnt  of  it  is 
that  the  preparation  of  it  is  very  secret,  and  that  it  is  made 
with  charms  in  the  same  way  with  the  garata  above  described. 
In  fact  the  correspondence  between  the  native  poison  and  the 
charm  that  works  destruction  through  a  fragment  of  food  is 
complete :  in  the  one  case  a  portion  of  the  food  already  eaten 
by  the  person  to  be  injured  is  mixed  with  certain  magically 
powerful  substances;  in  the  other  the  magically  powerful 
substances  are  mixed  in  the  food  to  be  eaten.  In  either  case, 
according  to  the  native  belief,  the  mischief  was  caused  by 
magic.    A  man  eating  away  from  his  closest  friends  was  in 


XII>]  Taboo.  215 

equal  fear  lest  lie  should  be  charmed  through  a  fragment  of  his 
food  or  poisoned  by  what  might  be  put  into  his  food.  The 
poisoned  arrows,  of  which  more  hereafter,  have  never  been 
found  to  have  been  prepared  with  anything  which  could  be  pro- 
perly said  to  be  poison  ;  and  undoubtedly  the  dreaded  power  of 
such  arrows  to  give  fatal  wounds  was  by  the  natives  believed 
to  be  due  to  the  magic  charms  with  which  they  were  made, 
and  to  the  dead  man's  bone  with  which  they  were  pointed. 

(9)  Tapu  and  Curses.  The  word  taboo  is  one  of  the  very 
few  that  the  languages  of  the  Pacific  Ocean  have  given  to  the 
English  language  ;  and  something  of  its  meaning  therefore 
may  be  supposed  to  be  understood.  But  the  tapu  or  tambu,  of 
Melanesia  is  not  so  conspicuous  in  native  life  as  the  tapu  of 
Polynesia  ;  and  it  differs  also  perhaps  in  this,  that  it  never 
signifies  any  inherent  holiness  or  awfulness,  but  always  a 
sacred  and  unapproachable  character  which  is  imposed.  This 
is  not  strictly  accurate  as  regards  the  word  in  the  Solomon 
Islands,  where  everything  connected  with  a  ghost  of  worship, 
tindalo,  lio'a,  or  'adaro,  is  tambu  of  itself ;  it  is  accurate  as  con- 
cerns the  Banks'  Islands  and  New  Hebrides,  where  what  is 
inherently  sacred  is  rongo  or  sapuga.  But  still  in  cases  where 
the  English  word  taboo  can  be  employed  there  is  always  in 
Melanesia  human  sanction  and  prohibition.  Some  thing, 
action,  or  place  is  made  tambu  or  tapu  by  one  who  has  the 
power  to  do  it,  any  one  whose  standing  among  the  people 
gives  him  confidence  to  lay  this  character  upon  it.  The 
power  at  the  back  of  the  tapu  or  tambu  is  that  of  the  ghost  or 
spirit  in  whose  name,  or  in  reliance  upon  whom,  it  is  pro- 
nounced ;  for  the  tapu  is  a  prohibition  with  a  curse  expressed 
or  implied.  Thus  in  Florida  a  chief  will  forbid  something  to 
be  done  or  touched  under  a  penalty;  he  has  said,  for  example, 
tambu  hangalatu,  any  one  who  violates  his  prohibition  must 
pay  him  a  hundred  strings  of  money ;  it  seems  to  the  Euro- 
pean a  proof  of  the  power  of  the  chief ;  but  to  the  native  the 
power  of  the  chief,  in  this  and  in  everything  else,  rests  on  the 
persuasion  that  the  chief  has  his  tindalo  at  his  back.  The 
sense  of  this  in  the  particular  case  is»remote,  the  apprehension 


216  Magic.  [CH. 

of  angering  the  chief  is  present  and  effective,  but  the  ultimate 
sanction  is  the  power  of  the  tindalo.    If  a  common  man 
were  to  take  upon  himself  to  tambu  anything  he  might, 
people  would  think  that  he  would  not  do  it  unless  he  knew 
that  he  had  the  power  to  do  it ;  they  would  watch,  and  if  any 
one  who  violated  his  tambu  were  to  fall  sick,  he  would  he 
recognized  at  once  as  one  who  had  a  powerful  tindalo,  and  he 
would  rise.    Each  tindalo  has  his  special  leaf,  and  a  man  will 
set  his  tambu  with  the  leaf  of  his  tindalo  as  a  mark  ;  men  do 
not  always  know  whose  leaf  it  is,  but  they  know  that  they 
have  to  deal  with  a  tindalo,  not  only  with  a  man,  if  they  dis- 
regard the  mark.    The  tambu,  is  too  convenient  an  institution 
to  drop  when  the  original  sanction  of  it  has  ceased  to  operate ; 
a  native  Christian  teacher  therefore  does  not  hesitate,  as  a 
man  of  position  in  society,  to  set  a  tambu  ;  thieves  he  says  are 
afraid  of  a  man  if  not  of  a  tindalo.    In  the  Banks'  Islands 
there  is  a  minor  prohibition,  soloi,  as  well  as  the  more  solemn 
tajm,  in  which  probably  there  is  no  direct  reference  to  a  super- 
natural sanction.    But  a  man  by  virtue  of  the  supernatural 
111  ana  which  accrues  to  him  through  his  association  with  a 
spirit  will  va-lapu,  separate  from  common  use,  a  path,  trees, 
part  of  the  sea-beach,  a  canoe,  a  fishing-net,  and  no  one  would 
be  surprised  if  sickness  fell  at  once  upon  any  one  who  should 
break  the  tapu.    A  person  of  no  particular  distinction  would 
set  his  soloi  before  the  trees  or  garden,  the  fruit  and  produce 
of  which  he  wished  to  reserve  for  some  feast,  and  intruders 
would  know  at  any  rate  that  he  carried  his  bow  and  arrows. 
Stronger  than  any  individual  sanction  was  that  of  the  secret 
societies  called  Tamate ;  each  had  its  leaf,  and  any  member  of 
one  could  set  the  leaf  of  his  society  as  a  mark,  to  disregard 
which  would  stir  the  anger  of  all  the  members.    The  payment 
of  a  pig  or  money  would  appease  the  individual  or  society 
whose  prohibition  had  been  despised. 

It  is  evident  that  a  tambu  approaches  to  a  curse,  when  it  is 
a  prohibition  resting  on  the  invocation  of  an  unseen  power. 
Thus  at  Saa,  a  few  years  ago,  the  chief  forbade  the  young 
people  of  the  place  to  go  ,to  school,  with  a  curse  by  the  name 


xii.]  Curses.  217 

of  a  lid  a,  a  ghost  of  power.  In  snch  a  case  if  native  ideas 
only  had  prevailed,  money,  pigs,  or  valuable  gifts  would  have 
been  sufficient  to  Mo,  make  it  up  with,  the  chief,  and  he 
would  have  been  willing  to  toto  'akalo  (page  137),  set  the 
matter  right  by  a  sacrifice  to  the  lio'a ;  but  in  this  case  the 
Christian  teachers,  though  really  in  some  danger  of  their  lives, 
refused  to  acknowledge  the  power  of  the  lio'a  and  of  the  curse, 
and  would  give  nothing  to  the  chief,  who  thereupon  professed 
himself  quite  unable  to  remove  the  curse. 

A  curse  by  way  of  asseveration  is  very  common  in  Florida, 
and  no  doubt  in  the  other  Solomon  Islands.    A  man  will  deny 
an  accusation  by  his  forbidden  food,  butonggu!  by  some  lindalo, 
Daula,  the  ghostly  frigate-bird,  or  Bagea,  the  ghostly  shark. 
The  Florida  people,  and  their  neighbours  probably,  were 
sufficiently  advanced  to  garnish  their  conversation  with  profane 
and  filthy  swearing,  even  before  '  contact  with  civilization  '  put 
into  their  mouths  those  words  which  are  too  often  the  first 
they  learn  of  English.    I  am  not  aware  of  the  existence  of  this 
habit  in  the  Banks'  Islands.     The  more  serious  curse  there  is 
to  vctffotia,  to  make  into  a  tangle,  to  prohibit  easy  access 
or  procedure,  under  the  sanction  of  a  spirit's  power ;  to  swear 
therefore  by  the  name  of  some  ghost  or  spirit  is  to  vava  vago- 
gonag,  that  is,  to  speak  making  a  supernatural  power  to 
intervene,  the  withdrawal  of  which  can  only  be  effected  by  a 
sufficient  offering  to  appease  the  layer  of  the  curse,  who  will 
proceed  to  satisfy  the  being  invoked.     To  curse  in  the  sense 
of  expressing  a  wish  for  mischief,  with  a  mental  if  not  a  verbal 
reference  to  a  supernatural  power,  is  to  vivnag.    Such  may  be 
called  the  formula  used  in  pouring  water  into  the  native  oven 
(page  147),  and  such  a  curse  is  supposed  to  be  the  cause  of 
sneezing.    The  milder  forms  are  those  whereby  a  troublesome 
or  impertinent  request  or  remark  is  met ;  '  Iniko  0  suri  tamate, 
you  are  a  dead  man's  bone  ' ;  and  by  what  they  call  sending  off, 
varowog,  to  certain  trees  which  have  something  of  a  sacred 
character,  vawo  mele!  on  a  cycas,  vawo  am!  on  a  casuarina, 
vawo  poga  I  forms  which  mean  not  much  more  than  '  you  be 
hanged ! ' 


CHAPTER  XIIT. 


POSSESSION.    INTERCOURSE  WITH  GHOSTS. 


It  is  difficult  to  separate  the  practice  of  magic  arts  from  the 
manifestation  of  a  ghost's  or  spirit's  power  in  possession ;  because 
a  man  may  use  some  magic  means  to  bring  the  possession  upon 
himself,  as  in  the  case  of  prophecy,  and  also  because  the 
connexion  between  the  unseen  powerful  being  and  the  man, 
in  whatever  way  the  connexion  is  made  and  works,  is  that 
which  makes  the  wizard.  Yet  there  is  a  distinction  between 
the  witchcraft  and  sorcery  in  which  by  magic  charms  the  wizard 
brings  the  unseen  power  into  action,  and  the  spontaneous  mani- 
festation of  such  power  by  the  unseen  being ;  even  though 
there  may  be  only  a  few  who  can  interpret,  or  to  whom  the 
manifestations  are  made.  In  a  case  of  madness  the  native 
belief  is  that  the  madman  is  possessed.  There  is  at  the  same 
time  a  clear  distinction  drawn  by  the  natives  between  the 
acts  and  words  of  the  delirium  of  sickness  in  which  as  they  say 
they  wander,  and  those  which  are  owing  to  possession.  They 
are  sorry  for  lunatics  and  are  kind  to  them,  though  their 
remedies  are  rough.  At  Florida,  for  example,  one  Kandagaru 
of  Boli  went  out  of  his  mind,  chased  people,  stole  things  and 
hid  them.  No  one  blamed  him,  because  they  knew  that  he  was 
possessed  by  a  tindalo  ghost.  His  friends  hired  a  wizard  who 
removed  the  tindalo,  and  he  recovered.  In  the  same  way  not 
long  ago  in  Lepers'  Island  there  was  a  man  who  lost  his  senses. 
The  people  conjectured  that  he  had  unwittingly  trodden  on  a 
sacred  place  belonging  to  Tagaro,  and  that  the  ghost  of  the 
man  who  lately  sacrificed  there  was  angry  with  him.  The 


Possession  by  Ghosts. 


219 


doctors  were  called  in  ;  they  found  out  whose  ghost  it  was  by 
calling  on  the  names  of  dead  men  likely  to  have  been  offended, 
they  washed  him  with  water  made  powerful  with  charms,  and 
they  burned  the  vessel  in  which  the  magic  water  had  been 
under  his  nose  ;  he  got  well.  In  a  similar  case  they  will  put 
bits  of  the  fringe  of  a  mat,  which  has  belonged  to  the  deceased, 
into  a  cocoa-nut  shell,  and  burn  it  under  the  nose  of  the 
possessed.  There  was  another  man  who  threw  off  his  malo  and 
went  naked  at  a  feast,  a  sure  sign  of  being  out  of  his  mind ;  he 
drew  his  bow  at  people,  and  carried  things  off.  The  people 
pitied  him,  and  tried  to  cure  him.  When  a  man  in  such 
condition  in  that  island  spoke,  it  was  not  with  his  own  voice, 
but  with  that  of  the  dead  man  who  possessed  him  ;  and  such 
a  man  would  know  where  things  were  hidden  ;  when  he  was 
seen  coming  men  would  hide  a  bow  or  a  club  to  try  him,  and 
he  would  always  know  where  to  find  it.  Thus  the  possession 
which  causes  madness  cannot  be  quite  distinguished  from  that 
which  prophesies,  and  a  man  may  pretend  to  be  mad  that  he 
may  get  the  reputation  of  being  a  prophet.  At  Saa  a  man 
will  speak  with  the  voice  of  a  powerful  man  deceased,  with 
contortions  of  the  body  which  come  upon  him  when  he  is 
possessed ;  he  calls  himself,  and  is  spoken  to  by  others,  by 
the  name  of  the  dead  man  who  speaks  through  him  ;  he  will 
eat  fire,  lift  enormous  weights,  and  foretell  things  to  come. 
In  the  Banks'  Islands  the  people  make  a  distinction  between 
possession  by  a  ghost  that  enters  a  man  for  some  particular 
purpose,  and  that  by  a  ghost  which  comes  for  no  other 
apparent  cause  than  that  being  without  a  home  in  the  abode 
of  the  dead  he  wanders  mischievously  about,  a  tamat  lelera,  a 
wandering  ghost.  Wonderful  feats  of  strength  and  agility 
used  to  be  performed  under  the  influence  of  one  of  these 
'  wandering  ghosts '  ;  a  man  would  move  with  supernatural 
quickness  from  place  to  place,  he  would  be  heard  shouting  at 
one  moment  in  a  lofty  tree  on  one  side  of  a  village,  and  in 
another  moment  in  a  tree  on  the  opposite  side,  he  would  utter 
sounds  such  as  no  sane  man  could  make,  his  strength  was  such 
that  many  men  could  hardly  master  him.    Such  a  man  was 


220      Possession.    Intercourse  with  Ghosts.  [CH. 

seized  by  his  friends  and  held  struggling  in  the  smoke  of 
st  rong  smelling  leaves,  while  they  called  one  after  another  the 
names  of  the  dead  men  whose  ghosts  wore  likely  to  be  abroad; 
when  the  right  name  was  called  the  ghost  departed,  but 
sometimes  this  treatment  failed.  It  was  a  different  thing 
when,  as  used  to  happen  in  former  days,  a  ghost  from  Panoi, 
the  abode  of  the  dead,  would  come  for  a  certain  purpose  into  a 
man  and  speak  with  his  voice.  This  did  not  happen  to  all 
men  alike,  but  to  some  who  were  subject  to  this  possession. 
Such  a  man  would  somewhere  see  a  ghost,  come  home  and  lie 
down  sick.  People  would  come  to  see  him,  and  calling  him  by 
his  name  would  ask  what  was  the  matter.  He  would  answer, 
'  It  is  not  he,  it  is  I,'  that  is,  not  the  sick  man,  but  the  ghost 
who  answers  by  his  voice.  Then  they  would  call  over  the 
names  of  the  lately  deceased  to  see  whose  ghost  it  was,  and 
when  they  hit  on  the  right  name  he  would  answer,  <  It  is  I.' 
Then  he  would  begin  to  weep,  and  tell  them  that  he  had  come 
back  because  he  knew  in  Panoi  that  his  wife  and  family  were 
not  duly  cared  for,  or  that  his  property  was  being  wasted. 
He  would  scold  his  relatives  for  their  misconduct,  and  he  would 
tell  them  of  things  they  did  not  know,  such  as  where  lost 
property  would  be  found.  Some  one  would  then  bring  in  a 
bunch  of  strong-smelling  leaves  to  drive  him  away,  and  he 
would  immediately  perceive  its  presence  ;  they  would  hide  it 
and  deny  in  vain  that  they  had  brought  it  in.  They  caught 
hold  of  him  straggling  and  howling,  and  put  the  leaves  to  his 
nose  ;  he  seemed  to  die,  the  ghost  departed  from  him  as  the 
soul  departs  from  a  dying  man.  After  a  while  his  senses 
would  return,  and  he  would  declare  that  he  knew  nothing  of 
what  had  been  said  or  done  since  he  saw  that  ghost  and 
sickened.  Such  a  medium  as  this,  though  not  a  wizard  by 
profession,  no  doubt  found  it  worth  his  while  to  receive  these 
ghostly  visits. 

An  Omen  is  a  spontaneous  manifestation  or  warning  given 
by  supernatural  power,  and  not  obtained  by  the  arts  of 
divination.  The  sign  given  to  a  Florida  party,  when  they 
start  upon  their  voyage  and  wait  for  the  rocking  of  their 


juh,]  Omens.     Vampires.  221 

canoe,  might  be  such  if  the  sign  were  not  given  in  answer  to 
the  wizard  on  board.  True  omens  are  observed  at  Saa.  There 
is  a  small  bird  named  wisi  from  its  cry,  which  means  '  No.' 
It  has  other  notes  which  resemble  the  voice  of  a  man  talking. 
If  men  starting  on  an  expedition  hear  the  cry  wisi !  it  is  not 
enough  to  turn  them  back  perhaps,  but  if  they  fail  they 
remember  the  warning  ;  if  they  hear  the  other  notes  they  are 
confident  of  success.  A  man  working  in  his  garden  hears  the 
bird,  and  he  asks,  'Is  there  fighting?'  The  bird  answers 
wisi,  No.  He  asks  again,  '  Is  it  a  stranger  come  from  far  ?  ' 
The  bird  answers  wisi,  or  chatters  to  give  an  affirmative  reply. 
This  is,  however,  not  seriously  thought  of.  If  a  frog,  or  some 
other  creature  that  does  not  usually  come  indoors,  is  seen  in  a 
house  it  is  an  omen.  They  will  go  and  enquire  of  a  wizard 
what  it  means.  If  the  creature  comes  and  cries  they  know 
that  soon  there  will  be  crying  for  a  death.  There  is  in  that 
island  a  remarkable  kind  of  snake  rarely  seen,  called  mati  e 
sato  ;  it  is  about  ten  inches  long,  glistening  like  gold,  and 
when  full  grown,  the  natives  say,  so  resplendent  that  nothing 
of  it  can  be  clearly  seen  but  its  eyes  and  snout ;  when  it  is 
taken  into  the  hand  it  is  exceedingly  smooth  and  slippery. 
If  one  of  these  is  seen  in  a  house  it  is  a  sign  of  death  ;  if 
running,  of  violent  death  ;  if  quiet,  of  death  by  sickness.  If 
the  venomous  snake  an  is  seen  in  a  house  it  is  a  sisrn  of  death 
or  fighting  or  misfortune ;  if  coiled  up  it  is  a  sign  of  quiet 
death  ;  if  running,  there  will  be  violence.  When  a  beginning 
is  made  of  building  a  house  or  canoe,  or  of  clearing  a  garden, 
a  man  will  call  aloud,  and  then  if  something  remarkable 
appears  it  is  a  sign  that  the  work  will  be  interrupted  by 
death  or  war ;  if  nothing  comes,  all  will  be  well.  The  sacred 
character  of  the  sigo,  kingfisher,  in  the  Banks'  Islands  has  been 
mentioned,  and  that  its  cry  is  ominous.  It  is  the  same  in 
Lepers'  Island,  where,  if  a  party  is  going  to  battle  and  a  king- 
fisher, higo,  cries  to  the  right,  it  foretells  victory ;  if  it  cries  to 
the  left,  it  bodes  failure. 

There  is  a  belief  in  the  Banks'  Islands  in  the  existence  of  a 
power  like  that  of  Vampires.    A  man  or  woman  would  obtain 


222      Possession.    Intercourse  with  Ghosts.  [CH. 

this  power  out  of  a  morbid  desire  for  communion  with  some 
ghost,  and  to  gain  it  would  steal  and  eat  a  morsel  of  a  corpse. 
The  ghost  then  of  the  dead  man  would  join  in  a  close  friend- 
ship with  the  person  who  had  eaten,  and  would  gratify  him  by 
afflicting  any  one  against  whom  his  ghostly  power  might  be 
directed.  The  man  so  afflicted  would  feel  that  something  was 
influencing  his  life,  and  would  come  to  dread  some  particular 
person  among  his  neighbours,  who  was  therefore  suspected  of 
being  a  talamaur.  This  latter  when  seized  and  tried  in  the 
smoke  of  strong-smelling  leaves  would  call  out  the  name  of 
the  dead  man  whose  ghost  was  his  familiar  often  the  names 
of  more  than  one,  and  lastly  the  name  of  the  man  who  was 
afflicted.  The  same  name  talamaur  was  given  to  one  whose 
soul  was  supposed  to  go  out  and  eat  the  soul  or  lingering  life 
of  a  freshly-dead  corpse.  There  was  a  woman  some  years  ago 
of  whom  the  story  is  told  that  she  made  no  secret  of  doing 
this,  and  that  once  on  the  death  of  a  neighbour  -she  gave 
notice  that  she  should  go  in  the  night  and  eat  the  corpse. 
The  friends  of  the  deceased  therefore  kept  watch  in  the  house 
where  the  corpse  lay,  and  at  dead  of  night  heard  a  scratching 
at  the  door,  followed  by  a  rustling  noise  close  by  the  corpse.  One 
of  them  threw  a  stone  and  seemed  to  hit  the  unseen  thins: ; 
and  in  the  morning  the  talamaur  was  found  with  a  bruise  on 
her  arm  which  she  confessed  was  caused  by  a  stone  thrown  at  her 
while  she  was  eating  the  corpse.  Such  a  woman  would  feel 
a  morbid  delight  in  the  dread  which  she  inspired,  and  would 
also  be  secretly  rewarded  by  some  whose  secret  spite  she 
gratified. 

A  certain  mysterious  power  was  believed  to  attach  to  some 
men  in  the  Banks'  Islands,  which  the  natives  find  it  difficult 
to  explain.  There  is  something  belonging  to  a  man  called 
his  wuqa  or  uqa.  If  a  stranger  sleeps  in  some  one's  habitual 
sleeping-place  in  his  absence  and  afterwards  finds  himself  un- 
well, he  knows  that  the  uqa  of  the  man  in  whose  place  he 
slept  has  struck  him  there ;  or  if  one  leaves  an  associate  and 
goes  elsewhere  to  sleep,  the  uqa  of  the  man  he  leaves  will  follow 
him  and  strike  him ;  he  will  rise  in  the  morning  weak  and 


x,,,.]  Tricks  of  Ghosts,  223 

languid,  or  if  he  had  been  unwell  before  he  would  be  worse. 
Although  this  is  not  done  by  witchcraft  a  man  is  held  re- 
sponsible for  what  his  nqa  does,  and  is  made  to  pay  money  to 
the  injured  man,  and  by  an  act  of  his  will  to  take  off  the 
malignant  influence. 

Here  may  be  mentioned  also  certain  tricks  which  ghosts  or 
spirits  play  on  men,  or  which  men  know  how  to  make  them 
play.  At  Mota  in  the  Banks'  Islands  a  little  boy  named 
Peitavunana,  heavenly  water,  was  frightened  and  chased  by  a 
ghost  up  the  mountain.  He  was  sought  for  in  vain,  and  a 
fight  was  threatened.  They  divined  for  him,  so  ilo,  by  crack- 
ing of  the  fingers  (page  an),  and  a  man  from  Vanua  Lava 
announced  that  he  would  be  found  in  a  certain  very  inaccessible 
place.  There  he  was  found  by  Somwaswas  at  the  root  of  a 
tree  crying  and  calling  on  his  mother,  his  body  covered  with 
excrement,  the  food  of  ghosts,  and  streaming  with  blood  from 
the  thorns  through  which  he  had  been  forced,  and  in  his 
hand  an  unripe  fruit  of  the  mammy-apple.  He  said  that  his 
dead  mother  had  come  to  him  and  given  him  the  food. 
Another  little  boy,  Nungwia,  sleeping  on  the  beach  at  night, 
was  conveyed  by  a  ghost  into  a  very  small  cavity  beneath  a 
rock,  into  which  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  have  climbed. 
In  Lepers'  Island  they  have  a  way  of  playing  with  a  ghost. 
They  build  a  little  house  in  the  forest  near  their  village  and 
adorn  it  with  leaves  and  cocoa-nut  fronds.  It  has  a  partition 
dividing  it  in  two,  and  a  bamboo  twelve  or  fifteen  feet  long 
is  put  within,  half  on  one  side  of  the  partition,  half  on  the 
other.  The  men  assemble  in  the  night  to  try  the  presence  of 
a  ghost,  and  sit  in  the  house  on  one  side  only  of  the  partition 
with  their  hands  under  one  end  of  the  bamboo.  They  shut 
their  eyes,  and  call  the  names  of  the  lately  dead.  When  they 
feel  the  bamboo  moving  in  their  hands  they  know  that  the 
ghost  is  present  whose  name  was  the  last  they  called.  Then 
they  ask,  naming  one  of  themselves,  '  Where  is  Tanga  ?  '  and 
the  bamboo  rises  in  their  hands  and  strikes  him,  and  then 
sinks  back.  They  are  sure  then  of  the  presence  of  the  ghost, 
and  tell  him  they  will  go  outside  ;  and  they  go  out,  singing, 


1 


224      Possession.    Intercourse  with  Ghosts.  [CH. 

with  one  end  of  the  bamboo  in  their  hands.  Then  the  bamboo 
leads  them  as  the  ghost  within  it  chooses.  They  make 
known  what  they  wish  by  singing,  and  the  bamboo  makes 
them  do  the  contrary  to  what  they  say  they  want ;  if  they 
sing  that  they  will  go  up  hill  it  drags  them  down.  Finally, 
they  sing  that  they  wish  not  to  return  into  the  path,  and  they 
are  led  out  of  the  bush  into  the  path  ;  they  sing  that  they  do 
not  want  to  go  into  the  village,  and  they  are  taken  there. 
In  the  same  way  a  club  is  put  at  night  into  a  cycas-tree, 
which  has  a  sacred  character,  and  when  the  name  of  some 
ghost  is  called  it  moves  of  itself  and  will  lift  and  drag  people 
about.  In  Mota  a  few  years  ago  they  tried  again  a  practice 
of  this  kind  long  disused,  with  a  success  that  caused  alarm. 
A  basket  was  fastened  to  the  end  of  a  bamboo  and  food  put 
in  it ;  a  man  took  the  bamboo  upon  his  shoulder  and  walked 
along,  the  basket  at  his  back  ;  presently  he  felt  a  heavy 
weight  in  the  basket  as  much  as  he  could  carry,  a  sign  that  a 
ghost  had  come  into  it.  The  bamboo  then  would  drag  people 
about,  and  put  up  into  a  tree  would  lift  them  from  the  ground. 
This  resembles  a  good  deal  a  method  of  divination  used  at 
Motlav,  and  described  above,  but  there  is  no  divination  in 
these  tricks. 

There  was,  and  perhaps  still  is,  in  the  Torres  Islands  some- 
thing similar  to  this,  when  ghosts  influenced  and  took 
possession  of  people  with  the  use  of  sticks.  This  has  been 
described  by  a  native  under  the  name  of  Na  tamet  lingalinga, 
by  which  name  those  who  are  subjected  to  the  ghostly  influence 
are  called.  It  is  done,  he  writes,  on  the  fifth  day  after  a  death. 
There  was  a  certain  man  at  Lo  who  took  the  lead,  and  without 
whom  nothing  could  be  done  ;  he  gave  out  that  he  would 
descend  into  Panoi,  the  abode  of  the  dead,  and  he  had  with 
him  certain  others,  assistants.  He  and  his  party  were  called 
simply  '  ghosts  '  when  engaged  in  the  affair.  The  first  thing 
was  to  assemble  those  who  were  willing  to  be  treated  in  a 
gamal,  a  public  hall,  perhaps  twenty  young  men  or  boys,  to 
make  them  lie  down  on  the  two  sides,  and  to  shake  over  them 
leaves  and  tips  of  the  twigs  of  plants  powerful  and  magical 


I 


■ 

xiii.]     Form  of  Possession  in  Torres  Islands  225 


with  charms.  Then  the  leader  and  his  assistants  went  into  all 
the  sacred  places  which  ghosts  haunt,  such  as  where  men 
wash  off  the  black  of  mourning',  collecting  as  they  went  the 
ghosts  and  becoming  themselves  so  much  possessed  that  they 
appeared  to  have  lost  their  senses,  though  they  acted  in  a 
certain  method.    In  the  meanwhile  the  subjects  lying  in  the 
gamal  begin  to  be  moved ;  those  who  bring  as  they  say  the 
ghosts  to  them  go  quietly  along  both  sides  of  the  house  with- 
out, and  all  at  once  strike  the  house  along  its  whole  length 
with  the  sticks  they  carry  in  their  hands.    This  startles  those 
inside,  and  they  roll  about  on  the  ground  distracted.  Then 
the  'ghosts'  enter  in  with  their  sticks,  and  in  this  performance 
each  is  believed  to  be  some  one  deceased,  one  Tagilrow,  another 
Qatawala  ;  they  leap  from  side  to  side,  turning  their  sticks 
over  to  be  beaten  by  the  subjects  on  one  side  and  the  other. 
The  subjects  are  given  sticks  for  this  purpose,  and  as  they 
strike  the  stick  the  ghost  '  strikes,'  possesses,  them  one  after 
another.     In  this  state  the  sticks  draw  them  out  into  the 
open  place  of  the  village,  where  they  are  seen.    They  appear 
not  to  recognize  or  hear  any  one  but  the  'ghosts'  who  have 
brought  this  upon  them,  and  who  alone  can  control  them  and 
prevent  them  from  pulling  down  the  houses  ;  for  they  have  a 
rage  for  seizing  and  striking  with  anything,  bows,  clubs, 
bamboo  water-vessels,  or  the  rafters  of  the  houses,  and  their 
strength  is  such  that  a  full-grown  man  cannot  hold  a  boy  in 
this  state.    After  a  time  the  '  ghosts '  take  them  back  into 
the  gamal,  and  there  they  lie  exhausted  ;  the  '  ghosts  '  go  to 
drink  /cava,  and  as  each  drinks  he  pours  away  the  dregs  call- 
ing the  name  of  one  of  the  possessed,  and  the  senses  of  each 
return  as  his  name  is  called.    It  is  five  days,  however,  before 
they  can  go  about  again.     This  was  done  once  after  a 
Christian  teacher  had  come  to  Lo,  and  two  of  his  scholars 
whom  he  let  go  to  prove  that  it  was  a  deception  were 
possessed. 

People  in  the  Banks'  Islands  have  certain  tricks  which 
those  who  do  not  understand  them  believe  to  be  the  work  of 
ghosts.    A  man  will  hear  a  voice  from  the  ground  beneath 

Q 


226      Possession.    Intercourse  with  Ghosts.  [ch. 

his  feet,  calling  him  by  his  name.  This  is  said  to  be  clone  by- 
letting"  an  open  bamboo  some  foot  or  two  into  the  ground  in 
some  place  not  far  from  the  person  to  be  addressed,  where  the 
operation  will  be  unseen,  and  then  speaking  into  the  end  of 
the  bamboo,  and  directing  the  voice  in  the  way  the  sound  is 
meant  to  travel.  Again,  a  family  party  working  in  their 
garden  will  see  smoke  and  sparks  ascending  in  the  direction 
of  their  village ;  they  hear  the  hissing  of  the  flames  and  the 
popping  of  the  bamboo  rafters ;  they  are  sure  that  it  is  their 
own  house  burning,  and  run  to  save  what  they  can.  "When 
they  reach  the  village  all  is  quiet,  the  houses  are  all  standing 
with  fastened  doors,  as  in  the  hours  of  work.  The  trick 
has  been  played  by  a  party  who  somewhere  in  a  line  with 
the  house  have  made  a  fire,  and  exploding  green  reeds 
which  fill  with  steam  when  heated  in  the  fire,  and  beating 
with  the  tips  of  dry  cocoa-nut  fronds  upon  the  ground, 
have  imitated  with  wonderful  exactness  the  noises  of  a  house 
on  fire. 

It  will  hardly  be  inappropriate  here  to  introduce  the 
Melanesian  superstition  about  sneezing,  to  which  some 
reference  has  been  already  made.  In  Florida  when  a  man 
sneezes  they  think  that  some  one  is  speaking  of  him,  is 
angry  with  him,  perhaps  cursing  him  by  calling  on  his  own 
tindalo  to  eat  him ;  the  man  who  sneezes  calls  upon  his 
tindalo  to  damage  the  man  who  is  cursing  him.  In  the 
same  way  at  Saa  if  a  man  sneezes  when  he  wakes,  he  cries, 
'  "Who  calls  me  1  If  for  good,  well :  if  for  evil,  may  So-and-So 
(naming  a  lid  a)  defend  me.'  In  the  Banks'  Islands  also  some 
one  is  supposed  to  be  calling  the  name  of  a  man  when  he 
sneezes,  either  for  good  or  evil.  In  Motlav  if  a  child  sneezes, 
the  mother  will  cry,  '  Let  him  come  back  into  the  world !  let 
him  remain.'  In  Mota  they  cry,  'Live,  roll  back  to  us ! ' 
The  notion  is  that  a  ghost  is  drawing  the  child's  soul  away. 
It  has  been  said  that  at  Mota  a  man  enquires  when  he 
sneezes  by  a  certain  divination  who  is  cursing  him  ;  he  will 
also  stamp  with  his  foot  and  cry,  '  Stamp  down  the  mischief 
from  me  !  Let  it  be  quiet !  Let  them  say  their  words  in  vain  ; 


xiii  ]  Sneezing.    ..  227 

let  them  lay  their  plots  in  vain  1 '  \  There  is  a  special  form  of 
words  used  when  one's  step-father  sneezes  (page  40).  The 
native  notions  in  the  New  Hebrides  are  much  the  same ;  but 
in  Lepers'  Island,  if  an  infant  sneezes,  it  is  a  sign  that  its  soul 
has  been  away,  and  has  just  come  back ;  the  friends  present 
cry  out  with  good  wishes.  They  judge  in  the  same  island  by 
the  character  of  the  sneeze  what  is  the  motive  with  which 
the  sneezer's  name  is  being  called ;  if  it  be  a  gentle  sneeze 
no  harm  is  meant,  a  violent  paroxysm  is  warning  of  a 
curse. 

1  Vara  tur  o  leu  nan  nan — ni  niasur — nira  vetcet  ivora,  tiira  sorsora  tvora/ 


Q  2 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


BIRTH.    CHILDHOOD.  MARRIAGE. 


In  attempting-  to  trace  the  course  of  a  Melanesian  life 
from  birth  to  burial  we  soon  meet  with  practices  connected 
with  the  Couvade.  A  proper  Couvade  has  perhaps  been 
observed  in  San  Cristoval  alone,  when  the  young1  father  was 
found  lying  in  after  the  birth  of  his  child  ;  and  it  should  be 
observed  that  this  was  where  the  child  follows  the  father's 
kindred.  There  is  much  however  which  approaches  this.  At 
Saa  it  is  not  only  the  expectant  mother  who  is  careful  what 
she  eats,  the  father  also  both  before  and  after  the  child's 
birth  refrains  from  some  kinds  of  food  which  would  hurt  the 
child.  He  will  not  eat  pig's  flesh,  and  he  abstains  from 
movements  which  are  believed  to  do  harm,  upon  the  principle 
that  the  father's  movements  affect  those  of  the  child.  A 
man  will  not  do  hard  work,  lift  heavy  weights,  or  go  out  to 
sea ;  he  keeps  quiet  lest  the  child  should  start,  should  over- 
strain itself,  or  should  throw  itself  about  as  he  paddles.  In 
the  Banks'  Islands  also,  both  parents  are  careful  what 
they  eat  when  the  child  is  born,  they  take  only  what  if  taken 
by  the  infant  would  not  make  it  ill ;  before  the  birth  of  her 
first  child  the  mother  must  not  eat  fish  caught  by  the  hook, 
net,  or  trap.  After  the  birth  of  the  first  child,  the  father 
does  no  heavy  work  for  a  month ;  after  the  birth  of  any  of 
his  children,  he  takes  care  not  to  go  into  those  sacred  places, 
tano  rongo,  into  which  the  child  could  not  go  without  risk. 
It  is  the  same  in  the  New  Hebrides;  the  expectant  Arag-a 
father  keeps  away  from  sacred  places,  ute  sajmga,  before  the 


Coitvade.  Infanticide. 


229 


child's  birth,  and  does  not  enter  his  house  ;  after  the  birth,  he 
does  work  in  looking  after  his  wife  and  child,  but  he  must 
not  eat  shell-fish  and  other  produce  of  the  beach,  for  the 
infant  would  suffer  from  ulcers  if  he  did.  In  Lepers'  Island, 
the  father  is  very  careful  for  ten  days ;  he  does  no  work,  will 
not  climb  a  tree,  or  go  far  into  the  sea  to  bathe,  for  if  he 
exerts  himself  the  child  will  suffer.  If  during  this  time 
he  goes  to  any  distance,  as  to  the  beach,  he  brings  back  wifh 
him  a  little  stone  representing  the  infant's  soul,  which  may 
have  followed  him  ;  arrived  at  home,  he  cries,  '  Come  hither,' 
and  puts  down  the  stone  in  the  house  ;  then  he  waits  till  the 
child  sneezes,  and  he  cries,  1  Here  it  is,'  knowing  then  that 
the  soul  has  not  been  lost. 

Abortion  and  Infanticide  were  very  common.  If  a  woman 
did  not  want  the  trouble  of  bringing  up  a  child,  desired  to 
appear  young,  was  afraid  her  husband  might  think  the  birth 
before  its  time,  or  wished  to  spite  her  husband,  she  would  find 
some  one  to  procure  abortion  either  by  the  juice  of  certain  plants 
taken  in  drink  or  by  twisting  and  squeezing  the  foetus.  Infan- 
ticide was  more  prevalent  in  some  islands  than  others  ;  since 
Christian  teaching  has  been  introduced  a  great  change  is  visible 
in  Maewo,  Aurora  Island,  and  at  Wango  in  San  Cristoval, 
where  the  birth  of  an  infant  was  of  late  years  indeed  an  un- 
usual thing,  and  all  the  children  in  the  villages  had  been 
bought  from  inland.  In  those  parts  the  old  women  of  the  vil- 
lage generally  determined  whether  a  newborn  child  should  live ; 
if  not  promising  in  appearance,  or  likely  to  be  troublesome,  it 
was  made  away  with,  its  mouth  perhaps  stuffed  with  leaves  and 
the  body  cast  into  a  hole  and  covered  with  a  stone.  In  the 
Banks'  Islands,  if  of  the  wrong  sex  or  otherwise  unwelcome,  the 
infant  was  choked  as  soon  as  born.  Male  children  were  killed 
rather  than  female  in  that  group  ;  if  there  were  female  children 
already,  another  would  not  be  desired ;  but  the  females  were 
rather  preserved,  as  it  is  important  to  observe,  because  of  the 
family  passing  through  the  female  side,  as  well  as  with  the 
prospect  of  gain  when  the  girl  should  be  betrothed  and  married. 

There  is  nowhere  in  the  groups  generally  the  practice  of 


230  Birth.    Childhood.    Marriage.  [CH. 

killing  one  of  twins,  nor  is  there  anywhere  any  dislike  to  the 
birth  of  twins  further  than  from  the  trouble  they  entail.  In 
some  places,  as  at  Saa,  twins  are  liked ;  at  Motlav  the  people 
of  a  village  are  proud  of  their  twins,  and  the  parents  and 
relations  make  much  of  them ;  no  one  would  adopt  one  of 
them,  because  it  would  spoil  the  pleasure  of  seeing  them 
together,  and  deprive  them  of  their  natural  right  to  be 
together ;  the  only  sad  thing  about  them  is  that  they  give 
much  trouble,  and  that  the  parents  will  be  so  sorry  if  they  die. 
In  Florida  alone  there  seems  to  be  something  of  a  suspicion 
that  two  fathers  may  be  concerned  ;  but  they  take  it  that  the 
woman  has  trespassed  on  the  sacred  place,  vumiha,  of  some 
ghost,  tinclalo,  whose  power  lies  that  way.  In  Lepers'  Island 
also  it  is  thought  that  twins  may  be  a  gift  of  Tagaro. 
"Women  who  want  a  child  will  go  to  a  sacred  place  in  hope 
that  the  spirit  will  give  them  one,  and  sometimes  he  gives 
them  two.  There  is  now  in  the  island  one  Malavaiboe,  Piff- 
twin,  the  survivor  of  twin  sons  of  Arusese  ;  the  people  believe 
he  will  turn  out  a  great  man,  not  so  much  because  he  is  a 
twin,  as  because  Tagaro  gave  the  twins  of  which  he  is  one  to 
their  mother  when  she  went  to  ask  a  child. 

At  Saa,  when  a  newborn  infant  is  eight  or  ten  days  old  a 
sacrifice,  'urni  qo  (page  137),  is  made  to  the  family  lid  a  to  provide 
against  misfortune.  In  Lepers'  Island  when  the  infant  is  ten 
days  old  the  mother  is  well  again,  and  the  father  goes  down 
to  the  beach  to  wash  the  things  belonging  to  the  child.  As 
he  goes  he  scatters  along  the  path  little  toy  bows,  if  it  be  a 
boy,  a  sign  that  he  shall  be  a  strong  bowman  ;  if  it  be  a  girl, 
he  throws  down  bits  of  the  pandanus  fibre  out  of  which  mats 
are  made,  for  the  mats  which  count  as  money  are  to  be  her 
work.  In  case  the  child  dies  after  eating  for  the  first  time 
the  parents  will  not  eat  that  food  afterwards  themselves.  At 
Araga,  Pentecost  Island,  a  first-born  son  remains  ten  days  in 
the  house  in  which  he  was  born,  during  which  time  the  father's 
kinsmen  take  food  to  the  mother.  On  the  tenth  day  they 
bring  nothing,  but  the  father  gives  them  food  and  mats,  which 
count  as  money,  in  as  gTeat  quantity  as  he  can  afford.  They, 


I 


xiv.]  Ceremonies  in  infancy.    Dress.  231 

the  kin  of  the  father  and  therefore  not  kin  of  the  infant,  on 
that  day  perform  a  certain  ceremony  called  Mfami ;  they  lay 
upon  the  infant's  head  mats  and  the  strings  with  which  pigs 
are  tied,  and  the  father  tells  them  that  he  accepts  this  as  a 
sign  that  hereafter  they  will  feed  and  help  his  son.  There  is 
clearly  in  this  a  movement  towards  the  patriarchal  system,  a 
recognition  of  the  tie  of  hlood  through  the  father  and  of  duties 
that  follow  from  it.  Another  sign  of  the  same  advance  of  the 
father's  right  is  to  he  seen  in  the  very  different  custom  that 
prevails  in  the  Banks'  Islands  on  the  birth  of  a  first-born  son  ; 
there  is  raised  upon  that  event,  a  noisy  and  playful  fight,  varjalo, 
after  which  the  father  buys  off  the  assailants  with  payment  of 
money  to  the  other  veve,  to  the  kinsmen  that  is  of  the  child 
and  his  mother.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  be  mistaken  in 
taking  this  fight  to  be  a  ceremonial,  if  playful,  assertion  of  the 
claim  of  the  mother's  kinsfolk  to  the  child  as  one  of  themselves, 
and  the  father's  payment  to  be  the  quieting  of  their  claim  and 
the  securing  of  his  own  position  as  head  of  his  own  family. 

As  children  grow  they  remain  in  their  tender  years  in  the 
women's  care  'within  the  house.  They  are  commonly  weaned 
when  they  can  crawl.  Their  first  advance  in  life  when  they 
are  boys  depends  very  much  upon  the  custom  of  the  place 
concerning  clothing.  In  the  Banks'  Islands,  where  males  of 
any  age  wore  nothing,  boys  as  they  grew  bigger  were  sent  to 
sleep  in  the  gamal,  the  public  club-house ;  the  parents  said 
1  He  is  a  boy,  it  is  time  to  separate  him  from  the  girls.' 
They  took  their  meals  at  home  until  sooner  or  later  they  had 
their  place  bought  for  them  in  the  Suae  Club.  In  the 
Torres  Islands  the  nose  is  bored  on  the  third  day  for  the 
future  ornament.  In  Florida  and  its  neighbourhood  boys  of 
six  or  seven  put  on  the  little  wrapper  worn  by  males,  and  are 
very  particular  about  it.  At  Santa  Cruz  the  boys  go  at  first 
to  the  chiefs  manclai,  canoe-house  and  public  hall,  in  the 
daytime  and  go  home  to  sleep ;  after  a  while  they  cease  to 
return  at  night.  Before  dress  in  that  island  comes  the  indis- 
pensable nose-ring ;  the  hole  for  this  is  made  in  infancy  and 
a  little  ring  inserted.    When  the  ears  are  bored  it  is  a  great 


232  Birth.    Childhood.    Marriage.  [CH. 

occasion  and  a  pig-  is  killed,  and  so  always  when  an  additional 
hole  is  made,  and  a  Santa  Cruz  hoy  may  be  seen  with  more 
than  bhirty  ear-rings.  The  Santa  Cruz  dress  is  ample,  and  is 
assumed  with  a  feast  and  killing  of  a  pig.  The  boy's  as- 
sumption of  a  dress  depends  therefore  on  the  ability  and 
willingness  of  his  friends  to  provide  the  feast,  and  some  big 
boys  go  naked.  The  dress  in  the  New  Hebrides,  at  Lepers' 
Island,  and  Pentecost  differs  little  from  that  of  Santa  Cruz. 
The  boy  puts  on  his  malo  dress  when  his  parents  think  him 
big  enough,  and  sooner  or  later  as  they  can  afford  to.  make  a 
feast.  Before  this  he  has  lived  at  home,  but  now  he  eats  and 
sleeps  in  the  gamali  club-house,  and  now  begins  his  strange 
and  strict  reserve  of  intercourse  with  his  sisters  and  his 
mother.  This  begins  in  full  force  towards  his  sisters;  he 
must  not  use  as  a  common  noun  the  word  which  is  the  name 
or  makes  part  of  the  name  of  any  of  them,  and  they  avoid 
his  name  as  carefully.  He  may  go  to  his  father's  house  to  ask 
for  food,  but  if  his  sister  is  within  he  has  to  go  away 
before  he  eats ;  if  no  sister  is  there  he  can  sit  down  near  the 
door  and  eat.  If  by  chance  brother  and  sister  meet  in  the 
path  she  runs  away  or  hides.  If  a  boy  on  the  sands  knows 
that  certain  footsteps  are  his  sister's,  he  will  not  follow  them, 
nor  will  she  his.  This  mutual  avoidance  begins  when  the 
boy  is  clothed  or  the  girl  tattooed.  The  partition  between 
boys  and  girls  without  which  a  school  cannot  be  carried  on  is 
not  there  to  divide  the  sexes  generally,  but  to  separate  brothers 
and  sisters.  This  avoidance  continues  through  life.  The 
reserve  between  son  and  mother  increases  as  the  boy  grows 
up,  and  is  much  more  on  her  side  than  his.  He  goes  to  the 
house  and  asks  for  food ;  his  mother  brings  it  out  but  does 
not  give  it  him,  she  puts  it  down  for  him  to  take  ;  if  she  calls 
him  to  come  she  speaks  to  him  in  the  plural,  in  a  more 
distant  manner  ;  1  Come  ye,'  she  says,  mini  vanai,  not  '  Come 
thou.'  If  they  talk  together  she  sits  at  a  little  distance  and 
turns  away,  for  she  is  shy  of  her  grown-up  son.  The  meaning 
of  all  this  is  obvious.  At  Santa  Cruz  and  the  neighbouring 
islands  the  separation  of  the  sexes  in  daily  life  is  carried  far, 


xiv.]  Avoidance.    Noviciate  at  Saa.  233 

but  has  not  this  character.  At  Santa  Cruz  the  men  and 
women  never  work  together  promiscuously  or  assemble  in 
one  group ;  men  with  their  wives  and  children  only,  and  men 
with  their  mothers,  work  in  the  gardens;  when  a  crowd 
assembles  the  women  collect  aloof.  In  Nufilole,  one  of  the 
Swallow  group,  the  separation  is  complete  ;  men  and  women 
are  never  out  together;  in  the  morning  the  men  go  out 
first  and  come  back,  after  that  the  women  go  and  fetch  water, 
when  they  return  the  men  go  out  again. 

It  has  been  said  in  Chapters  V  and  VI  that  there  is  not 
known  in  these  Islands  of  Melanesia  any  initiation  or  '  making 
of  young  men ' ;  there  is  only  the  entrance  into  the  various 
societies.  The  nearest  approach  to  such  initiation  seems  to  be 
found  at  Saa.  A  chief's  son  in  that  part  of  Malanta  goes 
early  to  the  oha,  canoe-house  and  public  hall,  while  common 
children  still  eat  and  sleep  at  home ;  he  may  go  there  when 
he  is  twelve  years  old.  Before  that  they  are  very  careful 
about  him ;  he  must  not  go  under  the  women's  bedplace,  his 
mother  must  never  use  bad  words  in  scolding  him,  he  must 
not  consort  with  big  boys  who  will  teach  him  bad  ways  ;  he  is 
kept  apart  lest  he  lo'u,  fall,  be  low 1.  At  first  he  goes  only  in 
the  daytime  to  the  oha,  and  comes  back  to  his  mother  to  sleep. 
When  the  time  comes  he  is  put  with  boys  of  his  own  age  to 
undergo  a  sort  of  noviciate.  The  custom  is  dying  out ;  boys 
used  to  stay  in  the  oha  sometimes  for  years.  First  of  all  there 
w  as  a  tuto  sacrifice  (page  137)  to  purify  the  boys.  Afterwards 
they  went  out  every  morning  early  in  a  canoe  to  catch  the 
bonito-fish,  till  each  boy  had  caught  one.  Men  paddled  with 
the  boys,  a  boy  sitting  behind  a  man ;  when  the  man  had  a 
bite  the  boy  behind  him  came  forward  and  helped  to  haul  it  in  ; 
the  fish  counted  as  the  boy's,  he  had  caught  a  fish  which  one 
must  be  saka,  be  possessed  of  a  certain  mysterious  power,  to 

1  It  is  curious  that  the  word  lotu,  commonly  used  for  the  profession  of 
Christianity  in  Polynesia  and  in  Fiji,  should  occur  in  this  sense  in  the  Solomon 
Islands.  The  meaning  from  which  its  use  to  describe  the  new  religion  came 
was  that  of  bowing  clown  as  in  prayer.  To  go  where  women  may  be  above  his 
head  is  degrading  to  a  chief ;  hence  the  refusal  to  go  below  on  board  a  vessel. 


234  Birth.    Childhood.    Marriage.  [CH. 

catch  ;  and  he  had  reached  a  certain  stage  in  life.  A  boy  did 
not  come  out  when  he  had  caught  his  fish,  he  remained  for 
the  time  fixed  for  him  at  his  entrance,  according  to  his  father's 
rank,  or  that  in  which  his  father  had  aspired  to  set  him ;  for 
the  length  of  his  stay  depended  very  much  upon  the  expense 
to  which  his  father  proposed  to  go.  One  might  come  out 
before  his  time,  as  Wateaado  did  when  his  brother  died  and  he 
was  wanted  to  take  bis  place.  At  certain  intervals  during 
this  seclusion  feasts  were  made,  and  a  great  one  when  a  boy 
came  out.  There  was  no  secret  initiation,  nothing  whatever 
was  taught  the  boys,  the  only  thing  they  learnt  was  how  to 
fish  for  bonito.  They  came  out  young  men  and  strangers  to 
the  people  of  the  village,  out  of  whose  sight  they  had  grown 
up.    This  custom  has  now  ceased  at  Saa. 

Circumcision  is  unknown  in  almost  all  the  islands  which  are 
here  in  view ;  it  has  come  up  from  Ambry m  to  the  lower  end 
of  Pentecost,  as  a  prevailing  custom,  and  not  very  lately.  It 
is  done  at  any  age,  whenever  the  boy's  friends  choose  to  make 
the  feast.  It  is  not  a  mark  of  initiation  and  has  no  religious 
or  superstitious  character ;  it  is  a  social  distinction.  It  is 
known  but  not  yet  practised  in  Lepers'  Island,  but  is  said  to 
have  been  already  introduced  into  the  southern  part  of  Aurora. 
A  sharp  bamboo  is  used.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  custom, 
for  it  is  not  a  rite,  has  come  across  from  the  eastwards  to  the 
Southern  New  Hebrides,  and  has  been  for  some  time  in  common 
use,  the  dress  in  some  of  those  islands,  if  it  may  be  so  called, 
being  adapted  to  it. 

The  childhood  of  a  girl  can  hardly  be  marked  except  by 
her  advance  towards  matrimony,  to  which  her  being  clothed 
and  tattooed  is  in  some  places  at  least  a  necessary  step.  In 
Florida  and  the  neighbouring  parts,  in  Santa  Cruz,  in  Pente- 
cost Island,  and  most  of  the  New  Hebrides,  the  women's  dress 
is  a  petticoat  of  strings  of  fibre  or  of  leaves.  In  the  south- 
eastern Solomon  Islands  and  the  Banks'  Islands  the  women 
wear  a  band  with  tufts  or  fringes,  to  which  in  Lepers'  Island 
there  is  added  out  of  doors  a  mat  which  envelopes  the  person. 
The  moral  character  and  training  of  the  girls  may  well  be 


XIV.] 


Chastity.  Harlots. 


235 


noticed  before  their  betrothal  and  marriage  are  taken  in  hand. 
Considerable  laxity  of  intercourse  between  boys  and  girls 
undoubtedly  existed,  and  unchastity  was  not  very  seriously 
regarded  ;  yet  it  is  certain  that  in  these  islands  generally 
there  was  by  no  means  that  insensibility  in  regard  to  female 
virtue  with  which  the  natives  are  so  commonly  charged. 
There  is  but  too  good  a  cause  generally  for  the  natives  to 
present  at  once  their  unchaste  females  to  white  visitors,  and 
these  then  speak  from  experience  little  creditable  to  those  of 
their  colour  who  have  preceded  them.   There  is  a  considerable 
difference  however  to  be  observed  between  one  island  and 
another  in  this  matter,  an  example  of  which  appears  in  the 
presence  or  absence  of  a  word  signifying  a  harlot.    In  Florida 
such  a  woman  is  called  rembi,  and  occupied  not  long  ago  a 
recognized  place  in  native  life ;  but  it  was  in  consequence 
generally  of  misconduct,  such  as  adultery  or  fornication  within 
the  kema  kin,  that  a  woman  was  condemned  by  the  chief  of 
her  place  to  such  a  life.    She  belonged  to  the  chief,  lived  in 
one  of  his  houses,  and  most  of  her  earnings  were  his.  When 
she  had  accumulated  porpoise  teeth  and  money  she  would  be 
allowed  to  marry,  being  well  worth  having,  and  then  reference 
to  her  former  career  would  not  be  proper.    While  rembi  she 
was  not  particularly  despised  ;  no  one  would  step  over  her  legs, 
go  too  near  to  her,  or  talk  to  her  without  cause.    At  Wan^o 
m  San  Cristoval  and  in  the  neighbourhood  girls  were  very 
loose  before  marriage,  getting  money  for  themselves  privately 
by  prostitution  ;  and  besides,  there  are  harlots,  repi,  there,  some 
girls  not  yet  married,  and  some  widows.    They  considered 
themselves  much  stricter  at  Saa  in  Malanta ;  a  girl  of  family 
found  pregnant  before  marriage  would  be  killed,  unless  the 
paramour  could  pay  enough  to  save  her  and  make  her  his  wife. 
A  girl  of  no  family,  that  is,  not  of  the  chiefs  family,  would 
not  be  killed,  but  might  be  allowed  to  become  a  harlot  if  not 
married  by  her  lover.    Sometimes  a  man  allows  his  daughter 
to  become  a  harlot  to  gain  money;  and  a  chief  at  Ulawa  will 
buy  a  girl  from  her  father  and  keep  her  to  earn  money  for  him 
as  well  as  for  herself ;  but  such  a  repi  in  either  island  is  not 


236  Birth.    Childhood.    Marriage.  [CH. 

respected,  is  thought  a  low  character,  and  will  have  but  little 
given  for  her  if  she  is  married.  The  good  families  in  Ulawa 
also  are  strict,  and  mothers  look  well  after  their  girls.  At 
Santa  Cruz,  where  the  separation  of  the  sexes  is  so  carefully 
maintained,  there  are  certainly  public  courtesans.  In  the 
Banks'  Islands  there  is  no  such  thing  known1;  it  was 
always  in  old  times  the  duty  of  parents  to  look  well  after 
their  children  both  boys  and  girls,  and  to  scold  and  correct 
them  if  they  should  see  them  going  wrong ;  girls  were  never 
allowed  to  go  about  alone  without  their  mother  or  elder  friend ; 
however  common  irregular  intercourse  may  have  been  it  was 
never  allowed,  never  respectable,  public  feeling  was  on  the  side 
of  virtue.  There  were  respectable  families  where  the  girls 
were  known  or  presumed  to  conduct  themselves  perfectly  well, 
to  toga  matitag,  and  a  girl  from  such  a  family  would  as  a  rule 
be  chaste  up  to  the  time  of  her  marriage.  Bastards  were  very 
rare  in  the  Banks'  Islands2.  A  woman  living  without  a 
husband  would  indeed  sometimes  be  seen  with  children ;  but 
then  it  was  known  in  the  place  that  she  had  been  taken  to 
wife  by  a  man  whose  previous  wife  was  jealous  and  had  driven 
her  from  the  house.  In  the  Northern  New  Hebrides,  as 
Pentecost  and  Lepers'  Island,  harlots  are  unknown,  though 
there  are  unmarried  girls  and  married  women  who  are  known 
to  receive  mats  and  ornaments  in  prostitution  secretly.  There 
is  a  story  in  Lepers'  Island  of  a  man  with  two  wives  who  when 
he  went  from  home  hung  a  bag  in  his  house  which  he 
expected  to  be  filled  with  mats  by  the  time  he  came  home. 
In  these  islands  also  a  reputation  for  chastity  is  valued  for  its 
own  sake,  and  in  respectable  families  care  is  taken  of  the 
girls.  In  every  island  it  may  be  said  that  there  are  house- 
holds in  which  it  is  understood  that  the  family  is  generally 

1  To  translate  the  word  harlot  in  Mota,  it  has  been  necessary  to  use  the 
phrase  iavine  vilcvile  som,  a  woman  who  gives  money,  with  a  singular  inversion 
of  meaning.  In  fact  the  women  of  bad  character  are  those  married  women 
who  give  secretly  money  to  youths  by  way  of  invitation.  The  youth  gives 
back  food  by  way  of  pledge. 

2  A  bastard  was  called  nat  gaegae,  a  child  of  the  thicket,  and  was  said  to  be 
toota  vanameag,  born  without  belongings,  as  a  desert  place  is  vcmuavanameag. 


XIV.] 


00 

Betrothal.  Tattoo. 


237 


well  conducted,  and  which  are  respectable  accordingly,  and 
everywhere  there  are  families  which  are  not  respectable. 
Bastards  are  generally  very  rare. 

Betrothal  comes  very  early  in  the  life  of  many  Melanesian 
2-irls  :  a  man  with  a  son  born  to  him  looks  out  for  the  birth  of 
a  suitable  girl  to  be  his  son's  wife.  This  is  especially  the  case 
with  persons  of  consequence  and  wealth,  and  upon  this  begins 
the  long  series  of  payments  and  negotiations  which  come  to 
their  end  at  the  marriage.  The  general  character  of  these 
transactions  may  be  understood  from  the  wa)rs  in  which 
matrimonial  affairs  are  managed  in  the  various  islands.  The 
first  marriage  of  the  young  man  may  be  taken  to  be  in  view  ; 
wives  are  added  to  the  first  with  less  to  do  about  it,  but  not  with- 
out a  good  deal  of  bargaining  on  the  part  of  the  men  concerned, 
and  a  great  deal  of  business  and  talking  on  that  of  the  women. 
In  Florida  the  girl  who  has  been  engaged  as  an  infant,  and 
for  whom  some  payment  has  been  made  on  the  engagement, 
is  tattooed  when  she  comes  to  the  proper  age  for  it.  This, 
uAuuhu,  is  done  by  a  man  whose  profession  it  is  to  do  it,  and 
who  receives  much  money,  pigs,  and  food  in  the  exercise  of  his 
art;  a  feast  is  made  for  him  and  for  the  company  assembled 
of  friends  and  relations,  who  help  to  bear  the  expense.  The 
pattern  is  first  marked  out  in  circles  with  a  bamboo,  and  the 
skin  is  cut  with  the  bone  of  a  bat's  wing.  The  amount 
of  tattooing  varies,  but  the  pain  and  swelling  is  always  con- 
siderable. No  girl  would  be  considered  marriageable  unless 
tattooed,  and  the  operation  performed  is  a  sign  that  the  time 
is  come  when  the  father  of  the  young  man  to  whom  one  is 
engaged  should  pay  something  down  with  a  view  to  the 
marriage.  Further  advance,  however,  may  be  delayed  for 
months  or  even  years  before  the  future  father-in-law  goes 
with  his  party  to  pay  down  the  whole  sum  of  money  agreed 
upon.  Then  after  staying  two  days  at  least,  with  endless 
difficulties  interposed,  the  girl  is  given  up,  and  an  extra  sum 
of  money  has  to  be  paid,  na  rongo  ni  nggoti  Mesa,  the  money  to 
break  the  post  near  the  door  used  to  take  hold  of  in  goin^  in 
and  out  of  the  house,  to  finish  her  going  in  and  out  of  heboid 


238         Birth.    Childhood.    Marriage.  rCH. 

home.  This  is  given  to  the  women  of  the  bride's  party,  who 
then  take  her  hy  the  hand  and  give  her  up.  They  lift  her 
from  the  ground  and  carry  her  on  the  back  of  one  of  them  out 
of  the  house  to  the  other  party,  who  then  take  her  away.  The 
bridegroom  does  not  yet  make  his  appearance.  The  bride  then 
stays  in  her  father-in-law's  house  two  or  three  months  waiting 
for  her  parents  to  bring  their  present  of  pigs  and  food.  When 
they  arrive  with  this  they  make  a  feast  which  is  the  wedding 
banquet,  but  neither  they  nor  the  young  couple  partake  of  it. 
This  is  the  final  ceremony;  the  young  man  takes  his  wife  to 
his  father's  house  or  his  own ;  he  is  married,  taulayi 1.  The 
amount  given  by  the  bridegroom's  party  varies  according  to 
the  wealth  and  position  of  the  families  ;  from  fifty  to  a  hundred 
ronffo,  coils  of  native  money.  When  fifty  is  given,  the  bride's 
party  give  in  return  five  pigs  ;  and  when  a  hundred,  ten  pigs  ; 
and  they  say  that  the  money  buys  the  pigs  and  not  thedamsel. 
It  is  the  duty  of  the  young  man's  relations  to  help  him  in 
this  matter,  and  they  are  very  willing  to  do  it,  if  he  on  his 
part  has  been  active  and  willing  in  garden- work  and  other 
duties. 

At  Saa  in  Malanta  when  little  children  have  been  betrothed, 
the  girl,  still  very  young,  comes  bringing  her  food  with  her 
to  spend  a  month  or  two  in  her  future  father-in-law's  house, 
and  to  become  acquainted  with  the  family.  The  betrothed 
children  converse  and  play  together  at  their  ease,  knowing 
what  is  proposed ;  and  this  visit  is  repeated  while  the 
children  are  little  from  time  to  time,  and  part  of  the  money, 
porpoise  teeth,  and  dogs'  teeth  to  be  paid  to  the  girl's 

1  '  During  the  morning  of  the  feast,  whilst  the  bride's  relations  are  waiting 
about  for  the  acknowledgment  of  their  contributions  to  the  wedding  breakfast,  it 
is  the  custom  of  the  boys  of  the  village  to  take  their  bows  and  arrows  and  prowl 
amongst  these  watchers,  and  so  to  irritate  or  alarm  them  by  shooting  amongst 
them,  that  they  are  glad  to  buy  immunity  from  this  dangerous  amusement  by 
paying  a  fish's  tooth.  They  shot  over  their  heads  and  past  their  ears,  and 
between  their  feet,  and  through  their  hair,  till  one  heard  exclamations  of 
disgust  and  annoyance  on  all  sides.' — Rev.  J.  H.  Plant.  It  should  be  observed 
that  this  is  in  the  bridegroom's  village,  and  that  the  boys'  object  is  to  get 
bought  off. 


xiv.]      Saa.    Santa  Cruz.    Banks  Islands.  239 

lather  is  handed  over1.  In  consequence  of  this  familiarity, 
when  the  girl  is  marriageable  and  all  is  arranged  she  goes 
willingly  enough  to  take  up  her  abode  in  her  new  family, 
without  any  real  or  affected  reluctance  on  her  part,  or  lifting 
and  carrying  by  her  friends.  It  is  sometimes,  however,  a  long 
time  before  the  marriage  is  consummated,  through  the  shyness 
of  the  bridegroom,  though  the  parents  encourage  the  young 
couple  to  be  friendly,  and  give  them  opportunities  of  talking 
and  working  together.  The  virginity  of  a  bride  is  a  matter 
of  much  concern  to  her  friends,  not  only  because  the  boy's 
friends  will  not  pay  what  they  have  promised  if  her  character 
in  questionable,  but  because  they  value  propriety.  This  all 
refers  to  the  good  families  in  the  main ;  among  inferior 
people  early  betrothals  are  unusual ;  the  young  people  have  not 
always  made  friends,  and  the  taking  of  the  bride  to  her  new 
home  is  a  greater  affair.  At  Santa  Cruz  in  the  same  way 
engagements  of  marriage  are  often  made  in  infancy.  The 
father  looks  out  a  suitable  girl  sooner  or  later,  and  the  boy 
is  not  told.  Presents  and  feather-money  are  interchanged 
between  the  parents  on  both  sides.  In  course  of  time  the  boy 
is  told  that  a  girl  is  engaged  for  him,  but  is  not  told  who  she 
is ;  he  is  warned  only  not  to  go  near  a  certain  house,  and 
guesses  who  it  is.  The  youth  when  the  time  comes  is  often 
very  reluctant  to  marry,  he  cries  and  asks  why  they  want 
him  to  go  away.  However,  when  he  marries  he  brings  his 
wife  to  his  father's  house,  until  he  builds  one  for  himself2. 

In  the  Banks'  Islands  arrangements  are  made  by  the  friends, 
and  the  paj'ment  to  be  made  agreed  upon  ;  the  young  man, 
or  his  friends  for  him,  la  goro  0  iavine,  give  money  and  pigs  to 
secure  the  woman,  and  her  friends  again  tango  goro  0  nago  lagia, 
1  lay  hold  on  the  face  of  the  marriage,'  by  an  answering  present. 

1  On  one  occasion,  when  Bishop  Selwyn  was  present,  eighteen  porpoise  teeth, 
fifty  strings  of  money,  twenty  pigs. 

2  I  have  been  told  by  a  Loyalty  Island  teacher  living  on  the  island  that  a 
young  married  couple  do  not  cohabit,  but  meet  secretly  for  a  time.  This 
however  was  not  allowed  to  be  correct  by  Santa  Cruz  boys  of  whom  I 
enquired. 


240         Birth.    Childhood.    Marriage.  [CH. 

When  the  matter  is  settled  the  bridegroom's  friends  make  a 
feast,  and  the  tail  of  the  pig  is  given  to  the  bride's  father. 
After  due  payment  of  the  money  the  girl  is  taken  to  wife 
without  ceremony.  If  a  girl  were  engaged  to  an  old  man  or 
one  she  dislikes  she  might  run  off  into  the  bush  with  the 
youth  of  her  choice,  and  a  pig  given  by  his  friends  might 
settle  the  matter.  The  payments  for  a  wife  are  not  very 
heavy  in  this  group,  but  vary  in  the  different  islands.  A 
girl  betrothed  as  a  child  is  here  often  taken  to  her  future 
home  to  be  brought  up  there  to  know  the  people  and,  if  she 
belongs  to  another  island,  the  language  of  the  place.  Boys 
and  girls,  and  young  people  generally,  who  are  engaged  are 
very  shy  about  it,  and  will  hardly  look  at  one  another ;  but 
as  the  time  for  marriage  dra  ws  on  it  is  correct  for  the  youth  to 
make  little  presents  and  otherwise  shew  attention. 

In  the  Northern  New  Hebrides  a  girl  betrothed  in  child- 
hood is  taken  to  her  future  father-in-law's  house  and 
brought  up  there ;  the  boy  often  thinks  she  is  his  sister,  and 
is  much  ashamed  when  he  comes  to  know  the  relation  in 
which  he  stands.  This  however  is  not  the  common  way,  for 
it  is  only  the  children  of  great  people  who  are  betrothed  as 
infants.  When  the  girl  is  old  enough  to  be  married  in 
Araga  she  is  sometimes  tattooed,  and  always  assumes  her 
petticoat.  There  is  some  ceremony  there  when  the  marriage 
day  arrives  ;  people  assemble  in  the  middle  of  the  village, 
and  the  father  of  the  bride  or  some  friend  of  consequence 
makes  a  speech.  The  bridegroom  sticks  a  branch  of  a 
dracasna  into  the  ground  and  brings  up  the  pigs,  food,  and 
mats  given  for  the  bride.  Then  the  orator  exhorts  him  to 
feed  his  wife  properly  and  treat  her  kindly,  and  not  to  be 
sulky  with  her,  and  he  hands  over  the  young  woman,  who  is 
attired  in  a  new  petticoat  and  wrapped  in  a  new  mat.  There 
follows  a  feast,  and  the  bridegroom  goes  round  about  his 
father-in-law  or  the  orator,  stroking  him,  to  thank  him.  A 
sort  of  sham-fight  takes  place  on  the  occasion,  in  which 
sometimes  men  are  hurt,  the  two  sides  being  the  kinsmen  of 
the  bridegroom  and  of  the  bride ;  if  one  of  the  bridegroom's 


xiv.]  Betrothal.  241 

brethren  is  hurt,  it  is  his  business  to  make  it  up  with  him  by 
a  present.    Whether  this  can  be  called  capture  is  very 
doubtful ;  but  no  doubt  it  represents  the  feelings  with  which 
the  bride's  kinsmen  regard  the  loss  of  her  services  ;  it  cannot 
be  the  loss  of  any  rights  of  intercourse,  since  she  was  un- 
approachable by  any  of  them.    The  bride  is  taken  by  female 
friends  to  the  bridegroom's  house  or  his  father's,  sometimes 
crying,  and  dragged  along  if  she  dislikes  the  match.  An 
unwilling  bride  will  refuse  intercourse  with  her  husband,  or 
run  away  to  some  one  she  likes  better ;  in  that  case,  if  her 
return  seems  hopeless,  a  pig  is  given  and  she  stays.  Some- 
times, again,  the  young  couple  are  so  shy  of  one  another  that 
they  will  not  speak  after  marriage,  as  it  has  not  been  proper 
to  speak  before ;  the  friends  and  neighbours  do  not  approve 
of  this,  and  it  is  on  this  account  that  it  is  thought  wise 
to  ensure  mutual  acquaintance  and  liking  by  bringing  the 
engaged  "couple  together  as  children.    At  Lepers'  Island 
among  people  of  consequence  infant  betrothals  are  the  proper 
thing ;  when  a  chief  has  a  girl  born  to  him  another  will 
come  and  secure  her  for  his  boy,  giving  a  present  and 
making  a  feast.    If  the  boy  is  old  enough  at  the  time  of  the 
feast  he  is  made  to  take  a  young  drinking  cocoa-nut,  put  a 
dracama  leaf  into  the  eye  of  it,  and  give  it  to  the  infant's 
mother  for  the  child  to  drink.    This  is  called  huhu  vulie  goroe, 
to  give  her  suck  with  a  drinking  cocoa-nut  and  secure  her1. 
When  the  betrothed  girl  is  about  ten  years  old,  the  boy's 
mother  takes  her  to  her  own  house  to  teach  her  household 
ways,  and  the  children  are  for  the  time  brought  up  together. 
When  she  is  growing  big  her  parents  take  her  back  for  her 
tattooing,  which  is  done  in  lines  all  over  her  body,  with 
nothing  on  her  face.    Hitherto  she  has  worn  nothing  except 
on  great  occasions ;  now  she  is  always  clothed ;  in  the  house 


1  < 


■  When  a  female  child  is  born,  the  father  or  mother  of  some  male  child 
brmgs  him  into  the  house  with  a  bamboo  of  water,  and  the  male  child  proceeds 
to  wash  the  female,  who  henceforth  becomes  his  betrothed,  and  they  grow  up 
together  recognizing  each  other  as  man  and  wife.'-Eev.  C.  Bice:  at  Maewo 
Aurora  Island.  ' 


242  Birth.    Childhood.    Marriage.  [ch. 

she  wears  only  the  para,  a  fringed  band,  and  out  of  doors  she 
is  wrapped  in  mats.  At  this  time  the  women  on  both  sides 
are  very  busy  talking  over  the  price  to  be  paid  by  the 
bridegroom's  friends,  which  varies  much ;  if  the  youth  is 
the  son  of  a  great  man,  a  tusked  pig  and  a  hundred  mats 
are  not  too  much,  for  common  people  two  or  three  ordinary 
pigs  and  fifty  mats  will  do.  These  arrangements  often  take 
a  long  time,  for  the  women  delight  in  them ;  and  while  they 
go  on  the  young  couple  are  encouraged  to  converse  and  not 
be  shy.  At  last  the  wedding  day  arrives ;  the  young  man's 
friends  take  the  pigs,  mats,  and  uncooked  food,  and  set  them 
down  in  the  middle  of  the  bride's  village.  The  bride's 
friends  have  already  prepared  cooked  food,  and  the  two 
parties  eat  together;  the  marriage  is  thus  complete.  The 
bride  is  carried  on  someone's  back  to  her  new  home,  wrapped 
in  many  mats,  and  with  palm-fans  held  about  her  face,  because 
she  is  supposed  to  be  modest  and  shy.  Formerly  there  was 
always  a  house  built  beforehand,  and  food  prepared  for  the 
young  couple,  who  ate  together  as  a  sign  of  union.  Here,  as 
elsewhere,  a  girl  will  run  away  to  one  she  loves,  and  he  may 
keep  her  if  he  can  satisfy  her  friends ;  but  sometimes  he  is 
afraid  of  the  disappointed  bridegroom's  friends,  sometimes  he 
is  too  poor  to  make  it  up  with  hers ;  he  is  obliged  then  to 
decline  to  receive  her,  and  she  must  go  back,  unless  indeed 
she  had  rather  strangle  or  hang  herself. 

The  reserve  exercised  between  those  who  have  been  brought 
near  by  marriage,  and  the  mutual  avoidance  of  some,  has  been 
already  mentioned,  and  must  be  understood  to  begin  as  soon 
as  the  engagement  of  the  young  couple  is  complete.  There 
is  a  singular  example  of  this  kind  of  reserve  at  Florida,  where 
there  is  no  difficulty  in  meeting  or  using  the  names  of  persons 
connected  by  marriage.  In  case  of  a  woman  having  had  a 
lover  before  her  marriage  she  will  never  after  marriage  mention 
his  name,  calling  him  a  lianu,  that  person,  and  she  will  never 
meet  him  in  the  path.  Her  husband  looks  out  for  this,  and 
observing  who  it  is  demands  money  of  the  former  lover,  and 
when  that  is  paid  no  more  notice  is  taken  of  the  matter ;  but 


XIV>-j  Adultery.  243 

if  satisfaction  were  refused  a  quarrel  would  ensue.  A  newly- 
married  husband,  without  waiting  for  observations,  would 
often  beat  his  bride  to  make  her  confess  who  her  paramour 
had  been. 

The  old  habits  of  the  people  in  all  the  islands  were  very 
strict  in  regard  to  adultery.  The  punishment  of  the  man 
was  death  ;  but  the  punishment  was  very  generally  mitigated 
on  payment  of  a  fine.  Thus  in  Florida  an  injured  husband 
would  give  money  to  the  chief  to  have  the  adulterer  killed, 
and  he,  if  he  could,  would  make  satisfaction  in  money  to  both 
chief  and  husband,  and  so  save  his  life.  The  woman,  however, 
would  probably  be  made  a  rembi,  harlot,  for  the  profit  of  the 
chief.  At  Saa  an  adulterous  wife  is  dismissed,  and  the 
adulterer  is  punished  with  death,  exile,  or  fines.  In  case  of 
adultery  in  a  chief's  family  he  will  have  the  adulterer  killed, 
or  receiving  a  large  fine  will  let  him  go  to  Ulawa  and  live  ; 
a  man's  friends  will  sometimes  hide  him  for  a  time,  hoping 
that  the  chief  will  consent  to  take  a  fine,  and  if  they  find  him 
implacable,  will  kill  the  man  themselves  or  give  him  up. 
When  the  wrong  has  been  done  among  lesser  men,  the  friends 
of  the  husband  and  of  the  adulterer  will  often  fight  about  the 
damages  to  be  exacted ;  and  from  this  cause  indeed  most  of 
the  fighting  throughout  all  the  groups  proceeds.  A  chief  of 
Saa,  Ulawa,  Ugi,  or  San  Cristoval,  who  has  had  the  adulterer 
killed,  makes  a  bea,  a  stage  from  which  speeches  are  made, 
and  rewards  those  who  have  killed  him  ;  and  for  himself  at 
Saa  he  makes  the  sacrifice  tofo  'akalo  (page  137),  to  clear 
away  any  danger  that  may  happen  to  him  as  the  cause  of 
death.  In  the  Banks'  Islands  and  Northern  New  Hebrides 
the  treatment  of  adultery  is  very  simple  ;  the  man  is  shot  or 
clubbed  by  the  husband  or  his  friends  in  their  first  indig- 
nation, and  the  woman  is  beaten,  scolded,  and  threatened  with 
death,  but  the  matter  is  compromised  very  generally  by 
payment  of  money  and  pigs.  A  wife  jealous  of  her  husband, 
or  in  any  way  incensed  at  him,  would  in  former  times  throw 
herself  from  a  cliff  or  tree,  swim  out  to  sea,  hang  or  strangle 
herself,  stab  herself  with  an  arrow,  or  thrust  one  down  her 

11  % 


244  Birth.    Childhood.    Marriage.  [CH. 

throat ;  and  a  man  jealous  or  quarrelling  with  his  wife  would 
do  the  like  ;  but  now  it  is  easy  to  go  off  with  another's  wife 
or  husband  in  a  labour  vessel  to  Queensland  or  Fiji. 

Divorce  is  easy  and  common,  and  may  be  said  to  be  effected 
at  the  will  of  either  party,  though- it  is  naturally  more  easy 
for  a  man  to  dismiss  his  wife  than  for  a  woman  to  leave  her 
husband.  The  great  difficulty  is  the  property  given  for  the 
wife ;  a  man  does  not  wish  to  lose  this,  and  will  try  many 
times  to  get  back  a  runaway  wife  before  he  gives  her 
up,  giving  presents  to  her  relations.  If  the  separation  is 
amicable,  the  father  of  the  woman  will  give  back  what  he 
has  received,  having  in  view  another  son-in-law.  After  some 
time  spent  in  wedlock  the  woman  has  worked  out  a  good  deal 
of  what  was  given  for  her,  and  a  pig  or  two  on  one  side  or  the 
other  settles  all  claims.  It  may  be  said  that  generally  man 
and  wife  get  on  well  together,  and  are  united  by  their  great 
fondness  for  their  children. 

The  Levirate  obtains  as  a  matter  of  course.  The  wife  has 
been  obtained  for  one  member  of  a  family  by  the  contributions 
of  the  whole,  and  if  that  member  fails  by  death,  some  other  is 
ready  to  take  his  place,  so  that  the  property  shall  not  be  lost ; 
it  is  a  matter  of  arrangement  for  convenience  and  economy 
whether  a  brother,  cousin  or  uncle  of  the  deceased  shall  take  his 
widow.  The  brother  naturally  comes  first ;  if  a  more  distant 
relation  takes  the  woman  he  probably  has  to  give  a  pig. 
In  Lepers'"  Island  if  a  man  who  is  a  somewhat  distant  cousin 
of  the  deceased  wishes  to  take  the  widow,  he  adds  a  pig  to  the 
death-feast  of  the  tenth  or  fiftieth  day  to  signify  and  support 
his  pretensions,  and  he  probably  gives  another  pig  to  the 
widow's  sisters  to  obtain  their  good- will.  If  two  men  contend 
for  the  widow  she  selects  one,  and  the  fortunate  suitor  gives  a 
pig  to  the  disappointed.  In  fact  a  woman,  when  once  the 
proper  payment  has  been  made  for  her,  belongs  to  those  who 
have  paid,  the  family  generally;  hence  a  man,  as  in  the  story 
of  Ganviviris,  will  set  up  his  sister's  son  in  life  by  handing 
over  to  him  one  of  his  own  wives ;  not  because  the  young 
man  has  a  right  to  his  uncle's  wives,  but  because  the  woman 


jfiv.]  Polygamy.    Polyandry.  245 

is  already  in  the  family.  It  is  a  rare  thing  that  a  woman 
should  remain  a  widow  long,  but  there  is  a  period  and  sign  of 
mourning.  In  San  Cristoval  men  and  women  wear  large 
tassels  of  grey  shells  as  ear-rings  for  a  mark  of  widowhood;  to 
cut  the  hair  short  and  daub  the  person  with  soot  and  ashes  is 
very  common.  In  the  Banks'  Islands  the  widow  or  widower 
refrains  from  some  article  of  food,  such  as  yam,  for  a  year  or 
lesser  time,  and  wears  a  rope  round  the  neck,  a  ganaro,  as  a 
sign  of  it.  To  val  or  naro  in  this  way  is  a  sign  of  mourning 
for  any  loss. 

Polygamy  is  the  rule,  though  a  considerable  number  of 
wives  is  found  only  with  rich  and  elder  men.  One  wife  is 
commonly  enough  for  a  Florida  man,  who  says  that  he  can 
neither  manage  nor  afford  more  than  one.  When  a  great 
man  like  Takua  had  seven  it  was  thought  a  great  many.  At 
Visale  in  Guadalcanal-  Tekaunga  has,  or  had,  sixty  wives; 
in  Florida  a  wife  costs  much,  in  Guadalcanar  but  little.  At 
Saa  ordinary  men  have  two  wives,  great  men  eight  or  ten. 
In  the  Banks'  Islands  a  well-fco-do  man  has  ordinarily  two 
wives,  and  may  have  three.  A  Vanua  Lava  man  was  not 
long  ago  believed  to  have  thirty.  As  a  man  advances  in 
life  and  survives  his  maternal  uncles,  his  brothers,  and  his 
cousins,  the  widows  of  these  tend  to  accumulate  around  him  ; 
they  are  called  his  wives,  Live  in  houses  round  him  and  work 
for  him,  but  he  lives  practically  with  two  or  three  younger 
women  whom  he  has  taken  for  himself.  In  Lepers'  Island, 
where  men  generally  have  two  wives,  a  singular  arrangement 
is  approved  of,  whereby  a  man  who  has  a  young  wife  takes  an 
elder  woman,  a  widow,  for  a  second,  to  look  after  the  first. 
Some  men  there  have  three  or  four  wives  ;  a  great  man 
lately  had  fifty  wives,  and  his  son  and  successor  has  already 
thirty  ;  a  chief  inland  is  credited  with  a  hundred.  Poly- 
gamy in  all  the  islands  is  a  fruitful  cause  of  quarrels  and 
bloodshed. 

Anything  properly  called  Polyandry  is  unknown,  nor  is  it 
easy  for  natives  to  conceive  of  it  as  a  possible  marriage  state. 
Still  cases  are  known  in  the  Banks'  Islands  where  two 


246  Birth.    Childhood.  Marriage. 

widowers  live  with,  one  widow,  and  she  is  called  wife  to  both, 
any  child  she  may  have  being-  called  the  child  of  both.  Such 
cohabitation,  however,  is  not  so  much  marriage  as  a  convenient 
arrangement  for  people  who  find  themselves  alone  in  later 
life.  In  Lepers'  Island,  also,  there  has  been  a  case  lately  in 
which  two  young  men,  brothers,  returned  from  Queensland, 
have  taken  a  young  woman  as  a  wife  for  hoth.  The  two  men 
have  their  gamali,  and  she  has  a  house  ;  there  are  two  chil- 
dren. This  is  a  new  and  unheard-of  thing,  brought,  as  the 
natives  say,  from  Queensland 1 ;  the  young  men  could  only 
get  one  woman  to  many,  and  in  their  absence  had  lost  all 
care  for  propriety.  In  the  Banks'  Islands  also  cases  occur 
where  a  husband  connives  at  his  wife's  connexion  with  another 
man ;  this  is  not  counted  adultery  because  it  is  allowed ;  it 
is  not  polyandry,  for  the  second  man  is  not  a  husband ;  the 
thing  is  thought  discreditable. 

1  ( Polyandry  ia  to  be  seen  under  our  eyes  here  in  Fiji  among  the  "imported 
labourers."  '—Rev.  L.  Fison.  The  women  being  very  few  in  proportion  to  the 
men  become  something  like  communal  wives  to  those  of  their  island,  or  group, 
one  of  whom  they  could  have  married  at  home. 


A. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

DEATH.    BURIAL.    AFTER  DEATH. 

That  death  is  the  parting  of  soul  and  body,  and  that  the 
departed  soul  continues  in  an  intelligent  and  more  or  less 
active  existence,  is  what  Melanesians  everywhere  believe; 
but  what  that  is  which  in  life  abides  with  the  body,  and  in 
death  departs  from  it,  and  which,  speaking  of  it  in  English, 
we  call  the  soul,  they  find  it  very  difficult  to  explain.  Like 
people  very  much  more  advanced  than  themselves,  they  have 
not  in  the  first  place  a  perfectly  clear  conception  of  what  it  is  ; 
and  in  the  second  place,  like  other  people,  they  use  words  to 
represent  these  conceptions  which  they  acknowledge  to  be 
more  or  less  figurative  and  inexact,  when  the  precise  meaning 
of  them  is  sought  for.    Nor  is  it  any  wonder  that,  believing 
that  such  a  thing  as  what  we  call  a  soul  exists  in  connexion 
with  the  body  which  they  see,  they  speak  of  and  conceive  of 
the  soul  when  separate  from  the  body  as  if  it  were  in  some 
form  and  shape  visible  to  the  eyes.    Thinking,  to  Melanesian 
natives  at  any  rate,  is  like  seeing ;  what  is  thought  of  must 
have  some  form  to  be  thought  of  in ;  and  a  visible  thing  that 
has  a  likeness  to  that  which  is  thought  of  offers  its  name  as  a 
convenient  means  of  expression.    1  Suppose  that  there  are 
people  who  call  the  soul  a  shadow,  I  do  not  in  the  least 
believe  that  they  think  the  shadow  a  soul  or  the  soul  a 
shadow ;  but  they  use  the  word  shadow  figuratively  for 
that  belonging  to  man  which  is  like  his  shadow,  definitely 
individual  and   inseparable   from   him,  but  unsubstantial. 
The  Mota  word  we  use  for  soul  is  in  Maori  a  shadow,  but 


248         Death.    Burial.    After  Death.  [CH. 

no  Mota  man  knows  that  it  ever  meant  that.    In  fact  my 
behei  is  that  m  the  original   language  this  word  did  not 
definitely  mean  either  soul  or  shadow,  but  had  a  meaning  one 
can  conceive  but  not  express,  which  has  come  out  in  one 
language  meaning  shadow,  and  in  the  other  meaning  some- 
thing like  soul,  i.e.  second  self1.'    So  Mr.  Fison  writes    <  The 
Fijian  word  for  soul  is  yah,  that  for  shadow  yaloyah.    I  have 
not  been  able  to  find  any  trace  of  the  belief  that  shadow  and 
soul  are  mdentical.    I  believe  that  Williams'  remark  about 
the  "two  spirits"  was  the  result  of  a  confusion  in  his  mind 
concerning  yah  and  yaloyah:    The  civilized  observer  is 
always  ready  to  assume  that  the  savage  takes  a  childish  view 
and  has  absurd  beliefs,  when  all  the  while,  if  the  savage  could 
put  him  to  a  close  examination,  his  own  conceptions  would 
be  found  very  indistinct  and  his  expressions  mainly  figur- 
ative.   Many  a  voyager,  not  an  observer,  carries  away  as  a 
sort  of  joke  the  story  that  the  natives  think  their  shadows 
are  their  souls,  who  could  not  tell  exactly  what  he  means 
by  the  word  '  soul '  which  he  uses  himself.    It  may  suffice 
to  make  the  statement  that,  whatever  word  the  Melane- 
sian  people  use  for  soul,  they  mean  something  essentially 
belonging  to  each  man's  nature  which  carries  life  to  his 
body  with  it,  and  is  the  seat  of  thought  and  intelligence, 
exercising  therefore  power  which  is  not  of  the  body  and  is 
invisible  in  its  action.    Further  understanding  of  their  con- 
ceptions cannot  well  fail  to  follow  from  the  study  of  the 
words  they  use. 

It  has  been  shown  (page  121)  that  among  Melanesians  there 
is  a  universal  belief  in  the  existence  of  personal  intelligent 
beings  of  power  superior  to  that  of  men,  and  without  bodies 
such  as  are  the  bodies  of  mankind;  and  that  these  beings, 
whom  we  call  spirits,  are  distinct  from  the  disembodied  spirits 
or  souls  of  dead  men  which  we  call  ghosts.  It  is  not  sur- 
prising, therefore,  that  the  same  word  which  is  used  for  spirit 
should  be  used  also  to  describe  the  soul  of  man  while  it  is 
clothed  with  and  animates  his  body.  The  soul  of  a  living 
1  Quoted  in  Professor  Max  Mtiller's  Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  88. 


xv-j  Sotds.  2  49 

man  in  Florida  is  a  tarunga,  a  spirit,  individual,  not  corporeal, 
separable,  though  not  in  fact  often  separated  during  life  from 
his  body.  So  also  is  such  a  spirit  as  a  vigona  a  tarunga, 
though  they  are  not  very  ready  to  acknowledge  the  existence 
of  such  a  tarunga.  During  life  a  man's  tarunga  goes  out  of 
him  in  dreams  and  returns ;  at  death  the  tarunga  departs 
finally  from  the  body;  the  corpse  is  simply  a  dead  man, tinoni 
mate ;  the  separated  soul  is  no  longer  tarunga,  a  spirit,  but 
tindalo,  a  ghost.  But  tarunga  is  not  equivalent  to  soul  any 
more  than  spirit  is  equivalent  to  soul ;  a  soul  is  a  tarunga,  and 
no  other  name  is  given  to  it.  Pigs  have  tarunga ;  when  a 
man  sells  a  pig  he  takes  back  from  it  its  tarunga  in  a  draesena 
leaf,  which  he  hangs  up  in  his  house ;  thus  he  does  not  lose 
more  than  the  fleshly  accidents  of  the  pig,  the  tarunga  remains 
waiting  to  animate  some  pig  that  will  be  born.  A  pig  is  an 
animal  of  distinction  and  has  a  tarunga  ;  yams  and  such 
things  have  none ;  they  do  not  live  with  any  kind  of  in- 
telligence. Is  it  then  to  be  said  that  a  man  and  a  pig 
are  alike  as  regards  the  tarunga,  that  each  has  a  soul  ?  The 
native  to  whom  the  question  is  put  intelligibly  will  laugh ; 
such  a  thing  cannot  be  ;  when  a  man  dies  his  tarunga  is  a 
tindalo,  a  ghost,  and  who  ever  heard  of  a  pig  tindalo1'!  In  the 
Banks'  Islands  the  spirit  that  never  was  a  man,  but  was 
always  superhuman  in  intelligence  and  power,  and,  as  far  as 
could  be  conceived  of  a  personal  being,  was  incorporeal,  was 
called  a  vui  (page  1 24).  It  would  not  be  surprising,  therefore, 
if  the  word  vui  were  used  to  describe  the  soul ;  and  it  is 
impossible  to  say  that  it  would  be  incorrectly  so  used,  for  the 
nature  of  a  vui  and  of  a  soul  is  the  same  (page  1 24)  2.  The 
words  accepted  in  use  to  represent  the  English  soul  are  in 
Motlav  lalegi,  in  Mota  atai.  A  man's  talegi  goes  out  of  him  in 
sleep,  not  in  all  dreams,  but  in  such  as  leave  a  vivid  im- 
pression of  scenes  and  persons  visited  when  the  man  awakes. 

1  The  word  taluna,  .another  form  of  tarunga,  is  found  in  Santa  Cruz,  but  I 
am  unable  to  assign  to  it  anymore  particular  meaning  than  '  spirit.' 

a  In  fact  I  have  known  a  native  of  Mota  writing  of  his  inward  feelings  to 
speak  of  his  vui,  na  vuik. 


250         Death.    Burial.    After  Death.  [CH. 

When  a  man  fainted  the  talegi  had  gone  out,  but  life  remained. 
Life  depends  on  the  presence  of  the  talegi  in  the  body,  health 
depends  upon  its  sound  condition.  A  ghost  can  damage  the 
talegi,  either  spontaneously  or  moved  by  magic  charms,  and 
then  the  man  falls  sick,  and  his  body  is  weak,  or  the  ghost 
takes  the  talegi  away,  and  the  man  lies  just  breathing  in  his 
chest ;  but  it  would  not  be  said  that  all  disease  is  the  result 
of  the  talegi  being  taken  or  damaged  ;  it  would  not  be  said  of 
ulcers  for  example.  The  talegi  has  no  form,  but  it  is  like  a 
reflection  or  a  shadow.  The  Mota  atai  is  no  doubt  the  Maori 
ata,  which  means  a  shadow,  but  atai  never  means  shadow  in 
Mota,  nor  is  niniai,  which  means  shadow  and  reflection,  ever 
used  for  soul.  At  the  same  time  damage  was  thought  to  be 
done  to  the  body  by  means  of  the  shadow  or  reflection,  as 
when  the  shadow  fell  upon  a  certain  stone  (pages  182,  4),  or  a 
man's  face  was  reflected  in  a  certain  spring  of  water  (page  186). 
The  power  of  the  spirit,  vuit  belonging  to  the  stone  or  the 
spring  could  lay  hold  on  the  man  by  his  shadow  and  reflection, 
as  the  power  of  a  ghost  could  get  a  hold  on  a  man  by  a 
fragment  of  his  food,  the  shadow  being  in  a  way  another 
person  of  the  man.  But  that  the  shadow  was  the  soul  was 
never  thought.  So  in  Saa  they  talk  of  a  ghost  snatching 
away  the  shadow  of  a  child  that  starts  in  sleep,  and  a 
doctor  undertakes  to  bring  it  back ;  but,  says  Joseph  Wate, 
who  tells  the  tale,  1  they  say  shadow  and  they  mean  some- 
thing else,  for  the  shadow  of  the  child  is  seen  all  the  while.' 
The  use  of  the  word  atai  in  Mota  seems  properly  and  origin- 
ally to  have  been  to  signify  something  peculiarly  and 
intimately  connected  with  a  person  and  sacred  to  him,  some- 
thing that  he  has  set  his  fancy  upon  when  he  has  seen  it  in 
what  has  seemed  to  him  a  wonderful  manner,  or  some  one  has 
shewn  it  to  him  as  such.  Whatever  the  thing  might  be  the 
man  believed  it  to  be  the  reflection  of  his  own  personality; 
he  and  his  atai  flourished,  suffered,  lived  and  died  together. 
But  the  word  must  not  be  supposed  to  have  been  borrowed 
from  this  use  and  applied  secondarily  to  describe  the  soul ;  the 
word  carries  a  sense  with  it  which  is  applicable  alike  to  that 


xvi  Souls.  25l 

second  self,  the  visible  object  so  mysteriously  connected  with 
the  man,  and  to  this  invisible  second  self  which  we  call  the 
soul.   There  is  another  Mota  word,  tamaniu,  which  has  almost 
if  not  quite  the  same  meaning-  as  atai  has  when  it  describes 
something  animate  or  inanimate  which  a  man  has  come  to  be- 
lieve to  have  an  existence  intimately  connected  with  his  own. 
The  word  tamaniu  may  be  taken  to  be  properly  'likeness,'  and 
the  noun  form  of  the  adverb  tama,  as,  like.    It  was  not  every 
one  in  Mota  who  had  his  tamaniu ;  only  some  men  fancied 
that  they  had  this  relation  to  a  lizard,  a  snake,  or  it  might  be 
a  stone ;  sometimes  the  thing  was  sought  for  and  found  by 
drinking  the  infusion  of  certain  leaves  and  heaping  together 
the  dregs ;  then  whatever  living  thing  was  first  seen  in  or 
upon  the  heap  was  the  tamaniu.    It  was  watched  but  not  fed 
or  worshipped ;  the  natives  believed  that  it  came  at  call,  and 
that  the  life  of  the  man  was  bound  up  with  the  life  of  his 
tamaniu,  if  a  living  thing,  or  with  its  safety;  should  it  die,  or 
if  not  living  get  broken  or  be  lost,  the  man  would  die. 
Hence  in  case  of  sickness  they  would  send  to  see  if  the  tamaniu 
was  safe  and  well.    This  word  has  never  been  used  apparently 
for  the  soul  in  Mota ;  but  in  Aurora  in  the  New  Hebrides  it 
is  the  accepted  equivalent.    It  is  well  worth  observing  that 
both  the  atai  and  the  tamaniu,  and  it  may  be  added  the 
Motlav  talegi,  is  something  which  has  a  substantial  existence 
of  its  own,  as  when  a  snake  or  stone  is  a  man's  atai  or  tamaniu  ; 
a  soul  then  when  called  by  these  names  is  conceived  of  as 
something  in  a  way  substantial.    There  is  another  word  used 
in  Mota,  never  applied  to  the  soul  of  man,  but  very  illustrative 
of  the  native  conceptions,  and  common  also  to  Aurora,  where  it 
is  used  with  a  remarkable  application ;  this  word  is  nunuai. 
In  Mota  it  is  the  abiding  or  recurrent  impression  on  the 
senses  that  is  called  a  nunuai ;  a  man  who  has  heard  some 
startling  scream  in  the  course  of  the  day  has  it  ringing  in  his 
ears  ;  the  scream  is  over  and  the  sound  is  gone,  but  the  nunuai 
remains  ;  a  man  fishing  for  flying-fish  paddles  all  day  alone  in 
his  canoe  with  a  long  light  line  fastened  round  his  neck  ;  he 
lies  down  tired  at  night  and  feels  the  line  pulling  as  if  a  fish 


252  Death.    Burial.    After  Death.  [cH. 

were  caught,  though  the  line  is  no  longer  on  his  neck  ;  this  is 
the  nunuai  of  the  line.  To  the  native  it  is  not  a  mere  fancy, 
it  is  real,  but  it  has  no  form  or  substance.  A  pig,  therefore' 
ornaments  or  food  have  a  nunuai  ■  but  a  pig  has  no  atai,  or 
may  hesitatingly  and  carelessly  be  said  to  have  one.  This 
word  is  no  doubt  the  same  as  niniai,  shadow  or  reflection, 
meaning  not  shade,  which  is  malnmalu,  but  the  definite  figure 
cast  by  the  interception  of  rays  of  light  upon  the  ground  or 
formed  by  reflection  in  the  water.  There  is  no  confusion  in 
the  native  mind  between  a  shadow  and  a  reflection,  but  they 
use  the  one  word  to  describe  that  definite  individual  something 
which,  itself  insubstantial,  is  so  closely  connected  with  the 
substance  that  gives  it  form. 

This  word,  in  the  form  nunu,  is  used  in  Aurora  to  describe 
the  fancied  relation  of  an  infant  to  some  thing  or  person  from 
which  or  from  whom  its  origin  is  somehow  derived.  A  woman 
before  her  child  is  born  fancies  that  a  cocoa-nut,  bread-fruit, 
or  some  such  thing  has  some  original  connexion  with  her 
infant.  When  the  child  is  born  it  is  the  nunu  of  the  cocoa-nut, 
or  whatever  it  may  be,  and  as  it  grows  up  it  must  by  no  means 
eat  that  thing,  or  it  will  be  ill ;  no  one  thinks  that  there  is 
any  real  connexion  in  the  way  of  parentage,  but  the  child  is  a 
kind  of  echo.  There  is  another  way  in  which  a  child  is  the 
nunu  of  a  person  deceased.  Thus  Arudulewari  is  the  nunu  of  a 
boy  whom  his  mother  brought  up  and  who  was  much  beloved 
by  her.  This  boy  died  not  long  before  Arudulewari  was  born, 
and  then  the  mother  believed  that  her  foster-child  had  wished 
to  come  back  to  her,  and  that  the  infant  was  bis  nunu.  But 
Arudulewari  is  not  that  person,  nor,  as  he  says,  is  his  soul 
supposed  to  be  the  soul  of  the  dead  boy ;  he  himself  is  the  nunu, 
the  echo  or  reflection  of  him.  So  Vilemalas,  a  name  which 
means  '  Bring-the-day-after,'  was  born  after  an  adopted  child 
of  his  mother's  had  been  killed  and  not  brought  back  till  the 
day  after,  and  he  is  the  nunu  of  the  slain  person  come  in  his 
place.  In  Mota  there  is  no  such  use  of  nunuai,  but  there  is  a 
notion  that  a  man  may  have  something,  not  exactly  his  atai 
or  tamauiu,  with  which  he  is  originally  connected.    A  man 


xv.]  Solomon  Islands.    Ghosts.  253 

will  scatter  money  into  a  deep  pool  among-  the  rocks  on  the 
shore  into  which  the  tide  is  pouring,  a  sacred  place ;  he  will 
call  on  his  near  forefathers,  dive  in,  and  seat  himself  upon  the 
bottom.  If  he  sees  anything  there,  a  crab  or  cuttle-fish 
perhaps,  he  fancies  that  is  his  real  origin  and  beginning ;  he 
gets  mana,  supernatural  power,  from  it,  and  pigs  will  multiply 
to  him.  At  Maewo,  Aurora,  mrm  is  never  the  soul ;  that  is 
tamaniu;  and  it  is  a  very  remarkable  thing  that  the  body 
is  thought  to  be  the  integument  of  the  soul.  It  is  a  strange 
thing"  that  in  the  islands  of  the  New  Hebrides  nearest  to 
Aurora,  in  Pentecost  and  Lepers'  Island,  the  word  tamtegi 
is  used  for  soul,  for  this  is  no  doubt  the  Mota  tamate,  dead 
man ;  the  natives,  however,  have  persisted  in  their  assertion 
that  they  have  no  other  word. 

We  are  now  prepared  to  follow  the  corpse  of  the  dead 
Melanesian  to  his  burial,  and  his  soul  after  its  separation  from 
the  body  to  the  abode  of  the  dead  ;  and  it  is  probably  better 
to  do  this  by  taking  the  funeral  customs  and  the  beliefs 
concerning  the  state  after  death  together  as  they  are  found  in 
the  various  islands.  It  will  be  seen  that  there  is  a  considerable 
agreement  both  in  customs  and  beliefs,  and  a  universal  consent 
about  some  particulars,  such  as  in  belief  in  the  continued 
existence  of  the  separated  soul,  and  in  the  practice  of  com- 
memorating the  dead  by  feasts  at  which  some  portion  of  food 
is  offered  to  them.  In  the  Solomon  Islands  the  ghost,  being 
the  principal  object  of  worship,  occupies,  as  has  been  shewn,  a 
much  higher  place  in  the  religious  world  of  the  natives  than 
it  does  in  the  islands  which  lie  to  the  eastward,  and  on  that 
account  it  is  desirable,  before  entering  upon  details,  to  draw 
the  distinction  between  the  two  classes  of  ghosts  which  is 
generally  recognized  in  the  former  islands.  The  distinction  is 
between  ghosts  of  power  and  ghosts  of  no  account,  between 
those  whose  help  is  sought  and  their  wrath  deprecated,  and 
those  from  whom  nothing  is  expected  and  to  whom  no  ob- 
servance is  due.  Among  living  men  there  are  some  who  stand 
out  distinguished  for  capacity  in  affairs,  success  in  life,  valour 
in  fighting,  and  influence  over  others ;  and  these  are  so,  it  is 


254         Death.    Burial.    After  Death.  [CH. 

believed,  because  of  the  supernatural  and  mysterious  powers 
which  they  have,  and  which  are  derived  from  communication 
with  those  ghosts  of  the  dead  gone  before  them  who  are  full 
of  those  same  powers.  On  the  death  of  a  distinguished  man 
his  ghost  retains  the  powers  that  belonged  to  him  in  life,  in 
greater  activity  and  with  stronger  force ;  his  ghost  therefore 
is  powerful  and  worshipful,  and  so  long  as  he  is  remembered 
the  aid  of  his  powers  is  sought  and  worship  is  offered  him ; 
he  is  the  tindalo  of  Florida,  the  lio'a  of  Saa.  In  every  society,' 
again,  the  multitude  is  composed  of  insignificant  persons! 
•numerus  fruges  consumere  nati,'  of  no  particular  account  for 
valour,  skill,  or  prosperity.  The  ghosts  of  such  persons  con- 
tinue their  insignificance,  and  are  nobodies  after  death  as 
before  ;  they  are  ghosts  because  all  men  have  souls,  and  the  souls 
of  dead  men  are  ghosts  ;  they  are  dreaded  because  all  ghosts  are 
awful,  but  they  get  no  worship  and  are  soon  only  thought  of 
as  the  crowd  of  the  nameless  population  of  the  lower  world. 

In  the  Solomon  Islands,  in  Florida,  when  a  man  dies,  his 
spirit,  tarunga,  becomes  a  ghost,  tindalo,  and  the  body  is 
spoken  of  as  a  dead  man,  tinoni  mate.  Some  ghosts  are  wor- 
shipped and  exercise  much  spiritual  activity  in  the  world  as 
tindalo  (chaps,  vii,  viii) ;  some  pass  at  once  out  of  the  con- 
sideration of  all  but  members  of  the  family.  The  corpse  is 
usually  buried.  Common  men  are  buried  in  their  garden 
ground,  chiefs  sometimes  in  the  village,  a  chiefs  child  some- 
times in  the  house.  The  grave  is  not  deep;  it  becomes 
sacred  in  so  far  as  no  one  will  tread  upon  any  grave,  while 
the  burial-place  of  a  man  whose  tindalo  has  become  an  object 
of  worship  is  a  sanctuary,  vunuha ;  the  skull  is  often  dug 
up  and  hung  in  the  house.  Men  and  women  are  buried 
alike,  their  feet  turned  inland ;  the  return  from  the  funeral 
is  by  another  road  than  that  along  which  the  corpse  was 
carried,  lest  the  ghost  should  follow.  A  man  is  buried  with 
money,  porpoise  teeth,  and  ornaments  belonging  to  him,  his 
bracelets  put  on  upside  down ;  and  these  things  are  often 
afterwards  secretly  dug  up  again.  Sometimes  a  man  will 
express  a  wish  to  be  cast  into  the  sea;  his  friends  then 


x  v  -j  Florida .    Burial  Customs.  255 

paddle  out  with  him,  tie  stones  to  his  feet,  and  sink  him. 
In  Savo,  near  by,  common  men  are  thrown  into  the  sea  as  a 
rule,  and  only  great  men  buried.    In  Florida  the  funeral  of  a 
chief,  or  of  one  who  is  much  esteemed,  is  delayed  for  two 
days' after  death;   and  after  the  funeral  the  relatives  and 
friends  assemble  to  kilo  clato  na  tinoni  mate,  that  is  to  say,  to 
partake  of  a  funeral  feast,  and  to  hang 'up  on  the  dead  man's 
house  his  cloth,  his  axes,  spears,  shield,  and  other  properties, 
heaping  yams  and  other  food  upon  the  ground.    At  the  feast 
a  bit  of  the  food  is  thrown  into  the  fire  for  the  deceased,  with 
the  call,  'This  is  for  you.'    As  the  mourners  eat,  they  are 
anxious  about  swallowing  the  food  well  down ;  if  a  morsel 
sticks  in  any  one's  throat,  it  is  a  butuli,  a  portent,  the  man 
will  die.    When  they  hang  up  the  dead  man's  arms  on  his 
house,  they  make  great  lamentations ;  all  remains  afterwards 
untouched,  the  house  goes  to  rain,  mantled  as  time  goes  on 
with  the  vines  of  the  growing  yams,  a  picturesque  and 
indeed,  perhaps,  a  touching  sight;  for  these  things  are  not 
set  up  that  they  may  in  a  ghostly  manner  accompany  their 
former  owner,  they  are  set  there  for  a  memorial  of  him  as  a 
great  and  valued  man,  like  the  hatchment  of  old  times. 
With  the  same  feeling  they  cut  down  a  dead  man's  fruit- 
trees  as  a  mark  of  respect  and  affection,  not  with  any  notion 
of  these  things  serving  him  in  the  world  of  ghosts ;  he  ate  of 
them,  they  say,  when  he  was  alive,  he  will  never  eat  again, 
and  no  one  else  shall  have  them.    There  is  a  certain  notion 
that  burial  is  a  benefit  to  the  ghost ;  if  a  man  is  killed  any- 
where and  his  body  is  not  buried,  his  ghost  will  haunt  the 
place  ;  when  a  man's  head  has  been  taken,  and  his  skull  added 
to  some  chief's  collection,  the  ghost  for  a  time,  at  least, 
haunts  about ;  and  so  it  is  also  when  the  arms  and  legs  of 
men  murdered  or  executed  for  crimes  are  sent  to  distant 
places  to  shew  what  has  been  done.    Ghosts  of  men  whose 
heads  have  been  taken  are  seen  without  their  heads.  The 
abode  of  the  departed  is  Betindalo ;  but  yet  ghosts  not  only 
haunt  their  burial-places  and  come  to  the  sacrifices  offered  to 
them,  but  they  are  heard  at  play  by  night  blowing  panpipes, 


256         Death.    Burial.    After  Death.  [CH. 

dancing  and  shouting.    Betindalo  is  apparently  situated  in 
the  south-eastern  part  of  the  great  island  of  Guadalcanal-,  to 
which  the  ghosts  pass  over  through  the  district  of  Florida 
nearest  to  it,  Gaeta.    Here  appears  a  ship  of  the  dead,  almost 
alone  in  Melanesia.    The  Gaeta  people  used  to  believe  that 
all  the  ghosts  of  Florida  passed  along  a  path  through  their 
gardens  leading  to  a  point  of  land  where  they  assembled ;  as 
they  passed  along  nothing  was  seen,  but  a  twittering  sound 
was  heard ;  while  they  were  waiting  at  the  point  their 
dancing  was  heard  at  night.    From  time  to  time  a  canoe 
came  over  from  Guadalcanar  and  took  the  ghosts  across  to 
Galaga,  opposite  to  Gaeta.    They  landed  first  upon  a  rock 
near  to  the  shore,  and  there  for  the  first  time  became  aware 
that  they  were  dead.    Arrived  upon  the  shore,  they  met  a 
certain  tindalo  with  a  rod,  which  he  thrust  into  the  cartilage 
of  their  noses  to  see  if  they  were  pierced ;  if  that  were  so, 
there  was  a  good  path  the  ghosts  could  follow  down  towards 
Marau  at  the  extremity  of  Guadalcanal-;  ghosts  who  could 
not  pass  this  test  were  not  allowed  to  follow  the  path,  but 
had  to  make  their  way  as  they  could  with  pain  and  difficulty. 
Living  men  in  canoes  when  nearing  the  shore  at  Galaga  have 
seen  the  forms  of  the  dead  and  recognized  the  persons,  but 
on  near  approach  they  disappeared.    A  man  not  long  ago 
alive  at  Gaeta  once  appeared  to  die,  but  revived  to  tell 
the  story  how  he  had  passed  with  others  along  the  path  of 
ghosts,  and  had  gone  to  take  his  place  in  the  canoe  which 
came  for  them  at  night ;  but  a  tall  black  titidalo,  he  said, 
whom  he  recognized,  forbad  him  to  come  aboard,  and  sent 
him  back  into  the  world  again. 

At  Bugotu,  in  Ysabel,  the  spirit,  tamnga,  leaving  the  dead 
man,  tinoni  dhelie,  becomes  a  ghost,  tindadho ;  the  place  of 
ghosts  is  the  little  island  of  Laulau,  but  they  haunt  their 
graves,  and  are  seen  at  night,  disappearing  when  approached. 
The  ghosts,  as  they  fly  through  the  air  and  near  Laulau,  light 
first  on  certain  rocks  where  they  become  aware  of  their  sad 
condition.  Living  men  visit  the  island,  as  in  the  story  of 
Samuku,  and  see  these  rocks ;  they  see  also  forms  as  of  men 


xv.j  Bugottt.    San  Crist  oval.  257 

which  vanish  as  they  are  approached ;  they  find  paths  round 
the  island  neatly  kept,  and  bathing-places  cleared  of  stones ; 
if  they  hang  up  fish  in  the  trees,  they  seek  for  them  in  vain 
in  the  morning  ;  marks  made  to  shew  a  road  are  taken  away. 
On  the  top  of  the  island  is  a  pool  of  water,  Kolapapauro,  and 
thither  the  ghosts,  when  they  arrive,  repair  to  present  them- 
selves to  Bolafagina,  the  Mndaclho  who  is  the  lord  of  the 
place.  Across  the  pool  is  a  narrow  tree-trunk  lying,  along 
which  the  ghosts  advance ;  Bolafagina  examines  their  hands 
to  see  if  they  have  the  mark  cut  upon  them  (a  conventional 
outline  of  the  frigate-bird ;  page  1 80)  which  admits  them  to 
his  company;  those  who  have  it  not  are  thrown  from  the  tree 
into  the  gulf  beneath,  and  perish  out  of  their  ghostly  life. 
When  a  chief  dies,  they  bury  him  so  that  his  head  is  near 
the  surface,  and  over  it  they  keep  a  fire  burning,  so  that  they 
may  take  up  the  skull  for  preservation  in  the  house  of  the 
man  who  succeeds  to  power.  An  expedition  then  starts  to 
procure  heads  in  honour  of  the  deceased,  now  become  a 
tindadho  to  be  worshipped.  Any  one  not  belonging  to  the 
place  will  be  killed  for  the  sake  of  his  head,  and  the  heads 
procured  are  arranged  upon  the  beach,  and  believed  to  add 
mana,  spiritual  power,  to  the  new  tindadho  ;  until  these 
are  procured  the  people  of  the  place  do  not  move  about. 
The  grave  is  built  up  with  stones,  and  sacrifices  are  offered 
upon  it1. 

At  Wango  in  San  Cristoval  the  soul,  'aunga  (another  form 
of  tarunga),  departed  from  the  body  becomes  a  ghost,  'ataro,  and 
the  ghost  on  leaving  the  body  is  believed  to  make  its  way  to 
three  small  islands  near  Ulawa.  On  his  first  arrival  there  the 
ghost  feels  himself  still  a  man,  and  does  not  realize  his  con- 
dition ;  he  finds  friends,  and  gives  them  the  news  of  the  place 
he  has  just  left.  After  some  days  a  kingfisher  pecks  his  head, 
and  he  becomes  a  mere  ghost  (page  190).  The  existence  of 
the  ghosts  in  these  islands,  Rondomana,  is  shadowy  and 

1  '  The  dead  man's  wife  and  child  were  then  dragged  to  the  open  grave  and 
strangled  there,  and  their  bodies  thrown  in,  together  with  his  possessions,  guns, 
rifles,  money,  and  valuables  of  all  kinds.'— Rev.  A.  Penny. 

S 


258  Death.   Burial.    After  Death.  [CH. 

inactive  ;  they  range  aimlessly  about  and  lodge  in  caves.  Men 
landing-  on  the  islands  in  stress  of  weather  see  them  on  the 
beach  ;  but  they  dread  living-  men,  and  disappear  when  closely- 
approached.  It  must  be  taken  that  these  'ataro  which  abide 
in  Rondomana  are  but  the  ghosts  of  common  men  who  while 
they  lived  had  no  power,  mana  ;  for  there  are  'ataro  also  which 
are  active  and  powerful,  feared,  invoked,  and  propitiated, 
present  in  full  activity  in  the  places  in  which  they  dwelt  as 
living  men.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  a  man's  ghost  has  in  greater 
force  the  power  which  the  man  had  in  his  lifetime,  when  he 
had  it  from  his  communication  with  the  ghosts  that  went 
before  him;  and  those  who  have  lately  died  have  most 
power,  or  at  least  are  the  most  active  sources  of  it.  The 
ghost  of  the  great  man  lately  dead  is  most  regarded;  as 
the  dead  are  forgotten  their  ghosts  are  superseded  by  later 
successors  to  the  unseen  power.  The  bodies  of  common 
people  are  cast  into  the  sea,  but  men  of  consequence  are 
buried,  and  some  relic  of  them,  skull,  tooth,  or  finger-bone, 
is  taken  up  and  preserved  in  a  shrine  in  the  village. 
There  are,  therefore,  land  ghosts  and  sea  ghosts.  The  former 
are  seen  about  the  villages  and  heard  to  speak,  haunt- 
ing their  graves  and  relics ;  their  appearance  that  of  men 
lately  dead,  their  voice  a  hollow  whisper.  Their  aid  can  be 
obtained  by  those  who  know  them,  and  they  are  believed  to 
fight  among  themselves  with  ghostly  weapons.  The  ghosts 
that  haunt  the  sea  have  a  great  hold  on  the  imagination  of 
the  natives  of  the  south-eastern  Solomon  Islands,  and  as  these 
people  love  to  illustrate  their  life  in  sculpture  and  painting, 
they  show  us  clearly  what  they  conceive  these  ghosts  to  be. 
There  was  many  years  ago  at  Wango  a  canoe-house,  oha,  full 
of  carvings  and  paintings  representing  native  life ;  it  had 
along  its  wall-plates  and  lower  purlins  a  series  of  pictures 
illustrating  the  principal  affairs  of  life  as  naturally  as  may  be 
seen  in  Egyptian  tombs  ;  a  feast  from  the  first  climbing  after 
cocoa-nuts  through  all  the  processes  of  preparing  and  cooking 
food ;  a  fight  upon  the  beach  (the  sea  shewn  to  be  so  by  the 
fishes  depicted  in  it),  with  all  its  various  action ;  voyages  and 


xv.]  San  Crist  oval.    Sea-ghosts.  259 

accidents  at  sea,  and  among  them  a  canoe  attacked  by  what 
appeared  at  first  sight  demons  horned  and  hoofed.  These  were 
the  ghosts  that  haunt  the  sea,  their  forms  having  suffered  a  sea 
change,  and  composed  as  much  as  possible  of  fishes,  their  spears 
and  arrows  long-bodied  garfish  and  flying-fish.  If  a  man  on 
returning  from  a  canoe  voyage  or  from  fishing  on  the  rocks 
falls  ill,  it  is  because  one  of  these  sea  ghosts  has  shot  him 
(page  196).     These  ghosts  are  therefore  propitiated  in  any 


Sea-ghost,  from  a  native  drawing. 


danger  at  sea  with  areca-nuts  and  fragments  of  food  cast  to 
them  among  the  waves,  and  their  anger  is  deprecated  in 
prayers.  Sharks  also  have  'ataro  in  them,  the  ghosts  of 
those  who  have  foretold  their  future  appearance  in  that  form. 
In  these  islands,  as  elsewhere,  the  death-feast  is  held,  and 
a  morsel  of  food  is  thrown  upon  the  fire  as  the  dead  man's 
share.  A  great  man  also  was  commemorated  by  an  image  of 
him  in  a  canoe-house  or  on  the  stage  put  up  at  feasts,  and 
before  it  food  Was  placed. 

s  % 


260         Death.    Burial.    After  Death.  [CH. 

At  Saa,  and  in  the  neighbouring  parts  of  Malanta,  the  same 
word  is  used  for  the  soul  of  a  living  man  and  the  ghost  of  an 
ordinary  person,  'akalo,  which  is  another  form  of  the  'alaro  of 
San  Cristoval.  The  'akalo,  which  goes-  out  of  the  body  in 
dreams  and  returns  again,  goes  out  finally  in  death,  leaving 
the  body  after  a  natural  death  rae,  after  a  violent  death  lalamoa. 
.  The  ghosts  of  ordinary  people  are  'akalo,  and  nothing  else ; 
those  of  chiefs,  valiant  fighting  men,  men  of  conspicuous 
success  in  life,  of  men  who  are  saka,  have  spiritual  power,  are 
expected  to  become  lio'a,  ghosts  which  again  are  saka,  have 
spiritual  power,  and  are  worshipful  accordingly ;  as  the  ghost 
of  a  warrior  when  found  by  proof  to  act  becomes  lio'a  ni  mae,  a 
ghost  powerful  for  death.  The  origin  of  death  is  ascribed,  as  in 
the  Banks'  Islands  and  New  Hebrides,  to  the  old  woman  who 
having  changed  her  skin  afterwards  resumed  the  slough,  which 
had  caught  upon  a  reed.  All  ghosts  upon  leaving  the  body 
swim  first  to  a  point  of  land  at  Saa,  then  to  a  point  of  TJlawa, 
then  to  the  Three  Sisters,  'Oho  Malau,  then  to  a  point  of  San 
Cristoval  near  Hada,  and  lastly  to  Marapa,  two  islands  lying 
off  Marau  in  Guadalcanal'.  "While  the  body  is  rotting  the 
ghost  is  weak  ;  when  the  smell  has  ceased  the  ghost  is  strong, 
it  is  no  longer  a  man.  The  ghostly  inhabitants  of  Marapa 
live  something  like  a  worldly  life ;  the  children  chatter  and 
annoy  the  elder  ghosts,  so  they  are  placed  apart  upon  the 
second  island ;  men  and  women  ghosts  are  together,  they  have 
houses,  gardens,  and  canoes,  yet  all  is  unsubstantial.  Living- 
men  cross  to  Marapa  and  see  nothing ;  but  there  is  water 
there  in  which  laughter  and  cries  are  heard ;  there  are  places 
where  water  is  seen  to  have  been  disturbed,  and  the  banks  are 
wet  as  if  bathers  had  been  there.  A  dead  chief  makes  his 
canoe  and  his  house  there,  like  those  which  his  living  son  is 
buildings  but  they  are  built  of  the  soft  esculent  hibiscus,  and 
come  to  nothing  ;  it  is  like  the  play  of  children.  This  ghostly 
life  is  not  eternal ;  the  mere  'akalo  soon  turn  into  white  ants' 
nests,  which  again  become  the  food  of  the  still  vigorous  ghosts; 
hence  a  living  man  says  to  his  idle  son,  '  "When  I  die  I  shall 
have  ants'  nests  to  eat,  but  then  what  will  you  have  ? '  The 


XVi]  Saa.    Hades.    Burial.  261 

Ho'a  ghosts  of  power  last  longer  because  they  are  sa&a,  and  the 
more  saka  they  are  the  longer  they  last ;  they  are  remembered 
and  worshipped  on  earth,  and  so  long  their  strength  remains ; 
but  when  men  forget  them  aud  turn  to  worship  some  more 
lately  dead,  and  when  no  sacrificial  food  is  offered  them,  then- 
power  fades  away,  and  they  turn  into  white  ants'  nests  like 
the  others.  There  are  two  rulers  of  Marapa,  who  are  called 
lid  a,  though  not  strictly  so,  because  they  were  never  men  and 
never  pass  away— the  chief  Kari'eu,  and  inferior  to  him,  Kikiri- 
ba'u,  the  cutter— off  of  heads.  These  two  go  about  in  their 
canoes,  one  collecting  ghosts,  the  other  heads;  in  times  of 
sickness  at  Saa  if  trunks  of  trees  are  seen  floating  by  at  sea 
they  are  said  to  be  the  canoes  of  Kari'eu  and  Kikiriba'u.  The 
ghosts  whose  abode  is  in  Marapa  can  return  to  Saa  to  visit 
their  village  and  their  friends  again.  They  are  seen  like 
shadows,  having  a  certain  form  fleeting  and  indistinct,  some 
hideous,  some  not  unpleasant.  If  one  who  sees  a  ghost  is 
not  frightened  he  can  discern  the  features  and  know  who 
it  is ;  but  if  he  is  frightened  he  sees  only  a  dreadful  some- 
thing. A  man  who  for  some  reason  wishes  to  see  a  ghost, 
puts  lime  from  his  betel-box  upon  his  forehead,  and  then  he 
plainly  sees. 

The  burial  of  common  people  at  Saa  is  a  simple  affair ;  an 
ordinary  man  is  buried  the  day  after  death,  a  very  inferior 
person  at  once.  There  is  a  common  burial-place  which  does 
not  get  filled  up  because  the  bones  are  from  time  to  time  taken 
up,  after  the  flesh  has  decayed,  and  heaped  on  one  side.  Men 
of  some  rank  and  consideration  are  not  buried  for  two  days  ; 
women  sit  round  the  corpse  and  wail,  i'o  pei  rae,  and  people 
assemble  to  see  the  dead  man  for  the  last  time  and  to  eat  the 
funeral  feast.  If  a  very  great  man  dies,  or  a  man  much 
beloved  by  his  son,  the  body  is  hung  up  in  his  son's  house, 
either  in  a  canoe  or  enclosed  in  the  figure  of  a  sword-fish,  Hi. 
Very  favourite  children  are  treated  in  the  same  way.  The 
figure  of  the  sword-fish  is  cemented  like  a  canoe  and  painted  ; 
no  smell  whatever  proceeds  from  it.  If  the  body  is  put  into 
a  canoe  they  make  fine  raspings  or  chippings  of  a  certain  tree 


262         Death.    Btirial.    After  Death.  [cH. 

to  spread  under  and  above  it,  and  lay  over  that  certain  large 
leaves,  and  planks  above  all.    The  canoe  is  not  closed  over 
with  cement,  but  there  is  very  little  smell.    Sometimes  the 
corpse  is  kept  in  this  way  for  years,  either  in  the  house  or  in 
the  o/ia,  the  public  canoe-house,  waiting  for  a  great  funeral 
feast1.    When  a  year  of  good  crops  arrives  a  man  will  say, 
'  Now  we  wiU  take  out  Father.'    The  corpse  is  taken  then,  if 
that  of  a  comparatively  inferior  person,  to  the  common  burial- 
ground,  if  of  a  chief,  to  the  family  burying-place,  where 
sacrifices  are  made  as  above  (page  137)  described.    The  skull 
and  jawbone  are  taken  out,  and  these  are  called  mangite,  which 
are  saka,  hot  with  spiritual  power,  and  by  means  of  which  the 
help  of  the  lio'a,  the  powerful  ghost  of  the  man  whose  relics 
these  are,  can  be  obtained.    The  mangite  is  enclosed  in  the 
hollow  wooden  figure  of  a  bonito-fish,  and  set  up  in  the  house 
or  in  the  oha,  where  it  remains  till  the  lio'a  goes  out  of 
memory  or  credit.    In  the  oha  on  the  beach  at  Saa  they  lately 
made  a  boat-like  receptacle,  and  put  in  it  all  the  old  mangite  of 
forgotten  lio'a.    A  man  will  sometimes  hang  up  his  wife  in 
this  way,  and  when  she  is  taken  out  to  the  burying-place  her 
jaw  will  be  kept  in  a  basket,  or  one  of  her  teeth  in  a  bit  of 
bamboo,  and  hung  up  in  the  house  as  a  memorial.    It  can 
be  nothing  more,  for  no  woman's  ghost  can  be  a  ghost  of 
power,  lio'a,  nothing  but  a  mere  departed  soul,  akalo.  Men 
will  put  food  as  an  offering  of  affection  and  memory  to 
these  mangite,  and  to  the  figures  and  canoes  containing 
corpses. 

Burial,  however,  is  not  universal  at  Saa.  It  often  happens 
that  the  corpse  of  a  chief  or  lesser  man  is  thrown  into  the  sea 
(to  do  which  is  called  kidu  rae),  either  at  the  request  of  the 
deceased,  or  to  save  trouble.  The  friends  tie  a  bag  of  sand  to 
the  feet  of  the  corpse,  paddle  out,  and  sink  the  corpse  in  a 
certain  place  where  are  hollow  rocks  below ;  it  never  rises  to 
the  surface.  When  this  is  done  a  mangite  is  preserved,  hair  or 
nails,  tied  in  a  bundle  and  hung  up.    Sometimes,  but  rarely, 


1  A  similar  custom  was  observed  by  Mr.  Forbes  at  Thnnr.  Naturalist's 
Wanderings  in  the  Eastern  Archipelago,  p.  435. 


xv>]  Saa.    Burial.    Santa  Cruz.  263 

a  corpse  is  burnt,  at  the  wish  of  the  deceased      When  this 
is  done  they  preserve  a  mangite.  by  wrapping  the  head  about, 
oi-  enclosing  it  in  a  hollowed  stem  of  banana,  to  keep  it  from 
the  tire.    The  place  where  a  corpse  is  burnt  is  sacred.  Some 
corpses,  again,  are  laid  in  a  canoe  or  on  a  stage  beside  a  pla.e 
of  sacrifice,  holes  being  made  in  the  bottom  of  the  canoe  and 
bamboos  set  to  carry  away  rain-water  and  the  liquor  of  the 
corpse  into  the  ground.    At  one  time  they  did  at  Saa  what 
now  they  do  in  Bauro  ;  they  poured  water  on  the  corpse  until 
the  flesh  was  consumed,  and  then  took  the  skull  as  a  mangite. 
In  these  methods  of  disposing  of  the  distinguished  dead, 
whose  o-hosts  are  expected  to  be  lid  a  possessed  of  power,  there 
may  be  seen  very  probably  the  effect  of  the  belief,  of  which 
mention  has  been  made,  that  the  ghost  continues  weak  while 
the  corpse  continues  to  smell ;  the  lid  a  of  the  dead  man  sunk 
in  the  sea,  burnt,  enclosed  in  a  case,  or  rapidly  denuded  of 
flesh,  is  active  and  available  at  once. 

The  ornaments  of  a  dead  man  are  buried  with  him,  or  are 
kept  in  remembrance  of  him.  A  man's  cocoa-nut  and  bread- 
fruit-trees, and  others,  are  cut  down  by  his  friends  after  his 
death,  out  of  respect  to  him  as  they  say;  and  they  deny  that 
they  think  that  such  things  follow  a  man  in  any  ghostly  form, 
since  it  seems  ridiculous  to  suppose  that  even  pigs  can  have  a 
soul,  akalo.  To  cut  trees  down  in  this  way  is  to  ngoli ;  for  a 
dead  chief  they  ngoli-tda,  they  fence  round  a  certain  plot  of 
ground  and  put  his  canoe  in  it  in  memory  of  him,  with  his 
bowl  and  weapons ;  his  friends  add  such  things  of  their  own 
in  honour  of  him,  and  decorate  the  fence  with  leaves  and 
flowers.  For  a  man  of  no  great  position  they  content  them- 
selves with  throwing  yams  and  other  food  upon  the  roof  of 
the  dead  man's  house  in  memory  of  him. 

At  Santa  Cruz  the  corpse  is  buried  in  a  very  deep  grave  in 
the  house,  wrapped  in  many  mats.  For  two  clays  they  cry 
over  a  man  and  then  bury  him ;  on  the  fifth  day  the  funeral 

1  This  is  the  only  example  within  my  knowledge  of  the  method  of  disposing 
of  the  dead  which  Dr.  Guppy  found  to  be  common  in  the  chiefs'  families  about 
the  Bougainville  Straits. 


264         Death.    Burial.    After  Death.  [cH. 

meal  is  eaten  and  all  is  over.  Inland  they  dig  up  the  bones 
again  to  make  arrowheads,  and  take  the  skull  to  keep  in  a 
chest  m  the  house,  saying  that  this  is  the  man  himself,  and 
setting  food  before  it.  The  departed  souls  are  duka  ■  they 
assemble  after  death  at  a  place  called  Natepapa,  and  from 
thence  go  on  to  the  great  volcano  Tamami  (called  Tinakula) 
m  which  they  are  burnt  and  renewed,  and  where  they  stay 
Nevertheless  they  haunt  the  bush  in  Santa  Cruz,  and  are  seen 
at  night,  and  when  it  is  wet  and  dark ;  men  see  them  like 
nre^with  fire  under  their  armpits  like  fire-flies,  and  are  much 
afraid  of  them. 

The  abode  of  the  dead  has  in  all  these  examples  been  shewn 
to  be  above  ground,  in  islands  more  or  less  remote  from  tho<=e 
in  which  the  living  dwell,  and  all  known  and  visited  by  living 
men.    It  is  probable,  however,  that  a  certain  belief  in  an 
underworld  is  also  present,  the  Turivatu  of  the  Florida  invoca- 
tion in  sacrifice  (page  131),  a  region  beneath  the  earth 
corresponding  to  that  country  above  the  sky  where  Kamaka- 
jaku  or  Vulaninggela  visited  the  sun.    The  belief  in  Santa 
Cruz  that  ghosts  pass  into  the  great  volcano  implies  some- 
thing of  a  descent  below,  as  does  the  parallel  belief  at  Savo 
that  the  volcanic  crater  there  is  the  receptacle  of  departed 
spirits.    When  we  pass,  however,  to  the  eastward  the  ghosts 
no  longer  have  their  abodes  upon  the  surface  of  the  earth,  but 
underground.    Erom  the  Torres  Islands  to  Pentecost  in  "the 
New  Hebrides,  the  name  of  the  nether- world  is,  with  varia- 
tions, Panoi,  to  which  all  the  openings— whether  by  volcanic 
vents  or  unknown  mouths— throughout  all  these  neighbouring 
islands  lead.    In  all  alike  the  ghosts  assemble  at  certain 
places  and  go  down  to  what  is  their  proper  place,  though  they 
can  return  again  to  earth.    The  locality  of  Panoi  is  unknown, 
save  that  it  is  underground ;  and  Panoi  is  one,  not  a  separate 
receptacle  for  the  ghosts  of  each  separate  island.    The  people 
of  the  Torres  Islands,  however,  and  those  of  Pentecost,  do 
not  know  that  they  have  a  common  belief  and  use  a  common 
word. 

In  the  Torres  Islands  the  word  used  for  soul  is  a  form  of 


xvn  Origin  of  Death.  265 

the  Mota  atai,  nete.  The  departed  soul  goes  down  to  Panoi 
near  a  rock  called  Vat  tugua,  not  far  from  Lo,  where  a  very 
ancient  casuarina-tree  growing  at  high-water  mark  overhangs 
the  sea,  and  endures  the  heaviest  storms  and  highest  tides 
unmoved.  In  these  islands  the  practice  has  prevailed  of 
laying  out  the  bodies  of  the  dead  on  stages  near  the  houses, 
to  putrefy  and  decay;  but  they  now  begin  to  bury. 

The  story  of  the  Origin  of  Death  noticed  in  the  account 
of  Saa  (page  260),  has  its  parallel  in  the  Banks'  Islands  and 
again  in  the  New  Hebrides.    At  first  men  never  died,  but 
when  they  advanced  in  life  they  cast  their  skins  like  snakes 
and  crabs,  and  came  out  with  youth  renewed.   After  a  time  a 
woman  growing  old  went  to  a  stream  to  change  her  skin  ; 
according-  to  some  she  was  the  mother  of  Qat,  according  to 
others  Ul-ta-marama,  Change-skin  of  the  world.    She  threw 
off  her  old  skin  in  the  water,  and  observed  that  as  it  floated 
down  it  caught  against  a  stick.    Then  she  went  home, 
where  she  had  left  her  child.    The  child,  however,  refused  to 
recognize  her,  crying  that  its  mother  was  an  old  woman  not 
like  this  young  stranger  ;  and  to  pacify  the  child  she  went  after 
her  cast  integument  and  put  it  on.    From  that  time  man- 
kind ceased  to  cast  their  skins  and  died.    In  another  Banks' 
Island  story  this  woman  is  Iro  Puget,  Bird's-nest  Pern,  the 
wife  of  Mate,  Death  \    There  are  many  others.    In  one  the 
cause  of  the  introduction  of  Death  was  the  inconvenience  of 
the  permanence  of  property  in  the  same  hands  while  men 
changed  their  skins  and  lived  for  ever.    Qat  therefore  sent 
for  Mate,  who  dwelt  in  Panoi,  or  by  the  side  of  a  volcanic 
vent  in  Santa  Maria,  and  assured  him  that  he  would  only 
have  to  go  to  Vanua  Lava  and  not  be  hurt.    Death  there- 
fore came  forth ;  they  laid  him  on  a  board,  killed  a  pig,  and 
covered  him  over ;  then  they  proceeded  to  divide  his  property 

1  There  is  a  saying  at  Mota,  when  any  one  is  observed  not  to  have  his  ears 
bored,  Iro  Paget  it  nine  wora  o  pue  ape  qatuma, '  Puget  will  break  her  bamboo 
water-carrier  on  your  head.'  The  meaning  is  that  Eo  Puget  will  be  met  at  the 
entrance  to  Panoi,  and  will  so  treat  any  one  who  has  not  followed  the  custom. 
This  is  parallel  to  what  has  been  noticed  at  Florida  and  Bugotu. 


266         Death.    Burial.    After  Death.  [c„. 

and  eat  the  funeral  feast.  On  the  fifth  day  when  the  conch 
was  blown  to  drive  away  the  ghost,  Qat  opened  the  covering- 
over  Mate  and  found  him  gone  ;  nothing  but  bones  remained. 
In  the  meanwhile  Tangaro  the  Fool  had  been  set  to  watch 
the  way  to  Panoi,  where  the  paths  to  the  lower  and  upper 
worlds  divided,  lest  Mate  should  go  below ;  the  fool  sat  in 
front  of  the  way  to  the  world  above,  and  let  Mate  go  down 
to  Panoi  ;  all  men  have  since  followed  Death  along  that  path. 
Another  story  makes  the  same  fool— under  his  name  of 
Tagilingelinge— the  cause  of  death,  because  when  Iro  Paget 
set  him  to  guard  the  way  to  Panoi  in  prospect  of  her  own 
death,  he  pointed  out  that  way  to  her  descending  ghost 
instead  of  the  way  back  to  the  world,  and  so  she,  and  all  men 
after  her,  died  and  never  came  back  to  life.  In  Lakona, 
part  of  Santa  Maria,  the  story  goes  that  Marawa  stole  a 
woman  whom  Qat  had  made  (page  157)  ;  and  in  the  night 
while  he  and  she  were  sleeping  Qat  came  quietly,  pulled  out 
their  teeth,  and  shaved  their  heads.  Then  he  took  the  hairy 
plexus  of  the  tree-fern  and  put  it  on  their  heads,  a-ivino-  the 
names  of  baldness  and  of  the  '  second  hair,'  as  gray  hair  has 
since  been  called.  Then  he  spread  spider's  web  over  their 
eyes,  so  that  when  they  woke  in  the  morning  dimness  was 
over  their  sight.  The  woman  refused  to  go  back  to  him  ;  so 
in  a  song  he  called  for  baldness,  blindness,  toothlessness,  old 
age,  and  death,  because  she  had  disobeyed  his  word. 

The  soul,  atai  or  talegi,  goes  out  of  the  body  in  some 
dreams,  and  if  for  some  reason  it  does  not  come  back  the  man 
is  found  dead  in  the  morning  ;  when  a  man  faints,  mate  mule, 
dies  and  goes,  his  soul  really  starts  on  the  way  to  Panoi,  but 
is  sent  back ;  the  other  ghosts  hustle  him  away  from  the 
mouth  of  the  descent,  or  his  father  or  friend  turns  him  back, 
telling  him  that  his  time  is  not  yet  come  ;  so  he  relates 
when  he  returns.  In  true  death  the  separation  of  soul  and 
body  is  complete,  the  atai  or  talegi  becomes  0  tamate  or  natmat, 
a  dead-man,  and  the  corpse  also  is  spoken  of  by  the  same  word. 
The  ghost,  however,  does  not  at  first  go  far,  and  possibly  may 
be  recalled  ;  the  neighbours  therefore  bite  the  finger  of  the  dead 


xv.]        Banks  Islands.    Death.    Burial.  267 

or  dying  person  to  rouse  him,  and  shout  his  name  into  his 
ear,  fn  hope  that  the  soul  may  hear  it  and  return.    The  soul 
possibly  may  be  caught.    A  woman  at  Mota  some  years  ago 
who  knew  that  a  neighbour  was  at  the  point  of  death  heaid 
something  rustling  in  her  house,  like  the  fluttering  of  a  moth, 
just  when  cries  and  wailings  told  her  that  the  soul  had  flown. 
She  caught  the  fluttering  thing  between  her  hands  and  ran 
with  it  to  the  house  of  death,  crying  that  she  had  caught  the 
atai  ;  she  opened  her  hands  above  the  corpse's  mouth  to  restore 
the  soul,  but  there  was  no  recovery.    The  ghost  does  not  at 
once  leave  the  neighbourhood  of  the  body,  it  hangs  about  the 
house  and  the  grave  five  or  ten  days,  and  shews  its  presence 
by  noises  in  the  house  and  lights  upon  the  grave.    It  is  not 
generally  in  the  Banks'  Islands  thought  desirable  that  the 
ghost  should  stay  longer  than  the  fifth  day,  and  there  is  a 
custom  of  driving  it  away  with  shouts  and  blowing  of  conchs; 
in  some  places  bull-roarers  are  sounded.    It  will  be  con- 
venient to  take  the  proceedings  which  follow  after  death  in 
the  various  islands  of  the  group,  before  describing  the  course 
of  the  departed  ghost  into  the  lower  world  and  its  condition 
there.    These  proceedings  consist  of  the  mourning,  the 
funeral,  and  the  funeral-feasts. 

In  the  Banks'  Islands  the  dead  are  generally  buried.  It  is 
the  duty  of  the  members  of  the  other  Veve,  of  the  other  'side 
of  the  house,'  to  dig  the  .grave.  The  burial  takes  place  earlier 
or  later,  according  to  the  estimation  in  which  the  deceased  is 
held.  In  an  ordinary  case  it  is  on  the  second  day,  the  friends 
cry  round  the  corpse,  and  women  are  hired  to  wail  meanwhile. 
The  place  of  burial  is  in  the  bush  not  far  from  the  village ; 
but  a  great  man,  or  one  whose  death  was  remarkable,  was 
buried  in  the  village  near  the  gamal,  and  a  favourite  son  or 
child  in  the  house  itself.  In  the  latter  case  the  grave  was 
opened  after  fifty  or  a  hundred  days,  and  the  bones  taken  up 
and  hidden  in  the  bush,  or  some  of  them  hung  up  in  the 
house.  Some  bodies  were  not  buried,  but  laid  up  in  the  bush 
outside  the  village  in  a  chest,  pufforo,  such  as  those  in  which 
dry  bread-fruit  is  kept,  and  there  left  to  decay.   This  is  called 


268         Death.    Burial.    After  Death.  [c„. 

to  mlo ;  as  is  also  the  laying  of  the  corpse  in  a  shallow  cave 
under  a  projecting-  rock.  There  was,  however,  and  still  remains 
a  custom  m  some  places  of  keeping  the  body  unburied  and 
putrefying-  m  the  house  as  a  mark  of  affection.    At  Gaua  in 
Santa  Maria,  it  was  the  women's  business  to  watch  the  corpse 
laid  on  a  mat  over  cross  sticks  between  two  slow  fires  in  the' 
house  for  ten  days  or  more,  till  nothing  but  skin  and  bones 
was  left ;  during  which  time  they  drank  the  drippings  of  the 
corpse.    The  same  was  done  in  former  days  at  Mota.  The 
description  of  the  funeral  of  a  man  of  rank  at  Motlav  will 
hold  good  generally  of  any  of  the  Banks'  Islands.    The  corpse 
of  a  great  man  was  brought  out  into  the  open  space  in  the 
middle  of  the  village,  loosely  wrapped  in  a  mat,  with  his 
malosaru  dress  of  ceremony  on,  his  somfa  Roioa  necklace  round 
his  neck,  his  forehead  smeared,  il,  with  red  earth, '  mea,  his 
armlets,  and  bracelets  of  pig's  tusks  reversed,  but  no  bow 
at  his  hand,  on  his  breast  a  eycas  leaf,  no  mele,  the  mark  of 
his  rank  in  the  Suqe,  and  the  leaves  of  the  crotons,  sasa, 
belonging  to,  his  Tamate  societies.    By  his  side  were  heaped 
bunches  of  cocoa-nuts  tied  together,  and  plenty  of  old  dry 
cocoa-nuts,  yams  of  various  kinds,  caladium,  and  all  kinds  of 
food,  with  a  bunch  of  the  leaves  of  a  particular  dracama  stuck 
upon  the  heap,  the  karia  garame  tamate,  the  ghost's  tonsne 
dracsena,  all  of  which  were  afterwards  heaped  upon  the  grave. 
Then  a  man  ready  of  speech  made  an  address  to  the  ghost, 
telling  him,  when  they  asked  him  in  Panoi  whether  he  were 
a  great  man,  to  say  what  was  heaped  beside  him.   The  orator 
would  not  spare  his  faults 1 ;  if  he  were  a  man  of  bad  character 
he  would  say  to  him,  '  Poor  ghost !  will  you  be  able  to  enter 
Panoi?    I  think  not.'    Then  the  burial  took  place.  Upon 
the  grave  was  set  a  bamboo  vessel  of  water  with  a  cocoa-nut- 
shell cup,  and  a  little  dish  with  a  roasted  yam  in  it ;  as  the 
food  was  eaten  by  rats  they  renewed  it,  for  the  rat  might  be 
the  deceased  himself,  at  any  rate  during  the  five  days  that  the 
ghost  remained  about  the  place.    At  Gaua  they  hang  up  pigs 

1  '  I  myself  heard  Parut  at  Mota  abuse  I  Mala,  because  he  had  died  without 
having  completed  his  suqe  for  him.' — Rev.  J.  Palmer. 


Sv.]         Banks  Islands.    Secret  Burial.  269 

that  they  have  killed,  or  parts  of  them,  at  the  grave ;  when 
the  man  goes  down  to  Bono,  Panoi,  the  ghosts  there  will  Bee 
him  come  down  with  these,  and  think  much  of  him.  ihe 
Gaua  people,  however,  deny  that  pigs  have  ghosts1.    It  is 
interesting  to  observe  how  a  judgment  upon  a  dead  man  s 
merits  was  pronounced.    Not  long  ago  when  a  corpse  was 
being  buried  at  Motlav,  a  man  whom  the  deceased  had  ill 
used  followed  with  a  stone,  and  threw  it  on  the  body,  crying 
out,  '  You  have  ill  used  me,  and  persecuted  me  to  kill  me— 
you  have  died  first.'    At  Gaua  when  a  great  man  died  his 
friends  would  not  make  it  known,  lest  those  whom  he  had 
oppressed  should  come  and  spit  at  him  after  his  death,  or 
govgov  him,  stand  bickering  at  him  with  crooked  fingers  and 
drawing  in  the  lips,  by  way  of  curse.    Relatives  in  Motlav 
watch  the  grave  of  a  man  whose  life  was  bad,  lest  some  man 
wronged  by  him  should  come  at  night  and  beat  with  a  stone 
upon  the  grave,  cursing  him.    Sometimes  the  friends  will 
have  a  sham  burial,  and  hide  the  grave  in  which  the  corpse  is 
really  laid ;  because  if  a  man  in  his  lifetime  has  had  mam  to 
shoot  and  kill,  to  charm  with  the  talamatai  and  in  other  ways, 
there  will  be  mam  for  the  same  purpose  in  his  corpse ;  men 
will  want  to  dig  up  his  bones  for  arrows  and  for  charms,  and 
his  skull  to  roll  the  string  upon  wherewith  to  tie  their  talamatai. 
So  at  Gaua  when  a  body  has  been  wasted  over  the  fire,  they 
bury  .the  bones  in  the  village  under  some  large  stone,  and 
cover  it  with  another  stone,  lest  the  bones  should  be  taken  up 
for  arrows.    At  Ureparapara 2  as  soon  as  a  man  dies  his 

1  If  the  pigs  that  have  been  killed  are  seen  in  Panoi,  it  may  be  thought  that 
they  must  have  souls  to  be  seen  there,  since  their  bodies  are  at  the  grave.  But 
this  is  not  the  native  notion ;  of  a  pig  or  an  ornament  there  is  a  certain  some- 
thing, shadow,  echo,  of  itself  that  can  be  seen,  but  there  is  not  that  which  man 
has,  the  intelligent  personal  spiritual  part  which  separates  from  the  body  in 
death.  When  a  ghost  is  seen  what  is  seen  ?  Not  the  soul,  the  atai,  but  the 
dead  man,  the  tamate  ;  for  the  atai  can  never  be  seen,  the  nunuai,  echo,  of  the 
body,  its  taqangiu,  outline,  can  be  seen,  but  indistinctly.  When  an  English 
ghost  appears  in  the  dead  man's  habit  as  he  lived,  is  it  thought  to  be  his  soul 
that  appears  ? 

2  For  this  and  for  what  follows  concerning  Lakona,  I  am  indebted  to  the 
Kev.  J.  Palmer. 


270         Death.    Burial.    After  Death.  [CH. 

friends  bring  a  quantity  of  food  of  all  kinds  to  hang-  up  on 
white  peeled  palako  sticks  round  the  corpse  when  it  is  laid 
out  in  the  middle  of  the  village.  Then  the  orator  makes  his 
speech  to  the  deceased,  giving-  him  messages  to  take  to  the 
dead,  bids  him  carry  the  news  of  the  place,  especially  what 
has  been  done  and  is  intended  to  be  done  in  the  various 
societies,  and  tells  him  for  whom  in  Panoi  besides  himself 
the  food  hanging  round  him  is  intended.  When  the  speech 
is  ended,  two  small  yams  or  caladium  roots  are  roasted  over  a 
fire  of  cocoa-nut  fronds  lighted  for  the  purpose ;  the  cooking 
is  only  in  show,  and  the  food  is  scraped  with  the  left  hand 
instead  of  the  right.  A  small  joint  of  bamboo  is  filled  with 
water,  and  put  with  the  food  into  a  new  clean  basket  for  the 
ghost.  At  the  same  time  a  pig  is  killed.  When  all  this  is 
done,  the  body  is  tied  up  in  a  mat  and  followed  to  the  grave  by 
all  the  men  and  women,  the  children  remaining-  in  the  village. 
All  the  food  is  buried  on  the  body ;  or  if  there  be  too  much, 
some  is  hung  above  the  grave,  whence  the  bolder  people  take 
it  secretly  and  eat  it. 

The  ghost  is  driven  away  in  the  same  island  five  days  after 
death  with  a  peculiar  ceremony.  Bags  of  small  stones  and 
short  pieces  of  bamboo  are  provided  for  the  people  of  the 
village,  and  are  charmed  by  those  who  have  the  knowledge  of 
the  magic  chant  appropriate  for  the  purpose.  Two  men, 
each  with  two  white  stones  in  his  hands,  sit  in  the'  dead 
man's  house,  one  on  either  side.  These  men  begin  to  cHnk 
the  stones  one  against  the  other,  the  women  begin  to  wail, 
the  neighbours — who  have  all  assembled  at  one  end  of  the 
village — begin  to  march  through  it  in  a  body  to  the  other  end, 
throwing  the  stones  into  the  houses  and  all  about,  and 
beating  the  bamboos  together.  So  they  pass  through  till 
they  come  to  the  bush  beyond,  when  they  throw  down  the 
bamboos  and  bags.  They  have  now  driven  out  the  ghost, 
who  up  to  this  time  has  been  about  the  house,  in  which  the 
widow  has  for  these  five  days  never  left  the  dead  man's  bed 
except  upon  necessity ;  and  even  then  she  leaves  a  cocoa-nut 
to  represent  her  till  she  returns.    At  Motlav  the  ghost  is  not 


xv.]    Driving  away  Ghosts.    Funeral-Feasts.    2  7 1 

driven  away  unless  the  man  who  has  died  was  badly  afflicted 
with  ulcers  and  sores,  either  *ff<n>  covered  with  sores,  or 
nigata  with  a  single  large  ulcer  or  more.  When  such  a  one 
is  dying  the  people  of  his  village  send  word  m  time  to  the 
next  village  westwards,  as  the  ghost  will  go  out  following  the 
sun,  to  warn  them  there  to  be  prepared.  When  the  gov  is 
dead  they  bury  him,  and  then,  with  shell-trumpets  blowing 
and  the  stalks  of  cocoa-nut  fronds  stripped  of  some  of  the 
leaflets  beating  on  the  ground,  they  chase  the  ghost  to  the 
next  village.  The  people  of  that  village  take  up  the  chase, 
and  hunt  the  ghost  further  westward ;  and  so  on  till  the  sea 
is  reached.  Then  the  frond  stalks  are  thrown  away  and  the 
people  return,  sure  that  the  ghost  has  left  the  island,  and  will 
not  strike  another  man  with  the  disease. 

The  series  of  funeral-feasts  or  death-meals,  the  1  eating  the 
death  '  as  they  call  it,  follows  upon  the  funeral,  or  even  begins 
before  it,  and  is  the  most  important  part  of  the  commemora- 
tion of  the  dead ;  it  may  be  said,  indeed,  to  be  one  of  the 
principal  institutions  of  the  islands.  The  number  of  the 
feasts  and  the  length  of  time  during  which  they  are  repeated 
varys  very  much  in  the  various  islands,  and  depend  also  upon 
the  consideration  in  which  the  deceased  is  held.  The  meals  are 
distinctly  commemorative,  but  are  not  altogether  devoid  of  the 
purpose  of  benefiting  the  dead ;  it  is  thought  that  the  ghost 
is  gratified  by  the  remembrance  shewn  of  him,  and  honoured 
by  the  handsome  performance  of  the  duty;  the  living  also 
solace  themselves  in  their  grief,  and  satisfy  something  of 
their  sense  of  loss  by  affectionate  commemoration.  It  is 
not  easy  to  determine  how  far  there  is  now  any  feeling  that 
friendly  association  of  the  living  and  dead  is  continued  by 
their  both  partaking  of  the  meal,  when  a  morsel  of  food  is 
thrown  aside  with  a  call  to  the  deceased.  At  ordinary  meals 
when  the  oven  is  opened  a  bit  of  food  is  put  aside  for  the 
dead,  with  the  words  1  This  is  for  you,  let  our  oven  be  well 
cooked.'  At  a  death-meal  the  words  are  'This  is  for  thee.' 
It  is  readily  denied  now  that  the  dead,  either  dead  friends 
generally  in  the  one  case  or  the  lately  deceased  in  the 


272  Death.    Burial.    After  Death.  [CH. 

other,  are  thought  to  come  and  eat  the  food,  which  they  say 
is  given  as  a  friendly  remembrance  only,  and  in  the  way  of 
associating  together  those  whom  death  has  separated ;  but  it 
can  hardly  be  doubted  that  the  original  intention  at  least  was 
a  common  participation  in  the  meal.    It  is  not  altogether 
consistent,  however,  with  the  conception  of  an  underground 
abode  of  the  dead,  that  they  should  be  conceived  of  as  present 
at  the  later  feasts,  though  the  first  of  all  is  held  while  they 
are  stiU  believed  to  be  about.    The  eating  the  death,  gana 
matea,  begins  with  the  burial ;  they  eat  first,  as  they  say,  his 
grave  ;  after  that  they  '  eat  his  days/   The  days  are  the  fifth 
and  the  tenth,  and  after  that  every  tenth  day  up  to  the 
hundredth,  and  it  may  be  in  the  case  of  a  father,  wife,  or 
mother  even  so  far  as  the  thousandth.    At  Nembek,  a  part  of 
Gaua,  where  they  lay  the  corpse  between  fires,  they  bury  the 
remains  and  finish  the  death-meal  on  the  fifth  day.  At 
Tarasag,  near  by.  when  a  great  man  dies  the  people  from  all 
the  villages  around  bring  mashed  yams  the  next  morning  to 
the  place  where  the  dead  man  lies,  and  eat  them  there.  The 
people  of  the  place  begin  the  death-meals  that  day  with  a 
large  ovenful,  and  continue  on  the  tenth,  and  on  every 
successive  tenth  day.    Sometimes  for  a  very  great  man  they 
eat  every  day  up  to  the  fiftieth,  and  then  start  with  the  fifth 
and  tenth  day  feasts.    For  counting  the  days  so  that  the 
guests  from  distant  villages  may  arrive  on  the  proper  days, 
they  use  cycas  fronds,  one  in  the  hands  of  each  party,  on 
which  the  appointed  clays  are  marked  by  the  pinching  off  or 
turning  down  of  a  leaflet  as  each  day  passes.    At  Ureparapara 
the  first  fire  for  the  death-meal  is  lit  on  the  day  after  the 
burial ;  after  that  on  each  fifth  day  to  the  hundredth,  and  if 
they  go  beyond  that  every  tenth  day  to  the  thousandth.  At 
Lakona,  in  Santa  Maria,  immediately  after  the  death  the  pigs 
of  the  deceased  which  he  has  left  as  legacies  are  distributed  to 
his  relatives,  and  one  or  two  more  are  killed  and  the  meat 
given  to  the  people  of  the  place.  In  the  evening  he  is  buried, 
or  laid  out  in  a  chest  or  in  a  cave,  and  no  food  or  water  is 
put  with  him.    Next  morning  begins  the  counting  of  the 


xv.]  Banks  Islands.    Hades.  273 

death-days.  If  the  deceased  was  a  great  man,  a  tavusmele, 
there  will  be  a  drum  brought  out  and  they  will  dance,  to 
drive  away  their  grief,  as  they  say,  so  that  they  may  eat  the 
death-meal  with  cheerfulness ;  visitors  come  to  dance  and  are 
paid  for  it.  The  death-feast  lasts  only  five  days  for  a  woman, 
six  for  a  man.  The  concluding  action  is  peculiar  to  Lakona ; 
on  the  sixth  day  after  death  each  man  kills  a  sow,  and  the 
women  come  and  buy  the  meat,  from  which  the  last  death- 
meal,  called  the  Vulqat,  is  supplied.  The  next  morning  all  is 
finished  with  a  meal  '  to  clear  away  the  Vulqat.' 

The  ghost  when  it  leaves  its  former  dwelling-place  makes 
its  way  to  Panoi,  to  which  there  are  many  entrances,  called 
sura,  in  the  various  islands,  some  underground  and  unknown, 
some  well  known,  like  the  rock  Aliali  on  the  mountain  at 
Mota,  volcanic  vents  on  the  burning  hill  Garat  over  the 
lake  at  Gaua,  and  the  great  mountain  of  Vanua  Lava,  the 
Sur-lav,  great  sura.  The  ghosts  congregate  on  points  of  land 
before  their  departure,  as  well  as  at  the  mouth  of  the  sura, 
where  they  are  heard  dancing,  singing,  shouting  and  whistling 
with  land-crabs'  claws  on  moonlight  nights.  To  these  points 
of  land  and  the  sura  entrances  to  Panoi  it  was  possible  for 
ghosts  who  had  already  descended  to  return,  and  it  was 
thought  by  some  that  they  would  come  out  to  receive, 
sometimes  with  dancing,  the  freshly  dead,  shew  them  their 
various  haunts,  and  conduct  them  to  the  underworld.  There 
is  also  the  notion  that  there  are  sura  appropriated  to  particular 
classes  of  ghosts ;  as  the  sure  tujpa,  where  simple  harmless 
people  congregate,  and  the  sure  lumagav,  where  youths  go  who 
die  in  the  flower  of  their  age,  a  place  more  pleasant  than  the 
rest,  where  all  kinds  of  flowers  abound  and  scented  plants. 
This  fancy  was  mostly  that  of  women,  who  thought  much  of 
all  who  died  young,  and  above  all  of  those  who  had  been  shot 
for  them,  who  had  died  on  their  account,  me  mateioolira  ti, 
paid  for  them  the  price  of  their  death. 

A  precise  and  consistent  account  of  the  condition  of  ghosts 
after  they  have  arrived  at  Panoi,  and  of  that  place  itself,  is 
difficult  indeed  to  obtain  from  the  natives  of  this  group  ;  nor 

T 


274         Death.    Burial.    After  Death.  [CH. 

perhaps  is  it  reasonable  to  expect  it.    But  the  stories  of 
descents  to  Panoi  shew  in  their  relation  what  are  the  common 
conceptions  in  the  native  mind.    It  does  much  to  reconcile 
the  varying-  accounts  to  recognise  the  truth  that  Panoi  is  not 
a  single  receptacle  the  same  for  all,  and  that  there  is  a 
corresponding  distinction  between  one  class  of  ghosts  and 
another.    This  is  clearly  believed  at  Motlav,  where  they  say 
that  when  a  ghost  goes  down  the  sura  it  is  met  by  another 
ghost,  and  according  to  the  character  of  the  man  in  life  is 
allowed  to  enter  into  Panoi,  or  sent  back  to  another  place, 
dreading  which  it  goes  to  wander  on  the  earth.    The  true 
Panoi  is  a  good  place,  and  there  is  a  bad  place  besides  which 
is  sometimes  meant  when  the  word  Panoi  is  used.    Thus,  if  a 
man  has  kiKed  another  by  treachery  or  witchcraft,  when  after 
death  he  descends  the  sura  he  finds  himself  withstood  at  the 
entrance  to  Panoi  by  the  ghost  of  the  man  he  has  wronged ; 
he  sees  another  path  leading  to  the  bad  place  he  dreads,  and  so 
he  turns  back  to  earth.    If  one  has  killed  a  good  man  without 
cause,  the  good  man's  ghost  withstands  his  murderer ;  if  one 
man  has  killed  another  in  fair  fight  he  will  not  be  withstood 
by  the  man  he  slew ;  if  a  bad  man  slew  a  bad  man  both 
would  be  together,  but  not  in  the  true  Panoi.    This  division 
is  very  important — that  there  are  some  ghosts  who  enter 
Panoi,  and  some  who  are  not  allowed  to  enter,  these  last 
being  of  bad  character.    Very  important  indeed  also  is  it,  as 
shewing  native  notions  of  moral  right  and  wrong  so  often 
denied  to  them,  to  observe  what  sort  of  men  were  admitted 
and  who  were  refused.    Who  was  the  man  of  good  character 
in  life  ?  It  is  answered  that  he  was  one  who  lived  as  he  ought 
to  do,  me  toga  mantag,  an  answer  that  may  have  no  moral 
meaning.    But  who  was  the  man  of  bad  character?    It  is 
answered,  one  who  killed  another  without  due  cause,  or  had 
caused  a  death  by  charms,  one  who  used  to  steal,  to  lie,  one 
given  to  adultery.    Thus  those  who  enter  into  the  true  Panoi 
still  live  as  they  ought,  toe  toga  mantag,  they  live  in  harmony, 
in  a  good  way  of  living ;  those  who  remain  in  the  bad  place 
quarrel  and  lie  in  misery,  not  in  physical  pain  indeed,  but 


xv.]  Banks  Islands.  Judgment.  Childless  Ghosts.  275 

restless,  wandering  back  to  earth,  homeless,  malignant,  pitiable ; 
these  are  they  who  eat  excrement  and  open  their  mouths  for 
wind  ;  these  are  they  who  do  harm  to  the  living  out  of  spite, 
who  are  dreaded  as  eating  men's  souls,  who  haunt  the  graves 
and  woods.  There  is  a  singular  belief  at  Lakona  concerning 
this  kind  of  judgment  after  death.  The  ghost's  path  leads 
him  to  the  volcanic  vents  of  the  burning  hill  Garat,  and  as  he 
runs  along  the  ghosts  assemble  to  receive  him.  They  beat 
him,  ghost  as  he  already  is,  to  death,  then  cut  him  to  pieces, 
and  each  ghost  will  take  a  piece.  They  then  put  him 
together  again,  and  if  he  has  in  his  lifetime  wrongfully  shot 
the  father,  brother,  or  sogoi  relation  of  any  of  the  ghosts  into 
whose  hands  he  has  fallen,  or  done  any  other  wrong,  the 
ghost  who  has  the  grievance  will  hide  the  piece  of  him  that 
he  has  taken ;  he  will  remain  with  some  part  of  him  deficient, 
and  when  he  goes  down  to  Panoi  and  the  ghosts  ask  him 
what  has  become  of  that  bit  of  him,  he  will  tell  them  that 
some  one  has  kept  it  from  him  because  he  had  done  him 
wrong. 

The  ghost  of  a  vasisgona,  a  woman  who  has  died  in  childbed, 
cannot  go  to  Panoi  if  her  child  lives,  for  she  cannot  leave  her 
child.  They  therefore  deceive  her  ghost  by  making  up  loosely 
a  piece  of  a  banana  trunk  in  leaves,  and  laying  it  on  her  bosom 
when  she  is  buried.  Then,  as  she  departs,  she  thinks  she  has 
the  child  with  her ;  as  she  goes  the  banana  stalk  slips  about 
in  the  leaves  and  she  thinks  the  child  is  moving ;  and  this  in 
her  bewildered  new  condition  contents  her,  till  she  gets  to- 
Panoi  and  finds  that  she  has  been  deceived.  In  the  mean- 
while the  child  has  been  taken  to  another  house,  because  they 
know  that  the  mother  will  come  back  to  take  its  soul.  She 
seeks  everywhere  for  the  child  in  grief  and  rage  without 
ceasing ;  and  the  ghost  of  a  vasisgona  therefore  is  particularly 
dreaded. 

Panoi  is  near,  under  the  land  of  living  men,  as  death  is 
near  to  life.  If  a  man  is  nearly  killed  he  says,  '  I  have  been 
close  to  Panoi,  and  have  returned.'  There  is  much  there  that 
is  like  the  upper  world,  villages,  houses,  trees  with  red  leaves, 

T  2 


276  Death.    Burial.    After  Death.  [cH. 

and  there  is  day  and  night ;  it  is  even  a  beautiful  place,  for 
at  a  great  festival  when  the  village  place  is  bright  with 
flowers  and  coloured  leaves,  and  thronged  with  people  dancing, 
drumming  and  singing,  the  saying  is  that  it  is  '  like  a  sura 
as  if  the  mouth  of  Panoi  were  opened.'    When  a  ghost  first 
descends,  he  waits  at  first  outside  the  ghostly  village ;  he  is 
weak,  and  he  stops  till  he  has  recovered  strength!  The 
ghosts  make  a  dance  in  his  honour.    When  he  arrives  they 
ask  him,  '  Have  you  come  to  stay  ? '  If  he  has  only  fainted, 
it  is  then  discovered,  and  he  returns.    The  fresh  ghost  finds 
there  something  like  an  earthly  life,  but  it  is  hollow  and 
unreal.    There  is  nothing  that  they  do  but  talk  and  sing  and 
dance;  there  is  no  gamal,  the  indispensable  club-house  of 
earthly  life ;  men  and  women  live  together,  without  sexual 
intercourse ;  there  is  no  fighting,  there  is  no  one  in  authority, 
no  vui,  spirits,  other  than  ghosts  of  men.    A  great  man  goes 
down  like  a  great  man,  in  all  his  finery  of  ornament.  The 
pigs  killed  for  his  funeral  feast,  the  food  heaped  upon  his 
grave,  do  not  go  down  as  he  does  ;  he  is  a  famate,  a  dead  man, 
a  ghost;  he  has  as  a  dead  man  the  atai,  soul,  that  he  had  under 
different  conditions  as  a  living  man ;  his  ornaments  are  on  his 
person  as  a  ghost,  but  the  shadow,  niniai,  of  them  only,  for 
no  such  things,  not  even  pigs,  have  atai.    There  is  a  further 
belief  that  there  are  compartments,  enclosures  fenced  apart,  in 
which  those  who  have  died  violent  deaths  keep  together  ;  those 
who  have  been  shot  are  in  one  place  together,  those  who  were 
charmed  to  death  in  a  second,  those  who  have  been  clubbed 
in  a  third  together.    Those  who  have  been  shot  keep  rattling 
the  reeds  of  the  arrows  they  were  shot  with  ;  hence  if  a  rat  is 
heard  in  a  house  making  that  kind  of  noise  the  saying  is  that 
it  is  a  reed-rattling  ghost,  tamate  ninginingi  togo.    Ghosts  in 
Panoi  have  not  knowledge  of  things  out  of  their  sight  and 
hearing  as  the  vui,  spirits,  have ;  nevertheless  they  are  invoked 
in  time  of  need  and  distress,  as  if  they  could  hear  and  help. 
They  come  upon  earth  when  they  please,  and  see  how  their 
friends  and  property  are  faring,  and  they  hear  the  news  from 
new-coming  ghosts.     These  ghosts,  as  distinguished  from 


xv.]     Banks  Islands.    Descents  to  Hades.  277 

those  who  have  no  home  in  Panoi,  are  in  a  general  way  kindly 
to  living  men;  though  if  their  friends  and  property  are 
damaged,  they  are  angry  and  revengeful.  It  is  true  that  men 
are  afraid  of  these  and  all  other  ghosts,  because  a  ghost  is  of 
itself  a  dreadful  thing  to  a  living  man.  They  are  seen,  but 
not  distinctly— only  their  eyes  like  phosphorescent  fungi,  or 
something  red.  Life  in  Panoi  is  eternal,  unless  indeed,  as 
some  say,  there  are  two  Panois,  one  below  the  other,  and  the 
dead  die  from  the  upper  to  the  lower,  as  living  men  die  from 
earth;  from  the  lower  they  never  die,  but  turn  into  white 
ants'  nests,  te  wog  qatete  nia. 

Descents  to  Panoi  have  been  by  no  means  uncommon. 
There  was  a  woman,  who  died  not  many  years  ago,  who  once 
much  desired  to  see  her  lately  dead  brother;  she  perfumed 
herself  with  water  in  which  a  dead  rat  had  been  steeped,  to 
give  herself  a  death-like  smell,  pulled  up  a  bird's-nest  fern,  a 
puget,  and  descended  by  the  hole  she  had  opened.    She  had 
no  difficulty  in  finding  Panoi,  and  she  saw  friends  there  who 
were  surprised  to  see  her,  and  never  discovered  that  she  was 
alive.    She  found  her  brother  lying  in  a  house,  because  as  a 
recent  ghost  he  was  not  strong  enough  yet  to  move  about. 
He  cautioned  her  to  eat  nothing  there,  and  she  returned. 
This  descent  was  in  the  body,  as  was  that  of  one  Molborbor 
of  Valuwa,  who  went  down  and  saw  his  wife ;  but  a  man  in 
Motlav,  more  lately  dead,  used  to  go  down  in  sleep,  his  soul 
descending,  and  his  body  remaining  as  in  a  trance.    He  could 
do  this  at  will,  and  received  money  for  doing  it,  professing  to 
visit  the  recently  dead,  about  whom  their  friends  were  un- 
happy, and  even  to  be  able  to  bring  them  back.    He  never 
did  in  fact  bring  any  back ;  he  said  he  had  seen  the  persons 
and  talked  with  them,  but  was  prevented  from  bringing  them 
back.    He,  too,  prepared  for  his  soul's  descent  by  washing  his 
body  with  water  in  which  a  putrid  rat,  snake  or  lizard  had 
been  steeped.    There  was  a  man  in  former  days  at  Motlav, 
Vanvanvegirgir  by  name,  who  going  down  to  Panoi  in  his 
talegi,  soul,  took  once  another  man  with  him  in  his  body. 
This  man  had  lately  lost  his  wife,  and  went  to  Vanvanvegirgir 


278         Death.    Burial.    After  Death.  [c„. 

to  enquire  about  her.    He  was  instructed  to  give  himself  the 
appropriate  smell  with  the  liquor  of  a  putrid  black  gecko,  and 
was  given  a  stick.    The  two  then  descended,  and  reached 
Panoi;  the  ghosts  detected  the  living  man,  and  cried  out 
'The  smell  of  that  world! '  The  two  declared  that  they  were 
really  dead,  and  to  try  them  the  ghosts  brought  out  dead 
men's  bones,  to  see  if  they  would  rattle  them  as  ghosts  do 
by  one,  by  two,  by  three ;  they  did  this  rightly  and  were 
allowed  to  go  on.    Vanvanvegirgir  went  forward  to  find  the 
man's  wife,  and  brought  her  to  him  ;  they  talked  together, 
and  the  man  begged  her  to  go  back  to  the  world  with  him. 
That  she  said  was  impossible,  and  she  gave  him  a  shell 
armlet  by  which  to  remember  her.    He  took  her  by  the 
hand  and  began  to  drag  her;  her  hand  came  off,  and  her 
body  came  to  pieces.    For,  as  the  story  is  explained,  ghosts 
in  Panoi  have  something  more  of  body  and  substance  than 
they  have  when  they  come  back  into  the  world;   else  the 
man  could  not  have  taken  hold  of  his  dead  wife's  hand. 
When  a  ghost  comes  into  the  world,  it  is  but  a  taqangiu  that 
is  seen,  a  something  circumscribed  by  an  outline  like  a 
shadow;  but  the  ghost  in  Panoi,  of  which  the  other  is  prob- 
ably again  the  ghost,  has  a  tarapei,  a  body,  which  has  not 
only  form  and  colour,  but  a  certain  consistency.    There  is 
still  living  in  Vanua  Lava  a  woman  who  turned  her  descent 
to  Panoi  to  a  useful  purpose.    Her  husband,  a  Gaua  man, 
died,  and  she  herself  was  very  ill  and  appeared  to  die.  She 
recovered,  however,  and  told  the  people  that  she  had  followed 
her  husband  to  the  hill  Garat,  and  had  seen  him  there  bound 
hand  and  foot.    The  ghosts  told  her,  she  declared,  that  this 
was  done  because  he  had  not  paid  his  debts ;  '  Go  back,'  they 
bade  her,  'to  the  Gaua  people,  and  say  to  them,  Pay  your 
debts,  don't  kill  one  another ;  this  is  how  we  shall  treat  such 
men.' 

The  manner  of  burial  in  Ma  wo,  Aurora,  in  the  New 
Hebrides,  and  the  belief  of  the  people  there  concerning  the 
dead,  is  fully  described  in  an  account  written  by  a  native,  of 
which  what  follows  is  generally  a  translation.    In  the  first 


xv.]    New  Hebrides.   Journey  of  the  Dead.  279 

place,  he  says,  they  think  that  when  the  wljamani,  leaves 
the  body  in  death,  it  mounts  into  a  tree  m  which  is  a  birds- 
nest  fern,  and  sitting  among  the  fronds,  laughs  and  mocks  at 
the  people  who  are  crying  and  making  great  lamentations 
over  him.    There  he  sits,  wondering  at  them  and  ridiculing 
them.   <  What  are  they  crying  for  ?  '  he  says  ;  <  who  is  it  they 
are  sorry  for?    Here  am  I.'    For  they  think  that  the  real 
thin-  is  the  soul,  and  that  it  has  gone  away  from  the  body 
just  as  a  man  throws  off  his  clothes  and  leaves  them,  and  the 
clothes  lie  by  themselves  with  nothing  in  them  ;  (the  Maewo 
word  garni  applies  in  such  a  case,  the  white  of  an  egg  is  the 
gavui  of  it,  the  yolk  the  real  thing  ;  the  word  for  clothes  is 
gavu,  integument).    Then  the  soul  goes  through  his  gardens 
and  along  his  customary  paths,  and  finally  leaves  the  place. 
He  runs  along  the  line  of  hills  till  he  reaches  the  end  of  the 
island,  and  there  he  comes  to  the  place  of  recollection,  the 
Maewo  name  for  which  is  vat  dodoma,  the  stone  of  thought ; 
if  he  remembers  there  his  child  or  his  wife  or  anything  that 
belongs  to  him,  he  will  run  back  and  come  to  life  again.  In 
the  same  place  also  are  two  rocks  with  a  deep  ravine  between 
them ;  if  the  ghost  clears  this  as  he  leaps  across  he  is  for 
ever  dead,  but  if  one  fails  he  returns  to  life  again.  The  ghost 
pursues  his  course  running  along  the  mountain  range  to  the 
end  opposite  to  Raga,  Pentecost,  at  the  mate  tasi,  land's  end, 
or  brink  of  sea,  and  when  he  arrives  safely  all  the  ghosts  of 
those  who  have  died  before  assemble  and  receive  him  joyfully. 
They  believe  also  that  as  he  runs  the  ghosts  of  those  whom  he 
has  wronged  in  this  world,  whom  he  has  foully  slain  by  club 
or  arrow,  or  has  killed  by  charms,  take  a  full  revenge  upon 
him,  beating  him,  tearing  him,  and  stabbing  him  with  dag- 
gers, mataso,  such  as  men  stick  pigs  with ;  one  of  them  will 
say  to  him,  '  While  you  were  still  in  the  world  you  thought 
yourself  a  valiant  man  ;  but  now  we  will  take  our  revenge 
upon  you.'    Another  path  of  the  ghosts  takes  them  to  the 
northern  point  of  Maewo,  where  there  is  a  deep  gully  and 
three  leaping-places,  one  for  men,  one  for  women,  and  one  for 
ulcerous  persons.    It  is  a  curse  to  wish  a  man  may  fall  down 


28o  Death.    Burial.    After  Death.  [CH. 

there ;  if  a  ghost  falls  in  leaping-  he  is  smashed  to  pieces,  but 
runs  on  and  comes  to  the  hill  Tawu,  which  is  very  sacred  to 
ghosts.    Here  is  the  mouth  of  the  hollow  which  leads  to 
Hanoi  and  here  the  newly-arrived  ghost  is  beaten  by  those 
whom  he  has  wronged,  and  they  cry  to  him,  <  Down  already ' ' 
Here  is  Gaviga,  a  mi,  the  chief  of  Banoi,  and  Matamakira,  or 
fealolo  as  the  Tanorild  people  say,  a  quarrelsome  and  ill- 
tempered  man  on  earth ;  these  stand  with  large  and  sharp 
spears  and  try  to  stab  the  new-comers.  There  is  a  huo-e  fierce 
pig  also  there,  which  will  devour  all  who  have  not  in  their 
lifetime  planted  the  emba,  pandanus,  from  which  mats  are  made 
one  has  Planted  s«ch  he  can  climb  up  out  of  the  reach  of 
the  devouring  beast,  and  for  this  reason  every  one  likes  to 
plant  that  tree.  Here  also,  if  a  man's  ears  are  not  pierced,  he  is 
not  allowed  to  drink  water;  if  he  is  not  tattooed,  he  must  not 
eat  good  food.'    Here  the  ghosts  of  those  who  have  not  joined 
the  Suqe  hang  like  flying  foxes  upon  the  trees  (chap.  vi). 
In  order  that  his  child  may  have  hereafter  a  good  house  in 
Banoi,  a  man,  when  the  child  is  a  year  old,  makes  a  little  gamal, 
club-house,  in  his  garden  for  a  boy,  and  puts  in  it  a  bow  and 
arrows  and  a  club  ;  for  a  girl  he  builds  a  little  house,  and  plants 
an  emba,  pandanus,  to  make  mats  with  beside  it.  The  writer  has 
not  mentioned  how  the  ghosts  congregate  at  the  entrance  to 
the  lower  world,  and  wait  there,  and  are  heard  by  men,  some 
at  play  and  some  crying  with  grief  and  pain  ;  the  latter,  the 
lately  dead  who  had  just  become  aware  of  their  condition  ;  he 
allows  that  it  is  so  believed,  but  says  that  the  people  of  his 
place,  Tanoriki,  are  not  so  well  acquainted  with  these  stories  as 
the  Tasmouri  people,  who  live  near  this  gulf  down  which  the 
ghosts  descend.    It  is  believed  also  that  the  ghosts  in  Banoi 
are  black,  and  feed  on  excrement,  some  of  them  at  least ;  and 
that  the  trees  there  have  red  leaves,  and  that  the  fowls  there 
are  also  red. 

The  writer  goes  on  to  describe  the  funeral  and  the  death- 
meals.  '  The  first  thing  after  the  death  of  a  man  of  some  rank, 
is  to  cut  in  the  bush  certain  vines  which  are  called  corpse- 
binding  vines.    Then  they  bring  together  many  mats  (such 


xvj  Aurora.    Burial.  281 

as  those  which  pass  as  money)  to  wrap  the  corpse  in.  Women 
bring-  out  mats,  such  as  are  used  for  sleeping  on,  and  spread 
them  in  the  open  place  in  the  middle  of  the  village,  and  over 
these  good  clean  mats.    When  these  are  ready,  those  who 
have  been  at  work  sit  on  the  heap  of  mats  and  begin  the 
wailing,  so  that  people  at  a  distance  may  know  that  the  time 
has  come  to  swathe  the  corpse.    Then,  all  having  assembled 
by  the  heap  of  mats,  men  and  women  carry  out  the  corpse 
wrapped  in  a  single  mat  from  his  house  to  the  weeping  crowd; 
and  when  they  lay  him  on  the  mats  spread  as  a  bed  the 
crying  is  wonderful,  nothing  can  be  heard  at  all  but  that. 
They  put  on  his  belt  and  his  malo  dress,  and  smear  him  with 
red  earth,  and  dress  his  hair  with  a  cock's  feather  or  pigs' 
tails.    His  mother,  or  wives  or  sisters,  throw  ashes  over  their 
heads  and  backs.    When  they  have  swathed  the  corpse  in  mats 
and  bound  all  round  with  the  vines,  some  man  of  the  dead 
man's  kin  sits  upon  the  bundle,  and  is  carried  with  it  by  many 
men  to  the  grave,  which  has  been  dug  by  the  side  of  the 
gatnal.    After  this  the  wives  of  the  deceased,  or  his  father  and 
mother,  do  not  go  about  as  usual  for  a  hundred  days,  they 
spend  the  day  at  home.    Men  may  walk  about,  but  the  female 
mourners  cannot  go  into  the  open,  and  their  faces  may  not  be 
seen  ;  they  stay  indoors,  and  in  the  dark,  and  cover  themselves 
with  a  large  mat  reaching  to  the  ground.     In  the  early 
morning  the  widow  goes  out  of  the  house  covered  over  with 
a  mat,  to  weep  at  the  graveside  ;  every  day  she  does  this  till 
the  hundredth  day,  and  also  in  the  afternoon  ;  and  not  she 
only,  many  people  of  the  village  weep.    All  the  women  put 
on  a  mat,  "as  large  as  a  single  plank,"  which  remains  on  their 
head  as  a  sign  that  they  are  in  mourning  for  the  death,  and 
refrain  from  certain  food  ;  but  the  immediate  relatives  of  the 
deceased  may  not  eat  yam,  caladium,  bananas,  or  other  good 
food ;  they  eat  only  the  gigantic  caladium,  bread-fruit,  cocoa- 
nuts,  and  mallow,  and  other  things ;  and  all  these  they  seek 
in  the  bush  where  they  grow  wild,  not  eating  those  which  have 
been  planted.    They  count  five  days,  and  then  build  up  stones 
over  the  grave  ;  great  heaps  of  stones,  much  larger  than  are 


282         Death.    Burial.    After  Death.  [CH. 

now  made,  are  seen  where  men  of  old  times  were  buried 
Alter  that,  if  the  deceased  was  a  very  great  man  with  many 
gardens  and  pigs,  they  count  fifty  days,  and  then  kill  pigS  0n  the 
day  called  the  Ulogi  or  Sawana.  On  the  Ulogi,  the  howling 
at  mid-day  there  is  wailing  at  the  grave-stones,  which  have 
been  dressed  and  adorned  with  leaves  and  flowers ;  some  cry, 
and  some  begin  a  song  sacred  to  the  dead.  When  the  ovens 
are  opened  the  assembled  crowd  departs  ;  and  the  people  of 
the  village  kill  pigs,  and  they  cut  the  point  off  the  liver 
of  each  pig,  and  the  brother  of  the  deceased  goes  near  the 
bush  and  calls  the  dead  man's  name,  crying  "This  is  for 
you  to  eat." 

'  Upon  this  all  cry  again  ;  and  all  their  body  and  face  they 
smear  over  with  ashes  ;  and  they  wear  a  cord  round  their  necks 
for  a  hundred  days,  to  shew  that  they  are  not  eating  good  food. 
If  they  kill  many  pigs  like  this  they  think  it  is  a  good  thing ; 
but  if  not,  they  think  that  the  dead  man  has  no  proper 
existence,  but  hangs  on  tangled  creepers,  and  to  hang  on 
creepers  they  think  a  miserable  thing.  That  is  the  real  reason 
why  they  kill  pigs  for  a  man  who  has  died  ;  there  is  no  other 
reason  for  it  but  that  V 

'  Meanwhile,'  he  continues,  '  the  ghosts  have  known  the 
number  of  days  since  the  last  comer  has  died  ;  and  the 
relatives  of  the  dead  man  have  counted  the  days  to  eat  the  death- 
meal  for  him,  the  fifth  day  or  the  tenth,  and  a  crowd  has 

1  Bishop  Selwyn  witnessed  a  singular  practice  at  Tanoriki  in  Aurora  on  the 
hundredth  day  after  a  woman's  death,  while  the  feast  was  being  held.  '  Pigs 
were  killed  and  yams  mashed  and  distributed,  and  then  the  men  began  to  go 
into  the  bush  and  get  long  rods  of  a  sort  of  ginger  that  tapered  to  a  point. 
These  they  brandished  with  both  hands,  and  looked  anxiously  down  the  path 
leading  to  the  next  village.  Then  the  cry  arose,  "They  are  coming,"  and 
down  came  some  ten  or  twelve  men,  mostly  young,  carrying  on  their  heads 
baskets  which  they  held  with  both  hands,  leaving  their  bodies  completely 
exposed.  Long  before  they  came  in  sight  one  heard  cracks  like  a  whip,  and 
saw  the  cause.  If  a  smiter  was  ready  he  threw  his  rod  back,  and  the  sufferer 
instantly  stood  still  and  received  an  unmerciful  thwack  delivered  with  both 
hands,  which  shivered  the  rod  to  atoms.  The  point  came  right  round  the  man's 
body,  and  I  could  see  the  long  wheals  afterwards,  though  the  back  was  some- 
what protected  by  the  string  girdle  they  wear.' 


xv. -\New  Hebrides.  Death-Meal.  Origin  of  Death.  283 

come  together  to  eat  and  to  remember  him  and  weep.  Then 
they  think  that  the  ghosts  and  he  who  has  lately  died  come 
back  to  the  world  for  this,  and  that  the  ghosts  call  this  the 
great  feast  of  the  man  who  died.  They  believe  that  they  come 
and  carry  away  food  and  pig's  flesh  for  themselves  to  eat ;  but 
men  are  not  aware  of  their  taking  anything  away,  they  speak 
figuratively.  It  is  just  as  when  a  little  mash,  or  cocoa-nut,  or 
bit  of  pig  is  put  upon  a  dead  man's  grave  for  him  to  eat ;  they 
do  not  think  that  the  ghosts  take  the  things  as  men  do  ;  not 
at  all,  the  things  remain  all  right ;  but  they  think  that  they 
take  away  the  tamani  of  the  things.  And  if  a  little  is  given 
they  think  that  they  carry  it  away  as  if  it  were  a  great  deal, 
and  go  down  rejoicing  to  Banoi  with  shouting  and  with  songs. 
Thus  they  do  to  the  hundredth  day,  aud  after  that  they  think 
no  more  about  it.' 

The  Origin  of  Death  was  ascribed  at  Lepers'  Island,  both  to 
the  disuse  of  the  power  of  changing  the  skin,  and  to  the  defect 
of  nature  which  had  not  given  men  that  power.  Once  upon 
a  time  a  woman  and  a  crab  disputed  the  point,  the  woman 
maintaining  that  the  crab  was  better  than  men,  changing  its 
shell,  becoming  young  again,  and  living  long.  She  wanted 
the  crab  to  change  bodies  with  her ;  and  she  blamed  Tagar 
because  he  did  not  make  men  rightly.  But  in  accordance 
with  the  story  which  is  told  in  varying  forms  in  the  Solomon 
Islands,  the  Banks'  group,  and  the  New  Hebrides,  men  had 
in  former  times  the  power  of  changing  their  skin.  There  was 
an  old  woman  who  had  two  grandchildren.  These  two  boys 
were  one  day  playing  at  blocking  back  the  water  of  a  little 
brook,  when  the  stream  brought  down  a  Tahitian  chestnut.  One 
of  the  boys  took  it,  and  gave  it  to  his  grandmother  to  roast. 
Afterwards  the  other  boy,  who  had  at  first  despised  the  chestnut, 
ran  home  unobserved  and  ate  it,  so  that  when  the  first  boy  went 
for  it  the  chestnut  was  gone.  The  boy  scolded  his  grandmother 
for  neglect,  and  she,  angry  in  her  turn,  said  to  the  boys,  '  You 
two  don't  wish  to  live  for  ever,  but  would  rather  that  we  should 
not  live.'  She  had  just  come  back  from  changing  her  skin  in 
the  water  higher  up  in  the  stream  which  the  boys  were  blocking 


284         Death.    Burial.    After  Death.  [CH. 

back;  and  they  had  seen  the  cast-off  skin,  picked  it  up  with  a 
stick,  and  thrown  it  out  of  the  water.  The  old  woman  in  her 
anger  followed  the  stream  down  to  the  place  where  her  skin 
was  lying-  on  the  bank,  and  put  it  on  again.  Since  that 
time  mankind  has  lost  the  power  of  changing  skins,  and  all 
have  died. 

At  death  the  soul,  tamtegi,  departs  from  the  body.  When 
it  is  certain  that  it  is  gone  the  wailing  for  death  begins. 
At  first  the  tamtegi  does  not  go  far  away,  and  there  are 
sounds  which  shew  its  presence ;  they  never  drive  it  away, 
it  is  only  the  soul  of  one  who  has  been  eaten  that  is  driven 
off  with  the  blowing  of  conchs  ;  when  the  time  comes  it  goes, 
and  the  time  is  a  hundred  days.  The  corpse  is  buried 
wrapped  in  the  mats  which  serve  as  money.  When  Mairuru 
died  they  wrapped  him  at  once  in  mats,  and  added  more 
next  day,  till  the  corpse  with  its  wraps  was  so  large  that  it 
took  two  days  to  dig  a  grave  for  it,  and  on  the  third  day 
they  buried  him.  He  was  swathed  in  one  hundred  short  mats 
and  ten  rolls  of  a  hundred  fathoms  each  ;  hut  Mairuru  was 
a  very  great  man  ;  with  common  people  fifty  mats  would  be 
enough  for  a  man,  five  for  a  boy.  After  the  funeral  pigs  are 
killed,  and  five  fowls,  and  the  fowls  are  roasted  over  the  fire. 
When  the  meal  is  ready  the  chief  mourner  takes  a  piece  of 
fowl  and  of  yam  and  calls  the  name  of  some  person  of  the 
place  who  has  died,  saying,  1  This  is  for  you.'  This  he  does 
till  he  has  called  all  those  whose  death  is  remembered  in  the 
place,  including  the  lately  dead,  and  has  given  each  a  bit  of 
fowl  and  yam.  What  remains  he  eats  himself,  and  then  the 
assembled  mourners  eat ;  this  is  to  '  eat  the  grave.'  Counting 
five  days  from  the  death,  they  pr  pare  the  oven  for  '  eating 
the  death,'  and  when  it  is  opened  give  morsels  to  the  ghosts, 
as  on  the  clay  of  burial.  The  same  is  done  on  the  tenth  day, 
which  is  a  great  day  with  a  large  assemblage,  and  the  same 
again  at  a  similar  feast  on  the  fiftieth  day.  Every  fifth  clay 
also  there  is  a  death-meal,  and  the  hundredth  is  the  last.  On 
that  day  for  a  very  great  man  there  will  be  a  hundred  ovens. 
The  last  solemnity  is  remarkable.    On  the  evening  of  that 


xv.]        Lepers  Island.    Burial.,  Hades.  285 

day  all  the  people  assemble  in  the  middle  of  the  village ;  a 
man  of  the  waivung  division  to  which  the  deceased  did  not 
belong,  one  near  to  him  by  male  descent,  mounts  a  tree 
and  calls  all  the  names  of  the  deceased  one  after  another,  for 
a  great  man  has  many  names  (page  114)  5  there  is  a  solemn 
silence  as  the  names  are  called,  all  listen  for  a  sound ;  if  any 
sound  is  heard  they  take  it  for  the  answer  of  the  dead,  and  all 
raise  the  wailing  cry  because  it  is  the  last  time  they  will 
hear  his  voice.  They  have  no  thought  of  driving  away  the 
ghost ;  they  call  to  him  to  come  and  take  all  their  food  and 
all  they  have,  and  go  with  it  to  Nggalevu.  If  no  sound 
answers  to  the  last  call  they  think  he  has  already  gone.  A 
man  is  buried  with  his  bow  and  arrows  and  his  best  orna- 
ments ;  but  his  pigs'-tusk  bracelets  are  put  on  upside  down. 
Nggalevu  will  know  him  to  be  a  great  man  by  what  he  sees 
with  him  and  upon  him,  for  he  will  be  seen  as  a  man  is  seen 
though  he  be  a  ghost,  a  tamtegi ;  what  it  is  of  the  ornaments 
and  other  things  that  will  be  seen  they  have  not  considered, 
but  certainly  not  a  tamtegi,  nor  a  soul ;  it  raises  a  smile  to 
ask  whether  there  be  the  tamtegi  of  a  bow.  When  a  man 
dies  his  cocoa-nut-trees,  fruit-trees,  and  things  in  his  garden 
are  cut  down  and  destroyed.  This  is  done,  they  say,  out  of  a 
feeling  of  tenderness  and  sorrow;  no  one  but  he  shall  enjoy 
them. 

The  dead  man's  soul  when  it  leaves  his  dwelling-place 
makes  its  way  along  the  mountain  path  to  Manaro,  to  the 
lake  which  fills  the  crater  of  the  island.  Sometimes  men 
notice  recent  footsteps  on  the  path,  and  go  down  to  the 
villages  to  ask  who  has  died  and  just  gone  up.  The  abode 
of  the  dead  is  Lolomboetogitogi,  and  the  descent  to  it  is  by  a 
volcanic  vent  near  the  lake.  There  ghosts  assemble,  and  there 
has  always  been  Nggalevu,  a  vui,  a  spirit  not  a  ghost,  who 
is  the  master  of  the  place,  and  receives  the  new-comers. 
There  is  also  a  pig  by  which  they  have  to  pass.  Beside  the 
lake,  on  the  farther  side,  which  no  man  has  been  known  to 
reach,  there  is  a  volcanic  vent  which  sends  up  clouds  of  steam. 
Men  go  up  to  the  nearer  side  of  the  lake  and  climb  a  tree 


286  Death.    Burial.    After  Death.  [cH. 

which  overhangs  it ;  they  cry  aloud  to  Nggalevu  to  give 
a  sign  that  he  is  there,  and  a  column  of  steam  goes  up.  In 
Lolomboetogitogi  are  trees  and  houses  where  the  dead  have 
their  abode ;  though  they  are  thought  to  come  out,  and  are 
seen  like  fire  at  night,  or  a  man  in  the  dusk  sees  something 
like  a  dead  tree-fern  trunk  standing  before  him  in  the  path, 
and  fears  to  go  on  further.  In  Lolomboetogitogi  the  dead 
are  thought  to  live  a  happy  if  an  empty  life,  free  from  pain 
and  sickness  ;  but  there  are  those  that  come  out  for  mischief, 
hunting  men  to  add  them  to  their  company;  and  if  a  man 
has  left  children  when  he  died,  one  of  whom  sickens  after- 
wards, it  is  said  that  the  dead  father  takes  it. 

Two  descents  to  Lolomboetogitogi  are  well  remembered. 
A  young  man  lost  his  wife  and  much  desired  once  more  to  see 
her ;  he  took  a  friend  and  mounted  to  the  lake ;  they  swam 
to  a  certain  rocky  islet,  and  the  widower,  giving  one  end  of  a 
clue  to  his  friend,  dived  into  the  water ;  as  long  as  he  was 
alive,  he  said,  he  would  keep  pulling  at  the  line.  He  arrived 
at  a  village,  and  found  an  old  friend,  who  warned  him  to  keep 
by  himself,  and  by  no  means  to  eat.  His  wife  he  could  not 
see ;  he  took  some  sweet  herbs  growing  in  the  village,  and 
returned  through  the  water  to  the  rock.  Another  man  still 
living  went  down  by  a  banyan  root  in  the  forest,  and  found 
the  village  of  the  ghosts;  they  gave  him  food,  which  he 
brought  back  with  him  without  eating  any,  bananas  old  and 
black.  Another  descent  is  the  subject  of  a  story  not  seriously 
told  or  believed,  a  sort  of  parody  on  the  above,  which  relates 
how  a  man  made  his  way  to  an  underworld  of  pigs,  ureuremloe, 
the  pig- world,  of  which  a  snake,  Tamatemboe,  dead- man-pig, 
was  the  master ;  the  snake  had  stones  in  a  lump  at  its  neck, 
and  these  stones  were  powerful  for  wealth  in  pigs  ;  so  the  man 
said  who  brought  the  stones  with  him,  and  had  them  for  sale 
or  hire. 

At  Araga,  Pentecost,  there  are  two  stories  as  to  the  Origin 
of  Death.  In  one  a  man  and  a  rat  dispute,  the  rat  saying 
that  the  man  would  die  outright,  but  that  himself  would  live 
again.    The  man  and  rat  meet  again  in  the  path  and  quarrel, 


xv.]       Pentecost  Island.    Burial.    Hades.  287 

and  the  man  kills  the  rat;  it  begins  to  putrefy:  'How  it 
stinks!'  cries  the  man.  'You  will  be  as  bad,'  says  the  rat. 
'  But  I  shall  live  again,'  says  the  man.  <  No  !  like  me,'  says 
the  rat.  The  other  story  is  a  variant  of  the  common  one 
about  changing  the  skin.  There  was  a  man  who  had  two 
boys  living  with  him,  and  used  to  change  his  skin  every  day 
and  come  out  to  work  with  them.  One  evening  he  put  on 
his  old  skin  again,  and  the  boys  killed  him  because  he  had 
deceived  them.  If  he  had  lived,  all  men  would  have  changed 
their  skins  and  never  died. 

A  ghost  after  death  is  atmat,  dead-man,  but,  as  in  Lepers' 
Island,  the  same  word  is  used  to  designate  a  man's  soul  when 
he  is  alive.  At  death  the  atmat  leaves  the  body,  but  lingers 
near  it  for  five  days.  It  is  not  driven  away,  but  goes  off  itself 
to  the  abode  of  the  dead  called  Banoi ;  in  case  of  fainting,  the 
man  on  recovering  says  he  was  not  allowed  to  enter.  .  The 
corpse  is  watched  till  it  is  buried  ;  in  the  case  of  a  great  man 
for  three  or  four  days  ;  it  is  then  rolled  in  the  mats  valued  as 
money  and  taken  to  the  gamal ;  if  a  great  man,  the  mats  are 
many,  and  the  swathed  corpse  is  set  up  between  two  stakes. 
After  a  time  it  is  buried  ;  a  great  man  is  buried  in  the  village 
place  in  a  qaru,  with  stones  set  up  and  with  dracaenas  and 
other  coloured  shrubs  planted  round.  After  the  burial  the 
fire  is  lighted  for  the  death-meal,  and  they  go  on  '  eating  the 
death '  for  a  hundred  days,  which  are  counted  on  a  cycas  leaf. 
By  way  of  mourning  the  relatives  smear  themselves  with 
smut  and  ashes.  The  ghosts,  going  away,  or  being  let  go, 
make  their  way  down  the  coast,  along  the  beach,  to  Vatang- 
gele,  where  they  are  heard  singing,  shouting,  and  drumming. 
The  place  of  assembly  before  the  descent  into  Banoi  is  a  point 
of  land  opposite  Ambrym,  where  there  is  a  stream  the  ghosts 
cannot  pass,  and  a  tree  from  which  they  leap  into  the 
shark  waiting  below  bites  off  the  noses  of  those  who  have  not 
killed  pigs  in  accordance  with  the  customs  of  the  island. 
There  is  a  town  in  Banoi,  with  houses,  trees,  sweet-smelling 
plants,  and  shrubs  with  coloured  leaves,  but  no  gardens,  because 
there  is  no  work.    The  new-comer  is  weak  at  first,  and  rests 


288  Death.    Burial.    After  Death.  [cH. 

before  he  begins  to  move  about  the  place.  A  new  arrival  is 
g  reeted  by  a  danee  ;  for  the  husband,  wife,  or  friend  of  one 
already  there  they  raparaM  boh,  go  through  an  elaborate 
performance.  The  ghosts  of  those  who  have  died  violent 
deaths  keep  together;  those  who  have  been  shot  with  the 
arrow  sticking  in  the  body,  those  who  have  been  clubbed 
with  the  club  fixed  into  the  head ;  those  also  who  have  died 
of  cough  keep  together.  When  a  ghost  comes  down  with 
the  instrument  of  death  upon  him,  he  tells  who  killed  him, 
and  when  the  murderer  arrives  the  ghostly  people  will  not 
receive  him ;  he  has  to  stay  apart  with  other  murderers.  To 
the  question  how  one  is  received  who  has  killed  another  in 
fair  fight  no  certain  answer  can  be  given.  As  to  the  food  of 
ghosts  in  Banoi  there  is  a  difference  of  opinion ;  some  say 
they  eat  nothing,  some  that  they  eat  excrement  and  rotten 
erythrina  wood  ;  probably  the  ghosts  rejected  by  the  happier 
crowd  have  the  dismal  food.  Ghosts  haunt  especially  their 
burial-places,  and  revenge  themselves  if  offended;  if  a  man 
has  trespassed  on  the  grave-place  of  a  dead  chief  the  ghost 
will  smite  him,  and  he  will  be  sick.  Ghosts  seen  appear  like 
fire.  My  informants  tell  me  that  no  fragment  of  food  is 
offered  to  a  ghost,  a  doubtful  statement;  but  if  they  see 
bananas  or  other  food  rotting  in  a  dead  man's  garden,  they 
say  it  is  the  ghost's  food,  not  meaning  so  much  that  the 
ghost  eats  this,  as  that  as  is  the  man  so  is  his  food 1. 

It  remains  to  notice  what  practice  there  appears  to  be  in 
these  islands  of  burying  the  living  with  the  dead.  A  case  is 
remembered  at  Saa,  where  the  wife  of  a  chief  killed  in  fighting 
asked  for  death  that  she  might  follow  her  husband,  and  was 

1  At  Ambrym  they  bury  in  the  house ;  after  five  months  they  dig  up  the 
bones,  take  the  skull,  jawbone  and  ribs  and  put  them  under  the  root  of  a  hollow 
tree.  The  small  bones  they  bury  again  in  the  house,  the  long  bones  they  tie 
up  in  baskets  with  yams  and  other  food  and  put  up  in  a  tree.  The  body  of 
a  great  man  is  not  buried  ;  it  lies  in  the  house  in  a  canoe  or  in  a  drum,  women 
and  children  sleep  round  it  to  watch  and  remove  the  worms  ;  after  ten  months 
they  take  up  the  skull,  jawbone,  and  long  bones  of  arms  and  legs  and 
hang  them  in  the  house ;  the  other  bones  are  wrapped  together  and  sunk 
at  sea. 


xvj  Btirial.  289 

strangled  accordingly.  At  Maewo  it  has  often  happened  that 
a  woman  has  demanded  to  be  buried  with  her  husband  or  a 
beloved  child.  Not  long  ago  a  woman  insisted  on  it ;  they 
dug  a  grave,  wrapped  her  in  mats,  and  buried  her  alive  with 
her  child.  In  Lepers'  Island  lately  when  Mairuru  was  buried, 
the  people,  accusing  his  wife  of  having  poisoned  him,  wanted 
to  bury  her  alive  with  him ;  she  consented,  but  the  presence 
of  a  Christian  native  prevented  this  being  done.  The  killing 
or  burying  alive  of  sick  persons  is  another  matter. 


CHAPTER  XVI 


ARTS  OF  LIFE. 

The  foregoing  chapters  have  been,  mainly  at  least,  con- 
cerned with  subjects  to  deal  with  which  such  knowledge  of 
the  thoughts  and  ways  of  Melanesian  people  as  can  only  be 
gained  by  personal  acquaintance  with  them,  and  familiarity 
with  their  language,  is  most  required.  The  present  chapter  will 
contain  notices  of  such  matters  as  lie  much  more  upon  the 
surface  of  native  life,  and  are  open  to  the  observation  of  the 
visitor  and  traveller ;  the  arts,  namely,  in  which  the  culture 
of  the  people  expresses  itself,  by  which  they  build  and 
decorate  canoes  and  houses,  plant  and  cultivate  their  gardens, 
furnish  themselves  with  weapons  and  implements  for  war 
and  work,  catch  fish,  prepare  their  food,  furnish  themselves 
with  clothing  and  ornaments,  make  and  use  money  as  a 
medium  of  exchange.  So  long  a  catalogue  of  their  arts  of 
life  shews  that  Melanesians  do  not  take  a  very  low  place 
among  the  backward  peoples  of  the  world.  To  deal  fully 
and  adequately  with  these  matters  would  require  much  space  ; 
it  is  the  less  necessary  to  do  so  since  much  information  has 
been  already  made  public,  as  by  Dr.  Guppy  for  example, 
concerning  the  Solomon  Islands ;  but  there  is  certainly  room 
for  additions,  and  even  in  these  matters  there  is  much  value 
in  what  natives  say  about  themselves. 

(i)  Canoes.  The  inhabitants  of  groups  of  islands  are  likely  to 
be  seafaring  people,  and  canoes  are  naturally  among  the  first 
objects  that  present  themselves  to  a  visitor.  Hardly  any- 
thing seems  in  my  remembrance  to  have  been  more  striking 


Canoes. 


29 1 


than  the  difference  between  the  canoes  of  the  natives  when 
for  the  first  time  we  passed  from  the  New  Hebrides  and 
Banks'  Islands  to  the  Solomon  Islands,  and  exchanged  the 
clumsy  outriggered  tree-trunks  of  the  Eastern  groups  for 
the  elegant  forms  and  brilliant  ornaments  of  the  plank-built 
craft  of  the  West.  But  upon  consideration,  the  outrigger 
canoe  that  sails  must  be  thought  to  take  a  higher  rank  than 


New  Hebrides  Canoe. 


one  propelled  by  paddles  only;  and  certainly  the  outrigger 
canoe  is  the  one  characteristic  of  Melanesia.  It  is  only  in  the 
Solomon  Islands  that  plank-built  canoes  are  seen ;  but  there 
also  small  canoes  with  outriggers  are  used,  and  these  are  in 
fact  the  same  with  those  of  Santa  Cruz,  the  Banks'  Islands 
and  the  New  Hebrides  ;  all  alike  are  hollowed  trunks  of  trees 
with  outriggers.    Double  canoes  are  nowhere  seen  in  these 

u  % 


IQ2 


Arts  of  Life. 


[CH. 


islands  as  in  Fiji ;  but  the  aka,  angga,  wangga,  of  the  Banks' 
Islands  and  New  Hebrides,  is  doubtless  the  same  thing-  with 
the  wangga  of  Fiji.  The  large  sailing  canoes,  which  in  the 
New  Hebrides  will  carry  forty  men,  are  also  single  trunks 
dug  out  and  shaped  for  the  hull,  with  sides  built  up  and 
decks  laid  with  planks  tied  on  with  sinnet.  Before  the  time 
when  the  labour  trade  made  the  natives  afraid  to  move 
about,  and  '  recruiting '  meant  destruction  of  canoes  for  the 
capture  of  their  crews,  red  '  butterfly '  sails  were  the  common 
and  pleasing  ornament  of  an  island  scene  in  the  New  He- 
brides and  Banks'  groups. 


Mota  Canoe. 


To  take  the  example  of  a  Mota  aka.  The  sail,  epa,  was 
formed  of  mats,  woven  by  women,  and  sewn  together  by  men 
with  needles  of  tree-fern  wood,  or  the  bone  of  a  ray's  sting. 
The  mast,  turgae,  with  a  forked  butt,  was  stepped  upon  the 
midmost  of  the  three  yoke-pieces,  iwalia,  which  connected  the 
outrigger,  sama,  with  the  hull.  The  yoke-pieces  were  fastened 
to  the  outrigger  by  being  lashed  to  wooden  pegs  fixed  into  it. 
Upon  the  foot  of  the  mast  was  stepped  again  the  forked  end 
of  a  hoom,  panei ;  both  were  stayed  with  ropes,  tali,  and  in 
the  triangular  space  between  the  mast  and  boom  was  spread 
the  sail,  lashed  to  both,  and  sinking  in  a  graceful  curve 
between  the  two.    A  large  paddle  for  steering,  timoosc,  was 


xvi.]  Canoes.  293 

tied  to  a  horn,  tiqa-taso,  at  the  stern.  The  whole  safety  of 
the  vessel  depended  on  the  strength  and  elasticity  of  the 
attachment  of  the  outrigger  to  the  hull.  In  former  times  the 
work  of  shaping  the  body  of  the  canoe  and  adzing  out  the 
planks  with  which  the  sides  were  raised  was  done  with  shell 
adzes ;  and  the  holes  for  the  lashings  were  bored  with  the 
columella  of  a  volute  shell.  A  large  canoe  was  owned  in 
common  by  several  men,  or  by  one  very  important  person ; 
money  was  paid  for  hire  and  freight.    All  canoes  of  any  size 


Santa  Cruz  Canoe. 


had  names ;  when  a  new  canoe  came  for  the  first  time  to 
land  away  from  home  the  crew  was  pelted  in  a  friendly 
way l. 

The  Santa  Cruz  canoes,  of  better  workmanship  and  form, 
are  substantially  the  same  as  these ;  the  large  sea-g-oing 
canoes,  loju,  carry  a  large  stage  on  either  side  above  a  very 

1  In  the  Torres  Islands  of  late  years  there  were  no  canoes  ;  the  people  were 
reduced  to  use  catamarans  of  bamboo,  if  they  wished  to  cross  from  one  to 
another  island.  Their  canoe-makers  had  died  out,  and  they,  very  character- 
istically, acquiesced,  as  at  Lakona  also  they  did  for  a  time,  in  going  without. 


294  Arts  of  Life.  [CH. 

narrow  hull,  and  have  a  house  upon  one  of  them  for  the  crew. 
In  these  canoes,  with  the  large  sail  rising  into  curved  horns 
they  make  long  voyages  to  Vanikoro  and  other  islands  that 
they  know,  steering  by  the  stars.  The  Solomon  Island 
plank-built  canoe  has  probably  not  been  developed  in  ignor- 
ance of  the  outrigger1.  In  the  straits  between  long  islands 
like  Malanta  and  Guadalcanal  the  natives  have  prided  them- 
selves on  the  skill  with  which  they  build  and  paddle  their 
canoes.  Ulawa  was  once  a  famous  centre  of  manufacture 
and  of  sale2.  Canoes  from  Saa  would  make  a  six  days' 
voyage  for  trade  and  pleasure,  to  Owa,  Santa  Anna  and 
Santa  Catalina,  in  one  direction,  steering  by  the  stars  at 
night,  and  to  Alite  in  the  other.  Large  canoes  again  cross 
from  Alite  to  Guadalcanal-  to  exchange  money  and  ornaments 
for  food,  and  as  they  return  heavily  laden  throw  out  floats  of 
dry  cocoa-nuts  at  night,  to  rest  and  sleep.  The  moon  in  her 
second  quarter  lying  on  her  back  is  called  in  Florida  a  1  canoe 
of  Mala.'  A  very  graceful  little  catamaran  is  used  within  the 
reefs  of  San  Cristoval ;  five  or  six  stems  of  the  fronds  of  the 
sago-palm  lashed  together,  the  tips  of  them  brought  back  by 
lines  towards  the  butts,  and  the  end  of  the  high  curved  prow 
so  formed  decorated  with  a  crimson  streamer.  A  war  canoe 
of  the  first  rate  is  a  long  while  in  building ;  for  three  suc- 
cessive years  I  had  the  opportunity  of  seeing  one  at  Ha'ani, 
from  the  lea  set  up  to  gain  funds  when  the  work  began  to 
the  last  ornamentation  with  shell  carvings  and  streamers. 
Such  a  canoe  forty-five  feet  long  would  carry  ninety  men.  The 
form  of  a  Florida  peko  is  more  graceful  than  that  of  the  Ulawa 
build ;  the  large  one  in  Takua's  great  hiala  at  Boli  was  sixty 

1  Dr.  Guppy  mentions  Bishop  Patteson's  notice  of  an  outrigger  canoe  at  San 
Cristoval,  said  to  have  been  built  after  a  Santa  Cruz  model.  Within  the  last 
few  years  again  it  has  been  said  that  at  Ulawa  they  have  lately  learnt  to 
catch  sharks  after  a  Santa  Cruz  fashion  in  outrigger  canoes.  But  they 
certainly  caught  sharks  in  that  way  more  than  twenty  years  ago ;  and  it  is 
likely  that  if  they  had  copied  Santa  Cruz  canoes  they  had  done  so  long  before 
Bishop  Patteson  observed  the  outriggers.  Such  small  canoes  are  not  uncommon. 

2  A  large  Ulawa  canoe  is  preserved  in  the  Brenchley  Museum  at  Maidstone  ; 
another  is  in  the  British  Museum. 


XVI.] 


Canoes. 


295 


feet  long  by  six  feet  wide,  and  the  stem  and  stern  turned  up 
to  the  height  of  fifteen  feet1.  These  canoes  are  all  con- 
structed of  planks  adzed  out  so  as  to  leave  cleats  by  which 
they  are  lashed  to  curved  rib-pieces  of  mangrove  wood,  which 
give  the  necessary  stiffness  to  the  vessel ;  the  edges  of  the 
planks  being  sewn   together  with  sinnet,  and  the  seam 


Spear-rest  in  Florida  Canoe. 

covered  with  cement.  In  a  war  canoe  a  rest  for  spears  and 
other  weapons  is  set  up  amidships 2,  and  various  tindalo 

1  Every  kind  of  canoe  has  its  own  name ;  as  in  Florida,  where  the  general 
name  is  tiola,  the  peJco  is  the  war  canoe,  with  stem  and  stern  running  up  to 
high  flat  ends,  and  long  in  proportion  to  its  breadth  ;  mbinambina,  with  stern 
turned  up  as  in  a  peko,  but  with  the  head  straight,  with  a  guard  of  planks 
against  the  wash  of  the  waves,  and  broader  than  a  peJco  in  proportion  to  its 
length ;  tola,  with  both  ends  turned  up  not  very  high ;  rolco,  with  ends  not 
turned  up  at  all. 

2  In  Mr.  Brenchley's  '  Cruise  of  the  Curacoa '  is  reproduced  a  native  picture 
of  a  canoe  from  Ugi,  now  at  Maidstone,  in  which  the  spears  are  seen  in  their 
rest ;  upon  them  is  a  bent  bow  set  up  upon  its  back,  which  is  described  as  a 
bowl  for  propitiatory  libations.  Though  the  explanation  is  incorrect  in  this 
particular,  sacrifices  are  commonly  offered  in  canoes.  The  woodcut  above  shows 


296 


Arts  of  Life. 


[CH. 


charms  are  fixed  and  hung  on  to  the  stem  to  secure  quiet  seas 
and  a  favourable  result  to  expeditions  *,  Canoes  of  importance 
in  these  islands  also  have  names,  and  festivities  follow  their 


Figure-head  of  Fioeida  Canoe. 

completion;  one  made  at  Olevuga  was  named  Biku,  after 
a  relation  of  the  owner ;  it  would  carry  thirty  paddlers  and 

a  rest  for  spears  forming  part  of  a  rib-piece  cut  out  of  a  slab  of  wood  and  used 
to  stiffen  a  canoe  amidships.  The  figures  represent  a  crocodile  and  a  dog 
above,  two  men  and  two  cockatoos  below.  To  this  rib-piece  the  cleats  on  the 
planks  are  seen  to  be  lashed. 

1  In  the  woodcut  above  not  only  are  the  head,  which  represents  that  taken 
when  the  canoe  was  first  used,  and  the  hanging  board,  which  swings  above 
the  waves  with  a  soothing  motion,  full  of  mana,  but  the  bamboo  tubes  above 
wound  round  with  red  braid  are  stuffed  with  tinilalo  relics  and  leaves  for 
protection  and  success. 


xvi.]  Canoes.  297 

as  many  sitters ;  when  it  was  cemented  with  tita,  a  hundred 
pigs  were  killed  for  the  feast.  Such  a  canoe  required  a  life 
for  its  inauguration  \ 

In  the  Eastern  Solomon  Islands,  if  no  victim  was  met  with  in 
the  first  voyage  of  a  new  canoe,  the  chief  to  whom  the  canoe 
belonged  would  privately  arrange  with  some  neighbouring 
chief  to  let  him  have  one  of  his  men,  some  friendless  man 
probably,  or  a  stranger,  who  would  then  be  killed,  perhaps  as 
he  went  out  to  look  at  the  new  canoe.  It  was  thought 
a  kind  thing  to  come  behind  and  strike  him  without 
warning.  Further  west  also  captives  were  kept  with  a 
view  to  the  taking  of  their  heads  when  new  canoes  were 
launched. 

It  is  remarkable  that  while  the  paddles  used  in  the  Eastern 
Solomon  Islands  as  far  as  Florida  are  pointed,  some  very 
narrow  and  pointed  indeed,  those  used  in  Ysabel  have  an 
obtusely  pointed,  short,  and  broad  blade  with  a  compara- 
tively long  shaft,  the  latter  having  a  crescent-shaped  handle, 
and  the  former  a  crutch,  for  the  upper  hand.  The  paddles  of 
the  Banks'  Islands  and  New  Hebrides  are  comparatively 
shapeless  and  heavy. 

A  custom  common  to  the  Solomon  Islands  and  the  Eastern 
groups  is  that  of  taking  a  new  canoe  about  to  show  it  with  a 
large  party  who  receive  presents  wherever  they  visit.  A  great 
deal  of  trading  is  carried  on  between  the  various  islands  of 
each  group ;  in  two  places  the  people  live  by  commerce  and 

1  For  example,  Dikea,  the  chief  of  Eavu  in  Florida,  bought  his  peko,  named 
Lake  (fire),  at  Olevnga  in  the  same  island,  for  sixty  rongo,  a  large  sum  of 
money.  It  was  brought  over  secretly  and  put  into  a  Jciala,  canoe-house, 
built  out  of  sight,  till  a  head  should  have  been  procured.  Dikea  sent  to  his 
broihevs  Sauvui  and  Takua  for  help,  and  when  he  saw  their  fire-signal  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Vula  passage  in  the  ni^ht  joined  them  there,  bringing  the 
new  canoe,  and  as  they  passed  through  other  canoes  joined  the  expedition. 
Before  daylight  they  had  ambushed  at  Hagalu ;  and  in  the  morning  a  single 
man,  Tibona,  came  by  them  in  his  canoe.  They  hid  till  he  was  past,  and  then 
drew  down  the  new  peko  to  chase  him ;  lie  dived  to  escape,  but  they  caught 
and  killed  him,  set  up  his  head  at  the  prow  of  the  canoe,  and  paddled  back  to 
Eavu  with  shouting  and  blowing  conch-shells ;  the  women  and  children  how- 
ever would  not  go  out  to  see. 


298  Arts  of  Life.  [CH. 

manufactures.  Rowa,  one  of  the  Banks'  group,  has  but  a 
tiny  population  on  one  of  the  islets  of  its  reef.  They  still 
mainly  obtain  their  food  from  Saddle  Island  and  Vanua 
Lava,  carrying-  over  in  exchange  fish  and  the  money  that 
they  make  at  home.  Not  many  years  ago  it  was  believed 
that  if  food  were  grown  at  Rowa  there  would  be  a  famine  in 
Vanua  Lava,  and  also  that  if  a  sow  were  taken  there  it  would 
devour  the  people  ;  but  the  Christian  teacher  of  the  place, 
himself  a  Rowa  man,  has  boldly  met  both  dangers.  The 
other  seat  of  commerce  is  on  the  Alite  islets  close  to  the 
Malanta  coast  near  Florida,  the  inhabitants  of  which  are 
enemies  to  their  neighbours  of  the  mainland,  and  have  no 
gardens  there;  they  buy  their  chief  subsistence  from 
Guadalcanal-  with  the  money  and  the  ornaments  that  they 
make. 

(2)  Houses.  The  typical  Melanesian  house  requires  very 
little  description ;  a  roof  of  bamboos  bent  over  a  riclge-pole, 
which  is  supported  by  two  main  posts,  very  low  side  walls, 
and  the  ends  filled  in  with  bamboo  screens.  The  dwelling-- 
houses  in  the  New  Hebrides  and  Banks'  Islands  are  poor, 
and  contain  little  that  can  be  called  furniture ;  a  chest  on 
legs,  cleverly  made,  to  contain  dried  bread-fruit,  a  fire-place 
sunk  into  the  ground,  a  hole  and  pile  of  stones  for  an  oven ; 
wooden  hooks,  cut  from  branching  trees,  hanging  from  the 
roof  with  bags  of  food  to  protect  them  from  the  rats ;  large 
wooden  platters  with  their  pestles,  bowls,  bamboos  for  water, 
and  wicker  dishes  leaning  against  the  side  walls;  a  few 
wooden  knives  and  tools  stuck  between  the  layers  of  thatch  ; 
mats  spread  upon  the  floor  ;  these  may  be  seen  everywhere  ; 
and  often  there  is  an  inner  chamber,  screened  off  with  reeds. 
The  door  is  nothing  but  a  number  of  stalks  of  sago  fronds 
run  through  the  middle  by  a  stick  which  is  thrust  down 
between  the  double  threshold  of  the  doorway,  and  tied  above, 
when  the  house  is  empty,  from  outside  through  an  opening 
left  above  the  doorway  for  the  purpose      The  gamal,  club- 

1  1  It  seems  to  be  the  custom  here  (at  Ureparapara),  as  well  as  in  some 
parts  of  Vanua  Lava,  for  three  or  four  families  to  occupy  a  single  house.  These 


XVI.-|  Hotises.  299 

house,  is  in  construction  the  same,  but  larger,  stronger,  and 
furnished  with  openings  in  the  sides  as  well  as  doorways 
at  the  ends.  The  roofing  is  thatch  of  the  smaller  sago- 
palm,  which  makes  an  excellent  roof,  and  the  preparation 
and  fixing  of  which  is  the  chief  work  of  house-building. 
The  palm  frond,  with  its  midrib  removed,  and  the  leaflets 
doubled  over  a  reed,  and  pinned  together  with  wooden  skewers, 
or  spikes  from  the  base  of  sago  fronds  (the  Malay  atap), 
is  in  all  the  islands  what  a  tile  or  slate  or  shingle  is  else- 
where. In  the  Solomon  Islands  the  cocoa-nut  frond  is  also 
used,  the  lesser  sago  being  apparently  unknown.  The  roofing 
there,  however,  is  very  fine,  the  ataps  being  laid  very  close 
together,  and  the  thatch  extremely  thick  in  the  large 
buildings  such  as  the  canoe-houses.  These,  oha  in  Malanta 
and  San  Cristoval,  kiala  in  Florida  and  Ysabel,  to  which 
the  Santa  Cruz  maclai  and  ofilau  correspond,  are  fine  and 
spacious  buildings ;  the  kiala  at  Kolakamboa  in  Florida 
was  a  hundred  feet  long  by  fifty  wide,  and  fifty  high  ; 
an  oha,  in  Ugi  and  San  Cristoval  at  least,  was  decorated 
with  all  the  skill  of  the  noteworthy  native  artist 1.  In 
these  the  large  canoes  are  kept,  men  congregate  and  young 
men  sleep,  strangers  are  entertained,  the  huge  wooden 
bowls  used  in  feasts  are  kept,  the  jawbones  of  pigs  eaten 
or  killed  in  such  feasts  are  suspended,  and  the  skulls  of 
men  killed  in  war,  and  sometimes  no  doubt  also  eaten  in  the 
place,  are  hung  up ;  in  the  oha  also  are  the  mangiie  of  the 
dead  (page  262).  The  posts  which  support  the  ridge-pole 
and  the  purlins  of  an  oha  are  carved  into  figures  of  men, 
crocodiles  and  sharks ;  a  kiala  is  much  less  ornamented. 
A  Solomon  Island  dwelling-house  is  certainly  superior  to 
one  in  the  Eastern  groups ;  its  walls  are  higher,  it  is  more 
generally  partitioned  into  chambers,  and  it  is  furnished  with 

are  built  very  long,  and  have  slight  divisions  in  them,  seldom  more  than  two 
feet  high.'— Bishop  Selwyn,  Journal,  1882. 

1  Brenchley's  '  Cruise  of  the  Curacoa,'  chap,  xvi ;  Guppy's  '  Solomon  Islands,' 
chap.  iv.  I  have  never  seen  any  ornamentation  so  elaborate  and  interesting 
as  that  of  an  oha  at  Wango,  long  since  fallen  into  decay. 


3QO  Arts  of  Life.  [CH. 

bedsteads  which  lift  the  sleeper  from  the  ground  ;  its  higher 
and  better-finished  ridge-piece  gives  it  a  more  picturesque 
appearance.  When  the  visitor  from  the  eastward  reaches 
.Florida  he  finds  houses  built  on  piles  ;  when  he  reaches  Ysabel 
he  sees  tree-houses  for  the  first  time.  The  pile-houses  are 
excellent  dwellings,  the  side  walls  and  the  floor  formed 
of  split  bamboos  flattened  and  interlaced,  and  the  face  of  the 


House  at  Ysabel. 


house  handsomely  ornamented  with  interlacing  patterns  of 
bamboo  stained  black.  The  dwelling-houses  of  chiefs  are 
sometimes  noble  buildings;  a  new  one  at  Honggo  mea- 
sured twenty-four  paces  long  by  nine  wide,  and  was  thirty 
feet  high.  The  floor  of  this,  of  interlaced  bamboo,  was 
raised  some  height  above  the  ground,  and  the  hearth  upon 
the  ground  occupied  a  sunken  space.  Inside  such  a  house 
small  houses  for  several  wives  are  sometimes  ranged  against 


XVI>]  Houses.    Tree-houses,  301 

the  walls,  and  sometimes  a  tiny  house  on  piles  is  built  in 
the  middle.  In  former  days  when  a  chiefs  dwelling-house 
or  canoe-house  was  finished  a  man's  head  was  taken  for  it 
as  for  a  new  canoe  ;  a  boy  or  woman  was  sometimes  bought 
to  be  killed.  It  is  a  matter  of  tradition  that  men  were 
crushed  under  the  base  of  the  great  pillar  of  such  a  house, 
when  it  was  set  in  its  place.  The  tree-houses,  vako,  are  not 
seen  till  Ysabel  is  reached,  where  they  are  needed  as  a  refuge 
from  the  head-hunters.  One  of  these  to  which  Bishop 
Patteson  mounted,  was  built  at  a  height  of  ninety-four  feet 
from  the  ground,  and  was  approached  by  a  ladder  from  a 
fortified  rock  below  which  the  tree  was  rooted  ;  the  house, 
which  had  a  stage  outside  it,  was  eighteen  feet  long,  ten 
feet  broad,  and  eight  feet  high.  The  houses  at  Santa 
Cruz,  according  to  the  account  given  of  the  first  discovery, 
were  round ;  they  are  now  square,  though  round  houses  are 
said  to  be  built.  The  only  round  house  that  has  come  under 
my  notice  was  at  Ha'ani  in  San  Cristoval,  one  built  to 
contain  and  shelter  the  village  drums,  and  an  excellent 
building.  Sometimes  in  the  Banks'  Islands  a  gamal  may 
be  seen  the  rafters  of  which  are  curved.  It  may  be  well 
to  notice  here  how  the  two  words  for  house  run  through  the 
islands  ;  one,  which  in  Malay  is  ruma,  varying  from  that 
form  in  San  Cristoval  to  'ma  in  the  Loyalty  Islands  and 
Santa  Cruz  ;  the  other,  which  is  whare  in  New  Zealand,  not 
by  any  means  so  common,  but  vale  and  hale  in  the  New 
Hebrides,  vale,  vatlie  and  va'e  in  the  Solomon  Islands  \  The 
absence  of  ancient  house-mounds  has  been  observed  (page  48), 
and  accounted  for  by  the  little  permanence  of  village  sites. 
When  a  ruinous  house  is  demolished  to  build  another  on 
the  same  site,  it  is  found  that  the  constant  sweeping  of  the 

1  In  Maewo,  Aurora,  <  the  ima  is  the  married  man's  residence.  Within 
this  house  the  cooking  of  the  food  for  the  family  is  done,  and  the  married 
couples  live.  This  house  is  known  from  the  rest  by  having  the  front  and 
back  ends  worked  with  cane,  and  more  pains  are  expended  on  the  building  of 
it.  The  vale  has  no  fire-place  for  cooking,,  and  is  mostly  used  as  the  apart- 
ment of  the  young  females  before  marriage,  and  for  stowing  anything  that  may 
be  inconvenient  in  the  ima.'— Journal  of  Rev.  C.  Bice,  1886. 


3Q2  Arts  of  Life.  [CH. 

floor  has  sunk  it  below  the  outside  level,  and  that  this  again 
has  been  raised  close  round  the  house  by  accumulation  of 
various  rubbish.  When  the  new  house  is  to  be  built,  the 
hollow  inside  is  filled  with  the  outside  accumulation,  and 
the  result  is  a  little  elevation  of  the  site.  If  then  an  ancient 
site  is  seen  some  four  or  five  feet  high,  it  must  represent 
a  pretty  long  occupation  of  the  ground. 

In  two  islands  far  apart,  in  Ysabel  and  in  Santa  Maria, 
there  are  very  remarkable  structures  to  be  seen.  In  Bugotu, 
Ysabel,  Bishop  Patteson  slept  in  1866  in  a  fortified  place  thus 
described.  1  The  site  for  the  village  has  been  chosen  on  a  hill 
surmounted  by  steep,  almost  perpendicular  coral  rocks;  the 
forest  has  been  cleared  for  some  space  all  round,  so  as  to 
prevent  any  enemy  from  approaching  unperceived  ;  there  is  a 
wall  of  stones  of  considerable  height  on  that  side  where  the 
rock  is  less  precipitous,  with  one  narrow  entrance,  approached 
only  by  a  smooth  slippery  trunk  of  a  tree,  laid  at  a  somewhat 
steep  inclination  over  a  hollow  below.'  So  also  at  Tega  the 
people  built  a  toa, '  an  impregnable  fort  on  a  rocky  knoll  in  the 
midst  of  the  village.'  These  forts  are  made  for  protection 
against  head-hunters.  The  stone  buildings  in  a  village  in 
Gaua,  Santa  Maria,  are  very  extraordinary;  nothing  like 
them  has  been  seen  elsewhere  in  these  islands.  There  are 
three  small  gamal  houses  on  platforms  about  ten  feet  high, 
built  up  with  stones  untouched  by  any  tool,  and  some  of 
them  three  feet  long  by  two  deep.  The  building  is  wonder- 
fully square  and  regular ;  the  style  quite  Cyclopean,  the  large 
stones  ingeniously  fitted,  and  the  interstices  filled  with  small 
stones.  Besides  these  platforms  there  are  two  or  three 
obelisks  about  four  feet  high,  and  a  little  dolmen  of  three 
stones.  There  are  also  two  wona  platforms,  such  as  are  always 
seen  near  a  gamal  (page  10 1),  but  much  larger,  and  built  of 
large  stones  very  squarely  put  together.  In  one  of  these  is  a 
passage  for  pigs  with  a  stone  lintel.  These  remarkable  works 
are  shown  in  the  frontispiece.  That  such  stone-work  exists 
elsewhere  in  these  islands  cannot  be  positively  denied,  but 
none  has  been  heard  of,  and  in  the  neighbouring  islands  there 


XVI.] 


Stone-work.  Cultivation. 


303 


is  nothing  at  all  resembling-  it.  It  would  naturally  be 
thought,  therefore,  to  belong  to  former  times  and  to  a  different 
population ;  but  it  is  indeed  recent,  and  has  proceeded  from 
the  ambition  or  the  fancy  of  a  single  man  but  lately  dead  K 
When  he  reached  the  rank  in  the  suqe  in  which  he  had  no 
equal,  and  had  to  eat  alone,  he  determined  to  build  his  gamal 
unlike  those  of  other  men.  When  he  took  further  steps,  and 
made  his  kolekole  feasts  (page  110),  he  did  the  same.  For 
this  he  hired  men  from  Lakona  in  the  same  island,  where 
they  build  their  wona  with  small  stones ;  they  selected  the 
stones  that  suited  Vagalo's  design,  and  worked  under  his 
direction.  This  example  of  originality,  and  of  the  individual 
enterprise  which  has  produced  a  work  single  of  its  kind, 
seems  most  valuable.  It  may  help  to  explain  the  strange 
trilithon  at  Tonga. 

(3)  Cultivations.  The  Melanesians  are  a  horticultural  people ; 
the  skill  and  care  with  which  gardens  were  kept  and  planted 
could  not  from  the  first  fail  to  strike  their  visitors,  and 
marked  them  off  by  a  distinction  that  cannot  be  mistaken  from 
the  natives  of  Australia.  The  Melanesian  '  labourer '  carried 
off  to  Queensland  was  amazed  to  find  men  who,  though  black, 
had  no  garden,  and  did  not  bring  back  very  flattering  ac- 
counts of  white  men's  cultivation  either.  A  garden  of  yams 
carefully  trained  on  reeds,  kept  absolutely  clear  from  weeds, 
and  beautiful  in  the  leafage  of  the  vines,  is  a  fine  sight 
indeed ;  gardens,  in  San  Cristoval  as  an  example,  with  the 
various  plots  within  a  common  fence  neatly  marked  and 
divided,  shew  the  exact  regard  for  individual  rights  ;  gardens 
raised  and  worked  in  steps  on  the  steep  sides  of  Meralava 
have  been  formed  with  much  skill  and  labour ;  the  irrigated 
gardens2  of  the  esculent  caladium  or  arum  in  Aurora  and 

1  The  death  of  this  man  Valago  shewed  his  remarkable  character.  Finding 
himself  weak  with  advancing  years  and  wasted  by  disease,  he  compelled  a 
young  man  to  fight  with  him  at  close  quarters.  Having  received  an  arrow 
wound  he  died,  forbidding  vengeance,  but  expressing  satisfaction  that  men 
should  say  that '  Valago  was  shot,  and  did  not  die  like  a  woman.' 

2  'Every  inch  that  was  available  was  used  for  irrigation,  by  means  of 
one  little  streamlet  which  is  made  to  do  a  vast  deal  of  work  before  it  can 


3°4  Arts  of  Life.  [CH. 

Vanua  Lava  (if  any  survive  the  ruin  caused  by  the  labour 
trade  in  the  latter  island),  are  a  proof  of  considerable  and  very 
ancient  skill  in  cultivation.  The  esculent  caladiuni  is  grown 
for  food  in  Egypt  and  in  Syria,  and  its  use  stretches  in  an 
unbroken  chain  from  China  throughout  the  islands  of  the 
Indian  and  Pacific  Oceans ;  it  is  not  by  any  accident  that  a 
dry  garden,  as  opposed  to  an  irrigated  one,  is  called  uma  in 
Sumatra  and  in  the  New  Hebrides  \  The  respective  shares  of 
men  and  women  in  garden  work  is  settled  by  local  custom. 
Cultivation  has  produced  a  wonderful  variety  in  yams,  ba- 
nanas, bread-fruit,  and  no  doubt  other  common  food-producing 
plants  ;  I  have  a  list  of  eighty  names  of  varieties  of  yams,  and 
sixty  of  bread-fruit,  grown  in  the  little  island  of  Mota, 
most  of  which  an  experienced  native  recognizes  and  names  at 
once.  It  may  be  said  generally,  that  the  natives  are  fond 
of  planting  flowering  shrubs  and  sweet  herbs  about  their 
villages,  but  this  is  much  more  seen  in  the  Banks'  Islands 
and  New  Hebrides  than  in  the  Solomon  Islands.  The  beauty 
and  variety  of  hibiscus,  croton,  dracsena,  acalypha.,  amaranthus, 
are  surprising ;  no  village  is  without  its  ornamental  plants 
and  flowers.  In  the  Banks'  Islands  they  know  how  to  graft 
the  various  kinds  of  croton ;  taking  two  young  branches  of 
equal  size  and  breaking  the  end  off'  each,  removing  an  inch  of 
the  bark  from  the  stock  and  the  same  length  of  the  wood  from 
the  scion,  bringing  the  bark  of  each  to  meet  exactly;  this  is 
done  in  damp  hot  weather  only. 

(4)  Weapons.  The  use  of  the  bow  is  universal  in  the  islands 
with  which  we  are  concerned  ;  but  the  bow  is  not  universally 
the  chief  war  weapon.  The  spear  is  in  some  islands  so 
conspicuously  the  fighting  weapon  that  it  is  easy  for  one  who 

reach  the  sea  in  a  course  of  about  two  miles.' — Bishop  Selwyn,  Maewo, 
1878. 

1  '  This  is  now  the  first  month  of  their  preparation  for  yam  planting,  which 
they  perform  in  different  stages.  After  a  man  has  marked  out  the  range  of 
his  garden  that  is  to  be,  he  determines  upon  the  day  when  they  shall  "  umwa" 
it,  that  is  clear  out  all  the  scrub  and  undergrowth.  Here  his  friends  make  a 
"  bee  "  for  him,  and  get  the  business  over  in  one  day.' — Eev.  C.  Bice,  Maewo, 
1883. 


XVI.] 


Weapons.  Fighting. 


305 


has  seen  a  good  deal  of  native  life  to  deny  that  the  bow  is 
used  in  war,  though,  as  in  Florida  for  example,  the  use  of 
it  is  not  so  very  rare.    In  Florida,  Guadalcanal-,  Ysabel,  San 
Cristoval,  and  to  a  less  degree  in  Malanta,  the  proper  thing 
is  to  fight  with  spears ;  and  the  fashion  may  not  be  of  very 
long  standing,  if  at  least  we  may  take  the  narrative  of  the 
first  discoverers  to  be  correct.    With  the  spear  comes  the  use 
of  the  shield;  yet  the  San  Cristoval  spearmen  use  no  such 
defence,  but  turn  off  spears  thrown  at  them  with  long  curved 
glaives,  and  the  shields  in  use  in  Florida  are  not  made  in 
that  island.    Spears  are  g-enerally  made  of  palm  wood,  in 
Ysabel  of  ebony;  they  are  mostly  barbed,  but  in  Florida  the 
kona  are  headed  with  human  leg-bones,  cut  and  broken  into 
jagged  points.    The  fighting  with  spears  in  the  open,  as  on 
a  beach,  is  not  attended  with  much  mortality,  and  comes 
very  much  to  a  series  of  duels ;  when  one  was  hit,  his  enemy 
would  run  in  on  him  with  his  club.    There  are  occasions  on 
which  a  combined  attack  is  made  upon  a  village  by  enemies 
who  have  by  payment  and  by  promises  secured  the  assistance 
of  numerous  allies,  and  such  an  attack,  if  not  at  once 
successful  or  defeated,  becomes  something  like  a  siege ;  but 
an  open  spear  fight,  the  mutual  spearing,  vei  iotoffoni,  of 
Florida,  is  not  common1;  ambushes  set  round  a  village  in 
the  night,  or  for  a  single  man  in  the  path,  are  more  common 
and  deadly;  in  these  the  tomahawk  is  now  the  effective 
weapon.    When  a  young  warrior  in  Florida  killed  his  first 
man,  he  would  let  the  blood  run  from  the  weapon  into  his 
mouth.    The    bows   of  Malanta,   powerful   weapons,  are 
commonly  used  in  war  in  that  island.    Slings  are  not 
unknown  in  the  Solomon  Islands,  and  are  said  to  have  been 
brought  into  use  for  attacking  the  tree-houses.    Men  never 
like  to  go  about  without  something  in  the  hand,  to  be  used 

1  According  to  Takua's  account  of  the  famous  fight  to  which  he  owed  his 
place  in  Florida,  200  canoes  came  together  from  the  neighbouring  parts  to 
attack  Ta-na-ihu.    Their  first  onset  being  unsuccessful,  because  anticipated 
they  fought  with  spears  on  the  slope  of  the  hill  for  three  days.    The  assailants 
then  withdrew,  without  much  loss  on  either  side. 

X 


306 


Arts  of  Life. 


[CH. 


in  a  sudden  quarrel  perhaps  ;  in  Florida  and  thereabouts  a 
paddle-shaped  club  is  a  favourite  walking-  weapon,  ran  ni  Aba, 
the  leaf,  so  called,  of  Aba,  a  place  in  Guadalcanal1  where  they 
are  made.  The  spears,  shields,  clubs,  bows  and  arrows  of  the 
Solomon  Islands  are  common  in  museums.  The  spear1  is 
practically  unknown  as  a  weapon  in  the  Banks'  Islands,  it 
comes  into  use,  in  company  with  the  bow,  in  Ambrym  ;  the 
Espiritu  Santo  spear,  with  its  triple  point  and  graduated 
barbing  of  human  bone,  is  perhaps  the  most  fearful  of  all 
these  weapons.  "Where  they  fought  with  bows,  as  in  the 
Banks'  Islands,  an  open  battle  was  not  common ;  much 
shouting  of  defiance,  cursing*,  abuse  and  boasting,  stamping 
with  the  heel,  and  grasping  of  the  ground  with  the  toes,  a 
great  sign  of  valour,  resulted  in  little  bloodshed2.  Slings, 
talvava,  in  the  Banks'  Islands  were  used  chiefly  in  defence 
against  a  night  attack ;  when  such  was  expected,  men  would 
from  time  to  time  sling  stones  down  the  paths  by  which  the 
enemy  would  approach ;  but  skilful  slingers  would  do  good 
service  in  a  fight.  Clubs  in  the  Banks'  Islands  never  seem 
to  have  been  the  carefully,  and  indeed  beautifully,  shaped 
weapons  used  in  the  New  Hebrides ;  with  these  latter  arrows 
are  warded  off  in  fighting. 

The  Melanesian  weapons,  however,  which  demand  most 
attention,  and  require  most  explanation,  are  the  poisoned 
arrows,  as  yet  so  little  understood.  The  belief  in  the  deadly 
virulence  of  the  poison  used,  and  in  the  hideous  methods  of 
preparing  it,  is  too  firmly  fixed  to  readily  give  way.  Yet 
a  careful  examination  of  poisoned  arrows  and  of  their  effects, 
by  English  and  by  French  medical  officers,  has  resulted  twice 

1  Old  men  in  the  Torres  Islands  carry  a  heavy  wooden  pointed  staff  which 
may  be  called  a  pike.  In  the  Banks'  Islands  a  spear  is  called  isar,  stabber, 
but  is  only  known  in  use,  as  in  Aurora  also,  to  stab  pigs. 

2  About  thirty  years  ago  a  combined  attack  was  made  by  about  600  men  from 
the  southern  parts  of  Vanua  Lava  upon  the  people  of  Port  Patteson,  who  with 
their  allies  numbered  about  half  their  assailants.  Their  women  backed  up 
the  attacked  party,  encouraging  them  with  cries  and  beating  upon  the  trees. 
There  was  no  great  loss  of  life,  and  the  assailants  retired.  Not  half  the 
number  could  be  brought  together  now. 


xvi.]  Poisoned  Arrows.  307 

over  in  the  declaration  that  the  reputed  poison-stuff  on  the 
arrows  is  not  poisonous,  and  that  therefore  the  fatal  effects  of 
wounds  from  the  arrows  are  not  due  to  the  preparation  which 
is  reputed  poisonous1.  From  the  scientific  side,  then,  the 
view  is  clear ;  and  if  the  matter  is  approached  from  the 
native  side,  it  appears  with  equal  plainness  that  the  deadly- 
quality  which  they  believe  to  attach  to  these  weapons  does 
not  belong-  to  what  can  properly  be  called  poison.  It  has  been 
said  (page  2T3)  that  the  Melanesian  preparations  wherewith 
deadly  property  was  believed  to  be  conveyed  to  food  were  not 
properly  poisonous,  that  the  effect  was  not  thought  to  be 
produced  by  the  natural  properties  of  the  substance  used,  but 
entirely  by  supernatural  properties  imparted  by  magic  arts  ; 
and  this  although  there  might  be  deleterious  qualities  in  the 
stuff  employed.  Most  certainly  this  is  the  native  view  of 
what  is  called  poison  on  their  arrows  ;  what  is  sought,  and  as 
they  firmly  believe  obtained,  is  an  arrow  which  shall  have 
supernatural  power,  mana,  to  hurt,  in  the  material  of  which  it 
is  made,  and  in  the  qualities  added  by  charms  and  magical 

1  '  An  Enquiry  into  the  Eeputed  Poisonous  Nature  of  the  Arrows  of  the 
South  Sea  Islanders,  by  Staff-Surgeon  A.  B.  Messer,  M.D.,  R.N.,  published 
by  the  Authority  of  the  Lords  of  the  Admiralty,'  1876,  has,  with  others,  the 
following  conclusions.  '  That  in  the  numerous  cases  in  which  men  have  been 
wounded  by  these  arrows,  no  recorded  instances  are  known  of  poisonous  effects 
following.'  '  That  the  "  locked-jaw  "  is  not  the  result  of  poison  on  the  arrows  ; 
and  as  this  disease  is  the  only  cause  of  fatal  results  after  these  wounds,  the 
arrows  themselves  are  not  in  any  way  dangerous  beyond  the  severity  of  their 
wounds,  and  the  conditions  under  which  they  are  received.'  The  Report  of 
the  Commission  appointed  by  the  Governor  of  New  Caledonia  in  1883  is 
quoted  by  Mr.  Eomilly  in  the  chapter  on  Poisoned  Arrows  in  'The  Western 
Pacific  and  New  Guinea,'  as  completely  dispelling  'the  vulgar  notion  of  the 
fatal  nature  of  these  weapons.'  As  Mr.  Eomilly  refers  to  myself,  I  may  say 
that  in  the  two  cases  mentioned  the  man  who  died  had  been  little  influenced, 
and  the  one  who  survived  much  influenced  by  Mission  teaching,  to  which 
indeed  it  is  reasonable  to  ascribe  a  good  deal  of  the  absence  of  alarm  and 
distress  from  his  mind.  His  constant  exclamation  was  « My  mind  is  easy  I 
have  heard  the  Bishop/  In  that  year,  1870,  I  obtained  without  difficulty  the 
information  concerning  these  arrows  in  the  Banks'  Islands  winch  is  here  set 
forth,  and  which  all  that  I  have  learnt  since  from  other  islands  has  shown  to 
be  correct  I  do  not  remember  to  have  heard  of  the  renewal  of  the  poison 
which  is  likely  enough.  ' 

X  2 


« 


30»  Arts  of  Life.  [cH. 

preparations.  That  a  punctured  wound  in  the  tropics  is  often 
followed  by  tetanus,  that  the  breaking  off  of  a  fine  point  of 
bone  in  a  wound  is  sure  to  be  dangerous  and  likely  to  be 
fatal,  that  an  acrid  or  burning  substance  introduced  by  the 
arrow  into  the  wound  will  increase  inflammation  in  it,  are 
facts  altogether  outside  the  native  field  of  view.  The  point 
is  of  a  dead  man's  bone,  and  has  therefore  mana,  it  has  been 
tied  on  with  powerful  mana  charms,  and  has  been  smeared 
with  stuff  hot  and  burning,  as  the  wound  is  meant  to  be, 
prepared  and  applied  with  charms  ;  that  is  what  they  mean 
by  what  we,  not  they,  call  poisoned  arrows.  And  when  the 
wound  has  been  given,  its  fatal  effect  is  to  be  aided  and 
carried  on  by  the  same  magic  that  has  given  supernatural 
power  to  the  weapon. 

Poisoned  arrows,  as  they  are  called  \  are  used  in  the  Solomon 
Islands,  Santa  Cruz,  the  Banks'  Islands,  and  New  Hebrides. 
In  the  Torres  Islands  and  Lepers'  Island  arrows  are  used  for 
fighting  which  are  not  poisoned,  yet  belong  entirely  to  the 
same  class  with  those  that  are,  being  as  much  valued, 
trusted  and  feared  as  the  others ;  a  very  instructive  fact :  in 
Lepers'  Island  both  kinds  are  used.  There  is  a  great  differ- 
ence in  the  size  and  weight  of  the  arrows  of  various  islands, 
and  in  the  proportion  of  the  parts,  but  the  structure  is  every- 
where the  same.  There  is  a  shaft  of  reed,  a  foreshaf't  of  hard 
wood,  tree-fern  or  palm,  and  a  point  of  human  bone ;  the 
point  is  let  into  the  foreshaft,  and  that  into  the  shaft,  and 
the  joinings  are  firmly  bound  with  fine  string  or  fibre. 
Santa  Cruz  arrows  are  uniformly  nearly  four  feet  long, 
and  weigh  about  two  ounces ;  Banks'  Island  arrows  are 
about  three  feet  nine  inches  long,  and  weigh  about  an 
ounce  ;  Torres  Island  arrows  are  only  two  feet  ten  inches 
long,  weighing  three-quarters  of  an  ounce.  The  bone  point 
of  a  Santa  Cruz  arrow  is  seven  inches  long,  and  the  fore- 
shaft  of  hard  wood,  curiously  carved  and  coloured,  is  sixteen 
inches  loner.    The  bone  head  of  a  Torres  Island  arrow  is 

1  Natives  would  never  use  the  same  word  for  the  preparation  with  which 
their  arrows  are  smeared  and  for  that  which  they  mix  with  food. 


xvi.]  Poisoned  Arrows.  309 

a  foot  long-,  the  fore-shaft  eight  inches,  the  reed-shaft  twenty 
inches.  The  one  is  a  heavy  and  powerful  weapon,  requiring  a 
large  and  powerful  bow;  the  other  is  slight  and  weak,  little 
more  than  a  human  hone  fitted  for  the  bow;  one  is  poisoned, 
the  other  is  not ;  both  are  in  native  estimation  equally  deadly. 
Some  of  the  New  Hebrides  and  Solomon  Island  arrows  have  a 
very  small  point  of  bone.  It  is  the  human  bone  first  of  all 
that  in  native  opinion  gives  the  arrow  its  efficacy;  the  bone 
of  any  dead  man  will  do,  because  any  ghost  has  mana  to  work 
on  the  wounded  man  ;  but  the  bone  of  a  man  who  was 
powerful  when  alive  is  more  valued 1. 

Though  it  is  the  human  bone  that  gives  in  the  first  place 
the  deadly  quality  to  the  arrow,  yet  the  bone  must  be  fitted 
into  the  shaft  with  the  magic  charms  which  secure  super- 
natural power  to  the  weapon.  The  maker  sings  or  mutters 
charms  as  he  ties  the  bone  to  the  foreshaft ;  hence,  as  I  have 
been  told,  the  mana  is  put  in  where  the  bone  joins  the  foreshaft. 
These  charms  are  known  but  to  a  few  whose  business  it  is 
to  make  the  arrows ;  but  still  if  one  should,  as  did  the  young 
man  at  Omba  who  made  arrows  of  his  brother's  bones,  take 
the  bones  of  one  he  knew  in  life  and  call  upon  his  ghost, 
as  he  would  be  sure  to  do,  in  binding  on  the  head,  no  doubt 
his  arrows  would  be  perfectly  well  prepared.  The  'poison,' 
again,  is  an  addition  to  the  power  of  the  bone ;  the  magical 
efficacy  of  this  preparation  is  added  to  the  supernatural  power 
residing  in  the  dead  man's  bone.  When  the  bone  had  made 
the  wound,  the  dead  man's  power,  which  had  been  brought  by 
incantations  to  the  arrow,  would  make  the  wound  fatal.  The 
preparation  of  burning  juices  mixed  with  charms,  and  smeared 

1  The  true  Lepers'  Island  arrow,  liwue,  is  made  with  a  broad  white  head 
of  human  bone  with  jagged  edges,  nine  or  ten  inches  long,  and  without  any 
preparation  in  the  way  of  poison ;  and  they  use  also  poisoned  arrows  made  and 
bought  in  Mae  wo.  To  make  the  liwue  the  leg-bones  of  men  of  no  particular 
consideration  are  taken  up  out  of  their  graves.  Not  long  ago  there  was  a 
man  in  that  island,  who  out  of  affection  for  his  dead  brother  dug  him  up  and 
made  arrows  of  his  bones.  With  these  he  went  about  speaking  of  himself  as 
'  I  and  my  brother ; '  all  were  afraid  of  him,  for  they  believed  that  his  dead 
brother  was  at  hand  to  help  him. 


310  Arts  of  Life.  [CH. 

upon  the  bone  with  charms,  carries  to  the  wound  what  is 
itself  like  inflammation,  and  the  ghost  will  make  it  inflame. 

The  treatment  of  the  wounded  man  proceeds  on  the  same 
principle.  If  the  arrow,  or  a  part  of  it,  has  been  retained,  or 
has  been  extracted  with  leaf  poultices,  it  is  kept  in  a  damp  place 
or  in  cool  leaves  ;  then  the  inflammation  will  be  little  and  soon 
subside.  Shells,  which  have  been  made  efficacious  for  the  pur- 
pose by  charms,  are  kept  rattling-  above  the  house  where  the 
wounded  man  lies,  to  keep  off  the  hostile  ghost.  In  the  same 
way  the  man  who  has  inflicted  the  wound  has  by  no  means 
done  all  that  he  can  do.  He  and  his  friends  will  drink  hot 
and  burning-  juices,  and  chew  irritating  leaves  ;  pungent  and 
bitter  herbs  will  be  burnt  to  make  an  irritating  smoke;  a 
bundle  of  leaves  known  to  the  shooter  or  bought  from  a  wizard, 
a  qesis,  will  be  tied  upon  the  bow  that  sent  the  arrow,  to  secure 
a  fatal  result ;  the  arrow-head,  if  recovered,  will  be  put  into 
the  fire  ;  the  bow  will  be  kept  near  the  fire  to  make  the  wound 
it  has  inflicted  hot,  or,  as  in  Lepers'  Island,  will  be  put  into  a 
cave  haunted  by  a  ghost ;  the  bow-string  will  be  kept  taut 
and  occasionally  pulled,  to  bring  on  tension  of  the  nerves  and 
the  spasms  of  tetanus  to  the  wounded  man. 

The  preparation  of  the  poisoned  arrows  in  Aurora,  New 
Hebrides,  is  thus  described  by  a  native  writer :  '  When  they 
have  dug  up  a  dead  man's  bone  they  break  it  into  splinters 
and  cut  it  properly  into  shape,  and  sit  down  and  rub  it  on  a 
stone  of  brain-coral  with  water.  After  that  it  is  fixed  into  a 
bit  of  tree-fern  wood ;  everyone  cannot  do  that,  it  is  some  one 
who  knows  (the  charms).  When  that  is  done,  the  thick  juice 
of  no-to  (excsevaria  agallocba)  is  put  upon  it.  Then  it  is  put 
in  a  cool  place  on  the  side  wall  of  a  public  hall,  and  no  fire  is 
made  there,  so  that  the  cold  may  strike  upon  it  and  it  may 
turn  like  mould.  Then  they  dig  up  the  root  of  a  creeper  they 
call  loki,  and  come  back  and  strip  off  the  bark  and  scrape  the 
inner  fibre  into  a  leaf;  and  that,  wrapped  in  another  leaf, 
is  put  upon  the  fire.  When  it  is  cooked  this  is  wrapped  in 
the  web  from  the  spathe  of  a  cocoa-nut,  and  squeezed  into 
a  leaf  of  the  nettle-tree.    Then  with  a  piece  of  stick  they 


XVI.] 


Poisoned  Arroivs. 


smear  it  on  the  point  of  bone  to  help  the  toto. 
is  put  again  into  a  cool  place,  and  it  swells  up  in 
as  it  dries  become  smooth  again.  Then  it  is 
fastened  to  the  reed,  and  bound  round  with 
fine  string.  After  that  they  take  a  green 
earth,  which  is  only  found  in  one  place,  and 
paint  it  over1.  "When  it  has  been  painted, 
they  take  it  to  the  beach  and  dip  it  into  the 
sea-water  till  it  becomes  hard  ;  then  the  toto 
(poisoned  arrow)  is  finished.'  In  the  neigh- 
bouring island  of  Whitsuntide  they  finish 
off  with  stuff  found  on  rocks  on  the  shore, 
thought  by  them  to  be  the  dung  of  crabs,  and 
believed  to  have  much  magic  power  2. 

In  Mota,  in  the  Banks'  Islands,  the  poison 
is  made  from  the  root  of  the  climbing  plant 
loki,  cooked  over  the  fire  with  the  juice  of 
pandanus  root.  This  mixture  is  black  and 
thick,  and  is  smeared  on  the  points  of  human 
bone,  which  are  put  in  the  sun  to  dry,  and 
then  kept  five  days  indoors  wrapped  up,  when 
the  stuff  turns  white.  Another  mixture  which 
is  thought  to  cause  more  inflammation  and  to 
act  more  quickly  is  made  with  the  juice  of 
toi,  an  euphorbia.   The  points  of  these  arrows 

1  I  was  once  assured  by  a  young  naval  office]-  that  he 
had  seen  putrid  flesh  upon  the  natives'  arrows.  Asked 
whether  he  had  taken  one  into  his  hand  to  examine  it,  he 
replied  with  disgust  that  he  would  not  have  the  thing 
near  him.  He  probably  to  this  day  believes  that  he  has  the 
witness  of  his  own  eyes  to  the  truth  of  the  common  belief. 

2  For  the  origin  of  these  arrows  at  Maewo  see  the 
story  of  Muesarava.  The  writer  of  that  story  adds, '  And 
this  Maevvo  toto  is  exceedingly  mana ;  if  it  hits  any  one 
by  chance,  without  being  shot  at  him,  he  dies.  If  it  hits 
any  one  like  that  they  always  take  care  of  salt-water;  any 
one  who  has  eaten  what  is  salt  cannot  go  near  the  house 
where  the  man  lies.  And  there  is  a  filthy  custom ;  if 
any  one. has  been  with  a  woman  he  cannot  possibly  go 
near ;  if  he  goes  to-day,  the  man  will  die  to-morrow.' 


312 


Arts  of  Life. 


[CH. 


are  protected  with  caps,  and  the  arrows  themselves  carried  in  a 
quiver.  The  man  in  a  rage  who  is  ready  to  shoot  pulls  off  the 
caps  and  thrusts  them  into  his  hair,  and  grasps  a  number  of 
arrows  in  his  bow  hand.  The  shafts  of  these  Mo  arrows  are 
most  elaborately  ornamented  in  Santa  Maria.  No  arrows  are 
feathered. 

At  Santa  Cruz  the  foreshaft  is  of  palm  wood,  carved  with 
shark's  tooth   or  shell,  and  painted  red  and  white.  The 

bone  head  is  covered  with 
a  preparation  of  vegetable 
ashes,  which  gives  great  su- 
pernatural power.  The  fore- 
shaft  is  bound  at  intervals 
with  a  string  of  fibre,  which 
is  covered  with  the  same 
sort  of  preparation  which 
covers  the  bone  point ;  and 
this  binding  is  no  doubt 
done  with  charms  to  fasten 
supernatural  qualities  on  the 
arrow. 

The  common  result  of  a 
wound  from  any  of  these 
arrows,  whether  'poisoned' 
or  of  bare  bone,  is  certainly 
tetanus,  which  is  expected. 
Even  if,  however,  the  loki 
be,  as  has  been  supposed, 
some  kind  of  strychnine, 
it  is  well  established  that 


Shell  Adze.    Tokees  Islands. 


this  is  not  the  cause  of  the  disease.  If  it  be  asked  how 
the  very  common  belief  has  arisen  that  these  arrows  are 
poisoned  with  putrefying  human  flesh,  if  the  preparation  be 
wholly  vegetable  as  above  described,  I  can  but  conjecture  that 
natives  answered  '  dead  man '  to  early  traders'  enquiries. 
The  native  meant  that  the  deadly  qualities  of  the  weapon 
came  from  the  dead  man  of  whose  bone  the  head  was  made ; 


XVI.] 


Tools  and  Implements.  313 


the  European,  thinking  of  poison,  not  magic,  supposed  that 
the  poison  was  from  a  corpse.  If  it  be  asked  again  why,  if 
the  arrows  be  not  really  poisoned,  the  natives  are  so  much 
afraid  of  them  and  careful  not  to  touch  them,  it  is  enough  to 
say  that  they  firmly  believe  that  they  are  deadly,  and  that 
this  belief  will  outlast  the  belief  in  the  power  of  the  charms 
with  which  they  are  made. 

(5)  Tools  and  Implements.  Before  the  introduction  of 
metal,  the  adzes 
with  which  most 
of  native  work  was 
done  were  in  some 
islands  of  stone,  in 
some  of  shell.  The 
division  is  very  /^ 
clear:  the  Solomon 
islanders,  except  in 
Rennell  and  Bel- 

lona,  use  stone,  and  so  do  the  New  Hebrides 
people ;  the  Santa  Cruz  people,  Torres  islanders 
and  Banks'  islanders  used  shell,  for  adzes  the 
giant  clam  shell.    The  form  of  Florida  stone 
adzes  and  of  the  Santa  Cruz  shell  adzes  is 
the  same,  roughly  cylindrical,  the  cutting 
edge  being  a  segment  of  the  circumference ; 
the  stone  adzes  of  the  Eastern  Solomon 
Islands  and  the  New  Hebrides,  and  the  shell 
adzes  of  the  Banks'  Islands,  have  the  same 
general  form,  a  long  oval  section,  the  flattish 
sides  meeting  to  form  the  edge.    The  shell     Shell  Adze. 
adzes  of  Santa  Cruz  are  beautifully  finished,     Santa  Ceuz- 
those  of  the  Banks'  Islands  often  very  rough. 
When  iron  was  introduced  the  Banks'  Islands  people,  seeing  it 
in  the  form  of  hoop  iron,  were  inclined  to  call  it  heaven-root, 
(jar  tu/ca,  supposing  ships  to  come  from  beyond  the  horizon,  and 
to  have  brought  some  of  the  strong  and  hard  base  of  the  firma- 
ment; when  axes  were  seen  they  settled  into  the  use  of  the  word 


3H  Arts  of  Life.  [CH< 

talai,  clam  shell,  for  iron.  In  Florida,  Solomon  Islands,  a  stone 
adze  was  gila,  the  mz  of  San  Cristoval,  and  whence  they  took 
halo  for  iron  is  not  explained.  It  is  interesting-  to  observe  that 
in  Lepers'  Island,  the  stone  adzes  were  called  talai  maeto,  black 
clam  shell,  a  name  now  given  to  iron ;  the  native  adze  was 
evidently  at  first  of  shell,  talai,  and  when  stone  was  used  the 
old  name  was  retained.    They  still  use  the  til,  a  volute  shell, 


Shell  Adze.    Lepers'  Island. 


Stone  Adze.   San  Cristoval. 


for  working  the  inside  of  their  canoes.  Another  shell,  the 
tire,  was  used  in  the  Banks'  Islands  for  a  chisel.  The  rapidity 
with  which  the  shell  and  stone  implements  give  way  to  iron 
is  surprising.  Santa  Cruz  was  very  little  visited,  almost  un- 
visited,  ten  years  ago,  and  it  was  difficult  to  get  any  shell 
specimens  even  five  years  ago.  The  crookedness  and  slight- 
ness  of  the  wooden  handles  used  in  the  Solomon  Islands  is 
surprising.  .  For  cutting  threads,  shaving,  and  fine  carving, 


XVI.] 


Implements.    Stone-boiling.  315 


obsidian,  chert,  and  sharks'  teeth  were  used.  The  bamboo 
knife  has  hardly  been  superseded  by  steel  or  iron ;  the  edge 
will  not  stand  long,  but  while  it  stands  it  is  far  sharper  than 
a  common  steel  knife  in  hands  that  know  how  to  use  it 1. 

Potteiy  is  unknown  in  the 'islands  which  are  here  in  view, 
being  present  in  well-known  forms  in  Fiji,  and  in  ruder 
unglazed  dishes  in  Espiritu  Santo.  There  may  be  room  for 
question  whether  the  wide  circular  wooden  dishes,  tapia,  of  the 


Paltaea.  Mota. 


Shell  Adze.  Mota. 


Banks'  Islands,  and  the  deep  wooden  pots,  popo,  bought  by 
the  Florida  people  from  Guadalcanal  carry  with  them  any 
reminiscence  of  fictile  ware.  The  paltara,  used  to  chop  bread- 
fruit open  in  the  Banks'  Islands,  is  an  interesting  representation 
in  wood  of  the  shell  adze. 

Stone-boiling,  in  Mota  salo,  was  known  all  through  the 
islands,  though  not  very  much  practised  for  cooking,  at  least 

•  f/aW  58  iU  the  Bank8'  Ielands  b?  rollinS  UP  »  Btrip  of  bamboo  in  a 

spiral  form.  The  name  given  to  this  implement,  eaosao,  casts  a  doubt  upon 
its  native  origin.  1 


316  Arts  of  Life.  [CH. 

m  the  Banks'  Islands,  where  the  cream  squeezed  out  from 
grated  cocoa-nut  was  often  cooked  over  the  embers  in  the 
shells.  The  bowls  of  the  south-eastern  Solomon  Islands, 
remarkable  some  of  them  for  their  enormous  size,  some  for 
their  fantastic  shape,  all  for  their  really  beautiful  orna- 
mentation, represent  stone-boiling-  in  purpose  if  not  often 
in  use.  The  oval  wooden  bowls,  wumeto,  of  the  Banks' 
Islands  sometimes  stand  on  legs.  The  pestles  in  very  active 
use  there  for  making  mash,  lot,  in  the  broad  wooden  dishes 
are  wooden,  sometimes  ornamented  with  the  figure  of  a  bird 
at  the  upper  end,  an  almost  solitary  instance  of  carved  figure 
ornament  on  the  implements  of  those  people.  It  need  hardly 
be  said  that  all  Melanesian  people  are  mat-makers  ;  the  remark- 
able thing  is  that  in  Santa  Cruz  alone  is  found  a  loom  with 
which  beautiful  mats  are  woven  with  the  fibre  of  a  banana 
cultivated  for  the  purpose;  these  looms  are  identical  with 
those  in  use  in  the  Caroline  and  Philippine  Islands  and  in 
Borneo. 

(6)  Fishing.  A  large  part  of  the  subsistence  of  Melauesians 
is  generally  and  naturally  derived  from  the  sea,  though  the 
character  of  the  shore  modifies  the  extent  of  fishing  industry. 
Something  to  eat  with  vegetable  food  is  always  looked  for; 
and  shell-fish,  octopus,  and  such  things  from  the  reefs  are  in 
daily  request.  Fish  are  caught  by  angling  from  the  shore 
or  from  canoes,  by  nets,  by  shooting  or  spearing,  in  woven 
pots,  by  poison,  and  with  the  use  of  torches  at  night.  Hooks, 
now  generally  superseded,  were  most  commonly  made  of 
tortoise-shell ;  in  the  Solomon  Islands  the  hook  common  in 
the  Pacific  was  beautifully  made  ;  a  piece  of  mother-of-pearl, 
with  or  without  a  wooden  back,  with  a  tortoise-shell  hook 
lashed  to  it,  and  a  few  beads  on  a  short  string,  requiring  no 
bait.  The  very  small  fish-hooks  of  mother-of-pearl  and  tor- 
toise-shell, of  either  material  alone,  or  of  some  shell  which 
might  imitate  a  bettle,  at  Savo,  San  Cristoval,  Ulawa,  were 
among  the  prettiest  and  most  skilful  products  of  native 
handiwork.  The  flying-fish  is  caught  not  with  a  hook,  but 
with  a  double  prickle  of  tortoise-shell,  or  spines  from  palms. 


XVI.] 


Fishing  Implements. 


To  fish  for  these  from  a  canoe  a  very  long-  and 
light  line  is  required ;  in  Santa  Cruz  and  the 
Solomon  Islands  a 
float  is  used,  a  short 
stick,  or  wooden 
shaft  shaped  like  a 
bird  atop,  weighted 
with  a  stone,  a 
contrivance  which 
must  also  he  known 
in  the  Banks'  Is- 
lands, since  it  has 
a  name,  wo-uto, 
there 1.  The  stitch 
in  netting  is  that 

familiar  in  Europe,  Santa  Crcz  Float 
and  nets  are  made 
extremely  fine,  and  very  large  and  strong.  In  the 
Solomon  Islands  no  mesh  is  used  for  a  very  large 
net,  hut  for  a  pig-net  the  loop  is  measured  by 
the  knee,  for  a  turtle-net  by  a  man's  shoulders. 
Nets,  sometimes  fifty  feet  square,  are  used  as  seines, 
and  are  let  down  between  stages  in  shoaling 
water ;  they  are  cast  by  the  hand,  or  sunk  by  the 
side  of  a  canoe.  An  ingeuious  contrivance  is  where 
a  square  net  has  its  four  corners  kept  apart  by  two 
diagonal  elastic  rods,  at  the  intersection  of  which 
the  line  by  which  it  is  lowered  is  attached  ;  when 

1  With  reference  to  the  remarks  of  Dr.  Hickson  (Naturalist 
in  Celebes,  p.  200)  and  Dr.  Guppy  (Solomon  Islands,  p.  151),  it 
should  be  observed  that  these  floats  are  used  to  catch  only 
flying-fish,  and  that  on  account  of  their  extreme  shyness.  Ik 
the  Solomon  Island  floats,  on  which  the  figure  of  a  bird  occurs, 
the  line  is  wound  round  the  hollow  of  the  bird's  back  and  a 
projection  below  made  for  the  purpose.  For  this  the  shape  of 
a  bird  is  certainly  convenient,  and  the  genius  of  those  people 
leads  them  to  ornamental  forms.  The  Celebes  floats  seem 
certainly  to  represent  those  of  the  Solomon  Islands  in  a  remark- 
able and  instructive  way. 


3?8  Arts  of  Life.  [CH. 

a  fish  is  seen  above  the  net  the  line  is  hauled  up,  the  ends  of 
the  rods  come  together,  and  the  net  forms  a  bag-  containing 
the  fish.    Fishing  with  a  kite  is  practised  in  the  Solomon 
Islands  and  Santa  Cruz  ;  the  kite  is  flown  from  a  canoe,  and 
from  it  hangs  a  line  with  a  tangle  of  spider's  web  or  of  fibre, 
which  it  drags  along  the  water,  and  in  which  a  fish  with  a 
projecting  under  jaw  entangles  its  teeth.    In  Lepers'  Island 
small  fish  are  caught  in  nets  made  of  spider's  web ;  in  the 
Banks'  Islands  they  are  driven  by  children  into  barricades 
of  dead  coral.    A  singular  method  of  catching  sharks  is 
practised  at  San  Cristoval,  which  is  said  to  have  been 
borrowed  from  Santa  Cruz ;  an  outrigger  canoe  is  used  with 
a  bamboo  stage  on  the  outrigger  ;  one  man  paddles  the  canoe, 
another  on  the  stage  shakes  cocoa-nut  shells  strung  on  a  loop 
of  bamboo  to  attract  a  shark ;  when  a  shark  comes  near,  the 
man  substitutes  a  fish,  and  has  a  noose  ready  into  which  the 
shark  swims ;  when  caught  and  hauled  on  to  the  stage  the 
shark  is  despatched  with  a  club.    This  goes  on  some  way  out 
from  shore,  to  be  clear  of  man-eating  sharks,  for  those  caught 
in  this  way  are  eaten.    The  dugong  is  taken,  but  rarely,  at 
the  Bugotu  end  of  Ysabel.    The  reef  and  lagoon  between  Ra 
and  Motlav  is  at  times  the  scene  of  an  exciting  chase  of  fish, 
when  a  shoal  is  driven  into  the  shallow  of  the  reef  by  a  long 
line  of  natives  shouting  and  beating  the  water  with  their 
hands.    I  have  seen  at  Lakona  in  Santa  Maria,  and  no  doubt 
the  same  thing  is  seen  elsewhere,  a  large  fish-trap  in  which 
reed  fences  lead  the  fish  as  the  tide  retires  into  circular 
enclosures  from  which  they  cannot  retreat.    Walls  of  stone 
to  shut  back  fish  as  the  tide  ebbs  are  common  in  the  New 
Hebrides.    Fresh-water  fish  are  abundant  wherever  there  are 
streams  and  lakes ;  some  the  natives  recognise  as  peculiar  to 
fresh-water,  some  they  say  live  also  in  the  sea,  sale  rua  tasi ;  in 
the  mud  of  the  irrigated  gardens  of  Aurora  an  eatable  fish  is 
found.    Eels  are  abundant,  but  in  some  places  are  not  eaten. 
In  the  fas,  the  lake  of  Santa  Maria,  they  are1  very  large  ;  when 
the  water  is  low  the  natives  dig  pits  by  the  margin  of  the 
lake,  and  into  these  the  eels  find  their  way  when  the  water 


XVI.] 


Food.  Cooking. 


319 


rises ;  when  it  recedes  again  the  eels  are  left  behind  and  are 
shot  and  speared.  Names  of  rank  are  given  to  the  very 
largest  eels,  after  the  names  of  the  Suqe ;  it  is  the  fashion  to 
measure  anything  remarkable  for  size,  and  to  hang  up  the 
measuring  line  in  the  gamal\  I  have  seen  a  measure  of 
thirty  inches  the  circumference  of  an  eel  not  of  the  highest 
rank. 

(7)  Food  and  Cooking.   The  yam  no  doubt  takes  the  highest 
place  as  the  staple  food  of  Melanesians,  though  in  some 
places  what  is  commonly  known  as  taro,  the  esculent  cala- 
dium,  is  much  more  grown.    The  number  of  varieties  of 
yams  in  a  single  island  has  been  noticed  ;  there  is  much  dif- 
ference also  in  the  general  character  of  the  tuber  in  eastern 
and  western  groups  of  islands,  the  Solomon  Island  yams 
being  round  and  compact,  and  of  no  great  size,  while  in  the 
New  Hebrides  one  at  least  has  been  measured  by  the  height 
of  a  man  of  more  than  six  feet.    A  species  with  a  prickly 
vine,  the  tomago  of  the  Banks'  Islands,  mitopu  of  Santa  Cruz, 
pana  of  Florida,  liana  of  San  Cristoval,  is  very  commonly 
grown;  and  another  prickly  kind  is  sometimes  cultivated, 
which  grows  wild  in  the  Banks'  Islands,  the  qauro,  and  is 
eaten  there  grated  and  washed  in  sea- water  when  food  is  scarce. 
The  caladium  is  only  called  taro  by  the  natives  when  they 
think  they  are  speaking  English;  there  are  many  varieties 
grown  in  dry  ground  on  the  hills,  as  well  as  in  the  skilfully 
irrigated  gardens  of  Aurora,   The  giant  caladium,  via  alike  in 
the  Banks'  Islands  and  Madagascar,  is  eaten  in  the  New  He- 
brides and  the  Solomon  Islands.    Bananas  supply  much  food 
in  numerous  varieties  ;  in  Lepers'  Island  the  fruit  seems  to  be 
eaten  in  larger  proportion  than  elsewhere.    The  bread-fruit  is 
scarce  in  the  Solomon  Islands,  most  abundant  perhaps  at  Mota 
and  the  other  Banks'  Islands,  where  it  forms  an  important 
part  of  the  food  supply  when  dried  over  a  fire,  wound  round 
with  strips  of  leaves,  as  is  done  also  in  the  Solomon  Islands 
and  preserved  in  chests.    The  making  of  anything  like  the 
madrai  of  Fiji  from  fermented  bread-fruit  is  not  practised.  In 
the  Banks'  Islands  the  pith  of  the  sago-palm  is  washed  into 


3 20  Arts  of  Life.  [CH. 

starch  in  a  trough  of  the  stem,  and  cooked  in  cakes,  but  it 
hardly  ranks  as  an  article  of  common  food.  In  Santa  Cruz  it 
has  an  important  place  ;  sago  pith  cooked  whole  was  the  main 
provision  of  canoes  from  Tikopia  which  visited  the  Banks' 
Islands  one  year  during-  my  stay.  Melanesian  natives  are 
very  fond  of  mashing  yams,  taro  and  bread-fruit,  and  eat  the 
puddings  so  made  with  sauce  of  the  cream-like  juice  squeezed 
out  of  scraped  cocoa-nuts,  and  cooked  by  stone-boiling  or  in 
the  shells  upon  a  slow  fire.  The  leaves  of  an  hibiscus  like  the 
manihot  and  of  many  trees  are  cooked  in  the  ovens.  Tapioca 
has  been  introduced.  The  nuts  of  the  canarium  have  a  very 
important  place  in  native  cookery.  Though  a  good  deal  of 
cookery  is  done  by  roasting  upon  the  fire  such  things  as  fish, 
mash,  eggs,  wrapped  in  leaves  and  laid  upon  the  embers,  and 
thin  yams  continually  scraped  and  turned,  all  the  substantial 
meals  are  prepared  in  the  native  oven.  There  are  differences 
in  detail,  but  the  method  generally  is  the  same,  and  the 
result  admirable,  the  food  being  cooked  by  steam  in  its  own 
juices.  The  hole  in  the  ground  which  forms  the  oven  is 
mostly  permanent,  with  its  heap  of  stones  that  will  bear  the 
fire  lying  by  it ;  the  fire  lighted  in  the  hole  which  has  been 
lined  with  stones  heats  those  and  others  heaped  upon  it ; 
when  the  fire  has  burnt  down,  these  latter  stones  are  taken 
out  with  wooden  tongs,  the  food  wrapped  in  leaves  is 
arranged  within,  hot  stones  are  laid  between  the  larger 
parcels,  and  the  rest  of  the  hot  stones  above  all ;  the  whole  is 
shut  in  with  leaves,  or  may  be  covered  in  with  earth  ;  water, 
salt  or  fresh,  is  poured  in  to  make  steam,  and  every  escape  of 
the  steam  is  watched  and  closed.  The  process  is  lengthy,  and 
gives  much  of  the  day's  occupation  to  the  native  men,  who 
cook  for  themselves;  it  is  a  pity,  perhaps  also  because  it 
takes  less  time,  that  the  introduction  of  iron  pots  and  sauce- 
pans is  changing  the  native  cooking  for  the  worse.  A  good 
deal  of  care  is  taken  about  washing  the  hands  before  cooking, 
and  to  eat  panlepa,  dirty-handed,  is  a  discredit  in  the  Banks' 
Islands.    Fire  is  produced  by  the  stick  and  groove. 

(8)  Clothing.    Bark -cloth,  tapa,  hammered  out  from  the 


XVI.] 


at* 

Dress. 


321 


bark  of  paper  mulberry  is  made,  but  roughly,  in  Ysabel,  and 
worn  in  Florida ;  it  was  made  till  lately  in  Ulawa  and  San 
Cristoval ;  a  rough  kind,  made  perhaps  always  from  the  bark 
of  banyan  figs,  is  used  in  the  New  Hebrides.    When  such 
cloth  was  in  use  the  name  of  it,  e.g.  tivi  in  Ysabel  and  Florida, 
sala  in  Ulawa,  was  ready  for  European  cloth.    In  Aurora  gavu, 
and  in  the  Banks'  Islands  nearest  to  Aurora  gar/avii,  is  used  for 
cloth,  no  doubt  identical  with  the  Maori  kahu  and  kakahu. 
In  Mota  the  word  siopa  was  applied  at  once  to  European 
clothes,  which,  as  the  natives  knew  nothing  of  tapa,  was  sur- 
prising.  The  native  explanation  is  that  the  Tongans,  who  for 
two  years  visited  the  Banks'  Islands  and  made  a  short  settle- 
ment on  Qakea,  were  clothed  with  giqpa.    They  have  in  fact 
shifted  the  vowels  in  siapo,  Mapo  (the  Maori  Malco,  bark),  the 
name  of  bark  cloth  in  Tonga  and  Samoa.    In  Motlav,  again, 
the  word  malsam  was  applied  to  cloth,  of  which  the  first 
syllable  is  no  doubt  the  common  malo  of  Fiji  and  elsewhere. 
It  was  strange  that  among  the  people  of  the  Banks'  Islands, 
where  the  men  were  content  to  go  without  any  covering  at  all, 
the  art  of  making  a  very  handsome  and  elaborate  dress  was 
known ;  this  was  the  malo  saru,  the  malo  put  on  over  the  head, 
of  variegated  matting  work  in  four  pieces  joining  at  the  neck,' 
worn  in  dances  by  those  of  sufficient  rank  to  do  so.    The  art 
expired  some  years  ago  with  the  last  two  men  who  practised 
it     Two  malo  saru,  probably  the  only  existing  examples,  are  in 
the  British  Museum,  one  of  which  is  shewn  on  page  108  To 
all  appearance  the  work,  which  much  resembles  that  in  the 
Santa  Cruz  mats,  must,  like  those,  have  been  produced  in  a 
kind  01  loom. 

The  dress  of  women  varies  remarkably,  and  does  not  vary 

quite  in  accordance  with  the  changes  in  the  dress  of  men.  In 

Honda  and  its  neighbourhood  in  the  Solomon  Islands,  where 

the  male  dress  is  scanty  but  perhaps  sufficient,  the  women 

have  short  petticoats  of  fibre.    In  the  south-eastern  Solomon 

Islands  the  male  attire  is  very  scanty,  and  the  women  are 
content  d     th     f  The  ^  ^  ^  ^ 

amply  clad  m  what  may  perhaps  be  called  the  dress  of  the 


32  2  Arts  of  Life.  [CH. 

Polynesian  colonies,  and  the  women  wrap  their  bodies  and 
cover  their  heads  with  mats.  In  the  Banks'  Islands  the  men 
wore  nothing,  and  the  women  had  a  little  double  band,  pari, 
ending-  in  fringed  tufts,  of  platted  fibre,  sometimes  well  orna- 
mented with  a  crimson  dye.    In  Lepers'  Island  the  dress 


Bellona.    Holomon  Islands. 

of  the  men  is  the  same  with  that  of  Santa  Cruz ;  the  women 
indoors  wear  the  pari,  and  out  of  the  house  wrap  themselves  in 
ample  mats.  But  whereas  the  man's  dress  is  the  same  in 
Pentecost  as  in  Lepers'  Island,  the  petticoat  of  the  women 
again  appears  there,  and  continues  southwards  in  the  group. 


xvi.]  Money.  323 

In  Lepers'  Island  a  crimson  dye  is  applied  to  mats  through 
a  stencil  of  banana  leaf. 

(9)  Money.  There  is  some  recognized  medium  of  exchange 
in  all  the  islands  now  in  view,  but  the  shell  currency  of 
the  Banks'  Islands  and  of  the  Solomon  Islands  is  perhaps 
alone  worthy  of  the  name  of  money.    It  is  probable  that 
the  ornaments  of  the  person  most  in  vogue  have  every- 
where a  certain  relative  value,  and  pass  in  exchange  for 
food  and  other  necessaries,  and  the  general  apparatus  of 
native  life.    Besides  these  there  are  products  of  industry 
which  are  made  for  the  single  purpose  of  exchange,  and 
which  may  be  called  Mat-money,  Feather-money,  and  Shell- 
money.    The  Mat-money  is  in  use  in  the  Northern  New 
Hebrides,  Aurora,  Pentecost  and  Lepers'  Island.    The  mats 
are  long  and  narrow,  made  for  no  other  purpose  than  to 
represent  value,  and  are  in  Aurora  and  Lepers'  Island  valued 
the  more,  the  more  ancient  and  black  they  are.  Women 
plait  them ;  either  those  of  the  family,  or  women  hired  for 
the  purpose.    In  Aurora  the  name  is  malo,  the  name  of 
the  dress  which  is  worn  by  some  men  there,  as  by  all  at 
Lepers'  Island.    The  mats  are  kept  in  little  houses  specially 
built  for  them,  in  which  a  fire  is  kept  always  burning  to 
blacken  them  ;  when  they  hang  with  soot  they  are  particularly 
valued.    Their-  value,  however,  is  estimated  by  the  number  of 
folds,  which  are  counted  in  tens ;  a  mat  of  twenty  folds  is 
called  double,  one  of  thirty  folds  treble.    Though  these  mats 
will  buy  anything  of  sufficient  value  to  equal  a  mat,  they 
are  mostly  used  for  buying  the  steps  in  the  Suae  Club. 
If  a  man  wants  to  raise  funds  for  this,  he  sends  a  pig 
into  a  village  where  he  knows  mats  are  to  be  had,  and 
he  receives  mats  less  in  value  than  his  pig ;  when  he  can 
repay  the  mats  he  recovers  his  pig.    In  Lepers'  Island 
and  m  Pentecost  these  mats  are  called  maraJia.    In  the 
latter  island  red  ones,  bwana,  a  word  which  in  San  Cristoval 
means  pandanus,  are  of  most  value  ;  in  Lepers'  Island  the 
ancient  and  rotten  ones  which  have  long  hung  in  the  house 
are  very  choice,  though  the  value  still  goes  by  the  number 


324  Arts  of  Life.  [cH. 

of  folds.  There  are  three  lengths  of  mats  in  common  use; 
some  mats  are  a  hundred  fathoms  long,  some  when  folded 
ten  fathoms  ;  the  width  is  about  two  feet.  A  middle- 
sized  mat  will  buy  a  tusked  pig.  A  rich  man  will  keep 
fifty  mats  and  more  in  his  house,  hung  up  and  decaying, 
a  proof  of  ancient  wealth.  Mat-money  is  also  lent  at  interest, 
and  so  becomes  a  source  of  wealth ;  there  is  no  fixed  rate 
of  increase,  the  lender  gets  what  he  is  able  to  insist  upon, 
up  to  a  double  return.  In  these  three  islands  the  discs 
of  shell,  som,  horn,  are  beautifully  prepared  and  worked  up 
into  armlets  and  necklaces,  which  are  much  valued,  but  there 
is  no  use  of  them  as  money.  Feather-money  is  peculiar  to 
Santa  Cruz ;  it  is  made  of  the  red  feathers  from  under  the 
wings  of  a  parrot,  Trichoglossus  Massena.  The  birds  are 
caught  in  the  deep  bush,  where  they  are  very  tame,  with 
bird-lime  smeared  on  a  rod  which  a  man  carries  in  his  hand, 
and  on  which  they  perch ;  he  must  take  care  not  to  eat 
anything  hot  or  fat,  or  they  will  not  come  near  him.  The 
small  red  feathers  are  first  gummed  on  to  pigeon's  feathers, 
and  these  are  bound  on  to  a  prepared  foundation  in  rows, 
so  that  only  the  red  is  seen.  A  length  of  this  feather-money, 
called  tavau,  about  fifteen  feet  long,  is  coiled  up  and  packed 
with  peculiar  ornaments.  Short  pieces  are  made  for  con- 
venience in  arranging  about  prices.  On  festive  occasions 
the  dancing  ground,  nava,  fenced  round  with  huge  discs 
of  coral,  is  hung  with  the  uncoiled  feather-money  of  those 
who  make  the  feast.  The  people  say  that  formerly  they 
had  also  shell-money.  Though  this  feather-money  is  peculiar 
to  Santa  Cruz,  there  is  in  the  Banks'  Islands,  in  Santa 
Maria  and  Meralava,  where  the  som  shells  are  not  found, 
a  medium  of  exchange  of  the  same  character.  The  little 
feathers  near  the  eye  of  fowls  are  bound  on  strings,  and 
generally  dyed  a  fine  crimson;  these  are  used  as  neck- 
laces or  anklets,  by  way  of  ornament  and  distinction  (Me 
weiaptip,  p.  no),  but  also  pass  very  much  in  the  way  of 
money.  A  braid  not  unlike  this  was  formerly  used  in  the 
Loyalty  Islands  as  a  medium  of  exchange,  the  red  fur  under 


xvi.]  Money.  325 

the  ears  of  the  flying-fox  being"  used  in  the  same  way  as  the 
feathers.    Shell-money  in  the  Solomon  Islands  and  the  Banks' 
Islands  differs  widely  in  one  respect ;  in  the  former  it  is 
in  some  places  carefully  and  evenly  made,  and  is  of  two 
sorts  of  less  and  greater  relative  value 1,  while  in  the  latter 
it  is  all  alike  rough  and  unfinished,  only  quantity  being 
cared  for  ;  but  in  the  Banks'  Islands  the  character  of  money 
is   more   clearly  marked,  and  money-dealing  surprisingly 
developed.    In  the  Solomon  Islands,  porpoise  teeth  in  San 
Cristoval  and  Malanta,  dogs'  teeth  in  Florida  and  Ysabel, 
are  current  with  a  tolerably  fixed  value ;  of  the  dogs'  teeth 
only  that  immediately  behind  the  canines  is  valued,  and  these 
to  be  worth  much  must  be  very  white  and  sound2.  The 
shell-money  used  in  Florida  and  at  Saa  is  made  at  Alite, 
and  is  taken  in  exchange  mostly  for  pigs.    The  discs  are 
carefully  and  accurately  made  from  certain  shells  broken  and 
rubbed  into  shape,  the  holes  for  stringing  being  drilled 
with  a  pump-drill,  in  Florida  pupuia,  in  San  Cristoval  nono, 
armed  with  a  point  of  flint  or  obsidian.    These  discs  are 
used  for  ornaments  as  well  as  money.    The  money  is  either 
white,  turomhuto,  or  red,  rongo ;  all  is  generally  called  rongo, 
and  there  does  not  appear  to  be  a  definite  proportion  of  value 
between  the  two  kinds.    Six  coils,  about  ten  fathoms,  is 
called  a  rongo,  and  ten  rongo  of  red  or  white  is  an  isa. 
Anything  can  be  bought  with  shell-money;  and  the  money 
is  lent,  but  without  interest.    In  this  last  particular  the 
Banks'  islanders  are  so  advanced  that  it  is  hard  to  believe 
them  in  other  ways  so  much  uncivilized.    The  material  is 
rude  enough,  but  the  forms  and  terms  of  money-lending 
are  most  elaborate.    To  make  the  money,  the  body  of  a 
shell,  sow.,  is  broken,  and  the  tip  rubbed  on  a  stone  by  means 
of  a  pointed  stick  inserted  in  the  broken  end  till  the  inner 

1  The  Florida  money  is  smoothly  finished ;  that  used  in  Ysabel  and  Ulawa 
is  much  more  rough;  a  very  small  and  finely-finished  kind  of  great  value  is 
made  at  Haununu  in  San  Cristoval;  about  50  discs  of  this,  of  an  inch  in 
diameter,  can  be  strung  upon  an  inch  of  thread. 

■  In  Florida  1  dog's  tooth  is  equal  in  value  to  5  porpoise  teeth ;  in  San 
Cristoval  1  dog's  is  worth  1  or  2  porpoise's,  according  to  quality. 


326  Arts  of  Life.  [CH. 

hollow  of  the  shell  is  reached  ;  into  the  hole  thus  appearing 
at  the  tip  of  the  shell  the  stick  is  then  inserted,  and  the 
broken  base  ground  smooth  on  the  stone.  There  is  thus 
a  shell  used  for  each  disc,  and  no  drill  is  needed,  as  indeed 
none  is  known.  The  shell  discs  are  strung  upon  a  slender 
strip  of  the  bark  of  a  hibiscus.  The  shell-money,  sow,,  thus 
made  is  good  for  any  kind  of  purchase,  but  the  great  use 
of  it  is  in  buying  steps  in  the  Suqe  Club.  The  torn  is 
arranged  and  counted  in  coils  ;  two  sticks  are  fixed  in  the 
ground  and  the  som  is  wound,  siga,  upon  them ;  a  turn  from 
the  one  stick  and  back  again  is  tal;  ten  rounds,  tal  sangavul, 
is  a  hank  or  coil,  qat.agiu;  when  the  quantity  is  less  than 
the  qatagiu  it  is  counted  as  so  many  tal.  The  full  length 
of  the  turn  is  a  full  fathom,  the  measure  of  a  man's  arms 
stretched  out,  rova  togtogoa  ;  if  a  smaller  measure  is  used  the 
qatagiu  is  named  accordingly.  Eich  men  accumulate  large 
quantities  of  this  money;  a  hundred  qatagiu,  however,  is 
enough  to  make  a  man  rich.  Accumulation  results  from 
the  system  of  the  Suqe  and  Tamate  Clubs  above  described 
(chapters  v,  vi),  and  also  from  the  practice  of  money-lending ; 
but  according  to  native  ideas  the  unseen  spiritual  influence 
called  mana  was  the  cause  of  wealth.  The  rate  of  interest 
is  cent,  per  cent,  without  regard  to  time.  A  man  borrows, 
ami,  and  the  owner  lends,  tawe ;  a  debt,  pug,  is  thus 
established.  A  debt  is  not  only  contracted  by  borrowing, 
but  a  rich  man  upon  occasion  imposes  a  loan,  which  his 
friend  for  his  own  credit  is  bound  to  accept,  and  to  dis- 
charge with  a  double  return.  The  pressure  put  on  a  debtor 
who  does  not  pay  when  payment  is  demanded  is  admirably 
effective.  All  the  men  of  the  creditor's  place  come  and  sit, 
bringing  their  wives  with  them,  in  the  debtor's  premises  ; 
the  debtor  lights  his  fire  and  cooks  food  for  them  ;  if  the  pay- 
ment is  not  forthcoming  they  stay  over  night,  go  home  next 
morning,  and  after  a  while  repeat  the  visit.  The  debtor's 
neighbours  and  friends  pity  him  and  help  him  with  food  and 
money,  till  he  scrapes  enough  together  to  pay  the  debt. 
A  man  borrowing  money  of  a  friend  to  pay  a  debt  asks  him 


XVI.] 


Money. 


327 


to  shield  him,  ti  goro,  to  stand  between  him  and  his  creditor. 
If  a  man  borrows  money  and  lends  that  again  to  another, 
he  is  said  to  tul  the  lender,  to  treat  him  unfairly;  if  a  man 
uses  money  he  has  borrowed  of  one  man  to  satisfy  another 
creditor,  he  is  said  to  divert  the  payment,  viro  goro,  into 
another  course.    When  a  man  borrows,  say  ten  strings  of 
money,  from  another,  he  will  make  the  creditor  his  debtor 
also,  by  lending  him  say  four  strings  of  his  own  money ; 
this  smaller  loan  is  called  a  tano  ravrav,  a  drawing-place, 
and  to  make  it  is  said  to  put  down  rollers  in  the  way  as  if 
to  draw  up  a  canoe,  lango  goro,  because  it  is  thought  to  make 
the  transaction  more  easy  for  the  borrower,  who  becomes  the 
creditor  of  his  creditor,  and  cannot  so  well  be  dunned  by  him. 
To  pay  a  debt  is  to  close  it  up,  loono.    Money  transactions 
play  a  great  part  in  native  life  :  social  advance  is  secured 
by  possession  of  shell-money,  because  the  steps  in  the  Suqe 
Club  cannot  be  taken  without  it ;  social  eminence  is  main- 
tained by  it,  because  the  moneyed  man  has  his  debtors  under 
his  thumb,  and  by  the  power  he  has  of  imposing  a  loan  he 
can  make  rising  men  his  debtors  and  keep  them  back. 
By  the  Suqe  institution  money  was  kept  in  continual  cir- 
culation, alike  in  large  and  small  quantities.    The  little 
reef  island  of  Rowa  supplies  common  money,  and  also  the 
finer  sort,  which  is  used  only  as  ornament.    This  is  sometimes 
extremely  small  and  finely  made,  and  with  it,  before  the 
introduction  of  beads,  was  sometimes  strung  a  bit  of  remark- 
able stone  or  a  concretion  from  some  shell 1.    In  the  Torres 
Islands,  where  the  material  for  shell-money  is  absent,  they 
now  buy  with   beads,  which  indeed  have  in  the  Banks' 
Islands  to  some  extent  superseded  money  for  small  purchases  ; 
formerly  their  very  pretty  arrows  were  used  in  the  way  of 

1  The  discs  of  Banks'  Island  money,  which  differs  little  in  size  from  that  of 
the  Solomon  Islands,  are  about  \  of  an  inch  in  diameter.  The  length  of  ten 
upon  the  string  is  about  an  inch.  The  fine  som  ta  Rowa  is  not  more  than  ^ 
of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  as  many  as  60  discs  go  on  an  inch  of  string.  A 
puto  laJcai,  rough  pearl  from  a  giant  clam,  when  bored  with  a  rat's  tooth  for 
stringing,  will  buy  a  large  pig. 


328 


Arts  of  Life. 


[CH. 


money,  and  in  a  lesser  degree  mats,  and  boars'  tusks;  the 
head  ot  the  peculiar  pig  rawe,  with  its  tusks,  is  still  very 
valuable  there. 


Lime-box.  Ysabel. 

(10)  Decorative  Arts.  There  appear  to  be  four  distinct 
groups  into  which  the  languages  of  the  Melanesian  islands 


Pattern  on  Cocoa-nut  Water-bottle.  Ysabel. 


here  in  view  naturally  fall ;  and  each  of  these  groups  has  a 
distinctive  style  of  decoration.    The  Western  and  Eastern 


XVI.] 


Ornamentation. 


329 


Solomon  Islands  must  be  divided  into  two  groups ;  San 
Cristoval,  Ulawa,  and  Eastern  Malanta  have  their  own  style 
of  art.    Santa  Cruz  stands  per- 
fectly distinct ;  the  Banks'  Is- 
lands and  the  Northern  New 
Hebrides  must  go  together. 

1.  Beginning  in  the  west,  if 
there  be  anything  distinctive  it 
may  be  found  in  such  ornament 
as  appears  on  the  lime-boxes  of 

Ysabel.  But  there  is  and  has 
been  so  much  intercourse  with 

islands  further  west  that  the 

style  of  New  Britain  ornament 

is  represented  in  the  paddles, 

for  example,  of  Bugotu.  The 

beautifully  made  and  orna- 
mented shields  and  clubs  which 

have  been  common  at  Florida 

were  made  in  Guadalcanal- ;  the 

discs  of  clam-shell  covered  with 

a  plate  of  tortoise-shell  cut  into 

an  open-work  pattern  belong  to 

all  these  islands  to  the  west. 

Patterns  of  lines  and  circles  in 

tattooing  or  incised  on  cocoa-nut 

bottles  are   also  characteristic. 

1.  The  carvings,  paintings  and 

representations    of    scenes  of 

native  life  executed  in  San  Cris- 
toval and  its  neighbourhood  have 

been  mentioned.    Drawings  by 

native  boys,  such  as  those  on 

pages  196,  259,  would  not  be 
found  in  other  islands.  The 
decoration  and  fantastic  shapes 

of  bowls  cannot  fail  to  strike      Banks'  Island  Ear-ornament. 


33o 


Arts  of  Life. 


[CH. 


attention ;  the  nautilus-shell  inlay  on  bottles,  cups,  spoons,  is 
really  excellent.  The  artistic  faculty  of  these  people  is 
remarkable.  From  Malanta  come  combs  which  shew  extra- 
ordinary beauty  of  decoration  as  well  as  neatness  of  make ; 
but  they  are  the  work  of  the  inland  people  rather  than  of 
those  whose  skill  is  shewn  in  the  ornamentation  of  canoes  and 
canoe-houses.    3.  The  change  of  character  in  decoration  when 


Ornament.    Aurora  Island. 

Santa  Cruz  is  reached  is  unmistakeable.  The 
ornamental  bands  in  the  mats  shew  perhaps 
nothing-  distinctive  ;  but  while  the  fancy  of  the 
natives  shews  itself  in  the  shapes  into  which 
their  bowls  and  pillows  are  carved,  there  is  a 
fixed  determination  of  painted  ornament  to 
lines,  crosses,  and  stars  of  black  and  red  upon  a 
white  ground.  Their  love  of  turmeric  as  a  dye 
for  ornamented  bags  connects  them  with  the 
Polynesian  colonies,  such  as  that  in  Mae  in  the 
New  Hebrides.  They  stand  alone  in  their  love 
of  tags  and  loose  ends  by  way  of  ornament.  4.  In  the  Banks' 
Islands  and  New  Hebrides  mats,  baskets,  bags  are  skilfully 
made  and  well  ornamented;  the  decoration  of  reeds,  as  the 
shafts  of  arrows  (page  311),  and  ear-ornaments  with  incised 
line  patterns,  is  characteristic.  It  is  remarkable  that  there  is 
a  style  of  pattern  belonging  to  each  island  or  neighbourhood  ; 
in  a  handful  of  ear-ornaments,  natives  can  pick  out  each  one 


XVI.] 


Ornamentation. 


33i 


and  determine  with  certainty  where  it  was  made.  In  the 
patterns  of  tattooing",  where  it  is  used  in  these  groups,  and 
in  the  stencilled  figures  used  on  the  mats  in  the  New  Hebrides, 
the  character  of  the  ornamentation  shewn  in  the  ear-orna- 
ments is  reproduced;  just  as  tattoo  on  the  cheeks  of  the 
women  of  the  Florida  neighbourhood  follows  the  pattern 
incised  on  the  cocoa-nut  bottles. 

With  this  conventional  character  of  the  ornament  of  each 
group  or  region  there  appears  also  upon  occasion  a  remark- 
able freedom  of  ornamentation.  The  part  of  an  ornamented 
walking-stick  here  shown  was  cut  with  a  common  knife  in 
Norfolk  Island  by  a  native  of  Aurora,  who  was  not  at  all 
aware  that  he  was  executing  a  work  of  art.  A  comparison  of 
the  graceful  foliage  ornamentation  incised  on  the  back  of  a 
nut-shell  used  as  a  casket  with  the  lined  pattern  on  the  cocoa- 
nut  bottle  above,  shews  again  an  unexpected  freedom  in  the 
art  of  Ysabel. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 


DANCES.    MUSIC.  GAMES. 


(i)  Dances.  It  may  be  confidently  asserted  that  in  the 
Melanesian  islands  here  in  view  dances  have  absolutely  no 
religious  or  superstitious  character,  although  visitors  find 
'  devil  dances '  and  '  devil  grounds '  enough.  Men  and  women 
always  dance  apart ;  the  songs  which  accompany  the  dances 
are  undoubtedly  some  of  them  indecent,  and  I  would  by  no 
means  deny  that  there  are  indecent  dances,  though  I  never 
heard  of  them.  There  might  be  thought  to  be  a  superstitious 
character  in  those  dances  in  which  the  performers  are  sup- 
posed to  be  '  ghosts,'  if  it  were  not  that  ghosts  were  believed 
to  amuse  themselves  with  dancing  as  well  as  men ;  it  might 
be  thought  that  when  the  members  of  tamale  ghost  clubs 
dance  in  masks  representing  birds  or  fish  they  are  dancing  in 
honour  of  what  may  be  called  their  totems,  if  there  were  the 
least  reason  to  believe  that  the  emblems  of  the  clubs  had  any 
character  of  the  sort.  An  Ambrym  drum  set  up  when  a 
death-feast  is  celebrated,  and  carved  into  a  representation  of  a 
face,  is  no  doubt  meant  to  represent  the  deceased,  so  that  it 
may  be  said  that  dances  are  performed  before  the  images  of 
ancestors,  and  the  deceased  may  be  called  either  'god'  or 
'  devil,'  according  to  the  terms  employed ;  but  after  all  it  is 
but  a  festival  in  memory  of  some  lately  dead  member  of  the 
community,  and  the  dancing  and  drumming  are  parts  of  the 
festivity.  Women's  dances  are  everywhere  ungraceful  and 
uninteresting  ;  in  the  rorohi  of  Florida  they  sway  their  bodies 


Dances. 


333 


and  stamp  their  feet  in  a  circle ;  in  the  lenga  of  the  Banks' 
Islands  they  stamp,  and  scream  a  song-.    In  a  Banks'  Island 
feast  while  the  men  sing*  and  dance  round  the  drum,  the 
women,  two  and  two,  with  the  arms  of  each  over  the  other's 
neck,  tramp  round  the  dancing-ground  with  short  heavy 
steps,  shaking  as  they  go.    The  most  graceful  men's  dance 
I  have  seen  is  one  in  which  in  San  Cristoval  and  Saa  per- 
formers wave  dancing  clubs  as  they  represent  fighting  scenes, 
with  the  accompaniment  of  a  very  soft  and  tuneful  song.  The 
general  term  for  men's  dancing  in  Florida  is  gavai ;  in  the 
silaru  they  sit  as  if  paddling ;  in  the  IiauJiamumu  there  is  a 
concert  of  many  bamboo  pipes   blown   in  certain  tunes, 
without  a  song;  this  is  a  performance  learnt  by  men  from 
ghosts,  and  brought  over   from  Laudari  in  Guadalcanar. 
Parties  of  men  practise  these  dances  till  they  are  perfect, 
and  then  start  on  a  voyage  about  the  neighbouring  islands, 
going  a-dancing,  gavai  tona,  exhibiting  their  performance 
everywhere,  and  receiving  hospitality  and  handsome  presents 
wherever  they  go.    After  the  return  of  such  a  party  they  will 
divide  from  two  to  five  hundred  rongo,  a  large  sum  of  money, 
among  them.    In  Santa  Cruz  every  great  man  has  near 
his  house  his  dancing- ground,  nava,  fenced  with  huge  discs 
of  coral ;  the  great  aim  in  dancing  is  to  stamp  the  feet  all 
together  with  the  utmost  exactness  and  the  loudest  shock. 
Many  of  the  Banks'  Island  dances,  in  elaborate  figures  earned 
out  with  the  greatest  precision,  are  really  beautiful  and  inter- 
esting ;  the  performers,  with  their  heads  wonderfully  adorned, 
and  their  limbs  decorated  with  shining  fringes  of  unopened 
palm-fronds,  advance  and  retire  in  two  lines,  interlace  in  curves, 
cross  and  recross  in  ranks,  waving  their  arms  and  stamping 
their  feet,  on  which  rattling  anklets  of  empty  nuts  are  hung, 
to  the  beat  of  a  bamboo  drum  carried  by  a  leader,  or  beaten 
by  a  seated  performer.    To  keep  them  right  in  their  steps 
they  repeat  to  themselves  the  words  of  the  song  belonging 
to  the  dance.    In  Maewo,  Aurora,  clapping  of  hands  plays  t 
great  part  in  common  dancing  and  singing.    In  Lepers' 
Island,  when  a  hundred  or  more  men  dance  and  sing  round  a 


334  Dances.    Music.    Games.  [CH. 

drum  or  drums  in  a  hue,  <  the  earth  shakes  under  their  feet, 
and  the  land  resounds  about  them;'  and  indeed  it  is  no 
wonder  that  such  dances  give  excitement  and  delight.  The 
favourite  time  for  dancing  is  a  moonlight  night,  if  the  dance 
is  the  chief  thing  in  view  ;  the  dancing  and  drumming  of  the 
common  feast  goes  on  in  daytime. 

(2)  Songs.  Words  fitted  to  music  are  the  songs  and  poetry 
of  the  people ;  the  character  of  the  tunes  differing  more  in 
the  various  groups  and  islands  than  the  general  character  of 
the  words.  There  is  no  conception  of  poetry  without  a 
tune,  though  tunes  without  words  are  not  unknown.  In 
songs  certain  words  or  forms  of  expression,  which  are  not 
used  in  common  speech,  are  everywhere  thought  poetical  and 
appropriate,  and  words  are  lengthened  or  shortened  to  fit 
what  must  be  called  the  metre.  In  the  Banks'  Islands  the 
use  of  a  distinct  song-dialect  is  very  remarkable,  in  which  not 
only  are  words  used  which  are  never  used  in  speech,  some 
probably  archaic  and  some  borrowed  from  a  neighbouring 
island,  and  not  only  are  words  contracted  or  prolonged  to  suit 
the  tune,  but  in  each  island  the  song-language  is  so  different 
from  that  of  ordinary  speech  that  the  two  have  the  appear- 
ance of  two  dialects,  as  completely  as  in  the  Dialogue  and 
Chorus  of  a  Greek  play.  The  difference  is  least  conspicuous 
in  Gaua,  Santa  Maria,  most  conspicuous  probably  in  Mota. 
On  one  side  of  Mota  songs  are  composed  in  something  like 
the  language  of  Gaua,  on  the  other  in  something  like  that  of 
Motlav;  yet  the  language  of  no  Mota  song  is  the  spoken 
language  of  Gaua  or  Motlav,  nor  is  a  Mota  song  quite  in  the 
song-dialect  of  Gaua  or  Motlav.  Every  one  of  the  Banks' 
Islands  has  at  least  one  form  of  speech  for  songs  and  another 
for  common  use,  while  some,  like  Mota,  are  not  content  with 
two.  In  Santa  Maria,  however,  while  the  spoken  language 
of  Lakona  is  very  different  from  that  of  Gaua,  the  songs  are 
almost  if  not  quite  the  same.  A  poet  or  poetess  more  or  less 
distinguished  is  probably  found  in  every  considerable  village 
throughout  the  islands ;  when  some  remarkable  event  occurs, 
the  launching  of  a  canoe,  a  visit  of  strangers,  or  a  feast,  song- 


xvn.]  Songs.  335 

makers  are  engaged  to  celebrate  it  and  rewarded,  or  the 
occasion  produces  a  song  for  which,  in  the  Banks'  Islands  at 
any  rate,  a  complimentary  present  is  made.    In  Florida  a 
song  is  linge ;  a  song  about  some  one,  in  honour  of  him,  is  his 
song,  na  lingena  ;  in  the  Banks'  Islands  a  song  is  as,  and  is 
called  the  song  of  the  person  celebrated,  na  asina  ;  to  compose 
a  song  in  Florida  is  to  fit  it,  kanggea  na  linge,  in  Mota  it 
is  to  measure  it,  towo  as.    New  words  are  thus  fitted  to  old 
tunes,  but  new  tunes  are  invented,  as  well  as  old  ones 
modified.    In  the  Banks'  Islands  a  song  has  certain  regular 
successive  parts  with  distinctive  names,  each  introduced  by  a 
vocalic  prelude  which  marks  the  qau-as,  the  knee,  or  turn,  of 
the  song.    Some  songs  are  led  off  by  a  single  voice,  we  put, 
some  begin  with  many  voices  together,  we  saru ;  sometimes 
the  party  of  singers  is  divided,  some  start  the  song,  we  tin, 
the  rest  follow  with  an  answering  part,  we  sarav  goro.  Songs 
are  no  doubt  often  indecent  and  obscene,  but  there  are  many 
which  are  perfectly  harmless,  some  pretty  in  tune  and  words, 
some  in  which  poetry  may  be  recognized,  though  much  is 
conventional.    The  following  song  is  surely  not  devoid  of 
poetry,  and  might  be  so  translated  as  to  give  a  very  favour- 
able impression  of  native  powers.     It  was  composed  at 
Lakona,  in  Santa  Maria,  in  honour  of  Maros  in  his  absence  at 
sea,  whose  song  it  therefore  is,  and  who  speaks  in  the  exor- 
dium.   'Leale!  ale!  I  am  an  eagle,  I  have  soared  to  the 
furthest  dim  horizon.    I  am  an  eagle,  I  have  flown  and 
lighted  at  Mota.    I  have  sailed  with  whirring  noise  round 
the  mountain.    I  have  gone  down  island  after  island  in  the 
West  to  the  base  of  heaven.    I  have  sailed,  I  have  seen  the 
lands.   I  have  sailed  in  circles,  I  have  been  strongly  set.  An 
ill  wind  has  drifted  me  away,  has  drawn  me  away  from  you 
two.    How  shall  I  make  my  way  round  to  you  two  ?  The 
sounding  sea  stretches  empty  to  keep  me  away  from  you 
You,  Mother,  you  are  crying  for  me,  how  shall  I  see  your 
lace?    You,  Father,  are  crying  for  me,  how  shall  I  see  your 
face  ?  I  only  long  for  you,  and  weep ;  it  is  irksome  to  me :  I 
go  about  as  an  orphan,  I  alone,  and  who  is  my  companion? 


336  Dances.    Music.    Games.  [CH. 

Roulsulwar  (his  little  daughter),  you  are  crying  after  me 
without  the  house.'  (Repeat  this  first  part  ;  then  the  poet 
speaks  to  Maros.)  '  Youths  !  My  friend,  you  have  lingered  ; 
I  have  lingered  over  your  song.  I  have  measured  it,  and 
lengthened  out  my  voice,  the  sound  of  it  has  spread  down 
hither  to  my  place.  Ask,  hear ;  who  was  it  that  measured 
the  song  of  Maros  ?  It  was  the  song-measurer  who  sits  by 
the  way  to  Lakona.'  Repeat  the  last  part.  The  songs  of 
Aurora  strike  visitors  as  more  musical  than  most.  The 
following  is  a  translation  of  a  song  used  in  flying  a  kite  in 
Lepers'  Island.  '  Wind  !  wherever  you  may  abide,  wherever 
you  may  abide,  Wind  !  come  hither  ;  pray  take  my  kite  away 
from  me  afar.  E-u !  E-u !  Wind  !  blow  strong  and  steady, 
blow  and  come  forth,  O  Wind ! ' 

(3)  Musical  Instruments.  The  drum,  in  many  forms,  may  be 
said  to  be  the  characteristic  instrument  of  Melanesia,  yet 
there  seems  to  be  no  use  of  such  a  thing  in  Florida,  and 
perhaps  no  knowledge  of  a  native  drum  in  Santa  Cruz.  The 
common  form  of  drum  is  represented  by  a  joint  of  bamboo 
with  an  open  longitudinal  slit ;  this  may  be  seen  in  various 
sizes  from  the  largest  to  small  bamboos,  and  is  followed  in 
the  form  of  the  drums  which  are  made  of  logs  of  trees.  In 
these  the  trunk  of  a  tree  of  a  suitable  kind  and  size  is  hollowed 
from  a  long  and  narrow  opening  at  the  side,  the  lip  of  which, 
cut  thin,  receives  the  beat  of  the  drum-sticks.  These  drums 
are  very  resonant  and  well  toned,  and  can  be  heard  at  a 
great  distance.  The  skill  of  the  drummers  and  the  pieces 
they  perform  are  not  contemptible,  when  two  or  even  three 
performers  sit  down  to  one  drum  and  play  some  piece  of 
native  drum-music  in  the  Banks'  Islands,  or  when  three 
drums  of  different  size  and  tone,  as  I  have  heard  at  Saa,  are 
played  together  with  surprising  precision  and  variety.  At 
Saa  and  in  San  Cristoval  there  are  large  houses  for  the  drums  ; 
the  story  of  the  settlement  at  Saa  (page  49)  shews  how  good 
drums  are  valued.  In  the  Banks'  Islands  a  drum  is  kore,  in 
Lepers'  Island  singsing ;  a  large  singsing,  and  some  are  very 
large,  has  a  handle  left  in  the  wood  when  the  end  is  squared 


XVII.] 


Musical  Instrttments. 


337 


to  help  in  moving-  ifc,  and  has  a  little  house  built  over  it  to 
keep  it  from  sun  and  weather.  In  all  these  islands  the  drums 
lie  horizontally  upon  the  ground,  but  in  Ambrym  and  the 
Southern  New  Hebrides  they  stand  erect,  the  butt  buried  in 
the  earth  and  the  tapering  top  shaped  into  a  face.  The 

bamboo  drums  if  large  are 

held  by  an  assistant  as  the 

performer  beats,  small  ones 

can  be  carried  in  a  dancer's 

hand.     Such  instruments 

as  these  are  no  doubt  im- 
properly called  drums.  I 

have  seen  the  hollow  trunk 

of  a  tree-fern  set  up  in  the 

ground,  and  a  mat  tied 

over  it  to  form  a  drum- 
head, beaten  with  the  fists, 

and  also  a  thin  broad  slab 

of  wood,  probably  cut  from 

the  buttress  of  a  tree,  laid 

over  a  hole  dug-  in  the 
ground  and  struck  with  a 
rammer ;  these,  however 
rude,  may  be  called  true 
drums.  Panpipes,  vigo  in 
Mota,  galevu  in  Florida, 
hiembalambala  if  of  seven 
or  eight  pipes,  nggovi  if 
of  three,  in  Lepers'  Island, 
are  common;    it   is  the 

proper  thing  in  some  places  to  assist  the  instrument  with  a 
vocal  sound.  Some  galevu  have  a  double  row  of  pipes  one  of 
each  pa,  open  at  the  bottom,  the  other  Jed.  ZZ 
bamboo  pipes are  blown  in  the  Florida  Aa^amumu  dan'ce 
two  with  each  performer,  or  one  of  the  largest  size-  with 
hese  certain  tunes,  which  have  each  their  narnes,  2 p W 
in  concert  with  considerable  musical  effect.    The  reed  or 


Ambrtm  dedms. 


338 


Dances.    Music.  Games. 


[CH. 


FLORIDA  GALEVU. 


(The  treble  and  bass,  with  other  notes  between  occasionally  thrown  in : 
written  down  by  Mr.  G-.  Bailey  of  Norfolk  Island.) 


P 


3= 


rr 


-*-ZJ  t0>r, 


TT" 


TTTT 


5=^ 


i  III 


i 


-1*- 


— g-  f*-  -r- 


-1  '"'I  '-'I 


XVII.] 


Micsical  Instruments. 


339 


bamboo,  pipes  of  the  Banks'  Islands,  ivegore,  produce  a  plaintive 
little  music.    The  corresponding-  nggore  of  Lepers'  Island  is 
long-er,  some  three  feet,  and  has  four  holes,  so  that  native 
songs  can  be  played.    The  tvara,  double  flute,  of  the  same 
island  consists  of  two  lengths  of  slender  bamboo  with  the 
knot  between  them ;  on  either  side  of  the  knot  on  the  upper 
side  is  a  hole,  and  at  both  ends  two  holes  above  and  below. 
TV  hen  the  instrument  is  played  the  knot  with  its  two  holes 
g-oes  into  the  performer's  mouth,  his   outstretched  hands 
support  the  bamboo,  and  he  modulates  the  sound  with  his 
fingers  and  thumbs  on  the  holes  at  the  ends.    The  bamboo 
used  is  not  more  than  two-thirds  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  for 
a  strong  sound  is  not  liked  ;  the  music  of  the  warn  is  'excellent 
to  heai- '  in  native  ears.    In  the  Solomon  Islands  the  bamboo 
jew's-harp,  the  nene  of  Florida,  is  common,  which  is  unknown 
in  the  Eastern  Islands.    A  stringed  instrument  is  known  in 
the  Solomon  Islands,  the  kalove  of  Florida.    It  is  made  of  a 
piece  of  bent  reed  or  bamboo  a  foot  long  and  of  half  an  inch 
diameter.    From  end  to  end  of  this  two  strings  are  stretched, 
passing  over  little  bridges  which  are  pushed  up  towards  the 
end  to  tighten  them;  the  strings  are  tuned  to  one  note. 
The  performer  holds  the  curved  back  of  the  instrument  in  his 
mouth,  and  strikes  the  strings  with  a  little  plectrum  of  reed 
held  in  his  right  hand ;  with  the  fingers  of  his  left  hand  he 
holds  the  kalove  so  that  he  keeps  one  of  the  strings  per- 
manently stopped,  and  to  produce  higher  notes  can  stop  the 
free  string  as  the  tune  requires  it.    The  music  thus  produced 
is  not  very  audible  to  any  one  but  the  performer,  to  whom  it 
gives  great  delight.    Among  musical  instruments  must  be 
included  the  castanets,  of  shells  of  nuts  and  seeds,  worn  upon 
the  ankles  in  dancing,  upon  the  wrists,  and,  as  in  Santa  Cruz 
hung  upon  dancing-clubs,  for  these  are  important  accessories' 
especially  m  a  stamping  dance  such  as  the  Banks'  Island  qat 
In  the  preparation  for  a  feast  in  San  Cristoval  men  sit 
together  to  scrape  the  cocoa-nuts*,  and  as  they  scrape  follow 

i  To  scrape  the  nut  conveniently  they  use  a  seat  like  a  quadruped,  the  body 
and  head  be:ng  the  trunk  of  a  8mall  tree  and  the  legs  fourVanclL ;  the  he^U 

Z  2 


34°  Dances.    Music.    Games.  [CH. 

the  song  they  sing  with  the  motion  of  their  hands,  rattling  the 
castanets  on  their  wrists  together  with  admirable  precision  and 
variety  to  beguile  their  task.  In  the  Banks'  Islands,  to  add 
to  the  din  of  the  multitude  of  drums  big  and  little  at  a  feast, 
I  have  seen  a  man  shaking  dry  shells  from  the  heach  in  a 
bag  of  matting.  In  Aurora  they  fasten  bamboo  rods  pierced 
with  holes  to  the  tops  of  trees,  and  so  contrive  an  iEolian 
flute,  such  as  those  mentioned  by  Dr.  Tylor  in  his  'Early 
History  of  Mankind.' 

(4)  Games.  A  game  which  belongs  to  the  Banks'  Islands  and 
New  Hebrides  is  tika,  the  Fiji  tiqa,  played  with  reeds  dashed  in 
such  a  manner  upon  the  ground  that  they  rise  in  the  air  and  fly 
to  a  considerable  distance.  In  some  islands,  as  Santa  Maria,  a 
string  is  used  to  give  impetus, and  in  some  the  reed  is  thrown  also 
from  the  foot.  The  game  is  played  by  two  parties,  who  count 
pigs  for  the  furthest  casts,  the  number  of  pigs  counted  as 
gained  depending  on  the  number  of  knots  in  the  winning  tika. 
There  is  a  proper  season  for  the  game,  that  in  which  the  yams 
are  dug,  the  reeds  on  which  the  yam  vines  had  been  trained 
having  apparently  served  originally  for  the  tika.  When  two 
villages  engage  in  a  match  they  sometimes  come  to  blows. 
There  are  marks  on  the  tiqa  to  shew  to  whom  they  belonged. 
It  is  remarkable  that  in  Mota  a  decimal  set  of  numerals  is 
used  in  this  game,  distinct  from  the  quinary  set  used  on  every 
other  occasion  of  counting;  in  Florida  also  there  are  numerals 
used  in  a  game,  but  only  the  common  numerals  in  an  altered 
form.  In  the  Banks'  Islands  boys  play  at  hide-and-seek, 
rurqonaqona  ;  there  are  two  sides,  and  if  the  boy  who  is  hiding 
is  not  found  by  the  seekers,  he  suddenly  jumps  up  and  counts 
a  pig  against  them.  There  is  also  a  kind  of  prisoners'  base, 
tajjtapau ;  each  party  has  a  cooking-place,  tm,  in  which  the)' 
are  safe,  and  outside  which  they  may  be  caught.  In  Lepers' 
Island  they  have  football,  played  by  men  and  boys  in  two 
sides  between  two  fences,  with  a  native  orange,  bread-fruit,  or 
cocoa-nut;  the  goal  is  gained  when  the  ball  is  driven  out  at 

is  armed  with  a  shell  scraper.  In  the  Museum  at  Batavia  is  a  similar  seat 
with  the  tail  of  a  horse,  and  the  scraper  of  iron. 


XVII.] 


Games. 


34i 


either  end  from  between  the  fences  ;  a  pig  is  counted  for  each 
goal.    In  the  same  island  in  waliweli  tambagau  two  parties  sit 
opposite  to  one  another  in  the  moonlight ;  a  man  or  boy  from 
one  side  comes  forward  holding  the  door-shutter  of  a  house, 
tambagau,  before  him,  and  the  other  side  guess  who  he  is  and 
call  his  name;  if  they  fail  a  pig  is  counted  against  them  ;  if 
they  succeed  one  of  their  party  takes  the  door.    The  women 
play  the  same  among  themselves.    They  have  also  a  game 
like  hunt-the-slipper,  and  play  at  hiding  canarium  almonds, 
counting  pigs  in  success.  Cat's-cradle,  in  Lepers'  Island  lelegaro, 
in  Florida  honggo,  with  many  figures,  is  common  throughout 
the  islands.    I  have  seen  in  Florida  a  game  in  which  two 
parties  of  boys  tossed  backwards  and  forwards  a  rough  ball  on 
the  points  of  sticks,  the  object  being  to  keep  it  from  the 
ground  as  long  as  possible.    In  the  Solomon  Islands  the  great 
game  is  throwing  and  dodging  spears,  or  sticks  instead  of 
spears.    This  is  to  some  extent  represented  in  the  Banks' 
Islands  by  two  parties  throwing  native  oranges  at  each  other. 
At  Lakona  they  used  in  a  friendly  way  to  resort  to  the  sarevnate, 
the  shooting-ground,  and  practise  at  one  another  with  their 
bows  and  arrows.    In  the  Banks'  Islands  and  Torres  Islands, 
and  no  doubt  in  other  groups,  they  use  the  surf-board,  tapa. 
In  Mofca,  taptajoui  is  racing  to  get  first  to  a  certain  object ; 
Utitiro  is  throwing  at  a  tree  or  some  other  mark.    Archery  is 
practised  with  banana  trunks  set  up  as  targets.    Counting  is 
made  into  a  kind  of  game;  in  the  Banks'  Islands  strokes ^are 
arranged  on  the  sand,  or  on  a  board,  in  a  certain  figure 
representing  numbers,  and  these  are  counted  with  the  finger 
accompanied  by  a  whistled  tune ;  something  of  the  same  kind 
is  done  in  Florida,  sticking  fingers  into  the  sand  in  number 
according  to  a  counting  song  brought  from  Alite.  Boys 
sitting  together  in  a  narrow  ring  toss  from  side  to  side  another 
who  stands  among  them,  and  holds  himself  as  stiffly  as  he  can, 
so  that  he  is  thrown  like  a  log  of  wood.    Children  in  the 
Banks'  Islands,  when  a  rainbow  is  seen,  play  at  cutting  off  its 
end,  toiogasiosio;  if  they  can  cut  it  short  there  will  be  no  more 
rain.    There  is  in  the  Banks'  Islands  a  certain  approach  to 


34 2  Dances.    Mtisic.  Games. 


acting ;  a  man  will  imitate  the  voice  and  gestures  of  another, 
the  gait  of  a  cripple,  the  fury  of  a  man  in  a  rage,  or  will 
pretend  to  be  a  woman,  for  the  amusement  of  a  crowd. 

(5)  Toys.  Kites,  used  in  fishing  in  the  Solomon  Islands 
and  Santa  Cruz,  are  used  as  toys  in  the  Banks'  Islands  and  New 
Hebrides,  though  not  commonly  of  late  years.  They  have  their 
season,  being  made  and  flown  when  the  gardens  are  being 
cleared  for  planting.  The  kite  is  steadied  by  a  long  reed  tail, 
and  a  good  one  will  fly  and  hover  very  well.  The  name  is  in 
the  Banks'  Islands  rea,  in  Lepers'  Island  mala,  an  eagle.  The 
use  of  the  bull-roarer,  buro,  in  the  Mysteries  at  Florida,  has 
been  mentioned.  It  is  there  only  that  any  superstitious 
character  belongs  to  it.  There  is  no  mystery  about  it  when 
it  is  used  in  the  Banks'  Islands  to  drive  away  a  ghost,  as 
in  Mota,  where  it  is  called  nanamatea,  death-maker,  or  to 
make  a  mourning  sound,  as  in  Merlav,  where  it  is  called  v:o- 
rung-tamb,  a  wailer,  and  used  the  night  after  a  death.  It 
is  a  common  plaything;  in  Vanua  Lava  they  call  it  mala, 
a  pig,  from  the  noise  it  makes ;  in  Maewo  it  is  tal-viv,  a 
whirring  string  ;  in  Araga  it  is  merely  tavire  faia,  a  bit  of 
bamboo.  Battles  are  merely  toys ;  in  the  Banks'  Islands 
the  dry  seed-pods  of  a  cassia  are  tied  in  a  rowT  between  two 
strips  of  bamboo.  In  the  same  group  the  name  of  a  toy, 
lajilagolago,  has  been  adopted  for  the  English  wheel,  and  after 
that  for  any  wheeled  vehicle  or  machine.  Children  used  to 
make  a  broad  hoop  of  a  sago  frond,  and  set  it  running  down 
hill,  with  the  cry  taplagolago !  '  it  runs  of  itself ! '  Tops  are 
made  in  the  Solomon  Islands  of  the  nut  of  a  palm  and  a  pin 
of  wood,  the  whole  visible  length  of  which,  between  two  and 
three  inches  long,  is  below  the  head.  To  spin  the  top  a 
doubled  string  is  wound  round  the  shaft,  and  the  two  ends 
are  pulled  smartly  asunder.  A  similar  top  was  used  in  Pitcairn 
Island  by  the  half  Tahitian  children  of  the  Bounty  Mutineers. 

Whistling  was  hardly  in  native  use  as  a  way  of  producing  a 
tune,  though  a  song  might  be  whistled  without  words.  In 
the  Banks'  Islands  there  is  a  way  of  whistling  a  man's  name 
to  call  him,  icosivos-loglog. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 


MISCELLANEOUS. 


(i)  Cannibalism.  It  may  be  safely  asserted  that  in  the 
Banks'  Islands  and  Santa  Cruz  there  has  been  no  cannibalism, 
though  the  natives  were  not  ignorant  of  the  practice  of  it  by 
others.  When  some  fifty  years  ago  a  party  of  men  from 
Tonga,  as  it  is  remembered,  left  the  little  island  of  Qakea,  on 
which  they  had  for  a  short  time  settled,  the  proofs  that  they 
had  eaten  tliose  whom  they  had  killed  in  the  fighting  which 
preceded  their  departure  caused  such  horror  and  rage  against 
them  that  a  party  returning  a  year  after  to  the  same  place 
was  immediately  attacked.  In  the  Solomon  Islands  it  is 
strange  that  the  practice  has  recently  extended  itself.  It  is 
asserted  by  the  elder  natives  of  Florida  that  man's  flesh  was 
never  eaten  except  in  sacrifice,  and  that  the  sacrificing  of  men 
is  an  introduction  of  late  times  from  further  west.  The  coast 
people  of  Bugotu  say  the  same  of  themselves ;  but  they  freely 
accuse  the  inland  people  of  the  same  island,  with  whom  they 
have  a  good  deal  of  free  intercourse,  and  whose  speech  is  not 
very  different  from  their  own,  of  being  cannibals,  and  of  killing 
men  for  the  sake  of  eating  them.  A  few  years  ago  one  Nunu, 
an  inland  chief,  was  believed  to  say  that  pig's  flesh  was  bad 
and  man's  flesh  sweet  to  him  ;  a  man  who  had  mounted  to  his 
place  and  found  himself  in  a  sweat  would  sit  down  to  cool 
before  he  showed  himself ;  Nunu  took  the  sweat  as  a  sign  of 
fatness,  and  would  desire  to  eat  him.    In  Ulawa,  again,  there 


344  Miscellaneous.  [CH< 

is  no  eating  of  men;  it  is  thought  that  the  lio'a,  the  ghosts  of 
power,  do  not  like  it ;  and  at  Saa  it  was  not  the  old  custom  of 
the  place,  the  elder  men  even  now  will  have  nothing  to  do 
with  it.    The  younger  men  have  taken  to  it,  and  eat  the 
bodies  of  men  killed  in  battle;    they  have  followed  the 
custom  of  men  from  the  eastern  coast  who  have  lived  with 
them,  and  of  the  Bauro  men  of  San  Cristoval  whom  they 
have  visited.    The  natives  of  San  Cristoval  not  only  eat  the 
bodies  of  those  who  are  slain  in  battle,  but  sell  the  flesh. 
To  kill  for  the  purpose  of  eating  human  flesh,  though  not 
unknown,  is  rare,  and  is  a  thing  which  marks  the  man  who 
has  done  it.    This  is  a  subject  on  which  stories  which  come 
from  traders  are  not  very  trustworthy.    In  the  Northern 
New  Hebrides  there  is  no  doubt  cannibalism.     I  know 
nothing  about  it  in  Aurora,  but  have  been  told  by  an 
eye-witness  of  what  is  done  in  Pentecost.    After  a  bitter 
fight  they  would  take  a  slain  enemy  and  eat  him,  as  a  sign  of 
rage  and  indignation ;  they  would  cook  him  in  an  oven,  and 
each  would  eat  a  bit  of  him,  women  and  children  too.  When 
there  was  a  less  bitter  feeling,  the  flesh  of  a  dead  enemy  was 
taken  away  by  the  conquerors  to  be  cooked  and  given  to  their 
friends.    In  the  neighbouring  islands,  and  at  the  back  of 
his  own  island,  said  my  informant,  they  kill  for  the  sake  of 
eating.    In  Lepers'  Island  they  still  eat  men.    It  was  not  the 
common  fashion,  however,  to  eat  enemies  killed  in  fail-  fight- 
ing, it  was  a  murderer  or  particularly  detested  enemy  who  was 
eaten,  in  anger,  and  to  treat  him  ill ;  such  a  one  was  cooked 
like  a  pig,  and  men,  elder  women  and  boys  ate  him.  The 
boys  were  afraid,  but  were  made  to  do  it.    It  is  the  feeling 
there  that  to  eat  human  flesh  is  a  dreadful  thing,  a  man- 
eater  is  one  afraid  of  nothing ;  on  this  ground  men  will  buy 
flesh  when  some  one  has  been  killed,  that  they  may  get  the 
name  of  valiant  men  by  eating  it.    A  certain  man  in  Lepers' 
Island  mourned  many  days  for  his  son,  and  woidd  not  eat  till 
he  bought  a  piece  of  human  flesh  for  himself  and  his  re- 
maining boy ;  it  was  a  horrid  thing  to  do,  appropriate  to  his 
gloomy  grief. 


* 


win.]  Heads.  Castaivays. 


345 


(2)  Heads.    Head-hunting-  is  not  practised  by  any  of  the 
natives  eastwards  from  Ysabel ;  that  is  to  say,  they  do  not 
make  expeditions  for  the  sole  purpose  of  obtaining"  heads.  In 
Bugofcu,  the  south-eastern  extremity  of  Ysabel,  the  people  have 
suffered  and  still  suffer  most  seriously  from  the  attacks  of  the 
head-hunters  from  beyond,  whose  expeditions,  following  the 
coasts  from  a  great  distance,  and  sometimes  for  months,  have 
reached  Malanta  and  Guadalcanal",  in  one  most  disgraceful 
instance  the  head-hunters  being  brought  to  Florida  in  an 
European  vessel.    The  practice,  however,  of  taking  heads  and 
preserving  them  as  signs  of  power  and  success  belongs  to  the 
Solomon  Islands  generally.    The  heads  of  enemies  killed  in 
fight  are  preserved  as  trophies,  and  set  out  on  stages  as  in 
Florida,  or  hung  up  under  the  eaves  of  the  canoe-house  as  in 
San  Cristoval.    When  a  chief  in  the  exercise  of  his  authority 
had  a  man  killed  for  an  offence,  or  had  him  murdered  out  of 
revenge  or  hatred,  or  for  a  sacrifice,  he  added  the  head  to  his 
collection  ;  it  was  a  sign  of  his  power  and  greatness.  Hence, 
as  the  more  heads  he  could  show  the  more  his  power  was  in 
view,  he  was  ready  on  every  opportunity  and  on  any  pretext 
to  take  a  life  and  a  head.    When  a  chief  had  a  man  killed,  he 
woidd  keep  the  head,  but  sent  the  legs  and  arms  to  his  neigh- 
bours, to  shew  what  he  had  done.    If,  for  example,  an  accused 
man  got  away  from  Mboli  in  Florida  to  Savo,  the  Mboli  chief 
would  send  a  request,  backed  by  a  present  of  money,  to  the 
Savo  chief  to  have  him  killed ;  the  Savo  chief  would  keep 
the  head  and  send  a  leg  or  arm  to  Florida,  where  the  chief 
would  hang  it  up  to  shew  his  power.    The  heads  thus  taken 
and  preserved  are  distinct  from  those  of  deceased  relatives, 
which  are  kept  as  memorials  of  affection.    Skulls  may  be 
seen  suspended  equally  at  the  entrance  of  a  Solomon  Island 
oka  and  a  New  Hebrides  gamal,  but  the  signification  is  in 
all  cases  probably,  distinct. 

(3)  Castaways.  A  stranger  as  such  was  generally  through- 
out the  islands  an  enemy  to  be  killed.  Thus  at  Florida  a 
stranger  who  had  escaped  from  a  wreck  on  to  an  islet  was 
killed  when  seen,  and  spoken  of  as  a  cocoa-nut  that  had  floated 


34-6  Miscellaneous.  rCH> 

ashore.  ^  There  was  a  common  belief  that  a  stranger  would 
hnng  with  him  disease  or  some  other  mischief.  But  it  was 
often  a  question  whether  a  castaway  was  a  stranger.  If  he 
were  recognised  as  belonging  to  an  hostile  district,  there  was 
no  doubt  of  his  fate ;  but  if  he  fell  into  the  hands  of  those 
to  whose  division,  kema  or  veve,  he  belonged,  he  would  prob- 
ably be  saved.  It  is  a  not  uncommon  thing  that  canoes 
should  be  blown  from  Santa  Cruz  and  the  Beef  Islands  to 
Malanta  and  Ulawa;  the  men  on  board  them  were  not 
wholly  strangers,  though  personally  unknown ;  they  were  men 
and  from  known  lands,  not  strange  beings  like  white  men 
from  without  the  world.  They  were  therefore  received  as 
guests,  sometimes  establishing  themselves  after  a  while  by 
marriage,  sometimes  waiting  an  opportunity  to  return. 
Many  single  canoes  from  time  to  time  have  been  blown  away 
from  Polynesian  islands,  and  have  drifted  to  the  Banks' 
Islands ;  in  many  cases  the  castaways  have  been  kindly  treated, 
and  have  added  a  strain  to  the  native  race.  Within  the 
last  forty  years  men  from  Tikopia  have  twice  been  most 
kindly  received  at  Mota. 

(4)  Slaves.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  slavery  properly  so 
called.  In  head-hunting  expeditions  prisoners  are  made  for 
the  sake  of  their  heads,  to  be  used  when  occasion  requires,  and 
such  persons  live  with  their  captors  in  a  condition  very 
different  from  that  of  freedom,  but  they  are  not  taken  or 
maintained  for  the  purposes  of  service.  In  the  same  islands 
when  a  successful  attack  and  massacre  enriches  the  victors 
with  many  heads,  they  spare  and  carry  off  children,  whom  tkey 
bring  up  among  their  own  people.  Such  a  seka  will  certainly 
be  killed  for  a  head  or  for  a  sacrifice  before  any  native  member 
of  the  community,  but  he  lives  as  an  adopted  member,  shares 
the  work,  pleasures,  and  dangers  of  those  with  whom  he 
dwells,  and  often  becomes  a  leading  personage  among  them. 
A  refugee  or  a  castaway  is  not  a  slave  but  a  guest;  his  life 
is  naturally  much  less  valued  than  that  of  a  man  of  the  place, 
and  useful  services  are  expected  from  him,  while  he  mixes 
freely  and  on  equal  terms  with  the  common  people. 


win.]        Burying  and  B timing  Alive.  347 


(5)  Burying  alive.  Nothing  seems  more  inhuman  than  the 
practice  of  burying  sick  and  aged  people  alive,  yet  it  is 
certain  that  when  this  was  done  there  was  generally  a  kind- 
ness intended.  It  is  true  that  sometimes  the  relatives  of  the 
sick  became  tired  of  waiting  upon  them,  and  buried  them 
when  they  thought  they  ought  to  be  ready  for  it ;  but  even 
in  such  cases  the  sick  and  aged  acquiesced.  It  was  common 
for  them  to  beg  their  friends  to  put  them  out  of  their  misery. 
Some  years  ago  a  man  at  Mota  buried  his  brother,  who  was 
in  extreme  weakness  from  influenza  ;  but  he  heaped  the  earth 
loosely  over  his  head,  and  went  from  time  to  time  to  ask 
him  whether  he  were  still  alive.  Of  late  years,  though  old 
people  ask  for  it,  their  friends  will  not  consent.  Not  long 
ago  in  Pentecost,  a  woman  after  a  lingering  sickness  in  a  time 
of  famine  was  buried,  and  was  heard  for  three  days  crying 
in  her  grave.  In  Lepers'  Island  the  patient  was  sometimes 
strangled,  with  his  own  consent \ 

(6)  Burning  alive.  This  has  only  been  heard  of  at  Araga, 
Pentecost  Island.  In  fighting  time  there,  if  a  great  man 
were  very  angry  with  the  hostile  party,  he  would  burn  a 
wounded  enemy.  When  peace  had  been  made,  and  the  chiefs 
had  ordered  all  to  behave  well  that  the  country  might  settle 
down  in  quiet,  if  any  one  committed  such  a  crime  as  would 
break  up  the  peace,  such  as  adultery,  they  would  tie  him  to  a 
tree,  heap  firewood  round  him,  and  burn  him  alive,  a  proof 
to  the  opposite  party  of  their  detestation  of  his  wickedness. 
This  was  not  done  coolly  as  a  matter  of  course  in  the  execu- 
tion of  a  law,  but  as  a  horrible  thing  to  do,  and  done  for  the 
horror  of  it ;  a  horror  renewed  in  the  voice  and  face  of  the 
native  who  told  me  of  the  roaring  flames  and  shrieks  of 
agony. 

1  In  the  same  island,  in  tbe  bush  country,  there  was  a  great  man  who  had 
a  poor  brother.  In  a  time  of  famine  the  poor  man  stole  food,  not  asking  food 
from  his  brother,  or  taking  it  from  him.  The  chief  buried  his  brother  alive, 
in  spite  of  his  own  wife's  entreaties,  and  the  poor  man's  supplications  ;  he 
bound  him,  dug  a  grave,  put  mats  in  it,  threw  him  in  and  buried  him.  The 
act  was  shocking  to  the  opinion  of  the  islanders,  but  it  marked  a  »reat  man 
who  would  do  what  he  chose. 


34§  Miscellaneous.  rCH( 

(7)  Heavenly  Bodies.  There  is  no  appearance  of  a  belief 
that  any  heavenly  bodies  are  living  beings  ;  in  the  Banks' 
Islands  the  Sun  and  Moon  are  thought  to  be  rocks  or  islands. 
In  Lepers'  Island  the  story  is  told  that  the  Sun  and  the 
Moon  quarrelled  while  the  Sun  was  making  a  mash  of  wild 
yam,  and  that  he  threw  the  mess  in  a  rage  at  the  Moon's  face, 
on  which  the  splashes  are  to  be  seen;  but  this  is  told  without 
any  serious  belief.  It  is  commonly  believed  that  there  is  a 
human  being,  male  or  female,  in  the  Moon.  The  stories  of 
Vulaninggela  and  Kamakajaku  shew  the  belief  in  Florida  and 
Ysabel  that  there  is  a  person  who  goes  with  the  Sun  and 
whose  name  is  Sun,  rather  than  fat  the  Sun  is  a  person.  In 
Florida  the  name  of  the  Man  in  the  Moon  is  Ngava ;  when 
the  Moon  rises  full  they  cry  '  There  is  Ngava  sitting.'  Every 
new  moon  is  thought  to  be  really  new.  No  cause  is  supposed 
for  eclipses,  unless  it  be  the  magic  of  some  weather-doctor ; 
an  eclipse  is  a  wonder,  a  portent,  bringing  an  appalling  sense 
of  danger,  which  finds  expression  in  shouting,  blowing  conchs, 
and  beating  house  roofs,  with  no  very  distinct  purpose  of 
driving  the  fearful  thing  away.  Eclipses  of  the  sun  are  not 
recognised  as  occurring  at  Mota.  "When  a  remarkable  comet, 
called  in  the  Banks'  Islands  a  'smoking  star,'  appeared  in 
the  year  1882,  the  Lepers'  islanders  blew  conchs  to  drive  it 
away,  or  at  least  to  divert  the  mischief.  A  falling  star  is 
the  same  sort  of  portent ;  some  great  man  will  die,  there  will 
be  an  attack  of  enemies.  The  appearance  of  two  stars 
close  together,  warue  in  Lepers'  Island,  signifies  war.  The 
Solomon  Islands  people  are  more  concerned  about  the  stars 
than  their  Eastern  brethren,  perhaps  because  of  their  longer 
voyages ;  the  Santa  Cruz  people  and  Reef  islanders  excel  all 
the  rest  in  their  practical  astronomy.  The  Banks'  islanders 
and  Northern  New  Hebrides  people  content  themselves  with 
distinguishing  the  Pleiades,  by  which  the  approach  of  yarn 
harvest  is  marked,  and  with  calling  the  planets  masoi,  from  their 
roundness,  as  distinct  from  vitu,  stars.  In  Florida  the  early 
morning  star  is  called  gama  ni  votu,  the  quartz  pebble  for 
setting  off  to  sea ;  when  it  rises  later  it  is  gama  ni  ndani, 


.win.]         Heavenly  Bodies.  Seasons. 


349 


the  shining-  stone  of  light ;  the  Pleiades  are  togo  ni  samu,  the 
company  of  maidens  ;  Orion's  belt  is  the  peko,  the  war  canoe  ; 
the  evening-  star  is  vaovarongo  diva,  listen  for  the  oven,  because 
the  daily  meal  is  taken  as  the  evening  draws  on ;  stars  are 
called  dead  men's  eyes.  At  Saa  the  Southern  Cross  is  ape, 
the  net,  with  four  men  letting  it  down  to  catch  the  palolo, 
and  the  Pointers  are  two  men  cooking  what  has  been  caught, 
because  the  palolo  appears  when  one  of  the  Pointers  appears 
above  the  horizon  ;  the  Pleiades  are  ajourunge,  the  tangle  ;  the 
Southern  Triangle  is  Three  men  in  a  canoe;  Mars  is  the 
Red  Pig. 

(8)   Month  and  Seasons.    The  moon  is  naturally  the 
measure  of  time ;  there  is  no  native  notion  of  a  year  as  a 
period  of  fixed  time  ;  the  word,  tan  or  niulu,  which  corresponds 
most  nearly  to  the  word  year,  signifies  a  season,  and  so  now 
the  space  of  time  between  recurring  seasons ;  thus  the  yam 
has  its  tau,  its  season  of  five  moons  from  the  planting,  when 
the  erythrina  is  in  flower,  till  the  harvest  after  the  palolo 
has  come  and  gone  ;   the  bread-fruit  has  its   tau  during 
the  winter  months  ;  the  banana  and  the  cocoa-nut  have  no 
tau,  being  at  all  times  in  fruit.    The  notion  of  a  year  as  the 
time  from  yam  to  yam,  from  palolo  to  palolo,  has  been 
readily  received  ;  it  is  very  doubtful  if  such  a  conception 
is  anywhere  purely  native.    It  is  impossible  to  fit  the  native 
succession  of  moons  into  a  solar  year ;  months  have  their 
names  from  what  is  done  and  what  happens  when  the  moon 
appears  and  while  it  lasts  ;   the  same  moon  has  different 
names.    If  all  the  names  of  moons  in  use  in  one  language 
were  set  in  order  the  periods  of  time  would  overlap,  and  the 
native  year  would  be  artificially  made  up  of  twenty  or  thirty 
months.    The  moons  and  seasons  of  Mota  in  the  Banks' 
Islands  may  serve  as  an  example.    The  garden  work  of  the 
year  is  the  principal  guide  to  the  arrangement,  the  succession 
of  (i)  clearing  garden  ground,  uma  ■  (3)  cutting  down  the 
trees,  tara  ■  (3)  turning  over  and  piling  up  the  stuff,  rakasag; 
(4)  burning  it,  sing  ;  (5)  digging  the  holes  for  yams,  nur,  and 
planting,  riv.    Then  follows  the  care  of  the  yam  plants  till 


35°  Miscellaneous.  [CH. 

the  harvest,  after  which  preparation  for  the  next  crop  begins 
again.  At  the  same  time  the  regular  winds  and  calms  are 
observed,  the  spring  of  grass,  the  conspicuous  flowering  of 
certain  trees,  the  bursting  into  leaf  of  the  few  deciduous  trees. 
When  a  certain  grass,  magolo,  springs,  the  winter  as  it  must 
be  called  is  over  ;  when  the  erythrina,  rara,  is  in  flower  it 
is  the  cool  season  ;  magoto  therefore  and  rara  are  names  of 
seasons  in  native  use,  and  answer  roughly  to  summer  and 
winter.  The  strange  and  exciting  appearance  of  the  well- 
known  annelid,  the  palolo,  un,  sets  a  wide  mark  on  the 
seasons.  The  April  moon  coincides  pretty  well  with  the 
time  of  the  magolo  qaro,  the  fresh  grass ;  clearing,  uma,  of 
gardens  goes  on,  the  trade  wind  is  steady.  This  is  followed 
by  the  magoto  rango,  the  withered  grass  ;  both  are  months 
of  cutting  down  trees  in  the  gardens,  vule  taratara,  and 
in  the  latter  the  stuff  is  burnt.  In  July  the  erythrina,  rara, 
begins  to  flower,  it  is  the  nago  rara,  the  face  of  winter ; 
gardens  are  fenced,  it  is  a  moon  of  planting  yams,  vule  vutvut. 
Planting  continues  into  August,  when  the  erythrina  is  in 
full  flower,  tur  rara,  the  gaviga  Malay  apple  flowering  at 
the  same  time  ;  the  south-east  wind  gauna  blows  ;  the  yams 
begin  to  shoot,  and  are  stuck  with  reeds.  In  the  next 
month  the  erythrina  puts  out  its  leaves,  it  is  the  end  of  it, 
here  rara  ;  the  yam  vines  run  up  the  reeds  and  are  trained, 
tanr,  upon  them ;  the  reeds  are  broken  and  bent  over,  ruqa, 
to  let  them  run  freely ;  the  ground  is  kept  clear  of  weeds  ; 
the  tendrils  curl,  and  the  tubers  are  well  formed.  Then 
come  the  months  of  calm,  when  three  moons  are  named  from 
the  un  palolo,  first  the  un  rig,  the  little  mi,  or  the  bitter, 
u/i  gogona,  when  at  the  full  moon  a  few  of  the  annelids  appear. 
It  is  now  the  tau  matna,  the  season  of  maturity;  yams  can  be 
eaten,  and  if  the  weather  is  favourable  a  second  crop  is 
planted.  The  m  lava,  great  palolo,  follows,  when  at  the 
full  moon  for  one  night  the  annelid  appears  on  the  reefs 
in  swarms ;  the  whole  population  is  on  the  beach  taking  up 
the  un  in  every  vessel  and  with  every  contrivance.  This 
is  the  moon  of  the  yam  harvest;  the  vines  are  cut,  goro, 


xvm.]  Mota  Months.    Narcotics.  351 


(in  old  days  this  was  done  with  a  shell),  and  the  tubers 
very  carefully  taken  up  with  digging-  sticks  to  be  stored. 
A  few  un  appear  at  the  next  moon,  the  werei,  which  may 
be  translated  the  rump,  of  the  un.  In  this  moon  they 
begin  again  to  nma,  clear  the  gardens ;  the  wind  blows  again 
from  the  west,  the  ganoi,  over  Vanua  Lava.  It  is  now  Novem- 
ber or  December,  the  logalau  wind  blows  from  the  north-west ; 
it  is  exceedingly  hot,  fish  die  in  the  shallow  pools,  the  reeds 
shoot  up  into  flower;  it  is  the  moon  of  shooting  up,  vide 
u-o/fforo.  The  next  month  is  the  vusiaru,  the  wind  beats  upon 
the  easuarina  trees  upon  the  cliffs ;  the  next  again  is  called 
tetemavuru,  the  wind  blows  hard  and  drives  off  flying  frag- 
ments from  the  seeded  reeds;  these  are  hurricane  months. 
The  last  in  order  is  the  month  that  beats  and  rattles,  lamasag 
noronoro,  the  dry  reeds ;  the  wind  blows  strong  and  steady, 
work  is  begun  again,  they  rakasag,  to  dry  the  rubbish  of 
their  clearings,  and  make  ready  the  fences  for  new  gardens. 
By  this  time  the  heat  is  past,  the  grass  begins  to  spring 
again,  and  the  winter  months  return. 

(9)  Narcotics.    The  use  of  the  areca  nut  mbua,  chewed 
with  the  betel  leaf,  with  the  addition  of  coral  lime,  is  universal 
in  the  Solomon  Islands  and  Santa  Cruz,  and  extends  to 
Tikopia ;  to  the  eastward  it  is  unknown.    Solomon  islanders 
on  their  way  to  Norfolk  Island  look  wistfully  at  a  species  of 
areca-palm  in  the  Torres  Islands,  the  nuts  of  which  the 
natives  of  that  group  sometimes  chew  to  quiet  hunger,  but 
which  will  not  do  for  those  who  know  the  mbua,  and  they  can 
replenish  their  stock  of  betel  leaves  in  the  New  Hebrides 
where  that  pepper  grows  naturally,  but  they  feel  that  they 
have  passed  into  a  foreign  region.    In  the  Banks'  Islands  and 
Wew  Hebrides  they  drink  the  infusion  of  the  root  of  the  Piper 
methyshcum  well  known  as  kava,  called  gea  at  Mota,  malowo 
m  Aurora.    This  is  in  the  Banks'  Islands  so  recent  an  intro- 
duction that  the  use  of  .it  had  not  spread  to  Santa  Maria  a 
few  years  ago.    The  difference  in  the  mode  of  preparation 
seems  to  pomt  to  two  distinct  sources  or  times  of  introduction. 
In  the  Banks  Islands  drinking  the  gea  is  called  woana ;  the 


35 2  Miscellaneotcs.  rCHi 

root  is  chewed  by  the  drinker ;  when  the  fibres  are  separated 
a  little  water  is  taken  into  the  mouth  to  assist  in  squeezing 
out  the  saliva,  water  is  added  again  in  the  cocoa-nut-shell  cup, 
and  the  fibres  being  removed  and  well  squeezed  over  the  cup 
the  potion  is  ready.  In  Aurora  the  malowo  is  pounded  with 
a  rough  coral  pestle  and  mortar.  The  moderate  use  of  this 
narcotic  has  no  bad  effect ;  excess,  which  is  more  common  per- 
haps in  the  New  Hebrides,  makes  a  man  listless  and  stupid. 
The  plant  used  is  not  indigenous ;  there  is  indeed  a  pepper  of 
the  same  species  very  common,  but  it  will  not  do  for  the 
woana.  There  is  a  certain  sacred  character  about  the  plant, 
as  has  been  shewn,  and  the  use  of  it  is  confined  to  men.  The 
introduction  of  tobacco  into  common  use  in  the  Northern  New 
Hebrides  and  Banks'  Islands  is  quite  recent,  but  the  people 
are  now  given  up  to  the  use  of  it.  Smoking  was  universal  in 
the  Solomon  Islands,  at  Florida,  Ysabel,  and  San  Cristoval, 
thirty  years  ago,  with  men,  women,,  and  infant  children,,  and 
the  tobacco  was  grown  and  prepared  by  the  natives ;  yet  it 
was  not  known  at  Saa  at  that  time,  where  it  has  since  been 
introduced  from  Arosi  in  San  Cristoval,  and  the  elder  men  at 
Florida  remember  when  it  was  a  new  thing  in  their  childhood. 
There  has  been  for  many  years  a  good  deal  of  intercourse 
with  whalers  at  San  Cristoval ;  they  have  no  native  name  for 
tobacco  there,  and  I  believe  never  grew  it ;  its  introduction 
then  is  readily  accounted  for.  In  Florida  the  native-grown 
tobacco,  now  discarded  for  the  far  stronger  tambaika,  was  called 
vavuru,  and  the  dried  leaves  were  made  up  in  twists  ;  the  pipe, 
formerly  made  of  a  shell  and  a  reed  in  evident  imitation  of  the 
European  pipe,  is  still  pipiala  ;  the  old  people  say  that  the 
seed  had  come  from  a  ship  x. 

1  Logana  at  Florida,  whom  I  should  not  take  to  be  more  than  6o  years  old, 
was  grown  up  when  he  first  saw  a  ship.  The  first  he  saw  had  two  masts ;  the 
people  on  board  traded  well  and  fairly,  giving  a  piece  of  iron  for  a  big  yam,  a 
hatchet  for  a  cockatoo.  This  was  probably  the  Southern  Cross.  The  name 
given  at  first  was  ungaungau,  not  vaka  as  now.  Ships  were  thought  to  belong 
to  UmJalo  ghosts,  and  to  portend  a  famine ;  those  who  saw  them  ran  away 
and  hid  themselves  in  their  houses.    Tobacco  appears  to  have  been  introduced 


XVIII.] 


Cotmting.  Measures. 


353 


(10)  Counting.    Measures.    The  systems  of  numeration  in 
use  among-  Melanesians  might  well  here  be  exhibited  and 
explained,  but  I  have  treated  the  subject  elsewhere.    It  will  be 
however  reasonable  to  say  something  as  to  methods  of  counting. 
The  fingers  are  the  natural  counters  ;  in  the  use  of  them  there 
is  curious  variation.    In  the  Banks'  Islands  the  rig-hfc  thumb 
is  turned  down  first,  and  is  followed  by  the  fingers  of  the 
right  hand  and  then  of  the  left,  both  hands  with  closed  fists 
being  held  up  together  to  shew  the  completed  ten.    It  is  the 
number  of  fingers  turned  down  that  is  to  be  noticed,  not  of 
those  that  stand  up.    In  Florida  they  begin  with  the  little 
finger.    In  Lepers'  Island  they  begin  with  the  thumb,  but 
having  reached  five  with  the  little  finger  they  do  not  go  on 
to  the  other  hand,  but  throw  up  the  fingers  they  have  turned 
down,  beginning  with  the  forefinger  and  keeping  the  thumb 
for  ten.    The  use  of  the  cycas  leaf  for  counting  (page  372)  is 
common  to  the  Banks'  Islands  and  New  Hebrides.    A  string 
with  knots  to  mark  the  days  is  used  in  the  Solomon  Islands. 
In  Florida  stones  and  canarium  shells  are  used  to  help  in 
counting ;  at  a  feast  a  man  will  go  round  with  a  basket,  and 
every  one  present  will  put  some  small  thing  into  it,  that  so 
the  number  entertained  may  be  known.    At  Saa  when  yams 
are  counted  two  men  count  out  each  five,  making  ten,  and  as 
each  ten  is  made  they  call  out  'one,'  £two/  and  so  ou.  A 
man  sits  by,  and  when  'ten'  is  called  making  a  hundred,  he 
puts  down  a  little  yam  for  a  tally. 

The  natural  measure  of  length  may  be  said  to  be  the 
fathom,  the  width  of  the  outstretched  arms,  the  Florida  goto 
Mota  rova.  Examples  of  more  particular  measurements  may 
be  taken  from  Mota;  the  taut  fathom,  rova  togtogoa,  is  the 
line  stretched  as  far  as  possible  with  the  arms  thrown  back  • 
rova  ale  lue,  the  fathom  of  looking  out,  is  that  of  a  line 
stretched  away  as  far  as  possible  by  the  left  hand,  but  held  by 
the  right  upon  the  shoulder,  where  the  face  turns  round  to 

to  Florida  and  Bugotu  by  Europeans  who  were  not  whalers;  their  pipe  in 

XtKT c,oes  not  alw  of  a — ^  ^  ^ 

a  a 


354  Miscellaneous .  [ch. 

meet  it ;  another  is  avawo  sus,  from  the  outstretched  left  hand 
to  the  right  nipple  ;  alo  masale  pei,  at  the  watercourse,  from 
the  left  hand  to  the  breast  bone.  Lesser  measurements  are, 
alo  vivngai,  from  the  arm  pit ;  alo  mahk,  from  the  hollow  of  the 
elbow  to  the  fingers'  end ;  sogo  shoo,  from  wrist  to  finger  end. 

(il)  Salutations.  People  living  in  small  communities  and 
always  in  view  of  one  another  have  little  need  for  salutations, 
and  there  is  little  to  be  said  upon  the  subject  in  regard  to 
Melanesia .  If  any  one  passes  through  a  village  he  will  be  asked 
whence  he  comes,  and  bid  to  go  on,  as  a  kind  of  salutation ; 
he  will  say  on  leaving,  1  You  stay.'  There  is,  however,  in  the 
Banks'  Islands  a  friendly  action  called  varpis;  two  men  insert 
each  the  middle  finger  of  his  right  hand  between  two  of  his 
friend's  fingers,  grip  them  tight  together,  and  then  quickly 
pull  them  asunder  with  a  crack.  This  is  a  greeting,  a  mark 
of  fellowship  and  of  approval.  Kissing  is  not  indigenous  ;  to 
flunpun,  is  analogous  to  it,  snuffing  with  the  nose,  not  rubbing 
noses,  and  this  is  not  thought  proper  or  becoming  to  be  done 
except  to  children.  Rubbing  noses  is  practised  in  the  Poly- 
nesian settlements  only.  It  is  not  the  custom  to  say 
anything  by  way  of  thanks ;  it  is  rather  improper  to  show 
emotion  when  anything  is  given,  or  when  friends  meet  again ; 
silence  with  the  eyes  cast  down  is  the  sign  of  the  inward 
trembling  or  shyness  which  they  feel,  or  think  they  ought  to 
feel,  under  these  circumstances.  There  is  no  lack  of  a  word 
which  may  be  fairly  translated  '  thank ' ;  and  certainly  no  one 
who  has  given  cause  for  it  will  say  that  Melanesians  have  no 
gratitude ;  others  probably  are  ready  enough  to  say  it. 

(13)  Wild  Men.  In  Florida  they  believe  that  on  the 
mountains  of  Laudari,  the  part  of  Guadalcanal-  upon  which 
their  own  island  looks  out,  there  are  wild  men  whom  they  call 
Mumulou.  They  are  men,  and  have  language;  the  hair  of 
their  heads  is  straight  and  reaching  down  their  legs,  then- 
bodies  are  covered  with  long  hair,  and  they  have  long  nails  ; 
they  are  large  and  tall,  but  not  above  the  size  of  men.  One 
was  killed  not  long  ago,  the  coast  people  of  Laudari  say,  and 
so  they  know  very  well  what  they  are  like.    They  live  in 


xvm.]  Wild  Men.  355 

eaves  in  the  mountains ;  they  plant  nothing",  and  eat  snakes 
and  lizards.    They  eat  any  coast  man  they  can  catch ;  they 
carry  on  their  backs  bag's  filled  with  pieces  of  obsidian,  with 
w  hich  to  pelt  men  whom  they  see,  and  they  set  nets  round 
trees  to  catch  men  who  have  climbed  them  ;  they  use  spears 
also.    In  Saa  they  say  there  are  Mumu  in  the  forest,  human, 
very  small  in  stature,  but  very  strong  and  swift  ;  they  have 
very  long  hair,  and  long  nails,  with  which  they  tear  the 
coast  men  to  devour  them  ;  they  go  about  in  threes,  a  male,  a 
female,  and  a  child.    Lastly,  Saa  men  who  have  been  in  the 
'thief-ships'  have  seen  the  Australian  natives  like  the  Mumu. 
In  the  New  Hebrides,  similar  creatures  are  seen  basking  on 
the  rocks  of  the  slopes  of  the  great  volcano  of  Ambrym  ;  even 
in  the  little  island  of  Mae  they  used  to  be  seen — for  they  are 
now  extinct— on  the  Three  Hills.  In  Lepers'  Island  the  wild 
men  are  called  Mae ;  they  have  long  hair,  long  teeth,  they 
dwell  in  caves,  carry  off  pigs,  and  if  they  meet  a  man  alone 
will  seize  and  eat  him.    In  the  night  they  are  heard  crying 
in  the  valleys,  and  it  is  then  said  that  the  Mae  is  washing 
her  child.    The  name  shows  some  connexion  with  the  super- 
stition described  (page  188),  but  they  call  no  snake  a  mae,  and 
these  are  men.    However  much  these  stories  vary,  the  belief 
may  be  said  to  be  general  from  Ysabel  to  Mae,  just  as  stories 
of  wild  men  have  been  current  in  New  Zealand.  Descriptions 
very  much  like  these  have  their  place  in  grave  treatises 
on   mankind.     It  may  be   said  to   be  certain  that  the 
Melanesian  belief  has  no  foundation  in  present  fact  in  the 
existence  either  of  ape-like  men  or  man-like  apes  ;  it  may  be 
a  question  whether  the  belief  is  founded  on  the  memory  of  large 
simians  in  former  seats  of  the  Melanesian  people.    To  myself, 
so  far  as  it  has  any  foundation  at  all  in  fact,  it  appears  to 
be  a  fanciful  exaggeration  of  the  difference,  which  the  coast 
people  are  much  disposed  to  exaggerate,  between  themselves 
and  the  men  of  the-  nta,  the  inland  tracts,  who  have  no 
canoes  and  cannot  swim,  the  true  < orang  utan '  or  man  of  the 
woods,  the  '  man-bush  '  of  pigeon-English. 


A  a  2 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


STORIES. 


The  native  Stories  or  Folk-tales  which  follow  are  all  of  them, 
with  the  exception  of  the  first,  translated  from  the  manuscripts 
written  for  me  by  natives  of  the  various  islands  in  which  the 
stories  are  told.  The  first  example  was  written  down  by  the 
Rev.  A.  Penny  at  Florida,  in  the  native  language  as  he  heard 
the  story  told.  The  translation  is  as  accurate  and  literal  in 
each  case  as  I  could  make  it ;  the  detailed  prolixity  of  a  native 
narrative  is  very  characteristic ;  and  it  is  possible  that,  with 
the  varying  quality  of  the  story-telling  of  the  individual 
writers,  there  may  appear  something  also  of  the  different 
narrative  style  of  the  eastern  and  western  groups  of  these 
islands  of  Melanesia.  The  value  of  truly  native  stories  is 
beyond  all  question ;  they  exhibit  native  life  in  the  particular 
details  which  come  in  the  course  of  the  narrative,  they  are  full 
of  the  conceptions  which  the  native  people  entertain  about  the 
world  around  them,  they  show  the  native  mind  active  in  fancy 
and  imagination,  and  they  form  a  rich  store  of  subjects  for 
comparison  with  the  folk-tales  of  other  parts  of  the  world. 
To  the  question  how  far  those  who  tell  and  those  who  hear 
these  stories  believe  them  to  be  true  it  is  hard  to  give  an 
answer.  To  some  extent  they  are  believed,  and  to  a  great 
extent  they  are  treated  as  flights  of  fancy.  A  story-teller 
warming  to  his  subject,  and  with  all  that  he  relates  pictured 
in  his  mind,  very  likely  believes  it  all  as  he  tells  the  tale ; 
a  story  will  be  quoted  to  explain  or  confirm  some  statement, 


The  Heron  and  the  Tzirtle. 


357 


and  would  have  little  effect  if  not  brought  forth  as  true ; 
a  story,  because  it  has  always  been  told  and  heard,  is  not  open 
to  much  doubt  or  criticism.    But  it  may  be  safely  said  that  to 
the  natives  a  story  is  not  a  piece  of  history;  the  marvels  are 
not  very  seriously  taken,  however  much  they  are  enjoyed  ; 
anything  seems  possible  of  course  when  magic  is  at  work  and 
when  spirits  are  the  agents ;  that  there  are  such  spirits  as 
Qat,  for  example,  is  not  doubted,  and  the  story  goes  that  he 
performed  certain  feats.    I  cannot,  however,  think  that  the 
natives  seriously  believe  that  birds  and  fish  talk;  I  have 
never  discovered  from  them  that  they  do  not  distinguish 
between  animate  and  inanimate  things,  between  birds  and 
beasts  and  men.   When  an  owl  in  a  story  talks  and  cooks  food, 
both  actions  are  on  a  level,  not  of  supposed  fact  but  of  fancy. 
The  native  mind  is  fidl  of  lively  intelligence,  and  is  by  no 
means  to  be  judged  incapable  of  the  invention  of  marvels  and 
enjoyment  of  the  flights  of  fancy ;  though  in  the  highest  flights 
it  moves  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  beliefs.  There 
is  in  Florida  and  in  Mota  a  title  for  a  story  to  tell,  tugu  ni 
pitu,  hahae  lea,  which  marks  the  character  of  the  narrative. 

These  stories  are  here  divided  into  three  classes  :  I.  Animal 
Stories,  concerned  mostly  with  birds  and  fishes,  as  is  natural 
in  islands  were  mammals  are  very  few;  II.  Stories  con- 
taining Myths  and  Tales  concerning  the  origin  of  things  • 
III.  Wonder  Tales. 


I.    ANIMAL  STORIES. 

i.  The  Heron  and  the  Turtle.  Florida. 

One  day  a  Soo,  Heron,  caught  his  foot  fast  in  the  coral ; 
the  tide  came  in,  but  his  neck  was  long.  When  the  tide 
reached  to  the  top  of  his  neck  there  came  along  a  Shark 
Come  and  save  me,  says  the  Soo.  Wait  a  bit,  says  the  Shark. 
There  comes  a  Boila  ;  Come  and  save  my  life,  says  the  Soo  ; 
and  the  Boila  says  to  him,  Wait  a  bit,  says  he.    There  comes 


35^  Stoi'ies.  j-CH# 

the  great  Garfish ;  Come  and  save  me,  brother,  says  the  Soo  ; 
the  Garfish  says,  Wait  a  bit.  There  comes  a  Rock-cod ;  Come 
and  save  my  life,  says  the  Soo  ;  Wait  a  bit,  says  the  Rock-cod. 
There  comes  a  Crocodile;  Come  and  save  me,  says  the  Soo; 
Wait  a  bit,  says  the  Crocodile.  In  the  end  all  the  fish  came,' 
and  nothing-  could  be  done.  Then  comes  a  Turtle.  Brother ! 
come  here  and  save  my  life,  says  the  Soo.  And  the  Turtle  says, 
You  will  pay  me  of  course.  And  the  Soo  says,  I  have  nothing 
with  me  to  pay  you  with.  And  there  was  a  sea-urchin 
alongside  the  Soo,  and  he  says,  I  will  pay  you  with  money, 
says  he.  But  the  Turtle  says,  No.  And  the  Soo  says,  Dog's 
teeth,  and  porpoise  teeth  ;  but  the  Turtle  says,  No,  I  don't 
want  it.  Then  he  offers  him  the  sea-urchin,  and  the  Turtle 
eats  it  up  with  great  delight,  and  says  joyfully,  Now  I  will 
save  you,  you  have  given  me  my  pay.  So  he  smashes  to 
fragments  the  stone  (that  held  the  bird's  foot)  and  the  Soo 
is  saved.  And  the  Soo  says,  Now  you  have  saved  my  life  ; 
if  ever  hereafter  you  are  in  need,  in  case  you  are  going  to 
be  killed  and  I  should  hear  you  call,  I  will  come  and  save 
you,  says  he. 

After  this  the  people  of  Hagelonga  went  to  fish,  and  they 
let  down  their  net  and  sat  holding  the  corners  of  it  on  their 
tripods  of  poles.  There  comes  a  shark  ;  A  fish  below  !  shall 
we  pull  up  the  net  ?  say  some ;  Not  that,  say  the  others. 
There  comes  a  rock-cod;  A  fish  below!  shall  we  pull  up? 
say  some ;  No,  say  the  others.  In  the  end  all  the  fish  in  the 
sea  come  along,  and  they  don't  pull  up  the  net.  Then  comes 
round  the  turtle,  and  comes  into  the  middle  of  the  net,  and 
they  cry,  Here  he  is  !  we  will  see  what  he  is  worth.  And 
the  turtle  comes  right  up  into  the  net,  and  they  take  him, 
and  tie  him,  and  carry  him  ashore,  and  make  a  fence  round 
him.  And  the  chief  of  Hagelonga  says,  To-morrow  we  will 
split  wood  for  him,  and  get  leaves  for  him,  and  dig  up  yams 
for  him,  this  turtle  of  ours,  says  the  chief.  So  as  soon  as  it 
was  light  they  went  off,  and  they  split  wood,  and  they 
gathered  leaves,  and  they  dug  food ;  and  they  appointed  the 
boys  to  watch  the  turtle  and  went  away.    And  when  they 


xix.]  The  Heron  and  the  Ttirtle.  359 

were  far  away  the  Soo  comes  along,  and  the  hoys  say  to  him, 
Where  have  you  come  from?  and  the  Soo  says  to  them, 
I  am  just  idling-  about ;  and  he  says  to  them,  Should  you 
like  me  to  dance  for  you  ?  says  he.  And  the  hoys  pay,  Yes, 
we  should  like  you  to  dance  for  us.  And  the  Soo  says,  Bring 
me  the  porpoise  teeth  and  dog's  teeth  ornaments  of  your 
lathers  and  mothers,  that  I  may  dress  myself  up  in  the  best. 
And  they  brought  him  the  best  ornaments,  and  he  dressed 
himself  out  in  them,  and  then  he  danced  for  them.  So 
he  danced  along  to  the  fence  in  which  the  Turtle  was,  and 
the  Turtle  saw  him  coming,  and  cried  out,  Now  I  am  to  die, 
my  brother,  cries  he.  And  the  Soo  says  to  him,  And  now  I 
shall  save  your  life,  because  you  saved  mine  before.  And  the 
Soo  came  into  the  house  where  the  boys  were,  and  there  he 
danced  for  them.  And  he  says,  Kerembaembae  !  Kerembaembae  ! 
Loosed  is  your  leg  that  they  have  tied  !  and  his  leg  is  loosed. 
Kerembaembae !  Slipped  out  is  your  head !  and  his  head 
slipped  out.  Kerembaembae  !  Clear  the  forepart !  and  the  fore- 
part of  him  was  clear.  Kerembaembae  !  Clear  the  hinder  part ! 
and  his  hinder  part  was  clear.  Kerembaembae  !  Clear  the  rest 
of  you !  and  the  rest  of  him  was  clear.  Kerembaembae ! 
Follow  the  path  !  Kerembaembae  !  Reach  the  sand !  Kerembaem- 
bae !  Down  with  you  into  the  sea  !  Kerembaembae  !  Dive  out 
of  sight !  Kerembaembae  !  Go  a  fathom's  length !  Kerembaembae  ! 
Go  two  fathoms  !  So  he  escaped  with  his  life.  And  the 
people  returned  from  inland  and  came  out  into  the  open, 
and  looked  at  the  fence.  But  the  Soo  was  gone  ;  and  they 
said,  Some  one  has  stolen  our  turtle  ;  and  they  asked  the 
boys,  and  said,  Who  has  been  here  now  ?  And  the  boys  said, 
There  was  only  a  Soo  came  here  and  danced  for  us,  and  we 
gave  him  all  your  things,  and  he  deceived  us  so  that  we 
did  not  go  and  look  after  the  turtle,  said  the  boys  to  them. 
And  bad  were  the  feelings  of  the  people  of  the  village ;  and 
they  went  and  looked  at  the  path,  and  there  they  saw  the 
traces  of  the  turtle,  and  they  said,  Yes,  he  has  saved  himself 
for  certain,  nobody  has  stolen  him,  said  they. 


36°  Stories.  [ciI< 


2.    The  Thb.ee  Fish.  Ureparapapa. 

The  story  of  the  Watwata  (an  Ostracion)  and  the  Sole.  The 
two  were  scratching-  one  another,  and  the  Sole  said  to  the  Wat- 
wata, Scratch  me.  But  the  Watwata  said,  No,  you  shall  scratch 
me  first.  And  the  Sole  scratched  the  Watwata,  scratched  him 
well.  And  the  Watwata  said,  Brother,  you  have  scratched  me 
badly,  but  the  Sole  said,  No,  it  is  all  right.  And  the  Watwata 
said,  Well !  now  I  shall  scratch  you  in  my  turn.  After  that  he 
scratched  him,  scratched  him  extremely  thin.  And  the  Sole 
said,  Well!  you  have  scratched  me  badly,  but  we  two  will 
play  hide  and  seek.  And  the  Sole  said,  You  shall  hide  first. 
After  that  the  Watwata  hid,  and  got  out  of  sight  under  a 
stone.  The  Sole  sought  him  and  found  him.  After  that 
the  Sole  hid  in  his  turn,  and  buried  himself  in  the  sand ; 
and  the  Watwata  sought  him  in  vain.  But  the  Song  (a  fish 
which  shews  its  teeth)  stood  and  laughed  at  it ;  and  he  has 
grinned  so  ever  since.    It  is  finished. 


3.   The  Rat  and  the  Rail.  Ukeparapara. 

A  Rat  and  a  Rail  (Porphyrio)  were  taking  a  walk  together, 
and  they  found  a  gaviga-tree  (eugenia)  with  ripe  fruit. 
They  stood  under  it  and  disputed  as  to  which  of  them  should 
climb  up.  The  Rat  said,  Rail,  climb  up  !  The  Rail  said,  You  ! 
So  they  disputed  till  the  Rat  climbed  up.  Then  the  Rail 
begged  of  the  Rat,  Brother,  give  me  that  black  ripe  one  ;  but 
the  Rat  ate  it,  and  threw  him  down  the  stone.  Then  said  the 
Rail  again,  Brother,  give  me  that  one,  it  is  very  ripe  indeed  ; 
but  the  Rat  ate  it  all,  and  again  threw  down  only  the  stone. 
Thus  the  Rail  begged  again  and  again  for  fruit,  and  the  Rat 
treated  him  in  the  same  way.  At  last  the  Rail  made  one  more 
petition  to  the  Rat,  Brother,  give  me  that  one  that  is  red  ripe  ; 
and  the  Rat  took  it  and  threw  it  down  upon  the  forehead 
of  the  Rail,  and  there  it  stuck  fast.  Eh  !  brother,  said  the 
Rail,  you  have  made  game  of  me,  my  brother;  but  make 


XIX.] 


MP 

The  Birds  Voyage. 


361 


haste  and  come  clown,  be  quick  about  it.  Then  the  Rail 
took  the  unfolded  leaf  of  a  dracsena  ;  and  as  the  Rat  was 
coming-  clown  the  stem  of  the  tree,  he  was  standing*  ready, 
and  thrnst  it  hard  into  the  rump  of  the  Rat,  and  there  it 
stood  fast.  So  the  tail  in  the  Rat's  ramp  is  the  unfolded 
leaf  of  a  dracsena  that  the  Rail  fixed  firmly  there ;  and  on 
the  forehead  of  the  Rail  is  the  gaviga  fruit,  still  red,  that  the 
Rat  threw  clown  upon  it. 


4.  The  Birds'  Voyage.  Mota. 

A  Story  to  tell.    They  lived  in  their  place.    The  tawan  was 
in  fruit  at  Qakea ;  the  wind  began  to  blow ;  then  said  they, 
Well,  now  at  last  we  will  paddle  over  and  eat  tawan.    So  they 
make  a  start  and  go,  and  come  from  here  and  there.  And 
the  renga,  Green  Parrot,  says,  I  go  with  you ;  but  they  say, 
O-o-o !  You  just  go  back,  lest  your  father  should  be  angry 
with  us  about  you.    And  he  sings  '  I  go  and  tell  my  daddy ! 
the  wind  has  blown  hard  against  you  ;  beat  against  you,  beat, 
beat ! '  Ah,  well !  come  along !  and  he  gets  on  board.  Then  says 
the  W asia,  You  fellows,  where  are  you  going  to  ?    And  they 
say,  To  Qakea,  to  eat  tawan.    So  says  he,  I  will  go  with  you  ; 
and  they  say,  Stay  where  you  are,  lest  your  father  and 
mother  scold  us  on  your  account.    Then  he  sings,  '  I  go  and 
tell  my  daddy !  the  wind  has  blown  hard  against  you,  beat 
against  you,  beat,  beat ! '  Ah,  well !  come  along !  and  he  gets 
on  board.    Then  the  Pigeon  says,  You  fellows,  where  are  you 
going  ?  And  they  say,  For  a  voyage.    And  he  says,  I  will 
go  with  you ;  but  they  say,  Not  you ;  lest  your  father  should 
scold  us  about  you.    And  he  sings,  '  I  go  and  tell  my  daddy  ! 
The  wind  has  blown  hard  against  you,  beat  against  you,  beat, 
beat ! '  Ah,  well !  come  along !  and  he  gets  on  board.  And 
when  all  were  on  board  there  was  a  Hermit  Crab  sitting  there, 
and  he  said,  You  fellows,  just  let  me  come.    But  they  said\ 
You  just  stay  there  to  look  after  our  island.    And  he  said! 
Nay,  my  brothers,  you  won't  make  me  miserable.    And  they 
said,  No  !  It  is  only  we  who  can  climb  that  are  going,  not  you 


3° 2  Stories.  [CHt 

who  crawl.  And  he  says,  Take  me  over !  I  will  sit  under  the 
ta  wan-trees,  and  you  will  eat  making-  the  fruit  fall,  and  I  will 
eat  on  the  ground.  So  they  said,  Very  well !  you  have  argued 
against  us,  but  come  along ;  and  he  gets  on  board.  Then  the 
//  em  says  to  the  Crab,  Friend,  sit  up  this  way  near  me  ;  and  he 
crawls  along  and  sits  near  him.  Then  the  Weru  says  to  him, 
Friend,  while  we  two  are  sitting  here,  don't  shuffle  about,  lest 
you  make  a  hole  in  the  canoe.  (The  canoe  was  the  leaf  of  a 
giant  arum.)  And  he  says,  Yes,  I  know  all  about  that.  But 
the  Weru  keeps  an  eye  upon  him,  and  if  he  shuffles  with  his 
claws  the  Weru  says  to  him,  Friend,  I  keep  telling  you,  don't 
be  shuffling  about ;  eh !  you  will  soon  have  made  a  hole  in 
the  canoe!  But  he  says,  Eh!  Friend,  I  know  all  about  it. 
The  wind  had  come  down  into  their  sail,  and  they  were 
already  in  the  open  sea ;  and  the  Crab  shuffled  about,  and  his 
claw  pierced  right  through  the  canoe,  and  the  water  came 
pouring  quickly  in.  (In  another  version  the  Crab  was  set  to 
bale  the  canoe,  and  scratched  a  hole.)  And  they  cried  out, 
Be  quick !  our  canoe  has  a  hole  in  it,  the  Crab  had  trodden  it 
through.  And  they  said,  Well,  let  us  leap  overboard ;  and  they 
all  of  them  leapt  overboard,  and  the  Crab  leapt  overboard,  and 
sank  right  out  of  sight  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea  ;  but  they  all 
of  them  swam,  and  he  crawled  along  on  the  bottom.  And 
they  all  swam  and  came  out  upon  the  shore,  but  not  he  you 
may  be  sure.  Then  they  said,  Fellows  !  are  we  all  men  alive 
or  not  ?  And  some  one  said,  No,  there  is  one  poor  fellow  our 
friend  missing.  So  they  said,  Ah !  but  who  will  swim  after 
him,  and  dive  in  search  of  him  ?  And  they  spoke  to  one,  and 
he  refused,  and  to  another,  and  he  refused  ;  then  said  the  Weru 
(eulabeornis),  Here  am  I,  I  will  go  and  look  for  him.  So  she 
swims,  and  dives,  and  does  not  find  him,  and  comes  up  to  the 
surface ;  and  dives  again,  and  goes  on  diving,  and  her  body 
turns  black,  and  dives,  and  dives,  and  dives,  and  her  eyes  turn 
red.  But  the  Crab  had  already  crawled  up  ashore  before  them 
all ;  and  there  he  was  quietly  sitting.  And  they  were  on  the 
sand  in  a  clump  of  ividawe,  when  the  Weru  swam  up  ;  and  they 
said,  Hallo  !  Have  you  seen  him,  or  not  ?    And  she  says,  Ah  ! 


xix.]  The  Birds   Voyage.  363 

my  brothers,  you  know  that  I  have  sought  him,  and  have  not 
seen  him  at  all ;  and  I  have  dived  and  dived,  and  my  body  is 
black  and  blue,  and  my  eyes  are  red ;  and  so  I  have  swum  up 
ashore.    But  as  they  are  still  together,  they  see  the  Crab 
crawling  out  into  the  open,  and  they  say,  Hallo !  where  did 
you  swim  up  from  the  sea?    And  he  said,  Indeed  when  we 
became  pieces  of  the  wreck,  you  know,  I  sank  right  clown,  you 
know,  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  and  then  I  crawled  here.  And 
they  said,  Ewe !  we  said  you  were  the  missing  one  of  our 
number,  but  it  is  not  so,  we  are  all  safe.    Come,  let  us  tidy 
ourselves  up.    Then  said  the  Tasis  to  the  Tagere,  Friend,  come 
here  and  make  me  tidy;  and  the  Qatman  said  to  the  Green 
Parrot,  I  will  tidy  you,  and  the  Tatagoras  said  to  the  JFasia,  I 
will  tidy  you  ;  and  they  all  of  them  sat  down  in  pairs.  Then 
said  the  Rat  to  the  Owl,  Friend,  come  here,  let  me  make  you 
tidy;  so  he  sits  down  and  the  Rat  begins  to  make  him  tidy; 
and  as  he  combs  his  head  he  keeps  saying, '  Comb-comb-dung- 
dung,  comb-comb-dung-dung ' ;  and  he  dungs  upon  the  head 
of  the  Owl.    Then  says  the  Rat,  My  paws  are  tired  out,  let 
some  one  else  take  my  place.    I  will,  says  the  Mes,  the 
trichoglossus  parrot ;  so  the  Rat  runs  off,  and  the  Mes  sits  down 
in  his  place.    And  the  Mes  parrot  combs  the  Owl's  head,  and 
perceives  that  it  smells,  and  Is-is  !  cries  the  Parrot.   And  the 
Owl  asks,  Eh  ?  what  is  the  matter,  friend  ?    Oh  !  nothing,  he 
says.   But  he  says,  Speak  out ;  and  the  Parrot  says,  Oh  !  your 
friend  the  Rat  has  played  you  a  trick,  he  has  played  you  a 
trick  in  tidying  you  ;  he  has  made  a  pig  of  himself  upon  you. 
Then  said  the  Owl,  Really  !  is  that  true  ?  and  he  flies  off  and 
chases  the  Rat ;  and  the  two  go  round  and  about.    But  the 
Rat  saw  a  hole  and  ran  into  it,  and  the  Owl  sat  by  helpless. 
Then  says  he,  What  shall  I  do  to  this  fellow  who  has  made  a 
mock  of  me  ?  and  he  cracks  a  cocoa-nut  and  sets  it  up  opposite 
the  mouth  of  the  hole  ;  but  the  Rat  did  not  come  out.  Then 
says  he,  What  shall  I  do  to  deceive  this  Rat  ?  and  he  sought 
what  he  might  do.    Then  says  he,  If  I  roast  this  red  wasia 
caladium  and  try,  will  that  do  or  not  ?    So  he  roasts  it  right 
off;  and  as  he  scrapes  that  root  the  smell  goes  out  and  reaches 


364  Stories.  [CH< 

the  Rat  in  the  hole.  And  when  it  was  cooked  he  broke  it,  and 
put  it  at  the  mouth  of  the  hole.  Then  the  Rat  creeps  out  to 
eat  the  wasia,  and  the  Owl  is  staring-  hard  at  the  mouth  of  the 
hole,  if  perchance  he  may  see  the  Rat  creep  out.  And  he  says, 
That  will  do ;  and  now  be  sure  you  die  this  minute !  And 
the  Rat  came  out  to  eat ;  but  the  Owl  swooped  down  upon  him, 
and  killed  him  you  may  be  sure  with  his  talons,  and  ate 
him  up. 


5.  The  Shark  and  the  Snake.    Lepers'  Island. 

This  is  about  the  Shark  and  the  Snake.  They  quarrelled, 
and  the  Shark  told  the  Snake  to  come  down  into  the  sea,  that 
the  Shark  might  eat  him.  The  Snake  said  to  him,  They  will 
kill  you,  and  I  shall  eat  a  bit  of  you.  Now  when  they  killed 
the  Shark,  the  Snake  went  down  into  the  sea  and  ate  the 
Shark. 


6.   The  Hen  and  her  Chickens.    Lepers'  Island. 

This  is  about  a  Hen  that  had  ten  Chickens.  So  they  went 
about  seeking-  their  food,  and  they  fell  in  with  the  tuber  of  a 
wild  yam,  a  gigimbo.  After  a  while  the  tuber  got  up  and  ate 
one  of  the  chickens.  They  called  to  a  Kite,  which  said  to  the 
Hen,  Put  them  under  me.  So  they  got  there  and  stayed. 
Presently  the  Tuber  came  and  asked  the  Kite,  Where  are 
they?  He-i,  said  he,  I  don't  know.  So  the  Tuber  scolded  the 
Kite ;  and  the  Kite  flew  down  and  took  it  up  from  the 
ground,  and  hovered  with  it  in  the  sky,  and  then  let  it  drop 
down  to  the  ground.  Then  another  took  it  up,  and  hovered 
in  turn  in  the  sky,  and  dropped  it,  and  it  fell  down  and  broke 
in  two.  So  the  two  Kites  divided  the  Tuber  between  them ; 
therefore  some  of  the  tubers  are  good,  and  some  are  bad.  We 
call  the  name  of  the  good  tuber  nggeremanggeggneni. 


XIX.] 


•*** 

Kamakajakti. 


365 


II.    MYTHS  AND  TALES  OF  ORIGINS, 
i.  The  Story  of  Kamakajaku.    Bugotu,  Ysabel  Island. 

He  dwelt  upon  the  hill  at  Gaji ;  and  he  was  mending  his 
nets,  and  he  looked  down  upon  the  ocean,  and  saw  it  dark 
exceedingly.    And  his  grandchildren  went  down  to  the  sea  to 
fish  upon  the  reef,  and  Kamakajaku  said  to  them,  Go  and 
dip  salt-water  for  me  in  the  place  I  see  the  sea  like  that,  said 
he  to  them.    And  his  grandchildren  went  forth  and  down  and 
fished  on  the  beach,  and  fished  with  nets;  and  afterwards 
they  dipped  the  salt-water,  and  came  up  and  arrived  at  the 
village,  and  went  and  gave  it  to  him.    And  he  said  to  them, 
Give  the  dish  hither,  and  I  will  pour  it  down  and  see  if  the 
blackness  of  it  is  like  what  I  looked  down  upon,  said  he. 
And  he  poured  it  down,  and  looked  and  did  not  find  it  like 
what  he  looked  down  upon  from  his  place  upon  the  hill. 
And  it  was  morning,  and  he  took  the  salt-water-vessel,  and 
went  forth  down,  and  put  in  his  ear  a  bit  of  obsidian,  and 
went  down  and  came  to  the  sea,  and  put  down  on  the  beach 
his  bag  and  club  and  shield ;  and  so  he  took  in  his  hand  the 
vessel  and  waded,  and  went  down  from  the  shore,  and  looked 
up  to  the  hill  where  he  dwelt,  and  did  not  yet  get  sight  of  it, 
and  swam  still  out  from  the  shore  till  he  saw  the  hill  at  Gaji,' 
and  then  he  dipped.    And  the  surface  of  the  sea  sounded  and 
bubbled,  and  he  heard  coming-to-him  a  Komlili  (King-fish), 
a  very  great  fish  ;  and  it  came  and  swallowed  him,  and  went- 
off  with  him  eastwards  to  the  rising  up  of  the  sun,  and  went 
off  with  him  till  it  arrived  with  him  at  a  shallow  place,  and  it 
threw  itself  about  so  that  Kamakajaku  perceived  that  there 
was  a  beach  probably.    Here  am  I,  says  he,  and  he  thought 
of  the  obsidian  in  his  ear,  and  felt  for  it  and  found  it,  and  cut 
asunder  the  belly  of  the  Kombili,  and  leapt  out,  and  saw  a 
brightness.    And  he  sat  down  and  pondered,  Where  I  wonder 
am  I  ?  he  said     So  up  rose  the  Sun  with  a  bang,  and  rolling 
from  side  to  side.    And  the  Sun  says,  Don't  stand  in  my  wa}* 


3^6  Stories.  [CH> 

you  will  die  at  once;  stay  on  my  right,  says  he.  And  he 
drew  aside  till  the  Sun  rose  away,  and  then  he  followed ;  and 
they  two  went  up  towards  heaven,  and  went  on  and  arrived 
at  the  village  of  the  Sun's  children.  And  he  said,  Here  you 
stay,  said  he ;  so  he  stayed  with  them,  with  his  children  and 
grandchildren,  and  the  Sun  went  off.  And  Kamakajaku 
stayed  ;  and  they  asked  him,  Whence  did  you  come  hither  ? 
And  he  said,  From  the  earth ;  I  dwelt  in  my  place,  and  I 
dipped  salt-water,  and  a  big  fish  swallowed  me,  and  so  I 
arrived  here  at  your  good  town.  So  they  remained  in 
company;  and  they  ate  only  raw  food,  those  people  above; 
and  he  shewed  them  fire,  so  that  they  ate  cooked  food.  And 
they  said  to  him,  Don't  go  to  that  place,  it  is  taboo,  said 
they  to  him  ;  and  they  went  their  way.  And  he  kept  house, 
and  thought  what  that  was  they  had  said  ;  Don't  you  go,  they 
said,  said  he.  And  he  went  over,  and  opened  up  a  stone  which 
was  the  covering  of  a  hole  in  the  sky,  and  he  looked  down  on 
his  place  at  Gaji,  and  he  cried.  They  brought  him  food,  but  it 
was  not  for  him  (he  would  not  have  it) ;  so  they  asked  him, 
Have  you  gone  over  by  the  further  end  of  the  house  there  ? 
We  forbade  you  to  go  there.  Yes.  And  do  you  want  to  go 
down  ?  And  he  said,  Yes.  And  they  made  a  house,  and  gave 
him  a  banana,  and  gave  him  seed  of  pau  (to  dye  with),  and 
they  took  a  cane  and  tied  it  to  the  saddle-piece  of  the  house, 
and  he  Kamakajaku  sat  in  it.  And  they  let  it  down.  And 
they  said,  When  the  birds  and  such  things  cry,  don't  look 
out,  but  when  the  cicalas  and  the  things  that  live  on  the 
earth  cry,  then  you  may  look  out ;  and  they  let  him  down, 
let  him  down.  And  when  one  cane  was  too  short,  they  tied 
another  to  it,  and  it  reached  down  to  the  hill  and  rested. 
And  his  friends  had  been  seeking  him,  because  they  thought 
that  he  was  dead  already.  And  on  the  day  that  he  came 
down  again  from  heaven,  they  rejoiced  because  they  saw  him 
again,  and  good  was  their  heart.  And  he  lived  a  long  while, 
till  he  died  on  his  hill  Gaji.  And  it  is  finished;  yes,  it  is 
just  this,  the  Story  of  Kamakajaku. 


XIX.] 


Samuku.     The  Mim. 


367 


2.  The  Story  of  Samuku.    Bugotu,  Ysabbl  Island. 

Samukn  lived  in  his  village,  and.  built  his  house,  and  worked, 
and  good  and  many  were  his  affairs  ;  so  he  took  a  wife  and 
married,  and  they  two  lived  well,  and  agreed  perfectly  well 
together,  and   worked,  and   much  was   their   food.  And 
Samuku  came  home  and  asked  for  food,  because  he  was 
hungry,  and  his  wife  had  not  prepared  any  food,  and  Sa- 
muku was  angry  with  his  wife,  and  scolded  her  greatly. 
And  his  wife  said  to  him,  I  am  tired  of  making  food  for  you, 
your  father  and  mother  are  dead,  who  is  to  make  you  food  ? 
Go  and  see  them  in  Tuhilagi,  says  she.    And  Samuku  was 
angry,  and  he  sat  and  thought ;  and  he  said,  Good,  I  will  go 
and  see  them.    So  he  hauled  down  a  canoe  and  put  out  to 
sea  to  Tuhilagi,  and  landed  at  Lelegia  tarunga,  the  Ghosts' 
Mangroves,  and  stepped  up  the  beach  and  went  in  shore,  and 
found  the  company  of  ghosts.    And  they  asked  him,  Why 
have  you  come  here?  You  are  not  dead  yet,  said  they  to 
him.    And  Samuku  answered,  My  wife  scolded  me,  and  sent 
me  here,  said  he.    And  at  night  he  stayed  in  a  house,  and 
when  it  was  morning  the  house  disappeared.    So  he  played 
them  a  trick  and  made  a  net,  and  they  went  to  fish  with  it, 
and  he  saw  the  forms  of  the  ghosts,  and  the  net  caught  in  the 
coral.    And  when  it  was  light  all  the  company  of  ghosts 
departed  from  him,  and  he  went  down  and  slept  on  the  sand. 
And  the  people  of  a  certain  place  found  him  and  took  hold 
of  him,  and  took  him  to  be  with  them  till  he  died.  Finished 
is  the  story  of  Samuku,  not  a  very  long  one. 

3.  The  Mim.    Torres  Islands. 

They  say  that  the  Mim  people  dragged  the  yams  from 
place  to  place,  having  brought  them  ashore  at  Hiw,  and 
then  dragged  them  to  Tugua,  for  which  reason  the  'yams 
at  Hiw  and  at  Tugua  are  very  large  and  long.  But  when 
they  dragged  them  along  here  to  Lo,  all  the  people  were 
down  on  the  reefs  fishing  and  heard  nothing  of  it;  nor 


368  Stories.  rCH< 

did  they  know  anything  till  they  found  the  rind  of  the 
yams  sticking  to  the  roots  of  the  trees  along  the  path. 
These  they  picked  up  and  planted;  and  on  that  account 
the  Lo  yams  are  not  very  large,  but  plentiful  enough. 
Because  the  Mim  people  sliced  their  yams  in  half  for  the 
men  of  Hiw  and  of  Tugua,  and  then  passed  on  to  Toga, 
and  sliced  again  for  them  there,  on  which  account  the  yams 
there  are  very  large  and  long.  Afterwards  they  crossed  to 
Ureparapara,  where  the  people  sliced  the  yams  in  half  and 
planted  them.  They  did  the  same  in  all  the  islands  that 
way ;  it  was  only  at  Lo  that  the  people  did  not  see  and  hear 
what  was  going  on.  The  crowns  of  the  yams  remained  and 
were  planted  somewhere.  The  Mim  people  went  dragging 
the  yams  through  all  the  islands,  shouting  and  calling  to  the 
men  of  every  place  to  come  and  slice  the  yams,  and  take  their 
burden  from  them. 

4.  The  Origin  of  Poisoned  Arrows.    Aurora  Island. 

I  have  often  heard  them  telling  the  story  about  it  in  this  way. 
They  say  that  in  old  times  there  was  no  fighting.  But  there 
was  an  old  man  whose  name  was  Muesarava,  who  was  blind 
and  used  to  stay  doing  nothing  in  the  house ;  and  he  heard  a 
pigeon  calHng,  and  took  a  bow  and  broad-headed  arrow  and 
went  under  the  tree ;  and  the  pigeon  let  drop  a  bit  of  the 
fruit  it  was  eating,  and  that  blind  man  shot  at  a  venture  into 
the  tree,  and  hit  the  pigeon  without  seeing  it.  And  he  took  it 
up,  and  went  and  put  it  into  the  oven  together  with  the 
yams,  and  sat  down  and  sang  a  song.  But  two  young  fellows 
came  along  and  quietly  opened  that  old  man  Muesarava' s 
oven,  and  ate  up  his  pigeon  with  some  of  his  yams.  Then 
they  went  to  another  place,  and  sang  back  a  song  to  him ; 
and  he  heard  it,  and  went  back  to  eat  his  pigeon,  but  found 
when  he  uncovered  the  oven  that  it  was  eaten  up,  and  that 
something  not  good  had  been  put  in  its  place.  Then  he 
was  exceeding  angry,  and  plotted  a  fight  against  the  people 
of  the  place  whence  the  two  young  men  had  come  who  had 


XIX.] 


Origin  of  Poisoned  A  rrows. 


stolen  and  eaten  Muesarava's  food.    And  now  Muesarava 
began  to  make  fighting  arrows  of  men's  bones.  Muesarava 
went  and  grubbed  up  with  his  hands  a  boy  who  had  died,  and 
took  his  bones,  and  beat  them  to  splinters  and  rubbed  them 
sharp.    But  his  enemies  on  their  side  knew  nothing  of  that, 
they  only  cut  wood  into  shape,  or  bones  of  fish  or  birds,  and 
fixed  them  in  their  arrows,  while  Muesarava  on  his  side 
prepared  men's  bones.    And  when  they  fought  they  shot  at 
him  and  hit,  but  he  did  not  die  ;  and  he  shot  them  and  they 
could  not  live,  but  died  outright  all  of  them.    And  they 
fought  again  and  shot  at  him,  and  hit  him  and  he  did  not 
die  ;  but  Muesarava  shot  at  them  and  hit,  and  they  all  died. 
So  it  often  happened,  and  they  saw  that  they  died  in  very 
great  numbers ;  and  they  asked  Muesarava  why  it  was  that 
they  shot  him  and  he  did  not  die,  while  he  shot  them  and 
they  all  of  them  died.    Therefore  he  told  them  and  said, 
« Go  and  grub  up  one  of  the  dead  men  I  have  shot,  and  scrape 
his  bones,  and  point  your  arrows  with  that.'    Upon  this  they 
listened  to  his  counsel  and  did  as  he  had  said  to  them ;  and 
when  they  fought  again  they  shot  him,  and  he  straightway 
died. 

And  that  thing,  the  dead  man's  bone  that  Muesarava 
ground  to  a  point  for  himself  with  his  own  hand,  stiU 
remains,  and  has  not  yet  been  spoilt ;  the  reed-shaft  has  been 
spoilt  and  replaced  over  and  over  again,  but  that  dead  man's 
bone  still  remains ;  I  have  seen  it  myself  in  my  brother's 
possession  ;  it  still  remains.  The  people  think  a  great  deal  of 
it,  thinking  that  there  is  supernatural  power,  nana,  in  that 
toto  arrow.  If  there  is  heard  a  rumour  of  fighting,  and  that 
is  pointed  m  the  direction  whence  it  comes,  the  -  fightin°- 
comes  to  nothino-.  5 


5-  Tagaro's  Departure.    Aurora  Island. 

There  was  a  man  looking  for  his  wife,  and  he  came  to 
Tagaro  s  village  when  he  was  not  there;  and  he  wished 
to  steal  Tagaro  s  pig,  a  rawe,  so  he  caught  the  pig  and 

B  b 


37°  Stories.  [CH 

tied  it  with  the  vine  of  a  wild  yam.  And  Tagaro  was  still 
in  the  forest  when  he  heard  the  noise,  and  he  came  back 
and  found  where  the  vine  had  been  broken  off,  and  he  was 
exceedingly  angry.  So  he  cut  out  a  canoe  for  himself,  and 
carried  all  the  things  of  this  world  into  it,  and  put  out  the 
fire,  but  threw  back  a  fire-brand.  All  the  good  things,  they 
say,  he  took  clean  away.    This  is  the  story  about  Tagaro. 


6.  How  Tagaro  made  the  Sea.    Aurora  Island. 

They  say  that  he  made  the  sea,  and  that  in  old  times  the  sea 
was  quite  small,  like  a  common  pool  upon  the  beach,  and  that 
this  pool  was  at  the  back  of  his  house,  and  that  there  were  fish 
in  the  pool,  and  that  he  had  built  a  stone  wall  round  it.  And 
Tagaro  was  gone  out  to  look  at  the  various  things  he  had 
made,  and  his  wife  was  in  the  village,  and  his  two  children 
were  at  home,  whom  he  had  forbidden  to  go  to  the  back  of 
the  house.  So  when  he  was  gone  the  thought  entered  into 
the  mind  of  those  two,  Why  has  our  father  forbidden  us  to  go 
there?  And  they  were  shooting  at  lizards  and  rats;  and 
after  a  while  one  said  to  the  other,  Let  us  go  and  see  what 
that  is  he  has  bid  us  keep  away  from.  So  they  went  and 
saw  the  pool  of  salt-water  with  many  fish  crowding  together 
in  it.  And  one  of  the  boys  stood  on  the  stones  Tagaro  had 
built  up,  and  he  sees  the  fish,  and  he  shoots  at  one  and  hits  it ; 
and  as  he  runs  to  catch  hold  of  it  he  threw  down  a  stone,  and 
then  the  water  ran  out.  And  Tagaro  heard  the  roaring  of  the 
water  and  ran  to  stop  it ;  and  the  old  woman  laid  herself 
down  in  the  way  of  it,  but  nothing  could  be  done  ;  those  two 
boys  who  had  thrown  down  the  stone  took  clubs  like  knives 
and  prepared  a  passage  for  the  sea,  one  on  one  side  and  the 
other  on  the  other  side  of  the  place,  and  the  sea  followed 
as  it  flowed.  And  they  think  that  the  old  woman  turned 
into  a  stone,  and  lies  now  on  the  part  of  Mae  wo  near 
Raga. 


XIX.] 


Origin  of  Soles. 


37i 


7.  How  Tagaro  the  Little  found  Ftsh. 
Lepers'  Island. 

They  say  that  he  drew  down  his  canoe  and  paddled  out  in 
search  of  fish ;  and  he  saw  a  great  rock  standing  in  the  sea,  and 
he  floated  gently  without  paddling  to  see  whether  he  would  find 
fish  or  not.    And  he  saw  many  fish  rising  up  to  the  surface 
from  under  his  canoe,  and  he  fed  them  with  the  food  he  had 
in  his  hand,  and  he  perceived  that  these  fish  knew  how  to 
eat  the  food  of  the  land.    Then  said  he,  I  am  going  to  leave 
you,  but  the  day  after  to-morrow  I  shall  grate  some  loho  for 
you  to  eat,  and  shall  pour  cocoa-nut  sauce  over  it,  and  bring  it 
here  to  you.    So  he  left  them  and  stayed,  they  say,  one  day 
at  home.    And  when  the  second  day  came  for  him  to  go 
he  took  that  loho  which  he  had  sauced  with  cocoa-nut  juice, 
and  launched  his  canoe,  and  paddled  out  to  the  place  where 
those  fish  were.    And  he  called  them  with  a  song-,  which  he 
sang  like  this,  Bulenggn  sava  ige  !  ige  wuweu,  mo  gaigei  woworoa, 
mo  gaigei  woworoa  sole,  My  fish,  whatever  you  are,  nice  little 
fish,  here  is  your  food  with  sauce,  your  food  done  with  cocoa- 
nut  sauce.    But  there  was  another  person,  whose  name  was 
Merambuto,  who  stood  on  the  beach,  and  heard  Tagarombiti 
calling  his  fish  with  a  song  like  that,  and  next  day  Merambuto, 
having  made  haste  to  prepare  food  in  the  night,  drew  down 
the  canoe  in  the  early  morning,  Tagarombiti's  canoe,  and 
paddled  out  till  ha  came  to  the  place  where  Tagarombiti  had 
floated  before.    And  he  sang  again  that  song-,  Bulenggn  sava 
ige ! — Then  those  fish  heard  his  voice  that  it  was  loud,  and 
did  not  rise,  because  they  knew  it  was  a  different  person  by 
his  loud  voice.    And  Merambuto  perceived  that  they  did  not 
rise,  and  he  altered  his  voice  so  as  to  be  small  like  Taga- 
rombiti's.   And  he  called  them  with  a  small  voice  singing 
that  song,  Bulenggu  sava  ige! -Then  those  fish  heard  that  the 
voice  was  small,  and  they  rose  all  of  them  to  the  surface,  and 
he  caught  every  one  of  them  with  a  hook.    And  he  made 
haste  to  paddle  ashore,  and  went  back  into  his  village,  and 

B  b  2 


37 2  Stories.  [-CH 

made  up  a  fire,  and  put  the  fish  in  the  oven.  But  when 
it  was  broad  daylight  Tagarombiti  went  himself,  and  they 
were  all  gone  ;  and  he  understood  that  this  thief  Merambuto 
had  caught  all  the  fish,  and  paddled  quickly  back  and  hauled 
up  his  canoe.  And  he  looked  for  footprints  to  know  which 
way  he  had  gone  round  ;  and  he  found  footprints  and  followed 
them,  following  on  till  he  came  to  Merambuto's  place ;  and 
there  he  went  into  the  house  to  him,  and  sat  down  with  him 
in  a  friendly  way.  Then  said  Tagaro,  What  is  that  in  the 
oven?  I  am  hungry.  And  Merambuto  said,  That  is  my 
food,  but  it  is  very  bad,  you  cannot  eat  it.  Then  says  Taga- 
romhiti, Indeed  !  is  your  food  so  very  bad  ?  But  those  are  my 
fish,  and  you  have  caught  them  all.  And  he  struck  bim,  and 
killed  him  in  his  house,  and  set  fire  to  the  house,  and  it  was 
burnt  and  destroyed.  And  Tagarombiti  took  back  tbe  fish 
from  the  oven,  and  went  back,  and  put  them  into  a  little  pool 
of  salt-water,  and  the  fish  revived;  one  side  of  them  was 
gone,  one  side  still  remained.  And  we  call  them,  tavahu  ige 
Lulei  Tagaro,  Tagaro's  half-fish — soles. 

8.  Story  of  the  old  Woman,  how  she  made  the  Sea. 
Lepers'  Island. 

Nobody  knows  what  her  name  was,  but  she  was  an  old 
woman.  And  there  were  two  children  who  lived  with  her  in 
her  house,  but  nobody  knows  what  their  father's  and  mother's 
names  were ;  the  story  about  them  is  that  the  mother  of  these 
two  was  the  daughter  of  this  old  woman.  Her  house  was  a 
good  one,  fenced  about  with  reeds ;  there  was  a  fence  all 
round  the  house,  and  there  was  a  fence  also  made  against  the 
back  of  the  house,  and  those  two  children  were  forbidden  to 
go  into  it,  because  she  would  be  there  by  herself.  And  in 
that  little  fence  at  the  back  of  the  house  she  put  carefully  a 
leaf  of  the  via  (gigantic  caladium)  ;  and  they  say  that  in  that 
leaf  she  always  made  water,  and  was  always  very  strict  in 
forbidding  those  two  to  go  there,  lest  they  should  see  it. 
And  these  two  were  both  boys,  and  they  were  always  shooting 


XIX.] 


Dilingavuv. 


lizards.  So  one  day  when  the  old  woman  went  into  the 
garden  to  work  and  to  bring-  back  food  for  the  three  of  them, 
she  said  to  those  two,  Don't  you  go  there!  and  they  an- 
swered, Very  well,  we  shall  not  go.  And  she  went  out  of  the 
house,  and  went  into  the  gardens,  and  those  two  brothers 
played  with  their  bows,  shooting  lizards.  After  a  while  one 
said  to  the  other,  It  would  be  a  good  thing  to  go  and  see 
what  it  is  where  the  old  woman  has  forbidden  us  to  go. 
Very  well,  said  the  other,  let  us  go ;  so  they  went,  and  they 
saw  that  via  leaf  and  the  water  in  it.  Then  they  saw  a 
lizard  sitting  on  a  part  of  that  leaf,  and  one  of  them  shot  at 
it,  but  missed  the  lizard  and  hit  the  leaf,  and  the  water  that 
was  in  it  burst  quickly  forth.  And  the  old  woman  heard  it, 
and  perceived  that  those  two  had  probably  shot  the  leaf.  And 
she  stood  up  and  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Horodali  bulu,  horo- 
dali  buhi,!  and  twice  again,  Dali  tire,  dali  ufe'!  (Pour  round 
about  and  meet !  Round  about  the  world !)  And  thus  the 
sea  for  the  first  time  stood  full  around  the  whole  world,  for 
before  that  they  say  there  was  no  sea.  So  the  old  woman 
you  may  say  made  the  sea  herself. 


III.    WONDER  TALES. 

i.  The  Stoky  of  Dilingavuv.    Tokres  Islands. 

They  were  riving  in  their  place,  and  his  companions  made 
a  garden,  and  planted  bananas  in  it.  When  the  bananas  bore 
fruit  and  ripened  Dilingavuv  went  every  day  and  ate  bananas 
in  their  garden,  not  eating  on  the  ground,  but  climbing  into 
the  trees  and  eating.  After  a  while  he  was  discovered ;  one 
of  the  party  went  into  the  garden  and  saw  him  up  in  a  banana- 
tree  eating;  so  he  ran  and  told  the  others.  Says  he,  You 
fellows,  I  have  seen  the  one  who  steals  and  eats  our  bananas. 
Then  said  Maraw-hihi,  Hew  out  bows  for  us  to  go  and  shoot 
and  kill  him.  But  they  said,  Marawhihi,  no  one  will  be  able 
to  shoot  and  kill  him.  I  will  shoot  him  and  kill  him,  said 
Marawhihi.   It  is  wholly  impossible,  said  they.  However 


374  Stories.  j-CH 

they  hewed  out  bows,  each  for  himself,  and  put  points  to  their 
arrows  ;  and  when  that  was  done  Marawhihi  said,  Let  us  go 
after  him  one  by  one.    So  one  went  first,  and  came  to  the 
garden,  and  saw  him  sitting  up  in  the  banana- tree,  and  went 
on  tiptoe  towards  him  to  shoot  him.  But  Dilingavuv  stretched 
out  his  arms  like  a  bat,  and  the  man  was  afraid,  and  ran  back 
and  told  the  others.   It  can't  possibly  be  done,  said  they.  But 
Marawhihi  said  that  one  must  go  again,  and  another  went, 
and  the  same  thing  happened  again.    Thus  they  all  went  in 
turn,  and  came  back  and  disputed  with  Marawhihi,  saying,  It 
can't  possibly  be  done.    Then  said  Marawhihi,  I  shall  do  it 
myself,  I  shall  shoot  him  and  kill  him.    And  this  Marawhihi 
they  say  was  more  clever  than  them  all ;  and  he  went  last  and 
saw  Dilingavuv  sitting  in  the  banana-tree,  and  he  stepped 
along  on  tiptoe  under  the  banana,  and  when  Dilingavuv 
stretched  out  his  arms  he  was  not  frightened  at  him ;  but  he 
shot  him  with  a  bird  arrow  of  casuarina  wood,  and  hit  him  on 
the  ear,  and  shot  it  right  off;  and  he  fell  headlong  to  the 
ground.    So  Marawhihi  ran  and  told  his  friends ;  but  Dili- 
gavuv  got  up  from  under  the  banana  and  went  home  to  his 
mother.    When  he  reached  his  mother's  house,  he  called  to 
her  within,  and  she  answered  him  and  said,  What  is  it,  my 
son  ?    And  he  said,  Give  me  an  axe.    And  his  mother  said, 
What  are  you  going  to  do  with  it  ?    But  he  deceived  her,  and 
did  not  tell  her  that  Marawhihi  had  shot  his  ear  off.   Then  he 
went  and  cut  another  ear  for  himself  out  of  the  root  of  a  tree, 
and  the  name  of  that  tree  is  the  Raw,  and  as  he  was  chopping 
the  Raw  root,  he  said,  Chop  in  pieces !  chop  asunder !  But 
Marawhihi  had  sent  one  of  his  men  who  went  and  listened, 
and  heard  him  saying  this,  Chop  in  pieces !  chop  asunder ! 
and  he  ran  back  and  told  Marawhihi  that  Dilingavuv  was 
chopping  himself  out  an  ear  in  place  of  the  other.    After  this 
Marawhihi  and  his  men  made  a  feast  and  danced,  and  danced 
every  day.    And  when  Dilingavuv  heard  of  it,  he  said,  I  will 
go  and  have  my  revenge.    So  he  gathered  a  great  quantity  of 
Tahitian  chestnuts,  and  took  fire,  and  collected  stones,  and 
took  a  dancing  cloak  of  leaves,  and  went  to  them.   But  he  did 


xix  ]  Dilingavuv.     The  Eel.  375 

not  go  right  up  to  them  into  the  open,  but  stayed  beside  the 
village.  Then  he  made  up  a  fire  and  roasted  his  chestnuts, 
and  heated  the  stones,  and  dug  a  very  deep  hole  and  covered 
over  the  mouth  of  it  with  the  dress  of  leaves ;  and  so  he  sat 
and  watched  them  dancing.  Before  long  as  they  were 
dancing  one  of  them  fell  out  to  take  breath ;  and  when  he 
saw  Dilingavuv  sitting  and  eating  chestnuts,  he  called  to  him 
to  give  him  one.  Run  over  here,  says  Dilingavuv  ;  so  he  runs 
over  to  him,  and  sits  down  on  this  dancing  dress ;  and  as  he 
throws  himself  clown  to  sit  he  goes  clean  down  into  the  hole. 
And  Dilingavuv  played  the  same  trick  to  all  the  company  at 
that  dance,  and  let  them  all  down  into  that  one  pit,  and 
Marawhihi  last  of  all.  Then  he  took  the  stones  that  he  had 
heated  over  the  fire,  and  threw  them  down  into  the  hole  to  kill 
the  men  with  heat ;  but  as  he  threw  them  down  Marawhihi  said 
to  his  companions,  Come  round  over  to  this  side  of  the  pit,  and 
they  did  so,  and  not  one  of  them  was  killed.  But  Dilingavuv 
went  home  thinking  he  had  killed  them  all.  Then  Maraw- 
hihi said  to  his  men,  Do  you  know  how  we  shall  save  our 
lives  ?  and  they  answered,  We  are  all  dead  already.  Not  at 
all,  said  he,  I  know  very  well  that  we  shall  not  die.  Then 
Marawhihi  cast  up  his  eyes  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  pit,  and 
saw  a  banyan  branch  bending  over  the  pit ;  and  he  said,  Let 
us  ker  galgalajmt  at  that  banyan  branch  (shoot  one  arrow 
after  another,  making  each  one  strike  and  fix  itself  into  the 
one  before  it).  And  they  did  so  ;  and  the  reed-shafts  of  the 
arrows  they  had  shot  reached  dowrl  to  them  into  the  pit. 
Then  said  Marawhihi,  Climb  up  along  the  shafts  ;  and  they 
said  to  him,  You  first,  and  we  after  you.  So  he  climbed 
up  on  the  line  of  arrows  and  got  out  of  the  pit,  and  so  they  all 
saved  their  lives. 


2.  A  Story  about  an  Eel.    Vanua  Lava. 

They  were  living  in  their  place,  and  they  were  planting 
their  gardens ;  and  one  day  when  they  went  to  plant,  a  boy 
said  to  his  father  and  mother,  To-morrow  when  you  go  again, 


Stories.  rQB 

you  will  put  by  a  yam  for  me.    Next  morning  bis  father 
and  mother  went  and  put  by  a  yam  for  him  ;  and  he  roasted 
it  and  ate  it,  and  then  went  and  asked  some  other  boys  for 
more.    But  they  scolded  him,  and  said  to  him,  What  I  has 
your  father  gone  and  not  left  you  anything  to  eat?  They 
gave  me  some,  he  said,  but  I  have  eaten  it  all  up  Why 
then  do  you  ask  for  our  food  too  ?  they  asked  ;  but  he  cried 
and  said,  Very  well!  I  will  tell  mother  and  father  by  and 
bye  that  you  have  scolded  me.    When  his  father  and  mother 
came,  back,  he  said  to  them,  When  you  both  left  me  I  ate 
up  all  my  food,  and  went  and  begged  some  of  theirs,  and 
they  were  very  angry  with  me  ;  so  to-morrow  when  you  go 
again  to  plant  you  are  to  put  two  yams  for  me.  Next 
morning  they  two  went  planting  again,  and  put  two  yams 
tor  the  boy;  and  when  he  had  roasted  them  he  went  and 
followed  a  stream,  and  found  a  nice  place,  and  sat  down  to 
eat.    As  he  was  eating,  crumbs  of  food  fell  into  the  water, 
and  an  Eel  came  out  and  ate,  and  turned  into  a  man,  and 
rose  up  and  came  to  the  boy.    When  they  two  had  eaten 
all  the  yam,  the  Eel  said  to  the  boy,  To-morrow  you  will 
roast  two  yams  again,  and  bring  them  here,  and  we  two  will 
eat  them.    After  that  the  boy  went  home,  and  the  Eel  went 
back  into  the  water  ;  and  the  boy  said  to  his  father  and 
mother,  To-morrow  when  you  go  you  must  put  two  yams  for 
me ;  and  in  the  morning  they  put  for  him  two  yams.  He 
roasted  them,  and  took  them  in  his  hand,  and  went  to  his 
place  and  ate  ;  and  the  Eel  came  out  again.    When  they 
had  finished  eating  the  Eel  said  to  the  boy,  Let  us  anoint  our 
heads.    So  they  dressed  their  heads  and  adorned  themselves, 
and  went  into  the  garden,  and  helped  the  people  who  were 
digging  the  ground.    But  when  that  Eel  dug  the  ground  all 
the  people  crowded  to  see  him  do  it ;  some  went  back  to  their 
digging,  but  the  women  would  not  do  their  work,  and  their  hus- 
bands were  exceedingly  angry  with  the  Eel,  and  rushed  upon 
him,  and  would  have  killed  him ;  but  the  boy  who  came  with 
him  poured  water  on  him,  and  he  turned  into  an  Eel  again. 
And  they  caught  hold  of  him,  but  he  escaped ;  and  they 


XIX.] 


Molgon  and  Molwor. 


377 


missed  their  hold  upon  hirn  over  and  over  again,  and  he 
jumped  into  the  water.  So  they  said,  All  right,  we  will 
make  rain  for  him  ;  and  they  made  a  great  rain,  and  the 
water  swelled  into  a  flood  and  carried  the  Eel  to  the  beach. 
When  the  flood  subsided  they  went  down  and  found  the  Eel 
lying*  on  the  beach,  and  they  cut  him  into  short  pieces,  and 
left  him.  But  the  boy,  his  brother,  ran  down  and  saw  the 
Eel  lying  there,  and  wept ;  and  his  tears  fell  upon  the  Eel, 
and  he  turned  into  a  man  again,  and  stood  up  and  said  to 
his  brother,  You  are  to  go  up  inland  and  tell  your  father  and 
mother  that  you  three  are  to  go  and  take  up  your  abode 
in  another  island.  The  boy  therefore  said  to  his  father  and 
mother,  We  three  are  to  move  to  another  island.  After  they 
had  gone,  one  day  an  old  woman  was  sitting,  and  she  heard 
the  Eel  singing  a  song ;  and  she  said  to  the  people,  Listen 
to  that  singing  a  song  like  the  Eel ;  but  some  of  them 
answered,  It  is  not  that,  the  Eel  is  dead;  but  they  heard 
plainly  the  Eel's  voice,  and  said,  It  is  true,  it  is  the 
Eel's  voice.  And  when  he  had  finished  singing  they  heard 
a  loud  report ;  and  as  they  were  sitting  a  very  great  surf 
rose  and  swept  them  away,  all  of  them  ;  and  they  all  died, 
and  that  island  was  entirely  lost. 

3.  Molgon  and  Molwoe.    Vanua  Lava. 

The  father  and  mother  of  these  two  brothers,  who  lived  ait 
Gaua,  said  to  the  elder  of  them,  Molgon,  you  are  to  look  well 
after  him,  the  younger  one,  and  feed  him  well.  All  right,  he 
said  ;  and  then  their  father  and  mother  died.  They  two  lived 
on  ;  and.  one  day  they  drew  down  a  canoe?  and  paddled  up  the 
course  of  a  stream,  and  came  upon  a  jpala&o  fruit  floating  down  it. 
They  broke  it  in  two  and  ate  it.  They  paddled  on  and  there 
came  floating  down  two,  one  for  one  of  them  to  eat,  one  for 
the  other;  they  paddled  on  and  three  came  floating  down 
one  for  one,  one  for  the  other,  and  one  they  broke  in  two  • 
they  paddled  on  and  four  came  floating  down,  two  for  one' 
two  for  the  other;  they  paddled  on  and  five  came  floatin- 


378 

Stories.  j-CH 

down,  two  for  one,  two  for  the  other,  and  one  they  broke  in 
two ;  they  paddled  on  and  six  came  floating  down,  three  for 
one,  three  for  the  other ;  they  paddled  on  and  seven  came 
floating-  down,  three  for  one,  three  for  the  other,  and  one  they 
broke  in  two;  they  paddled  on  and  eight  came  floating  down, 
four  for  one,  four  for  the  other ;  they  paddled  on  and  nine' 
came  floating  do.wn,  four  for  one,  four  for  the  other,  and  one 
they  broke  in  two ;  they  paddled  on  and  ten  came  floating 
down,  five  for  one,  five  for  the  other ;  they  paddled  on  and 
saw  the  source  from  which  the  fruits  had  floated  down. 
Then  the  first-born  said  to  the  younger,  You  sit  here,  and  1 
will  go  and  gather  for  us  both  to  eat.  So  he  went  and 
gathered  fruit.  But  a  woman,  Roprialal,  came  out  of  her 
house,  and  looked  down  to  where  he  was  standing,  and 
called  him.  He  went  to  her,  and  she  said  to  him,  We  two 
will  cook  food  in  the  oven  ;  and  they  two  cooked  food  in  the 
oven,  and  afterwards  they  ate.  He  could  not  eat  all  the  qeta, 
caladium,  and  he  said  to  her,  I  will  go  with  this  to  my 
brother,  that  he  may  eat  it ;  but  the  woman  said,  If  you  can't 
eat  it  all,  throw  it  outside  for  the  pigs  ;  and  he  cried.  Then 
they  made  a  mash,  and  he  could  not  eat  it  all,  and  said  to  her, 
I  shall  take  this  for  my  brother  to  eat.  But  the  woman  said, 
Throw  it  outside  to  the  pigs ;  and  he  cried.  Then  she  asked 
him,  What  is  your  name  ?  and  he  said,  Molgon.  And  what 
is  the  name  of  that  fellow  over  there  ?  and  he  said,  Molwor. 
And  she  said,  Ala !  true  enough !  your  name  is  Molgon, 
Go-catch,  and  you  have  come  here  and  have  caught  on  to  the 
pigs  which  belong  to  you  and  me,  and  the  house,  and  the 
gamal,  and  the  food,  and  the  money;  but  he,  his  name  is 
Molwor,  Go-clear,  and  he  has  come  here  to  be  clear  of  all  the 
goods  of  you  and  me.  And  he  cried  and  cried.  Then  the 
woman  said,  Get  up,  let  us  go  and  see  him ;  and  they  went 
over  and  found  him  dead,  lying  in  the  canoe,  for  the  sun  had 
smitten  him  dead  with  its  rays.  And  he  cried  and  cried,  and 
his  tears  dropped  on  his  brother's  breast,  and  he  came  to  life 
again,  and  said  to  him,  Brother,  our  father  when  he  died  told 
you  to  take  care  of  me,  but  you  have  gone  away  to  eat  and 


XIX.] 


The  Ghost-wife. 


379 


have  not  thought  of  me  ;  and  he  went  on  talking-.  But  the 
woman  stood  and  urged  him,  saying,  Come  here !  we  two 
will  go  up  away  from  him  again.  Then  as  Molwor  spoke  to 
him,  Molgon  wept  wonderfully;  and  when  he  had  finished 
speaking,  Molwor  sang  a  song  to  him,  and  got  down  from  the 
canoe,  and  put  his  legs  into  the  water,  and  began  to  turn  into 
an  eel  ;  and  when  he  had  quite  finished  his  song  he  plunged 
into  the  water,  and  his  brother  who  had  been  standing  by 
leapt  down  also  into  the  water.  And  the  woman  stood  and 
looked  down,  and  blood  came  up  from  the  water.  And  they 
two  turned  into  stones  lying  in  the  water-course ;  and  the 
woman  stood  and  wept  greatly,  and  went  back  again  up  the 
hill. 


4.  The  Ghost-wife.  Mota. 

A  story  to  tell.  They  were  living  and  living  in  their 
place ;  a  famine  prevailed.  And  there  was  a  woman  and  her 
son,  and  they  both  were  hungry.  After  a  time  the  mother 
went  to  dig  qauro,  wild  yams,  for  them  to  eat,  and  when  she 
had  finished  digging  the  qauro  she  would  return  to  her  son  in 
the  village  ;  and  as  she  went  she  found  a  gaviga  (Malay  apple) 
tree  in  fruit,  in  a  deserted  garden,  and  she  put  down  her 
basket,  and  took  a  stick  with  a  crook  and  pulled  down  the 
branches  of  the  gaviga  with  it,  and  then  she  gathered  with  her 
hands  and  ate.  And  when  she  had  finished  eating  she  put 
some  seeds  into  her  basket ;  and  as  she  went  along  she  broke 
the  tips  of  the  branches  to  mark  the  path.  And  when  she  had 
arrived  at  the  village  she  said  to  her  son,  Take  the  things  out 
of  our  basket ;  and  he  took  them  out  one  by  one,  and  as  he 
took  them  out  he  found  the  gaviga  seeds  in  the  basket  which 
his  mother  had  put  there.  Then  says  her  son  to  her,  What 
is  this  you  have  been  eating,  and  have  put  the  seeds  in  the 
basket  for  me  to  see  ?  And  his  mother  says,  Where  ?  And 
her  son  takes  out  the  gaviga  seeds.  Then  says  his  mother  to 
him,  Ml  I  don't  know  ;  somebody  I  suppose  has  put  them 
there.    But  he  says,  No  !  you  have  been  eating  them  to-day, 


38°  Stories.  [CH 

because  I  see  plainly  that  the  seeds  are  still  moist.  So  he 
presses  his  mother  hard  to  tell  him ;  and.  his  mother  tells 
him.  And  it  was  already  evening,  and  she  says  to  him,  As 
you  go  along  you  will  see  a  little  path  where  the  branches 
have  their  tips  broken  down,  and  you  will  pass  through  there 
and  come  out  (upon  the  tree).  So  he  follows  the  word  his 
mother  gave  him  ;  and  as  he  goes  along  the  sun  is  setting, 
but  he  arrives  at  the  gaviga-tree  and  climbs  up.  And  when 
he  had  climbed  up  to  eat  it  was  dark.  Then  he  sees  some- 
thing flying  to  him  on  the  gaviga  and  settling.  Then  says 
the  ghost  to  the  living  man,  Where  do  you  come  from  ?  And 
the  man  says  to  him,  It  is  not  as  you  suppose.  Mother  came 
here  to  dig  qawro  and  she  found  this  gaviga,  and  then  she 
went  home  and  told  me,  and  after  that  I  came  here.  Then 
said  the  ghost  to  him,  She  is  my  sister  to  be  sure,  and  my  own 
nephew  are  you  ;  come  here  and  let  me  hide  you,  because  we  are 
many  of  us  now  coming  here  to  eat  gavigas.  So  he  takes  him 
and  makes  him  sit  down  in  the  hollow  of  the  gaviga ;  and 
his  uncle  sat  over  the  mouth  of  the  hollow  of  the  gaviga  in 
which  the  man  was.  Then  while  he  is  in  the  hollow  he  hears 
a  whirring  sound  coming,  like  birds,  and  settling  on  the  top 
of  the  gaviga.  Then  says  the  man  to  the  ghost  his  uncle, 
What  is  this  ?  And  he  says  to  him,  They  are  here  already, 
some  ghosts  who  are  come  to  eat  gavigas,  and  if  you  hear 
them  buzzing  in  talk  together  don't  be  afraid,  and  don't  let 
your  bones  quake,  here  am  I  with  you.  So  he  sits  within ; 
and  his  uncle  looks  about,  and  sees  two  gavigas  in  a  bunch,  and 
says  to  another  ghost,  Pluck  those  two  for  me.  And  he  gives 
them  to  him,  and  he  eats  one  and  gives  the  man  the  other. 
And  he  went  on  doing  so  for  him  till  daylight;  and  when  the 
day  was  dawning  and  some  of  the  ghosts  were  taking  flight 
he  says  to  a  damsel  among  them,  Don't  be  in  a  hurry  to  fly 
off,  you  and  I  will  fly  together  ;  and  she  says,  Very  well.  But 
when  they  had  all  the  lot  of  them  taken  flight,  and  it  was  clear 
daylight,  the  ghost  says  to  the  man,  Well  now,  come  out ; 
and  he  comes  out  from  the  hollow  of  the  gaviga-tree.  Then 
says  the  ghost  his  uncle  to  him,  Well,  here  is  a  damsel  for 


xix.]  The  Ghost-ivife.  381 

your  wife.    And  the  man  says  to  the  ghost,  Ah,  I  don't 
know!  will  she  be  agreeable  or  not?    And  his  uncle  says, 
She  agrees.    Then  the  female  agreed  with  the  man,  and  they 
two  went  back  into  the  village.    And  when  the  two  arrived 
at  the  village  his  mother  asked  him,  Where  is  that  woman 
from  ?    And  he  says,  She  is  my  wife  ;  Uncle  gave  her  to  me. 
And  she  says,  Who  is  Uncle  ?    And  he  says,  Your  brother  of 
course,  wbo  died  long  ago ;  when  I  went  to  eat  gavigas  and 
it  was  night  I  saw  him  fly  first  to  me,  and  he  put  me  in  the 
hollow  of  the  gaviga.    Then  saj'S  his  mother,  Very  well,  we 
three  will  live  here,  and  she  may  live  with  you  ;  so  the  three 
lived  together.    And  as  the  three  lived  together  those  two 
worked  for  yams  and  taro  and  tomago  and  hibiscus ;  and  as 
they  were  working  so  her  husband  appointed  the  time  for  his 
mqe,  and  appointed  five  days.    And  they  waited  counting- 
the  days,  and  when  it  came  to  the  fifth  day  he  went  off,  and 
he  said  to  his  wife,  You  two  are  not  to  come,  you  and  our 
child ;  you  two  go  into  the  garden  and  weed  away  the  grass 
from  the  taro,  and  when  you  have  finished  weeding  go  to  the 
other  part  where  it  is  ripe,  and  pull  up  for  yourselves,  and 
come  back  here.    And  she  did  so  ;  and  when  she  had  finished 
weeding  she  took  up  their  child  on  her  back ;  but  as  the  two 
came  near  the  taro  the  woman  stretched  out  her  hand  to  pull 
some  up,  and  there  was  a  bunch  of  taro  already  in  her  hand  ; 
and  she  put  it  aside ;  and  if  she  touched  a  hibiscus  plant  to 
pluck  the  leaves,  behold,  a  bundle  of  hibiscus  leaves  again  in 
her  hand  ;  and  if  she  essayed  to  lay  hold  on  sticks  for  fire-wood, 
there  was  a  faggot  of  fire-wood  already  in  her  hand  ;  and  the 
two  went  home.    And  they  two  come  back  into  the  village, 
and  light  a  fire  for  their  oven,  and  do  the  necessary  work 
about  it,  and  cover  it  in.    And  she  opens  it,  and  then  her 
husband  comes  back  and  asks  her,  Where  have  you  two  been  ? 
And  she  says,  In  our  garden.    Then  he  says,  But  who  gave 
you  taro  ?  And  he  says,  But  I  have  seen  that  belonging  to  us 
still  untouched.    Then  she  says,  Not  so  ;  it  was  taken  in  our 
garden.    Then  he  says  again,  Ed  !  perhaps  I  did  not  observe 
exactly.    So  they  waited  again  five  days  for  the  rank  of  Qoro- 


3^2  Stories.  rCH< 

qorolava ;  and  when  it  comes  to  that  day  he  goes  away  again 
from  those  two ;  and  he  makes  the  same  arrangements  and 
goes  away.    After  that  she  takes  her  child  up  on  her  back, 
and  goes  with  it  to  the  yam  garden ;  and  when  they  have  arrived 
there  she  puts  down  her  child  and  works  at  weeding.  And 
when  she  has  weeded  all  the  place  she  does  again  as  before ; 
if  she  essays  to  dig  a  yam  for  their  food,  and  she  lays  hold  on 
the  leaf  of  the  yam,  there  is  a  tuber  already  in  her  hand  ;  and 
if  she  essays  to  pluck  hibiscus  leaves,  they  are  in  her  hand 
already;  and  if  she  essays  to  take  a  cocoa-nut,  there  is  a  cocoa- 
nut  already  in  her  hand.    And  the  evening  draws  on,  and  the 
two  go  home ;  and  her  husband  comes  home  and  sees  them,  and 
asks  them,  What  have  you  two  eaten  ?    And  she  says,  We  two 
have  been  in  our  garden  working,  and  have  dug  a  yam  for 
our  food,  and  plucked  hibiscus  leaves,  and  taken  cocoa-nuts. 
But  her  husband  says  to  her,  Not  so ;  I  have  been  into  our 
garden  and  have  seen  one  thing,  but  I  have  not  seen  at  all 
that  a  yam  has  been  dug,  not  at  all ;  and  no  cocoa-nut  has 
been  taken.    And  the  woman  says  to  him,  Not  so ;  we  two 
certainly  have  got  the  food  in  our  garden.    But  the  man 
says,  Not  so ;  there  is  some  one  else  probably  who  has  given 
it  to  you.    And  she  says,  Who  is  there  that  will  trouble 
himself  about  us?  he  will  be  a  ghost,  I  suppose!    And  he 
says,  Tell  me  who  gives  these  things  to  you.    Who  should  it 
be  that  would  give  me  anything?  says  she.    And  the  man 
says,  No !  tell  me  the  truth.    Then  the  woman  says  to  him, 
Well !  come  along,  we  three  will  go  into  our  garden.    So  the 
three  set  out  and  went  and'  arrived  ;  and  the  woman  says  to 
him,  Well !  look  here,  you  are  angry  with  us,  but  you  may 
see  for  yourself.    Then  she  touches  taro,  and  it  was  as  before, 
and  yams,  and  it  was  so.    Then  the  man  says,  Not  so  ;  some 
one  else  has  been  giving  you  things.    But  as  he  says  thus  he 
lays  hold  on  a  stick  and  beats  her,  and  says,  You  don't  belong 
down  here  below,  you  belong  above  the  sky.    What  have 
you  been  doing  here?    Get  back  into  your  own  country. 
And  she  says,  Very  well,  I  will  soon  go  back  into  my  own 
country.    And  one  day  after  again  he  beat  her  and  went  off. 


xix.]  Ganviviris.  383 

And  when  she  has  seen  that  he  is  gone  she  gathers  banyan 
leaves  into  a  heap,  and  sets  fire  to  them,  and  they  burn. 
Then  she  says  to  her  child,  Sit  here,  and  I  will  go  to  the 
other  side  of  the  fire  ;  and  she  goes  to  the  other  side  of  the  fire, 
and  the  smoke  goes  straight  up  into  the  clouds,  and  the 
child's  mother  goes  up  in  it;  and  her  child  cries  beside  tbe 
fire,  and  she  goes  on  up  into  the  clouds  1. 


5.  Ganviviris.  Mota. 

The  story  about  what  Ro  Som  did  for  Ganviviris  is  not  an 
old  one ;  he  was  a  man  whom  my  father's  grandfather  and 
his  friends  had  seen  ;  he  was  an  orphan,  his  father  was  dead, 
and  his  mother  too  was  dead,  and  he  lived  with  his  mother's 
brother.    And  his  uncle  did  nothing  for  him  in  the  snqe 
club,  he  still  remained  an  avlava,  because  he  was  an  idle 
fellow,  and  whenever  they  called  him  to  go  to  work  he  would 
refuse,  and  when  they  were  all  gone  inland  to  the  gardens  he 
would  go  down  to  the  beach  to  shoot  fish,  and  do  nothing 
else  day  after  day.    But  one  day  when  they  had  called  him  to 
work  and  were  all  gone,  he  took  his  bow  and  went  down  to 
Ngerenow,  and  there  he  saw  a  sauma  slowly  swimming  along 
and  rolling  from  side  to  side  quite  close  to  him  ;  and  he  took 
an  arrow  tipped  with  casuarina  wood,  and  drew  his  bow  to 
shoot.    And  just  as  he  was  releasing  the  string  he  heard  a 
voice  inciting  him  and  saying,  Let  fly!  Let  fly!  And  he 
drew  down  his  arrow  from  the  bow-string,  thinking  it  was 


a 


Here  the  MS.  ends.    The  story  goes  on  to  relate  that  the  man  found 

H  ^T^/"  US  m°ther  b68ide        ^  and  refusi^  t0  be  conned 
He  sought  help  from  all  the  birds  and  living  creatures,  but  none  would  listen 
o  mm   ,11  he  came  to  the  Spider,  who  readily  undertook  to  bring 

the  cMd  to  its  mother.    He  spun  a  line  from  earth  to  heaven,  took  the  man 
and  the  chid  on  his  back  and  carried  them  safely  up.    A  feast  was  117 
m  heaven,  and  the  two  sat  down  in  the  circle  of  spLtatos     Th^  rifen  were 
dancmg  round  the  drum,  and  the  women  tramping  round  in  pair"  Zl 
tune  the  mother  passed  the  child  it  cried  out  Mother  ,  She  Ip^  d  at  Hs 
and  asked  Who  s  that  cries  Mother!  to  me?  Eecognizing  her  child  and 


3<H     .  Stories.  rCH. 

man,  and  he  turned  his  head  again  and  again  to  look  behind 
him  to  S66  who  it  was,  but  there  was  no  man.  And  he  drew 
again,  and  heard  again  the  voice  inciting  him  ;  and  he  looked 
again,  for  he  still  thought  it  was  a  man.  And  the  third  time 
he  drew  his  bow.  and  heard  the  voice,  and  loosed  the  string 
and  hit  the  sauma.  And  he  ran  down  and  caught  the  fish  by 
the  tail,  and  threw  his  arms  round  it ;  but  the  fish  struggled, 
throwing  itself  about,  and  carried  him  off  into  a  dry  cave, 
which  was,  they  say,  the  dwelling  of  Bo  Som  (Money).  And 
Ganviviris  cried  aloud,  but  the  sauma  turned  into  a  woman,  and 
said,  Don't  cry,  it  is  I  who  have  had  pity  on  you.  I  have 
seen  you  every  day,  and  now  I  am  going  to  do  you  a  service. 
You  shall  go  back ;  and  when  you  go  home  you  are  to  tell 
your  uncle  to  bid  his  wives  plait  bags  for  you,  and  let  them 
be  ten,  and  make  a  chamber  for  yourself  parted  off  from  the 
house,  and  hang  up  all  the  bags  in  the  open  ;  and  don't  eat 
anything  to-day.  So  Ganviviris  dived  out  of  the  cave,  and 
went  back  into  the  village,  and  said  to  his  uncle,  Tata,  tell 
those  three  to  plait  me  ten  bags.  And  his  uncle  said  to  him, 
What  have  you  got  belonging  to  you  to  stow  in  them  ?  You 
are  a  penniless  fellow,  and  one  who  never  plants  or  gathers. 
But  he  says,  E!  just  let  me  have  them  plaited.  So  his 
uncle  said  to  his  wives,  You  are  to  plait  bags  for  Ganviviris. 
And  they  three  cried,  E-o-o !  who  is  to  listen  to  him,  an 
avlava,  a  fellow  who  does  nothing  at  all  ?  But  his  uncle  said, 
Plait  them  just  to  try  what  his  nonsense  means  ;  then  we 
shall  see  what  sort  of  property  he  has  got  to  stow  in  them. 
So  the  three  women  plaited  the  bags.  And  in  the  night  Bo 
Som  came  to  Ganviviris  and  said,.  Make  haste  to  hang  up 
your  bags.  And  next  day  he  hung  up  the  bags ;  and  in  the 
night  as  he  was  lying  down  to  sleep  he  heard  the  rafters 
creak  again  because  of  the  money  which  was  filling  the  bags ; 
and  he  got  up  and  felt  one  after  another  those  ten  bags, 
every  one  quite  full.  And  Bo  Som  said  to  him,  Tell  your 
uncle  to  give  you  his  third  wife.  So  he  spoke  out  to  him 
about  it,  and  his  uncle  let  him  have  one.  And  he  said  again, 
Tata,  let  us  break  up  fire-wood  for  the  day  after  to-morrow. 


XIX.] 


Ganviviris. 


385 


But  his  uncle  said  to  him,  What  property  have  you  got  to 
give  for  us  to  buy  your  rank  with,  you  a  penniless  fellow 
with  nothing  coming  in  ?    And  he  says,  Lend  me  some 
money  and  a  pig  to  make  the  first  payments  with  ;  but  this 
he  said  to  try  him.    And  his  uncle  said  to  him,  I  shall  not 
consent  to  let  you  have  any  property  of  mine  ;  why  should  I? 
you  are  an  idle  fellow.    But  he  says,  Tata,  let  us  break  up 
fire-wood  the  day  after  to-morrow,  and  to-morrow  we  will  go 
into  your  gardens,  and  I  will  look  for  some  taro  there.  So 
they  went  to  the  gardens,  and  he  said  to  his  uncle,  Put  up  a 
palako  as  a  warning  against  taking  anything  from  these 
gardens.    And  his  uncle  said  to  him,  You  are  putting  a  mark 
upon  a  great  quantity ;  what  have  you  got  of  your  own  to  pay 
so  great  a  price  with  ?  And  he  says,  You  will  pay  the  great 
price.    But  he  says,  I  shall  not  listen  to  you  about  my  money 
and  my  food.    So  they  went  back  again  into  the  village,  and 
all  the  people  then  heard  of  what  had  been  done,  and  they 
laughed  at  Ganviviris,  saying  that  he  would  never  be  able  to 
eat  his  suae  rank.    But  next  day  they  broke  up  fire- wood,  and 
he  bought  taro  with  a  great  price,  with  ten  coils  of  money  for 
each  garden.    And  his  uncle  said  to  him,  You  have  bought 
food  with  a  great  price  ;  you  have  succeeded  in  thab,  but  you 
have  to  give  money  all  round  for  your  suae,  where  have  you 
got  anything  for  that?  And  he  says,  That  will  be  your  doing 
of  course.    But  his  uncle  had  no  wish  to  let  him  have  his 
money;  so  he  says,  Let  us  bring  the  taro  to-morrow,  and 
crack  almonds  for  the  feast.    And  he  said  again  to  his 
uncle,  Tata,  let  your  children  twist  some  cords.    So  his  two 
children  twisted,  and  his  wives  twisted  ;  and  the  neighbours 
asked  his  uncle  saying,  They  are  twisting  cords,  but  where  is 
the  pig  there  tied  up  by  the  house  ?  And  he  says,  En  !  we  have 
never  seen  any  belonging  to  him,  he  is  a  pauper.    But  in  the 
evening  he  went  and  got  four  pigs,  and  tied  them  up  near  the 
village.    And  he  ate  on  one  day  the  avink  and  the  qatagiav 
And  m  the  night  Ro  Som  said  to  him,  You  are  to  take  all 
your  ranks  m  the  suae  here  at  Qakea ;  you  are  not  to  take 
any  at  Mota ;  if  you  disobey  my  word  in  this  you  will  die. 

c  c 


3^6  Stories.  rcir< 

And  on  the  day  he  bought  his  rank  he  said  to  them,  Have 
you  made  all  the  return  for  my  money?  And  they  said,  When 
you  have  completed  your  distribution  of  property  we  will 
make  an  end  of  our  return ;  lest  we  should  crush  ourselves 
into  poverty.  So  he  went  and  loosed  and  brought  out  two 
rawe  pigs  and  two  boars,  and  he  went  into  his  bouse  and 
earned  out  his  money-bags  on  his  back,  and  with  that  he 
made  distribution ;  and  they  were  amazed  at  those  rawe  and 
boars,  all  of  them  with  their  tusks  curled  round  till  they  met, 
that  Eo  Som  had  given  to  him.  And  after  five  days  agaiu 
they  broke  up  fire- wood,  and  on  the  tenth  day  again  he  bought 
his  steps  of  rank,  the  avtagataga  and  the  hmaiav.  And  on 
the  fifth  day  again  they  broke  up  fire-wood,  and  on  the  tenth 
day  he  bought  his  steps,  the  tamasuria  and  the  tavai  suqe ; 
and  on  the  fifth  day  again  he  said,  Let  us  break  up  fire-wood, 
and  on  the'  tenth  day  he  bought  the  steps  lavasuqelava  and 
kerejme.  And  always  he  was  buying  food  with  large  pay- 
ments, and  he  paddled  over  to  Vanua  Lava  and  bought  with 
large  sums  there,  and  to  Mota  and  bought  with  large  sums 
there :  and  he  went  on  in  the  suqe  till  he  reached  the  weme- 
teloa.  Then  he  desired  to  make  his  suqe  also  at  Mota,  and  he 
went  and  built  his  house  at  Tasmate,  and  they  broke  up  fire- 
wood and  danced  the  taqesara.  But  he  appointed  the  tenth  day 
for  a  sawae,  and  on  the  ninth  day  he  prepared  mashed  yams ; 
and  at  the  sawae  he  appointed  the  tenth  day  for  a.  kolekole. 
And  at  the  kolekole,  when  the  noise  of  the  sawae  was  sounding 
like  thunder,  and  the  feast  was  at  its  height,  they  saw  a 
woman  walking  up  the  sloping  ground  below  the  cliff,  using 
a  spear  for  a  walking  stick,  with  bracelets  on  her  arms  reach- 
ing to  the  elbow,  and  on  her  right  arm  a  boar's  tusk,  and  her 
head  smeared  with  red  earth,  and  pigs'  tails  fastened  to  her 
hair ;  and  they  thought  that  some  visitors  had  just  landed 
from  a  canoe.  And  she  went  straight  to  the  house  of  Gan- 
viviris  and  passed  out  of  sight  within  it ;  and  they  went  to 
see  who  it  was  and  found  no  one  there.  And  they  told  Gan- 
viviris,  We  have  seen  a  woman  go  into  your  kole  house,  with 
bracelets  and  boars'  tusks  on  her  arms ;  and  he  said,  Don't 


XIX.] 


The  Little  Orphan. 


387 


mention  it  in  the  village.  And  he  went  up  there  to  bring 
out  his  money-bags  on  his  back,  and  he  saw  that  his  ten  bags 
had  nothing  in  them  ;  and  he  went  outside  and  saw  that  all 
his  pigs  were  gone ;  his  distribution  of  property  came  to 
nothing  at  all.  And  when  the  evening  was  dark,  and  Gan- 
viviris  was  sleeping-  in  his  house,  they  heard  him  cry  out, 
and  they  asked  him,  What  ails  you?  And  he  said,  Esi ! 
there  is  something,  but  I  "don't  know  what  it  is,  that  has 
happened  to  me.  And  he  began  to  sicken  on  that  very  night, 
and  on  the  fifth  day  he  died. 

6.  The  Little  Oephan.  ^Mota. 

A  story  to  tell.    They  were  living  in  their  place,  the  boys 
were  growing  up,  and  their  father  and  mother  said  to  them, 
Go  down  to  the  beach,  and  catch  fish  with  hook  and  line  for 
us,  and  we  two  will  go  inland  and  get  vegetables  for  us  all 
to  eat  with  them.    And  they  said,  Very  well ;  and  the  two 
went  up  to  the  garden,  and  they  went  down  to  the  beach. 
And  as  they  were  going  along  the  path  the  Little  Orphan  said, 
Let  me  go  with  you.    But  they  said  E-0-0  !  not  you,  a  little 
orphan,  we  will  go  by  ourselves  alone,  we  who  are  children  of 
fathers;  if  you  were  to  go  with  us  what  would  you  eat? 
You  have  no  father,  you  have  no  mother,  who  will  give  you 
food  to  eat  with  your  fish  ?  And  they  went  first,  and  the 
Little  Orphan  behind.    And  those  the  children  of  fathers 
went  down  to  the  beach,  and  the  Little  Orphan  went  down 
a  steep  place  eastwards  to  the  landing-place  at  Sanwawa ; 
and  there  he  fishes  for  himself  with  a  line  and  hook.  And 
when  he  sees  those  others  mounting  back  into,  the  island, 
he  also  strings  his  fish  together  and  mounts  back  himself; 
and  he  comes  near  to  them,  and  they  say,  Don't  come  together 
with  us,  you  have  no  father  and  no  mother  to  give  you 
vegetable  food  to  eat  your  fish  with.    So  they  mount  up 
and  they  before  and  he  behind.    But  they  go  on  the  way 
homeward,  and  he  stops   short,  and  goes  into  his  cave 
and  roasts  his  fish.    And  when  he  has  roasted  them  he  take, 


3^8  Stories.  [CH. 

his  fish  up  tog-ether  and  goes  out,  and  goes  out  down  to  the 
beach,  and  sits  down,  and  dips  his  fish  into  a  little  pool  of 
salt-water,  and  eats  them  by  themselves  without  any  vegetable 
food.  After  this  on  another  day  they  went  again ;  and  the 
Little  Orphan  says,  I  will  go  with  you  ;  and  they  say,  No,  we 
have  already  said  that  you  the  Little  Orphan  are  not  to  come. 
If  you  come  with  us,  and  you  catch  fish,  what  have  you  to 
eat  with  them?  you  have  no  food  to  eat  your  fish  with.  And 
they  went  before  and  he  went  after  ;  and  they  went  to  their 
place,  and  he  to  his.  And  he  fishes  with  his  hook  and  line 
and  keeps  his  eye  upon  them ;  and  when  he  sees  them 
mount  up  inland,  he  also  mounts  up  himself.  And  they  say 
to  him,  Don't,  we  tell  you,  be  coming  along  with  us ;  if  you 
come  here  who  is  there  to  give  you  food  ?  you  have  no  father 
and  no  mother  to  give  you  food  to  eat  your  fish  with.  And 
they  go  on  into  the  village,  and  he  stops  short,  and  roasts 
again  his  fish  and  eats  them  without  vegetable  food.  After 
this  on  another  day  again  they  went ;  and  he  said,  Let  me 
g'o  with  you  ;  but  they  said,  You  are  not  to  go,  we  only 
shall  go  who  have  fathers  and  have  mothers,  you  are  not 
to  come,  a  little  orphan.  And  they  went  again  before,  and 
he  behind,  and  they  to  their  place  and  he  to  his.  And  as  he 
stood  down  there,  a  fish  comes  on  his  hook  first,  and  he  runs 
up  on  the  rocks  and  takes  it  off  the  hook  ;  and  runs  and 
lets  down  his  hook  into  the  water,  and  a  iapanau  is  caught, 
and  he  takes  it  up,  and  runs  up  and  puts  it  down  into  a  little 
pool.  And  he  runs  over  again  and  lets  down  his  hook  and  a 
nongpitpit  is  caught ;  and  he  runs  up  and  puts  it  down  into 
the  pool ;  and  runs  over  and  lets  down  his  hook  and  a  gavaru 
is  caught,  and  he  goes  with  it  and  puts  it  down  into  the  pool, 
and  runs  over  and  lets  down  his  hook,  and  a  plaited  hibiscus 
line  (gavarv)  is  caught  by  him ;  and  he  goes  up  with  it  and  puts 
it  down.  And  he  runs  over  to  let  down  his  hook,  and  a  woman 
and  her  child  come  up  out  of  the  sea  to  him  ;  and  their  name 
is  Eo  Som  (Money),  and  he  puts  them  down  on  the  reef. 
Then  Ro  Som  says  to  him,  Let  us  three  go  together.  And 
the  Little  Orphan  says,  E-o-o  !  not  you  two  ;  I  will  go  by 


XIX.]  The  Little  Orphan.  389 

myself.  But  she  says,  No,  we  three.  But  the  Little  Orphan 
says,  No,  you  two  must  not  ;  I  shall  go  by  myself,  because 
I  have  no  food  to  feed  you  with.  But  she  says,  Never  mind, 
string  our  fish  together  and  we  three  will  go.  So  the  three 
went  along  and  arrived  at  the  Little  Orphan's  dwelling-place  ; 
and  he  looks  and  sees  a  house  and  a  gamal ;  and  he  asks  her, 
"Whose  house  is  this  ?  and  whose  gamal  is  this  ?  And  Ro  Som 
says  to  him,  It  is  the  house  of  us  three,  and  your  gamal.  So 
they  three  enter  into  the  house,  and  sit  down.  And  Ro  Som 
says  to  the  Little  Orphan,  Come  now,  cook  the  fish  for  us 
three  to  eat.  But  he  says  What  is  there  ?  What  are  we 
going  to  eat  the  fish  with  ?  I  told  you  that  you  two  must 
not  come  with  me  ;  I  have  no  food.  But  she  says,  Cook 
the  fish,  we  three  will  eat  them  with  some  vegetable  food 
presently.  So  he  makes  up  a  fire  for  the  fish,  and  puts  hot 
stones  inside  them  and  wraps  them  in  leaves,  and  puts  them 
on  the  fire,  and  the  three  sit  down  and  wait.  Then  Ro  Som 
says  to  him,  Now  then,  take  down  our  fish.  And  he  says, 
What  are  we  to  do  ?  What  are  we  going  to  eat  them  with,  I 
mean  ?  And  she  says,  Look,  there  is  a  heap  of  cooked  food 
there  for  us  to  eat  the  fish  with.  So  he  goes  over  to  the  fish, 
and  takes  them  off  the  fire,  and  they  three  ate.  And  when 
they  had  finished  eating  he  goes  out  of  the  house  into  the 
village  and  sees  gardens,  a  banana  garden,  and  atomago  garden, 
and  a  yam  garden,  a  wpwosa  garden,  a  weswes  garden,  a 
sugar-cane  garden  ;  and  the  bananas  were  beginning  to  rot, 
and  the  tomagos  were  sprouting  afresh,  and  the  yams  were 
sprouting,  and  the  reeds  were  throwing  up  flower  stalks,  and 
the  qeta  were  beginning  to  rot.  Then  he  said  to  his  mother, 
Oh,  mother,  whose  gardens  are  these  here  ?  And  Ro  Som 
says,  They  belong  to  us  three  only;  and  she  says  to  him, 
To-morrow  you  will  make  up  fires  in  the  gamal  in  every  oven, 
and  we  two  will  be  here  in  the  house,  and  we  three  will  make 
mixture  of  cooked  food  and  scraped  cocoa-nut  for  food  for  pigs. 
And  says  the  Little  Orphan,  Very  well,  but  what  are  we  to 
feed  with  it  ?  But  she  says,  Just  get  to  work  about  it.  So 
they  two  cooked  a  quantity  of  food  in  the  oven  inside  the 


390  Stories.  [CH. 

house,  and  he  also  cooked  a  quantity  in  the  gamal;  and  the 
pigs'  food  made  by  the  two  in  the  house  was  a  hundred  baskets- 
full  and  that  in  the  gamal  a  hundred.    And  as  soon  as  they 
covered  m  the  ovens  the  food  was  cooked.    And  the  Little 
Orphan  mixed  the  food  for  his  part  in  the  gamal,  and 
Som  and  her  child  mixed  for  their  part  in  the  house ; 
and  when  the  three  have  finished  mixing,  they  take  the  food 
out  into  the  village  place,  and  the  Little  Orphan  puts  his 
down  on  a  stone,  and  Som  and  her  child  put  theirs  down 
at  the  door  of  the  house.    And  Ro  Som  says,  Well  now,  call 
the  pigs,  summim-  and  the  Little  Orphan  gets  up  and  swnsums, 
and  he  hears  continued  squealing,  and  he  sees  boars  with 
tusks  that  curl  and  meet,  and  rawe  with  tusks  that  curl 
and  meet,  and  sows  ;  these  all  come  rushing  out  to  the  three, 
and  the  three  feed  them  and  they  eat.    And  while  they  are 
eating,  Ro  Som  says  to  him,  Have  you  got  any  uncle  on  your 
mother's  side?  And  he  says,  I  have  an  uncle,  but  he  does 
not  come  to  look  after  me,  and  he  gives  me  no  food.  Then 
said  Ro  Som,  Run  and  say  to  him,  Tata,  come  and  make  the 
payments  for  my  steps  in  the  suqe.    So  the  wife  of  the  uncle 
of  the  Little  Orphan  saw  him  coming,  and  she  said  to  the 
people,  Drive  that  boy  away  that  is  coming  here ;  who  is 
there  to  attend  to  him,  and  give  him  food  ?  Then  says  the 
Little  Orphan,  Tata!   And  his  uncle  says  O-e !  what  is  it? 
And  he  says,  Come  out  here.    So  his  uncle  came  out  to  him  ; 
and  he  says,  Tata,  pray  come  to  me  to  pay,  sar,  for  my  steps. 
And  his  uncle  says,  Oh,  but  if  I  pay  that,  what  will  you  vile 
pulai,  return  payment,  with  ?  And  his  nephew  says,  Come  let 
us  go.    So  the  Little  Orphan  led  the  way,  and  his  uncle 
came  behind,  and  they  went  on.    And  when  they  arrived 
beside  the  Little  Orphan's  village,  his  uncle  sees  a  place  where 
pigs  have  been  rooting,  and  he  says,  Ah  !  these  pigs'  rootings, 
whose  are  they  ?  And  he  says,  Mine  to  be  sure.    But  he  says, 
Oh,  I  dare  say !   Where  are  you  going  to  get  pigs  from  to 
be  your  property  ?  Then  he  sees  also  a  garden,  and  he  says, 
Whose  is  this  yam  garden  ?  and  he  says,  Mine.    And  his  uncle 
says,  I'll  beat  you  for  saying  it;  but  he  looks  about  and 


xjx.]  The  Little  Orphan.  39 r 

the  bananas  arc  rotting-,  and  the  caladium  is  rotting,  and 
the  tomagos  are  sprouting.  And  then  he  sees  a  house  and 
says,  But  whose  house  is  this  ?  and  whose  cjamal  is  this  ? 
And  the  Little  Orphan  says,  My  house  and  my  gamal.  And 
his  uncle  says,  But  how  is  it  that  you  have  got  these  ?  Who 
is  there  who  will  assist  you  and  give  you  thatch  ?  And  the 
Little  Orphan  says  to  his  uncle,  Well,  let  those  people  give 
the  first  money,  vene,  for  the  avrik.  And  his  uncle  says  to 
the  people,  Come,  give  in  your  money  to  begin  with,  I  will 
sar,  pay  back,  to  you.  And  all  the  people  say,  You  fellows ! 
how  is  it  ?  What  has  he  got  to  return  with  ?  He  has  no 
money.  But  his  uncle  makes  the  first  return,  sar,  payment 
to  them,  and  when  be  had  paid  them  all,  the  Little 
Orphan  gives  money  for  his  unele's  property;  and  he  says 
again,  Tata,  make  payment  again  to  them  for  the  qatagiav. 
And  they  vene  to  his  uncle,  and  he  makes  the  full  return 
to  them  all,  and  his  nephew  returns  his  property  to  him, 
pigs  and  money.  And  he  says  to  his  uncle  again,  Pay, 
sar,  them  again  for  the  av  tagataga,  and  he  pays ;  and 
when  he  has  paid  them  all,  his  nephew  makes  the  return  of 
his  property,  gives  pigs  and  money  And  he  says  again  to  his 
uncle,  Tata,  let  those  people  again  make,  vene,  their  contribu- 
tion of  money  for  the  Imcai  av ;  and  they  make  it ;  and  his 
uncle  repays  them ;  and  when  he  has  paid  them  all,  his 
nephew  runs  up  into  the  house,  and  brings  money  out  on  his 
back,  and  makes  the  return  of  his  property  to  his  uncle.  And 
that  food  that  they  ate  would  never  come  to  an  end ;  they 
made  one  cooking  of  it,  and  they  still  went  on  eating  it  for 
rank  after  rank  in  the  suqe ;  they  eat,  and  they  stay  at  it 
right  through  like  that.  Afterwards  he  says  again  to  his 
uncle,  Well  now,  pay  them  again  for  the  tamasuria,  and  he 
pays  them  again ;  and  his  nephew  runs  up  again,  and  brings 
out  again  on  his  back  bags  of  money,  and  gives  pigs,  and 
makes  return  of  his  property  to  his  uncle.  And  the  people 
still  remain ;  and  he  says  again  to  his  uncle,  Tata,  pay  them 
again  for  the  tavai  suqe ;  and  he  pays  again ;  and  when  he 
has  paid  them  all,  his  nephew  runs  up  and  goes  into  the 


39  2  Stories.  rCH. 

house,  and  carries  out  money  again  on  his  back,  and  gives 
pigs  and  rawes,  and  makes  return  of  his  uncle's  property 
And  he  says,  Tata,  pay  again  for  the  kerepue;  and  he  pays 
and  his  nephew  brings  money,  and  pigs,  and  rawes,  and  gives 
them  to  his  uncle.  And  he  says  again,  Tata,  pay  them  for  the 
mele  ;  and  he  pays  ;  and  his  nephew  runs  up  and  goes  into  the 
house  and  carries  out  money,  and  gives  pigs  and  rawes,  and 
makes  return  of  his  uncle's  property.  And  that  money  will 
never  come  to  an  end,  because  his  mother  was  Ro  Som  (i.e. 
Money);  and  she  sits  in  the  house  and  is  hard  at  work  multi- 
plying that  money.  And  he  says  again,  Tata,  pay  them  again 
for  the  tetug;  and  he  pays ;  and  his  nephew  runs  up  and  goes 
into  the  house,  and  carries  out  money,  and  gives  pigs  and 
rawes,  and  makes  return  of  his  uncle's  property.  And  he 
says  again,  Tata,  pay  them  again  for  the  lano ;  and  he  pays 
them ;  and  his  nephew  makes  return  of  his  property  again. 
And  he  says  again,  Tata,  pay  them  for  the  qorqorolava ;  and 
he  pays  ;  and  his  nephew  makes  return  of  his  property,  brings 
pigs,  and  brings  rawes,  and  makes  return  again  to  his  uncle. 
And  thus  it  went  on  till  he  rose  to  the  top,  till  he  ate  right 
through  all  the  ranks  of  the  suqe.  After  that  he  says  to  his 
uncle  again,  Tata,  let  us  two  make  a  kolekole ;  and  his  uncle 
says,  Very  well.  And  he  makes  a  kolekole  for  a  stone,  a  sewere, 
makes  one  for  an  image,  nule,  makes  one  for  a  gamal,  makes 
one  for  a  wenereqoe,  pig's  tail,  makes  one  for  a  wetapup, 
chicken's  feathers,  makes  one  for  a  sarlano,  a  hat,  makes  one 
for  a  liwan  tamate,  figure  of  a  ghost,  all  those  kolekoles  of 
every  sort  and  kind  he  accomplished.  After  that  his  nephew 
made  a  return  of  his  property;  he  returned,  went  on  re- 
turning, returned  to  the  uttermost  his  uncle's  property. 
And  his  uncle  killed  pigs  for  him  ;  killed  for  the  sewere, 
killed  for  the  nule,  killed  for  the  gamal,  killed  for  the  wenere- 
qoe, killed  for  the  tvetapup,  killed  for  the  kolevat,  the  stone, 
killed  for  the  qatqatmemea,  the  red  head,  killed  for  the  sarlano, 
killed  for  the  Imantamate.  And  when  he  had  finished  killinsr, 
his  uncle  commanded  the  people  of  his  village  to  take  his 
pigs,  and  his  rawe,  and  his  money,  to  carry  away;  to  carry 


xix.]  The  Little  Orphan,  393 

away  his  pigs,  and  to  carry  away  his  rawe,  and  to  carry  away 
his  money.    And  his  uncle  went  up  to  the  door  of  the  house, 
and  said  to  his  wives,  Come  along,  get  up  you  two,  we  three 
will  go  home ;  one  of  you  will  lead  a  pig  with  a  line,  one  of 
you  will  carry  a  hag  of  money  on  her  back.    But  they  said 
to  him,  No  !  go  home  yourself,  we  two  are  going  to  stay  and 
marry  your  nephew,  the  Little  Orphan.    And  he  says,  Not 
so,  you  two  cannot  marry  him  because  formerly  you  used 
contemptuous  language  to  him  ;  has  he  become  good  again  ? 
no,  he  is  bad.    I  wanted  to  give  him  food,  but  you  two 
forbade  it,  and  I  was  prevented  giving  him  food  ;  and  I 
wanted  to  go  and  look  after  him,  but  you  two  forbade  it,  and 
my  going  to  see  him  came  to  nothing ;  and  if  you  two  are 
to  make  advances  to  him,  is  he  good  again  ?  no,  he  is  bad. 
You  two  could  not  eat,  when  you  saw  him  it  made  you  sick, 
and  you  two  can't  live  with  him.    But  they  said,  Not  at  all, 
you  go  home  by  yourself,  we  two  are  going  to  stay  with  him. 
Then  his  uncle  says,  No,  get  up  both  of  you,  we  three  are  to 
go  home.    But  they  two  say,  No,  you  go  home  by  yourself. 
Then  says  he,  Who  is  it  you  two  here  are  going  to  marry  ? 
You  two  can't  live  with  him,  the  object  of  your  scorn.  Then 
they  two  get  up  and  the  three  go  home  together.    And  the 
Little  Orphan  goes  into  the  house,  and  makes  a  fire,  and  puts 
pig's  flesh  into  the  oven  to  make  it  keep.    And  when  he  has 
finished  with  his  pig,  then  comes  a  report  of  a  voyage,  that 
the  Motalava  people  with  the  Losalava  people  are  going  to 
paddle  over  to  Gaua.    Then  says  the  Little  Orphan  to  his 
mother,  Oh,  mother,  those  people  are  going  to  paddle  over  to 
Gaua  to-morrow,  and  may  I?     And  his  mother  says,  You 
must  not ;  stay  and  look  after  your  meat  in  the  oven.  But 
he  says  E-0-0 !  not  so,  mother,  I  shall  go  on  the  voyage  with 
them ;  I  am  going  to  them,  and  you  two  will  cook  my  pig 
for  me.    So  it  was  night  and  morning  ;  and  when  morning 
was  come  he  goes  up  inside  the  house  and  speaks  to  his 
mother  and  says,  Well,  mother,  as  I  am  going  away  from  you 
two,  and  you  two  stay  here,  there  is  that  heap  of  food  you  are 
to  eat ;  but  these  you  are  not  to  touch.    And  he  goes  off,  and 


394  Stories.  [CH# 

they  start  on  their  voyage.  And  when  he  reaches  the  landing-- 
place,  he  sees  that  those  people  have  already  dragged  down 
the  canoe  and  set  it  afloat  on  the  edge  of  the  sea ;  and  he 
runs  and  jumps  up  and  climbs  right  up  on  board  the  canoe, 
and  they  paddle  off.  But  they  all  of  them  had  taken  pigs 
with  them,  but  the  Little  Orphan  had  not  taken  one  for 
himself,  and  he  had  brought  nothing  but  a  cockle-shell  in  his 
hand,  and  that  shell-fish  was  not  opened.  And  when  they 
brought  the  canoes  to  shore  at  Gaua,  the  people  there  came 
down  to  meet  them,  and  one  of  them  runs  over  and  cries, 
Friend  !  and  touches  his  friend's  hand,  and  the  two  go  up  the 
beach  together ;  and  some  other  runs  down  and  cries,  This  is 
my  friend,  and  touches  his  hand,  and  they  two  walk  up 
together;  and  some  other  runs  down  and  cries,  This  is  my 
friend,  and  takes  him,  and  they  two  walk  up  ashore  ;  but 
that  poor  Little  Orphan,  they  don't  want  to  be  friends  with 
him.  And  they  stay  and  stay,  and  the  wind  rises,  and  they 
are  to  start  on  their  voyage  ;  and  they  set  off  and  paddle,  pad- 
dle on,  and  go  out  at  Losalava.  And  when  those  people  drag 
up  their  canoe  (at  Mota),  he  runs  back,  runs  and  runs,  and 
reaches  the  house  where  they  three  lived,  and  goes  straight 
inside  the  house,  and  sees  the  heap  of  yams  still  remaining  as 
it  was;  and  he  says,  What  have  you  two  been  eating?  this 
food  still  remains  untouched.  And  they  two  say,  We  have 
been  eating  it  to  be  sure,  that  food.  But  he  says,  No,  there 
is  some  other  man  I  think  has  been  bringing  you  wild  food  of 
the  forest.  Now  he  makes  a  fool  of  himself  in  this,  supposing 
that  it  was  as  if  his  mother  were  living  with  a  man.  But 
that  female  Bo  Som  wept  exceedingly  because  he  had  been 
angry  with  her,  and  she  and  her  child  wept  till  the  sun  went 
down.  Then  the  Little  Orphan  goes  near  to  them,  and  lies 
upon  their  legs,  and  tries  to  eonsole  them,  but  can't  succeed  ; 
and  they  cried  on,  till  they  heard  the  nose  of  the  Little 
Orphan  whistling  in  sleep,  and  then  they  removed  softly 
their  legs,  and  put  down  his  head  on  the  ground ;  and  they 
run  to  the  money-bags,  and  unloose  the  pig,  and  the  two 
run  off.    And  as  they  went  out  that  village  turned  into  a 


XIX.] 


The  Little  Orphan. 


395 


deserted  garden.  But  as  they  ran  away  the  old  woman  sat 
down,  the  bags  of  money  were  very  heavy  upon  her,  and  one 
of  the  bags  fell  down.  And  a  pig  with  tusks  remained 
tied  at  that  landing'-place  at  Sanwawa,  and  that  money-bag 
remained  lying  where  it  fell.  And  that  Little  Orphan  woke 
and  jumped  up,  and  there  he  was  in  a  deserted  garden,  and  he 
ran  looking  for  those  two,  and  he  came  out  upon  the  shore, 
and  sees  an  old  woman  sitting  there  and  asks,  Oh !  have  you 
seen  anybody  at  all  here  just  now  ?  And  she  sings,  Look,  look 
over  there !  Ioio  !  ialo  !  the  two  are  plunging  back  into  the 
sea  at  the  place  where  the  Little  Orphan  had  fished  them  up. 
It  is  finished. 

Note.— Two  more  Stories  from  Mota  in  native  MS.  are  too  long  for  insertion 
in  full.    One  is  the  Story  of  Wowui-ta-Taragaviga,  whom  his  parents  kept  in 
the  house  till  he  was  grown  up,  and  then  advanced  to  the  highest  suqe  rank. 
Another  man  of  the  same  island  taking  the  same  step  sent  a  portion  of  his 
feast  to  Wowut-ta-Tavagaviga  by  an  orphan,  all  others  being  afraid  of 
approaching  the  gamal  of  so  high  a  rank.    Wowut  takes  a  liking  to  the 
orphan,  and  pays  him  with  money.    He  goes  again  and  again  with  food  till  he 
has  •  thousands  of  money,  thousands  of  boars,  thousands  of  pigs  with  curled 
tusks,'  and  with  these  advances  himself  to  high  suqe  rank.    Then  Wowut 
dies,  and  directs  that  when  his  friend  comes  to  mourn  over  him  he  is  to  be 
given  his  wife  in  memory  of  him.    The  other  is  the  Story  of  Qat-wuruga,  who 
was  born  of  a  mother  who  had  been  killed  by  a  fall  from  a  tree,  and  grew  up 
in  the  forest  like  the  children  in  the  Story  of  Taso.    His  maternal  uncle  finds 
him  and  takes  him  home,  where  his  uncle's  wives  neglect  him  and  ill-use  him, 
and  give  him  his  name  of  Scurfy-head.    The  boy  begs  his  uncle  to  take  him 
back  to  the  forest,  and  he  carries  him  out  of  the  sight  of  the  sea  into  the 
midst  of  the  island,  Vanua  Lava.    Then  he  settles  himself,  and  after  a  while 
snares  birds.    One  day  the  fat  of  a  bird  roasting  over  the  fire  fell  through  on 
to  the  head  of  Wetopunpun  beneath  the  earth,  and  he  comes  up  above  ground. 
This  is  the  boy's  father,  the  ghost  of  his  dead  father,  or  a  Vai  spirit.   With  the 
charm  '  Suso-punpun,  Soso-punpun '  (like  the  Eere-mbaembae  of  Story  No.  i)  he 
makes  food,  gardens,  a  village,  a  gamal,  pigs,  fowls,  a  drum— all  native  wealth. 
Qat-wuruga's  uncle  comes  to  see  him,  and  undertakes  his  advance  to  the  highest 
ranks  of  the  suqe,  receiving  his  due  payment  of  pigs.    His  wives,  incredulous 
at  first,  go  to  a  kolelcole  and  see  the  youth  they  have  despised  in  all  his 
splendour.    They  desire  to  stay  as  his  wives,  and  make  him  cut  open  his 
breast  and  give  them  some  of  his  liver  to  eat.    A  canoe  from  Maewo  comes 
over,  and  they  find  the  fresh  emblems  of  his  rank  ;  they  challenge  comparison 
with  their  own,  and  see  open-mouthed  with  astonishment  the  number  of 
jawbones  of  the  pigs  he  has  killed  in  his  feasts.    They  beguile  him  to  sleep 
and  carry  him  off  to  their  own  island  to  kill  and  eat  him.    While  they  are 


396 


Stories. 


[CH. 


7.  The  Woman  and  the  Eel.  Auroea. 
A  woman  went  to  lay  pandanus  leaves  to  weave  mats 
with  in  the  water,  and  she  laid  them  there  in  the  evening  and 
went  home.  In  the  morning-  she  went  to  take  the  leaves  from 
the  water;  and  when  she  went  to  take  them  out,  hehold, 
they  were  turned  into  an  eel.  Then  she  ran  back  and  told  it 
to  some  men  who  were  engaged  in  the  suqe,  and  they  ran 
down  and  tied  a  cord  to  the  eel  and  dragged  it  up  to  the 
village.  But  there  was  a  lame  man  who  could  not  go  with 
them,  and  he  lay  in  the  gamal,  club-house  ;  and  by  the  side  of 
the  gamal  there  was  a  croton-tree ;  and  as  they  dragged  up 
that  eel  it  curled  its  tail  round  the  croton,  and  the  c-roton  was 
nearly  broken,  and  the  lame  man  saw  it.  But  they  dragged 
hard  at  the  eel  and  it  loosed  its  tail  from  the  croton,  and  they 
brought  it  into  the  village,  and  laid  it  at  the  entrance  of  the 
gamal.  So  when  they  ran  off  for  fire-wood  and  banana  leaves 
to  cook  it  with,  the  eel  said  to  the  lame  man,  When  they  are 
eating  don't  you  eat ;  they  shall  eat  by  themselves.  Con- 
sequently the  lame  man  did  not  eat ;  but  they  put  the  eel  to 
be  cooked  in  the  oven  of  the  suae,  and  covered  in  the  oven. 
And  when  they  opened  the  oven  they  all  took  up  pieces  of 
the  eel,  every  one  of  them  a  piece,  and  when  the  great  man 
said  to  them,  Now  put  them  ready,  then  they  all  put  them 
ready ;  and  after  that  he  said  again,  Now  let  us  eat,  and  they 
all  took  a  bite  at  once.  But  as  they  bit  once  their  legs 
turned  into  eels ;  and  they  bit  a  second  time  and  the  bodies 
of  them  all  turned  into  eels ;  and  they  bit  again,  and  they 
were  all  eels  ;  and  the  great  man  glided  away  first,  and  they 
all  followed  him  into  the  water. 

making  preparations  for  their  dance  and  feast,  one  of  their  party  takes  pity  on 
him,  unties  and  delivers  him ;  the  two  paddle  back  to  Vanua  Lava.  But 
when  they  reach  Qat-wuruga's  place  all  has  disappeared.  When  he  was 
captured  his  father  Wetopunpun  had  gone  to  the  beach  and  sat  there  grieving. 
The  Qakea  people,  seeing  him  there  day  after  day,  paddled  over  and  took  him 
to  their  place,  where  there  was  a  famine.  There  with  his  charm  '  Soso-pu7ipun  ' 
he  makes  gardens  full  of  food  to  appear.  They  envy  him  and  he  leaves  them, 
and  seeks  a  solitary  place,  where  he  sits  down  by  the  side  of  Ro  Som  with  all 
his  possessions  round  him.  A  stone  there  representing  him  is  a  place  of 
sacrifice  to  this  day. 


x.x.]    The  Little  Owl.    The  Winged  Wife.  397 


8.  The  Little  Owl.  Aurora. 

This  is  about  two  women  who  were  getting-  fire- wood,  and 
found  a  young  owl,  a  bird  with  white  feathers  and  very  large 
eyes;  it  was  a  young  bird  of  this  kind  that  they  found. 
And  one  day  the  two  women  went  to  look  at  their  little  bird, 
and  found  that  he  was  turned  into  a  man  ;  so  they  took  him 
into  the  village,  and  he  became  their  husband.  And  the 
three  lived  always  in  perfect  harmony  together,  and  built 
their  house,  and  worked  in  their  garden,  and  so  remained 
many  years.  But  after  that  he  took  to  beating  them  when 
they  quarrelled,  and  they  scolded  him  for  it,  saying,  You 
there  are  a  bird,  and  our  property  because  we  found  you ; 
why  do  you  beat  us  like  this?  So  he  said  he  would  leave 
them  ;  and  in  the  evening  he  drank  kava,  and  forbade  them  to 
blow  the  fire.  But  when  he  lay  down  to  sleep  the  two 
women  blew  up  the  fire  into  a  blaze,  and  looked  at  him,  and 
he  turned  into  a  bird,  and  flew  away.  .  And  the  two  women 
cried  after  him,  and  he  threw  down  money  to  them. 

9.  The  Winged  Wife.  Aurora. 

This  is  about  the  women  that  they  say  belonged  to  heaven, 
and  had  wings  like  birds ;  and  they  came  down  to  earth  to 
bathe  in  the  sea,  and  when  they  bathed  they  took  off  their 
wings.  And  as  Qatu  was  going  about,  he  chanced  to  see 
them ;  and  he  took  up  one  pair  of  wings  and  went  back  into 
the  village  and  buried  them  at  the  foot  of  the  main  pillar  of  his 
house.  Then  he  went  back  again  and  watched  them.  And 
when  they  had  finished  bathing  they  went  and  took  up  their 
wings  and  flew  up  to  heaven  ;  but  one  could  not  fly  because 
Qat  had  stolen  her  wings,  and  she  was  crying.  So  Qat  goes 
up  to  her,  and  speaks  deceitfully  to  her  and  asks  her,  What 
are  you  crying  for  ?  And  she  says,  They  have  taken  away  my 
wings.  Then  he  takes  her  to  his  house  and  marries  her. 
And  Qat's  mother  takes  her  and  they  go  to  work ;  and  when 


398  Stories.  [CH 

the  leaf  of  a  yam  touches  her  there  are  yams  as  if  someone  had 
already  dug  them  up,  and  if  a  leaf  of  a  banana  again  had 
touched  her,  just  a  single  one,  all  the  bananas  were  ripe  at 
once.    But  when  Qat's  mother  saw  that  things  were  so  she 
scolded  her  ;  but  not  Qat ;  he  was  gone  shooting  birds.  And 
when  Qat's  mother  scolded  her  she  went  back  into  the  village; 
and  she  sits  beside  the  post  of  the  house  and  cries.  And 
as  she  cried  her  tears  flowed  down  upon  the  ground  and 
made  a  deep  hole ;  and  the  tears  drop  down  and  strike 
upon  her  wings,  and  she  scratches  away  the  earth  and  finds 
them,  and  flies  back  again  to  heaven.    And  when  Qat  was 
come  home  from  shooting  he  sees  that  she  is  not  there,  and 
scolds  his  mother.    Then  he  kills  every  one  of  his  pigs,  and 
fastens  points  to  very  many  arrows,  and  climbs  up  on  the  top 
of  his  house,  and  shoots  up  to  the  sky.    And  when  he  sees 
that  the  arrow  does  not  fall  back  he  shoots  again  and  hits  the 
first  arrow.    And  he  shoots  many  times,  and  always  hits,  and 
the  arrows  reach  down  to  the  earth.    And,  behold,  there  is 
a  banyan  root  following  the  arrows,  and  Qat  takes  a  basket  of 
pig's  flesh  in  his  hand  and  climbs  up  to  heaven  to  seek  his 
wife.    And  he  finds  a  person  hoeing ;  and  he  finds  his  wife 
and  takes  her  back  ;  and  he  says  to  the  person  who  is  hoeing, 
When  you  see  a  banyan  root  don't  disturb  it.    But  as  the 
two  went  down  by  the  banyan  root  and  had  not  yet  reached 
the  ground,  that  person  chopped  the  root  off,  and  Qat  fell  down 
and  was  killed,  and  the  woman  flew  back  to  heaven.    That  is 
the  end  of  it. 


10.  The  Story  of  Taso.  Aurora. 

This  is  a  story  about  Taso  a  man-eater.  This  Taso  was  a 
man  who  ate  men,  and  there  was  a  woman,  the  sister  of  Qatu, 
who  was  pregnant  and  near  her  time.  Taso  found  her  in  the 
garden  ground,  in  a  thicket,  and  killed  her ;  but  he  did  not 
eat  her,  because  she  was  pregnant  and  her  time  was  nearly 
come.  She  lay  and  rotted  in  the  thicket,  never  having  been 
brought  in  for  burial.    And  while  this  corpse  of  a  woman 


XIX.] 


Taso. 


399 


killed  with  a  club,  Qatu's  sister,  was  lying-  and  rotting,  her 
two  infants  were  alive,  and  as  the  mother  rotted,  it  left  them 
free.    So  they  lay,  and  they  rolled  along  on  the  smooth 
ground,  and  by  and  bye  they  grew  strong.    Then  they  found 
dry  leaves  in  which  rain  water  had  collected  and  they  sipped 
and  drank;  and  they  came  ©n.to  a  root  of  qena  (a  gingi- 
beraceous  plant)  and  sucked  it,  for  this  qena  has  a  swollen 
lump  at  its  root  and  water  accumulates  in  a  small  hollow  in  it. 
So  they  clung  to  the  qena  root  till  they  were  strong  and 
could  move  about,  and  then  they  began  to  wander,  and  made 
their  way  out  of  the  thicket.    And  as  they  so  wandered  along 
they  came  to  a  place  where  there  was  a  sow  with  young  ;  and 
they  sat  and  looked  at  her.    Now  this  sow  was  the  property 
of  their  maternal  uncle  Qatu  ;  and  they  sat  looking  out  for 
the  cocoa-nuts  with  which  the  sow  was  fed.    After  a  while 
their  uncle  Qatu  came  and  sat  down  and  called  his  sow,  and 
the  sow  came  with  her  litter  of  pigs,  and  Qatu  cut  up  their 
food  for  them  ;  and  when  he  had  cut  it  up  he  did  not  sit  there 
till  it  was  all  eaten  and  then  go ;  he  went  away  before  that, 
he  turned  his  back  and  went.    Then  these  two  came  forth 
and  drove  away  the  sow,  and  took  from  her  the  cocoa-nuts 
that  had  been  cut  up  to  eat  them  themselves,  and  sat  down 
and  ate.    But  the  sow  went  up  into-  the  village  and  cried  to 
her  owner  Qatu.    Next  morning  when  he  came  down  to  feed 
the  sow  they  did  the  same  thing ;  the  sow  went  off  to  her 
owner,  and  they  gathered  up  the  cut  cocoa-nut  in  their  arms 
and  took  it  off  to  eat  it  themselves.    And  Qatu  saw  that  his 
sow  was  always  coming  back  to  him,  and  was  thin  without 
any  fat  about  her,  and  he  asked  himself,  Why  is  it  I  wonder 
that  my  sow  comes  back  to  me,  as  if  I  had  not  fed  her,  and  is 
not  at  all  fat  ?   Let  me  sit  and  observe  what  it  is  that  makes 
her  come  back  to  me  up  into  the  village.    So  after  feeding  her 
he  pretended  to  go  back,  but  went  round  and  returned  that 
he  might  see  what  it  was  that  happened  to  his  sow.    And  he 
stood  and  watched  them  coming  out,  light  in  complexion, 
wonderfully  fair,  as  they  came  and  stood  and  drove  away  the 
sow  to  take  her  food.    And  Qatu  jumped  out,  and  called  to 


400  Stories.  [CH< 

them,  What,  is  it  you  who  are  always  driving  away  my  sow  ? 
1  have  seen  her  coming  back  to  me.  These  two  twins  let  the 
food  slip  from  their  arms  and  stood  ashamed,  biting  their 
fingers.  And  Qatu  asked  them,  Where  do  you  come  from? 
And  they  told  him  how  they  lay  and  rolled  and  found  their 
way  out  of  the  thicket,  and  saw  the  water  and  drank  it,  and 
came  to  the  root  of  qena  and  sucked  it ;  and  how  when  they 
did  so  they  grew  strong,  and  saw  the  sow  and  filled  their 
bellies  with  the  food  the  sow  was  eating.  And  Qatu  under- 
stood without  mistake  that  these  were  the  children  of  his 
sister  whom  Taso  had  killed  long  ago. 

Qatu  called  them  and  went  up  to  the  village  and  hid  them 
at  the  further  end  of  his  house ;  and  he  bade  Eo  Motari  his 
wife  to  go  into  the  garden  and  dig  some  yams,  and  bring 
hibiscus  leaves,  tender  such  as  locusts  eat,  and  come  back  to 
make  a  yam-mash  for  the  two  twins.  And  Ko  Motari  did 
so  ;  she  went  and  gathered  the  leaves  and  dug  the  yams  and 
came  back  and  made  the  loko.  And  when  the  oven  was  closed 
in  Qatu  bade  Eo  Motari  to  go  and  cut  down  cocoa-nut  fronds 
for  mats,  and  plait  and  spread  them,  and  to  make  up  a 
pillow.  Then  Qatu  bids  Eo  Motari  go  to  the  further  end  of 
the  house ;  and  she  goes  and  sees  the  two  little  twins  sitting 
at  the  further  end  of  the  house  in  the  pig  fence ;  and  she  runs 
back  and  cries  to  Qatu,  Lili  !  Lili !  What  are  those  little  ones 
to  me  ?  my  children,  or  my  brothers,  or  my  grandchildren  ? 1 
Qatu  says  to  her,  O-o-o !  your  grandchildren.  So  she  took 
them  gladly  into  the  house,  she  and  Qatu,  and  gave  them 
food,  and  they  stayed  with  him  and  Eo  Motari.  After  a 
while  they  grew  big,  and  Qatu  shaped  bows  for  them  made  of 
the  rachis  of  the  sago  fronds ;  and  when  they  could  shoot 
lizards  he  broke  the  bows  and  took  them  from  them,  and  made 
different  ones  for  them.  And  when  they  could  shoot  geckos 
he  took  the  bows  away  from  them  and  broke  them  and  shaped 

1  In  another  version  of  the  story,  '  When  Motari  saw  the  two  handsome 
boys  with  their  white  hair,  she  liked  them  and  asked  Qatu,  Are  these  my  chil- 
dren or  my  husbands?  And  Qatu  said,  Yes  indeed,  your  husbands,  for  they 
are  my  sister's  children.' 


XIX.] 


Taso. 


401 


different  ones  for  them,  and  put  points  to  their  arrows.  And 
when  they  could  both  shoot  the  small  birds  tatagoras  he  took 
the  bows  away  and  broke  them,  and  made  them  bows  much 
larger  than  before,  and  put  points  to  their  arrows,  and  then 
they  could  shoot  doves.  So  they  came  to  be  able  to  shoot  all 
kinds  of  birds  ;  and  then  he  cut  clubs  for  them,  and  they  killed 
rats  with  them,  and  he  took  them  away  and  broke  them  ;  and 
presently  when  they  were  full-grown  youths  he  made  clubs 
for  them  again,  for  one  a  oi  uttt  (Barringtonia  fruit)  with  four 
corners  to  it,  for  the  other  a  simple  tarara  with  a  ring  and 
spike. 

Qatu  brought  them  up  till  they  were  quite  big,  and  then 
one  day  he  told  them  about  Taso,  saying  that  they  were  not 
to  go  carelessly  about  or  go  where  Taso  was  without  due 
cause,  because  he  had  killed  their  mother  and  was  a  man-eater. 
When  they  had  considered  this  they  set  a  taboo  upon  a  banana 
belonging  to  them,  and  said  to  their  uncle  Qatu,  If  you  go  into 
the  garden  and  see  our  bunch  of  bananas  beginning  to  ripen  at 
the  top  and  ripening  downwards  to  the  end,  Taso  has  killed  us  ; 
but  if  you  see  that  it  has  begun  to  ripen  at  the  end  and  is 
ripening  upwards  we  shall  have  killed  him.  So  their  uncle 
turned  his  back  and  went  his  way,  and  the  twins  started  off  to 
take  Taso  by  surprise.  They  came  to  Taso's  place,  but  did 
not  find  him  there,  because  he  had  gone  down  to  the  beach  to 
sharpen  his  teeth1 ;  so  the  twins  asked  Taso's  mother,  Where 
is  this  Taso  gone?  We  have  come  here  to  see  him.  And 
Taso's  mother  called  to  them  to  come  up  and  sit  by  the  gamal 
to  wait  for  him,  and  they  came  up  to  the  gamal  and  sat  there 
waiting  for  Taso.  Now  short  round  yams  had  been  dug,  and 
a  fire  lighted  in  the  gamal,  and  they  heated  the  yams,  and 
pulled  out  the  stones  that  lined  the  ovens,  and  put  them  on 
the  fire  to  pelt  Taso  with.  There  were  two  fire-places  in  the 
gamal,  at  the  one  end  and  at  the  other.  And  Taso's  mother 
came  down  from  the  house ;  and  the  old  woman  lay  down  on 
the  ground  and  sang  a  song,  crying  down  to  Taso  on  the  beach. 
This  is  the  song :  Taso  I  sarosaro  ganga  tamate,  a  ganga  i  tuara, 
1  A  tooth  of  Taso  is  still  to  be  seen  at  Maewo 

d  d 


4°2  Stories.  [ch. 

gakn  i  tuara.  Taso  !  (Taso  !  look  out  for  your  dead  man  to 
eat,  one  for  you,  one  for  me.  Taso !)  Taso  was  sitting  on  the 
beach,  and  heard  his  mother  crying  to  him,  and  he  got  up  and 
came  back  along  the  path  ;  and  as  he  came  he  turned  his  head 
from  side  to  side  and  struck  the  trees,  and  they  came  down 
with  a  crash.  But  the  twins  had  made  ready  for  their  attack 
on  Taso,  red-hot  stones  and  cooked  yams,  and  they  stood  with 
their  feet  firmly  planted  and  waited  for  him  inside  the  gamal, 
one  at  the  one  end  of  it,  and  the  other  at  the  other.  Then 
they  heard  Taso  come  up  and  ask  his  mother,  What  is  it, 
mother?  And  she  said,  What  is  it  but  dead  men  for  us  to 
eat,  sitting  there  in  the  gamal?  So  Taso  went  on  and  up  to 
the  gamal,  and  as  he  got  in  over  the  rail  at  the  door,  one  of 
the  twins  took  up  a  red-hot  stone  and  threw  it  at  him  and  hit 
him,  and  when  he  ran  down  to  the  other  end  of  the  gamal,  the 
other  twin  threw  at  him  and  hit  him.  Taso  cried  out,  It  is 
in  vain  that  you  throw  at  me,  I  will  eat  you  both  to-day. 
As  he  runs  to  one  end  of  the  gamal  one  of  the  twins 
throws  at  him,  as  he  runs  to  the  other  the  other  throws ;  so 
they  go  on  at  him  till  his  bones  shake  within  him,  and  he  lies 
down  and  only  groans.  Then  the  twins  leap  upon  him  and 
beat  him  to  death  with  their  clubs.  Then  they  go  down  to 
the  house  and  drag  out  the  old  woman,  Taso's  mother,  and 
club  her ;  they  clubbed  them  both  to  death.  Then  they  set 
fire  to  the  houses  over  them,  and  went  back  homewards.  But 
Qatu  and  Motari  were  standing  in  the  garden  listening  to  the 
popping  of  the  bamboo  rafters  as  they  burnt,  and  wondering 
what  was  going  on  over  there :  '  Those  two  probably  have 
come  across  Taso  and  he  is  killing  them.'  Qatu  starts  and 
goes  off,  and  as  he  goes  he  meets  them,  and  they  tell  him  that 
they  have  killed  Taso.  And  he  said  to  them,  I  forbade  you 
to  go  there,  you  have  disobeyed  me  and  gone,  and  very  nearly 
he  has  eaten  you.  So  it  was  finished ;  they  killed  Taso  and 
revenged  their  mother  whom  Taso  had  murdered. 


XIX.] 


Betaiverai. 


403 


11.  About  Betawerai  a  Snake.  Aurora. 

The  beginning  was  in  this  way;  a  woman  and  her  child 
went  to  strip  pandanus  leaves  for  weaving  mats,  and  the  boy 
saw  a  young  snake  on  the  stalk  of  a  leaf  and  begged  his 
mother  to  let  him  have  it  for  he  wanted  it ;  his  mother  forbade 
him  to  take  it.  But  he  said  that  he  wished  for  it,  and  so  he 
laid  hold  on  the  little  red  snake,  and  took  it  and  put  it  in  the 
hollow  trunk  of  a  tree ;  and  the  name  of  that  tree  is  the 
vqava  ;  he  put  it  into  the  hollow  of  that,  and  he  used  to  feed  it 
with  rats  or  birds  or  black  lizards,  or  pig's  flesh,  and  that 
snake  became  extremely  large.  And  one  day  when  he  killed 
a  pig  he  went  to  give  it  some ;  but  that  snake  snatched  the 
pig  from  him,  and  ate  him  up  also,  and  crawled  out  of  the 
hollow  tree,  and  came  into  the  village  and  ate  up  all  the 
people  in  the  place.  But  there  was  one  pregnant  woman  who 
survived ;  and  she  dug  a  pit,  and  took  a  thin  flat  stone  and 
laid  it  over  the  pit,  and  she  stayed  within  it.  And  she 
brought  forth  her  children,  twins,  and  they  three  remained  in 
that  pit  in  the  ground.  And  the  snake  ate  up  all  the  people, 
and  then  went  and  took  up  its  abode  on  a  banyan-tree,  and 
brought  forth  exceedingly  many  young  ones,  and  two  the 
chief  among  them.  The  name  of  one  of  these  was  Betawerai, 
and  this  one  was  not  able  to  go  about,  but  stayed  always  on 
a  branch  of  the  banyan.  But  we  call  the  branch  of  a  big 
tree  like  a  banyan  tawerai,  like  the  flat  of  the  hand,  and  this 
was  named  after  that,  Betawerai,  At  the  branch.  And  the 
other  one  used  to  go  very  far  away  seeking  diligently  men  or 
pigs  to  eat,  and  his  name  was  Walolo.  But  one  day  those 
two,  the  children  of  the  woman  who  had  lived  in  the  ground, 
begged  of  their  mother  to  make  them  bows  and  arrows  ;  and 
after  that  they  said  they  would  go  into  the  village  and  seek 
that  snake  to  shoot  it  and  kill  it.  But  when  they  had  gone 
and  had  seen  from  a  distance  that  banyan  where  Betawerai 
and  Walolo  lived,  they  saw  upon  the  branches,  and  on  the 
little  twigs,  and  on  the  leaves,  nothing  but  snakes  on  that 

D  d  2 


4°4  Stories.  [cH> 

banyan.    But  Walolo  was  not  on  the  tree,  because  be  bad 
gone  across  the  sea  and  was  still  seeking-  for  men  to  devour. 
And  these  two  boys  went  up  to  the  banyan-tree  and  began  to 
pelt  it  with  sticks  thrown  end  over  end ;  and  while  tbey  were 
pelting  so  the  snakes  fell  down  in  very  great  numbers.  And 
Betawerai  began  to  sing  a  song  to  make  Walolo  come  quickly 
back  and  kill  and  eat  them.    And  this  was  the  song,  Risurisu 
vano,  Betawerai,  a  lang  togalau,  ti  uvi goro  nanagoku.  Walolo! 
Walolo  !  go  vano  mai  I  Walolo  !  Walolo  !  go  vano  mai !  Turn  and 
come  to  Betawerai,  the  wind  is  North-west,  it  blows  against 
my  face.    Walolo,  Walolo,  come  hither!   Walolo,  Walolo, 
come  hither !  And  they  say  that  Walolo  heard  him  singing,' 
and  thought  that  something  had  happened.    And  he  came 
end  over  end  like  a  stick,  and  as  he  came  near  he  heard 
plainly  that  it  was  Betawerai's  voice,  and  he  thought  that 
indeed  there  was  surely  a  man  there.    Therefore  he  came  end 
over  end  in  haste,  and  came  near  to  those  two ;  and  one  of 
them  shot  him,  and  then  the  other  shot,  and  both  hit  him ; 
and  he  tried  to  rush  upon  them,  and  one  shot,  and  the  other 
shot,  and  both  hit.    And  they  went  on  shooting  like  this,  till 
they  shot  him  to  death.    And  they  went  after  Betawerai,  and 
pulled  him  down  to  the  ground  and  killed  him.    And  when 
they  had  killed  the  snakes  in  this  way  they  heaped  them  up 
at  the  roots  of  the  banyan-tree,  and  brought  plenty  of  wood 
and  bumed  them  up,  a  great  heap  of  snakes,  as  a  sign  that 
the  devouring  snake  was  destroyed.    And  they  three  (the 
boys  and  their  mother)  returned  to  their  village  and  dwelt 
there. 


12.  The  Story  of  Basi  and  Dovaowari.  Aurora. 

She  was  a  girl  of  Dama,  and  her  mother,  a  snake,  lived  in 
a  cave  there.  And  there  was  a  young  man  living  at  Tanoriki ; 
and  one  day  Basi  and  another  girl,  her  sister  I  suppose,  went 
down  to  the  beach  to  dip  salt-water;  and  Dovaowari  was  the 
name  of  the  youth,  and  he  also  went  down  to  bathe  in  the  sea, 
but  on  another  part  of  the  beach.    You  know  our  ways,  that 


xix.]  Bast.  4°5 

we  always  like  to  dress  our  hair  to  make  it  white,  and  that  the 
hail-  too  may  be  curly,  in  ringlets,  such  as  you  always  see 
with  the  Opa  people.  So  these  two  girls  stand  looking  over 
to  the  other  part  of  the  beach,  and  see  the  fellow  bathing,  and 
washing  his  hair  till  it  was  exceedingly  white,  and  they  say, 
Let  us  two  go  and  see  who  that  is  bathing.  And  they 'went 
and  saw  that  it  was  Dovaowari;  and  he  asked  them  what 
they  were  looking  for,  and  they  said  that  they  had  been 
standing  far  off  and  had  seen  him,  and  were  come  to  look  at 
him.  And  Basi  said  to  the  other  girl,  You  go  home  to  our 
mother,  and  tell  her  that  I  am  going  after  Dovaowari.  But 
Dovaowari  forbade  her  in  vain  to  follow  him,  saying  that  he 
was  poor,  and  not  one  that  had  money,  that  he  had  no 
property  and  no  garden ;  and  she  disputed  with  him,  saying 
that  she  would  certainly  go  with  him.  So  he  said,  Well,  we 
will  go  together  ;  then  that  other  girl  went  back  to  the  mother 
of  them  both,  the  Snake,  and  Basi  followed  Dovaowari  to  be 
his  wife,  and  so  they  married.  But  Basi  kept  going  to  her 
mother  at  Dama  a  long  way  off,  and  Dovao  was  vexed  at  it, 
and  he  told  Basi  to  go  and  say  to  her  mother  that  she  was  to 
move  to  that  place  so  that  all  might  live  together.  But 
Basi  said,  Mother  cannot  come  here  to  this  place ;  yet  she 
went  and  entreated  her,  and  she  agreed  that  it  would  be 
possible  to  make  the  move.  But  the  chief  thing  she  thought 
of  was  how  she  should  manage,  because  she  was  a  snake  very 
long  and  large,  and  if  a  small  house  were  built  for  her  it 
would  not  be  enough.  She  considered,  therefore,  and  said  to 
Basi,  Go  and  tell  my  son-in-law  to  build  me  a  house,  and  let 
there  be  ten  chambers  in  it.  But  Dovao  did  not  yet  know  the 
truth,  and  when  he  heard  about  the  house  with  ten  chambers 
he  was  astonished  at  it,  and  thought  to  himself,  What  is 
this?  When  the  house  was  finished,  Basi  carried  the  news 
saying,  Your  house  is  finished ;  but  she  had  said  beforehand, 
I  shall  go  in  the  night,  and  if  my  son-in-law  should  hear 
anything  don't  let  him  take  notice  of  it.  So  in  the  middle  of 
the  night  they  heard  an  earthquake,  and  thunder,  and  a  very 
great  rumbling  as  if  all  the  world  would  come  to  an  end ; 


4°6  Stories.  [CH. 

and  when  she  reached  that  place,  her  tail  entered  first  and 
coiled  itself  in  the  first  chamber,  and  then  in  the  second,  until 
all  those  chambers  were  filled  with  the  big-  snake;   and  her 
head,  a  woman's,  lay  opposite  the  door,  though  the  whole 
house  was  full  of  the  snake.    In  the  morning  the  people  came 
to  see  this  person,  and  saw  that  it  was  a  snake  with  a  human 
head.   And  whenever  Dovao  and  Basi  went  anywhere  and  re- 
turned, she  would  go  to  her  mother,  that  snake,  and  rub  her 
nose  upon  her,  and  lie  close  upon  her ;  but  her  husband  did  not 
like  that  sort  of  thing.  On  that  account  (and  because  the  snake 
devoured  the  pigs  and  fowls  that  came  near  the  door),  when 
there  was  a  feast  at  another  village  at  a  distance,  he  told  some 
of  the  people  that  he  and  his  wife  were  going  to  the  dance, 
and  while  they  were  away  they  were  to  set  fire  to  the  house 
and  burn  it  so  as  to  burn  up  the  snake  with  it.    But  the  snake 
knew  this,  and  called  Basi  and  told  her  that  they  were  going 
to  set  fire  upon  her  and  burn  her  that  night,  and,  When  you 
are  standing  at  the  feast,  she  said,  if  you  see  sparks  run  quickly 
back  to  me.    So  it  was  done  ;  while  she  was  dancino*  she  saw 
sparks  flying  and  ran  quickly  back  and  leapt  herself  into  the 
fire,  and  both  were  burnt  to  death.    And  after  a  long  while 
the  liver  that  was  burnt  was  found,  and  still  remains,  the 
liver  of  Basi  and  of  her  mother ;  and  I  have  seen  a  bone  in 
possession  of  some  wealthy  people ;  there  is  mam,  magic 
power,  in  it,  they  say,  for  pigs,  and  for  wicked  intercourse 
with  women  when  they  blacken  their  faces  under  the  eyes 
with  it 1. 


13.  The  Story  of  Deitari.  Aurora. 

They  say  that  Tari  went  into  his  garden  to  work,  and  as  he 
was  working  something  cut  him,  and  he  put  the  blood  into  a 
bamboo  vessel,  and  went  into  the  village,  and  set  it  by  his 

1  The  power  of  the  liver  to  attract  women  was  discovered  by  a  boy  playing 
with  his  bow  and  arrow  as  his  mother  worked  in  the  garden  near  where  the 
snake  had  been  burnt.  His  arrow  fell  into  the  ashes  of  the  liver,  and  seeing  it 
blackened  he  smeared  his  face  with  the  black  stuff. 


xlxn  Deitari.    Tarkeke.  4°7 

fire-place,  and  there  it  stayed.  And  after  many  days  when  he 
was  going  to  work  he  told  his  wife  to  cook  some  food  for  him, 
and  she  went  to  get  it.  But  when  she  came  back  into  the 
house  she  found  food  already  cooked,  and  she  did  not  know 
who  had  prepared  the  food  for  her.  Thus  it  happened  very 
often,  and  the  woman  told  her  husband.  And  he  when  he 
heard  it  bade  her  sit  and  watch  who  it  was  that  did  it.  So 
she  sat  by  the  side  wall  of  the  house,  and  saw  Deitari  (Tari's 
blood)  creep  out  of  the  bamboo  vessel  which  Tari  had  put 
aside  ;  and  she  saw  that  he  was  exceedingly  fair,  and  she  hid 
him.  Then  when  Tari  came  in  from  work  he  asked  his  wife, 
Haven't  you  seen  him  ?  And  she  said,  What  was  that  you 
put  by  the  fire-place  ?  I  did  not  put  anything  there,  said  he. 
But  his  wife  said,  Not  so,  you  put  something  small  there  in  a 
bamboo.  Then  he  remembered  about  his  blood,  and  he  said 
to  his  wife,  My  blood  was  in  that  bamboo;  and  his  wife 
said,  I  saw  him  come  out  of  that  bamboo  that  you  had  put 
there.  So  she  brought  him  forth,  and  Tari  rejoiced  very 
much  to  see  him.  And  one  day  as  they  were  living  together 
the  boys  of  the  village,  and  Deitari  with  them,  went  to  bathe 
in  the  stream,  and  sang  songs.  And  there  was  a  man  called 
Taepupuliti,  and  they  say  that  he  changed  himself  into  a 
fish,  and  went  and  devoured  the  boy  who  had  come  out 
of  the  bamboo,  and  went  off  with  him  into  a  different 
country.  And  Tari  sent  every  kind  of  fish  and  bird  to  seek 
for  Deitari ;  and  he  found  a  little  fish,  extremely  thin,  and 
this  fish  and  Deitari's  father  found  him  hidden  at  the  back 
end  of  Taepupuliti's  house.  And  they  two,  Tari  and  Taepu- 
puliti, sat  down  to  drink  /cava ;  and  the  father  of  the  one 
whom  the  other  'had  devoured  let  the  liquor  fall  from  his 
mouth  as  he  drank,  so  that  the  /cava  did  not  strike  (affect) 
him ;  but  as  for  the  one  who  had  eaten  his  child  it  struck 
him  very  much,  and  his  father  carried  him  off  again. 

14.  Taukeke.  Aurora. 

They  say  that  he  used  to  devour  men  in  all  the  islands,  and 
that  he  made  the  image  of  a  fish  with  woven  vines,  and  got 


St°™.  [CH. 

into  it  and  turned  into  a  fish.    And  when  he  wanted  to  eat  a 
man  he  entered  into  that  fish  and  went  to  Opa  or  Ruga 
One  day  he  went  into  his  garden,  and  his  son  was  in  the 
village,  and  his  father  had  forbidden  the  boy  to  go  to  the 
inner  part  of  the  house  ;  but  his  father  had  gone  away  and 
he  and  his  mother  were  in  the  village,  and  he  was  playing 
about  alone,  and  he  thought  he  would  go  and  see  what  it  was 
that  his  father  had  forbidden  him  to  see.    So  he  went  into 
the  further  end  of  the  house,  and  saw  the  image  of  the  fish 
lying,  and  got  into  it.    And  a  kingfisher  flies  down  as  a  sicn 
if  any  one  gets  into  the  figure  of  the  fish  ;  and  the  old 
woman  lying  in  the  house  when  she  hears  the  kingfisher 
breaks  a  stick,  and  the  image  then  goes  into  the  sea.  And 
when  the  boy  got  into  the  figure  of  the  fish,  and  the  king- 
fisher flew  down  to  the  roof  of  the  house,  and  the  old  woman 
heard  it,  she  broke  a  piece  of  fire-wood,  and  the  image  of 
the  fish  with  the  boy  inside  it  went  down  into  the  sea,  and 
crossed  to  Opa.    And  the  father  was  in  his  garden  and  he 
heard  a  noise,  and  he  ran  as  fast  as  he  could,  but  found  that 
the  fish  was  already  gone.    So  he  weaves  together  the  stuff 
that  is  on  a  cocoa-nut,  in  no  particular  shape,  and  puts  it  on  his 
breast,  and  goes  into  the  sea  to  seek  the  boy.    And  he  finds 
him  at  Opa ;  and  the  Opa  people,  they  say,  had  very  nearly 
shot  him.    And  his  father  brought  him  home.    And  as  they 
were  coming  back  they  saw  a  man  in  a  bread-fruit-tree,  and 
the  father  said  to  his  son,  Go  and  eat  him ;  and  the  son  said 
to  his  father,  How  shall  I  go,  father,  because  he  is  on  dry 
land?    And  his  father  hit  him  hard,  and  said,  Go,  for  you 
want  to  eat  a  man.    Then  he  went,  and  as  he  went  up 
towards  the  shore  the  sea  went  up  too  upon  the  shore,  and  he 
was  carried  up  into  the  bread-fruit-tree  after  that  man  and 
swallowed  him.    And  they  came  back  to  the  back  part  of  the 
house,  and  put  him  there,  for  he  was  not  yet  dead.  And 
when  they  put  him  there  at  the  further  end  of  the  house,  and 
he  moved  himself  about,  he  saw  the  sea,  and  the  shark,  and 
the  fishes  with  their  mouths  open  to  devour  him.    And  so  he 
stayed  there  and  died. 


XIX.] 


Tagaro  and  Mera-mbuto. 


409 


15.  The  Woman  and  the  Ghost.  Aurora. 

This  is  about  a  woman  who  lost  her  husband,  and  went  in 
search  of  him,  and  she  had  a  child  with  her.  And  a  ghost 
met  the  woman  carrying-  the  child  on  her  hip,  and  the  woman 
thoue-ht  it  was  her  husband.  And  the  three  went  down  to 
the  beach  to  burn  for  fish.  Then  the  ghost  said  to  the 
woman,  You  go  and  burn  for  fish,  and  I  will  look  after  our  child. 
And  when  the  woman  went  with  the  torch  the  ghost  ate  one 
finger  of  the  child.  And  its  mother  asked  him  what  hurt  the 
child,  and  the  ghost  said,  Nothing,  a  mosquito  bit  it.  After  he 
had  spoken  the  child  ceased  to  cry,  and  the  woman  discovered 
that  it  was  a  ghost  because  it  had  eaten  the  child  entirely  up. 
Then  she  knew  for  certain  that  it  was  a  ghost,  because  she 
had  set  up  cocoa-nut  branches  along  the  shore,  and  the  ghost 
when  it  had  eaten  the  child  went  to  eat  the  mother,  and  as 
he  ran  along  to  eat  her  he  ate  the  branches  she  had  set  up, 
thinking  that  the  branches  were  the  woman.  And  the  woman 
ran  away  fast  and  climbed  into  a  pandanus-tree,  and  when  the 
ghost'  would  have  climbed  up  to  eat  her  the  woman  pelted 
him  down  with  the  fruits.  And  so  she  did  till  dawn  ;  and 
when  it  was  light  she  saw  that  he  turned  into  a  hermit  crab. 

16.  A  Story  about  Tagabo  the  Little. 
Lepers'  Island. 

They  say  that  he  went  to  a  part  of  the  island  called 
Vagimbangga  to  pay  for  a  pig  there,  and  that  on  his  return  the 
sun  set  while  he  was  still  in  the  forest.  And  he  was  hungry, 
for  he  had  nothing  whatever  to  eat.  Now  beside  that  path 
they  say  there  was  a  single  gaviga-tree,  with  many  branches, 
and  also  ripe  fruit  on  it ;  and  he  climbed  up  to  eat,  and  to 
sleep  awhile  on  that  tree ;  and  in  his  hand  was  his  conch- 
shell  trumpet  to  blow  as  he  went  along  the  path.  And  in 
the  middle  of  the  night,  when  he  had  finished  eating,  he 
climbed  further  up  to  the  top  of  that  gaviga-tree  to  sleep  and 
rest  there  ;  and  as  he  begins  to  fall  asleep  he  hears  the  voices 


4I°  Stories.  [CH 

of  a  number  of  people  coming-  along  underneath  the  gavi-a- 
tree    And  he  woke  up  thinking  that  it  was  probably  his 
brothers  lookiug  for  him  ;  but  it  was  not  so,  these  were 
different  persons;  these  were  Mera-mbuto  and  his  brothers 
coming  along,  and  they  climbed  up  the  gaviga-tree  them- 
selves.   And  Tagaro-mbiti  sits  perfectly  still  lest  they  should 
see  him,  and  he  hears  one  of  them  say  <Inm  ranganggn  ngaha,' 
This  is  my  branch,  and  another  cries  'Ineu  ranganggu  ngaha ' 
and  so  say  all  of  them.  Then  says  Mera-mbuto  'Ineu  ranganggu 
ngaha  lo  vnlmngegi;  This  is  my  branch  at  the  top;  and  this 
he  said  with  a  loud  voice.    And  Mera-mbuto  climbed  straight 
up  to  the  top  of  that  gaviga-tree,  and  there  he  found  Tagaro- 
mbiti.    Then  says  Mera-mbuto,  Who  are  you  ?   And  says  he, 
I  am  Tagaro-mbiti.    Now  they  say  that  this  Mera-mbuto  and 
his  brothers  had  a  cave  for  their  dwelling.    And  he  asked 
Tagaro  again,  What  is  that  in  your  hand  ?  And  he  says,  The 
voice  of  you  and  me  to  be  sure.    And  he  begged  of  him  to 
speak  in  that  conch  that  he  might  hear  it ;  but  he  said  also, 
Wait  a  bit  till  I  go  back  to  my  dwelling-place,  and  when  I 
get  there  you  will  hear  me  whistle  ;  then  you  shall  speak  with 
the  voice  of  us  two  that  I  may  hear  it  for  myself.    And  he 
made  haste  down  from  the  tree,  and  his  brothers  said,  Are  we 
to  come  too  ?  No,  says  he,  I  am  only  going  to  get  rid  of  a 
mess  and  then  I  shall  come  back.    Thus  he  deceived  them ; 
and  when  he  reached  his  dwelling,  the  cave,  he  whistled 
for  Tagaro  to  hear,  that  he  might  blow  the  conch.  And 
Tagaro  heard  Mera-mbuto  whistle,  and  he  put  forth  all  his 
strength  to  blow  the  conch  hard,  and  he  blew,  and  Mera- 
mbuto's  brothers  fell  every  one  of  them  from  the  tree  ;  and  he 
himself  was  delighted  and  jumped  high  again  and  again  in 
his  cave,  and  his  head  struck  against  the  rock,  and  the  rock 
stuck  fast  into  his  head,  and  there  he  died.    And  his  brothers 
who  had  fallen  down  died  every  one  ;  and  on  that  account 
they  say  that  bushes  grew  up  in  that  place  where  Mera- 
mbuto's  brothers  fell.    And  when  it  was  light  Tagaro-mbiti 
returned  to  his  home. 


xix.]  Mera-mbuto  and  Tagaro.  411 

17.  About  Mera-mbuto  and  Tagaro.    Lepers'  Island. 

Mera-mbuto  prepared  food  for  himself,  and  then  he  invited 
Tagaro  to  come  that  they  might  eat  together.  So  Tagaro 
came  to  him  in  his  house  ;  and  the  food  of  Mera-mbuto  was 
exceedingly  bad,  and  as  they  ate  Tagaro  did  not  eat  at  all,  but 
he  wrapped  the  food  up  to  deceive  Mera-mbuto,  and  went  and 
threw  it  away,  and  then  went  back  to  his  house.  Afterwards 
Tagaro  sent  after  him  saying,  Mera-mbuto,  come  here  to  my 
house.  Mera-mbuto  came  and  they  two  ate.  And  the  food 
was  good  ;  Mera-mbuto  liked  Tagaro's  food  very  much  ;  he  had 
made  his  own  not  at  all  good.  So  Mera-mbuto  considered 
silently,  What  sort  of  thing  is  this  we  two  are  eating  ?  So  he 
asked  Tagaro,  and  Tagaro  said  to  him,  I  have  grated  up  my 
barrow  pig.  So  Mera-mbuto  went  and  grated  up  his  barrow 
pig,  and  in  due  course  they  two  ate  it.  After  this  Tagaro 
invited  Mera-mbuto  to  eat  with  him  in  return  in  his  house. 
So  he  asked  him  again,  What  food  is  this  we  two  are  eating  ? 
And  Tagaro  was  tired  of  being  asked,  and  deceived  Mera-mbuto, 
saying  to  him,  My  mother ;  I  cooked  her  in  the  oven.  So 
Mera-mbuto  went  home  and  cooked  his  mother  in  the  oven. 
After  this  Tagaro  said  to  him,  Light  a  fire  over  me.  So 
Mera-mbuto  came,  and  tied  up  the  door  of  Tagaro's  house, 
bound  it  very  tight,  and  set  fire  to  Tagaro's  house.  Then 
Tagaro  wept ;  Mera-mbuto  said  to  him,  Don't  cry,  you  deceived 
me  formerly,  now  you  are  soon  to  die  for  it.  He  thought  that 
Tagaro  was  dead;  but  not  at  all,  he  had  dug  a  hole,  and 
stayed  in  it.  In  the  morning  thinking  that  he  was  dead  he 
came,  and  Tagaro  had  been  long  sitting  ready  for  him.  So 
Mera-mbuto  asked  him,  Are  you  sitting  like  this  ?  Tagaro 
said,  Yes.  So  Mera-mbuto  said  to  him,  My  turn  now,  to-night 
you  set  fire  to  my  house.  So  Tagaro  set  fire  to  his  house,  and 
the  fire  burnt  him  up. 


•  > 


INDEX. 


Abomination,  buto,  p.  31. 
Abortion,  229. 
Acting,  342. 

Admission  to  Clubs,  105. 

—  to  Mysteries,  80. 
Adoption,  25,  27,  42,  51  note. 
Adultery,  243. 

Agnatic  descent,  29. 

Alite,  298,  325. 

Alligators,  see  Crocodiles. 

Ainbrym,  13,  72,  84,  144,  174,  288 

note,  306,  332,  337,  355. 
Amulets,  121,  134,  184. 
Anaiteum,  123. 
Animism,  123. 
Antiquity,  48. 

Apes,  anthropoid,  19  note,  354. 
Araga,  see  Pentecost  Island. 
Arrows,  Poisoned,  215,  306. 
Arts  of  life,  290. 

—  Decorative. 
Atai,  250. 
Atolls,  17. 

Aurora  Island,  Maewo,  6,  25,  86,  112, 
143,  168,  182,  199,  201,  ■540,  291, 

298.  3°9,  3*3,  319.  323,  333,  34°. 

352,  369. 
Australian  Mysteries,  70. 
Avoidance,  43,  232. 

Badges,  75,  82,  87,  110,  112. 
Bamboo  Knife,  315. 
Bananas,  319. 

Banks'  Islands,  2,  3,  4,  7  note,  16,  23, 

24.  29,  35>  43.  54,  63,  72,  75,  104, 
123,  139,  146,  151,  174,  181,  198, 
211,  214,  216,  219,  225,  229,  231, 
236,  239,  245,  265,  298,  306,  311, 
313,  3i8,  319,  322,  325,  333,  334, 

^  34°,  342,  348,  353,  354- 
Bastards,  236. 


Bauro,  4  note,  6  note. 
Belief  in  Magic,  193. 
Bellona  Island,  2,  16,  313,  322. 
Betel  nut,  I,  9  note,  351. 
Betrothal,  237,  238. 
Bice,  Rev.  C,  241  note,  301  note,  304 
note. 

Bird's-nest  Fern,  265,  277,  279. 
Birgus  latro,  19. 
Birth,  230. 
Biu  IslanH,  19. 
Bligh,  4,  7  note. 

—  Island,  see  Uieparapara. 
Bonesetters,  198. 
Bonito,  179,  233. 
Bougainville,  3. 
Boundaries,  65  note. 
Bows,  8,  304. 

Bowls,  316. 

Breadfruit,  83  note,  319. 
Brenchley,  Mr.,  5, 122,  295,  299  note. 
Bridge  of  Dead,  257. 
Brothers  and  Sisters,  36,  232. 
Bugotu,  30,  135,  180,  196,  256,  299, 

300,  302,  318,  343,  345. 
Bull-roarers,  80,  98,  342. 
Burial,  254,  257,  258,  261,  263,  267, 

270,  278,  284,  287,  288  note. 
Burning  alive,  347. 

—  the  dead,  263. 
Burying  alive,  288,  347. 

—  in  sea,  254,  258,  262. 

—  wives,  257. 
Buto,  31. 

Caladium,  304  ;  see  Taro. 
Canarium,  132,  138,  320. 
Cannibalism,  343,  395  note,  398. 
Canoe-houses,  258,  299. 
Canoes,  290. 

Capture  in  Marriage,  238  note,  240. 


414 


Index. 


Carving,  172. 
Castanets,  339. 
Castaways,  345. 
Casuarina,  186. 
Catamarans,  293  note,  294. 
Cat's-cradle,  341. 
Cause  of  Sickness,  196. 
Celebes,  317  note. 

Changeling  Snakes  and  Spirits,  172, 
187,  188.  '    '  ' 

—  Trees,  187. 
Channels,  16. 
Charms  in  food,  49. 

—  sung,  119,  161,  190,  198,  202,  359, 

395* 
Chastity,  235. 

Chiefs,  46,  47,  50,  51,  54,  56,  60. 

Childhood,  231. 

Childless  Ghost,  275. 

Children  in  Societies,  70,81,  84,  92,98. 

Circumcision,  234. 

Classes  of  Ghosts,  253. 

Cloak  in  Mysteries,  78,  81  note,  91 ,  99. 

Close-time  in  Mysteries,  83,  95. 

Cloth,  320. 

Clothing,  321. 

Club-houses,  102. 

Clubs,  306. 

—  Societies,  101,  103,  104,' 110,  112 
114. 

Cockatoos,  17. 

Cocoa-nut,  to  mark  absence,  77. 
Comet,  348. 

Com  ins,  Eev.  E.  B.,  42  note. 
Communal  Marriage,  27. 
Contrarie'te  Island,  see  Ulawa. 
Cook,  Capt.,  4. 
Cookery,  319. 
Coral,  14. 

Cotoira,  2  note,  9  note. 
Counting,  341,  353,  377. 

—  days,  272. 

—  son^,  341. 
Couvade,  228. 
Creation,  26,  28,  154,  171. 
Cremation,  263. 
Crocodiles,  18,  179,  I  So. 
Cultivations,  303. 
Curses,  51,  147,  216. 
Cuscus,  17. 

Cycas,  186. 

Dances,  84,  87,  91,  93,  95,  332. 
Darkness  universal,  182. 
Death,  247. 

—  Days,  271. 

—  Meals,  see  Funeral  Feasts. 

—  Origin  of,  260,  265. 
Decorations,  111,  116,  386. 


Decorative  Arts,  328. 
Deliverance  Feast,  112. 
Descent  in  Family,  22,  41. 

—  to  Hades,  277,  286. 

—  of  Property,  59. 

Destruction  of  Property  after  Death, 

255,  263,  285. 
Devil,  117,  122. 
Discoveries,  2,  8. 
Diseases,  12  note. 
Disposing  of  corpses,  267,  269. 
Divination,  196,  210. 
Division  of  People,  21,  24,  400. 
Divorce,  244. 
Doctors,  195. 
Dreamers,  208. 
Dreams,  208,  249,  266. 
Dress,  107,  23T,  234,  241,  321. 
Drill,  325. 

Driving  Ghosts,  2  70. 
Drums,  175,  336. 
Dugong,  318. 
Dukdtik,  69. 
Dye*  322,  323. 

Ear  ornaments,  330. 

Ears  pierced,  232,  265  note,  280. 

Eclipses,  348. 

Eels,  18,  318. 

Elevation  of  land,  16. 

Elopement,  240. 

Enclosures,  84,  86. 

Entrance  to  Clubs,  105. 

—  to  Hades,  273. 

—  to  Mysteries,  see  Initiation. 

—  payments,  81,  84,  92,  103, 106, 115. 
Espiritu  Santo,  3,  6,  8,  17,  306,  315. 
Exclusion  of  Women,  1  28. 
Exogamy,  21,  24,  29,  34. 
Exorcism,  220. 

Fagani,  see  Ha'ani. 
Fainting--  260,  287. 
Familiar  Spirits,  142. 
Family,  25,  26,  34,  68. 

—  System,  35,  40. 
Fasting,  107,  205. 
Feasts,  104,  108,  no,  112. 

—  funeral,  255,  259,  261,  264,  271, 
273,  280,  282,  284,  287. 

Feather-money,  324. 

Fenua  loa,  1 7- 

Fighting,  305. 

Figure-heads,  296. 

Figures  in  Mysteries,  87,  96. 

Fiji,  2,  22  note,  34,  43,  48,  59,  61 
note,  64  note,  69,  72,  122,  147 
note,  198  note,  246  note,  248,  315, 
3T9>  34°- 


Index, 


415 


Fines,  30,  52.  _ 

Fingers,  counting  on,  353. 

Fire,  320.  > 

First-fruits,  95,  133,  138,  139. 
Fishing,  316. 

—  hooks,  316. 

—  Boats,  317. 

—  kites,  318. 

—  nets,  317,  358. 

—  traps,  318. 

Fison,  Rev.  Lorimer,  22  note,  48  note, 
59  note,  61  note,  64  note,  72,  122, 
147,  198,  246  note,  24S. 

Flies,  18. 

Floats,  317. 

Flood,  166. 

Florida  Island,  3,  5  note,  16,  23,  29, 
40,  61,  73,  94,  124,  130,  145,  174, 
175,  180,  194,  200,  209,  210,  214, 
215,  217,  21S,  235,  237,  242,  249, 
254.  257,  295,  300,  305,  325,  333, 
337,  343,  345>  348,  352,  353,  354- 

Flutes,  339. 

—  iEolian,  340. 
Food,  319. 

—  fragments  of,  203. 

—  offered  to  Dead,  128, 147,  259,  271, 
283. 

—  of  Ghosts,  260,  2S6,  288. 
Forbes,  Mr.,  186  note,  262  note. 
Forts,  302. 

Fowls,  10,  18. 
Fragments  of  food,  203. 
Frigate-birds,  126, 145,  179,  180,  257. 
Frogs,  17. 

Fruit-trees,  property  in,  6r,  62,  65, 
68. 

Funeral  feasts,  see  Feasts. 

—  oration,  268. 
Funerals,  268,  281,  284,  287. 
Futuna  Island,  8,  15. 

Gallego,  2  note,  5  note,  8. 
Qamal,  101,  113,  298. 
Gaines,  340. 

Gardens,  59,  68,  303,  349. 

—  Spirits,  134. 

Gaua,  Santa  Maria,  3,  13,  1 7,  85,  86, 

105,  166,  189,  268,  302. 
Geology,  13. 
Gera,  Gela,  5,  16. 
Ghost-shooters,  205. 
Ghosts,  II,  120,  125,  194,  196,  247,- 

253,  260,  288. 

—  Societies  of,  75. 

Ginger,  133,  180,'  195,  197,  200. 
Gods,  122,  124. 
Grafting,  304. 
Graves,  257. 


Guadalcanar,  5,  327,  354. 

Guest-wives,  24. 

Gulf  Island,  see  Ugi. 

Guppy,  Dr.,  2  noter  5  note,  9  note,  1 9 

263  note,  290,  294  note,  299  note, 

317  note. 

Ha'ani,  173,  294,  301. 

Hades,  255,  256,  260,  264,  273,  280, 

285,  287,  367,  395. 
Harlots,  235. 
Hats,  69,  77,  85,  104. 
Haunting  Ghosts,  255,  258,  261,  264, 

267,  288. 
Head,  43,  45,  233  note. 

—  hunting,  345. 

—  taking,  257,  297,  301,  345. 
Heaps  of  Stones,  185. 
Heavenly  Bodies,  348. 
Hereditary  Succession,  50,  55,  56. 
Hickson,  Dr.,  317  note. 

Hot  Springs,  1 3. 
House-mounds,  48,  66,  68,  301. 
House-sites,  61,  65,  301. 
Houses,  298. 

Human  Sacrifices,  134,  297,  301. 
Idols,  173. 

Images,  105,  110,  173,  259. 
Implements,  313. 
Incest,  23,  30. 
Infancy,  230. 
Infanticide,  229. 

Inheritance,  50,  59,  64  note,  65,  67, 
68. 

Initiation,  70,  80,  84,  86,  88,  92,  97, 
233- 

Intercourse  of  Sexes,  23,  235. 
Invocations,  50,  145,  148. 
Iron,  313. 

Irregular  intercourse,  23,  235. 
Irrigation,  303. 

Jew's-harps,  339. 
Joske,  Mr.,  72. 

Journey  of  the  Dead,  256,  279,  285. 
Judgment  after  Death,    256,  257, 
269,  274. 

Kahausibware,  150. 

Kava,  1,  3,  351. ' 

Kema,  30,  33. 

Kindreds,  24,  29. 

Kingfishers,  147,  190,  221,  257. 

Kinship,  21,  37,  40,  41. 

Kissing  354- 
Kites,  342. 

—  fishing,  318. 

—  song,  336. 


416 


Index. 


Koevasi,  21.' 
Kolekole,  no,  392. 

Lagoons,  17. 
Lakes,  17,  166. 

Lakona,  Santa  Maria,  13,  66,  86,  157, 

266,  272,  275,  293  note,  318,  341. 
Land,  29,  50,  59,  61,  65  note. 

—  reclaimed  from  forest,  61,  62,  64, 
67. 

Lang,  Mr.  A.,  91. 
La  Perouse,  4. 

Lepers'  Island,  3,  14,  24,  26,  45,  56, 
67,  "3,  i?o,  183,  199,  201,  207, 
210,  213,  214,  218,  223,  229,  230, 
232,  236,  322,  323,  337,  344,  347, 

348.  353=  355.  371- 
Levirate,  244. 

Libations,  128,  147. 

License  at  Feasts,  27. 

—  of  Societies,  83,  98. 
Lifting  brides,  238,  242. 
Lizards,  180. 

Lodges,  72,  77. 

Looms,  10,  20,  316,  321. 

Lopevi,  13. 

Loyalty  Islands,  1,  15,  324. 

Madagascar,  21. 
Madness,  218. 
Mae,  Three  Hills. 
Maewo,  see  Aurora  Island. 
Magic,  191. 

—  Sympathetic,  200,  214,  310. 
Magicians,  191. 

Mala,  Malaita,  Malanta,  3,  4,  5,  16, 

33.  33°,  345.  346. 

—  Paina  and  Masiki,  16. 
Malanta,  see  Saa. 
Malicolo,  3. 

Man,  making  of,  21,  157,  167,  171. 

—  in  Moon,  348. 

Maria,  51,  57,  90,  103.  115,  119,191, 

200,  307. 
Manslaughter,  133. 
Mara,  see  Mala. 

Marawa,  152,  157,  373,  383  note. 
Marina,  Espiritu  Santo. 
Marriage,  23,  27,  37,  238,  240,  242. 
Masks,  69,  72,  77,  83,  96. 
Mat,  316. 

—  money,  323. 
Matambala,  69,  94. 
Matema  Group,  17. 
Maternal  Descent,  21. 
Matriarchal  System,  34. 
Max  M  tiller,  Prof.,  118  note. 
Measures,  353. 
Medicine,  195. 


Megapod,  17. 
Mendana,  2,  9. 
Meralava,  Star  Island. 
Merig,  Sainte  Claire  Island. 
Merlav,  Star  Island. 
Messer,  Dr.  R.  N.,  307  note. 
Metamorphosis,  207. 
Mission  Voyages,  10  note. 
Money,  63,  66,  323. 

—  feather,  324. 

—  lending,  326. 

—  mat,  323. 

—  shell,  325. 
Months,  349. 
Moon,  348. 

—  Man  in,  348. 
Mosquitos,  18. 

Mota,  Sugarloaf  Island,  n,  15,  18, 
25,  35,  i°4,  147,  158,  223,  250, 
266,  292,  337,  340,  342,  346,  347, 

349,  353,  379- 
Mother-in-law,  42. 

Motlav,  Saddle  Island,  25,  47,  48,  55, 

66, 146,  181,  211,  249,  268,  274. 
Mourning,  245,  282. 
Music,  337. 

Musical  Instruments,  336. 
Mysteries,  69. 

Names  of  Islands,  4,  5  note,  7. 

—  new  personal,  87,  94,  114. 

—  not  mentioned,  43. 
Nanga  of  Fiji,  69,  72. 
Narcotics,  351. 

Native  Names  of  Islands,  4,  5,  7. 
Ndeni,  Santa  Cruz,  5. 
Nearness  in  blood,  29. 
Nets,  317. 

New  Caledonia,  2,  13,  69,  73. 

New  Hebrides,  2,  3,  6,  24,  56,  67,  72, 
84,  86,  124,  143,  148,  151, 199,  240, 
29],  298,  309,  313,  319,  337,  340, 

342,  344.  345,  348,  351,  353,  355- 
Nggela,  Florida,  16. 
Night,  156,  171. 
Nitendi,  5. 
Nopitu,  153. 
Nose-rings,  231,  256. 
Nufilole  Island,  17. 

Oaths,  217. 

Oba,  Omba,  Opa,  see  Lepers'  Island. 
Offerings,  127. 

Olu  Malau  Islands,  Three  Sisters,  5 

note. 
Omens,  220. 
Ordeals,  212. 

Origin  of  Chiefs  power,  51,  56,  116, 
167. 


Index. 


417 


Origin  of  Death,  260,  265,  283,  286. 

—  of  Kindreds,  26. 

—  of  Man,  ar,  26. 
Original  Self,  253. 
Ornamentation,  328. 
Ornaments  burieil,  254,  263,  268. 
Ovens,  320. 

Owa-raha  and  -rii,  5  note. 
Paddles,  297. 

Palmer,  Eev.  J.,  14,  81  note,  83  note, 
199 note,  201  note,  268  note,  269  note. 
Palolo,  350. 

Panoi,  264  ;  see  Hades. 

Panpipes,  337. 

Paternal  Descent,  22,  41,  50. 

Path  of  the  Dead,  256,  275,  278,  285. 

Patriarchal  System,  22,  41,  50,  68. 

Patteson,  Bishop,  4  note,  6  note,  9, 
10  note,  11,  12  note,  74  note,  85 
note,  121  note,  144,  166,  294  note, 
301,  302. 

Pedigree  of  Mota  family,  37. 

Penny,  Rev.  A.,  99  note,  176  note, 

257  note>  356. 

Pentecost  Island,  Whitsuntide  Island, 
Araga,  3,  26, 45, 48, 67,92,114, 169, 
183,  187,188,  199,  209,  228,230, 
240,  253,  286,  311,  323,  344,  347. 

Personal  Property,  63,  66,  67. 

Pigs,  57  note,  249. 

—  souls  of,  249,  263,  269. 

—  world,  286. 
Pile-houses,  300. 

Piper  methysticuni,  Kava,  351. 

Pipes,  337,  352. 

Pitcairn  Island,  342. 

Places,  Sacred,  173. 

Plant,  Eev.  J.  H.,  238  note. 

Poison,  213. 

Poisoned  Arrows,  306,  368. 
Polyandry,  245. 
Polygamy,  39,  245. 
Polynesian  Colonies,  2,  322. 
Possession,  153,  209,  218,  224. 
Pottery,  315. 

Power  of  Chiefs,  47,  51,  56,  1 16,  167. 
Prayer,  127,  145,  148. 
Priests,  128,  132. 
Primogeniture,  64. 
Property,  33,  50,  59. 

—  personal,  63,  66,  67. 

—  in  trees,  6i,  65  note,  68. 
Prophecy,  209. 

Public  Halls,  102. 

Qat,  11,  31,  22,  154,  156,  397,  398. 

—  Society,  69,  75,  84,  86. 
Quiros,  2,  5,  7,  note. 


Rainbow,  341. 
Eainmaking,  200. 

Eanks  in  Societies,  103,  104, 113,  115, 

385>  391- 
Eattles,  342. 

Eeclaimed  Land,  61,  62,  64,  67. 
Eed,  183. 

Eedemption  of  Land,  65. 
Eeef  Islands,  17. 

Eeef  Islands  of  Santa  Cruz,  2,  6,  9, 

17.  232,  346- 
Eeflection,  250. 

Relation  of  Brother  and  Sister,  36. 

—  by  Marriage,  37. 

—  in  Polygamy,  39. 

—  of  Sister's  son,  24. 
Eelationship,  35. 
Eelics,  126,  134,  258,  262. 
Eeligion,  117,  123. 
Eennell  Island,  2,  16,  313. 
Reserve,  42,  232,  242. 
Respect,  45. 

Restriction  on  intercourse  of  sexes, 

23,  43- 

—  on  Marriage,  30. 
Retainers,  52,  58. 
Eomilly,  Mr.,  307. 

Eowa  Island,  7,  17,  298,  327. 
Eubbing  noses,  354. 

Saa,  Malanta,  48,  63,  124,  136,  176, 
191,  209,  212,  216,  219,  221,  230, 
233:  235,  238,  250,  260,  288,  299, 
3°5>  3l6,  336,  344.  349.  352>  353, 
355- 

Sacred  Places  and  Things,  173,  177. 
Sacrifices,  128,  144  note. 

—  in  Ambrym,  144. 

—  in  Aurora  Island,  143. 

—  in  Banks'  Islands,  139. 

—  of  First  Fruits,  132,  138,  139. 

—  in  Florida,  1 30. 

—  Human,  134. 

—  in  Lepers'  Island,  144. 

—  in  New  Hebrides,  139. 

—  in  Pentecost  Island,  143. 

—  at  Saa,  1 36. 

—  in  San  Cristoval,  129,  138. 

—  at  Santa  Cruz,  139. 

—  in  Ysabel,  135. 

Saddle  Island,  see  Motlav  and  Valuwa. 

Sago,  319. 

Salagoro,  73,  77. 

Sale  of  Land,  50,  60,  65  note. 

Salt,  311  note. 

Salutations,  354,  394. 

San  Cristoval  Island,  3,  4,  12  note, 
17,  41,  42  note,  51  note,  124,  129, 
138,  146,  150,  177,  179,  190,  196, 


4i8 


Index, 


-28,  ;229,  235, 245,  294)  299, 303, 

305,  318,  325, 329. 333, 336, 344, 
345, 352. 

Santa  Ana  Island,  5  note. 

Santa  Catalina  Island,  5  note. 

Santa  Cruz  Island,  2,  3,  5,  9,  17,  18, 
2°>  43,  59,  63,  139,  167,  174,  180, 
196,  201,  231,  232,  239,  249  note, 
263,  293,  301,  312,  313,  3I7,  3I9, 

321,  324,  333,  342,  348,  351. 
Santa  Maria  Island,  3,  7,  13,  85,  86, 

105,  166,  189,  268,  302,  351.  See 

Lakona. 
Santo,  Espiritu  Santo. 
Savo,  3,  5,  13,  18,  179,  206,  214,  255, 

345- 
Saw,  315  note. 
Sea-ghosts,  196,  258. 
Seasons,  349. 

Seclusion  in  Mysteries,  81,  84,  86,  93, 
95,  100. 

Secret  Societies,  54,  69.,  74  note,  75, 

76,  86,  91,  94. 
Selwyn,  Bishop,  6  note,  10  note. 

—  Bishop  John,  9,  14,  17,  95,  125, 
204,  239  note,  282  note,  298  note, 
303  note. 

Separation  of  Sexes,  43,  232. 
Sesarga  Island,  5. 
Shadow,  176,  209,  247,  250. 
Sharks,  126,  179,  187,  259. 

—  fishing  for,  318. 

Shell  Implements,  16,  313. 

—  Money,  325. 
Shields,  305. 

Ship  of  the  Dead,  326  note. 

—  first  seen,  35  2  note. 
Shrines,  X26,  130,  175,  177. 
Sickness,  T94. 

'  Side  of  House,'  25. 
Sister's  son,  34,  41 ,  380,  400. 
Slaves,  346. 
Slings,  305. 

Snakes,  18,  178,  187,  199. 
Sneezing,  40,  211,  226. 
Social  Regulations,  20,  46. 
Societies,  Clubs,  101,  103,  104,  110, 

114,  115. 
Sogoi,  25. 

Solomon  Islands,  2,  3,  5  note,  22,  40, 

94,  I24,  I29,  *75,  294,  3°9-  3[3. 
316,  317,  319,  339,  342,  343,  348, 

35i,  352,  353- 
Songs,  85,  93,  334. 

—  Dialect,  334. 
Soul,  247,  267. 

Sounds  in  Mysteries,  So,  S3,  95. 
Spanish  Discoveries,  2. 

—  Names,  4. 


Spears,  305. 
Spells,  147. 

8l'!1r!8'Ir«0'I2Q3'  125,  r34,  Ho,  150, 
151,  16S,  248. 

Star  Island,  Meralava,  6,  7,  14,  303 

Stars,  348. 

Stepfather,  40. 

Stone-boiling,  315. 

—  buildings,  302. 

—  implements,  16,  313. 

Stones,  119,  140,  143,  151,  169,  175, 

178,  180,  183,  185. 
Stories,  356. 
Streams,  177,  186. 
Stringed  Instrument,  339. 
Succession  of  Chiefs,  53,  55,  56. 

—  of  Property,  29,  59,  6i,-  63,  66,  67, 

Oo. 

Sugarloaf  Island,  Mota. 
Suicide,  243. 
Sumatra,  186  note. 
Sun,  200,  348,  365. 

—  making,  184,  201. 
Sup  we  Spirit,  168. 

Suqe  Club,  102, 112,  114,  385,  390. 
Surf-board,  341. 
Surville,  4. 

Swallow  Group,  2,  17. 
Swearing,  217. 

Sympathetic  Magic,  200,  214,  3*10. 
System  of  Relationship,  35. 

Taboo,  iambu,  tapu,  31,  63,  77,  82, 

94,  182,  215. 
Tagaro,  21,  168,  369. 
Tamate,  69,  72,  75,  266. 
Taro,  304,  319. 
Tas,  17,  186. 

Tattoo,  232,  234,  237,  240,  241,  331. 
Taumako,  5. 

Teeth,  dog  and  porpoise,  325. 
Terms  of  Relationship,  35,  40. 
Tetanus,  312. 
Thanks,  354. 
Thatch,  299. 

Three  Hills  Island,  330,  355. 

Three  Sisters  Island,  5  note. 

Tikopia,  1,  6  note,  17,  319,  346,  351. 

Timor,  186  note,  262  note. 

Tinakula,  13. 

Tindalo,  125,  249. 

Tobacco,  352. 

Tonga,  303,  321,  343. 

Tools,  16,  313. 

Tops,  242. 

Torres,  2. 

Torres  Islands,  3,  7,  16,  75,  104,  ill, 
224,  231,  264,  293  note,  306  note, 
307,  30S,  313,  327,  351,  373. 


Index. 


419 


Totems,  32. 

Town  lots,  59,  61,  63,  65,  67. 
Toys,  342. 
Trade,  297. 

Tradition,  absence  of,  47. 
Translation  of  Relics,  126. 
Treatment  of  Wounds,  310. 
Tree-houses,  301. 

Trees  cut  down  at  death,  255,  263, 

a8s-         ,  ,   ,  . 

—  property  in,  61,  05,  6S. 

—  sacred,  186. 

Trials  of  the  Dead,  256,  257,  265  note, 

275,  2S0,  287.' 
Tribes,  21,  33  note. 
Tricks  of  Ghosts,  223. 
Twins,  230. 

Ugi,  Gulf  Island,  5. 

Ulawa,  Contrariety  Island,  3,  5,  32, 

i79>  lS°,  235,  294,  343,  346- 
Ureparapara,  Bligh  Island,  13,  81,  84, 
114,  269,  272,  298  note. 

Valuwa,  Saddle  Island,  185,  186,  205. 

Vampires,  221. 

Vanikoro  Island,  4. 

Vanua  Lava,  Great  Banks'  Islands, 

n,  !3,  J7>  43,  H1,  3°3,  3o6  note, 

375- 

Variety  of  Flowers  and  Plants,  304. 
Vat  Ganai,  7  note. 
Vava,  Torres  Islands. 
Veve,  24,  28. 
Vigona,  151. 


Villages,  59,  61,  66. 
Visitors,  appearance  of,  10. 
Volcanos,  13. 
Vui,  123,  151. 

Wandering  Ghosts,  219. 
Washing,  84,  86,  93,  320. 
Water,  sacred,  177,  186. 
Weaning,  231. 
Weapons,  304. 
Weather  Doctors,  184,  200. 

—  Spirits,  134. 
Whistling,  342. 
Widowhood,  245. 
Wild  Men,  19  note,  354. 
Wills,  66,  68. 

Winged  Women,  172,  397. 
Witchcraft,  191,  202. 
Wizards,  192. 

Women,  exclusion  of,  69,  74,  87,  92, 

94,  i°3- 

—  Clubs,  110. 

—  Dress,  234,  241,  321. 
Woodford,  Mr.,  2  note,  5  note,  9  note, 

]  32  note. 
Words  forbidden,  44.  • 
World,  11. 
Worship,  124. 

Yams,  319,  367. 

Ysabel  Island,  3,  4  note,  30,  135,  175, 
180,  196,  256,  299,  300,  302,  318, 
343,  345,  348- 

Zoology,  17. 


THE  END. 


gdtct  %\*t  of  £>fanMrt>  WoxU 


PRINTED  AT 


THE  CLARENDON  PRESS,  OXFORD. 


DICTIONARIES 


Page  r, 


LAW  

HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  ETC. 
PHILOSOPHY,  LOGIC,  ETC. 
PHYSICAL  SCIENCE  . 


2 


i.  3 


6. 


7- 


1.  DICTIONARIES. 

A  New  English  Dictionary  on  Historical  Prin- 


ciples, founded  mainly  on  the  materials  collected  by  the  Philological 
Society.    Imperial  4to.    In  Parts,  price  1 2s.  6d.  each. 
Vol.  I  (A  and  B),  half  morocco,  aZ.  izs.  6d. 
Part  IV,  Section  2,  C— CASS,  beginning  Vol.  II,  price  5s. 
Part  V,  CAST— CLIVY,  price  12s.  6d. 

Edited  by  James  A.  H.  Murray,  LL.D. 
Vol.  Ill  (E,  F,  and  G),  Part  I,  edited  by  Henry  Bradley.  In  the  Press. 


An  Etymological  Dictionary  of  the  English 


Language,  arranged  on  an  Historical  Basis.  By  W.  W.  Skeat,  Litt.D. 
Second  Edition.    4to.    2l.  4s. 

A  Middle-English  Dictionary,  containing  Words  used 

by  English  Writers  from  the  Twelfth  to  the  Fifteenth  Century.  By 
Francis  Henry  Stratmann.  A  new  edition,  re-arranged,  revised,  and 
enlarged  by  Henry  Bradley.    4to,  half-bound,  ll.  1  is.  6d. 

An  Anglo-Saxon  Dictionary,  based  on  the  MS.  col- 
lections of  the  late  Joseph  Bosworth,  D.D.  Edited  and  enlarged  by 
Prof.  T.  N.  Toller,  M.A.,  Owens  College,  Manchester.  Parts  I-III. 
A-SAE.  4to,  stiff  covers.  15s.  each.  Part  IV  (completing,  the  Work)  in 
the  Press, 

An  Icelandic-English  Dictionary,  based  on  the  MS. 

collections  of  the  late  Richard  Cleasby.  Enlarged  and  completed  by 
G.  Vigfusson,  M.A.  With  an  Introduction,  and  Life  of  Richard  Cleasby, 
by  G.  Webbe  Dasent,  D.C.L.    4to.    3I.  ?s. 

A  Greek-English  Lexicon,  by  H.  G.  Liddell,  D.D., 

and  Robert  Scott,  D.  D.  Seventh  Edition,  Revised  and  Augmented  throughout.  4to, 
il.  1 6s. 


Oxford :  Clarendon  Press.   London  :  Henry  Frowde,  Amen  Corner,  E.C. 


ENGLISH  AND  ROMAN  LA  W 


AnfIoI1f!ieTedifeilGreek-English  Lexicon,  abridged 

irom  the  above.    Small  4to.    12s.  6d.  ° 

A  Latin  Dictionary,  founded  on  Andrews'  edition  of 

w^it  D-«--y.  revised,  enlarged,  and  in  great  part  rewritten 
by  Chailton  T.  Lew1S,  Ph.D.,  and  Charles  Short,  LL.D.    4to.  il.  g8. 

A  f,°50C?  Latin  Dicti0Iiary.    By  Charlton  T.  Lewis, 

.rh.D.    Small  4to.  18s. 

A  Sanskrit-English  Dictionary.   Etymologically  and 

Philologically  arranged,  with  special  reference  to  Greek,  Latin,  German, 

^%  gUsh'  and  °ther  Indo-European  Languages 

By  Sir  M.  Monier-Williams,  D.CL.    4to.  4i.14s.6d. 

Thesaurus  Syriacus  :  collegerunt  Quatremere,  Bernstein 

Lorsbach  Arnoldi,  Agrell,  Field,  Eoediger:  edidit  K.  Payne  Smith,' 
B.I.P.    Vol.  I,  containing  Fasc.  I-V,  sm.  fol.  5l.  5s. 

Fasc.  VI.  il.  is.       Fasc.  VII.  il.  ns.  6d.      Fasc.  VIII.  il.  ,6s 


2.  LAW. 


Anson.     Principles   of  the 

English  Law  of  Contract,  and  of  Agency 
in  its  Relation  to  Contract.  By  Sir  W. 
E.  Anson,  D.CL.  Sixth  Edition.  8vo. 
10s.  6d. 

 Law  and  Custom  of  the 

Constitution.  Part  I.  Parliament. 
8vo.    i  os.  6d. 

Bentham.    An  Introduction 

to  the  Principles  of  Morals  and  Legislation. 
By  Jeremy  Bentham.  Crown  8vo. 
6s.  6d. 

Digby.    An  Introduction  to 

the  History  of  the  Law  of  Real  Property. 
By  Kenelm  E.  Digby,  M.A.  TJiird 
Edition.    8vo.    10s.  6d. 

Grueber.   Lex  Aquilia.  The 

Eoman  Law  of  Damage  to  Pro- 
perty :  being  a  Commentary  on  the 
Title  of  the  Digest  'Ad  Legem 
Aquiliam'  (ix.  2).  With  an  Intro- 
duction to  the  Study  of  the  Corpus 
Iuris  Civilis.  By  Erwin  Grueber, 
Dr.  Jur.,  M.A.    8vo.    10s.  6d. 


Hall.     International  Law. 

By  W.  E.  Hall,  M.A.  Third  Edition. 
8vo.    22s.  6d. 

Holland.  Elements  of  Juris- 
prudence. By  T.  E.  Holland,  D.CL. 
Fifth  Edition.    8vo.    10s.  6d. 

 The  European  Concert 

in  the  Eastern  Question ;  a  Collection 
of  Treaties  and  other  Public  Acts. 
Edited,  with  Introductions  and 
Notes,  by  T.  E.  Holland,  D.CL. 
8vo.    12s.  6d. 

Holland.    Gentilis,  Alberici, 

Be  lure  Belli  Libri  Tres.  Edidit  T.  E. 
Holland,  LCD.  Small  4to.  half 
morocco,  21s. 

Holland.    The  Institutes  of 

Justinian,  edited  as  a  recension  of 
the  Institutes  of  Gaius,  by  T.  E. 
Holland,  D.CL.  Second  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  5s. 


Oxford :  Clarendon  Press. 


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  ETC. 


3 


Holland  and  Shadwell.  Select 

Titles  from  the  Digest  of  Justinian.  By 
T.  E.  Holland,  D.C.L.,  and  C.  L. 
Shadwell,  B.C.L.    8vo.  14s. 

Also  sold  in  Parts,  in  paper  covers, 
as  follows : — 
Parti.  Introductory  Titles.  2S.6d. 
Part  II.  Family  Law.  is. 
Part  III.  Property  Law.    2S.  6d. 
Part  IV.    Law  of  Obligations 

(No.  1).    3s.  6d. 
Part  IV.    Law  of  Obligations 
(No.  2).    4s.  6d. 

Markby.    Elements  of  Law 

considered  with  reference  to  Principles  of 
General  Jurisprudence.  By  Sir  William 
Markby,  D.C.L.  Fourth  Edition.  8vo. 
12s.  6d. 

Moyle.      Imperatoris  Ius- 

tiniani  Institutionum  Libri  Quattuor ; 
with  Introductions,  Commentary, 
Excursus  and  Translation.  By  J.  B. 
Moyle,  D.C.L.  Second  Edition.  2 vols. 
Svo.   Vol.  I.  16s.  Yol.  II.  6s. 

Pollock   and    "Wright.  An 

Essay  on  Possession  in  the  Common  Law. 


By  Sir  F.  Pollock,  M.A.,  and  R.  S. 
Wright,  B.C.L.  (Now  the  Hon.  Mr. 
Justice  Wbight).    8vo.    8s.  6d. 

Poste.    Gaii  Institutionum 

Juris  Oivilis  Commentarii  Quattuor  ;  or, 
Elements  of  Roman  Law  by  Gaius. 
With  a  Translation  and  Commen- 
tary by  Edward  Poste,  M.A.  Tldrd 
Edition.    Svo.  18s. 

Raleigh.    An  Outline  of  the 

Law  of  Property.  By  Thos.  Raleigh, 
M.A.    8vo.    7s.  6d. 

Stokes.    The  Anglo-Indian 

Codes.    By  Whitley  Stokes,  LL.D. 

Vol.  I.  Substantive  Law.  Svo,  30s. 

Vol.  II.  Adjective  Law.  8vo,  35s. 
A  Supplement  to  the  above,  1887- 

1888.    Stiff  covers,  2s.  6d. 

Twiss.    The  Law  of  Nations 

considered  as  Independent  Political  Com- 
munities. By  Sir  Travers  Twiss, 
D.C.L. 

Part  I.  On  the  Rights  and  Duties 

of  Nations  in.  time  of  Peace. 

New  Edition.    8vo.  15s. 
Part  II.  On  the  Rights  and  Duties 

of  Nations  in  time  of  War. 

Second  Edition.    8vo.    2  is. 


3.  HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  ETC. 


Baker's  Chronicle.  Chronicon 

GalfricH  le  Baker  de  Swynebroke. 
Edited  with  Notes  by  Edward 
Maun  de  Thompson,  Hon.  LL.D.  St. 
Andrews;  Hon.  D.C.L.  Durham; 
F.S.A.  ;  Principal  Librarian  of  the 
British  Museum.  Small  4to,  stiff 
covers,  18s.  ;  cloth,  gilt  top,  21s. 

Bentham.    A  Fragment  on 

Government.    By  Jeremy  Bentham. 


Edited  with  an  Introduction  by 
F.  C.  Montague,  M.A.    Svo,  p.  6d. 

Bentham.    An  Introduction 

to  the  Principles  of  Morals  and  Legisla- 
tion. By  Jeremy  Bentham.  Crown 
8vo.    6s.  6d. 

BoswelPs  Life   of  Samuel 

Johnson,  LL.D.  Edited  by  G.  Birk- 
beck  Hill,  D.C.L.  In  six  volumes, 
medium  8vo.  With  Portraits  and 
Facsimiles.    Half  bound,  3?.  3s. 


London  :  Henby  Frowde,  Amen  Corner,  E.C. 


4 


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  ETC. 


Calendar  of  the  Clarendon 

State  Papers,  preserved  in  the  Bodleian 
Library.  In  three  volumes.  1869-76. 

Vol.  I.  From  1523  to  January 
1649.    8vo.    1 8s. 

Vol.  II.  From  1649  to  ^54-  16s. 

Vol.111.  From  1655  to  1657.  14s. 

Calendar  of  Charters  and  Rolls 

preserved  in  the  Bodleian  Library. 
Svo.   ll.  11s.  6d, 

Carte's  Life  of  James  Duke  of 

Ormond.    6  vols.    8vo.    il.  5s. 

Clarendon's  History  of  the 

Rebellion  and  Civil  Wars  in  England. 
Ee-edited  from  a  fresh  collation  of 
the  original  MS.  in  the  Bodleian 
Library,  with  marginal  dates  and 
occasional  notes,  by  W.  Dunn 
Macray,  M.A.,  F.S.A.  6  vols.  Crown 
8vo.    2l.  5s. 

 History  of  the  Rebellion 

and  Civil  Wars  in  England.  To  which 
are  subjoined  the  Notes  of  Bishop 
Warburton.    7  vols,  medium  8vo. 

2l.  I  OS. 

  History  of  the  Rebel- 
lion and  Civil  Wars  in  England. 
Also  his  Life,  written  by  himself, 
in  which  is  included  a  Continua- 
tion of  his  History  of  the  Grand 
Eebellion.    Royal  8vo.    il.  2s. 

 Life,  including  a  Con- 
tinuation of  his  History.  2  vols, 
medium  8vo.    il.  2s. 

Earle.  Handbook  to  the  Land- 
Charters,  and  other  Saxonic  Documents. 
By  John  Earle,  M.A.,  Professor  of 
Anglo-Saxon  in  the  University  of 
Oxford.    Crown  Svo.  16s. 


Finlay.    A  History  of  Greece 

from  its  Conquest  by  the  Romans  to  the 
present  time,  b.  c.  146  to  a.  d.  1864. 
By  George  Finlay,  LL.D.  A  new 
Edition,  revised  throughout,  and 
in  part  re-written,  with  considerable 
additions,  by  the  Author,  and  edited 
by  H.  F.  Tozer,  M.A.  7  vols.  8vo. 
$1.  10s. 

Fortescue.    The  Governance 

of  England:  otherwise  called  The 
Difference  between  an  Absolute  and 
a  Limited  Monarchy.  By  Sir  John 
Fortescue,  Kt.  A  Revised  Text. 
Edited,  Notes,  with  Introduction, 
etc.,  by  Charles  Plummer,  M.A. 
8vo,  half  bound,  12s.  6d. 

Freeman.     The  History  of 

Sicily  from  the  Earliest  Times.  Vols.  I. 
and  II.  8vo.  Cloth,  2I.  2s.  Just 
Published. 

 History  of  the  Norman 

Conquest  of  England;  its  Causes 
and  Results.  By  E.  A.  Freeman, 
D.C.L.  In  Six  Volumes.  8vo. 
5Z.  9s.  6d. 

 The  Reign  of  William 

Rufus  and  the  Accession  of  Henry  the 
First.    2  vols.    8vo.    il.  16s. 

 A  Short  History  of  the 

Norman  Conquest  of  England.  Second 
Edition.    Extra  fcap.  8vo.    2s.  6d. 

Gardiner.  TheConstitutional 

Documents  of  the  Puritan  Revohdion, 
1628-1660.  Selected  and  Edited 
by  Samuel  Rawson  Gardiner,  M.A. 
Crown  8vo.  9s. 

Gaseoigne's  Theological  Dic- 
tionary ('  Liber  Veritatum ')  :  Selected 
Passages,  illustrating  the  Condition 
of  Church  and  State,  1403-1458. 
With  an  Introduction  by  James  E. 
Thorold  Rogers,  M.A.    4to,  10s.  6d. 


Oxford :  Clarendon  Press. 


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  ETC. 


5 


Greswell.     History    of  the 

Dominion  of  Canada.  By  W.  Parr 
Greswell,  M.  A.  Under  the  auspices 
of  the  Eoyal  Colonial  Institute. 
Crown  8vo.  With  Eleven  Maps. 
7s.  6rf. 

  Geography  of  the  Do- 
minim  of  Canada  and  Newfoundland. 
By  the  same  Author.  Crown  8vo. 
With  Ten  Maps.  6s. 

Gross.    The  Gild  Merchant; 

a  Contribution  to  British  Municipal 
History.  By  Charles  Gross,  Ph.D. 
Instructor  in  History,  Harvard  Uni- 
versity. 2  vols.  8vo.  Half-bound, 
24s. 

Hodgkin.  Italy  and  her  In- 
vaders. With  Plates  and  Maps.  By 
T.  Hodgkin,  D.C.L.  Vols.  I-IV, 
a.d.  376-553.    8vo.    3Z.  8s. 

  The  Dynasty  of  Theo- 

dosius;  or,  Seventy  Years'  Struggle 
with  the  Barbarians.  By  the  same 
Author.    Crown  8vo.  6s. 

Hume.  Letters  of  David  Hume 

to  William  Strahan.  Edited  with 
Notes,  Index,  etc.,  by  G.  Birkbeck 
Hill,  D.C.L.    Svo.    12s.  6d. 

Kitehin.  A  History  of  France. 

With  Numerous  Maps,  Plans,  and 
Tables.  By  G.  W.  Kitehin,  D.D. 
Bj.  three  Volumes.  Second  Edition. 
Crown  8vo,  each  10s.  6d. 
Vol.  I.  to  1453.  Vol.  II.  1453- 
1624.    Vol.  III.  1624-1793. 

Luttrell's  (Narcissus)  Diary. 

A  Brief  Historical  Eelation  of  State 
Affairs,  1678-1714.  6  vols.  8vo. 
ll.  4s. 

Lucas.    Introduction  to  a 

Historical  Geography  of  the  Briiish 
Colonies.  By  C.  P.  Lucas,  B.A. 
With  Eight  Maps.  Crown  8vo. 
4s.  6d. 


Lucas.  Historical  Geography 

of  the  British  Colonies  : 

Vol.  I.  The  Mediterranean  and 
Eastern  Colonies  (exclusive  of 
India).  With  Eleven  Maps. 
Crown  Svo.  5s. 

Vol.  II.  The  West  Indian  Colo- 
nies. With  Twelve  Maps. 
Crown  8vo.    7s.  6dt. 

Machiavelli.  II  Principe. 
Edited  by  L.  Arthur  Burd,  M.A. 
With  an  Introduction  by  Lord 
Acton.    8vo.    Cloth,  14s. 

Ranke.  A  History  of  Eng- 
land, principally  in  the  Seventeenth 
Century.  By  L.  von  Banke.  Trans- 
lated under  the  superintendence  of 
G.  W.  Kitehin,  D.D.,  and  C.  W. 
Boase,  M.A.    6  vols.    8vo.    3Z.  3s. 

Rawlinson.     A  Manual  of 

Ancient  History.  By  George  Eawlin- 
son,  M.A.  Second  Edition.  8vo.  14s. 

Rhys.  Studies  in  the  Arthu- 
rian Legend.  By  John  Ehys,  M.A. 
Svo.    12s.  6d. 

Ricardo.     Letters  of  David 

Bicardo  to  T.  R.  Malthus  (1810-1823). 
Edited  by  James  Bonar,  M.A.  8vo. 
1  os.  6d. 

Rogers.  History  of  Agricul- 
ture and  Prices  in  England,  a.d.  1259- 
1702.  By  James  E.  Thorold  Eogers, 
M.A.    6  vols.,  8vo.    7Z.  2s. 

 First  Nine  Tears  of  the 

Bank  of  England.    8vo.    8s.  6d. 

 Protests  of  the  Lords,  in- 
cluding those  which  have  heen  expunged, 
from  1624  to  1874  ;  with  Historical 
Introductions.    In  three  volumes. 

8vo.     2l.  2S. 

Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations. 

With  Notes,  by  J.  E.  Thorold  Eogers, 
M.A.     2  vols.    8vo.    2 is. 


London :  Hunky  Fhowde,  Amen  Corner,  E.C. 


PHILOSOPHY,  LOGIC,  ETC. 


Spngg's  England's  Recovery  ; 

being  the  History  of  the  Army 
under  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax.  Svo.  6s. 

Stubbs.    Select  Charters  and 

other  Illustrations  of  English  Constitu- 
tional History,  from  the  Earliest  Times 
to  the  Reign  of  Edward  I.  Arranged 
and  edited  by  W.  Stubbs,  D.D 
Lord  Bishop  of  Oxford.  Fifth  Edi- 
tion.   Crown  8vo.    8s.  6d. 

■  The  Constitutional  His- 
tory of  England,  in  its  Origin  and 
Development.  Library  Edition.  3  vols. 
Demy  8vo.    2I.  8s. 

Also  in  3  vols,  crown  8yo.  price 
12s.  each. 

  Seventeen  Lectures  on 

the  Study  of  Medieval  and  Modern 
History,  delivered  at  Oxford  1867-1884. 
Crown  Svo.    8s.  6d. 


Stubbs.    Registrum  Sacrum 

Anglicanum.   An  attempt  to  exhibit 
the  course  of  Episcopal  Succession 
in  England.    By  W.  Stubbs,  D.D 
Small  4to.    8s.  6d. 

Wellesley.    A  Selection  from 

the  Despatches,  Treaties,  and  other 
Papers  of  the  Marquess  Wellesley,  E.G., 
during  his  Government  of  India.  Edited 
by  S.  J.  Owen,  M.A.    8vo.    U.  4s. 

Wellington.  A  Selection  from 

the  Despatches,  Treaties,  and  other 
Papers  relating  to  India  of  Field-Marshal 
the  Duke  of  Wellington,  E.G.  Edited 
by  S.  J.  Owen,  M.A.    Svo.    il.  4s. 

"Whitelock's    Memorials  of 

English  Affairs  from  1625  to  1660. 
4  vols.    8vo.    il.  1  os. 


4.  PHILOSOPB 

Bacon.  The  Essays.  With  In- 
troduction and  Illustrative  Notes. 
By  S.  H.  Reynolds,  M.A.  8vo,  half 
bound.    1 2s.  6d. 

 Novum  Organum. 

Edited,  with  Introduction,  Notes, 
&c,  by  T.  Fowler,  D.D.  Second 
Edition.    8vo.  15s. 

  Novum  Organum. 

Edited,  with  English  Notes,  by 
G.  W.  Kitchin,  D.D.    8vo.    9s.  6d. 

  Novum  Organum. 

Translated  by  G.  W.  Kitchin,  D.D. 
Svo.    9s.  6d. 

Berkeley.      The    Works  of 

George  Berkeley,  D.D.,  formerly  Bishop 
ofCloyne;  including  many  of  his  writ- 
ings hitherto  unpublished.  With  Pre- 
faces, Annotations,  and  an  Account 


r,  LOGIC,  ETC. 

of  his  Life  and  Philosophy,  by  Alex- 
ander Campbell  Eraser,  LL.D.  4 
vols.    8vo.    21.  1 8s. 

The  Life,  Letters,  &c,  separately,  16s. 

Bosanquet.     Logic  j   or,  the 

Morphology  of  Knowledge.  By  B.  Bo- 
sanquet, M.A.    8vo.    2  is. 

Butler's  Works,  with  Index  to 

the  Analogy.    2  vols.    8vo.  lis. 

Fowler.  The  Elements  of  De- 
ductive Logic,  designed  mainly  for  the 
use  of  Junior  Students  in  the  Universities. 
By  T.  Fowler,  D.D.  Ninth  Edition, 
with  a  Collection  of  Examples. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.    3s.  6d. 

 The  Elements  of  Induc- 
tive Logic,  designed  mainly  for  the  use  of 
Students  in  tlie  Universities.  By  the 
same  Author.  Fifth  Edition.  Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  6s. 


Oxford :  Clarendon  Press. 


PHYSICAL  SCIENCE. 


7 


Fowler.     The  Principles  of 

Morals.  (Introductory  Chapters.) 
By  T.  Fowlor,  D.D.,  and  J.  M. 
Wilson,  B.D.    Svo,  boards,  3s.  6d. 

  The    Principles  of 

Morals.  Part  II.  By  T.  Fowler,  D.D. 
Svo.    i  os.  6d. 

Green.  Prolegomenato Ethics. 

By  T.  H.  Green,  M.A.  Edited  by 
A.  C.  Bradley,  M.A.  8vo.    12s.  6d. 

Hegel.    The  Logic  of  Hegel ; 

translated  from  the  Encyclopaedia 
of  the  Philosophical  Sciences.  With 
Prolegomena  by  William  Wallace, 
M.A    Svo.  14s. 

Hume's  Treatise  of  Human 

Nature.  Edited,  with  Analytical 
Index,  by  L.  A.  Selby-Bigge,  M.A. 
Crown  8vo.  9s. 


Locke's  Conduct  of  the  Under- 
standing. Edited  by  T.  Fowler,  D.D. 
Third  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  2s.6d. 

Lotze's  Logic,  in  Three  Books ; 

of  Thought,  of  Investigation,  and 
of  Knowledge.  English  Translation; 
Edited  by  B.  Bosanquet,  M.A. 
Second  Edition.  2  vols.  Cr.  8vo.  12s. 

  Metaphysic,  in  Three 

Books ;  Ontology,  Cosmology,  and 
Psychology.  English  Translation ; 
Edited  by  B.  Bosanquet,  M.A. 
Second  Edition.  2  vols.  Cr.  8vo.  1 2s. 

Martineau.    Types  of  Ethical 

Theory.  By  James  Martineau,  D.D. 
Third  Edition.  2  vols.  Cr.  Svo.  15s. 

 ■  A  Study  of  Religion : 

its  Sources  and  Contents.  Second  Edition. 
2  vols.   Cr.  Svo.  15s. 


5.  PHYSICAL 

Aplin.   The  Birds  of  Oxford- 
shire. By  O.  V.  Aplin.  Svo,  ios.  6d. 
Chambers.     A  Handbook  of 

Descriptive  and  Practical  Astronomy. 
By  G.  F.  Chambers,  F.RA.S.  Fourth 
Edition,  in  3  vols.    Demy  8vo. 
Vol.  I.    The  Sun,  Planets,  and 

Comets.    2  is. 
Vol.  II.    Instruments  and  Prac- 
tical Astronomy.  21s. 
Vol.  III.    The  Starry  Heavens. 
14s. 

De  Bary.  Comparative  Ana- 
tomy of  the  Vegetative  Organs  of  the 
Phanerogams  and  Ferns.  By  Dr.  A. 
De  Bary.  Translated  and  Anno- 
tated by  F.  0.  Bower,  M.A,  F.L.S., 
and  D.  H.  Scott,  M.A,  Ph.D., 
F.L.S.  Royal  8vo,  half  morocco, 
1 7.  2s.  6d. 

  Comparative  Mor- 
phology and  Biology  of  Fungi,  Mycetozoa 
and  Bacteria.    By  Dr.  A.  De  Bary. 


SCIENCE. 

Translated  by  H.  E.  F.  Garnsey, 
M.A  Revised  by  Isaac  Bayley 
Balfour,  M.A,  M.D.,  F.R.S.  Royal 
8vo,  half  morocco,  il.  2s.  6d. 

DeBary.  Lectures  on  Bacteria. 

By  Dr.  A.  De  Bary.  Second  Im- 
proved Edition.    Translated  by  H. 

E.  F.  Garnsey,  MA.  Revised  by 
Isaac  Bayley  Balfour,  M.A.,  M.D., 

F.  R.S.    Crown  8vo,  6s. 

Fisher.  A  Class  Book  of  Ele- 
mentary Cliemistry.  By  W.  W.  Fisher 
M.A.,  F.C.S.    Crown  Svo.    4s.  6d.  ' 

Goebel.  Outlines  of  Classifi- 
cation and  Special  Morphology  of  Plants. 
A  new  Edition  of  Sachs"  Text-Book 
of  Botany,  Book  II.  By  Dr.  K. 
Goebel.  Translated  by  H.  E.  F. 
Garnsey,  M.A.  Revised  by  Isaac 
Bayley  Balfour,  M.A,  M.D.,  F.R.S. 
Royal  8vo,  half  morocco,  il.  is. 


London  :  Hknhy  Frowde,  Amen  Corner,  E.C. 


8 


PHYSICAL  SCIENCE. 


Sachs.  Lectures  on  the  Phy- 
siology of  Plants.  By  Julius  von 
Sachs.  Translated  by  II.  Marshall 
Ward,  M.A.,  F.L.S.  Eoyal  Svo, 
half  morocco,  ll.  ns.  6d. 

 A  History  of  Botany. 

Translated  by  H.  E.  F.  Garnsey, 
M.A.  Edited  by  I.  Bayley  Balfour, 
M.A.,  M.D.,  P.E.S.    Crown  8vo. 

I  OS. 

Solms-Laubach.  Introduc- 
tion to  Fossil  Botany.  By  Count  H. 
von  Solms-Laubach.  Authorised 
English  Translation,  by  H.  E.  F. 
Garnsey,  M.A.  Edited  by  Isaac 
Bayley  Balfour,  M.A.,  M.D.,  F.B.S. 
In  the  Press. 

Annals  of  Botany.  Edited  by 

Isaac  Bayley  Balfour,  M.A.,  M.D., 
F.E.S.,  Sydney  H.  Vines,  D.Sc, 
F.E.S.,  and  W.  G.  Farlow,  M.D. 
Vol.  I.  Parts  I-IV.    Eoyal  8vo, 

half  morocco,  gilt  top,  ll.  16s. 
Vol.  II.    Parts  V-VIII.    2l.  2s. 
Vol.  III.    Part  IX    1  is.   6d.  ; 
X.  13s.  6d. ;      XI.  18s. ; 
XII.  in  the  Press. 
Vol.  TV.   Part  XIII.   12s.  6d.  ; 
XIV.  13s.  6d.  ;    XV.  10s.  6d. ; 
XVI.  in  the  Press. 
Vol.  V.    Part  XVII.    10s.  6d. 

Biological  Series.  (Transla- 
tions of  Foreign  Biological  Memoirs. ) 
I.  The  Physiology  of  Nerve,  of  Muscle, 
and  of  the  Electrical  Organ. 
Edited  by  J.  Burdon-Sanderson, 
M.D.,  F.E.SS.  L.  &  E.  Medium 
8vo.    ll.  is. 


II.  TJie  Anatomy  of  the  Frog.  By 
Dr.  Alexander  Ecker,  Professor 
in  the  University  of  Freiburg. 
Translated,  with  numerous 
Annotations  and  Additions,  by 
G.  Haslam,  M.D.  Med.  8vo,  2  is. 

III.  Contributions  to  the  History 
of  the  Physiology  of  the  Nervous 
System.  By  Professor  Conrad 
Eckhard.  Translated  by  Miss 
Edith  Prance.    In  Preparation. 

IV.  Essaijs  upon  Heredity  and 
.  Kindred  Biological  Problems. 

By  Dr.  August  Weismann. 
Translated  and  Edited  by  E.  B. 
Poulton,  M.A.,  Selmar  Schim- 
land,  Ph.D.,  and  Arthur  E. 
Shipley,  M.A.  Medium  Svo,  16s. 

Prestwich.  Geology,  Chemi- 
cal, Physical,  and  Stratigraphical.  By 
Joseph  Prestwich,  M.A.,  F.E.S. 
In  two  Volumes. 

Vol.  I.    Chemical  and  Physical. 

Eoyal  8vo.  ll.  5s. 
VoL.  II.  Stratigraphical  and 
Physical.  With  a  new  Geo- 
logical Map  of  Europe.  Eoyal 
Svo.  il.  1 6s. 
New  Geological  Map  of  Europe. 
In  case  or  on  roller.  5s. 

Bolleston  and  Jackson.  Forms 

of  Animal  Life.  A  Manual  of  Com- 
parative Anatomy,  with  descrip- 
tions of  selected  types.  By  George 
Bolleston,  M.D.,  F.E.S.  Second 
Edition.  Bevised  and  Enlarged  by 
W.  Hatchett  Jackson,  M.A.  Medium 
Svo.    il.  1 6s. 


AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS 
LONDON: HENRY  FROWDE 
OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS  WAREHOUSE,  AMEN  CORNER,  E.C. 


