R€/lUSTR/lLI/iN 


K-WNGLOH-PflRKeR 


u«tt!»,J!Ulmimfmam>i!ftm:v'smmiJmM'JiS!a!imB, '  v  ^jw  'mmjjjdwbimiwj 


mull  mmxmxii^  f  ihatg 

BOUGHT  WITH  THE  INCOME 
FROM  THE 

SAGE  ENDOWMENT  FUND 

THE  GIFT  OF 


Mitntu  W.  Sage 


189X 


A'Jay* 


'rm, 


GR365  .P2T2d"ter'"'  """" 

"°  miiiMiiiili'?,.,,',M,tlJ!?7  'ales   collect 


3   1924  029  ■909 ''''086 


All  books  are  subject  to  recall  after  two  weeks. 
Olin/Kroch  Library 

DATE  DUE 

ucr 

mi. 

j^Hwy 

GAYLORD 

PRINTED  IN  U.S.A. 

q  ao   ^i-Jj 


Date 

Due 

<, 

. 

Q 


^Mfj 


MORE   AUSTRALIAN 
LEGENDARY    TALES 


3>h5 

hi 


By  the  same  Author  and  Publisher 

Australian   Legendary  Tales 

3S.  6d. 

SOME  PRESS  NOTICES 
Saturday  Review. — "  Mrs.  Parker  has  added  to 
the  gaiety  of  nations  by  this  collection  of  Antipo- 
dean legends." 

Antiquary.  — "  Extremely  interesting  and 
curious." 

Church  Re-view. — "To  the  ethnologist  and  folk- 
lorist  this  book  is  of  great  value,  but  its  main  use 
will  probably  be  to  provide  new  and  original  fairy 
tales  for  the  juveniles." 

Sydney  Morning  Herald. — "Mrs.  Parker  has 
striven,  and  not  unsuccessfxiUy,  to  do  for  Australian 
folk-lore  what  Longfellow  did  in  '  Hiawatha  '  for 
the  North  American  tribes. " 


MORE    AUSTRALIAN 

Legendary  Tales 


COLLECTED  FROM  VARIOUS  TRIBES  Br 

Mrs.    K.     LANGLOH    PARKER 

AUTHOR    OF 
AUSTRALIAN    LEGENDARY    TALES 


WITH  INTRODUCTION  Br 

ANDREW   LANG,  M.A. 


IVITH  ILLUSTRATION'S  BV  A  NATIVE  ARTIST 


LONDON 

DAVID    NUTT,   270-271,   STRAND 

MELBOURNE 

MELVILLE,    MULLEN   &   SLADE 

1898 


"  And  he  told  me  in  a  vision  of  the  night : 
There  are  nine  and  sixty  -ways  of  constructing  tribal  lays. 
And  every  one  of  them  is  right !'" 


ALL  RIGHTS   RESERVED 


DEDICATED 
TO 

THE  EUAHLAYI-SPEAKING  PEOPLE 

IN   GRATEFUL  RECOGNITION   OF  THEIR 

EVER-WILLING  ASSISTANCE   IN 

MY  FOLK-LORE  QUEST 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  this  book  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924029909086 


Contents 


PREFACE .            .            .  ix 

INTRODUCTION,    BY    ANDREW   LANG,    M.A.      .            .            .                         .            .  xvii 

THE    CRANE    AND    THE    CROW          .            .            ■            .                         .            .  I 

BEEREEUN    THE    MIRAGE    MAKER 3 

BOHRAH    THE    KANGAROO    AND    DINEWAN    THE    EMU       ...  I3 

GHEEGER   GHEEGER,    THE    COLD   WEST  WIND        .                         .            .            .  I5 

BILBER   AND    MAYRAH              .            .                                      .                         .            .            .  I9 

BRALGAH    THE    DANCING   BIRD       .            .                         .                         ...  21 

HOW    THE    SUN   WAS    MADE               .            .                                                  ...  28 

STURI'S    DESERT  PEA,    THE    BLOOD    FLOWER           .                         .            .            .  3I 

PIGGIEBILLAH   THE   PORCUPINE    .           .                       39 

GAYARDAREE   THE   PLATYPUS        .                       41 

HOW   MDNGGHEE,   OR   MUSSELS,   WERE   BROUGHT   TO   THE   CREEKS       .  45 

WURRUNNAH's  TRIP  TO  THE   SEA 49 

WALLOOBAHL  THE   BARK   LIZARD  ....  -55 

GOOLAYYAHLEE   THE    PELICAN 57 

MUNGOONGARLEE     THE     IGUANA    AND    OUYOUBOOLOOEY    THE     BLACK 

SNAKE , 61 

WAYAMBEH   THE   TURTLE   AND   WOGGOON   THE   TURKEY        ...  68 

WHERE   THE   FROST  COMES   FROM 73 


Vlll 


Contents 


EUBBURR  THE  GIANT  BROWN  AND  YELLOW  SNAKE 

THE  YOUAYAH  MAYAMAH,  OR  STONE  FROGS 

A  LEGEND  OF  THE  FLOWERS 

THE  FROG  HERALDS  OF  THE  FLOOD  . 

EERIN,  THE  SMALL  GREY  OWL 

THE  LEGEND  OF  NAR-OONG-OWIE,  THE  SACRED  ISLAND 
GLOSSARY  .  ■ •    . 


76 

79 
84 
90 
93 
99 
loi 


P  r  e  f  a  c  e 

I  MUST  begin  the  preface  to  a  new  series  of  Australian 
Legendary  Tales  by  thanking  the  press  and  public  for  the, 
to  the  collector,  gratifying  reception  they  gave  the  first  one. 
There  are  many  persons  who  have  individually  expressed 
their  interest  in  my  work  so  kindly  that  I  would  like  to 
name  them  here  and  publicly  thank  them,  but  some  of  them 
are  of  such  world-wide  fame  that  to  do  so  might  seem  a 
mere  self-advertisement  at  their  expense.  Should  this 
come  under  their  notice,  they  will,  I  hope,  understand  my 
reticence,  and  accept  my  gratitude. 

The  present  series  of  legends  have  all  been  collected  by 
myself  from  the  Blacks,  as  were  the  previous  ones.  But 
in  this  instance  I  had  much  help  given  to  me  by  friends, 
who  either  told  or  sent  me  scraps  of  legends  they  themselves 
had  seen  or  heard.  On  receiving  any  such  I  immediately 
made  inquiries  amongst  the  Blacks,  and  I  was  often  enabled 
to  complete  the  scraps,  gaining  through  their  hints  a  whole 
legend.  For  should  the  local  tribes  know  nothing  of  what 
I  wanted  to  hear,  I  would  get  them  to  make  inquiries  of 
wandering  Blacks  from  other  tribes  whom  they  might  meet 
during  their  periodic  "  walk-abouts,"  or  at  corroborees  they 
attended.  I  myself  have  had  opportunities  of  knowing  well 
members,  of  nine  tribes,  though  that  which  I  know  best   is 


X  Preface 

the  Euahlayi-speaking  one,  of  which  the  Noongahburrahs 
are  a  branch. 

As  far  as  I  know,  only  one  of  the  legends  in  this  series 
has  previously  been  printed  entire.  This  is  one  of  my  own 
collecting  from  a  Wiradjari  black  fellow,  "The  Crane  and 
the  Crow,"  and  appeared  in  the  Sydney  Bulletin. 

Some  of  the  Blacks  who  have  helped  to  build  up  this 
series  belong  to  the  Murrumbidgee,  Darling,  Barwon, 
Paroo,  Warrego,  Narran,  Culgoa  and  Castlereagh  rivers ; 
the  Braidwood,  Yass,  Narrabri,  and  other  districts  of  New 
South  Wales  ;  to  the  Balonne,  Maranoa,  Condamine,  Barcoo, 
Mulligan  rivers,  and  the  Gulf  country  in  Queensland.  But 
I  have  confined  myself  as  far  as  possible  to  the  Noongah- 
burrah  names,  thinking  it  would  create  confusion  if  I  used 
those  of  each  dialect — several  different  names,  for  example, 
for  one  bird  or  beast.  To  such  as  were  told  in  song  I 
have  tried  to  retain  something  of  the  rhythmical  rendering. 
I  have  no  doubt  a  skilled  writer  could  have  mosaicked  these 
legendary  scraps  with  flowery  language  into  a  beautiful 
work  of  art,  but  I  have  preferred  to  let  the  Blacks  as  far  as 
possible  tell  their  legends  in  their  own  way,  only  adding 
such  explanations  as  seemed  necessary  to  make  them  clear 
to  the  English  reader. 

I  trust  the  fact  that  these  legends  belong  to  a  stone  age, 
an  age  when  everything  was  rough  hewn,  will  not  be  lost 
sight  of  by  readers.  Ever  since  I  have  been  collecting 
folk-lore  I  have  endeavoured  to  keep  as  many  of  the 
"coloured  people  "  about  me  as  I  could  in  various  capacities, 
even  going  the  length  that  "  Uncle  Remus's  "  creator  did, 
namely,  of  "  at  times  sacrificing  digestion  to  sentiment,"  the 
practical  result  of  which  has  been  that  many  scraps  of  folk- 


Preface 


XI 


lore  were  revealed  to  me  of  which,  but  for  this  daily  inter- 
course, I  should  probably  never  have  heard.  For  instance, 
a  young  Bootha  brought  in  the  lamp  one  evening ;  seeing 
some  big  grey  moths  fluttering  round  it  she  said :  "  No 
good,  Comebeegeeboon  darngliealdah,  no  tomahawks  here  ; 
you'll  get  burnt  for  nothing."  Then  I  learnt  that  the  spirits 
send  these  grey  moths  as  soon  as  it  is  dark  to  the  camps 
to  steal  tomahawks  for  them.  The  bag-like  back  of  their 
bodies  is  supposed  to  be  the  comebee  (bag)  they  carry  these 
in  if  they  get  them,  but  most  often  they  are  dazzled  by  the 
light  of  the  fires,  and  blindly  flutter  into  them,  getting 
singed  as  they  do  round  the  lamp. 

While  walking  through  the  bush  after  heavy  rain,  I  came 
across  some  very  brilliant  fungi,  growing  on  to  dead  trees. 
I  picked  off  a  piece,  and  on  my  return,  going  out  to  speak 
to  some  of  the  Blacks,  I  carried  this  fungus  in  my  hand.  A 
little  black  child,  seeing  its  bright  colour,  came  towards  me 
as  if  to  get  it,  but  his  mother  quickly  interposed,  saying  in 
an  alarmed  tone  :  "  Don't  let  him  touch  it.  It  is  way-way. 
Don't  let  him  touch  it."  Then  she  told  me  that  all  fungi 
growing  on  trees  were  the  bread  of  ghosts,  and  if  a  child 
touched  any  he  would  be  spirited  away  by  the  ghosts. 
She  said  these  fungi  were  luminous  at  night  so  that  the 
ghosts  could  see  them. 

Walking  through  the  bush,  as  I  often  do,  with  some  of 
the  Blacks,  I  hear  many  httle  scraps.  Quite  lately,  while 
going  along  the  edge  of  one  of  the  plains  we  put  up  some 
spur-winged  plover,  who  went  off  harshly  screeching.  I 
asked  why  the  bird  had  that  strange  spur.  Because, 
they  said,  a  long  time  ago,  a  black  fellow  called  Bahl- 
durrahdurrah,  as  the  plovers  are  now,  had  been  noted  for 


xii  Preface 

never  going  abroad  without  poison-tipped  spears,  from 
which  even  a  scratch  was  fatal.  When  he  died  he  was 
turned  into  a  plover,  and  has  his  spears  still,  in  the  modified 
form  of  the  spurs  on  the  wings  ;  he  brings  these  forward 
if  he  wishes  to  injure  anything,  holding  it  between  them, 
with  fatal  result. 

On  similar  occasions  I  learnt  that  when  the  sun,  as  it 
sometimes  does  in  summer,  goes  down  like  a  fiery  red  ball, 
it  is  the  reflection  of  wattle  gum  on  it  that  makes  it  so 
bright.  After  such  a  sunset,  if  they  go  out  for  gum,  they 
are  certain  to  find  quantities/  they  say.  The  gum  they  melt 
in  water,  making  it  into  a  half  liquid  jelly  which  they  eat 
with  relish,  and  which  they  say  has  great  strengthening 
properties.  That  when  the  moon  looks  very  yellow  after  it 
has  risen  on  a  winter's  evening,  it  is  a  sign  of  frost.  "The 
Meamei  have  told  Bahloo  they  will  send  frost  to-night.  He 
is  going  to  keep  himself  warm  ;  look  at  his  bright  fire," 
they  say. 

When  they  see  a  tree  that  usually  grows  on  the  plains 
on  the  ridges,  or  vice  versa,  they  sa}' :  "  There  are  two 
who  have  married  wrongly ;  that  Coolabah  must  have  run 
away  from  her  tribe  with  a  Bibbil.  And  now  the  wirree- 
nuns,  or  wizards,  have  turned  them  into  trees." 

I  often  come  in  contact  with  instances  of  their  deeply 
ingrained  superstitions.  One  morning  a  very  fine  healthy 
specimen  of  a  young  native  woman  was  scrubbing  the 
verandahs.  As  I  passed  her,  she  said,  "  I  might  die  soon, 
Innerah."  (They  call  me  Innerah  in  the  sense  of  boss- 
woman.)  On  inquiry  I  found  some  young  man  whom  she 
had  declined  to  marry  had  stolen  a  lock  of  her  hair,  and 
was  now  making  his  way  with   it  to  the  wirreenuns  of  the 


Preface 


Xlll 


Boogahroo.  Should  he  reach  them  and  they  agree  to  burn 
it,  she  would  die.  There  was  some  hope  for  her,  she  said ; 
her  totem  clan,  the  Beewees,  were  very  strong  out  that  way, 
and,  having  been  warned,  might  intercept  him.  Should  he 
succeed  in  causing  her  death,  so  long  as  any  of  her  tribe 
were  alive  they  would  be  at  enmity  with  his,  and  the  feud 
would  go  on  from  generation  to  generation. 

Another  day  a  girl  came  to  borrow  a  horse  to  go  down 
the  river  to  see  her  sister,  whose  baby,  a  messenger  had 
just  come  to  tell  her,  was  dead.  She  went,  and  on  her 
return  I  asked  if  the  baby  were  buried.  She  told  me  the 
wirreenuns  had  put  its  breath  back  in  it  and  it  was  alive 
again.  On  my  doubting  that  it  had  been  really  dead,  she 
brought  two  or  three  witnesses  to  corroborate  her  story, 
and  they  described  how  the  two  wirreenuns  had  caught 
the  breath  just  after  it  left  the  body,  put  it  back  through 
the  child's  mouth,  and  then  set  to  work  to  suck  the 
sickness  out  of  the  body,  with  the  result  that  the  baby 
recovered. 

It  was  in  the  summer  of  1896,  when  the  six  weeks  of  a 
heat  wave  caused  so  many  deaths  in  this  district  from  heat 
apoplexy,  that  the  Blacks  first  saw  Marmbeyah,  the  ghost 
with  the  green  boondee,  about  here.  The  next  summer  I 
said  one  day  to  a  black  woman  that  I  hoped  we  should  not 
hear  of  so  many  deaths  that  season.  "  Oh  no,"  she  said, 
"  there  won't  be  any  this  year  because  a  black  fellow  has 
killed  Marmbeyah,  who  caused  the  deaths  by  knocking  the 
people  on  the  back  of  their  necks  with  his  green  boondee." 
The  black  fellow  is  supposed  to  have  seen  this  evil-dealing 
ghost  in  front  of  him  one  day,  he  himself  being  unobserved, 
when  he  stole  up  and  flattened  him  with  his  boondee,  thus 


xiv  Preface 

saving  his  people  and  the  whites  from  further  sickness  c 
the  heat  apoplexy  kind.  We  have  in  the  camp  an  ol 
woman  who  is  supposed  to  call  up  spirits — and  they  d 
come.  She  gave  us  a  test  of  her  power  one  day,  which 
am  bound  to  say  compared  favourably  with  any  seances  c 
a  like  nature  I  had  seen  before,  inasmuch  as  she  held  her 
in  the  light  of  day.  She  never  drinks  hot  tea  nor  any  soi 
of  hquid  which  would  heat  her  internally  ;  did  she  do  sc 
she  says  the  spirits  would  be  driven  out  and  she  be  power 
less  as  a  medium  of  communication  with  them ;  it  is,  sh 
says,  because  the  black  people  drink  the  "  grog "  of  th 
white  people  they  are  losing  their  ancient  power ;  in  th 
past  they  never  drank  any  hot  hquid. 

It  was  the  same  old  woman  who  accurately  foretold  th< 
breaking  up  of  a  drought.  The  oldest  woman  of  this  tribi 
having  died,  was  buried  the  next  day.  The  Blacks  told  mi 
I  could  go  to  the  funeral,  and  on  the  way  the  old  spiritualis 
walked  beside  me.  Seeing  the  droughty  desolation  of  th( 
country,  I  asked  her  when  she  thought  it  would  rain  again 
Coming  very  close  to  me,  she  half  whispered,  "  In  thret 
days  I  think  it ;  old  Beemunny  tell  me  when  she  dying  tha 
s'posing  she  can  send  'im  rain,  she  sent  'im  three  day,  wher 
her  yowee  go  long  a  Oobi  Oobi."  Beemunny  died  or 
Wednesday  night,  and  we  went  to  bed  on  Saturday  with 
the  skies  as  cloudless  as  they  had  been  for  weeks ;  in  the 
middle  of  the  night  we  were  awakened  by  the  patter  ol 
raindrops  on  the  iron  roof.  All  night  it  rained  and  all  the 
next  day. 

Since  my  first  series  came  out  I  have  heard  some  items 
which  more  fitly  complete  four  of  the  legends  in  it,  which 
completions   I   now   add.      To    "  Mullyangah   the    Morning 


Preface 


XV 


Star"*  might  be  added  that  under  the  tree  in  which  Mullyan's 
gahreemay  or  camp  was,  the  spring  of  water  which  was 
there  then  is  still  so,  and  from  time  to  time  it  throws  up 
various  sorts  of  mammoth  and  strange  bones  belonging  to  a 
past  age,  which  the  Blacks  say  are  the  remains  of  Mullyan's 
many  victims,  whose  bones  were  dropped  from  the  tree  into 
this  spring,  called  Guddee,  which  is  in  the  Brewarrina 
district. 

To  "The  Galah  and  Oolah  the  Lizard,"t  some  Blacks  add 
that  the  present  colouring  of  the  bird,  grey  and  rose-pink, 
is  owing  to  her  having  rolled  in  the  dust  as  the  blood 
streamed  down  both  sides  of  her  head  from  the  wound  the 
bubberah,  thrown  by  Oolah,  had  made,  staining  for  ever  her 
breast  and  underpart  of  her  wings,  the  dust  toning  the 
blood-red  down  to  rose-pink. 

It  is  to  the  legend  of  "  Mooregoo  the  Mopoke,  and  Bahloo 
the  Moon,"|  that  we  owe  a  black  fellow's  reason  for  a  halo 
round  the  moon.  Ever  since  the  storm  in  that  legend  when 
Bahloo  built  himself  a  dardurr,  he  has  done  so  before  rain. 
Seeing  a  halo  the  Blacks.say,  "  Bahloo  has  built  his  dardurr, 
there  will  be  rain." 

To  "  Deereeree  the  Wagtail  and  the  Rainbow  "§  they  add 
that  Bibbee,  who  made  the  Euloowirree  or  rainbow,  put 
snakes  at  its  end  to  guard  it,  and  if  any  one  goes  near  it, 
these  savage  flat-headed  snakes  will  kill  them. 

The  former  series  were  all  such  legends  as  are  told  to 
the  black  piccaninnies ;  among  the  present  are  some  they 
would  not  be  allowed  to  hear,  touching  as  they  do  on  sacred 
subjects,  taboo  to  the  young. 

"  Australian  Legendary  Tales,"  p.  6i.  t  Ibid.  p.  6. 

%  Hid.  p.  68.  §  Ibid.  p.  83. 


xvi  Preface 

The  Legend  of  Nar-oong-owie,  the  Sacred  Island,  was 
not  heard  directly  by  myself  from  the  Blacks,  but  was  first 
told  to  me,  when  a  child,  by  my  grandmother,  and  was 
sent  recently  to  me  by  my  uncle  in  much  the  same  form, 
having  been  told  to  him  by  a  full-blooded  aboriginal  ol 
Southern  South  Australia. 

To  the  legend  of  "  Dinewan  the  Emu,  and  Whan  the 
Crows,"  some  natives  add  that  when  Dinewan's  wives  (the 
crows)  threw  the  hot  coals  over  him  his  wings  were  burnt  off, 
and  that  singed  appearance  which  has  been  theirs  ever  since 
given  to  the  feathers  where  the  stumps  of  the  wings  are. 


K.   LANGLOH  PARKER. 


Bangate,  Narran  River, 

New  South  Wales, 

September  1898. 


Introduction 

Mrs.  Langloh  Parker  has  requested  me  to  write  a  little 
"  fore-word  "  to  her  new  collection  of  AustraHan  popular 
tales.  "  Good  wine,"  like  these  stories,  "  needs  no  bushy" 
and  Mrs.  Parker's  intimate  knowledge  of  the  bush  and  its 
wild  native  lords  cannot  be  improved  by  any  merely 
literary  information.  Yet  one  would  not  willingly  dis- 
oblige a  lady  to  whom  children  owe  so  much  for  her 
legends,  and  who  has  so  remarkably  vindicated  the 
thoroughly '  human  and  amiable  character  of  an  unfortu- 
nate people. 

These  dark  backward  friends  of  hers,  "  the  blacks,"  are, 
we  find,  "  very  much  like  you  and  me,"  as  Mr.  Kipling  says, 
or  rather  they  are  our  superiors  in  poetical  fancy.  With- 
out our  savage  ancestors  we  should  certainly  have  had  no 
poetry.  Conceive  the  human  race  born  into  the  world  in 
its  present  advanced  condition,  weighing,  analysing,  ex- 
amining everything,  except  a  few  phenomena  which  happen 
not  to  chime  in  with  the  general  ideas  of  science.  Such  a 
race  would  have  been  destitute  of  poetry  and  flattened  by 
common  sense.  The  world  would  never  have  been  "dis- 
peopled of  its  dreams,"  because  there  would  have  been  no 


n^ 


xviii  Introduction 

dreamers.  Barbarians  did  the  dreaming  for  the  world, 
poetry  arose  in  their  fancies,  and  poetry,  in  spite  of 
facts  and  science,  resolutely  refuses  to  "  follow  dark- 
ness like  a  dream."  Mrs.  Parker's  collection  demonstrates 
that,  among  the  world's  dreamers,  the  Australians,  just 
escaping  from  the  Palaeolithic  age,  were  among  the  most 
distinguished. 

On  many  points  we  need  further  information.  It  is 
commonly  said  that  the  Biraarks,  or  native  necromants, 
have  disappeared.  But  Mrs.  Parker  has  seen  one,  a  woman, 
whose  call  the  spirits  obey,  and  who,  like  D.  D.  Home, 
works  her  marvels  in  open  day.  We  have  had  no  account 
of  an  Australian,  though  we  have  several  accounts  of  Maori, 
Guiana  and  Red  Indian  seances.  One  hopes  that  Mrs. 
Parker  will  fill  up  the  lacuna  with  a  detailed  report  of  her 
own  observations,  to  which  she  briefly  refers.  Anthro- 
pology has  no  reason  for  neglecting  these  affairs  any  more 
than  the  countless  other  things  in  which  savage  practice 
tallies  with  the  mysticisms  of  civilisation. 

Many  of  the  myths  are  setiological — they  account  for 
origins.  The  tales  of  the  "  West  Wind,"  of  "  The  Mirage 
Maker,"  of  "The  Blood  Flowers,"  and  others,  are  highly 
poetical.  Ovid  would  have  found  in  them  excellent  material 
for  more  Metamorphoses.  The  girl  who  "  sang  new  songs, 
which  she  said  the  spirits  taught  her,"  merely  gave  the 
animistic  explanation  of  her  own  genius.  "Their  voices 
come  to  me  on  every  breeze,"  as  to  the  girl  of  Domremi. 
The  stories  are  tender  with  human  affection. 


Introduction  xix 

These  are  interesting  traits  for  the  student  of  animism, 
as  when  Piggiebillah  sleeps  on  his  face  that  his  doowee, 
or  dream  spirit,  may  not  -leave  him  as  he  slumbers.  Wur- 
runnah  is  eager  to  know  "where  Byamee  (Baiame)  is," 
the  Good  Being  who  made  and  instructed  mankind  ;  who  has 
withdrawn  to  heaven  which  is  His  home,  leaving  laws  not  to 
be  broken.  We  see  the  black  seeking  after  God,  if  perhaps 
he  may  find  Him,  dreaming  the  great  dream  of  the  universal 
Father,  the  friend  of  righteousness  (as  it  is  understood 
by  the  tribes),  who  receives  His  children  into  everlasting 
habitations.  Byamee  is  at  once  the  god  and  the  culture 
hero  in  these  myths.  He  made  the  "  stone  fisheries," 
which  Mr.  Gideon  Scott  Lang,  many  years  ago,  described 
to  me  as  the  only  material  evidence  of  a  time  of  more 
organisation  and  enterprise  among  the  blacks  than  now 
exist. 

The  "  Legend  of  the  Flowers  "  is  the  most  important 
example  of  the  Byamee  creed  in  this  volume.  The  flowers 
all  followed  Byamee,  when  he  retired  from  earth  and  went 
to  BuUimah,  the  land  of  rest.  I  cannot  persuade  myself 
that  Byamee  and  BuUimah  are  echoes  of  Christian  teaching. 
Waitz  has  rejected  that  idea,  and  I  see  no  evidence  that  we 
"white devils"  have  largely  influenced  native  belief.  These 
stories  reflect  human  hopes  and  the  world's  desire,  things 
natural,  untaught,  inevitable.  :  The  All  Seeing  Spirit  is  here 
distinguished  from  Byamee;  but  in  Mr.  Howitt's  accounts; 
Durumulun  (another  name  for  the  same  conception)  can 
himself  see  and  hear  everything.     Byamee  has  spirits  who 


XX  Introduction 

do  his  bidding,  such  as  Wallahgooroonbooan,  whose  voice 
is  heard  through  the  gayandy  (the  Tundan  or  Rule  Roarer  ?). 
Byamee  is  now  (like  the  Fijian  Ndegei)  "  fixed  and  frozen 
to  permanence "  on  his  crystal  rock  in  the  land  of  rest. 
The  souls  of  those  who  keep  his  law  go  to  him,  the  wicked 
go  to  Eleanbah  Wundah,  the  native  Inferno.  All  this  is  in 
direct  contradiction  to  the  odd  theory  that  morals,  among 
low  savages,  have  no  religious  sanction.  That  theory 
cannot  long  resist  the  impact  of  accumulating  evidence.  We 
are,  in  truth,  all  alike,  and  from  an  unknown  antiquity  the 
Maker  of  men  has  also  been  their  Judge. 

I  have  elsewhere  argued  (in  "  The  Making  of  Religion") 
that  such  beings  as  Byamee  are  not  the  ghosts  of  an 
aincestor  carried  to  the  highest  power.  Ancestor  worship  I 
do  not  discover  in  Australia.  Mr.  Dawson  reports  that  the 
habit  of  ghost-feeding  (the  supposed  origin  of  religion)  is 
"recent,"  and  that  the  blacks  call  it  "white  fellows' 
gammon."* 

Mr.  Dawson  found  a  deity  called  Pirnmeheal,  a  good  being. 
"  The  aborigines  say  that  the  missionaries  and  government 
.protectors  have  given  them  a  dread  of  Pirnmeheal ;  and 
they  are  sorry  that  the  young  people,  and  many  of  the  old, 
are  now  afraid  of  a  being  who  never  did  any  harm  to  their 
forefathers."  Mr.  Dawson  received  his  information  in  the 
native  languages,  and  sifted  it-  carefully.  We  have  seen 
what  he  regards  as  the  result  of  the  teaching  of  the  white 
devils,  missionaries  and  others. 

*  "  Australian  Aborigines,'"  pp.  50,  51.     Melbourne.     1881 


Introduction  xxi 

If  he  is  right,  if  "  providing  food  for  it "  (the  corpse  or 
ghost)  is  a  recent  custom,  what  becomes  of  Mr,  Herbert 
Spencer's  theory  ? 

If  Mr.  Dawson  is  right  in  Australia  we  surprise  religion 
already  possessed  of  a  God  on  his  way  to  be  otiose. 
Byamee  sits  like  Keats's 

"  Grey-hair'd  Saturn  quiet  as  a  stone  ;  " 

and  Pirnmeheal  is  seldom  mentioned.  Elsewhere  Durumulun 
is  served  in  the  secret  rites  of  the  mysteries  ;  none  of 
these  gods  receive  food  or  sacrifice.  Religion  is  at  this 
point,  and  is'  only  just  beginning  to  turn  towards  animism. 
Corpse-feeding  is  recent.  In  Mrs.  Parker's  book  Byamee 
is  implored  to  receive  the  soul  of  Eerin.  "  For  Eerin  was 
faithful  on  earth,  faithful  to  the  laws  you  left  us."  The 
mourners  "  let  their  blood  drop  into  his  grave,"  but 
such  a  sacrifice  is  not  necessarily  more  than  a  tribute 
of  affectionate  regret.  It  need  not  imply  feeding,  while 
of  later  sacrifices  to  spirits  I  have  vainly  looked  for  a 
trace.  Now,  by  a  mythical  inconsistency,  the  spirit  of 
Eerin  (or  one  of  his  spirits,  perhaps  his  doowee)  dwells  in 
a  grey  owl. 

Here,  then,  is  a  kind  of  theism,  and  beside  it  only  the 
germs  of  an  animism  which  is  not  yet  a  religion  of  service 
and  propitiation  of  ancestors. 

This  helps  my  argument  (that  theism  is  not  the  latest 
flower  of  animism)  very  well,  and  Mr.  Dawson  (as  far  as 
'his  evidence  attests)  has  no  theory  to  prove  or  disprove. 


xxii  Introduction 

Mrs.  Parker  has,  in  MS.,  a  considerable  body  of  evidence 
as  to  both  the  religion  and  the  mythology  of  Byamee.  I 
have  maintained,  in  this  case,  on  the  evidence  of  Mr. 
Howitt,  an  initiate,  that  rehgion  and  mythology  represent 
quite  different  moods  of  men.  In  religion,  the  Australian 
is  serious,  and  will  not  mention  "  The  Master "  except  at 
the  solemn  mysteries.  In  mythology,  he  is  either  curious, 
when  making  fanciful  explanations  of  facts,  or  he  is  romantic 
and  humorous,  telling  stories  for  pleasure  about  Byamee  or 
Durumulun,  whom  he  now  envisages,  not  as  Father  and 
Judge,  but  very  much  as  a  black  fellow  like  himself. 
Grant  such  a  black  fellow  unlimited  power,  and  he  will 
frolic  as  in  the  Australian  and  other  mythologies.  Con- 
sider him  as  the  maker  and  lawgiver,  the  all-seeing  witness 
and  rewarder  of  conduct,  and  Byamee  or  Durumulun  is  no 
longer  the  wanton,  gigantic  wirreenun;  rather  is  he  God.  I 
am  unable  to  see  any  inconsistency  between  my  notion  of  a 
kind  of  early  theism,  and  my  belief  that  many  of  the 
absurdities  of  mythology  are  the  result,  and  (in  civilisation) 
the  survival,  of  the  savage  intellectual  condition.  Odd 
stories  enough  about  Our  Lord,  the  Virgin,  and  the  Saints 
occur  in  our  European  folk-lore.  These  are  mythical 
popular  accretions,  like  the  similar  tales  about  Byamee. 
But  neither  our  creed  nor  that  of  the  Australians  began  in 
buffoonery.  To  these  themes,  and  to  a  wider  and  more 
minute  examination  of  Australian  religion,  I  hope  some  day 
to  return.  Meanwhile  the  literary  merit  of  the  tales 
collected   by  Mrs.  Parker  may  teach  us  not  to  be  surprised 


Introduction  xxiii 

by  traces  of  elevated  thought  and  morality  in  the  religious 

traditions  of  this  people,  so  low  in  the  scale  of  culture  that 

no  remains  of  the  rudest  pottery  have  been  discovered  in 

the  soil  of  the  continent. 

ANDREW   LANG. 


The  Crane  and  the  Crow 

The  crane  was  a  great  fisherman.  He  used  to  hunt  out 
the  fish,  with  his  feet,  from  underneath  the  logs  in  the 
creek,  and  so  catch  numbers. 

One  day  when  he  had  a  great  many  on  the  bank  of  the 
creek,  a  crow,  who  was  white  at  that  time,  came  up.  He 
asked  the  crane  to  give  him  some  fish. 

"  Wait  a  while,"  said  the  crane,  "  until  they  are 
cooked." 

But  the  crow  was  hungry  and  impatient,  and  would  not 
cease  bothering  the  crane,  who  kept  saying,  "  Wait. 
Wait." 

Presently  the  crane  turned  his  back.  The  crow 
sneaked  up  and  was  just  going  to  steal  a  fish.  The  crane 
turned  round,  saw  him,  seized  a  fish,  and  hit  the  crow 
right  across  the  eyes  with  it.  The  crow  felt  blinded  for 
a  few  minutes.  He  fell  on  the  burnt  black  grass  round 
the  fire,  and  rolled  over  and  over  in  his  pain.  When  he 
got  up  to  go  away  his  eyes  were  white,  and  the  rest  of  him 
black,  as  crows  have  been  ever  since. 

The    crow    was   determined  to   pay  out   the   crane    for 
having  given  him  white  eyes  and  a  black  skin. 


2  More  Australian  Tales 

So  he  watched  his  chance,  and  one  day  when  he  saw 
the  crane  fast  asleep,  he  crept  quietly  up  to  him  holding  a 
fish-bone.  This  he  stuck  right  across  the  root  of  the 
crane's  tongue. 

Then  he  went  off  as  quietly  as  he  had  come ;  careful, 
for  once,  to  make  no  noise. 

The  crane  woke  up  at  last,  and  when  he  opened  his 
mouth  to  yawn  he  felt  like  choking.  He  tried  to  get  the 
obstruction  out  of  his  throat.  In  the  effort  he  made  a 
queer  scraping  noise,  which  was  all  he  could  give  utterance 
to.     The  bone  stuck  fast. 

And  to  this  day  the  only  noise  a  crane  can  make  is, 
"  gah-rah-gah,  gah-rah-gah  !  "  This  noise  gives  the  name 
by  which  he  is  known  to  the  blacks. 


Beereeun  the   Mirage  Maker 

Beereeun  the  lizard  wanted  to  marry  BuUai  BuUai  the 
green  parrot  sisters.  But  they  did  not  want  to  marry  him. 
They  liked  Weedah  the  mocking-bird  better.  Their  mother 
said  they  must  marry  Beereeun,  for  she  had  pledged  them 
to  him  at  their  births,  and  Beereeun  was  a  great  wirreenun 
and  would  harm  them  if  they  did  not  keep  her  pledge. 

When  Weedah  came  back  from  hunting  they  told  him 
what  their  mother  had  said,  how  they  had  been  pledged  to 
Beereeun,  who  now  claimed  them. 

"To-morrow,"  said  Weedah,  "old  Beereeun  goes  to 
meet  a  tribe  coming  from  the  Springs  country.  While  he 
is  away  we  will  go  towards  the  Big  River,  and  burn  the 
track  behind  us.  I  will  go  out  as  if  to  hunt  as  usual  in 
the  morning.  I  will  hide  myself  in  the  thick  Gidya  scrub. 
You  two  must  follow  later  and  meet  me  there.  We  will 
then  cross  the  big  plain  where  the  grass  is  now  thick  and 
dry.  Bring  with  you  a  firestick  ;  we  will  throw  it  back 
into  the  plain,  then  no  one  can  follow  our  tracks.  On  we 
will  go  to  the  Big  River  ;  there  I  have  a  friend  who  has  a 
goombeelgah,  or  canoe,  then  shall  we  be  safe  from  pursuit, 
for  he  will  put  us  over  the  river.     And  we  can  travel  on 


4  More  Australian  Tales 

and  on  even  to  the  country  of  the  short-armed  people  if  so 
we  choose." 

The  next  morning  ere  Gougourgahgah  had  ceased  his 
laughter,  Weedah  had  started. 

Some  hours  later,  in  the  Gidya  scrub,  the  BuUai  BuUai 
sisters  joined  him. 

Having  crossed  the  big  plain  they  threw  back  a  firestick, 
where  the  grass  was  thick  and  dry.  The  fire  sped  quickly 
through  it,  crackling  and  throwing  up  tongues  of  flame. 

Through  another  scrub  went  the  three,  then  across 
another  plain,  through  another  scrub  and  on  to  a  plain 
again. 

The  day  was  hot  ;  Yhi  the  sun  was  high  in  the  sky. 
They  became  thirsty,  but  saw  no  water,  and  had  brought 
none  in  their  haste. 

"We  want  water,"  the  BuUai  Bullai  cried. 

"  Why  did  you  not  bring  some  ?  "  said  Weedah. 

"We  thought  you  had  plenty,  or  would  travel  as  the 
creeks  run,  or  at  least  know  of  a  goolahgool,  or  water- 
holding  tree." 

"  We  shall  soon  reach  water.  Look  even  now  ahead, 
there  is  water." 

The  Bullai  Bullai  looked  eagerly  towards  where  he  pointed, 
and  there  in  truth,  on  the  far  side  of  the  plain,  they  saw  a  sheet 
of  water.  They  quickened  their  steps,  but  the  further  they 
went,  the  further  off  seemed  the  water,  but  on  they  went 
ever  hoping  to  reach  it.  Across  the  plain  they  went,  only 
to  find  on  the  other  side  a  belt  of  timber,  the  water  had 
gone. 

The  weary  girls  would  have  lain  down,  but  Weedah 
said  that  they  would   surely  reach  water  on   the  other  side 


Beereeun  the   Mirage   Maker         5 

of  the  wood.     Again  they  struggled  on  through  the  scrub 
to  another  plain. 

"  There  it  is  !     I  told  you  so  !     There  is  the  water." 
And  looking  ahead  they  again  saw  a  sheet  of  water. 
Again  their  hopes  were  raised,  and  though  the  sun  beat 
fiercely   on  them   they   marched,   only   to   be   again    disap- 
pointed. 

"Let  us  go  back,"  they  said.  "This  is  the  country  of 
evil  spirits.  We  see  water,  and  when  we  come  where  we 
have  seen  it  there  is  but  dry  earth.  Let  us  go  back." 
"  Back  to  Beereeun,  who  would  kill  you  ?  " 
"  Better  to  die  from  the  blow  of  a  boondee  in  your  own 
country  than  of  thirst  in  a  land  of  devils.  We  will  go 
back." 

"  Not  so.  Not  with  a  boondee  would  he  kill  you,  but 
with  a  gooweera,  or  poison  stick.  Slow  would  be  your 
deaths,  and  you  would  be  always  in  pain  until  your  shadow 
was  wasted  away.  But  why  talk  of  returning  ?  Did  we 
not  set  fire  to  the  big  plain  ?  Could  you  cross  that  ? 
Waste  not  your  breaths,  but  follow  me.  See,  there  again 
is  water  ! " 

But  the  Bullai  Bullai  had  lost  hope.  No  longer  would 
they  even  look  up,  though  time  after  time  Weedah  called 
out,  "  Water  ahead  of  us  !  Water  ahead  of  us  ! "  only  to 
again,  and  again,  disappoint  them. 

At  last  the  Bullai  Bullai  became  so  angry  with  him  that 
they  seized  him  and  beat  him.  But  even  as  they  beat  him 
he  cried  all  the  time,  "  Water  is  there !  Water  is  there ! " 
Then  he  implored  them  to  let  him  go,  and  he  would  drag 
up  the  roots  from  some  water-trees  and  drain  the  water 
from  these  for  them. 


6  More  Australian  Tales 

"Yonder  I  see  a  coolabah  ;  from  its  roots  I  can  drain 
enough  to  quench  your  thirst.  Or  here  beside  us  is  a 
bingahwingul;  full  of  water  are  its  roots.  Let  me  go;  I 
will  drain  them  for  you." 

But  the  BuUai  Bullai  had  no  faith  in  his  promises,  and 
they  but  beat  him  the  harder  until  they  were  exhausted. 
When  they  ceased  to  beat  him  and  let  him  go,  Weedah 
went  on  a  little  way,  then  lay  down,  feeling  bruised  all 
over,  and  thankful  that  the  night  had  come  and  the  fierce 
sun  no  longer  scorched  them. 

One  Bullai  Bullai  said  to  her  sister :  "  Could  we  not 
,sing  the  song  our  Bargie  used  to  sing,  and  make  the  rain 
fall  ?  " 

"  Let  us  try  if  we  can  make  a  sound  with  our  dry 
throats,"  said  the  other. 

"  We  will  sing  to  our  cousin  Dooloomai  the  Thunder ; 
he  will  hear  us,  and  break  a  rain  cloud  for  us." 

So  they  sat  down,  rocking  their  bodies  to  and  fro,  and, 
beating  their  knees,  sang  : 

"  Moogary,  Moogaray,  May  May, 
Eehu,  Eehu,  Doongairah." 

Over  and  over  again  they  sang  these  words  as  they  had 
heard  their  Bargie,  or  grandmother,  do.  Then  for  them- 
selves they  added  : 

"  Eehu  oonah  wambaneah  Dooloomai 
Bullul  goonung  inderh  gingnee 
Eehu  oonah  wambaneah  Dooloomai." 

Which  meant : 

"  Give  us  rain,  Thunder,  our  cousin, 
Thirsting  for  water  are  we. 
Give  us  rain,  Thunder,  our  cousin." 


Beereeun  the  Mirage  Maker         7 

As  long  as  their  poor  parched  throats  could  make  a 
sound  they  sang  this.  Then  they  lay  down  to  die,  weary 
and  hopeless.  One  said  faintly :  "  The  rain  will  be  too 
late,  but  surely  it  is  coming,  for  strong  is  the  smell  of  the 
Gidya." 

"  Strong  indeed,"  said  the  other.  But  even  this  sure  sign 
to  their  tribe  that  rain  is  near  roused  them  not ;  it  would 
come,  they  thought,  too  late  for  them.  But  even  then  away 
in  the  north  a  thundercloud  was  gathering.  It  rolled  across 
the  sky  quickly,  peahng  out  thunder  calls  as  it  came  to  tell  of 
its  coming.  It  stopped  right  over  the  plain  in  front  of  the 
Bullai  BuUai.  One  more  peal  of  thunder,  which  opened 
the  cloud,  then  splashing  down  came  the  first  big  drops  of 
rain.  Slowly  and  few  they  came  until  just  at  the  last, 
when  a  quick,  heavy  shower  fell,  emptying  the  thunder- 
cloud, and  filling  the  gilguy  holes  on  the  plain. 

The  cool  splashing  of  the  rain  on  their  hot,  tired  limbs 
gave  new  life  to  the  Bullai  Bullai  and  Weedah.  They  all 
ran  to  the  gilguy  holes.  Stooping  their  heads,  they  drank 
and  quenched  their  thirst. 

"  I  told  you  the  water  was  here,"  said  Weedah,  "  You 
see  I  was  right." 

"  No  water  was  here  when  you  said  so.  If  our  cousin 
Dooloomai  had  not  heard  our  song  for  his  help  we  should 
have  died,  and  you  too." 

And  they  were  angry.  But  Weedah  dug  them  some 
roots,  and  when  they  ate  they  forgot  their  anger.  When 
their  meal  was  over  they  lay  down  to  sleep. 

The  next  morning  on  they  went  again.  That  day  they 
again  saw  across  the  plains  the  same  strange  semblance 
of  water  which  had   lured  them  on  before.     They  knew 


8  More  Australian  Tales 

not  what   it  could   be,  only   they  knew   that  it   was   not 
water. 

Just  at  dusk  they  came  to  the  Big  River.  There  they 
saw  Goolayyahlee  the  pelican,  with  his  canoe.  Weedah 
asked  him  to  put  them  over  on  to  the  other  side.  He  said 
he  would  do  so  one  at  a  time,  as  the  canoe  was  small. 
First  he  said  he  would  take  Weedah,  that  he  might  get 
ready  a  camp  of  the  long  grass  in  the  bend  of  the  river. 
He  took  Weedah  over.  Then  back  he  came  and,  fastening 
his  canoe,  he  went  up  to  the  BuUai  BuUai,  who  were  sitting 
beside  the  remains  of  his  old  fire. 

"Now,"  said  Goolayyahlee,  "you  two  will  go  with  me 
to  my  camp,  which  is  down  in  that  bend.  Weedah  cannot 
get  over  again.  You  shall  hve  with  me.  I  shall  catch  fish 
to  feed  you.  I  have  some  even  now  in  my  camp  cooking. 
There,  too,  have  I  wirrees  of  honey,  and  durrie  but  ready 
for  the  baking.  Weedah  has  nothing  to  give  you  but  the 
grass  nyunnoos  he  but  now  is  making." 

"  Take  us  to  Weedah,"  they  said. 

"  Not  so,"  said  Goolayyahlee,  and  he  stepped  forward  as 
if  to  seize  them. 

The  Bullai  Bullai  stooped,  filled  their  hands  with  the 
white  ashes  of  the  burnt-out  fire,  which  they  flung  at  him. 

Handful  after  handful  they  threw  at  him,  until  he  stood 
before  them  white,  all  but  his  hands,  which  he  spread  out 
and  shook,  thus  freeing  them  from  the  cloud  of  ashes 
enveloping  him  and  obscuring  his  sight. 

Having  thus  checked  him,  the  Bullai  Bullai  ran  to  the 
bank  of  the  river,  meaning  to  get  the  canoe  and  cross  over 
to  Weedah. 

But  in  the  canoe,  to  their  horror,   was  Beereeun ! — Beer- 


Beereeun  the  Mirage  Maker         9 

eeun,  to  escape  whom  they  had  sped  across  plain  and 
through  scrub. 

Yet  here  he  was,  while  between  them  and  Weedah  lay 
the  wide  river. 

They  had  not  known  it,  but  Beereeun  had  been  near 
them  all  the  while.  He  it  was  who  had  made  the  mirage 
on  each  plain,  thinking  he  would  lure  them  on  by  this 
semblance  of  water  until  they  perished  of  thirst.  From 
that  Dooloomai,  their  cousin,  had  saved  them.  But  now 
the  chance  of  Beereeun  had  come. 

The  Bullai  Bullai  looked  across  the  wide  river  and  saw 
the  nyunnoos  Weedah  had  made.  They  saw  him  running 
in  and  out  of  them  as  if  he  were  playing  a  game,  not 
thinking  of  them  at  all.  Strange  nyunnoos  they  were  too 
having  both  ends  open. 

Seeing  where  they  were  looking,  Beereeun  said  :  "  Wee- 
dah is  womba,  deaf.  I  stole  his  doowee  while  he  slept  and 
put  in  its  place  a  mad  spirit.  He  knows  naught  of  you 
now.  He  cares  naught  for  you.  It  is  so  with  those  who 
look  too  long  at  the  Eer-dheer,  or  mirage.  He  will  trouble 
me  no  more,  nor  you.      Why  look  at  him  ?  " 

But  the  Bullai  Bullai  could  not  take  their  eyes  from 
Weedah,  so  strangely  he  went  on,  unceasingly  running  in 
at  one  end  of  the  grass  nyunnoos,  through  it  and  out  of  the 
other. 

"  He  is  womba,"  they  said,  but  yet  they  could  not  under- 
stand it.  They  looked  towards  him  and  called  to  him,  though 
he  heeded  them  not. 

"  I  will  send  him  far  from  you,"  said  Beereeun  getting 
angry.  He  seized  a  spear,  stood  up  in  the  canoe,  and 
sent    it   swiftly   through   the  air  into  Weedah,  who  gave  a 


lo  More    Australian  Tales 

great  cry,  screamed  "  Water  is  there  !  Water  is  there  !  "  and 
fell  back  dead. 

"  Take  us  over  !  Take  us  over  !  "  cried  the  Bullai  Bullai. 
"We  must  go  to  him,  we  might  yet  save  him." 

"He  is  all  right.  He  is  in  the  sky.  He  is  not  there," 
said  Beereeun.  "  If  you  want  him  you  must  follow  him 
to  the  sky.  Look,  you  can  see  him  there  now."  And  he 
pointed  to  a  star  which  the  Bullai  Bullai  had  never  seen 
before. 

"There  he  is,  Womba." 

Across  to  the  grass  nyunnoos  the  Bullai  Bullai  looked, 
but  no  Weedah  was  there.  Then  they  sat  down  and  wailed 
a  death  song,  for  they  knew  well  they  should  see  Weedah  no 
more.  They  plastered  their  heads  with  white  ashes  and 
water ;  they  tied  on  their  bodies  green  twigs  ;  then,  cutting 
themselves  till  the  blood  ran,  they  lit  some  smoke  branches 
and  smoked  themselves,  as  widows. 

Beereeun  spoke  to  Goolayyahlee  the  pelican,  saying : 
"  There  is  no  brother  of  the  dead  man  to  marry  these 
women.  In  this  country  they  have  no  relation.  You  shall 
take  one,  and  I  the  other.  To-night  when  they  sleep  we 
will  each  seize  one." 

"  That  which  you  say  shall  be,"  said  Goolayyahlee  the 
pelican. 

But  the  sisters  heard  what  they  said,  though  they 
gave  no  sign  and  mourned  the  degd  Wedeah  without 
ceasing.  And  with  their  death  song  they  mingled  a  cry  to 
all  of  their  tribe  who  were  dead  to  help  them,  and  save 
them  from  these  men  who  would  seize  them  while 
they  were  still  mourning,  before  they  had  swallowed  the 
smoke-water,   or  their  tribe   had   heard  the  voice  of  their 


Beereeun  the   Mirage   Maker       ii 

dead.  As  the  night  wore  on,  the  wailing  of  the  women 
ceased. 

The  men  thought  that  they  were  at  length  asleep,  and 
crept  up  to  their  camp.  But  lo  !  it  was  empty  !  Gone 
were  the  BuUai   Bullai ! 

The  men  heaped  fuel  on  their  fire  to  light  up  the  darkness, 
but  yet  saw  no  sign  of  the  Bullai  Bullai. 

They  heard  a  sound,  a  sound  of  mocking  laughter.  They 
looked  round,  but  saw  nothing. 

Again  they  heard  a  sound  of  laughter.  Whence  came 
it  ?     Again  it  echoed  through  the  air. 

It  was  from  the  sky.  They  looked  up.  It  was  the  new 
star  Womba,  mocking  them.  Womba  who  once  was 
Weedah,  who  laughed  aloud  to  see  that  the  Bullai  Bullai 
had  escaped  their  enemies,  for  even  now  they  were  stealing 
along  the  sky  towards  him,  which  the  men  on  earth  saw. 

"We  have  lost  them,"  said  Goolayyahlee.  "I  shall 
camp  alone,"  and  he  turned  to  go  to  his  dardurr. 

"They  shall  not  escape  me,"  said  Beereeun.  "  I  shall 
make  a  roadway  to  the  skies  and  follow  them.  Thence 
shall  I  bring  them  back,  or  wreak  my  vengeance  on 
them." 

He  went  to  the  canoe  where  were  his  spears ;  having 
grasped  them,  he  took  too  the  spears  of  Goolayyahlee,  which 
lay  by  the  smoulderhig  fire. 

He  chose  a  barbed  one.  With  all  his  force  he  threw  it 
up  to  the  sky.  The  barb  caught  there,  the  spear  hung 
down.  Beereeun  threw  another  which  caught  on  to  the 
first,  and  yet  another,  and  so  on,  each  catching  the  one 
before  it,  until  he  could  touch  the  lowest  from  the  earth. 
This  he  clutched  hold  of,  and  climbed  up,  up,  up,  until   he 


12  More  Australian  Tales 

reached  the  sky.  Then  he  started  in  pursuit  of  the  Bullai 
Bullai,  and  he  is  still  pursuing  them. 

Since  then  the  tribe  of  Beereeun  have  always  been  able 
to  swarm  up  sheer  heights.  Since  then  too,  his  tribe,  the 
little  lizards  of  the  plains,  make,  just  like  he  did,  the  mirages 
to  lure  on  thirsty  travellers,  only  to  send  them  mad  before 
they  die  of  thirst.  Since  then  Goolayyahlee  the  pelican 
has  been  white,  for  ever  did  the  ashes  thrown  by  the  Bullai 
Bullai  cling  to  him,  except  where  he  had  shaken  them  off 
from  his  hands,  where  are  a  few  black  feathers.  The  tribe 
of  Bullai  Bullai  are  coloured  like  the  green  of  the  leaves 
the  sisters  strung  on  themselves,  in  which  to  mourn 
Weedah,  with  here  and  there  a  dash  of  whitish  yellow  and 
red,  caused  by  the  ashes  and  the  blood  of  their  mourning. 
And  Womba  the  star,  the  mad  star,  still  shines ;  Canopus 
we  call  it.  And  Weedah  the  mocking-bird  still  builds 
grass  nyunnoos,  open  at  both  ends,  in  and  out  of  which  he 
runs,  as  if  they  were  but  his  playground. 

And  the  fire  that  Weedah  and  the  Bullai  Bullai  made 
spread  from  one  end  of  the  country  to  the  other,  over  ridges 
and  across  plains,  burning  the  trees  so  that  their  trunks 
have  been  black  ever  since.  Deenyi,  the  iron-barks, 
smouldered  the  longest  of  all,  and  their  trunks  were  so 
seared  that  the  seams  are  deeply  marked  in  their  thick  black 
bark  still,  making  them  show  out  grimly  distinct  on  the 
ridges,  to  remind  the  Daens  of  Beereeun  the  mirage  maker 
for  ever. 


Bohrah  the   Kangaroo  and   Dinewan 
the  Emu 

Bohrah  the  kangaroo  lived  in  a  grass  nyunnoo  with  his 
wife  Dinewan  the  emu.      He  was  a  great  wirreenun. 

One  evening  when  Bohrah  was  lying  down  trying  to 
sleep,  Dinewan  kept  making  holes  in  the  roof  of  the 
nyunnoo. 

"  What  are  you  doing  that  for  ?  "  asked  Bohrah. 

"  Just  for  nothing,"  said  Dinewan. 

"  Then  get  some  grass  and  mend  it  up." 

"There  is  no  grass  here." 

"Then  we  will  travel  until  we  find  some,  for  you  won't 
let  me  sleep." 

Off  they  went.  It  grew  darker  and  darker  every  minute. 
Dinewan  could  not  see  where  she  was  treading.  She  trod 
on  bindeahs,  which  stuck  into  her  feet  and  hurt  her. 

Limping  along  and  feeling  sore  from  the  prickles,  she 
said  :  "  If  you  are  such  a  great  wirreenun  as  you  say, 
surely  you  could  make  the  dark  roll  away  !  Hunt  it  right 
away  to  another  country.  Let  me  see  where  to  walk.  My 
feet  are  very  sore.      If  you  could  hunt  the  dark  away,  then 


14  More  Australian  Tales 

you  would  be  a  great  wirreenun.  Oh  my  poor  sore  feet !" 
So  crying  she  rubbed  them  against  each  other,  which  only 
made  the  bindeahs  stick  further  in,  raising  rough  lumps  on 
her  feet.  Which  lumps  have  been  on  the  feet  of  her  kind 
ever  since,  and  their  legs  have  been  bare  and  hard  up  to 
the  knee  joint. 

Now  Bohrah  the  kangaroo  was  really  a  great  wirreenun. 

While  it  was  still  quite  dark  he  said  :  "We  will  sleep 
here,  and  I  will  hunt  the  dark  away  while  we  rest." 

They  laid  down. 

As  soon  as  Bohrah  was  asleep,  he  sent  his  Mullee  Mullee, 
or  dream  spirit,  out  from  his  body  to  gather  up  the  darkness 
and  roll  it  away  to  the  westward.  Having  done  so  back 
came  the  Mullee  Mullee  to  the  body  of  Bohrah,  who  now 
woke  up  and  saw  what  his  spirit  had  done.  He  turned  to 
Dinewan,  whom  he  saw  had  slept  with  one  eye  and  one  ear 
open  that  she  might  see  what  he  would  do,  and  said  : 

"  My  Mullee  Mullee  has  rolled  the  night  from  us.  The 
darkness  is  no  more.  It  is  rolled  away  for  ever  from  me. 
I  and  my  people,  from  this  out,  shall  be  able  to  see  to 
travel  and  feed  at  night  as  if  it  were  day;  for  us  there  is  no 
more  darkness.  You  must  feed  in  the  daytime  ;  I  can  as  I 
please  at  night.  You  kept  one  eye  and  one  ear  open,  you 
shall  always  sleep  so.  First  one  side  of  your  head  shall  go 
to  sleep  and  then  the  other,  but  never  from  henceforth  both 
at  once."  And  since  that  time  so  it  has  been  even  as 
Bohrah  the  kangaroo  wirreenun  said  it  should  be. 


Gheeger  Gheeger  the  Cold 
West  Wind 

DuRROON  the  night  heron  lived  near  a  creek  in  which 
was  an  immense  hollow  log;  this  he  used  both  as  a  fish  and 
a  man  trap.  He  was  by  choice  a  bunna,  or  cannibal.  The 
immense  log  was  hollow  and  was  under  the  water.  In  the 
middle  of  it  Durroon  had  cut  an  opening. 

When  a  Daen  came  to  his  camp  Durroon  used  to  ask 
him  to  go  fishing  with  him,  saying  he  wanted  a  muUayerh, 
or  mate,  as  he  was  like  a  gundooee,  one  emu  living  alone. 
He  wanted  some  one  to  go  to  one  end  of  the  log  and  drive 
the  fish  to  the  other,  where  he  could  catch  them. 

Seeing  sense  in  this  the  Daen  would  agree,  and  off  they 
would  go,  Durroon  armed  with  his  spear,  to  spear  the  fish 
when  they  came  to  his  end  of  the  log,  so  he  said.  But  as  soon 
as  he  had  sent  his  mullayerh  off"  to  the  far  end,  he  would 
go  along  the  log  to  the  opening  in  the  middle. 

Unsuspecting  treachery  the  Daen  would  come  through 
the  hollow  log,  driving  the  fish  ahead  of  him.  Directly 
he  was  under  the  opening  Durroon  would  drive  his 
spear  swiftly  into   him,   killing   him   on    the    spot.      Then 


1 6  More  Australian  Tales 

Durroon   would    drag   his   victim   out,    and,  dismembering 
him,  cook  him. 

In  this  way  many  men  disappeared  mysteriously  until  at 
length  a  clever  crow  wirreenun  determined  to  solve  the 
riddle  of  their  disappearance. 

Wahn  the  crow  went  to  Durroon's  camp.  Durroon  asked 
him  to  go  fishing  with  him,  but  first  offered  him  some  good 
fat  goodoo,  or  cod,  he  already  had  cooked. 

Wahn  agreed,  and  when  they  had  finished  their  meal 
Durroon  proposed  they  should  go  fishing,  but  Wahn  said  : 
"  I  ate  too  much  goodoo.  It  was  very  fat.  I  ate  a  great 
deal  and  must  have  a  sleep  first  before  I  start." 

"All  right.  Plenty  of  time,"  Said  Durroon,  feeling  sure 
of  his  man-flesh  supper. 

Wahn  went  to  sleep  that  he  might  send  his  Mullee  Mullee, 
or  dream  spirit,  to  find  out  what  was  the  trap  Durroon  had 
in  the  creek.  The  Mullee  Mullee  soon  found  out  all  about 
the  opening  in  the  top  of  the  log,  having  done  which  back 
he  came.  Then  Wahn,  having  learnt  all,  woke  up,  and 
said  he  was  ready,  so  off  they  started.  Durroon  showed 
Wahn  where  to  enter  the  hollow  log,  at  the  far  end. 

Now  Wahn  was  a  great  wirreenun  whom  Durroon  had 
no  power  to  hurt,  so  he  fearlessly  went  in.  Durroon  waited 
until  he  appeared  under  the  opening,  then  down  went  the 
spear,  evoking  yells  of  "  Wah  !  Wah  !  Wah  !  "  from  Wahn, 
who  nevertheless  went  on  and  came  out  at  the  other  end 
with  the  spear. 

"What  made  you  do  that  ?"  he  said,  pulling  out  the  spear 
from  where  it  had  stuck  in  him. 

"  I  did  not  mean  to  spear  you,"  said  Durroon.  "  I  thought 
it  was  a  big  goodoo." 


Gheeger  Gheeger  17 


"  Well)  come  on,  I  have  had  enough  fishing,"  said  Wahn. 
"  You  might  make  a  mistake  again." 

On  came  Durroon,  thinking  Wahn  really  believed  it  was 
an  accident,  but  no  sooner  had  he  caught  up  Wahn  than 
he  found  himself  speared  in  his  turn,  and  fatally,  as  Wahn 
struck  to  slay. 

About  this  time,  Gheeger  Gheeger  the  cold  west  wind 
had  been  blowing  such  hurricanes  that  the  trees  had  been 
blown  in  all  directions,  and  the  crows'  humpies  scattered 
everywhere.  "Now,"  thought  Wahn,  "  I  will  catch  Gheeger 
Gheeger  and  shut  her  up  in  this  immense  hollow  log,  but 
first  I  must  dry  the  water  off  it." 

This  he  set  to  work  to  do,  and  soon,  one  day  when 
Gheeger  Gheeger  was  tired  out,  after  having  blown  down 
miles  of  trees,  and  cut  the  tribes  with  her  cold  blasts, 
Wahn  sneaked  upon  her  and  drove  her  into  the  hollow  log, 
which  he  blocked  up  at  both  ends  and  also  at  the  hole  in 
the  middle. 

Gheeger  Gheeger  roared  and  howled,  but  to  no  purpose. 

"  You  only  go  about  destroying  things ;  you  shall  stay 
where  you  are,"  said  Wahn. 

Gheeger  Gheeger  promised  to  be  more  gentle  in  future  if 
only  he  would  let  her  out  sometimes.  For  a  long  time 
Wahn  would  not  trust  her  and  kept  her  closely  imprisoned, 
but  after  a  while  he  let  her  come  out  occasionally,  after  she 
promised  to  blow  no  more  gales.  Sometimes  she  breaks 
her  word  and  blows  destructively  as  of  old,  but  Wahn 
quickly  captures  her  again,  and  hurries  her  back  to  her  log 
prison. 

There  are  holes  now  in  this  log  and  the  breath  of 
Gheeger  Gheeger  comes  through,  so  unless  Wahn  finds  a 

B 


i8 


More  Australian  Tales 


new  prison  for  her,  one  day  she  will  burst  forth,  and  then 
there  will  be  such  a  gale  as  never  blew  across  the  western 
plains  before.  Gheeger  Gheeger  will  blast  with  her  breath 
everything  that  stands  in  her  way  as  she  rushes  to  meet 
her  loved  Yarrageh,  the  spring  wind  which  blows  from  the 
east  Kumbooran,  and  which  had  of  old  been  wont  to  meet 
Gheeger  Gheeger  as  she  blew  from  Dinjerrah  the  west, 
tempering,  where  they  met,  her  cold  with  his  own  balmy 
warmth. 

Twice  a  year  the  winds  all  met,  holding  great  corroborees 
and  wild  revellings.  Dourandowran  came  with  his  scorching 
breath  from  Gurburreh,  the  north,  to  meet  his  loved 
Gunyahmoo,  the  south-east  wind  which  came  from  Bullime- 
deehmundi,  to  fan  him  with  her  softer,  cooler  breezes 
until  his  heat  lessened,  and  he  scorched  those  in  his  path 
no  longer.  Then  from  Nurroobooan,  the  south,  blew 
Nooroonooroobin  to  meet  Mundehwuddah,  the  north-west 
wind. 

After  the  big  corroboree  the  winds  parted,  each  to  return 
to  his  own  country,  hoping  to  meet  again  in  another  few 
months  to  again  corroboree. 

Hence  the  unrest  of  Gheeger  Gheeger  in  the  hollow  log, 
and  her  much  wailing  that  she  could  not  break  forth  from 
her  prison  and  rush  to  mingle  her  icy  breath  with  the  balmy 
one  of  Yarrageh. 


Bilber  and   Mayrah 


BiLBER,  the  soft-furred  sandhill  rat,  was  once  a  man,  and 
lived  in  a  camp  with  Mayrah  the  wind  for  a  mate.  Mayrah 
was  a  strange  mullayerh  for  a  man,  he  was  invisible.  He 
could  hold  conversations  with  Bilber,  but  much  as  he 
desired  it,  Bilber  could  never  see  him.  One  day  he  said  to 
Mayrah  :  "  Why  do  you  not  become  like  me  that  I  might 
see  you  ?  " 

"  I  can  see  you,"  said  Mayrah. 

"Yes,  I  know  that  you  can,  but  I  cannot  see  you,  only 
hear  you.  I  know  you  are  there  because  you  eat  the  food 
before  you.  You  catch  opossums,  and  get  honey,  but 
though  I  go  with  you,  following  your  voice,  yet  I  can 
never  see  you,  and  I  long  to  see  some  one  again." 

"  But  I  can  see  you,  so  I  am  all  right." 

"  But  I  cannot  see  you,  and  I  long  to  see  some  one 
again.  I  must  travel  away  somewhere  and  join  others  of 
my  tribe.  If  I  could  only  see  you  I  would  not  wish  for  a 
better  mullayerh." 

"  Well,  I  am  off  hunting  now.      Are  you  coming  ?  " 

"  No,  I  will  stay  in  the  camp  to-day." 

Mayrah  the  wind  went  off,  and  when  evening  was  at 


20  More  Australian  Tales 

hand  he  was  not  yet  back.  Suddenly  Bilber  heard  a 
roaring  in  the  distance  such  as  he  had  never  heard  before. 
Then  he  saw,  where  the  sound  seemed  to  be,  a  column  of 
dust  and  leaves  spouting  up.  "  What  sort  of  a  storm  is 
this?"  he  asked  himself.  "I  never  saw  anything  like  it 
before.  I  will  go  up  to  that  sand-ridge  behind  our  camp 
and  make  a  hole  in  the  soft  ground,  into  which  I  will  get, 
so  that  this  storm  cannot  take  me  away  in  its  fury." 

Off  went  Bilber  hard  as  he  could  to  the  soft  sandhill,  the 
storm  roaring  behind  him.  There  he  made  a  hole  and 
buried  himself  in  it  until  the  wind  storm  had  passed. 

Up  came  the  wind,  tearing  on  to  the  ridge,  whirling 
round  the  camp,  sending  the  bark  and  boughs  flying  about. 
On,  on  he  went  round  Bilber's  hole,  but  that  he  could  not 
shift,  so  howling  with  impotent  rage  as  he  went,  he  passed 
on  until  his  voice  was  heard  only  in  the  distance,  and  at 
length  not  at  all. 

After  a  time  Bilber  came  out.  He  had  been  so  safe 
and  warm  in  his  hole  in  the  sand  that  he  lived  there  ever 
afterwards,  and  there  he  took  his  wife,  when  he  found  one, 
to  live.  And  to  this  day  the  Bilber  tribe  live  in  burrows 
in  the  sand.  They  still  hear  the  voice  of  the  old  Bilber's 
mate,  but  never  see  his  face,  nor  do  they  hear  him  speak 
any  longer  their  language  as  of  old,  for  so  angry  was  he  at 
Bilber's  desire  to  see  his  face  or  leave  him,  that  he  only 
howls  and  roars  as  he  rushes  past  their  camps.  And  never 
since  have  any  of  the  tribes  seen  where  he  camps,  nor  does 
any  one  know  except  the  six  winds  that  blow,  and  they  tell 
the  secret  to  none. 


Bralgah  the  Dancing  Bird 

Bralgah  Numbardee  was  very  fond  of  going  out  hunting 
with  her  young  daughter  Bralgah.  Her  tribe  used  to  tell 
her  she  was  foolish  to  do  so.  That  some  day  the 
Wurrawilberoo  would  catch  them. 

It  was  not  for  old  Bralgah  Numbardee  that  the  Daens 
cared,  but  all  the  camp  were  proud  of  young  Bralgah. 
She  was  the  merriest  girl  and  the  best  dancer  of  all  her 
tribe,  the  women  of  whom  were  for  the  most  part  content 
to  click  the  boomerangs,  beat  their  roUed-up  opossum-skin 
rugs,  and  sing,  in  voices  from  shrill  to  sweet,  the  corroboree 
songs,  while  the  men  danced  ;  but  not  so  Bralgah.  She 
must  dance  too,  and  not  only  the  dance?  she  saw  the  rest 
dance,  but  new  ones  which  she  taught  herself,  for  every 
song  she  heard  she  set  to  steps.  Sometinjes,  with 
laughing  eyes,  she  would  whirl  round  like  a  boolee,  or 
whirlwind.  Then  suddenly  she  would  change  to  a  stately 
measure.  Then  for  variety's  sake  perform  a  series  of  swift 
gyrations,  as  if,  indeed,  a  whirlwind  devil  had  her  in  his 

grip- 

The    fame    of   her    dancing  spread   abroad,    and  proud 
indeed  was  the  tribe  to  whom  she  belonged,  hence  their 


2  2  More  Australian  Tales 

anxiety  for  her  safety,  and  their  dread  that  the  Wurra- 
wilberoo  would  catch  her. 

The  Wurrawilberoo  were  two  cannibals  who  lived  in  the 
scrub  alone. 

But  in  spite  of  all  warnings  Bralgah  Numbardee  con- 
tinued to  hunt  as  usual  with  only  her  daughter  for  com- 
panion. 

One  day  they  went  out  to  camp  for  two  or  three  days. 
Nothing  hurt  them  the  first  night,  but  the  next  day  the 
Wurrawilberoo  surprised  and  captured  them.  They  gave 
Bralgah  Numbardee  a  severe  blow.  She  fell  down  and 
feigned  death,  lest  they  should  strike  her  again  and  kill  her. 
The  Wurrawilberoo  picked  her  up  to  carry  her  off  to  their 
camp.  They  did  not  wish  to  hurt  young  Bralgah  ;  they 
meant  to  keep  her  to  dance  for  them.  They  told  her  so, 
and  gave  her  their  muggil,  or  stone  knife  to  carry,  telling 
her  to  fear  nothing,  and  come  with  them. 

She  went  with  them,  but  when  they  were  not  looking 
she  threw  the  knife  away. 

As  soon  as  they  reached  the  camp  the  Wurrawilberoo 
asked  her  for  it.  They  wanted  to  cut  up  Bralgah  Numbardee 
before  cooking  her.  Bralgah  said  she  put  the  muggil  down 
where  they  had  rested,  some  way  back,  and  had  for- 
gotten it. 

They  said :  "  We  will  go  back  and  get  it.  You  stay 
here." 

They  started.  When  they  were  some  way  off  the 
mother  said  :   "  Are  they  out  of  sight  yet  ?  " 

"  Not  yet.     Wait  a  little  while." 

Bralgah  watched  them  go  right  away,  then  told  her 
mother,  who  immediately  jumped  up.      Off  then  went  both 


Bralgah  the  Dancing  Bird         23 

mother  and  daughter  as  fast  as  they  could  to  their  own 
tribe,  whom  they  told  what  had  happened. 

When  the  Wurrawilberoo  came  back  they  were  enraged 
to  find  not  only  the  daughter  but  the  mother  gone,  even  she 
whom  they  had  left,  as  they  thought,  dead.  No  feast,  no 
dance  for  them  that  night  unless  they  recovered  their  victims, 
from  whose  tracks  they  found  that  Bralgah  had  actually 
been  able  to  run  beside  her  daughter. 

"  She  only  feigned  death,'  they  said,  "  to  deceive  us. 
We  will  hasten  and  overtake  them  before  they  reach  the 
tribe.  Yea,  even  if  they  are  with  the  tribe  we  will  snatch 
them  away." 

But  the  Daens  were  looking  out  for  them,  fully  armed, 
seeing  which  the  Wurrawilberoo  turned  and  fled,  the  Daens 
after  them  in  quick  pursuit,  but  they  failed  to  overtake 
them  ;  and,  fearing  to  follow  them  too  far  lest  a  trap  lay 
ready  for  them,  they  returned  to  the  camp.  But  so  wroth 
were  they  at  the  attempt  to  capture  their  prized  Bralgah 
that  a  council  was  held,  and  the  destruction  of  the  Wurra- 
wilberoo determined  upon.  Two  of  the  cleverest  wirreenuns 
said  they  would  send  their  Mullee  MuUees  in  whirlwinds 
after  the  enemy  to  catch  them. 

This  they  did.  Whirling  along  went  the  boolees  with 
the  Mullee  Mullees  in  them.  Quickly  they  went  along  the 
track  of  the  Wurrawilberoo,  whom  they  soon  headed,  turn- 
ing them  back  towards  the  camp  whence  they  had  fled. 

"  We  will  go,"  said  one  of  the  Wurrawilberoo  to  the 
other,  "  back  to  the  camp,  ahead  of  these  whirlwinds.  We 
will  seize  the  girl  and  her  mother,  and  fly  in  another 
direction.  The  whirlwinds  will  miss  us  in  the  camp  and 
seize   others.     We  will   not  be   baulked.     Young  Bralgah 


24  More  Australian  Tales 

shall  be  ours  to  dance  before  us,  and  her  mother  shall 
make  our  supper  to-night." 

On,  on  they  fled  before  the  whirlwinds,  which  gained 
both  size  and  pace  as  they  followed  them. 

The  Daens  were  so  astonished  at  seeing  the  Wurrawil- 
beroo  returning  straight  towards  them,  the  whirlwinds  after 
them,  that  they  never  thought  of  arming  themselves.  Into 
the  midst  of  them  rushed  the  Wurrawilberoo.  One  seized 
Bralgah  the  mother,  the  other  young  Bralgah,  and  before 
the  astonished  Daens  realised  their  coming  they  had  gone 
some  distance  along  the  edge  of  the  plain. 

"  Bring  your  weapons,"  roared  the  Mullee  Mullees  in  the 
whirlwinds  to  the  Daens  as  they  swirled  through  the  camp 
after  the  enemy. 

The  Wurrawilberoo  carrying  young  Bralgah  was  ahead. 
The  other,  finding  the  whirlwinds  were  gaining  on  them, 
dropped  his  burden,  Bralgah  Numbardee,  and  ran  on. 
Just  in  front  of  them  were  two  huge  balah  trees.  Feeling 
that  the  whirlwinds,  which  they  now  knew  must  have 
spirits  in  them,  were  already  lifting  them  from  their  feet, 
the  Wurrawilberoo  clung  to  the  balah  trees,  the  one  who 
had  captured  young  Bralgah  still  holding  her  with  one  arm 
while  he  grasped  the  tree  with  the  other. 

"Let  the  girl  go,"  shouted  the  other  to  him.  "Save 
yourself." 

"  They  shall  never  have  her,"  he  answered  savagely. 
"  If  I  have  to  lose  her  they  shall  not  get  her." 

Then  as  the  whirlwinds  howled  round  them,  tearing  up 
everything  in  a  wild  fury,  the  balah  trees  now  in  their 
grasp  creaking  and  groaning,  Wurrawilberoo  muttered  a 
sort  of  incantation  and  released  young  Bralgah.     As  she 


Bralgah  the  Dancing  Bird         25 

slipped  from  his  grasp  came  a  shout  of  joy  from  the  Daens, 
who  were  just  in  the  wake  of  the  whirlwinds  ;  they  had 
their  spears  poised,  but  had  been  frightened  to  throw  for 
fear  of  injuring  Bralgah. 

Now  that  she  was  free  they  called  aloud  :  "  Gubbah  youl 
gingnee  !     Gubbah  youl  gingnee  !  " 

But  their  joy  was  short-lived.  The  whirlwinds  wound 
round  the  balah  trees  to  which  the  Wurrawilberoo  clung, 
and  dragged  them  from  the  roots  before  the  men  could 
leave  go.  Up,  up  the  whirlwinds  carried  the  trees,  the 
men  still  clinging  to  them,  until  they  reached  the  sky ; 
there  they  planted  them  not  far  from  the  Milky  Way. 
And  there  they  are  still,  two  dark  spots,  called  Wurra- 
wilberoo, for  the  two  cannibals  have  lived  in  them  ever 
since,  being  dreaded  by  all  who  have  to  pass  along  the 
Warrambool,  or  Milky  Way.  Where  are  camped  many  old 
Daens,  cooking  the  grubs  they  have  gathered  for  food, 
and  the  smoke  of  their  fires  shows  the  course  of  the 
Warrambool.  But  only  can  any  one  reach  these  fires  if  the 
Wurrawilberoo  are  away,  as  sometimes  happens  when  they 
go  down  to  the  earth,  and,  through  the  medium  of  boolees, 
or  whirlwinds,  pursue  their  old  enemies  the  Daens. 

When  the  Daens  saw  their  enemies  were  gone,  they 
turned  to  get  Bralgah ;  her  mother  was  already  with 
them. 

But  where  was  young  Bralgah  ?  She  had  not  been 
seen  to  move  away,  yet  she  was  gone.  All  round  the 
plain  they  looked.  They  saw  only  a  tall  bird  walking 
across  it.  They  went  to  the  place  whence  the  trees  had 
been  wrenched.  They  scanned  the  ground  for  tracks,  but 
saw  none  of  Bralgah  going  away.     Only  those  of  the  big 


26  More    Australian  Tales 

crane-like  bird  now  on  the  plain.  Wurrawilberoo  must 
have  seized  her  again  and  taken  her  after  all,  they  said. 

As  soon  as  the  MuUee  MuUees,  which  had  animated  the 
whirlwinds,  returned  from  placing  the  balah  trees  and  the 
Wurrawilberoo  in  the  sky,  the  Daens  asked  them  if  they 
had  left  her  there. 

No  Bra,lgah  they  said  had  gone  to  the  sky.  Surely  the 
Daens  had  seen  Wurrawilberoo  let  her  go. 

Then  where  was  she  ? 

That  no  one  could  say,  and  none  thought  of  asking  the 
big  bird  on  the  plain.  All  mourned  for  Bralgah  as  for  one 
dead.  Her  spirit,  they  said,  would  haunt  the  camp  because 
they  could  not  find  her  body  to  bury  it,  though  they  knew 
she  must  be  dead,  otherwise  would  she  not  return  to  them  ? 

They  moved  their  camp  away  to  the  other  side  of  the 
plain. 

After  a  while  they  noticed  that  a  number  of  birds,  like 
the  one  they  had  seen  on  the  plain  at  the  time  of  Bralgah's 
disappearance,  came  feeding  round  not  far  from,  their  camp, 
and  after  feeding  for  a  while  these  birds  would  begin  to 
corroboree ;  such  a  strange  corroboree,  of  which  one  bird 
taller  than  the  others  was  seemingly  a  leader. 

This  corroboree  was  so  human  and  like  no  movements  of 
any  other  birds,  like  indeed  nothing  of  the  sort  that  the 
Daens  had  ever  seen,  unless  it  were  the  dances  of  the  lost 
Bralgah. 

Out  on  to  a  clear  space  the  leader  would  lead  her  troupe, 
There  would  be  much  craning  of  necks,  and  bowing, 
pirouetting,  stately  measured  changing  of  places  ;  then 
gyrating  with  wings  extended,  just  as  Bralgah  had  been 
wont  to  fling  her  arms,  before  she  madly  whirled  around 


Bralgah  the  Dancing  Bird        27 

and  around  as  these  birds  did  now,  seeing  which  likeness 
the  Daens  called  :  "  Bralgah  !  Bralgah  !  " 

The  bird  seemed  to  understand  them,  for  it  looked 
towards  them,  then  led  its  troupe  into  wilder,  and  more 
intricate,  figures  of  the  corroboree. 

As  time  went  on  the  leader  of  the  birds  was  seen  no 
more,  but  so  well  had  her  troupe  learned  the  corroborees 
that  they  went  through  the  same  grotesque  performances  as 
in  her  time. 

The  old  Daens  died  who  remembered  the  dancing  girl 
Bralgah,  but  all  these  dancing  birds  were  known  for  ever 
by  her  name. 

When  Bralgah  Numbardee  died  she  was  taken  to  the 
sky,  there  to  live  for  ever  with  her  daughter  Bralgah,  both 
known  to  us  as  the  Clouds  of  Magellan,  to  the  Daens  as 
the  Bralgah. 

There  Bralgah  Numbardee  learned  that  the  Wurrawil- 
beroo  by  his  incantation  had  changed  her  daughter  into  the 
dancing  bird,  which  shape  she  had  to  keep  as  long  as  she 
lived  on  earth. 

Afterwards,  if  ever  the  Daens  saw  a  boolee  speeding 
along  near  their  camp  the  women  would  cry,  "  Wurrawil- 
beroo,"  clutch  their  children  and  bury  their  heads  in  their 
rugs ;  the  men  would  seize  their  weapons  and  hurl  them  at 
the  ever-feared  and  hated  capturers  of  Bralgah. 


How  the  Sun  was  Made 

For  a  long  time  there  was  no  sun,  only  a  moon  and  stars. 
That  was  before  there  were  men  on  the  earth,  only  birds 
and  beasts,  all  of  which  were  many  sizes  larger  than  they 
are  now. 

One  day,  Dinewan,  the  emu,  and  Bralgah,  the  native 
companion,  were  on  a  large  plain  near  the  Murrumbidgee. 
There  they  were  quarrelling  and  fighting.  Bralgah,  in  her 
rage,  rushed  to  the  nest  of  Dinewan,  seized  from  it  one  of 
the  huge  eggs  in  it,  which  she  threw  with  all  her  force  up 
to  the  sky.  There  it  broke  on  a  heap  of  firewood,  which 
burst  into  a  flame  as  the  yellow  yolk  spilt  all  over  it,  which 
flame  lit  up  the  world  below,  to  the  astonishment  of  every- 
thing on  it.  They  had  only  been  used  to  the  semi-darkness, 
and  were  dazzled  by  such  brightness. 

A  good  spirit  who  lived  in  the  sky  saw  how  bright  and 
beautiful  the  earth  looked  when  lit  up  by  this  blaze.  He 
thought  it  would  be  a  good  thing  to  make  a  fire  every  day, 
which  from  that  time  he  has  done.  All  night  he  and  his 
attendant  spirits  collect  wood,  and  heap  it  up.  When  the 
heap  is  nearly  big  enough  they  send  out  the  morning  star 
to  warn  those  on  earth  that  the  fire  will  soon  be  lit. 


How  the   Sun  was   Made  29 

They,  however,  found  this  warning  was  not  sufficient,  for 
those  who  slept  saw  it  not.  Then  they  thought  they  must 
have  some  noise  made  at  dawn  of  day  to  herald  the  coming 
of  the  sun  and  waken  the  sleepers.  But  they  could  not 
decide  upon  to  whom  should  be  given  this  office  for  a  long 
time. 

At  last  one  evening  they  heard  the  laughter  of  Gougour- 
gahgah,  the  laughing  jackass,  ringing  through  the  air. 
"  That  is  the  noise  we  want,"  they  said.  Then  they  told 
Gougourgahgah  that  as  the  morning  star  faded  and  the  day 
dawned  he  was  every  morning  to  laugh  his  loudest,  that 
his  laughter  might  awaken  all  sleepers  before  sunrise.  If 
he  would  not  agree  to  do  this  then  no  more  would  they 
light  the  sun-fire,  but  let  the  earth  be  ever  in  twilight 
again. 

But  Gougourgahgah  saved  the  light  for  the  world,  and 
agreed  to  laugh  his  loudest  at  every  dawn  of  day,  which  he 
has  done  ever  since,  making  the  air  ring  with  his  loud 
cackling  "  gou-gour-gah-gah,  gou-gour-gah-gah,  gou-gour- 
gah-gah." 

When  the  spirits  first  light  the  fire  it  does  not  throw 
out  much  heat.  But  in  the  middle  of  the  day  when  the 
whole  heap  of  firewood  is  in  a  blaze,  the  heat  is  fierce. 
After  that  it  begins  to  die  gradually  away  until  only  the 
red  coals  are  left  at  sunset,  and  they  quickly  die  out,  except 
a  few  the  spirits  cover  up  with  clouds,  and  save  to  light 
the  heap  of  wood  they  get  ready  for  the  next  day. 

Children  are  not  allowed  to  imitate  the  laughter  of 
Gougourgahgah,  lest  he  should  hear  them  and  cease  his 
morning  cry.  If  children  do  laugh  as  he  does,  an  extra 
tooth  grows  above  their   eye-tooth,   so  that  they  carry  a 


30  More  Australian  Tales 

mark  of  their  mockery  in  punishment  for  it,  for  well  do  the 
good  spirits  know  that  if  ever  a  time  comes  wherein  the 
Gougourgahgahs  cease  laughing  to  herald  the  sun,  then  the 
time  will  have  come  when  no  more  Daens  are  seen  in  the 
land,  and  darkness  will  reign  once  more. 


Sturt's  Desert  Pea,  the   Blood  Flower 

Great  was  the  talking  in  the  camp  one  morning  of  the 
river  tribe,  for  during  the  night  Wimbakobolo  had  fled, 
taking  with  him  Purleemil,  the  promised  bride  of  Tirlta. 
The  elders  sat  together  and  planned  how  to  capture 
them.  While  they  were  talking  the  young  men  came 
and  told  them  that  the  tracks  of  the  fugitives  were 
leading  towards  the  large  Boulka,  or  lake,  where  was 
camped  a  hunting  expedition,  part  of  a  tribe  from  the 
back  country,  of  whom  the  father  of  Wimbakobolo  had 
been  one. 

Then  the  elders  knew  the  fugitives  must  be  going  to  take 
refuge  with  this  tribe.  They  called  the  fighting  men 
together,  and  they  said  :  "  Gather  ye  your  weapons,  we 
shall  go  to  this  tribe  and  demand  that  they  give  us  the 
fugitives.  Wimbakobolo  shall  we  slay,  Purleemil  shall  be 
Tirlta's  to  slay  or  keep  as  it  pleases  him." 

Soon  they  went  forward,  after  having  painted  themselves 
in  full  war  paint  and  armed  themselves  with  many  weapons. 
For  two  days  they  followed  the  track.  On  the  third  day 
they  saw  the  camp  fires;  then  they  sent  their  messengers 
to  the  tribe,  whose  elders  received   them   and   listened  to 


32  More  Australian  Tales 

their  request  that  Wimbakobolo  and  Purleemil  should  be 
given  up. 

"  Do  not  send  me  back,"  cried  Purleemil,  "  to  old  Tirlta.. 
Two  wives  has  he  slain  with  his  waddy ;  let  me  not  be  the 
third."      And  she  sobbed  aloud. 

"  Cease  your  crying,"  said  Wimbakobolo.  "  I  give  you 
up  to  no  man,  rather  would  I  slay  you  with  my  spear. 
Let  Tirlta,"  he  said,  turning  to  the  elders,  "  be  a  man  and 
fight  me.  I  am  ready  but  he  is  a  coward.  Men  of  my 
father's  tribe,  who  have  given  us  shelter,  who  when  we 
were  hungry  gave  us  food,  remember  that  in  the  days  that 
are  past  my  father  was  one  of  you,  a  great  warrior  who 
slew  your  enemies  as  if  they  were  ants,  so  powerful  was 
he.  Even  as  he  fought  for  j'ou,  so  will  his  son  in  the  days 
to  come,  if  you  give  him  your  aid  now.  Long  have  I 
loved  Purleemil,  she  with  the  starry  eyes,  and  her  heart 
has  been  mine  ever.  Can  a  maid  at  the  bidding  of  the 
greybeards  turn  Her  heart  to  a  wife-slayer,  leaving  the  one 
she  loves,  turning  from  one  who  is  young,  strong,  and 
straight,  to  a  bowed  cripple  ?  Remember  my  father  before 
you  despise  the  help  of  his  son  before  you,  and  his  grand- 
sons to  come.  We  shall  never  go  back  to  the  tribe  of 
Tirlta,  rather  will  I  spear  Purleemil,  my  heart's  beloved,  as 
she  stands  before  you,  and  mingle  my  blood  with  hers." 

Wimbakobolo  drew  himself  up  and  looked  so  powerful 
and  fierce  a  warrior  as  he  stood,  weapons  in  hand,  before 
the  elders,  that  they  said  :  "  Fools  should  we  be  to  give  up 
the  son  of  our  old  leader  to  our  enemies.  He  shall  lead  us 
as  did  his  father  before  him,  and  his  Purleemil  shall  be  the 
mother  of  warriors  to  follow  him,  for  strong  are  the  clan  of 
Wimbakobolo,  men  like  mountains  as  their  name  tells." 


Sturt's  Desert  Pea 


33 


Then  an  elder  turned  to  the  messengers  saying :  "  Let 
Tirlta  come  alone  out  on  to  the  plain,  there  Wimbakobolo 
will  meet  him,  and  there  they  can  fight.      If  Tirlta  will  not. 


then  let  him  go  back,  a  coward,  to  his  country,  and  stay 
there.  Wimbakobolo  remains  with  us,  we  shall  give  him 
up  to  none." 

Back  to  their  tribe  went  the  messengers,  but  no  Tirlta 
came  to  accept  the  challenge,  and  back  to  the  big  river  went 
he  with  the  others. 

Wimbakobolo  and  Purleemil  lived  in  peace,  loved  of  all 
the  tribe  they  had  come  to,  for  he  was  a  mighty  hunter,  and 
she  a  singer  of  sweet  songs. 

After  a  while  when  the  cold  winds  began  to  blow  round 

c 


34  More  Australian  Tales 

the  Boulka,  the  tribe  moved  their  camp  to  where,  on  the  far 
side  were  more  trees  for  shelter  and  firewood,  for  the 
winter  was  at  hand. 

Before  the  winter  had  gone  a  son  was  born  to  Wimba- 
kobolo  and  Purleemil,  and  seeing  what  a  big  baby  he  was, 
the  tribe  laughingly  called  him  "The  Little  Chief,"  and 
brought  him  offerings  of  toy  boomerangs,  throwing  sticks 
and  such  things  until  the  eyes  of  his  mother  shone  with 
pride,  and  the  father  already  began  to  make  him  weapons 
to  be  used  one  day  against  the  enemies  of  the  tribe  who 
had  sheltered  them. 

And  Purleemil  sang  new  songs,  which  she  said  the  spirits 
taught  her,  about  her  little  son,  whom  she  said  was  to  live 
for  ever,  the  most  beautiful  thing  on  the  plains  of  the  back 
country. 

Purleemil  would  sing  her  songs,  and  her  baby  would 
crow  and  laugh,  and  the  father  would  say  little,  but  bear  so 
proud  a  look  on  his  face  as  he  glanced,  from  his  carving 
of  weapons  with  an  opossum's  tooth,  from  time  to  time  at 
his  wife  and  child,  that  all  would  smile  to  see  his  happy 
pride,  and  their  hearts  were  glad  that  the  elders  had  not 
given  up  Purleemil  to  be  the  bride  of  Tirlta,  the  wife- 
slayer. 

The  winter  passed  away,  and  with  the  coming  of  the 
summer  all  made  ready  to  return  to  their  hunting  ground 
where  the  fugitives  had  first  come  to  them. 

But  Purleemil  sang  no  longer.  The  spirits  she  said  told 
her  that  misfortune  was  at  hand. 

"  Let  us  stay  in  the  winter  camp,"  she  said  to  her  husband, 
"where  we  have  been  so  happy.  I  fear  we  shall  lose 
our  Little  Chief  if  we  go.     Let  us  stay,  my  husband." 


Sturt's   Desert  Pea  35 

"  That  cannot  be,  my  wife,  or  the  tribe  would  call  me  a 
coward,  and  say  I  feared  to  meet  Tirlta." 

"  Better  be  called  a  coward,  which  all  know  you  are  not, 
my  husband,  than  lose  our  Little  Chief.  Dark  would  our 
hves  be  without  him,  he  is  the  sun  that  brightens  our  days, 
without  him  dark  as  a  grave  would  they  be  for  ever." 

"  That  is  true,  my  wife  ;  now  he  has  been  with  us  so 
long  life  would  be  dreary  without  him,  our  Little  Chief. 
But  why  should  we  lose  him  ?  Did  not  the  spirits  say- he 
should  live  for  ever  on  the  plains,  then  why  should  you  fear 
for  him,  my  loved  one  ?  " 

"I  cannot  tell.  Truly  the  spirits  said  so,  and  yet  they  say 
now,  as  their  voices  come  to  me  on  every  breeze,  that  mis- 
fortune is  at  hand." 

"But  not  for  the  Little  Chief,  Purleemil.  For  the 
tribe,  maybe,  who  sheltered  us,  then  how  could  we  leave 
them  to  face  it  alone  ?  Come  with  me  bravely,  mother 
of  the  Little  Chief,  lest  your  son  drink  in  fear  at  your 
breast." 

So  Purleemil  hugged  her  child  to  her,  and  spoke  no  more 
of  her  fear.  And  as  the  days  passed  merrily  in  the  new 
camp  which  was  the  old,  the  fears  were  forgotten,  and  the 
spirits  ceased  their  warnings. 

One  night  when  the  tribe  were  all  asleep  unwitting  of 
danger,  their  enemies  who  had  been  waiting  their  chance 
closed  in  round  them.  Closer  and  closer  they  came,  led  by 
the  crafty  Tirlta ;  too  great  a  coward  to  risk  an  open  fight, 
he  stole  like  a  dingo  into  the  camp  at  night,  meaning  to  slay 
by  treachery  all  who  had  baulked  him  of  his  prey  Purleemil, 
she  should  be  slain  with  the  rest,  men,  women  and  children, 
all  were  to  be  sacrificed  to  his  hate.      He  had  laid  his  plans 


36  More  Australian  Tales 

well,  waiting  until  all  fear  of  vengeance  was  over  and  all 
vigilance  relaxed. 

Closer  and  closer  they  crept,  making  no  sound  as  they 
came  nearer  and  nearer. 

The  Little  Chief  stirred  in  his  sleep  ;  Purleemil  crooned 
him  to  rest  again  with  the  spirit's  song  telling  how  he 
should  live  on  the  plains  for  ever,  the  brightest,  most  beautiful 
thing  on  them;  soon  was  he  soothed  and  the  mother,  nestling 
closer  to  the  ever  loved  Wimbakobolo,  slept  again  unwitting 
of  danger. 

A  dog  at  their  feet  growled,  and  Wimbakobolo  stirred  ; 
again  the  dog  growled,  Wimbakobolo  rose  to  his  feet,  but 
even  as  he  stood  up  he  was  felled  to  the  ground  by  a  deadly 
blow  from  Tirlta,  and  into  the  camp  rushed  the  enemy, 
slaying  the  sleepers  as  they  lay  for  the  most  part,  though 
some  had  time  to  seize  their  weapons,  but  in  vain,  to  defend 
themselves. 

Tirlta,  who  for  days  had  known  the  camp  of  Purleemil, 
and  claimed  as  his  own  victim  her  husband,  having  killed 
him,  now  with  a  fiendish  yell  transfixed  the  body  of  the 
Little  Chief  with  a  jagged  spear. 

The  tongue  of  Purleemil,  the  sweet  singer,  clove  to  her 
mouth  as  she  saw  her  husband  dead  beside  her,  and  her 
child  on  the  spear  of  her  enemy.  Then  she  wrenched  the 
spear  from  Tirlta,  and  the  end  which  had  passed  through 
the  body  of  her  baby  she  turned  and  .plunged  into  her  own 
heart,  pinning  the  Little  Chief  to  her,  and  fell  with  him  dead 
on  to  the  body  of  her  husband,  and  the  life  blood  of  the 
three  mingled  into  one  stream. 

Thus  was  accomplished  the  vengeance  of  Tirlta,  which 
left  not  one  of  the  tribe,  who  had  given  the  fugitives  shelter. 


Sturt's  Desert  Pea  37 

alive.      Leaving  the  bodies  to  the  hawks  and  crows,  Tirita 
and  his  tribe  went  back  to  the  Callawatta. 

The  next  season  they  determined  to  hunt  on  the 
hunting  grounds  of  their  dead  enemies.  But  when  they, 
reached  them  they  camped  some  distance  away  from 
the  scene  of  the  slaughter,  lest  the  spirits  of  the  dead 
should  molest  them. 

At  night  th'ey  saw  strange  lights  moving  on  that  spot, 
then  they  knew  that  the  spirits  were  indeed  abroad. 

The  next  morning  they  went  for  water  to  the  Boulka,  or 
lake.  How  it  glistened  in  the  sun !  But  was  it  water  ? 
They  paused  and  looked.  No  water  was  that  before  them. 
On  they  went  and  then  saw  that  the  large  lake  had  been 
turned  to  salt.  Then  the  tribe  were  frightened,  and  turned 
back  to  their  own  hunting  grounds,  for  no  man  likes  to 
dare  the  spirits.  Tirita  said  he  would  follow  them,  but  first 
would  he  go  to  where  bleached  the  bones  of  his  enemies,  it 
would  give  him  joy,  he  said,  to  see  them.  With  hatred 
still  strong  in  his  heart  he  went.  But  surely,  he  thought, 
must  his  eyes  be  dazzled  with  the  glare  from  the  salt 
lake  before  him,  for  he  saw  no  bones  in  the  place 
where  his  enemies  had  been,  only  masses  of  brilliant  red 
flowers  spreading  all  over  the  scene  of  the  massacre,  flowers 
such  as  he  had  never  seen  before. 

As  he  was  gazing  with  a  dazed  expression  at  them,  there 
stretched  down  from  the  sky  a  spear  with  a  barb  that  caught 
him  in  the  side  and  lifted  him  from  his  feet.  As  he  hung 
in  mid  air  he  heard  a  voice,  though  he  saw  nothing,  say: 
"  Cowardly  murderer  of  children  and  women,  how  dare  you 
set  foot  on  the  spot  made  sacred  for  ever  by  the  blood  that 
you  spilt,   the  blood    of  the  Little  Chief,  his  mother  and 


38  More  Australian  Tales 

father,  which  flowed  in  one  stream  and  blossomed  as  you 
see  it  now,  for  no  man  can  kill  blood,  for  more  than  the  life 
of  the  flesh  is  in  blood.  Their  blood  shall  live  for  ever, 
making  beautiful  with  its  blazing  brightness  the  bare  plains 
where  are  the  salt  lakes,  the  dried  tears  of  the  spirits  whose 
songs  Purleemil  sang  so  sweetly,  the  salt  tears  which  they 
shed  when  you  and  such  as  you  poured  out  the  life  blood  of 
their  loved  tribe.  Here  shall  you  sit  for  ever  before  your 
handiwork,  the  work  of  a  coward." 

So  saying  the  spirit  transfixed  Tirlta  to  the  ground, 
leaving  the  spear  still  through  him. 

There  in  the  course  of  ages  man  and  spear  turned  to 
stone  as  an  everlasting  monument  of  the  spirit's  power,  and 
there  at  Tirlta's  feet  spread  the  beautiful  red  flower,  the 
glory  of  the  Western  plains  where  the  salt  lakes  are — -Sturt's 
Desert  Pea  we  call  it,  but  to  the  old  tribes  it  was  known  as 
the  Flower  of  Blood. 


Piggiebillah  the  Porcupine^ 

PiGGiEBiLLAH  was  getting  old  and  not  able  to  do  much 
hunting  for  himself.  Nor  did  he  care  so  much  for  the  flesh 
of  emu  and  kangaroo  as  he  did  for  the  flesh  of  men. 

He  used  to  entice  young  men .  to  his  camp  by  various 
devices,  and  then  kill  and  eat  them. 

At  last  the  Daens  found  out  what  he  was  doing.  They 
were  very  angry,  and  determined  to  punish  him.  "  We 
will  kill  or  cripple  him,"  they  said,  "  so  that  he,  giant 
though  he  be,  shall  be  powerless  against  our  people."  A 
mob  of  them  went  and  surrounded  his  camp. 

He  was  lying  asleep,  face  downwards,  as  he  did  not 
wish  his  doowee  or  dream  spirit  to  leave  him,  as  it  might 
have  done  had  he  slept  on  his  back,  with  his  mouth 
exposed. 

In  his  sleep  even  he  seemed  to  hear  a  rustling  in  the 
leaves,  but  suspected  no  evil,  saying  drowsily  to  himself : 
"  It  is  but  the  Bullah  Bullah,  or  butterflies,  fluttering  round." 
Then  he  slept  on  while  his  enemies  closed  in  round  him. 

Raising  their  spears,  with  one  accord  they  threw  them 
at  him,  until  his  back  was  one  mass  of  them  sticking  up  all 
over  it.     Then  the  Daens  rushed  in,  and  broke  his  arms 


40  More  Australian  Tales 

and  legs,  with  their  boondees  and  woggarahs,  crippling  him 
indeed.  As  he  made  neither  sound  nor  movement,  they 
thought  they  had  killed  him,  and  went  back,  satisfied  with 
their  vengeance,  to  the  camp,  meaning  to  return  for  their 
weapons  later. 

As  soon  as  the  Daens  were  gone,  Piggiebillah  crawled 
away  on  all  fours  to  the  underground  home  of  his  friend, 
Murgah  Muggui  the  spider.  Down  he  went  in  through 
the  trap-door,  and  there  he  stayed  until  his  wounds  were 
healed. 

He  tried  to  draw  out  the  spears,  but  was  unable  to  do 
so ;  they  stayed  in  his  back  for  ever,  and  for  ever  he  went 
on  all  fours,  as  his  tribe  have  done  ever  since.  They,  too, 
as  he  did,  get  quickly  underground  if  in  danger  from 
enemies. 

When  the  Guineeboo  or  redbreasts,  of  whose  family 
Piggiebillah's  wife  had  been  one,  heard  what  had  happened 
to  him,  they  lifted  up  their  voices  and  sang  the  death  wail 
until  its  melancholy  sounds  echoed  through  the  bush,  as 
they  rose  and  fell  in  wave-like  cadences.  In  their  grief 
they  cut  their  heads  with  muggil  or  stone  knives,  and 
comeboos  or  tomahawks,  until  the  blood  ran  down  staining 
their  breasts  red,  and  the  breasts  of  the  Guineeboo  have 
been  red  ever  since. 


Gayardaree  the  Platypus 

A  YOUNG  duck  used  to  swim  away  by  herself  in  the  creek. 
Her  tribe  told  her  that  MuUoka,  the  water  devil,  would  catch 
her  some  day  if  she  were  so  venturesome.  But  she  did 
not  heed  them. 

One  day  after  having  swum  down  some  distance,  she 
landed  on  a  bank  where  she  saw  some  young  green  grass. 
She  was  feeding  about  when  suddenly  out  rushed  from  a 
hidden  place  Biggoon,  an  immense  water  rat,  and  seized  her. 

She  struggled  and  struggled,  but  all  in  vain.  "I  live 
alone,"  he  said  ;   "I  want  a  wife." 

"  Let  me  go,"  said  the  duck ;  "  I  am  not  for  you ;  my 
tribe  have  a  mate  for  me." 

"  You  stay  quietly  with  me,  and  I  will  not  hurt  you.  I 
am  lonely  here.  If  you  struggle  more,  or  try  to  escape,  I 
will  knock  you  on  the  head,  or  spear  you  with  this  little 
spear  I  always  carry." 

"  But  my  tribe  will  come  and  fight  you,  and  perhaps  kill 
me." 

"  Not  they.  They  will  think  MuUoka  has  got  you.  But 
even  if  they  do  come,  let  them.  I  am  ready."  And  again 
he  showed  his  spear. 


42  More  Australian  Tales 

The  duck  stayed.  She  was  frightened  to  go  while  the 
rat  watched  her.  She  pretended  that  she  liked  her  new 
life,  and  meant  to  stay  always  ;  while  all  the  time  she  was 
thinking  how  she  could  escape.  She  knew  her  tribe  came 
to  look  for  her,  for  she  heard  them,  but  Biggoon  kept  her 
imprisoned  in  his  hole  in  the  side  of  the  creek  all  day,  only 
letting  her  out  for  a  swim  at  night,  when  he  knew  her  tribe 
would  not  come  for  fear  of  MuUoka. 

She  hid  her  feehngs  so  well  that  at  last  Biggoon  thought 
she  really  was  content  with  him,  and  gradually  he  gave  up 
watching  her,  taking  his  long  day  sleep  as  of  old.  Then 
came  her  chance. 

One  day,  when  Biggoon  was  sound  asleep,  she  slunk  out 
of  the  burrow,  slid  into  the  creek,  and  swam  away  up  it,  as 
quickly  as  she  could,  towards  her  old  camp. 

Suddenly  she  heard  a  sound  behind  her ;  she  thought  it 
must  be  Biggoon,  or  perhaps  the  dreaded  Mulloka,  so,  stiff 
as  her  wings  were,  she  raised  herself  on  them,  and  flew  the 
rest  of  the  way,  alighting  at  length  very  tired  amongst  her 
tribe. 

They  all  gabbled  round  her  at  once,  hardly  giving  her 
time  to  answer  them.  When  they  heard  where  she  had 
been,  the  old  mother  ducks  warned  all  the  younger  ones 
only  to  swim  up  stream  in  the  future,  for  Biggoon  would 
surely  have  vowed  vengeance  against  them  all  now,  and 
they  must  not  risk  meeting  him. 

How  that  little  duck  enjoyed  her  Hberty  and  being  with 
her  tribe  again  !  How  she  splashed  as  she  pleased  in  the 
creek  in  the  daytime  and  flew  about  at  night  if  she  wished  ! 
She  felt  as  if  she  never  wanted  to  sleep  again. 

It  was  not  long   before  the  laying  season  came.     The 


Gayardaree  the  Platypus  43 

ducks  all  chose  their  nesting  places,  some  in  hollow  trees, 
and  some  in  mirrieh  bushes.  When  the  nests  were  all 
nicely  lined  with  down  feathers,  the  ducks  laid  their  eggs. 
Then  they  sat  patiently  on  them,  until  at  last  the  little  fluffy, 
downy  ducks  came  out.  Then  in  a  little  time  the  ducks  in 
the  trees  took  the  ducklings  on  their  backs  and  in  their 
bills,  and  flew  into  the  water  with  them,  one  at  a  time. 
Those  in  the  mirrieh-bushes  waddled  out  with  their  young 
ones  after  them. 

In  due  course  the  duck  who  had  been  imprisoned  by 
Biggoon  hatched  out  her  young,  too.  Her  friends  came 
■swimming  round  the  mirrieh-bush  she  was  in,  and  said  : 
"  Come  along.  Bring  out  your  young  ones,  too.  Teach 
them  to  love  the  water  as  we  do." 

Out  she  came,  only  two  children  after  her.  And  what 
were  they  ?  Such  a  quacking  gabble  her  friends  set  up, 
shrieking  :  "  What  are  those  ?  " 

"  My  children,"  she  said  proudly.  She  would  not  show 
that  she,  too,  was  puzzled  at  her  children  being  quite 
different  from  those  of  her  tribe.  Instead  of  down  feathers 
they  had  a  soft  fur.  Instead  of  two  feet  they  had  four.  Their 
bills  were  those  of  ducks,  and  their  feet  were  webbed,  and  on 
the  hind  ones  were  just  showing  the  points  of  a  spear,  like 
Biggoon  always  carried  to  be  in  readiness  for  his  enemies. 

"  Take  them  away,"  cried  the  ducks,  flapping  their  wings 
and  making  a  great  splash.  "  Take  them  away.  They  are 
more  like  Biggoon  than  us.  Look  at  their  hind  feet  ;  the  tip 
of  his  spear  is  sticking  from  them  already.  Take  them 
away,  or  we  shall  kill  them  before  they  grow  big  and  kill  us. 
They  do  not  belong  to  our  tribe.  Take  them  away.  They 
have  no  right  here." 


44  More  Australian  Tales 

And  such  a  row  they  made  that  the  poor  little  mother 
duck  went  off  with  her  two  little  despised  children,  of 
whom  she  had  been  so  proud,  despite  their  peculiarities. 
She  did  not  know  where  to  go.  If  she  went  down  the 
creek,  Biggoon  might  catch  her  again,  and  make  her 
live  in  the  burrow,  or  kill  her  children  because  they  had 
webbed  feet,  a  duck's  bill,  and  had  been  hatched  out  of  eggs. 
He  would  say  they  did  not  belong  to  his  tribe.  No  one 
would  own  them.  There  would  never  be  any  one  but  her- 
self to  care  for  them  ;  the  sooner  she  took  them  right  away 
the  better. 

So  thinking,  away  up  stream  she  went  until  she  reached 
the  mountains.  There  she  could  hide  from  all  who 
knew  her,  and  bring  up  her  children.  On,  on  she  went, 
until  the  creek  grew  narrow  and  scrubby  on  its  banks,  so 
changed  from  the  broad  streams  which  used  to  placidly  flow 
between  large  unbroken  plains,  that  she  scarcely  knew  it. 
She  lived  there  for  a  little  while,  then  pined  away  and  died, 
for  even  her  children  as  they  grew  saw  how  different  they 
were  from  her,  and  kept  away  by  themselves,  until  she  felt 
too  lonely  and  miserable  to  live,  too  unhappy  to  find  food. 
Thus  pining  she  soon  died  away  on  the  mountains,  far  from 
her  old  noorumbah,  or  hereditary  hunting-ground. 

The  children  lived  on  and  throve,  laid  eggs  and  hatched 
out  more  children  just  like  themselves,  until  at  last,  pair  by 
pair,  they  so  increased  that  all  the  mountain  creeks  had  before 
long  some  of  them.  And  there  they  still  live,  the  Gayardaree, 
or  platypus,  quite  a  tribe  apart — for  when  did  ever  a  rat 
lay  eggs  ?     Or  a  duck  have  four  feet  ? 


How  Mungghee,   or  Mussels,  were 
Brought  to   the  Creeks 

One  day  in  the  far  past  a  Mungghee  wurraywurraymul,  or 
sea-gull,  Was  flying  over  the  Western  plains  carrying  a 
mussel.  Wahn  the  crow  saw  her,  and  wondering  what 
she  carried,  pursued  her.  In  her  fear  at  being  overtaken 
she  dropped  the  mussel. 

Seeing  it  drop,  Wahn  stopped  his  pursuit  and  swooped 
down  to  see  what  this  strange  thing  was.  Standing  beside 
it,  with  his  head  on  one  side,  he  peered  at  it.  Then  he 
gave  it  a  peck.  He  rather  liked  the  taste  of  it ;  he  pecked 
again  and  again,  until  the  fish  in  one  side  of  the  shell  was 
finished.  He  never  noticed  that  there  was  a  fish  in  the 
other  side  too,  so  he  took  up  the  empty  shell,  as  he 
thought,  and  threw  it  into  the  creek.  There  this  Mungghee 
throve  and  multiplied,  all  that  followed  her  being  as  she 
was,  one  fish  enclosed  between  two  shells,  not  as  the  one 
Mungghee  wurraywurraymul  had  brought,  which  had  two 
fish,  one  on  each  side  shell. 

Not  knowing  that  he  had  thrown  a  Mungghee  mother 
into  the  creek,  Wahn  determined  to  pursue  Mungghee  wurray- 


46  More  Australian  Tales 

wurraymul  and  get  more,  or  find  out  whence  she  had 
brought  the  one  he  had  thought  so  good,  that  he  might  get 
some.  Away  he  flew  in  the  direction  she  had  gone.  He 
overtook  her  some  miles  up  the  creek  beside  a  big  water- 
hole.  Before  she  saw  him  coming  he  had  swooped  down 
upon  her,  crying,  "  Give  me  some  more  of  that  fish  in  two 
shells  you  brought." 

"  I  have  no  more.      Let  me  go." 

"  Tell  me,  then,  where  you  got  it,  that  I  may  get  more 
for  myself." 

"  They  do  not  belong  to  your  country.  They  live  in 
one  far  away  which  I  passed  in  my  flight  from  the  big  salt 
water  here.  Let  me  go."  And  she  struggled  to  free 
herself,  crying  piteously  the  strange,  sad  cry  of  her  tribe. 

But  Wahn,  the  crow,  held  her  tightly.  "  If  you  promise 
to  go  straight  back  to  that  country  and  bring  some  more 
I  will  release  you.  That  you  must  promise,  and  also  that 
when  I  have  finished  those  you  shall  bring  more,  that  I 
may  never  be  without  them  again.  If  you  do  not  promise 
I  will  kill  you  now." 

"  Let  me  go,  and  I  will  do  as  you  ask.  I  promise  my 
tribe  shall  help  me  to  bring  Mungghee  to  your  creeks." 

"  Go,  then,"  said  Wahn,  "  swiftly  back,  and  bring  to  me 
here  on  the  banks  of  the  creek  the  fish  that  hides  itself 
between  two  shells."  And  he  let  her  go,  turning  her  head 
towards  the  south. 

Away  she  flew.  Days  passed,  and  months,  and  yet 
Mungghee  wurraywurraymul  did  not  return,  and  Wahn  was 
angry  with  himself  for  not  having  killed  her  rather  than  let 
her  so  deceive  him. 

He  went  one  day  to  the  creek  for  a  drink,  and  stooping. 


Mungghee  in  the  Creeks  47 

he  saw  before  him  a  shell  such  as  he  had  thrown  into  the 
water.  Thinking  it  was  the  same  he  took  no  notice,  but 
going  on  along  the  creek  he  saw  another  and  yet  another. 
He  cracked  one  by  holding  it  in  his  beak  and  knocking  it 
against  the  root  of  a  tree  on  the  bank.  Then  he  ate  the 
fish,  and  looking  round  for  more  he  found  the  mud  along 
the  margin  of  the  creek  was  thick  with  them.  Then  not 
knowing  that  the  mussel  shell  he  had  thrown  away  held  a 
fish,  he  thought  Mungghee  wurraywurraymul  must  have 
returned  unseen  by  him,  disappearing  secretly  lest  he  should 
hurt  her. 

Later  he  found  that  was  not  so,  for  one  day  he  saw  a 
flock  of  her  tribe  flying  over  where  he  was.  They  alighted 
a  little  higher  up,  where  he  saw  some  of  them  stick  the 
Mungghee  they  were  carrying  in  the  mud  just  under  the 
water.  Having  done  so,  on  they  flew  a  little  farther  to  stick 
others,  and  so  on  up  the  creek.  Having  finished  their 
work  they  turned  and  flew  back  towards  the  sea-coast. 
Wahn  noticed  that  the  Mungghee  came  out  of  the  water, 
and  opening  their  shells,  stretched  out.  between  them,  and 
uttered  a  low,  piteous,  muffled,  raew-like  sound.  Making 
their  way  along  the  mud,  they  cried  as  they  went  for  the 
Mungghee  wurraywurraymul  to  take  them  back  to  their  own 
country.  But  their  cries  were  unheeded,  for  far  away  were 
the  sea-gulls. 

At  last  they  reached  the  Mungghee  which  had  been  born 
in  the  creek.  These  being  stronger  and  more  numerous 
than  the  newcomers,  soon  altered  their  habits  of  life, 
teaching  them  to  live  as  they  did,  only  one  fish  in  the  two 
joined-together  shells  ;  and  so  have  all  mussels  been  ever 
since.      For  though  from  time  to  time,  on  the  rare  visits  of 


48  More  Australian  Tales 

the    sea-gulls    to    the   Back   Creeks,  fresh    Mungghee  are 
brought,  yet  these  too  soon  do  as  the  others. 

The  Daens  cook  mussels  in  the  hot  ashes  of  their  fires, 
and  eat  them  with  relish,  saying,  "  If  it  had  not  been  for 
Wahn  we  should  not  have  had  this  good  food,  for  he  it  was 
who  caused  it  to  be  given  to  us  by  Mungghee  wurray- 
wurraymul,  the  mussel-bringer." 


Wurrunnah's  Trip  to  the   Sea 

When  the  two  Meamei*  were  translated  to  the  sky  from 
Wurrunnah's  camp,  failing  to  recover  them,  he  journeyed  on 
alone.  He  was  now  a  long  way  from  the  spot  he  had 
started  from,  which  was  near  Nerangledool.  He  had 
passed  Yaraanbah,  Narine,  and  had  reached  Nindeegoolee, 
where  the  little  sand-ridges  are,  to  where  the  Earmoonan 
have  gone  from  Noondoo. 

He  was  camping  by  some  water  when  he  saw  a  strange 
creature  coming  towards  him,  having  the  body  and  head  of 
a  dog,  feet  of  a  woman,  and  a  short  tail.  It  bounded  four 
or  five  feet  in  the  air  as  it  came  along,  making  a  whirring, 
whizzing  noise  with  its  lips. 

"  What  is  this  coming  to  water  ?  "  said  Wurrunnah  to 
himself.  When  the  creature  was  close,  he  said  :  "  It  must 
be  Earmoonan,  one  of  the  pups  of  the  dog  Byamee  left  at 
Noondoo  that  I  have  heard  of."  t 

He  called  out  to  it,  "  Where  is  your  old  master  ?  "  for 
he  thought  he  would  find  out  if  the  strange  creature  knew 
where  Byamee  was.      For  answer  the  Earmoonan  made  the 

*  See  "Australian  Legendary  Tales,"  p.  41,  "  Meamei  the  Seven  Sisters." 
t  Ibid.,  p.  104,  "  The  Borah  of  Byamee." 


50  More  Australian  Tales 

spluttering,  whizzing  noise  witii  his  lips  Wurrunnah  had 
already  heard. 

Wurrunnah  said  :  "  Has  he  gone  right  away  from  you?" 
Again  came  only  the  spluttering,  whizzing  noise,  a  sort  of 
pursing  of  the  lips  together,  and  blowing  out  a  sound  like 
"  Phur-r,  phur-r." 

"Is  it  true  that  he  has  gone  for  ever  ?  " 

"  Phur-r,  phur-r,"  came  again  the  answer. 

Wurrunnah  stood  up  and  motioned  Earmoonan  back, 
saying:  "You  go  away  now.  That  will  do.  I  want  you 
ihere  no  more.      You  tell  me  nothing  of  Byamee." 

At  the  sound  of  the  name  "Byamee,"  Earmoonan  jumped 
away,  saying  as  lie  went :    "  Phur-r,  phur-r." 

He  quickly  disappeared,  going  back  to  the  sand-ridges 
under  which  Wurrunnah  had  heard  he  and  the  rest  of 
the  strange  litter  lived,  in  huge  caves,  where-  they 
imprisoned  any  travellers  they  could  round  up  into 
them.  Nothing  frightened  them  but  mention  of  the  name 
of  Byamee. 

Wurrunnah  did  not  mean  to  risk  another  encounter,  so 
he  hurried  on  to  Dungerh.  On,  on  he  travelled  for  many 
days,  until  at  last  he  reached  Doogoonberh,  which  is  on  the 
sea.  Seeing  a  wide  expanse  of  water  before  him  and 
feeling  thirsty,  he  took  his  little  binguie  down  to  dip  some 
out  and  drink. 

"  Kuh  !  "  he  said  as  he  swallowed  a  mouthful  before  he 
realised  the  strange  taste.  "  Kuh  !  Budta !  Budta  !  Salt ! 
Salt ! "  said  he,  as  he  spat  out  what  he  could. 

He  thought  it  must  be  the  white  froth  that  was  salt,  so 
he  cleared  this  off  with  his  hand,  dipped  the  binguie  in 
again,  and  again  tasted.      "  Kuh  !   Kuh  !   Budta  !  Budta  1  I 


Wurrunnah's  Trip  to  the   Sea     51 

am  thirsty.    I  must  go  back  to  the  water-holes  I  passed  and 
get  a  drink  there." 

Before  going,  he  looked  as  far  as  his  eye  could  reach 
across  the  sea.  He  said  :  "  What  sort  of  flood  water  is 
this  that  has  a  tree  in  it  nowhere,  not  even  a  mirrieh-bush, 
and  is  salt,  salt  to  taste  ?  It  does  not  look  like  flood  water 
at  all.  It  looks  like  Goonagulla,  the  sky,  with  white 
clouds  on  it.  Yet  when  the  clouds  move  the  sky  is  still ; 
all  this  moves  and  is  water,  though  surely  man  never  tasted 
such  before." 

Wonderingly,  back  he  went  to  the  water-holes  and 
quenched  his  thirst.  Then  he  killed  two  opossums,  and 
skinned  them  to  make  water-bags,  orguUeemeah. 

That  night  as  he  camped  out  of  sight  of,  and  some 
distance  away  from,  the  sea  he  heard  its  booming  noise, 
for  the  wind  had  risen.  What  the  noise  was  he  did  not 
know. 

The  next  morning  he  went  to  see  the  strange  water 
again,  thinking  he  might  now  make  out  a  bank  on  the  far 
side.  Seeing  a  high  tree  a  few  hundred  yards  from  the 
beach,  he  climbed  up  it  and  looked  again  seawards, 
scanning  the  distant  horizon  for  trees  or  land.  He  saw 
only  water,  a  dark  troubled-looking  water  that  day. 

"  There  is  a  thunderstorm  in  it.  This  must  be  the 
camp  of  Dooloomai  the  Thunder,  and  the  roaring  winds," 
he  said  as  he  listened  to  the  angry  booming,  "  That  is 
what  I  heard  last  night."  Then,  as  he  saw  the  tide  rising 
and  the  waves  chasing  each  other  on  to  the  beach,  where 
they  dashed  with  an  angry  roar,  going  back  only  to  come 
rushing  in  again  higher  next  time,  he  said:  "There  must 
be  Wundah — devils — in  it,  and  they  are  trying  to  get  me. 


52  More  Australian  Tales 

I  will  go  up  that  high  mountain  ;  there  shall  I  see  better." 
But  in  vain  he  climbed  the  mountain  ;  he  saw  only  the 
strange  water,  as  far  as  he  could  see,  water,  only  water. 

Down  the  mountain  he  went  again,  back  to  the  water- 
holes,  where  were  hanging  the  opossum  skins  to  dry. 
These  he  quickly  made  into  water-bags.  He  waited  until 
he  saw  the  strange  water  still  as  when  he  first  saw  it,  then 
he  went  to  it  and  filled  the  bags  with  it.  He  then  picked 
up  a  few  shells  to  take  away  with  him.  He  meant  to  go 
straight  back  to  his  tribe  and  tell  them  what  he  had  seen, 
taking  with  him  the  bags  of  water  that  they  might  taste  it 
and  know  his  story  was  true. 

On  his  return  journey  he  met  a  very  old  Daen.  Wur- 
runnah  thought  he  might  know  something  of  this  strange 
water,  and  its  booming  voices.  The  old  wirreenun  listened 
to  all  Wurrunnah  told  him.  He  tasted  the  water,  spat  it 
out  again,  sat  silent  for  some  time,  then  he  said  :  "  Surely 
have  then  my  father's  fathers  spoken  truly  when  they  told 
their  children,  that  there  was  beyond  the  mountains  more 
water  than  the  eye  of  man  could  stretch  across,  water 
covering  a  bigger  plain  than  the  eye  of  man  has  ever  seen, 
water  which  is  full  of  dangers  for  man,  whom  it  pursues  to 
its  very  banks,  where  it  rages  when  it  cannot  catch  him  for 
the  many  monsters  which  live  in  it,  and  are  bigger,  they 
said,  and  deadlier  than  Kurreahs.      Saw  you  any  such  ?  " 

"  Nothing,"  said  Wurrunnah,  "  did  I  see  but  water,  budta 
water  everywhere.  But  the  voices  of  these  monsters  was 
the  noise  I  heard,  bidding  the  water  draw  me  to  them,  and 
howling  in  rage  when  I  got  free  away.  I  shall  go  swiftly 
to  my  tribe,  and  tell  them  what  I  have  seen  and  heard." 

Before  going  he   gave  the  old  wirreenun   some  of  the 


Wurrunnah's  Trip  to  the  Sea     53 

salt  water  that  his  tribe  might  taste  it.  He  also  gave  him 
a  shell,  one  of  those  he  had  picked  up  on  the  beach. 

These  shells  were  afterwards  the  cause  of  many  fights, 
one  tribe  trying  to  get  them  from  the  other.  The  oldest 
wirreenun  of  the  tribe  always  wore  one  of  them  at  the  great 
corroborees.  After  many  generations  had  passed  away, 
one  wirreenun,  in  whose  possession  it  was,  put  it  for  safety 
in  his  Minggah,  or  spirit  tree.  And  to  this  day  there  are 
fights  about  it,  for  he  died  leaving  it  there.  Some  tribes 
try  to  steal  it,  but  others  fight  to  protect  it. 

Every  now  and  then  on  his  road  home  Wurrunnah  had 
to  stay  and  make  fresh  bags  to  carry  the  salt  water  in,  as 
the  old  ones  started  to  leak,  but  at  length  he  reached 
Nerangledool  again,  with  enough  for  the  elders  of  his  tribe 
to  taste. 

None  of  them  knew  where  he  had  been,  nor  could  they 
imagine  what  this  water  was  which  stretched  farther  than 
all  their  hunting  grounds.  Any  stranger  that  came  to  the 
camp  was  brought  to  Wurrunnah  that  he  might  hear  from 
him  what  had  turned  him  back  on  his  journey.  But 
Wurrunnah  did  not  live  long  to  tell  his  story ;  what  he  had 
seen  became  a  tradition  in  his  tribe. 

He  had  broken  the  law  of  Byamee  by  leaving  his  own 
hunting  ground,  so  was  not  allowed  to  live  long  after  his 
return. 

But  yet  so  famous  was  he  from  his  far  journeyings  that 
when  he  died,  followed  by  a  terrific  crash,  a  huge  meteor 
shot  across  the  sky,  thereby  telling  the  tribes  for  miles 
round  that  a  great  spirit  had  passed  from  the  earth. 
From  generation  to  generation  was  told  the  story  of 
Wurrunnah's  journey  and  the  strange  water  he  had  seen, 


54-  More  Australian  Tales 

and  at   the   big   corroborees  were  seen  the  shells  he  had 

brought. 

At  length  the  Wundah   or  white  devils  came  to  live  in 

the  country,  and  the  truth  of  the  old  tradition  was  proved 

by  some  black  boys  who  went  down  from  Gundablouie  with 

cattle  to  Mulubinba. 

There   they   saw  the  widely  stretching  water,   with   the 

white  clouds  on  it.      There  they  heard   its   booming  roar. 

They  were  terrified,  but  one  boy,  more  venturesome  than 

the  others,  said  : 

"  Let  US-taste  it.  If  it  is  salt,  then  in  truth  this  is  lilce 
the  water  the  old  men  tell  us  Wurrunnah  saw."  They 
tasted  it.      It  was  salt. 

'  "  It  is  true,"  they  said,  "  that  which  they  told  us.  We 
will  tell  them  that  we  too  have  seen  it,  and  have  tasted  it. 
And  we  will  take  back  some  of  these  wa-ah  to  wear  at  the 
corroborees."  So  back  to  the  tribes  they  took  the  shells 
to  prove  their  story. 

One  of  those  boys,  the  first  who  tasted  the  salt  water,  is 
an  old  man  now.  He  it  is  who  told  me  the  story  of 
Wurrunnah's  trip  to  the  sea. 


Walloobahl  the   Bark  Lizard 

Every  day,  while  the  little  camp  children  were  playing  and 
their  parents  were  away  hunting,  a  strange  little  boy  used 
to  come  to  the  camp.  He  was  only  a  little  boy  about  six 
or  seven  years  old. 

Every  afternoon,  after  having  played  for  some  time  with 
the  other  children,  he  would  run  away  from  them,  go  round 
the  different  dardurrs,  and  steal  food  out  of  them  all,  taking, 
anything  eatable  he  could  find. 

When  the  children  saw  him  thus  helping  himself,  they 
called  out :   "  Don't  touch  our  mother's  things  !  " 

He  did  not  heed  them,  but  took  what  he  wanted.  The 
children  used  to  try  and  get  what  he  took  back.  But  when- 
they  came  near  to  him  he  shot  up  suddenly  taller  and  taller, 
far  out  of  their  reach.  Having  thus  startled  them  into 
leaving  him  alone,  he  would  escape  to  his  own  camp,  the 
whereabouts  of  which  no  one  knew.  At  last  the  parents 
began  to  notice  how  much  of  their  food  was  taken  during 
their  absence,  and  they  said  angrily  to  their  children,  "  You 
eat  all  our  food." 

"No,"  they  said,  "we  do  not.  It  is  a  little  boy  who 
comes  while  you  are  away.  He  comes  along  that  track  in 
the  scrub." 


56  More  Australian  Tales 

The  parents  said  :  "  To-morrow  we  will  wait  for  him, 
and  see  if  you  are  telhng  the  truth,  for  it  would  be  a  strange 
little  boy  who  could  steal  all  the  food  we  miss  every  day." 
Accordingly  the  next  day  the  parents  hid  themselves  in 
their  humpies,  instead  of  going  out  as  usual. 

The  children  played  about,  watching  for  the  little  boy  ; 
when  they  saw  him  coming  one  of  them  ran  and  told  the 
parents. 

Walloobahl,  after  playing  for  a  little  while  as  usual,  went 
to  the  first  humpie  and  sat  down,  looking  round  for  what 
he  might  take.  After  he  had  rested  a  few  minutes  he 
helped  himself  to  some  food,  and  was  then  moving  on  to 
the  next  humpie.  But  before  he  had  time  to  go  many 
steps,  out  the  men  and  women  rushed,  yelling  at  him  and 
brandishing  boomerangs  and  boondees,  which  they  soon 
threw  at  him.  But  to  their  surprise,  even  as  their  children 
had  said,  up  he  shot,  growing  taller  and  taller,  while  their 
weapons  fell  harmlessly  around  him.  Seizing  more  they 
threw  another  shower  at  him,  aiming  higher  up,  but  he 
grew  taller  and  taller,  still  unhurt.  Then  dropping  their 
remaining  boomerangs  and  boondees,  they  caught  hold  of 
their  spears  and  threw  these  with  deadly  force  at  him.  As 
the  spears  pierced  him,  Walloobahl  fell  dead. 

As  they  saw  him  lying  there,  the  Daens  said  :  "He  was 
our  enemy,  stealing  our  food.  No  need  to  bury  him.  We 
will  only  cover  him  with  bark  and  change  our  camp." 

This  they  did,  and  long  afterwards  they  saw  creep  from 
under  the  bark  a  little  lizard.  And  they  called  it  Walloo- 
bahl, because  they  said  it  must  be  the  spirit  of  the  boy  they 
had  killed.  And  ever  since  then  the  little  bark  hzard  has 
been  called  Walloobahl. 


Goolayyahlee  the   Pelican 

At  one  time  the  Daens  had  no  fishing  nets,  nor  then  had 
they  the  stone  fisheries  which  Byamee  afterwards  made  for 
them,  the  best  model  of  which  is  still  to  be  seen  at 
Brewarrina. 

In  order  to  catch  fish  in  those  days  they  used  to  make 
a  wall  of  poligonura  and  grass  mixed  together,  across  the 
creek ;  then  go  above  it  and  drive  the  fish  down  to  it, 
catching  them  with  their  hands  against  the  break  or  wall. 
Or  they  would  put  these  breaks  across  a  mubboon  or  small 
tributary  of  the  main  creek,  as  a  flood  was  going  down,  and, 
as  the  water  ran  out  of  the  mubboon,  fish  would  be  caught 
in  numbers  in  the  break. 

Goolayyahlee  the  pelican,  a  great  wirreenun,  was  the 
first  seen  with  a  net.  But  where  he  had  obtained  it  from, 
or  where  he  kept  it,  no  one  knew  for  a  long  while.  When 
he  wanted  to  fish  he  used  to  tell  his  children  to  go  and  get 
sticks  for  the  ends  of  the  net,  that  they  might  go  fishing. 

"  But  where  is  the  net  ?  " 

"  It  will  be  here  when  you  come  back.  You  do  what  I 
tell  you.      Get  the  sticks." 

Frightened  to  ask  more  the  children  went  to  break  the' 


58  More  Australian  Tales 

sticks  which  Goolayyahlee  said  must  be  of  Eurah,  a  droop- 
ing shrub  growing  on  the  banks  of  the  creeks,  or  near 
swamp  oak-scrub.  This  shrub  bore  masses  of  large  cream 
bell-shaped  flowers,  spotted  with  brown,  beautiful  to  look 
at,  but  sickening  to  smell :  where  no  dheal  grew  this  shrub 
was  used  in  place  of  that  sacred  tree. 

When  the  children  brought  back  the  eurah  sticks,  there 
on  the  ground  in  front  of  their  father  was  the  big  fishing 
net,  ten  or  twelve  feet  long,- and  four  or  five  feet  wide. 
Beside  it  was  a  small  smoke  fire  of  budta  twigs,  on  to 
which  Goolayyahlee  now  threw  some  of  the  eurah  leaves, 
and  when  the  smoke  was  thick  he  held  the  net  in  it.  Then, 
taking  the  net  with  them,  down  they  all  went  into  the 
water,  where  two  rnen  with  the  net — through  the  ends  of 
which  were  the  eurah  sticks — -went  down  stream  to  a 
shallow  place,  where  they  stationed  themselves  one  at  each 
end  of  the  net  stretched  across  the  creek  between  them. 
The  others  went  up  stream  and  splashed  about  to  frighten 
the  fish  down  to  the  net,  in  which  some  were  soon  caught. 

When  they  had  enough  they  would  come  out,  make  fires 
and  cook  the  fish.  Every  fishing-time  the  tribe  puzzled 
over  the  question  as  to  how  and  where  Goolayyahlee  had 
obtained  this  valuable  net,  and  as  to  where  he  kept  it,  for 
after  each  fishing-time  he  took  it  away  and  no  one  saw  it 
again  until  they  went  fishing  ;  his  wife  and  children  said 
he  never  took  it  to  his  humpie. 

One  day  the  children  thought  that  when  they  were  sent 
for  the  eurah  sticks,  some  of  them  would  hide  and  watch 
where  their  father  did  get  this  net  from.  They  saw  him, 
when  he  thought  they  were  safely  out  of  sight,  begin  to 
twist  his  neck  about  and  wriggle  as  if  in  great  pain.     They 


Gbolayyahlee   the   Pelican         59 

thought  he  must  be  very  ill  and  were  just  coming  from 
their  hiding  place,  when  all  of  a  sudden  he  gave  a  violent 
Wriggle,  contorting  himself  until  his  neck  seemed  to  stretch 
to  an  immense  length  ;  the  children  were  too  frightened  at 
his  appearance  to  move ;  they  stayed  where  they  were, 
speechless,  huddled  together,  their  eyes  fixed  on  their 
father,  who  gave  another  convulsive  movement  and  then,  to 
their  amazement,  out  through  his  mouth  he  brought  forth 
the  fishing  net. 

So  that  was  where  he  kept  it,  inside  himself.  The  chil- 
dren watched  him  drawing  it  out,  until  it  all  lay  in  a  heap 
in  front  of  him,  then  down  he  sat  beside  it,  apparently  none 
the  worse,  to  await  their  return. 

The  children  who  had  been  hiding  ran  to  meet  the  others, 
whom  they  told  what  they  had  seen.  They  were  so  excited 
at  their  discovery  that  they  talked  much  about  it,  and  soon 
the  secret  hiding-place  of  the  net  was  a  secret  no  longer, 
but  as  yet  no  one  knew  how  it  was  made.  At  last  Goolay- 
yahlee  grew  tired  of  having  to  produce  his  net  so  often,  for 
the  fame  of  this  new  method  of  fishing  had  spread  through- 
out the  country ;  even  strange  tribes  came  to  see  the 
wonderful  net.  He  told  the  people  to  do  as  he  had  done, 
and  make  nets  for  themselves.  Then  he  told  them  how  to 
do  it.  They  were  to  strip  off  mooroomin,  or  Noongah  bark, 
take  off  the  hard  outside  part,  then  chew  the  softer  part,  and 
work  it  into  twine,  with  which  they  could  make  the  nets 
though  he  only,  he  said,  swallowed  the  fibre,  and  it  worked 
itself  up  into  a  net  inside  him  ;  but  that  was  because  he  was 
a  great  wirreenun  ;  others  could  not  do  so. 

After  that  all  the  tribes  made   fishing-nets,  but   only  the 
tribe  of  Goolayyahlee  could  work  the  fibre  inside  them  into 


6o  More  Australian  Tales 

nets,  which  the  pelicans  do  to  this  day,  the  Daens  say.  And 
the  Daens  tell  you  that  if  you  watch  the  Goolayyahlee  or 
pelicans  fishing,  you  will  see  that  they  do  not  dip  their  beaks 
straight  down,  as  do  other  fish-catching  birds ;  the  pelicans 
put  their  heads  sideways,  and  then  dip  their  long  pouched 
bills,  as  if  they  were  going  to  draw  a  net.  Into  these 
pouches  go  the  fish  they  catch,  and  thence  down  into  their 
nets,  which  they  still  carry  inside  them,  though  they  never 
bring  them  out  now  as  in  the  days  of  Goolayyahlee,  the 
great  fishing  wirreenun,  who  gave  all  his  tribe  the  deep 
pouches  which  hang  on  to  their  long  yellow  bills,  to  use 
instead  of  the  net  which  each  carries  inside  him,  though 
these  are  very  miniature  editions  of  the  original  Gpolayyah^ 
lee's  net,  but  yet  big  enough  to  let  the  tribe  still  bear  his 
name,  which  means  one  having  a  net. 


Mungoongarlee  the  Iguana 
and  Ouyouboolooey  the   Black  Snake 

When  the  animals  were  first  on  the  earth  they  were  very 
much  bigger  than  they  are  now.  In  those  days  the  bite  of 
a  snake  was  not  poisonous,  but  that  of  an  iguana  was. 
Mungoongarlee,  the  largest  kind  of  iguana,  which  even  now 
in  its  comparatively  dwarfed  condition  measures  five  feet  or 
so  from  tongue  to  tail,  was,  by  reason  of  his  poisonous  bite, 
quite  a  terror  in  the  land.  His  favourite  food  was  the  flesh 
of  black  fellows,  whom  he  used  to  kill  in  numbers.  Such 
havoc  had  he  wrought  amongst  them  that  at  last  all  the 
other  tribes  held  a  meeting  to  discuss  how  best  to  check 
this  wholesale  slaughter.  Many  things  were  suggested, 
but  nothing  that  seemed  likely  to  be  effective.  The  meeting 
was  breaking  up  ;  the  tribes  could  think  of  no  plan  to  save 
their  relations,  the  Daens.  Just  as  they  were  dispersing 
came  Ouyouboolooey  to  the  watering-place.  He  asked 
what  the  meeting  was  about ;  Dinewan  the  emu  told  him,  that 
Mungoongarlee  was  so  merciless  towards  the  Daens  or 
black  fellows,  living  almost  entirely  on  their  flesh,  that  they 
feared  the  race  would  soon  be  exterminated  if  something 
were  not  done  to  stop  it. 


62  More  Australian  Tales 

"And,"  said  Bohrah  the  kangaroo,  "though  some  of  us 
are  as  big  and  bigger,  as  strong  and  stronger  than  Mun- 
goongarlee,  if  we  went  to  fight  him  he  would  kill  us  with 
the  poison  he  carries  in  a  hidden  bag,  and  we  too  should 
die,  even  as  our  relations  the  Daens  do.  Most  of  us  have 
relations  amongst  the  Daens,  and  we  do  not  wish  to  see 
them  all  killed,  yet  we  know  not  how  to  stop  the  slaughter." 

"  I,  too,  have  relations  amongst  them,  the  hippi  and 
comeboo.  My  relations  must  be  saved,"  said  Ouyouboo- 
looey. 

"  But  how  ?  "  said  the  others.  "  We  are  nearly  all  their 
relations." 

"  Mungoongarlee  himself  is  their  and  my  relation,"  said 
Moodai  the  opossum. 

"  But  that  does  not  stop  him  from  slaying  them,  whether 
they  are  our  relations  the  Murrees  and  Gubbees,  or  the 
others,  he  slays  all  alike." 

"  I  tell  you  that  I  shall  save  the  Daens  from  Mungoon- 
garlee," said  Ouyouboolooey. 

"  But  how  ?  "  said  the  others  in  chorus. 

"  That  I  tell  to  none.  But  Yhi  the  sun  shall  not  go  to 
her  rest  to-morrow  before  I  shall  have  got  that  poison  bag 
from  Mungoongarlee." 

"Yhi  the  sun  shall  not  have  hidden  behind  that  clump 
of  Yaraan  trees  before  you  lie  dead  from  the  poison 
Mungoongarlee  carries,  if  you  fight  against  him." 

"  Did  I  talk  of  fighting  ?  Is  there  no  way  to  gain  your 
end  but  by  fighting  ?  Let  those  who  fight  die.  I  shall 
not  fight  him,  and  I  shall  live.  No  Mungoongarlee  shall 
kill  me." 

So  saying,  away  glided  Ouyouboolooey  through  the  trees 


Mungoongarlee  the  Iguana        63 

surrounding  the  water-hole  where  the  tribes  had  met. 
When  he  was  gone,  the  others  talked  of  him  and  his  boast- 
ing for  awhile,  then  they  all  dispersed,  having  agreed  to 
meet  again  at  the  same  place,  when  Yhi  the  sun  was  sinking 
to  rest  the  next  evening. 

Ouyouboolooey  went  his  way  alone,  pondering  over  his 
plans.  Cunning  he  knew  must  be  his  guide  to  victory; 
not  otherwise  could  he  hope  to  gain  it,  for  Mungoongarlee 
was  bigger  than  he  was,  stronger,  quicker  of  hearing  and 
quicker  to  move,  and  above  all  the  hidden  bag  of  poison 
was  his.  The  only  advantage  that  Ouyouboolooey  thought 
he  had  was  that  Mungoongarlee  had  been  invincible  so 
long  that  he  might  have  grown  careless  and  unsuspicious. 
Ouyouboolooey  decided  he  would  wait  until  Mungoon- 
garlee was  gorged  with  his  favourite  food.  He  would  then 
follow  him  until  he  saw  him  go  to  sleep  after  his  feast.  That 
would  be  the  next  day. 

Having  thus  decided,  Ouyouboolooey  went  near  Mun- 
goongarlee's  camp,  and  lay  down  to  sleep  there.  The 
next  morning  he  watched  Mungoongarlee  sally  out.  He 
followed  him  at  a  distance,  saw  him  surprise  three  Daens 
one  after  the  other,  and  kill  them  all,  then  sit  down  and 
eat  his  favourite  parts,  taking  some  of  the  flesh  afterwards 
back  to  his  camp  with  him.  Ouyouboolooey  followed  him, 
saw  him  sit  down  and  eat  more,  then  roll  over  and  go  to 
sleep. 

"  Now  is  my  chance,"  thought  Ouyouboolooey,  as  he 
crept  into  the  camp. 

He  was  just  going  to  raise  his  boondee  to  crack  the 
skull  of  Mungoongarlee,  when  he  thought,  "  But  first  I 
might  as  well  find  out  where  he  keeps  and   how  he  uses 


64  More  Australian  Tales 

the  poison.      If  I  had  it  I  could  soon  make  myself  feared 
of  all  the  tribes  as  he  is." 

Thus  thinking  he  sat  down  to  wait  until  Mungoongarlee 
awoke.  He  did  not  have  to  wait  long.  Mungoongarlee 
slept  but  restlessly.  Feeling  something  was  near  he  awoke, 
sat  up  and  looked  round.  At  a  little  distance  away  he 
saw  Ouyouboolooey.  As  he  was  making  a  rush  at  him, 
Ouyouboolooey  called  out : 

"  Take  care  !  If  you  kill  me  you  will  hear  nothing  of 
the  plot  the  tribes  have  planned  against  you,  of  which  I 
have  come  to  warn  you." 

"  What  plot  ?  What  can  the  tribes  do  against  me  ? 
Have  I  killed  numbers  of  the  biggest  tribe  to  be  frightened 
now  of  the  others  ?  " 

"  If  you  knew  their  plot  you  would  have  no  need  to  fear 
them  ;  knowing  it  not  your  life  is  in  danger." 
"  Then  tell  it  to  me." 

"  So  I  meant  to  do.  But  you  were  going  to  kill  me, 
though  I  had  not  harmed  you.  Why,  then,  should  I  save 
your  life  ?  " 

"  If  you  do  not  tell  me  I  shall  surely  kill  you." 
"  Then  you  will  be  killed  yourself,  for  no  one  else  will 
warn  you." 

"  Tell  me  the  plot,  Ouyouboolooey,  and  your  life  is 
spared,  and  the  lives  of  your  tribe  for  ever." 

"  How  do  I  know  that  you  will  keep  your  word  ?  You 
will  promise  much,  but  how  do  I  know  that  you  will  fulfil 
your  promise  ?  " 

"  Ask  of  me  what  pleases  you,  and  I  will  give  it  to  you, 
to  show  I  mean  what  I  say." 

"  Then  while  I  tell  you  the  plot  that  threatens  you,  give 


Mungoongarlee  the   Iguana        65 

me  your  hidden  poison  bag  to  hold.  Then  only  shall  I 
feel  safe.  Then  only  shall  I  tell  you  what  was  planned  at 
the  water-hole  where  the  tribes  meet  to  drink ;  where  all 
said  the  Daens  should  be  saved  and  your  end  assured. 
And  surely  it  will  be  so  if  you  do  not  know  their  plans." 

Mungoongarlee  asked  Ouyouboolooey  to  name  some 
other  boon,  and  surely  he  would  grant  it  ;  but  his  hidden 
poison  bag  would  he  give  to  none. 

"  That  is  the  way.  You  ask  me  to  name  what  I  want. 
I  do  so.  You  cannot  grant  it.  So  be  it.  Keep  your 
poison  bag.  I  will  keep  my  plot."  And  he  moved  as  if 
to  go. 

"  Stay  ! "  cried  Mungoongarlee,  who  was  determined  to 
hear  the  plot  at  all  risks. 

"  Then  let  me  hold  the  poison  bag." 

Mungoongarlee  tried  to  induce  Ouyouboolooey  to  make 
other  terms,  but  in  vain,  so  he  gave  in.  Reaching  into  his 
mouth  he  drew  the  hidden  poison  bag  out ;  then  he  tried  to 
frighten  Ouyouboolooey  from  taking  it  by  saying  : 

"  The  touch  of  it  will  poison  one  not  used  to  handle  it. 
I  will  put  it  beside  me  while  you  tell  the  plot  against  me." 

"You  will  not  do  what  I  ask  ;  I  will  go."  And  he 
turned  away. 

"  Not  so  ;  not  so  !  "  cried  Mungoongarlee.  "  Here, 
take  it." 

Assuming  as  indifferent  an  air  as  he  could,  Ouyou- 
boolooey took  the  bag,  and  went  back  with  it  to  his  old 
place  on  the  edge  of  the  camp. 

"  Now  quickly  tell  me  the  plot,"  said  Mungoongarlee. 

"It  was  this,"  said  Ouyouboolooey,  putting  the  poison 
bag  into  his  own  mouth.     Then  going  on  :   "  It  was  this. 

E 


66  More  Australian  Tales 

One  of  the  tribes  was  to  get  this  bag  from  you,  and  so 
take  away  your  power  to  harm  the  Daens  in  the  future.  I 
vowed  to  do  so  before  Yhi  the  sun  went  to  her  rest 
to-night.  Not  by  strength  could  I  do  it.  Nor  by  strength 
did  I  try  to  do  it.  Cunning  I  brought  with  me,  and 
cunning  has  done  it.      Back  I  go  now  to  tell  the  tribes." 

And  before  Mungoongarlee  had  time  to  realise  how  he 
had  been  tricked,  Ouyouboolooey  was  gone. 

After  him  went  Mungoongarlee,  but  his  meal  had  been 
heavy  ;  he  only  caught  Ouyouboolooey  up  in  time  to  hear 
him  tell  the  tribes  that  as  he  had  said  so  had  he  done. 

"  Give  us  then  the  poison  bag  that  we  may  destroy  it," 
they  said. 

"  Not  so,"  said  Ouyouboolooey.  "  None  of  you  could 
get  it.      It  is  mine  alone.      I  shall  keep  it." 

"  Then  you  shall  never  live  in  our  camp." 

"  I  shall  come  as  I  please  to  your  camps." 

"  Then  we  shall  slay  you.  You  are  not  big  as  is 
Mungoongarlee." 

"But  I  have  the  poison  bag.  Whosoever  interferes  with 
me  surely  shall  he  die." 

And  away  went  Ouyouboolooey  with  the  poison  bag, 
leaving  Mungoongarlee  to  tell  the  tribes  how  he  had  been 
tricked. 

Ever  since  then  the  snakes  have  been  poisonous,  and 
not  the  iguanas,  and  there  has  been  a  feud  between  the 
snakes  and  the  iguanas,  who  never  meet  without  fighting. 
But  though  the  snakes  have  the  poison  bag,  they  are 
powerless  to  injure  the  iguanas  with  it.  For  Mungoongar- 
lee was  a  great  wirreenun,  and  he  knew  of  a  plant  which  if 
eaten  after  snakebite  made  the  poison   powerless  "to  kill  or 


Mungoongarlee   the  Iguana        67 

injure.  Directly  an  iguana  is  bitten  by  a  snake  he  rushes 
to  this  plant,  and  eating  it,  is  saved  from  any  evil  con- 
sequences of  the  bite.  This  antidote  has  ever  since  been 
the  secret  of  the  iguana  tribe,  left  in  their  possession  by 
the  Mungoongarlee  who  lost  his  poison  bag  by  the  cunning 
of  Ouyouboolooey  the  black  snake. 


Wayambeh  the  Turtle  and  Woggoon 
the  Turkey 

Wayambeh  the  turtle  was  the  wife  of  Gougourgahgah,  the 
laughing  jackass.  They  had  a  quarrel  when  the  time  came 
for  Wayambeh  to  lay  her  eggs.  She  was  going  as  her 
tribe  did  to  the  sand  beside  the  creek,  there  to  make  a  hole 
and  deposit  them  ;  but  Gougourgahgah  said  that  was  a 
mad  thing  to  do,  a  flood  might  come  and  wash  them  away. 
She  should  lay  the  eggs  in  a  hollow  tree. 

Wayambeh  said  :  "  How  shall  I  get  into  a  hollow  tree  ? 
And  even  if  I  did  get  there  how  should  I  get  sand  up  to 
cover  the  eggs  ?  And  how  would  the  sun  shine  on  the 
sand  to  heat  it  and  hatch  them  out  ?  " 

"  How  was  I  born,  and  my  mother  before  me  ?  "  asked 
Gougourgahgah,  answering  her  question  with  another,  going 
on,  "  My  wife  can  do  surely  as  our  mothers  did  ?  " 

"  I  am  a  Wayambeh,  and  it  is  right  only  for  me  to  do 
as  the  Wayambehs  do.  Does  a  child  not  take  its  name 
from  its  mother  ?  My  children  will  be  Wayambeh  even  as 
I  am.      I  shall  go  to  my  own  tribe." 

Straight  went  Wayambeh   to   the  creek  where  her  tribe 


Wayambeh  the  Turtle  69 

lived.  Into  the  water  she  went  after  them.  Gougourgah- 
gah  followed  her  to  the  edge.  Then  he  turned  back  and 
sent  his  servant  Wonga  the  pigeon,  and  Dumerh  the  wife 
of  Wonga,  after  Wayambeh. 

Wonga  sent  Dumerh  on  to  tell  Wayambeh  to  come  back. 

But  Wayambeh  said  :  "  No,  I  will  not  go  back.  Let 
him  come  himself  if  he  wants  me." 

Wonga  and  Dumerh  went  back  and  told  this  to  Gou- 
gourgahgah,  who  went  as  his  wife  had  asked  for  him. 
But  on  the  bank  of  the  creek  he  saw  the  mother  of 
Wayambeh,  so  he  turned  back,  for  the  law  of  the  tribes 
did  not  let  him  speak  to  his  mother-in-law.  He  sent 
Wonga  to  consult  her. 

"Tell  him,"  said  Wayambeh  the  mother,  "my  daughter 
will  not  go  back.  He  would  have  her  break  the  laws  of 
her  tribe.      She  shall  not  leave  her  people." 

Wonga  went  back  to  tell  Gougourgahgah.  Just  as  he 
was  beginning  to  do  so,  out  from  the  grass  crept  behind 
him  Ouyouboolooey  the  black  snake,  an  old  lover  of 
Wayambeh,  who  was  so  enraged  at  this  messenger  wanting 
to  bring  his  old  love  back  to  the  husband  she  had  left  that 
he  meant  to  kill  him.  He  was  in  the  act  of  making  a 
spring  on  to  Wonga  to  throttle  him,  when  Gougourgahgah 
saw  him. 

Gougourgahgah  made  one  dart  and  was  on  the  back  of 
Ouyouboolooey.  Clutching  hold  of  him,  he  flew  high  in 
the  air,  up,  up,  as  far  as  his  flight  let  him  go,  then  he 
loosened  his  hold  of  Ouyouboolooey  and  let  him  drop 
swiftly,  thud  to  the  earth,  his  back  broken.  Down  after 
him  flew  Gougourgahgah.  There  in  his  camp  he  saw  his 
enemy  lying  dead. 


70  More  Australian  Tales 

"  Twice  have  you  tried  to  injure  me,  and  twice  have  you 
failed,"  he  said ;  "  once  when  you  wanted  to  marry 
Wayambeh,  who  was  promised  to  me,  and  now  when  you 
wanted  to  kill  my  faithful  servant,  sneaking  as  you  did  like 
a  coward  behind  him.  But  instead  of  him,  you  yourself  lie 
dead,  powerless  for  ever  to  harm  me.  So  shall  I  kill  ever 
your  treacherous  tribe,  against  whom  my  people  shall  have 
a  dullaymullaylunnah,  or  vengeful  hatred,  for  ever.  Ah  ! 
But  it  is  good  to  see  you  my  enemy  lying  there." 

And  Gougourgahgah  laughed  long  and  loud  peals  of 
laughter,  until  the  whole  creek-side  echoed  with  his  startling 
"  Gou — gour — gah — gah.      Gou — gour — gah — gah." 

Startling  indeed  was  the  sound  to  Wayambeh,  for  her 
liusband  had  always  looked  too  solemn  to  laugh,  except 
when  he  had  to  herald  the  sunrise.  She  hurried  out  of  the 
water,  and  went  away  along  the  opposite  bank  as  fast  as 
she  could.  She  thought,  as  peal  after  peal  of  his  strange 
loud  laughter  reached  her,  that  her  husband  had  gone  mad, 
and  if  he  caught  her  would  kill  her.  So  near  the  laughter 
sounded  that  she  fancied  he  was  pursuing  her.  She  did 
not  dare  to  look  round  but  sped  swiftly  on.  But  instead 
of  following  her,  Gougourgahgah  was  eating  his  enemy,  and 
vowing  again  that  so  long  as  his  tribe  lived  so  long  should 
they  wage  war  against  the  tribe  of  Ouyouboolooey,  killing 
and  eating  them. 

While  this  feast  off  her  old  lover  was  going  on,  Wayambeh 
was  putting  an  immense  distance  between  herself  and  her 
old  camp.  At  length  she  was  too  tired  to  go  farther. 
Where  she  rested  was  a  nice  sandy  place  beside  the  creek. 
Here  she  decided  to  camp.  She  made  a  hole  and  laid  her 
eggs  in  it  in  due  course.      When  the  last  was  laid,  and  she 


Wayambeh  the   Turtk  71 

was  carefully  covering  them  up  ready  for  the  hatching,  she 
heard  a  sound  on  the  bank  above  her.  Looking  up  she 
saw  there  a  dark-feathered  bird,  with  a  red  head  and  neck, 
peering  down  at  her,  who,  on  seeing  her  look  up,  said  : 
"  Why  do  you  cover  your  eggs  up  ?  " 

"That  the  sand  and  sun  may  hatch  them." 

"  But  won't  you  sit  on  them  yourself?" 

"  No  indeed  !  Why  should  I  do  that  ?  They  will  be 
warm  where  they  are,  and  come  out  even  as  I  came  out,  in 
the  right  time.  If  I  sat  on  them  I  might  break  them. 
And  who  would  get  me  food  ?      I  should  die  and  they  too." 

The  red-headed  bird,  which  was  Woggoon  the  brush 
turkey,  went  back  to  where  her  mate  was  feeding  and  told 
him  what  she  had  seen.  She  said  she  would  like  to  try 
that  plan,  it  seemed  much  easier  than  having  to  sit  on  the 
eggs  week  after  week. 

Her  mate  told  her  not  to  be  in  a  hurry  to  change  her 
ways  ;  each  tribe  had  its  own  custom.  Then  the 
Wayambeh  might  be  only  fooling  her.  They  would  wait 
and  see  if  the  eggs  came  out  all  right.  But  even  so  he 
would  not  have  her  make  a  nest  near  the  creek  where  a 
sudden  rise  might  wash  it  away.  They  must  stick  to  their 
scrub. 

At  length  time  proved  that  what  Wayambeh  had  said 
was  true.  The  little  Wayambeh  all  came  out,  and  were 
strong  and  well.  Then  the  Woggoons  decided  they  would 
try  and  hatch  their  eggs  without  sitting  on  them.  They 
could  not  dig  a  hole  to  lay  them  in,  but  they  scratched  up  a 
heap  of  mixed  debris,  earth,  sand,  leaves  and  sticks.  Then 
the  mother  Woggoon  every  second  day  laid  an  egg  until  in 
the  mound  were  fifteen,  all  apart  from  each  other,  with  the 


72  More  Australian  Tales 

thin  end  downwards.  Over  these  they  put  some  more 
decayed  leaves  and  rubbish,  and  outside  all  a  heaped-up 
covering  of  more  leaves  and  twigs.  When  all  this  was 
done  the  parents  waited  anxiously  for  the  result. 

As  time  went  on  the  mother  bird  grew  restless.  What 
if  she  had  killed  all  her  young  just  to  save  herself  ?  She 
fussed  round  the  big  mound  which  stood  some  feet  high. 
She  put  her  head  in  to  feel  if  it  were  warm  ;  drew  it  out 
quickly,  delighted  to  find  the  nest  was  absolutely  hot. 
Then,  she  began  to  fear  it  would  be  too  hot.  Full  of 
anxiety  she  scratched  away  the  earth  and  leaves,  thinking 
the  covering  was  too  much.  She  stopped  suddenly  and 
listened.  Was  that  a  baby-bird  note  ?  She  listened 
again.  It  was.  She  called  to  her  mate.  He  came,  and 
when  she  told  him  what  she  had  heard,  he  scratched  away 
until  to  their  joy  out  came  the  finest  chicks  they  had  ever 
seen,  quite  independent  and  strong,  with  feet  and  wings 
more  advanced  than  any  seen  on  their  chicks  before. 

Proud  of  the  success  of  her  plan,  and  anxious  to  spread 
the  good  news,  the  mother  Woggoon  ran  away  from  her- 
family  to  tell  all  her  tribe  about  them. 

The  next  season  the  other  Woggoons  added  to  the  size  of 
the  mound,  and  many  of  the  mothers  laid  their  eggs  in  one 
nest,  until  at  last  the  whole  tribe  adopted  the  same  plan, 
thus  earning  for  themselves  the  name  of  Mound  Builders. 


where  the   Frost  Comes   From 

The  Meamei,  or  Pleiades,  once  lived  on  this  earth.*  They 
were  seven  sisters  remarkable  for  their  beauty.  They  had 
long  hair  to  their  waists,  and  their  bodies  sparkled  with 
icicles.  Their  father  and  mother  lived  among  the  rocks 
away  on  some  distant  mountain,  staying  there  always,  never 
wandering  about  as  their  daughters  did.  When  the  sisters 
used  to  go  hunting,  they  never  joined  any  other  tribes, 
though  many  tried  from  time  to  time  to  make  friends  with 
them.  One  large  family  of  boys  in  particular  thought 
them  so  beautiful  that  they  wished  them  to  stay  with  them 
and  be  their  wives.  These  boys,  the  Berai-Berai,  used  to 
follow  the  Meamei  about,  and  watching  where  they  camped, 
used  to  leave  there  offerings  for  them. 

The  Berai-Berai  had  great  skill  in  finding  the  nests  of 
bees.  First  they  would  catch  a  bee,  and  stick  some  white 
down  or  a  white  feather  with  some  gum  on  its  back  between 
its  hind  legs.  Then  they  would  let  it  go,  and  follow  it  to 
its  nest.  The  honey  they  found  they  would  put  in  wirrees 
and  leave  at  the  camps  of  the  Meamei,  who  ate  the  honey, 
but  listened  not  to  the  wooing. 

*  Sei  "  Australian  Legendary  Tales:  "  Meamei,  the  Seven  Sisters. 


74  More  Australian  Tales 

But  one  day  old  Wurrunnah  stole  two  of  the  girls, 
capturing  them  by  stratagem.  He  tried  to  warm  the  icicles 
off  them,  but  only  succeeded  in  putting  out  his  fire. 

After  a  term  of  forced  captivity  the  two  stolen  girls  were 
translated  to  the  sky.  There  they  found  their  five  sisters 
stationed.  With  them  they  have  since  remained  ;  not 
shining  quite  so  brightlj'  as  the  other  five,  having  been 
dulled  by  the  warmth  of  Wurrunnah's  fires. 

When  the  Berai-Berai  found  that  the  Meamei  had  left 
this  earth  for  ever,  they  were  inconsolable.  Maidens  of 
their  own  tribe  were  offered  to  them,  but  as  they  could  not 
have  the  Meamei  they  would  have  none.  Refusing  to  be 
comforted  they  would  not  eat,  and  so  pined  away  and  died. 
The  spirits  were  sorry  for  them,  and  pleased  with  their 
constancy,  so  they  gave  them  too  a  place  in  the  sky,  and 
there  they  are  still.  Orion's  Sword  and  Belt  we  call  them, 
but  to  the  Daens  they  are  still  known  as  Berai-Berai,  the 
boys. 

The  Daens  say  the  Berai-Berai  still  hunt  the  bees  by 
day,  and  at  night  dance  corroborees  which  the  Meamei  sing 
for  them.  For  though  the  Meamei  stay  in  their  own  camp 
at  some  distance  from  the  Berai-Berai,  they  are  not  too  far 
away  for  their  songs  to  be  heard.  The  Daens  say,  too,  that 
the  Meamei  will  shine  ever  as  an  example  to  all  women  on 
earth. 

At  one  time  of  the  year,  in  remembrance  that  they  once 
lived  on  earth,  the  Meamei  break  off"  some  ice  from  them- 
selves and  throw  it  down.  When,  on  waking  in  the 
morning,  the  Daens  see  ice  everywhere  they  say  :  "  The 
Meamei  have  not  forgotten  us.  They  have  thrown  some 
of  their  ice  down.      We  will  show  we  remember  them^too." 


Where  the    Frost  Comes   From     75 

Then  they  take  a  piece  of  ice,  and  hold  it  to  the  septum 
of  the  noses  of  such  children  who  have  not  already  had 
theirs  pierced.  When  the  septums  are  numb  with  the  cold 
they  are  pierced,  and  a  straw  or  bone  placed  through  them. 
"  Now,"  say  the  Daens,  "  these  children  will  be  able  to 
sing  as  the  Meamei  sing." 

A  relation  of  the  Meamei  was  looking  down  at  the  earth 
when  the  two  sisters  were  being  translated  to  the  sky. 
When  he  saw  how  the  old  man  from  whom  they  had 
escaped  ran  about  blustering  and  ordering  them  down 
again,  he  was  so  amused  at  Wurrunnah's  discomfiture, 
and  glad  at  their  escape,  that  he  burst  out  laughing,  and 
has  been  laughing  ever  since,  being  still  known  as  Daendee 
Ghindamaylannah,  the  laughing  star,  to  the  Daens,  to  us  as 
Venus. 

Whpn  thunder  is  heard  in  the  winter  time  the  Daens  say  : 
"There  are  the  Meamei  bathing  again.  That  is  the  noise 
they  make  as  they  jump,  doubled  up,  into  the  water,  when 
playing  Bubahlarmay,  for  whoever  makes  the  loudest  flop 
wins  the  game,  which  is  a  favourite  one  with  the  earth 
people  too."  When  the  noise  of  the  Bubahlarmay  of  the 
Meamei  is  heard  the  Daens  say  too,  "  Soon  rain  will  fall, 
the  Meamei  will  splash  the  water  down.  It  will  reach  us 
in  three  days." 


Bubburr  the  Giant  Brown  and 
Yellow  Snake 

BuTHA  the  lissome  and  soft-eyed  was  promised  to  Murree, 
the  swift-in-pursuit-of-game,  and  the  time  was  at  hand  when 
he  could  claim  her,  for  he  was  now  coming  back  from  a 
Boorah.  Back  from  the  tests  of  courage,  back  as  a  brave 
of  his  tribe,  back  with  a  right  to  marry.  Back  to  dis- 
appointment ;  back  to  despair.  For  first  to  meet  him  was 
Gubbee,  the  father  of  Butha.  First  to  tell  him  the  news  of 
Butha,  his  promised  one.  Told  how  she  had  been  hunting 
for  honey.  How  she  had  come  to  the  nest  of  a  Bubburr, 
whence  she  had  taken  some  eggs,  bringing  them  even  into 
the  camp.  How,  just  as  those  who  knew  of  the  danger 
rebuked  her  for  touching  these,  gliding  into  their  midst  had 
come  the  mammoth  snake  Bubburr. 

Past  them  all,  straight  to  Butha  went  Bubburr,  coiled  his 
form  round  hers,  crushing  the  life  from  her.  Then  swiftly 
went  he  as  he  had  come,  leaving  Biltha,  the  lissome  and 
soft-eyed,  lifeless  before  them. 

"Am  I  in  time  for  the  burial  ?  "  said  Murree. 

"Three  times  has  Yhi  slept  since  we  buried  her,"  said 
Gubbee. 


Giant  Brown  and  Yellow  Snake      77 

"  Then  she  is  even  now  travelling  towards  Weebulloo, 
the  heaven  of  women.  I  shall  be  swift  to  follow  her.  The 
dheal  twigs  are  yet  green  on  her  path.  I  shall  snatch  her 
yet  from  Weebulloo." 

"Think  you,"  said  Gubbee  scornfully,  "that  she  who 
was  murdered  will  follow  one  who  has  not  avenged  her  ?  " 

Then  Murree  paused  from  slaying  himself  as  he  stood, 
and  he  said  :  "  There  is  wisdom  in  your  words,  O  Gubbee, 
father  of  She-who-is-lost.  I  shall  first  slay  Bubburr,  the 
snake  demon."  Thus  saying,  Murree  turned  to  the  camp  of 
his  tribe. 

The  days  passed,  and  Biltha  was  still  unavenged.  But 
Murree  never  forgot  her.  Nor  did  he  cast  one  glance  on 
the  comeliest  of  maidens.  His  heart  was  with  Biltha  in 
Weebulloo.      His  mind  was  bent  on  revenge. 

He  went  hunting  with  two  of  his  tribe.  At  length  he 
saw  what  he  wished  for  ahead  of  him.  A  nest  of  the 
Bubburrs  was  there.  He  did  not  run  straight  to  attack  it, 
as  his  mullayerhs  expected,  but  went  back  with  them  to 
the  camp. 

"  Come,"  he  said  to  his  tribe,  "  come  and  let  us  gather 
the  gum  of  Mubboo." 

He  told  them  then  why  he  spoke  so,  and,  seeing  his 
reason  was  good,  they  followed  him.  Having  gathered  the 
gum  in  plenty,  they  carried  it  back  to  their  camp. 

Next  day  they  went  with  Murree,  and  at  his  bidding 
broke  down  the  branches  of  trees  some  distance  from  the 
nest  of  the  Bubburrs.  With  these  branches  they  made 
platforms  on  the  boughs  of  some  trees  which  he  showed 
them.  They  went  on  to  these  platforms,  and  the  noise 
they  made  was  great ;  hearing  which  out  came  the  snakes. 


7  8  More  Australian  Tales 

the  mammoth  Bubburrs.  Murree  and  the  Daens  had  been 
careful  that  no  shadow  of  theirs  should  fall  on  the  ground. 
They  knew  well  that  the  bite  of  even  their  shadows  by  a 
Bubburr  would  kill  them. 

As  the  Bubburrs  came  nearer,  and  nearer,  the  Daens 
made  ready  pieces  of  gum,  gum  of  the  Mubboo,  about  the 
size  of  a  pigeon's  egg,  to  throw  at  their  mouths.  Snap 
went  the  jaws  of  the  Bubburrs  at  them.  Another  pellet  ot 
gum  was  thrown.  Snap  !  and  the  jaws,  the  jaws  of  death, 
were  closed,  held  fast  by  the  gum  between  them.  The 
murderous  Bubburrs  were  mastered.  Murree  the  avenger 
had  conquered. 

Seeing  the  scheme  had  worked  as  they  wished,  the 
Daens  returned  to  their  camp.  There  they  waited  patiently, 
returning  in  due  time  to  the  scene  of  their  gum  throwing. 
They  were  laden  with  wood,  for  they  expected  to  find  their 
enemies  dead,  and  the  flesh  of  Bubburrs  was  good.  Great 
was  the  joy  of  Murree  when  he  saw  the  gum  had  stuck 
their  jaws  fast,  and  that  the  Bubburrs  were  all  dead.  His 
hand  was  swift  to  raise  his  comeboo,  and  sever  their  heads 
from  their  bodies.  Swift,  too,  were  the  Daens  in  lighting 
fires  for  cooking  the  Bubburrs. 

Scarce  have  Bubburrs  been  in  the  land  since  Biitha  the 
lissome  and  soft-eyed  was  avenged  by  the  cunning  of 
Murree  the  swift-to-hunt-game. 

Though  their  name  carries  terror  yet  to  its  hearer. 
Their  size  has  grown  with  the  time,  and  fear  has  stretched 
their  measurements,  until  even  the  strongest  and  wariest 
feel  a  tremour  when  the  name  of  the  brown  and  yellow 
Bubburr  is  mentioned. 


The  Youayah  Mayamah,   or 
Stone   Frogs 

A  FAMILY  of  girls  once  so  offended  an  old  wirreenun  that 
one  day,  when  they  were  out  hunting  in  the  bush,  he  turned 
them  all  into  Youayah,  or  frogs. 

When  days  passed  and  they  did  not  return,  their  mother 
and  relations  thought  that  they  had  been  stolen  by  men  of 
a  strange  tribe.  Rain  had  come  before  there  was  any 
alarm  about  their  absence,  so  all  tracks  were  washed  out, 
except  the  track  of  the  Oodoolay,  or  round  rain-making 
stone,  which  had  been  abroad,  as  it  always  was  in  muddy 
weather.  This  stone  had  the  spirits  of  past  rain-makers  in 
it,  and  could  move  about,  as  its  tracks  proved.  Also,  when 
it  was  making  itself  a  new  camp  before  rain,  it  could  be 
heard  laughing  with  joy  in  anticipation  of  the  mud  to  come. 
No  one  was  ever  seen  to  touch  the  Oodoolay,  yet  its  changes 
of  camp  were  frequent. 

Though  some  days  had  passed  since  they  were  missed 
the  mother  of  the  girls  still  hoped  to  find  them,  thinking 
they  might  have  seen  the  rain  coming  and  built  themselves 
a  shelter   in  the  bush,   remaining  there  until  it  was  over. 


8o  More  Australian  Tales 

She  went  in  the  direction  they  had  gone,  and  called  aloud 
to  them.  There  came  an  answering  call.  On  she  sped  to 
whence  it  had  seemed  to  come,  and  called  again.  Again 
came  an  answer  from  close  beside  her.  She  looked  round, 
but  saw  no  one.  Again  she  called.  There  came  an 
answer  from  a  tussock  of  grass  at  her  feet.  Then  she 
knew  she  had  only  heard  the  cry  of  Noorahgogo,  the 
orange  and  blue  beetle,  which  could  always  answer  thus  a 
Noongahburrah  in  the  bush  when  one  of  that  tribe  was 
alone.  She  gave  up  hope  of  finding  her  daughters,  and 
being  weak  and  hungry  she  looked  round  for  food. 

Soon  she  saw  some  tracks  of  Youayah,  or  earth  frogs, 
and  finding  where  they  were,  she  began  to  dig  them  out. 
Fine  large  Youayah  they  were,  the  largest  she  had  ever 
seen. 

"  What  a  feed  I  shall  have,"  she  said  aloud. 

There  came  a  startlingly  melancholy  cry  from  the  frogs, 

who  seemed  to  be  gazing  fixedly  at  her.  But  taking  no 
notice  she  went  on  :  "I  think  I  shall  eat  them  here.  I  am 
very  hungry,  and  if  I  take  them  to  the  camp  the  others  will 

want  some." 

She  stooped  to  pick  them  up,  but  such  a  crying  came  as 

surely    never    frogs    made   before,    and    so    piteously   they 

looked  at  her  that  she  began   to   feel  there  was  something 

strange  about  these  frogs,  and  she  dropped  the  one  she  held 

in  her  hand. 

"  But  I  am  stupid,"  she  said,  "  to  take  notice  of  a  frog's 

cry.      I  would   be  mad   to  leave   such  a  good   feed  here." 

And  again  she  stooped  to  pick  them  up. 

Again  came  their  croaking  cries  intensified.     And  the 

cries  seemed  to  frame  themselves  into  the  words  :   "  You 


The  Youayah  Mayamah  8i 

must  not  eat  us.  You  are  our  mother.  We  are  the  girls 
you  lost.  The  old  wirreenun  changed  us  into  frogs  because 
we  but  laughed  at  the  mah  of  his  tribe,  saying  the  back  of 
it,  the  back  of  the  emu,  was  humped  as  was  his.  You 
cannot  eat  us."  And  loud  was  the  croaking,  and  so 
frightened  was  the  woman  that  she  turned  and  sped  quickly 
through  the  bush  back  to  the  camp  with  the  mournful  cry 
still  ringing  in  her  ears,  and  a  vision  of  the  piteous  eyes 
ever  before  her. 

She  'went  straight  to  the  old  wirreenun  and  said  :  "  Did 
you  change  my  girls  into  youayah,  which  are  crying  now 
even  in  the  bush  ?  " 

"  I  did  so,"  said  he,  quite  proud  the  woman  had  seen 
proof  of  his  power. 

■  "  Why  did  you  so  ?     Why  should  you  leave  me  to  grow 
old  with  no  daughter  to  care  for  me  ?  " 

"  Did  you  not  choose  their  father  rather  than  me  ?  Why 
should  I  think  of  you  now  ?  Let  their  father  change  them 
again.  Surely  he  is  more  powerful  than  I  am,  since  you 
chose  him  before  me  ?  I  am  but  a  humped-back  one, 
so  your  girls  said,  even  as  they  said  my  mah  was,  the 
dinewan.  Well  you  must  know  that  to  scoff  at  the  mah  of 
a  man  is  to  make  war  with  his  tribe,  yet  I  war  not  ;  I  but 
turn  your  daughters  into  such  as  have  voices  which  none 
heed ;  no  more  can  they  scoff  at  the  back  of  a  dinewan. 
Go,  woman,  eat  them.  Youayah  is  food  that  is  good."  So 
he  taunted  the  woman  who  once  in  her  youth  had  scorned 
him. 

"  How  should  I,  a  mother,  eat  her  young  ?  What  talk 
is  that  you  make?  But  alas!  surely  another  will  find  them 
and  eat  them.      Only  you  can  save  them.     Change  them 

F 


82  More  Australian  Tales 

again,  I  pray  you,  so  that  none  can  eat  them.  Never  again 
shall  they  scoff  at  a  dinewan.  Never  again  will  I  scorn 
you  ;  I  will  come  to  your  dardurr  for  ever." 

"Why  should  I  take  you  to  my  dardurr  now  you  are 
old,  when  you  came  not  young  ?  "  And  he  turned  away, 
going  on  with  the  carving  he  was  making  on  a  boomerang 
with  an  opossum's  tooth. 

"Change,  oh  change  them,  I  pray  you,  so  that  none  can 
eat  them.  I  will  give  you  the  dooree,  or  grunting  dayoorl, 
of  my  father's  father's  fathers  to  be  yours  for  ever.  No 
one  but  its  rightful  owner  can  use  it,  for  does  it  not  grunt 
when  a  stranger  touches  it?  This  stone,  which  of  old 
belonged  to  the  wirreenuns  of  my  father's  tribe,  Iwill  give 
you,  this  stone  which  alone  of  all  dayoorls  has  a  voice." 

"Bring  me  the  dooree,"  said  the  wirreenun,  "and  I  promise 
to  change  your  girls  so  that  they  shall  never  be  eaten." 

The  woman  brought  the  magical  stone  of  her  forefathers, 
her  greatest  possession,  which  grunted  as  she  laid  it  at  the 
wirreenun's  feet. 

*'  Now  go,"  said  the  wirreenun,  "  into  the  bush,  there 
you  will  find  your  daughters,  and  find  I  have  kept  my 
promise.  Even  now  they  are  so  that  surely  no  one  could 
eat  them." 

Back  on  her  tracks  went  the  woman  to  where  she  had 
seen  the  Youayah.  Hopefully  she  went  expecting  to  see 
her  daughters  again.  But  when  she  reached  the  plac€  there 
were  the  frogs  still. 

"  Oh,  my  daughters,  my  daughters  !  Shall  I  never  see 
you  more  as  you  once  were  ?  "  And  she  wailed  aloud  as 
if  mourning  the  dead.  But  no  answer  came  from  the 
Youayah.     Nor  did  they  look  towards  her. 


The  Youayah  Mayamah  83 

Wailing,  she  stooped  to  pick  one  up. 

"  The  wirreenun  tricked  me,"  she  said;  "  surely  indeed 
no  one  will  ever  eat  them,  for  they  are  turned  into  stone." 

And  so  it  was.  Some  were  of  plain  grey  stone,  and 
some  with  a  stripe  of  green  on  them,  just  as  the  frogs  had 
been  marked.  Her  daughters  would  be  stone  frogs  for 
ever,  as  were  the  frogs  that  Birrahgnooloo  and  Cunnum- 
beillee  had  dug,  and  left  for  cooking  before  they  took  that 
fatal  plunge  into  the  Spring  Cowrigul,  whence  the  Kurreahs 
took  them  down  the  Narrin,  and  whither  Byamee  followed 
them  after  changing  the  food  they  had  gathered  into  stones 
to  mark  the  spot  for  ever.  And  there  at  the  spring  were 
the  stone  frogs  still,  as  the  mother  knew,  and  now  she  saw 
their  fellow  in  these  the  wirreenun  had  changed,  these 
who  had  once  been  her  girls  but  now  were  Youayah 
Mayamah. 


A  Legend  of  the   Flowers 

After  Byamee  left  the  earth,*  having  gone  to  dwell  in 
BuUimah,  the  far-away  land  of  rest,  beyond  the  top  of  the 
Gobi  Gobi  mountain,  all  the  flowers  that  grew  on  the 
wogghees  or  plains,  on  the  moorillahs  or  ridges,  and  all 
the  flowers  that  grew  on  the  trees  withered  and  died. 
None  grew  again  in  their  place.  The  earth  looked  bare 
and  desolate  with  no  flowers  to  brighten  it.  That  there 
had  ever  been  any  became  but  a  tradition,  which  the  old 
people  of  the  tribes  told  to  the  young  ones. 

As  the  flowers  were  gone  so  were  the  bees.  In  vain 
the  women  took  their  wirrees  out  to  fill  with  honey  ;  they 
always  returned  without  it.  In  all  the  length  of  the  land 
there  were  but  three  trees  where  the  bees  still  lived  and 
worked,  and  these  the  people  did  not  dare  to  touch,  for 
Byamee  had  put  his  mah  or  brand  on  them,  claiming  them 
thus  as  his  own  for  ever. 

The  children  cried  for  honey,  and  the  mothers  murmured 
because  the  wirreenuns  would  not  let  them  touch  the  trees 
of  Byamee,  which  were  sacred  from  all  for  ever. 

When  the  All-seeing  Spirit  saw  that  though  the  tribe 

*  See  the  Borah  of  Byamee,  "  Australian  Legendary  Tales,"  p.  97. 


A  Legend  of  the   Flowers         85 

hungered  for  honey,  yet  did  they  not  touch  Byamee's  trees 
he  told  him  of  their  obedience. 

Byamee  was  pleased,  and  said  he  would  send  them 
something  which,  when,  as  now,  the  land  was  perished 
with  a  drought,  should  come  on  the  Bibbil  and  Goolabah 
trees,  giving  a  food  as  sweet  to  the  taste  of  the  children  as 
honey. 

Soon  were  seen  white  sugary  specks  on  the  leaves  of 
the  Bibbil,  which  the  Daens  called  Goonbean,  and  then 
came  the  clear  wahlerh,  or  manna,  running  down  the  trees 
like  honey,  to  pile  into  lumps  which  stiffened  on  the  forks 
of  the  branches,  or  sometimes  fell  to  the  ground,  whence 
the  children  gathered  and  ate  it  when  they  could  not  reach 
the  branches. 

The  hearts  of  the  people  were  glad  as  they  ate  gratefully 
the  sweet  food  sent  them.  But  still  the  wirreenuns  greatly 
longed  to  see  the  earth  covered  again  with  flowers,  as  before 
the  going  of  Byamee.  So  great  grew  the  longing  that  they 
determined  to  travel  after  him,  and  ask  that  the  earth  might 
again  be  made  beautiful.  Telling  the  tribes  nothing  of 
where  they  were  going,  they  sped  away  to  the  north-east. 
On  and  on  they  journeyed,  until  they  came  to  the  foot  of 
the  great  Gobi  Gobi  mountain,  which  towered  high  above 
them  until  they  lost  sight  of  its  top  in  the  sky.  Steep  and 
unscalable  looked  its  sides  of  sheer  rock  as  they  walked 
along  its  base. 

But  at  length  they  espied  a  foothold  cut  in  a  rock, 
another  and  yet  another,  and  looking  upward  they  saw  a 
pathway  of  steps  cut  as  far  as  they  could  see.  Up  this 
ladder  of  stone  they  determined  to  climb. 

Gn  they  went,  and  when  the  first  day's  climb  was  ended 


86  More  Australian  Tales 

the  top  of  the  mountain  still  seemed  high  above  them,  and 
even  so  at  the  end  of  the  second  and  third  day,  for  the 
route  was  circuitous  and  long ;  but  on  the  fourth  day  they 
reached  the  summit.  There  they  saw  a  stone  excavation 
into  which  bubbled  up  a  spring  of  fresh  water,  from  which 
they  drank  thirstily,  and  found  it  so  invigorated  them  as  to 
make  them  lose  all  feeling  of  weariness,  which  had  previously 
almost  prostrated  them.  They  saw  at  a  little  distance  from 
the  spring  circles  of  piled  up  stones.  They  went  into  one 
of  these,  and  almost  immediately  they  heard  the  sound  of  a 
gayandy,  the  medium  through  which  Wallahgooroonbooan's 
voice  was  heard.  Wallahgooroonbooan  was  the  spirit 
messenger  of  Byamee.  He  asked  the  wirreenuns  what 
they  wanted  there,  where  the  sacred  lore  of  Byamee  was 
told  to  such  as  came  in  search  of  knowledge.  They  told 
him  how  dreary  the  earth  had  looked  since  Byamee  had  left 
it,  how  the  flowers  had  all  died,  and  never  bloomed  again. 
And  though  Byamee  had  sent  the  wahlerh,  or  manna,  to 
take  the  place  of  the  long-missed  honey,  yet  they  longed  to 
see  again  the  flowers  making  the  earth  gay  as  once  it  had 
been. 

Then  Wallahgooroonbooan  ordered  some  of  the  attendant 
spirits  of  the  sacred  mountain  to  lift  the  wirreenuns  into 
Bullimah,  where  fadeless  flowers  never  ceased  to  bloom. 
Of  these  the  wirreenuns  might  gather  as  many  as  they 
could  hold  in  their  hands.  Then  the  spirits  would  lift 
them  back  into  the  sacred  circle  on  the  summit  of  Oobi 
Oobi,  whence  they  must  return  as  quickly  as  possible  to 
their  tribes. 

As  the  voice  ceased  the  wirreenuns  were  lifted  up  through 
an  opening  in  the   sky,  and   set  down  in  a  land  of  beauty, 


A   Legend  of  the   Flowers        87 

flowers  blooming  everywhere,  in  such  luxuriance  as  they  had 
never  seen  before,  massed  together  in  lines  of  brilliant 
colouring,  looking  like  hundreds  of  euloowirrees,  rainbows, 
laid  on  the  grass.  So  overcome  were  the  wirreenuns  that 
for  some  moments  they  could  only  cry,  but  the  tears  were 
tears  of  joy. 

Remembering  what  they  had  come  for,  they  stooped  and 
gathered  quickly  their  hands  full  of  the  various  blossoms. 

The  spirits  then  lifted  them  down  again   into  the  stone, 
circle  on  the  top  of  Oobi  Oobi. 

'  There  sounded  again  the  voice  of  the  gayandy,  and 
Wallahgooroonbooan  said  :  "  Tell  your  tribes,  when  you 
take  them  these  flowers,  that  never  again  shall  the  earth  be 
bare  of  them.  All  through  the  seasons  a  few  shall  be  sent 
by  the  different  winds,  but  Yarrageh  Mayrah  shall  bring 
them  in  plenty,  blossoms  to  every  tree  and  shrub,  blossoms 
to  wave  midst  the  grasses  on  wogghees  and  moorillahs, 
thick  as  the  hairs  on  an  opossum's  skin.  But  Yarrageh 
Mayrah  shall  not  always  make  them  thus  thick,  but  only  at 
times  ;  but  the  earth  shall  never  again  be  quite  bare  of 
blossoms.  When  they  are  few,  and  the  sweet-breathed 
wind  is  not  blowing  to  bring  first  the  showers  and  then  the. 
flowers,  and  the  bees  can  only  make  scarce  enough  honey 
for  themselves,  then  the  wahlerh  or  manna  shall  again  drop 
from  the  trees,  to  take  the  place  of  honey  until  Yarrageh 
Mayrah  once  more  blows  the  rain  down  the  mountain  and 
opens  the  blossoms  for  the  bees ;  and  then  there  will  be 
honey  for  all.  Now  make  haste  and  take  this  promise,  and 
the  fadeless  flowers  which  are  the  sign  of  it,  to, your 
people." 
>    The  voice  ceased,  then  the  wirreenuns  went  back  to  their 


88  More  Australian  Tales 

tribes  ;  back  with  the  blossoms  from  Bulh'mah.  Down  the 
stone  ladder,  which  had  been  cut  by  the  spirits  for  the 
coming  of  Byamee,  they  went  ;  across  the  wogghees  and 
over  the  moorillahs  back  to  the  camp  of  their  tribes.  Their 
people  flocked  round  them,  gazing  with  wonder-opened  eyes 
at  the  blossoms  the  wirreenuns  carried.  Fresh  as  when  they 
left  BuHimah  were  these  flowers,  filling  the  air  with 
fragrance.  When  the  tribes  had  gazed  long  at  the  blossoms 
and  heard  of  the  promise  made  to  them  by  Byamee  through 
his  messenger,  Wallahgooroonbooan,  the  wirreenuns 
'scattered  the  flowers  from  Bullimah  far  and  wide.  Some 
fell  on  the  tree  tops,  some  on  the  plains  and  ridges,  and 
where  they  fell  their  kind  have  grown  ever  since. 

The  name  of  the  spot  where  the  wirreenuns  first  showed' 
the  flowers  and  scattered  them;  is  still  called  Ghirraween, 
the  place  of  flowers.  There,  after  the  bees  of  Byamee  had 
made  Yarrageh  blow  the  rain  down  the  mountain  of  Gobi 
Gobi  to  soften  the  frost-hardened  ground,  green  grasses 
shot  up  framing  fragrant  bright  flowers  of  many  hues.  And 
the  trees  and  shrubs  blossomed  thickly  again,  and  the  earth 
was  covered  with  cool  grass  and  flowers  as  when  Byamee 
walked  on  it. 

It  is  the  work  of  the  bees  of  Byamee  to  make  Yarrageh 
the  east  wind  blow  the  rain  down  the  mountain,  that  the 
trees  may  blossom  and  the  earth  bees  make  honey. 

Gladly  does  Yarrageh  do  the  bidding  of  the  bees,  lighting 
the  face  of  the  earth  with  the  smile  of  rain-water,  for  are 
not  the  Gwaimuthen  his  relations  ?  The  Gwaimuthen 
whose  dark  blood  is  warm  as  is  his. 

And  the  messengers  who  come  in  the  drought,  bringing 
manna,  are  the  black  ants,   who  bring  the  goonbean  on  to 


A   Legend  of  the   Flowers        89 

the  leaves,  and  the  httle  grey  birds  called  Dulloorah,  who 
bring  the  wahlerh,  or  liquid  manna. 

And  when  they  come  the  Daens  say:  "A  time  of  drought 
is  here,  a  great  drought  on  all  the  land.  Few  are  the  flowers 
anywhere,  and  the  grass-seed  has  gone.  But  goonbean  and 
wahlerh  will  go,  and  the  drought  will  go,  and  then  the 
flowers  and  the  bees  will  come  again,  for  so  it  has  always 
been  since  the  wirreenuns  brought  the  blossoms  from 
BulUmah." 


The   Frog  Heralds   of  the   Flood 

When  Byamee  ceased  to  sojourn  on  this  earth,  and  went 
back  the  way  he  had  come  from  Bulliniah,  up  the  circuitous 
ladder  of  stone  steps,  to  the  summit  of  Oobi  Oobi,  only  the 
wirreenuns  were  allowed  to  hold  intercourse  with  him,  and 
that  only  through  his  messenger,  Wallahgooroonbooan. 

For  Byamee  was  now  fixed  to  the  crystal  rock  on  which 
he  sat  in  BuUimah,  as  was  also  Birrahgnooloo.*  The  tops 
of  their  bodies  were  as  they  had  been  on  earth,  but  the 
lower  parts  were  merged  into  the  crystal  rock. 

Wallahgooroonbooan,  Baillahburrah  and  Cunnumbeillee 
alone  were  allowed  to  approach  them,  and  pass  on  their 
commands  to  others.  Birrahgnooloo  was  the  flood  maker. 
^yhen  the  creeks  were  drying  up  and  the  wirreenuns 
wanted  a  flood  to  come,  they  would  climb  up  to  the  top  of 
Oobi  Oobi,  and  await  in  one  of  the  stone  circles  the  coming 
of  Wallahgooroonbooan.  Hearing  what  they  wanted,  he 
would  go  and  tell  Byamee. 

Byamee  would  tell  Birrahgnooloo,  who,  if  she  were  willing 
to  give  her  aid,  would  send  Cunnumbeillee  to  the  wirreenuns 
bidding   her  say  to  them  :   "  Haste  ye  to  tell  the  Bungun 

*  See  the  Origin  of  Narran  Lake,  "  Australian  Legendary  Tales,"  p.  ii. 


The   Frog  Heralds  of  the   Flood    91 

Bungun    tribe  to  be  ready.     The  ball  of  blood  will  be  sent 
rolling  soon." 

Hearing  which,  the  wirreenuns  would  go  swiftly  back 
down  the  mountain  and  across  the  wogghee  below,  until  they 
reached  the  Bungun  Bungun,  a  powerful  tribe  with  arms 
strong  for  throwing  and  voices  unwearying. 

This  tribe  would  station  themselves,  at  the  bidding  of 
the  wirreenuns,  along  the  banks  on  each  side  of  the  dry 
river,  from  its  source  downwards  for  some  distance.  They 
made  big  fires,  and  put  in  these  fires  huge  stones  to  heat. 
When  these  stones  were  heated,  the  Bungun  Bungun  placed 
some  before  each  man,  laying  them  on  bark.  Then  they 
stood  expectant,  waiting  for  the  blood  ball  to  reach  them. 
As  soon  as  they  saw  this  blood-red  ball  of  fabulous  size 
roll  into  the  entrance  to  the  river,  every  man  stooped,  seized 
a  hot  stone,  and  crying  aloud,  threw  it  with  all  his  force 
against  the  rolling  ball.  In  such  numbers  and  with  such 
force  did  they  throw  these  stones  that  they  smashed  the 
ball.  Out  gushed  a  stream  of  blood  flowing  swiftly  down 
the  bed  of  the  river.  Louder  and  louder  rose  the  cries  of 
the  Bungun  Bungun,  who  carried  stones  with  them,  following 
the  stream  as  it  rushed  past.  They  ran  with  leaps  and 
bounds  along  the  banks,  throwing  in  stones  and  crying 
aloud  without  ceasing.  Gradually  the  stream  of  blood, 
purified  by  the  hot  stones,  changed  into  flood  water,  of 
which  the  cries  of  the  Bungun  Bungun  warned  the  tribes 
so  that  they  might  move  their  camps  on  to  the  high  ground 
before  the  water  reached  them.  While  the  flood  water  was 
running  the  Bungun  Bungun  never  ceased  crying  aloud. 
Even  to  this  day,  as  a  flood  is  coming,  are  their  voices 
heard,  and  hearing  them   the   Daens   say  :   "  The  Bungun 


92  More  Australian  Tales 

Bungun,  or  flood-frogs,  are  crying  out.  Flood  water  must 
be  coming."  Then,  "  The  Bungun  Bungun  are  crying  out. 
Flood  water  is  here." 

And  if  the  flood  water  comes  down  red  and  thick,  the 
Daens  say  that  the  Bungun  Bungun  must  have  let  it  pass 
them  without  purifying  it. 


Eerin,   the   Small  Grey  Owl 

Eerin  the  Daen  was  a  very  light  sleeper,  and  when  at 
night  an  enemy  tried  to  steal  into  the  camp,  to  spear  some 
one  of  the  tribe  or  crack  a  skull  with  his  boondee,  there 
was  no  chance  of  his  being  able  to  do  so  if  Eerin  was  there. 
For  no  sooner  did  the  enemy  get  within  spear-shot  of  the 
camp  than  Eerin  would  cry  out :  "  Mil  I  Mil !  Mil !  "  which 
was,  "Eye,  Eye,  Eye,"  meaning  his  tribe  were  to  look  out, 
there  was  danger  threatening. 

And  when  at  length  Eerin  died,  the  Daens  all  grieved 
much,  saying  that  now  indeed  their  enemies  would  sneak 
upon  them,  and  they  be  unwarned,  for  none  could  hear  as 
did  Eerin  the  light  sleeper. 

They  placed  the  body  of  Eerin  in  a  bark  coffin  which 
they  painted  all  over  with  red  ochre.  Before  the  ochre 
dried  the  oldest  wirreenun  ran  his  thumb-nail  from  one 
end  to  the  other,  then  across  the  coffin,  leaving  thus  divisions 
in  the  ochre  forming  a  cross.  This  done  they  corroboreed 
round  the  coffin,  singing  one  of  the  death  chants.  Towards 
evening  they  lifted  up  the  coffin  and  carried  it  to  the  grave 
they  had  dug.  The  mourners  were  all  painted,  and  had 
leaves  and  feathers  in  their  hair,  dheal  tree  twigs  round 


94  More  Australian  Tales 

their  wrists,  knees,  ankles  and  waists,  also  through  the 
holes  in  the  cartilage  of  the  noses.  They  carried  bunches 
of  dheal  twigs  too  in  their  hands. 

When  they  reached  the  grave  they  laid  some  logs  in  the 
bottom,  which  they  thickly  covered  with  dheal  twigs,  on  the 
top  of  which  they  put  the  coffin,  as  a  wail  went  up  from 
all  assembled,  the  mournful  death  wail  of  the  tribe  which 
rose  and  fell  in  wave-like  cadences. 

Then  an  old  wirreenun  stood  up  and  spoke,  telling  them 
that  as  Eerin  was  now,  so  some  day  they  all  would  be, 
and  it  behoved  them  to  keep  well  the  laws  of  Byamee  lest, 
when  their  spirits  reached  Bullimah,  they  were  not  allowed 
to  stay  nor  to  wander  at  will,  but  were  sent  to  the  Eleanbah 
Wondah,  the  abode  of  the  wicked. 

After  this  address  more  twigs  were  thrown  on  the  coffin, 
then  the  things  belonging  to  the  dead  were  placed  in  the 
grave,  rugs,  weapons  and  food,  which  would  be  wanted. on 
the  journey  to  the  sacred  mountain,  Oobi  Oobi.     . 

While  this  was  being  done  the  oldest  male  relative  stood 
in  the  grave  to  guard  the  body  from  the  Wondah  until  the 
earth  covered  it.'  He  stood  there  while  a  chant  somewhat 
as  follows  was  sung  : 

"  We  shall  follow  the  bee  to  its  nest  in  the  goolabah ; 
We  shall  follow  it  to  its  nest  in  the  bibbil-tree. 
Honey  too  shall  we  find  in  the  goori-tree, 
But  Eerin  the  light  sleeper  will  follow  with  us  no  longer." 

Then  the  mourners  wailed  until  the  wirreenuns  chanted 
again  : 

"  Many  were  the  days  when  we  took  our  nets  to  the  river  ; 
Many  and  big  were  the  cod-fish  we  caught  in  them, 
But  Eerin  the  light  sleeper  will  go  no  more  to  the  river  ; 
M  o  more  will  he  rub  himself  with  the  oil  of  cod-fish, 
Eerin  will  never  eat  again  of  the  cod-fish." 


Eerin,   the   Small  Grey  Owl       95 

Then,  as  the  wirreenuns  paused,  the  wailing  was  loud 
again  until  they  began  once  more  the  dirge  : 

"  We  shall  spear  Bohrah  on  the  moorillas, 

And  Dinewan  shall  fall  when  we  throw, 
.  But  Eerin  will  hunt  with  us  no  longer, 

Never  again  will  Eerin  eat  of  our  hunting. 

Hunt  shall  we  often,  and  oft  shall  we  find  ; 

But  the  widow  of  Eerin  will  kindle  no  fires  for  his  coming," 

Loud  again  was  the  wailing,  then  on  went  the  voice  of 
the  wirreenun  : 

"Never  again  shall  the  voice  of  the  light  sleeper 
Cry  '  Mil;  Mil,  Mil,'  as  an  enemy  nears  us. 
Cracked  will  our  skulls  be  and  speared  our  bodies. 
Eerin  can  warn  us  no  more  with  his  cry,  :, 

Only  his  spirit  can  come  to  us  ever,^  an  offering  let  us  now  pour 
to  it." 

Then  with  loud  wailing,  seizing  stone  knives  and  comeboos, 
the  mourners  cut  themselves,  letting  their  blood  drop  into 
the  grave.  Never  before"  was  there  such  a  blood  offering. 
Then  the  earth  was  thrown  quickly  into  the  grave,  while 
some  of  the  mourners  corroboreed  round  it,  crooning  a 
dirge. 

When  the  earth  was  filled  in,  all  stood  in  a  dense  smoke 
that  the  wirreenuns  had  made  of  Budta  twigs,  which  was 
to  keep  them  free  from  the  unseen  spirits  known  to  be 
hovering  round. 

When  the  grave  was  filled  in  back  to  their  new  camp 
went  the  women,  for  the  old  one  was  now  gummarl,  a  place 
of  death,  with  a  marked  tree  showing  it  was  taboo. 

No  children,  or  women  with  children  who  could  not 
walk,  were  allowed  to  go  to  the  funeral. 

After  the  women  left,  all  the  men  stood  round  the  grave. 


96  More  Australian  Tales 

the  oldest  wirreenun  at  the  head,  which  faced  the  east. 
The  men  bowed  their  heads  as  if  at  a  first  Boorah,  the 
wirreenun  lifted  his,  and,  looking  towards  where  Bullimah 
was  supposed  to  be,  said  :  "  Byamee,  let  in  the  spirit  of 
Eerin  to  Bullimah.  Save  him,  we  ask  thee,  from  the 
Eleanbah  wundah,  abode  of  the  wicked.  Let  him  into 
BuUimah,  there  to  roam  as  he  wills,  for  Eerin  was  great 
on  earth  and  faithful  ever  to  your  laws.  Hear,  then,  our 
cry,  O  Byamee,  and  let  Eerin  enter  the  land  of  beauty,  of 
plenty,  of  rest.  For  Eerin  was  faithful  on  earth,  faithful  to 
the  laws  you  left  us." 

Then,  standing  round  the  grave,  all  wailed  the  goohnai, 
or  death  dirge. 

Then  the  men  covered  the  grave  with  boughs  of  dheal 
trees  and  swept  a  clear  space  all  round  it.  By  the  tracks 
on  that  space  in  the  morning  they  would  know  of  what 
mah  was  he  who  had  caused  the  death  of  Eerin.  If  on  it 
was  the  track  of  an  iguana  then  had  one  of  the  Beewee 
clan  done  it ;  if  the  track  of  an  emu,  then  was  a  dinewan 
guilty. 

The  widow  of  Eerin  had  put  mud  over  herself,  daubing 
her  head  and  face  with  white.  She  slept  beside  a  smoulder- 
ing smoke  all  night. 

Three  days  afterwards  the  Daens  made  a  fire  by  the 
river.  They  chased  the  widow  and  her  sisters  down  to  it. 
The  widow  caught  hold  of  a  smoking  bush  from  the  fire, 
put  it  under  her  arm,  and  jumped  into  the  middle  of  the 
water.  As  the  smoking  bush  was  going  out  She  drank  a 
draught  of  the  smoky  water.  Then  she  came  out  and 
stood  in  the  smoke  of  the  fire.  When  she  was  thoroughly 
enveloped  in  the  smoke  she  called   to  those  in  the  camp, 


Eerin,   the  Small  Grey  Owl       97 

and,  looking  towards  her  husband's  grave,  she  called  again. 
Those  in  the  camp  called  to  her  that  his  spirit,  had  answered; 
she  might  speak  now.  She  had  been  obliged  to  keep 
silence,  except  for  death  wails,  since  Eerin's  death. 

Back  she  went  to  the  camp.  A  big  smoke  was  made, 
and  the  whole  camp  smoked.  Every  time  a  stranger  came 
the  widow  made  a  smoke,  until  the  time  arrived  when  the 
nearest  of  her  husband's  kin  could  claim  her  for  his  own. 

For  some  months  after  the  death  of  Eerin,  every  time  a 
stranger  came  to  the  camp,  early  the  next  morning  he  would 
sing  the  goohnai,  or  dirge ;  then  each  man  would  take  part 
in  turn,  until  all  were  singing.  Then  they  all  moved  out 
of  their  camps  and  gradually  closed  round  into  a  smaller 
circle,  when  they  would  cease  singing,  sit  down,  and, 
rocking  their  bodies  to  and  fro,  they  would  cry  and 
wail. 

When  the  time  of  mourning  was  over  an  enemy  came 
again  to  attack  them,  but  they  were  saved  by  hearing  the 
old  cry  of  "  Mil !   Mil!  Mil!" 

And  so  it  often  happened. 

At  last  an  enemy  died  and  carried  his  hatred  of  them  to 
another  world,  whence  he  returned  as  a  spirit  to  attack 
them.  But  again  they  were  saved  by  the  warning  cry  of 
"Mil!  Mil!  Mil!" 

This  cry  they  discovered  was  made  by  a  little  grey  owl, 
with  black  rings  round  its  eyes,  which,  having  warned  the 
camp,  flew  from  it.  The  wundah,  or  evil  spirit,  saw  it,  and 
said  :  "  Why  do  you  warn  them  ?  Keep  quiet  next  time  I 
go  to  sneak  upon  them.  See,  I  have  my  boondee  ;  I  will 
kill  one  of  the  tribe  quickly,  and  you  can  join  me  in  my 
feast  of  his  flesh." 


98  More  Australian  Tales 

The  bird  promised  silence,  and  the  wundah  went  again; 
into  the  camp.  But  just  as  he  was  going  to  raise  his 
boondee  to  deal  a  fatal  blow,  "Mil!  Mil!  Mil!"  was  cried 
in  the  sleeper's  ear.  The  owl  had  followed  the  wundah- 
into  the  camp. 

"  Why  did  you  do  that  ?  "  the  wundah  angrily  asked. 

"That  I  shall  always  do,  even  as  when  I  was  Eerin  the 
man,  for  did  not  my  tribe  spill  freely  the  blood  offering  ? 
Shall  I  not  then  save  them  from  the  wundah  even  as  I  did 
from  their  old  enemies  ?  By  day  I  shall  rest,  and  at  night 
I  shall  roam,  hovering  round  their  camps  to  guard  them,  by 
my  cry,  when  danger  threatens  theiii." 

And  so  it  has  been  ever  since.  The  spirit  of  Eerin  the 
light  sleeper  is  in  the  little  grey  owl,  which  is  called 
Eerin  too,  and  ever  warns  its  old  tribe  at  night  by  crying, 
"Mil!  Mil!  Mil!" 


The   Legend   of  Nar-oong-owie, 
The   Sacred   Island 

Ngroondoorie,  the  giver  of  laws,  customs,  and  a  religion  to 
the  Southern  tribes  of  aboriginals  in  South  Australia, 
became  to  them  as  a  God,  and  his  promise  was  ever 
believed,  that,  if  they  followed  the  laws  he  had  given  them, 
after  death  their  spirits  should  follow  his  footsteps  over 
the  island  of  Nar-oong-owie,  and  thence  be  translated,  as 
he  was,  to  his  home  in  the  skies.  The  tradition  was  that 
his  departure  took  place  somewhat  as  follows.  His  two 
wives  ran  away  from  him.  In  going  after  them  he  crossed 
what  is  now  called  Lake  Albert,  went  on  for  some  distance 
over  the  Corrong  to  the  sea,  and  along  the  beach  past  the 
present  Port  Victor  to  Cape  Jarvis.  When  he  arrived 
there  he  saw  the  fugitives  wading  through  the  water,  being 
when  he  sighted  them  about  half-way  across  the  channel — 
which  at  that  time  was  quite  a  shallow  one — between  the 
mainland  and  Nar-oong-owie,  as  Kangaroo  Island  was  then 
called. 

Enraged    at    his  wives    for    running    away    from    him, 
Ngroondoorie  determined  to  punish  them.     He  bade  the 


loo  More  Australian  Tales 

water  to  rise  up  and  drown  them.  With  a  terrific  rush  the 
water  rose,  and  the  women  were  carried  back  towards  the 
mainland.  They  tried  to  swim  against  this  tidal  wave, 
but  were  powerless  to  do  so,  and  the  terror-stricken  pair 
were  drowned,  and  their  bodies  were  turned  into  rocks 
which  were  called  Rine-jool-ang,  and  can  be  seen  to  this 
day,  and  are  known  to  the  white  people  as  the  Pages  or 
Two  Sisters.  After  his  wives  were  drowned,  Ngroondoorie 
walked  into  the  water  and  dived  out  towards  the  island. 
Where  he  emerged  from  the  water  is  a  black  patch  three 
or  four  yards  in  width.  He  went  on  to  the  island,  and  as 
the  day  was  hot  he  wished  for  a  shade  to  rest  under. 
Seeing  none,  he  made  spring  from  the  earth  a  she-oak  tree 
which  is  said  to  be  the  largest  in  Australia.  He  lay  down 
in  the  shade  and  tried  to  sleep,  but  could  not,  for  as  every 
breeze  blew  he  heard  the  wailing  of  his  drowning  wives' 
voices  through  the  tree-top.  Finding  he  could  get  no  rest, 
he  walked  to  the  end  of  the  island.  He  threw  his  spear 
out  into  the  sea,  and  immediately  a  reef  of  rocks  came  from 
the  island  to  where  the  spear  dropped.  He  then  threw 
away  all  his  other  weapons  and  departed  to  his  home  in  the 
skies,  where  those  who  have  kept  the  laws  he  gave  the  tribes 
will  some  day  join  him.  And  to  this  day  anyone  who  tries 
to  sleep  under  a  she-oak  tree  will  hear  the  wailing  that 
Ngroondoorie,  the  greatest  of  all,  heard  as  he  lay  beneath 
that  giant  tree  he  had  made  to  shade  him  on  Nar-oong-owie, 
that  island  which  ever  afterwards  was  held  as  sacred  to 
him  and  the  spirits  of  the  dead  by  the  Southern  tribes  of 
South  Australia. 


Glo 


ssar' 


Bahloo,  moon  {masculine). 
Bargie,  grandmother. 
Beereeun,  a  small  grey  lizard. 
Berai  Berai,  The  Boys   (Orion's 

sword  and  belt). 
Bibbil,  shiny-leaved  box-tree. 
Biggoon,  water-rat. 
Bilber,  a  large  rat. 
Bindeah,  prickle  or  thorn. 
Bingahwingul,      needle-bush,      u, 
flowering  shrub  with  roots  from 
which  water  can  be  drained. 
Binguie,  wooden  vessel  for  holding 

water. 
Birrahgnooloo,  woman's  name  (= 

face  like  a  hatchet-handle) 
Bohrah,  kangaroo. 
Boolee,  whirlwind, 
Boondee,  club-headed  weapon. 
Boorah,  larger  borah  ring. 
Borah  or  Boorah,   sacred  tribal 
initiation  rites. 


Boulka,  leak. 

Bralgah,  native  companion,  large 
crane. 

Bubahlarmay,  game  played  by 
jumping  into  the  water  with  a 
splash. 

Bubbur,  giant  brown  and  yellow 
snake. 

Budta,  rosewood-tree. 

Budtah,  salt. 

BuUah  Bullah,  butterflies, 

BuUai  bullai,  green  parrot. 

BuUimah,  Byamee's  camp  {native 
Elysium). 

BuUimehdeehmundi,  south-east. 

Bungun  Bunguu,  frog. 

Bunna,  cannibal, 

Byamee,  big  man  {Creator,  Cul- 
ture hero). 


Comebee,  bag. 


I02 


Glossary 


Comebeegeeboondarnghealdah, 

grey  moth. 
Comeboo,  tomahawk. 
Coolah,    tree    with    water-holding 

roots, 
Corroboree,  tribal  dance. 


Daen,  black  fellow. 

Daendeeghindamaylannah, 
Venus  the  laughing  star.     Lit., 
"A  laughing  Plan." 

Dardurr,  shelter  made  of  bark. 

Dayoorl,  magical  speaking  stone. 

Deenyi,  iron  bark. 

Deereeree,  Willy  wagtail. 

Dheal,  sacred  tree. 

Dindee,  pointed  stick. 

Dinewan,  emu. 

Dinjerrah,  west. 

Dooloomai,  thunder. 

Doongairah,  lightning. 

Doowee,  dream-spirit. 

Dourandouran,  north  wind. 

DuUoorah,  small  grey  birds. 

Dullaymullaylunnah,   fend,   ven- 
detta. 

Dumerh,  brown  pigeon. 

Durrie,   bread   made   from    grass 
seed. 

Durroon,  the  night  heron. 


Eehu,  rain. 
Eer-dher,  mirage. 
Euahlayi,    language     of    Narrin 
blacks. 


Euloowirree,  rainbow. 
Eurah,  a  drooping  shrub. 


Gahreemay,  camp. 

Garahgah,  crajie. 

Gayanday,  man's  name  for  voice 
of  borah  spirit. 

Gayardaree,  platypus. 

Gheeger  Gheeger,  the  cold  west 
wind. 

Gidya,  tree  of  acacia  species,  which 
gives  forth  a  sickening  smell  in 
damp  weather,  or  if  in  bloom. 

Girrahween,  place  of  flowers. 

Goodoo,  codfish. 

Goplabah,  grey-leaved  box-tree. 

Goolahyool,  water-holding  tree. 

Goolayahlee,  pelican. 

Goolmai,  death  dirge. 

Goombeelgah,  bark  canoe. 

Goomblegubbon,  turkey  or  bus- 
tard of  the  plains. 

GoonaguUah,  the  sky. 

Goonbean,  specks  on  the  leaves  of 
the  bibbil. 

Gooweera,  small  stick  or  bone, 
possessing  magical  death-dealing 
power. 

Gougourgahgah,  laughing  jack- 
ass. 

Gubbah,  good. 

Gubbee,  man's  clan  name. 

Gubberah,  sacred  wonder-working 
stone. 

Guineeboo,  redbreast. 


Gl 


ossar 


y 


103 


Gummarl,  plau  where  some  one 

has  died. 
Gundooee,  solitary  emu. 
Gunyahnoo,  south-east  wind. 
Gurburreh,  north. 

lUahwaylayah,  good-bye  {said  by 

CM  going). 
Innerah,  mistress. 

Kumbooran,  east. 
Kurreah,  alligator. 

Mah,  totem. 

Marmbeyah,    white    devil     who 

carries  a  green  boondee. 
May,  wind. 
Mayamah,  stone. 
Mayrah,  wind. 

Meamei,  The  Girls,  Pleiades. 
Mil,  eye. 

Minggah,  spirit-haunted  tree. 
Mirrieh,  poligonum. 
Moodai,  opossum. 
Moogaray,  hailstones. 
Moorillah,  pebbly  ridge. 
Mubboo,  beefwood-tree, 
Mubboon,    small    creek    running 

into  larger  one. 
Muggil,  stone  knife. 
MuUayerh,  mate,  companion. 
MuUee  MuUee,  dream-spirit  {of  a 

wirreenun). 
Mulloka,  water-spirit. 
Mundehwaddah,  north-west  wind. 


Munggheewurraywurraymul,  sea- 
gull. 

Mungoonyarlee,  iguana  {largest 
kind  of) 

Murgah  Muggui,  trap-door  spider. 

Murroomin,  bark. 

Noongah,  kurragong  tree. 
Noongahburrah,  belonging  to  the 

Noongah  country. 
Noorahgogo,     orange    and     blue 

beetle. 
Nooroonooroobin,  south  wind. 
Noorumbah,  hunting-ground. 
Numbardee,  mother. 
Nurroolooan,  south. 
Nyunnoo,  grass  humpy. 

Oobi  Oobi,  Byamee's  mountain 
dwelling-place  in  the  other  world. 

Oodoolay,  round  rain-making 
stone. 

Oolah,  reS,  prickly  lizard. 

Oonah,  give. 

Ouyouboolooey,  black  snake. 

Piggiebillah,  spiny  Echidna. 
Purleemil,     woman's     name     (  = 
starry  eyes). 

Wa-ah,  shell. 

Wahlerh,   manna    running   down 

stems  of  branches. 
Wahn,  crow. 


"  The  Ideal  Qift=Books  of  the  Season.' 


FAIRY   TALES    OF   THE 

BRITISH    EMPIRE. 

Collected  and  Edited  by  JOSEPH  JACOBS. 
Illustrated  by  J.  D.  BATTEN. 

MR.  JACOBS'  FAIRY  TALES,  which  have  been  appear- 
ing since  1890,  have  won  immediate  and  widespread 
acceptance.  The  choice  of  matter,  the  simplicity  and 
suitable  character  of  the  language  of  the  text,  the  beauty,  humour, 
and  charm  of  Mr.  Batten's  Illustrations,  and  the  large  and 
legible  type^  have  commended  the  series  alike  to  children  and  to 
lovers  of  art;  whilst  the  prefaces  and  elaborate  notes,  parallels, 
and  references  added  by  the  Editor,  have  made  them  indispens- 
able to  the  increasingly  large  portion  of  the  public  interested  in 
the  history  ^nd  archaeology  of  popular  fiction. 

"Fairy  Tales  of  the  British  Empire"  are  to  be  had  in  two 
forms,  at  3s.  6d.  and  at  6s.  a  volume. 

In  so  far  as  Tales  and  Illustrations  are  concerned,  the  3s.  6d. 
Edition  is  the  same  as  the  original  6s.  one.  But  the  Editor's 
Prefaces,  Notes,  Parallels,  and  References  are  omitted. 

A  full  list  of  the  Series,  a  specimen  of  Mr.  Batten's  beautiful 
Illustrations,  and  a  very  small  selection  from  the  numberless  kindly 
notices  which  the  Press  has  bestowed  upon  the  Series,  will  be 
found  on  the  following  pages. 


Fairy  Tales  of  the  British  Empire. 

English  Fairy  Tales.  Complete  Edition,  xvi.,  255  pages,  9 
full-page  Plates,  and  numerous  Illustrations  in  the  text. 
Designed  Cloth  Cover,  Uncut  or  Gilt  Edges.     6s. 

The  same.  Children's  Edition,  viii.,  227  pages,  7  full- 
page  Plates,  and  numerous  Illustrations  in  text.  Cloth,  Cut. 
3s.  6d. 

More  English  Fairy  Tales.  Complete  Edition,  xvi.,  243 
pages,  8  full-page  Plates,  and  numerous  Illustrations  in  text. 
Designed  Cloth  Cover,  "Uncut  or  Gilt  Edges.     6s. 

The  same.  Children's  Edition,  viii.,  214  pages,  7  full- 
page  Plates,  and  numerous  Illustrations  in  text.  Cloth,  Cut. 
3s.  6d. 

Celtic  Fairy  Tales.  Complete  Edition,  xvi.,  274  pages,  8  full- 
page  Plates,  numerous  Illustrations  in  text.  Designed  Cloth 
Cover,  Uncut  or  Gilt  Edges.     6s. 

The  same.  Children's  Edition,  viii.,  236  pages,  7  full-page 
Plates  and  numerous  Illustrations  in  text.  Cloth,  Cut.  3s,  6d. 

More  Celtic  Fairy  Tales.  Complete  Edition,  xvi.,  234  pages, 
8  full-page  Plates,  numerous  Illustrations  in  text.  Designed 
Cloth  Cover,  Uncut  or  Gilt  Edges.     6s. 

The  same.  Children's  Edition,  viii.,  217  pages,  7  full- 
page  Plates,  and  numerous  Illustrations  in  text.  Cloth,  Cut. 
3s.  6d. 

Indian  Fairy  Tales.  Complete  Edition,  xvi.,  255  pages,  9  full- 
page  Plates,  and  numerous  Illustrations  in  text.  Designed 
Cloth  Cover,  Uncut  or  Gilt  Edges.     6s, 

No  Children's  Edition  of  the  "Indian  Fairy  Tales" 
will  be  issued  for  the  present. 

3 


Specimen"  of  Mr.  Batten's  full-page  Illustrations  to 
of  the  British  Empire." 
4 


Fairy  Tales 


Some  press  IRotices 

OF 

JACOBS'  AND   BATTEN'S   FAIRY  TALES. 


English  Fairy  Tales. 

Daily  Graphic. — "  As  a  collection  of  fairy  tales  to  delight  children  of  all 
ages,  ranks  second  to  none."  Globe. — "A  delight  alike  to  the  young  people 
and  their  elders."  England.— •'  K  most  delightful  volume  of  fairytales." 
Daily  News. — "  A  more  desirable  child's  book  .  .  .  has  not  been  seen  for 
many  a  day."  Atheniemn. — "  From  first  to  last,  almost  without  exception, 
these  stories  are  delightful."  E.  S.  Hartland. — "The  most  delightful 
book  of  fairy  tales,  taking  form  and  contents  together,  ever  presented  to 
children,"  Miss  Thackeray. — "  This  delightful  book. "  Review  of  Reviews. 
— "  Nothing  could  be  more  fascinating." 

Celtic  Fairy  Tales. 

Scotsman. — "  One  of  the  best  books  of  stories  ever  put  together."  Free- 
man's Journal. — "An  admirable  selection."  Ariel. — "Delightful  stories, 
exquisite  illustrations  by  John  D.  Batten,  and  learned  notes."  Daily 
Telegraph. — "  A  stock  of  delightful  little  narratives."  Daily  Chronicle. — "  A 
charming  volume  skilfully  illustrated."  Pall  Mall  Budget.— "  P>.  perfectly 
lovely  book.  And  oh!  the  wonderful  pictures  inside."  Liverpool  Daily 
Post.— "Th.s  best  fairy  book  of  the  present  season. "— 06«k Times.— •'  Many 
a  mother  will  bless  Mr.  Jacobs,  and  many  a  door  will  be  open  to  him  from 
Land's  End  to  John  o'  Groat's." 

More  English  Fairy  Tales. 

Athenaum. — "  Will  become  more  popular  with  children  than  its  prede- 
cessor." Notes  and  Queries. — "Delightful  and  in  every  respect  worthy  of 
its  predecessor."  Glasgow  Herald. — "  A  more  delightful  collection  of  fairy 
tales  could  hardly  be  wished  for."  Glasgow  Evening  News. — "The  new 
volume  of  '  English  Fairy  Tales '  is  worthy  of  the  one  that  went  before, 
and  this  is  really  saying  a  great  deal." 

More  Celtic  Fairy  Tales. 

Daily  Chronicle. — "A  bright  exemplar  of  almost  all  a  fairy-tale  book 
should  be."  Saturday  Review.—"  Delightful  for  reading,  and  profitable  for 
comparison."  Irish  Daily  Independent.—"  Full  of  bold  and  beautiful  illus- 
trations." North  British  Daily  Mail.— "The  stories  are  admirable,  and 
nothing  could  be  better  in  their  way  than  thedesigns."  News  of  the  World. 
— "  Mr.  Batten  has  a  real  genius  for  depicting  fairy  folk." 

Indian  Fairy  Tales. 

Dublin  Daily  Express.— "  Vniqae.  and  charming  anthology."  Daily 
News.— "  Good  for  the  schoolroom  and  the  study."  .Siac- "  Illustrated 
with  a  charming  freshness  of  fancy. "  Gloucester  Journal.—"  A  book  which 
is  something  more  than  a  valuable  addition  to  folk-lore ;  a  book  for  the 
student  as  well  as  for  the  child."— Sco^swian.—"  Likely  to  prove  a  perfect 
success."    Literary  World.—"  Admirably  grouped,  and  very  enjoyable." 

5 


Specimen  Illustration  from  the  "First  Book  of  Krab." 


WORKS  BY  HIS  HONOUR 
JUDGE  EDWARD  ABBOTT  PARRY. 

Illustrated  by  ARCHIE  MACGREGOR. 

THE  issue  of  Katawampus :  its  Treatment  and  Cicre,  in  the 
Christmas  Season  of  1895,  revealed  a  writer  for  children 
who,  in  originality,  spontaneity,  and  fulness  of  humour 
as  well  as  in  sympathy  with  and  knowledge  of  childhood,  may  be 
compared,  and  not  to  his  disadvantage,  with  Lewis  Carroll.  And, 
as  is  the  case  with  "  Alice  in  Wonderland,"  an  illustrator  was 
found  whose  sympathy  with  his  author  and  capacity  for  rendering 
his  conceptions  have  won  immediate  and  widespread  recognition. 
The  later  works  due  to  the  collaboration  of  Author  and  Illustrator 
have  fully  maintained  the  level  of  their  forerunner.  A  list  of  the 
series  and  a  specimen  of  the  illustrations  will  be  found  below, 
and  a  small  selection  from  the  press  notices  overleaf. 


Got  him  this  time 


KATAWAMPUS :  its  Treatment  and  Cure.     Second  Edition, 
96  pages,  Cloth.     3s.  6d. 

"  One  of  the  very  best  books  of  the  season." — The  World.. 
"  A  very  delightful  and  original  hook:  •—Review  of  Reviews. 
"  The  book  is  one  of  rare  drollery,  and  the  verses  and  pictures  are  capital 
of  their  kind." — Saturday  Review. 

"We  strongly  advise  both  parents  and  children  to  read  the  book." 

Guardian. 
"  A  truly  delightful  little  book,  .  .  ."—Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

"  A  tale  full  of  jinks  and  merriment." — Daily  Chronicle. 

"  The  brightest,  wittiest,  and  most  logical  fairy-tale  we  have  read  for  a 
long  time." — Westminster  Gazette. 

"  It's  fun  of  the  sort  that  children  revel  in  and  '  grown-ups  '  also  relish, 
so  spontaneous  and  irresistible  is  it." — Manchester  Guardian. 

••  A  delightful  extravaganza  of  the  '  Wonderland  '  type,  but  by  no  means 
a  slavish  imitation."— Gte^oa/  Herald. 

"  Since  'Alice  in  Wonderland  '  there  has  not  been  a  book  more  calculated 
to  become  a  favourite  in  the  nursery." — Baby. 


KATAWAMPUS  KANTICLES.    Music  by  Sir  J.  F.  Bridge, 

Mus.  Doc,  Organist  of  Westminster  Abbey.     Words  by  His 

Honour  Judge  E.  A.  Parry.    Illustrated  Cover,  representing 

Kapellmeister  Krab,  by  Archie  Macgregor.     Royal  8vo, 

Is. 

"  The  reviewer's  duty  in  this  case  is  confined  to  considering  the  music  of 
Dr.  Bridge :  the  pleasant  task  of  praising  Judge  Parry's  verses  is  super- 
fluous. .  .  .  The  learned  Dr.  Bridge,  of  Westminster,  who  also  wields  the 
thunders  of  the  Albert  Hall,  the  greatest  living  authority  on  Purcell,  and 
hard  to  beat  at  counterpoint,  is  also  known  as  the  most  genial  of  musical 
humorists.  It  was,  therefore,  a  happy  idea  which  inspired  the  witty 
Judge  of  County  Courts  to  seek  the  aid  of  '  Westminster '  Bridge  in 
this  case,  and  the  results  have  been  remarkably  happy.  Dr.  Bridge's 
melodies  are  simple  and  engaging,  and  humorously  descriptive  where 
necessary,  without  ever  becoming  unintelligible  to  the  youngest  hearer. 
That  they  never  descend  below  the  dignity  of  music,  and  are  thoroughly 
sound,  goes  without  saying," — Manchester  Courier. 


BUTTER-SCOTIA,  or,  a  Cheap  Trip  to  Fairy  Land.  i8o  pages. 
Map  of  Butter-Scotia,  many  Full-page  Plates  and  Illustrations 
in  the  Text.    Bound  in  specially  designed  Cloth  Cover.     6s. 

"  Leaving  the  sea,  a  pleasant  passage  through  Starland  and  across  the 
Milky  Way  lands  the  voyagers  in  Fairyland,  and  Herald  Houp-La  invites 
them  to  the  Court  of  King  Puck.  Tomakin  has  a  narrow  escape  of  being 
devoured  by  a  vfitch.  ...  By  Krab's  instructions,  Olga  defeats  Brassiface 
the  Ogre  in  a  game  of  golf.  ...  With  the  Silver  Niblick  won  from  the 
Ogre,  Olga  rescues  Tomakin  and  defeats  a  dragon  at  Puck's  Court,  and 
ultimately  secures  a  masterly  retreat  from  Butter-Scotia.  The  trial  of 
Tomakin,  an  election  scene,  and  a  Cabinet  Council,  are  excellent  fun.  .  ,  . 
The  plot  of  the  story  is  admirably  worked  out,  the  incidents  are  full  of 
interest  and  excitement,  and  the  humour  is  irresistible. " — Manchester  Courier. 

"  The  geographically-minded  may  be  glad  to  know  that  '  Butter-Scotia  is 
near  the  North  Pole,  and  not  far  from  the  Equator,  in  longitude  looi  and 
any  amount  of  latitude  !  '  Moreover,  it  is  '  bounded  on  the  N.  by  the  Gulf 
of  Funland,  on  the  W.  by  Cocoa  Nut  Iceland,  on  the  S.  by  the  Caramel 
Mountains,  and  on  the  E.  by  the  A  B  Sea,  or  Sea  of  Troubles.  Chief 
exports — crackers  and  goodies.'  " — Birmingham  Gazette. 

"Almost,  if  not  quite,  as  good  as  '  Kata  wampus.'  The  little  folks  for 
whom  it  is  written  will  say  it  is  a  jolly  book.  Olga,  Molly,  Kate,  and 
Tomakin  turn  up  again,  and  make  a  voyage  from  Fleetwood  to  Butter- 
Scotia — such  a  voyage  and  such  wonderful  people  they  see  when  they  get 
there  :  King  Puck,  a  golfing  ogre,  witches,  and  a  goblin  newspaper  reporter, 
among  them.  It  is  right-down  funny,  is  this  book,  and  all  the  little  ones 
who  have  read  '  Katawampus,'  and  many  more,  should  read  it.  The 
pictures  are  again  by  Archie  Macgregor,  who  is,  we  suppose,  a  Butter- 
Scotchman." — Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  KRAB.  Christmas  Stories  for 
Children  of  All  Ages.  132  pages,  with  many  Full-page  Plates 
and  Illustrations  in  the  Text.  Bound  in  specially  desigiied 
Cloth  Cover.    3s.  6d. 

"  His  Honour  .  .  .  has  known  how  to  make  even  the  domestic  black- 
beetle  interesting.  His  verses  flow  easily  and  ring  pleasantly,  and  the 
illustrations  by  Archie  Macgregor  are  decidedly  good,  and  some  of  them 
strikingly  so." — Athenceum. 

"  Krab  is  a  goblin,  who  tells  most  delightful  stories  at  Christmas-time  to 
a  party  of  children.  Perhaps  the  story  of  Undine  the  Wave  is  the  prettiest 
and  most  imaginative,  but  the  Clockwork  Child  is  very  funny." 

Educational  Review. 

"  The  half-dozen  stories  it  comprises  are  as  charming  and  fresh  as  ever.'' 

Star. 

"  In  '  The  First  Book  of  Krab'  Judge  Parry  seems  to  have  eclipsed  all 
his  former  efforts,  and  has  produced  a  book  which  will  at  once  establish 
itself  as  a  favourite  with  children.  .  .  .  The  stories  are  extravagantly  non- 
sensical, but  original  in  conception  and  charmingly  told." 

Liverpool  Daily  Post. 

"  Krab  is  an  old  gentleman  who  has  a  delightful  turn  for  story-telling, 
Christmas  stories  especially,  but  I  am  bound  to  admit  that  they  are  the 
real  old-fashioned  sort.  Krab  himself  was  old-fashioned,  you  see,  he  didn't 
even  ride  a  bicycle ;  he  travelled  by  a  sleigh  drawn  by  two  white  reindeer, 
Friska  and  Floska,  but  he  was  a  marvellous  story-teller,  so  all  wise  young 
people  are  advised  to  forget  his  old-fashioned  qualities,  and  just  listen  to 
the  stories  of  Butterwops,  Undine,  and  the  Clockwork  Child." — Madame. 


THE  BOOK  OF  WONDER  VOYAGES. 

Edited  with  Introduction  and  Notes  by  JOSEPH  JACOBS. 
Illustrated  by  J.  D.  BATTEN. 

Square  demy  8vo,  sumptuously  printed  in  large  clear  type  on 
specially  manufactured  paper,  at  the  Ballantyne  Press.  With 
Photogravure  Frontispiece,  and  many  Full-page  Illustrations 
and  Designs  in  the  Text.    Specially  designed  Cloth  Cover,  6s. 

Contents. — The  Argonauts — The  Voyage  of  Maelduin — The 
Journeyings  of  Hasan  of  Bassorah  to  the  Islands  of  Wak-Wak — 
How  Thorkill  went  to  the  Under  World  and  Eric  the  Far- 
Travelled  to  Paradise. 

2'his,  the  latest  of  the  volumes  in  which  Mr.  Jacobs  and  Mr. 
Batten  have  collaborated  with  such  admirable  results,  will  be 
welcomed  as  heartily  as  its  predecessors  by  the  children  of  the 
English-speaking  world.  A  specimen  of  Mr.  Batten's  illustrations 
is  appended. 


COMPANION  VOLUME  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  WONDER  VOYAGES 

Square  demy  8vo,  sumptuously  printed  in  large  clear  type  at  the  Ballantyne 

Press.     With  many  full-page  Illustrations  and  Designs  in  the  text, 

specially  designed  Cloth  Cover,  6s. 


TJieWoi^LttAVoTii3ei\PuL 

bcinq 

^bgStort)optbgTravcls  anit 
peri  Is  oF  Fou**  Brotbg  rs  K"'9^^ 
oFSicilv  wbo  adventured  tothe^ 
Nortly  an^tbU)cSoufl) 
€^8tan.A  to  tt|cWest 

Written,  bit  Charles  Squire 
lUuS*^^  b  n  A  q  M  a«j  rggor 


LONDON 

David  NoTT  2/0  Strand. 

1898 


NURSERY  SONGS  AND  RHYMES  OF  ENGLAND. 

Pictured  in  Black  and  White  by  Winifred  Smith.  Small 
4to.  Printed  on  hand-made  paper.  In  specially  designed 
Cloth  Cover,  3s.  6d. 


Some  ipress  motices  of  "IRurserB  Songe  an£)  IRbBines." 

Literary  World. — "Delightfully  illustrated." 

Athenisum. — "  Very  cleverly  drawn  and  humorous  designs." 

Manchester  Guardian. — "  All  the  designs  are  very  apt  and  suited  to  the 
comprehension  of  a  child." 

Scotsman. — "  The  designs  are  full  of  grace  and  fun,  and  give  the  book  an 
artistic  value  not  common  in  nursery  literature." 

Globe. — "  The  drawings  are  distinctly  amusing  and  sure  to  delight 
children." 

Star. — "  Really  a  beautiful  book.  .  .  .  Winifred  Smith  has  revelled  into 
old  rhymes,  and  young  and  old  alike  will  in  their  turn  revel  in  the  results 
of  her  artistic  revelry." 

Pall  Mall  Gazette. — "  No  book  of  nursery  rhymes  has  charmed  us  so 
much." 

Magazine  of  Art. — "  Quite  a  good  book  of  its  kind." 

Woman. — "Miss  Smith's  drawings  are^now  celebrated  and  are  indeed 
very  beautiful,  decorative,  and  full  of  naive  humour." 

14 


WORKS  BT  MRS.  ERNEST  RADFORD. 
SONGS   FOR   SOMEBODY.     Verses  by  Dollie 

Radford.  Pictures  by  Gertrude  Bradley.  Square 
crown  8vo.  Six  Plates  printed  in  colour  by  Edmund 
Evans,  and  36  Designs  in  monochrome.  Coloured  Cover 
by  Louis  Davis.     3s.  6d. 

GOOD    NIGHT.    Verses  by  Dollie  Radford. 

Designs  by  Louis  Davis.     Forty  pages  entirely  designed  by 
the  artist  and  pulled  on  the  finest  and  the  thickest  cartridge 
paper.     Boards  and  canvas  back  with  label,  2s.  6d. 
Some  ipress  IFlotlces. 

Daily  Chronicle. — "  As  far  as  we  know  no  one  else  sings  quite  like  Mrs. 
Radford ;  hers  is  a  bird's  note — thin,  high,  with  a  sweet  thrill  in  it,  and  the 
thrill  is  a  home  thrill,  a  nest  thrill." 

Commonwealth. — "  We  have  read  with  pure  enjoyment  Mrs.  Radford's 
slight  but  charming  cycle  of  rhymes." 

Star, — "A  tender  spirit  of  motherhood  inspires  Mrs.  Radford's  simple 
little  songs." 

Review  of  Reviews. — "Very  charming  poems  for  children  not  unworthy 
even  to  be  mentioned  in  the  same  breath  with  Stevenson's  '  Child's  Garden 
of  Verses. '  " 

Aihenaum. — "  'Good  Night'  is  one  of  the  daintiest  little  books  we  have 
seen  for  years.  The  verses  are  graceful  and  pretty,  and  the  illustrations 
excellent.     It  will  please  both  young  and  old." 

Literary  World. — "  Charming  little  songs  of  childhood. " 

New  Age. — "Mrs.  Radford  is  closely  in  touch  with  a  child's  mind,  and 
her  ideal  child  is  a  nice,  soft,  loving  little  creature  whom  we  all  want  to 
caress  in  our  arms." 

Artist. — "  Since  Blake  died  never  has  a  book  been  produced  which  can 
so  truly  be  described  as  a  labour  of  love  to  the  artist  as  '  Good  Night.'  " 


MEDI/EVAL  legends.     Being  a  Gift-Book  to 

the   Children  of  England,  of  Five   Old-World  Tales   from 

France  and  Germany.     Demy  8vo.     Designed  Cloth  Cover, 

3s.  6d. 

Contents. — The  Mysterious  History  of  Melusina— The  Story  of 

.^sop— The   Rhyme    of  the   Seven   Swabians— The   Sweet  and 

Touching  Tale  of  Fleur  and  Blanchefleur— The  Wanderings  of 

Duke  Ernest. 

Some  press  iftotices. 

Saturday  Review. — "  A  capital  selection  of  famous  legends." 
Times. — "  There  can  be  no  question  as  to  the  value  of  this  gift." 
Morning  Post. — "  Full  of  romantic  incident,  of  perilous  adventure  by  land 

and  sea."  -    .    ui 

GMay^'aM.— "This  delightful  volume.  .  .  .  In  all  respects  admirable. 
World. — "  An  elegant  and  tasteful  volume." 

15 


THE  HAPPY  PRINCE,  and  other  Tales.  By  Oscar 

Wilde.  ii6  pages,  small  4to.  Beautifully  printed  in  old- 
faced  type,  on  cream-laid -paper,  with  wide  margins.  Bound 
in  Japanese  Vellum  Cover,  printed  in  red  and  black.  With 
three  full-page  Plates  by  Walter  Crane,  and  eleven 
Vignettes  by  Jacomb  Hood.     Second  Edition.     3s.  6d. 

Some  press  Bottces. 

Christian  Leader. — "Beautiful  exceedingly;  charmingly  devised — exqui- 
sitely told." 

Universal  Review. — "  Heartily  recommended." 

Athenceum. — "  Mr.  Wilde  possesses  the  gift  of  writing  fairy  tales  in  a  rare 
degree." 

Dublin  Evening  Mail. — "A  beautiful  book  in  every  sense.'' 

Glasgow  Herald. — "  It  is  difficult  to  speak  too  highly  of  these  tales." 


FAIRY  TALES  FROM  THE  FAR  NORTH.      By 

p.  C.  AsBjoRNSEN.  Translated  by  H.  L.  Br^kstad.  With 
94  Illustrations  by  E.  Werenskiold,  T.  Kittelsen,  and  H. 
SiNDiNG.  Small  4to  ("  Wonder  Voyages  "  size),  beautifully 
printed  at  the  Ballantyne  Press  on  specially  manufactured 
paper.     Cloth,  designed  Cover.     6s. 

*^L*  The  raciest  and  quaintest  oj  stories,  the  most  spirited 
and  humorous  of  illustrations. 

THE  GIANT  CRAB,  and  other  Tales  from  Old  India. 

Retold  by  W.  H.  D.  Rouse.  Profusely  Illustrated  by  Wl 
Robinson.  Square  crown  8vo,  beautifully  printed  at  the 
Ballantyne  Press  on  special  paper.  Designed  Cloth  Cover. 
3s.  6d. 

***  Adaptation  for  English  children  of  Tales  from  the  Oldest 
Story  Book  in  the  world,  the  Jatakas,  or  Birth-stories  of 
Buddha. 

i6 


1. 1 


mi 


