N  THE  SHADOW 


HE  BUSH 


h 

i 

1  ill^ 

®S88&SSSS&9g&5& 


P  AMAURY  T 


S99B 


SSS&: 


^SS^BJBSBSSSBB 


' 


f«rf*i4i<i<*<rf<Jcii<i*j<*<5<»' 


.--,;.:•,,-, 

■ 

. 

.V.~-:.~-v,  .^ -•-•.-  .--       - 

JDuquwAltriwrsityi 


Gift   of 

Rev.    Francis  R.    Duffy 
C.S.Sp. 


w 


«Vy*^-® 


2""Ia— '■ 


.^  \ 


IN  THE  SHADOW   OF   THE  BUSH 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2010  with  funding  from 

Lyrasis  Members  and  Sloan  Foundation 


http://www.archive.org/details/inshadowofbushOOperc 


Ekoi  Girl  in  "  Fatting- House"  Costume. 


IN  THE  SHADOW 
OF    THE    BUSH 

By   P.   AMAURY    TALBOT 

OF   THE    NIGERIAN   POLITICAL   SERVICE 

WITH   ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  A  MAP 


NEW  YORK:  GEORGE  H.  DORAN  COMPANY 

LONDON:       WILLIAM       HEINEMANN 

MCMXII 


57^cxa 


AFr.:: 


Printed  in  England. 


if /V  if 7 

T3 


Co 

THE    DEAR   AND    HONOURED    MEMORY 
OF 

LADY    GALTON 

THIS    BOOK,    BEGUN    UNDER  HER 

KIND    ENCOURAGEMENT, 

IS   GRATEFULLY    AND    AFFECTIONATELY 

DEDICATED 


L  1,5 11] 
SEP.  -5  1957 


viii  FOREWORD 

through  accident  or  adventure  of  our  own,  and  it  is  for  this 
reason  that  some  personal  incidents  have  been  included. 

I  wish  to  take  this  opportunity  of  thanking  the  chief  officials 
of  my  own  Colony  for  their  more  than  kind  encouragement, 
and  the  authorities  of  the  Natural  History  Museum  for  their 
unsparing  kindness  and  generous  help.  Of  the  assistance 
given  by  my  wife  and  her  sister,  I  should  like  to  say  more,  but 
am  debarred  by  the  very  conditions  under  which  their  help  was 
given. 


CONTENTS 


CHAP 

PAGE 

I. 

On  the  Way  to  Oban   ......         i 

II. 

Religion      .... 

13 

III. 

Religion  (continued) 

23 

IV. 

Egbo    ..... 

37 

V. 

Jujus            .... 

49 

VI. 

Jujus  (continued)  . 

65 

VII. 

Metamorphosis     . 

80 

VIII. 

Oban  to  Niaji 

89 

IX. 

Woman — Position,  Etc. 

94 

X. 

Woman — Position,  Etc.  (continued 

) 

105 

XI. 

Birth  Customs     . 

120 

XII. 

Birth  Customs  (continued) 

130 

XIII. 

Beyond  Niaji       .         ... 

139 

XIV. 

The  South  Cameroons 

151 

XV. 

Along  the  Border 

160 

XVI. 

Ordeal         .... 

165 

XVII. 

Divination  .... 

174 

XVIII. 

Ojje  or  Witchcraft     . 

190 

XIX. 

Oberekkai  to  Etara    . 

203 

XX. 

Ekoi  of  the  Cross  River 

216 

XXI. 

Funeral  Ceremonies    .    S    . 

221 

XXII. 

Ghosts         .... 

230 

XXIII. 

Beyond  Netim 

242 

XXIV. 

Uyanga  and  Ekuri 

255 

XXV. 

Conditions  of  Life  in  Peace  and  War 

262 

XXVI. 

Conditions  of  Life  in  Peace  and  War  (continued) 

278 

XXVII. 

Art      ........ 

287 

XXVIII. 

Records       .... 

304 

XXIX. 

Government,  Etc.         .    '     . 

310 

XXX. 

Treatment  of  "  Members  "  . 

325 

XXXI. 

Folk-lore    .... 

335 

L'Envoie      .... 

Facing 

?     404 

CONTENTS 


APPENDICES 

APPENDIX 

A. 

Tabus           .... 

B. 

Clubs  . 

C. 

Anthropometry 

D. 

Orthography 

E. 

Grammar 

F. 

Vocabularies 

G. 

Nsibidi  Signs 

H. 

Botany 

I. 

Zoology 

J- 

Mineralogy 

K. 

Meteorology 

L. 

Geographical  Survey 

407 

410 

414 
415 
417 
424 

447 
462 

465 

474 
476 
478 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 


Ekoi  Girl  in  "  Fatting-House  "  Costume  (Coloured)       Frontispiece 


Kwa  River  .  .  .  . 

Esuk  Atimbo,  Beach  on  Calabar  River 
Kwa  River  ...... 

Oban-Obutong  Road     .... 

Farm  Path  with  Offerings,  near  Ekong 
Juju  Circle  at  Oban    .... 

Egbo  House  and  Juju  Trees 

The  Lake  of  the  Dead,  near  Nsan 

Cotton  Tree  at  Nsan   .... 

Club  Image,  Ewaw        .... 

"  Image  "  of  Nkanda  Grade  of  Egbo  with  Emblem  "  Ekabe 
Nkanda "..... 

Hunting  Juju  "  Image,"  Ekuri  Ibokk,  Oban 
Juju  Nimm  Asam  ..... 

Juju  Emomm  ..... 

Juju  "  Images  "  with  Attendants 

Masks  used  in  Religious  Dances 

Juju  Heads — worn  at  Dances — and  Fetish 

Head  Priest  Akunane  before  Juju  Ofiri  at  Ekong 

Distributing  Consecrated  Offerings,  Eja  Festival,  Oban 

A  Ceremony  at  Eja  Festival,  Oban       .... 

Partaking  of  Sacrifice  to  Eja  at  Obung 

Dance  at  the  Eja  Festival,  Oban  .... 

Chief  Agbashan  of  Oban  (a  Were-Elephant) 

Awaw  Ita,  the  "  Snake  Woman  "  of  Oban,  with  her  Husband 

Source  of  the  River  of  Good  Fortune 

The  River  of  Bad  Fortune 

Maia,  the  Priestess  of  Nimm 

Nimm  Neophytes  ..... 


TO    FACE    PAGE 

2 


4 
4 
6 
8 
io 

IO 
24 

30 
38 

42 

44 
50 
50 
54 
58 
58 
66 

74 
74 
76 
76 
82 

84 
90 
92 

94 

98 


Xll 


LIST   OF   ILLUSTRATIONS 


The  Head  Priestess  of  Nimm         ...... 

Pits  in  the  Rock  by  the  Riverside  in  which  Cam-wood  Dye 
is  made  ..... 

Type  of  Liane  in  the  Ekoi  Bush  . 
Girl  Attendant  on  Juju  "  Image  " 
Ekoi  Interior,  with  Woman  sewing 
Akwa  Yafe  Falls  .... 

Dance  in  Honour  of  the  Birth  of  Twins 

Juju  left  in  Deserted  Town 

Mother  with  Twins  mentioned  on  p.  120 

A  Woman  from  the  Interior 

Juju  "  Image  "  with  Attendants 

Leaders  of  the  Children's  Agara  Club,  Nchofan 

Ekoi  Woman 

After  a  Hunt,  Ndebbiji 

Ekoi  Hunter 

Ojokk 

Native  Suspension  Bridge  in  the  South  Cameroons 

Dr.  Mansfeld  in  a  Hut  on  the  Shore  of  Lake  Ijagham 

Ijagham  (Lake  of  the  Dead),  South  Cameroons 

The  Original  Home  of  Akpambe  at  Okuri     . 

Pass  near  Mbinda         ..... 

River  Akwa  Yafe         ..... 

Entrance  to  Underground  Caves  near  Akwa  Yafe  River 
Ododop         ........ 

Sexagonal  Stone  dedicated  to  Nimm,  Abbiati 
Etai  Ngbe,  Mkpott       ...... 

Etai  Ngbe,  with  Twisted  Rods,  Egbo  House,  Okuni 

Falls  at  the  Source  of  the  Ikpan  River 

River  Scene,  Ekoiland 

Juju  Akpambe 

Play  at  Oban,  Nsikpe  Club 

Central  Falls,  Kwa  River 

Kwa  River  . 

Rest  House,  Nsan 

Egbo  House,  Netim 

New  Cola     . 

Napoleona  Alexandri 

New  Anacardiace^ 

Dance  given  by  Children's  "  Agara  "  Club,  Nchofan 


TO    FACE    PAGE 
I02 


IO8 
IO8 

no 

114 
114 

120 
124 
124 
126 
126 

132 
132 

142 

150 
150 
152 

154 
154 

158 

158 

160 
162 
164 
172 
172 
172 
190 
192 

198 
198 

204 
206 

212 
212 
214 

214 
214 
2l6 


LIST   OF   ILLUSTRATIONS 


xm 


The  Great  Drum  of  the  Boy  Scouts 

Chief  of  Okuni,  Upper  Cross  River 

Type  of  Northern  Ekoi  Woman   . 

Sacred  Drum  at  Aw  aw  Offong     . 

"  Image  "  of  the  Igumi  Club 

A  Girl  with  "  Ghost  Marks  "  on  her  Arm 

"  Image  "  of  Ojjen        .... 

A  House  in  Oban  where  the  Body  of  a  Late  Head  Chief  lay 

in  State  under  the  Protection  of  the  Union  Jack 
Household  Juju  ......... 

Upper  Falls  on  Kwa  River.  ...... 

Nimm  Stone,  Calabar  River  ...... 

Ikum,  Head  Chief  of  Ojo  Nkonmba       ..... 

Source  of  the  Calabar  River       ...... 

Interior  of  Egbo  House,  Ojo  Akangba,  showing  Type  of 

Native  Fresco        ........ 

Ojo  Types    .......... 

Crossing  a  River  ........ 

An  Oban  Elephant       ........ 

Type  of  Ekuri      ......... 

Type  of  Uyanga  ......... 

Juju  Post  at  Ekuri  Owai  with  Mummified  Head  in  Fork    . 
An  Elephant  Road       ........ 

Dancers  with  Juju  Masks  at  Ekuri  Eying   .... 

Mourning  Emblems  at  House  of  Dead  Chief 

Juju  Obassi  Osaw  ........ 

Sacred  Tree  always  brought  to  a  New  Town  from  the 

Parent  Tree  in  the  Old  Town        ..... 

Type  of  Ekoi  Roof       ........ 

Weaving  Bags      ......... 

Ekoi  Calf    .......... 

Leaf  Men     .......... 

Momodo  Mandara,  my  Bornuese  Skinner      .... 

Woman  saved  from  being  offered  as  a  Sacrifice  to  Juju 

Mfuor   .......... 

A  Stilt  Dance      ......... 

Stilt  Dance,  "  Lame  Boy  "  in  Foreground   .... 

Type  of  Ekoi        ......... 

Ekoi  Type    .......... 

Type  of  "  Member  "  from  Slave  Towns         .... 


PAGE 

216 

218 
218 

220 
222 
224 
224 

226 
226 

234 
242 
244 
246 

248 
248 
250 
250 
254 
254 
256 
258 
260 
260 
266 

266 
270 
270 
276 
276 
276 

276 
284 
284 
316 
316 
316 


XIV 


LIST   OF   ILLUSTRATIONS 


TO    FACE    PAGE 


Type  of  Ekoi 

Types  of  Ekoi  Coiffure        ..... 

Types  of  Ekoi  Coiffure        ..... 

Types  of  Ekoi  Coiffure        ..... 

Types  of  Ekoi  Coiffure;  Female  and  Male  . 

Types  of  Ekoi  Coiffure,  Small  Children 

Types  of  Ekoi  Coiffure        ..... 

People  from  the  Interior  waiting  to  welcome  us 
Lowest  Falls,  Kwa  River    ..... 

Village  on  Cross  River        ..... 

Cascade        ........ 

Climbing  Palms    ....... 

Tree    surrounded    with    Lattice    Work    Creeper 
eventually  kills  it        ....         . 

Type  of  Vegetation     ...... 

Native  Tree-bridge      ...... 

Cola  Lepidota      ....... 

Macrolobium  lamprophyllum  Harms     . 
Group  of  pale  Duck's-egg  blue  Fungi 


which 


316 
318 
318 
320 
320 
322 
322 
324 
324 
336 
346 
346 

356 
356 
366 

374 
400 
400 


INSETS 
Decoration  of  Wall  in  Egbo  House,  Ekuri  Owai  .         .     256 

Map  of  the  Oban  District,  Southern  Nigeria       .    at  end  of  volume 


CHAPTER   I 

On  the  Way  to  Oban 

The  Ekoi  people  are  divided  into  two  unequal  parts  by  the 
boundary  which  separates  the  Cameroons  from  Southern 
Nigeria.  Their  land  is  most  easily  reached  by  way  of  the 
River  Kwa,  which  empties  itself  into  the  Cross  River,  a  few 
miles  from  the  latter's  mouth.  For  some  distance  before  its 
junction  the  Kwa  is  too  broad  to  permit  of  a  good  photograph, 
and  it  is  not  till  nearing  the  beach  from  which  runs  the  main 
Calabar-Oban  road,  that  one  can  be  obtained. 

The  banks  are  fringed  first  with  mangrove  and  screw  pine, 
then,  further  on,  by  palm  trees.  When  that  part  is  reached 
which  the  Ekoi  proudly  term  "our  own  water,"  the  river 
narrows  and  becomes  more  beautiful.  At  its  edge  grow  giant 
arums,  green  on  the  outer  sheath,  but  cream  splashed  with 
purple  within.  Behind  these  spring  trees  of  every  variety  of 
shape  and  tint,  from  mimosas,  with  their  delicate  mauve  or 
cream  balls  and  feathery  foliage,  to  the  huge  trumpet-shaped 
flowers  of  the  Gardenia  physophylla,  the  heavily-scented, 
purple-splashed  blooms  of  the  Kalbreyeri,  or  the  great  Berlinia, 
the  white  flowers  of  which  shine  with  a  pearl-like  lustre  from 
amid  its  dim,  dark  leaves. 

Here  and  there,  at  a  bend,  one  comes  across  beaches  of 
clear  white  sand,  glistening  with  mica,  where  crocodiles  lie 
sunning.  On  the  single  occasion  when  I  went  down  the  river, 
after  having  expended  all  my  ammunition  during  a  long  "  bush 
tour,"  the  Fate  which  presides  over  such  matters  arranged  an 
interesting  tableau.  On  the  branch  of  a  great  tree,  which 
hung  directly  over  the  water,  lay  a  creature  such  as  I  have 
never  seen  before  or  since.  In  shape  it  was  like  a  medium- 
sized  crocodile,  but  with  a  flat  snout  like  that  of  a  pig,  and  with 

s.B,  b 


2  IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

six  to  eight  black  rings  round  its  tail.  As  if  aware  of  its  perfect 
security,  it  lay  quite  still  until  we  were  almost  level,  and  then 
slid  out  of  sight. 

Sometimes  a  monitor  slips  from  a  fallen  tree-trunk  as  one 
draws  near,  or  a  great  snake  ruffles  the  surface  as  it  swims  across 
with  a  bird,  just  caught,  in  its  mouth.  Huge  butterflies  of 
gorgeous  colouring  flutter  hither  and  thither,  and  now  and  then 
a  flash  of  turquoise  hangs  for  a  moment  over  the  water  as  a 
kingfisher  swoops  down,  to  rise  again  with  a  tiny  fish. 

These  fishes,  called  Tatabonko  by  Efik  and  Ekoi,  hold 
an  important  place  in  song  and  folk-lore.  A  little  Efik  ode  to 
them  begins — 

"  Enjenne  nmonn  asanga  nben  Tatabonko." 

"Ye  are  the  lords  of  the  water.  Ye  walk  near  the  banks.  O  tiny 
Tatabonko." 

Every  few  minutes  a  grey  heron  rises,  and  over  a  small  island, 
near  the  place  where  a  Sierra  Leonean  has  made  a  rice  farm, 
circle  flocks  of  mole-grey  birds  with  breasts  of  vivid  rose. 

Now  and  again  a  space  is  passed,  where  the  coarse  grass  has 
been  cropped  short  by  that  strange  creature  the  manatee.  Save 
an  elephant,  this  is  the  most  valuable  prize  which  can  fall  to 
the  lot  of  the  Ekoi  hunter.  Egbo  Societies,  those  powerful 
secret  associations  which,  before  the  coming  of  the  white  man, 
ruled  the  land,  are  known  to  give  as  much  as  £10  to  £15  for  a 
large  one.  This  is  not  only  because  its  flesh  is  thought  a 
delicacy,  but  because  they  believe  that  it  confers  magical 
properties  on  those  who  eat. 

Magic  is  the  key-note  on  which  the  lives  of  the  Ekoi  are  attuned. 
The  river  itself  is  magical,  and  bold  indeed  would  be  that  man 
or  woman  who  should  break  an  oath  sworn  on  its  name.  For 
somewhere  in  its  depths  dwells  Nimm — the  terrible — who  is 
always  ready,  at  the  call  of  her  women  worshippers,  to  send  up 
her  servants,  the  beasts  that  flock  down  to  drink  and  bathe  in 
her  stream,  to  destroy  the  farms  of  those  who  have  offended. 
Nimm  is,  above  all,  the  object  of  the  women's  devotion.  She 
manifests  herself  sometimes  as  a  huge  snake,  sometimes  as  a 
crocodile.  Her  priestesses  have  more  power  than  those  of  any 
other  cult,  and  the  society  which  bears  her  name  is  strong 
enough  to  hold  its  own  against  the  dreaded    "Egbo  Club" 


ON    THE   WAY   TO    OBAN  3 

itself.  It  is  during  the  rainy  season  that  she  is  most  to  be 
feared.  In  1909,  at  the  height  of  the  rains,  one  of  my  best 
paddlers  was  coming  up  with  a  consignment  of  goods  from 
Calabar.  Several  of  his  friends  were  in  the  canoe,  and  they 
were  all  talking  and  laughing.  Suddenly,  as  his  hand  neared 
the  water  at  the  down  stroke,  the  head  of  a  crocodile  appeared 
above  the  surface.  The  cruel  jaws  closed  on  the  man's  wrist, 
and  in  a  flash  he  was  dragged  under.  "  Nimm,"— whispered 
the  terrified  survivors,  as  they  paddled  on,  "  Who  knows  ? 
Perhaps  he  had  angered  his  wife,  and  she  prayed  to  Nimm  to 
avenge  her." 

As  one  passes  up  the  river,  further  and  further  from  Calabar 
and  all  it  represents,  one  leaves  behind  not  only  one's  own 
race,  but  one's  own  century  as  well,  and^  glides  backward 
through  the  ages,  up  the  stream  of  time,  to  the  childhood  of  the 
world — to  a  land  full  of  mystery  and  terror,  of  magic  plants,  of 
rivers  of  good  and  ill  fortune,  of  trees  and  rocks,  ever  lowering 
to  engulf  unwary  wayfarers ;  where  the  terror  of  witchcraft 
stalks  abroad,  and  where,  against  this  dread,  the  most  devoted 
love  or  faithful  service  counts  as  naught. 

After  awhile  the  banks  grow  steeper,  and  one  enters  a  deep 
gorge  which  the  water  has  worn  for  itself  in  the  course  of 
centuries.  Down  this  rolls  the  thunder  of  the  falls,  and  seems 
to  shut  out  all  sounds  from  the  world  one  has  left,  just  as  the 
bush,  creeping  down  around  one,  curtains  off  familiar  sights. 
This  gorge  forms  the  boundary  between  the  sedimentary 
deposits  below  and  the  crystalline  rocks  of  the  hilly  country,  of 
which  the  greater  part  of  the  Oban  district  is  formed.  The  line 
of  demarcation  lies  along  this  parallel  of  latitude  to  the 
Calabar  River  on  the  one  side  and  the  Akwa  Yafe  on  the  other. 

Beyond  Obutong  beach,  navigation  is  impossible,  for  the 
great  curve  of  the  first  falls  reaches  from  side  to  side  in  one 
white  horseshoe.  Above  this  again  comes  a  stretch  of  foaming 
water,  and  then  in  rapid  succession  the  higher  falls,  which  are 
very  beautiful  for  their  size. 

After  landing  on  the  little  beach,  a  climb  of  about  two 
hundred  steps,  steep  as  the  staircase  of  many  an  old  house  at 
home,  leads  to  a  three-roomed  Rest-house.  On  the  first  morning 
of  my  wife's  arrival  here,  she  was  dressing  with  her  sister  Bimba 

B    2 


4  IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

in  the  latter's  room,  when  suddenly  a  cry  rang  out,  so  evidently 
caused  by  terror,  that  it  brought  me  hurrying  to  their  door. 
My  wife  was  sitting  at  the  end  of  a  bamboo  bench,  which  runs 
along  the  wall,  trying  to  tear  off  the  long  marching  boot 
which  she  had  pulled  on,  without  taking  the  precaution  of 
first  shaking  it  upside  down  to  make  sure  that  neither 
snake,  lizard,  nor  millipede  was  hidden  within.  For  the 
moment  the  foot  was  stuck  fast  ;  beneath  it  something 
writhed  and  squirmed.  One  jerk  and  the  boot  was  in  my 
hand.  I  ran  with  it  to  the  open  house  door,  followed  by 
"boys"  and  carriers,  who  crowded  round  with  anxious, 
frightened  faces,  each  armed  with  stick  or  matchet  to  kill  the 
reptile  as  it  fell.  A  violent  shake,  and  the  cause  of  the  com- 
motion slid  into  view — a  small  oval  tablet  of  Roger  and  Gallet's 
soap  !  Roar  after  roar  of  laughter  burst  from  the  delighted 
carriers  at  the  sight,  and  for  the  rest  of  the  day  we  heard  fre- 
quent bursts  of  merriment,  or  saw  one  of  them  suddenly  double 
up  with  mirth  as  the  recollection  overcame  him. 

The  fear  of  snakes  is  no  idle  one,  for  they  literally  swarm  in 
the  District.  On  another  occasion  when  we  were  staying  in  the 
same  Rest-house,  my  wife  and  her  sister  had  both  gone  to  bed, 
while  I  was  still  working  in  the  central  room.  This  time  it  was 
Bimba  who  called,  and,  on  running  in,  we  found  her  huddled 
up  under  a  rug.  A  long  snake  had  let  itself  down  from  the  roof  on 
to  her  mosquito  net,  the  frail  strings  of  which  threatened  to  give 
way  under  its  weight,  and  collapse,  reptile  and  all,  on  to  the 
little,  shrinking  figure  beneath. 

When  the  unwelcome  visitor  had  been  disposed  of,  it  struck 
me  that  it  would  be  well  to  make  a  thorough  search  of  the 
roof.  As  a  result,  seven  cobras  from  4  to  6  feet  long  were 
accounted  for.  The  roof  was  low,  and  I  shot  at  close  quarters, 
so  that  each  snake  fell  down  in  several  sections  through  the 
close  criss-cross  of  palm  stems  which  form  the  under  roof. 
Each  part  seemed  endued  with  a  life  of  its  own,  so  that  before 
the  little  adventure  was  over  the  floors  of  the  three  rooms  were 
literally  covered  with  a  carpet  of  writhing  snakes.  Later  the 
District  Commissioner,  who  came  up  to  relieve  me,  asked  if  we 
had  noticed  some  fair-sized  holes  in  the  floor.  On  having  an 
affirmative  answer,  he  told  us  that  once  during  his  stay  there 


Esuk  Atiinbo.  Beach  on  Calabar  River. 


Kwa  River , 


ON   THE  WAY   TO   OBAN  5 

he  found  a  puff  adder  sleeping  beneath  one  of  the  benches. 
Subsequent  investigations  proved  the  holes  to  be  entrances  to 
the  abodes  of  quite  a  family  of  these  beautifully  marked, 
sluggish  reptiles. 

This  Rest-house  lies  close  to  the  road  which  runs  straight 
from  Obutong  to  Oban.  Roads  like  this,  only  naturally 
broader  and  better  in  older  Districts,  are  cut  through  the 
heart  of  dense  "  bush."  They  now  cross  the  country  in  every 
direction,  instead  of  the  winding  native  tracks,  often  hardly 
distinguishable  from  those  of  bush  animals,  which  were  the 
only  means  of  communication  over  a  great  part  of  Southern 
Nigeria  up  to  1902. 

One  hears  from  certain  sources  at  home  of  the  hardships 
entailed  on  the  natives  by  the  making  of  these  roads.  In  an 
unimportant,  thinly  populated  District  like  Oban,  not  only  the 
making  but  the  upkeep  entails  a  considerable  amount  of  labour 
on  the  scanty  population.  No  one,  however,  is  quicker  than 
the  natives  themselves  to  see  the  advantages  to  be  gained  from 
such  improved  means  of  communication,  whether  as  regards 
personal  safety  or  trading  facilities.  Whatever  the  people  of 
the  District  have  been  called  on  to  do  in  this  direction  has 
invariably  met  with  a  cheerful  and  willing  response.  On 
several  occasions  towns  have  offered,  of  their  own  free  will,  to 
do  more  than  had  been  asked  of  them,  and  in  some  cases  they 
have  even  made  a  new  piece  of  road  on  their  own  initiative,  as 
a  surprise  for  my  next  visit  to  their  part  of  the  country.  It 
would  perhaps  be  unnatural  were  they  not  willing  to  comply 
with  the  one  demand  made  on  them  by  Government  in  return  for 
all  that  it  gives,  and  even  for  this  they  are  well  paid. 

Natives  quickly  realise  the  importance  of  the  change.  Not 
long  ago  a  well-known  black  lawyer  was  discussing  the  matter 
with  a  native  clergyman  in  my  presence  on  board  an  Elder 
Dempster  liner.  His  voice  was  so  strident  as  to  be  heard  from 
end  to  end  of  the  deck.  "  You  should  go  to  Sapele,"  he  said, 
"  there  you  walk  for  200  miles,  safe  as  here.  This  Governor  * 
makes  good  roads.  We  call  him  '  the  road  maker.'  I  am  black 
man  myself,  but  I  tell  you  for  true.  It  is  only  white  men  who 
can  make  the  way  safe." 

*  Sir  Walter  Egerton. 


6  IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

Not  far  from  Obutong  stands  a  compound  which  goes  by 
the  name  of  "  Nwan's,"  but  is  now  fast  dropping  to  decay. 
Round  it  plantains  and  bread-fruit  trees  are  heavy  with  their 
unplucked  burdens,  while  behind  them  tower  cocoanut  palms, 
laden  with  great  green  globes.  Calabash  vines  trail  in  all 
directions  over  the  deserted  dwellings,  but  those  who  planted 
them  fear  to  come  back  and  gather  the  fruits  of  their  labour, 
for  no  "  Juju"  seems  strong  enough  to  keep  the  unquiet  ghost 
in  his  grave.  In  the  words  of  his  family,  "  Nwan  came  back 
too  much  and  made  us  fear."  So  they  migrated  to  Esuk  Aram, 
and  left  the  deserted  homestead  and  the  little  wayside  grave. 

The  road  from  Obutong  to  Oban  is  of  sand  and  gravel,  firm 
enough  for  a  bicycle,  but  on  it  the  unshod  feet  of  the  carriers 
make  no  sound.  It  leads  under  a  continuous  archway  of 
boughs,  so  thick  that  the  sunlight  only  filters  through  to 
dapple  the  roadway  or  sparkle  on  the  many  streams  which 
cross  it.  All  along  one  sees  the  spoor  of  bush  animals 
which  use  the  road  as  well  as  their  two-footed  brothers. 
Antelope,  buffalo,  wild  pig,  leopard,  and  elephant  all  leave 
their  traces — the  latter  too  often  in  broken  bridges,  which, 
alas  !  were  not  constructed  with  a  view  to  such  heavy  traffic. 
Here,  as  everywhere  in  the  District,  the  streams  are  crystal 
clear,  and  ripple  over  pebbly  beds  or  between  boulders  of 
quartz  or  dark  gneiss — the  former  of  these  stones  is  thought  to 
be  male  by  the  Ekoi,  the  latter  female.  White,  star-shaped 
lilies  raise  their  heads  above  the  water.  These  are  often  nearly 
6  inches  across,  and  usually  four  or  five  of  them  grow  on  a 
stem.  They  have  a  faint,  sweet  scent,  and  are  in  bloom  for  the 
greater  part  of  the  year.  Occasionally  the  road  passes  through 
a  village  with  its  "  Egbo  "  house  and  "Juju  "  tree,  or  a  little 
side  path  or  farm  track  branches  off  from  the  main  route,  with 
offerings  to  gods  or  ancestors  hung  out  on  poles. 

Near  several  of  the  towns  are  frail  little  huts  made  of  posts 
driven  into  the  ground,  and  supporting  a  palm-leaf  roof. 
Round  these  are  scattered  various  pieces  of  property,  such  as 
plates,  dishes,  &c,  all  broken,  and  cloths  which  were  once 
bright-coloured,  but  have  grown  faded  by  sun  and  rain.  These 
are  little  funeral  shrines,  built  over  the  graves  of  persons  of 
distinction.    The  things  scattered  round  are  broken,  so  that  their 


Oban-Obutong  Road. 


ON   THE   WAY   TO   OBAN 


astral  forms  may  be  set  free,  to  be  borne  by  the  shade  of  their 
owner  into  the  spirit  world. 

At  each  end  of  the  village  of  Ekong,  as  in  most  Ekoi  towns, 
dried  palm  leaves  about  30  feet  long  are  raised  on  high. 
These  are  stripped  bare,  save  for  a  tuft  at  the  top,  and  from 
them  dangle  small  wooden  objects,  much  the  shape  of  a  Moslem 
praying  board.  They  form  a  charm  to  keep  leopards  from  the 
town,  as  do  also  the  sections  of  palm  trunk  which  are  found 
half  buried  across  the  pathway,  flanked  at  either  end  with  a 
small  earthen  pot  containing  "medicine." 

After  a  15-mile  march  Oban  itself  is  reached.  At  the 
entrance,  as  in  all  Ekoi  towns, 
ghost  offerings  are  to  be  found, 
hung  on  either  side  of  the  way, 
or  buried  in  the  path.  These 
are  meant  to  propitiate  the 
spirits,  and  keep  them  from 
entering  the  town. 

The  Ekoi  have  a  wonderful 
folk-lore,  and  are  never  at  a 
loss  for  story  or  legend,  to 
explain  their  customs  or  be- 
liefs. Many  —  of  which  the 
following  is,  perhaps,  the  best- 
known  example  —  deal  with 
the  institution  of  ghost  sacri- 
fices at  the  entrance  to  the 
towns. 


Charm  against  Leopards.     Ekong. 


Why  Ghost  Offerings  are  made  before  Towns. 

Once  a  tortoise  had  two  children,  which  were  born  on  the  same 
day.  When  only  two  days  old  they  began  to  fight  together, 
and  so  equal  were  they  that  neither  could  overcome  the  other. 
Three  days  later  they  went  to  cut  bush,  and  make  a  farm  for 
their  father.  While  doing  this  they  heard  a  far-off  drumming. 
They  followed  the  sound,  and  it  led  them  to  the  ghost  town. 

The  ghosts  were  beating  their  drum  for  a  wrestling  match. 
"  Let  us  try  if  we  cannot  conquer  these  tortoises,"  said  they. 


8  IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

The  first  tortoise  stood  forth,  and  overthrew  twenty  of  the 
ghosts,  one  after  the  other,  so  that  they  fell  down  dead ;  for 
though  ghosts  have  died  once,  they  can  die  a  second  time,  and 
so  become  more  dead  than  before. 

Now  in  this  town  dwelt  a  ghost  named  Ne-Achi-Esam  (the 
Man  with  the  twenty  heads),  who  was  a  great  wrestler.  He 
was  lying  down  in  his  house,  sick  with  a  very  large  boil,  but 
when  he  heard  the  noise  of  the  combat  he  ran  out,  and  wished 
to  take  part  in  it.  He  said  to  himself,  "  My  boil  will  hold  me 
back  ;  what  can  I  do  ?  "  He  laid  his  hand  upon  the  boil,  and  by 
magic  transferred  it  to  a  post  that  stood  near.*  So  the  post  got 
the  boil,  and  he  himself  grew  well  again.  He  went  out  and 
said,  "  Now  I  will  see  what  I  can  do  against  Tortoise."  They 
closed,  and  he  fought  so  well  that  Tortoise  gave  way  before  him. 
A  great  box  had  been  brought  out  and  placed  near  the  drum. 
Ne-Achi-Esam  drove  Tortoise  against  this  with  such  force  that  he 
broke  in  two,  and  fell  to  the  ground  dead.  After  this  the  second 
tortoise  tried  to  avenge  his  brother,  but  met  with  a  like  fate. 

Then  the  ghosts  went  and  got  magic  "  medicine,"  which 
they  rubbed  on  all  their  companions  who  had  been  killed,  so 
that  they  came  to  life  again.  Next  they  cooked  "  chop  "  and 
ate  it.  Afterwards  they  all  went  back  to  bush  to  collect  firewood 
with  which  to  roast  the  two  tortoises. 

Now  one  of  the  ghosts  had  a  beautiful  daughter  who  was  in 
the  fatting-house.f  She  had  pity  on  the  tortoises,  and  when  the 
other  ghosts  had  gone,  slipped  out  and  went  and  got  magic 
leaves.  These  she  crushed,  and  laid  them  on  the  mouths  and 
eyes  of  the  tortoises.  After  awhile  the  latter  came  to  life 
again.  She  pointed  out  the  road  to  them,  and  said,  "  Here 
is  your  way.  Go  home  now  before  the  others  come  back."  So 
they  thanked  her  and  went. 

As  the  two  hurried  along,  they  heard  the  sound  of  the 
ghosts  returning  with  the  firewood,  so  they  hid  themselves  in 
the  bush  till  the  way  should  be  clear.  When  one  of  the 
ghosts  reached  the  place,  he  stood  for  a  long  time,  and  said,  "  I 
think  the  two  tortoises  have  escaped,  and  are  hiding  here." 

*  Compare  the  method  of  Paracelsus. 

t  A  room  set  apart  in  most  compounds  for  the  seclusion  of  girls,  while  being 
fattened  before  marriage. 


ON    THE   WAY  TO   OBAN  g 

Then  the  ghosts  called  to  the  black  ants,  and  sent  them  to 
search  for  the  tortoises  ;  also  they  called  water  from  the  river,  and 
bade  it  flow  round  and  seek  them.  In  their  terror  the  tortoises 
cried  for  help  to  Obassi  Osaw.*  So  neither  the  ants  nor  the  water 
could  find  them.    At  last  all  gave  up  the  search  and  went  home. 

When  the  way  was  clear  once  more,  the  tortoises  crept  out  and 
hurried  onward.  After  awhile  they  saw  a  bunch  of  ripe  plantains. 
Of  these  they  took  seven,  and  went  on  again  till  they  came  to  a 
place  where  the  road  branched  into  two.  There  they  laid  down 
the  seven  ripe  plantains  and  went  onward. 

When  the  ghosts  got  back  to  their  town,  and  found  that  their 
prey  had  escaped,  they  said,  "  Let  us  follow."  They  ran  very 
swiftly  till  they  came  to  the  place  where  the  plantains  lay. 

The  first  ghost  saw  them,  and  began  to  count — I,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6 
he  counted,  but  could  not  add  7.  The  second  ghost  pushed 
him  aside.  "  Go  away,"  he  said,  "  you  know  no  addition." 
He  also  counted  up  to  six,  but  could  get  no  further.  Then  all  the 
ghosts  tried,  but  none  of  them  could  add  the  seventh  number. 

Meantime  Obassi  Osaw  had  seen  the  danger  of  the 
tortoises,  and  determined  to  help  them.  He  counselled  them 
to  use  every  effort  to  reach  their  town,  and  there  prepare  to 
receive  their  pursuers.  "  There  is  one  thing  you  can  do,"  he 
said,  "  to  keep  the  ghosts  from  entering  your  town.  Kill  goats 
and  cows,  get  palm  oil  and  palm  wine  and  lay  them  before  the 
entrance.  When  they  see  these  sacrifices  they  will  eat,  and  go 
back  satisfied  to  their  own  place." 

This  the  tortoises  did,  and  when  the  ghosts  came  before  the 
town  they  found  a  rich  offering.  All  of  them  ate  and  were  well 
content,  save  Ne-Achi-Esam  alone,  who  said,  "  Let  us  enter 
the  town  "  ;  but  the  others  answered,  "  No,  we  may  not  enter." 

Since  then,  when  ghosts  come  to  your  house,  seeking  some- 
thing, you  inquire  by  the  charm  t  what  sacrifice  they  are  asking, 
and  having  found  out,  you  take  it  to  the  beginning  of  the  road, 
and  offer  it  there. 

This  is  the  reason  why  whenever  you  near  a  town  you  see 
sacrifices  set  out  for  the  ghosts,  so  that  they  should  no  longer 
enter  within. 

*  The  Sky  God. 

t  See  Method  of  Divination,  p.  174. 


io   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

At  Oban  there  are  two  circles  of  unhewn  stones,  each  arranged 
round  a  "  Juju  "  tree.  Here  mystic  rites  are  performed  when 
the  moon  is  at  the  full,  and  on  the  rising  of  the  new  moon. 
The  latter  ceremony  takes  place  near  the  compound  of  Chief 
Itaokui,  not  far  from  the  "  Egbo  "  house,  and  it  is  here  that 
one  of  the  most  important  of  the  women's  "  Jujus  "  is  held.  At 
the  new  moon  the  women  and  girls  gather  together.  The  head 
women  sit  round  on  the  stones  of  the  circle,  and  distribute 
"medicine"  made  of  meat  and  plantains,  mixed  with  Juju 
herbs  and  leaves.  Even  the  very  young  girls  partake  of  this. 
When  all  has  been  consumed  they  start  a  dance,  which  is  only 
used  on  this  occasion. 

The  object  of  the  ceremony  is  to  insure  fruitfulness  when  the 
time  comes  for  marriage,  and  it  is  firmly  believed  that  any 
neglect  of  it  would  be  punished  by  barrenness.  Should  a 
woman  specially  long  for  a  child,  she  brings  a  goat  to  be 
sacrificed ;  then  stands  within  the  circle,  and  prays  that  a  babe 
may  be  born  to  her.  Her  forehead  is  smeared  with  the  blood 
of  the  sacrifice,  and  it  is  thought  certain  that  her  prayer  will 
be  granted  within  the  year. 

Neither  men  nor  boys  are  allowed  to  approach  during  these 
rites,  though  women  are  not  prevented  from  looking  on  when 
the  men  gather  to  carry  out  theirs  before  the  Juju  "  Nchibbi." 
This  ceremony  is  performed  at  the  smaller  circle,  when  the 
moon  is  at  the  full.  The  scene  on  bright  moonlight  nights  is 
uncanny  to  a  degree,  and  it  is  hard  for  any  European,  who  has 
come  suddenly  on  such  a  sight,  to  believe  that  he  is  still  in  the 
twentieth  century,  and  has  not  rather  stumbled  on  some  witches' 
sabbat  of  the  middle  ages. 

Near  the  greater  circle  of  stones  stands  the  miniature  house 
of  the  Juju  "  Ta  Amat,"  where  the  "  small-pox  medicine  "  and 
that  used  to  ward  off  any  epidemic  is  kept.  When  the  people 
fear  the  approach  of  an  infectious  disease,  the  head  chief 
enters  the  little  hut  and  makes  "  medicine,"  compounded  of 
magic  herbs.  This  the  people  drink,  and  it  is  given  to  all 
strangers,  especially  to  those  who  may  have  come  from  an 
infected  area.  In  this  way  it  is  hoped  that  disease  may  be 
warded  off,  while  as  a  further  safeguard  inoculation  is 
practised.     This  is  done  by  injecting  into  the  arm  the  milky 


PHI  • 


Juju  Circle  at  Oban. 


A  .         • 


Egbo  House  and  Juju  Trees. 


ON    THE   WAY   TO    OBAN  n 

juice    of  the    leaves    of   a    certain    tree    planted  near  for  the 
purpose. 

Oban  was  chosen  as  the  seat  of  government  for  the  District, 
because  it  lies  high  and  is  easily  reached  from  all  parts  of  the 
Ekoi  country.  Half  a  mile  from  the  town  stands  the  station 
on  a  hill,  the  top  of  which  had  to  be  sliced  off  to  make  a  level 
space  large  enough  for  the  necessary  buildings.  This  cleared 
land  forms  the  most  extensive  open  space  in  the  District,  and 
the  view  from  the  house  is  beautiful  enough  to  make  up  for 
the  plainness  of  the  structure  itself.  In  front,  beyond  the 
River  Ataiyo,  rises  the  rounded  hill  of  Oban,  clothed  to  the 
summit  by  masses  of  flowering  trees,  some  of  which  are 
always  in  bloom.  Behind  this  the  sun  sinks  in  a  perfect 
wonder  of  colour,  and  perhaps  the  sunsets  and  sunrises, 
beautiful  everywhere,  are  the  most  gorgeous  sights  of  all  this 
gorgeous  land.  On  all  sides  the  "  bush  "  sweeps  down  and 
shuts  in  the  little  clearing,  while  to  the  rear,  beyond  this 
green  belt,  tower  the  blue  peaks  of  the  Cameroons. 

From  the  top  of  Oban  hill  a  good  view  is  to  be  had. 
To  the  north  lie  clusters  of  peaks,  of  every  shape  and  form, 
3,000  to  4,000  feet  high,  wooded  to  the  summit  and  forming 
the  watershed  of  the  country  between  the  Cross  River  and 
the  sea.  To  the  south  flow  those  streams  which  unite  to 
form  the  Calabar,  the  Kwa,  and  the  Akwa  Yafe  Rivers  ;  while 
to  the  north  flow  many  of  the  main  tributaries  of  the  Cross 
River. 

The  rocks  of  the  District  are  mostly  metamorphic,  and  the  hill, 
on  which  the  station  is  built,  is  a  good  example  of  the  geological 
formation  of  this  part  of  the  country.  It  is  mainly  composed 
of  gneiss ;  but  there  is  a  large  vein  of  manganese,  and  huge 
masses  of  quartz  and  felspar,  with  pegmatite  dykes  running 
through  all.  Traces  of  ilmenite,  columbite,  magnetite,  tin  and 
monazite  are  also  to  be  found. 

There  is  always  a  slight  breeze  here,  and  even  to  the  most 
careless  glance  the  difference  in  healthfulness  between  those 
children  who  live  on  the  hill,  in  the  new  well-ventilated  houses 
built  for  the  station  people,  and  their  contemporaries  in  Oban 
itself,  is  very  marked.  The  Ekoi  are  devoted  parents,  but  it 
will   take   years   of   patient    teaching    before    they  grasp   the 


12   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

importance  of  fresh  air  and  the  simplest  sanitary  measures  for 
the  health  of  their  little  ones.  They  are  most  particular  in 
the  matter  of  personal  cleanliness  so  far  as  bathing  and  the 
washing  of  garments  are  concerned,  but  the  old  habit  of 
crowding  together  for  safety,  in  case  of  attack  from  a  hostile 
tribe,  still  influences  them  to  build  their  compounds  of  small, 
ill-ventilated  rooms.  They  seem  utterly  indifferent  to  the 
existence  of  evil  smells,  and  to  this  cause  the  high  death-rate 
among  the  children  is  chiefly  due.  So  high  is  it,  indeed,  as  to 
be  hardly  more  than  covered  by  the  birth-rate. 

One  day,  sixty-two  married  women  were  chosen  at  haphazard 
in  Oban  town.  To  these  it  was  found  that  270  children  had 
been  born,  of  whom  163  had  died.  This  gives  an  average  of 
4*3  children  to  each,  of  whom  only  17  now  survive.  Of  these 
sixty-two  women,  one  had  borne  fifteen  children,  and  seven 
others  ten  or  over,  while  only  four  were  childless. 

Oban  gives  its  name  to  the  district,  and  from  this  fact  and  its 
position  is  regarded  by  all  Ekoi  under  British  rule,  and  even  by 
many  on  the  other  side  of  the  border,  as  the  central  point  of 
their  race. 

Perhaps  therefore,  before  going  further,  it  would  be  well 
to  pause  here  a  little,  and  attempt  some  account  of  the 
influences  which  have  shaped  the  character  of  the  people. 


CHAPTER   II 

Religion 

The  religion  of  the  Ekoi  is  altogether  a  fascinating  study. 
Its  principal  features  are  the  Cult  of  Ancestors  and  of  Nature 
Forces.  These  dominate  the  lives  of  the  people  to  such  an 
extent,  and  have  such  countless  ramifications,  that  it  becomes 
impossible  to  arrange  definitely  under  headings,  or  say  where 
one  begins  and  the  other  ends.  Ancestor  worship,  Nature 
Jujus,  Secret  Societies,  the  principal  events  of  life,  and  the 
commonest  actions  of  the  day,  all  blend  inextricably  in  a 
complicated  ritual. 

Of  actual  Deities  there  are  only  two,  Obassi  Osaw,*  the  Sky 
God,  and  the  Earth  God  Obassi  Nsi,  but  of  the  less  powerful 
Genii  of  trees,  lakes,  rocks  and  rivers,  there  are  countless  hordes. 
The  whole  bush  is  peopled  with  these  supernatural  beings  ;  its 
dim  twilight  thick  with  terrible,  half-human  shapes,  akin  to  the 
were-wolves  of  our  own  Northern  lands.  Here,  more  truly 
even  than  in  old  Greece,  the  terror  of  Pan  reigns  supreme. 

The  shadow  of  the  bush  lies  heavy  over  all ;  but  beneath  the 
thousand  superstitions  which  have  grown  up,  fungus-like,  in  its 
dark  places,  are  still  to  be  found  traces  of  an  older,  purer  form 
of  worship— a  relic  possibly  of  that  forgotten  time  when  the 
Ekoi  were  a  people  living  in  open  lands,  swept  by  free  air  and 
bounded  by  wide  horizons. 

On  every  hand,  indeed,  indications  are  to  be  found,  beneath 
modern  corruptions  and  disfigurements,  of  a  form  of  worship, 
which  carries  us  back  to  the  oldest  known  Minoan  civilisation, 
and  links  the  belief  of  the  present-day  Ekoi  with  that  of  the 
ancient  Phoenician,  the  Egyptian,  the  Roman,  and  the  Greek. 

In  some  ways,  indeed,  the  Ekoi  form  may  be  termed  the 
most  ancient  of  all,  for  whereas   in  the  oldest  representation 

*  Compare  Osa,  the  supreme  Deity  of  the  Binis,  and  the  Yoruba  generic  term 
for  "  Juju." 


i4        IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 


of  Minoan  bird  and  tree  worship  which  have  come  to  light,  the 
tree  is  shown  almost  entirely  conventionalised  into  pillar 
shape,  and  later  as  a  mere  pedestal  for  the  bird,  among  the  Ekoi 
it  still  keeps  its  original  form,  that  of  the  actual,  living  tree. 

The  smallest  town  has  its  "Juju"  tree.  There  are  many 
varieties  of  these,  but  each  stands  alone,  usually  in  an  open 
space  before  the  Egbo  house.  They  are  generally  bound  round 
with  tie-tie,  or  surrounded  by  a  little  fence  festooned  with 
linked  rings  of  the  same.  On  the  branches  of  these  trees  hang 
countless  nests  of  one  kind  or  another  of  the  weaver  bird. 
Even  the  smallest  child  knows  that  these  are  sacred,  for  on 
them  depends  the  prosperity  of  the  town.  Should  they  be 
injured  or  driven  away  the  women  would  become  barren  and 
the  cattle  cease  to  bear.  The  birds  know  that  they  are  safe 
and  flit  fearlessly  hither  and  thither,  keeping  up  such  a  loud 
twittering  and  crying  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  hear  oneself 
speak  in  their  neighbourhood. 

Surely  in  this  we  have  the  oldest  picturing  of  the  wedding  of 
earth  and  sky  ;  Sky  Father  and  Earth  Mother — for  of  all  created 
things  the  bird  is  most  akin  to  air  and  sky,  while  the  tree, 
with  its  roots  in  the  dark  ground,  reaching  even,  as  in  many 
Northern  sagas,  to  the  nether  world,  is  the  best  and  oldest 
personification  of  Mother  Earth. 

Another  possible  picturing  of  this 
mystic  marriage  was  found  painted  on 
the  inner  wall  of  the  Egbo  house  at 
Mbeban.  What  first  struck  me  was 
an  apparent  representation  of  the 
Cretan  double-headed  axe,  lying 
horizontally  across  a  knobbed  sceptre. 
Over  these  again,  diagonally,  lies  an 
Egbo  feather.  Without  any  hint  from 
me  these  signs  were  explained  in  a 
way  which  tallied  exactly  with  my 
own  interpretation. 

The  cult  of  the  double-axe  is  known 
to  have  prevailed  in  Egypt  during  certain  dynasties.  Vague 
memories  came  back  to  me  of  an  axe  and  knobbed  sceptre, 
used  together  as  symbols  of  a  deity.     Attempts  to  verify  this 


Ekoi  Symbols:  Double-headed 

Axe,    Knobbed     Sceptre    and 

Feather. 


RELIGION 


15 


impression  led  me  to  read  a  paper  on  "  The  Cretan  Axe  Cult 
outside  Crete,"*  in  which  the  following  passages  occur: — ■ 

"  Longp6rier  also  published  an   Assyrian    cylinder  in  white 
agate,   which    had    been    brought    from    Constantinople    by   a 


certain  M.  Cayol. 
This  shows  a 
priestly  person- 
age presenting 
a  fish  to  a  deity, 
who  is  symbo- 
lized by  an  axe 
and  a  knobbed 
sceptre  erected  on 
a  high  backed 
throne.  .  .  ." 

"It  will  be  re- 
membered that 


Assyrian  Cylinder,  showing  Axe  and  Knobbed  Sceptre 
as  Symbols  of  a  Deity. 


the  painted  sarcophagus  from  Hagia  Triada,  in  Crete,  represents 
a  pair  of  double-axes  embedded  in  two  supports  of  unique 
design.  Professor  von  Duhn  kindly  informs  me  that  these  sup- 
ports are  apparently  pillars  or  posts  covered  with  leaves,  most 
probably  with  cypress  leaves.  If  so,  they  were  obviously  ritual  sub- 
stitutes for  cypress  trees.  On  either  axe  is  perched  a  bird.  .  .  ." 
After  going  the  round  of  the  Mediterranean  the  author  pro- 

ceeds    to     gather     up 

"It  seems  to  me, 
then,  that  throughout 
theiEgean  andAdriatic 
area  (not  to  mention 
localities  still  further 
afield)  we  have  to  do 
with  a  cult  of  imme- 
morial antiquity — the 
joint  worship  of  a  sky- 
father  and  an  earth-mother.  The  former  descends  from  above 
when  the  lightning  flashes  down,  and,  in  old  aniconic  days, 
leaves  his  weapon  as  a  tangible  token  of  himself.     The  latter 

*  By  A.  B.  Cook.      Transactions  of  the  third  International  Congress  for  tha 
History  of  Religions,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  184,  189,  193. 


U-TTW 


Cretan  Double-headed 
Axe. 


Labrys. 


16   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

ascends  from  below  when  vegetation  springs  up,  and,  at  the 
same  early  epoch,  gives  visible  proof  of  her  presence  in  the 
sacred  tree.  Where,  as  was  the  case  with  the  sarcophagus  from 
Hagia  Triada,  we  see  the  axe  embedded  in  the  tree  trunk,  there 
we  must  recognize  the  union  of  the  sky-father  with  the  earth- 
mother — a  union  essential  to  the  fertility  of  crops,  and  beasts, 
and  men.  The  axe  embedded  in  a  tree  is  the  prototype  of  the 
axe  embedded  in  a  wooden  column  or  a  stalactite  pillar. 
Ultimately  a  double-axe  of  the  usual  type  is  found  serving  as  a 
symbol  of  the  united  deities,  the  axe  head  being  the  male,  the 
axe  handle  the  female,  element  in  their  union." 

In  the  Ekoi  representation,  the  cleft  base  of  the  axe  may 
well  be  a  highly  conventionalized  remnant  of  pillar  or  tree, 
while  the  feather,  now  that  of  the  peacock  sacred  to  Egbo 
societies,  probably  in  earlier  days  was  merely  a  bird  symbol. 
The  two  circles  may  well  be  meant  for  eggs,  and  therefore  as 
indications  of  fertility. 

In  the  course  of  the  ages,  strangely  enough,  Mother  Earth 
has  become  Father  Earth  in  Ekoi  legend.  The  two  principal 
Deities,  as  has  been  mentioned,  are  now  Obassi  Osaw,  the 
Sky  God,  and  the  Earth  God  Obassi  Nsi.  Still  enough  legends 
and  fragments  of  ritual  have  been  collected  to  show  that  the 
older  idea  has  not  yet  quite  died  out.  This  may  be  seen  from 
the  following  conversation  with  Ndum  of  Nsan,  one  of  the 
most  interesting  of  the  Ekoi.  He  is  as  yet  practically  untouched 
by  "White"  influence,  knows  no  word  of  English,  and  is  a 
mine  of  folk-lore. 

"  Who  is  Obassi  Nsi  ?  "  he  was  asked. 

"  He  is  Obassi  who  is  kind  to  us,"  he  answered. 

"  Where  does  he  live  ?  " 

"  Under  the  earth.  There  is  a  world  beneath  the  earth  whose 
king  is  Obassi  Nsi." 

"  Which  do  you  think  the  more  powerful — Obassi  Nsi  or 
Obassi  Osaw?  " 

"  Both  are  powerful,  but  Osaw  is  cruel  and  Nsi  kind  and  good." 

"  Why  then  do  you  pray  to  Obassi  Osaw  ?  " 

"  Obassi  Nsi  told  us  to  do  so,  that  Osaw  might  spare  our  lives, 
for  the  latter  always  seeks  to  kill  us." 

"  How  do  you  know  that  Osaw  is  fierce  and  cruel  ?  " 


RELIGION  17 

"  Because  he  tries  to  kill  us  with  thunder  and  in  many  other 
ways.  Also,  he  is  not  so  loving  and  near  to  us  as  Obassi  Nsi,  for 
he  cannot  receive  our  offerings.  We  sometimes  throw  things 
up  into  the  air  for  him,  but  they  always  fall  back  again  to  the 
earth.  Obassi  Nsi  draws  them  down  ;  that  shows  he  is  more 
powerful." 

"  How  do  you  know  that  Obassi  Nsi  is  good  ?  " 

"  He  never  shows  us  terrifying  things  as  Osaw  does,  such  as 
thunder  or  lightning,  nor  the  sun  which  blazes  so  hot  as  to 
frighten  us  sometimes,  and  the  rain  which  falls  so  heavily  at 
others  as  to  make  us  think  there  will  be  no  more  sunshine. 
Nsi  ripens  our  yams,  cocos,  plantains,  &c,  which  we  plant  in 
the  ground.  "When  we  are  dead  we  are  buried  in  the  ground,  and 
go  to  the  world  under  the  earth,  to  our  Father  Obassi  Nsi." 

"  What  do  you  think  happens  to  you  when  you  are  buried  ?  " 

"  When  a  man's  body  decays,  a  new  form  comes  out  of  it,  in 
every  way  like  the  man  himself  when  he  was  above  ground. 
This  new  shape  goes  down  to  its  Lord,  Obassi  Nsi,  carrying 
with  it  all  that  was  spent  on  its  funeral  in  the  world  above." 

"  You  said  that  Obassi  Nsi  told  you  to  make  offerings  to  Obassi 
Osaw.  Why  then  does  he  draw  them  down  to  himself,  as  you 
say  he  does  ?  " 

"  He  draws  them  back  because  he  is  greater  than  Osaw. 
Besides,  he  wants  the  latter  to  come  to  him,  that  they  may 
divide  the  offerings  between  them.    They  are,  of  course,  friends." 

"  Does  Obassi  Nsi  ever  want  to  kill  you  ?  " 

"  No,  he  would  like  us  to  live  always  ;  but  when  Osaw  kills 
us,  Nsi  takes  us  to  his  country  under  the  earth." 

"  You  said  that  you  were  told  to  make  offerings  to  Osaw,  in 
order  that  he  might  spare  your  lives.  How  then  can  Nsi,  who 
does  not  want  you  to  die,  partake  of  these  ?  " 

(Hesitation  and  shy  laughter.) 

"  I  told  you  that  they  are  friends.  They  talk  together  and 
eat  together.  I  think  that  Obassi  Nsi  is  really  our  mother  and 
Osaw  our  father.  For  whenever  we  make  offerings  we  are  taught 
to  say  Nta  Obassi  (Lord  Obassi)  and  Ma  Obassi  (Lady  Obassi). 
Now  I  think  that  the  lord  is  Osaw,  and  the  lady  Nsi.  Surely 
Nsi  must  be  a  woman,  and  our  mother,  for  it  is  well  known 
to  all  people  that  a  woman  has  the  tenderest  heart." 

s.b.  c 


18   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

After  this  Ndum  could  be  drawn  into  no  more  answers,  but 
only  laughed  softly  in  his  shy  way  at  attempts  to  get  further 
information  ;  and  soon  bade  "  good  night "  and  went  back 
to  his  compound. 

Another  story  in  which  a  feminine  Deity  also  figures  was  told 
by  Itambo  Isom  of  Niaji. 

How  the  Poor  Boy  came  to  the  Land  of  Obassi  Osaw. 

Two  great  friends  once  lived  in  the  same  town.  One  was 
poor  and  the  other  very  rich,  and  each  of  them  had  an  only  son. 

Now,  on  a  day,  the  poor  man  died,  and,  not  long  after,  his 
rich  friend  also  fell  ill.  The  latter  therefore  called  to  the  two 
boys  and  said  : 

"  I  do  not  think  that  I  can  live  much  longer  on  earth.  I 
have  gathered  together  everything  necessary  for  the  funeral 
ceremonies  of  my  dead  friend.  When  I  die  I  should  like  you 
two  boys  to  dwell  together."  Next  he  told  them  to  go  to  the 
farm  and  fetch  yams.     When  these  were  brought  he  said  : 

"  Cut  them  into  pieces  and  boil  them.  Mix  them  with  palm 
oil,  and  let  me  try  if  I  can  eat  once  more." 

When  all  was  ready  the  boys  brought  the  dish  before  him. 
Some  of  the  food  he  put  in  his  own  mouth  and  threw  some  on 
the  ground,  calling  at  the  same  time  on  the  name  of  his  late 
friend.    Soon  after  the  offering  had  been  made,  he  himself  died. 

The  two  children  did  not  know  that  their  protector  was 
dead.  They  thought  only  that  he  was  very  ill,  so  they  left  him, 
and  went  out  weeping. 

On  their  return  they  saw  the  body  lying  there,  and  the  yams 
left  almost  untouched.  These  they  ate,  then  licked  up  the 
palm  oil,  washed  the  calabash,  and  hung  it  up  again  in  its  place. 

Now  neither  of  the  fathers  had  either  brother  or  sister,  so  one 
of  the  principal  men  in  the  town  took  the  boys  to  his  house  and 
cared  for  them.  They  grew  up  very  quickly,  and  one  day  left  their 
foster-father,  and  went  back  to  the  rich  man's  old  compound. 

Not  long  after,  their  late  guardian  saw  them  roaming  and  said  : 

"  Why  will  you  not  live  with  me  as  you  used  to  do  ?  Come, 
let  us  go  back  to  my  house.  You  are  not  yet  old  enough  to  live 
alone." 

They  answered,  "  We  will  not  live  in  any  house  but  our  own." 


RELIGION  19 

So  the  man  was  angered  and  said,  "  From  to-day  I  give  up 
with  you.     Never  come  to  me  any  more." 

The  boys  replied,  "  We  are  in  charge  of  our  fathers'  property. 
We  have  neither  brother  nor  sister  to  share  it  with  us.  We 
are  strong  and  healthy  and  can  take  care  of  ourselves  until  we 
are  fully  grown." 

When  they  were  alone,  the  son  of  the  rich  man  said  to  the 
poor  man's  son,  "  Come,  we  must  perform  the  ceremonies  for  the 
deaths  of  our  fathers.    Let  us  give  both  plays  at  the  same  time." 

The  poor  man's  son  said,  "  I  do  not  agree.  My  father  died 
first.  Let  us  go  step  by  step."  So  they  began  the  rites  for  the 
death  of  the  poor  man.  They  killed  two  cows  and  two  goats, 
and  when  all  the  first  customs  were  finished,  they  began  those 
for  the  rich  boy's  father.  For  him  they  killed  twelve  cows  and 
twelve  out  of  their  remaining  fifteen  goats.  From  what  was  left 
the  poor  boy  took  one  goat  and  the  rich  boy  two,  each  for  his  own. 

Next  day  they  bought  a  chicken.  In  course  of  time  it  grew 
to  be  a  hen,  and  hatched  out  ten  eggs,  of  which  they  each  took 
five.  Both  tended  the  chicks,  but  a  hawk  came  and  carried  off 
all  those  which  belonged  to  the  poor  man's  son.  Also  a  leopard 
came  and  ate  up  his  one  goat. 

Then  Mkpaw-Ekett  (Poor)  went  to  Nsuma-Mbi  (Rich)  and 
said,  "  Hawk  has  taken  away  all  my  chickens  and  leopard  has 
eaten  my  goat.  My  father  is  dead  ;  I  have  no  relations  to  care  for 
me  ;  I  cannot  endure  such  continued  ill-fortune,  and  wish  there- 
fore to  hang  myself  up  and  die."  The  rich  boy  comforted  him  for 
that  time,  but  next  day,  very  early  in  the  morning,  Mkpaw  asked  : 

"  Have  you  any  eggs  to  give  me  that  I  may  go  and  make 
sacrifice  ?  " 

Nsuma  gave  what  his  friend  wanted,  and  then  went  to  work 
on  his  farm. 

As  the  sun  rose,  the  poor  boy  stood  with  the  eggs  in  his 
hand.  He  looked  up  at  the  sun,  and  held  them  so  that  they 
pointed  towards  it.  "  Male  God  !  Female  God  !  "  he  cried, 
"  Will  you  open  the  gate  for  me  ?  "  Then  the  eggs  slipped 
from  his  hand,  and  out  of  each  flew  a  small  chick.  These 
surrounded  the  boy,  and  flew  with  him  up  to  the  sky,  to  the 
kingdom  of  Obassi  Osaw. 

The  first  thing  which  Mkpaw  saw  on  reaching  this  land  was 

c  2 


20   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

a  woman  full  of  sores   over  all    her  body.     She  said  to  him, 
''  Why  do  you  come  here,  Earth-child  ?  "     He  answered  : 

"  I  have  come  by  reason  of  the  loss  of  my  property." 

The  woman  said,  "  If  you  will  wash  my  sores  I  will  tell  you 
something."     He  did  as  she  asked,  and  she  continued  : 

"  Listen  well.  In  this  country  there  are  two  kinds  of  flies — 
Nkonn  (Bee)  and  Mfut  (Red-fly).*  When  you  come  to  the  house 
where  Obassi  sits  in  judgment  you  will  see  many  chiefs.  Watch 
Mfut,  and  when  he  settles  on  one  of  them,  make  the  sign  of 
supplication  before  him,  for  that  one  will  be  Obassi  himself." 

The  boy  did  as  he  was  bidden,  and,  when  Mfut  alighted  on 
the  shoulder  of  one  of  the  chiefs,  approached  and  bent  down 
before  him,  with  the  fingers  of  both  hands  touching  the  ground. 

Obassi  said,  "  I  know  why  you  have  come.  It  is  about  the 
loss  of  your  property.  Sit  down  awhile.  The  ghost  people  will 
soon  come  by,  on  their  way  to  market,  and  I  will  show  you  your 
poor  father  and  his  rich  friend." 

First  Nsuma's  mother  went  by,  next  the  two  fathers,  and 
after  a  little  while  Mkpaw  saw  his  own  mother,  with  her  old 
cloth  round  her  loins. 

When  all  had  passed  by,  Obassi  said  to  the  boy,  "  Here  is  a 
small  box.  Take  it  home  with  you.  Whenever  you  want  any- 
thing, ask  this  box  and  it  will  give  it  to  you ;  but  take  care  that 
it  is  never  left  open,  and,  above  all,  let  no  woman  touch  it." 

When  the  boy  reached  earth  again,  he  showed  the  box  to  his 
friend.     The  latter  asked  : 

"  Where  have  you  been  all  this  time  ?  " 

Mkpaw  answered,  "  I  have  been  with  Obassi  Osaw,  who  gave 
me  this  box." 

As  he  said  this,  he  went  to  it  and  asked  for  a  fine  cloth  to 
give  to  his  friend.  When  this  fluttered  out  from  under  the  lid, 
Mkpaw  said  : 

"  Here  is  a  present  for  you,  that  you  may  know  that  I  have 
come  from  the  home  of  my  parents."  On  this  both  were  very 
glad  and  began  to  dance. 

Now  the  rich  boy  had  just  married  a  wife.  On  hearing  the 
sound  of  dancing  and  singing  she  ran  in,  and,  before  they  could 
stop  her,  bad  laid  hold  of  the  box  that  she  might  see  what  it  was. 

So  both  sons  died. 

*  Chxysops  silacea,  Austen. 


RELIGION 


21 


This  is  the  reason  why,  when  we  buy  a  strong  Juju,  the  priest 
tells  us  to  take  great  care  of  it  and  not  allow  our  wives  to  touch  it. 

The  rule  is  not  for  all  Jujus,  but  for  the  principal  ones.  For 
instance,  women  must  never  touch  Bigui  or  Mfam,  or  the  Juju 
would  certainly  catch  them. 


As  another  indication  of  the  original  femininity  of  Obassi  Nsi, 
it  will  be  noticed  that  in  the  story  quoted  on  p.  98,  when 
Obassi  Osaw  and 
Obassi  Nsi  each 
built  a  town,  the 
latter  was  the 
founder  and  pro- 
tector of  that  set 
apart  for  women. 

The  two  Deities 
enter  into  countless 
folk  -  lore  stories, 
from  which  many 
details  as  to  their 
nature  and  attri- 
butes may  be 
gleaned. 

In  the  central 
atrium  of  almost 
every  compound  is 
set  a   little    group, 


Emblems  of  Obassi  Nsi. 


consisting  usually  of  a  growing  tree,  carved  post  and  sacri- 
ficial stone,  sacred  to  one  or  other  of  the  Deities.  By  far 
the  greater  number  of  these  are  dedicated  to  Obassi  Nsi,  as  is 
shown  by  the  coco  yams  planted,  or  laid  in  a  small  heap,  close 
by.  Those  of  Obassi  Osaw  can  easily  be  distinguished  by  the 
clump  of  epiphytic  ferns  growing  upon  the  tree  trunk. 

Before  beginning  the  work  of  the  day,  each  man  or  woman 
who  still  clings  to  the  old  custom,  takes  a  calabash  of  water  and 
goes  into  the  central  court  to  wash.  With  eyes  lifted  to  the 
newly-risen  sun  they  pray  : 

"  Eyo  ofu,       eyo         egu,         'me  eyange  eyange." 

"  Sun  of  morning,  sun  of  evening,  let  me  (be)  free  from  danger  (to-day)." 


22    IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

This  is  done  because  the  sun  is  supposed  to  be  deputed  by 
Obassi  to  receive  all  prayers  offered  on  earth,  and  carry  them 
before  him. 

Next,  water  is  taken  in  the  right  hand  and  held  on  high, 
while  the  name  of  Obassi  Osaw  is  invoked.  Then  a  little  is 
taken  in  the  left  hand  and  poured  out  on  the  ground  to  entreat 
the  protection  of  Obassi  Nsi. 

In  all  ceremonies,  whether  connected  with  Juju  or  ancestor 
worship,  the  names  of  the  two  Deities  must  first  be  invoked. 

When  the  new  moon  is  seen  in  the  sky,  every  man,  woman 
and  child  comes  out  and  offers  a  prayer  in  the  following  words  : 

"  'Mi    mfe,    'Mi    mfe  ka  osaw,        nkaiyen       njum  ebi." 
"  Moon  new,  Moon  new  in  sky,   let  me  not  see  thing  bad." 
Or 

"  'Mi  kpe,    afanikong        akajoi        na  'me." 
"  Moon  this,     trouble    let  not  come  to    me." 


CHAPTER  III 

Religion   {continued) 

Not  far  from  Nsan,  a  town  of  some  importance  to  the  west, 
the  road  passes  near  to  a  small  lake.  This  is  supposed  to  be 
haunted  by  the  ghosts  of  dead  and  gone  Ekoi,  and  is  looked  upon 
as  the  dwelling  place  of  a  great  Nature  Juju,  on  which  the 
prosperity  of  the  surrounding  country  depends.*  A  rumour  of 
this  lake  had  reached  my  ears,  but  on  first  asking  for  its  where- 
abouts, the  question  was  met  by  expressions  of  the  blandest 
and  blankest  ignorance  as  to  the  existence  of  any  such  thing. 
When  the  line  of  march  was  altered  in  order  to  search,  the 
carriers  begged  to  be  excused  from  accompanying  us,  and  so  were 
left  behind. 

A  struggle  through  dense  bush,  in  what  seemed  the  most 
probable  direction,  brought  us  suddenly  into  a  broad  belt  of 
fern.  Through  this  we  waded  knee  deep,  and  finally  emerged 
on  a  smooth  stretch  of  grass,  which  was  obviously  a  lake  bed 
during  the  rains.  Across  this  we  could  see  the  edge  of  the 
water,  which  shrinks  in  the  dry  season  till  scarcely  bigger  than 
a  large  pond.  The  surface  was  still ;  not  a  ripple  stirred  the 
grassy  fringe.  Near  by  grew  bushes  about  10  feet  high,  covered 
with  what  looked,  at  a  distance,  like  tufts  of  creamy  flowers, 
but  proved  on  a  nearer  view  to  be  the  nests  of  that  curious  and 
little-known  creature  the  tree-nesting  frog.f 

One  or  two  of  our  people  had  followed  to  the  edge  of  the 
water.  Among  these  was  Eyiddimfonni  (Hater-of-the-rich),  the 
Priest  of  Eja,  a  cult  for  the  protection  of  farms  and  cattle,  in 
which  certain  forms  of  thunder  worship  are  also  mixed. 
Eyiddimfonni   volunteered   the    information   that   he   and   his 

*  A  far  more  beautiful  example  of  a  Lake  of  the  Dead  is  to  be  found  in  the  old 
home  of  the  Ekoi,  over  the  German  Border.     For  description  see  Chapter  XIV. 
f  Hylambatus  rufus. 


24   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

companions  were  very  brave  men  to  venture  there,  as  the  place 
was  haunted  by  devils,  into  whose  power  fell  all  those  who 
dared  to  set  foot  beyond  the  belt  of  fern. 

Later,  we  learned  that  nothing  must  be  allowed  to  trouble  the 
water,  even  so  much  as  at  its  utmost  edge,  otherwise  the 
guardians  of  the  lake  would  be  enraged  and  bring  disaster,  in 
some  dire  form,  such  as  famine  or  pestilence,  on  the  whole 
countryside.  The  place  is  a  sanctuary  for  all  wild  things,  for 
no  hunter  would  dare  to  penetrate  the  belt  of  fern  in  search  of 
wounded  bird  or  beast  which  had  fled  thither. 

In  walking  round  we  came  upon  no  less  than  five  crocodiles' 
holes,  and  the  tracks  on  the  soft  mud  showed  the  owners  to  be 
"  at  home "  in  each  case.  These  crocodiles  are  regarded  as 
manifestations  of  the  guardian  spirits  of  the  place,  and  there- 
fore as  specially  sacred.  Hither  by  night  come  the  ghosts  of 
long-dead  Ekoi,  to  drift  in  sad  companies,  hopeless  and  wailing, 
over  the  surface  of  the  water.  Even  in  the  bright  sunlight  the 
place  has  an  uncanny  look,  and  one  can  easily  imagine  that  at 
midnight,  when  the  white  mists  shimmer  ghost-like  in  the  light 
of  the  moon,  people  with  the  terror  and  mystery  of  the  "  bush" 
in  their  blood  would  rather  sit  chatting  round  the  fire  or  dance 
by  torchlight  in  the  open  spaces  of  the  towns,  than  seek  out 
this  uncanny  spot,  on  the  chance  of  holding  communion  with 
the  spirits  of  their  long  dead  kin. 

As  we  stood  at  the  edge,  gazing  out  over  the  water,  its  quiet 
was  suddenly  broken  by  a  broad  ripple,  and  little  fish  were  seen 
to  spring  agitatedly  above  the  surface.  A  great  python  was 
crossing,  and  this,  we  learned,  shared  with  the  crocodiles  the 
guardianship  of  the  Sacred  Lake. 

Everywhere  in  Ekoi  mythology,  the  cult  of  the  snake  is 
found  to  be  closely  connected  with  that  of  the  crocodile.  In 
many  of  the  Egbo  houses  a  representation  of  the  former  is  to  be 
seen  modelled  in  high  relief  on  the  wall  at  the  farther  end, 
while  the  crocodile  is  usually  found  carved  on  the  principal 
pillar.  Those  families  who  are  members  of  the  Cult  of  Nimm,* 
never  drive  a  snake  from  their  houses,  but  take  powdered  chalk 
and  strew  before  the  visitor,  very  softly,  so  as  not  to  frighten  it 
in  any  way.      Should  a  snake  enter  a  house  not  protected  by 

*  See  p.  94 


RELIGION 


25 


Nimm,  the  owner  must  consult  the  "  Diviner  "  in  order  to  find 
out  if  it  is  sent  by  ghosts  or  "  Juju." 

Possibly  the  cult  of  snake  and  crocodile  has  come  down  from 
very  ancient  times.  It  is  well  known  that  both  were  honoured 
in  Egypt  as  tutelar  gods,  and  if  the  Ekoi  have  trekked,  as  seems 
likely,  from  the  east  of  Africa,  it  is  probable  that  the  original 
reason  for  deifying  snake  and  cat,  i.e.,  that  these  creatures  were 
the  principal  scourges  of  the  plague- 
carrying  rat,  lies  at  the  back  of  the 
powerful  snake  cult,  while  traces  of  cat 
worship  are  still  to  be  found.*  Rats 
are  a  great  pest  all  over  the  land,  and 
every  possible  means  is  taken  to  keep 
them  down,  though  with  little  result. 

In  Egypt  the  snake  was  not  only 
the  guardian  of  house  and  tomb,  but 
a  snake  goddess  presided  over  the 
harvest  festival,  held  in  the  month 
of  Pharmuthi  or  April.  Doubtless 
among  other  attributes  she  was  re- 
garded as  the  protectress  of  the  gar- 
nered grain,  and  her  cult  grew  from  the 
practice  of  introducing  non-poisonous 
snakes  into  granaries,  in  order  to  pro- 
tect their  contents  from  predatory 
rodents.  Nimm  also  is  looked  upon 
as  the  guardian  of  farms  and  crops, 
and  her  great  festival  falls  at  the  time 
of  the  gathering  of  the  new  yams. 

Since  writing  the  above,  an  article 
by  Dr.  W.  Sambon,  F.Z.S.,  has  come 
to  my   notice.      It    appeared   in    the 
Times  of  February  4,  191 1,  and  part  of  it  bears  so  closely  upon 
the  subject  in  hand,  that  I  venture  to  quote  it. 

"  A  very  interesting  measure  adopted  by  the  ancient  Romans 
to  fight  the  plague  was  the  introduction  of  rat-eating  snakes. 
In  the  year  291  B.C.  Rome  was  devastated  by  the  plague.  The 
Sibylline  books  were  consulted,  and  it  was  decided  to  dispatch 

*  See  p.  151. 


Pillar  in  Egbo  House  with 
carved  figure  of  Nimm  in 
crocodile  form. 


26   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

ten  ambassadors  to  Epidauros  to  confer  with  the  .Esculapian 
priests.  Valerius  Maximus  tells  us  how  the  tribune  Quintus 
Ogulnius,  chief  of  the  embassy,  returned  with  the  snake  sacred 
to  the  god  of  healing,  and  how  a  temple  to  yEsculapius  was 
subsequently  erected  on  the  Tiberine  island.  A  beautiful 
medallion  of  Antoninus  commemorates  this  event.  A  galley  is 
represented  passing  beneath  a  bridge,  and  from  its  prow  a  snake 
moves  towards  the  figure  of  the  Tiber-god,  who  stretches  out 
his  right  hand  in  sign  of  welcome.  This  legend,  I  have  no 
doubt,  refers  to  the  introduction  of  rat-snakes  in  Rome  for  the 
purpose  of  destroying  rats  and  thus  stamping  out  the  plague. 
In  fact,  Pliny  clearly  states  that  '  the  yEsculapian  serpent  was 
imported  in  Rome  from  Epidauros ;  it  was  kept  in  the  public 
edifices,  and  also  in  private  houses '  $fand  we  know  from  iElian 
!  and  other  authors  that  the  Egyptians  kept  domestic  snakes  in 
their  houses  and  looked  upon  them  as  tutelar  gods.,/ Indeed, 
from  the  remotest  antiquity  throughout  the  East,  snakes  were 
kept  in  houses  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  rats  and  preventing 
rat-conveyed  diseases.  Certainly,  non-venomous  rat-snakes  are 
a  far  better  protection  against  plague  than  cats  or  dogs,  because 
they  are  not  likely  to  harbour  fleas.  For  years  I  have  thought 
that  the  guardian  snakes  painted  on  the  walls  of  Roman  houses 
might  be  a  vestige  of  the  long-forgotten  introduction  of  rat- 
snakes  to  save  Rome  from  the  plague.  Only  a  few  days  ago,  in 
looking  through  Dyer's  book  on  Pompeii,  published  in  1871,  I 
came  across  the  figure  of  a  painting  found  in  a  baker's  shop  of 
the  Via  Consularis.  In  this  fresco  are  represented  the  two 
guardian  serpents  moving,  as  usual,  towards  an  altar  placed 
between  them,  on  which  is  placed  the  incense-yielding  pine 
cone  sacred  to  /Esculapius,  but  above  each  snake  is  a  bird 
darting  after  a  fly.  The  tail  considerably  shorter  than  the 
wing,  the  peculiar  marking,  and  the  very  action  in  which  they 
are  represented  of  hawking  flies  on  the  wing,  show  that  these 
birds  are  the  common  spotted  flycatcher.  The  association  of 
the  snake  with  the  flycatcher,  a  bird  even  at  the  present  day 
kept  in  the  houses  of  Southern  Italy  for  the  purpose  of  destroy- 
ing flies,  proves  beyond  doubt  that  also  the  tutelar  reptile  is 
here  depicted  as  an  emblem  of  a  house-pest  destroying  animal. 
The  information  just  given  explains,  I  believe,  in  a  satisfactory 


RELIGION  27 

manner  why  ^Esculapius  was  represented  leaning  on  a  snake- 
entwined  staff." 

Early  in  1909,  an  official,  who  was  passing  through  the 
District,  mentioned  that  in  the  course  of  his  tour  he  had  visited 
a  tribe  where  the  snake  cult  seemed  very  strong. 

One  of  the  carriers  happened  to  kill  a  small  python.  He 
bore  it  back  to  camp,  cut  it  into  several  "  lengths,"  and  laid  one 
or  two  of  these  on  a  dish  preparatory  to  cooking.  News  of 
what  he  had  done  reached  the  chiefs  of  the  town  and  they 
came  in  a  body,  followed  by  an  excited  crowd,  to  ask  that  the 
man  should  be  punished  for  his  sacrilege.  They  also  demanded 
the  matchet  with  which  the  snake  was  killed,  the  dish  on  which 
it  had  lain,  and  a  considerable  fine  to  appease  its  "manes," 
lest  it  should  return  to  trouble  them. 

A  superstition  connected  with  this  cult  came  to  light  in  July, 
1911. 

On  our  return  to  headquarters  after  a  "  bush  "  tour  the  warder 
mentioned  in  his  report  that  a  python,  some  22  feet  long, 
had  been  killed  close  to  the  prison.  He  had  ordered  this  to  be 
skinned,  and  had  himself  witnessed  the  extraction  of  the  "  bad 
parts,"  which  he  had  intended  to  bury  in  a  deep  hole  in  a  place 
known  only  to  himself,  so  that  they  could  not  be  used  by 
witchcraft  for  the  hurt  of  anyone.  Before  these  could  be 
buried,  one  of  the  chief  clerks  had  demanded  that  they  should 
be  given  up  to  him.  At  first  the  warder  refused,  but  afterwards, 
reflecting  that,  while  the  Commissioner  was  away  from  the 
station,  this  clerk  was  his  representative,  he  gave  up  the  parts 
in  question,  on  the  distinct  understanding  that  they  were  to  be 
kept  for  my  return.     Needless  to  say  they  disappeared. 

Subsequent  inquiries  brought  out  the  information  that  the 
most  dreaded  portion  of  these  "  bad  parts  "  is  the  gall.  This, 
used  in  a  certain  way,  is  capable  of  producing  the  most  dire 
results.  Of  all  animals,  snake  and  leopard  are  most  feared 
for  the  magical  properties  of  their  gall.  This  will  be  seen  from 
the  following  legend  told  by  Ojong  of  Oban. 

How  Slaves  killed  the  Free-born. 

Once  all  the  hunters  collected  together  for  a  great  hunt  in 
the  bush  near  their  town.     Among  other  animals  killed  was  a 


28   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

leopard,  which  they  brought  back  and  skinned.  The  meat  was 
given  to  the  slaves,  for  free-born  Ekoi  do  not  eat  the  flesh  of 
leopards,  but  before  dividing  it,  the  gall  was  carefully  taken  out 
and  kept,  for  it  is  used  for  a  certain  purpose. 

One  of  the  slaves  thought  to  himself,  "  I  will  ask  my  master 
why  the  gall  is  always  taken  away  before  the  flesh  is  shared." 
He  did  so,  and  the  master  explained  that  the  gall  was  a  strong 
"  medicine,"  and  would  cause  death  if  mixed  with  food  or  drink. 

When  the  slave  had  learnt  this,  he  called  together  all  his 
fellow-slaves  and  explained  to  them  how  galls  could  be  used  as 
poison.  Then  they  plotted  among  themselves,  and  said,  "  Let  us 
kill  the  free-born  and  ourselves  be  free." 

Now,  one  of  the  girl-slaves  loved  her  mistress,  and  could  not 
bear  that  any  harm  should  come  to  her,  so  she  said,  "  To-morrow 
touch  no  food  and  drink  no  water  in  the  house ;  only  come  into 
the  bush  with  me,  and  I  will  bring  you  all  that  you  need." 

The  woman,  however,  took  no  heed  of  what  her  slave  had 
said,  but  drank  what  was  offered  her  by  other  servants,  and 
soon  after  died.  She  left  a  tiny  girl-babe,  and  when  the  slaves 
prepared  to  leave  the  town  and  called  to  the  faithful  maid  to  go 
with  them  the  latter  said,  "  I  cannot  come ;  I  will  not  leave  my 
mistress's  child."  When  they  urged  her,  she  took  up  the  babe, 
and  carried  it  with  her. 

After  they  had  gone  a  little  way  her  sweetheart  came  and 
said,  "  What  is  this  that  you  do  ?  All  the  other  free-born  are 
now  dead.     Give  me  the  child  that  I  may  kill  it  also." 

The  girl  saw  that  her  charge  could  never  be  safe  among  the 
slaves,  so  she  turned  and  ran  back  whence  she  had  come. 
When  she  reached  the  house  of  her  late  mistress  she  laid  the 
child  down  within,  and  shut  the  door.  Then  she  went  back 
again  to  rejoin  her  companions. 

While  the  babe  lay  alone  she  began  to  cry,  and,  at  the  sound, 
one  of  the  big  calabashes,  which  hung  against  the  wall  of  the 
room,  called  to  her  and  said,  "  Do  not  weep  any  more."  After 
that  Calabash  slid  down  off  the  wall  and  said  to  a  basket  and 
matchet  which  were  lying  near : 

"  Go  to  the  farm  of  the  child's  mother  and  bring  plantains." 

Both  went  and  did  as  they  were  ordered,  and  when  the  fruit 
was  brought  home,  Calabash  called  to  a  pot  and  said  : 


RELIGION  29 

"  Go  down  to  the  river  and  fetch  water."  This  also  was  done. 
So  Calabash  cooked  for  the  babe  and  tended  her  many  years 
till  she  grew  into  a  very  beautiful  maiden. 

One  day  the  son  of  Obassi  Nsi  went  hunting  in  the  bush. 
After  awhile  he  came  to  a  ruined  village,  in  which  only  one 
house  was  still  standing  unharmed,  and  from  this  smoke  was 
rising.  He  went  up  to  it  and  there  saw  a  beautiful  girl  who  had 
evidently  just  come  out  of  the  fatting-house.  The  room  was 
empty  save  for  herself  and  a  great  quantity  of  calabashes.  So 
beautiful  was  she  that  he  wished  to  have  her  for  his  sweetheart. 
She  was  willing,  so  he  stayed  with  her  for  some  time  and  then 
went  back  home. 

Another  day  he  went  to  visit  her  again  and  asked,  "  Do  you 
live  here  alone,  or  is  anyone  with  you  ?  "  This  she  would  not 
answer.  After  a  while  he  began  to  ask  her  to  go  with  him  to  his 
father's  town,  but  in  the  end  had  to  go  alone,  because  she  was 
afraid  to  leave  Calabash. 

After  the  young  man  had  gone,  Calabash  said  to  her  fosterling, 
"  Next  time  your  sweetheart  comes,  go  home  with  him."  The 
girl  answered,  "  Why  should  I  go,  and  leave  you  alone  ?  " 

That  night,  the  son  of  Obassi  said  to  his  parents,  "  While  I 
was  hunting  I  found  a  town  in  the  bush,  and  in  it  one  very 
beautiful  girl  dwelling  alone.  I  married  her,  but  she  will  not 
leave  her  home  and  come  with  me."  His  father  answered,  "  To- 
morrow I  will  send  my  people  with  you  to  bring  her  hither." 

Next  day,  the  Prince  set  out  with  a  great  train,  and  when 
Calabash  saw  them  coming,  she  said  to  her  fosterling,  "  Let  us 
go  now  with  your  husband ;  only  remember  one  thing.  Pot  and 
I  stand  to  you  in  place  of  your  mother.  Allow  no  one  to  borrow 
us  from  you." 

The  son  of  Obassi  gave  orders  to  his  people  to  gather  together 
all  his  wife's  property,  and  carry  it  to  his  father's  town.  When 
they  reached  their  new  home  Obassi  said,  "  This  is  the  first 
time  my  son  has  taken  a  wife.  We  will  make  a  great  feast  for 
the  wedding."  One  day,  while  they  were  making  the  marriage 
play,  rain  began  to  fall  very  heavily.  The  girl  went  to  her 
door  and  looked  around.  Near  by  she  saw  the  female  slave 
who  had  taken  care  of  her  when  she  was  small.  She  recognised 
her,  and  called  "  Come  into  the  house." 


30    IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

The  woman  came,  and  sat  down  by  the  fireside.  She  turned 
round  and  saw  Calabash.  At  once  she  knew  her  and  took  her 
in  her  arms,  crying  as  she  held  her.  The  girl  said  "  Do  you 
not  know  me  too  ?     I  am  the  child  of  your  former  mistress." 

The  slave  went  out,  and  sought  Obassi  Nsi.  "  I  am  the  foster- 
mother  of  your  son's  wife,"  said  she.  After  me  Calabash  came 
and  took  care  of  her.  The  slaves  killed  all  the  free-born  in 
the  town  with  leopard  gall.  Among  them  the  girl's  mother 
perished  also." 

When  Obassi  heard  this  he  called  forth  the  Nsibidi  *  images, 
and  bade  them  go  through  all  the  town  and  put  to  death  all  the 
slaves  who  had  killed  the  free-born. 

This  was  done.  Then  Obassi  called  the  townsfolk  before 
him  and  said,  "  From  henceforth  the  free  men  must  keep  the 
gall  themselves.  It  must  never  again  be  given  in  charge  of  the 
slaves." 

That  is  the  reason  why  we  keep  the  custom  even  to  this  day. 
For  after  the  kill,  when  it  is  time  to  divide  up  leopard  or  snake, 
no  slave  may  go  near  till  the  principal  men  in  the  town  have 
taken  away  the  gall. 

By  the  side  of  the  main  road,  at  the  point  most  near  to  the 
Sacred  Lake,  stands  a  huge  cotton  tree,  hung  round  with  strips  / 
of  cloth  and  other  votive  offerings.     This  is  the  special  Juju  tree/ 
for  the  town  of  Nsan.     In  this  spot,  therefore,  the  Genii  of  both/ 
wood  and  water  may  be  worshipped  in  convenient  proximity. 

Everywhere  in  the  bush  grow  giant  trees,  each  with  some 
special  magic  property,  but  perhaps  the  cotton  trees  are  not 
only  highest  of  all,  but  most  dreaded.  It  is  difficult  to  get  good 
photographs  of  such,  owing  to  the  thickness  of  the  surrounding 
bush,  which  would  take  too  long  to  clear  for  a  sufficient 
distance.  The  one  shown  in  the  illustration  is  a  comparatively 
poor  specimen  which  happened  to  stand  at  the  edge  of  an  open 
space. 

Should  man  or  woman  among  Efik  or  Ekoi  wish  to  avenge 
themselves  on  an  enemy,  a  sure  way  of  bringing  this  about  is 
to  seek  out  one  of  these  great  trees  in  a  lonely  part  of  the  bush. 

*  Officials  of  the  Nsibidi  Club,  covered  from  crown  to  heel  in  long  robes  only 
pierced  with  eye-holes,  acted  as  executioners  in  ancient  times  (see  p.  306). 


Cotton  Tree  at  Nsan.     The  Man  Standing 
Six  Feet  in  Height. 


at  the  Foot  was  over 


RELIGION  31 

If  the  petitioner  be  rich  and  of  the  Erik  race,  a  white  bull  should 
be  offered  in  sacrifice,  together  with  a  dish  of  rice  flour  and  a 
flagon  of  palm  oil.  For  the  poorer  Ekoi  a  white  cock,  or  even 
lesser  offering,  may  suffice. 

The  name  of  the  enemy  is  called  aloud.  The  Genius  of  the 
tree  hears,  and  from  thenceforward  lies  in  wait  to  wreak  ven- 
geance. Should  a  child  be  born  to  anyone  so  cursed,  the  tree 
takes  possession  of  it.  Such  a  child  will  see  strange  black 
shapes  from  its  birth,  and  be  haunted  by  the  demons  of  the 
bush.  In  time  the  tree  will  seize  on  and  imprison  the  child, 
unless  some  powerful  Juju  man  can  be  found  to  make  strong 
"  medicine,"  and  so  deliver  it.  There  are  two  well-known  ways 
of  administering  this  "  medicine."  It  should  either  be  poured 
upon  a  lump  of  brass,  from  which  anklets  are  made  for  the  child 
to  wear,  or  the  face  must  be  cut  and  the  medicine  rubbed  in. 
Either  of  these  methods  will  prevent  the  Genius  of  the  tree  from 
obtaining  possession  of  its  victim,  though  it  may  trouble  him 
by  means  of  dreams  and  visions  till  about  the  age  of  eight 
years. 

For  those  too  poor  to  provide  a  bull,  or  any  costly  sacrifice, 
there  remains  another  and  more  dreaded  way  of  enlisting  the 
services  of  the  Genius  of  the  tree.  A  man  may  buy  vengeance, 
wealth,  or  power,  by  offering  up  himself.  For  a  certain  time 
he  will  enjoy  the  fruits  of  his  sacrifice,  but  at  length  the  call 
comes,  and  he  must  go,  to  exist,  imprisoned  Ariel-like  within, 
as  long  as  the  tree  endures. 

On  December  5,  1908,  a  case  came  up  in  Court  against  a  man 
who  killed  his  brother  by  forcing  him  to  undergo  the  ordeal  of 
eating  Esere  bean,  in  order  to  clear  himself  from  the  charge  of 
trying  to  imprison  their  sister  within  a  tree. 

On  another  occasion  an  accident  brought  out  the  fact  that 
tree  affinities  are  well  known  among  the  Ekoi. 

One  Sunday  evening  cries  were  heard  coming  from  the 
quarters  occupied  by  the  staff  at  Oban.  Soon  after,  the 
Corporal  was  seen  running  towards  the  District  House,  with 
torn  tunic  and  distracted  air. 

It  seemed  that  one  of  the  warders,  Oji  by  name,  had  suddenly 
become  delirious,  and  tried  to  run  away  into  the  bush.  It  was 
after  the  hour  when  station  officials  were  supposed  to  be  in 


32   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

quarters,  and  the  Corporal  tried  to  stop  him,  on  which  Oji  was 
reported  to  have  flown  at  him.  Five  policemen  had,  in  the 
meantime,  hastened  to  the  scene  of  action,  and  in  their  hands 
he  man  was  left  struggling  while  the  Corporal  ran  up  to  head- 
quarters for  instructions. 

On  my  arrival  Oji  ceased  to  struggle,  and  begged  to  be 
allowed  to  go  away  at  once,  because  his  tree  was  calling. 

In  reply  to  questions  as  to  what  this  might  mean,  he  said  : 

"  I  come,  as  D.  C*  knows,  from  the  country  of  the  Ibos. 
There  the  Oji  trees  grow  and  flourish,  some  in  the  water,  and 
some  on  dry  land.  To  all  who,  like  me,  bear  the  name  of  the 
tree,  there  comes  a  call  at  certain  times  of  the  year.  When  we 
hear  our  trees  calling,  wherever  we  may  be,  we  must  set  out  at 
once,  by  night  or  day,  and  run  till  we  come  to  the  place  where 
they  grow.     We  cannot  stay  for  anything  until  we  reach  them. 

"  To-night  I  was  very  tired,  and  lay  down  on  my  bed.  In 
my  sleep  my  tree  began  to  call  '  Oji,  Oji ! '  I  woke,  and  still 
heard  it  call.  So  I  started  up  to  run  out  into  the  night.  It 
always  calls  about  the  time  of  the  new  yams,  sometimes  earlier, 
sometimes  later.  When  they  tried  to  stop  me  it  called  louder 
and  louder.  So  I  fought  them  to  get  away  and  go  to  my  tree. 
That  is  all." 

The  torn  tunics  and  battered  limbs  of  the  policemen  seemed 
to  attest  that  it  was  quite  enough  too ! 

The  latter,  mostly  Yorubas,  listened  with  an  air  of  disdain  to 
the  "  bushman's  "  foolish  tale.  Several  of  the  Ekoi,  on  the 
other  hand,  who  had  come  up  to  learn  the  cause  of  the  dis- 
turbance, eagerly  asserted  that  such  things  happened  in  their 
country  also,  and  that,  once  heard,  every  man  must  follow 
the  call. 

There  are  many  stories  about  tree  voices,  and  the  ceremonies 
necessary  for  invoking  the  aid  of  the  Genius  of  the  tree. 
Perhaps  the  following  is  the  best  known  of  these. 

Why  Sacrifices  are  made  to  Cotton-trees. 

Once  a  man  was  born  with  but  one  foot  and  one  hand. 
When  he  grew  up  and  married,  the  people  of  his  town  drove 

*  The  contracted  form  of  District  Commissioner  always  used  by  natives. 


RELIGION  33 

him  out  from  among  them.  So  the  couple  went  sadly  away, 
and  built  themselves  a  little  house  in  the  bush.  Here  they 
dwelt  for  many  years,  hoping  that  Obassi  would  send  them  a 
son  ;  but  their  hopes  remained  unfulfilled.  One  day  they  went 
together  to  the  banks  of  the  River  of  Good  Fortune,*  which 
flowed  not  far  from  their  hut,  and  there  prayed  to  Obassi  to 
send  them  a  child. 

When  they  had  prayed  for  a  long  time,  the  man  asked  his 
wife  to  help  him  back  to  their  house.  Some  weeks  later  she 
told  him  that  she  thought  their  prayers  were  to  be  granted,  and 
from  this  time  he  prayed  more  and  more  fervently. 

One  day  a  son  was  born  to  them.  He  came  into  the  world 
bearing  a  Juju  knife  in  one  hand,  and  a  small  calabash  full  of 
Juju  in  the  other. 

When  the  father  saw  such  an  extraordinary  child  he  trembled, 
and  would  have  run  away;  but  the  babe  said,  "Do  not  be 
afraid,  I  am  sent  by  Obassi  to  your  help,  because  you  have  only 
one  leg  and  one  arm." 

His  mother  brought  him  the  usual  offering  of  rain  water,  or 
plantain  juice  if  no  rain  water  is  to  be  had,  which  is  always 
given  to  new-born  children.  This  the  babe  refused,  and  said 
in  a  strong  voice,  "  Give  me  no  water.  Bring  me  chop 
to  eat."t 

Seven  days  after  its  birth  the  child  could  walk  alone.  People 
said,  "  How  is  it  possible  for  a  week-old  child  to  do  such 
things  ?  " 

The  boy  answered,  "It  is  because  I  am  sent  from  Obassi. 
My  small  brother  will  be  coming  soon." 

One  day  he  got  his  Juju  knife,  and  held  it  out  in  his  hand. 
The  blade  bent  downwards  of  itself.  He  straightened  it,  and 
held  it  out  again  in  a  different  direction.  A  second  time  it  bent. 
A  third  time  he  did  as  before,  but  this  time  the  knife  kept 
straight,  and  pointed  into  the  bush.  The  boy  followed  the  way 
which  the  knife  showed.  After  a  time  he  came  home  and  said 
to  his  mother,  "  Give  me  one  single  plantain." 

She  did  as  he  asked,  and  he  took  the  fruit  and  went  out. 
He  plucked  leaves  in  the  bush,  mixed  them  with  the  plantain, 

*  See  p.  90. 

t  Compare  the  birth  of  Gargantua. 
S,B,  t. 


34        IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

and  made  "  medicine,"  some  of  which  he  ate.  Afterwards  he 
returned  and  showed  the  rest  to  his  mother,  saying  : 

"  This  is  the  original  food  which  Obassi  ordained  for  me.  I 
am  a  man  of  ability." 

Next  day  at  dawn,  he  took  his  knife  as  before,  and  held  it 
out.  It  did  not  bend,  so  he  followed  where  it  pointed,  and 
entered  the  bush.  His  way  led  him  to  the  foot  of  a  cotton 
tree.  The  tree  called  and  he  answered.  It  said  to  him  "  Where 
are  you  going  ?  "  He  answered,  "  I  go  where  I  choose,  for  the 
'  bush '  is  the  town  of  my  parents." 

The  cotton  tree  said  "  Not  so.  This  place  belongs  to  me. 
Make  ready,  therefore,  a  sacrifice  of  young  palm  leaves,  palm 
oil,  palm  wine,  meat,  and  twisted  creeper.  Before  you  offer  it 
to  me  call  on  the  name  of  your  true  father,  Obassi." 

The  boy  did  as  he  was  bidden,  and  then  went  into  the  bush. 
Soon  he  heard  the  sound  of  a  drum.  At  this  he  returned,  and 
said  to  his  foster-father,  "  I  think  there  must  be  a  town  in  the 
bush,  for  I  heard  a  drum  being  played." 

Next  day  the  boy  set  forth  again,  and  once  more  heard  the 
sound  of  the  drum,  beaten  as  if  for  a  wrestling  match.  He 
followed  the  sound,  and  came  at  length  to  a  ghost  town.  In  his 
hand  he  bore  the  calabash  of  "Juju,"  which  made  him  invisible. 
So  he  passed  unseen  through  the  town  till  he  came  to  the  Egbo 
house,  near  which  the  Lame  Boy*  dwelt.  There  he  saw 
ghosts  wrestling  together.  A  matchet  lay  on  the  ground,  and 
he  noticed  that  if  one  ghost  succeeded  in  thrusting  another 
against  this  the  latter  died. 

After  a  while  the  new-comer  wished  to  join  in  the  wrestling, 
so  he  laid  aside  his  calabash  of  Juju,  and  became  visible  to  the 
ghosts.  He  started  to  wrestle.  For  a  time  he  was  successful 
and  overcame  several  of  his  opponents,  but  at  length  one  of 
them  forced  him  backward  on  to  the  Juju  matchet.  The  boy 
died,  and  the  wrestling  continued  until  only  one  ghost  was  left 
alive.  Afterwards  this  ghost  made  Juju  medicine  for  the 
others,  and  they  became  as  before.  Only  the  boy  was  left 
lying  dead. 

*  The  Lame  Boy  is  the  Ekoi  Prometheus  (see  p.  285),  and  the  good  fairy 
of  their  stories.  He  is  one  of  the  principal  characters  in  boys'  plays  and 
dances. 


RELIGION  35 

All  the  ghosts  then  went  to  bush  to  get  firewood,  in  order  to 
roast  their  visitor,  that  they  might  have  a  great  feast,  but  before 
leaving,  they  called  the  fowls,  and  set  them  as  a  guard  upon 
the  body.     To  one  of  the  cocks  they  said  : 

"  Watch  well,  and,  if  you  see  the  Lame  Boy  go  near  the  dead 
body,  crow  loudly  so  that  we  may  hear." 

After  they  had  all  gone  the  Lame  Boy  said  to  himself,  "  I  am 
sorry  for  the  boy." 

He  went  and  got  corn,  and  threw  it  on  the  ground  before  the 
fowls.     They  all  ran  to  eat  this,  and  forgot  their  charge. 

Now,  when  the  ghost  made  the  Juju  medicine  to  revive  his 
dead  companions,  he  had  made  more  than  was  necessary,  and 
what  was  left,  he  threw  into  the  inner  compartment  of  the 
Egbo  house.  While  the  fowls  were  busy  pecking  up  the  corn, 
the  Lame  Boy  went  thither,  and  got  what  remained  of  the  magic 
medicine.  He  put  this  on  the  dead  boy's  eyes,  and  the  latter 
stood  up.  When  the  Lame  Boy  saw  that  the  stranger  was  alive 
once  more,  he  said : 

"  Take  your  calabash  of  Juju,  and  go  home  quickly." 

The  lad  set  out,  but  had  not  got  very  far  before  the  fowls  had 
pecked  up  the  last  grains  of  corn  which  the  Lame  Boy  had 
thrown  down  for  them.  They  therefore  went  back  to  keep 
watch  over  the  corpse,  but  found  it  gone.  So  the  cocks  crowed, 
to  call  back  the  ghosts.  These  came  hurrying  in  with  their 
firewood,  but  found  that  the  visitor  had  been  brought  back 
to  life,  and  had  fled  from  them. 

Then  the  ghosts  said  among  themselves,  "  Let  us  pursue  him  ; 
perhaps  he  may  yet  be  overtaken." 

When  the  boy  reached  the  cotton  tree,  he  related  all  that 
had  befallen  him  in  the  ghost  town.  Cotton  Tree  said,  "  When 
you  reach  home,  cook  fufu  *  and  fresh  plantains,  and  offer  them 
up  before  the  house  of  your  father." 

The  boy  had  just  time  to  do  this  before  the  ghosts  came. 
They  found  the  place  spread  with  offerings  ;  so  they  ate  these 
and  returned  home.  After  that  he  took  a  chicken  and  some 
palm  oil,  and  went  and  placed  them  before  Cotton  Tree.  The 
latter  accepted  them  and  said  : 

*  Yam,  etc.,  beaten  up  into  a  paste. 

D  2 


36   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

"  Now  I  will  tell  you  about  the  ghost  sacrifices.  When  the 
dead  come  to  a  town  to  catch  a  man,  they  will  leave  him 
unharmed,  and  go  back,  if  they  find  plentiful  offerings  before 
the  entrance  to  the  town."  The  tree  also  said,  "  From  to-day, 
should  anything  bad  happen  to  you,  or  should  you  fall  sick,  and 
wish  to  find  out  the  cause  of  your  misfortune,  come  to  me,  and 
I  will  tell  you.  Come  to  me  also  should  anyone  harm  you,  and 
I  will  be  ready  to  help." 

This  is  the  reason  why  native  people  go  alone  into  the  bush, 
if  they  are  offended  with  anyone,  and  why  they  make  sacrifice 
to  the  cotton  tree,  if  they  fall  sick  or  wish  to  be  avenged  on  an 
enemy. 


CHAPTER   IV 

Egbo 

The  whole  country  is  honeycombed  with  secret  societies, 
among  which  the  Egbo  Club  is  the  most  powerful.  Before 
the  coming  of  the  "  white  man  "  this  institution  ruled  the  land, 
and  even  now  it  has  more  influence  in  many  ways  than  Govern- 
ment itself,  and  has  caused  endless  difficulty  to  administrators. 

The  Ekoi  claim  to  have  originated  the  whole  idea  of  such 
clubs,  which  have  existed  among  them  for  centuries,  and  are 
mentioned  in  some  of  their  very  old  folk-lore  tales.  Later  on, 
the  Ododop  and  other  tribes  near  IfBanga,  Akwa  and  Efut  in 
the  South  Cameroons,  started  a  similar  society,  which  gradu- 
ally became  more  powerful  than  the  original  Ekoi  one,  and 
therefore  more  costly  to  join.  The  Efiks  of  Calabar  were  not 
slow  to  perceive  the  advantage  of  such  institutions,  and  so 
founded  the  Ekkpe  Club,  which,  with  the  growing  importance  of 
their  town,  through  the  coming  of  white  men,  soon  became  the 
wealthiest  of  all  Egbo  Societies. 

As  the  Efiks  held  the  monopoly  of  the  Calabar  trade  they 
and  their  club  obtained  great  influence  over  the  Ekoi,  who 
found  it  advisable  to  adopt  many  Enk  customs  and  laws.  This 
was  especially  the  case  with  the  Ekoi  who  live  to  the  South 
of  Oban,  and  therefore  nearest  to  Calabar.  Those  to  the  North 
still  keep  their  old  Egbo  practically  unchanged,  except  the 
inhabitants  of  Ndebbiji,  who  have  adopted  that  of  the  Ododop 
people,  which  is  almost  the  same  as  the  Efik  one. 

Calabar  was  practically  the  only  place  whence  the  Ekoi 
could  obtain  guns  and  gunpowder.  To  reach  it,  they  had  to 
pass  through  Efik  territory.  The  roads  were  picketed  by  the 
latter  people,  and  it  was  impossible  to  reach  the  factories  save 
by  their  good  will.  Even  if  some  men  from  the  interior 
managed  to  reach  a  white  official  and  attempted  to  lay  their 


38   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

grievances  before  him,  the  Efik  interpreter  took  care  that  the 
true  state  of  things  should  not  be  translated.  If  a  case  was 
tried  in  the  Calabar  Courts  the  only  chance  which  a  "  bush 
man  "  had  of  winning  it  was  to  enlist  the  help  of  some  powerful 
Efik,  and  often  the  only  way  of  doing  this  was  to  promise 
to  become  his  "member."  The  arts  by  which  Efik  traders 
entrapped  first  one  man  and  then  the  whole  family,  as  slaves, 
were  often  cruel  in  the  extreme.  The  only  holds  possessed  by 
the  Ekoi  over  their  persecutors  were  that  the  Efiks  feared  their 
Jujus  and  wanted  the  dried  meat  killed  and  preserved  by  Ekoi 
hunters.  The  establishment  of  a  Native  Court  at  Oban  did 
not  much  improve  matters.  Indeed,  in  some  ways,  it  made  them 
worse,  as  the  clerk  who  ruled  it  was  always  an  Efik  and  arranged 
that  judgment  should  be  given  in  favour  of  his  own  people. 

It  is  natural  that  the  most  powerful  society  should  be  called 
by  the  name  of  the  most  dreaded  denizen  of  the  bush,  for 
"  Egbo"  is  supposed  to  express  to  the  Efik  "  Ekkpe  "  and  the 
Ekoi  "  Ngbe,"  i.e.,  Leopard.* 

Possibly  among  the  Ekoi,  where  totemism  is  still  an  article 
of  belief,  though  most  of  them  will  deny  the  existence  of  any 
such  idea,  the  Leopard  Society  originally  consisted  only  of 
those  who  belonged  to  this  totem.  On  account  of  the  superior 
craft  and  power  of  the  animal  it  would  naturally  draw  to 
itself  the  largest  following.  Later,  as  totemism  began  to  lose 
force,  first  one,  then  another  prominent  individual  who  was 
not  properly  speaking  a  "  Leopard  soul  "  might  be  allowed  to 
join,  until  it  gradually  became  open  to  all. 

There  are  many  indications  which  seem  to  place  beyond 
doubt  the  fact  that  some  form  of  totemism  still  enters  into  the 
ritual  of  the  Egbo  Society.     For  instance,  at  some  of  the  bigger 

Compare  the  Leopard  Society  of  Sierra  Leone,  which  terrorised  vast  regions 
especially  among  the  Mendis.  In  1903,  while  engaged  in  delimitating  the  Anglo- 
Liberian  frontier,  one  of  the  carriers,  who  was  a  member  of  this  Society  and 
considered  himself  somewhat  indebted  to  me,  gave  a  considerable  amount 
of  information  about  it.  Members  can  often  be  recognised  at  sight,  as  many 
of  them  have  the  sharply  protruding  forehead,  caused  by  pressure  applied  in 
infancy  by  the  mothers.  When  the  Society  wishes  to  kill  a  man,  certain  members 
are  chosen  for  the  deed.  These  are  armed  with  a  set  of  iron  instruments,  fastened 
inside  both  hands,  and  track  their  victim,  until  they  come  upon  him  iri  a  lonely 
part  of  the  ubush."  They  watch  their  opportunity,  suddenly  spring  upon  him 
from  behind,  and  seize  him  by  the  throat.  Should  the  body  ever  be  discovered  ; 
the  marks  so  exactly  resemble  those  made  by  leopard  claws  that  the  death  is  put 
down  to  these  beasts. 


EGBO  39 

"plays,"  while  the  principal  performers  or  "  images"  as  they 
are  called,  run  up  and  down,  now  to  the  right,  now  to  the  left, 
the  lesser  personages  form  a  circle,  and  keep  time  to  a 
monotonous  chant.     In  one  case  they  sang  : 

"Okum  ngbe  ommobik  ejennum  ngimm,  akiko  ye  ajakk  nga  ka  ejenn 
nyamm." 

The  Egbo  cannot  walk  straight,  he  is  driven  hither  and  thither  by  the 
movement  of  the  beast. 

On  another  occasion  a  prominent  member  of  the  "  Egbo," 
who  had  the  reputation  of  knowing  more  "  Nsibidi  " — a 
primitive  secret  writing  much  used  in  this  part  of  the  world — 
than  any  man  now  alive,  was  asked  to  give  me  a  little  help  in 
the  study  of  this  script.  He  refused  point  blank,  though  a 
good  remuneration  had  been  offered  for  his  services.  He  added 
as  an  "  aside  "  to  another  member  of  the  society,  with  no  idea 
that  his  words  could  be  understood  by  the  "  white  man,"  "  If 
I  taught  D.  C.  Nsibidi,  he  would  know  all  the  Egbo  signs,  and 
the  secrets  of  the  animals."  He  refused  to  give  any  further 
information,  and  soon  after  went  away. 

The  importance  of  the  society  is  obvious  even  to  the  most 
careless  visitor  to  any  land  where  it  has  gained  a  foothold, 
for  the  Club  house  is  the  principal  building  in  every  town. 
Even  the  smallest  village  has  its  Egbo  shed,  and  when  a  town 
decides  to  migrate  the  first  thing  done,  so  soon  as  the  fresh 
site  is  cleared,  before  even  new  farms  are  "  cut,"  or  the  land 
divided  up,  is  to  fix  the  position  of  the  Club  house.  A  small 
shed,  called  Ekpa  Ntan  (the  house  without  walls)  is  erected  to 
mark  the  spot  where  the  Egbo  house  is  to  stand.* 

The  many-sided  character  of  Egbo  may  be  judged  from  the, 
immense  powers  which    it  has   arrogated   to    itself  in  almost 
every  direction.     Under  native   rule  it  usurped  practically  all 
functions   of  government,    made   trade   almost  impossible  for : 
non-members,  and  exercised  a  deep  influence  on  the  religious 
and  mystic  side  of  the  nation. 

The  ritual  is  certainly  very  ancient,  and  in  it  many  Juju 
cults  are  mixed.  The  name  of  Obassi  is  invoked  before  every 
sacrifice,  and  an  oblation  of  food  and  drink  laid  in  front  of  the 

*  See  story,  p.  350. 


40    IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

Etai  Ngbe  (Leopard  stone),  the  cut  stone  usually  found  before 
the  second  pillar  of  the  Club  house.* 

It  is  difficult  to  discover  more  than  the  merest  fragments 
of  the  secrets  of  Egbo,  as  any  known  informant  would  meet 
with  a  speedy  death.  Still  from  what  has  been  gathered — 
mostly,  as  in  the  case  already  quoted,  from  snatches  of  song 
sung  at  different  plays — there  seems  to  be  a  close  resemblance 
between  these  secrets  and  the  Eleusinian  and  ancient  Egyptian 
mysteries.  Certainly  a  considerable  amount  of  hypnotism, 
clairvoyance  and  spiritualism  is  taught,  and  only  too  many 
proofs  have  been  given,  that  some  of  the  powers  of  Nature  are 
known  and  utilised  by  initiates,  in  a  way  forgotten  or  unknown 
to  their  white  rulers. 

For  instance,  some  of  the  esoteric  members  seem  to  have  the 
power  of  calling  up  shadow  forms  of  absent  persons.  Once  an 
exhibition  of  this  nature  given  in  the  central  court  of  the  com- 
pound of  one  of  the  head  chiefs  of  Oban,  was  described  to  me. 

It  was  midnight,  and  a  bright  moon  was  shining.  Within 
the  open  space  in  the  centre  of  the  compound  a  fire  was 
burning.  On  this  from  time  to  time  "  medicine  "  was  thrown, 
which  caused  clouds  of  smoke  to  rise.  These  died  down,  save 
for  isolated  "  puffs,"  which  after  a  time  assumed  definite  shape. 

The  spectators  sat  on  the  ground  in  a  half-circle  behind 
the  fire,  and  facing  a  low  mud  wall,  beyond  which,  against  the 
background  of  the  moonlit  sky,  dark  silhouettes  began  to  pass, 
each  clearly  recognisable  as  that  of  some  person  known  to  be 
absent  at  the  time.  There  was  no  sign  of  any  artificial  means 
of  producing  these  shapes,  which  continued  to  pass  for  about  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  at  the  end  of  which  time  they  grew  faint  and 
at  length  faded. 

The  Chiefs  claimed  to  have  the  power  of  calling  up  the 
shadow  shapes  of  white  men,  but  no  case  in  which  this  had 
actually  been  done  was  cited. 

There  are  seven  grades  which  the  aspirant  must  pass  before 

1  he  can  be  admitted  to  the  deeper  teaching  or  the  revelation  of 

any  save  the  lesser  mysteries.     All  may  be  entered  by  young 

boys,  should  their  fathers  be  rich  enough  to  pay  the  necessary 

*  See  Chapter  XXV. 


EGBO  41 

fees,  but  the  secrets  are  not  unfolded  till  middle  age  has  been 
reached. 

1.  Ekpiri  Ngbe.     Small  Egbo. 

2.  Ebu  Nko  (an  old  word,  the  meaning  of  which  is  not 
known).  At  a  dance  given  by  this*  grade,  members  must 
always  wear  their  best  clothes.  Aspirants  to  each  of  these 
are  marked  with  white  chalk  on  both  arms. 

3.  Mbawkaw  (old  Ekoi  word  adopted  by  Efiks).  Aspirants 
to  this  are  marked  on  the  forehead  with  Ekui  (cam-wood  dye). 
These  three  grades  are  called  collectively  Abonn  Ogbe,  i.e., 
children  of  the  Egbos.  They  are  neither  important  nor 
expensive  to  enter. 

4.  Ndibu  (old  word,  meaning  unknown,  equivalent  to  Efik 
Nyampke).  This  is  the  second  division,  and  one  to  which  it  is 
accounted  a  great  honour  to  belong.  It  is  often  called  "  The 
Mother  of  the  Grades."  Its  president  holds  the  second  place 
in  the  whole  society.  If  it  was  found  necessary  to  expel  a 
member  who  had  reached  this  grade,  death  followed  as  a 
matter  of  course,  lest  any  of  its  secrets  should  be  revealed  by 
the  outcast. 

When  a  man  joins  Ndibu  the  head  chiefs  and  officials  stay 
in  the  Egbo  house,  while  the  young  men  dance  and  play 
round  the  town.  The  best  friend  of  the  aspirant  brings 
forward  a  calabash  containing  a  leg  of  meat,  and  two  bottles  of 
palm  wine.  The  postulant  then  enters  the  Club  house,  and 
sits  down  before  the  Chief,  who  puts  powder  on  his  head,  and 
recites  all  the  names  of  the  Egbo.  The  new  member  next 
rises  and  invokes  the  names  in  his  turn,  while  after  each  the 
chiefs  call  out  "  Owe,"  i.e.,  our  own.  He  then  goes  out  and 
dances  with  the  young  men.  The  play  is  carried  on  for  about 
eight  days,  during  which  time  palm  wine  and  meat  are 
supplied  to  all. 

At  the  present  day  at  Oban,  entrance  to  this  grade  costs  about 
£30,  which  must  be  paid  before  full  membership  is  allowed. 

5.  Oku  Akama  (the  priest  consents).  This  is  not  very  expen- 
sive to  enter,  nor  considered  of  much  account,  but  it  must  be 
passed  before  further  grades  can  be  reached.  The  postulant  is 
marked  with  yellow  dye  (Ogokk)  on  the  abdomen  and  the  back 
of  his  shoulders. 


42   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

The  old  Ekoi  grade  was  called  Asian,  but  when  Oban  adopted 
the  Calabar  Egbo,  the  Efiks  insisted  on  this  being  suppressed. 

6.  Eturi  (metal  or  brass  rod),  Efik  Okpokgo.  In  the  old 
days  during  a  play,  all  fires  had  to  be  extinguished  and  no  noise 
of  any  kind  was  permitted  in  the  town.  Formerly  very  few  men 
succeeded  in  reaching  this  grade,  but  now  it  is  usually  passed 
on  the  same  day  as 

7.  Nkanda,  the  highest  and  final  grade.  Oban  took  this 
from  the  Efiks,  who  again  insisted  on  the  destruction  of  the  old 
Ekoi  equivalent  "  Isong,"  and  of  another  old  grade  "  Mutanda," 
of  slightly  lesser  importance. 

Nkanda  is  more  expensive  than  any  other  grade,  and  most 
men  only  enter  late  in  life.  When  a  man  has  succeeded  in 
joining  this  high  grade,  he  is  rubbed  on  head  and  chest  with 
yellow  powder  (Ogokk).  Five  rings  are  made  on  front  and 
back.  Two  yellow,  one  round  each  breast,  a  white  one  in 
the  centre  some  few  inches  below,  and,  beneath  this  again, 
two  more  yellow  ones,  forming  a  square  with  those  on  the 
breasts. 

On  the  back  the  rings  are  arranged  in  the  same  way,  but  the 
central  one  is  yellow  and  the  four  outer  ones  white.  The  arms 
are  ornamented  with  alternate  stripes  of  white  and  yellow,  and 
till  the  last  rite  is  finished,  the  man  goes  bare  save  for  a  long 
loin  cloth  which  reaches  from  waist  to  feet. 

The  chief  of  Nkanda  is  the  president  of  the  Egbo  Lodge, 
and  by  far  the  most  powerful  man  of  the  town.  His  office  is 
sometimes  hereditary,  and  only  free-born  chiefs  can  aspire  to  it. 
In  olden  days  a  slave  could  not  join  Egbo,  lest  he  should 
reveal  its  secrets  to  a  new  master.  He  could,  however,  be 
present  at  most  of  the  ceremonies  if  his  owner  was  a  member  of 
Egbo,  and  permitted. 

One  of  the  chief  insignia  of  the  Nkanda  grade  is  called  the 
Ekabe  (Efik  Ekarra)  Nkanda.  This  is  a  kind  of  hoop,  covered 
with  bright-coloured  cloth.  The  attendant  whose  duty  is  to 
carry  this,  performs  many  curious  evolutions  with  it.  He  is 
obliged  to  hold  back  the  Okum  (or  "  image")  by  its  means  if  the 
latter,  in  a  state  of  excitement,  seems  about  to  show  himself  to  a 
non-member,  particularly  a  woman,  at  a  time  when  this  is  not 
permitted.     Should  the  Okum  succeed  in  evading  the  vigilance 


Image  "  of  Nkanda  Grade  of  Egbo  with  Emblem  "  Ekabe  Nkanda. 


EGBO 


43 


of  the  Ekabe  bearer,  a  cow  is  killed,  and  a  feast  provided  for 
the  members  at  the  expense  of  the  defaulting  official. 

Another  symbol,  used  by  Nkanda  and  Ebu  Nko  alike,  is  the 
Effrigi  (see  drawing),  a  sort  of  wooden  fan  on  which  Nsibidi 
signs  are  inscribed. 

The  head  priest  of  the  whole  Egbo  Society  is  called  Iyamba, 
the  old  Ekoi  equivalent  for  which  was 
Musungu. 

Other  officials  are  Murua,  who 
carries  the  rattle  during  "  plays," 
and  Isua,*  the  master  of  ceremonies 
for  the  Abonn  Ogbe.  The  head  of 
each  grade  is  called  Ntui  (chief)  and 
acts  as  treasurer. 

Those  who  belong  to  the  four  higher 
grades,  and  have  paid  the  fees  in  full, 
may  join  in  another  ceremony  called 
Mariba,  or  Etem-I-Ngbe  (the  bush 
leopard).  This  is  performed  in  the 
depths  of  the  forest  and  with  the 
greatest  secrecy.  It  is  during  the 
"Mariba"  that  the  successive 
mysteries  are  unveiled.  The  ceremony  may  also  be  performed 
at  the  funeral  "  customs  "  of  very  great  chiefs. 

The  danger  run  by  non-members  on  such  occasions,  before 
the  coming  of  white  rule,  may  perhaps  be  better  understood 
by  a  case  which  happened  not  long  before  my  arrival  to  start 
the  District. 

During  the  "  Mariba  "  the  sacred  images,  &c,  are  carried  to 
a  part  of  the  "  bush  "  where  a  little  hut  of  green  boughs  has 
been  built  to  receive  them.  Sentries  are  posted  to  keep  all 
intruders  from  coming  within  a  mile  of  this  spot.  On  this 
occasion,  however,  two  young  girls,  sisters,  happened  to  have 
missed  the  patrol,  and  trespassed  unwittingly  within  the  sacred 
precincts,  probably  in  search  of  nuts  or  bush  fruits,  which 
abound  everywhere.    They  were  caught  by  the  sentries,  brought 

*  This  is  also  the  name  given  to  a  particular  dance  never  performed  save  on 
the  death  of  one  of  the  Chief  Members,  such  as  the  Iyamba,  or  when  fulfilling 
the  latter's  "  customs." 


Effrigi  Fan. 
(Notice  svastika  on  handle.) 


44   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

before  the  "  Egbo,"  condemned  to  death,  and  hanged  almost 
immediately.  Their  brother,  who  was  a  member  of  the  highest 
grade  of  the  society,  was  allowed,  as  a  great  favour,  to  be 
present  at  their  death  and  afterwards  to  carry  home  the  bodies 
to  his  family.  Of  redress,  in  such  a  case,  there  could  be  neither 
hope  nor  thought. 

Sometimes  rich  and  influential  women  are  permitted  to  become 
honorary  members  of  all  grades,  but  they  are  never  allowed  to 
be  full  members,  nor  to  know  any  of  the  mysteries. 

Each  grade  has  its  particular  dances  and  tunes,  and  each  its 
own  Okum  Ngbe  or  Egbo  "  image,"  which  is  never  supposed 
to  come  out  and  show  itself  unless  under  direct  inspiration  to 
do  so. 

The  so-called  "  image  "  is  a  figure  robed  from  crown  to  heel 
in  a  long  garment,  of  the  colour  proper  to  the  grade,  and 
pierced  with  eyeholes.  It  usually  bears  on  its  head  a  wooden 
framework  covered  with  skin  and  shaped  like  a  human  head, 
often  with  two  faces,  one  male  and  the  other  female.  This 
represents  the  omniscience  of  the  Deity  looking  both  ways, 
into  the  future  and  back  to  the  past,  as  also  the  bi-sexual 
character  shown  in  the  oldest  conceptions  of  Obassi  Osaw  and 
Obassi  Nsi,  Sky  Father  and  Earth  Mother. 

The  Okum  runs  up  and  down  accompanied  by  two  attendants 

clothed  in  gorgeous,  close-fitting,  knitted  garments,  usually  of 

red,  yellow,  and  white.     One  of  these  carries  a  rod  or  whip,  the 

symbol  of  the  power  of  the  society,  which,  under  native  law, 

I  had   the    right    to  flog  to  death  any  non-members  who  had 

\  seriously   offended    against    its    rules.     The    other    bears    the 

symbolic  green  boughs,  which  play  so  great  a  part  in  the  lives 

lof  the    Ekoi.      At    almost   every  important   occurrence,  from 

tbirth  onward,  green  leaves  of  the  kind  proper  to  the  event  are 

used,  and  at    the  last   are   gently  drawn    over   the  face  of  a 

dying  man,  that  his  spirit  may  pass  peacefully  and  without  pain 

from  this  world  to  the  next.       Curiously  enough  the  scientific 

name   of    the     tree    used    on    this    last   occasion    is    Croton 

amabilis,    though    the   small,    dark    leaves    and    inconspicuous 

flowers  hardly  suggest  such  an  appellation. 

There  is  great  rivalry  between  the  different  towns  as  to 
which  can   produce  the    most   gorgeous   robes  for  "images" 


EGBO  45 

and  members.  The  financial  state  of  a  place  can  be  told  by  a 
glance  at  one  of  the  "  plays,"  as  the  local  resources  are  strained 
to  the  utmost  in  the  hope  of  outdoing  neighbouring  towns. 
The  chiefs  of  Oban  volunteered  the  information  that  the  play 
was  so  much  finer  on  the  second  New  Year  after  my  arrival 
than  formerly,  because  the  opening  of  a  Government  Station 
had  brought  them  an  increase  of  wealth. 

The  most  interesting  figure  in  last  New  Year's  dance,  how- 
ever, wore  nothing  either  rich  or  attractive.  This  was  the 
Ekuri  Ibokk  (Efik  "axe-medicine").  It  is  a  very  old  Ekoi  Juju, 
but  was  renamed  a  few  years  ago  when  the  axe  was  placed 
between  its  jaws  in  addition  to  the  other  insignia. 

The  image  was  robed  in  a  long  gown  of  dark  blue  cloth,  daubed 
with  mud  from  the  river-bed.  This,  to  the  Ekoi,  as  formerly  to 
performers  in  the  Greek  Mysteries  and  to  Flamen  Dialis,  is  in 
itself  a  great  "Juju."  Over  the  robes  of  the  image  dark -spotted 
Juju  leaves  were  fastened  here  and  there.  On  its  head  it  bore 
a  crocodile  mask,  carved  in  wood,  perhaps  a  representation  of 
Nimm  herself.  It  was  attended  by  two  hunters  armed  with 
flint-lock  guns,  a  third  bore  a  fishing-net,  and  a  fourth  a  curious 
earthen  trumpet  covered  with  leopard  skin.  The  "image"  was 
supposed  to  be  deaf  to  human  voices,  and  to  hear  only  those  of 
the  bush  beasts,  save  when  awakened  by  the  call  of  the  trumpet. 
Ekuri  Ibokk  is  the  great  "  hunting  Juju  "  of  the  Ekoi,  and  had 
never  before  appeared  to  a  European.  It  is  the  Juju  that  is 
supposed  to  have  the  power  of  "  smelling  out  "  all  others,  and 
the  axe  in  its  jaws  is  a  sign  of  its  special  fierceness.  Powerful 
as  it  is,  however,  it  is  not  proof  against  the  very  human  weak- 
ness of  wishing  to  have  its  photograph  taken,  and  appeared,  on 
this  inducement,  among  its  less  exclusive  brothers. 

At  such  "  plays  "  all  the  principal  characters  carry  wands  or 
whips,  the  symbol  of  the  power  of  the  society,  which,  as  has  :; 
already  been  mentioned,  had  the  right  to  flog  to  death  non- 
members  who  ventured  outside  their  houses  during  an  Egbo 
performance,  or  seriously  offended  in  any  way.  Minor  offences 
were  punished  by  fines,  and  from  these  the  main  revenues 
of  the  Club  were  derived. 

One  great  advantage  to  be  gained  from  membership  in  the 
old  days  was   the   facility  offered   for  the    recovery  of  debts, 


46   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

A  creditor  brought  his  case  before  the  Egbo  Lodge  in  the 
debtor's  town.  The  Council  considered  the  matter,  and  if  the 
claim  was  thought  justified,  the  Club  drum  would  be  beaten 
through  the  streets,  and  the  defaulter  ordered  to  pay.  He  was 
also  bound  to  provide  a  "  dash  "  for  the  Egbo  Society.  Should 
he  be  unable  to  comply  with  both  demands,  his  goods  were 
seized,  and,  other  means  failing,  himself  or  some  of  his  family 
reduced  to  the  position  of  slaves,  in  order  to  make  good  all 
liabilities. 

There  are  many  stories  to  account  for  the  coming  of  Egbo, 
but  perhaps  the  following  is  the  best  known. 

How  the  First  Egbo  Image  Came. 

One  day  Nki  *  went  into  the  bush  to  gather  palm  kernels. 
He  cut  down  a  great  cluster  from  which  one  fell.  This  rolled 
down  a  crab's  hole,  right  through  to  the  ghost  town,  where 
the  son  of  one  of  the  chiefs  found  and  ate  it. 

Nki  climbed  down  from  the  palm  tree,  and  went  in  search  of 
his  kernel.  He  followed  it  till  he  came  to  the  ghost  town. 
There  he  saw  the  young  chief  and  guessed  what  he  had  done. 
So  he  went  before  the  head  chief  and  said  : 

"  Will  you  give  me  back  the  palm  kernel  which  your  son  has 
eaten  ?  " 

The  old  chief  answered  : 

"  Here  is  a  drum.  Take  it  and  beat  upon  it.  It  will  repay 
you  for  what  you  have  lost." 

Nki  did  as  he  was  told.  Hardly  had  he  struck  the  drum 
when  a  calabash  full  of  fruit  appeared.  The  chief  said,  "  Take 
the  drum  with  you,"  so  Nki  took  it  and  went  on  his  way. 

When  he  reached  home  he  called  to  his  wives  and  said : 

"  Weep  no  more.     I  bring  you  food  in  plenty." 

He  beat  the  drum,  and  the  calabash  appeared  as  before.  He 
ate  of  the  fruit,  and  gave  some  to  all  his  family. 

After  this  there  was  always  much  chop  in  his  house,  for  he 
needed  only  to  strike  the  drum  to  obtain  a  fresh  supply.  He 
grew  rich,  and  hired  people  to  work  for  him  instead  of  working 
himself  as  formerly. 

*  New  Dormouse  (Graphiurus  C.  Dorothea),  discovered  by  me  in  191 1. 


EGBO  47 

One  day  he  hired  the  men  of  the  town  to  go  and  cut  farm 
for  him.  All  of  them  went  save  Ngbe  (Leopard)  alone.  Each 
day  Nki  cooked  twelve  great  calabashes  of  chop  for  his 
workers. 

When  the  farm  was  cleared  he  hired  the  women  to  plant  it, 
and  prepared  food  for  them  as  he  had  done  for  the  men.  The 
wife  of  Ngbe  took  her  portion  home.  Her  husband  seized  it 
and  ate  it  up,  whereon  she  said : 

"  When  the  others  went  to  cut  farm  for  Nki,  you  refused  to 
go  with  them.     Why  then  do  you  eat  my  chop  ?  " 

One  day  Nki  went  to  visit  his  farm.  He  put  the  magic  drum 
into  an  inner  room  and  locked  the  door.  Then  he  gave  the  key 
to  the  Lame  Boy  and  said,  "  If  anyone  should  come  and  ask 
for  this  do  not  give  it." 

As  soon  as  he  was  out  of  sight  Ngbe  came  and  demanded  the 
key.  The  boy  refused  to  give  it  up,  but  Leopard  said,  "  I  will 
kill  you  if  you  do  not  give  it  to  me."     So  the  boy  gave  it. 

Ngbe  opened  the  door,  seized  the  drum  and  bounded  with  it 
into  the  bush.  There  he  made  a  small  clearing,  set  up  the 
drum  and  began  to  beat  it.  So  strongly  did  he  strike,  that 
almost  at  once  several  calabashes  appeared  full  of  sweet  things. 
There  was  too  much  for  one  to  eat  alone,  so  Ngbe  ate  what  he 
could  and  left  the  rest,  then  broke  up  the  drum  and  threw  away 
the  pieces.     Afterwards  he  went  off  to  his  house. 

When  Nki  came  home,  he  asked  the  Lame  Boy  for  the  key  of 
the  inner  room,  whereon  the  boy  told  him  all  that  Ngbe  had 
done. 

Nki  was  sad  over  his  loss.  After  a  while  he  went  out  into  the 
bush  as  before.  Again  he  cut  palm  kernels,  but,  as  none  of 
them  fell,  he  looked  round  for  a  crab  hole,  threw  a  kernel  into 
it,  and  pushed  it  down  with  a  long  stick.  He  then  followed  it 
through  the  hole  till  he  came  again  to  the  ghost  town.  Here 
he  saw  a  chief  and  said  : 

"  One  of  your  sons  has  taken  my  palm  kernel.  Give  it  back 
to  me." 

On  this  the  chief  gave  him  Egyuk,  the  long  kind  of  drum 
which  we  now  find  in  Egbo  houses.  Nki  took  it  and  went  on 
his  way. 

When  he  reached  the  bush  where  he  had  cut  the  kernels  he 


48   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

set  down  the  drum  and  began  to  beat  it.  Out  sprang  the  Egbo 
"  image  "  and  started  to  flog  him  with  the  whip  which  it  held 
in  its  hand. 

Nki  went  on  beating  the  drum,  and  after  a  while  the  image 
went  back  into  it.     Then  he  took  up  the  drum  and  went  home. 

Next  day  Nki  went  out  as  if  he  were  again  going  to  farm. 
No  sooner  was  he  out  of  sight  than  Ngbe  came  as  before  and 
demanded  the  key  from  the  Lame  Boy.  This  time  the  latter 
gave  it  without  difficulty,  as  his  master  had  told  him  to  do. 

Ngbe  opened  the  door  of  the  inner  room  where  the  drum 
was,  took  it,  and  sprang  into  the  bush  as  before.  He  started 
to  play  with  all  his  might,  and  so  furiously  did  he  strike  that 
seven  Egbo  "  images  "  sprang  out,  each  armed  with  a  whip, 
and  began  to  flog  him. 

Full  of  anger  and  fear,  he  broke  the  drum,  and  threw  the 
pieces  into  the  bush.  The  "  images  "  could  no  longer  go  back 
to  their  home  in  the  drum,  so  they  ran  into  the  town,  and  beat 
all  who  came  in  their  way. 

That  is  the  reason  why  the  "images"  run  up  and  down  to 
this  day,  and  beat  those  who  cross  their  path.  It  is  because 
Ngbe  broke  the  first  long  drum  which  was  brought  from  the 
ghost  town,  and  in  which  they  used  to  dwell. 

The  reason  we  call  them  "  Egbo  "  is  because  Nki  gave  that 
name  to  the  first  "  image  "  which  came  out  of  the  magic  drum. 


Beside  the  Egbo  Club  there  are  almost  innumerable  societies,* 
secret  and  otherwise,  some  partially  religious  in  character, 
some  formed  simply  for  amusement  and  entertainment,  some 
for  mutual  protection,  and  various  other  purposes,  such  as  to 
carry  out  special  celebrations  at  the  funeral  customs  of  members. 
In  many  cases  such  institutions  grew  from  an  "age  class"  which 
formed  a  club  for  its  members ;  this  became  popular  and 
outsiders  were  allowed  to  join. 

*    For  list  of  Oban  Societies,  see  Appendix  B. 


CHAPTER   V 

Jujus 

The  term  "  Njomm,"  which  can  only  be  translated  by 
"  Juju,"  is  so  elusive  as  to  defy  definition,  but  as  far  as  may  be 
gathered  from  the  vague  conception  of  the  Ekoi,  it  includes  all 
uncomprehended,  mysterious  forces  of  Nature.  These  vary  in 
importance  from  elementals,  so  powerful  as  to  hold  almost  the 
position  of  demi-gods,  to  the  "  Mana  " — to  use  a  Melanesian 
term — of  herb,  stone,  or  metal.  In  another  sense  the  word 
also  includes  the  means  by  which  such  forces  may  be  con- 
trolled or  influenced ;  secrets  wrung  from  the  deepest  recesses 
of  Nature  by  men  wise  above  their  fellows,  or  mercifully 
imparted  to  some  favoured  mortal  by  one  or  other  of  the 
Deities. 

Jujus  vary  in  importance  in  different  towns  according  to 
local  opinion,  but  everywhere  a  dominant  one  is  to  be  found, 
and  whatever  other  attributes  may  be  claimed  for  this,  that  of 
protection  against  witchcraft  always  ranks  first.  Each  of  the 
lesser  Jujus  presides  over  its  particular  department,  though  in 
many  cases  attributes  overlap.  As  an  example  of  the  various 
kinds  usually  to  be  found,  those  existing  in  1907  at  the  little 
village  of  Ekong,  on  the  Obutong-Oban  road,  may  be  cited. 

1.  Ofiri,  thought  at  the  time  to  be  the  most  powerful  of  all 
Jujus  for  defending  the  town  against  witchcraft  and  theft.  So 
great  was  its  reputation  for  destroying  wizards  that  people 
came  from  hundreds  of  miles  in  order  to  join  the  cult.  Each 
member  wears  a  metal  torque  or  anklet,  on  which  some  of  the 
"  medicine  "  has  been  poured,  and  carries  back  more  "  medicine  " 
to  be  placed  in  a  shrine  at  his  own  home. 

2.  Nimm  Asam  (Nimm  of  the  Spears).  This  is  strong 
against  witchcraft,  and  also  helps  hunters,  but  is  chiefly  valued 

s.b.  E 


50   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

for  its  power  of  warning  members  against  poison  in  food  or 
drink,  especially  against  that  made  from  ground  porcupine 
quills,  which  is  called  "  the  poison  of  Nimm  Asam,"  and  is  the 
Ekoi  equivalent  for  ground  glass  or  ground  palm  stem.  Certain 
members  of  this  Juju  are  thought  to  have  the  power  of  producing 
the  rainbow,  and  therefore  causing  the  rain  to  cease  for  a  time.* 

3.  Egpatim,  against  witchcraft  and  theft.  This  is  of  the 
same  "  family  "  as  Nimm  Asam. 

4.  Nkajokk,  the  province  of  which  is  to  ward  off  sickness 
from  the  town. 

5.  Ebup  to  ensure  success  in  hunting  and  fishing. 

6.  Ngapong,  for  protection  against  beasts  of  prey,  especially 
leopards. 

These  six  Jujus  are  common  to  the  whole  town,  but  most 
families  have,  in  addition,  others  which  have  been  handed 
down  from  father  to  son,  and  mother  to  daughter  for  countless 
generations. 

In  Oban,  the  most  powerful  Jujus  are  the  very  old  ones  of 
Okpata,  Ejamet  and  Eja — the  first  two  against  witchcraft  and 
theft,  and  the  latter  to  increase  the  crops,  ward  off  wild  animals 
from  the  herds,  and  give  protection  from  thunder  and  lightning. 
The  feast  of  Eja  is  the  chief  one  of  the  year,  and  corresponds  to 
the  harvest  festival,!  as  do  those  of  Mfuor  and  Animm  in  some 
towns. 

Among  the  lesser  Jujus  at  Oban  is  that  which  takes  the  place 
of  the  Ekong  Ngapong.  It  is  called  Ngbe  Abum  Obbaw 
(Leopard  knocks  his  foot),  and  was  brought  from  Mkpott 
about  two  years  ago.  Before  its  arrival  leopards  had  been  a 
scourge.  Five  cows  were  once  killed  by  them  within  twenty-four 
hours,  while  even  in  the  middle  of  the  town  compounds  were 
entered  and  goats  carried  off. 

One  night,  before  the  Station  was  built,  when  I  was  sleeping 
in  the  doorless  Court  House,  I  awoke  to  find  a  leopard  snuffing 
round  my  mosquito  net.  It  was  after  a  long  march,  and  I  felt 
too  tired  to  exert  myself  to  repel  the  intruder  save  by  a  sleepy 
"  tsch — ,"  but  was  punished  for  this  laziness  by  the  loss  of 
several  of  my  best  fowls,  which  it  took  in  default  of  bigger  prey. 

*  See  p.  72.  I  See  dances,  p.  295. 

t  See  p.  74. 


UJ 


z 


JUJUS  51 

The  same  thing  happened  again  at  the  station  before  the  doors 
had  been  hung.' 

On  returning  to  Oban  after  absence  on  leave,  a  remarkable 
change  was  found.  Since  the  installation  of  the  new  Juju  not 
a  leopard  showed  itself  within  a  mile  of  the  houses,  and  not 
a  sheep,  goat  or  cow  had  been  lost.  The  cattle,  in  fact,  were 
wandering  safely  outside  the  town,  eating  my  pineapples,  and 
spoiling  my  rubber  plantations. 

The  Juju  is  said  to  lose  its  efficacy  if  certain  rites  are  not 
observed.  Since  its  arrival  palm  kernels  must  be  picked  from 
the  bunch  before  being  brought  into  the  town.  Should  this 
not  be  done,  a  leopard  will  come  before  dawn,  and  exact  the 
penalty  of  cow  or  sheep.  The  same  punishment  is  inflicted 
should  any  violent  quarrel  take  place  in  the  town,  as  also  if 
a  fire  is  lighted  outside  a  compound's  walls.  The  undoubted 
efficacy  of  the  Juju  may  perhaps  be  explained  in  part  by  the 
purgation  ceremony  described  on  p.  220.  It  is  possible  that 
the  strong-smelling  pitch  used  to  "  renew  the  power  "  of  the 
Juju  may  offend  the  nostrils  of  the  keen-scented  beasts  of  prey 
and  cause  them  to  avoid  the  town. 

The  four  Jujus  with  the  widest  distribution  are  Mfam,  Ofiri, 
Mfuor  and  Akpambe.  All  alike  protect  against  witchcraft  and 
theft.  The  first  is  the  oldest,  and  was  in  the  possession  of 
the  Ekoi  when  they  arrived  in  this  part  of  the  world.  It  is 
held  in  some  places  to  be  so  powerful,  that  it  has  had  to  be 
removed.  For  instance,  in  1909  the  people  of  Nsan  came  to 
beg  that  it  might  be  taken  away  from  their  town,  as  many  of 
the  inhabitants  were  dying  because  of  it.  Even  if  a  man 
■thoughtlessly  ate  a  single  plantain  when  passing  through  a 
farm,  without  first  obtaining  the  permission  of  the  owner,  Mfam 
was  said  to  kill  him  for  theft.  Wherever  this  Juju  is  dominant, 
the  entrails  of  any  animal  killed  in  hunting  must  be  brought 
before  its  priest. 

To  revoke  the  tabu  on  entrails  for  the  general  public,  an 
animal  must  be  killed  and  brought  into  the  town.  Each  man 
then  takes  his  matchet  and  scrapes  his  tongue,  refusing  to  be 
bound  by  the  "Ntubi"  (tabu).  After  this  the  entrails  are 
divided  and  eaten. 

Early  in  1909  the  cult  of  Akpambe  invaded  the  District  and 

E  2 


52   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 


rapidly  gained  such  a  reputation  that  lodges  were  established  in 
almost  every  town.  The  cult  was  started  about  a  year  earlier 
by  a  man  named  Obassi  Abong,  who  was  taught  the  necessary 
rites  by  his  mother,  a  celebrated  Juju  woman  of  Okuri  in  the 
Cameroons,  where  its  first  shrine  still  exists  (see  photograph, 
p.  158).  Many  older  cults  were  overthrown  at  the  coming  of 
Akpambe,  but  the  shrine  of  Eburuk  Pabi  stands  untouched. 
People  even  aver  that  the  new  Juju  cannot  enter  a  place 
unless  Eburuk  Pabi  is  there  first ;  for  the  latter  alone  confers 

__j!W=3'  the  power  of  "  seeing  " 


Akpambe.  Certainly 
the  "  Okum  "  at  each 
"  play  "  bows  before 
the  shrine  of  Eburuk 
Pabi.  It  is  somewhat 
significant  that  this 
last-named  is  looked 
upon  as  a  female  Juju. 
Some  aver  that 
Eburuk  Pabi  is  an  old 
name  for  Obassi,  in 
which  case  it  may 
§&&  perhaps  be  taken  as 
a  further  indication  of 
the  original  femininity 
of  Obassi  Nsi.  The 
sign  of  Eburuk  Pabi  is 

Shrine   of   Eburuk  Pabi  at   Ndingane.    with  old    an      earthen     pot— al- 
Juju  post  overthrown  at  the  coming  of  Akpambe.    ways  a  female  symbol. 

Votaries  of  Akpambe,  Ekuri  Ibokk  and  Mfuor  wear  amulets 
of  blue  cloth  containing  "  medicine,"  the  chief  function  of  which 
is  to  ward  off  witchcraft. 

The  "images"  of  all  three  Jujus  wear  robes  of  dark  blue 
native  cloth,  bordered  with  a  fringe  of  palm-fibre  and  decked 
with  the  silvery  shells  of  a  bivalve.  From  a  certain  resemblance 
in  shape  these  are  supposed  to  represent  the  human  ear,  and 
symbolise  the  all-hearing  power  of  the  spirit,  like  those  pottery 
and  enamel  representations  of  the  organ  found  in  Egyptian 
temples.     In  each  case  the  "  image  "  bears  a  roughly-carved 


JUJUS  53 

crocodile's  head  upon  its  own,  thus  seeming  to  link  itself  with 
the  cult  of  the  great  nature  goddess  "  Nimm." 

When  a  man  wishes  to  sacrifice,  he  must  first  call  on  Eyo 
(the  sun)  to  carry  his  petition  before  Obassi.  Should  the 
ceremony  take  place  in  the  morning  the  title  Eyo  Ofu  (sun 
of  the  morning)  must  be  used,  but  if  after  noon  that  of  Eyo 
Egu  (sun  of  the  evening). 

The  ceremonies  proper  to  the  various  Jujus  are  long,  com- 
plicated, and  contain  many  fragments  of  old  ritual  of  which  the 
meaning  has  long  since  been  forgotten.  An  account  of  some 
of  these  may  be  not  without  interest. 

At  Oban  on  February  2,  1908,  a  sacrifice  was  offered  by  a 
woman  named  Ogai  Etab  for  recovery  of  health.  When  the 
townsfolk  had  assembled  the  suppliant  advanced  holding  a 
calabash  of  food,  covered  with  a  white  cloth. 

The  priest  received  the  offering,  then  took  the  cloth  and  held 
it  up  before  the  Juju,  saying,  "  Here  is  cloth  brought  by  Ogai 
Etab.  By  the  charm  you  told  her  that  the  sickness  had 
fallen  upon  her  because  she  had  not  offered  sacrifice  for  a  very 
long  time." 

Next,  dried  meat  was  taken  from  the  calabash,  and  offered 
with  the  same  words,  together  with  an  earthen  jar  containing 
palm  wine.  After  this  the  priest  called  for  water  and  filled  his 
mouth  ;  then  laid  two  Juju  leaves  on  the  back  of  his  left  hand. 
He  blew  the  water  out  upon  them  and  called  aloud,  "  Behold, 
here  is  food  come  from  Ogai  Etab.  Answer  whether  or  not  you 
will  eat  of  it,  Obassi-0-0  !  Obassi-0-0  !  " 

The  names  of  all  dead  members  of  the  cult  were  called,  for 
ghosts  have  great  power  over  the  Juju  which  they  served  in 
life.  This  is  particularly  the  case  with  the  "  Founder,"  i.e.,  the 
priest  who  first  started  the  cult  in  a  new  town  and  is  supposed 
to  remain  its  guardian  after  death.  Before  any  further  step  is 
taken  the  Diviner  (Mboni)  assures  the  people  that  the  ghost  of 
the  Founder  is  present. 

When  the  long  list  of  dead  was  ended,  the  priest  struck  his 
right  hand  against  the  back  of  his  left,  on  which  the  two  leaves 
were  lying.  These  fluttered  down  ;  one  fell  face  upward,  and 
the  other  downward.  This  showed  that  the  sacrifice  was 
accepted. 


54   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

Next  the  priest  poured  water  into  the  earthenware  pot, 
where  the  Juju  is  supposed  to  live,  and  said : 

"  Here  is  fresh  water.  Make  our  bodies  cool  and  fresh  as 
water,  that  fever  may  keep  far  from  us  !  "  He  then  dropped  in 
a  little  powdered  white  chalk  saying,  "  Here  is  chalk.  Give  us 
good  fortune."  Next  he  added  some  palm  wine  and  palm  oil, 
saying  "  Make  our  blood  rich  and  pure  as  oil  and  palm 
wine." 

The  meat  was  then  cut  into  small  pieces  and  divided  among 
the  worshippers,  and  dried  corn,  mixed  with  palm  wine,  was 
shared  among  them,  after  it  had  been  held  before  the  Juju. 

When  all  had  been  eaten,  the  priest  again  laid  two  leaves 
upon  his  hand  and  said  : 

"  Now  we  have  eaten  and  drunken.  May  we  go  home 
satisfied  ?  " 

He  struck  the  leaves  as  before.  If  they  had  not  fallen  rightly, 
the  woman,  on  whose  behalf  the  ceremony  had  been  held,  must 
have  gone  to  the  Diviner  to  find  out  why  her  petition  had  not 
been  granted.  The  latter  would  then  practise  the  charm,  and 
give  some  reason,  for  example,  "  The  offering  was  not  enough." 
In  such  a  case  more  food  must  be  gathered  and  the  whole 
ceremony  repeated. 

On  the  occasion  described  above,  the  woman  was  very  ill, 
and  unfit  to  collect  all  that  would  usually  have  been  thought 
necessary ;  but  the  priest  allowed  the  ceremony  to  take  place, 
on  the  understanding  that  the  rest  of  the  sacrifice  should  be 
offered  later. 

Another  Juju  for  the  recovery  of  health  is  called  Ntuanto,  i.e., 
the  Soul  or  Outbreathing.  This  ceremony  was  witnessed  one 
day  at  Nsan.  As  we  went  along  the  street,  a  low  tomtoming, 
mixed  with  the  sharper  strokes  of  the  Okankan  (a  musical 
instrument  like  two  flat  bells  joined  together),  was  heard  from 
the  compound  of  one  of  the  minor  chiefs  named  Atop  Atun. 
We  entered  and  found  the  whole  family  gathered  in  the  central 
court  round  the  Juju  Ntuanto.  Exactly  facing  it  sat  the  head 
of  the  house,  with  a  small  table  before  him.  On  this  lay  five 
little  fetishes,  each  robed  in  fresh  green  leaves  bound  on  with 
fine  tie-tie.  Two  were  somewhat  larger  than  the  others,  one 
male  and  the  other  female.     These  possibly   represented   the 


pr* 


JUJUS  55 

special  fetishes  of  the  father  and  mother,  while  the  lesser  ones 
were  those  of  the  children.  Before  the  Juju  an  iron  spear 
(Osam),  notched  at  the  point  like  a  gigantic  fish  hook,  stood 
upright  in  the  ground. 

To  the  rear,  at  the  right-hand  corner,  a  tortoise  was  impaled 
head  upwards,  and  front  toward  the  spectators.  In  the 
foreground,  on  the  right  of  the  head  of  the  family,  knelt 
one  of  the  "members,"  holding  the  black  cock,  destined  to  be 
sacrificed. 

As  we  watched,  Atop  took  up  an  egg  which  lay  beside  him, 
and  broke  it  with  great  care,  on  the  topmost  barb  of  the  spear. 
He  then  gently  crushed  the  shell  round  the  puncture,  and 
pressed  it  against  the  spear  in  five  different  places,  so  that  some 
of  the  yolk  and  specks  of  egg-shell  adhered  to  the  metal. 
The  little  dolls  were  then  anointed  in  the  same  way,  and  what 
remained  of  the  shell  was  crushed  in  the  hand,  and  laid  at  the 
foot  of  the  Juju. 

A  deputation  of  chiefs  was  waiting  at  the  Rest-house,  so  it 
was  impossible  to  stay  till  the  end  of  the  ceremony,  the 
object  of  which  was  to  restore  health  to  Atop  himself,  who 
was  sick. 

On  asking  for  the  name  of  the  Juju,  I  was  told  that  it  was 
called  "  Monni  Njomm,"  i.e.,  Little  Juju,  but  when  I  shook  my 
head  and  said  I  already  knew  that  it  was  one  of  the  lesser 
Jujus,  and  wished  to  learn  its  real  name,  my  informant  looked 
confused,  though  rather  amused,  and  answered  that  it  was 
called  Ntuanto,  i.e.,  the  Soul  or  Outbreathing. 

Cocks  and  tortoises  are  sacrificed  not  only  on  an  occasion 
such  as  that  just  described,  but  to  nearly  all  the  greater  Jujus, 
together  with  the  blood  of  animals  killed  in  the  bush.  During 
many  ceremonies,  pipes  made  from  crabs'  claws  are  blown. 
The  legendary  causes  for  these  customs  are  to  be  found  in  the 
following  stories. 

Why  Cock  and  Tortoise  are  Sacrificed  to  the  Juju. 

Cock  and  Tortoise  dwelt  together  in  a  town  where  there  was 
a  great  famine.  No  fruits  ripened  in  the  farms,  and  the  yams 
and  dried  corn  from  last  year's  harvest  were  all  eaten.  So  the 
townsfolk  knew  not  how  to  stay  their  hunger. 


56   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

Tortoise  said  to  himself, "  If  I  stay  here,  I  starve,"  so  he  set 
out,  determined  not  to  turn  back  till  he  had  found  food. 

After  he  had  gone  a  long  way,  he  came  to  a  place  where  the 
ghosts  had  made  their  farm.  They  went  hither  and  thither 
collecting  plantains,  yams,  pumpkins,  and  other  food.  When 
they  had  got  together  a  great  store,  they  divided  it  among 
them,  and  returned  homeward  heavily  laden. 

No  sooner  had  they  gone  than  Tortoise  crept  out  from  his 
hiding  place,  cut  a  great  bunch  of  plantains,  and  hurried  back 
with  it.  When  he  got  home  he  began  to  cook,  and,  while  he  was 
busy  preparing  the  food,  in  came  Cock.  The  latter  saw  what 
his  friend  was  doing,  and  asked  whence  the  plantains  came. 

Tortoise  answered  that  he  had  seen  them  growing  on  a 
deserted  farm.  Cock  asked  if  he  might  accompany  him  thither 
next  day,  but  Tortoise  refused. 

On  the  morrow  he  set  out  again  for  the  ghost  farm,  and  came 
back  at  night  with  more  plantains.  Cock  was  awaiting  him, 
and  said,  "  It  is  not  good  that  you  treat  me  so." 

Tortoise  replied,  "  The  reason  I  will  not  let  you  come  with 
me  is  that  you  cannot  hold  your  tongue." 

Cock  asked,  "What  have  I  spoken  about  ?  "  Tortoise  only 
answered,  "  Be  satisfied.  I  will  give  you  a  share  of  my  food, 
but  cannot  allow  you  to  accompany  me." 

At  dawn  therefore  he  set  out  alone  once  more.  This  time, 
when  he  saw  the  ghosts  preparing  to  go  back  to  their  town,  he 
thought  "  I  should  like  to  know  where  they  come  from."  So 
he  followed  behind  them  all  the  way. 

Just  before  the  entrance  to  the  town,  Tortoise  hid  himself 
in  the  bush,  in  a  place  whence  he  could  see  everything,  but 
where  no  one  could  see  him.  He  thought  to  himself  "  I  have 
never  seen  so  fine  a  town  before.  Perhaps  later  I  may  enter 
and  find  out  how  the  ghosts  live." 

While  he  lay  there  hidden,  some  of  the  ghosts  came  by  from 
the  river.  One  of  them  sai-d  "  I  smell  the  odour  of  fresh  meat. 
What  is  it  that  can  smell  so  ?  "  The  other  ghosts  said,  "  Let 
us  look  around." 

They  began  to  search  up  and  down.  When  they  came  to 
the  place  where  Tortoise  lay,  he  hid  himself  beneath  his  shell. 
The  ghosts  saw  him  but  said,  "This  is  only  a  stone."     After 


JUJUS  57 

they  had  grown  weary  of  searching  they  returned  to  their  town. 
Then  Tortoise  went  back  to  the  farm,  and  cut  more  plantains, 
which  he  took  home  as  before. 

Cock  questioned  him  again,  "  Where  did  you  get  these 
plantains  ?  "  Tortoise  said,  "  I  will  not  tell.  I  went  through 
great  danger  to  get  them.  That  is  why  I  will  not  allow  you  to 
come  with  me.  You  are  a  babbler,  and,  should  you  come,  you 
would  surely  make  a  noise  ;  then  someone  would  hear  and  come 
and  kill  us." 

Cock  said,  "  Of  two  friends  it  is  not  good  that  one  should  sit 
hungry  in  the  town,  while  the  other  goes  abroad  and  feeds  in 
plenty." 

Tortoise  answered,  "  All  you  say  is  useless.  You  make  too 
much  noise  to  come  with  me." 

Cock  said  "  Good,"  and  spoke  no  more. 

Shortly  afterwards  Tortoise  went  away.  No  sooner  had  he 
left  the  house  than  Cock  flew  within.  He  found  the  bag 
which  Tortoise  usually  carried,  took  out  his  knife,  made  a 
small  hole,  then  scooped  up  some  ashes  from  the  hearth 
and  put  them  at  the  bottom  of  the  bag.  He  said  to  himself 
"  No  matter  how  secretly  you  go  to-morrow,  I  will  know  where 
you  get  all  this  food." 

Next  morning  when  Tortoise  set  out,  the  ashes  fell  along  the 
road.    Cock  followed,  and  both  arrived  at  the  ghost  farm. 

After  the  ghosts  had  taken  their  food  and  gone  away, 
Tortoise  went  to  cut  plantains  as  before.  When  he  turned 
round  to  go  back  he  saw  Cock.  He  was  afraid  and  said, 
"  Why  did  you  come  ?  Now  we  must  hurry  back.  I  fear 
that  the  owners  of  the  farm  may  catch  us."  Cock  said, 
"  Even  if  I  make  a  noise  I  do  not  think  they  will  do  me 
any  harm." 

Tortoise  replied,  "  If  you  make  a  noise,  not  you  alone,  but  both 
of  us  will  die."  In  great  fear  he  hurried  home,  and  for  four 
days  did  not  leave  his  town. 

At  the  end  of  that  time  all  the  stolen  plantains  were  finished, 
so  he  was  forced  to  set  out  in  search  of  more. 

He  said,  "  I  will  go  back  to  the  farm."  He  went  in  front. 
Cock  walked  behind.  When  they  reached  the  farm  they  saw 
the  ghosts  gathering  their  fruits. 


58   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

Tortoise  said  to  Cock,  "  Do  not  go  near  to  the  ghosts  or 
they  will  catch  you.     Stay  hidden  until  they  have  gone." 

Cock  kept  still  for  a  little  time,  but  after  a  while  he  saw  a 
great  heap  of  coco-yams,  and  ran  to  get  some.  One  of  the 
ghosts  saw  him  and  cried,  "  What  is  this  ?  "  Cock  ran  away. 
He  was  frightened  and  began  to  make  a  small  noise. 

Tortoise  had  already  started  to  run,  and,  when  Cock  caught 
him  up,  said : 

"  Did  I  not  tell  you  to  keep  well  hidden,  and,  above  all,  to 
make  no  noise  ?  "  Both  hurried  home,  and  fasted  that  day 
rather  than  return  to  the  ghost  town. 

Next  morning,  however,  driven  by  hunger,  Tortoise  resolved 
to  go  once  more.  When  he  got  to  the  place,  he  looked  round 
and  saw  Cock  coming.     Tortoise  said  : 

"  You  give  a  great  deal  of  trouble." 

On  this  occasion  none  of  the  ghosts  were  present.  The  two 
friends  began  eagerly  to  gather  as  much  food  as  they  could 
carry  away.  They  took  enough  for  four  days.  Cock  grew  so 
excited  that  he  started  to  crow  once  more.  Tortoise  said, 
"  It  is  too  much.  I  am  weary  of  all  the  worry  you  cause  me. 
I  am  going  to  the  town  to-day.  If  they  catch  me  I  shall  at 
least  be  rid  of  you." 

Cock  said,  "  You  at  first  told  me  the  ghosts  would  do  us 
harm.  Why  then  do  you  go  to  their  town  ?  However,  if  you 
go,  I  will  come  along  with  you." 

Now  when  Tortoise  had  lain  hidden  near  the  ghost  town,  he 
had  seen  the  Lame  Boy  sitting  outside  one  of  the  houses.  To 
this  place,  therefore,  he  went,  and  entered  into  the  small 
room  belonging  to  the  Lame  Boy. 

The  latter  said,  "  We  have  never  seen  a  man  like  you  in  our 
town  before.  You  must  hide  yourself  and  let  no  one  see  you. 
They  bring  food  for  me  here,  and  I  will  give  you  some  of  it." 

Cock  entered  also.  Tortoise  said  to  him,  "  Above  all  things 
I  beg  you  not  to  make  a  noise." 

For  two  days  they  stayed  there  safely,  but  on  the  third,  Cock 
saw  a  small  boy  strewing  corn  before  the  house.  He  began  to 
crow. 

Tortoise  ran  to  him  and  held  him  fast.  "  Why  do  you  cry 
out  ?  "  he  asked.     Cock  said,  "  I  saw  corn,  therefore  I  had  to 


JUJUS  5g 

crow."  He  wanted  to  run  outside  and  peck  it  up,  but  Tortoise 
held  him  by  the  waist  and  said  : 

"  You  will  bring  death  on  us  both.  We  must  get  back  to 
our  town." 

The  Cock  struggled  and  crowed.  All  the  town  heard  his 
crowing.  The  townsfolk  ran  and  filled  the  house.  They 
caught  Cock,  who  said  : 

"  It  was  Tortoise  who  brought  me.    I  never  came  here  before." 

Then  the  ghosts  asked,  "  Whence  do  you  come  ?  We  have 
never  seen  anyone  like  you." 

Cock  shook  with  fear,  and  could  only  answer  "  Tortoise 
brought  me." 

Then  the  ghosts  said,  "  What  shall  we  do  with  him,  because 
he  has  dared  to  enter  our  town  ?  "  and  Cock  answered  : 

"  I  came  down  from  the  sky.  If  you  ask  what  is  the  best 
thing  you  can  do  for  yourselves  I  must  tell  you.  Get  white 
cloth  and  hang  it  round  my  neck.  Then  tie  me  up  on  a  high 
palm  tree,  and  pray  to  Obassi  Osaw.  Say  "  Here  is  the  Cock.  We 
have  not  killed  him  for  nothing,  but  because  he  came,  uninvited 
and  without  permission,  into  our  town.    Therefore  he  must  die.' ' 

This  the  ghosts  did,  and  from  thence  came  the  custom 
that  a  cock  should  be  sacrificed  to  many  Jujus.  In  the 
beginning  of  things,  before  Cock  went  to  the  ghost  town,  men 
did  not  take  him  to  sacrifice  before  the  Juju. 

When  all  was  finished  with  Cock,  the  ghosts  turned  to 
Tortoise  and  said  : 

"  What  then  shall  be  done  with  you  ?  "  and  Tortoise 
answered  "  I  also  must  be  sacrificed  to  the  Juju.  Take  a  long 
stick,  sharpen  it  at  one  end,  and  drive  it  through  me  under  my 
shell  so  that  the  pointed  end  holds  me  upright  in  the  ground. 
Thus  it  is  ordained  that  I  also  should  suffer  because  I  came 
uninvited  to  the  town  of  the  ghost  people." 

This  too  was  done,  and  we  see  Tortoise  impaled  to  this  day 
before  many  Jujus. 

Why  Tortoise  is  always  Sacrificed  to  the  Juju. 

Once  when  Obassi  Osaw  lived  on  earth,  Tortoise  was  very 
sad,  because  all  the  women  of  his  town  were  friends  with  the 
men,  and  took  presents  from  them,  but  gave  none  to  hi 


60   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

He  thought  within  himself,  "What  can  I  do  to  get 
presents  ?  " 

Now  one  day,  as  he  went  hunting,  he  met  a  slave  who 
belonged  to  Obassi  Osaw.  As  he  passed  her  he  noticed  that 
she  looked  very  ill.  When  he  came  back  from  hunting  she  lay 
dead  by  the  roadside.  He  stood  looking  at  her,  then  said  to 
himself: 

"  To-day  I  see  a  way  of  getting  presents."  So,  when  it  was 
dark,  he  took  up  the  body  and  carried  it  into  his  house. 

In  the  morning  he  went  out  and  said  to  the  townfolk : 

"  I  have  a  daughter  who  is  very  beautiful.  She  has  been  in 
the  Fatting-house  for  a  long  time,  but  will  come  out  to-day. 
Will  you  come  and  play  ?  " 

The  people  came.  They  beat  drums  and  sang  songs. 
Tortoise  went  inside  and  ornamented  himself  as  is  done  in 
honour  of  a  girl  who  is  coming  out  of  the  Fatting-house.  Then 
he  began  to  dance. 

The  people  cried,  "  Let  the  maiden  come  out  that  we  may 
see  her"  ;  but  Tortoise  said  "  Wait." 

Meantime  someone  went  to  Obassi  Osaw,  and  told  him 
about  the  matter. 

Obassi  sent  to  Tortoise  and  said,  "  Do  you  not  know  that 
all  the  most  beautiful  brides  must  be  brought  to  me  ?  You 
also  must  not  forget  to  offer  your  daughter."  With  this 
message  he  sent  the  sweetheart  and  marriage  presents. 

These  Tortoise  accepted,  and  Obassi  bade  him  fix  a  day  to 
bring  the  new  wife. 

This  was  done,  but  Tortoise  asked  that  during  the  wedding 
day  no  man  should  be  allowed  to  go  from  his  town  to  that 
of  Obassi,  nor  from  Obassi's  town  to  his.  Also  he  said, 
"  Leave  the  small  door  open  that  we  may  enter,  but  keep  all 
your  people  within  the  house  that  no  man  may  see  us  come. 
When  my  daughter  is  prepared  to  receive  you,  I  will  call." 

At  dawn  he  carried  the  dead  body  of  the  slave  over  his 
shoulder  till  he  came  to  the  room  which  Obassi  had  prepared. 
Here  he  saw  a  bed  covered  with  rich  cloths  and  many  fine 
pillows.  He  arranged  the  dead  body  among  them  ;  then  went 
and  said  to  Obassi : 

"  Before  you  enter  I  have  something  to  say.     My  daughter 


JUJUS  61 

will  sometimes  act  like  a  dumb  woman,  and  not  answer  when 
one  speaks.  To-day  she  is  very  tired.  You  must  let  her  rest 
till  I  have  gone," 

Obassi  ordered  that  chop  should  be  prepared  for  Tortoise, 
but  the  latter  said  : 

"  It  is  too  hot.  I  cannot  stay  till  it  cools.  Tell  your 
people  to  bring  me  some  large  leaves,  that  I  may  wrap  them 
round  it  and  carry  it  away." 

Before  leaving,  he  said  : 

"This  is  the  only  daughter  I  have.  She  lies  quietly  in 
your  bed.  Take  care  of  her,  for  now  you  cannot  blame  me 
if  any  bad  thing  happens.  Should  she  die,  I  claim  her  back 
from  you." 

To  this  Obassi  agreed. 

When  Tortoise  had  left,  Obassi  entered  the  bride-room  and 
called,  "  Dearest,  dearest."  As  no  answer  came,  he  thought 
"  I  have  heard  of  this  silent  habit."  So  he  went  away  and 
returned  with  rich  food  and  drink,  and  said  "  Will  you  open 
your  mouth  ?  "     Still  she  lay  without  moving. 

Then  Obassi  touched  her  head  and  said  : 

"  Will  you  wake  up  ?  "  but  the  hair  came  away. 

He  took  her  hand  in  his,  and  the  hand  broke  off. 

The  people  heard  the  sound  of  weeping,  and  ran  in.  They 
saw  the  dead  body  and  said  to  their  lord  : 

"  Do  not  weep.  Let  us  carry  out  the  dead  woman  and 
examine  her."  Then  they  cried,  "  This  is  your  female  slave 
who  was  sick  a  few  days  ago.     Do  you  not  know  her  ? " 

Tortoise  was  called.  He  came  shouting,  "  I  had  told  Obassi 
about  my  daughter.     It  is  he  who  has  killed  her." 

At  daybreak  Obassi  called  a  meeting  of  the  townspeople  and 
said  to  Tortoise,  "  Why  did  you  do  such  a  thing  as  to  bring 
the  dead  body  of  my  slave  and  say  that  it  was  your  daughter  ?  " 
Further  he  said  to  all  the  townsfolk,  "  I  cannot  punish  Tortoise, 
because  of  the  compact  he  made  with  me  before  I  saw  the 
dead  body,  but  from  to-day  all  sacrifices  shall  be  made  with 
Tortoise." 

That  is  the  reason  why  native  people  always  offer  Tortoise  to 
the  Juju. 


62        IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

Why  Crab's  Claw  is  used  in  many  Jujus. 

One  year  there  was  no  fruit  in  the  land,  and  all  the  people 
were  hungry.  Mbaw  (Dormouse,  Graphiurus  Hueti)  went  into 
the  bush  to  cut  tie-tie.  He  came  to  a  river,  and  walked  along 
the  bank.  After  a  while  he  saw  a  calabash  floating  on  the 
water.  He  called  "  Calabash,  come  here."  It  came  at  his 
bidding,  but  within,  instead  of  food,  he  found  a  foul  thing.  So 
hungry  was  he  that  he  tried  to  eat,  but  could  not,  so  he  covered 
it  up  once  more  and  sent  it  away.  Next  he  saw  a  log  of  wood 
floating  down.  Some  plantains  were  lying  on  it.  He  called  to 
the  wood  to  come  to  him.  It  came.  He  ate  some  of  the 
fruit,  kept  the  rest,  and  sent  the  log  away.  When  he  got  home 
he  gave  some  of  the  plantains  to  his  friend  Nki  (Dormouse, 
Graphiurus  C.  Dorothea). 

The  latter  said,  "  Where  did  you  get  such  sweet  fruit  ?  I 
should  like  to  go  with  you  to-morrow  and  find  some  for  myself." 
Mbaw  said  "  No." 

Very  early  in  the  morning  Nki  woke  up,  filled  a  leaf  with 
ashes  from  the  hearth,  then  crept  into  Mbaw's  house,  made  a 
small  hole  in  his  bag,  and  put  in  the  leaf  full  of  ashes.  Then 
he  went  back  to  his  own  home. 

At  daybreak  Nki  went  again,  and  called  his  friend,  but  the 
people  said  that  Mbaw  had  already  gone  out  to  hunt. 

Nki  sought  about  till  he  found  the  marks  of  ashes.  He 
followed  the  trail  till  he  met  his  friend  down  by  the  river. 
Another  calabash  had  just  came  floating  by.  In  it  was  the 
same  as  in  the  first.  Mbaw  asked  Nki  if  he  would  taste  it,  but 
he  said  : 

"  No,  I  will  not  eat  rubbish,"  and  threw  it  back  in  the  water. 
Hardly  was  it  out  of  sight  before  a  second  appeared  full  of 
plantains. 

Nki  called  the  calabash,  and  as  it  drew  near  the  bank 
sprang  upon  it.  It  floated  away  with  him  down  the  river. 
The  whole  day  long  they  floated,  and  at  evening  time  came  to 
the  ghost  town. 

Nki  hid  in  the  bush  and  watched,  for  he  was  a  curious 
man.  The  very  first  ghost  he  saw  was  his  sister  who  had 
died  a  year  before.     He  called  to  her,  and  she  took  him  to 


JUJUS  63 

her  house  and  hid  him  there.  Then  she  began  to  prepare  the 
evening  meal.     A  friend  came  in  to  help  her  make  the  fu-fu. 

While  they  were  doing  this,  the  friend  said,  "  There  is  a  smell 
of  fresh  flesh  here,"  for  ghosts  can  always  smell  out  any  live 
thing.  The  sister  sent  her  away,  and  then  called  Nki  to  come 
out.  She  gave  him  coco  yams,  but  he  said,  "  That  is  not 
enough."     So  she  replied  : 

"  I  have  no  more.  If  you  must  have  some,  go  to  the  head 
chief  of  all  the  ghosts.  Bend  down  before  him,  and  touch  the 
ground  with  your  hands.     Perhaps  he  may  give  you  food." 

Before  Nki  could  reach  the  chief,  all  the  ghosts  came 
crowding  in.  They  brought  a  little  thing  like  a  trumpet,  made 
from  a  crab's  claw.  They  cried,  "  If  a  live  person  is  here,  let 
him  die."  Then  they  blew  on  the  small  instrument,  and  Nki 
died. 

When  the  evening  meal  was  ended,  the  ghosts  played  on  the 
crab's  claw  once  more.  They  had  forgotten  about  Nki,  but  at  the 
sound  of  the  magic  notes  he  came  to  life  again.  They  hung  up 
the  trumpet  on  the  wall  of  the  house,  and  went  away,  while 
Nki  hid  till  morning. 

At  dawn  he  saw  children  going  to  the  spring  to  fetch  water. 
He  took  the  magic  claw  and  followed  them.  Near  a  small 
stream  he  saw  a  crab.  This  he  caught  and  broke  off  a  claw, 
which  he  hung  up  in  place  of  the  ghost  trumpet,  for  he  was 
very  cunning. 

When  he  was  ready  to  escape  he  blew  on  the  magic  pipe,  and 
sleep  caught  all  the  ghosts,  so  that  they  could  not  follow.  All 
day  long  he  walked,  and  towards  nightfall  neared  his  home. 
Then  he  blew  again  on  the  crab's  claw,  and  the  ghosts  woke  up 
and  found  him  gone. 

They  got  another  pipe  to  call  him  back.  They  played  it 
long.  Nki  heard,  and  shook  the  claw  instead  of  answering,  for 
ghosts  can  hear  if  you  shake  a  crab's  claw. 

They  blew  again,  and  again,  and  always  he  answered  with  his 
hand.  Then  he  ran  to  Etuk  (Bay  Duiker)  and  said,  "  Will 
you  please  hold  this  for  me?  "  but  Etuk  refused. 

Nki  ran  a  little  further,  and  came  across  He-goat.  To  him 
he  said  the  same  thing.  He-goat  took  the  claw.  Then  Nki 
went  back  to  his  house. 


64   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

When  the  ghosts  blew  again,  the  crab's  claw  answered  from 
the  hand  of  He-goat.  The  latter  was  frightened  and  shook 
his  hand  to  be  rid  of  the  strange  thing  that  made  a  noise  by 
itself.  The  claw  held  tight,  and  he  could  not  free  himself. 
The  ghosts  followed  wherever  he  went,  for  they  heard  the 
sound  of  the  claw. 

Then  He-goat  dug  a  hole  and  buried  himself,  but  left  one  foot 
above  ground.  When  the  ghosts  reached  the  place,  one  of 
them  knocked  against  the  foot.  Then  they  set  to  work  and 
dug  him  up,  and  asked  how  he  came  to  have  their  trumpet. 
When  they  heard,  some  of  them  said,  "Let  us  kill  him,"  but 
others  said,  "  No,  only  take  away  crab's  claw."  This  they  did, 
and  then  threw  foul  things  upon  his  body,  so  that  goats  remain 
evil-smelling  to  this  day. 

It  is  because  ghosts  can  hear  when  you  play  upon  such  claws, 
that  crab  is  used  in  many  Jujus. 


Emblems  of  Juju  Mfuor,  Egbo  House,  Aking. 


CHAPTER   VI 

Jujus  (continued) 

Several  times  it  has  come  to  my  knowledge  that  Jujus  have 
been  used  against  me  in  Court,  in  the  hopes  of  securing  a 
favourable  decision,  or  of  causing  temporary  dumbness  and 
even  sudden  death,  should  an  adverse  judgment  be  contem- 
plated. Probably  something  of  the  kind  goes  on  every  time  a 
Court  is  held  throughout  the  country,  but  knowledge  of  the 
fact  seldom  reaches  the  judge's  ears. 

On  one  occasion  a  man  named  Nsa  Obassi  brought  a  com- 
plaint against  some  members  of  the  Egbo  Club  who  had  beaten 
him  for  being  found  outside  his  house  during  an  Egbo  per- 
formance.    In  the  course  of  his  evidence,  he  stated : 

"  It  was  Inyan  Ita  and  Oberi  Oye  who  beat  me  most 
cruelly."  The  latter  said,  "  You  cannot  bring  an  action  for 
this,  as  almost  all  the  town  is  concerned  in  the  matter.  Besides, 
even  should  you  try  to  bring  trouble  upon  us  on  account  of  it, 
you  cannot  succeed,  for  I  have  a  strong  Juju  which  I  should 
take  into  Court  against  you.  When  I  stamp  with  my  foot  on 
the  ground,  the  Judge  will  become  dumb,  and  so  will  be  unable 
to  pronounce  judgment  for  you." 

It  is  useless  to  attempt  to  revoke  any  Juju  without  the  proper 
offerings  and  full  rites.  In  a  case  which  came  before  the  Native 
Court  in  1907,  Oyonmba,  the  head  priest  of  Nfam  at  Ntebba- 
shott,  said  in  his  evidence  that  the  Juju  had  not  been  properly 
revoked,  as  it  had  been  done  without  full  ritual  and  empty 
handed. 

As  an  example  of  the  revocation  of  a  Juju,  that  of  Ofiri, 
witnessed  at  Ekong  in  December,  1907,  may  be  quoted.* 

Akunane,  the  head  priest  of  the  cult,  stated  : 

"  One  of  my  sons  named  Atananingba  quarrelled  with  his 
*  For  revoking  Juju  Mfam,  see  p.  139. 

S.B,  F 


66   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

wife,  and  swore  by  Ofiri  that  he  would  eat  no  coco-yams  which 
came  from  her  farm.  Afterwards  they  became  friends  again, 
and  he  repented  of  the  oath  he  had  sworn.  First  he  went  to 
the  Diviner  (Mboni),  who  found  out  by  the  charm  that  he  must 
take  coco-yams  before  Ofiri,  and  offer  up  a  sacrifice  consisting 
of  plantains,  dried  meat,  a  mat,  a  cock,  palm  oil  and  red  and 
yellow  powder.  My  son  got  together  all  these  things  and 
brought  them  to  me. 

Very  early  in  the  morning  I  washed  my  face  and  hands,  and 
brought  out  the  three  Juju  images  (small  wooden  fetishes)  and 
the  horns  containing  "  medicine,"  and  set  them  on  the  altar. 

First  I  took  water  and  an  egg.  This  latter  I  pointed  towards 
the  Juju,  and  called  on  Obassi  Nsi  and  Obassi  Osaw. 

"  Obassi,  everything  was  made  by  you.  You  made  earth  and 
heaven.  Without  you  nothing  was  made.  Everything  comes 
from  you.  You  it  is  who  give  Ofiri  power  to  protect  the 
town." 

Then  I  called  on  the  names  of  all  the  dead  who  used  to 
belong  to  the  Juju,  and  laid  the  meat  and  plantains  on  the 
ground  for  them  to  eat. 

After  that  I  poured  out  water  beside  the  altar,  saying,  "  Here 
is  water.  I  wash  your  face  and  hands ;  then  I  will  bring  you 
food,  Ofiri." 

Next  I  called  on  the  name  of  Ofiri.  I  took  two  leaves,  held 
them  out  on  my  left  hand,  and  showed  them  before  him  and 
asked  : 

"  Have  you  waked  up  or  not  ?  " 

The  leaves  fluttered  down,  the  one  fell  on  its  face  and  the 
other  upward,  which  showed  that  Ofiri  was  awake.  Had  they 
fallen  otherwise,  I  must  have  waited  a  while  and  then  showed 
the  leaves  again. 

Next  I  took  a  piece  of  plantain  and  some  meat,  chewed  them 
and  put  them  inside  the  pot.  I  lifted  the  cock  on  high  and 
said,  "Here  is  food  from  my  son.  He  swore  not  to  eat  coco- 
yams  from  his  wife's  farm.  He  has  come  to  make  confession 
to-day  that  his  oath  was  against  your  custom.  He  asks  to  be 
set  free,  so  that  he  may  eat  coco-yams  as  before.  Forgive  my 
son,  O  Lord,  for  the  oath  he  swore  was  against  himself  alone. 
No  one  has  been  harmed  through  his  fault."     Then  I  poured 


JUJUS  67 

palm  wine  within  the  pot,  saying,  "  Here  is  palm  wine.     Drink 
as  you  eat,  my  Lord."  . 

After  that  I  chewed  red  and  yellow  powder  in  my  mouth, 
and  spat  it  out  on  the  pot,  over  the  fetishes  and  on  all  the 
worshippers,  saying  : 

"  Here  is  powder  for  you,  red  and  yellow  as  our  custom  is, 
that  we  may  get  red  blood  in  our  bodies  like  the  red  powder, 
and  that  Ofiri  may  protect  the  whole  land." 

Then  I  showed  the  leaves  again  to  see  whether  or  not  the 
offering  was  accepted,  and  asked  : 

«  Do  you  receive  the  offering  of  my  son  ?  The  leaves  fell 
as  before,  so  I  knew  that  all  was  well. 

After  this  I  held  up  the  mat,  saying,  "  Here  is  the  mat.  Let 
no  one  sleep  long  upon  it "  (i.e.,  fall  ill).  _  _ 

Lastly  I  poured  out  the  rest  of  the  palm  wine,  crying,  Let 
all  our  goods  remain  safely  in  our  houses." 

As  has  been  said,  the  pot  represents  the  female,  andthethree\ 
fetishes,  the  male  attribute  of  the  Juju.     When  eggs  are  offered,  \ 
one  of  them  is  usually  broken  and  the  forehead  of  the  petitioner 
marked  with  the  yolk  just  above  the  junction  of  the  eyebrows, 
over  the  pineal  gland,  according  to  Descartes  the  seat  of  the    i 
mind.     This  is  done  with  the  avowed  purpose  of  giving  clear  / 
vision.     Afterwards  the  egg  is  crushed  small  and  deposited  on 
the  creepers  round  the  Juju  post. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  there  is  a  very  strong  resemblance 
between  the  ritual  described  above,  and  the  daily  service  of  the 
chief  Egyptian  temples,  save  that  here  actual  food  is  offered  to 
the  Deity  in  lieu  of  incense. 

It  is  somewhat  curious  that  a  lamb,  regarded  in  most  parts  | 
of  the  earth  as  an  acceptable  offering,  should  here  be  forbidden  / 
for  sacrificial  purposes.  The  mythical  reason  for  this  tabu  is/ 
given  in  the  following  story. 

Why  Lambs  should  not  be  Sacrificed. 

There  was  once  a  lamb  whom  Leopard-child  wished  to  eat. 

The  latter  therefore  said :    "  Let  us  be  friends  ;   we  will  play 

together,  and    always    trust  one   another."     Lamb   answered, 

"  Agreed.      As  a  first  proof  of  friendship  let  us  change  our 

F  2 


68   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

skins."  To  this  Leopard-child  consented  in  his  turn.  No  sooner 
had  Lamb  donned  the  gay  new  coat  of  black  and  yellow  than  a 
boar  came  out  of  the  bush.  Lamb  felled  him  with  one  stroke. 
Little  Ise  (Cephalophus  melanorrheus — Blue  duikerbok)  ran  out 
a  few  minutes  later,  and  a  like  fate  overtook  him.  Some  time 
after  a  young  bush  cow  came  tramping  forth.  Lamb  sprang  at 
his  throat,  and  he  too  died. 

After  that  Leopard-child  came  up  and  said,  "  Give  me  back 
my  skin  now,  and  we  will  feed  on  all  that  you  have  slain  with 
my  teeth  and  my  claws."  Lamb  said  "Very  well."  He  sprang 
upon  Leopard-child  and  killed  the  latter  also. 

When  Leopard  heard  how  her  son  had  died  she  was  very 
angry,  but  went  to  Sheep  and  said,  "  Let  us  be  friends." 
Sheep  answered,  "  I  am  willing."  One  of  the  little  lambs, 
however,  said,  "  Leopard  only  wants  to  be  revenged  on  you 
because  your  eldest  son  has  killed  her's.  If  you  do  not  hide  me 
carefully  she  will  certainly  cause  my  death." 

One  day  when  Sheep  was  going  to  farm,  the  Lamb  said 
again,  "  Please  hide  me  under  the  floor  mat.  I  am  sure  that 
Leopard  will  come  as  soon  as  you  have  gone."  So  Sheep  hid 
her  little  son  very  cunningly. 

Just  at  this  time  Obassi  Nsi  wanted  a  new  "boy,"  so  he  sent 
to  Sheep  and  asked  that  one  of  her  small  sons  might  be  sent 
to  live  with  him  as  his  servant.     To  this  Sheep  consented. 

When  Leopard  heard  that  Lamb  was  living  with  Obassi,  she 
went  to  his  house  and  brought  a  great  "  dash."  She  spoke 
cunning  words,  and  made  a  bargain  that  the  lamb  might  be 
given  her  to  kill.  Obassi  agreed  for  a  great  price.  He 
said  : 

"  Go  and  hide  yourself  in  the  bush  near  my  farm,  and  I  will 
send  Lamb  to  gather  vegetables ;  then  he  will  fall  into  your 
power." 

Now  Lamb  knew,  by  the  knowledge  which  was  within  him, 
how  they  had  agreed  together ;  so  when  he  was  sent  to  fetch 
yams  from  the  farm,  he  went  very  cautiously  and  knew  by  the 
scent  where  Leopard  was  hiding.  He  went  round  by  the  other 
side,  took  the  yams  quickly,  and  ran  back  home.  When 
Obassi  saw  him  return  in  safety,  he  wondered  how  this  had 
been  done. 


JUJUS  69 

Some  time  after,  Leopard  went  and  said,  "  Will  you  send 
Lamb  on  a  message  ?     Then  I  may  catch  him  on  the  road." 

To  this  Obassi  agreed,  but  Lamb  said,  "  You  engaged  me  as 
a  personal  attendant,  not  as  a  messenger."  So  Obassi  replied 
"  Very  well.  I  will  send  someone  else."  He  therefore  chose 
out  some  men  and  bade  them  go  by  river  to  a  great  city 
where  they  were  to  buy  a  big  box,  bring  it  back,  and  leave 
it  on  the  beach  near  his  town.  This  they  did,  and,  while 
those  who  had  charge  of  the  canoe  were  busy,  Leopard  went 
and  hid  herself  in  the  box. 

On  the  way  to  the  river  a  canoe-man  met  Lamb  and  said, 
"  Be  careful  when  you  get  to  the  landing  place,  for  Leopard  is 
hiding  in  the  box." 

Lamb  said  "  I  thank  you  ;  she  is  one  of  my  enemies."  So  he 
turned  back,  and  got  a  padlock  and  key,  then  went  slowly  on  his 
way  to  the  landing  place.  The  box  stood  open.  He  crept  round 
behind,  jumped  on  the  lid,  pressed  it  down,  and  then  leant  over 
and  locked  it.  After  that  he  pushed  the  box  into  the  water  and 
kept  it  there  till  Leopard  was  drowned.  Then  he  drew  it  up, 
and  carried  it,  with  the  dead  leopard,  before  Obassi. 

The  latter  looked  at  the  body  and  saw  that  it  was  quite  dead. 
He  said  "  Leopard  made  a  fool  of  herself  and  spoilt  her  own 
life."     Therefore  he  ordered  his  people  to  bury  the  body. 

One  day  Lamb  went  to  his  master's  room,  and  found  there 
many  rich  clothes.  The  most  splendid  of  these  he  made  into  a 
bundle  and  carried  away  with  him.  Then  he  took  his  gun  and 
went  out  to  the  bush.  He  walked  for  some  time  till  he  came 
to  a  great  cotton  tree.  Here  he  unfolded  the  clothes,  and 
hung  them  all  round  the  tree.  When  he  had  done  this  he 
went  home  and  said  to  his  master : 

"  I  have  found  the  place  from  which,  in  the  old  days,  people 
used  to  get  all  their  fine  clothes.  Yesterday  I  went  into  the 
bush  and  found  a  cotton  tree  from  which  gay  robes  were 
hanging." 

Obassi  said,  "  I  should  like  to  see  this  thing.  Can  you  lead 
me  thither  ?  "  and  Lamb  answered  : 

"  If  you  are  willing,  you  and  I  will  go  there  together ;  but  you 
must  tell  no  one  whither  we  are  going,  for  it  is  a  great  Juju. 
Also  we  must  take  an  axe  with  us." 


70   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

When  they  got  to  the  place,  Lamb  said,  "  Let  us  cut  down 
the  cotton  tree,  so  that  we  may  find  out  how  it  can  produce 
such  things  as  these."  To  himself  he  thought,  "  Obassi  tried 
to  betray  me  to  Leopard,  so  I  myself  will  try  to  kill  him  to- 
day !  "     He  took  the  axe  and  said  further  : 

"  I  will  cut  the  tree,  for  I  am  your  servant ;  but  I  beg  you  to 
be  careful,  so  that  none  of  these  rich  robes  touch  the  ground." 

Lamb  struck  at  the  tree  with  such  strength  that  after  a  time 
it  was  ready  to  fall.  Obassi  put  out  his  hand  to  hold  up  the 
garments,  but  at  that  moment  the  great  trunk  came  crashing 
down  and  buried  him  in  its  fall.  On  this  Lamb  ran  back  to 
the  town  weeping,  and  said  "  My  master  is  lost ;  I  do  not  know 
where  he  may  be." 

The  people  all  went  out  to  search.  They  found  the  dead 
body  and  brought  it  home,  but  Lamb  went  to  his  mother's 
house  and  told  her  all  that  had  happened  to  him  since  he  went 
to  serve  Obassi  Nsi.  Also  he  said,  "  Earth  is  no  longer  safe  for 
us.  Let  us  flee  to  the  sky."  He  went  outside  and  made  a 
Juju;  then  he  looked  upward  and  prayed,  and  lo !  a  great  rope 
began  to  come  down  from  the  sky. 

When  it  reached  to  the  ground,  he  said  to  his  mother  "  Will 
you  go  first  ?  I  myself  will  come  later."  He  stood  and  watched 
while  the  rope  drew  her  gently  up,  and  then  went  back  to  his 
place  in  the  house  of  his  master. 

About  a  week  later,  while  the  townspeople  were  playing  for 
the  death  of  Obassi,  Lamb  went  outside  and  stood  before  them. 
He  looked  up  into  the  sky  and  called  "  My  mother,  my  mother, 
send  the  rope  down  to  me  now."  She  heard  the  voice  of  her 
son  and  threw  down  the  rope.  He  laid  his  hand  upon  it  and 
then  said  : 

"  I  will  confess  about  the  death  of  my  master.  It  was  I  who 
deceived  and  killed  him  in  the  bush,  because  he  would  have 
given  me  over  to  Leopard."  Then  he  quickly  climbed  up  the 
rope  and  disappeared  in  the  sky. 

That  is  why  we  do  not  sacrifice  a  young  sheep.  After  such 
behaviour  he  would  not  be  an  acceptable  offering. 

According  to  Ekoi  belief  Obassi  Osaw  and  Obassi  Nsi  made 
all  things  between  them.     First  they  dwelt  together,  but  after 


JUJUS  71 

a  while  agreed  to  have  different  lands.  Obassi  Osaw  fixed  his 
dwelling  place  in  the  sky,  while  Obassi  Nsi  came  down  to  earth 
and  lived  there. 

After  this  separation  Nsi  grew  in  power,  "  for  when  a  child  is 
born  it  falls  to  the  earth,  and  when  a  man  dies  he  returns  to  the 
earth,  whence  all  things  have  sprung.  Nsi  is  the  governor  of  all 
crops  which  the  earth  ripens.  The  sky  is  bad,  for  sometimes 
it  sends  too  much  rain,  sometimes  not  enough." 

Often  people  who  are  Efumi*  of  crocodiles  make  rain  for 
themselves,  especially  in  midsummer,  when  the  water  grows  too 
hot  and  low  for  their  comfort. 

When  a  farm  has  been  cut  and   prepared   for   sowing,  the 
owner  cannot  plant  yams  until  some  rain  has  fallen,  so  he  goes 
to  the  priest  of  the  great  rain  Juju  and  asks  him  to  make  the 
rain  fall.     Members  of  the  cult  of  Ekuri  Ibokk  have  special  1 
power  in  this  direction.     At  the  time  of  the  new  moon,  they  go! 
forth  into  the  bush  and  gather  magic  leaves.     These  they  bring  I 
home  and  dry  carefully  in  bundles.     When  rain  is  wanted  theyi 
cut  them  open,   and   either  pour  water  upon  them  out  of  al 
calabash,  or  lay  them  to  soak  in  a  bowl  of  water.     Then  it  will ' 
surely  rain. 

Chief  Ita  Sakese  of  Oban  was  said  to  be  able  to  produce  rain 
by  drinking  water  mixed  with  magic  potions,  or  stop  the  down- 
pour by  refraining  from  taking  water  for  two  or  three  days  at  a 
time.  During  this  period  he  was  not  debarred  from  palm 
wine. 

Early  in  1909,  a  man  near  Obutong  was  shown  a  famous 
rain  Juju,  and  told  that  it  was  so  powerful  that  rain  would  fall, 
even  at  the  height  of  the  dry  season,  if  certain  rites  were  per- 
formed before  it.  He  was  a  sceptical  soul,  for  no  sooner  had 
he  heard  than,  in  a  spirit  of  bravado,  he  seized  the  Juju  and 
performed  the  rites.  Unfortunately  the  rest  of  the  season  was 
wet  enough  to  strengthen  belief  even  among  the  most  doubting. 
In  the  words  of  the  Ekoi — "  Njokk  I  mbuta  eya  nji " — "  an 
elephant  of  rain  fell  this  year."  The  man  paid  for  his  scepticism, 
probably  at  the  hands  of  the  owners  of  the  ruined  farms,  for  he 
disappeared,  and  no  trace  of  him  has  ever  been  found. 

*  The  Ekoi  word  Efumi  denotes  a  person  who  has  the  power  of  sending  his 
spirit  into  the  form  of  some  animal. 


72   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

It  is  only  another  paradox,  such  as  is  constantly  cropping 
up  among  the  Ekoi,  that  importance  should  still  be  attached 
to  rites  for  rain-making,  in  a  country  where  about  200  inches 
fall  in  the  year ;  for  such  customs  are  seldom  found,  save 
where  the  rainfall  is  precarious.  The  ceremonies  practised  to 
this  end  are  probably  another  survival  from  the  time  when 
the  Ekoi  dwelt  in  parklands,  but,  as  is  to  be  expected  under 
the  present  conditions,  rain-stopping  by  magic  arts  has  now 
assumed  greater  importance  than  the  older  ceremonial  for  its 
production. 

Once  on  visiting  Effion  Iyawe's,  a  settlement  not  far  from 
Ekkonnanakku,  I  noticed  two  bundles  of  thin  roots  wrapped 
round  by  leaves  hanging  over  a  fire.  The  chief  assured  me  that 
no  rain  could  fall  so  long  as  the  flame  was  kept  burning. 

A  few  hours  later,  on  our  way  back,  the  rain  came  down  in 
torrents.  Two  or  three  days  afterwards  we  met  the  weather- 
prophet  and  asked  why  his  Juju  was  not  working.  He 
began  eagerly  to  explain  that  the  mishap  must  not  be  put 
down  to  the  Juju,  but  solely  to  the  fact  that  he  himself 
had  been  called  away  from  home  on  urgent  business,  and 
the  man  deputed  to  tend  the  fire  had  neglected  his  duty 
and  allowed  it  to  die  out. 

Another  way  of  stopping  a  heavy  downpour  is  to  produce 
a  rainbow.  Certain  Juju  men  claim  to  be  able  to  do  this  without 
special  difficulty.  Ntui  Itabon  of  Oban,  for  instance,  is  credited 
with  the  power.  He  has  but  to  take  powdered  cam-wood,  mix 
it  with  certain  magic  medicines  in  his  palm,  and  then  throw  the 
red  paste  up  towards  the  sky.  This  he  did  one  day  at  three 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  and  an  hour  later  a  splendid  rainbow 
spanned  the  heavens. 

Many  members  of  the  cult  of  Nimm  Asam  are  supposed  to 
have  this  power,  but  in  varying  degrees.  Those  of  little 
importance  can  only  produce  a  rainbow,  the  results  of  which 
will  last  for  a  few  hours,  but  those  more  deeply  versed  in  the 
mysteries  can  guarantee  fair  weather  for  several  days. 

The  bow  itself  is  supposed  to  arch  over  the  earth,  one  end 
resting  in  one  river,  and  the  other  in  another,  a  long  way  off. 


Most   winds  are   sent   by    Obassi    Osaw,    but   those    which 


JUJUS  73 

cause  the  greatest  damage  to  farms  usually  come  from  the  great 
wind  Juju  <;  Mfepp." 

Members  of  this  cult  only  use  their  power  to  work  ill  on 
others.  They  never  acknowledge  that  they  belong  to  the  Juju, 
but  use  it  against  hostile  towns,  debtors  who  will  not  pay  what 
they  owe,  or  any  one  against  whom  they  have  a  grudge.  They 
prove  their  power  to  aspirants  by  sending  a  sudden  wind  to 
blow  down  some  forest  giant,  usually  a  cotton  tree,  which  they 
have  previously  pointed  out  as  an  object  on  which  to  show 
their  might. 

Opinions  differ  as  to  the  causes  which  produce  Thunder 
(Nsann)  and  Lightning  (Nyanga  Ainya).  Some  think  that  the 
former  is  a  giant,  who  marches  across  the  sky,  others  a  great 
sheep  which  runs  up  and  down  in  the  house  of  Obassi  Osaw. 
Some  people  again  believe  that  Lightning  is  the  servant  of 
Thunder,  others  that  they  are  enemies.  Many  Ekoi  will  put 
out  all  lamps  during  a  storm,  lest  Thunder  should  notice 
their  gleam  and  send  his  bolt  to  crush  them.  "  When 
Thunder  sees  Lightning,"  they  say,  "  he  is  very  angry,  and 
growls  '  r-r-rong,'  '  r-r-rong,'  to  drive  it  away." 

"  Nsann  "   is  the    name  of  a  great   Juju    cult,  members  of 
which   claim    the    power   to   produce    storms   and   direct    the 
lightning.      As    the    initiates    of   the    Mfepp    Juju    can   show 
their   might    by   overthrowing    great   cotton    trees,    so    those 
of    Nsann    demonstrate   theirs    by    pointing    out     some     tree, 
usually  a   cocoanut   palm,   and   then  causing  it  to  be  struck 
by  lightning,  for   which  these  palms   are   thought    to   have    a 
peculiar    attraction.      The    Father    Rector    of    the    Catholic  -} 
Mission   at  Calabar   said  that   he  considered  them    as  great  | 
a   protection  as  any   conductor,    for  houses  near   which  they  ' 
grew.     In  a  storm  he  had  often  watched  the  peculiar  movement 
of  the  leaves,  all  of  which  swept  upward  to  a  point,  and  only 
returned  to  their  normal  position  when  the  storm  was  dying 
down. 

Lightning  is  said  to  be  attracted  to  rocks  and  peaks  because 
of  the  fire  within  them ;  "  For  many  stones  contain  fire, 
which  a  hunter  can  bring  forth  by  striking  them  with  his 
matchet." 

When  Lightning  flashes  from  out  a  clear  sky,  the   people 


74        IN   THE   SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

whisper  "  A  man  will  die  to-day,"  for  they  think  that  all 
members  of  Nsann  are  powerful  poisoners,  and  that  the  flash 
is  a  sign  that  a  new  victim  had  been  singled  out  for  death. 
The  only  Juju  great  enough  to  save  a  man  from  the  power  of 
Nsann  is  Eja,  the  festival  of  which  is  the  chief  one  of  the 
year,  and  is  celebrated  at  the  time  of  the  new  yams.  This 
cult,  as  already  mentioned,  is  supposed  not  only  to  produce 
plentiful  harvests,  but  also  to  protect  human  beings,  farms  and 
cattle  from  damage  by  lightning  and  thunderbolt. 

No  one  who  has  attended  the  festival  could  fail  to  be 
struck  by  the  resemblance  between  the  present-day  Ekoi  ritual 
and  those  descriptions  which  have  come  down  to  us  of  the 
old  Adonis-Attis-Osiris  worship.  The  ecstatic  frenzy  of  the 
dancers,  the  trances  into  which  some  of  them  fall,  and  the 
jealousy  with  which  all  strangers  are  excluded,  show  that  this 
ceremony  holds  a  very  special  significance. 

One  day,  while  speaking  to  the  chief  of  an  important  town 
about  the  local  "  Eja,"  he  remarked  that  it  had  been  brought 
from  the  interior  many  years  before,  and  was  a  most  powerful 
Juju.  To  ensure  its  continued  efficacy,  however,  sacrifices 
must  be  offered  every  two  years.  It  struck  me  that  this  had 
not  been  done  since  my  arrival  in  the  District,  and  I  asked 
the  reason  for  the  neglect.  The  old  man  grew  confused,  and 
stammered  that  it  had  not  been  possible  to  confirm  the  Juju 
for  three  years  because  they  had  been  unable  to  procure 
the  most  necessary  ingredient  for  the  "medicine."  When 
questioned  as  to  what  was  missing,  and  whether  it  would  not 
be  possible  to  help  them  in  the  matter,  he  grew  more  and 
more  confused,  and  at  length  answered  that  it  was  nothing 
that  could  be  procured  by  a  white  man.  None  but  a  native 
could  get  it,  and  that  only  under  certain  circumstances.  He 
further  added  that  he  dared  disclose  no  more,  or  the  Juju 
might  kill  him. 

From  later  inquiries  it  turned  out  that  the  ceremony  had 
been  performed  with  the  utmost  regularity  before  the  coming 
of  the  "  white  man,"  and  the  fact  that  there  had  been  difficulty 
in  providing  the  necessary  ingredients  ever  since  his  arrival 
seemed  highly  suspicious.  Nothing  more  could  be  learned  at 
the  time  ;  but  some  weeks  later,  a  man  came  up  to  the  house 


JUJUS  75 

where  we  were  staying,  with   the  news  that   there  would  be ' 
a  plentiful  supply  of  fresh  meat  next  day.     All  the  hunters  had 
gone  out,  he  added,  to  provide  game  for  the  feast  to  be  held  in 
honour  of  the  "confirmation  of  Eja." 

This  was  interesting  news,  but  I  said,  as  casually  as  possible, 
"  I  thought  that  they  did  not  possess  the  ingredients  for 
confirming  the  Juju  ! "  The  man  answered  quite  unsus- 
piciously, "  Formerly  they  did  not,  but  now  they  have  got  all 
that  is  necessary." 

Everyone  knows  that  the  easiest  way  to  extract  information 
from  natives  is  to  assume  more  knowledge  than  one  really 
possesses.  In  this  case  the  man  took  for  granted  that  I  knew 
all  about  it,  for  in  answer  to  the  question,  "  Do  they  kill,  or 
only  mutilate  their  victim?"  he  answered,  "  They  could  not 
cut  away  so  large  a  part  without  causing  death."  After  this 
admission  it  was  comparatively  easy,  under  promise  of  not 
revealing  the  name  of  my  informant,  to  get  many  further 
details. 

As  I  had  grown  to  suspect,  the  ingredient,  which  had  been 
so  difficult  to  procure,  since  the  coming  of  the  "  white  man," 
was  the  same  organ  as  that  flung  to  the  symbolic  tree  in  the 
Osiris  ritual  described  by  Dr.  Frazer.  Among  the  Ekoi, 
however,  a  woman  is  usually  chosen  as  the  victim.  This 
is  natural  when  one  remembers  that  up  to  quite  recent 
times  with  them,  woman,  not  man,  was  the  head  of  the 
house. 

Somewhere  in  the  bush  a  poor  woman  had  been  done  to 
death,  that  her  mutilated  body  might  bring  prosperity  to  the 
Ekoi  farms.  It  is  useless,  according  to  their  belief,  to  employ 
the  necessary  part  of  any  corpse  which  had  met  its  death  by 
accident,  or  from  natural  causes.  The  victim  must  be  slain 
purposely,  or  the  rite  is  of  no  avail.  None  of  the  townspeople 
had  disappeared  on  this  occasion,  so  that  the  murdered  woman 
must  have  been  some  poor  soul  brought  down  from  the 
interior  or  one  kept  prisoner  in  a  lonely  bush  farm,  till  it 
was  thought  that  the  time  had  come  for  her  to  be  sacrificed 
without  the  knowledge  of  the  "  white  man." 

So  jealously  was  the  secret  guarded,  that  the  most  anxious  in- 
quiries failed  to  find  actual  proof  of  the  murder,  or  bring  to  justice 


76        IN   THE   SHADOW   OF    THE   BUSH 

those  responsible.     A  mass  of  evidence,  however,  came  to  light, 
as  to  the  frequency  of  such  sacrifices  in  former  days. 

On  one  occasion,  during  our  visit  to  the  Cameroons,  after  a 
long  march  through  the  beautiful  pass  of  Okuri,  we  arrived 
at  the  village  of  Mbinda,  and  settled  down  in  the  Egbo 
house.  The  day  had  been  a  good  one  from  the  point  of 
view  of  the  Botany  collection,  and  we  were  all  in  the  highest 
of  spirits.  Suddenly  one  of  my  companions,  who  was 
sitting  opposite,  stopped  in  the  midst  of  a 
sentence,  her  eyes  fixed  in  a  stare  of  horror 
on  something  above  my  head. 

An  upward  glance  showed  three  gruesome 
objects  dangling  from  the  roof.  They  would 
not  bear  minute  description  save  in  a  strictly 
anthropological  work,  but  as  will  be  seen 
from  the  accompanying  little  sketch,  each  of 
the  bowls  which  composed  the  body  was  set 
on  a  pair  of  widely  opened  human  jaws  which 
Eja  fetish.  formed  a  foot  or  stand. 

One  glance  was  enough  to  show  that  these 
were  Eja  symbols.  Later  we  learned  that  the  fetish  consists 
of  two  parts.  The  bowl,  always  the  feminine  sign,  is  called 
Ekum  Oke,  while  the  curved  male  symbol  represents  Eja  him- 
self. It  has  not  been  possible  to  learn  anything  concerning 
the  origin  of  the  names.  We  were  only  told  vaguely  that 
"Eja"  always  consists  of  the  two  personalities  mentioned 
above.  "  Eja,  he  is  man,  and  the  stronger  of  the  two.  Ekum 
Oke  is  a  woman,  less  strong  than  Eja;  nevertheless  without 
her  he  can  do  nothing." 

At  every  great  Eja  festival  the  following  song  is  sung.     It  is 
perhaps  worth  noticing  that  Ekum  Oke  is  first  invoked : — 

The  Song  of  Eja  and  Ekum  Oke. 
"  Ekum  Oke,  '  me       njawe        na    '  we. 
Ekum  Oke,     I     am  staying  with  you. 
O  '  me     njawe       na    '  we. 
O,     I    am  staying  with  you. 
Num  Eja,  '  me      njawe        na    '  we. 
Man  Eja,     I     am  staying  with  you. 
O  '  me     njawe  na   'we. 

O,    I    am  staying    with  you. 


JUJUS  77 

O  kare  mana  njum  ka  obbaw  chang. 

O  give    now    (there  is)    thing  in  (your)  hands       no. 
O  kare  ntung  eya,   O  kare  mana. 
O  give  throat  your,  O  give    now." 

The  meaning  of  the  last  two  lines,  which  is  somewhat  obscure, 
seems  to  be  as  follows  : — 

Should  a  poor  man  have  nothing  of  sufficient  value  to  offer  to  the  Juju, 
his  full  brother  or  full  sister  must  be  sacrificed.  The  term  "  throat " 
includes  all  the  children  of  the  same  father  and  mother. 

At  Obung,  roots  rubbed  with  charcoal  enter  into  the  com- 
position of  the  Eja  "medicine."  When  an  Obung  man  goes 
to  another  town  to  attend  a  "  play  "  at  which  many  people  are 
expected  to  be  present,  he  rubs  some  of  the  medicine  on 
his  forehead,  and  some  on  the  soles  of  his  feet,  as  a  protection 
against  any  witch  or  wizard  who  may  be  among  the  crowd. 

One  of  the  chief  ceremonies  at  the  festival  is  the  bringing  in 
of  the  first  fruits.  Each  family  sends  a  representative  bearing  a 
basket  of  yams,  the  greater  number  of  which  are  eaten  during  the 
feast,  but  part  is  reserved  to  be  offered  up  at  the  entrance  to 
the  town. 

Till  the  Eja  festival  comes  round,  neither  fu-fu  nor  fresh  yams 
may  be  eaten.  Men  may  begin  to  partake  of  these  on  the  first 
and  second  days,  but  women  may  not  touch  any  till  the  third. 
On  the  first  day  neither  food  nor  drink  may  be  taken  by  either 
sex,  till  the  sun  has  reached  his  zenith. 

At  the  actual  offerings  of  yams,  the  following  song  is  sung  : — 
"  Achibong,        aba     yi    aiyu  o-or-we. 
(Name  of  original  cQme  eat  0-or-we. 

priest  of  Juju),  J 

Nta  Asu,    aba     yi    aiyu  o-or-we. 
Lord  Asu,  come  eat  yams  o-or-we." 

On  one  occasion  at  which  I  was  present,  an  old  slave  had 
been  placed  in  a  crouching  position  within  a  little  fence  by  the 
Juju.  He  probably  represented  the  human  sacrifice  formerly 
offered  up  at  this  time. 

Now  that  Government  has  at  least  succeeded  in  making 
such  offerings  extremely  dangerous,  the  people  have  looked 
anxiously  round  for  substitutes,  which  as  far  as  possible  might 
replace  those  now  forbidden.     The  little  vase-shaped  ant  hills, 


78   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

or  "  bush-men,"  as  they  are  called,  are  therefore  often  used. 
These  abound  everywhere,  and  are  so  strongly  built  as  to  be 
easily  movable.  They  are  often  found  at  the  entrance  to  towns, 
farms  or  compounds,*  bound  round  with  a  piece  of  cloth.  To 
quote  the  Ekoi,  "  dress  him  up  fine — say,  '  take  him  and  spare 
me.' " 

The  chief  of  one  town,  when  questioned  as  to  the  uses  of 
these  offerings,  answered  in  an  aggrieved  tone  : 

"We  give  'bush-men'  to  the  Juju,  because  our  father,  the 
D.  C,  no  longer  allows  us  to  offer  real  ones." 

As  a  substitute  for  human  sacrifice,  however,  the  Drill  Ape 
(Papio  leucophceus) — so  rare  in  most  places  that  the  skulls 
forwarded  by  me  to  the  British  Museum  are  said  by  the 
authorities  to  be  the  first  ever  received  by  them — holds  first 
place  from  its  near  resemblance  to  man.  It  exists  in  vast 
quantities,  but  is  by  no  means  an  easy  prey,  owing  to  its 
strength  and  fierceness. 

The  Ekoi  firmly  believe  that  Drill  Apes,  and  indeed  all 
anthropoids,  are  degenerate  men.  The  story  of  their  degradation 
is  told  in  the  following  tale  : — 

Why  Ape  People  no  longer  Live  in  Towns. 

By  Ntui  Nenshaw  of  Mfamosing. 

Once  long  ago  a  man  named  Nshum  (Drill  Ape)  lived  in 
a  town.  The  other  men  were  building  houses,  but  Nshum 
only  ran  round,  ate  their  chop,  and  would  do  nothing  to  help. 
One  of  the  chiefs  called  to  the  idler  and  said,  "  Why  do 
you  not  work  like  all  the  rest  ?  "  To  this  Nshum  did  not 
answer. 

A  few  weeks  later  all  the  townsfolk  went  to  cut  farm,  but 
Nshum  refused  to  go  with  them  and  remained  idle  in  the 
town. 

Again  the  chief  called  and  said,  "  Why  do  you  not  go  and  cut 
farm  like  the  others  ?  " 

On  this  Nshum  was  angry,  so  he  said,  "  I  will  live  by  myself, 
I  will  not  stay  in  your  town  any  more."  With  that  he  left 
them,  and  went  into  the  bush. 

*  See  Nsibidi  Sign  43,  Appendix  G. 


JUJUS  79 

The  head  chief  ordered  the  people  to  take  their  nets,  and  go 
out  to  catch  him.  They  tried  to  do  this,  but  he  went  too  far 
and  so  escaped  them. 

At  that  time  men  did  not  like  to  kill  Nshum,  because  he  was 
a  man  like  themselves,  though  a  very  bad  one,  but  in  course  of 
years  all  the  lazy  people  gathered  together  in  the  bush,  and  not 
only  drove  away  the  good  people  who  went  near  them,  but 
tried  to  do  them  harm. 

One  day  a  hunter  went  into  the  bush.  He  saw  some  creature 
moving  in  the  branches  of  a  great  tree  and  shot  it.  It  was 
Nshum. 

Then  the  hunter  caught  up  the  body  and  dragged  it  home 
to  his  town.  He  took  it  before  the  charm  and  said  to  the 
Diviner  : 

"  I  have  brought  this  creature  who  was  once  a  man,  but  has 
now  become  a  bush-beast.  You  may  practise  on  him  on 
account  of  his  laziness." 

The  Diviner  practised  the  charm  and  said  : 

"  He  is  no  longer  a  human  being,  but  only  a  wild  animal 
now.     You  may  kill  him  and  eat  his  flesh." 

This  is  the  reason  why  it  is  no  longer  unlawful  to  eat  Nshum. 
Before  the  charm  was  practised,  no  one  ate  him.  His  name  is 
still  that  of  a  person,  and  if  a  man  is  lazy  we  sometimes  call  him 
"  Nshum." 


CHAPTER   VII 

Metamorphosis 

The  head-dresses  representing  bird  or  beast,  worn  by  the 
"images"  of  the  Egbo  and  other  clubs,  seem  originally  to 
have  been  connected  with  the  common  belief  in  Metamor- 
phosis. It  is  quite  usual  to  hear  one  of  the  Ekoi  say  of 
another,  "  he  (or  she)  possesses "  such  and  such  an  animal, 
meaning  that  the  person  alluded  to  has  the  power  to  assume  the 
shape  of  that  particular  creature.  To  primitive  people  like  the 
Ekoi,  such  cases  seem  on  the  same  plane  as  those  recorded 
from  other  continents,  where  the  souls  of  mystics  or  sick 
people,  are  supposed  temporarily  to  quit  their  bodies.  It  is  an 
article  of  belief  that,  by  means  of  constant  practice  and 
hereditary  secrets,  a  man  can  leave  his  human  form  and  take 
on  that  of  some  wild  creature.  They  say  that  every  man  has 
two  souls,  one*  which  always  animates  the  human  shape,  and  a 
bush  soul,  which  at  times  is  capable  of  being  sent  forth  to  enter 
the  form  of  the  animal  "possessed."  When  a  man  wishes  to 
send  out  his  bush  soul,  he  drinks  a  magic  potion,  the  secret  of 
which  has  been  handed  down  in  his  family  from  time  imme- 
morial and  some  of  which  is  always  kept  ready  for  use  in  an 
ancient  earthen  pot  set  apart  for  the  purpose. 

After  drinking  the  potion  the  bush  soul  is  supposed  to  leave 
its  human  form,  and  float  invisibly  through  the  town  till  it 
reaches  the  forest,  where  it  begins  to  swell,  and,  safe  in  the 
shadows  of  the  trees,  takes  on  the  shape  of  its  were-body.  The 
commonest  animals  "  possessed  "  in  this  manner  are  elephant, 
leopard,  buffalo,  wild  boar  and  crocodile. 

Different  potions  are  naturally  necessary  for  the  assumption 
of  each  shape. 


METAMORPHOSIS  81 

All  the  totem  animals  were  once  the  eponyms  of  the  families 
which  possess  them.  A  man  cannot  belong  to  a  totem  to  which 
neither  his  father  nor  mother  belonged. 

One  of  the  advantages  of  being  able  to  take  on  animal  form 
is  that  the  farms  of  enemies  may  be  devoured  during  the  night- 
time. That  is  why  men  with  buffalo,  elephant  or  wild  boar 
"bush  souls"  are  usually  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of  places 
where  there  are  large,  well-kept  farms. 

At  Oban,  where,  owing  to  the  unenterprising  nature  of  the 
inhabitants,  the  farms  are  neither  extensive  nor  particularly 
fruitful,  there  are  very  few  farm-devouring  creatures,  and  the 
favourite  were-beasts  are  leopards  and  crocodiles.  Townsfolk 
declare  that  in  crossing  rivers,  especially  the  Calabar  and 
the  Awa,  which  separates  the  British  Ekoi  from  their  kinsfolk 
in  the  Cameroons,  men  bearing  loads  have  been  attacked 
by  a  crocodile  and  terrified  into  dropping  their  possessions 
in  the  hurry  to  escape.  Occasionally  goods  have  been  returned 
by  a  friend,  who  explained  that  it  was  only  a  trick  played 
by  him  as  a  joke  while  in  crocodile  form,  but  usually  were- 
crocodiles  have  a  particularly  bad  reputation,  as  they  are 
supposed  to  overturn  canoes  in  order  to  seize  both  goods 
and  men. 

Early  in  191 1,  a  deputation  from  Netim,  one  of  the  largest 
towns  in  the  District,  brought  a  chief  and  his  son  to  the  Commis- 
sioner at  Oban.  These  were  accused  of  having,  in  crocodile 
form,  killed  two  women  while  the  latter  were  crossing  the  Calabar 
river.  Some  men  stated  that  they  had  watched  the  women 
enter  the  water,  and,  about  mid-stream,  saw  them  dragged 
under  by  crocodiles.  The  chief  and  his  son,  who  had  long 
been  suspected  of  such  crimes,  were  at  once  seized,  and  a 
meeting  held  in  the  town.  The  dominant  Juju  was  brought 
out,  and  the  accused  were  asked  to  clear  themselves  by  swear- 
ing their  innocence  upon  it.  This  they  refused  to  do,  and  were 
therefore  brought  up  before  the  D.  C,  who  was  administering 
the  District  at  the  time.  He,  very  naturally,  said  that  it  was  not 
in  his  power  to  do  anything  in  such  a  case,  as  more  proof  was 
necessary.  The  people  returned  to  the  town  and  held  another 
meeting  at  which  the  accused  were  asked  to  swear  their 
innocence  on  the  "  Broom  Juju."  This  is  held  in  considerable 
s.b  .  g 


82    IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

veneration,  because  it  enters  into  every  little  corner  in  cleaning 
out  the  compound,  so  no  part  of  the  house  is  supposed  to  be 
safe  from  it.  The  son  confessed  that  both  he  and  his  father 
were  guilty,  that  they  had  killed  and  eaten  seven  other  men  and 
women,  but  that  in  this  case,  as  in  all  others,  it  was  his  father 
who  had  taken  the  lead.  He  asserted,  however,  that  one  of  the 
women  was  not  dead,  but  that  after  reviving  her  by  magic  arts, 
they  had  drawn  her  up  out  of  the  water,  and  then,  in  their  human 
forms,  taken  her  to  Uyanga,  where  she  had  been  sold  as  a  slave. 
The  body  of  the  other  had  been  placed  in  the  fork  of  a  tree 
just  beneath  the  surface,  where  it  was  kept  to  devour  at 
leisure. 

The  people  swore  that  they  went  to  the  place  indicated,  and 
found  the  body  exactly  as  had  been  said.  They  then  sent  to 
Uyanga  and  found  the  other  woman.  She  at  once  pointed  to  the 
chief  and  his  son,  and  said  that  it  was  they  who,  as  crocodiles, 
had  dragged  her  down  to  a  house  which  they  had  beneath 
the  water.  There  she  lost  consciousness,  and  only  recovered 
when  they  restored  her,  and  forced  her  to  follow  them  into 
slavery. 

After  being  confronted  with  the  woman,  the  chief  also  con- 
fessed the  truth  of  the  accusation,  and  within  ten  days  both  he 
and  his  son  were  dead — killed,  as  the  townsfolk  said,  by  the 
Broom  Juju,  but  more  probably  by  poison  administered  by 
avenging  neighbours. 

Should  women  strew  fish  poison  in  the  water  above  the 
dwelling  place  of  a  were-crocodile,  the  Efumi  of  the  crocodile 
dies  within  seven  days. 

Soon  after  my  first  arrival  at  Oban,  information  was  brought 
that  something  of  an  unusual  nature  was  happening.  On 
investigation,  it  appeared  that  a  certain  chief  had  fallen  under 
the  suspicion  of  having,  in  the  guise  of  a  were-leopard,  killed 
several  cows  and  goats.  Preparations  were  on  foot  for  ridding 
the  town  of  him  in  a  summary  manner,  when  the  arrival  of  the 
"  white  man  "  put  an  end  to  the  proceedings  of  the  extempore 
tribunal. 

Chief  Agbashan,  a  splendid  hunter,  is  believed  to  have 
the  power  of  transforming  himself  into  an  elephant,  an 
accomplishment  that  would  certainly  be  of  great  use  to  him 


METAMORPHOSIS  83 

when  out  after  these  creatures.  During  the  last  few  months 
before  my  arrival,  he  had  killed  thirty-five  elephants  with  his 
own  hand. 

A  man  of  considerable  intelligence,  educated  in  England,  the 
brother  of  a  member  of  the  Legislative  Council  for  one  of  the 
West  African  Colonies,  offered  to  take  oath  that  he  had  seen 
Agbashan  not  only  in  his  elephant  form,  but  while  actually 
undergoing  the  metamorphosis. 

Those  who  have  elephant  affinities  know  at  once  should  any 
beast,  which  happens  to  be  killed,  be  "possessed"  by  a  man's 
soul.  In  the  latter  case  they  would  not  eat  of  it.  Were- 
elephants  are  said  to  be  seldom  seen  in  the  day-time,  but  there 
is  a  curious  superstition  with  regard  to  were-leopards.  At  noon 
of  day  or  night,  such  creatures  are  supposed  to  rise  on  their 
hind  legs  and  walk  upright.  Occasionally  when  the  people 
of  a  bush  farm  have  left  the  compound  and  gone  to  work,  one 
of  these  uncanny  beings  will  creep  up  to  the  deserted  dwelling 
and  reconnoitre.  If  all  seems  safe  he  will  enter,  with  the 
object  of  carrying  off  one  of  the  domestic  animals.  In 
such  a  case  it  is  thought  that  he  walks  upright,  holding  his 
tail  with  the  left  hand,  and  hiding  his  face  behind  a  bunch  of 
green  boughs  held  in  the  right.  Sick  folk,  left  behind  while  the 
rest  of  the  family  went  to  work,  have  repeatedly  testified  to 
having  watched  through  door  or  wall  chink  while  their  terrible 
visitor  approached  lamb  or  kid,  in  the  manner  described,  then 
suddenly  pounced  upon  its  prey  and  bore  it  off  to  devour  in 
the  bush. 

An  old  woman  of  Oban,  Awaw  Ita  by  name,  was  suspected 
of  a  still  more  sinister  familiar.  Her  husband,  by  whom  she 
is  standing  in  the  photograph,  had  a  sore  on  his  ankle. 
Somehow  or  other  the  idea  got  about  that  this  could  not 
heal  because  a  snake  came  out  of  her  mouth  every  night 
to  lick  the  wound  while  they  slept.  Curiously  enough,  as 
in  similar  cases  in  our  own  country  during  the  Middle  Ages, 
she  herself  firmly  believed  in  the  truth  of  the  story,  and  owned 
to  it  when  she  thought  that  such  a  confession  might  cost  her 
her  life. 

The  following  is  the  account  of  her  trial  by  the  Egbo  Society, 
given  in  her  own  words  : — 

G   2 


84        IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

"  Last  month  I  was  in  my  house,  when  the  Juju  Image  entered 
the  compound  at  night-time,  with  many  companions.  He  called 
me  '  Awaw  Ita,  Awaw  Ita.'  I  answered,  and  he  said,  '  Come 
out.'  I  followed  him.  He  led  me  into  Ntui  Iterem's  com- 
pound, where  all  the  Jujus  are  kept.  Many  people  were 
gathered  together.  They  said  to  me,  '  You  possess  a  snake  ?  ' 
I  answered,  '  Yes,'  because  I  have  it  for  true.  In  my  country, 
Okorroba,  which  is  a  long  way  from  here,  both  snakes  and 
hippopotami  are  possessed  by  women.  I  left  my  snake  in  the 
bush  of  my  land,  when  I  was  brought  from  my  home.  When 
I  sleep  and  dream  I  sometimes  see  my  snake,  but  not  very  often. 
In  the  day-time  I  have  not  seen  it  since  I  was  brought  here  as 
a  slave  many  seasons  ago." 

Fortunately  for  all  parties  the  wound  was  soon  healed,  by 
means  no  more  romantic  or  mysterious  than  the  application  of 
a  little  clean  water  and  some  ointment. 

Cases  of  this  kind  are  always  coming  on  before  the  Native 
Court  of  the  District.  These  Courts  are  mines  of  information 
as  to  customs  and  beliefs,  and  the  intelligence  obtained  from 
them  can  be  relied  on  ;  for,  should  one  party  to  a  suit  volunteer 
a  false  statement,  it  would  be  quickly  rectified  by  the  other. 
Three  chiefs,  unconnected  with  either  side  and  from  different 
towns,  are  always  chosen  to  sit  as  an  advisory  committee,  and 
give  information  as  to  native  custom  and  law,  which  is  followed 
except  when  in  opposition  to  British  justice. 

Another  interesting  case  came  to  our  notice  lately.  In  1909, 
while  marching  toward  Ekkonnanakku,  the  new  town  built  by 
a  branch  of  the  Ododop  tribe,  which  came  to  settle  in  the 
District  about  five  j'ears  ago,  I  noticed  the  skull  of  a  great  bush- 
cow.  It  stood  at  the  base  of  the  Juju  tree  in  the  centre  of  the 
settlement,  where  the  Head  Chief,  Awaw  Anjanna,  dwelt  about 
twelve  miles  from  his  town,  and  was  so  unusually  fine  a  speci- 
men that  I  asked  the  chief  if  he  were  willing  to  sell  it.  He 
answered  that  he  would  rather  not,  as  he  liked  to  see  it 
there,  and  could  not  easily  get  another  so  large.  He  spoke 
naturally,  even  carelessly,  and  I  attached  no  importance  to  the 
matter. 

Between  the  settlement  and  the  town,  all  along  the  way,  lie 
huge  boulders,  water-worn  and  rounded  like  those  on  the  sea- 


METAMORPHOSIS  85 

shore.  On  our  first  visit,  Awaw  Anjanna  took  us  along  a 
hunters'  track,  about  a  mile  from  his  dwelling,  which  led  to  the 
foot  of  a  colossal  boulder.  Here  he  stooped  down,  and,  bending 
aside  the  bushes,  showed  us  a  hole  through  which  we  pro- 
ceeded to  crawl.  After  going  for  a  few  yards  in  this 
cramped  position,  we  emerged  into  a  hunter's  cave — apparently 
formed  by  a  great  piece  of  rock  which  had  split  off  from  the 
main  block,  swung  over  by  its  own  weight,  and  been  held  up 
by  two  small  pinnacles  which  stood  in  its  way.  These  now  form 
rough  pillars  to  which  the  fallen  boulder  acts  as  roof.  Once  in 
the  cave  it  was  found  roomy  enough  to  hold  a  hundred  people, 
and  quite  light,  for  the  side  between  the  pillars  is  open. 

In  revisiting  Awaw  Anjanna's  two  years  later,  we  found  it 
deserted.  The  chief,  we  thought,  had  at  last  yielded  to  the 
entreaties  of  his  people,  and  gone  to  live  among  them. 

Just  before  reaching  the  old  dwelling  place,  one  of  our 
attendants,  a  man  half  Yoruba,  half  Bini,  asked  my  wife, 
who  was  a  little  ahead,  to  come  back  a  few  paces.  She  found 
him  gazing  with  peculiar  intentness  at  some  tracks  in  the  soft 
sand.  "Makeelook,  lady,"  he  said;  "These  be  bush-cow  tracks. 
They  come  and  they  go.  Every  day  there  be  fresh  one  for 
Awaw  Anjanna's  farm." 

His  tone  was  intensely  sad,  but  my  wife  thought  this  probably 
due  to  a  fear  that  rations  might  be  hard  to  get,  as  at  so 
many  places,  owing  to  the  ravages  of  the  bush  beasts. 

All  along  the  road,  we  looked  for  the  figure  of  the  chief,  who, 
in  immaculate  white  linen  coat  and  dark  blue  loin  cloth, 
had  been  in  the  habit  of  coming  out  a  long  way  to  greet  us. 
There  was  no  sign  of  him,  and  though,  on  our  arrival  at 
Ekkonnanakku,  the  head  men  of  the  town  were  assembled  to 
meet  us,  we  still  sought  in  vain  for  his  familiar  figure.  My  first 
question  was  as  to  his  whereabouts.  There  was  a  moment's 
silence,  and  then  one  of  the  men  answered  : 

"  He  died  long  since." 

No  other  information  was  volunteered.  Our  condolences 
were  received  in  silence,  and  the  people  obviously  did  not  wish 
to  be  questioned  on  the  subject. 

Soon  after  the  townsfolk  had  gone,  the  same  man  who  had 
pointed  out  the  tracks  came  in,  and  after  looking  anxiously 


86   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

round  to   make  sure  of  not  being  overheard,    startled   us   by 
announcing. 

"  When  D.  C.  Talbot  go  for  his  own  country,  the  new  D.  C. 
kill  Awaw  Anjanna  for  Oban." 

There  was  obviously  something  wrong  here,  as,  on  the  face 
of  it,  such  a  thing  was  impossible.  After  a  while  the  whole 
story  came  out. 

It  seems  that  the  chiefs  of  the  Ododop  tribe  are  supposed  to 
be  mysteriously  linked  with  buffaloes.  When  one  of  them  dies, 
his  soul  enters  into  one  of  the  last-named  beasts.  At  night,  too, 
the  bush  soul  goes  out  into  the  form  of  his  affinity.  Hence  the 
skull  beneath  the  Juju  tree. 

All  Ododop  people  are  supposed  to  have  some  totem  or 
other,  mostly  wild  boar  or  antelope,  though  some,  like  the 
chiefs,  are  buffalo  souls. 

Now  Awaw  Anjanna  had  been,  according  to  custom,  to  attend 
Court  at  Oban,  for  he  was  a  particularly  intelligent  man  and 
took  a  great  interest  in  learning  everything  possible  about  the 
administration  of  justice.  He  returned  home  in  excellent 
health,  and  two  days  afterwards  was  sitting  talking  with  several 
of  his  people,  when  he  suddenly  struck  his  hand  against  his 
body  and  cried  out : 

"  They  kill  me  for  (i.e.  at)  Oban." 

It  was  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  At  that  hour  a  buffalo 
was  seen  to  come  down  to  drink  at  a  stream  which  runs  through 
the  station  garden.  The  Commissioner  shot  the  beast,  and  it 
turned  round  and  ran  off  badly  wounded.  It  was  followed,  but 
got  away  for  the  time.  In  the  excitement  of  the  chase,  two 
men  were  shot  by  mistake,  one  in  the  arm  and  the  other  in  the 
body  ;  fortunately,  however,  both  recovered.  Two  days  later 
the  buffalo  was  found  dead  in  the  bush,  and  an  hour  or 
so  before  this  discovery  Awaw  Anjanna  died  at  his  little 
settlement  over  ten  miles  away.  Just  before  his  death  he  sent 
a  message  to  Ekkonnanakku  to  warn  all  people  who  belonged 
to  the  buffalo  totem  to  keep  away  from  Oban,  as  it  was  too 
dangerous  there. 

Now  his  brother  rules  in  his  stead.  The  old  dwelling  place 
stands  lonely  and  deserted,  with  carefully  padlocked  doors ;  but 
the  farms  seem  still  to  be  tended,  that  the  soul  of  the  dead 


METAMORPHOSIS  87 

chief,  roaming  up  and  down  in  buffalo  form,  may  see  that  the 
space  he  reclaimed  from  the  bush  is  kept  in  good  order. 

Whatever  may  have  been  the  case  in  earlier  times,  there  is 
now  no  restriction  as  to  marriage  between  the  various  totem 
peoples.  For  instance,  a  wild  boar  man  may  marry  an  ante- 
lope woman,  or  vice  versa,  and  the  children  of  such  a  marriage 
seem  given  the  choice  of  totem.  A  bush-cow  man  will  never 
shoot  a  beast  of  his  own  affinity,  though  he  may  kill  antelope 
or  wild  boar,  but,  after  having  done  this,  should  he  think  that 
his  kill  is  not  an  ordinary  animal,  but  one  "  possessed "  by 
any  of  the  townspeople,  he  must  go  through  certain  cere- 
monies over  the  body  of  the  beast,  and  then  hurry  back  at 
topmost  speed  to  take  a  particular  "  medicine  "  to  the  man  whose 
totem  it  was.     Otherwise  the  Efumi  must  die. 

It  was  unfortunately  impossible  to  extract  information  as  to 
the  nature  of  this  medicine,  but  some  few  indications  seemed  to 
show  that  it  was  a  part  of  the  animal  itself. 

There  are  differences  of  opinion  as  to  the  moment  of  death. 
Some  assert  that  the  man's  coincides  with  that  of  the  animal, 
others  that  the  possessor  lives,  though  with  decreasing  strength, 
so  long  as  the  body  of  his  affinity  remains  entire.  Should  a 
man  unknowingly  eat  a  beast  of  the  family  to  which  he  is 
mysteriously  linked  he  would  fall  sick.  On  this  he  must  consult 
his  Juju  as  to  the  cause  of  the  illness,  and  would  recover,  after 
making  the  required  sacrifice.  Should  he  eat  knowingly, 
however,  he  would  surely  die. 

Amid  these  weird  beliefs,  one  curious  fact  stands  out. 
While  nearly  all  other  tribes  in  the  District  have  been  driven 
to  despair  by  the  depredations  of  boar,  bush  cow  and  other 
wild  beasts,  the  Ododop  farms  remain  untouched.  Tracks  are 
everywhere  to  be  seen,  but  never  a  plantain  is  trodden  down,  nor 
yam  uprooted.  Here,  strangely  enough,  the  bush  beasts  seem 
to  leave  the  farms  alone,  and  feed  only  on  wild  herbage. 

The  same  man  who  had  offered  to  take  oath  as  to  having 
seen  Chief  Agbashan  when  changing  into  his  elephant  form, 
wrote  out  and  sent  the  following  account  of  a  ceremony  at 
which  he  claimed  to  have  been  present.     I  give  it  in  his  ow 
words,  for  what  it  is  worth : — 

"  In  the  month  of  June,  1908,  I  was  wakened  from  a  peaceful 


88    IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

slumber  in  the  middle  of  the  night  by  a  noise  which  seemed 
unearthly.  I  got  up  shivering  with  fear,  and  found  that  the 
light  which  I  always  kept  burning  till  the  small  hours  of  the 
morning  had  unaccountably  been  extinguished.  I  fondled 
(fumbled  ?)  under  my  pillow  in  search  of  matches  and  a  candle 
which  were  usually  kept  there  in  case  of  emergency,  and  when 
I  had  secured  these,  I  ventured  outside. 

"  There  I  saw  shadowy  persons  of  both  sexes  and  all  ages 
sitting  on  stools  and  benches,  and  talking  in  undertones. 
Among  the  crowd  was  my  landlord.  In  front  of  him  stood 
two  native  wooden  bowls,  about  24  inches  wide  and  12 
deep,  filled  with  what  the  natives  call  "  Ekpo  Juju  "  and  also 
some  bottles  charged  (sic)  with  herbal  decoctions.  On  one  of 
the  bowls  lay  a  brush  made  of  palm  branches,  with  which,  when 
he  saw  me  watching,  he  sprinkled  some  of  the  contents  in  my 
direction.  I  then  irresistibly  fell  headlong,  and  entirely  lost 
locomotion.  The  candle  was  snatched  from  my  grasp,  and  the 
compound  plunged  into  utter  darkness. 

"  After  a  few  minutes  I  crawled  along  on  my  elbows  till  I 
reached  a  certain  point  where  an  empty  stool  was  standing. 
On  this  I  sat  down. 

"  The  rain  began  to  fall  in  drenching  torrents  and  lightning 
flashed  vividly,  which  enabled  me  to  discern  the  features  of  the 
members  of  this  company,  all  of  whom  are  capable  of  assuming 
the  forms  of  ferocious  animals,  and  in  olden  days  used  to  feast 
on  human  flesh. 

"  Suddenly  a  flash  of  lightning  revealed  my  whereabouts  ;  my 
landlord  again  threw  some  of  the  decoction  over  me,  and  I 
became  insensible.  For  hours  I  lay  in  the  drenching  rain,  and 
when  I  began  to  recover  consciousness  thought  that  my  end 
had  come.  After  a  while  I  heard  the  voices  of  some  people 
talking  to  the  head  of  the  house,  and  saying  that  I  had  been 
kind  to  them.  On  this  he  wrenched  open  my  jaws  and  forced 
a  '  pillet '  down  my  throat.  I  lay  as  still  as  the  dead,  though 
shaking  with  fright  lest  he  should  really  put  an  end  to  me. 
After  this  he  began  some  incantation  in  the  vernacular.  Then 
all  present  assumed  the  shape  of  ducks,  and  began  greedily  to 
drink  at  the  pools  of  rain,  save  the  paramount  chief  himself, 
who  took  on  the  form  of  a  large  elephant." 


CHAPTER   VIII 
Oban  to  Niaji 

To  the  north-east  of  Oban  live  those  Ekoi  of  purest  blood. 
They  show  hardly  a  trace  of  having  mixed  with  Efifs  or  any 
other  people,  and  are  of  a  more  enterprising  character  than 
the  rest  of  their  race. 

The  way  leads  along  a  forest  path,  8  to  10  feet  wide,  clear 
of  trees,  fern-fringed  and  carpeted  ankle-deep  with  a  thousand 
little  flowers,  amid  which  small  Acanthacese  raise  their  pure 
white  or  deep  purple  heads,  recalling  with  curious  vividness  the 
violets  of  Worcestershire  spinneys.  Amid  this  wealth  of  flowers 
winds  the  foot-wide  track,  bare  and  smooth,  which  is  all  that 
natives  use. 

The  first  river  to  be  crossed  is  the  Ojuk.  On  its  banks,  by 
the  ford,  a  powerful  Juju  was  formerly  buried.  So  many  people 
died  after  crossing,  that  the  "  Okum  "  Ekuri  Ibokk,  described 
on  p.  45,  was  taken  down  to  smell  out  the  magic.  He  indicated 
a  spot  between  the  gnarled  roots  of  a  tree,  and,  after  digging 
for  a  considerable  depth  at  this  point,  a  pot  containing  Juju 
medicine  was  discovered  and  removed.  The  path  was  then 
declared  safe  once  more — but  we  did  not  find  it  so. 

One  evening  we  reached  the  river  bank  a  little  before 
sunset.  I  was  ahead  with  my  gun,  next  came  Bimba,  and  then 
my  wife,  followed  by  our  botanical  collector.  Suddenly  I  heard 
a  warning  cry,  and  looking  back  saw  my  wife  pointing  to  a 
small  cobra  which  had  crossed  the  path  between  herself  and 
her  sister.  Bimba  at  once  passed  me,  so  as  to  be  out  of  the 
way,  and  our  positions  then  formed  a  triangle,  with  the 
snake,  between  my  wife  and  myself,  for  its  apex.  I  shot,  and 
thought  that  the  reptile  had  been  blown  to  pieces,  as  it 
disappeared.  Next  moment  our  collector  sprang  into  the  air 
with  a  yell  of  terror.     The  cobra  had  been   "  lofted  "  by  the 


go    IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

shot  at  a  seemingly  impossible  angle,  had  hit  my  wife  across  the 
mouth  with  its  tail,  and  then  fallen  just  beyond  her  feet,  in 
close  proximity  to  the  bare  brown  toes  of  our  black  companion. 
Almost  at  the  same  spot,  an  Oban  man  had  been  bitten  in  the 
heel  by  one  of  this  species  a  few  days  before,  and  had  died 
within  the  hour. 

Beyond  the  river,  the  first  town  to  be  reached  is  Aking,  a  small 
place  nestling  at  the  base  of  the  beautiful  purple  hills  of  the 
same  name.  Here  on  one  occasion  the  children  gave  a  par- 
ticularly charming  series  of  games,  singing  all  the  while  in  the 
pretty  lilting  way  usual  among  them.  Nothing  could  be  more 
graceful  than  the  waving  arms  and  swaying  limbs  of  the  little 
brown  forms  as  they  bent  and  moved,  always  in  perfect  time  to 
their  song. 

After  leaving  this  town  the  next  stopping  place  is  Ako,  where 
a  specimen  of  that  rare  and  wonderful  creature  the  Goliath 
beetle  was  secured.  Up  to  this  point  the  road  from  Oban, 
though  hilly,  is  one  of  the  most  level  in  the  District,  but  from 
now  onward  it  grows  steep  and  rocky. 

At  the  next  town,  Ntebbashott,  the  walls  of  the  houses  were 
covered  with  rude  black-and-white  frescoes,  which  stood  out 
boldly  from  their  dull  yellow  background.  Inquiries  as  to  the 
meaning  of  the  paintings  elicited  the  explanation,  somewhat 
reproachfully  given,  that  they  were  representations  of  the 
District  Commissioner  as  he  rode  through  on  horseback  some 
time  before.  This  is  the  furthest  point  in  the  District  to  which 
it  is  possible  to  ride,  and  my  horse  was  the  first  ever  seen  in 
this  part  of  the  country.     The  Ekoi  have  no  proper  name  for 


Myself  on  Horseback. 


the  animal,  but  always  call  it  "  the  white  man's  cow."     A  feeling 
of  vanity  in  this  testimony  to  the  grace  of  my  seat  prompts  me 


Source  of  the  River  of  Good  Fortune. 


OBAN    TO    NIAJI  91 

to  venture  on  reproducing  two  of  the  more  striking  positions 
depicted. 

After  leaving  Ntebbashott  the  way  leads  down  a  steep,  rocky 
slope  into  a  charming  little  dell,  through  the  centre  of  which 
flows  a  stream  of  clearest  water.  The  carriers  always  set 
down  their  loads  and  run  forward  to  drink  of  this ;  then  after 
plucking  leaves  from  the  banks,  form  into  an  irregular  pro- 
cession, and  proceed  to  a  heap  of  leaves  which  lies  a  few  yards 
off.      Here  they  rub  those  they   have   gathered   across   their 

foreheads,  saying  : 

"  '  Me  nfonn    ofa! 
(May)      I      have    luck ! " 

and  then  drop  them  en  the  heap. 

The  reason  for  this  little  ceremony  is  that  the  stream  is  called 
the  river  of  Good  Fortune,  and  anyone  who  conforms  to  the 
rite  above  described  is  supposed  to  have  good  luck  throughout 
the  current  year.  It  is  specially  practised  by  traders  who  go 
up  to  the  German  Cameroons. 

Another  heap  of  leaves,  with  which  a  similar  ceremony  is 
connected,  for  the  prevention  of  evil  fortune,  is  to  be  found  on 
the  bank  of  the  Calabar  River  (see  p.  242). 

Lesser  mounds  may  occasionally  be  seen  on  the  roadside. 
If  these  be  pushed  aside,  they  will  usually  be  found  to  cover  a 
dead  chameleon.  According  to  the  law  of  the  old  men,  should 
one  of  these  creatures  be  killed  on  the  road,  it  must  not  be 
thrown  into  the  bush,  but  left  by  the  wayside.  Each  passer-by 
then  takes  a  few  leaves,  spits  upon  them,  and  drops  them  on 
the  dead  animal,  saying,  "  Look  !  Here  is  your  mat." 

"  Enn  !   mkpa  eya. 
Behold !    mat   your." 

The  reason  is  that  when  a  chameleon  has  been  killed,  his 
spirit  is  supposed  to  go  before  Obassi  Nsi,  and  pray  for  revenge 
on  the  race  of  those  who  have  caused  his  death. 

The  rite  is  intended  to  placate  the  "manes"  of  the  dead 
creature,  and  avert  punishment. 

When  a  poisonous  snake  is  killed,  this  also  is  left  lying  across 
the  road,  so  that  all  who  pass  by  may  step  over  its  body.  It  is 
thought  that  by  so  doing  danger  from  snake-bite  will  be  averted 
till  a  new  moon  shines  in  the  sky. 


92   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

Niaji,  the  first  town  to  be  reached  beyond  the  river  of  Good 
Fortune,  lies  at  the  base  of  Osaw  Ifogi  (High  hill  with  holes 
i.e.,  caves).  This  is  a  conical  peak,  over  3,000  feet  high,  covered 
with  flowering  trees.  On  a  single  visit  six  varieties  new  to 
science  were  discovered. 

In  1909  the  summit  had  been  cleared  for  theodolite  observa- 
tions save  for  one  tree,  which  stood  amid  its  fallen  brethren  a 
lonely  sentinel,  visible  for  miles  around.  The  top  of  the  hill 
was  too  narrow  to  allow  of  the  tents  being  pitched  there  with 
any  degree  of  safety,  so  camp  was  made  on  the  slope,  about 
50  yards  below. 

I  began  to  take  angles,  but  storm  clouds  gathered,  and  the 
sky  became  overcast.  At  four  o'clock,  Itamfum,  our  second 
"  boy,"  who  naturally  took  his  time  from  the  sun,  brought  the 
lamps,  under  the  impression  that  it  was  6  p.m.  A  strong  wind 
arose,  branches  began  to  crash  in  every  direction,  and  a  few 
minutes  later  the  storm  burst  upon  us  in  all  its  fury. 

We  took  refuge  in  one  of  the  tents.  For  awhile  the  wind 
tore  at  the  frail  structure,  as  though  to  carry  it  away.  Then 
suddenly  we  were  enveloped  in  a  blaze  of  light.  At  the  same 
moment  came  a  deafening  crash,  and  we  were  thrown  to  the 
ground  by  a  force  there  was  no  resisting. 

When  consciousness  returned  it  was  to  find  both  my  com- 
panions senseless,  and  apparently  dead,  beside  me.  I  dragged 
them  outside  into  the  downpour,  where  pandemonium  reigned. 
Carriers  and  "boys"  were  screaming  at  the  highest  pitch  of  terror, 
tearing  helplessly  hither  and  thither,  too  frightened  to  think 
what  to  do,  while  cook,  cook-mate,  the  Interpreter,  and  one  of 
my  "  boys  "  still  lay  in  a  helpless  heap  where  they  had  been 
flung  downhill  by  the  force  of  the  stroke. 

When  my  wife  recovered  consciousness,  she  explained 
that  when  she  first  felt  the  blow  which  struck  her  down,  it 
flashed  through  her  mind,  "  This  is  death."  There  was  no 
time  for  fear,  only  a  feeling  of  interest  that  the  experience, 
which  must  come  at  some  time,  and  in  some  guise,  to  us  all, 
was  there  so  swiftly.  Afterwards  she  knew  nothing  until,  she 
declares,  a  voice,  very  thin  and  far  away,  as  if  over  a  distant 
telephone,  came  to  her  ears.  "  Are  you  killed  ? "  it  piped. 
"  Are  you  killed  ?  "  and  then,  "  Oh,  you're  both  dead  !  "     She 


The  River  of  Bad  Fortune. 


OBAN    TO    NIAJI  93 

thought  for  the  moment  that  I  was  raising  a  death  wail — a 
circumstance  which  she  insists  quite  cheered  her  by  its 
picturesqueness.  She  soon,  however,  realised  that  she  was  still 
alive,  and  sat  up,  and  a  few  minutes  later  Bimba  too  revived. 

The  next  hour  or  so  was  the  most  unpleasant  of  our  lives.  We 
all  suffered  intense  pain,  and  it  was  a  long  time  before  I  could 
stand  upright,  while  my  wife  bore  for  weeks  the  marks  of  scarlet 
zigzags,  and  Bimba's  left  arm  became  white  and  crinkled 
almost  like  tissue-paper. 

Niaji  Peak  is  the  centre  of  a  huge  amphitheatre  of  hills. 
As  we  sat  in  our  soddened  deck  chairs  amid  a  solid  downpour, 
the  storm  receded  from  us,  to  rumble  round  and  return  again 
and  again,  breaking  overhead  in  deafening  crashes,  and  flashes 
which  seemed  to  render  transparent  closed  eyelids  and  sheltering 
hands. 

The  actual  blow  which  had  felled  us  had  come  so  suddenly 
that  there  was  no  time  for  fear.  Sitting  there,  counting,  from 
the  time  between  flash  and  crash,  whether  the  storm  were 
receding  or  returning,  with  the  expectation  that  next  time  it 
broke  above  us  it  must  surely  finish  its  work  of  destruction, 
would,  I  think,  have  tried  the  strongest  nerves.  The  peaks  are 
needle-pointed,  there  is  much  ironstone,  and  the  storms  here 
are  among  the  worst  in  the  world.  Later  we  heard  that  one  of 
the  carriers,  employed  by  a  surveying  party  while  delimitating 
the  Nigerian  Cameroons  Boundary,  had  been  struck  and  killed 
on  a  hill  not  many  miles  off. 

When  the  storm  had  at  length  rumbled  away  in  the  direction 
of  Calabar,  we  walked  along  the  topmost  ridge  of  the  peak. 
Far  as  the  eye  could  reach  chaos  reigned.  No  sign  of  human 
habitation  was  in  sight,  and  pacing  from  end  to  end  of  the  long 
narrow  summit  gave  one  the  curious  sensation  of  being  on  ship- 
board, the  sole  survivors  of  a  world  overwhelmed  in  some 
mighty  convulsion  of  Nature. 

All  around  lay  white  mists,  billowing  and  breaking  like 
the  crests  of  angry  waves,  which  stretched,  sweep  upon  sweep, 
to  the  great  dark  hills  beyond.  Above  lowered  a  sky  of 
sombre  grey,  broken  here  and  there  by  splashes  of  stormy 
orange,  while  in  the  distance,  over  Calabar,  the  mutter  of  the 
dying  storm  might  still  be  heard. 


CHAPTER    IX 

Woman — Position,  Etc. 

Just  outside  Niaji  is  to  be  found  the  only  attempt  at  a 
portrait  statue  known  in  the  Oban  District,  though  others 
existed  till  lately  on  the  further  side  of  the  Boundary. 

The  figure  is  a  representation  of  Maia,  priestess  of  Nimm.  It 
is  modelled,  rudely  enough,  in  mud  on  a  framework  of  sticks, 
and  is  placed  above  the  grave  of  the  woman  it  commemorates. 
Over  it  a  little  hut  has  been  built,  and  round  this  are  hung  most 
of  the  things  once  used  by  the  dead  woman.  These  are  all 
broken  according  to  custom. 

As  has  already  been  stated  on  p.  2,  Nimm  is  the  special 
object  of  devotion  to  Ekoi  women,  and  her  cult,  founded, 
according  to  tradition,  by  a  Divine  woman  who  came  down 
to  earth  for  the  purpose,  seems  to  provide  satisfactory  expression 
for  the  religious  feelings  of  her  human  sisters.  Every  eighth 
day  is  sacred  to  her,  and  is  called  "  the  women's  day" 

"Ofu        ane  akai. 

Day  of  persons  female." 

On  this  women  have  even  more  power  than  usual,  and  no 
work  must  be  done.  Should  any  transgress  the  law  and  go  to 
work  upon  their  farm,  Nimm  would  be  angered  and  send  up 
her  servants,  the  beasts,  to  destroy  it. 

Those  freshly  initiated  into  the  mysteries  of  Nimm  are  rubbed 
over  with  red  cam-wood  dye.  Afterwards  they  have  the  right 
to  wear  special  ornaments  round  neck  and  arms  and  carry 
the  "  feathers  of  Nimm "  in  the  right  hand  and  in  their 
coiffure,  while  in  the  left  they  bear  a  Juju  knife. 

Each    "  Nimm    woman "    has    a   little   shrine   built   in   the 

1  corner  of  her  room.     On  this  stands  a  pot,  usually  an  ancient 

earthenware  one,  containing  "  medicine,"  peculiar  to  the  cult, 


Main,  the  Priestess  of  Nimm. 


WOMAN— POSITION,    ETC. 


95 


together  with  some  queerly  shaped  pieces  of  carved  wood, 
corn  cobs,  a  Juju  knife,  and  the  feathers  of  the  white  "  Ebekk." 
Sometimes  in  addition  they  have  pieces  of  the  "  Ngaw"  creeper, 
supposed  to  be  used  by  were-crocodiles  to  draw  men  down  to 
their  death. 

Across  the  door  of  the  room  hangs  a  split  palm  leaf,  so 
arranged  that  all  the  "  spikes  "  hang  downward,  while  among 
them  corn  cobs  and  Juju  leaves  are  usually  tied. 

Nimm  women  are  supposed  to  have  the  power  of  foretelling 
the    future.      They     strew    white    chalk    over    the    floor    of 


Nimm  Woman's  Room,  with  Corner  Shrine. 

their  room  immediately  before  the  shrine.  On  this  space  a 
little  pile  of  white  feathers  is  laid.  A  light  is  then  applied, 
and  when  nothing  remains  but  ashes  the  priestess  sits 
gazing  intently  into  their  midst  till  the  desired  answer  can  be 
given. 

All  Nimm  women  have  not  equal  powers  of  divination,  but 
those  who  have  won  a  reputation  for  their  oracles  are  treated 
with  great  respect. 

When  one  of  the  priestesses  gives  a  dance,  the  townspeople 
are  supposed  to  bring  offerings  of  roasted  corn  cobs,  palm  oil, 
and  pieces  of  dried  Nsun  (Ogilby's  duiker)  flesh.  In  the  old  days 
a  Nimm  woman  never  appeared  outside  her  compound  without 
a  Juju  knife  in  her  left  hand  and  the  symbolic  white  Ebekk 


96        IN   THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

feather  in  the  right.   These  are  now  only  obligatory  on  occasions 
of  ceremony. 

All  stones  rounded  by  water  action  into  oval  form  are  sacred 
to  Nimm.  Those  too  heavy  to  be  moved  are  left  standing  in 
situ  and  used  as  a  kind  of  rustic  altar,  while  the  smaller  ones,  of 
about  the  size  of  eggs,  are  carefully  collected  and  placed  in 
compounds  and  farms.     Sometimes  such  stones  are  inserted  in  a 


^C- 


Mboandem  Woman's  Room,  with  Shrine,  Cupboard,  and  Shelves 
beneath  Niche  Bed. 

little  hole  made  for  the  purpose  in  the  mud  base  of  the  prin- 
cipal  pillar   in    the    Egbo   house.      The   object    of  all    is    to 
promote  fertility.     They  are   looked   upon   as   the   "  Eggs  of 
f  Nimm,"   whether  in  crocodile  or  serpent  shape. 

No  man  is  permitted  to  share  in  the  mysteries  of  Nimm,  and 
not  even  the  fear  of  death  would  induce  a  male  Ekoi  to  intrude 
at  the  celebration  of  her  rites.  A  woman  is,  however,  occa- 
sionally chosen  as  the  head  of  powerful  Jujus,  to  which  both 
sexes  may  belong.  Such  an  one  was  brought  from  Nsan 
to  Ndingane  by  an   Aking  man.     It  is  specially  strong   as    a 


WOMAN— POSITION,    ETC. 


97 


protection  against  witchcraft  and  the  breaking  of  oaths  sworn 
in  its  name. 

The  cult  of  Nimm  seems  to  bear  a  strong  resemblance  to  that 
of  the  "  Mboandem  Fraiien,"  described  by  Dr.  Mansfeld 
("  Urwald  Dokumente,"  p.  70).  It  has  not,  however,  been 
possible  to  discover  any  of  this  designation  on  the  British  side 
of  the  Frontier. 

At    Niaji,  in    one   of  the   compounds,    the   Juju    Enyere  is 
to   be  seen.      This  consists  of  a  growing  "Egakk"  tree,  to 
which  an  earthen   pot  is  attached  by  a   coil  of  thick  bronze 
wire,      which      con- 
tinues down  the  stem. 
The  pot  is  closed  by 
a    flat     earthenware 
lid,     and     decorated 
with  a  fringe  of  split 
palm  leaves  and  two 
Nimm  feathers. 

The  head  man  of 
a  family  is  the  priest 
of  its  Lares,  but 
should  he  die  and 
leave  no  male  rela- 
tive to  take  his  place, 
all  other  Jujus  are 
banished     from    the  ■,UJU     ny 

compound  and  "Enyere"  raised  in  their  stead.     This  is  the 
only  Juju  permitted  to  a  family  which  consists  solely  of  women. 

The  Ekoi  are  a  polygamous  people,  but  till  several  years 
after  my  arrival,  the  chief  wife,  not  the  husband,  was 
regarded  as  head  of  the  house.  This  is  still  true  to  a  great 
extent,  but  there  are  indications  that  native  customs  in 
this,  as  with  children,  property,  &c,  are  beginning  to  be 
influenced  by  those  of  white  men ;  especially  in  places  near 
European  centres,  such  as  Calabar.  At  Niaji,  and  the  more 
northern  towns,  the  change  has  hardly  had  time  to  make  itself 
felt,  and  old  customs  still  obtain.  Each  wife  has  complete 
control  over  her  children,  and  the  latter  almost  invariably  go 
with  her  if  she  leaves  her  husband. 

S.B.  H 


g8   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

So  strictly  are  woman's  rights  guarded  by  native  law  that 
even  now  it  is  not  at  all  unusual  for  a  wife  to  summon  her 
husband  before  Court  on  the  heinous  charge  of  having  made 
use,  without  permission,  of  some  of  her  property,  perhaps  a  pot 
or  pan. 

The  following  stories  give  some  idea  of  the  position  of  the 

sexes  : — 

Why  Men  must  serve  Women. 

Long  ago,  Obassi  Osaw  and  Obassi  Nsi  determined  to 
build  two  towns  ;  the  former  one  for  men,  and  the  latter  one 
for  women.  Each  was  to  be  separate  from  the  other.  When 
both  were  inhabited,  the  people  of  the  two  towns  began 
to  interchange  visits.  Sometimes  men  visited  the  women's 
town,  sometimes  women  went  to  the  men's.  In  course  of 
time  disputes  arose  as  to  the  ownership  of  the  intervening  bush, 
and  the  men  began  to  fight  their  neighbours. 

Obassi  Nsi  and  Obassi  Osaw  said  to  one  another,  "  What  can 
we  do  to  prevent  this  ?     Let  us  hold  a  meeting." 

When  they  had  considered  the  question,  they  decided  that  it 
would  be  better  for  men  and  women  to  live  together  in  one 
town.  The  women  refused,  and  said,  "  Men  began  to  kill  us. 
Why  should  we  go  to  live  in  their  town  ?  If  the  men  want  to 
dwell  with  us,  let  them  come  and  live  in  ours." 

To  this  the  men  agreed,  and  that  is  the  reason  why,  when 
we  marry  a  woman,  we  must  serve  her  so  long  as  she  lives 
with  us. 

The  next  story  goes  even  further. 

How  Men  came  on  Earth. 
At  the  beginning  of  things  the  world  was  peopled  by  women 

only. 

One  day,  Obassi   Nsi  happened  to  kill  a  woman  by  accident. 

On  hearing  this  the  rest  gathered  together,  and  prayed  him, 
if  he  meant  to  slay  them,  to  bring  destruction  on  all  together, 
rather  than  kill  them  slowly  one  by  one. 

Obassi  Nsi  was  sorry  for  the  grief  that  he  had  caused.  So 
he  offered  to  give  them  anything  they  should  choose  out  of  all 


WOMAN— POSITION,    ETC.  99 

his  possessions,  to  make  up  to  them  for  their  fellow-woman 
whom  he  had  slain. 

They  begged  him  to  mention  what  he  had  to  offer,  and  said 
that  they  would  all  cry  "  Yes  "  when  he  named  the  thing  which 
they  wished. 

Obassi  began,  and  mentioned,  one  by  one,  all  his  fruits, 
fowls,  and  beasts,  but  at  the  name  of  each  they  shouted 
"No." 

At  length  the  list  was  nearly  ended.  Only  one  thing  remained 
to  offer.     "  Will  you  then  take  man  ?  "  said  Obassi  at  last. 

"  Yes,"  they  roared  in  a  great  shout,  and  catching  hold  of  one 
another,  began  dancing  for  joy,  at  the  thought  of  the  gift  which 
Obassi  was  sending. 

They  took  man,  therefore,  as  compensation  for  the  fellow- 
woman  whom  they  had  lost.  Thus  men  became  the  servants 
of  women,  and  have  to  work  for  them  to  this  day.  For, 
though  a  woman  comes  under  the  influence  of  her  husband  on 
marriage,  yet  she  is  his  proprietor,  and  has  a  right  to  ask  any 
service,  and  expect  him  to  do  whatever  she  chooses. 


It  is  not  unusual  in  these  stories  for  a  man  to  lose  his  life, 
rather  than  fail  to  gratify  some  whim  of  his  wife's,  as,  for  instance, 
in  the  following  : — 

The  Man  who  understood  Animals'  Speech. 

Once,  long  ago,  a  man  went  into  the  bush  to  hunt.  He  saw 
an  antelope,  and  tried  to  kill  it,  but  could  not  do  so.  The  beast 
got  away,  and  ran  down  a  great  hole  in  the  earth.  The  hunter 
followed  and  found  himself  in  a  ghost  town. 

When  he  arrived,  the  antelope's  mistress  was  questioning  it 
as  to  why  it  had  returned  so  hurriedly.  It  replied  that  a  hunter 
had  tried  to  kill  it  in  the  world  above.  While  speaking,  it  turned 
round  and  saw  the  very  man,  standing  aghast.  It  pointed  him 
out  to  the  ghost-woman,  and  said: 

"That  is  the  man." 

Now  the  hunter  heard  the  sound  of  voices,  but  could  not 
understand  what  was  said. 

The  ghost-woman  called  her  ghost  friends,  and  told  them  what 

h  2 


ioo      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

the  stranger  had  done.  So  they  tied  him  to  a  post,  where  he 
stayed  all  through  the  night. 

Next  morning  the  grown-up  folk  went  into  the  bush  to  gather 
firewood  with  which  to  roast  the  prisoner,  that  they  might  make 
a  great  feast.  No  one  was  left  in  the  town  but  the  captive  and 
the  small  children. 

The  man  noticed  that  the  little  ones  were  sad-looking  and 
dirty,  and  that  their  hair  was  long,  matted  and  verminous.  So 
he  called  them  to  come  and  sit  round  him. 

Before  the  ghosts  left  the  town,  they  had  loosed  his  bonds  a 
little,  and  put  "medicine"  in  his  ears,  that  he  might  understand 
their  speech.  He  now  began,  in  turn,  from  the  first  child  to  the 
last,  to  cut  off  the  hair  from  their  heads  and  wash  them  all 
properly  with  water. 

When  the  ghost  people  came  back,  they  found  their  ugly 
children  made  neat  and  very  clean.  They  embraced  the  hunter, 
and  thanked  him  heartily  for  what  he  had  done.  Those  who 
had  elder  children  with  matted  and  dirty  heads,  brought  them 
to  him,  that  he  might  tend  them  as  he  had  done  the  others.  So 
well  did  he  work,  that  the  ghosts  said  he  should  not  be  killed, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  should  be  free  to  go  home.  When  his 
work  was  done,  they  gave  him  for  reward  the  power  to  under- 
stand the  language  of  all  beasts;  but  warned  him  that  he  must 
not  reveal  this  to  any  living  being,  or  he  himself  would  die  at 
once. 

The  hunter  thanked  them  and  returned  home.  His  towns- 
men were  glad  to  see  him  again,  and  he  told  them  where  he 
had  been,  and  how  he  got  back,  but  kept  the  secret  of  the 
language  of  the  beasts. 

One  day  his  wife's  mother  heard  of  his  return  and  went  to 
visit  him.  She  sat  on  the  verandah  of  the  house,  and  ate  corn 
which  her  daughter  brought  her.  As  she  bit  the  grains  from 
the  cob,  a  few  of  them  fell  down,  and  a  hen  who  was  near  saw 
this,  and  began  to  call  her  chickens. 

"  Agbaw  Okpok,  Agbaw  Okpok,"  she  cried— for  that  is  the 
way  a  hen  calls  her  brood—"  If  you  want  to  pick  up  the  fallen 
grains,  do  not  go  near  the  woman's  right  hand,  but  go  as  close  as 
you  please  to  her  left  eye,  because  she  is  blind  on  that  side,  and 
cannot  see  you." 


WOMAN— POSITION,   ETC.  101 

On  hearing  this  the  man  burst  into  a  loud  laugh,  for,  indeed, 
his  mother-in-law  had  lost  her  left  eye.  His  wife  thought  that  he 
was  laughing  at  her  mother,  and  grew  vexed  with  him.  The 
husband  explained  that  he  was  not  laughing  at  what  she  thought, 
but  only  because  he  had  just  remembered  a  story  which  had  once 
amused  him.  His  wife  asked  to  be  told  what  it  was,  and  would 
not  be  satisfied  till  he  granted  her  request.  When  he  found 
out  how  much  she  wished  to  know,  he  told  her  what  the  hen 
had  said,  and  how  he  came  to  understand  her  speech.  He  then 
fell  dead  on  the  spot,  as  the  ghosts  had  warned  him  would 
happen  if  he  told  the  secret. 

This  man  was  the  only  living  being  who  ever  understood 
the  talk  of  animals.  He  told  his  wife  what  the  hen  had  said 
simply  to  please  her,  and  in  full  knowledge  that  his  death  would 
follow. 

Why  Children  Belong  to  the  Mother. 

There  was  once  a  beast  called  Ejimm,*  who  had  two 
Ejimm  sons,  by  name  Obegud  and  Igwe.  They  lived  in  the 
bush,  near  the  dwelling  of  a  poor  couple  who  had  twelve 
children. 

One  day  the  parents  left  their  little  ones  at  home  and  went 
to  farm.  While  they  were  away,  the  children  sang  and  played 
happily  together,  but  the  wicked  beast  Ejimm  heard  their  voices. 
She  told  her  son  Obegud  to  go  to  their  house  and  say  that  he 
had  something  for  sale.  This  the  beast  did,  and  the  children 
asked  him  to  show  his  wares. 

As  soon  as  he  had  succeeded  so  far  in  his  errand,  he  went 
back  singing  : — 

"  Obegud  Obegud  ayaya-ay 
Bia  koko  ayaya-ay 
Ajima  anwa  nwa  ayaya-ay." 

(The  narrator  repeated  this  song  very  carefully,  but  had  no 
idea  as  to  its  meaning.  It  has  apparently  come  down  from  very 
ancient  times.) 

When  Ejimm  knew  from  the  sound  of  her  son's  voice  that  all 

*  "  Ejimm  "  is  the  name  of  the  iron  instrument  used  by  the  Ekoi  to  spear  lumps 
of  meat  from  out  a  boiling  pot.  The  monster  in  this  story  was  probably  so 
named  on  account  of  the  long  sharp  jaws  with  which  she  seized  her  victims. 


i02      IN    THE    SHADOW    OF    THE    BUSH 

was  well,  she  rushed  to  the  hut,  and  stood  in  the  doorway — a 
fearful  sight !  Then  she  thrust  out  her  long  mouth,  seized  a 
child,  and  carried  it  off  to  her  den  in  the  bush. 

On  their  return  from  farm  work,  the  parents  missed  one  of 
their  children,  and  heard  from  the  others  that  a  monster  with  a 
very  long  mouth  had  killed  him  and  borne  him  away. 

Long  they  wept  for  their  lost  child,  and  when  the  time  came 
to  go  to  farm  next  day,  the  father  bade  his  wife  go  alone  while 
he  waited  at  home  to  kill  Ejimm. 

At  first  the  woman  would  not  go,  but  after  a  while  her  husband 
persuaded  her,  so  she  left  him. 

At  noon  the  beast  sent  out  her  other  son  Igvve,  with  instruc- 
tions to  say  what  his  brother  Obegud  had  said  before.  He  did 
so,  and  again  the  children  bade  him  bring  out  his  wares, 
whereon  he  ran  homeward,  singing  as  he  went : 

"  Igwe  Igwe  Igwe  Iya 
Bia  koko  Iya 
Ajim  anwa  nwa  Iya." 

On  hearing  this  Ejimm  again  set  forth  in  search  of  prey,  and 
came  to  the  threshold  as  before.  The  man  was  well  armed,  but 
at  the  horrible  sight  of  the  beast  his  courage  failed  him.  He 
ran  for  his  life  through  the  back  doorway,  leaving  his  children 
helpless  before  the  greedy  monster. 

Again  Ejimm  seized  a  child  and  carried  it  off,  rejoicing  greatly 
over  the  prey  she  had  found. 

When  the  mother  came  back  and  heard  that  a  second  child 
had  been  taken,  her  grief  knew  no  bounds.  She  turned  fiercely 
on  her  husband,  and  asked  why  he  had  not  saved  his  child. 
To  excuse  his  cowardice,  he  told  her  that  he  had  been  very 
ill,  and  had  had  to  leave  the  little  ones  for  a  while,  during 
which  time  the  monster  had  come. 

The  children,  however,  all  cried,  "  No,  mother.  Our  father 
fled  in  terror  at  the  sight  of  the  beast,  and  left  us  to  face  the 
danger  alone." 

Filled  with  fury  at  this,  the  woman  bade  her  husband  begone. 
He  did  not  need  to  be  told  twice,  but  went  out  and  hid  himself 
in  the  bush  near  by. 

The  mother  determined  to  risk  her  life  to  save  her  little  ones. 


WOMAN— POSITION,    ETC.  103 

She  armed  herself  with  a  very  sharp  matchet,  and  waited  for  the 
beast,  who  came  again  as  before,  and  thrust  in  her  head  to 
seize  a  child. 

Then  the  woman  stood  forth  bravely,  and  killed  her  enemy, 
whereon  the  children  raised  a  cry  of  triumph.  The  father 
heard,  and  came  from  his  hiding  place,  in  the  hope  that  all 
danger  was  now  over.  The  two  sons  Obegud  and  Igwe, 
however,  had  heard  the  noise  of  the  struggle,  and  now  sallied 
forth  to  the  aid  of  their  mother.  When  the  man  saw  them  he 
fled  once  more,  but  the  woman  held  her  ground  bravely,  and 
killed  these  two  beasts  also. 

When  all  was  indeed  over,  out  came  the  timid  husband  from 
his  hiding  place,  and  asked  for  a  sharp  knife,  that  he  might 
divide  the  kill  between  himself  and  his  wife.  All  the  best  of 
the  flesh  he  kept  for  his  share,  and  gave  the  heads  only  to  the 
woman  who  had  slain  the  beasts. 

To  this  division  she  refused  to  agree,  and  called  upon 
Obassi  to  decide  between  her  husband  and  herself.  Obassi 
heard  her  cry,  and  sent  a  messenger  to  fetch  the  couple 
before  him. 

When  they  appeared,  the  wife  stood  forth,  made  obeisance 
and  said  : 

"  After  promising  to  fight  Ejimm  and  defend  our  children,  my 
husband  ran  away,  and  left  them  for  the  beast  to  kill.  I  am 
the  person  who  stood  bravely  fighting,  and  slew,  not  her  alone, 
but  her  two  sons.  Yet  my  husband  would  give  me  the  heads 
only,  of  all  my  kill.  So  I  come  to  claim  my  right  before  our 
Lord." 

Obassi  then  asked  the  husband  what  he  had  to  say  in  his 
defence ;  but  the  man  could  only  confirm  what  his  wife  had 
said. 

Thereupon  Obassi  gave  order  that,  as  the  woman  had  such  a 
brave  heart  to  defend  her  children,  from  thenceforward  no  man 
should  claim  any  property  which  his  wife  had  risked  her  life 
to  get. 

Further  Obassi  gave  judgment,  that,  should  the  woman  choose 
to  take  the  remaining  ten  children  away  from  her  husband,  she 
should  be  allowed  to  do  so ;  for  she  had  suffered  much  for  their 
sakes.     Obassi  also  said  that  a  woman  was  sure  to  risk  her  life 


104   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

for  her  children,  though  there  were  but  few  men  who  would 
do  so. 

It  is  in  obedience  to  the  above  decision  that  when  a  woman 
leaves  her  husband,  she  may  be  asked  to  give  up  all  gifts 
received  from  him,  but  not  her  children,  nor  any  other  thing  for 
which  she  may  have  risked  her  life. 


CHAPTER   X 

Woman — Position,  Etc.  {continued) 

By  native  custom  a  man  who  wishes  to  marry  an  Ekoi 
maiden  must  serve  her  people  for  some  considerable  time, 
usually  from  two  to  three  years.  His  work  mostly  consists  in 
helping  to  clear  bush  for  the  next  season's  farms,  but  other 
services  may  be  required  of  him. 

During  this  time  he  is  expected  to  make  presents  to  the  rela- 
tions of  his  future  wife,  the  value  of  which  varies  according  to 
his  means.  A  very  usual  list  of  gifts  offered  to  father  and 
mother,  or  guardians,  is  the  following  : — 

i  demijohn  of  palm  oil. 

i  head  of  plantains. 

i  piece  of  dried  meat. 

2  bottles  of  rum. 

2,  or  more,  heads  of  tobacco. 

Maidenhood  in  a  bride  is  not  considered  of  the  first  import- 
ance, though  parents  usually  watch  over  their  daughters  with 
great  care,  and  in  some  cases  girls  are  not  allowed  to  go  out 
alone. 

Even  should  young  girls  be  allowed  considerable  freedom 
before  marriage,  they  may  be  regarded  as  fairly  faithful  once 
the  ceremony  has  been  performed.  This  is  partly  due  to  fear 
of  the  Jujus  invoked  by  the  husband,  and  partly  because 
considerable  damages  may  be  claimed  from  the  co-respondent, 
and  also  from  the  woman,  should  the  husband  consider  the 
affair  serious  enough  to  demand  a  divorce. 

The  wedding  ceremony  is  not  regarded  as  possessing  any 
religious  character,  and  there  is  no  trace  of  ritual  symbolising 
former  marriage  to  a  deity. 

The  actual  marriage,  according  to  native  law,  consists  in  the 
acceptance,  by  the  bride  from  the  groom,  of  at  least  one  wedding 


106      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

gift,  on  the  distinct  understanding  that  it  is  received  as  such. 
Acceptance  must  be  followed  by  public  proclamation  of  the 
marriage  before  chiefs  and  people,  after  the  bell  has  been  rung 
round  the  town  for  the  purpose.  The  actual  words  used  in 
most  towns  are  "  Oho  Oho  Owe,"  but  in  some  places  "  Ora 
Ho,  Ora  Ho,"  is  called  instead.  The  expressions  are  practically 
identical,  and  mean  "Our  own."  After  these  words,  the  names 
of  the  couple  are  usually  added. 

The  proclamation  is  mostly  a  precautionary  measure  on  the 
part  of  the  husband.  Ekoi  women  are  unfortunately  all  too 
fond  of  inducing  suitors  to  give  them  as  wedding  gifts  offerings 
which  they  afterwards  declare  they  only  regarded  in  the  light 
of  "  sweetheart "  presents,  and  therefore  not  binding  them  to 
marriage. 

The  following  is  a  list  of  the  dowry  demanded  by  one  Aret 
Offiong  of  Oban.  It  finishes,  as  will  be  seen,  by  a  frank 
declaration,  transcribed  and  translated  by  a  friend  whose  store 
of  English  was  somewhat  limited  : — 

5  silk  handkerchiefs,  5s. 

1  piece  of  cloth,  5s. 

1  bead  necklace,  5s. 

1  tin  plate,  6d. 

1  spoon,  3d. 

1  piece  of  cloth,  2s.  6d. 

1  looking  glass,  6d. 

1  razor,  6d. 

1  comb,  6d. 

1  pair  scissors,  6d. 

1  piece  of  black  cloth,  is.  3d. 

1  piece  of  white  cloth,  is.  3d. 

5  balls  of  string,  is.  3d. 

1  earthenware  plate,  is. 

1  knife,  3d. 

"  I  told  him  that  if  he  will  not  me  all  this  things  I  will  not 
married  him — 

I  am  Aret  Offiong." 

Before  their  wedding,  all  free-born  Ekoi  girls,  of  well-to-do 
parents,  spend  a  time  in  the  "  fatting-house."  During  this 
period  they  may  not  wash  their  faces  and  are  not  supposed  to 


WOMAN— POSITION,    ETC. 


107 


go  out  or  do  any  work.  If  the  parents  are  too  poor  to  keep 
their  daughter  in  idleness,  and  provide  her  with  sufficient  food 
to  fatten  her  during  this  period,  she  is  looked  down  upon 
by  her  companions  before  marriage,  and  also  by  the  members 
of  her  husband's  family  when  she  joins  them. 

Should  an  Ekoi  mother  not  approve  of  the  man  of  her 
daughter's  choice,  she  can  sometimes  induce  her  to  give  him 
up  by  the  threat  of  not  providing  her  with  a  good  "  fatting- 
house,"  i.e.,  not  letting  her  have  as  much,  or  as  rich,  food  during 
the  time  of  her  seclusion,  as  if  she  had  chosen  a  suitor  whom 
the  mother  favoured. 

A  case  of  this  kind  came  before  the  native  Court  on  March  3rd, 
1909,  when  Mane  Okon  claimed  damages  for  breach  of  promise 
to  marry  from  Itakui  Mbing  Atan.     The  latter  stated : 

"  I  promised  to  marry  him,  but  said  I  did  not  want  to  take 
his  present  yet,  as,  if  I  accepted  it,  my  mother,  who  did  not 
approve  of  him  as  a  husband  for  me,  would  not  give  me  a  good 
'  fatting-house '  like  the  others.  After  two  months  spent  in  the 
'  fatting-house  '  I  looked  at  him  again,  and  said  to  myself  '  He 
does  not  seem  to  be  a  clever  man.  I  do  not  think  he  would 
make  a  good  husband.'  I  therefore  chose  another,  and  pointed 
him  out  to  my  father  as  the  one  I  would  have." 

The  period  spent  in  the  fatting-house  varies,  according  to  the 
wealth  of  the  parents,  from  a  few  weeks  up  to  two  years.  It  is 
very  usual  for  a  girl  confined  in  this  way  to  amuse  herself  by 


CO 000000000  o  00  00  000  o 


painting  on  the  walls  of  her  room  a  series  of  circles  to  represent 
the  number  of  "  moons"  she  has  spent  in  seclusion. 

The  accompanying  drawing,  copied  from  a  wall  at  Nkami, 
shows  that  the  artist  had  spent  twenty  months  in  this  manner. 


108      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

The  little  row  of  circles  at  the  left-hand  corner  represents  the 
first  tally  kept.  This  was  later  elaborated  in  the  manner  shown 
above. 

Usually  before  leaving  the  fatting-house,  the  girl  undergoes 
clitoridectomy,  but  this  operation  is  sometimes  performed  in 
infancy,  and  sometimes  not  till  after  the  birth  of  the  first  babe. 

When  a  girl  leaves  the  fatting-house,  it  is  an  occasion  of 
I  much  rejoicing.  A  great  feast  is  made  and  dances  are  given. 
The  girl  herself  is  smeared  from  the  waist  downward  with  a  red 
dye  made  from  the  cam-wood  tree.  Fatting-house  ornaments, 
consisting  of  tassels  and  chains  made  of  dried  palm-leaf  fibre 
also  dyed  red,  are  hung  round  her  neck,  while  a  cross-piece 
of  the  same  is  usually  passed  beneath  the  breasts.  Her  girdle 
of  beads,  cowries  and  palm,  is  also  rubbed  over  with  the  same 
dye.  Her  face  is  painted  in  various  patterns  and  colours,  and 
her  hair  dressed  in  a  very  elaborate  way  and  decorated  with 
combs,  and  large  "  pompoms  "  of  white  feathers,  while  over  all 
nods  a  plume  of  the  dark  green  and  creamish  feathers  of  the 
Nkundak  (Greater  Plantain-eater). 

Unless  my  memory  misleads  me,  some  such  custom  also 
obtains  among  the  Bavili  of  the  French  Congo,  where  a  girl  is 
secluded  for  a  time  in  the  "  Paint  House,"  so  called  because, 
after  being  carefully  fed  and  tended  there  in  enforced  seclusion, 
she  is  painted  red  before  being  led  to  the  dwelling  of  her  future 
husband. 

At  a  wedding,  beside  the  gifts  presented  to  the  bride  and  her 
people,  offerings  must  also  be  sent  to  the  chiefs  of  the  town. 
A  feast  is  made  for  the  "  Nkan  "  or  "  age  classes  "  of  bride  and 
groom.  By  this  expression  those  townspeople  born  within 
two  or  three  years  of  one  another  are  meant.  The  men  of  about 
the  same  age  form  a  sort  of  club  to  themselves  and  the  girls  and 
women  likewise.* 

Immediately  after  marriage,  if  the  husband  be  wise,  he  will 
try  to  induce  his  wife  to  swear  with  him  before  the  Juju  Njomm 
Ekatt  (the  Foot  Juju),  which  is  supposed  to  keep  wives  faithful 
to  their  husbands. 

The  method  of  procedure  is  as  follows  : — The  newly-wedded 
pair  take  mud  from  the  river-bed.     This  in  itself,  as  has  already 

*  See  p.  283. 


Pits  in  the  Rock  by  the  River  side  in  which  Cam-wood  Dve  is  made. 


Type  of  Liane  in  the  Ekoi  Bush. 


WOMAN— POSITION,    ETC.  iog 

been  mentioned,  is  supposed  to  possess  magic  properties.  Hen's 
eggs  and  a  quantity  of  Mfu  leaves  are  collected,  and  the  latter 
placed  in  a  vessel  of  fresh  water ;  the  woman  then  holds  an  egg 
in  each  hand,  while  the  man  pours  water  over  them.  Next  she 
lays  the  eggs  on  the  ground  and  places  two  leaves  beside  them. 
The  husband  advances  his  left  foot,  and,  while  standing  in  this 
position,  crushes  up  the  leaves  in  the  vessel  of  water.  Into 
this  the  woman  carefully  stirs  the  mud  brought  for  the  purpose, 
and,  after  awhile,  when  it  is  well  mixed,  dips  in  her  hand,  and 
makes  a  mark  with  the  liquid  on  her  husband's  forehead.  He 
in  turn  does  the  same  for  her. 

The  object  of  this  ceremony  is  to  prevent  women  from  having 
lovers  after  marriage.  Should  they  do  so  after  the  rite  above 
described,  it  is  thought  that  Njomm  Ekatt  will  "catch  "  them 
and  give  them  a  sickness,  from  which  they  can  only  recover 
after  confessing  to  their  husbands  and  inducing  these  to  revoke 
the  Juju. 

Another  way  of  ensuring  fidelity  in  a  wife  is  to  swear  with 
her  before  Njomm  Aiyung  (the  Blood  Juju). 

Each  of  the  contracting  parties  sucks  a  little  blood  from  the  | 
wrist  of  the  other  as  in  the  ancient  marriage  rite.     Certain  | 
death  is  thought  to  follow  any  infraction  of  this  oath.     The 
blood  of  the  husband  which  has  entered  the  woman's  body  is 
said  to  rebel  at  the  first  sign  of  unfaithfulness,  and  course  so 
furiously  through  her  veins  as  to  bring  about  speedy  death. 
A  third  way  will  be  found  described  on  p.  224. 
On  marriage  the  wife  becomes  a  member  of  her  husband's 
family,  and  goes  to  live  in  his  compound.     A  man's  first  wife 
is  always  the  head  of  the  house.     The  younger  wives  obey  her 
and  consider   her  in    everything.     Therefore   a  wife  likes  her 
husband  to  marry  plenty   of  other  women.     The  chief    com- 
plaint  of  cruelty  brought   by  the   wife   of  Njabong   of  Oban 
before  the  Native  Court  was  that  her  husband  refused  to  marry 
anyone  but  herself. 

Should  a  wife's  father  die  after  marriage,  it  is  usual  for  the 
husband  to  support  his  mother-in-law,  but  this  is  not  obli- 
gatory. Each  wife  is  given  one  side  of  the  central  "  atrium," 
and  two  fireplaces  are  made  for  her,  one  for  her  own  use  and 
one   for   that  of  her   children.     When   the   number   of  wives 


no   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

exceeds  the  accommodation  afforded  by  one  compound, 
another  is  built,  and  so  on  till  there  is  room  enough  for  all. 
The  husband  has  his  own  private  room  where  he  entertains  his 
male  friends. 

As  a  rule  the  only  objection  offered  by  a  man's  wives  to  his 
visiting  other  women  is  that,  if  the  latter  receive  his  attentions, 
they  ought  to  do  their  share  of  house  and  farm  work  for  his 
family.  This  was  brought  out  during  a  case  which  came  up  in 
Court  on  May  17th,  1907.  A  man  named  Akari  Ntui  claimed 
a  certain  Atim  Okon  as  his  wife.  She  disavowed  the  claim, 
and  in  her  sworn  evidence  stated  : 

"  I  was  never  a  proper  wife  of  plaintiff's,  nor  was  I  his 
proper  '  friend.'  Okon  Asibong  was  my  real  '  friend,'  but 
plaintiff  used  to  visit  me,  till  his  wife  warned  me  that  if  her 
husband  came  to  my  house  again,  she  should  reckon  me  as  one 
of  his  wives.  I  then  summoned  the  plaintiff,  to  prove  that  I 
was  not  married  to  him.  This  happened  at  Obutong  about  five 
years  ago." 

There  are   practically   no   marriage  restrictions  among  this 

people.    A  man  may  marry  a  woman  of  the  same  name  and  tribe, 

/  or  of  another.     It  is  not  even  forbidden  by  native  law  for  half- 

/  brothers  and  sisters   to  marry,  though  cases  of  this  kind  are 

^  extremely  rare.     Such   a  one  came   before  the    Native    Court 

on  October  4th,  1909,  between  Ma  Mfon  Ita  and  Ntui  Obassi. 

In  her  sworn  evidence  the  former  stated,  "  When  I  was  a 
small  girl  my  father  Itu  gave  me  as  a  child-wife  to  Ntui 
Obassi.  When  I  grew  old  enough  for  motherhood  the  latter 
gave  me  in  marriage  to  Ita  Nken.  I  was  not  willing.  I  was 
never  willing  to  live  as  a  wife  with  either  of  them.  I  am  Ntui's 
half-sister." 

She  was  declared  free  by  native  law  as  her  consent  had  never 
been  given. 

There  is  nothing  repugnant  to  Ekoi  ideas  in  the  marriage 
of  uncle  and  niece,  as  is  shown  by  another  case  heard  before 
the  same  Court.  In  it  Ared  Asham  of  Mfamosing  claimed 
that  she  was  not  the  wife  of  her  uncle  Njokk  Abang.  The 
plaintiff  stated  on  oath  : 

"  My  father  told  me  that  I  was  the  wife  of  Njok  Abang, 
but  that  when  I  grew  up  I  need  not  have  the  marriage  con- 


WOMAN- POSITION,    ETC.  in 

firmed  unless  I  chose.  When  my  father  died,  defendant 
claimed  all  the  property  of  the  deceased  because  he  was  his 
brother.  About  six  months  ago,  my  uncle  came  back  from 
Esuk  Aje  and  seized  me.  He  tried  to  tie  me  up  so  as  to  force 
me  to  become  his  wife,  but  I  would  not  consent." 

Ma  Kokk  (sworn)  :  "  I  am  the  mother  of  plaintiff.  My 
husband  gave  my  daughter  to  defendant  as  a  wife,  when  she 
was  a  very  small  child ;  but  defendant  never  gave  any  gift  to 
my  daughter  since  she  became  of  marriageable  age." 

Njokk  Abang  (sworn)  stated  : 

"At  plaintiff's  birth  her  father  gave  her  to  me.  I  used  to 
take  care  of  her.     Now  I  claim  her  as  my  wife." 

The  claim  was  disallowed  by  native  law,  on  the  same 
grounds  as  the  former  one. 

From  the  last  case  it  will  be  seen  that  parents  occasionally 
promise  their  daughters  in  marriage  without  the  consent  of  the 
latter.  Such  an  arrangement  could  never  become  binding, 
however,  unless  the  girl  herself  agreed  to  it,  when  of 
marriageable  age,  and  accepted  the  wedding  gift. 

Very  small  children  are  sometimes  induced  to  take  presents, 
and  afterwards  claimed  as  wives,  on  the  ground  that  these 
gifts,  accepted  years  before,  bound  them  to  marriage.  Little 
Ekoi  girls  are  therefore  very  cautious  about  accepting  offerings 
from  their  boy  companions.  That  they  have  need  to  be 
wary  is  shown  by  the- following  case,  heard  on  January  3rd, 
1908,  in  which  Ma  Obassi  of  Ayabam  claimed  the  restitution 
of  her  daughter  from  Chief  Nenkui.     She  declared  on  oath  : 

"  I  sent  my  daughter  Baii  to  Mfamosing.  She  went  out  to 
play  with  the  children.  Etim,  son  of  Nenkui,  gave  this  ring  to 
her  saying,  '  Here  is  a  present.'  Baii  asked,  '  Are  you  giving 
this  in  marriage  ?  '  Etim  answered,  '  No,  I  only  give  it  as  a 
dash.'  When  Baii  had  taken  the  ring,  the  relatives  of  the  boy 
caught  hold  of  her,  and  took  her  to  their  compound.  There 
they  kept  her.     She  was  about  eight  years  old  at  the  time. 

"  I  went  to  Nenkui  and  begged  him  to  give  Baii  back.  He 
said  '  No,'  not  unless  I  ransomed  her  by  the  payment  of  many 
pieces  of  cloth. 

"Afterwards  I  went  to  Obutong.  My  daughter  escaped  and 
ran  away  to  me  there.     Nenkui    sent  after    her  and  had  her 


ii2      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

seized   and  taken   back.     In  doing  this  they  broke   down  the 
door  of  my  house  and  did  damage." 

If  a  man  claims  a  girl  as  his  sweetheart,  and  she  wishes 
to  show  that  his  suit  is  hopeless,  she  calls  for  water  and  washes 
her  hands  before  him. 

This  was  done  by  Ikwo  Okon,  who  stated  on  oath  : 

"  Once  Ntui  Akam  sent  a  messenger  to  ask  me  to  go  to  his 
house.  I  did  so,  thinking  that  something  good  would  happen. 
He  asked  me,  '  Why  will  you  not  accept  my  love  ?  Are  you 
afraid  of  your  mother  ?  '  I  said  '  I  am  too  young  for 
marriage.'  Next  morning  he  brought  palm  oil  to  my  mother. 
My  big  brother  Usimebin  took  some  of  this,  and  my  father 
took  some  also.  A  little  while  after,  defendant  asked  me  to  go 
and  eat  food  with  him.  I  went,  and  after  we  had  eaten  he  rose 
up  and  said,  '  Now  you  are  my  "  friend,"  and  we  will  continue 
like  this  till  we  become  permanent  husband  and  wife.'  At  once 
I  washed  my  hands  and  went  away,  telling  him  not  to  come 
to  my  mother's  house,  and  saying  that  I  would  never  be  his 
friend.'  " 

When  more  than  one  man  loves  the  same  girl,  magic  rites 
are  practised  by  the  suitors  in  order  to  secure  her  affection, 
or  to  keep  another  from  winning  her.  Two  well-known  ways 
of  bringing  this  about  came  up  in  Court  on  February  3rd,  1908. 
Obiri  Awaw  (sworn)  stated  : 

"  Two  years  ago  my  sister  Ekpo  Awaw  gave  Usin  to  me  as  a 
'  friend.'  Obassi  Ndo  tried  to  take  the  girl  away  from  me.  So 
I  took  my  company  *  '  Ekpe  Kusua,'  and  crossed  two  sticks 
before  her  door,  that  defendant  should  not  visit  there  any  more. 

"  Some  time  after  I  saw  Usin  sitting  by  Obassi  on  his 
verandah.  I  told  her  to  go  away,  and  he  ran  up  to  me,  and 
said  very  angrily,  '  I  know  that  you  want  to  kill  me.'  I 
raised  my  hands  on  high  and  said :  '  God  knows  my  father 
knew  nothing  of  poison,  nor  do  I.'  " 

"  One  morning  I  went  to  salute  the  mother  of  the  girl,  and  saw 
defendant  tying  up  her  food  with  a  piece  of  native  rope.  This 
was  a  Juju  to  prevent  the  food  from  nourishing  her  if  she  carried 
on  friendship  with  anyone  but  himself." 

Should  a  wife  refuse  to  live  with  her  husband,  without  having 

*  Age  class. 


WOMAN-POSITION,    ETC.  113 

freed  herself  by  any  of  the  usual  rites,  the  Juju  Eburuk  Pabi,  if 
invoked  by  the  husband,  may  bring  death  upon  her  unless 
revoked  in  time. 

On  March  3rd,  1909,  Ekoli  charged  her  husband  before  the 
Native  Court  with  trying  to  bring  about  her  death  in  this 
manner.     She  stated : 

"  One  and  a  half  months  ago  I  quarrelled  with  my  husband 
Itui  Ita.  While  he  was  away  my  child  died.  On  his  return 
he  asked  me  where  it  was.  I  said,  '  It  is  dead.'  He  said, 
'  Whenever  you  have  a  child  it  dies.'  I  answered,  '  It  is  not  I 
who  kill  them,  but  Obassi.'  One  night  he  called  me  to  go  to 
his  room.  I  refused  to  go  with  him  and  said,  '  It  is  no  use. 
Whenever  I  have  a  child  it  dies.' 

"  He  took  his  Juju  named  Eburuk  Pabi,  held  a  matchet  in  his 
right  hand  and  the  Juju  in  his  left,  and  called  '  Eburuk  Pabi ! 
Eburuk  Pabi !  If  Ekoli  will  not  come  to  me,  may  you  catch 
her  !  If  she  comes,  may  you  not  catch  her.'  Soon  afterwards 
the  fever  took  me,  and  I  sent  and  told  Effion  Archibong." 

The  latter  stated  on  oath  : 

"  When  the  woman  was  ill,  I  sent  for  accused,  and  told  him 
to  gather  meat  for  the  sacrifice  that  he  might  revoke  the  Juju. 
He  did  not  deny  that  he  had  sworn  Juju  against  her,  nor  make 
any  objection  to  gathering  the  meat  for  the  sacrifice,  so  the 
charm  was  revoked  and  the  woman  grew  well." 

Divorce  is  extremely  easy  under  native  law.  The  most 
common  rite  for  freeing  a  wife  is  to  rub  white  chalk  on  both 
her  hands.  If  a  woman  wishes  to  free  herself  without  the  con- 
sent of  her  husband,  she  usually  rakes  out  the  fire  and  pours 
water  on  the  embers  till  they  die  out.  She  then  cuts  her  hair 
and  covers  herself  with  white  paint.  After  this,  even  if  both 
parties  wished  it,  she  could  never  return  to  her  husband.  Such 
a  case  occurred  on  December  3rd,  1908,  when  Awaw  Otu 
stated  on  oath : 

"  Machott  was  my  wife.  One  day  she  pulled  out  the  kitchen 
fire  on  to  the  floor,  and  poured  water  on  it  till  it  died  out. 
Then  she  cut  her  hair  and  covered  herself  with  white.  This 
is  against  our  rule ;  so  now  she  cannot  come  back  to  me  as  my 
wife." 

By  old  law  also,  it  appeared  that  a  woman   could  divorce 

S.B.  i 


U4   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

herself  by  giving  a  slave  or  "  member  "  to  her  husband  instead 
of  herself.  This  will  be  seen  from  the  following  case,  which 
incidentally  throws  a  curious  sidelight  on  the  relations  of 
husband  and  wife  : — 

On  December  4th,  1908,  Awo  Otu  stated:  "One  day  I 
was  lying  down  by  the  fireplace  in  my  compound.  My  other 
wife  asked  me  to  come  and  dine.  Then  my  wife  Machott 
caught  me  and  beat  me,  and  prevented  me  from  going  to  my 
food.  She  then  abused  me.  I  replied,  '  Look  at  you  with 
a  mouth  as  wide  as  a  bag !  '  Then  she  said,  '  Here  is  my 
member  Ndo  Tammi.  You  can  have  her  instead  of  me.  I  give 
her  to  you." 

In  cases  of  divorce  public  sympathy  is  usually  on  the  side  of 
the  wife,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  following  story  : — 

Why  Wives  sometimes  Leave  their  Husbands. 

Once  an  animal  named  Mbaw,  and  his  wife  Ma  Ndikange, 
were  eating  young  coco-yams.  He  said  to  her,  "  I  will  go  and 
set  a  trap."  So  he  went  to  the  bush  for  the  purpose.  Next 
morning  an  Etuk  (duiker)  was  found  within.  He  gave  it  to 
his  wife  and  said,  "  Boil  this,  but  for  you  it  is  tabu,  as  it  is 
the  first  animal  caught  in  the  trap." 

Next  day  and  the  next,  he  said  the  same,  and  ate  all  his  kill. 
On  the  excuse  that  each  was  caught  in  a  new  trap,  he  gave  none 
to  Ndikange,  though  she  had  cooked  it. 

The  third  day  he  caught  a  pig.  This  he  took  home,  and  said 
to  his  wife,  "  Boil  it  well.  I  think  you  will  eat  of  this  pig." 
After  the  meat  was  cooked,  however,  he  made  the  same  excuse 
as  before,  and  ate  all  himself. 

Then  the  woman  thought  within  herself,  "  What  can  I  do  ? 
All  this  time  I  am  eating  only  young  coco-yams.  Of  the  beasts 
my  husband  traps,  he  gives  me  none."     She  made  a  plan. 

She  got  her  basket  and  went  out;  then  collected  magic 
leaves,  mixed  them  together  and  made  "medicine."  Next  she 
went  down  to  the  river-side,  and  poured  the  medicine  into  the 
water.  Soon  the  river  dried  up  because  of  the  magic  medicine. 
So  she  walked  along  its  bed,  and  caught  four  baskets  full  of 
fish,  of  a  very  good  kind,  called  Noi-oshi.  She  then  went 
home,  cooked  these  and  ate  her  fill  of  them,  for  they  were 


WOMAN— POSITION,   ETC.  115 

sweet  to  the  taste  ;  but  what  was  over,  she  left  standing  upon 
the  fireplace. 

At  daybreak  the  husband  said  he  felt  very  sick,  so  the  woman 
left  him  to  rest  in  the  house,  and  went  alone  to  farm.  No 
sooner  had  she  gone,  than  he  sprang  up  and  tasted  the  fat  left 
in  the  pot  from  the  fish  his  wife  had  caught.  At  once  he  said 
to  himself,  "  Oh,  what  a  sweet  taste!  This  is  what  my  wife 
ate  yesterday." 

Now  the  fish  was  inside  a  native  pot,  and  before  the  woman 
left  her  house,  she  had  put  a  Juju  upon  the  fish  to  protect 
them. 

So  greedy  was  the  husband,  that  he  stuck  his  head  right 
inside  the  pot,  that  so  he  might  more  quickly  eat  up  the  good 
fish. 

When  he  had  done,  he  would  have  pulled  his  head  out  again, 
but  the  Juju  caught  him  and  held  him  fast. 

He  knocked  his  head  up  and  down,  and  tried  to  break  the 
pot,  but  still  the  Juju  held,  and  he  could  not  free  himself. 

All  of  a  sudden,  he  heard  his  step-son,  the  lame  boy,  salute 
Ndikange  as  she  came  back  from  farm.  The  lame  boy  was  the 
son  of  the  latter. 

Mbaw  did  not  want  to  face  his  wife  in  that  state,  so  he  ran 
out,  his  head  still  covered  with  the  pot,  and  stuck  it  in  the  deep 
gutter  before  the  house.  He  thought  that  all  of  him  was 
hidden,  but  alas  !  his  feet  stuck  out. 

The  woman  said  to  her  son,  "  Where  is  my  husband  ?  " 
The   boy  answered,  "  He   has  eaten   your  fish.     When   he 
heard  you  returning  he  ran  outside  to  hide.     Here  he  is,  with 
his  head  in  the  gutter  and  his  feet  sticking  out." 

The  woman  went  and  caught  her  husband  by  the  feet.  She 
pulled  him  out  and  said  to  him  : 

"  You  killed  three  animals.  All  these  you  ate  without  giving 
me  any.  Look  at  your  head  covered  with  the  pot !  Obassi 
sees  everything.  That  is  his  judgment  on  you.  You  have 
stolen  my  fish." 

The  husband  went  out  with  the  pot  on  his  head,  and  called 
together  his  "  age  class."  When  they  were  all  gathered  before 
the  house,  he  said  to  them  : 

"  I  have  stolen  my  wife's  fish.     When  she  went  away,  she 

I   2 


n6   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

left  it  in  the  house  with  some  Juju  to  protect  it.     Therefore 
the  Juju  keeps  my  head  in  the  pot." 

His  companions  took  his  part,  and  said  that  the  matter  went 
against  the  woman,  and  that  she  must  take  off  the  pot. 

She  said,  "  Why  should  I  do  so  ?  If  the  pot  be  taken  off  his 
head,  I  will  not  be  his  wife  again  for  ever." 

Then  she  threw  some  medicine  on  to  the  pot,  and  it  fell 
away.  The  man's  neck  and  head  swelled  up.  The  woman  ran 
from  them  all,  and  said,  "  I  will  be  his  wife  no  longer,  but  will 
marry  another  man." 

The  husband  remained  full  of  sorrow.  Then  he  disguised 
himself  and  followed  her.  He  went  round  by  another  way,  and 
lay  down  in  the  road  where  she  must  pass  by.  When  the 
woman  came  up  to  him,  he  said : 

"  You  have  left  your  husband.  Here  am  I.  Come  marry 
me." 

She  said  to  him,  "  You  are  too  like  my  former  husband.  I  will 
not  marry  you,  but  someone  else."  She  then  went  on  her  way. 
Again  the  husband  disguised  himself,  and  ran  on.  He 
caught  her  up,  and  accosted  her  as  before.  She  said  to  him  : 
"  Very  well,  I  will  marry  you  temporarily,  to  see  how  you 
will  be.  If  you  behave  badly,  like  my  first  husband,  I  shall 
divorce  myself  again,  and  leave  you." 

This  is  the  reason  why  women  divorce  themselves,  and  marry 
other  men.  Whenever  they  marry  a  husband,  and  find  that  he 
is  good,  they  stop  with  him.  Ndikange  remained  with  this 
husband,  and  had  six  children  by  him.  She  often  said  to 
herself,  "  If  I  had  stayed  with  my  first  husband,  I  should 
not  have  done  so  well  as  this." 

During  all  this  time  the  husband  took  such  good  care  of  her 
and  her  children  that  she  became  very  rich. 

The  reason  why  people  sometimes  say  "  Women  are  too 
roaming "  is  because  these  women  have  not  found  good 
husbands.  When  they  find  a  good  husband  they  stop  with 
him,  and  do  not  want  to  leave  him  to  go  to  another. 


Divorced  wives  may  marry  again,  but  a  widow  must  not 
listen  to  the  proposals  of  any  man  until  the  mourning  for  her 
late  husband  is  over. 


WOMAN— POSITION,    ETC.  117 

On  July  17th,  1909,  a  case  came  up  before  Court,  in  which 
Asot  Ankpe  confessed,  "  During  the  mourning  for  my  husband 
I  accepted  a  certain  man  as  a  '  friend.1 "  According  to  native 
custom  in  such  a  case,  a  woman  must  be  handed  over  to  her 
children,  and  the  latter  will  have  no  right  to  their  late  father's 
property, 

During  another  trial  on  August  3rd,  1909,  Ekpri  Nwan  Ndifon 
stated  on  oath  : 

"  Okon  Ene  Okpo  said  to  me,  '  What  about  the  widow  of 
your  late  master  ? '  I  said,  '  She  is  still  mourning.  You  must 
not  talk  about  sweethearting  yet.  After  the  mourning  is  over 
you  can  speak  to  her,  but  not  now.' 

"  Later  I  said  to  him,  '  Our  custom  is  that  when  a  widow  is 
released  from  mourning  for  her  husband,  you  can  approach  her 
as  to  a  new  marriage,  but  not  now.'  Another  day  I  said 
further,  "  After  the  mourning  is  quite  over,  you  may  bring  a 
gift  of  one  bottle  of  palm  wine  to  the  widow,  but  even  then 
you  must  not  talk  of  sweethearting  at  once." 

The  respective  duties  of  husband  and  wife  are  clearly  laid 
down  by  native  law,  and  will  be  found  fully  treated  on  pp.  269 
et  seq. 

Custom  also  insists  that  no  favouritism  may  be  shown 
to  one  wife  above  another,  save  for  the  privileges  enjoyed 
by  the  first  wife.  An  elderly  woman  has  no  cause  to  complain 
of  neglect  on  the  score  of  her  advancing  years,  for  what  she 
loses  in  youthful  attraction  is  made  up  by  the  reverence  accorded 
to  age. 

Custom  regulates  even  the  smallest  matters.  In  spite  of  the 
growing  liking  for  European  finery,  no  Ekoi  woman  could  be 
induced  to  wear  a  hat.  For  them  such  a  thing  is  "  tabu,"  and 
as  a  reason  the  following  legend  is  given : — 

Why  Women  Do  Not  Wear  Hats. 

Obassi  Osaw  had  five  wives.  Among  them  was  one  named 
Ekwaw,  whom  he  loved  above  all  the  rest.  She  did  no  work, 
but  stayed  at  home  all  day,  while  the  other  wives  were  made  to 
wait  upon  her. 

One   day    Obassi    brought    a   little   slave,  and   said   to    his 


n8   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

favourite  wife,  "  I  bring  this  young  girl,  that  she  may  attend 
on  you,  and  do  all  you  wish." 

After  some  time  Ekwaw  said  to  her  maid,  "  To-day  you  must 
go  to  market.  Come  back  and  tell  me  what  you  have  seen 
there." 

When  the  girl  returned  she  told  her  mistress,  "  I  saw  seven 
young  men,  each  handsomer  than  the  other.  Never  before 
have  I  seen  such  as  these.  Shall  I  bring  them  to  you  next 
time  ?  " 

To  this  the  woman  eagerly  assented. 

Another  day  the  maid  was  sent  as  before.  Again  she  saw 
the  seven  young  men,  and  said,  "  My  mistress  calls  you."  They 
asked,  "  Who  is  your  mistress  ? "  When  she  did  not  answer 
they  refused  to  follow  her.  She  went  home  and  related  this  to 
Ekwaw. 

The  mistress  said,  "  Next  time  you  go,  take  a  great  jar  of 
palm  wine,  and  beg  them  to  come  to  me." 

This  the  maid  did.  The  young  men  drank  the  wine,  and 
agreed  to  follow  her.  She  brought  them  secretly  to  the 
compound. 

When  they  came  into  the  presence  of  Ekwaw  she  made  a 
great  feast,  and  kept  them  in  her  own  room.  Then  she  sent  a 
message  to  her  husband,  "  I  cannot  cook  chop  for  you  to-day. 
I  have  no  time." 

Next  day  one  of  the  slaves  went  to  Obassi  and  said,  "  Yester- 
day I  saw  some  men  go  into  your  wife's  house."  He  was  very 
angry,  and  ordered  the  slave  to  be  killed  for  accusing  his 
wife. 

Another  time  one  of  the  wives  went  to  Obassi  and  said, 
"  I  wish  to  tell  you  something,  but  fear  that  you  will  have  me 
put  to  death  like  the  slave."  He  answered,  "  No,  I  will  not 
kill  you.  You  may  tell  me  what  you  wish."  She  said,  "  Come 
with  me.  If  you  listen  you  will  hear  people  talking  in  Ekwaw's 
room." 

Obassi  went,  and  found  that  the  statements  were  true.  He 
came  back  to  his  own  house  and  sent  to  call  the  guilty  wife 
before  him.  When  she  came  he  said  to  her  :  "  For  six  days  you 
have  cooked  no  chop  for  me,  neither  would  you  admit  me  to 
your  room." 


WOMAN— POSITION,    ETC.  119 

The  woman  answered,  "  I  have  not  been  well  all  this  time ; " 
but  her  husband  sent  a  message  to  the  townsfolk,  and  said : 

"  In  seven  days  you  may  play  the  play  called  Nsibidi.  I  will 
find  out  what  is  happening  in  my  house." 

When  the  seven  days  were  over  chains  were  put  upon  the 
woman,  and  upon  the  little  slave,  and  on  the  seven  young  men, 
and  Obassi  ordered  Nsibidi  to  kill  them  all ;  but  before  they 
died  he  called  Ekwaw  before  him. 

In  the  time  when  they  were  loving  together,  they  two  had 
changed  hats.  Now,  therefore,  he  gave  her  back  her  hat,  and 
she  returned  his  also. 

After  she  was  dead  a  law  was  proclaimed.  "  From  to-day  no 
man  shall  change  hats  with  his  wife." 

Women  always  have  bad  consciences.  After  they  have 
married  they  should  not  be  unfaithful  at  all.  Up  to  that  time 
if  you  loved  your  wife  you  used  to  change  hats  with  her,  but 
since  Ekwaw  deceived  her  husband  women  must  not  wear  hats 
any  more. 


CHAPTER   XI 

Birth  Customs 

Like  most  primitive  peoples,  the  Ekoi  have  the  haziest  ideas 
as  to  the  causes  of  their  being.  Those  who  have  come  under 
white  influence  during  the  last  few  years  affect,  it  is  true,  amuse- 
ment over  the  foolish  stories  of  the  "  bush  people  " ;  but  in  the 
interior  the  old  vague  myths  still  hold  their  ground. 

There  are  many  interesting  beliefs  as  to  the  advent  and  death 
of  babes.  One  charming  superstition  forbids  all  quarrelling  in 
a  house  where  there  are  little  children.  The  latter,  so  it  is 
said,  love  sweet  words,  kind  looks,  and  gentle  voices,  and  if 
these  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  family  into  which  they  have 
reincarnated,  they  will  close  their  eyes  and  forsake  the  earth, 
till  a  chance  offers  to  return  amid  less  quarrelsome  surroundings. 

As  an  instance  of  how  near  primitive  thought  sometimes 
reaches  to  the  most  cultured  minds  of  our  own  time,  perhaps  it 
may  not  be  without  interest  to  mention  the  Ekoi  equivalent  for  the 
Song  of  the  Mothers  who  come  forth  to  welcome  the  new-born 
in  M.  Maeterlinck's  play,  "  The  Blue  Bird."  Once  on  arriving 
at  a  little  town  among  the  hills,  in  the  interior,  after  a  long, 
hot  march  over  hard  country,  we  stopped  for  the  night  at  the 
Egbo  house,  in  the  centre  of  the  town,  as  one  always  does 
where  no  Rest-house  has  been  built.  From  a  compound  near  by 
came  the  sound  of  singing,  accompanied  by  tomtoms  and  okan- 
kan.  As  Bimba  had  developed  a  bad  headache  on  the  march, 
and  found  the  noise  very  trying,  the  inhabitants  were  requested 
to  postpone  their  rejoicing,  or  carry  it  out  in  a  less  noisy 
manner.  On  hearing  this  a  little  deputation  was  sent  by  the 
head  woman  of  the  compound,  to  say  that  twin  sons  had  just 
been  born  to  her,  and  that  if  the  family  ceased  singing  and 
playing  to  show  their  joy,  the  new-born  would  think  themselves 
unwelcome,  and  go  back  whence  they  came. 

As  will  be  seen  from  this,  unlike  in  many  parts  of  Southern 


BIRTH    CUSTOMS  121 

Nigeria,  twin  births  are  here  a  cause  of  great  rejoicing.  The 
accompanying  photograph  is  of  a  dance  given  to  celebrate  such 
an  event.  The  father  and  mother  were  rubbed  over  with  native 
red  dye,  and  the  latter  further  decorated  with  white  chalk  spots. 
The  babes  were  carried  by  the  two  oldest  of  the  chief  women 
of  the  town,  who  hold  much  the  position  of  godmothers  to  the 
new-born,  and  are  called  "  mother "  by  them  in  later  life. 
Parents  and  "  sponsors "  wear  round  their  necks  ornaments 
made  of  young  palm  leaves.  On  this  occasion  they  danced  to 
the  accompaniment  of  the  following  song  : — 

"  Ofung      okupba,      ojokk     okupba. 
Buffaloes    come,    elephants    come. 

Aya  aya  pong  ki  pong. 
Egimamfuk,  ka  osaw  are     aje,     ka      nsi      are  ayingi. 
Corktree,     in    air    are  leaves,  in  ground  are  roots." 

The  refrain  "  Pong  ki  pong "  is  added  to  give  onomato- 
poeically  the  tramp  of  the  oncoming  buffalo  and  elephant,  and 
may  perhaps  be  compared  with  "  Iliad,"  XXIII.,  1.  116, 

*  iroWa  h'&vavTa.  Kdravra  ita.pa.vTO.  re  86x/j.td  r'^Xdov  "  ; 

and  the  "iEneid,"  VIII.,  1.  596, 

"  Quadrupedante  putrem  sonitu  quatit  ungula  campum." 

Two  very  old  songs  in  honour  of  the  birth  of  twins  run  as 
follows : — 

I. 

(Sung  by  the  Mother.) 

"  Nchitt,        Nchitt,     eyama  ngaw  ka  aya. 

Egg  plant,  Egg  plant,        mine  is       in  (the)  water  (or  river). 

Mbonga     chang,    Mbonga    chang. 
Picker  out     none,  picker  out   none. 

Tuk         awmenge                   awbonga,  Aiyamba  ? 

Can  you         know    (how)      to  pick  it  out,  Eldest  born  ? 

Tuk         awmenge                   awbonga,  Manyo  ? 

Can  you        know      (how)     to  pick  it  out,  Second  born  ? 

Nchitt,        Nchitt,    eyama  ngaw  ka  aya. 

Egg  plant,  Egg  plant,     mine  is       in  (the)  river." 

It  is  perhaps  over-fanciful  to  find  in  this  little  song  an  echo 
of  two  old  mid-European  beliefs  as  to  the  origin  of  new  souls. 
One   legend   places   the   home   of   the   unborn    in    the   water 


122      IN   THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

kingdom — the  mother  of  all — and  one  in  the  realm  of  the  dead, 
thus  completing  the  circle  of  life. 

According  to  Ekoi  superstition,  all  egg-shaped  substances, 
such  as  oval  stones,  etc.,  exert  a  favourable  influence  on 
generation.  It  is  perhaps  not  without  interest  to  note  that 
many  of  their  legends  affirm  that  both  egg-plant  fruits  and 
native  tomatoes  were  gifts  from  the  nether  world.* 

II. 

(Sung  by  the  Family  to  the  Guests.) 

"  Awfat       are,  ibin,        ikumi,      nji,  aha., 

Twins       are  (born),   dancing,  sit  down,  go,  aha. 
Aiyamba    o-e-e,         manyo        o-e-e,  o-e-e. 
First  born  o-e-e     second  born   o-e-e,  o-e-e." 

At  the  end  of  the  celebration,  before  the  guests  go  home,  the 
family  sing  with  charming  frankness : — 

"  Ntemm,     akuri     eye     nju. 
Friend,   go  away  into  house." 

To  which  the  visitors  respond  : — 

"  '  Me  nkuri  eyama    nju. 
I      go       my     house." 

On  the  way  home  the  latter  sing : — 

"  Ikuri  ka  oju,  oju. 

Going  to  (our)  houses  (our)  houses." 

The  third  line  from  the  end  reminds  one  somewhat  of  the 
hint  afforded  by  the  dish  placed  on  Polish  tables  as  an  intima- 
tion that  a  guest  has  outstayed  his  welcome. 

Should  a  woman  be  childless  for  several  years  after  marriage, 
it  is  thought  that  there  must  be  some  special  reason  for  the 
non-appearance  of  the  babe.  The  cause  is  usually  attributed 
to  the  "ill-wish"  of  some  witch  in  the  town,  often  a  jealous 
fellow-wife  or  relative,  who,  like  the  mother-in-law  in 
"  Willie's  Lady,"  or  the  deserted  mistress  mentioned  in  the 
"  Metamorphoses  of  Apuleius,"  has  used  magic  arts  to  prevent 
the  birth  of  the  babe. 

The  greatest  efforts  are  made  to  overcome  all  such  evil 
magic,  for  barren  women  have  but  little  influence  among  their 

*  See  pp.  236,  238. 


BIRTH    CUSTOMS 


123 


Juju  Isse  Obassi  Nsi — 
Exterior. 


fellows.     Such  an  one  will  spend  all  she  has  in  the  purchase  of 

"  medicines  "  or  offerings,  and  her  husband 

usually  helps  her  to  the  utmost  of  his 

power. 

The    principal    Juju    used   to    protect 

women    about    to   become    mothers,    or 

those  suffering  from  barrenness  induced 

by   witchcraft,    is    named   "  Isse    Obassi 

Nsi."     It  consists  of  two  different  parts. 

First  a  double  string  of  knotted  palm- 
leaf  strips  hung  up  over  the  door  of  the 

woman's    room,    and    secondly   a    little 

shrine   within.      On   the   latter   a    small 

lamp  is  to  be  found,   unlighted  by  day, 

but  burning  all  the  night-time.      Corn, 

meat  (regarded  in  many  parts  of  the  world, 

and   especially   among    North   American 

Indians,  as  a  fecundating  substance),  and  oil  are  offered  to  the 

guardian  spirit.    Iron,  too,  must  always  be  present  in  some  form 

or  other,  for  this  the  witches  dread.     Should  a  witch  enter  a 

room  so  protected  she 
will  surely  die. 

A  case  of  this  nature 
came  before  theNative 
Court  a  little  while 
ago.  The  suspected 
woman  had  taken 
Esere  bean,  to  clear 
herself  of  the  charge 
of  witchcraft,  and  was 
therefore  arrested  for 
attempted  suicide. 

The  accused  stood, 
a  picture  of  hopeless 
misery,  with  arms 
folded     and     eyes 

glancing  hither  and  thither  like  those  of  a  hunted  animal,  or 

with  bent  head,  and  face  half  hidden  in  her  hands.     When 

she  was  asked  why  she  ate  the  Esere  bean  she  said — in  a  voice 


Juju  Isse  Obassi  Nsi— Interior. 


124      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

so  sad  as,  in  Gray's  beautiful  phrase,  to  touch  "  the  very  heart 
strings  of  compassion  "  : — 

"  I  had  a  child,  a  son  named  Itagbo,  who  wished  to  marry  the 
daughter  of  Aya.  First  they  were  only  sweethearts,  but  one  day 
I  saw  that  a  grandchild  was  coming  to  me.  I  took  the  girl  to  my 
house  and  looked  after  her.  When  the  babe  came,  I  looked 
after  both  till  they  became  strong.  Then  I  sent  to  Aya  to 
ask  her  to  come,  as  I  wished  to  circumcise  him.  She  came, 
and  all  was  done  according  to  our  custom,  but  some  time  after 
the  boy  died. 

"  Aya  did  not  say  that  I  had  killed  the  babe,  but  her  daughter 
went  back  for  a  time,  and  then  a  proper  marriage  was  proclaimed 
between  the  latter  and  my  son.  Twice  the  girl  conceived,  but 
each  time  her  child  died.  Then  Aya  said  it  was  I  who  killed 
the  children.  She  said  that  I  was  always  passing  invisibly 
through  the  house  where  her  daughter  was,  both  by  day  and 
by  night,  and  so  by  my  witchcraft  brought  about  the  death  of 
the  babes. 

"  I  went  to  Aya  and  said,  '  Do  you  say  that  I  killed  the 
children  ?  In  the  old  days  I  should  have  known  what  to  do  to 
show  that  I  am  not  guilty ;  but  now  it  is  Talbot's  time,  and  we 
may  no  longer  undergo  trial  by  ordeal.'  So  I  did  not  eat 
Esere. 

"  Once  more  the  girl  conceived,  but  the  fact  was  hidden  from 
me.  One  day  I  went  to  the  house  where  she  was,  and  saw  the 
Juju  Isse  Obassi  Nsi  before  the  door  of  her  room,  and  the  same 
Juju  within  it.  I  knew  that  the  reason  they  put  this  there 
was  because  they  thought  that  I  was  a  witch,  and  that  if  I 
entered  to  do  her  harm  the  Juju  would  kill  me. 

"  I  laughed  for  a  long  time  and  was  not  afraid,  for  I  knew 
what  was  in  my  heart,  and  how  I  wished  for  a  grandchild. 
Then  I  went  out  and  said  publicly  that  the  townspeople  should 
ask  Aya  if  she  accused  me  of  witchcraft. 

"  Again  a  piccan  was  born.  This  time  it  was  a  girl  child. 
They  concealed  the  fact  from  me,  and  the  mother  was  sent 
away  from  the  town  so  that  I  should  not  know.  I  called  my 
son  and  said  to  him,  '  Where  is  your  wife  ?  '  He  answered, 
'  I  think  that  she  has  gone  to  Ndebbiji ' — not  suspecting  that 
I  knew  anything  about  it. 


BIRTH    CUSTOMS  125 

"Not  long  after,  the  great  Juju  Akpambe  arrived  at  Okuri. 
When  Aya  heard  this  she  sent  to  her  daughter  and  told  her  to 
go  before  Akpambe.  This  the  girl  did,  and  on  her  way  thither 
my  children  wanted  to  go  out  and  salute  her,  but  I  prevented 
them,  and  said,  '  They  hide  her  from  me  because  they  accuse  me 
of  having  the  evil  eye  with  regard  to  her.  Therefore  I  beg  you 
to  let  her  go  by  unnoticed.'  She  came  and  asked  Itagbo  to 
give  her  a  bottle  of  rum  to  pour  out  before  Akpambe.  My  son 
came  to  me  and  said,  '  What  shall  I  do  ? '  I  answered,  '  I  do 
not  want  you  to  do  it  for  myself,  but  if  you  do  not  give  it  they 
may  say  that  I  prevented  you  from  doing  so  because  I  am  a 
witch.'  So,  at  my  prayer,  he  did  as  she  asked  him,  and  himself 
took  her  to  Okuri,  but  the  Juju  would  not  give  her  any  answer. 
After  some  time  my  son  said : 

" '  I  will  return  to  Niaji,  and  afterwards  come  back  for  you.' 
"  No  sooner  had  Itagbo  gone,  than  the  charm  was  practised, 
and  afterwards  an  Okuri  man  told  him  that  Akpambe  had  said 
it  was  I  who  killed  the  children. 

"  Not  long  after  one  of  our  chiefs  died,  and  the  Okuri  people 
came  to  Niaji  for  the  funeral  play.  They  boasted  about  the 
power  of  Akpambe,  but  I  said  to  them,  'Your  Juju  does  not 
say  anything  at  all.  The  mother  of  the  girl  had  accused  me  of 
witchcraft  before  the  Juju  said  that  I  was  guilty.  I  do  not 
believe  that  Akpambe  can  find  out  anything.'  Then  I  took  one 
piece  of  cloth  and  a  bottle  of  rum,  and  said,  '  I  myself  will  go 
before  Akpambe  and  question  him  face  to  face,  that  he  may 
openly  tell  me  anything  he  has  to  say.' 

"  Itambo  Isum  of  Niaji  said  '  I  will  go  with  you.'  So  we  set 
forth ;  but  when  we  got  half-way,  we  heard  that  the  German 
D.  C.  was  coming  to  Okuri,  and  that  the  people  were  packing 
up  their  things  to  cross  over  into  English  territory.  So  Itambo 
prevented  me  from  going  on. 

"  The  Okuri  people  discussed  the  matter,  and  said  if  I  were  a 
witch  there  would  be  a  sign  in  my  house.  So  I  watched  and 
waited. 

"  Then  my  children  began  to  suffer  from  pains  and  wounds, 
and  I  thought  to  myself  *  Can  this  be  what  the  Okuri  people 
meant  when  they  said  that  a  sign  would  come  ?  '  I  thought 
within  myself  '  I  will  not  wait  till  my  children  die.    I  will  go  to 


126      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

Aya,  who  has  accused  me  of  being  a  witch,  and  settle  it  once  for 
all.'  So  I  published  the  matter  at  Niaji  town  ;  but  the  people 
took  no  notice,  though  all  of  them  heard. 

"  Next  some  sunbaked  mud  fell  down  from  the  roof  of  my 
house,  and  struck  one  of  my  children,  so  that  it  hurt  her.  I 
picked  it  up  and  went  before  the  Okuri  people,  and  said : 

"  '  You  have  prophesied  that  there  should  be  a  sign  in  my 
house  to  prove  whether  I  am  a  witch,  as  Aya  says.  Is  this  what 
you  mean  ? ' 

"  Then  they  answered  me,  '  If  you  are  accused  of  witchcraft, 
why  do  you  not  clear  yourself  by  eating  Esere  before  all  the 
people  ? ' 

"  Up  till  then  I  had  been  afraid  to  eat'the  Esere  bean,  because 
white  rule  had  come  to  our  land  ;  but  when  I  heard  the  Okuri 
people  say  this,  and  Ekuri  San,  who  was  a  member  in  the 
District  Court,  said  nothing  to  stop  them,  I  thought  '  Perhaps 
the  white  man  no  longer  forbids  the  trial  by  ordeal.'  So  I  took 
the  bean  and  ate  it  in  the  presence  of  Aya." 


When  a  woman  is  childless  for  several  years  after  marriage, 
it  is  thought  that  the  babe  has  lain  for  all  that  time  in  the  womb, 
waiting  till  the  right  moment  should  come  for  it  to  be  born. 

Such  a  case  is  told  in  the  following  story : — 

Seven  Years  in  the  Womb. 

Once,  long  ago,  God  made  a  man  and  a  woman,  and  placed 
them  in  a  little  hut  which  he  had  built  for  the  purpose. 

In  a  few  months  the  woman  began  to  think  that  she  ought  to 
have  a  child.  Nevertheless  she  remained  childless  for  seven 
years. 

One  day  when  that  time  had  passed  by,  the  husband  went  off 
to  hunt.  He  went  very  far  from  their  hut,  and  was  gone  for 
many  nights  and  days.  When  he  came  back  he  saw  a  boy 
sitting  in  the  house. 

Now  while  he  was  away  his  wife  went  into  the  bush  to  gather 
firewood.  On  the  road  she  felt  that  her  time  had  come.  She 
laid  her  hands  upon  a  tree  and  held  it  firmly.  Then,  instead 
of  a  tender  babe,  behold  !  there  appeared  a  boy  whose  size  was 


BIRTH    CUSTOMS  127 

nearly  equal  to  her  own.  At  once  the  latter  took  her  by  the 
hand  and  led  her  home,  for  she  was  very  faint,  from  bringing 
forth  such  a  person. 

When  the  husband  came  back  and  saw  the  boy,  he  asked  the 
latter  whence  he  had  come.  "  I  am  your  son,  Tata,"*  answered 
the  child. 

"  How  can  that  be  ?  "  asked  the  man. 

"  I  am  born  of  my  mother,  who  is  your  true  wife,"  answered 
the  child  ;  "  but  as  I  knew  that  you  needed  a  helper,  I  would 
not  come  to  you  for  seven  years.  I  finished  my  time  of  helpless- 
ness in  her  womb  and  am  now  ready  and  able  to  help  you  both." 

The  man  could  hardly  believe  the  boy's  story,  and  was  very 
much  afraid.  He  thought  he  was  going  to  die  after  seeing  such 
a  wonderful  sight.  "  Perhaps,"  thought  the  father,  "  he  is  sent 
by  the  ghosts  to  fetch  me." 

So  his  thoughts  wandered,  although  the  wife  also  told  him 
that  the  child  was  really  his  son. 

For  four  days  the  boy  stayed  at  home,  and  looked  after  his 
mother.  On  the  fifth  day  he  begged  his  father  to  give  him  a 
matchet,  with  which  he  could  go  to  "  bush." 

In  one  hand  he  carried  the  matchet,  and  in  the  other  he 
held  a  two-edged  knife  called  Isawm.  The  latter  was  a  magic 
knife,  and  pointed  out  the  direction  of  any  place  to  which  its 
owner  wished  to  go.  For  instance,  should  he  want  to  reach  a 
town  which  lies  to  the  south,  the  knife  bent  of  itself  if  pointed 
towards  the  east,  north  or  west,  yet  kept  quite  straight  if  held 
to  the  south. 

The  boy  laid  snares  as  he  went  along.  He  went  on 
and  on,  making  traps,  till  at  last  he  thought  the  time  had 
come  for  him  to  return.  On  the  way  back  he  found  many 
birds  caught  in  the  snares  he  had  set.  These  he  took  home  to 
his  parents,  and  they  thanked  him  heartily. 

Next  day  again  he  went  out  to  set  more  traps,  and  just  as 
he  was  turning  to  come  back  as  before,  he  heard  a  distant 
music  played  as  if  for  a  wrestling  match. 

Now  the  lad  was  very  fond  of  wrestling,  so  he  hurried  back 
home  and  told   his   parents  that  he  had  heard  the  sound  of 

:   Native  name  for  father. 


128      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

wrestlers'  music,  and  would  start  on  the  morrow  to  find  whence 
it  came.  His  parents  advised  him  not  to  go,  but  he  would  not 
be  put  off,  and  started  with  Isawm  in  his  hand. 

When  he  reached  that  part  of  the  bush  where  he  had  before 
heard  the  playing,  he  stopped  and  listened,  but  the  woods  were 
all  silent.  By  the  help  of  Isawm,  however,  he  found  the  way, 
and  went  on  and  on,  till  about  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon 
he  heard  the  music  once  more.  The  magic  knife  had  led  him 
straight  to  the  place  whence  it  came. 

At  the  sound  he  flew  forward,  as  if  winged,  and  found  him- 
self at  the  foot  of  a  very  steep  mountain,  from  the  summit  of 
which  sounded,  clear  and  sure,  the  long-sought,  longed-for 
music. 

The  face  of  the  mountain  was  so  steep  and  slippery  that  no 
mortal  foot  could  have  climbed  it  unaided.  The  boy  set  to 
work,  however,  with  Isawm  and  made  two  holes  for  his  feet, 
then  standing  in  these,  he  made  two  others  higher  up,  and  so 
continued  till  at  length,  in  this  way,  he  reached  the  top  of  the 
mountain.  At  the  moment  he  reached  it,  he  saw  and  was  seen 
by  the  people  who  dwelt  on  the  plateau  above  the  precipice, 
up  which  he  had  climbed.     At  once  he  joined  in  the  wrestling. 

Now  the  best  wrestlers  among  these  people  were  seven  in 
number,  but  the  newcomer  beat  them  all. 

Obassi  heard  the  din  of  the  strife,  and  came  at  once  to  see 
what  was  the  matter,  for  the  town  was  his.  He  saw  the  boy, 
knew  him  for  the  one  he  had  sent  to  help  the  poor  couple, 
and  signed  to  him  to  come  near. 

Now  to-day  was  the  seventh  day  since  he  had  been  born,  but 
he  was  already  grown  to  manhood.  Obassi  said,  "  You  have 
overcome  all  the  others ;  therefore  I  will  adopt  you  as  my  own 
son." 

The  youth  was  so  beautiful  that,  when  Obassi's  chief  wife 
saw  him,  she  at  once  fell  in  love  with  him.  At  first,  the 
boy  refused  her  love,  but  it  was  not  long  before  he  fell  into 
temptation,  and  foolishly  accepted  her  proposals.  Obassi  knew 
all,  for  nothing  can  be  hidden  from  him.  He  asked  the 
woman  if  she  would  own  what  she  had  done,  but  she  denied 
it.  He  then  asked  his  adopted  son,  who  admitted  his  fault, 
and  Obassi  therefore  at  once  forgave  him. 


BIRTH    CUSTOMS  129 

After  staying  for  a  week  the  boy  told  Obassi  that  he  would 
like  to  go  and  see  his  other  parents,  but  would  come  back. 

To  this  Obassi  agreed,  and  gave  him  a  rich  present  to  take 
to  his  poor  parents,  and  the  boy  started,  well  content. 

When  he  had  got  half-way  on  the  homeward  road,  he  heard 
a  sound  in  the  bush  at  the  side  of  the  path.  The  branches 
were  pushed  back,  and  out  stepped  the  woman  whom  he  had 
left  in  the  mountain  town.  She  had  heard  the  conversation 
between  her  lover  and  his  adopted  father,  and  had  quickly 
followed. 

The  boy,  who  had  by  now  learned  the  benefit  of  having  a 
mate,  was  glad  to  take  her  to  his  home,  and  never  returned 
to  Obassi  any  more. 

The  latter  knew  that  his  wife  had  gone  away  with  the 
lad,  but  was  patient,  thinking  "  Perhaps  he  will  come  back 
to  ask  forgiveness  as  he  did  before."  When  the  boy  did  not 
return,  however,  after  a  long  time,  Obassi  sent  out  his  war-men 
to  punish  him. 

Now,  on  adopting  the  boy,  Obassi  had  shown  him  the  Jujus 
of  good  and  evil.*  When  the  war-men  appeared,  therefore, 
this  wicked  youth  put  forth  a  strong  magic,  and  bade  them 
fight  among  themselves.  So  each  man's  hand  was  turned 
against  his  neighbour,  and  they  fought  together  till  all  died, 
save  a  very  few.  These  went  back  to  their  Lord,  and  told 
him  how  they  had  fared.  When  Obassi  heard  what  the  boy 
had  done,  he  was  very  angry  and  shut  the  gates  of  mercy  to 
mankind.  Were  it  not  for  the  fault  of  this  couple,  we  might 
at  any  time  have  run  to  Obassi,  and  pleaded  forgiveness  for 
whatsoever  evil  we  had  done,  and  he  would  have  pardoned 
us  at  once  and  spared  our  lives.  Since  the  sin  of  this  paii, 
however,  the  road  to  mercy  is  blocked  for  ever. 

*  Cf.  Genesis  iii.  5. 


S.B, 


CHAPTER    XII 

Birth  Customs — continued 

From  the  moment  a  woman  knows  she  is  about  to  become 
a  mother,  she  must  take  many  precautions  to  ward  off  ill. 
For  instance,  she  must  be  careful  in  passing  along  a  road,  or 
through  the  bush,  never  to  go  near  the  tree  Njo  Uru,  the  bark 
of  which  is  used  in  fishing,  otherwise  the  child  will  die. 

Neither  she  nor  her  husband  may  eat  elephant  flesh,  and  she 
must  also  abstain  from  porcupine,  water  chevrotain  and  the 
leaves  of  gourd  or  pumpkin.  It  seems  probable,  from  certain 
indications,  that  these  plants  were  once  regarded  as  totems. 
She  must  sacrifice  to  her  houshold  Juju — the  most  ordinary  one 
of  which  is  Osam  (Spear).  For  this  rite,  a  calabash,  or  native 
pot  of  lightly-baked  earthenware,  is  filled  with  food,  and  the 
spear  driven  through  it. 

Just  before  the  birth  is  expected,  the  head  women  of  the  town 
assemble,  and  administer  soothing  draughts  to  the  mother. 
From  the  moment  of  their  entry  until  after  the  washing  of 
the  babe,  no  man  may  approach  the  house,  though  the  father 
and  his  male  relatives  may  be  present  at  the  anointing  with 
palm  oil. 

After  the  birth,  the  mother  is  secluded  for  one  or  two  months, 
and,  should  the  grandmother  be  still  alive  and  in  a  position  to 
bear  the  expense,  she  generally  goes  to  the  fatting-house  for 
a  period  varying  from  four  to  six  months,  during  which  time 
the  husband  does  not  visit  her.  On  returning  to  ordinary  life, 
the  young  mother  must  sacrifice  to  her  Juju,  while  the  husband 
makes  an  offering  to  his. 

When  a  babe  is  first  carried  outside  the  birth-room,  the 
mother  herself,  or  her  mother,  must  bear  it  to  the  threshold 
between  her  two  palms.  One  of  the  female  relatives,  either 
grandmother,  sister,    or  aunt,  then  throws   water   on   to   the 


BIRTH   CUSTOMS  131 

roof  so  that  it  drips  upon  the  child.  Should  this  not  be 
done  it  would  get  fever.  A  week  later  it  is  rubbed  over  with 
white  chalk  to  bring  good  luck,  and  is  then  carried  round  to 
the  houses  of  friends.  On  this  occasion  gifts  are  presented  to 
the  mother. 

The  first  curl  on  the  head  of  a  babe  is  carefully  cut  by  the 
grandmother,  wrapped  in  a  cloth  and  hidden  in  a  box. 

Should  a  woman  be  unable  to  suckle  her  babe,  she  may  give 
it  to  her  sister  to  nurse ;  but  this  practice  is  looked  upon  with 
general  disfavour,  and  the  mother  must  be  doctored  so  as  to 
tend  her  own  child  as  soon  as  possible.  After  two  or  three 
months,  plantains  are  crushed  and  given  in  addition.  When 
the  infant  is  thought  old  enough,  the  wrist  is  cut,  and  magic 
medicines  rubbed  within.  That  generally  used  to  give  strength 
is  made  from  the  index  finger  of  the  Nyokk  (Chimpanzee, 
Anthropopithecus  troglodytes),  and  for  quickness  and  activity 
crushed  Nsoii — the  large,  fierce  black  ants  {P alt othy reus  tarsahis 
fabricius) — are  used. 

A  child  is  usually  given  its  first  name  from  the  day,  time,  or  , 
place  of  its  birth.  For  instance,  should  it  be  born  on  a  native 
Sunday  it  would  be  called  "  Edet  "  if  a  boy,  and  "  Ared  "  if  a 
girl.  If  it  came  in  the  night-time  it  would  be  called  "  Okun," 
or  "  Akun"  (night).  If  born  at  a  farm,  "  Etim,"  or  "Atim" 
(bush).  The  name  is  given  immediately  after  birth.  In  many 
cases  Efik  names  are  chosen,  as  they  are  often  shorter  than 
their  Ekoi  equivalents. 

Should  the  child  continue  healthy  for  a  full  year,  the  name 
first  given  becomes  its  permanent  one,  but,  should  it  fall  sick, 
the  parents  carry  it  before  the  "  Mboni  "  (Diviner).  The  latter 
tells  them  to  get  ready  a  sacrifice,  consisting  of  meat,  plantains 
and  coco-yams.  On  the  appointed  day  the  family  assembles, 
and  calls  a  meeting  of  the  townspeople.  The  head  of  the  house 
then  slowly  recites  the  names  of  the  ancestors  on  both  sides. 
As  each  is  called,  the  Diviner  answers  "  No,"  until  at  length 
one  is  mentioned  to  which  he  assents.  This  name  is  given  to 
the  babe,  in  the  belief  that  the  soul  of  this  particular  ancestor 
has  reincarnated  in  him.  The  illness  is  thought  to  be  sent  as  a 
sign  that  the  spirit  wishes  the  Diviner  to  be  consulted,  in  order 
that  the  right  name  may  be  given. 

K  2 


i32      IN   THE   SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

The  name  of  the  father  or  father's  brother  is  added  as  a  sur- 
name, though  not  often  used  in  everyday  life. 

After  the  ceremony  above  described,  should  a  child  sicken,  the 
illness  is  usually  ascribed  to  the  influence  of  witchcraft,  and  all 
possible  precautions  are  taken,  and  charms  practised,  to  safe- 
guard it  from  being  "  overlooked  "  by  the  evil  eye.  Should  the 
child  die  through  no  fault  of  its  parents,  such  as  quarrelling,  &c, 
but  merely  through  the  ill-wish  of  an  enemy,  it  may  return  again 
and  again  to  the  same  family.  It  is,  therefore,  not  unusual,  for 
parents  who  have  lost  several  children,  one  after  the  other,  to 
say  of  the  first  they  have  succeeded  in  rearing,  "  He  has  been 
born  three  times,"  or  "  seven,"  as  the  case  may  be.  Subsequent 
children  are  usually  given  a  protective  name,  such  as  Ajomm 
(Jujus),  or  Obassi  (God),  in  much  the  same  way  as  many 
Israelitish  names  were  compounded,  of  Yahweh,  Baal,  Bel,  or 
El.  All  children  sent  as  a  result  of  special  prayer  to  the  Juju 
are  called  Njomm  or  Ajomm.  Before  the  birth  of  a  babe,  the 
mother  generally  makes  a  pilgrimage  to  the  shrines  of  greatest 
repute  in  her  part  of  the  world. 

In  olden  days,  if  man  and  wife  were  childless,  or  if  an  old 
woman  was  lonely  and  longed  for  a  son  or  daughter,  there  were 
many  ways,  so  legends  assert,  of  securing  babes.  Fruits,  flowers, 
vegetables,  and  even  fungi,  might,  on  the  prayer  of  the  childless, 
open,  and  provide  them  with  son  or  daughter.  Indeed,  in 
many  cases,  prayer  was  unnecessary,  the  mere  intensity  of  the 
wish  was  enough  to  bring  about  its  fulfilment. 

Perhaps,  in  the  belief  in  flower  and  fruit  births,  some  faint, 
far-off  echo  may  be  traced  of  those  vague  myths,  the  loveliest  of 
which  grew  into  the  story  of  the  birth  of  Adonis. 

To  quote  the  "  Golden  Bough  "  (p.  281),  "  His  (Adonis')  con- 
nection with  vegetation  comes  out  at  once  in  the  common  story 
of  his  birth.  He  was  said  to  have  been  born  from  a  myrrh  tree, 
the  bark  of  which,  bursting  .  .  .  allowed  the  lovely  infant  to 
come  forth."  And  again  (p.  298),  "  His  origin  is  further  attested 
by  the  story  that  he  was  born  of  a  virgin,  who  conceived  by 
putting  in  her  bosom  a  ripe  almond  or  pomegranate." 

The  tales  next  given  are  typical  of  the  Ekoi  version  of  such 
legends. 


w 


o 


BIRTH   CUSTOMS  133 

The  Flower  Child. 
By  Effa  Mbop,  Woman  of  Niaji. 

There  was  once  a  woman  who  was  very  sad,  because  she  had 
never  had  a  child.  She  said  to  herself,  "  What  can  I  do,  so 
that  a  babe  may  come  to  me  ?  "  She  went  into  the  bush  and 
sought  around,  then  came  back  and  planted  what  she  had 
found.  Each  day  she  tended  it  well,  and  it  sprouted,  and  always 
she  said,  "  Other  women  have  many  children,  but  none  come  to 
me."  One  day  she  went  to  her  plant,  and  lo !  it  bore  great 
flowers,  while  at  its  root  sat  a  beautiful  boy.  This  she  carried 
home,  and  kept  hidden  in  her  room.  All  day  she  talked  to 
him  and  was  very  glad.  The  child  said,  "  Let  no  one  know 
whence  I  came." 

One  day  someone  said  to  her,  "  With  whom  are  you  always 
talking  in  your  room  ?  "     She  answered,  "  I  talk  to  myself." 

Later  she  had  to  go  to  farm  with  the  other  women,  but, 
after  they  had  started,  one  of  them  ran  back  to  the  compound, 
opened  the  door  of  the  Childless-one's  room,  and  saw  who  was 
within. 

When  they  came  back  the  two  women  had  a  quarrel,  for 
the  one  accused  the  other  of  having  stolen  the  babe  she  had 
found.  While  they  quarrelled  a  third  came  up.  "  It  is  no 
proper  child  at  all,"  said  she,  "  but  only  the  son  of  the  flowers 
of  the  tree." 

The  Childless-one  went  into  her  room  and  took  the  little  babe 
in  her  arms.  "  If  you  are  born  of  a  flower,"  said  she,  "  you 
are  just  the  same  as  my  own  to  me." 

The  boy  began  to  cry  bitterly,  and  said  :  "  I  told  you  that  no 
one  must  know  you  had  found  me.  Now  that  all  men  know 
I  am  a  flower-child,  I  must  go  back  whence  I  came." 

Next  day,  very  early  in  the  morning,  the  boy  said,  "  Now,  I 
go."  He  ran  from  the  room  and  into  the  bush.  The  Childless- 
one  followed,  but  though  she  searched,  she  could  not  find  him. 
At  length,  when  the  day  had  grown  very  hot,  she  came  to  a 
place  where  a  great  plant  bloomed  full  of  the  flowers  beneath 
which  she  had  first  found  the  babe.  There,  at  the  foot  of  the 
plant,  he  lay  dead. 


134      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

Up  till  then,  if  a  woman  had  no  child,  she  could  get  one 
from  a  fruit  or  a  flower,  but  since  the  boy  ran  away  from  this 
woman,  no  one  can  get  a  child  from  a  plant  anymore.  If  this 
one  had  stayed  with  his  foster-mother,  it  would  still  have  been 
possible  to  get  children  in  that  way. 

White  people  call  the  plant  "  bitter  leaf,"  because  its  leaves 
have  grown  bitter  from  the  tears  of  the  woman,  as  she  buried 
her  little  dead  child  at  its  root. 

The  Fruit  Child. 

By  Ikpuma  of  Ndebbiji. 

Two  young  men  were  great  friends.  The  name,  of  the  one 
was  Okun  and  the  other  Eret. 

One  day  both  went  into  the  bush  to  hunt.  On  the  way 
they  saw  an  Mbum  fruit  which  was  quite  ripe.  This  they 
gathered  and  carried  with  them. 

When  they  came  to  the  hunter's  hut  where  they  were  to 
spend  the  night,  they  laid  the  fruit  down  on  the  bank  of  a 
stream  which  flowed  close  by.  This  was  in  the  evening.  Next 
day  both  went  out  to  hunt,  and,  when  they  returned,  a  calabash 
of  food  stood  ready,  and  all  was  prepared  for  the  meal.  Both 
wondered  who  could  have  cooked  for  them,  but  one  said, 
"Anyhow,  let  us  eat.  We  are  hungry."  So  they  ate,  and  the 
food  was  very  good. 

Next  day  again  they  went  forth  to  hunt,  and  once  more,  on 
their  return,  the  meal  stood  ready.  They  ate  it  and  said,  "  To- 
morrow we  will  go  forth,  but  will  come  back  early  and  watch." 

Okun  reached  the  hut  before  his  friend  and  hid  in  a  hollow 
tree.  After  he  had  waited  awhile,  he  saw  the  fruit  open  and 
a  beautiful  girl  step  forth.  She  began  setting  everything  in 
order,  and  then  cooked  chop  for  the  evening  meal.  Okun 
came  from  his  hiding  place  and  would  have  spoken  to  her,  but 
when  she  saw  him  she  tried  to  run  away.  He,  however,  said, 
"  Do  not  leave  us.  We  have  something  to  say  to  you."  He 
then  called  his  friend,  "  Eret,  Eret.  Come,  I  have  found  out 
who  it  is  who  has  worked  for  us." 

They  persuaded  the  girl  to  stay  with  them,  but  when  many 
moons  had  gone  by  she  said  to  Okun,  "  I  must  go  back  to  my 


BIRTH    CUSTOMS  135 

place."  "  Why  should  you  go  ?  "  asked  he.  "  Because  I  shall 
soon  bear  a  child,"  she  answered,  "  and  I  fear  that  someone 
will  tell  of  me  that  I  came  out  of  the  fruit  Mbum."  He 
comforted  her,  however,  and  she  stayed. 

One  day,  when  her  child  was  a  few  weeks  old,  she  left  it  in 
the  house,  and  went  to  work  at  the  farm.  While  she  was  away 
the  child  cried.  The  husband's  sister  said  to  it,  "  Hush  !  You 
son  of  a  fruit !  " 

Though  the  mother  was  afar  off,  the  wind  bore  the  sound  to 
her,  and  she  ran  home  crying,  "  All  of  you  promised  that 
none  would  ever  say  that  I  came  out  of  a  fruit." 

She  took  the  child  in  her  arms,  and  ran  to  the  great  Mbum 
tree  which  was  growing  near.  This  opened,  and  she  stepped 
within,  and  it  closed  over  her  and  her  child. 

In  those  days  if  a  woman  had  no  child  she  could  go  into  the 
bush,  and  ask  Mbum  to  open  and  give  her  a  babe,  but  since 
they  said   to  this   little   one,  "  You  are  the  young  child  of 
fruit,"  no  one  can  get  children  in  this  way  any  more. 

The  Fungus  Daughter. 
By  Bai  Effiong,  a  Girl  of  Nsan. 

There  once  lived  an  old  couple  who  had  never  had  any  child 
at  all.  One  day  the  old  man  went  out  into  the  bush  and 
searched  and  searched  to  find  a  child.  He  found  nothing  but 
a  great  Ebbuya  ball,  which  the  Ekoi  people  use  to  grate  up 
fine,  and  then  put  into  the  soup  to  thicken  it.  This  he  took, 
and  put  into  his  bag,  for  he  said  to  himself,  "  I  have  heard 
that  when  the  lucky  person  finds  a  thing  like  this,  he  can 
carry  it  home,  and  it  becomes  a  child  to  him."  When  he 
reached  his  hut,  he  heard  a  voice  from  the  bag,  which  said, 
"  Take  me  out  of  the  bag,  my  father,  for  it  is  very  hard  for  me 
to  breathe  here." 

The  old  man  put  his  hand  into  the  bag,  and,  instead  of  the 
Ebbuya  ball,  drew  forth  a  beautiful  young  girl.  You  may 
think  how  pleased  he  was  to  have  found  a  child  so  easily !  His 
wife  also  was  delighted  when  she  heard  the  good  news,  and  did 
everything  she  could  to  make  the  new  daughter  happy.  After 
a  while  the  girl  grew  old  enough  to  be  sent   to  the  fatting- 


136      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

house.  The  old  couple  arranged  everything  for  her,  and  gave 
her  a  little  slave  to  attend  on  her,  while  they  themselves  went 
to  work  at  their  farm. 

When  the  foster-daughter  spoke  to  this  maid,  however,  and 
asked  her  to  cook  or  do  any  other  service,  she  answered  "  I 
do  not  recognise  you  at  all  as  my  mistress,  for  I  well  know 
that  you  are  not  the  proper  daughter  of  those  whom  you  call 
your  parents.     You  are  nothing  but  an  Ebbuya  ball !  " 

On  hearing  this  unkind  speech,  the  foster-daughter  went 
sadly  back  to  the  bush,  and  once  more  became  a  fungus. 

When  the  old  couple  returned  they  found  their  fosterling 
missing.  Now  in  the  same  house  there  lived  a  lame  boy, 
who  had  overheard  the  whole  matter,  and  told  them  all. 
Then  the  old  people  knew  that  their  child  had  gone  back 
whence  she  came,  and  would  never  come  to  them  any  more. 

Again  the  old  man  set  forth  to  look  for  Ebbuya  balls,  but, 
though  he  found  many,  none  ever  turned  into  a  child  again. 

Had  it  not  been  that  the  little  slave  taunted  the  Ebbuya 
maiden  with  not  being  the  proper  daughter  of  the  family, 
she  might  have  remained  with  them,  and  from  thenceforth  it 
would  have  been  the  custom  for  man  or  woman  to  get  a  child 
this  way,  if  he  or  she  were  lucky  enough  to  find  the  right  Ebbuya 
ball. 

The  Herb  Daughters. 

By  Akon  Ekpo,  a  Woman  of  Nsan. 

There  was  once  a  woman  who  was  very  very  old,  and  had 
never  had  a  child.  Round  her  hut  grew  many  edible  herbs 
which  she  had  planted.  Among  them  were  Etigi,  Etinyung 
Ikaw,  and  Etidut  roots. 

Day  by  day  the  woman  left  her  home  and  went  into  the  bush 
to  search  for  nuts  and  wild  fruit,  and  each  day  when  she  had 
gone,  four  beautiful  girls  crept  forth  from  the  herbs.  They 
went  into  the  house,  cooked  food  on  the  hearth,  ate,  and  then 
went  back  to  their  herbs  once  more. 

One  day  a  neighbour  passed  the  hut,  and,  as  she  went  by, 
heard  voices  within.  She  knew  that  the  old  woman  had  no 
children,  and  wondered  who  could  be  talking  so  gaily.  So  she 
went  to  the  hut  and  looked  within  it.     To  her  surprise  she  saw 


BIRTH    CUSTOMS  137 

four  beautiful  girls,  who  started  up  and  ran  quickly  to  the  herb 
bed,  where  they  disappeared.  She  went  away  as  if  she  had 
noticed  nothing,  but  next  day  told  her  neighbour  what  she  had 
seen.  "  Do  not  go  to  farm,"  she  said,  "  but  hide  yourself 
somewhere,  then  come  back  stealthily,  and  you  will  surely  see 
something  which  will  please  you." 

The  old  woman  did  not  need  to  be  told  twice,  but  did  just  as 
her  neighbour  had  said.  She  pretended  to  go  out  as  usual,  but 
hid  herself  near  the  hut,  and  soon  came  back  and  peeped 
stealthily  within.  There  she  saw  four  beautiful  girls,  cooking 
and  eating  merrily  in  her  house.  Before  they  could  run  away, 
she  stepped  forward,  and  begged  that  they  would  stay  with  her 
and  be  her  children.  They  promised  to  live  with  her  so  long 
as  the  herbs  from  which  they  had  sprung  were  never  given  them 
to  eat,  Etinyung,  Ikaw,  Etidut,  and  Etigi.  This  the  old  woman 
promised,  and  most  carefully  kept  her  word,  for  she  did  not 
need  to  be  told  how  sad  it  is  for  one  of  her  age  to  be  left 
alone. 

As  time  went  on,  she  noticed  that  her  daughters  grew  bigger 
and  more  beautiful,  especially  Etinyung,  who  was  the  loveliest 
of  all.  So  beautiful  was  she  that  a  great  prince  named 
Ekpenyong  Obassi  fell  in  love  with  her  as  he  saw  her  one  day, 
near  the  hut. 

At  first  the  old  woman  refused  to  give  her  consent  to  the 
marriage,  but  Ekpenyong  was  not  to  be  put  off.  He  tried  and 
tried  to  persuade  her,  and  at  last  prevailed.  The  old  woman, 
however,  made  him  agree  to  the  following  conditions : — 

Etinyung  should  not  be  troubled  to  do  any  work  whatsoever, 
as  the  other  wives  did.  Once  in  every  four  days  she  should  be 
brought  back  to  see  her  foster-mother,  and  last,  but  most 
important  of  all,  none  of  the  herb  Etinyung  should  ever  be 
mixed  in  her  food.  The  secret  of  the  girl's  birth  was  confided 
to  him ;  he  was  willing  to  do  all  that  was  asked,  and  went 
home  to  get  together  suitable  marriage  presents. 

When  the  prince  came  again,  he  brought  sixteen  slaves  laden 
with  offerings,  and  all  these  were  left  as  servants  to  the  old 
woman. 

Then  Etinyung  was  given  to  him  to  be  his  wife,  and  the 
attendants  spread  skins  and  rich  cloths  all  the  way  from  the  old 


138      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

woman's  hut  to  the  house  of  the  bridal  pair.  With  singing  and 
dancing  they  went  away  together,  and  their  feet  never  touched 
the  ground  the  whole  of  the  way.  Ekpenyong  grew  so  fond 
of  this  new  wife,  that  he  spent  all  his  time  with  her.  One  of 
his  other  wives  became  vexed  at  this.  Somehow  or  other  the 
latter  found  out  that  Etinyung  must  not  eat  of  the  herb  that  bore 
her  name,  lest  some  great  evil  should  befall  her.  The  jealous 
wife  therefore  plucked  some  of  it  in  secret,  and  mixed  it  with 
the  food  that  was  set  before  the  bride.  No  sooner  had  Etinyung 
eaten  this  than  she  said  to  her  husband : 

"  I  must  go  home  to  my  mother,  even  at  this  very  moment." 

How  sad  was  the  prince  when  he  found  that  she  had  eaten 

of  the  forbidden  herb  !     In  vain  he  begged  her  to  remain  with 

him.     She  told  him  that  she  was  forced  to  leave  him,  and  could 

no  longer  be  his  dear. 

As  she  hurried  towards  her  mother's  hut  she  sang — 

"  Etigi  eyene     ka     'mi  di      inyawng-o. 
Okro  sister  come  to  me  we  must  go-o. 
Etidut  eyene     ka    'mi  di      inyawng-o. 
Etidut  sister  come  to  me  we  must  go-o. 
Ikaw  eyene     ka    'mi  di      inyawng-o. 
Ikaw  sister  come  to  me  we  must  go-o." 

As  she  sang  thus,  calling  her  sisters  Etigi,  Etidut,  and  Ikaw, 
who  had  in  the  meantime  been  married,  they  all  rushed  from 
their  husbands'  houses,  back  to  the  hut  of  their  foster-mother. 
There  they  told  what  had  happened  to  them,  and  once  more 
became  the  herbs  which  they  had  been  before. 

Had  not  Ekpenyong's  other  wife  been  so  cruel  as  to  give 
Etinyung  the  forbidden  herb  to  eat,  it  would  have  been  possible 
for  a  woman  of  any  nation,  who  had  grown  too  old  to  get  a 
child  in  the  ordinary  course,  to  be  lucky  enough  to  obtain  one 
or  more  in  the  way  of  this  old  woman. 

When  the  herb-daughters  had  left,  the  foster-mother  had 
to  be  content  with  the  servants  given  to  her  by  her  son-in-law, 
but  Ekpenyong's  grief  at  the  loss  of  his  sweet  wife  was  more 
than  can  be  told. 


CHAPTER   XIII 
Beyond  Niaji 

After  leaving  Niaji,  the  first  village  to  be  reached  is  Ikpai, 
which  has  a  great  reputation  as  one  of  the  homes  of  "  Mfam." 
Behind  the  Egbo  house  is  a  tiny  shed,  built  over  this  Juju,  and 
close  by  stands  the  Mfam  tree,  the  scientific  name  of  which 
is  Croton  amabilis.  It  is  small-leaved,  with  insignificant,  almost 
invisible  flowers,  and,  so  far  as  could  be  learned,  possesses  no 
medicinal  properties.  Its  importance  in  the  mystical  herbal  of 
the  race  is  therefore  hard  to  understand. 

When  a  rich  or  influential  man  is  sick,  he  sends  for  the  priest 
of  Mfam  to  bring  him  some  of  the  boughs  of  the  sacred  tree, 
and,  unless  the  Fates  are  spinning  the  last  strands  of  life,  the 
mere  touch  of  the  leaves  is  said  to  restore  health. 

To  rich  and  poor  alike,  when  at  the  point  of  death,  the 
boughs  are  brought.  The  priest  stands  by  the  side  of  the 
dying  man  and  draws  them  gently  over  his  face  that  his  spirit 
may  pass  painlessly  to  the  realm  of  Obassi  Nsi. 

On  August  19,  1907,  I  was  present  at  the  revocation  of 
the  Juju. 

Obu  of  Ikpai  had  sworn  "  Mfam  "  against  anyone  who  should 
try  to  take  from  him  a  young  girl  named  Nkoiyu,  whom  he 
wished  to  keep  in  his  family. 

When  all  the  members  of  the  Juju  had  gathered  together 
before  the  shrine,  naked  to  the  waist,  Itagbun,  the  head  priest, 
opened  the  Juju  shed  and  took  from  it  six  horns  containing 
"  medicine."  These  he  laid  on  the  ground,  and,  after  drinking  a 
little  palm  wine,  sprinkled  some  over  the  horns. 

Next  he  took  up  two  of  these,  one  in  each  hand,  and  calling 
on  the  names  of  Obassi  Nsi,  Obassi  Osaw,  and  of  the  ghosts, 
prayed : 

"  Behold  !    Obu  has  come  to  take  off  the  Juju  which  he  swore, 


140      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF    THE   BUSH 

when  he  asked  that  if  anyone  should  take  the  girl  from  his 
house,  Mfam  might  kill  them.  He  has  now  come  to  pray  the 
Juju  to  take  off  the  curse  that  the  whole  business  may  stop." 

While  Itagbun  spoke  to  the  Juju,  the  people  knelt  or  stood 
with  their  eyes  reverently  lowered.  He  then  drank  a  little 
more  palm  wine  and  tried  the  leaves  to  see  if  the  Juju  agreed. 
The  answer  was  favourable. 

Obu  himself  next  stepped  forward  and  said,  "  Look !  I  come 
to  take  off  the  Juju  from  the  girl.  Let  the  Juju  oath  be 
cancelled.  Let  her  go  to  her  former  mistress  Idan  Awaw.  Let 
the  Juju  not  interfere  with  the  business  again.  I  leave  her  now 
to  Idan  Awaw.     Let  the  Juju  not  fall  upon  Idan  !  " 

Itagbun  continued,  "  O  Juju,  hear  the  thing  that  I  say. 
Obu  has  come  to  tell  you  he  has  nothing  more  to  do  with 
Nkoiyu.  Make  nothing  able  to  touch  her  to  her  hurt.  Should 
anyone  try  to  do  harm  to  Nkoiyu  or  Idan,  may  you  stop 
them  !  " 

He  then  sat  down,  poured  palm  wine  into  a  small  calabash, 
drank  some  and  threw  the  rest  on  the  ground  before  the 
Juju.  Then  he  rose  and  placed  two  leaves  beneath  it.  Next 
he  poured  palm  wine  on  the  six  horns  and  prayed  : 

"  This  is  the  palm  wine  that  Obu  gave.  Accept  it  and  let  all 
be  well  for  the  persons  who  have  come  before  you  to-day." 

After  this  he  laid  the  two  leaves  on  the  back  of  his  left  hand 
and  struck  his  right  hand  upon  them,  saying,  "  If  you  accept 
the  palm  wine  and  everything  is  finished,  tell  me  now." 

The  leaves  agreed,  and  the  people  shouted  "  Ohe  !  "  (It  is 
good !). 

All  the  chiefs  drank  a  little  palm  wine.  Then  the  meat 
brought  by  Obu  was  cut  into  small  pieces.  Some  were  laid  on 
each  of  the  horns  and  the  rest  distributed. 

Itagbun  next  stood  before  the  Juju  and  said,  "This  is  the 
beef  which  Obu  has  given  you."  He  then  took  up  a  cloth  and 
waved  it  over  the  horns,  saying,  "Look,  O  Juju,  at  the  cloth 
Obu  has  given.  Set  Nkoiyu  free  from  the  curse  which  was 
sworn  against  her  in  your  name." 

A  third  time  he  took  up  the  leaves  and  asked,  "  Everything 
is  finished.  Do  you  agree  ?  "  To  this  again  the  leaves  gave  a 
favourable  answer. 


BEYOND   NIAJI 


141 


Itagbun  then  called  Nkoiyu.  As  she  stepped  forward  she 
dropped  the  long  cloth  which  she  wore,  and  stood  before  the 
Juju,  clothed  only  in  a  small  loin  cloth. 

Itagbun  said,  "Come,  hold  forth  your  hands."  She  held 
them  together,  palm  to  palm,  as  if  to  receive  a  gift.  Then  he 
spat  solemnly  into  them  and  said,  "  Everything  is  finished. 
Go  in  peace." 

Last  of  all  Idan  was  called,  and  the  same  rite  gone  through 
with  her. 

After  this  the  priest  replaced  the  horns  in  the  little  shed,  and 
the  people  went  back  to  their  homes. 

Itagbun,  priest  of  Mfam,  has  amassed  great  wealth  from  the 
offerings  of  pilgrims 
who  come  from  many 
miles  round  to  invoke 
the  Juju.  His  "  trea- 
sure house"  is  elabo- 
rately decorated,  as 
will  be  seen  from  the 
ornamentation  of  one 
of  its  seats.  The  most 
valued  possessions  of 
rich  Ekoi  consist  in 
collections  of  glass, 
pottery  and  china. 
Among  the  latter,  beautiful  old  specimens,  amassed  during  the 
slave-trading  days,  are  often  to  be  found. 

The  Etai  Ngbe,  or  Egbo  stone,  in  the  local  club  house  has  a 
particularly  clear  sharp  edge. 

At  Ndebbiji,  the  next  town  of  interest,  another  fine  example 
of  these  stones  is  to  be  seen.  It  stands  before  the  base  of  the 
Egbo  pillar,  on  which  there  are  some  curious  drawings. 

The  animal  represents  an  antelope,  the  upright  rods  are 
meant  for  native  money,  and  the  figure  in  Egbo  dress  is  holding 
out  its  hand  in  the  traditional  attitude  to  indicate  the  telling  of 
news. 


Seat  in  Ilagbun's  Treasure  House. 


142      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

Hunting  Customs. 

The  Ekoi  are  a  race  of  hunters,  but  the  northern  towns,  such 
as  Niaji  and  Ndebbiji,  are  the  most  celebrated  in  the  District 
for  their  skill  in  the  chase.  So  long  as  gunpowder  was  avail- 
able, they  never  failed  to  arrange  a  good  drive  on  each  visit, 
and  some  of  their  hunting  customs  are  of  great  interest. 

Usually,  before  the  hunt,  each  man  sacrifices  to  his  own 
Juju.  Should  a  leopard  have  been  lately  killed,  Juju  leaves  are 
rubbed  over  its  skull  and  prayers  are  offered  to  its  spirit  that  it 
will  go  on  the  left  hand,  and  drive  the  gentler  game  towards 
the  hunters  who  keep  to  the  right.  It  is  also  entreated  to  help 
in  the  killing  of  other  leopards  or  any  dangerous  beast,  should 
such  be  met  with. 

On  one  occasion  we  started  at  seven  o'clock,  with  about  sixty 
guns  and  a  large  number  of  beaters,  and  marched  to  a  little 
glade  about  three  miles  off.  Here  we  separated  to  take  up  our 
several  stations. 

Usually  nets  about  6  feet  high  and,  when  joined,  half  a  mile 
long,  are  stretched  across  the  angle  caused  by  the  junction  of 
two  rivers.  Here  the  principal  guns  are  posted,  while  the  rest, 
when  they  have  reached  a  sufficient  distance,  form  a  huge  semi- 
circle, and,  on  a  given  signal,  bear  down  towards  the  apex, 
driving  all  before  them. 

The  wait  is  more  exciting  than  might  be  imagined  by  those 
unaccustomed  to  this  method,  as  there  is  an  interesting 
uncertainty  as  to  what  game  may  first  appear.  On  one 
occasion  a  leopard  flashed  past  within  a  few  feet  of  me  and 
cleared  the  net  before  it  could  be  dropped. 

It  is  not  often  that  an  Ekoi  hunter  misses,  even  in  the 
thick  undergrowth  and  with  primitive  flint-locks.  Among  the 
animals  killed  in  this  hunt  were  seven  fine  antelopes,  one  of 
which,  a  harnessed  antelope,  was  apportioned  to  the  carriers. 

A  few  minutes  after  the  distribution  had  taken  place  the 
interpreter  came  up  and  said,  Might  he  be  allowed  to  mention 
that  the  carriers  did  not  like  the  skin  of  the  animal  ?  When  I 
suggested,  with  some  astonishment,  that  they  were  not  expected 
to  eat  the  skin,  he  showed  obvious  embarrassment,  and  at 
length  explained  that  none  would  dare  to  eat  the  flesh  of  a 


BEYOND    NIAJI— HUNTING    CUSTOMS     143 

spotted  antelope  unless  the  proper  rites  had  been  performed. 
Otherwise  the  Juju  would  catch  them  ;  they  would  die  and  the 
spots  appear  on  their  bodies.  When  one  of  the  party  pointed 
to  a  Bay  duiker,  and  asked  if  its  dark  stripe  would  have  a  like 
fatal  effect,  they  seemed  much  amused.  Luckily  some  of  the  old 
chiefs  of  the  town  were  capable  of  performing  the  necessary 
ceremonies,  in  which  "  Egakk  "  leaves  played  a  great  part. 
After  these  rites  had  been  duly  performed  carriers  and  "  boys  " 
feasted  merrily  on  the  Juju  antelope. 

This  tabu,  like  many  others,  probably  had  its  origin  in 
totemic  causes.*  Others  were  imposed  for  sanitary  reasons, 
and  many  from  the  desire  of  the  old  men  to  obtain  a  share  of 
what  was  killed  by  their  juniors,  as  in  the  following  story: — 

Why  a  Hunter  may  not  eat  Apes  killed  in  the  Bush, 
but  must  first  bring  them  before  his  father  or 
the  Head  of  his  House. 

Once,  long  ago,  a  man  named  Atai  Ikot  (Ikot  the  hunter) 
went  out  into  the  bush.  He  saw  a  great  many  Nyori  nuts,  so 
collected  them  into  a  heap.  Then  he  made  a  fire,  and  sat  down 
to  break  the  nuts  between  two  stones. 

Some  Oiyokk  (chimpanzees)  came  down  and  watched.  After 
a  while,  when  the  hunter  had  gathered  together  many  kernels, 
he  went  off  a  little  way.  When  he  looked  back,  he  saw 
that  the  monkeys  had  come  down.  They  took  the  Nyori  in 
their  hands,  and  tried  to  crush  them  with  stones  as  he  had 
done,  but  only  hurt  their  hands.  The  hunter  laughed  at  them, 
and,  when  his  friend  Okun  came  to  join  him,  Okun  laughed  also. 
They  went  to  spend  the  night  in  a  hunter's  hut,  and  while 
there  Ikot  said : 

"  Let  us  go  back  to  the  place  where  the  monkeys  are,  and 
pretend  to  fight  together,  then  we  will  leave  our  cutlasses. 
Very  likely  they  will  take  them  and  kill  one  another." 

The  two  friends  did  this,  and  when  they  had  gone  away  again, 
the  Oiyokk  came  back  and  picked  up  the  cutlasses.  One 
chopped  at  his  friend,  and  the  latter  cried  : 

"  How  is  this  ?     Blood  is  coming  out  from  my  skin."     He 

*  For  list  of  Tabus  see  Appendix  A. 


i44      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

himself  then  took  a  cutlass,  and  struck  at  the  beast  who  had 
wounded  him.  Both  fell  down  dead,  and  the  others  con- 
tinued fighting  with  the  cutlasses  till  all  were  slain,  save  one, 
very  old  and  wise,  named  Etim  Aiyaiyokk.  This  last  picked  up 
the  matchets,  turned  them  over  and  over  and  said  "  What  can 
these  things  be  ?  "     Then  he  broke  them  both  and  went  away. 

Ikot  and  Okun  gathered  together  all  the  bodies  and  laid  them 
by  the  fire,  but  Etim  Aiyaiyokk  called  together  all  the  monkey 
people  to  come  and  look  at  their  dead  friends. 

The  hunters  saw  that  the  apes  wanted  to  kill  them,  so 
they  made  a  great  fire,  and  began  roasting  nuts.  They  ate  the 
kernels  and  threw  away  the  shells,  and  then  hid  themselves  to 
watch. 

The  Oiyokk  also  wished  to  roast  nuts  and  eat  them,  but  did 
not  know  how  to  do  it  properly,  so  burnt  their  fingers  and 
threw  away  the  nuts,  kernels  and  all. 

Okun  said  to  his  friend,  "  You  see,  they  do  not  know  how 
to  eat  such  things  !  but  if  they  catch  us  with  all  the  Oiyokk 
meat  they  will  kill  us,  for  they  are  too  many  for  us.  Let  us 
run  and  fetch  help."  So  they  ran  to  their  town  and  called  all 
the  people  to  come  out  and  bring  in  the  kill. 

When  the  townsfolk  learned  what  had  happened,  they  said, 
"  You  have  done  well,  because  you  bring  all  this  meat  to  the 
town  instead  of  eating  it  yourselves  in  the  bush." 

After  this  a  law  was  made  that  whoever  should  kill  an  ape 
in  the  bush,  must  not  eat  of  it,  but  must  bring  it  before  his 
father  or  the  head  of  his  house. 


The  next  tale  explains  other  hunting  rules. 

Why  the  Owner  of  a  Gun  gets  all  of  his  Kill 
save  one  Leg. 

By  Itamfum  of  Oban. 

All  the  men  in  Elephant's  town  went  out  hunting.  Crab 
fired  the  first  shot,  and  killed  an  antelope,  and  at  the  second 
shot  killed  a  bush  cow.  Elephant  was  angry,  because  he  him- 
self could  shoot  nothing,  so  he  took  Crab's  gun  away  from  him. 

Crab  went  home,  and  got  out  all  his  nets.    He  hung  them,  up 


BEYOND    NIAJI— HUNTING   CUSTOMS     145 

round  the  bush.  When  the  next  shot  was  fired  a  water 
chevrotain  started  up.  It  ran  into  the  nets  which  Crab  had 
spread  and  was  caught.  On  this  Lord  Elephant  took  the 
nets  and  burnt  them.  He  also  took  the  water  chevrotain,  for 
he  said,  "  It  is  not  right  that  Crab  should  kill  so  much  when 
the  others  have  caught  nothing." 

Crab  took  up  the  ashes  of  his  nets,  and  made  a  strong  Juju 
over  them.  Then  he  went  round  all  the  bush  strewing  the 
ashes.  If  any  beast  came  where  they  lay  he  was  caught  by  the 
magic  and  held  fast,  just  as  in  a  net.  Elephant  again  took  away 
all  thus  caught. 

Then  Crab  was  very  angry.  He  went  home  and  got  out  his 
water  Juju.  Next  he  went  to  every  spring  and  every  little 
stream  in  the  bush,  and  put  some  of  his  Juju  into  each.  Every- 
where the  water  dried  up.  Into  the  river  by  Elephant's  town 
he  poured  the  same  Juju,  and  that  also  dried. 

Crab  went  back,  and  entered  the  compound  where  all  the 
women  were  cooking.  He  said,  "  I  am  a  messenger  from  Lord 
Elephant.  He  bids  each  woman  put  much  pepper  in  the  food 
to-day,  and  also  throw  away  all  water.  There  must  be  none 
left  in  the  town  when  my  Lord  comes  home." 

After  a  while  Crab  went  again  and  said,  "  I  have  come  to  see 
that  you  have  obeyed  the  order,  lest  Elephant  should  blame 
me."  He  inspected  the  houses  and  saw  that  not  a  drop  of 
water  remained,  so  he  said,  "  I  will  tell  Elephant  that  all  has 
been  done  according  to  his  command."  After  this  he  went  away 
and  hid  in  his  own  hole. 

When  Elephant  came  back  from  the  hunt,  he  said  to  his 
wife,  "  I  am  thirsty.  Give  me  some  water."  She  answered, 
"There  is  none."  He  said,  "  Why  is  this?  "  and  she  replied, 
"  Crab  said  that  you  had  ordered  all  the  water  to  be  thrown 
away." 

Elephant  was  very  angry,  but  all  the  people  said, "  We  know 
Crab.  He  is  a  sensible  man.  Eat  your  food,  and  when  he  comes 
back  he  will  explain  about  the  water." 

All  began  to  eat,  but  the  pepper  burnt  their  mouths,  and 
made  them  more  thirsty  than  before,  so  they  cried  out.  Ise 
was  sent  to  call  Crab,  but  could  not  find  him.  Then  Etuk  was 
sent,  but  he  was  faint  with  thirst  and  lay  down  on  the  road. 

s.b.  L 


146      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

Meantime  three  of  the  beasts  had  died  for  want  of  water,  so 
they  called  Pig,  and  said  to  him,  "  Find  Crab,  or  all  of  us 
must  perish." 

Pig  went  round  in  the  bush,  and  dug  up  all  the  ground  with 
his  snout.  At  length  he  came  to  Crab's  hole,  and  rooted  him 
out.  He  said,  "  You  are  wanted  by  the  Chief ;  "  but  Crab 
answered,  "  I  will  not  go.     I  also  am  a  chief." 

On  this  Pig  said,  "  Please  respect  my  orders  and  let  us  go." 
Crab  replied,  "  First  get  back  my  meat,  and  my  gun." 

Pig  went  to  his  house,  took  his  own  gun  and  some  meat  that 
he  had,  and  brought  them  to  Crab,  who  accepted  the  offering. 

The  latter  said : 

"  You  are  my  friend,  and  have  behaved  justly.  For  your 
sake  I  will  give  back  the  water." 

So  these  two  went  before  Elephant,  and  Crab  said  : 

"  Before  I  give  back  that  which  you  desire,  you  must  proclaim 
one  thing  throughout  your  town.  That  is,  that  whenever  we 
go  hunting,  the  townsfolk  may  have  one  leg  of  each  beast 
killed,  but  the  rest  shall  belong  to  the  actual  slayer,  to  be 
divided  by  him  according  to  hunters'  law." 

All  the  people  agreed  to  what  Crab  proposed,  and  confirmed 
it,  for  they  said,  "  Many  people  have  died  of  thirst  already,  and 
we  must  have  water." 

Crab  then  announced  to  Elephant,  "  Though  you  are  bigger 
than  I,  yet  the  water  is  mine  and  I  have  control  over  it."  He 
took  his  Juju  and  poured  it  into  the  streams,  whereon  the 
water  flowed  once  more. 

This  is  the  reason  why,  when  Ekoi  men  go  hunting,  one 
leg  of  all  their  kill  is  the  right  of  the  townsfolk,  but  the  rest 
belongs  to  the  hunter  or  the  owner  of  the  gun,  to  be  divided  by 
him  among  all  those  to  whom  a  part  of  his  kill  is  due,  such 
as  the  head  of  his  house,  his  parents,  wife,  etc. 


As  one  follows  a  bush  path,  rough  platforms  of  sticks  may 
often  be  seen,  fastened  across  the  branches  of  some  tree,  the 
fruit  of  which  bush-beasts  love  ;  or,  should  the  trunk  of  the  actual 
tree  be  unforked,  little  shelters  may  be  found   in  convenient 


BEYOND    NIAJI— HUNTING    CUSTOMS     147 

nearness  to  such.  On  this  frail  perch  the  hunter  crouches  till 
his  prey  comes  to  feed  on  the  heap  of  fallen  fruits  spread 
out  below. 

Sometimes  too,  in  unfrequented  parts,  one  stumbles  on  a 
deep  pit  dug  by  the  wayside,  and  hidden  by  green  boughs, 
to  ensnare  the  feet  of  unwary  buffalo. 

It  is  probably  to  their  highly  developed  musical  sense  that 
Ekoi  hunters  owe  their  marvellous  faculty  for  imitating  the  cry 
of  any  beast  for  which  they  lie  in  wait.  So  perfect  is  the 
imitation  that  the  animal  nearly  always  follows  the  sound,  to  its 
destruction. 

The  ordinary  West  African  form  of  trap  is  much  in  use  for 
catching  leopards,  genet  and  wild  cat,  and  there  are  many  bird 
traps,  mostly  on  the  lever  principle. 

Although  there  are  no  Ekoi  words  to  express  the  points  of 
the  compass,  the  sense  of  direction  is  very  keen,  as  is  usual 
with  forest  peoples.  It  is  rare  for  men  to  be  lost  in  the 
bush,  no  matter  how  far  they  may  follow  their  prey.  They 
are  quick  to  read  woodland-signs  and  are  wonderful  trackers 
— in  this  the  hunting  dogs  are  of  great  help.  Certain  rites 
are  performed  over  the  latter  before  they  are  given  the  freedom 
of  the  bush  :  as  is  mentioned  in  the  following  : — 

Concerning  Hunting  Dogs. 

One  day  the  Ennying  (francolin)  was  sitting  on  her  eggs. 
She  grew  very  hungry  and  went  out  to  find  some  food.  While 
she  was  away,  Njaw  (dog)  ate  her  eggs.  Then  he  went  off, 
stole  some  feathers  and  covered  himself  with  them,  so  that  he 
should  not  be  found.  When  inquiry  was  made  about  the  egg- 
thief,  Porcupine  said,  "  It  is  Njaw  who  is  guilty."  The  dog 
therefore  thought,  "  From  to-day  Porcupine  is  my  enemy." 
He  ran  after  her,  but  she  got  to  her  home  and  hid  within  it. 
Njaw  got  nets  and  hung  them  round  the  hole.  Then  he  waited, 
and  after  a  while  she  tried  to  come  out,  and  was  caught. 

That  is  the  reason  why,  when  a  hunting  dog  goes  into  the 
bush,  he  always  seeks  out  the  place  where  Porcupine  lives. 
They  have  been  enemies  for  many  years.  Whenever  he  can, 
Njaw  goes  down  the  hole,  kills  Porcupine,  and  then  comes  back 

L   2 


148      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

to  his  master,  wagging  his  tail.  The  master  follows  the  dog  to 
the  hole  and  gets  the  porcupine. 

Often  a  man  buys  a  young  dog,  and  confirms  him  by  Juju 
for  hunting.  Till  the  proper  rites  have  been  carried  out,  the 
dog  is  not  of  much  use  to  his  master.  Afterwards,  when  he 
grows  big,  he  can  go  out  alone  and  hunt. 

Some  dogs  go  with  their  masters,  but  many  go  alone.  When 
they  have  killed  anything,  they  go  back  and  wag  their  tails. 
Often  the  master  sees  blood  on  their  mouths. 


Before  starting  out  after  elephant,  the  hunter  almost  invariably 
sacrifices  to  the  special  fetish  which  is  to  be  found  in  most 
villages.  This  act  is  supposed  to  be  of  the  first  importance,  as 
it  is  universally  asserted  that  none  have  been  killed  unless 
the  sacrifice  has  been  neglected.  The  rites  are  also  efficacious 
in  another  way,  for  a  man  so  protected,  is  in  no  danger 
of  shooting  a  were-elepbant  in  mistake  for  an  ordinary  animal. 
The  beast  always  gives  some  sign,  by  which  it  can  be  known. 
Usually  this  is  said  to  be  done  by  lifting  the  right  fore-foot, 
and  at  the  same  time  bending  down  the  head. 

An  unsuccessful  hunter  almost  invariably  attributes  his  failure 
to  witchcraft.  In  order  to  break  such  evil  spells,  he  takes  an 
offering  of  dried  meat  and  plantains  to  some  place  on  the  road 
outside  the  village.  There  he  spreads  out  the  sacrifice  and 
pours  a  libation  of  spirit  upon  the  ground,  praying  at  the  same 
time  to  Obassi  and  the  ghosts,  that  they  will  set  him  free  from 
the  spells  which  hold  him. 

Supposing  the  ill-luck  continues,  the  hunter  next  consults 
a  Diviner,  who,  after  questioning  the  charm,  tells  him  that  the 
witchcraft  is  very  strong,  and  can  only  be  broken  by  recourse 
to  a  powerful  Juju.  On  such  an  occasion  the  prayer  is  always 
offered,  "  This  hunter  begs  you  to  protect  his  gun  and  him- 
self, that  no  ill-spells  may  have  power  upon  them." 

At  the  conclusion  of  the  ceremony,  when  all  the  members 
of  the  Juju  have  feasted  at  the  hunter's  expense,  the  Diviner 
returns  the  gun  to  its  owner  with  the  words  : 

"  Go   into   the    bush,    and   may   good   fortune   attend   you. 


BEYOND   NIAJI-HUNTING   CUSTOMS      149 

Should  you  kill,  bring  back  an  offering  to  the  Juju,  and  to  its 
priest." 

It  is  indicative  of  a  certain  side  of  the  Ekoi  character,  that 
they  deem  it  necessary  to  explain  the  right  by  which  a  hunter 
may  kill  the  bush  beasts.  The  reason  for  this  is  given  in 
many  tales,  of  which  the  following  is  perhaps  best  known  : — 

HOW   ALL   THE    BEASTS    CAME    UPON    EARTH. 
By  Ndum  of  Nsan. 

Obassi  Osaw  and  Obassi  Nsi  were,  as  we  know,  great  friends. 

Once  upon  a  time  the  former  told  the  latter,  that  he  was 
going  to  fix  a  day  to  invite  him,  with  all  his  people,  to  a  great 
feast  at  his  home  in  the  sky. 

Obassi  Nsi  answered  that  he  should  be  very  pleased,  and, 
when  the  day  came  round,  went,  with  a  great  following,  to  the 
feast  given  by  Obassi  Osaw. 

Up  to  this  time,  all  the  beasts  had  lived  in  the  sky,  and  we 
human  beings  only,  then  as  now,  lived  on  earth  with  Obassi 
Nsi. 

The  guests  ate  their  fill,  and  were  afterwards  entertained 
with  dances  and  games.  When  the  time  came  to  say 
"  farewell,"  Obassi  Nsi  thanked  his  host,  but  said  that  he 
thought  he  himself  could  give  a  still  more  splendid  feast,  if  his 
friend  would  come  with  his  people  to  visit  him  on  earth. 
The  day  was  fixed,  and  all  promised  to  attend,  but  Obassi  Nsi 
warned  them  that  they  would  not  be  able  to  eat  in  a  year  the 
half  of  what  he  would  spread  before  them  at  this  one  day's 
feast. 

Obassi  Osaw  said  that  this  was  well,  and  no  sooner  had  his 
guests  gone  back  to  earth,  than  he  sent  round  to  announce  to 
the  sky  people — for  the  heavens  were  then  peopled  by  every 
kind  of  animal — that  on  the  appointed  day  all  the  beasts  must 
go  with  him  to  earth  to  visit  his  friend  Obassi  Nsi.  No  excuse 
would  be  accepted  from  any  who  should  fail  to  come. 

When  the  time  for  the  feast  came  round,  all  the  animals, 
from  the  smallest  ant  to  the  biggest  elephant,  followed  their 
Lord  Obassi  Osaw  earthward,  to  the  land  of  his  friend. 

Now  the  day  before,  Obassi  Nsi  had  gone  round  the  whole 


150      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

earth  and  bidden  every  tree  and  bush  to  bring  forth  abun- 
dance of  fruit.  This  they  did,  and  yielded  to  the  utmost  of 
their  power,  so  that  the  whole  land  was  beautiful  with  ripe 
fruits,  which  hung  down  temptingly  from  every  stem  and  bough. 
Besides  all  this,  Nsi  ordered  great  calabashes  of  cooked  food  to 
be  prepared,  and  many  drinks  got  ready  to  receive  his  guests. 

All  the  beasts  came  down  from  the  sky  and  saw  an  infinite 
number  of  trees  clad  with  fruits  of  the  most  enticing  ripeness. 
They  broke  from  their  master,  and  spread  themselves  over  the 
land,  eagerly  feeding.  The  monkeys  were  busy  with  bananas, 
the  swine  rooted  for  cassava,  while  the  birds  hardly  knew  what 
to  choose  of  all  the  feast  provided  for  them. 

Obassi  Osaw  was  asked  by  his  friend  why  his  people  did  not 
attend  him,  and  answered,  very  sadly,  that  they  were  coming 
behind.  He  saw  at  a  glance  that  he  was  surely  exceeded  by 
Obassi  Nsi,  just  as  the  latter  had  said.  However,  he  sat  down 
at  table  and  enjoyed  all  the  good  things.  It  began  to  grow 
dark,  but  still  none  of  his  people  came  back  to  him.  Again 
Nsi  asked  him  where  his  people  could  be,  since  they  did 
not  come  to  attend  him.  Osaw  answered  nothing,  but,  sadly 
and  alone,  went  back  to  his  home  on  high. 

Afterwards  he  sent  word  to  Nsi  that  he  and  his  people  might 
hunt  the  beasts  and  kill  them,  for  they  should  no  longer  be 
sky  people,  but  only  food  for  the  earth  men,  as  they  had 
disgraced  him,  their  Lord,  and  refused  to  return  to  their 
own  land. 

This,  then,  is  the  only  ground,  by  right  of  which  we  may  kill 
the  beasts  and  eat  their  flesh,  and  this  is  truly  the  way  in  which 
the  animals  came  to  this  world.  Some  of  them  were  free, 
from  this  time,  to  prey  upon  others,  as  leopards,  bush  cats, 
crocodiles,  etc.,  but  they  have  long  since  forgotten  the  way 
back  to  their  old  home  in  the  sky,  and  must  now  stay  here, 
whether  they  like  it  or  not. 


Ekoi  Hunter. 


Ojokk. 


CHAPTER   XIV 

The  South  Cameroons 

After  Ndebbiji  the  road  leads  up  positive  precipices  to  the 
towns  of  Ojokk  and  Obepp.  These  were  once  great  centres  of 
the  slave  trade,  but  now  lie,  veritable  palm  gardens,  sunny  and 
peaceful,  at  the  foot  of  their  crescent- shaped  mountain  back- 
ground. 

About  three  miles  further  stands  Nkami,  the  last  British 
town,  the  inhabitants  of  which  are  among  the  simplest  and 
most  charming  of  their  race.  Here,  as  well  as  at  Ekoneman 
in  the  German  Cameroons,  some  traces  of  cat  worship  still 
remain.  In  the  night-time,  when  a  play  of  this  nature  is 
given,  the  people  spring  upon  the  roofs  just  as  cats  do. 
Especially  famous  in  the  cat  dance  is  Ntui  Esame  of 
Ekoneman. 

A  few  miles  beyond  Nkami  flows  the  Awa  River,  which 
is  roughly  taken  as  the  boundary  between  Southern  Nigeria 
and  the  South  Cameroons.  At  the  moment  of  writing,  the 
actual  frontier-line  has  not  been  ratified  by  the  Governments 
concerned. 

Over  this  river  the  courteous  German  Commissioner,  Dr. 
Mansfeld,  had  had  a  new  suspension  bridge  built,  and  had  told 
the  chief  of  the  nearest  town  to  put  up  a  Juju,  so  that  no  one 
should  use  it  before  the  arrival  of  our  party. 

Nfunum  is  only  just  on  the  other  side  of  the  water,  and  here 
our  complimentary  escort,  a  coloured  sergeant-major  with  a 
couple  of  privates,  was  awaiting  us.  In  one  of  the  houses  was 
a  small  "  treasure  chamber,"  the  wall  design  of  which  seemed 
worth  copying  (see  p.  152). 

Dr.  Mansfeld  had  suggested  meeting  us  at  Lake  Ijagham, 
the  sacred  lake  of  the  Ekoi,  which  he  had  discovered  about 
three  years  ago. 


152      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 


The  way  thither  led  through  ruined  villages  or  almost 
deserted  towns.  Here  and  there  along  the  roadside,  amid  the 
luxuriant  growth,  a  fallen  Juju  post  or  Egbo  drum  showed  the 
site  of  some  abandoned  settlement.  So  rapidly  does  vegetation 
spring  up  to  cover  the  rain-levelled  walls  that,  save  for  indica- 
tions such  as  these,  one  would  pass,  unnoticed,  sites  where 
thriving  towns  had  stood  only  a  few  years  before. 

Just  beyond  the  River  Agegam,  over  which  a  second  excellent 
native  suspension  bridge  has  been  built,  are  a  series  of  beautiful 
little  cascades.  Beyond  these  the  road  gradually  rose,  and  for 
the  last  hour  led  along  a  narrow  ridge  with  a  deep  gorge  on 


Treasure  Chamber  at  Nfunum. 

either  side.  The  vegetation,  for  a  considerable  way,  was  much 
the  same  as  that  on  the  other  side  of  the  boundary,  but  this 
suddenly  changed.  Dense  bush  gave  place  to  comparatively 
thin  clumps  of  a  palm  new  to  science  and  as  yet  unnamed, 
which  extends  in  a  narrow  irregular  belt  far  into  British 
territory.  The  former  style  of  bush  reasserted  itself,  however, 
before  Lake  Ijagham  was  reached. 

Dr.  Mansfeld  met  us  on  the  road,  and  took  us  to  the  houses 
which  he  had  had  built  for  our  accommodation,  in  full  view  of 
the  beautiful  lake. 

It  is  indicative  of  the  jealous  way  in  which  a  primitive  people 
like  the  Ekoi  guards  its  secrets,  that  a  Government  station  had 
existed  for  years  within  a  few  miles  of  this  spot,  yet  no  hint  of 
the  lake    had   reached    German    ears.      It    was   only   through 


THE    SOUTH    CAMEROONS  153 

noticing  the  recurrence  of  the  word  "  Ijagham  "  in  the  phono- 
graph records  of  folk  songs  which  he  was  collecting,  and 
the  fact  that  no  translation  could  be  got  from  the  people, 
that  Dr.  Mansfeld's  suspicions  were  aroused.  After  a  long 
time  and  by  means  of  considerable  bribes,  one  man  was 
induced  to  explain  that  it  meant  a  great  water  which  existed 
in  the  neighbourhood.  It  was  still  a  matter  of  difficulty 
to  discover  the  actual  situation,  but  in  time  this  also  was 
accomplished. 

The  word  "  Ijagham  "  bears  a  strong  affinity  to  "  Ejagham," 
the  name  by  which  the  Ekoi  call  themselves ;  but  so  far  it  has 
been  found  impossible  to  induce  them  to  give  any  explanation 
for  the  similarity.  The  word  Ekoi  itself  is  Erik,  but  it  is  the 
only  name  by  which  the  people  are  generally  known,  and  is 
therefore  a  more  convenient  designation  for  them. 

Like  the  smaller  Lake  of  the  Dead,  near  Nsan,*  Ijagham, 
or  Toten  See,  as  the  Germans  have  named  it,  is  supposed  to  be 
haunted  by  the  ghosts  of  dead-and-gone  Ekoi. 

According  to  legend,  the  centre  of  the  lake  is  of  immense 
depth,  and  contains  a  whirlpool  into  which  all  are  sucked  who 
venture  to  bathe  in  its  waters,  or  attempt  to  cross  them  in  a 
canoe.  No  such  evil  fate,  however,  overtook  the  little  Berthon 
boat  in  which  we  crossed.  Perhaps  the  Genius  of  the  lake 
was  too  chivalrous  to  harm  the  first  white  women  to  visit  his 
shores. 

As  in  the  Nsan  Lake  of  the  Dead,  a  great  snake  dwells 
beneath  the  waters,  and  this  at  least  is  fact,  not  legend  alone, 
for  Dr.  Mansfeld  informed  us  that  a  skin  was  found  not  100 
yards  from  the  huts  he  had  built  on  the  shore.  It  had 
only  just  been  cast,  and  measured  18  feet.  Wild  ducks 
cling  in  coveys  to  the  branches  of  dead  trees  which  raise  their 
bare  limbs  above  the  surface,  while  hawks  and  eagles  circle 
continually  in  the  clear  air  above. 

The  lake  is  in  the  shape  of  an  oval  cup,  ringed  round  with 
high  trees,  which  reach  right  down  to  the  water's  edge.  There 
is  no  encircling  belt  of  reed  or  fern,  and  noticeably  little 
undergrowth.     The  bed  is  of  clean  white  sand,  which  seems  to 

*  See  p.  23. 


154      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

stretch  from  rim  to  rim.  Through  the  clear  green  water 
hundreds  of  fishes  dart  hither  and  thither,  of  different  sizes,  but 
only  one  variety.  They  are  much  like  trout  to  the  eye  and 
taste,  but  need  no  salt  for  cooking.  The  natives  say  "  They 
have  salt  in  their  bodies,"  and  experience  would  seem  to  prove 
them  right.  Possibly  the  fact  that  the  lake  lies  in  the  centre 
of  a  circle  of  thirteen  salt  springs  may  have  something  to  do 
with  this  peculiarity,  though  the  water  of  Ijagham  itself  is 
beautifully  clear  and  sweet. 

Strangely  enough,  the  temperature  of  the  water  at  the  bottom 
of  the  lake  is,  even  on  the  hottest  day,  far  higher  than  that 
of  the  surface.  On  September  24,  at  8  a.m.,  8i°  on  the 
surface  and  84°  at  a  depth  of  72  feet  was  obtained.  No 
river  enters  and  only  one  flows  from  it,  which  eventually 
empties  itself  into  a  tributary  of  the  Cross  River. 

Before  the  sun  sank,  it  caught  the  tops  of  the  trees  which 
ringed  the  far  side,  and  turned  their  fresh  green  into  a  glory  of 
russet  and  gold.  As  the  glow  faded,  and  we  sat  watching  the 
shadows  darkening  round  the  quiet  surface,  a  ring  suddenly 
appeared  near  the  centre  of  the  lake  but  a  little  to  the  right. 
This  spread  in  our  direction — a  thin  circle  of  mist — till  it 
enclosed  about  one-eighth  of  the  whole  area.  From  that  point 
it  faded,  spreading  always  outward,  and  growing  fainter  and 
fainter  until  quite  swallowed  up  in  the  darkness.  It  had  the 
appearance  of  steam  rising  from  some  giant  cauldron. 

After  a  while  a  splendid  moon  rose  over  Ijagham,  turning  its 
surface  into  a  mirror  of  silver. 

For  much  of  the  information  contained  in  the  foregoing 
account  I  am  indebted  to  Dr.  Mansfeld,  who  also  most  kindly 
raised  no  objection  to  our  visiting  all  that  we  wished  to  see  of 
the  Ekoi  country  under  German  rule. 

We  marched  to  Ekoneman  by  the  way  we  had  come, 
and  thence  over  the  2,000-feet-high  hills  by  Naretim  to 
Mbabong. 

For  some  reason  or  other  the  inhabitants  of  this  place  have 
earned,  among  their  kinsfolk,  much  the  same  reputation  as  that 
of  the  Boeotians  among  the  keener-witted  Greeks  around  them. 
Endless  stories,  of  the  same  character  as  the  three  following, 
have  been  invented  at  their  expense  : — 


THE    SOUTH    CAMEROONS  155 


The  Folly  of  the  Mbabong. 

By  Ndum  Agurimon  of  Nsan. 

I. 

There  was  once  a  very  handsome  young  man  of  Mbabong, 
who  had  an  old  mother.  He  was  quite  poor,  but  promised 
that  when  she  died  he  would  get  a  cow  and  kill  it,  that  the 
people  might  eat,  and  honour  her  memory. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  year  in  which  the  death  occurred, 
he  made  his  farm  close  to  the  cave  in  which  a  buffalo  lived. 
One  day  he  went  into  the  bush  near  by,  to  cut  sticks,  on  which 
to  train  his  yam  vines.  In  the  cave  he  saw  the  buffalo  lying 
asleep,  and  went  back  quietly  so  as  not  to  disturb  it.  He 
warned  his  wife  not  to  make  any  noise  when  she  went  to 
the  farm,  lest  she  should  frighten  away  the  cow  which  Obassi 
had  sent. 

The  wife  was  a  good  woman,  so  she  carefully  attended  to  this 
warning. 

Not  long  after,  the  old  mother  died,  and  as  soon  as  she  had 
ceased  to  breathe,  the  son  sent  his  wife  to  announce  the  death 
to  the  town. 

When  the  people  began  gathering  together  for  the  mourning, 
the  man  took  a  rope  and  went  toward  his  farm,  saying  that  he 
was  going  to  bring  the  cow  for  his  mother's  funeral  feast.  He 
tied  the  rope  properly  round  his  waist,  made  a  slip  knot  in  the 
other  end,  wide  enough  for  the  head  of  the  cow  to  pass  through, 
and  laid  the  snare  across  the  entrance  of  the  cave.  He  then 
hid  himself  and  set  up  a  great  shout.  On  hearing  the  noise, 
the  buffalo  dashed  out.  Over  hill  and  dale  she  ran,  through 
bush  and  river,  dragging  the  poor  Mbabong  to  a  terrible 
death. 

A  wise  man  would  have  asked  some  strong  men  to  go  with 
him,  to  help  hold  the  rope,  or  else  would  have  made  it  fast  to 
the  trunk  of  a  great  tree.  In  either  case  he  would  have  won 
the  cow  with  hurrahs  !  On  account  of  this  folly,  when  we 
wish  to  express  contempt  of  anyone,  he  or  she  is  simply  called 
"  Mbabong." 


156      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

II. 

This  second  story  is  of  another  Mbabong  man,  who  was  also 
very  ridiculously  foolish. 

One  day  he  stood  watching  a  friend  of  his  climb  a  palm  tree 
by  means  of  an  "  nded  "  loop.  This  is  a  rope  used  to  climb 
trees  with  smooth  straight  trunks.  First  it  is  tied  round 
the  bole  of  the  tree,  but  so  loosely  that  though  one  side  of 
the  circle  touches  the  trunk  there  is  a  space  of  about  3  feet 
between  it  and  the  other.  The  climber  slips  the  loop  over  his 
head,  and  lets  it  fall  to  his  waist.  He  then  presses  his  feet 
against  the  tree,  and  his  back  against  the  rope.  Next  he 
makes  a  short  leap,  raising  the  rope  at  the  same  time  in  both 
hands.  A  good  "  nded  "  climber  will  go  up  2  feet  at  each 
leap. 

The  Mbabong  man  saw  his  friend  climb  the  palm  tree  to  the 
very  top,  and  then  give  another  long  leap.  At  this  the  rope 
slipped,  and  the  man  fell  dead  on  the  ground  below. 

The  second  Mbabong  could  not  think  what  had  happened, 
and  went  to  try  for  himself.  As  a  good  climber  he  went 
leaping  up  proudly,  but  gave  the  same  unnecessary  leap  at  the 
end,  and  also  fell  down  dead. 

Because  of  this  it  has  become  the  proverb  of  the  country — 

"  Mbabong  agyut  obi,  echi  ekin. 
Mbabong  climbs  a  palm,  head  half. 
Akin  mfong  ngu,  nkipp. 

Dries  cow  -  hide,  flayed  side  downwards." 


On  our  visit,  my  interpreter  produced  roars  of  laughter  from 
his  own  countrymen,  and  embarrassment  to  the  inhabitants  of 
the  town,  by  asking,  with  a  would-be  innocent  air,  to  be 
shown  the  famous  palm  tree. 

III. 

A  third  Mbabong  went  hunting  in  the  "  bush."  Almost  as 
soon  as  he  had  left  his  town,  he  saw  an  antelope.  He  fired, 
and  the  beast  fell  dead,  after  running  a  little  way.  Although 
it  lay  motionless  on  the  ground  the  man  kept  on  firing  at  it, 
till  a  hunter  from   another   town    drew   near,  guided   by  the 


THE   SOUTH    CAMEROONS  157 

sound  of  the  shots.  The  newcomer  asked,  "  At  what  are  you 
shooting  ?  "  On  which  Mbabong  answered,  "  I  shoot  at  the 
antelope  which  has  fallen  over  there,  and  shall  go  on  shooting 
till  I  have  made  it  come  over  here  to  me." 

The  other  man  explained  that  this  was  impossible,  as  it  was 
dead,  but  that,  were  it  alive,  it  would  run  further  away  instead 
of  coming  near  him.  "  If  you  ever  happen  to  shoot  another 
beast,"  said  he,  "  I  should  advise  you  to  run  towards  it,  and 
not  go  on  wasting  shot  in  trying  to  force  it  to  come  near  you." 

Were  they  not  foolish  people  in  those  days  ?  We  may 
hope  that  they  have  grown  wiser  now. 


As  the  greater  number  of  Mbabong,  like  many  other  Ekoi, 
have  left  their  old  homes  in  the  Cameroons,  and  migrated  to 
the  Oban  district,  in  order  to  avoid  the  poll-tax,  imposed  over 
the  border,  I  venture  to  echo  the  pious  aspiration  of  the  narrator. 

The  people  seemed  simple  and  friendly,  and,  after  a  few 
sufferers  had  been  given  the  various  medicines  which  they 
came  to  beg,  the  inhabitants  came  out  in  crowds  to  ask  for 
medicaments. 

The  town  stands  on  the  top  of  a  hill,  from  which  a  splendid 
view  can  be  obtained  of  the  mountains  to  the  south  and  south- 
west. From  Babi,  our  next  stopping  place,  the  way,  which  is 
a  mere  hunter's  track,  led  through  the  beautiful  pass  below 
Okuri  Peak.  In  the  course  of  this  march,  two  hills,  each 
over  2,000  feet  high,  were  crossed.  On  the  summit  of  the 
last  was  a  small  cleared  space,  called  "  Anwan  Nsibidi," — the 
place  of  cunning  words.  This  name  was  given  in  the  old  slave- 
dealing  days,  when  chiefs  of  the  principal  towns  on  each  side 
met  here  to  arrange  a  treaty,  by  which  they  mutually  bound 
themselves  not  to  raid  one  another's  territory  for  the  purpose 
of  seizing  captives  to  sell  to  the  slave-dealers  at  Calabar. 

At  the  next  town,  Mbinda,  we  bought  the  Eja  fetish  described 
on  p.  76. 

The  town  is  surrounded  by  an  amphitheatre  of  mountains, 
mist-wreathed  and  purple-tinted  in  the  soft  light  of  a  late  rain's 
sunset.  Looking  backward,  the  pass  through  which  we  had 
come  could  be  clearly  seen,  a  cleft  in  the  surrounding  wall. 

We  had  oeen  specially  anxious  to  visit  Okuri  as,  till  recently, 


158      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

it  had  been  a  town  of  considerable  importance  and  the  home 
of  many  powerful  Jujus.  Thence  it  was,  for  instance,  that 
Akpambe  crossed  the  border  to  invade  the  Oban  district.  Dr. 
Mansfeld  has  described  the  elaborate  decoration  of  the  Egbo 
house,  which  was  the  largest  in  the  whole  countryside.  Now 
only  low  mounds  remain  to  show  its  original  dimensions. 
Within  these  a  smaller  building  is  in  process  of  construction, 
but  of  ornamentation  there  was  no  sign. 

On  the  road,  not  far  from  Okuri,  is  a  sad  memento  of  the 
Ekoi  struggle  for  independence.  As  we  passed  along  we 
noticed  a  group  of  carriers  who  had  laid  down  their  loads,  and 
were  clustered  in  the  shade  of  a  great  tree.  They  looked 
unusually  sad,  and  down  the  cheeks  of  some  great  tears  were 
rolling.  As  we  came  up,  one  of  them  bent  down  and  drew 
back  the  creepers  from  the  base  of  the  tree.  Low  on  its 
trunk  a  round  hole  showed,  made  by  the  bullet  which  killed 
the  chief  of  a  neighbouring  town.  The  latter  was  a  near 
relative  of  some  of  our  men,  and,  according  to  their  story,  had 
been  shot  because  he  first  protested  against  his  yams  being  taken 
without  permission  by  the  soldiers,  and  then  tried  to  escape 
after  being  arrested.  He  was  retaken,  made  to  stand  before 
the  great  tree,  and  shot  by  the  officer  in  charge. 

Night  travelling  is  not  popular  among  the  Ekoi,  but  this 
road  is  specially  shunned  after  sunset,  through  fear  of  the 
unquiet  ghost  which  is  thought  to  wander  there. 

We  had  already  passed  another  sad  memento  of  the 
struggle.  Near  to  Ekoneman  stands  the  tree  from  behind 
which  Leutnant  Queisz  was  shot  in  the  breast  in  November, 
1899.  An  echo  of  this  tragedy  was  heard  a  few  months  ago, 
when  the  man  who  had  fired  the  shot  was  caught  and  hanged. 
On  the  suppression  of  the  rising  he  had  fled,  but,  drawn  by 
the  yearning  for  home,  had  crept  back  later  to  his  own  town. 
For  ten  years  he  had  dragged  out  a  wretched  existence,  hidden 
in  a  hole  in  the  ground,  behind  some  boulders  in  the  bush  near 
by.  His  secret  was  faithfully  kept  till  some  accident  revealed 
it  to  a  native  official,  who,  as  in  duty  bound,  reported  it  to  the 
"  white  man."  One  would  think  that  it  would  be  almost  a 
relief  when  the  long  agony  of  such  an  existence  was  over,  and 
he  paid  with  his  own  life  for  the  life  which  he  had  taken. 


The  Original  Home  of  Akpambe  at  Okuri. 


Pass  near    Mbinda. 


THE    SOUTH    CAMEROONS  159 

The  period  of  the  Ekoi  struggle  for  independence  was 
necessarily  one  of  great  suffering.  How  intense  this  must  have 
been  is  shown  by  a  fact  related  by  Dr.  Mansfeld  in  his  book 
"  Urwald  Dokumente,"  p.  21  : — 

"  Von  mehreren  Seiten,"  he  says,  "  habe  ich  bestimmte 
Mitteilungen  erhalten,  dass  die  Mutter  wahrend  des  Aufstandes 
fast  alle  Sauglinge  getotet  haben  ;  als  Grund  wurde  mir 
angegeben  dass  die  Sauglinge  Stets  den  Soldaten  Patrouillen 
durch  ihr  Geschrei,  besonders  bei  Nacht,  die  Verstecke  im 
Wald  verrieten." 

The  Ekoi  are  such  devoted  parents  that  the  idea  of  a 
mother  killing  the  babe  at  her  breast  to  ensure  safety  is  almost 
inconceivable.  Possibly  the  want  of  proper  nourishment,  com- 
bined with  the  necessity  for  constant  trekking  and  hiding  in 
the  bush,  entailed  such  hardships  on  the  little  ones,  that  the 
mothers  killed  them  in  pity  for  their  sufferings,  and  in  the  firm 
belief  that  their  spirits  would  return  to  earth  as  soon  as  all  was 
peaceful  once  more. 

Sad  indeed  is  the  description  given  by  Dr.  Mansfeld  of  the 
state  of  the  country  at  the  end  of  the  war  : — 

"  Trostlos  war  der  Anblick,  den  das  Land  in  Herbst  1904 
machte  :  Uberall  niedergebrannte  Hiitten ;  die  leeren  Mauern 
dort,  wo  sie  durch  den  Regen  nicht  eingestiirzt  waren,  iiber- 
wuchert  von  allerlei  Grasern,  violetten  und  gelben  Bliiten 
und  zahlreichen  Schlingpflanzen.  Die  Wege  fast  unpassierbar, 
da  sie  ein  Jahr  lang  nicht  gereinigt  waren.  Die  Farmen  alle 
leer,  keine  Banane  weit  und  breit  zu  kaufen ;  kein  Menscb, 
keine  Ziege,  kein  Huhn  zu  erblicken ;  geht  man  vom  Lager 
aus  auf  Buschwegen  auf  die  Suche  nach  Menschen,  so  trifft 
man  auf  einzelne  bewohnte  Stellen,  die  aus  einem  mit  einem 
Mattendach  iiberdeckten,  sonst  aber  ganz  offenen  Feuerherd 
bestehen,  und  aus  dem  in  wilder  Flucht  Manner  und  Weiber 
mit  ihren  kleinen  Kindern  entlaufen." 


CHAPTER   XV 

Along  the  Border 

The  last  of  the  German  Ekoi  are  to  be  found  at  Ndebbiji 
Itaokui,  an  almost  deserted  village,  tenanted  by  only  two  men. 

Soon  after  re-entering  British  territory,  as  we  were  crossing 
a  small  river,  a  dark  object  was  noticed  swimming  rapidly  down 
stream.  The  ^carriers  called  out  that  it  was  a  big  fish,  and 
begged  me  to  shoot  it.  It  was  below  the  surface,  but  from 
the  ripple  I  felt  sure  that  it  was  no  fish,  but  probably  a 
monitor.  A  shot  seemed  likely  to  settle  the  question,  and  so 
it  did,  but  in  a  way  astonishing  to  all.  The  supposed  fish 
sprang  to  the  bank,  and  disappeared  in  a  series  of  graceful 
bounds — a  water  chevrotain  confessed. 

This  beautiful  little  antelope,  so  rare  in  most  parts  of  the 
world  that  travellers  are  advised  to  forward  skin  and  skull  of 
every  specimen  procured  to  the  Natural  History  Museum,  is  here 
so  common  that  a  drive  is  practically  never  arranged  without 
securing  at  least  two.  It  is  strange  that  so  small  and  graceful 
a  creature  should  be,  in  some  respects,  intermediate  between 
deer  on  the  one  hand,  and  camel  and  boar  on  the  other. 

I  believe  that  we  were  the  first  Europeans  fortunate  enough  to 
see  a  water  chevrotain  actually  swimming  beneath  the  surface, 
though  Major  Powell  Cotton  once  saw  one  take  to  the  water. 

Along  these  roads,  as  everywhere  in  Ekoi  land,  stones  about 
the  size  of  the  palm  of  the  hand  are  to  be  seen,  tightly  wedged 
into  the  forks  of  small  trees.  Should  a  casual  visitor  chance  to 
ask  a  native  the  reason  for  this,  the  latter  will  probably  answer 
vaguely  that  someone  has  put  them  there  to  mark  the  place  where 
he  has  hidden  his  kill,  or  where  rubber  vines  are  to  be  found, 
or  maybe  where  he  should  return  later  to  gather  ripening  fruits  or 
nuts.  When  one  has  gained  their  confidence,  however,  through 
long  dwelling  amongst  them,  quite  a  different  story  is  told. 

When  a  man  has  occasion  to  go  to  a  neighbouring  town  to 


ALONG   THE    BORDER  161 

visit  a  friend  who  is  not  expecting  him,  he  picks  up  a  medium- 
sized  stone  and  presses  it  firmly  into  the  fork  of  a  tree  on  the 
right-hand  side  of  the  path.     As  he  does  so  he  says: 

„  ivru  •       (name  of  man  sought     _i__j:j         ,-nfmn 

"  Mbongi  aiyipp  *   ig  here  insertedf         akadji        mfum, 

Heart    heavy  ,,  ,,  do  not  go  anywhere, 

ta    nji   mkpoi  'we. 
till  I  go   meet   you." 

The  spirit  of  the  stone  then  hastens  on  before,  till  it  reaches 
the  house  of  the  man  to  be  visited.  Should  the  owner  be 
within,  it  lies  invisibly  upon  the  threshold,  thus  blocking  up  the 
exit,  and,  all  unknown  to  the  inhabitant,  keeping  him  a  prisoner 
till  the  arrival  of  the  man  who  has  wrought  the  spell. 

Sometimes,  instead  of  stones,  bare  corn  cobs  may  be  seen, 
similarly  held  in  the  fork  of  a  tree.  For  a  long  time  when 
questioned  as  to  the  cause  of  this,  the  men  answered  with  a 
shrug,  "For  no  reason,  Sar."  At  length  one  day  someone, 
whose  store  of  tobacco  had  run  short,  came  up  on  the  road, 
and,  in  the  hope  of  thus  earning  a  fresh  supply,  explained  that 
the  corn  spirit  gets  very  angry  should  even  the  bare  core  be  left 
to  rot  on  the  ground.  As  this  decays  the  body  of  the  man  who  \ 
had  discarded  it  would  waste  away  also.  In  dread  of  such  a 
fate  the  core  is  placed  where,  after  rain  has  fallen,  sun  and  air 
may  dry  it  again,  that  it  may  be  preserved  for  as  long  as 
possible.  Subsequent  inquiries  proved  the  truth  of  this 
explanation. 

The  first  town  in  British  territory  is  Ako,  which  has  already 
been  described,  but  leaving  this  on  the  right,  one  can  pass  on 
to  Okarara,  where  on  our  last  visit  the  inhabitants  were  even 
more  clamorous  than  most,  on  the  subject  of  the  bush-cow  and 
elephant  which  were  devouring  their  farms.  On  one  occasion 
during  our  stay  in  the  neighbourhood  news  was  brought  of  the 
presence  of  a  herd  of  six,  which  had  grown  so  troublesome 
that  the  children  feared  to  go  down  to  fetch  water  or  cut 
plantains. 

A  few  minutes  was  enough  to  strike  the  trail,  and  after  an 
hour  or  two's  careful  tracking  the  elephants  were  caught  up  in 
a  little  clearing,  which  was  evidently  one  of  their  playgrounds. 

A  shot  from  a  -470  just  at  the  tip  of  the  ear  laid  one  of  them 

s.b.  M 


1 62   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

low.  The  other  five  crowded  round,  regardless  of  danger,  and 
began  stroking  the  dead  beast  with  their  trunks,  uttering  all  the 
time  a  kind  of  mournful  trumpeting. 

The  sight  was  too  pitiful  to  permit  of  further  destruction, 
but  it  was  necessary  to  drive  away  the  rest  of  the  herd.  A 
couple  of  shots  fired  just  over  their  heads  effected  this,  and 
soon  afterwards  the  delighted  townspeople  arrived  to  take 
possession  of  the  "  beef." 

The  bush  hereabouts  is  honeycombed  by  elephant  roads, 
often  far  broader  and  more  distinct  than  the  little-used  native 
paths.  So  clear  are  they  at  times  that,  on  his  way  to  visit  us, 
Dr.  Mansfeld  followed  one  for  several  miles,  under  the  impres- 
sion that  he  was  walking  along  the  regular  road.  The  whole 
stretch  of  land  along  the  frontier  indeed,  by  the  rivers  Awa 
and  Akwa  Yafe,  forms  a  natural  forest  reserve,  for  it  is  all  but 
uninhabited,  and  teems  with  animal  life. 

Near  the  falls  of  the  Akwa  Yafe,  we  were  fortunate  enough 
to  happen  on  an  interesting  discovery. 

Less  than  a  mile  from  the  bank,  on  the  British  shore,  a  bush 
path  leads  down  a  cup-like  depression,  at  the  bottom  of  which, 
in  the  wall-like  side,  looms  a  great  cave.  From  the  blackness 
within,  countless  bats  shrill  ceaselessly  above  the  dull  rush  and 
boom  of  water,  for  just  beyond  the  opening,  two  underground 
rivers  join.  Save  for  the  heavy  odour  of  swarms  of  bats, 
disturbed  by  our  approach,  the  air  was  clear  and  pure,  showing 
the  presence  of  many  openings.  This  system  of  vast  under- 
ground halls  and  vaulted  tunnels  reaches  for  miles,  in  many 
cases  with  roofs  smoothly  curved  as  though  hewn  by  the  hand 
of  man. 

The  caves  are  said  to  extend  up  to  the  first  falls,  but  time 
did  not  permit  of  anything  like  thorough  exploration.  They 
are  the  property  of  the  Ododop  people,  and  much  valued  on 
account  of  the  bats  which  inhabit  them  in  vast  numbers  and 
are  looked  on  as  a  delicacy. 

The  method  of  capture  is  as  follows  : — 

At  each  known  entrance  stand  men  armed  with  long  sticks, 
with  which  to  strike  down  the  escaping  bats.  The  principal 
hunters  then  enter  the  caves,  accompanied  by  lantern  bearers, 
and  carrying  triangular  nets  fastened  at  the  end  of  long  poles. 


Entrance  to  Underground  Caves  near  Akwa  Yafe  River. 


ALONG   THE    BORDER  163 

With  these  they  sweep  the  roofs,  enmeshing  hundreds  of  the 
dusky  denizens,  and  driving  the  rest  toward  the  entrances. 

When  first  disturbed,  the  din,  caused  by  the  screams  of  the 
startled  bats,  and  the  whirr  of  their  thousand  wings,  was 
indescribable.  Great  clouds  of  them  made  for  the  exits,  to  fall, 
line  after  line,  under  the  blows  of  the  beaters  outside.  The 
sight  of  the  strewn  ground  was  hideous  in  the  extreme,  for  half 
the  wounded,  writhing  creatures  bore  young  beneath  the 
breast,  and  even  in  their  death  agony  rolled  over,  in  a  last 
effort  to  protect  them.  Many  too  carried,  in  addition,  young 
perched  upon  the  back. 

The  Ododop,  or,  to  use  their  own  name,  Korawp,  are  an 
interesting  people.  To  quote  Professor  Keith's  remarks,  on 
measurements  taken  by  me,*  they  represent  "what  Sir  Harry 
Johnston  has  named  the  Forest-negro  type.  The  stature  is 
short,  the  arms  long,  the  face,  the  head  and  the  nose  massive, 
but  the  head  is  proportionally  long  as  in  most  of  the  Northern 
negro  tribes."  They  appear  particularly  gentle  in  character, 
and  the  most  careful  enquiries  failed  to  find  any  trace  of  cruel 
rites  or  customs. 

On  my  second  visit  to  their  town,  I  was  astonished  to  find 
that  they  had,  on  their  own  initiative,  erected  a  little  three- 
roomed  Rest-house.  This  was  the  more  good  of  them,  as  they 
were  new  arrivals  from  the  Cameroons,  and  their  own  planta- 
tions were  too  young  to  supply  palm  leaves  for  the  roof  mats, 
every  one  of  which  therefore  they  had  been  forced  to  buy  from 
the  next  town,  Mfamosing. 

Since  the  Rest-house  had  been  built  as  a  surprise  for  me,  it 
was  not  possible  to  have  any  voice  in  the  choice  of  site.  A 
position  right  in  the  middle  of  the  town  had  therefore  been 
chosen,  instead  of,  as  in  those  fixed  upon  by  me,  at  a 
sufficient  distance  to  ensure  quiet. 

As  ill-luck  would  have  it,  on  our  visit,  my  sister-in-law 
had  developed  malaria  on  the  march,  which  caused  a  very  bad 
headache. 

Surrounded  on  all  sides  by  bleating  goats,  screaming  children, 
and  the  thousand  and  one  noises  of  a  crowded  native  town   it 
seemed  useless  to  hope  for  the  necessary  quiet.     A  few  minutes 
*  See  Appendix  C. 

M   2 


1 64      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

after  I  had  explained  the  state  of  affairs  to  the  Chief,  however, 
a  strange  stillness  seemed  to  settle  over  the  town.  The  goats 
were  led  off  to  distant  pens,  but  how  silence  could  have  been 
so  successfully  imposed  on  the  usually  noisy  babies  remains  a 
mystery,  while  only  the  most  sympathetic  co-operation  on 
the  part  of  every  inhabitant  could  have  stilled  the  stir  and 
bustle  of  everyday  life. 

Just  as  we  had  started  to  go  to  the  next  town  after  our  last 
visit  to  this  tribe,  the  cords  of  my  wife's  hammock  suddenly 
broke,  and  she  was  thrown  out  backwards,  all  the  weight  of 
her  body  falling  on  to  her  head,  which  struck  the  ground  with 
such  force  as  to  stun  her.  At  first  I  thought  that  her  neck  must 
be  broken  by  the  fall,  but  after  a  door  had  been  unhinged  and 
brought,  she  revived,  and,  strapped  to  this,  was  carried  over  the 
twelve-mile  march  to  Mfamosing,  in  order  to  get  at  least  that 
much  nearer  to  a  doctor,  in  case  it  should  be  necessary  to 
summon  one.  A  deputation  of  Korawp  accompanied  us  the 
whole  way,  and  spent  the  night  away  from  home  in  order  to 
make  enquiries  next  morning.  On  learning  that  the  injuries 
were  not  as  grave  as  had  been  feared,  the  Head  Chief  made  a 
charming  little  speech,  expressing  how  great  would  have  been 
the  grief  of  his  people  had  any  grave  mishap  happened  to  their 
white  visitor. 


Ododop.     The  principal  figure  is  a  Buffalo  Soul.     The  figure  in  the 
background  is  a  Boar  Soul. 


CHAPTER   XVI 

Ordeal 

Up  to  1907,  Mfamosing  had  been  the  scene  of  a  veritable 
reign  of  terror  under  Chief  Nenkui.  The  latter  was  a  giant  of  a 
man,  with  a  huge  bull  neck  and  the  arms  of  a  prize  fighter — a 
good  chief  according  to  his  lights,  but  so  obsessed  by  the  terror 
of  witchcraft  that  every  single  person  in  the  town  was  forced  by 
him,  at  some  time  or  other,  to  undergo  trial  by  ordeal,  in  order 
to  clear  themselves  from  the  suspicion  of  black  magic.  Many 
died  from  the  tests  imposed,  others  suffered  horribly.  He  had 
killed  two  of  his  wives  in  this  way,  and  forced  his  own  children 
to  take  Esere.  This  is  the  most  ordinary  form  of  ordeal  among 
the  Ekoi.  The  bean  itself  is  to  be  found  in  a  wild  state  all  over 
the  District.  The  ordeal  is  practised  by  giving  it  ground  up  and 
mixed  with  water  to  the  accused  person,  who  must  then  drink 
the  potion. 

The  superstition  is  that  wizard  or  witch  will  die  on  drinking, 
but  that  no  ill  effect  will  be  produced  on  innocent  persons. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  should  the  bean  have  been  boiled  before 
the  ordeal  is  tried,  it  will  result  only  in  intense  pain,  followed 
by  vomiting.  This,  however,  is  a  jealously  guarded  secret. 
Some  natives  assert  that  the  danger  varies  in  proportion  to  the 
quantity  administered.  Should  either  an  under-  or  overdose 
be  given  it  will  only  result  in  vomiting.  The  exact  amount  is 
known  only  to  initiates. 

The  ordeal  by  boiling  palm  oil  is  far  less  dreaded,  not  only 
because  its  results  were  practically  never  fatal,  but  because  the 
physical  anguish  entailed  is  acknowledged  to  be  less  intense 
than  that  produced  by  Esere. 

When  the  surviving  townsfolk  of  Mfamosing  found  that  the 
"  white  man  "  was  strong  enough  to  protect  them  against  Chief 


1 66      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

Nenkui,  they  brought  charge  upon  charge  against  him ;  and  the 
following  cases  may  be  cited  as  typical : — 


I. 

Itagbo  Arap  of  Mfamosing  had  reason  to  believe  that  his 
wife  Ada  was  unfaithful  to  him.  She  acknowledged  her  fault 
in  part,  but  he  thought  that  she  was  still  concealing  something. 
He  stated  on  oath  : 

"  Nenkui  said  that  the  charm  ought  to  be  consulted  in  order 
to  see  if  my  wife  had  confessed  all,  so  I  told  her  to  '  practise ' 
with  palm-oil.  We  boiled  the  oil  and  brought  coco-yam  leaves, 
and  laid  them  on  the  ground.  Then  we  took  the  shell  of  a 
great  snail  (Achatina  marginata),  dipped  it  into  the  pot  and 
poured  boiling  oil  on  the  leaves.  We  knew  that,  if  they  should 
shrivel,  it  proved  that  the  woman  had  lied.  The  leaves  perished 
■utterly,  but  the  woman  would  not  confess. 

"  Then  she  herself  sent  for  some  oil,  and  demanded  that  it 
should  be  tried  in  another  way.  A  new  pot  was  brought,  and 
again  we  boiled  the  oil.  When  it  was  ready  we  told  the  palm- 
oil  all  about  the  affair,  pointing  to  the  woman.  We  put 
medicine  in  the  pot.  Fire  caught  it,  the  flames  rose  up,  and 
we  found  that  the  palm-oil  pronounced  her  guilty  a  second  time. 
Still  she  would  not  confess  properly. 

"  Then  Nenkui  shouted,  '  Pour  the  oil  on  the  hands  of  the 
woman.' 

"  Ada  stated :  '  I  was  not  willing  that  they  should  pour  the 
boiling  oil  upon  me,  my  heart  trembled,  and  I  grew  weak  with 
fear;  but  Nenkui  shouted  to  me  again  and  again  to  do  it.  So 
at  length,  in  terror  of  him,  I  held  out  my  hands.  The  oil  burnt 
both  my  palms  so  fiercely  that  I  could  not  endure  the  pain,  and 
at  last  confessed  all  my  fault.'  " 

II. 

Baii  Barine  of  Mfamosing  stated  on  oath : 

"  My  daughter  Enok  Eijuni  was  ill,  and  Chief  Nenkui  said 
that  I  had  bewitched  her.  So  I  went  to  the  Diviner  and  asked 
him  to  practise  the  charm.     I  sat  down  before  the  Juju  and 


ORDEAL  167 

said,  '  Ask  if  it  is  I,  her  mother,  who  is  bewitching  my  child  ?  ' 
The  charm  answered  that  it  was  not  I.  On  this  I  said  to  the 
Mboni,  '  It  is  enough.     You  may  take  away  the  charm.' 

"  Nenkui  said,  '  Not  so.  I  must  know  who  is  guilty.'  So 
the  Diviner  was  told  to  practise  again.  Nenkui  asked  if  one 
of  his  own  people  had  bewitched  the  girl,  and  the  charm 
answered  '  Yes.' 

"  Then  the  Chief  said,  '  All  my  people  have  undergone  the 
ordeal  except  Obassi  Nenkui ;  is  it  he  ? '  The  charm  answered, 
'  It  is  he.' 

"  After  this  I  went  away,  but  a  little  later  Nenkui  came  after 
me  and  said,  '  I  have  been  trying  to  find  out  about  the  accused, 
and  he  swears  that  he  knows  nothing  of  the  matter.' ': 

Obassi  Nenkui  stated  : 

"  Chief  Nenkui  called  me  to  have  the  charm  practised.  The 
Diviner  said  it  was  I  who  had  bewitched  the  girl.  On  this  the 
Chief  told  me  to  go  to  her  mother,  and  ask  for  Esere.  The 
woman  said,  '  It  is  not  I  who  accuse  you,  but  Nenkui.'  I  went 
back  and  told  him  this.  He  answered,  '  If  you  are  not  guilty, 
why  do  you  not  go  and  eat  Esere  ? ' 

"  So  I  went  into  the  bush  and  ate  the  bean.  Afterwards  I 
vomited.  When  I  had  grown  well  again  I  went  home,  for  now 
no  man  could  say  that  I  was  guilty." 

"  Afterwards,"  Baii  continued,  "  I  said  to  Nenkui,  '  Since  it 
is  not  Obassi  who  has  bewitched  my  daughter,  and  since  you 
accused  me  also,  I  myself  will  take  Esere.' 

"  When  day  broke  I  did  as  I  had  said.  Then  I  went  to  my 
daughter's  room  that  I  might  die  by  her." 

Enok  Eijuni,  the  daughter,  stated: 

"  Early  in  the  morning  I  woke  up  and  saw  my  mother  lying 
by  the  fire  in  my  room.  She  said,  '  I  have  eaten  Esere.'  I 
sprang  up  to  go  to  her,  but  just  then  a  woman  named  Ndu 
Mojong  came  in,  and  asked  what  had  happened.  When  she 
understood,  she  said  to  me,  '  I  will  tend  your  mother.  You 
yourself  must  not  go  near  her,  because  you  are  about  to  bear 
a  child,  and  it  is  not  lawful  that  such  an  one  should  touch  a 
woman  who  has  eaten  Esere.'  Then  she  called  other  women 
to  my  mother's  help,  and  they  tended  her  till  she  grew  well 
again." 


1 68      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 


III. 

Awo  Mbu  of  Mfamosing  stated  on  oath  : 

"  My  son  Okon  Itagbo  was  sick  at  Mfamosing.  I  gathered 
together  all  that  I  had  to  sacrifice  to  the  Juju,  so  that  he  might 
be  made  well  again.  One  day  Nenkui  came  to  my  room.  He 
stood  looking  at  me,  and  said : 

" '  You  are  a  witch.  You  are  killing  your  son  because  you 
wish  to  give  him  as  an  offering  to  your  witch  company.' 

"  I  answered,  '  I  am  no  witch,  but  if  I  were  I  would  beg  my 
witch  company  to  take  me  and  spare  my  son/ 

"  Nenkui  still  said,  '  I  know  that  you  are  a  witch.  If  you 
wish  to  prove  that  you  are  not  bewitching  your  son  you  must 
eat  Esere.'  So  I  went  to  my  town  and  did  as  he  bade  me,  to 
show  that  it  was  not  I  who  was  harming  my  son." 

IV. 

Ngob  Anyok  of  Mfamosing  stated  : 

"  I  had  two  children,  both  of  whom  died.  Chief  Nenkui 
came  to  me,  and  said,  '  Your  mother  was  a  witch.  She  took 
Esere  and  died.  You  also  are  a  witch,  and  have  caused  the 
death  of  your  children.' 

"  I  ate  the  Esere  bean,  so  that,  if  I  were  a  witch  and  had 
killed  the  children,  I  might  die  also,  for  I  did  not  want  to  live 
if  I  had  harmed  my  little  ones.  This  happened  a  long  time 
ago,  before  Government  came  to  Oban." 

V. 

Mojong  Akpamit  of  Mfamosing  stated  on  oath  : 
"  Whenever  a  child  was  born  to  me  it  died.  Chief  Nenkui 
came  and  said,  '  Do  you  think  that  I  do  not  know  what  you 
do?  You  are  making  a  custom  of  bewitching  your  children. 
All  those  which  you  have  had,  you  have  killed  already.  Have  a 
care  that  you  do  not  destroy  any  more  !  '  Five  months  later 
he  came  again  and  said,  '  You  have  had  another  child,  and 
that  too  has  died.  You  have  killed  it  like  the  others.'  He 
called  his  daughter  Njenamba,  and  said  : 


ORDEAL  169 

" '  Do  not  go  near  this  woman,  else  she  will  bewitch  you 
also.' 

"At  daybreak  therefore  I  took  Esere  and  ate  it  in  the  bush. 
My  heart  was  clean,  so  it  did  me  no  harm." 

VI. 

Njenamba,  daughter  of  Nenkui,  stated  on  oath  : 

"  My  father  accused  me  of  witchcraft.  One  day  while  play- 
ing I  touched  his  eye.  He  said,  '  You  are  shutting  my  eye. 
You  have  shut  one  ;  now  you  can  shut  the  other.'  I  said, 
'  What  have  I  done  to  shut  your  eye  ?  '  He  said,  '  You  have 
already  shut  one  with  your  hand.  It  pains  me.'  Therefore  I 
went  out  and  ate  Esere.  Abassi  Nenkui  was  present  and^ 
heard."  W 

Abassi  Nenkui,  sworn :  "  I  heard  Nenkui  accuse  Njenamba 
of  witchcraft." 

Njenamba  stated  further,  "  My  father  also  swore  Juju  that  if 
any  man  wanted  to  marry  me  the  Juju  should  kill  both  me  and 
my  lover,  unless  the  latter  would  pay  500  great  logs  of  ebony, 
which  was  the  dowry  Nenkui  himself  gave  before  wedding  my 
mother." 

VII. 

The  sister  of  Chief  Nenkui,  Makok  of  Mfamosing,  stated  on 
oath  : 

"  I  am  the  mother  of  Nse  Nyo.  She  had  a  little  child,  who 
died  while  her  husband  Okun  Omin  was  in  Calabar.  When  he 
came  back  and  found  that  his  boy  was  dead,  he  was  very  angry, 
and  said  that  it  was  I  who  had  bewitched  the  child.  He  pro- 
claimed before  all  the  people,  '  I  will  not  believe  that  Makok 
has  not  killed  my  son,  unless  she  will  swear  before  a  powerful 
Juju  like  Mfam  or  Ofiri.' 

"  They  brought  in  the  Oka  Juju.  I  blew  pepper-corns  seven 
times  towards  the  Oka.  Then  the  owner  of  the  Juju  took  the 
Oka  knife  and  pointed  it  at  my  breast,  crying  '  Swear  before 
the  Juju  that  you  will  tell  the  truth  in  this  affair.' 

"  I  answered,  '  I  call  upon  you,  Oka.  If  it  is  I  who  have 
killed  the  child,  or  if  I  possess  any  animal,  or  other  witchcraft 
within    my  body,  may  you    catch    me,  O  Oka  !  '     Then  gun- 


170      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

powder  was  laid  on  the  big  knife  of  Oka.  The  owner  of  the 
Juju  held  it  beneath  my  breasts  and  put  fire  upon  the  powder. 
There  was  a  great  explosion,  but  I  remained  unhurt.  Next, 
palm  wine  was  brought  and  given  me  to  drink.  After  I  had 
drunk,  the  owner  of  the  Juju  said,  '  If  Oka  catches  her,  I  will 
not  remove  the  curse  unless  one  cow  is  given  to  me  as 
payment.'  " 

Okun  Omin  stated,  "  I  did  not  force  her  to  swear  the  Juju. 
She  herself  wished  to  do  so.  She  had  sworn  Juju  against  my 
wife  that  if  the  latter  had  a  child  it  should  be  a  girl,  or  if  a  boy  it 
should  die.  Chief  Nenkui  told  me  this.  She  also  used  witch- 
craft, so  that,  when  her  daughter  bore  a  babe,  the  milk  might  dry 
up  within  the  breast. 

"  Next  my  wife  grew  sick,  and  I  practised  the  charm  for  her. 
It  answered  that  the  ghosts  had  caught  her.  My  babe  was 
dead,  and  the  townsfolk  taunted  me  and  said,  '  Goats  have 
kids  and  fowls  chicks,  but  you  are  a  childless  man.'  So  I 
called  a  meeting  and  asked  what  I  should  do.  Nenkui  stood 
up  and  said : 

"  '  About  thirty  children  have  died  in  my  town.  You  must  eat 
Esere  to  prove  that  it  is  not  you  who  have  killed  them.' 

"  I  went  back  home  and  said  to  Makok,  '  Your  brother,  Chief 
Nenkui,  has  ordered  me  to  eat  Esere.'  She  answered,  'There 
is  some  in  the  basket.'  So  I  put  in  my  hand  and  took  it  out. 
My  wife  ground  it  for  me,  and  put  it  into  a  calabash.  I  drank 
it,  but  it  did  not  kill  me,  so  I  was  pronounced  guiltless." 
***** 

These  are  but  a  few  of  the  stories  told  by  survivors.  Of 
the  far  more  terrible  cases,  in  which  countless  victims  died, 
no  trustworthy  information  was  forthcoming.  As  a  result  of 
the  trial  Nenkui  was  condemned  to  four  years'  imprisonment  at 
Calabar. 

His  family  consider  him  as  dead.  The  part  of  his  com- 
pound once  sacred  to  his  use  is  left  unrepaired.  Sun,  wind 
and  rain  have  faded  the  bright  colourings  of  his  mural  paintings. 
Many  of  his  carved  pillars  lie  rotting  on  the  ground,  while 
others  lean  at  a  perilous  angle.  The  roof  has  fallen  in.  Only 
the  Juju  tree  still  flourishes  amid  the  ruins,  like  the  promise  of 
new  life  springing  from  the  wreckage  of  the  old. 


ORDEAL 


171 


Another  form  of  ordeal  is  by  pepper  inserted  in  the  eyes. 
Should  this  produce  no  injury  the  accused  is  declared  innocent. 


Nenkui's  Deserted  Compound. 

If  inflammation  sets  in  he  is  thought  guilty.     Very  often  the 
pain  induces  confession. 

This  ordeal  was  tried  in  the  case  of  Ndifon  of  Ndebbiji,  who 
was  accused  of  having  shot  a  fellow  townsman  in  the  bush. 


After  leaving  Mfamosing,  the  road  next  leads  through  the  old 
site  of  Abbiati,  a  town  which  was  deserted  nearly  two  years 
ago,  because  a  half-witted  woman  in  quarrelling  with  her 
husband  threw  salt  upon  the  ground  and  cried,  "  So  may  God  do 
with  you  all."  In  order  to  avoid  this  curse,  the  whole  town 
fled  into  the  bush,  and  has  never  gathered  together  again.  So 
rapidly  does  the  vegetation  grow  up  and  efface  all  signs  of 
human  habitation,  that  hardly  a  trace  is  now  left  to  show  that 
a  town  once  stood  here. 

Before  the  site  of  the  old  Egbo  house  stands  a  hexagonal 
stone,  about  6  feet  above  the  ground,  and,  the  natives  assert, 
almost  as  much  below  it.  The  inhabitants  of  Abbiati,  while 
searching  for  a  site  for  their  town,  came  upon  this  carved  stone 
and  took  it  as  an  indication  that  they  should  settle  in  that  spot. 


172      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

It  was  then  raised  up  before  their  Egbo  house,  painted  with 
black  and  white  circles,  called  the  stone  of  Nimm,  and  sacrifices 
were  offered  before  it  as  the  guardian  of  the  town. 

Many  such  stones  lie  buried  in  the  bush,  and  when  discovered 
are  objects  of  great  reverence  to  the  Ekoi.  Even  those  who 
have  been  educated  in  Government  schools  insist  that  all  such 
stones  are  the  work  of  Obassi  alone,  and  that  no  man  has 
carved  them.  Yet  they  are  clearly  cut,  not  split  by  fire,  and  show 
the  presence  of  some  old  race  to  whom  stone  shaping  was  well 
known.  No  legend  of  such  a  race  can  be  found,  though  this  is, 
after  all,  natural,  as  the  Ekoi  themselves  only  arrived  to  take 
possession  of  the  country  a  few  hundred  years  ago. 

Each  Egbo  house  has  one  of  these  cut  stones  called  "  Etai 
Ngbe  "  or  "  Leopard  Stone,"  erected  before  the  second  pillar, 
and  we  ourselves  have  come  across  countless  examples  in  the 
bush.  From  some  of  these  sharp  angles  have  been  cut  out, 
seemingly  for  the  insertion  of  corresponding  ones  protruding 
from  other  blocks,  roughly  in  the  manner  of  Inca  masonry. 
Many  stones  show  merely  natural  fractures,  to  be  expected 
among  the  gneiss  and  granite  of  the  District,  but  a  careful 
examination  shows  that  all  could  not  be  accounted  for  in  this 
manner. 

The  subject  has  great  fascination,  and  a  closer  study  seems  to 
point  to  the  possibility  of  a  Carthaginian  origin.  When  the 
latter  people  circumnavigated  Africa  in  their  small  coasting 
ships,  it  is  improbable  that  they  would  have  passed  by  the 
Calabar  River,  one  of  the  best  natural  harbours  on  the  coast, 


without  putting  in  for  shelter,  refitting,  or  provisions.  In  such 
a  case  it  is  easy  to  surmise  that  some  of  the  crew  should 
have  remained  behind,  either  as  a  small  colony  or  as  captives 
or  deserters. 


■f.  ^  < 


ORDEAL  173 

This  might  account  for  the  strongly  Phoenician  types 
sometimes  to  be  met,  as  also  the  presence  of  articles  occasion- 
ally disinterred,  which  seem  to  show  a  Mediterranean  origin. 
A  small  object,  made  from  a  mixture  of  copper  and  brass, 
looped  as  if  for  a  pendant,  and  with  delicate  spiral  ornamenta- 
tion, was  found  by  me  near  Aking.  When  shown  to  one  of  the 
greatest  authorities  in  Europe,  it  was  at  once  pronounced  by 
him  to  be  the  work  of  some  early  Mediterranean  civilisation, 
though,  on  its  place  of  discovery  being  disclosed,  the  trained 
eye  of  the  connoisseur  detected  indications  of  a  nearer  and  less 
interesting:  origin. 


CHAPTER   XVII 

Divination 

This  practice,  which  among  the  Ekoi  is  called  "  Ebu,"  *  or  by 
the  older  title  "  Efa,"  but  is  more  generally  known  to  Europeans 
/'under  its  Erik  name  "  Idiong,"  is  in  very  general  use.  Almost 
'  all  questions  are  referred  to  the  Diviner  (Mboni),  and  answered 
by  him  after  consulting  the  charm,  which  consists  of  two  pairs 
of  strings,  each  composed  of  four  "Osing"  shells.  These  are 
laid  side  by  side  on  either  hand  of  the  Diviner.  Those  on  the 
right  are  supposed  to  be  male  and  on  the  left  female.  Each 
pair  must  "  confirm  "  the  other,  by  falling  in  exactly  the  reverse 
manner.  If  the  pairs  do  not  agree,  everything  must  be  begun 
again,  and  should  the  question  be  at  all  important,  it  is  often 
repeated  several  times. 

A  man  who  wishes  to  qualify  as  a  Diviner  (Mboni)  must  first 
learn  how  the  charm  (Ebu)  makes  its  communications.  He 
then  goes  to  an  old  Diviner,  and  asks  him  to  "  confirm  "  the 
power.  This  is  done  by  gathering  leaves  and  bark  from  various 
Juju  trees.  The  old  man  chews  these  and  spits  out  small 
quantities  into  the  shells.  The  aspirant  then  takes  the  latter,  and 
places  them  high  up  in  the  roof-thatch,  that  they  may  listen  to 
Obassi  Osaw  and  talk  with  him.  After  a  while  they  are  taken 
down  and  carried  outside  the  town,  to  a  place  where  cross-roads 
meet,  and  there  buried,  to  talk  with  the  ghosts,  and  with 
Obassi  Nsi.  After  a  few  days  the  strings  are  dug  up  again, 
and  the  man  starts  practice  as  a  full-fledged  "  Mboni." 

Osing  shells  are  the  dried  covering  of  the  seeds  of  the  Osing 
tree,  which  in  itself  is  sacred ;  but  they  cannot  be  used  for 
purposes  of  divination  until  an  elephant  has  taken  the  ripe 
fruit  into  his  mouth  and  then  ejected  the  seeds.     These  arej 

*  Compare  Ebo,  the  Bini  name  for  minor  deities. 


DIVINATION 


l75 


afterwards  split  open,  and  the  half  shells  strung  together  as 
described. 

Other  objects,  always  spread  out  before  the  magician, 
are — First,  the  egg  of  a  bush  fowl.  It  is  thought  that  this 
birdcalls  up  the  dawn  each  morning,*  so  the  Diviner 
holds  up  its  egg,  pointing  toward  the  sun,  and  prays 
"  As  the  bush  fowl  cries  for  the  light,  so  may  light 
be  shed  on  what  we  wish  to  know."  Secondly,  a  quill 
and  tail  of  a  porcupine  are  held  up,  because  in  all 
legends  Porcupine  is  the  great  diviner.  White  chalk 
is  laid  out  to  bring  good  luck,  and  a  boar's  tooth  is 
used,  like  Neapolitan  coral,  to  ward  off  evil  influences 
from  the  questioner.  After  having  been  held  out 
towards  the  latter,  the  shells  are  touched  with  it, 
one  after  another. 

The  small  horns  usually  to  be  seen  are  those  of  Ise, 
the  blue  duikerbok,  because  it  is  looked  upon  as  the  ally  of 
magicians,  and  is  thought,  like  the  dog,  to  have  "  four  eyes," 
i.e.,  to  be  able  to  see  by  night  as  well  as  day,  and  to  recognise 
ghosts,  witches,  and  all  such  uncanny  beings,  when  they  pass 
invisible  to  human  eyes. 

The  shells  composing  the  four  strings  are  naturally  capable 


of  falling  in  almost  innumerable  combinations,  and,  as  a  conse- 
quence, an  expert  Mboni  has  an  extensive  system  on  which  to 
work. 

As  an  example  of  the  vocabulary  used — 

One  shell  turned  upward  and  all  the  rest  downward  means  a  young  man. 
Two  shells  ,,  ,,  ,,  mean  water. 

Three    ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,      food. 

Four     ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,     sickness. 


See  story,  p.  384. 


176      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF    THE    BUSH 

An  instance  of  consulting  the  charm  was  observed  at 
Ndingane  in  1907,  when  a  sick  woman  went  to  inquire  the 
cause  of  her  illness.  After  the  preliminaries  described  above, 
the  Mboni  called  to  Ebu  : 

"Wake  up." 

A.  "  We  are  awake." 

Q.  "  Why  does  the  woman  call  you  ?  " 

A.  "  Because  she  is  sick." 

Q.   "  What  is  the  matter  with  her  ?  " 

A.   "  Something  bad  has  caught  her." 

Q.  "  What  has  caught  her?     Ghosts,  Juju,  or  witchcraft  ?  " 

A.  "  A  noise  has  caught  her." 

(If  ghosts  quarrel  near  a  person,  some  sickness  "  catches  " 
the  latter  unless  sacrifices  be  made.) 

This  answer  was  contradicted  by  the  second  hand ;  so  the 
query  had  to  be  repeated.  The  next  answer  was  a  laugh  of 
ridicule,  and  the  questions  had  to  be  started  again  from  the 
beginning. 


"  Is  it  witchcraft  ?  " 

"  No." 

"  Is  it  Juju?" 

"No." 

"  Is  it  ghosts?" 

"Yes." 

"  Is  it  mother's  ancestors  or  father's  ancestors  ? 

"  Mother's  family." 

"Man?" 

"No." 

"  Woman  ?  " 


A.  "Yes." 

All  the  names  of  female  ancestors  on  the  mother's  side 
were  then  called,  till  the  charm  signified  which  of  them  had 
caused  the  sickness. 

Q.  "  What  does  the  ghost  want  ?  " 

A.  "  Libations." 

Q.  "  Anything  else  ?  " 

A.  "  Yes.     Food  sacrifices." 

The  inquirer  then  proceeded  to  make  a  round  basket  of  palm 
leaves.  In  this  she  put  some  palm  wine,  together  with  a  small 
quantity  of  rum.     She  then  went  before  the  town  and  put  the 


DIVINATION  177 

basket  down  on  the  ground,  as  is  usual  for  the  ghosts.  Some- 
times, however,  the  offering  is  placed  on  poles,  which  is  always 
done  when  the  sacrifice  is  made  to  Obassi  Osaw.  She  called 
on  the  ghosts  and  said  :  "  Here  is  drink  and  food  "  ;  then  poured 
out  the  libation  on  the  ground,  and  said  "  Here  is  what  you 
asked  of  me.     Do  not  let  me  be  sick  any  more." 

After  that  she  paid  the  usual  fee  to  the  diviner,  $d.  in  kind 
and  3d.  in  money,  and  then  returned  home. 

The  spirit  of  Osing,  which  inhabits  all  Osing  trees,  gives  the 
power  of  divination  to  the  shells  "Akparhe  Osing."  In  the 
beginning,  the  tree  itself  had  the  power  of  talking  to  human 
beings,  but  lost  it  in  the  way  related  below  : — 

Why  Osing  Tree  can  no  longer  Speak  to  Men 
save  by  the  Charm. 

In  the  beginning  of  all  things,  both  Ojje  (Witchcraft)  and 
Osing  (the  Spirit  of  the  Osing  tree)  used  to  live  with  Obassi 
Osaw,  and  accompany  him  wheresoever  he  went. 

One  day  Obassi  disguised  himself  like  a  man,  and  journeyed 
through  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  earth,  to  see  how  people 
were  faring.  In  course  of  time  he  came,  with  his  two  com- 
panions, to  the  place  where  a  peasant  was  cutting  bush  for  his 
farm. 

Obassi  asked  what  he  was  doing,  and  how  many  people  there 
were  in  that  place.  The  man  answered  that  there  was  only  one 
other  beside  himself,  that  he  was  making  a  farm,  and  next 
year  was  going  to  clear  a  larger  space,  adjoining  that  on  which 
he  was  now  working. 

Obassi  bade  "  goodbye  "  to  him,  and  went  on  to  the  second 
man,  of  whom  he  asked  the  same  questions.  This  latter 
answered  that  there  were  two  of  them,  and  that,  God  willing, 
he  hoped  to  continue  his  work  next  year. 

Now  Osing  stood  near  and  heard  both  replies.  Afterwards 
he  went  back  to  the  first  man  and  told  him  how  foolishly  he  had 
spoken,  and  how  wise  was  the  second  man  in  saying  "  If  God 
wills  "  before  anything  he  intended  to  do  ;  for  the  questioner  was 
Obassi  himself,  who  greatly  disliked  over-free  and  presumptuous 
speech. 

s.b.  N 


178      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

The  first  man  took  the  lesson  to  heart,  and  next  time  Obassi 
came  in  disguise  to  question  him,  he  answered,  modestly 
enough,  that  he  hoped  to  extend  his  farm  if  God  were  willing. 

Now  Obassi  saw  at  once  that  this  change  of  speech  was  due 
to  Osing,  who  had  thus  taught  the  man  how  to  draw  down  a 
blessing  upon  his  future  projects. 

If  Osing  had  continued  to  tell  such  secrets,  men  would  have 
learnt  all  those  things  which  are  able  to  bring  trouble  or  danger 
upon  them,  and  at  last  be  freed  even  from  death  itself.  So 
Obassi  ordained  that  Osing  should  no  longer  be  able  to  talk 

(unrestrainedly.  Yet  he  allowed  him  to  communicate  with  men 
when  the  hard  shells  of  his  seeds  had  been  made  into  a  practising 
charm.  Now  the  fruits  of  this  tree  are  edible  and  something 
like  mangoes.  Diviners  collect  the  seed  shells,  and  through 
them  Osing  can  still  speak,  and  give  answer  as  to  whether 
accused  persons  are  innocent  or  guilty,  and  on  many  other 
subjects.  When  the  charm  is  proclaimed  in  this  way  it  is  given 
the  name  of  "  Efa,"  or  "  Idiong." 

Thus  Osing  lost  his  right  to  be  the  companion  of  Obassi 
Osaw,  and  also  the  advantage  of  speaking  freely  with  whomso- 
ever he  chose.  Had  he  been  left  to  do  so  as  before,  we  should  by 
now  have  learnt  how  to  avoid  the  consequences  of  wrongdoing, 
sickness,  trouble  and  even  death. 

Ojje,  on  the  contrary,  told  no  secrets,  but  kept  them  all 
hidden  in  his  breast.  Therefore,  he  was  not  driven  away  from 
the  fellowship  of  Obassi  Osaw,  and  can  communicate  as  he 
chooses  with  his  evil  followers,  both  witch  and  wizard. 


Another  story  gives  the  following  explanation  : — 

Why  "  Osing  "  may  only  speak  through  the  Charm. 

There  was  once  a  town  in  which  all  the  inhabitants  were  rich 
save  one,  who  had  lost  the  goods  which  his  father  had  left 
him.  So  poor  was  he  that  neither  he  nor  his  wife  had  anything 
to  eat. 

One  day  the  people  of  the  town  were  holding  a  feast  for  the 
dead.  Now,  when  the  poor  man  was  young,  his  father  had  paid 
the  necessary  price  for  him  to  become  a  member  of  the  Egbo 
Club.    So  he  went  to  join  the  play  like  all  the  rest,  but  the  people 


DIVINATION  179 

called  out,  "  You  are  too  poorly  dressed ;  you  cannot  join  in 
our  celebration,"  and  drove  him  away. 

It  was  evening  time,  so  he  went  to  his  house  and  slept,  but 
at  daybreak  he  went  into  the  bush  to  hunt.  All  day  long  he 
followed  the  bush  tracks,  but  found  nothing,  and  at  length,  as 
twilight  fell,  returned  hungry  and  sad  to  his  town.  As  he  neared 
it,  he  heard  voices  in  the  darkness.  He  walked  very  softly,  and 
found  that  seven  ghosts  were  talking  together  before  a  small 
hut.  He  went  behind  this,  and  watched  the  ghosts.  Each 
of  them  held  in  his  hand  a  calabash  containing  a  black  Juju, 
which  they  rubbed  on  their  faces,  saying,  "  May  this  make  me 
invisible."  Then  each  hung  up  his  calabash  on  the  wall  of  the 
little  house,  and  went  into  the  town. 

When  the  seven  were  out  of  sight,the  man  crept  into  the  house, 
and  took  down  one  of  the  calabashes.  He  poured  some  of  the 
black  Juju  on  to  his  hand,  smeared  his  face,  and  said  the 
same  words  which  he  had  overheard  from  the  ghosts.  Then  he 
took  the  calabash  to  his  home,  left  it  there,  and  went  on  to  the 
place  where  they  were  playing  for  the  dead.  There  he  saw  all 
the  people  feasting,  and  the  ghosts  feasting  with  them.  The 
others  did  not  know  that  the  ghosts  were  there,  but  the  poor 
man  knew  it,  for  he  had  used  their  Juju  and  therefore  could 
see  them. 

One  of  the  richest  men  in  the  town  stood  up  and  served  out 
much  food.  He  then  poured  out  rum  into  a  glass.  One  of  the 
ghosts  was  about  to  drink  the  essence  of  the  spirit,  but  the  poor 
man  stretched  out  his  hand  and  said,  "  Stop,  do  not  touch  it." 

The  ghost  stopped  still,  and  for  the  rest  of  the  feast  the  poor 
man  prevented  any  of  them  from  eating  or  drinking  with  the 
living.  The  ghosts  said  within  themselves,  "  What  can  be  the 
matter  ?  Someone  is  preventing  us  from  eating  with  the  living 
as  we  used  to  do." 

Before  dawn  broke,  the  ghosts  had  to  go  back  to  their  own 
place.  When  they  reached  the  small  house,  the  Head-man  said, 
"  We  have  left  our  Jujus  here.  Let  us  take  them  away  with  us." 
Then  all  but  one  took  down  his  calabash  from  the  wall.  The 
one  whose  Juju  was  missing  cried  out  very  loudly,  and  the  poor 
man,  who  had  followed  them  all  the  time,  came  forward  and 
said,  "  It  is  I  who  took  your  Juju."     The  ghost  said,  "  Go,  and 

n  2 


180      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

bring  it  to  me."  The  man  did  so,  and  then  the  ghost  continued, 
"  Now  go  and  get  me  another  calabash." 

This  was  done,  and  the  ghost  made  the  same  Juju  for  him  and 
said,  "  Take  it  home  with  you,  but  allow  no  one  to  touch  it;  for 
if  anyone  should  do  so,  it  will  run  away  from  you,  and  you  will 
die.  Listen  carefully,  and  I  will  tell  you  what  to  do.  Hang  it 
up  in  a  room  in  your  house,  and  fasten  the  door.  The  first  day 
when  you  enter  you  will  find  that  it  has  given  you  fine  clothes 
to  wear,  and  after  that  it  will  give  you  all  that  you  need  till  you 
become  very  rich." 

The  poor  man  gladly  did  as  he  was  bidden,  and  next  day 
opened  the  door.  There  within  he  found  a  great  piece  of  very 
fine  cloth.  He  cut  off  as  much  as  he  needed,  and  tied  it  round 
him. 

When  his  wife  came  back  from  farm  she  said,  "  Where  did 
you  get  that  cloth?  I  have  never  seen  any  so  fine."  The 
husband  answered,  "It  is  a  gift  from  the  Egbo." 

The  wife  thought  "  I  should  like  to  know  whence  such  a 
beautiful  thing  came."  She  watched  till  the  man  went  down  to 
the  spring  to  bathe,  and  no  sooner  was  he  out  of  sight  than  she 
opened  the  door  of  the  room  where  the  Juju  was  kept.  When 
she  saw  it,  she  stretched  out  her  hand,  but  no  sooner  did  she 
lay  so  much  as  a  finger  upon  it,  than  it  sprang  up,  and  floated 
out  of  the  door,  back  to  the  ghosts.  At  the  same  time  she  felt 
a  stinging  pain,  like  that  of  a  lash,  curling  round  her  body. 

When  the  husband  returned,  he  saw  that  his  wife  had  a  great 

cut  across  back  and  breast.     He  asked  her  "  How  did  you  get 

this  mark  ?  "     She  answered,  "  It  is  your  Juju  that  flogged  me." 

Her  husband  said,  "  You  have  killed  me,  for  the  rule  of  that 

Juiu  is  that  no  one  may  touch  it,  save  the  owner." 

He  went  into  his  room,  and  sent  for  his  brother.  When 
the  latter  came,  he  said,  "  My  wife  has  killed  me,  for  she 
touched  my  Juju." 

Then  he  made  a  coffin  and  lined  it  with  the  fine  cloth  which 
he  had  got  from  the  magic  calabash.  When  all  was  ready,  he 
lay  down  within  it  and  died. 

His  brother  called  a  meeting  of  the  townsfolk  and  said,  "  This 
woman  caused  the  death  of  her  husband,  so  I  ask  that  she 
should  die  too." 


DIVINATION  181 

The  meeting  called  the  woman  before  them  and  asked  her, 
"  Have  you  anything  to  say  about  the  death  of  your  husband  ?  " 

She  answered,  "  Yes,  for  since  he  brought  the  Juju  home,  he 
never  told  me  about  the  rule  that  none  may  touch  it." 

The  brother  said,  "  In  spite  of  this,  the  woman  must  hang  "  ; 
but  Osing  tree,  which  stood  near  the  house,  shouted  out,  "  The 
woman  shall  not  hang.  If  anyone  die  by  accident,  it  cannot  be 
helped." 

Obassi  Osaw  heard  all  that  passed.  He  came  down  and 
stood  among  the  people.  He  held  up  his  right  hand,  and  said 
to  the  Osing  tree,  "Because  you  give  judgment  without  being 
asked,  from  to-day  you  shall  no  longer  be  able  to  speak  when- 
ever you  choose,  but  only  through  the  shells  of  your  seeds  when 
they  are  used  to  practise  the  charm." 


In  animal  stories,  when  any  beast  is  in  trouble  he  goes  to 
Porcupine  to  find  out  the  cause.  Sometimes  men  also  consult 
her,  as  has  already  been  mentioned.  This  will  be  seen  again 
from  the  following  three  tales : — 

I. 

Porcupine   Witch. 

By  Itamfum  of  Oban. 

Once  the  women  of  a  town  arranged  among  themselves  to 
choose  a  day  on  which  they  would  all  go  to  catch  fish.  This 
they  do  by  throwing  a  great  number  of  Adhatoda  leaves  into  a 
place  which  they  have  prepared  in  the  river.  The  juice  of  the 
leaves  stupefies  the  fish  as  they  pass  through  the  water,  so  that 
they  rise  and  float  on  the  surface,  where  the  women  catch  them. 

On  this  occasion,  though  many  leaves  had  been  collected  and 
thrown  into  the  river,  no  fish  rose. 

After  awhile,  a  great  crocodile  was  seen  eating  up  all  the 
leaves,  and  so  preventing  them  from  harming  the  fish. 

The  women  went  back  to  their  town.  When  they  got  there 
they  went  to  Porcupine,  and  asked  her  to  practise  the  charm 
to  find  out  who  it  was  who  sent  the  crocodile. 

Porcupine  said,  "It  is  the  Head  Chief  of  the  town,  who 


i82      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

lay  there  in  that  guise.     All  of  you  go  to  him  and  ask  why 
you  might  not  poison  the  fish." 

They  went,  as  the  Diviner  had  ordered,  and  the  Chief  said, 
"  It  is  true  that  it  is  I  who  possess  this  witchcraft.  In  the 
shape  of  a  crocodile  I  protect  the  river.  The  reason  why  you 
could  catch  nothing  is  that  you  went  without  permission  to  fish 
in  my  stream.  For  the  future  women  shall  not  go  alone  to 
poison  the  fish.  Men  and  women  can  both  go.  Women,  you 
are  not  strong  enough  to  do  this  alone.  Arrange  it  among 
yourselves." 

The  women  explained  the  new  order  to  the  men.  All  went 
into  the  bush,  gathered  leaves,  and  brought  them  to  the  Head 
Chief.     The  latter  said  : 

"  You  have  not  brought  enough."  So  they  went  again,  and 
gathered  still  more,  till  he  said : 

"  That  will  do." 

Then  all  set  out  gaily,  both  men  and  women.  They  spent 
three  nights  in  the  bush,  gathering  fish,  till  they  had  caught  a 
great  quantity,  when  they  retured  home. 

Each  gave  one  fish  as  a  "  Dash "  to  the  Chief,  but  no  one 
gave  any  to  Porcupine,  who  was  the  priestess  of  the  charm. 

The  latter  therefore  went  to  the  Head  Woman,  and  asked  for 
her  share  of  the  catch. 

They  refused  to  give  any,  whereon  she  said,  "  Very  well." 
She  then  announced  to  the  townsfolk,  "The  charm  shall  be 
practised  for  none  of  you  any  more." 

On  this  they  were  afraid,  and  answered,  "  When  any  woman 
conceives,  she  must  practise  the  charm." 

At  the  same  moment  one  of  them  conceived.  She  went  to 
Porcupine  and  asked  her  to  practise  the  charm. 

At  first  Porcupine  refused,  but  all  the  townsfolk  begged  her 
most  earnestly  to  take  pity  on  the  woman.  They  brought  yams 
and  palm  oil,  and  promised  to  go  out  and  get  plenty  of  fish. 
So  Porcupine  at  last  consented. 

After  the  woman's  child  was  born,  and  she  had  grown 
strong  again,  she  went  fishing  by  herself,  and  brought  all  that 
she  caught  to  Porcupine. 

The  latter  was  very  pleased,  and  announced,  "  I  remove  the 
law  I  made.     All  priests  may  practise  the  charm  as  usual." 


DIVINATION  183 

This  is  the  reason  why  when  a  native  woman  conceives,  she 
goes  to  the  "  Mboni  "  to  practise  the  charm  for  her. 

II. 

How  Obassi  Drove  Forth  His  Unloved  Wife. 

Before  Obassi  Osaw  left  the  earth,  he  married  many  wives. 
Two  of  these  he  loved,  but  the  others  he  did  not  care  for.  One 
day  one  of  his  favourite  wives  saw  a  woman  weeping  in  the 
compound.  "  What  is  your  trouble  ?  "  she  asked,  and  the 
woman  answered,  "  I  weep  because  I  am  the  wife  of  Obassi, 
yet  I  may  never  come  near  to  my  Lord." 

The  favourite  wife  had  pity  on  her,  and  at  night  led  her 
privately  into  their  husband's  chamber. 

Some  months  later,  Obassi  chanced  to  pass  by  this  woman, 
as  she  sat  working,  and  saw  what  had  befallen  her.  He 
thought  she  had  been  guilty  of  unfaithfulness,  and  therefore 
ordered  her  to  be  driven  away  from  the  town. 

The  woman  fled  into  the  bush,  and  there  her  child  was  born. 
For  several  years  they  dwelt  together,  till  the  boy  grew  tall 
and  strong. 

One  day  the  people  of  Obassi  set  out  to  cut  "  bush  "  for  new 
farms.  While  doing  this,  they  saw  a  boy  coming,  and  said 
to  their  master,  "  This  youth  is  very  like  you."  They  roasted 
yams  and  offered  them  to  the  new  arrival,  but  he  said  : 

"  I  cannot  eat  the  food  of  Obassi,  neither  can  my  mother, 
because  he  drove  her  away  without  cause." 

Another  day  the  woman  also  came  to  visit  them,  and,  on 
seeing  her,  the  second  of  the  favourite  wives  approached  her 
husband  and  said,  "  Here  is  the  woman  whom  you  turned  out  of 
your  compound.     Her  son  is  named  Effion  Obassi." 

Obassi  caught  his  discarded  wife,  and  handed  her  over  to  the 
people  that  they  might  put  her  to  death,  but  Effion  stood  forth 
and  said  : 

"  I  want  to  know  why  you  wish  to  kill  my  mother." 

The  wife  who  had  at  first  befriended  her  also  said : 

"  Why  should  the  woman  be  killed  ?  What  is  the  name  of 
her  son  ?  "  and  they  answered,  "  He  is  called  EfBon  Obassi." 

This  wife  went  to  her   husband  and  said :    "  It    is    I    who 


1 84   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

have  deceived  you.  I  brought  the  woman  to  your  room  in  my 
place  in  the  night  time,  and  her  son  is  yours." 

No  sooner  did  Obassi  hear  this,  than  he  ordered  his  people  to 
build  a  house  for  his  discarded  wife,  and  allowed  her  to  dwell 
there  with  the  boy. 

One  day  the  sons  of  Obassi  were  sent  to  market  to  buy  and 
sell.  All  of  them  made  unprofitable  bargains  save  Effion  only, 
who  did  well.  From  that  time  he  was  entrusted  with  the 
disposal  of  all  merchandise. 

Once  he  was  preparing  to  set  out  for  market  as  usual,  when 
his  father  called  to  him  and  said,  "The  time  draws  near  when 
I  must  leave  the  earth.  If  you  should  see  a  fresh  leaf  fall  down 
before  you  on  the  road,  or  in  the  market  place,  you  will  know 
that  I  am  dead." 

Effion  left  home  and,  in  time,  reached  the  town  where  the 
market  was  held.  While  he  bought  and  sold,  a  leaf  fluttered 
down,  and  fell  at  his  feet.  At  once  he  left  his  business  and 
hastened  home,  but  alas !  his  father  was  already  dead. 

After  the  funeral,  Effion  wanted  to  enter  the  place  where  the 
treasure  was  kept,  but  his  half-brothers  prevented  him.  On 
this  he  went  to  Porcupine,  who  was  a  witch,  and  ask  her  to 
practise  the  charm  for  him,  to  find  out  what  he  should  do 
in  order  to  gain  some  of  the  goods  of  his  late  father. 

Porcupine  said,  "  On  your  way  back,  you  will  meet  a  man 
who  is  covered  with  sores.  Follow  him  and  he  will  tell  you 
what  to  do." 

He  met  the  man,  who  led  him  along  a  road  which  passed 
the  foot  of  a  hill.  There  he  saw  a  bell  hanging.  The  man 
said,  "  Presently  some  people  will  come  down  from  the  top 
of  the  hill.  They  will  ring  the  bell,  and  then  take  up  the 
loads  which  are  awaiting  them.  These  they  will  carry  back 
whence  they  came,  and  you  must  follow." 

Effion  did  as  he  was  advised,  and  followed  till  he  had  climbed 
a  long  way.  Then  he  saw  all  the  people  enter  a  large  house. 
He  too  went  in,  and  saw  someone  lying  by  the  hearth.  Efnon 
bent  down  and  held  out  his  hands  towards  him,  touching  the 
ground  with  his  fingers.  The  man  was  Obassi.  He  arose  and 
looked  and  knew  the  lad  for  his  son,  and  bade  him  wait  for  one 
night. 


DIVINATION  185 

At  daybreak  Obassi  ordered  all  the  people  to  go  out  hunting, 
but  Effion  he  kept  in  the  house.  When  they  were  alone  he 
took  the  boy,  and  opened  the  door  of  his  treasure  house.  As 
they  entered,  one  of  the  boxes  shouted,  "  Whom  do  you  bring  ?  " 
Obassi  answered  "  My  son." 

On  this  the  box  opened  of  itself  and  all  kinds  of  food  poured 
out.     The  boy  ate  till  he  was  satisfied,  for  he  was  very  hungry. 

Then  Obassi  got  some  "  medicine  "  and  rubbed  on  the  boy's 
eyes.  At  this  the  room  faded  from  sight,  and,  when  Effion 
looked  round  him,  he  saw  that  he  was  standing  on  a  grave,  but 
in  his  arms  he  held  the  magic  box. 

He  saw  people  coming  towards  him,  and  ran  inside  the  bush 
to  hide  his  treasure,  for  his  father  had  said  that  he  must  tell 
no  one  of  his  secret,  else  he  would  be  able  to  get  nothing  from 
it  save  with  much  trouble. 

After  he  had  gone  a  long  way,  he  sat  down  and  rested.  No 
one  was  in  sight,  so  he  called  to  the  box.  It  opened  and  within 
it  he  found  yams,  ready  for  planting.  He  called  again,  and 
from  it  stepped,  one  after  the  other,  a  long  line  of  slaves. 
These  set  to  work,  built  a  town,  laid  out  farms  and  planted 
them  with  everything  that  was  necessary  for  food.  After  this, 
troops  of  sheep,  goats  and  cattle  appeared  from  the  box. 

When  all  was  finished,  Effion  went  back  to  the  town  where 
his  mother  dwelt.  He  brought  her  with  him,  together  with  his 
brothers  and  sisters.  When  they  arrived  he  made  a  great  feast  for 
them,  and  "  dashed  "  them  very  fine  linen.  They  said  that  they 
never  wished  to  go  back,  but  would  always  dwell  there  with  him. 

After  a  time  he  made  a  great  play  for  the  death  of  his  father. 
To  this  he  invited  all  nations  on  earth,  but,  great  as  was  the 
number  of  those  who  came,  the  box  provided  enough  for  all, 
both  of  meat  and  drink. 

Like  his  father,  the  youth  married  many  wives,  but  he  also 
cared  for  only  two  of  them.  One  day  he  brought  a  present  to 
the  wife  he  loved  best  of  all,  but  she  refused  it.  Soon  after  this 
he  left  home  to  go  to  a  far  town,  but,  before  setting  out,  gave 
the  key  of  his  treasure  house  to  his  eldest  son. 

One  day  the  mother  of  the  boy  took  the  key  while  he  slept, 
and  opened  the  store  house.  As  she  entered,  the  magic  box 
shouted,  "  Who  are  you  ?  "  and  she  answered : 


186      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

"  I  am  the  wife  of  Effion  Obassi."  Then  the  box  opened  and 
a  piece  of  very  fine  cloth  fluttered  out,  and  hung  upon  her  hand. 

Now  Effion  was  a  long  way  off,  but  at  that  same  moment 
he  knew  within  himself  what  had  happened  between  his  wife 
and  the  box. 

At  once  he  hurried  homeward,  and  entered  the  treasure  house. 
He  asked  the  box  "  What  sacrifices  must  I  offer  to  you  so  that 
you  may  be  to  me  as  before  ?  " 

The  box  answered,  "  Send  to  the  bush,  cut  down  a  great 
tree,  and  fashion  it  like  a  canoe."  This  Effion  did,  and  when 
all  was  ready,  the  box  said  : 

"  Carry  me  down  to  the  river-side,  and  place  me  within  the 
canoe." 

This  was  also  done,  and  Effion  himself  embarked.  The  box 
said  "  Sit  down,"  and  he  sat  down.  Then  it  said  "  Pull  at 
right  hand,  pull  at  left  hand."  He  paddled  for  some  hours,  as 
far  as  from  Ekoi  land  to  Calabar. 

When  the  people  saw  a  man  with  a  great  box  approaching 
their  town,  they  made  a  sacrifice  of  white  cloth  and  young  palm 
leaves  in  token  of  peace,  and  offered  it  at  the  landing  place. 

Then  Box  said  to  his  master,  "  You  may  not  leave  this  place 
any  more.     We  must  stop  here  for  ever." 

III. 
The  Magic  Fish. 

By  Idem  Mbaifonge  of  Ako. 

Three  girls  once  went  down  to  the  river  to  gather  snails. 
One  of  them  saw  a  small  black  fish  named  Mbonne,  in  the  water. 
She  caught  it,  and  brought  it  back  to  the  place  where  her 
companions  were  bathing.  As  she  showed  it  to  them,  it  fell 
from  her  hand,  and  slipped  under  the  edge  of  some  great 
stones,  which  stood  half  in  and  half  out  of  the  water.  The 
girl  dived  after  the  fish,  but  did  not  reappear. 

When  her  two  companions  saw  that  she  did  not  come  back 
they  went  to  the  town,  and  told  her  parents. 

Not  long  afterwards,  a  man,  who  was  building  a  house,  went 
into  the  bush  to  cut  tie-tie,  for  binding  the  roof-ribs  together. 
As  he  walked  by  the  river-side,  he  saw  some  tie-tie  lying  on 


DIVINATION  187 

the  stones.  He  pulled  at  it,  and,  as  he  did  so,  heard  the 
girl's  voice  from  the  water  beneath.  At  once  he  went  home 
and  told  her  parents,  "  I  heard  your  daughter's  voice  beneath 
the  stone."  They  followed  him  to  the  place,  and  offered  a 
sacrifice.  When  this  was  ended,  the  girl  came  up,  with  the 
fish  in  her  hand.  The  parents  said,  "  Let  us  go  home,"  but 
she  answered,  "  You  go ;  I  will  come  in  a  little  time." 

When  she  reached  her  father's  house,  they  gave  her  chop. 
She  took  it,  and  went  down  to  the  river  to  eat  with  the  fish 
to  whom  she  gave  some  of  all  she  had. 

At  evening  time  again,  the  same  thing  happened,  and 
dawn  saw  her  once  more  by  the  stones  with  her  morning's 
meal.  She  struck  her  hand  on  the  fish  as  she  fed  him,  and 
said,  "  Grow  as  big  as  my  father's  goats."  Next  day  she  came 
and  did  as  before,  but  this  time  she  said  "  Grow  to  the 
size  of  my  father's  cows,"  and  again  on  the  third  day,  "  Do 
not  cease  growing  till  you  become  as  big  as  the  elephants." 

One  day  some  people  watched  her,  and  came  to  her  parents 
and  said,  "  Your  daughter  is  accustomed  to  eat  with  the  fish." 
So  when  she  came  home  again  her  father  said : 

"  To-day  you  will  go  to  the  market."  The  girl  answered, 
"  I  will  not  go." 

He  replied,  "  It  is  my  order,  and  in  spite  of  everything  you 
shall  be  sent." 

She  answered,  "  If  it  must  be,  it  must ;  nevertheless  some 
bad  thing  will  happen — perhaps  I  may  die." 

This  time  she  cooked  chop  herself,  and  went  and  ate  it  with 
the  fish.  She  told  him  "  To-day  I  go  to  market.  Should  any- 
one come  and  call  you,  do  not  answer.  If  they  kill  you,  your 
blood  will  call  and  let  me  know." 

That  evening,  after  she  had  set  out  for  the  town  whither  she 
was  sent,  her  small  sister  took  chop  alongside  the  river, 
sang  to  the  fish,  and  called  him,  "  Mbonne,  Mbonne,  come 
out  to  me."  This  she  did,  so  that  she  might  kill  him.  He 
would  not  answer,  so  she  ate  alone,  and  returned  home. 

Next  day  she  went  again  with  several  people,  who  surrounded 
the  stone.  She  sang  more  sweetly  than  before,  and  this  time 
the  fish  came  out.  No  sooner  did  it  appear  above  the  stone, 
than  one  of  the  men  killed  it. 


1 88   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

The  blood  flew  up  to  a  cotton  tree  which  stood  near,  and 
thence  a  little  stream  ran  till  it  reached  the  feet  of  the  owner 
of  the  fish.  So  the  girl  knew  that  her  fish  was  dead.  She 
scooped  up  a  little  of  the  blood,  and  put  it  in  a  small  calabash. 
Then  she  went  on,  as  far  as  from  here  to  Ndebbiji. 

The  people  saw  her  coming  with  the  calabash  of  blood  in 
her  hands,  and  asked  : 

"  Has  your  father  killed  any  elephant  ?  "  She  said,  "  Whether 
or  not,  I  have  eaten  nothing  of  his  kill." 

Next  she  went  on  so  far  as  to  Owum,  where  the  people 
asked  her  the  same  question,  to  which  she  replied  as  before. 
At  each  town  the  same  thing  happened,  and  at  length  she 
arrived  at  her  home. 

As  she  returned  her  parents  saluted  her,  but  she  said : 

"  I  do  not  want  any  welcome." 

She  got  some  Juju  leaves,  and  mixed  them  with  the  blood. 
Then  she  went  down  to  the  river,  and  with  the  mixture 
smeared  a  palm  tree  which  grew  near  by.  At  daybreak  she 
asked  her  father  to  go  with  her  to  the  water.  When  she  had 
reached  the  place,  she  begged  him  to  climb  up  the  palm  tree 
and  gather  her  some  clusters  of  kernels.  He  did  so,  but  no 
sooner  had  he  climbed  to  the  top,  than  she  called  to  the  palm 
tree  "  Grow  up,"  and  at  once  it  grew  so  high,  that  her  father 
fell  down  and  died.  She  hid  his  body,  and  went  back  to  the 
house. 

Next  she  asked  her  mother  to  go  with  her  to  the  river. 
When  they  got  there,  she  made  the  same  magic,  and  her  mother 
died  also. 

She  returned  home,  but  there  was  no  fire  on  the  hearth,  so 
she  went  to  the  house  of  some  neighbours  and  begged  that 
they  would  give  her  a  lighted  brand.  They,  however,  drove 
her  away  and  said,  "  It  is  you  who  have  killed  your  father  and 
your  mother." 

After  this  the  girl  went  from  door  to  door  begging  for  fire,  but 
all  the  townsfolk  said  the  same  thing,  and  at  length  drove 
her  forth  into  the  bush. 

Then  she  grew  afraid  because  of  what  she  had  done,  and 
went  to  Porcupine,  to  beg  her  to  practise  the  charm. 

Porcupine  said  "  Get  yam  and  palm-oil  and  bring  tome." 


DIVINATION  189 

This  the  girl  did,  and  Porcupine  said  further,  "  Now  I  will 
show  you  a  magic  medicine,  which  will  bring  your  parents  to 
life  again." 

The  girl  did  all  that  Porcupine  had  told  her.  She  made  the 
medicine  and  rubbed  it  over  the  bodies  of  her  father  and 
mother,  so  that  they  were  cured  of  the  hurt  of  their  fall,  and 
stood  up  alive.  Then  all  returned  home  together,  and  the 
neighbours  brought  brands  and  relit  the  fire  on  the  hearth. 

Some  of  the  medicine  with  which  she  had  cured  her  parents 
remained  over.     This  she  threw  away  on  the  rubbish  heap. 

Now  hawk  had  watched  all  the  time,  when  the  girl  went  to 
consult  Porcupine,  and  again  when  she  made  the  medicine, 
and  brought  her  parents  to  life.  That  is  the  reason  why  you 
often  see  a  hawk  circling  round  and  round  over  a  rubbish 
heap,  because  he  wants  to  get  the  medicine  which  the  girl 
threw  away,  so  that,  if  his  parents  die,  he  also  may  be  able  to 
bring  them  to  life  again. 


The  last  paragraph  is  really  a  separate  story,  entitled  "  Why 
hawks  haunt  rubbish  heaps."  The  narrator,  however,  joined  it 
to  the  last  story  in  the  way  given  above. 


CHAPTER   XVIII 

Ojje   or  Witchcraft 

It  is  perhaps  during  long  "  bush  "  tours  that  one  comes 
nearest  of  all  to  understanding  forest  folk  such  as  the  Ekoi. 

During  the  night,  when  the  voices  of  the  tired  carriers  have  at 
last  died  down,  and  one  lies  awake,  listening  to  the  myriad  sounds 
of  Africa  the  sleepless,  one  is  aware  of  a  soft  undercurrent,  the 
murmur  of  countless  streams,  rippling  over  pebbly  beds,  the 
far-off  splash  of  little  cascades  leaping  from  rock  to  rock,  the 
gentle  rustle  of  encircling  leaves,  or  the  sleepy  chirp  of  the 
cricket  and  its  even  smaller  brethren — "  The  manifold  soft 
chimes,  that  fill  the  haunted  "  vastness  of  the  African  night. 
Against  this  restful  undercurrent,  sound,  with  startling  distinct- 
ness, the  harsh  cries  of  night  jars,  the  howl  of  a  leopard,  or  the 
scream  of  a  giant  cicada,  as  yet  unnamed,  close  to  one's  ear. 
This  latter  sound  almost  invariably  makes  the  newcomer  spring 
up  to  search  around,  so  like  is  it  to  the  cry  of  a  child  in  pain. 

The  camp  clearing  is  often  as  much  as  ioo  feet  by  50  feet, 
but  the  great  branches  still  arch  high  above  one,  shutting  off 
all  but  the  merest  glimpse  of  blue  sky  beyond. 

In  the  whole  land  there  are  no  open  spaces,  save  those  which 
have  been  cleared  as  sites  for  villages  or  farms.  The  heavenly 
bodies  play  but  little  part  in  the  life  of  the  race,  for,  as  one 
of  the  men  remarked,  "  Ekoi  people  do  not  trouble  themselves 
about  the  stars,  because  the  trees  always  hide  them."  Very  few 
have   distinctive   names.     Among  these  are : 

Nkai  Okott  cMi.     The  woman  of  the  moon's  love  (Venus). 

Nkai  Nkokk  Obassi.     The  hen  of  Obassi  (Aldebaran). 

Aati  Ikang  Aiyu.     The  yam  rack  (the  girdle  of  Orion). 

Nkokk  Abonn.     The  hen's  chicks  (Pleiades). 

Besides  these,  none  seem  to  have  particular  significance. 

To  those  of  us  whose  interests  are  to  a  large  extent  geographical 


OJJE   OR   WITCHCRAFT  191 

and  botanical,  the  study  of  the  part  played  by  the  land  itself  in 
moulding  the  character  of  its  people  must  appeal  in  a  special 
degree,  and  it  is  the  all-enfolding  mysterious  bush  that,  more 
than  any  other  influence,  has  formed  the  Ekoi.  To  this  they 
owe  that  leucocholy  which  lies  deep  down  beneath  the  surface 
gaiety  of  their  natures,  and  makes  the  dread  of  the  unknown 
the  dominant  note  of  their  lives. 

The  bush,  with  its  soft  green  twilight,  its  dark  shadows  and 
quivering  lights,  is  peopled  by  many  terrors,  but  among  these 
that  of  Ojje  reigns  supreme.  Some  people,  indeed,  believe 
that  there  are  good  Jujus  which  are  stronger,  but  many  think 
that  none  but  Obassi  himself  can  give  protection  against 
this  dread,  which  walks  by  day  or  night,  and  may  manifest 
itself  in  the  least  suspected  ways.  Mother,  sister,  or  sweet- 
heart may  be  witches  in  disguise.  The  bird  which  flies  in  at 
your  open  door  in  the  sunshine,  the  bat  which  circles  round 
your  house  at  twilight,  the  small  bush  beasts  which  cross  your 
path  while  hunting, — all  may  be  familiars  of  witch  or  wizard, 
or  even  the  latter  themselves,  disguised  to  do  you  hurt.  In  this 
world  of  magic,  shape-shifting  is  an  everyday  occurrence,  and  it 
seems  scarce  harder  of  belief  that  a  man  should  be  able  to 
change  into  leopard  or  crocodile  than  that  tiny  flowers,  no  bigger 
than  a  pin-head,  should  become  huge  fruits,  hanging  from  tree 
and  liane,  ready  to  fall  on,  and  stun,  the  passer-by.  To  those  who 
know  the  depths  of  virgin  forests — with  their  strange  solitudes, 
filled  by  the  thousand  unexplainable  sounds,  which  together 
make  up  one  vast  silence — such  beliefs  seem  not  only  natural 
but  inevitable. 

Witchcraft  and  all  bad  Jujus  are  thought  to  have  been  sent 
to  earth  by  Obassi  Osaw,  while  the  good  ones  came  from 
Obassi  Nsi.  Sometimes  people  pray  to  the  latter  to  destroy 
Ojje,  for  it  is  well  known  that  no  witchcraft  can  stand  against 
his  might. 

A  case  which  came  before  the  Native  Court  on  January  5, 
1909,  shows  how  the  smallest  event  is  sometimes  thought  to 
have  been  caused  by  supernatural  agency. 

On  being  questioned  as  to  why  she  took  Esere  bean,  a 
woman,  named  Awaka,  stated  : 

"  One  day  when  I  sat  alone  in  my  house,  a  white  bird  flew 


ig2      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

in.  When  my  husband  Atean  returned  I  told  him  about  it. 
He  said  : 

"  '  Perhaps  someone  wants  to  destroy  my  Juju.' 

"  At  evening  time,  he  sent  to  call  the  man  who  practised  the 
charm,  and  asked  him  to  find  out  whether  a  ghost  or  living 
person  had  sent  the  bird. 

"  The  Diviner  decided  that  a  living  person  had  sent  it  to  try 
to  injure  the  Juju.  At  that  time  we  were  three  women  within 
the  compound,  but  the  men  remained  outside. 

"  First  Iamba  was  called  before  the  charm,  and  it  was  asked  if 
she  were  guilty.  It  answered  '  No.'  Next  the  second  woman 
was  called,  with  the  same  result.  Lastly  the  Diviner  called  my 
name,  and  I  also  was  pronounced  guiltless. 

"  After  some  time  I  asked,  '  Have  you  got  the  person  ? '  and 
Mboni  answered  '  Not  yet.' 

"  From  that  day  my  husband  gave  me  no  part  of  the  animals 
which  he  killed  in  the  hunt.  I  was  vexed  and  went  into  the  bush 
and  ate  Esere,  because  my  name  had  been  called  before  the 
charm.  I  took  the  bean  to  prove  that  I  was  guiltless  of  witch- 
craft, and  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  coming  of  the  white  bird." 


Those  possessed  by  Ojje  have  a  power  which  warns  them 
of  the  approach  of  others  similarly  possessed,  as  the  magic 
knife  in  the  girdle  of  the  king's  daughter  rang  on  the  coming 
of  Weland. 

Should  witch  or  wizard  wish  to  kill  a  man,  they  gather 
together  at  night  time  in  front  of  the  town,  and  dance,  not 
upon  the  ground,  but  a  few  feet  above.  While  dancing  they 
often  grow  to  giant  size.  No  noise  can  be  heard,  and  they  are 
invisible  to  all  who  have  not  the  "  four  eyes." 

E.  E.  Offiong,  one  of  the  best-known  chiefs  of  Calabar, 
claims  to  have  the  power  of  witnessing  these  witches'  revels. 
He  says  that  he  has  often  seen  them  dancing  in  the  moonlight, 
and  that  after  looking  on  for  a  long  time  one  night,  he  went 
next  day  to  each  of  the  men  and  women  whom  he  had  recognised, 
and  forced  them  to  confess  that  they  were  possessed  by  Ojje. 

Perhaps  the  most  terrible  power  held  by  witch  or  wizard  is 
that    of    "  sucking    out    the    heart "  of    a    man    without   his 


>  *  i 

f7^w    i 


w 


OJJE   OR   WITCHCRAFT  193 

knowledge.  They  can  sit  on  the  roof  of  the  house  at  night  and 
suck  out  the  heart  while  he  sleeps,  and,  without  the  aid  of  some 
strong  Juju,  he  will  never  know  what  is  killing  him.  A  man 
wasting  away  from  consumption  or  Beri-beri,  is  usually  thought 
to  have  been  bewitched  in  this  way. 

When  the  witch  knows  that  her  victim's  last  hour  draws 
near,  she  sends  Ekpangpang  in  the  night  time  to  the  town  of  the 
dying  man.  This  is  the  bat  (Hypsignathus  monstrosus)  which 
is  always  looked  upon  as  the  servant  of  witch  or  wizard,  and 
its  sinister  reputation  is  well  borne  out  by  its  hideous  hippo- 
potamus-shaped head  and  large  unwinking  yellow  eyes.  One 
afternoon  we  watched  a  couple  flying,  in  blazing  sunlight,  from 
side  to  side  of  the  Kwa  river.  Great  was  the  joy  of  the 
paddlers  when  one  fell  to  my  gun,  and  was  retrieved  from  the 
water  in  a  butterfly  net. 

The  name  Ekpangpang  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  brass  pan 
used  in  Ekoi-land  for  washing  hands.  When  not  needed  for 
this  purpose  it  is  often  held  up,  and  the  knuckles  struck 
against  the  back  to  form  a  sort  of  gong.  When  put  to  this  use 
it  produces  a  sound  from  which  its  name  is  onomatopceically 
derived.  The  same  name  has  been  given  to  the  bat,  because  its 
dull  monotonous  cry  "  Pangpang  "  sounding  out  of  the  darkness 
is  taken  for  the  blows  on  the  nails  driven  into  the  coffin,  which 
it  has  been  ordered  to  prepare  for  the  burial  of  some  victim. 
When  such  a  sound  is  heard  during  the  night,  it  is  a  matter 
of  faith  that  at  dawn  there  will  be  one  dweller  the  less  in  the 
little  town. 

In  old  days,  if  a  man  was  thought  to  be  a  wizard,  he  used  to 
be  taken  into  the  bush  to  be  "examined."  There  he  was  bound, 
and  a  hole  cut  in  his  body  just  above  the  liver.  From  this  the 
officiating  "Juju  man"  usually  succeeded  in  withdrawing  the 
suspected  familiar,  generally  in  the  form  of  a  bird,  toad,  or 
other  small  creature,  but  sometimes  in  that  of  a  tiny  man.  If 
nothing  was  found,  the  victim  was  cleared  of  all  suspicion,  but 
alas  !  death  always  resulted  from  the  treatment. 

Even  now  the  bodies  of  those  who  have  fallen  under  the 
suspicion  of  witchcraft  are  examined  in  this  way  after  death. 
Should  the  ceremony  be  omitted,  and  the  familiar  remain  un- 
killed,  it  is  thought  that  it  will  sally  from  the  grave  at  night 

s.b,  O 


194      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

time,  and  bring  disaster  on  the  dead  man's  town.  As  a 
precaution  the  corrosive  juice  of  a  species  of  cactus  is  dropped 
into  the  eyes  of  the  corpse,  and  the  mouth  is  filled  with  the 
leaves  of  the  Egakk  tree,*  so  that  the  soul  should  be  unable  to 
sally  forth  through  these  apertures. 

A  case  in  which  two  familiars  were  exorcised  by  a  witch- 
doctor from  a  live  woman,  Antikka  by  name,  came  before  the 
Native  Court  on  December  4,  1908. 

The  husband,  Ojokk,  stated  on  oath  : 

"  It  was  during  the  dry  season,  while  I  was  cutting  farm. 
My  little  child  came  to  call  me,  and  said  that  her  mother  was 
dying.  I  ran  home  and  found  my  wife  very  ill.  I  gave  her 
eggs  and  kernel  oil.  I  got  water,  boiled  it,  and  washed  her. 
Then  again  I  gave  her  eggs  and  kernel  oil.  I  held  her  in  my 
arms  and  called,  and  called,  her  name.  She  answered  very 
slowly  and  feebly.  Then  I  took  pepper  and  ground  it  on  a 
stone.  I  boiled  yams  and  beat  fu-fu.  All  these  I  gave  her. 
She  ate  and  grew  better.  Next  I  began  to  question  her  :  '  What 
is  the  matter  with  you  ?  '  She  said  :  '  I  have  eaten  Esere  on 
account  of  the  death  of  my  child.  Take  me  to  Aiyu,  the  great 
witch-doctor  who  lives  near  Okuni.' 

"  I  questioned  the  people.  They  said  that  the  man  was  indeed 
strong  to  drive  forth  witchcraft  and  all  bad  things  from  the 
heart.  So  I  took  my  wife  before  him.  We  spent  twelve 
nights  on  the  way,  and  found  him  at  length  at  his  farm  planta- 
tion called  Ibara  Nshi.  He  went  to  the  bush  and  gathered 
dark  leaves.  These  he  crushed  in  mud,  mixed  with  water, 
and  gave  to  Antikka  to  drink. 

"After  this,  Aiyu  gave  me  a  matchet  and  told  me  to  dig  a 
small  hole.  He  then  bade  my  wife  stand  forth  and  look  at  the 
hole.  First  he  asked  her  to  confess  what  she  had  done,  and 
she  said : 

"  '  The  children  which  I  bore  were  twins.  One  of  them  died. 
It  was  I  who  killed  it.  One  of  my  sisters  was  named  Ogaba ; 
her  I  killed  also.' 

"  After  she  had  finished  confessing  the  evil  she  had  done,  she 

*  Both  cactus  and  "  Enyere  "  are  called  Egakk.  The  first  is  looked  on  as  female 
and  the  latter  male,  and  they  are  supposed  to  hold  the  position  of  husband  and 
wife,  as  are  also  "  male  "  and  "  female  "  ebony. 


OJJE    OR   WITCHCRAFT  195 

began  to  vomit  the  medicine.  First  there  came  out  of  her 
mouth  a  bat,  the  small  kind,  and  after  that  a  frog.  Then  the 
priest  said  to  me  : 

"  '  Take  your  wife  home.  Give  her  one  Esere  bean  to  drink. 
Should  she  die,  come  and  take  back  all  the  goods  you  have  paid 
to  me ;  but  if  she  does  not  die,  you  will  know  that  I  have  done 
well  in  driving  forth  the  witchcraft  from  out  of  her,  and  that 
the  goods  are  therefore  mine.' 

"When  I  reached  home,  I  explained  everything  to  the  towns- 
folk, and  to  my  elder  brother  Mbe,  who  got  the  bean  and  ground 
it  on  a  stone.  My  wife  drank,  and  vomited  as  the  priest  said 
she  would.  When  she  was  well  again  I  went  out  hunting.  No 
sooner  was  I  gone  than  she  ran  away  to  Akot  Ekpim,  and 
complained  to  him  that  all  the  townsfolk  had  seen  her  shame, 
so  she  did  not  wish  to  live  in  my  house  any  more." 

Another  case  was  brought  to  my  notice  in  which  a  great 
Juju  man  had  exorcised  a  witch's  familiar,  in  the  form  of  a 
black  butterfly.  This  he  drove  forth  from  between  her  lips, 
after  laying  his  own  hand  across  her  mouth. 

As  was  the  case  in  Europe  from  the  fourteenth  century 
onwards,  there  are  thought  to  be  far  more  witches  than 
wizards,  and,  though  both  can  transform  themselves  at  will 
into  the  shape  of  any  animal,  they  more  often  take  the  form 
of  bat  or  owl  than  of  other  creatures.  All  witches  have  a 
special  cry  like  that  of  a  bird.  This  is  believed,  not  by  the 
Ekoi  alone,  but  practically  all  over  West  Africa.  The  shell 
of  the  ground  nut  is  their  boat,  and  in  this  they  can  travel 
through  air  or  by  water. 

There  are  some  trees,  for  example,  the  Mbaghe,  which,  like 
our  own  rowan,  has  the  power  to  keep  witches  at  bay.  The 
leaf  of  this,  pressed  against  the  nostrils,  will  save  a  man  from 
death  if  he  is  suffering  through  witchcraft,  and  green  boughs  are 
also  often  burnt  over  a  fire,  so  that  the  smoke  may  drive  witches 
away.  Should  one  of  them  be  forced  to  drink  water  into  which 
Esere  has  been  scraped,  she  will  confess  all  her  misdeeds  before 
dying. 

In  much  the  same  way  as  with  us,  the  owl  is  looked  upon  as  / 
a  bird  of  ill  omen,  and  a  familiar  of  witch  and  wizard.  The  / 
origin  of  this  belief  is  explained  in  the  following  way  : — 

o  2 


196      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE     BUSH 

Why  Owl  is  the  Witches'  Familiar. 
By  Ntui  Mfum  of  Niaji. 

Egut  (Parrot),  Nkundak  (Greater  Plantain-eater),  and  Ekku 
(Owl)  were  all  great  friends.  One  day  they  consulted  together 
and  said,  "  Let  us  pretend  to  die,  that  we  may  see  whether  our 
children  mourn  for  us  or  not." 

First  they  acted  as  if  they  were  very  sick,  then  all  three  lay 
down  and  pretended  to  die.  When  the  children  saw  their 
mothers  lying  motionless,  and  seemingly  dead,  the  daughter  of 
Egut  began  to  weep  bitterly,  as  did  Nkundak's  daughter  also. 
The  son  of  Ekku,  however,  did  not  mourn  at  all,  but  went  gaily 
away  to  the  place  where  the  dried  meat  was  kept,  and  began  to 
eat  it  up  greedily.  When  Ekku  heard  what  he  was  doing,  she 
called  to  her  friends,  "  It  is  time  to  wake  up.  My  son  has 
eaten  up  almost  all  the  dried  meat  in  the  house."  So  they 
arose,  and  told  their  children  the  trick  which  had  been  played 
on  them.  Nkundak  put  her  daughter  into  the  fatting-house,  as 
did  Egut  also.  When  the  right  number  of  moons  had  gone  by, 
they  both  made  ornaments  for  their  daughters  as  a  reward  for 
the  affection  shown  by  them.  Nkundak  gave  her  child  glistening 
feathers,  and  Egut  brought  red  tail-feathers  for  hers.  That  is 
why  these  birds  are  so  fine  even  at  the  present  day. 

Ekku,  however,  said  to  her  son,  "  Because  you  had  no  love 
for  me,  and  did  not  mourn  my  death  like  the  others,  from  to-day, 
wherever  your  cry  is  heard,  people  will  swear  Juju  against  you." 

This  is  the  reason  that  whenever  native  people  hear  an  owl 
hoot  they  say  "  A  bad  man  is  near."  When  such  a  cry  is 
heard,  they  go  at  once  to  the  Juju  man,  and  ask  him  to  make  a 
"  medicine  "  to  protect  them  from  witchcraft,  for  since  the  day 
on  which  Ekku  cursed  her  son,  he  has  been  driven  away  from 
among  the  other  birds,  and  has  become  the  familiar  of  witch 
and  wizard.  

Crab  claws  form  an  important  part  of  a  witch's  stock-in-trade. 
This  crustacean  is  never  eaten  by  the  Ekoi,  who,  when  questioned 
as  to  the  reason,  usually  answer,  "  We  never  eat  Crab  because 
he  is  the  grandfather  of  us  all."  The  relationship  does  not, 
however,   prevent  him   from  being   used    in   nearly   all  Juju 


OJJE    OR   WITCHCRAFT  197 

sacrifices.     The  reason   for  this  is  explained  in  the  following 
story,  another  version  of  which  has  already  been  given  (p.  144)  : 

Why  Crab's  Claw  is  Sacrificed. 

Once  the  Lord  Njokk  (Elephant)  sent  out  to  his  people  to  tell 
them  that  they  must  come  together  on  a  certain  day  to  hunt  for 
him. 

All  the  animals  brought  good  guns,  save  Crab  alone,  whose 
weapon  was  so  old  that  it  appeared  quite  useless.  The  other 
beasts  taunted  him  and  asked,  "  How  can  you  expect  to  kill 
anything  for  our  Lord  with  such  a  miserable  gun?"  Neverthe- 
less, when  the  hunt  began  they  all  missed  everything  at  which 
they  aimed,  while  Crab  alone  killed  five  great  antelopes,  one  after 
the  other. 

Then  the  beasts  were  very  angry  and  took  away  from  him  all 
his  kill.    They  took  the  gun  away  also,  and  wrecked  it  utterly. 

Crab  said  nothing,  but  left  them  in  the  bush,  and  went  back 
to  the  town.  He  entered  the  compound  where  Elephant's  wives 
were,  and  said  to  them  : 

"  Your  husband  has  sent  me  to  tell  you  to  get  ready  his  chop. 
You  are  to  put  in  it  much  pepper  and  plenty  of  native  salt. 
When  you  have  done  this,  you  are  to  throw  away  every  drop  of 
water  that  is  in  the  compound,  and  none  is  to  be  fetched  until 
after  his  return,  for  he  wishes  that  all  should  be  brought  him 
fresh  from  the  spring." 

Next,  Crab  went  off  to  his  home  by  the  river-side,  and  drank 
up  all  the  water,  so  that  the  stream  ran  dry. 

When  the  huntsmen  returned  they  began  hungrily  to  eat  up 
the  food  that  had  been  prepared  for  them.  Soon  they  grew 
very  thirsty  because  of  the  pepper  and  salt.  They  went  to  the 
water-pot,  but  found  nothing  there.  All  had  been  thrown  away 
by  Elephant's  wives. 

At  once  they  sent  to  the  river  to  get  water,  but  found  that 
all  had  dried  up. 

Elephant  called  Ise,  the  little  grey  duiker,  and  bade  him  fetch 
water.  On  his  way,  Ise  saw  Crab  run  to  his  hole,  and  knew  that 
it  was  he  who  had  brought  the  trouble  upon  them.  He  there- 
fore went  back  and  told  Lord  Elephant. 


ig8      IN    THE    SHADOW    OF   THE    BUSH 

Next  the  latter  sent  Etuk  (Bay  duiker);  but  Etuk  always 
wants  to  sleep,  so  no  sooner  had  he  reached  a  good  place  in  the 
road  than  he  lay  down  and  slept. 

Day  dawned  and  he  did  not  come  back,  so  Njokk  sent  out 
Pig,  with  orders  to  bring  water  at  all  costs.  Pig  began  to 
root  about,  till  he  came  to  the  place  where  Crab's  hole  was. 
Then  he  broke  up  the  hole  and  crushed  Crab.  No  sooner  was 
the  latter  dead,  than  the  water  began  to  flow  again.  Pig 
filled  a  great  jar  and  carried  it  back.  Njokk  drank  and  quenched 
his  thirst. 

Then  the  Chief  called  all  his  people  together  and  gave 
orders  that  whoever  makes  a  sacrifice  to  the  Juju  should  put  a 
piece  of  crab  in  it.  This  is  the  reason  why  natives  always  add 
a  crab's  claw  when  they  sacrifice.  Sometimes  it  is  filled  with 
Juju  medicine  and  hung  round  the  neck  of  the  man  who  makes 
the  offering.  Also,  when  some  "  companies  "  carry  their 
"  image  "  round  the  town,  a  man  goes  by  the  side  of  the  Okum 
blowing  on  a  crab's  claw,  for  the  Juju  can  hear  the  sound. 


Akpambe  is  now  almost  universally  supposed  to  be  the 
strongest  Juju  for  smelling  out  witchcraft,  but  the  Oban  people 
still  believe  in  the  superior  power  of  their  own  "Okum,"  Ekuri 
Ibokk.  Not  long  ago  an  Oban  woman  died.  She  was  buried  with 
the  usual  rites,  and,  some  time  after,  people  began  to  fall  sick 
and  die.  This  was  put  down  to  witchcraft,  practised  by  some- 
one in  the  town,  but,  as  Government  does  not  allow  suspected 
characters  to  be  "tested"  in  the  way  already  described,  the 
inhabitants  could  only  seek  safety  by  going  to  outlying  farms. 
Then  the  Juju  "  image  "  declared  that  every  night  he  saw  the 
ghost  of  the  dead  woman  rise  from  her  grave,  and  walk  through 
the  town  spreading  pestilence  among  its  people. 

The  District  Clerk  was  appealed  to,  and  he,  in  company  with 
the  Station  Carpenter,  went  down  to  the  grave  to  investigate 
matters.  There  they  found  a  small  hole  like  the  entrance  to  a 
rat's  run, — which  it  probably  was.  They  sprinkled  pepper  on  a 
piece  of  paper,  and  laid  it  inside.  On  the  morrow  this  had  dis- 
appeared, so  the  people  were  sure  that  the  ghost  had  come  out 
by  that  way.  All  the  town  collected  together  and  made  a  great 
bonfire.     Then  they  dug  up  the  body  and  burnt  it,  and  after 


Juju  Akpambe. 


Play  at  Oban.  Nsikpe  Club. 


OJJE   OR   WITCHCRAFT  199 

this  there  was  no  more  sickness  in  Oban.     Almost  exactly  the 
same  thing  happened  at  Aking,  a  little  later. 

Some  hold  the  belief  that  witch  or  wizard  passes  on  death 
from  out  the  human  form  to  take  up  its  abode  in  that  of  an 
animal.  

There  are  supposed  to  be  seven  different  kinds  of  witchcraft, 
as  will  be  seen  from  the  following  : — 


The  Seven  Witchcrafts. 

Once,  long  ago,  seven  different  witchcrafts  dwelt  together  in 
a  little  town.  Four  were  wizards  and  three  witches.  They 
dwelt  all  alone  because  everyone  feared  them. 

At  that  time  people  did  not  know  about  making  offering 
against  witchcraft.  They  only  knew  how  to  hang  up  charms  to 
keep  these  evil  creatures  out  of  their  houses.  One  day  the 
seven  witchcrafts  gathered  together  and  said,  "  We  are  all 
hungry,  yet  we  cannot  enter  into  men's  houses  to  take  food 
from  them.  Let  us  devise  some  way  by  which  they  may  be 
forced  to  bring  us  offerings." 

The  first  said,  "  I  will  choose  out  a  man,  and  put  a  bad 
Juju  in  the  path  to  his  farm,  so  that  he  shall  become  cold  and 
sick  when  he  steps  across  it.  In  a  few  days  he  will  die,  and  I 
will  let  the  people  know  that  if  they  do  not  set  offerings  for  us 
on  the  farm  paths,  they  also  will  perish  in  this  way." 

The  others  said  "  Good."  Next  morning  all  seven  went  out 
to  the  farm  road  and  buried  medicine  in  the  ground. 

Not  long  after,  the  owner  of  the  farm  came  along.  He  crossed 
the  spot  where  the  magic  was  buried.  Afterwards  he  began 
to  feel  cold. 

As  he  went  back  home  he  crossed  the  place  again,  and  saw 
the  seven  kinds  of  witchcraft  standing  there  ;  the  four  wizards 
on  the  one  side,  and  three  witches  on  the  other. 

They  said  to  him,  "  Go  home,  and  tell  all  your  people.  If  no 
offerings  are  made  against  witchcraft  in  the  path,  all  the  town 
will  die  as  they  go  to  farm.  You  yourself  will  die,  that  all  men 
may  know  what  we  tell  you  is  true." 

The  man  went  home  and  gathered  his  friends  around  him. 


200      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

He  told  them  what  had  befallen  him,  and  lay  down  and 
died.  All  the  townsfolk  feared  very  much,  so  they  made 
offerings  before  their  farms  as  the  evil  beings  commanded. 

After  this,  the  second  called  all  the  seven  together  and  said  : 

"  It  is  not  enough.  Let  us  go  to  the  place  in  the  road  where 
the  big  rocks  stand.  There  we  will  make  a  magic,  and  wait 
till  a  man  comes  by.  When  he  comes  we  will  fasten  him  in 
the  rock."  The  others  said,  "  It  is  well.  We  will  put  him 
within  the  rock,  save  one  hand,  which  shall  remain  outside,  that 
all  who  pass  by  may  see  and  fear  our  power,  and  offer 
sacrifice." 

Next  morning,  very  early,  they  did  as  they  had  said.  Then 
they  waited,  but  no  one  came. 

About  noon  they  heard  a  man  coming.  He  came  very  gaily. 
Behind  his  ear  he  wore  a  red  flower,  Akpane  Bcsin,  as  a  sign 
that  he  had  overcome  the  wrestlers  in  his  town,  and  was  now 
going  to  another  to  challenge  all  comers. 

Him  the  wizards  seized,  and  shut  up  within  the  rock; 
only  one  hand  they  left  free,  so  that  all  passers-by  might  see  it 
and  take  warning. 

During  the  afternoon  six  of  the  townsfolk  came  by.  They 
were  taking  their  farm  produce  for  sale  to  a  village  some  way 
off.     As  they  passed  the  rock  one  of  them  stopped  and  said  : 

"  I  see  the  hand  of  a  man."  The  second  said, "  I  do  not  see  it." 
The  third  said,  "  I  see  it,  and  it  is  holding  the  red  flower  that 
'  Ne  Ikomm  (Strong  Man)  wore  behind  his  ear."  The  fourth 
said,  "  It  is  surely  the  hand  of  a  man.  Some  wizard  must  have 
killed  him  and  put  him  within." 

Since  this,  everyone  knows  that  a  man  may  be  imprisoned  in 
rocks  and  great  stones. 

All  the  other  magicians  killed  a  man  in  some  way,  each 
after  his  kind.  So  men  learnt  to  make  offerings,  and  hang  up 
charms  in  many  places,  that  wizards  and  witches  might  be 
powerless  to  harm  them. 


Some  time  ago  in  one  of  the  larger  towns,  the  people  were 
dying  so  fast  that  it  was  thought  witches  must  be  killing  them. 
To  stop  this,  the  Chief  proclaimed  that  the  inhabitants  must  come 


OJJE    OR   WITCHCRAFT  201 

together  on  a  certain  day.  When  all  were  present  he  ordered  that 
the  Juju  "  Njomm  Aiyung  "  (the  Blood  Juju)  should  be  practised. 
A  cut  was  made  in  the  body  of  each,  and  a  few  drops  of  blood 
allowed  to  flow  into  a  calabash  half  full  of  dry  corn,  which  had 
been  brought  for  the  purpose.  None  were  exempt,  even  the 
babies  born  that  day  gave  one  drop  of  blood,  and,  when  all  had 
been  collected,  each  man,  woman  and  child  was  made  to 
partake  of  the  corn.  This  was  done  so  that  witchcraft  might 
no  longer  be  practised  against  any  of  the  townsfolk ;  for,  after 
mingling  blood  and  then  partaking  of  it,  should  one  of  the 
parties  attempt  to  harm  another,  Njomm  Aiyung  would  catch 
them,  and  the  evil  they  had  tried  to  inflict  would  fall  on 
themselves. 

Much  the  same  ceremony  is  used,  though  more  rarely,  to  J 
bind  friends  in  a  blood  bond.  In  this  case,  after  cuts  have  } 
mutually  been  made,  the  blood  is  allowed  to  flow  into  a  small  1 
clay  basin,  in  which  some  strong  Juju  "  medicine  "  has  already  | 
been  placed.  This  is  then  drunk  by  the  celebrants.  Should  I 
one  of  them  afterwards  act  in  an  unfriendly  way  towards  the  I 
other,  the  Juju  will  catch  him  and  he  will  die. 

Sometimes  the  terror  of  witchcraft  will  scatter  a  whole  town.  *****t- 
Such  was  the  case  with  Oberekkai  ("  Obet  Ekkai,"  Crab  mud), 
which  stands  on  a  little  tributary  of  the  Kwa  river.  This  was, 
in  old  slave-dealing  days,  a  large  and  prosperous  town,  and  its 
Chief,  Nataba,  was  the  wealthiest  man  in  the  District.  As  more 
labour  was  needed  to  develop  his  great  cocoa  and  other  planta- 
tions, he  sent  to  buy  workpeople  from  the  German  Cameroons. 

In  course  of  time  the  emissaries  returned  with  a  band  of 
some  thirty  captives,  whose  great  limbs  and  strong  appearance 
gave  promise  of  excellent  labour  material. 

The  newcomers  kept  apart  from  the  people  of  Oberekkai  and 
refused  to  take  any  share  in  the  social  life  of  the  town.  When 
"  plays "  were  given,  they  hung  together  at  the  edge  of  the 
crowd,  looking  sombrely  on,  but  more  often  gathered  by  stealth 
in  the  night  time,  at  a  farm  hut  belonging  to  one  of  them. 
After  a  while  strange  stories  began  to  spread  of  midnight  rites 
practised  before  unknown  Jujus,  brought  by  the  newcomers 
from  their  own  land.  Then  the  townsfolk  sickened.  One  after 
another   they   died,    and    the    survivors    whispered   that    the 


202      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

captives  were  wizards  from  the  Cameroons,  and  were  "eating  out 
the  hearts  "  of  those  who  had  enslaved  them,  so  that  soon  neither 
man,  woman  nor  child  would  remain  of  the  free-born  folk  of 
Oberekkai.  Terror  took  the  people,  many  fled,  and  in  a 
comparatively  short  time  the  inhabitants  were  reduced  to 
a  mere  remnant.  Nataba,  and  those  of  his  family  who  still 
survived,  determined  on  desperate  measures.  One  after 
another  the  slaves  disappeared.  Their  magic  was  powerless 
to  protect  them  from  the  vengeance  of  the  infuriated  survivors, 
and  Oberekkai  remains,  with  its  untended  plantations,  over 
which  the  bush  is  rapidly  creeping,  a  shrunken  survival  of  its 
former  prosperity. 

*  *  #  #  # 

One  of  the  real  causes  of  the  decrease  in  population  became 
painfully  evident  during  our  stay,  and  proved  to  be  nothing 
more  mysterious  or  romantic  than  the  insanitary  conditions 
prevailing.  When  this  was  pointed  out  to  Chief  Nataba,  he 
answered  in  a  bewildered  kind  of  way  that  native  people  did 
not  notice  bad  smells  like  white  men,  but  professed  himself 
willing  to  obey  orders  about  cleaning  up  the  town,  and  ended 
by  saying,  "Almost  I  believe  what  White  Man  says, that  this  is 
the  cause  of  the  deaths  of  my  people."  A  great  improvement 
in  the  sanitary  conditions  has  now  been  made. 


CHAPTER   XIX 

Oberekkai  to  Etara 

A  few  hours  after  leaving  Oberekkai,  Obutong  was  reached 
once  more,  and  that  evening,  as  we  sat  working  in  the  Rest- 
house,  after  dinner,  a  timid  tap  came  on  the  door.  Outside 
we  found  the  Interpreter  and  a  tall,  slim  girl,  clothed  in  the 
graceful  native  style,  which  is  now  fast  disappearing.  She 
wore  a  piece  of  cloth  passed  under  the  right  arm  and  knotted 
over  the  left  shoulder,  beneath  which  her  only  garment  was  a 
ribbon-like  strip  round  the  waist,  with  ends  falling  down  on  the 
left  side  where  the  upper  cloth  swung  slightly  open.  Round 
her  slender  ankles  and  wrists  were  strings  of  dark  blue  beads, 
and  the  whole  length  of  her  left  arm,  almost  from  shoulder  to 
wrist,  was  ornamented  with  carefully  made  round  scars,  about 
the  size  of  a  wafer.  These,  she  told  us,  it  was  the  custom  of 
her  people  to  make  on  their  arms,  because  after  death  the  ghost 
could  remove  them  one  by  one,  and  sell  them  to  the  spirits  in 
exchange  for  food.  This  is  a  widespread  belief  among  the 
Ekoi,  though  all  scars  to  be  seen  on  their  arms  must  not  be 
attributed  to  this  superstition.  Many  of  them  are  due  to  a 
simple  desire  for  ornament,  and  others  to  the  marks  of  native 
inoculation  described  on  p.  10. 

The  girl  had  come  down  from  a  town  about  60  miles  off, 
to  ask  protection  from  her  father,  who  was  trying  to  force  her 
into  marriage  against  her  will.  When  asked  the  reason  for  her 
unwillingness,  she  answered,  modestly  enough,  that  she  was  too 
young  for  wifehood,  and  did  not  wish  to  be  wed  until  she  had 
learnt  to  know  herself  better,  and  also  understood  more 
thoroughly  the  meaning  of  marriage. 

On  the  following  morning  we  set  off  for  a  climb  along  the 
river-side  to  the  uppermost  of  the  Kwa  falls. 

The  world  has  countless  falls  more  splendid  than  these,  yet 


2o4      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

the  place  has  a  quiet  charm  all  its  own.  On  both  sides  the 
high  banks  are  covered  with  tall  trees,  which  throw  a  cool 
green  light  on  the  dark,  swift-flowing  water.  Scarcely  a  ray  of 
sunlight  filters  through,  and  no  flowers,  save  a  few  heavily- 
scented  white  landolphias,  break  the  restful  green  of  the  gorge. 

The  rocks  here  are  of  foliated  gneiss,  mixed  with  a  con- 
siderable amount  of  manganese.  The  century-old  lap  and 
wash  of  the  water  has  worn  the  stone  into  great  dark  folds, 
which  in  places  enclose  little  stretches  of  golden  sand  and 
shining  pebbles.  The  rocks  in  many  parts  of  the  District  are 
highly  garnetiferous,  and  gold  dust  and  sapphires  are  reported 
from  many  streams,  though,  in  our  case,  careful  washings  only 
resulted  in  the  merest  trace  of  "colour." 

In  the  midst  of  the  river,  immediately  above  the  falls,  is  a 
great  "  pot-hole,"  more  than  7  feet  across,  and  very  deep. 

On  the  further  shore  the  ground  slopes  down  to  a  little  bay, 
over  which  the  trees  arch  from  side  to  side,  till  it  looks  like  a 
dim  cool  arbour.  As  we  sat,  watching  the  lace-like  mist  rise 
from  the  edge  of  the  fall,  a  fawn  and  kid  came  down  to  drink  at 
the  brink.  The  golden  brown  of  their  coats  stood  out  with 
startling  distinctness  against  the  twilight  of  the  alcove,  but, 
though  so  near,  we  sat  motionless,  and  passed  for  the  time 
unnoticed.  Suddenly  the  fawn  looked  across,  and  seemed  to 
give  a  warning  signal.  Both  stood  for  a  while  petrified  with 
astonishment  at  the  sight  of  the  strange  white  creatures  on 
the  other  side,  but  they  seemed  more  curious  than  fearful,  and 
after  watching  us  for  some  time  turned  and  trotted  off  in  a 
leisurely  manner. 

It  would  have  taken  a  harder  heart  than  any  there  to  mar 
the  beauty  of  the  picture,  or  break  the  silence  of  the  place  by 
the  crack  of  a  rifle  ;  so  fawn  and  kid  got  off  safely  for  the 
time. 

The  way  from  the  falls  leads  past  several  leopard  lairs,  over 
tree  trunks  covered  with  orchids  and  flowering  creepers,  down 
to  Obutong  beach.  Here  a  dug-out  canoe  is  stationed  for  the 
ferrying  over  of  traders,  to  supplement  the  somewhat  dangerous 
tie-tie  bridge  which  spans  the  river  immediately  over  one  of  the 
highest  falls. 

On  the  other  side  a  scramble  of  several  hundred  feet  led  up 


Hn 


Central  Falls,  Kwa  River. 


OBEREKKAI    TO    ETARA  205 

to  the  top  of  the  bank.  It  seemed  to  me  that  this  climb  was 
too  steep  and  dangerous  for  traders,  especially  women  traders, 
who  come  down  in  considerable  numbers  with  heavy  loads, 
en  route  for  Calabar;  so  a  broad  flight  of  steps  has  now  been 
made  like  the  one  on  the  other  side  of  the  river. 

The  way  from  Obutong  to  Mbarakpa  is  a  bush  road,  but 
clear  and  broad,  and  bordered  almost  continuously  by  an  end- 
less variety  of  cauliflorous  trees  and  bushes.  These  strangely 
flowering  growths  are  so  rare  in  most  parts  of  the  world  that, 
as  we  learned  from  the  authorities  at  Kew,  they  had  remained 
almost  unstudied,  for  no  collection  of  importance  had  been 
made.  Here,  however,  they  occur  in  vast  numbers,  and  almost 
countless  varieties,  several  hundred  of  which  have  now  been 
sent  to  England.  The  strangeness  of  their  appearance  is 
equalled  in  many  cases  by  their  loveliness ;  for,  in  the  case  of 
Napoleonas  and  many  of  the  more  showy  species,  one  happens 
suddenly  amid  the  deep  green  of  the  bush,  on  a  great  trunk, 
covered  from  root  to  branches  with  myriads  of  flowers.  At 
first  sight  the  trees  look  as  if  wreathed  round  by  garlands,  such 
as  were  offered  at  some  festival  in  Arcady,  or  brought  as  gifts 
to  the  fairy  folk  by  little  old-world  children,  like  those  of 
Domremy  in  the  time  of  Jeanne  d'Arc. 

Above  the  town  of  Mbarakpa  stands  the  Rest-house,  in  a 
clearing  at  the  top  of  a  little  hill.  On  their  own  initiative  the 
inhabitants  had  made  a  broad  road  leading  up  to  it,  which  was 
particularly  charming  of  them,  as  the  town  is  a  small  one,  and 
the  task  of  keeping  even  narrow  roads  in  good  order  is  by  no 
means  popular. 

On  one  occasion,  soon  after  our  arrival,  a  boy  came  up  with 
a  bird  which  he  had  snared,  and  brought  in  as  a  present.  This 
was  placed  in  an  extemporised  cage  on  the  verandah.  During 
the  night  it  seemed  to  flutter  and  beat  its  wings;  then  there  was 
a  noise  as  of  something  falling.  I  was  about  to  go  out  to  investi- 
gate, but  the  march  had  been  a  long  one  that  day,  and  laziness 
counselled  waiting  to  see  if  anything  further  would  happen.  I 
must  have  dropped  off  to  sleep  again,  for  suddenly  the  voice  of 
"  small  boy  "  woke  us  all  with  a  start. 

"  Sar,  Sar,"  he  yelled,  "  leopard  catch  one  fowl,  seize  him 
and  run  for  bush." 


206      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

It  did  not  take  long  to  pick  up  my  rifle  and  follow.  The 
trail  led  to  the  edge  of  the  clearing,  but  the  light  of  the  few 
hastily  brought  lanterns  failed  to  show  anything  further.  Next 
morning  unmistakable  signs  were  found  that  the  beast  had 
devoured  his  prey  in  the  shadow  of  a  bush,  the  outermost 
branches  of  which  must  have  brushed  my  rifle.  Before  seizing 
the  chicken  he  had  paid  a  visit  to  our  verandah,  and  the  noise 
we  had  heard  had  been  caused  by  the  fall  of  the  cage,  which  he 
had  knocked  over  in  trying  to  get  at  the  bird.  The  latter  had 
escaped,  flown  through  the  ventilation  space  at  the  top  of  the 
mud  wall,  and  taken  refuge  on  Bimba's  mosquito  net,  where  it 
was  found  and  liberated  next  day. 

At  Mbarakpa  the  children  have  a  Club,  in  close  imitation  of 
the  "  Egbo  Society"  of  their  parents.     They  usually  came  up 
to  give  a  "  play  "  before  the  Rest-house  during  our  visit,  at  the 
end  of  which  we  often  threw  handfuls  of  "  tenths  "  among  them, . 
for  the  children  dearly  love  a  "scramble."     These  coins  are,j 
as  their  name  denotes,  of  the  value  of  one-tenth  of  a  penny. \ 
It  struck  me  that  the  little  "  Okum  "  or  "  image  "  was  heavily 
handicapped  by  the  cloth  which  concealed  his  face,  so,  as  he 
passed  by,  I  thoughtlessly  pulled  off  the  covering. 

A  cry  went  up  from  the  children,  all  of  whom  stopped  the 
scramble  as  if  at  a  word  of  command.  The  little  "  Okum  " 
covered  his  face  with  his  hands,  and  the  elders  hastened  up  to 
rearrange  the  veils  about  him,  volubly  explaining  that  the  face 
of  the  "  image"  must  never  be  seen  by  his  companions. 


The  whole  country  is  honeycombed  with  waterways,  which 
meander  in  every  direction,  through  the  green  of  the  bush,  like 
the  veins  in  some  giant  leaf.  Across  many  of  the  smaller 
streams  stepping-stones  are  placed,  while,  over  larger  ones,  tree 
trunks  have  been  felled  to  serve  as  bridges. 

On  one  tour,  when  nearing  the  river  before  Nsan,  terrified 
screams  were  heard,  and,  on  hurrying  up,  some  women  were 
found  huddled  together  on  the  near  bank,  while,  from  a  branch 
overhanging  the  far  end  of  the  rough  bridge,  a  great  snake 
dangled.  The  water  was  too  deep  for  fording,  and  the  reptile 
hung,  darting  its  wicked  head  threateningly  hither  and  thither, 


OBEREKKAI    TO    ETARA  207 

as  if  fully  conscious  of  the  terror  it  caused.     A  shot  cleared  the 
way,  and  gave  me  a  fine  skin  some  14  feet  in  length. 

The  name  Nsan  (Thunder  town)  is  a  common  one  in  Ekoi 
folk-lore.  One  of  the  dangers  to  which  Obassi  Osaw,  Obassi 
Nsi,  or  indeed  any  unjust  father,  doomed  his  unloved  son  was  a 
visit  to  a  town  of  this  name,  usually  in  the  underworld,  on  a 
mission  planned  for  the  youth's  destruction.  Such  a  tale  will  be 
found  quoted  in  the  Creation  stories  ("  How  the  Two  Brightest 
Stars  came  into  the  Sky  "),  but  there  are  many  others,  among 
which  the  following  are  perhaps  the  best  known : — 

About  Obassi  Osaw  and  his  Unloved  Son. 

Obassi  Osaw  married  a  woman,  who  bore  him  two  sons,  one 
named  Oru  and  the  other  Agbo.  The  first  work  given  to  them 
was  making  native  traps.  Before  they  set  about  this,  both  went 
and  asked  their  father  to  give  them  each  a  matchet.  He  gave 
one  to  Oru  but  refused  Agbo.  This  last,  therefore,  went  and 
complained  to  his  mother,  "  Our  father  refuses  to  give  me  a 
matchet."  His  mother  gave  him  an  old  one,  which  was  the 
best  she  had. 

Both  sons  went  into  the  bush.  Agbo  caught  many  birds  in 
his  traps,  while  Oru  caught  none.  Agbo  "  dashed  "  twenty  of 
his  birds  to  his  brother,  and  they  took  all  before  their  father. 
The  father  refused  the  birds  of  Agbo  and  drove  him  away,  but 
accepted  those  from  Oru.  Agbo  therefore  took  the  birds  to  his 
mother  and  said,  "My  father  refuses  them."  The  mother  took 
them  and  ate. 

When  the  boys  were  old  enough  to  use  the  gun,  both  went 
to  their  father  to  ask  for  one.  As  before,  Obassi  gave  to  Oru, 
but  refused  Agbo,  and  said,  "  I  do  not  like  you  at  all."  Both 
asked  for  gunpowder,  but  this  again  was  refused  to  the  unloved 
son.  The  mother,  however,  supplied  him  with  a  very  old  gun 
and  a  little  powder. 

Both  lads  went  into  the  bush.  Agbo  killed  many  antelopes, 
then  called  his  brother  who  had  slain  none  and  said,  "  Let  us 
divide  them,  half  for  me,  half  for  you." 

They  then  went  into  the  town,  and  Agbo  said :  "  Take  the 
meat  home,  it  is  for  yourself  and  your  wife." 


I 


208      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

When  Agbo  got  back  to  the  compound,  he  took  his  kill  to 
their  father,  who  refused  it  and  drove  him  away.  Then  he  took 
it  to  his  mother,  who  accepted  and  ate  it. 

At  evening  time  Obassi  sent  to  call  Agbo.  He  pointed  to  a 
cotton  tree  and  said,  "  To-morrow  go  and  cut  it  down." 

When  Agbo  saw  the  huge  girth  of  the  tree,  how  tall  it  was, 
and  how  strong,  he  wept,  and  went  as  usual  to  his  mother,  who 
bade  him  be  comforted.  When  night  had  come,  she  went  with 
a  witch  to  the  place,  and  together  they  sucked  out  the  inside  of 
the  tree.*  At  dawn  the  boy  went  with  his  matchet,  and  after 
two  or  three  blows  the  tree  fell  down. 

Next  Obassi  pointed  to  a  very  high  rock  and  said,  "  To- 
morrow go  and  break  it  into  pieces." 

Again  the  lad  complained  to  his  mother,  and  once  more  she 
went  with  her  witch  friend  in  the  night  time,  and  together  they 
ate  up  all  the  inside  of  the  stone.  At  dawn  the  boy  went,  and 
after  a  few  blows  the  rock  split  as  the  tree  had  done.  People 
went  to  see  the  wonderful  feats  which  Agbo  had  performed, 
and  said  to  Obassi,  "What  is  the  matter  with  this  son?  The 
most  difficult  tasks  he  does  easily." 

Next  Obassi  showed  him  a  very  great  lake  and  said,  "  To- 
morrow dive  within  it,  and  pick  up  a  heavy  stone  which  lies  at 
the  bottom." 

Again  the  boy  complained  to  his  mother  of  this  new  task. 

When  night  came  the  woman  went  and  slipped  into  the 
water.  She  found  the  stone,  bore  it  to  the  edge,  and  laid  it 
down  by  the  brink.  At  daybreak  the  lad  went  and  brought  it 
back  to  his  father. 

Also  Obassi  said,  "  To-morrow  go  to  Nsann,  the  Thunder 
town,  and  ask  for  my  elephant  tusk  which  is  there.  Do  not 
come  into  my  presence  again  unless  you  bring  it." 

At  dawn  his  mother  cooked  plantains  and  gave  him,  saying, 
"  Go  with  good  courage.  I  will  make  the  way  safe  before 
you." 

On  the  road  was  a  woman  named  Ita  Ebat  Ane  (the  Chief 
of  the  ghost  people)  bathing  in  a  spring.  She  was  full  of  boils, 
her  whole  body  stank,  and  her  hands  had  become  useless  because 

*  Witches  are  supposed  to  be  able  to  "  suck  out "  the  inside  of  things,  such  as 
trees,  rocks,  and  even  the  hearts  of  human  beings.     See  p.   192. 


FOBEREKKAI   TO   ETARA  209 

of  the  sores.  For  this  reason  she  was  not  able  to  wash  herself 
well,  and  asked  Agbo  to  help  her. 

The  latter  did  so,  and  bade  her  lean  on  him  as  she  came  up 
from  the  spring.  He  showed  her  a  place  to  sit  down,  and  gave 
her  some  of  his  plantains  to  eat.  A  bird  flew  by ;  he  turned  for 
a  moment  to  watch  it,  and  when  he  looked  back  the  woman 
was  gone. 

The  youth  walked  on  till  he  came  to  the  side  of  a  river. 
There  he  saw  the  same  woman,  who  again  asked  him  to  help 
her  wash  her  body.  He  did  as  before,  and  again  gave  her  his 
plantains.  She  said  to  him,  "Do  you  know  where  you  are 
standing  ?  "  He  answered,  "  Yes,  in  the  middle  of  the  bush." 
She  said  to  him,  "  Nay,  this  is  not  the  bush  at  all."  Again 
she  asked,  "  Do  you  know  who  has  played  a  trick  upon  you  ?" 
He  answered  "  No."  So  she  said,  "  I  will  tell  you  something. 
I  know  that  your  father  does  not  like  you  at  all,  and  has  sent 
you  on  this  journey  that  you  may  die." 

She  knocked  upon  her  belly,*  and  at  the  stroke  the  bush 
became  a  town ;  also  her  sores  disappeared,  and  she  became 
very  beautiful.  She  said  to  him,  "  I  wish  to  help  you."  So 
she  washed  him  all  over  in  the  river,  and  turned  him  up  and 
down.  Then  she  said,  "  I  will  tell  you  where  the  tusks  are,  for 
which  your  father  has  sent.  There  is  the  road  to  the  ghost 
town,  and  here  is  a  piece  of  chalk. t  When  you  reach  the  town 
and  they  cook  chop  for  you,  touch  none  of  it,  but  throw  it  on 
the  ground,  and  see  what  will  happen.  Only  eat  of  your 
plantains  and  this  piece  of  chalk.  When  night  comes  and 
they  ask  you  where  you  will  sleep,  say  you  will  sleep  among 
the  goats,  but,  when  all  the  people  are  asleep,  leave  the  place 
quietly,  and  just  choose  a  manger.  You  will  see  what  the 
ghost  people  will  try  to  do." 

Before  he  left  her,  the  woman  asked  Mfut,  the  Red  Fly,  to  go 
with  him.  She  then  said,  "  Here  is  a  guide  who  will  lead  you. 
Follow  him.     When  Mfut  enters  the  Egbo  shed,  you  will  see  a 

*  To  strike  upon  the  belly  in  Ekoi  legends  produces  the  same  effect  as  the 
stroke  of  a  magic  wand  in  European  fairy  tales. 

f  The  word  used  means  chalk,  but  from  the  explanation  given,  probably  a  kind 
of  edible  clay  or  "  steinbutter "  is  meant  here.  Chalk  is  a  great  Juju,  and 
marks  are  made  with  it  on  the  bodies  of  men,  women,  and  children  to  bring  them 
good  luck. 

S.B.  p 


210      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

very  small  old  chief.  When  the  fly  goes  near  and  settles  on  him, 
kneel  down  and  beg  his  protection,  or  the  ghosts  will  kill  you." 

To  the  fly  she  said,  "  Do  not  forget  or  fail  to  carry  out  my 
message." 

To  Agbo  she  said  further,  "  You  will  see  several  tusks  in  the 
Egbo  house.  Among  them  there  is  a  very  long  one  which 
points  toward  the  town.  That  is  the  one  your  father  means. 
Should  they  be  moved  from  their  place,  wait  until  you  see  on 
which  one  Mfut  will  settle." 

When  Agbo  reached  the  town,  they  brought  him  chop,  but 
he  said : 

"I  never  eat  from  out  the  calabash."*  So  they  brought  a 
plate,  and  put  the  chop  upon  it. 

He  took  this  round  to  the  back  yard,  threw  it  on  the  ground, 
and  saw  that  the  grass  withered  where  the  chop  was  thrown. 

When  night  came,  they  asked,  "  Where  will  you  sleep  ?  "  He 
said,  "  I  will  sleep  among  the  goats." 

When  they  had  all  entered  their  houses  and  closed  the  doors, 
he  went  softly  out,  and  slept  in  the  manger  with  the  cows.  In 
the  middle  of  the  night,  they  sent  a  thunderbolt  to  kill  him.  It 
fell  among  the  goats,  and  struck  many  of  them.  In  the  morning, 
very  early,  he  went  back  and  lay  among  the  dead  goats. 

When  the  people  came  to  see  what  had  happened,  they  saw 
the  mark  in  the  ground  which  the  thunderbolt  had  made,  and 
the  dead  goats  and  other  damage,  but  Agbo  sat  there  without 
a  hurt. 

During  all  the  time  of  his  stay  in  the  town,  he  did  not  eat 
their  chop,  but  only  that  which  he  had  with  him. 

At  length  the  townspeople  grew  tired  and  said,  "  We  will 
try  now  to  send  the  boy  back  with  his  father's  tusk." 

They  brought  all  the  tusks  from  the  Egbo  shed  and  laid  them 
down  before  him,  saying,  "  Choose." 

Agbo  stood  there  with  Mfut  his  guide,  and  the  fly  settled  on 
one  of  them.  He  caught  hold  of  this  and  lifted  it  up.  All  the 
people  clapped   their  hands,  because  he  had  chosen  rightly. 

*  Some  chiefs  may  not  eat  from  calabashes,  and  for  some  plates  are  forbidden. 
In  many  cases  a  carved  wooden  dish  is  used  with  a  lid  which  slides  up  and  down 
on  a  plaited  handle.  These  are  kept  suspended  from  the  roof  of  the  house,  and 
only  taken  down  and  used  on  the  arrival  of  visitors,  for  whom  other  utensils  are 
tabu.    See  p.  219. 


OBEREKKAI    TO   ETARA  211 

They  "  dashed "  him  two  women  slaves  and  three  cows,  and 
appointed  three  men  to  guide  him  home. 

He  returned  to  the  friend  who  had  helped  him  on  his  way 
to  the  ghost  people.  She  asked  him,  ". Where  is  the  piece  of 
chalk  ?  "     He  said,  "  I  have  eaten  it  all." 

The  woman  said,  "  Rest  here  to-night ;  to-morrow  I  will  give 
you  a  matchet  with  which  you  can  cut  a  thunderbolt  in  two. 
When  you  see  one  of  them  coming,  do  this,  then  put  the  half  in 
your  bag.  When  you  see  bees  coming  towards  you,  you  can  cut 
these  also  in  pieces."  She  added,  "  These  three  guides  may 
now  go  back.  Take  your  wives  and  your  cows.  When  you  arrive 
near  your  father's  town,  take  the  half  thunderbolt  from  your 
bag  and  send  it  before  you  to  kill  your  father,  who  is  your 
enemy." 

On  the  boy's  return,  those  townsfolk  who  were  his  friends 
came  out  to  meet  him,  uttering  joyful  cries,  and  beating  upon 
their  mouths  with  their  hands.*  His  mother  heard  the  noise 
also  ran  to  greet  him. 

When  he  saw  her  he  said,  "Do  not  come  near  me  till  you 
have  told  me  one  thing.  Of  us  two,  which  do  you  choose, 
your  husband  or  me  ?  "  She  answered,  "  I  choose  you."  So 
he  said,  "  Pass  me  and  stand  behind." 

Oru  his  brother  also  came,  and  Agbo  said  to  him,  "  Here  is 
the  elephant's  tusk  for  which  I  was  sent.  Go  and  give  it  to 
our  father." 

Oru  took  the  tusk,  and  went  back  with  it.  Then  Agbo  stood 
before  the  town  and  said  : 

"  My  father  tried  to  kill  me.  Therefore  he  sent  me  to  Nsann, 
the  Thunder  town  ;  see  now  what  I  am  about  to  do."  On 
that,  he  opened  his  bag,  and  took  out  half  of  the  thunderbolt 
which  he  had  cleft  in  two  as  the  Queen  of  the  Ghosts  had 
ordered.  He  sent  this  before  him  into  the  town.  It  killed 
his  father  and  all  the  people,  save  those  who  had  come  out  to 
welcome  him. 


About  two  miles  from  Nsan  is  the  town  of  Obung.  This 
had  formerly  been  further  off,  but  according  to  the  statement  of 
one  of  the  inhabitants,  the  town  had  now  "  walked  forward  in 

*  The  Ekoi  sign  of  welcome. 

P   2 


212      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

order  to  dwell  nearer  to  the  D.  C."  The  old  town  had  been 
small  and  in  bad  repair,  while  the  greater  part  of  the  people 
lived  in  scattered  farms.  The  new  town  is  one  of  the  best  in 
the  District,  large  and  clean,  with  broad  well-kept  streets,  and 
plenty  of  space  between  the  compounds. 

Many  years  ago  the  jar  containing  the  Eja  medicine,  which 
belonged  to  the  town,  was  accidentally  broken.  In  terror  as 
to  the  consequences,  the  inhabitants  scattered  in  the  bush, 
hoping  if  they  kept  apart,  and  well  hidden,  to  escape  the 
vengeance  of  the  Juju.  This,  it  seemed  to  them,  might  not 
take  the  trouble  to  search  out  and  strike  down  each  family, 
though  it  would  surely  have  avenged  itself,  could  this  have  been 
brought  about  by  one  fell  stroke.  Now  that  so  long  a  time 
had  elapsed,  the  people  of  Obung  thought  the  danger  might 
have  blown  over,  and  had  gathered  together  once  more  to  form 
a  town.  They  had  bought  a  new  pot  of  Eja  medicine,  and 
seemed  to  be  in  a  very  flourishing  condition. 

During  one  visit  the  rain  came  down  in  torrents;  it  poured 
through  the  roof  of  the  little  Egbo  shed,  and  as  this  had  no 
walls,  the  floor  soon  became  like  a  pond.  The  head  chief 
invited  us  into  his  compound,  where  there  was  a  picturesquely 
arranged  Juju.  While  my  wife  was  sketching  this,  and  I  was 
busy  hearing  a  complaint  brought  by  some  of  the  townspeople, 
my  rifle  suddenly  went  off  with  a  tremendous  report  within 
about  a  yard  of  us.  The  gunboy  had  been  too  interested  in 
the  proceedings  to  pay  attention  to  his  charge,  and  the 
curiosity  of  one  of  the  spectators  in  the  new  type  of  weapon 
proved  too  strong  for  discretion.  While  examining  it  the 
little  safety  catch  became  displaced,  and,  considering  the 
crowded  state  of  the  room,  it  was  almost  miraculous  that  no 
one  was  harmed. 

Beyond  Nsan,  the  next  place  of  importance  is  Netim,  a 
town  about  4  miles  off  which  had  at  first  been  disinclined 
to  submit  to  white  rule,  but  like  all  others,  soon  made  up  its 
mind  to  accept  the  inevitable  with  good  grace.  It  is  the 
largest  town  in  the  District,  and  the  only  pure  Ekoi  one,  the 
inhabitants  of  which  live  in  their  bush  farms  during  the  greater 
part  of  the  year,  and  only  return  to  their  town  houses  in  the 
dry  season,  and  on  special  occasions.     It  was  once  necessary 


Rest-House,  Nsan 


Egbo  House,  Netim. 


OBEREKKAI   TO   ETARA  213 

to  pay  a  visit  to  this  place,  while  staying  at  Nsan,  in  order  to 
inquire  into  the  complaint  of  a  man  who  was  too  ill  to  come 
over  to  plead  his  own  cause.  Soon  after  starting,  the  rain 
began  to  come  down  in  sheets.  It  continued  in  a  steady 
downpour  during  our  visit  and  on  the  way  back.  When  about 
two  miles  from  Nsan,  a  rushing  roaring  sound  made  itself 
heard,  growing  momentarily  louder  and  louder,  much  like 
an  approaching  express  train.  We  had  crossed  no  river 
on  our  way  to  Netim,  only  some  small  streams ;  but  one  of 
these,  which  had  been  a  mere  trickle  flowing  between  steep, 
wide  banks,  had  now  become  a  torrent,  more  than  60  feet 
broad  at  our  crossing  place,  and  over  100  feet  a  little  further 
down.  A  foot  or  so  from  the  bank  the  water  was  up  to  my 
shoulders,  and  the  current  tearing  down  like  a  mill  race,  put 
swimming  out  of  the  question. 

While  we  were  trying  to  make  a  bridge  of  some  sort,  the 
Netim  children,  on  their  way  back  home  from  Nsan  school, 
appeared  on  the  opposite  bank.  Ropes  of  tie-tie  were  thrown 
over  to  them  and  they  were  shown  how  to  fasten  these  to  some 
of  the  trees,  but  this  contrivance  broke  under  the  strain  of  the 
mass  of  water,  tearing  against  the  body  of  the  man  who  tried 
to  cross  by  its  means.  A  way  had  to  be  cut  through  the  bush 
by  the  water-side,  to  search  for  some  place  where  a  crossing 
would  be  possible.  After  some  time  the  trunk  of  a  tree  was 
found  which  had  fallen  half  across  from  the  opposite  bank. 
Another  was  felled,  so  that  it  almost  joined  the  first,  and  by  this 
means  we  managed  to  reach  the  other  side,  and  were  able  to 
get  the  children  over  in  the  same  way. 

From  Netim  to  Ibum  the  march  leads  through  the  midst 
of  the  Forest  Reserve,  a  stretch  of  land  nearly  400  square 
miles  in  extent,  which  has  been  set  aside  by  the  wish  of 
Government  as  a  sanctuary  for  all  wild  bush  things.  Here 
one  evening  we  came  upon  a  great  herd  of  elephants,  which 
melted  silently  into  the  shadows  on  our  approach.  One  cow, 
however,  bolder  or  more  friendly  than  the  rest,  paused  a 
moment  to  wag  its  tail  before  disappearing  in  the  wake  of  its 
companions. 

Once  too,  on  pitching  camp,  the  arrival  of  the  carriers  dis- 
turbed a  leopard,  which  was  busily  eating  an  antelope.     The 


214      IN   THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

meal  was  hardly  begun,  however,  and  the  men  were  delighted 
at  this  welcome  addition  to  their  larder. 

The  inhabitants  of  Ibum  itself  are  far  more  enterprising 
and  hard-working  than  their  kin  below.  Farms  stretch  for 
miles  in  every  direction,  and  one  of  these  shows  a  really 
remarkable  amount  of  energy  ;  for,  in  order  to  make  it,  the 
whole  surface  of  a  small  hill  had  to  be  cleared.  From  the  top 
a  panoramic  view  may  be  gained  to  the  feet  of  a  great  circle 
of  mountains,  by  which  the  landscape  is  shut  in  on  all  sides. 
Standing  in  the  midst  of  this  natural  amphitheatre,  the  place 
has  much  the  appearance  of  a  huge  crater. 

Ibianshi  peak,  near  Ibum,  divides  the  sources  of  the  Calabar 
and  Kwa  rivers.  From  its  summit,  which  can  only  be  reached 
by  a  stiff  climb  up  the  bare  face  of  the  rock,  a  magnificent 
view  can  be  obtained  of  the  mass  of  hills  in  the  middle  of  the 
Forest  Reserve.  These,  with  their  sharply  defined  outlines  of 
every  conceivable  shape,  seem  so  closely  huddled  together  that 
it  looks  almost  as  if  they  had  been  suddenly  dropped  in  a  heap 
by  some  Titan  grown  weary  of  carrying  them  further.  It 
was  on  this  peak  that  the  beautiful  specimen  of  Napoleona 
was  found,  which  is  not  only  a  new  variety  of  this  interesting 
group,  but  shows  an  inflorescence  hitherto  unknown.  I  have 
ventured  to  call  it  Egertoni,  after  the  former  Governor  of 
Southern  Nigeria,  who  managed  somehow,  amid  all  his  work, 
to  keep  track  with,  and  encourage,  every  effort  of  his  sub- 
ordinates, even  in  so  small  a  matter  as  a  botany  collection. 
Another  has  been  named  after  the  Provincial  Commissioner, 
Mr.  Widenham  Fosbery,  C.M.G.  It  is  impossible  adequately 
to  express  my  thanks  to  both  for  the  help  and  encouragement 
so  generously  extended.  A  third  has  been  called  Alexandri, 
after  my  friend  and  former  leader  Boyd  Alexander.  The  whole 
family  bears  the  name  of  his  hero,  Napoleon,  so  it  seems  fitting 
that  one  of  them  should  also  bear  his  own. 

From  Ibum  the  way  is  steep  and  difficult,  almost  untouched 
by  the  hand  of  man,  and  very  beautiful  ;  though,  as  my 
companions  had  to  be  lowered  down  huge  boulders,  or  occasion- 
ally thrown  upward  to  be  clutched  and  pulled  into  safety  by 
someone  stationed  above,  it  was  not  unnatural  that  they  should 
express  a  preference  for  the  humbler  beauties  of  lowlier  paths. 


■2  -° 

5  "rt 


o  ^ 


^5 


y. 


-^ 
^ 


u 


z 


OBEREKKAI    TO    ETARA  215 

The  road  often  leads  down  the  faces  of  small  cataracts 
which  dash  from  the  steep  hill-sides  to  the  rivers  below,  one  of 
the  most  important  of  which  is  the  River  Ukpon.  As  we 
wished  to  explore  this,  we  waded,  on  one  occasion,  for  a  con- 
siderable distance  up  its  shallow  bed.  After  a  while  the  water 
deepened ;  a  great  tree  trunk  jutted  out  of  the  bank  at  a  con- 
venient angle,  and  my  companions  elected  to  rest  there  while  I 
went  on.  I  was  just  turning  to  leave  them,  when  the  orderly, 
after  saluting  with  great  punctiliousness,  very  slowly  and 
respectfully  begged  leave  to  inform  us  that  beneath  that  par- 
ticular tree  was  the  home  of  a  crocodile,  the  eggs  of  which 
the  carriers  had  just  discovered  and  were  taking  home  for 
supper. 

In  less  time  than  it  takes  to  write,  my  companions  had  left 
their  seat  and  reached  shallow  water,  nearly  a  quarter  of  a  mile 
down  stream  ! 

Some  of  the  people  of  Ibum  have  now  migrated  to  the  12- 
mile-distant  town  of  Etara,  for,  as  the  chief  explained  sadly, 
bachelors  were  growing  scarce  in  his  town,  and  the  young  and 
beautiful  women  did  not  find  sufficient  choice  of  wooers,  so 
wished  to  descend  to  the  larger  town  below. 

In  many  of  the  houses  of  Etara  elaborate  graves  are  to  be 
seen.  These  usually  take  the  form  of  a  low  divan  made  of 
mud,  8  to  10  feet  long,  3  feet  wide,  and  about  i£  feet  high.  All 
along  the  edge  plates  and  dishes  have  been  pressed  into  the 
mud  when  soft.  These  were  first  broken,  as  is  always  done 
with  the  property  of  the  dead,  but  the  hardening  mud  acts  as 
cement  to  hold  them  together.  In  the  case  of  a  rich  man,  a 
fresh  coating  of  mud  is  plastered  over  the  wall  behind  the 
grave,  and  in  this  more  plates  and  dishes  are  fixed  in  a  rough 
design. 


CHAPTER   XX 

Ekoi  of  the  Cross  River 

The  first  town  beyond  the  Oban-Ikom  boundary  is  Abijang. 
Here  the  Ekoi  have  intermarried  to  a  considerable  extent  with 
their  neighbours  in  the  twin  town  of  Akam,  which  came  over 


Egbo  House. 

from  Obubra  and  settled  so  close  to  Abijang  that  at  first  sight 
the  two  towns  seem  to  form  only  one. 

The  decoration  of  some  of  the  compounds,  and  of  the  Egbo 
house,  is  different  to  that  in  most  Ekoi  towns,  though  a  little 
later  we  came  on  a  particularly  beautiful  example  of  this  style 
made  by  an  Oban  man.  Instead  of  the  pattern  being  moulded 
in  relief  on  the  surface  of  the  wall,  after  the  latter  has  been 
roughly  mudded  to  form  a  background,  the  design  here  is  first 
marked  on  the  surface,  which   is  then   dug  out  between  the 


EKOI    OF   THE   CROSS    RIVER  217 

lines,  so  as  to  leave  the  pattern  raised.  This  is  afterwards  picked 
out  in  white  paint,  and  over  all  raised  figures  are  sometimes 
added,  in  the  same  manner  as  those  of  other  parts.  The  figures 
shown  in  the  drawing  were  variously  explained  as  Obassi  Osaw, 
his  wife  and  Nimm  (Snake),  Obassi  Osaw  and  Nimm  in  her 
three  shapes  (woman,  snake,  and  crocodile),  Obassi  Osaw  and 
Obassi  Nsi  with  Nimm. 

The  clay  near  this  part  of  the  Cross  River  is  specially  suitable 
for  pottery,  and  particularly  beautiful  examples  are  therefore  to 
be  found  in  the  neighbourhood. 

The  head  chief  of  Abijang  has  literally  dozens  of  skulls 
embedded  in  the  mud  before  the  entrance  to  his  room,  and 
also  in  the  ends  and  sides  of  the  mud  couches  along  the  walls. 
The  atmosphere  of  this  apartment  is  singularly  evil-smelling, 
even  for  this  part  of  the  world,  owing  to  a  small  pool  of 
fermenting  palm  wine  before  the  entrance. 

In  one  corner  of  the  room  was  a  very  old,  roughly-carved, 
wooden  figure,  holding  its  pointed  beard  with  its  right  hand. 
The  type  of  head  is  curiously  like  some  ancient  Egyptian 
burial  masks  discovered  by  my  late  brother-in-law,  Dr.  Hugh 
Baker,  in  the  sand  of  the  Egyptian  oasis  of  Kharga. 

At  Nchofan,  the  next  place  of  importance  on  the  river,  where 
the  people  are  practically  pure  Ekoi,  a  wonderful  variety  of 
designs  was  to  be  found. 

Here  the  children  came  to  give  a  very  charming  "  play." 
The  performers  numbered  about  fifty  boys  and  girls,  dressed  in 
gay-coloured  cloth  and  chains  of  beads,  with  ceintures,  to  which 
were  attached  little  bunches  of  brass  bells,  or  tiny  rattles, 
made  from  the  seeds  of  the  "  Agara  "  tree,  with  three  big  pods 
brightly  painted  in  red  and  white,  caught  together  by  strings 
and  tied  just  below  each  knee.  In  their  right  hands  they  bore 
thin  play-swords  of  white  wood,  decorated  with  Nsibidi  writing, 
with  long  fringes  of  palm  fibre  dyed  red. 

The  drum  belonging  to  the  club  was  a  wonderful  example  of 
its  kind.  It  was  cut  from  a  solid  piece  of  wood,  trough-shaped, 
and  with  a  roll  of  soft  cloth  fastened  on  its  edge.  This  was 
held  in  place  by  nails,  which  also  served  to  separate  from  one 
another  rough  slabs  of  cork  wood,  which  were  laid  across  it, 
much  in  the  manner  of  a  xylophone.   At  either  end  sat  a  carved 


2i8      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

figure,  male  to  the  right,  female  to  the  left,  and  to  the  right  hand 
of  the  latter,  raised  on  a  post,  was  Tortoise.  These  again  were 
explained  to  us  in  two  ways.  First,  as  the  three  principal  per- 
sonages in  the  well-known  story,  "  How  Obassi  Osaw  proved 
the  Wisdom  of  Tortoise "  ;  and  secondly,  as  Obassi  Osaw, 
Obassi  Nsi  and  Tortoise,  representing  certain  attributes  of  the 
latter,  much  in  the  same  way  as  in  the  worship  of  Aphrodite 
Hestiaea. 

Two  performers  sat  facing  each  other,  at  different  ends  of  the 
instrument,  beating  out  the  songs  of  the  club,  real  "  Lieder 
ohne  Worte,"— for  this  society,  unlike  most  others,  has  no  song 
which  can  be  put  into  words  and  sung.  The  subject  of  drum 
songs  will  be  found  treated  more  fully  in  Chapter  XXVII. 

On  this  occasion  the  songs  beaten  upon  the  drum  were — 

"  Makara       araw  ba,   kun       abonn  akam  asum. 

(If)  white  man  come  not,  then  the  children  would  become  slaves." 

The  second  referred  to  the  coming  of  the  first  white  women  to 
Insofan — 

«'  Nkanang  oiyenn  ntuk    nji,        njum       nji     'me   nyenn   A. 
(I)  never    saw     such  as  this,  a  thing  as  this     I       saw    not." 

The  head  chief  of  Insofan  possessed  a  particularly  elaborate 
example  of  a  "  chief's  dish,"  which  he  unfortunately  declined  to 
sell  at  any  price,  though  he  was  delighted  with  the  "  dash  "  of 
tobacco  leaves,  which  were  given  him  for  allowing  it  to  be 
drawn.  These  dishes  are  carved,  lid  and  all,  from  solid  blocks 
of  wood,  and  are  suspended,  by  a  string  passing  through  base 
and  lid,  from  the  roofs  of  the  houses  of  head  chiefs,  till  a 
neighbouring  chief,  of  equal  or  superior  position,  comes  on  a 
visit.  The  dish  is  then  taken  down  and  in  it  the  visitor's  food 
is  served. 

Another  object  of  interest  in  the  same  room  was  a  drum- 
shaped  box  of  antelope  and  leopard  skin,  in  which  were  kept 
the  caps  worn  by  the  principal  chiefs  of  Insofan  for  many 
generations. 

Before  the  entrance  was  a  little  pool  for  ghost  libations,  like 
the  one  already  described  at  Abijang,  but  surrounded  by  a  crowd 
of  objects,  old  bronze  bracelets  and  anklets,  Nimm  stones  of 


EKOI    OF   THE    CROSS    RIVER 


219 


varying  sizes,  long  stones  roughly  cubical,  and  human  thigh 
bones. 

On  first  entering  one  of  the  compounds,  with  the  idea  of  pur- 
chasing typical  examples  of  pottery,  &c,  the  women  rushed,  in 
a  state  of  panic,  to 
hide  their  treasures, 
but  no  sooner  did 
they  understand  that 
we  wished  to  take 
away  nothing  that 
they  did  not  want  to 
sell,  and  at  a  price 
for  which  they  were 
willing  to  exchange, 
than  we  were  almost 
mobbed  by  would-be 
sellers. 

A    march    of    13  chief's  Dishl 

miles  took  us  once  more  across  the  Oban  border,  to  the  ruined 
town  of  Mkpott.  On  the  way  thither  a  deserted  farm  was 
passed,  close  to  the  overgrown  road  of 
Itaka.  Here,  before  the  abandoned  Juju 
tree,  one  of  the  pointed  stones  was  found 
roughly  sugar  loaf  in  shape,  which  might 
have  been  a  fragment  of  the  larger  piece 
afterwards  discovered  before  the  Egbo 
house  at  Mkpott.  Within  the  latter  build- 
ing, just  in  front  of  the  mud  base  in  which 
the  great  end  pillar  is  embedded,  a  splendid 
example  of  the  "  Etai  Ngbe  "  was  to  be 
found,  the  sides  of  which  were  absolutely 
clear  cut  and  four  square  (see  p.  172). 
Hat  Box.  In  the  lowest  circle  of  this  base  was  a 

Nimm  stone,  which  served  to  close  up  a  small  hole  in  which 
was  concealed  "medicine"  to  ensure  the  birth  of  many 
children  to  the  townsfolk. 

The  former  inhabitants  of  this  once  large  and  flourishing 
town  have  now  divided,  and  formed  several  smaller  ones,  each 
under  the  leadership  of  its  particular  chief  or  group  of  chiefs. 


220      IN   THE   SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

In  one  of  the  deserted  houses  the  "treasure  chamber" 
remains  intact,  and  is  a  really  beautiful  specimen  of  native 
ornamentation.  No  colour  is  employed ;  the  whole  is  made  of 
clay,  with  a  surface  smooth  as  that  of  pottery.  The  pattern, 
of  conventionalised  leaves,  is  left  in  relief  by  the  depression  of 
the  background,  like  those  already  described  at  Abijang. 

At  the  next  stopping  place,  Ewaw-Offong,  a  curious  little 
custom  came  to  our  notice.  As  usual,  on  arriving  in  a  town, 
a  stand  was  built  for  the  cases  of  botanical  specimens.  So  soon 
as  this  was  finished  the  carriers  brought  logs  and  lighted  a  fire 
beneath.  The  spot  chosen  was  under  the  sheltering  eaves 
of  a  house.  We  had  found  it  better  to  have  the  little  erections 
built  outside  rather  than  within  the  compounds,  and  quite  near 
to  our  own  quarters,  for  it  was  thus  easier  to  see  that  the  fires 
were  not  allowed  to  die  out. 

In  the  centre  of  the  open  space  before  the  Egbo  house  a 
Juju  tree  is  to  be  seen,  springing  from  a  heap  of  small  stones 
brought  as  offerings.  Round  this  again  a  circle  of  larger  stones 
is  laid,  to  serve  as  seats  for  head  men  when  special  rites  are 
being  performed. 

After  dark  had  fallen,  a  bright  light  suddenly  sprang  out  from 
the  edge  of  the  heap  of  stones.  So  brilliant  was  it  that  every 
leaf  and  flower  on  the  Juju  tree  stood  out  against  the  night. 
The  fire  rose  into  a  great  flare,  which  flickered  and  wavered  over  a 
semi-circle  of  men  who  had  silently  gathered  in  the  background, 
then  settled  down  to  a  clear  steady  flame.  Investigation 
showed  this  to  be  caused  by  a  resin  which  exudes  from  the 
Njaii  Asung  cactus. 

The  reason  for  the  ceremony  proved  to  be  that,  in  this  town 
as  in  all  which  possess  the  Juju  Ngbe  Abum  Obbaw,  it  is 
unlawful  for  a  fire  to  be  lit  outside  the  compound  walls.  Should 
this  rule  be  infringed,  according  to  old  tradition,  the  Juju  which 
protects  the  town  from  leopards  will  no  longer  avail.  The 
very  night  after  the  offending  fire  has  been  lighted  one  of  these 
beasts  will  break  through  and  carry  off  some  of  the  goats  or 
sheep.  Only  by  means  of  the  rite  described  above  can  the 
power  of  the  outraged  Juju  be  restored. 


CHAPTER    XXI 

Funeral  Ceremonies 

In  December,  1907,  the  head  chief  of  Oban,  Itorok  by  name, 
died.  The  funeral  was  typical  of  those  of  the  more  important 
members  of  his  race,  so  an  account  of  it  may  not  be  without 
interest. 

First,  water  was  heated,  and  the  body  washed.  It  was  then 
clothed  in  the  best  robes  which  had  been  owned  by  the  dead 
man,  and  enveloped  in  a  broad  native  mat  of  plaited  reed. 
Pieces  of  new  cloth  were  wound  round  this,  and  then  three 
more  mats  were  added  fastened  with  tie-tie. 

The  body  was  then  carried  into  the  bush,  about  100  yards 
from  the  town,  and  laid  on  the  ground,  while  a  grave  6  feet  by 
6  feet  was  dug  in  the  presence  of  all  the  chiefs. 

When  the  grave  was  ready,  Agbashan,  the  dead  man's  chief 
representative,  approached,  with  two  bottles,  one  containing 
rum  and  the  other  Juju  "  medicine."  He  had  smeared  red  and 
yellow  powder  over  his  face,  and  poured  out  the  spirit  as  a 
libation,  while  he  took  some  of  the  "  medicine  "  into  his  mouth, 
and  spat  it  out  near  the  head  of  the  corpse.  Next  he  placed 
two  dishes  in  the  grave  where  the  feet  would  lie,  and  a  cup  and 
spoon  by  the  head. 

A  net  was  then  brought,  and  divided  into  three  pieces,  which 
were  placed  under  the  body,  and,  by  means  of  these,  six  of  the 
dead  man's  "  members "  lowered  the  corpse  into  the  grave. 
While  this  was  being  done  Chief  Itaban  took  a  Juju  spear  and 
struck  it  twenty-five  times  against  the  heart,  counting  each 
stroke.  Each  time  that  he  touched  the  body  all  those  present 
called  out  "  Owe."  All  this  time  three  young  men  were  beat- 
ing drums,  very  softly,  and  a  sound  was  heard,  the  origin  of 
which  was  difficult  to  locate.  This  was  said  to  be  the  voice  of 
the   invisible  Egbo,  lamenting  over  the  dead   chief.      It  was 


222      IN   THE   SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

unfortunately  impossible  to  ascertain  the  actual  cause  of  the 
sound,  but  it  was  produced  by  something  quite  different  to  the 
bull-roarer. 

The  nets  were  next  drawn  up,  another  cloth  was  spread  over 
the  body,  and  three  calabashes  filled  with  earth  were  placed 
upon  it.     Then  the  grave  was  filled  in. 

After  this  a  brass  pan  was  brought,  holes  were  made  in  it, 
and  it  was  set  at  the  head  of  the  mound.  A  sapling  was  taken 
from  one  of  the  Juju  trees  and  planted  close  by. 

The  burial  took  place  in  the  bush  instead  of  within  the  house, 
as  is  usual  with  persons  of  distinction,  because  the  deceased 
had  died  of  dysentery  and  cough,  which  are  considered  very 
infectious. 

All  this  time  the  women,  who  are  never  allowed  to  attend 
/  the  funeral  of  a  chief,  sat  in  the  house  of  the  dead  man, 
V^naked  save  for  loin  cloths,  and  weeping  by  an  empty  coffin, 
which,  when  the  real  burial  was  over,  was  let  down  into  a  hole 
in  a  small  inner  room.  After  this  the  house  was  cleared  of  all 
inhabitants,  and  young  palm  leaves  were  tied  against  the 
lintels  as  a  sign  that  none  might  enter,  as  well  as  to  keep  out 
bad  ghosts  and  spirits. 

On  the  eighth  day  the  door  was  opened,  and  a  goat  and  cow 
were  sacrificed.  The  former  was  placed  with  an  offering  of 
plantains  under  the  Juju  Obassi  Nsi,  in  the  courtyard.  The 
latter  was  killed,  as  is  always  the  case  under  such  circumstances, 
by  suffocation,  through  having  its  mouth  and  nostrils  tightly 
bound  round.  Then  the  various  Clubs  to  which  the  dead  man  had 
belonged  came  and  gave  plays,  during  which  all  the  performers 
had  yellow  powder  rubbed  over  their  faces.  At  all  funeral 
dances  free  men  carry  a  spear  in  both  hands,  while  those  not 
free  are  only  allowed  to  hold  one  in  the  right  hand. 

A  wake  was  held  more  or  less  continuously  for  several  months, 
especially  when  relays  of  kinsfolk  arrived  from  long  distances. 
Had  it  not  been  that  Government  had  already  taken  over  the 
/"District,  the  six  members  who  lowered  the  coffin  would  probably 
\have  been  murdered,  and  buried  in  their  master's  grave.  By 
ancient  custom  this  was  always  done,  so  that  a  chief  might  not 
arrive  servantless  in  the  spirit  world. 

The  Egbo  was  supposed  to  have  fled  from  the  town  after  the 


Image  "  of  the  Igumi  Club. 


FUNERAL   CEREMONIES  223 

death  of  Itorok,  so  during  February  a  hunt  was  instituted,  in 
the  course  of  which  it  was  reported  to  be  discovered  and 
captured,  and  was  then  conducted  back  in  great  triumph. 

Two  years  after  the  funeral  above  described,  the  head  men 
of  Oban  came  up  to  the  station  to  invite  us  to  be  present  at  a 
great  play  which  was  to  be  held  in  honour  of  the  same  chief, 
and  act  as  a  finale  to  the  long  burial  rites. 

In  the  principal  compounds  stands  had  been  dressed,  much 
like  the  stalls  of  a  country  fair.  These  were  spread  with 
blankets  or  other  bright  cloths,  and  hung  round  with  gay 
handkerchiefs  and  gaudy  prints.  On  them  was  set  out  an  array 
of  china,  from  beautiful  old  Dutch  pieces — brought  by  early 
traders — and  groups  of  "  cottage"  figures,  down  to  the  crudest 
and  coarsest  examples  of  present-day  earthenware. 

The  Ekoi  happened  to  be  very  pleased  with  me,  as  my 
efforts  to  procure  gunpowder  with  which  to  protect  their  farms 
from  the  ravages  of  buffalo  and  elephant,  and  their  cattle  from 
those  of  leopard  and  wild  cat,  had  just  been  successful.  They 
well  knew  my  interest  in  all  their  old  customs,  and  it  was  to  a 
child-like  wish  to  do  something  to  show  gratitude  for  my  efforts 
in  their  behalf,  that  I  put  down  the  fact  that  two  figures  which 
here,  at  any  rate,  never  before  had  shown  themselves  to  a  white 
man,  suddenly  appeared  before  us. 

The  first,  a  dark  mask  covered  with  skin,  and  with  a  ridiculous 
snake-like  nose,  was  called  Igumi,  the  name  of  a  tree  with  tiny 
inconspicuous  flowers,  and  a  leaf  much  like  that  of  Virginia 
Creeper.  This  tree  has  a  bad  name  among  the  natives,  partly 
because  its  hollow  stems  harbour  innumerable  ants,  and  partly 
for  supposed  occult  properties.  The  Club  had  originally  been 
formed  to  wage  war  on  the  neighbouring  town  of  Aking,  and 
the  curious  head  adopted  as  its  standard  or  device. 

Roars  of  laughter  greeted  the  image,  and  were  redoubled 
as  the  other  figure  sprang  forward,  and  came  bobbing  and 
dancing  in  our  direction.  This,  Ojjen  by  name,  was  a  sight, 
which  for  actual  grisly  horror  would  be  hard  to  beat.  On  its 
head  it  bore  a  human  skull,  or  rather  dried  head,  the  mouth  of 
which  was  fixed  open  in  a  ghastly  grin.  The  parched  skin  was 
wrinkled  round  the  eye-holes  in  a  way  which  produced  the 
effect  of  ghoulish  merriment.     Words   can  give  but  a   feeble 


224      IN   THE   SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

impression  of  the  loathsome  horror  of  this  apparition,  as  it 
mopped  and  mowed  in  the  brilliant  sunlight,  among  the  gay 
dresses  and  gayer  laughter  of  the  delighted  multitude.  The 
accompanying  photograph  gives  no  idea  of  the  ghastliness  of 
its  appearance.  As  in  so  many  cases,  the  camera  has  utterly 
failed  to  catch  the  spirit  of  the  thing. 

The  skull  is  a  great  Juju.  It  was  brought  by  the  Ekoi  when 
they  trekked  down  from  their  old  home  near  Mkpott,  and  now 
forms  the  chief  treasure  of  the  "company"  "  Etim  Ngbe  "  or 
"  Ojjen."  Its  present-day  use  is  interesting  enough.  On  the 
marriage  of  a  member  of  the  club,  or  of  any  man  rich  enough 
to  pay  for  the  privilege,  it  is  carried  to  the  door  of  the  bride- 
chamber.  There  it  remains,  a  grim  sentinel  on  the  threshold, 
till  the  company  come  to  fetch  it  again  at  dawn.  It  is  thought 
that  this  will  ensure  fidelity  on  the  part  of  the  wife,  for,  should 
she  attempt  to  leave  her  husband,  the  horrible  head  would 
follow  her  through  the  night,  and,  if  necessary,  summon  to  its 
aid  countless  hordes  of  dim  mowing  shapes  from  the  ghost 
towns,  which  would  throng  around  and  block  the  way  to  the 
house  of  another  lover. 


The  "  customs "  now  to  be  described  are  typical  of  those 
carried  out  at  the  funeral  of  every  woman  of  importance. 

On  the  death  of  Adet  Awaw,  one  of  the  chief  women  of  Oban, 
the  friends  and  relatives,  who  had  gathered  round  her  bed, 
remained  for  a  short  time  bewailing  their  loss.  Then  water 
was  heated,  and  the  women  washed  the  corpse.  New  clothes 
were  placed  upon  it,  and  the  hair  was  elaborately  arranged  in 
tufts.  By  ancient  custom  no  coffin  was  provided,  but  in  this 
case  one  was  brought.  It  was  lined  with  new  cloths,  and  on 
these  four  pillows  were  laid,  one  for  the  feet,  one  for  the  head, 
and  one  under  each  elbow.  The  hands  were  folded  across  the 
breast,  and,  after  the  coffin  had  been  nailed  down,  a  new  cloth 
was  spread  upon  it.  The  women  now  accompanied  it  outside 
the  house,  and  a  goat  and  cow  were  sacrificed  while  the  men 
dug  a  grave,  6  feet  deep,  in  one  of  the  rooms.  When  all  was 
ready  the  coffin  was  carried  back,  and  gently  lowered.  Then 
the  earth  was  filled  in  again,  and  smoothed  over. 

Various  men's  societies  of  which  the  dead  woman  had  been 


FUNERAL    CEREMONIES  225 

an  honorary  member,  came;  to  play,  and  the  women's  society, 
Ekkpa,  gave  a  performance.  This  is  the  same  as  the  one 
called  "  06m  "  at  Big  Kwa  town,  and  its  rites  are  always  held 
on  the  death  of  a  member.  About  January,  when  the  bush  is 
cut  for  farms,  and  in  the  new  yam  season,  September  to  October, 
Ekkpa  plays  are  also  given.  By  some  people  this  society  is 
thought  so  powerful  as  to  take  for  women  the  place  of  the 
men's  Egbo.  The  Juju  is  strong  enough  to  kill  a  man,  and 
can  ward  off  sickness — especially  small-pox — from  family  or 
town. 

On  the  occasion  of  the  death  of  Adet  Awaw  the  members  of 
Ekkpa  ran  maenad-like  round  the  town  in  a  nearly  naked  state  ; 
many  brandished  guns  and  swords,  and  all  looked  fierce  and  wild. 
The  men  kept  carefully  out  of  sight,  though  their  presence  is 
not  absolutely  forbidden  in  daylight,  but  after  dark  no  man 
must  show  his  face.  The  women  dance  stark  naked  the 
whole  night  through,  and,  should  any  man  attempt  so  much  as 
a  glance  at  these  mysteries,  his  strength  will  ebb  away,  and  all 
his  vital  powers  shrivel  up  for  ever. 

Men  may  join  the  cult  on  payment  of  four  "  wires  "  and  3d. 
worth  of  spirit,  but  they  can  only  be  regarded  as  outside 
members,  and  have  no  part  in  the  ceremonies. 

While  the  "  plays  "  were  being  given  in  honour  of  Adet,  the 
animals  offered  for  sacrifice  were  divided.  When  this  had  been 
done  the  Head  of  the  House  arose,  and  took  four  small  pieces 
of  goat's  flesh,  and  some  boiled  plantains.  He  called  on  the 
names  of  his  principal  ancestors,  and  said  : 

"  Listen,  my  family  !  Here  is  the  goat  we  have  killed  for 
our  sister  who  has  just  died.  Here  is  your  portion."  On  this 
he  threw  the  meat  into  the  middle  of  the  court,  crying,  "  It 
is  time  for  us  to  eat." 

The  men  and  women  gathered  together  in  separate  groups, 
and  sat  down,  and  the  meat  was  divided  between  them.  Next 
the  sister  of  Adet  Awaw  stood  up,  and  gave  a  small  quantity  of 
spirit  to  all.  Then  the  Head  of  the  House  poured  out  upon  the 
ground  what  was  left,  so  that  the  ghosts  might  also  drink, 
calling,  "  Here  is  rum  for  you."  After  this  the  people  left  the 
compound,  but  a  wake  lasting  several  weeks  was  held  in  the 
dead  woman's  honour. 

s.B.  Q 


226      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

CA  goat  is  always  sacrificed  at  funerals,  and  in  explanation  of 
this  custom  the  following  story  is  told : — 

Why  a  Goat  is  Sacrificed  at  every  Funeral. 

One  day  the  ghost  of  a  woman  came  back  to  earth.  With 
her  she  brought  a  magic  cloth,  which  she  laid  down  by  the  side 
of  the  road  near  a  town,  before  entering. 

A  boy  saw  the  cloth  by  the  wayside,  and  took  it  up.  He 
ran  away,  and  when  the  ghost  came  back  for  it,  lo  !  it  was 
gone. 

She  went  back  into  the  town,  crying,  "  Who  has  taken  my 
property?"  The  cloth  itself  answered,  and  said,  "  A  live  person 
took  me.  Here  I  am  tied  round  this  boy's  loins."  The  boy 
feared  greatly.  He  ran  away,  and  said  to  himself,  "  How  is  it 
that  a  cloth  can  talk  like  a  human  being  ?  "  He  took  it  off  and 
threw  it  over  a  he-goat.  The  goat  tied  it  round  his  middle. 
The  Ghost  Woman  still  cried,  and  the  cloth  answered  her. 
Then  He-goat  also  said,  "  Strange  !  I  never  before  saw  a  lifeless 
thing  that  could  talk  !  "  He  ran  and  buried  himself  in  the  earth, 
but  left  one  hoof  above  ground. 

When  the  ghost  passed  by,  this  foot  trembled.  She  chopped 
at  it  with  a  matchet,  and  saw  blood  running  out.  Then  she 
took  hold  and  pulled,  till  out  came  the  goat  with  the  cloth  still 
tied  round  him.  She  cried  aloud,  and  at  her  call  other  ghosts 
came.  They  spat  upon  the  goat,  and  threw  foul  things  upon 
his  body,  because  he  had  taken  the  cloth.  That  is  the  reason 
why  he-goats  smell.  Also  they  said,  "  From  to-day,  whenever 
anyone  dies,  they  may  sacrifice  you."  That  is  the  reason  why 
native  people  always  kill  a  goat  at  funeral  ceremonies. 


The  final  rites  are  carried  out  at  no  special  date,  but  at  any 
time  when  the  relatives  have  got  together  enough  money  and 
food.  Should  the  ceremonies  be  delayed  for  more  than  two  or 
three  years,  the  townspeople  would  talk  behind  the  back  of  the 
man  responsible,  and  say,  "  Look  how  long  it  is  since  the  death 
of  his  relative,  and  he  has  never  yet  given  a  play !  " 

The  dread  of  being  looked  down  upon  for  such  a  reason 
causes  survivors  to  use  every  effort  to  carry  out  the  rites  of 


FUNERAL   CEREMONIES  227 

their  dead  kin  with  as  little  delay  as  possible,  and  with  almost 
incredible  lavishness. 

***** 

When  a  stranger  dies  he  is  not  buried  in  the  bush,  but  on  the 
road  by  which  he  entered  the  town,  so  that  his  spirit  may 
easily  find  the  path  back  to  his  own  place,  or  at  least  see  the 
way  to  his  home,  and  listen  and  watch  for  the  coming  of 
friends. 

Certain  burial  customs  are  illustrated  by  the  following  story : 

Why  Chiefs  are  Buried  in  their  Houses. 

Once  a  woman  had  a  son.  He  prepared  his  goods  to  carry 
them  to  market  in  a  far-off  town.  The  mother  said,  "  Do  not 
leave  me,  because  I  am  old  now,  and  near  to  my  death."  The 
son  answered,  "  I  go,  but  will  soon  come  back."  He  went  to 
the  trading  place  and  began  to  sell  his  wares.  Then  he  thought 
of  his  mother  and  looked  within  himself,  and  saw  that  she 
could  only  live  for  two  more  days ;  so  started  back  home.  When 
he  was  only  about  11  miles  off  he  again  looked  within  him- 
self, and  saw,  and  said,  "  My  old  mother,  only  one  day  left  for 
her !  "  When  he  reached  home  the  woman  cried,  "  O  my  son, 
you  have  come  !  "  She  looked  at  him  with  great  gladness, 
and  that  same  day,  before  the  sun  sank,  she  died. 

At  midnight  the  townspeople  chose  a  few  of  their  number  to 
go  and  dig  a  grave,  but  the  son  thought  within  himself,  "  I 
will  bury  my  old  mother  without  the  knowledge  of  anyone." 
He  went  alone  to  the  small  inner  room  of  his  house  and  there 
dug  a  grave.  The  coffin  he  made  with  his  own  hands,  and  at 
midnight  buried  his  mother  alone. 

Afterwards  he  made  another  coffin  and  placed  it  outside,  so 
that  all  who  entered  the  compound  should  see  it.  In  the 
morning  he  called  together  his  "  age  class  "  and  that  of  his 
mother.  He  feasted  them,  and  at  eight  o'clock  they  started 
to  carry  the  coffin  into  the  bush  where  the  grave  had  been  dug. 
There  they  laid  it  down  and  opened  it,  but  lo  !  there  was  nothing 
within  save  some  stones.  So  they  buried  it,  full  of  wonder,  and 
went  away. 

Now  among  them  was  one  old  woman.     She  said  to  herself, 

Q  2 


228      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

11 1  must  know  what  has  become  of  the  body."  So  she  went  home 
and  brought  out  palm  wine  and  food,  which  she  set  ready  for 
the  boy  on  his  return.  When  he  had  eaten  and  drunk,  she 
said  to  him,  "  Tell  me  now  what  you  have  done  with  the  body 
of  your  mother,  and  why  did  you  bury  her  without  the  know- 
ledge of  anyone  in  the  town  ?  " 

Then  the  boy  took  her  to  the  small  inner  room  and  showed 
the  place  where  he  had  laid  his  mother.  When  the  old  woman 
saw  what  he  had  done  she  said,  "  You  are  a  good  son.  Now  I 
give  you  a  distinct  order.  When  I  die,  bury  me  as  you  have 
buried  your  mother."     To  this  the  boy  agreed. 

Three  days  later  the  father  sent  for  his  son  and  said,  "  Prepare 
to  go  to  market  once  more."  The  boy  answered,  "  There  is  an 
old  woman  named  Anyin,  who  gave  me  distinct  orders  to  bury 
her  as  I  buried  my  mother.  She  might  die  any  day.  How  can 
I  bury  her  if  I  am  away  at  the  market  when  she  dies  ?  " 

The  father  said,  "  Anyhow,  you  must  go."  He  would  listen 
to  no  further  excuse.  The  boy  thought,  "  There  is  only  one 
way  to  keep  my  promise."  He  therefore  went  to  the  old  woman 
and  said,  "  My  father  wants  me  to  go  to  market.  Will  you  die 
to-day  that  I  may  bury  you  before  I  set  out  ?  " 

The  woman  answered,  "  If  I  had  known  there  would  be  such 
a  hurry  about  it,  I  would  not  have  given  you  the  order.  I  did 
this  because  I  saw  that  you  were  a  dutiful  son,  and  I  have  no 
child  to  bury  me." 

The  boy  still  told  her  that  she  had  better  die  at  once.  She 
denied  the  necessity,  but  he  entered  into  the  small  room  of  her 
compound  and  dug  the  grave.  When  all  was  ready  he  called  a 
meeting  of  the  townspeople.  He  related  all  that  had  passed 
between  himself  and  Anyin,  and  asked  what  should  be  done. 

The  Head  Chief  got  up  and  said :  "  The  woman  gave  a  dis- 
tinct order.  Agreements  never  change,  save  with  the  consent 
of  both  parties.  She  is  old,  and  may  as  well  die  to-day,  so  that 
the  boy  can  bury  her." 

Anyin  still  refused.  Therefore  the  boy  killed  her  and  buried 
her  at  midnight  as  he  had  promised. 

Afterwards  he  went  to  market. 

That  is  the  reason  why,  when  Ekoi  people  die,  they  are 
buried  that  same  night.     Before  this  time  all  people  had  been 


FUNERAL   CEREMONIES  229 

buried  in  the  bush,  but,  from  the  day  that  the  boy  buried  his 
mother  in  the  house,  the  custom  arose  to  bury  all  chief  people 
in  their  dwellings,  save  when  they  died  of  some  very  bad  thing. 


According  to  Ekoi  belief,  in  the  beginning  of  the  world  when 
men  died,  they  were  carried  in  a  sort  of  dream  to  the  dwelling- 
place  of  Obassi  Osaw.  If  Obassi  thought  it  would  be  a  good 
thing  he  would  bid  the  dead  man  wake,  and  stand  up  before 
him.  Then  he  would  make  him  alive  again  and  send  him  back 
to  earth,  but  such  men  on  their  return  could  never  tell  what  had 
happened  to  them. 

One  day  Obassi  thought,  "  Men  fear  to  die.  They  do  not 
know  that  perhaps  they  may  come  to  life  again.  I  will  tell 
them  that  sometimes  such  a  thing  may  happen,  then  they  will 
have  less  dread  of  death."  So  he  stood  up  in  his  house  in  the 
sky,  and  called  a  frog  and  a  duck  before  him.  To  the  first  he 
said,  "  Go  to  earth  and  say  to  the  people,  When  a  man  dies, 
it  is  the  end  of  all  things ;  he  shall  never  live  again."  To  the 
second  he  said,  "  Go  tell  the  earth  folk  that  if  a  man  dies  he 
may  come  to  life  again."  He  led  them  a  little  way,  and  showed 
them  the  road,  saying,  "  Take  my  message.  Duck,  you  may  go 
to  the  left  hand.     Frog,  keep  to  the  right." 

Frog  kept  on  till  he  came  to  earth.  He  told  the  first  people 
who  met  him  the  message  which  Obassi  had  sent.  In  course 
of  time  the  duck  also  reached  earth.  She  came  to  the  place 
where  they  had  been  making  palm  oil  and  began  to  gobble  it 
up.  So  eager  was  she,  that  she  forgot  all  about  the  message,  and 
thus  men  never  heard  the  good  news  which  Obassi  had  sent. 

That  is  the  reason  why,  when  a  man  dies,  we  cannot  see  him 
again,  because  Duck  lost  the  message,  and  we  must  go  according 
to  the  one  which  Frog  brought  us. 


CHAPTER   XXII 

Ghosts 

Ntuanto,  the  word  which  is  sometimes  used  for  a  ghost, 
really  denotes  the  soul  or  spirit  of  a  person.  It  is  in  some  way 
connected  with  the  breath,  and  leaves  the  body  on  the  wings  of 
the  last  outbreathing.  While  within  the  form  of  a  living  man, 
it  is  a  small  thing,  and  dwells  in  his  breast,  but,  once  set  free,  it 
expands  and  rarefies,  till  it  reaches  the  size  and  shape  of  the 
body  in  which  it  used  to  dwell.  It  is  intangible  like  air,  though, 
to  those  who  have  the  "  four  eyes  "  and  can  see  spirits,  it  looks 
just  like  a  man.  This  gift  of  "  second  sight"  or  "  Eenna  "  is 
not  confined  to  human  beings.  Dogs  have  it,  and  so  has  the 
little  Ise,  as  has  previously  been  mentioned.  Two  eyes  they  use 
in  the  day  time,  and  two  others  at  night.  These  latter,  accord- 
ing to  all  Ekoi,  may  be  seen  when  the  animal  is  killed  ;  they  lie 
at  the  back  of  the  other  two,  beneath  the  eyebrows. 

The  word  in  common  use  for  Ghost  is  "  Akaba-Nsi  " — i.e., 
One-who-cannot-come-back-to-earth.  There  are  bad  and  good 
ghosts,  but  it  is  very  seldom  that  evil  ones  are  allowed  to  roam 
alone.  Usually  a  good  spirit  accompanies  a  malevolent  one,  in 
order  to  prevent  it  from  doing  harm  to  the  living.  Should  a 
man,  without  the  "  four  eyes,"  meet  a  bad  spirit  alone  in  the 
way,  the  ghost  will  not  step  aside,  but  waits  till  the  man  reaches 
him,  then  stretches  forth  an  invisible  hand  and  deals  a  blow  on 
the  face.  This  produces  lock-jaw,  from  which  death  always 
follows. 

With  reference  to  this  superstition,  it  is  somewhat  singular 
that  the  Buduma  assured  me  that  the  Djinns  of  Lake  Chad  bring 
death  in  exactly  the  same  way  on  any  of  the  race  who  are  unfor- 
tunate enough  to  meet  them  in  the  night  time.  The  Djinn  strikes 
the  man  across  the  face  with  his  long  thin  hand,  and  it  is  well 


GHOSTS  231 

known  that  death  must  come  before  moon  and  stars  have 
climbed  next  night  to  the  same  place  in  the  sky.  The  Genii 
of  the  great  Baobab  trees  of  Bornu,  too,  kill  any  against  whom 
they  have  a  grudge  by  a  blow  across  the  face. 

To  return  to  Ekoi  beliefs.  Ghosts  can  be  kept  from  entering 
a  room  or  compound  during  the  night  by  burning  spices  or 
tobacco,  by  keeping  lamps  alight,  or  by  wearing  amulets. 
Some  magicians  can  make  a  preparation,  which  ghosts  dread, 
for  washing  the  face  and  body ;  bad  spirits  will  never  appear 
to  anyone  protected  in  this  way.  Should  a  man  meet  a 
ghost  without  such  safeguard,  he  will  probably  fall  sick,  and 
must  go  to  the  Diviner  to  find  out  why  he  should  have  been 
thus  visited. 

The  soul  is  the  real  man,  and  can  never  be  destroyed, 
while  the  body  is  something  inferior  and  temporary,  and 
rots  away  when  no  longer  needed.  The  shadow  cast  by  a 
live  man  is  really  the  shape  of  the  soul  which  is  within  him, 
though  compressed,  for  the  time,  into  a  small  space. 

Sometimes  the  soul  leaves  the  body,  and  then  returns. 
Living  beings,  more  often  women,  can  pass  into  a  kind  of 
trance,  in  which  their  souls  fly  away.  While  absent  they  can 
see  what  is  taking  place  in  other  worlds,  much  as  some  people 
do  in  dreams. 

Once  during  my  absence  from  Oban,  a  Nimm  woman  was 
thought  to  have  died,  and  was  therefore  buried  with  the  usual 
rites.  Some  weeks  afterwards  her  spirit  is  said  to  have  appeared 
to  one  of  the  initiates,  and  have  complained  of  premature  burial : 
"  It  was  a  great  pity  that  my  kin  were  in  such  a  hurry  to  lay 
me  in  the  grave,"  the  ghost  is  reported  to  have  said,  "for  my 
soul  had  but  gone  away  for  a  time,  and  I  only  died  after  its 
return,  because  I  could  no  longer  breathe  in  the  earth." 

A  man  has  two  minds,  a  good  one  and  a  bad  one,  but  these 
are  only  connected  with  the  body,  and  die  with  it.  He  has 
only  one  soul. 

With  regard  to  dreams,  the  Ekoi  may  be  divided  into  two 
classes — those  whose  dreams  come  true,  like  the  visions 
which  in  the  Odyssey  pass  earthwards  through  the  portals 
of  shining  horn  ;  and  those  whose  dreams  go  by  contrary. 
Should  the    latter  dream    of  a  wedding,  it    is    the   sign   of  a 


232      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

funeral  ;  while  to  dream  of  a  new-born  babe  means  a  death 
in  the  house. 

Everything  which  exists  has  a  soul  of  its  own,  from  trees  and 
rocks  down  to  weapons,  and  the  commonest  of  household 
goods,  and  it  is  their  astral  forms  which  are  visible  in 
dreams. 

Wraiths  of  dead  friends  often  come  in  visions  of  the  night, 
to  give  warnings  of  dangers,  or  ask  for  offerings.  Should  a 
man  unwittingly  eat  food  which  has  been  laid  out  for  the 
ghosts,  no  harm  will  happen,  but  should  he  do  so  knowingly, 
some  ill  is  sure  to  befall  him.  Food  is  always  thrown  upon 
the  graves,  and,  though  seeming  to  suffer  no  change,  the 
spirits  can  feed  upon  it  by  sucking  out  the  essence,  and 
leaving  only  the  shell  of  the  offering. 

Many  beliefs  which  the  Ekoi  hold  in  common  with  Brahmins 
and  Shintoists,  seem  to  point  to  the  probable  easterly  origin 
of  this  people.  After  death,  the  spirits  who  have  lived  a  full 
earth  life,  or  have  no  particular  reason  for  staying,  are  supposed 
to  go  right  away  to  another  world,  and  only  come  back  in 
exceptional  cases.  Others,  who  have  died  a  violent  death  or 
are  held  back  by  some  special  cause,  wander  about  in  this  world 
and  trouble  people  until  the  time  comes  when  they  are  set  free 
to  join  those  who  have  gone  before.  Such  unhappy  wanderers 
usually  stay  near  their  graves,  and  only  come  into  the  towns 
between  midnight  and  3  a.m.  If  anyone  passes  through  a  burial 
place  at  this  time  therefore,  he  will  take  no  ill,  for  all  the  ghosts 
are  away  in  the  town. 

Should  a  wraith  be  called  up  by  a  Diviner,  he  is  always 
in  a  great  hurry,  and  cannot  be  persuaded  to  answer  many 
questions.  He  never  tells  you  that  he  is  dead,  and,  if  a  man 
with  the  "  four  eyes  "  meets  such  an  one,  there  is  nothing  to 
show  that  it  is  not  an  ordinary  man  whom  he  has  met. 


Akunane,  the  head  priest  of  the  Juju  Ofiri,  was  talking  about 
ghosts  one  day  : 

"  I  do  not  know,"  he  said,  "if  ghosts  can  do  harm  to  the 
living,  but  I  always  sacrifice  yams  and  plantains  to  my 
father's  spirit,  so  that  I  may  not  fall  sick,  and  to  ask  him  to 


GHOSTS  233 

protect  my  farms.  About  once  a  year  too,  generally  when  it 
it  is  time  to  cut  '  bush '  for  our  farms,  I  sacrifice  to  my  mother, 
for  we  know  that  ghosts  are  hungry  just  as  we  are." 


The  reason  why  living  men  no  longer  visit  the  ghost  town 
is  given  as  follows  : — 

Why  Living  Men  can  no  longer  see  the  Road  to  the 
Ghost  Town. 

By  Ndum  of  Nsan. 

There  was  once  a  man  with  two  wives.  One  day  they 
went  down  to  the  stream  to  bathe  and  fill  their  water-pots. 
While  they  were  standing  in  the  water,  the  younger  one 
cried  out.  The  other  looked  at  her  and  saw  that  a  child  was 
about  to  be  born.  At  once  this  cruel  woman  picked  up  her  pot 
and  ran  back  home,  leaving  her  poor  companion  alone  and 
helpless. 

The  young  wife  still  cried  for  aid,  and  a  witch  named  Ngbe 
Eing  (Leopard-tooth)  heard  and  ran  towards  her.  No  sooner 
was  the  child  born,  than  the  monster  said  to  the  mother,  "  We 
will  cut  the  babe  into  equal  shares  and  devour  him,  you  and  I." 

The  poor  woman  did  not  know  what  to  do,  for  she  was  too 
weak  to  defend  her  child,  but  fortunately  at  that  moment  Ise, 
the  little  grey  duiker,  ran  up  and  said  : 

"  It  is  quite  right  that  Eing  should  claim  half  the  child,  only 
first  she  must  go  down  the  stream  till  she  comes  to  the  deep 
part  and  search  for  a  large  flat  stone  which  lies  there.  This  she 
must  bring  back,  for  it  is  only  on  such  a  stone  that  the  child  may 
be  laid  to  be  killed." 

Eing  was  so  pleased  that  Ise  had  said  she  was  right  in  her 
demand,  that  she  never  saw  the  trick,  but  went  dancing  gaily 
down  stream  in  full  confidence  that  she  would  find  the  stone. 
The  way  she  had  to  go  was  about  three  times  as  far  as  to  the 
house  of  the  terrified  woman,  and  no  sooner  was  she  out  ot 
sight,  than  Ise  told  the  latter  to  make  all  haste  to  her  home. 

When  Eing  came  back  with  the  stone,  and  found  that  her 
prey  had  escaped,  and   Ise  also,    she   was   very   angry.     She 


234      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

followed  hard  in  pursuit,  but  could  not  overtake  the  poor 
mother.  When  the  monster  reached  the  town,  and  found  it 
nearly  empty,  for  all  the  men  had  gone  out  hunting,  she  forced 
her  way  right  into  the  compound  where  the  woman  had  taken 
refuge. 

Now  Ngbe  Eing  was  one  of  the  most  rapacious  monsters 
ever  seen.  For  days  she  sat  watching  the  poor  woman, 
thinking  that  the  latter  must  fall  asleep  some  time,  but  night 
and  day  the  mother  lay  guarding  her  babe. 

One  day  the  monster  was  thirsty,  and  left  the  house  to  go 
down  to  the  spring.  While  she  was  away,  the  husband  came 
back  and  his  wife  at  once  told  him  all  that  had  happened, 
and  begged  him  to  hide  so  that  he  might  see  Eing  on  her 
return.  The  husband  caught  up  an  Ejimm  which  belonged 
to  his  other  wife,  and  then  hid  himself  to  watch.  Now  the 
thing  he  took  is  the  sharp-pointed  iron,  used  to  spear  lumps 
of  meat  from  out  a  boiling  pot,  and,  when  the  wicked  intruder 
returned,  he  sprang  out  upon  her,  and  drove  it  into  her  eye 
with  such  vigour  that  it  ran  right  through  her  head.  Neverthe- 
less, she  did  not  die  at  once,  for  her  magic  helped  her.  She  ran 
screaming  from  the  town,  and  fell  dead  as  soon  as  she  reached 
her  home.  There  the  people  drew  out  the  Ejimm  from  her  eye 
and  buried  her,  mourning  over  her,  for  they  were  witches 
like  herself. 

Unfortunately  the  Ejimm  was  the  property  of  the  second 
wife,  as  has  been  said,  and  the  latter  had  ill-will  toward  the 
fruitful  woman,  because  she  herself  was  barren.  When  there- 
fore she  learned  what  had  happened,  she  said  that  she  would 
take  nothing  in  exchange  and  no  excuse,  but  that  her  fellow 
wife  must  set  out  at  once  and  recover  the  property. 

Very  sadly  the  poor  woman  gave  her  babe  to  a  friend,  and 
set  out  to  consult  Porcupine  as  to  what  she  must  do. 

The  latter  consulted  the  charm,  and  said  that  she  would  be 
successful  unless  she  offended  someone  whom  she  should  meet 
on  the  road. 

The  woman  therefore  set  out  on  her  way,  while  all  the  towns- 
people stood  weeping  for  fear  lest  she  might  never  return. 
She  went  on  and  on,  till  at  last,  at  a  stream  near  the  ghost  town, 
she  saw  a  woman    bathing.     The  latter  was  a  terrible  sight, 


GHOSTS  235 

for  she  was  covered  with  sores.  Her  left  side  was  quite  eaten 
away,  and  from  it  maggots  were  falling  as  rain-drops  drip 
from  the  eaves.  This  poor  woman  called  in  a  feeble  voice  and 
said,  "  Will  you  please  pick  up  some  sticks  and  scrub  my 
back,  because  I  am  not  strong  enough  to  do  it  myself." 

The  newcomer  answered  gently,  "  I  will  wash  you  with  my 
hands,  for  they  will  be  softer,  and  it  is  always  good  to  help  those 
in  pain." 

The  answer  pleased  the  old  woman,  who  all  at  once  grew 
sound  and  well.  "  You  will  succeed  in  your  adventure,  what- 
ever it  may  be,"  said  she,  "for  I  am  the  Chieftainess  of  all  the 
ghosts."  At  these  words  hope  flowed  into  the  heart  of  the 
mother,  and  she  related  where  she  was  going,  and  on  what 
errand.  "  Do  not  fear,"  said  the  Chieftainess,  "  for  I  will  tell 
you  how  you  can  easily  obtain  what  you  seek,  and  will  also 
shorten  the  road  before  you.  When  you  meet  anyone  in  our 
country  which  is  called  Mfam  Akabansi  (Ghost  town),  you 
must  say  that  the  dead  person  was  your  elder  sister;  then  go 
along  singing : 

'■' '  Atone  ngam         njum         ayui     'ne     ama. 
Show    me    thing  (which)  kills  person  mine.' 

"  The  people  will  flock  round  you,  and  dance  and  be  pleased 
with  your  singing,  and,  when  you  stop,  they  will  ask  you  the 
name  of  your  dead,  and  you  must  say  that  it  is  Ngbe  Eing. 
They  will  at  once  fetch  what  killed  her,  and  allow  you  to  go 
freely  away  with  it,  by  my  order." 

This  encouraged  the  young  mother  still  more,  and  as  she 
neared  the  town,  she  began  to  sing  in  a  strong  voice  the  words 
of  the  song.  All  the  people  came  out  and  surrounded  her, 
dancing  and  asking  why  she  had  come.  She  said  what  the 
Ghost  Woman  bade  her,  "Ngbe  Eing  was  my  elder  sister;  I 
have  come,  by  your  good  will,  to  fetch  the  thing  that  killed 
her."  All  the  ghost  people  were  very  pleased  at  this  modest 
way  of  speaking.  They  went  and  fetched  the  Ejimm  iron, 
and  gave  it  to  their  visitor.  She  thanked  them,  and  walked 
away  well  pleased. 

When  the  town  was  already  some  way  behind,  the  young 
mother  began  to  hasten  her  steps,  for  she  thought  of  her  babe. 


236      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

All  at  once  she  heard  someone  calling.  She  looked  back  and 
saw  that  it  was  her  friend  the  Chieftainess,  who  had  at  first 
appeared  to  her  as  a  feeble  old  woman.  The  latter  bore  a 
basket  in  which  were  seven  Ochitt  fruits  (Egg  Plant).  These 
she  gave  to  the  stranger  saying,  "  Take  these  fruits  to  your 
town,  and  divide  them  up  among  all  the  people  to  whom  you 
wish  to  do  good ;  only  be  careful  not  to  let  any  single  person 
have  more  than  half  a  fruit,  so  that  the  happiness  they  bring 
may  be  shared  among  as  many  people  as  possible."  The 
woman  thanked  her  and  hastened  onward. 

When  the  townsfolk,  who  were  watching,  saw  the  young 
wife  drawing  near,  they  rejoiced  greatly,  and,  when  she  gave 
back  the  iron  to  her  fellow  wife,  they  praised  her  much  for 
her  courage.  Her  husband  also  gave  her  great  gifts  for  being 
so  brave.  Her  child  meanwhile  had  almost  cried  itself  to 
death,  for  she  had  been  away  four  days,  but  it  looked  up  and 
smiled  when  she  took  it  once  more  in  her  arms. 

After  she  had  rested,  the  woman  cut  up  the  Ochitt  fruits 
and  distributed  them  to  as  many  as  possible  of  the  townsfolk. 
Half  of  one  she  gave  to  her  fellow  wife,  the  owner  of  the 
Ejimm,  who  had  forced  her  to  undertake  such  a  dangerous 
journey.  For  herself  she  kept  only  a  quarter  of  a  fruit,  and 
even  this  she  did  not  eat,  but  laid  it  down  on  the  Nju  Aiipp, 
the  little  mound  on  which  the  water-pots  are  set.  Then  she 
told  her  elder  child  to  look  after  the  babe  and  the  house 
while  she  herself  went  down  to  the  stream  to  draw  water. 
Hardly  had  she  left  before  the  barren  wife  came  in,  saw  the 
piece  of  fruit  lying  upon  the  mound,  snatched  it  up  and  ate  it. 

When  the  younger  wife  returned  from  the  spring  she  wished 
to  eat  her  fruit,  but  could  not  find  it.  She  asked  her  child 
if  she  had  taken  it,  and,  while  questioning  her,  the  other 
wife  came  into  the  room. 

"  You  need  not  ask  your  daughter,"  said  she,  "  for  it  was  I 
who  ate  the  piece  of  Nchitt."  * 

On  this  the  younger  woman  went  out  and  called  the  townsfolk 
together.     When  all  were  assembled,  she  said  to  them  : 

"  One  day,  when  our  husband  was  away  hunting,  my  fellow- 
wife  and  I  went  down  to  the  spring.  She  saw  that  my  child 
*  Singular  of  Ochitt. 


GHOSTS  237 

was  about  to  be  born,  but  went  away  and  left  me  mourn- 
fully calling  for  help.  All  of  a  sudden,  out  came  Ngbe  Eing 
and  aided  me,  but  demanded  that  half  my  babe  should  be 
given  her  to  devour.  I  was  glad  when  Ise  ran  up,  but  sad 
when  he  decided  that  Eing  must  have  what  she  claimed  as 
the  price  of  her  aid.  Soon,  however,  I  saw  that  he  was  only 
deceiving  the  monster,  so  that  I  might  gain  time  to  reach 
home.  Thither  Eing  tracked  me,  and  sat  waiting  to  devour 
my  child,  but  my  husband  returned  while  she  had  gone  to  the 
spring,  and  killed  her  with  the  pot-hook  which  belonged  to  his 
other  wife.  When  the  latter  heard  all  that  had  chanced,  she 
would  accept  nothing  in  exchange  for  the  iron,  but  demanded 
that  I  myself  should  fetch  it  from  the  ghost  town,  thinking  that 
I  should  die  on  the  way,  and  that  my  new-born  babe  would 
perish  for  lack  of  me.  Judge  now,  all  ye  people,  whether  this 
proves  hatred  and  ill  will  ?  " 

"  It  is  hate,  strong  hate,"  shouted  all  the  people. 

The  woman  continued,  "  Please  listen  further.  After  having 
had  more  of  the  joy-giving  Nchitt  than  I  kept  for  myself,  this 
woman  stole  the  one  piece  which  was  left  in  my  house,  so  that 
nothing  remains  for  me  of  all  that  I  brought  from  Mfam 
Akabansi.     What  punishment  does  she  deserve  for  this  ?  " 

"  No  other,"  answered  all  the  people  in  a  great  shout,  "  than 
to  go  to  the  ghost  town,  and  fetch  you  your  Nchitt  from  the 
chief  of  the  ghosts." 

The  husband  tried  to  plead  that  his  wife  might  be  forgiven, 
but  she  herself  stepped  forth  proudly  and  stopped  him.  "  I  will 
accept  no  favour,"  she  said,  "  and  am  willing  to  go  to  Mfam 
Akabansi  and  fetch  the  Nchitt." 

Just  as  the  first  had  done,  this  woman  also  went  to  Porcupine 
to  question  the  charm,  and  the  answer  was  unfavourable.  Yet 
she  started  out. 

On  reaching  the  same  stream,  the  second  wife  saw  the  woman 
covered  with  sores.  At  the  sight,  she  held  her  nose  and  began 
to  spit  as  though  she  had  tasted  gall.  The  poor  old  creature 
begged  her  to  stop  doing  this  and  to  take  a  stick  with  which  to 
scrub  her  back,  as  she  was  not  fit  to  do  this  for  herself. 

The  elder  wife  took  a  long  stick,  stood  as  far  off  as  possible 
still  holding  her  nose,  and,  instead  of  rubbing  the  poor  old  dame, 


238      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

only  poked  at  the  sores.  The  old  woman  begged  her  to  stop, 
but  she  poked  the  more,  saying,  "  You  asked  for  scrubbing,  and 
shall  get  such  an  one  as  to  last  you  once  for  all  !  "  No  entreaties 
could  touch  her,  but  suddenly  the  old  woman  sprang  out  of  the 
water,  and  stood  before  her,  young,  beautiful  and  richly  robed. 
Then  the  wicked  wife  was  frightened  and  begged  to  befcrgiven. 
The  Chieftainess  answered,  "  I  will  do  you  no  harm.  Go  on 
your  way." 

When  the  visitor  entered  the  town  she  would  not  look  at  the 
old  and  sick  people,  and,  when  a  man  barred  her  path,  and 
asked  where  she  was  going,  she  bade  him  be  off  out  of  her  sight, 
for  she  had  come  to  get  Ochitt  from  the  Chief  of  the  ghosts,  and 
not  to  answer  questions  from  such  as  he. 

This  answer  angered  the  man,  who  struck  out  with  his  club 
and  felled  her  to  the  earth,  so  that  she  died  at  once. 

All  the  ghosts  gathered  round,  and  ate  up  the  body.  After- 
wards the  Chieftainess  gave  orders  that  no  live  person  should 
ever  again  come  to  Mfam  Akabansi,  and,  from  that  day,  hid  the 
road  from  mortal  eyes. 

Days,  weeks,  months  and  years  went  by,  but  the  wicked  wife 
returned  no  more.  The  younger  woman  lived  happily  with  her 
husband  till  the  end  of  her  life,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  she  did 
not  get  the  Nchitt ;  for  she  was  kind  and  sweet  tempered  to  all. 

When  a  man  dies  he  can  see  the  road  to  the  ghost  town, 
but  while  alive  he  can  find  it  no  more. 


Not  only  egg  plants,  but  native  tomatoes,  are  also  thought  to 
have  come  from  the  ghost  town,  as  related  in  the  following 
story  : — 

How  the  First  Tomatoes  came  on  Earth. 

There  once  lived  a  man  named  Effa,  and  his  wife  named 
Akat.  When  the  husband's  mother  died  they  sent  round  to  all 
the  neighbouring  towns  to  invite  the  people  to  come  and  "play" 
for  her  death.  The  spirit  of  the  dead  woman  went  to  a  ghost  town, 
which  was  as  far  off  from  that  where  her  son  dwelt  as  is  Niaji 
from  Nkami.  One  of  the  ghosts,  named  Echi,  who  in  life  had 
dwelt  near  them,  thought  that  he  would  like  to  attend  the  play 
for  the  old  woman's  death,  so  he  started  out  to  go  to  Effa's  town. 


GHOSTS  239 

At  the  first  place  he  came  to,  the  Chief  asked  him,"  What  is 
your  name?"  He  answered,  "  I  am  called  Egut  when  I  travel," 
and  begged  them  to  lend  him  a  hand.  This  they  did.  At 
the  next  town  he  asked  some  of  the  people  to  give  him  a  neck. 
This  also  they  granted.  The  third  town  gave  him  a  second 
hand,  the  fourth  a  belly,  the  fifth  loins,  and  the  sixth  and 
seventh  each  provided  a  foot.  At  the  next  town  he  begged  for 
a  matchet,  and  for  a  gun  at  the  one  after  that. 

At  the  tenth  town  the  people  were  all  away  save  one  woman. 
She  came  to  the  door  of  her  compound  to  look  at  the  stranger. 
So  beautiful  was  he  with  all  his  borrowed  limbs  that  she  fell  in 
love  with  him,  and  begged  him  to  stay  with  her  for  a  few  days. 
She  also  was  very  beautiful,  so  he  agreed,  and  when  she  asked 
for  his  name  he  said  to  her,  "  My  name  is  Nopp  Amba." 

After  he  left  her  he  went  straight  to  the  town  where  they 
were  "  playing"  for  the  dead  woman.  All  the  people  rejoiced 
at  the  coming  of  so  handsome  a  stranger,  and  to  them  he  said, 
"  My  real  name  is  Echi."  Then  they  all  fell  to  singing  and 
dancing,  but  in  both  arts  the  ghost  man  excelled  them. 

A  woman  named  Atem  marked  the  grace  of  his  dancing  and 
the  sweetness  of  his  voice,  and  fell  in  love  with  him.  He  in 
turn  noticed  how  kind  were  her  glances  when  they  rested  upon 
him,  and  said  to  her  as  he  had  done  to  the  other  woman : 

"  My  name  is  Nopp  Amba.  Will  you  take  me  for  your 
husband  while  I  stay  in  the  town  ?  "     To  this  Atem  agreed. 

When  they  had  finished  "  playing  "  for  the  dead  woman, 
Echi  prepared  to  go  back  home.  Atem  begged  to  be  taken 
with  him,  but  he  refused,  and  said  to  her.  "  I  am  not  able  to 
keep  two  wives." 

A  meeting  of  the  whole  town  was  called,  and  the  matter  laid 
before  them.  They  said,  "  You  have  married  the  woman,  and 
it  must  be  as  she  chooses."  So,  as  she  still  persisted,  the 
couple  started  back  together.  At  the  towns  from  which  he  had 
borrowed  them,  the  husband  returned  the  gun  and  the  matchet. 
At  the  next  places  he  gave  up  those  parts  of  his  body  which 
had  been  lent  him  there. 

When  the  woman  saw  him  do  this  she  began  to  weep,  and 
said : 

"  Had  I  known  what  manner  of  man  you  were  I  would  never 


240      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

have  taken  you  for  my  husband."    But  he  still  went  on,  and  at 
each  town  his  body  grew  less. 

At  length  Atem  refused  to  go  any  further,  and  would  have 
returned  to  her  own  home,  but  the  ghost  said,  "  Of  your  own 
will  you  came,  and  now  there  is  no  turning  back  for  you." 

After  the  last  town  was  passed  only  a  skull  remained  to  him 
When  they  entered  the  ghost  town  the  inhabitants  flocked  out 
to  welcome  them,  and  one  woman  ghost  saw  Echi's  wife,  and 
recognised  her  at  once.     She  said  : 

"This  woman  is  my  sister.     Let  her  come  to  my  house." 

When  night  came,  all  the  ghost  people  gathered  together. 
and  wanted  to  kill  Atem,  so  that  they  might  eat  her.  The 
sister,  however,  hid  her,  and  said : 

"  Listen  to  me,  and  I  will  save  you.  Touch  nothing  which 
they  shall  give  you  to  eat,  for  if  you  eat  of  their  chop  you  will 
die.  They  cannot  harm  you  if  you  eat  only  what  I  give  you." 
She  then  hid  her  sister  in  a  secret  place,  and  gave  her  tomatoes 
on  which  to  stay  her  hunger. 

So  soon  as  all  was  safe  she  took  Atem  by  the  hand  and  set 
her  on  the  homeward  road.     At  parting  she  said  to  her : 

"  When  you  get  home  tell  no  one  of  what  you  have  seen 
here." 

So  Atem  left  her  sister,  and  hastened  back  to  her  town. 

When  she  reached  her  house  she  felt  very  ill,  so  she  went  to 
Nyopp  (Porcupine)  and  asked  him  to  practise  the  charm  for 
her: 

Porcupine  did  so,  and  said : 

"  Throw  the  tomatoes  which  still  remain  to  you  into  some 
soft  earth  at  the  back  of  your  house,  then  go  to  the  entrance  of 
the  town,  make  a  sacrifice,  and  lay  seven  leaves  on  the  ground." 

This  Atem  did,  and  when  the  ghosts  who  had  pursued  her 
came  and  found  them,  they  began  to  count  the  leaves.  I,  2,  3, 
4,  5,  6,  they  counted,  but  could  not  add  7.  So  they  ate  the 
sacrifice,  and  went  their  way. 

Up  till  this  time,  when  ghosts  were  hungry,  they  came  into 
the  towns,  and  into  the  houses,  and  would  not  leave  till  the 
owners  had  given  them  whatever  they  asked.  Since  the  sacrifice 
of  the  seven  leaves  was  made,  they  do  not  do  this  any 
more.     That  is  the  reason  why  you  see  ghost  sacrifices  hung  up 


GHOSTS  241 

before  the  town.  There  were  also  no  native  tomatoes  till  Atem 
brought  them  from  her  sister  Affion  at  the  ghost  town.  Those 
which  she  threw,  by  command  of  Porcupine,  into  the  earth  at 
the  back  of  her  house,  sprang  up  and  flourished,  and  it  is  from 
them  that  all  native  tomatoes  come. 


S.B. 


CHAPTER   XXIII 
Beyond  Netim 

Three  miles  beyond  Netim  flows  the  Calabar  River,  which  is 
the  boundary  between  the  land  of  the  Ekoi,  and  that  of  the  Ojo 
and  Uyanga  tribes. 

A  few  yards  from  the  bank  lies  a  great  oval-shaped  stone, 
half  embedded  in  the  ground.  Behind  it  a  Juju  tree  has  been 
planted,  and  in  front  a  heap  of  leaves  is  piled,  similar  to  that 
near  the  River  of  Good  Fortune.  The  stone  is  one  of  the 
altars  of  Nimm,  and  well  it  is  to  seek  her  protection  before 
entering  the  water,  for  the  river  has  a  sinister  reputation,  and 
is  here  over  300  feet  wide  and  very  rapid.  The  Ekoi  have  a 
little  song  about  it,  which,  in  all  save  name,  is  the  counterpart 

of  our 

"  River  of  Dart,  River  of  Dart 
Every  year  thou  claimest  a  heart." 

To  ensure  safety  in  crossing,  leaves  should  be  plucked  and 
rubbed  on  the  forehead,  over  the  pineal  gland,  with  the 
following  prayer: 

" '  Me  eyange,  eyange,      nkiji  ka     njimm       aiya   '  ni 

(May)  I  (be)  free  from  danger,  from  danger,  I  go  to  other  side  water  in, 

kpe         njum  ebi    nkaien  ! 
may  (I)     thing  evil  not  see  !  " 

The  leaves  are  then  thrown  upon  the  heap,  with  this 
invocation : 

"  Nkupba       aiya  oiyange,  kpe      nyipp       aserre         echi  1 
I  am  coming  river   across,   may  crocodile  lay  down  (his)  head  1  " 

At  the  time  of  the  new  yams  no  prayer  is  made,  as  everyone 
knows  that  it  would  be  unheard,  for  just  as  the  Kwa  is  the 
dwelling-place  of  Nimm,  so  the  Calabar  is  the  special  home 
of  the  Efumi  of  crocodiles  and  elephants,  many  of  whom  have 
their  homes  in  its  deep  places, 


Nimm  Stone,  Calabar  River. 


BEYOND   NETIM  243 

At  one  Ekoi  town,  a  little  lower  down,  where  all  the 
inhabitants  are  supposed  to  be  "Efumi"  of  crocodiles,  they 
give  notice  that  for  seven  days  during  the  new  yam  festival  all 
traffic  should  be  stopped,  for  if  any  man  enter  the  water  during 
that  time  he  would  never  gain  the  further  bank.  The  Efumi 
are  holding  their  great  festival  to  the  Juju  "  Animm  "  (plural 
of  Nimm),  and  to  this,  anyone  rash  enough  to  enter  the  water, 
or  unfortunate  enough  to  be  caught  and  dragged  down  from 
the  bank,  must  be  sacrificed.  Nimm  will  hear  no  prayer,  as  she 
longs  for  offerings,  in  return  for  which  she  makes  fruitful  the 
farms  of  her  worshippers.  At  this  time  too  each  crocodile  soul 
leaves  the  body  which  it  has  inhabited  during  the  last  year, 
and  chooses  another  in  which  to  dwell  during  the  next  twelve 
moons. 

Early  in  191 1  the  towns  of  Nsan,  Obung,  and  Netim  begged 
me  to  send  up  a  hunter  to  drive  away  the  herds  of  wild  animals 
which  were  devastating  their  farms.  The  same  request  had 
come  in  from  so  many  towns,  however,  that  it  was  not  until 
late  in  the  year  that  I  could  send  my  hunter  to  that  part  of  the 
District.  He  seemed  reluctant  to  go,  but  this  might  have  been 
due  to  the  fact  that  he  had  no  friends  there,  so  I  did  not  give 
the  matter  further  thought.  The  reason  for  his  unwillingness 
was  however  explained,  when,  a  little  later,  circumstances  made 
it  necessary  for  me  to  visit  the  neighbourhood. 

One  morning  a  boy  of  about  fifteen  ran  into  my  office  in 
the  last  stage  of  terror  and  exhaustion.  According  to  his  story, 
two  men  named  Tambe  and  Wanchi  hired  him  at  Calabar,  to 
go  with  them  to  the  interior.  They  did  not  allow  him  to 
enter  towns  on  the  way,  but  sent  him  through  the  bush,  giving 
as  an  excuse  that  there  was  something  in  his  load  which  they 
did  not  wish  seen,  but  really  because  they  feared  that  ques- 
tions might  be  asked  on  their  return  without  the  boy.  Just 
before  reaching  Ojo  Nkonmba  food  ran  short,  so  they  stopped 
at  one  of  the  towns  to  buy  more.  At  Ojo,  Ongwaw,  the 
son  of  one  of  the  chiefs,  asked  the  boy  what  country  he 
came  from ;  afterwards  he  was  taken  by  his  masters  to  the 
house  of  Chief  Ikum,  where  they  arranged  to  sell  him  for 
£20.  Next  day  he  was  left  with  Ikum,  while  Tambe  and 
Wanchi  went   back   to    Calabar.      Soon  after   they  had   left, 

R  2 


244      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

a  cage  formed  of  iron  rods  was  brought  out,  4  feet  by  4  feet 
by  2  feet,  such  as  was  only  used  for  human  sacrifice  to  the 
Jujus.  The  Chief  wanted  to  make  the  boy  drink  rum,  but 
he  would  not  do  so,  for  one  of  the  women  cried  out  that 
they  were  going  to  kill  him.  Ikum  himself  ate  and  drank, 
then  tied  his  hunting  knife  round  his  waist.  One  of  his  wives, 
named  Ekungbe,  called  out  and  said,  "  Do  not  kill  the  boy." 
Ikum  was  very  angry  and  struck  her.  The  chief  stood  by  the 
door.  The  boy  stated,  "It  was  night  time,  and  I  was  on  the 
other  side  of  the  compound  by  the  head  wife.  She  said  to 
me,  '  I  am  sorry  for  you,  because  you  are  a  good  boy.  You 
brought  firewood  and  helped  with  other  work  in  my  house. 
If  you  could  get  away,  perhaps  you  might  reach  "white 
man."  '  I  slipped  behind  her  and  ran  into  the  bush.  People 
came  out  with  lanterns  to  seek  for  me,  but  I  hid  away  from 
them.  I  dared  not  follow  the  road  lest  men  from  other  towns 
might  be  warned  of  my  escape,  and  catch  me  and  give  me 
up  again  to  the  people  of  Ojo.  On  the  third  day  I  saw 
Forest-guard  Okore,  so  I  ran  to  him,  and  begged  him  to  help 
me  to  get  to  white  man." 

Under  these  circumstances  it  was  necessary  to  visit  the  town 
concerned,  both  to  inquire  into  the  story  and  to  ensure  the 
safety  of  the  friendly  woman. 

After  crossing  the  Calabar  River,  the  road  leads  through 
beautiful  and  comparatively  easy  country,  over  streams,  many 
of  which  are,  during  the  dry  season,  mere  strings  of  tiny  water- 
falls, dashing  down  between  fern-fringed  banks,  but,  in  the 
rains,  swell  into  torrents,  which  tear  down  from  the  mountains, 
bearing  all  before  them. 

Just  before  Ojo  Nkonmba,  we  came  upon  a  little  river,  on 
the  banks  of  which,  by  the  ford,  grew  a  great  clump  of  ground 
orchids,  allied  to  Horsmanii,  but  with  some  points  of  difference. 
The  flowers,  shading  from  palest  mauve  to  deepest  purple, 
were  borne  on  stems  4  to  5  feet  high.  The  whole  clump  stood 
out  from  its  dark  background  with  the  lustre  of  dew-drenched 
amethysts,  and  was  mirrored  again,  narcissus-like,  in  the  clear 
stream  below. 

The  native  name  for  the  inhabitants  of  Ojo  Nkonmba  and 
their  neighbours  of  Ojo   Akangba  is    "  Kabila,"  but   they  are 


o 


BEYOND   NETIM  245 

generally  known  by  their  Efik  name—"  Ojo."  They  belong  to 
the  same  race  as  the  people  of  Ekuri,  whom  we  shall  mention 
later  on,  but  separated  from  them  many  years  ago.  Even 
in  a  comparatively  short  space  of  time,  and  although  a  certain 
amount  of  communication  has  been  kept  up,  the  language  has 
considerably  altered.  Like  all  other  tribes  in  this  neighbour- 
hood, they  have  gradually  come  down  from  the  North. 

The  old  chief  is  an  object  of  great  reverence  to  his  people. 
On  a  former  visit,  when  he  came  up  to  welcome  us,  he  was 
wearing  a  gorgeous  cap  of  scarlet  cloth,  cut  somewhat  after  the 
Phrygian  style,  and  decorated  round  the  base  with  two  double 
rows  of  leopards'  claws.  By  old  custom  he  is  never  supposed 
to  be  seen  bareheaded,  and  is  the  object  of  several  interesting 
tabu. 

In  a  country  like  this,  where  the  black  population  out- 
numbers the  white  by  about  4,000  to  I,  it  is  a  matter  of 
absolute  necessity  that  certain  signs  of  respect  should  be  shown 
to  the  ruling  race.  Had  the  chief  been  allowed  to  continue 
covered,  it  would  not  only  have  meant  that  white  rule  would 
have  fallen  into  discredit  in  his  town  and  for  many  miles 
round,  but  that  he  himself  would  have  had  no  respect  for  those 
who  did  not  exact  this  token  of  it  from  him.  He  was  therefore 
told  that  the  hat  must  be  removed  while  addressing  the  white 
man,  and  after  some  little  trouble  consented.  His  submission 
had  one  curious  result.  An  elderly  woman,  with  hair  once 
bright  red,  but  now  tinged  with  grey,  came  up,  positively 
capering  with  joy,  which  she  made  no  effort  to  hide.  She 
brought  us  a  present  of  the  largest  yam  we  had  ever  seen, 
and  explained  that  she  was  the  head  wife  of  the  chief  who  had 
just  had  a  lesson  in  manners.  Her  evident  delight,  because 
of  her  husband's  discomfiture,  puzzled  us  until  we  found  out 
that  he  had  been  annoying  her  for  years  by  airs  and  graces, 
invented  to  enhance  his  importance  among  his  people,  beside 
those  tabu  imposed  on  him  by  reason  of  his  position  as  head 
priest  of  Akillinga,  such  as  the  rule  of  eating  alone. 

When  we  reached  the  town  to  inquire  into  the  boy's  story, 
we  found  it  divided  against  itself.  The  townsfolk  had  decided 
to  remove  to  another  site,  and  the  women,  the  young  men 
and  "  members  "  were  strongly  opposed  to  that  which  the  head 


246      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

men  had  chosen.  The  former  pleaded  that  they  did  not  wish 
to  leave  the  main  road  and  go  right  into  the  "  bush,"  and  also 
that  there  was  no  good  water  near  the  new  site.  When  I 
visited  this  next  morning,  the  reason  both  for  the  objection 
of  the  people  and  the  choice  of  the  chiefs  became  perfectly 
clear.  The  latter  had  chosen  a  spot  where  they  hoped  to 
be  less  visited  by  Government  officials,  or  any  person  likely  to 
carry  reports  to  the  white  man.  It  was  a  long  distance 
from  the  main  road,  along  a  difficult  track,  and,  as  the  oppo- 
sition party  had  stated,  the  only  water  within  easy  reach 
was  a  stream  which  dried  up  during  the  dry  season.  The  new 
town,  however,  would  have  been  close  to  the  place  where  the 
head  chief  had  built  this  compound,  within  which  was  the 
shrine  of  the  great  Juju  Akillinga. 

No  wonder  that  the  women,  the  young  men  and  the  "  mem- 
bers "  feared  to  leave  the  main  road,  where  there  was  always  a 
chance  that  some  passer-by  might  hear  cries  for  help  or  appear 
on  the  scene  in  time  to  make  the  chiefs  afraid  to  sacrifice  them 
to  the  Juju,  lest  news  of  their  doings  should  be  carried  to  those 
who  would  exact  a  swift  vengeance. 

Akillinga  has,  even  in  this  land,  the  reputation  of  being  a 
particularly  cruel  Juju.  Before  it,  up  to  quite  recent  times, 
enemies  were  admittedly  sacrificed,  and  cannibal  rites  carried 
out,  though  at  present  such  practices  are  disclaimed  with 
great  energy.  The  relief  of  those  of  the  community,  from 
among  whom  sacrificial  victims  would  naturally  be  chosen, 
was  so  obvious  on  my  pronouncing  against  the  site  favoured 
by  the  chiefs,  that  the  cause  of  their  objection  was  clear  to  the 
most  unobservant. 

The  people  of  Ojo  Nkonmba,  and  their  neighbours  of  Ojo 
Akangba,  all  of  whom  have  now  agreed  to  join  together  to  form 
one  town,  believe  that  their  souls  are  "  Efumi "  of  elephants. 
Their  farms  are  unravaged,  and  not  a  single  uprooted  palm  tree 
was  to  be  seen,  though,  only  a  few  miles  off,  in  Ekuri  territory, 
the  people  were  complaining  of  starvation  from  the  depredations 
of  vast  herds. 

The  day  before  our  visit,  my  hunter,  Okun  Omin,  had 
tracked  two  wounded  beasts  down  to  the  brink  of  the 
Calabar  River,  but  when  he  saw  them  take  to  the  water,  he 


Source  of  the  Calabar  River. 


BEYOND    NETIM  247 

dared  not  follow,  as  the  people  of  Netim,  who  accompanied 
him,  said  that  these  were  two  of  the  Ojo  who  had  gone  down 
to  their  houses  in  the  bed  of  the  river,  there  to  take  on  human 
forms  and  tend  their  wounds.  It  was  about  the  time  of  the 
new  yams,  and  he  dared  not  risk  the  peril  of  being  seized  by 
these  uncanny  river-folk,  and  offered  to  Animm. 

One  evening,  not  long  after,  the  talk  turned  on  the  Efumi  of 
elephants,  and  the  following  story  was  told  : — 

Ada  the  Forest  Demon. 

By  Ndum  of  Nsan. 

Awsang  Atikawt  was  a  great  hunter.  So  skilled  was  he  that 
he  never  gave  up  the  chase  of  any  animal  whose  trail  he  had 
once  started  to  follow.  One  day  he  was  sitting  with  some 
friends  when  they  began  complaining  of  the  way  in  which  their 
farms  were  being  destroyed  by  elephants.  Atikawt  asked 
why  they  did  not  at  once  follow  the  tracks  of  the  beasts  and 
kill  them.  They  answered  that  they  were  afraid  to  do  this, 
lest  they  themselves  should  be  killed  by  the  elephants.  Atikawt 
said  that  they  were  cowards,  and  that  he  himself  would  not  rest 
till  he  had  destroyed  every  elephant  which  might  dare  to  leave 
its  mark  upon  his  farm. 

Now  among  those  present  were  two  men  who  were  Efumi  of 
elephants.  One  of  these  Efumi  stood  up  and  said  to  Atikawt, 
"  Ka  kpe  awkame.  Ojjokk  kun  oyi  ebin  eja  awsem  "  ("  Boast 
no  more.     Elephants  may  eat  your  farm  and  go  free  "). 

But  Atikawt  answered  steadily,  "  Ofu  ojjokk  awgae,  tik  oyen 
ngam  "  ("  The  day  elephants  try,  they  will  see  me  "). 

When  they  heard  this,  the  two  Efumi  men  looked  sharply  at 
one  another.  Then  they  arranged  to  go  and  destroy  the  farm 
and  see  what  would  happen. 

Not  long  after,  Atikawt's  wives  brought  him  news  that  their 
farm  had  been  ruined  by  elephants.  At  once  he  began  to  get 
provisions  together,  and  having  filled  his  hunting  bag,  set  out 
well  armed  for  the  chase.  He  soon  got  on  the  trail  of  the 
beasts  and  followed  them  till  dark.  All  night  he  rested,  leaning 
against  a  tree,  and  started  again  as  soon  as  the  dawn  rose.  On 
and  on  he  went  till  it  was  dark  once  more.     Then  he  climbed 


248      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

into  a  great  tree  to  pass  the  night,  and  next  day  overtook  the 
elephants  by  a  stream.  At  once  when  they  saw  him  with  his 
gun  loaded  ready  to  fire,  they  changed  into  human  form,  and 
begged  him  to  spare  them.  He  knew  them  for  his  friends  the 
two  Efumi,  with  whom  he  had  conversed  a  few  days  before,  so 
bade  them  watch  while  he  shot  at  the  trunk  of  a  very  tall 
tree.  When  the  men  saw  how  great  a  piece  was  blown  away 
by  the  shot,  they  grew  still  more  fearful,  and  begged  Atikawt 
not  to  harm  them,  and  they  would  repay  him  for  all  the  damage 
they  had  done.  To  this  he  agreed,  and  turned  to  go  home  by 
the  way  he  had  come. 

No  sooner  was  he  out  of  sight  than  the  men  once  more 
assumed  their  elephant  forms.  Then  they  performed  a  great 
Juju  and  caused  a  heavy  rain  to  fall,  so  that  the  whole  road  was 
blotted  out.  Atikawt  could  not  find  his  way  home,  and  wandered 
in  the  woods  till  he  was  completely  lost.  After  many  hours  he 
found  himself  in  a  part  of  the  bush  where  he  had  never  been 
before.  When  the  rain  stopped,  he  saw  that  he  was  close  to  a 
house  the  like  of  which  he  had  never  seen,  it  was  so  splendid. 
/In  it  dwelt  a  "  Forest  Woman,"  and  all  around  were  heaps  of 
human  skulls  and  piles  of  bones. 

The  hunter  gave  himself  up  for  lost,  but  suddenly  he  heard  a 
call,  "  Awsang  Atikawt."  He  answered,  and  saw  a  little  lame 
girl  creep  out  from  a  small  side  door.  She  came  up  to  him  and 
said  how  sorry  she  was  that  he  had  been  so  unlucky  as  to  come 
to  that  place,  for  her  mistress  was  a  monster  who  killed  and  ate 
all  who  came  near  her  palace,  and  by  magic  arts  could  overtake 
those  who  tried  to  flee.  "  Nevertheless,"  said  the  girl,  "  I  may 
save  you,  and  send  you  home  safely  if  you  will  do  as  I  say. 
Only  you  must  not  eat  of  any  food  which  my  mistress  may 
offer  you." 

Awsang  was  thankful  to  hear  this,  and  gladly  promised  to  eat 
nothing  save  by  the  little  maid's  leave. 

"  Good,"  she  said.  "  Then  take  this,"  and  gave  him  a  piece 
of  edible  clay.  "  Eat  of  it,  and  throw  the  food  given  you  by  my 
mistress  to  any  animal  which  you  may  see,  only  do  not  let  her 
know  that  you  do  this.  In  the  night  time  you  must  beware,  for 
she  will  take  you  to  her  chamber.  When  she  seems  to  fall 
asleep,  listen  carefully.      If  her  snores  are  only  as  loud  as  a 


BEYOND   NETIM  249 

tornado  lie  quite  still,  for  she  is  awake,  but  when  the  sound  of 
them  shakes  the  house  like  the  crash  of  thunder,  you  will  know 
that  she  is  asleep  at  last.  Then  creep  from  her  room  and  come 
to  me  very  softly.  I  will  give  you  two  kinds  of  magic  plants 
which  you  must  carry  with  you  in  your  flight.  Wring  the  juice 
of  the  first  so  that  it  falls  on  the  gate,  and  it  will  fly  open  for 
you  to  pass  out.  Let  the  juice  of  the  second  fall  into  the  river 
and  it  will  dry  up,  so  that  you  can  cross  over.  When  you  are 
once  on  the  other  side  do  not  turn  round,  but  throw  the 
'  medicine '  leaves  over  your  shoulder  into  the  water,  and  the 
river  will  rise  behind  you  and  fill  up  the  pass,  so  that  you 
cannot  be  followed  and  recaptured." 

Just  then  they  heard  the  sound  of  the  beating  of  drums,  the 
blowing  of  horns  and  all  kinds  of  music,  borne  on  the  evening 
breeze. 

The  little  maid  said  that  her  mistress  was  coming,  and  that 
all  the  sounds  came  from  her  body.  She  bade  the  hunter  stand 
still,  while  she  hurried  back  to  her  hiding  place. 

Atikawt  stood  trembling  with  fear.  No  sooner  had  the 
Giantess  drawn  near  than  the  music  stopped.  She  approached 
him  quite  gently,  and  told  him  not  to  fear,  for  she  would  take 
him  for  her  husband,  as  she  had  been  long  without  one. 

When  they  had  entered  the  palace  she  asked  him  to  be  seated. 
He  sat  down  trembling,  for  indeed  he  was  much  afraid. 

"  Monn-I-Mbuni  "  (Child  of  Lameness),  she  called  to  the  little 
maid.  The  latter  came  to  her  slowly,  pretending  that  she  had 
been  sleeping.  In  her  forest  language  the  Giantess  said,  pointing 
to  her  guest,  "  To-morrow  we  shall  have  good  meat  for  dinner." 

"  Anaw  "  ("Just  so  "),  answered  the  girl. 

When  the  evening  meal  was  ready,  the  monster  dropped 
"  medicine  "  into  Atikawt's  share.  He,  however,  told  her  that  in 
his  country  it  was  only  lawful  for  a  man  like  him  to  eat  in  the 
goat  pen,  so  he  was  allowed  to  carry  his  food  thither. 

When  he  reached  the  place  where  the  goats  were,  he  spilt  the 
ood  on  the  ground  so  that  the  beasts  might  eat  it.  At  the 
moment  when  it  touched  the  ground,  a  flame  sprang  forth,  but 
he  sat,  quietly  watching,  till  the  fire  had  gone  out,  and  the 
goats  ate  all.  Then  he  went  back  to  the  Forest  Woman,  and, 
after  a  short  talk  together,  they  went  to  bed. 


250      IN    THE    SHADOW    OF   THE    BUSH 

Before  this  the  Giantess  had  put  an  iron  instrument,  sharply 
pointed,  to  heat  in  the  fire.  This  she  meant  to  thrust  through 
Atikawt  when  he  fell  asleep.  After  a  while  she  began  to  snore 
like  a  tornado,  just  as  the  little  lame  girl  had  said.  He  lay 
very  quiet,  and  in  a  short  time  the  snores  grew  so  loud  that 
the  whole  palace  trembled. 

Then  the  hunter  crept  out,  took  some  pillows,  and  put  them 
in  the  place  where  he  had  lain.  Next  he  drew  a  cover  over 
them,  and,  when  all  was  arranged  smoothly,  went  in  search  of 
his  little  lame  friend,  who  gave  him  the  promised  "  medicines." 

When  the  first  drops  wrung  from  the  magic  herb  fell  upon 
the  gate,  it  flew  open  before  him,  and,  on  crushing  the  leaves  so 
that  their  juice  fell  into  the  river,  this  also  held  back  the  flow 
of  its  waters,  and  allowed  him  to  cross.  Just  before  he  had 
reached  the  other  side,  however,  he  heard  a  sound  as  of  thunder 
from  the  palace.    "  The  Forest  Woman  is  coming,"  thought  he. 

Once  on  shore  he  felt  quite  safe.  He  threw  the  "  medicine  " 
over  his  shoulder  without  looking  round,  and  then  turned  to 
see  what  would  happen.  Immediately  the  river  began  to  rise, 
and  soon  the  whole  pass  was  blocked  by  the  swirling  water,  so 
that  Atikawt  could  go  on  his  way  without  fear  of  pursuit. 

Meantime,  about  midnight,  the  Giantess  awoke.  She  went 
to  the  fire  and  drew  from  it  the  sharp-pointed  iron,  which 
was  now  quite  red.  This  she  forced  through  the  pillows  which 
Atikawt  had  arranged.  They  at  once  caught  fire.  Judge  if  the 
monster  was  vexed  or  no  !  The  fire  raged  all  around,  and  the 
man,  on  whom  she  had  intended  to  feast  next  day,  had  fled 
homeward  ! 

She  turned  to  follow  in  hot  pursuit,  but  in  her  haste  forgot  to 
take  with  her  the  magic  herbs  which  would  cause  the  water  to 
divide.  Therefore  when  she  came  to  the  torrent  she  could  not 
cross,  so  she  stood  on  her  side  of  the  river  and  called  to  him  on 
the  other  side  : 

"  Ojjak  anaw  tik  osiri  se  jen,  Awsang  Atikawt  ?  "  ("  What 
will  you  say,  where  you  go,  Awsang  Atikawt  ?  ") 

"  I  will  say,"  he  answered,  "  that  I  have  seen  a  woman  who 
lives  alone  in  the  woods,  who  kills  and  eats  all  whom  she 
entraps.  A  woman  who  has  drums,  blowing  horns  and  even 
big  guns  in  her  belly.     She  is  a  danger  to  the  whole  human 


Crossing  a  River. 


An  Oban  Elephant. 


BEYOND    NETIM  251 

race.  The  sooner  she  is  killed  the  better  for  all  hunters." 
Filled  with  fury  at  this,  the  Giantess  went  back  to  her  palace, 
but  Atikawt  went  on  his  way,  and  was  received  with  the 
utmost  joy. 

A  few  days  later  a  beautiful  woman  was  seen  coming  towards 
the  town.  On  her  head  she  bore  a  calabash  full  of  "  chop," 
and  her  robes  were  richer  than  any  there.  She  stopped  to  ask 
which  was  the  house  of  Atikawt,  and  was  at  once  led  towards  it. 
When  the  hunter  came  forward  to  welcome  his  guest  and  ask 
what  she  wished  of  him,  she  said  that  she  came  from  a 
neighbouring  town  through  which  he  had  passed  some  time 
ago.  She  had  seen  him  and  at  once  fallen  in  love,  but,  though 
she  had  inquired  from  everyone  as  to  his  name  and  dwelling 
place,  it  was  only  that  very  day  that  she  had  at  last  found 
out.  Awsang  Atikawt  listened  to  her  flattering  words,  and 
never  doubted  that  all  was  as  she  said. 

Now  one  of  the  wives  of  Atikawt  was  a  witch,  and  by  her 
magic  she  found  that  the  visitor  was  none  other  than  Ada 
Etim  Agbo  Etum  (Ada  the  Forest  Ruler).  So  she  called  to  her 
husband  and  warned  him,  saying,  as  plainly  as  possible,  that 
the  beautiful  stranger  was  the  very  monster  from  whom  he  had 
lately  escaped,  the  fiend  woman,  with  the  drums,  bugles,  guns 
and  all  manner  of  terrors  in  her  belly. 

Atikawt  only  laughed,  and  said  that  if  his  wife  could  see 
the  Giantess,  she  would  know  at  once  how  different  was  the 
latter  from  their  visitor. 

When  evening  came,  the  witch  wife  went  to  him  again,  and 
begged  that  now  at  least  he  would  send  the  stranger  away,  for 
indeed  she  was  the  very  monster  about  whose  cruel  deeds  he 
had  been  so  ready  to  talk  a  few  days  before.  He,  however, 
instead  of  consenting,  only  laughed  the  more,  and  told  his  wife 
that  she  was  too  jealous  by  far. 

At  night  when  he  was  going  to  rest  by  the  side  of  the 
beautiful  stranger,  his  wife  again  called  him  aside,  and  begged 
yet  more  earnestly  that  at  least  he  would  not  sleep  with  their 
guest,  lest  she  should  kill  him,  for  she  was  indeed  none  other 
than  the  forest  woman  Ada  Etim  Agbo  Etum.  When  he 
remained  obstinate,  the  woman  saw  that  warnings  were  useless, 
but  determined  to  do  what  she  could  to  save  him,  for  she  was 


252      IN   THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

too  anxious  on  his  account  to  sleep  unheeding.  She  went  to 
the  place  where  her  husband's  hunting  dogs  were,  and  pre- 
tended to  be  looking  on  the  ground  for  something  she  had 
lost.  Meantime  she  singled  out  two  of  the  fiercest,  and, 
while  patting  and  fondling  them,  managed  to  whisper  that  they 
must  keep  wide  awake  all  night  and  guard  their  master,  other- 
wise the  strange  woman  would  kill  him.  Now  both  of  these 
dogs  were  witch  dogs,  as  the  woman  very  well  knew,  and  when 
she  had  gone  sadly  to  her  room,  though,  alas  !  not  to  sleep, 
they  rose  and  crept  to  the  place  where  their  master  lay  by  the 
stranger's  side. 

When  some  hours  had  passed,  and  all  was  still,  Ada  Etim 
Agbo  Etum,  for  indeed  it  was  she,  disguised  as  a  beautiful 
woman,  thought  that  now  it  would  be  quite  safe  to  kill  Atikawt. 
She  therefore  struck  her  belly,  and  lo  !  out  of  it  sprang  the 
sharp-pointed  iron,  red  hot.  She  prepared  to  drive  this  into 
the  man  by  her  side  and  kill  him  while  he  slept  ;  but  at  the 
first  movement  up  sprang  the  dogs,  barking  their  loudest,  and 
threw  themselves  upon  her. 

Atikawt  awoke  at  once,  and  Ada,  full  of  vexation,  struck  her 
belly  once  more,  whereon  the  red-hot  iron  sprang  within  and 
was  hidden.  She  then  pretended  that  she  also  had  been  disturbed 
by  the  dogs,  and  said  that  she  could  not  sleep  if  they  stayed  in 
the  room.  He  therefore  got  up,  took  a  stick,  and  soundly  beat 
the  poor  dogs  who  had  saved  his  life.  Afterwards  he  chained 
them  up  on  the  verandah,  and  went  back  to  his  guest  once 
more. 

No  sooner  had  he  entered  and  closed  the  door  than  the 
witch  wife  crept  out  of  her  room,  unchained  the  dogs,  and 
whispered  to  them  to  keep  as  wide  awake  as  before. 

When  Ada  saw  the  hunter  once  more  sleeping,  she  got  up 
again,  and  hit  her  belly,  whereon  the  red-hot  iron  reappeared. 
In  sprang  the  dogs  through  the  window,  and  attacked  her, 
barking  as  loudly  as  before,  so  that  Atikawt  was  awakened 
again.     Just  at  that  moment  the  cock  crowed. 

Ada  sprang  up  at  the  sound,  and  told  Atikawt  that  she  must 
at  once  set  out  homeward.  She  begged  him  to  chain  up  his 
dogs,  and  himself  lead  her  on  her  way. 

So  foolish  was  the  man  that  he  not  only  did  as  she  asked> 


BEYOND   NETIM  253 

but  took  the  keys  with  him,  so  that  it  should  be  impossible 
for  anyone  to  free  the  dogs  after  he  had  left. 

On  the  way  the  stranger  told  Atikawt  to  walk  in  front  of 
her,  but  he  refused  her  request,  and  said  that  he  would  rather 
she  should  go  before  him.  This  was  the  first  and  quite 
necessary  opposition  offered  to  his  guest  by  Atikawt.  His 
refusal,  however,  warned  her  that  he  might  be  growing  aware 
of  her  true  nature.  She  waited  her  chance,  and  often  turned 
round  to  look  at  him,  but  could  do  nothing  since  she  was 
before  him,  and  he  could  see  everything  which  she  tried  to  do. 

In  a  short  time  she  hit  upon  a  plan  by  which  she  thought 
she  could  rid  herself  of  him  for  a  while.  Near  the  road  grew 
a  tree,  which  was  covered  by  a  climber.  On  this  hung  ripe 
fruits  of  a  kind  called  Nsebbe  by  the  Ekoi,  though  the  Efik 
people  call  it  Eting  Keni.  She  asked  the  hunter  to  climb  this 
tree  and  gather  fruits  for  her.  No  sooner  had  he  obeyed, 
than,  by  her  magic,  she  caused  it  to  grow,  till  it  was  taller  than 
any  tree  in  the  whole  world.  Then,  when  she  saw  that  Atikawt 
was  safely  held  so  far  above  her  that  he  could  not  get  back  to 
prevent  anything  she  might  do,  she  struck  her  belly  once  more. 
About  twenty  men  sprang  out  fully  armed.  They  surrounded 
the  tree,  and  called  up  tauntingly  to  the  hunter,  "  Now  fly." 
Ada  also  began  to  boast  and  to  speak  thus : 

"'We  oyen,      okkpe       oyen  se  oyen    njum    ebi. 

If  you  look,  (and)  again  look  you  can  say  you  see  a  bad  thing." 

When  Atikawt  heard  this,  he  thought  of  all  his  wife's 
warnings,  and  burst  into  tears.  Also  he  understood  the  true 
reason  why  his  dogs  had  barked  in  the  night.  From  the  top 
of  the  tree,  where  he  clung,  he  could  see  his  native  town.  He 
thought  of  the  dogs  whom  he  had  chained  up,  and  began  to 
call  for  them,  and  to  weep  for  his  own  folly. 

Ada  meanwhile  ordered  her  men  to  cut  down  the  tree  with 
the  axes  which  they  carried.  They  began  to  do  this,  and, 
while  the  blows  fell,  a  parrot  flew  by.  He  saw  what  had 
happened  and  bore  to  Atikawt's  house  news  of  the  wretched 
plight  of  its  master.  He  told  them  to  loose  the  dogs  at  once, 
or  one  who  had  gone  forth  that  morning  would  never  come 
home.     The   keys  could  not  be    found,  and  the  other  people 


254      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

would  have  given  up  in  despair,  but  the  witch  wife  saw  by  her 
vision  that  the  tree  was  near  falling,  and  that  only  if  the  dogs 
were  set  free  at  once  could  they  reach  their  master  in  time. 
So  she  got  a  stone,  with  it  beat  the  chains  till  they  broke, 
and  then  told  the  dogs  where  to  go.  These  had  not  got  half 
way,  however,  before  the  tree  fell,  but,  happily  for  Atikawt,  it 
was  caught  by  another  tree,  and  so  could  not  come  to  the 
ground.  Then  Ada  gave  orders  that  the  second  tree  should  be 
cut  through,  so  that  Atikawt  might  at  length  fall  into  her 
power. 

At  the  moment  when  this  tree  also  came  crashing  down, 
the  dogs  reached  the  spot.  Now  one  of  them  was  called  Oro 
Njaw.  He  was  the  fiercest  of  them  all,  and  at  once  darted  on 
the  Forest  Woman,  while  the  others  attacked  her  men  and  put 
them  to  flight.  Many  of  these  were  killed,  but  some  escaped. 
Ada  herself  was  torn  in  pieces. 

Thus  ends  the  story  of  Awsang  Atikawt,  the  famous  hunter, 
and  Ada  Etim  Agbo  Etum,  the  terrible  Forest  Woman,  who 
had  within  her  belly  all  the  music  of  all  the  world,  and  also  all 
weapons  which  have  ever  been  made. 

So  we  see  that  the  plot  made  by  the  two  Efumi  of  elephants 
to  destroy  this  hunter's  farm  brought  about  a  great  advantage 
to  us,  namely,  the  death  of  Ada  Etim  Agbo  Etum,  the  Forest 
Woman.  A  famous  hunter  must  Atikawt  indeed  have  been  to 
have  freed  the  bush  from  so  cruel  a  monster  ! 


CHAPTER    XXIV 
Uyanga  and  Ekuri 

To  the  north  of  the  Ojo  people  live  a  small  tribe  called  the 
Uyanga,  who  have  settled  at  Ifunkpa,  Ovvai  Ifunkpa,  and 
the  three  Iko  towns.  They  are  renowned  all  over  this  part 
of  the  country  for  their  knowledge  of  medicine  and  magic. 
According  to  an  article  written  by  the  Rev.  J.  K.  MacGregor, 
in  the  Journal  of  the  Royal  Anthropological  Institute,  June,  1909, 
they  are  supposed  to  have  learned  the  greater  part  of  their 
magic  lore,  and  also  their  knowledge  of  Nsibidi — the  secret 
primitive  writing  already  mentioned — from  monkeys  who  came 
and  sat  round  their  camp  fires.  Unfortunately,  it  has  not 
been  possible  to  find  a  trace  of  this  interesting  legend  among 
the  people  themselves.  Perhaps  it  is  allowable  to  mention 
here  that  the  Ekoi  claim  to  have  originated  this  script,  of 
which  several  hundred  characters  and  a  considerable  number 
of  complete  stories  were  collected  during  our  stay.* 

Up  to  fifty  years  ago,  the  whole  Uyanga  tribe  lived  together 
by  the  River  Tegott,  north  of  Owai  Ifunkpa,  but  separated 
about  that  time  and  founded  the  different  towns  in  which 
they  now  dwell.  Early  in  1909  the  tribe  was  in  a  state  of 
great  excitement.  They  had  heard  that  a  force  was  marching 
against  them,  to  arrest  the  persons  concerned  in  the  maltreat- 
ment of  a  Court  Messenger.  Some  Native  Court  Clerk  had 
sent  in  a  highly  picturesque  account  of  their  habits.  Among 
other  pleasing  details  he  wrote  that  the  houses  were  all/' 
"occupied  with  skulls."  Up  to  this  time,  the  people  had' 
been  dwelling  on  more  or  less  debatable  land,  as  the  country 
was  not  yet  mapped,  so  it  was  not  certain  to  which  District 
they  belonged. 

It  was  somewhat  difficult  to  obtain  a  guide,  owing  to  the 

*  See  Nsibidi,  Chapter  XXVIII. 


256      IN    THE    SHADOW    OF   THE    BUSH 

sinister  reputation  of  the  people,  but  when  Owai  Ifunkpa  was 
reached,  white  rags  were  seen  fluttering  from  bamboo  poles, 
/to  act  as  flags  of  truce.  The  Juju  trees  and  stones  had  been 
freshly  smeared  with  blood,  or  in  some  cases  red  and  yellow 
paint,  in  order  to  propitiate  the  Genii  and  ensure  protection 
from  any  danger  which  their  white  visitors  might  be  bringing 
upon  them. 

Iko  Akperem  is  only  about  8  miles  from  Owai  Ifunkpa. 
No  white  man  had  been  through  this  part  of  the  country 
before,  and  everywhere  in  the  bush  Juju  offerings  were  to  be 
seen,  overhead,  underfoot,  and  at  each  side  of  the  road.  Here, 
as  at  all  non-Ekoi  towns  in  the  District,  the  people  were  away 
at  their  bush  farms.     They  only  come  into  the  towns  during  the 

I  rainy  season,  or  on  special  occasions,  for,  unlike  the  Ekoi,  they 
have  not,  as  yet,  reached  the  sociable  "  town  "  stage.  The 
difference  is  very  clearly  marked  in  their  manners,  which  are  not 
nearly  so  polite  or  friendly  as  those  of  the  Ekoi.  Some  of  the  Iko 
chiefs  were  in  the  town,  but  from  their  behaviour  it  was  evident 
that  their  feelings  were  far  from  friendly.  This  was  quite 
explained  when  we  heard,  on  our  return,  that  not  many  miles  off 
vigorous  hostilities  were  proceeding  between  two  tribes,  one  of 
which  was  allied  to  the  people  of  Iko.  A  Government  force  was 
at  the  moment  employed  in  restoring  order,  which  was  attended 
;  with  considerable  difficulty,  as  the  warring  tribes  had  provided 
themselves  with  rifle  pits  and  similar  luxuries. 

About  20  miles  from  Owai  Ifunkpa  lies  Ekuri  Owai.  The 
road  leads  through  difficult,  hilly  country,  and  is  crossed  by 
innumerable  streams  and  rivers.  It  is  in  this  part  of  the  district 
that  that  rare  and  beautiful  tree,  the  Baikiea  Insignis,  is  to  be 
found,  with  its  creamy  white  petals  over  half  a  foot  in  length 
and  velvety  buds  of  dark  golden  brown. 

On  first  visiting  the  place,  nothing  but  a  bush  track  was  to  be 
found,  and  men  with  matchets  had  to  go  on  ahead  to  clear  a 
path  for  the  carriers,  who  could  not  march  at  the  rate  of 
more  than  a  mile  an  hour.  The  inhabitants  are  called  Ekuri 
by  Efik  and  Ekoi,  but  "  Nkokolle "  is  the  name  they  give 
themselves. 

While  dining  in  the  Egbo  shed,  loud  cries  were  heard,  and 
people  were  seen  rushing  round  the  town  in  a  great  state  of 


Note  Chameleon. 


Open  spaces  represent  windows.     (Heraldic  colouring.) 
Decoration  of  wall  in  Egbo  House,  Ekuri  Owai. 


UYANGA   AND    EKURI 


257 


excitement.  On  sending  out  to  find  the  cause  of  this,  it  was 
discovered  that  a  "  war  party  "  had  come  in  from  Oburekkpe. 
When  questioned,  they  quieted  down,  and  explained  that  they 
had  come  to  inform  Ekuri  that  ''war"  had  broken  out  in 
some  neighbouring  towns.  Later,  it  transpired  that  they  them- 
selves had  started  the  righting,  and  had  been  carrying  round 
young  palm  leaves,  on  which  were  hung  freshly  killed  human 
jaws,  in    token    of  victory.     These    gruesome    trophies    were 


Figures  at  end  of  Egbo  House,  Ekuri  Owai. 

hidden  on  the  first  whisper  of  the  arrival  of  a  "white  man," 
and  information  was  not  brought  till  too  late  to  take  action. 

The  Egbo  house  here  is  most  elaborately  painted.  Indeed, 
the  designs  seemed  remarkable  enough  to  be  worth  copying, 
as  it  is  the  most  ambitious  colour  scheme  in  the  District.f 
Before  the  house  stands  a  pillar  which  forms  a  ghastly' 
monument  to  the  state  of  affairs  which  is  only  just  passing 
away.  All  over  the  country  such  relics  exist,  and  a  still  worse 
example  is  to  be  found  at  Oburekkpe,  where  many  skulls  are 
fastened  round  the  Juju  post. 

The  chiefs  of  Ekuri  Owai,  who,  like   most  others,  have  now 
grown  very  friendly,  asked  permission  to  remove  their  town  to 

*  See  p.  290. 
S.B,  S 


258      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

a  new  site  on  the  bank  of  the  Ukpon  River,  just  opposite  Etara. 
They  gave  as  a  reason  that  it  was  impossible  for  them  to 
exist  in  their  present  town,  because  of  the  ravages  caused  by 
elephants  in  outlying  farms,  which  the  townsfolk  were  not 
numerous  enough  to  protect.  They  described  the  bush  around 
them  as  full  of  elephants,  but,  although  I  had  come  across  a 
herd  on  a  former  visit,  the  statement  on  the  present  occasion 
seemed  so  exaggerated  that  I  thought  it  possible  that  the  chiefs 
were  giving  the  rein  to  their  fancy,  in  the  hope  that,  by  so 
doing,  a  few  extra  kegs  of  gunpowder  might  be  obtained. 

The  statements  were,  however,  completely  corroborated  during 
the  march  next  day.  Hardly  had  we  left  the  outlying  farms 
behind  us  before  we  saw  the  traces  of  great  herds  of  elephants, 
and  only  a  few  miles  had  been  traversed  when  a  delighted 
exclamation  broke  from  one  of  my  companions.  "  Oh,"  she 
cried,  "  we  have  nearly  reached  camp  !  I  can  hear  them  cutting 
and  hammering." 

Almost  at  the  same  moment  the  chair-carrier,  who  was  a 
little  ahead,  came  rushing  back,  his  face  a  picture  of  terror. 

There  was  only  time  to  beg  my  companions  to  take  cover 
^behind  some  big  trees,  and  snatch  my  rifle.  The  sounds  came 
nearer,  and  a  great  herd  of  dark  forms  was  to  be  seen  crashing 
through  the  bush  in  our  direction.  A  few  resounding  blows  on 
one  of  the  tree  trunks  by  the  path  was  enough  to  turn  them, 
however,  and  they  headed  away  from  us.  Hardly  had  they 
disappeared  than  something  must  have  startled  them  in  another 
direction — possibly  the  voices  of  carriers  descending  the  hill  to 
the  rear.  Anyhow,  they  turned  again,  and  this  time  seemed  to 
be  making  a  blind  rush  down  upon  us.  A  shot  from  my  -470 
turned  them  once  more,  and  they  made  off  determinedly  through 
the  bush  to  our  right. 

One  huge  bull  was  hit  in  the  forehead,  and  left  a  great  trail  of 
blood  which  it  was  easy  enough  to  follow.  About  an  hour's 
stalking  led  past  a  mud  bath,  which  they  had  made  for 
themselves,  to  a  little  clearing,  where  the  wounded  bull  was 
found  in  company  with  four  others,  all  fully  grown  and  with 
splendid  tusks.  A  further  shot  from  my  orderly  settled  the 
business.  The  bull  fell  as  a  tree  falls,  and  lay  as  if  sleeping, 
without  so  much  as  a  twitching  muscle,  while  his  three  com- 


An  Elephant  Road. 


UYANGA   AND    EKURI  259 

panions  made  off  after  the  main  herd.    Unfortunately  he  proved 
to  have  only  one  tusk,  about  a  33-pounder ;  the  other  had  been 
broken    off  close   in    some    fight.      He   was,    however,    a  fine  ~) 
specimen  in  his  way,  well  over  11  feet  in  height. 

That  night  there  was  great  rejoicing.  Fires  were  lit  to  keep 
off  unwelcome  visitors,  while,  with  the  same  object,  lamps  were 
hung  from  poles  outside  the  tents. 

A  beautiful  spot  had  been  chosen  for  the  camp,  within  the 
loop  of  a  river,  which  encircled  it  on  three  sides.  During  the 
night,  several  times,  strange  boomings  and  trumpetings  were 
heard,  and  next  morning,  not  100  yards  from  the  further  bank, 
great  five-toed  indentations,  only  a  few  hours  old,  were  found,  to 
prove  how  near  to  us  the  herd  had  passed.  I  followed  them 
up,  and  for  hours  they  kept  tantalisingly  just  ahead,  but  time 
did  not  allow  of  tracking  them  down.  No  matter  how 
often  one  has  been  out  after  elephants,  it  yet  remains  a 
somewhat  curious  experience  to  follow,  hour  after  hour,  in  the 
footsteps  of  these  strange  survivals  from  another  world.  The 
very  irresistibility  of  their  onward  march,  crushing  down, 
by  sheer  weight,  all  but  the  very  greatest  of  obstacles,  appeals 
curiously  to  the  imagination.  As  if  in  contempt  of  danger,  or 
indeed  as  a  kind  of  challenge  thrown  down  to  possible  pursuers, 
they  leave  records,  often  strangely  intimate,  of  themselves  and 
their  doings,  for  him  who  cares  to  read.  One  huge  bull  had 
stayed  to  sharpen  his  tusks  upon  a  tree,  which  was  scored  again 
and  again  at  least  14  feet  from  the  ground.  Countless  palm 
trees  were  uprooted  to  enjoy  the  soft  "  cabbage/'  while  in  places 
regular  slides  had  been  made  in  the  clayey  banks  down  which 
the  great  beasts  might  glide,  as  on  an  inclined  plane,  to  gambol 
in  the  baths  below. 

From  Ekuri  Owai  the  road  leads  through  a  region  where 
ebony  is  so  plentiful  that  almost  all  the  houses  are  built  of  it. 
The  Egbo  house  at  Oburekkpe  was  so  small  that  we  decided  to 
use  it  as  a  sitting-room  only,  and  had  our  tents  pitched  near  by 
to  sleep  in.  I  cannot  say  that  we  passed  a  very  happy  night. 
The  side  of  our  tent  almost  touched  a  little  ebony  hut  built 
over  a  large  and  gruesome-looking  pot,  the  sides  of  which  were 
ornamented  with  iron  hooks.  Before  this,  about  breast  high, 
and  the  length  of  a  man,  was  a  kind  of  altar,  made  of  stout 

s  2 


260      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

ebony  blocks.  In  front  of  our  tent  door  was  a  tall  carved 
pillar,  ornamented  with  strings  of  human  skulls.  The  people 
all  had  the  filed  teeth  and  tilth"  shrunken  appearance 
usually  associated  with  cannibal  rites,  and,  although  one  and 
all  stoutly  denied  knowledge  of  anything  of  the  kind,  every 
one  of  our  carriers  said  that  not  only  was  the  pot  in  the  little 


hut  meant  for  the  sacrifice  of  human  victims,  but  the  two 
hideous  mud  figures  of  a  god  and  goddess  in  another  shed  on 
the  further  side  of  the  carved  pillar  had  had  their  heads  worn 
away  by  constant  libations  of  human  blood  poured  over  them. 

The  next  place  to  be  visited  was  Ekuri  Eying,  where  the 
people  of  the  two  last-named  towns  first  settled  on  coming 
down  from  the  north.  About  sixty  years  ago  they  left  to  found 
Oburekkpe,  whence,  somewhat  later,  the  people  of  Ekuri  Owai 
again  split  off.  On  the  road  a  rotting  tree-trunk  was  passed, 
covered  with  Geasters,  the  first  of  this  flower-like  fungus  to  be 
discovered  in  Nigeria.  Later,  specimens  of  an  unusually  small 
kind  were  found  on  a  peak  near  Oban,  and  in  ign  three  more 
varieties  of  varying  sizes  were  added  to  the  collection. 

To  return  to  Ekuri  Eying.  This  is  a  small  town,  now 
practically  deserted,  but  with  several  points  of  interest. 

One  of  the  houses  contains  the  shrine  of  a  queer  little  god 


Dancers  with  Juju  Masks  at  Ekuri  Eyiru 


**7 


Mourning  Emblems  at  House  of  Dead  Chief. 


UYANGA   AND    EKURI  261 

and  goddess.  The  figures  are  seated  on  the  ground,  surrounded 
by  offerings.  The  female  has  long,  upstanding  ears,  which  give 
her  a  rather  rabbit-like  appearance,  while  the  male  wears  a 
false  beard.  In  another  house  dwells  a  famous  Juju  man. 
Embedded  in  the  mud  before  his  door  are  three  human  skulls, 
before  which  human  sacrifices  used  to  be  offered,  and  a  very  large 
number  of  these  gruesome  relics  are  displayed  within.  In  his 
possession  were  several  ancient  carved  wooden  heads  of  an 
unusual  type,  covered  with  human  skin.  With  one  of  these  he 
was  induced  to  part.  It  bears  a  curious  likeness  to  a  fourteenth- 
century  helmet. 

In  this  part  of  the  country,  when  a  chief  dies,  it  is  customary  J 
to  affix  his  coat  and  umbrella  to  the  top  of  a  tall  palm  stem,  / 
raised  before  his  house. 

On  one  occasion  an  old  war  dance  was  given  in  our  honour. 
At  the  present  day,  mercifully,  only  wooden  masks  covered  with 
skin  are  used,  in  lieu  of  the  freshly  killed  heads  of  enemies 
formerly  borne  by  the  victors. 


CHAPTER   XXV 

Conditions  of  Life  in  Peace  and  War 

f~  By  old  custom  land  can  never  be  sold,  but  belongs  to  the 
''  heirs  of  the  first  settler,  even  if  abandoned  for  hundreds  of 
years.  It  is  doubtful  whether  any  part  of  the  Ekoi  country 
remains  unowned  at  present,  though  there  are  great  spaces,  for 
instance,  the  Game  and  Forest  Reserve,  nearly  400  square  miles 
in  extent,  which  have  been  uninhabited  for  many  years.  A 
town,  therefore,  that  wishes  to  remove  to  a  fresh  site  must 
purchase  the  right  of  settlement,  not  ownership,  from  another. 
This  is  usually  an  affair  of  little  difficulty,  and  the  founding  of 
Oban  town  on  its  present  site,  some  fifty  years  ago,  may  be  taken 
as  typical. 

The  land  belonged  to  the  Ojuk  people,  who  charged  the 
newcomers : 

One  matchet,  1  sheep,  1  piece  of  iron,  1  hoe,  and  7  iron  hooks 
for  the  right  to  settle. 

Forty  pieces  of  dried  meat  for  the  hunting  rights. 

Fifteen  baskets  of  fish  for  water  rights ;  while,  for  forestry 
rights,  1  goat,  5  pieces  of  dried  meat,  and  500  pieces  of  ebony 
were  exacted. 

In  addition,  3  pots  of  palm  oil,  500  yams,  500  sleeping  mats, 
and  10  bundles  of  corn  were  demanded  in  final  settlement. 

On  starting  a  new  town,  a  meeting  is  called,  and  after  the 
site  for  the  Egbo  house  has  been  agreed  on,  each  family  is 
apportioned  its  share  of  the  new  bush.  As  a  rule,  the  first 
newcomer  to  explore  a  particular  part  has  primary  claim  to  it. 
The  bush  beyond  the  immediate  vicinity  is  counted  as  belonging 
to  the  men  who  found  it. 

As  already  mentioned,  the  first  ceremony  of  all  is  the  choosing 
of  the  new  site  for  the  Egbo  house.  On  this  a  little  hut  is 
erected,   called  "  Ekpa   Ntan  "  (the  house  without  walls),  and 


LIFE   IN    PEACE   AND   WAR 


263 


\ 


\ 


V- 


?. 


-^ 


r 


some  Nimm  stones  laid  where  the  Etai  Ngbe  will  be  raised 
later.  Various  sacrifices  are  then  made  to  Obassi  Osaw,  Obassi 
Nsi  and  the  ancestors. 

The  young  men  next  clear  bush,  and  erect  temporary  shelters,  • 
after  which  the 
actual  planting  is 
begun.  The  head 
chief's  compound 
/is  built,  and  gra- 
/  dually  others,  till 
dwellings  have 
been  provided  for 
all. 

Special  cere- 
monies are  ob- 
served before  the 
building  of  each 
homestead.  The 
head  chief,  in  com- 
pany with  the 
principal  men  of 
the  town,  hang  up 
Antann  leaves,  and 
plant  two  young 
saplings  of  the 
Ibonn  and  Irun 
trees,  where  the 
little  shrine  will  be  set  later.  The  name  of  Obassi  is  invoked, 
together  with  those  of  the  chief  ancestors.  A  libation  of  palm 
wine  is  then  made,  and  other  sacrifices  offered. 

When  the  house  is  finished,  the  liane  Mfinn  is  often  laid 
right  round  it,  without  a  break,  so  that  no  evil  spirit  can  enter. 
The  chief  women  of  the  town  are  then  summoned,  and  palm  oil 
and  dried  "  Nsun"  flesh  offered  to  them,  while  the  oldest  of 
all  lights  the  new  fire  upon  the  hearth. 

Each  compound  is  built  much  on  the  plan  of  a  Roman  house, 
with  a  central  atrium,  from  which  the  living  and  sleeping  rooms 
branch  off.  Even  the  mud  couches,  built  against  the  walls  of 
these  rooms,  are  Roman  in  shape,  while  the  red  and  black  mural 


Main.        Stteet 


hs'jres  sW  height  slows  groimdW 

Plan  of  Compound. 
Scale  :  h  inch  =  8  feet. 


264   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 


decorations  vividly  recall 


Egbo  House  .Ndebbiji 

Figures  shew  height  above  ground  level 

Scale  :  J  inch  =  8  feet. 


in  colour,  though  not  in  form,  those 
of  Pompeii. 

Here,  too,  as  in  old  Rome,  the  head 
of  each  house  is  the  priest  of  its  par- 
ticular Lares  and  Penates,  though  each 
Juju  has  in  addition  a  head  priest  for 
the  whole  town. 

As  will  be  seen  from  the  plan 
on  p.  263,  the  four  sides  of  a  com- 
pound practically  form  four  self- 
contained  houses.  One  of  these 
would  be  that  of  the  husband,  and 
each  of  the  others  would  belong  to 
one  of  his  wives  with  her  family,  or  to 
a  married  son.  If  the  man  is  rich  he 
would  have  an  adjoining  compound, 
on  one  side  of  which  would  be  a  hall 
to  receive  his  guests,  on  another  his 
sleeping  room,  and  on  a  third  his 
"  treasure  house." 

Each  compound  is  a  little  fortress  in 
itself.  A  narrow  door,  which  can 
easily  be  barricaded,  at  the  back,  and 


Interior  of  Egbo  House. 


LIFE    IN    PEACE   AND   WAR 


265 


the  front  door,  opening  into  the  street,  are  the  only  means  of 
ingress  and  egress.  At  night  the  animals  were  always  driven 
into  the  central  compound,  as  they  still  are  in  most  towns,  to 
ensure  safety  from  leopards  and  other  wild  beasts.  Should 
an  enemy  break  into  a  compound,  he  would  find  it  no  easy 
matter  to  capture  or  kill  the  occupants, 
for  the  number  of  little  secret  chambers 
crammed  into  an  Ekoi  house  is  hardly 
believable. 

As   soon    as    the    private    dwellings    are 
finished,  the  inhabitants  set  about  building 
/  an  Egbo  house,  nearly  always  on  the  plan 
given  on  the  previous  page. 

This  style  of  architecture  is  singularly 
well  adapted  to  the  conditions  of  the 
country.  The  open  front,  and  many  loop- 
holes, sheltered  by  overhanging  eaves,  provide 
the  maximum  of  air  with  the  minimum  of 
glare — while  complete  protection  is  afforded 
against  tornadoes. 

Perhaps  the  most  important  part  of  the 
whole  structure  is  the  "  Etai  Ngbe,"  the  long, 
cut  stone,  usually  found  standing  before  the 
second    pillar.      When    this     stone 
is  first  erected  in  a  new  town,  every 
chief  has  to  bring  food  in  a  calabash, 
and  palm  wine   in  an  earthenware 
pot.     A  part  is  offered  in 
sacrifice,    and    the    rest 
eaten. 

The     stone     is     often 
transformed     by    rude 

painting  into  the  rough  semblance  of  a  human  being.  A 
cap  is  made  to  fit  the  upper  end,  and  iron  in  some  form  is 
always  present,  either  in  bars  twisted  round  the  stone,  or  laid 
below  it. 

Women  mud  the  walls,  which  they  decorate  after  smoothing 
but  afterwards  are  never  allowed  to  enter,  save  for  cleaning 
purposes. 


Typical  Pillar  in  Egbo  Hon^e. 


266      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 


D 


^5-J.j.  °"'i 

[  1 

1- 

■*/*•> 


c 


r  7 


Near  the  Egbo  house,  and 
generally  in  front  of  it,  is 
planted   a   young  slip  of  the 

/Isinn  tree,  brought  from  the 

x>ne  in  the  old  town. 

A  village  is  usually  com- 
posed of  two  rows  of  houses 
bordering  the  main  road, 
which  opens  out  into  a  broad 
space,  where  dances  are  held, 
before  the  Egbo  house,  then 
divides  into  two  semi-circular 
arms,  which  surround  the 
latter,  and  again  join  behind 
it.  Sometimes  several  streets 
run  parallel  to  the  main  one. 

To  a  certain  extent  the 
Ekoi  may  be  termed  an  in- 
dustrious people,  and,  with 
the  exception  of  some  turbu- 
lent spirits,  both  sexes  have 
now  become  keen  traders, 
though  the  greater  share  of 
this  occupation  naturally  falls 
into  the  hands  of  the  men. 
They  have  almost  secured  a 
monopoly  of  trade  with  the 
South  -  Western  Cameroons, 
where  they  find  a  ready 
market  for  the  salt,  tobacco, 
cloth,  and  hardware  from 
Calabar,  which  they  them- 
selves have  purchased  in  ex- 
change for  fowls,  dried  meat, 
sleeping  mats,  rubber,  and 
palm  kernels.  Owing  to  the 
improved  roads  and  greater 
safety,  trade  has  shown  an 
extraordinary  increase  during 


Tlan     of      Aktng. 
Scale  :  \  inch  =  16  yards. 


LIFE   IN    PEACE   AND   WAR  267 

the  last  four  years.      To  take  mats  alone — where  about  fifty/ 
went  down  daily  in  1907,  over  500  are  carried  now. 

In    another  direction   also   commerce  is  greatly  increasing^ 
for    the    Hausas   have   begun    to    come   straight   down    from\ 
Northern   Nigeria.     Should  the  railway  from   Calabar  to  Ibi  \ 
on    the    Benue,   and   thence   through    Bornu   to    Lake    Chad,  • 
ever  be  laid  it   could   hardly   fail,  with    such   a    harbour   for 
its   base,    and   such  a  country   to    open    up,  to    become    one 
of    the    greatest    trade    arteries    for    Africa.      There    is    but 
little   doubt  that  such  a  line  would   attract   the  whole  trade 
of   the    Central    Sudan,    and    assurances    have    been    given 
me    from    French  sources  that  the  project  would  be  warmly 
welcomed. 

It  is  somewhat  curious  that  among  a  people  where  the 
instinct  for  trade  is  well  developed,  there  should  be  no  market- 
places throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land.  These  ' 
are,  however,  constantly  mentioned  in  the  folk  lore,  which  shows 
that,  before  dividing  into  small  forest  communities,  the  Ekoi  were 
accustomed  to  such  institutions.  I  have  twice  started  markets 
at  Oban.  These  were  opened  with  solemn  ritual,  and  for  a 
week  or  two  seemed  to  promise  great  success.  Gradually, 
however,  the  inhabitants  of  other  towns  ceased  to  bring 
down  their  farm  produce,  as  the  ravages  of  elephants  left 
them  with  less  than  enough  for  their  own  needs,  while  the 
three  traders  established  at  Oban  supply  the  demand  for 
European  goods. 

There  are  naturally  some  unruly  members  of  the  race  who 
refuse  to  take  up  any  money-earning  occupation,  and  regret  the 
old  order  of  things,  when  town  and  tribal  wars  offered  a  quicker 
means  for  the  strong  to  enrich  themselves  than  is  possible 
to-day.  In  the  folk  lore,  descriptions  are  to  be  found,  often 
naive  enough,  of  the  lawless  state  denoted  by  the  Nsibidi  sign 
shown  at  the  right  hand  corner  of  the  Nsibidi  story  No.  9, 
Appendix  G,  which  stands  for  the  condition  of  the  country 
before  the  coming  of  "  white  "  rule — "  When  there  was  no 
redress  if  a  man  hit  you  on  the  head."  The  following  story 
is  typical : — 


268      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

Why   Ntabe  warred   no   more. 

There  once  lived  a  man  named  Ntabe,  who  went  about  with  his 
gun,  and  (contrary  to  the  hero  of  Aristophanes'  "  Acharnians  ") 
made  war  for  himself  alone.  He  had  a  wife  named  Asim  Eji. 
One  day  the  latter  went  to  visit  a  woman  friend,  who  gave  her 
the  flesh  of  a  newly  roasted  duiker  to  eat,  and  asked,  "Where  is 
your  husband  ?  "  "  He  is  always  at  war,"  said  Asim  Eji.  "  It 
is  his  only  business.  He  never  brings  me  meat  from  the  bush 
like  the  husbands  of  other  women." 

When  the  unhappy  wife  reached  home,  she  thought  to 
herself  "  What  can  I  do  ?  I  must  try  to  stop  my  husband  from 
such  an  occupation."  She  therefore  cooked  fu-fu  and  placed  it 
in  a  calabash.  In  the  midst  she  set  a  man's  skull,  but  piled 
high  the  fu-fu,  so  that  nothing  else  should  be  seen.  Then  she 
cooked  soup  and  poured  over  all. 

When  the  husband  came  in  from  his  fighting  he  asked, 
"  Where  is  my  food  ?  "  She  answered,  "  Before  I  bring  it,  call 
all  the  townspeople  to  come  and  dine  with  you,  for  I  have 
made  a  great  feast." 

When  the  neighbours  were  gathered  together,  the  woman  set 
the  table  before  them,  and  placed  the  food  upon  it.  Next  she 
put  a  knife  into  the  hand  of  her  husband,  and  said,  "  Will  you 
cut  the  fu-fu  ?  " 

The  man  took  the  knife  and  tried  to  divide  up  the  food,  but 
every  way  he  turned  the  blade  he  found  it  strike  against  some- 
thing hard.     So  he  dug  down  and  found  what  lay  beneath. 

The  people  all  wondered,  and  said  to  the  woman,  "  Why  did 
you  do  such  a  thing  ?  "  She  answered,  "  I  married  him  when  I 
was  a  very  young  girl,  and  since  our  marriage  he  has  never 
hunted  for  me  as  do  other  women's  husbands,  but  his  sole 
business  is  to  kill  men." 

On  hearing  this,  Ntabe  got  up  and  said,  "  I  am  not  angry 
with  what  you  have  done  to-day."  He  stood  before  the  table 
and  called  to  the  townspeople,  "  That  which  my  wife,  Asim 
Eji,  has  done  is  but  to  advise  me  to  give  up  the  killing  of 
men,  and  take  to  some  other  occupation,  as  the  rest  of  the 
townsfolk  do." 

Then  he  went  into  a  small  inner  room,  and  took  down  a  large 


LIFE    IN    PEACE   AND    WAR  269 

calabash  from  the  wall.  In  this  he  laid  ten  parcels  of  salt  and 
spread  two  pieces  of  native  cloth  over  all.  This  he  brought 
and  set  down  before  Asim  Eji,  and  said  to  all  the  people, 
"  Here  is  a  present  for  my  wife.  Will  you  kindly  plead  with 
her  for  me?     I  promise  that  I  will  war  no  more  from  this  day." 

Then  the  woman  also  stood  forth  and  said,  "  Should  my 
husband  not  take  to  some  other  way  of  life,  according  to  this 
promise,  I  will  divorce  myself,  and  marry  another  man."  To 
Ntabe  she  said,  "Will  you  promise  solemnly  in  the  presence  of 
all  these  people  ?  " 

He  answered,  "  How  can  I  promise  more  than  I  have 
already  ?  " 

She  said,  "  Unless  you  get  two  kola  nuts  and  bite  a  piece  from 
one  and  give  it  to  me  to  eat,  and  take  also  from  me  a  piece 
which  I  have  bitten  off  from  the  other,  I  will  not  believe  you. 
Also  you  must  take  of  my  blood  and  of  yours,  so  that  we  mix  it 
together.  Then  I  will  believe  that  you  will  give  up,  and  never 
war  any  more.     Otherwise  I  will  never  believe  you." 

This  the  man  did,  and  from  that  day  he  warred  no  more,  but1 
kept  the  faith  which  he  had  sworn  on  the  kola  nut. 


The  division  of  work  between  the  sexes  has  been  clearly  laid 
down  from  time  immemorial,  and  neither  would  dream  of 
encroaching  on  that  of  the  other.  Indeed  there  would  seem  to 
be  something  indelicate  and  even  impious  in  the  mere  thought 
of  such  a  thing. 

The  chief  occupations  are  hunting  for  men  and  farm  work 
for  the  women,  but  it  is  the  task  of  the  former  to  cut  bush 
in  December  and  January  for  the  new  farms.  This  should  be 
begun  at  the  time  of  the  new  moon.  The  big  trees,  especially 
the  cotton  trees,  are  left  standing,  but  all  undergrowth  is 
cleared  away.  The  men  help  the  women  to  plant  yams  and 
plantains,  but  coco-yams  and  corn  are  planted  later  by  women 
alone.  All  weeding  is  done  by  the  women,  with  the  help  of 
their  "  members." 

The  yams  may  be  garnered  in  October,  but,  as  has  already 
been  mentioned,  are  not  eaten  in  towns  where  the  rites  of  Eja 
or  Mfuor  are  practised,  until  these  have  been  performed.  They 
can  be  stored  for  a  whole  year  in  racks  built  on  the  farms  for 
the  purpose. 


270      IN    THE    SHADOW    OF    THE    BUSH 

Coco-yams  ripen  in  September,  and  can  be  kept  in  heaps  for 
nearly  a  year.  They  are  looked  on  as  women's  food.  Corn 
ripens  in  July,  and  can  be  kept  till  January,  though  it  is  usually 
eaten  at  once.  Farms  are  left  to  lie  fallow  after  one  crop,  save 
plantain  farms,  which  can  be  used  for  two  years. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  Sir  Walter  Egerton  pointed  out 
in  a  recent  speech  that,  with  all  our  science,  the  Forestry  Officers 
have  as  yet  discovered  no  better  way  of  farming  the  land. 

Fishing  again  is  looked  on  as  almost  exclusively  woman's 
work.  For  this  purpose  they  generally  use  one  of  the  many 
varieties  of  vegetable  poison.  This  they  throw  in  the  water. 
The  fish  rise  stupefied  and  float  on  the  surface,  forming  an 
easy  prey. 

Each  woman  is  supposed  to  give  her  husband  one  big  fish 
from  her  haul,  generally  the  "  Monn  Aiya  "  (Child  of  the  Big 
Water),  and  some  to  her  father  and  mother.  Before  starting 
she  usually  rubs  "  lucky"  leaves  over  her  hand-net. 

Save  during  June  and  July,  when  fish  is  in  much  request  to 
eat  with  the  new  corn,  most  of  the  fishing  is  carried  on  during 
the  dry  season,  which  is  counted  by  the  Ekoi  to  begin  from 
the  flowering  of  the  grass  Setaria  Mauritana  (Sprengel),  usually 
about  October.     This  lasts  till  June,  when  the  heavy  rains  begin. 

The  division  of  work  is  strictly  maintained  in  building  a 
house.  The  husband  cuts  down  the  necessary  timber,  and, 
with  the  help  of  his  male  friends,  fixes  all  the  posts  into  the 
earth  and  binds  them  with  wattle.  This  forms  the  framework 
of  the  compound.  The  men  also  make  the  roof,  usually  by 
crossing  over  each  other  the  stems  of  great  palm  leaves.  They 
also  make  and  fix  in  place  the  palm-leaf  mats,  which  form  a 
kind  of  thatch.  There  should  be  four  thicknesses  of  these  in 
a  properly  made  roof. 

It  is  the  business  of  the  women  to  spread  mud  over  the  walls 
and  floors.  They  smooth  these  with  wooden  implements  made 
for  the  purpose,  and  leave  them  to  be  baked  hard  by  the  heat 
of  the  sun.  When  dry,  the  cracks  are  filled  in,  and  the  whole 
smoothed  over  once  more. 

Men  do  all  the  fine  plaited-work  bags  of  coloured  palm  fibre, 
while  the  women  make  the  coarser  mats  of  plaited  reed  for  the 
floor  and  sleeping  mats  of  screw-pine,  dyed  and  worked  in 
various  colours. 


LIFE    IN    PEACE   AND   WAR 


271 


As  has  been  mentioned,  before  the  coming  of  "  white  "  rule, 
fighting  was  one  of  the  principal  occupations  of  Ekoi  men. 
The  flint-lock  gun,  at  present  in  use,  displaced  the  spear,  club 
and  cross-bow,  the  latter  of  which  is  still  used  to  shoot  birds 
and  as  a  child's  plaything.  As  flint-locks  increased  in  number, 
the  old  shields  of  plaited  palm  strips  were  discarded,  but  many 
men  still  alive  have  carried  them  into  battle. 


Ekoi  Shield  of  Split  Palm  Stem. 


Before  setting  out  to  attack  an  enemy,  solemn  sacrifices  were 
made  to  the  chief  war  Juju  of  the  place.  In  Oban  this  was 
Oke  Ewara.  Every  warrior  drank  from  a  vessel  of  "  sacred  " 
water  and  poured  some  over  his  body.  Strips  of  palm  leaf 
were  tied  round  the  neck  of  each. 

Small  parties  were  then  organised  to  set  out  for  the  farms 
and  watering-places  of  the  enemy,  there  to  lie  in  wait. 

A  slave,  who  fell  into  such  an  ambush,  would  either  be  shot 
on  sight,  or  kept  as  a  sacrifice  to  the  war  Juju  of  his  captors, 
while  a  free-born  man  would  probably  be  spared  for  the  sake  of 
ransom.  Old  women  were  sometimes  killed,  but  young  ones 
and  children  carried  off  as  slaves. 

Sometimes  all  the  warriors  of  a  place,  with  the  exception 
of  a  small  body  left  as  guards,  would  sally  forth  in  the  night 
time  and  surround  the  enemy's  town.     Everyone  who  left  the 


/; 


: 


, 


272      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

houses  would  be  seized  or  killed,  but  apparently  towns  were 
never  rushed  nor  compounds  broken  into. 

The  victorious  party  bore  off  the  heads  of  all  slain  enemies  in 
triumph  to  their  town,  where  they  laid  the  trophies  before  the 
Egbo  house  or  the  war  Juju. 

The  "  Egyuk  "  drum  was  beaten,  and  a  great  dance,  in  which 
only  warriors  might  take  part,  held  to  celebrate  the  return  of 
the  victors.  Each  danced  with  his  gun  and  matchet,  or  in 
older  times,  with  shield,  spears  and  cross-bow.  The  same 
dance  is  now  given  after  the  killing  of  an  elephant.  The  chiefs 
and  elders  distributed  the  Nkundak's  (Greater  Plantain  eater) 
feathers.  To  those  who  had  slain  an  enemy,  a  long  tail  feather 
was  given,  to  the  rest  only  the  smaller  wing  feathers. 

The  heads  were  first  smoked,  then  plastered  thickly  with 
mud  and  dried  again.  In  this  state  they  could  be  kept  for 
many  years.  A  large  number  still  exist  and  are  used  for  Juju 
purposes.  Some  such,  strangely  pitiful  in  expression,  as  if  still 
suffering  behind  their  mask  of  clay,  are  to  be  seen,  raised  on 
little  altars,  in  towns  of  the  Interior.  By  some  strange  mental 
I  process,  the  spirit  of  the  slain  foe,  represented  by  the  head,  has 
become  the  guardian  of  the  slayers'  hearths  and  homes,  just 
as  the  slain  leopard  was  invoked  to  aid  the  hunter  (p.  142). 

After  a  war  dance  the  oldest  man  and  woman  present  took 
palm  oil,  plantains  and  dried  Nsun  meat  and  offered  them  at 
the  end  of  the  town  to  their  own  ancestors,  praying  that  these 
would  not  allow  the  ghosts  of  the  dead  enemies  to  enter  the 
town  to  do  harm.  They  also  made  a  sacrifice  to  Obassi  Osaw, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  poured  a  libation  of  palm  wine  on  the 
ground.  Then  they  took  gunpowder  in  the  palms  of  their  hands 
and  scattered  it  in  the  air,  so  that  the  eyes  of  the  ghosts,  and  those 
of  their  live  enemies,  might  be  filled  with  dust  and  thus  blinded. 

Any  slave  caught  alive  would  then  be  taken  to  the  altar,  his 
l<  throat  cut,  and  the  blood  poured  over  the  Juju.  The  body 
would  be  thrown  away,  but  the  head  kept  by  the  Juju  and 
mummified  as  described  above. 

If  either  side  wanted  peace,  a  man  from  a  neutral  town,  or  one 
belonging  by  birth  to  both,  would  be  sent,  holding  a  palm  leaf  in 
his  hand.    Pourparlers  then  took  place,  and  terms  were  settled. 

The  reason  why  the  Nkundak's  feathers  were  worn  on  such 


LIFE    IN    PEACE   AND   WAR  273 

an  occasion   as  the  dance  just  described  is  explained  in  the 
following  manner : — 

Why  Nkundaks  Feathers  may  only  be  worn  by  a 
Warrior  who  has  Slain  a  Foe. 

By  Ndum  of  Nsan. 

Ekandem  Obassi  was  the  daughter  of  Obassi  Nsi.  She  was 
as  beautiful  as  the  sun,  and,  when  the  time  came  for  her  to 
enter  the  fatting-house,  she  was  asked  in  marriage  by  all  the 
richest  and  noblest  young  men  in  the  land.  She  said  that  as  no 
one  was  her  equal  in  beauty,  she  would  not  marry  any  of  her 
suitors ;  and  her  father  therefore  troubled  her  no  longer  by 
asking  her  to  look  favourably  on  them. 

Soon,  however,  the  princess  grew  tired  of  living  unsought ; 
so  she  sent  out  her  maid,  a  girl  three  years  younger  than  her- 
self, to  the  market-place  with  orders  to  try  to  find  her  a  husband. 

For  two  days  the  girl  sought,  but  came  back  each  evening 
and  said  that  she  had  failed  to  find  anyone  worthy  to  become 
her  mistress's  husband.  Ekandem  was  sorry,  but  asked  her  to 
try  again  a  third  time.  To  this  the  maid  agreed,  for,  though  a 
servant,  she  was  also  a  faithful  friend. 

On  the  third  morning,  soon  after  arriving  in  the  market- 
place, she  saw  a  beautiful  young  man  coming  towards  her. 
So  handsome  was  he  that  all  the  people  forgot  their  wares 
and  sought  neither  to  buy  nor  sell,  but  only  gazed  upon 
him.  Except  Princess  Ekandem  Obassi  herself,  no  one  had 
ever  before  been  seen  to  compare  with  him  in  beauty  or 
attractiveness. 

The  little  maid  ran  at  once  to  her  mistress  and  told  her  that 
she  had  at  last  seen  just  such  a  suitor  as  she  had  been  waiting  for. 

Ekandem  ordered  her  to  go  back  at  once  to  the  market  and 
stand  where  the  man  must  pass  by  ;  then,  when  he  drew  near, 
to  tell  him  that  her  mistress  was  calling  him,  and  to  bring  him 
back  with  her  at  once. 

This  the  girl  did,  and  led  the  willing  youth  to  the  fatting- 
room.  What  a  merry  party  they  were  !  The  flesh  of  a 
duckling  was  made  into  a  stew  for  them  to  eat  with  fu-fu.     For 

s.b.  t 


274      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

a  long  time  they  sat  at  table,  and  then  began  to  play  sweet- 
hearts. 

When  morning  dawned  the  man  asked  leave  to  go  home,  but 
the  Princess  said : 

"  If  you  go,  I  am  coming  with  you." 

"  That  you  must  not  do,"  said  her  lover,  "  for  I  am  a  very 
bad  man.  My  name  is  a  terrible  one,  Ita  cNe  Echi  (Chief  man 
of  Head  (only) ),  and  my  home  is  as  fearful  as  my  name.  Listen 
again,  my  country  is  called  Mfam  Ane  Achi  (Land  of  Men  of 
Heads  (only)).  I  am  not  worth  staying  with,  or  indeed  look- 
ing at." 

In  answer  to  this  warning  Ekandem  only  said : 

"  I  will  never  part  from  you.  It  is  useless  to  try  to  put  my 
heart  off  from  you.  I  do  not  care  whether  you  are  bad  or  not. 
I  am  coming  with  you,  and  mean  to  stay  with  you  until  death. 
See  how  much  I  love  you.  My  parents  have  gone  to  farm,  but 
I  do  not  care  even  to  await  their  return  to  ask  leave,  or  see 
them  again  before  I  go.     I  am  ready  to  start  with  you  now." 

"  I  know,"  said  the  man,  "  how  you  love  me.  So  do  I  also 
love  you,  but  I  am  a  bad  man  and  am  called  Ita  fNe  Echi.  If 
you  come  with  me  you  will  repent  it." 

Nevertheless  she  would  not  be  put  off,  so  they  set  out, 
together  with  the  little  maid. 

On  and  on  they  went,  and  one  after  another  the  hands,  feet, 
and  other  members  departed  from  Ita  'Ne  Echi,  and  went  back 
to  those  from  whom  he  had  borrowed  them  in  order  to  become 
an  entrancing  beaut}'.  Ekandem  noticed  the  wonderful  sight, 
and  began  to  wish  to  go  back.  At  length  only  a  skull  was  left, 
which  bounded  along  the  ground,  making  a  noise  like  a  cocoa- 
nut  shell.  Then,  alas  !  she  found  out  the  truth  of  his  words,  for 
a  skull  is  indeed  not  worth  looking  at,  much  less  living  with. 

Now  she  would  gladly  have  turned  back,  but  with  the  beauty 
which  her  love  had  been  forced  to  return  to  the  proper  owners, 
had  gone  his  goodness  and  kindness  also.  He  was  now  as 
wicked  and  cruel  as  any  of  the  skull-people,  and  would  no  longer 
let  her  go  back. 

In  vain  she  pleaded.  He  only  said,  "  You  ask  uselessly. 
There  is  no  going  back  for  you  any  more.  You  will  now  come 
with  me  to  the  country  of  skulls.      I  never  told  you  that  I  was 


LIFE    IN    PEACE    AND   WAR  275 

better  than  I  now  am.  You  refused  to  take  my  warning,  and 
must  now  abide  by  what  you  have  chosen." 

Poor  Ekandem  !  What  could  she  do  ?  When  she  tried  to 
turn  back  she  found  that  the  road  closed  up,  and  was  dark 
behind  her,  though  in  front  it  was  still  bright  and  clear.  So 
against  her  will,  she  must  still  go  on.  It  was  fearful  to  see, 
instead  of  her  Love,  a  skull  bounding  and  rolling  by  her 
side. 

When  they  arrived  at  Mfam  Ane  Achi,  both  she  and  the 
little  maid  were  very  badly  frightened  by  the  way  they  were 
greeted.  From  every  corner  of  the  town  the  skulls  rolled  out. 
Up  into  the  air  they  bounded,  and  then  fell  back  on  to  the 
ground  with  a  terrible  crash.  Some  knocked  against  others  so 
hard  that  it  seemed  to  the  lookers-on  as  though  they  must 
break.  In  the  whole  town  there  was  not  a  single  inhabitant 
save  these  bounding  skulls.     It  was  indeed  a  fearful  sight  ! 

Still  worse  did  it  seem  to  the  two  girls  when  the  skulls  began 
to  thank  Ita  fNe  Echi  for  bringing  them  such  a  feast  of  fresh 
meat !  Poor  Ekandem  and  her  maid  stood  trembling  for  fear 
that  they  might  be  killed  and  eaten  on  the  spot,  while  all  the 
skulls  shouted  through  the  spaces  where  their  noses  should  be, 
one  calling  this  thing  and  one  that. 

Suddenly  one  of  the  skulls  asked  the  rest  to  stop  making  such 
a  noise,  and  said  that  the  girls  were  far  too  beautiful  to  be  killed 
and  eaten,  but  should^rather  be  given  in  marriage  to  Abia-Nkpaw, 
the  king  of  the  skull-people.  To  this  they  all  agreed,  and 
thanked  him  for  having  such  a  good  thought. 

Now  Abia-Nkpaw  is  a  giant.  His  bed  is  70  feet  long  and  his 
house  120  feet  high.  Terrible  as  he  was,  however,  Ekandem 
preferred  him  to  Ita  fNe  Echi ;  she  was  therefore  willing  and 
even  glad  to  become  his  wife,  and  went  to  his  house. 

That  night  she  sang  as  follows : 

"  Obassi,  obod  owo  onnaw  isong, 

Ekandem  Obassi,  angwan  Abia-Nkpaw. 

Obassi,  obod  owo  onnaw  isong."* 
"  Obassi,  when  he  made  a  person  gave  him  land, 

Ekandem  Obassi,  is  now  the  wife  of  Abia-Nkpaw. 

Obassi,  when  he  made  a  person  gave  him  land." 

*  Efik. 

T  2 


276      IN   THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

This  song  seemed  to  excite  the  skulls.  It  gave  them  a 
note  to  bubble  about,  and  they  started  to  tread  a  measure. 
A  skull  when  dancing  will  often  bound  to  a  distance  of  a  mile, 
and  back  again.     Is  this  not  curious  ? 

When  Ekandem's  parents  returned  from  their  farm  in  the 
evening,  they  could  find  neither  their  daughter  nor  her  maid. 
They  therefore  began  at  once  to  seek  for  them,  and  promised 
great  rewards  to  anyone  who  could  give  information  as  to  their 
whereabouts.     All  was,  however,  in  vain. 

As  the  wife  of  King  Abia-Nkpaw,  Ekandem  was  now  less 
afraid  ;  she  was  allowed  to  go  wherever  she  pleased  in  the 
town,  for  the  skulls  were  quite  sure  that  she  could  not  find 
her  way  home. 

One  day  she  went  with  her  little  maid  to  fetch  some  water 
from  the  spring.  As  she  drew  near  she  heard  a  bird  called 
Nkundak,  whom  she  well  knew  to  be  a  friend  of  her  father's, 
crying  "  Kawkaw  kawkawk  kru  kru  kru  kru  kru  kru  kru." 
She  called  out,  "  Nkundak,  Nkundak,  where  are  you  ? " 

"  Who  are  you  who  calls  ?  "  asked  the  bird.  "  I  am 
Ekandem  Obassi,  the  daughter  of  your  friend  Obassi  Nsi," 
she  answered  eagerly. 

Down  darted  the  bird,  spread  his  wings  above  the  two  girls, 
and  told  them  each  to  seize  a  wing  and  hold  firmly. 

Off  it  flew  with  them  to  its  own  house,  where  it  left  them, 
and  went  to  tell  the  good  news  to  Obassi  Nsi. 

Obassi  was  quite  overcome  with  joy  when  he  found  his  two 
lost  children  in  Nkundak's  house.  He  thanked  the  bird  again 
and  again,  and  told  him  to  choose  anything  he  liked  out  of  the 
whole  world,  and  it  should  become  his  as  a  reward  for  what  he 
had  done. 

Nkundak  begged  that  he  should  be  given  bravery  of  plumage 
beyond  that  of  all  other  birds. 

So  Obassi  painted  his  tail  feathers  with  a  bar  of  black  on 
pale  yellow.  Breast  and  wings  he  dyed  a  glorious  blue,  and 
placed  a  beautiful  crest  on  his  head.  Also  he  gave  him  a  very 
strong  voice,  which  might  cause  his  enemies  to  fear  when  they 
heard  it,  "  Kawkawk  Kawkawk  kru  kru." 

To  this  day  the  feathers  of  Nkundak  worn  in  the  hair  by  any 
man  at  a  public  dance  are  a  sign  of  bravery,  for  no  man  dares 


Ekoi  Cal 


Leaf  Men. 


LIFE  IN   PEACE  AND  WAR  277 

to  wear  them  unless  he  has  first  killed  an  enemy,  wilfully 
and  challengingly.  One  tail  feather  only  may  be  worn  for 
each  man  slain.  Of  a  truth  Nkundak  is  a  famous  bird  in  the 
land  of  the  Ekoi,  and  is  well  worth  being  seen  by  all  people 

who  come  to  this  country. 

*  *  *  * 

The  monotony  of  bush  life  is  described  by  most  white  men  as 
among  its  greatest  drawbacks.  Curiously  enough,  it  seemed  to 
us  almost  overcrowded  with  incident.  At  the  most  unexpected 
times  and  places  the  silence  would  suddenly  be  broken  by  a  cry 
for  help,  or  a  few  steps  lead  us  straight  from  the  drowsy  peace 
of  the  forest  into  the  heart  of  a  tragedy. 

Once,  for  instance,  we  reached  a  town  just  as  the  Juju  image 
was  busy  smelling  out  a  "  witchcraft,"  and,  in  defiance  of  all 
the  proprieties,  attended  the  ceremony.  Had  the  proceedings 
been  forbidden  they  would  only  have  been  delayed  till  our 
departure,  and,  besides  an  inborn  interest  in  such  matters,  it 
was  possible,  by  keeping  on  the  alert,  to  see  that  no  ill  effects 
resulted.  Not  long  after  the  supposed  "  magic  "  was  unearthed, 
unmistakable  sounds  of  a  commotion  brought  us  hurrying  to 
the  scene  to  find  a  wretched  woman  struggling  in  the  grasp  of 
her  husband,  who,  eager  to  show  zeal,  was  forcing  her  down  on 
the  ground,  extremely  rocky  just  there,  before  the  accusing 
"  image." 

At  sight  of  us  she  wrenched  free,  and,  launching  herself 
across  the  crowd,  lay  clutching  my  boots,  every  muscle 
twitching  with  terror.  The  onlookers  drew  back,  their  ex- 
pressions of  hatred  changing  to  shame-faced  submission,  but 
none  would  approach  the  suspected  witch,  till  at  last  one 
plucked  up  courage,  and,  kneeling  down,  folded  the  poor 
woman  in  her  arms,  and  tried  to  soothe  the  sobs  which  were 
tearing  her.  It  was  the  usual  story.  Several  well-known  men 
had  died  in  the  town,  and  the  woman  accused  of  bewitching 
them,  a  childless  wife,  who  had  come  from  a  strange  land,  with 
no  kin  save  one  sister — was  chosen  as  the  most  suitable  victim. 
Both  women  followed  us  through  the  long  trek,  and  are  now 
happily  settled  under  the  eye  of  the  white  man." 


\ 


CHAPTER   XXVI 

Life  in  Peace  and  War — continued 

Medical 

According  to  Ekoi  beliefs,  illness  is  usually  sent  by  ancestors, 
as  a  reminder  that  offerings  have  been  neglected,  by  some 
offended  Juju,  or  by  the  malice  of  witch  or  wizard.  When  a* 
man  or  woman  falls  sick,  therefore,  they  go  to  the  Diviner  to 
discover  the  cause  of  the  affliction,  except  in  the  case  of  some 
few  illnesses,  such  as  cough  or  dysentery,  which  are  recognised 
as  due  to  natural  causes.  For  these,  native  doctors  are  con- 
sulted. The  latter  possess  considerable  knowledge  as  to  the 
curative  properties  of  barks,  leaves  and  roots,  often  gathered, 
as  among  the  Leeches  of  the  Middle  Ages,  at  the  time  of 
the  new  moon.  The  luminary,  now  as  then,  is  supposed  to 
have  great  influence  on  disease.  A  sick  man's  malady  increases 
with  her  waxing,  and  lessens  as  she  wanes  ;  while  a  madman 
has  been  noticed  to  grow  more  violent  after  she  has  passed  her 
first  quarter.  The  fat  of  snakes  also  holds  an  important  place 
IkJn  the  Ekoi  pharmacopoeia. 

Most  Jujus  are  supposed  to  inflict  a  special  disease.  For 
instance,  Mfam  and  Onnuri  give  dropsy. 

Ebangi — a  split  palm  leaf,  set  up  as  a  protection  against 
farm  thieves — gives  pleurisy  or  pneumonia. 

Emenn,  a  large  pod  used  for  the  same  purpose  as  the  last, 
produces  sciatica  or  lumbago. 

Etokk,  a  large  round  fruit,  gives  rheumatism  and  a  pain  in 
the  ankle. 

A  simple  sort  of  surgery  is  practised.  For  instance,  a  man 
gored  in  the  abdomen  by  an  elephant,  replaced  the  bowels, 
which  had  been  partially  torn  out,  inserted  a  small  calabash  to 
keep  them  in  place,  then  drew  the  skin  over  all  and  sewed  it 


LIFE    IN    PEACE   AND   WAR  279 

across.  The  shape  of  the  calabash  can  be  clearly  seen,  but  he 
has  quite  recovered  and  is  able  to  take  his  share  of  any  hard 
labour,  such  as  road  work. 

The  most  common  diseases  are  malaria,  dysentery,  yaws, 
craw-craw,  pneumonia,  consumption,  elephantiasis  and  beri- 
beri. Leprosy  is  rare,  and  to  explain  its  origin  the  following 
story  is  told  : — 

How  Leprosy  came. 

There  was  once  a  man  of  Nsan  named  Nsonn  Agbe,  who  was 
a  great  wizard.  All  the  people  feared  him  for  miles  round, 
for  it  was  well  known  that  he  had  the  power  to  kill  men  by  his 
magic  arts.  One  day  the  townsfolk  gathered  together  and  said, 
"  What  can  we  do  to  rid  us  of  Nsonn  ?  "  The  wizard  heard 
and  was  very  angry.  He  killed  a  man,  drained  his  blood  into  a 
great  calabash,  and  then  went  among  all  the  people,  sprinkling 
the  blood  to  right  and  left.  Wherever  a  drop  fell,  whether 
on  man  or  woman,  a  leprous  spot  appeared.  That  was  the 
first  time  that  leprosy  was  seen  in  our  country. 


In  old  days  a  man  could  force  a  woman  to  wed  him  in 
payment  for  having  nursed  her  through  an  illness,  but  this  was 
forbidden  many  years  ago.  Doctors'  fees,  for  cases  requiring 
long  attendance,  were  also  fixed,  as  is  related  in  the  following 
tale  :— 

How  Doctors'  Fees  were  regulated. 

Once  there  lived  a  doctor  named  Abia  Ankokk.  A  woman 
named  Adet  was  cutting  firewood,  when  a  small  splinter  flew 
into  her  eye,  so  she  went  to  Abia  to  be  tended.  For  about  two 
weeks  he  looked  after  her,  and  then  the  woman  recovered.  She 
offered  twenty  pieces  in  payment  for  his  services,  but  the  man 
refused  them,  saying : 

"  I  wish  to  take  you  yourself  either  as  wife  or  slave,  and  will 
accept  nothing  else." 

Then  the  townsfolk  held  a  meeting  and  asked,  "  Why  do  you 
refuse  the  twenty  pieces  ?  "     Abia  answered  : 

"  Because  I  want  the  woman  herself." 

Then  the  people  said  : 


280   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

"  By  our  custom,  if  you  are  going  to  doctor  a  woman,  you  must 
first  ask  '  Have  you  any  goods  to  give  in  payment  ? '  If  she 
answers  '  I  have  none,'  then  you  can  take  her  for  your  wife  or 
slave,  but  not  if  she  offers  you  goods  instead.  From  to-day, 
Doctors  must  keep  this  law,  and  not  try  to  wed  a  patient  against 
her  will." 

Then  Abia  made  his  own  price  and  said,  "  When  a  man 
doctors  anyone  in  a  town  the  price  is  twenty  pieces  of  cloth." 


That  rational  ideas  exist  as  to  some  causes  of  disease  is 
shown  by  the  next  story  : — 

Why  Disease  often   comes. 

Once  a  husband  had  two  wives.  Both  went  with  him  to 
plant  yams  in  the  farm.  When  they  came  home,  one  woman 
had  no  water  with  which  to  cook,  so  she  went  and  borrowed 
some  from  the  other. 

Next  day  the  first  woman  sent  her  daughter  to  fetch  water, 
that  she  might  repay  what  she  had  taken.  It  was  very  hot, 
and  when  the  daughter  reached  the  stream,  she  found  that 
it  had  all  dried  up.  She  went  on  and  on,  seeking  for  water, 
but  could  find  none,  so,  after  a  while,  when  she  came  to  a 
market-place,  she  sat  down  quietly,  thinking,  "  Perhaps  I  may 
buy  some  water." 

A  ghost-man  noticed  the  girl  sitting  among  the  stalls.  He 
saw  that  she  was  very  beautiful,  and  wished  to  have  her  for 
his  wife,  so  he  said,  "  Will  you  come  home  with  me  ? "  To 
this  she  agreed. 

When  they  reached  the  man's  house,  his  people  asked  the 
girl,  "  Where  do  you  come  from  ?  "  She  answered,  "  My  mother 
sent  me  to  fetch  water."  Her  lover  said,  "  We  will  ask  no 
questions  at  present.    Let  us  at  once  prepare  the  marriage  feast." 

No  sooner  was  the  wedding  over  than  the  girl  heard  a  voice 
calling  her,  "  Strange  maiden,  come  hither  to  me."  She  looked 
up  and  saw  the  Lame  Boy  standing  at  the  door  of  his  house. 
She  went  to  him  at  once,  and  he  said : 

"  If  your  husband  offers  you  food,  you  must  not  eat  it.  Put 
it  on  one  side,  and  eat  only  what  I  give  you."     On  that,  he 


LIFE    IN    PEACE   AND   WAR 


251 


gave    her   a   great    piece  of   edible  clay  (or  chalk).     Next  he 
warned   her,  "  When  your  husband   enters  your  room  in  the 
night  time,  say  to  him,  '  I  may  not  lie  on    a  bed,  but  must 
sleep  on  the  ashes  of  the  hearth.'     You  will  see  that  he  has 
sores  on  his  body,  but  be  careful  not  to  touch  them.     Allow 
no  one  to  arrange  your  hair,*  and  when  you  go  down  to  bathe 
in  the  morning,  look  at  the  bathing-place.     You  will  see  two 
springs  gushing  side   by  side  from  the  rock,  and  falling  into 
a  shallow  pool.     One  is  of  black  water,  and  the  other  white 
and  sparkling.     Wash  only  in  the  black  water  and  bring  some 
of  it  home  with  you.     Do  not  touch  the  clear  water,  nor  let 
a  single  drop  fall  upon  you,  else  your  body  will  become  full 
of  disease.     If  you  listen  to  all  this,  you  may  go  safely  home 
again,  though  the  ghosts,  who  have  caught  you,  wish  to  keep 
you  among  them ;  but  if  you  do  not  do  as  I  bid  you,  some 
great  misfortune  will  happen."     The  girl  thanked  him  and  said 
that  she  would  do  all  as  he  bade. 

One  day  at  dawn  she  was  sweeping  up  the  house,  which 
she  always  kept  clean  and  sweet.  She  saw  a  piece  of  stale 
meat  lying  on  the  floor,  and  swept  it  up  among  the  ashes, 
then  threw  all  into  the  back-yard,  where  dead  leaves  lay, 
amid  the  other  rubbish. 

When  it  was  time  to  go  back  to  her  mother,  she  began  to 
arrange  her  hair.  A  woman  ghost  came  and  said,  "  Let  me 
do  it  for  you,"  but  the  girl  refused.  Another  ghost  came  and 
said,  "  Let  me,"  but  she  refused  again.  After  this,  she  went 
for  the  last  time  down  to  the  spring.  When  she  came  back 
the  ghost  people  all  said,  "  Are  you  ready  to  go  home  now  ? " 
She  answered,  "  Yes,"  and  went  into  the  house  to  fetch  a 
small  box.  They  asked,  "  Is  it  yours  ?  "  She  said,  "  It  is 
mine,"  so  they  bade  her  adieu. 

The    husband    accompanied    her   on    the  road  towards  her 
mother's  town.     When  they  had  reached  halfway,  he  said  : 

"  Of  these  two  things,  breeze  and  wind,  which   do  you  like 
best  ?  "     And  she  answered  : 
"  I  like  '  breeze  '  best. 

*  This  prohibition  is  probably  connected  with  the  hair  Juju  (see  page  327).  Cf. 
the  mediaeval  superstition  by  which  hair  thrown  by  sorcerers  to  the  wind  demons 
was  capable  of  raising  a  storm— or  a  single  lock  offered  to  the  powers  of  evil 
delivered  the  sacrificer  into  their  hands,  vide  Sintram  und  seine  Gefahrten. 


282      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

The  husband  said,  "  Now  I  am  going  back;  "  but  she  said 
"  No.  First  take  me  to  the  beginning  of  the  town."  So  he 
took  her  on  till  they  came  to  the  nearest  river.  This  was  now 
full  of  water,  so  she  filled  her  jar  and  took  it  home.  The  husband 
went  back,  but,  from  that  day,  a  gentle  breeze  followed  the 
girl  wherever  she  went.  The  mother  and  all  her  friends  were 
very  glad  to  see  her  again,  and  the  water,  which  she  brought, 
was  given  to  the  other  wife  to  repay  what  had  been  borrowed  so 
long  before. 

One  day  when  the  dry  season  had  come  again  the  second 
woman  came  to  borrow  water.  The  mother  was  away  from 
home,  but  the  girl  gave  her  all  that  there  was  in  the  house.  The 
second  woman  called  her  daughter  to  go  and  fetch  water  with 
which  to  repay  what  she  had  borrowed. 

This  girl  went  straight  to  the  market-place  and  sat  down  as 
the  first  had  done.  The  same  man  came  and  took  her  home 
with  him. 

When  the  ghost  town  was  reached,  the  Lame  Boy  called  to 
the  second  girl  as  he  had  done  to  the  first.  "  Will  you  come 
here  ?  I  have  something  to  say  to  you."  She  went  to  him  and 
he  told  her  all  that  he  had  said  before.  This  one,  however, 
answered  "  No,  I  will  eat  whenever  I  see  meat.  Also,  I  do  not 
fear  to  touch  the  body  of  my  husband." 

A  woman  came  and  offered  to  dress  her  hair,  and  she  accepted 
at  once,  and  when  she  went  down  to  bathe  she  washed  in  the 
clean,  white  spring.  Her  body  therefore  grew  full  of  disease, 
and  at  length  she  became  as  a  leper. 

When  she  prepared  to  go  home,  she  went  within  the  house 
and  took  a  very  large  box.  This  she  filled  with  all  the  goods 
which  she  could  lay  hands  on.  The  husband  did  not  accompany 
her,  as  he  had  done  in  the  first  case,  but  asked,  "  Of  these  two 
things,  wind  and  breeze,  which  do  you  like  best?"  She  answered, 
"  I  like  wind." 

Then  a  strong  wind  arose,  and  blew  the  girl  up  and  down  and 
threw  her  against  the  trees,  one  after  another.  When  she  reached 
her  home,  no  one  knew  her,  for  her  face  and  body  were  so 
changed  with  disease  and  blows.  Soon  she  died,  and  went  back 
to  the  ghosts  for  evermore. 

The  reason  why  disease  often  comes  is  because  people  will 


LIFE    IN    PEACE   AND    WAR  283 

eat  bad  meat,  touch  others  who  are  diseased,  and  bathe  in  the 
white  spring  which  should  be  left  clean  for  drinking  and 
cooking. 

Also,  when  a  woman  leaves  her  husband,  or  when  death  has 
carried  him  away  from  her,  she  may  not  wash  in  the  white 
water,  but  in  black  for  purification. 

Amusements 

Life  in  an  Ekoi  village  is  more  full  of  amusement  and  variety 
than  might  appear  at  first  sight.  There  is  a  strong  local  feeling 
in  every  town,  and  the  inhabitants  are  very  jealous  of  its  repute, 
whether  for  wealth,  size,  or  the  power  of  its  Jujus.  Social 
qualities  are  very  highly  developed — there  is  nothing  more 
prized  than  popularity,  or  more  dreaded  than  ridicule. 

On  almost  every  day  of  the  year  some  wedding  or  birth  is 
celebrated,  some  girl  leaves  the  fatting-house,  some  Juju  gives 
a  "  play,"  or  one  of  the  many  clubs  or  age-classes  holds  a  feast. 
As  has  already  been  mentioned,  these  last-named  associations, 
of  which  the  Ekoi  name  is  "  Ekan  "  (plural  "Nkan  "),  consists  of 
all  of  one  sex  born  within  the  same  three  years.  The  age-class 
forms  a  kind  of  self-governing  community,  with  power  to  watch 
over  the  conduct  of  its  members,  much  in  the  same  way  as  the 
experimental  "Children's  Republics"  of  the  United  States. 
Not  long  ago  a  case  came  under  my  notice  of  a  small  girl  of 
seven  who  was  fined  by  her  age-class  for  having  allowed  too 
free  behaviour  on  the  part  of  a  boy  friend.  When  the  members 
have  reached  the  age  of  about  fifteen  years,  they  usually  send  a 
deputation  to  some  man  of  influence  in  the  town,  and  ask  him 
to  become  their  president.  If  he  accepts  he  gives  them  a  name, 
usually  that  of  some  former  age-class  which  has  now  died  out, 
and  also  the  power  to  play  the  club  drums  and  "  Okankan." 
In  return  for  all  this  they  "cut"  farm  for  him,  and  render 
other  services.  The  age-class  is  then  launched  on  its  career, 
and  its  reputation  depends  on  the  energy  and  capabilities  of  its 
members. 

Should  a  boy  be  of  rich  parentage,  his  admission  fees  to  the 
Egbo  and  other  clubs  are  paid  while  he  is  quite  young.  In 
such  a  case  he  is  accounted  an  honorary  member,  but  is  not 


284      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

initiated  into  the  mysteries  till  he  reaches  the  age  of  discretion. 
If  the  mother  be  richer  than  the  father,  she  pays  the  fees 
for  her  son. 

Theoretically,  all  postulants  are  beaten  before  the  mysteries 
of  any  club  are  unveiled  .to  them.  The  more  important  the 
club  the  more  painful  the  initiatory  rites,  but  these  may  be 
commuted  for  a  fine  in  the  case  of  some  clubs.  In  others,  such 
as  Ekkpo  Njawhaw,  no  bribe  can  avail. 

Most  clubs  hold  their  initiatory  ceremonies  and  secret  rites 
at  some  place  in  the  bush,  not  far  from  the  entrance  to  the 
town.  This  is  approached  by  a  winding  path,  cut  through  the 
thick  bush,  which  gives  almost  the  privacy  of  a  yew  hedge. 
Over  this  path,  at  intervals  of  about  10  to  20  feet,  hang  split 
palm  leaves,  held  up  at  each  end  by  thin  posts.  These  arches 
are  usually  seven  in  number,  and  before  each  members  are 
stationed,  armed  with  whips  or  rods,  for  the  flogging  of 
postulants,  who  run  through  at  topmost  speed. 

Before  this  ceremony  the  youth  must  have  undergone 
circumcision,  though  this  is  usually  performed  a  few  weeks 
after  birth,  by  some  old  woman  of  the  town.  Should  the 
boy  be  sickly,  the  ceremony  may  be  deferred  till  the  age  of 
eight  or  nine  years,  or  even  later,  in  which  case  he  is  afterwards 
confined  in  the  fatting-house  for  three  or  four  months. 

In  some  clubs,  the  "  Enyara  Akum,"  the  "  dark  things  of  the 
clubs,"  i.e.,  bull-roarers,  are  used.  These  were  formerly  only 
played  in  secret ;  no  woman  was  allowed  to  see  them,  or  know 
the  cause  of  the  sound.  My  wife  and  her  sister  were  the  first 
women  in  this  part  of  the  world  to  whom  the  much-prized 
secret  was  disclosed. 

Another  carefully  guarded  mystery  was  the  art  of  walking  on 
stilts  (Ekoi  "  Abia-Nkpaw "  or  "  Abum-bum  "),  which  no 
woman  was  allowed  to  see. 

The  origin  of  the  custom  was  obligingly  written  down  for  me 
in  the  following  words  : — 

"  In  the  olding  olding  Oban  town,  there  was  once  an  old 
man  named  Awo  Ntui  Ane  (Awo  the  Chief  of  Men).  He  been 
working  in  his  farm,  where  he  been  plant  the  yams.  One  of 
the  day,  he  find,  the  earth  very  hot  with  the  sun,  especially  in 
the  dry  season.     He  cut  a  very  piece  of  stick  and  put  them  in 


A   Stilt   Dance. 


Stilt  Dance       Lame  Boy"  in  Foreground. 


LIFE    IN    PEACE   AND    WAR  285 

his  feet.  One  of  his  sons  named  Itafaha  Egbise  saw,  and  when 
they  get  home  he  called  his  friend  named  Itaneni,  and  said, 
'  Here  what  my  father  been  doing  to-day  in  his  farm.'  " 

By  these  first  stilts  the  feet  were  only  raised  a  few  inches 
from  the  ground,  but  the  height  was  gradually  increased,  till 
now  a  good  performer  can  walk  on  a  level  with  the  heads  of  the 
spectators. 

On  New  Year's  Day,  1910,  a  particularly  interesting  "  stilt 
play  "  was  given.  There  were  four  principal  performers,  each 
thickly  veiled,  among  them  one  with  only  one  stilt,  very  short, 
and  bound  round  his  right  leg  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  him 
limp  like  a  cripple.  In  him  we  recognised  the  "  Lame  Boy," 
the  "  Good  Fairy  "  of  Ekoi  tales.*  The  heads  of  several  of 
the  minor  characters  were  bound  with  wreaths,  from  which 
depended,  so  as  to  cover  the  ears,  leaves  of  the  Piper  plant, 
sacred  to  the  ghosts.  It  is  curious  that  the  name  for  stilts, 
Abia-Nkpaw,  is  that  of  the  giant  King  of  the  Skulls,  mentioned 
on  page  275.  We  gathered  that  the  play  was  in  honour  of  the 
ghosts,  and  that  the  other  principal  characters  were  Obassi 
Osaw  and  Obassi  Nsi. 

Next  to  their  dances,  the  exercise  which  gives  most  delight 
to  the  people  in  general  is  undoubtedly  that  of  wrestling.  The 
style  is  Grseco-Roman,  and  interesting  enough  to  watch,  for 
not  only  are  the  men  surprisingly  light  on  their  feet,  but  they 
show  a  distinctly  sporting  feeling.  It  is  seldom  that  the  greatest 
strain  overcomes  the  good  humour  of  the  combatants,  but,  at 
the  least  sign  of  anger  or  foul  play,  the  bystanders  rush  in  and 
stop  the  contest.  Before  and  all  through  a  wrestling  match, 
the  drums  are  beaten  in  the  manner  only  used  on  such  occasions. 
Before  beginning  each  bout,  both  wrestlers  bend  before  the 
drum  and  touch  the  earth  with  their  hands.  The  monotonous 
tom-toming  seems  to  go  to  the  heads  of  performers  and  spectators 
alike,  and  produces  intense  excitement. 

Among  ball  games,  the  most  popular  is  perhaps  Ukpe  Ewaw, 
in  which  any  number  of  men  can  join.  Two  unequal  sides  are 
chosen.  The  smallest  party  divides  into  two,  and  stands  about 
50  yards  off.     In  between  stand  their  opponents.     The  outside 

*  See  pages  58,  370  etc. 


286      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

men  throw  a  piece  of  knotted  cloth,  made  to  serve  as  a  ball,  to 
their  friends  on  the  other  side.  This  the  inside  men  try  to  seize 
and  charge  back  their  opponents. 

Another  game  is  one  in  which  the  ball  is  never  allowed  to 
touch  the  ground. 

As  is  to  be  expected  in  a  primitive  people,  almost  countless 
variations  of"  Ikomm"  or  Cat's-cradle  are  known  to  the  Ekoi. 
Among  playthings,  tops,  some  made  from  round  fruits,  pierced 
by  a  pointed  stick,  and  others  roughly  shaped  from  soft  wood, 
are  in  use.  The  "  Mancala  "  and  a  kind  of  chess-board  are  also 
in  great  favour. 


CHAPTER   XXVII 

Art 

The  belief  has  gradually  grown  upon  me  that  among  the 
Ekoi  there  exists  the  germ  of  a  love  of  beauty  almost  Greek  in 
character,  though  warped,  and  indeed  all  but  overwhelmed  by 
the  introduction  of  blatantly  hideous  European  wares,  with 
which  the  country  has  been  flooded. 

That  pure  beauty  does  appeal  to  the  race  is  shown  by 
their  surprising  knowledge  of  flowers,  and  their  delight  in  the 
form  and  colour  of  these,  and  even  in  the  texture  of  leaves. 
On  first  coming  among  them  it  had  seemed  that  they  cared 
little  for  the  wealth  of  blossoms  strewn  on  every  side,  for  one 
seldom  finds  flowers  used  for  personal  adornment,  and  never 
to  decorate  their  homes.  Closer  study,  however,  has  made  it 
doubtful  whether  this  is  not  due  to  other  causes  than  want 
of  appreciation.  For  the  Ekoi,  not  only  great  trees,  but  the 
smallest  plants  possess  a  soul,  and  can  feel  pain  when 
plucked.  Very  occasionally  one  sees  a  young  girl  with  a 
single  vivid  flower  twisted  into  her  hair  for  purposes  of 
adornment,  but  more  usually,  both  among  men  and  women, 
leaves  or  blossoms  are  only  worn  as  signs,  to  express  a  definite 
message,  such  as  the  scarlet  Akpanebesin,  worn  as  a  challenge 
behind  the  ear  of  a  wrestler,  or  the  little  Ishut  flower  or  leaf  of 
Ekuri  fern,  which,  worn  in  hair  or  cap,  announces  a  death  in 
the  house  of  the  man  addressed  by  anyone  so  decorated. 

Wherever  suitable  clay  is  to  be  found,  infinite  pains  are 
taken  to  mould  even  the  water-pots  into  beautiful  shapes. 
None  of  these  are  used  for  house  decoration,  as  would  be  the 
case  with  us,  so  that  the  time  spent  in  moulding  the  many- 
handled,  strangely  graceful  jars  must  be  exacted  by  that  indwell- 
ing love  of  beauty,  which,  debarred  from  expression  on  almost 
every  side,  finds  an  outlet  in  this  one  primitive  art.     There  is 


288      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 


Ekoi  pottery. 


ART 


289 


Ekoi  pottery. 


S.B. 


2go      IN   THE   SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

no  market  for  the  pottery,  it  is  made  solely  for  domestic  use. 
Obviously  a  jar  with  slender  neck  from  which  spring  three  or 
four  thin,  outstanding  handles  is  far  more  liable  to  break  than 
the  plainer  pottery  in  general  use  among  more  civilised  peoples 
— such  indeed  as  the  comparatively  cultured  inhabitants  of 
Northern  Nigeria. 

In  many  cases  both  form  and  decorative  pattern  strike  a 
curiously  modern  note,  that  indeed  of  "  L'Art  nouveau"  itself. 
An  example  of  this  came  to  my  notice  among  an  even  more 
primitive  people,  namely,  the  Banana  of  the  Logone,  the 
decorative  lines  on  whose  weapons  might  have  been  designed 
by  Liberty. 

In  seeming  contradiction  to  this  feeling  for  beauty  is  the 
undeniable  crudeness  of  the  wall  paintings.  The  most  elabo- 
rate of  these  are  naturally  to  be  found  in  the  Egbo  houses, 
and  typical  examples  are  shown  on  the  next  page.  Yet  the 
designs  painted  on  their  foreheads,  or  clipped  on  their  heads, 
show  a  sureness  of  drawing  which  few  white  people  could  equal. 
When  the  head  chief  of  Ibum  was  questioned  as  to  whether 
any  of  the  younger  people  were  taught  to  paint  by  their  elders, 
or  if  some  members  of  the  community  practised  the  art  more 
than  others,  he  answered  that  the  women  alone  made  the  walls 
fine  in  this  manner,  and  that  they  needed  no  teacher,  save  the 
good  sense  which  Obassi  had  given  them.*  Although  only 
capable  of  such  rude  expression,  all  Ekoi  are  quick  to  under- 
stand the  meaning  of  drawing  or  painting.  If,  for  instance, 
my  wife  wished  for  specimens  of  a  flower  which  we  had  reason 
to  believe  grew  in  the  neighbourhood,  she  had  only  to  show 
what  was  wanted  by  a  few  rapid  pencil  strokes,  or  a  brushful 
of  colour,  and  delighted  exclamations  proclaimed  its  recogni- 
tion. Search  parties  scattered  in  every  direction,  and  not  long 
afterwards  some  triumphant  individual  usually  returned  with 
the  specimen,  to  be  exchanged  for  leaves  of  another  plant  in 
great  favour  with  the  Ekoi,  namely,  tobacco. 

As  an  instance  of  appreciation  of  pure  line,  apart  from  the 
attraction  of  colour  generally  supposed  to  be  irresistible  among 
black  peoples,  perhaps  it  may  be  not  without  interest  to  relate 

*  Cf.  the  custom  in  Bohemia  and  Moravia,  where  the  house  walls  are  decorated 
each  spring  by  the  peasant  women. 


ART  291 

an  incident  which  occurred  after  we  had  got  back  from  a  long 
tour.  The  chief  men  of  Oban  came  up  to  congratulate  us  on 
our  safe  return  from  what  seemed  to  them  an  almost  incredibly 
long  and  dangerous  journey.  We  had  collected  a  good  many 
objects  of  interest  on  the  way,  especially  specimens  of  pottery 
made  by  a  far-away  branch  of  the  Ekoi,  and  some  musical 
instruments  of  a  pattern  unknown  in  these  parts.  The  inter- 
preter asked,  on  behalf  of  the  chiefs,  if  they  might  be  allowed 
to  see  the  collection  of  "fine  things"  in  my  house.  After 
examining  these,  they  showed  the  most  lively  interest  and 
admiration  for  the  simple  furniture  and  the  few  pictures  and 
ornaments  scattered  around.  I  had  just  had  framed  for  the 
office  a  couple  of  gaudy  pictures  of  the  King  and  Queen  in  their 
Coronation  robes.  These  were  shown  to  the  visitors,  and  they 
expressed  respectful  interest,  but  no  admiration.  Suddenly  we 
heard  an  exclamation  of  delight,  and  a  moment  after  all  our 
visitors  were  crowding  round  one  of  their  number  who  happened 
to  be  a  member  of  the  highest  grade  of  Egbo,  and  who  had 
picked  up  a  reproduction  in  black  and  white  of  Long's 
"  India." 

The  man's  face  was  alight  with  joy,  and  his  hands  kept 
moving  up  and  down,  following  the  folds  of  the  drapery  and 
the  lines  of  the  figure,  in  the  same  manner  as  one  has  seen 
employed  over  and  over  again  by  artists,  whether  Chinese, 
Japanese,  or  European,  in  explaining  the  beauty  of  some 
wonderful  old  painting.  Several  of  the  others  caught  fire  from 
his  enthusiasm,  and  his  voice  was  positively  unsteady  with 
excitement,  as  he  said  : 

"  I  never  knew  that  white  people  could  be  so  beautiful  in 
shape,  nor  that  they  ever  wore  such  long  graceful  robes.  I 
thought  white  people  always  wore  clothes  like  those  they 
bring  out  here.  Why  are  they  so  unkind  as  not  to  let  us  see 
things  like  this  ?  " 

If,  too,  as  many  people  contend,  with  regard  to  the  Greeks, 
colour  phraseology  is  any  test  as  to  colour  sense,  the  Ekoi  are 
by  no  means  backward  in  this  respect. 

The  following  terms  are  in  common  use : — 

Ogokk-Ogokk,  yellow,  from  Ogokk,  the  yellow  powder  used  as  dye 
(Adjectives  are  usually  formed  by  doubling  the  noun.      See  Appendix  E.) 

U   2 


292      IN   THE   SHADOW   OF  THE   BUSH 

Enyagha,  black. 

Ebarre,  white. 

Nkuyang-Nkuyang,  red. 

Ebii,  brown. 

Enyaghe  Awa,  blue. 

Awa-Awa,  green. 

Atong-Atong,  grey.     (From  ashes.) 

Ebarre  Ogokk,  pale  yellow. 

Ebarre  Awa,  pale  green. 

Thus  roughly  doubling  the  colour  terms  of  Homer's  days. 

It  is  certain  that  white  influence  is  to  blame  in  many  ways 
for  vitiating  the  taste  of  the  people.  Even  now,  except  at 
trading  centres,  one  practically  never  sees  any  colour  chosen 
for  loin  cloths  or  shoulder  robes  save  dark  blue,  sometimes 
with  a  white,  or  paler  blue  pattern.  This  tint  is,  above  all 
others,  suited  to  bring  out  the  warm  brown  skin  tones  and 
satisfy  one's  sense  of  colour. 

The  lines  of  the  piece  of  cloth  which,  till  a  few  years  ago, 
was  the  ordinary  women's  wear,  and  which  is  still  always  worn 
for  farm  work,  could  hardly  be  bettered.  The  garment  passes 
under  the  right  arm,  and  falls  from  a  knot  on  the  left 
shoulder  in  free  graceful  folds  which  reach  well  below  the  knee. 
It  is  our  influence,  alas!  which  is  changing  the  deep  quiet  tones 
of  the  old  blue  native  dyes  for  the  hideous  reds,  yellows,  and 
greens,  which  have  dazzled  the  untrained  eyes,  and  are  ruining 
the  once  true  colour  sense  of  the  people.  To  the  same  cause  is 
also  due  the  hideous  shape  of  the  pinafore  gowns,  short  in 
front  and  trained  behind,  often  still  further  disfigured  with 
common  lace,  or  strips  and  yokes  of  cotton-backed  velvet 
and  satin,  and  sleeves  which  do  their  utmost  to  disguise  the 
shape  of  the  usually  well-moulded  arms.  It  is  true  that  one 
garment  is  to  be  bought  which  is  perhaps  as  little  ugly  as  any 
of  European  make  for  the  use  of  primitive  peoples  is  likely 
to  be.  This  is  a  simple  little  gown,  cut  something  in  the  style 
of  those  made  familiar  by  the  drawings  of  Kate  Greenaway,  and 
with  sleeves  which  only  cover  the  arm  2  or  3  inches  below 
the  shoulder.* 

*  Since  writing  the  above,  I  have  read  what  Mr.  Morel  says  on  the  subject — 
"  Nigeria  :  its  People  and  its  Problems,"  page  219  : 

"  Why  cannot  the  Administration  and  the  missionary  societies  combine  in  some 
practical,  positive  form,  to  combat  this  curse  of  alien  dress  ?    There  is  absolutely 


ART  293 

It  is  in  a  great  measure  to  freedom  from  the  distorting 
influences  of  clothes  that  many  of  the  Ekoi  men  owe  their 
magnificent  physique.  Very  young  girls,  too,  are  often 
beautifully  shaped,  but  the  constant  walking  over  stony 
ground  roughens  their  bare  feet,  as  the  farm  work  coarsens 
their  hands.  One  undeniable  charm,  too,  is  possessed  by 
almost  every  member  of  the  race — men  and  women  alike 
have  noticeably  long,  exquisitely  curved  eyelashes. 

The  fatting-house  was  not  originally  instituted  with  the 
idea  that  mountains  of  flesh  were  beautiful,  but  because  the 
treatment  was  supposed  to  strengthen  the  girl  before  and  after 
any  special  drain  on  the  system.  Fat  in  daughter  or  wife  grew 
to  be  desired  as  a  token  of  strength  and  well-being,  and  at 
length,  though  not  universally,  as  attractive  in  itself. 

Two  other  great  factors   have  helped  the   physique  of  the 
Ekoi,  first   the  habit  common  to   most   primitive   peoples   of  II 
carrying  great  water  jars,  and  other  loads  which  need  careful 
balancing,  upon  their  heads  ;  and  second,  but  perhaps  most 
important  of  all,  their  love  of  dancing,  to  which  reference  has  2 
already  been  made. 

All  other  pastimes  pale  before  the  attractions  of  the  dance, 
which,  to  the    Ekoi,  is  one  of  the  main  occupations   of  life, 

nothing  to  be  said  in  its  favour.  The  West  African  looks  better  in  African  dressA 
the  robe  of  the  Mohammedan  and  of  many  pagan  Africans.  It  is  much  healthier1, 
for  him.  It  is  preservative  of  his  racial  identity  ;  and  that  is,  perhaps,  the  most 
important  of  all  pleas  which  can  be  put  forward  for  its  retention.  With  very 
slight  modification — such  as  one  sees  among  the  native  staff,  and  personal 
servants  in  many  parts  of  Northern  Nigeria — it  can  be  made  suitable  for  any 
form  of  labour,  literary  or  otherwise.  Clad  in  his  national  dress,  the  African 
has  a  dignity  which  in  most  cases  he  loses  almost  entirely  when  he  attires 
himself  in  a  costume  totally  unfitted  for  the  country,  and  hideous  at  best. 
Nothing  to  my  mind  is  more  pitiable  than  to  visit  school  after  school  in  West 
Africa,  filled  with  little  boys  and  girls  and  big  boys  and  girls  in  an  alien  dress,  to 
see  the  denationalizing  process  going  on  day  after  day  and  nothing  whatever 
done  to  stop  it.  In  the  case  of  the  women  it  is  not  only  dignity  and  nationalism 
which  are  concerned,  but  decency  as  well.  The  national  dress  of  the  women  in 
West  Africa  is  classical  and  graceful,  and  although  leaving  more  of  the  body 
exposed  than  is  usual  at  home  (except  in  the  ballroom)  it  lacks  suggestiveness. 
It  does  not  accentuate  the  figure.  It  emphasizes  that  racial  difference — not 
inequality,  but  difference — which  it  is  so  essential  to  emphasize.  With  the 
substitution  of  European  dress,  especially  of  the  prevailing  fashion,  the  West 
African  woman  loses  much  of  what  she  need  never  lose,  and  acquires  that  which 
is  of  no  profit  to  her.  These  things  cannot  be  altered  in  a  day,  nor  would  it  be 
possible  in  some  cases  for  the  present  adult  generation  to  go  back  to  African 
costume.  But  it  would  in  many  cases,  and  the  reform  could  be  at  once  taken  in 
hand  so  far  as  the  children  are  concerned." 


294   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

and,  as  with  the  Greeks  of  old,  provides  an  outlet  for  the 
dramatic  instinct  and  religious  fervour  of  the  race.  It  affords 
the  one  means  of  expressing,  as  perfectly  as  possible,  their 
otherwise  inarticulate  sense  of  the  mystery  of  existence,  the 
power  of  the  supernatural  influences  which  enfold  them,  the 
ecstasy  of  joy  in  life — of  youth  and  strength  and  love — all  the 
deeper  and  more  poignant  feelings  so  far  beyond  expression  by 
mere  words. 

Every  event,  either  in  the  life  of  the  family  or  that  of  the 
community,  is  celebrated  in  this  way.  Occasions  of  rejoicing 
or  grief,  such  as  births,  a  girl's  reappearance  from  the  fatting- 
house,  marriages,  successful  hunts,  the  entertainment  of 
visitors,  deaths,  funeral  rites,  and  the  thousand  and  one 
religious  observances — all  have  their  special  dances.  No  noon- 
day sun  is  too  hot,  no  rain  too  heavy,  to  cause  zeal  to  flag,  or 
damp  the  ardour  of  the  people.  For  hour  after  hour  the  per- 
formance continues,  monotonous  indeed  to  European  eyes 
and  ears,  but  capable  of  causing  frenzied  excitement  in  the 
dancers,  and  showing  a  feeling  for  true  rhythmic  motion  which 
is  little  short  of  marvellous.  Every  atom  of  the  body  dances, 
but  the  point  which  distinguishes  an  accomplished  dancer  from 
others  is  the  never-ceasing,  wave-like  ripple  which  runs  down 
the  muscles  of  the  back,  and  along  the  arms  to  the  finger-tips. 

Though  dancing  is  carried  on  during  every  hour  of  the  day, 
and  all  seasons  of  the  year,  it  is  by  the  light  of  the  full  moon 
that  the  Ekoi  most  love  to  indulge  in  this  pastime.  On  such 
occasions,  when  the  people  of  some  town  in  the  interior  have 
gathered  together  to  give  a  series  of  dances,  the  scene  possesses 
a  weird  beauty  impossible  to  define  or  express,  but  which,  like 
the  monotonous  chant  and  drumming  of  its  accompaniment, 
vibrates  on  chords  of  being  which  more  strictly  beautiful 
performances  fail  to  touch. 

This  is  one  point  of  view.  That  there  is  another  is  shown  by 
the  description  sent  home  by  my  wife  and  sister-in-law  soon 
after  their  arrival : — 

"  The  dance  was  a  maddening  performance,"  they  wrote, 
"  and  made  all  the  more  unendurable  to  us  by  P.  A.'s 
attempts  to  draw  our  attention  to  the  '  rhythmic  harmony  of 
the  monotone'  or  some  such  appreciative  expression.     To  our 


ART  295 

unmusical  ears  it  sounded  far  more  as  if  all  the  fiends  had 
been  let  loose  around  us,  and  when,  after  hours  of  dancing, 
the  performers  broke  into  a  new  song,  the  refrain  of  which 
sounded  exactly  like  '  hustling  and  bustling  away,'  but  proved 
to  be  the  prelude  to  a  yet  longer  and  more  energetic  series,  it 
really  seemed  as  if  insult  had  been  added  to  injury,  in  an 
almost  unendurable  degree." 

It  was  not  till  months  after  their  arrival  that  I  discovered 
what  terror  these  dances  had  at  first  caused  my  companions. 
During  any  such  performance  they  sat  smiling  and  apparently 
interested,  and  it  never  occurred  to  me  that  the  sight  of  the 
brown  figures  painted  with  patterns  in  white,  red,  and  yellow, 
dancing  in  and  out  of  the  fitful  torchlight,  could  conjure  up 
Fenimore-Cooper-like  visions  of  frenzied  savages  working 
themselves  up,  by  uncouth  dance  and  song,  to  a  sudden, 
treacherous  attack.  Only  when  a  nearer  knowledge  had 
banished  fear  was  the  secret  of  this  first  terror  confided 
to  me. 

Whatever  may  be  the  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  merit  of 
Ekoi  dances  from  an  sesthetic  standpoint,  there  can  be  none 
as  to  their  interest  from  an  anthropological  one.  Some  of  the 
oldest  hold  enshrined  within  them  traces  of  beliefs  and  fancies 
which  have  faded  from  every  other  record. 
^  Such  is  "  Ejame,"  a  solemn  dance,  never  given  save  during 
the  funeral  rites  of  very  great  chiefs. 

Seven  men  dance  in  the  centre  of  an  immense  circle  formed 
by  the  other  performers  a  long  way  off.  Each  of  the  seven 
must  take  care  to  leave  a  great  space  between  himself  and  his 
neighbour  on  either  hand,  for  should  the  "  aura  "  of  one  of  the 
seven,  which  on  this  occasion  is  thought  to  extend  beyond  its 
usual  limits  around  his  body,  overlap  that  of  any  other  present, 
both  will  die.  It  is  forbidden  for  any  of  the  principal  per- 
formers to  raise  their  eyes.  From  beginning  to  end  of  the 
dance,  each  must  keep  them  fixed  upon  the  earth  at  his  feet. 
Three  at  least  must  wear  rattles  round  the  neck  and  bear 
spears.  The  songs  sung  during  this  dance  are  declared  to  be 
so  old  that  their  meaning  has  long  since  been  forgotten. 

Another  peculiar  dance  is  called  "  Okpata."  When  this  is 
given,   two  little  wooden  fetishes  are   brought  out  from   the 


[I 


296      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

back  of  the  Egbo  house,  and  placed  upright  upon  a  stone. 
Only  one  man  dances,  while  another  plays  on  a  native  harp. 
After  a  while  the  little  fetishes  begin  to  bend  up  and  down,  and 
appear  to  skip  on  the  stone,  in  the  manner  of  marionettes, 
though  careful  observation  by  broad  daylight  failed  to  show 
any  mechanical  contrivance  by  which  this  was  brought  about. 
None  but  those  conversant  with  the  mysteries  of  the  dance  are 
allowed  to  approach  within  several  yards  of  the  stone.  The 
name  Okpata  is  also  given  to  the  bundle  of  palm  leaves  set 
up  in  a  farm  to  scare  away  thieves.  Anyone  who  steals  from 
a  farm  thus  protected  will  fall  sick,  and  will  not  recover  unless 
the  particular  dance  is  given.  The  secret  of  Okpata  has  been 
handed  down  from  father  to  son  for  many  generations,  in  the 
family  of  Obassi  Unaw  of  Oban. 

Another  very  old  dance,  already  described  (page  151),  is  the 
"  Cat  dance,"  now  only  practised  at  Niaji  and  Ekoneman. 

There  are  many  imitative  dances,  among  the  most  graceful  of 
which  may  be  mentioned  : — 

"  Fabi  fabi  ga  ekum. 
Fly    fly   like  hawks." 
And 

"  Ut  ebbena  ga  nonn  mfibba. 
We   dance   as  birds      fly." 

Many  refrains  are  taken  from  incidents  of  everyday  life,  such 
as : — 

"  Ut       efferk         mba,     ka      mba      arap      aching. 
We  are  seeking  a  road,  but  the  way  is  far  too  much." 
"  Aiipp  aienn  are  ka  mba   ebbu  akut     ut  kun  ebikk  echingum 

A  water  great  lies  in  (our)  path,  when  (it)  dries  up  we  then  can     pass  by 
ejakk    ka  mbinn  egira. 
(and)  go  to  farms     our." 

It  should  be  remarked  that  in  all  dances,  the  movement  is 
from  left  to  right,  never  from  right  to  left. 

The  children,  too,  have  a  charming  series  of  action  dances, 
one  of  which  recalled  the  "  King  of  the  Castle  "  of  our  own 
childhood,  though  played  more  gently.  All  the  time  they 
kept  up  a  chorus  of  "  Ikpai,  Ikpai :  I  conquer  you."  Another 
was  not  unlike  musical  chairs,  and  is  danced  to  the  accompani- 
ment of  a  song,  the  translation  of  which  runs  "  Three  bottles 


ART  297 

of  rum  for  a  hundred  men.  Who  will  get  some  and  who  go 
without  ?  " 

Nothing  could  be  more  graceful  than  the  waving  arms  and 
swaying  limbs  of  the  little  brown  forms,  as  they  bent  and  moved 
always  in  perfect  time  to  their  song. 

The  musical  faculty  of  this  people  is  certainly  wonderful, 
though  developed  along  peculiar  lines.  They  have  a  consider- 
able number  of  musical  instruments,  but  among  these  the  drum 
reigns  supreme.  Of  this  there  are  many  varieties,  from  the  small 
boy's  tom-tom,  about  6  inches  high,  to  the  long  drums  almost 
the  height  of  a  man,  and  the  great  drum  of  the  town,  which  is 
an  object  of  reverence  to  the  inhabitants,  and  in  honour  of 


which  many  songs   are   composed.     A  typical  one   heard  at 
Nkami  ran  : — 

"  Mfam  are  egina,  akpatim  egyuk. 
The  town  belongs  to  thee,     great    drum." 

"  Mfam  are  e*gina,  akpatim  egyuk. 
The  town  belongs  to  thee,     great     drum." 

,r  By  old  custom,  when  a  stranger  entered  a  town  he  asked  for 
//  the  head  chief,  that  he  might  salute  him.  In  the  chiefs 
absence,  the  visitor  was  expected  to  go  straight  to  the  Egbo 
house  and  salute  the  big  drum  "  Egyuk."  This  he  did  by 
bending  down  before  it,  till  the  tips  of  his  fingers  touched  the 
ground. 

There  is  great  rivalry  among  clubs  as  to  which  can  procure 
drums  with  the  most  beautiful  tone,  for,  to  the  Ekoi,  the 
tone  of  a  drum  means  almost  as  much  as  that  of  an  old 
violin  to  us.     Many  a  man  has  risked  fine  and  imprisonment 


298      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF    THE    BUSH 

for  playing  on  those  which  belonged  to  other  men.  It  is  not 
unusual  for  such  cases  to  be  brought  before  me.  Summonses 
are  even  occasionally  taken  out  before  the  Native  Court,  as  for 
instance,  that  of  the  Nkum  Enan  Club  of  Okarara  on  Julys,  1909. 
Obi  Ekpe  sworn,  stated  : 

"Itoga  came  to  our  town.  He  was  beating  an  old  small  drum 
in  Mbi's  compound.  He  asked,  '  What  about  the  good  drums 
you  use  for  dancing  ?  '  Mbi  said,  '  They  are  kept  in  Itayin's 
compound.'  Itoga  asked,  '  Is  any  permission  necessary  before 
they  may  be  played  ? '     Then  he  went  thither  to  beat  them." 

Mbi  (sworn),  "  When  Itoga  went  to  Itayin's  house,  he  began 
to  beat  the  drums.  The  owners  asked  from  whom  he  had 
authority.  He  answered  that  I  myself  had 
given  it  to  him.  At  night  the  club  members 
gathered  themselves  together  and  summoned 
Itoga  before  them.  They  pronounced  him 
guilty  of  beating  their  drums.  He  told  them 
that  I  was  responsible,  but  I  said,  '  I  am  not  a 
member  of  this  club.  How  then  could  I  give 
Itoga  authority  over  the  drums  of  others  ? ' " 

For  this  unauthorised  performance  the  Club 
claimed  goods  to  the  value  of  30s. 

The  study  of  the  drum  is  well  worth  the, 
attention  of  officials,  as  it  is  possible  in  this); 
way  not  only  to  know  what  is  going  on  in  native  towns  round/ 
one — for  every  event  has  its  different  tune  by  which  to  summori 
the  inhabitants,  such  as  Egbo  and  Juju  performances,  wrestling 
bouts,  &c. — but  one  is  able  to  learn  the  drum  language,  and 
so  interpret  almost  every  secret  message  sent  in  warning  to' 
counteract  one's  orders  or  plans. 

Two  drums  are  generally  beaten,  of  which  the  first  leads 
while  the  second  responds.  In  the  transcription  here  attempted, 
the  top  line  represents  the  notes  of  the  first  drum  and  the  bottom 
one  that  of  the  second,  usually  lower  in  pitch.  A  dot  repre- 
sents the  value  of  half  a  dash.  When  only  one  performer  is 
available,  he  beats  the  two  drums. 

The  combinations  are  so  limitless  that  any  attempt  to  do  more 

than  indicate  the  method  employed  would  but  weary  my  readers. 

For  instance,  a  white  man  travelling  through  the  country 


ART 


299 


will  often  hear,  on  his  approach  to  a  town,  two  drums  beaten  in 
the  following  manner  : — 


Which  means  : 

"  Aba  babapp  ka  mfam,  ekum        ekifari. 
Come  quickly  to  town,  hawks  are  around." 

This  is  used  to  summon  the  townsfolk  from  their  outlying  farms. 
The  term  "  hawk  "  is  employed  to  designate  the  white  visitor. 


"  Nsan    iburutu. 
Nsan   the  brave. 


Nsum         nyamm. 
Monkey  flesh  (comes). 


Aigyut  eriti  babapp. 
Climb  tree  quickly." 


This  means  "  Men  of  Nsan,  brave  ones,  another  town  is 
coming  to  attack  us  ;  return  at  once  to  your  homes."  The  words 
"  monkey  flesh  "  were  used  instead  of  the  name  of  the  enemy, 
lest  the  women  should  be  so  terrified  by  the  approaching  danger 
as  to  lose  their  heads. 


"  Abakk  'ne  oyue.  Mfonn  mfam       aiyuk         eju. 

Come    man  kill.     Chief  (or  owner)  (of)  town  has  heard  before." 

I.e.,  Come  to  the  town,  we  are  killing  a  man.     The  Chief  knows 
(or  agrees). 

Should  a  man  be  proved  guilty  of  attempting  to  attract  to 
himself  the  affection  of  a  chief's  wife,  the  following  is  played  to 
warn  all  the  townsfolk  that  no  help  or  succour  must  be  shown 
to  the  offender : — 


"  Ekum     ekaw  nkai  eriti.  Afabe  aiye  'we     akumi        fan  ? 

Hawk  marries  woman  (or  wife)  tree.  Wings  tired  he  sits  down  where  ?  " 


300      IN   THE   SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

I.e.,  Should  a  hawk  marry  the  tree  wife,  where  will  he  find  a 
resting  place  when  his  wings  are  tired,  as  all  trees  would  refuse 
him  shelter. 


.  The  next  is  used  to  warn  a  friend  to  follow  the  course  of  a 
stream,  as  danger  awaited  him  on  the  road  : — 


"  Aiipp  aiipp  ebarre  akatt.     Ngun  ojimm   ajonge. 
Water  water  white    feet.      Land    walk    thorns." 

I.e.,  "  If  you  walk  along  in  the  water,  your  feet  will  keep  white 
(smooth  and  unhurt).  If  you  walk  on  land,  thorns  (will  pierce 
them)." 


"  Akai     akare    atui.     Achott  akare    akukana. 
Women  give   chiefs.    Palaver  give  fatherless." 

A  chief  may  take  a  fatherless  woman  in  marriage,  though  this 
is  forbidden  to  others,  as  there  is  no  one  to  provide  a  dowry. 
In  the  case  of  a  chief,  it  will  be  provided  by  the  women  of  the 
town. 

The  following  drum  songs,  true  "  Lieder  ohne  Worte,"  were 


ART 


301 


played  in  our  honour  by  the  children's  "Agara"  Clubof  Nchofan 
(Insofan)  : — 


"  A  makara    araw    ba.    Kun    abonn    akam    asun. 
If  white  man  come  not.    Then  children  agree  slaves." 

"  If  the  white  man  had  not  come  to  our  country,  the  children 
would  have  no  choice  but  to  be  seized  as  slaves." 

The  next  was  in  honour  of  the  first  white  woman  to  visit  the 
town  : — 


"  Nkang  oiyenn  ntuk       nji.        Njum    nji  'me    nyenna. 
Never    saw  I  such  (as)  this.    Thing  this    I    saw  not." 

The  drum  on  which  these  songs  were  played  has  been  described 
on  page  217,  but  those  in  ordinary  use  are  the  great  Egbo  drum 
"  Egyuk,"  and  four  varieties  of  that  formed  from  a  wooden  cylinder 
covered  at  one  end  with  antelope,  or,  more  rarely,  snake  skin. 

To  call  Oban  people  to  a  meeting  the  following  is  played : — 


"  Oban  iburutu.         Aba  nyaghe,   nyaghe. 

Oban  (people)  brave  ones.     Come  quickly,  quickly." 

Each  man  of  importance  in  a  town  has  his  drum  name,  by 
which  he  can  be  summoned  at  any  moment.  For  instance, 
should  Ojong  Egomm  of  Oban  be  at  his  farm  when  wanted, 
the  townsfolk  beat  the  following  : — 


"  Awmenge  ntemm   etim.     Kenn  okubi  ekubi  ebi. 
Know        friend  inside.    Then  story    talk   bad." 


302      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF  THE   BUSH 

To  summon  Itandak  of  Oban  they  play  : — 


"  Osing  onnopp     ngun. 
Osing  no  good  (for)  fire. 


Onnuri     ngun       anoba. 
Onnuri  (for)  fire  no  good." 


For  Itaokui  of  Oban  they  beat : — 


"  Ekut  ekui  nyaw  ebuk  eriti. 

Wood-pecker  (with)  strong  mouth  (makes)  hole  (in)  tree." 

At  dawn,  after  the  death  of  a  great  man,  in  the  old  days,  the 
Egbo  drum  might  always  have  been  heard  insistently  beaten  in 
a  series  of  five  equal  strokes — 

"  Kran,  kran,  kran,  kran,  kran, 
Kran,  kran,  kran,  kran,  kran." 

While  this  sound  boomed  through  the  town,  the  people  were 
seeking  a  victim  to  seize  and  offer  up  in  sacrifice,  and  then  to 
lay  in  the  grave,  beneath  the  swathed  body  of  the  dead  chief. 
So  soon  as  the  strokes  stopped,  strangers  approaching  from  a 
distance  knew  that  they  might  enter  the  town  in  safety — the 
victim  had  already  been  found.  In  such  a  case  he  was  usually 
put  to  death,  near  the  Juju  stone,  by  means  of  brass  rods  twisted 
round  his  throat.  The  body  was  thrown  down  before  the 
great  drum,  which  was  then  solemnly  beaten  once  more. 

Beside  the  drum,  the  principal  musical  instruments  are  the 
harp,  okankan,*  and  rattle,  but  there  are  countless  others,  such 
as  the  one  made  from  a  palm  mid-rib  3  to  4  feet  long,  of  which 


See  p.  54. 


ART  303 

a  strip  of  fibre  has  been  loosened  for  the  whole  length  save  a 
couple  of  inches  at  either  end,  and  then  raised  by  two  tiny 
"bridges"  thrust   beneath.     This   is  played  by   a   couple   of 


performers,  one  of  whom  strikes  the  strings  with  two  slender 
wooden  sticks,  and  the  other  touches  it  here  and  there  with  a 
small  closed  calabash,  with  which  he  makes  occasional  "  runs  " 
by  drawing  sharply  up  and  down. 


CHAPTER   XXVIII 

Records 

Records  are  usually  kept  by  means  of  tallies  of  different 
kinds, — by  dropping  small  stones  or  corn  grains  into  a  calabash, 
and  by  making  strokes  on  walls. 
f  The  system  of  reckoning  was  to  count  first  on  the  fingers, 
/  then  on  the  toes,  and,  should  the  number  exceed  twenty,  to  lay 
down  a  small  piece  of  grass,  stick,  or  palm  leaf  for  each  five  in 
excess,  or,  if  large  numbers  were  concerned,  for  each  twenty. 
It  was  customary  to  begin  with  the  little  finger  on  the  left 
hand. 

To  express  numerals  up  to  twenty,  the  following  signs  are 
employed. 

i,  2,  3,  and  4,  the  corresponding  number  of  fingers  are  held 
out  on  one  hand. 

5,  a  closed  fist  is  shown. 

6,  three  fingers  are  held  out  on  each  hand. 

7,  two  fingers  of  the  right  hand  are  struck  twice  on  to  the 
palm  of  the  left  hand,  or,  four  fingers  of  left  hand  and  three 
fingers  of  right  are  held  out. 

8,  four  fingers  of  each  hand  are  held  out. 

9,  the  left  hand  is  held  out,  the  fingers  loosely  closed,  the 
right  hand  with  the  thumb  against  the  palm  is  drawn  from  the 
left  hand  across  the  breast. — The  old  custom  of  shooting  with 
the  bow  is  clearly  imitated. 

10,  two  closed  fists  are  held  out. 

15,  the  tips  of  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand  are  bent  over  to 
touch  the  right  shoulder. 

20,  the  right  hand  is  raised  before  the  face,  and  then  swung 
downward  with  the  index  finger  extended. 


RECORDS  305 

NSIBIDI. 

In  1905,  Mr.  T.  D.  Maxwell,  District  Commissioner  of 
Calabar,  discovered  the  existence  of  a  secret  primitive  writing 
in  use  among  the  Efiks.  Twenty-four  signs,  the  meaning  of 
which  he  had  succeeded  in  learning,  were  published  in  the 
Government  Civil  List  of  July,  1905.  Later,  a  paper  by 
the  Rev.  J.  K.  MacGregor  appeared  in  the  Anthropological 
Journal  for  1909.  In  this  paper  its  author  states,  first  that 
Nsibidi  originated  among  the  Ibos,  or  alternatively  among  the 
Uyanga,  who  learned  it  from  the  monkeys  which  crowded 
rounoTtheir  camp  fires.  He  says  that  he  has  been  unable  to 
learn  of  any  trace  of  such  a  script  in  the  Cameroons,  and 
according  to  his  opinion,  it  was  unlikely  that  such  should  exist 
among  peoples  of  the  Bantu  stock,  but  he  adds  a  note  to  the 
effect  that  a  work  by  Dr.  Mansfeld — "  Urwald  Dokumente  " — 
has  since  come  under  his  notice  in  which  some  signs  are 
given. 

With  regard  to  the  Ibos,  all  of  this  nationality  questioned  by 
me   deny  the   existence   of  any   system    of  writing   save   that  / 
adopted  from  missionary  sources,  which  has  been  modified  tp' 
suit  their  convenience. 

Among  the  Uyanga  also  it  has  unfortunately  been  impossible 
to  find  any  trace  of  the  interesting  legend  alluded  to  above, 
whereas,  so  far  from  a  Bantu  relationship  offering  any  bar  to 
the  knowledge  of  the  script,  the  Ekoi,  who  certainly  have  a 
strong  Bantu  strain,  claim,  and  with  what  seems  good  grounds, 
to  have  originated  the  whole  system.  At  the  present  day  a 
greater  variety  of  signs  seems  to  exist  among  the  Ekoi  of  the 
interior  than  amid  any  other  tribe. 

The  script  is  certainly  of  considerable  antiquity,  and  is  to  a 
large  extent  pictographic,  but  has  become  highly  convention- 
alised in  the  course  of  years.  The  Ekoi  explanation  of  the 
name  Nsibidi,  or  more  properly  Nchibbidy,  is  that  it  is  derived 
from  the  verb  "  Nchibbi,"  "to  turn,"  and  this  has  taken  to 
itself  the  meaning  of  agility  of  mind,  and  therefore  of  cunning 
or  double  meaning. 

One  of  the  oldest  clubs,  which  apparently  existed  before  the 
inception   of  the  Egbo,  bears  the    same   name.     This   was  a 

s.b.  x 


306      IN    THE    SHADOW    OF    THE    BUSH 


powerful  society  to  which  chiefs  alone  could  belong,  and  was 
charged  with  the  execution  of  criminals. 

On  a  small  calabash,  bought  at  Nkami,  the  record  of  a  trial 
by  the  Nsibidi  Club  is  to  be  found. 

The  circles  show  the  Court-house,  with  verandah,  round 
which,  and  the  inner  walls,  the  towns- 
folk are  standing  in  order  to  hear  the 
case.  The  five  "  Ts  "  are  the  Nsibidi 
executioners.  No  sooner  was  judgment 
pronounced  against  a  man  than  these 
officials  dragged  him  forth  to  death. 
They  are  said  to  have  disguised  them- 
selves by  covering  their  faces  on  the 
one  side  with  a  black  dye  made  from 
groundcharcoalandoil,andonthe  other 
with  chalk.  Over  this  background,  signs 
in  contrasting  colours  were  painted.  They  used  torush  upon  their 
victim,  bearing  a  buffalo  horn  in  the  left  hand,  and  the  "  Isawm  " 
or  Juju  knife  in  the  right.  According  to  Mr.  Goldie  (Enk  Dic- 
tionary), an  "  Owo  Nsibidi  "  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Calabar  was 
in  the  habit  of  disguising  himself  in  much  the  same  way  till  quite 
recent  days,  before  inflicting  punishment  or  injury.  The  func- 
tions of  the  old  Nsibidi  Club  are  mentioned  in  the  following 
story  :  — 

Lex   Talionis. 

By  Atem  Mbaiojonge  of  Ako. 

Effion  Obassi  and  all  his  people  built  a  town.  One  day  thev 
went  into  the  bush  to  cut  palm  leaves  with  which  to  make  new 
roof-mats  (Oka).  The  leaves  were  collected  and  brought  back, 
and  the  townsfolk  said,  "  We  will  sit  in  the  Egbo  house  to 
make  the  mats."  Before  they  entered,  they  made  a  law  that 
no  one  should  leave  in  the  evening  and  go  home  before  he  had 
cleaned  away  all  the  palm  leaves.  If  anyone  should  leave  so 
much  as  a  single  piece  in  the  Egbo  house  he  should  be  put  to 
death. 

One  day,  after  all  had  gone  home,  the  man,  whom  Effion 
Obassi  had  chosen  for  his  friend,  but  who  was  secretly  very 
jealous  because  Effion  was  richer  than  he,  got  a  piece  of  palm 


RECORDS  307 

leaf  and  hid  it  under  the  floor-mat  where  Effion  had  been 
sitting.  Next  morning  it  was  found  there.  Inquiry  was  made, 
and  the  townsfolk  ordered  everyone  to  sit  in  the  place  where 
he  had  been  sitting  the  day  before.  They  found  that  the  piece 
of  palm  leaf  was  under  the  mat  on  which  Effion  had  sat.  So 
they  said  to  him  : 

"  You  must  die  within  twelve  days  according  to  the  rule  we 
have  made."  Obassi  himself,  however,  answered,  "  My  son 
shall  not  be  killed  at  all." 

When  the  days  were  over,  all  the  town  went  to  Obassi  and 
said,  "  Give  us  your  son  that  he  may  die." 

Obassi  replied,  "  I  will  give  you  a  slave ;  take  him  instead  of 
my  son."     This  the  townsfolk  refused. 

Now  at  that  time  there  was  a  very  powerful  club  called 
Nsibidi,  to  which  only  chiefs  might  belong.  The  seven 
"  Images "  of  Nsibidi  came  out  and  demanded  the  son  of 
Obassi.  He  could  no  longer  refuse,  so  Effion  Obassi  was 
delivered  up  to  them,  and  they  cut  off  his  head. 

Obassi  was  very  sad.  He  said,  "  This  was  the  only  son  I 
had.  I  got  plantains  from  him.  From  him  I  got  yams  and 
fresh  water."  One  day  he  went  into  the  bush.  He  saw  a 
kola  tree  bearing  three  fruits.  He  said  to  himself,  "  If  my 
son  were  here,  I  should  send  him  to  pick  the  nuts  for  me." 
He  went  home.  He  called  to  the  man  whom  his  son  had 
chosen  for  friend,  and  said,  "  My  son  is  dead.  You  who  were 
his  friend,  will  you  pick  the  kola  nuts  for  me  in  his  stead  ?  " 
The  man  said  "Yes." 

Both  went  into  the  bush.  When  the  false  friend  had  climbed 
the  tree,  Obassi  called  to  it,  "  If  this  is  the  man  who  deceived 
my  son,  and  gave  him  to  be  killed  by  the  people,  O  tree !  you 
may  grow  up  very  high,  and  throw  him  down  to  the  ground,  so 
that  he  dies.      If  he  is  guiltless,  you  may  not  grow." 

Then  the  tree  shot  up  into  the  sky,  bearing  the  man  with  it. 
It  shook  its  top  and  flung  him  down  to  the  ground,  so  that  he  died. 

Obassi  went  home  for  a  time,  but  another  day  when  he 
was  hunting  in  the  bush,  he  saw  a  porcupine  run  into  its  hole. 
He  said  to  himself,  "If  my  son  were  here,  he  would  kill  that 
animal  for  me.  I  will  try  to  kill  all  those  people  who  put  my 
son  to  death." 

x  2 


308      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

On  his  return  Obassi  called  to  one  of  those  who  had  helped 
to  kill  his  son,  and  said,  "  Will  you  please  go  down  that  hole 
and  fetch  up  porcupine  for  me?"  The  man  did  as  he  was 
asked,  and,  no  sooner  had  he  entered,  than  Obassi  cried  out, 
"  If  this  man  be  guilty,  O  hole  !  cover  him  so  that  he  dies.  If 
he  be  guiltless,  let  him  come  out  unharmed." 

Another  day  Obassi  called  one  of  the  men  and  said,  "  Go  to 
Oremm  and  buy  twenty  3'ams  for  me,  but  take  only  one  day  on 
the  journey,  for,  if  you  take  more  than  this,  Nsibidi  shall  kill 
you  as  it  killed  my  son."  The  messenger  went  very  hurriedly, 
but  the  road  seemed  to  lengthen  before  him,  and  he  spent  two 
days  on  the  journey.  When  he  returned  Obassi  sent  for  the 
Nsibidi  "  Images,"  and  they  came  and  cut  off  the  man's  head. 

Next  Obassi  called  to  one  of  the  seven  "  Images"  and  sent 
him  to  the  bush  to  pick  native  pears.  When  he  climbed  the 
tree  Obassi  spoke  to  it  as  he  had  done  to  the  palm  tree.  It 
grew  up  high  and  flung  the  man  to  the  earth,  so  that  he  died. 

The  fourth  man  was  sent  fishing,  but  the  river  had  been 
ordered  to  kill  him  if  he  were  in  any  way  guilty  of  the  death  of 
EfBon,  so  he  was  drawn  under  and  drowned. 

The  fifth  man  was  told  to  go  and  plant  yams  in  the  farm. 
There  the  farm  Juju  caught  him.  He  cried,  "  I  am  sick,  I  am 
sick."     Then  he  died. 

To  the  sixth  man  Obassi  said,  "  Now  that  my  son  is  dead 
there  is  no  one  to  sleep  in  the  room  with  me.  Will  you  come  ?  " 
The  man  consented.  In  the  middle  of  the  night  a  great  snake, 
which  Obassi  had  brought,  came  and  swallowed  him  up. 

The  seventh  man  was  sent  into  the  bush  to  collect  firewood. 
There  a  tree  fell  on  him,  so  that  he  died. 

The  wife  of  Obassi  also  said,  "  I,  too,  will  do  my  best  to  kill 
those  who  injured  my  son."  She  also  put  Jujus  upon  some  of 
them,  so  that  they  died. 

The  parents  of  all  those  dead  men  called  a  meeting  in  the 
town  and  said,  "  What  is  the  cause  of  the  deaths  of  our 
children?" 

Then  Obassi  stood  forth  and  said,  "  My  son  died  through  the 
deceit  of  one  who  pretended  to  be  his  friend.  Therefore  I  also 
have  killed  those  who  had  any  part  in  his  death.  All  the 
town  was  jealous  of  the  wealth  of  my  son,  and  wished  that  he 


RECORDS  309 

should  die,  so  that  on  my  death  my  riches  might  be  shared 
among  you.     Now  your  sons  have  died  in  payment  for  mine." 

That  is  the  reason  why  if  anyone  does  you  harm  you  try  toi 
do  him  harm  also. 

The  rule  about  the  palm  leaves  was  only  made  so  that  the 
richest  man  might  be  killed,  and  his  wealth  be  shared  by  the 
town. 

For  a  long  time  messages  have  been  sent  in  Nsibidi  script,  cut 
or  painted  on  split  palm  stems. 

The  more  interesting  signs  collected,  each  of  which  has  been 
carefully  verified,  will  be  found  in  Appendix  G. 


CHAPTER   XXIX 

Government,  Etc. 

In  old  days  each  town  was  ruled  by  its  council  of  elders — 
the  Homeric  "yepotma" — and  in  most  ways  this  still  holds. 
Anyone,  from  the  greatest  chief  to  the  smallest  child,  has  the 
right  to  summon  such  a  meeting  and  lay  complaints  before  it. 
The  greater  number  of  the  townspeople  attend,  but  only  the 
elders  have  the  right  to  speak,  others  do  so  on  sufferance.  A 
powerful  chief  naturally  would  have  more  influence  than  a  poor 
man  on  such  occasions,  but,  should  the  case  be  clear  against  the 
former,  the  meeting  would  never  decide  in  his  favour. 

In  most  ways  the  Ekoi  are  still  ruled  according  to  old 
custom,  but  appeal  can  always  be  made  from  the  decision  of  the 
elders  to  that  of  the  Native  Court,  and  from  the  latter  direct 
to  the  District  Commissioner.  The  old  "yepovsia"  has  no 
longer  power  to  enforce  punishments. 

The  Native  Court  is  composed  of  representatives  from 
different  towns  of  the  District,  who  sit  in  turns,  usually  under 
the  presidency  of  the  Commissioner.  Should  the  latter  un- 
avoidably be  absent,  his  place  is  taken  by  the  principal  chief 
present,  but  all  decisions  are  inspected  by  the  Commissioner  on 
his  return. 

In  this  manner  the  people  may  be  said  to  have  almost 
complete  self-government.  Indeed,  among  races  of  a  high  type 
like  the  Ekoi,  who  have  comparatively  few  customs  repugnant 
to  the  English  sense  of  justice,  self-government  is  more  truly  a 
fact  since  the  coming  of  the  "  white  man  "  than  before,  when 
the  rights  of  the  poor,  and  those  not  free-born,  were  too  often 
set  aside. 

The  only  serious  crime  prevalent  among  the  Ekoi  is  that  of 
poisoning,  and  this  is  more  often  directed  against  suspected 
magicians  than  private  enemies.     That  it  is  all  too  prevalent, 


GOVERNMENT,    ETC.  311 

however,  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  antidotes  are  kept  close  at 
hand,  usually  in  the  form  of  dried  herbs  hung  from  the  roof. 
These  are  sometimes  used  as  a  lotion,  and  sometimes  given  as 
a  drink. 

It  is  usual  to  take  an  antidote  before  going  to  a  meal, 
should  there  be  any  reason  to  suspect  one's  host  of  evil 
intentions.  After  this  precaution,  if  poison  be  administered, 
the  guest  vomits  at  once  and  suffers  no  further  ill-effects. 

The  only  cases  of  deaths  by  violence  known  to  me  in 
the  District  were  both  committed  by  old  "  members  "  of  alien 
race. 

The  Ekoi  custom  with  regard  to  the  murder  of  a  free  man 
was  to  summon  the  head  chiefs  of  the  neighbouring  towns, 
to  inquire  into  the  case.  Judgment  was  given  after  seven 
days,  and,  if  found  guilty,  the  murderer  was  immediately  put  / 
to  death.  No  compensation  was  permitted,  and  the  wealth 
or  position  of  the  guilty  man  was  not  allowed  to  weigh  in  the 
least. 

Should  the  death  have  been  proved  due  to  accident,  the 
slayer  could  ransom  himself  by  the  payment  of  one  slave,  or 
like  value,  for  his  own  life,  and  one  for  each  full  brother,  and  two 
for  each  full  sister  possessed  by  himself,  lest  the  blood  guilt 
should  fall  upon  them  also. 

The  punishment  for  serious  theft  in  the  old  days  was  to  cut  off 
ear,  toe,  or  finger.     For  some  time  past,  however,  the  procedure  • 
has  been  as  follows  : — 

For  the  first  offence  the  culprit  was  fined  by  the  Egbo  Club, 
for  the  second  his  "company"  fined  him  more  heavily,  while 
for  the  third  he  was  very  heavily  fined  indeed.  A  cow  was 
usually  shot  and  he  was  obliged  to  refund  the  value  to  the 
owners.  Next  a  bell  was  hung  round  his  waist,  he  was  painted 
over  with  black  and  white  and  driven  round  the  town.  The 
owner  of  the  property  taken  was  not  allowed  to  inflict  any 
punishment  himself. 

Most  other  offences  were  punished  by  fines.  A  transgressor 
of  the  marriage  laws  would  have  to  pay  damages  to  the  injured 
party.  As  far  as  possible,  punishment  was  made  to  fit  the 
crime,  and,  in  the  old  days  at  least,  a  murderer  was  put  to  death 
in  the  same  way  as  his  victim. 


312      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

Why  a  Murderer  should  Die  in  the  same  Way  as  his 

Victim. 

There  was  once  a  man  who  had  two  wives.  The  name  of 
the  one  was  Nka  Menge  Njum  (Know  nothing)  and  of  the  other 
Menge  Marri  (Know  all).  After  seven  months  the  first  woman 
bore  a  daughter,  but  the  second  wife  remained  barren. 

The  child  grew  up  very  quickly,  and  after  five  months  could 
walk  alone.  One  day  she  went  to  the  house  of  Menge  Marri, 
but  the  latter  drove  her  away  and  said,  "  I  want  no  children  in 
my  room."     A  second  day  the  same  thing  happened. 

Once  the  father  went  out  hunting.  Menge  Njum  said  to 
herself,  "  I  want  to  go  to  my  farm  and  get  food ;  firewood 
also  is  needed,  but  there  is  no  one  to  take  care  of  the  child. 
If  I  could  see  anyone  with  whom  to  leave  her,  I  would  go  at 
once." 

On  hearing  this  the  daughter  herself  said,  "  If  you  do  not 
fetch  food,  we  shall  die  with  hunger,  so  you  must  go.  If  Menge 
Marri  were  your  friend,  you  could  leave  me  with  her  ;  but  she 
does  not  like  you,  so  I  am  better  alone." 

The  mother  set  out  and  collected  all  that  was  needed.  On 
her  return  she  found  her  daughter  safe  in  the  house.  Nothing 
had  happened  to  her.  Next  day,  therefore,  the  woman  went 
forth  again  to  her  farm. 

This  day,  however,  Menge  Marri  came  to  the  house  of  her 
rival  and  said  to  the  child,  "  Your  mother  is  away.  Let  us  go 
together  to  the  bush.     We  will  catch  fish  in  the  river." 

To  this  the  girl  agreed,  and,  when  they  had  gone  some  way, 
they  came  to  a  river  in  which  there  were  many  fish.  Menge 
Marri  took  her  little  companion  and  flung  her  into  the  water,  so 
as  to  form  a  dam.  A  high  tree  was  growing  by  the  side  of  the 
river,  and  on  this  sat  a  blue  bird.     He  cried  : — 

"  I  never  before  saw  any  woman  take  the  daughter  of  another 
and  lay  her  across  the  water  like  this.  If  you  want  to  dam  the 
water,  why  do  you  not  cut  sticks  ?  " 

When  the  wicked  wife  heard  this  she  picked  up  many  stones, 
and  threw  them  at  the  bird,  but  it  flew  away  safely.  She 
caught  plenty  of  fish,  and,  after  she  had  finished,  drew  the  body 
of  the  drowned  girl  up  from  the  water,  and  laid  it  across  her 


GOVERNMENT,    ETC.  313 

back.  On  her  head  she  bore  a  basket  of  fish,  but  when  she 
found  her  load  too  heavy,  she  set  down  the  fish,  carried  the 
body  for  some  distance,  and  then  set  this  down  and  returned 
for  the  fish.  Thus  she  did  till  she  reached  home.  When  she 
arrived  she  put  the  dead  body  of  the  little  one  in  the  mother's 
room,  then  went  to  her  own  house  and  began  to  clean  the  fish. 

When  Menge  Njum  came  back  from  farm  she  called  to  her 
daughter,  "  Come,  help  me  down  with  my  load,  for  it  is  very 
heavy.  The  child  did  not  answer,  so  the  mother  let  fall  her 
load,  and  ran  and  caught  hold  of  her.  Then  she  began  to  weep 
bitterly. 

A  little  time  after,  the  father  returned  from  hunting,  and  asked : 

"  What  is  the  matter  ?  When  I  started  I  left  my  daughter 
without  sickness.  How  is  it  possible  that  she  can  have  died  in 
two  days?  " 

The  blue  bird  flew  down  and  settled  on  the  roof. 

"  I  never  saw  a  woman  take  another  woman's  daughter  and 
use  to  dam  a  river  instead  of  sticks,"  sang  he. 

The  father  stopped  his  wife  from  weeping,  and  said,  "  Let  us 
listen  to  the  bird ;  "  and  the  latter  sang  further: 

"  There  is  the  woman  who  took  your  daughter  and  used  her 
to  dam  a  river."  At  that  moment  Menge  Marri  went  by,  but 
the  man  could  not  believe  what  the  bird  sang. 

Next  morning  the  wife  said,  "  Our  child  is  dead.  Let  us  go 
and  bury  her."  The  man  answered,  "  We  will  do  as  you  say, 
but,  if  I  live,  I  will  find  out  who  has  killed  her." 

While  they  were  burying  their  little  one  the  bird  flew  down 
once  more,  and  sang,  "  Menge  Marri  it  is  who  took  the  child 
to  the  river  to  drown  her,  and  afterwards  carried  the  body  back 
to  the  house.     She  is  the  one  who  killed  your  daughter." 

Then  the  parents  called  a  meeting  of  the  townsfolk,  and 
accused  Menge  Marri  of  what  she  had  done. 

The  latter  stated,  "  The  reason  I  killed  their  daughter  is 
because  I  had  none  of  my  own." 

On  this  the  meeting  gave  judgment  that  she  must  die  in  the 
same  way  as  she  had  killed  the  girl. 

From  that  day  a  man  who  kills  another  must  be  put  to  death 
in  the  same  way  as  his  victim. 


314      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

At  death  all  property  goes  by  right  to  the  eldest  brother  of  the 
deceased.  Should  the  heir  be  a  good  man  he  would  share  with 
the  dead  man's  children,  but  he  cannot  be  forced  to  do  this. 

Any  property  given  to  a  wife  remains  hers  at  the  death  of  her 
husband,  should  she  have  children,  but  if  childless  it  all  goes  to 
the  elder  brother. 

A  strict  account  as  to  property  is  kept  between  husband 
and  wife.  A  rather  amusing  instance  of  this  came  up  in  Court 
soon  after  my  arrival  : — 

A  man  had  lent  his  wife  goods  to  the  value  of  fourteen  pieces 
of  cloth.  She  acknowledged  the  debt,  and.was  anxious  to  repay 
it.  As  she  could  think  of  no  other  way  in  which  to  do  so,  she 
sallied  forth  in  true  Amazonian  style,  and  annexed  another 
woman,  whom  she  brought  back  captive,  and  presented  to  her 
husband  in  full  discharge  of  her  own  liabilities. 

The  practice  of  seizing  free  persons  and  converting  them 
into  slaves  has  naturally  been  forbidden  throughout  the  land 
since  the  coming  of  white  rule.  So  complaint  was  brought, 
with  the  result  that  the  whole  affair  came  into  Court. 

That  this  punctiliousness  as  to  "  Meum "  and  "  Tuum " 
extends  also  to  the  children  was  proved,  on  one  occasion,  by  a 
child  of  eight,  who  claimed  damages  against  her  father  because 
he  had  used,  without  her  permission,  a  cooking  pot,  which  he 
had  given  her  some  time  before.  By  native  law  she  won  her 
case.  The  father  was  condemned  to  return  the  pot,  and  pay 
compensation  to  his  daughter  for  having  made  unauthorised 
use  of  her  property. 

Before  entering  into  the  next  section  of  my  subject,  I  should 
like  to  state  that  I  myself  do  not  touch  intoxicants  of  any  kind, 
and  have  the  cause  of  temperance  nearly  at  heart,  while  I  yield 
to  no  member  of  the  Native  Races  Committee  in  interest  in  the 
people  among  whom  my  lot  is  cast. 

At  all  hours,  without  a  moment's  warning  of  our  coming, 
native  houses  of  every  class  of  Ekoi  have  been  open  to  us,  as 
hundreds  of  sketches  of  interiors,  type  studies,  &c,  can  testify. 
In  the  course  of  my  life  here,  and  the  thousands  of  miles  traversed, 
only  two  cases  of  natives  the  worse  for  drink  have  come  under 
my  notice.     Neither  was  more  than  slightly  intoxicated,  and 


GOVERNMENT,    ETC.  315 

both  lapses  from  virtue  were  due,  not  to  imported  liquor,  but  to 
palm  wine,  though  in  the  last  case  about  a  teaspoonful  of  gin 
had  been  added. 

The  Ekoi  are  a  thoroughly  sober  people,  and,  though  a  con- 
siderable amount  of  European  spirit  is  brought  to  the  District, 
a  great  part  of  this  is  used  for  libations  or  sacrificial  purposes. 
The  only  native  intoxicant  is  palm  wine,  of  which  there  are  two  V 
kinds.  First,  that  obtained  by  climbing  up  the  tree,  making  an 
incision  at  the  top,  and  fixing  a  gourd  or  demi-john  to  catch 
the  flow  of  sap.  This  is  a  troublesome  process,  owing  to  the 
height  of  the  tree  and  its  spiked  leaves. 

The  wine  thus  obtained  will  keep  for  some  time,  but  after 
the  first  few  days  it  begins  to  grow  heady.  "  Medicine  "  is 
then  mixed  with  it,  and  it  is  used  almost  exclusively  for  Juju 
purposes. 

The  second  kind  of  palm  wine  is  obtained  by  felling  the  tree,  I 
cutting  out  the  greater  part  of  the  "  cabbage,"  and  affixing  some 
receptacle  in  much  the  way  described  above.  The  sap  thus 
obtained  must  be  drunk  within  thirty-six  hours,  and  is  no  more 
intoxicating  than  cider.  This  method  is  discouraged  by  Govern- 
ment, as,  if  allowed,  it  would  cause  the  destruction  of  many 
oil  palms,  the  vast  number  of  which  now  make  Southern  Nigeria 
the  wealthiest  of  our  Crown  Colonies,  and,  if  properly  preserved, 
will  form  an  inexhaustible  source  of  trade  with  Great  Britain, 
and  the  means  of  building  up  an  ever-increasing  market  for 
her  goods. 

As  has  already  been  mentioned,  an  enormous  amount  of 
imported  liquor  is  used  for  libations  at  funeral  ceremonies,  and 
at  "  plays "  in  honour  of  dead  chiefs.  At  practically  all 
sacrifices  and  religious  ceremonies  libations  play  an  important 
part.  Till  we  can  educate  the  natives,  not  by  book  learning, 
but  by  gradual  raising  to  a  higher  plane  of  thought,  it  is 
useless  to  attempt  to  keep  them,  by  forcible  legislation,  from 
what  they  deem  necessary  to  bring  good  fortune  on  themselves, 
and  happiness  to  their  dead  kinsfolk.  Spirits  they  will  have,  if 
only  for  the  causes  mentioned,  and,  if  import  is  forbidden,  not 
only  will  the  palm  trees  be  sacrificed  to  this  end,  but  illicit 
distilleries  will  spring  up  on  every  hand,  as  has  been  repeatedly 
pointed  out  by  the  Press.     In  the  dense  bush  which  covers  the 


3i6      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

greater  part  of  the  Protectorate,  a  whole  army  of  officials 
would  be  unable  to  control  this  danger,  and  the  consequent 
degradation  of  a  people,  at  present  law-abiding  and  sober, 
would  lie  at  the  door  of  those  who,  in  mistaken  zeal,  are 
anxious  to  bring  about  at  once  what  must  need  years  of 
patient  teaching. 

Could  those,  who  have  the  real  good  of  the  native  races  at 
heart,  cast  aside  prejudice  and  come  out  to  study  the  workings 
of  the  present  administrative  system,  I  venture  to  believe  that 
they  would  go  back  to  their  own  country  to  turn  their  zeal  for 

/temperance  into  channels  which  so  badly  need  it.  Centuries 
of  education,  backed  by  the  whole  strength  of  our  police  force, 

■  have  not  succeeded  in  rendering  wife  murder,  due  to  drink, 
uncommon  among  us,  while,  amid  the  Ekoi,  the  murder  of  a 
woman  is  utterly  unknown,  with  the  exception  of  those  offered 
up  in  sacrifice,  or  killed  in  time  of  war. 

Surely,  for  very  shame's  sake,  we  should  wait  till  at  least 
such  hideous  crime  was  stamped  out  in  our  land  before 
attempting  to  force  our  own  unsuccessful  experiments  in  the 
direction  of  temperance,  on  a  people,  who — to  our  utter 
disgrace  be  it  said — are  incomparably  more  sober  than  our- 
selves. When  we  can  point  to  the  self-conquest,  whose  outward 
unmistakable  sign  will  be  a  sober  England,  there  will  no  be  need 
of  temperance  legislation  for  Southern  Nigeria.  Its  people,  of 
whom  the  greater  number  are  law-abiding  and  loyal  to  the 
core,  if  not  forced  into  other  courses  by  legislation  which  in 
their  present  state  of  evolution  they  could  not  but  regard  as 
a  tyrannical  abuse  of  power,  would  follow  us  upward  in  the 
disuse  of  harmful  spirits,  as  surely  as  they  are  doing  in  the 
discarding  of  their  old  customs  of  ordeal  and  torture.  Only 
these  changes  must  be  made  gradually,  as  the  evil  of  such 
thing  can  be  brought  home  to  them,  and  in  this  no  amount  of 
legislation  can  have  the  force  of  example. 

Is  it  much  to  plead  for  a  little  patience — for  a  few  years  in 
which  to  bring  about  such  vast  changes — above  all,  for  the 
charity  of  judgment,  of  which  we  all  stand  in  need,  to  be 
extended  to  those  at  the  head  of  the  Administration,  who  have 
striven  so  nobly  for  the  good  of  the  people  entrusted  to  their 
charge  ? 


Jf  «& 


w* 


Type  of  Ekoi. 


Ekoi  Type. 


Type  of  "Member"  from  Slave 
Towns. 


Type  of  Ekoi. 


GOVERNMENT,    ETC.  317 

Origin  and  Characteristics. 

That  the  Ekoi  are  mainly  of  Bantu  stock  is  shown  both  by 
their  language  and  the  shape  of  their  heads.  The  latter  point 
has  been  determined  by  Professor  Keith,  from  skulls  which  he 
was  good  enough  to  work  out  for  me.*  Distinctly  Himyaritic 
types  are,  however,  still  to  be  found. 

The  original  Bantu  stock  is  now  generally  acknowledged  to 
have  arisen  from  a  mixture  of  Hamitic  and  negro  blood.  The 
Ekoi  were  probably  among  the  first  of  the  races,  so  formed,  to 
split  off  from  the  parent  stem,  and  seem  to  have  come  straight 
from  the  lower  end  of  the  Nile  valley.  There  are  many  points 
about  the  Nsibidi  writing,!  which  recall  traces  of  the  earliest 
Egyptian  hieroglyphics.  It  is  perhaps  worth  remarking,  that 
with  hardly  any  exceptions,  buildings  are  represented  in  this 
script  as  circular,  \  a  form  generally  considered  peculiar  to  park- 
land peoples,  and  quite  different  to  the  rectangular  houses  of 
forest-folk. 

That  the  Ekoi  are  descendants  of  a  people  living  in  large 
communities,  swayed  by  powerful  rulers,  is  shown  by  the 
fact  that  ancestor  worship,  practically  unknown  to  tribes 
consisting  of  petty  settlements,  is  still  so  strong.  To  the 
reasons  already  cited  for  believing  that  they  have  come 
down  from  the  north-east,  and  probably  from  a  land  not 
so  densely  forested  as  Southern  Nigeria,  may  be  added  the 
fact  that,  with  hardly  an  exception,  the  former  sites  of  all 
their  towns  are  north  of  their  present  ones,  and  that  the  great 
"  Nki  "  (lion)  figures  very  largely  in  their  early  folk-lore.  It  is 
not  impossible  that  this  animal  should  occasionally  leave  its 
home  in  the  grass  country  to  the  north,  and  pass  the  Cross 
river.  More  or  less  trustworthy  authority  is  to  be  found  for 
believing  that  it  has  actually  penetrated  as  far  south  as  Aking, 
but  such  incursions  are  certainly  rare. 

The  salt  springs  which  occur  round  the  sacred  lake  Ijagham, 
and  in  other  parts  of  Ekoi  land,  some  indeed  quite  near  to 
Oban  station,  were  possibly  a  determining  factor  in  the  final 

*  See  Appendix  C. 
t  See  Appendix  G. 
%  See  Story  4,  Nsibidi  Signs,  Appendix  G. 


318     IN    THE     SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

choice  of  settlement,  as  the  need  for  salt  is  strong  among  all 
tribes. 

With  the  exception  of  a  few  towns  near  Obokum,  all  Ekoi 
now  seem  to  have  settled  south  of  the  Cross  river.  There  are, 
roughly  speaking,  20,000  in  British  territory,  mostly  in, 
or  adjoining,  the  Oban  district.  Across  the  border  of  the 
Camerons,  according  to  Dr.  Mansfeld,  they  number  less  than 
6,000,  but  if  one  includes  the  tribes  called  by  him  Keaka  and 
Obang,  with  whom  the  Ekoi  claim  kinship,  and  who  speak  an 
almost  identical  language,  the  number  would  be  raised  to  over 
12,000.  To  the  east  of  these  are  the  Banjangs,  a  kindred  tribe 
about  5,000  strong,  whose  speech  is  also  very  similar.  Should 
the  present  rate  of  immigration  into  British  territory,  continue, 
however,  the  number  of  Ekoi  in  the  Camerons  will  soon  show 
great  diminution. 

The  inhabitants  of  big  Kwa  town,  near  Calabar,  claim  to  be 
the  first  Ekoi  to  have  come  down  from  the  north,  and  were 
certainly  there  before  the  arrival  of  the  Efiks,  as  the  latter 
people  obtained  from  them  permission  to  mark  out  a  site  for 
their  new  settlement.  The  land  within  the  bend  of  the  Cross 
River  was  apparently  uninhabited  on  the  arrival  of  these 
pioneers,  but  other  branches  of  the  tribe  soon  followed,  till 
practically  the  whole  territory  was  settled. 

The  average  height  of  the  men  is  about  2  inches  below  that 
of  Englishmen,  while  the  women  are  still  shorter  in  comparison 
with  those  of  Teutonic  races.  So  far  from  my  experience  of 
black  peoples  coinciding  with  that  expressed  by  Mr.  Northcote 
Thomas  (p.  6  of  Report  on  Edo-speaking  Peoples,  Part  I.), 
"  Although  the  negro  is  able  to  carry  loads  for  long  distances, 
he  must  go  at  his  own  pace;  even  without  a  load  his  endur- 
ance is  small  when  he  is  called  upon  to  move  faster  than 
usual,"  I  have  found  the  negro  show  great  powers  of  endur- 
ance over  the  whole  extent  of  country  covered  by  me  in 
West  and  Central  Africa,  since  1902.  Leaving  on  one  side 
such  splendid  material  as  Mendis,  Hausas,  the  inhabitants  of 
the  Tuburi  marshes,  &c. — to  take  the  Ekoi  alone — it  is  quite 
usual  for  them,  when  carrying  for  themselves,  to  bear  a  100-lb. 
load  over  the  15-mile  hilly  road  from  Oban  to  Obutong, 
and  return  the  same  day.     With  regard  to  speed,  it  may  be 


m   /j**' 


«s^ 


M^k 


A 


n/iSLy 


<  VI 


Types  of  Ekoi  Coiffure. 


Types  of  Ekoi  Coiffure. 


GOVERNMENT,    ETC. 


3X9 


mentioned    that     the     ordinary    mail- 
runners,    sometimes    with    a    load    of 

50    lb.,    do    the   80    miles    to    Calabar 

and  back  in  three  days,  though,  unless 

they  wish  for  any  reason  to  come  back 

at  once,  they  usually  wait  a  day  or  two 

for  the  return  mail. 

Like  most  hill  tribes,  the  men  prefer 

to  carry  heavy  loads  on  their  shoulders, 

kept  in  place  by  a  strap  round  the  fore- 
head. Women  and  girls,  however,  carry 

everything   on    their   heads,    and    their 

loads  of  firewood,  &c,  must  often  weigh 

over  60  lb.    Like  those  of  most  tropical  i 

tribes,  the  women  age  quickly,  though 

some   keep    their  good  looks   till    over ; 

forty.     It  is  impossible  to  get  accurate 

ages,  as  these  are  never  known  by  the 

people  themselves,  but  those  over  seventy 

seem  rare,  and  I  do  not  think  it  would 

be  safe  to  put  down  any  as  more 
than  ninety. 

Contrary  to  the  custom  of  many 
West  African  tribes,  artificial  dis- 
figuring of  face  or  body  is  extremely 
rare  among  this  people.  Up  to  a 
few  years  ago,  the  two  front  in- 
cisors were  filed,  so  as  to  form  an 
inverted  V,  but  this  custom  is  now 
dying  out.  In  olden  times,  three 
small  circles  of  concentric  rings 
were  cut  at  the  side  of  the  face 
from  the  temple  downwards.  Into 
these  a  mixture  of  ground  char- 
coal and  palm  oil  was  rubbed 
and  renewed  about  every  six 
months.  When  the  Ekoi  met  the 
Efiks,  however,  this  race  mark  was 
changed  to  one  larger  circle,  though 


320      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

some  claim  that  they  had  made  the  alteration  beforehand 
and  the  Efiks  adopted  it  from  them.  This  custom  is  also 
dying  out,  and  since  my  arrival  in  the  District,  no  child  has 
been  so  marked. 

In  the  interior,  children  and  young  girls  still  have  their 
bodies  painted  with  designs  made  by  black  vegetable  dyes. 
The  most  usual  of  these  is  extracted  from  the  rhizome  of  the 
little  flower  "  Ibiri  Nsi,"  much  like  a  wild  hyacinth.  A  small 
amount  of  tattooing  is  practised,  and  also  the  ghost  marks 
described  on  p.  203.  As  regards  coiffures,  the  variety  of 
designs  to  be  found  among  young  girls  and  children  is  aston- 
ishing. Usually  they  first  shave  the  head,  then,  when  the  hair 
has  grown  to  a  uniform  length  of  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch, 
trace  out  with  chalk  an  elaborate  pattern,  which  is  left  standing 
against  a  clean-shaved  background. 

Young  women  and  children  are  also  fond  of  ornamenting 
their  faces,  especially  their  foreheads,  with  designs  in  various 
colours.  The  absolute  mastery  of  outline  shown  by  these,  as 
well  as  by  those  mentioned  in  the  last  paragraph,  is  far  beyond 
the  average  to  be  expected  from  Europeans.  The  variety  of 
such  patterns  is  extraordinary.  Several  hundred  sketches  were 
made  by  my  wife  and  her  sister — indeed,  the  supply  seemed 
inexhaustible.  The  outlines  are  often  filled  in  with  Nsibidi 
writing,  and  sometimes  a  girl's  whole  life-history  is  proclaimed 
in  this  manner.  Such  patterns  are  always  traced  by  a  female 
relative,  usually  the  aunt  of  the  person  decorated. 

The  Ekoi  are  mentally  an  intelligent  race,  and  though  they 
have  not  the  concentration  of  mind  possessed  by  white  people, 
they  can  undeniably  fix  their  attention  for  hours  at  a  time  on 
any  subject  which  interests  them,  while  their  memories  are 
incomparably  better,  and  their  senses,  at  least  those  of  sight, 
hearing  and  smell,  are — as  is  to  be  expected — far  keener  than 
those  of  Europeans. 

They  are  an  eloquent  people,  and  there  are  very  few  who 
cannot,  at  a  moment's  notice,  discourse  fluently  on  any  topic  of 
which  they  are  conversant,  or  defend  themselves  ably  enough  on 
every  occasion.  Their  points,  though  sometimes  long  drawn 
out,  are  well  made  in  the  end,  the  words  accompanied  by 
expressive  tone  and  gesture.   They  have  a  keen  sense  of  humour, 


s,*®******--4*- 


A 


Types  of  Ekoi  Coiffure. 


'■'•'.--(•".  ~l 


•"V 


Female 


T\-pes  of  Ekoi  Coiffure. 


Male. 


GOVERNMENT,    ETC.  321 

often  disguised  by  a  child-like  guilelessness,  and  cropping  up  in 
the  most  unlikely  times  and  places.  Once  a  prisoner  was 
brought  before  Court  on  the  charge  of  having  broken  the 
prison  rules  by  speaking  to  his  wife  without  permission.  When 
brought  up  by  the  Corporal,  he  pleaded  "  not  guilty"  in  spite 
of  the  many  witnesses  against  him. 

He  stated,  "  Among  those  who  brought  rations  to  the  prison 
gate,  I  saw  my  wife  with  a  basket  of  plantains.  I  would  have 
liked  to  speak  to  her,  but  could  not  get  permission,  as  the 
Corporal  was  busy.  I  thought  to  myself,  '  Our  Father  the  D.  C. 
has  forbidden  us  to  speak  with  the  townsfolk  who  come  to  sell 
us  food,  but  never  has  he  forbidden  us  to  speak  with  the  plan- 
tains.' Therefore  I  looked  sadly  upon  those  which  lay  in  the 
basket  and  asked,  '  O  plantains !  why  are  you  so  few  ?  If 
more  of  you  do  not  come  quickly,  I  shall  surely  die  of  hunger !  " 
I  swear  to  Your  Worship  that  that  was  all.  I  said  no  word  to 
anyone,  save  the  plantains,  and  against  conversing  with  them 
there  is  no  law." 

The  simplest  statements,  too,  often  show  a  touch  of  unconscious 
poetry.  Not  long  ago  at  Nsan  we  were  visited  by  an  old,  old 
woman,  who  had  come  to  present  us  with  a  small  mat,  made 
by  her  own  hands. 

She  stood  in  the  vivid  sunshine  leaning  on  her  stick,  shrunken 
and  feeble,  an  image  of  extreme  old  age,  but  with  eyes  still 
bright,  and  a  clear,  kind  voice. 

"  Each  time  D.  C.  came  to  our  town,"  she  said,  "  I  thought, 
'  This  time  at  least  he  will  come  to  my  compound,  so  that  I  shall 
learn  to  know  him,  for  I  am  the  oldest  woman  of  Nsan.'  Yet 
he  never  came  to  see  me,  so  I  have  come  to  him  that  I  may  at 
last  see  the  face  of  my  Father." 

We  were  very  sorry  that  she  had  been  unvisited  for  so 
long,  but  found  that  her  house  lay  by  itself  in  a  little  side 
street  at  the  back  of  the  main  road.  She  took  great  pride  in 
her  age,  and  told  how  she  had  come,  when  already  old  enough 
to  bear  a  small  load  for  herself,  from  the  old  town  of  Nsan.  We 
asked  if  any  others  of  her  "  age  class"  were  still  alive,  but  she 
answered,  "  Of  all  those  who  were  with  me,  dancing  up  and 
down  in  the  moonlight  or  the  sunshine,  I  alone  remain.  The 
others  long  since  lie  sleeping." 

S.B.  y 


\L 


322      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

The   two   most    noticeable   qualities   of  the   Ekoi  are  their 


reverence  for  age,  and  their  love  of  children.  The  oldest  man 
of  the  town  is  always  its  head  chief,  unless  he  has  been  so  poor 
all  his  life  as  to  have  been  debarred  from  entering  any  of  the 
clubs.  Only  one  case  of  harshness  to  a  child  has  come  to  my 
notice  during  the  whole  time  spent  among  them,  and  the  spirit 
of  indulgence,  with  which  children  are  everywhere  treated, 
shows  its  results  in  the  independence  and  utter  fearlessness  of 
even  the  smallest. 

One  day  at  Nsan,  while  my  wife  and  her  sister  were  alone 
in  the  Rest-house,  a  mite  of  three  invaded  their  room.  He 
announced  that  he  had  come  to  see  the  "white  man,"  and 
lay  a  complaint  before  him.  They  at  once  sent  to  request  my 
return  from  the  school  play-ground,  where  a  football  match 
was  in  progress,  and  when  I  got  back  to  interview  the  com- 
plainant, his  tale  was  unfolded  without  delay.  The  small 
visitor  declared  that  his  father  had  not  given  him  enough  to  eat, 
therefore  he  came  to  lay  his  "case"  before  "white  man." 
His  well-nourished  little  body  looked  as  if  any  error  of  diet  had 
lain  in  the  contrary  direction.  Biscuits  of  various  kinds 
proved  inadequate  to  his  needs,  but  at  length  he  was  made 
happy  with  a  corn-cob,  nearly  as  big  as  himself,  and  with  this 
he  toddled  away. 

On  another  occasion,  when  standing  at  the  theodolite,  I  felt  a 
touch  at  about  the  height  of  my  shooting  boot.  Looking  down, 
I  saw  a  mite  who  could  only  just  have  learned  to  walk.  In  his 
upraised  hands  were  some  limes  about  the  size  of  acorns. 

He  had  come  all  alone,  and  quite  on  his  own  initiative,  to 
"dash"  the  "  white  man,"  and  had  selected  these  diminutive 
limes  as  a  suitable  offering. 

Everywhere  the  small  children  seem  fond  of  playing  at  Juju 
processions,  in  imitation  of  their  elders.  A  typical  one  was  seen 
at  Mfamosing. 

The  tiny  "  Okum  "  wore  a  long  ragged  garment  of  blue  stuff, 
which  had  once  formed  part  of  his  mother's  gown.  This 
trailed  behind,  but  was  held  up  in  front  by  both  small  hands. 
He  glided,  courtesied  and  turned,  in  carefully  studied  imitation 
of  "  Akpambe."  Before  him  marched  a  diminutive  gnome-like 
mortal,  solemnly  tom-toming  on   one  of  our  discarded  coffee 


Types  of  Ekoi  Coiffure  (Small  Children). 


4&2t 


Types  of  Ekoi  Coiffure. 


GOVERNMENT,    ETC.  323 

tins,  while  behind,  with  an  air  of  ineffable  importance,  walked 
a  third  midget  carrying  a  wand.  Later,  two  others,  similarly 
weaponed,  but  with  sticks  about  four  times  their  own  size, 
came  to  join  the  procession.  Whether  the  superior  height  of 
the  newcomers'  wands  struck  terror  or  envy  into  the  breast  of 
small  "Tom-tom"  was  not  easy  to  tell,  but  he  burst  into  floods 
of  tears  at  sight  of  the  new  arrivals,  and  fled  sobbing  to  his  home. 


Proverbs  and  Omens. 


The  language  has  an  extensive  vocabulary,  and  many  phrases 
show  unexpectedly  poetical  turns  of  thought.  It  is  also  rich  in 
proverbs,  some  of  which  are  apt  enough,  though  many  have 
little  meaning  for  European  ears. 

The  following  are  perhaps  typical :  — 

"  Eeti  ejim    ka  mkpe  aiya,  mbuta  anak         amobikk 

Big  tree  stood  on  bank   of  great  water,     rain      fell    (but)  could  not 
etim. 
cover  (it)." 

"  Nse       oa,       nkpe      oa,     na   akpawoi,  odikk  amitt  amobikk 

Father  your,  mother  your,    if   they  die,  crying  (but)    eyes     cannot 
etannum. 
break." 

i.e.,  A  high  tree  grew  by  the  side  of  a  great  water  ;  the  rain 
fell  and  fell,  and  the  water  rose,  yet  could  not  overflow  the  top 
of  the  tree. 

If  your  father  or  mother  should  die,  you  weep  and  weep,  yet 
grief  cannot  quite  overwhelm  you.  Your  eyes  will  brighten 
again  some  day. 

"Ofung     otue  okett,      ojokk      otue  okett,     njinni         ba     ntue. 
Buffaloes  draw  tired,  elephants  draw  tired,  small  birds  come  draw." 

i.e.,  What  great  folk  failed  to  do,  may  sometimes  be  done 
by  the  small  and  weak. 

"Ikuni      igbaw  mfepp.     Chong  obinn     eye         okaka        eyuk. 
Firewood    falls     wind.         Go     break  to-day,  don't  sleep  cold." 

The  firewood  has  been  blown  down  by  the  wind.  Go  and 
break  it  up  and  carry  it  home  to-day,  so  that  you  should  not 
have  to  slee*p  cold  to  night ;  i.e.,  Don't  miss  an  opportunity. 

Great  attention  is  paid  to  any  signs  supposed  to  foretell  the 
future,  whether  from  outside  or  inside  influences.     Among  the 

Y  2 


324      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

former,  the  cries  and  flights  of  birds  hold  an  important  place. 
There  are  five  principle  kinds  with  the  gift  of  prophecy : 

The  Nkundak,  or  Greater  Plantain-eater. 

The  Osaiiri,  or  Kingfisher. 

The  Ara, 
and  two  varieties  of  Itott. 

In  making  a  journey,  it  is  a  good  omen  if  either  of  the  first 
three  of  these  birds  cries  on  your  left  hand,  but  it  foretells  ill- 
luck  should  they  be  heard  on  the  right.  The  Itott,  on  the 
other  hand,  brings  good  fortune  if  it  crosses  your  path  from 
right  to  left,  but  bad  luck  if  in  the  contrary  direction. 

Of  divination  by  feelings  in  different  parts  of  the  body  : — 

A  twitching  in  the  upper  eyelid  of  the  left  eye  denotes  that 
one  is  about  to  see  a  bad  thing,  such  as  an  ordeal  by  burning  oil. 

A  twitching  in  the  upper  eyelid  of  the  right  eye,  on  the 
contrary,  foretells  a  fine  sight,  such  as  a  dance. 

The  same  sensation  in  either  of  the  bottom  eyelids  predicts 
coming  cause  for  tears. 

Should  the  twitching  be  felt  in  the  top  of  the  left  arm  before 
starting  on  a  journey,  it  means  that  evil  awaits  you,  and  that 
the  friendly  powers  are  trying  to  hold  you  back.  If  this  warning 
be  disregarded,  misfortune  is  sure  to  follow.  Should  the  twitching 
be  felt,  however,  in  the  top  part  of  the  right  arm  it  is  a  good  sign, 
and  foretells  that  a  friend's  arm  will  soon  lie  within  one's  own. 

If  this  sensation  comes  in  the  hollow  of  the  elbow  of  the 
right  arm,  or  the  palm  of  the  right  hand,  it  means  that  you 
will  be  called  on  to  pay  a  debt  or  give  a  gift ;  if  in  the  left 
hand,  that  you  are  about  to  receive  one,  as  in  our  own  "  Right 
hand  ta'e,  left  hand  pay." 

A  twitching  above  the  heart  means  danger,  trouble,  or 
punishment,  as  also  a  tingling  on  the  forehead  or  left  thigh. 
On  the  right  breast  or  thigh  it  means  good  luck.  The  same 
sensation  below  the  elbow  on  either  arm  denotes  that  news  of 
a  death  will  soon  reach  you.  On  the  sole  of  the  right  foot,  it 
means  that  a  strange  man  is  coming  to  see  you ;  on  the  left 
foot,  that  you  will  be  visited  by  a  strange  woman. 

When  a  meteor  falls  to  the  ground,  it  is  a  sign  of  a  coming 
I   death  in  the  neighbourhood ;   while  a  comet   or  a  dark   ring 
round  the  moon  betokens  the  death  of  a  chief. 


People  from  the  Interior  waiting  to  welcome  us  at  the  nearest   River  to 

their  Town. 


Lowest  Falls,  Kwa  River. 


CHAPTER   XXX 
Treatment  of  " Members " 

In  the  old  days,  Calabar  and  Bonny  were  rivals  for  pre- 
eminence among  the  slave  ports  of  Africa,  and  few  places  in  the 
world  can  have  seen  more  misery.  In  this  infamous  traffic  the 
Ekoi  acted  as  "  middle-men  "  for  the  greater  part  of  the  land  to 
the  north  and  north-east.  Most  of  the  victims  were  brought 
down  from  the  "slave  towns,"  as  they  are  still  called,  i.e., those 
lying  between  the  Cross  river  and  the  Benue,  and  more  especi- 
ally near  the  line  of  the  present  Anglo-German  frontier.  The 
Ekoi  did  not  usually  travel  far  into  the  interior  themselves,  but 
the  slaves  were  brought  down  and  delivered  into  the  hands  of 
those  living  most  to  the  north,  and  from  these  passed  from 
town  to  town,  till  they  reached  the  Calabar  traders. 

The  abolition  of  slavery  by  England  put  a  stop  to  all  such 
export  trade,  but  it  still  continued  among  the  natives  in  out-of- 
the-way  parts,  such  as  the  Ekoi  country,  which  had  not  as  yet 
been  fully  taken  over  by  Government.      For  the  first  year  after  I 
my  arrival  in  1907,  one  of  my  principal  duties  was  to  stamp  |j 
it  out. 

The  administration  of  Southern  Nigeria  is  carried  on  to  a  1 
large  extent  through  the  so-called  "  Heads  of  Houses."  The  I 
word  "  House  "  includes  not  only  the  immediate  family,  but  its 
retainers,  freed  slaves  and  their  descendants — all,  in  fact,  who 
recognise  the  authority  of  the  Chief  of  the  "sept."  All,  save 
blood  relations,  would  perhaps  be  best  described  by  the  old 
Latin  word  "  Clientes,"  and  the  reciprocal  duties  of  the  Roman 
noble  and  his  retainers  are  closely  paralleled  by  those  of 
present-day  Ekoi.  The  Head  of  the  House  now,  as  then, 
supports  his  "  members  "  in  infancy  and  sickness,  sees  to  their 
general  well-being,  and  in  return  receives  their  services,  and 
exacts  submission  to  his  authority  in  all  lawful  ways. 


326      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

This  state  of  affairs  has  been  recognised  by  the  Government 
of  Southern  Nigeria,  and,  should  either  party  not  fulfil  his  part 
of  the  compact,  there  is  a  remedy  at  law.  The  one  objection 
from  a  working  point  of  view  is  that,  in  the  mind  of  the  people, 
I  there  still  exists  a  distinction  between  free-born  "members"  of 
such  a  house  or  clan,  and  those  not  free.  They  are  beginning 
to  grasp,  however,  that  no  such  distinction  exists  before  the 
law,  and  the  difference  will  doubtless  gradually  die  out. 
According  to  the  unanimous  opinion  of  those  who  have  had 
experience  in  the  governing  of  natives,  it  would  be  most  inex- 
pedient suddenly  to  deprive  chiefs  and  heads  of  families  of  their 
^hereditary  authority.  Such  a  course  would  reduce  to  anarchy 
that  part  of  the  Central  and  Eastern  Provinces  of  South  Nigeria 
near  the  coast,  unless  the  number  of  officials  were  multiplied 
ten-fold  and  even  then  the  natives  would  be  less  happy  and  con- 
tented than  under  the  existing  state  of  affairs.  The  necessity 
for  slowness  and  caution  in  all  changes  is  borne  in  from  day  to 
day  with  greater  force  upon  all  who  have  to  do  with  ruling 
West  African  negroes.  To  change,  at  a  stroke  of  the  pen,  the 
system  of  government  evolved  by  the  natives  in  the  course  of 
thousands  of  years,  would  have  far-reaching  ill  results.  By  the 
present  state  of  affairs  at  least  no  one  is  left  uncared  for,  and 
beggars  are  unknown  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  the 
Ekoi  country. 

The  pledging  of  free-born  persons  for  debt  was  common  among 
the  Ekoi,  but  this  was  a  mild  form  of  slavery.  "  Members  "  so  I 
pledged  were  specially  well  treated,  and  returned  to  freedom  on 
payment  of  the  debt.  At  death,  also,  they  were  buried  like 
free-born  men,  not,  as  in  the  case  of  slaves,  tied  to  bamboo/ 
poles,  by  means  of  which  the  bodies  were  borne  to  a  distant/ 
part  of  the  bush  and  there  left  unburied. 

At  the  present  day,  a  good  "member"  gives  up  from  one- \ 
third  to  one-half  of  his  time  for  the  service  of  the  Head  of  his 
House,  mostly  in  farm  work  or  hunting.  Sometimes  he  trades, 
usually  with  capital  supplied  by  the  "  Head,"  to  whom  the 
profits  go,  but  a  part  is  practically  always  returned  to  the 
"  member."  In  the  old  days  an  idle  slave  was  flogged,  but, 
should  the  punishment  be  excessive,  he  could  complain  to  the 
principal  chief  of  the   town.     It    is    to   be    feared   that    such 


TREATMENT   OF   "MEMBERS"         327 

complaints  were  too  often  unheeded,  in  which  case  the  slave  | 
usually  ran  away.  If  he  were  caught  he  was  sometimes  cruelly  : 
punished,  but  more  often  sold  at  Calabar. 

To  guard  against  attempts  at  escape,  on  first  arrival  in  the 
house  of  a  new  master,  the  latter  usually  cut  off  a  lock  of  hair 
and  some  nail  parings,  then  took  a  piece  of  old  cloth  which  the 
slave  had  worn.  These  were  carried  before  the  Juju  and  a 
prayer  offered  that  death  or  recapture  might  follow  any  attempt 
to  escape.  After  the  ceremony  the  pieces  were  carefully  kept 
in  a  secret  place,  and  the  slave  believed  that,  should  he  run 
away,  the  Juju  would  infallibly  "catch"  him. 

Not  long  ago  one  of  the  wives  of  chief  Nataba  of  Oberekkai 
ran  away,  and  he  brought  an  action  in  Court  for  her  return. 
She  was  his  "  member"  and  accused  him  of  having  practised 
witchcraft  against  her,  in  that,  seven  years  before,  he  had  cut  a 
strip  from  the  hem  of  her  gown  and  hung  it  up  before  the  Juju. 
She  is  a  light-skinned  woman  with  some  pretensions  to  beauty, 
and  during  the  eighteen  years  in  which  they  had  been  wedded, 
had  not  a  single  other  act  of  unkindness  to  urge  against  her 
husband,  or  reason  for  wishing  to  leave  him.  The  old  man 
pleaded  pathetically  that  she  should  not  be  allowed  to  desert 
him,  because  all  his  other  wives  had  quarrelled  with  him  for 
loving  her  so  much  better  than  any  of  them,  and  giving  her 
an  unfair  share  of  ornaments  and  presents  of  every  kind. 
"Just  lately,"  the  old  Chief  said,  "the  Oberekkai  women 
were  dancing,  so  I  dressed  my  wife  full  of  native  ornaments 
that  she  might  go  and  dance  with  them.  When  the  dance 
was  over,  she  came  and  piled  up  outside  my  door  all  the 
property  of  her  dead  mother,  who  had  been  my  '  member,' 
saying  that  by  so  doing  she  would  free  herself  from  me 
for  ever." 

Up  till  twenty  years  ago  the  ordinary  price  of  a  slave 
was : — 

£  s.    d, 

7  pieces  of  cloth  .  .  .1150 
1  keg  gunpowder  .  .  .050 
1  gun      .         .         .         .  o  15     o 

1  matchet       .         .         .         .010 

£2  16     o 


328   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

At  the  time  of  my  arrival  the  price  had  risen  to  thirty  pieces 
of  cloth  or  one  cow,  i.e.,  £y  ios.  to  £10. 

As  a  general  rule  slaves  were  kindly  treated,  as  are  "  members  " 
•  at  the  present  time,  but  cases  of  cruelty  were  not  unknown,  and 
are  still  occasionally  brought  before  the  Native  Court. 

Once  at  Nsan  a  man  came  up  to  beg  that  he  might  be  allowed 
to  settle  down  in  the  Oban  District  instead  of  having  to  stay 
with  the  master  whose  slave  he  had  formerly  been,  and  in 
whose  house  he  still  lived  as  a  "member."  He  said  that  this 
man  had  lately  returned  from  the  funeral  of  a  neighbouring 
chief,  and  had  been  overheard  to  say  to  his  son,  "  Formerly 
when  so  great  a  chief  died,  slaves  were  sacrificed  round  the 
grave  that  they  might  serve  him  in  the  spirit  world.  Now  it 
is  the  day  of  the  white  man's  rule  and  we  are  no  longer 
allowed  to  do  this.  Nevertheless  I  have  thought  what  to  do. 
One  by  one  I  will  kill  my  '  members  '  as  if  by  accident.  Half 
I  will  leave  alive  for  you.  Some  we  will  hold  down  in  crossing 
a  river,  to  others  we  will  give  poison  and  say  they  died  of  snake- 
bite and  other  things,  then  when  I  come  to  die  will  all  be  waiting 
to  serve  me,  so  that  I  should  not  be  poor  and  unattended  among 
,  the  ghosts." 

On  another  occasion,  while  at  Niaji,  a  big  Juju  dance  was 
given.  The  head  priest,  a  man  named  Erim,  feared  on  account 
of  his  magic  by  all  the  countryside,  attended  dressed  in  his  full 
robes.  Round  his  ankles  he  wore  deep  bands  covered  with 
little  bells.  In  one  hand  he  bore  green  boughs,  which  he  kept 
waving  before  my  eyes,  and  in  the  other  his  Juju  staff,  which 
he  pointed  almost  ceaselessly  in  my  direction.  Both  actions 
were  performed  with  such  peculiar  intentness,  that  it  would 
have  been  impossible  not  to  suspect  some  serious  motive.  He 
was  obviously  trying  to  work  a  magic  on  the  "  white  man," 
whose  presence  appeared  to  have  a  disturbing  effect  on  him. 
Inquiries  led  to  the  following  case  coming  before  the  native 
Court : — 

Ekpiri  Otu,  who  had  once  been  a  slave-wife  of  Erim's,  after 
taking  oath  on  the  Juju  "  Mfam,"  said  : 

"  Before  I  make  my  statement  I  beg  that  the  D.  C.  will  protect 
me,  so  that  no  man  shall  be  able  to  hurt  me  because  of  what  I 
may  say. 


TREATMENT    OF   "MEMBERS"         329 

"  Erim  was  my  first  husband;  I  know  him  well.  His  belly 
contains  poison,  and  his  body  all  round  is  poisonous.  He  is  a 
great  Juju  man,  and  has  a  medicine  which  protects  him,  so  that 
if  anything  happens  like  this,  he  can  make  favour  for  himself 
by  magic,  so  that  the  Court  shall  decide  for  him. 

"  One  of  his  wives  reproached  him  for  having  married  me, 
because  she  said  that  he  should  not  have  wedded  a  slave. 
He  therefore  divorced  me  in  the  name  of  his  wife.  In  the 
month  of  February,  at  night  time,  the  woman  came  and  told 
me  that  a  tree  had  fallen  down  in  the  farm.  Next  day  Erim 
found  me  working  there,  and  said  I  was  to  give  up  work 
and  go  away.  Next  morning,  when  the  day  broke,  they  went 
and  cut  off  part  of  my  farm  and  gave  it  to  a  small  boy.  The 
big  tree  had  fallen  in  the  corner,  and  the  owner  of  the  next 
arm  complained  that  it  had  spoilt  her  crops.  She  said, 
'  You  are  just  like  a  small  sister  of  Talbot's,'  because  when- 
ever she  called  me  '  wild  animal '  or  anything  like  that  I  said 
'  I  will  go  and  complain  to  Talbot.'  I  answered  her,  '  If  I 
were  his  small  sister,  this  very  day  I  would  go  and  live 
near  him  ;  then  you  could  harm  me  no  more.'  Then  the 
woman,  Ode  by  name,  told  her  husband  that  I  was  going  to 
take  them  to  Court  before  Talbot.  I  was  in  the  farm.  They 
came  and  asked  my  daughter,  '  Where  is  your  mother  ? ' 
She  said,  '  She  has  gone  to  farm.'  Erim  said  before  my  three 
children  that  he  would  meet  me  in  the  road  and  kill  me,  that  I 
might  not  take  them  down  to  Oban.  He  also  said,  '  I  should 
like  to  die  with  my  slaves.  When  Otu  died,  no  one  killed 
slaves  to  bury  with  him,  as  was  formerly  the  custom  with 
chiefs.'  When  I  came  back  I  found  him  in  my  house.  He 
called,  '  Come  here.'  Then  he  caught  hold  of  me,  pushed  me 
down  on  the  floor,  and  began  to  kick  and  beat  me.  Our 
custom  is  that  whenever  a  master  beats  a  slave,  the  slave 
cannot  touch  the  master.  My  children  all  cried  out.  He  said, 
'  You  cry  because  of  your  mother.'  My  daughter  Omin  was  in 
the  fatting-house,  but  he  beat  me  so  badly  that  she  came  out. 
He  caught  her  and  pushed  her  away.  She  clung  to  the  roof 
ribs,  but  he  shook  her  backwards  and  forwards,  knocking  her, 
and  at  length  pushed  her  out  of  the  house.  The  accused's 
sister  parted  them,  but  he  came  back  again  and  tore  off  my 


330      IN    THE    SHADOW    OF   THE    BUSH 

clothes  and  drove  me  naked  into  the  town  place.  Chief  Obun 
came  up  and  said,  '  Have  you  not  heard  of  the  "  white  man's  " 
rule  that  no  one  must  do  such  a  thing  as  this  ?  If  your  wife 
complains,  why  do  you  not  wait  till  the  people  return  from  their 
farms  ?  '  To  me  he  said,  '  Go  to  your  house  and  stay  there  till 
the  evening.'  When  night  fell  the  people  came  back,  so  they 
called  and  said,  '  It  is  now  time  for  the  meeting.'  They  took 
me  to  the  place  where  all  the  town  was  sitting.  The  people 
asked  me  to  make  a  statement,  but  I  refused,  saying,  '  Let  those 
who  brought  the  complaint  first  make  theirs.' 

"  This  they  did,  and  next  I  put  my  case,  saying  to  the  towns- 
people all  that  I  am  now  telling  the  Court.  Erim  then  hit  me 
hard  on  the  head  with  his  wife's  staff.  I  cried  out  loudly. 
Ekuri  San  stood  forth  and  said,  '  I  have  often  been  to  Court 
and  heard  about  the  '  white  man's '  rules ;  also  when  I  returned 
home  I  used  to  tell  everything  to  you.  Why  do  you  do  a  thing 
like  this  ? "  I  wept  for  the  pain  in  my  head,  and  kept  on 
weeping  as  I  went  home.  Ncha  Echi,  the  daughter  of  Ode,  met 
me  and  began  to  fight  with  me.  My  daughter  came  and  parted 
us.  It  was  night  time.  A  woman  named  Magbo  met  me  and 
said,  'You  must  not  go  home,  Erim  is  waiting  for  you  there.' 
I  said  to  her,  '  He  and  his  daughter  both  beat  me.  What  can 
I  do  ?  Must  I  sleep  outside  ?  '  I  said  to  myself,  '  Erim  has 
said  "  I  will  kill  all  my  slaves  to-day."  I  must  run  and  hide  in 
the  bush,'  but  Ekuri  San  and  Akimni  caught  me  and 
prevented  me  from  doing  this.  They  said  to  me,  '  Anyhow, 
we  must  prevent  you  from  going  to  the  bush.  The  white  man 
says,  if  people  fight,  the  bystanders  must  part  them.'  That 
same  night,  Ncha  Echi,  Ode's  daughter,  met  my  child  and 
began  to  beat  her.  Omin  did  nothing,  but  only  said  to  the 
Niaji  people,  '  You  see  what  she  does  to  me.'  The  husband  of 
Nicha  Echi  said  to  her,  'You  have  a  child  on  your  back.  Why 
do  you  fight  with  other  people  ? '  It  was  dark,  Ode  was  hiding 
in  the  compound ;  but  she  came  out,  caught  hold  of  Omin 
by  her  feet,  knocked  her  down  and  jumped  upon  her,  then 
caught  her  by  the  throat  and  crushed  it  against  the  ground. 
When  Erim  came,  he  saw  Ode  sitting  on  my  daughter  and 
beating  her.  He  joined  with  his  wife,  and  beat  my  child  with 
his  Juju  '  Ekpiri  Nkara.'     His  wife  had  told  me  before,  as  well 


TREATMENT    OF    "MEMBERS"         331 

as  other  people,  that  this  Juju  was  most  deadly,  and  that,  if  you 
took  it  in  your  hand  and  touched  people  with  it,  the  person 
who  was  touched  would  surely  die.  As  Erim  beat  my 
daughter,  his  hand  touched  Ode,  and  she  cried  out,  '  Do  you 
want  to  kill  me  because  of  the  slave  ?  '  His  hand  only  touched 
her  by  accident.  One  of  my  sons  named  Ekpe  was  present. 
After  a  while  the  people  parted  them  and  took  my  daughter 
home.  Erim  went  again  and  said  to  her,  '  Let  us  die 
to-day.' 

"  That  same  night  the  townspeople  took  me  and  my  daughter 
and  hid  us,  so  that  our  master  should  not  see  us  again.  He 
got  the  Egbo  drum  and  beat  round  the  town  against  Ekuri  San 
and  Akimni,  and  said  if  they  did  not  bring  us  out,  he  would 
fine  them  heavily  by  means  of  the  Egbo.  They  said  to  him, 
'  We  cannot  give  them  back,  lest  we  break  the  white  man's 
rule.'  I  said  to  Ekuri  San,  '  Let  me  go  outside,  so  that  he  can 
kill  me,'  but  Ekuri  said  '  No,  we  will  not  let  you  go.'  Erim  did 
not  sleep  at  all  that  night,  but  went  all  the  time  round  the 
town  with  the  Egbo  drum.  At  daybreak  I  went  back  to  my 
compound.  My  daughter's  throat  had  swelled  out,  because  of 
the  beating  by  Ode  and  Erim,  and  her  body  was  full  of  sores. 
Her  breasts  also  pained  her,  for  she  was  enceinte.  When  Ode, 
Erim,  and  Ncha  Echi  knocked  her  down,  they  crushed  her 
body,  and  it  was  that  that  killed  my  daughter.  This  happened 
just  before  D.  C.  came  to  our  town  last  time." 

Once  on  a  march,  a  man  and  woman  stepped  out  of  the 
bush,  and  stood  waiting,  hand  in  hand,  in  the  middle  of  the 
road.  When  we  reached  them  they  first  bent  down  and 
touched  the  ground  with  their  finger-tips,  in  sign  of  supplica- 
tion, then  stood  up  and  claimed  the  protection  of  their  D.  C. 
against  several  people  who  had  wronged  them.  The  case 
was  tried  next  Court  day,  when  Itita,  the  husband,  stated 
on  oath : 

"  Akot,  my  wife,  told  me  one  day  that  our  master,  Kako, 
had  flogged  her  and  wounded  her  with  a  matchet.  The  marks 
on  her  throat  are  still  to  be  seen.  In  1904  he  made  me  swear 
by  Osai,  so  that  the  Juju  might  catch  me  if  I  married  a  certain 
woman  who  was  one  of  his  '  members.'  She  kept  following  me, 
so  Osai  caught  me,  and  I  almost  died.     My  master  also  grew 


332      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

ill,  and  Effion  was  sent  to  say  that  I  had  bewitched  him. 
Several  years  ago  he  forced  me  and  Akot,  my  wife,  to  swear  by 
the  Juju  Mbian*  that  we  would  no  longer  keep  together." 

Akot  stated  on  oath,  "  The  accused  wounded  me  with  a 
matchet  and  said,  '  You  are  not  free-born,  but  no  better  than 
a  wild  animal.  If  D.  C.  Talbot  were  not  always  walking  up 
and  down  through  his  District,  you  would  long  since  have  been 
offered  up  to  the  Juju.'  Then  he  took  up  a  knife  and  gashed 
my  throat. " 

Cruelty  was  proved,  the  master  was  sent  to  prison  for  a  long 
/  term,  and  the  woman  set  free,  but  there  was  grave  suspicion 
\  that  on  his  release  he  avenged  himself  by  poisoning  her,  though 
the  case  remained  unproved. 

Once  a  small  boy  of  nine,  a  mere  bag  of  skin  and  bone,  ran 
into  the  office.  He  stated  that  he  was  bought  from  his 
parents  only  two  years  ago,  but  that  his  master  dared  not  bring 
him  into  the  town,  because  "  Makara  "  (white  man)  has  his 
eyes  all  around ;  he  walks  always  up  and  down,  and  would  say 
at  once,  "  Who  is  this  '  man  '  ?  It  is  a  new  face.  I  do  not 
know  him."  So  he  kept  me  in  the  bush  at  a  farm  that  he  has. 
There  he  beat  me  often  for  no  cause.  Then  I  heard  the  other 
"members"  say,  "White  man  fears  no  one,  not  even  great 
chiefs.  If  the  smallest  slave  goes  to  him  he  will  see  that 
justice  is  done."  Then  the  others  asked,  "  Shall  we  bring 
complaint  of  our  master's  cruelty  before  him  ?  "  But  each  one 
answered,  "  Nay,  lest  he  kill  us,  when  white  man  does  not 
know."  But  I  know  that  "white  man"  will  not  let  him  hurt 
me,  so  I  come  to  bring  my  complaint." 

Such,  given  in  their  own  words,  are  the  blackest  cases 
brought  by  "members"  against  the  Heads  of  their  Houses. 
Now,  the  cases  brought  by  the  latter  against  "  members  "  far 
outweigh  in  number  those  against  themselves,  and  there  is  little 
doubt  but  that,  at  the  present  time,  the  pendulum  is  beginning 
to  swing  too  far  in  the  other  direction.  This  is  only  natural, 
however,  after  the  centuries  of  repression  imposed  by  the 
free-born.  That,  even  in  the  old  days,  these  modern  helots 
occasionally  turn  on  their  masters  is  shown  by  many  legends, 

*  Juju,  into  the  composition  of  which  sea-water  enters.  Mostly  used  by  coast 
people. 


TREATMENT    OF   "MEMBERS"  333 

of  which  the  one  given  on  p.  27,  "  How  the  Slaves  killed  the 
Free-born  with  Gall,"  and  the  following  are  typical : — 

How  Slaves  used  to  lie  in  wait  to  kill  the 
Free-born. 

By  Eta  Ndom  of  Niaji. 

A  woman  named  Ome  once  left  her  town  to  visit  a  friend 
who  lived  some  way  off.  With  her  she  took  her  daughter  Ara, 
and  a  female  slave  called  Ngonne.  When  they  came  to  a 
shallow  stream  Ome  said,  "  Let  us  bathe  here  ; "  but  Ngonne 
answered,  "The  water  is  not  good.     Let  us  go  further." 

After  a  while  they  came  to  the  banks  of  a  river,  where  the 
water  was  deep  in  places,  but  shallow  in  others.  Here  the 
slave  woman  said,  "  The  water  is  good ;  let  us  bathe." 

While  they  washed,  Ngonne  said  to  her  mistress,  "  Let  me 
rub  your  back."  No  sooner  had  the  other  turned  round 
than  the  slave  pushed  her  into  a  deep  hole  where  a  crocodile 
was  living.  The  beast  rose  and  caught  the  woman,  and 
Ngonne  took  the  child  and  went  back  to  the  town  whence 
they  had  come. 

When  they  arrived  the  slave  bore  her  mistress's  child  to  the 
house  of  her  own  sweetheart.  As  they  entered  the  compound 
the  people  saluted  her,  and  said,  "  Welcome,  Ngonne.  Where 
is  Ome?"  To  this  she  only  answered  through  her  nose, 
"  Hong,  Hong,  Hong."  (This  is  the  noise  made  by  Ngonne,  a 
bird  with  a  very  long  beak.)  *  Her  sweetheart  cooked,  and 
brought  the  food  for  her  to  eat.  Ara  wanted  to  eat  also,  but 
the  slave  woman  drove  her  away,  and  would  give  her  no  food 
save  two  pieces  of  plantain.  For  a  long  time  Ngonne  acted 
thus  towards  her  mistress's  daughter,  eating  all  the  good  food 
herself  and  giving  a  very  little  of  what  was  left  over  to  the  child. 

One  day  birds  were  spoiling  the  beans  in  the  farm,  so  the 
slave  woman  called  Ara  and  bade  her  go  thither  and  drive 
them  away.  All  day  the  little  maid  wept  in  the  farm,  and  a 
man  who  was  cutting  palm  kernels  came  down  from  the  tree  to 
find  out  who  it  was  who  was  crying  so  bitterly.  He  found  no 
one,  for  she  had  wandered  away  from  the  farm,  and  came  at 

*  Hornbill. 


334   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

length  to  the  river  where  her  mother  had  been  lost.     She  sat 
down  on  the  bank,  weeping  and  calling  her  mother's  name. 

The  woman  heard  the  voice,  and  knew  it  for  that  of  her 
daughter,  so  she  begged  Crocodile  to  let  her  come  out  of  the 
water.  When  she  saw  the  child  she  put  her  arms  round  her, 
and  drew  her  head  against  her  own  breast.  Then  she  parted 
her  hair  very  tenderly,  and  after  a  while  went  down  again  into 
the  river. 

Ara  went  back  to  the  house.  When  she  got  there  Ngonne 
asked,  "  Who  made  that  parting  on  your  head  ?  "  The  girl 
answered  nothing. 

Another  day,  when  sent  to  scare  birds  in  the  farm,  she 
sat  down  and  wept  again,  and  the  same  man  heard  her  voice, 
and  came  to  seek  her.  This  time  he  found  her,  and  asked, 
"What  is  the  matter?"  The  girl  told  him  all  about  her 
mother,  and  how  cruelly  the  slave  had  treated  her.  He  took 
her  back  to  the  town,  and  asked  some  people  to  go  with  them 
down  to  the  river.  To  this  they  agreed,  took  their  nets  and 
went. 

When  the  bank  was  reached  Ara  called  to  her  mother.  Ome 
came  up  to  the  surface,  and  the  townsfolk  caught  her  in  their 
nets  and  brought  her  home,  without  letting  Ngonne  know. 

Next  time  that  the  slave  cooked  chop,  and  began  to  eat, 
without  giving  any  to  Ara,  the  latter  called  out  in  a  loud  voice, 
"  Why  do  you  eat  before  me  ?  Do  you  not  know  that  you  are 
my  mother's  slave  ?  " 

Ngonne  replied,  "  You  have  not  said  such  a  thing  as  this  for 
a  very  long  time.    I  think  that  something  must  have  happened." 

At  that  moment  Ome  came  out  from  her  hiding  place.  In 
her  hand  was  a  sharp  knife.  She  caught  the  slave  and  killed 
her. 

At  that  time  slaves  were  always  seeking  to  kill  their  masters 
and  hide  the  bodies.  Since  Ngonne  tried  to  destroy  her 
mistress,  however,  people  have  watched  their  slaves,  lest  they 
should  do  harm. 


CHAPTER   XXXI 

Folk-lore 

Unlike  most  primitive  peoples,  whose  legends  deal  mostly 
with  the  terrible,  there  are  many  tender  and  gracious  touches 
about  Ekoi  stories,  while  several  show  a  distinct  sense  of 
humour.  In  not  a  few,  too,  traces  may  be  found,  half  under- 
stood, or  wholly  misapplied,  of  beliefs  which  have  come  down 
from  ages  so  remote  as  to  be  forgotten  save  for  such  faint 
echoes.  Some  refer  to  times  when  snakes  still  possessed  hands 
and  feet  *  ;  and  one,  Oporopootop,  appears  to  be  a  relic  of  times 
when  farms  were  actually  subject  to  the  ravages  of  dinosaurs 
and  such-like  monsters. 

Much  of  the  charm  of  these  tales  was  doubtless  due  to  the 
manner  of  their  telling ;  for  the  Ekoi  are  wonderful  story-tellers, 
and  many,  especially  the  young  boys,  relate  their  legends  in  a 
sort  of  dramatic  recitative,  chanting  and  crooning  at  times  till 
the  words  almost  fall  into  song. 

Most  of  the  tales  recorded  were  taken  down  from  sources 
never  before  brought  into  contact  with  white  influence.  Some, 
despite  modern  touches,  show  a  close  resemblance  to  well- 
known  stories  from  the  "  Arabian  Nights,"  for  instance,  "  The 
Treasure  House  in  the  Bush."  In  some,  again,  I  have  fancied 
that  echoes  of  Herodotus  may  still  be  traced.  All  have  been 
taken  down  exactly  as  they  were  told,  except  the  one  given 
on  P-  337,  "  How  all  Stories  and  all  History  came  on  Earth." 
The  introduction  to  this  was  related  by  one  man,  and  the  bulk 
of  the  tale  by  another,  but  the  finale  so  obviously  belongs  to 
that  of  which  the  first  otherwise  disjointed  fragment,  forms  the 
beginning,  that  it  seemed  better,  in  this  one  case,  to  combine 
the  two. 

One  of  the  most  persistent  characters  in  these  tales  is  the 

*  See  pp.  374-377. 


336      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 


>) 


I  Woman  covered  with  Sores,  who  meets  all  travellers  to  the 
nether  world,  and  helps  to  success,  or  dooms  to  failure, 
according  to  whether  their  goodness  of  heart  is  such  as  to 
pass  her  tests.  In  one  case  only  (p.  62)  is  this  personage  of 
the  male  sex. 

Another  interesting  and  persistent  character  in  Ekoi  mythology 

7  is  the  "  LameJBoy,"  already  mentioned  in  the  "  Stilt  Dances"* 
who  plays  the  part  of  "  Good  Fairy  "  wherever  he  appears.  As 
will  be  seen  from  the  story  "How  Fire  first  came  on  Earth" 
he  holds  for  the  Ekoi  much  the  position  which  Prometheus 
held  among  the  Greeks.  In  one  tale,  "  Ada,  the  Forest  Demon," 
the  character  is  feminine. 

My  knowledge  of  such  things  is  unfortunately  too  limited  for 
an  opinion  of  mine  to  bear  weight  in  the  matter,  yet  I  venture 
to  think  that  the  importance  of  the  "  Lame  Boy,"  not  among 
the  Ekoi  only,  but  in  West  African  ritual  generally,  has  not,  as 
yet,  been  appreciated  by  Europeans,  otherwise  the  significance 
of  the  lame  man  dragged  round  Benin  would  surely  have  been 
clear  to  Mr.  Northcote  Thomas;  yet  he  passes  it  by  with  only 
the  remark,  "  Another  custom  enjoined  that  once  a  year  a 
lame  man  should  be  dragged  round  the  city,  and  then  as  far  as 
a  place  on  the  Enyai  road  called  Adaneha.  This  was  probably 
a  ceremony  of  purification. "t 

Another  point  that  may  perhaps  be  worth  mentioning  is  that, 
as  in  the  case  of  Persephone,  no  visitor  to  the  nether  world 
may  eat  of  food  offered  by  the  ghosts,  else  he  will  never  return 
to  the  sunlight.  Usually  the  necessary  food  is  provided  by  the 
Lame  Boy,  or  the  Woman  with  Sores.  In  one  case  tomatoes 
were  given  by  the  ghost  of  a  dead  sister,  {  and  those  not  eaten 
were  brought  back  for  planting  in  the  upper  world.  In  another 
case,§  egg  plants  were  given  by  the  Chieftainess  of  the  Ghosts 
to  the  last  visitor  whom  she  allowed  to  return  from  her  king- 
dom, on  condition  that  they  should  be  distributed  among  the 
living. 

The  constant  recurrence  of  the  number  7  in  these  stories, 

*  See  p.  285. 

f  Report,  "  Edo-speaking  Peoples,"  Part  I.,  p.  35. 

j  See  p.  240. 

§  See  p.  236. 


FOLK-LORE  337 

and  the  fact  that  ghosts  can  never  make  use  of  it  when  counting, 
is  also  worthy  of  note. 

Sheep  and  tortoise  are  credited  with  cunning  above  all  other 
animals,  and  hold  in  this  respect  somewhat  the  position  of 
Brer  Rabbit  and  Reincke  Fuchs  in  the  Folk-lore  of  other 
continents. 

I  would  call  attention  to  the  length  of  these  stories,  unusual 
among  those  of  primitive  peoples.  Their  cleanliness  of  tone 
is  also  noteworthy.  Hardly  a  single  unpleasant  tale  was  taken 
down,  and  of  those  here  recorded  only  one  sentence — marked 
by  dots  in  the  text  on  p.  341 — has  been  expurgated. 

How  all  Stories  and  all  History  came  among  Men. 
By  Agra  of  Mbeban. 

Mouse  goes  everywhere.  Through  rich  men's  houses  she 
creeps,  and  visits  even  the  poorest.  At  night,  with  her  little 
bright  eyes,  she  watches  the  doing  of  secret  things,  and  no 
treasure-chamber  is  so  safe  but  she  can  tunnel  through  and  see 
what  is  hidden  there. 

In  old  days  she  wove  a  story-child  from  all  that  she  saw,  and 
to  each  of  these  she  gave  a  gown  of  different  colours — white, 
red,  blue,  or  black.  The  stories  became  her  children,  and  lived 
in  her  house  and  served  her,  because  she  had  no  children  of  her 

own. 

***** 

Now  in  olden  days  a  sheep  and  a  leopard  lived  in  the  same 
town.  In  course  of  time  Leopard  became  enceinte  and  Sheep 
also.     Sheep  bore  a  daughter  and  Leopard  a  son. 

There  was  a  famine  in  all  the  land,  so  Leopard  went  to  Sheep 
and  said,  "  Let  us  kill  our  children  and  eat  them."  Sheep 
thought, "  If  I  do  not  agree,  she  may  kill  my  child  in  spite  of 
me,"  so  she  answered  "  Good." 

Then  Sheep  went  and  hid  her  own  babe,  and  took  all  that  she 
had  and  sold  for  a  little  dried  meat.  This  she  cooked  and  set 
before  Leopard,  and  they  both  ate  together.  Leopard  killed 
her  own  child,  and  ate  that  also. 

In  another  year  they  both  became  enceinte  once  more'.     This 

s.b.  z 


338      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

time  again  the  townsfolk  were  hungry.  Leopard  came  as  before 
and  said,  "  Let  us  kill  these  children  also."  Sheep  agreed,  but 
she  took  her  second  child  and  hid  her  in  the  little  room  where 
the  first  child  was,  then  went  out,  and  begged  till  someone 
gave  her  a  few  pieces  of  dried  meat.  These  she  cooked  and  set 
before  Leopard  as  she  had  done  before,  in  place  of  her  babe. 
Leopard  ate  and  said  nothing. 

Some  years  afterwards  Leopard  sent  to  Sheep  and  said, 
"  Come ;  to-day  you  shall  feast  with  me." 

Sheep  went,  and  found  a  great  calabash  on  the  table.  She 
opened  it,  and  found  it  full  of  food,  and  by  it  three  spoons  laid 
ready. 

She  was  astonished  and  questioned  Leopard.  "  Formerly 
we  used  two  spoons,  you  and  I.  Why  should  there  be  three 
to-day?" 

Leopard  laughed,  opened  the  door  of  the  inner  room,  and 
called,  "  Come,  daughter,  let  us  eat."  Her  daughter  came, 
and  they  all  ate  together.  Then  the  mother  said,  "  When  my 
first  child  came,  I  killed  and  ate  him  because  we  were  very 
hungry  ;  but  when  I  learned  how  you  had  saved  your  child,  I 
thought,  '  Next  time  I  also  will  play  such  a  trick  on  Sheep.' 
Therefore  I  saved  my  daughter  alive." 

After  that  Sheep  went  home,  and  tended  her  two  children. 
Years  passed  by,  and  all  the  daughters  began  to  grow  up. 
Leopard  put  her  child  into  the  fatting-house.  Then  she 
went  to  Sheep  and  said,  "  Give  me  one  of  your  daughters  to 
stay  with  mine  in  the  fatting-house.  She  is  alone  and  cannot 
eat." 

Now  Sheep  and  both  her  daughters  were  quite  black,  but 
there  were  some  young  goats  in  the  house  which  served  them 
as  slaves.  These  were  white,  so  before  Sheep  sent  her  daughter 
to  Leopard's  house  she  rubbed  her  all  over  with  white  chalk, 
then  dyed  one  of  the  young  goats  black,  and  sent  them  together. 

When  they  both  arrived  at  the  house,  Leopard  thought  that 
the  goat  was  Sheep's  daughter.  All  three  of  the  young  ones 
were  placed  in  the  fatting-house.  During  the  night  Leopard 
entered  the  room,  took  Goat  and  killed  her,  then  cooked  the 
meal  and  gave  to  her  own  daughter  to  eat,  thinking  it  was  the 
daughter  of  Sheep  whom  she  had  slain. 


FOLK-LORE  339 

Next  day  Leopard  went  to  Sheep  and  said,  "  Give  me  your 
other  child,  that  our  three  daughters  may  be  in  the  fatting- 
house  together." 

Sheep  consented,  but  before  this  child  went  she  advised  her 
what  to  do. 

When  therefore  the  second  lamb  reached  the  fatting-house 
she  took  out  a  bottle  of  rum  and  gave  it  to  Leopard's  daughter, 
saying  "  Drink  this.  It  is  a  present  which  my  mother  has  sent 
you."  So  Leopard's  child  drank  and  fell  asleep.  The  two 
young  sheep  kept  awake  until  their  companion  slept.  They 
then  got  up,  carried  her  from  her  own  bed,  and  laid  her  on  one 
of  those  prepared  for  themselves. 

It  was  very  dark  in  the  room,  and,  when  Leopard  came  in  to 
kill  one  of  the  young  sheep,  she  killed  her  own  daughter  instead. 
She  was  pleased  and  thought,  "  Now  I  have  finished  with 
the  children  whom  Sheep  hid  from  me."  Next  morning,  very 
early,  she  went  out  to  the  bush  to  get  palm  wine  that  she 
might  drink  it  with  her  daughter  while  they  feasted  on  the 
young  sheep. 

No  sooner  had  she  left  the  house  than  the  two  sheep  ran  out. 
One  of  them  went  home  to  her  mother's  house,  but  the  other 
followed  after  Leopard.  The  latter  was  at  the  top  of  a  high 
palm  tree,  so  Sheep's  child  stopped  some  way  off  and  called  in 
a  loud  voice  : 

"  Last  night  you  tried  to  kill  me  as  you  did  the  young 
goat,  but  you  made  a  mistake,  and  killed  your  own  child 
instead." 

No  sooner  had  Leopard  heard  this  than  she  jumped  from 
the  tree  and  ran  after  the  young  sheep. 

The  latter  ran  to  the  cross-roads,  and  when  Leopard 
reached  the  place  she  could  not  tell  which  way  Sheep  had 
gone.  After  thinking  a  while  she  took  the  wrong  road  and 
ran  on. 

Now  when  Sheep  had  run  a  long  way  she  met  the  Nimm// 
woman    walking    along  with  her  Juju   round  her  waist.     The 
woman  looked  as  if  she  had  come  a  long  way,  and  Sheep  said, 
"  Let  me  carry  your  Juju  for  you." 

To  this  the  Nimm  woman  agreed.  When  they  came  to  her 
house  she  was  very  tired  and  her  head  hurt  her. 

z  2 


340      IN    THE    SHADOW    OF   THE    BUSH 

Sheep  said,  "  Let  me  fetch  water  and  firewood  while 
you  rest." 

The  Nimm  woman  was  very  thankful,  and  went  into  her  house 
to  lie  down. 

When  the  young  Sheep  had  done  as  she  promised,  she  went 
into  the  other  part  of  the  house  where  the  Nimm  shrine  was. 
On  it  she  saw  the  "  medicine."  This  she  took  and  rubbed  over 
herself. 

Next  day  the  Nimm  woman  said,  "  Will  you  go  and  fetch  me 
my  '  medicine  '  which  stands  on  the  shrine  of  Nimm  ?  " 

Sheep  asked  her,  "  Do  you  not  know  that  I  was  '  born  '  into 
your  medicine  last  night  ?  " 

At  this  the  Nimm  woman  was  very  angry  and  sprang  up. 
Sheep  ran,  and  the  Nimm  woman  followed  her.  In  her  hurry 
to  escape,  Sheep  ran  against  the  door  of  the  house  where  Mouse 
lived.  The  door  was  old  and  it  broke,  and  all  the  stories  on 
earth,  and  all  the  histories  ran  out.  After  that  they  never  went 
back  to  dwell  with  Mouse  any  more,  but  remained  running  up 
and  down  over  all  the  earth. 

How  the  First  Rain  came. 

By  Okun  Asere  of  Mfamosing. 

Once,  long  ago,  a  daughter  was  born  to  Obassi  Osaw,  and 
a  son  to  Obassi  Nsi.  When  both  had  come  to  marriageable 
age,  Nsi  sent  a  message  to  say  "  Let  us  exchange  children.  I 
will  send  my  son  that  he  may  wed  one  of  your  maidens.  Send 
your  daughter  down  to  my  town,  that  she  may  become  my 
wife." 

To  this  Obassi  Osaw  agreed.  So  the  son  of  Nsi  went  up  to 
the  heavens  carrying  many  fine  gifts,  and  Ara,  the  sky  maiden, 
came  down  to  dwell  on  earth.  With  her  came  seven  men-slaves 
and  seven  women-slaves,  whom  her  father  sent  that  they  might 
work  for  her,  so  that  she  should  not  be  called  upon  to  do 
anything  herself. 

One  day,  very  early  in  the  morning,  Obassi  Nsi  said  to  his 
new  wife,  "  Go,  work  in  my  farm  !  "  She  answered,  "  My 
Father  gave  me  the  slaves  so  that  they  should  work  instead  of 
me.     Therefore  send  them."     Obassi  Nsi  was  very  angry  and 


FOLK-LORE  341 

said,  "  Did  you  not  hear  that  I  gave  my  orders  to  you.  You 
yourself  shall  work  in  my  farm.  As  for  the  slaves,  I  will  tell 
them  what  to  do." 

The  girl  went,  though  very  unwillingly,  and  when  she  returned 
at  night,  tired  out,  Nsi  said  to  her  : 

"  Go  at  once  to  the  river  and  bring  water  for  the  household." 

She  answered,  "  I  am  weary  with  working  in  the  farm ;  may 
not  my  slaves  at  least  do  this  while  I  rest  ?  " 

Again  Nsi  refused,  and  drove  her  forth,  so  she  went  backward 
and  forward  many  times,  carrying  the  heavy  jars.  Night  had 
fallen  long  before  she  had  brought  enough. 

Next  morning  Nsi  bade  her  do  the  most  menial  services,  and 
all  day  long  kept  her  at  work,  cooking,  fetching  water,  and 
making  lire.  That  night  again  she  was  very  weary  before  she 
might  lie  down  to  rest.  At  dawn  on  the  third  morning  he  said, 
"  Go  and  bring  in  much  firewood."  Now  the  girl  was  young 
and  unused  to  work,  so  as  she  went  she  wept,  and  the  tears  were 
still  falling  when  she  came  back  carrying  her  heavy  burden. 

As  soon  as  Nsi  saw  her  enter  he  called  to  her,  "  Come  here 
and  lie  down  before  me.  ...  I  wish  to  shame  you  in  the 
presence  of  all  my  people.  ..."  On  that  the  girl  wept  still  more 
bitterly. 

No  food  was  given  her  till  midday  on  the  morrow,  and  then 
not  enough.  When  she  had  finished  eating  up  all  there  was, 
Nsi  said  to  her  : 

"  Go  out  and  bring  in  a  great  bundle  of  fish  poison." 

The  girl  went  into  the  bush  to  seek  for  the  plant,  but  as  she 
walked  through  the  thick  undergrowth  a  thorn  pierced  her  foot. 
She  lay  down  alone.  All  day  long  she  lay  there  in  pain,  but  as 
the  sun  sank  she  began  to  feel  better.  She  got  up  and  managed 
to  limp  back  to  the  house. 

When  she  entered,  Nsi  said  to  her,  "  Early  this  morning  I 
ordered  you  to  go  and  collect  fish  poison.  You  have  stayed 
away  all  day  and  done  nothing."  So  he  drove  her  into  the 
goat  pen,  and  said,  "  To-night  you  shall  sleep  with  the  goats  ; 
you  shall  not  enter  my  house." 

That  night  she  ate  nothing.  Early  next  morning  one  of  the 
slaves  opened  the  door  of  the  goat  pen,  and  found  the  girl  lying 
within,  with  her  foot  all  swollen  and  sore.     She  could  not  walk 


342      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

so  for   five  days  she  was  left  with  the  goats.     After  that  her 
foot  began  to  get  better. 

So  soon  as  she  could  walk  again  at  all,  Nsi  called  her  and 
said : 

"  Here  is  a  pot.  Take  it  to  the  river,  and  bring  it  back 
filled  to  the  brim." 

She  set  out,  but  when  she  reached  the  water-side,  she  sat 
down  on  the  bank  and  dipped  her  foot  in  the  cool  stream. 
She  said  to  herself,  "  I  will  never  go  back ;  it  is  better  to  stay 
here  alone." 

After  a  while  one  of  the  slaves  came  down  to  the  river. 
He  questioned  her  : 

"  At  dawn  this  morning  you  were  sent  to  fetch  water.  Why 
have  you  not  returned  home  ?  " 

The  girl  said,  "  I  will  not  come  back." 

When  the  slave  had  left  her  she  thought,  "  Perhaps  he  will 
tell  them,  and  they  will  be  angered  and  may  come  and  kill  me. 
I  had  better  go  back  after  all."  So  she  filled  her  pot  and 
tried  to  raise  it  on  to  her  head,  but  it  was  too  heavy.  Next 
she  lifted  it  on  to  a  tree  trunk  that  lay  by  the  side  of  the 
river,  and,  kneeling  beneath,  tried  to  draw  it,  in  that  way,  on 
to  her  head,  but  the  pot  fell  and  broke,  and  in  falling  a  sharp 
sherd  cut  off  one  of  her  ears.  The  blood  poured  down  from 
the  wound,  and  she  began  to  weep  again,  but  suddenly  thought : 

"  My  Father  is  alive,  my  mother  is  alive,  I  do  not  know  why  I 
I  stay  here  with  Obassi  Nsi.    I  will  go  back  to  my  own  Father."  I 

Then  she  set  out  to  find  the  road  by  which  Obassi  Osaw  had 
sent  her  to  earth.  She  came  to  a  high  tree,  and  from  it  saw  a 
long  rope  hanging.     She  said  to  herself: 

"  This  is  the  way  by  which  my  Father  sent  me." 

She  caught  the  rope  and  began  to  climb.  Before  she  reached 
half-way  she  grew  very  weary,  and  her  sighs  and  tears  mounted 
up  to  the  kingdom  of  Obassi  Osaw.  When  she  reached  mid- 
way she  stayed  and  rested  a  while.  Afterwards  she  climbed 
on  again. 

After  a  long  time  she  reached  the  top  of  the  rope,  and  found 
herself  on  the  border  of  her  Father's  land.  Here  she  sat  down 
almost  worn  out  with  weariness,  and  still  weeping. 

Now,  one  of  the  slaves  of  Obassi  Osaw  had  been  sent  out  to 


FOLK-LORE  343 

collect  firewood.  He  chanced  to  stray  on  and  on,  and  came  to 
the  place  near  where  the  girl  was  resting.  He  heard  her  sobs 
mixed  with  broken  words,  and  ran  back  to  the  town,  crying  out, 
"  I  have  heard  the  voice  of  Ara.  She  is  weeping  about  a  mile 
from  here." 

Obassi  heard  but  could  not  believe,  yet  he  said : 

"  Take  twelve  slaves,  and,  should  you  find  my  daughter  as 
you  say,  bring  her  here." 

When  they  reached  the  place  they  found  that  it  was  Ara  for 
true.     So  they  carried  her  home. 

When  her  Father  saw  her  coming  he  called  out : 

"  Take  her  to  the  house  of  her  mother." 

There  one  of  the  lesser  wives,  Akun  by  name,  heated  water 
and  bathed  her.  Then  they  prepared  a  bed,  and  covered  her 
well  with  soft  skins  and  fine  cloths. 

While  she  was  resting,  Obassi  killed  a  young  kid  and  sent  it 
to  Akun,  bidding  her  prepare  it  for  his  daughter.  Akun  took  it, 
and  after  she  had  washed  it,  cooked  it  whole  in  a  pot.  Also  Obassi 
sent  a  great  bunch  of  plantains  and  other  fruits,  and  these  also 
they  set,  orderly  upon  a  table  before  the  girl.  Next  they 
poured  water  into  a  gourd,  and  brought  palm  wine  in  a  native 
cup,  bidding  her  drink. 

After  she  had  eaten  and  drunk,  Obassi  came  with  four  slaves 
carrying  a  great  chest  made  of  ebony.  He  bade  them  set  it 
before  her,  opened  it  and  said,  "  Come  here ;  choose  anything 
you  will  from  this  box." 

Ara  chose  two  pieces  of  cloth,  three  gowns,  four  small  loin 
cloths,  four  looking-glasses,  four  spoons,  two  pairs  of  shoes 
(at  £1),  four  cooking  pots,  and  four  chains  of  beads. 

After  this  Obassi  Osaw's  storekeeper,  named  Ekpenyon,  came 
forward  and  brought  her  twelve  anklets.  Akun  gave  her  two 
gowns,  a  fu-fu  stick  and  a  wooden  knife. 

Her  own  mother  brought  her  five  gowns,  richer  than  all  the 
rest,  and  five  slaves  to  wait  upon  her. 

After  this  Obassi  Osaw  said  ;  "  A  house  has  been  got  ready 
for  you,  go  there  that  you  may  be  its  mistress." 

Next  he  went  out  and  called  together  the  members  of  the 
chief  "  club "  of  the  town.  This  was  named  Angbu.  He 
said  to  the  men  : 


344      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

"  Go  ;  fetch  the  son  of  Obassi  Nsi.  Cut  off  both  his  ears  and 
bring  them  to  me.  Then  flog  him  and  drive  him  down  the 
road  to  his  Father's  town,  with  this  message  from  me  : 

"  I  had  built  a  great  house  up  here  in  my  town.  In  it  I 
placed  your  son,  and  treated  him  kindly.  Now  that  I  know 
what  you  have  done  to  my  child,  I  send  back  your  son  to  you 
earless,  in  payment  for  Ara's  ear,  and  the  sufferings  which 
you  put  upon  her." 

When  the  Angbu  Club  had  cut  off  the  ears  of  the  son  of 
Obassi  Nsi,  they  brought  them  before  Obassi  Osaw,  and 
drove  the  lad  back  on  the  earthward  road,  as  they  had  been 
ordered. 

Osaw  took  the  ears  and  made  a  great  Juju,  and  by  reason  of 
this  a  strong  wind  arose,  and  drove  the  boy  earthward.  On 
its  wings  it  bore  all  the  sufferings  of  Ara,  and  the  tears  which 
she  had  shed  through  the  cruelty  of  Obassi  Nsi.  The  boy 
stumbled  along,  half-blinded  by  the  rain,  and  as  he  went  he 
thought  : 

"  Obassi  Osaw  may  do  to  me  what  he  chooses.  He  had 
never  done  any  unkind  thing  before.  It  is  only  in  return  for 
my  Father's  cruelty  that  I  must  suffer  all  this." 

So  his  tears  mixed  with  those  of  Ara  and  fell  earthward  as 
rain. 

Up  till  that  time  there  had  been  no  rain  on  the  earth.  It 
fell  for  the  first  time  when  Obassi  Osaw  made  the  great  wind 
and  drove  forth  the  son  of  his  enemy. 

How  the  Moon  first  came   into  the  Sky. 
By  Okun  Asere  of  Mfamosing. 

In  a  certain  town  there  lived  Njomm  Mbui  (Juju  sheep).  He 
made  great  friends  with  Etuk  (antelope),  whose  home  was  in 
the  "  bush." 

When  the  two  animals  grew  up  they  went  out  and  cut 
farms.  Njomm  planted  plantains  in  his,  while  Etuk  set  his 
with  coco-yams. 

When  the  time  came  round  for  the  fruits  to  ripen,  Njomm 
went  to  his  farm  and  cut  a  bunch  of  plantains,  while  Etuk 
dug  up  some  of  his  coco. 


FOLK-LORE  345 

Each  cleaned  his  food  and  put  it  in  the  pot  to  cook.  When 
all  was  ready  they  sat  down  and  ate. 

Next  morning  Etuk  said,  "  Let  us  change.  I  saw  a  bunch 
of  plantains  in  your  farm  which  I  would  like  to  get.  Will  you 
go  instead  to  mine  and  take  some  coco  ?  " 

This  was  arranged,  and  Etuk  said  to  Njomm,  "Try  to  beat  up 
fu-fu."  Njomm  tried,  and  found  it  very  good.  He  gave  some 
to  Etuk.  The  latter  ate  all  he  wanted,  then  took  the  bunch  of 
plantains  and  hung  it  up  in  his  house. 

Next  morning  he  found  that  the  fruit  had  grown  soft,  so  he 
did  not  care  to  eat  it.  He  therefore  took  the  plantains  and 
threw  them  away  in  the  bush. 

During  the  day  Mbui  came  along  and  smelt  plantains.  He 
looked  round  till  he  found  them,  then  picked  up  one  and 
began  to  eat.  They  were  very  sweet.  He  ate  his  fill,  then 
went  on,  and  later  met  a  crowd  of  the  Nshum  people  (apes). 
To  them  he  said,  "  To-day  I  found  a  very  sweet  thing  in  the 
bush." 

In  course  of  time  Etuk  grew  hungry  again,  and  Njomm  said 
to  him,  "  If  you  are  hungry,  why  don't  you  tell  me  ?  " 

He  went  to  his  farm  and  got  four  bunches  of  plantains.  As 
he  came  back  he  met  the  monkey  people.  They  begged  for 
some  of  his  fruit,  so  he  gave  it  to  them. 

After  they  had  eaten  all  there  was,  they  in  their  turn  went 
on,  and  met  a  herd  of  wild  boars  (Ngumi).  To  these  they  said, 
"  There  is  very  fine  food  to  be  got  from  Njomm  and  Etuk." 

The  Ngumi  therefore  came  and  questioned  Etuk,  "  Where  is 
coco  to  be  had  ? "  and  Etuk  answered,  "The  coco  belongs  to  me." 

The  boars  begged  for  some,  so  Etuk  took  a  basket,  filled  it 
at  his  farm,  and  gave  it  to  them. 

After  they  were  satisfied,  they  went  on  their  way  and  next 
morning  met  Njokk  (elephant). 

To  him  they  said,  "  Greetings,  Lord  !  Last  night  we  got 
very  good  food  from  the  farms  over  there." 

Njokk  at  once  ran  and  asked  the  two  friends,  "  Whence  do 
you  get  so  much  food  ?  "     They  said,  "  Wait  a  little." 

Njomm  took  his  long  matchet  and  went  to  his  farm.  He 
cut  five  great  bunches  of  plantains  and  carried  them  back. 
Etuk  also  got  five  baskets  full  of  coco,  which  he  brought  to 


346      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

Elephant.  After  the  latter  had  eaten  all  this,  he  thanked  them 
and  went  away. 

All  the  bush-beasts  came  in  their  turn  and  begged  for  food, 
and  to  each  the  two  friends  gave  willingly  of  all  that  they 
had.     Lastly  also  came  Mfong  (Bush-cow). 

Now  not  far  from  the  two  farms  there  was  a  great  river 
called  Akarram  (the  One  which  goes  round).  In  the  midst  of 
it,  deep  down,  dwelt  Crocodile.  One  day  Mfong  went  down 
into  the  water  to  drink,  and  from  him  crocodile  learned  that 
much  food  was  to  be  had  near  by. 

On  this  crocodile  came  out  of  the  water  and  began  walking 
towards  the  farms.     He  went  to  Njomm  and  Etuk  and  said  : 

"  I  am  dying  of  hunger,  pray  give  me  food." 

Etuk  said,  "  To  the  beasts  who  are  my  friends  I  will  give  all 
I  have,  but  to  you  I  will  give  nothing,  for  you  are  no  friend  of 
mine  ;  "  but  Njomm  said  : 

"  I  do  not  like  you  very  much,  yet  I  will  give  you  one  bunch 
of  plantains." 

Crocodile  took  them  and  said,  "  Do  not  close  your  door  to- 
night when  you  lie  down  to  sleep.  I  will  come  back  and  buy 
more  food  from  you  at  a  great  price." 

He  then  went  back  to  the  water  and  sought  out  a  python, 
which  dwelt  there.     To  the  latter  he  said  : 

"  I  have  found  two  men  on  land,  who  have  much  food." 
Python  said,  "  I  too  am  hungry.     Will  you  give  me  to  eat  ?  " 

So  crocodile  gave  him  some  of  the  plantains  which  he  had 
brought.  When  Python  had  tasted  he  said,  "  How  sweet  it 
is  !  Will  you  go  back  again  and  bring  more  ?  "  Crocodile 
said,  "  Will  you  give  me  something  with  which  to  buy?  "  and 
Python  answered,  "  Yes.  I  will  give  you  something  with 
which  you  can  buy  the  whole  farm." 

On  this  he  took  from  within  his  head  a  shining  stone  and 
gave  it  to  crocodile.  The  latter  started  to  go  back  to  the 
farm.  As  he  went,  night  fell  and  all  the  road  grew  dark,  but 
he  held  in  his  jaws  the  shining  stone,  and  it  made  a  light  on 
his  path,  so  that  all  the  way  was  bright.  When  he  neared  the 
dwelling  of  the  two  friends  he  hid  the  stone  and  called  : 

"  Come  out  and  I  will  show  you  something  which  I  have 
brought." 


o 


FOLK-LORE  347 

It  was  very  dark  when  they  came  to  speak  with  him.  Slowly 
the  crocodile  opened  his  claws,  in  which  he  held  up  the  stone, 
and  it  began  to  glimmer  between  them.  When  he  held  it  right 
out,  the  whole  place  became  so  bright  that  one  could  see  to 
pick  up  a  needle  or  any  small  thing.  He  said,  "  The  price  of 
this  that  I  bring  is  one  whole  farm." 

Etuk  said,  "  I  cannot  buy.  If  I  give  my  farm,  nothing 
remains  to  me.  What  is  the  use  of  this  great  shining  stone  if  I 
starve  to  death  ? "  But  Njomm  said,  "  I  will  buy — oh,  I  will 
buy,  for  my  farm  full  of  plantains,  for  that  which  you  bring 
fills  the  whole  earth  with  light.  Come  let  us  go.  I  will  show 
you  my  farm.  From  here  to  the  water-side  all  round  is  my 
farm.  Take  it  all,  and  do  what  you  choose  with  it,  only  give 
me  the  great  shining  stone  that,  when  darkness  falls,  the  whole 
earth  may  still  be  light." 

Crocodile  said,  "  I  agree." 

Then  Njomm  went  to  his  house  with  the  stone,  and  Etuk 
went  to  his.  Njomm  placed  it  above  the  lintel,  that  it  might 
shine  for  all  the  world ;  but  Etuk  closed  his  door  and  lay 
down  to  sleep. 

In  the  morning  Njomm  was  very  hungry,  but  he  had  nothing 
to  eat,  because  he  had  sold  all  his  farm  for  the  great  white 
stone. 

Next  night  and  the  night  after  he  slept  full  of  hunger,  but  on 
the  third  morning  he  went  to  Etuk  and  asked,  "  Will  you 
give  me  a  single  coco-yam  ?  "     Etuk  answered  : 

"  I  can  give  you  nothing,  for  now  you  have  nothing  to  give 
in  exchange.  It  was  not  I  who  told  you  to  buy  the  shining 
thing.  To  give  something,  when  plenty  remains,  is  good ;  but 
none  but  a  fool  would  give  his  all,  that  a  light  may  shine  in  the 
dark  !  " 

Njomm  was  very  sad.  He  said,  "  I  have  done  nothing  bad. 
Formerly  no  one  could  see  in  the  night  time.  Now  the  python 
stone  shines  so  that  everyone  can  see  to  go  wherever  he 
chooses." 

All  that  day  Njomm  still  endured,  though  nearly  dying  of 
hunger,  and  at  night  time  he  crept  down  to  the  water,  very 
weak  and  faint. 

By  the  river-side  he  saw  a  palm  tree,  and  on  it  a  man  trying 


348      IN    THE    SHADOW    OF    THE    BUSH 

to  cut  down  clusters  of  ripe  kernels  ;  but  this  was  hard  to  do, 
because  it  had  grown  very  dark. 

Njomm  said,  "  Who  is  there  ?  "  and  the  man  answered,  "  I 
am  Effion  Obassi." 

The  second  time  Njomm  called,  "  What  are  you  doing  ?  " 
and  EfBon  replied  : 

"  I  am  trying  to  gather  palm  kernels,  but  I  cannot  do  so,  for 
it  is  very  dark  amid  these  great  leaves." 

Njomm  said  to  him,  "  It  is  useless  to  try  to  do  such  a  thing 
in  the  dark.     Are  you  blind  ?  " 

Effion  answered,  "  I  am  not  blind.     Why  do  you  ask  ?  " 

Then  Njomm  said,  "  Good  ;  if  you  are  not  blind,  I  beg  you  to 
throw  me  down  only  one  or  two  palm  kernels,  and  in  return  I 
will  show  you  a  thing  more  bright  and  glorious  than  any  you 
have  seen  before." 

Effion  replied,  "  Wait  a  minute,  and  I  will  try  to  throw  a 
few  down  to  you.  Afterwards  you  shall  show  me  the  shining 
thing  as  you  said." 

He  then  threw  down  three  palm  kernels,  which  Njomm  took, 
and  stayed  his  hunger  a  little.  The  latter  then  called,  "Please 
try  to  climb  down.     We  will  go  together  to  my  house." 

Effion  tried  hard,  and  after  some  time  he  stood  safely  at  the 
foot  of  the  tree  by  the  side  of  Njomm. 

So  soon  as  they  got  to  his  house,  Njomm  said,  "  Will  you 
wait  here  a  little  while  I  go  to  question  the  townspeople  ?  " 

First  he  went  to  Etuk  and  asked,  "  Will  you  not  give  me  a 
single  coco  to  eat  ?  See,  the  thing  which  I  bought  at  the  price 
of  all  that  I  had  turns  darkness  to  light  for  you,  but  for  me,  I 
die  of  hunger." 

Etuk  said,  "  I  will  give  you  nothing.  Take  back  the  thing 
for  which  you  sold  your  all,  and  we  will  stay  in  our  darkness  as 
before." 

Then  Njomm  begged  of  all  the  townsfolk  that  they  would 
give  him  ever  so  little  food  in  return  for  the  light  he  had  bought 
for  them.     Yet  they  all  refused. 

So  Njomm  went  back  to  his  house  and  took  the  shining 
stone,  and  gave  it  to  Effion  Obassi,  saying  : 

"  I  love  the  earth  folk,  but  they  love  not  me.  Now  take  the 
shining  thing   for  which   I    gave    my  whole  possessions.     Go 


FOLK-LORE  349 

back  to  the  place  whence  you  came,  for  I  know  that  you 
belong  to  the  sky  people,  but  when  you  reach  your  home  in  the 
heavens,  hang  up  my  stone  in  a  place  where  all  the  earth  folk 
may  see  its  shining,  and  be  glad." 

Then  Effion  took  the  stone,  and  went  back  by  the  road  he 
had  come.  He  climbed  up  the  palm  tree,  and  the  great  leaves 
raised  themselves  upwards,  pointing  to  the  sky,  and  lifted  him, 
till,  from  their  points,  he  could  climb  into  heaven. 

When  he  reached  his  home,  he  sent  and  called  all  the  Lords 
of  the  Sky  and  said,  "  I  have  brought  back  a  thing  to-day 
which  can  shine  so  that  all  the  earth  will  be  light.  From  now 
on  everyone  on  earth  or  in  heaven  will  be  able  to  see  at 
the  darkest  hour  of  the  night." 

The  chiefs  looked  at  the  stone  and  wondered.  Then  they 
consulted  together,  and  made  a  box.  Effion  said,  "  Make 
it  so  that  the  stone  can  shine  out  only  from  one  side." 

When  the  box  was  finished,  he  set  the  globe  of  fire  within, 
and  said,  "  Behold  the  stone  is  mine.  From  this  time  all  the 
people  must  bring  me  food.  I  will  no  longer  go  to  seek  any  for 
myself." 

For  some  time  they  brought  him  plenty,  but  after  a  while 
they  grew  tired.  Then  Effion  covered  the  side  of  the  box,  so 
that  the  stone  could  not  shine  till  they  brought  him  more. 
That  is  the  reason  why  the  moon  is  sometimes  dark,  and 
people  on  earth  say  "  It  is  the  end  of  the  month.  The  sky 
people  have  grown  weary  of  bringing  food  to  Effion  Obassi, 
and  he  will  not  let  his  stone  shine  out  till  they  bring  a  fresh 
supply." 

HOW    ALL   THE    STARS    CAME. 
By  Okun  Asere  of  Mfamosing. 

Ebopp*  and  Mbawf  were  making  a  tour  in  the  bush.  They 
looked  for  a  good  place  to  cut  farm.  When  one  was  found 
they  cut  down  the  trees,  and  took  two  days  to  clear  enough 
ground.  After  this  they  went  back  to  the  town  where  the 
other  animals  were  living.     Next  morning  Ebopp  said,  "  Let 

*  The  Lemur  (Galago  talboti). 
t  Dormouse  [Graphiurus  hueti). 


350   IN  THE  SHADOW  OF  THE  BUSH 

us  go  back  to  our  new  farms  and  build  a  small  house."  This 
they  did.     Ebopp  made  bis,  and  Mbaw  his. 

Now  before  a  new  town  is  begun,  a  little  shed  called  Ekpa 
Ntan  (House  without  Walls)  is  made  where  the  Egbo  house  is  to 
stand.  Ebopp  and  Mbaw  accordingly  set  to  work  and  built  an 
Ekpa  Ntan.  Then  they  went  back  to  their  old  town  and 
rested  for  two  days. 

On  the  third  day  they  went  to  work  again.  Ebopp  worked 
on  his  farm,  Mbaw  on  his.  That  night  they  slept  in  the  huts 
they  had  built,  and  at  dawn  started  to  work  once  more. 
When  night  came,  Ebopp  lighted  a  lamp  and  said,  "  I  do  not 
want  to  sleep  here.  If  we  sleep  here  we  shall  sleep  hungry. 
Let  us  go  back  to  our  old  town." 

When  they  got  there  their  wives  cooked  for  them.  Ebopp 
said  to  Mbaw,  "  Come  and  join  together  with  me  in  eating." 
So  his  friend  came  and  ate  with  him. 

Afterwards  Mbaw  said,  "  Let  us  go  to  my  house  and  have 
food  too."     So  they  went  thither. 

After  they  had  eaten  up  all  that  Mbaw  had  cooked,  Ebopp 
went  home. 

Next  morning  he  went  to  call  his  friend  and  said,  "  Go  and 
get  young  plantains  to  plant  in  the  farm."  Both  of  them 
collected  a  great  basket  full  of  these,  and  went  to  the  place 
where  the  new  farms  were  ;  Ebopp  to  his,  and  Mbaw  to  his. 

Both  worked  hard.  At  midday  Ebopp  said,  "  Let  us  rest  a 
little  while,  and  eat  the  food  we  have  brought."  To  this  Mbaw 
agreed,  but  after  some  time  they  set  to  work  again. 

About  five  o'clock  Ebopp  called,  "  Let  us  go  back  now  to 
the  old  town,  for  it  is  very  far  off." 

So  they  left  off  working  and  went  back,  but  before  they  could 
get  there  night  fell. 

Next  morning  they  took  more  young  plantains,  and  again 
worked  hard  all  day.  When  it  was  time  to  go  back,  Ebopp, 
asked,  "  How  many  remain  to  plant  of  the  young  plantains  ?  " 
Mbaw  answered  "  About  forty."  On  which  Ebopp  said,  "  Of 
mine  also  there  remain  about  forty." 

At  dawn  next  day  they  went  to  their  old  farms  to  get  some 
more  plantain  cuttings.  Then  they  went  on  to  the  new  farms 
and  began  planting.     So  soon  as  he  had  finished,  Ebopp  said 


FOLK-LORE  351 

"  I  have  finished  mine."  To  which  Mbaw  replied,  "  Mine  also 
are  finished." 

Ebopp  said,  "  My  work  is  done,  I  need  only  come  here  for  the 
hunting." 

Then  they  both  went  back  to  the  old  town  and  told  their 
wives : 

"  We  have  finished  setting  the  plantains.  We  hope  that  you 
will  go  and  plant  coco-yams  to-morrow.  Try,  both  of  you,  to 
get  baskets  full  of  coco-yams  for  the  planting." 

To  this  the  women  agreed,  and  when  they  had  collected  as 
many  as  were  necessary  they  set  out  for  the  new  farms. 

When  they  arrived,  Mbaw's  wife  asked  the  wife  of  Ebopp, 
"  Do  you  think  we  can  finish  planting  all  these  to-day  ? " 
Ebopp's  wife  answered,  "  Yes,  we  can  do  it." 

All  day  they  worked  hard,  and  at  night  went  home  and  said, 
"  We  have  finished  planting  all  the  coco-yams."  Ebopp  said, 
"  Good,  you  have  done  well." 

Now  his  wife's  name  was  Akpan  Anwan  (Akpan  means  first- 
born). She  and  her  sister  Akandem  were  the  daughters  of 
Obassi  Osaw.  When  she  got  home  she  started  to  cook  the 
evening  meal  for  her  husband.  When  it  was  ready  she 
placed  it  upon  the  table,  set  water  also  in  a  cup,  and  laid 
spoons  near  by. 

They  were  eating  together  when  a  slave  named  Umaw 
ran  in.  He  had  just  come  from  the  town  of  Obassi  Osaw. 
He  said,  "  I  would  speak  to  Ebopp  alone."  When  Akpan 
Anwan  had  left  the  room,  the  messenger  said,  "  You  are  eating, 
but  I  bring  you  news  that  Akandem  is  dead." 

Ebopp  called  out  aloud  in  his  grief,  and  sent  a  messenger  to 
call  his  friend  Mbaw. 

So  soon  as  the  latter  heard  he  came  running  and  said,  "  What 
can  we  do  ?  We  are  planting  new  farms  and  beginning  to  build 
a  new  town.  There  is  hardly  any  food  to  be  got.  How  then 
can  we  properly  hold  the  funeral  customs  ?  " 

Ebopp  said,  "  Nevertheless,  I  must  try  my  best."  When 
Umaw  got  ready  to  return,  Ebopp  said  : 

"  Say  to  Obassi  Osaw  '  Wait  for  me  for  six  days,  then  I  will 
surely  come.'  " 

Next  morning  he  said  to  Mbaw,  "  Come  now,  let  us  do  our 


352      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

utmost  to  collect  what  is  necessary  for  the  rites  of  my  sister-in- 
law." 

They  went  round  the  town  and  bought  all  the  food  which 
they  could  find.  Then  Ebopp  went  back  and  said  to  his  wife, 
"  I  did  not  wish  to  tell  you  before  about  the  death  of  your 
sister,  but  to-day  I  must  tell  you.  Get  ready.  In  five  days' 
time  I  will  take  you  back  to  your  Father's  town  to  hold  the 
funeral  feast." 

Akpan  Anwan  was  very  grieved  to  hear  of  this  and  wept. 
Ebopp  said  to  Mbaw,  "  We  must  get  palm  wine  for  the  feast, 
also  rum  for  libations.  How  can  we  get  these  ?  I  have  no 
money  and  you  also  have  none."  Mbaw  said,  "  Go  round 
among  the  townsfolk  and  see  if  any  of  them  will  lend  you  some." 

Ebopp  said  "  Good,"  and  began  to  walk  up  and  down, 
begging  from  all  his  friends,  but  none  would  give  to  him, 
though  it  was  a  big  town.  At  last  he  went  down  to  the  place 
where  they  were  making  palm  oil  by  the  river.  Near  to  this 
lived  Iku  (Water  Chevrotain).  Ebopp  told  his  trouble  and 
begged  help,  but  Iku  said,  "  I  am  very  sorry  for  you,  but  I 
have  nothing  to  give." 

Ebopp  was  quite  discouraged  by  now,  and  turned  to  go  away 
full  of  sorrow.  When  Iku  saw  this  he  said,  "  Wait  a  minute, 
there  is  one  thing  I  can  do.  You  know  that  I  have  the  '  four 
eyes.'  I  will  give  you  two,  and  with  them  you  can  buy  all  that 
you  need." 

From  out  of  his  head  he  took  the  two  eyes  with  which  he 
used  to  see  in  the  dark.  They  shone  so  brightly  that  Ebopp 
knew  they  were  worth  a  great  price.  He  took  them  home  and 
showed  them  to  his  wife  and  his  friend  Mbaw. 

The  latter  said,  "  From  to-day  you  are  freed  from  all  anxiety. 
With  those  you  can  buy  all  that  is  needed." 

Next  morning  they  gathered  together  all  that  had  been 
collected,  the  plantains  and  the  two  shining  eyes.  Ebopp, 
Mbaw  and  Akpan  carried  the  loads  between  them.  They  set 
out  for  the  dwelling-place  of  Obassi  Osaw. 

When  they  got  to  the  entrance  of  the  town,  Akpan  Anwan 
began  to  weep  bitterly.  She  threw  down  her  burden,  and  ran 
to  the  spot  where  her  sister  lay  buried.  Then  she  lay  down  on 
the  grave  and  would  not  rise  again. 


FOLK-LORE  353 

Ebopp  carried  his  own  load  into  the  house  where  the  dead 
woman  had  dwelt.  Then  he  went  back  and  got  his  wife's  load 
which  she  had  left  behind. 

The  townsfolk  said  to  Ebopp,  "  You  have  come  to  keep  your 
sister-in-law's  funeral  customs  to-day.  Bring  palm  wine.  Bring 
rum  also  for  the  libations,  and  let  us  hold  the  feast." 

Ebopp  said,  "  I  have  brought  nothing  but  plantains.  All 
else  that  is  necessary  I  mean  to  buy  here." 

Now  there  was  a  famine  in  Obassi  Osaw's  town,  so  Ebopp 
put  all  his  plantains  in  the  Egbo  house.  Next  day  he  sent  to 
Obassi  Osaw  to  bring  his  people,  so  that  the  food  might  be 
divided  among  them.     Each  man  got  one. 

Then  Osaw  said,  "  All  that  you  brought  is  eaten.  If  you  can 
give  us  no  more,  you  shall  not  take  my  daughter  back  with  you 
to  your  country." 

Ebopp  went  to  find  his  friend,  and  told  him  what  Obassi 
had  said. 

"  Shall  I  sell  the  two  eyes  ?  "  he  asked.  "  They  are  worth 
hundreds  and  hundreds  of  plantains,  and  many  pieces  of  cloth, 
but  if  I  sell  them  now,  the  people  are  so  hungry,  they  will  only 
give  a  small  price." 

Mbaw  said,  "  Do  not  mind.  See,  I  will  teach  you  how  to 
get  more  sense." 

"  You  hold  one  in  your  hand,  and  it  is  a  big  thing  like  a  great 
shining  stone,  but  if  you  put  it  in  a  mortar  and  grind  it  down, 
it  will  become,  not  one,  but  many,  and  some  of  the  small  pieces 
you  can  sell." 

This  Ebopp  did,  and  ground  up  the  great  bright  stones 
which  had  been  Iku's  eyes  till  they  became  like  shining  sand. 

Then  they  went  and  got  a  black  cap,  which  they  filled  with 
the  fragments. 

Mbaw  said,  "  Now  go  and  look  round  the  town  till  you  find 
someone  who  can  sell  what  we  need." 

Ebopp  did  so,  and  in  the  house  of  Effion  Obassi  he  saw 
great  stores  hidden — food  and  palm  wine,  palm  oil  in  jars,  and 
rum  for  the  sacrifice. 

Ebopp  said  to  Effion,  "  If  you  will  sell  all  this  to  me  I  will 
give  you  in  exchange  something  which  will  make  all  the  towns- 
folk bow  down  before  you." 

S.B.  A    A 


354      IN    THE   SHADOW    OF   THE    BUSH 

Effion  said,  "  I  will  not  sell  all,  but  half  of  what  I  have  I  will 
sell  you." 

So  Ebopp  said,  "  Very  well.  I  will  take  what  you  give  me, 
only  do  not  open  the  thing  I  shall  leave  in  exchange  till  I 
have  got  back  to  my  own  country.  When  you  do  open  it,  as  I 
said  before,  all  the  townsfolk  will  bow  down  before  you." 

So  the  funeral  feast  was  made,  and  the  people  were 
satisfied. 

When  the  rites  were  finished,  Obassi  said,  "  It  is  good.  You 
can  go  away  now  with  your  wife." 

So  Ebopp  said  to  Mbaw  and  Akpan  An  wan,  "  Come,  let  us 
go  back  to  our  own  town.     We  must  not  sleep  here  to-night." 

When  they  had  reached  home  once  more,  Ebopp  sent  a 
slave  named  Edet  to  Effion  Obassi  with  the  message  : 

"  You  can  open  the  cap  now.  I  have  reached  my  town 
again."  It  was  evening  time,  but  Effion  at  once  sent  to  call 
the  townspeople  and  said,  "  I  have  a  thing  here  which  is  worth 
a  great  price."  They  cried,  "  Let  us  see  it."  He  answered, 
"  My  thing  is  a  very  good  thing,  such  as  you  have  never  seen 
before." 

He  brought  the  cap  outside  and  opened  it  before  them.  All 
the  shining  things  fell  out.  As  they  fell  a  strong  breeze  came 
and  caught  them  and  blew  them  all  over  the  town.  They  lay 
on  the  roads  and  on  the  floors  of  the  compounds,  each  like  a 
little  star. 

All  the  children  came  round  and  began  picking  them  up. 
They  gathered  and  gathered.  In  the  daytime  they  could  not 
see  them,  but  every  night  they  went  out  and  sought  for  the 
shining  things.  Each  one  that  they  picked  up  they  put  in  a 
box.  At  length  many  had  been  got  together  and  shone  like  a 
little  sun  in  the  box.  At  the  end  of  about  a  month  nearly  all 
had  been  collected.  They  could  not  shut  down  the  lid,  how- 
ever, because  the  box  was  too  full,  so  when  a  great  breeze  came 
by  it  blew  all  the  shining  things  about  again.  That  is  why 
sometimes  we  have  a  small  moon  and  plenty  of  stars  shining 
round  it,  while  sometimes  we  have  a  big  moon  and  hardly  any 
stars  are  to  be  seen.  The  children  take  a  month  to  fill  the  box 
again. 

When  the  sparkles  were  scattered   about  the  town,   Effion 


FOLK-LORE  355 

sent  a  messenger  to  Ebopp  to  ask,  "  Can  you  see  the  things 
shining  from  your  town  ?  " 

At  that  time  earth  and  sky  were  all  joined  together,  like  a 
house  with  an  upstairs. 

Ebopp  went  out  and  looked  upward  to  the  blue  roof  overhead. 
There  he  saw  the  small  things  sparkling  in  the  darkness. 

Next  day  he  went  to  Iku  and  said  : 

"  Will  you  please  go  into  a  deep  hole  ?  I  want  to  look  at 
your  eyes." 

Iku  went  inside  the  hole.  Ebopp  looked  at  his  eyes.  They 
were  very  bright,  just  like  the  sparkles  which  shone  in  the  sky. 

The  cause  of  all  the  stars  is  therefore  Ebopp,  who  took  Iku's 
eyes  to  Obassi's  town. 

Iku's  eyes  are  like  the  stars. 

The  moon  shines  when  all  the  fragments  are  gathered  together. 
When  he  shines  most  brightly  it  is  because  the  children  have 
picked  up  nearly  all  the  fragments  and  put  them  into  the  box. 

How  the  Two  Biggest  Stars  came  into  the  Sky. 

Obassi  Osaw  had  three  sons.  Two  of  these  he  loved,  but 
Ndifemm,  the  third,  he  did  not  love. 

One  day  the  three  brothers  went  out  to  see  what  had  been 
caught  in  the  traps  they  had  set.  The  two  favourite  sons  found 
nothing,  but  Ndifemm  found  an  animal  in  each  of  his  six  traps. 
Four  of  the  beasts  he  "  dashed  "  between  his  two  brothers,  and 
the  other  two  he  took  home  to  his  father.  Obassi  refused  them, 
but  accepted  from  his  other  two  sons  those  which  Ndifemm  had 
given  them. 

Another  day  Obassi  ordered  his  three  children  each  to  dig  a 
hole.  They  did  so.  He  went  and  examined  the  work,  and  said 
"  I  find  the  two  holes  well  done,"  but  to  Ndifemm  he  said, 
"  Your  hole  is  not  deep  enough." 

The  boy  began  to  dig  deeper,  but  one  of  his  brothers  went  to 
him  very  softly  and  said,  "  Our  father  is  attempting  to  kill  you. 
Will  you  go  to  consult  the  charm  ?  That  will  tell  you  what 
you  should  do." 

Ndifemm,  therefore,  went  to  Nyopp  (Porcupine)  and  asked 
him  to  practise  the  charm. 

A  a  2 


356      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

Nyopp  said,  u  Go  and  bring  me  a  piece  of  yam  and  some 
palm  oil." 

Ndifemm  fetched  these  and  gave  them  to  Porcupine.  The 
latter  practised  the  charm,  and  told  him,  "  Go  and  ask  the 
Dassie  to  dig  a  run  from  your  mother's  house  to  the  hole  you 
have  made." 

When  all  this  was  done,  Obassi  sent  one  day  and  said,  "  Go 
down  into  the  hole  you  have  dug." 

Ndifemm  obeyed,  but  so  soon  as  he  reached  the  bottom  he 
passed  through  the  little  tunnel  and  reached  his  mother's  house. 
Next  Obassi  ordered  the  people  to  throw  stones  into  the  hole. 
The  pit  was  soon  filled  up  by  these,  but  Ndifemm  was  there  no 
longer.  After  a  time  Obassi  began  to  cry  out  for  the  mourning 
of  his  son,  and  called  all  the  people  together  to  make  a  great 
play  for  Ndifemm's  death. 

On  hearing  this,  the  mother  sent  to  her  husband  and  said, 
"  The  Juju  image  will  now  come  out."  She  dressed  her  son  in 
the  Egbo  robes  and  took  him  before  Obassi.  Then  she 
showed  him  that  it  was  his  own  son  whom  he  had  thought 
dead.     At  that  the  father  remained  full  of  vexation. 

One  day  Obassi  called  to  his  unloved  son,  and  said,  "  Go 
to  Nsann  (the  Thunder  town)  and  bring  me  my  cow  from 
thence." 

Ndifemm  went  to  his  mother  and  told  her  of  this  new 
order.  She  took  a  horn,  and  gave  to  her  son  saying,  "  When 
you  get  to  Nsann  town  take  this  and  blow  upon  it.  You  will  see 
cows  standing  under  a  tree.  When  one  answers  the  sound  of 
the  horn  you  will  know  that  that  is  the  very  one  for  which  your 
father  sent  you." 

Ndifemm  set  forth,  and  did  all  that  she  had  said.  In  a  few 
days  he  brought  back  the  cow  to  his  father. 

Obassi  thought  within  himself,  "  I  sent  this  boy  to  Nsann 
town  that  he  might  die,  but  he  has  returned  home  full  of  life." 
He  therefore  took  thought  for  a  way  in  which  he  might  surely 
kill  his  son. 

Ndifemm  saw  that  his  father's  heart  was  steadfastly  set  against 
him,  so  he  went  to  his  mother  and  said  : 

"  I  know  that  it  is  my  time  to  die.     Will  you  die  with  me  ?  " 

The  woman  answered,  "  My  husband  loves  me  no  more.     In 


o 


-^  -a 


FOLK-LORE  357 

this  world  I  have  no  one  but  you,  therefore  if  you  die  I  will  die 
also." 

Then,  by  cunning,  Ndifemm  made  a  hole  in  his  father's 
eyes  while  the  latter  slept,  and  entered  into  them  with  his 
mother. 

There  they  both  died,  and  became  stars  in  the  sky. 

Obassi  opened  his  eyes,  which  are  the  heavens,  and  there 
they  shone  !  Those  are  the  two  biggest  stars  which  you  see 
in  the  sky.  They  are  Ndifemm,  son  of  Obassi,  and  his 
mother. 

How  the  Sun  came  into  the  Sky. 

By  Okun  Asere  of  Mfamosing. 

Once  there  lived  a  man  named  Agbo  and  his  wife  named 
Nchun.  They  had  a  daughter  called  Afion.  When  the  latter  was 
about  fifteen  years  old,  her  father  and  mother  agreed  that  it 
was  time  to  put  her  in  the  fatting-house.  So  they  sent  for 
an  old  woman  named  Umaw,  who  was  very  wise  in  such 
matters,  and  told  her  to  prepare  everything.  She  came  and 
made  all  ready,  and  then  said,  "  There  is  nothing  more  to  be 
done.     I  will  go  back  to  my  own  place." 

The  parents  "  dashed  "  her  two  bottles  of  palm  oil  and  two 
pieces  of  dried  meat.  To  the  townsfolk  also  the  father  gave 
many  demi-johns  of  palm  wine.  He  took  ten  pieces  of  dried 
meat,  cooked  them  and  called  all  the  people  to  a  feast,  because 
his  daughter  had  entered  the  fatting-house  that  day. 

After  about  four  months  the  mother,  Nchun,  said  to  Afion, 
"  You  have  stayed  long  enough.  You  may  come  out  to- 
morrow." 

Then  the  father  got  together  several  demi-johns  of  palm  wine, 
the  kind  that  is  drawn  from  the  tops  of  the  palm  trees,  and 
five  pieces  of  dried  meat.  The  mother  also  took  the  same 
amount  of  meat  and  drink.  The  father  announced  to  the 
townsfolk : 

"  My  daughter  is  going  to  clean  her  face  to-morrow.  Let  all 
men  stay  in  the  town."  Next  morning  the  parents  cooked  ten 
calabashes  full  of  chop  for  the  people,  who  feasted  all  that 
day. 

In  the  evening  the  father  took  his  daughter  into  the  other 


358      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

part  of  the  house,  and  said  to  her,  "  To-day  you  have  cleaned 
your  face.  From  to-day  if  a  man  should  call  you  into  his  house 
you  can  go." 

Next  morning  the  mother  cooked  for  the  girl.  Then  the 
parents  went  to  their  farm  and  left  her  with  a  small  boy  who 
was  as  yet  too  young  to  work. 

Now  at  that  time  Eyo  (the  Sun)  dwelt  upon  earth,  in  the 
place  that  lies  towards  the  great  water.  His  body  was  redder 
than  fire.  He  was  very  tall  and  thin.  He  lay  in  the  bush,  so 
that  all  his  body  up  to  the  waist  was  hidden  by  the  bush  trees, 
but  he  stretched  out  his  head  and  arms  right  into  the  room 
where  the  fatting-girl  was.     He  said  to  her  : 

"  I  want  to  keep  sweethearts  with  you,"  but  she  answered : 

"  You  are  so  tall,  your  head,  hands  and  arms  alone  fill  my 
room.     I  cannot  keep  friends  with  you." 

When  he  heard  this  the  Sun  was  very  angry,  and  said,  "  If 
you  are  not  willing  to  become  my  sweetheart  I  will  take  my 
length  away,  but  first  I  will  kill  you  and  leave  you  here." 

Anon  said  to  him  : 

"  I  do  not  care  so  much  if  you  kill  me.  I  would  rather  die 
than  wed  such  a  terrible  being  as  you." 

As  soon  as  Eyo  heard  this  he  stretched  out  his  hands,  and 
killed  her  for  true. 

All  this  time  the  small  boy  had  hidden  himself  where  he  could 
see  everything  that  happened.  He  watched  the  terrible  visitor 
draw  the  body  into  the  middle  room.  Next  he  saw  him  go  into 
the  inner  place  where  Nchun  kept  the  fine  mats.  He  took  four 
of  these  and  covered  the  fatting-girl.  Next  he  went  into  another 
place  where  the  fine  cloths  were  kept.  Of  these  again  he  took 
four,  with  four  blankets  and  two  small  loin  cloths.  All  these 
he  laid  over  the  dead  girl. 

After  this  Eyo  left  the  house  and  stood  in  the  little  courtyard 
at  the  back.  He  began  to  lift  his  body  up  to  the  sky.  He  was 
so  long  that,  though  he  tried  all  day,  six  o'clock  in  the  evening 
was  come  and  he  had  not  quite  finished.  Some  of  him  was  in 
the  sky  and  some  still  stayed  upon  earth. 

When  Agbo  and  Nchun  came  back  from  their  farm,  the  small 
boy  crept  out  from  his  hiding  place,  and  said  to  them  : 

"  The  man  who  killed  your  daughter  is  a  very  tall  man." 


FOLK-LORE  359 

Father  and  mother  began  to  weep.  They  took  the  body  and 
called  all  the  townsfolk  together  for  the  burial. 

The  people  came  with  four  guns.  They  wished  to  shoot  the 
man  who  had  killed  the  fatting-girl.  At  the  back  of  the  house 
they  found  him.  They  could  not  see  all  his  body,  but  the  feet 
only.  With  their  four  guns  they  shot  at  these.  Then  he  gave 
a  great  spring  and  drew  his  feet  up,  after  the  rest  of  him,  into 
the  sky. 

A  fine  house  was  standing  there  ready.  Eyo  entered  and 
closed  the  door  that  he  might  be  safe  from  the  guns  of  the 
townsmen.  In  the  morning,  about  six  o'clock,  he  opened  a 
window,  and  looked  out  a  little  way,  very  cautiously.  When 
no  one  shot  at  him,  he  felt  safer,  and  put  his  face  right  out. 
All  day  he  looked  down  in  case  Anon  should  not  be  dead 
and  he  might  see  her  once  more.  The  people  were  busy 
away  at  their  farms.  At  six  o'clock  they  came  back,  so  he 
drew  in  his  face  again,  lest  they  should  begin  to  shoot  once 
more. 

That  is  the  reason  why  you  only  see  the  sun  in  the  daytime. 
In  the  evening  he  draws  back  into  his  house  and  shuts  the 
windows  and  doors. 

How  Sun  and  Moon  went  up  to  the  Sky. 

By  Ite  Okonni  of  Aking. 

Obassi  Nsi  had  three  sons,  named  Eyo  (Sun),  Ejirum  (Dark- 
ness), and  'Mi  (Moon).  The  first  two  he  loved,  but  the  last 
he  did  not  love.     One  day  Nsi  called  to  'Mi  and  said  : 

"Go  into  the  bush,  catch  a  leopard,  and  bring  him  to  me." 

'Mi  went  sadly  away,  and  as  he  reached  the  outskirts  of  the 
town  began  to  weep.  A  man  named  Isse  saw  him  and  called 
"  What  is  the  matter?  "  'Mi  answered,  "  My  father  does  not 
love  me,  and  is  sending  me  to  catch  a  leopard  in  the  bush,  in 
order  to  destroy  me." 

The  man  said  "  Take  comfort ;  I  will  give  you  a  '  medicine ' 
which  will  make  you  successful."  He  went  away,  but  soon 
returned  with  what  he  had  promised,  and  rubbed  the  "medicine" 
on  the  boy's  hands. 

'Mi  went  into  the  bush,  and  almost  at  once  saw  a  leopard 


360      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

lying  down  asleep.  He  cut  strong  lianes,  and  tied  up  the 
beast,  so  that  it  could  not  move,  then  dragged  it  along  till  he 
reached  home  once  more,  and  stood  before  his  father. 

Nsi  was  astonished,  but  concealed  his  vexation,  and  said  in  a 
cunning  way,  "  This  my  son  is  indeed  a  good  son  because  he  has 
done  this  thing." 

Some  time  afterwards  Nsi  married  another  wife.  Obassi  Osaw 
came  down  to  the  wedding  feast  with  his  sons  and  daughters 
and  a  great  retinue  of  sky  people.  These  started  to  play  with 
the  earthfolk,  who  had  also  gathered  together  for  the  festival. 
After  a  while  they  took  a  cloth  and  tied  it  up  in  a  bundle.  To 
this  a  rope  was  fastened,  and  one  of  Nsi's  sons  caught  the  end, 
and  began  to  draw  it  along  the  ground.  All  got  sticks  and 
tried  to  hit  the  bundle  as  it  was  dragged  hither  and  thither. 
Ejirum  also  tried  to  hit  it,  but  a  splinter  sprang  from  his  stick 
as  it  struck  the  ground,  and  wounded  the  eye  of  one  of  Osaw's 
sons,  so  that  the  latter  was  blinded. 

Osaw  was  angry,  and  said,  "  I  myself  will  blind  the  eyes 
of  Obassi  Nsi." 

The  townspeople  crowded  round,  and  begged  him  to  show 
mercy,  but  he  would  not  relent.  So  they  took  Nsi  and  hid  him 
away,  where  Osaw  could  not  find  him.  After  the  latter  had 
searched  in  vain  he  was  still  angry,  and  said : 

"  Now  I  am  going  back  to  my  town,  but  Nsi  will  not  escape 
me." 

After  two  days  he  sent  down  ten  men  to  fetch  Obassi  Nsi. 
They  said,  "  We  have  been  sent  to  bring  you  up,"  but  the 
townsfolk  said,  "  Here  are  great  gifts  of  cows,  bulls,  and  goats. 
Take  them  before  your  master,  and  perhaps  he  will  not  be  angry 
any  more." 

When  the  men  returned  to  the  sky  they  said,  "  Here  is  a 
message  from  Obassi  Nsi.  He  wants  to  beg  you  very  much.  He 
says,  "  It  was  not  I  who  told  anyone  to  hurt  your  son's  eye." 

Osaw  would  not  listen,  but  sent  down  three  other  men,  and 
said : 

"  Even  if  you  yourself  did  not  break  my  son's  eye  yet  you 
must  come  up  to  me." 

When  Nsi  heard  this,  he  called  his  people  together.  To  his 
son  Eyo  (Sun)  he  said: 


FOLK-LORE  361 

"  Here  are  forty  pieces  of  cloth.  Will  you  take  them  to  Osaw 
and  beg  him  for  me  ?  " 

Eyo  started  on  his  journey,  and  had  reached  about  half  way 
when  he  saw  five  beautiful  women  standing  at  the  entrance 
to  a  town.  No  sooner  had  he  seen  them,  than  he  forgot  all 
about  his  errand,  and  began  to  sell  the  cloth  for  plantains, 
palm  oil  and  palm  wine,  with  which  he  made  a  feast  for  the 
beautiful  women.  There  he  stayed  for  some  weeks,  then 
took  what  was  left  of  the  goods  and  went  on  a  little  further 
till  he  came  to  another  town,  where  he  found  two  more  women, 
as  beautiful  as  the  first.  For  four  years  he  stayed  at  one  or 
other  of  the  towns,  journeying  to  and  fro  between  them. 

After  four  years,  when  Nsi  found  that  Eyo  did  not  come  back 
nor  send  any  message,  he  called  to  his  son  'Mi  and  said : 

"  The  case  which  I  have  before  Obassi  Osaw  has  taken  a  long 
time  to  finish.  Go  to  Nsann  (Thunder  town)  and  fetch  hence 
a  cow  which  you  will  find.  When  you  have  brought  it  away 
take  it  as  a  gift  to  Obassi  Osaw,  and  settle  my  case  for  me." 

'Mi  answered,  "Very  well;"  and  his  mother  called  to  him, 
and  said : 

"  Do  what  you  can  for  your  father,  who  is  guiltless  as  to 
Obassi  Osaw,  but  take  care  for  yourself  when  you  reach  Nsann 
town.  Let  no  one  know  the  place  where  you  sleep,  lest  you 
should  perish  in  the  night  time." 

'Mi  answered,  "  I  will  do  what  I  can." 

Next  morning  he  set  forth,  and  before  evening  had  reached 
Nsann.     The  people  asked  him  : 

"  Where  will  you  sleep  to-night?"  He  answered,  "  I  will 
sleep  among  the  goats."  When  all  was  still  he  left  the  goat 
pen  in  the  darkness,  and  went  to  the  Egbo  house,  where  he  lay 
down  and  slept. 

At  midnight  a  thunderbolt  struck  the  shed  where  the  goats 
were  herded,  and  killed  them  all. 

Early  in  the  morning  the  people  came  together  and  opened 
the  door.  When  they  saw  the  dead  goats,  but  could  not  find 
the  boy  they  were  much  astonished.  As  they  stood  wondering 
'Mi  came  forward  and  said  : 

"  If  I  were  not  a  smart  boy,  the  bolt  would  have  killed  me. 
As  it  is,  I  have  saved  myself." 


362      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

Everybody  in  the  town  was  sorry  for  the  lad,  and  said  "  Let 
us  give  him  the  cow  to  take  to  his  father."  So  the  boy  set  out 
homeward,  well  content. 

When  'Mi  reached  his  father's  house  and  led  the  cow  before 
him,  Nsi  said,  very  softly  to  himself,  so  that  he  thought  no  one 
could  hear  : 

"  What  can  I  do  to  kill  this  son  of  mine  ?  " 

'Mi  heard,  and  next  morning  took  the  gun  which  his  mother 
had  given  him,  and  went  into  the  bush  to  hunt.  First  he  shot 
Ise,  the  little  grey  duiker,  and  next  Ngumi  (the  wild  boar). 
These  he  carried  home,  and  brought  before  his  father,  but  the 
latter  said  : 

"  I  will  not  eat  of  them." 

So  'Mi  took  his  kill  away  sadly,  and  gave  it  to  his  mother. 

The  woman  cooked  the  meat  in  a  delicate  way,  and  then 
took  it  to  her  husband,  who  ate  gladly  of  what  he  had  before 
refused  ;  but  when  he  learned  what  she  had  done,  he  said : 

"  From  to-day  take  your  son  away  from  here.  Neither  of 
you  shall  live  in  my  town  any  more." 

When  'Mi  learned  this  he  also  was  very  angry.  He  took  his 
gun  and  his  matchet  and  went  to  find  his  friend  Isse,  who  had 
given  him  the  "  leopard  medicine  "  years  before.  To  his  grief 
he  heard  that  this  good  friend  had  died  while  he  himself  was 
away  at  Nsann.  So  he  went  sadly  out  into  the  bush  to  hunt, 
that  his  mother  might  not  starve.  After  a  while  he  saw  an 
Ikomme  (squirrel)*  standing  between  the  thick  branches.  He 
raised  his  gun  to  shoot,  but  in  a  moment  all  the  place  grew 
dark.  A  voice  called  behind  him  out  of  the  darkness,  "'Mi 
'Mi,"  and  he  answered,  "Who  calls?"  The  voice  cried,  "I 
am  your  dead  friend.  Tell  me,  now,  which  do  you  choose,  to 
die  or  to  live  ?  "  'Mi  answered,  "  I  am  willing  to  die.  Why 
should  I  live  when  my  father  seeks  to  kill  me  ?  " 

After  he  had  spoken,  a  deep  sleep  fell  upon  him.  When  he 
awoke  the  whole  place  was  clear  of  trees.  The  sun  was  shining 
brightly,  and  before  him  stood  a  long  table,  on  which  were  set 
dried  meat,  biscuits,  rum,  and  palm  wine,  and  all  kinds  of  gin. 
Then  he  saw  Isse  walking  up  and  down  as  in  life,  and  directing 
everything,  while  many  people  were  busily  working  round  about. 

*  Funisciurus  leucostisma  talboti. 


FOLK-LORE  363 

They  worked  hard,  and  as  they  worked  more  and  more  men 
came  out  of  the  bush,  till  in  a  little  space  the  whole  house  was 
finished.     Then  Isse  said  : 

"  This  is  your  house,  and  all  these  are  your  people.  Now, 
your  father's  case  is  a  very  long  one.  I  will  give  you  goods  so 
that  you  may  go  and  arrange  it." 

'Mi  agreed,  and  next  morning  called  together  seven  com- 
panions. He  gave  them  300  pieces  of  cloth  from  the  goods 
that  Isse  had  provided,  many  heads  of  tobacco,  and  countless 
demi-johns  of  palm  wine. 

Then  'Mi  himself  set  out  at  their  head  for  Obassi's  town. 

When  he  reached  the  entrance  he  called  a  meeting  of  the 
townsfolk,  and  said  to  them  : 

"  I  have  come  to  try  to  settle  my  father's  case,  which  has 
already  been  a  very  long  one.  I  wish  to  hear  from  you  how 
many  goods  I  must  pay." 

The  people  said,  "  Let  us  see  what  you  have  brought." 

So  he  showed  them  all,  and  they  went  before  Obassi  and 
begged  him  to  take  the  gifts  in  payment,  and  settle  the  affair. 
Obassi  answered,  "  Good.  I  accept  what  you  have  brought. 
The  case  is  finished." 

Then  'Mi  went  back  to  his  father's  town  to  fetch  his  mother. 
He  met  her  wandering  about  at  the  entrance  to  the  town,  and 
was  about  to  lead  her  away,  when  Nsi  himself  came  by. 

"  Whither  are  you  going  ?  "  he  asked. 

'Mi  answered,  "  I  am  leading  my  mother  away  to  my  own 
town,  which  is  a  long  way  from  here,  and  is  full  of  rich  things." 

On  hearing  this  Nsi  said,  "  I  should  like  to  see  3'our  town." 
So  he  followed  his  outcast  wife  and  son  till  they  came  to  that 
part  of  the  bush  where  the  new  town  stood. 

Nsi  was  amazed  at  what  he  saw,  and  still  more  so  when  he 
found  that  'Mi  had  been  to  Obassi  Osaw  and  arranged  his 
case.  On  this  he  sent  a  great  company  of  men  to  seize  Eyo 
and  bring  the  latter  before  him.  When  they  returned  Nsi 
called  both  his  sons,  and  said  : 

"  From  to-day  you,  Eyo,  are  my  unloved  son.  You  are  too  hot ; 
no  one  will  like  you  any  more.  You  are  careless  sometimes, 
and  burn  up  all  tender  plants  in  the  farms."    But  to  'Mi  he  said  : 

"  You,  'Mi,  are  my  good  son.     In  the  night  you  can  shine 


364      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

softly,  so  that  men  may  see  to  walk  safely  when  they  are  away 
from  home." 

When  Eyo  heard  this  he  thought,  "  Now  my  father  will  hate 
me  as  he  used  to  hate  'Mi.  Perhaps  he  will  try  to  kill  me  also. 
I  will  not  stay  here  on  earth,  but  will  go  up  to  the  sky  to 
Osaw." 

'Mi  also  thought,  "  Perhaps  my  father  is  deceiving  me,  or,  at 
at  any  rate,  he  may  grow  to  hate  me  again.  It  is  better  to  go 
up  to  the  sky  and  stay  with  Obassi  Osaw.  From  thence  I  can 
see  what  passes  both  in  his  land  and  in  that  of  my  father. 
Also  I  can  shine  the  brighter  on  high,  so  that  heaven  and 
earth  will  be  full  of  my  light."  Thus  Nsi  lost  both  of  these 
sons,  and  remained  on  earth  alone  with  his  third  boy,  Ejirum 
(Darkness). 

Why  the  Sunset  is  sometimes  Red  and  Stormy. 

In  the  beginning  of  things,  Obassi  Osaw  and  Obassi  Nsi 
lived  in  towns  some  distance  apart.  The  former  had  no 
sons,  but  the  latter  had  three.  The  first  of  them  was  a 
great  thief,  the  second  was  the  same,  and  when  they  stole 
anything  their  Father  had  to  pay  for  it. 

Now  Obassi  had  great  farms  and  plantations  outside  the 
town.  Sometimes  cows  ate  his  yams ;  so  one  day  he  came 
home  and  put  powder  in  his  gun  but  no  shot,  meaning  to 
frighten  the  beasts  away  next  time  they  came.  During  his 
absence  the  two  bad  sons  went  and  put  shot  in  the  gun.  So 
when  he  fired  at  the  cows  one  of  them  died. 

Obassi  Nsi  cried  out,  and  went  back  to  the  town.  When 
he  reached  it  he  told  the  owner,  "  I  shot  your  cow  by  accident; " 
but  the  man  replied  : 

"  Then  I  must  kill  you,  just  the  same  as  my  cow." 

A  meeting  was  held,  and  the  townsfolk  begged  the  man  to 
accept  another  cow  in  exchange  for  the  one  he  had  lost,  but  he 
refused  to  do  so,  and  still  said  that  Obassi  must  die. 

Next  morning,  therefore,  Obassi  said  to  his  third  son,  "  I 
have  to  die  to-day ;  "  but  the  latter  cried  : 

"  How  can  you  die.  First  son  and  second  son  are  fully 
grown,  but  I  am  still  small.  Do  not  leave  me  till  I  am  grown 
up." 


FOLK-LORE  365 

Obassi  said,  "  Here  is  a  key.  The  room  to  which  it  belongs 
shall  be  your  own,  so  that  you  have  somewhere  to  run  to,  and 
be  safe  from  your  brothers." 

In  the  evening  he  called  the  boy  again,  and  said : 

"  Do  no  evil  thing  in  the  town,  and  when  I  am  dead  kill  a 
cow  and  give  it  to  the  people."     That  night  he  died. 

The  third  son  killed  the  cow  as  he  had  been  bidden,  but  the 
first  and  second  sons  were  very  angry,  and  beat  him,  and  said, 
"  The  cow  belonged  to  us."  They  took  away  the  key  of  his 
room,  so  that  small  boy  had  nowhere  to  go,  and  they  seized  all 
the  goods  for  themselves,  so  he  was  left  penniless.  After  that 
they  went  away  from  their  father's  land. 

The  boy  went  out  sadly  and  walked  through  the  town.  He 
met  an  old  woman,  who  asked  "  Whither  are  you  going  ?  " 
He  said,  "  I  am  the  small  son  of  Obassi  Nsi,  and  I  have 
nowhere  to  go." 

The  old  woman  answered,  "  Do  not  trouble.  Stay  here  with 
me,"  and  to  this  the  boy  agreed.  One  day  he  found  an  old 
knife  in  the  ground;  this  he  cleaned  and  sharpened  till  it 
became  all  right  again.  Next  morning  he  went  to  the  bush  and 
set  native  traps.  In  one  of  these  he  caught  an  Iku  (water 
chevrotain),  which  he  brought  home  and  gave  to  the  old 
woman.  She  said,  "I  cannot  eat  this  meat ;  perhaps  you  have 
stolen  it ; "  but  he  answered,  "  No,  I  will  take  you  to  the  place 
where  the  traps  are  set."  She  went  with  him,  and  saw  that  it 
was  as  he  had  said ;  so  agreed  to  eat  the  meat. 

Next  morning  the  boy  said,  "  I  wish  to  go  and  clear  my 
farm."  When  he  got  to  the  plantation  he  saw  some  slaves  of 
Obassi  Osaw  coming  towards  him.  When  they  arrived  they 
said  : 

"  We  have  come  to  take  charge  of  the  goods  of  Obassi  Nsi." 
On  this  the  boy  answered,  "  They  are  not  in  my  hands.  First 
and  second  sons  have  taken  everything."  So  the  men  returned 
empty-handed. 

Next  day  six  more  came  and  asked  the  same  thing,  but  the 
lad  said,  "  Wait  a  minute  and  I  will  see  what  can  be  done.' 
Then   he   went   to   the   old   woman   and   told   her   what  had 
happened.     She   said,   "  Go    to   Porcupine,    and   get    him    to 
practise  the  charm." 


366      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

When  this  was  done  the  Diviner  said,  "  Go  to  the  middle 
compound  of  your  father's  town,  and  under  the  floor  of  the 
inner  room  you  will  find  what  will  content  the  messengers." 

The  boy  did  as  he  was  told,  dug  up  the  goods  and  gave  them 
to  the  men  to  carry  to  Obassi  Osaw. 

When  Obassi  saw  that  his  slaves  brought  back  the  goods, 
but  not  the  boy,  he  was  angry  and  said,  "  I  told  you  to  bring 
me  the  young  son  also.     Why  have  you  not  done  this  ?  " 

Next  day,  therefore,  two  more  men  were  sent  to  bring  the  boy. 
No  sooner  did  he  arrive  than  the  sky  people  brought  him  fruits, 
and  all  kinds  of  rich  gifts,  together  with  some  very  beautiful 
slaves.  In  spite  of  all  that  Osaw  could  do,  however,  the  boy 
was  not  happy,  but  said,  "  I  wish  I  could  go  back  to  earth 
once  more." 

Then  Obassi  Osaw  was  vexed,  and  his  eyes  began  to  glow, 
and  from  their  gleam  the  sky  grew  red  and  stormy.  That  is 
the  reason  why  we  see  Tornado  sunsets.  Obassi  grows  angry 
and  his  eyes  become  red.  The  storm  always  follows,  for 
Tornados  are  the  sound  of  the  wrath  of  Obassi  Osaw. 

HOW   ALL   THE    RlVERS    FIRST    CAME    ON    EARTH. 
By  Okun  Asere  of  Mfamosing. 

In  the  very,  very,  very  olden  time,  an  old  man  named 
Etim  fNe  (old  person)  came  down  from  the  sky ;  he  alone  with 
his  old  wife  Ejaw  (wild  cat).  At  that  time  there  were  no 
people  on  the  earth.  This  old  couple  were  the  very  first  to  go 
down  to  dwell  there. 

Now  up  to  this  time  all  water  was  kept  in  the  kingdom  of 
Obassi  Osaw.     On  earth  there  was  not  a  single  drop. 

Etim  'Ne  and  his  wife  stayed  for  seven  days,  and  during  that 
time  they  had  only  the  juice  of  plantain  stems  to  drink  or  cook 
with. 

At  the  end  of  that  time  the  old  man  said  to  his  old  wife,  "  I 
will  go  back  to  Obassi  Osaw's  town  and  ask  him  to  give  us  a 
little  water." 

When  he  arrived  at  the  old  town  where  they  used  to  dwell, 
he  went  to  the  house  of  Obassi  and  said  : 

"  Since  we  went  down  to  earth  we  have  had  no  water,  only 


FOLK-LORE  367 

the  juice  which  we  sucked  from  the  plantain  stems.  For  three 
nights  I  will  sleep  in  your  town,  then  when  I  return  to  earth  I 
hope  that  you  will  give  me  some  water  to  take  with  me. 
Should  my  wife  have  children  they  will  be  glad  for  the  water, 
and  what  they  offer  to  you  in  thanksgiving  I  myself  will  bring 
up  to  your  town." 

On  the  third  morning,  very  early,  Obassi  Osaw  put  the  water 
charm  in  a  calabash,  and  bound  it  firmly  with  tie-tie.  Then  he 
gave  it  to  Etim  fNe,  and  said,  "  When  you  wish  to  loose  this,  let 
no  one  be  present.  Open  it,  and  you  will  find  seven  good  gifts 
inside.  Wherever  you  want  water,  take  out  one  of  these  and 
throw  it  on  the  ground." 

Etim  fNe  thanked  Lord  Obassi,  and  set  out  on  his  way 
earthward.  Just  before  he  came  to  the  place  where  he  had 
begun  to  cut  farm,  he  opened  the  calabash,  and  found  within 
seven  stones,  clear  as  water.  He  made  a  small  hole  and  laid 
one  of  the  stones  within  it.  Soon  a  little  stream  began  to 
well  out,  then  more  and  more,  till  it  became  a  broad  lake,  great 
as  from  here  to  Ako. 

Etim  'Ne  went  on  and  told  his  wife.  They  both  rejoiced 
greatly,  but  he  thought,  "  How  is  this  ?  Can  a  man  be  truly 
happy,  yet  have  no  child  ?  " 

After  two  days  his  wife  came  to  him  and  said,  "  Obassi  is 
sending  us  yet  another  gift.  Soon  we  shall  be  no  longer  alone 
on  earth,  you  and  I." 

When  the  due  months  were  passed,  she  bore  him  seven 
children,  all  at  one  time.  They  were  all  sons.  Later  she 
became  enceinte  again,  and  this  time  bore  seven  daughters. 
After  that  she  was  tired,  and  never  bore  any  more  children. 

In  course  of  time  the  girls  were  all  sent  to  the  fatting- house. 
While  they  were  there  Etim  'Ne  pointed  out  to  his  seven  sons 
where  he  would  like  them  to  build  their  compounds.  When 
these  were  finished,  he  gave  a  daughter  to  each  son  and  said, 
"  Do  not  care  that  she  is  your  sister.  Just  marry  her.  There 
is  no  one  else  who  can  become  your  wife." 

The  eldest  son  dwelt  by  the  first  water  which  Etim  'Ne  had 
made,  but  to  each  of  the  others  he  gave  a  lake  or  river — seven 
in  all. 

After  one  year,  all  the  girls  became  enceinte.     Each  of  them 


368      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

had  seven  children,  three  girls  and  four  boys.  Etim  fNe  said, 
"  It  is  good."  He  was  very  happy.  As  the  children  grew  up  he 
sent  them  to  other  places. 

Now  the  seven  sons  were  all  hunters.  Three  of  them  were 
good,  and  brought  some  of  their  kill  to  give  to  their  father,  but 
four  were  very  bad,  and  hid  all  the  meat,  so  that  they  might 
keep  everything  for  themselves. 

When  Etim  fNe  saw  this,  he  left  the  rivers  near  the  farms  of 
his  three  good  sons,  but  took  them  away  from  the  four  bad 
boys.  These  latter  were  very  sad  when  they  found  their  water 
gone,  so  they  consulted  together  and  went  and  got  palm  wine. 
This  they  carried  before  their  father  and  said : 

"  We  are  seven,  your  children.  First  you  gave  the  water  to 
all.  Now  you  have  taken  it  away  from  us  four.  What  have 
we  done  ?  " 

Etim  'Ne  answered,  "  Of  all  the  meat  you  killed  in  the  bush 
you  brought  none  to  me.  Therefore  I  took  away  your  rivers. 
Because  you  have  come  to  beg  me  I  will  forgive  you,  and  will 
give  you  four  good  streams.  As  your  children  grow  and 
multiply  I  will  give  you  many." 

After  another  year  the  sons  had  children  again.  When  the 
latter  grew  up  they  went  to  different  places  and  built  their 
houses. 

When  these  were  ready  Etim  fNe  sent  for  all  the  children 
and  said,  "  At  dawn  to-morrow  let  each  of  you  go  down  to 
the  stream  which  flows  by  the  farm  of  his  father.  Seek  in  its 
bed  till  you  find  seven  smooth  stones.  Some  must  be  small 
and  some  big  like  the  palm  of  your  hand.  Let  each  one  go  in 
a  different  direction,  and  after  walking  about  a  mile,  lay  a  stone 
upon  the  ground.  Then  walk  on  again  and  do  the  same,  till  all 
are  finished.  Where  you  set  a  big  stone  a  river  will  come,  and 
where  you  set  a  small  stone  a  stream  will  come." 

All  the  sons  did  as  they  were  bidden,  save  one  alone.  He 
took  a  great  basket  and  filled  it  with  stones.  Then  he  went  to 
a  place  in  the  bush  near  his  own  farm.  He  thought,  "Our 
father  told  us,  if  you  throw  a  big  stone  a  big  river  will  come. 
If  I  throw  down  all  my  stones  together,  so  great  a  water  will 
come  that  it  will  surpass  the  waters  of  all  my  brothers."  Then 
he  emptied  his  basket  of  stones  all  in  one  place,  and,  behold  ! 


FOLK-LORE  369 

water  flowed  from  every  side,  so  that  all  his  farm,  and  all  the 
land  round  about  became  covered  with  water.  When  he  saw 
that  it  would  not  stop  but  threatened  to  overflow  the  whole 
earth  he  grew  very  much  afraid.  He  saw  his  wife  running,  and 
called  to  her,  "  Let  us  go  to  my  father."  Then  they  both  ran 
as  hard  as  they  could  toward  the  house  of  Etim  'Ne. 

Before  they  reached  it  the  other  children,  who  had  been 
setting  the  smooth  stones  in  the  bush,  as  their  father  had  told 
them,  heard  the  sound  of  the  coming  of  the  waters.  Great 
fear  fell  upon  them,  and  they  also  dropped  what  remained  and 
ran  back  to  Etim  'Ne. 

He  also  had  heard  the  rushing  of  the  water  and  knew  what 
the  bad  son  had  done.  He  took  the  magic  calabash  in  his  hand 
and  ran  with  his  wife  to  a  hill  behind  their  farm.  On  this 
there  grew  many  tall  palm  trees.  Beneath  the  tallest  of  these 
he  stood,  while  his  children  gathered  round  one  after  the  other 
as  they  got  back  from  the  bush.  Etim  'Ne  held  on  high  the 
calabash  which  Obassi  had  given  him,  and  prayed  : 

"  Lord  Obassi,  let  not  the  good  thing  which  you  gave  for  our 
joy  turn  to  our  hurt." 

As  he  prayed  the  water  began  to  go  down.  It  sought  around 
till  it  found  places  where  there  had  been  no  water.  At  each  of 
these  it  made  a  bed  for  itself,  great  or  small,  some  for  broad 
rivers,  and  some  for  little  streams.  Only  where  the  bad  son 
had  emptied  his  basket  it  did  not  go  back,  but  remained  in  a 
great  lake  covering  all  his  farm,  so  that  he  was  very  hungry, 
and  had  to  beg  from  his  brothers  till  the  time  came  for  the 
fruits  to  ripen  in  the  new  farm  which  he  had  to  cut. 

After  many  days  Etim  'Ne  called  all  his  children  around,  and 
told  them  the  names  of  all  the  rivers,  and  of  every  little  stream. 
Then  he  said,  "  Let  no  one  forget  to  remember  me  when  I  shall 
have  left  you,  for  I  it  was  who  gave  water  to  all  the  earth,  so 
that  every  one  shall  be  glad." 

Two  days  afterwards  he  died.  In  the  beginning  there  were 
no  people  on  the  earth  and  no  water.  Etim  'Ne  it  was  who 
first  came  down  to  dwell  with  his  old  wife  Ejaw,  and  he  it  was 
who  begged  water  from  Obassi  Osaw. 


S.B.  B    B 


370     IN    THE    SHADOW    OF   THE     BUSH 

How  the  Lame  Boy  brought  Fire  from  Heaven. 

By  Okon  Asere  of  Mfamosing. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  world,  Obassi  Osaw  made  everything, 
but  he  did  not  give  fire  to  the  people  who  were  on  earth. 

Etim  fNe  said  to  the  Lame  Boy,  "  What  is  the  use  of  Obassi 
Osaw  sending  us  here  without  any  fire  ?  Go  therefore  and  ask 
him  to  give  us  some."     So  the  Lame  Boy  set  out. 

Obassi  Osaw  was  very  angry  when  he  got  the  message,  and 
sent  the  boy  back  quickly  to  earth  to  reprove  Etim  'Ne  for  what 
he  had  asked.  In  those  days  the  Lame  Boy  had  not  become 
lame,  but  could  walk  like  other  people. 

When  Etim  'Ne  heard  that  he  had  angered  Obassi  Osaw,  he 
set  out  himself  for  the  latter's  town  and  said  : 

"  Please  forgive  me  for  what  I  did  yesterday.  It  was  by 
accident."  Obassi  would  not  pardon  him,  though  he  stayed 
for  three  days  begging  forgiveness.     Then  he  went  home. 

When  Etim  reached  his  town  the  boy  laughed  at  him. 
"  Are  you  a  chief,"  said  he,  "  yet  could  get  no  fire  ?  I  myself 
will  go  and  bring  it  to  you.  If  they  will  give  me  none  I  will 
steal  it." 

That  very  day  the  lad  set  out.  He  reached  the  house  of 
Obassi  at  evening  time  and  found  the  people  preparing  food. 
He  helped  with  the  work,  and  when  Obassi  began  to  eat,  knelt 
down  humbly  till  the  meal  was  ended. 

The  master  saw  that  the  boy  was  useful  and  did  not  drive 
him  out  of  the  house.  After  he  had  served  for  several  days, 
Obassi  called  to  him  and  said,  "  Go  to  the  house  of  my  wives 
and  ask  them  to  send  me  a  lamp." 

The  boy  gladly  did  as  he  was  bidden,  for  it  was  in  the  house 
of  the  wives  that  fire  was  kept.  He  touched  nothing,  but 
waited  until  the  lamp  was  given  him,  then  brought  it  back  with 
all  speed.  Once,  after  he  had  stayed  for  many  days  among  the 
servants,  Obassi  sent  him  again,  and  this  time  one  of  the  wives 
said,  "  You  can  light  the  lamp  at  the  fire."  She  went  into  her 
house  and  left  him  alone. 

The  boy  took  a  brand  and  lighted  the  lamp,  then  he  wrapped 
the  brand  in  plantain  leaves  and  tied  it  up  in  his  cloth,  carried 


FOLK-LORE  371 

the  lamp  to  his  master  and  said,  "  I  wish  to  go  out  for  a  certain 
purpose."     Obassi  answered,  "  You  can  go." 

The  boy  went  to  the  bush  outside  the  town  where  some 
dry  wood  was  lying.  He  laid  the  brand  amongst  it,  and  blew 
till  it  caught  alight.  Then  he  covered  it  with  plantain  stems 
and  leaves  to  hide  the  smoke,  and  went  back  to  the  house. 
Obassi  asked,  "  Why  have  you  been  so  long  ?  "  and  the  lad 
answered,  "  I  did  not  feel  well." 

That  night  when  all  the  people  were  sleeping,  the  thief  tied 
his  cloth  together  and  crept  to  the  end  of  the  town  where  the 
fire  was  hidden.  He  found  it  burning,  and  took  a  glowing 
brand  and  some  firewood  and  set  out  homeward. 

When  earth  was  reached  once  more  the  lad  went  to  Etim 
and  said  : 

"  Here  is  the  fire  which  I  promised  to  bring  you.  Send  for 
some  wood,  and  I  will  show  you  what  we  must  do." 

So  the  first  fire  was  made  on  earth.  Obassi  Osaw  looked 
down  from  his  house  in  the  sky  and  saw  the  smoke  rising.  He 
said  to  his  eldest  son  Akpan  Obassi,  "  Go,  ask  the  boy  if  it  is 
he  who  has  stolen  the  fire." 

Akpan  came  down  to  earth,  and  asked  as  his  father  had 
bidden  him.  The  lad  confessed,  "  I  was  the  one  who  stole  the 
fire.     The  reason  why  I  hid  it  was  because  I  feared." 

Akpan  replied,  "  I  bring  you  a  message.  Up  till  now  you 
have  been  able  to  walk.  From  to-day  you  will  not  be  able  to 
do  so  any  more." 

That  is  the  reason  why  the  Lame  Boy  cannot  walk.  He  it 
was  who  first  brought  fire  to  earth  from  Obassi's  home  in  the 
sky. 

Oporopootop. 

Tortoise  and  Ram  were  friends.  One  day  they  went  to  cut 
their  farm,  but  only  prepared  a  small  bit.  Next  day  they  went 
back  to  do  more,  but  found  the  whole  place  cleaned.  They 
wondered  who  had  done  all  the  work  for  them,  but  started  to 
burn  the  ground  with  fire.  After  this  they  went  home  to  rest, 
and  when  they  got  back  next  day,  lo !  all  the  earth  was  ready 
tilled.  They  began  planting  yams,  and  next  day  found  that 
this  too  had  been  finished  while  they  slept.     They  wondered 

b  b  2 


372      IN   THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

very   much    who    had    done    this.     It   was    a    person    named 
Oporopootop. 

Later  the  wives  went  and  planted  a  few  coco  yams,  and 
again,  on  their  return,  found  the  whole  place  set  with  these 
also.  Next  they  started  sowing  corn,  but  could  not  cover  much 
ground  on  the  first  day.  The  second  day,  however,  a  great 
space  was  found  to  have  been  planted. 

When  the  corn  grew  ripe,  the  owners  of  the  farm  went  to 
gather  it.  They  took  a  very  few  cobs  at  first,  but  lo  !  next  day 
all  had  been  garnered,  and  so  it  was  with  the  other  vegetables. 
The  two  friends  got  a  little  for  themselves  and  for  their  wives, 
but  the  rest  disappeared  mysteriously. 

Tortoise  said  to  Ram,  "  What  can  we  do  to  find  out  who  has 
stolen  our  fruits  and  vegetables  ?  "  Ram  said,  "  Let  us  watch." 
So  Tortoise  went  to  his  wife  and  said,  "  Will  you  go  to-day  and 
watch  the  farm  ?  "  She  agreed,  and  after  waiting  a  while  in  the 
little  house  they  had  built,  heard  something  moving  in  the  bush. 
It  sounded  like  a  wind  among  the  trees,  but  was  caused  by  the 
coming  of  Oporopootop.  He  came  to  the  hut  and  knocked  at 
the  door,  crying  in  a  loud  voice,  "  Who  is  there  ?  " 

The  woman  answered,  "  I  am  the  wife  of  Tortoise,"  and 
opened  the  door.  The  visitor  entered  and  said  to  her,  "  Go  and 
find  some  fruit  in  the  farm,  that  we  may  eat."  She  answered, 
"  Someone  has  stolen  nearly  all  our  fruit."  She  went,  however, 
and  found  a  few  corn  cobs,  which  she  brought  back  and  roasted 
over  the  fire. 

When  the  meal  was  finished,  Oporopootop  said,  "  Will  you 
scratch  the  craw-craw  on  my  body  ?  "  This  the  woman  did,  but 
he  cried,  "  You  scratch  too  hard  !  "  and  suddenly  swallowed  her 
up  ! 

At  daybreak,  the  husband  came  to  fetch  his  wife,  but  found 
no  trace  of  her.  He  said  to  himself,  "  What  can  have  happened 
to  my  wife  ?  I  will  stay  here  till  I  find  out  what  has  become  of 
her."     So  he  made  a  fire  on  the  ground  and  waited. 

At  evening  time  again  a  sound  was  heard,  like  the  going  of  a 
wind  through  the  bush.  It  was  Oporopootop.  The  latter  knocked 
at  the  door  as  before  and  said,  "  Who  is  within  ?  " 

Tortoise  answered,  "  It  is  I,"  and  opened.  Oporopootop 
entered  and  said,  "  Go  and  fetch  some  fruits  that  we  may  eat." 


FOLK-LORE  373 

Tortoise  went  and  collected  what  he  could.  He  brought  it 
back,  cooked  and  gave  to  his  visitor  to  eat.  Again  Oporopootop 
said,  "  Scratch  my  craw-craw,"  but,  while  his  host  obeyed, 
exclaimed,  "  You  scratch  too  hard  !  "  and  before  the  latter  could 
answer,  caught  him  and  swallowed  him  up  ! 

When  daylight  dawned  Ram  also  came  to  the  farm,  but  could 
find  neither  his  friend  nor  the  wife  ;  so  sat  down  to  await  their 
return.  At  evening  time  Ram  heard  the  coming  of  Oporopootop, 
just  as  the  others  had  done.  When  the  visitor  asked,  "  Who  is 
there  ?  "  Ram  replied,  "  Why  do  you  ask  this?  Does  the  whole 
earth  belong  to  you  ?  "  And  when  the  monster  begged  for  food 
Ram  refused,  whereon  they  began  to  fight. 

Now  Oporopootop  was  a  fearful  beast,  bigger  than  all  the 
animals  on  earth  in  our  day.  He  was  like  a  great  lizard,  but 
covered  with  hard  shell,  so  that  he  could  roll  himself  down  from 
a  high  hill,  yet  take  no  hurt.  His  head  and  neck  were  very 
long,  like  those  of  some  birds,  so  that  he  could  reach  up  to  eat 
from  off  the  high  trees.  In  colour  he  was  mixed  white  and  black. 
On  his  wings  were  claws,  though  he  could  not  fly,  and  on  his 
feet  were  terrible  claws.  It  was  with  these  that  he  usually 
fought. 

Nevertheless,  in  spite  of  the  huge  size  of  the  beast  and  his 
great  strength,  Ram  was  more  cunning  than  he.  For  a  long 
time  they  fought,  but  at  length  Ram  struck  down  his  enemy 
with  his  horns,  and  broke  off  his  feet,  so  that  he  died. 

Oporopootop  was  a  great  king  in  the  bush,  and  when  people 
planted  new  farms  he  sent  his  servants  to  help  them,  so  that  he 
might  eat  of  the  first  fruits  when  they  were  ripe.  If  Ram  had 
not  killed  him,  there  would  soon  have  been  no  more  farms,  as 
the  people  would  all  have  died.  How  lucky  it  is  that  the  bush 
is  now  free  from  such  a  monster ! 

How  Palm  Trees  and  Water  came  on  Earth. 

In  the  beginning  of  all  things  Obassi  made  a  man  and  a 
woman  and  brought  them  down  to  earth.  There  for  a  while 
he  left  them,  but  came  again  a  little  later,  and  asked  what 
they  had  found  to  eat  and  drink.  They  answered  that  they 
neither  ate  ror  drank,  so  Obassi  made   a  trench  in  the  ground 


374      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

Then  from  a  fold  of  his  robe  he  took  out  a  vessel  containing 
water,  and  poured  it  into  the  trench.  This  became  a  stream. 
Afterwards  he  took  a  palm  kernel,  and  planted  it.  He  then  told 
the  couple  to  use  water  for  cooking  their  food,  for  washing  and 
drinking.  He  also  said  they  must  carefully  tend  the  palm  tree 
which  he  had  planted.  When  ripe  clusters  appeared  upon  it, 
they  should  cut  these  down,  and  take  great  care  of  them,  for 
they  would  provide  food  as  well  as  medicine.  The  outer  cover 
or  rind  should  be  used  as  food,  while  the  kernel  makes  good 
medicine. 

How  Pythons  lost  Hands  and  Feet. 

There  was  once  a  Python,  whose  wife  was  about  to  bear  him 
a  child.  One  day,  in  coming  through  the  bush,  he  saw  some 
ripe  Aju  fruits,  and  plucked  them,  as  he  thought,  "  Perhaps 
my  wife  would  like  these." 

The  woman  ate  them  with  great  delight,  and  from  that  day 
on,  kept  begging  her  husband  to  bring  her  some  more.  He 
went  out  to  the  bush  to  search,  but  could  not  find  any.  She, 
however,  threatened  that  unless  more  were  brought  to  her,  she 
would  break  her  pregnancy. 

In  those  days  Pythons  had  hands  and  feet  like  men,  and 
could  walk  upright.  When  therefore  he  found  no  fruits  in  the 
bush  with  which  to  satisfy  his  wife's  desire,  Python  went  to  the 
farm  of  a  man,  where  an  Aju  tree  stood,  and  each  day  plucked 
some  of  the  fruit. 

Now  the  owner  of  the  tree  had  a  son  named  Monn-akat- 
chang-obbaw-chang  (Child-feet-not-hands-not),  because  he  had 
neither  hands  nor  feet.  One  day  he  complained  to  his  father 
that  someone  was  stealing  their  Aju,  and  begged  that  he 
should  be  carried  to  the  foot  of  the  tree,  so  that  he  might 
watch  for  the  thief.     To  this  the  father  consented. 

When  Nkimm  (Python)  came  next  day,  he  found  the  tree 
guarded  by  a  wonderful  boy  without  hands  or  feet.  So  soon  as 
the  latter  saw  the  snake  he  called,  "  Are  you  the  person  who 
steals  my  father's  Aju  ?  "  Nkimm  denied  his  guilt,  and  said 
that  this  was  the  first  time  he  had  seen  the  tree,  but  begged  the 
boy  to  give  him  a  few  of  the  fruits  for  his  sick  wife. 

Akat  Chang  replied  that  he  would  do  so  with  pleasure,  had 


FOLK-LORE  375 

he  but  hands  and  feet  with  which  to  climb  the  tree,  but,  since 
he  had  not,  this  was  impossible,  as  he  could  not  allow  any 
stranger  to  pluck  his  father's  fruits. 

Python  offered  to  take  off  his  own  hands  and  feet  and  lend 
them  to  the  boy,  that  he  might  be  able  to  climb.  This  was 
done  and  the  limbs  bound  on,  after  which  the  boy  quickly 
went  up  into  the  tree,  and  threw  down  as  many  of  the  fruits  as 
the  visitor  could  carry  away.  He  then  came  down  again  and 
returned  the  limbs  to  their  owner,  who  thanked  him  and  left 
with  his  load.  When  he  reached  his  house  he  gave  the  Aju 
to  his  wife,  who  ate  them  with  great  delight. 

Before  it  grew  dark,  the  father  of  Akat  Chang  came  to  the 
tree  to  carry  the  boy  home  for  the  night.  His  son  related  how 
he  had  spent  the  time  with  the  Aju  thief,  and  enjoyed  the 
advantage  of  using  the  latter's  hands  and  feet. 

Two  days  afterwards,  Nkimm's  wife  had  finished  all  the 
Aju,  so  told  her  husband  that  he  must  fetch  her  some  more, 
again  threatening  to  break  her  pregnancy  if  he  did  not  do  as 
she  asked.  So  Python  was  obliged  to  set  out  once  more  for 
his  well-known  tree.  There  again  he  met  his  friend,  the  boy, 
who  had  been  told  by  his  mother  to  ask  the  thief  to  fix  on  the 
hands  and  feet  very  firmly.  She  bade  him  then  climb  into  the 
tree,  and  stay  there  until  his  father  came. 

Once  more  Python  took  off  his  feet  and  hands  and  bound 
them  strongly  to  the  boy's  body  as  the  latter  asked  him  to  do. 
What  a  loss  to  Nkimm  ! 

Off  went  the  boy  up  the  tree,  and  did  not  cease  from  climbing 
till  he  reached  the  topmost  branch.    Then  he  began  to  sing  : 

"  Sini  sini  mokkaw.     Sine  sine  mokkaw 

Oro  obba 
Nta     abe  Aju,  monn  akat   akpim. 
(Lord  plant  Aju,  child  feet   not  get) 

Oro  obba 
Nkimm  afonn  akat,  akaw  anam  Aju. 

(Python    has    feet,    take     buy   (with)  Aju  fruit). 

Oro  obba 
Sini  sini  mokkaw.     Sine  sine  mokkaw. 

Oro  obba." 

(The  narrator  repeated  the  song  very  carefully  as  it  had  been 
taught  him    by  his   grandfather,  but    he   had  no  idea  of  the 


376      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

meaning  of  the  refrain.  The  latter  appears  to  have  some 
similarity  to  the  Efut  language.) 

When  the  parents  heard  the  singing,  they  ran  towards  their 
son.  In  his  hands  the  father  bore  a  great  spear.  When 
Nkimm  saw  this,  he  rushed  off  for  his  life  in  the  opposite 
direction,  throwing  himself  along  the  ground  in  the  only  way 
possible  to  him. 

Since  then,  no  man  has  been  born  without  hands  or  feet 
and  no  Python  or  other  snake  with  them. 

Had  it  not  been  for  this  act  of  Monn-Akat-Chang,  snakes 
would  have  continued  to  be  footed  animals  instead  of  creepers, 
and  man  would  sometimes  have  been  born  without  feet  or 
hands. 

Why  Snake  has  neither  Hands  nor  Feet. 

By  Itambo  Asong  of  Oban. 

Obassi  Nsi  once  made  a  farm.  In  it  he  put  three  animals, 
Mfong  (cow),  Mbui  (goat),  and  Nyaw  (snake).  Cow  and  Goat 
were  the  gardeners,  while  Snake  was  ordered  to  collect  the 
fruits  and  take  them  to  the  house  of  Obassi. 

Before  leaving  them  to  their  work,  Obassi  said,  "  Of  all 
the  fruits  of  this  farm  you  may  not  eat.  Even  should  any 
plantains  or  other  fruits  fall  down,  you  must  not  touch 
them." 

One  day  some  strangers  came  from  a  far  town  to  visit 
Obassi ;  whereon  the  latter  sent  Snake  to  his  farm  to  bring 
back  a  supply  of  food  for  them.  At  that  time  Snake  had 
hands  and  feet  just  like  all  other  creatures.  The  first  day  he 
went  quickly  and  brought  back  a  plentiful  supply,  but  the 
second  day,  when  he  went  again,  Cow  asked,  "  Why  does  our 
master  want  so  many  plantains  ? "  Snake  said,  "  He  is 
feeding  the  strangers  who  have  come  to  stay  with  him." 

Goat  said,  "  I  do  not  quite  understand.  Do  you  mean  that 
our  master  eats  none  of  all  these  good  things,  but  only  gives 
them  to  strangers  ?  "  The  three  of  them  disputed  the  ques- 
tion, and  it  was  late  when  Snake  got  back  with  his  load. 
Obassi  was  angry  and  beat  him  because  he  was  so  long  on 
the  way. 


FOLK-LORE  377 

Next  time  Snake  was  sent  to  the  farm  he  said  to  Cow  and 
Goat : 

"  I  do  not  see  why  we  should  die  of  hunger  while  all  the 
food  is  devoured  by  strangers.  Why  should  not  we  ourselves 
enjoy  the  fruits  of  our  labours  ?  " 

To  this  the  others  agreed,  and  Cow  sent  Goat  to  cut 
plantains.  They  were  ripe,  and  when  Cow  divided  them  out, 
Goat  said  to  him  : 

"  You  are  the  head  man  in  the  farm.  You  should  eat  first." 
On  this  Cow  began  to  eat,  and  cried  out,  "  Oh,  very  sweet 
plantains  !  "     Then  both  the  others  joined  him  in  eating. 

Snake  went  and  got  yams.  He  came  back  and  said  to  the 
others,  "  Do  not  tell  anyone  what  I  have  done,  for  if  my 
master  heard,  he  would  do  something  to  me." 

On  his  return,  Obassi  was  more  vexed  than  before.  He 
said,  "  Why  did  you  stay  away  so  long  ?  You  already  knew 
that  there  were  strangers  in  the  house." 

Next  day  again  Obassi  sent  the  Snake,  but  this  time  he  bade 
one  of  his  daughters,  named  Afion  Obassi,  follow  secretly,  that 
she  might  learn  why  Snake  stayed  so  long  in  the  farm. 

When  Afion  arrived,  she  found  Cow  and  Goat  eating.  She 
said,  "  Who  told  you  to  eat  the  fruits  in  my  father's  farm  ?  " 
They  answered,  "  It  was  Snake  who  told  us  we  might  eat." 

After  the  girl  returned  home,  she  told  her  father  what 
she  bad  seen.  Obassi  therefore  sent  for  the  three  animals. 
When  they  stood  before  him  he  asked,  "  How  is  it  that  you  ate 
the  fruit  in  my  farm,  which  I  had  forbidden  you  to  touch  ?  " 
They  answered,  "  It  was  Snake  who  taught  us  to  eat." 

Obassi  said,  "  Each  of  you  must  suffer  for  disobeying  my 
orders."  To  Cow  he  said,  "  From  now  onward,  when  men 
pick  plantains,  they  will  keep  the  good  part  for  themselves  and 
throw  only  the  rind  to  you."  That  is  the  reason  why  we 
always  see  Cow  eating  plantain  skins.  To  Goat  he  said, 
"  When  people  prepare  their  yams,  the  peelings  only  shall  be 
your  portion."  That  is  why  we  see  Goat  eating  up  the  yam 
parings. 

Obassi  seized  Snake,  pressed  him  and  pulled  off  his 
hands  and  feet.  That  is  the  reason  why  he  no  longer  has 
these,  like  other  animals. 


378      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

Why  Lizard's  Head  is  always  moving  up  and  down. 

By  Ojong  Itaroga. 

In  the  old  days,  when  all  the  beasts  could  speak  like  men, 
Obassi  Nsi  married  many  wives.  These  were  the  daughters  of 
nearly  all  animals  on  earth,  and  each  creature  who  gave  his 
daughter  in  marriage  to  Obassi  received  a  very  rich  gift  in 
exchange. 

Now  Tortoise  also  wanted  a  gift  like  the  rest,  but  he  had 
only  sons  and  no  daughter.  He  took  a  long  time  to  think 
over  the  matter ;  at  length  he  made  a  plan.  He  called 
two  of  his  sons  and  told  them  that  he  was  about  to  give 
them  to  Obassi  as  wives,  so  they  must  take  care  never  to 
let  anyone  see  their  nakedness.  After  warning  them  in  this 
way,  he  dressed  them  in  very  rich  robes,  like  girls,  and  they 
set  forth. 

When  Tortoise  and  his  two  seeming  daughters  reached  the 
hall  where  Obassi  was  sitting,  he  stood  forth  and  said : 

"lam  the  best  of  all  your  friends,  for  the  rest  have  given  you 
each  a  wife,  but  I  alone  bring  two." 

Obassi  thanked  him,  and  gave  him  in  return  twice  as  great 
riches  as  he  had  given  to  the  others.  "  Lord,"  said  Tortoise, 
"  there  is  one  thing  which  I  must  tell  you.  No  one  must  see 
my  daughters'  nakedness,  else  they  will  die." 

"  What  a  thing  to  say  !  "  answered  Obassi.      "  It  would  be 
death  to  any  man  to  see  one  of  my  wives  unclothed." 
"  I  spoke,"  said  Tortoise,  "  of  their  fellow  women." 
"  Fear  not,"  answered  Obassi ;  "  since  you  have  told  me  this, 
there  is  no  danger  of  such  a  thing." 

On  this  Tortoise  went  away,  rejoicing  in  his  success,  while 
Obassi  handed  over  the  two  new  wives  to  his  head  wife 
that  she  might  look  after  them,  never  thinking  that  they 
were  boys. 

Not  long  after,  their  mistress  found  out  the  true  state  of  the 
case.  She  went  secretly  to  Obassi  and  told  him  that  the  two 
girls  whom  Tortoise  had  given  him  in  marriage  possessed  the 
masculine  nakedness. 

Obassi  questioned  the  woman  very  earnestly  if  she  meant 


FOLK-LORE  379 

what  she  said,  and  when  she  assured  him  that  it  was  true,  he 
replied  quietly  : 

"  Do  not  speak  of  this  any  more,  lest  the  two  Tortoises 
should  overhear  and  flee  away  to  their  father." 

Obassi  fixed  a  day  on  which  to  make  known  to  all  the  trick 
which  had  been  played  upon  him.  He  sent  round  to  his  fathers- 
in-law  to  tell  them  that  he  was  about  to  give  a  great  show,  and 
that  he  expected  all  those  who  were  invited  to  be  present  and 
in  good  time.  By  this  invitation  he  meant  to  have  Tortoise 
punished,  and  perhaps  even  killed,  for  his  deceit. 

The  two  sons  of  Tortoise  suspected  what  was  going  on,  so 
they  sent  for  Lizard,  and  from  her  they  borrowed  the  feminine 
nakedness.  When,  therefore,  the  day  came  round,  and  Obassi 
went  very  early  in  the  morning  to  ascertain  the  fact  that  his 
two  young  wives  were  boys,  he  found  them  girls  after  all. 

The  guests  came  in  great  multitudes  and  sat  down  in  com- 
panies, eager  to  see  the  wonders  which  Obassi  had  promised. 
The  latter  was  very  angry,  and  began  scolding  his  head  wife  for 
lying  to  him,  not  knowing  that  all  she  had  said  was  true.  Then 
he  went  to  the  audience  hall,  and  simply  told  the  people  that 
there  would  be  no  show,  for  his  wife  had  disappointed  him.  So 
all  departed  with  much  discontent. 

Three  days  later  Lizard  went  to  the  boys  to  ask  for  the  parts 
she  had  lent  them,  but  they  only  asked  her  to  take  a  seat  and 
eat  a  few  balls  of  fu-fu.  Later  they  begged  her  to  come  again 
in  a  few  days'  time,  when  they  would  do  as  she  asked. 

Over  and  over  again  Lizard  came,  but  each  day  she  was  put 
off  in  the  same  manner.  At  length  one  day  she  began  to  sing 
loudly,  and  her  song  was  as  follows  : 

"  Ared      nkui,    kumm  'me       ndipp        eyama 
Ared  Tortoise,  give    me   secret  parts  mine. 
Affion     nkui,     kumm  'me       ndipp        eyama 
Affion  Tortoise,  give    me   secret  parts  mine. 
'Me  nkpaw,  'me  nkpaw,  ka      ndipp       eyama 

I       die,        I       die,    for  secret  parts  mine. 
Fenne,  kpe    nde  mbitt,  nde   ka       ndipp       eyama 

Also,    if    I  live    life,  I  live  for  secret  parts  mine." 

The  people  in  the  compound  heard  the  singing,  and  ran  to 
see  who  it  was  who  could  make  such  a  song.     Tortoise  boys 


380      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

(now  girls)  begged  Lizard  to  take  a  seat  once  more  and  eat  a  few 
fu-fu  balls  as  usual.  She  sat  down  and  began  eating.  One  of 
them  then  said,  "  Let  us  each  make  fu-fu  balls  for  the  others  to 
swallow,"  and  all  agreed  to  the  fun.  One  of  our  well-known 
two  then  rolled  a  fine  ball  and  secretly  put  some  pricking  fish- 
bones within  it,  dipped  it  in  the  soup-pot,  and  put  it  in  poor 
Lizard's  mouth.  The  latter  tried  to  swallow  it,  but  it  stuck  in 
her  throat,  where  the  pin-like  bones  held  it  fast.  Lizard 
lay  on  the  ground  voicelessly  stretching  her  neck,  and  trying  in 
vain  to  swallow  the  ball  or  eject  it. 

This  is  the  cause  why  Lizards  are  seen  to  raise  and  let  fall 
their  heads.  They  are  still  trying  to  get  rid  of  the  fu-fu  ball 
given  them  by  the  sons  of  Tortoise. 

That  is  the  reason  why  Tortoise's  trick  has  never  been  dis- 
covered up  to  this  day,  and  thus  it  is  that  Lizard  lost  her  voice 
and  her  "  Ndipp,"  and  only  gained  in  exchange  the  habit  of 
lifting  her  head  up  and  down. 


How  Tortoise  got  the  Cracks  and  Bumps  on  his 

Back. 

By  Effion  Mkpat  Okun  of  Niaji. 

Once  Nkui  (Tortoise)  was  a  great  friend  of  Obassi  Osaw.  He 
went  to  visit  Obassi  and  ate  and  drank  in  his  house.  Before  he 
left  he  said,  "  Let  us  make  a  rule."  Obassi  asked,  "  How  do 
you  mean  ?  "  "I  mean  about  the  funeral  'play,'"  said  Nkui. 
"  Whichever  of  us  shall  die  first,  the  other  must  kill  an  elephant 
for  the  'customs.'  "  To  this  Obassi  agreed,  but  when  his  friend 
had  left,  he  ordered  his  people  to  build  a  house  without  doors 
or  windows.  There  was  only  a  hole  in  the  roof.  Through  this 
Obassi  let  himself  down  with  all  his  chop  and  his  loving  wife. 
He  said  to  his  eldest  son,  "  Please  go  and  tell  Tortoise  that  I 
am  dead."  This  the  son  did,  and  Tortoise  started  out  to  go  to 
his  friend's  town.  As  he  went  along  the  road,  he  saw  an 
Elephant  feeding  on  some  grass  down  by  the  water.  Tortoise 
said  : 

"  Lord,  you  are  eating.  They  have  sent  to  call  me  because 
my  friend  is  dead.      I  am  looking  for  someone  who  will  be  able 


FOLK-LORE  381 

to  dance  at  the  funeral.  Will  you  go  with  me  for  the  dancing  ? 
I  think  you  could  dance  very  finely  indeed." 

Next  Tortoise  got  some  pods  of  the  Agara  tree,  which,  when 
shaken,  make  a  noise  like  little  bells.  These  he  made  into 
anklets  and  tied  them  round  the  feet  of  Elephant.  Then  he 
said,  "  Try,  Lord,  and  see  how  you  can  dance."  Elephant 
danced,  and  Tortoise  cried  out,  "  In  all  the  world  there  is  no 
such  dancer !  The  ceremonies  will  be  held  next  month.  I 
shall  come  along  this  road  early  in  the  morning  and  trust  that  I 
may  see  you,  so  that  we  may  go  together  to  the  dancing." 

Now  during  all  this  time  Obassi  was  inside  the  house,  but 
Tortoise  was  making  a  very  strong  rope  all  covered  with  the 
little  bell-like  pods.  When  the  new  moon  shone,  Nkui  took 
the  rope  and  went  along  the  road  as  before.  He  called  to 
Elephant,  "  Lord,  Lord,  it  is  time  now." 

Elephant  heard  and  came.  Tortoise  took  the  anklets  and 
tied  them  round  the  great  feet.  Next  he  took  the  rope  and 
threw  it  round  Elephant's  neck,  saying,  "Come,  Lord,  I  will 
lead  you  to  the  dance." 

When  the  two  reached  Obassi's  town  all  the  people  danced 
with  joy  at  the  sight  of  them.  Tortoise  tied  Elephant  to  the 
Juju  tree  before  the  Egbo  house.  When  he  thought  that  his 
prey  was  safely  tied,  he  went  away. 

Two  small  children  ran  out  and  said,  "Ho!  here  is  the 
Elephant  which  Nkui  said  he  would  kill  for  the  burial  of  his 
friend.     Ho  !  Elephant  will  be  killed  very  soon." 

When  Elephant  heard  this  he  knew  that  he  had  been  deceived. 
He  was  very  angry,  and  strained  at  the  rope  till  it  broke.  Then 
he  ran  round  seeking  Nkui,  who  fled  before  him  into  the  bush. 
Elephant  went  round  and  round,  but  could  not  find  whom  he 
sought,  because  Tortoise  had  hidden  himself  in  a  very  cunning 
place  by  the  river.  One  day,  as  the  latter  sat  in  this  new  home, 
he  cooked  plantains,  then  peeled  them  and  threw  the  skins  into 
the  water.  They  floated  down  stream  till  they  came  to  the 
place  where  Elephant  was  walking  along  the  bank.  He  picked 
them  up  with  his  trunk,  and  asked,  "Where  do  you  come 
from  ?  "  They  answered,  "  We  come  from  Nkui's  place."  So 
he  begged  them  to  guide  him  thither. 

When   Tortoise   saw  them    coming,  he   called   to   his  wife, 


382      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

"  Turn  me  over,  and  grind  medicine  upon  my  breast.  Should 
Elephant  ask  for  me,  say  that  I  am  not  at  home." 

When  Elephant  arrived  he  saw  the  wife  of  Nkui  grinding 
medicine  and  asked,  "  Where  is  your  husband  ?  "  She  replied, 
"  I  have  been  very  ill  for  a  long  time,  and  do  not  know  where  he 
has  gone." 

Elephant  looked  fixedly  at  the  stone,  and  then  said,  "  If 
you  do  not  mind,  I  think  that  I  had  better  throw  away  that 
stone." 

She  answered,  "  Do  )tou  not  hear  that  I  am  very  ill,  and  am 
grinding  medicine  for  my  sickness.  Certainly  you  must  not 
touch  my  stone." 

On  that  Elephant  laughed  and  turned  the  stone  over  with  his 
foot.  He  saw  Nkui  and  knew  him.  He  placed  his  foot  upon 
him,  pressed  him  into  the  earth  and  broke  all  his  shell.  Up  till 
that  time  Tortoise  had  had  a  smooth  skin,  but  it  has  since  been 
broken  and  humpy  because  Elephant  smashed  it  up  in  punish- 
ment for  his  deceit. 

Why  there  are  no  more  Lions  in  the  Bush. 

By  Okun  Asukwor  of  Ndebbji. 

A  man  named  Etim  married  a  wife.  After  a  time  she  told 
him  that  a  son  was  about  to  be  born.  He  left  home  and 
went  out  hunting,  but  Nki  (lion)  sprang  from  out  the  bush  and 
killed  him. 

The  wife  remained  in  charge  of  a  brother  of  her  late  hus- 
band. When  the  babe  was  born,  this  man  took  care  of 
both.  One  day  when  the  boy  was  nearly  grown  up  the  uncle 
called  to  him,  saying  "  My  son."  The  lad  answered,  "  Do 
not  call  me  thus.  I  am  no  son  of  yours.  My  father  was  killed 
in  the  bush  by  Nki." 

One  day  the  boy  went  out  and  collected  a  great  quantity  of 
palm  kernels.  He  took  these  to  the  white  traders  and  exchanged 
them  for  guns.  When  he  reached  home,  he  went  to  the  bush 
near  the  town  and  climbed  up  a  tree.  On  this  he  made  two 
seats,  one  high  up  and  the  other  low  down.  He  took  his 
gun  to  the  high  place  and  left  it  there,  while  he  went  to  call 
one  of  his  sisters.     Her  he  set  in  the  lower  place,  with  a  small 


FOLK-LORE  383 

bell  in  her  hand,  and  a  horn  with  which  to  blow.  He  himself 
climbed  up  on  high  and  lay  in  wait,  and  told  his  sister  to  ring 
the  bell  and  blow  the  horn  to  call  their  enemy  Nki. 

It  was  day  time.  The  girl  rang  the  bell  and  blew  the  horn 
as  her  brother  had  bidden.  After  a  while  the  lion  heard,  and 
sent  a  poisonous  snake  to  go  and  spy  and  bring  him  back  word. 

When  Snake  came  the  boy  said,  "  I  am  not  looking  for 
you,  but  for  my  enemy  Nki.  I  could  easily  kill  you  with  my 
matchet  and  would  not  need  a  gun."  So  Snake  went  back  and 
reported  what  he  had  heard. 

When  he  had  gone,  the  girl  again  began  to  ring  and  blow  the 
horn,  and  this  time  Lion  sent  Python  to  go  and  bring  him  back 
word. 

When  the  boy  saw  Python  he  said,  "  You  are  big  and  long, 
yet  I  could  cut  you  in  pieces  without  a  gun.  I  wait  here  for 
my  enemy  Nki." 

Again  the  third  time,  the  girl  began  to  ring  the  bell  and  to 
blow,  and  this  time  Nki  sent  Flame  to  report  to  him  ;  but  the 
boy  called,  "  I  could  quench  you  with  water.  Go  back  and  tell 
Nki  that  I  wait  for  him  alone." 

After  this  Nki  himself  came.  "  Who  is  it  who  keeps  calling 
me?  "  he  roared  out. 

The  boy  answered  never  a  word,  but  raised  his  gun  and 
fired,  and  Nki  fell  down  dead.  For  a  while  the  two  children  did 
not  dare  to  come  down  from  the  tree,  for  fear  that  their  enemy 
still  lived,  and  would  harm  them.  A  Parrot  flew  by,  and  the 
boy  said,  "  Will  you  go  down  and  cut  off  a  finger  from  Lion 
for  me  ?  " 

Parrot  answered,  "  He  is  a  very  fearful  animal;  therefore  I 
must  refuse." 

Just  then  Hawk  flew  past.  To  him  also  the  boy  called,  and 
asked  the  same  question.  Hawk  replied,  "  Give  me  a  matchet." 
When  this  had  been  given,  he  flew  down  and  cut  off  the  middle 
finger  from  Nki. 

Then  the  boy  came  down  and  turned  the  dead  lion  round. 
From  its  breast  he  saw  the  head  of  his  own  dead  father  hanging. 
This  he  loosed  and  put  it,  together  with  the  claw,  in  his  hunting 
bag. 

As   the    couple  walked  through    the    streets  of   their  town, 


384      IN   THE    SHADOW    OF   THE    BUSH 

the  boy  cried  out,  "  I  have  killed  a  lion  to-day."  The  people 
said,  "  We  do  not  believe  it,"  but  the  lad  opened  his  bag  and 
pulled  out  his  father's  head,  and  the  claw  of  the  lion,  so  that 
they  might  know.  All  clapped  their  hands  and  shouted.  The 
boy  said  : 

"  We  will  keep  my  father's  funeral  customs." 

He  buried  the  head  and  gave  a  great  "  play."  After  this  some 
of  the  people  whose  relations  had  also  been  devoured  by  the 
lion  went  and  found  these  heads  too  hanging  to  the  breast  of 
the  dead  beast. 

Up  to  that  time  no  one  could  go  into  the  bush  alone  for  fear 
of  the  lions.  Since  the  boy  killed  their  chief,  however,  they 
have  gone  far  away  and  left  our  bush  free. 

Why  Bush  Fowl  (Ikpai)  always  calls  up  the  Dawn. 
By  Ndum  Agurimon  of  Nsan. 

A  man  once  went  into  the  bush  with  his  wife  to  collect  palm 
nuts.  He  saw  a  palm  with  ripe  clusters  upon  it,  and  climbed 
up  to  get  them.  While  he  was  trying  to  cut  through  the  stems, 
a  black  fly  named  Njinn-I-Nyakk  began  to  buzz  round  him, 
dash  into  his  eyes,  against  his  nose,  and  all  over  his  face.  He 
raised  his  hand  to  drive  it  away,  and  as  he  did  so  the  knife  fell 
from  his  grasp.  "  Run,  run,"  he  called  to  his  wife,  who  was 
just  beneath  the  tree,  for  he  feared  that  it  might  fall  upon  her. 
It  was  the  time  of  the  woman's  seventh  month,  but  she  sprang 
aside  so  quickly  that  she  was  out  of  the  way  before  the 
knife  reached  the  ground.  In  her  haste  she  jumped  over  a 
serpent  called  Nkimm.  This  startled  him  so  that  he  dived 
down  a  brown  rat's  hole,  and  begged  for  a  drink  of  water.  Rat 
handed  him  a  calabash  full,  and  he  emptied  it  at  one  draught. 
Rat  was  so  frightened  at  her  visitor  that  she  sprang  past  him 
out  of  the  hole  and  ran  up  a  tree,  where  she  sat  trembling.  The 
place  she  had  chosen  was  near  Nkundak's  (Greater  Plantain- 
eater)  nest.  No  sooner  did  the  latter  see  her  than  she  raised  a 
war  cry.  This  startled  a  monkey  named  Nyak-I-Mbuk  (Black 
Monkey),  who  sallied  out  ready  for  a  fight.  In  his  haste  to 
meet  his  enemy,  Nyak  sprang  on  to  a  ripe  fruit  of  the  tree 
called  Ntun.     This  fell  from  its  stalk  on  to  the  back  of  an 


FOLK-LORE  385 

elephant  who  was  passing  beneath.  The  latter  rushed  away  so 
furiously,  that  he  tore  down,  and  carried  off  a  flowering  creeper 
called  Mfinn,  which  caught  round  his  neck. 

The  Mfinn  in  turn  pulled  over  an  ant  heap,  which  fell  on  to 
Bush-fowl's  nest,  and  completely  destroyed  her  eggs. 

Bush-fowl  was  so  sad  because  of  her  loss,  that  she  sat 
brooding  over  the  crushed  eggs,  and  forgot  to  call  the  dawn. 
For  two  days  therefore  the  whole  world  was  dark. 

All  the  beasts  wondered  what  could  be  the  reason  of  this 
continued  night,  and  at  length  Obassi  summoned  them  before 
him  to  inquire  into  the  matter. 

When  all  were  present  Obassi  asked  Bush-fowl  why  it  was 
now  forty-eight  hours  since  she  had  called  for  light.  Then  she 
stood  foi-th  and  answered  : 

"  My  eggs  were  broken  by  Ekughi  Nke  (ant  hill),  which 
was  pulled  over  by  Mfinn,  which  was  dragged  down  by  Elephant, 
who  was  knocked  by  Ntun  fruit,  which  was  plucked  by  Monkey, 
who  was  challenged  by  Nkundak,  who  was  startled  by  Rat,  who 
was  frightened  by  Serpent,  who  had  been  jumped  over  by  a 
sick  woman,  who  had  been  made  to  run  by  the  fall  of  a  knife, 
which  had  been  dropped  by  her  husband,  who  had  been  teased 
by  a  black  fly.  Through  vexation,  therefore,  at  the  loss  of  my 
eggs,  I  refused  to  call  the  day." 

Each  thing  and  every  beast  was  asked  in  turn  to  give  the 
reason  for  the  damage  it  had  done,  and  each  in  turn  gave  the 
same  long  answer,  till  it  came  to  the  turn  of  Black  Fly,  who  was 
the  first  cause  of  all  the  mischief.  He,  instead  of  answering 
properly,  as  the  others  had  done,  only  said  "  Buzz,  buzz."  So 
Obassi  commanded  him  to  remain  speechless  for  evermore,  and 
to  do  nothing  but  buzz  about  and  be  present  wherever  a  foul 
thing  lies.  To  Bush-fowl  he  also  gave  judgment  that  she 
should  call  on  the  instant  for  the  long-delayed  dawn,  and 
never  again  refuse  to  do  so,  whether  her  eggs  were  destroyed 
or  not. 

Were  it  not  that  Obassi  had  given  strict  orders  to  Bush-fowl, 
it  might  easily  happen  that  one  day  or  another  she  would  again 
refuse  to  call,  and  then  we  should  unawaredly  enter  on  a  long 
night,  which  might  perhaps  last  for  a  week  or  more. 

S.B.  C   C 


386      IN   THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

Why  Frog  and  Snake  never  play  together. 

Frog  had  a  son.  Snake  also  had  a  son.  Both  children  went 
out  to  play  in  the  bush.  They  said,  "  We  feel  hungry;  let  us  go 
home."  When  they  arrived  at  home,  each  of  them  went  to  his 
mother's  house.  Mrs.  Frog  asked  her  son,  "  Where  have  you 
been  this  morning  ?  "  He  said,  "  I  was  in  the  bush  playing 
with  Snake-child."  His  mother  said,  "  Don't  you  know  that 
the  Snake  family  are  bad  people  ?     They  have  poison." 

Also,  when  the  little  Snake  went  home,  his  mother  asked, 
"  Who  was  your  playmate  ?  "  Snake-child  said,  "  Frog  was 
my  playmate."  Mrs.  Snake  said,  "  What  foolishness  is  this  to 
come  and  tell  me  you  feel  hungry  !  Don't  you  know  that  it  is 
the  custom  of  our  house  to  eat  frogs  ?  Next  time  you  play  with 
him,  catch  him  and  eat  him." 

Snake-child  therefore  went  to  call  Frog  to  play  with  him 
again,  but  the  latter  refused.     Snake-child  then  said  : 

"  Evidently  your  mother  has  given  you  instructions.  My 
mother  also  has  given  me  instructions." 

From  that  day  Frog  and  Snake  never  played  together  again. 

How  the  First  Hippopotami  came. 

Once,  long  ago,  Elephant  had  a  beautiful  daughter,  whom  all 
the  beasts  wished  to  wed.  Now  at  that  time  a  very  great  fish 
named  Njokk  Mbonn  (Elephant  fish)  dwelt  in  the  river,  and 
one  evening  he  came  to  Elephant  and  said,  "  I  should  like  to 
marry  your  daughter." 

Next  morning  Leopard  came  too,  and  said,  "  Do  not  let 
anyone  marry  the  girl  but  me."  When  he  heard  that  the  King 
of  the  fishes  had  also  asked  her  in  marriage  he  was  very  angr}', 
and  went  home  to  call  all  his  family  together  to  fight.  Nsun 
(antelope)  happened  to  pass  by  while  they  were  arranging  the 
matter,  and  he  went  at  once  and  said  to  Fish : 

"  Listen  to  what  I  have  heard  to-day.  Leopard  and  all  his 
people  are  coming  to  fight  you." 

When  Njokk  Mbonn  heard  this  he  said  nothing,  but  only 
took  a  yam  and  roasted  it.  When  it  was  ready  he  ate  part,  and 
put  the  rest  on  one  side.     Just  then  he  heard  the  sound  of  his 


FOLK-LORE  387 

enemies  coming  in  the  distance,  and  close  at  hand  he  saw 
Elephant  also  with  his  daughter. 

Then  Fish  went  down  into  the  water.  By  magic  he  made  a 
big  wave  rise  up  and  overflow  the  bank.  As  this  ebbed  it  drew 
Elephant  and  his  daughter  down  to  the  depths  beneath,  where 
Fish  lay  waiting. 

When  the  other  animals  saw  what  had  happened  they  all 
fled,  crying  to  one  another: 

"  If  we  try  to  fight  with  Njokk  Mbonn  he  will  kill  us  all. 
Let  us  go  back  at  once." 

Fish  thought  to  himself,  "  I  must  kill  Leopard,  or  he  will 
come  back  again  some  day." 

At  dawn,  therefore,  he  came  up  to  the  bank,  and  lay  there 
cleaning  his  teeth,  which  were  very  white  and  shining. 

When  Leopard  came  along  he  stood  looking  at  his  enemy 
and  thought,  "  My  teeth  are  not  so  fine  as  his.  What  can 
I  do  ? "  So  he  said,  "  Will  you  kindly  clean  my  teeth 
also  ?  " 

When  Fish  heard  this  he  answered,  "  Very  well,  but  I  cannot 
do  it  unless  you  will  lie  down.  If  you  are  willing  to  do  this  I 
will  clean  your  mouth." 

Leopard  lay  down ;  Fish  sent  his  wave  once  more,  and  swept 
his  enemy  down  to  the  depths  of  the  river.  Instead  of  finding 
a  fine  house  there,  as  Elephant  and  his  daughter  had  done, 
Leopard  found  only  a  strong  prison,  where  he  soon  died. 

Njokk  Mbonn  married  the  daughter  of  Elephant,  and  they 
lived  happily  for  many  years.  Their  children  were  the  Water- 
Elephants  (i.e.,  Hippopotami).  If  Fish  had  not  wedded  this 
wife  there  would  have  been  no  Hippo  in  our  rivers. 

How  Black  and  White  Men  came  on  Earth. 

By  Ojong  of  Oban. 

In  the  beginning  of  things,  Obassi  had  only  one  wife.  These 
two  were  the  first  of  all  people.  Before  them  neither  man  nor 
woman  had  ever  been. 

In  course  of  time  the  woman  bore  four  children  to  her 
husband.     Two  were  white  and  two  black. 

One  day,  when  the  children  were  yet  young,  the  father  called 

c  c  2 


388      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

the  two  boys,  and  sent  them  out  hunting,  while  the  mother  told 
both  girls  to  go  and  fish. 

Now  when  the  white  girl  had  been  for  a  little  time  down  by 
the  river  she  saw  a  bird  catching  fish,  and  noticed  that  it  had 
already  thrown  down  several  on  the  bank.  These  she  took  and 
ran  quickly  home  to  give  them  to  her  mother,  but  the  black 
girl  still  went  on  slowly  fishing  with  her  nets  in  the  river. 

Meantime  the  white  boy  thought,  "  Why  should  I  trouble  to 
go  hunting  ?  "  So  he  took  his  mother's  goat  and  skinned  it. 
Then  he  brought  it  to  his  father  and  said,  "  Here  is  an  antelope 
which  I  have  just  killed  in  the  bush." 

When  the  black  girl  returned  with  the  fish  that  she  had 
caught,  her  mother  said,  "  The  white  girl  has  brought  me  all 
that  I  want,  and  to  her  I  have  given  the  recompense  which  I 
promised  to  both  of  you." 

After  a  time  the  black  boy  came  back  with  a  fine  antelope 
(Nsun)  which  he  had  killed,  but,  when  he  laid  it  down  before  his 
father,  the  latter  said : 

"  I  have  already  accepted  enough  fresh  meat  from  my  white 
son,  and  to  him  have  I  given  the  hunter's  reward." 

In  course  of  time  the  children  grew  up  and  thought  of 
marriage.  When  this  had  taken  place  Obassi  sent  the  black 
son  and  daughter  into  the  bush,  to  live  afar  off,  but  the  white 
children  he  kept  with  him  always. 

When  some  years  had  gone  by,  the  white  son  and  daughter 
came  to  their  father  and  said,  "  Where  are  our  black  brother 
and  sister  ?  "  To  which  Obassi  answered,  "  I  have  sent  them  a 
long  way  off." 

Another  day  they  came  again,  and  said,  "  We  wish  to  see  our 
brother  and  sister."  But  again  they  were  answered,  "  I  have 
made  a  very  high  fence  in  the  road,  and  hewed  down  many 
trees  so  that  the  way  is  quite  blocked  up.  You  cannot  go  by  to 
visit  them." 

Again  a  third  time  they  pleaded,  but  once  more  Obassi 
answered,  "  I  have  already  told  you,  you  cannot  pass  by  and 
come  to  their  town  without  my  order." 

One  day  the  white  boy's  son  was  playing  down  by  the  river. 
He  fastened  a  long  piece  of  tie-tie  round  his  toy,  and  threw  it 
into  the  water.     He  held  the  end  fast,  and  the  wind  took  the 


FOLK-LORE  389 

toy,  and  blew  it  along  the  water  as  if  it  were  a  kite.  So  pleased 
was  he  with  the  new  game  he  had  made  that  he  came  next  day 
to  play  again  in  the  same  way.  When  the  men  of  the  town  saw 
what  he  was  doing,  they  went  to  watch,  and  said  to  one  another, 
u  It  is  a  strange  game  for  a  small  boy  to  play  all  alone.  Come, 
let  us  help  him." 

Now  this  second  day,  the  boy  had  taken  an  old  nest,  and 
fastened  it  to  his  tie-tie.  The  wind  blew  it  to  the  other  side  of 
the  river.  Each  time  when  it  had  crossed  over,  the  boy  pulled 
it  back  to  him. 

When  Obassi  saw  what  the  child  had  done,  he  called  his  son 
and  daughter  before  him,  and  said,  "  If  you  want  to  go  to  the 
place  where  your  brother  and  sister  live,  you  must  make  a  canoe 
out  of  wood.  Come,  and  I  will  show  you  how  the  thing  should 
be  done." 

When  the  boat  was  ready,  Obassi  said,  "  Get  in,  but  take 
your  guns  and  matchets  with  you,  for  I  think  that  when  your 
black  brother  first  sees  you,  he  will  wonder  greatly  and  perhaps 
think  that  you  come  to  bring  some  misfortune  upon  him." 

The  white  children  did  as  they  were  bidden,  and  their  canoe 
bore  them  a  long  way  down  stream  till  they  came  to  the  creek 
where  their  black  brother  had  built  his  town. 

The  Treasure  House  in  the  Bush. 

By  Ojong  Akpan  of  Mfamosing. 

Obassi  Osaw  had  two  sons.  The  name  of  the  first  was  Oro, 
and  of  the  second  Agbo.  When  their  father  died,  Oro  took  all 
the  property,  while  Agbo  remained  in  the  sky  as  a  poor 
washerman.  One  day  the  latter  said  to  his  wife,  "  There  is  no 
food  either  for  you  or  me.  I  must  go  into  the  bush  and  hunt, 
that  we  may  not  die  of  hunger."  He  went  along  a  road  which 
brought  him  down  to  earth,  and  led  him  at  length  to  a  part  of 
the  bush  where  a  house  was  standing  by  itself.  He  wondered 
whose  it  might  be,  and  crept  round  behind  some  bushes  to 
watch  unseen. 

Soon  some  white  people  came  through  the  bush  close  to 
where  the  hunter  was  hidden.  He  saw  them  open  the  door, 
carry  forth  a  great  treasure,  and  then  lock  up  again. 


390      IN   THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

When  they  had  gone,  Agbo  crept  out  from  his  hiding  place, 
found  a  way  to  enter  the  house,  and  took  from  it  as  much 
treasure  as  he  could  carry.  This  he  bore  off  to  the  sky. 
When  his  wifes  aw  what  he  had  brought  she  said,  "  Where  did 
you  get  all  this  ?  "  He  answered,  "  From  a  house  in  the  bush 
where  white  people  keep  it." 

Some  days  later  the  hunter  went  down  again,  and  once 
more  brought  back  a  great  load  of  treasure.  When  he  had 
secured  as  much  as  he  wanted,  he  went  to  his  elder  brother  and 
said  : 

"  Please  lend  me  a  basket  ;  I  wish  to  measure  my  money." 

Oro  did  as  he  was  asked,  but  one  of  his  wives  thought,  "  I 
should  like  to  know  how  this  poor  man  can  suddenly  have 
become  rich."  She  followed  Agbo,  and,  when  they  reached 
his  house,  offered  to  help  him  measure  the  money. 

It  took  seven  days  to  measure,  and,  when  at  last  all  was 
ended,  the  woman  went  back  and  told  her  husband  how  rich  his 
brother  had  grown.  On  learning  this  Oro  went  straight  to  the 
latter's  house  and  said,  "  Open  the  door  and  let  me  see  what 
you  have  got." 

Agbo  replied,  "  Why  should  I  show  it  ?  I  am  but  a  very 
small  man  compared  to  you."  His  wife  however  said,  "  Open 
the  door  and  let  him  see."     So  at  length  it  was  opened. 

When  Oro  saw  what  was  stored  within  he  asked,  "  Where 
did  you  get  all  this  ?  "  Agbo  replied,  "  It  came  from  the 
Treasure  House  of  the  white  people,  which  I  found  in  the  bush." 
Then  the  elder  brother  began  to  beg  the  younger  to  show  him 
the  place,  and  the  latter  said,  "To-morrow  I  will  not  go;  but  if 
you  will  come  for  me  the  day  after,  we  will  set  out."  This 
they  did,  and  when  they  reached  the  house,  entered  and  carried 
off  a  load. 

Another  day  Oro  said,  "  I  want  to  go  again ; "  but  Agbo 
replied,  "  You  must  go  alone.  I  will  go  no  more."  This  time, 
therefore,  the  elder  brother  set  off  by  himself.  When  he 
reached  the  Treasure  House,  he  crept  in  by  the  way  his  brother 
had  made  ;  but  instead  of  quickly  gathering  together  some  of  the 
treasure,  he  saw  rich  robes  lying  in  a  heap  on  one  side,  and 
began  trying  them  on.  One  after  another  he  tried,  and  each 
seemed  to  him  more  gorgeous  than  the  last.    While  he  was  still 


FOLK-LORE  391 

robing  himself,  the  owners  came  in.     They  bound  him,  cut  him 
in  pieces  and  laid  the  fragments  on  the  threshold. 

When  night  came,  Agbo  grew  anxious  because  his  brother 
did  not  return.  All  night  he  waited,  and,  when  day  dawned, 
set  out  by  the  way  which  Oro  had  taken.  On  and  on  he  went 
till  he  came  to  the  house  in  the  bush.  There,  oh,  terrible 
sight !  he  found  the  fragments  of  his  brother's  body  lying  before 
the  door.  He  collected  every  bit,  and  carried  them  sadly 
away.  After  a  while  he  sought  out  a  tailor  and  said,  "  Here  is 
the  body  of  a  man  who  got  cut  to  pieces  in  the  bush.  Can 
you  sew  it  together  again  ?  If  you  will  do  this  for  me  I 
will  pay  you  richly."  The  tailor  answered,  "  I  will  try  what 
I  can  do." 

When  the  owner  of  the  treasure  returned  and  found  all  the 
pieces  gone  he  was  very  angry.  He  thought,  "  Who  can  have 
carried  away  the  dead  man's  body,  and  what  can  have  been  done 
with  it  ?  "  In  his  turn  he  also  went  to  the  tailor  and  asked, 
"  Has  anyone  brought  you  pieces  to  mend  ? "  The  tailor 
replied,  "  Yes,  a  man  named  Agbo  brought  some." 

The  owner  asked,  "Who  is  Agbo?  I  do  not  know  him." 
One  of  his  servants  answered,  "  I  know  who  he  is,  and  can  find 
out  all  about  him." 

One  day  therefore  this  boy  sought  out  Agbo  and  said,  "  I 
want  to  be  your  friend." 

Agbo  was  willing,  and  cooked  chop  for  his  guest,  but  his  son 
said,  "  My  father,  do  not  be  friends  with  this  boy,  for  he  will  go 
and  tell  his  master  all  that  you  have  done,  and  then  they  will 
come  and  kill  you." 

The  servant  went  back  to  earth  and  told  everything.  In  the 
night  time  he  came  again  with  some  white  paint,  and  painted 
all  the  posts  of  Agbo's  house.  After  this  he  returned  and  told 
his  master,  "  The  place  where  the  man  lives  who  has  wronged 
you  will  be  easy  to  find,  for  I  have  marked  it  with  white 
paint.  In  the  morning,  therefore,  you  can  go  with  a  large 
following  and  kill  him,  with  all  who  dwell  in  his  compound." 
Now  a  bright  moon  had  been  shining  while  the  servant  worked, 
and  the  son  of  Agbo  had  seen  what  was  done.  So  he  also  got 
white  paint  and  ran  hastily  round  and  painted  all  the  houses  in 
the  town  in  the  same  way. 


392      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

When  the  white  man  came  early  in  the  morning  with  a 
great  following,  he  found  the  whole  town  painted  alike,  so  he 
could  not  find  the  house  which  he  sought,  and  was  forced  to 
return  home  without  doing  anything.  He  blamed  his  servant 
because  the  latter  had  failed  to  keep  his  promise,  but  the  boy 
said : 

"If  you  will  lend  me  some  of  your  war  men,  you  shall  not 
only  be  avenged  of  your  enemy,  but  recover  all  that  he  has 
stolen."  To  this  the  master  agreed,  and  called  together  some 
of  his  bravest  fighters.  The  boy  collected  a  lot  of  empty  casks. 
These  they  rolled  along  till  they  neared  the  entrance  to  Agbo's 
town.  There  the  servant  said  to  twelve  of  the  war  men  who 
were  strong  above  their  fellows,  "  I  beg  that  you  will  now  get 
into  the  casks."  When  they  had  entered  and  the  covers  were 
replaced,  the  others  rolled  them  along  till  they  came  to  Agbo's 
door. 

Then  the  boy  called  out,  "  Agbo,  Agbo.  I  am  your  friend, 
come  back  with  a  great  gift.  See,  here  are  many  puncheons 
of  palm  oil." 

Agbo  was  very  pleased,  but  his  son  said,  "  I  think  that  there 
are  men  hidden  in  those  casks."  The  father  answered,  "  How 
can  you  be  so  suspicious  ?  There  is  nothing  but  oil."  After 
that  he  made  a  great  feast  for  his  friend,  and,  when  night  came, 
prepared  a  bed  for  him  in  a  room  near  to  his  own. 

When  all  was  quiet,  the  son  got  up  and  boiled  much  water. 
First  he  took  a  sharp  knife  and  cut  the  throat  of  his  father's 
guest.  Next  he  went,  very  softly,  to  the  casks,  and  made  a 
small  hole  in  each.  Through  this  he  poured  in  the  boiling 
water  till  all  were  nearly  full. 

Next  morning  when  Agbo  came  out  of  his  room  he  called  to 
his  friend,  but  no  answer  came.  He  went  to  the  side  of  the 
bed  and  found  him  lying  with  his  throat  cut.  When  he  saw 
this  he  gave  a  great  cry  and  called : 

"  Who  has  killed  my  friend  ?  "     His  son  answered,  "  It  is  I." 

On  this  Agbo  caught  the  boy,  chained  him,  and  dragged  him 
before  the  Judge,  and  there  accused  him  of  having  killed  their 
guest. 

The  Judge  asked,  "  Is  it  true  that  you  have  done  this  thing  ?  " 
and  the  boy  answered  "  Yes."     Then  he  asked,  "  Why  did  you 


FOLK-LORE  393 

do  it?  "and  he  answered,  "To  save  my  father's  life,  for  his 
friend  tried  to  kill  him." 

Then  the  son  told  of  the  casks  which  had  been  brought 
to  the  house  with  soldiers  inside.  The  Judge  sent  to  fetch 
them,  and  when  they  were  brought  it  was  found  to  be  even 
as  the  boy  had  said,  for  the  boiling  water  had  killed  all  the 
men. 

The  Judge  said  to  Agbo,  "  I  cannot  blame  your  son,  for  he 
has  saved  your  life."  So  they  decided  to  send  the  lad  away 
free  with  rich  gifts. 

When  home  was  reached,  Agbo  let  his  son  into  the  place 
where  his  treasure  was  kept,  and  said  to  him,  "  The  half  of  this 
I  give  to  you  now.  When  I  die,  all  that  I  have  will  be  yours, 
for  you  have  been  a  good  son  and  have  saved  my  life.  Fathers 
should  take  care  of  their  sons,  and  sons  should  always  help 
fathers." 

Further  he  gave  the  lad  seven  slaves. 

Why  the  other  Members  must  serve  Belly. 

By  Okam  Ntem  of  Ndebbiji  (Girl  just  out  of  fatting-house). 

There  was  once  a  man  named  Effiong  who  had  many  children. 
One  of  these  was  named  Hand,  one  Foot,  a  third  Back,  a  fourth 
Head,  and  the  fifth  Belly.  He  loved  all  his  children,  save  the 
last.  Foot  was  useful  for  travelling,  Back  for  carrying  loads, 
and  Hand  for  work.  Head  was  also  useful  for  some  loads,  but 
he  did  not  like  Belly  at  all. 

One  day  Obassi  heard  Effiong  scolding  the  unloved  son,  so 
he  came  down  and  called  all  the  children  before  him,  together 
with  their  father,  and  asked  them  to  state  what  work  they  did. 
Belly  said,  "  My  father  gives  me  nothing,  so  there  is  nothing  I 
can  do.  I  only  remain  empty."  On  this  Obassi  said  to 
Effiong: 

"  Do  you  not  know  that  Belly  is  a  very  important  part  ?  " 
To  Foot  he  said,  "  For  ever  you  must  walk  up  and  down,  crush- 
ing the  earth  and  soiling  yourself  as  you  go."  To  Hand  he 
said,  "  You  must  always  keep  washing  to  make  yourself  clean." 
To  Back  he  continued,  "  You  also  must  wash  once  or  even 
twice  a  day."     But  to  Belly  he  said,  "I  make  you  headman 


394     IN   THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

among  the  children.     You  are  the  eldest    son,    and   shall  be 
served  three  times  a  day." 

That  is  the  reason  why  the  other  members  must  serve  Belly 
three  times  a  day  for  evermore. 

How  Human  Beings  got  Knee-caps. 

Once,  long  ago,  a  woman  named  Nka  Yenge  went  fishing  in 
the  river.  With  her  were  many  other  women.  They  all  went 
into  the  water,  some  down  stream  and  some  up.  Now  deep 
down  in  one  of  the  pools  a  smooth  white  stone  was  lying, 
something  like  a  Nimm  stone.  As  the  women  went  by,  several 
of  them  said,  "  What  a  beautiful  stone  !  "  but  when  Nka  Yenge 
came,  she  stood  looking  at  it  for  a  long  time  and  said,  "  I  wish 
I  could  get  that  stone  !  "  When  she  came  back  she  said  the 
same  thing,  and  as  she  passed  a  third  time  she  said  : 

"  I  must  have  that  stone." 

Suddenly  the  stone  sprang  out  of  the  water  and  struck  against 
her  knee.  There  it  stayed  and  she  could  not  loosen  it ;  so  she 
went  home  weeping  with  pain.  On  the  way  thither,  she  met  a 
man,  who  asked,  "  Why  do  you  weep  ?  " 

The  woman  could  not  speak  for  tears,  but  the  stone  answered, 
"  I  was  lying  in  the  water.  When  the  woman  passed  up  and 
down,  she  said  that  she  wished  to  have  me.  Her  wish  was  so 
strong  that  it  drew  me  up  out  of  the  water.  Now  I  have  joined 
myself  to  her,  and  shall  never  leave  her  again." 

The  man  was  very  sorry,  and  called  to  the  woman,  "  Come 
here.  We  will  go  to  my  house,  and  I  will  try  what  I  can  do." 
When  they  reached  his  house,  he  got  a  strong  knife  and  tried 
to  chop  off  the  stone,  but  it  was  no  use.  The  stone  had  gone 
inside. 

That  is  the  reason  why  we  have  knee-caps.  Formerly  we 
did  not  have  any. 

Hair's  Revenge. 
By  Ntui  Obassi  of  Mbeban. 

In  the  olden  times,  Stomach  and  Hair  lived  in  the  same 
town.      Hair  went   trading,   and  left    his  wives  alone   in  the 


FOLK-LORE  395 

house.     While  he  was  away,  Stomach  came  and  made  love  to 
them  all. 

When  Hair  returned,  he  called  to  his  wives  and  asked  them 
to  make  a  bed  ready  for  him,  but  they  refused  and  said : 

"  If  you  will  cook  us  a  big  calabash  of  food,  and  give  us  some 
fine  clothes  from  those  you  have  bought,  we  will  tell  you  what 
has  been  happening  in  the  house." 

Hair  did  as  he  was  asked,  and  the  wives  said,  "  Now  we  will 
tell  you  all,  according  to  promise.  While  you  were  away, 
Stomach  came  to  the  house  and  made  love  to  us  all." 

Hair  was  very  angry.  He  went  alone  to  his  room  and  there 
talked  to  himself.     "  To-morrow  I  will  do  this  and  that  thing." 

Now  Rat  was  in  his  hole,  and  when  he  heard  what  Hair  was 
saying,  he  ran  to  Stomach  and  said,  "  Get  ready,  you  must  not 
stay  here.  Hair  is  coming  to  punish  you  for  what  you  have 
done  to  his  wives." 

Next  morning,  very  early,  Stomach  left  his  house  and  set  out 
to  try  to  escape  from  his  enemy.  He  had  not  gone  far  before 
he  heard  Hair  running  after  him.  He  ran  on  as  fast  as  he 
could,  and  at  length  overtook  a  man  on  the  road.  To  the 
latter  he  said,  "  Will  you  please  open  your  mouth  ?  " 

The  man  did  as  he  was  asked,  and  Stomach  went  inside. 

When  Hair  came  up,  he  asked  the  man : 

"  Have  you  seen  Stomach  go  by  ?  " 

The  man  answered,  "  No.     What  is  the  matter  ?  " 

Hair  told  him  all  that  had  happened,  and  the  man  answered  : 

"  Ah,  ha !  That  is  why  Stomach  was  so  anxious  to  hide. 
He  has  now  gone  inside  my  body." 

Hair  said,  "  I  do  not  believe  you."  Nevertheless  he  bent 
down  his  head  and  put  his  ear  to  the  man's  belly.  He  heard  it 
shaking  with  fear,  and  then  knew  that  his  enemy  was  inside  for 
true. 

Then  Hair  took  teeth,  and  set  them  all  round  the  man's 
mouth.     To  these  he  said  : 

"  If  my  enemy  tries  to  come  out  this  way,  bite  him,  but  do 
not  let  him  escape." 

He  himself  settled  in  the  man's  nose,  and  round  both  eyes,  so 
that  his  enemy  might  not  pass  out  thence,  and  also  above  the 
mouth  in  a  moustache,  that  he  might  watch  over  Teeth. 


396      IN    THE   SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

From  that  time  forward,  if  a  single  hair  gets  into  a  man's 
food  and  is  swallowed,  he  vomits  it  at  once.  Hair  and  Stomach 
have  not  made  up  their  quarrel  to  this  day,  and  therefore  do 
not  agree. 

How  Obassi  Osaw  proved  the  Wisdom  of  Tortoise. 

By  Anjong  Ntui  Animbun  of  Nsan. 

Obassi  Osaw  married  many  wives.  Among  these  was  the 
daughter  of  Tortoise.  She  was  so  proud  of  her  father  that  she 
annoyed  Obassi  by  exclaiming,  "  Oh,  my  father,  you  have  more 
sense  than  any  other  person  !  "  whenever  the  least  thing 
happened,  even  if  she  only  knocked  her  foot  or  felt  surprised. 

Obassi  determined  to  find  out  for  himself  if  Tortoise  was 
really  so  very  wise.  He  therefore  built  a  room  without  doors 
or  windows.  Into  this  he  secretly  let  down  eight  persons,  and 
sent  to  Tortoise  to  come  at  once  and  tell  him  what  was  within. 

Tortoise  sent  back  a  message  that  he  would  certainly  come 
next  day,  but  in  such  a  way  that  no  one  should  see  him  enter, 
for  he  was  surely  the  wisest  of  men,  and  none  could  know  how 
he  came.     Obassi  was  still  more  displeased  when  he  heard  this. 

Now  the  daughter  went  and  told  Tortoise  that  her  husband 
was  annoyed  with  her  for  constantly  praising  her  father's 
wisdom.  "  Perhaps,"  said  she,  "it  is  to  prove  this  that  he  has 
sent  for  you."     Tortoise  answered,  "  It  is  well." 

Next  morning  Obassi  sent  other  messengers  to  bid  his 
father-in-law  hasten,  but,  when  the  men  arrived,  Tortoise  was 
nowhere  to  be  found.  His  wife  said  that  he  had  gone  hunting, 
so  the  messengers  had  better  not  wait.  They  agreed  to  this, 
and  set  out  once  more.  The  woman  ran  after  them  with  a 
parcel  and  said,  "  Will  you  please  take  this  to  my  daughter  ?  " 

This  the  men  promised,  and  gave  the  parcel  to  the  girl,  not 
knowing  that  it  was  Tortoise  whom  they  carried.  She  bore  the 
packet  before  Obassi,  set  it  on  the  ground  and  unfastened  the 
tie-tie,  when  out  stepped — what  ?     Tortoise  himself. 

Obassi  was  very  much  surprised,  and  bade  the  guest  go  and 
stay  in  his  daughter's  house  till  next  morning.  So  they  went 
off  together. 

At  night,  when  all  was  quiet,  Tortoise  made  a  small  hole  in 


FOLK-LORE  397 

the  wall  of  the  room  which  Obassi  had  built.  Then  he  took  a 
stick  and  dipped  it  into  some  foul-smelling  stuff.  The  men  who 
were  inside  noticed  the  bad  odour,  and  began  calling  to  each 
other  by  name,  asking  its  cause. 

In  this  way  Tortoise  heard  that  there  were  eight  men  in  the 
secret  room,  and  also  learned  their  names.  He  was  very  careful 
to  fill  up  the  little  hole  which  he  had  made,  and  afterwards  went 
back  to  bed. 

Next  morning  a  great  company  was  gathered  together  to 
witness  the  shame  of  Tortoise  when  he  should  fail  to  answer 
the  question  of  their  Lord. 

Obassi  stood  in  the  middle  of  the  audience  room  and  said 
very  loudly  that  Tortoise  must  now  tell  him  what  was  hidden 
in  the  windowless  house,  or  suffer  death  if  he  could  not  do  so. 

Then  Tortoise  rose  and  said  that  there  were  eight  men  shut 
up  within,  and,  to  the  surprise  of  all  the  people,  he  repeated 
their  names,  thus  proving  himself  to  be  wiser  than  all  his 
fellows,  just  as  his  daughter  had  said. 

Obassi  was  so  vexed  that  he  ordered  his  men  to  seize  Tortoise, 
sharpen  a  stick,  and  drive  it  through  this  overwise  creature, 
so  as  to  fasten  him  to  the  ground  at  a  place  where  cross-roads 
meet.  He  also  ordered  that  the  beast  should  be  fixed  upright, 
so  as  to  look  at  his  judge  on  high.  Obassi  decreed  further 
that,  whenever  a  man  wished  to  make  him  a  sacrifice,  Tortoise 
should  be  offered  in  this  way.  That  is  why  we  often  see 
Tortoise  impaled  before  Jujus,  or  at  cross-roads. 

Why  Nki*  lives  in  the  Tops  of  Palm  Trees. 

A  new  piece  of  land  had  been  cleared  by  the  people  of  a 
certain  town.  Next  morning,  when  they  went  thither  to  work, 
they  found  the  place  befouled.  Inquiry  was  made,  but  the 
offender  was  not  to  be  found.  The  head  chief  therefore  gave  a 
gun  to  Ise  and  set  him  to  watch. 

When  night  fell,  Ejaw  t  crept  out  of  the  bush,  and  began  to 
befoul  the  place  as  before.  Ise  took  aim  and  shot  him,  then 
ran  and  told  the  people  what  he  had  done. 

*  Small  Dormouse  (Gvaphiurus  C.  dorothea  talboti). 
t  Civet  cat. 


398      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE   BUSH 

At  daybreak  they  all  went  forth  and  brought  in  the  body. 
They  cut  up  the  flesh,  and  asked  Ise  to  dry  it  in  the  smoke  of 
the  fire  that  they  might  feast  upon  it  next  day.  Ise  did  as  he 
was  bidden,  and,  when  he  had  laid  the  pieces  in  order  upon  the 
drying  shelf,  sat  down  to  watch  by  the  hearth. 

Now  Nki  loved  fresh  meat,  and  thought  of  a  way  by  which 
he  alone  might  feast  upon  the  kill.  He  took  a  great  jar  of  palm 
wine,  and  went  to  visit  Ise.  The  latter  was  very  thirsty,  so  he 
drank  a  deep  draught  and  then  lay  down  and  fell  asleep. 
While  he  slept  Nki  stole  all  the  meat,  then,  when  dawn  broke, 
before  the  theft  could  be  discovered,  this  treacherous  animal 
took  a  drum  and  stood  in  the  open  space  before  the  Egbo  house 
playing : 

"Ofu   awche,  kpa  kun     edingi     ane     aba. 
Day  breaks,  now  we  may  know  each  other. 
Mbana  nyamm    aba    kare  nyamm. 
Drier    of  meat  come  give     meat." 

Ise  awoke  and  found  all  the  flesh  gone,  so  he  cried  out : 

"  A  thief  has  taken  all  the  meat  which  was  given  me  to 
guard.     Take  my  flesh  instead  that  the  town  may  feast." 

On  this  the  people  said,  "  It  is  just,"  so  they  killed  Ise  and 
gave  his  body  to  Etuk,*  that  it  might  be  smoked  before  the  fire. 

Nki  did  as  before,  stole  the  meat,  and  at  daybreak  beat  upon 
the  summoning  drum.  So  Etuk  lost  his  life  as  Ise  had  done, 
and  his  flesh  was  entrusted  to  Nkongam.t 

On  him  Nki  played  the  same  trick,  with  the  result  that  he 
also  was  slain,  and  his  body  given  in  charge  to  Ngumi.t  This 
latter  also  fell  a  victim  to  Nki  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as 
the  other  beasts,  and  this  time  Mbaw  §  was  chosen  to  smoke 
the  meat. 

Now  the  latter  is  a  very  cunning  animal,  and  no  sooner  had 
he  reached  his  house  than  he  laid  the  flesh  upon  the  drying 
shelf,  and  spread  over  it  great  lumps  of  rubber.  Next  he  piled 
high  the  fire,  so  that  the  rubber  grew  soft,  and  sat  down  to  wait 
for  the  thief. 

After  a  while  Nki  appeared  as  before,  but  Mbaw  only  pretended 

*  Bay  duiker. 

f  Yellow-backed  duiker. 

X  Boar. 

§  Large  dormouse  (Graphiurus  hueti). 


FOLK-LORE  399 

to  drink  the  palm  wine,  and  poured  it  away  little  by  little  when 
his  visitor  was  not  looking.  At  length  he  tco  lay  down  as  if 
overcome  by  sleep. 

Nki  called,  "  Mbaw,  Mbaw,  are  you  awake  ?  "  but  the  latter 
did  not  answer. 

The  thief  thought  that  all  was  now  safe,  so  he  rose  up  softly, 
and  laid  his  hand  upon  the  meat.  At  once  the  rubber  caught 
him  and  held  him  fast.  Nki  was  angry  and  cried,  "  Let  go  of 
me,  whoever  you  are,  or  I  will  punch  your  head."  Still  the 
rubber  held  fast.  Then  Nki  drove  his  own  head  against  the 
place  where  his  hand  was  held,  thinking  to  force  back  his 
enemy,  but  the  rubber  caught  his  hair  and  held  that  also.  In 
vain  he  struggled  and  fought,  threatening  his  unseen  foe  all  the 
while.     Rubber  answered  nothing,  but  only  held  the  tighter. 

At  dawn  Mbaw  went  out  and  beat  upon  the  summoning  drum, 
"  Day  breaks  now,  we  may  know  each  other ;  drier  of  meat  come 
and  give  meat." 

The  people  came  together,  and  found  the  thief  caught  fast. 
They  debated  as  to  how  he  could  best  be  punished  for  the 
deaths  of  all  those  beasts  who  had  died  through  his  fault. 

While  they  talked  together,  each  proposing  some  more  cruel 
fate  than  the  other,  Nki  began  to  wring  his  hands  and  to  weep. 
With  each  new  suggestion  he  heartily  agreed,  adding  always, 
"  Yes,  yes,  kill  me  in  any  of  these  ways,  only  do  not  fix  spears 
in  the  ground,  and  throw  me  up  so  that  I  may  fall  upon  their 
points." 

The  people  were  so  angry  that  they  shouted,  "  Since  he 
dreads  this  death  above  all  others,  it  is  by  this  that  he  shall 
die."  They  got  spears,  and  fixed  them  firmly  in  the  earth, 
points  upward.  Then  they  freed  Nki  from  the  rubber  which 
had  held  him  till  now,  and  placed  him  before  the  spears. 
Six  of  the  strongest  men  advanced  to  seize  him  and  fling 
him  into  the  air,  but  to  the  surprise  of  everyone,  he  himself 
gave  a  great  leap,  and  sprang  up  a  palm  tree  which  stood 
near. 

At  once  the  people  got  axes,  and  cut  down  the  tree,  but 
before  it  fell,  Nki  sprang  to  another.     Then  they  said : 

"  If  we  follow  this  man,  we  shall  ruin  all  the  palm  trees. 
It  is  better  to  leave  him  alone." 


400      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

That  is  why  Nki  always  stays  in  the  tops  of  palm  trees. 
Up  to  that  time  he  had  lived  on  earth  like  all  other  animals, 
but  since  he  caused  the  death  of  so  many  creatures,  no  one 
will  be  his  friend,  and  he  cannot  come  back  to  dwell  among 
them  any  more. 

The  Lord  of  the  Bush. 

In  the  beginning  of  things,  Nkimm  (Python)  and  Njokk 
(Elephant)  were  Lords  of  the  Bush.  They  disputed  together 
as  to  which  was  the  strongest.  One  said,  "  The  bush  belongs 
to  me."  The  other  answered,  "  Nay,  it  is  mine."  Osian 
(the  black  ants)  listened  and  said,  "  In  seven  days'  time, 
let  us  all  fight ;  then  he  who  shall  beat  the  others  shall  be 
called  Lord  of  the  Bush."  The  two  great  beasts  laughed, 
because  the  ants  are  so  small ;  but  they  agreed,  and  from  that 
time  the  latter  gathered  together  over  every  tree  and  rock. 
When  the  seventh  day  came  they  began  to  fight.  First,  they 
saw  Iku.  Him  they  surrounded  and  bit  so  badly  that  he  ran 
to  the  river  and  was  drowned.  Next  they  sought  out  Nkimm, 
whom  they  found  with  his  young  ones.  They  came  in  such 
thousands  that  the  great  snake  had  to  take  his  children  and 
flee  to  the  water,  where  they  escaped.  Next  the  ants  pursued 
the  monkeys,  many  of  whom  they  killed,  while  the  rest  sprang 
up  very  high  trees,  calling  out,  "  We  leave  the  ground  to 
you."   " 

After  this  the  Osian  gathered  themselves  together  in  vast, 
numbers,  and  set  out  to  fight  with  Njokk  ;  but  the  latter  only 
laughed.  For  several  days  they  fought,  but  could  not  prevail, 
and  at  length  sent  a  message  to  their  king  that  the  battle  went 
against  them,  and  that  they  would  all  be  trampled  to  death 
beneath  the  great  feet  of  their  enemy  if  help  were  not  sent. 

Then  the  King  of  all  the  ants  called  together  his  people,  even 
to  the  last  one,  and  they  came  in  such  numbers  that  the  whole 
earth  was  dark  with  them.  Into  Elephant's  mouth  they  poured 
and  into  his  eyes,  his  nose  and  his  belly,  till  he  could  no  longer 
stand  against  them,  but  fled  to  the  water  for  refuge  as  the  other 
beasts  had  done.  When  the  bush  creatures  saw  him  fleeing 
they  knew  for  true  that  the  ants  were  lords  of  the  bush.  So 
they  called  a  meeting   and  brought  out  a  great   chair.     The 


o 


FOLK-LORE  401 

King  of  the  ants  came  and  sat  upon  it,  and  all  the  animals 
stood  before  him,  holding  out  their  hands  and  saying : 

"  From  to-day  you  are  our  lord.  The  land  is  yours,  the 
bush  is  yours,  and  we  will  obey  your  orders." 

During  this  time  the  monkeys  were  still  amid  the  tree  tops. 
The  other  beasts  called  to  them  and  said,  "  Will  you  come 
down  ?  "  but  they  answered  : 

"  No,  we  will  make  our  homes  in  the  branches."  From  that 
time  onward  the  Ant  King  has  been  Lord  of  the  Bush. 

Why  a  Murderer  must  Die. 

There  was  once  a  woman  named  Ukpong  Ma,  who  had  only 
one  daughter.  Just  before  it  was  time  to  put  the  girl  into  the 
fatting-house  the  mother  died. 

One  day  the  husband,  whose  name  was  Uponnsoraw,  set 
out  for  market.  On  his  way  he  passed  through  a  neighbouring 
town,  where  he  saw  a  beautiful  woman,  and  persuaded  her 
to  return  with  him  as  his  wife. 

When  the  couple  reached  the  man's  house,  his  daughter 
came  out  to  salute  them,  and  the  new  wife  saw  that  in  a  little 
while  her  step-daughter  would  be  more  beautiful  than  she.  So 
she  hated  the  girl,  and  thought  how  she  might  destroy  her. 

One  day,  therefore,  when  the  husband  went  out  to  hunt, 
the  new  wife  called  to  her  step-child  and  said,  "  Take  the 
great  water-pot,  and  go  to  the  far  river  for  water.  Do  not 
bring  home  any  from  the  streams  near  by." 

So  soon  as  the  girl  had  set  out,  the  new  wife  killed  a  goat, 
ate  the  best  part  of  the  meat  herself,  and  hid  what  was  left  over. 

As  the  girl  came  back  from  the  river  it  began  to  grow  dark. 
Rain  fell  and  she  felt  cold.  When  she  reached  home  she  went 
to  the  fireside  to  warm  herself.  Some  water  fell  down  on  her, 
and  she  said  to  the  new  wife,  "  Where  does  it  come  from  ?  " 
and  the  latter  answered,  "  The  roof  leaks." 

When  Uponnsoraw  came  back  from  the  hunt,  he  could  not 
see  the  goat,  so  he  called  to  his  daughter  and  asked  where  it 
was.  She  answered,  "Your  new  wife  sent  me  to  the  river  for 
water.  I  have  only  just  come  back,  and  do  not  know  what 
has  been  happening  at  home." 

S.B.  D    D 


402      IN    THE    SHADOW   OF   THE    BUSH 

At  this  the  cruel  step-mother  came  out  of  her  room  and  said  : 

"  Let  us  practise  the  charm  to  find  who  has  stolen  the  goat." 

They  sent  for  the  Diviner,  and  he  came  with  a  very  long 
rope  and  said  : 

"  We  will  go  down  to  the  river  where  the  girl  filled  the  jar." 

Now  the  new  wife  was  a  great  witch,  so  she  secretly  made  a 
strong  charm.  Then,  when  they  came  to  the  river  and  threw 
the  rope  across,  she  stood  on  the  brink  and  called : 

"  If  I  have  stolen  the  goat  may  the  rope  break  and  let  me 
fall  into  the  river.     If  I  am  guiltless  may  I  walk  over  safely." 

She  put  her  foot  upon  the  rope,  but  the  charm  held,  and  she 
crossed  without  mishap. 

The  young  girl  stood  by  the  river-side  and  said  the  same 
words.  Then  she  walked  on  the  rope  as  far  as  mid-stream. 
There  the  charm  which  the  witch  had  made  caused  it  to  break, 
and  the  girl  fell  into  the  water.  A  great  crocodile  came  up  to 
the  surface  and  caught  her  as  she  fell.  Then  all  the  people 
said,  "  She  it  was  who  stole  the  goat."     Only   her  father  said  : 

"  My  daughter  never  stole  anything.  I  must  find  out  the 
reason  of  her  death." 

A  palm  tree  grew  by  the  river-side,  just  by  the  place  where 
the  girl  was  lost,  and  one  day  a  man  climbed  up  this  to  collect 
palm  wine. 

Now  beneath  the  water  was  the  house  of  a  were-crocodile, 
and  she  it  was  who  had  seized  the  girl,  and  kept  her  all  this 
while  as  a  slave.  When  the  man  began  to  climb  the  palm  tree 
the  crocodile  was  angry.  So  she  took  an  axe  and  put  it  into 
the  girl's  hand  and  said : 

"  Go  up  to  the  top  of  the  water  and  throw  this  axe  at  the  man, 
that  he  may  leave  my  palm  tree  and  go  back  whence  he  came." 

The  girl  did  as  she  was  bidden,  but  threw  the  axe  so  as 
not  to  hit  the  man.  As  it  struck  the  tree  the  climber  looked 
down  and  saw  her.  He  therefore  went  back  to  his  town  with 
all  haste,  and  told  her  father  what  had  happened. 

The  latter  wondered,  and  went  before  the  chief  and  said : 

"  This  man  says  that  he  saw  my  daughter  who  died  two 
years  ago  in  the  great  river." 

The  chief  was  angry  because  he  thought  that  the  man  was 
lying.     So  he  ordered  that  chains  should  be  brought  and  put 


FOLK-LORE  403 

upon  him.  The  man,  however,  begged  that  they  would  take 
him  to  the  place  where  he  had  seen  the  girl,  and  watch  while 
he  climbed  the  palm  tree.  To  this  the  chief  consented,  and 
sent  him,  with  three  men,  to  the  river.  With  them  also  went 
Uponnsoraw.  The  man  climbed  the  tree  and  struck  it  with  his 
matchet.  No  sooner  did  the  girl  hear  than  she  rose  to  the 
surface,  covered  with  ornaments,  but  sank  down  again  almost 
at  once.  On  this  all  the  men  ran  back  to  the  chief  to  tell  him 
that  the  man  had  spoken  truth,  for  they  also  had  seen  the  girl. 

The  whole  town  set  forth  to  fetch  the  Diviner,  and  asked 
him  to  practise  the  charm.  This  he  did,  and  told  them  they 
must  bring  a  black  cock,  an  egg,  a  piece  of  white  cloth,  a  ball 
of  red  cam  wood  dye,  and  some  of  the  yellow  "  ogokk " 
powder ;  also  they  must  bring  the  great  nets  which  are  used  in 
hunting.  All  these  things,  save  the  red  powder,  they  must 
sacrifice  to  the  crocodile,  but  the  nets  they  must  hold  ready  in 
their  hands. 

As  soon  as  they  threw  the  offering  into  the  river  the  girl 
rose  to  the  surface.  When  she  appeared  they  cast  the  nets 
and  caught  her  like  a  fish.  Then  they  drew  her  to  land  and 
washed  her  with  the  red  powder  and  with  sand,  and  carried  her 
in  triumph  to  the  house  of  the  chief. 

The  cruel  witch-wife  came  out  to  salute  her,  but  no  sooner 
did  the  girl  hear  her  voice  than  she  said : 

"  I  will  not  see  her  at  all.  Crocodile  told  me  a  story  about 
her.  It  was  she  who  stole  the  goat."  Then  she  said  to  her 
father,  "  Call  all  the  people.     I  wish  to  say  something." 

When  the  townsfolk  had  come  together  they  carried  the  girl 
before  the  Egbo  house,  where  she  stood  up  and  said : 

"  Here  I  am.  It  was  the  new  wife  of  my  father  who  stole 
the  goat  that  she  might  destroy  me,  lest  I  should  be  counted 
more  beautiful  than  herself.  Then  she  made  a  strong  magic, 
so  that  the  rope  might  bear  her  across  the  river,  but  break  when 
I  tried  to  pass  over.  Therefore  all  the  people  thought  that  I 
was  guilty  of  the  theft.  Judge  now,  oh  ye  people,  between 
her  and  me." 

Then  the  Head  Chief  said,  "  Let  the  town  give  judgment " ; 
and  they  cried  in  a  great  shout : 

"  The  witch  shall  die  for  her  crime."     Then  they  set  up  two 

D   D   2 


404      IN   THE    SHADOW    OF   THE    BUSH 

great  posts,  and  from  these  hanged  the  woman  by  the  very  cord 
which  by  her  magic  she  had  caused  to  break  beneath  the  feet 
of  the  innocent  girl.  Thus  died  the  witch  in  the  sight  of 
all  men. 

From  that  day  forward  a  law  was  made,  "  If  anyone  is 
proved  guilty  of  the  death  of  another,  he  shall  surely  die." 

That  is  the  reason  why  if  anyone  kills  another  they  must 
hang. 


L'ENVOIE 

Sitting  as  now,  in  the  very  heart  of  the  Bush — writing, 
regretfully  enough,  the  last  words  of  what,  to  me,  has  been  a  work 
of  pure  pleasure,  however  weary  a  task  it  may  have  proved  to 
those  who  made  fair  copies  of  my  illegible  manuscripts — I  can 
but  feel  how  powerless  are  mere  words  to  express,  even  faintly, 
the  charm  of  such  a  land.  At  best,  one  can  but  give,  as  it 
were,  the  dry  bones  of  a  country,  which  for  sheer  beauty  can 
hardly  be  surpassed.  Green  as  if  carved  from  the  heart  of  an 
emerald,  flushed  by  opal  dawns  and  sunsets,  watered  by  streams 
of  crystal  clearness,  and  gleaming  with  the  flash  of  countless 
waterfalls,  it  may  be  called,  like  the  famous  orchid,  "  Beautiful 
as  the  seven  deadly  sins."  Yet  all  its  loveliness  cannot  quite 
hide  the  deadliness  that  lurks  beneath,  and  even  on  the  strongest 
and  most  energetic,  the  strain  of  the  climate  must  tell  after 
a  while.  Government  has  done  wonders  as  regards  improved 
drainage,  and  so  forth,  but  many  years  and  an  enormous 
expenditure  will  be  necessary  before  the  country  can  become 
habitable  for  white  men  for  more  than  short  terms  of  service. 

There  are  occasions  when  the  beauty  around  one  fails  to 
soothe  the  sting  of  hordes  of  sandflies  and  mosquitoes,  which, 
when  one  stands  at  the  theodolite,  seem  determined  to  leave 
no  pin-point  of  face  or  hands  unmarked ;  nor  does  it  allay  the 
torture  of  prickly  heat  as  one  toils  painfully  up  some  hill  in  the 
course  of  the  almost  ceaseless  journeys  necessary  for  the 
maintenance  of  law  and  order.  Yet,  even  at  the  worst  of  times, 
when  one  is  tempted  to  ask  with  Mary  Kingsley,  "  Why  did  I 
come  to  Africa  ?  "  one  has  but  to  let  one's  eyes  wander  over  the 
loveliness  around  to  answer  like  her,  "  Why !  Who  would 
not  come  to  its  twin-brother  Hell  itself,  for  all  the  beauty 
and  the  charm  of  it  ?  " 


LIST  OF  APPENDICES. 


A. 

Tabus 

B. 

Clubs 

C. 

Anthropometry 

D. 

Orthography    . 

E. 

Grammar 

F. 

Vocabularies  . 

G. 

Nsibidi  Signs  . 

H. 

Botany    . 

(i)  Fungi  . 

(2)  Lichens 

I.      Zoology 


(1)  Mammals 

(2)  Birds    . 

(3)  Fish,  Reptiles,  etc 

(4)  Insects,  etc 

(5)  Arachnida,  etc. 

(6)  Crabs  . 

(7)  Mollusca 


J.      Mineralogy 

K.     Meteorology    . 

L.     Geographical  Survey 


PAGE 

407 
410 
414 
4i5 
4i7 
424 

447 
462 
462 
463 
465 
465 
469 
470 
470 
47i 
473 
473 
474 
476 
478 


APPENDIX  A. 

Tabus. 

There  are  many  strict  laws  and  tabus  (Ntubi)  which 
regulate  the  distribution  of  animals  killed  in  the  chase. 

After  a  town  hunt,  one  fore  and  one  hind  leg  of  each  beast 
killed  must  be  given  to  the  townsfolk.  The  neck  becomes  the 
property  of  the  man  who  stood  nearest  during  the  kill,  the  tail 
belongs  to  the  mother  of  the  hunter,  one  leg  and  the  back  to 
the  father  or  the  head  of  his  house,  while  the  head  and  remain- 
ing fore  leg  are  left  to  the  actual  slayer. 

When  a  man  hunts  alone  or  with  one  companion,  the  rules 
vary  according  to  the  animal  killed. 

In  the  case  of  a  boar,  the  tail  is  given  to  the  mother,  the  two 
legs  and  trotters  to  the  father  or  head  of  the  house,  but  he 
usually  returns  the  latter.  The  cheeks  and  jaws  must  be 
cooked  for  the  hunter's  age  class  ;  half  of  the  head  and  the 
stomach  is  given  to  the  wife,  and  the  other  half-head  to  the 
companion  ;  leaving  the  two  fore  legs  to  the  man  himself. 

Both  water  chevrotain  and  bay  duiker  must  be  taken  whole 
before  the  head  of  the  house,  who  returns  all  except  the  two 
hind  legs.  Much  the  same  rule  applies  to  Ogilby's  duiker, 
except  that  this  is  always  taken  to  the  hunter's  father.  Should 
the  latter  be  dead,  there  is  no  obligation  to  offer  it  to  the  head 
of  the  house. 

The  rules  about  porcupine,  blue  duikerbok,  and  monitor  flesh 
are  similar,  but  not  so  strictly  kept. 

Elephant,  buffalo,  yellow-backed  duiker,  pangolin,  civet  cat, 
and  genet  must  also  be  brought  before  the  head  of  the  house. 

Should  these  rules  be  infringed,  a  Juju  will  catch  the  hunter 
and  give  him  a  sickness,  from  which  he  will  not  recover  except 
by  confession  and  sacrifice.  In  the  case  of  a  genet,  the  illness 
is  supposed  to  take  the  form  of  elephantiasis. 


408  APPENDIX   A 

The  tabu  on  harnessed  antelope  has  been  described  on 
p.  142. 

Should  a  man  keep  to  himself  a  male  drill  ape  or  chim- 
panzee, certain  death  is  supposed  to  follow,  and  an  illness  from 
which  recovery  is  unlikely,  if  the  kill  be  female. 

When  a  leopard  or  python  is  killed,  the  heart  and  gall  are 
cut  out,  buried  in  a  deep  hole,  and  the  earth  beaten  over  them. 
Anyone  eating  of  these  would  die  (see  p.  27).  Only  slaves 
eat  leopards  ;  for  free  men  they  are  tabu. 

Of  birds,  the  Monkey-killing  Eagle  and  the  Greater  Plantain- 
eater  must  be  taken  to  the  head  of  the  house. 

Neither  man  nor  woman  may  feed  on  any  scavenger  bird,  such 
as  the  vulture,  nor  on  the  owl,  because  it  is  a  witch's  familiar. 
If  killed,  the  latter  must  be  offered  up  on  two  posts  at  the 
entrance  to  the  town.  The  Kingfisher  also  is  forbidden  food. 
When  killed  its  skull  is  dried,  powdered,  mixed  with  leaves  and 
given  as  cough  medicine. 

Members  of  the  Juju  Mfam  are  forbidden  to  eat  the  bird 
called  "  Aru." 

Many  persons  may  not  eat  the  fish  called  Ecchan  or  Mbonn, 
the  heads  of  which  are  ground  up  and  used  as  "  medicine." 

Of  tabus  for  men  alone,  the  principal  ones  are — the  fish 
Eddokk,  of  which,  should  a  hunter  eat,  he  will  be  killed  in  the 
bush,  and  crab,  "The  Father  of  all  Jujus,"  the  eating  of  which 
would  cut  a  man  off  from  partaking  in  any  ceremonies. 

A  woman  may  not  eat  (a)  nandinia  binotata,  as  a  child  born 
afterwards  would  surely  die  ; 

(6)  Wild  cat,  lest  she  should  become  barren. 

(c)  Anything  killed  by  leopard  or  wild  cat,  otherwise  her 
child  would  be  still-born. 

(d)  Crocodile,  as  her  child  would  be  born  with  a  scaly  skin 
and  die. 

(e)  The  Greater  Plantain-eater. 

(/)  The  first  thing  caught  in  her  husband's  new  trap  (see 
story  p.  114). 

The  greater  number  of  these  tabus  probably  arose  from 
totemic  causes,  others  from  sanitary  reasons,  and  some,  obviously, 
from  the  desire  of  the  old  men  to  obtain  a  full  share  of  what 
was  killed  by  their  juniors. 


APPENDIX    A  409 

Tabu  on  Fish  for  Men,  Flesh  for  Women. 

One  day  Obassi  Nsi  called  all  the  people  on  earth  together. 
He  said,  "  I  make  a  law  concerning  the  food  which  is  proper 
for  you.  Of  the  fruits  of  the  earth  you  may  eat,  both  men  and 
women,  but  of  living  creatures  women  alone  may  eat  fish,  and 
men  only  may  eat  the  flesh  of  animals." 

Now  there  was  a  woman  named  Aiya  Ita,  who  had  a  husband 
named  Atu  Utup  (Efik  word  for  hunter).  One  day  each  of 
them  went  out,  she  to  the  river,  and  he  to  the  bush.  After  she 
had  been  fishing  for  a  little  while  she  caught  a  fine  fish.  This 
she  took  home  and  boiled  in  her  pot.  When  it  was  done,  she 
ate  some  of  it,  and  some  she  left  for  the  morrow. 

In  the  evening  Atu  Utup  came  home.  He  had  hunted  all 
day  but  killed  nothing,  and  was  very  hungry.  He  saw  the  fish 
which  his  wife  had  left,  and  he  took  a  piece  and  ate  it. 

Now  a  bird  came  out  of  the  bush,  and  settled  on  the  branch 
of  a  tree  which  grew  close  to  the  house.  Through  a  small  hole 
in  the  wall  he  saw  what  the  man  had  done.  At  once  he  flew 
away  to  Obassi  Nsi,  and  told  what  he  had  seen. 

Obassi  sent  for  the  hunter  and  said,  "  You  have  gone  against 
the  rule  which  I  made,  that  no  man  should  eat  fish.  There- 
fore you  must  die." 

After  the  man  was  dead,  Obassi  thought  "  The  rule  that  I 
had  made  is  too  hard  for  my  people."  So  he  sent  and  called 
them  again  before  him,  and  said : 

"  From  to-day  I  remove  the  law.  Men  may  eat  fish.  Women 
may  eat  meat.  Only  let  no  woman  eat  the  genitals  of  any 
animal  slain  by  a  hunter.  Should  she  do  so,  the  hunter  will 
never  be  able  to  kill  again,  unless  he  finds  out  from  the  charm 
who  it  is  who  has  transgressed  my  law  and  makes  due  sacrifice, 
that  the  curse  may  be  taken  off  him." 


APPENDIX  B. 

CLUBS  (OKUM,  PL.  AKUM). 

The  Oban  Clubs  may  be  taken  as  typical  of  those  in  most 
Ekoi  towns.  They  may  be  roughly  divided  into  (A)  those  only 
resuscitated  for  special  occasions,  and  (B)  those  in  constant  use. 

A. 

The  following  are  ancient  institutions  revived  under  special 
circumstances,  for  instance  on  the  death  of  a  member  of  the 
club,  an  important  chief,  or  the  funeral  customs  of  such  : — 

i.  "  Oshum  njum  ka  etemm.    Oba  eku  ka  nju, 

"  Draw     thing  in    bush.     Come  die  in  house. 
Owomm  okpaw." 
Want         die." 
i.e.,  When  a  hunter  shoots  animals  in  the  bush,  he  only  comes 
to  his  house  to  die,  if  he  fails  to  satisfy  the  inhabitants.     The 
meaning  is  that  members  of  his  household  would  want  to  share 
in  his  kill,  and  would  probably  poison  him  if  he  did  not  content 
them. 

This  was  originally  a  club  for  avenging  the  murder  of  its  mem- 
bers, and  was  a  very  powerful  association  in  olden  days.  When 
a  dance  is  given,  big  rattles  are  worn,  and  should  a  member  put 
on  an  Okum  dress,  without  the  permission  of  the  President, 
the  superstition  is  that  the  dress  would  stick  to  him  and  could 
not  be  laid  aside  until  the  old  men  had  made  sacrifices  in 
atonement. 

2.  "  Ewaw  ekabomm     cne." 

"  (Name  of  Okum)     not  cut     a  person." 

When  the  dance  proper  to  this  is  given,  an  old  man  must  get 
water,  mix  medicine  in  it,  and  pour  it  over  the  bodies  of  the 
members,  while  repeating  the  above  words.  The  Okum  bears  a 
large  cane  erection  on  his  head.  The  fine  of  a  ram  is  levied  on 
anyone  who  should  cross  in  front  of  the  dancers. 


APPENDIX    B  411 

3.  "  Okpe  etuma." 
"  (Name  of  Okum)  jumps." 

This  club  is  so  called  because  the  Okum  must  never  stand 
still.  He  is  always  accompanied  by  two  girl  attendants, 
bearing  looking  glasses.     One  goes  before  and  one  behind. 

4.  "  Orui.     Achibbi  wa  njimm." 

"Go.        Turn      to     back." 
"  Go  and  come  back."    These  words  are  said  to  a  member 
who,  after  breaking  a  rule,  is  sent  to  fetch  the  fine  ordained  as 
punishment.     The   name   has   also   a   secondary   meaning  of 
"back-biting  "  during  the  man's  absence. 

5.  "  Ikadum."  The  Okum  wears  a  skull.  This  club  gave 
war  dances,  especially  when  its  members  came  back  with  the 
heads  of  enemies.  Meetings  are  never  held  in  the  town,  but  in 
the  bush  near-by.     At  all  celebrations  guns  are  fired. 

6.  "  Ayunga."  On  the  death  of  a  member,  his  family  must 
pay  one  goat,  20  yams  and  4  bottles  of  palm-wine  to  the  club. 
The  eldest  son  is  elected  in  his  father's  place.  This  society 
used  formerly  to  serve  as  executioners  for  those  condemned  to 
death  by  the  yepotma. 

7.  "  Esere  Ise."  No  one  could  be  found  who  was  willing 
to  explain  the  meaning  of  this,  but  the  words  appear  to  point 
to  the  practise  of  enforcing  the  trial  by  ordeal.  Its  functions 
were  only  given  as  those  of  a  dancing  club. 

8.  "  Ukwa."  This  is  the  lodge  of  a  Calabar  club.  Members 
dance  with  long  swords  to  the  accompaniment  of  two  large 
drums. 

9.  "Adia.      Akere       idemm." 
"Eat.     Think  of  yourself." 

A  dining  club.  The  name  signifies  that,  while  being  enter- 
tained in  another  man's  house,  you  must  remember  that  it  will 
soon  be  your  turn  to  act  as  host. 

10.  "  Erong-Isonn  "  (Efik).  "  Knee  earth."  This  is  a  dancing 
club.     When  plays  are  given,  rattles  are  worn  above  the  knee. 

11.  "  Ukai      ke  isonn   obio,    Oban  "  (Efik). 
"  Difficult  on  earth    town,    Oban." 

.  A  dancing  club,  started  by  an  age  class  whose  members  had 
got  into  trouble  with  the  Chiefs  of  Oban,  and  were  heavily 
fined  in  consequence. 


412  APPENDIX    B 

12.  "  Nchibbi  achi    ebai." 

"  (Name  of  Okum)    heads  two." 

The  Okum  wears  a  large  two-faced  head,  one  side  male  and 
the  other  female,  decorated  with  the  feathers  of  the  Greater 
Plantain-eater.  The  dancers  hold  matchets  and  guns  and  fire 
the  latter  at  intervals. 

No  woman  can  belong  to  any  of  these  clubs,  and  none  save 
the  free-born,  after  passing  middle  age,  to  any  except  the  last 
mentioned. 

B. 

The  following  are  those  most  prominent  at  the  present  day. 
Any  man,  free-born,  or  "  member,"  can  join  them,  while  to  the 
first  women  may  also  belong. 

i.  "  Ikkpai,"  Whip.  At  dances  every  member  carries  a 
whip.  The  Okum  wears  two  white  feathers  above  a  carved 
head.  This  association  was  formerly  more  powerful  than 
now. 

2.  "  Utap-Anam."  "  Touch  take  from,"  i.e.,  Should  you 
injure  our  club,  we  will  fine  you. 

This  was  originally  started  by  two  age  classes.  Women  may 
neither  join  in  the  dances  nor  see  the  instruments  proper  to  the 
club.  These  are  long  hollow  pieces  of  wood,  which,  when 
rubbed  together,  produce  a  loud  harsh  sound.  Juju  worship 
is  connected  with  the  rites. 

3.  "  Ekang."  When  the  Okum  comes  out,  a  young  palm 
leaf  and  other  prickly  leaves  are  tied  about  him.  Should  he 
meet  a  non-member,  he  catches  hold  of  the  man,  so  that  the 
leaves  should  scratch  and  hurt  him. 

4.  "Ekkpo  Njawhaw  "  (Efik).  "Ghosts  break,"  a  lodge  of 
an  Ibibio  club.  A  common  plan  to  increase  membership  of 
this  society  is  to  take  the  Okum  to  the  house  of  a  friend  who  is 
a  non-member.  Should  the  latter  be  unprepared  to  provide 
entertainment  without  notice  for  so  large  a  number  of  guests, 
his  plates  and  calabashes  are  broken  by  the  club.  To  this 
proceeding  the  association  probably  owes  its  name,  as  the 
damaged  property  looks  as  if  broken  to  lay  on  a  grave  for  the 
use  of  the  ghosts. 

5.  "  Obbonn  "  (Efik  and  Ekoi).  "  Chief."  This  club  dances 
at  night,  and  no  woman  may  be  present. 


APPENDIX    B  413 

6.  "  Itiatt  Obbonn."  "  Stones  of  the  Chief."  Connected 
with  the  last-named  society.  Only  old  men  can  become 
members,  and  a  considerable  amount  of  Juju  worship  is  mixed 
up  with  its  rites.     There  is  no  dancing. 

7.  "  Angbo."  It  is  impossible  to  learn  the  meaning  of  this 
word.  Every  town  has  a  lodge.  In  many  none  but  adults  are 
allowed  to  join.  Dances  are  always  given  at  night,  and  no 
woman  may  be  present. 

8.  "  Nsikpe."  A  new  and  powerful  club  brought  from  Onun, 
near  Calabar.  The  Okum  wears  a  tall  cane  erection  on  his 
head,  and  much  Juju  is  connected  with  its  rites. 

9.  "  Mfuor."  This  is  specially  devoted  to  the  worship  of  the 
great  Juju  "  Asunga."     It  is  very  powerful  in  some  towns. 

10.  "  Ekkpa."  This  is  a  powerful  club  in  which  the  worship 
of  Nimm  Asam  is  very  strong.  It  differs  from  the  others  in 
being  a  woman's  club  (see  p.  225). 

"  Members  "  have  many  clubs  of  their  own.  The  mysteries 
of  one  of  these,  named  "  Kpifonn,"  may  be  witnessed  by  no  free- 
born  man  nor  by  any  woman. 

All  clubs  have  different  tunes  and  peculiar  ways  of  beating 
the  drums,  so  that  even  at  a  distance  it  is  easy  to  tell  which  of 
the  many  societies  is  holding  a  celebration. 


APPENDIX  C. 


ANTHROPOMETRY. 

Below  is  given  an  abstract  of  the  more  important  measure- 
ments of  inhabitants  of  the  Oban  District.  Fuller  information 
will  be  found  in  an  article  entitled  "  On  certain  Physical 
Characters  of  the  Negroes  of  the  Congo  Free  State  and 
Nigeria,"  in  the  Journal  of  the  Royal  Anthropological  Institute, 
January  to  June,  191 1,  in  which  Professor  Keith,  M.D.,  kindly 
subjected  my  measurements  to  an  exhaustive  analysis  ;  except 
those  of  the  Ekuri,  which  will  be  published  in  a  later  number  of 
the  Journal  : — 


Tribe. 

Head. 

Face. 

Nose. 

Stat. 

Span. 

L. 

B. 

Ind. 

L. 

B. 

Ind. 

- 

- 

- 

24 

Ekoi  . 

191 

146 

76-2 

61 

139 

43"5 

45 

43 

95*9 

1687 

1761 

74 

10 

Kabila 

(Ojo) 

195 

144 

74-0 

64 

143 

447 

47 

46 

99-2 

1717 

1765 

48 

20 

Ekuri 

194 

145 

74-6 

59 

I4I 

41-9 

43 

47 

108-3 

l654 

1722 

68 

17 

Korawp 
(Ododop) 

195 

146 

74'9 

61 

138 

44'3  !  45 

45 

99"3 

1644 

1754 

no 

4 

Uyanga  . 

194 

145 

75"2 

54 

139 

38-8  45 

46 

101-3 

1658 

1702 

44 

2 

Efik  . 

193 

148 

76-4 

56 

124 

43'5  i  42 

42 

ioi"6 

1702 

1753 

5i 

I 

Ibibio 

190 

153 

80-5 

57 

133 

42-9 

44 

45 

I02'2 

1753 

1804 

5i 

2 

Ibo  . 

190 

145 

76-1 

64 

135 

47"9 

47 

46 

88-5 

1676 

1740 

64 

APPENDIX  D. 

ORTHOGRAPHY. 

The  system  of  orthography  employed  in  this  book,  with  the 
few  exceptions  mentioned  below,  is  that  laid  down  by  the 
Royal  Geographical  Society  and  fully  explained  in  "  Hints  to 
Travellers."  As  stated  therein,  the  broad  features  of  the 
system  are : — 

(a)  "  That  vowels  are  pronounced  as  in  Italian  and  consonants 
as  in  English. 

(b)  Every  letter  is  pronounced,  and  no  redundant  letters  are 
introduced. 

(c)  Two  accents  only  are  used  : 

i.  The  acute,  to  denote  the  syllable  on  which  stress  is 
laid." 

2.  The  sign  "  used  by  me  over  the  short  and  open  u,  a,  i, 
and  o,  when  followed  by  ng,  to  avoid  the  more  awkward  nng. 

To  express  the  different  sounds  of  the  vowel  u  three  ways  are 
used  : — 

(a)  When  pronounced  as  in  "  up  "  or  "  lull,"  the  following 
consonant  is  doubled,  as  usual,  or  the  sign "  is  employed  ; 

03)  For  the  sound  as  in  "pull"  or  "full,"  no  alteration  is 
made; 

(y)  While  for  the  u  sounded  as  in  "  flute,"  a  long  mark  is 
placed  over  the  vowel,  thus  u. 

Before  some  consonants  a  sound  like  a  rough  breathing  may 
be  heard,  which,  in  the  case  of  m  or  n,  sometimes  produces 
the  effect  of  doubling  the  consonant.  This  sound  has  been 
marked  with  a  rough  breathing  as  "  'Mi "  moon. 

At  least  two  distinct  tones  are  prevalent  in  the  language,  and 
serve  to  differentiate  words  spelt  in  the  same  way.  Thus  Nki 
on  a  high  note  means  dormouse,  on  a  low  note,  lion. 

As  with  us,  words   spoken  with  a   rising   inflection   denote 


416  APPENDIX    D 

questions,  e.g.,  "  Akaba  ?  Is  he  coming  ?  "  while  without  the 
raised  tone,  it  merely  states  the  fact,  "  He  is  coming." 

Interrogation  is  often  shown  by  the  use  of  the  word  "  na"  at 
the  beginning  of  each  sentence. 

As  a  rule  equal  stress  is  laid  on  all  syllables. 

The  letters  b  and  p,  r,  d  and  t,  sh  and  ch  are  often  inter- 
changeable, as  are  also,  though  more  rarely,  1  and  r  ;  or  it  may 
be  more  accurate  to  say  that  sounds  exist  midway  between 
these,  not  accurately  represented  by  either.  The  same  man, 
too,  in  repeating  a  word,  will  often  interchange  consonants. 

A  final  vowel  is  elided  when  the  following  word  begins  with 
another  vowel. 

The  detailed  system  of  phonetics  employed  by  some 
authorities  does  not  seem  applicable  in  the  case  of  the  tribes 
under  consideration,  since  pronunciation  varies  considerably 
even  in  the  same  town. 


APPENDIX  E. 

A  SHORT  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  EKOI   LANGUAGE. 

Nouns. 

Nouns  are  usually  derived  from  verbs.     The  most  common 
ways  are  : 

i.  By  prefixing  a  vowel  to  the  verb  root,  e.g., 

Kott,  love  (verb).  Okott,  love  (noun). 

Ji,       go.  Eji,       place. 

Siri,   speak.  Esiri,  story. 

2.  By   prefixing  a  consonant,  generally  n  or  m,  to  the  verb 
root,  e.g., 

Fonn,  have.  Mfonni,  possessor. 

Chott,  to  speak.  Nchott,  speaker. 

Berk,    cut.  Mberk,    cutter. 

3.  By  prefixing  e  and  affixing  m,  um,  umm,  emm,  or  imm  to 
the  verb  root,  e.g. — 

Maghe,  leave.  Emaghum,  abandonment. 

Yimm,    do.  Eyimmum,  action. 

Fap,       go.  Efapumm,    departure. 

Words  formed  in  the  latter  way  are  verbal  nouns,  and  may 
be  used  as  infinitives. 

Plurals  are  formed  by  changing  the  prefixes  as  follows : 
Singular.  Plural. 

O  A 

M  A 

E  M 

N  O 

N  A 

M  O 

E  A 

&c.  &c,  &c. 
Examples  will  be  found  in  the  vocabulary. 
s.b.  e  E 


418  APPENDIX    E 

Gender  is  shown  in  some  few  cases  by  the  use  of  different 
words,  e.g., 

Nse,  father.  Nyenn,  mother. 

Ntemm,  male  friend.  Nat,       female  friend, 

but  is  usually  denoted  by 

Num  (plural,  arum),  male. 

Nkai  (     „       akai),    female, 
placed  before  the  word  qualified,  e.g., 

Num  mfong,  bull.  Nkai  mfong,  cow. 

Num  njaw,      he  dog.  Nkai  njaw,     bitch, 

except  in  the  case  of 

'Ne-num,  man      (plural,  ane-arum), 

'Ne-nkai,  woman  (     „       ane-akai). 
No  trace  of  declension  has  been  found. 

Adjectives. 

Adjectives  agree  in  number   with  the  substantive  qualified, 
and  form  their  plurals  in  the  same  way  as  the  nouns,  e.g., 
Singular.  Plural. 

Eebi,  bad.  Abi. 

Enopp,  good.  Anopp. 

Ndam,  long.  Adam  or  Aram. 

Iruk,  small.  Nduk. 

Ibonne,  little.  Mbonne, 

with  the  exception  of  those  formed,  as  is  usual  in  the  present 
day,  by  doubling  the  noun,  e.g., 

Ewak,  quickness.  Ewak-ewak,  quick. 

Efebbum,  cleverness.  Efebbum-efebbum,  clever. 

These  never  change  in  the  plural. 

Degrees  of  comparison  are  expressed  by  the  introduction  of 
other  words;  the  comparative  by  "  Achinge,"  "  surpasses,"  e.g., 
"'We   enopp    achinge  "wa." 

"  He  good  surpasses  you,"  (i.e.,  He  is  better  than  you), 
the  superlative  by  Mfonne,  very,  Etimm,  oldest  or  last,  or  by 
repetition  of  the  word. 

P     '  Mfonne  nyenn,  very  good. 

Etimm  eebi,  very  bad. 
Ndam-ndam,  very  long. 
Ngpuk-ngpuk,  very  short. 


APPENDIX    E 


419 


The  rules  for  the  position  of  adjectives  are  very  complicated. 
Some  always  proceed  the  noun,  while  others  must  follow  it.  A 
third  class  comprises  those  placed  either  before  or  after, 
probably  according  to  the  Ekoi  ideas  of  euphony. 

Pronouns. 
The  personal  pronouns  are  as  follows  : — 

Singular.  Plural. 

'Me,  I.  Ut  or  ud,  we. 

'We,  thou.*  Un,  you. 

'We,  he,  she,  it.  Abaw,  they, 

when  used  as  subject  to  the  verb,  and  by  themselves ; 
eNgam,  me.  Ut  or  ud,  us. 

'Wa,  thee.  Un,  you. 

'We,  him  her,  it.  Abaw,  them, 

when  governed  by  a  verb  or  preposition. 

The  interrogative  pronouns  Enne  ?  who  ?  Bagha  ?  which  ? 
Jenn  ?  what  ?  do  not  change.  The  other  pronouns  vary  accord- 
ing to  the  category,  to  which  the  word  qualified  belongs,  as  can 
be  seen  in  the  following  list : — 

CATEGORIES.t 

Possessive  Pronouns. 


Meaning.            1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

My,  mine    (S)  Oma 

Eama 

£jama 

ffima 

lima 

Awama 

.  Aama 

„      „       (P)  Ama 

Awama  Aama 

lima 

Ama 

Ama 

Ama 

or 

or 

or 

or 

or 

Aama 

Eama 

Aama 

Aama 

Aama 

Thy,  thine  (S)  Oa 

Ea 

Eja 

Ifa 

Ima 

Oba 

Ama 

„       „     (P)  Aba 

Oba 

Ama 

Ima 

Ama 

Ama 

Ama 

His,  her,  hers, 

it,  its    (S)  Oe 

Egye 

Eje 

Ife 

I  me 

Obe 

Ame 

„  (P)  Abe 

Ebe 

or 

obe 

Ame 

I  me 

Ame 

Ame 

Ame 

Our,  ours  (S)  Ora 

Egyira 

fijira 

ffira 

fmira 

Obira 

Amira 

or 

or 

or 

or 

or 

£jara 

Ifara 

fmara 

Obara 

amara 

*  "  'We,  thou,"  is  spoken  in  a  high  tone ; 
f  See  p.  422. 


'we,  he,"  in  a  low  tone. 


E  E   2 


420  APPENDIX   E 

Our,  ours  (P)  Abara  Obara    Amara  f  mara  Amara  Amara  Amara 

or  or  or 

Awara  Amara  Ebira 

or 

£gira 

Your,  yours (S)  Oana     £gyina    Ejina     tfina     Imina   Obina   Amina 

or 
£jana 
,,         ,,     (P)  Abina  Obina     Egina  Minna  Amina  Amina  Amina 
or  or 

Abana  Ebina 
Their,theirs  (S)  Abaw  Abaw     Abaw   Abaw    Abaw    Abaw    Abaw 
ii         »i      \*)     i>  ii  u  ii  ii  ii  ii 

Relative  Pronouns. 

Who,which(S)Nyaw  Nyi        Nji        Mfi        Mi         Mbi        Ma 
„        „     (P)Mba     Mbi         Ma        Mi         Ma        Ma         Ma 

Demonstrative  Pronouns. 
This,  the  same  as  Who,  Which. 

That           (S)  Anyaw  Anyi       Aji  Afi        Ami       Abi        Ama 

„              (P)  Aba       Abi         Anyi  Ami      Ama      Ama       Ama 

What  kind  of  ? 

(S)  Nyonn  Nyinn    Njenn    Mfunn  Munn    Mbunn  Munn 

ii  \r)       "  "  m  i'  »»  »»  ii 

The  Reflexive  Pronouns  are  : 

Myself  (masc.  or  fern.)  Ka-biji  eama. 

Thyself  „  „         eba. 

Himself,  herself,  itself  „  „         ebe. 

Ourselves  „  „         ebara. 

Yourselves  ,,  „         ebina. 

Themselves  ,,  „         abaw. 

Pronouns  follows  the  words  to  which  they  refer. 

Verbs. 

All  verbs  are  conjugated  in  the  same  way  as  the  example 
given  below : — 

I  dd  'me  nyimm.  Thou  dost, 'we  oyimm.  He,  she,  or  it  does, 
we  ayimm.  We  do,  ut  eyimm.  You  do,  un  oyimm.  They  do, 
abaw  ayimm. 


APPENDIX   E  421 

I  do  not :  cme  nkayimm,  'we  okai  yimm,  'we  akai  yimm,  ut 
ekai  yimm,  un  okai  yimm,  abaw  akai  yimm. 

I  am  doing :  'me  nki  yimm,  'we  oki  yimm,  'we  aki  yimm,  ut 
eki  yimm,  un  oki  yimm,  abaw  aki  yimm. 

I  am  not  doing:  'me  nka  yimm,  'we  okai  yimm,  &c. 

I  have  done  :  'me  ba  nyimm,  'we  ba  oyimm,  'we  ba  ayimm, 
ut  ba  eyimm,  un  ba  oyimm,  abaw  ba  ayimm. 

I  have  not  done  :  'me  be  nkai  yimm,  'we  be  okai  yimm,  &c. 

I  have  been  doing  :  'me  na  nyimmi,  'we  na  oyimmi,  &c. 

I  have  not  been  doing :  'me  nka  yimm,  &c. 

I  had  done:  'me  nde  nyimm,  'we  ore  oyimm,  'we  are  ayimm, 
ut  ere  eyim,  un  ore  oyimm,  abaw  are  ayimm. 

I  had  not  done:  'me  ka  ndaw  nyimm,  'we  ka  oraw  oyimm,  'we 
ka  araw  ayimm,  &c. 

I  had  been  doing  :  'me  nde  na  nyimm,  'we  ore  na 
oyimm,  &c. 

I  had  not  been  doing  :  'me  are  nkai  yimm,  'we  are  okai  yimm, 
'we  are  akai  yimm,  &c. 

I  shall  do :  'me  tikk  (or  tukk)  nyimm,  'we  tikk  oyimm,  &c. 

I  shall  not  do :  'me  tikk  mawyimm,  'we  tikk  omawyimm, 
'we  tikk  amawyimm,  ut  tikk  emawyimm,  un  tikk  omawyimm, 
abaw  tikk  amawyimm. 

I  am  about  to  do:  'me  njawe  nyimm,  'we  ojjawe  oyimm,  'we 
ajawe  ayimm,  ut  ejawe  eyimm,  un  ojjawe  oyimm,  abaw  ajawe 
ayimm. 

I  am  not  about  to  do :  'me  mawjawe  nyimm,  'we  omawjawe 
oyimm,  &c. 

I  shall  be  doing :  'me  tikk  njawe  nyimm,  'we  tikk  ojjawe 
oyimm,  &c. 

I  shall  not  be  doing :  'me  tikk  mawjawe  nyimm,  'we  tikk 
omawjawe  oyimm,  &c. 

I  shall  have  done :  'me  ta  ba  nyimm,  'we  ta  ba  oyimm,  &c. 
I  shall  not  have  done :  'me  kpe  nkai  yimm,  'we  kpe  okai 
yimm,  &c. 

I  would  do  :  'me  kun  nyimm,  'we  kun  oyimm,  &c. 
I  would  not  do:  'me  kun  mawjawe  nyimm,  'we  kun  omawjawe 
oyimm,  &c. 


422  APPENDIX   E 

I  would  be  doing :  'me  kun  njawe  nyimm,  fwe  kun  ojjawe 
oyimm,  &c. 

I  would  not  be  doing :  'me  kun  mawjawe  nyimm,  &c. 

I  would  have  done:  'me  kun  ba  nyimm,  'we  kun  ba  oyimm,  &c. 

I  would  not  have  done :  'me  kun  nkai  nyimm,  &c. 

I  would  have  been  doing  :  'me  kun  ba  njawe  nyimm,  &c. 

I  would  not  have  been  doing:  'me  kun  mawjawe  nyimm,  &c. 

Imperative. 
Do,  yimm  ;  Do  ye,  yimm  un. 

Infinitive  and  Verbal  Noun. 
To  do  or  doing,  eyimmum. 
No  sign  of  a  passive  voice  has  been  discovered. 
"  A  "  is  added  to  the  verb  when  followed  by  a  plural  object, 
e.g.,  'Me  nyimm  njum,  I  do  a  thing  ;  'Me  nyimma  mbimm,  I  do 
things. 

Syntax. 

The  construction  of  sentences  is  very  simple,  as  may  be  seen 
from  the  interlined  stories  shortly  to  be  published.  Conjunc- 
tions are  little  used.  The  order  of  words  closely  resembles  that 
of  English. 

Numerals. 

The  Ekoi  divide  all  things  into  seven  principal  categories  or 
classes.  The  first  nine  numerals  are  inflected  according  to  the 
category  to  which  the  word  they  qualify  belongs : — 

Categories. 


No. 
i. 

2. 

i 
wat 
abai 

2 

yit 
ebai 

3 

jutt 
ebai 

4                5 
futt           mat 
mbai          abai 

6 

butt 
abai 

7 
mat  or  butt 
abai 

3- 

asa 

esa 

esa 

nsa           asa 

asa 

asa 

4- 
5- 
6. 

7- 

ani 
aronn 
asaasa 
anighaasa 

eni 
eronn 
esaesa 
enighaesa 

eni 

eronn 

esaesa 

enighaesa 

ni              ani 
ndonn       aronn 
nsansa      asaasa 
'nighansa  anighaasa 

ani 

aronn 

asaasa 

anighaasa 

ani 

aronn 

asaasa 

anighaasa 

8.  anighani     enighaeni  enighaeni  'nighaani  anighaani  anighaani  anighaani 

9.  aronnani    eronneni    eronneni     ndonneni  aronnani    aronnani    aronnani. 

The  remaining  numerals  are  uninfected  and  will  be  found  in 
the  vocabulary.      From  these  it  will  be  seen  that  Ekoi  and 


APPENDIX    E  423 

Ododop,    unlike    neighbouring    tribes,   have    built    up    their 
numerical  system  principally  on  groups  of  three  and  four. 

There  are  no  proper  ordinals,  but  the  following  phrases  are 
used : — 

The  first  cow,  ndagha-mba  (the  leader  on  the  road)  mfong. 
The  second  cow,  mfong  ennyere  (following). 
The  third  cow,  ennyere-ennyere  mfong. 
The  fourth  cow,  mfong  ennyere  mfong  esa. 
The  fifth  cow,  mfong  ennyere  mfong  eni. 
Numeral  adverbs  are  formed  by  the  word  ntimm  : — 
Once,  ntimm  yit. 
Twice,  ntimm  ebai. 
Thrice,  ntimm  esa,  &c. 


424 


APPENDIX   F 


5 

w 

Oh 

< 


o 


04 

PQ 

H 

U 

W 

P 

Z 

O 

<* 

s 

CQ 
O 

d 

d 

W 

S5 

Q 

H 

H 

H 

X 

Z 

Z 

in 

O 

i — i 

S 
^ 

W 
PQ 

5" 

Vi 

H 

< 

>i 

W 

ho 

X 

C/3 

C/) 

!* 

►Sf 

oa 

W 

z 

O 

HI 

w 

H 

to 

o 

o 

'St 

W 

5 

< 

pq 
< 
u 
o 
> 


rt 
to 

P 

Awkokkoi 
Bawkokkoi 

Ejja 
Boja 

a 

w 

Bobinn 

Adifan 

Osboding 

Metwina 

Baturna 

Etuba 

Botuba 

Eyum 
Boum 
Ufurna 
Bafurna 

d 

O 

-o 
o 

O 

a      a 
a   .  a 

rt  13   rt 
.*  ,q  -* 

S    C    9    <D   to 

5  rt  5  bo  a 
3  2      -So 

B 

o 
a 
W 

3               'i  ^               - 
§              3  3   cu        +j        W>  &0  3  5   2  d 

W 

||         II 

rt 
3 
iD 

a, 
5  <u 

13 

«  e                                           £  d  s  a 

bo  o                                                        3   3   rt   nJ 
3                                                          nj  "D  •£>  ,£3 

O                                          WOP< 

60              2 

►— 1                              /-4 

o 

o 
O 

a  1    o   |                 1    1  .£      .* 

o       a>       o                   .5    -  o    - 
T3        .Q         to                          to        ;3 

W      W      O                   Z      2 

bo  bjo 
a  a 

(/3    tO          ^  ^4 

zo    z< 

a 
o 

to 

z 

1    1    1    1    1    1 

o       o  o  3           cd 
to        bo  bcTi     SOJ  in 

o    zow    ^z 

*3 

W 

bo 

a      w> 
3      2 
z     -* 

-  ~o 

bO  bO 

5  5     o 

to  to        bjO-M 

ZO    zo 

a 

to 

z 

to        oo  bc-ij     -  tu   to       -i*!   ?    to   to   K-..X/ 

o    zow    ^z    z<;zozo 

c 
W 

?  rt    jr-rt 

a          a 
<         < 

.M 

'3 

1  „<" 

"cu  So 
< 

o      tj                     o 

_o          (D                             N 

rttoo™— '™3rt     i   »3    rt  ■— i    ra   c    " 
3alj3^333S'a3Ui3Xi3 
0,^3^^0,3^==        CU  O-Oh  wCL, 

Kri    m    S    >;        g,    « 

<     < 

APPENDIX    F  425 


3  a      a 


'•&  rt    g    rt  fl  3  3 

I  ."  si  I'll  ifrVl  i  iiS-l^aSS 

OOQOCQ^CQ  WCQO       03  Q      Q  W  03      QQO      P3  P3  J  W  03  W  P3  W  P3  Q  H 


£  > 

rt   etl 

rt 

X3.C 

3 

jo  rt 

IP 

£ 

£ 

3 

3 

0 

3 

.«    rt 

J3 

£ 

,3 

3 

3    >. 

O 

rt 

■u   0 

Ubaw 

Ibaw 

Katai 

Butai 

Chuun 

Ichun 

1 

Inum 

Munum 

Lundou 

3    3 

a  3 
a  h 

Uwan 
Soi 
Soi  keet 

Bugun 

Kommp 

Itott 

Muntott 
Munkch 
Munket 
Beekett 

Kuwi 

Biiwi 

Unikk 

Ninekki 

Munbop 

?          3   3     -   G 

1 

1 
abomibe 
om 
mokarara 

a  a 

0  a 

mm 

unkwana 
unkwana 

3 

3 

13    O 

3 

0  rp,_7  ™ 

a  ebomm 

inkauo 

ankauo 

kk 

ekk 

iokk 

rt   O  .O  ^2    5   2 

„M^ 

£  0 

2  ?  * 

afc  s 

HU3.a    <"    3-3, 

OO  JJ £d 

J  J  w 

O  W 

ZO< 

0 

a 

_* 

en 
3 

0) 

-1 

£                               1 

p     2     w 

'u 

"a, 

W 

-   3 

z; 

£    s 

Idibi 
Inuen 

lyipp 

>> 
Idem 

J* 

Awkpa 

Otiga 

Mfune 

0) 

0 

.Q 

rQ 

03 

<D     ^j 

<D 

0)    rt 

bbaw 

bo 

bawm 

bawm 

fok 

fok 

1 

gyim 
gyim 
gawm 

3     a) 
bn  ^ 

"8.S 

Awa 

Aa 

Inonn 

nonn 
ung 

egye 

aa         a 
0,0,         a 

•  u  .—     ^     y*     O 

o<  S<  W< 

ZO  W 

<  ? 

Z< 

Z<3      03 

w<o<< 

o 
«9 


loji^iiiii  still  s.J1i|...  p_i 


Arm 

Plui 
Arrow 

Plu 
Axe 

Plu 
Baboon 

Plu 
Back 

Plui 
Banana 

K  "g 

B      B 

53    s 

3 

pq 

ID 
<U 

PQ 

Bell 
Bird 

rt        rt        rt        rt        rt        rf 

|_l       .    M       .    M      .1-1      •    V-l      •    W 

S  T3  EC  >^EC   u  Oh       EC   3  cu 
„°         O  O         O  w 

pq       CQ       PQ       03       03 


426 


APPENDIX   F 


w 


hi 

3 

!£.* 

H3 

T3 

rt 

•J3  rt 

S 

3 

0  a, 

PQ< 

O 

rt 
rt  Sue 

'S  a> 
o^  ? 


rt 
w 
rt 

Q     d     A3     >^ 


-*  rt  3  rt  2  ai  >o'0  S  o  > 
O  PQ  <  P2  O  PQ  O  2,Q  Q  W 


H 
O 

H- I 

h 

1/2 


ho 


« 


13  a 
fi  S 


rt^ 


-e  Jo 


?  a  o 
a  o  x) 

rt^  o 


a 
a 

c  5 
<u  rt  a 


-         ?   ?   C   «*   O   ?   ?5 

S      DZ<ZOfflU5MW 


3 
rt  J3 
SO 


z 
< 
pq 
O 

W 

tn 


r. 

w 

pq 

w 
- 
H 

o 

c/2 
W 

< 

P 
PQ 
< 

c 
> 


JO 


rt 

Xi 

M  J* 

"e^ 

0  0  5 
a  o<  ? 

SuO 

rt 

^  ^  G 

J 

wo< 

a  3 

l-l      1-1      O 


rt 

-O 

3  3  O  O-rr  p3  3 

„»Q.Q    tuCO.Si,  <U    rt 

"  bo  sue  o  o  o  :30s 
CXOPQ  J  JZ 


a 

rt 


a  c 


_,   3 


s     •- 


5       a>      .t: 


w 


2     ^3° 

o    < 


<SWZO 


en 


DO 


oi        3 

.3^-  rt 

rt  o 

w8  * 

3  ,0  *-" 

rt  ,     <L> 

tx  b  Si 
Z  °W 


3 
3 
s 

<r  £ 
•^  s 

3-3 
C    ? 


3 

(U 

3 


"7    3 

oc|,ga 
<  'SO? 


0)   0 


Oh 

3 

o 


rt 
a)  <u  £ 

Qh  Oh  SuC 

-^  jsd  a 

o<< 


O    O 


*    £ 


"    O   ^    £    TO 

O;    ra    rf    n 
_f)  (^  ^  *J-« 

z<S<w<S 


rt 
a 

A  > 

Sue  c 

3   3 

iri 


Sue  a 

a  p 

o 


5*rt 


.  s 

>>  3 

3    ' 


«^. 


oj    O    " 

:,  ^  s 

rt  ^  o  S    _ 


H 
3 

c  3  2  --.J.  6 

.     3  Tl    n    rt    3 
8 

o  9  o  ^.j3  a 


s  c 


3  g2  I  §  c  §  §.S?2 


ex 

Oh 

■a.S 


a,  a  sx 

Jb«  ^    3 

o<< 


J3 

c  tuo  3^  a 

-SsSOctirtrtnirtX 

Z<^<W2S  c  cO 


cc 


•rt 

3  vh 


ec 


•  g  « 

2^  ° 

3         3 

CQ       PQ 


rt 


a 


a 


3 


rt 

_.    Oh 

3   3 

2  a 


J3        J3        ^3 

E  vh-  S  -a  E  j-  Oh  rt 
0      -m      .S;      3:      "S       o 

rt         rt        -3        XI        ^5         O 

o    u    o    u    u    g 


APPENDIX    F 


427 


>>3 


b| 


w  rt 


§  >  5  td  bo 

rtrt^  O-O  0-2  o 


.2  rt 
'ft'cL, 
ft  o 


O    <D 
.O    ho 

^  3 

rt  o  rt  o 
££G£CQ 


s  S 


o 

buO 

o 

a 
a 

o 


to^a a  as 

o  9  o  3     .-  a  a 
s  d .2 ^     'aus  <c 

i<  •  3  TJ  nJS  OOJrt 
OQWWSCQQQ 


^ 

a> 

s 

rt 

E 

09 

buO 

3 

'33 

*  8  5  *  1  § 
13.2  £  a  13.2 

1   <" 

"rt    * 

CD       KA 

3 

5313 
so  13 

1    S3 

H-2  2 
333 

3 

0 

6 

B 

0 

£ 
3 

O 

6 

£ 
0 

3 

■3 

1  1 

Gnung 

mng 

ssienn 

usienn 

nyi 

unyi 

sienn 

esienn 

pq 

jZMwwm 

WfflWffl 

dSQ 

_3 

§ 

J^WCQWfflDZ 

0 
a 
rt 

a 

3 

eg 

'c? 

ft 

1  i°gis§ 

T3.3    S    £    2    rt 

1    « 
3  rt 

hc'a 

1 

1  • 

aj    crl    ctJ 

rt 
u 

1 

1 

0 

3   S 

g   ^Oj-   rt                1 

rt   ?    3    3   a!        „h 
+•■  rt  0  c-3.s  jO 
£  .t!    3    O    3    3    rt 

_* 

»Q   a!   0   O   rt  i3 

•Sf-o 

)S!S  0. 

W 

OZUOSP 

ffiW 

wb 

WOdC 

<;jwZhDj 

60 

4j 

to 
a 

.9 

.O 

a 

rt 

a 

=  i  £      |£ 
2SD     w 

1   a   1 

1 

1     1 

OS 

C/3 

3 
1     C     1 

1  .S  '  ft 

rt 

s 

1 

!' 

he  1  «  1  E  1  > 

3        3        3        g 

<u 

02 

13 

J3 

C        T3 

: 

rt 

.Q 

,3        <u        a>        rt     - 
-m         en         3         3     - 

H 

P 

w 

W        Z 

w 

S 

P     Z     w     £ 

3     ..<+*  Se  <*<  Sc   ^.S" 


o  Jj 

OS 


£  rt 

.5  2 


£ 

.3-3  £ 

8  ^  s    «<: 

£   rt  3    _  cu 

rt  >,  a)    -  a, 

Z<Z     W 


M  bo  -^-^  he 

-m  +3  bo  be  bo  bo„a 

o<w<zo< 


a 
o 

3       TS^S0^^''        3 
>,    .  rt  J  »o  J  .&.&       3  3 

W      SOSOZO     OS 


iso" 


s 

rt  s 

rtXJ  u 

S<Z 


W 


fl 

13 

rt 

>,       Jd 

^! 

be      '3 

z 

,.--  be 

"a 
ft 

g  8  Z  to  bo         m  3  tf 

rt    w          3    3               _^  "S    B 
rt-3          3   rt  _          0°3 

!z; 

sS  z    o<w<zo< 

^i        d  d   <a   d  3        rt        rt  rt  £»       rt        rt 

•      l-l      ^        h  •^r-SlH'3          .W          .^  .lH^                .VH          •      Jh          • 

3£"2  ^^      =      &H           5             ^  2^          ^rt^ 

ft  "E  Oh  ftOCL,               ft^-ft  ft^^ftS^B 

2          3  ^          8         •§   b       ^  b03O          g          g 

O        o  O        w        rtrt        a)  O        00        in        in 

OOOO     QQ     Q  Q     QQ     Q     Q 


ft 


.  a 

oj         ni  j,   rt   C   cj 

bO  l-i 

•  i_i     .   in  t;   ^   iu  b 

2     £rt£H5 

a  3 

tfft 

Oh         ft  X!  ft    JJ  ft 

H       he      E?      0 

rt          60       nS          X 

W     W     W     w 

428 


APPENDIX    F 


J3  rt  3  oj  rt 

UQJJW 


o 

0<j 

uun 

ijuun 

urrdi 

ofurrd 

bawn 

bawn 

tam 

.t!  <u  J3  rt 

•a 

OJ2    013 

o 

wwwa 

PQ 

QQ^CGOWW 

S    ^    .,    4> 

cqoq«sOcq 


c  o 

S  *  * 

5  rt  rt 


I 

H 
O 

04 
H 
t/3 


3   3 
3   3 

<D    OJ 


3    ™ 


ZQQmS 


O    V 
O    3 

CQCQ 


I  B 

3    tD 

S  3  £  * 
3  3  -*-* 
.5.2  -* 


Q      S      CZWB5mKO 


rt  3 

3  &3 
rt-^  3 
*5 


5  g  a  hi  S  c 

3    O    c    nj    £    nj 

OZ<Z<M 


S3 

< 

O 

W 

X 
H 


C/3 

W 

n 

5 

H 

X 

W 

h 

fa 
O 

c/) 

W 

t—i 

< 

m 

< 
o 

o 
> 


-.2.Z  J  J  D 


rt 

a 

3 

5 
S 

-3 


rt 


g  b  a 
«  5  S 

bo  £  3 


ct 


be 


3  Ji^J 

O   3^33   C   3    » 

■^  or;  *o  o„ 

WZSDJJJ 


v  a 

bO  3 

J2  b 
13  o 


hJld 


I4* 

5  rt  - 


3 

a 
'>> 

c 
W 


..  a 

c/3    rt 


w 


c 

3 


5     fa*    O     < 


~    '"I    '    3 


o 

Oh 

J* 

fa 


rt 

is 
rt 


£  s  -33  -a  £ 


o 


rt 


3   3 
3    3 

O  o._. 

tO  bO  "3 


rt  rt 
>->  u 

rt  rt 

W<  rt 


<W      J3      Z      Z<ZOW<W 


CO    U) 

rt  ^j  bo  3  c 
>.  J*  ^  bo  3  rt  rt 
4?  -*    O    C    rt    3    e 

o  o.*  J3  £.5.5 

<zoz<z< 


bo  3  o     =<i; 
W<0      < 


-a 

u 

O 

rt   * 

Z2 
„  o 


.b!       C 
•S       « 

b  >  *■<  % 

o  ?  oi 

v — '  re  > — '  i> 
_.S  3. 3    ^ 


a>  c  e 

gag 

"C  "-5  .s 

^,^J.^,'1'^'-^-^  to  to  rt 


I  .^  ..*  rt 


Ji's^^.^-^  oc  c-ojo 


to  bo'10  '"2  -^  -^  -^ 


-  ui         wu-,     -;-=   o^:    L<   auao«   mj^ssu 


^  J«S  M   -. 

<ZOWZZ< 


rt  rt 

•  u     •  i_     • 

t^       rt  rt 

W       fa  (K 


rt  c 
oj  .3 
fa       fa 


rt 


rt 


rt 


a 


a 


2.     3     B 
fa     S^^  "^ 

.3     .52      o      o 

(Jh  fa  fa  fa 


3  3 

?  o 

O  u 

fa  fa 


APPENDIX   F 


429 


•% 

a 

a 
.0 


o 


s  * 

ID    W) 

s 


rt    O* 

:3  o  ^   o 
o 


+3    O 


ri 


W      WOWOffl  ~PQ  W  OQ  <  CQ 


§1    £f 
3  :sr  .5 

QQ  Q 


W>T3iS 
.g  .2  rt 
O    rt  rt    p  rt 


O  O 


<D 
<U 

-So 

3  rt    J. 
rt  tuo  2 

a    rt     o 
-u  O    rt 


M  JW  QQ  WW  J      Q^     PQ 


a 

3 

a 

rt 


C 

3 
.O 

3 
,0 

d        -^ 
J3         rt  —-1 

rt         -^    en 

6  -3  9  S 

«  -*^  5 

a<SgO 


g  g 

rt  rt    £J 
:*PQ  PQ 


-d 

w 


I  I    I 


a 
a  Z 


o£  QZ W^  M 


«      ~ 


3 

I  lS 

3  rt   aj 

3  ^T3 

3  g   3 

rt  .2,  ^  ja 


rt 

a. 

3 


•j     <TD<Tw      H 


O  3 
^  O 
M  M  .„ 

WZ  J 


a  S 
§§ 

MS 

£>  rQ    <u  rt 


3  3 

3  3 

3  3 

O  O 


WZ JJ JJJ 


o 

3  ^ 

d  a, 

o  3 

3  rt 

rt  X! 

rt  o 


rt 

Oh 
.- 
3 

a 

,3 


3 

<D 
I 

3 
rt 

g 

o 


rt 

W> 
O 
rt 
>> 

3 
zi 

Z 


ho 

a 

rt 

G 
rt 

s 


a 

rt 
-d 


I  J 


o 
D 


3 
J3 


O 

3 
1 

a 


W 


Z 


rt  3 
Oh3 

a  1 

>  3 

3°^ 
■5  rt 
^   Oh 

Z^ 


s 

I 

0) 

a 
M 
Z 


J2 

?    3?  '35 

<°    3  c    2 
rt    g  3    rt 

_*  -3.  o  -Q 
<  Z<  O 


tuo 
3 

n 

3  =         9 

h0         <U    u    5 

3        "2  Sj  £ 

<J       Z<|  S 


o 

g     °    < 

9  G    - 

O    O      B 

z<  ? 


rt 

|e isl 

X)  X>    05   55  -°  J3   -J-l 

Q<  W<  SO  ? 


g 
g 

"S  rt 
rt  >, 

rt  ^_^ 

0l,O 
O    W) 

<z 


o^ 


rt 

„,  o 

13   hO-o 

c  rt  o 

.-  g.JL 
rt  a,  rt    ««  s    rt 

Z  '-'<  w  <  o 


13 

g'= 

.^  o 

S  g 

3 


HO  tuO 

3  a 

:     ^      rt       r-  -« 

^  ^  "55  '55  ,3 

«<  z<  S 


3 
*j  o 
o"< 

I? 

&S)  I'll 
Z<  ?^"° 


«     3       r?" 


II  S 

g^ 

'ti'--t;  2      rtC^ 

3  W)  rt  «        >,  d 

--   iu  Jd   rt  ^  c  3 
■r-.rt     <U—    rt    >^-3    §    3 

•Q   d  X!  J3    2  3°  •-   O  .3*13  "3  '3 

O  <  W  <J  S  O  Z  ^<  Z  rt  O 


X! 


rt 
O 

O 


1— I  p-H  UJ  ^-< 

rt  ^-n  rt  rt  rt 

H    OH  J3  ' 

.2  AM 

rt  -o 

o  o 

O  O 


rt         rt    q  rt    O         rt 

Om  .|_l  «TrtUH  .      Uj 

•^Ph  «_  9cl  9„  w      cu 

^     i/i1^  O1^     3^^     c     _  w 

12         rt  O         O        >g    3        .3 


OOO 


3    3 


rt 


rt         rt         rt  rt 

H      •  1-1      .   u  ■   u 

3        ^3        ^3  ^3 

PhTJPhTdS  tlPn^ 

3         rt  rt         0) 

V  V           4} 

EKE 


3 
rt 

E 


Oh 


430 


APPENDIX    F 


H 

o 

H 


w 

O 

CO 

W 

P 

CG 
< 
O 
O 
> 


rt 

^ 

*-^ 

(=1 

cn 

rt 

a 
>> 

! 

1 

rt 

5  9 

S    rt 

s 

rt 
13 

| 

1 

1 

*   I    > 

1 

3 
rt 

1 

1 

3 

a   3    3   3  ••h 

3  a   g  3  o 

'3 

So 

D 

o 

> 

*  XI 

rt  H    rt 

3 

.v,.v.jax>   > 

T3 

<L> 

rt 

rt 

G  o   3 

rt 

rt 

<u  rt    cd  rt    bjD 

0 

w 

CQ  Q 

WCQ  CQ 

-<  CQ 

QQ  QQ  W 

CQ 

~rt 

-4-1 

d 

? 

3 

2 

o 

-a 
o 

o 

1 

1 

(0 

'S.3 

s 

s 

3 

o 

1 

o 

a  a   * 

rt  2    2 

1 

a, 

a 

1 

1 

1 

•i-t    l^»  3   3  •»-» 
>,  3    in   t-.    cn 

'cn 
cn 
'C 

3 

rt 

3 

>^ 

s 

o 

o 

3  <D    O  O  'u 

3 

s 

S  QD  W 

W^  S 

M 

QQ  QZ  W 

« 

5 

i 

1 

rt 

a 

rt 

1 

1 

? 

i 

1 

1 

| 

rt 

m   3  b   > 

rt  'J?  9  "J    M 

rt 

5 

I 

1 

c 

1 

OJ 

1 

I 

o 

I 

1 

I 

-3^5  -0*3    0 
^3    0   3    3 

•3  33    rt  rt    S 

£p  PZ  O 

0 

w 

3 

IS 

J3 

rt 

o  o  0 
13  9  Co 

e 

rt 

s 

rt 

o 

JJ 

WZ  O 

S 

< 

J4 

rt 

I 

rt 

S     «                Oh 

=?rt 

Z 

a 

^ 

2  £ 

-i! 

M 

s 

jid 

a    :       ,  -* 

S.S 

<43 

w 

a 

a 

rt 

cn 

1 

3 
i 

C 

< 

1 

a 

►—i 

hfl 

a 
rt 

a 
W 

1 

1     M 

•^       2 

1 

rt 

P 

1 

'en 
4J 

O 

13 

5?W      lS 

cn  -rH 
'     'u 

a* 

a 

rt 

rt 

rt 

a! 

a 

rt 

-£ 

ctt 

rt 

rt 

o 

i 

Ji 

* 

| 

5 

^6 

j* 

^t 

1 

1—1 

^ 

"  i 

5 

rt 

| 

M 

-* 

^ 

o 

T 

,M 

be  rt 

bfl 

e 

a) 

rt 

rt 

_    M>  tuO   ^ 

rt 

O 
>> 

tuO 

o 

52 

1 

-2 

0) 

1 

3 

3 

3 
ig 

rt 

0  O    rt 
X  >,  >, 

be  buO   Dfi 

9  a 

2  2 

g 

o 

13 
cn 

rt   H    3   3    2 
Jl    111 

1 

Z 

o< 

<  s 

0 

20  z 

w< 

^■j 

Z 

z 

a 

^  & 

a 

a 

rt 
rt 

rt 

rt 
i-. 

Q*^ 

>.s- 

o 

,M 

^ 

•37  4-» 

-m 

rt 

cd 

rt 

'o 

At  -3 

C  "rt 

0 

t 

-* 

V 

U 

s 

15 
is 

M 

s 

rt 

1 

19 

0) 

tug  op  buo  m 

j*i  a. 

o  a> 

"o 

3 

> 

a) 

B 

3 

3 

IS 

3   3  'rt 

3 
U 

3 
U 

m 

0 
13 

o 

13 

e   c    3  3-3 

»S  'S  P  3  S 

1 

•43 

zS 

'<?  < 

<  s 

JO 

o 

z 'o  z 

W< 

»— * 

Z 

z 

J3 

en 

3 

s 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

0) 
3 

-4-1 

"rt 

*c3 

Irt 

"3 

'rt 

o 

^3 

rt 

"e3 

13     13 

*rt 

a 
W 

o 
o 

u 

3 

u 

• 

3 

•  u 

3    u 

u 
3 

t4 

3 

•    1*        •     l-i 

3         3 

3 

5 

a 
o 

Cu 

a 

O 

EC 

a 

M 

i-i 

o 

51! 

o       a 

O          3 

rt 
3 

3 
O 

s 

■a 

3 

s 

9       a       0 

s 

s 

K 

X 

X 

HI      33  ffi 

u 

ca 

>— 1             i^M             HM 

APPENDIX    F  431 


3  c  a 

g  Ox)  rt 


-a      3^         S          all  c  «         a 

O  QWffl  W  «<<      O      «      WSS  S  Wffl^OW      PQ 


U     -  '3 

«  n^^rt  -mI         "  g    I         g.  g-.Q 

*         |J^.3.ag  |J3          3  fc         .3-2  § 


£  a  S-S  rt        2  Srt  Cgrtonj  •«        „,xi  rt 

8  >-^fi<a       5  axir^rtxixixi  £       g.rt-3 


2 

CD          pj   g 

3 

fl5.S*3  g   3 

>^  aJ  g  rt  '3 

>> 

0  m  <  m  0 

S 

rt 


M 


2                 2     §  £     §           rt  s    I 

2             W     £     £  £         W      £     D     S  WO     WS<      2 

ad-  5  .3      rt 

o  as                              „  g,                             "O      -a 

-3x:<»  jes<6      a      g  §•§  -3                     art      5 

+,            .«  £  X)  rt  rt  a>  -EE.g        O        §  rt  Cu  a,-*  ^       «  C  a!  J   (U  %  § 

rt            rt  -R  toaax  mrtrt        3        rt        rt  >>  &  p<  2  o ..-  •-  <u  >,  rt  o  5  & 

W    <SOW<0  <22   Z  <   ZO<  <SO?<2<WH<a 

o<u              £  £   ■  ^-»    --*.            "«>  '3     *3 

•*-"       3                3  rt^j  ■                             .£2               £  5x>-s$£ 

«)        S                   &£•«  3                                 ^        3                  £  0)33   rt 

H          O                     O0)>  >          33               3    2    2    rt   ^   g-^-!i_.Q  3-°    S 

3^r-  o            <u  wi  is— CTS^W  E  3oa3rtgE^4;co"  «  3  ^  to*a 

-Ma]|-'^<D^Qrtrt       fi  c?       rt:        ?«T^Cnl  ft-ti  rt   O,-^  Js!              C   (U   3  -S   fl 

W^  <20W<0°W*J<Z  ?  3<   ZO<  <SO?<2<2   < 


zi       a 

rt 

rt 

3    2    3         3 

u     ■  u 

H 

•  u    • 

Ih        u     •  u     •  u  .3 

3         3 

3 

3 

3>i3        3  ^   3  rt 

g*    «    a 

3         O        il         3 

S  ^Ph 

Ph 

*.0h 

a 

rt       •* 

cp        B<       rt 

rt 

rt 

<U        33 

o      o       o       o 

J     J     S 

§ 

s 

s    s 

a   s   s   s 

432 


APPENDIX   F 


s 

3 

is 

ss 

a 

1  rt 

3 

s 

o 

cd 

u 

c 

a 

>> 
p 

rt.J!.2S      | 

ed  .0,0.0  2     -  >» 

s 

3 

B                   3   rt 

„,     .2  b  cd      £ 

4-J 

cd 

si.*-- 

cd   cd^^J    2 

cd 
M 

cd 

j:  oj  o'S    -  a) 

cd 

IB1  a>  cu-r  B     "•& 
QQQ  ~  c/)      W 

O 

T3  O  •-   rt  2 

"o 

3  o 

01 

WDQWCQQ      Q 

Q 

pq 

WWQQH 

m 

PQPm 

•S 

3 

s 

B 

i 

H 

o 

d 

o 

T3 
O 
13 
O 

cd  -M  +j 

m  ^  o  o  a  a  Cm 
£  3  0  3:3:3. 153 

a, 

3 
13 

S 

3 
&  5             3  a   3 

i 

M 
O 

3 

3 
CO 

43 

1    1  -  '§ 

b5  'S  3 

CD  .M    D 

^!  cd  ±! 

3 
B 

3 

B 
CD 
*J 
B 
cd 

B 

3 

3 

3  3 
3  3 

2 

5SWMQZQ 

Z 

Wo*         SSO 

pq 

oz? 

S 

£S 

H 

c/) 

Q 

£ 

Z 

< 
CQ 

3 
« 

§ll| 

cd  cd  3  °£   £  n 

o 

2  S 
o  B  5 

3Basc>,g 

3 
u 

cd 

S 

B 

°   O'C   3   2 

"o-S  S  ««  | 
o  ^o  *j  -m  cd 

o 

3 
3  3 

O 

3  0-S  a  "3  3  3 

cd 

13  -S  J3  £  rt  a   a 

^  rt3jS   >,rt     O 

G 
O 

"rt 

.§:? 

w 

W2SDJJJ 

J 

JJSOZJ^O 

•O 

Z<OZ£ 

J 

Hd 

M 

H 

Z 

S.3 

t/) 

w 

_■         H       -B        Cm 

1 

1   &  1        Im 
3       .3       .-        cd 

fi     -3     S     o 

£    o    £    w 

1 

I         JJ  3 

B            Cm                -^^ 

Cm    ' 

1 

3 

3 
3 

HM 

W 

2 

£    s    w    w 

<D          O      .  S3    Cm 

D      W      S  — 

O 

CD 

2 

H 

cd 

cd 

* 

cd 

ai 

c75 

<t5 

»|Sig4 

'3 
cd 
be 

bo  bo                     b£i 

B    B                    _   S 

bfl 

B 

3 
3 

1 

H 

>,s  3  ££,0  2 

ZO<      ?OS 

s 

cd  cd  •«•- .  -r 

J^  ^  J3  J2    ? 

o  o 

tuO  tuO 

zow<^ow 

< 

o 

w<o<< 

w< 

O 

2 

o 

IS 

17) 

CD 

cd 

w 

*o 

si  d>  »  .. 

*   ^cdc^ 

cd  c   >>>v~,£  § 

£ 

1— 1 

OS 

-J 

W 

bo  bo                       bo 
cd   B   B                  ._   3 

S    -4-»    -*-»    -4-1             ^      *hT| 

tuO 

B 

3 

*c3               " 
cd   cd---^  ■? 
^£  JX  Xi  J2    ? 

3 
3 

CD 

^M 

bC  tuD 

p 

zow<sow 

"^ 

O 

w<o<< 

< 

w< 

PQ 

.    . 

o 

o 

> 

ja 

•     • 

"3b 

cd  ^"^  co        ctj 

cd 

cd        cd        cd 

cd 

cd  cd  cd  a 

cd 

cd 

c 

.    l-i    0)    U       .    U       • 

H 

.(-,     .  sm     •  u     • 

ki 

•    1m    CD    v-<  .3 

H 

•  u 

W 

BOB          3 

J3 

3        O        3 

B 

D^iS    £ 

3 

3 

3        33          3          > 
O        cd        cd        cd 

-*-*  T4 

s 

8    §    8     m 

&H 

13             rS             5 

cd        cd        cd 

Pm 

O  Ph 
Im 

cd 

l    s     z     Z     Z 

z    z    z    o 

On        Ph        Pm 

a, 

APPENDIX    F 


433 


cd  cd 
cd  cd 

O  rt 


E£ 


■gL>»CH 

!*£  o  33  G  g 

35    O  '.G1  O    3    > 


cd 

„_cd 
C  '5J" 


«  9-rt 

^33  J 


cd 

.  cd 

cd  -G    H 
Cd 


cd 


a 

c  ^  — « 
•v  o  -^ 
~PQO 


.,-.        c   ri 


J-,   o 


a  c 

^      «      £ 

cd  >>.G> 
:;?  £  cd 

t3    cd  -O 

cd  ^ 

a, 
< 


a.     rt 
w    o 


o 

>> 

cd 

cd 

z 


CJ      -  G 

a    -  o 


Si 

cd  cd 
G  G 
C   3 


cd  cd  .q 

g  S   - 

cj  &JA 

a 


^ 


■3      S 

S        cd 


o 

o  a, 

^s  cd 


cd 

o  o 
ftft 

&  J5f  1 1  S 

►itDcl,  ft  m 


is  -a  ft  cd 


o      .a 
rt;ft  3        cu 


CO 


6u0 

«         6 
a  cj       o 

<2  3?  6  cd 

-g^    s 


a 

cd 
c 
cd 
0 
cd 

o 


cd 

3 

cd 

a 

cd 
X) 

o 

pq 


cd 

cd 
ft 
jcj 

W 


x 

w 


cd 
ft 

cd 


s 


IS      >^.H  .E 

w    £^2 


p    § 


w    o 


c  c  3  S 

co  rt  -53  cd 


w 


;a.s 

"5  °  <u  « 
-  cd"  E  S 

ri-o  o  o  fl 


be 


ft 


cj 

CJ    o 


-  rt  a 
S  -°  o 

Xl.O    UJ 

SOZ 


Ml 

.3    «  •?  d 
V  W)  A  cd 

-  c  3  E-2 


o       o 
r  cu  cd   d  cd 


■a-  E'S 

c  c  a  a  s 

'J  '43    U!  SX-G 

2020,2 


'.-G,-«-G 


be. 

IS 


CO 


ft' 

Cm 


s  3 


3  3  ^ 

°Sri 

>,CJ 


ioz^ 


G 


-3  a 

"g  <u 

Xi    E-G 

z  So 


e1  cd  cj  .rt 
I  I  §1 


#OT  Oh         ft    o  ft    CJ  ft 


S        .3°       .3? 
ft        ft        ft 


ft   u 


cd         .2 

Oh         Oh 


-o^  S 

cd  cd 
O  J2 
M       CO 


^ft  2 


CO 


CO 


ft 


S.B. 


F  F 


434 


APPENDIX    F 


u 

o 

2 

H 
C/5 


< 

O 
W 
H 
h 

o 

oo 

W 

2 
2 

H 

W 
K 
H 

O 

00 

w 

M 

04 
< 

< 

o 
> 


H 

3 

u 

3 

O 

4>                .-. 

d              d 

'3 

^4 

t3 

rt 

^     1 

<L>                G 

3 

M 
M 

a 

0) 

P-. 

O 

a 

> 

a  § 

3    ■* 

O 

3 
l-i 

O 

1 

s  I  a  a 

a 
a 

c 
a) 
a) 

P   * 

El 

XI    0 
rt    ? 

JO 

S 

3 

rt 

s 

^    bO 
?   rt 

^  bo 

bO  3 

rt  3  3  -^ 

£  3  3  S 

O  O   3 

£   £   £ 

g 
>     - 

>>  a!    o   <D    °£  O 
DDQ  _JQ  OCQ 

X 

a, 

3  rt 

rt  rt  -M 

OT3    O 

mwoQ 

J, 



1 

3 

-a 

0 

X 

o 

d 

3 

bo 

bo 

<D 

o 

u 

w> 

d 

3 

T3 

™  .— 

■ 

bo 

tuO  O 

1 

JO 

a) 

3    M      1 

O 

•a 
O 

bC  to 

C  rt 
3X 

n   3    = 
a   cd    rt 
rt   £  T3 

?    d     3 

3 

a 

d 

3 
3 

a 

c  >  5 
3  >  h 

1 

X 
rt 

3  a 

33 

M£ 

nj     : 

"OPQ  Q 

w 

W 

bi«  w 

w 

oz^ 

S  J 

0 

13 

D 

3 

S 
0 

X) 

xi 
rt 

X 
V 

X 

3 

w 

O-    & 

c  2 

[So 

o 

15  -*   .5      : 

2 

1 

£ 

d 

.12 

~  rt 

nj   rt 

'3 

3 

r,    °    d 
S    a    3 
3    O    ? 
O  ^J    ? 

a 
0 

X 

rt  a  a 
3  3 

o  o 

x!  .£}  T) 

ca 

13 

a  £ 

£ 

^;  rt  -^ 

"^^! 

WZ  J 

D<  Z 

2 

Q 

QO 

O 

OJW 

S<! 

(JO 

c 

bC 

bO 

H1 

0 

o' 

w 

, 

a 
o 

a 

0) 

, 

1 

a 

1 

c/3 

ox3   g 

mo         « 

d 

£    1 

0 

l  i 

0 

a    2 
15  1 

a! 

a, 

►— < 

rt 

a. 

d 

CO 

3 

D           3 

0      >> 

rt 

-3 

rt 

3        3T3       -3 
d         3    d          Oh 
T3           ™    rt         J5 

^ 

OS  2 

Z 

& 

ii     W 

Z 

w    z~ 

s    w 

S 

a 

i 

0 

rt 

'3 

d 

0 

0 

5 

aJ 

I 

1 

T3 

d 

a 

3  s    > 

3 

1 

•S 

d 

3 

d  d 
g  a 

ae° 

rt 
1-1 

9  o 

0 

3    3     oj 

<A 

g  d 

O 

0  0 

ci   rt   bt 

•SiJiJ 

bo  box 

03    02      >. 

>> 

c  0 

X 

j*-* 

m   in   p 

ZO  W 

z<  w 

< 

z 

OS 

< 

WZ 

o<£ 

zw<: 

'Co 

3  c 

a 

o 
u 

3  0 

7    02 

0) 

3 
-1 

3 

'S 

\jS  & 

* 

1 

I 

^2' 

d 

rt 

0) 

3 

•a 

d 

x  c 

5P  ^  >   ' 
c  d    > 

j^ 

1 

? 

5~c 
rt  a 

d  d 

G  9 

d 

a  a  s 

a 

3   3 

bo  bC 

'§, 

- 

0  3    cd 

fl 

rt 

a  g  :3 

3    °X 

3  0 
eX 

0  0 

rt  rt  a 

01   w   p 

3 

zo  z 

Z<  W 

3| 

Z 

OSS 

< 

WZ 

o<« 

Z^Z 

60 

CTJ 

cd 

rt        rt 

rt 

rt 

^ 

rt 

rt 

n       d 

C 

•  i-i 

u 

•   u      •   ■-, 

H 

l-l          • 

u 

•  1-1 

•  1-1     • 

U         •     t-l 

W 

_3 

3 

-2      J2 

3 

3 

3 

3         3 

D  - 

'.3 

&< 

>         <u 
rt        a) 

_*  Oh 
O 

B 

0 

rt 
3 

3 
O 

Dm 

bOS 

3 

O 

00 

00 

OO        00 

00 

CO 

00 

00 

00    00 

00 

APPENDIX    F  435 

aid0     a§.  ll^-B.     slIMi  fi  lisi-i 

s  1 1  §  §  s  s  §  I  - 1  i  5  g:§  .ill  l^-s-3  |  *  «   *  1 1 

OQQQQQWfflQ      OWOQCQ      UhQOW^WJ  D      .J  J      J      ^  pq 


a 

d 

d 

d 

rt    i 

£  £ 

d 

5*8 

M 

d 

d   45 

d  Js   £ 

rt  d  j* 

i     u 

1      45 

1         ° 

1      ID 

'5* 

13 

d* 

1 

1         a            u 

s  «  2.        t 

.'2,       d  ni.SJ    =  S 

rt 

d 

eigwi 
naw- 
nonn 

d 
d 

4) 

a 

1            d 
rt        45 

91  « 

d   ni    3 

0) 

d 

d 

£ 

T3  O  d 

aj     ~  05 

d  2 

D2  _) 

Q 

s 

S 

o     dzm    « 

O 

ZQS 

Q 

Q      Z 

JZ 

d 
d 

d  d 

q  d              S 

45 

be 

ota 
ata 
igije 

-d 

1    d 
a 
-d 
o 

-  !* 

"Is" 

4) 

dawana 

dawana 

otiakk 

tiakk 

ojamm 

kpojam 

idi 

as 
,0 

.rt   aj 
O  "J 

Shishini 

Inanai 

Tinanai 

d 
o. 

bo 
a 

eliakk 
aliakk 
ala 

o 

8.2 

KZ  -) 

W 

z 

J 

0<WZCQOIDW 

M 

JJJ 

J 

•4J 

-M 

1     g 

+■> 

J   a 

1 

1) 
0) 

d 

: 

LW 

inaw 
.-ukut 

paw 

ukim 

1     a 

d 

'gS1 

bO 

d 
>o 

1  U  1  a 

1        C-«        l      -4J 

d          45 

1 

! 

"Jrt            9 

s 

d 

Q< 

be 

d  S 

Oh 

45         T3 

.2       -J3 

-  o 

M 

™    45   ^         ^         ^ 

d 

«3   s 

J* 

T3        T3 

jQ 

s    o 

i— i 

§ 

W 

►5s£     z     z 

D 

§Z 

3 

W        W 

o 

rt 

as 

aj 

d 

3  rf 

d 

rt 

rt  j3                 _,  rt 

rt  "J 

1       -^-* 

£ 

1 

afH 

-d  bo           e  S  bo  t»b  ? 

1          ^  rt 

a! 

1 

bC 

£§ 

i  -J    „ 
rt  rt    » 

-d 

bo  rt    rt         d    jj   d 

a  ao 

rt   ~i 

45    45    tlO 

d 

0) 

4)    d 

u 

rt    >»  "f    rt    O  •-  iO  >b    d 

D-|.d 

45    45  -d 

F 

££ 

w<  w 

HH 

Z  < 

zo  z<  <<zsw<:o 

o 

W<W 

< 

so 

■s-fl 


W<W  "HZ  <<  ZO  z<  <<zsw<<<w«o    o    w<w    <    so 


9d-"dc<ju5.2.2f.SojQ.45  .do  ^ 

ildaj4545^;x:j3-dooo  ooo  o 

F  F    2 


436 


APPENDIX    F 


APPENDIX    F  437 


■a         a          rt     :a      a  a 

r"              aj              rt         ctf         Q  rt 

rt-rtX>rtbrtra<i>  <u                     rt 

c_S      art      a3flrt-£.-H  •*-*                ,q 


a      0  5      rt      ««     ia      a  S      >a         ia     ia      2  3  ^         ;£  *S  .a         25 

,G        a  rt        rt        rt        rt        rt  S        rt  rt        rt       XI  J3  rt  u  ufl  <u 

O      «  PQ      PQ      PQ      PQ      03-°      PQ  PQ      PQ      UU*  QQ  °  Q 


~ 


rt  a 


§  |   a   §  a         s 

H      «a             S        A       —        A        rt            — .  Miabjoart  n)  rt  rt 

aa          rtrtnjiurt          rt  arte          c  -rt-ca  «« 

^a          £aaa«>          a  rt  ^  rt      -.«  ^^a  .m 

•-a          aaaart          a  .aoa-oa  rtni^j  rt 

qpq        pq     pq     pq     pq     u;        pq  o     pq     qq  qq^3  q 


a 


o 

•a  '«  rt 

rt             rt  a  £ 

rt            S           "S      '3            5P  rt  rt 

ft     2          rt     =3      rt      o      g          g          aa          a  a  a  a 

Sf      Si.          >      -^      -a       «      -a          .5          .-h      •-.       o  o  rt  rt  rt 

:art            rt        rt        rt        rt        rt            rt            rt        rt        rt  rt  <d  <u 


a  a 
«      Z  Z      Z      Z      Z      Z  Z  Z      Z      ZZ  JJ 


"53  en 

-3  -§ 

is      |i         n 


■*     .23          _g       rt       rt       o       o           rt           rt  g  g  §  a          -  3  -a           rt 

£  ^_r  +j       o"      rt"               O                                93  £ 

rt  a  a       r,       rt         -       o            rt       $  rt       >.  .2i  '         '             5« 

iu  iu£  3                tn      "     rt  "  _  ??  rt  rt  -?*  rt  2  -?„  <"  '    °  5            8                rt 

a     .tirt     'Q*a<')ni0rti-<rtc/3rtrt(5artQ  ^3  oo  ^jm  c;a  a  -k         .a 

w    >:       waJwajwrtwrtwartw-rtw  w  cSmWJW&£ww1,       < 

_    _  __    ___ 

cSgsl-agrt             -  C  S    'a 

t  km^  I      tiff  I  II     liilll 

W      •^,W3GW      W^W      Wrtw          WrtW  W  OO              HW01J02 


5N 

rt  

V  rt  >■ 


a         +j  S  "S  >> 


o 


tn     O         HHfcfec^         02         WZ     HW  hh  fe 


438 


APPENDIX    F 


H 
O 

i—i 

H 
C/3 


< 
PQ 
O 

W 
M 
H 


W 

CQ 
i — i 

04 

H 


W 

a; 

H 

C 

w 

<j 
•j 
p 

PQ 

< 
U 
O 
> 


rt 

rt 

:3  :3 

•rt 

ci 

a  a 

3 

CD 

1.2 

H 

u 

TDT3 

O 

CO 

c 
id 

3, 

3 
3 
X! 

rt 

& 
rt 

■rt 

01  ci  ^        a 

^^  &       ^ 
&,  Cl.,3   D-^d 
rt  rt  3  rt 
-rt  -rt  •£  -rt 
T3  T3  u  T3 

rt 
tie 

1 

a 

s  cd  i>  «-i           _5 
S   >  3  rt  ,cu  cd  "3 

03       i>       3    <-W    M-l   *4H       •-' 

rt 

£ 

3 

H 

3 

1 

m 

<u  <u 

cj  a>  <D  cd 

O 

t3 

a 

Q~ 

QQ^Q 

Q 

<<<<<<ut 

O 

g 

3          3 

*3*c3 

HO 

CD 
3 
3 
O 

d 
o 

;3 

3        ^ 
rt        rt 

3   3 
rt  rt 
3   3 

3 

c 

3 
•3 

s  a 

3 

3  3  3 

a  a      3 

0 

3 

T3 

3   3 

3 

3  a 

*3  <S 

3   3   3   3 

Tl 

3 

1 

bo 

^ 

1 

■o 

a  cd 

a 

rt  rt  "in  rt 

rt 

3 

0 

1 

o 

^  g 

-^ 

-rt  -rt  T3  -rt 

-^rt 

^    3    CD    £    C 
.-   g,  ci   3.0-0   3 

^ 

3 

rt  rt 

rt 

Q 

3  S 
Q  c 

rt   rt  ^   nl 

ci 
Q 

CD 
3 
O 

J4 

"o 

IS 

o 

rt 

rt -3       o 

•  3    3          qj 

3    rt        -^ 

'53} 

3 

3 

rt 
3 

rt  « 
3.0 

rt  a        rt 
3       .OS 

O 

3 

1 

CD 

,3        bp 

'3 

1 

ja 

3   ? 

3 

3  2 

3  3   rt"  3 

ci 

1 

^3       'rt 

rt 

1 

W 

rt   3 

rt 

rt  3 

a  a  a  a 

O 

3               3    3         3 
3  rt        rt  rt  .^h  rt 

bC 

co   e 

3 

3   rt 

-J  c 

3   3   rt   3 

<d  a)  v;  <d 

3 

rt 

0) 

3 

rt  ,0    CD  J2    3  J3  ^3 

3 

J 

w 

<<w<<<:<j 

O 

O4 

a, 

3, 
O 
3 
T3 

04 
o 

0 

3 

•a 

ci 

3 

O 

M 

3 

0) 

■~                               3 

CD 
U 

3 

3 
CD 

W 

CD 
>> 

,0 

< 

rt 

< 

CD 

a 
< 

Cud  bo 
3    3 

rt  ci        a> 

1 

1 

_G               ,.,01-1 

'££  s"^  «  3 

CO 

3' 

CD 

w 

O 
O 

u 

£"'£ 

CD    3 
U    <D 

* 

^ 

3   > 

ci  "rt 
0)      - 

.3  rt 

a 

CD    K 

d 

a  Z 

ci            i< 
3             tg 

S           o  o 

cd  aj  a>     .  o 
>»a  c  rtr^, 

CD 
ci 

ci 

0 

£ 

a                       cd 

jj-  cd  cd     -  _  rt  a> 

CD   rt 
en    >^ 

3   ° 
<D    3 
en   3 
CD    g 

rt 

£ 
£ 

rtS3 

rt  iC 

ci 

rtSc 

rt 

rt  rt        rt 

CD 

ja 

0 

< 

c/. 

rt 

<<       < 

< 

a 

3 

3 
< 

"ci 

a      9 

"ci  "ci 

s 

?t 

5 

■8* 

rt 
r-  "3 
3    O 

ci 
5 

3         ^    g 

£  S  0  £ 

3 

0 

0)    g 
too  3 

c 

0 

£ 

3 

rt 

rt   -                            — 1 

3;  £                     13 

O  rt                            «o 
tuo 

17    CD                                CD 

rt 

a 

X) 

£ 

W 

s- 

S 

s-^ 

s  £-^£ 

■^ 

-5 
0 

3 

3 

rt  ™ 

c^ 

rt    rt 

rt   rt   rt   rt 

o°rt 

cd"    -  ^  — '  -   rt   CD 

0 

03  "H' 

<S1 

10  "ST 

u)   en  ~rT  en 
Z2  CZ 

0 

*. 

0 

rt 

m   cd  >T3   3  xi  O4 

CD 

3 
< 

J3 

"Ho 

• 

T3 

3 
rt 

■3 

c 

•     •       "O 

3 

l-i 

W 

>> 

V 

rt 

^3 

>>  >^      .3 

10 

s 

>- 

53 

3 
V 
> 

3«          3 
SuO  3        3 

w'z     ffi 

3 
O 

H 

O 

0 

M 

<D    3                       >, 

5    0          0)    3    CD 

_rH  K  ^  >  H  «< 

00 

Dh 

APPENDIX    F  439 


% 

<u 

1#H 

3 

a  a 

E 

ai 

H 

a 

3 

3   3 

cd 

he 

1      ° 

ni 

aj 

|     be 

1  £ 

ai 

ai 

ai 

^•A 

43    CO 

'5 
be 

i 

c 
nj 

s 

o 

he 
o 

1    a 
o 
be 

■H 

Is 

he 

3 
O  ■ 
bo 

rt 

be 

rt 

1  i 

CO    to    (fl 

£   3   3 

3x1  IS 
i-i  w  m 

3    43    rt 
T3X    CU 

rt   ai 

S  fl 

=>    3                rt 
^3  <-"   ai   ai  .« 
43  '03  X  X  ~u 

rt 
X) 

-.QJ  >0J 

X  -3 
03    0) 
O    43 
1-.    u 

X   &, 

u 

|H 

U 

l-i 

o 

o 

ai    O    O 

^s  <u   O  (0  -Q 

o 

o  O 

2 

w 

w 

w 

w 

M 

tt 

CQCQCQ 

OCQQQW 

P3 

mm 

i 

he 

3 

s 
a 

£ 

So 

£ 

c 

3 

3 
X 

X 

0) 

-  rt 

I 

3 

1  £ 

TO 

a 

c 
1    £ 

ai 

a 

1  *• 

ai 

a 

3 

i> 
en 

1 

s     1 

43 

3   03 

3 

2  C          3     1 

■fl  S  3  S 

3  a]  3   ai 

1 

O    3 

s 

s 

s 

s 

>3 

0)  X 

3    O 

6" 

w 

W 

W 

W 

►J 

hJ 

CQO 

<CQOCQ 

Offl 

a 

ai 

be 
|    9 

S 
o 

0) 

be— 

3 
be 

5 

I 

3 

0] 

3 
o 

1   * 

ai 

bo 
.     £ 

ai 

ai 
Ifl 

rt 

'3 

is 

rt 

3 
3 
O 

1 

X 

ai   o 

x  £x 

"2  9 

43      5      "J                r-. 

be  5  be      a 
S   rt   ai   2   rt 

•s  j?  rt  ^  be 

3 

a 

3 
ai 

3   3 

3   3 

4)    CD 

-^ 

SD 

^O 

O    ai    O 

be 

D 

HI 

w 

W 

w 

_) 

-1 

CQCqCQ 

< 

WP 

n 

O 

o 

o 
o 

-*-, 

a, 

o 

3 

o 

43 

3 

a 

3 
3 

X 

B 

£-3* 

3  X 

J* 

3 

3          C 

3    a 

a    .59 

a  g  a; 

4)    3 

o 

1-1 

o 

0 

o 

1 

s' 

o 

3 

s  o 

3 
O 

c 
IE 

0 

«    O    J". 

ai  —   O 

2  ^23         ^ 
x-^  2      2 

rt 

43 

0) 

o 

-  O 

£ 

o 

X 

X 

o 

T3  •■-  •  - 

XJ^3    3      --« 

rt 

*J  *3 

W 

w 

D 

P 

►3 

O 

O 

<^ 

z2S 

OSD      D 

wz 

s  ' 

^    M 

rt 

s 

rt 
3.    rt 

rt   ? 
3    ^ 

'•2     2 

3         rt              rt 

X               3 

•5     ^-°     cu 

0)    S 

X  .2 

l"S 

o,'^-       be 
rt  rt            o  aj    '    i 

Ninimn 
gaw 
Anaom 
Ete  nyi 
Ate  ma 
Ngyo  a 

?    <u  ?    <u 

rt    o  rt    o 

x  •- 

O     g 

a| 

-   3 

fl  c^^ 

nyagh 

nyagh 

kae 

■cae 

fop-ef 

wgbar 

a 

ninaw 

ninaw 

O     >*,  O     S-. 

O    rt 

-ii  ,rt 

^>^  «e  k*^  *->e 

^S: 

^  S 

S3  .3    ca;    uj 

o  zo  z 

O  S 

O  £ 

o<:w< 

w<z<w    <    w< 

-<       _  cu  ft 

3  3    ^^  0°< 

22rt-^.>  U3  30 


S.    i«.|     lg.ll    1*    -^    =1-111     5Ji        •--    t     g-§ 

^  rt«g(U  oiO3rt03  OS  22  2s. „'rt  oirt.«.„0  A  ?^: 


o        E  "K  -n  .'=       'A  'A  'A 


i3       i3  ,rt       JS  ,rt       ^o2.h"       >>  >>  rt  "rt  -~        &       ^  'i 

Z     <w<z     OZOZ     OS     os     o<w<     w<z<o     w     w< 


3  rt    ..  "rt    43  'rt    ®*rt    4)  *rtrt  'rt    S 

°  S-E°  mxK°  E°  S« 

TJ  03         •J-H  ►.  3 

3  "Z          ^  ^         w  lH  3 

H  H      S  H      W  0  > 


43 

H 

—  TZ) 

rt  ^J 

rt 

rt        rt 

rt 

rt 

3  J3 

■   H     •  U     ' 

u 

3 

3    (0    3 

3 

-*Cu"rtCU   S 

CU   u 

CU 

Cu 

•X3  i-< 

43  T3 

y     s     ^ 

O 

x 

rt 

O 

H 

cq 

»     Ik     Ik 

0 

440 


APPENDIX   F 


cd 

rt 

M 

^ 

u 

rt 

RJ 

oi 

CX 

cd 

rt    ^    P 

!»J 

&  o 

ft?>H 

u 

0) 
-Q 
O 

PQ 

o 

pq 

Bopa 

paai 

Uwei 

CD 

< 

S  a  C  rt 
jS  rt  c  c  c 

g  3  CX  CXm-, 
S  J3  ^  ^  <D 
■•*   o   <D   rt  X. 

SCQh-lGO 


buo 

a 
rt 

o 


< 

ex 

o 
w 

h 


C/3 

w 

pq 

h 

>< 
w 

W 
K 

H 

Ui 

o 

c/) 
W 

i — i 

< 

D 
PQ 
<J 
O 

o 
> 


bo 
a 
rt 


bo 

a 

M 

a 
33 


E 

o 

O 


■2    :s    -c     E     3 

a      a      >>     t3      a 

PQ      PQ      O      O      PQ 


r.  e  fl 

G    3    3 

a  co 
a  o  a 
OPQ< 


a 

rt 

^ 

a 

a 

JA 

0 

rt 

> 

o 

s 

a 

£ 

a 

s 

o 

PQ 

o 

23 

0) 

rt 

60 

3 

E 

rt 

<u 

rt 

rO 

u 

^ 

< 

o 

rt  ?5  Wi  <p  rt 
•a  Bfa^j  to 

a  E,3;a  a 
5  jS  1 3  43 
Z<K<0 


o 


'rt 
-1 


•a  B 

rt* 

•°  £         •-  a 

S  rt  .     .a  £      rt 

rt  ex  "•     ex  ft1     >-• 

^  -*         -*  da 


a;       .a  -w 

{f  %>  2  £-'3  "3  a 

rt  2  rt  O  rt  rt-V 

j?  o  JT  o  -g  a;  T3 
<q      Z      <  Z  m 


SO 


z  o  az  a  Gk-j 


CD          CD      - 

a 

> 

^ 

0) 

CD 

ho 

rt        rt  g  ^4 

T3 

rt 

ri 

G 

a 

a^a^i^ 

.9  rt.S  rt.a    - 
■ti  cx-y  ex     a 

rt   k>  rt   v   j-  a 
CX:G   CX-"G^  o 

^   O^  ^  u   S 

a 

rt' 
a  „ 

rt 

is 

rt 

G 

E 
2 

o 

4) 

K 

rt 

<u 

rt 

i 

rt 

E 

0) 

bo  ™ 

W 

rt 

w 

< 

O 
< 

a  .a  § 

rt 

rt   s    m 

CX  ri    ™ 

•/    n    rt 

rt  -s  a 
Qj  d   ci 

^£>  a 

G 
rt 

S 
< 

rt        rt .~ 

cx      a  a 

"o 

E 

rt 
G 

rt 

-a 

G 

a 

rt 

G 
rt 

s  rt 

a     a 

'o 

a?      g:  c 

'43      '43            a 

rt       rt         -  a 

o 

rt  C 

-  a 

J4    O 

B 

F 

lal 

'3  ._r  <u 

rt 

rt 

a 

rt 

a; 
bo 

a 

rt 

E 

CX       CU      -^  o 

3  X3 

rt 

rt 

G 

"  o 

o 

-^     -*      5-° 

'O   G 

T3 

T3 

in 

>0)  ^  J3 

^rt 

^rt 

a 

W     «J     A'rt 

Z   " 

z 

< 

Z 

< 

W<W 

< 

< 

W 

< 

o 


bo 

a 
o 


CX 


cx 


Pu  § 


C4      « 


cx 


rt 
u 

a 


CVO 


APPENDIX    F  441 


S  3 

s  a 


eg    ..  B  •£  _,  6  rt  bf 


rt  >,  > 


S  I  £  rt 

o  S  q 


"0^3       S  3             B  rt-O  rt  Crt  SS 

OX<      UP           3  <jD  J  O  Sri  Z  W  <      < 

■a 

rt                      H  rt  ? 

*¥                    I      •     1  h.  *0              1  o  8»  SP 

ii    C                   '                         T1  &"  O  OS  c!  rt 

^  -£>     C           rt  <r,                 •§.  0    '-  "§  ri                  C°  rt  a 


z 


■g     Jij      cj                       el  o 

^Mirto'a            3  3  £    a;       a)                         rt  ►?  c          ;s  rt       S 

<<X      «      O          <<ZI      ffi                      M  i>  i>          Z  K      < 

3rt           3                        tirtrt^  ^rt  - 

?rt_,?rt_,rt.*:  (n.'C      13  J$      .2 


c 


*  d    v      -2       <u  >,  rt  "^  rtcuMrtajtjort.S^-a  5      .rt      ,rt 

*«aj        o        u  a  >*--   0        rt^C^-ac^^^o^  rt        3        S 

<  S  *      M      bd  <  Z  S  W      «QJrtWa,rtZ0J^Q^  «      <      < 


C  C  e     •  5  -^  £         <D         ?        2 


buo 


c 


X5j2rt       rt^S^£^--rt       tuo  tuo  £  rtrt-S  X*T  $  'O       ^  3  -a 


rt  rt  '-5  0           2       -^ 

>                      E,o  „,  a  aSrtrt 

>    «si    ff    hB  "8    s       "  ic    s    •-"    rtS^ 

S^—       rt^rt      J3    I  5  J-  —  S^Cf??  ^    e-           °            0)G      -t 


4J 

* 

'a 
a 

B            3 

£       S    „ 

O 

J3 

t,        n 

,fH 

^ 

<U 

0) 

^      i! 

3 

< 

CQ 

PQ 

fe      ffi 

3^-3°         ^ 


to 


3  ^         ^  rr  o" 

Q  Pl,         H  ^         Z 


442 


APPENDIX   F 


•G       rt 


bx 

a 

< 


o 

I 

H 

o 
5 

H 


O 

w 
H 


en 
W 

m 

2 
h 

00 

w 
H 

O 

w 

2 
<n 

p 

CQ 
< 
O 
O 
> 


a 
a  9 

§^ 
•  H,  o 

c  d 


3    ' 


fcXr 

G  I 
'a 


S     S 


s    s 


■o     .5 


„-  £  <u 


•2-3  2 


2     ^     i~v  s  bos  2 


a, 

ai  ^ 


fcx2 

G 


a 

s 


cEcE 

_£  ._    C  ,rt 


bx      "2 
£  rt  «;  ,9  bV-c 

iSJ  cd  *?9  g>p.s  * 


5  co 


bX  S  C  9 
_   d.rt  Jj.^ 

>i  >  £  >%  g 
Z  ^<Z< 


co"     "T   c     .—■ 


a  "5. 


•-  .9 
£  > 


.9  'O 
£      c 


2  .H-C  'G   rt  .B 

G    C    >i  G  *->    r 


d 

. .  d 

*  S'S. 


z-"<:z 


d 


a 
a 


M 


d 

G 

P^P« 


5  ■*    bx  crj   bx 
4         rt    v   rt 

a  d  .Q    G 


IS 
D 


St 

03 

^   co 
G  -^ 

^P 


G 

S3 
r*P 


P 


0) 

9  * 


9 


rt 


co 


rt-Q  co! 

CO   _Q 

ci 

« : 


G         £ 

Ilia0 


O) 


Sj^S 


P^P 


^£  is  > 

■2  a.  bX  « 

G  -^    G  ? 

(DO  ^ 

S3?  3 


^     CO 

G  J* 


?o 


P 


^    CO 


coOrtrt  rt  n  t&       a  rt  oi  oi  rt 

i_,         Q         ^         u     •         u  •   u     •         u         H  ij  *i-i-y         l-i  •  *i 

O  O  "O        *0  "0"0  rO(U4J  tX 


APPENDIX    F  443 

B      I      s3     .gjs  js-   g*    ^2     I    a  3      «<-§  "g 

a       I™       ,  J  w> «,  S  « *S     1      i-2     7?.S   I       »     S    3      3  P  &"3  M 

S  '     5  'O^^C  |        |&3        ^O1  «        3  *  to  |    3    2  bo 

<       <j       zSz    z<    j    <q    <          <    !5    <    o"E  o 
, < 


S*    , »    ,a,p    ^^"gs   .«53:s    rt    °   ^    §    <? rt        * 

.2  .2  <u       3       rt  ci  B  rt      .2       Sjja       bo      bo     ^       £       bo  n.. -* 


a 

2 


±        ° 


oa  -^^^32^  .So 


§    ||  I  a|  8  .8.8  S*  §  |  I  5  -a    £  s 


SS"        S  P  "2  ^      rt  <"  u      ^°5<u 

'-'  j—  !»1-''-1  <n    B    B  3  -t-1  ^.  o  <-t-H    to  ^"  m 


bo  o 
E   E   E   E   B   £       £   g   >>  >^   >.        CSCC^       £flS'0         S   E   B 

-a, 


vj  ^i  >>>>2BPSSn303_?  >.<D 

m  m  DO)  ojj  od       (u^^a;—       <u       ^       rt       _,._^       oj       <a 


rt  <u  >  bo  rt  rx.  a! 

&^SC  Ci!  <l>  Bo-.       -P 


BB        cfiCG         SB         O        <""       ^       ^       S1        £         §       '^>>)^^'"J^ 


3  -^ 

o <u 


3 

g 

s 

O 

•      •    <u 

>> 

XI 

J3 

<u 

<D 

B  ** 

> 

o  S^S 
to  ?  at 

bo 

bO 

rt  bo     'P 
•^    ^  ^^*3^tD  .3^3 


<u  ii 


QO  3  Pc/3  CO-^tJ  >,>  fc    £ 


B    B  O 


H^^^ffiKH^^         ^ 


XJ 

bo 

3 

V 

>> 

z 

D 

rt 

-B 

n 

H 

>< 

444 


APPENDIX   F 


o 
tuo 

a 

g 
'■5 
< 


£   re 


P  re 


G?X> 
T3  3 


i    I 

bfl 


>  2  -^ 

pre  a  o 

bjQ<tJ  3   3 

z  rt  h~ 


Tl 

rt    «-i  5    S 

U 

bjO    CD    Cli    O    _< 

P 

A  "O  rt  "O  c 

~ 

0) 

i- 

w 

penn 
Amin 

oran 
Ngwo 

afein 

aam 

bo        re 


£  s 

re  'r! 


re  t3 


I 

H 
O 

i — i 

H 

en 


Z 

< 

0 
W 
h 


w 

H 

O 

c/3 
W 

5 
< 

D 
PQ 
< 

c 
> 


rt 


3 
g 
be 

tuO 

a 
'3 
< 


-9      c  ? 

en    a    3   <-c    3 

re    3    re    G  :  = 

4?s  eJ5  s 


!        o..    a) 

Ml  c 


g  a 

re  G 

£  c       r«« 

^  g  rt  <u 

•*  rt           ^    bO 

aj  g    br-^   - 

>  03      r-<     ~- 

u  H     _ 

re  G 


<U    O     S    c     3 
;T    3   ~   3   >S 

><     z     s 


- 


5 

CD 

sj 

<u 

u 

U 

XI 

Bd 

G 

,.Q 

ttf 

he 

It 

a 

^j 

re 

o 

0 
1 — 1 

3 

O.S 
X>   G  "■• 

X)  o   | 


a 
3 

-    t 

re  re 


a 

O 


.a  b  si  &  *? 


re 
Z 


O     J,  3"~ 

re  g   o       o  a 

'?J3G         O    3 
~   en  _c   m 

8  £3   s 

c      .3  2  g- 

G  3. 3    re   nJ 

ed        -3  re    bo-" 

o     z~  z  " 


u 

o 

03 

a 

% 

c 

o 

re 

a 

•a 

0) 

O 

J 

o 
.  S 

re   a} 

vs 

bjO  be 
o  o 


re 
re 


1§ 

13   cu 


2  o 


S       a 


cn  a . 

c  5?  S  &  'S  "• 
.3  o  o  .3    n  > 

>,>    "3T3    «S    g 


■2      g  s  JJ  - 

M  G    .3   C 

G    U    nl 


OJ    (U    o 


C    in 

W1" 


0) 


0) 


r>..  r>..  r 

G  G  Jt£ 

G  G  r.   a! 

a)  a>  S  _, 

„,  a)  >  re 


•3  c  3  G 

^   G  -^   G 


re 
X) 


2  S 

re  o 
^   3 


S  G 

re 

re 


"3  »>■ 
cm, 
2  >  2 


G 

.2 

cu  -^  re  ^ 

re  ^  re  _^ 


rehire    <u«w>^ 


re 

G  3 
"  T3 
G 
C  — 
G-Q 

°,2 
Z^ 


G 
re 

re  c 

re2 
re  c 


s    2 


3    cu        +^ 


a  c 


>   re 


G  —    G 


D—  'H  —  ^' 


re  s-1 


5  re°      9  3 

•Hg   ^t)3^      g:g« 


3         0) 
O  JC 

53       2 


T3  T!  •!-< 


in 
O 
T3 


o 

O-    TJ    g 


re 

M 

-i-.   G 


«  s 


o 


a 

rt 

•-S1 

0) 

^j 

3 

0 

3 

nl 

ID 

3 
0 

a 

+J 

rn 

.= 

u 

>_ 

^ 

^       <u 


•5      .b 


bo 
3 

CD   X    ^ 

•rt  3        re 

O 

cu  -3    S  re 

>, 

B      H 

APPENDIX    F 


445 


to 
•G  "> 

o° 


bo 

3 


03 
tt)  Se        § 

«  9  S  rt 
m3  o  a  a 
•a  ex  <u  •" 


g 

43 
o 

w  *  w  °  d 


1    «  -*    rt 


03    fl    (3    03 


0) 


>1  tfi  +J 

-q   >,  0)  J-   cO 


03    S    03    O    03    »  -H 

43ti43-r--G    G    O 
-4-1    ^  -w  .5  -j-j   o  -S: 


"•a 


e 

g 

i- 

a 
a 
o 

cO 


a -a « 

a  co  G 
a  &.  ™ 

"¥  c2  ^  a 
<       < 


>*M 


_  be 
o  ™ 


s^  .  s    so 

oTD^^gcOm^ 

o-OcoO  c3oi3x3 


cd 
13 

o 

cd 

cd  co 


3  be 

-°  2 

a)  ,c0 
■s  o 

•^    w  °o 


cd 


_>-a  coO    . 

43  •-■    n,       -4-1 
C-     .        .2 

03      t-    J^  IH 


<a  a 

G  cO 
rt44 

E  rt 
cd 
bo 

(D  a 
>s° .~ 
fl"o  E 


0) 


t3      S^ 

.a  Zo'V 


E  a 

cd 


4*  r3 

O    «    c<J 

0.50 
w 


CO  G 

I* 

42  « 

43  bO 

c 

D    0) 


cO    cd 

^  a 
Hi  be  <u 
iJ  £  >^- 

1)4J    D    p 


O 

be 

W 


44 


rO   OJ 
03    be43 

G  a)  cO 

.°  42  44 

.~  Ez 


0)    a)    « 
+3    Oh43 

44   rt   S 


cO  JO 

bca  -..-j 

G3    5^    ^^    »^H     j_j 

id43        -^   G 
^   cO   o   CO  y 


fe    E    V.    C  CO  44 

S    a!    °    c  c  •-" 

g  g.      co  E42 

-^  be  K  m  G  G  44 

G-^  G 


cj 


44 


a.-=3    G    G 

13  _Q    U  -G 


15  4)    ^O    X^VU 


43  ,rH 
f  »  - 

42^   cO  +J 

53  •-  O  3 

aW5Q 

CD 


cO        jh 


.« 

13 

03  co  a 

1—1 

03 

43 

43  ^    CO 

0 

I 

H 

H     O 

Z 

APPENDIX  G. 

NSIBIDI    SIGNS. 


Ns  IBID  1 


*> 


P 


448 


APPENDIX    G 

NSIBIDI    SIGNS. 


GO 


(?) 


/fV^S^^ 


***« 


csi 


© 


<J5 


(i)  Husband  and  wife  love  each  other  ardently.  They  like  to  put  their 
arms  round  one  another  (shown  by  extended  hands).  They  are  rich,  have 
three  pillows  and  a  table  on  each  side.     The  wife  holds  a  comb. 

(2)  Wedded  pair  belonging  to  Egbo  Society.  Shown  by  the  Egbo  feather. 

(3)  Very  great  love  between  husband  and  wife.  The  central  "  star  " 
denotes  a  warm  and  loving  heart. 

(4)  A  husband  cooks  two  calabashes  of  food  to  give  to  his  wife. 

(5)  Man  and  wife  with  river  between  them.  The  latter  is  denoted  by 
two  "  canoes."  The  crosses  show  that  messages  are  always  being  sent 
from  one  to  another. 

(6)  Another  sign  for  ardent  love  between  husband  and  wife.  They  have 
many  servants. 

(7)  Man  and  wife  lying  with  their  "  piccan "  between  them.  The 
consorts  lie  with  their  heads  in  different  directions. 

(8)  Quarrel  between  husband  and  wife.  They  turn  their  backs  on  one 
another  and  place  a  pillow  between. 

(9)  A  woman  wants  to  marry  a  man,  but  her  people  object. 

(10)  A  man  wishes  to  leave  his  wife  because  she  has  craw-craw. 

(n)  The  wife  tries  to  hold  back  her  husband  by  his  loin-cloth.  At  the 
bottom  of  which  her  hand  is  to  be  seen. 

(12)  Woman  who  wishes  to  be  rid  of  her  husband. 


© 


APPENDIX   G 


449 


\ 


Q 


I 


© 


/• 


% 


^ 


© 


© 


# 


A 

1 


(13)  An  inconstant  lover. 

(14)  A  courtesan. 

(15)  Man  who  tries  to  steal  the  affection  of  a  married  woman. 

(16)  A  woman  who  is  about  to  become  a  mother. 

(17)  A  man  has  been  in  the  habit  of  going  along  a  certain  road  to  visit 
his  sweetheart. 

(18)  He  comes  to  a  place  where  a  great  tree  lies  across  the  road.  He 
holds  both  hands  against  his  breast,  and  stands  wondering  ^.  (17)  if  the 
road  has  been  blocked  on  purpose,  and  if  so,  why  ?  X.   /- 

(19)  The  woman  stands  waiting  for  her  lover.  Her  hands  are  crossed 
on  her  breast — showing  expectancy. 

(20)  She  sends  a  message  telling  the  man  to  hurry. 

(21)  Two  men  accompany  a  third  part  of  the  way  homeward. 

(22)  The  "  bush  "  road  along  which  they  walk. 

(23)  They  come  to  a  river  where  they  say  "  good-bye."  The  one  crosses 
in  a  canoe,  and  the  others  return. 

(24)  Trader  bearing  native  money  £)  comes  to  forked  roads. 

(25)  Main  road  with  much  traffic. 

(26)  Slave  with  hands  tied  together. 

(27)  Sign  denoting  plenty  of  money. 

(28)  Razor. 

(29)  Egbo  sign. 

(30)  Egbo  feather. 

S.B.  G  G 


450 


APPENDIX   G 


EX 


l € 


© 


P 


© 


© 


vl  //.       ^J 


(3  7) 


© 


T       ^fe 


H) 


<y 


(♦'I 


© 


i     i      i 


«D 


/r*- 


■o 


(31)  Weaver's  frame. 

(32)  Two  ways  of  drawing  a  dancer's  rattle. 

(33)  Manilla,  native  money. 

(34)  Moon  in  three  phases. 

(35)  Sun. 

(36)  Darkness. 

(37)  A  chain. 

(38)  A  very  heavy  chain. 

(39)  Handcuffs. 

(40)  Man  fastened  by  leg-irons. 

(41)  "  Ghost-mat"  offered  to  ancestors. 

(42)  Ghost  bracelet  or  anklet  offered  to  ancestors. 

(43)  Sign  for  little  ant-hills  "  bush  men  "  put  up  to  keep  danger  from 
a  house. 

(44)  Sign  for  firewood. 

(45)  Two  hand  glasses. 

(46)  Swing  mirror  to  stand  on  table. 

(47)  (a)  Mirror  standing  on  table.  *^  denotes  the  metal  "point"  with 
which  partings  are  made.  (0)  People  who  have  come  to  arrange  their  hair 
at  the  mirror. 


APPENDIX   G 


45i 


ft«) 


C4  y 


(SO) 


(ft 


(#A1 


o 


(J  S) 


trt) 


^=£> 


^7) 


L,  U01 


C^3! 


(U) 


48)  Lizard  tracks. 

49)  («)  Wild  cat  tracks.     (&)  Sign  for  genet  or  "  bush  "  cat. 

50)  Bird  trap. 

51)  Lizard. 

52)  A  spider's  web. 

53)  A  butterfly. 

54)  A  parrot's  beak. 

55)  A  canoe. 

56)  Gourd  ladle,  used  for  drinking. 

57)  (0)  Calabash  spoon,     (a)  Cupboard  in  which  spoon  is  kept. 

58)  Calabash  laid  open  ;  strings  between  top  and  bottom. 

59)  Table  with  calabash  of  food  in  centre. 

60)  Table  with  crossed  legs. 

61)  Plate. 

62)  Bed. 

63)  Spoon,  fork,  mug,  and  knife. 

64)  Okankan  (see  p.  54). 

65)  A  native  comb. 


G   G   2 


452 


»y 


9 


APPENDIX   G 

(.67)  (.6  s  J 


o><P 


1.7  « 


W> 


17M 


cfi     Ix. 


17+  ) 


X 


"IV 


(id 


(66)  Man  (o)  and  woman  (3)  with  small-pox. 

(67)  Crab. 

(68)  Signs  for  hunger,  (a)  The  man  is  supposed  to  stand  pointing  to 
his  stomach. 

(69)  Sign  denoting  the  conflicting  testimony  of  two  witnesses.  The  first 
talks  "  straight,"  and  the  other  tells  a  deceitful  tale. 

(70)  Crossbow. 

(71)  Denotes:  "  I  have  no  gunpowder — send  some." 

(72)  (a)  Two  women  quarrelling  ;  (0)  what  they  say  ;  (7)  each  threatens 
the  other  with  leg-irons,  and  (8)  prison  house. 

(73)  The  husband  enters  the  house,  and  tries  to  settle  the  quarrel. 

(74)  Sign  denoting  a  talkative  man. 

(75)  House  where  discussion  is  going  on;  people  listen  round  inner  wall, 
and  in  verandah. 

(76)  Sick  man  lying  down  in  his  house,  with  three  visitors. 

(77)  A  case  in  court:  (a)  and  ($)  two  Chiefs  sitting  as  judges;  (7)  woman 
plaintiff  (without  hat)  ;  (  )  male  defendant  (with  hat) ;  (e)  two  women 
friends  who  sit  outside  listening ;  ~9*  (tj)  three  court  "members"  acting 
as  jury. 


APPENDIX   G 


453 


454 


APPENDIX   G 


o 

c/5 


APPENDIX   G 


455 


u 
o 


# 


456 


APPENDIX   G 


'u 

H 


1 


^ 


l-inii.'i/ 


4, 


APPENDIX   G 


457 


458 


APPENDIX   G 


APPENDIX   G 


459 


Story  (8). 


(  "7^v    J  L^f  *k    -^zr>T  .  61ti  n     ft?  |  ) 


^jr^u^.,* 


7i  A»«^o 


"""^ iLl_ Iji/  *~*  H^ 


7~  Z     I  Jt* 


I 


Ufhfj  Tit*.   &>   «<v. 


460 


APPENDIX   G 


Story    (9). 


Tffh     J'H*'    &***$  .    ot**    Dfcj 


T 


7L    /i<*^rzi^J     S-CjC^ 


Hie       A<nr'       iZ. 


lit     <-<xJ&°       fc- 


s  >*+• 


1^ -Xy      /  A/ive       t^~j     lure     ^^^      i^K.ev^     /  &~e 


I  u~u  L*~< 


^■J$"\  '  pr       ~71j-  ffivL'  ***■    c*~*  f*  -   '  *■**£  **« 


■/ 


/ 


\ 


V 


APPENDIX   G 


461 


1 


vr^$4    ?  3 


APPENDIX   H. 

BOTANY. 

The  Oban  District  has  a  marvellous  flora.  Out  of  the  2,000 
varieties  collected  by  us  in  1911-12,  about  150  new  genera  and 
species  have  already  been  worked  out  by  the  authorities  of 
the  British  Museum,  Dr.  Rendle,  F.R.S.,  Mr.  E.  G.  Baker, 
Mr.  Spencer  Moore,  and  Mr.  H.  F.  Wernham,  to  whom  we 
owe  deep  gratitude  for  the  kind  interest  shown.  1,600  natural- 
size  drawings,  mostly  in  water-colour,  have  been  made  by  my 
wife  of  new  and  rare  species. 

It  would  be  impossible  to  give  here  any  adequate  idea  of  the 
flora  of  the  country,  but  a  descriptive  catalogue  of  the  collection 
is  shortly  to  be  published  by  the  British  Museum.  It  is  also 
hoped  to  issue,  a  little  later,  a  volume  containing  full  descrip- 
tions, with  coloured  plates,  of  the  new  genera  and  species.  In 
aid  of  this,  the  Royal  Society  has  most  kindly  signified  its 
intention  of  making  a  grant,  subject  to  the  approval  of  referees. 

(1)  FUNGI. 

List    kindly   supplied    by    Mr.    Massee,    of   the    Royal    Botanic 

Gardens,   Kew. 
Hypholoma  Talboti,  Massee  (sp.  nov.). 

Hymenomycetes. 

Marasmius  ferrugineus  B. 

sp. 
Lentinus  velutinus  Fr. 
,,         exilis.  Klotzsch. 
,,         fasciatus  Berk. 
Lenzites  pallida  B. 
Polyporus  adustus  (Willd.)  Fr. 
„         sp.  (indeterminable). 


APPENDIX    H  463 


Hymenomycetes — continued. 

Fomes  rugosus  Fr.  (immature). 

„       lucidus  Fr. 
Polystictus  carneo-niger  B. 

„  Malaiensis  Cke.  (prox.). 

„  xanthopus  Fr. 

sp. 
sp. 
sp. 
Favolus  brasiliensis  Fr. 
Stereum  elegans  Fr. 
„        involutum  Kl. 
„        lobatum  Fr. 
„        versicolor  (Sw.)  Fr. 
Lachnocladium  semivestitum  B.  et  C. 

sp. 
Tremella  fuciformis  B. 

DlSCOMYCETES. 

Trichoscypha  Hindsii  B. 
Pyrenomycetes. 

Xylaria  Wrightii  B.  et  C. 

„       sp.  (immature). 
Hypoxylon  coccineum  Bull. 


Daldinia  concentrica,  Ces.  et  de  Not. 
Panus  sp. 
Phallus  sp. 
Panus  sp. 
The  last  collections  and  those  at  the  British  Museum  are  not 
worked  out  as  yet. 

(2)  LICHENS. 

List  kindly   supplied   by   Miss   Lorraine    Smith,   of  the  British 

Museum. 

Parmelia  Hildebrandtii  Krempelh. 

„         melanothrix  Wain. 

„         olivetorum  var.  esorediata  Wain. 
Ramalina  leptosperma. 


4^4  APPENDIX    H 

Usnea  angulata  Ach. 
articulata. 
arthroclada  Fee. 
dasypoga  Fr. 
florida  Hoffm. 

„       var.  australis  Wain, 
rigida  Wain. 


APPENDIX  I. 

ZOOLOGY. 

Information  supplied  through  the  kindness  of  Dr.  Harmer,  F.R.S., 
of  the  British  Museum  {Natural  History). 

(i)    MAMMALS    OF    THE    OBAN    DISTRICT. 

By  Guy  Dollman,  Esq.,  of  the  British  Museum. 
N.B. — Ekoi  names  in   parentheses. 

Cercocebus  collaris,  Gray. — The  white-collared  Mangabey. 

Cercopithecus  mona,  Schreb.  (Mbuk). — The  Mona  Guenon. 

Papio  nigeria,  Elliot  (Monni  Nshum). — The  Nigerian  Baboon. 
A  skull  from  Oban. 

Papio  leucophxus,  F.  Cuv.  (Nshum). — Drill  Ape. 

Two  specimens  $ ,  Nos.  63  and  74. 

In  addition  to  the  above-mentioned  specimens  (No.  74  being 

a  very  fine  old  male),  Mr.  Talbot  also  collected  nine  skulls  of 

this  rare  Ape,  these  skulls  being  the  first  the  Museum  has  ever 

received. 

Andropopithecus  troglodytes  (Nyokk). — Chimpanzee. 

Galago  talboti,  Dollm.,  sp.  nov.  (Ebopp). 

This  handsome  Galago,  originally  described  from  a  single 
specimen,  is  now  represented  by  a  fine  series  of  skins  and 
skulls,  adult  and  immature.  The  young  Pelage  is  rather  greyer 
and  less  suffused,  with  the  yellowish-buff  tint  so  dominant  in 
the  adult  phase. 

On  account  of  the  great  differences  in  colour,  especially  of 
the  under  parts,  this  Nigerian  form  must  be  considered  quite 
distinct  from  G.  elegantulus,  and  deserving  of  specific  rank. 
G.  eleganutus  pallidus,  Gray,  is  readily  distinguished  from  this  new 

S.B.  H  H 


466  APPENDIX   I 

species  by  its  dull  greyish  under-surface,  greyer  back  and  much 
larger  size. 

A  full  description  of  this  and  other  new  mammals  has  been 
published  in  the  "  Annals  and  Magazine  of  Natural  History." 

Galago  demidoffi,  Fisch.  (Monni  Ebopp). 
Unlike  the  larger  forms,  this  small  Lemur  enjoys  a  very  wide 
geographical  distribution,    specimens   from    the    Gold    Coast, 
Nigeria,  Cameroons,  and  Congo  all  appearing  to  be  representa- 
tives of  the  same  species. 

Hypsignathus  tnonstrosus,  H.  Allen  (Ekpangpang). 
Both  Mr.  Talbot's  examples  of  this  extraordinary  Bat  were 
male  specimens  ;  the  unique  development  of  the  nasal  region  is 
well  illustrated  by  these  two  individuals.    This  Bat  is  popularly 
known  as  the  hammer-headed  fruit  bat. 

Epomops  franqueti  strepitans,  K.  And. — A  small  species  of  Fruit- 
eating  Bats. 
Eidolon  helvum,   Kerr. — One  of  the  commonest  of   the  larger 

African  Fruit  Bats. 
Rousettus     cegyptiacus,     E.     Geoff. — A      medium-sized      Fruit- 
eating  Bat. 
Taphozous  peli,  Temminck. — The  West  African  Tomb  Bat. 
Hipposidorns  caffei. 

Crocidura,  sp.  (Ifim  Mbe). 
It  is  impossible  to  accurately  determine  this  Shrew,  as  the 
specimen  is  not  quite  mature. 

Genetta  cequatorialis  (Nsimm). — West  African  Genet. 

Nandinia  binotata  (Reinwardt),  Gray  (Mbai). 

Viverra  civetta,  Schreb.  (Ejaw). — Civet  Cat. 

Mungos  naso,  de  Wint.  (Ebi). — Long-nosed  Mungoose. 

Mungos  paludinosus,  G.  Cuv.  (Ebi). — Marsh  Mungoose. 

Crossarchus  obscurus,  F.  Cuv.  (Ifett). — Brown  Cusimanse. 

Crossarchus  talboti,  sp.  nov.  Thos. — Talbot's  Cusimanse. 

Bdeogale  nigripes,  Puch.  (Obo  Ebi). — The  Four-toed  Mungoose. 

Lutra  macidicollis,  Licht.  (Esimm  Nsaw). — Otter. 

Manis  tricuspis  (Njokk  Ika). — Pangolin. 


APPENDIX    I  467 

Anomalurus  beecrofti  argenteus,  Sch.  (Ebhagi). 
Two  specimens  quite  in  agreement  with  Schwann's  type 
which  came  from  Abutshi,  150  miles  from  the  coast,  Niger 
River.  The  general  pale  silvery-grey  tint  which  is  so  dominant 
in  the  coloration  of  this  Flying  Squirrel  readily  distinguishes 
it  from  all  the  allied  forms. 

Sciurus  poensis,  Sm.  (Isumm). 
There  would  appear  to  be  no  great  difference  in  general 
colour  between  these  Nigerian  specimens  and  individuals  from 
Fernando  Po,  the  type  locality.  Probably  with  the  help  of  a 
larger  series  some  racial  differences  would  manifest  themselves, 
but  for  the  present  it  is  best  to  regard  these  specimens  as 
representing  the  Island  species. 

Sciurus  stangeri. 

Heliosciurus  rufobrachiatus,  Waterh.  (Irun  Ebange). 

This  would  appear  to  be  the  commonest  of  all  West  African 

Squirrels.      In    general  colouring   this   species   shows   a    very 

considerable  range  of  variation,  chiefly  due  to  the  bleaching  of 

the  dark-brownish  tints  into  a  rich  rusty  red. 

Funisciurus  auriculatus  olivice,  Dollm.,  sp.  nov.  (Ebange). 

This  strikingly  coloured  Squirrel  is  now  represented  in  the 
Museum  collection  by  six  specimens,  all  exhibiting  the  same 
beautiful  colouring  as  described  in  the  original  diagnosis. 

This  handsome  Squirrel  is  readily  distinguished  from  the 
allied  forms  by  the  bright,  yellowish  coloration  of  the  hind 
quarters  and  posterior  back,  the  yellowish-olive  neck,  shoulders 
and  limbs,  the  almost  pure  rufous-orange  colour  of  the  head, 
without  any  conspicuous  black  speckling,  and  by  the  pale  buff 
tint  of  the  entire  ventral  surface.  Funisciurus  auriculatus,  a.  boydi, 
and  a.  beatus  are  all  much  more  rufous  oh  the  back,  a  great 
deal  darker  on  the  neck  and  shoulders,  richer  in  colour  on  the 
ventral  surface,  and  with  the  posterior  portion  of  the  head 
speckled  with  black  or  yellow  and  black. 

Funisciurus  leucostigma  talboti,  sp.  nov.  Thos.  (Ikomme). 
This  Squirrel  was  described  by  Mr.  Thomas  in  a  paper  on 
"  New  African  Squirrels  "  published  in  November,  1909  ;  since 
that    date    further     specimens    of    this    interesting     Squirrel 

H  H  2 


468  APPENDIX    I 

have  been  collected  by  Mr.  Talbot,  and  the  form  is  now  well 
represented  in  the  Museum  collection. 

Protoxerus  strangeri  eborivorus,  Du  Ch.  (Nchab  Ebange). 
These  giant  Squirrels  appear  all  very  much  like  each  other, 
there  being  very  little  colour  variation. 

Epimys  rattus,  L.  (Mbe).—  The  Black  Rat. 

Epimys  tulbergi,  Thos.  (Mbe). 

Hybomys  univittatus  (Pet). — Striped  Mouse. 

Cricetomys  gambianus,  Waterh.  (Nku). — Giant  Rat. 

Atherura     africana,      Gray      (Nyopp). — African      Brush-tailed 

Porcupine. 
Cephalophus     sylvicultor,     Afzel       (Nkongam). — Yellow -backed 

Duiker. 
Cephalophus  ogilbyi,  Waterh.  (Nsum). — Ogilby's  Duiker. 

Cephalophus  dorsalis,  Gray  (Etuk). — Bay  Duiker. 
Cephalophus  melanorrheus,  Gray  (Ise). — Blue  Duikerbok. 
Dorcatherium  aquaticum  (Iku). — Water  Chevrotain. 
Syncerus  nanus,  Lydekk  (Mfong). — Congo  Buffalo. 
Dendrohyrax  dorsalis,  Fraser  (Iting). — Tree  Hyrax. 
Potamochcerus  porcus. 
Procavia  dorsalis  (Ikpimm). — Dassie. 
Graphiurus  hueti. 
Graphiurus  crassicaudatus  dorothece  (Dollm.),  sp.  nov. 
The  type  and  one  other  specimen  are  the  only  known  repre- 
sentatives   of   this   interesting   Dormouse.     It  appears  closely 
allied  to  the  Liberian  crassicaudatus,  and,  at  present,  represents 
the   eastern    limit   of    that    group.       The    cranial    characters 
exhibited  by  these  .two  forms  are  quite  unlike  those  found  in 
the  " murinus"   group,  and  the  only  approach  to  these  condi- 
tions is  found  in  the  large  Graphiurus  hueti,  which  agrees  with 
the  crassicaudatus  group  as  regards  the  broad  cranial  and  inter- 
orbital  regions  and  the    narrow  parallel-sided  nasals.     These 
cranial  characters,  considered  together  with   the   question    of 
the  distichous  tail,  appear  to  justify  the  conclusion  that  the 
crassicaudatus   group  are  diminutive  allies  of   the   large  West 
African  Dormice  belonging  to  the  hueti  group. 


APPENDIX    I 


469 


This  handsome  new  form  is  named  after  Mrs.  Talbot;  it 
forms  a  most  worthy  addition  to  the  long  list  of  new  and  rare 
Nigerian  mammals  collected  by  Mr.  Talbot,  and  presented  by 
him  to  the  National  Collection. 


(2)  BIRDS. 

Found  in  the   Oban  District,  and  Previously  Unknown 
to  Exist  in  Nigeria. 

List  kindly  supplied  by  Mr.  Ogilvie  Grant,  of  the  British 
Museum  {Natural  History). 


Astur  macroscelides 
Lamprocolius  splendidus 
,,  splendens 

„  purpureiceps 

Onychognathus  hartlaubi 
Nigrita  canicapilla 
Spermestes  bicolor 
Hyphantornis  cucullatus 

,,  castaneofuscus 

Malimbus  nigerrimus 

malambicus 

nitens 

scutatus 

olachellias 

racheliae 

ocutatus 
Spermospiza  guttata 
Andropadus  gracilis 
Ixonotus  guttatus 
Bleda  notata 

,,      indicator 
Cinnyris  batesi 
Psalidoprocne  nitens 
Alseonax  milanoptera 


Muscicapa  lugens 
Turacus  meriani 
Chrysococcyx  smaragdineus 
Coracias  abyssinicus 
Eurystomus  gularis 
Astur  castaniluis 
Herodias  alba 
Hoplopterus  coronatus 
Glottis  nebularius 
CEdicnemus  senegalensis 
Galactochrysoea  liberix 
Porphrio  alleni 
Podica  senegalensis 
Francolinus  lathami 
Xenocichla  notata 
Totanus  glottis 
Lobivanellus  albiceps 
Ceryle  rudis 
Lophoceros  communis 

,,  hartlaubi 

Coccystes  cafer 
Centropus  anselli 

,,  monachus 

Scotornis  climacurus 


470 


APPENDIX   I 


Bubo  cinerascens 
Haliaetus  vorcifer 
Asturina  monogrammica 
Phalocrocorax  africanus 
Ardea  purpurea 


Pseudo-tantalus  ibis 
Ceratogymna  atrata 
Hoptopterus  spinosus 
Machetes  pugnax 


Snakes. 


Crocodiles. 


Frogs. 


(3)  FISH,  REPTILES,  Etc. 

List  kindly  supplied  by    Dr.  Boulenger,  F.R.S.,  of  the   British 

Museum. 
Among  the  most  interesting  are: — 

Tropidonotus  ferox. 

Causus  lichtensteini. 

Chlorophis  heterodermus. 

Bitis  nasicornis. 

Crocodilus  niloticus  ?  (egg). 

Osteolemus  tetraspis. 

Rana  oxyrhynchus. 

Arthrodeptis  poecilonotus. 

Rappia  tuberculatus. 

Hylambatus  rufus. 

Cardioglossa  leucornystax. 

Bufo  superciliaris. 
„     latifrons. 

Marcusenius  brachistius. 

Barbus  ablabes. 

Haplochilus  sexfasciatus. 

Malopterurus  electricus. 
Gecko.  Hemidactylius  fasciatus. 

Chameleons.     Chameleon  cristatus. 

Rhampoleon  sputicus. 
An  eroded  Cinixys  from  the  District  is  now  in  the  Zoological 
Gardens. 

(4)  INSECTS,  Etc. 

A  large  collection  was  made,  but  it  has  not  yet  been  worked 
out.  The  authorities  of  the  British  Museum  inform  me,  however, 
that  it  contains  a  considerable  number  of  specimens  new  to 
science. 


Toads. 


Fishes. 


APPENDIX   I 


47 1 


Butterflies. 

Information    kindly    supplied    by    Mr.    Heron,    of    the    British 

Museum. 

Within  a  few  months  in  1909  the  following  species  were 
collected : — 

Lycaenidae 14  species 

Satyrinse    . 


Danainae     . 
Acroeinas     . 
Nymphalinae 
Papilionniae 
Pierinae 
Hesperidae . 


7 

4 

11 

76 

17 
16 

4 
149 


Some  of  these  were  new  to  the  Museum. 

E.g.,  in  Nymphalinae.      Euryphene  barombina.     Stan- 

dingeri.  J  ? 

Harma  reinholdi.     Ploetz.  ? 
Harma  standingeri.    Aurivillus.  $  ? 
„         Lycenidae.  Phytata  elais.     Hewittus.  ? 

The  genus  Hypotimnas  is  well  represented  by  five  forms  and 
varieties. 

Conspicuous  among  the  Papilionidae  are  the  sabre-winged 
Antimachus,  the  blue-green  Salmoxis,  and  the  large  Meneothais 
and  Hesperus  ;  while  EuxantheTrajanus  is  the  showiest  of  the 
Nymphalinae.  The  Papilio  (Drurya)  Antimachus  measured 
9J  inches. 

(5)  ARACHNIDA,    Etc. 

From  information  kindly  supplied  by  Mr.  S.  Hirst,  of  the  British 

Museum. 
Spiders. 

1.  A  new  genus  and  species,  not  yet  described,  of  the  family 
Barychelidae,  allied  to  Cyphonisia,  Sim.,  trap-door  spider. 

2.  A  new  species.  Hysterocrates.  Mygale  or  bird-eating 
spider.     (The  natives  have  assured  me  that  people  have  died 


472  APPENDIX   I 

from  a  bite  of  this  insect.  Within  my  own  experience  the 
mother  of  one  of  my  boys,  Itamfum  by  name,  nearly  succumbed 
to  a  bite  and  was  ill  for  weeks.) 

3.  Hysterocrates  laticeps.  Poc.  Mygale  or  bird-eating 
spider. 

4.  Nephila  lucasii.     Sim.     Large  orb-web  spider. 

5.  Nephila  femoralis.     Lucas.     Large  orb-web  spider. 

6.  Nephila  pilipes.     Lucas. 

7.  Heteropoda  regia.     L.     House  spider. 

8.  Araneus  sp.  (immature). 

Harvest  Men. 

Guruia  talboti,  n.  sp.  Roewer  (Archiv.  fur  Naturgeschichte, 
191 1.     Supp.  pp.  106,  3  pi.). 

Acari  (Mites). 

Haemaphysalis  leachi.  Aud.  Taken  from  a  long-nosed 
Mungoose. 

Hyalomma  segyptium.     L. 

Myriopoda. 

Centipedes. 

Ethmostigmus  trigonopodus.     Leach. 
Scolopendra  morsitans.     L. 

Millipedes. 

Spirostreptus,  sp.  nov. 
Odontopyge,  sp.  nov. 
Trigoniulus,  sp.  nov. 
Osircomulas,  sp.  nov. 
Alloporus,  sp.  nov. 
Oxydesmus  granulosus.     Palirot. 
Cryptodesmus,  sp. 

Of  the  seven  millipedes  four  are  new  species  and  one  is 
remarkable  for  its  length  (11^  inches),  which  is  greater  than 
that  of  any  millipede  hitherto  known. 

Pedipalpi. 
Damon  johnstoni.     Poc. 


APPENDIX   I  473 

(6)  CRABS. 

Crabs  exist  in  great  numbers  in  the  District,  as  might  be 
guessed  from  the  prominent  part  which  they  play  in  ritual  and 
folk-lore.  My  collection  has  not  yet  been  worked  out,  but 
according  to  Mr.  A.  T.  Caiman,  "  Some  appear  to  come  near 
the  species  known  as  Potamon  (Potamonautes)  Pobeguini,  but 
the  group  to  which  they  belong  is  still  very  imperfectly  known, 
and  it  is  difficult  to  speak  positively  as  to  the  identification." 


(7)  MOLLUSCA. 

No  shells  new  to  science  have  been  discovered  in  the  District, 
but  various  points  in  the  life-history  of  some  of  them  have  been 
noticed  which  were  previously  unknown. 

The  large  Achatina  Marginata,  for  instance,  possesses  the 
power  of  screaming.  This  fact  is  well  known  to  the  natives, 
who  were  much  amused  at  my  start  of  surprise  when  one  of 
these  Snails  screamed  on  being  taken  into  my  hand.  It  is 
supposed  that  the  noise  is  produced  by  the  creature  scraping 
against  its  shell.  Anyhow,  the  sound  is  loud  enough  to  prove 
distinctly  startling  on  a  first  experience. 

Another  small  land  snail  has  the  power  of  springing  3  to  4 
feet. 

Fine  clusters  of  CEtheria  are  to  be  found  in  the  beds  of  the 
rivers,  especially  in  the  Kwa. 


APPENDIX  J. 

MINERALOGY. 

Information  supplied  by  courtesy  of  Dr.  Prior. 

Minerals  are  present  throughout  the  District  in  very  large 
quantities.  As  an  example,  the  compositions  of  pannings  from 
eleven  rivers,  kindly  worked  out  for  me  by  Mr.  W.  Campbell 
Smith,  of  the  British  Museum  (Natural  History),  are  given 
below  : — 


No. 


Name    of  River. 


No.  of 
Pans. 


Weight. 


Remarks. 


Mo,  near  Nkami 


Awa,  near 

N  fun  urn 


Akup,  near 

Ojokk 


Ekku,  near  Ako 


389  gms. 


68  gms. 


32  gms. 


116  gms. 


Fine  grained.  Consists  mainly  of 
ilmenite,  with  much  magnetite. 
Zircon  in  microscopic  colourless 
crystals  is  abundant.  Some 
fragments  of  pink  garnet. 
Rounded  quartz  grains. 

As  above  (1),  but  very  rich  in  pink 
garnet  in  small  crystals  and 
fragments. 

Very  fine  grained.  Magnetite 
much  more  plentiful  than  in 
any  other  sample.  Zircons  and 
garnets  only  occur  as  micro- 
scopic crystals,  the  latter  being 
rather  scarce. 

Coarser  grained.  Ilmenite  with 
very  much  magnetite.  Zircons 
very  abundant  in  colourless 
prisms  with  brilliant  lustre,  and 
often  1  mm.  long.  Pink  garnets 
are  also  abundant.  No  cassi- 
terite.  Rounded  grains  of 
quartz. 


APPENDIX   J 

Mineralogy — continued. 


475 


Name  of  River. 


No.  of 
Pans. 


Weight. 


Remarks. 


Between  Niaji 
and  Ntebba- 
shott 


Akpininni,  near 
Oremm 


Between 
Oremm  and 

Ntebbashott 

Ikpan, on 
Mfamosing- 
Ekkonna- 
nakku  Road 


Okot-Ikpo, 
near 
Ekkonnanakku 


273  gms. 


300  gms. 


103  gms. 


25  gms. 


150  gms. 


Aiipp  Ainyakk, 

near 
Ekkonnanakku 


Akwa  Yafe, 

near  Falls 


350  gms. 


42  gms. 


Fine  grained.  Ilmenite  with  some 
magnetite.  No  cassiterite.  Gar- 
nets scarce.  Zircons  much  less 
abundant  than  in  No.  4. 

Fine  grained.  As  above  (5),  but 
zircons  present  as  microscopic 
crystals.     Garnet  rather  scarce. 

Fine  grained.     As  above  (6). 


This  is  characterised  by  the  pre- 
sence of  monazite  in  quantity 
sufficient  to  give  a  yellow  colour 
to  the  sand;  the  monazite  is, 
however,  quite  subordinate  to 
the  ilmenite.  Pink  garnet  and 
quartz  are  both  abundant. 
Zircon  is  relatively  scarce. 

Again  a  large  percentage  of  quartz 
has  remained  in  the  pan.  Gar- 
net is  abundant  and  in  large 
fragments.  There  is  a  very 
small  amount  of  monazite.  The 
ilmenite,  which  forms  the  bulk 
of  the  sand,  is  very  finely 
divided. 

A  nearly  pure  ilmenite  concen- 
trate. Quartz,  garnet,  and 
zircon  are  all  present,  but  only 
in  small  percentages. 

A  very  pink  and  white  sand,  con- 
taining much  quartz  and  pink 
garnet.  It  contains  a  small 
amount  of  monazite  and  some 
brownish  zircons.  This  con- 
centrate seems  characterised 
by  the  presence  of  fragments 
of  a  green  hornblende. 

Cassiterite  seems  to  be  entirely 
absent  in  all  the  pannings. 


APPENDIX  K. 


METEOROLOGY. 

Temperature. 

Readings  were  taken  during  the  rainy  season  from  June  to 
October,  1909,  which  is  the  coolest  time  of  the  year.  Early  in 
November  the  instruments  were  struck  by  lightning,  and  the 
records  thus  brought  to  a  sudden  end. 

Temperature  in  the  Shade. 


Greatest 

Month. 

Mean. 

Highest. 

Lowest. 

Diurnal 
Variation. 

Mean  Max. 

Mean  Min. 

June 

777 

89 

64 

19 

83-3 

72'I 

July         .         . 

76-5 

89 

69 

18 

817 

7i"3 

August     . 

77-2 

90 

69 

23 

84-3 

70*  1 

September 

77*9 

92 

69 

23 

84-9 

70-9 

October  . 

79-9 

95 

68 

27 

89-8 

70-0 

Rainfall  at  Oban  Station  during  1911. 


Total  Rainfall 

No.  of  Days  per 

Maximum  Rain 

Duration  of  Rain- 

Month. 

per  Month  in 

Month  on  which 

in  any  one  Day 

fall  on  Day  of 

Inches. 

Rain  fell. 

in  Inches. 

Maximum  Rain. 

January . 

3'22 

7 

165 

7  hours 

February 

2-63 

3 

I-83 

6      , 

March     . 

5"99 

II 

I  32 

I      , 

April 

12-18 

17 

2'20 

6      , 

May 

25*98 

25 

5-00 

6      , 

June 

I7-59 

15 

3-60 

6      , 

July         .         . 

22-88 

26 

4-15 

9      » 

August    . 

28-17 

29 

6-38 

10      , 

September 

24'2I 

27 

4-11 

3      . 

October . 

27-28 

23 

4-63 

10      , 

November 

3*43 

18 

0-89 

3      . 

December 

i-93 

3 

r8o 

4      . 

Total 

I75-49 

204 

APPENDIX    K  477 

The  rainfall  during  June  to  December  in  1909  amounted  to 
n6'83  inches,  and  that  for  the  whole  year  1910  to  144*10  inches. 
The  latter  was  an  exceptional  year,  and  many  streams  dried 
up,  which  had  never  been  known  to  fail  previously.  According 
to  native  reports  the  rainfall  during  191 1  was  below  the 
average. 


APPENDIX  L. 


GEOGRAPHICAL   SURVEY. 

I. — Principal  Positions. 

The  survey  depends  chiefly  on  latitude  and  azimuth  base 
lines  from  Oban  to  Mt.  Awsaw  Ifogi  and  Oban  to  Ibianshi 
Peak,  and  three  subsidiary  measured  bases  at  Oban,  Ibum,  and 
Nkami. 

Longitude  is  reckoned  from  the  position  of  Obutong,  fixed 
by  chronometrical  differences  from  Calabar. 


Place. 

Latitude 
North. 

Longitude 
East. 

Height 
in  Feet. 

Remarks. 

Oban  Hill  A    . 

5°  19'  37" 

8°  33'  36" 

1 105 

A   Cairn  at  N.W.  point. 

,,      ii    Al  . 

5    19    3i 

8    33    40 

1067 

A   Easterly  end. 

„    Station  . 

5    19    22 

8    34    30 

408 

In  front  of  District  House.      Latitude  by 
Observation. 

Ibum  Town     . 

5    38    18 

8    28    59 

1045 

x   Latitude  by  Observation. 

Ibianshi  Peak  . 

5    34    49 

8    26   41 

2880 

A          11          from  Ibum  Town. 

AS    . 

5    23    41 

8    34    27 

1619 

x   H.P. 

D3  . 

5    26    57 

8    36     9 

2487 

x   H.P. 

Agamdugum  Peak  . 

5    41    34 

8    21      6 

2348 

x   H.P. 

Dl. 

5    3°    21 

8    37    11 

3i47 

x   H.P. 

K<. 

5    33     9 

8    51      7 

373i 

x   H.P. 

K5. 

5    33    59 

8    50    41 

3573 

x   H.P. 

Kl  . 

5    30     6 

8    50    18 

3162 

x   H.P. 

Gl. 

5    29    29 

8    46    10 

2697 

x    H.P. 

G2. 

5    30    35 

8    46     8 

2287 

x   H.P. 

Gs. 

5    31    10 

8    46    13 

2081 

x    H.P. 

G*. 

5    31    24 

8    46     9 

1959 

x    H.P. 

Ml. 

5    35    55 

8    52      4 

2031 

x   H.P.     Dependent  upon  the  position  of 
Nkami. 

M2. 

5    35    27 

8    52    20 

2181 

Ditto               ditto. 

M3. 

5    35    13 

8    51    27 

2435 

Ditto               ditto. 

Mt.  Awsaw  Ifogi     . 

5    3°    " 

8    49    14 

3085 

A  6   feet   East   of  single   tree.      Latitude 
from  Niaji. 

Niaji  Town 

5    32    11 

8    46    50 

678 

A  In  front  of  Egbo  House. 

Ikpai 

5    32    23 

8    47    12 

652 

In  front  of  Egbo  House.     Fixed  by  Sub- 
tenses from  Mt.  Awsaw  Ifogi. 

Owum 

5    32    41 

8    47   22 

608 

Ditto               ditto. 

Ibum  Farm  Hill,  Bi 

5    38    47 

8    28    58 

906 

H.P. 

..     B2 

5    38    42 

8    29     7 

953 

H.P. 

K8 

5    32    42 

8    49     9 

2237 

H.P. 

K9 

5    33      5 

8    48    29 

1997 

H.P. 

N5 

5    38    28 

8    27     5 

1830 

H.P. 

Pinnacle  Peak,  B6  . 

5    36     9 

8    33    38 

3280 

H.P. 

B8  . 

5    36    33 

8    29    37 

2331 

H.P. 

N3  . 

5    40    17 

8    29     8 

mo 

H.P. 

B5  . 

5    33    56 

8    30    42 

2784 

H.P. 

B4  . 

5    35    46 

8    33    18 

3501 

H.P. 

Oi  . 

5    37    54 

8    35    45 

3024 

H.P. 

02  . 

5    38    40 

8    34    21 

2888 

H.P. 

R    . 

5    16    13 

8    40    45 

1 180 

H.P. 

Rl  . 

5    14    19 

8    38    20 

1178 

H.P. 

D2. 

5    26    41 

8    33    36 

1653 

H.P. 

pi . 

5    29     3 

8    26   56 

"47 

H.P. 

D4. 

5    29    12 

8    37     2 

3255 

H.P. 

APPENDIX    L 


479 


Height  from  theodolite  vertical  angles  (dependent  upon  the 
lowest  step  at  Obutong  Beach  being  60  feet  above  sea  level). 

Heights  are  reckoned  to  ground  level,  except  at  intersected 
points,  where  the  tallest  tree  has  been  observed. 
H.P.  =  Highest  Point. 
A     =  Triangulation  Station. 
X      =  Triangulation  Intersected  Point. 

II. — Secondary  Positions. 
Latitudes  and  longitudes  by  astronomical  observations,  the 
latter  being  determined  by  chronometric  differences.     Heights 
by  aneroid. 


Place. 

Latitude 
North. 

Longitude 
East. 

No.  of  Inde- 
pendent 
Observations 
for  Longitude. 

If  Longitude 
checked  by 

bearing  to  x 

at  or  near 

Town. 

Height 
in  Feet. 

Remarks. 

Nkami 

5°  36'  51" 

8°  52'    8" 

4 

Yes. 

540 

In  front  of  Egbo  House. 

Ndcbbiji  . 

5   35     9 

8    49    29 

4 

„ 

600 

.. 

Ekkonnanakki 

1     5     6  24 

8    40     9 

2 

No. 

320 

>,          Rest         ,, 

Obarekkai 

5     5    57 

8    26     6 

4 

„ 

70 

Eastern  end  of  Town. 

Nsan 

5    19     9 

8    22    55 

n 

„ 

490 

In  front  of  Rest  House. 

Mbarakpa 

5    12   19 

8    26    24 

10 

,, 

39° 

I                           M 

Netim 

5   21   13 

8    21      4 

1 

„ 

43° 

Egbo      „ 

Ekuri  Ovvai 

5   42   12 

8    24    59 

3 

Yes. 

890 

Oburekkpe 

5   49  20 

8    23    12 

2 

„ 

410 

Owai  Ifunkpa 

5   33  48 

8    14    17 

4 

„ 

480 

Ojo  Nkonmba 

5   25   53 

8    16    16 

2 

No. 

460 

Etara 

5  47     5 

8    29    30 

2 

„ 

5io 

Iko  Akperetn 

5  38     2 

8    10    54 

2 

Yes. 

390 

Ako. 

5  27  49 

8    43    12 

8 

No. 

500 

Rest 

Okarara    . 

5   22     8 

8    42      5 

4 

„ 

420 

,         Egbo      „ 

Aking 

5   26   12 

8    38     5 

5 

Yes. 

460 

Ebutigo     . 
Nchofan 

5     0   14 

8    41    45 

2 

No. 

100 

Rest       „ 

5   48   26 

8    40    40 

2 

,, 

— 

(Insofan 

III. — Positions  fixed  by  Obutong-Oban  Theodolite 
Traverse. 


Place. 

Latitude 
North. 

Longitude 
East. 

Height 
in  Feet. 

Remarks. 

Oban  Town 

5°  19'     4" 

8°  34'  22" 

413 

West  end  Juju  Nchibbi. 

Ekong       .... 

5    16    29 

8    33    31 

478 

In  front  of  Egbo  House. 

Ndingane .... 

5      8    55 

8    30    41 

310 

>>              is          >> 

Nwan's      .... 

5      8    14 

8    29    38 

281 

„              ,,          „ 

Obutong    .... 

5      8    19 

8    29    12 

236 

„           Rest       „ 

Top  of  Kwa  Falls     . 

5      8    36 

8    29    12 

162 

Bench  mark  on  Eastern  bank. 

Bottom          ,, 

5      8    19 

8    28    53 

60 

Lowest  Step,  beginning  of  Oban- 
Obutong  Road. 

Obutong-Calabar 

Oban-Cross-Roads 

5      8    35 

8    30    21 

286 



Ekong-Ndekke 

Obutong  Cross-Roads  . 

5    16    16 

8    33    33 

423 

480  APPENDIX    L 

Additional  Heights  from  Aneroid  Readings. 


Place. 

Height 
in  Feet. 

Remarks. 

Agbung  Beach 

Hill  North  of  Agbung 

R.  Donnya 

R.  Ndiansha     . 

310 
50 
210 
250 
350 
420 
750 

In  front  of  Egbo  House. 

Mbe  Kako's  Compound. 
On  Netim-Ibum  Road. 

Magnetic  Variation  (1909): 
Mean  Value  of  Needle  Reversed  and  Unreversed. 


Place. 


Oban  Stn.    . 

ObanHill    ! 

Nkami 

Mr.  Avvaw  Ifogi 

Ibianshi  Peak 


Date. 


Dec.  27,  '08 
Dec.  5,  '09 
Dec.  6,  '09 
Oct.  23,  '09 
Oct.  28,  '09 
Dec.  12,  '09 


Latitude. 


5°  19'  22" 


19  37 

36  5i 

30  11 

34  49 


Longitude. 

8° 

34' 

36" 

8 

33 

36 

8 

52 

8 

8 

49 

14 

8 

26 

41 

I2o  4+<  37» 
12  39  35 
12  43  28 
12  18  25 
12  41  36 

12   35   12 


Not  reversed.    1 105  feet  high. 
Considerable  local  attraction. 
3085  feet  high. 
Not  reversed.    2880  feet  high. 


T 


P.  Amaury  !/■ 


Scale    l:200,OOOorlJnci=    3-156 
1  34  *2  **  o 


Reference 


Eggui  IfUL 
,    .  -             ftouXe 


JLe^ghts   in    f<eet>. 


—  Note  — 
CamerooTis  corrtpHe<L  from  pttblishedL 


~hj5l 


INDEX 


Abbiati,  Egbo  stone  at,  17 1-2 
Abiankpaw,     giant     king     of     Skull 

people,  275-6 
Abijang,  Ekoi-Akam  inter-marriages 

at,  216 
Pool  at,  use  of,  217,  218 
Skulls  at  Chief's  house,  217 
Abonn  Ogbe,  Egbo  grade,  41 
Master  of  ceremonies  of,  43 
Ada,      the     Forest     Demon,     story 

of,  247,  336 
Adet    Awaw,    Woman    of    position, 

Funeral  of,  224-5 
Adia  Club,  411 
Adonis,  birth  of,  Ekoi  analogies  to, 

132  et  seq. 
Adonis-Attis-Osiris     worship,      Ekoi 

parallels,  74-5 
iEsculapius,     staff     of,      symbolism 

of,  27 
After-life     {see    also    Ghosts),     Ekoi 

ideas  on,  17 
Agara  tree,  pods,  in  Folk-tale,  381, 

seeds  in  decoration,  217 
Agbashan,    Chief,  at    Oban,    Were- 

shape  of,  82-3,  87 
Age,  Ekoi  reverence  for,  322 

Probable  maximum,  319 
Age-classes,     108,     112,     115,    321  ; 

evolution,  48  ;  nature,  283 
Agegam,  River,  Bridge,  and  Cascades 

of,  152 
Agriculture,  Crop-rotation,  270 

Women's  part  in,  269 
Akaba-Nsi,  Ekoi  word  for  Ghost,  230 
Akam-Ekoi  inter-marriages    at  Abi- 
jang, 216 
Akillinga  Juju,  of  the  Ojo,  245-6 
Aking,  Children's  Games  and  Songs 

at,  90 
Mediterranean  type  of  Ornament 

from,  173 
Ako,  90,  161 
Akpambe  Juju,  51,  52 
Amulets  of  votaries,  52 
Case  of,  125 

Smelling-out  of  Witches  by,  198 
Akpanebesin    flower,    as    Wrestler's 

challenge,  287 

S.B. 


Akunane,  head-priest   of   Juju  Ofiri, 
on    sacrifice    to     Ghosts, 

232-3 
Akwa,    tribes    near,   Secret    Society 

of,  37 
Akwa  Yafe  river,  3,  Falls  of,  Caves 

near,  162-3 
Alexander,  Lieut.  Boyd,  Plant  named 

after,  214 
Ambushes,  271-2 
Amulets,  against  Ghosts,  231 
Amusements,  283-6 
Ancestors,  Diseases  sent  by,  278 
Ekoi  cult  of,  13 
Sacrifices  to, 

at  House-building,  263 
after  War,  272 
Angbo  Club,  413 

Animal   forms   assumed  by  Humans 
{see    also    Efumi),    80   et 

sqq-,  195 
Life     {see     also     Zoology),      Kwa 

river,  1,  2 
Animal  Sacrifice,  9,   10,  19,  55,  222, 

224,  225,  story  on,  226 
Crab's    Claw    in,    196,     story    on, 

197-8 
Animals    in    Folk-tales     {see    under 

Names),  American  Negro 

parallels,    337 
Second-sight  of,  175,  230 
Speech  of,  The  Man  who  Under- 
stood, story  of,  99-101 
Animm    Juju,    50,    human   sacrifice 

at,  243-6 
Antann  leaves,  ritual  use  of,  263 
Antelopes  {see  also  Duiker),  6,  142-3, 

160 ;  in  Egbo  art,  141 ;  in 

Folk-tales,  344-9 
Ant-hills  in  Eja  Juju,  77-8 
Anthropometry,  Appendix  C,  414 
Antikka,    Familiars   exorcised   from, 

194-5 

Ants,  Lords  of  the   Bush,   story   of, 
401-2 
Black,  in  Folk-lore,  9  ;    in  "  Medi- 
cine," 131 

Anwan  Nsibidi,  site,  and  meaning  of 
words,  157 

I    I 


482 


INDEX 


Ape  People,  why  they  no  longer  live 

in  Towns,  78-9 
Apes  (see  also  Drill  Ape) ,  Anthropoid, 

Ekoi     beliefs     on,     story 

on,  78-9 
Oban  District,  465 
Why  Hunter  may  not  Eat  Apes 

killed  in  the  Bush,  143-4 
Ara,  the  Sky-maiden,  340-4 
Arachnida,  &c,  Oban  District,  471-2 
Aret  Offiong's  dowry,  106 
Art,  Ekoi,  287  et  sqq. 
Aru  bird,  Omens  from,  324  ;    Tabu 

on,  410 
Arums,  Kwa  river,  1 
Assyria,  Axe  symbol  from,  15 
Astral  forms  of  Things  in  Dreams,  232 
Astronomical   Myths,  344,  349,  355, 

357 
Asunga  Juju,  of  Mfuor  Club,  413 
Ataiyo  river,  11 
Aura,  personal,  belief  in,  295 
Awa  river,  Bridge  over,  151 

Were-crocodiles  of,  81 
Awaw      Anjanna,     Head    Chief,    of 
Ododop     tribe,     84,     85, 
death  of,   in    Were-beast 
form,  85-6 
Axe  (see  also  Double  Axe),  in  Folk- 
tale, 402 
Symbol,  Assyrian  origin  of,  15 
Axe-Medicine,  Ekuri  Ibokk,   features 

of,  45 
Ayunga  Club,  411 


Babi,  157 

Baboon,  Oban  District,  465 

Baikiea  insignis,  256 

Ball  games,  285-6 

Banana  people,  Decorative  art 
of,    290 

Banjang  tribe,  Ekoi  affinity  of,  318 

Bantu  strain  in  Ekoi,  305,  317 

Baobab  trees,  Bornu,  Genii  of,  Death- 
blows from,  231 

Barrenness,  Ideas  on,  Jujus  against, 
Stories  on,  and  Tabu 
against,  123-6,  126-9, 
I32.  x33  et  sqq.,  408 

Bats,  Oban  District,  465 

Cave-dwelling,  as  delicacies,  162-3 
Hammer-headed,  Death-messenger, 
193,  466 

Bavili  Paint  House,  Ekoi  analogy 
to,   108 

Beasts,  How  they  all  came  upon 
Earth,   149-50 


Beasts,  Birds,  &c,  Tabued  as  Food 
for  Men,  and  for  Women, 
407,  408,  story  on,  409 

Beating,  Initiatory,  284 

Beauty,  Ekoi  love  of,  287  et  sqq. 

Bee,  Ekoi  name  for,  20 

Beggars,  non-existent,  326 

Bells,  and  Rattles,  in  Children's 
"  Plays,"  217 

Belly,  of  Witch,  music  and  weapons 
in,  249,  251,  254 
Striking  on,  209  $  «.*,  252,  253 
Why  other  Members  must  serve, 

393-4 
Beri-beri,   279  ;    ascribed   to  Witch- 
craft, 193 
Berlinia,  Kwa  river,  1 
Bigui  Juju,  tabu  to  Women,  21 
Bini  people,  Osa,  high  god  of,  13  n. 
Bird  and  Tree  worship,  Minoan,  Ekoi 

analogies,  14 
Bird-eating      Spider,      n.sp.,      Oban 

District,  471-2 
Birds,  see  under  Names, 
Dances  imitating,  296 
in  Folk-tales,  196,  312,  313,  409 
Found  in  Oban  District,  previously 
unknown     to     exist      in 
Nigeria,  469-70 
Omen-giving,  324 
Sacred,  14 
Tabus  on,  408 
Birth   customs,     Ekoi,     31,    44,    120 
et  sqq. 
Post-natal,  130  et  sqq. 
Pre-natal,  130,  167,  183,  219,  408 
Births,  Multiple,  in  Folk-tale,  367-8 
Bisexual  character  of  Ekoi  gods,  14 
et    sqq.,     44,     and     Juju 
symbols,   67,   76 
"  Bitter  leaf  "  plant,  story  of,  133-4 
Black  Fly,  why  he  can  only  Buzz,  384, 

385 
Black    Men   and    White,  How    they 

came  on  Earth,  387-9 
Blood-bond,  ceremony  in,  201 
Blood,  Human,  Libations  of,  260,  272 
Blood  Juju,  109,  procedure  in,  201 
Blow   on   Face   from   Ghost,    Death 

from,  230-1 
Blue  bird,  in  Folk-tale,  312,  313 
Boar,  Wild,  in  Folk-tale,  362,  398 

Hunting  Tabu  on,  407 
Boat  of  Witches,  195 
Body,  borrowed,  of  Ghost,  239 
Body-painting,  295,  320 
Bonny,  Slave  trade  (former),  at,  325 
Bornu,    Baobab      trees     of,      beliefs 

on,    231 


INDEX 


483 


Botanical  Notes,  see  Names  of  Plants, 
4-c. 
Paintings,  &c,  by  Mrs.  P.  Amaury 
Talbot,  462 
Botany,  Appendix  H.,  462-4 
Bowel-repair,  278-9 
Bowl,  as  Eja  symbol,  76 
Box,  talking,  185-6 
Boys,  Age  classes  of,  283 
Initiation  of,  into  Egbo  and  other 
Clubs,  284-5 
Brahmin  beliefs,  and  Ekoi  parallels, 

232 
Breach  of  promise,  106,  107 
Brer   Rabbit  and   the  Briar  Patch, 

parallel  tale  to,  399 
Bride-gifts,  60,  105-8,  111 
Bridges,  204,  206,  213 
British     Museum     authorities,     help 
acknowledged  from, 

462-74 
Broom  Juju,  81-2 
Buduma  belief  on  Death  from  Djinn's 

blow,  230-1 
Buffal-afnnities    of    Ododop    Chiefs, 

86,  87 
Buffalo,  6 

Hunting  Tabu  on,  407 
Ravages  of,  223 
Congo,  Oban  District,  468 
Bull-roarer,  222,  284 
Burial  (see  also  Death  and  Burial), 

premature,  231 
Burial  Masks,  Egyptian,  Ekoi  parallel 

to,  217 
Bush,  Division  of,  near  Towns,  262 
Lord  of  the,  story  of,  400-1 
Supernatural  denizens  of,  13 
Tours  in,  290 

Treasure  House  in,  story  of,  389-93 
Bush   Animals,   damage   by,  6,  161, 

223,  243 
Bush-cow,  devastations  by,  161  ;  in 

Folk-tales,  346 
Bush  Fowl,    Egg   of,  in   Divination, 

175 

Why  it  always  Calls  up  the  Dawn, 

384-5 

"  Bush  men,"  see  Ant-hills 

Bush  Soul,  Animals  possessed  by,  80 
et  sqq. 

Butterflies,  Kwa  river,  2  ;  Oban  Dis- 
trict, 471 
Black,  as  Witch's  Familiar,  195 


Cactus,  Resin  from,  220 
Cactus-juice,  use  of,  194 


Calabar,    Efiks    of,    Trade    of,    and 
Secret  Society,  37 
Railway  from,  to  Lake  Chad,  route 

for,  267 
Slave  trade  (former),  at,  325 
Calabar     river,     3  ;     affluents      n  ; 
source,  214 
Leaves  heaped  beside,  91,  242 
Tribes  divided  by,  242 
Were-animals  in,  81-2,  242 
Calabashes,  Chiefs  tabued  from  using, 
210  cS~n. 
Magic,  28,  367,  369 
Cameroons,  Ekoi  in,  318 
Mountains  of,  11 
Nigerian  Boundary  of,  1 
South,  151  et  sqq. 
Secret  Society  in,  37 
Camp  Life,  190— 1 
Cam-wood  dye  in  Egbo  ritual,  41 
Cannibal   rites,    at    Akillinga    Juju, 
246  ;    aspect  of  those  as- 
sociated with,  260 
Canoe-making,  origin  of,  story,  389 
Cap  of  Chief  Ikum,  245 
Cap-box  of  Chiefs  of  Insofan,  218 
Carriers,  Ceremony  and  Song  of,  91 
Carthaginian  origin,  possible,  of  Ekoi 

cut  stones,  172-3 
Carved  Dishes,  210  n.,  218 
Figure,  Ekoi,  24 

Egyptian  parallel  to,  217 
Cassava,  150 
Cat  Dance,  151,  296 
Cat- worship,  traces  of,  151 
Categories,  Ekoi,  419-20,  422 
Cats,  why  deified,  25 
Cats'-cradle,  286 

Cauliflorous  growths,  Kwa  river,  205 
Caves,   Akwa  Yafe  river,   162-3  ;  at 

Ekkonnanankku,  84-5 
Chalk,  White,  ritual  uses  of,  24,  41, 
94.  113,  121,  131,  209  #n. 
Chameleons,     Oban    District,     470  ; 

notions  concerning,  91 
Charms,  see  also  Magic,  Divination, 
4-  Witchcraft 
Against    Ghosts  and  Leopards  at 
entrances  of  Ekoi  towns, 
story  of,  7  et  seq. 
Witchcraft,  200 
Used  on  Drill  Ape,  79 

to  Ascertain  Ghost  preferences,  9 
in  Divination,  174  et  seq. 
Chastity,    pre-marital    and    marital 

105 
Chessboard,  Ekoi,  286 
Chiefs        administration     by     and 
through,  325-6 

I    T   2 


484 


INDEX 


Chiefs — continued. 

Death  and  Burial  of,  221  et  sqq., 
261,  295,  315 
story  on,  227 
Dishes  of,  210  n.,  218 
Child-protecting  motif  in  Folk-tales, 

337-40 
Children,     see  also    Birth    Customs, 
Naming,  $c. 
Clubs,    Dances,  "  Plays,"  Jfc,    of, 

206,  217,  296-7,  322-3 
Ekoi  love  of,  322 
From  Plants,  &c,  stories  on,  132 

et  sqq. 
Wife's  rights  over,   97,   story  on, 
101-4 
Chimpanzee,  Oban  District,  465 
Finger  of,  in  "  Medicine,"  131 
Tabu  on,  408 
China  owned  by  Ekoi,  141 
Circles  of   unhewn  Stone,  Oban,  rites 
performed  at,  at  full  and 
new  Moon,  10 
Circumcision  of  Boys,  284 
Civet  Cat,  Oban  District,  466 
Hunting  Tabu  on,  407 
in  Folk-tale,  397 
Classical  analogies  to  Ekoi  refrains, 

121 
Clay,  Edible,  209  n.\,  248 
Cloth,  Magic,  180 

Clubs      and     Secret     Societies,     see 
Dances,     see    also    Egbo, 
and  others  under  Names 
Ekoi,  13;  Appendix  B.,  410-3 
Origin  of,  37 
Women's,  see  Women 
Clubs  (weapons),  271,  272 
Cobras,     adventure     with,     89-90  ; 

seven  in  one  house,  4 
Cock-crow,  as  affecting  a  Witch,  252 
Cocks  sacrificed  in  Juju  rites,    story 

on,  55  et  sqq. 
Coco-yams,    associated    with    Obassi 
Nsi,  21  ;  culture  of,   269, 
270 
Cocoa-culture,  Native,   201-2 
Cocoanut  Palms  as  Lightning    Con- 
ductors, 73 
Coffins,  Empty,  in  Chiefs'   Funerals, 

222 ;  Women's,  224 
Colours  associated  with  Egbo  Society's 
grades,  40-2 
Names  for,  291-2 
Comets,  Omens  from,  324 
Commerce,  Progress  of,  266-7 
Compounds,  see  also  Houses, 
Building  ritual,  &c,  of,  263,  270 
Ghost-exclusion  from,  231 


Compounds — continued 
Haunted,  6 

Plan    of,    and    Roman    analogies, 
263-5 

Congo  Buffalo,  Oban  District,  468 

Congo  Free  State,  Anthropometry 
of,  414 

Consumption,  279,  ascribed  to 
Witchcraft,  193 

Cook,  A.  B.,  cited  on  "  Cretan  Axe 
Cult  outside  Crete,"  15-16 

Corn-cobs  wedged  into  Tree-forks, 
161 

Corn  culture,  269,  270 

Costume,  Children's  "  Plays,"  206, 
217;  Egbo  Plays,  44-5,  52 

Cotton  trees,  as  Juju  tree,  30  ;  over- 
thrown by  Mfepp  Juju, 
73  ;  sacrifice  to,  34,  36 

Councils,  Native,  310 

Counting  methods  {see  also  Seven), 
304,  422-3 

Courts,  Chiefs'  position  in,  84 

Cows,  in  Folk-tales,  211,  361-2,  364, 

365.  376-7 
Sacrificed  at  Funerals,  222 
Crabs,  Oban  District,  473 
Father  of  all  Jujus,  408 
in  Folk-tales,  144-6 
Claw  of,  in  Ritual,  198 
Tabu  on,  408 

Why  Sacrificed,  story,  197-8 
Why    used    in    many    Jujus, 
story,  62  et  sqq. 
Cranial  manipulation  of  members  of 
Leopard    Society,    Sierra 
Leone,  38  n. 
Measurements,    Natives    of    Oban 
District,  414 
Craw-craw  disease,  279,  372 
Creation    beliefs,    Ekoi,    70,     387-9, 

story     on,     373-4 
Criminals,  Execution  of,  by  Nsibidi 

Club,  306 
Crocodile,    Cult,    Ekoi,    24.       ossible 
origin,  25 
Form  of  Nimm,  2 
Heads  of  Juju  "  Images,"  53 
Honoured  in  Egypt,  28 
Mask,  in  Eko  Juju,  45 
Crocodiles   in    Folk-tales,    333,    334, 

346-7 
of  Oban  District,  470 
Tabu  on,  408 

of  various  Rivers,  &c,  1,  3,  24,  215 
Efumi  of,  80,  81,  94,  95,  242-3, 
402 
Rain-making  by,  71 
Cross-bows,  271,  272 


INDEX 


485 


Cross  River,  Ekoi  settlements  in  rela- 
tion to,  318 
Watershed  and  affluents  of,  11, 154 
Crossed-stick  Juju,  112 
Croton  amabilis,  the  Mfam  Juju  tree, 
139,    leaves   of,    in   Ekoi 
death  ritual,  44 
Cruelty,  328  et  sqq.,  332 
Cry  of  Owl,  196 
of  Snails,  473 
of  Witches,  195 
Cusimanse,  Talbot's,  n.sp.,  466 
Custom,  in  Ekoi  governance,  310 


Dances,  285,  293  et  seq. 
at  Eja  festivals,  74 
Cat-dance,  151 
Children's,  296-7 
of  Egbo  Society  and  other  Clubs, 

39,  41,  43  n.,  44,  272,  410-3 
Funeral,  43  4'  n.,  222,  225,  239,  295 

Ghost-excellence  in,  239 
Imitative,  296 

of  Witches  and  Wizards,  192 
Dancing,  Effect  of,  on  Physique,  293 
Dancing  Skulls,  story,  275-6 
Dawn,  Why  the  Bush  Fowl  always 

calls  up  the,  story,  384-5 
Dead,  invocation  of,  66,  139 
Lakes  of,  Ekoi,  23  $  n.*  et  seq. 
Names  called  in  Juju,  53 
Death,  Ekoi  ideas  on,  17,  87,  200-1, 
229,  230-2 
Return  from,  story  on,  229 
Death  and  Burial  Customs,  44,  94, 
139,  215,  226-7,  239,  287 
Ancient,  302  ;  of  Ekoi  Clubs,  410 
Animal   sacrifices,    19,   222,    story 

on,  226 
Chiefs',  221  et  sqq.,  261,  295,  315 
Egbo  Society,  Dance,  &c,  43  6-  n. 
Funeral     "  Plays,"    in    Folk- tales, 
380-1,  384 
Shrines,  6-7 
Funerals  of  Women  of  importance, 

224-5 
Human  sacrifice  in,  302,  328  et  sqq. 
in  story,  179,  180 
as  to  Widows,  116-7 
Debts,  Free-born  pledged  for,  326 
Recovery    of,    by    Egbo    Society, 
45-6 
Decorative  art,  Banana  people,  290 

Ekoi,  see  Wall-paintings 
Deities,  Ekoi,  analogies  of,  13  et  sqq., 

320 
Dinosaur-like  monster   in  Folk-tale 
see  Oporopootop 


Diseases,    causes    ascribed    to,    407 ; 
story  on,  280-3 
Divination  concerning,  176,  278 
Infectious,  see  Small-pox 
Jujus  of,  278 

to  Prevent,  50,  225 
Most  common,  279 
Disguise  of  Nsibidi  Club  Execution- 
ers, 306 
Dishes,  Chiefs',  &c,  210  n.,  218 
Divination,  see  also  Charms,  Magic, 
Ordeal,  4-  Witchcraft 
Concerning  Disease,  176,  278 
Concerning  Snakes,  25 
Methods  of,  174  et  sqq.,  324 
By  Nimm  women,  95 
Diviners    (see   also   Porcupine),    Fee 
to,  177 
Functions,  &c,  of,  131, 174  et  sqq. 
in  Folk- tales,  402,  403 
Divorce,  113-4,  story  about,  114-7 
Doctors,  Native.  278 

Fees  of,  How  they  were  Regulated, 
story,  279-80 
Dogs,  in  Folk  tales,  252  et  seq. 

Hunting,  story  on,  147-8 
Dormouse,  Graphiurus  crassicaudatus 
dorothecs,     Dollm.     n,sp., 
Oban  District,  468-9 
in  Folk-tales,  46,  398  et  sqq. 
Hueti,   in    Folk-tales,    62,    349    et 
sqq.,  398 
Double  Axe,   in  Crete,   Egypt,    and 

Egbo,  14,  15 
Dowry,  see  Bride  gifts 
Drawing,    &c,  understood   by  Ekoi, 
290-1 
Botanical,    of    Mrs.    P.     Amaury 

Talbot,  462 
on  Egbo  Pillar  at  Ndebbiji,  141 
Dreams,  two  classes  of,  231-2 
Dress    (see    also    Costume),    Female 
native,  292,  strictures  on 
Europeanised,  292  $  n. 
Drill  Apes  (Nshum),  specimens  and 
skulls  of,  78,  465 
Substituted   for   Human  sacrifice, 
78,  story  of  their  degrada- 
tion, 78-9 
Tabu  on,  408 
Dropsy,  Jujus  of,  278 
Drum-language,  298-302,  399,  413 
Drum-names,  301-2 
Drum-songs,  47,  48,  218,  300,  398 
Drums,  285,  297,  302 
Club,  46,  217-8,  283 
Tone  of,  297 
Town,  272,  297,  301 
Dry  season,  How  reckoned,  270 


486 


INDEX 


Duck    and    Frog    as    Messengers    of 

Obassi  Osaw,  story  on,  229 

Duiker,  various  sorts,  Oban  District, 

468 

Hunting  Tabus  on,  407 

Bay,   flesh   of,    as  offering,  95 ;  in 

Folk-tale,  63,  398 
Small     grey,    or    Blue   Duikerbok 
(Ise),  Oban  District,  468, 
in    Folk-tales,  233,    237, 
362,  397-8  ;  Horns  of,  in 
Divination,  175 
Yellow-backed,  468,    in  Folk-tale, 
398 
Dysentery,  279 


Eagle,  Monkey-killing,  Tabu  on,  408 
Ears,  cutting  off  of,  in  Folk-tale,  344 
Earth  God,  Ekoi,  see  Obassi  Nsi 
Ebangi  Juju,  278 
Ebony,   male   and   female,    194   n.  ; 

plentiful  near  Ekuri  Owai, 

259 
Ebu,  Efa,  or  Idiong,  see  Divination 
Ebu  Nko,  grade  of  Egbo,  41 
Ebup  Juju,  50 
Eburuk  Pabi,  female  Juju,  52,  and 

Divorce,  113 
Echann  fish,  Tabu  on,  408 
Edible  Clay,  209  n.\,  248 
Effrigi,  the,  in  Egbo  ritual,  43 
Efik,  and  Efik-named  Clubs,  37,  412, 

413 

Influence  over  Ekoi,  37-8,  42 
Language,  passim.,  vocabulary  of, 

424-45 
Names,  131 

Ode  to  the  Tatabonko  fish,  2 
Song,  in  Folk-tale,  275 
Efiks  near  Kwa  Town,  318 
Physical  characters  of,  414 
Secret  primitive  Writing  of,  305 
Secret  Society  of,  37 
Efumi  of  Crocodiles  and   Elephants, 

see  those  heads 
Efut,    tribes     near,    Secret    Society 

of,  37 
Egakk  leaves  in  ritual,  143,  194 
Egbo  Club,  2,  37,  39,  45-6 
Dances,  39,  44 
Drum  of,  46 
Entrance  to,  283-4 
Grades  in,  40-2 
Officers  of,  43 
Images,  39,  44-5 

How    the    first    came,    story, 
46  et  seq. 


Egbo  Club — continued. 
Parallel  to,  206 
Revenue  of,  sources  of,  45 
Ritual  ("  Plays,"  &c),  39  et  sqq., 
284 
Whipping  in,  44,  45,  65 
Secrecy  of,  how  secured,  40,  41 

44.  45 
Totemistic  elements  in,  38-9 
Women  in  relation  to,  44 
Feather  (see  also  Feathers),  14 
Egbo  Houses,  6,  10,  39,  216-7,  257  et 
alibi ;  contents  and  deco- 
rations, 24  ,96,   172,  220, 
290;    as  Hotels,  76,  120, 
212 
Plan  of,  265 

Sites  for,  first  to  be  chosen,  39,  262 
Egbo  Pillar,  Drawings  on,  Ndebbiji, 
141 
Stone,  see  Etai  Ngbe 
Egerton,  Sir  Walter,  native  sobriquet 
for,  5  S-  n. 
Plant  named  after,  214 
Egg-plant,  legend  on,  122,  236-8 
Eggs,  in  Divination,  175 

and  Egg-shaped  things,  in  relation 

to  Fertility,  122 
in  Juju  rites,  55,  67,  109 
in  Sacrifice,  19 
Egpatim  Juju,  50 

Egyptian    analogies    in    Ekoi    ideas, 
&c,  25  et  sqq.,  67,  217,  317 
Egyuk,  see  Drums,  Town 
Eja  Fetish  or  Juju,  bisexual  symbo- 
lism of,  74,  76,  157 
Feast  of,  50,  76-8 

Yams  at,  77,  269 
Human  offerings  to,  74-8 

substitutes  for,  77-9 
"  Medicine,"  77,  212 
Priest,  on  Lakes  of  the  Dead, 

23-4 
Ejame  dance,  at  Chiefs'  Funerals,  295 
Ejame  Juju,  50 

Ejimm,  story  of,  101  $  n.,  102-4 
Ejium  (used  in  Cooking),  in  Folk* tale, 

234-7 
Ekabe  Nkanda,  hoop,  uses  of,  42 
Ekandem  and  the  Skull-folk,  story  of, 

273  et  sqq. 
Ekang  Club,  412 
Ekarra,  see  Ekabe 
Ekkonnanakku,  Cave  at,  84-5 
Ekkpa  or  Oom,  Women's  Club,  Juju 

of,  225,  413 
Ekkpe  Club,  Efik,  at  Calabar,  37 
Ekkpo  Njawhaw  Club,   412;   initia- 
tory beating  of,  284 


INDEX 


487 


Ekoi,  an  Efik  word,  153 

Ekoi  people,  Characteristics,  II,  12, 

141,   159,    191,    256,    266 

et  seq.,    283,  287,    314-6, 

320,  321,  322,  335 
Clubs  or  Secret  Societies  of  {see 

also  under   Names),  37  et 

seq.,  410-3 
Death  and  Burial  Customs,  see 

that  head 
Efik  Customs  and  Law  adopted 

by,     and     Influence    on, 

37-8,  42 
Folk-Lore  {see  also  Ghosts,  and 

Stories,    passim.),   335    et 

sqq. 
Houses  of,  see  Compounds 
Hunters,  Customs,  Skill,  &c,  of, 

and  Stories   on,   38,   142, 

147  ;  Musical  sense  of,  147 
Industry  and  Trade  of,  266-7 
Infant  mortality  among,  12 
Language,    Short    Grammar   of, 

Appendix  E.,  417  et  sqq. 
Vocabulary,  424-45 
Location,  1,  and  distribution,  318 
Magic  the  keynote  of  lives  of,  2 
Marriage  customs,  see  that  head 
Name  for  themselves,  affinity  of, 

x53 
Origin,    Bantu    Strain    in,    305, 
317;  deductions  on,  172-3, 
232 
Physical     characters     of,     293, 

318-9,  414 
Religious  ideas,   &c, 

Before  White  rule,  story  on, 

267-9 
Creation     belief,     70,     stories 
on,  98-9,   149-5°.   344-9, 
366-9,  373-4,  387-9 
Cult  of  Crocodile,  24,  possible 
origin,  25 
of  Nimm,  Snakes  venerated 
in,  24-5 
Lakes  of  the  Dead,  23  #  n* 

et  seq. 
Prayers  to  Sun  and  Moon,  21-2 
Secret  Societies  of,  see  Clubs, 

&c. 
Symbolism  of,  Bisexuality  of, 

14  et  sqq.,  44,  67,  76 
Traces  of  a  purer  form,  13 
Two  minds  in,  231 
Secret  writing  of,  see  Nsibidi 
Shields  of,  271 
Struggle    of,   for    independence, 

158-9 
Welcome,  Sign  of,  211  <J"  n. 


Ekoi   Towns,  Entrances  of,    Charms 
at,    against   Ghosts    and 
Leopards,  7 
Ekoi-Akam    inter-marriages  at  Abi- 

jang,  216 
Ekoneman,  154,  158 
Cat-dances  of,  151 
Ekong,    Jujus    at,    and    Juju    rites, 

49-50,  65-7 
"  Ekpa  Ntan,"  the,  39,  262 
Ekpangpang,  the  Bat,  193,  466 
Ekpangpang,  washing-pan,  193 
Ekpiri  Ngbe,  grade  of  Egbo,  41 
Ekpo  Juju,  87-8 
Ekum  Oke,  76 
Ekuri     Eying,     Fungus     near,     and 

Houses  at,  260-1 
Ekuri  fern,  funeral  use  of,  287 
Language,  Vocabulary,  424-45 
People,  245,  256 

Chiefs  of,  burials  of,  261 
Physical  characters  of,  414 
Ekuri  Ibokk  Cult  or  Juju,  amulets  of 
votaries,  32 
Axe-medicine,  features  of,  45 
Rain-making  by  Members  of,  71 
Smelling-out  of  Witchcraft   by, 
198 
Ekuri   Owai,    256 ;    Chief    of,    257  ; 
Egbo     House    at,     257  ; 
Elephant      ravages       at, 
258 
Ekwaw  and  the  Hat,  story,  117-9 
Elephant   and    Python,    bested     by 

Ants,  story,  400-1 
Elephant- tracks,  162 
Elephantiasis,  279,  409 
Elephants,  6 

Attack  by,  Ekuri  Owai,  258-9 
Efumi  of,    80,   82-3,    148,    246-7, 

story  on,  247  et  sqq. 
in  Folk-tales  (Njokk),  144-6,  197-8, 
208-11,  380-2,  385,  386-7 
Herd  met,  213 
Hunting  customs  concerning,  148, 

272,  407 
Prized  by  Ekoi  hunters,  2 
Ravages  of,  83,   161-2,  222,   223, 

246,  258-9,  267 
Tusks  of,  in  Folk- tales,  208-11 
as  Were-beasts,  see  Efumi 
Enyara  Akum,  see  Bull-roarer 
Enyere  and  Cactus,  Sex  of,  in  Magic, 

194  n. 
Enyere  Juju,  97 
Erim,    Juju   priest,   cruelty  of,   328 

et  sqq. 
Erong-Isonn       Club,      Efik      name, 
411 


488 


INDEX 


Esere  Bean,  Ordeal  by,  31,  123,  165, 
166  et  sqq.,  170,  191-2, 
195 ;  reason  for  eating, 
124-6 

Esere  Ise  Club,  411 

Etai  Ngbe,  Egbo,  or  Leopard  Stone, 
40, 141, 172,  219,  263,  265 

Etara,  House-burial  at,  215 

Etokk  Juju,  Pains  given  by,  278 

Eturi  grade,  Egbo  Society,  42 

Evil  and  Good,  Jujus  of,  129 

Ewaw  Club,  410 

Ewaw-Offong,  Fire  customs  at,  220 

Exorcisms,   194-5 

Eyelashes,  beauty  of,  293 

Eyes  (see  also  Pineal  gland) ,  Pepper  in, 
Ordeal  by,  171 
for  Seeing  in  the  Dark,  story  of,  352 
Used  in  Magic  and  Second  Sight, 
230,  232 


Face,     Ghost's    blow    on,     causing 

Death,  230-1 
Face-form,  Nigeria,  &c,  414 
Facial  markings,  and  Painting,   108, 

319-20 
Familiars,  see  undey  Witches 
Families,  Jujus  of,  50 
Organisation  of,  97 
Fan,  ceremonial,  see  Effrigi 
Farm  work,  see  Agriculture  et  passim. 
Father  of  all  Jujus,  see  Crab 
Fatting-houses  in  fact  and  story,  60, 
273.  283,  329,  338-91,  357 
Boys  in,  284 

Life  in,  106-8  ;  feast  at  leaving,  108 
Use  of,  8,  real  object  of,  293 
Wives'  visits  to,  130 
Feathers     (see    Egbo,     Nimm,     and 
Nkundak),  ceremonial  use 
of,  108 
Feminine    attribute     of    Juju,    Pot- 
symbol  of,  52 
Feminine  deities,  Ekoi  ideas  on,  17,  18 
Ferns,  Epiphytic,  dedicated  to  Obassi 

Osaw,  21 
Fertility,    10,    96,    Aids     to,    122-3, 

219 
Fetish  Images,  emblems  of  Juju  male 

attributes,  67 
Fines  as  punishments,  45,  311 
Fire,  How  the  Lame  Boy  brought  it 
from  Heaven,  story,  370 
Lighting,  in  New  House,  263 
Raked  out,  in  Divorce,  113 
Rainfall-hindering,  72 
Fires  outside  Compounds,    rules   on, 
51,  220 


First-fruits,  offering  of,  Eja  Juju,  77 
First  thing  caught  in  Husband's  New 
Trap,  tabu  to  Wife,  114, 
408 
Fish,  in  Folk-tales,  186-8,  386-7 
of  Kwa  river,  2 
of  Lake  Ijagham,  154 
of  Oban  District,  470 
Poisoning  of,  270,  341 
Tabus  on,  408 
Story  on,  409 
Fishing,    Women's  occupation,   270; 

Juju  of,  50 
Flame  in  Folk-tale,  383 
Flora,  Oban  District,  89,  462-4 
Flower  Child,  The,  story,  133-4 
Flycatcher  and  Snake,  association  of, 

in  Pompeiian  fresco,  26 
Foe,    Slain,    Spirit    of,     as     House- 
guardian,  272 
Folk-Lore,  and  Folk-tales,  Ekoi,  335 
et  seq.,  et  passim. 
Analogies,  length,  and  tone  of,  335, 

337 
Folly,  The,  of  the  Mbabong,  stories 

of,  155-7 
Food  of  Ghosts,  tabu  to  Living,  232, 
336,  240,  and  see  Stories 
of  Witch,  tabu  to   others,    248   et 
passim. 
Food  Tabus,  407-9 
Foot  Juju,  108-9 

Forbidden  Fruit,  eating  of,  in  Folk- 
tale, 377 
Foreheads,  designs  painted  on,  290 
Protruding,    of    Leopard    Society 
members,  38  n. 
Forest  Demon,  see  Ada 
Faiths,  191 

Reserve,  the,  213,  214,  262 
"  Forty    Thieves "      story,     parallel 

to,  391-3 
Fosbery,  W.,  Plant  named  after,  214 
"  Four  eyes,"  in  Magic,  192,  230 
Francolin  in  Folk-lore,  147 
Free-born      folk,      Clubs        limited 
to,    412 
and  other  "  Members,"  difficulties 

concerning,  326 
killed  by  Slaves,    stories  of,  27  et 

sqq-,  333-4 
Murder  of,  punishment  of,  311 
Pledged  for  Debt,  326 
Frog    and    Duck    as    Messengers    of 
Obassi  Osaw,  story,  229 
and  Snake,  why  they  never  Play 

together,  story,  386 
Tree-nesting,  homes  of,  23 
Frogs,  Oban  District,  470 


INDEX 


489 


Fruit  Child,  The,  story  of,  134-5 

Fufu,  35  %  n.,  passim. 

Funerals,  see  Death  and  Burial  Cus- 
toms 

Fungi  (see  also  Geasters),  Oban 
District,  462-3 

Fungus  Daughter,  The,  135-6 


Galago  T-ilboti,  Dol!m.  n.sp.,  463-6 
Gall,    333-4 ;    of   Leopard,    Python, 

and        Snake,        Magical 

Properties  of,   27,   Tabus 

on,  408 
Game  Reserve,  262 
Games,  &c,  Children's,  at  Aking,  go 
Gardenia  physophylla,  Kwa  river,  1 
Geasters,  near  Ekuri  Eying,  260 
Gecko,  Oban  District,  470 
Genet,  Hunting  tabu  on,  407 

West  African,  Oban  District,  466 
Genii  of  Trees,  stories  about,  31  et  sqq., 

231 
Genitals  of  Animals  slain  by  Hunters, 

tabu  to  Women,  409 
Geographical  Survey,   Appendix    L., 

478-80 
Geological  formation,  Kwa  river,  204 
Geology,  Oban  District,  6,  11 
Ghost  Town,  Why  Living  Men  can 

no  Longer  See  the  Road 

to,  story  of,  233  et  sqq. 
Ghosts,  230  et  sqq. 

of  Dead  Mother  returning,  334 

Ekoi  name  for,  230 

in  Folk-tales,    56-9,  62-4,  99-100, 

179-80,     208-11,     234-8, 

280-2 
Food  of,   tabu  to  Living,  232,  240, 

336,  and  see  stories 
Inability   of,    to   count   Seven,    9, 

24°. 337 
Invocation  of,  139,  148 
in  Juju  cults,  53 
Offerings,   &c,   to,   7,   176-7,    225, 

232-3,  story  on,  7  et  seq. 
Precautions  to  Exclude,  6,  7,  231, 
240,  272,  story  on,  yet  seq. 
Girl,  see  Lame  Girl 
Girls,   Adornment   on    leaving    Fat- 
ting-houses,  108 
Dress  of  native,  203 
Fattening  of,  for  Marriage  (see  also 
Fatting-house),  8 
Gneiss,  Sex  ascribed  to,  by  Ekoi,  6 
Goats  in  Folk-tales,  63-4,  376-7 
Sacrificed   at   Funerals,    222,    225, 
226,  story  on,  226 


God  and  goddess,  shrine   and  figures 

of,  Ekuri  Eying,  260-1 
Goliath  beetle,  90 
Good  and  Evil,  Jujus  of,  129 
Good    Fortune,    River    of,    Carriers' 

Ceremony  and  Song  at,  91 
Government,  310  et  sqq.,  325 
Grammar,  Short,  of  Ekoi  Language, 

Appendix  E.,  417  et  sqq. 
Graves  in   Houses,    215,    222,    story 

on, 227 
Greater  Plantain-Eater,  see  Nkundak 
Greek    analogies    to    Ekoi    Symbols, 

218 
Ground  nut,  Shell  of,  Witches'  Boats, 

195 
Groups  dedicated  to  the  Ekoi  high- 
gods,  21 
Gun,  Owner  of,  Why  he  gets  all  of 
his    Kill    save    one    Leg, 
story,   144  et  sqq. 
Gun-firing,  ritual,  411 
Gunpowder,  ritual  use  of,  272 
Guns,  Flint-lock,   271,  272  ;   in  Folk- 
tales, 359,  383 


Hagia  Triada,  Double  Axe  emblem 

at,  15-16 
Hair,  Arranging  of,   tabu  on,   story 
of,  281  $  n.,  282 
Curl,  first,  cut  off,  131 
Cut  off,  in  Divorce,  113 
Juju,  327. 
Hair's  Revenge  on  Stomach,    story, 

394-6 
Hands  and  Feet,  How  Pythons  Lost, 
story,  374-6 
Why    Snake    has    neither,    story, 

376-7 
Hanging,  story  about,  404 
Harnessed  Antelope,  Hunting  Tabus 

on,  142-3,  408 
Harp,  302 
Hats,    Why   Women   do   not   Wear, 

story,   1 1 7-9 
Hausas  as  Porters,  318 
Hawks,  in  Folk-tales,  383 

Why    they  haunt  Rubbish-heaps, 
story,  189 
Head-form,  Ekoi,  317,  414 
Nigerian  tribes,  &c,  414 
Heads,  designs  clipped  on,  290 
Human,  in  War  Dances,  261,  272 
Load-carrying  on,  319 
Wooden,     covered     with     Human 

Skin,  261 
Worn  by  Akum  of  Clubs,  412 


49Q 


INDEX 


Heads  of  Houses,  Administration  by, 

325  et  sqq. 
Health,  Recovery  of,   Juju  for,   53, 

54-5 
Hearts    of    Pythons    and    Leopards, 

magic    value    of,     27    et 

seq.,  408 
Heaven,  How  the  Lame  Boy  brought 

Fire  from,  story,  370-1 
Herb  Daughters  in  Folk-tales,   136-8 
Herons,  Kwa  river,  2 
Hippopotami,    How   the   first   came, 

story,   386-7 
History,  How  it  came  among  Men, 

story,  337 
Horn,  Gates  of,  231 
Horns  in  Divination,  175 

"  Medicine  "  in,  139 
"  House,"  definition  of,  325 
House-Guardian,  Spirit  of  Slain  Foe 

as,  272 
Household     Juju,     Sacrifice     to,     of 

expectant  mother,  130 
Houses  (see  also  Compounds,  and  Egbo 

Houses),   Graves  in,  215, 

222,  story  on,  227 
Shapes  of,  deductions  from,  317 
Wall-paintings  on,  90 
Human   Beings   (see    also   Men,    and 

Women),   How    they  got 

Knee-caps,  story,  394 
Human  Sacrifices,   74-8,  245-6,  259, 

260,  272,  302,  328  et  sqq. 
Substitutes  for,  77-9 
Hunter,  Why  he  may  not  Eat  Apes 

killed      in       the      Bush, 

story,  143-4 
Hunters,    Customs    of,    Jujus,    and 

Stories  on,  45,  49,  50,  142 

et  sqq.,  148,  149-50,  269 
Hunting     Dogs,    Concerning,    story, 

147-8 
Tabus,  407-9 
Huts  as  Funeral  Shrines,  6-7 


Ibianshi  Peak,  214 

Ibibio  Club,  branch  of,  412 

Ibibio  tribe,  Physical  Characters 
of,  414 

Ibo  tribe,  and  origin  of  Nsibidi,  305 
Physical  Characters  of,  414 

Ibonn  tree  in  ritual,  263 

Ibum,  Agriculture  at,  214;  Forest 
reserve  near,  213;  Migra- 
tions from,  215 

Iffianga,  tribes  near,  Secret  Society  of, 
37 


Ifunkpa,  Uyanga  town,  255 

Igumi,    Juju,   never  before  seen  by 

White  Man,  223 
Ikadum  Club,  411 
Ikkpai  (Whip)  Club,  412 
Iko    Akperem,   First    White    Man's 

visit  to,  256 
Iko  tribe,  manners  of,  256 

Towns  of,  Uyanga  people  at,  255 
Ikpai,  Mfam  Juju  centre,  139 
Ikum,  Chief   of,    Ojo  Nkonmba,  and 

the    hired     boy,    243-4  > 

Head-gear,  Official  status, 

&c,    245 
Illness     (see     also     Disease),     Mfam 

boughs  in,  139 
Image  (Okum),  in  Egbo  ritual,    39, 

42,  44-5.  52-3,  206 
How  the    First    came,    story,    46 

et  seq. 
Imprisonment,     Magical,    in     Trees, 

31 
Incantation  of   Tree-wedged  Stones, 

161 
Infant  Mortality,  Ekoi,  at  Oban,  12 
Inheritance,  314 
Inoculation,    Native,     10-n  ;    Scars 

left  by,  203 
Insects  (see also  Goliath  Beetle),  Oban 

District,  collection  of,  470 

et  seq. 
Insignia  in  Egbo  ritual,  42,  43 
Insofan,  Chief  of,  treasures  of,  218 
Invocations  (see  also  Prayers),  22,  39, 

66,  139,  148 
Iron,  dreaded  by  Witches,  123 

in  Etai  Ngbe  stones,  265 
Irun  tree  in  ritual,  263 
Isawm,  Magic  two-edged  Knife,  127, 

izl 
Ishut  flower,  sign  of  a  Death,  287 
Isinn  tree,  ritual  use  of,  266 
Isse  Obassi  Nsi  Juju,   123,  case  of, 

123-6 
Isua,    Master   of   Ceremonies,    lower 

grades,  Egbo  Club,  43  fy  n. 
Ita    'Ne     Echi,     story    of,     274     et 

sqq. 
Ita  Sakese,  Chief,  Oban,  Rain-maker, 

71 
Itagbun,    Head    priest    Ikpai,     139, 

treasures  of,  141 
Itaokui,  Chief,  Oban,  10 
Itiatt  Obbonn,  413 
Itorok,  Head  Chief,  of  Oban,  Funeral 

ceremonies  of,  221  et  sqq. 
Itott  bird,  Omens  from,  324 
Iyamba,   title  of  Head  priest,  Egbo 

Society,  43 


INDEX 


491 


Jaws,    Human,    token    of    Victory, 

257 
Johnston,  Sir  H.  H.,  List  of    words 
chosen    by,   for    Vocabu- 
laries, 424-45 
Joseph,  a  modified  parallel  to,  128 
Juju,  Chalk  as,  209  fy  n.\ 
Dance,     and     its     object,     Niaji, 

328-32 
Emblems,  67 
Hair,  327 

Hunting,  45,  50,  142,  148 
in  Club  ritual,  412,  413 
Knives  of  Nimm  women,  94,  95 
Man,  famous,  at  Ekuri  Eying,  261 
of  Ojuk  river,  89 

Posts,  Skulls  attached  to,  257,  260 
Rites,  53  et  seq. 

of  Revocation,  51,  65-7,  139-41 
Stones,  Genii  of,  Propitiation  of,  256 
Trees,  6,  10 

Weaver  birds  associated  with,  14 
Jujus  (see  also  under  Names),  ^get  sqq. 
Ekoi,  feared  by  Efiks,  38 
of  Good  and  Evil,  129 
in  Litigation,  65 
of  Special  Diseases,  10-11,  278 
Women  in  relation  to,  21,  96,  181 

Kabila,  or  Ojo  tribe  (q.v.),  Physical 

Characters  of,  414 
Kalbreyeri,  Kwa  river,  1 
Keaka  tribe,  Ekoi  affinity  of,  318 
Keith,  Prof.,  M.D.,  help  from,  acknow- 
ledged, 414 
Keloids  on  Women,  203 
Kingfishers,    Kwa    river,    2  ;   Omens 
from,  324  ;  Tabu  on,  410 
Knee-caps,  How  Human  Beings  got, 

story  of,  394 
Knitted        garments        of         Egbo 

"  Image,"  44 
Knives,  magic  (Isawm),  127,  128 

of  Nimm  Women,  94,  95 
Kola-tree  in  Folk-tale,  307 

Nuts  of.  Oath  on,  269 
Korawp  tribe,  see  Ododop 
Kpifonn,    "  Members'  "     Club,  mys- 
teries of,  413 
Kwa  Language,  Vocabulary,  424-45 
Kwa  river.  Bridge  over,  204 

Crocodiles  of,  1,  3 

Flora  and  fauna  of,  1-3,  204-5 

Geological  formations  near,  3, 203-5 

Magical  character  of,  2 

Navigable  limit  of,  3 

Scenery  along,  1-3 

Source,  214 
Kwa  town,  Ekoi  and  Efiks  of,  318 


Lake    Ijagham,    sacred     to     Ekoi, 
discovered    by  Mansfeld, 

151,  153 
Legends  of,  153 
Salt  springs  near,  317 
Lakes  of  the  Dead,  23  <y  n.*  et  sqq.,  153 
Lamb,     unacceptable     as     Sacrifice, 

story  of  reason,  67-70 
Lame  Boy,  the,  in  Ekoi  Folk-tales, 
34  tf  n.  et  seq.,  47,  48,  58, 
280-2,  analogies  of,  336 
Fire  brought  by,  from  Heaven, 

story,  370-1 
in  Stilt-Play,  285 
in  West  African  ritual,  336 
Girl  in  Folk-tale,  248-9 
Land    of     Obassi    Osaw,    how    the 
Poor  Boy  came  to,  story, 
18  et  seq. 
Land  tenure,  262 
Landolphias,  Kwa  river,  204 
Languages,  Oban  tribes,  see  Vocabu- 
laries 
Leaves  and    Boughs  in   Ekoi   Sym- 
bolism, 44 
"  Lucky  "  in  Fishing,  270 
Magic,  8,  53,  54,  66,  67,  71,  249 
Ritual  uses  of,  44,  91,  95,  97,  121, 
123,    140,    143,  240,  242, 
263,  285 
Legends,  Ekoi,  tone  of,  &c,  335 
Lemurs  in  Folk-tale,  349  et  sqq. 

Oban  District,  465-6 
Leopard,  Secret  Societies  of  (see  also 
Egbo,  and  Ekkpe),  38  <£  n. 
in  Folk-tales,  337-40,  386-7 
Gall  of,  Magical  properties  of,  27 

et  seq.,  408 
in  Hunting  Juju,  142 
"  Medicine  "  for  catching,  359,  362 
Slain,  hunters'  aid,  272 
Leopard-child   and    Lamb,  story  of, 

67-70 
Leopard  Stone,  see  Etai  Ngbe 
Leopards,  6,  213-4 

Charms  and  Juju  against,  7,  50-1, 

220 
Daring  of,  50,  205-6 
Ravages  of,  223 
Tabu  on,  408 
as  Were-beasts,  82,  83 
Leprosy,  Origin  of,  story  of,  279 
Lex  Talionis,  story  of  Nsibidi  Club, 

306-9 
Libations,  of  Human  Blood,  260,  272 
of  Water,  Wine,  &c,  22,  67,  131, 
139,  140,  148,  176-7,  217, 
225,  263,  271,  272,  315, 
352 


492 


INDEX 


Lichens,  Oban  District,  463-4 
Lightning  beliefs  on,  73-4 

Party  struck  by,  92-3 
Lilies,  Kwa  river,  6 
Line,  pure,  delight  in,  of  Ekoi,  290-1 
Lions,  in  Folk- tales,  317 

Why   there   are   no   more   in    the 
Bush,  story,  382-4 
Living,  the,  Ghost  Food  tabu  to,  232, 
240,   336 
Why  they  can  no  longer  see  the 
Road     to    Ghost    Town, 
,  .        ,  233  et  sqq. 

Lizard,  Song  of,  in  Folk-tale,  379 
Lizard's    Head,    Why    it    is    always 
moving    Up    and    Down, 
story,  378-80 
Load-carrying       on       Heads,       and 

Physique,   293 
Lock-jaw,  from  Ghost's  blow   230 
Lord  of  the  Bush,  story  of,  400-1 
Lord  of  Life  and   Death,  see  Obassi 

Nsi 
Love  charms,  112 
"  Lucky  "  leaves  in  Fishing,  270 
Lumbago,  Juju  causing,  278 
Lunacy  and  the  Moon,  278 


Macgregor,  Rev.  J.  K.,  on  Magic, 
&c,  of  the  Uyanga,  255  ; 
on  Nsibidi,  305 
Machauns,  equivalents  of,  146-7 
Magic   {see  also  Charms,   Divination, 
Juju,       Leaves,       Witch- 
craft) ;   importance  of,  to 
Ekoi,  2 
Plants,  in  Folk-tale,  249,  250 
Sympathetic,  8 
of  the  Uyanga,  255 
Magical  properties  of  Gall  of  Pythons 
and  Leopards,   27  et  sqq., 
408 
value  of  Manatees,  2 
Maia,  priestess  of  Nimm,  Statue,  94 
Malaria,  common,  279 
Male   attributes  of    Jujus,    emblems 

of,   67 
Males,   tabued  from  Women's  Juju, 

Oban,  10 
Mammals,  Oban  District,  465  et  sqq. 
Man     and      Woman,     Creation      of, 

story,  373-4 
Man,  the,  Who  understood  Animals' 

Speech,  story,  99-101 
Manatee,  Kwa  river,  magic  value  of,  2 
Mancala,  the,  286 
Mangroves,  Kwa  river,  1 


Mariba, 


Manners,  Ekoi  and  Non-Ekoi    256 
Mansfeld,       Dr.,      97,      and  '    Lake 
Ijagham,    151  ;     on   Ekoi 
struggle  for  independence, 
159,  on  Nsibidi,  306 
or   Etem-I-Ngbe    ceremony 
of    Egbo,   importance  of, 
43-4 
Markets,  non-existent,  267 
Marriage    Customs,    Ekoi     {see     also 
Fatting-house),  105  etsqq. 
279 
Chiefs',  300 

Polygamy,  97,  109,  no 
Restrictions  practically  nil,  87,  no 
Masks,  Burial,  Egyptian,  Ekoi  parallel 
to,  217 
of  Ekuri  Ibokk,  45 
in  War  Dances,  261 
Mat     and     bag     work,     Men's     and 

Women's  share  in,  270 
Matchets,  272 

Magic,  211 
Matriarchy,  traces  of,  97,  234-6,  237, 

238 
Maxwell,  T.  D.,  Efik  Secret  Writing 

discovered  by,  305 
Mbabong    people,     Migration    of,    to 
Oban  District,  157 
Stupidity  attributed  to,  154 
Stories  of,   155  et  sqq. 
Mbaghe  tree,  and  Witches,  195 
Mbarakpa,  Rest-house  near,  Native- 
made  road  to,  205 
Mbeban,    Egbo   House   at,   symbolic 

Painting  in,  14 
Mbian  Juju,  332  «y  n. 
Mbinda,  Eja  fetish  from,  76,  157 
Mboandem    Frauen,    Ekoi   analogies 

of,  97 
Mbonne  fish  in  Folk- tale,  186-8 
Meat  and  Fertility,  123 
Medical  beliefs,  Customs,  and  Stories, 

Ekoi,  278  et  sqq. 
Medicinal  Knowledge  of  the  Uyanga 

255 
Medicine,  Animal  matter  used  in,  408 
"Medicine,"  in  Juju,  49;  in  Wrist- 
cutting,  131 
Melancholy  of  the  Ekoi,  191 
"  Members,"  defined,  Treatment  of, 
325  et  sqq. 
Clubs  of,  413 
Duties  of,  326 
Roman  parallel  to,  325 
Members    of    Body,     borrowed     by 
Skull-man,  story,  274-6 
Why  they  must  serve  Belly,  story 
393-4 


INDEX 


493 


Men,    Black   and   White,   How  they 
Came    on    Earth,    story, 
98-9 
Ekoi  {see  also  Ekoi,  and  Hunters), 
Chief  occupations  of,  269 
Fine  form  of,  293 
Juju  of,  see  Nchibbi 
Tabus  of,  at  Birth,  130 

on  Food,  407,  408,  story  on,  409 
on  Nimm  mysteries,  96 
Why    they    must    Serve    Women, 
story,  98 
Mendi  people,  as  porters,  318 

Terrorised  by  Leopard  Society,  38  n. 
Mentality  and  Memory,  Ekoi,  320 
Mercy    to    Mankind,     why    barred, 

story,  129 
Metamorphosis      (see     also     Efumi, 
Shapeshifting,     4'-     Were- 
beasts) ,    Common    belief 
in,  80  et  sqq. 
Meteorology,  Oban  Station,  Appendix 

K.,  476-7 
Meteors,  Divination  by,  324 
Mfam  Akabansi,  see  Ghost  Town 
Mfam    Ane    Achi  (Land  of    Men  of 

Heads),  274 
Mfam  Juju,  age  of,  51 

Aru  bird  tabu  to  Members  of,  408 
at  Ikpai,  139 

Revocation  rites,  139-41 
Dropsy  given  by,  278 
Tabu  to  Women,  21 
Tree  of,  see  Croton  amabilis 
Mfamosing,  163,  164 

Ordeals  at,  163  et  seq. 
Mfepp  Juju,  Winds  sent  by,  73 
Mfuor  Club,  413 
Juju,  50,  51 

Amulets  of  votaries,  52 
Rites  of,  Yams  tabu  before,  269 
Mfut  (Red  fly),  in  Folk- tales,  28  $  n., 

209-10 
Mimosas,  Kwa  river,  1 
Minds,  Two,  in  Ekoi  belief,  231 
Mineralogy,  Appendix  J.,  474-5 
Minoan  analogies  with  Ekoi  religion, 

13  et  sqq. 
Mkpott,    ruined  town,   Egbo  House, 
&c,  at,  219 
Juju  Skull  from,  223-4 
Treasure  chamber  in  house  at,  220 
Mollusca,  Oban  District,  473 
Money,  conventionally  drawn,  14 
Monitors,  Hunting  tabu  on,  407 

Kwa  river,  2 
Monkeys  (see  also  Apes,  Baboons  A'c), 
in  Folk-tales,  345,  384 
Originators  of  Nsibidi,  255,  305 


Monni  Njomm,  55 
Moon,  see  also  Sun  and  Moon, 
Full,  Dances  at,  294 
How  it  first  came  into  the  Sky, 

story,  344-9 
Influence  of,  on  Disease,  278 
New,  Women's  Juju  at,  at  Oban, 

object  of,  10 
Prayers  to,  Ekoi,  21-2 
Ring  round,  Omen  of,  324 
Morel,  E.  D.,  cited  adversely  to  Euro- 
peanised  clothing,  291  n. 
Mothers-in-law,  109 
Mouse  and  her  Story-children,    story 

of,  337.  34° 
Mud  couches,  263 
Murder,  punishment  of,   311,  stories 

on,  312-3,  401-4 
Ritual,  former,  222 
by  Witchcraft,  192 
Murderer,  Why  he  should  Die  in  the 

same  way  as  his  Victim, 

story,  312-3 
Murderers,     Why     they     must     die, 

story,  401-4 
Murua,  Rattle-bearer,  at  Egbo  Plays, 

43 
Muscular  ripple  in  Dances,  294 
Music,  Ekoi,  297 

Within  Witch's  body,  story  of,  249, 

25L  254 
Musical     Instruments,     see     Drums, 
Harp,     Okankan,     Pipes, 
Rattle,  Wooden,  $c, 

Naming  of  Children,  13 1-2 
Napoleonas,  Kwa  river,  205 

Alexandri,  Egertoni,  and   Fosberyi, 
where  found,  214 
Nataba,  Chief,  cocoa-culture  of,  and 
fear  of  Witchcraft,  201-2 
Native  Court,  310 

Willingness  in  Road-making,  5 
Nature  Forces,  Ekoi  Cult  of,  13,  40 

Juju  of  Lake  of  the  Dead,  Nsan,  23 
et  sqq. 
Nchibbi  Club,  412 

Men's  Juju,  at  Full  Moon,  Oban,  10 
Ndebbiji,  Egbo  Stone  at,  141 

Ododop  Secret  Society  adopted  at, 

37 
Ndibu  grade,  Egbo  Society,  41 
Nenkui,      Chief,      Mfamosing,      and 

Ordeals,  165  et  sqq.,  fate 

of,  170 
Netim,  purely  Ekoi  town,  212-3,  242, 

247 
Nfam  Juju,  Head  priest  of,  on  Juju 
revocation,  65 


494 


INDEX 


Nfunum,  Treasure  chamber  at,  151 

Ngapong  Juju,  50 

"  Ngaw "    creeper,    used  by   Were- 

crocodiles,  95 
Ngbe,  see  Leopard 
Ngbe  Abum  Obbaw  Juju,  Oban,  50 
Fire      forbidden      outside      towns 
possessing,  220 
Niaji,  site  of,  92 

Nigeria,  Southern,  Administration  of, 
325  et  sqq. 
Boundary  of,  151 
Oil  palms  in,  value  of,  315 
Railway  projects,  and  commerce, 
267 
Night  Sounds,  African,  190 
Nilotic  origin  of  Ekoi,  317 
Nimm,    nature    goddess,    53  ;    attri- 
butes of,  25 
Crocodile  form  of,  3 
Cult  of,  2,  3,  94  et  seq. 
Analogies  to,  97 
Feathers  in,  94,  95 
Leaves  in,  95,  97 
Mysteries  of,  tabu  to  Men,  96 
Snakes  venerated  in,  24-5 
Figure  of,  in  Egbo  house,  217 
Statue  of,  94 

Stones,  218,  219,  242,  263,  395 
Women,  "  Done"  by  Sheep,  story, 

339-4° 
Shrines.  &c,  of,  94-5 
Nimm  Asam  Juju,  49-50  ;  Poison  of, 
50 ;  Rainbow-making  by, 
72 
Njomm,  meaning  of  term,  49 
Njomm  Ekatt  (Foot  Juju),  108-9 
Njomm  Aiyung  (Blood  Juju),  109,  201 
Nkajokk  Juju,  50 
Nkami,  last  British  town,  151 
Nkanda,  highest  grade,  Egbo  Society, 

insignia,  &c,  42-3 
Nkokolle,  see  Ekuri 
Nkundak  Bird,  Feathers  of,   used  in 
Dances,  272  et  seq.,  412 ; 
Why  they  may    only   be 
worn  by  Warrior  who  has 
Slain  a  Foe,  story,  273 
in  Folk-tale,  196 
as  Omen-giver,  324 
Tabu  on,  408 
Non-Ekoi  peoples,    Manners  of,  256 ; 

Rural  dwellings  of,  256 
Nose-form,  Nigeria,  &c,  414 
Nsan,  Juju  tree  of,  30 

Lake  of  the  Dead  near,  23  e/  sqq. 
Mfam  Juju  at,  51 
Nsann  Juju,   Poisoners,   74 ;  Storm- 
making,  73 


Nsann,  Thundertown,  in  Folk-tales, 
207,  356,  361 

Nshum,  the  Lazy  Man  made  Ape, 
story  of,  78-9 

Nsibidi  Club,  305,  Functions  of, 
story  on,  306-9 

Nsibidi  Secret  writing,  39,  217,  305, 
306,  309  ;  as  Body  decora- 
tion,'320  ;  Egyptian  analo- 
gies to,  317;  Messages 
in,  309 ;  origin  of,  and 
Author's   collection,    &c, 

255 

Signs  used,  267,  309,  Appendix  G., 

447  et  sqq- 
Nsippe  Club,  413 
Nsun  meat  in  ritual,  263,  272 
Nta  Obassi  and  Ma  Obassi  invoked 

in  Ekoi  sacrifices,  17 
Ntabe,    Why   he   Warred   no    More, 

story,  268-9 
Ntuanto    Juju,    54 ;     rites    of,     55 ; 

meaning  of  word,  230 
Ntui    (Chief)    of    each    Egbo    grade, 

functions  of,  43 
Ntui  Itabon,  Rainbow  maker,  72 
Numerals,  422-3  ;  signs  for,  304 
Nyampke  grade,  Eflk  Society,  41 

Oath,  on  Kola  Nuts,  269 
Oban,    position   of,    seat  of  govern- 
ment, 11,  founding  of,  262 

Circles  of  unhewn  stone,  at  rites 
performed  at,  at  full  and 
new  Moon,  10 

Clubs,  typical,  divisions  of,  410 
et  sqq. 

Egbo  House  at,  10 

Jujus  at,  50,  51  ;  Chief  War  Juju, 
271 

Were-beasts  at,  81 
Oban  District,   Birds  found  in,  pre- 
viously unknown  to  exist 
in  Nigeria,  469-70 

Botany,  Appendix  H.,  462-4 

Butterflies  of,  471 

Character  of  the  region,  3 

Crabs  of,  473 

Ekoi  in,  318 

Fish  and  Reptiles,  &c,  of,  470 

Flora,  89,  462-4 

Fungi  and  Lichens  of,  462-4 

Geographical  Survey,  Appendix  L., 
478-80 

Geology  of,  3 

Insects  of  {see  also  Goliath  Beetle) 
470  et  sqq. 

Mammals  of,  465-9 

Meteorology,  476 


INDEX 


495 


Oban  District — continued. 

Mineralogy,  Appendix  J.,  474-5 

Mollusca  of,  473 

Natives     of,     Anthropometry    of, 

Appendix  C,  414 
Vocabularies  of  the  Six  Tribes  in, 

424-45 
Oban  Hill,  healthiness  of,  11 
Oban    Station,  Meteorology  at,  Ap- 
pendix K.,  476-7 
Obang  tribe,  Ekoi  affinity  of,  318 
Obassi  Abong,  52 

Obassi  Nsi,  Earth  god,  Lord  of  Life 
and    Death,    13,    44,   71, 
139 ;  Cult  of,    16-7,    21, 
271  ;    in   Creation  myth, 
188  ;    feast  of,  71,  139 
and  Lamb,  68-70 
and  the  Chameleon,  91 
Children  of,  in  Folk-tales,  29,  273 

et  sqq.,  340-4,  351,  359 
Dwellings  of,  70,  71 
Good  Jujus  sent  by,  191 
Invocation  of,  53,  66,  139 
Sacrifices  to,  272 
in  Stilt-play,  285 

in  Stories    about    Women's    posi- 
tion, 98-9,  103 
Yams  associated  with,  21 
Obassi   Nsi   Juju,   Funeral    offerings 

to,  222 
Obassi  Osaw,  Sky  god  of  the  Ekoi,  13, 
44,  characteristics  of,  177, 
Lord  of  Witchcraft,   &c, 
191,  Wind-sender,  72 
Cult  of,  16,  17,  217,  feast  of,  149-50 
Dwelling  places  of,  70,  71,  177 
Eyes  of,  as  Stars,  357 
Omnivision  of,  118 
Ferns,  epiphytic,  dedicated  to,  21 
How  the   Poor  Boy  came  to  the 

Land  of,  18 
Invocation  of,  39,  139 
Messengers  of,  as  to  Living  again, 

story  of,  229 
and  the  Osing  Tree,  177  et  sqq. 
Sacrifices  to,  263,  272 
in  Stilt-play,  285 

in    Stories    about  Women's  posi- 
tion, 98-9,  103 
and    Tortoises    in    Folk-tales,     9, 

59-6i,  397 
Wives    and    Sons    in     Folk-tales, 
117-9, 128-9,  183,  207-11, 
273  etsqq.,  340-4,  351,  359 
Obbonn,  Efik  and  Ekoi  Club,  412 
Obepp,  151 

Oberekkai,  Witchcraft  terror  at,  201-2 
Obung,  Eja  "  medicine  "  at,  77,  212 


Oburekkpe,  Egbo  House  at,  259-60 

"  War  "  tokens  of,  257 

Obutong,  Rest  House,  Snakes  at,  4,  5; 

surroundings,  3,  6,  203  et  sqq. 

Ochitt  (Nchitt)  fruits,  see   Egg  Plant 

Ododop    or    Korawp    tribe,    Animal 

affinities  in,  86-7 
Courtesy  of,  163,  164 
Farms     undevastated      by     Bush 

beasts,  87 
New  town  of,  84 
Physical  type  of,  163,  414 
Secret  Society  of,  37 
Vocabulary,  424-45 
Offerings    and    Oblations    {see    also 

Libations),  39,  53-5.  I48» 

176-7,  200,  263 
Officers  of  Egbo  Society,  43 
Offiong,  E.  E.,  Chief,  at  Calabar,  on 

Witch  revels,  192 
Ofiri,  Juju,  49,  51,  revocation  of,  65-7 
Oil  palms,  see  Palms 
Oji,  the  warder,  and  his  Tree  affinity, 

31-2 
Ojje,  or  Witchcraft   (q.v.),   171,  178, 

190  et  seq. 
Ojjen,   never  before  seen  by  White 

Man,  223-4 
Ojo  Akangba,  244,  246 
Ojo  Nkonmba  {see  also  Ojo  people), 

Human  sacrifice  attempted 

at,  243  et  seq. 
Native  name  for,  244-5 
Ojo  or  Kabila  tribes,  Efumi  of  Ele- 
phants,     246-7 ;      trans- 
Calabar    river,  locale   of, 

242,  244 ;  origin  of,  245 
Ojokk,  151 
Ojuk  people,  sale  by,  of  site  of  Oban, 

262 
Ojuk  river,  Juju  of,  89 
Okankan,  283,  302 ;  tone  of,  54 
Okarara,   devastations  at,   by  Wild 

beasts,  161  et  sqq. 
Oke  Ewara,  War  Juju,  Oban,  271 
Okpata  Juju  and  dance,  50,  295-6 
Opke  Club,  411 

Oku  Akama  grade,  Egbo  Society,  41 
Okum,  see  Clubs,  and  Image 
Okun  Ohin,  hunter,  dread  of  Elephant 

Efumi,  &c,  243,  246-7 
Okuri,  Jujus  of,  52,  157-8 
Okuri  Peak,  pass  near,  76,  157 
Okuri  people,  and  Esere  Bean  Ordeal, 

126 
Omens,  323-4 
One-armed  and  one-legged  Man,  and 

the  Cotton  Tree,  story  of, 

32  et  seq. 


4g6 


INDEX 


Onnuri  Juju,  Dropsy  given  by,  278 
Oom,  play,  225 

Oporopootop,  story  of,  335,  371-3 
Orchids,  near  Ojo  Nkonmba,  244 
Ordeals  : — 

Boiling  palm  oil,  165,  166 
EsereBean,  31,  123,  165,  166  et  sqq., 

170,  191-2 
Pepper  in  Eyes,  171 
Rope-walking,  402,  403 
Ordinals,  423 
Ornaments,  Female,  49,  203  ;  Votive, 

218 
Orthography,  Appendix  D.,  415 
Orui  Achibbi  Club,  411 
Osa,  High  god  of  the  Bini,  13  n. 
Osaiiri,  see  Kingfisher 
Osaw  Ifogi  peak,  Flora  of,  and  Storm 

at,  92-3 
Oshum  njum  ka  etemm  Club,  410 
Osing  Shells,  174-5 

Bisexual  element  in,  174 
Divination  by,  175-8 
Osing  Tree,   Why  it  can  no   longer 
Speak,  save  by  the  Charm, 
177  et  sqq. 
Owai  Ifunkpa,  Uyanga  town,  255 
Owl,    Tabu    on,    408  ;     as    Witches' 
Familiar,  195,  story  on,  196 

Paint  House,  analogy  to,  108 
Palm  kernels  in  anti-Leopard  Juju,  51 
Palm  leaf  Juju,  278,  296 
Palm  leaves,  &c,  as  Leopard  charms,-7 
for  Mats,  rule  on,  story  of,  306-9 
in  Nimm  cult,  95,  97 
Ritual  uses  of,  9,  257 
Oil,  in  Birth  customs,  &c,  130,  188 

Boiling,  Ordeal  by,  165,  166 
Rib,  "  violin,"  302-3 
Stems,  split,  Nsibidi  written  on,  309 
Strips,  Shields  of,  271,  272 
Trees,  Kwa  river,  1 

and  Water,  How  they  came  on 

Earth,  story,  373-4 
Tops  of,  why  Nki  lives  in,  story, 
397  et  seq. 
Wine,  two  kinds,  315,  ritual  uses,  9, 
139,    140,  263,    272,   315, 

352,  357 
Pan,  terror  of,  Nigeria,  13 
Pangolin,  Oban  District,  466 

Hunting  Tabu  on,  407 
Parents,  Ekoi  as,  159 

Expectant,  Tabus  on,  130 
Ghosts  rf,  Sacrifices  to,  232-3 
Parrots  in  Folk-tales,  196,  253,  383 
Pepper  in  the  Eyes,  Ordeal  by,  171 
Phoenician  type  of  things  found,  173 


Physical  Characters,  Ekoi,  Erik,  &c, 

293.  4*4 
Pig,  in  Folk-tale,  146 

Wild,  6 
Pineal  gland,  in  Juju  rites,  67,  242 
Piper    plant,    leaves    of,    ritual    use 

of,  285 
Pipes    (musical)    of  Crabs'  Claws  in 

Juju  rites,  55 
Pits  for  Trapping  Game,  147 
Plague,  Rats,  and  Tutelary  gods,  25 

et  sqq. 
Plantain-Eater,  Greater,  see  Nkundak 
Plantains  in  Folk-tales,  9  et  alibi. 

Sacrificed  to  Ghosts,  232-3 
Plants,  Magic,  in  Folk-tale,  249,  250 

Souls  of,  287 
Plates,  Funeral  uses  of,  215,  221 
Tabu  to  (some)  Chiefs,  210  n. 
"  Plays,"  of  Children,  206,  217 

of     Egbo     Society,      43,    45 ;     at 

Funerals      222,      223,    a 

Ghost  at,  238  ;  Totemistic 

details  in,  38-9 
Pleurisy,  Juju  of,  278 
Pneumonia,  279 
Poison,  Juju  against,  50 
Poisoners,  Juju  of,  see  Nsann 
Poisoning,  and  Antidotes,  310-11,  332 

of  Fish,  270 
Poll-tax,  German  Cameroons,  157 
Polygamy,  Ekoi,  97,  109,  no 
Pools  for  Ghost  libations,  217,  218 
Poor  Boy   {see  also  Rich  Boy  and), 

How    he    came    to    the 

Land    of     Obassi    Osaw, 

story,   18  et  sqq. 
Population,  Ekoi,  Decrease  in,  Causes 

of,      201-3 ;      Southward 

trend  of,  245 
Porcupine,  as  Diviner,  30,  181  et  sqq., 

234.    235,  237,    240,  241, 

355-6,      365-6 ;      Dog's 

enmity    for,    story,     147; 

Hunting  Tabus   on,   407  ; 

Oban  District,  468 
Porcupine  Witch,  story  of,  18 1-2 
Pot-hook,  see  Ejimm 
Potions  to  enable  Bush  Souls  to  enter 

Animals,  80 
Pottery   {see  Bowls,   Dishes,  Plates), 

Ekoi,   217,  219,    287-90; 

Funeral  uses  of,  223 
Pots,  emblem  of  Juju  Female  attri- 
bute,   52,   67 ;  in  Enyere 

Juju,  97 
Powder  in  Egbo  ritual,  41 
Prayers  {see  also  Invocations),  21-2, 

242,  369 


INDEX 


497 


Presidents  of  Age-classes,  283 
Priest,  Head,  of  Egbo  Society,  43 
Priestesses  of  Nimm,  power  of,  2 
Prisoners  of  War,  fate  of,  271 
Property,  Inheritance  of,  314 

Personal,  in  Funeral  customs,  6-7, 

17 
Most  valued  by  Ekoi,  141 
Proverbs,  156  ;  and  Omens,  323-4 
Puff-adders  in  Rest  House,  5 
Python    and     Elephant    bested    by 
Ants,  story  of,  400-1 
of  Lake  of  the  Dead,  24 
Tabu  on,  408 
Pythons,  Gall  of,  Magic  properties  of, 
27  et  seq.,  408 
in     Folk-tales,    346,    383,  400-1  ; 
How    they    Lost    Hands 
and  Feet,  374-6 


Quarrelling,  when  forbidden,  120 
Quartz,  Sex  ascribed  to  by  Ekoi,  6 
Queisz,  Leutnant,  fate  of,  158 


Railway   projects,  and    Commerce, 
267 

Rain,  How  the  First  came,  340-4 

Rainbow-making,  72 

Rainfall,  Oban,  476-7 

Rain-making  and  staying,  Ekoi,  71-2 

Rainstorm  at  Netim,  213 

Ram  and  Tortoise,  story  of,  371-3 

Rats,  in  Folk-tale,  395 

and  Mice,  Oban  District,  468 
Plague-carrying,  Chief  enemies  of 
deified,  25  et  sqq. 

Rattle  in  Egbo  Plays,  &c,  43,  295, 
302,  410 

Records,  Ekoi,  304 

Religion  of   the  Ekoi,  see  under  Ekoi 

Re-marriage  of  Divorced  Women,  and 
Widows,  1 1 6-7 

Reptiles   (see  also  Pythons,   Snakes, 
4'c),  Oban  District,  470 

Rest-houses,  163,  205  et  alibi 

Rheumatism,  &c,  Juju  of,  278 

Rich  Boy  and  Poor  Boy  and  Osing, 
story,  178-81 

Ridicule,  Ekoi  dread  of,  283 

Ring-decoration  in  Egbo  ritual,  42 

Rivers,  see  Calabar,  Cross,  Kwa,  $c, 
heaps  of  leaves  beside, 
9-17,  242  ;  How  they  all 
first  came  upon  Earth, 
story,  366-9 
Pannings  from,  Mineralogical  com- 
position of,  474-5 

S.B. 


Roads     and     Road-making,     native 
attitude  to,  5 

Roman  analogies  in  Nigerian  House- 
building, 263-4 

Rope  Juju,  112 

Rope-walking   Ordeal    in    Folk-tale, 
402,  403 

Rubber,  in  Folk-tale,  398,  399 
Plants,  see  Landolphias 

Rubbish-heaps,    Why    haunted    by 
Hawks,  story,  189 


Sacrifice  (see  Animal,  and  Human), 
to  Cotton  trees,  34,  36  ; 
to  Ghosts,  232-3  ;  at 
Town-founding,  263 

Salt  Springs,  317-8 

Salutations  on  entering  Towns,  297 

Sambon,  Dr.  W.,  on  Rat-eating 
Snakes  in  ancient  Rome, 

25-7 

Sanctuaries  for  Animals,.  24,  213-4, 
262 

Sanitation,  and  Decrease  in  Popula- 
tion, 202 

Sapele,  Roads  of,  5 

Scars  on  Arms,  Ekoi  ideas  on,  203 

Scavenger  Birds,  Tabus  on,  408 

Sciatica,  Juju  causing,  278 

Screw  pines,  Kwa  river,  1 

Second  Sight  of  Animals  and  Men, 
230,  232 

Secret  Chambers  in  Ekoi  Houses,  265 

Secret  Societies  [see  also  Egbo),  13, 
410-3 ;  origin,  37 

Seven  (the  number),  in  Folk- tales,  9, 
336-7 

Seven  Witchcrafts,  The,  199-200 

Sex-shifting  in  Folk- tale,  378-80 

Shadows  of  the  Absent,  calling  up  of, 
by  Egbo,  40 ;  Ekoi  belief 
on,  231 

Shape-shifting  (see  also  Efumi,  and 
Metamorphosis)  ;  of  Ani- 
mals, 67-70 ;  of  Efumi, 
243  ;  Ekoi  belief  in,  191 ; 
of  Witches  and  Wizards, 

195.  199 
Sheep,  as  Cunning  beast,  337 ;  Juju, 

in  Folk-tale,  344  et  sqq. 
Sheep    and    Leopard,    in    Folk- tale, 

337-4° 
Shields,  Ekoi,  271 

Shinto  beliefs  and  Ekoi  parallels,  232 
Shrew,  Oban  District,  466 
Shrines  of  Nimm  Women,  94-5 
Sierra    Leone,    Leopard    Society    of, 

38  n. 

K  K 


498 


INDEX 


Sight,  Hearing,  &c,  Ekoi  keenness  of, 

320 
Signs,  Flowers  and  Leaves  as,  287 
Singing,  at  Funerals,  239 
Size,  increase  of,  in  Witch  revels,  192 
Skull  People,  and   Town,  story   of, 

274-7 
Skulls,  Dancing,  in  Folk-tale,  275 
Juju  uses    of,     217,     223-4,    257» 

260,  261,  411 
Sky  father  and   Earth  mother   (see 

Obassi      Osaw      $     Nsi), 

Wedding  of,  Ekoi  parallel 

symbolism,  14  et  sqq. 
Slave-giving,      to      Husband,      and 

Divorce,  114 
"  Slave  towns,"  325 
Slave  trade,  Ekoi  share  in,  325 

Old  centres  of,  151 
Slavery,  314;  and  the  Egbo  Society, 

42,  46 
Slaves,  Cruelty  to,  case  of,  328  et  sqq. 
Dead,  disposal  of,  326 
Escapes  of,  Juju  against,  327 
How    they     killed    the    Free-born 

with  Gall,  story,  27  etsqq., 

333-4 
Made  by  Efiks,  of  Ekoi,  38 
Prices  of,  327,  328 
Slain  at  Funerals,  328  et  sqq. 
in  War  time,  fate  of,  271-2    ' 
Small-pox  medicine,  10 
"  Smelling-out  "     powers    of     Ekuri 

Ibokk,  45 
Snails,  Screaming  and  Springing,  473 
Snake-form  of  Nimm,  2 
Snakes  (see  also  Cobras  and  Pythons), 
alarms    from,    4,    206-7 ; 
Ekoi  cult  of,  24,  25 ;  Fat 
of,  in  Medicine,  278  ;   Kwa 
river    region,    2,   4-5 ;  of 
Lakes  Ijagham  and  Nsan, 
153  ;    of    Oban    District, 
470;  Poisonous,  as  Juju, 
91  ;     as    Were  -  animals, 
Egbo  trial,  83-4 
in  Folk-tales,  377,  383 

Snake  and  Frog,  Why  they  never 

play  together,  386 
Why  Snake  has  neither  Hands 
nor    Feet,    376-7,    <#■  see 

325 
Societies  (see  Secret),  various  kinds, 

48  $  n. 
Songs  (see  also  Drum  Songs)  ;  of  Boy 

without   Hands   or    Feet, 

375 
about  Calabar  river,  242 
of  Carriers,  at  river,  91 


Songs — continued. 
at  Eja  festivals,  76-7 
of  Ekandem,  275 
Funeral,  Ghost-excellence  in,  239 
of  the  Herb  daughter,  138 
of  Igwe,  102 
of  Killing-thing,  235 
Mansfeld's  Collection  of,  T53 
of  Obegud,  101 
of  Welcome  to  the  New  born,  120, 

121,  122 
to  Town  Drums,  297 
Souls  or    Spirits,  Animal,  see    Bush 
Soul,  and  Efumi, 
Human,  in  Ekoi  beliefs,  80  et  sqq., 

230  et  sqq.,  272 
Plant,  287 
Things,  232 
Spears,  271,  272;  Juju,  55,  130,  221, 

222 
Spiders,    New   Species,   Bird-Eating, 

471-2 
Spitting,  Ceremonial,  91,  141,  171 
Spotted  Antelope,  tabus  on,  142-3 
Squirrels,  Flying,  467;    in  Folk-tale, 
362  ;  Oban  District,  467-8 
Stars,  Ekoi  names  for,  190 

How  they  all  came,  story,  349~55 
How  the  Two  Biggest  came  into 
the  Sky,  story,  355  et  sqq. 
Statue  of  Nimm  at  Niagi,  94 
Stilt-walking,  origin  of,  284-5 
Stomach,       Hair's       Revenge       on, 

story,  394-6 
Stones  (see  also  Etai  Ngbe,  and  Nimm 
Stones)  ;  Carved,  17 1-2; 
Unhewn,  circles  of,  at 
Oban,  rites  connected 
with,  10;  Wedged  into 
Tree-forks,  160-1 
Stories,   How  all  came  among  Men, 

story,  337  et  sqq. 
Storm-making  Juju,  73 
Strangers,  Burial  places  of,  227 
Streams,  Oban  District,  6 
Sucking  out  Heart  of  Men  and  Things, 

192-3,  208  $  n.,  232 
Sun,  How   it   came    into    the    Sky, 
story,     357-9 
and  Moon,  How  they  went  up  to 
the  Sky,  story,  359-64 
Prayers  to,  21-2 
Sunset,    Why   sometimes    Red     and 

Stormy,  story,  364-6 
Supplication,  sign  of,  331 
Surgery,  Ekoi,  278-9 
Surnames,  132 
Sword  dance,  413 
Swords,  Children's  "  Play,"  217 


INDEX 


499 


Symbolism,    Ekoi,    see    Leaves    and 
Green  Bough,  and  Pots 

Ta  Amat  Medicinal  Juju,  Oban,  10 
Tabus,  Hunting,  114,  407-9 
Juju,  181  et  alibi 
Pre-natal,  130,  167 
Totemistic,  143 
Tailor  sewing  Body  together,  story, 

392 
Talbot,  Mrs.  P.  Amaury,  accident  to, 
164  ;  Adventures  of,  with 
Snakes,  4 ,  206-7  '•  Botani- 
cal drawings  by,  462  ; 
Dormouse  named  after, 
468-9 
Talbot,  P.  Amaury,  native  drawings 

of,  90 
Tallies,  304 

Tatabonko  fish,  Kwa  river,  2 
Tegott  river,  Uyanga,  of,  255 
Temperance,  Ekoi,  and  British,  314-6 
Temperature,  Oban  Station,  476 
Theft,  Juju  against,  50,  296  ;  punish- 
ment of,  311 
Thomas,  N.,  on    Lame  Man  in    pro- 
cession at  Benin,  336;  on 
Negroes  as  Porters,  318 
Thunder,  beliefs,  and  stories  on,  23, 

73,  207,  211 
Thunder  Town  {see  Nsann),  in  Ekoi 

Folk-Lore,  story  of,  207 
Toads,  Oban  District,  470 
Tobacco,  Ekoi  delight  in,  290 
Tomatoes,  legend  on,  122,  238-41,  336 
Tom-toms,  297 
Tooth-filing,  319 
Tops,  286 
Tornadoes,  366 

Torque  or  anklet,  in  Ofiri  Juju,  49 
Tortoise  in  Folk-tale,  7  et  seq.,  371-3, 
378-80 ;  Cunning  of,  337  ; 
How   he   got   the  Cracks 
and  Bumps  on  his  Back, 
380-2  ;  How  Obassi  Osaw 
proved    the    wisdom    of, 
396-7,  4'   see   218;    Why 
Sacrificed   in    Juju  rites, 
55  et  sqq. 
Totem  Animals,  origin  of,  81 
Totem  Peoples,  inter-marriage  of,  87 
Totemistic    details    in    Egbo    Plays, 

38-9 

Tabus,  143 
Totems  not  eaten,  137,  138 
Towns,  Egbo  Houses  in,  39 

Entrances  of,  Leopard  charms  at,  7 

Hours  for  Ghosts  to  visit,  232 

Jujus  of,  49-50 


Tow  ns — continued . 

Moving  of,  to  fresh  sites,  Typical 

cases,  201-2,  262  et  sqq. 
Sacrifices  at  Founding,  263 
Why  Ape  People  no  longer  live  in, 
story,  78-9 
Trade  and  Trade  Routes,  Ekoi,  205, 

266-7 
Trance,  Ekoi  beliefs  on,  231 
Treasure  Chambers  in  Egbo  houses, 
151,  220 
House,  The,   in    the  Bush,  story, 
390-4 
of  Itagbun,  141 
Tree  and  Bird  worship,  Cretan  and 

Ekoi,  14 
Trees   (see  also  Juju  trees,    4*  under 
Names)  in  Folk-tales  and 
sayings,   323   et  passim. ; 
in  House-building  ritual, 
263  ;      Magic     properties 
ascribed  to,  30,  195  ;  Souls 
of,  287 
Vocal,  31-2,  story  on,  32  et  sqq. 
Twins,  Ekoi  attitude  to,  120-3 
Twitching  of  various  parts  of  Body, 

Divination  by,  324 
Two-faced  "  Image,"  Egbo  analogies 
of,  44 

Ukai  Club,  411 

Ukpe  Ewaw,  Ball  game,  285-6 

Ukpon  River,  Cataracts  and  Crocodile 

of,  215 
Ukwa  Club  (Calabar),  411 
Unborn,  homes  of,  122 
Uncle  and  Niece  marriages,  110-11 
Unloved    Son  in  Folk-tales,  207-11, 

355,  359,  363,  393-4 

Utap-Anam  Club,  412 

Uyanga  people,  Language  of.  Vocabu- 
lary of,  424-45  ;  locale  of, 
242,  255  ;  Nsibidi  of,  305  ; 
Physical  characters  of, 
414  ;  Renown  of,  255 

Vegetation,  Kwa  river  shores,  1,  6 
Vengeance,Tree-sacrificesand,3O0?se^. 
Villages,  Amusements  in,   283-6 
Egbo  houses  in,  39 
Medicine  in,  278-83 
Plan  of,  266 
Virginia  creeper-like  tree,  properties 

of,  223 
Vocabularies  of  the  Six  Tribes  in  the 
Oban  District,  List  of 
Words  chosen  by  Sir  H. 
H.  Johnston,  Appendix  F., 
424-45 


5oo 


INDEX 


Vocal  Trees,  31-2,  story  on,  32  etsqq. 
Vulture,  tabu  on,  408 


Wakes,  222,  225 

Wall-paintings,  90,  107,  263-4,  29° 

Wands,  see  Whip 

War,  Ritual  preliminaries  and  Juju, 
271-2 

War-dances,  261,  272,  411 

Warfare,  271  et  seq. 

Washing,  Personal,  Ekoi,  12 ;  Ritual 
of,  21-2 

Water  and  Disease,  story,  280-3 
and  Palm  trees,  How  they  came  on 

Earth,  story,  373 
Ritual  use  of,  see  Libations 

Water  Chevrotain,  160;  in  Folk- 
tales, 352,  365  ;  Hunting 
tabu  on,  407  ;  Oban  Dis- 
trict, 468 

Waterways,  206 

Weapons,    see    Guns,     Shields,   and 
Swords, 
within    Witch's    body,    250,    251 
et  sqq. 

Weaver-birds,  Sacred,  14 

Welcome,  Ekoi  sign  of,  211  4"  n- 

Were-beasts,  see  Efumi 

West  Africa,  Ritual  of,  Lame  Boy  in, 
336  ;  Population  of, 
southward  trend  of,  245 

Whipping,  Ceremonial,  44,  45,  65, 
284 

White  (see  also  Chalk) ,  Ceremonial  use 
of,  113,  186,  256 
Animals  in  Vengeance  Sacrifice,  31 
Men,  and  Black,  How  they  came 
on  Earth,  story,  387-9 

Widows,  re-marriage  of,  116-7 

Wild  Boar  in  Folk-tale,  362 

Wild  Cat,  in  Folk- tale,  366 ;  Ravages 
of,  223  ;  Tabu  on,  408 

Winds,  causes  of,  72-3 

Witchcraft,  132;  Charms  and  Jujus 
against,  49  et  sqq.,  96-7, 
148,  198,  200;  Diseases 
due  to,  278  ;  Murder  by, 
192  ;  Seven  different  kinds 
of,  story  on,  199-200 ; 
Terror  of,  3,  201-2 

Witch  doctors,  Exorcism  by,  194-5 

Witch,  Outfit  of,  Crab-claws  in, 
story  on,    196-8 


Witches  and  Wizards,  Animal  shapes 
assumed  by,  195,  199 
Bat  messenger  of,  193  ;  Cry,  and 
Boat  of,  195  ;  Dances  of, 
192  ;  Dead,  beliefs  on, 
198-9  ;  Familiars  of, 
I93~4»  4°8,  story  on, 
196  ;  in  Folk-tales,  223-4, 
225,  237,  279,  402-4  ; 
Offerings  to,  200 ;  How 
kept  at  bay,  123,  195 

Wives,  attitude  of,  to  Polygamy, 
109-10  ;  Faithfulness  of, 
how  secured  and  tested, 
105,  108-9,  166,  224  ; 
Position  of,  97,  109-10, 
117  ;  Property  of,  314  ; 
Running  away  of,  327, 
story  on,  114-^6 

Woman  covered  with  Sores,  in  Folk- 
tales, 208,  234-5,  336 

"  Woman's  day,"  94 

Women,  Avocations  of,  223,  263, 
265,  266,  269,  270,  290 
<$•«.  ;  Clubs  of  (seeEkkpa, 
and  Nimm),  41,  412-3  ; 
Important,  Funerals  of, 
224-5  ;  in  relation  to 
Jujus,  10,  21,  44,  224-5  ; 
Keloids  on,  203  ;  Position 
of,  stories  on,  98-104  ; 
Subject  to  Trances,  231  ; 
Tabus  for,  on  Food,  410, 
story  on,  411 
Why  Men  must  Serve,  story,  98 
Why  they  do  not  wear  Hats,  1 1 7-9 

Wooden  instruments  used  in  Utap 
Anam  Club,  412 

Wraiths,  visions  of,  232 

Wrestlers  and  Wrestling,  200, 285,  287 

Wrestling  Ghosts,  7-9 

Wrist-cutting,  131 

Writing,  Secret,  see  Nsibidi 

Yams  (see  also  Coco-yams),  18  et 
passim. ;  harvest,  &c, 
of.  269  ;  sacrificed  to 
Ghosts,  232-3  ;  tabus  on 
eating,  77,  269 
New,  Festival  of,  dangers  of,  242 
et  seq. 

Yaws,  279 

Yellow,  ritual  use  of,  41,  42,  221,  222 

Zoology,  Appendix  L.,  465-73 


BRADBURY,   AGNBW,    &   CO.    LD.,    PRINTERS,    LONDON    AND    TONBRIDGE. 


Date  Due 

_r^^^ 

lE^-r 

Demco  293-5 

T3 


