Presented  to  the 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO 
LIBRARY 

by  the 

ONTARIO  LEGISLATIVE 
LIBRARY 


1980 


PAGAN    RACES 


OF    THE 


MALAY   PENINSULA 


*P.  o 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2011  with  funding  from 

University  of  Toronto 


http://www.archive.org/details/paganracesofmal01skea 


S     o 


b 


1 


PAGAN   RACES 


S  C$3  3 

0)  hi  n  r  it 


01      III! 


<      ' 


MALAY  PENINSULA 


.-» 


BY 


WALTER  WILLIAM  SKEAT,  M.A. 

LATE  OF    THE   FEDERATED   MALAY  STATES  CIVIL  SERVICE    • 
AUTHOR  OF  4  MALAY   MAGIC  '  AND  '  FABLES  AND   FOLK-TALES   FROM   AN   EASTERN    FORES  1 

AND 

CHARLES  OTTO  BLAGDEN,  M.A. 

LATE  OF  THE  STRAITS  SETTLEMENTS  CIVIL  SERVICE 


WITH  NUMEROUS  ILLUSTRATIONS  SPECIALLY  TAKEN 
FOR  THE  WORK 


0)hIhhq 

(>♦  I- 


IN  TWO  VOLUMES 
VOL.  I 


iiauu. 


lLontion 

MACMILLAN   AND    CO.,  Limited 

NEW  YORK  :    THE   MACMILLAN  COMPANY 
1906 


All  rights  resei-?>ed 


DS 

sys 

37 


V.I 


A    LAND 

of  old  upheaven  from  the  abyss  by  fire  .  .  . 
where  fragments  of  forgotten  peoples  dwelt. 

Tennyson. 


TO    HIS    M  Ml 

CHULALONGKORN 

KING    OF   SIAM    OF    THE    NORTH    AND    SOUTH 

SOVEREIGN    OF   THE    LAOS,    MALAYS,   ETC. 

IN    GRATITUDE    FOR    HELP 

EXTENDED    TO 

THE    CAMBRIDGE    EXPEDITION    OF    1899-1900 

THIS    RESULT   OF    INTERNATIONAL    CO-OPERATION    AND    GOODWILL 

IS  RESPECTFULLY  DEDICATED 


PREFACE 

The  line  between  comparative  and  descriptive  ethno- 
graphy is  now  very  definitely  laid  down,  and  in  spite 
of  the  occasional  citation  of  illustrative  parallels  here 
and  there,  especially  in  the  footnotes,  it  is  to  the 
second  class  that  the  present  work  claims  to  belong. 

The  work  is  essentially  a  compilation  from  many 
sources,  but  differs  from  most  books  of  that  kind, 
first,  in  being  based  to  a  very  large  extent  on 
materials  hitherto  unpublished,  and  accessible  only 
through  private  channels  of  information,  and  secondly, 
in  having  been  constructed  with  special  knowledge  of 
the  subject  and  in  a  critical  spirit.  The  need  of  such 
a  work  has  long  been  felt  by  all  who  have  interested 
themselves  in  the  subject,  and  will  be  obvious  to 
any  one  who  glances  over  the  Bibliography  contained 
in  the  present  volume. 

The  method  pursued  by  the  authors,  and  the 
peculiarly  heterogeneous  nature  of  the  materials  at 
their  disposal,  have  made  it  impossible  to  present  to 
the  reader  an  invariably  harmonious  and  ordered 
narrative  in  a  uniform  and  attractive  style.  Instead 
of  this,  he  will,  however,  have  within  the  compass  of 
a  pair  of  volumes  the  whole    substance  of  what  has 


Vll 


viii  PREFACE 

been  written  about  the  Pagan  Races  of  the  Malay 
Peninsula  by  dozens  of  explorers  and  observers  in 
scores  of  more  or  less  inaccessible  or  obsolete  books 
and  periodical  publications,  supplemented  by  and 
critically  collated  with  a  great  mass  of  the  most 
recent  original  material  collected  on  the  subject.  He 
will  find  in  this  book  many  facts,  but  few  hypotheses  : 
at  the  present  stage  of  our  study  of  these  races  the 
collection  of  definite  data  seems  to  be  the  most 
immediate  duty,  and  such  theories  as  are  here  put 
forward  are  intended  to  suggest  lines  of  research  for 
future  explorers  and  students. 

The  work  has  grown  under  the  hands  of  its 
authors.  Both  had  spent  some  years  of  their  lives 
in  districts  partly  occupied  by  Pagan  tribes  in  the 
South  of  the  Peninsula,  and  had  been  attracted  to 
the  study  of  their  peculiarities  primarily  by  the  fact 
that  some  of  these  aborigines  spoke  strange  non- 
Malayan  dialects.  In  default  of  any  record  of  their 
antecedents,  it  seemed  that  the  problem  of  the  past 
history  of  these  races  could  be  approached  most 
readily  from  the  linguistic  side  ;  and  though  a  more 
comprehensive  survey  of  their  physical  and  cultural 
characteristics  has  somewhat  modified  this  view,  there 
is  no  doubt  of  the  importance  of  the  evidence  of 
language  in  this  connexion.  Both  in  speech  and  in 
blood  the  races  dealt  with  in  the  present  work  are, 
however  (except  in  small  and  comparatively  circum- 
scribed areas),  mixed  and  diverse,  and  it  is  only  by 
unravelling  the  different  strands  which  enter  into 
their  structure  that  we  can  hope  to  understand  them. 


PREFAi  I 

With  this  end  in  view,  il  era]  part  i  of  I  he  b<  - 

dealing  with  their  racial  and  cultural  chara< 
which  had  originally  been  arranged  under  the  head- 
ings oi  the  various  subjects  dealt  with,  were  entirely 

rewritten  upon  a  phylogenetic  system,  so  as  to   throw 

into  relief  the   differences  which  separate  one  ra 
from  another;  and  in  the  part  dealing  with  languaf 
the    several  distinct  elements  of  which   their  dialects 
are     made    up    have    been    analysed    in    considerable 

detail.  One  great  difficulty  which  besets  a  student 
of  this  subject  is  how  to  reconcile  the  sometimes 
apparently  conflicting  testimonies  of  anthropology 
and  philology  :  while  not  assuming  to  have  found  the 
explanation,  the  authors  of  the  present  work  claim 
that  in  laying  bare  some  seeming  contradictions  in  the 
evidence,  they  are  clearing  the  ground  for  the  recon- 
struction on  a  sound  basis  of  the  early  history  and 
ethnology  of  an  important  part  of  South-Eastern  Asia. 
It  is  not,  therefore,  solely  as  a  monograph  on  the 
particular  tribes  specially  dealt  with  that  the  present 
work  claims  to  be  regarded,  but  also  as  a  necessary 
preliminary  to  a  general  scientific  survey  of  the  races 
of  Southern  Indo- China  and  the  Malay  Peninsula. 
Resident  as  they  have  been  for  untold  centuries  in 
the  Peninsula,  these  pagan  tribes  nevertheless  have 
much  affinity  with  some  of  the  wild  races  of  Indo- 
China,  and  thus  form  a  link  between  these  two 
regions.  Moreover,  the  Malay  population  of  the 
Peninsula  presents  characteristics  which  vary  very 
distinctly  in  different  districts,  and  in  some  parts  it 
contains  a  strong  strain  of  aboriginal  blood,  so  that 

VOL.  I  a  2 


PREFACE 

an  investigation  into  the  wild  races  is  an  essential 
preparation  towards  a  scientific  study  of  the  Malays 
themselves.  The  authors  hope  that  the  material 
they  have  collected  will  serve  as  a  basis  upon  which 
may  be  reared  a  more  systematic  and  accurate  study 
of  all  the  races  of  the  Malay  Peninsula.  There  is 
great  need  of  a  thorough  survey  of  the  Peninsula  as  a 
whole,  from  the  point  of  view  both  of  geographical 
and  ethnological  science  and  of  industrial  and  eco- 
nomic development. 

Such  a  work  should  be  undertaken  by  the 
Governments  of  the  Straits  Settlements  and  the 
Federated  Malay  States,  disposing  as  they  do  of 
ample  revenues  which  they  have  always  shown  them- 
selves ready  to  spend  freely  on  objects  of  material 
utility.  Whereas  the  Governments  of  British  India, 
the  Netherlands  Indies,  French  Indo- China,  and 
even  that  enterprising  novice  among  colonial  adminis- 
trations, the  American  Government  of  the  Philippines, 
have  done,  and  are  doing,  a  great  deal  in  the  way  of 
promoting  the  scientific  study  of  their  respective 
countries  and  peoples,  the  Governments  of  the  Malay 
Peninsula  have  as  yet  done  very  little  in  that  direc- 
tion. The  matter  appears  to  have  been  overlooked, 
owing  to  the  pressure  of  other  business.  Yet,  apart 
from  the  high  scientific  value  of  such  investigations, 
there  are  not  wanting  signs  of  the  times  that  point 
to  the  supreme  importance  to  European  Governments 
in  the  tropics  of  intimately  studying  and  carefully 
considering  the  peculiarities  of  the  alien  and  less 
civilised   races   committed   to  their  care.     There  has 


PREFACE 

been,  of  late,  in  more  than  our  quarter,  a  dangero 
tendency  to  elaborate  and  Europeanise  administrati 
and  judicial  machinery,  and  pari  passu  to  lose  to 
with  native  ideas  and  customs,  to  push  the  native 

gently  but  firmly  aside,  and  to  impose  upon  him  all 
manner  of  well-meant  but  complicated  regulations, 
which  he  cannot  in  the  least  understand,  and  which 
often  run  counter  to  his  social  and  religious  principles. 
A  more  intimate  study  of  the  people  of  the  country  and 
their  habits  of  life  and  thought  is  urgently  required  in 
order  to  avoid  the  growing  danger  of  estrangement  and 
want  of  sympathy  between  the  rulers  and  the  ruled. 

In  such  a  survey  of  the  Peninsula  it  is  to  be 
hoped  and  expected  that  the  Government  of  Siam,  as 
the  suzerain  of  the  Northern  Malay  States,  would 
co-operate.  Indeed,  some  of  the  preliminary  work  in 
that  quarter  has  already  been  done  by  the  Cambridge 
Expedition  of  1 899-1 900,  which  visited  the  Siamese 
Malay  States  by  the  special  permission  and  with  the 
active  and  generous  assistance  of  His  Majesty  the 
King  of  Siam.  It  was  during  the  course  of  that 
expedition  that  the  whole  of  the  recent  information 
relating  to  the  Negritos  of  the  Northern  States,  and 
now  embodied  in  this  work,  was  collected,  as  well  as 
the  material  contained  in  the  progress  reports  of  the 
expedition  to  the  British  Association  (Anthropological 
Section,  1900,  1901),  and  a  very  large  mass  of  other 
anthropological  matter,  as  yet  unpublished. 

The  title  of  the  present  work,  which  had  been 
provisionally  fixed  as  "  Wild  Tribes  "  or  "  Wild  Races 
of  the    Malay   Peninsula,"   was    finally   cast    into    its 


xii  PREFACE 

present  form  because  it  was  felt  that  the  point  of 
religion  (as  between  Mohammedan  and  non-Moham- 
medan) was  perhaps  a  better  dividing  line,  on  account 
of  its  definiteness,  than  the  vague,  indefinite,  and 
perhaps  undefinable,  quality  of  wildness. 

The  title-page  bears  the  names  of  two  authors,  but 
by  far  the  greater  part  of  the  book  (including  the  Intro- 
duction) was  written  by  the  one  whose  name  stands 
first,  the  special  task  of  the  other  having  been  confined 
to  writing  the  part  dealing  with  Language,  together 
with  the  Appendix  relating  thereto,  in  the  second 
volume.  Each  author  has,  as  far  as  possible,  revised 
and  checked  the  work  of  the  other,  but  the  ultimate 
responsibility  of  each  is  to  be  apportioned  to  his  own 
share  of  the  book. 

Moreover,  though  the  authors  themselves  have 
contributed  the  greater  part  of  the  original  material 
wThich  the  book  contains,  they  are  indebted  to  others 
for  a  considerable  amount  of  hitherto  unpublished 
information,  which  has  greatly  enhanced  the  value  of 
the  work.  Their  acknowledgments  are  particularly 
due  to  Messrs.  D.  F.  A.  Hervey,  C.M.G.,  H.  Clifford, 
C.M.G.,  F.  Emeric,  A.  Grubauer,  C.  D.  Bowen, 
N.  Annandale,  H.  C.  Robinson,  G.  B.  Cerruti,  and 
H.  Ling  Roth,  the  Rev.  H.  E.  Luering,  Father  W. 
Schmidt,  Professor  Rudolf  Martin,  and  the  Councils 
of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society  of  Great  Britain  and 
Ireland,  and  the  Straits  Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society  respectively,  for  information  relating  directly 
to  the  aborigines  of  the  Peninsula  and  their  lan- 
guages ;  and  to  Messrs.  A.  Cabaton,  A.  Lavallee,  the 


PRE  i  Ai 

late  P.  ( )dend'hal  (wh(  arly  death  wa 
loss  to  the  cause  ol  Indo-Chinese  research),  S.  H. 
Ray,  (!.  A.  Grierson,  CLE.,  E.  II.  Man,  C.I.I ...  Sir 
Richard  Temple,  C.I.E.,  W.  L.  II.  Duckworth,  and 
others,  for  help  in  connexion  with  cognate  or  allied 
races  and  languages.  Several  officers  of  the  Govern- 
ment Service  in  the  Malay  Peninsula,  particularly 
Messrs.  L.  Wray,  jnnr.,  A.  Hale,  II.  N.  Ridley,  and 
F.  W.  Knocker,  have  also  been  kind  enough  to  read 
portions  of  the  book  in  proof,  and  have  contributed, 
as  the  fruit  of  their  experiences,  no  small  amount  of 
material  in  the  shape  of  comments  and  criticisms. 
Mr.  A.  Cabaton  was  good  enough  to  read  the  Com- 
parative Vocabulary  in  proof,  and  his  intimate  know- 
ledge of  several  Indo-Chinese  languages  enabled  him 
to  enrich  it  by  many  valuable  etymological  sugges- 
tions. To  him  the  authors  are  also  indebted  for 
access  to  the  unpublished  material  of  Messrs.  P. 
Odend'hal  and  A.  Lavallee. 

For  the  illustrations,  which  form  a  notable  addition 
to  the  value  of  the  work  (the  greater  part  having 
been  taken  specially  for  the  occasion),  the  authors 
are  also  indebted  to  the  help  of  many  hands. 
Mr.  T.  J.  McGregor  has  contributed  (at  his  own 
charges)  the  largest  part  of  the  original  photographs  ; 
others  have  been  lent  by  Messrs.  L.  Wray,  A.  D. 
Machado,  A.  Hale,  G.  B.  Cerruti,  W.  P.  Hume, 
F.  W.  Douglas,  T.  Gardner,  F.  F.  Laidlaw  and 
Professor  R.  H.  Yapp  (the  two  last  being  members 
of  the  Cambridge  Expedition),  F.  M.  Elliot,  R.  F. 
Arnott,   and    others,   who   cannot   all    be   mentioned ; 


xiv  PREFACE 

while  to  Sir  W.  Hood  Treacher,  K.C.M.G.  (formerly 
Resident-General  of  the  Federated  Malay  States), 
Sir  John  Rodger,  K.C.M.G.,  Messrs.  E.  W.  Birch, 
H.  C.  Belfield,  Cecil  Wray,  D.  G.  Campbell, 
F.  J.  Weld  (Residents  of  the  several  States), 
R.  N.  Bland,  recently  Acting  Resident  Councillor  of 
Malacca,  H.  W.  Thomson,  His  Siamese  Majesty's 
Assistant  Adviser  in  Kelantan,  A.  T.  Dew,  and  G.  C. 
Bellamy,  the  authors  owe  special  acknowledgments 
for  their  kind  assistance  in  helping  to  get  photographs 
specially  taken  for  use  in  the  present  work. 

For  permission  to  reproduce  certain  published 
illustrations,  which  were  needed  to  explain  the  work 
of  other  writers,  the  authors  are  indebted  to  Professor 
A.  Grunwedel,  to  the  General  Council  of  the  Royal 
Museums  (Museums  Administration  Department), 
Berlin,  the  Council  of  the  Berlin  Anthropological 
Society,  Dr.  von  Traeger,  Mr.  H.  Singer,  the  Editor 
of  Globus,  the  firms  of  Georg  Reimer,  Berlin  (pub- 
lisher to  the  Royal  Museums  Department),  Friedrich 
Vieweg  und  Sohn,  Brunswick  (publishers  of  Globus), 
Gustav  Fischer,  Jena  (publisher  of  Martin's  Inland- 
stdmme),  as  well  as  to  M.  A.  de  Mortillet  (for  per- 
mission to  reproduce  the  illustrations  from  U Homme), 
to  Cambridge  University  (Museum  of  Archaeology 
and  Ethnology),  for  photographs  of  the  Skeat  collec- 
tion, to  the  Council  of  the  Anthropological  Institute 
of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  the  Council  of  the 
Straits  Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  and  to 
Messrs.  Lambert  and  Co.,  photographers,  of  Singa- 
pore.    To    Messrs.    Stanford    they  are   indebted   for 


PREFACE 

permission  to  reproduce  their  map  oi  S.E,  Asia,  to 
Dr,  1).  Geiger  for  a  map  showing  the  Distribution  oi 
Ipoh,  to  Mr.  F \  F.  Laidlaw  for  help  in  the  arrang 
ment  of  Part  I.,  and  to  Mr.  N.  W.  Thomas  for  much 
generous  assistance  in  the  revision  of  the  proofs,  and 
for  the  compilation  of  the  Indexes. 

To  these  and  man)-  other  willing  helpers  the 
authors  hereby  express  their  most  hearty  thanks  ; 
and  they  venture  also  to  anticipate  on  behalf  of  their 
readers  a  high  appreciation  of  the  unselfish  and 
public-spirited  manner  in  which  these  numerous  colla- 
borators have  contributed  valuable  material  towards 
a  work  that  has  not  been  undertaken  in  a  commercial 
spirit  but  for  a  scientific  purpose. 

Lastly,  acknowledgments  are  due  to  the  publishers 
and  printers  for  undertaking  the  work  in  the  same 
spirit,  and  executing  it  in  a  manner  which  it  must  be 
left  to  the  reader  to  appraise.  The  date  of  publication 
has  been  repeatedly  postponed  by  the  recurring  ill- 
health  of  one  or  other  of  the  authors,  and  this  has,  of 
course,  thrown  an  additional  burden  on  the  publishers, 
to  whose  forbearance  under  these  trying  circumstances 
the  authors  feel  that  special  recognition  is  due. 

W.  W.  SKEAT. 
August  1906.  C.  O.  BLAGDEN. 


CO NT K NTS 


PREFACE 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 

INTRODUCTION  i 


PART  I.— RACE 

Racial  Characters   .  19 

Racial  Affinities — General  .  .  24 

Note   by  W.  L.  H.    Duckworth    on    "  Fasciculi    Malay- 

ENSES"        .......  96 

Note  on  Diseases  of  the  Aborigines        .  .  .100 

PART  II.— MANNERS  AND  CUSTOMS 

CHAPTER    I 
Food — Stimulants — Narcotics  .109 

CHAPTER    II 
Dress  ....  .  .     137 

CHAPTER    III 

Habitations  .  .  .  .168 


xviii  CONTENTS 


CHAPTER    IV 

PAGE 

Hunting,  Trapping,  and  Fishing    ....     200 


CHAPTER    V 

Modes  of  Barter  .  .  .  .  .225 

CHAPTER   VI 

Weapons  and  Implements    .....     242 

CHAPTER    VII 

Cultivation    .......     338 

CHAPTER   VIII 

Arts  and  Crafts       ......     374 

CHAPTER    IX 

Decorative  Art         .  .  -395 

CHAPTER    X 
The  Social  Order    ...  •     494 

CHAPTER    XI 
Dealings  with  Other  Races  .  .  •  521 

APPENDIX     .  .  •  •  •  -571 

PLACE  AND  PERSONAL  NAMES.  •     717 


ILLUSTRATIONS 

The  Lair  o(  Mowgli  .....  Frontispiece 
The   Langat    River  near  the   Hot   Springs,   Duson  Tua 

(Selangor)  .....     Introduction 

The  River  Langat  at  Lubo'  K'lubi  (or  Kclubi),  Selangor. 

Upper  Reaches  of  the   Klang  River,  near  Sakai   Houses 

(Selangor)  ...  ,, 

TO   FACE   PACE 

Negrito  Type — Andamanese  28 

Negrito  Type — Semang  of  Perak  28 

Aboriginal  Dravidian  Type — Veddas  of  Ceylon    .  29 

Suggested  Aboriginal  Dravidian  Type — Sakai  of  Perak   .  29 

Suggested  Aboriginal  Malayan  or  Jakun  Type — "  Savage  Malays  :" 

of  Pekan,  in  Pahang  (Heathen)        .  .  .  .31 

Civilised  Malay  Type — Chiefs  of  Negri  Sembilan  (Mohammedan)  31 
Negrito  Type — Head  of  Semang  Man,  Kedah  .34 

Negrito  Type — Head  of  Semang  Man,  Perak      .  .  .34 

Suggested   Aboriginal    Dravidian    Type  —  Head    of   Sakai    Man, 

Perak  .  .  .  .  .  .  -35 

Suggested  Aboriginal   Malayan,  or  "  Savage  Malay  "  Type — Jakun 

of  Sungei  Ujong     .  .  .  .  -35 

Mixed  Group  of  Ulu  Jelai  Sakai,  Pahang  38 

Group  of  Ulu  Jelai  Sakai,  Pahang  .  .  -39 

Bujo',  a  young  Jakun,  mixed  with  strong  Negrito  Strain  .  .        40 

Head  of  Bujo'  in  Profile,  showing  marked  Prognathism    .  40 

Young  Sakai  Girl  in  Centre  (mixed  Type  showing  strong  Negrito 

Strain)        .  .  .  .  .41 

Jakun  with  marked  Sakai  Strain,  Selangor  .  .  .42 

Jakun  of  Mixed  Type,  Bukit  Prual,  Selangor        .  .  .43 

Yeop   Sandah,    Wife   and  Child,   Ulu   Jelai    Sakai   with   Negrito 

Strain,  Pahang        .  .  .  .  .44 

Sakai  Girl  (showing  Negrito  Strain)         .  .  .45 

Semang  of  Kuala  Kenering,  Ulu  Perak  .54 


XX 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 


TO    FACE   PACE 

SakaiofS.  Perak  .  .  -55 

Sakai  Group,  Ulu  Kali,  Ulu  Selangor      .  .  .58 

Old   Sakai   Man,  "The   Father  of  all  the  Sakai*,"   Ulu   Berang, 

Eight  Miles  from  Tanjong  Malim,  South  Perak  59 

Mixed  Sakai-Semang  Type,  Ulu  Batu,  Selangor  .  .60 

Mixed  Sakai-Semang  Type,  Ulu  Batu,  Selangor.  .61 

Sakai  Boy  with  Blowpipe,  Ulu  Sungkai,  S.  Perak  .        62 

Sakai  Boy  (probably  of  Ulu  Slim)  .  .  .63 

Group  of  Jakun,  showing  Negrito  and  Sakai  Blood,  at  Ulu  Batu, 

Selangor     .  .  .  .  .  .66 

Mixed  Jakun  Type,  Bukit  Prual,  Selangor  .  .67 

Group  of  Jakun  (Aboriginal  Malayans)  from  Klang  .        90 

Orang  Laut  or  Sea-Jakun  (four  specimens)  .  .  .91 

A.  Profile  of  Semang  Girl  with  Skin  Disease       .  .102 

B.  Semang  Girl  (Full  Face)  with  Skin  Disease  .  .102 
Smallpox  Patient  in  Seclusion,  Ulu  Slim  (South  Perak)  .  .103 
Semangs  preparing  Poisonous  Yams  for  Food  (A,  B)  .  .116 
Semang  of  Kedah  having  a  Meal  .  .  .  .116 
Sakai   cooking  Rice   in    Bamboo  Vessels,    Chenderiang   (Batang 

Padang,  Perak)       .  .  .  .  .  .117 

Sakai  of  Ulu  Slim  (Perak)  .  .120 

Negrito  Dress  and  Articles  of  Apparel  .  .  .138 

Semang  Dress    .  .  .  .  139 

Semang  and  Pangan  Girdles  .  .  .142 

Fungus-String  Girdle  of  Semang  Woman  (Kedah)  .  .      143 

Seed  and  Tooth  Necklace  of  Semang  Woman  (Kedah)    .  .143 

Semang  with  Girdles  of  Malay  Cloth       .  .  .  .148 

Semang  Combs  .  .  .  .  .  .149 

Sakai  Girl  of  South  Perak  .  .  .  .  .152 

Sakai  Women  in  Malay  "  Sarongs/'  showing  Necklaces,  Armlets, 

and  Bracelets  .  .  .  .  .  153 

Sakai  Family,  showing  Head-dresses,  Necklaces,  and  Nose-quills      156 
Sakai  Family,  showing  Nose-quills,  Necklaces,  Armlets,  and  Leaf- 
Ornaments  .  .  .  .  .  .157 

Sakai  Group,  Ulu  Lui,  Ulu  Langat,  showing  Women  and  Girls  in 

Malay  Dress  .  .  .  .  .  .      1 58 

Aboriginal   Group  at  Ulu  Kali,  Ulu  Selangor,  showing  Adoption 

of  Malay  Dress       .  .  .  .  .  .159 

Pangan  Weather  Screen  of  Palm  Leaves  (Ulu  Kelantan)  .      176 

Interior  of  Round  Leaf-Shelter  of  Pangan  (Ulu  Kelantan)  .      176 

Plan  and  Sections  of  Long  (or  Oval)  Shelter  used  by  Semang  at 

Siong,  Kedah  .  .  .  .  .177 


/   OF  II  I  US  TRA  II 


Scin.ii] ;;  .it  I'ln  Irlcntnli,  <  ."i"  n',  Kinta,  with  Xip.'ili  Palms  {  \ 
fruticans)  in  Background,  newly  cut  foi  Thatchwork 

Semang    itanding  ai     ide  oi    Hut  (at   Sungei  Tapah),  nc 

<  iajah,  Kini.i,  Perak  .  .  .  i 

An  Invisible  Sakai  Village  (up  the  Big  Tree  in  the  Centre  oi  the 

Picture)     ,  .  .  .180 

Sakai  Tree  Hut,  Sungei  Berang,  Perak,  Seven  Miles  from  Tan 

M.ilim  ....... 

Sakai  Huts  at  Chenderiang,  Batang  Padang,  Perak 

Tree  Hut,  l *  1  u   Batu,  about  Twelve   Miles  from   Kuala   Lumpur, 

Selangoi  .  .  .  .  183 

Sakai  House  at  Changkat  Kerbu  or  Korbu 
House  of  Aborigines  ai  Kuala  Seleh,  Ulu  Klang 
Huts  at  Durian  Chandong,  Ulu  Langat,  about  Three  Miles  above 
Klubi,   but   on   a  Tributary  of  the   Langat     Men  absent 
Hunting     .  .  .  .  .  .  .185 

Sakai  Mouse,  Lui  River,  Ulu  Langat,  Selangor   .  .  .186 

Ground  Hut  with  thatched   Roof,  Ulu  Kuang,  about  Three  Miles 

from  Kuang  Station,  Selangor  .  .  .  .186 

Besisi  Huts  about  One  and  a  Half  Miles  from  Sepang     .  .187 

Besisi    Hut  about    One  and  a  Half  Miles   from   Sepang  (Kuala 
Langat    District   of  Selangor),   showing   overlapping   Gable- 
Ridge  .  .  .  .  .  .  .187 

Sakai  with  Spring-Trap,  Perak    .....      206 

Sakai  with  Trap,  Perak — Boy  explaining  its  Action  .  .      206 

Sakai  Boy  watching  Rat-Trap,  Gunong  Ubi,  Ulu  Slim     .  .      207 

Sakai  Boy  watching  Pig-Trap  (with  Spring-Spear),  Ulu  Slim         .      207 
Sakai  with  Trap  set  in  an  Opening  of  a  Game  Fence        .  208 

Types  of  Fish-Hooks  (Natural  and  Artificial)       .  .  .      209 

Sakai  Fish-Dam,  for  catching  Fish  in  the  Kinta  River  at  Lubo' 

Kelah  ("  Lobou  Kela")        .....      209 

Sakai  in  Jungle  Accoutrements,  Sungei  Berang,  Seven  Miles  from 

Tanjong  Malim       .  .  .  .  .  .212 

Aboriginal    Group    ready    for    Hunting,    Bukit    Prual,    Kepong, 

Selangor     .  .  .  .  .  .  .213 

Sakai  Fishing  at  Ulu  Kali,  Ulu  Selangor  .  .  .214 

Aborigines  Fishing  at  Ulu  Klang  .  .  .  .214 

Two  Sakai  Women  with  Pet  Jungle-Pigs.      Ulu  Slim,  Perak         .      215 
Sakai  Women  and  Children  with  Pet  Jungle-Pig  .  .215 

Group  of  Jakun  with  Blowpipes,  showing   Man   (in   Centre)   with 

Back-Basket,  Blowpipe,  and  Chopper  .  .  .218 

Hunting  Party  with  Blowpipes,  Bukit  Prual,  Kepong,  Selangor    .      219 


XXII 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRA  TIONS 


Aboriginal  Group  at  Lubo'  K'lubi,  Ulu  Langat,  Selangor 

Jakun  Women  (Ulu  Klau,  Pahang),  with   Hunting   Dog  in   Fore 

ground        ...... 

Stone  Implements  from  Pahang 

Jakun  Man  in  Hunting  Accoutrements    . 

Semang  Implements       ..... 

Two  Semang  Bows,  Two  Quivers,  and  their  Arrows 

Semang  Apparatus  for  poisoning  Blowpipe  Darts 

Padang  the   Semang   collecting   Poisonous   Sap   from  the  Upas 

Tree.  Ulu  Siong,  Kedah  .... 
Semang  Blowpipe  Apparatus  .... 
Semang   of  Sumpitan,    near    Lenggong,   Upper    Perak,   showing 

Blowpipes  and  Quivers        .... 

Sakai  of  South  Perak,  with  Blowpipes 

Sakai  Quivers    ...... 

Sakai  of  South  Perak,  carrying  Blowpipe 

Sakai   Men,  One  (standing)  with  Blowpipe  and  Quiver,  the  Other 

(seated)  with  Back-Basket  .... 
Man  using  Blowpipe,  Bukit  Prual,  Selangor  ;  at  his  left   Side  is 

the  open  Quiver  with  Darts 
Jakun  using  Blowpipe,  Lubo'  K'lubi,  Ulu  Langat,  Selangor 
One  of  the  Upas  (Antiaris)  Trees  that  furnish  the  Dart  Poison 

Berang  River,  Perak  .... 

Young     Upas     Tree     ("  Pohun     Ipoh"),     near     Berang     River 

Perak  ...... 

Boiling  the  Poison  for  the  Blowpipe  Darts 

Besisi  Quivers  containing  Darts  poisoned  with  Upas  Sap 

Dart-Quivers  and  Poison-Case    . 

Drying-Rack  for  Blowpipe  Darts  employed  by  the  Besisi 

Besisi  Apparatus  for  brewing  Dart-Poison 

Kuantan  Darts  with  Poison  Spatula 

Jakun  walking  up  a  Tree,  Ulu  Batu,  Selangor 

Sakai  Tree-Felling  :  One   Man  (on   Staging)  starting  Work,  the 

Other  (on  the  Left)  climbing  up  to  assist  him 
A  Sakai  Plantation  at  Changkat  Bertam  on  the  River  Raya  (Perak) 
Sakai    Plantations   near  the   Head -waters  of  the   River    Kampa 

(Perak),  seen  from  the  Summit  of  Mt.  Chabang 
Aboriginal  Hill  Clearing,  with  Huts,  Ulu  Batu,  Selangor 
Aboriginal  Hill  Clearing,   with  mixed   Cultivation  (Tapioca  and 

Bananas),  Ulu  Batu,  Selangor 
Aboriginal  Women  husking  Padi  with   Pestle   in   large   wooden 

Mortar,  Ulu  Klau,  Pahang 


TO  FACE  J'AGE 

220 


221 
244 
245 
270 
271 
28l 

28l 
282 

283 
296 
297 
298 

299 

304 

305 

312 

312 

313 
314 
314 
315 
315 
315 


339 

344 

344 

345 

345 

352 


LIST  OF  ill 


Aboriginal  Women  husking  Padi  (showing    I  nd-\  •■    ol   Mo 
i 'in  Klau,  r. ih. in  .  ... 

Tapioi  .1  Plantation,  « ith  ( rroup  oi  Abo  I  flu  Batu, 

c  lultivation  oi   the    i  apia  ■  Plant    on    Li  fl    and 

Centre)  —  Aboriginal    Woman    in    '  und,    Ulu    Kali, 

Selangor  .  ... 

White  Cloth  of  Upas  Bark         ..... 

Semang  Baal  .  ... 

Sakai   Men  with  Back  Basket  and  Blowpipe  .  Ulu  Slim,  s.  P< 

Negrito  Industries 

Group  at  Sungei  Ledong,  Ulu  Klang.  These  Sakai  arc  Lampan 
(Stream-Tin)  Work 

Semang  Mats  and  Baskets 

J  alum  Betel- Wallets 

Aboriginal  Women  washing  for  Stream  Tin  with  Wooden  Pan, 
Kuala  Scleh,  Ulu  Klang,  Selangor  .... 

Encampment  of  Aboriginal  Stream -Tin  Workers,  Ulu  Klang, 
Selangor    ...... 

I  kvelopment  of  the  Patterns  from  the  Chevron    . 

Quivers  for  Blowpipe  Darts  employed  by  the  Semang  of  Kedah 

Semang  Quivers  ..... 

Semang  Combs,  Ulu  Siong,  Kedah 

Semang  Receptacles       ..... 

Charm-Patterns  on  Combs  .  .  .  .  426, 

Hypothetical  Ixora  Blossom  and  Comb  explaining  the  Flower- 
Theory  of  Vaughan-Stevens  .... 

Specimens  of  Correct  "  Tin-weg  "  {i.e.  "  Central-Panel  ")  Patterns 

Specimens  of  Correct  "  Was  "-Patterns    .... 

Specimens  of  Correct  "  Pawer  "-Patterns 

Charm-Patterns  on  Combs  ...  432, 

Correction  of  Inaccurate  Drawings  .... 

Alleged  Representation  of  Parts  of  the  Body 

Bamboo  No.  I.     Bamboo  No.  2.     Bamboo  No.  3.     Bamboo  No.  4 

Burial  Bamboo  of  a  Chief  ("  Sna-hut  ") — unexplained 

Burial  Bamboo  of  a  Married  Woman 

Burial  Bamboo  of  a  Man 

Birth  Bamboo  or  Tahong 

Burial  Bamboo  of  a  Boy 

Burial  Bamboo  of  a  Girl 

Tube  ("Gor"  and  "Gar")  Patterns,  Plate  I. 

Tube  ("Gor"  and  "Gar")  Patterns,  Plate  II. 

Tube  ("Gor"  and  "Gar")  Patterns,  Plate  III. 


353 


376 
370 

377 
384 

385 
386 


3«8 

389 

414 
414 
414 
415 

415 
427 

428 
429 

43o 
43i 
433 

434 
434 
450 

45i 
451 

45i 
460 
460 
460 
461 
462 
463 


XXIV 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 


Tube  ("Gor"  and  "Gar")  Patterns,  Plate  IV.    . 

Tube  ("Gor"  and  "Gar")  Patterns,  Plate  V.      . 

Tube  ("Gor"  and  "Gar")  Patterns,  Plate  VI.     . 

Specimens  of  "  Sumpit "  Patterns,  Plate  VII. 

Specimens  of  "Sumpit"  Patterns,  Plate  VIII. 

Specimens  of  "  Sumpit  "  Patterns,  Plate  IX. 

Specimens  of  "  Sumpit "  Patterns,  Plate  X. 

Specimens  of  "  Sumpit  "  Patterns,  Plate  XI. 

Sakai  Hairpins,  Perak    ..... 

Sakai  Combs,  Perak  (two  specimens) 

Bamboo  Vessels  used  by  Perak  Sakai 

Quiver  used  by  Perak  Sakai        .... 

Bamboo  Vessels  used  by  Perak  Sakai 

Bamboo  No.  i.  —  Charm  Pattern  of  unknown  use 

Fig.  7. — Magician's  Staff  .... 

Fig.  8. — Charm  to  invoke  Aid  of  Argus-Pheasants  against  Centi 

pedes  and  Scorpions  .... 

Fig.  9. — Charm  to  cause  Rain  and  protect  Young  Rice  Plants 
Fig.  10. — Charm  to  keep  away  Ants 
Fig.  11. — Charm  against  two  Kinds  of  Skin-Disease 
Fig.  1 2. — Hut-Building  Charm  (to  facilitate  Collection  of  Materials) 
Fig.  13. — Charm  for  driving  away  Demons 
Fig.    14. — Charm    to    send     Centipedes    to    sleep    and    protect 

Gatherers  of  "  Nipah  "-Fruit 
Fig.  1  5. — Charm  against  Venomous  Spiders 
Fig.  16. — Charm  to  facilitate  Capture  of  Fish  and  protect   the 

Anglers       ...... 

Fig.  17. — Charm  to  protect  the  Crops  from  their  Enemies 

Fig.  18. — Charm  to  bring  Rain  for  the  Crops 

Kuantan  Dart-Quiver      ..... 

Mantra  Patterns  ..... 

Besisi  Zoomorphs  ..... 

Model  of  Insignia  of  Besisi  Batin  or  Chief 
Central  Panels  of  Comb  Patterns,  Fig.  7 
Central  Panels  of  Comb  Patterns,  Fig.  8 


TO    FACE   PAGE 
464 


Map  showing  Distribution  of  Ipoh  (Upas-Poison) 


261 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Tin  authority  >  enumerated  In  the  following  II  I  mi  oi  cow  i  >i  i  narj  i  ralue, 
Into  which  the  personal  equation  toi  Lai  n.-\rnii.  possible 

to  make  t  rough  classification  winch  may  be  of  o  intending  ituden 

in  with,  it  should  be  perfectly  evident  that,  although  the  work  done  by  tl 
writers  who  have  actually  had  lo<  al  i  cperience  Is  ol  immeasurabl  i   impor- 

tance in  questions  of  facl  than  any,  even  thi  ,  work  of  home  itayin 

can  be,  yel  in  respect  oi  deductions  from,  01  in  the  identify    treatment  oi  ■■ 
facts,   iii>-  home  staying  student,  with    his   ea  •  to  libraries,   museums, 

laboratories,   and  othei    scientific    machinery,  holds   the  field    at    a  very  | 
advantagea      it  is  necessary  to  dram   attention  to  this  point,  the  full 

measure  ol  credence  to  be  given  to  any  particular  part  oi  the  material  here  got 
togethei  cannot  otherwise  be  properly  arrived  at.  Broadly  speaking,  then,  the 
entire  series ci  writers  here  recorded  may  be  briefly  classified  as  follows: — 

(a)  Writers  with  local  experience,  including  not  only  government  officials  hut 
European  missionaries  (chiefly  French  Roman  Catholics),   planters,  and 

miners,  to  whom  may  he  added  a   few  scientific    men  who  have  acq 
some  local  field-knowledge. 
(<6)  Scientific  men  who  have  no  local  field-knowledge,  but  who  possess  other 

advantages,  as  above. 
(<•)  Travellers  without  any  scientific  training,  and  at  the  same  time  without  any- 
adequate  local  knowledge.      These  might  well   be  expected   to  be  mere 
discoverers  of  "mare's-nests,"   but  taking  their  work  as  a  whole,  I  am 
glad  to  be  able  to  state  that,  though  they  have  made  some  bad  blunders, 
there  are  fewer  of  these  than  might  be  expected. 
The  foregoing  remarks  being  duly  borne  in   mind,  I   have  next  to  point  out 
that  the  modern  study1  of  the  Wild  Races  of  the  Malay  Peninsula  may  be  divided 
advantageously,    from   an   historical    point   of  view,    into    three    main    stages   or 
periods  of  development  : — 

The  first  of  these  stages  covers,  roughly  speaking,  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  from  1 800-1 8 50.  This  period  contains  the  name  of  no  systematically 
trained  anthropologist,  and  the  evidence  collected  pending  its  duration  rests  upon 
the  observations  of  various  able  but,  from  a  modern  point  of  view,  comparatively 
untrained  European  observers,  among  whom  may  be  mentioned,  Sir  Stamford 
Rallies,  the  founder  of  Singapore,  William  Marsden  (author  of  the  History  of 
Sumatra,  a  Malay-English  and  English-Malay  Dictionary,  and  other  works),  John 
Leyden  (translator  of  the  Malay  Annals),  John  Crawfurd  (a  most  prolific  writer 
but  much  inclined  at  times  to  spread  himself  in  mere  speculation),  John  Anderson 
(author  of  the  "Considerations"),  P.  J.  Begbie,  and  Lieutenant  Newbold,  all  of 
whom  did  much  good  pioneer  work  in  the  early  days. 

The  second  period  runs  from  the  year  1850  to  about  1890.  At  the  very  out- 
set of  this  period  the  (for  his  time,  remarkably)  critical,  accurate,  and  voluminous 
writings  of  J.  R.  Logan,  based  in  the  main  on  his  own  personal  investigations, 
placed  the  study  of  these  races  on  an  altogether  higher  plane.  At  the  same  time 
the  reports  of  travellers  like  Miklucho-Maclay,  Miss  Isabella  Bird  (the  latter  in  a 

1  In  this  "  modern  study  "  are  not,  of  It  will  of  course  be  remembered  that 
course,  included  the  few  scattered  the  Portuguese  domination  which  corn- 
notices  from  Dutch  sources  (before  the  menced  with  the  capture  of  Malacca  by 
time  of  Raffles),  or  from  early  Portuguese  d'Albuquerquein  15 1 1,  was  terminated 
writers  such  as  Goudinho  de  Eredia,  by  their  loss  of  Malacca  to  the  Dutch 
who  is  the  only  one  of  these  early  in  1641,  who  ceded  it  in  turn  to 
authorities  that  is  really  worth  quoting.  England  by  treaty. 

VOL.  I  xxv  b 


xxvi  BIBLIOGRAPHY 


more  popular  way  only),  Montano,  and  tie  Morgan,  together  with  the  great  store 
of  valuable  information  collected  on  the  one  hand  by  French  Roman  Catholic 
missionaries,  such  as  P.  Favre  and  P.  Borie,1  and  on  the  other  hand  by  officials 
of  the  local  governments,  amongst  whom  may  be  mentioned  Leech,  Maxwell, 
Swettenham,  (Major)  M'Nair,  Hervey,  G.  Bellamy,  Hale,  J.  A.  G.  Campbell,  and 
Lister,  arrested  the  attention  of  European  anthropologists  and  filtered  through 
various  channels  into  the  works  of  Waitz,  Reclus,  De  Quatrefages,  and  A.  H. 
Keane. 

The  third  period,  which  may  be  described  as  having  lasted  from  about  the  year 
1890  to  the  present  day  (1906),  is  distinguished  by  the  fact  that  during  its  course 
some  of  the  most  eminent  anthropologists  of  Europe,  more  especially  of  Germany, 
have  themselves  either  personally  or  through  their  agents  taken  an  active  part  in 
the  work  of  inquiry.  At  the  same  time  the  excellent  work  done  by  the  official 
element  during  the  two  preceding  periods  was  continued  and  greatly  extended  by 
Clifford,  Leonard  Wray,  Ridley,  Kelsall,  A.  D.  Machado,  and  Cerruti ;  whilst  as  a 
representative  of  the  non-official  element  during  this  period  should  be  specially 
mentioned  the  name  of  Mr.  Nelson  Annandale,  late  of  Balliol  College,  Oxford, 
and  now  Curator  of  the  Indian  Museum  at  Calcutta.  Mr.  Annandale  first  broke 
ground  in  the  Peninsula  as  a  member  of  the  Cambridge  Expedition  of  1899,  and 
has  since  collected  much  valuable  material  on  his  own  account,  the  results  of  his 
work  being  given  in  Fasciculi  Malayenses.  From  the  point  of  view  of  mere  bulk, 
however,  the  greater  proportion  of  the  ethnographical  material  and  notes  collected 
during  this  period  was  got  together  by  Vaughan-Stevens,  and  as  it  is  in  a  just  and 
reasonable  estimate  of  this  very  material  that  one  of  the  chief  difficulties  of  dealing 
with  this  period  consists,  I  propose  here  to  discuss  the  matter  in  detail.  In  1 891 
Vaughan-Stevens,  whose  Christian  name  is  given  (by  his  German  editors)  as  Hrolf, 
was  commissioned  by  a  group  of  the  leading  anthropologists  of  Berlin  (the  Rudolf 
Virchow  Stiftung,  headed  by  Virchow  himself),  in  combination  with  the  Berlin 
(Government)  Ethnographical  Museum,  to  undertake  a  systematic  study  of  the 
Wild  Races  of  the  Malay  Peninsula.  From  the  very  outset  Vaughan-Stevens'  work 
was  to  some  extent  shrouded  in  mystery  and  doubt,  and  his  mode  of  action  and 
even  his  character  were  criticised  and  assailed.  He  arrived  under  the  aegis  of  one 
of  Europe's  greatest  anthropologists,  and  he  styled  himself,  or  at  least  passed  as  a 
"  professor,"  yet  he  himself  possessed,  as  his  own  work  shows,  no  scientific 
or  linguistic  attainments,  and  could  have  had  no  right  to  any  sort  of  academic 
title.  Mr.  H.  N.  Ridley,  who  knew  him  well,  and  with  whom  he  stayed,  gravely 
doubted,  in  conversation  with  myself,  whether  his  name  were  really  Vaughan- 
Stevens  at  all,  and  told  me  that  he  had  at  least  an  alias,  presumably  of  Norse 
origin,  i.e.  Svensen.  His  dialect  was  a  variety  of  the  "cockney,"  apparently  of 
the  Islington  variety  ;  he  was  uneducated  and  ignorant  in  many  ways  to  a  quite 
remarkable  degree.  On  the  other  hand,  he  had  travelled  extensively  in  many  parts 
of  the  world,  and  he  was  a  fair  observer.  Martin,  who  was  at  great  pains  to  follow 
up  Vaughan-Stevens'  tracks  in  the  Malay  Peninsula,  with  the  express  object  of 
testing  his  veracity,  charges  him  with  the  love  of  exaggeration  for  its  own  sake,  and 
makes  no  less  serious  reflections  in  connection  with  some  of  his  statements  as 
to  the  extent  and  difficulty  of  his  wanderings  and  methods  of  collecting  specimens 
(see  Martin,  page  1 70  seqq. ).  These  exaggerations  were  no  doubt  due  to  the  natural 
vanity  of  the  man,  and  his  love  of  self-glorification,  and  in  the  case  of  the  latter  he 

1  There  has  frequently  been  in  other  in  the  text)  been  accurate,  unbiassed, 
parts  of  the  world  a  tendency  to  dis-  and  helpful.  This  has  also  been  the 
credit  all  reports  of  this  kind  when  case  in  British  North  Borneo  and  Sara- 
made  by  missionaries,  but  I  am  able  to  wak,  where  the  same  sound  pioneering 
say  that  in  the  Malay  Peninsula  the  work  accomplished  by  the  missionary 
work  done  by  them  has  in  the  main  (in  element  has  been  testified  to  by  Brooke 
spite  of  one  or  two  exceptions  dealt  with  Low  [v.  Ling  Roth,  op.  cit.). 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


in  iv  lum  ii  ii  h.iv  been  deceivi  d.     Bui  what  hi  •  no 

h.r,  !-;u  ncil  ;i     .1    .i-i  i<  mi  .   .  I  tit  I  <  - :  1 1    i     lii     n-|. ii  1. 1  lii  it  i  :r.  ;t  1<  ll<  i  "I  a  fin  din 

wim-ii  certainh  had   ithing  of  the  trui  Gilbertian  i  mt  them,  and  it  i 

doubt  this  1. 1. 1  that  hat  motl  adversely  ifTected  the  opinion  ol 
in. >ic  ih. in  one  authority  ol  itanding,     ! •  me  oi  I  en  Inforn 

were  capital,  and  Va  \ttnr.x     \  idoll 

\i.iiiin  (page  [  74)  himself  hesitates  to  deny  that  then  may  tx  still    om< 
Vaughan  Si  evens'  M  voluminous "  communications  (ol  course  with  the  proviso  thai 
they  must  be  mosl  carefully  and   criticall)   handled  and   lifted  from  an  expert 
poinl  "i  view,  before  they  can  be  tafelj  n  ;arded  1    material  foi 
ethnologist);  and  his  conclusion  is,  thai  li  we  eliminate  from  the  materia]  left 
behind  by  Vaughan-Stevens  what  may  be  styled  the  '  of  his  own 

fancy,  there  must  yet  always  be  left  ovei  s   foundation  of  valuable  facts  the 
collection  of  which  will  remain  Vaughan-Stevi  tanenl  contribution  to  the 

subject  of  our  inquiry. 

It  is  with  this  view  (which  is  also  that  oi  Blagden)  that  I  desire  to  associate 
myself.  Inn  I  may  here  explain  that  in  ordei  to  assist  the  reader  and  the  student  I 
haw  taken  the  precaution  ol  having  the  uncorroborated  or  more  doubtful  portions  of 
Vaughan-Stevens'  material  (such  as  his  remarks  on  "  totemism,"  which,  though  to 
my  mind  hopelessly  wide  of  the  mark,  are  too  important  to  omit)  set  in  smaller 

type,  except  in  cases  of  isolated  facts  or  portions  of  a  particular  context,  in  which 
instances  attention  is  drawn  to  the  doubtful  or  inaccurate  portion  in  the  footnotes. 
An  exception  to  this  treatment  had  to  he  made  in  the  chapter  on  "  Decorative 
Ait,"  where  to  avoid  the  perpetual  alternation  of  small  and  large  type,  the  doubtful 
and  uncorroborated  passages  have  been  enclosed  in  square  brackets,  as  has  been 
explained  in  the  text.  It  should  also  be  here  noted  that  I  have,  as  a  general  rule, 
throughout  my  own  (i.e.  the  non-linguistic)  portion  of  this  work  (Parts  I. -III. 
inclusive)  taken  the  opportunity  of  correcting  mistakes  and  misspellings,  and  of 
unifying  the  spelling  of  native  words,  though  otherwise  adhering  as  closely  as 
possible  to  the  exact  wording  of  the  texts  quoted.  With  regard  to  the  references, 
it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  in  dealing  with  the  Semang  of  Kedah,  the  Pangan 
(where  so  stated),  the  Blandas  and  Besisi  of  the  Kuala  Langat  district  in  Selangor, 
I  am  writing  from  my  own  experiences  ;  no  foot  references  therefore  are  given, 

1  A  few  instances  of  the  tales  so  corpse,  into  the  sacred  and  inviolable 
embroidered  by  Vaughan-Stevens  are  enclosure  of  the  Towers  of  Silence  in 
given  as  evidence  well  known  to  resi-  order  to  have  the  opportunity  of  select- 
dents  in  the  Malay  Peninsula  :  In  New  ing  at  leisure  the  skull  of  a  Parsee  ; 
Guinea  a  whole  tribe  he  was  staying  being  refused  permission  to  return, 
with  were  massacred  by  a  rival  tribe,  he  made  the  doorkeeper  drunk  with  a 
Vaughan-Stevens  himself  escaping  to  the  bottle  of  whisky  that  he  had  by  him. 
Fly  River  and  floating  down  it  for  three  And  so  forth,  and  so  forth.  Small 
weeks  clinging  to  a  drifting  log,  and  wonder  that  his  professional  reputation 
feeding  on  raw  fish  that  he  caught  with  went  by  the  board,  more  especially  as 
his  hands  as  he  drifted  by. — He  was  he  brought  from  Ceylon  the  name  of  an 
sleeping  in  the  king's  hut  in  a  cannibal  artist  in  fiction  scarcely,  if  at  all,  inferior 
island  in  the  South  Pacific,  and  expect-  to  that  he  earned  in  the  Straits.  Vet 
ing  treachery,  slept  with  his  feet  wide  examples  of  professional  men  who  have 
apart  on  the  pillow,  and  his  head  where  done  good  work,  although  they  may  have 
his  feet  should  have  been ;  his  foresight  suffered  from  a  similar  weakness  have 
was  justified,  as  at  midnight  an  axe-head  not  been  uncommon,  and  if  we  compare 
crashed  into  the  unoccupied  part  of  the  one  part  of  Vaughan-Stevens' work  with 
pillow,  and  jumping  up,  he  found  him-  another,  and  the  whole  with  the  work 
self  presenting  his  pistol  at  the  head  of  of  other  observers,  we  shall  find  suffi- 
his  royal  host. — He  was  in  Bombay,  ciently  conclusive  proofs  of  his  general 
and  got  himself  carried,  disguised  as  a  good  faith  in  the  facts  that  he  recorded. 


XXV111 


HinUOGRAPIfY 


In  all  other  cases,  the  reference  to  the  authority  quoted  is  given  at  the  foot  of  the 
page,  though  in  the  case  of  an  obviously  continued  passage  or  narrative  the  refer- 
ence has  not  of  course  been  put  at  the  foot  of  every  page  but  at  suitable  intervals 
only,  which  will  easily  explain  themselves.  The  work,  however,  has  grown 
considerably  under  my  hands,  and  here  and  there  it  has  been  necessary  to  make 
corrections,  or  even  to  add  material  in  a  footnote,  which  should,  strictly  speaking, 
have  been  incorporated  in  the  text.  For  this  and  for  any  other  shortcomings  in 
dealing  with  the  material  I  can  only  plead  that  I  have  done  my  best,  subject  to 
the  very  great  and  severe  limitations  that  have  conditioned  the  work  from  start  to 
finish.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  part  of  the  material  in  this  book  has  come 
from  rare  old  pamphlets  and  journals  written  by  travellers  in  nearly  all  the 
important  languages  of  Europe,  some  of  which  contain  numerous  typographical 
errors  and  other  mistakes  due  to  their  ignorance  of  Malay,  which  have  here 
been  corrected. 

It  only  remains  to  mention  the  most  eminent  and  distinguished  of  all  the 
anthropologists  that  science  has  yet  sent  out  to  study  the  many  vexed  questions 
connected  with  these  races.  I  refer  to  my  friend  Rudolf  Martin,  whose  monumental 
and  epoch-making  work  (Die  Inlandstamme  der  Malayischen  Halbinsel),  the  first 
of  its  kind,  was  published  at  Jena  by  Gustav  Fischer  during  the  past  year. 

W.  S. 
The  following  main  references  to  Martin's  work  corresponding  to  certain  main 
references  in  this  book  are  given  for  the  benefit  of  students,  it  being  premised 
that  Martin  deals  with  the  aborigines  chiefly  from  an  anthropological,  the 
present  authors  chiefly  from  a  cultural  and  linguistic  point  of  view  ;  moreover, 
Martin's  book  is  arranged  according  to  subject,  ours  is  founded  on  a 
phylogenetic  or  tribal  basis  :  the  two  works  thus  stand  in  a  complementary 
relation  to  each  other. 


PAGAN  RACES  OF  THE  MALAY 
PENINSULA. 

Vol.  I. 


PAGE 

Part    I.  Race      . 

19-106 

Part  II.- 
Ch.       i.   Food 
Ch.      ii.  Dress 
Ch.    iii.  Habitations 

109-136 
.     137-167 

168-199 

Ch.     iv.  Hunting,  Trapping,  Fish-  \ 

ing 200-224  > 

Ch.     vi.  Weapons  and  Implements  242-337  J 

Ch. :    v.  Modes  of  Barter        .        .  225-241  \ 

Ch.     xi.  Dealings  with  other  Races  521-570/ 

Ch.    vii.   Cultivation        .         .         .  338-373 

Ch.  viii.  Arts  and  Crafts         .         .  374-394 

Ch.     ix.  Decorative  Art .         .         .  395-493 

Ch       x.  The  Social  Order      .        .  494-520 

Vol.  II. 
Part  III.— 

Ch.       i.  Birth   -   Customs  and 

Beliefs     .        .         .         .  1-27 
Ch.     ii.  Maturity     Customs      and 

Beliefs     .                 .         •  28-54 

Ch.    iii.  Marriage     Customs     and 

Beliefs              .         .         .  55-33 

Ch.     iv.  Burial        Customs       and 

Beliefs     .        .         .        .89-116 

Ch.      v.   Music,  Songs,  and  Feasts  117-172 

Ch.     vi.  Religion  and  Folklore       .  173-376 

Part  IV.   Language    ....  379-end 


INLANDSTAMME  DER  MALAY 
ISCHEN  HALBINSEL. 


/II. 
I IV. 

III. 


(4. 


PAGE 

219-644 
IOOO-I036 


Physiche  Anthropologic  . 
Schluss  .... 
Ergologie — 

Nahrung ....  720,  732-744 
Korperbedeckung  .  .  .  680-695 
Besiedelungs-    u.    Wohnungs- 

verhaltnisse  ....  659-677 
Nahrungssuche,  .     Jagd        u. 

Fischfang,   Jagd-  u.  Fange- 

genithe  .  .  _  .  .  .  745*793 
Soziologie.    Geheimer  Tausch- 

handel.  Verkehrmit  Malayen  878-882 
Anpflanzungen    der    Halbkul- 

turstamme  ....  729-731 
Hausgerathe,  Haushalt,  u.s.w.  796-800 
Ornamentik  ....  801-853 
Soziologie.     Soziale  Ordnung. 

Rechtsgewohnheiten     .        .     874-877 


Sitten  u.  Gebrauche.  Schwan- 
gerschaft,1  Geburt,  u.s.w.      .     890-903 

Ohr-  und  Nasenschmuck, 
u.s.w.,  Tatauierung,  Bema- 
lung  ....     696-706 

Ehe.  Hochzeitsgebrauche, 
u.s.w.     .....     862-873 

Tod.  Grabbeigaben.  Seelen- 
haus,  u.s.w 926-931 

Spiele.  Musikinstrumente. 

Gesang,  u.s.w.       .         .         .     904-921 

Religiose  Vortstellungen  '     932-986 

Sprache 987-999 


1  Cp.  also  Martin,  pp.  678-679. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


ABBR]  VIATIONS  \     BD  IN    PARI      I     III.  I    Cll     IV]    01     mi      WOl 

tusland.—  Das  Auslandx  Mmn.li.  etCi 
/.  /•.  . /.     Journal  of  Ec  [ant  n&nbci  only  Issued), 

/■     n    rVo     •!.     Ethnologischt    c\ 
/././.     Journal  of  the   Anthropological   Institute  <>/    Gnat    Britain 

Inland, 
/.  /.  ./.     Journal  of  tho  Indian  An  nd  i     '  •  •   - /  ia  (othei 

known  as  "  Logan1  -  Joui  nal  "). 
/.  A'.  A.  S.     Journal  of  the  /«  \oty, 

/.  A'. ./.  .v.,  .v.  /.'.    -Journal  of  tho  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Straili  Branch. 
Man's  ./W.1     Man,   E.   II.     On   thi  ■nal  Inhabitants  of  the  Anda- 

manose  Islands, 
Sol,  Journ,  or  .V  /.     Solangor  Journal  (formerly  published  at  the  Government 

PreSt,    Kuala   Lumpur,  Sel.m; 

/'.  />'.  G,  ./. —  Verhandlungon  dor  Berliner  Gosollschaft Jiir  Anthropology 

■.  /•:.     Zoitschrift fUr  Ethnologic, 
Vaughan-StevenSi  ii.  ;    Vaughan-StevenSi  \\\.—  I  n  am  don  A'. 

Museum ftir  Vblhorhunde:  \k\.  ii.  (3-4  Heft);  Bd.  iii.  (3-4  Heft). 

JVo/t'.—'lhc  abbreviations  of  names  of  authors  or  works  occurring  in   tin    I 

are  riven  in  the  Bibliography  itself.       Where  there  are  several  works  by  the  same 

author,  the  abbreviation  indicates  which  work   is   referred   to.      Thus   "Hale,  p. 

300/'  refers  solely   to  that   author's   paper   "On    the   Sakais "    in  vol.  xv.  of  the 

Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute,   after   which   entry  in   the  bibliography 

the  abbreviation  ["  Hale  "]  is  shown. 

All  articles  on  or  by  editors  of  Vaughan- Stevens'  material  are  given  under 

the  heading  "Stevens,  Vaughan-,"  not  under  the  name  of  each  individual  editor. 
This  list    includes  a  number   of  works  of  a  general   nature   which   contain 

incidental  references  to  or  descriptions  of  the  races  here  dealt  with. 

1904.  Akrot,  Dr.  Human  Images  among  the  Mantong  [Orang  Laut]. 
Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch  [No.  41],  pp. 
128,  129. 

1S46.   Abdullah.      Hikayat  Abdullah  bin  Abdulkadir  Munshi.      Singapore. 

1824.    Anderson,    John     ["Anderson"].       Political    and    Commercial    Con- 
siderations relative  to  the  Malayan  Peninsula  and  British  Settlements 
in  the  Straits  of  Malacca.      With  Appendix  :   of  the  Aboriginal  Inhabi 
tants  of  the  Malayan  Peninsula,  and  particularly  of  the  Negroes,  called 
Semang.     Prince  of  Wales'  Island.      Pp.  xxvii-xlvii. 

1902.  Annandale,    Nelson,    and    Robinson,    H.    C.       Some    Preliminary 

Results  of  an  Expedition  to  the  Malay  Peninsula.  Journal  of  the 
Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland.  London. 
Vol.  xxxii.  p.  407. 

1903.  Annandale,   Nelson,    and   Robinson,    H.    C.      Fasciculi   Malayenses 

["Fasc.  Mai."].     Anthropology.      Pt.  i.      London:  Longmans,  Green, 

and  Co. 
1903.  Annandale,  Nelson.     Fasciculi  Malayenses.     Supplement,  Map,  and 

Itinerary.      London  :   Longmans,  Green,  and  Co.      ["Fasc.  Mai."]. 
1S78.   Anonymous.       The  Semangs.      Journal  of  the   Royal   Asiatic    Society, 

Straits  Branch,  No.  2,   p.  231.     [Miscellaneous  notices.] 
1 88 1.   Anonymous.      The  Ipoh  Tree — Perak.     Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 

Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.  8,  p.  161.      [Miscellaneous  notes.] 
1850.   Barbe,   Rev.    ["Barbe"].       Agriculture    of  the    Mintra    {i.e.    Mantra]. 

1  To  distinguish  it  from  the  publica-       Anthrop.    Inst,    of  Great    Britain    and 
tion    called    "Man"    issued    by    the       Ireland,  which  latter  is  printed  Man. 


xxx  nillLIOGRAPHY 


Bengal  Catholic  Herald,  June  12,   1S50.      Reprinted  in  Journal  of  the 

Indian  Archipelago,  vol.  v.  p.  487. 
1896.    Bartels,  M.      See  Stevens,  Hrolf  Vaughan-. 
1 886.    Bastian,    Adolf.       Indonesien,     oder    Die    Inseln    des    Malayischen 

Archipelago's.      Berlin.      III.  Lieferung,  Sumatra  und   Xachbarschaft. 

S.  104  seqq. 
1886.   Bastian,  Adolf.      Reisen  in  Birma.     Leipzig.     P.  432. 
1834.    Begbie,    P.    J.    ["Begbie"].       The    Malayan    Peninsula,    embracing    its 

History,  Manners,  and  Customs  of  the  Inhabitants,  pp.  2-18.     Madras. 

1886.  Bellamy,    G.    C.    ["Bellamy,    G."]      The   Sakais    of   Selangor,   Kuala 

Langat.  Selangor  Journal,  1895,  vol.  iii.  No.  14,  p.  224  seqq.  Re- 
printed from  Government  Report  (1886). 

1849.  Bigandet,  P.  ["  Bigandet "].  N.  Ann.  de  la  Propagation  de  la  Foi, 
1849,  tome  i.  pp.  80-88. 

1883.   Bird,  Isabella  (Mrs.  Bishop).     The  Golden  Chersonese,  pp.  13-17. 

1893.  Blagden,  Charles  Otto  ["  Blagden,"  or  "  C.  O.  B."].     MS.  Notes  on 

Aborigines  in  the  Jasin  District  of  Malacca. 

1894.  Blagden,  Charles  Otto.     Early  Indo-Chinese  Influence  in  the  Malay 

Peninsula.  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch, 
No.  27,  p.  21  seqq. 

1902.  Blagden,    Charles    Otto.       A    Malayan    Element    in    some    of   the 

Languages  of  Southern  Indo- China.  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society,  Straits  Branch  [No.  38],  p.  I  seqq. 

1903.  Blagden,   Charles   Otto.     The   Comparative  Philology  of  the  Sakai 

and  Semang  Dialects  of  the  Malay  Peninsula.  Journal  of  the  Royal 
Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.  39,  p.  47  seqq. 
1861.  Borie,  H.  ["Borie  (tr.  Bourien) "].  Notice  sur  les  Mantras,  tribu 
sauvage  de  la  Peninsule  Malaise.  Tijdschrift  voor  Indische  Taal- 
Land-  en  Volkenkunde.  Deel  x.  p.  413.  Translated  by  Bourien,  P. 
On  the  Wild  Tribes  of  the  Interior  of  the  Malay  Peninsula.  Transac- 
tions of  the  Ethnological  Society  of  London,  N.S.  vol.  iii.  p.  72  seqq. 

1887.  Borie,  H.     An  Account  of  the  Mantras,  a  Savage  Tribe  in  the  Malay 

Peninsula.  Miscellaneous  Essays  relating  to  Indo-China.  London. 
Second  series,  vol.  i.  pp.  286-307. 

1886.  Borie,  H.      La  Presqu'ile  de  Malacca,  les  Malais  et  les  Sauvages.     Tulle. 
1878.   Bort,    Balthasar.       Corte    beschrijvinch    der    wilde    Menschen.    hun 

omtrent  Malacca,  Tijdschrift  voor  Indische  Taal-,  Land-  en  Volken- 
kunde, 1878.  Also  Batav.  Genootsch.  K.  en  W.  Batavia,  1883,  xxviii. 
88-92. 

1865.   Bourien.     See  Borie. 

1876.  Bradley,  Capt.  J.  Travel  and  Sport  in  Burmah,  Siam,  and  Malay 
(sic,  i.e.  Malaya). 

1882.  Brau  de  St. -Pol  Lias.     Sur  la  Riviere  Pluss,  interieur  de  la  presqu'ile 

Malaise.      Nouvelle  Revue.     Juni,  1882. 

1883.  Brau  de  St.-Pol  Lias  ["Brau  de  St.-P.  Lias"].     Perak  et  ies  Orangs- 

Sakeys.      Paris. 
1865.   Cameron,    J.    ["Cameron"].      Our    Tropical    Possessions    in    Malayan 
India.      London  :  Smith,  Elder,  and  Co. 

1887.  Campbell,  J.  A.  G.  ["Campbell,  J.  A.  G."].     The  Sakais  of  Selangor, 

Ulu  Langat.     Selangor  Journal,  vol.   iii.  1895,  No.  15,  p.  240  seqq. 

Reprinted  from  Government  Report  (1887). 
1876.   Castelnau,  Fr.  de.      Memoire  sur  les  Mantras.      Revue  de  PhiLologie 

et  d'Ethnographie,  vol.  ii.  pp.  132-143. 
1904.   Cerruti,  G.  B.     The  Sakais  of  Batang  Padang,  Perak.     Journal  of  the 

Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch  [No.  41],  pp.  113- 1 17. 
1892.   Claine.     Tour  du  Monde,  Jun.  18,  1892,  p.  398. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


[$91,  Clifford,  Huoh.  on  the  Sal  si  D 

i'.  urn  ui.i.     Journal   oJ   th<  idc   Society,  Stn 

No,  a 1.  p.  1  - 
1  s.)f).  Clifford,    Hugh.       1         1  1  1  1 

Singapore. 
1  s. >7 .  Clifford,  Huom.     a  fourney  through  the  Malay  States  <>f  '1 1 

and  kri.mi.m.     [oumal  oi  the  1  phical  Society.     London. 

VbL  be  i».  1  >"/</. 
1  s « >  7 .  Clifford,  Hugh.     In  Court  and  Kampong.     Grant  Richarda 
1898,  Clifford,  Hugh.     Studi<    in  Brown  Humanity.     CJi 
1903.  Clifford,  Hugh,  C.M.G.  [*'  Clifford  "J      Ms-  not  1  and  yocabubu 

embodied  in  this  book. 

1 S jo.    CRAWF1   RD,     [OHN.        History     of     the     Indian     Archipelago.        3     | 

Edinburgh.     Vol.  ii.  pp.  125*1921 
1828.  Crawfurd,  John.    Journal  of  an  Ambaitady  from  the  Goveraor-GeneraJ 

of  India  to  the  Courts  of  Siam  and  Cochin  China.     London. 
[834.  Crawfurd,  John.     Miscellaneous  Works  on  the  Polynesian  and  I 

Indian  Languages  (with  vocabulary). 

1848.  CRAWFURD,     [OHN.       On    the    Alphabets    of    the    Indian    Archipelago. 

Journal     of    the     Indian     Archipelago     and     Eastern     Asia,     vol.     ii. 
p.  765  seqq. 
1S48.    CRAWFURD,  John.       On   the   Malayan   and    Polynesian  Languages  and 
Races.     Journal  of  the   Indian  Archipelago  and   Eastern  Asia,  vol.  ii. 
p.  183  seqq. 

1852.  Crawfurd,  John.      Grammar  and   Dictionary  of  the  Malay  Language. 

2  vols.      London.      Vol.  i.  ch.  xvi.  clxxi.-ii. 
1856.   Crawfurd,  John.     Descriptive  Dictionary  of  the   Indian   Islands  and 

Adjacent  Countries.      London. 
1882.   Croix,  J.  ERRINGTON  de  LA["De  la  Croix"].     Etude  sur  les  Sakaies 

tie  Perak.      Revue  d'Ethnographie,  tome  i.  p.  317  seqq. 
1S85.   Croix,  J.   Errington  de  la.     Sept  mois  au  pays  de    l'etain,  Perak. 

Bulletin  de  la  Societe  de  Geographie  de  Paris,  1885,  p.  394  seqq. 
1882.   Daly,   D.    D.      Surveys  and   Explorations  in  the  Native  States  of  the 

Malayan     Peninsula,    1875-82.       Proceedings    of    the     Geographical 

Society.      London.      N.S.  vol.  iv.  p.  393  seqq.  (1882). 
De  Morgan.     See  Morgan,  J.  de. 
1894.   Dennys,  N.  B.      Descriptive  Dictionary  of  British  Malaya.      London. 
1897.   Douglas,   W.    W.      Report  to  Government  relating  to  Sakei  Tribes  in 

Selangor,  Klang  District.      Reprinted  in  Selangor  Journal,  vol.  v. 

1902.  Duckworth,   W.  L.  H.,   M.A.     Some  Anthropological  Results  of  the 

Skeat  Expedition  to  the  Malay  Peninsula.  Journal  of  the  Anthropo- 
logical Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  vol.  xxxii.  p.  142  seqq. 
See  also  Skeat. 

1903.  Duckworth,  W.   L.  H.,  M.A.     Note  on  a  skull  labelled  "  Soemang- 

schadel,  $ ,  Bukit  Sapi,  Upper  Perak,  1902  "  ;  now  in  the  Museum  of 
the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons.      Man,  No.  18,  p.  34  (March). 

1904.  Duckworth,  W.L.H.,  M.A.     Studies  in  Anthropology,  pp.  242,  256. 

Cambridge  University  Press. 
1904.   Duckworth,  W.  L.  H.,  M.D.,  Sc.D.     Morphology  and  Anthropology, 
PP-    359»   488-490.      Cambridge  University  Press. 

1849.  Earl,  S.  W.      On  the  Leading  Characteristics  of  the  Papuan,  Australian, 

and  Malayu-Polynesian  Nations.  Journal  of  the  Indian  Archipelago 
and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  iii.  pp.  682  ;  vol.  vi.  pp.  1,  66  seqq. 

1853.  Earl,    S.    W.       Native    Races    of    the    Indian    Archipelago — Papuans. 

London. 
1863.   Earl,  S.  W.      On  the  Shell-Mounds  of  Province  Wellesley,  in  the  Malay 


xxxii  BIBL10GRAPH  Y 


Peninsula.  Transactions  of  the  Ethnological  Society.  London. 
N.S.  vol.  ii.  p.   119  seqq. 

1882.  ERBDIA,    Goudinho   de.      Malaca,    L'Inde    Mcridionale  et   le   Cathay. 

(Trans.)     Bruxelles. 

1548.  Favrs,  P.,  A.M.      Account  of  the  Wild  Tribes  inhabiting  the  Malayan 

Peninsula,  Sumatra,  and  a  few  neighbouring  Islands.  Journal  of  the 
Indian  Archipelago  and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  ii.  p.  237  seqq.  Translation. 
For  the  original,  see  Ann.  de  la  P.  de  la  F.,  vol.  xxii. 

1549.  Favre,  P.,  A.M.    Journey  in  Johore.    Journal  of  the  Indian  Archipelago 

and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  iii.  p.  50. 
1849.   Favre,  P.,  A.M.      Pawangs.      Journal  of  the  Indian  Archipelago  and 

Eastern  Asia,  vol.  iii,  p.  115. 
1S49.   Favre,   P.,  A.M.      Journey  in   the  Menangkabau  States  of  the  Malay 

Peninsula.      Journal   of   the    Indian    Archipelago    and    Eastern   Asia, 

vol.  iii.  p.  153. 
1865.   Favre,  P.,  A.M.     Account  of  the  Wild  Tribes  inhabiting  the  Malayan 

Peninsula,  Sumatra,  and  a  few  neighbouring  Islands.      With  a  Journey 

in  Johore  and  a  Journey  in  the  Menangkabau  States  of  the  Malayan 

Peninsula.      Paris. 

1904.  Folkmar,  Daniel.     Album  of  Philippine  Types.      Manilla. 

1901.   Geiger,    P.    ["Geiger"].       Beitrag  zur  Kenntnis   der   Ipoh-pfeil-gifte. 

(Inaugural  Dissertation.)     Basel.      With  map. 
1893.   Gerland.     Jb.  Verein  fiir  geographie,  Frankfurt,  1893,  p.  60. 
Grunwedel,  A.      See  Stevens,  Hrolf  Vaughan-. 

1905.  Grubauer,  A.      Negritos.      Ein  Besuch  bei  den  Ureinwohnern  Inner 

Malakkas.  Dr.  A.  Petermann's  Geogr.  Mitteilungen,  1905,  Heft  xii. 
(Mainly  an  account  of  a  visit  to  the  Sakai  of  Ulu  Kerbu.) 

1895.  Haddon,  Dr.  A.  C,  F.R.S.      Evolution  in  Art,  as  illustrated  by  the  Life- 

Histories  of  Designs.      London  :  W7alter  Scott. 
1885.   Hale,  Abraham.      Stone  Axes,  Perak.      Nature,  vol.  xxxii.  p.  626. 
1888.    Hale,    Abraham.      On    the    Sakais.     Journal    of  the    Anthropological 

Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  vol.  xv.  p.  285-301.     ["  Hale."] 
1888.   Hale,  Abraham.      Notes  on  Stone  Implements  from  Perak.     Journal  of 

the  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  vol.   xvii. 

p.  66. 
1903.    Hale,  Abraham.      MS.  notes  and  comments  embodied  in  this  book. 
1874.   Hamy,  E.  T.     Sur  les  races  sauvages  de  la  peninsule  Malaise.      Bulletins 

de  la  Societe  d' Anthropologic,  Paris.      Ser.  2,  tome  ix.  p.  716-723. 

1896.  Hamy,   E.   T.      Les  races  malaiques  et  americaines.      L; Anthropologic, 

vol.  vii.  p.  129. 

1883.  Haughton,  T.   H.      Landing  of  Raffles  in  Singapore.     Journal  of  the 

Royal   Asiatic    Society,    Straits    Branch,    No.    10,   p.    285;    No.    11, 
p.  282. 
1879.   Hervey,  D.   F.   A.     Trip  to   Gunong  Blumut.      Journal  of  the  Royal 
Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.  3,  p.  85. 

1882.  Hervey,  D.  F.  A.      The  Endau  and  its  Tributaries.      Journal  of  the 

Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.  8,  p.  93. 

1883.  Hervey,  D.   F.   A.      The   Mentra  Traditions.      Journal    of  the   Royal 

Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.  10,  p.  189. 
1888.   Hervey,   D.   F.   A.     Journal  of  the  Folklore  Society,  vol.   vi.   (1888), 
p.  64. 

1903.  Hervey,  D.F.A.,  C.M.G.      MS.  material  and  vocabularies  embodied  in 

this  book. 

1904.  Hervey,  D.  F.  A.,  C.M.G.     The  Legends  of  Bukit  Dato'  Batu  Gedong, 

and  of  Tanjung  Tuan  (Cape  Rachado)  in  Malacca.     Man,  1904,  14. 
1879.    Hornaday.  Wm.   T.      Account  of  a  Naturalist's  Visit  to  the  Territory 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


ol   s 1 1 . 1 1 1 ; ■ . . i .     | < >ui n.i I  oj   the  Royal  Aaial  I     ncb| 

No.  3,  p.  12 
18481   1  I'M-  .1  !!■  1  1 1,  Thomai,  m.  1 ».     Report  on  tin   1  land  oi  Banks,     fo 

..1   iii.-  [ndian   An  hipel  ig<    ana    Beaten    \  la,  voL  ii    pp. 

|(  bntaini  .in  .i<  1  ounl  of  the  '  or  "  Oi 

1SS7.   1 1.»\  1- 1  a  1  qi  1  and  1 1 1  1  \  1       Preci   d'Anthropol  ;8i. 

1906.   Hubback,  T.   R.     Elephant  and  Seladang  Hunting  in   Malaya,     1 

land  Ward. 
1  n  s  5 .   [nnbs,  Emily.     The  Chei  onete  (with  the  Gilding  off).     2  \ 
iS(>().  Jacok,  !•'.     Singapore  Malacca  fava  Keiseskizzcn.     Berlin. 

Jansbn,  1 1.     Sec  Steven  1,  \  1  ghan  . 
1902.  Johnston,  Sii  11.     The  Uganda  Protectorate,  vol.  ii.  p.  478  ttff, 
1863,  Jobdanus,   Fbiab.      The  Wonden  of   the    Baal    (Trana.   Ed  CoL  sir 

Henry  Yule).     London  (Hakluyl  Society). 
1SS0.   Ksanb,  A.  II.     On  tin-  Relations  of  the  Indo-Chinese  and  inter-Oceanic 

Races   and   Languages.     Journal  oi  the  Anthropological  Institute 

Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  vol,  Ix.  No.  3,  p.  254 
1S00.    Ki  wi.  a.  II.     Ethnology.     Cambridge  University  Pn  P.  257  seqq. 

[894,    In. i  1  jall,  II.  s.     A  Trip  up  the  Pahang,  Tembeling,  and  Tahan  Rivers, 

and  an  Attempt  tO  reach  Gunong  Tahan.      Journal  of  the  Roy;d  Asiatic 

Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.  25,  p,  33  seqq. 

1 S04.    KELSALL,    II.    S.       A   List   of  Jakun   Names  of  Persons  collected  at   S. 

M.ulek.     Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.  26, 

p.  57.      See  also  Lake. 
1S96.   Ki.kmm.     See  Stevens,  Vaughan-. 

1893.  Klinkert,  H.  C.      Malay-Dutch  Dictionary.      Leyden. 

1905.   Knocker,    F.    W.      A    Sakai   Counting-Stick   or   Tally.       With   plate. 

Journ.  F.  M.  S.  Museum,  vol.  I.  ii.  60-61. 
1S94.    KXENIG,  J.  G.     Journal  of  a  Voyage  from  India  to  Siam  and   Malacca  in 

1 779.     Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society.      [No.  26],  p.  59  seqq. 

1895.  KBUYT,  J.   A.       On  the   Straits  Settlements  and  the  Malay   Peninsula. 

Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.  28,  p.   19. 
18S9.   Kuhn.     Beitnige  zur  Sprachenkunde  Hinter-Indiens.     Ref.  Bayer.  Akad. 

1S89,  p.  198. 
1902.  Laidlaw,  F.  F.     See  under  Duckworth,  W.  L.  H.,  and  also  Skeat,  W.  W. 

1 894.  Lake  and  Kelsall.     Journey  on  the  Sembrong  River.     Journal  of  the 

Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.  26,  p.  1. 
1894.   Lake   and    Kelsall.      Johore.      Journal    of    the    Royal    Geographical 

Society.      London.     Vol.  iii.  p.  281. 
1 894.    Lake  and  Kelsall.    The  Camphor  Tree  and  Camphor  Language  of  Johore. 

Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.  26,  p.  35. 

1878.  Lane-Fox.      Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain 

and  Ireland,  vol.  vii.  p.  434  seqq. 
1895-6.   Lapicque.     A  la  recherche  des   Negritos.       Tour  du    Monde,   N.  S. 
(1895),  tome  i.   pp.   409,  421,  433,  445,  453,  589,  601,  613;  N.  S. 
(1896),  tome  ii.  pp.  37,  49,  61,  73. 

1896.  Lapicque.     La  race  Negrito.     Annal.  de  Geographie,  tome  v.  p.  407. 

1879.  Leech,  H.  W.  C.      About  Kinta.     Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society, 

Straits  Branch,  No.  4,  p.  21. 
1892.   Letessier,     Rev.     Charles,    A.M.    ["  Letessier '"].       The    Sakais    of 

Selangor.      Selangor  Journal,  vol.  i.  p.   101. 
1642.   Leupe,  P.  A.    (Jansz).      Die  Orang  Bencea's  of  Wilden  op  Malacca  in 

1642.      Tijdschrift  voor  Indische,  Taal-  Land-  en  Volkenkunde,  Bd.  iv. 

(Ser.  ii.),  S.  128. 
181 1.   Leyden,  John.      On  the  Languages  and  Literature  of  the  Indo-Chinese 

Nations.     Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  x.  p.  158. 


xxxi  v  II  Hi  LI  0  GRA  PH  Y 


1821.    LSYDENj  John.      Malay  Annals.      Translated  from  the  Malay  Language. 
London. 
Lias.      See  Brau  de  St. -Pol. 

1896.  Ling  Roth,  H.  The  Natives  of  Sarawak  and  British  North  Borneo. 
London,  1896.  See  especially  vol.  ii.  pp.  200-201.  Tools  used  in 
preparing  Ipoh- Poison  in  the  Malay  Peninsula.      With  diagrams. 

1887.  Lister,  Hon.  Martin.  The  Negri  Sembilan,  their  Origin  and  Con- 
stitution.    Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,   Straits  Branch,  No. 

19,  P.  35- 

1895.   Lister,  Hon.  Martin.     Atoran  Sungei  Ujong.     Journal  of  the  R.A.S., 

S.B.  [No.  28],  p.  53. 
1847.    LOGAN,  J.    R.      The  Orang  Binua  of  Johore.       Journal    of   the    Indian 

Archipelago  and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  i.  p.  242. 
1847.    Logan  J.    R.       Physical    Characteristics    of   the    Mintira.       Journal    of 

the  Indian  Archipelago  and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  i.  p.  294. 
1847.    Logan,  J.   R.       The   Orang   Sabimba    of  the    Extremity  of   the    Malay 

Peninsula.     Journal  of  the  Indian  Archipelago  and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  i. 

p.  295. 
1847.   Logan,  J.  R.     Biduanda  Kaliang  of  the  River  Pulai  in  Johore.     Journal 

of  the  Indian  Archipelago  and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  i.  p.  299. 
1847.   Logan,  J.  R.      The  Orang  Sletar  of  the  Rivers  and  Creeks  of  the  Old 

Strait  and  Estuary  of  the  Johore.     Journal  of  the  Indian  Archipelago 

and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  i.  p.  302. 
1847.  Logan,   J.    R.      Table    of    Measurements    illustrative    of    the    Physical 

Peculiarities  of  the  Mintira,  Biduanda  Kaliang,  and  Sabimba.     Journal 

of  the  Indian  Archipelago  and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  i.  p.  305. 
1847.   Logan,  J.  R.     The  Superstitions  of  the  Mintira.     Journal  of  the  Indian 

Archipelago  and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  i.  p.  307*. 
1847.   Logan,  J.  R.      Visit  of  a  Party  of  Orang  Mintira  to  Singapore.     Journal 

of  the  Indian  Archipelago  and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  i.  p.  332*. 

1847.  Logan,  J.   R.     The  Ethnology  of  the  Johore  Archipelago.     Journal  of 

the  Indian  Archipelago  and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  i.  p.  336*. 

1848.  Logan,  J.  R.     Customs  common  to  Assam  Hill  Tribes  and  those  of  the 

Indian  Archipelago,  vol.  ii.  p.  229.      See  also  pp.  515  n.,  $16,  517  n., 

529- 

1848.  Logan,  J.   R.     Journal  of  a  Voyage  to  the  Eastern  Coast  and  Islands 

of  Johore.     Journal  of  the  Indian  Archipelago  and  Eastern  Asia,  vol. 
ii.  p.  616. 

1849.  Logan,   J.    R.       Five   Days    in   Naning,    with  a  Walk   to  the  Foot  of 

Gunong  Datu   in   Rambau.      Journal  of  the  Indian  Archipelago  and 
Eastern  Asia,  vol.  iii.  pp.  24,  203,  278,  402,  489. 

1849.  Logan,  J.  R.     The  Languages  of  the  Indian  Archipelago.     Journal  ot 

the  Indian  Archipelago  and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  iii.  p.  637. 

1850.  Logan,  J.   R.     The  Ethnology  of  the  Indian  Archipelago.     Journal  of 

the  Indian  Archipelago  and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  iv.  p.  252,  etc.     Cp. 

ib.  p.  411  (Silong  and  Orang  Laut). 
1850.   Logan,  J.   R.     The  Ethnology  of  Eastern  Asia.     Journal  of  the  Indian 

Archipelago  and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  iv.  p.  441. 
1850.   Logan,   J.    R.      Ethnology  of  Eastern   Asia   and    Indo-Pacific    Islands. 

Journal  of  the  Indian  Archipelago  and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  iv.  p.  552. 

1850.  Logan,  J.  R.     The  Ethnology  of  South-Eastern  Asia.     Journal  of  the 

Indian  Archipelago  and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  iv.  pp.  456-482. 

185 1.  Logan,  J.  R.     Notices  of  Pinang.     Journal  of  the  Indian   Archipelago 

and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  v.  pp.   1,  93,  155,  189,  292,  354,  4°°- 
1 85 1.    Logan,  J.   R.      Notes  at  Pinang,   Kidah,   etc.      Journal  of  the   Indian 
Archipelago  and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  v.  p.  53. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  **xv 


185X1   Looan,  I    R.     The  1  Ethnology  oi  the  1 

ill.-    Indian    An  lii|"  l.i;;.»  ;iii.|    I  \    1.1,    vol.    v.    j).    211      i 

;.    i .. >■ ..w,  J.   K.     Ethnology  ol  the  fndo  Pa<        I  [ouri 

lii.li  in   \i.  hipel  i": »  and  1      tern    taia,  vol.  vii.  p. 
[880i   Looan,   I.   R.     Memorandum  of  the  Various  Tritx  •  inhabiting  Pei 

.ui.i    Provini  <•    Welle  (ley.      Journal    <>i    the    H 

Straits  Branch,  N<>.  7,  p.  8  ;. 
).   Low,  Col.  [ami   .     'IIh-  EC  in.  in  Tiii.cs  ..r  Aboi  >i  Martaban  and 

l.iv.u,  wiih  Notices  oi  tin    Aborigim  1  in  Keddah  and  Perak.     Jew 

of  th>-  [ndian  Archipelago  and  Es  item  Asia,  fol.  W.  p.  41  ;. 

1850.  Low,   CoL   Jambs.      The   Semang   and  rribes   "f    the    Malay 

Peninsula.     Journal  of  the  Indian  Archipelago  and  Eastern  A  ia,  vol. 

iv.   p.   424   v,y./. 

1851.  LOW,  Col.    [AMBS.      Ancient    Connection    between    Kedah  and    Siam,  vol. 

V.    p.      p,S 

1901.    LUBBING,     Dr.       Ula    ECampar    Sakai.       Journal    of  the    Royal    Asiatic 
Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.  35. 

1900.  McCarthy,  Jambs.     Surveying  and  Exploring  in  Siam.     London.     Pp. 

1314 

1901.  M'CRINDLB,  Dr.  J.  W.      Ancient   India  as  described  in   Classical   Litera- 

ture.     London.      1'.  77. 

1902.  Machado,  A.  D.      A  Vocabulary  of  the  Jakuns  of  Batu  I'ahat,  Johore, 

together    with    some    Remarks    on    their    Customs    and     Peculiarities. 

Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  S.B.,  No.  38,  p.  29. 
1876.    M'Mahon,   Lieut.-Col.  A.  R.      The  Karens  of  the  Golden  Chersonese. 

London. 
1878.    M'Nair,  Major  F.      Perak  and  the  Malays,  or  Sarong  and  Kris.      London. 
1839.   Malcolm,  H.     Travels  in  South-Eastern  Asia.      2  vols.      London. 
1883.   Man,   E.   H.      On  the  Aboriginal  Inhabitants  of  the  Andaman  Islands. 

London.      ["  Man's  Andam."]. 

1882.  Marche,   M.    Alfr.       Bull.    Soc.    Normand.    de  Geogr.       Rouen,      iv. 

273-S7. 

1883.  Marche,  M.  Alfr.     Report  in  Arch.  Miss.  Sci.  et  Litt.     Paris,  1883. 

1811.  Marsden,  William.     The  History  of  Sumatra.     Ed.  1783,  1784,1811. 

1 812.  Marsden,  William.      Grammar  of  the   Malayan   Language,   with    an 

Introduction  and  Praxis.      London. 

1899.  Martin,     Professor     Rudolf.       Die     Ureinwohner    der     Malayischen 

Halbinsel.       Correspondenz-Blatt    der    Deutschen    Anthropologischen 
Gesellschaft.      S.  125. 

1900.  Martin,    Professor   Rudolf.     Ueber  eine  Reise  durch   die  Malayische 

Halbinsel.      Mitteilungen  der  Naturwdssenschaftlichen  Gesellschaft   in 

Winterthur.      Heft  ii.  S.  21. 
1905.   Martin,     Professor    Rudolf    ["Martin''].        Die    Inlandstamme    der 

Malayischen  Halbinsel.     Gustav  Fischer.     Jena. 
1 89 1.   Mason,  Otis  T.      Origins  of  Invention  :    a    Study  of   Industry  among 

Primitive  People. 
1897.   Maxwell,  Charlton  N.     Report  to  Government  relating  to  the  Sakai 

Tribes  in  Selangor,  Ulu  Selangor  District.      Reprinted  in  Sel.  Journ. 

vol.  v.  p.  398. 
187S.   Maxwell,  W.  E.   (Sir  William).     Antiquities  of  Province  Wellesley. 

Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.  1,  p.  114. 

1878.  Maxwell,  W.   E.   (Sir  William).     The  Semang  and  Sakei  Tribes  of 

the  Districts  of  Kedah  and   Perak  bordering  on  Province  Wellesley. 
Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.  1,  p.  ill. 

1879.  Maxwell,  W.   E.   (Sir  W'illiam).     The  Aboriginal  Tribes  of  Perak. 

Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.  4,  p.  46. 


HWLIOGRAPHY 


1881.  Maxwell,  W.  E.  (Sir  William).  Aryan  Mythology  in  Malay  Tradi- 
tion.    J.R.A.S.,  N.S.  1 88 1,  vol.  xiii. 

1899.  Meyer,  A.  13.,  M.D.  Distribution  of  the  Negritos  in  the  Philippine 
Islands  and  elsewhere.      Dresden. 

1895.  Meyners,  d'Estrey,  Dr.  Revue  de  Geographic  Dix-neuvieme  Annee, 
Deuxieme  livraison,  pp.   1 10- 11 5. 

1875.  Miklucho-Maclay  (Baron)  N.  von.  Journal  of  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  i. 
(the  only  number  issued),  p.  94,  with  plate. 

1875.  Miklucho-Maclay  (Baron)  X.  von.    Ethnologische  Excursion  in  Johore. 

Natuurkundig  Tijdschrift  voor  Nederlandsch  Indie,  Deel  xxxv.  p.  250. 

1876.  Miklucho-Maclay  (Baron)  N.  von.      Ethnologische  Excursionen  in  der 

Malayischen    Halbinsel    (Nov.    1874   to  Oct.    1875).       Natuurkundig 

Tijdschrift   voor   Nederlandsch   Indie,   Deel  xxxvi.    p.    1   seqq.      Plates 

I. -III.1 
1876.   Miklucho-Maclay    (Baron)   N.    von.      Ueber  die  Orang-Semang  und 

Orang-Sakai.      Verhandlungen  der  Berliner  Gesellschaft  fiir  Anthropo- 
logic     S.  226. 
1876.   Miklucho-Maclay  (Baron)  N.  von.     Sprachrudimente  der  Orang-Utan 

von  Johor.      Tijdschrift  voor  Ind.  Taal-,  Land-  en  Volkenkunde,  Deel 

xxiii.  pp.  309-312. 
1876.   Miklucho-Maclay   (Baron)   N.    von.      Einiges  iiber  die  Dialecte  der 

Melanesischen  Volkerschaften  in  der  Malaiischen  Halbinsel.    Tijdschrift 

voor  Ind.  Taal-,  Land-  en  Volkenkunde,  Deel  xxiii.  p.  309. 
1878.   Miklucho-Maclay   (Baron)   N.    von.     Ethnological  Excursions  in  the 

Malay  Peninsula.     Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch, 

No.  2,  p.  205. 
1878.   Miklucho-Maclay  (Baron)  N.  von.     Dialects  of  the  Melanesian  Tribes 

in  the  Malay  Peninsula.      Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Straits 

Branch,  No.   1,  p.  38. 

1883.  Miklucho-Maclay  (Baron)  N.  von.     Abstract  of  Four  Lectures  before 

the  Imp.  Russ.  Geog.  Obtch.  in  Oct.  1882.      See  also  Ausland,  1883, 

No.  33,  p.  64. 
1882.    Montano    ["Montano"].       Quelques    jours    chez    les    indigenes    de    la 

province  de  Malacca.      Revue  d'Ethnographie,  tome  i.  p.  41. 
1837.   Moor,    H.    J.    ["Moor"].       Notices   of    the    Indian    Archipelago   and 

Adjacent  Countries.      Singapore. 

1884.  Morgan,   J.    de.       Article    in    Bulletin   de    la   Societe   Normande    de 

Geographie,  tome  vi.  pp.  423  seqq. 

1885.  /'Morgan,  J.  de  [L'Homme,  or  L'H.].     L'age  de  la  pierre  polie  dans  la 

presqu'ile  Malaise.      L'Homme,  tome  ii.  p.  494. 

1885.  Morgan,  J.  de  [L'Homme,  or  L'H.].  Negritos  de  la  presqu'ile  Malaise. 
L'Homme,  tome  ii.  pp.  545,  577,  609,  641,  713. 

1886.  Morgan,  J.  de  [L'Homme,  or  L'H.].  Quelques  observations  au  sujet  des 
publications  sur  les  Negritos  de  la  presqu'ile  Malaise.  L'Homme, 
tome  iii.  p.  40. 

1885.  /-Morgan,    J.    de.       Moeurs,   coutumes,   et    languages   des    Negritos    de 

l'interieur  de  la  presqu'ile  Malaise.      Bulletin  de  la  Societe  Normande 
J      de  Geographie,  tome  vii.  p.  411. 

1 886.  I  Morgan,  J.  de  ["  De  Morgan  "].  Voyage  d'exploration  dans  la  presqu'ile 
Malaise.      Bulletin  de  la  Societe  Normande  de  Geographie,  tome  viii. 

>     pp.  141,  211,  281  ("Journal  de  Voyage"). 
1854.   Netscher,  E.       Beschrijving  van  een  Gedeelte  der  Residentie  Riouw. 

1  Three  plates  of  Sakai  and  Semang,  best  in  his  collection.  The  distinction 
stated  to  have  been  drawn  with  the  between  Sakai  and  Semang  comes  out 
help  of  a  camera  lucida,  and  to  be  the       strongly,  though  Maclay  did  not  see  it. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  x> 


Tijd*  linn  vim  I ii< 1 1  m  he   I  ial»,  Land*  en  \  nde.      B 

inS    ..  ././. 

1 839.   Nbwboi  d,  T.  I.  I "  Newbold  "|.     Political  and  Statistical  Accounl 

Britlth  Settlementi  in   th<-  Strtiti  ol    Malacca.      j  Ion. 

Vol.   ii-   chap,   w.,   "  Remarki  on    \l>"i  ;      With 

Voe  ibularie  1,  pp    1  ■-'  1  ;  1 ,   1  ;  1 
iS()i.    Pleyte,  C.  M.  ["  Pleyte  "].     Sumpitan  and  Bow  in  Indonesia.     I    1 

An  luv  1.  Ethnologie.     Bd.  iv.       165       [Vans.     With  lllu 
Pibuss,  K.  T.  II-     See  Stevens,  Vaughan-. 
1883.  Quaiki  1  \i.i   ,  11.     The  Pigmii  u     Journal  of  the! 

St  1  aits   Branch,    No.    ti,  p.  83;    No.    1  5,  p.    I.      Ci    1 

Paris,  1S87.     ["  De  Quatrefs  pi    | 
1S17.   Raffles,  Sii  Thomas  Stamford.     The  History  of  Java.     London. 

Second  edition.     1830. 
1S1S.  Raffles,  Sir  Thomas  Stamford.     On  the  Malaya  Nation.     Asiatic 

Researches!  vol.  xii.  p.  102. 
1S30.   Raffles,  Sir  Thomas  Si  imford.    Memoir  of  the  Life  and  Public  Sen 

of  Sir  Thomas  Stamford  Raffles.     London.     Second  Edition.     1 S 3 5 . 
[879.   Raffles,  Sir  Thomas  Stamford.     The  Maritime  Code  of  the  Malays. 

Malay  Weekly  Register,  reprinted  in  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 
Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.  3,  p.  62  ;  No.  4,  p.   I. 

[898.  RATHBORNE,  A.  B.  Camping  and  Tramping  in  Malaya.  London.  P. 
1 86  s <■</(/. 

1883.  RECLUS,  E.  Nouvelle  Geographie  Universelle,  vol.  viii.  L'Inde  et 
l'lndo-Chine.      Paris. 

1 89 1.  Ridley,  Henry  N.  Discovery  of  a  Stone  Implement  in  Singapore. 
Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.    23,  p.   141. 

1S95.  Ridley,  Henry  N.  Mammals  of  the  Malay  Peninsula.  Nat.  Science, 
vol.  vi.  No.  37  (March),  p.   163. 

1S98.  Ridley,  Henry  N.  The  Poisonous  Plants  of  the  Malay  Peninsula.  Agri- 
cultural Bulletin  of  the  Botanic  Gardens  Department,  Straits  Settle- 
ments, No.  8  (December),  p.  199  seqq.  [Contains  much  valuable 
information  about  "  Ipoh  "  and  other  dart-poisons  of  the  Peninsula, 
with  list  of  authorities.] 

1903.  Ridley,    Henry    N.       MS.    Notes   and    comments    embodied    in    this 

book.      See  also  Skeat,  1900. 

1904.  Ridley,   Henry   N.      The  Orang  Laut  of  Singapore.      Journal  of  the 

Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch  [No.  41],  pp.  129,  130. 

1897.  Roe,  E.  J.      Report  to  Government  relating  to  Sakai  Tribes  in  Selangor, 

Kuala  Lumpur  District.      Reprinted  in  Selangor  Journal,  vol.  v. 
1893.    Ronkel,   P.   S.   von.       Ein   Malayischer   Bericht  iiber  die   Djakun   der 
Halbinsel  Malakka.     Globus,  Bd.  lxiv.  No.  4,  S.  53. 

1898.  Rowland,   W.    R.    ["Rowland''].      Bemerkungen   Liber    einen    kleinen 

Stamm  von  Orang  Bukit,  zur  Zeit  angesiedelt  und  beobachtet  auf 
Perhentian  Tinggi  Estate,  Negri  Sembilan,  Mai  -  Sep.  1896.  Mit- 
teilungen  d.  k.  k.  Geographischen  Gesellschaft,  in  YVien.  Bd.  xli. 
Heft  io-ii,  S.  706-713. 

1901.  Schmidt,  P.  W.  ["Schmidt"].      Die   Sprachen  der  Sakai  und   Semang 

auf  Malaka  und  ihr  Verhaltnis  zu  den  Mon-Khmer-Sprachen.  Bijdragen 
tot  de  Taal-,   Land-  en  Volkenkunde  van  Ned. -Indie,  6  volgr.,  Deel 
viii.  pp.  399-583  of  vol.  lii.  (1901). 
1897.   Scott,  W.    D.       Report   relating    to   Sakai  Tribes   in    Selangor,    Kuala 
Selangor  District.      Reprinted  in  Sel.  Journ.  vol.  v.  p.  396. 

1902.  Seligmann,  C.   G.      Note  on  the  Preparation  and  Use  of  the  Kenyah 

Dart  Poison  "Ipoh."  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute  of 
Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  vol.  xxxii.  p.  239. 


xxxviii  BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1869.   Semper,  Carl.     Die  Philippinen  u.  ihre  Bewohoer. 

1896.  SKEAT,  \V.  W.      Vocabulary  of  the  Besisi  Dialect.     Journal  of  the  Royal 

Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.  29,  p.   13. 

1897.  Skeat,   W.    W.       Report  to   Government   relating    to    Sakai    Tribes    in 

Selangor,    Kuala  Langat  District.      Reprinted  in  Sel.   Journ.    vol.    v. 

pp.  325  seqq. 
1900.   Skeat,    \V.    \Y.       Malay   Magic,  an   Introduction  to   the   Folklore  and 

Popular  Religion  of  the  Malay  Peninsula.      London  :   Macmillan. 
1900.   Skeat,   W.   W.      First  Report  on  Results  of  the  Cambridge   Exploring 

Expedition   to   the  Malay   Provinces   of  Lower  Siam.      Report  to  the 

British  Association,   Bradford,  1900.       British  Association,  Section  D 

(Anthropology).      See  also  Duckworth  and  Smyth. 

1900.  Skeat,  W.   W.  and  Ridley,   H.  N.       The  Orang  Laut  of  Singapore. 

Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.  33,  p.  247. 

1 90 1.  Skeat,   W.    W.       Fables   and    Folktales    from    a    Far    Eastern    Forest. 

Cambridge  University  Press. 

1 90 1.  Skeat,  W.  W.      Second  Report  on  the  Results  of  the  Cambridge   Ex- 

ploring Expedition  to  the  Malay  Provinces  of  Lower  Siam.  Anthro- 
pological Section,  British  Association,  Glasgow. 

1902.  Skeat,   W.   W.      The  Wild  Tribes  of  the  Malay  Peninsula.     Journal  of 

the  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  vol.  xxxii. 

p.  124. 
1902.   Skeat,  W.  W.      Blowpipe  from  Kuantan,  Malay  Peninsula.      Man,  No. 

108  (Oct.),  p.  145. 
1902.   Skeat,  W.  W.      Malay  Spiritualism.     Journal  of  the  Folklore  Society, 

vol.  xiii.  No.  2,  p.  134  seqq. 

1898.  Smyth,   H.    Warington.      Five  Years  in  Siam.      London.      Vol.   ii. 

pp.  76,  77. 

1902.  Smyth,  H.  Warington.  Boats  and  Boat-building  in  the  Malay  Penin- 
sula, with  Notes  by  W.  W.  Skeat.  Journal  of  the  Society  of  Arts. 
[Deals  with  O.  Laut  boats.] 

1849.  Spenser,  St.  John.  The  Population  of  the  Indian  Archipelago.  Journal 
of  the  Indian  Archipelago  and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  iii.  p.  379. 

1 89 1.  Stevens,  Hrolf  Vaughan-.  Die  Reisen  des  Hrn.  Vaughan-Stevens 
in  Malacca.  Verhandlungen  der  Berliner  Gesellschaft  fiir  Anthropo- 
logic, S.  829.      Ed.  Grunwedel.      [V.  B.  G.  A.] 

1 89 1.  Stevens,  Hrolf  Vaughan-.     Die  Wilden  Eingeborenen  von  Malacca. 

Verhandlungen  der  Berliner  Gesellschaft  fur  Anthropologic,  S.  837. 
Ed.  Virchow.      [V.  B.  G.  A.] 

1892.  Stevens,  Hrolf  Vaughan-.     Schadel  und  Haar  von  Orang  Panggang 

in  Malacca.  Verhandlungen  der  Berliner  Gesellschaft  fur  Anthropo- 
logic, S.  439.      Ed.  Virchow.      [V.  B.  G.  A.] 

1892.  Stevens,  Hrolf  Vaughan-.  Orang  Panggang  und  Orang  Benua. 
Verhandlungen  der  Berliner  Gesellschaft  fiir  Anthropologic,  S.  465. 
Ed.  Grunwedel.      [  V.  B.  G.  A.] 

1892-4.  Stevens,  Hrolf  Vaughan-.  Materialen  zur  Kenntniss  der  Wilden 
Stamme  auf  der  Halbinsel  Malaka.  Veroffentlichungen  aus  dem  K. 
Museum  fiir  Volkerkunde,  Berlin.  Bd.  ii.  Heft  3-4,  S.  81  ["Vaughan- 
Stevens,  ii."];  Bd.  iii.  Heft  3-4,  S.  95  ["Vaughan-Stevens,  iii."]. 
Ed.  Grunwedel. 

1892.  Stevens,   Hrolf  Vaughan-.       Orang    Panggang   und    Orang   Benua. 

Zeitschrift  fiir  Ethnologic  Bd.  xxiv.  S.  465-468.  Mitteilungen  von 
A.  Grunwedel.      [Z.f.  E.  xxiv.] 

1893.  Stevens,   Hrolf  Vaughan-.     Die   Zaubermuster  der  Orang-Semang. 

Bearbeitet  von  A.  Grunwedel.  Zeitschrift  fiir  Ethnologie,  Bd.  xxv. 
S.  71.      [Z.f.  E.  xxv.] 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


,Si).|.   Sii  Hi. <>i  i     VAUOHAN-.      i  >;.    Zanberroustei    dei    Oi 

Bearbeitet  von    \*  GrUnwedel.     Zcitschrifi  fUi  Ethnologic.    Bd    • 

S.    141.      [Z.  /.   B.   \wi.  1 

,  so  1    s  1 1  \  1  N  ,  N  Ri  n  1   Vauohan-,     1 1. 1. 1 1  11  n« I  Schadel  von  Blai 

I  M.ii.u  ca).     \  1  rhandlungen  d<  r  Berlii    1  1  nthropol* 

s.  354.     \r.  /{.  G.  A.] 
s  1 1  \  1  n  ,  1 1  k< 'i  1  Vauohan-,     Schadel  und  Extremitatei 
racoon .,     Malacca.      Verhandlungen   dei     !'•«  rlii 
Anthropologic,  S.  141.     1 1  '•  B.  G.    t.  ] 

[896.  Stevens,  Hroli    Vauohan*.     Mitteilungen  aui  deni  Frauen-L 

Orang  Belendas,  da   Orang  Djakun  and  da  1  Lant     Zeitschrift 

fill    Ethnologic,    Bd.    icxviii    S.    163-902.      Ed    Bartels.      [Z.J 

wviii.] 

[896.  Sua  i\s,  Hrolp  Vaughan-.  A>utdruck  dei  Gemtithsbewegnngen  <ler 
Orang-hutan  von  Malacca,  Verhandlungen  dei  Berlinei  GesellschaA 
(ur  Anthropologie,  S.  270-272.      Ed.  I  (/'./-'.  (,.  ./.  j 

1896.  Stevens,  Hroli  Vauohan-.  Geschichte  dei  Djakun  (Benar-Benar). 
Verhandlungen  dei   Berlinei  Gesellschafl   fUi  Anthropolo]  joi« 

309.     Ed  Klemm,     [  V.  B,  G.  -•/.] 

1596.  Stevens,    Hrolf   Vaughan-.      Abreise   von   Malacca,      liricf  an   K. 

Virchow.      Verhandlungen  dei  Berliner  GeseUschaft  fiir  Anthropologic, 
s.  463.     [/'.  /-'.  G.  .i.\ 
lSwo.    Stk\'kns,     llROLF    VAUGHAN-.       Notizcn    aus    den     Reisen     dea    Ilrolf 
Vaughan-Stevens  in   Malaka.      Von  A.    GrUnwedel.      Ethnologisches 
Notizblatt,  Jahrgang  I.   Heft  3,  S.  1  seqq.     [Ethn.  Notizbl.} 

1896.  Stevens,   Hrolf  Vaughan-.     Dcr  Cholera-zauber  bei   den  Temia  auf 

der   Halbinsel   Malaka  (Jansen,    H.).      Globus,    Bd.    lxix.  S.   117-119; 
and  137-142. 

1597.  Stevens,  Hrolf  Vaughan-.     Anthropologische  Bemerkungen  iiber  die 

Eingeborenen  von  Malacca.      Zeitschrift  fiir  Ethnologic      Bd.  xxix.  S. 

173-206.      Ed.  Bartels.      \Z.f.  E.  xxix.] 
1899.   Stevens,  Hrolf  Vaughan-.     Die  Zauber-Muster  der  Orang  Semang  in 

Malaka.      Zeitschrift  fiir  Ethnologic      Bd.   xxxi.  S.   137.      Ed.  Preuss. 

[Z./.  E.  xxxi.] 
1S99.   Stevens,  Hrolf  Vaughan-.     Die  Zauberbilderschriften  der  Negrito  in 

Malaka.      Globus,  Bd.  lxxv.  S.   345  (Nr.   22);    and   S.    364  (Nr.  23). 

Von  Dr.  K.  Th.  Preuss.     [Globus,  lxxv.] 
1902.   Stevens,  Hrolf  Vaughan-.     Namengebung  und  Heirat  bei  den  Orang 

Temia  auf  der  Halbinsel   Malaka.      Globus,    Bd.    lxxxii.    (No.    16),  S. 

253.      Ed.  Stonner.      [Globus,  lxxxii.] 
Stonner,  H.      See  Stevens,  H.  Vaughan-. 

1897.  Stonor,    O.    F.       Report   to   Government   relating   to   Sakai  Tribes    in 

Selangor,    Ulu  Langat  District.      Reprinted  in  Sel.  Journ.   vol.    v.   p. 

395- 

1904.  Swan,  R.  M.  W.  Note  on  Stone  Implements  from  Pahang.  Man, 
No.  34  (April). 

1880.  Swettenham,  (Sir)  Frank  A.  From  Perak  to  Slim,  and  down  the 
Slim  and  Bernam  Rivers.  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Straits 
Branch,  No.  5,  p.  51. 

1880.  Swettenham,  (Sir)  Frank  A.  Comparative  Vocabulary  of  the  Dialects 
of  some  of  the  Wild  Tribes  inhabiting  the  Malayan  Peninsula.  "Journal 
of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.  5,  p.  125.  Cp. 
No.  6,  p.  293. 

1887.  Swettenham,  (Sir)  Frank  A.  ["Swettenham"].  On  the  Native  Races 
of  the  Straits  Settlements  and  Malay  States.  Journal  of  the  Anthropo- 
logical Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  vol.  xvi.  pp.  221-229. 


xl  BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1894.    SWSTTENHAM,  (Sir)   FRANK  A.      Note  on  the  Jacoons.      Journal  of  the 

Anthropological   Institute    of    Great    Britain    and    Ireland,    vol.    xxiii. 

p.  89. 
1899.    TEMPLE,  SIB   RICHARD,  Bart.     Journal  of  the   Anthropological  Institute 

of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  vol.  xxix.  p.   101. 
1901.   Temple,  Sir  Richard,  Bart.     Census  Report  on  Andaman  Islands. 
Thomsen,  Rev.  C.,  referred  to  by  Begbie  in  his  Introduction  (p.  ix). 
1847.   Thomson,    J.    T.    T.       Remarks  on    the    Sletar   and    Sabimba    Tribes. 

Journal  of  the  Indian  Archipelago  and  Eastern  Asia,  vol.  i.  p.  341*. 
185 1.   Thomson,   J.    T.    T.      Description  of  the   Eastern  Coast  of  Johore  and 

Pahang  and  Adjacent  Islands.      Journal  of  the  Indian  Archipelago  and 

Eastern  Asia,  vol.  v.  pp.  85,  133. 
1873.   Thorel.       Voyage    d'Exploration    en    Indo-Chine.      Paris.      Tome   ii. 

p.  289  seqq. 
1844.   Tomlin,  Jacob.      Miss.  Journals  and  Letters  written  during  Eleven  Years 

Residence  and  Travels  among  the  Chinese,  Siamese,  Javanese,  Khassias, 

and  other  Eastern  Nations,  p.  85. 
1 90 1.  Turner,    Sir  W.       Transactions  of  the    Royal   Society  of  Edinburgh, 

vol.  xl.  part  i.  No.  6. 
Virchow,    Professor    Rudolf.        See    Stevens,    Hrolf  Vaughan-,    and 

Miklucho-Maclay. 
1865.  Waitz,   Th.   ["Waitz"].      Anthropologic    der   Naturvolker.       Theil  v. 

Heft  1-2,  pp.  84  seqq  and  175  seqq. 
1869.   Wallace,  Dr.  Alfred  Russel  ["  Wallace"].     The  Malay  Archipelago, 

The  Land  of  the  Orang-utan  and  the  Bird  of  Paradise.      London.      2 

vols.     See  vol.  ii.  pp.  441-451. 
Warington  Smyth.     See  Smyth. 
1903.  Wilkinson,  R.  J.      Malay-English  Dictionary.      In  three  parts.      Kelly 

and  Walsh,  Singapore,  Hong-Kong,  Shanghai,  and  Yokohama. 
1890.  Wray,   Leonard,  Junior.      Journal  of  a  Collecting  Expedition  to  the 

Mountains  of  Batang  Padang,    Perak.      Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic 

Society,  Straits  Branch,  No.  21,  p.  123. 

1892.  Wray,  Leonard,  Junior.     Ipoh  Poison  of  the  Malay  Peninsula.     Journal 

of  the  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  vol.  xxi. 
p.  476.      Reprinted  from  the  Kew  Bulletin  of  1891. 
1894.   Wray,  Leonard,  Junior.      Some  Observations  on  the  Height  and  Eye- 
sight of  the  Wild   Tribes  of  Perak.      Perak  Museum  Notes,  No.   iii. 

P-  33- 
1894.    Wray,   Leonard,  Junior.       The  Long-jointed  Bamboo,  called  "Buloh 

Ber-sumpitan,"  used  by  the  Semang   for   making   Blowpipes.      Perak 

Museum  Notes,  No.  iii.  p.  54. 
1897.   Wray,    Leonard,  Junior.       The  Cave-dwellers  of  Perak.      Journal  of 

the  Anthropological  Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,   vol.   xxvi. 

No.  1,  p.  36.      Repr.  Perak  Mus.  Notes,  No.  ii.  pt.  1.      See  also  Perak 

Mus.    Notes,   vol.  i.  No.  i.   pp.    13-15.      Further  Notes  on   the   Cave- 
dwellers  of  Perak  ;  and  vol.  iii.  passim. 
1903.   Wray,  Leonard,  Junior.      MS.  notes  and  comments  embodied  in  this 

book. 
1880.   Yule,  Col.  Sir  Henry.     Notes  on  and  Analogies  of  Manners  between  the 

Indo  -  Chinese    Races    and     the    Races    of    the     Indian    Archipelago. 

Journal  of  the  Anthropological   Institute  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland, 

vol.  ix.  No.  3,  p.  290  seqq. 
1903.  Yule,   Col.    Sir  Henry,   and   Burnell,   A.    C.    Hobson-Jobson.     A 

Glossary    of   Anglo -Indian     Colloquial    Words    and    Phrases.       New 

Edition,  edited  by  William  Crooke,  B.A. 

1893.  Zuniga,  Martinez  de.     Estadimo  de  las  Islas  Filipinas.     Madrid. 


M** 


> 


OlildilU 


INTRODUCTION  (Environment) 

Onk  of  the  most  important  of  th  il  aspects  of  the  Malay 

Peninsula  (winch  we  may  take  as  running  fi  »m  Tavoy  to  Singapore) 

i|    its  shape,  which  is  that  of  a  Kin.;  nocked  bottle  01  an   Indian  dub, 

narrow  towards  the  upper  extremity,  bulging  at  the  centre,  and  taper- 
ing again  at  the  lower  extremity,     The  neck  of  the  bottle  or  club  at 

LtS  narrowest  point  in  the  north  (the  Isthmus  of  Kraw)  measures  but 
thirty  live  miles  from  sea  to  sea  ;  at  its  broadest  (the  belly  of  the 
bottle),  it  is  still  under  two  hundred  miles  across  ;  hence,  in  spite 
of  its  great  length  of  roughly  about  a  thousand  miles  from  north  to 
south,  there  is  no  spot,  even  in  the  far  interior  of  the  Peninsula, 
which  is  as  much  as  a  hundred  miles  from  the  sea.  The  result  is 
that  the  Malay  Peninsula,  though  distinctly  forming  a  part  of  the 
Asiatic  mainland,  takes  on  the  characteristics  of  an  island  rather  than 
those  of  the  continent  to  which  it  incidentally  coheres,  and  in  most 
respects  should  be  properly  regarded  as  forming  an  integral  part  of 
the  Malay  Archipelago.  Regarded  from  another  aspect,  the  Malay 
Peninsula  is  at  once  a  causeway  of  colossal  proportions,  and  a  break- 
water. In  the  former  capacity  it  connects  the  land  forms  of  the  fauna 
and  the  flora  (and  even  the  geological  strata)  of  the  Asiatic  main- 
land with  forms  occurring  in  the  islands  of  the  Malayan  Archipelago, 
with  several  of  which,  including  Rio  and  Lingga,  Banka,  Billiton, 
and  Sumatra,  it  is  known  to  have  been  once  geologically  connected. 
In  the  latter,  it  deflects  what  might  be  the  normal  course  of  the 
trade  of  the  Far  East,  some  hundreds  of  miles  to  the  south-eastward, 
towards  the  equator  and  the  cluster  of  great  tropical  islands  of 
which  the  Malay  Archipelago  consists.  The  actual  course  of  trade 
therefore  follows  the  coast-line  of  the  Malay  Peninsula  through  the 
Straits  by  way  of  Penang,  Malacca,  and  Singapore,  the  first  and  last 
of  which  certainly  appear  to  be  as  convenient  spots  for  vessels  pro- 
ceeding by  this  route  as  any  that  could  have  been  chosen.  At  the 
same  time  the  descriptions  of  the  ancient  glories  of  Malacca,  even 
if  we  allow  for  considerable  exaggeration  on  the  part  of  the  chroniclers, 
leave  no  doubt  as  to  the  reality  of  its  former  importance,  and  but 
for  the  silting  up  of  its  harbour  there  appears  but  little  reason  why 
the  former  Queen  of  those  seas  should  now  sit  brooding  over  her 
ancient  fame.  But  apart  from  these  three  ports,  which,  after  all, 
VOL.  I  B 


INTRODUCTION 


are  to  a  great  extent  more  of  the  nature  of  ports  of  call  than  termini, 
and  apart,  too,  from  the  fast-growing  commercial  importance  of  the 
Federated  Malay  States,  by  far  the  greater  portion  of  the  Peninsula 
is  still  much  cut  off  from  the  world,  and  knows  as  little  of  it  as,  to 
quote  the  homely  Malay  simile,  the  "  frog  under  a  coconut-shell." 
Hence,  in  spite  of  the  recent  great  developments  both  of  planting 
and  mining,  perhaps  two-thirds  of  the  entire  country  is  still  "  un- 
opened," and  remains  covered  with  the  tropical  growth  of  centuries, 
forced  to  its  utmost  development  by  the  hot  and  humid  climate  result- 
ing from  its  insular  character  and  equatorial  position. 

With  regard  to  the  character  of  the  country  itself,  a  glance  at 
the  map  will  showr  that  the  backbone  of  the  Peninsula  consists  of  a 
range,  or  rather  system  of  ranges,  the  source  of  the  innumerable 
small  rivers  and  streams  which  drain  and  irrigate  the  country  from 
end  to  end,  and  the  chief  of  which  give  their  names  to  the  several 
States  of  Kedah,  Perak,  and  Selangor  on  the  west  coast,  to  Patani, 
Kelantan,  and  Trengganu  on  the  east,  and  to  Johor  at  the  southern- 
most extremity.  The  hills,  which  are  steep  and  savage,  being  clad 
with  jungle  to  the  very  sky-line,  terminate  in  not  a  few  places  in  rugged 
and  precipitous  peaks,  several  of  the  highest  of  which  are  upwards 
of  7000  to  8000  feet  high.  Their  formation  is  chiefly  of  a  granitic 
character,  with  quartz  and  quartzose  veins,  wrhich  on  decomposition 
yield  the  extensive  stanniferous,  and  to  a  minor  extent  auriferous 
deposits  that  have  been  worked  with  such  conspicuous  success  in 
the  alluvial  plains.  It  is  chiefly  on  the  foothills,  where  these  are 
unoccupied,  that  the  wild  aborigines  make  their  home.  They  are, 
however,  also  found  in  small  scattered  communities  on  the  hills 
of  the  main  ranges,  up  to  a  height  of  even  3000  feet  and  more. 
Though  caves  are  fairly  common,  especially  in  isolated  limestone 
masses  in  the  northern  part  of  the  Peninsula,  the  aborigines  do  not 
as  a  rule  frequent  these,  preferring  the  rock-shelters,  which  are  not 
infrequently  the  haunt  of  the  Semang.  The  alluvial  land,  which 
lies  at  the  foot  of  the  hills  and  in  stretches  along  the  coast,  has 
every  appearance  of  having  been  formerly  covered  by  the  sea,  and 
indeed  in  this  respect  the  observations  of  science  are  at  one  with 
aboriginal  tradition,  which  asserts  that  the  sea  in  former  times 
washed  right  up  to  the  base  of  the  mountains.  The  alteration  of 
the  coast-line  itself  is  continuous  and  extraordinarily  rapid.  On  the 
eastern  coast,  which  is  subject  to  an  annual  bombardment  from  the 
rollers  of  the  China  Sea,  hurled  against  it  by  the  full  sledge-hammer 
force  of  the  north-easterly  monsoon,  the  fierce  tides  that  race  up 
and  down  the  coast  are  continually  forming  long,  narrow  bars  of 
sand  parallel  to  the  coast,  each  end  of  which  keeps  growing  till 
it  reaches  a  point  at  which  the  coast-line  curves  to  meet  it,  when  a 
narrow  mouth  perhaps  is  all  that  is  left.  The  result  is  an  extra- 
ordinary phenomenon   like   the  Inland  Sea  of  Singora,   which  has 


/  NV1R0N  Ml 


been  formed  exact]}  in  the  mannei  described,  and  measun  i  about 
sixty  miles  in  length  by  about  twenty  in  the  broadesl  pan  ;  the  u] 
pari  "i  ii  is  fresh  watei  and  the  lowei  part  alt,  and  in  motl  parti 
ii  is  10  shallow  as  to  be  difficult  of  navigation,  except  foi  the  nat 
canoes  01    boats  specially  constructed.     The  Cape  ol    Patani    is 
another  example  ol  oneoi  these  long  landy  peninsulas.     It  mi 
about  four  miles  in  length. 

The  western  coast  is  protected  from  the  full  force  ol  the  south- 
western monsoon  by  the  Island  of  Sumatra,  whi<  h  forms  a  natural 
breakwater,  and  gives  to  the  Straits  ol  Malacca  the  character  ol  i 
vast  river  or  lake.  With  every  tide  the  straits  fill  from  the  open 
sea,  the  tides  rising  to  a  height  ol  between  twenty  and  thirty  feet 

Here  and  there,  at  intervals  along  the  western  (oast,  <.-.  for  many 
miles  along  the  CO&St  of  the  Malacca  I  hstrict,  as  well  as  at  the  northern 
and  southern  extremities  of  the  coast-line  of  Selangor,  extend 
magnificent  expanses  Of  sandy  beach,  fringed  here  and  there  by 
coconut  palms,  but  more  generally  by  what  looks  at  first  sight 
something  like  a  row  of  larches,  in  reality  the  Casuarina%  or  "she- 
oak  "  tree  of  Australia.  Here,  more  especially  on  the  shore  of 
Kuala  Langat,  their  favourite  haunt,  wander  from  time  to  time  rare 
scattered  parties  of  the  Sea-Jakun,  the  women  fishing  for  the  small 
fry  in  the  hot  and  shallow  waters,  the  men  spearing  razorshells, 
or  digging  out  mussels  with  a  quick  twist  of  their  jungle-knife  from 
among  the  roots  of  the  "  api-api  "  trees,  or  collecting  cockles  and 
other  bivalves  whose  tracks  and  haunts  revealed  themselves  to  the 
initiated  eye  alone  in  the  bright  and  smoking  sands. 

In  spite  of  these  and  other  most  welcome  breaks  in  the 
monotony  of  the  mangrove,  however,  there  is  less  open  coast  on 
this  side  of  the  Peninsula  than  there  is  on  the  eastern,  and  almost 
anywhere  the  serried  ranks  of  mangrove  trees  can  be  seen,  working 
their  way  out  from  the  river-mouths  into  the  sea,  their  network  of 
prong- like  roots  checking  the  dispersion  of  the  soil  continually 
eroded  and  carried  down  by  the  wash  of  the  tidal  rivers,  and  build- 
ing it  up  with  continual  accretions  and  by  sensible  gradations  into 
higher  and  firmer  banks.  One  of  the  chief  causes  of  this  alteration 
of  the  coast-line,  which  although  it  is  gaining  on  the  sea  in  places, 
is  in  others  losing  ground  writh  equal  rapidity,  is  undoubtedly  the 
velocity  of  the  tides  and  the  continual  alteration  in  the  set  of  the 
marine  currents.  For  the  alteration  of  the  geographical  character 
of  the  interior,  however,  the  chief  factor  is  undoubtedly  the  climate, 
which  has  a  temperature  varying  from  about  68c  to  a  little  above 
900  in  the  shade  in  the  plains,  and  the  torrential  rainfall  (varying  from 
about  90  inches  to  130  inches  per  annum) — a  combination  which 
naturally  tends  to  turn  the  greater  part  of  the  country  into  a 
forcing-house  calculated  to  promote  the  most  rapid  development 
conceivable  of  every  form  of  vegetation. 


INTRODUCTION 


What  is  this  vegetation  like,  and  what  is  its  effect  upon  the 
various  forms  of  life  that  depend  upon  it  ?  This  is  a  question  which 
has  been  answered  in  many  different  ways,  in  accordance  with  the 
temperament  of  the  questioner.  To  one  the  very  name  of  the 
tropical  jungle  implies  something  horrible,  haunting,  monstrous,  the 
oppressive  darkness  of  a  perpetual  smothering  gloom,  teeming  with 
pestiferous  disease  and  death.  To  another  it  implies  everything 
luxuriant,  gorgeous,  glowingly  beautiful,  a  feast  of  form  and  colour  ; 
to  a  third  it  brings  the  absorbing  interest  which  attends  every  fresh 
self-revelation  of  nature,  every  new  half-glimpse  into  the  region  of  her 
awful  mysteries.  At  all  events  the  jungle  is  not,  when  taken  as  a 
whole,  a  sort  of  improved  botanical  or  zoological  garden.  Its  trees 
(even  the  largest)  are  not  invariably  curtained  about  and  festooned 
with  a  fantastically  twisted  network  of  serpentine  creepers  and 
parasites,  nor  is  it  even  invariably  difficult  to  penetrate.  Brilliant 
plumaged  birds  and  butterflies  of  all  the  hues  of  the  rainbow  do 
not  flit  in  myriads  from  tree  to  tree.  No  carpet  of  the  choicest 
and  gayest  hot-house  flowers  is  spread  under  foot.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  country  is  not  a  mere  collection  of  malarial  swamps, 
exhaling  mephitic  and  poisonous  vapours  ;  there  is  not  at  least  one 
tiger  behind  every  tree,  at  least  one  snake  in  every  clump  of  grass. 
Splendours  such  as  we  read  of  are  certainly  not  wanting,  and  their 
beauty  is  not  exaggerated,  but  their  occurrence  is  occasional,  sporadic, 
isolated,  and  irregular,  and  hence  (but  for  the  rare  exception  of  a 
chance  encounter  with  a  wild  beast)  they  come  upon  the  traveller 
with  the  sense  of  a  delightful  surprise  and  relief  which  may  occur 
at  any  moment,  and  which  is  never  long  absent.  But  the  colour 
scheme  of  it  is  on  the  whole  sombre,  and  even  monotonous,  with 
rare  splashes  of  bright  colour,  usually  from  some  gaily-marked  tree- 
stem,  or  from  light  shining  through  an  opening  in  the  forest.  It  is 
on  the  topmost  branches  that  the  flowers,  buds,  fruits  are  generally 
displayed,  and  therefore  the  butterflies  and  the  birds  congregate  ;  it 
is  but  rarely  that  these  can  be  seen  from  below,  though  in  the  under- 
wood and  brushwood  the  case  is  often  different.  The  most  densely 
matted,  and  as  a  rule  the  gayest,  part  of  the  jungle  is  always  at  the 
edge  of  a  clearing  or  along  the  banks  of  the  rivers.  In  such  places 
and  in  the  underwood  it  is  often  all  but  impenetrable,  and  if  a  mile 
a  day  be  taken  for  the  cutting  of  a  jungle-trace,  it  may  be  put  down 
as  very  good  progress.  But  throughout  by  far  the  greater  part  of  the 
Peninsula  no  great  trouble  will  be  experienced  in  penetrating  the 
undergrowth,  if  the  approved  method  be  adopted  of  following  the 
Malay  forest-paths,  which  are  often  those  of  wild  beasts,  and  of  the 
races  of  which  we  write,  who  are  scarcely  less  wild  than  they. 

The  tropical  vegetation  of  the  Peninsula  is  of  many  kinds,  and 
each  region  (whatever  its  area)  has  its  own  often  highly  specialised 
character.     Inland  the  deep  primeval  or  virgin  forest  ("  rimba  "),  the 


/  VVIRONMENT  5 


underwood  w  "sa  ondary  growth'  ("bfclu  rally  th< 

abandoned  plantationi  ol  rice  oi  othei  products,  the  bamboo  inn 

the  "  mahang  M-tree  swamp,  the  tamarisks  and  the  iubtropi< 

tion  oi  the  highest  mountain  peak  ,  the  "dusun    01  half-wild  fi 

on  hard  of  the  abori  rim  a  m  ith  its  ton  durian  I 

with  their  great  green  globes  ol  prickly  fruit,  that  look  fox  .'ill  the 

world  like  Brobdingnagian  chestnuts,  and  the  less  stately,  but  not   ■ 

welcome  fruit  trees  that  cluster  to  eth<  r  about  the  durian'i  foot, 

mangostin,  the  "rambutan"  with  the  blood-red  hairy  fruit-clusters 

that  give  it  its  name,  the  smooth  white <  reamy  "1  the  "rambai," 

"duku,"  mango,  jack,  and  many  others),  the  low  scrub  or  brushwood 

("s£makM),  the  man-rove  BWamp  and  the  sandy  stretches  along  the 
sea-coast  that  are  fringed  by  the  (  'asuarinOy  one  and  all  have  their 
own  distinctive  herbs  and  plants  and  to  some  extent  their  distinctive 
fauna  The  same  remark  may  in  fact  be  made  of  the  relatively 
small  area  where  the  jungle  lias  been  completely  outrooted  and 
killed,  such  as  that  in  the  neighbourhood  of  deserted  tin-mines,  to 
which  the  heaped-up  overburden  gives  the  air  of  a  burial-place  of 
giants,  the  Malacca  hills,  where  tapioca  once  flourished,  now  clad 
with  tall  jungle-grass,  the  wide  rice-plains  of  Kedah  and  Perak  and 
Province  YVellesley,  and  the  pasture- lands  kept  for  the  plough- 
buffaloes  in  and  near  the  villages  of  the  rice-cultivators  themselves. 

One  and  all  of  these  regions  reveal  emphatically  the  working 
of  the  law  of  development  in  correspondence  with  environment.  In 
the  deep  forest,  for  instance,  where  the  vast  tree-trunks,  impelled  by 
the  universal  struggle  for  light  and  life,  rise  to  about  four  times  the 
height  of  our  ordinary  English  oaks,  the  eye  is  at  once  attracted  by 
the  fact  that  so  many  stems  rise  bare  and  branchless  for  a  hundred 
feet  (and  upwards)  from  the  soil.  These  are  most  frequently, 
perhaps,  the  hardwood  timber-trees  that  depend  upon  the  depth  of 
their  roots  for  safe  anchorage  against  the  tropical  tempests.  Others, 
whose  roots  strike  less  deeply,  or  which  for  some  special  reason 
require  additional  support,  are  buttressed  about  with  huge  "  struts  " 
(the  bane  of  the  woodcutter),  that  taper  and  converge  upwards 
continuously  till  they  merge  in  the  mighty  bole  at  a  height  of  some 
twelve  yards  or  more  from  the  tree-foot.  In  either  case  the  branches, 
flowers,  and  fruit  are  mostly  developed  as  near  the  crown  of  the  tree 
as  may  be,  since  it  is  there,  and  there  only,  that  they  can  obtain  the 
necessary  amount  of  air  and  light  and  warmth,  and  even  of  rain,  that 
they  require  for  their  self-nourishment.  The  rush  of  the  trees 
towards  the  light,  in  fact,  is  a  struggle  for  life,  a  contest  a  ontrance^ 
in  which  the  defeated  have  scant  chance  of  surviving,  for  beneath 
the  thick  branch-canopy  of  the  big  jungle  there  is  dim  twilight  even  at 
broad  noontide.  This  life-and-death  struggle,  moreover,  produces 
yet  greater  modifications  in  the  structure  of  plants  other  than  trees  ; 
it  is  to  this  that  we  may  ascribe  the  interminable  array  of  parasites, 


INTRODUCTION 


orchids,  ferns,  fungi,  mosses,  lichens,  and  of  plants  that  climb  (guttas, 
rattans,  peppers,  ficuses,  to  mention  a  few  that  are  obvious),  some 
by  utilising  their  stems  (serpent-fashion)  for  twining  round  their 
sturdier  neighbours,  others  by  use  of  their  leaf-stalks,  by  modification 
of  the  leaves  themselves,  by  adventitious  roots,  tendrils,  "  suction- 
pads,"  suckers,  curved  hooks,  and  all  other  imaginable  grappling 
devices  and  developments  of  which  the  botanical  world  is  capable. 

Next  to  this  struggle  for  light,  heat,  and  moisture,  which  is  terrible 
in  its  almost  passionate  intensity,  comes  the  need  for  self-protection, 
and  to  some  extent,  perhaps,  as  a  corollary  of  this,  the  need  for  the 
efficient  propagation  of  the  species.  To  the  first  of  these  two  causes 
we  owe  the  huge  number  of  prickly,  thorny  plants,  shrubs,  and  trees 
that  seem  in  places  to  turn  the  forest  into  a  vast  natural  vegetable 
armoury  (the  rattans,  a  great  number  of  palms,  many  creepers,  and 
trees  with  prickly  fruits,  such  as  the  durian,  belong  to  these)  ;  the 
plants  with  bitter  or  poisonous  sap,  the  glass-like  spicules  of  the 
leaf- cases  of  the  bamboo,  and  the  stings  of  the  giant  tree-nettle, 
the  terror  of  man  and  beast,  under  the  branches  of  one  of  which  I 
have  myself  ridden  on  elephant-back.  To  the  second  cause  we  owe 
such  curiosities  in  the  history  of  dispersion  as  the  "  fillcup  "-fruit, 
whose  "  sail "  gives  it  a  rotatory  motion  that  enables  it  to  bore  into 
the  ground  at  the  tree's  foot,  and  the  great  pincushion-like  (albeit 
barbed)  heads  of  the  spinifex  grass  on  the  east  coast  of  the  Peninsula, 
which  goes  bowling  over  the  sand  at  the  rate  of  an  express  train, 
till  it  catches  against  a  fallen  branch  or  log  or  similar  obstruction, 
where  it  is  most  likely  to  find  the  depressions  that  collect  the 
moisture. 

In  the  animal  kingdom  of  the  Peninsula  this  specialising  ten- 
dency is  not  less  distinctly  marked.  For  instance,  the  colour  of  the 
black  leopard  (or  panther,  as  it  is  variously  called),  which  is  an 
exclusively  nocturnal  animal,  furnishes  it  with  a  most  effective 
means  of  concealment,  and  when  we  observe  how  cunningly  its 
sable  hue  (which  might  otherwise  become  conspicuous,  as  a  mass, 
from  its  very  uniformity)  is  in  one  species  at  least  mottled  and 
diversified  by  greyish  rosettes,  which  produce,  with  an  almost 
startling  fidelity  to  nature,  the  effect  of  moonlight  shining  through 
leaves,  it  becomes  impossible  to  withhold  our  admiration  of  the 
design.  The  striped  colouring  of  the  tiger  and  civet,  the  mottled 
skin  of  the  yellow,  spotted  panther  and  tiger-cat,  are  undoubtedly  due 
to  the  same  instinctive  selection  for  stalking,  or  what  may  be  called 
"strategic"  purposes.  So  too  in  the  colour  of  the  crocodile,  which  has 
no  enemies  to  fear  in  its  own  domain,  we  have  an  admirable  example 
of  "  strategic  "  colouring,  for  it  is  the  exact  counterpart  of  the  tidal 
mudbanks,  and  especially  of  the  slime-covered  logs  that  lie  scattered 
about  them,  the  "deception"  being  so  complete  that  even  the  mouse- 
deer,  monkeys,  and  other  small  game  which  go  down  to  the  water 


ENVIRONMENT 


eithei  to  drink,  or  to  feed  on  shell-fish,  at  ebb-tide  in  th  oi 

the  day,  are  completely  deceived,  and  not    infrequently  pay  the 

penalty  foi  then  want  oi  care  in  adventuring  I  i  theii  lurl 

enemy,  by  being   iwepl  into  the  water  after  the  mannei 

in  the  Besisi  jungle  songs,  l>y  one  swoop  oi  the  crocodiL  ling 

tail 

On  tin-  other  hand,  the  grey  blue  "slaty"  coloui  oi  the 
elephant,  buffalo,  rhinoceros,  adult  tapir,  and  wild  boar,  which  (with 
the  possible  exception  of  the  elephant,  though  it  too  may  at  lea  I  be 
described  as  being  to  a  large  extent  a  water-animal)  very  closely 
matches  the  colour  of  the  forest  mud  in  winch  they  disport  them 

solves  during  the  heat  of  the  tropical  noonday,  is  clearly  intended  to 

afford  them  whatever  protection   may  be  possible  when  they  are 

immersed  in  their  wallow,  and  lor  the  time  being,  therefore,  entirely 
defenceless,  and  is  therefore  protective.  Similarly  the  piebald  colour- 
ing oH  what  is  called  the  striped  squirrel,  and  (as  Ridley  has  pointed 
out)  the  striped  and  spotted  skin  of  the  young  tapir,  roe-deer,  and  wild 
hoar,  with  the  prevalence  of  russets  and  chestnut  browns,  browns 
and  greys,  among  many  species  of  deer,  squirrels,  smaller  monkeys, 
and  wild  dogs,  are  in  various  ways  admirably  adapted  for  the  protec- 
tion of  the  species,  the  browner  shades  in  particular  being  very 
difficult  to  see  in  the  dusk  of  the  evening,  which  is  the  time  when 
the  majority  of  these  animals  seek  their  food.  A  still  more  interest- 
ing case  is  that  of  the  white  fauna  of  the  immense  limestone  caves 
of  the  Peninsula,  of  which  the  Batu  caves  in  Selangor,  and  the 
Biserat  caves  of  Ulu  Patani,  are  well-known  examples.  These  caves 
are  frequented  by  myriads  of  bats,  which  produce  deep  deposits  of 
guano,  and  among  the  fauna  which  live  either  upon  the  bats  or  the 
guano,  are  a  white  snake,  a  white  rat,  and  even  a  white  cockroach  ! 
Among  the  apes  and  monkeys  (especially  the  larger  ones)  which, 
owing  to  their  extreme  agility  and  strength  are  in  little  need  of  any 
specially  protective  colouring,  the  correspondence  of  colour  to 
environment  is  less  marked ;  it  may,  however,  be  worth  pointing 
out  that  the  spectacled  monkey  (Semnopithecus  obscurus)  is  called 
"  lotong "  by  the  Malays,  who  have  evidently  observed  the  close 
correspondence  of  its  colour  to  the  bark  of  the  immense  forest-tree 
called  "  jelotong "  (Dyera  Maingayi,  D.  costulata),  which  abounds 
in  the  forest  where  it  lives. 

In  the  cases  we  have  mentioned  the  protective  or  "  strategic  " 
colouring  of  the  animal,  when  once  modified,  has  been  permanent ; 
but  the  Peninsula  yields  more  than  one  example  of  an  animal  which 
can  change  its  colouring  from  time  to  time  for  the  purpose  of 
still  more  effective  concealment.  Such  are  the  "  sumpah-sumpah  " 
(Ca/ofes),  wrhich,  though  not  a  true  chamaeleon,  has  yet  received 
that  name  from  its  sharing  the  chameleon's  most  remarkable 
characteristic,  and  in  a  lesser  degree,  certain  tree-lizards  and  tree- 


8  INTRODUCTION 


frogs,  which  latter  I  have  seen  turn  an  almost  milky  white  when 
exposed  to  full  sunlight. 

In  all  the  foregoing  cases,  as  indeed  in  all  of  which  we  have 
hitherto  any  record,  the  specialisation  of  the  animal,  whether 
of  an  aggressive  or  prophylactic  character,  takes  the  form  of  a 
modification  of  colouring  in  conformity  with  its  most  usual  sur- 
roundings for  the  purpose  of  concealment,  and  the  principle  of  the 
importance  of  colouring  thus  developed  is,  of  course,  very  marked 
among  the  lower  orders  of  creation,  among  the  birds,  snakes,  and 
various  forms  of  the  insect  world  (more  especially  the  well-known 
leaf  and  stick  insects),  with  the  all  -  important  modification  that 
among  all  these  latter  classes  the  influence  of  an  additional  pur- 
pose is  observable,  viz.  that  of  colouring  for  sexual  attraction — a 
feature  of  which  no  example  whatever  is  known  among  the  higher 
animals  of  the  Peninsula.  But  colour-modification  is,  of  course,  by 
no  means  the  only  form  of  specialisation  that  occurs,  for  form- 
modification,  combined  with  that  of  colour,  is  found  in  a  host  of 
Malay  insects,  of  which  the  leaf-insect  and  stick-insect  are  the  best 
known  examples ;  while  the  shield  of  the  many  varieties  of  tortoise, 
the  scaly  mail  of  the  manis,  and  the  lance-like  quills  or  cJievatix 
de  /rise  of  the  porcupine,  all  afford  notable  examples  of  animals 
provided  with  special  forms  of  armour  because  they  are  ground 
animals  and  have  no  other  way  of  escape. 

But  we  approach  what  is  still  far  the  most  significant  and  charac- 
teristic section  of  the  fauna  of  the  Peninsula  when  we  consider  the 
immense  proportion  of  the  denizens  of  the  jungle  that  have  learnt  to 
live  in  trees.  Among  these  are  the  bear,  the  leopard,  and  panther, 
and  all  other  representatives  of  the  cat  kind  (with  the  sole  exception 
of  the  tiger),  the  bear-cat  and  the  civet,  and  an  uncounted  army  of 
squirrels,  apes,  monkeys,  snakes,  and  lizards.  By  far  the  most 
numerous  part  of  the  sylvan  population  of  the  Peninsula  is,  in  fact, 
distinctively  arboreal,  and  the  most  interesting  section  of  these  are 
those  bizarre  creatures — half-animal,  half-bird — which  in  the  Malayan 
jungles  continually  afford  some  fresh  and  delightful  surprise.  These 
are  the  flying-foxes  and  fruit-bats,  flying  squirrels,  flying  lemurs,  flying 
lizards,  flying  frogs. 

Some  of  these,  of  course,  such  as  the  flying-foxes,  which  owe 
their  name  to  the  vulpine  character  of  their  head,  are  true  bats,  and 
really  fly,  but  many  of  them  progress  on  the  principle  of  the  aero- 
plane, by  taking  off  from  the  trunk  of  a  tree  at  a  considerable  height 
from  the  ground,  gliding  downwards  to  the  next,  and  then  climbing 
up  from  the  point  at  which  they  alight,  and  repeating  the  glide  as 
before.  The  flying  squirrels  and  flying  lemurs,  which  travel  by  this 
method,  make  use  of  a  fold  of  skin  between  the  fore  and  hind  leg  on 
each  side  of  the  body,  the  membrane  when  tightly  stretched  perform- 
ing the  work  of  a  parachute.     Of  the  large  flying  lemur,  or  "  kubong," 


V1R0NMI  V7 


which   ii  locally  plentiful,  there  are  at  leasi   two  varieties,  oro 

win.  i)  ii.i .  .1  soft,  moil  beautifully  deli<  ate  sitoi 
being  ol  ■  reddish  brown  <  olour.     'I  hew 

squirrel,  which  is  very  much  small*  r,  if  ■  body  being  little  bigger  than 
.i  rather  large  mouse.     The  flying  lizard,  01   1  which 

brilliantly  coloured,  has  the  membranes  with  which  it  Hii  ened 

by  slight  processes,  which  enable  it  to  use  them  to  s  hunted 
extent  as  wings,  its  flight  producing  an  impression  similar  to  the 
"  buzzing  "  of  the  wings  of  some  large  insect  ba  flj  ing  it  inflates  the 
gorgeous  golden  pouch  beneath  its  throat  (l>y  means,  as  it  appeared 
to  me,  of  a  spine  which  it  erected  and  depressed  at  pleasure),  and  in 

full    BUnlight    produces    the    Strangest    and    at    the    same    time    HI 

fascinating  effect  imaginable. 

'The  flying  frog,  which  is  said  to  glide  through  the  air  by  means 
of  an  abnormal  development  of  the  webs  of  its  feet,  is  well  known 
from  the  description  given  by  Wallace,  but  I  think  it  is  worth  while 
adding  that  there  are  other  tree  fro^s  in  the  Peninsula,  which  do  not 
appear  to  be  flying  frogs,  their  feet  being  merely  provided  with 
suction  pads,  resembling  those  of  the  Malayan  house-lizard. 

In  another  department  of  animal  life,  that  of  the  fishes,  there 
are  in  the  Malay  Peninsula  many  good  examples  of  specialisation 
that  should  not  be  passed  over  :  these  are  (to  take  some  of  the 
most  conspicuous)  the  frog-fish  called  "  tembakul,"  which  may  be 
seen  in  great  numbers  skipping  over  the  sloping  banks  of  tidal  rivers 
at  the  passing  of  a  boat  or  steamer;  the  "aruan"  or  " snakehead  " 
{Ophiocephalus),  a  kind  of  walking  mud-fish  resembling  a  perch, 
which  may  be  seen  progressing  over  dry  land  towards  a  pool  by  the 
opening  and  shutting  of  its  gill-cases;  and  a  small  fish  called  Toxotes 
jaculator,  which  is  able  to  shoot  a  fly  off  a  leaf  above  the  stream  by 
means  of  a  drop  of  water  forcibly  expelled  from  its  mouth,  a  remark- 
able fact,  which,  as  I  have  ventured  to  suggest  in  a  later  part  of  this 
book,  is  necessarily  a  matter  of  common  knowledge  to  the  aboriginal 
inhabitants  of  the  Peninsula,  to  whom  it  may  not  inconceivably  have 
suggested  the  blowrpipe. 

We  have  seen  how  powerful  has  been  the  effect  of  the  joint 
insular  and  climatic  conditions  upon  the  fauna  and  flora  of  the 
Peninsula,  and  how  the  peculiar  character  of  the  vegetation  has 
affected  the  fauna.  This  latter  idea  leads  us  naturally  to  the 
question,  in  what  way  and  to  what  extent  have  the  indigenous  races 
of  the  Peninsula  been  themselves  affected  by  the  climate  and  the 
character  of  the  country  ?  Throughout  the  world  this  physical 
specialisation  is  far  less  marked  in  man  than  in  the  lower  animals. 
This,  however,  is  probably  not  due  to  the  fact  that  he  is  incapable 
of  such  development,  nor  is  it  due  to  his  being,  comparatively 
speaking,  a  late  arrival  on  the  earth,  but  simply  to  the  fact  of  his 
possessing  mechanical  ability  to  a  degree  that  lifts  him  far  above  the 


io  INTRODUCTION 


other  members  of  the  brute  creation,  above  the  orang-outang,  for 
example,  a  comparison  worth  making  because,  according  to  native 
tradition,  a  variety  of  it,  called  the  "  mawas,"  once  inhabited  the  Pen- 
insula, as  it  still  inhabits  the  neighbouring  islands  of  Borneo  and 
Sumatra,  to  the  latter  of  which  at  least  the  Malay  Peninsula  was  once 
(as  already  pointed  out)  geologically  united.  That  it  is  not  due  to  any 
incapacity  for  such  development,  is  clear  from  the  immense  number 
and  variety  of  ways,  as  in  the  blind,  deaf  and  dumb  (or  in  special 
trades  for  instance),  in  which  one  or  other  of  his  senses  becomes  quite 
abnormally  developed  through  constant  use,  to  say  nothing  of  isolated 
phenomena,  such  as  the  cases  of  web-foot  connected  with  East  Anglia 
since  the  days  of  the  Gyrvii.  That  it  is  not  due  to  his  late  arrival 
will  appear  when  we  reflect  that  the  most  wonderful  development 
does  continually  occur  in  the  life-history  even  of  a  single  individual. 
Probably  we  should  be  quite  safe  in  saying  that  of  all  animals  man 
is  best  able  to  accommodate  himself  to  new  or  strange  surroundings, 
even  to  those  which  appear  most  certain  to  threaten  his  very 
existence.  But  since  he  is  able  to  obtain  this  end  by  the  use  of 
special  implements  and  devices,  we  shall  find  that  (as  might  almost 
be  expected)  it  is  these  mechanical  appliances  that  he  improves 
rather  than  his  own  members.  Hence  even  in  the  Malay  Peninsula, 
which  must  certainly  be  one  of  the  most  densely  wooded  countries 
in  the  world,  although  the  Sakai  has  been  driven  by  the  dangers 
that  threaten  him  to  build  his  huts  in  trees,  he  shows  no  tendency 
to  develop  into  a  really  arboreal  type  ;  and  although  he  is  quite 
capable  of  walking  up  the  stem  which  forms  the  approach  to  his 
aerial  abode,  he  still  prefers  to  make  use  of  some  rude  kind  of  ladder 
to  go  up  and  down  by  (just  as,  in  Les  Landes,  the  French  fenlander 
has  kept  to  his  stilts).  So  too  the  Orang  Laut,  although  he  has 
lived  in  his  boats  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave,  as  far  back  as  history 
will  carry  us,  has  never  developed,  however  expert  in  diving  he 
may  be,  anything  remotely  approaching  amphibious  characteristics.  It 
is  therefore  not  so  much  in  the  sphere  of  physical  development,  great 
as  in  certain  ways  this  undoubtedly  is,  that  we  must  expect  to  find 
the  full  effect  of  the  wild  man's  geographical  surroundings,  but  in 
the  use  that  he  makes  of  those  surroundings,  and  the  development  of 
his  character. 

In  what  relationship,  then,  does  the  wild  man  of  the  Peninsula 
stand  to,  and  what  use  does  he  make  of  the  flora  and  fauna  that 
have  been  described  ?  It  is  certainly  owing  to  the  dangerous 
proximity  of  wild  beasts,  such  as  elephants  and  tigers,  that  he  has 
taken  to  living  in  the  high  tree-huts  just  referred  to.  For  the  wild 
elephant  of  the  Peninsula  in  particular  is  very  rascally,  and  will 
pull  even  a  tree-hut  to  pieces  if  he  can  reach  it  (as,  in  one  case 
that  I  remember,  an  elephant  in  the  Langat  river  demolished, 
for  sheer  mischiefs  sake,  a  Malay  dug-out  canoe).     But  nevertheless 


ENVIRONMES  1  n 


both  tigei  and  elephant  arc  hunted]  killed,  and  eaten  at  time  .  and 
there  ii  hardly  any  animal,  bird,  01   reptile  in  tl  e   jungle 
perhaps  tin-  toad,  scorpion,  and  .1  few  snakes  and  insects)  that  d 
not  at  some  time  or  other,  and  in  some  district  01  other,  form  part 
of  the  aboriginal  menu.      Monkeys,  wild  pig,  deei  oi  all  Icii 
squirrels,  porcupines,  flying  foxes  and  flying  lemurs,  argus  pheasi 

and  peacocks,  blue  herons   and  hombills,  tortoises,  li/aids,  rats,  and 

snakes,  these  provide  some  of  their  favourite  dishes,  and  it  one  01 

two  concessions  are  made  tO  the  prejudices  of  civilisation,  there 
would  perhaps  not  be  much  to  which  we  should  he  inclined  to  take 
exception.  Hut  the  catholicity  of  their  tastes  necessitates  at  once  a 
most  thorough  and  accurate  knowledge  of  the  habits  of  the  varied 
denizens  of  the  jungle,  and  a  considerable  amount  of  ingenuity  and 
mechanical  skill  in  the  contrivance  of  traps,  pitfalls,  springes,  and 
nooses  for  securing  their  quarry,  and  this  knowledge,  skill,  and 
ingenuity  the  wild  races  certainly  possess  in  a  very  marked  degree. 

The  Itesisi  method  of  securing  the  argus  pheasant,  described  in 
the  text,  is  the  outcome  of  close  observation,  as  is  their  method  of 
"  splashing "  with  the  tip  of  their  rod  in  the  water  to  catch  the 
"sembilang"  fish;  their  springes  and  traps  for  monkeys,  wild  pigs, 
and  other  small  mammals  and  birds,  are  frequently  most  complicated 
devices.  But,  cleverly  designed  as  these  are,  they  will  catch 
nothing  unless  the  trappers  have  a  sufficiently  intimate  knowledge  of 
the  haunts  and  habits  of  their  intended  victim  to  foresee  the  exact 
spot  at  which  the  latter  will  inevitably  pass,  and  in  passing  release 
the  catch  that  starts  the  mechanism  :  their  knowledge  of  the  presence 
and  movements  of  game,  even  at  a  considerable  distance  away  in 
the  jungle,  amounts  to  an  instinct :  their  lungs  (though  this  is  a 
matter  that  has  not  yet  been  investigated)  must  be  enormously 
developed  and  improved  to  enable  them,  at  (comparatively)  great 
distances,  to  exhibit  such  skill  with  the  blowpipe,  as  they  are  known 
to  possess :  their  sight,  whether  longer  or  not  than  that  of  the 
average  European,  is  unquestionably  so  much  better  trained,  that 
they  can  instantaneously  distinguish  quite  small  birds  or  squirrels 
even  when  partially  screened  by  thick  foliage,  where  a  European 
would,  for  some  time  at  all  events,  be  totally  unable  to  perceive 
anything  at  all :  their  sense  of  smell,  by  which  they  are  able  even  to 
track  snakes,  is  unquestionably  keener,  and  certainly  far  better 
trained,  than  that  of  an  European,  or  even  than  that  of  an  ordinary 
town-bred  (and  therefore  as  a  rule  in  every  way  degenerate)  Malay, 
though  it  may  not  be  materially  better  than  that  of  the  Malay  who 
has  been  bred  to  the  jungle. 

With  regard  to  the  vegetation  of  the  Peninsula,  it  may  be  safely 
said  that  the  wild  races  make  use  of  everything  that  can  in  any  way 
be  regarded  as  even  remotely  edible  and  capable  of  sustaining  life,  for 
they  not  only  employ  every  edible  fruit,  seed,  root,  tuber,  stem,  bark, 


12  INTRODUCTION 


leaf,  young  shoot,  bud  (not  to  mention  ferns  and  fungi)  that  comes 
their  way,  but  even  make  use  of  plants  that  are  highly  poisonous, 
until  they  have  been  treated,  such  as  the  fruit  of  the  "  perah  "-tree, 
which  is  poisonous  unless  cooked,  and  some  of  the  wild  yams,  which 
they  eat  after  washing  out  the  poison.  Of  the  number  of  edible  fruits 
in  the  jungle,  the  lists  of  their  names  given  in  the  text  will  give 
some  faint  idea,  though  even  these  lists  must  not  be  taken  as  in  any 
sense  complete,  and  if  they  should  (to  take  a  very  rare  contingency) 
be  in  any  manner  of  doubt  as  to  the  edibility  of  any  particular  fruit, 
the  birds  and  the  monkeys  will  be  their  guide.  Even  the  despised 
mangrove  swamp,  regarded  by  Europeans  as  the  ne  plus  ultra  of 
all  impenetrable  and  unproductive  forms  of  vegetation,  contributes 
its  quota  of  edible  fruits,  such,  for  instance,  as  the  "  pisang-pisang  " 
and  "  berembang,"  of  both  of  which  I  myself  have  eaten.  Water 
is  obtained  by  tapping  the  "  kait-kait  "  and  other  wild  creepers,  and 
from  the  stems  of  certain  large  bamboos,  which  not  infrequently  hold 
water  in  their  hollow  internodes.  But  the  most  important  plants 
and  trees,  from  an  ethnological  point  of  view7,  are  undoubtedly  (after 
mere  food-producers),  the  upas  tree,  the  upas  creeper,  the  tuba  or 
fish-poison  creeper,  and  a  species  of  bamboo  called  Bambusa  Wrayi. 
Of  these  it  will  be  sufficient  to  remark  (since  they  have  been  treated 
very  fully  in  the  text)  that  the  first  three  are  the  main  ingredients  of 
the  famous  dart-poison  of  the  aborigines,  which,  like  the  wourali 
poison  of  the  South  American  Indians,  is  in  some  of  its  compounds, 
at  all  events,  almost  immediately  fatal,  whether  to  man,  bird,  or 
beast.  The  fish-poison  (so  called  because  it  was  formerly  much 
used  for  poisoning  the  small  streams  in  the  Peninsula  and  thereby 
stupefying  the  fish)  is  used  in  combination  with  both  of  the  other 
two  main  ingredients  of  the  dart-poison,  whether  tree  or  creeper. 
And  the  last  of  the  category,  Bambusa  Wrayi  ox  longinodis,  is  an 
extremely  rare  bamboo,  which  has  exceedingly  slender  internodes 
that  grow  to  quite  six  feet  in  length,  and  which,  though  only  known 
to  growT  on  two  or  three  mountains  in  the  Peninsula,  has  been  never- 
theless singled  out  by  the  aborigines  to  serve  in  the  production  of 
their  jointless  blowrpipe. 

In  the  foregoing  pages  we  have  glanced  at  that  inexhaustible 
(and  after  all  indescribable)  profusion  of  nature  by  which  the 
ancestors  of  these  races  found  themselves  surrounded  in  that  dim 
and  unrecorded  past,  when  first  their  toilsome  wanderings,  prolonged 
through  generations,  brought  them  face  to  face  within  the  narrow 
confines  of  the  Malay  Peninsula.  At  whatever  period  this  was,  and 
in  whatever  order  they  may  have  arrived,  we  can  now  recognise  with 
sufficient  clearness  the  Semang,  Sakai,  and  Jakun  as  three  distinct 
and  separate  races ;  the  Negritos  or  Semang,  with  their  woolly  hair 
and  round  bright  eyes,  the  darkest,  the  best-developed,  and  at  the 
same   time  the   most    markedly    nomadic   of  all   the   races   in   the 


ENVIROA  ://  A  / 


Peninsula  ;  the  Sakai,  who  arc  the  lightest,  with  then  often  intert 

features,  reminiscent  nut)  be  "i  theii  old  Dravidian  ancestry, 
though  modified  b)  the  effeci  ol  theii  somewhat  narrow-lidded  h 
closed  eyes,  hair  oi  i  distinctly  wavy  character,  and  their  generally 
-Mimwli.it  emaciated  appearance;  and  the  Jakun  or  aboriginal 
Malayans,  with  their  smooth  blue-black  bail  race  bard  to  dii 
tinguish,  because  of  its  admixture  with  the  other  two  main  stocks,  but 
who  must  nevertheless  be  accepted  as  a  type,  it  the  physical  ei 
of  skull  and  skull  features,  skin  colour  and  bail  <  bara<  tes  are  not  to 
be  utterly  denied,  [n  each  case  the  Gate  of  thru-  scanty  hands  must 
have  been  very  similar  a  never-ending  Btruggle  tor  existent 
against  the  forces  of  nature,  against  hunger,  disease,  and  a  hundred 
forms  of  death,  and  later  against  the  persecutions  of  man,  thus  faith- 
fully mirroring  the  battle  of  the  gigantic  vegetation  and  dangerous 
1  teasts  among  which  they  lived.  The  shadow,  the  hall-mark  of  the 
primeval  forest — at  once  their  protector,  their  sustainer,  and  their 
grave — is  burned  into  them,  and  shows  itself  in  the  restless  motion 
and  hunted  expression  of  their  eyes,  and  even  in  their  very  gait,  for 
the  great  height  to  which  they  raise  the  foot  in  walking  (a  habit 
acquired  in  circumventing  the  continual  obstacles  that  meet  them 
in  the  undergrowth),  and  the  careful  deliberation  with  which  they 
plant  it  on  the  ground,  remain  even  when  they  come  out  into  open 
country,  and  expose  them  to  much  ridicule  and  cheap  witticisms  on 
the  part  of  the  Malays.  It  was  the  forest  that  supplied  them  with 
food,  shelter,  clothing,  ornaments,  implements  of  every  description, 
with  drugs  and  simples  when  they  were  sick,  with  materials  and 
subjects  for  their  dances,  feasts,  songs,  instruments  of  music.  Their 
strongest  asseveration  was  to  say,  "  May  a  tree  fall  on  me,'' — an 
expression  that  fully  brings  out  the  extent  to  which  this  particular 
terror  dominated  their  lives.  It  was  the  forest  that  received  their 
dead  into  its  kindly  bosom ;  indeed,  to  be  laid  to  rest  in  the  cool 
outstretched  arms  of  the  great  forest-trees  was  the  highest  honour 
that  could  be  paid  to  their  departed  chiefs,  wrhose  spirits  they  so 
pathetically  prayed  to  '  pay  heed  only  to  their  dead  ancestors,  for 
their  living  friends  would  find  food/  Their  simple  idea  of  the 
delights  of  a  future  state  was  after  all  but  a  glorified  "  Avilion,"  an 
"  Island  of  Fruits,"  from  which  all  that  was  noxious  and  distressing 
to  man  (and  therefore  to  man's  soul)  had  been  eliminated,  and  the 
very  entrance  to  which  lay  over  the  natural  bridge  formed  by  the 
trunk  of  a  fallen  tree. 

Yet,  surrounded  as  they  were  by  possibilities  of  harm,  they 
quitted  themselves  like  men,  and  as  iron  is  welded  into  steel,  the 
very  hardships  of  their  life  only  served  to  throw  into  relief  their 
higher  qualities — their  ingenuity,  dexterity,  open-heartedness,  sin- 
cerity, and  well-developed  common  sense — qualities  which,  I  must 
confess,  I  never  yet  met  so  generally  diffused  in  any  other  tropical 


i4  INTRODUCTION 


race  of  which  I  have  had  experience,  and  had  never  expected  to 
meet  outside  the  fabled  frontiers  of  Arcadia.  Yet  this  is  the 
universal  testimony  of  all  who  have  known  them  well,  and  I  need 
only  add  to  my  own  a  single  testimony,  that  of  a  Malay  (who  was 
of  all  men  best  qualified  to  speak),  who  himself  once  remarked  to 
me  in  tones  of  deep  disdain,  "  What  stupid  animals  these  Sakai 
are,  they  don't  know  how  to  tell  a  lie  ! " 

It  is  a  fact  that,  as  a  natural  consequence  of  their  inherent 
honesty,  unselfishness,  and  single-mindedness — the  undoubted  result 
of  their  natural  and  unluxurious  mode  of  life — these  despised,  per- 
secuted, and  (in  a  worldly  sense)  ignorant  savages,  without  the 
guiding  star  of  even  the  most  rudimentary  form  of  letters, 
philosophy,  or  history,  have  yet  given  us  a  practical  example  of  the 
ideal  social  state  in  which  liberty,  equality,  and  fraternity  are  not 
mere  names  but  real  and  living  forces,  and  in  which,  since  a 
moderately  communistic  system  of  property  prevails,  there  is  no 
room — so  simple  is  their  form  of  life  —  for  the  disintegrating 
influences  of  theft,  murder,  fraud,  greed,  or  any  other  of  the  grosser 
sins  that  plague  the  conscience  of  civilised  humanity,  influences 
which,  whenever  the  experiment  has  been  tried  among  Europeans 
of  establishing  a  community  on  the  same  lines,  have  been  (and  are 
long  likely  to  remain)  the  inevitable  causes  of  its  failure.  The 
facts,  viewed  in  this  light,  are  striking,  and  perhaps  mortifying,  but 
probably  all  that  they  mean  is  that  the  stage  of  development  reached 
by  those  races  is  a  rudimentary  one,  the  exact  counterpart  of  that 
golden  age  of  innocence  to  which  all  civilised  and  semicivilised 
races  regretfully  look  back,  and  which  ceases  when  once  the  golden 
apple  of  commerce  is  thrown  into  their  midst.  "Why  rushed  the 
discords  in  but  that  harmony  should  be  prized  ?  "  Yet  surely,  if  for 
no  other  reason  than  for  their  possession  of  these  high  qualities,  the 
needs  of  these  rude,  uncultured,  but  not  all-unenlightened  tribes 
now  subject  to  our  sway,  should  stir  the  real  and  ready  sympathy  of 
all  who  believe  in  our  manhood,  and  in  our  imperial  worth  as 
champions  of  the  weak. 

The  most  important  factor  that  remains  to  be  mentioned  in  the 
development  of  these  races,  is  the  subject  of  the  relations  between 
them  and  the  Peninsular  Malays.  Which  of  the  three  races 
was  the  first  to  arrive  in  the  Peninsula,  is  a  point  that  in  the 
nature  of  things  cannot  be  decided.  As  an  equatorial  race  we  may 
perhaps  suppose  that  it  was  the  Negritos.  All  that  we  can  say  for 
certain  is,  that  in  the  mediaeval  period,  when  all  three  races  were 
already  established  there,  the  Peninsula  appears  to  have  been 
occupied  in  some  force,   first  by  some  old   Indo-Chinese  race1  of 

1  It  is  of  interest   to  note  the  fact       Prince    Damrong,    a    keen    and    pro- 
that  when  I  was  in  Bangkok  H.R.H.       gressive  ruler,    drew  my  attention    in 


.'    \  I  fR(    \  ,.'/    \  / 


,  omparativel)  high  i  h  ili  lation,  irho  ic  li  on 

the  aboriginal  dialects  (but  oi  whose  domination  there  i 
record  in  history),  and  latei  by  colonies  ol   Malay  imn  rom 

Sumatra     a  people  also  ol  Borne  civilisation  (ol  fl   Eiinduised  type) 
whose  immigration  has  continued  i<>  the  presenl  day,  and 
influence  on  the  abori  turally  much  more  marked      i 

conversion  of  these  lattei  Bettlei  from  theii  more  toleranl  Hindu 
beliefs  to  the  militant  and  missionary  faith  ol  [slam  (which  took 
place  less  than  ooo  years  ago),  was  b  most  critical  event  foi  the 
aborigines,  its  ultimate  effect  being  to  drive  these  unfortunate  tribes- 
men into  the  hills  of  the  interior  and  redui  e  them  to  the  condition 

of  hunted  outlaws,  to  he  enslaved,  plundered,  and  murdered  by  the 

Malay  chiefs  at  their  tyrannous  will  and  pleasure. 

This  condition  of  things  lasted  some  five  'cnturies,  and  naturally 

enough  branded  itself,  in  unforgetable  fashion,  deep  into  the  memory 

oi'  the  victims.  The  Portuguese  domination  of  Malacca  (which 
commenced  with  the  taking  of  that  city  in  151 1  and  lasted  for  130 

years),  and  that  of  the  Dutch,  who  became  their  successors  on 
the  capture  of  Malacca  in  1641  and  held  it  till  1795  (an(J  who  were 
able  besides  to  establish  trading  factories  in  several  parts  of  the 
Peninsula),  did  nothing  to  rescue  the  aborigines  from  their  state  of 
serfdom.  It  was  not  indeed  until  the  establishment  of  the  British 
Protectorate,  which  raised  them  to  an  equality  with  their  oppressors, 
and  thereby  righted  an  historic  wrong,  that  they  regained  the  right 
and  the  power  to  live  as  men.  Indeed,  even  in  the  earlier  days  of 
that  protectorate  itself,  and  so  long  as  the  power  of  the  Malay  pirate 
in  these  seas  remained  unbroken,  their  condition  improved  but 
slowly,  and  indeed  for  many  years  after  they  had  acquired  some 
measure  of  security  for  life  and  property,  they  were  still  most  out- 
rageously imposed  on  by  the  Malay,  who  traded  upon  their  naive 
simplicity,  and  at  the  same  time  upon  their  unrivalled  knowledge  of 
the  jungle,  to  acquire  for  his  own  purposes  immense  quantities  of 
gutta,  camphor,  eagle-wood,  rattan,  damar,  and  other  valuable  jungle 
products,  for  which  he  paid  the  collectors  the  merest  fraction  of 
their  real  value.  These  methods  and  many  other  forms  of 
oppression  have  since  been  almost  completely  suppressed  by  the 
strong  arm,  but  we  are  now  confronted  by  the  yet  graver  question, 
whether  our  system  of  protection  is  to  become  more  fatal  to  our 
proteges  than  even  the  Malay  slave-raids  that  we  so  strenuously  put 
down,  the  effect  of  which  was,  after  all,  though  individual  members 
might  be  lost  to  the  community,  to  keep  them  a  race  apart,  whereas 

particular  to    the  words  of   command  were  neither  Siamese  nor  Malay.      The 

addressed  by  the  mahouts,  in  the  north  answer   to    this   suggestive    inquiry   of 

of  the  Malay  Peninsula,  to  the  elephants  Prince  Damrong  has  been  given  at  the 

under  their    charge,    and    pointed  out  end  of  vol  ii. ,  in  the  chapter  devoted 


that  some  of  these  words  at  all  events       to  "  Language." 


16  INTRODUCTION 


to-day  (though  there  is  as  yet  no  marked  decline  in  their  numb' 
they  are  fast  tending  to  become  assimilated  and  absorbed,  losing 
their  language,  their  customs,  their  purity  of  blood  and  (worst  loss  of 
all)  their  natural  truthfulness  and  honesty.  Probably  at  the  present 
stage  it  is  too  late  to  avert  wholly  the  natural  trend  of  events,  and 
the  only  palliative  appears  to  be  (in  the  best  interest  of  the  aborigines 
themselves  as  well  as  of  their  former  oppressors)  to  encourage  and 
develop  the  systematic  study  by  our  own  officials  of  native  thought, 
law,  and  custom,  and  to  encourage  and  develop  the  ideas  of  the  natives 
themselves  through  the  means  (some  of  which  I  am  glad  to  say  have 
already  been  tried)  of  their  own  industries  and  culture  (barbarisms 
and  babuisms,  of  course,  excluded).  By  thus  giving  them  an  assured 
status  and  the  stimulus  of  a  new  and  higher  form  of  self-respect, 
we  may  at  least  develop  and  improve  that  most  important  class  of 
the  race  (as  distinct  from  his  degenerate  fellow-countryman  of  the 
towns),  the  genuine  Malay  peasant,  inured  to  the  hard  vicissitudes 
of  the  jungle  or  the  sea.  Whatever  can  be  achieved  in  this 
direction,  be  it  little  or  much — and  the  writer  is  one  of  those  whom 
experience  has  convinced  that  much  can  be  done — will  be  in  its 
ultimate  result  of  immeasurably  greater  benefit  to  the  unsophisticated 
alien  races  over  whom  the  Malay  genius  for  assimilation  is  so  soon 
destined  to  prevail,  than  any  system  of  forest  reservation  or  even  the 
most  paternal  vigilance  over  their  affairs. 


RACE, 


PART    I 


VOL.  I 


RACIAL   CHARACTERS. 

The  N  vmes  of  the  Tribes. 

In  discussing  the  affinities  of  the  various  races  and 
tribes  of  wild  men  in  the  Malay  Peninsula,  it  is  im- 
portant to  get  a  clear  idea  of  the  exact  meaning  of  the 
names  which  the  Malays  apply  to  them,  and  which 
are  taken,  for  the  most  part,  either  from  the  natural 
(geographical)  features  of  the  country  in  which  the 
particular  race  of  "  wild  men"  in  question  live,  or 
from  the  stage  of  civilisation  at  which  they  happen 
to  have  arrived. 

The  commonest  of  these  names,  with  their  English 
equivalents,  are  as  follows  : — 


Malay  Name. 

Translation. 

Remarks. 

Orang  Utan   . 

Men  of  the  Forest 

Used  of  all  the  tribes. 

,,      Bukit  .      . 

Men  of  the  Hills  .      .     . 

Of  Inland  Tribes  only. 

Paya   . 

Men  of  the  Swamps. 

Darat  .      . 

Men  of  the  Dry  Land    . 

Land  Jakun. 

,,      Laut    . 

Men  of  the  Sea    . 

Jakun  of  the  coast,  especially 
the  Besisi  of  the  Selangor 
coast,  and  the  Johor  and 
Singapore  tribes,  sometimes 
called  "  Sea-gypsies." 

,,      Dalam 

Men  of  the  Interior. 

„      Ulu     .      . 

Men  of  the  Head-waters. 

Tanjong  . 

Men  of  the  Capes 

I.e.  Men  of  the  "  river-bends." 

,,       Liar    . 

"Wild  "Men       .      .      . 

Of  wholly  nomadic  tribes  who 
are  rarely  met  with. 

19 


20 


RACIAL  CHARACTERS 


PART 


Malay  Name. 

Translation. 

Remarks. 

Orang  Jinak  . 

Lit.  "Tame"  Men   .      . 

Of  all   tribes  either  settled  or 
less  absolutely  nomadic. 

JJ'la     .      . 

"  Kept  "    or    "  Domesti- 

! especially  of  slaves  and 

cated  "  Men 

dependants    (  =  "  Bila  "    of 
some      old      writers,      e.g. 
Logan). 

Sabbat     . 

From    Arabic    "Sahabat"  = 
"  Friend." 

, ,       Rayat  . 

Subjects  or  Serfs  . 

From  Arabic  "  Ra'iyat. "  Used 
especially  of  the  sea  tribes 
(Rayat  Laut). 

Of  the  foregoing  names,  the  term  "  Orang  Utan"  (or 
"  Hutan  ")  is  perhaps  the  one  which  is  most  generally 
used  in  the  Peninsula.  The  correct  meaning  of 
"orang"  in  Malay  is  "man"  {homo),  and  "utan" 
means  "jungle."  Hence  "  Orang  Utan  "  simply  means 
"Man  of  the  Jungle,"  i.e.  "Wild  Man,"  and  the 
phrase  has  (in  modern  Peninsular  Malay)  no  other 
meaning.  The  application  of  the  name  "  orang-outang  " 
in  Europe  to  a  kind  of  ape  was  probably  due  to  the 
mistake,  or  the  jest,  of  some  early  traveller.  It  goes 
back  to  1 63 1,  when  it  occurs  in  a  passage  in  Bontius, 
quoted  by  Yule,  s.v.  "  orang  utan."  The  mistake  was 
repeated,  as  has  since  been  pointed  out,  in  1652,  when 
Tulpius,  in  giving  a  representation  of  the  ape  (not 
the  man)  wrote  underneath  it  "Homo  Sylvestris, 
Orang  utang."1  The  term  "orang  utan,"  as  has  just 
been  said,  has  practically  come  to  mean  nothing  more 
than  "Wild  Man"  (or  "  Men")  in  Malay,  and  hence 
it  is  even  used  of  the  sea  tribes,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
Orang  Utan  S'letar  (the  "Jungle-men  of  the  S'letar" 
river),  who  form  a  branch  of  the  Orang  Laut.2 


1  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiii.  831  ;  and  Nic. 
Tulpii  Observ.  Med.  Amsterdam,  1652, 
p.  284.  The  original  specimen  of  the 
Homo  Sylvestris  of  Tulpius  is  now  in 


the   British   Museum.      We  must  note 
that  Malay  "Orang  utang"  (net  "utan") 
=  "  debtor  "  ;  v.  H  Homme,  iii.  43. 
2  It  seems,  however,  that  in  Sumatra 


////    NAMES  <>/■    /■///■    //://:/■ 


i 


On  the  other  hand,  the  following  names  are  applied 
to  definite  local  groups  or  hordes  of  wild  men,  with, 
in  some  cases,  a  vague  amount  oi  racial  connotation, 
this  being  especially  the  case  with  "  Seman  and 
"Sakai": 


Mum  oi  ( rroup. 

i.il  ( !onno(                <>y). 

I.    SfiMANG 

Negi ito  tribes  oi  tii<-  Mai  j 

Al  to  called    M<  uik,  Mi  ni',  "i 

Peninsula  generally  (also 

\]<  ndi'    by    tti'in   |  1 \  <       (  = 

especially  "i  w  est  ( loast 

Martin's  "  Mendi  "). 

Negritos) 

Pangan 

I'.i  •     (  loast     Negritos    {i.t\ 

V.-Si  vcd    li i    "  Panggang " 

"  l'.asi  Semang '') 

passitHf  erroneously. ' 

1  i .    Sakai    . 

Dr.i  vido*  A usi  i  .1 1  i.i  n   (?) 

rionally  used  by  mistake 

tribes  of  the  Malay  Ten 

for  Semang.  The  "Blandas" 

insula  generally 

ofV.-Sl.;  "S.noi  "of  Martin. 

Scnoi  . 

"  Central  Sakai  "  tribes 

The   term   used   by  some  pur 
sang  Sakai   of   themseh 
It  is  said  to  mean  "  Man  " 
in  Sakai. - 

III.  Jakun 

Aboriginal    Malayan    tribes 

Formerlyspelt  Jacoon(  Raffles, 

generally 

Jokong),  etc. 

Hill    Jakun   or 

Aboriginal    Malayan    Land 

Including  the  Benua  (Logan) 

Orang  Bukit 

tribes 

ssBenai  (V. -Stevens). 

Sea    Jakun    or 

Aboriginal     Malayan     Sea 

S'letar,  Sabimba,  Bed.  Kallang, 

Orang  Laut 

tiibes 

Muka  Kuning,  Akik,  etc. 

Blandas  .     . 

Certain  mixed  tribes  of  the 

Wrongly  used  as  synonymous 

Interior  of  Selangor  and 

with   Sakai  by  V.  -Stevens. 

S.  Ujong 

Called  Landas  by  themselves. 

i'.ksisi  .    .    .- 

Certain      (Malayan  ?)      Sea 

Also  called  Bersisi(V. -Stevens), 

tribes    of    the    Selangor 

and  'Sisi  (by  themselves). 

and  Malacca  Coast 

Mantra    .     . 

Certain    (Malayan?)    tribes 

Also    Mentera'     and    Mintira 

of  Interior  of  Malacca 

(Logan). 

Udai    . 

A      certain      mixed      tribe 
(? Semi-Negrito)  of  Johor 

Unidentified. 

the  expression  is  actually  used  to  de- 
note the  anthropoid  apes.  In  Borneo 
the  word  "Maias"is  used  to  denote 
the  "orang-outang,"  of  which  the 
"  Mawas  "  of  the  Peninsula  is  probably 
a  tradition.  In  a  letter  of  November 
3rd,  1 90 1,  Mr.  Hale  informs  me 
that  the  term  "  Orang  alas"  (an  old 
Malay  phrase  for  "jungle-men  ")  is  used 
in  the  Kinta  valley  as  the  equivalent  of 
"  Mawas." 

1  The  word  is  properly  spelt  Pangan, 
and    has    nothing    to    do    with    Malay 


"panggang,"  "to  roast,  "as  V. -St. oddly 
imagined,  the  two  words  being  pro- 
nounced quite  differently.  Mr.  Charles 
Hose  has  suggested  that  it  may  be  akin 
to  a  North  Bornean  word  "  pangan," 
which  means  "friendly" — a  much  more 
likely  suggestion. 

2  De  Morgan  (viii.  225)  mentions  a 
hill  called  "Gunong  Senoi"  ("Sonoi"), 
a  place-name,  but  this  probably  means 
"  Hill  of  the  Senoi*'  or  "  Wild-men's 
Hill."  Cp.  Luering's  Vocabulary  of  the 
"Ulu  Kampar"  Dialect,  s.v.  "  Man." 


22  RACIAL  CHARACTERS  i-akt 

The  term  "  Semang"  has  never  been  satisfactorily 
explained.  The  term  "  Sakai,"  on  the  other  hand,  has 
been  (unjustifiably,  as  I  think)  explained  as  meaning 
"dog";  a  more  possible  derivation,  as  Griinwedel 
points  out,1  being  from  the  Sanskrit  "  Sakhi  "  = 
"  Friend,"  in  which  case  its  use  would  be  paralleled  by 
the  alternative  Malay  name  "  Sahbat"  or  "Sabat"  (from 
Arab.  "  Sahabat  "  =  "  Friend  "  or  "  Friendly  "),  though 
even  this  is  hardly  a  likely  explanation. 

The  word  "  Sakai "  is  also  used  in  Malay  (as  is 
"  Semang  ")  in  the  sense  of  retainer  or  follower  of  a 
native  chief.  It  is  thus  more  or  less  analogous  to  Rayat 
or  subject.  This  last  term  is  commonly  applied 
by  the  Malays  to  the  Mantra  and  Besisi  ;  but  these 
last  two  tribes  prefer  to  speak  of  themselves  as  "  Hill 
Men"  (Orang  Bukit),  or  "  Men  of  the  Interior" 
(Orang  Dalam),  and  "  Men  of  the  Sea  "  (Orang  Laut) 
respectively,  or  else  simply  as  "  Jakun." 

Finally,  the  term  "  Sakai "  has  not  unfrequently 
been  used,  like  the  expression  "  Orang  Utan,"  as  a 
generic  term  for  all  the  wild  men  of  the  peninsula. 
It  is  also  frequently  used  by  the  Malays  in  combina- 
tion with  many  of  the  terms  given  above  (e.g.  Sakai 
Liar,  Sakai  Jinak,  Sakai  Bukit,  Sakai  Rawang,  Sakai 
Laut,  Sakai  Ulu,  Sakai  Dalam,  Sakai  Bla),  but  not  as 
a  rule  with  the  other  words  mentioned  in  the  list. 
The  word  "  Semang "  is  also  occasionally  used  in  a 
similar  way.  But  the  majority  of  the  names  applied 
to  these  tribes  by  the  Malays  are  purely  place-names, 
e.g.  Orang  Kinta  (from  the  Kinta  valley  in  Perak)  ; 
Orang  Klang  and  Orang  Rawang  (from  places  in  the 
"  Klang  "  and  "  Langat "  districts  of  Selangor),  and 
the  numerous  tribal  names  of  the  Orang  Laut,  such 

1  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiii.  830.      "  Sakei  "  is  an  alternative  spelling. 


THE  NA  Ml  S   OF    THE    TRIh 


as  the  "  S&bimba,"  "S'letar,"  u  Muka  Kuning,"  and 
many  similar  title 

In  the  following  work  the  name  "  Semang"  will  be 
used  principally  for  .ill   Negrito  tribes,  whether  tho 
dwelling  on  the  West  Coast  <>r  those  on  the  East,  the 
latter  <>f  whom  arc  generally  called  (as  has  already 
been  explained)  M  Pangan." 

It    will    also     be    used    (culturally)    of     the    mixed 

Semang-Sakai  tribes  amongst  whom,  cither  on  account 

of  their  use  of  the  bow  or  for  other  reasons,  the 
Semang  element  has  been  assumed  on  the  whole  to 
preponderate. 

The  name  c<  Sakai  "  will  be  similarly  ear-marked 
for  the  second  ethnical  group  ( Dravido- Australian  .J), 
whether  pure  or  only  preponderatingly  Sakai. 

The  name  "  Jakun  "  will,  in  the  same  way,  be  applied 
to  the  southern  tribes,  composing  the  third  ethnical 
group,  for  which  the  name  "  Benua"  (Orang  Benua = 
Men  of  the  Country  or  "  Aborigines,"  as  opposed  to 
the  immigrant  Malays)  was  used  by  European  writers 
at  least  as  far  back  as  1613,  although  it  does  not  now 
appear  to  be  used  by  the  natives  themselves.1 

Finally,  I  may  say  that  the  names  of  the  fabulous 
tribes,  e.g.  Orang  Ekor  or  "Tailed"  People,  Orang 
Gergasi  or  Giants,  Orang  Mawas  or  "Orangoutang" 
People,  referred  to  by  Vaughan  -  Stevens,2  Orang 
Peri  or  Fairies,  etc.,  etc.,  will  be  treated  of  in  the 
chapter  on  Religion,  to  which  they  more  properly 
belong. 

Vaughan -Stevens   asserts  that   the  term    "  Udei  " 

1  At   the   same    time    it    should    be  Goudinho      de      Eredia      (JZa/aca, 

observed  that   certain    modern  writers  Brussels,    1882)    mentions    the    Benua 

(among    whom    is     Logan)    apply    the  in  a  work  written  in  161 3. 

name  "Benua''  to  a  particular  Jakun  2    Vide    Grunwedel    in     V.  B.  G.  A. 

tribe  in  Johor,  who  will  be  here  called  xxxiii.  830,  and  elsewhere. 
"Benua-Jakun.;' 


24  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 

(  "Udai")  is  used  by  the  Orang  Pangan  as  an  ex- 
pression  of  contempt  for  the  tribes  dwelling  near 
Belum  in  Perak,  and  that  its  meaning  is  equivalent  to 
"  bastard."  He  also  alleges  it  to  be  applied  by  the 
Malays  in  the  north  to  the  Orang  Jinak,  i.e.  the 
more  settled  ("  Tame  ")  Semang.  His  explanation  of 
the  word,  however,  is  certainly  incorrect.1 


RACIAL  AFFINITIES— GENERAL. 

The  Older  Views. 

The  descriptions  of  these  tribes  by  the  older 
writers  were  based  on  very  inadequate  knowledge, 
and  were  often  extremely  speculative  and  misleading. 
De  Quatrefages,  De  Morgan,  M.-Maclay,  Vaughan- 
Stevens,  and  others  held  what  may  be  called  the  Pan- 
Negrito  theory,  i.e.  the  belief  that  all  the  wild  tribes 
were  of  Negrito  origin,  and  attempted  to  account  for  the 
anthropological  difficulties  involved  by  premising  the 
intermixture  of  these  tribes  with  Malays  and  certain 
other  races,  selected  apparently  at  random,  such  as 
Siamese,  Papuans,  and  African  negroes,  to  account 
for  the  presence  of  whom  the  "  wrecked  slave-dhow  " 
theory  was  introduced,  without  the  slightest  regard  to 
the  obvious  geographical  objections,  or  to  the  remark- 
able racial  discrepancies  between  the  races  compared. 
We  have  it,  for  instance,  on  the  authority  of  Mr. 
H.  N.  Ridley,  that  Vaughan -Stevens  at  one  time 
regarded  the  Semang  as  descendants  of  ''escaped 
negro  slaves  brought  over  by  Alexander  the  Great "  ! 

1  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  Heft.  3-4,  p.  100. 


in  I  \NG  PROBLL  Vt  2s 


Even  some  ol  those  sounder  authorities  who  re- 

nised  the  fact  that  the  identit)  ol  origin  ol  .ill  th< 
tribes  could  not   be   maintained,  spoilt  their  by 

attempting  t<>  identif)  the  Semang  with  the  African 
negro,  an  attempt  which  the  marked  diversity  <>i  type 
between  the  two  races  concerned  would  alone  render 
little-  short  ol  absurd. 

An  allied  theory  (that  of  the  Papuan  origin  ol 
the  Semang)  has  been  completely  confuted  by  a 
succession  of  modern  anthropologists,  among  whom 
it  will  be  sufficient  to  mention  Wallace,  Wait/, 
Hamy,  and  others,  whose  researches  may  be  con- 
sidered to  have  fairly  established  the  following  pro- 
positions :  ] — 

(i)  That  there  were  not  less  than  two  clearly  dis- 
tinguishable, if  not  contrasted,  racial  types  among  the 
wild  aborigines  of  the  Peninsula. 

(2)  That  the  characteristics   of  the   Negrito   type 
found  among  the  Semang  showed  no  more  trace  of 
derivation  from  the  true  negro  than  they  did  from  that...*^h*  ** 
of  the  Papuan.  *)   f*&\    \ 

*     '■&$?+    **i 
A.— The  Semang  Problem.  iDiimim 

As  regards  the  former  (Pan-Negrito)  theory,  it 
should  be  noticed  that  even  Vaughan-Stevens  and  his 
followers  unconsciously  divide  the  Semang  from  the 
Sakai. 

Thus  Vaughan-Stevens,  while  strongly  postulating 


1  Wallace,  for  instance,  clearly  dis-  Malays '  of  Wallace)  .    .    .   relient  For- 

tinguishes    between    the    Semang    as  mosa  a  Malacca." 

Negritos,   and  the  Jakun  as    "savage  Waitz  distinguishes  two  clearly  sepa- 

Malays."  rate  types — the  Semang  whom  he  de- 

Hamy,  after  admitting  the  existence  clines  even  to  call  Negritos — apparently 

of  Negritos  in  the  Peninsula,  goes  on  for  fear  of  implying  Negro  affinities — 

to  say,  "  Les  Indonesiens  (the  'savage  and  the  Benua  or  savage  Malays. 


26  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  i-akt 

their  common  Negrito  origin  (according  to  the  "  Pan- 
Negrito  "  theory),  divides  the  tribes  into  two  well- 
marked  main  groups — (i)  The  Sakai  or  "Blandas" 
(including  the  "  Tembeh,"  the  "  Keni,"  the  "Senoi," 
"Besisi,"  and  "Kenaboi");  (2)  the  Orang  Menik, 
whom  he  subdivides  correctly  into  Pangan  and 
Semang,  the  latter  comprising  the  tribes  of  Kinta, 
Kensiu,  Belum,  and  Bong  Districts. 

In  the  first  of  these  two  groups  the  names 
Tembeh,  Keni,  and  Kenaboi  are  probably  nothing 
but  place-names  ; 1  Tembeh,  which  Vaughan-Stevens 
spells  Tumior  or  Tummeor,  and  which  he  would 
derive  from  Timor — the  name  of  an  island  at  the 
opposite  end  of  the  Malay  archipelago ! — is  certainly 
identical  with  the  Tembe  of  Clifford,  in  spite  of 
Vaughan-Stevens'  description  of  them  as  being  "dark 
of  colour  "  and  "tattooed,"2  two  facts  which  would,  if 
established,  appear  to  indicate  a  proportion  of  Semang 
blood,  though  no  doubt  much  mixed  with  Sakai. 

In  the  second  group  the  names  of  the  subdivisions 
are  mostly  names  of  places,  Kensiu  being  in  the  north 
of  Kedah  ;  the  Kinta,  a  tributary  of  the  Perak  river  ; 
Belum  in  Ulu  Perak ;  and  Bukit  Bong,  a  hill  in 
Ligeh.  All  the  tribes  in  this  second  group  belong 
to  the  Negrito  stock,  and  Vaughan-Stevens,  in  spite 
of  his  preconceived  theories,  could  not  help  noticing 
the  difference  between  them  and  the  Sakai  tribes. 

The    third    (Malayan)    element   Vaughan-Stevens 

1   "Kenaboi"  is  the  name  of  a  stream  beh  "    at     Sepang,    south    of    Klang, 

in  Jelebu.     "  Tembeh ":  other  spellings  upon  the  same  coast.      I  may  add  that 

are  "Tembir"  and  "Tembe,"  the  form  there  is,  in  N.  Selangor  and  Perak,  a 

employed  by  Clifford.      For  a  parallel  strong    tendency    to    pronounce    this 

compare   the  word  "gambier,"   which  same   word    as    "gambiok,"    or    even 

is  (correctly)  pronounced  "gambir"at  "gamiok,"    a    form    which    accounts 

Klang  in   the  central  part  of  the  Se-  for  the  form  "Temiok,"  which  is  also 

langor  coast-line,  "  gambior  "  at  Kwala  found  (Martin). 

Selangor  (north  of  Klang),  and  "gam-  2    V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiii.  831. 


THE  SI  MA  VG  PROBLEM 


apparently  attributes  exclusively  to  modem  (civilised) 

Malay  admixture. 

So,  too,  De  la  Croix,1  though  professing  his  ad 
herence  to  the  "  Pan- Negrito "  theory,   nevertheless 
distinguishes  to  a  great  extent  the  Semang  from  the 
Sakai. 

De  Morgan  distinguishes  between  the  "Sakai1 
peoples  to  the  south  of  the  river  Plus,  a  large  tributary 
of  the  Perak  river,  and  the  Semang  who  live  to  the 
north,  and  remarks  that  these  two  tribes  are  hostile 
to  eaeh  other ;  but  yet  concludes  that  all  the  wild 
men  of  the  Peninsula  belong  to  a  single  race  which 
he  identifies  with  the  "  Negritos  of  New  Guinea"  ! 

It  is  not,  I  think,  necessary  to  deal  at  length  with 
the  statements  of  all  the  writers  who  hold  this  view, 
though  mention  should  certainly  be  made  of  the  work 
of  Miklucho-Maclay,"  who  states  that  both  the  "  Orang 
Sakai"  and  "  Orang  Semang"  (two  radically  different 
types)  are  "pur  sang  Melanesians  "  ! 3 


1  Rev.  (FEthn.  vol.  i.  No.  4,  1882. 

2  /.  R.  A.  S.,  S.  B.,  No.  2,  p.  208. 

3  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  only  fair 
to  point  out  that  both  Miklucho-Maclay 
and  Meyer  (following  M.-Maclay)  re- 
garded both  Negritos  and  Papuans  as 
one  stock,  and  were  apparently  unable 
to  see  the  difference  of  type  between 
them,  in  which  connection  Keane 
writes,  "  It  will  be  enough  to  insist, 
with  Wallace  and  Flower,  on  the  funda- 
mental differences  (between  the  Papuan 
and  the  Negrito  type)  .  .  .  the  two  have 
in  fact  little  in  common  except  their 
dark  colour  and  frizzly  or  woolly  hair, 
features  which  they  share  also  with  the 
African  Negro  "  (Keane  in  J.  A.  J.  ix. 
p.  285). 

The  only  kind  of  ultimate  connec- 
tion between  these  races  that  appears, 
anthropologically  speaking,  at  all  pos- 
sible, would  be  that  outlined  in  a 
suggestion  put  forward  by  the  late 
Sir    William    Flower,     who     thought 


that  the  Negrito  might  represent 
the  undeveloped  type  of  an  aboriginal 
race,  of  which  both  Negro  and  Papuan 
might  be  the  highly  specialised  deriva- 
tives. 

For  an  opposite  opinion,  see  A.  B. 
Meyer's  Negritos,  p.  83.  It  may, 
however,  be  still  taken  as  true  that  no 
satisfactory  proof  of  the  connection  of 
the  two  races  has  yet  been  formulated, 
and  that  Sir  William  Flower's  brilliant 
hypothesis  still  remains  an  hypothesis. 

It  should  be  noted  that  the  existence 
of  the  Negritos  was  definitely  known 
early  in  the  nineteenth  century  (Craw- 
furd,  Raffles,  Anderson,  circa  1810- 
1825),  and  at  the  same  time  it  was 
distinctly  understood  that  they  were 
distinct  from  the  Orang  Benua  of  the 
South.  These  early  writers  had  no 
opportunity  of  seeing  the  central  (Sakai) 
tribes,  because,  until  the  year  1875, 
the  Northern  States  were  practically  a 
terra  incognita. 


28  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 


Relationship  of  tJic  Semang  to  other  Races. 

In  the  Appendix  will  be  found  a  table  which  is, 
perhaps,  the  most  compendious  way  of  enabling  some 
comparison  to  be  made  between  the  various  branches 
of  the  undoubtedly  pure  and  allied  Negrito  races  now 
known  to  us,  though  the  number  of  measurements  in 
most  cases  is  far  too  small  to  be  at  all  conclusive,  and 
the  intention  is  not  to  prove  the  connection,  but  merely 
to  show  the  nature  of  the  unsolved  problem. 

The  net  result  is  to  show  that  the  African  pygmies 
(Bambute,  etc.)  observed  by  Sir  H.  Johnston  may 
be  rather  shorter  than  either  the  Andamanese  or  the 
Negritos  of  the  Philippines  and  of  the  Malay  Penin- 
sula, whereas  these  last  three  races  are  practically  of 
the  same  height.  All  four  are  brachycephalic,1  and 
have  actually  woolly  hair,  and  their  skin-colour  varies 
from  a  dark  copper  or  chocolate  to  a  glossy  black. 

A  curious  point  about  this  group  is  that  it  still 
remains  a  moot  question — as  our  most  recent  authori- 
ties declare — whether  any  Negritos  occur  in  Borneo, 
which  would  naturally  be  the  connecting  link  between 
the  Malay  Peninsula  and  the  Philippines. 

B. — The  Sakai  Problem. 

According  to  the  older  writers,  all  traces  of  non- 
Negrito  blood  among  the  wild  tribes  of  the  Peninsula 
were  due  to  admixture  between  these  tribes  and 
civilised  Malays.  The  types  of  those  two  races 
(Semang    and     Sakai)    are,    however,    fortunately    so 

1  The    Semang    are    said     to    vary  brachy-  or  mesaticephalic,   their  head- 

from     brachy-     to     dolichocephalism,  length      increasing      in      Perak      and 

but      the      writer      believes      it     will  elsewhere     through     admixture      with 

ultimately    be    found    that    the    purer  their     dolichocephalic     Sakai      neigh - 

Semang    {e.g.    in    Kedah)   are    mainly  bours. 


I  1 1 1     \h,riln    I » K  ( )  II I 


Man. 


\"l  GR1  TO    \'\  l'l       Andam  \\i  se. 


/  'ol.  I.  p.  28. 


Negrito  Type — Semang  of  Perak. 

(See  al-o  Appendix.) 


II?  ay. 


i  III.  S  \K.\I    PROBLEM. 


Mat  tin. 


Aboriginal  Dravidian  Type — Veddas  of  Ceylon. 


Suggested  Aboriginal  Dravidian  Type — Sakai  of  Perak. 

(See  also  p.  55,  Appendix,  etc.) 


Cerruti. 


/'('/.     /.    />.    20. 


///.  I  h  M 


1 1 ■«  mgly   (  ontrasted    thai    their   separal  ion    i  >    not 
very  difficult   matter.      The  existence  ol  a   separate 

kai  type  had  long  been  suspected,  and  tin 
to  this  effect  had  been  more  than  once  promulgated 
(first,  I  believe,  by  Clifford)*  but  the  honour 
proving  the  fact  by  scientific  demonstration  and 
measurements  has  fallen  to  Germany  in  the  person 
of  Professor  Rudolf  Martin,  oi  Zurich,  who  has  made 
.1  careful  study  of  the  Senoi  tribe,  and  in  his  recent 
pamphlet  on  the  relationship  of  these  tribes  has  pointed 
out  the  need  for  isolating  the  second  dement  in  this 
complex  racial  problem.1  With  this  fact  well  estab- 
lished, the  Sakai  problem  has  entered  upon  a  new 
phase,  the  most  burning  question  connected  with  it  at 
present  being  that  of  the  probable  relationship  of  the 
Sakai  to  certain  races  in  the  same  region  who  are  to 
some  extent  of  a  similar  habitus. 

Briefly,  it  may  be  said  that  two  alternative  theories 
now  hold  the  field.  One  of  these  theories,  which  has 
recently  been  advanced  by  P.  W.  Schmidt  in  his 
brilliant  paper  in  the  Bijdragen,  seeks  to  identify  the 
Sakai  with  certain  tribes  of  Mon  -  Annam  origin. L 
His  argument  is  based  partly  upon  the  admitted 
linguistic  affinity  between  the  Sakai  dialects  and 
those  of  the  Mon -Annam  family,  and  partly  upon 
an  old  description  by  Thorel 3 — (i)  of  the  Annamese  ;4 
(2)  of  the  Cambojans  or  Khmers;5  and  (3)  of 
the  wild  tribes  of  the  interior  of  Camboja  (Stieng, 
Bahnar,    Sedang,    etc.).       Linguistic    evidence,    how- 

1  The  scientific   proof  of  the  state-  -  Bi;'drageni    etc.,    1901.      No.     '2 

merits  made  in  the  pamphlet   has  ap-  (6  Volgr.  deel  8),  pp.  399-5S3. 
peared  in  Professor  Martin's  larger  work,  3    Voyage    a  Exploration     en     Indo- 

which  was  published  by  Gustav  Fischer  Chine:  Gamier,   Paris,    1S73,   vol.    ii. 

at  Jena  in  the  course  of  the  current  year  p.  2S9  seqq. 
(1905),  and  which  is  entitled  Die  Inland-  4   L.c.  p.  290  se?q. 

stdmme  der  malayischcn  Halbinsel.  ~°  L.c.  p.  294  seqq. 


3o  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 


ever,  when  taken  by  itself,  is  notoriously  an  unsafe 
guide,  and  though  of  the  three  races  described  by 
Thorel  the  third  group  mentioned  certainly  approach 
the  nearest  to  the  Sakai  type,  the  points  of  divergence 
between  the  two  are  nevertheless  much  too  great  to 
allow  of  an  unhesitating  assent  to  this  identification. 
The  tribes-folk  (of  Thorel's  third  group),  for  instance,  are 
described  as  being  "  above  the  middle  height,"  whereas 
the  Sakai,  as  proved  by  the  measurements  to  hand, 
do  not  in  the  least  correspond  to  Thorel's  description. 
The  second  difference  is  in  their  skin-colour,  which  is 
described  by  Thorel  as  darker  than  that  of  the  Malays, 
whereas  the  colour  of  the  Sakai,  though  very  variable, 
is  in  fact,  as  a  rule,  except  when  mixed  with  Semang 
blood,  a  good  deal  lighter.1 

Again,  the  eyes  of  the  Stieng,  Bahnar,  Sedang, 
etc.,  are  described  as  being  very  rarely  a  trifle  oblique, 
whereas  the  eyes  of  the  Sakai  are  certainly  horizontal. 

None  of  these  difficulties  taken  separately  would, 
perhaps,  appear  insuperable,  but  when  taken  together 
they  must  be  sufficient  to  cause  us  at  least  to  suspend 
our  judgment,  and  to  regard  the  Sakai  problem  as  still 
awaiting  solution. 

The  alternative  theory  comes  to  us  on  the  high 
authority  of  Virchow,  who  puts  it  forward,  however, 
in  a  somewhat  tentative  manner.2  It  consists  in  re- 
garding the  Sakai  as  an  outlying  branch  of  a  racial 
group  formed  by  the  Vedda,  Tamil,  Korumba,  and 
Australian  3  races,  to  show  the  nature  of  the  connexion 
between  which  a   table  (for  which  see  Appendix)  of 


1  It  is  unfortunate  that  Schmidt  omits  3  Assuming  the  Australian  Blacks 
mentioning  these  first  two  important  to  be  a  non-homogeneous  group,  it  is 
points  in  quoting  Thorel.  the   type    which  approaches  the   Dra- 

2  Virchow  in  V.B.G.A.  xxviii.  152  vidian  that  is,  of  course,  alluded  to 
seqq.,  and  elsewhere.  here. 


I  III.  \I  \I..\YA\   PROBLEM. 


*  £^>  $  I 


1  4  Wray 

Aboriginal  Malayan  or  Jakun  Type— "Savage  Malays"  of  Pekan, 

in  Pahang  i  Heathen). 

Xos.  i  and  4  are  the  best  types. 


■r  ■  r  •  1   .  • 


Lent  by  Hale. 

Civilised  Malay  Type— Chiefs  of  Negri  Sembilan  (Mohammedan). 


Vol.  I.  p.  31. 


,  ////    /./a  i  \   PROBLEM 

comparative  measurements  has  been  drawn  up  by  the 

v\  rit<T. 

Relationship  <>/  the  Sakai  to  <>///</■  Roa 

The  possibility  oi   there   being  some  ultimate  re 
lationship  (such  as  has  just  been  referred  to)  between 
the    Veddas,    Tamils,    Australians,    and    Sakai    was 
foreshadowed  l>y  Virchow  in   [896, '  the  main  points  ol 
comparison    being   the   height,    skull  character,  skin 

colour,  and  hair-character.  ( )f  these,  to  go  by  the 
comparative  table,  the  height  is  variable,  but  in  all 
tour  of  the  races  compared  it  is  certainly  greater  than 
tli.it  of  the  Negrito  races.  The  skin-colour,  again,  it 
is  true,  varies  to  a  remarkable  degree,  but  the  general 
hair- character  appears  to  be  uniformly  long,  black, 
and  wavy,  and  the  skull -index,  on  the  other  hand, 
appears  to  indicate  consistently  a  dolichocephalic  or 
long-shaped  head. 

C. — The  Jakun   Problem. 

The  third  of  the  three  great  problems  which  con- 
front us  in  dealing  with  the  wild  tribes  of  the  Peninsula 
is  that  of  the  relationship  between  the  Malays  and  the 
Benua  or  mixed  tribes  in  the  southern  portion  of  the 
Malay  Peninsula. 

By  the  Pan- Negrito  theorists  the  Jakun  were 
regarded  as  tribes  of  Negrito  origin,  more  or  less 
modified  by  admixture  with  the  civilised  (Moham- 
medan) Malays.  Both  Crawfurd,  however,  and,  more 
particularly,  Favre  long  ago  pointed  out  the  reasons 
which  oblige  us  to  regard  the  Jakun  as  aboriginal 
tribes,  and  as  having  been  settled  in  the  Peninsula  since 

1    V.  B.  G.  A.  xxviii.  152  seqq.,  and  elsewhere. 


32  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 

a  period  long  anterior  to  the  conversion  of  the  Pen- 
insular Malays  to  Mohammedanism.  "  In  course  of 
time  the  early  Arab  trading  vessels  brought  over  priests 
from  Arabia,  who  made  a  number  of  converts  to  Islam  ; 
those  of  the  Benua  (i.e.  Jakun)  who  declined  to  abjure 
the  customs  of  their  forefathers,  in  consequence  of  the 
persecutions  to  which  they  were  exposed,  fled  to  the 
fastnesses  of  the  interior,  where  they  have  since  con- 
tinued in  a  savage  state."1  In  other  words,  part  of 
them  remained  wild,  and  part  adopted  the  civilisation  of 
the  immigrant  Malays.  So,  moreover,  Logan,  follow- 
ing Newbold,  goes  a  step  further,  and  comes  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  physiognomy  of  the  Jakun  of  Johor 
(with  some  exceptions)  points  to  a  "  Tartar"  ex- 
traction— an  expression  for  which  I  think  we  are 
justified  in  reading  Mongol  or  Mongoloid.2  In  this 
sense  it  has  certainly  been  accepted  by  later  writers, 
such  as,  for  example,  Waitz  and  A.  R.  Wallace,  the 
former  of  whom  describes  the  Benua  (i.e.  Jakun) 
as  "primitive  Malays,"  while  the  latter  explicitly 
describes  the  Jakun  as  "savage  Malays";  more- 
over, many  writers  (e.g.  Miklucho-Maclay,  in  writing  of 
the  Mantra,  etc.)  describe  their  remarkably  close  re- 
semblance to  the  Malays,  whilst  attributing  it  solely 
to  (civilised)  Malay  admixture.  The  view  taken  by 
the  present  writer  is  to  a  great  extent  in  accordance 
with  these  writers,  with  the  proviso  that  the  isolation 
of  the  "  savage  Malay  "  element  is  not  the  key  to  the 
whole  of  the  mystery  with  which  we  are  here  con- 
fronted. The  Jakun,  in  fact,  as  will  appear  in  this 
work,  form  a  composite  group,  consisting  of  tribes 
which,  though  largely  Jakun  or  aboriginal   Malayan, 

1  Favre  in  J.  I.  A.  vol.  ii.  p.  240. 
2  Besides  this,  Logan  talks  of  their  "  strong  family  likeness  to  the  Malays." 


rill    JAKUN  PROBL  EM 


are  also  in  some  cases  partly  Semang  and  partly 
Sakai,  the  crossing  between  these  various  elements 
making  it  impossible  .it  present  to  adopt  an)  prop \t 

classification  beyond  specifying  both  Land  and  Sea 
fakun  as  for  the  most  part  aboriginal  heathen  Malays.1 

Relationship  of  the  fakun  to  other  Races, 
Our  statistics  unfortunately  at  present  are  far  too 
incomplete  even  to  admit  of  such  a  comparison  being 
made  between  the  two  types  specially  concerned,  as  was 
possible  in  dealing  with  the  Semang  and  Sakai.  The 
difficulty  is,  moreover,  largely  increased  by  the  fact 
that  the  influence  of  the  civilised  Malays  has  in  this 
part  of  the  world  been  very  widely  spread,  and  hence 
it  has  hitherto  been  the  custom  to  label  as  Malay 
many  non- Malayan  crania.  It  must  not  be  forgotten 
that  the  true  Malay  should  always  bear  some  relation- 
ship to  the  Mongolian  or  "  Tartar"  type,  and  that  it  is 
only  on  measurements  obtained  from  countries  where 
the  Malay  stock  is  relatively  pure  (e.g.  in  the  centre 
of  Sumatra  and  the  Malay  Peninsula)  that  a  table 
of  statistics  of  any  practical  value  can  be  founded. 
Meanwhile  the  most  important  evidence  of  aboriginal 
Malayan  influence  in  the  Peninsula  consists  in  the 
aboriginal  Malayan  dialects  still  spoken  by  the 
Jakun,  though  even  in  the  case  of  the  Jakun  the 
matter  has  been  complicated  by  the  uncritical 
practice  of  attributing  their  Malayan  vocabulary,  as 
well  as  their  physical  characteristics,  to  admixture 
with  civilised  Peninsular  Malays.  Whereas,  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  both  the  dialects  and  the  general 
characteristics   of  the   Jakun  may   perhaps   rather  be 

1  Cf.  Hamy,  p.  2$n.3ante.  Though  no  Jakun  tribe  exists  which  does  not  contain 

single  Jakun  tribe  may  now  consist  solely  some  such  individuals,  and  I  believe  that 

of  aboriginal  Malayans,  I  doubt  if  any  in  many  cases  they  amount  to  over  50  %. 
VOL.   I  D 


34  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 

compared  to  those  of  the  Malay  Archipelago  than  to 
those  of  the  civilised  Peninsular  Malay.  The  table 
in  the  Appendix,  incomplete  as  it  is,  will,  however, 
perhaps  be  of  some  use  here  as  showing  the  kind  of  in- 
formation which  is  required  to  clear  up  this  part  of  the 
still  unsolved  Malayan  problem. 

At  present  all  that  can  be  said  is  that  we  might 
expect  the  civilised  Malays  to  be  at  least  as  tall  as,  if 
not  taller  than,  the  Jakun,  their  uncivilised  cousins. 
This  condition  of  things  does  not  appear  to  be  borne 
out  by  the  table,  but  we  must  wait  for  fuller  information 
before  this  point  can  be  decided.  The  skull-index  of  both 
races  is  as  nearly  as  possible  identical  (brachycephalic). 
The  hair-character,  moreover,  is  absolutely  identical, 
but  the  skin  of  the  Jakun,  doubtless  through  exposure 
to  the  weather,  is  a  shade  darker,  as  a  rule,  than  that 
of  the  Malays. 

General  Results. 

The  synoptical  table  to  be  found  in  the  Appendix 
will,  it  is  hoped,  provide  certain  standards  by  which  to 
test  and  classify  the  three  main  ethnical  groups  of  the 
Peninsula.  It  need  perhaps  scarcely  be  added  that 
although  many  individuals  are  to  be  found  in  the  Pen- 
insula who  conform  pretty  closely  to  one  or  other  of  the 
three  types  indicated,  the  least  degree  of  intermixture 
(either  as  between  themselves  or  as  between  them 
and  their  civilised  neighbours)  will  tend  immediately 
to  produce  some  divergence  from  these  standards. 

Generally  speaking,  however,  and  bearing  in  mind 
these  necessary  qualifications,  the  three  types  may  be 
roughly  described  as  follows  : — 

A.  Semang  Type.  —  Height  of  men  about  1491 
mm.  ;    of  women,    1408    mm.  ;    skull- index    brachy- 


£ 


/ 


— 

: 

— 


/ 


<«    — 

Q 

- 

■J. 


a 
2 


i. 


*, 


2   - 
.  as 

*    r.    " 


■/. 

- 

- 

Z 

^ 

f. 

"* 

V 

2 

** 

V. 

£  - 

a 

z 
- 


-        < 


~JL      f- 


- 
f. 


,  THE  THREl    MAW  T\  r 

cephalic  (or  bullet  headed)  to  me  iati<  ephalic  ;  skin  ol  .1 
dark  copper  or  rather  chocolate-brown  colour  p 
into  a  "  shiny  black  " ; x  hair  (which  is  generally  shaved 
off)  woolly,  like  that  of  the  Negro  and  the  Papuan; 
forehead  low  and  rounded;  nose  remarkably  broad 
and  flat  or  "spreading";  cheeks  full,  but  with  the 
cheek-bones  not   very  prominent  ;  eyes  round,  wide 

open,    and    Straight    (f.*.    not    "oblique"   like    those   of 

Mongolian  races);  chin  feebly  developed  {i,e.  rounded 
off,  and  frequently  almost  unmarked);  mouth  variable, 

but  rather  large  as  a  rule,  the  lips,  which  are  also 
variable,  being  generally  well  formed,  but  sometimes 

turned  outwards  or  "everted";  beard,  none  to  speak 
of,  as  a  rule,  but  when  found,  thin  and  straggling,  or, 
occasionally,  woolly,  like  the  hair  itself. 

B.  Sakai  Type.  —  In  height  the  Sakai  are,  I 
think,  without  doubt,  a  slightly  taller  race  than  the 
Semang  or  Negritos.  The  shape  of  their  head,  on 
the  other  hand,  is  in  marked  contrast  to  that  of  the 
Negritos,  as  they  belong  in  type  to  the  dolichocephalic, 
or  long-headed,  races.  Their  skin-colour  varies  more 
remarkably  than  that  of  any  of  these  tribes,  being  in 
some  extremely  dark  brown,  in  others  a  remarkably 
light  yellowish-brown,  much  lighter  than  that  of 
the  Malays.  Their  hair,  too,  is  long,  black,  and  wavy 
in  character,  sometimes  with  a  slight  reddish  tinge  in 
reflected  light.  Their  forehead  is  flat,  and  projects 
remarkably  over  the  root  of  the  nose,  which  latter  is, 
as  a  rule,  somewhat  fine  and  small,  and  often  slightly 
tilted  at  the  tip.  The  cheek-bones  are  very  broad, 
especially  when  considered  in  relation  to  the  rest  of 
the  features.  Their  eyes  are  a  very  dark  brown, 
small,  horizontal,  and  often  half-closed,  as  different  as 

1  Seey.  /.  A.  vol.  iv.  p.  428. 


36  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  i-art 

can  be  from  those  of  the  Semang.  Their  chin  is  lonor 
and  somewhat  sharp  and  pointed.  Their  mouth  is  of 
small  size,  with  lower  lip  full,  loose,  and  often  con- 
spicuously projecting.  Their  beard  is,  as  a  rule, 
almost  non-existent,  but  a  few  individuals  occur  who 
are  fairly  well  covered  with  hair. 

C.  fakun  Type. —  In  height  the  Jakun  appear  to 
be,  if  anything,  a  little  taller  than  the  Sakai  (in  which 
case  they  would  be  the  tallest  of  the  three  aboriginal 
races).  Their  head  is  brachycephalic,  or  "  bullet  "- 
shaped.  Their  skin  is  generally  of  a  dark  coppery 
colour,  not  unlike  that  of  the  Malays,  but  with  a 
tendency  to  darker  shades,  which  are,  doubtless,  due 
partly  to  exposure  and  partly  to  their  manner  of  living. 
Their  hair  is  long  and  straight,  or  "smooth,"  and  of  a 
dark  bluish-black  tint,  such  as  is  invariably  found  in 
the  hair  of  Mongolian  races.  Their  forehead  is 
usually  well  developed.  Their  nose  is,  as  a  rule,  thick, 
flattish,  and  short,  with  wide-open  nostrils,  though  it 
must  be  noted  here  that  a  more  developed  type  occurs. 
Their  cheek-bones  are  very  high  and  well  marked, 
like  those  of  the  Mongolian  type.  The  face,  as  a  rule, 
is  inclined  to  be  flattish.  Their  eyes  are  dark  brown, 
of  moderate  size,  and  rarely  with  some  slight  tendency 
to  obliquity.  They  have,  as  a  rule,  a  strong  chin  and 
somewhat  square  jaws.  Their  mouth,  as  a  rule,  is 
large  and  broad,  though  frequently  moderate  and  with 
well-formed  lips.     Their  beard  is  of  the  scantiest. 

The  establishment  of  these  types  may,  I  think,  be 
considered  to  justify  the  classification  based  on  hair- 
character  which  Martin  proposes.  The  Semang  he 
describes  as  Ulotrichi,  or  woolly-haired  tribes,  who  are 
to  be  clearly  distinguished  from  the  Sakai,  who  are 
wavy-haired   (Cymotrichi).      In   the   third  (composite) 


\  t    1//.7  A'.  . 


\7 


group,  for  which  I  propose  to  retain  the  generall)  used 
native  name  oi    [akun,  I   have  merely  to  si  the 

recognition  (for  our  present  purposes)  o(  the  J  akun  (or 
aboriginal    Malayan)  type  as    Lissotrichi,  or  smooth 

haired  individuals,  in  the  place  O)    Martins  mixed  tril 

that  cannot  be  classed.  Willi  this  slight  modifica- 
tion, I  may  say  that  the  present  work  is  based  entirely 
on  Martin's  plan  of  classification,  which  in  this  modi- 
fied form  may  now  be  given  as  follow 


t  iroup. 

1  l.iii  -th. ii. 

Name  <>f  1 1  ibe. 

Know,  n  i.'. 

present  wort 

I. 

Ulotrichi,   or   Woolly- 

Si  man  •.    M<  nik,  or 

S<  mang. 

haired  tribes. 

Pangan. 

II. 

Cymotrichi,  or  Wavy- 
haired  tribes. 

Senoi  or  SakaL 

Sak.ii. 

III. 

Lissotrichi,  or  Smooth- 

(a)  Land  Jakun 

Jakun. 

haired  tribes. 

or  ().  Bukit 

(b)  Sea  Jakun  or 

Orang  Laut. 

O.  Laut. 

This  list  is,  as  I  have  just  said,  merely  a  classifica- 
tion of  racial  types  or  standards,  and  does  not  include 
mixed  tribes  such  as  the  Kenaboi,  Blandas,  Besisi, 
and  Mantra,  which  will  be  included  culturally  under 
the  general  title  of  Jakun,  the  Malayan  aborigines, 
who  form  a  sub-group  of  the  Jakun,  being  divided 
into  the  Hill  or  Land  Jakun  (Orang  Bukit)  and  Sea 
Jakun  (Orang  Laut)  respectively. 


Numbers. 

It  is  extremely  difficult  to  form  any  idea  of  what 
the  real  numbers  of  the  aboriginal  population  of  the 
Peninsula  may  be.  What  Favre  remarks  of  the 
Jakun  applies  equally  to  all  the  wild  races  of  the 
Peninsula,  whose  number,  as  he  says,  is  very  difficult 
to    ascertain,    because    part    of   them    are    a    nomadic 


38 


RACIAL  AFFINITIES 


PART 


people,  so  that  the  same  family,  and  in  fact  the  same 
individuals,  appear  to-day  in  one  place  and  next  week 
some  two  or  three  miles  further  on  ;  next  month  they 
will  remove  again,  to  roam  the  forest  or  to  come  hack 
to  their  first  habitation,  so  that  those  who  perceive 
them  here  and  there  imagine  that  they  are  fresh 
persons,  and  in  their  calculation  they  count  the 
same  individuals  two  or  three  times  over.  Their 
number,  as  reported  to  him,  was  always  much  more 
considerable  than  the  number  he  found  upon  visiting 
the  places  themselves.1 

The  most  recent  (1901)  census  report  of  the 
Federated  Malay  States,  though  containing  at  least 
one  clerical  error,2  and  often  doubtless  falling  far  short 
of  the  truth,  is  yet  our  sole  guide  to  the  real  numbers 
of  the  aborigines  : — 


Aborigines  of  Perak. 


Larut 
Matang 
K.  Kangsar    . 
Upper  Perak 
Kinta    . 
Lower  Perak 
Batang  Padang 
Krian 
Selama  . 
New  Territory 

Total 


1021 

515 

1681 

189 

2808 

37 
173* 

7982 


Aborigines  of  Selangor. 

Kuala  Lumpur        .          .          .  219 

Ulu  Selangor           .          .          .  470 

Klang 172 

K.  Langat      ....  899 

K.  Selangor   ....  I 

Ulu  Langat    .          .          .          .  114 

Total.          .          .          .  1875 


Aborigines  of  Negri  Sembilan. 


Aborigines  of  Pahang 
Ulu  Pahang  -J 


2467 


Seremban 
Coast     . 
Jelebu  . 
Kuala  Pilah 
Tampin 


Total  . 
Grand  Total 


157 
174 
125 
700 
221 

1377 


Temerloh 
Pekan   . 

Kuan  tan 


K.  Lipis  . 

Raub  and  Bentong    669 

•  1593 

•  2391 
.        215 


Total 


7340 


18,574 


1  See  Favre  in  J.  I.  A.  vol.  ii.  pp. 
253-255.  Against  this  statement  must, 
however,  be  set  the  inveterate  tendency 
of  these  tribes  to  hide  themselves  in  the 


forest  upon  the  approach  of  a  European. 
-   In  one  of  the  Perak  districts  immi- 
grants   from     India    are    included     as 
aborigines. 


MIXTURE   OF  RACl 


Allowing    25,000  as  a  probable  minimum  for  I 
"F.M.S.,"    the    Straits    Settlements,     Kedah,     I 
ast  States,  and   fohor  should  swell  the  total  to  at 

least  ;>5,ooo  or  40,000.' 

Mixture  01   Races. 

According  to  Vaughan-Stevens,  the  Sakai  ("  Senoi ' 
or  "Blandas,"  as  he  calls  them,  giving  a  quite  un- 
warranted extension  to  the  term  Blandas)3  are  a 
Negrito  tribe  with  a  very  large  admixture  of  civilised 
Malay  blood,  which  he  supposes  to  have  obscured  the 
original  characteristics  of  the  tribe.  This  view  (the 
Pan-Negrito  theory)  is,  however,  as  has  already  been 
said,  quite  untenable,  since  it  is  obvious  that  what- 
ever else  may  happen  anthropologically,  the  fusion  of 
two  brachycephalic  tribes,  or  even  two  mesaticephalic 
tribes,  could  not  possibly  produce  a  mixed  tribe  which 
was  mainly  dolichocephalic. 

Vaughan-Stevens  leaves  out  of  sight,  moreover, 
the  extremely  potent  cultural  and  religious  barrier 
which  divides  the  civilised  Mohammedan  Malays  from 
the  rude  heathen  tribes  of  the  jungle.  In  the  case  of 
a  Malay  mating  with  one  of  these  heathen  women, 
the  children  as  a  rule  follow  the  religion  of  the  father,3 
and  become  merged  in  his  race,  the  only  important 
exception  being  the  case  of  Malay  traders  living  with 
Sakai  women  in  the  Sakai  country,  and  then  deserting 
them  and  their  children,  in  which  case  the  children 
remain  with  the  tribe.  Hence  it  is  the  civilised  Malay, 
and  not  the  uncivilised  aboriginal  race,  that  is  most 

1  For    fuller    details,    showing    dis-       neighbourhood. 

tribution  of  the  sexes,  see  Appendix.  3  Among  the  jungle  tribes  themselves 

2  Blandas  or  Belandas.  It  is  probably  it  seems  that  the  tribal  name  follows  the 
a  mere  coincidence  that  Ptolemy  speaks  male  line  ;  sons-in-law  join  their  father- 
of  ariverPalandas  (apparently  the  river  in-law'ssettlement. — Vaughan-Stevens, 
Muar)  and  a  town  Palanda  in  the  same  ii.  90,  94. 


4Q  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 


affected  when  the  two  live  in  close  proximity  (as 
indeed  has  been  observed  in  Kedah  by  Logan,  and 
elsewhere).  On  the  other  hand,  unions  between 
Malay  women  and  heathen  tribesmen,  although  they 
are  certainly  known  to  occur,1  are  nevertheless  of  the 
rarest  description  ;  and  whereas  in  former  days  a 
woman  who  so  disgraced  her  family  as  to  mate  with 
one  who  was  regarded  as  little  better  than  the  brutes 
that  perish,  would  have  paid  the  penalty  with  her  life, 
she  still  has  to  undergo  an  extreme  form  of  social 
ostracism,  which  must  inevitably  act  as  a  strong 
deterrent.  Hence  the  most  appreciable  admixture  of 
blood  is  only  as  between  one  wild  tribe  and  another. 

This,  which  I  believe  to  be  the  normal  state  of 
things,  has  one  very  important  exception,  for  in  various 
parts  of  what  is  known  as  the  Negri  Sembilan,  but 
especially  in  Johol,  a  number  of  small  groups  of 
Sumatran  Malays  (principally  of  Menangkabau  origin) 
have  amalgamated  with  the  local  groups  of  aboriginal 
tribes  on  what  were  (nominally  at  least)  honourable 
and  equal  terms,  under  which  the  Batins  or  chiefs  of  the 
Jakun  even  retained,  for  a  time  at  least,  their  full  share 
of  authority  in  the  mixed  government  thus  established.2 

The  late  Martin  Lister,  in  writing  of  the  Rembau 

1  Mr.  C.   O.    Blagden  informed  me  had    previously    been    the    mistress    of 

of   a   case  at   Malacca  which  was   re-  more    than   one   white   man,  she  died 

ported   to  him  by  the  woman's  family.  suddenly  soon  after.      And  such  ca^es 

Mr.  Hale  supports  the  view  expressed  have   not   been  uncommon.      The  fact 

in    the    text    by   writing,    that    in    his  that  there  is  the  same  objection  to  an 

many  years'  experience   he   has   never  alliance  between  a  Malay  woman  and 

met  with  a  case  of  the  kind  {i.e.  of  a  a  Chinese  or  a  Tamil,  clearly  shows 

Malay  woman  marrying  a  Sakai  man).  that  this  prejudice  is  based  on  religious 

He  explains  this    by   saying   that   the  scruples. 

Mohammedan  naturally  does  not  like  2  Thus  Mr.  Hale  writes  me  that  the 

his  women,  who  are  virtually  his  slaves,  "  Waris  "  tribe  in  Rembau  was  divided 

to   get    out   of  his   control,    and    that  into  two   sections,   called    "Beduanda 

when    the    daughter    of    a  well-known  Jawa"  and  "Beduanda  Jakun !;  respec- 

S.    Ujong   chief   went   to   live   with    a  tively ;  and  that  the  paramount  chief  of 

Chinaman    at    Malacca,    although    she  Rembau  (called  "  Penghulu  "  or  "  Un- 


-    < 

— 
DQ 


s   - 
■J3  i: 


"3     = 


A     H       -    — 


r.    £ 


z 


□ 

— 

0 

>> 

^ 

— 

" 

~ 

< 

ttf 

ryi 

\ 

U 

rt 

>v3 

Machado. 

Young  Sakai  Girl  in  Centre  (mixed  Type  showing  strong  Negrito  Strain). 

Caught  when  young  in  Ulu  Lipis,  and  now  in  the  To'  Raja  of  Jelai's  household.     The 
other  two  are  Malay  children. 


Vol.  I.  p.  41. 


MIXTURE   OF  RACES  41 


Malays,1  gives  reasons  for  this  remarkable  divergent  e, 
pointing  out  that  whereas  the  rest  of  the  Peninsular 
Malays  at  the  time  of  the  Menangkabau  immigration 

were,    speaking    generally,    mere    piratical    freebooters 

bent  on  conquest  and  rapine,  the  Menangkabau  people, 

on  the  other  hand,  were  peaceful  agriculturalists  who 
had  been  forced  to  emigrate  through  the  pressure  of 
population  in  their  own  country.      Hence  all  that  the 

latter  desired  was  land  for  cultivation,  and  this  they 
were  quite  satisfied  to  obtain  by  peaceful  means.  And 
hence  in  the  case  of  these  Menangkabau  colonies  there 
has  been  a  true  amalgamation  between  them  and  the 
J  akun  of  Rembau,  which  has  not  been  the  case  elsewhere. 

It  must  not  be  forgotten,  as  I  have  already  said, 
that  large  masses  of  the  soi-disant  Malay  population 
in  many  parts  of  the  Malay  States  from  Kedah  to 
Singapore  are  undoubtedly  the  descendants  of  savage 
tribesmen  who,  by  intermarriage  with  the  civilised 
Malays  and  by  the  adoption  of  the  higher  level  of 
culture  which  in  these  parts  accompanies  conversion 
to  the  Mohammedan  religion,  have  in  the  course  of 
a  few  generations  become  barely  distinguishable  from 
the  ordinary  Malay  inhabitants,  of  the  western  and 
southern  portions  of  the  Peninsula. 

Traces  of  such  absorption,  in  which  the  meta- 
morphosis is  not  quite  complete,  are  certainly  to  be 
found,  for  instance,  in  the  State  of  Kedah,  in  which, 
some  years  back,  it  was  noticed  by  Logan  that  the 
Malayan  population  approximated  in  their  general 
appearance  to  the  wild  Negrito  tribes  of  the  interior. 

dang  ")  was  chosen  from  each  of  these  Negri  Sembilan,  aboriginal  descent  is 

sections  alternately.      "  Originally  the  claimed,  in  order  to  prove  the  owner- 

Batins  {i.e.  the  Jakun  chiefs)  had  a  say  ship  of  land." 

in  the  matter,  but  now  they  are  squeezed  l  In    J.  R.  A.  S.t    S.  B.,    Xo.     32, 

out    of   it."     And  yet    "all   over   the  p.  300. 


42  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 


The  descendants  of  aboriginal  slaves  would,  of  course, 
form  a  large  factor  in  the  problem. 

This  process  of  absorption  is,  moreover,  still  pro- 
ceeding with  quite  as  much  rapidity  as  in  the  past, 
and  where  it  appears  that  the  numbers  of  the  abo- 
rigines are  dwindling,  we  may  rest  convinced  that,  in 
the  majority  of  cases  at  all  events,  their  gradual  dis- 
appearance is  rather  due  to  conversion  and  absorption 
than  to  the  proximity  of  civilisation,  which  in  the 
case  of  these  tribes  does  not  appear  to  have  produced 
such  deleterious  effects  as  it  is  said  to  have  done  in 
other  parts  of  the  world.1 

In  spite  of  this  important  exception,  however,  the 
amount  of  admixture  of  Malay  blood,  even  in  the  Jakun 
group  (to  say  nothing  of  the  Sakai  or  Semang  groups, 
where  the  mixture  is  admittedly  less),  has  been  un- 
doubtedly very  much  exaggerated,  especially  by 
writers  who  failed  to  recognise  the  "  savage  Malay" 
element,  and  regarded  every  approach  to  the  Malay 
type  of  features  as  evidence  of  civilised  Malay  ad- 
mixture. 

In  conclusion  we  may  say  that,  except  in  the 
northern  and  some  of  the  central  states,  where  the 
circumstances  were  different,  the  "civilised  Malay" 
element  has  not  appreciably  affected  the  racial  purity 
of  the  wild  tribes  of  the  Peninsula,  the  main  admixture 
(which  in  many  places  is  obvious  enough)  having 
been  among  themselves.  Hence  the  chief  forms  of 
admixture  that  are  worth  considering  are  as  follows  :■ — 

1  See  p.  30,  par.  35,  of  the  recent  18,574  persons. 
(190 1)  Federated  Malay  States  Census  Mr.  Hale  writes  me  that  the  point 

Report,    where   we  are    told    that   the  of  religion  often  means  nothing  but  the 

returns  show  that  there  is  little  tend-  ceremony    of    circumcision,    and    that 

ency  on  the  part  of  the  aborigines  to  converted    slaves    of    this    kind    often 

decrease,   and  that   they  now   number  reverted   to   the  jungle  (on  emancipa- 

(in  the  Federated  Malay  States  alone)  tion). 


JAKUN    WITH    MARKED    SAKAI    STRAIN,    SELANGOR. 


Vol.  I.  p.  42. 


Gre°vr. 


Takun  of  Mixed  Type,   Bukit.  Prual,  Selangok 


I  rol.  I.  p.  43- 


i  RAt  'A  CHARACTERS  <  >/■  A  /■  1 7RJ 1  <  43 

(i)  Semang  +  Sakai,  or  "Semang  Sakai," 

(2)  Semang  1  -Jakun,  or  "Semang  Jakun," 

(3)  Sakai  +  Jakun,  or  "  Sakai- Jakun," 

and  further  crosses  arising   From   the  various  mixed 
races  thus  produced.1 

I. — Race-Characters  of  Semang. 

The  Semang  country  runs  (roughly  speaking)  from 
Chaiya'2  and  Ulu  Patani  (Singora  and  Patalung)  to 
Kedah  in  the  north  of  the  Peninsula,  and  thence  to 
mid-Perak  and  Northern  Pahang. 

Wallace3  states  that  the  height  of  the  Semang 
varies  between  1266  mm.  and  14 16  mm.  This  latter 
figure  is,  however,  certainly  too  low. 

Martin  lays  stress  on  the  fact  that  the  sexual 
difference  in  height  is  actually  greater  in  tribes  of 
small  stature  (i.e.  Semang  and  Senoi)  than  it  is 
amongst  taller  tribes  of  the  wild  races,  especially, 
e.g.,  among  the  Blandas.  His  rough  estimate  of  the 
average  height  of  a  male  Semang  is  about  the  same 
as  that  of  a  Sakai  (1500  mm.).  De  Morgan  says  the 
Semang  are  the  taller,  but  the  fact  is  doubtful.4 

The  following  account  of  the  physical  characters 
of  the  Peninsular  Negritos  includes  measurements' 
taken  by  Mr.  Laidlaw  and  myself  in  the  Ulu  Lebih 
district  of  Kelantan,  and  by  myself  at  Jarum  : — 

1  That  the    foregoing   statement    of  that   any  stranger  who,   while  staying 

the  case  is  the  true  one,  appears  even  in  a  Jakun  house,  was  able  to  talk  the 

from  the  remarks  of  Vaughan-Stevens  husband  off  to  sleep,  acquired  thereby 

himself,    when    he    says    that    "  Half-  an   acknowledged    right    to    usurp    his 

bloods,  with  Malay  or  Chinese  fathers,  marital  privileges  for  the  time  being, 
are    quite    unknown    among   the   wild  -  W.   Smyth's  Five   Years  in  Siam, 

tribes,  but  that  such  admixture  is  per-  ii.  76. 

mitted,    although    not    liked,    by   those  :;  Quoted  by  Lane- Fox,  y.  A.  I.  vii. 

clans  who   live  in   close   contact   with  437  ;  cp.  J.  R.  A.  S.,  S.  B.,  No.  7. 
the  Malays"  (  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiii.  833).  4  For  measurements,  see  U  Homme, 

Mr.    Hale,    on     the    other    hand,    in-  ii.  552  ;    and  Wray,  Per.  Mus.  N.  iii. 

forms  me   that    among  the  Malays  in  pp.  33-35. 
N.  Sembilan  it  was  an  accepted  belief  5  Given  in  extenso  in  Appendix. 


44  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  tart 

The  average  height  of  five  adult  males  that  we 
measured  was  1491  mm.  (about  4  feet  9  inches),  that 
of  three  women  1408  mm.,  or  some  3!  inches  less. 

The  face  was  round,  the  forehead  low,  rounded, 
narrow,  and  projecting,  or,  as  it  were,  "  swollen."  The 
nose  was  short  and  flattened,  the  nostrils  much  dis- 
tended, and  the  breadth  of  the  nose  was  remarkably 
great,  five  adult  males  having  an  average  of  10 1.2,  and 
three  adult  females  an  average  of  97.4.  The  cheek- 
bones were  broad,  and  the  lips  were  sometimes  full  and 
turned  outwards,  or  "everted,"  but  not  as  a  rule  thick. 

The  jaws  often  protruded  slightly,  but  I  did  not 
see  any  case  of  marked  prognathism.  The  ears  were 
small.  The  six  front  teeth  in  the  upper  jaw  were 
often  filed  so  as  to  present  a  concave  surface  anteriorly, 
in  imitation  of  the  common  Malay  practice.  The 
teeth  as  a  rule  were  white  and  good,  except  in  ad- 
vanced age.  In  one  or  two  cases  only  they  were  dis- 
coloured with  betel -juice,  and  in  one  case  caries  was 
present.  The  milk-teeth  of  a  child  when  examined  were 
perfectly  normal  and  regular.  The  shoulders  were  com- 
paratively broad.  The  forearms,  with  two  exceptions, 
appeared  not  to  be  so  long  relatively  as  they  are  in 
the  Andamanese.  The  exceptions  were  two  Pangan 
at  Jarum,  whose  arms  were  so  long  as  to  present  a 
pithekoid  character.  But  the  number  of  persons  ob- 
served is  too  small  to  separate  them  from  the  Pangan 
of  Kelantan.     The  person  was  usually  well  developed. 

The  head  measurements  taken  by  ourselves  give 
a  mesaticephalic  index  as  an  average  ;  for  five  men  the 
average  was  78.9,  for  three  women  81. 1.  This  feature, 
however,  is  clearly  variable,  as  one  of  the  men  (Pan- 
dak)  had  an  index  of  73.8,  and  a  Pangan  at  Jarum 
one  of  74.4,   as  against  an  index  of  85  in  the  skull 


Machado. 
Sakai  Girl  (showing  Negrito  Strain- i. 

Living  at  Batu  Pahat    Johor   but  originally  from  Ulu  Lipis    Pahang.     Carrying  a  bamboo 

cylinder  fur  water. 


Vol.  I.  p.  45- 


RACl   CHARAi  TERS  OJ     VE(  R/T( 


collected  by  Grubauer,  which  means  an  index  of  about 
87  in  the  living  person*1 

Martin  again  states  tli.it  -ill  the  Mendi'  (     Semar 
measured  by  him  were  mesaticephalic,  with  a  str< 
tendency  to  dolichocephaly. 

The  following  notes  on  a  male  skeleton  found  by 
myself  in  Kedah,  and  averages  oi  measurements  taken 
from  living  Semang  (Pangan)  in  Kelantanand  Patani, 
may  be  of  interest  I  am  indebted  for  them  to  Dr. 
\Y.  L.  11.  Duckworth,  of  Jesus  Col!-  1  imbridge, 
who  has  also  described  .1  Semang  skull  recently 
collected  by  Dr.  Grubauer.8 

The  skull  viewed    in  norma  \ crticalis    i.-,   ellipsoid    and    mesaticephalic.      The 

glabellar  prominences  are  fery  moderate  in  amount.  Muscular  ridges  are  feebly 
developed,  and  the  zygomatic  arch  is  slender.     The  nasal  profile  is  comparatively 

flat,  Imt  the  nasal  spine  is  large.  Prognathism  of  the  subnasal  and  dental  type- 
is  well  marked.  The  nasal  hones  are  large  and  rather  flat,  the  aperture  pyri- 
formis  is  cordate  in  outline.  The  palate  is  hypsiloid,  the  teeth  large  and 
blackened.  The  anterior  surfaces  of  the  upper  incisors  and  canines  have  been 
filed.  Chin-prominence  slight,  ascending  ramus  of  mandible  short.  The  skull 
should  be  described  as  mesaticephalic,  metriocephalic,  mesognathous,  chamie- 
prosopic,  microsemic,  platyrhine,  mesoprosopic,  and  mesocephalic,  and  on  the 
whole  probably  represents  an  intermediate  form  between  the  dolichocephalic  and 
brachycephalic  types. 

The  vertebral  column  shows  no  particular  marks  of  inferiority.  The  scapulae 
are  small  and  relatively  very  broad,  the  coracoid  is  large,  and  the  upper  border 
very  straight.  The  clavicles  show  signs  of  disease,  but  have  a  very  remarkable  form 
which  can  hardly  be  altogether  pathological.  The  peculiarity  consists  in  the 
exaggeration  of  the  normal  curve  (with  concavity  directed  forward)  of  the  outer 
part  of  the  bone  ;  the  two  portions  of  the  bone  meet  at  about  a  quarter  of  its 
length  from  the  outer  end,  at  an  angle  which  in  the  right  clavicle  is  nearly  900. 

The  pelvis  affords  the  best  indication  of  the  sex  of  the  skeleton.  The  crests 
of  the  ilia  are  not  so  much  incurved  anteriorly  as  in  the  European  pelvis.  The 
femurs  are  rather  straight  in  the  shaft,  with  distinct  accessory  adductor  tubercles. 

Generally  speaking,  the  characters  of  the  skull  are  not  such  as  to  enable  us 
to  refer  it  to  any  well -recognised  type  without  hesitation.  Certain  marks  of 
inferiority,  which  may  be  regarded  not  as  racial  peculiarities,  but  as  constituting 
retentions  of  conditions  normal  in  infancy,  should  be  noticed.  These,  which 
often  occur  in  lower  or  primitive  races,  and  are  spoken  of,  with  others,  as 
"infantile"  features,  are  the  rotund  contour  of  norma  occipitalis,  and  the  short- 
ness of  the  ascending  ramus  of  the  mandible.  The  conditions  of  the  cranial 
suture  leave  no  doubt  as  to  the  skull  having  reached  maturity. 

The  conformation  of  the  skeleton  of  the  nose,  and  the  type  of  prognathism, 
constitute  resemblances  to  skulls  met  with  not  unfrequently  amongst  the  negro 
races,  especially  the  races  of  Central  Africa,  rather  than  amongst  Oceanic  negroes. 

1  In  mesaticephalic  subjects  the  possibility  of  Sakai  admixture  should,  I  think, 
be  discounted.  a  See  Appendix. 


46  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  i-art 

The  lack  of  characters  usually  determining  sex  in  '.he  skull  is  also  in  favour  of  this 
view.      On  tin-  other  hand,  no  definite  resemblance  in  respect  of  the  cranium  can 

be  traced  to  the  Bush  natives  of  South  Africa,  whereas  the  facial  features  resemble 
certain  crania  from  Sumatra,  Java,  Borneo,  and  one  from  the  Andamans.  Again, 
the  size  and  proportions  of  the  scapula  are  not  unlike  those  of  the  Bushman 
of  Africa  ;  an  accessory  adductor  tubercle  appears  on  the  femurs  in  both,  and  in 
both  the  lower  ends  of  the  femurs  are  slender.  Differences,  however,  obtain  in 
the  sacra,  and  on  the  whole  the  Semang's  bones  are  the  larger.  The  great  length 
of  the  forearm  said  to  characterise  the  Andamanese  is  absent  in  the  Semang.1 

Sir  William  Turner  describes  a  skeleton  from 
Pahang,"  which  differs  notably  from  the  above.  It  is 
microcephalic  and  brachycephalic.  There  is,  however, 
no  precise  evidence  as  to  whether  this  skeleton  belonged 
to  an  undoubted  Semang,  and  as  brachycephaly  is  a 
mark  of  certain  tribes  belonging  to  the  third  group  of 
Martin's  classification,  it  might  perhaps  equally  be  re- 
ferred to  one  of  these.  Another  skeleton  described  by 
Virchow  (quoted  by  Turner,  loc.  cit.)  shows  also 
differences  in  other  directions.3 

Hair. 

The  hair  of  the  Semang  that  we  observed  was  in 
most  cases  characteristically  Negrito — crisp,  short, 
and  very  curly,  in  fact,  actually  woolly  in  the  purer 
types  of  the  tribe.  In  colour  it  was  of  a  brownish- 
black,  not  a  bluish -black  like  that  of  Malays  (and 
other  Mongoloid  races).  In  section  it  varied  from  an 
oval  or  ellipse  at  the  thicker  or  basal  end,  to  almost  a 
circle  near  the  tip.  In  other  words,  it  possessed  a 
Negrito  character  in  respect  of  section ; 4  and  the 
measurement  of  the  spirals  was  about  15  mm.  The 
chin-hairs  were  few  and  straggling,   and  in  only  two 

1  For    a    fuller    description    of    this  end  of  Part  I.  and  also  the  Appendix 

skeleton  see  W.  L.  H.  Duckworth  in  of  this  book. 

J.  A.  I.  vol.  xxxii.  (1902),  p.  142^^. ;  2   Trans.  R.  S.  Edin.    vol.    xl.   part 

and   for    his  description   of  a   brachy-  i.  No.  6. 
cephalic  Semang   skull    purchased    by  3  See  Appendix, 

the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  see  Ap-  4   For  a  detailed  description  of  this 

pendix  ;  and  for  other  Semang  measure-  hair  kindly  supplied  by  Dr.  W.  L.  H. 

ments,  see  note  by  Dr.   Duckworth  at  Duckworth,  see  Appendix. 


i  RACE  CHARACTERS  <>/■    VEGR/Ti  i, 

(  ises  did  we  see  a  Semang  with  even  the  sli 
beard,1   which   in  <>n<'  <>i    the  two  c.i'.c,   w.i     i  -  ,«-ly 
curled  and  x\ < >< >  1 1  \- ,  in  the  <>i  her  I  bin  and   »l  raj    lii 

In    anollui     |>;i     Ayr    Yaii<;haii     St«       i  hat     'In-     half 

breed  Semangi  are  the  only  membei  i  "i  thi  le  tribei  \\i><>  could  I 

imparativel]  well  provided  with  hair,  and  thai  even  in  theii  case  il"-  haii 
standi  in  almost   direel    relation   i>»  the  mixture  ol    blood        I        I 
(Pangan)  when  ol  pure  blood  hai  v"  little  beard  "i  whisken  thai   h< 
foi  in-,  little  icrubby  beard  to  be  Been(  and  therefore  plucli    il  out,     Ye\  h< 
to  retain  the  moustache,  10  thai  il  may  "di  tingui  li  him  from  i  woman"  [sic). 

Elsewhere  we  are  told  thai  "  The  haii  ol  the  Semang  (Menik)  i    le     im  lined 
to  turn  grey  in  <>ld  age  than  that  <>i  the  Malays,  gn  \  hall  k>  in 
as  quite  exceptional."  ■' 

Skin-colour. 

The  skin   was  of   a  dark   chocolate-brown    in    the 
Semang  that  we  measured  in  K  el  an  tan,  approximating 

in  the  case  of  some  of  the  Kedah  Negritos  to  the 
glossy  black  mentioned  by  Anderson.4  In  the  old 
people  it  was  much  scarred  and  sometimes  diseased, 
the  disease  most  prevalent  being  that  called  "  kurap  " 
by  the  Malays,  but  of  a  mild  type.  The  colour  of  No.  3 
of  Topinard's  scale  corresponded  very  closely  with  the 
colour  of  most  of  the  Eastern  Semang  measured  by 
myself.  In  the  younger  individuals  the  skin  was 
smooth   and   clean  and   the  body  physically  well    de- 

I  For  a  fuller  account  see  J.  A.  J.  tendency  towards  it  that  the  source  can- 
xxxii.  151.  For  hair-sections  see  not  be  mistaken,  although  the  hair  of 
Montano,  PI.  xxxi.  In  another  place  the  rest  of  the  family  may  more  nearly 
Yaughan-Stevens  remarks  as  follows  : —  approach    the    Sakai    (Blandas)    type. 

II  The  peculiar  spirally  tufted  ('  pep-  The  pure  types  of  either  kind  are  very 
per-corn ')  hair  of  the  E.  Semang  (Pan-  seldom  seen  there  ;  but  rather  they  over- 
gan)  has  kept  its  influence  up  to  the  lap  and  produce  intermediate  groups, 
present  day  in  that  district  in  Pahang  which  show  in  some  cases  more  and  in 
where  the  half-breed  descendants  of  the  others  less  of  a  tendency  to  possess  the 
E.  Semang  (Pangan),  Tembeh  (Temia),  curly  hair  referred  to." 

and    Sakai    (Blandas)    were  settled  as  2  In   other   words,    the   hairiness    is 

prisoners    of   the    Rawa    Malays    ever  due  to  the  presence  of  the  Sakai  ele- 

since    their    pure-blooded    forefathers  ment. 

were  first  sold  to  the  Malays  of  Pahang.  3  Z.f.  E.  xxix.   178. 

In  a  family  of  this  mixed  type  it  often  4  J.  Anderson,  quoted  by  Col.  James 

happens    that    one    or    several    of   the  Low,  states  that  the  Semang  of  Treng- 

children  show  in  this  respect  either  a  ganu  were  not  of  such  a  ' '  jet-black  and 

complete  reversion  to  the  E.  Semang  glossy  appearance "  as  those  of  Kedah 

(Pangan)  type,  or  at  least  so  decided  a  {J.  I.  A.  vol.  iv.  p.  428). 


48  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  pari 


vcloped,  but   in  older   individuals  it  was  often   much 
scarred,  and  in  two  or  three  cases  slightly  diseased. 

With  regard  to  the  skin-colour  of  the  Negritos,  Vaughan-Stevens  remarks  that 
amonij  the  wilder  Semang,  or  "  Menik  "  (the  men  of  which  tribe  wear  nothing 
but  a  cord  or  girdle  and  the  women  a  waist-fringe  that  lets  the  light  through), 
the  colour  of  the  skin  is  very  uniform.  The  W.  Semang  (?  Semang-Sakai 
tribes),  however,  offer  nearly  as  great  a  variety  as  the  Malays.  The  Semang 
(Menik)  did  not  regard  the  lighter  -  coloured  Sakai  (Blandas)  as  superiors  (!). 
Their  god  Pie  was  dark  like  themselves.  Although  the  Semang  is  of  darker 
colour  than  the  Sakai  (Blandas),  and  appears  to  be  less  influenced  by  heat,  he 
(V. -St.)  was  still  of  opinion  that  this  capacity  for  bearing  heat  arises  rather 
from  his  constitution,  than  from  the  darker  colour  of  his  skin  {vide  remarks  on 
this  subject  as  affecting  the  Sakai,  infra). 

The  pronounced  nomadic  character  of  all  these  tribes  makes  it  impossible  to 
arrive  at  any  conclusions  as  to  the  effect  produced  by  altitude,  soil,  shade,  dust, 
or  clothes  upon  the  texture  and  colour  of  the  skin.  The  family  or  tribe  lives 
perhaps  for  a  month  upon  a  hill  at  an  elevation  of  some  thousands  of  feet  above 
the  sea,  next  month  at  the  foot  of  the  same  hill  ;  at  one  time  in  the  thick,  dark 
jungle,  and  at  another  in  the  hot,  open  plains. 

According  to  the  Malays,  the  Negritos  never  wash  themselves,  and  therefore 
possess  as  a  rule  a  powerful  odour,  and  the  statement  is  certainly  a  true  one. 
When,  for  instance,  for  the  sake  of  the  experiment,  he  (V.-St.)  had  induced  the 
E.  Semang  (Pangan)  to  wash  themselves  with  soap,  they  did  not  appear  to 
retain  any  particular  smell  afterwards.  But  when,  immediately  afterwards,  he  ac- 
companied them  on  a  rapid  march,  and  after  going  some  distance  from  them 
had  again  returned  to  their  company,  the  odour  was  distinctly  noticeable.1 

Sight. 
The  eyes  of  the  Semang  that  we  examined,  which 
were  round,  wide-open,  and  horizontal,  were  uniformly 
of  a  very  rich  deep  brown  in  colour  ;  in  one  case  only, 
that  of  an  old  man,  they  were  of  a  greyish-brown  tint. 
The  Semang  as  a  race  were  far  from  being  unpleasant- 
looking  people,  the  most  striking  peculiarity  in  their 
appearance  being  a  certain  wild  look  about  the  region 
of  the  eyes,  probably  due,  in  part,  to  the  great  width 
between  them,  and  to  the  curious  depression  of  the 
upper  part  of  the  nose,  as  well  as  to  a  natural  rest- 
lessness of  the  eyes  themselves,  which  these  tribes 
possess  in  common  with  wild  animals.  Their  eyesight 
appeared  to  be  good  of  its  kind,  and  in  the  few  cases 
that  we  tested  the  colour-vision  was  normal.2 


1  Z.f.  E.  xxix.  174-176.  are    given    by   Wray,    Per.    Mits.    N. 

2  A    few  sight-statistics  of  Semang       iii.  p.  38. 


RACE  CHARACTERS    0/  NEGRITi 


1 1„   tyi     "i  th<    i  1 1  '.  ul,r"  ,l"  i"'"'  l,! 

i ii<-  i  onjum  ii.  >  -I  i  da  i1  yellow  i  oloui  i  wh  tm    tin 

iiu-  E,  Semang  (Pangan)    how   no  traces  ol    ihorl  ighl  and  the 

top  of  thi    call    '  in  quickm    i  oi  observation)  thii  quality,  however,  itandin 
Invei  ■<•  ratio  to  the  progn      mack  by  thi  ii  trik>  In  civil! 


Hearing, 
The  cars  of  the  Semang  that  we  observed  were 

distinctly  small,  and  their  hearing  appeared   ordinarily 
acute.       In  one  case,  however,  that  of  a  youngish  man, 

slight  deafness  was  noticeable. 

The  sense  of  hearing  among  t > * < -  v.  Semang  (Pangan),  though  not  so  acute 
.1.  among  the   fakun,  is  nevertheless  .sharper  than  among   the  more  civil 
\v.  Semang,  Sakai  (Blandas),  or  Tembeh  (Temia). 

Ow  the  other  hand,  exceptional  sharpness  of  hearing  occurred  more  frequently 
among  the  W.  Semang  than  among  any  of  the  other  tribes  mentioned.3 

Hands  and  Feet. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  these  wild  nomadic  tribes 
frequently  meet  with  accidents.  Out  of  the  few  men 
that  we  measured,  one  suffered  from  a  deformed  finger, 
and  another  had  lost  the  little  toe  of  his  left  foot. 

It  is  very  difficult  to  answer  the  question  concerning  the  usual  position  of  the 
palm  of  the  hand,  i.e.  whether  it  is  directed  forwards,  or  backwards,  or  sideways. 
The  hands  are  so  constantly  occupied  in  the  case  of  both  sexes  that  they  are  very 
seldom  at  rest.  So  far,  however,  as  he  (V.-St.)  had  been  able  to  observe  it,  the 
palm  was  held  sideways  by  the  Negritos,  i.e.  directed  towards  the  leg  or  a  little 
towards  the  front,  whereas  by  the  Sakai  (Blandas)  and  Jakun  it  was  directed 
backwards. 

The  aborigines  were  at  first  much  perplexed  by  being  asked  whether  when 
their  fist  was  closed  they  could  still  stretch  out  one  finger  of  the  hand  without 
unclosing  the  others.  Both  the  Semang  and  Sakai  (Blandas)  could,  however, 
do  this  very  easily  when  it  was  explained  to  them. 

In  measuring  the  width  of  the  span  between  the  thumb  and  the  little  or 
middle  finger,  he  (V.-St.)  was  struck  by  their  inability  to  open  their  fingers 
freely.4 

The  most  noticeable  point  about   the  feet  of  the 
Semang  is  the  remarkable  inward  curve  of  the  hallux, 

1  Z.f.E.  xxix.  176.  3  lb.  p.  182. 

2  lb.  p.  181.  4  lb.  pp.  190,  191,  194. 

VOL  I  E 


5o  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 


as  shown  in  the  tracings  of  Pangan  feet  which  we  took 
in  Ulu  Kelantan. 

The  following  passage  from  Vaughan-Stevens  about 
the  walk  of  the  aborigines  in  general  ("  Orang  Utan  ") 
applies  perfectly  to  the  Semang  : — 

11  I  have  tried  to  obtain  some  data  on  the  walk  of  the  Orang  Utan,  but  I 
find  that  this  is  scarcely  possible,  from  reasons  related  to  the  great  variability  of 
their  environment.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  very  rare  to  find  a  man  who  is  free 
from  cuts,  cracks,  or  thorn-pricks  ;  for  according  to  their  custom  they  go  bare- 
foot in  spite  of  the  roughness  of  the  land  and  of  the  obstacles  and  dangers  with 
which  the  thick  vegetation  threatens  them.  This  influences  their  walk  in  one 
respect.  In  the  second  place,  they  are  appreciably  influenced  by  the  character 
of  the  jungle  through  which  they  have  been  wandering  for  some  weeks  previously. 
From  habit  they  adapt  their  walk  to  the  peculiarities  of  the  way  by  which  they 
have  to  travel.  A  path  (for  instance)  where  thorns  that  have  fallen  from  the  trees 
and  creeping  plants  surround  him  causes  the  man  to  walk  carefully  and  slowly, 
and  at  each  step  to  delay  a  moment  before  he  trusts  the  whole  weight  of  the 
body  to  the  foot ;  and  this  method  of  walking  is  retained  some  days  from  mere 
habit,  even  when  the  thorny  jungle  is  left  and  the  path  is  once  more  smooth  and 
level. 

"  After  observing  a  man  for  a  whole  day,  I  found  that  he  employed  no  fewer 
than  eight  different  ways  of  walking,  which  varied  with  the  nature  of  the  ground 
to  be  traversed.  And  the  ground  to  be  traversed  suffers  such  constant  changes 
throughout  the  life  of  the  Orang  Utan  that  I  really  do  not  know  which  of  these 
ways  of  walking  I  should  describe  as  his  most  usual  method.  Contrary  to  the 
European  in  general,  he  has  few  or  no  level  paths  to  go  by,  and  hence  the  gait 
which  he  adopts  on  such  a  path  would  not  be  his  usual  way  of  walking,  but 
would  be  precisely  the  method  which  he  employs  most  rarely. 

"  The  footsteps  of  the  Negritos,  I  am  prepared  to  maintain,  are  almost  straight 
in  the  majority  of  cases,  whereas  all  those  of  the  Orang  Utan  (?)  turn  outwards. 
In  all  races,  however,  there  is  so  great  a  difference  in  the  [usual]  angles  that  it 
is  impossible  to  say  which  angle  is  the  real  standard."1 

Locomotion.'1 

With  regard  to  strength  and  endurance  in  walking,  the  wild  E.  Semang 
(Pangan)  stand  in  the  front  rank.  Then  come  the  Jakun  and  the  civilised  (W. ) 
Semang  ;  and,  last  of  all,  the  various  tribes  of  Sakai  (Blandas  and  Tembeh). 

The  Semang  are  bad  runners,  but  they  are  as  quick  as  an  eel  or  a  snake  in 
getting  through  marshy  swamps  or  forest,  their  small  bodies  being  very  pliant  and 
supple.  In  getting  fast  through  bushes  or  mangrove  jungle  they  are  better  than 
the  Sakai  (Blandas),  although  the  latter  have  the  better  sense  of  direction  in 
unknown  forest. 

Cfanbing. 

The  following  remarks,  from  the  dialectal  forms, 
evidently  refer  to  the  Semang  : — 

1  Z.f.E.xxix.  191,  192.  2  Id.  pp.  193,  194. 


RAi  /   CHARACTERS  OJ    VI  GRITi  51 


Climbing!  irhi(  h  In  general  I  • « ailed  "  i-  I  by 

three  different  nun.   ,  i ling  to  the  method  employed  i 

i.  "(  iihiu.ni "  ("  <  Ihidward  "),  hi  which  the  fool  ily  a.  m 

the  position  "i  the  SakaJ  (Blandas)  in  the  photograph  I  lenl  jrou. 

2.  ■•  Tinbon"  (" Tinhorn  M),  In  a  hi<  ii  th<  •  I  p  the  tree  iHth  the  innei 

.hi.  . .1  the  ■■' 'I*'- 

■•  1 1  Nangan  '  I "  ree  Nun   u n  "),  in  wln<  h  .1  i"]--  1 1  used  (pi 
in  Ceylon),  >"  In  winch  the  item  I    embraced  by  the  arm    and  l<        I  1 
time  (European  fashion)*     The  grasp  "'  1 1 » « -  hand  ■  1  •  1  ailed  "  Ma-4  neb." 

A  specimen  of  rope  sent  to  Berlin  by  Vaughan- 

Stevens  was  labelled  as  follows  : — 

'*Nangan  ('Nungarn'),  the  rope  used  in  climbing,  for  fastening  the  ankles 
together,  whilst  tin-  inside  oi  c.uh  fool  is  pressed  against  the  tret-." 

In  the  same  passage  Vaughan-Stevens  speaks  very 
contemptuously  of  the  Semang  as  climbers — 

"The  Semang  arc  bad  climbers;  an  ordinary  school  -girl  would  excel 
the  best  of  them.  For  climbing  a  straight,  high  stem,  the  Sakai  (Blandas)  is 
the  better.  The  Semang  is  nervous  when  high  up  in  the  air,  especially  if  the 
wind  blows  a  little.  The  winds  are  for  him  the  messengers  of  diseases  ;  he  does 
not  like  to  be  unprotected  in  their  domain  at  the  top  of  a  high  tree."  * 

This  description,  however,  is  most  unfair  to  the 
Semang,  many  of  whom,  at  least,  can  climb  almost 
like  monkeys.  I  myself  once  saw  two  of  the  Kedah 
Semang  run  several  yards  up  trees  by  putting  the  flat 
of  their  feet  against  the  trunk  and  their  arms  round  it. 

Swimming.2 

The  Semang  are  very  bad  swimmers,  but  the  majority  of  them  know  how 
to  swim,  which  is  called  "Kijuaij"  ("  Keejooije "),  and  in  water  which  only 
reaches  up  to  the  breast  they  splash  merrily  about.  They  swim  exactly  in  the 
same  way  as  the  Northern  Malays,  swimming  on  the  breast  and  paddling  with 
the  hands  like  dogs,  and  drawing  the  legs  vertically  upwards  from  the  knees, 
and  then  straightening  them  vigorously,  thus  making  a  great  splashing.  Of  deep 
or  rushing  turbid  water  they  have  superstitious  fears  ;  they  are  afraid,  as  a  child 
is  afraid  of  the  dark,  as  they  "do  not  know  what  their  god  Kari  (' Kee,'  sic) 
may  send  to  draw  them  down  into  the  depths." 

Throwing. 3 

In  throwing  the  ["  tame  "]  Semang  is  as  clumsy  as  a  European  woman.  The 
action  is  the  same,  i.e.  with  the  shoulder  instead  of  with  the  wrist  and  elbow. 

1  Z.f.  E.  xxix.  199.  2  lb.  p.  198.  3  lb.  p.  200. 


52  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 

Sensitiveness  to  Pain. 
The  Semang  appear  to  be  less  sensitive  to  pain  than  the  Sakai  (Blandas).1 

Physiognomy. 

The  open  mouth  is  sometimes  covered  l>y  the  hand,  or  the  latter  is  carried  up 
to  some  part  of  the  head. 

When  a  man  is  indignant  or  defiant  he  frowns.  He  does  not,  however,  at 
the  same  time  clench  his  fists. 

In  "simple"  people  the  corners  of  the  mouth  are  very  slightly  depressed,  and 
the  adjacent  extremities  of  the  eyebrows  raised,  by  the  muscle  that  the  French 
call  the  "  grief  muscle." 

In  the  more  intelligent  the  eyes  sparkle,  the  skin  round  and  under  them  being 
wrinkled,  and  the  mouth  slightly  drawn  back  at  the  corners. 

When  one  man  sneers  or  jeers  at  another  it  rarely  happens  that  the  corners 
of  the  upper  lip  over  the  canine  or  eye  teeth  are  raised  on  the  side  facing  the 
man  whom  he  addresses. 

A  dogged  or  obstinate  expression  can  be  very  easily  recognised  among  the 
Semang. 

It  is  uncertain  whether  any  gesture  of  contempt  exists. 

Disgust  is  expressed  by  a  sudden  expiration  of  the  breath,  something  like 
incipient  vomiting. 

In  the  case  of  extreme  fear  the  Semang  children  remain  quite  quiet.  The 
met  sit  down  quietly  and  frequently  utter  a  sharp  hissing  noise.  Both  men  and 
women  open  their  mouths  and  eyes. 

To  show  that  he  cannot  prevent  something  being  done,  or  cannot  himself  do 
something,  he  slightly  raises  his  eyebrows,  and  keeps  his  mouth  somewhat  open. 

The  children  pout  markedly  when  they  are  sulky,  and  run  away  quietly. 

To  express  affirmation  the  head  is  thrust  forwards,  whereas  to  express  negation 
the  eyes  are  cast  down.2 

Physical  Endurance. 

Vaughan-Stevens  remarks  that  he  did  not  observe  any  difference  between  these 
races  in  the  power  of  enduring  heat,  e.g.  when  they  had  been  exposed  through 
the  whole  day  to  the  sun  on  a  journey,  except  as  regards  their  general  [sic, 
?  individual]  power  of  enduring  fatigue.  Elsewhere  he  remarks  that  in  the  sensi- 
tiveness of  the  head  to  the  sun's  heat  very  little  difference  (between  the  three 
races)  at  first  probably  existed.  [This  point,  however,  is  a  difficult  one  to  establish, 
since]  the  Semang  (Menik)  wear  nothing  as  a  rule  but  a  head-band,  and  hence 
scarcely  feel  any  special  increase  of  the  sun's  heat. 

There  is  never  any  appreciable  degree  of  cold  in  the  plains  of  the  Peninsula, 
and  even  such  falls  of  temperature  as  occur  are  never  of  long  duration.  The 
cold  wet  winds  of  the  mountains  are,  however,  felt  more  by  the  E.  Semang 
(Pangan)  and  Tembeh  (Temia)3  than  the  Sakai.  The  wild  E.  Semang  (Pangan), 
however,  can  bear  such  low  temperatures  as  occasionally  occur  without  the  least 
sign  of  discomfort,  when  the  more  civilised  tribes  are  reduced  to  cowering  over  a 
fire  with  chattering  teeth. 

1  Z.f.E.  xxix.  203.  omitted.      Even  the  answers  given  by 

2  Answers  to  questions  drawn  up  by  Vaughan-Stevens  with  regard  to  the 
Darwin,  collected  by  V.-St.,  and  pub-  Semang  are  sometimes  inconsistent, 
lished  in  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxviii.  270-272.  3  Vaughan-Stevens  ascribes  this 
The  answers  referring  to'  the  Sakai  greater  sensitiveness  of  the  Tembeh  to 
and  Jakun  are  valueless,  the  two  races  the  fact  of  their  constitution  having 
being  confused  by  V.-St.,  and  are  hence  been  enfeebled  by  disease  ! 


.  SUMMARY  "/■    v/  GRITO  CI  LTURE  S3 

I  lie      i\< ■••!  ilo        lln  in   f-1  vi  lh.it      lli<       S(  mm;;     (  •  liild 

■  rally  iuflf<  i    tnon  when  In  want  ol  food  than  to  (Blandt  )  and  [akan 

children. ' 

Summary  oj  Si  hang  (  i  u\  ure, 
The  Semang  arc  the  most   nomadii    ol    ill  tin 

tribes,  the  wilder  ones  never  Staying,  it  is  alleged, 
more  than  throe  days  ill  one  place.  But  lew  ol  them 
have  taken  to  agriculture,  and  they  obtain  their  liveli- 
hood 1))'  hunting,  fishing,  and  trapping,  by  digging  up 

wild  roots  and  tubers,  and  by  gathering  the  various 
jungle  fruits  as  they  come  into  season. 

They  are  fond  of  tobacco,  but  very  seldom  indulge 
in  betel-chewing,  of  which,  in  fact,  I  never  saw  an 
instance  among  the  Semang  of  Kedah  and  Ulu  Patani. 
They  wear  to  some  extent  the  loin-cloth  of  tree-bark 
(the  bark  selected  being  in  some  cases  that  of  the 
upas  or  poison-tree),  but  their  distinctive  costume 
appears  to  be  a  mere  girdle  of  leaves,  or,  as  especially 
on  festal  occasions,  a  peculiar  girdle  manufactured  from 
the  long  black  shiny  strings  (really  the  rhizomorph) 
of  a  toad-stool ! 

The  wildest  of  the  Semang  do  not  appear  as  a 
race  to  tattoo,  or  scarify,  either  the  face  or  the  body, 
though  in  some  cases  they  may  have  learnt  the  custom 
(of  scarification)  from  the  Sakai.  They  (the  men 
especially)  often  shave  the  head,  and  not  unfrequently 
about  half  a  dozen  of  their  front  teeth  will  be  seen 
to  have  been  filed,  though  this  is  not  necessarily  a 
Semang  custom.  The  women  wear  in  their  hair  a 
magic  comb  which  is  believed  to  avert  disease  and 
danger.  The  Semang  do  not  circumcise.  Their  dis- 
tinctive weapon    is    the    bow   with    poisoned   arrows, 

1  Z.f.  E.  xxix.  202,  203. 
2  For  Col.  Temple's  comparison  of  Semang  with  Andamanese  v.  Appendix. 


54  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  pari 

though  many  of  them  have  now  adopted  the  blowpipe 
of  the  Sakai  and  Jakun. 

Their  habitations  are  of  the  most  primitive  descrip- 
tion, generally  consisting  of  natural  shelters  under 
overhanging  rocks,  or  of  the  simplest  form  of  leaf- 
shelters,  erected  either  on  the  ground  or  between  the 
branches  of  trees.  The  most  advanced  type  of  these 
leaf-shelters  was  a  shelter  made  long  enough  to  accom- 
modate the  entire  tribe  and  furnished  with  their  re- 
markable bamboo  bed-places.  They  have  no  boats, 
but  occasionally  use  rough  bamboo  rafts  for  drifting 
down  stream.  Their  musical  instruments  are  all  of 
bamboo,  and  consist  of  simple  kinds  of  "  stamping  " 
instruments  (intended  for  beating  time  rather  than  for 
making  music),  the  nose-flute  and  the  Jew's-harp. 
They  have  no  drums. 

They  barter  jungle  produce  with  the  Malays,  but 
do  not  work  for  the  latter  to  so  great  an  extent  as  the 
Jakun.  Their  religious  ideas  are  of  great  interest. 
They  have  a  kind  of  deities  called  Kari  and  Pie,  but 
these  appear,  like  some  of  the  "  high  gods "  of  the 
Australian  "  Blackfellows,"  to  be  rather  of  the  nature 
of  mythological  personages  or  otiose  gods  than  real 
divinities,  as,  although  they  have  many  divine  attri- 
butes, there  is  practically  no  trace  of  an  actual  cult. 
The  Semang  marriage  rite  is  of  the  slightest,  but 
they  are  strict  monogamists,  and  both  sexes  are  faith- 
ful to  the  marriage  tie.  It  is  said  by  Malays  that  they 
formerly  devoured  their  dead,  burying  the  head  only  ; 
this  assertion  may  rest  on  some  old  Semang  practice 
of  disinterring  the  corpse,  but  they  now  invariably 
bury  the  deceased  entire.  They  have  no  great  fear 
of  the  ghosts  of  the  deceased,  such  as  is  shown  so 
strongly  by  the  Sakai  and  the  Jakun. 


^ 


Sakai  of  s.    Perak. 


Vol.  /./>.  55. 


RACE  CHARACTERS  OF  SAA  AJ 


1 1.  —  Racb-(  iiai-  \<  i  i  i      oi    Sakai. 

The  Sakai  appear  to  have  their  racial    focui   in 
the  mountain  ranges  of  S.E.    Perak    and   N.W.  Pa 
hang.     Their  district  marches  on  the  north  (in  Perak) 
with   that  of  the   Semang,  th<-   dividing   line   being 

stated  l>y  some  observers  to  be  the  Perak  river,  and 
by  Others  (De  Morgan,  Hale,  and  others)  to  be  the 
Plus  river  already  referred  to.  Then'  can  be  no 
doubt,  however,  that  there  has  been  a  considerable 
admixture  ;  witness  the  photographs  of  some  so-called 
"Semang"  tribes  of  Perak  and  elsewhere,  which 
frequently  include  types  that  are  distinctly  Sakai  ; 
certainly  no  really  distinct  geographical  boundary  can 
be  drawn  between  the  two  races,  and  on  the  whole  it 
would  seem  that  the  much-talked-of  line  of  demarca- 
tion between  the  Semang  and  Sakai  is  (as  far  as  race 
and  culture  go)  no  line  at  all,  but  a  belt  of  mixed  tribes 
which  run,  e.g.,  through  mid-Perak  and  N.  Pahang.1 

On  the  east  coast  the  Sakai  do  not  appear  to 
extend  far  into  either  Kelantan  or  Trengganu,  though 
they  are  found  in  Pahang,  their  admixture  with  Pangans 
commencing  somewhere  near  Clifford's  line,  e.g.,  in 
the  district  of  Ulu  Jelai.  Westward  of  the  central 
chain,  on  the  other  hand,  they  appear  to  extend 
through  the  interior  of  Selangor,  and  thence,  in 
the  form  of  a  narrowing  wedge  (and  with  a  rapidly 
increasing  admixture  of  Jakun  blood),  through  the 
inland  districts  of  Negri  Sembilan,  at  least  as  far  south 
as  Malacca,  and  almost  certainly  as  far  south  as  Johor. 

1   For  further  notes  on  their  distribu-  fortunately    no    clear    proof    that    the 

tion,   see,  for  instance,  De  la  Croix's  writer    is    always    able    to    distinguish 

article  in  Rev.   d"* Ethnogr.  vol.  i.  No.  between  Semang  and  Sakai. 
4  (1882),  p.  320;  though  there  is  un- 


56  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 


As,  however,  the  exact  racial  limits  of  the  Sakai  have 
not  yet  been  defined  (if,  indeed,  they  will  ever  be 
definable),  it  has  been  thought  best  to  draw  the  line 
between  the  Sakai  and  the  Jakun  at  the  point  where 
the  influence  of  the  latter  commences  to  be  fairly 
certain  and  appreciable,  i.e.  at  Southern  Selangor  and 
mid-Pahang. 

Passing  to  the  general  physical  characters  of  this 
second  group,  the  Senoi '  (or  Cymotrichi  of  Martin), 
I  am  indebted  to  Professor  Martin  for  much  of  my 
information  concerning  them.  Owing  to  the  fact  that 
their  headquarters  are  in  S.E.  Perak  and  N.W. 
Pahang,  no  member  of  our  exploring  party  came  across 
any  individuals.  Consequently  the  following  account 
is  drawn  chiefly  from  published  notes  and  other 
material  kindly  supplied  by  Martin.2 

In  height  the  Sakai  does  not  appreciably  differ 
from  the  Semang. 

The  average  height  of  the  men  is  1504  mm.,  85 
per  cent  of  the  individuals  measured  ranging  from 
1460  to  1580  mm.  Some  few  individuals  were  as  low 
as  1380  mm. 

The  average  height  of  the  women  is  1437  mm.,  53  per 
cent  ranging  from  1390  to  1450  mm.,  and  17  per  cent 
below  1390  mm.  The  smallest  individuals,  two  adult 
married  women,  possessed  a  height  of  1320  mm.  only. 

The  head  is  chiefly  dolichocephalic,  whereas  the 
Semang  measured  by  Martin  are  described  as  mesati- 
cephalic,  with,  however,  a  strong  tendency  to  the 
dolichocephalic  condition. 

1  Senoi  =  Orang  Halas  of  Newbold.  pines'  quills  therein. 

Cp.y.  /.  A.  vol.  iv.  p.  429,  where  the  2  To    this    should    be    added    the 

O.    Alas  of  Ulu    Kantu  (?  Kinta)  are  measurements    of    Wray    {Per.    Mus. 

described    by   Col.    Low  as  a  tribe  of  Notes,  iii.  pp.  33,  34).    Those  in  Fasc. 

Perak   Sakai,  who  pierce  the  cartilage  Mai.   are    taken   account   of  at   p.   96 

of  the  nose  and  ears  and  insert   porcu-  sea.,  infra. 


RACt  i  n  IRAi  TER     OJ 


The  fa<  e  is  fairl)  long  and  broad,  but  pointed 
towards  the  chin,  The  forehead  is,  in  the  male,  flat, 
often  far  overshadowing  the  <         and  «  the  root 

o!  the  nos'-  to  rcircit  far  back.  ()i  the  men  93  per 
cent,  and  J3  per  cent  ol  the  women,  are  mesopro  lopu . 
rhe  lips  are  thick  ;  the  under  lip  often  hangs  down 
and  maybe  described  as  "swollen."  The  Sakai  are 
distinctly  lighter  in  complexion  than  the  Semanj  The 
hair  is  black,  but  never  deep  black  ;  in  most  cases  it 
shows  a  brownish  shimmer,  especially  in  the  young,  and 
differs  widely  from  that  of  the  Semang  and  the  Malax. 

From  the  remarks  of  other  travellers  who  ha 
met  with  Sakai,  as  well  as  from  photographs,  we  m 
picture  the  Sakai  as  a  slenderly  built  race,  and  as  often 
presenting  an  emaciated  appearance,  which  is  increased 
by  their  long,  unkempt  wavy  hair  hanging  down  to  the 
shoulders,  and  by  their  large  restless  eyes. 

In  evidence  of  their  striking  resemblance  to  the 
\  eddas,  it  is  perhaps  worth  remarking  that  one  of  the 
brothers  Sarasin,  who  had  lived  among  the  Veddas 
and  knew  them  well,  when  shown  a  photograph  of  a 
typical  Sakai,  at  first  supposed  it  to  be  a  photograph 
of  a  Vedda.1 

Without  wishing  to  definitely  commit  myself  as  to 
the  affinities  of  this  race,  I  think  that  it  is  fairly  clear 
even  from  the  existing  evidence  that  they  are  at  any 
rate  quite  distinct  from  the  Semang  or  Ulotrichi  of 
Martin,  as  they  are  also  from  the  Jakun  (Lissotrichi) 
type  found  among  the  southern  tribes. 

A  number  of  other  measurements  concerning  this 
type  are  taken  from  the  writings  of  Rudolf  Virchow, 


1  This  information  was  given  me  by  quite  as  emphatically  remarked  to  me 
Professor  Martin,  who  himself  showed  upon  the  resemblance  of  my  Sakai 
the  photograph.     Mr.   Shrubsall  once       photographs  to  Tamils. 


58  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 


who,  in  discussing  the  height  of  individuals  measured 
by  Vaughan- Stevens,  gives  the  figures  which  are 
quoted  in  the  Appendix. 

In  another  volume  of  the  VerJiandlungen  x  Virchow 
refers  to  the  skull  of  a  Sakai  (Senoi)  woman,  which 
he  describes  as  orthodolichocephalic,  and  the  full  de- 
scription of  which  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix. 

The  most  interesting  point  about  this  skull,  apart 
from  its  dolichocephalic  character  and  certain  structural 
anomalies,  is  the  formation  of  the  nose,  which  is  de- 
pressed to  such  an  extent  that  Virchow  was  tempted 
to  regard  it  as  pithekoid.  Another  no  less  important 
point  in  Virchow's  paper  is  the  description  he  gives  of 
the  Sakai  hair-character,  concerning  which  he  says  : — 

"  On  the  other  hand,  I  must  also  point  to  a  very  pronounced  Sakai  (Blandas) 
characteristic.  In  a  recent  consignment  sent  by  H.  Vaughan-Stevens  was  found 
the  lock  of  hair  of  a  Sakai  {Senoi)  man  from  the  north  of  the  Peninsula.  The 
memorandum  sent  with  it  was  to  the  effect  that  '  the  clan  to  which  the  man 
belongs  does  not  cut  the  hair.'  At  the  meeting  of  21st  November  1891  ( Verh. 
p.  844),  I  treated  the  Sakai  (Blandas)  hair  in  detail  from  a  large  number  of 
specimens  of  hair  sent  by  Vaughan-Stevens.  As  compared  with  those  specimens, 
I  may  briefly  state  that  the  lock  of  hair  now  before  us  exactly  corresponds  to 
them.  Its  wavy  structure  distinguishes  it  completely  from  the  spirally  curled 
structure  of  the  E.  Sernang  {Pangan)  hair  (Verh.  1892,  p.  443).  Its  length 
amounts  to  rather  more  than  20  cm.,  but  we  cannot  decide  exactly  how  long  the 
hair  was  when  entire,  as  it  is  not  stated  at  what  distance  from  the  scalp  the  lock 
was  cut  off.  It  is  of  a  blackish  appearance,  and  in  reflected  light  of  a  slightly 
brownish  and  glossy  colour  ;  seen  under  the  microscope  in  thin  sections  it  is  light 
brown,  with  a  dark  and  often  interrupted  medulla.  The  ends,  as  is  the  case 
with  the  uncut  hair,  are  pointed,  broken  at  the  sides,  and  frequently  split  into  two 
or  more  fragments. 

' ' The  contrast  between  the  two  races  cannot  be  more  sharply  expressed.  Unfor- 
tunately Vaughan-Stevens  has  neglected  to  take  advantage  of  his  opportunities, 
and  to  send  us  a  larger  number  of  specimens  of  hair  from  his  Semang  friends,  of 
which  measurements  would  also  be  highly  desirable.  We  hope  the  opportunity 
will  be  given  him  to  fill  up  these  gaps."  2 

Elsewhere  Vaughan-Stevens,  writing  apparently  of 
the  body-hair  of  the  Sakai  (Blandas)  tribes,  says  : — 

"  The  natural  growth  of  the  hair  is  thin  and  scattered,  and  in  both  sexes  the 
direction  of  growth  of  the  hair  (of  the  body),  as  well  as  that  at  the  back  of  the 
head  and  under  the  arms,  is  slightly  upwards." 

1    V.  B.  G.  A.  xxviii.    154  (cp.   /.   c,  2  lb.  xxvi.  359.     See  also  Montano, 

1894,  for  further  particulars).  PI.  xxxi. 


Old  Sakai   Man,    '   The  Father  of  all  the  Sakais,"   Ulu  Berang,   Eight  Milks 
from  Tanjong  Malim,  South  Perak. 


Vol  I.  /.  59. 


/   (  HARACTER  i  Oh     akai 


Tin-  bail  ..i  iiir  ,  in  !.,  |  in  old   if    ..!<.    In  lined  to 

tli. in    that    ol    thC    Mini. i >    .    .ni.|    <  ..mplrtr    baldness    I.    .kIii. illy  -      lial    it    i. 

,-,!  u|m,ii  ;i  .  .1  i. -in  aikahle  < -m  eption  whil  li  "ill)  ii. illy.1 

The  more  detailed  account  of  the  Sakai  (Blandas) 

hair    referred    to    above     as     collected     by     V.iii'.di.m- 

Stevens  is  as  follows,  the  description  oi  the  specimen  - 
being  in  Vaughan-Stevens'  own  words: 

''No.  39.  Specimen  >>t  hail  ehoeen  i"i  nc  by  an  old  Batin,  a>  a  typical  example 
of  Sakai  (Blandas)  hair ;  tradition  declared  it  to  be  the  original  form.  The  Sakai 
themaelvei  nnanimooaly  declare  that  the  straight)  sir  lometimei  found 

among  them  comei  from  cross-breeding  vritfa  the  Malays,  and  themselves  call  it 

COane  [*  kasar').       The   Supposed    original    type,  of  which    they   arc    very    proud, 

died  Watei  hail  (' Rambut  Ayer'Jj  it  is  still  to  be  leen  occasionally  and 

has  a  distinct  reddish  tinge.  Moreover,  it  does  not  as  a  rule  turn  white,  as  the 
COarsei  hair  does.  The  present  specimen  is  from  a  Sakai  woman  35  year-,  old, 
and  has  been  cut  offaS  close  to  the  scalp  as  possible." 

No.  40.   From  a  75-year-old  Sakai  man,  wizened  and  bent  with  age. 
No.  41.    From  a  37-year-old  Sakai  man. 

No.  43.  From  children.  The  shortest  specimen  is  from  a  4-months-old 
boy  j   the  next  longest  from  a  2-year-old  girl  ;  the  longest  from  a  6-year-old  boy.- 

To  the  foregoing  may  be  added  Virchow's  descrip- 
tion of  a  remarkable  specimen  of  hair  (No.  105)  sent 
by 


Vaughan-Stevens  :- 


It  is  an  immense  shock  (Schopf)  reaching  30  cm.  in  length,  and  consists 
of  thick  glossy  black  hairs,  which  display  a  somewhat  reddish  tinge  towards  the 
tips. 

A  fourth  specimen  of  hair  (No.  104)  sent  by  Vaughan-Stevens  consisted  of  a 
beautifully  wavy  lock  of  36  cm.  in  length,  which,  taken  as  a  whole,  was  of  a 
splendid  black,  with  a  reddish  shimmer  in  reflected  light,  especially  towards  the 
tips,  though  otherwise  it  is  coarse  but  glossy.  I  find  no  noticeable  difference 
from  the  Sakai  hair  which  I  have  already  fully  described  at  the  meeting  of  21st 
November  189 1  {Verh.  pp.  844-846). 

Not  only  from  these  statements  of  Vaughan-Stevens,  but  still  more  from  inspec- 
tion of  the  hair-specimens  sent  by  him,  it  is  clear  that  the  Sakai  (Blandas)  cannot 
be  at  all  nearly  related  either  to  Negritos  or  Papuans.  Moreover,  the  difference 
of  this  hair  from  that  of  the  "  Orang  Sakai  "  described  by  Miklucho-Maclay  is 
abundantly  clear.3 

With  regard  to  the  above-mentioned  specimens  of 
hair  Virchow  adds  a  few  remarks  of  his  own,  conclud- 
ing as  follows  : — 

The  net  results  of  this  investigation  lead  me  to  a  conclusion  similar  to  the 
one  to  which  I  came  at  the  meeting  of  the   16th  February  1889  ( Verh.  p.  158), 

1  Z.f.E.  xxix.  178,  179. 

2  Vaughan-Stevens,  quoted  by  Virchow  in  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiii.  844,  845. 

3  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxviii.  (Virchow)  149,150. 


6o  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 


with  respect  to  the  more  ancient  races  of  the  Southern  and  South- Eastern 
Islands  of  the  Malay  Sea.  Just  as  in  these  islands  I  could  point  out  a  broad 
/one  of  wavy-haired  people  between  the  spiral -haired  Melanesians  and  the  straight- 
haired  Malays,  so,  too,  in  Malacca  the  wavy -haired  Sakai  race  (Blandas) 
appears  to  have  established  itself  between  the  spiral-haired  Negritos  (Semang) 
of  the  North  and  the  lank-  {straff)  haired  [Jakuns  and]  Malays  of  the  South 
and  of  most  of  the  coast  districts.  For  the  islanders  I  have  again  adopted 
for  this  race  the  old  and  certainly  much-misused  name  of  Alfuros.  It  follows 
that  the  near  relationship  of  the  Sakai  (Blandas)  to  the  Alfuros  might  be  inferred 
from  this  evidence. 

Of  the  insular  Alfuros  I  remarked  that,  in  respect  of  their  hair-character,  they 
connect  up  with  the  Australians  on  the  one  hand  and  the  Veddas  of  Ceylon  on 
the  other.  Perhaps,  therefore,  the  Sakai  ("  wild  men  ")  of  Malacca  might  be 
regarded  as  Dravidians.  However,  we  are  precluded  from  regarding  them  as 
entirely  identical,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  Sakai  (Blandas)  are  inclined  to  be 
brachycephalic,  whereas  these  other  races  are  dolichocephalic.1  This  raises  new 
questions,  which  can  only  be  decided  by  further  information.2 


The  Colour  of  the  Skin.z 

According  to  Vaughan- Stevens,  the  Sakai  (Blandas)  of  the  present  time  (like 
the  western  or  domesticated  ("  tame  "  Semang)  offer  nearly  as  great  a  diversity  of 
colour  as  the  Malays. 

The  Sakai  is  lighter  than  the  Semang,  and  seems  to  be  more  affected  by 
heat  than  the  latter  (v.,  however,  supra). 

Among  the  Sakai  (Blandas),  whose  colour  varies,  he  (V.-St.)  saw  nothing 
that  could  support  the  theory  that,  among  a  number  of  individuals,  those  with 
darker  skins  stood  exposure  better  on  the  march.  On  the  other  hand,  in  this 
thickly  wooded  country  one  cannot  walk  far  without  coming  into  the  protection 
of  the  shade  of  the  forest. 

The  Sakai  (Blandas)  prefer  the  lighter  colour,  and  are  proud  of  fair- 
coloured  children,  in  which  they  possibly  follow  the  Malay  view.  But  in  olden 
times  the  light  colour  was  not  an  attribute  of  their  chiefs.4 

He  could  not  find  that  there  was  any  relation  between  a  coarse  or  fine  skin 
texture  and  its  colour,  when  the  coarseness  of  the  skin  is  not  the  result  of  special 
exposure,  or  of  a  disease. 

He  found  among  the  Sakai  (Blandas),  when  no  skin  disease  was  present,  no 
other  smell  than  that  which  is  ever  to  be  observed  in  cases  wdiere  the  activity  of 
the  skin  is  suppressed,  and  no  cleansing  material,  such  as  soap,  etc.,  is  employed  ; 
for  the  splashing  of  water  over  the  body  rather  answers  the  purpose  of  refreshing, 
than  that  of  cleansing,  the  skin. 

Sight. 

The  eyes  of  the  Sakai  (Blandas)  are  all  alike,  and  Vaughan-Stevens  observed 
no  deviation  from  shades  Nos.  I  or  2.5 

1  There  can,  however,  now  be  little  in    small    numbers    between    brachy- 

doubt     arising     from     this     particular  cephalic   Negritos   as   well   as   brachy- 

difficulty,    in    view    of    the    fact    that  cephalic  Malayan  tribes. 
in   the    purest    strain    of   Sakai    blood  2   V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiii.   (Virchow)  847. 

dolichocephaly    has     been     shown     to  3  Z.f.E.  xxix.  (V.-St.)  174-176. 

obtain.      The   original   dolichocephalic  4  This  statement  of  Vaughan-Stevens 

character  of  the  Sakai  appears  to  have  is,  I  believe,  without  foundation, 
been  modified  owing  to  their  isolation  6  Virchow  in  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiii.  840. 


A' 


t  V  ;  '* 


-  r 

& 


T 


-    ' 


M  G 


Mixed  Sakai-Semang  Type,  Ulu  Batu,  Sei.an.gor. 


Vol.  I.  /•  60. 


w* 


* 


McGrezor. 


Mixed  Sakai-Semang  Type,   Ulu  Batu,   Selangob. 


;w.  /. /.  61. 


RAi  I   CHARACTERS  ■  /•     Ai  Al 


in  , oloui  the  -  \<  •  ••!  all 
do  not  have  the  conjunctiva  coloured  deep  jrellom  u  th<   Negritos  do. 

ilu-  eyi     "i  theii  children  are  extremel)  well  formed,  and  with  t) 
blai  hes  add  much  to  the  beauty  of  their  ap|>carancc.     There  i    no  ti 

,,i  id,  "  \  1 . •ii-.. - 1 1 . i n  fold,"  in  which  the  ikin  "i  the  tnnei  coraei  ol  tl 
ovei  the  eyi  il  ieli  ;  the  edge  o!  the  upp  i  i  velid  >•  alwaj  i  well  formed.' 

Squinting  is  certainl)   known  to  them,    tince  they  arc  much  afraid  of  the 
endangering  ol  theii   padi  harvi  il   by  -i  demon  (Hantu),  whom  they  i 
"  iquinting."     Hie  Sakai  (Blandaa)   believe  that    the  visual   field   ol    i    i 
who  squints  Is  widei  than  oi  .i  pei  on  whose  tighl  ^  normal.1 

Among  the  Sakai  (Blandas)  he  (V.*St.)  only  met  with  thi  4  ihort  ^ight, 

two  oi  which  were  men  and  one  ■  woman.  <  >n  the  othei  hand,  however,  the 
i.u  sightedness  oi  the  eye  cannot  In-  well  estimated  in  the  jungle,  thickly  stmt  in 
as  it  is  by  trees  and  1<  Much  depends  on  practice  and  general  acquaint 

with  the  objects  in  the  jungle,  to  which  Vaughan-Steven  ively 

tpeaking,  much  less  accustomed.     But  the  jungle  nun  oi  women  would  • 
show  him  the  points  oi  an  animal's  horns  anion;;  the  surrounding  foliage,  a  thing 
which  it  is  naturally  very  difficult  to  discover,  whereas  he,  with  normally 
sight  (foi  an  European),  had  to  search  vainly  for  ■  long  time  before  he  observed 
them.     Again,  everything  which  was  in  motion  they  >aw  at  <  nee,  however  inaigni- 
ficant  it  might  be  in  point  of  size. 

The    Sakai    (Blandas)    had,     in    general,    decidedly    weak     i  In    their 

earliest  youth,  if  no  accident  attacked  them,  they  had  good  sight  for  any  object 
moving  in  the  jungle.  But,  as  might  be  expected  in  the  case  of  a  forest -people, 
their  eyes  soon  tired  in  a  strong  light.  On  the  few  opportunities  which  Vaughan- 
Stevens  had  of  finding  himself  with  Sakai  (Blandas)  in  a  wide,  open  space,  he 
observed  that  he  could  distinguish  far-distant  objects  much  better  than  they  could. 

He  adds  that  among  the  Sakai  (Blandas),  who  wore  Malay  clothing,  and 
were  acquainted  with  the  use  of  needle  and  thread,  he  never  met  with  an  old 
Sakai  (Blandas)  woman  who  could  not  thread  an  ordinary  needle  without 
difficulty.3 

On  the  subject  of  sight,  Mr.  L.  Wray,4  during  his 
travels  in  Perak,  came  to  the  following  conclusions  : — 

"  Seven  Sakais  from  Cheroh  came  up  to  carry  down  baggage,  so  ...  in  the 
afternoon  I  measured  them  and  tested  their  eyesight.  I  have  now  tested  the 
sight  of  between  thirty  and  forty  of  both  sexes,  and  there  seems  to  be  no  doubt 
that  they  have  very  good  sight  as  a  race.  Of  those  tested  in  Batang  Padang,  the 
shortest  distance  that  the  Army  test-spots  could  be  seen  was  32  feet,  and  the 
longest  91  feet.  In  testing  recruits  for  the  British  Army  20  feet  is  considered  an 
average  distance  for  these  spots  to  be  read,  and  a  man  reading  at  over  that 
distance  is  classed  as  long-sighted,  and  under  as  short-sighted.  In  measuring  the 
women  there  was  great  difficulty,  as  they  did  not  know  Malay  and  could  not  count. 
...  I  got  over  it  by  giving  the  subject  a  handful  of  matches,  and  explaining  by 
signs  that  I  wanted  a  match  for  each  spot  on  the  card  held  up." 

Hearing^ 

The  sense  of  hearing  of  the  Sakai  (Blandas)  and  Tembeh,  though  not  so  acute 
as  that  of  the  Takun,  was  about  equal  to  that  of  the  W.  Semang. 

1  Z.f.E.  xxix.  (V.-St.)  176,  177.  ±  J.  R.  A.  S.,    S.B.,    No.    21,   pp. 

2  Grlinwedel  in  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.  148,    149.       For   fuller    statistics    and 
I52-  details,  v.  Perak  Mus.  ATofes,  iii.  p.  36. 

3  Z.f.E.  xxix.  (V.-St)  180,  181.  5  Z.f.  E.  xxix.  181. 


62  RACIAL  AFFINITIES 


Hands  and  Feet. ] 

The  Sakai  (Wandas),  like  the  Semang,  experienced  no  difficulty  whatever  in 
stretching  out  one  finger  when  the  rest  of  the  fingers  were  closed. 

The  little  toe  of  the  Sakai  (Blandas)  is  much  less  straight  than  that  of  the 
Jakun,  although  they  never  wear  boots  as  we  do  to  deform  their  feet,  but  the 
tip  of  the  little  toe  is  nevertheless  bent  like  ours,  and  is  either  comparatively 
small  in  proportion  or  differs  in  direction  from  the  other  toes. 

After  remarking  that  the  footsteps  of  the  Orang 
Utan  are  usually  turned  outwards,  Vaughan-Stevens 
adds  : — 

One  thing,  however,  is  worthy  of  remark  among  all  Sakai  (Blandas),  the 
setting  down  of  the  foot  is  done  with  the  middle  of  the  foot.  The  heel  does  not 
touch  the  ground  first.  But  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten  which  came  under  observa- 
tion the  foot  was  injured  by  thorns,  stones,  etc.,  so  that  from  time  to  time  a  more 
or  less  unnatural  gait  was  caused. 

It  is,  therefore,  very  difficult  to  give  an  exact  description  of  the  walk  of  the 
Sakai  (Blandas).  The  body  is  held  upright  and  very  straight,  while  the  whole 
movement  proceeds  from  the  ankles,  knees,  and  hips.  At  the  same  time  there  is 
only  a  very  slight,  rhythmical  swing  of  the  arms.2 

One  hand  usually  carries  the  blow-gun  (Sumpitan),  the  other  being  armed 
with  the  parang,  i.e.  jungle-knife  or  chopper,  and  is  always  in  readiness  to  give 
a  quick  blow  to  a  prickly  rattan  or  other  obstacle  half  hidden  among  the  foliage 
through  which  the  path  of  the  Sakai  leads.  This  custom  has  to  such  an  extent 
become  second  nature  that,  even  when  he  walks  without  a  weapon  in  the  open 
plains,  the  Sakai  holds  his  arms  in  the  accustomed  position.  It  is  difficult  to  say 
what  is  the  usual  carriage  of  the  head. 

In  the  matter  of  strength  and  physical  endurance  the  Sakai  (Blandas)  and 
Tembeh  (Temia)  are  at  the  bottom  of  the  scale. 

The  Sakai  (Blandas)  are  not  so  clever  as  the  Semang  in  getting  through 
bush  or  jungle,  though  the  Sakai  have  the  better  sense  of  direction.3 


Climbing. 

In  climbing  a  straight  high  stem  the  Sakai  (Blandas) 
are  better  than  the  more  civilised  Semang.  This, 
however,  is  not  saying  much,  since  the  Western 
Semang  are  (according  to  Vaughan-Stevens)  very  bad 
climbers4 — an  opinion  already  combated  (p.  51). 

When  the  Sakai  (Blandas)  want  to  climb  a  small  tree  only,  they  climb  it  like 
the  Central  Sakai  (Senoi).  The  larger  trees  usually  have  climbing-plants  and 
runners  hanging  down  from  their  branches,  or  smaller  trees  in  their  immediate 

1  Z.f.  E.  xxix.  (V.-St.)  190.  arms  are  not  swung  in  walking. 

2  On  the  very  next  page  (193),  how-  3  Z.f.  E.  xxix.  (V.-St.)  192,  193. 
ever,  Vaughan-Stevens  remarks  that  the  4  lb.  p.   199. 


•**- 


Cerruti. 


Sakai  Boy  with  Blowpipe,   1'i.r  Sungkai,  S.   Perak. 


Vol.  /.  A  62. 


Cerruti. 


Sakai  Boy  (probably  of  Ulu  Slim). 


I  ~ol.  I.  p   6-- 


/   CHARACTERS  OF  SAKAI 


neighbourhood]  from  the  branches  ol  which  the  Sakai  i  I  up  into 

the  branches  ol  the  target  ones.     The  Sakai,  hou 
cul  nofc  he*  in  the  bark  fbi  the  purpo  e  '>i  climl  I 

.\ i  tin    present  day  they  practise  every  method  ol  climbing  which  thi 
Irani  from  tneii  neighbours. 

\    en  i"  the  high  raised  huti  ol  the  Tembeh  (l  emia)  i    afforded  by  i 
trunk  placed  diagonally,  similar  to  the  ihortei  tree-trunk  utilised  by  tip-  .v 
(Blandas)  of  Kuantan,  who  are  much  mixed  with  Tembeh  (Temia)  blood.     They 
allege  thai  as  their  huti  have  do  doors,  the  dogi  and  fowli  which  are  wandering 
about  everywhere  might  otherwise  g<-t  into  the  huts  and  do  mischief  there  when 

the  men  were  away. 

Among  the  Tembeh  (Temia)  the  objed  is  solely  to  keep  intruders  out, 
especially  the  black  panther  and   the  python.      For  this  reason  ■  smooth  and 

slippery  bamboo  IS  carefully  freed  from  all  projections  at  the  nodes,  with  the 
exception  of  a  few  thin  twigs,  by  which  the  feet  may  he  supported  in  climbing, 
and  set  up   in  a  sloping  position.       No  special  grip  of  the  toes  is  used  in  climbing 

them,  and  the  toes  of  the  Tembeh  (Temia),  especially  the  great  toe,  are  not  more 
strongly  developed  for  gripping  than  the  toes  of  other  Sakai  Very  small 
children  are  often  left  for  hours  in  those  airy  huts,  on  account  of  their  safety,  as 
they  are  here  safe  from  the  great  cats  and  snakes,  and  prevented  from  falling 
down  by  the  low  parapet.1 

Swimming, 

The  Sakai  (Blandas)  swim  but  little,  in  fact  they  only  do  so  when  they  are 
obliged  to  cross  a  river,  or  when  they  are  bathing.  They  then  swim  like  dogs. 
They  throw  out  their  arms  forwards  in  a  swinging,  circular  stroke,  while  the 
body  turns  towards  the  side  away  from  the  stroke.  Both  the  breast-stroke  and 
side-stroke,  as  well  as  swimming  on  the  back,  are  unknown  to  them. 

Among  the  Sakai  (Blandas)  the  Central  tribes  (Senoi)  are  always  con- 
sidered the  best  swimmers  ;  this  is  probably  due  to  the  fact  that  the  big  Pahang 
river  has  afforded  them  more  practice. 

The  Tembeh  (Temia)  cannot  swim  at  all.'2 


Sleeping.* 

The  Sakai  (Blandas)  women  do  not,  as  a  rule,  sleep  on  the  side,  but  on  the 
back,  and  try  to  raise  the  head  a  little  by  some  sort  of  pillow.  They  give  as 
their  reason  for  this  that,  if  they  lie  on  the  side,  the  hip  has  to  bear  the  weight 
of  the  body,  in  which  case  they  would  get  "  latah,"4  and  suffer  from  cramp  in 
their  sleep  ! 

The  Sakai  (Blandas)  men  often  sleep  on  the  back,  at  the  same  time  drawing 
the  legs  up  towards  the  body,  so  that  the  sole  of  the  foot  rests  fiat  upon  the 
ground.  But  the  side-long  position  is  also  not  unfrequently  adopted  by  the  men 
when  they  first  lie  down,  in  fact  sometimes  one  side  and  sometimes  the  other 
is  chosen  indifferently.  Sakai  (Blandas)  men  told  Vaughan-Stevens  that  when 
they  lay  upon  their  side  such  vermin  as  ants,  scorpions,  and  centipedes  would 
crawl  over  the  sleeping-mats  and  enter  their  eyes,  nostrils,  and  mouth,  whereas 
by  lying  on  the  back  they  could  feel  their  approach.  Others,  however,  declare 
that  by  sleeping  on  the  back  they  can  hear  a  noise  or  alarm-signal  better. 

Among  the  Sakai  (Blandas),  as  among  the  Semang  (Pangan),  the  bachelors 
inhabited  the  verandah  (when  there  was  one)  or  else  the  external  portion  of  the 

1  Z.f.  E.  xxix.  200.       2  lb.  p.  198.  4  A     strange      hysterical     affection 

3  Z.f.E.  xxix.  186-198.  common  among  Malays. 


64  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 

huts.      Among   the   Tembeh   the  only  difference  was  that   the  bedroom  of  the 
married  people  was  separated  off  by  a  low  partition.1 

Physical  Endurance.* 

Sakai  tribes  which  have  adopted  Malay  clothing  generally  experience  dis- 
comfort in  the  absence  of  headgear  to  protect  them  from  the  sun.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  Sakai  (Blandas)  appear  to  suffer  more  from  the  cold,  wet  winds 
of  the  mountains  than  the  Jakun. 

If  this  power  of  withstanding  change  of  temperature  depended  upon  the 
relatively  greater  abundance  and  regularity  of  their  food,  the  Sakai  should  be 
less  sensitive  to  such  changes  than  any  other  tribe.  But  whether  their  sensitive- 
ness to  such  changes  was  originally  greater  than  that  of  other  tribes  or  not,  the 
fact  that  they  are  now  accustomed  to  clothes  and  to  the  protection  of  better- 
built  houses  has  rendered  them  more  susceptible  to  every  change  of  temperature. 

The  Sakai  children  endure  want  of  food  better  than  the  Semang  children 
[v.  supra). 

The  younger  men  of  the  Sakai  have  a  game  called  "  K'lupent,"  which  is 
usually  played  when  they  are  sitting  round  the  fire  in  the  evening  while  their 
womenfolk  are  plaiting  mats  and  baskets.  Each  player  who  is  a  candidate  for  the 
favour  of  a  girl,  endeavours  to  heap  disgrace  on  his  opponent  and  raise  himself 
in  the  esteem  of  the  women.  The  game  is  played  with  short  slivers  of  rattan, 
which  can  by  a  particular  knack  be  made  to  draw  blood  at  every  stroke,  a  rapid 
backward  motion  of  the  arm  and  wrist  causing  the  sharp  edge  of  the  rattan 
to  strike  the  skin  like  a  knife,  and  cutting  it  easily.  When  I  asked  for  its  applica- 
tion in  earnest,  the  force  of  the  blow  from  the  knot  made  me  writhe  with  pain. 
The  instrument  is  also  made  from  string.  The  ring  (of  rattan  slivers)  is  twisted 
round  the  hand,  the  knot  at  the  end  of  the  strips  being  held  between  the  thumb 
and  forefinger.  The  arm  is  then  lifted,  and  as  it  is  brought  down  the  knot  is 
released  and  descends  with  a  swingeing  blow  on  the  forearm  of  the  opponent, 
whilst  at  the  same  moment  the  arm  is  drawn  rapidly  in  to  the  body. 

The  men  sit  opposite  one  another  with  bare  arms.  A  small  stake  is  deposited 
by  each.  He  who  first  acts  as  striker  asks  the  other  how  many  blows  of  the 
rattan  he  will  bear  on  his  forearm  without  crying  out.  If  he  receives  the 
stipulated  number  without  wavering,  he  puts  his  opponent's  wager  into  his 
pocket,  and  then  in  turn  takes  the  rattan  slivers  and  challenges  the  other  to 
name  the  number  of  blows  he  will  endure  ;  should  any  one  who  receives 
the  blows  call  out  for  them  to  cease,  he  loses  his  bet  and  is  loaded  by  his 
opponent  and  the  spectators  with  scorn  and  jeers  (which  is  the  true  purpose  of 
the  game  when,  as  usual,  it  is  inspired  by  malice). 

The  Sakai  (Blandas)  children  are  acquainted  with  a  form  of  the  tug-of-war 
in  which  one  or  more  children  on  each  side  pull  a  rope  in  opposite  directions. 
They  have  probably  borrowed  the  idea  from  Malay  children,  who  may  be  frequently 
seen  playing  at  it. 


Summary  of  Sakai  Culture. 

The  Sakai,  though  still  largely  nomadic,  and  at  first 
extremely  shy,  are  perhaps  the  most  sociable  and  talka- 
tive of  the  three  races,  when  once  their  confidence  is 

1  Z.  f.  E.  xxix.   190.  -   lb.  pp.  201-203. 


i  SUMMARY  OJ       /      \i  CUL1 URL 

gained.  Like  the  Semang  they  not  unfrequently  live 
in  tree-huts  or  other  temporary  forms  ol  shelter 
Their  men  weir  the  tree  bark  loin  cloth,  and  their 
women  a  tree-bark  wrapper,  except,  of  course,  where 

they    have    borrowed     Malay    clothing.       They    tattoo 

the  face,  the  design  commonly  taking  the  form  of  four 
gradually  converging  lines  drawn  from  the  region  of 
the  ear  to  the  root  of  the  nose,  with  perhaps  a  sort  of 
pitchfork  design  incised  upon  the  chin.  These  designs 
are  sometimes  marked  out  in  rows  of  black  and  white 
dots  (in  lieu  of  scarification)  ;  with  these  may  be  con- 
nected their  black  and  white  bead- necklaces.  Both 
scarification  and  body-painting  take,  however,  various 
forms,  the  latter  having  been  developed  into  a  regular 
system.  They  do  not  circumcise,  and  seldom  file  the 
teeth,  but  they  not  unfrequently  wear  a  metal  ring  or  a 
porcupine  quill  inserted  through  the  septum  of  the  nose. 

Their  distinctive  weapon,  like  that  of  the  Jakun, 
is  the  bamboo  blowpipe,  which  they  have  brought  to 
great  perfection. 

They  have  no  form  of  boat,  nor  do  they  even  as  a 
rule  use  rafts.1 

Their  musical  instruments  are  very  fairly  similar 
to  those  of  the  Semang,  and,  like  the  latter,  they  not 
unfrequently  engage  in  the  barter  of  jungle  products. 
Their  agriculture  is  of  the  most  primitive  description, 
their  chief  implement  (for  breaking-up  the  soil)  being 
a  pointed  stick. 

Of  their  religion  very  little  is  at  present  known — 
less  even  than  of  that  of  the  Semang.  There  is, 
however,  a  kind  of  deity  whom  they  call  Tuhan,  and 
who  appears  somewhat  analogous  to  the  Kari  of  the 
Semang.     Their  alleged  totemism  is  quite  unproved. 

1  Hale,  p.  286. 
VOL.  I  F 


66  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 

Like  the  Semang  they  are  strict  in  their  observ- 
ance of  the  marriage  tie,  but  unlike  them  they 
have  the  greatest  possible  fear  of  death,  or  rather, 
perhaps,  of  the  ghost  of  the  deceased,  and  will 
frequently  burn  down  or  desert  an  encampment  in 
which  a  death  has  occurred. 

III. — Race-Characters  of  Jakun. 

There  remains  for  consideration  the  third  group 
of  tribes  which  inhabit  the  southern  portion  of  the 
Peninsula.  These  are  the  mixed  tribes  of  Martin,  and 
include  the  Jakun  or  "savage  Malays"  of  Wallace. 
They  fall  into  three  main  and  two  subordinate  groups, 
the  latter  of  which  are  without  doubt  closely  allied. 

i.  Tribes  mainly  of  Semang  origin,  e.g.  the 
Kenaboi  (?)  and  perhaps  the  Udai. 

2.  Tribes  mainly  of  Sakai  origin,  e.g.  the  Blandas 
and  Berembuns  (?). 

3.  The  Jakun  or  Malayan  aborigines,  comprising — 
(a)  The  Orang  Bukit,  or  Land  (lit.  "  Hill")  Jakun. 
(6)  The  Orang  Laut,  or  Sea  Jakun. 

Although  it  is  not  possible  at  present  to  make  a 
proper  classification  of  all  the  tribes  of  the  Jakun 
group,  it  may  yet  be  useful  to  attempt  a  rough  and 
general  identification  of  them  so  far  as  the  very  scanty 
information  we  possess  will  take  us. 

The  Blandas  properly  so  called,  whose  home  is  in 
Southern  Selangor,  have  been  described  by  Martin  as 
dolichocephalic,  and  hence  are  most  likely  to  prove 
largely  of  Sakai  extraction.1      Their  exact    affinities, 

1  For     the     "Blandas,"    see     also  Lenggeng,    Singa   Kuasa,    and    Pakat, 

Newbold,   ii.   393,  where  we  are  told  and    four    Jinangs    or    chiefs   of    the 

that   they   had   (in    1839)   four  Batins  second    rank,   viz.    Pawang    Padiching 

or  chiefs  of  the  first  rank,  viz.  Baning,  ("  Pawampa    de    Cheyng"  !),     Ampu 


WV 


at 


*&"*» 


o 

5 


^ 


Mixed  Jakun    I'v  1*1  .   lu  kit  Pruai  .  Selang 


5gw. 


OR 


i  A-./.  /  <  //  \RACTERS  Oh      I  /'  f(7f   ■  '/.//  ./  r.v  67 

however,  have  not  hitherto  been  traced,  and  in  ipitc  ol 
their  dolichocephalii  skull-character,  it  would  not  h 
safe,  id  the  absent  e  oi  moi  1  1  act  informal  ion  as  to 
their  hair  character^  etc.,  to  attempt  to  bo  ident 
them  as  such.  They  have,  therefore,  been  retained 
in  the  group  oi  mixed  tribes  to  which  the  name  ol 
fakun  has  been  given  in  this  book.  It  may  be  noted 
that  although  their  district  is  conterminous  with  that 
..i  the  Besisi,  they  present  a  marked  contrast  to  the 
latter  tribe,  both  in  respect  of  their  head-index,  which 
is  dolichocephalic  as  contrasted  with  the  brachycephaly 
oi  the  Besisi,  and  also  in  their  language  and  their 
customs.1  No  exact  measurements  ol  the  Blandas 
have  v<t  been  published,  pending  the  appearance  of 

Martin's   forthcoming    work,    and    hence   they   will    not 

be  referred  to  again  in  the  present  chapter. 

The  Kenaboi  (or  "Sakai"  of  S.  Ujong)  may 
perhaps  prove  to  be  a  mixed  tribe  mainly  of  Semang 

type  (though  with  some  Sakai  admixture),  as  the  few 
facts  we  possess  would  lead  us  to  expect.2  The 
Berembun,  or  Birmun,  and  Pago  tribes  cannot  yet  be 
safely  classified.  The  Udai  appear  to  have  a  stronger 
Semang  admixture  than  the  tribes  surrounding  them. 

The  Besisi  and  Mantra  of  Selangor  and  Malacca 
are  brachiocephalic  (Martin),  and  are  most  probably  a 
mixed  branch  of  the  Sea-Jakun — in  spite  of  the  fact 
that  the  Besisi  dialect  presents  a  close  connection  with 

Manis,   Patau  (?  IV  Lcsai),  and    Ram*  ]    For  further  remarks  re  admixture, 

bong("Rumbong").   Vaughan-Stevens  v.  conclusions,  infra, 

gives  a  quite  unwarranted  extension  to  -  The  Kenaboi  is  a  stream  injelebu. 

the  t<rm  which  lie  generally  uses  as  In  a  letter  of  3rd    November   1902, 

the   equivalent    of    Sakai.      He   also  Mr.   Hale  writes  that  the  "  O.  Kena- 

st:iw:s  (obviously  as  a  pure  guess)  that  boi  "  had  so  harmful  a  reputation  that 

the  amount  of  Malay  blood    in   them  is  it  was   believed   that   any  one  who  ac- 

"  not    less   than  2   per  cent,  and    prob-  cidentally    trod    upon    their   expectora- 

ahly   more"   (V. -St.    ii.    94),    but    the  tion   would   suffer  severely   from    boils 

entire  passage  wants  correction.  and  blains,  if  he  did  not  die  of  it. 


68  RACIAL  AFFINITIES 


PART 


the  dialect  of  the  Sakai.  They  have  certainly  some 
Semang,  and  probably  a  little  Sakai  admixture,  but 
appear  nevertheless  to  be  largely  Malayan. 

The  Beduanda  of  Naning  and  Rembau  are,  as  is 
locally  known,  mixed  with  a  strong  Menangkabau  Malay 
element.     The  term  "  Beduanda"  is  to  be  applied — 

(i)  To  Mohammedan  Malays  descended,  it  is 
alleged,  from  Menangkabau  men  and  aboriginal 
women. 

(2)  To  aborigines  (heathen).  These  latter  prob- 
ably have  no  right  to  be  considered  as  descended 
from  Menangkabau,  although  they  do  sometimes 
claim  it. 

"  Beduanda"  appears  to  be  a  title  introduced  from 
without  (through  Hinduised  Malay  influence)  among 
these  tribes.  The  Malay  Beduanda1  are  the  premier 
"  Suku "  or  clan  in  their  own  estimation,  and  are 
"  sons  of  the  soil,"  because  of  their  (partial)  aboriginal 
descent.  They  recognise  the  aboriginal  Beduanda 2  as 
distant  kinsmen  who  have  been  left  behind  in  the 
march  of  civilisation.  The  Mantra  are  Beduanda, 
but  the  Jakun  are  not  so  recognised. 

The  Benua  of  Logan  and  other  early  writers,  here 
called  Benua -Jakun,  cannot  yet  be  classed,  but  the 
Jakun  and  the  Orang  Laut  have  a  comparatively  large 
Malayan  element,  though  both  have  in  some  parts  a 
strong  infusion  of  Semang  and  Sakai  blood. 

Labu  Tribes. 

Reliable  accounts  of  the  tribes  in  the  Labu  district 
of  Sungei  Ujong  are  so  rare  that  I  make  no  excuse 
for  the  following  quotation  : — 

1   "  Beduanda  J awa."  2   ';  Beduanda  Jakun." 


i  RAi  i  CHARACTERS  OF  SAVAGE   mm  ay 

"The  tribe  settled  here  (i.*.  on  I'erhcntian    I  of  twelve 

men,  seven  women,  ds  oldei  and  fiv(     mall  children,     ii   l>< 
tribe  <»r  about   two  hundred  loul ■■,   which   ii    ettled   In   Batang  Labu,  Sungci 

l  'j«»ii}'v,   ii  11 « It  i   .i    I  '..ilm. 

"The  Batin,  who  might  have  been  able  to  give  information  on  the  j  ><  >i  1 1 ' 
not  here,  and  from  the  lomewhal  indefinite  itatementi  of  the  oldei  men  I 
conclude  thai  thii  tribe  belongi  to  one  ol  the  Com  greet  Sakai  families,  which 
(according  to  Martin  Lister),  coming  from  the  mountains  ol  Skudei,  have  si  ttled 
in  the  States  ol  Johol,  Jelebu,  Klang,  and  Sungei  LJjong,  and,  indeed,  la  that 
ol  s.  Ujong,  as  from  all  that  I  could  heai  they  have  nothing  in  common  with 
the  Sakais  (sic,  [?]  Besisi  tribes)  ol  Klang, 

"According  to  the  observations  made  up  to  the  present,  the  height  of  the 
men  is  on  the  average  1580  nun.,  of  the  women  1470  nun.  The  trunk  is  long, 
the  legs  slmrt  and  sturdy,  the  arms  longi     The  ihoulderi  an-  broad,  and  th<-  head 

normal  ;  the  face  at  the  temples  and  lower  jaw  narrow,  but  broad  in  the  middle. 
The   colour   Of  the   skin    is    usually   43/44    of    Broca's   scale  j     the  colour  of    the 

hair  41,  Broca.     Tin-  quantity  <>i  hair  on  the  head  is  considerable,  in  the  I 
moderate,  on  the  body  scanty.     The  hair  is  certainly  not  generally  crimped  or 
curly,  as  many  report  ;  for  although  among  the  women  it  is  usually  so,  among  the 

men  I  found  it  very  variable,  i.r.  both  wavy  and  curly,  and  yet  again  straight, 
as  amongSl  the  Malays. 

"  The  colour  of  the  iris  is  2/5,  according  to  Broca.  The  slits  of  the  eyes  are 
somewhat  crooked.  The  nose  is  small  and  pointed  ;  the  root  broad,  as  are  also 
the  nostrils  and  the  bridge.  Seen  from  the  side,  the  bridge  of  the  nose  is  slightly 
convex,  the  root  deep,  the  point  slightly  bent  to  the  side. 

"The  lips  are  thick;  the  ear  small  and  somewhat  prominent;  the  helix  is 
incurved  ;  the  lobule  adhesive  to  the  head  ;   Darwin's  tip  very  insignificant. 

"The  men  are  generally  well  formed  ;  the  women  are  remarkably  small  and 
slender  as  a  rule.  In  physical  strength  they  appear  to  resemble  the  Malays,  though 
they  may  perhaps  be  somewhat  tougher  ;  in  the  handling  of  the  chopper  (parang) 
and  adze  (bliong)  they  are  acknowledged  to  be  the  Malays'  superior,  though  this 
may  perhaps  depend  upon  agility  and  practice  rather  than  on  actual  strength.  In 
the  felling  of  trees  they  always  strike  the  same  point  with  the  greatest  precision 
with  their  heavy  narrow  axes.  It  is  one  of  their  special  characteristics  that  they 
do  not  use  the  hoe  in  the  same  way  as  other  people  ;  instead  of  making  the  stroke 
and  bringing  back  the  hoe  in  the  same  direction  for  the  next  blow,  they  bring  it 
back  to  its  original  position  by  raising  it  in  both  hands  over  the  left  temple  and 
over  the  head,  so  that  every  blow  gains  considerably  in  force. 

"  The  carriage  of  the  body  is,  in  general,  negligent ;  the  shoulders  are  drawn 
inwards,  the  knees  and  feet  turned  inwards  ;  in  fact,  even  the  strongest  men 
afford  an  unedifying  spectacle.  In  the  jungle,  however,  they  appear  to  greater 
advantage,  as  they  are  evidently  more  at  home  there.  They  do  not  strike  about 
them  with  the  chopping-knife  (parang)  so  much  as  the  Malays  in  clearing  a  way 
for  themselves,  but  turn  and  wind  about  with  much  agility  in  all  directions,  and 
in  this  way  move  from  one  spot  to  another  very  noiselessly  and  quickly. 

"  In  physiognomy  they  generally  resemble  the  Malays  so  closely  ( !)  that  one  only 
recognises  them  by  their  look,  which  is  invariably  one  of  surprise  and  timidity  ; 
they  have  besides  a  somewhat  wilder  expression  than  the  Malays. 

"Their  power  of  sight  was  throughout  very  well  developed  ;  but  without  having 
taken  exact  tests,  nothing  abnormal  in  this  respect  has  struck  me.  The  same 
remark  applies  to  their  sense  of  hearing. 

"  I  have  not  been  able  to  notice  any  artificial  deformities  among  them  ;  but  as 
natural  abnormalities  I  might  mention  the  unusually  broad  and  inward-turned 
feet  of  most  of  the  men,  and  the  quite  remarkable  pigmentation  of  the  breasts 
of  the  women.  Of  the  seven  multiparas  which  I  had  the  opportunity  of  obser- 
ving, two  were  already  quite  old  and  shapeless  ;  the  other  five,  however,  were 
all  under  twenty-three,   and  in    each  of  them  the  extraordinarily  light-coloured 


70  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 

areola  (Broca,  about  40)  'covered  the  nipple  and  the  greater  part  of  the  mamma 
like  a  broad  flat  cover.'  The  diameter  of  the  areola  was  never  below  5  cm., 
and  in  some  almost  10  cm."  l 

Kenaboi  Tribes. 

One  of  the  tribes  mentioned  by  Logan  consists 
of  the  "Sakai,"  said  to  frequent  the  neighbourhood 
of  Mount  (Gunong)  Kenaboi.  These  are  doubtless 
identical  with  the  Orang  Kenaboi  of  Vaughan- Stevens.2 
If  it  is  possible  to  locate  this  "  tribe,"  and  at  present 
there  is  hardly  any  information  concerning  them,  the 
latter  name,  i.e.  "  Kenaboi,"  is  obviously  preferable 
to  that  loosely  used  by  Logan. 

Vaughan -Stevens  considered  them,  as  already 
stated,  to  be  a  subdivision  of  the  parent-stock  of  the 
Sakai  (Blandas).  This  classification,  however,  re- 
quires confirmation,  the  measurements  taken  showing 
a  brachycephalic  as  well  as  a  dolichocephalic  element. 

Further  measurements  taken  by  Vaughan-Stevens 
will  be  found  in  the  Appendix.3 

Berembun  and  Udai  Tribes. 

Logan4  further  mentions  certain  tribes  living  to 
the  north  of  the  Benua-Jakun,  whom  he  calls  the 
Berembun  ("  Birmun  ")  tribes,  because  they  have  their 
headquarters  about  Gunong  Berembun  and  the  neigh- 
bouring mountains.5 

The  upper  reaches  of  the  rivers  rising  in  the 
Berembun  mountains  are  occupied  by  the  tribe  called 
Udai. 

The  Udai  (who  appear  to  be  the  same  people 
who  are  known  to  the   Benua-Jakun  of  Johor  under 

1  W.  Rowland  in  Mitt.    Geog.    Ges.  4  Loc.  at. 

Wien.  xli.  706,  707.  5  Gunong    Bermun    appears    to    be 

2  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  97.  identical     with      Gunong     Berembun, 

3  Virchow  in  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiii.  842-  which    is    situated    in    Sungei    Ujong, 
844.  1020  2'  E.  by  2°  55'  N. 


RACE  CHARACTERS  OF  SAVAGE  MALA  71 


the  name  of  Orang  Pago)  are  found  on  someol  the 
tributaries  oi  the  Muar.  This  tribe  has  less  approxi- 
mated to  Malayan  habits  than  the  others.1 

Newbold,"  on   the  other  hand,  makes  the  following 

remarks  about  this  tribe  :  — 

The  Udai  tribe1  is  little  known.  The  Tuanku 
Putih  of  Rembau  once  informed  me  that  the  Uclai 
were  a  race  of  savages  thinly  scattered  over  the  slates 
of  Jelebu,  Pahang,  Trengganu,  and  Kedah,  and  that 
they  resembled  in  features  the  darker  variety  of 
Jakun.3  Their  size  is  represented  as  smaller,  and 
their  habits  more  savage. 

Newbold  regards  them  as  distinct  from  the  Benua, 
under  which  title  he  groups  the  following  tribes  : — 
Jakun,  Orang  Bukit,  Rayat,  Utan,  Sakai,  Alas,4  Blan- 
das,  Besisi,  and  Akik. 

Vaughan-Stevens 5  has  the  following  note  on  the 
Udai  :— 

"The  term  Udai  is  applied  by  the  Pangan  to — 

"  (1)  The  pygmy  tribes  of  Belum  in  Perak. 

"(2)  By  the  Malays  to  the  Orang  Jinak  or 
*  Tame '  Semang. 

"  (3)  And  also  to  a  species  of  demon  (Hantu),  who 
was  sometimes  identified  with  the  whole  jungle  race, 
whom  many  Patani  Malays  call  '  Hantu  Pari,'  or 
'Udai  Pari.'" 

Belum,  as  already  noted,  is  in  the  extreme  north 
of  Perak,  but  the  people  referred  to  are  Semang,  as 
may  also  be  the  Udai  of  Newbold  and  Logan.  The 
latter  live   on   the   Muar,    which    rises    in    the   Negri 

1  Logan,  vol.  i.  /.  c.  Perak  "  (Newbold,  ii.  383).     It  should 

2  Newbold,  ii.  381,  382  be  noted  that  such  names  as  "Orang 

3  I.e.   the    Negrito    element    among  Bukit,"  "  Rayat,"  and  "  Orang  Utan  " 
the  Jakuns.  or  "  Alas,"  can  hardly  be  considered  as 

4  The    "  Alas    are    said    to    be    a  tribal  names, 
tattooed  race,  living  in  the  interior  of  6  P.  10 1. 


72  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 


Sembilan  and  in  Sungei  Ujong.  Their  alternative 
name  Pago  is  taken  from  a  tributary  of  the  Muar  in 
Johor  which  bears  that  name. 

So  little  is  definitely  known  of  these  Orang  Pago 
or  Udai,  however,  that  it  is  very  difficult  to  ascertain 
what  is  their  exact  relationship  to  the  other  wild  people. 
On  the  whole,  they  are  probably  a  race  somewhat  mixed 
with  the  Semang,  dwelling  in  N.W.  Johor,  the  Negri 
Sembilan,  Sungei  Ujong,  and  Jelebu  ;  or  they  may 
even  perhaps  be  chiefly  of  Negrito  origin,  an  outlier, 
as  it  were,  of  the  main  groups  of  that  race  whose 
principal  home  is  farther  to  the  north.  For  the 
present,  and  until  more  definite  information  is  forth- 
coming, the  question  must  remain  open. 

Besisi. 

One  of  the  most  important  of  the  tribes  living  on 
the  southern  extremity  of  the  Peninsula  are  the  Besisi. 
The  name  always  used  by  themselves  is  "  Sisi '' ;  the 
Malay  explanation  (Besisi  =  Bersisik) 1  is  certainly  due 
entirely  to  Malay  popular  etymology. 

According  to  Logan  (/.  c),  the  Mantra  on  the  north- 
west "  march  with  the  Besisi,  one  of  the  most  numerous 
tribes,  who  occupy  all  the  streams  flowing  in  that 
direction  from  Gunong  Berembun.  It  is  this  tribe 
which  occupies  the  Sungei  Ujong  and  Linggi,  and  the 
lower  part  of  the  Langat,  with  their  feeders." 

Martin  says  of  the  Besisi  that  they  are  essentially 
brachycephalic,  whilst  the  Blandas,  like  the  Sakai 
(Senoi),  are  chiefly  dolichocephalic.  He  adds  that 
whilst  the  Sakai  (Senoi)  are  amongst  the  shortest  of 
the  wild  tribes,  the  Blandas  and  Besisi  show  a  larger 
percentage  of  relatively  taller  individuals.     With  them, 

1  I.e.  the  "  scaly  M  people. 


i  RACE-CHARACTERS  01  SAVAG1   MALAYS  73 

curiously  enoughj  the  women  also  are  'all  (1510  mm.), 
.md  the  sexual  difference  sink',  with  them  to  2.4  cm.1 

Mantra  ok    MlNTERA. 

The  Mantra   (Mcntra  or    Mintera),1   the   largest 
tribe,  dwell  about  Gunong  Berembun  and  the  adjacent 

mountains.  They  possess  the  higher  part  of  both  the 
western  and  eastern  streams.  On  the  south  they  fre- 
quent the  upper  part  of  the  Langat,  etc.  The  follow- 
ing notes  on  the  physical  characters  of  the  "  Mantra  " 
are  given  by  Logan,3  who  gives  figures  : — 

The  remarks  respecting  the  Benua  physiognomy 
(v.  infra)  are,  on  the  whole,  applicable  to  the  "Mantra." 
The  face  of  the  woman  (figured),  in  particular,  although 
grave,  is  not  dull  and  sullen.  In  the  case  of  the 
most  intelligent  of  the  party,  the  head  preserves  the 
general  Benua  characteristics.  The  forehead  is  fine, 
but  as  usual  the  cheek-bones  swell  out  laterally  beyond 
it.  The  faces  of  all  the  Mantra  seem  to  be  formed 
of  two  parts,  separated  by  a  line  across  the  eyes. 
The  upper  (part)  is  the  forehead,  rising  from  a  base 
considerably  narrower  than  the  line  connecting  the 
zygomatic  projections.  The  great  bulk  of  the  lower 
part  is  horizontally  oblong,  the  external  lines  having 
a  slight  inclination  inwards  from  the  zygomatic  arches 
to  the  angles  of  the  lower  jaw  opposite  the  mouth, 
after  which  they  converge  towards  the  chin,  which 
forms  an  angle  much  more  obtuse  than  in  the  Beduanda 

1  For  further  measurements  see  App.  2  Often  derived  from  Mai.  "Mantra" 

According    to    Newbold  (ii.    393)   the  (a  "  charm  "),    I  believe  wrongly,  the 

chiefs  of  the  Besisi  included  one  Batin  word   being  pronounced   Mentcra'   by 

or  chief  of  the  first  rank  only,  viz.  Pa'  the      Mantra      themselves.        "  Men- 

Limpei,  who  succeeded  his  uncle  Breh  dera'  "  (  =  a  "man"  in  Semang)  seems 

("  Breyk  !  "),  a  Jinang  called  Mumin,  a  a  better  derivation,  though  the  "  d  "  is 

Jukrah  named  Sak£nal,  and  a  Poyang  certainly  a  difficulty, 
named  Manan.  3  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  294. 


74  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 


Kallang.1  This  form  is  given  by  the  lower  jaw  not 
proceeding  directly  to  the  ear,  but  forming  an  angle 
below  it.  The  vertical  elongation  of  the  upper  part 
of  the  face  is  a  striking  feature.  The  nose  in  all  is 
small  and  slightly  turned  up,  and  the  mouth  large. 
The  hair  falls  over  the  shoulders  ;  and,  in  one  of 
the  men,  showed  a  profusion  of  curls.  The  toes  of  the 
Mantra  tribes,  like  those  of  all  the  tribes  of  the  interior 
with  which  I  have  any  acquaintance,  are  spreading, 
so  that  the  foot  is  very  broad  anteriorly  in  propor- 
tion to  its  length.  Other  characteristics  may  be 
gathered  from  an  inspection  of  the  annexed  table.2 

Elsewhere3  the  lips  of  the  Mantra  are  said  to  be 
''gross  and  loose,"  and  the  profile  prognathous. 

M.  Borie 4  stated  that  the  tribes  from  Selangor  up 
to  Mount  Ophir  are  known  as  Mantra,  and  that  "  the 
number  of  Mantra  "  did  not  appear  to  him  to  exceed 
2000,  although  it  was  one  of  the  most  numerous  tribes. 
To  many  authors  even  this  estimate  appears  too  great. 
It  is  indeed  doubtful  if  M.  Borie  was  right  in  stating 
that  the  Mantra  were  the  most  numerous  tribe.  They 
distinguish  themselves  both  from  the  Besisi  and  the 
Jakun.  M.  Borie  speaks  of  the  Mantra  as  extending 
from  Selangor  to  Mount  Ophir,  in  which  case  he  has 
evidently  included  with  them  the  Besisi. 

The  Catholic  mission  to  the  Mantra  near  Malacca 
was  visited  by  Miklucho-Maclay,  who  gives  the  head- 
index  of  the  Mantra  (15)  as  between  74  and  89/ 

Further  measurements  will  be  found  in  the 
Appendix. 

1  See  under  O.  Laut.  3  J.   I.   A.    vol.    i.    p.    301.      The 

2  See   Appendix.      The   "profusion  "  loose  "  lips  are  a  Sakai  feature, 
of  curls"  may  be  due  to  Semang  ad-  4  (Trans.  Bourien),  p.  72. 
mixture  ;  in  other  respects  the  features  °  Virchow     in     V.  B.  G.  A.     xxiii. 
described  are  Sakai.  843. 


/»v/r/.;  ciiAKAcri'.KS  or  sai\\>,/   ma/. a  7$ 


M-Maclay  strongly  supports  the  Malayan  <  hara  tcr 
stipulated  for  the  M.mti.i,  although  as  he  believed 
that  element  t<>  be  due  to  admixture  with  civili  led 
Malays,  he  fails  to  sec  the  full  force  of  his  fa<  1  \, 

He  layi  that  the  Ortng  Mantra,  new  Mala  -    malt  tribe  bettei  known 

than  the  othei  Orang  Utan,  from  the  bet  that,  so  ion}.;  ago  ai  the  year  1848, 
Catholic  missionaries  settled  down  anion;;  them.'  He  visited  1  numbei  of  them 
at  the  Ayci  Salak  Mission  neai  Milan  a,  and  found  them,  in  consequence  oi  the 
influence  oi  the  school  and  their  constant  Intercourse  with  the  missionaries,  "the 
most  uninteresting  of  all  the  Orang  Utan  tribes  foi  the  purpose-,  of  Mis  particulai 
studies."  Their  language  had  been  forgotten  and  had  been  replaced  by  Malay, 
in  which  all  their  school-books  and  religious  works  were  written.  The  mission' 
.iiu  1  had  done  nothing  to  collect  the  remains  of  the  old  language. 

The  Mantras  whom  he  saw  (most  of  them  children  and  women)  were  almost 
without  exception  of  a  Malay  type;  if  he  had  come  to  see  them  without  knowing 
that  they  were  Mantras,  he  would  probably  have  taken  them  for  a  number  of 
Malays,  badly  led,  and  brought  up  in  a  miserable  condition,  and  he  should  have 
doubted  the  possibility  of  any  mixture  of  Melanesian  blood.- 

According  to  Logan,  the  Mantra  were  chary  of 
bathing,  and  their  only  plaything  was  a  kind  of  top 
called  "gasing  kunde."3 

Beduanda. 

The  Jakun  of  the  Rembau  and  Negri  Sembilan 
states  are  said  to  bear  the  closest  resemblance,  how- 
ever, to  the  Malays  of  those  states.  "  But  we  cannot 
infer  from  this  that  they  descend  from  these  Malays, 
as  we  know  by  history  and  tradition  that  they  were  in 
the  Peninsula  before  them  ;  and  that  the  Rembau 
Malays  descend  from  the  Jakun  by  their  mother's  side, 
as  we  have  seen  when  speaking  of  the  arrival  of  To' 
Peter  (Tu  Puttair),  which  explains  sufficiently  the  re- 
semblance wre  perceive  in  the  [Rembau]  Malays  to 
the  Jakun."4 

Favre  states  that  the  Jakun — of  these  states  {i.e. 

1  The  founder  of  the  mission,    M.  mission  in  1878. 
Borie,  has  written  a  short  paper  upon  2  J.  R.  A.  S.,    S.  B.,    No.    2,    pp. 

them,   since   printed    in  Misc.    Essays  218,  219. 
on  Indo- China,  series  ii.    vol.    i.    pp.  3  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  330*. 

286-307.      Herr  F.  Jagor  visited   the  4  Favre  in^.  /.  A.  vol.  ii.  p.  245. 


76  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 


of  Rembau,  Negri  Sembilan,  etc.) — were  very  short, 
their  physiognomy  was  low,  and  seemed  to  announce 
great  simplicity  ;  many  of  them  were  ugly  and  badly 
made — they  had  the  inferior  part  of  the  nose  much 
depressed — but  though  their  lips  projected  a  little  they 
were  generally  well  formed.  To  the  foregoing  Favre 
adds  that  he  had  already  observed  that  this  class  of 
Jakun  bore  a  great  resemblance  to  the  Malay  ;  or  at 
least  to  many  of  the  Malays.1 

Johor  Land-Tribes — Distribution. 

The  Jakun  of  Johor  were  spoken  of  by  Logan 
as  being  a  taller  race  than  those  of  Malacca.  He 
found  several  of  them  with  hawked  or  aquiline 
noses2 — the  men  were  healthy  but  generally  thin; 
the  women,  on  the  contrary,  were  plump,  and  though 
healthy  too,  were  not  particularly  "  stout "  (?). 

Logan  has  given  the  fullest  account  of  the  wild  folk 
that  inhabit  Johor.  He  divided  them  into  several 
distinct  tribes,  the  first  of  which  he  called  the  Orang 
Benua  of  Johor.  These  occupied  all  the  interior  of 
Johor  properly  so  called.  They  also  possessed  the 
interior  of  the  most  southerly  portion  of  Pahang.  The 
most  definite  description  of  their  territory,  however, 
was  that  they  occupied  the  upper  branches  of  the  most 
southern  system  of  rivers  in  the  Malay  Peninsula.3 
These  rivers,  from  west  to  east,  were  the  Batu  Pahat, 
the  Pontian,  the  Johor  river,  and  the  Endau.  This 
latter  communicates  in  its  upper  reaches  with  the  Batu 
Pahat  by  a  branch  called  the  Sembrong,  so  that  the 

1  /.  /.  A.  vol.  ii.  p.  246.  may  be  due.  It  does  not,  moreover, 

2  This,  coupled  with  the  greater  appear  to  be  so  common  as  to  be 
height,  points  to  some  sort  of  admixture,  typical  of  the  tribe,  much  less  of  the 
but  it  is  impossible  in  the  absence  of  race. 

further   details  to  say  to  what  race  it  3  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  246  seq. 


i  RACE-CHARACTERS  OB  SAVAGE    MALAYS  77 

communities  living  to  the   west   could   communicate 

with  those  of  the  east,  and  vice  versa* 

All  these  rivers  except  the  Pontian  rise  in  a  group 
of  mountains  known  as  Gunong  Blumut 

Two  rivers  in  this  neighbourhood  do  not  app 
to  be  inhabited  by  the  Jakun  ;  these  are  the  Pulai  in 

the  south-west  of  Johor,  and  the  Setlili,  lying  just  to  the 
north  of  the  Johor  river.  Logan  found  no  Benua  on 
the  Johor  river  below  the  junction  of  the  Sayong  and 
Lenggiu  (branches  of  the  Johor  river).  On  the 
north-west  they  did  not  extend  beyond  the  Simpang 
Kiri — a  branch  of  the  Batu  Pahat.  Whether  the 
Pahang  tribes— to  the  north  of  the  Endau — are  similar 
to  the  Benua,  he  had  no  opportunity  of  ascertaining, 
but  the  Benua  inhabiting  the  country  indicated  un- 
doubtedly formed  a  separate  tribe  in  themselves — 
they  had  no  connection  with  any  other  tribe  and 
scarcely  any  knowledge  of  such.1 

Race-Characters  of  Johor  Land-Tribes. 

Speaking  of  the  personal  appearance  of  the  Benua- 
Jakun  (or  "  Benua  of  Johor,"  as  he  calls  them),  Logan 
says 2  that  in  personal  appearance  they  bore  a  strong 
family  resemblance  to  the  Malays,  and  he  remarked  of 
many  of  them,  as  he  had  previously  done  of  the  Besisi, 
that  the  difference  was  scarcely  appreciable  so  long  as 
they  remained  at  rest  and  silent.  But  the  great  majority 
were  at  first  glance  distinguishable  from  Malays. 
The  most  constant  and  obvious  characteristic  was  the 
eye,  which,  as  in  the  Berembun  tribes  (noticed  below), 
was  soft,  mild,  and  with  a  liquid  brilliancy,  very  different 
from  the  dark,  cloudy  aspect  of  that  of  the  Malay.      He 

1  Logan,  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  246  seq.  2  lb.  p.  249  seq. 


78  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 

only  noticed  in  two  or  three  of  the  men  that  habitually 
wild  expression  which  occurs  more  frequently  amongst 
the  Berembun  tribes.     The  mouth  varies  greatly,  but  in 
all  is  open  and  entirely  devoid  of  that  degree  of  firm- 
ness which  generally  characterises  that  of  the  Malay, 
but  which  is  sometimes  wanting  in  them  also.      In  a 
considerable  number  the  lips  are  thick  and  projecting, 
and  this  is  sometimes  carried  so  far  that  they  are  as 
prominent  as  the  nose.     The  lips  do  not  form  an  acute 
angle  but  are  often  in  a  line.      The  forehead  has   a 
moderate  slope,   and  in  itself  is  well  formed,  though 
small.       But   it   is    disproportionate    to    the    face,    the 
middle  part  of  which,   between  the  posterior  part  of 
the  lower  jaw  and  the  upper  part  of  the  cheek-bones, 
expands  laterally  much  beyond  the  base  of  the  fore- 
head.    The  nose  is  always  low,  whereas  in  the  Malay, 
although  it  is  frequently  of  the  same  description,  it  is 
sometimes  seen  higher  and  more  shapely.     The  general 
shape  of  the  head  and  features  of  the  Benua  assimilates 
to  the  Malayan,  although  it  is  decidedly  smaller  ;  but 
it  is  not  clear  whether  more  examples  might  not  be 
obtained    of  approximation    to    Bugis    faces    than    to 
Malayan.       In    many    cases    the    Benua  -  Jakun    face 
is  fat  and  fleshy  and   all   the   features   heavy,   but   in 
general  it  is  not  fat.     The  greatest  breadth  is  commonly 
across  the  cheek-bones,  but  in  several  instances  where 
the  jaws  were  prominent  the  lower  part  of  the  face  was 
broadest.     Viewed  in  profile,  the  jaw-bones  are  seen 
to  advance  more  than  in  the   Malays  in  general,  so 
that  the  chin,  lips,  and  extremity  of  the  nose  are  in 
one  line,  approaching  to  the  vertical,  which  forms  an 
obtuse  angle  with  that  on  which  the  nose  and  fore- 
head are  placed.     Physically  they  may  be  considered  a 
link  between  the  Negrito  ("  negro")  and  brown  races 


i  RACh  CHARACTERS  OF  SAVAGE   MALA\ 

of  the  Archipelago.     The  general  expression  ol   the 

lace  denotes  good  nature,  mildness,  inna  en<  e,  i  ontent, 
want  of  mental  energy  and  reflectiveness,  and  a  pre 
dominance  of  the  senses  over  the  intellei  t.     The  com- 
plexion is  generally  similar  to  that  of  the  Malays,  but 
he  noticed  several   who  were  much   fairer  than  any 

Malays.  The  hair  is  black  and  in  general  smooth 
and  lank,  and  in  all  somewhat  more  dry  and  tangled 
than  in  the  Malays,  arising  from  the  little  oil  which 
they  use.  The  children  were  often  dull  and  fat,  and 
very  timid,  yet  many  were  lively,  bold,  and  engag- 
ing, and  his  Malay  followers  everywhere  remarked 
that  in  appearance  they  could  not  be  distinguished 
from  Malayan  children.  The  body  is  smaller  and  in 
general  shorter  than  that  of  a  Malay,  but  it  is  hand- 
somer and  less  heavy  ;  the  great  length  of  the  trunk 
in  proportion  to  the  limbs  sometimes  destroys  the 
effect  of  the  slighter  and  neater  build.  The  chest  is 
generally  broad  and  full,  and  the  shoulders  narrower 
and  less  sloping  than  is  the  case  with  Malays.  The 
pelvis  is  not  so  broad,  and  the  limbs  in  particular  are 
lighter,  neater,  and  often  well  shaped.  They  are  almost 
always  in  excellent  condition,  without  being  too  fat, 
although  the  softer  sex  has  often  a  tendency  to  obesity. 
The  comparative  shortness  of  stature,  and  the  smooth, 
rounded  surfaces  which  the  person  presents  throughout, 
in  a  large  majority  of  the  Benua-Jakun,  add  to  the 
Bugis  aspect  which  is  often  observable  among  them.1 

Most  of  the  preceding  remarks  may  be  extended 
to  the  Berembun  tribes. 

Miklucho-Maclay,  in  a  brief  account  of  an  excursion 
made  long  after  Logan,  in  1875,  through  Johor,  comes 
to  the  conclusion  that  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the 

1  Logan  in  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  250. 


80  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 

existence  in  Johor  of  an  aboriginal  non-  Malayan 
population,  not  only  not  of  Malay  origin,  "  but  prob- 
ably related  to  the  Papuans  "  (!). 

Here  and  there  l  he  came  across  individuals  whom 
he  could  not  consider  otherwise  than  as  retrogrades 
to  the  main  aboriginal  type.  In  most  of  these  cases 
the  hair,  though  not  absolutely  identical  with  that  of 
the  pure  Papuan  type,  resembled  in  texture  and  growth 
that  of  the  Malayo-Papuan  (mixed  race)  of  the  West 
Coast  of  New  Guinea,  who  are  by  no  means  incon- 
siderable in  number.  In  these  individual  cases  the 
hair  was  quite  different  from  the  curled  hair  of  the 
other  Jakun  ("Orang  Utans  ").2 

The  chief  reasons  for  his  decision  on  this  point 
were  deduced  from  the  existence  of  these  reversions 
from  the  present  to  the  aboriginal  type ;  the  fact  that 
the  Jakun  ("Orang  Utans")  were  not  easily  dis- 
tinguishable from  the  Malays  inhabiting  the  interior  of 
Johor  did  not  diminish  this  decision,  because  these 
Malays  had  "by  intermarriage  partly  inherited  the 
Jakun  ('  Orang  Utan  ')  type." 

This  system  of  intermarriage  had,  in  M.-Maclay  s 
opinion,  been  "in  practice  for  centuries,"  and  was 
likely  to  have  been  occasioned  "  by  the  flight  into  the 
interior  of  those  of  the  coast  Malays  who  preferred 
retirement  into  the  jungle  to  embracing  the  doctrines 
of  Islam  "  at  the  time  of  the  conversion  of  the  country 
to  Mohammedanism. 

1  The  italics  are  mine.  The  net  consciously  selected  Negritos  to  figure 
result  of  M.  -Maclay's  remarks  is  to  and  observe,  without  paying  any  re- 
establish the  presence  of  a  small  gard  to  the  perhaps  somewhat  less 
Negrito  element  among  some,  at  all  striking  characteristics  of  the  Malayan 
events,  of  the  Jakun  tribes  of  Johor.  type  so  general  in  the  tribes  through 
Unfortunately  M.-Maclay  could  not  get  whom  he  passed.  But  this  weakness, 
rid  of  his  preconceived  ideas,  and  as  unfortunately,  is  a  very  general  one. 
he  was  hunting  for  what  he  believed  2  M.-Maclay,  Journ.  East  Asia,  i. 
to  be  the  Papuan  (!)  element,  he  un-  97. 


i  RACL  CHARACTERS  OF  SAVAGE  MALAYS  I 

Miklucho  Macla)  figures  a  woman  of  the  river 
Leba,  a  tributary  of  t li < -  Endau,  age  about  [8  /ears, 
and  mother  of  two  children ;  height  1420  mm.;1  head 
brachycephalic  ;  index  81.     The  hair  was  frizzled,  and 

for  this  reason  Miklucko- Maclay  selected  her  to  figure. 
She  cannot  then  be  regarded  as  a  typical  example  of 

the  Wild  Tribes  ("Orang  Liar")  of  that  neighbour- 
hood—  who  are  in  all  probability  identical  with 
Logan's  Benua-Jakun, — as  Maclay  speaks  of  meeting 
with  individuals  with  frizzled  hair  only  "  here  and 
there." 

A  male  Jakun  ("  Orang  Utan")  from  Garib,  on  a 
tributary  of  the  Endau,  is  also  figured  by  the! same 
author.  His  height  is  1500  mm.  ;*J  cephalic  index  79  ; 
age  about  18.  "The  face  is  remarkable  owing  to  the 
small  forehead,  a  broad,  slightly  projecting  nose,  thick 
lips,  narrow  under-jaw,  and  receding  chin.  The  hair 
is  of  Malayan  type." 

The  third  person  figured,  a  woman  of  the  Jakun 
("Orang  Utan")  Sletar,  belongs  to  a  branch  of  the 
Orang  Laut.3 

It  is  difficult  to  form  any  estimate  of  the  numbers 
of  the  Benua-Jakun  of  Johor. 

Maclay  remarks  that  these  tribes  are  gradually 
becoming  extinct,  and  attributes  it  to  the  constant 
advance  of  the  Malay  and  Chinese  population,  and  to 
frequent  intermarriage  between  the  Malays  and  the 
Jakun  ("  Utan  ")  women  ;  the  latter  race  is  becoming 
intermixed  into  the  former,  and  this  mixed  race  is  fast 
increasing. 

But  it  would  have  been  more  consistent  had  he  said 


J   In  orig.  1.42  inches  (sic).                       O.     Sletar    see     Lapicque,  Tour    du 

2  In  orig.   1.50  inches  (sic).                       M.,    N.S.   ii.    (1896),     liere  sem.    pp. 

3  For     other     illustrations  of     the       58,  59. 

VOL.  I  G 


82  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 


that  the  "  aboriginal  non-Malayan  population"  was 
being  swamped  by  intermixture  with  Malay  blood, 
assuming  his  view  to  be  correct,  for  the  "aboriginal 
population,"  according  to  his  own  theory,  already 
largely  consists  of  individuals  of  mixed  parentage. 

Hervey,  writing  six  or  seven  years  after  Miklucho- 
Maclay,  states  that  the  settlements  of  the  tribe  under 
discussion,  whom  he  calls  Jakun,  on  the  Sayong  and 
Lenggiu,  on  the  Benut,  Pontian,  and  Batu  Pahat,  as  well 
as  those  on  the  Madek,  a  tributary  of  the  Sembrong, 
and  the  upper  Endau  (Indau),  may  be  described  as 
Orang  Ulu  Jinak,  or  "tame  tribes  of  the  interior." 
He  believes  that  there  are  within  the  limits  of  Johor 
a  few  representatives  of  the  Orang  Liar,  or  wild  men, 
amongst  the  Segamat  hills,  near  the  source  of  the 
Endau.1 

The  "  Madek  tribe  "  was  visited  by  Hervey,  who 
says  that  their  numbers  are  very  limited,  comprising 
no  more  than  thirty  souls.  They  are  not  uniform  in 
type,  even  their  limited  community  presenting  several 
varieties,  which  is  accounted  for  by  the  intermarriage 
with  Malays ;  the  Chinese  have,  he  believes,  had  little, 
if  any,  intercourse  with  them. 

In  the  Appendix  will  be  found  Virchow's  remarks 
on  the  Jakun  material  (measurements,  etc.)  collected 
by  Vaughan-Stevens. 

Under  the  same  reference  will  be  found  Virchow's 
description  of  three  Jakun  skulls  sent  home  by  the 
same  collector,  the  main  points  of  interest  in  which  are 
as  follows  : — 

The  first  of  these  skulls  was  that  of  a  young 
woman,  and  was  very  light,  the  second,  that  of  an 
old   man  ;    yet    both,    in   fact,    were    characterised    by 

1/.R.A.S.,S.B.,  No.  8,  p.  ioo  seg. 


i  RACE-CHARACTERS  OF  SAVAGE  MALAl  «3 

Virchow  as  being,  in  point  of  size(  it  dwari  skull 
(nannocephalic).     The  skull  shown  in  Figi  3  belonged 

in    shape    to    the    bullet  -  head    type,    1>UL    was    high    ill 

proportion    (hypsi-brachycephalic).      The    nose    was 

very  broad,  the  bridge  being  deeply  incurved  and 
short,    its   position,    together    with    that   of   the    teeth 

(which  were  thickly  encrusted  with  betel),  agreeing 
very  well  with  the  extreme  prognathism  of  this 
specimen.  The  second  skull  (that  of  the  old  man) 
was  a  little  broader  in  proportion  than  that  of  the* 
young  woman  (ortho-mesaticephalic).  The  features 
were  large  and  heavy,  the  orbits  very  large,  and  the 
nose  broad  and  flat  (platyrhine). 

The  third  (which  was  stated  to  be  that  of  a  male, 
but  appeared  to  Virchow  to  be  that  of  a  female)  was 
of  yet  broader  and  flatter  appearance  (eurycephalic). 
The  cheek-bones,  as  a  whole,  were  depressed,  the 
orbits  of  moderate  size,  and  the  nose  resembled  that 
of  No.  2.  In  this  skull,  again,  as  in  No.  2,  progna- 
thism of  a  pronounced  type  was  present.  The  pro- 
portions of  the  face  in  all  three  skulls  were  much  more 
constant  than  those  of  the  cerebral  portion  of  the 
skull.  Nevertheless,  in  spite  of  a  certain  amount  of 
marked  variation  in  the  latter,  "the  racial  unity  of  the 
tribe  cannot  be  doubted,  as  the  similarities  are  greater 
and  more  numerous  than  the  differences."  Virchowr 
proceeds  to  describe  the  limb-bones  of  a  female  skeleton 
sent  home  by  the  same  collector,  and  in  this  con- 
nection remarks  that,  although  they  undoubtedly  come 
from  an  adult  individual,  '"  they  are  small  and  delicate 
like  children's  bones." 

From  this  Professor  Virchow  drew  the  conclusion 
that  "'in  any  case  we  can  congratulate  ourselves 
on   seeing    before    us    the    most   unmistakable  dwarf 


84  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 

bones  offered  by  ethnology."  If,  however,  by  this 
expression  he  intends  to  convey — which  appears  to 
be  the  only  interpretation  possible — that  the  Jakun 
are  a  dwarf  race,  one  can  only  reply  that  any  such 
conclusion,  especially  when  based  upon  measurements 
taken  from  a  single  individual,  even  if  it  were  other- 
wise well  founded,  would  be  altogether  premature,  and 
furnishes  an  example  of  one  of  the  curious  lapses  to 
which  even  great  intellects  appear  occasionally  liable. 
We  shall  have  to  await,  there  is  very  little  doubt,  a 
considerable  body  of  fresh  evidence  before  any  such 
conclusion  can  be  either  definitely  established  or 
refuted. 

On  the  important  subject  of  the  hair-character  of 
the  Jakun,  Virchow  remarks  that  in  his  opinion  the 
hair  of  all  the  Jakuns  examined  (by  Vaughan-Stevens) 
belonged  to  the  same  type,  and  that  the  contrast  with 
that  of  the  Semang  and  Sakai  was  "  as  sharp  as  can 
be  imagined."  This  was  a  matter  of  the  more  im- 
portance "  as  the  relationship  of  the  Jakun  to  the 
other  tribes  has  always  been  a  matter  of  dispute." 

The  Jakun  hair,  then,  appears  to  have  been, 
generally  speaking,  black  ("glossy  black"  in  the  case 
of  a  specimen  sent)  and  straight,  and  the  percentage 
of  Jakuns  with  wavy  or  curly  hair  seems  to  have  been 
extremely  small.  There  can  at  all  events  be  no 
doubt  whatever,  in  spite  of  the  exceptions  that 
admittedly  occur,  that  the  former  is  the  real  hair-type 
of  the  Jakun  race. 

The  skin -colour  in  general  was  a  yellowish  or 
greyish  tint  of  brown  (No.  37  of  the  Parisian  colour- 
plate  being  the  commonest  shade). 

The  eyes  of  the  Jakun  were  usually  a  dark 
shade    of    brown    (Nos.     2-3),    and    the    conjunctiva 


RACE-CHARACTERS  Oh  SAVAGE  MALAY.  85 


frequently  more  or  less  bloodshot.     The  teeth  were 
good,  often  slightly  projecting,  l>nt  free  from  cart< 
the  lips  well  formed  and  thin  ;  the  ear  lobes  invariably 

perforated  and  much  distended. 

1 1  car  1  tig. 
The  sense  of    hearing  was   certainly  sharper    among    the  Jakun  '    [tlian  among 

either  the  Semang  or  the  Sakai]. 

Hands  and  1 
in  the  case  of  the  Jakun,  especially  with  the  children,   it  is  possible  to 

ascertain  pretty  exactly,  by  observing  the  feet,  whether  any  kind  of  mixture  with 
Malay  or  other  blood,  at  least  of  recent  date,  has  taken  place.  The  little  toe 
of  the  Jakun,  especially   in   childhood,  is   very   Straight    in  comparison  with    that 

ol  the  Sakai  (Blandas),  and  quite  especially  so  in  comparison  with  that  of  the 
Malays  and  Chinese.  It  has  much  less  ol  the  talon-like  crook  which  is  so  usual 
in  our  own  feet.  I  have,  in  fact,  seen  little  toes  in  Jakun  children  which  were 
as  straight  and  well-formed  as  any  of  the  other  toes  of  the  foot. 

When,  moreover,  the  Jakun  arrives  at  manhood,  and  especially  by  the  time 
he  is  upwards  of  thirty  years  old,  his  feet  become  covered  all  over  with  knobs 
and  knots,  are  stiff,  ugly,  scarred  and  diseased.  The  Jakun  never  wash, 
and  although  their  hands  and  feet  are  often  in  water,  it  is  usually  dirty,  marshy, 
and  unhealthy  water,  which  penetrates  into  the  cracks  of  the  skin,  scratches  and 
pricks  caused  by  thorns,  etc.,  and  causes  the  limbs  to  swell  and  stiffens  them, 
until  they  look  like  the  work-worn  hands  of  an  old  labourer  in  England  who 
has  had  to  be  out  in  all  sorts  of  weather. 

This  is  one  result  of  the  hardships  of  their  life  ;  for  the  infants  and  children 
have  small,  well-formed  hands  and  feet.  The  contrast  between  those  of  the 
father  and  of  the  youngest  child  is  very  great.  The  hands  of  the  women,  how- 
ever, are  beautiful  and  soft. 

The  half-blooded  Orang  Laut  are  skilful  at  thieving,  especially  with  the  toes. 
I  have  been  robbed  of  small  objects  which  lay  on  the  ground,  while  I  have  been 
talking  with  a  man,  face  to  face,  and  never  noticed  that  he  took  them  off.  I  have 
also  seen  from  the  corner  of  the  eye  how  the  toes  of  the  foot  slowly  slid  over  the 
desired  object  and  dragged  it  along  with  them,  till  the  foot  could  be  raised  to  the 
hand,  when  the  thing  could  be  grasped  in  the  fingers  and  hidden.2 

Climbing. 

The  oldest  (!)  method  of  climbing  employed  by  the  Jakun  (or  "  Benua  ") 
consists  in  binding  the  ankles  with  a  head-rope  {Kopf-seil)  as  the  Sinhalese  do.3 

Swimming. 

The  Jakun  (Benua)  swim  well,  and  are  good  divers.  They  use  the  Malay 
method.  The  Orang  Laut  is  an  excellent  swimmer.  He  swims,  like  the  Malay, 
on  the  breast,  so  that  his  body  is  in  a  somewhat  sidelong  position.  He  stretches 
the  left  and  right  arm  alternately  out  of  the  water,  and  brings  them  back  to  the 
side  of  the  body,    like  the  spokes  of  a  wheel  from  the  hub.      The  hands  are 

1  Z.J\  E.  xxix.   182.  2  lb.  p.  190.  3  lb.  p.  200. 


86  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 

thus  directed  backwards  with  open  palms,  and  the  legs  are  struck  outwards  at 
each  motion  of  the  body,  like  those  of  a  frog.  The  children  swim  as  well  as 
adults,  even  before  they  can  walk.      The  Orang  Laut  are  also  excellent  divers.1 

Among  the  Jakuns,  two  children  at  a  time  will  take  the  end  of  a  rattan-rope 
between  the  teeth  and  tug  till  one  has  conquered  the  other  ;  but  they  have  not 
the  Malay  tug-of-war. 

It  amused  me  very  much  to  see  how  a  small  Jakun  boy  one  day  diverted 
his  comrades  by  sitting  down  in  the  well-known  Indian  fashion,  with  the  soles 
of  his  feet  placed  flat  on  the  floor,  his  legs  bent  at  the  knees,  and  drawn  up 
close  to  the  body,  and  his  body  depressed  till  it  almost  touched  the  ground. 
While  he  was  in  this  position  a  short  stick  of  bamboo  was  placed  through  his 
elbows  behind  his  back.  Thus  handicapped,  the  fat,  tubby  little  fellow  had  to 
bend  forward  till  he  touched  the  ground  with  his  forehead,  without  letting  the 
bamboo  slip  out  of  position.  All  made  the  attempt,  but  this  little  fellow  was  the 
most  expert  and  agile  of  all.2 

Sleeping. 

The  Jakun,  whether  lying  on  one  side  or  the  other,  usually  rolls  himself 
together  into  a  "ball"  for  sleeping.  If  the  night  is  hot,  he  soon  begins  to 
unroll  himself  a  bit,  but  in  the  early  or  colder  hours  of  the  morning  one 
can  be  quite  sure  of  finding  both  sexes  with  knees  drawn  up  to  the  body. 
The  children  sleep  from  earliest  childhood  on  a  mat  which  is  laid  upon  the 
ground.  Their  place  is  at  their  mother's  breast,  between  her  and  the  smoulder- 
ing fire,  and  enclosed  more  or  less  in  her  arms.3 

As  soon  as  signs  of  approaching  puberty  appear  in  their  children,  the  Jakuns 
arrange  for  them  to  sleep  apart.  On  land,  the  boy  slept  in  a  separate  part  of  the 
hut,  or  in  the  front  part  of  the  boat  if  he  was  on  water.  In  the  covered 
platforms  on  the  coast  the  girls  slept  with  the  married  people.  In  the  temporary 
huts  with  covered  platforms  used  in  former  times,  which  the  Jakuns  visited  in 
their  well-known  places  of  assembly  on  the  coast,  the  bachelors,  when  they 
passed  the  night  there,  always  slept  in  huts  which  were  separate  from  the  married 
people.4 

Physical  Endurance. 

In  illustration  of  the  fortitude  of  the  Jakun,  Yaughan-  Stevens  tells  of 
one  who  had  deep-seated  ulcers.  "  I  gave  him  sulphate  of  copper  [Blaustein) 
and  zincoid,  showed  him  how  to  use  it,  and  expressly  warned  him  to  be  careful. 
But  as  I  feared  a  misunderstanding,  I  followed  him  soon  after  he  had  left  me, 
and  came  upon  my  patient  just  as  he  had  made  use  of  the  Blaustein.  That 
had  been  done  very  freely,  as  the  earlier  neglect  of  the  ulcer  prevented  him 
from  feeling  it  at  once,  although  the  whole  surface  of  about  four  square  inches 
was  touched  with  it."  The  patient  squatted  on  the  ulcered  leg,  and  Vaughan 
Stevens  saw  the  muscles  of  the  leg  quiver  and  contract  into  knots  in  con- 
sequence of  the  pain  which  the  patient  felt  after  a  few  minutes  ;  but  not  a 
movement,  not  a  sound,  nor  any  other  sign  except  a  deep  breathing  was  to  be 
observed.  "He  began  to  speak  in  firmly  measured  tones,  and  when  I 
remarked  that  that  was  called  medicine  ('ubat'),  he  calmly  replied  that  the 
doctor  ('  bomor  ')  had  told  him  so.  He  had  shown  endurance  with  a  vengeance, 
but  as  there  was  no  reason  to  put  him  to  a  further  test,  I  gave  him  a  morphia 
injection,  for  which  he  was  very  grateful."0 

The  question  of  the  Jakun's  sensitiveness  to  heat  is  difficult  to  answer,  since 

1  Z.f.E.  xxix.   198.  -  lb.  p.  201.  a  /*.   186. 

*  Id.  p.  190.  5  Id.  pp.  205,  206. 


i  MALA  YAA  SEA  G  YP  ?/i  I7 

he   v.  1   1 1 1 1 «-,    nothing   l>nl   .1   h'-.nl    li.iml   t.>   l.r.  j,   In.   loflg    bftil    '"    <<nliT, 

hence   n<( .   •«>   .11  <  11  .loiiicd    Id    tli'-     mi  .    i.i).    1l1.it    In-    scarcely  I-  •<  I  .    any     | 

incic  r.r   111   lli<-    .nil's   licit. 

Ill,-  [ftkUfl  ttppt'UI  to  illllci  less  It-  .in  the  u<:,  cnlcl  wnuls  <>f  tin-  mountain » 
ill. 111    my  n|   llic  otlici    liilics.      The  Jul.  tm  .i|>|><-.n  .   !•■     >w>     In,  p0WC1     "I  I  ffldtU 

t>>  thi  reUtive  robustness  i>"tii  "i  hii  ph)  leal  -i".i  mentftl  !"">'••  1  ,  doe  to  his 
'.•K  fttei  tendency  t<>  iftvagery. 

lie  h. is,  moreover,  long  carried  on  ft  rude  i>ut  persistent  form  ol  agriculture, 
cultivating  rice  and  tubers,  though  h<-  alio  consumes  much  more  bah  than  thr 
others. 

The  Jftkuo  children  endure  vrant  o(  i<><><1  bettei  thftn  those  ol  the  Semftng*' 


Sea-Jakun  or  Orang  Laut    -Distribution. 

Orang  Laut  is  the  name  applied  to  wandering 
coast  tribes  whose  permanent  dwelling  is  usually  in 
their  boats.  They  are  spoken  of  as  Rayat  Laut,  or 
Sea-subjects — subjects,  that  is,  of  the  kings  of  Johor 
or  Malacca.  According  to  Crawfurd,2  they  are  some- 
times called  Sika,  Orang  Akik  ("Akkye"),  or  more 
frequently  Bajau  or  pirates.  Their  headquarters  are 
the  narrow  straits  between  the  islands  of  the  Johor 
archipelago.3  The  same  wrriter  says  that  from  this 
neighbourhood  they  have  spread  to  the  shores  of 
Banca,  Billiton,  some  of  the  islands  of  the  coast  of 
Borneo,  and  even  as  far  as  the  Celebes  and  Buru, 
from  whence  they  make  voyages  to  the  north  coast  of 
Australia.  Prior  to  the  introduction  of  steam-vessels 
by  the  English  and  Dutch  Governments  these  "  Sea- 
folk  "  are  said  to  have  been  formidable  pirates.4 

The  Johor  archipelago  is  thinly  peopled  by  a 
number  of  "  tribes  "  of  Orang  Laut,  known  collectively 
as  the  Orang  Pe-suku-an,5  a  name  meaning  the  people 
divided  into  tribes.  A  list  of  some  twelve  of  these 
tribes  is  also  given,  and  we  are  told  that  besides  these 

1  Z.f.  E.  xxix.  202,  203.  Singapore   and    Billiton    (see  J.  I,  A. 

2  Descr.  Diet.,  s.v.  "Orang  Laut."  vol.  i.  p.  336*).         4  V.  p.  570  infra. 

3  The  Johor  archipelago  consists  of  5  Seef.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  336*,  "  Eth- 
the  innumerable  islands  lying  between  nology  of  the  Johor  Archipelago." 


88  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 


there  are  some  wild  tribes  in  the  interior  of  the  larger 
islands. 

The  Sabimba  river  has  not  yet  been  traced,  but  the 
Orang  Sletar  take  their  name  from  Sungei  Sletar,  a 
creek  of  the  island  of  Singapore,  only  8  miles  distant 
from  the  modern  town.  According  to  Thomson,1  they 
numbered  in  all  200  people,  or  40  boats,  and  were 
subject  to  a  Batin  or  petty  chief,  under  the  sovereignty 
of  the  Sultan  of  Johor. 

At  the  time  of  the  first  landing  of  Sir  Stamford 
Raffles  at  Singapore  about  thirty  families  of  Orang 
Laut  lived  a  little  way  up  the  Singapore  river,  about 
half  of  them  on  shore  and  half  in  boats.2  This  settle- 
ment had  been  in  existence  since  181 1  or  thereabouts.3 

At  the  present  time  there  are  still  a  few  of  the 
Orang  Laut  to  be  found  in  the  island  of  Singapore. 

Amongst  other  branches  of  the  same  race  one  or 
two  may  be  mentioned  as  having  been  described  by 
various  writers.  Such  are  the  Beduanda  Kallang 4  of  the 
Pulai  river  in  Johor.  These  folk  formerly  haunted  the 
"  Kallang  "  creek  to  the  east  of  the  town  of  Singapore, 
but  when  the  island  was  ceded  to  the  British  they 
were  removed  by  the  Temenggong  (or  raja)  of 
Johor  to  the  Pulai  river  in  that  state,  where  they  have 
since  dwelt.  From  about  100  families  they  have 
been  reduced  by  the  ravages  of  small-pox  to  eight. 
They  were,  beyond  a  doubt,  very  closely  allied  to  the 
Orang  Sletar  of  Singapore,  as  well  as  to  the  Orang 
Laut  who  formerly  inhabited  the  Singapore  river,  and 
the  few  survivors  now  living  in  the  island. 

The  Orang   M  Muka    Kuning,"  also  described   by 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  342*  (1847).  bimbangs,   Muka  Kunings,  and  Bidu- 

2  J.  R.  A.  S.,  S.B.  No.  10,  p.  285.         andas,"  then  settled  near  Cape  Romania, 

3  Crawfurd,  Desc.  Diet.,  s.v.  "Singa-       at  the  mouth  of  the  Johor  river, 
pore."    Borie  (1861)  mentions  the  "  Sa-  4  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  299  (Logan). 


RACE  CHARACTERS  Oh  MALAYAh  SEA-GYP,  u 


the  same  writer,  inhabit  the  foresti  on  the  banks  ol 
the  Sa-raya  and  its  tributary  the  Muka  Kuning. 

Pulau  Tinggi,  ofl   the  east  coast  of  fohor,  wra  i  .1 
favourite  lurking-place  for  the  ( >rang  Laut  in  the  da 
when  they  practised  pirac; . 

We  may  conclude  then  that  the  almost  innumer- 
able creeks,  inlets,  and  islands  lying  along  the  coast 
of  Johor  and  to  the  south  of  it,  as  far  as  Billiton  at  any 
rate,  are — or  perhaps  it  is  necessary  to  say  were — 
peopled  by  wild  men  of  Malayan  origin,  who  spent 
most  of  their  time  on  the  water,  and  that  almost  every 
community  of  these  people  was  called  by  a  different 
name,  the  name  of  the  locality  that  it  occupied  for  the 
time  being. 

And  finally  we  are  told  by  Anderson  that  in  the 
upper  coasts  of  the  Malay  Peninsula,  from  "  Poongha  " 
to  Trang  (in  the  neighbourhood  of  Junk  Ceylon),  in- 
cluding a  coast  of  16  or  18  leagues  and  a  number  of 
islands,  there  were  no  inhabitants  except  the  Orang 
Laut  who  navigated  from  island  to  island.1 

Race-Characters  of  the  Orang  Laut. 

The  physical  characters  of  members  of  this  race 
have  been  described  by  Logan  2  and  Thomson.3 

The  former  gives  an  account  of  three  men  of  the 
Beduanda  Kallang.  The  chief  features  of  the  face 
appear  to  be  the  great  width  of  the  forehead,  which  is 
at  the  same  time  unusually  low,  the  absence  of  prog- 
nathism, and  the  thinness  of  the  lips.  The  face  is  flat 
and  the  eye-brows  horizontal.  The  general  character 
of  the  face  is  between  that  of  the  Malay  and  Siamese, 

1  App.  to  Anderson's  Considerations,        "  Cellates  ''  or  "Men  of  the  Straits." 
p.  liv.  (1824).      The  O.  Laut  are  first  2  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  301  seq. 

mentioned  by  De  Barros,  who  calls  them  3  lb.  p.  347*. 


9o  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 


but  perhaps  nearer  the  latter.  The  features  of  Saweng 
and  Sango  (two  of  the  men  described)  had  a  pinched 
or  compressed  look.  He  had  never  seen  any  men 
who  resembled  them.  The  Orang  Sletar  are  closely 
allied  to  the  Beduanda  Kallang(both  indeed  appear  to 
be  branches  of  one  tribe,  the  aborigines  of  Singapore). 

In  the  same  paper  the  height  of  three  individuals 
of  the  Beduanda  Kallang  is  given  as  respectively  5  ft., 
5  ft.  4^-  in.,  5  ft.  5  in.1  Other  measurements  of  interest 
are — circumference  of  the  head,  average  21  in.  ;  height 
of  forehead,  2  in.  ;  breadth  of  forehead,  $\  in.2 

Thomson,"  remarking  on  the  physical  characters 
of  the  Sletar  tribe,  says  that  they  are  closely  allied 
to  the  Beduanda  Kallang.  This,  coupled  with  the 
fact  that  the  Sletar  and  Kallang  are  both  creeks  of  the 
island  of  Singapore,  the  original  locality  of  each,  and 
that  sampans  (canoes)  can  approach  the  navigable 
part  of  either  creek  within  two  miles,  there  need 
not  be  any  hesitation  in  proclaiming  their  identity 
of  origin,  although  they  now  live  as  separate 
tribes.  The  most  distinctive  features  of  these  tribes 
are  the  lowness  of  the  brow,  retreating  back- 
wards from  the  superciliary  ridge ;  a  protrusion  of 
the  lower  part  of  the  face,  not  in  the  manner  of 
prognathous  tribes,  but  by  the  acuteness  of  the  facial 
angle.  When  viewed  from  the  front  they  are  found 
to  possess  an  obliquity  of  eyes  and  eyebrows,  the 
eyelids  being  much  closed  and  only  showing  half  the 
pupil.  The  general  contour  of  the  face  obtains  a 
decided  character  by  great  breadth  of  forehead,  ex- 
pansion of  zygoma,  and  rapid  tapering  to  the  chin, 
which  is  lengthy  and  narrow.  The  nose  is  depressed 
and  mouth  moderate.     Such   may  be  considered  the 

1  1.523  m.,  1.638  m.,  1.657  m.    a  532  mm.,  5  cm.,  13  cm.    3  Loc.  cit. 


.1/-Y7; 


Group  of  Jakun  (Aboriginal  Malayans)  from  Klang 


Vol.  I.  p.  90. 


ORANG   I.  \l"I"  or   SEA- J  \KI.W. 


A\  //.  Yapp. 

Orang  Laut  of  Kalang,  Singapore. 


R.  H.  Va/>/>. 

Orang  Laut  of  Kalang,  Singapore. 


Vol.  I.  p.  91. 


^ 

1 

«•*- 

' 

^J 

V 

\vm 

1 

-v  ■--■' 

A'.  //.  J  '«#. 

Orang  Laut  of  Kalang,   Singapore. 


A'.  //.  Yap !>{Skeat  Expedition). 

Orang  Laut  of  Kalang,   Singapore. 


RACE  CHARACTERS  OF  MAI. A  VAN  SEA  <>  YPSIBS     gi 


distinctive  features  of  the  race,  though  many   wrerc 

seen    possessing   the    Malayan    type   Strongly   marked.1 

In  a  previous  passage  Thomson  states  that  in  his 
own    opinion    this    tribe    of    Orang    Laut    may  be 

said,  with  little  fear  of  contradiction,  to  be  merely  un- 
converted Malays  in  the;  general  acceptation  of  the 
term,  though  a  distinct  class  from  the  Malays  properly 
so  called  who  poured  their  hordes  over  the  Archi- 
pelago (sic})'1  prior  to  1200  of  the  Christian  era,  from 
the  great  river  Malayu  ("Malayoo"),  in  Sumatra. 
While  all  the  tribes  of  Malays  on  the  coast  of  the 
Malayan  Peninsula  and  adjoining  islands  have  em- 
braced the  tenets  of  Mahomet,  they  have  remained 
unaffected  by  the  movement. 

Taking  into  consideration  Logan's  view  as  to  the 
"Tartar"  characters  of  the  Jakun  quoted  above  in 
dealing  with  that  race,  and  the  close  relationship 
existing  between  the  Jakun  and  the  Orang  Laut,3  it 
seems  safe  to  conclude  that  both  are  branches  of  a 
Mongoloid  stock  which  probably  inhabited  the  Penin- 
sula before  the  irruption  of  the  more  civilised  Malays, 
who  in  this  case  are  to  be  regarded  as  a  specialised 
branch  of  the  same  stock. 

A  distinguishing  feature  of  the  Orang  Laut  appears 
to  be  their  height,  which  is  about  5  ft.  3  in.4  on  an 
average,  to  judge  from  the  scanty  measurements  avail- 
able. That  of  the  Besisi  and  Blandas  appears  to  be 
about  5  ft.  1  in.5  according  to  Dr.  Martin's  statement. 
But  an  extensive  series  of  measurements  is  necessary 
before  it  is  justifiable  to  make  a  definite  statement  on 
the  subject.     I  venture,  however,  to  suggest  that  the 

1  Thomson,  loc.  cit.  5,  p.  325  ;  also  Crawfurd,  Descr.  Did. 

2  The  interrogation  is  mine.  under  "  Benua." 

3  See  Newbold,  ii.  410,   411,  413,  4   1.6  m. 
414;  and  Skeat,/.  A\  A.  S. ,  S.  B. ,  No.  5   1. 548  m. 


92  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  part 

greater  height  of  the  Orang  Laut  may  depend,  at  any 
rate,  partly  on  the  smaller  amount  of  intermixture  with 
Semang  (and  Sakai)  tribes.  The  more  inland  Jakun 
of  Johor  and  Selangor  sometimes  show  considerable 
traces  of  a  Negrito  strain.  Had  this  been  noticeably 
present  in  the  Orang  Laut,  I  think  Logan  and 
Thomson  and  other  good  observers  would  have 
noticed  it,  especially  if  it  had  affected  the  hair.1 

It  is  impossible  to  form  an  estimate  of  the  number 
of  Orang  Laut  existing  at  the  present  time.  Certain 
it  is  that  the  number  is  much  less  than  it  was  a  century 
ago,  largely  owing,  no  doubt,  to  the  ravages  of  small- 
pox as  well  as  to  their  conversion  to  Islam  and  con- 
sequent absorption  among  the  Malays. 

Walking. 

The  children  of  the  Orang  Laut  very  soon  become  tired  on  land,  and  walk 
with  legs  bent  outwards ;  the  half-breeds  are  straighter  and  stronger. 

The  adult  Orang  Laut  soon  becomes  tired  in  walking,  and  the  walk  of  the 
entire  race  is,  in  fact,  very  clumsy  on  the  land,  because  they  squat  down  so  much 
together  in  their  little  boats  ;  they  can,  in  fact,  be  recognised  at  once  from  this 
characteristic.2 

Climbing. 

The  Orang  Laut  climb  well,  when  obliged  to  do  so.  As  the  trees  on  the 
coast  are  usually  of  small  circumference,  they  can  clasp  the  round  trunk  more 
than  half-way  round  with  their  arms,  and  use  the  inside  of  the  foot  in  climbing  up. 
They  do  not  appear  to  be  acquainted  with  the  idea  of  climbing  by  help  of  a  rope 
or  noose.  If,  therefore,  they  wish  to  climb  a  larger  tree,  which  they  cannot 
climb  up  by  the  help  of  the  arms  and  legs  alone,  they  are  obliged  to  make  a  ladder. 
For  this  purpose  bamboo  pegs  are  driven  into  the  tree  one  above  the  other,  at 
distances  of  about  two  feet.  To  the  ends  of  these  pegs  a  bamboo  pole  is  lashed 
so  that  it  stands  out  from  the  tree  about  six  inches.  By  means  of  these  pegs, 
which  serve  in  place  of  the  rungs  of  a  ladder,  the  man  climbs  up,  and  as  he 
climbs  drives  fresh  pegs  into  the  tree  above  those  already  driven  ;  when  he  has 
reached  the  end  of  the  first  pole,  he  fastens  a  second  pole  to  the  tree  in  con- 
tinuation of  the  first,  and  so  on  till  he  reaches  the  branches.  Bark-fibre  is  used  for 
lashings,  and  the  ladder  thus  constructed  is  left  in  its  place  till  it  falls  to  pieces.3 

Throwing. 

The  Orang  Laut  are  very  sure  and  strong  throwers,  and  far  excel  all  the 
other  tribes  in  this  respect.      They  are,  for  instance,  very  clever  at  throwing  the 

1  There    are,   however,    to  be  seen       though  there  are  straight-haired   ones 
curly-haired  Orang  Laut  boys  in  Singa-       as  well, 
pore.      In  fact  they  are  fairly  common,  2  Z.f.  E.  xxix.  194.        3  lb.  p.  198. 


i  SUMMARY  OF  SAVAGE  MALA\    CULTURE  ■>; 

ihelli  <>i  ii.it   bivalvei  ("  Mum ihel  "),    mch   u  thai  "i   tin  pearl  oystei       i 
hold  it  .u  the  edge  between  one  fingi  i  end  the  thunb(   •<>  thai  the   ihell  lii  i 
back  flat  over  the  wrist,  and  jerk  It  at  a  crab  or  a  bird  upon  the  lands, 
t ln-ii   target  with  the  iharp  edge,     a  lump  oi  hard  coral  with  ■<  natural  bole, 
through  which  a  line  woven  from  willowi  I  •  threaded,  ami  hound  into  the  form  o( 

a    ring,  is    thrown    hy  help  of  this  line  with    great    forCC   and    certainty  fd   tin 

crabs  on  the  ihore,  and  so  forth.' 


Summary  ok   Jakun  CULTURE.1 

The  Jakun,  no  less  than  the  Semang  and  Sakai, 
are  largely  nomadic  tribes,  and  though  the  Land  Jakun 
for  the  most  part  practise  some  form  of  agriculture, 
they  also  live  to  a  great  extent  by  hunting,  trapping, 
and  fishing,  and  keep  both  dogs  and  fowls. 

Some  of  the  Jakun  of  Johor  cultivate  rice,  others 
plant  yams,  plantains,  water-melons,  sugar-cane,  and 
sometimes  also,  on  a  very  small  scale,  tobacco.  In 
particular,  however,  they  plant  durian  trees,  on  which 
they  set  a  high  value  on  account  of  the  fruit.3  The 
Mantra  and  Besisi  hold  a  marriage-carnival  at  harvest- 
time.4  They  smoke  tobacco  and  chew  betel,  or,  as  a 
substitute,  cassia- leaves,  together  with  gambir  and 
lime,  which  they  obtain  by  barter  from  the  Malays 
of  the  coast.5  Their  clothing  is  like  that  of  the 
Malays  but  scantier,  that  of  the  men  only  a  linen 
apron  {e.g.  among  the  Mantra  and  Udai),  that  of  the 
women  a  sarong.6  They  are  accustomed  to  file  their 
teeth  to  a  point ;  they  do  not  practise  circumcision, 
but  a  form  of  incision  has  been  recorded.7  The 
universal  weapon  of  the  northern  Jakun  (Besisi, 
Mantra,  and  others)  is  the  blowpipe  with  poisoned 
arrows.      Bows  and  arrows   are   known   to  them,   but 

1  Z.f.  E.  xxix.  (V.-St.)  200.  3  Logan    in  J.  I.  A.    i.    254,    255  ; 

2  This  account  is  re-written  from  the       Favre,  ib.  ii.  259. 
summary  of  Benua  Culture  by  Waitz  4  Logan,  loc.  cit.  p.  260. 

(who  uses  Benua  as  the  equivalent  of  5  Logan,  loc.  cit.;  Newbold,  ii.  406. 

11  Savage     Malay,"     in     which     sense  6  Logan,  loc.  cit.  p.  252. 

Jakun  is  used  here).  ~  Ib.  p.  271. 


94  RACIAL  AFFINITIES  iakt 

are  not  employed  ;  they  do  not  engage  in  tribal 
fights.1  The  blowpipe  is  often  fitted  with  a  spear- 
point  at  the  muzzle,  as  is  frequently  the  case  among 
the  Dayaks.  That  of  the  Sabimba  is  said  to  have 
been  introduced  to  them  from  Sambas  in  Borneo  by 
the  Malays  of  the  sea-board,  from  whom  they  also 
obtain  other  objects,  especially  rice.2  The  ten-foot 
blowpipe  of  the  Benua,  and  the  preparation  of  their 
arrow-poison,  has  been  described  by  Newbold.3  The 
Jakun,  who  do  not  invariably  poison  their  arrows,  carry 
spears  and  long  knives 4  in  addition  to  the  blowpipe  ; 
the  Mantra  use  the  sword  and  kris  of  the  Malays, 
as  well  as  the  blowpipe  and  spear.5  The  huts  of 
the  Benua-Jakun  vary  in  point  of  size  and  fittings  ; 
they  have  usually  only  one  room  in  the  centre,  are 
built  on  piles,  and  are  reached  by  means  of  a  ladder  ; 
many  of  them  are  not  altogether  without  such  com- 
forts as  Chinese  curtains  for  dividing  the  rooms,  and 
perhaps  a  few  Chinese  dishes  ; 6  for  the  most  part, 
however,  they  are  but  poorly  built  and  furnished,  the 
sides  being  only  constructed  of  leaves  or  tree -bark, 
and  they  are  forsaken  by  the  inhabitants  when  a 
death  occurs.7  The  Jakun  of  Malacca  build  their 
huts  only  two  feet  high,  four  feet  broad,  and  six  feet 
long,  but  raise  them  on  piles  and  surround  them  with 
a  bulwark  of  thorns  for  protection  against  tigers.8  For 
river  voyages  (with  the  exception  of  the  Sabimba) 
they  employ  boats  constructed  out  of  a  hollow  tree- 
trunk,  but  they  do  not  venture  on  the  open  sea,  which 
they  are  said  to  dread.9     Of  musical  instruments  the 

1  Logan,  i.  272,  273,  iii.  405,  406,  6  lb.  p.  253,  254. 

iv.  429.  7  Newbold,     ii.      404  ;      Borie     in 

2  Thomson  in/.  1.  A.  i.  337*,  338*.  Tijdschr.    Deel   x.   420  ;    Netscher,  ib. 

3  n-  395,  396.  Deel  ii.   138  ;  Moor,  242. 

4  Favre  in/.  7.  A.  ii.  262.  8  Favre,  loc.  cit.  257. 

6  Logan,  i.  330.  ■   Logan    in  /.  LA.    i.    271,    284, 


SI  MMARY  <>/■'  S A  VAGI   MAI  A  Y  CULTl 


Maiuni  emploj  a  bamboo  flute  and  a  kind  ol  guitar, 

though    others    are    recorded.        From    their    position    it 

follows  that  all  the  trade  oi  the  Jakun  is  in  the  hands  ol 
the  Malays,  who  give  them  cloth,  pots,  dishes,  ironware, 
etc.,  iii  exchange  lor  jungle  produce,  hut  who  .it  the 

same  lime  greatly  oppress  them  hy  means  of  the  debt  i 
into  which  they  lead  them,  as  well  as  by  their  treat  hery 
and    unjust    dealing,'    this    treatment    being    in    din 
contrast  to  that  which  they  receive  from  the  Chinese. 

At  their  tribal  leasts  they  chant  songs  and  perform 
mimetic  dances  in  imitation  of  the  various  denizens  <>t 
the  jungle,  the  performer,  who  is  dressed  in  leaves, 
carrying  a  peculiar  dance-wand,  and  the  performances 
themselves  being  apparently  a  form  of  productive 
magic.  They  have  a  more  advanced  social  organisa- 
tion than  the  Sakai  and  Semang,  and  in  some  cases 
their  Batin  or  chief  has  a  peculiar  and  unknown  object 
as  part  of  his  regalia. 

They  also  practise  peculiar  marriage  and  burial 
rites  (e.g.  the  mound-ceremony,  a  species  of  marriage- 
carnival  at  harvest-time,  and  the  erection  of  a  miniature 
hut  for  the  soul  of  the  deceased),  and  have  many 
magic  ceremonies  and  traditions  which  point  to  the 
prevalence  of  ancestor- worship  and  Shamanism  as 
ingredients  in  their  religion. 

297>  332  >  Thomson,    ibid.    347*  ;  cp.  men  "  for  pirates,   or  in  some  similar 

also  Logan  in  /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.   p.    388,  motive.       But   these   Benua  may  have 

where    he    remarks    that     "like    the  been  Land  Jakun  after  all. 

northern     tribes,    the    Benua    have   a  l  Borie,  he.  cit.  p.  424. 

great  dread  of  the  sea,"  a  characteristic  2  Logan,  he.  cit.  pp.  261,  285. 

which    he  attributes   to   "exaggerated  3  Waitz,    pp.    176,    177.       As    Col. 

ideas    respecting   waves,    sea -sickness,  R.    C.   Temple  points  out,   what  such 

and  pirates."     On  this  it  may  be  re-  tribes  get  by  barter  may  be  of  value  to 

marked  that  it  is  hard  to  believe  that  themselves  ;   what  they  give  is  of  none, 

any  true  Sea  Jakun  really  dread  the  sea,  But    though    the     bargaining    of    the 

and  that  formerly  when  fluty  professed  Chinese  may  perhaps  thus  be  defended, 

themselves  afraid  of  it,  the  reason  might  that  of  the  Malays,  who  go  far  beyond 

perhaps  be  sought    in  a   fear  of  their  the     Chinese,    can    not. — Temple    in 

being  themselves  taken  by  the  "white  /.  A.I.  vol.  xxix.  p.   101. 


Note  by  W.  L.  H.  Duckworth  on  "  Fasciculi 
Malayenses,"  Vol.   I. 

Messrs.  Annandale  and  Robinson,1  whose  expedition 
to  the  Malay  Peninsula  followed  that  of  Mr.  Skeat 
(of  whose  party  Mr.  Annandale  was  a  member),  have 
provided  abundant  data  which  will  yield  much  in- 
formation when  fully  worked  out.  At  present  the 
chief  results  that  have  come  to  hand  appear  to  me 
to  be  the  following.  Firstly,  as  regards  the  living 
inhabitants  of  the  Malay  Peninsula,  we  are  presented 
with  observations  whence  the  average  colour  of  skin 
and  eyes,  the  hair -characters,  the  stature,  and  the 
cephalic  index  of  Semang,  Sakai,  people  of  the 
Trang  coast,  and  South  Perak  Malays  are  obtainable, 
founded  on  a  much  broader  basis  than  has  hitherto 
been  accessible.  As  regards  the  South  Perak  Malays, 
the  data  are  probably  entirely  new.  The  foregoing 
results  have  been  tabulated  in  the  Appendix'2  (i)  for 
purposes  of  general  comparison  in  the  comparative  table, 
and  (2)  separately  for  purposes  of  comparison  inter  se. 
In  the  second  place,  the  craniological  collection 
comprises  some  extraordinarily  valuable  specimens, 
though  unfortunately  the  number  is  not  very  large. 
Special  mention  must  be  made  of  the  collection  of 
skulls  of  the  Orang  Laut  formed  by  Mr.  Annandale. 
The  appended  table 3  gives  concisely  the  results  of  the 

1   Authors  of  Fasciculi  Malayenses.       2  For  this  table  see  Appendix.      3  lb. 

96 


part  i         NOTE  ON     i  ASi  ICUU  MAI  A  I  ENS1 


craniometrical  study  oi  the  It  will  be  noted  thai 
the  Orang  Laut  and  Orang  Bukit,  although  separated 
by  Mi-.  Annandale,  are  \ el  <  loeely  associated  physically. 
When  the  general  results  of  the  expedition  are  reviewed, 
it  heroines  evident,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  Semang 

and  the  Sakai  types  are  connected  by  transitional 
forms  so  numerous  that  it  is  only  Irom  the  examination 

oi  very  large  numbers  of  individuals   that   the   two 

extreme  forms  can  be  differentiated.  It  is  particu- 
larly to  be  noted  that  the  cephalic  index  fails  con- 
spicuously to  differentiate  the  two,  whereas  the  stature 
is  a  more-  reliable  characteristic,  and  it  is  from  this, 
with  the  skin-colour  and  hair-characters,  that  evidence 
upon  which  the  distinction  is  based  is  to  be  obtained. 
In  the  second  place,  the  Samsams  of  the  Trang  coast 
(as  is  also  the  case  with  the  South  Perak  Malays) 
stand,  as  indeed  might  have  been  expected,  quite  apart 
from  the  Semang  and  Sakai.  Thirdly,  as  regards  the 
results  of  the  Skeat  expedition,  the  characters  of  the 
Pangans  measured  by  Messrs.  Skeat  and  Laidlaw  fall 
within  the  range  of  variation  established  by  the  more 
numerous  observations  in  the  Fasciculi  Malayenses. 
When  we  turn  to  the  craniological  side  we  find  that 
the  Pangan  skull  provided  by  Mr.  Skeat  possesses 
characters  which  bring  it  also  into  line  with  the 
Semang  and  Sakai  group  of  Messrs.  Annandale  and 
Robinson  in  everything  except  cranial  capacity,  which 
in  the  former  example  is  greater  than  in  any  case 
observed  by  the  authors  of  Fasciculi  Malayenses. 

Then  comes  the  extraordinary  case  of  Grubauer's 
Semang  skull.1  This,  although  microcephalic,  provides 
the  unusually  high  cephalic  index-figure  of  85,  which 
carries  it  far  beyond   the  range  of  indices  otherwise 

1   Cf.  Man,  No.  18,  1903. 
VOL.  I  H 


98  NOTE  BY  W.  L.  H.  DUCKWORTH  part 

available  for  comparison.  This  unusual  index  need  not 
be  regarded  as  ruling  out  the  skull  from  the  ranks  of 
the  Semang-Sakai  group,  as  the  total  number  of  skulls 
known  is  but  fifteen  or  so,  and  in  the  living  the  index 
may,  as  is  seen  from  the  table,  reach  the  figure  of  85.5 
(  =  83.5  on  the  skull). 

Three  more  remarks  may  be  made  on  the  results 
of  the  authors  of  the  Fasciculi  Malayenses. 

In  the  first  place,  they  have  obtained  extraordinarily 
high  figures  for  the  radio-humeral  index  in  the  living 
Semang :  results  which  do  not  accord  with  those 
obtained  from  the  data  of  the  Skeat  expedition  (whether 
from  living  Pangan  or  Semang  or  skeletons  of  the 
same),  nor  with  Messrs.  Annandale  and  Robinson's 
own  results  in  the  case  of  the  skeletons  collected  by 
them.  This  is  evidently  due  to  their  method  of 
measurement,  for  their  results  for  the  living  Semang 
are  consistent  throughout  inter  se.  But  the  final  effect 
is  to  give  an  incorrect  idea  of  the  preponderance  of 
forearm  length,  which,  though  present,  is  not  nearly  so 
marked  as  the  figures  suggest. 

Secondly,  and  regarding  the  craniological  results 
detailed  in  the  Fasciculi  Malayenses,  the  skulls  repre- 
sented in  photographs  afford  but  slight  material  for 
comparisons,  partly  owing  to  the  fact  that  two  of  them 
are  skulls  of  aged  women.  The  Semang  skull,  Plate 
xvi.  Figs.  4,  5,  6,  has  a  much  flatter  nasal  skeleton 
than  that  of  the  Pangan  in  the  Cambridge  Museum  ; 
and  also  presents  less  subnasal  prognathism  than  the 
latter  skull. 

Finally,  Plate  xviii.  Figs.  4,  5,  6,  gives  photo- 
graphs of  the  skull  of  an  "  Orang  Laut  Kapir"  {i.e. 
"Kafir"  or  "unconverted"  Orang  Laut)  of  the 
Trang  coast :  were   the  provenance  of  this  specimen 


i  <>x  «  FASCICUl  i  MALA  I 

not  precisely  known,  its  dimensions,  as  given  in  the 
cable,  and  its  proportions  and  appearance  would  lead 
to  its  being  regarded  as  a  good  example  ol  the  <  ><  eanu 
negro  type  as  met  with  in  New  Guinea,  New  Britain, 
and  neighbouring  islands.  Caution  must  therefore  be 
exercised  in  basing  conclusions  on  skulls  taken  from 

ancient   cemeteries  of  the   kind  whence   this   skull  was 
obtained. 


Note  on  Diseases  of  the  Aborigim.-. 

Very  little  has  been  observed  about  the  diseases  to 
which  the  wild  aboriginal  tribes  are  subject,  and  on  the 
whole  it  appears  that  they  are  not  much  troubled  by 
sickness,  the  reason  being  doubtless  that  as  they  live  in 
a  state  of  nature  only  the  hardiest  of  their  children 
survive.  All  of  them  are,  however,  in  mortal  terror 
of  one  disease  in  particular,  viz.  small-pox,  from  which 
many  of  their  tribes  have  greatly  suffered  from  time 
to  time. 

I. — Semang. 

Fever  does  not  appear  to  trouble  the  Semang 
so  much  as  a  malignant  sort  of  ulcers  and  various 
minor  forms  of  cutaneous  disease  (Mai.  "kurap") 
which  are  very  prevalent  locally.  The  wife  of  the 
Semang  chief  (Pelima)  at  Siong  was  afflicted  with 
an  ulcer  which  was  one  of  the  worst  I  have  seen  in 
the  East,  and  which  had  eaten  deeply  into  the  left  leg. 

Both  Semang  and  Sakai  are  generally  well  formed, 
and  are  not  unfrequently  described  as  showing  a 
magnificent  physique.  Deformed  people  and  dwarfs 
are  extremely  rare,  probably  for  the  reason  already 
given.  One  of  the  Semang  (Pa'  Gelugor)  whom  I 
observed  at  Jarum  may,  however,  have  approximated 
to  a  dwarf  type,  all  of  his  measurements  proving  to  be 
under  the  average.     On  the  other  hand,  his  back  was 

IOO 


PAfti  i  Nl  GR1T0S  or  KEDAH  ioj 


slightly  bowed,  but  as  he  had  arrived  at  an  advanced 
age,  this  is  perhaps  more  likely  to  have  been  due  to 
physical  infirmity  than  to  congenital  deformity. 

Some  form  ol  acute  rheumatism,  or  more  probably 

sciatica,     appeals     occasionally      to     attack      them, 

in  the  case  of  a  woman  belonging  to  the  Kedah 
Semang,  of  whose   temporary  "cure"  I    myseli    w 

witness.1  From  the  woman's  own  account,  the  pain, 
which  was  extremely  acute  and  caused  her  great 
suffering,  was  situated  in  the  hones  of  the  leg*.  The 
pain  caused  her  to  break  out  openly  into  weeping 
and  loud  crying,  but  nevertheless  she  was  able  to 
make  her  way  into  the  forest  for  some  thirty  yards 
till  she  reached  the  site  of  her  former  house,  in  which 
she  was  presently  M  doctored  "  by  the  chief  of  the  tribe. 

The  teeth  of  the  Semang,  like  those  of  most  other 
savages  on  a  similar  plane  of  culture,  were  extremely 
good,  and  were  seldom  attacked  by  caries. 

Delivery,  as  a  rule,  was  attended  by  very  little 
difficulty,  the  woman  usually  resuming  her  ordinary 
avocations  after  three  or  four  days'  seclusion. 

It  could  not  be  determined  what  sickness  was 
meant  by  a  ''great  death"  or  plague  that  was 
traditionary  among  the  Semang,  but  the  symptoms 
were  described  to  Vauehan-Stevens  as  follows  :  those 
who  were  attacked  by  the  disease  about  noon,  died 
before  sunset,  by  which  time  the  body  had  turned 
black  in  colour.  It  was  evidently  also  much  swollen 
up,  since  it  was  described  by  the  Semang  as  looking 
"like  a  leech,  when  it  falls  off." 

That  the  Semang  ("  Menik ")  had  no  name  for 
the  disease  seems  to  show  that  it  was  formerly 
unknown  to  them,  and  that  they  had  no  other  tradi- 

1  Cp.  vol.  ii.  p.  230. 


io2  NOTE  ON  DISEASES  OE  THE  ABORIGINES        part 

tion  about  it  than  that  "it  had  only  come  twice." 
The  only  thing  that  could  be  found  out  about  it, 
besides,  was  that  nobody  attacked  by  it  escaped  with 
his  life.  It  was  further  stated  that  it  had  arisen  in 
consequence  of  the  neglect  of  Pie's  command  never 
to  stay  more  than  five  days  in  one  place.  This 
command,  however,  only  applied  to  the  men.1 

Vaughan-Stevens  gives  Semang  names  for  many 
other  diseases,  but  in  almost  every  case  fails  to 
translate  or  identify  them. 

II. — Sakai. 

The  foregoing  remarks  appear  to  be  as  applicable, 
generally  speaking,  to  the  Sakai  as  to  the  Semang. 
At  all  events,  the  Sakai  have  the  same  dread  of  small- 
pox and  the  same  liability  to  ulcers  and  skin  diseases, 
of  which  latter  Hale  (p.  288)  distinguishes  three  kinds 
("  Kurap,"  "  Kurap  ayam,"  and  "  Kudis "),  the  pre- 
valence of  which  he  ascribes  to  the  fact  that  the  Sakai 
"very  seldom  bathe."2  He  also  mentions3  headache 
and  stomach-ache  as  being  diseases  which  are  prayed 
against  by  the  Sakai.  De  Morgan  (ii.  717)  mentions 
fevers  (which  are  cured  by  the  use  of  crushed 
"  langsat "  stones),  colic,  diarrhoea  (for  which  calcined 
bones  are  used),  dysentery,  "  kurab,"  and  "wounds," 
which  latter  are  dressed  with  sugar-cane  pulp,  bound 
with  a  strip  of  bark-cloth. 

III. — Jakun. 

Blandas. — There  are  no  very  special  remarks  to  be 
made  with  regard  to  the  diseases  of  the  Blandas 
tribe.       Some  individuals  suffered  greatly  both  from 

1  Sic  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  102.  ii.   717;     Brau    de    Saint  -  Pol    Lias, 

2  The  two  latter  are  ringworm  and       and  other  writers, 
itch.      Cp.   De    Morgan  in   E  Homme,  3  Hale,  p.  301. 


■roj/i/i       ii 


•/. 


SAVAGE   MAI  A  YS  OF  SELANGOR  ioj 


cutaneous  disorders  and  ulcers,  but  this  was  probably, 
as  with  the  Semang  and  Sakai,  the  result  of  the  food 
thai   they  lived  on,  more  especially  ol   some  of  the 

yams  and  roots.      Fevers  were  also  very   prevalent  at 

Certain  seasons,  btit  small-pox  was  the  one  disease  that 

they  most  greatly  dreaded,  and  on  the  appearance  of 

which  they  would  llee  from  the  district. 

Besisi. — Owing  to  their  way  of  life,  it  was  not 
uncommon  to  meet  amongst  them  individuals  who  had 
been  accidentally  maimed  or  wounded,  and  on  one 
occasion,  whilst  driving  along  the  Langat  road  at  Klang, 
I  encountered  a  Jakun  who  had  been  badly  lamed  by 
the  injury  and  contraction  of  the  muscles  of  the  knee. 
After  considerable  persuasion,  I  induced  him  to  return 
to  Klang  and  enter  the  hospital,  which  was  then 
in  charge  of  the  late  Mr.  W.  M.  Little.  Mr.  Little 
kindly  interested  himself  in  the  case,  and  succeeded  in 
affording  the  man  a  good  deal  of  relief;  but  when  the 
man  had  been  a  few  days  in  hospital  he  returned  to 
the  jungle,  saying  before  he  left  that  he  could  not  live 
in  a  place  which  was  so  shut  in  and  devoid  of  trees. 
I  never  knew  a  case  of  mental  disease  among  any 
of  these  tribes. 

Jakun  of  Negri  Sembilan. — The  chief  diseases  are 
more  or  less  malignant  kinds  of  skin-disease — in  part 
inherited,  in  part  brought  on  themselves,  for  the 
hillmen  of  Negri  Sembilan  never  indulge  in  the 
luxury  of  a  bath. 

They  do  not  appear  to  possess  much  stamina  for 
resisting  fever  and  other  internal  ailments.  When 
they  had  been  living  in  the  house  assigned  to  them  by 
Rowland  for  a  short  time,  they  became  dissatisfied,  and 
all  developed  a  dry,  painful  cough,  and  moved  about 
very  despondingly  ;  scarcely  an  hour  passed  without 


104  NOTE  ON  DISEASES  OF  THE  ABORIGINES        part 

one  of  them  coming  to  Rowland  and  saying  that  he 
was  about  to  die,  until  at  last  Rowland  had  huts  built 
for  them  after  their  own  manner,  when  they  at  once 
recovered.  Rowland  adds  that  he  heard  nothing  of 
mental  diseases  among  them,  though  there  are  many 
such  among  the  Malays.1 

Jakun  of  Johor.  —  The  Jakun  were  not  much 
subject  to  sickness  ;  though  none  the  less,  for  want  of 
proper  care,  few  of  them  reach  to  an  advanced  age. 
The  sickness  of  which  they  have  the  greatest  dread,  and 
from  which  they  suffer  most,  is  the  small-pox.  If  any 
one  is  attacked  by  it,  he  is  at  once  entirely  abandoned  ; 
parents,  relations,  friends,  and  neighbours  all  fly  from 
him  alike,  and  the  poor  sick  man,  left  without  any 
assistance,  of  course  dies  miserably.  In  the  case  of 
other  diseases,  the  sick  are  not  so  entirely  uncared  for  ; 
some  sort  of  physic,  which  consists  ordinarily  of  an 
infusion  or  decoction  of  wild  plants,  being  given 
according  to  the  rude  prescription  of  a  Pawang, 
though  usually  without  any  success.  The  Jakun  die 
for  the  most  part  of  fever  caused  by  the  dampness 
and  insalubrity  of  the  places  they  inhabit.2 

Like  the  people  of  India,  they  are  also  generally 
very  subject  to  ulcers.  Many  of  them  have  very 
troublesome  skin  diseases,  though  as  a  rule  these  are 
not  dangerous.  If  the  missionaries  succeed  in 
gathering  the  Jakun  into  villages,  as  they  intend  to 
do,  and  to  make  their  habitations  more  salubrious, 
ulcers  will  certainly  be  much  more  scarce  amongst 
them  ;  and  it  may  be  hoped  that  the  cure  of  their 
skin  diseases  will  not  present  any  great  difficulty. 
A    small    provision    of     quinine    or    other  remedies 

1  Rowland,  p.  707. 
2  Favre  \r\J.  I.  A.  vol.  ii.  p.  265. 


SAVAG1    MALA  KS  Ob  J<>iH)i< 


for   Fever  would   also  doubtless  preserve   the   life  ol 

in. my.1 

Benua-Jakun.  Of  the  Benua  «»!  [ohor  we  are  told 
that,  like  all  these  tribes,  they  have  an  ex<  i  fear  ol 
the  small-pox.  The  explanation  they  giverof  thi  isthat 
in  former  times  their  tribe  was  severely  visited,  and 

greatly  thinned,  l>y  it,  and  that  a  vow  was  then  mad'' 
that  they  and  their  descendants  in  all  time  to  <  om<- 
should  flee  from  its  presence  whenever  and  wherever 
it  appeared.  If  it  should  again  break  out,  they  would 
necessarily  abandon  both  the  victim  and  the  locality. " 

The  Henna  of  the  Lenggiu  and  Sayong  are  said  to 
close  their  rivers  by  felling  trees  across  them  whene\  r 
they  hear  that  this  disease  prevails  at  Johor  Lama 
(t,e.  "Old  Johor")  or  elsewhere  in  the  country. 
Vaccination  would  prove  a  great  boon:' 

Orang  Laut  ok  Sea-Jakun. 

0.  Laut,  Beduanda  Kallang. — The  Beduanda  Kallang 
of  Singapore  formerly  consisted  of  about  a  hundred 
families  occupying  as  many  boats,  but  the  ravages 
of  the  small-pox  have  reduced  the  number  to  eight.4 

0.  Laut,  Sletar. — Several  of  the  men  and  women  of 
the  Sletar  tribe  were  subject  to  deformity  in  hands 
and  limbs,  a  rather  unusual  circumstance  for  these 
parts,  and  the  disease  most  prevalent  among  them 
was  a  cutaneous  scaly  eruption  (Mai.  u  Kurap  ")  that 
covered  the  whole  body.  To  this  disease  whole 
families  were  subject,  from  the  mother  to  the  infant  at 
the  breast,  nearly  every  second  person  appearing  to  be 
afflicted  with  it.     The  feet  of  the  old  people  were  also 


1  Favre  in_/.  /.  A.  vol.  ii.  p.  265.  3  lb. 

2  /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  284.  4  lb.  p.  300. 


io6  NOTE  ON  DISEASES  OF  THE  ABORIGINES     part  i 


attacked  by  a  sort  of  disease  resembling  leprosy,  and 
the  features  of  the  face  in  one  or  two  cases  were  found 
to  be  contracted  from  some  such  cause,1  its  victims 
being  naturally  rendered  hideous  to  look  upon.2 

1    From  the  description  this  might  be  suffered  from  a  disease  of  the  skin  of 

attributed  to  some  disease  of  syphilitic  the  feet  and  hands,  named   "  Kedal," 

origin,  which  is  not  impossible,  seeing  which  had,  however,   no  affinity  with 

the  propinquity  of  the  Sletar  to  Singa-  leprosy  properly  so  called, 

pore.      On  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  2  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  345*. 
remarked  that  the  Malays  themselves 


MANNERS   AND   CUSTOMS. 


PART    II 


CHAPTER   I. 

I  r00D — Sti  M  1 1 1  .A  NTS N  ARCOTICS. 

Although  food  is  always  (naturally)  a  burning  ques- 
tion among  the  wild  tribes  that  are  still  nomadic,  it 
apparently  becomes,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  of  even 
greater  importance  among  those  that  are  just  entering 
the  path  of  civilisation,  who  are  frequently  rendered,  to 
a  pitiable  extent,  dependent  upon  the  Malays  for  their 
verv  existence,  a  circumstance  which  the  latter  are  not 
slow  to  turn  to  their  own  advantage.  The  wildest 
tribes,  who  are  thoroughgoing  nomads,  seldom  stay 
more  than  three  or  four  days  in  one  place,  but  as 
soon  as  they  have  exhausted  the  sources  of  food  in 
one  neighbourhood,  move  on  to  the  next,  and  hence 
are  as  a  rule  fairly,  though  not  liberally,  supplied. 

The  staple  food  of  these  tribes  does  not  consist  so 
much  of  the  flesh  of  animals  as  of  such  wild  vegetable 
food  as  may  happen  to  fall  from  time  to  time  in  season. 
When  this  fails,  the  men  engage  in  hunting,  trap- 
ping, and  fishing  excursions  in  order  to  eke  out 
their  dwindling  stock  of  vegetable  supplies,  which 
consist  mainly  of  wild  yams,1  roots,  and  fruits  of  the 
jungle. 

The  less  wild   tribes  who  have  learnt  the  use  of 

1  According   to   H.    N.    Ridley    the       of  the  wild   tribes  is  Dioscorea  penta- 
yam  most  sought  after  by  all  branches      phylla. 

109 


no  FOOD  PART  II 

rice  are  forced  to  obtain  their  supplies  of  it  by  the 
barter  of  jungle  produce  at  ruinous  rates,  as  they 
seldom  succeed  in  obtaining  a  crop  of  their  own  which 
will  last  for  more  than  a  small  portion  of  the  year. 

As  will  readily  be  expected,  not  only  the  knife  and 
fork  of  civilisation,  but  even  such  objects  as  chop- 
sticks, are  completely  unknown,  the  flesh  of  the  animal 
which  has  been  killed  being  broken  up  into  pieces  of 
convenient  size,  which  are  picked  up  from  the  dish 
(which  often  consists  of  nothing  more  elaborate  than 
a  large  banana-leaf  obtained  from  the  neighbouring 
forest)  and  conveyed  to  the  mouth  by  hand.  In  the 
case  of  a  leg  or  wing  of  a  small  mammal  or  bird  the 
bone  is  held  in  the  hand  in  primitive  fashion,  and  the 
flesh  gnawed  off  it  sans  cdrdmonie  and  sans  gene.  For 
drinking  purposes  bamboo  vessels,  gourds,  and  coco- 
nut-shells are  used,  though  a  mere  leaf,  or  the  hand 
itself,  are  used  at  convenience. 

In  eating,  the  women  and  girls  of  all  three  wild 
races  wait  until  the  men  have  finished. 

For  drinking  purposes  the  "  tamer  "  tribes  generally 
keep  in  their  huts  earthenware  water-pots,  for  which  a 
half  coconut-shell  is,  as  among  the  Malays,  the  most 
generally  accepted  "  bailer."  In  drinking  from  running 
water,  however,  the  water  is  thrown  into  the  mouth 
by  hand,  unless  a  big  leaf  happens  to  be  available. 

In  this  connexion  it  may  be  of  interest  to 
note  a  statement  to  the  effect  that  the  Orang  Laut, 
when  they  wished  to  drink,  threw  the  water  up  into 
the  mouth  with  the  hand  with  unerring  aim,  and 
instead  of  splashing  the  entire  face  (as  a  European 
would),  they  were  able  to  throw  water  into  the  mouth 
at  about  the  distance  of  a  foot  from  the  palm  of  the 
hand  without  wetting  their  faces  to  speak  of.     Even 


chap,  i  GENERAL  REMAR  in 


the  children  employed  this  method.     On  the  other 

hand,  when  a  mot  her  wished    to   give   her    infant   BOme 

water  tO  drink,  she  let  it  drip  from  her  hand  into  the 
child's  open  mouth.1 

With  regard  to  rice,  the  wildest  tribes  of  the 
Peninsula  (Pangan,  etc.)  do  not  cat  it,  although  it  is 
the  Staple  food  of  the  Malays  and  all  the  later  im- 
migrants to  the  country. 

The  first  step  towards  the  adoption  of  a  grain  diet 
would  seem  to  be  taken  when  the  wild  people  take 
to  cultivating  and  eating  a  species  of  millet  ("sekoi  ")." 

For  this,  at  a  later  period,  a  more  or  less  scanty 
diet  of  rice  (obtained  from  the  Malays  by  barter)  is 
gradually  substituted  by  the  less  nomadic  tribes 
(generally  by  tribes  who  have  learned  to  grow  a  few 
light  u  catch "  crops,  in  which  rice  is  not  included), 
and  eventually  we  find  the  first  beginnings  of  rice 
culture  among  tribes  who  cultivate  for  themselves  not 
only  bananas,  maize,  tapioca  (and  in  a  few  cases  even 
tobacco),  but  also  a  scanty  stock  of  half-wild  rice. 

The  wilder  tribes  of  Semang  and  Sakai,  and  even 
perhaps  a  few  of  the  Jakuns,  practise  methods  of 
obtaining  fire  by  friction.  The  Malayising  tribes 
appear,  however,  for  a  long  time  past  to  have  known 
the  use  of  flint  and  steel,  which  is  perhaps  the  method 
still  most  generally  in  vogue.  A  few  of  the  more 
advanced  have,  however,  learnt  the  use  of  "trade" 
matches,  which  they  call  by  their  Malay  names 
("tarek  api  "  =  pull-fire,  or  "gesek  api  "  =  scratch-fire). 
The  tinder  used  consists  of  the  downy  substance  or  fluff 
which  collects  round  the  leaf-bases  of  certain  palms.3 

1  Z.f.  E.  xxix.  184.  3  It  is  chiefly  obtained  from  Caryota 

2  De  la  Croix,  p.  340.  It  is  Panic  tint       mitis,  Lour. — Ridley. 
italicum. — Ridley. 


I  12  FOOD  PART  II 

This  fluff  is  also  used  as  a  kind  of  wad  to  prevent 
windage  in  shooting  with  the  blowpipe. 

A  simple  form  of  torch,  consisting  of  lumps  of 
11  dammar  "  (Mai.  "  damar  ")  wrapped  round  with  palm- 
leaves  and  tied  with  vegetable  fibres,  is  also  pretty 
generally  employed. 

Among  the  Semang,  cooking  is  the  duty  of  the 
women,  and  among  the  more  nomadic  tribes  usually 
consists  in  slightly  roasting  the  flesh  of  the  small 
mammals  and  birds  killed  by  the  men,  though  it  is 
certain  that,  in  some  cases  at  all  events,  the  definition 
of  man  as  a  "  cooking  animal "  breaks  down,  for  the 
meat  is  eaten  absolutely  raw.  Flesh-meat  is  inserted 
in  a  cleft  stick,  which  is  made  to  lean  at  an  angle  over 
the  fire.  Rice,  if  obtainable,  is  fire-dried  in  green 
bamboos,  which  are  carried  about  and  broken  open  as 
circumstances  may  require.  Yams  and  roots  are  grated 
and  wrapped  up  in  strips  of  banana-leaf  for  baking. 
Fish  are  usually  baked  in  the  same  way  as  the  flesh  of 
birds  and  animals. 

The  methods  of  the  Sakai  are  very  similar,  and 
both  they  and  the  Semang  have  several  ingenious 
methods  of  treating  poisonous  yams,  etc.,  in  order  to 
make  them  fit  for  consumption. 

Among  the  Jakun  of  the  coast,  and  to  some  extent 
among  the  inland  Sakai  and  Semang,  iron  cooking 
utensils  (Malay  rice-pots,  etc.)  have  been  introduced, 
and  with  these  the  difficulties  of  cooking  largely  dis- 
appear. 

I. — Semang. 

Food  and  its  Preparation. 

Kedah  Semang. — The  food  of  the  Western  Semang, 
when  I  visited  them  in  Kedah,  consisted  of  rice  eked 


chap   i  NEGRITOS  Of  KEDAH  \\  \ 


out  with  a  little  sugar  cane,  both  of  which  were  <  ultivated 
l>y  themselves,  together  with  a  little  tapioca  and  the 

wild  roots  .tiul  fruits  of  the  jungle,  Their  flesh  food 
consisted  of  small  birds  and  animals,  but  more  often  of 

fish  and  turtle,  etc.,  which  they  caught  or  harpooned 

in    the    river   at    the    loot    of    the    hill.      A  few    of  th< 

Negrito  tribes  still  hum  with  the  how,  but  the  blow- 
pipe has  also  made  some  Converts,  especially  towards 
the  south.  They  are  unlettered  by  religious  re- 
strictions in  their  search  for  food,1  and  are  averse  to 
nothing  which  can  be  converted  into  a  means  of 
sustenance.  We  often  encountered  the  holes  made  by 
them  in  digging  for  roots  in  the  deepest  recesses  of 
the  forest. 

Pangan. — The  food  of  the  Eastern  Semang  (Pan- 
gan)  does  not  differ  from  that  of  their  western  kindred. 
In  a  small  rock -shelter  which  I  visited  in  the  hills 
of  Patalung  near  Singora,  and  which  was  deserted 
by  the  Pangan  just  before  we  got  there,  we  found 
the  remains  of  a  fire,  the  ribs  of  a  small  tortoise 
on  which  they  had  been  feeding,  and  a  half-smoked 
(native)  cigarette.  In  the  deserted  semicircular 
huts  of  the  Pangans  at  Ulu  Aring,  in  Kelantan, 
we  found  the  remains  of  fires,  short  bamboo  vessels 
which  had  been  used  for  carrying  dried  rice  ("  nasi 
lemang"),  and  a  half  coconut-shell,  which  had,  no  doubt, 
been  used  for  drinking.  These  Pangan  when  in  the 
neighbourhood  used  to  come  down  to  the  Malay 
hamlet  at  Kampong  Buntal  for  rice  and  tobacco. 

Kedah  Semang-  and  Pang-an.  —  Fire  -  making  by 
friction  is  the  simplest  method  practised  by  both 
Eastern  and  Western  Semang.  It  usually  takes  the 
form    of    rubbing    together   short    blocks    of    wood, 

1  For  rules  as  to  eating  the  "  soul-bird  "  (an  alleged  exception),  v.  vol.  ii.  pp.  4-6. 
VOL.    I  I 


I  14  FOOD  PART  II 

bamboo,  or  cane.  A  common  method  consists  in 
passing  a  rattan  line  round  the  portion  of  a  dried 
branch  (that  of  certain  kinds  of  trees  can  alone  be 
used),  and  holding  the  branch  down  by  the  foot,  whilst 
the  line  is  rapidly  worked  to  and  fro  with  the  hands, 
until  the  friction  ignites  the  dust  which  falls  from  the 
wood. 

The  Semang  also  not  unfrequently  supply  them- 
selves with  fragments  of  flint  and  tool-iron,  which  they 
carry  about  with  them. 

They  use  as  tinder  the  down-like  substance  or 
fluff  which  gathers  about  the  leaf-bases  of  palms,  and 
which  they  also,  as  has  been  said,  use  as  a  wad  in 
shooting  with  the  blowpipe. 

This  complete  fire  apparatus  is  generally  carried 
on  the  person,  not  unfrequently  in  a  small  bamboo 
cylinder. 

Perak  Semang". — The  same  remarks  apply  to  the 
Semang  of  Perak.  De  Morgan  adds  that  the  bamboo 
tube  in  which  the  fire  apparatus  is  carried  is  often 
beautifully  decorated  (by  incised  lines).  He  also 
states  that  the  Perak  Semang  obtain  their  tinder  from 
the  sugar-palm1  ("kabong").2 

Semang*  and  Pang^n. — The  Semang  hearth  con- 
sists of  a  few  short  logs  or  sticks,  whose  ends  converge 
to  a  common  centre.  They  are  laid  upon  a  clear  spot 
of  ground,  and  the  fires  are  allowed  to  smoulder  away 
gradually,  being  only  "made  up"  when  a  bigger  fire 
is  required  for  cooking,  though  they  are  kept  burning 
night  and  day  until  the  encampment  changes  its 
ground. 

Kedah  Semang. — Of  roots  and  fruits  it  is  not  only 
the  innocuous  kinds  that  are  employed  ;  even  poison- 

1  Arenga  saccharifera. — Ridley.  2  De  Morgan,  vii.  414. 


.  n\r.  i  NEGRITOS  <>/■  a  /  DAH  1 1  | 

ous  yams  unci  roots  .ire  '.]«•<  tally  treated  by  the 
Semang  to  render  them  fit  lor  food,  lor  this  pur- 
pose they  arc  rasped  against  .1  prickly  stick  (a  son  "I 
natural  "nutmeg  grater  "J,1  the  raspings  being  mixed 

with  a  little,  lime  (slaked  with  water  in  .1  CO<  Ollllt    shell] 

and  worked  up  with  a  small  spatula  ol  "txrtam"' 
palm.  Finally  they  are  kneaded  1))'  hand  into  a  SOll 
of  dough,  which  is  wrapped  up  in  a  Strip  of  fresh 
banana -leal,  slipped  into  a  cleft  stick,  and  slowly 
roasted  over  the  fire.  The  yams  thus  treated 
.ire  called  "kleb"  by  the  Semang,  and  "ubi  kapor " 
by  the  Malays.  The  Semang  informed  me  they 
were  highly  poisonous,  unless  treated  as  here  de- 
scribed.3 

I  noticed  a  number  of  these  yams  (4<  ubi  kapor  ")  in 
the  Semang  shelter  at  Siong  in  Kedah,  where  they 
were  inserted  between  the  slats  of  the  roof.  Other 
kinds  of  yams  employed  by  the  tribe  in  question 
were  the  "ubi  takob,"  which  is  baked;  the  "ubi 
tanjong,"  which  is  boiled;  and  "kense"  or  tapioca- 
root,  which  was  no  doubt  obtained  by  barter  from 
the  Malays,  as  none  was  grown  in  the  clearing  at 
Siong. 

Perak  Semang.  —  The  Perak  Semang  render  the 
roots  of  the  wild  yam  edible  by  means  of  prolonged 
fermentation  (in  the  earth  ?)  and  by  culinary  treat- 
ment extending  over  six  days. 

But  the  roots  of  the  amorphophallus  cannot,  it 
appears,  be  made  edible  by  any  sort  of  treatment,  this 
latter  plant  being  regarded  as  furnishing,  wThen  mixed 
with   Ipoh,  the  most  deadly  kind  of  poison  known  to 


1  The    prickly  stem    of   a    kind    of       (or    "gadong"),  ^that    requires   to    be 
-rattan  {Calamus).   2  Eugeissona  tristis.        prepared     in    this    way.       The    other 
3  It  is  only  Dioscorea  dcemona,  Roxb.        species  are  harmless. — Ridley. 


u6  FOOD  part  ii 

the  tribe*,  whilst  even  the  contact  of  the  sap  with  the 
skin  produces  considerable  irritation.1 

Meals. 

Kedah  Semangr. — Among  the  Semang  of  Kedah  the 
women  and  girls,  after  cooking  the  food,  were  not 
allowed  to  eat  any  of  it  until  the  men  and  boys  of 
the  tribe  had  finished  their  repast.  At  Siong  on 
one  occasion  I  photographed  a  number  of  Semang 
in  the  middle  of  a  meal.  Their  food,  which  they 
eagerly  devoured  and  obviously  enjoyed,  consisted 
of  a  quantity  of  rice  and  some  small  fowls  that 
I  had  brought  with  me, — a  sufficient  reply  to  the 
assertion  which  has  often  been  made  that  these  tribes 
are  afraid  to  eat  the  flesh  of  any  domestic  creature. 
These  materials,  after  cooking,  were  deposited  in 
separate  heaps  upon  large  banana- leaves,  and  were 
partaken  of  first  by  all  the  males  of  the  tribe  sitting 
together. 

The  women  could  be  seen  inside  the  hut  waiting 
quite  patiently  when  their  work  was  done  until  their 
lords  and  masters  should  have  finished  their  repast. 

[Stimulants  and  Narcotics. 

Kedah  Semang*.  —  Betel -chewing  appeared  to  be 
very  sparingly  indulged  in  by  all  the  Semang  tribes 
that  I  came  across.  Occasional  instances  certainly 
occur,  but  the  custom  is  certainly  very  much  more 
rarely  found  among  the  Semang  than  among  the  more 
southern  tribes,  and  their  teeth  were,  as  a  rule,  entirely 

1  De  la  Croix  (quoting  Sir  H.  Low),  same  as  that  of  the  Semang  of  Kedah, 
p.  334.  From  Mr.  L.  Wray  I  learn  that  with  the  addition  of  gourds,  pumpkins, 
in  other  respects  their  diet  is  much  the       chillies,  maize,  and  sweet  potatoes. 


Skcat. 
A.    Semang  of  Kedah  rasping  yams  with  prickly  />'.   Pouring  lime  upon  the  raspings  pr»  \ 

stem  of  young  rattan.  mixii  g  '►.in.;. 


Semangs  preparing  Poisonous  Vams  for  Food. 


Semang  or  Kedah  having  a  Meal. 


Vol.  I.  /.  116. 


■ 

1 


u 


<MM-  i  NEGRITOS  "/■  KEDAH  1.7 


free    from    the   discolo ration    which    nr<  rv„inl\    ., 

panics  1 1 1  < ~  custom  referred  to.' 

Semang  and  Pangnn  Perak  Semang". — On  the  Other 
hand,  both  Semang  and  Pangan  (East  Semang)  are 

(like  all  the  wild  tribes  of  the  Peninsula)  inordinately 
foml  of  tobacco.  They  carry  it  in  a  small  hut  beauti- 
fully decorated   bamboo  tube,  a  Specimen   of  which    I 

obtained  in  IMu  Kelantan.  Someofthe  more  civilised 
tribes  are  said  to  grow  their  own  tobacco.  Almost 
invariably,  however,  they  obtain  it  by  barter  from  the 
Malays,  as  do  also  the  Semang  of  Perak.2 

1 1. — Sakai. 

Food  and  its  Prepai'ation. 

Perak  Sakai.  —  The  wilder  Sakai  tribes  (Sakai 
Bukit),  like  the  Semang,  live  upon  wild  tubers,  roots, 
and  fruits,  together  with  the  flesh  of  animals  and  birds 
that  fall  victims  to  the  darts  shot  from  their  blowpipe. 
They  do  not  as  a  rule  search  for  game  until  every- 
thing else  fails.3  They  will,  however,  eat  almost 
any  sort  of  animal  food,  and  the  land  tortoise  is  as 
acceptable  to  them  as  to  the  Karens  of  Martaban.4 

To  both  these  classes  of  food  must  be  added, 
among  the  more  settled  tribes,  the  produce  of  their 
gardens,  which  includes  maize,  sugar-cane,  tapioca, 
sweet  potatoes,  yams,  rice,  and  many  plants  which  can 
be  cultivated  as  catch  crops.  A  curious  fact  recorded 
of  them  is  that  they  do  not  make  use  of  salt.5     This 


1  Mr.    L.    Wray    tells    me    that    in  3  Hale,  p.  295  ;  see  also  De  la  Croix, 
Upper  Perak   he    saw  some    Semang-  p.  340. 

Sakai   (from   the   Plus)  burning  fresh-  4  J.  I.  A.  vol.  iv.  p.  430. 

water  shells  to  make  lime  for  their  betel.  5  lb.  vol.   iv.   p.  429.      To  this  list 

2  J.  /.  A.  vol.  iv.  pp.  425,  426.  of  plants  millet  must  be  added. 


n8  FOOD 


PART  II 


has  been  contradicted  by  other  writers,1  though  it  is 
quite  possible  that  salt,  owing  to  the  difficulty  of 
obtaining  it,  may  not  be  used  by  some  of  the  wilder 
tribes,  who  fear  the  risks  attendant  upon  barter.  The 
young  growing  shoots  of  the  giant  bamboo  ("buluh 
betong  ")  are  eaten  both  cooked  and  raw.2 

According  to  M.  Lias,  the  food  of  the  Perak  Sakai 
consists  mainly  of  tapioca-root,  yams,  sweet  potatoes, 
maize,  bananas,  poultry,  eggs,  fish,  and  game  killed 
by  the  blowpipe. 

"They  also,"  he  continues,  "eat  rats,  snakes, 
monkeys  .  .  .,"  a  Malay  said  to  me,  laughing. 

But  To'  Lela  denies  it. 

"  It  is  not  we,  the  Sakai  of  Kerbu,  who  eat  that, 
it  is  the  Ulu  Burong  people."8 

De  Morgan  says  that  they  eat  the  shoots  of  ferns, 
palms,  bamboos,  p'rah-fruit,  certain  fungi  that  grow  on 
rotten  trees,  and  yams  of  every  description,  together 
with  tapioca  (which  has  been  imported  in  recent  times, 
but  the  use  of  which  has  spread  everywhere),  sugar- 
cane, maize,  gourds,  and  water-melons,  turmeric, 
millet,  and  (half- wild)  bananas  which  have  big  seeds 
in  them.      Kulim  leaves  are  used  as  seasoning.4 

Both  these  accounts,  curiously  enough,  omit  to 
mention  the  wild  fruits  which  grow  in  great  profusion 
at  certain  seasons  of  the  year  in  the  forests  of  the 
Peninsula.  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  whether  the 
Sakai  are  less  markedly  frugivorous  than  the  Semang 

1   L.    Wray,    Cave-dwellers,    p.    39.  2  J.  R.  A.  S.,  S.  B.,  No.  21,  p.  154. 

Mr.   Wray  tells   me  that    the  food   of  3  Brau  de  S.  P.  Lias,  pp.  279,  280. 

the  Batang  Padang  Sakai  (and  those  of  4  De      Morgan,      viii.       1 57  ;       cf. 

the   Hills  between  Kinta  and   Pahang)  L*  Homme,    ii.    713.       The    Sakai    are 

agrees  with  that  of  the  Perak  Semang,  also    said    to    eat    the    tuberous    roots 

except    that    millet    is    substituted    for  of    Smilax    megacarpa,    De    C.       Its 

rice.      Frogs  and  snakes  are  also  eaten,  Malay    names     are     "  Akar     banau," 

as    well    as    some    insects,    e.g.,    the  "  Rabanu,"  "  Rabana,"  "  K'luna,"  and 

"Buprestes"  beetles,  which  are  roasted.  "  Lampau  Bukit." — Ridley. 


c  .i  m    i  SAKAI  OF  PERAK  no 


or  [akun.     But  there  is  no  reason  to  think  bo,  and  mi 
probably,  like  the  others,  thej  will  eal  anything  that  i  1 
not  actually  poisonous.    Thus  Mr.  L.  Wray  writes  thai 
once,  in  an  evil  moment,  he  was  induced  by  assuram 

and  example  of  some   of   the    Sakai    to  eat  Some  pretty 

apple  like  fruit  with  which  .1  tree  growing  I>y  the  af  1< • 

of  the  river  was  laden.       The  fruit,  though    pleasant    at 

first,    left    a    very   disagreeable   after -taste,   and   he 

suffered  for  the  remainder  of   the  day  with  sore  month 
and  lips.      It  was  a  species'  of  the  genus  ( iannua,  of 

which  the  "  gfilugor "  fruit '  is  a  well-known  and  closely 

allied  example. 

Mr.  Wray  first  saw,  on  Gunong  Chunam  Prah, 
at  a  height  of  3350  feet  (1021  m.),  a  blackberry 
which  grows  amongst  the  nnderwood  ("  blukar  ")  on 
the  old  Sakai  clearings  ("  ladang  ").  The  berry  was 
red  and  long,  and  had  something  of  the  flavour  of  its 
English  ally.  The  leaf  and  method  of  growth  were  also 
very  similar.  Raspberries 3  were  common  in  the  same 
situations,  but  the  fruit  was  small  and  nearly  tasteless.4 

The  methods  employed  by  the  Sakai  for  obtaining 
fire  are  similar  to  those  used  by  the  Negritos.  To 
procure  fire  the  hill  Sakai  (Orang  Bukit)  rub  two  dry 
pieces  of  bamboo  together.5 

In  Kinta,  according  to  Hale,  every  Sakai  carries  a 
tinder-box,  which,  however,  he  does  not  use  more 
than  he  is  obliged  to  do,  as  the  fire  of  each  family  is 
always  kept  smouldering  to  prevent  its  extinction.6 

Hale's  description  of  the  Sakai  hearth  deserves 
full  quotation.  Each  family  (he  writes)  and  wife  .  .  . 
had    a   separate    hearth.       These    hearths    are    very 

1  Probably  Garcinia  Castafa,  Hensl.  6  De  la  Croix,  p.  340. 

2  Mai.     "  gelugor,"     i.e.     Garcinia  6  Hale,  p.  294.     The  Batang  Padang 
atroviridis.                3  Rubus  rosafolius.        Sakai  are  said  to  use  the  fire-drill. — 

4  /.  R.  A.  S. ,  S.B.,  No.  21,  p.   155.       Fasc.  Mai.  41. 


120  FOOD  I'AKI    II 

simple  constructions  ;  a  mat  of  leaves  is  spread 
on  the  floor,  and  over  this  is  spread  about  three 
inches  of  earth,  and  a  fire  lighted,  which  once  lighted 
is  not  allowed  to  got  out.  For  although  every  Sakai 
carries  a  tinder-box,  it  is  much  easier  to  blow  up 
a  smouldering  log  into  a  blaze  than  to  rekindle  it. 
Three  or  four  long  logs  of  suitable  wood,  each  about 
nine  inches  in  diameter,  are  arranged  so  that  their 
ends  approach  the  middle  of  the  hearth.  A  small  fire 
of  sticks  is  lighted  in  the  centre,  and  the  logs  keep  the 
fire  up  for  weeks,  and  as  they  burn  away  are  drawn 
gradually  into  the  fire.  The  burning  ends  serve  to 
support  the  saucepans,  and  the  accumulated  ashes 
below  to  roast  tapioca  and  sweet  potatoes  in.  As 
there  are  always  several  other  logs  lying  about  the 
floor  drying  so  as  to  be  ready  for  use,  it  is  not  very 
easy  to  get  about  without  knocking  one's  shins.1 

The  Sakai  generally  use  earthen  cooking  vessels, 
but  prefer  iron  ones  when  they  can  get  them.  Like 
the  Negritos,  they  have  many  ingenious  methods 
for  the  preparation  of  their  food.  The  wild  yam 
and  the  "kapayang"  fruit2  ("piyung")  are  cut  into 
small  pieces,  cooked,  and  laid  in  running  water  for 
twenty-four  hours  to  draw  the  poison  out  of  them.3 

A  similar  process  is  employed  in  the  preparation  of 
the  bitter  cassava 4  (Manihot  utilissima). 

A  yet  more  curious  process  described  by  Hale  is 
to  bury  such  poisonous  tubers  for  days  together  in  one 
of  the  swamps  in  the  jungle.  After  being  steeped  in 
this  way  till  they  are  sodden,  they  are  dug  up  again 
and   rasped   with   a  prickly  shoot    of  rattan   (already 

1  Hale,  p.  294.  *  Sic    Vaughan  -  Stevens    (/#.),    but 

2  Pangiumedule.    The  husk  of  the  nut  according  to    Mr.    H.    N.    Ridley   the 
is  used  as  a  receptacle. — VH.  ii.  619.  bitter  cassava  is  not  cultivated  in  the 

3  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.  112.  Peninsula! 


I  KAF,  i  /A  .//  <>/    PERAK 

described).     The  raspings  are  put   into  a  matwork 
bag,   and    the    foul- smelling,   unwholesome   moisture 

squeezed  out  of  them  with  .1  kind  of  primitive  lever. 

They  arc  then  dried  over  the    fire    in  a  green  lMinl.no, 
and  put  aside  till  required  lor  food.1 

This  preparation  is  said  l>y  Hale  to  be  Called 
"  koyi  "  ("  koyee  "),  and  will  keep  good  for  a  month." 

The  seeds  of  some  trees  (such  as  the  "p'rah")'5  are 
similarly  treated  ;  they  are  put  into  a  matwork  bag 
and  buried  in  swamps  sometimes  for  months  together 
before  they  are  touched.  Eventually,  however,  they 
are  lifted  out  of  the  swamp  by  means  of  a  cord  attached 
to  the  bag,  and  are  then  pounded  and  squeezed  into  a 
bamboo,  when  they  are  ready  for  use.  The  result  is 
a  highly  flavoured  kind  of  preserve  called  by  the 
Malays  "serum  p'rah,"  or  "  p'rah  paste,"  which  in 
spite  of  its  strong  odour  is  yet  greatly  prized.4 

The  Sakai  use  rude  wooden  spice-blocks  ("seng- 
kalan  ")  for  grinding  their  spices.  Not  unfrequently 
part  of  a  bamboo  internode  is  used  for  the  purpose 
when  they  are  travelling  in  the  jungle.  In  this  way 
they  grind  up  their  salt,  chillies,  and  the  other  season- 
ings5 which  they  eat  with  their  rice,  the  latter  of  which 
is  boiled  in  an  internode  of  bamboo.6 


Meals. 

Perak  Sakai. — Hale  says  of  the  Sakai  that  they 
have  only  two  regular  meals,  an  early  morning  break- 
fast and  a  midnight  supper,  but  that  they  were  con- 
tinually having  slight  snacks  of  some  kind  of  vegetable 

1  Hale,  p.  298.  3  De     M.    figures    a    wooden    plate 

2  lb.  p.  295.  (probably  used  for  this  purpose)  and  a 

3  Mezzettia  leptopoda,  Oliver   (Ano-  bamboo  water-vessel. — VH.  ii.  619. 
nacea?).                            4  Hale,  p.  298.  0  L.  Wray,  Cave-dwellers,  p.  39. 


122 


FOOD 


PART   II 


food   (sugar-cane,    tapioca,    or    sweet   potatoes)   when 
they  happened  to  be  indoors  during  the  daytime.1 

Stimulants  and  Narcotics. 

Perak  Sakai. — Of  tobacco  and  betel  the  Sakai  are 
exceedingly  fond,  the  leaf  of  a  wild  betel  ("  chambai  ") 2 
being  freely  taken  when  no  other  is  obtainable.  Both 
of  these  habits  are  probably  acquired  from  the  Malays, 
from  whom  a  Sakai  will  also  occasionally  learn  to 
smoke  or  eat  opium.3 

III. — Jakun. 

Food, 

Blandas.  —  There  is  nothing  requiring  special 
comment  about  the  diet  of  the  Blandas,  except  that  it 
contains  less  animal  food  and  a  larger  proportion  of 


1   Hale,  p.  295. 

Yaughan- Stevens  states  that  he  had 
often  read  that  the  aborigines  (Orang 
Hutan)  relieve  themselves  from  flatu- 
lence in  any  way  that  they  please, 
without  the  least  notice  being  taken  of 
it  by  any  of  those  present,  but  that  this 
habit  is  condemned  and  regarded  as 
"  vulgar."  Vaughan  -  Stevens  often 
heard  one  Sakai  reprove  another  when 
such  a  breach  of  decorum  was  made, 
although  men  only  were  present.  On 
one  occasion  an  excuse  was  offered  by 
one  of  those  present  on  behalf  of 
his  comrade,  the  offender  "looking 
ashamed  as  he  went  out."  Whenever 
Vaughan  -  Stevens  asked  the  Sakai 
what  was  their  opinion  in  such  a  case, 
they  always  condemned  it  very  strongly, 
but  suggested  that  it  might  have 
occurred  accidentally  and  unintention- 
ally, by  way  of  apology.  The  idea 
that  this  habit  might  be  regarded  (as 
among  the  Chinese)  as  a  compliment 


to  the  host  cannot  be  entertained, 
as  among  the  aborigines  it  would  be 
an  insult  rather  than  a  compliment. 
Accidents  of  the  kind  may  happen 
from  their  greedy  manner  of  eating,  and 
if  the  men  appear  to  take  no  notice, 
it  is  only  because  they  do  not  wish  to 
attract  attention  to  the  mistake  which 
has  been  made  (Z.f.  E.  xxix.  184). 

2  Mr.  Ridley  writes  me  that  several 
wild  pepper  leavesare  used  as  substitutes 
for  the  betel-leaf.  He  has  seen  Selangor 
Sakai  near  Kuala  Lumpor  cut  off  long 
strips  of  bark  from  Piper  argent 'earn, 
with  the  object  of  chewing  them.  A 
portion  only  of  the  bark  was  taken  in 
each  case,  so  that  the  plant  might  not 
be  killed. 

3  L.  Wray,  Cave-dwellers,  p.  39. 
Mr.  Wray  tells  me  further  that  the 
Batang  Padang  Sakai  grow  tobacco, 
drying  and  cutting  but  not  fermenting 
the  leaves,  and  wrapping  the  product 
in  young  "  palas  "  leaves. 


<  hap.  i  SAVAGE  MAI   1  KS  OF  Si  I  >A 


rice  than  that  of  the  Semang  and  Sakai,  the  Sclan- 
gor  tribe  being  rather  more  advanced  in  matters  ol 
cultivation.      In    Kuala   Langat,   I    have  myseli    fre 

quently  seen    the   latter   at   their  meals   (vvhi<  h    I    have 

also  occasionally  shared),  when  their  only  i<><>d  consisted 

of  boiled  rice,  seasoned  with  acid  iruits  ("asain  k'lubi  " 

=  Zalacca  conferta)  obtained  from  the  jungle. 


/unni  and  its  Preparation* 

Besisi.  —  A  favourite  kind  of  preserve  not  yet 
mentioned  consists  of  a  paste  obtained  from  the  pulp 
of  the  durian,  which  the  Besisi  bury  in  the  ground  for 
months  together  until  long  after  it  has  fermented. 

A  curious  but  firmly  held  belief  of  the  Besisi  is 
that  acid  fruits  must  not  be  eaten  with  the  game 
killed  by  their  poisoned  darts,  as  to  do  so  will,  they 
imagine,  bring  out  the  full  symptoms  of  the  poison  in 
those  who  partake  of  it. 

When  cooking  such  game  they  generally  cut 
out  the  part  surrounding  the  puncture  caused  by  the 
dart. 

In  some  of  the  songs  improvised  by  the  Besisi 
the  various  processes  employed  in  the  preparation  of 
their  game  for  food  are  described  in  detail.  The 
game  (if  an  animal)  first  has  its  fur  removed  by 
singeing,  when  the  skin  is  "poked"  off,  and  the 
carcase  quartered  and  cooked. 

The  seasonings  used  are  "  kulim " l  leaves,  tur- 
meric, and  (wild)  ginger,  leaves  of  the  "kayu  k'lat,"2 


1  Sorodocarpus  bortieensis  (Olacinece),  2  A  name  applied  to  many  species  of 

a  large  tree,  every  part  of  which  smells       Eugenia   of  the    section    "syzygium," 
strongly  of  onions. — Ridley.  and  other  trees  somewhat  resembling 

them  (Myrtaceae). — Ridley. 


124  FOOD  PART  II 

"Spices"  (the  precise  kind  is  not  mentioned),  and 
"  kesom."  l 

Different  kinds  of  seasoning  are  mentioned  in 
other  songs,  especially  various  kinds  of  wild  pepper, 
"pedas  chanchang"2  and  "pedas  jintan."3  "Asam 
k'lubi"4  is  excluded  as  a  seasoning  for  animals 
killed  with  the  blowpipe,  for  the  reasons  stated  above. 

The  most  usual  method  of  making  fire  among 
all  the  branches  of  the  Jakun  race  (including  the 
Besisi)  is  by  means  of  flint  and  steel.  Logan,  how- 
ever, mentions  a  case  in  which  some  Jakun  produced 
fire  by  circular  friction,  exactly  as  it  is  sometimes  pro- 
duced by  civilised  Malays.5  The  steel  consists  of  a 
fragment  of  tool-iron,  and  is  generally  wrapped  up 
together  with  the  flint  in  a  piece  of  cloth  and  left  in 
the  hut  during  short  absences  of  the  owner,  or  carried 
on  the  person  (in  his  "  bujam "  or  matwork  pouch) 
together  with  the  usual  palm-fluff  tinder. 

The  commonest  type  of  hearth  is  the  Malay  box- 
hearth,  which  consists  of  a  shallow  box  filled  with 
earth,  upon  which  are  usually  laid,  in  a  triangle,  the 
Malayan  firestones,  between  which  a  fire  of  sticks  is 
kindled.  Fire-logs,  such  as  are  used  by  the  inland 
Sakai,  are,  however,  often  to  be  seen. 


Meals. 

Besisi. — As  in  the  case  of  all  the  wild  tribes,  the 
Besisi  men  eat  before  the  women.  Morning  and 
evening  are   their  special   meal-times,  but   they  con- 

1  Probably  =  "  kasum,"    Polygonum  3  Cummin,  also  used  by  the  Malays 
flaccidum,    Meissn.    (Polygonaceae),    a       in  making  curries. — Ridley. 

common    weed,    also    called    "  kalima  4  The     fruit     of    Zalacca    conferta, 

paya "or  " swamp "  kalima. — Ridley.  Griff. 

2  Unidentified.  6  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  255. 


,  map.  i  SAVAGE  MAL  A  I  A'  i 

Btantly  chew  sugar  cane,  etc.,  throughout  the  day,  and 
they  do  not  hesitate  to  accept  an  extra  meal  whenei 
the  opportunity  offers.  They  gorge,  in  fact,  lil 
pythons  whenever  they  get  the  chance,  and  are  only 
too  willing  to  sleep  it  off  afterwards.  It  is,  however 
only  fair  to  them  to  say  that  the)  do  not  often  get  the 
opportunity  of  eating  toex<  ept  in  the  fruit  season 

or  at  harvest-time.     They  eat  monkej  i,  rats,  sua! 

and  even  crocodiles. 

One  of  their  more  elaborate  banquets,  at  which  I 
was  present,  will  be  described  in  detail  in  a  later 
chapter. 

11  etc  I- leaf  and  Tobacco. 

Besisi.  -The  chewing  of  the  betel-leaf  is  a  favourite 
occupation  of  the  Besisi,  who  especially  affects  the 
wild  betel-leaf  called  "  chambai  "  and  the  bark  from  the 
stem  of  a  creeper  called  "  kalong,"  '  which  is,  I  was  told, 
identical  with  the  stem  of  the  "chambai."  I  have 
tasted  both,  and  found  that  both  possessed  equally  the 
pungent  aromatic  flavour  of  the  betel-leaf,  and  left 
behind  them  a  sort  of  roughness  of  the  palate  for  at 
least  a  few  minutes  after  they  had  been  chewed. 
The  Besisi  are  also  extremely  fond  of  tobacco,  which 
is  generally  smoked  in  the  form  of  small  cigarettes, 
rolled  up  in  thin  coverings  of  palm-leaf  after  the  Malay 
fashion,  but  which  is  also  occasionally  chewed.2 

Food  and  its  Preparation. 

Mantra. — Of  the  Mantra  we  are  told  that  no  kind 
of  food  comes  amiss,  so  long  as  it  does  not  "  intoxicate  " 
or  poison  them.3 

1  Piper  caninnm.  2  Skeat  in  Sel.  Jonrn.  vol.  v.  p.  381. 

3  /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  254. 


126 


FOOD 


PART  II 


According  to  Logan,  the  Mantra  never  eat  the 
flesh  of  the  elephant.1  The  same  writer  gives  a  list  of 
no  fewer  than  forty  different  jungle  fruits,  all  of  which 
the  Mantra  are  in  the  habit  of  eating.2 

Father  Barbe  has  said  that  if  the  flesh  of  monkeys, 
to  which  the  Mantra  are  very  partial,  were  not 
prohibited  by  the  Koran,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the 
generality  of  them  would  have  been  converted  to 
Islam.3 

Meals  arid  Tobacco} 

The  Mantra  have  three  meals — morning,  mid-day, 
and  evening. 

The  Mantra  women  were  much  addicted  to  to- 
bacco, but  they  did  not  smoke  it. 


1  Borie  (tr.  Bourien)  says  they  "eat 
all  that  falls  into  their  hands — bears, 
monkeys,  squirrels,  rats,  deer,  birds,  and 
the  roots  and  bulbs  which  the  earth 
produces  in  abundance,  such  as  the 
kaledek,  or  sweet  potato  ('kledek'); 
fruits  such  as  the  banana,  and  the  sugar- 
cane, which  serves  to  satisfy  their  thirst 
as  well  as  to  nourish  them.  The  maize 
and  rice  which  they  cultivate  can  only 
support  them  four  months  in  the  year. 
To  cultivate  rice  on  the  mountains  it 
is  necessary  to  cut  down  the  forest,  to 
burn  it,  and  then  to  sow,  which  de- 
mands more  labour  than  is  required  for 
hunting  in  the  forest,  where  perhaps, 
too,  they  may  find  roots  or  other  vege- 
table food.  The  hunting  of  monkeys 
and  squirrels  pleases  them  more  than 
anything  else,  and  they  give  themselves 
up  to  it  with  ardour  ;  their  labour  and 
fatigue  they  count  as  nothing  if  they 
can  but  capture  their  prey,  which  they 
distribute  part  to  their  parents,  part  to 
their  relations,  and  part  to  their  friends 
who  attend  the  feast.  If  they  are 
joined  by  no  one,  they  first  of  all  burn 
off  {i.e.  singe)  the  hair,  and  then  cut 
up  the  carcase,  and  throw  the  portions 


into  a  frying-pan  to  cook  them,  when 
each  person  proceeds  to  devour  his 
share  silently  in  the  shade"  (Borie, 
pp.  76,  77).  Later,  M.  Borie  adds, 
the  Mantra  "do  not  give  themselves 
the  trouble  of  cutting  out  that  part 
of  the  flesh  which  has  been  pierced  by 
the  arrow,  and  which  has  a  slightly 
bluish  appearance "  (p.  78).  This  is 
contrary  to  the  usual  statements  of 
the  Besisi,  who  maintain  that  the  flesh 
surrounding  the  wound  ought  always 
to  be  cut  out. 

2  "  The  fruits  used  are  the  tampui, 
takaro,  lari,  kandim,  kimok,  kledang, 
tampune,  kleres,  pulasan,  rambutan, 
ramnian,  lerang,  prah,  jireh,  kingong, 
kadumpal,  kumpal,  binnong,  tangkoi, 
redan,  sikrang,  ampadil,  bangkong, 
puteh,  lonah,  kamalun,  didalin,  mang- 
kapas,  jangkang,  bombong,  luen,  kamui, 
sop,  chittong,  sippam,  lanjut,  klissa, 
lalam,  kimoh,  sirlang,  rumang." — -J.  I. 
A.  vol.  i.  p.  331*.  For  identifications, 
v.  Ridley's  Plant-List  [l.c.)t  and  other 
parts  of  this  book. 

3  Barbe,  J.  I.  A.  vol.  v.  pp.  487, 
488. 

4y.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  254,  255. 


.  hap.  i  WAGE    MALA  YS  0/  JOHOR  \r) 

Food  and  i/s  Preparation, 

Benua-Jakun.     Much  oi  their  [the  Benua  .|  food 
according  to  Logan,  derived  from  fishing,  snaring,  and 
hunting,    no    sorts    ol    flesh    being    rejected.      The 
ungka,    kra,    and    probably    some    other   spei  ie     oi 

monkeys,    an;,    according    to     Logan,    used    by    them 

as    food,    hut    he   believes    not    frequently    so,    and 

"although    the     Malays     asserted     that    snakes    were 

eaten,"  he  could  find  no  corroboration  of  the  state- 
ment while  amongst  the  Henna.1 

According  to  the  same  authority,  the  Benua-Jakun 
tribes  of  Johor  also  make  use  of  a  considerable 
number  of  fruits  and  seeds,  which  they  obtain  from  the 
forest,  and  eat  either  in  their  raw  state  or  after  boiling 
or  roasting  them.  He  mentions  the  names  of  no  less 
than  sixty-nine  of  these  trees.2 

In  dealing  with  the  subject  of  fire-making  among 
the  Benua-Jakun,  Logan  remarked  that  the  means  of 
obtaining  a  light  were  so  simple  that  there  was  no 
occasion  to  carry  fire  on  their  journeys.      On  his  way 

1  Logan,  J.  R.  A.  S.  No.  7,  p.  87.    Cp.  one  with  fleshless  seeds  ;  the  rambutan, 

Newbold  :   "  In  eating,  no  dish  adorns  ther.gading,  r.uban,r.kasumba,  rambei, 

their  table,  save  occasionally  the  leaf  of  duku,  two  kindsof  manggis  (mangostin), 

the  'sayak'  tree,  and  that  of  the  Biro  bangke,  bidara,  tampui,  marki,  lunko- 

(?  Birah)  furnishes  their  usual  drinking-  koyo,klueng,  bokobaka,bahkon,  katian, 

cup.      A  vessel  of  clay  called   '  Tam-  chaminoi,    rampinoi,    saun,    kampong, 

mumong '  is  applied  to  the  purposes  of  sundeh,    taban,   merpadi,    kes,    garop, 

cooking,   differing  in  shape  from  that  chabet,    rameng,   palas,   gippu,  kadun- 

used  by  Malays.      The  entrails  of  wild  dong,  kulem,  saloi,  hukam,  tampanoi, 

animals    are    taken    out    and   the    hair  petai,    kerdas,    bluru,   blatong,    malai, 

scraped  or  singed   off  before  the  flesh  mindaleng,    kapas,    ridan,    ramampas, 

is  boiled.      Instead  of  betel-leaf,   they  ramun,  jila,  ujol,  kerabu,  pahet,  kich- 

cften   chew  the  leaf  of  a    tree   called  ipo,  tikaet,  kikai,  pinjeng,  jiring,  kika, 

'  kassi,' together  with  the  areca-nut  and  buntol,    jilibom,     mayong,     machang, 

gambier,   but   seldom   mix  them    with  kachang,   kirpol,    kawe,    pakop,    tayo, 

lime.      Tobacco,    whenever   it   can   be  timambun,  gungang,  dumpa,   merlilin, 

had,  is  used  to  excess,  even  by  women  kansil,   pilampi. — J.  I.  A.  vol.   i.    pp. 

and     children."  —  Newbold,    ii.    405,  258,    259.       For    identifications,    see 

406  ;  cp.  /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  257.  Ridley's  Plant-List,  and  other  parts  of 

2  Including  several  kinds  of  durian,  this  book. 


128  FOOD  PART  II 

from  Pines  to  the  Lenggiu  his  two  guides  asked  him  to 
allow  them  to  go  for  a  little  while  to  a  small  deserted 
gutta-collector's  ("taban")  hut  not  far  from  the  path. 
As  their  absence  was  prolonged,  and  a  heavy  rain  was 
falling,  he  went  to  the  hut,  and  there  found  them 
comfortably  extended  and  smoking  native  cigarettes 
("  roko'  "),  and  it  was  only  with  great  difficulty  that  he 
could  induce  them  to  resume  the  journey.  They  had 
procured  a  light  by  making  the  end  of  a  piece  of  dry- 
stick  revolve  rapidly  in  a  small  depression  which  they 
had  made  in  another  stick.1 

There  were  usually  two  fireplaces  among  the  Benua, 
and  they  were  furnished  with  the  ordinary  pots  and 
pans  used  by  the  Malays,  and  had  also  small  supplies  of 
the  coarsest  Chinese  plates  and  saucers.  Water  was 
carried  and  kept  in  the  shell  of  a  peculiar  species  of 
large  melon  which  they  cultivate,  and  which  forms  a 
very  neat  and  serviceable,  though  not  durable,  jar. 
The  bamboo  is  converted  to  the  same  purpose,  but 
not  often.  The  stem  of  an  "  onak  "  2  with  the  [tips  of 
the]  thorns  broken  off  formed  a  strong  and  very 
effective  grater.  This  was  also  used  by  the  northern  (?) 
tribes.  Platters  made  of  hard  wood,  cut  into  neat 
shapes  and  slightly  curved,  served,  in  conjunction  with 
a  half  coconut  -  shell,  to  bruise  chillies  and  other 
condiments.  Malays  have  generally  adopted  for  this 
purpose  a  pestle  and  shallow  stone  mortar.  Most  of 
the  condiments  were  supplied  by  the  Malays,  such  as 


1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  254,  255.  up    which    it    climbs    in    the   jungle. 

2  "  Onak  "  is  the  whip-like  structure  There  may  be  some  doubt,  however, 
(or  "  flagellum  ")  which  forms  the  con-  as  to  whether  this  "whip"  is  ever 
tinuation  of  the  midrib  of  a  rattan  (or  strong  enough  to  be  used  for  the 
calamus)  leaf.  It  is  armed,  as  a  rule,  purpose  described,  and  as  "onak"  is 
with  most  formidable  (recurved)  thorns,  often  mistakenly  used  for  the  creeper 
and  serves  as  a  species  of  grapnel  by  itself,  it  is  possible  that  the  stem 
which  this  gigantic  creeper  hooks  itself  of  the  rattan  is  all  that  is  here  in- 
on  to  the  higher  branches  of  the  trees  tended. 


,  kap.  i  WAGk     '/  \LA  V     <  '/■  /<>!/<>/< 


onions  and  turmeric,  etc.  The  roots  ol  i  cultivated 
plant  were  variously  prepared  In  the  time  between 
me. ils,  or  when  a  person  came  in  hungry,  they  were 
roasted  amongst  the  embers.  For  regular  meals  thej 
were  grated  down  or  simply  boiled  with  the  addition 
of  hog's  grease  or  vegetable  oil.1 

Meats. 

Benua-Jakun. — The  whole  household  ate  together, 
the  wife  sitting  near  the  fireplace,  SO  as  to  have  the 
smoking  pots  and  pans  within  reach.  From  these  she 
replenished  the  plates  from  time  to  time.  From  the 
activity,  relish,  and  high  good-humour  with  which  the 
viands  were  discussed,  it  was  very  apparent  that  the 
Benua  is  blessed  with  a  strong  appetite,  and  looks 
upon  the  satisfying  of  it  as  the  main  end  of  life.  The 
children  were  in  general  overfed,  and  even  those  who 
were  naturally  vivacious  seemed  with  difficulty  to 
resist  the  lethargic  influence  consequent  on  their 
cramming  themselves  with  potatoes  boiled  in  hog's 
grease,  a  kind  of  food  with  which  their  natural  nutri- 
ment is  eked  out  from  the  third  or  fourth  day  of  their 
existence.*2 

Stimulants  and  Narcotics. 
Benua-Jakun.  —  The  Benua  use  betel -leaf,  but  not 
to  excess  like  the  Malays.  The  gambier,  betel-nut,  and 
lime  which  are  eaten  with  it  they,  like  other  aborigines, 
obtain  from  the  Malays.  Their  favourite  luxury  was 
tobacco,  in  which  both  sexes  freely  indulged.  The 
women  were  often  to  be  seen  seated  together  and 
weaving  mats,  each  with  a  native  cigarette  ("  roko'  ")  in 
her  mouth.     While  they  were  speaking  it  was  trans- 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  254.  2  lb.  pp.  266,  267. 

VOL.  I  K 


130  FOOD  I' ART  II 

ferred  to  the  perforation  in  the  ear.  When  they  were 
met  paddling  their  canoes,  the  "  roko' '  was  seldom 
wanting.1 

Articles  of  Diet. 

Berembun  Tribes. — Snakes  (as  well  as  the  ungka, 
kra,  and  some  other  species  of  monkeys)2  were  used  as 
food  by  the  Berembun  tribes,  who  employed  dogs  to 
discover  them.  Those  principally  sought  were  pythons 
(e.g.  the  ular  sawa  and  u.  sawa  rendam,  cobra  (u. 
tedong),  and  others  which  are  unidentified,  e.g.  u.  ipong, 
u.  naga,  u.  gasing,  u.  ripung,  u.  ulabat,  u.  ringkup,  u. 
siu,  u.  manan,  and  u.  kamong.  The  pythons  (sawa)  and 
ripung  were  the  best  flavoured.  They  all  possessed 
"a  fishy  taste."  Several  kinds  of  snakes,  even  if  the 
teeth  are  carefully  removed,  like  those  of  the  preceding 
species,  cannot  be  used,  the  aborigines  asserting  that 
their  flesh  is  poisonous.3 

The  Berembun  tribes  use  wooden  platters  and 
coconut-shells  (for  grinding  their  condiments)  like  the 
Benua  (and  the  Javanese).  They  also  employ  either 
large  bamboos  or  the  shell  of  a  particular  species  of 
large  melon  for  carrying  water.4 

Food  and  its  Preparation. 

Jakun  of  Johor. — The  food  of  the  Jakun  differs  in 
no  way  from  that  of  the  other  semi -civilised  tribes 
already  referred  to.  I  may  mention,  however,  that 
they  have  grown  so  used  to  rice  that  they  cannot  do 
without  it,  and  probably  first  began  to  cultivate  it 
more  than  forty  years  ago.5 

Tapioca-root  appears,   however,   to  be  the  staple 

1  /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  254,  255.  4  lb.  p.  254. 

2  Cp.  p.  127  (of  the  Benua-Jakun).  6  See  Hervey  in/.  R.  A.  S.t  S.  B., 

3  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  257.  No.  8,  p.  122. 


i  hap,  i  WAGl   MALA  \  S  0/  JOHOR  i  n 

diet  <>i  the  fakun  living  near  Batu  Gajah  in  fohor, 
for,  according  to  II.  W.  Lake,  although  they  also  eat 
fruits  and  fish,  with  a  little  rice  which  they  obtain, 
together  with  salt  and  tobacco,  from  Malay  trad<  rs  in 

exchange  lor  rattan  ("rotnn"),  resin  Or  "(laminar,"  glltta 
("gfttah"),     and     camphor     wood,     they     n<-vnt  li<i< 
mainly   subsist   on    the    rOOt  of  the    tapioca       He    was 

further  informed  by  the  Batin  that  during  the  greater 

part  of  the  year,  when  they  disperse  in  search  of  jungle 
fruits,  these  people  live  entirely  on  tapioca-root  ("ula 
kayti  ")  and  fruit.1 

On  the  other  hand,  bavre,  writing  of  the  food 
eaten  by  the  Jakun  in  general,  emphasised  the  fact 
that  they  had  no  regular  diet.  They  liked  good 
food,  but  when  they  were  deprived  of  it  they  eat  with 
satisfaction  any  other,  even  such  food  as  would  be  an 
object  of  horror  to  civilised  people.  They  lived  upon 
the  flesh  of  every  kind  of  animal — snakes,  monkeys, 
bears,  tigers,  birds,  etc.,  whilst  yams,  plantains,  wild 
fruits,  the  leaves  of  trees,  and  certain  roots  furnished 
the  principal  part  of  their  ordinary  food.  Those  of 
them  who  cultivated  rice  sold  a  part  of  it  to  the 
Malays,  or  exchanged  it  for  cloth,  and  upon  the 
remainder  they  lived  for  a  few  months  in  the  year. 
They  did  not  dislike  the  flesh  of  domestic  animals, 
fowls,  etc.,  but,  on  the  contrary,  they  preferred  it  to 
that  of  wild  animals.  At  several  of  their  houses  there 
was  a  good  quantity  of  fowls.  Sometimes  they 
cooked  the  flesh  before  they  ate  it,  but  at  other  times 
they  ate  it  raw  ;  some  merely  put  the  animal  upon  the 
fire  till  the  hairs  were  singed,  when  they  considered  it 
"  cooked."  Favre  saw  some  large  monkeys  which, 
after  having  been  "  cooked"  in  this  very  fashion,  were 

1  H.  W.  Lake  in/.  R.  A.  S.,  S.  B.,  No.  25,  p.  3. 


132  FOOD  PART  II 

dished  up  upon  a  kind  of  mat  as  a  meal  to  some  seven 
or  eight  persons,  who  speedily  devoured  the  whole  in 
a  few  minutes,  leaving  only  the  skeleton.  In  eating 
they  used  no  dish;  an  iron  frying-pan  served  for 
cooking,  plantain  leaves  served  as  plates,  and  some 
coconut-shells  formed  their  usual  drinking-cups.  Some 
Jakun  tribes1  refused  to  eat  the  flesh  of  elephants, 
under  the  pretext  that  it  would  occasion  sickness,  but 
many  others  were  "  not  so  scrupulous."  When  an 
elephant  was  killed  either  by  themselves  or  by  the 
Malays,  they  called  together  their  friends  and  relatives 
to  partake  of  the  large  entertainment  which  was 
prepared  ;  and  then  built  huts  in  which  to  lodge  their 
guests  until  the  animal  which  furnished  the  feast  was 
entirely  finished,  when  every  one  decamped  and 
returned  to  his  usual  way  of  living.  When  the  durian 
season  was  come,  a  good  number  of  Jakun  families 
left  their  houses,  both  men  and  women  as  well  as 
children  repairing  to  the  places  where  the  durian  trees 
grew.  They  then  cleared  the  ground  in  order  to  find 
the  fruit  more  easily  when  it  ripened  and  fell,  and, 
dwelling  in  a  small  shelter  built  of  leaves,  "prepared 
themselves  to  enjoy  the  treat  that  nature  presented  to 
them."  For  six  weeks  or  two  months  they  ate  nothing 
but  durians.  When  the  season  was  over  the  place  was 
deserted  till  the  proper  season  next  year.2 

Favre  further  observes  that  "  one  of  their  most 
prized  dishes  is  a  honeycomb,"  and  "let  it  be  said 
with  due  respect  to  the  opinion  of  our  European 
cooks,  the  time  when  the  honey  is  in  the  comb  is  not 
(amongst    these   epicures    of   nature)    considered    the 


1   Favre  writes  :  "  Plusieurs  tribus  de  a  J.  I.  A.  vol.  ii.  pp.  260,  261  ;  cp. 

Benuas"   [A.   P.   F.   xxii.    303);    but       also  vol.  i.  pp.  254-260. 
totemism  need  not  be  hence  inferred. 


(map  i  SAVAGE    MALA  I      -  >FJOHOR  133 

proper  moment  t<>  take  the  1 1  i \< • ;  but  they  wait  until 

the  small  bees  .ire  well    formed    in  the    Cells,  and  .1    few 

days  before  they  ate  ready  to  fly  away,  the  honey- 
comb is  taken  with  great  (arc,  and,  wrapped  up  in  a 
plantain   leal,   IS   put    upon    the    tire    lor  a   lew  minul' 

when  wax  and  animals  are  devoured  together,  .and 

considered  as  an  uncommon  treat!"  ' 

Jakun  (unspecified).  —  According  to  Vaughan- 
Stevens,  the  |akun  were  in  the  habit  of  using  tor 
drinking  purposes  either  "some  sort  of  cup"  or  a  leaf 
if  nothing  else  were  obtainable." 

The  same  authority  informs  us  that  the  Jakun  on 
their  wanderings  always  carried  the  smouldering  end 
of  a  rope  made  of  tree-bark  fibre.3 

The  ceremonial  method  used  by  the  Jakun  for 
kindling  fire  will  be  described  in  detail  in  a  latei 
chapter. 

Stimulants  and  Narcotics. 

Finally  Favre  states  of  the  Jakun  that  they  were 
in  the  habit  of  chewing  betel-leaf  together  with  its 
usual  accompaniment  of  areca-nut  and  gambier,  and 
that  when  they  were  unable  to  procure  the  betel-leaf 
they  used  the  leaf  of  a  tree  called  "kasi."4  Tobacco, 
when  it  was  procurable,  was  much  used,  even  by 
women  and  children,  both  for  smoking  and  chewing.5 

Udai. — Of  the  Udai  our  information  is  of  the 
scantiest,  all  we  are  told  being  contained  in  a  sentence 
by  Newbold,  to  the  effect  that  "they  (the  Udai)  sub- 
sist on  the  flesh  of  the  animals  they  catch,  on  wild 
roots,  and  on  fruits  of  the  forest."6 


1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  ii.  p.  261.  5  J.  I.  A.   vol.   ii.  p.   261  ;  see  also 

2  Z.f.  E.  xxix.  184.  vol.  i.  p.  255. 

3  lb.  xxviii.  168.  6  Newbold,  ii.  381,  382. 

4  Gomphia  Hookeri,  Planch. 


134  FOOD  part  ii 

Orang  Laut  or  Sea-Jakun. 

Orang"  Laut,  Sletar. — The  food  of  the  Orang  Laut 
or  sea  tribes  appears  to  have  differed  very  little  from 
that  of  the  land  tribes  (Orang  Bukit),  though  doubtless 
it  included  much  more  fish  than  that  of  the  latter.  We 
are  told  of  the  O.  Sletar  that  the  satisfying  of  hunger 
was  their  only  pursuit,  of  water  they  had  abundance 
without  having  to  search  for  it;  with  the  "serkap"  or  fish- 
spear,  and  the  "  parang  "  or  chopper  as  their  only  imple- 
ments, they  eked  out  their  existence  from  the  stores  of 
the  river  and  forest.  To  them  the  staple  of  life  in  the 
East,  rice,  was  a  luxury  ;  tobacco  they  procured  by  the 
barter  of  fish  and  a  few  marketable  products  collected 
from  the  forests  and  coral  reefs.  Of  esculent  roots 
they  had  the  "  prioh  "  and  "  kalana,"  1  both  bulbous  and 
not  unlike  coarse  yams  ;  of  fruits  they  ate  the  "tampoi,"2 
"kledang,"3  and  "  buroh,"  when  they  came  in  season  ; 
and  of  animals  they  hunted  the  wild  hog,  but  refrained 
from  snakes,  dogs,  "iguanas,"  and  monkeys.  This 
formed  their  principal  food,  for  many  minor  products 
of  the  forests  and  creeks  must  be  left  unmentioned.4 

0.  Laut,  Sabimba. — The  Sabimba,  when  visited  by 
Logan,  planted  no  vegetables  of  any  kind,  but  used  such 
leaves,  roots,  and  fruits  as  the  forest  afforded.5  They 
ate  the  flesh  of  every  forest  animal  which  they  could 

1  Dioscorea  deflexa,  Hook.  The  palm  [Oncosperma  Tigillarid],  and  the 
"akar  kakap  "  {Dioscorea  orbiculata)  fruit  of  the  "  tampoi,"  "  maneling," 
is  also  eaten. — Ridley.  "  pancho,"    "kabes,"    "  ridan  "    [Ne- 

2  Baccaurea  Malay  ana.  phelium     glabrum,     Noronh.],      "  ka- 

3  Artocarpus  lanceizfolius.  dumpa  "    [?  "  kadampang  "  =  Sterculia 

4  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  343*.  parviflora,  Roxb.],  "ranjas,"  "mangos 
6  E.g.    the    "akar   kalana"  [Diosc.       utan "   [Mangifera    spp.],    "kledang," 

deflexd],  "  simapo  "  [?  Simpoh  Dillenia  "  pasal  "  [Ardisia  odontophylla\  "  dur- 

spp.,  of  which  the  acid  fruit  is  eaten],  ian  "  [Durio  zibet hinusy  L.],  "lakup," 

"ajas,"  "  anpiro,"   "katapa"  [?  "  ka-  "pakala,"     "tore." — J.  I.  A.   vol.    i. 

tapang "  =  Terminalia    catappa,     L.],  p.  296. 
the  cabbage  ("umut")  of  the  nibong 


chap,  >  MALA  YAh  \  PS/1 

kill,  .Mid  when  brought  in  contact  from  time  to  time 
with  more  civilised  people,  showed  no  objection  to  any 

kind    of   food,    s.tvr    the    fowl,    whirl)    they  '><  rupuloir.ly 

avoided.     The  wild  animals  and  birds  eaten  were  the 

wild  i )!*<_;, '  mouse-deer  or  chrvrntain  '  ('' plandok  "),  the 

monkeys  called  "k'ra"    and  "lotong/M  the  civet  cat 
("musang"),  the  squirrel  ("  tupai "),  "kubong,"1  monitor 
lizard7  ("bewak"), "  malok,"  imperial  pigeon  ("pergam"), 
"  kalongkang,"  "koko,M  mynah  bird    ("tiong"),  green 

pigeon  ''  ("  punai  "),  the  oil  of  snakes,  and  many  kinds  of 
fish.  The  roe-deer  ln  ("  kijang  "),  the  samhhur  deer 
("  rusa  '),  elephant,  and  bear  are  not  found  in  Battam. 
Flesh  of  all  kinds  was  cooked  by  the  men,  vegetables 
by  the  women.11 

Another  observer  of  the  Sabimba  (Thomson),  who 
visited  them  shortly  after  Logan,  tells  us  that  their 
food  consisted  of  rice  as  the  staple  article,  but  that 
they  added  to  this  the  flesh  of  the  hog,  monkey, 
snake,  and  ape,  and  birds  of  all  kinds  excepting  that 
of  the  fowl,  for  the  reasons  stated  in  Logan's  paper. 
Their  vegetables  consisted  of  the  wild  fruits  of  the 
jungle.  This  tribe  was  much  more  helpless  than  the 
Orang  Sletar,  being  entirely  dependent  on  the  Malays 
for  their  arms  and  for  the  greater  part  of  their  food. 
They  were  unacquainted  with  the  brewing  of  inebriat- 
ing liquors,  though  they  informed  Thomson  that  their 
tribe  formerly  possessed  the  art.  In  their  habits  they 
were,  therefore,  as  temperate  as  the  Malays.1'2 

0.  Laut,  Muka  Kuning-. — Of  the  diet  of  the  Orang 

1  Sus  indicus.  7  Hydrosaurus  salvator. 

2  Tragulus     napu     and  Traguhts  8  Mainatus  javantnsis. 
kanchil.  9   Osmatreron  vtr)ians. 

3  Macacus  cynomolgus.  10   Cenmlus  /mtntjac. 

4  Semnopit heats.  n  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  296. 
6  Paradoxurus  and  Viverra.  12  lb.  p.  347. 

•  Galeopithtcus — the  flying  squirrel. 


136  FOOD  i'aki  11 

Muka  Kuning  all  that  we  know  is  contained  in  the 
following  passage  :  "The  articles  of  food  which  they 
derive  from  the  forest  are  the  same  animals  and 
vegetables  that  are  used  by  the  Orang  Sabimba  (see 
pp.  134,  135).  As  with  the  Sabimba,  the  fowl  is  for- 
bidden food."1 

0.  Laut  (tribe  unspecified).  —  Thomson  found,  at 
Pulau  Tinggi  (off  the  east  coast  of  Johor),  a  number 
of  O.  Laut  who  had  been  attracted  thither  by  a  plenti- 
ful crop  of  durians.  Six  boats  from  Mora,  an  island 
of  the  Johor  Archipelago  (about  50  miles  N.  lat),  he 
found  on  their  way  to  P.  Tinggi ;  they  had  travelled 
by  sea  one  hundred  and  eighty  miles  to  partake  of  this 
fascinating  fruit.2 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  337*.  2  Ibid.  vol.  v.  p.  140. 


CHAPTER    II 

I  )ki.ss. 


Although  it  has  been  more  than  once  asserted  '  that 
the  wild  people  of  the  Peninsula  are  accustomed  to  go 
entirely  nude,  I  have  hitherto  failed  to  get  any  satis- 
factory first-hand  proof  of  this.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
fact  that  any  such  custom  is  invariably  denied  by  the 
wild  people  themselves,  is  by  no  means  conclusive,  and 
the  matter  must,  at  least,  await  further  investigation. 
The  Semang  of  Kedah,  for  instance,  strenuously 
denied  it,  and  it  was  not  alleged  of  them  even  by  the 
neighbouring  Malays.  There  is  no  more  proof  of  the 
practice  obtaining  in  the  case  of  the  Sakai  than  there 
is  in  that  of  the  Semang,  and  with  regard  to  the  Jakun 
of  the  south,  the  opposite  view  has  been  strongly 
set  forth  by  Logan.  The  fact  that  the  children,  up 
to  the  age  of  puberty,  are  allowed  to  run  about  un- 


1  Cp.,  e.g.,  Bradley,  pp.  294,  295  : 
"The  pitiable  objects  before  us  were 
completely  naked,  both  men  and 
women ."  [Bradley,  however,  was  a  bad 
observer  from  a  scientific  point  of  view.] 
But  see  Logan's  remark  in  J.  1.  A. 
vol.  i.  pp.  252,  253:  "With  the 
exception  of  one  house,  where  the 
mistress  lay  in  a  corner  and  appeared 
to  be,  like  her  husband,  totally  destitute 
of  clothes,  I  found  the  women  every- 
where wearing  a  short  'sarong.'"     It 


does  not  appear  from  this  statement 
that  there  was  anything  amounting  to 
a  custom  among  the  Benua  of  going 
totally  nude,  and  it  is  possible  that 
the  impression  may  have  got  about 
from  a  few  similarly  isolated  instances, 
for  which  there  was,  doubtless,  some 
special  reason.  See  Favre  in  J.  I.  A. 
vol.  ii.  p.  258,  where  this  view  is 
advocated.  Cp.,  on  the  other  hand, 
Swettenham,  p.  228  :  "  Their  clothing, 
when  they  wear  any,  consists,"  etc. 


137 


133  DRESS  part  ii 

dressed  does  not  of  course  imply  that  the  grown-up 
people  do  so. 

Before  entering  upon  a  description  of  the  dress 
worn  by  the  various  tribes,  I  should  like  to  point  out 
the  remarkable  fact  that  none  of  the  wild  tribes 
of  the  Peninsula,  so  far  as  has  been  observed,  are  in 
the  habit  of  dressing  themselves  in  the  skins  of 
animals,  or  of  decorating  themselves  with  the  feathers 
of  birds.  In  both  respects  they  appear  to  obey  what 
seems  to  have  been  an  ancient  and  general  prejudice 
(possibly  of  religious  origin)  on  the  part  of  the  tribes 
of  South-East  Asia,  and  in  this  regard  they  present 
a  strong  contrast  to  the  bulk  of  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Malay  Archipelago.  This  neglect  is  certainly  not 
due  to  the  lack  of  opportunity,  since  the  Malay 
Peninsula  is  probably  little,  if  at  all,  worse  off  from  a 
zoological  point  of  view  than  any  of  the  islands  of 
Netherlands  India. 

The  Girdle. 

In  the  matter  of  dress,  the  girdles  worn  by  the  three 
main  races  form  one  of  the  most  interesting  subjects 
of  inquiry.  It  is  not  easy  to  determine  for  certain 
which  of  the  various  forms  of  girdle  are  of  Sakai  and 
which  of  Semang  origin,  but  there  certainly  appears  to 
be  a  strong  affinity  of  type  between  the  Semang 
fungus-string  girdle  1  and  some  forms  of  girdle  worn  by 
the  Andamanese.  Moreover,  this  form  of  girdle 
appears  only  to  be  found  among  fairly  pure  Semang, 
and  amonor  such  tribes  as  the  N.  Perak  Sakai  (who  are 
neighbours  to  the  Semang,  and  have  a  strong  infusion 

1  Professor  M.  Ward,  who  has  kindly  structure  this  so-called  "  Rock-  vein 
examined  my  specimens  under  the  Creeper "  can  only  be  the  rhizomorph 
microscope,  informed  me  that  from  its       of  a  kind  of  fungus. 


Negrito  Dress  and  Articles  of  Apparel. 


De  Morgan. 


i,  2,  3.  '•  Bouquets"  worn  in  the  hair  hy  Sakai  (sic)  woman  (No.  1  is  wrapped  in  a  painted  leaf).  4.  Head- 
circlet  or  "diadem."  5,  6,  9,  10,  22,  24.  Necklaces  with  pendants  of  shells,  etc.  (Xo.  6  of  " buprestes "-legs 
threaded  like  beads  :  No.  10  with  squirrels'  tails,  etc.;  the  shells  so  used  are  Hybocy,  t  usseaumei, 

Cyclophorus  Malay  antes,  C.  semisulcatus,    etc.).     7,  8.   Bracelets  of  coiled  wire.     14.  15.    $0.    Two  rings  of 
■  oiled  brass  wire,  and   one  [No.   30]  of  woven  rattan.      16.   Girdle.      11.   Loin-cloth.     12.  13.    Nose-quills  (or 
"nose-pins").     iS,  19,  28,  29.  Combs  (Nos.  18,  28  used  for  pinning  flowers,  etc..  into  the  hair  :  Nos.  19,  29  of 
wood).     17,25,26,27.  Bamboo  hair-pins.     20,23.  Knives.     21,31.  Vessels  of  bone  and  of  wild-goat's  horn. 
Vol.  I.  p.  138. 


olleciion. 


Semang  Drk». 


i,  2.   Two  Pangan  leaf-ornaments  (Ulu  Aring,  Kelantan). 

3.  One  Pangan  ear-ornament  of  rolled  strips  of  palm-leaf  (Ulu  Aring). 

4.  Pangan  woman's  leaf-ornament  worn  as   bandolier  (Ulu   Aring)  — leaves  and   Stsi 

palm  leaf  strung  upon  black  fungus-strings. 


J  'ol.  /.  /.  139. 


CIIAI'.    N 


GENERAL  REMAl 


of  Semang  Mood),  whereas  il  is  not  recorded  amo 
pur-sang  Sakai  in  other  parts  ol  the  country  remote 
from  Negrito  influence.     I  lence  there <  an  be  no  reason- 
able doubt  that  tins  form  of  girdle  should  I"-  a  (signed 
to  tli«'  Semang  tribes  rather  than  to  the  Sakai.1 

Another   form   oi'  waist  belt   whieh    seems    possibly 

derived  from   Negrito  sources  is  that  consisting  ol  a 
fringe1of  leaves  suspended  from  a  string,  such  as  is 

said    to    be    worn    by    the    wilder    Negritos    {e.g*    the 

Pangan).1     It  occurs,  sporadically,  among  the  Perak 
Sakai  (of  G.   Bujang    Malaka),  and  also  among  the 

Mantra  of  Malacca,   in   both  of  which  cases   it   might 
consequently  be  regarded  as  an  interesting  survival  of 

Negrito  culture  among  the  more  southern  tribes. 

The  original  Sakai  type  of  girdle  has  not  yet  been 
identified,  and  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge 
it  is  probably  not  identifiable  with  any  certainty. 
There  only  remain,  in  fact,  for  us  to  choose  between 
the  girdle  of  coiled  cane4  and  the  bark-cloth  girdle. 
But  both  of  these  girdle-types  reappear   among  the 


1  Cp.  Man's  And.,  I.e.  p.  181  : 
"Garenpeta,  the  ornamental  waist-belt 
of  Dtnialium  octagon  urn  which  is  worn 
occasionally  by  both  sexes "  (cp.  ib. 
Plate  vii.  Fig.  35). 

2  Or  fringes  (v.  infra)  ;  it  would 
appear  that  a  string  with  the  leaves 
attached  is  considered  sufficient  in  the 
case  of  men,  but  that  several  rows 
of  these  fringes  are  worn  by  the 
women. 

3  Mail's  And.,  I.e.  109  :  "The  males 
of  this  tribe  (Jarawa)  wear  round  their 
heads,  waists,  knees,  and  arms,  fringes 
of  string  attached  to  a  cord  or  cane." 
And  cp.  ib.  p.  no  (note):  "The 
Jarawa  women  have  hitherto  been 
seen  with  only  armlets  and  cinctures 
of  string,  to  which  a  few  short  fibres 
were  attached,  obviously  only  for 
ornamental  purposes." 


4  The  late  Mr.  J.  E.  Peall,  F.R.G.S., 
in  the  course  of  some  notes  on  the 
Malayo-Polynesian  theory  {J.  R.  G.  S. 
vol.  iv.  p.  241),  says  :  "  At  page  293, 
note  100,  of  the  Journal  (vol.  iv.  ?),  I 
see  the  waist-girdle,  'rua-rua,'  men- 
tioned. Coiled  cane  waist-girdles  are 
common  among  most  of  our  ultra- 
Indian  races,  for  men  and  also  for 
women.  Baupa  Nogas  (sic  ?)  call 
them  ru-pak,  usually  a  long  split  cane 
[is  used],  coiled  eight  or  ten  times  round 
the  waist ;  chiefs  have  very  orna- 
mental ones,  with  patterns  in  coloured 
seeds  and  trade  beads  ;  an  exception- 
ally rare  kind  has  thin  plates  of  brass 
on,  and  is  called  a  ra  rong  ru-pak.  A 
monograph  of  the  cane-girdle  as  seen 
from  the  Himalayas  to  Eastern  Poly- 
nesia would  reveal  some  startling 
affinities." 


140  DRESS  part  11 

Jakun,  and  indeed  among  other  aboriginal  tribes  with 
Malayan  affinities,  e.g.  among  those  of  Sumatra  and 
Borneo.  This  question,  therefore,  must  also  await 
further  inquiry. 

The  girdle  of  bark-cloth  is  so  well-known  and  so 
widely  spread  throughout  S.E.  Asia,  the  Malay  Archi- 
pelago, and  the  Pacific  Islands,  that  a  very  few  words 
about  it  should  here  suffice.  The  finest  and  best- 
known  variety  of  this  cloth  is  the  "  tapa "  cloth  of 
Polynesia.  The  cloth  made  by  the  tribes  of  the 
Malay  Peninsula  is,  as  a  rule,  more  roughly  manu- 
factured, though  some  very  good  cloth,  decorated  with 
zigzag  patterns,  is  made  in  Perak.  An  interesting 
point  is  that  the  grooving  or  toothing  of  the  bark-cloth 
mallet  used  by  some  of  the  Jakun  runs  longitudinally 
instead  of  transversely  as  in  specimens  from  Rotuma.1 

Ligatures. 

The  bands  or  ligatures  worn  by  the  aborigines 
round  the  upper  part  of  the  arm,  the  wrist,  and  just 
below  the  knee,  were  doubtless  originally  employed, 
as  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  for  a  practical  object, 
viz.  to  strengthen  the  muscles  and  prevent  strains, 
the  risk  of  which  must  be  constantly  present  to  the 
mind  of  a  jungle  people.  It  would  appear  just 
possible  that  even  the  use  of  the  girdle,  more  especially 
that  of  coiled  cane,  may  perhaps,  in  some  cases,  have 
had  an  equally  utilitarian  origin.  On  the  other  hand, 
this  explanation  can  hardly  apply  to  the  necklace,  or 
to  rings,  so  that  one  key  will  certainly  not  fit  all  the 
locks.  The  necklaces  worn  by  these  Peninsular  tribes, 
and    I    think    also    the    rings,   are   certainly   worn   for 

1  Cp.  p.  389,  infra.      I  have  to  thank  Mr.  J.  Stanley  Gardiner  for  pointing 
this  out. 


okap.  ii  GENL  RAl   RE  MAR  i  \\ 

medical,  or  rather  for  magico-medical  reasons,  as 
the  combs  <>i  the  Semang  and  ol  tin-  Semang  Sal 
women.     I  mysell  \\.ii>  definitely  told  this  on  several 
occasions  both  by  the  Semangand  [akun,  and  itagn 
with  the  observations  ol  other  travellers  in  the  same 
region. 

Thus,  for  instance,  the  Sakai  of  Kampong  Langkor 
(S.  Kerbu)  believed  in  the  ubiquitous  presence  ol 
evil  spirits  (Ilantu),  against  whose  evil  intentions 
they  protected  themselves  by  means  of  charms  worn, 
in  the  forms  referred  to,  upon  their  persons.  Their 
bracelets,  rings,  and  copper  ornaments  were,  in  fact, 
nothing  but  talismans,  as  De  la  Croix  discovered  in 
the  following  way  : — A  young  girl  who  had  disposed 
of  her  seed  necklace  to  him  came  back  in  a  hurry  to 
ask  for  it  to  be  returned.  He  thought  she  was  not 
satisfied  with  her  bargain,  and  was  about  to  give 
her  some  knick-knack  or  other  in  addition,  when  she 
informed  him  that  all  she  wanted  back  was  the  set 
of  small  spirals  of  copper-wire  attached  to  the  neck- 
lace. In  spite  of  the  most  extravagant  offers  of 
tobacco,  which  certainly  ought  to  have  persuaded  her, 
she  would  not  allow  him  to  retain  the  spirals,  and 
evidently  attributed  a  far  greater  value  to  them  than 
could  be  accounted  for  by  the  mere  worth  of  the 
copper.  De  la  Croix  subsequently  asked  the  chief 
of  the  tribe  (Bah  Itam)  about  it,  and  the  latter  told 
him,  with  evident  conviction,  that  the  girl  would 
certainly   fall   ill   if  she   ceased    to   wear  these    metal 


rin^s.1 

o 


1  De   la  Croix,   p.    338.     See,  too,       use   of  necklaces  and    other    ligatures 
the    necklace    described   by   Vaughan-       may  also  apply  to  the  girdle. 
Stevens,  p.   153,  infra.      This  magical 


M2  DRESS  I'art  ii 

I.  —  Semang. 

The  Girdle. 

Kedah  Semang'. — By  far  the  most  remarkable  and 
becoming  form  of  girdle  worn  by  any  of  these  tribes,  and 
one  which  appears,  as  has  been  said,  to  be  of  typically 
Semang  origin  (though  occasionally  found  among  the 
Sakai  and  even  the  Malays  of  Perak),  was  the  girdle 
made  from  the  long  black  glossy  strings  of  a  fungus 
(called  in  Malay  the  "Rock-vein  Creeper").1  These 
fungus  girdles  were  of  elaborate  workmanship,  the 
strings  of  the  rhizomorph  being  most  beautifully  woven 
into  a  long  narrow  plait  which  was  coiled  round  and 
round  until  it  formed  a  girdle  of  the  requisite  shape 
and  size,  the  loose  ends  forming  a  handsome  fringe. 
This  girdle  was  rarely  worn  by  men,  but  more 
frequently  by  women,  and  it  was  from  these  latter 
that  I  obtained  the  specimens  now  in  the  Cambridge 
Museum. 

A  yet  simpler  form  of  personal  attire  worn  by 
the  men  of  these  Semang  tribes  as  well  as  by  the  Sakai 
consists  of  a  simple  waist-cord  or  string  into  which 
leaves  are  inserted  to  form  a  fringe.  The  leaves 
generally  used  are  those  of  the  "  chalong  "  tree  or  the 
11  kelawe." 

Even  when  the  Semang  were  wearing  the  Malay 
"  sarong"  they  still  frequently  retained  this  string 
underneath  it,  either  from  the  mere  force  of  habit  or  for 
reasons  connected  with  their  belief  in  Magic.  In  such 
a  case,  however,  the  leaves  were  more  conveniently 
omitted,  and  the  string  alone  retained. 

A   similar  leaf-belt  was  also   sometimes  worn   by 

1  Mai.  "akar"or  "  urat  batu,"  i.e.  "Rock-creeper"'  or  "Rock-vein  Creeper." 


Skeat  Collection. 

Semang  and  Pangan  Girdles. 

i.  Man's  girdle  of  tree  bark  {Artocarpus)  (Ulu  Aring).  2.  Black  fungus-string  woman's  girdle, 
bought  from  owner  (Siong).  3.  Girdle  of  Pangan  woman  (Kuala  Sam.  Kelantan  river).  4. 
Woman's  string-girdle  of  jungle  fibre  (Siong). 


Vol  I.  />.  14: 


Sicca:  Collection. 

Fungus-String  Girdle  of  Semang  Woman  (Kedah). 

Bought  from  the  wearer. 


Skeat  Collection. 

Seed  and  Tooth  Necklace  of  Semang  Woman  (Kedah). 

Bought  from  the  wearer. 


Vol.  I.  />.  143. 


,  ha?,  ii  NEGRITOS  0/  KEDAH  143 

the  women,  whilst  the  boys,  aa  .1  rule,  wore  th 

or  cord  in  all  its  simplicity,     h  was  made,  .is  a  rule, 

either  of  twisted  strips  of  palm-fibre  ( Eugeu sona  tristx 

or  "  l>ertain  "),  or  of  the  long  l)la<  L  String  I  Ol  the  R<*  k 

vein  fungUS  ("akar  batu")  already  mentioned. 

The,  Semang  of  Kedah,  however,  most  commonly 

wore  the  ordinary  (Malayan?)  loin-eloth.  which  con- 
sists,   in    its    most    primitive    form,    of  a    lone/    narrow 

strip  of  beaten  tree-bark  or  cloth,  one  end  of  which  is 
wrapped  round  the  waist,  the  other  (loose)  end  being 
passed  between  the  legs  and  tucked  in  through  the 
part  which  serves  as  a  girdle,  with  the  free  part  hang- 
ing down  in  front.  This  bark  loin-cloth,  however,  was 
not  at  all  common  among  the  Kedah  tribes,  the  men 
preferring  to  use  the  cloth  variety,  which  they  obtained 
by  barter  from  the  Malays.  In  default  they  occasion- 
ally utilised  the  bark  of  the  Artocarpus  or,  preferably, 
a  finer  cloth  manufactured  from  the  bark  of  young 
saplings  of  the  Antiaris  or  "  upas  "  tree.1  The  most 
usual  attire  of  these  Kedah  women  was  a  cloth  waist- 
wrap  reaching  to  the  knee. 

Pangan. — The  Pangan  of  the  Belimbing  district  in 
Ulu  Kelantan  were  said  to  make  their  loin-cloths  from 
the  bark  of  a  species  of  Ficus  ("ara"),  as  well  as  from 
that  of  the  "  upas  "  tree  and  the  Artocarpus.  A  girdle 
of  coiled  cane  with  a  fringe  of  leaves  was  also  worn  by 
the  Pangan  women,'2  if  not  by  the  men,  in  the  Ulu 
Kelantan  (S.  Sam)  district. 

1  De    M.'s    unnecessarily  vehement  {Calamus),  which  form  a  girdle  round 

dimenti  is  due,  no  doubt,    to  his    not  the  waist  as  thick  as  the  arm.      They 

having  seen  it.  also  wear  a  piece  of  bast  or  cotton  stuff, 

-  I  give  the  following  in  a  foot-  fastened  in  front,  drawn  through  De- 
note as,  though  it  is  certainly  Pangan,  tween  the  legs,  and  then  tied  to  the  girdle 
there  is  nothing  to  show  its  locality  : —  behind.  Fig.  2  (Plate  ii.)  shows  a  Sakai 
"  The  remainder  of  the  costume  of  the  (sic,  recte  Pangan)  lady  in  her  daily  cos- 
women  consists  of  a  number  of  thin  tume,  drawn  from  nature." — M.-Mac- 
and    sometimes    red  -  coloured    rattans  lay  in^.  R.  A.  S.,  S.  B.t  No.  2,  p.  214. 


144  DRESS  paki  n 

Perak  Semang.  —  The  clothing  of  the  Perak 
Semang  is  similar  to  that  of  the  Negritos  of  Kedah.1 

As  they  have  no  manufactures  of  their  own,  their 
clothing  consists  chiefly  of  the  inner  bark  of  trees.  A 
few,  however,  who  venture  to  approach  the  Malayan 
villages  obtain  a  little  cloth  in  exchange  for  various 
kinds  of  jungle  produce.2 

Necklaces. 

Kedah  Semang. — The  simplest  form  of  necklace 
worn  by  the  Semang  in  Kedah  took  the  form  of  a 
simple  neck-string  or  ligature  either  of  the  "  Rock- 
vein  "  fungus  or  of  fibre  of  the  "  bertam "  palm 
(Eiigeissona),  and  was  sometimes  further  embellished 
by  stringing  upon  it  the  leaves  of  certain  trees  in 
alternation  with  knots  of  palm-leaf  (Licuala).  It  was 
therefore,  in  fact,  made  on  the  same  principle  as  the 
simplest  form  of  girdle. 

More  elaborate  necklaces  were,  however,  frequently 
worn.  These  consisted  of  two  or  more  strings  which 
were  fastened  together  at  a  single  point,  and  on  which 
were  threaded  various  small  trophies  of  the  chase, 
small  wild  roots,  fruits,  seeds,  and  other  objects,  all 
of  which  appear  to  be  commonly  worn  for  magical 
reasons. 

One  of  these  more  elaborate  necklaces,  which  I 
obtained  from  the  Semang  of  Kedah,  consisted  of  a 
double  string  on  which  were  threaded  the  teeth  of 
an  ape  (Siamang),  a  number  of  minute  bundles  of 
fragrant  grass,  a  couple  of  bear's  (?)  teeth,  a  number 
of  small  flat  beans,  and  a  couple  of  small   buttons  of 


1   De  Morgan,  vii.  412  ;  cp.  Swett.  p.  228. 
2  J.  I.  A.  vol.  iv.  pp.  425,  426. 


chap,  n  NEGRITOS  <>/■  PERAK 

European    manufacture,   the    latter    being   evidentlj 
regarded  as  objects  oi  no  small  i  alue  I 

Perak  Semang-.  I  he  necklaces  (ol  the  IY-rak 
Negritos)  consist  ol  a  series  oi  chains  ol  black  and 
w  bite  seeds,  alternately  arranged  and  fastened  together 
in  a  hunch.  Some  ol  these  are  very  small,  others  as 
big  as  the  closed  list.1 

To  these  strings  are  attached  hunting  and  fishing 
trophies  consisting  of  the  teeth  or  bones  oi  animals, 

tufts    of  squirrels'    tails,    big    fish-scales,  and    so    forth, 
together  with  shells  of  the  genus    BuliflUlS  and    Ilybo- 

cystis,  or  sea-shells  of  various  sorts  (but  not  I  [elix  nor 
Cyclophorus,    which    are    common    in    these    iorests). 
These  shells  are  tilled   with  a  perfume  extracted   from 
trees." 

Ihe  green  legs  of  a  beetle  (Jruprestes)  are  some- 
times but  very  rarely  inserted  between  the  seeds.3 
Whenever  they  can  get  coins,  the  Negritos  wear  them 
on  their  necklaces.  De  Morgan  saw  them  wearing 
dollars,  copper  coins,  and  even  Dutch  coins  of  the 
seventeenth  century.4 

Ligatures  (Armlets  and  Bracelets). 

Kedah  Semang. — In  addition  to  girdles  and  neck 
laces,  the  Semang  of  Kedah  almost  all  wore  armlets, 
bracelets,  and  knee-bands,  which  were  usually  made, 
like  their  girdles  and  necklaces,  from  jungle-fibre,  and 
very  much  upon  the  same  principle. 

These  ligatures  were  usually  made,  in   Kedah,  of 

1  De  Morgan,  vii.  413.      It  must  be  doubtless  Sakai.                   2  Ibid. 

remembered  that  he  is  writing  of  mixed  3  Ibid. 

Semang  -  Sakai    tribes,    and   does    not  4  De  Morgan,  vii.  414.      Cp.  Swett. 

apparently   distinguish   between  Sakai  p.  228  :    "  The  women  (Semang)  wear 

and  Semang  necklaces.     The  black  and  strings  of  brass  rings,  boars'  or  squirrels' 

white  arrangement  is  not  found  among  teeth,  beads  or  beetles'  legs,  and  coins 

the    purer   Semang  or  Jakun,   and   is  when  they  can  get  them." 

VOL.  I  L 


146  DRESS  i'art  11 

twisted  fibre  obtained  from  the  "  bertam  "  palm 
{Eugeissona).  Sometimes,  however,  they  were  made 
of  finely  plaited  strips  of  rattan  (Calamus),  or  of  the 
strings  of  the  "  Rock-vein  "  fungus.  Metal  armlets  and 
rings  were,  however,  worn  in  a  few  cases,  but  these  are 
more  commonly  found  among  tribes  who  mix  more 
freely  with  the  Malays.  I  never  saw  any  armlets 
with  European  beads  among  the  Semang  of  Kedah. 

The  foregoing  remarks  apply  equally  to  the  Pan- 
gan  of  Kelantan. 

Perak  Semang. — The  bead  -  armlets  or  ligatures 
worn  by  the  Semang  of  Perak  were  frequently  made 
on  the  same  plan  as  their  necklaces  {i.e.  of  black  and 
white  seeds  strung  alternately).  Ordinarily  they  were 
very  narrow,  but  in  some  cases  they  were  very  broad 
and  covered  a  large  portion  of  the  arm.1 

Semang*  (of  Perak  ?). — The  women  wore,  by  way  of 
a  charm,  bracelets  made  from  the  leaves  of  the 
"  palas "  {Licuala  peltata),  the  men  bracelets  of  the 
Rock-vein  Creeper  (the  plant  called  "Tam-tum") 
fitting  tightly  to  the  left  wrist.  These  bracelets  are 
called  "  Chin-ing-neng."  2 

Head-dress — Men  }s. 

Kedah  Semang. — Among  the  Semang  at  Siong 
some  of  the  men  were  wearing  short  woolly  hair  forming 
small  spiral  clusters  close  to  the  scalp.  Most,  how- 
ever, had  adopted  the  fashion  of  shaving  the  head, 
which  is  found  among  other  branches  of  the  Negrito 
race  {e.g.  the  Andamanese),  as  well  as,  frequently, 
among  the  local  Malays. 

None  of  the  men  that  I   saw  were  in  the  habit  of 

1  De  Morgan,  vii.  413.  2  Vaughan- Stevens,  iii.  126. 


«  ma.-,  ii  NEGRITOS  <>/■  a  /■/>.///  i47 

wearing  anything  on  their  heads,  though  several  made 
a  rough  kind  of  turban  out  of  some  strips  ol  bright  red 
cloth  that  I  had  given  them,  and  in  this  guise  strutted 
about  lor  all  the  world  like  great  turkey-cocks  I 

On  special  occasions  thry  hound  their  heads  with 
fillets  of  palm  leaf,  and  for  protection  against  various 
diseases  special  head  dresses  were  used,  which  will  be 
described  later.      Flowers  are  also  worn  "for  dandy." 

The  (Malayan  ?)  top-knot  was  worn  by  some  of  the 
boys,  but  not  by  any  of  the  men  that  I  saw,  though 
Vaughan- Stevens  says  that  he  saw  men  wearing  it. 

Perak  Semang. — Vaughan-Stevens'1  account  of  the 
top- knot  worn  by  the  Perak  Semang  is  as  follows  : — 

Some  of  the  Perak  men  leave  a  tuft — at  the  frontal  end  of  the  scalp, — but  this  is 
adopted  from  the  B&ttaks  (.v/V),  who  cut  their  hair  into  all  sorts  of  shapes.  Nothing 
is  known  why  this  tuft  is  left.  "  Pie's  orders  "  [Pie,  a  deity  of  the  Semang  tribes, 
brother  of  Karih]  is  the  only  reply  they  give.  Each  of  the  tufts  was  taken  from  a 
man  of  about  thirty  years  of  age,  whose  hair  had  never  been  cut  before,  and  had 
ceased  growing.  They  were  not  tied  in  any  way  while  on  the  head  and  were  cut 
off  for  me  readily  without  demur.  .  .  .  When  the  hair  of  the  rest  of  the  scalp 
has  been  left  for  a  long  time  without  cutting,  the  tuft  cannot  be  distinguished  from 
the  rest  of  the  hair.  The  exact  position  of  the  tuft  varies  slightly  in  different  men, 
by  about  20  or  25  mm.  either  to  the  front  or  back,  but  always  in  the  median  line. 

When  the  hair  (as  a  whole)  is  not  cut  for  a  long  time,  the  tuft  shows  the 
"  pepper-corn  "  character  with  increased  distinctness,  it  being  in  that  case  less  dis- 
turbed by  the  leaves  and  twigs  through  which  the  Semang  passes.  The  tuft, 
when  left  to  itself,  gets  more  or  less  combed  out  from  its  isolated  position. 

The  Beard. 
Kedah  Semang. — In  one  or  two  cases  only  did   I 
see     Kedah    Semang    with    anything   approaching   a 

1  In  the  same  passage  we  are  told  that  much-mixed  Perak  Semang  (No.  55). 

the  E.  Semang  (Pangan)  men  cut  off  ...   The  '  pepper-corn '  character  is 

their  hair  as  close  to  the  scalp  as  the  best  shown  some  six  months  [sic)  after 

jungle-knife  (parang)  will  allow,  partly  cutting,  when  the  spirals  lie  only  from 

for  coolness'  sake  and  partly  for  cleanli-  5  to  10  mm.  above  the  scalp.      I   gave 

ness.      But  they  left  a  small  tuft,  at  each  of  the  men  furnishing  specimens 

the  top  of  the  occiput,  which  they  did  55  and  56  a  high   cap  which  I   made 

not  cut.     Vaughan-Stevens  continues  :  them  wear  for  a  week,  so  as  to  allow 

"Two   of    these    little    tufts  —  called  the  hair   to   assume  its  normal  shape 

'  Bag-i ' — I  now  send  cut  off  close  to  before  cutting  it.       And   I  kept  both 

the  skin,  complete.   One  belonged  to  an  men   near  me  for  that  time."     (From 

Eastern  Semang  (Pangan)  of  unmixed  Fasc.  A.  fol.  29  ;  Vaughan-Stevens  in 

blood  (No.  56),  and  the  other  to  the  V.  B.  G.  A.  vol.  xxiv.  pp.  440,  441.) 


148  DRESS  pari  11 

beard,  their  chin-hairs  as  a  rule  being  few,  straggling, 
and  scanty.  Yet  in  one  case  I  saw  a  Semang  with 
a  real  beard,  which,  though  very  short,  grew  in  closely 
curled  spirals,  presenting  a  woolly  appearance,  exactly 
like  the  owner's  hair.  On  the  other  hand,  most  of 
the  grown  men  had  slight  black  moustaches. 

Pangan. — The  wild  pure-blood  Eastern  Semang 
(Pangan)  "  plucks  out  his  scrubby  little  beard,  but 
tries  to  retain  the  moustache,"  in  order,  we  are  told, 
that  he  may  be  "  distinguished  from  a  woman  "  (!) l 

Head-dress —  Women  s. 

Kedah  Semang*. — The  women's  hair  usually  grew 
longer  than  the  men's,  and  was  in  some  cases  allowed 
to  grow  (apparently  uncared  for)  in  a  species  of  curly 
mop.2  This,  however,  was  probably  in  the  case  of 
women  who  had  some  proportion  of  Sakai  blood  in 
their  veins.  In  several  cases  the  women,  as  well 
as  the  men,  had  partially  shaved  the  head,  the 
women  always  leaving,  however,  a  circular  patch  at 
the  back  of  the  head,  and  a  thin  fringe  on  the  fore- 
head untouched. 

Several  of  them  were  wearing  the  magic  combs 
which  they  employ  as  a  safeguard  against  diseases,  and 
several  of  them  too,  probably  with  a  view  to  receiving 
4 'company,"  had  bound  their  heads  with  the  Licuala- 
leaf  fillets  usually  reserved  for  special  occasions. 

The  following  were  some  of  the  forms  of  head- 
dress employed  by  the  Semang  women  : — 

a.  An  oval  shaven  patch  on  top  of  head. 

b.  A  rectangular  shaven  patch  on  top  of  head. 

c.  Quill-like  plant  shoots  worn  like  horns  in  the  hair. 

1  Z.  f.  E.     xxix.      179.       The     ab-  the  waist,  is  so  obvious  as  to  scarcely 

surdity   of  the    explanation    given    by  need  pointing  out. 
Vaughan-Stevens,  as  purporting  to  come  2  Among     these    was     the    chief's 

from  a  race  who  habitually  go  bare  to  wife. 


Wray. 


Semang  with  Gird]  es  of  Malay  Cloth. 


Vol.  I.  />.  i43- 


^r- 


Semang  Combs. 


Skeat  Collection. 


i,  2.   Two  Wot  Negrito  (Semang  of  Kedah),  said  to  be  worn  as  charms— old  well-worn 
specimens  bought  off  the  head  of  the  wearer>. 

3.  One  E.  Negrito  (Pangan)  obtained  from  Ulu  Aring,  Kelantan. 

4,  5.  Two  obtained  by  Grubauer  in  Upper  Perak.—  Presented  to  Cambridge  Museum  by 

Ridgeway. 


Vol.  I.  /.  149. 


i  hap,  n  NEGRITOS  (>/■  KEDAH 


In  the  method  oi  dressing  the  hair  represented  by 
,/,  three  fillets  of  Lima/a  leal  weic  used.  One  o( 
these  was  carried  from  ear  to  ear  over  the  top  oi 

the    head,  and    the   other   two    from  ear  to  ear  over  the 

back  of  the  head,  the  one  just  above  and  the  other 

just   helow   the   clump  of  untouched    hair  covering    the 
back  of  the  head. 

In  b%  a  single  fillet  was  used,  which  was  carried 
all  round  the  edges  of  the  clump  at  the  back  of  the 
head  only.  In  c,  the  horns  consisted  of  the  quill-like 
growing  shoots  of  the  Lowia  grandiflora  ("sulur 
lobak  "),  and  were  worn  for  magical  purposes.  Another 
woman  had  bound  her  head  with  a  fishing  line,  using 
the  hook  as  a  fastening. 

Magic  Combs. 

Kedah  Semang". — In  addition  to  the  various  forms 
of  head-dress  mentioned,  some  of  which  are  common 
to  both  sexes,  the  Semang  women  wore  in  their  hair 
a  remarkable  kind  of  comb,  which  appears  to  be  worn 
entirely  as  a  charm  against  diseases. 

These  combs  were  almost  invariably  made  of 
bamboo  (an  average  specimen  measuring  perhaps 
three  inches  by  five),  and  were  decorated  with  an 
infinite  variety  of  designs,  no  two  of  which  ever  entirely 
agreed.  It  was  said  that  each  disease  had  its  appro- 
priate pattern,  and  hence  in  some  cases  several  combs 
were  worn  simultaneously,  apparently  to  protect  the 
wearer  against  several  diseases  at  once. 

Similar  combs  are  worn  by  the  Pangan,  the  Semang 
and  Sakai  of  Perak,  and  most  of  the  mixed  (Semang- 
Sakai)  tribes,  e.g.  the  O.  Jelei  of  Pahang. 

Their  patterns  and  magical  significance  will  be 
fully  described  in  a  later  chapter. 


150  DRESS  part  ii 

Nose-sticks  and  Earrings. 

Kedah  Semang. — The  custom  of  wearing  a  stick 
through  the  septum  of  the  nose  was  not  practised  in 
Kedah.  It  is  also  unknown  to  the  Andamanese,  and 
as  it  is  common  among  the  Perak  Sakai  and  the  Sakai 
of  Pahang,  it  is  no  doubt  a  practice  of  Sakai  origin.1 

Earrings  of  rolled-up  leaf  (banana  and  "licuala") 
are  worn  by  both  sexes.2 

Perak  Semang-. — It  is  quite  possible  that  some  of 
the  Perak  Semang  may  have  learnt  nose-boring  from 
the  Sakai,  but  I  have  not  met  with  any  record  of  its 
employment  among  the  purer  Semang  tribes,  though 
they  do  wear  earrings ;  it  is  quite  unknown  to  the  Jakun. 

II. — Sakai. 
The  Girdle. 

Perak  Sakai.  —  The  fringed  waist-cord  sometimes 
worn  by  the  Semang  is  also  found  among  the  Sakai 
and  Jakun.  Thus  De  la  Croix  says  that,  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Mt.  Bujang  Malaka,  the  Sakai 
women  that  he  saw  wore,  instead  of  the  tree -bark 
girdle,  a  row  of  small  grass-bundles  attached  to  a 
cord  which  went  around  the  waist.  And  in  1869  (?) 
M.  Alfred  Marche  observed  the  same  form  of  girdle 
among  the  Mantra  women  north  of  Malacca.3 

On  the  other  hand,  we  are  told  that  the  waist- 
wrap  or  "loin-cloth'  of  tree  -  bark,  which  is 
most  probably  of  Malayan  origin,  appears  to  be  very 

1  Cp.    Man's    And.   p.    115:    "No  differ  greatly  from  their  neighbours  the 

attempt  is  made  to  alter  the  shape  of  Nicobarese."  -  See  p.  526,  infra. 

the  nose  by  flattening  or  pinching  it,  3  De    la    Croix,   p.    330.      Another 

nor    is   the  cartilaginous   septum    ever  form  (of  coiled  jungle-fibre  with  leaves 

perforated  for  the  purpose  of  inserting  attached)    is    sometimes    seen    among 

ornamental  bars  or  rings.      In  this,  as  mixed  Semang-Sakai  {e.g.  the  O.  Jelei 

in  many  other  respects,  the  Andamanese  of  Pahang). 


okap.  M  SAKAI  OF  PERAK  1)1 

generally  worn  by  all  Sakai  iribes  who  have  not  yet 

adopted  the  Malay  "sarong."1 

It  varies  from  about  3  or  4  inches  (7.5  cm.  to  10 
cm.)  to  about  1  inch  (2.5  cm.)  in  width. " 

The  fullest  description  of  this  girdle  is  that  given 

by  I  )e  la  Croix,  who  tells  us  that  the  dress  of  the 
Sakai  consists  of  a  mere  strip  of  tree  bark  rolled 
round  them,  which  is  passed  between  the  legs  and 
carried  round  the  waist,  tucked  through  at  the  belt, 
and  then  allowed  to  fall  down  in  front  in  the  shape 
of  a  fan.  This  garment,  which  is  called  "selampit," 
measures  from  3  to  4  metres  in  length,  and  is  manu- 
factured either  from  the  bark  of  the  Ipoh  tree  (Anti- 
aris  toxicaria)  or  from  that  of  the  wild  bread-fruit 
tree  {Artocarpus).  It  is  prepared  by  spreading  the 
bark  upon  a  tree-trunk  and  striking  it  with  a  wooden 
mallet.  The  sap  is  thus  driven  out  of  it,  but  the  cloth 
has  then  to  be  washed  and  dried  several  times  before 
it  attains  the  requisite  suppleness.3 

The  best  and  finest  cloth  is  that  made  from  the 
Ipoh  tree.4 

Both  men  and  women  wore  this  garment,  which 
De  la  Croix  took  to  be  "  the  national  costume  of  the 
Sakai."5 

The  use  of  the  black  fungus  girdle,  which  un- 
doubtedly originated  among  the  Semang,  has  also 
been  observed  among  the  Perak  Sakai,6  but  not,  so  far 

1  Cp.  J.   I.  A.  vol.   iv.   p.   429  (of  6  lb.     See  figure  136. 

the    Perak     Sakai),    and    also    Hale,  6  Hale,  I.e.,  describes  this  girdle  as 

p.  292  (of  the  same).  made  from  "a  black,  leafless,  aquatic 

2  75-100  mm.  by  25  mm.  Mr.  Ridley  creeper  called  '  akar  batu'  ('area  battu') 
tells  me  that  the  "chawats"  worn  by  found  growing  on  stones  under  water 
the  Sakai  of  the  "  Batu  Caves"  (near  in  mountain  streams."  "  Akar  batu," 
Kuala  Lumpur  in  Selangor)  were  cer-  or  more  properly  "urat  batu"  {i.e. 
tainly  not  more  than  an  inch  in  width,  "  Rock-creeper"  or  "  Rock- veins"),  is 
and  if  anything  a  little  less.  the  Malay  name  of  this  rhizomorph,  for 

3  De  la  Croix,  p.  330.  4   lb.  which  v.  p.  i^8,snj>ra.    Hale  describes 


152  DRESS  pari  ii 

as  I  am  aware,  among  other  sections  of  the  race  more 
remote  from  the  Semanof. 


Necklaces,  Armlets,  Bracelets,  Rings. 

Perak  Sakai. — De  Morgan  speaks  of  the  necklaces 
and  bracelets  of  the  Perak  Sakai  as  in  no  way  differing 
from  those  worn  by  the  Perak  Semang  (p.  146). 

According  to  Hale,  the  men  appeared  to  wear  no 
ornaments  except  very  small  bracelets  and  waist-belts 
made  of  the  M  Rock-vein  "  fungus  (already  mentioned).1 
The  women,  on  the  other  hand,  wore  bracelets  and 
necklaces  made  of  seeds,  shells,  certain  sweet-smelling 
roots,  and  anything  they  could  get  from  the  Malays 
that  could  be  strung  on.  A  necklace,  purchased  from 
an  old  woman,  contained  nine  strings  of  black  and 
white  seeds  differently  arranged,  a  string  of  old  Malay 
copper  coins,  a  few  glass  beads,  the  tip  of  a  squirrel's 
tail,  two  tufts  of  monkeys'  hair,  a  spiral  of  brass 
wire,  five  snail  shells,  and  the  brass  support  of  the 
ribs  of  an  umbrella.  This  was  about  the  average  of 
a  Sakai  necklace.2 

The  Sakai  of  "  Changkat  Riam"  (in  Perak), 
according  to  De  Morgan,  strung  upon  their  necklaces 
and  bracelets  not  only  seeds  but  small  bones  as  well.3 

These  necklaces  and  bracelets  were  very  similar  to 
those  of  Sungei  Raya,  but  at  Changkat  Riam  brass 
ornaments  were  conspicuous  by  their  absence,  prob- 
ably owing  to  the  great  distance  of  the  latter  settle- 
ment from  any  of  the  Malay  villages.4 

On  the  arm  a  thickish  string,  or  series  of  strings,  is 

it  as  being  worn  by  the  Sakai  men  (of  x  Hale,  p.  292. 

Kinta  in  Perak),  as  well  as  by  the  local  2  lb.     See  also  De  la  Croix,  p.  330. 

Malays,   who   in   this  case  are   clearly  3  Sic,  ?  "  Riang. " — De  Morgan,  viii. 

borrowers.  211.                             4  lb. 


Co  ruli. 


Sakai  Girl  of  South  PeraKj 

showing  hark  cloth  dress,  headband,  necklace,  armlet,  ring,  and  bracelets. 


Vol.  I.  p.  is--. 


Wray. 

Sakai  Women  in  Malay   "Sarongs,"  showing  Necklaces,  Armlets,   and  Bracelets. 

Ulu  Hertang,  Perak. 


I'oi.  i:p.  i53. 


chap,  ii  SAKAJ  ('/■  PBRAK 

also  occasionally    worn    by    the    Sakai.       The    women 

(very  rarely)  wear  anklets  as  well  ;r,  bracelets  and 
armlets.1  Moreover,  whenever  they  are  able  to  do  bo, 
the   Perak  Sakai  substitute  metal  rings,  spirals,  and 

beads  obtained  lrom  the  Malays  for  the  Strings  Of 
natural  objects  just  described.  Their  favourite  piece 
of  jeweller\r  is  undoubtedly  the  brass  bracelet  or 
finger-ring,  both  of  which  are  in  the  form  of  spirals, 
which  they  fit  on  to  their  arm  or  finger.1 

Vaughan-Stevens'  states  that  necklaces  ("dokoh") 
among  the  Sakai  were  worn  by  persons  of  both  sexes 
and  of  all  ages,  whereas  among  the  Jakun  or  Benua 
("  Benar-  Benar  ")  they  were  only  occasionally  worn. 
Attached  to  them  were  amulets  ("tangkal")  made 
from  the  "bunglei,"  the  fresh  roots  of  which  were  cut 
"diagonally"  into  small  slices.  When  the  necklace  is 
ready  its  maker  lays  it  upon  his  palm,  and  facing 
eastwards,  touches  it  with  his  lips,  and  repeats  the 
following  invocation  addressed  to  the  Evil  Spirit 
(Hantu) : — 

Necklace  Charm. 

OM  !  Die,  O  Mati-anak,  buried  under  the  earth  heaped  up  for  the  Roadway. 

What  is  the  origin  of  thy  existence  ? 

Demon  of  the  blood  of  a  person  dead  in  childbirth, 

That  is  the  origin  of  thy  existence. 

Mati-anak  of  the  River-banks,  return  to  the  River-banks  ; 

Mati-anak  of  the  "  outcrop,"  return  to  the  outcrop  ; 

Pluck  out  with  spells  and  neutralise  again  and  again  the  demon  Mati-anak. 

Descend,  O  poison  of  the  Mati-anak  ; 

Rise,  O  Neutraliser  of  mine. 

As  soon  as  the  words  have  been  spoken,  the 
speaker  spits  twice  upon  the  necklace  and  the  cere- 
mony is  ended.     The  plants  of  which  the  necklace  is 

1  De  Morgan,  vii.  413.  black    and     white    seeds     with     glass 

2  De  Morgan,  viii.  150  and  vii.  413.  beads.  3  De  Morgan,  vii.  413. 
Cp.  also  Hale,  p.    293.     Their  great           4  V.-St.  ii.  144.     The  original  has 
ambition  seems  to   be  to   replace   the  been  corrected. 


154  DRESS  part  ii 

made  must,  like  officinal  plants,  be  pulled  up,  and  not 
cut  or  dug  up.1 

Selangor  Sakai. — The  foregoing  remarks  as  to  the 
dress  of  the  Perak  Sakai  apply  equally  to  the  Sakai 
of  Selangor,  amongst  whom,  however,  copper,  brass, 
and  even  iron  arm -rings  (spiral  or  otherwise)  and 
bracelets  are  perhaps  rather  more  commonly  worn,  as 
most  of  these  Selangor  tribes  live  somewhere  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Malay  civilisation. 

The  same  is  true  of  finger-rings,  which  are  still 
occasionally  manufactured  from  various  products  of 
the  jungle  (bone,  horn,  tortoiseshell,  the  crest  of  the 
Rhinoplax,  etc.),  though  metal  rings  are  much  pre- 
ferred, and  are  usually  obtainable. 


The  Head-dress. 

Perak  Sakai. — The  method  of  wearing  the  hair  is 
for  the  men  (whose  hair  is  long  and  wavy)  to  wear  it 
just  down  to  the  shoulders  in  a  wild  and  unkempt 
condition  ;  and  the  women  are  also  said,  among  the 
wilder  tribes,  to  wear  it  in  a  mop,  which  "  stands 
out  all  round  from  the  head."  When,  however,  they 
have  intercourse  with  the  Malays  they  tie  it  back  in  a 
knot  like  the  latter.2 

According  to  Bartels,  Vaughan  -  Stevens  heard 
(among  the  Sakai)  that  iron  may  not  be  used  for 
cutting  either  the  hair  or  finger-nails,  this  being  the 
reason  why  the  wilder  tribes  of  them  (Orang   Liar) 


1  Vaughan  -  Stevens,    ii.    144,    145.  sion  of  "batu  ampat"  ("four  boulders") 

Vaughan  -  Stevens'    account     contains  with    "batu    am  par "    ("outcrop     of 

several  errors  (due  to  his  ignorance  of  rock  "),  and  his  building  up  of  a  pretty 

Malay),  which  have  here  been  corrected.  little  theory  on  the  mistaken  version. 
The  worst  of  these  is  perhaps  his  confu-  2  Hale,  p.  293. 


<  map.  ii  SAKA1  OF  PERAK 

would  never  have  their  h.iir  rut.1  Both  men  and 
women  left  untouched  the  hair  OJ  tlie  body." 

We  are  further  told  that  the  Sakai  ( lilanda-,),  for 
thoroughly  washing   the  head  and    hair,   employed    the 

scrapings  of  the  inner  part  of  the  hark  of  a  particular 
creeper  (M  kletterrebe  "),  of  which  the  young  stems  and 
shoots   were  armed   with    an    abundant  quantity   ol 

sharp  thorns,  like  those  of  the  rose.  1  he  leaf  was 
like  that  of  an  acacia,  dark  green  and  smooth,  and 
of  great  circumference.  A  handful  of  freshly  scraped 
bark  was  applied  to  the  head,  together  with  water, 
somewhat  like  a  sponge,  when  it  produced  a  thick 
lather.3 

This  creeper  may  well  be  the  "b'luru,"  a  climber 
used  by  the  Malays  as  a  substitute  for  soap. 

By  way  of  head-dress  the  men,  however,  some- 
times wore  a  mere  cord,  furnished  with  two  small 
knots  or  rosettes,  whereas  the  women  preferred 
merely  to  wear  in  their  hair  the  flowers  of  the 
field.4 

Elsewhere,  speaking  of  some  (fifteen)  Sakai  women 
whom  he  saw  at  Kampong  Langkor  (on  S.  Kerbu), 
De  la  Croix  remarks  that  one  of  them  who  had 
charming  features,  and  was  indeed  actually  pretty, 
wore  in  each  ear  a  small  white  flower  which  she  had 
picked  at  the  side  of  the  path  ;  another  wore  a  simple 
tuft  of  grass  in  her  hair,  and  (passed  through  her  ears) 
some  kind  of  plant  which  hung  down  as  far  as  her 
back.  An  old  woman,  again,  wore  in  her  hair  (or 
''chignon")  nothing  but  a  tall  plant,  which  oscillated 
with  every  movement  of  her  body.5 

The  women  also  occasionally  wear  the  combs  of 

1  Z.f.  E.  xxix.  178.  4  De  la  Croix,  p.  330. 

-  lb.  p.  179.  S  lb.  5  lb.  p.  336. 


156  DRESS  FART  II 

the  Negrito  women.1  According  to  De  Morgan, 
these  combs  are  made  of  decorated  bamboo,  or  else 
of  small  wooden  teeth  bound  together  by  means  of  an 
exceedingly  tight  string.  These  latter  are  used  by 
the  Sakai  of  G.  Bujang  Malaka  and  of  S.  Kampar  - 
(both  of  which  places  are  in  Perak). 

In  addition  to  these  combs  the  Sakai  women, 
when  they  wear  their  hair  long,  adorn  their  heads 
with  fillets  and  bouquets,  which  they  keep  in  place 
by  means  of  a  comb  or  a  long  dagger-shaped  bamboo 
pin,  covered  with  (incised)  patterns.3 

The  fillets  and  bouquets  are  generally  gathered  in 
the  forest  and  worn  fresh,  though  the  Sakai  not 
unfrequently  also  wear  dried  plants  cleverly  plaited.4 

According  to  Hale,  the  Sakai  women  also  wear 
porcupines'  quills,  etc.,  through  the  lobe  of  the  ear,  rolls 
of  cloth  and  other  materials  being  also  worn,  not  for 
the  purpose  of  ornament,  but  in  order  to  enlarge  the 
orifice.5  Short  bamboo  tubes  with  flowers  in  them  are 
then  inserted.6 

For  the  quills,  earrings  were  not  unfrequently 
substituted  —  probably  owing  to  their  greater  con- 
venience. According  to  De  Morgan,  the  women  also 
wore  earrings  consisting  of  copper  rings,  a  small 
string  of  beads,  or  a  mere  flower,  whose  stalk  is 
inserted  into  the  perforation  of  the  lobe.7 

Nose-sticks  or  Nose-quills. 

Perak  Sakai. — But  one  of  the  most  distinctive  orna- 
ments is  the  nose-quill,  which  appears  to  be  originally 

1  Hale,  p. 295  (and  Plate  xiii.  id.).  *  De  Morgan,  vii.  413,  414. 

2  De  Morgan,  vii.  413,  414.  5  Hale,  p.  293  :  cp.  vol.  ii.  39. 

3  This  pin  is  also  used   (Hale,    p.  6  E.g.  among  the  Semang-Sakai  of 
295)  for  disentangling  the  hair.       For  U.  Jelei,  Pahang. 

patterns,  v.  Fasc.  Mai.  35,  36.  7  De  Morgan,  vii.  413,  414. 


/ 


2      o 


X 


Cerruti. 


Sakai  Family,  showing  Nose-quills,   Ne<  ki.ac  es,  Armlets,   and 

Leaf-Ornaments. 

Ulu  Bikum,  near  Bidor,  South  I'erak 


Vol.  I.  p.  157. 


chaf.  ii  SAKAJ  OF  PERAK  157 


a  Sakai  ornament,  and  is  worn  by  both  Some 

tribes  le.g*  those  <>l  S.  Kinta)  wore  porcupines1  quills 
passed  through  a  perforation  made  for  the  purpose  in 
the  septum  of  th<:  nose.1  The  men  wore  them  with 
the  ends  passed  between  the  hair  and  the  top  ol  the 
ear.  The  women  passed  them  through  the  lobe 
itself.2  A  long  bone  of  a  fish,  bird,  or  monkey  '  (and 
among  the  Sakai  ol"  Pahang  a  nose-ring  l)  is  sometime 
substituted  for  the  quill. 

Occasionally  for  the  porcupine's  quill  a  piece  of 
wood,  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch  (6  mm.)  in  diameter 
and  about  six  inches  (15  cm.)  long,  was  substituted. 

A  few  who  affected  to  be  dandies  used  to  orna- 
ment their  nose-sticks." 

An  occasional  substitute  for  the  quill  is  a  rolled-up 
piece  of  banana-leaf.7 

Selangor  Sakai. — The  nose-quill  is  also  occasionally 
worn  by  the  Selangor  Sakai  {e.g.  in  the  district  of 
Ulu  Langat).8 

III. — Jakun. 

Blandas  of  Selang-or. — The  Blandas  of  the  Kuala 
Langat  district  have  now  largely  adopted  the  Malay 
dress,  though  when  at  work  in  the  jungle  they  still 
frequently  revert  to  the  bark  loin-cloth,  which  forms  a 
more  convenient  working  dress.  The  women  more 
usually  wear  a   sort   of  short   skirt  or    kilt  of  bark- 

1  According    to    Colonel    Low,    the  of  porcupines  (J.  I.  A.  vol.  iv.  p.  429). 

Malays    divided    the    Sakai    of   Perak  2  De  Morgan,  vii.  414. 

into  three  classes — the  "Tame"  Sakai,  3  Hale,  p.  293. 

the  "  Hill"  Sakai  of  Ulu  Birtang  (sic,  4  As  in  a  photograph  by  R.  Martin. 

qtucre   "Bertang"),  and    the   Alas    of  5  15  cm.  by  6.2  mm.   Cp.y.  K.  A.  S., 

Ulu    Kantu    (sic,     qucere    "Kinta").  S.  B.,  No.  4,  p.  30. 

This  last  tribe  differed  from  the  other  G  lb.       This    applies    also     to     the 

two  in  having  adopted  the  custom  of  Semang-Sakai  of  Ulu  Jelei,  Pahang. 

piercing  the  cartilage  of  the  nose  and  7  Swettenham,  p.  228. 

ears,   and   inserting  therein   the  quills  8  J.  A.  G.  Campbell,  p.  243. 


158  DRESS  part  11 

cloth,  the  ends  of  which,  though  usually  unsewn,  are 
sometimes  roughly  stitched  together  with  jungle  fibres. 
The  "  feel "  of  the  bark-cloth  made  by  these  people 
is  not  unlike  a  sort  of  rough  leather. 

The  above  remarks  are  equally  true  of  the  Besisi 
tribes  of  Selangor,  who  were  pretty  generally  in  the 
habit  of  wearing  Malay  dress. 

Besisi. — The  everyday  dress  of  the  Besisi  differed 
very  little  from  that  of  the  Malays,  the  men  wearing 
for  the  most  part  a  loose  cotton  jacket  and  trousers, 
and  the  women  a  jacket  and  a  Malay  sarong.  In  the 
jungle,  however,  the  more  convenient  "  chawat  "  '  still 
lingered  on,  and  shy  as  the  Besisi  might  be  of 
wearing  it  before  strangers,  they  had  no  such  scruples 
when  by  themselves.     Red  "sarongs"  were  preferred. 

Bracelets  and  armlets,  rings,  necklaces,  etc.,  were, 
on  the  other  hand,  worn  most  profusely,  a  good  scrap 
necklace,  with  plenty  of  coins  on  it,  being  highly 
valued,  as  the  wearing  of  coins  was  believed  to  be 
especially  good  for  the  eyes. 

The  rings  worn  by  the  Besisi  were  made  of 
various  natural  products  of  the  jungle,  bone,  horn, 
tortoiseshell,  etc.  ;  from  chips  of  coconut-shell ;  from 
black  coral  ("akar  bahar") ;  from  "batu  akik,"  a  species 
of  stone  ;  from  various  kinds  of  shell ;  and  from  the 
red  crest  of  the  solid-crested  Hornbill  or  Rhinoplax. 
This  latter  was  valued  by  the  Besisi,  as  by  the  Malays, 
on  account  of  the  belief  that  it  would  turn  green 
whenever  poison  approached  the  wearer.  Finely 
woven  matwork  pouches  ("  bujam  ")  were  also  com- 
monly carried  for  holding  betel-leaf,  etc. 

Nose-boring  and  tattooing  of  all  kinds  (or  rather 
scarification),   if  ever    practised,  had,  however,   long 

1   Cp.  vol.  ii.  p.  144,  n.  I. 


McGregor. 

Sakai  Group,   Ulu  Lui,   Ulu  Langat,   showing  Women  and  Girls  in  Malay  Dress. 


Vol.  I.  p.  158. 


.map.  ii  SAVAGE    MALA  )'.l>  Ob  SI  LANGO)  i  S'> 


disappeared,  and  though  face  -  painting  wz  (till 
occasionally  to  be  seen,  it  was  only  on  special  occasions 
(such  as  the  tribal  [feasts)  that  the  ancient  methods  oi 
persona]  adornment  were  still  in  evidence. 

Mantra.--- The    Mantra,    with    the  ption   ol 

their  young  children,   never  go  absolutely   nude,   the 

men  always  wearing  at  least  some  "covering  round  the 
waist,"  and'the  women  always  wearing  the  "sarong"  of 
the  Malays,  "  which  covers  the  entire  body  from  the 
knee  to  above  the  breast."  The  "holiday  garb  "of 
the  men  is  the  ordinary  wear  of  the  local  Malays 
(a  loose  jacket,  a  "sarong,"  or  perhaps  short  trousers, 
and  a  coloured  handkerchief  wrapped  round  the 
head).1 

Many  of  the  Mantra  around  Gunong  Berembun 
still  wear  the  bark  of  the  Artocarpus  ("  t'rap  "),  the 
men  using  the  "  chawat,"  and  the  women  a  piece  of 
rude  cloth,  formed  by  simply  beating  the  bark,  which 
they  wrap  round  their  persons,  and  which,  like  the 
"  sarong  "  of  the  Johor  females,  reaches  only  from  the 
waist  to  the  knees.  They  have  no  description  of 
shoe,  sandal,  or  slipper,  and  no  articles  of  the  toilet.2 

The  women  "  take  considerable  care  of  their 
hair,  which  they  gather  up  on  the  top  of  their  heads, 
and  plait  in  the  shape  of  a  crown,"  fastening  it  with 
pins,  and  on  special  occasions  inserting  round  it 
flowers  and  leaves.3 

The  Mantra  females  have  wider  ear-perlorations 
(than  the  Benua  of  Johor).  They  are  enlarged  to  the 
diameter  of  about  half  an  inch  by  inserting  a  wooden 
pin  or  roll  of  Licuala-  ("  palas  ")  leaf,  which  is  gradually 
increased  till  the  desired  width  is  acquired.  Pendants 
are  not  worn,  but  many  have  ear-studs  ("  subang  "), 

1  Logan  in/".  /.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  252,  253.  2  lb,  3  lb. 


160  DRESS  part  ii 

about  the  size  of  a  Company's  rupee,  made  by  Malays, 
and  similar  to  those  worn  by  Javanese  females. 
Silver  rings  are  also  worn.  They  bind  the  hair  in 
the  same  way  as  the  Johor  Benua.1 

The  "  little  girls "  have  their  ears  pierced  by 
their  parents  for  the  reception  of  earrings ;  in  the 
absence  of  earrings,  these  holes  are  filled  with  small 
rolled-up  strips  of  banana-leaf  or  a  large  stud  of 
wood." 

They  also  wear  large  Malay  waist-buckles  (of  the 
kind  called  "pinding")  and  Malay  bracelets.3 

The  children  wear  necklaces  consisting  of  strings 
of  monkeys'  bones,  teeth  of  bears  or  tigers,  coins,  and 
shells ;  these  necklaces,  however,  are  not  worn  for 
mere  ornament,  but  as  a  talisman  against  disease.4 

The  only  other  point  that  calls  for  remark  with 
regard  to  the  dress  of  the  Mantra,  lies  in  the  close 
resemblance  between  the  form  of  girdle  worn  by  the 
Sakai  women  in  the  neighbourhood  of  G.  Bujang 
Malaka  (which  consisted  of  a  row  of  small  grass- 
bundles  fastened  to  a  cord  which  went  round  the 
waist),  and  that  observed  in  1869,  by  Marche,  among 
the  Mantra  women  north  of  Malacca.5 

Benua  -  Jakun  of  Johor.  —  According  to  Logan, 
the  original  dress  of  the  males,  to  which  a  few 
individuals  whom  he  met  were  still  restricted,  was  the 
"  chawat " — a  narrow  strip  of  cloth  passing  between 
the  legs  and  fastened  round  the  waist.  With  these 
exceptions  all  were  provided  with  the  Malay  short 
trousers  ("  seluar "),  jacket  ("  baju  "),  plaid  skirt,  or 
wrapper  ("  sarong  "),  and  headkerchief  ("  saputangan  "), 
or  some  of  them,  but  often  in  so  ragged  a  condition  as 

1   Logan  in/.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  252,  253.  2  Borie  (tr.  Bourien),  pp.  75,  76. 

3  lb.  4  lb.  5  De  la  Croix,  p.  330. 


i  map.  ii  \A\  AGl    M*  \LA\      I '/   fOHOR 

to  show  that  the)  carried  their  wardrobes  on  their 
persons,  and  \\ci<  seldom  able  to  renew  them.  With 
the  exception  of  one  house,  where  the  mistress  lay  in  a 

corner  and  appeared  to  be,  like  her  husband,  tOtall) 
destitute  o!  clothes,  Logan  lound  the  women  every- 
where   wearing   a   short    "sarong,"    Fastened    at    the 

waist  or  a  little  below  it,  and  barely  reaching  to  the 
knees  it  was,  in  fact,  only  the  hall  of  an  ordinary 
Malay  "sarong."  This  was  the  only  garment  that 
they  possessed,  hut  in  a  few  families,  such  as  that  oi 
the  Hcntara  o\  Boko,  some  of  the  Females  wore  the 
Malay  jacket  ("baju"),  The  hair  was  bound  in  a  knot 
behind.  From  the  great  desire  universally  expressed 
forprettx  "  sarongs,"  jackets  ("  bajus  "),  handkerchiefs, 
and  ornaments,  we  must  do  the  Benua  ladies  the  justice 
to  believe  that  they  would  willingly  deck  themselves  in 
the  full  Malayan  costume  if  they  had  the  means.1 
The  only  ornaments  that  they  possess  are  plain 
brass  rings  and  bracelets.  Their  ears  were  pierced, 
hut  the  orifice,  which  is  of  the  diameter  of  a  quill,  was 
more  often  occupied  by  the  native  cigarette  or  "roko'," 
or  a  piece  of  cloth,  than  an  earring. - 

The  hair  was  black  and  in  general  smooth  and 
lank,  but  in  some  it  was  frizzled,  and  in  all  somewhat 
more  dry  and  tangled  than  in  the  Malay,  arising  from 
the    little    oil    that    they   use.       It    is   worn    long    or 

1    "  Both  men  and  women  go  nearly  to   appear   more    decently   clad.      The 

naked  whilst   near  their   own  haunts  ;  women  particularly  lake  great  pleasure 

they  wear  nothing  but  a  strip  of  the  in  silver  bracelets,  rings,  and  other  orna- 

fibrous  bark  of  the  'terap'  tree,  beaten  ments.   I  do  not  recollect  that  I  have  seen 

into  a  sort  of  cloth  of  a  reddish-brown  any  instance  of  the  Benua  wearing  the 

colour,  called  a  'sabaring,'  round  their  skins  of  wild  beasts,  as  has  been  alleged, 

loins  ;     part    of   this    comes    down    in  They  carry  about  with  them  little  mat 

front,  is  drawn  between   the  legs,  and  pouches,   containing  generally  a  small 

fastened  behind.      The  men  sometimes  portion  of  tobacco,  a  flint  and  steel,  a 

encircle   their  heads   with    a   string  of  knife,  and  a  rude  bamboo  call  or  whistle'' 

I.icuala-  ('  palas ')  leaves.      On  visits  to  (Newbold,  ii.  398):  7:  p.   137,  ante 
Malay  villages  they  generally  contrive  -  J.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  252,  253. 

VOL.    I  M 


1 62  DRESS  part  n 

cropped  short,  as  with  the  Malays,  according  to  the 
taste  of  the  individual.  Some  old  women  had  long 
discontinued  the  use  of  oil,  and  their  dry,  rusty, 
unkempt  locks,  aiding  the  effect  of  their  piercing, 
sinister  eyes,  wrhich  almost  seemed  to  be  touched  by 
insanity,  frightened  some  of  Logan's  Malays  not  a 
little  ;  and  so  persuaded  were  they  that  the  old  ladies 
had  the  "  evil  eye,"  that  they  felt  greatly  relieved  when 
he  left  the  house.1 

The  clothes  of  the  Jakun  (when  they  used 
any)  were  ordinarily  the  same  as  those  used  by 
the  Malays,  but  poor,  miserable,  and,  above  all,  very 
dirty  ;  many  of  them  used  clothes  without  washing, 
from  the  day  they  received  or  bought  them  until  they 
became  rotten  by  use  and  dirt,  when  they  were 
obliged  to  throw  them  away  ;  if  vermin  were  found, 
which  was  often  the  case,  principally  upon  the  women 
who  were  more  dressed  up,  they  were  immediately 
eaten  with  delight,  as  in  Cochin-China.  If  many  of 
them  were  badly  dressed,  and  some  nearly  naked,  it 
was  more  from  a  lack  of  clothing  than  in  accordance 
with  their  own  wishes,  especially  amongst  the  women  ; 
for  all  desired  to  be  clothed,  and  the  most  agreeable 
presents  which  could  be  offered  to  them  were  the 
short  (Malayan)  trousers,  "  sarongs,"  jackets,  or  hand- 
kerchiefs to  put  round  their  heads,  according  to 
the  Malay  fashion.  Those  of  them  who  went 
habitually  nearly  naked  never  appeared  in  that 
condition  before  strangers,  except  when  they  actually 
had  no  clothes.  The  Jakun  of  Johor,  who  were 
superior  to  the  others  in  many  respects,  as  can  be 
inferred  from  what  has  been  said,  were  also  the  best 
dressed  ;  their  women  wore  much  the  same  as  Malay 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  251,  252. 


chap,  ii  SAVAGl   MAI   /  KS  I '/  JOHOR 


women,  both  .is  to  dress  and  the  order  ol  their  appear 
.mcc ;  they  had,  moreover,  a  great  number  of  rings  on 

their    fingers,    some    of    which    were    crystal,    some    ol 
copper,  and  some  ol  tin,  hut  also  a  good  many  of  silver; 
they  took   a   peculiar   pleasure    in    these  ornaments, 
well  as  in  silver  bracelets.1        The  men  had  at  least  the 
trousers,  a  small  jacket  or  "  baju,"  and  a  handkerchief 

tor  the*  head.      The  Jakun  of  the   Negri   Sembilan 

and  Rembau  had  the  same  dress  as  was  used  by  the 
Jakun  of  Johor,  and  the  women  the  same  ornaments, 
hut  they  were  not  so  well  clothed,  many  of  them 
going  nearly  naked,  at  least  near  their  houses  ;  and 
those  who  used  clothes  often  showed  an  embarrass- 
ment which  proved  that  they  were  not  accustomed 
to  their  use.  The  Jakun  of  Malacca  were  badly 
dressed,  many  of  the  women  had  only  a  "  sarong,"  and, 
if  they  were  married,  a  ring,  the  necessary  present  of 
the  husband  at  marriage.  The  greater  part  of  the 
men  had  nothing  but  a  strip  of  the  fibrous  bark  of  the 
44t'rap"  tree,  beaten  into  a  sort  of  cloth  of  a  reddish- 
brown  colour,  called  a  M  sabaring,"  round  their  loins  ; 
part  of  this  came  down  in  front,  was  drawn  between 
the  legs,  and  fastened  behind.2 

As  regards  the  hair,  some  of  them  left  the 
whole  to  grow  and  turned  it  round  the  head,  like 
the  Cochin-Chinese  ;  others,  as  for  instance  many  of 
those  of  Malacca,  cut  theirs  off  entirely;3  yet  others, 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  ii.  p.  258.  hair,    however,   is  allowed  to  grow  as 

2  lb.  long  as  possible.     The  Jakun  custom 

3  "Formerly  the  Jakun  did  not  cut  of  binding  the  fringe  of  hair  with  a 
the  hair,  but  let  it  grow  (from  child-  band  of  tree-bark,  to  keep  it  out  of 
hood  to  age)  down  to  their  neck  and  the  eyes,  is  imitated  by  the  Oran<* 
shoulders.  The  hair  of  the  boys  is  at  Laut "  (Z.  f.  E.  xxix.  177).  "The 
the  present  day  cut  to  a  fringe  over  Jakun  girls  stick  flowers  in  their  hair, 
the  forehead,  or  else  it  is  all  cut  off  instead  of  the  brightly  coloured  shells 
with  the  exception  of  a  scalp-lock,  as  used  by  the  Orang  Laut "  {ib.  p. 
among    Malay    children.       The    girls'  178). 


164  DRESS  lAiti  11 

chiefly  those  of  the  Negri  Sembilan  and  Rembau  and 
Johor,  shaved  the  head,  leaving  unshaven  only,  on 
the  crown,  a  space  about  three  inches  in  diameter, 
where  they  never  cut  it,  just  in  the  same  way  as  the 
Chinese  ;  and  to  prevent  this  head  of  hair  from  being 
hooked  by  the  branches  of  trees  in  the  jungle,  they 
tied  it  up  in  the  form  of  a  top- knot.  They  had 
scarcely  any  beard,  and  many  of  them  had  none  at 
all.  The  women  left  their  hair  to  grow,  and  then  tied 
it  up  in  the  same  way  as  the  Malay  women  ;  but  as 
they  had  but  little  occasion  to  care  much  for  appearance, 
it  will  be  easily  imagined  that  they  were  not  very 
particular  in  this  respect.  Some  of  them  are  said  to 
treat  their  hair  with  lime.1 

It  does  not  yet  seem  to  have  been  recorded 
whether  the  Jakun  are  in  the  habit  of  eradicat- 
ing their  beard,  but  there  is,  I  believe,  very  little 
doubt  upon  the  point.  Vaughan  -  Stevens  does 
not  actually  state  that  the  Jakun  men  pull  out  the 
hair  of  the  face,  though  he  clearly  implies  it  in 
saying  that  the  beard  and  whiskers  (of  the  Jakun) 
are  scarcely  ever  present,  even  if  they  are  not  in- 
tentionally pulled  out.2 

Orang  Laut  or  Sea-Jakun. 

Necklaces  and  Arm  lets. 

Name  of  Tribe  unspecified. — The  Orang  Laut  have 
now  all  taken  to  the  Malay  dress.  The  desire  to 
adorn  the  person  exists  among  their  women  despite 


1   Logan  in  J.  I .  .  I.  vol.  ii.   p.  248.  people,  to  which  I  called  their  attention 

Cp.,  however,    the    statement    of   V.-  a  long  time  before,  ever  treated  their 

Stevens— -"I  could  not  learn  whether  the  hair  with    lime,   as  some  of  the  New 

Takun,    although    they    perceived    the  Guinea  men  do "  {Z.f.  E.  x.\ix.   178). 
reddish  colour  of  the  hair  of  the  young  -  Z.f.  E.  xxix.   179. 


«  i,M'.  ii  MALA  YA  \   S£   /  G  YPSI1 

their  usuall)  degraded  condition.      I  he  girls  will  take 

any  object  that  glitters  tO  wear  upon  their  arm-,, 
neck,  or  breast.  Nowadays  these  objects  are  nearl\ 
always    the     products    of    civilisation    obtained     from 

Malays    and    Chinese,    but    formerly    coloured    bi 

valves,  seed-grains,  etc.,  were  employed.  Vaughan- 
Stevens  saw  a  prettily  composed  necklace,  with  which 

the  woman   who  possessed   it   positively  refused   to 

part.  It  was  made  up  of  variously  coloured  plant- 
seeds  growing  on  the  coast,  small  variegated 
marine  bivalves  gathered  from  the  sands,  and  short 
segments  of  crabs'  legs  (like  one  of  our  own  coral 
necklaces).1 

The  Hair. 

The  "  turned  in "  (cingekangte)  part  of  the  claw 
of  a  crawfish  is  often  used  by  the  Orang  Laut  as 
a  head-scratcher,  and  for  this  purpose  is  stuck  in  the 
hair  or  kept  in  the  girdle.  If  the  claw  is  short,  a 
little  piece  of  stick  is  stuck  in  it,  in  order  to  lengthen 
it  sufficiently.  Half  of  the  lower  jaw  of  fishes  which 
have  "  needle-teeth  "  is  frequently,  even  to  the  present 
day,  used  in  place  of  a  comb." 

As  might  be  expected  from  people  who  are  so  much 
on  the  sea,  the  Orang  Laut  girls  use  brightly 
coloured  shells  for  hair  ornaments,  instead  of  the 
Mowers  which  are  used  by  the  Jakun.3 

Up  to  manhood  the  boys  do  the  same,  but  no 
later,  unless  there  is  some  special  reason  (besides 
mere  decoration  of  the  person)  for  their  doing  so.4 

At  the  present  day  the  Orang  Laut  bind  the  hair 
back  to  keep  it  out  of  their  eyes  either  with  a  band 

1   Z.f.E.  xxviii.   170.  2  lb.  xxix.  178.  3  lb.  4  lb. 


1 66  DRESS 


PART   II 


of  cotton  stuff,  or  else,  in  imitation  of  the  Jakun,  with 
a  similar  band  of  tree-bark.  They  do  not,  however, 
like  to  wear  any  sort  of  covering  for  the  (top  of  the) 
head,  even  in  the  sun.1 

Among  the  Orang  Laut  both  sexes  use  fat  or  oil 
for  their  body  and  hair,  because,  as  they  say,  the  sea- 
water  irritates  the  unprotected  skin,  if  it  is  later 
exposed  to  the  sun.  At  the  present  time  coconut- 
oil  and  other  oils  are  easy  to  get,  but  formerly  fish-fat 
was  used.2 

In  the  following  accounts  the  name  of  the  tribe  is 
specified  : — 

0.  Laut,  Sletar.  —  The  middle  of  both  men  and 
women  was  generally  covered  by  a  coarse  wrapper  made 
from  the  bark  of  the  Artocarpus,  and  extending 
from  the  navel  to  the  knee.  The  women  affected  a 
slight  degree  of  modesty  at  first  approach,  but  this  soon 
disappeared.  Instead  of  the  wrapper  of  "  t'rap,"  they 
frequently  put  on  instead  an  old  patched-up  Malay 
"  sarong."  The  locks  of  the  men  were  bound  up 
with  a  tie  of  cloth,  and  sometimes  by  the  Malay 
headkerchief  or  "  saputangan  "  ;  those  of  the  women 
fell  in  wild  luxuriance  over  their  face  and  shoulders. 
Their  children  went  entirely  naked  until  the  age  of 
puberty.3 

0.  Laut,  Sabimba. — Their  close  relations  with  the 
Malays  have  given  them  a  taste  for  dress,  as  they 
were  wearing  cloth  instead  of  the  bark  of  trees.  The 
women  were  dressed  in  "  sarongs,"  after  the  manner 
of  Malay  women,  but  the  men  wore  only  a  strip 
of  cloth  of  scanty  dimensions  round  the  middle  and 
passing  between  the  thighs.4 

1  Z.f.  E.  xxix.  177.  3  /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  345*. 

2  lb.  p.  185.  4  lb.  p.  350*. 


'  mai.  ii  mm  .1  \  .1  \    ,/■  A  C  VPS/1  167 

0.  Laut,  Muka  Knnlnff.     The  males  (ol  the  Ora 
Muk;i  Kuning)  mostly  wear  the  "chawat  "  ol  Arte 
carpus  ("t'rap")  bark,  and  the  females  short  "sarong 

of  cloth.1 

0.  Laut,  Akik.  Their  dress  resembled  that  <>i  the 
Malay,  but  was  coarser  and  poorer,  and  when  they  were 
engaged  in  ordinary  pursuits  seldom  extended  beyond 
a  waist-cloth  or  "  chawat." 


1  /.  /.    /.  vol.  i.  p.  337*.  '  Newbold,  ii.   113,  |i| 


CHAPTER    III. 

Habitations. 

The  two  first  and  most  obvious  forms  of  shelter  would, 
to  a  wild  jungle-dwelling  race,  naturally  be  the  large 
umbrella-like  palm-leaves  growing  in  the  forest,  and 
natural  caves  or  holes  in  the  ground.  In  the  case  of 
the  latter,  however,  it  appears  that  certain  preferences 
exist,  for  "the  caves  which  have  been  inhabited  (in 
Perak)  are  those  which  are  formed  by  the  overhanging 
of  the  cliffs  [i.e.  '  rock-shelters  '),  and  not  those  caverns 
that  have  been  hollowed  out  in  the  rock.  The  same 
class  of  cave  was  inhabited  by  many  of  the  cave- 
dwellers  of  Europe,  as  well  as  by  the  early  New 
Zealanders."  !  Mr.  Wray  further  informs  me  that 
he  could  find  no  trace  of  human  remains  in  the  caves 
themselves,  but  that  in  some  rock-shelters  near  the 
"dark  caves"  there  were  some  thick  deposits.  For 
an  exception  to  this  rule,  however,  it  ought  to  be 
pointed  out  that  the  well-known  "limestone  caves" 
at  Batu  (six  miles  from  Kuala  Lumpor  in  Selangor) 
were  certainly  at  times  inhabited  by  some  of  these 
jungle -folk,  as  was  stated  by  W.  T.  Hornaday 
in  his  account  of  his  discovery  of  the  caves,  in  the 
company  of  the  late  Captain  Syers,  and  confirmed  by 

1  L.  Wray,  Cave-dwellers^  p.  37. 

168 


i  hap.  ill  <■/  w  RAl    REMAR 

later  visitors.     The  reason  for  this  L18C  <>!  ill' 
moreover,  is   in   this   instance   known,  viz. :  the  fai  I 
that  they  afforded  protection  against  wild  elephant 

At  the  same  time  it  LS  only  lair  to  add  that  lln  .  i  I  tin- 
only  exception  I  know  of. 

Although,  however,  the  practice  of  utilising  such 
natural  refuges  as  are  afforded  by  the  geographical 

features  (such  as  trees  and  rock-shelters)  of  the  country 
they  live   in   appears  to  be  common   to  all  the  wilder 

members  of  the  three*  races  alike,  and  although  it  may 
be  possible  to  trace  certain  similarities  in  the  methods 
by  which  their  more  settled  fellow-tribesmen  succeeded 
in  evolving  a  hut-type  which,  at  first  of  the  pile-hut 
type  common  in  S.E.  Asia,  became  gradually  assimi- 
lated to  that  of  the  Peninsular  Malays,  it  is  neverthe- 
less quite  possible  in  certain  respects  to  differentiate 
the  various  types  of  hut,  and  even  to  specify  with 
almost  complete  certainty  to  which  of  the  three  races 
these  types  should  be  assigned. 

The  Semang  huts,  for  instance,  frequently  resemble 
(as  might  almost  be  expected)  the  huts  built  by  the 
Andamanese,  and  the  circular  (and  semicircular)  huts 
formed  by  planting  a  number  of  palm-leaves  upright 
in  the  ground,  with  their  tops  drooping  over  to  a 
common  centre,  appear  also  to  be  only  recorded  in 
districts  where  Negrito  influence  is  either  certain  or 
to  be  suspected.  The  long  leaf-shelter,  too,  that  I 
visited  in  Kedah  was  certainly  of  a  type  apparently 
confined  exclusively  to  the  Semang  or  Negrito.  It 
may  be  added,  moreover,  that  the  Semang  appear 
(speaking  broadly  and  generally)  to  be  on  the  whole 
more  given  to  the  use  of  tree-shelters  and  huts  on 
ground-level  than  the  average  Sakai  or  the  Jakun, 
and  that  both  of  the  latter  races  seem  especially  fond 


1 70  HA  BIT  A  T10NS  part  i  i 


oi  building  their  huts  upon  very  lofty  house-posts. 
Mr.  Wray  informs  me  that  he  has  never  seen  in 
Perak  a  "bee-hive"  hut,  or  even  a  tree-hut,  made 
either  by  the  Semang  or  by  the  Sakai,  although  at 
Kuala  Dipang  and  elsewhere  he  has  seen  very  tall 
tree-huts  built  by  the  Malays. 

The  most  interesting  question,  however,  connected 
with  this  subject  is  undoubtedly  that  concerned  with 
the  successive  steps  by  means  of  which  the  hut-type 
is  evolved. 

Among  the  Semang  its  evolution  is  perhaps  on  the 
whole  the  clearest,  the  various  stages  being,  as  they 
appear  to  me,  the  following  : — 

1.  Natural    shelters — rock -shelters,    caves,    tree 

buttresses,  branches,  etc. 

2.  Artificial  shelters  or  weather-screens — a  single 

large  palm-leaf,  either  planted  in  the  ground 
or  fixed  across  the  fork  of  a  tree. 

3.  A  number  of  such  palm-leaves,  planted  in  a 

straight  row,  or  in  a  semicircle  or  circle,  their 
tops  drooping  over  towards  a  common  centre, 
thus  forming  a  "round"  or  "bee-hive"  hut 
— if  in  the  fork  of  a  tree,  the  hut's  shape  is 
naturally  adapted  to  suit  its  branches.1 

1    For  one   of  the  earliest    ac-  neighbourhood   of  this   river,    through 

COUntS    Of    these     tree -dwellings  our  glasses,  our  notice  was  attracted  by 

.  .  c  ,  °  what    seemed    to    be    some    enormous 

(treated  from  a  somewhat  sensa-  birds,  nests  in  the  trees     The  size  of 

tional  Standpoint),  see  Travel  and  these   nests   was    prodigious,   yet   they 

Sport    in     Burmah^     Siam}    and  were  not  placed  at  a  very  great  height 

Malay  \sic\  by  Capt.  J  Bradley,  from  the  ground>  ™  "»  the  tallest  trees. 

/o_*\-rTr_j         i-i      i.u  The  number  of  them  was  seven,  but  we 
(1876).      Unfortunately  the  ac-  ,  A  A  f,  .-  '    .  .. , 

\       '     "  J  concluded  there  were  others  not  visible 

count  is  only  of  general  interest,      from  our  position.     We  were  puzzled 

as    no    means     are    afforded    of      to  think  what  bird  could  construct  nests 

even    approximately    identifying      of  this  size>  for  they  appeared  from  our 

the  locality  point  of  view  to  be  as  big  as  toIeraDl.v' 

^"  sized    huts,    and    much    the    shape    of 

"  While  searching  the  country  in  the       roughly  constructed  wigwams.      While 


<  II  \l\  III 


GENERAL  Hh  MARKS 


171 


.|.   The  "  long  "  or  "  communal "  shelter,  which  is 
nothing  more  than  .1  round  or"bee-hii 
hut  extended  to  form  an  ellipse  or  oval. 

5,  Small  granaries  or  store  Inns  on  high  po 

and    perhaps    also    huts   which    commence    to 

approach  for  the  first  time  the  Malayan  hul 

type,  but    arc  still    built    on    the    level    of  the 

ground.1 

6.  A  hut  similar  to  the  last,  but  with  floor  raised 

on  posts  (which  makes  it  still  more  conform- 
able with  the  common  Malayan  hut-type). 


we  wore  still  speculating,  the  difficulty 
was  solved.  A  large  ape  was  observed 
to  leave  one  of  the  nests  and  descend 
to  the  ground  ;  and  he  was  soon  fol- 
lowed by  eight  or  nine  others,  who  all 
walked  about  erect  like  men.  We 
watched  them  for  a  long  time,  and  saw 
them  picking  berries,  or  something  else 
of  a  similar  kind,  from  the  bushes. 
Their  actions  were  most  humandike. 
They  walked  about  exactly  like  men, 
and  even  appeared  to  be  talking  to  each 
other.  Several  of  them  climbed  the 
cocoa-palms  in  search  of  the  nuts  ;  but 
they  did  not  display  that  activity  in 
ascending  which  distinguishes  most  of 
the  ape  tribe.  Their  every  motion  was 
human  in  the  extreme"  (p.  292). 
Later,  he  discovers  that  the  supposed 
"  apes  "  are  men. 

[The  mention  of  "  cocoa-palms"  (!) 
is  a  strange 'circumstance  requiring  ex- 
planation, as  none  of  these  wild  tribes 
plant  coconuts,  at  least  until  they  are  a 
good  deal  more  advanced  in  civilisation 
than  these  tribes  otherwise  appear  to 
have  been.  It  may  of  course  have 
been  that  they  were  living  in  or  near 
an  abandoned  Malay  clearing,  or  that 
they  were  less  wild  than  was  supposed, 
or,  most  probably,  I  think,  that  the 
trees  were  not  really  coconut-palms. 
— W.  S.] 

In  a  later  passage  we  read  :  "They 
[the  tree-huts]  were  from  30  to  50  feet 
[9-15  m.]  from  the  ground,  built  in  the 
lower  branches  of  a  species  of  large, 


wide-spreading  tree,  in  general  appeal 
ance  very  much  like  the  oak.  Access 
to  them  was  gained  by  a  number  of 
notches  cut  in  the  tree-trunk,  .  .  . 
and  when  we  got  amongst  the  branches 
we  had  to  crawl  out  snake  -  fashion, 
to  get  at  the  huts,  which  were  the 
shape  of  a  bee -hive,  though  rather 
more  pointed  at  the  apex.  They  were 
constructed  entirely  of  small  branches 
and  twigs  tied  together  at  the  top,  and 
bent  round  to  form  the  hollow  space  in 
the  interior.  The  height  of  each  hut  was 
about  6  ft. [180  cm.],  the  internal  diameter 
about  the  same.  The  entrance  was  a 
hole  in  the  side,  so  small  that  we  could 
scarcely  force  our  way  in.  The  cordage 
with  which  the  huts  were  constructed 
was  made  of  some  tough  creeper,  and 
the  strands  were  so  loosely  twisted 
together  that  the  least  touch  parted 
them." — Bradley,  pp.  297,  298. 

Elsewhere  (J.  B.  pp.  319,  320)  Capt. 
Bradley  mentions  a  settlement  of  fifteen 
huts,  "one  or  two"  (he  says)  "in  a 
tree."  On  pp.  330,  331  he  mentions 
another  of  these  tree-villages.  "It" 
(the  village)  "  consisted  of  five  huts  built 
in  the  trees,  and  seven  hovels  erected 
on  the  ground."  "They  were"  (he 
continues)  "  built  of  branches  like  those 
described  in  a  former  chapter  ;  but 
were  overlaid  with  deer  -  skins." 
Another  settlement  (described  on  p. 
315)  had  four  tree  -  huts  only  in 
number. 

1   De  Morgan,  viii.  296. 


i72  HABITATIONS  PART  n 


The  last  type  of  dwelling — and  by  no  means  the 
least  interesting  one — to  find  a  place  in  these  pages 
is  that  of  the  old  "  Orang  Laut  "  of  Singapore  and 
Johor.  These  once  most  formidable  pirates  (who  at 
that  time  dwelt  exclusively  in  their  boats)  were  the 
only  inhabitants  of  the  island  of  Singapore  (which  has 
now  a  population  of  over  200,000)  on  the  memorable 
day  of  February  ( 1 8 19)  when  Sir  Stamford  Raffles 
landed  to  make  a  city  out  of  what  was  then  a  mere 
desolate  mangrove  swamp.  Contemporary  and  more 
recent  writers  give  us  a  picture  of  the  "  Orang  Laut," 
and  the  extraordinarily  restricted  quarters  in  which  they 
lived.  Huddled  up  in  a  small  boat,  measuring  scarcely 
twenty  feet  in  length,  they  found  all  the  domestic 
comfort  of  which  they  were  in  need.  At  one  end  was 
the  hearth,  in  the  centre  their  few  utensils,  and  at  the 
other  end,  beneath  a  matwork  awning,  not  exceeding 
six  feet  in  length,  was  the  sleeping  apartment  of  a 
family  that  often  counted  five  or  six,  together  with  a 
cat  and  a  dog.  Under  this  awning  they  found  shelter 
from  the  tropical  rains  and  heats  alike,  from  the  time 
of  their  birth  to  the  grave.1 


I. — Semang. 

The  Rock-shelter. 

Kedah  Semang.  —  The  Semang  are  almost  in- 
eradicably  nomadic,  have  no  fixed  habitations,  and  rove 
about  like  the  beasts  of  the  forest.2  The  wilder  ones 
seldom  stay  more  (they  informed  me)  than  three  days 


1   See  Crawfurd,  Descr.  Diet.,  s.v.  "Malay  Peninsula." 
2  J.  /.  ./.  vol.  iv.  pp.  425.  426. 


(    HAT.     Ill 


NEGRITOS   <>/    KEDAH 


in  one  place1  Rock-shelters  are  also  commonl)  used 
l>\  them. 

Pangan.     At  Ban  Tun,  in   the  province  ol   I' 
lung  on    the    north-western    shore    of    th<-    Inland 
Sea  (Singora),    I    visited   one  of  these   small   rock 

shelters  which  had  been  inhabited,  up  tO  the  night  oi 
our   arrival,   1))'   nine    Pangans,  who  had  only  deserted 

it  on  hearing  our  approach.     It  was  formed  by  a  large 

Overhanging  rock  under   the   brow  of  a  Very  steep  and 

lofty  hill.      Its  size  was  very  small,  measuring  only 

from  about  9  to  1  2  feet  (2.7  m.  to  3.6  m.)  in  length  by 
6  to  8  feet  (  1.8  m,  to  2.4  m.)  in  width,  and  from  about 
4  to  5  feet  (1.2  m.  to  1.5  m.)  in  height.  Its  position 
on  a  shoulder  of  the  hill  was  very  well  chosen,  as 
the  ground  fell  away  precipitously  in  front  of  it,  and 
the  only  way  to  reach  it  was  to  go  round  by  the  back 
of  the  overhanging  rock  itself.  The  mouth  of  the 
cave  was,  moreover,  further  concealed  and  protected 
by  a  thicket  of  thorny  bamboo,  which  grew  at  the 
more  precipitous  end.  Altogether  it  was  as  difficult 
a  spot  to  find  without  a  guide  as. any  which  could  have 
been  selected.  The  sole  article  of  furniture  was  one 
of  the  rough  bamboo  sleeping-stages,  or  "barbicans," 
which  are  to  be  seen  in  most  Semang  encampments," 
and  which  are  made  by  lashing  half  a  dozen  thick 
bamboo  poles  together.  This  particular  bed,  however, 
could  not  have  accommodated  more  than  one  or  two 


1  Among  the  E.  Semang  (Pangan) 
it  is  an  established  custom  to  break  up 
the  existing  encampment  on  the  fifth 
clay  at  the  latest.  This  custom  is  called 
"J°g>"  ar*d  is  attributed  to  the  com- 
mands of  Pie  ;  indeed,  the  days  are 
counted  on  the  fingers,  and  it  is  believed 
that  if  this  custom  be  seriously  in- 
fringed, a  severe  form  of  plague  will 
attack    the    guilty    parties.       The    W, 


Semang    are    less    particular  than    the 
Pangan  (Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.   103). 

2  See  a  valuable  note  on  this  subject 
by  Mr.  L.  Wray  [Cave-dwellers,  p. 
37). 

3  These  most  peculiar  platforms  or 
"bedsteads''  are  found  also  in  the 
Andamans,  and  (according  to  my  friend 
Mr.  Lorimer  Fison)  in  Fiji  !  I  should 
be  glad  to  know  of  other  examples. 


74  HABITATIONS  PART  II 


persons  at  most,  and  the  other  members  of  the  family 
had  evidently  been  sleeping  on  beds  of  heaped-up 
leaves,  which  were  still  quite  green  and  fresh  on  our 
arrival.  There  were  also  the  ashes  of  four  separate 
fires,  one  at  least  of  which  had  been  extinguished  by 
water  ;  and  there  were  fragments  of  the  ribs  of  a  small 
tortoise  on  which  they  had  been  feeding,  as  well  as  a 
half-smoked  (native)  cigarette,  an  indication  that  they 
had  probably  had  some  traffic,  either  direct  or  through 
the  medium  of  "tamer"  fellow-tribesmen,  with  the 
Malays  or  Siamese  of  the  locality. 

Tree-shelters. 

Perak  Semangf. — Another  obvious  kind  of  "  natural 
shelter  "  is  that  afforded  by  the  branches  of  trees,  the 
scanty  protection  thus  obtained  being  speedily  im- 
proved by  the  building  of  a  weather-screen,  out  of 
which  is  easily  and  naturally  developed  the  tree-built 
hut.  The  exact  purpose  served  by  those  arboreal 
dwellings  has  been  much  disputed,  but  the  most 
reasonable  explanation — and  I  think  undoubtedly  the 
correct  one — is  that  they  are  built  for  protection  from 
wild  beasts.  In  most  cases  the  proximity  of  wild 
beasts  is  certainly  their  raison  detre.  We  are  told,1  for 
instance,  in  so  many  words,  that  some  of  the  Semang 
11  in  the  thicker  parts  of  the  forest,  where  the  elephants, 
tigers,  and  other  zvild  animals  are  most  abundant,  make 
their  temporary  dwellings  upon  the  cliffs  and  branches 
of  large  trees."  2     The  simplest  form  of  the  tree-shelter 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  iv.  425,  426.  their  houses  on  the  level  of  the  ground. 

2  Another  possible  cause  (inunda-  When,  however,  safeguarding  against 
tions)  is  certainly  suggested  by  the  tigers  is  necessary,  they  build  between 
following  note  (for  which  see  Bastian,  the  branches  of  the  trees,  just  as  the 
Reisen  in  Birma.  Leipzig,  1886,  p.  Puleahs  build  their  nests  in  their 
432): — "The  inhabitants  of  the  hills  forests."  But  in  the  Malay  Penin- 
in  Pegu,  who  are  insured  [by  their  sula  this  first  reason  would  rarely  if  ever 
position]    against     inundations,     build  apply. 


,  hap.  m  NEGRITOS  <>/■  PBRAK  175 


consists  oi  . 1  screen  oi  leaves  fixed  across  the  branch 
of  the  tree  a  little  above  the  fork  to  serve  a  a  roof.    U 
ally,  however,  side  screens  are  added,  for  comfort  •  take. 
1   am   told   by  Mr.  Wray  thai   he  once  visited  a 
Semang  house  in   the   Piah  valley,  in   Upper  Perak. 
It  measured  about  50  feet  (15.2  m.x6m.)in  length 

by    20    feet    in  width,  and    Was    built    On    posts    oi    such 

a  height  that   the   floor  was  15  feet  (4.5  m.)  above 

the  ground.  There  were  three  ladders  on  one  side  oi 
the  house  to  give  access  to  it,  and  it  appeared  to  have 
been  inhabited  by  at  least  three  families.  Underneath 
it  Mr.  Wray  found  the  bones  of  the  wild  pig,  deer, 
and  "  seladang  "  (Bos gaums,  the  wild  bull  or  "  bison  "), 
as  well  as  the  horn  of  one  of  these  latter  animals. 

Pangan.  —  The  Pangan  tree -huts  observed  by 
Messrs.  Ridley  and  Kelsall  on  the  banks  of  the  Ulu 
Tahan  river  in  Pahang  (in  1 891)  were  "small  roofed 
platforms,  raised  about  15  or  20  feet  (4.5  m.  to 
6  m.)  from  the  ground,"1  and  were  reached  (as  Mr. 
Ridley  tells  me)  by  a  ladder  formed  of  sticks  lashed 
across  two  neighbouring  trees. 

Ground- screens  of  Leaves. 
Semang*  and  Pang-an. — Yet  another  kind  of  shelter 
used  by  the  Semang  is  the  palm-leaf  ground-screen,2 
which  is  intended  simply  as  a  protection  against  rain 
and  wind.  It  is  constructed  by  planting  three  or  four 
stout  sticks  or  poles  in  a  row  in  the  ground  at  an 
angle  of  about  6o°  to  750,  and  lashing  palm-leaves 
across  them  so  closely  that  the  rain  cannot  penetrate.3 

1  J.  R.  A.  S.,    S.  B.,    No.     25,     p.  will  frequently  content  himself  with  the 

45-  shelter  of  a  single  palm-leaf  planted  in 

-  It  goes  without  saying  that  these  the  ground, 
screens   vary  in  size  and   construction  3  Cp.  ~Loga.n{J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,No.  7, 

according   to   the   needs  of  the  party.  p.  85):  The  "temporary  lairs"  (of  the 

When  a  Semang  is  travelling  alone,  he  Semang)  are  "  only  protected  from  the 


17  HABITATIONS  part  n 

Shelters  of  this  type  are  also  largely  used  by  the 
Malays  for  temporary  purposes,  especially  in  the 
eastern  states  of  the  Peninsula. 

Pangran. — The  next  stage  would  appear  to  be  that  of 
the  round  or  bee-hive  hut.  In  the  interior  of  Kelantan 
(near  Kampong  Buntal  in  Ulu  Aring),  Mr.  Laidlaw 
and  I  visited  several  of  these  curious  habitations.  One 
that  we  photographed  was  a  hemispherical  leaf- 
shelter,  very  slenderly  constructed,  the  materials  em- 
ployed being  leaves  of  the  "bertam"  palm  {Engeissona) 
and  a  Rattan  or  Calamus  called  "  Rotan  Dudok."  The 
bases  of  the  leaf-stalks  were  firmly  planted  in  the  ground, 
the  upper  ends  of  the  leaves  bending  naturally  over  so  as 
to  protect  about  one-half  of  the  hut-floor  from  the  rain. 
The  leaves  planted  round  the  circumference  of  the 
semicircle  at  the  back  of  the  shelter  were  of  full  length, 
but  a  slight  fence  of  shorter  leaves,  about  2  feet  (60  cm.) 
high,  completed  the  circumference.  At  the  back  of 
the  hut  was  the  usual  big  abattis  or  chevaux-de-frise 
of  felled  trees,  which  is  very  generally  formed  by  these 
people  for  protection  against  wild  beasts. 

A  slightly  different  type  of  hut  was  seen  on  the 
banks  of  the  Tahan  river  by  Mr.  Ridley  in  1891.  The 
huts  themselves  consisted  of  a  bee-hive-shaped  structure 
of  palm-leaves  about  4  feet  (1.2  m.)  high,  the  bases  of 
the  leaves  planted  in  the  ground  and  their  upper  parts 
interwoven  together.  So  far  the  structure  was  similar 
to  those  already  described,  but  these  particular  huts 
"  were  completely  filled  with  palm-leaves,  in  the  midst 
of  which  could  be  seen  the  depression  caused  by  the 
occupant  when  he  curled  himself  up  in  them  "  either  for 

weather  by  a  few  branches  or  leaves  stuck  in  the  ground,  with  a  small  cross- 
hung  over  two  or  three  sticks."  And  piece,  and  a  few  leaves  or  branches  of 
cp.  z\so  J.  I.  A.  vol.  iv.  pp.  425,  426  :  trees  laid  over  to  secure  them  from  the 
"  Their  huts  .    .    .   consist  of  two  posts  weather." 


A'.  //.   Yapp(Skeat  Expedition). 

Pangan  Weather  Screen  01    Palm  Leaves  (Ulu  Kelantan). 


R.  //.   Yapp{Skeat  Expedition). 

Interior  of  Round  Leaf-Shelter  of  Pangan  (Ulu  Kelantan). 


Vol  I.  p.  176. 


D 


D       <§> 


□ 

The 
Chief 

(Pelima) 

□ 

fl> 

hfl 

43 

1 

c 

O 

l4H 

o 

H 

o 

>. 

D 

<L> 

ho 

— 

o 

<— 

o 

B 

0 

>> 

X. 
o 
id 
<u 

c 

0) 


rt 


en 
<u 
o 

"E. 

C 

'a. 
<u 


o 
o 

.a 

S 


C 

<u 
6 

<u 
two 

c 


c 

I 

o 

J3 
w 

S3 

< 

(X 
Q 

D 
O 

K 
O 


/. 


chap,  in  VEGRITO&  o/    KEDAH  177 


rest  or  warmth.  "  Thm-  were  altogether  seven  ol 
these  '  nesta '  on  the  river  bank/' '  and  the  occupant  i, 

who  were,   I   think,  undoubtedly    Pangan,  had  only  {us! 

left  them  before  fit's  and  his  companion's  arrival. 

(  ommunal  Shelter  r, 

Semang*  of  Kedah.      From    an   ordinary    round    hut 

which  will  shelter  one  or  two  small  families  the  transi- 
tion to  an  elongated  shelter  which  will  hold  a  greater 
number  is  not  very  difficult.  The  Semang  shelter  at 
Siong  in  Kedah  accommodated  all  the  members  of  the 
tribe  who  were  living  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  con- 
tained no  fewer  than  eleven  (?)  sleeping-places  arranged 
in  two  long  rows  ;  it  may  therefore  be  described  as 
being  of  the  "  barrack  "  or  "long-house"  type.  The 
upright  timbers  of  this  shelter  consisted  of  young  sap- 
lings planted  in  two  opposite  rows,  across  them  being 
lashed  the  leaves  of  the  "  chencham,"  a  low-growing 
palm  not  unlike  the  well-known  "  bertam "  palm 
(Eugeissona  tristis)  in  appearance,  but  which  was 
declared  by  the  Semang  to  be  a  different  tree.  The 
uprights  of  the  shelter  were  called  "pengkong,"  and 
the  leaves  lashed  across  them  "hapoi."  There  were, 
besides,  two  central  posts  or  pillars  ("jehu"),  each  about 
a  third  of  the  distance  from  either  end  of  the  shelter, 
and  a  dozen  poles  placed,  as  props  or  "wind-braces," 
in  various  positions  and  at  various  angles,  in  order  to 
strengthen  the  structure  and  keep  it  from  being  blown 
over  in  a  high  wind.2  In  front  of  the  shelter  at  the 
upper  end  was  a  big  opening  which  served  as  the 
main    entrance,   but   there    were    in    addition    several 

*  J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  25,  p.  45. 
2  "  Tenungked,"  Plus  dialect ;  or  "  chenidel,*'  Kedah. 

VOL.  I  N 


178  HABITATIONS  i-artii 

smoke-holes1  which  were  also  used  for  ingress  or  egress 
as  occasion  might  serve.  The  two  slopes  of  the  roof 
were  not  united  over  a  ridge-pole,  as  in  the  ordinary 
(Malay)  house,  but  a  longitudinal  aperture  was  left  be- 
tween them  for  about  two-thirds  of  the  entire  length  of 
the  roof,  and  through  the  gap  thus  caused  the  greater 
part  of  the  smoke  from  the  many  fireplaces  issued. 

All  round  the  walls  were  ranged  a  number  of 
bamboo  sleeping-platforms,  consisting  of  a  framework 
of  split  bamboos,  each  end  of  which  was  supported  by 
a  horizontal  slat  or  rod.2  These  latter  were  in  turn 
supported  on  low  forked  wooden  trestles  called 
"jongka."  These  bed-platforms  were  between  5-6 
ft.  (1.5  m.  to  1.8  m.)  in  length  by  about  3  ft.  (.91  m.) 
in  breadth  ;  and  their  exact  position  was  as  shown  in 
the  accompanying  diagram.  Young  men  of  the  tribe 
slept  near  the  main  opening  or  door,  and  the  chief 
at  the  upper  end  as  shown. 

I  may  add  that  the  owner  of  each  sleeping-platform 
or  family  unit  possessed  a  separate  fire  or  hearth,  over 
which  he  used  to  sit  and  warm  himself  when  the  nights 
were  cold.  On  the  other  hand,  I  never  saw  any  kind 
of  pillow,  either  in  the  houses  of  the  Semang  of  Kedah 
or  in  those  of  the  Pangan. 

Huts. 

Kedah  Semang. — We  now  come  to  the  last  class 
of  Semang  dwellings  in  which  they  begin  to  build 
huts  of  a  rather  more  substantial  character  than  those 
hitherto  described,  apparently,  in  the  first  instance, 
to  serve  as  store-houses.  An  excellent  example  of  this 
was  to  be  seen  in  the  Semang  encampment  at  Siong 

1   "Karop?"  Plus;  or  "pemong?"  Kedah. 
2   "Keding,"  Plus  dialect  ;  or  "pelayen,"  Kedah. 


% 


'< 


*\ 


■  - 


/ 


.  .... 


s^e 


*: 


2? 


Semang  at  I'll-  Jelentoh,  Gopeng,   Kinta,  with  Nipah-Palms  {Nipa  frutic 
in  Background,  newly  cut  for  Thatchwork. 

/  ol.  I,  /.  i78. 


Wwy. 


U'rav. 


Semang  standing  at  side  of  Hut  (at  Sungei  Tapah),   near  Batu  Gajah,   Kinta,   Pekak. 

The  hut  shows  one  of  the  methods  of  interweaving  palm  leaves. 


Vol.  I.  p.  179. 


chap,  in  NEGRITOS  <>/■  KEDAH 


in  Kedah,  where,  side  by  side  with  the  long  "communal11 

shelter  in  which  the  tribe  lived,  stood  a  tiny  granary 
in    which    their   scanty   stores   o!    rice    wen-    preserved. 

This  little  granary  stood  on  six  thin  posts,  the  floor 
being  raised  about  -i-5  ft.  (1.2  m.  to  1.5  m.)  from  the 
ground,    lor  the  purpose  of  protecting    its  contents 

from  small  marauders.  It  measured  about  4  ft.  in 
length  by  about  3  ft.  (1.2  m.  x.91  m.)  in  width,  and 
was  little  more  in  fact  than  a  large  box  on  posts.  Its 
walls  were  made  of  tree-bark,  and  the  roof  was 
thatched  with  the  leaf  of  the  "  bertam  "  palm,  and 
it  was  entered  by  a  tiny  doorway  to  which  access  was 
aitorded  by  a  long  inclined  pole.  From  the  stage  in 
which  these  tiny  huts  were  used  solely  for  the  pur- 
poses of  storage,  to  one  in  which  they  could  be  used 
as  dwellings,  the  transition  would  be  as  easy  and  as 
natural  as  possible. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  must  here  be  remarked  that 
although  in  this  way  they  may  sometimes  come  to 
dwelling — in  Malayan  fashion — in  a  hut  with  raised 
flooring,  the  Semang  nevertheless  appear  to  retain  a 
strong  predilection  for  building  their  huts  either 
altogether  aloft  in  trees,  or  else  upon  the  level  of  the 
ground  itself.1 

Perak  Semang. — Direct  evidence  of  huts  with  raised 
Mooring  being  inhabited  by  pure  Semang  is  very  scanty. 
The  Semang  village  mentioned  by  De  Morgan  prob- 
ably belonged  to  this  latter  (more  developed)  class, 
especially  as  he  describes  it  as  standing  in  the  midst 

1  The  huts  built  by  the  Pangan  seem  carry  about  with  them  when  they  move  to 

rather    intended    for    the    purpose     of  their  next  camping-place.      These  huts 

storing    supplies    {e.g.    rice)    than    for  are  always  set  up  in  the  thickest  part  of 

regular    occupation.       Five    or    six    of  the  jungle,  and  by  way  of  further  precau- 

these  huts  are  usually  built  in  one  place,  tion  the  articles  left  behind  are  frequently 

and  the  Pangan  leave  such  articles  of  marked  with  special  signs. — V.-St.  iii. 

property  there  as  they  do  not  wish  to  102,  103. 


r  80  HA  HIT  A  TJONS  r  \  W  11 


of  an  immense  plantation  ("  tin  vaste  jardin  "),  which 
seems  to  imply  some  degree  of  permanence.  All  he 
says  of  the  houses,  however,  is  that  they  "  were  con- 
structed on  a  level  with  the  ground,"  and  "  were  open 
to  all  the  winds  that  blow,"  and  that  the  Semang 
protected  themselves  at  night  against  the  attacks  of  wild 
beasts  by  means  of  great  "braziers"  (sic)  which  they 
light  up  under  their  roof.1  On  the  whole,  it  seems 
that  the  Semang  take  much  less  readily  than  the  Sakai 
to  the  Malayan  custom  of  building  their  huts  on  piles. 
Among  the  Semang  of  Perak  (Menik)  no  one  uses 
any  special  kind  of  pillow,  whether  of  wood  or  of  any 
other  material.  Often  they  use  no  pillow  at  all,  and 
if  they  do,  the  first  thing  that  comes  to  hand  (such  as 
a  bundle  of  grass  or  twigs),  or  the  arm  will  be  used." 

II. — Sakai. 
Shelters  and  Tree-huts. 

Perak  Sakai. — The  wild  tribes  of  the  Perak  Hills 
(Sakai  Bukit),  according  to  what  De  la  Croix  was 
told  by  the  tame  Sakai  of  S.  Kerbu,  are  seldom  met 
with,  as  they  do  not  live  in  villages,  and  build  no 
houses,  but  when  night  arrives  they  either  sleep  in 
the  shade  of  a  tree,  or  (at  the  most)  hurriedly  erect  a 
shelter  of  leaves.3 

Selangor  Sakai.  —  The  Sakai,  like  the  Semang, 
make  use  of  caves  as  well  as  trees  to  dwell  in.  Mr. 
Ridley  informs  me  that  he  once  saw  an  excellent 
example  consisting  of  a  rock-shelter  which  he  visited 

1  De  Morgan,  viii.  296.  ever,  seems  to  have  been  hearsay,  and 

2  Z.f.E.  xxix.  186.  Elsewhere  (p.  Mr.  Wray  informs  me  that  the  Sakai 
187),  V. -St.  says  that  the  wild  Semang  of  the  Perak  Hills  build  very  good 
(Pangan)alonedonot  use  thepillowcon-  houses  (cp.  VH.  ii.  646),  which  prob- 
sisting  of  a  cloth  bag  stuffed  with  cotton.  ably  accounts   for   De   M.'s  much   too 

3  De  la  Croix,  p.  340.      This,  how-  sweeping  dtmenti  {VH.  iii.  43). 


McGregor. 

Sakai  Tree  Hut,  Sungei  Berang,   Perak,  Seven  Miles  from  Tanjong  Malim. 


Vol.  I.  p.  181. 


<    II  W.     I  I  i 


SAKAI  OF  PERAK  181 


.it  the  Batu  caves  seven  miles  from  Kuala  Lumpur  in 
Selangor.  I  [ere,  as  in  the  Semang  rock  shelters,  were 
the  remains  oi  a  bamboo  bed  place,  and  in  addition 
then-  were  screens  <>i  palm  leaves  which  had  been  put 
up  as  a  protection  against  the  weather,  In  this  rock- 
shelter,  as  in  others  in  the  same  district,  the  walls 
were  decorated  with  rough  charcoal  sketches  of  well- 
known  objects,  eg*  boats,  etc.  Excavations  were  made 
in  the  lloor  of  this  rock-shelter  on  the  chance  of  finding 
traces  of  earlier  occupation,  but  nothing  was  found 
except  a  round  stone  evidently  brought  from  the  river 
to  support  a  cooking-pot. 

In  spite  of  the  foregoing,  however,  both  rock- 
shelters  and  palm-leaf  wind-screens  appear  to  be  less 
popular  with  the  Sakai  than  with  the  Semang,  and 
there  are  few  records,  if  any,  of  their  employment  of 
the  bee-hive  type  of  hut,  at  all  events  beyond  the 
limits  of  Negrito  influence.  So  far  as  I  have  been 
able  to  discover,  the  huts  of  the  pure-bred  Sakai  are, 
as  a  rule,  rectangular  in  plan. 

Tree-huts,  on  the  other  hand,  analogous  to  those 
already  described  as  used  by  the  Semang,  are  certainly 
to  be  seen  among  the  Inland  (Sakai)  Tribes  of 
Selangor  at  least.  On  an  expedition  to  Ulu  Kali  in  the 
interior  of  Selangor  in  1893,  I  myself  saw  two  of  these 
Sakai  tree-huts,  one  of  which  must  have  been  from 
30-40  ft.  (9  m.  to  12  m.)  from  the  ground.  Both  must 
have  been  very  nearly  the  same  size,  about  6  ft.  by 
4  ft.  (1.8  m.  x  1.2  m.),  and  not  more  than  4  ft.  in  height.1 


1  Of  the  same  district  Mr.  William  huts  high  up  against  the  trees,  usually 

T.  Hornaday  says  :   "  We  were  at  Batu  tifteen  to  twenty  feet  from  the  ground, 

in  the  durian  season,  and  often  visited  to  get  out  of  the  way  of  wild  beasts, 

the  trees  in  the  forest  when  the  Malays  But   the  rascally  elephants  often  take 

were  collecting  the  fruit  as  fast  as  it  the   trouble  to  pull  down  even   those 

fell.      Like  the  Jakun,  they  build  little  high    platforms    and    frighten    the    in- 


182 


HABITATIONS 


PART    II 


Huts  and  Houses. 

Perak  Sakai. — The  Sakai  in  commencing  to  build 
their  huts  with  rather  more  reference  to  Malay 
models  still  retain  the  communal  idea.  One  of  these 
Sakai  communal  houses,  described  by  Hale,1  was  built 
on  a  slope,  close  to  the  summit  of  a  lofty  hill.  The 
thatching  of  the  roof  (with  leaves  of  the  bertam  palm) 
was  a  clumsy  imitation  of  Malayan  methods.  The 
floor  of  the  house,  which  was  raised  above  the  ground, 
rested  upon  nine  posts,  eight  of  inconsiderable  and 
one  of  very  great  diameter,  which  was,  in  fact,  the 
trunk  of  a  large  tree.  Every  other  part  of  the  house 
was  entirely  built  of  bamboo.2  The  walls  consisted  of 
long  screens  of  sheet-thatch,  which  were  suspended 
loosely  at  their  upper  ends  under  the  eaves,  so  that 
the  lower  ends  could  be  pushed  open  outwards.     The 


habitants  half  out  of  their  wits.  The 
herds  to  which  we  paid  our  respects 
had  just  the  night  before  visited  several 
durian  camps,  and  had  torn  down  the 
highest  platform  of  all,  as  if  to  show 
the  Malays  that  it  was  of  no  use  trying 
to  build  a  hut  out  of  their  reach.  Of 
course  the  Malays  fled  to  the  jungle. 
There  are  several  large  caves  in  the 
vicinity,  and  the  Jakun  are  in  the 
habit  of  taking  refuge  in  them  when 
the  elephants  become  too  neighbourly  " 
(J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  3,  p.  128). 
Batu  is  a  small  village  six  miles  from 
Kuala  Lumpur  in  Selangor.  Mr. 
Hornaday  is  probably  here  writing  of 
the  Inland  or  Hill  Sakai.  The 
Jakun  are  really  the  savage  Malayan 
tribes,  but  the  word  is  often  used 
loosely,  especially  by  Malays  (as  here). 

1  P.  249.  So  too,  according  to  De 
Morgan,  the  entire  tribe  of  Sakai  at 
Changak  (?  Changkat)  Kerbu  (in  Ulu 
Perak)  lived  in  a  big  house  which  they 
shared  in  common. 

The  house  was  divided  into  com- 
partments, where  the  various   families 


were  separately  installed,  the  hearths, 
however,  being  shared  in  common,  and 
placed  in  the  centre  of  the  building. 
The  room  of  the  chief  (Penghulu)  was 
much  better  kept  than  the  others,  the 
sleeping  -  places  of  flattened  bamboo 
being  covered  with  mats  decorated  with 
yellow  patterns  ;  all  the  blowpipes  of 
the  tribe  were  suspended  from  the 
rafters,  and  big  bamboos  covered  with 
decoration  were  deposited  in  the  corners 
to  supply  him  with  water  (De  Morgan, 

i-  43)- 

2  Mr.  Hale,  however,  very  rightly 
points  out  that  the  Sakai  are  very 
ready  to  adapt  themselves  to  circum- 
stances in  the  matter  of  material.  Thus 
elsewhere  Mr.  Wray  remarks  that  the 
leaves  of  fan -palms  are  used  by  the 
Sakai  to  thatch  their  houses,  and  that, 
owing  to  the  extreme  hardness  of  the 
stems,  they  are  not  in  the  habit  of 
cutting  the  palms  down  when  felling 
the  jungle  for  their  clearings,  which 
probably  accounts  for  their  great  abund- 
ance {J.  R.  A.  S.,  S.  B.,  No.  21,  p. 
i55)- 


McGregor. 

Tree  Hut,   Ulu  Batu,  about  Twelve  Miles  from  Kuala  Lumpur,   Selangor. 


Vol.  [.*.  18^5. 


chap,  m  SAA  AJ  OF  PERAK 

house  in  question  was  more  than  an  hour's  climb  from 

water.  It  was  surrounded  by  a  clearing  ol  about  two 
acres  in  extent,  where  tapioca,  m.ii/.e,  sugar  <  ui<\  and 
tobacco  were  grown.  The  house  contained  sixteen 
inhabitants,  divided  into  six  distinct  family  units,  each 
of  which  had  its  own  hearth.  In  the  cast!  ol  a  man 
having  two  wives,  each  wile  had  her  own  hearth, 
marked  out  by  means  of  a  low  partition  of  split 
bamboos.  There  was  a  door  in  the  (Mid-wall,  and  also 
an  outlet  in  the  slope  of  the  roof.1 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Sakai  huts  observed  in  Ulu 
Kinta  by  De  Morgan  are  described  as  being  built 
very  far  apart  from  each  other,  and  sittiated  in  the 
midst  of  immense  plantations  of  tapioca,  "  sorgho  "  (?) 
and  maize,  from  which  it  may  possibly  be  deduced 
that  they  were  on  rather  less  strictly  communal 
principles.  De  Morgan  was  invited  to  enter  the 
Penghulu's  hut,  which  was,  like  those  at  S.  Raya,  built 
at  a  height  of  about  1.50  m.  from  the  ground.  It  was 
very  small,  but  very  clean.  Blowpipes,  arrows,  and  a 
spear  hung  from  the  roof,  and  it  contained  many  betel- 
leaf-wallets,  necklaces,  nets,  lines,  and  a  small  but 
highly  decorated  piece  of  bamboo,  the  use  of  which 
was  for  carrying  the  worms  used  in  rod-fishing.2 

In  another  place,  De  la  Croix,  in  describing  the 
Sakai  village  of  Kampong  Chabang,  in  the  upper 
reaches  of  S.  Kerbu  (a  tributary  of  the  Plus  river  in 
Perak,  wahich  is  a  few  miles  further  north  than  Ulu 
Kinta),  remarks  that  the  village  consisted  of  a  dozen 
huts,  erected  in  the  midst  of  a  clearing,  on  the  banks 
of  the  river.  The  chiefs  hut  (the  largest)  was  built 
upon  piles,  and  measured  ten  metres  in  length  by  fiv^ 


1    Hale,  p.  294.  ii.  645,  for  illustrations  showing  ground- 

-  De  Morgan,  viii.   167.      Cp.  L'H.        plan  and  elevations  of  a  Sakai  hut. 


184  HABITATIOXS  pari  ii 

metres  in  breadth.  The  flooring,  consisting  of  tlattened 
tree-bark,  was  raised  about  a  metre  above  the  ground. 
Both  the  walls  and  the  roof  with  its  double  slope  were 
constructed  alike  of  broad  strips  of  bark,  which  afforded 
an  excellent  shelter  from  the  floods  of  rain  that  fell  in 
the  wet  season.  A  notched  tree-trunk  served  as  house- 
ladder  for  giving  access  to  the  interior  of  the  building.1 

In  the  middle  of  the  only  room  was  placed  a  hearth 
consisting  of  a  thick  layer  of  clay  deposited  in  a  (square) 
wooden  frame.  This  was  the  hearth  ("dapor")  of  Malay 
houses.  A  few  pots  and  receptacles  of  various  kinds 
containing  provisions  were  hung  upon  the  walls.  The 
remaining  huts  were  all  of  the  same  type,  except  two 
or  three  whose  side-walls  were  made  of  matwork,  in 
imitation  of  the  Malays. - 

Pahang  Sakai.  —  A  graphic  description  of  the 
mountain  hut  of  a  Sakai  by  Mr.  L.  Wray  is  interest- 
ing from  the  fact  that  the  locality  referred  to  is  in 
the  far  interior  of  Pahang. 

Mr.  Wray  wrote3  that  the  house  (in  the  Tahan 
valley)  in  which  he  passed  the  night  was  a  large  and 
well-built  one,  and  seemed  to  be  occupied  by  two 
families.  It  was  at  an  elevation  of  about  4000  feet 
(1225  m.),  and  being  perched  on  the  top  of  a  cleared 
hill  fully  exposed  to  the  winds,  he  found  it  very  cold. 

Hanging  up  in  the  house  were  strings  of  the  lower 
jaws  of  monkeys,  musangs,  and  other  animals,  and  in 
another  house  he  saw  bunches  of  hornbill  skulls. 
These  were  kept  hanging  up  in  the  smoke  as  trophies, 
in  the  same  way  as  the  Dayaks  keep  human  heads  in 
their  houses.     Another  custom  which  seemed  to  point 

1   De  la  Croix,  pp.  322,  323.      Brau  fifteen  families  in  the  same  place  (pp. 

de  S.  P.  Lias,  in  writing  of  the  Sakai  279,  280). 
of    Sungei    Kerbu,     adds    that     they  2  Ibid. 

always  lived  in  groups  of  from  ten  to  z  J.  R.  A.  S.,  S.  £?.,  No.  21,  p.  162. 


Transverse  S 


' 


I         itudirtal  S< 


^^ 


■  ■  ■    -  ■  ■ 


I 


!  —  —  ~      '  - 

1 


Elevation 
Sakai  House  at  Changkat  Kerbu  or  Korbu, 


;  <!  \\\f,  c 

A  ■.'    il.l  III  I 

■    \  tv---   9 


PI: 


J* 
Dc  Morgan. 


Vol.  I.  p.  184. 


House  of  Aborigines  at  Kuala  Seleh,   Ulu  Klang. 


McGregor. 


McGregor. 
Huts  at  Durian  Chandong,   Via:  Langat,   about  Three  Milks  above  Klubi,   rut  ox 

a  Tributary  of  the  Langat.     Men  absent  Hunting. 
Vol.  I.  />.  185. 


omap.  in  S  i/CAJ  <>/■'  PAHA  V6 

to  a  connection  between  the  two  races  was  that  they 
kepi  large  fires  burning  in  the  centre  ol  their  hou 
during  1 1 1< -  night,  and  thai  it  was  only  during  the  first 
part  of  the  night  that  they  slept,  after  that  they  sat  up 
round  the  fire  and  talked  till  morning.1 

Hut  Furniture     Pillows, 

Perak  Sakai.     It  appears  that  pillows  were  much 
more  generally  used  by  the  Sakai  than  by  the  Semang. 

The  pillow  of  the  Central  Sakai  (Senoi)  men  was 
always  an  ink-mode  of  bamboo,  through  each  extremity 
of  which  four  small  round  pegs  were  driven.  The 
pillows  of  the  women  were  the  same,  but  they  were 
usually  fitted  with  a  pair  of  pegs  or  "  feet  "  pointed  at 
both  ends,  so  that  by  a  blow  they  could  be  driven  into 
the  hole  at  the  end  or  taken  out.  For  this  purpose  part 
of  the  node  was  cut  away,  in  order  to  allow  the  inside  of 
the  tube  to  be  reached.  Small  objects  that  the  women 
used  for  their  toilet  or  for  other  purposes  were  kept  in 
the  interior  of  these  bamboo  pillows  ;  and  by  means  of 
the  "  feet  "  they  were  prevented  from  falling  out  again. - 
These  pillows  were  of  various  patterns,  which 
differed  with  the  tribe.  The  Central  Sakai  (Senoi), 
who  always  appear  to  have  had  a  somewhat  more 
artistic  feeling  than  the  other  Sakai  (Blandas),  say 
that  their  bamboo  pillows  were  formerly  ornamented 
with  incised  lines  or  "  painted  "  emblems,3  but  that 
these  are  all  now  forgotten,  and  the  form  of  pillow 
now  universally  employed  is  a  kind  of  stuff-bag  or 
pillow  filled  with  cotton.  This  new  form  of  pillow, 
however,  could  only  be  used  when  the  tribe  became 
more    settled.      So    long    as    they  remained    entirely 

1   Wray    in  /.  R.  A.  S.,   S.  B.,   No.  2  Z.f.  E.  xxix.  (V.-St.)  186. 

21,  p.   162.  3  In  original,  ''painted  totems"! 


1 86  HAR1TATIUNS 


I'ART    II 


nomadic,  bulky  things,  such  as  these  pillows,  could 
not  be  carried  with  them  ;  and  if  the  present  cotton- 
filled  pillows  were  left  a  week  in  a  house  uncared  for, 
termites  and  other  vermin  would  injure  them,  even  if 
damp  and  mould  did  not  do  so.1 

The  bamboo  pillows  referred  to  formed  part  of  the 
furniture  of  the  house,  and  when  not  being  used  lay 
together  in  a  corner.2 

III. — Jakun. 

Blandas. — As  far  as  I  was  able  to  discover,  the 
Blandas  (Hill  Tribes  of  the  Kuala  Langat  district  in 
Selangor)  seldom  if  ever  dwelt  in  leaf-shelters,  and 
the  only  important  difference  between  their  houses 
and  those  of  the  Besisi — which  will  presently  be  de- 
scribed— lay  in  the  far  greater  relative  height  of  the 
wooden  posts  on  which  the  Blandas  house  was  built. 
These  high-built  huts  of  the  Blandas  were  frequently 
entered  by  means  of  a  movable  ladder,  which  was  re- 
moved when  they  went  abroad  into  the  forest.  Their 
traditional  pillow  was  a  block  of  "  pulai  "  (alstonia,  a 
soft,  cork-like  wood). 

Besisi.  —  On  the  other  hand,  although  I  never 
came  across  an  instance  of  a  Blandas  family  living  in 
a  tree-hut,  I  think  there  is  practically  no  doubt  that 
the  Besisi,  who  had  a  relatively  larger  proportion  of 
Semang  blood  in  them,  did  occasionally  do  so.  At 
S.  Nipah  (in  the  very  same  district  of  Selangor)  I 
once  knew  a  soi-disant  Malay  family  (in  reality  they 
were  Besisi  converts)  who  lived  in  a  tree-hut  some  20 
ft.  to  30  ft.  (6  m.  to  9  m.)  from  the  ground,  and  on  one 
occasion  I  climbed  up  to  have  a  look  at  it.  The  "hut" 
itself  was  a  tiny  shelter  about  6  ft.  (1.8  m.)  in  length, 

1  Z.f.  E.  xxix.  (V.-St.)  187,  188.  2  lb. 


Sakai  House,   Lui  River,   Ulu  Langat,  Selangor. 

Notice  the  height  of  the  house-posts. 


Aft  Gregor. 


y^„  -v  tt  McGregor. 

Ground  Hut  with  thatched  Roof,   Ulu  Kuang,   about  Three  Miles  from 


Vol.  I.  p.  i J 


Kuang  Station,   Selangor. 


F.  M.  Elliot. 

Besisi   Huts  about  One  and  a  Half  Miles  from  Sepang, 

showing  abattis  of  trees  felled  as  a  protection  against  wild  beasts. 


-~„.-;^ 


/■'.  M.  Elliot. 

Besisi  Hut  about  One  and  a  Half  Miles  from  Sepang  (Kuala  Langat 
District  of  Selangor);  showing  overlapping  Gablk-Ridgi-:. 

1  was  myself  inside  this  hut  when  it  was  taken. 


Vol.  1.  p.  187. 


chap,  m  SAVAGE   MALAYS  OF  SELANGOR 

by  4  ft,  (i.a  m.)  in  width,  and  was  not  more  than  three 
or  tour  feet  high.  The  walls  and  root  were  made  ol  the 
Malay  palm-leaf  awning  ("kajang"),  and  it  contained  a 
small  sleeping-mat  and  mosquito-curtain  (an  unlooked- 
for  luxury  in  SO  poor  an  abode),  and  a  few  cooking 
and  Other  utensils.      A    man    and    his  wife   lived    then 

but  I  cannot  say  whether  they  had  any  children.     Both 

happened  to  be  very  short,  I  should  say  not  more  than 
41'  ft*  (i«37  m-)'  but  I  should  much  doubt  whether 
either  of  them  could  stand  upright  in  it.  The  method 
of  entering  it  was  enough  to  try  the  nerves  of  any 
one  that  was  at  all  inclined  to  be  dizzy.  The  ascent  was 
achieved  by  means  of  the  rudest  and  most  primitive 
stick-ladder  imaginable,  a  large  creeper  that  grew 
upon  the  tree  affording  some  slight  additional  assist- 
ance. On  reaching  the  top  of  this  ladder,  one  had  to 
rest  one's  elbows  upon  the  Moor  of  the  shelter,  and 
swing  one's  self  up  into  safety  by  main  force.  The 
descent  was,  if  anything,  the  more  trying  process  of 
the  two,  yet  the  Malays  did  not  appear  to  mind  it. 

The  actual  houses  of  the  Besisi  in  this  same  district 
were  built  of  timber  and  palm-thatch  like  the  houses 
of  the  local  Malays,  but  had  several  peculiar  points 
about  them.  The  slopes  of  the  roof-gable,  for  one 
thing,  were  carried  much  lower  than  in  an  ordinary 
Malay  house,  and  in  some  cases  at  least  the  eaves 
were  actually  level  with  the  floor. 

Another  characteristic  feature  was  that  one  of  the 
slopes  of  the  gable  was  frequently  carried  much  higher 
than  the  other,  so  as  to  overlap  and  leave  a  gap 
through  which  smoke  could  issue,  without  the  rain 
penetrating  too  easily.  In  the  Malay  type  of  house, 
the  upper  edges  oi  the  two  roof-slopes  meet  at  the 
top,  and  the  rain  is  kept  out  by  an  arrangement  called 


i  j  8  HA Bl TA  TIONS  part  i  i 


44  perabong,1'  which  covers  over  the  gap  between  the 
edges. 

The  houses  are  exceedingly  diminutive,  much 
more  so,  in  proportion  to  their  inhabitants,  than 
Malay  houses  ;  in  fact,  I  saw  many  among  the  Besisi 
that  were  little  more  than  boxes.  They  are  usually 
thatched  with  palm-leaves  loosely  strung  together,  the 
kind  of  leaves  usually  employed  being  either  those  of 
the  fan-palm  or  the  44  bertam  "  palm.  A  few  of  these 
houses  were  supported  on  fairly  high  posts,  higher 
than  those  of  Malay  houses.  The  Besisi,  wrho  carry 
the  eaves  of  their  huts  down  to  the  level  of  the  floor, 
generally  use,  however,  very  short  house-posts. 

The  joists  are  tied  together  with  split  rattan  or 
other  strong  lashings,  and  each  settlement,  however 
small,  is  as  a  rule  defended  by  an  abattis  of  fallen  trees. 
The  Besisi  often,  perhaps  in  imitation  of  the  Malays, 
erect  a  sort  of  landing  of  split  "  nibong "  stems  in 
front  of  the  door  whereon  to  winnow  their  grain. 

The  house  of  one  of  the  Batins  or  big  chiefs  of 
the  Besisi  (Batin  Suntai  by  name)  was  described  to 
me  in  one  of  their  tribal  songs  as  follows  : — 

Song  of  the  Batin's  Hut. 

"  Kepong  "  bark  was  all  its  roofing, 
"Bertam"  leaves  were  all  the  side-walls, 
11  Bertam  "  stems  were  all  the  flooring, 
"  Loyak  :'  stems  were  all  its  pillars. 
Such  the  house  of  Batin  Suntai, 
At  "Nine-Rivers,"  up  the  Kalis, — 
Durian-wood  did  form  his  pillow, 
Leaves  of  "  lc-mba  "  were  his  dishes, 
His  the  beaten  tree-bark  girdle. 

The  pillow  generally  used  by  the  Besisi  is  said  to 
have  been  a  block  of  hard  wood,  without  feet,  concave 
on  the  upper  side,  and  convex  on  the  lower,1  and  cut 

1   In  the  original   it  is  described   as       take    and    an    impossibility,    which    is 
being  convex  on  the  upper  side,  and       clearly  due  to  some  confusion, 
concave   underneath,   an  obvious   mis- 


i  hap.  in  SAVAGE   MM  A  KS  01     1ELA  VGOR 

off  squarely  at  1 1 1  < -  end  It  differs  from  the  Jakun 
and  Blandas  pillow,  the  wood  <>i  which  wa  i  very    loft 

The   II a  la  i. 

Besisi.     Before  leaving  the  subject  ol  Besisi  huts  I 
must  not  omit  to  mention  the  important  fact  that  there 

were  among  these  |akun  tribes  trace,  <>l  the  use  of  a 
Tribal  Hall,  such  as  is  always  attached  to  the  house 
of  a  Malay  chief,  and  is  called  "  Balai  "  both  by  Jakun 
and    Malays.      On   the  occasion  of  a    Besisi    wedding, 

the  Besisi  of  Ayer  ham  (on  the  Selangor  coast)  had 
built  a  hall  of  this  kind  at  right  angles  to  the  house  of 
their  tribal  chief  or  Batin  (thus  forming  a  sort  of"  T  "- 
shaped  building  in  which  the  "  Balai  '  formed  the 
downstroke  of  the  "  T  ").  Such  Balais  are  frequently 
mentioned  in  Besisi  songs,  and  I  think  there  is  very 
little  doubt  that  we  do  not  find  here  a  simple  instance  of 
borrowing  from  the  Malays,  but  rather  an  example  of  a 
custom  sprung  from  their  common  origin.  The  building 
in  question  was  erected  by  the  voluntary  labour  of  all 
the  men  of  the  tribe  (just  as  would  have  been  the  case 
if  it  had  been  built  by  a  Malay  chief),  and  it  was  large 
enough  to  contain  abotit  sixty  to  seventy  people  or 
more  (the  members  of  the  tribe  itself  numbering  about 
sixty).  It  was  opposite  the  door  of  this  building  that 
the  bell-shaped  mound  which  was  explained  to  me  as 
the  religious  emblem  of  the  tribe2  was  thrown  up. 
And  it  was  inside  this  same  building  that  the  various 
tribal  feasts  took  place. 

Huts. 
Labu  Tribes. — Their  dwellings  are  the  simplest  and 


1  Z.f.E.  xxix.   186.      See  p.  186,  supra,  and  p.   195,  infra. 
2  Cp.  vol.  ii.  pp.  72-74. 


1 9o  HA  Bl  TA  TIONS  pa  rt  ll 

rudest  that  can  be  imagined.  Rowland,  in  writing  of 
the  Labu  tribe  that  he  observed,  mentions  that  when 
they  had  deserted  the  house  built  by  his  coolies,  with 
its  raised  sleeping-platforms,  he  found  them  again  in 
the  interior  of  the  jungle  (instead  of  at  the  edge), 
and  that  every  married  man  (or  bachelor)  had  built 
for  himself  a  small  round  hut  on  the  level  of  the 
ground.  Each  of  these  huts  was  entirely  constructed 
of  the  leaves  of  the  "  bertam  "  palm  (Eugeissona  tristis, 
Griff.),  measuring  about  two  or  three  metres  in  length, 
the  stalks  of  which  were  planted  close  together  in  the 
ground,  so  as  to  form  a  circle  of  about  two  metres  in 
diameter ;  the  extremities  of  the  leaves  met  at  the 
top,  but  gave  only  a  scanty  shelter  from  the  rain. 
The  people  in  these  huts  lived  upon  the  ground  itself, 
which  is  always  moist  in  the  jungle,  and  generally 
considered  to  be  unhealthy,  and  in  heavy  rain  were 
not  protected  from  flooding  even  by  a  ditch  round  the 
hut.  Yet  in  these  huts  they  soon  recovered  from 
their  fevers  and  coughs,  and  regained  their  usual 
serenity.  These  huts  stood  close  together,  a  few  steps 
from  a  brook.1 

Hut  Furniture. 

Kenaboi. — The  Kenaboi,  who  appear  determined 
in  this  as  in  many  other  things  to  take  a  different  line 
from  the  Sakai,  to  which  race  Vaughan-Stevens  says 
he  assigns  them,2  made  their  pillows  of  split  lengths 
of  bamboo  cut  square  at  each  end,  the  lengths  being 
interwoven  with  one  another  "  in  and  out."  The 
interior  served  the  women  for  holding  small  objects, 

1  Rowland,  p.  708.  have  Semang  affinities. 

2  This  begs  the  entire  question.      It  3  An    obscure    and     obviously    in- 
is  more  probable  that  the  Kenaboi  may       accurate  description. 


chap,  in  SAVAGE  MALAYS  Of    MALACi    I  "/' 

such  as  combs  and  medicines.      The  exa(  I   patterns 

were  said  to  be  lost.1 


I Ints  and  tlnir  Furniture. 

Mantra. — Of  the  Mantra  huts,  M.  Boric  says  that 
their  dwellings  scarcely  kept  out  the  rain,  and  were 
open  to  every  wind,  most  frequently  being  without 
cither  doors  or  windows.  The  best  of  them  consisted 
of  nine  posts,  of  which  three  were  about  a  third  longer 
than  the  six  others.  These  nine  posts  were  strongly 
planted  in  the  ground  in  three  rows,  with  the  long 
posts  in  the  centre  ;  these  posts  were  then  united  at 
the  top  by  means  of  longitudinal  and  transverse 
timbers  lashed  together  by  means  of  rattans  ;  upon 
these  timbers  were  placed  rafters  2  to  sustain  the  roof, 
which  was  made  of  leaves  ;  and  the  floor,  which  was 
generally  raised  several  feet  above  the  ground,  was 
formed  by  laying  laths  across  the  longitudinal  and 
transverse  timbers  and  covering  these  laths  with  the 
bark  of  trees  ;  the  sides  were  similarly  more  or  less 
covered  in  either  with  leaves  or  tree-bark/5 

The  following  articles  were  found  in  a  compara- 
tively well-furnished  Mantra  hut,  which  was  occupied 
by  two  men,  two  women,  and  two  children. 
There  were  two  blowpipes  ("  sumpitan "),  several 
choppers  and  axes,  two  torch-stands,  twro  iron  pans, 
two  earthenware  pots,  two  wallets  or  back-baskets 
("  sentong  "),  a  kind  of  basket  termed  by  the  Malays 
"garing,"  two  plates,  two  cups,  five  small  tea-cups, 
four  earthenware  spoons,  seven  "  sarongs,"  three  jackets 
("baju"),  three  pairs  of  trousers  ("seluar"),  four 
waist-bands,    four    headkerchiefs,    one    pair    of    ear- 

1   Z.f.  E.  xxix.  187.  2  In  original,  "shingles"  [sic). 

3  Borie  (tr.  Bourien),  p.  76. 


I 92  HA  /VTA  TIONS  part  1 1 


studs  ("  subang  "),  three  hair-pins,  and  three  copper 
rings.1 

Shelters  and  Tree-huts. 

Jakun. — Of  the  tree-huts  of  the  Jakun  M.  Borie 
says,  that  however  poor  might  be  the  huts  of  the 
Mantra,  those  of  the  Jakun  were  still  more  primitive  ; 
it  was  their  custom  to  perch  their  domicile  on  trees, 
sometimes  at  a  height  of  from  25  ft.  to  35  ft.  (7.6  m.  to 
10.6  m.)  from  the  ground  ;2  most  commonly,  however, 
they  were  only  about  twenty  feet  from  the  ground,  and 
were  ascended  by  means  of  a  ladder,  which  even  their 
dogs  became  accustomed  to  climbing.3 

On  the  other  hand,  some  members  of  the  tribe 
would  construct  their  huts  at  a  height  of  no  more  than 
3  ft.  or  4  ft.  (.91  m.  to  1.2  m.)  from  the  ground.  Like 
the  Mantra,  they  lived,  ate,  and  slept  on  the  main 
lioor  of  the  building.  At  one  side  of  it  was  the  hearth, 
on  which  a  fire  was  always  kept  burning  to  drive  away 
mosquitoes,  and  they  used  the  loft  for  putting  away  their 
weapons,  their  provisions,  and  their  cooking  utensils.4 

Jakun  of  N.  Sembilan. — The  best  houses  of  the 
Negri  Sembilan  Jakun  were  about  the  same  as  the 
poorer  and  ruder  houses  belonging  to  the  Jakun  of 
Johor,  but  others  were,  as  described  by  Newbold, 
rude  edifices  perched  on  the  top  of  four  high  wooden 
poles  ;  thus  elevated  for  fear  of  tigers,  and  entered  by 
means  of  a  long  ladder,  and  presenting,  when  viewed 
through  certain  holes  which  served  as  doors,  no  very 
satisfactory  appearance  to  the  uninitiated.  The  roofs 
were  often  thatched  with  "chucho"  leaves.  There  was 
but  one  room,  in  which  the  whole  family  was  huddled 
together,  with  their  dogs  and  the  bodies  of  such  animals 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  254.  and  even  more. 

-   Bigandet    (p.    427)    says    60    feet  3   Borie  (tr.  Bourien),  p.  76.        4  lb. 


chap,  in  WAGl    MAI  i  r.v  <>/   .:  ,s 


as  they  mighi  have  caught.  They  were  interdicted,  by 
one  of  their  singular  rules,  from  using  any  other  wood 
than  that  of  the  "  pStaling  "  and  "  jambu  k'lat "  in  the 
construction  of  these  huts.  The  huts  were  made 
to  l>e  movable  .it  a  moment's  warning;  on  the  appear- 
ance of  small-pox,  or  any  other  contagious  disorder 
a  whole  encampment  would  vanish  in  the  course  ol  a 

single  night.  The  huts  were  ordinarily  situated  on 
the  steep  side  of  some  forest -clad  hill,  or  in  some 
sequestered  dale,  remote  from  any  frequented  road  or 
footpath,  and  with  little  plantations  of  yams,  plantains, 
and  maize  about  them  (some  also  had  fields  of  rice). 
The  bones  and  hair  of  the  animals  whose  flesh  the 
inmates  might  have  been  feeding  upon  strewed 
the  ground  near  them,  whilst  numbers  of  dogs — 
generally  of  a  light  brown  colour — gave  timely  notice 
of  the  approach  of  strangers.1 

Jakun  of  Malacca. — The  Malacca  Jakun(or"Benua"), 
characterised  by  Favre  as  the  most  ignorant,  were  the 
poorest  and  most  miserable,  their  best  houses  being 
about  the  same  as  the  worst  of  those  of  the  Menang- 
kabaus  ;a  indeed  Favre  found  several  families  who  lived 
without  houses  at  all.  These  latter,  gathering  them- 
selves together  to  the  number  of  five  or  six  families, 
would  choose  a  place  in  the  thickest  of  the  forest,  and 
there  clear  a  circle  about  25-30  ft.  (7.6  m.  to  9  m.)  in 
diameter ;  having  cleared  this  space,  they  would  sur- 
round it  with  the  branches  of  trees  they  had  just  cut  ; 
to  this  they  would  add  other  thorny  branches  collected 
from  other  parts,  and  so  make  a  sort  of  bulwark 
against  tigers,  bears,  and  panthers,  which  were  present 
in  good  numbers.  Having  done  this,  they  would  pro- 
ceed to  establish  their  dwelling  in  the  enclosure  thus 

1  Newbold,  vol.  ii.  p.  404.  2  I.e.  Inland  Malays  near  Malacca. 

VOL.   I  O 


1 94  HA  BIT  A  TIONS  fa  r  t  i  i 


formed  in  the  following  way :  each  family  worked  to  con- 
struct what  would  afford  them  a  bed  during  the  night, 
a  seat  in  the  day-time,  a  table  for  their  repasts,  and  a 
shelter  in  bad  weather  ;  it  consisted  of  about  fifteen 
or  twenty  thin  poles  about  6  ft.  (1.8  m.)  long,  which 
were  laid  the  one  beside  the  other,  and  supported  at  the 
two  extremities  by  two  transverse  sticks  set  upon  four 
wooden  posts  ;  the  completed  structure  being  about 
two  feet  in  height,  four  feet  in  breadth,  and  six  feet  in 
length.  A  dozen  leaves  of  the  "chucho"  gathered 
together  by  their  ends,  and  tied  up  at  the  head  of  the 
bed,  extended  over  it  and  covered  it  from  end  to  end. 
These  beds  were  placed  all  round  the  enclosure,  in  such 
a  position  that  when  all  the  occupants  were  sleeping 
every  one  lay  with  his  feet  directed  towards  the  centre 
of  the  hut,  which  was  purposely  left  vacant,  to  serve 
either  as  a  place  for  cooking,  or  for  any  other  purpose.1 
Jakun  of  Johor. — Before  Favre  himself  visited  the 
Jakun,  report  had  induced  him  to  consider  them  (he 
says)  as  savage  as  wild  beasts,  and  as  sleeping  like 
birds  on  the  branches  of  trees.  Even  afterwards 
when  he  questioned  the  Malays  on  the  subject,  some 
of  them  answered  as  before  ;  but  this  was  far  from 
being  the  truth,  as  there  was  no  Jakun  without  some 
sort  of  more  or  less  well-ordered  dwelling.  Some  of 
them  indeed  had  habitations  which  could  scarcely  be 
called  houses ;  but  these  were  very  few  ;  and  for  the 
most  part  they  had  houses.  The  Jakun  of  Johor 
built  houses  in  the  Malay  manner,  some  of  them  being 
"  fine  buildings."  Favre  found  several  which  were 
much  more  comfortable  than  any  Malay  house  he  had 
seen  in  the  interior  of  Johor;  such  were  the  houses 

^Translated  in/.  /.  A.  vol.  ii.  pp.  250,  257.      For  the  original,  see  Favre  in 
Ann.  P.  F.  xxii.  301. 


(  hap.  in  SAVAGE  MAl.A  YS  <>/  /( '//<'/■" 


of  the  Penghulu  Batin  on  the  [ohor  river,  and  that  ol 
a  [akun  chid  on  the  Benut  river.    These  two  hou 
were  divided  into  several  rooms,  some  ol  which  wert 

for  the  private  accommodation  ol  the  Jakim  \\om«n, 
and  the  furniture  consisted  ol  a  lew  pots,  plat' 
several  other  similar  vessels,  and  a  good  quantity  of 
mats.  Other  houses  were  much  more  ordinary,  but 
were  yet  pretty  comfortable  and  clean,  and  were 
always  divided  into  two  or  three  rooms  at  least,  and 
furnished  with  an  iron  frying-pan  for  cooking  rice  in, 
a  few  coconut-shells  for  holding  water,  and  baskets 
for  carrying  food.  All  these  houses  were  raised  about 
6  ft.  (1.8  m.)  from  the  ground,  and  were  entered  by  a 
ladder  like  the  Malay  houses.1 

House  Furniture — Pillows. 

Jakun  (district  unspecified). — The  J  akun  pillow  was, 
unlike  the  others,  made  of  soft  wood,  probably  because 
it  could  in  that  case  be  made  without  iron  tools.  It 
was  always  convex  at  the  sides  and  underneath,  but 
concave  at  the  top,  and  was  often  stained  red,  yellow, 
or  black.  These  colours  were  obtained,  the  red  from  a 
tree-bark,  the  yellow  from  a  root,  and  the  black  from 
a  mixture  of  oil  and  charcoal.  The  yellow  appears 
from  the  description  to  be  the  Malay  "  kunyit "  or 
turmeric — a  well-known  root.  The  particular  tree 
which  gave  the  red  is  not  known,  although  there  are 
several  trees  whose  bark  gives  a  red  colour. 

It  was  the  log-pillows  of  the  women  which  were 
most  carefully  stained.  Those  of  the  men  were  used 
during  the  day  for  all  sorts  of  purposes,  e.g.  as  a  float 
for  a  crocodile  line,  in  which  case  their  dark  colour 

1  /.  /.  A.  vol.  ii.  pp.  255,  256. 


1 96  HABITATIONS  part  ii 

makes  them  easily  visible,  and  hence  soon  shows  where 
the  crocodile  has  gone  after  swallowing  the  bait.  The 
above  type  of  pillow,  however,  is  never  seen  now  ; 
stuff-pillows  filled  with  cotton  having  replaced  it.1 

Houses  and  House  Furniture. 

Benua-Jakun  of  Johor.  —  According  to  Logan, 
the  houses  of  the  Benua  of  Johor  varied  greatly  in 
size,  neatness,  and  finish.  They  were  much  slighter 
and  more  primitive  than  the  huts  of  the  Malays,  the 
greater  part  consisting  only  of  one  small  room  raised  on 
thin  posts  made  of  saplings,  with  a  rough  flooring 
of  small  sticks  placed  at  irregular  distances,  and  some- 
times with  such  large  gaps  between  them  that  children 
were  liable  to  fall  through.  The  sides  were  made  of 
bark,2  and  were  generally  enclosed  all  round,  but 
sometimes  they  had  only  a  piece  of  bark  here  and 
there,  and  Logan  himself  slept  in  houses  three  sides 
of  which  were  quite  open.  A  rude  and  very  narrow 
and  steep  ladder  led  to  an  open  doorway.  The  roof 
was  covered  with  leaves,  commonly  those  of  the 
"  serdang,"  which  answer  as  well  as  the  leaves  of  the 
nipah  palm,  but  last  only  half  as  long.  The  leaves  of 
the"  Palas"  and  other  palms  were  also  occasionally  used, 
and  Logan  was  told  that  even  padi-straw  was  some- 
times collected  for  thatch.  The  floor  was  constructed 
at  various  heights  from  5-9  ft.  (1.5  m.  to  2.7  m.)  above 
the  ground.  In  localities  where  elephants  abounded  it 
was  generally  high.  Houses  of  greater  pretensions 
were  sometimes  to  be  seen.  On  the  Pau,  Logan  visited 
a  house  which,  under  one  roof,  had  a  large  hall  with  an 


1  Z.f.  E.  xxix.  (V.-St.)  p.  189.  chiefly  used   for  this  purpose,  both  in 

2  The  bark  of   the   "kepong"  was       Johor  and  by  the  Berembun  tribes. 


i  ha?,  m  MALA  YAh  >  VPS/1  \>n 

elevated    recess   Facing   the   door,  where   guests   sat 
during  the  day  and  slept  at  night.     At  the  sides  wen 
two  large  rooms  and  a  long  narrow  apartment  with 
two  fireplaces  and  an  array  ol  cooking  utensils.     An 
open  platform,  a  foot  or  two  below  the  level  ol  the 

floor,  connected  the  liall  with  two  other  bedrooms 
under    a    separate    roof.        At     1'aya    Sandar,   near  the 

Sembrong,  he  visited  another  large  cottage  which,  in 
addition  to  bedrooms  which  were  partitioned  off,  had 
several  recesses  with  curtains  of  coarse  cloth  hung  before 
i hem.    Sleeping  mats  and  pillows  were  in  every  house.1 

Berembun  Tribes.  The  Berembun  tribes  had  mats, 
but  as  a  rule  no  pillows  or  curtains.  Coarse  Chinese 
curtains  were  general,  but  were  often  lacking,  and 
where  this  was  the  case  the  whole  family,  with  the 
guests,  slept  in  one  and  the  same  open  apartment,  and 
were  sometimes  packed  rather  closely  together.  There 
were  usually  two  fireplaces,  and  these,  in  the  larger 
huts,  were  sometimes  in  a  separate  room,  but  they 
were  in  general  at  one  side  of  the  single  apartment, 
where  the  floor  was  depressed  by  about  a  foot.2 

Udai. — According  to  Newbold,  the  Udai  were  said 
rarely  to  construct  huts.  They  employed  the  day  in 
roaming  the  forest,  and  sank  down  to  rest  wherever 
fatigue  or  the  shades  of  night  overtook  them.8 

Orang  Laut  or  Sea-Jakun. 

Orang-  Laut,  Sletar. — The  Sletar  tribe  of  the  Orang 
Laut,  though  confining  their  wanderings  to  a  limit  of 
some  30  m.  sq.  (7500  hectares),  might  still  be  considered 
highly  nomadic.  In  boats  (or  "  sampans")  barely 
sufficient  to  float  their  load,  they  would  skirt  the  man- 

1  /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  253,  254.  2  lb.  3  Newbold,  ii.  381,  382. 


198  HABITATIONS  part  n 


groves,  collecting  their  food  from  the  shores  and 
forests  as  they  proceeded,  exhausting  one  spot  and 
then  searching  for  another.  To  one  accustomed  to 
the  comforts  and  wants  of  civilisation,  their  life  ap- 
peared to  be  one  of  extreme  hardship.  Huddled  up 
in  a  small  boat  hardly  measuring  20  ft.  (6  m.)  in 
length,  they  yet  found  in  it  all  the  domestic  comfort 
they  were  in  want  of;  at  one  end  was  the  fire- 
place, in  the  middle  the  few  utensils  of  which  they 
might  be  in  possession,  and  at  the  other  end  beneath 
a  network  awning  (or  "  kajang  "),  not  exceeding  six 
feet  in  length,  was  the  sleeping  apartment  of  a 
family  numbering  as  many  as  five  or  six,  together 
with  a  cat  and  dog ;  under  this  awning  they  took 
shelter  from  the  dews  and  rains  of  the  night,  and  from 
the  heat  of  the  day.  Even  the  Malays  in  pointing 
out  these  confined  quarters  exclaimed  "how  miserable," 
though  of  any  misery  the  objects  of  their  commisera- 
tion were  not  aware.  In  these  same  quarters  they 
found  all  their  wants  supplied  ;  their  children  would 
sport  on  the  shore  at  low  water  in  search  of  shell-fish  ; 
and  during  high  water  they  might  be  seen  climbing 
the  mangrove  branches,  and  dashing  from  thence  into 
the  water,  with  all  the  life  and  energy  of  children  of  a 
colder  clime,  at  once  affording  a  proof  that  even  they 
were  not  without  their  joys.1 

Opang*  Laut,  Sabimba. — The  Sabimba  tribe  (of  the 
Orang  Laut)  erected  in  the  forest  rude  temporary  huts, 
the  floors  of  which  were  on  the  level  of  the  ground, 
and  never  remained  long  in  the  same  spot.-' 

Orang"  Laut,  Muka  Kuning*. — The  tribe  consisted  of 
about  fifty  families,  who  lived  scattered  in  small  huts 
beneath   the   trees   of  the   forest.      Their  huts   were 

1  J.  1.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  344*,  345*.  2  Logan  in/.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  297. 


chap,  in  MALA  \  AN  SEA  GYPSIi  199 


formed  of  a  rude  platform  supported  by  lour  post  - 
about  three  feet  in   height,   from  which   the  rool  oi 
"  s£rdang "    leaves  rose  at  once  without  any   inter 
vening  wall.     They  were  open  at  both  ends,  and  had 

no  ladder  or  door.1 

Orang:  Laut,  Beduanda  Kalian^-.  Before  the  British 
obtained  possession  of  Singapore,  the  Kallang  river, 
which  may  be  said  to  bound  the  present  suburbs  of 

Singapore  to  the  eastward,  was  the  immemorial  haunt 
of  a  small  tribe  who  lived  in  boats,  but  avoided  the 
sea.  Upon  the  cession  of  Singapore  they  were  re- 
moved by  the  Temenggong2  to  the  Pulai,  where  they 
have  remained  ever  since.  They  formerly  consisted 
of  about  one  hundred  families,  occupying  as  many 
boats,  but  these  members  were  reduced  to  eight  by 
the  ravages  of  small-pox.  They  had  so  much  dread 
of  the  sea3  that  they  did  not  venture  to  quit  the  river, 
and  constantly  proceeded  towards  the  interior  before 
night.  When  a  strong  breeze  arose  they  would  drag 
their  boats  ashore,  but  yet  they  never  made  huts.4 

Orang  Laut,  Akik. — The  Akik  tribe  of  the  Orang 
Laut,  on  the  other  hand,  did  build  houses,  erecting 
temporary  sheds  called  "  bagan "  along  the  coast, 
whenever  they  had  occasion  to  go  ashore  to  build  boats, 
mend  nets,  or  collect  dammar  or  wood-oil,  etc.  Other- 
wise they  resided  along  with  their  families  in  their 
boats  for  months  together,  during  which  they  employed 
themselves  both  in  fishing  and  in  collecting  Zostera 
(agar-agar)  and  beche-de-mer  (or  tripang).  They 
frequently  made  long  voyages  in  their  fragile  vessels.5 


1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  337*.  3  But  see  p.  94,  n.  9. 

2  I.e.  the  Raja  of  Johor.  4  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  300. 

5  Newbold,  ii.  413,  414. 


CHAPTER    IV. 

Hunting,  Trapping,  and  Fishing. 

Although  the  aboriginal  tribes  of  the  Peninsula  do 
not  usually  resort  to  the  hunting  of  game  until  their 
supply  of  vegetable  food  begins  to  give  out,  and  they 
thence  begin  to  feel  the  pressure  of  want,  yet  from  the 
moment  they  set  out  on  the  chase  they  shake  off  their 
apparent  apathy  and  appear  as  if  transformed,  show- 
ing themselves  most  keen,  clever,  and  determined 
hunters.  Their  rate  of  progress  through  even  the 
thickest  parts  of  the  jungle  has  already  been  noticed. 
In  shooting,  they  are  most  careful  and  accurate,  seldom 
wasting  an  arrow  or  a  dart,  and  simple  as  their 
weapons  may  appear  to  us,  they  are  able  with  these 
imperfect  means  to  attack  and  destroy  both  the  elephant 
and  the  tiger.  Their  powers  of  scent,  sight,  and 
hearing  are  very  fully  developed  ;  they  are  credited 
with  the  power  of  tracking  snakes  (which,  however, 
have  a  fairly  strong  odour)  by  their  smell  alone. 
Their  knowledge  of  the  movements  of  game  amounts 
to  intuition  ;  they  know  better  than  any  one  the  rare 
hot  springs  and  "  salt  licks  "  where  the  wild  beasts 
congregate,  the  small  cleared  patches  on  lonely 
mountain-heights  where  the  argus  pheasant  "  dances," 

or  the  monkey-king  hunts  for  grubs,  and  the  far-off 

200 


I    IIAf.     I\ 


Gl  VERAl    REM  Ah 


i 


forest  pools,   which    .in-    the   drinking-pla         >i    the 

birds.1 

The  weapons  of  these  tribes  consist  chiefly  of  the 
blowpipe  and  the  bow,  the  former  being  the  weapon 
of  the  Sakai,  the  latter  that  of  the  Semang.      1  <>  th< 

may  be  added    a    rude  kind  of  adze  and   a  jungle-knife 

ov  chopper,  spears  of  palm-wood  or  bamboo,  which 
are  replaced  by  iron-bladed  weapons  among  the 
Malayising  tribes.     Of  the  use  of  the  "squailer"  or 

throwing-Stick,  there  is  not  much  recorded,  although 
these  are  undoubtedly  used,  especially  by  the  Jakun 
tribes  of  the  south.  Throw  ing-sticks  of  hard  wood, 
some  of  which  are  sharpened  at  one  end  only  whilst 
others  are  sharpened  at  both,  are  also  used  by  the 
Peninsular  Malays,  by  whom  they  are  called  (as  by 
the  Jakun)  "seligi."2  They  are,  moreover,  I  believe, 
much  used  by  other  races  of  Indo-China. 

In  trapping  and  fishing  they  are  particularly 
expert — some  of  their  traps  having  the  simplicity  of 


1  Of  their  extraordinary  skill  in 
jungle  travelling,  M.-Maclay  wrote  as 
follows  : — Knowing  the  direction  in 
which  he  was  to  go  and  keeping  it  in 
mind,  the  Sakai  would  try  to  find  out 
the  thinner  patches  in  the  jungle. 
The  saplings  which  he  could  not  avoid 
he  would  bend  aside  with  his  hand 
without  breaking  them  ;  the  larger  ones 
he  would  stoop  or  creep  underneath. 
He  would  never  tear  or  cut  away 
a  liana  or  creeper  which  hung  in  his 
way,  preferring  to  hold  it  in  his  hand 
and  crawl  underneath  it  ;  and  in  spite 
of  this  constant  stooping  and  crawling, 
circumventing  and  circuitous  running, 
he  would  advance  with  great  rapidity. 
In  following,  not  without  trouble, 
these  real  men  of  the  jungle,  M.-Maclay 
had  to  confess  that,  in  spite  of  his 
long  experience  and  practice  in  these 
things,  he  had  found  his  master  in  a 
fifteen -year-old  boy  (/.  ^.  A.  S.,  S.B., 


No.    2,   pp.    212,   213). 

2  Capt.  J.  Bradley  mentions  seeing 
on  several  occasions  in  the  Penin- 
sula what  he  evidently  took  for 
"  squailers,"  and  though  he  gives  no 
details  of  locality,  his  evidence  is  very 
circumstantial.  Thus  in  one  place  he 
says  that  outside  the  tree-huts  which 
they  discovered,  '-a  number  of  spears 
were  laid  among  the  branches  of  the 
trees."  These  consisted  merely  of 
"long  sticks  of  hard  wood,  sharpened 
at  both  ends "  ;  in  other  words,  the 
Malay  "  seligi "  (J.  Bradley,  Travel 
and  Sport,  p.  298).  In  yet  another 
place  he  mentions  that  he  found,  "in 
the  interior  of  one  of  the  huts,  a 
number  of  short  thick  sticks  intended 
apparently  as  missile  weapons.  Several 
of  them  had  traces  of  blood  and 
feathers  adhering  to  them,  as  if  they 
had  been  used  for  knocking  down 
birds"  (id.  p.  330). 


202  HUNTING,   TRAPPING,  AND  FISHING  part  ij 


genius.  Snares  are  perhaps  the  most  commonly 
employed  by  them,  often  differing  little  from  those  in 
use  among  the  Malays — in  which  case  it  is  hard  to 
say  which  way  the  borrowing  went.  An  example  of 
this  is  to  be  seen  in  the  Semang  rat-trap,  which 
appears  to  be  exactly  identical  with  a  bamboo  rat-trap 
commonly  used  by  the  Malays  [e.g.  in  Selangor  and 
Perak).  So,  too,  many  of  the  bird-snares  and 
monkey-traps  employed  by  the  Jakun  are  hardly  to 
be  distinguished  from  those  used  by  the  Malays, 
although  in  a  few  instances,  such  as  in  their  method 
of  catching  fish  by  splashing  or  dabbling  for  them,  and 
a  peculiar  method  of  entrapping  the  argus  pheasant, 
the  Langat  Malays  themselves  informed  me,  probably 
not  without  good  reason,  that  they  had  picked  up 
these  ideas  from  the  Jakun  in  the  same  district. 

I. — Semang. 

Hunting  and  Trapping. 
Semang  (locality  unspecified).  —  The  Semang 
handle  both  the  bow  and  the  spear  with  wonderful 
dexterity,  and  destroy  even  the  largest  and  most 
powerful  animals  (such  as  the  elephant  and  rhinoceros) 
by  ingenious  contrivances.  They  are  also  very 
expert  with  the  blowpipe,  and  poison  their  darts 
with  a  deadly  poison  called  Ipoh,  procured  from 
the  juice  of  various  trees.  They  seldom  suffer  from 
beasts  of  prey,  as  they  are  extremely  sharp-sighted, 
and  as  agile  in  climbing  trees  as  the  monkeys.  Their 
method  of  destroying  elephants,  in  order  to  procure 
their  flesh  or  their  tusks,  is  both  extraordinary  and 
ingenious.  When  they  have  perceived  any  elephants 
ascending  a  hill,  they  lie  in  wait  in  small  parties  of  two 
or  three,  and   as   the  animals  descend   again   (which 


.  hap.  iv  NEGRITi 


they  usually  do  at  a  slow  pace,  plucking  the  brand 
as  they  mow  along),  while  the  hind  legs  are  lifted  up, 
the  Semang  cautiously  approach  them   from   behind, 

and    drive,  by    main     force,  a    sharp  pointed    and     fire 
hardened  splinter  of  ham  boo  or  palm- wood  ("  nibong  "), 
which    has    been    touched  with  poison,  into  the  sole  ot 
their  victim's  foot.1       In  this  way  they  effectually  lame 

him,  and  not  unfrequently  brine  him  down,  when  the 
whole  party  rush  upon  him  with  spears  and  sharp- 
pointed  sticks  and  soon  despatch  him.  The 
rhinoceros  they  obtain  with  yet  greater  ease.  This 
animal,  which  is  of  solitary  habits,  is  frequently  found 
wallowing  in  marshy  places,  with  its  whole  body 
immersed  in  the  mud  and  only  part  of  its  head 
visible.  The  Malays  call  such  an  animal  "  badak  tapa," 
or  the  "  recluse  "  rhinoceros.  Especially  towards  the 
close  of  the  rainy  season  they  are  said  to  seek  places 
in  which  to  bury  themselves  in  this  manner,  and  upon 
the  dry  weather  setting  in,  through  the  powerful  effect 
of  the  vertical  sun,  the  mud  which  surrounds  them 
forms  a  hard  thick  crust,  in  which  the  rhinoceros  is 
imbedded,  and  from  which  it  cannot  effect  its  escape 
without  some  difficulty  and  exertion.  The  Semang 
thereupon  collect  large  quantities  of  combustible 
materials  which  they  convey  to  the  spot,  and  quietly 
approaching,  quickly  build  up  over  the  animal  an  im- 
mense fire,  which,  being  well  fed  with  fresh  fuel, 
soon  completes  his  destruction,  and  renders  him  in 
a  fit  state  to  make  a  meal  of.  The  projecting  horn 
on  the  snout  is  carefully  preserved,  as  it  is  supposed 


1  J.  /.  A.  vol.  iv.  p.  426  ;  cf.  infra,  p.  man  who  .  .  .  would  drive  a  large-bladed 

207,;/.!.  And  cp.  also  Ridley,,  Mam  mals  spear    between  the   hind    legs   [of  the 

of the  Malay  Peninsula,  p.  163  :    "The  elephant]    into    the    abdomen,   which 

Aborigines  known  as  Sakai  sometimes  wound  was  soon  after  fatal,  and  tracking 

hunt  it.      There  was  recently  living  a  the  animal  he  would  secure  the  ivory.'' 


2o4  HUNTING,    TRAPPING,  AND  FISHING  part  n 


to  be  possessed  of  medicinal  properties,  and  is  highly 
prized  by  the  Malays,  to  whom  the  Semang  generally 
barter  it  for  tobacco  and  similar  commodities.1 

Kedah  Semang1. — I  had,  unfortunately,  while  in  the 
Semang    country    no    opportunity    of   testing    in   the 
capacity  of  an  eye-witness  the  remarkable  account  of 
their  methods  of  big-game  hunting  as  related  above  by 
Marsden.     The  weighty  authority  of  the  latter,  how- 
ever, should  strongly  support  his  account,  even  if  we 
did  not  know   that  in   other  parts  of  the  world,  and 
even  of  the  Malay  Peninsula  itself,  methods  quite  as 
ingenious    have    been    recorded."       The    Semang    of 
Kedah,  in   addition  to  the  bow,  spear,  and  blowpipe, 
make  use  of  all  sorts  of  ingenious  traps,  pitfalls,  and 
snares   to  secure  their  quarry.      Birds  are  caught  by 
means  of  a  species  of  bird-lime  manufactured  from  the 
viscid     sap    of    some    of    the    numerous    "ficus"    or 
"gutta"  trees   that   abound    in   the  forest,  and   even 
rats  are  caught   by  means  of  a  peculiar  snare  which 
resembles,  however,  in  principle,  a  rat-trap  commonly 
used  by  the  Malays.      For  hunting  purposes  a  kind  of 
semi-wild  reddish-coloured  dog  is  used,  but  it  does 
not  appear  to  have  much  pace. 

I  may  add  that  the  Semang  do  not  appear  as  a  rule 
to  keep  the  domestic  cat,  but  they  not  unfrequently 
make  pets  of  young  monkeys  (e.g.  the  "  lotong "), 
which,  it  is  alleged,  are  sometimes  brought  up  by  hand. 

Perak  Semang. — Mr.  L.  Wray  writes  me  (in  a 
letter  dated  November  12,  1903)  that  the  Semang  of 
Upper  Perak  kill  big  game  by  means  of  their  bows 
and  arrows,  the  latter  being  poisoned,  and  having 
barbed  heads  and  detachable  fore-shafts. 


1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  iv.  pp.  426,  427.  not    credit      this    account,      which     is 

2  Mr.  Wray  informs  me  that  he  does       supported  by  Logan  and  others. 


chap,  i  NEGRITOS  Of  A  Bk 


Kedah  Semang.  The  wilder  Negrito  tribes  who 
live  on  high  mountains  naturally  depend  little  upon 
lish  as  an  article  ol  diet.  Those  who  dwell  near 
rivers,  however  (<•..•;.  the  Semang  ol  Siong),  no  1- 
naturally  make  use  <>i  fish  for  purpo  i  ol  Food,  and 
though  I  believe  the)  usually  eat  them  in  a  fr< 
condition,  the)  certainly  do  not   always  do  is 

stated   of   the  Sakai    by   Mai-  The   simplest    instru- 

ment   that    they  employ  for  this   purpose   is   ,i    kind   of 

small  basket-work  scoop,  which  is  made  of  bamboo, 

and  is  used  lor  catching  small  fry  in  pools  or  sluggish 
waters,  or  in  any  place,  from  which  their  retreat  is  cut 
off.  For  angling  the  Semang  employ  the  rod  and 
line,  the  rod  being  usually  a  straight  unpeeled  stick 
about  six  feet  in  length,  and  the  line — which  is  usually 
not  much  longer  than  the  rod — being  made  from 
twisted  strands  of  tree-bark  (Artocarftus).  The  line 
is  always  made  fast  to  the  tip  of  the  rod,  and  no  reel 
is  used,  though  the  use  of  it  is  well  known  to  the 
neighbouring  Malays.  The  hooks  are,  as  a  rule, 
roughly  manufactured  from  bits  of  brass  or  other  wire. 
In  addition  to  the  foregoing  the  Semang  are 
adepts  in  the  use  of  fish  -  spears  and  harpoons,  by 
means  of  which  they  kill  or  capture  quite  large  fish 
and  tortoises.  The  harpoon  used  by  the  Semang  at 
Siong  was  of  very  great  length  (about  ten  feet),  and 
was  made  of  the  leaf-stem  of  a  kind  of  large  palm. 
The  river  being  shallow  at  this  spot,  and  full  of 
obstacles,  the  Semang  who  was   to  act  as  harpooner 

1  Cp.  De  M.  viii.  285:  "  Beside  the  the  coast,  whence  they  obtain  salt, 
river  Krian  the  Semang  frequently  de-  nipah  leaves,  shell-fish,  and  fish  which 
scend  to  the   plain,   on    their    way  to       they  d)y."     Cp.  UHomnie,  ii.  716. 


206  HUNTING,   TRAPPING,  AND  FISHING  PART  n 

would  take  his  stand  in  concealment  behind  a  fallen 
tree-trunk  or  snag,  and  there  wait  whilst  another 
Semang  drove  the  fish  upstream  towards  him.  The 
fish  in  endeavouring  to  conceal  themselves  from  the 
latter  would  naturally  make  for  the  snag  or  tree-trunk, 
thus  affording  his  opportunity  to  the  harpooner. 

The  harpoon-head  wras  of  iron,  obtained  from  the 
local  Malays,  and  the  shaft  was  the  leaf- stem  of  a 
palm  called  "  ranggam." 

The  temporary  poisoning  of  the  stream  by  means 
of  the  root  of  Derris  elliptica  (Mai.  "tuba"),  which 
is  a  general  method  of  fishing  among  the  Peninsular 
tribes,  may  also  have  been  practised  by  the  Semang 
at  Siong,  but  I  neither  saw  nor  heard  anything  of  it 
during  my  stay,  any  more  than  I  did  of  the  use  of  the 
casting-net. 

II. — Sakai. 

Hunting  and  Trapping. 

Perak  Sakai. — Their  most  important  weapon  is 
the  bamboo  blowpipe,  a  full  account  of  which  will 
appear  in  a  later  chapter.  By  means  of  the  poisoned 
darts  blown  through  this  tube,  both  birds  and  monkeys 
and  other  small  animals  are  brought  down  from  quite 
high  trees  at  distances  varying  up  to  60  yds.  (55  m.).1 

Mr.  L.  Wray  informs  me  that  he  knew  of  a 
well-authenticated  case  of  a  leopard  being  killed  near 
Gopeng  in  Perak  by  a  Sakai  with  a  blowpipe. 

To  kill  an  elephant  the  Sakai  stalk  it  from  behind 


1   "Almost  their  only  weapon  consists  couple  of  minutes.      They  say  that   if 

of  a  blowpipe  about  seven  or  eight  feet  they    can    hit   an    elephant    or    a    pig 

long,  from  which  they  shoot  poisoned  in  the  eye,   a  couple  of  darts  will  do 

darts  with   great  accuracy  as  much  as  the  job"  (J.  R.A.S.,   S.B.,     No.    4, 

thirty   or  even  forty  paces  (23  m.   to  p.   29).      Cp.    De  M.   ii.   649  seq.  for 

30    m. ) ;    a    single    dart   is    sufficient  further       notes       on       hunting       and 

to  bring  a  bird  or  monkey  down  in  a  trapping. 


Sakai  with  Spring-Trap,   Perak. 


Cemttu 


Sakai   with  Trap,   Perak— Boy  explaining  its  Action. 


Vol.  I.  /.  206. 


m-s 


*&•- 


■ 


BKJmJB^B 


C  emit  i. 


Sakai  Boy  watching  Rat-Tkai-,  Gunong  Urn.   Ui.u  Slim. 


Sakai  Boy  watching  Pig-Trap  (with  Spring-spear),   Ulu  Slim. 


Cerruti. 


CHAP,  iv  A  .//   (>/■    PERAh 


until  they  arc  able  to  drive  a  sharp  pointed  stake  into 
the  sole  of  its  fool  as  th<-  latter  is  lifted  in  walking. 
The  elephant  being  thus  effectually  lamed,  and  un- 
able  tO  pursue  them,  they  shoot   their   poisoned   darts 

into  him  from  behind  a  tree  (preferably  into  his  eye), 

and  thus  despatch  him.  They  are  no  less  ready  to 
attack  the  tiger  and  the  rhinoceros.1 

The  Sakai  of  Perak,  like  the  Semang,  not  un- 
frequently  employ  dogs  in  the  chase,  a  custom  which 
Mohammedanism  has,  no  doubt  (to  some  extent,  though 
not  entirely),  brought  into  disuse  among  the  Malays. - 

The  traps  and  snares  used  by  the  Sakai  are  of 
various  sorts  and  sizes,  one  of  the  commonest  being 
the  "b'lantek"  or  spring-spear  trap,  of  which  there  is 
a  very  good  account  in  Hale.3  This  trap  is  used  for 
killing  game  of  almost  any  size,  from  the  rhinoceros 
to  the  porcupine.  When  used  for  large  game  the 
spear  is  either  manufactured  from  a  single  piece  of 
bamboo,  or  has  its  shaft  made  of  a  hard  piece  of  wood, 
with  a  bamboo  spike  or  blade  firmly  bound  to  its 
lower  extremity.  In  either  case  the  point  of  the 
weapon  is  generally  fire-hardened.  For  small  mammals 
a  hardwood  shaft,  the  end  of  which  is  similarly 
sharpened  and  fire-hardened,  is  employed. 

The  "  b'lantek"  described  by  Mr.  Hale  is  one  of  the 
forms  of  a  Malay  spear-trap  called  "  b'lantek  parap," 
or  the  "  slapping  spring-spear."  The  different  parts  of 
it  are  as  follows  : — 


1  De  la  Croix,  p.  335.  De  M.  held  in  a  bent  position  by  a  bit  of 
{V Homme,  ii.  651)  questions  the  truth  jungle  cord,  which  at  a  touch  releases 
of  this  account.  the  spring,  when  the  spike,  which  is 

2  J.  I.  A,  vol.  iv.  p.  429.  eight  to  ten  inches  long,  is  buried  in 

3  Hale,  pp.  289,  290.  Cp.  "They  the  animal.  The  existence  of  these 
generally  get  pigs  and  deer  by  an  in-  spring  traps  makes  it  advisable  always 
genious  wooden  spring  made  of  the  to  be  accompanied  by  a  Sakai  guide 
branch  of  a  tree  with  a  bamboo  spike  when  moving  about  their  country." — 
fixed  to  the  end   of  it ;    the  spring  is  J.  R.  A.  S.,  S.  B.>  No.  4,  p.  29. 


2o8  HUNTING,    TRAPPING,  AND  FISHING  PART  n 


(i)  A  powerfully  elastic  and  tapering  rod  or 
"  spring "  is  set  horizontally,  with  its  thicker  end 
passed  between  two  trees,  the  butt-end  of  the  spear- 
shaft  (2)  being  securely  lashed  to  its  thinner  extremity. 

Two  strong  uprights  (3)  and  (4),  firmly  planted 
in  the  ground  at  right  angles  to  the  big  spring,  are 
then  connected  by  a  stout  cross-bar  (5)  and  two  pairs 
of  crossed  sticks  (6)  and  (7),  the  latter  being  planted 
in  the  ground  in  a  line  with  the  two  uprights. 

A  cord  is  then  made  fast  to  the  outside  pair  of 
cross-sticks  (7)  and  attached  to  a  rattan  ring  (8), 
which  slides  along  the  cross-bar  (5)  till  the  cord 
connecting  it  with  (7)  is  drawn  taut ;  the  smaller  end  of 
the  big  spring  is  drawn  back  till  it  touches  the  anterior 
upright  (3),  and  set  by  means  of  a  strong  bamboo 
noose  (9),  which  is  held  by  a  small  spring  (9),  the 
other  end  of  which  is  connected  with  the  rattan  ring 
(8)  already  referred  to. 

Any  animal  which  passes  along  the  path  between 
the  two  sets  of  cross-sticks  (6)  and  (7)  and  touches 
the  taut  cord,  in  so  doing  pulls  away  the  rattan  ring 
(8)  and  releases  the  small  spring  (9),  which  flies  up, 
releasing  the  big  spring  in  its  turn,  the  result  being 
that  the  spear  is  driven,  with  all  the  force  that  the 
spring  is  capable  of  giving  it,  straight  towards  the 
animal  that  touched  the  cord. 

The  next  kind  of  spring-trap,  referred  to  by  Hale, 
is  one  in  which  the  big  wooden  spring  is  made  to 
strike  the  butt-end  of  a  spear,  causing  it  to  fly  like 
an  arrow  across  the  track  of  any  passing  animal. 

This  spring-trap  is  undoubtedly  the  "  b'lantek 
paut,"  or  "draw-back  spring-spear,"  of  the  Peninsular 
Malays. 

The  third  kind  of  spring-trap,  which  is  described 


f.    7 


I. 


i  234         De  Morgan. 

Types  of  Fish-Hooks  (Natural  and  Artificial), 

1.  Natural  hooks  of  the  rattan  or  climbing  cane 
{Calamus), 

2.  Single  Malay  fish-hook  (iron). 

3.  Double  hook  of  rattan  used  by  aborigines. 

4.  Single  hook  of  rattan  used  by  aborigines, 


■■<.- 


lV  ^-vJ'  i'      ~1 


.    ,fj£  ->f  <aY  ^ 


De  Morgan. 

Sakai  Fish-Dam,  for  catching  Fish  in  the  Kinta 
River  at  Lubo'  Kelah  i  "  Lobou  Kela"). 

See  p.  211. 
{X.B.   The  lettering  is  not  explained  in  De  Morgan's  text.) 


Vol.  I.  p.  209. 


(ii  \i'.   i\  .  /A  .  //   <>/■    /'/  / 


as  being  worked  on  the  bou  principle,  is  the  Mala) 
11  b'lantek  t  fir  bang,"  or  "  flying  spring-spear." 

I  dn  not,  however,  give  Hale's  description,  as  he 
states  that  t  h< -  Sakai  professed  "  utter  ignorant  e    of  it.1 

All  three  forms  of  the  spring-spear-trap  described 
are,   however,  certainly  known   to  and   used   by   the 

Peninsular  Malays,  though  it  may  be  an  open  question 

whether  the  Malays  or  the  aboriginal  tribes  were  the 

first  tO  employ  it. 

Of  ordinary  snares  or  springes  (tor  animals  and 
birds)  Male  says  that  they  are  made  of  rattan  by  the 
Sakai  and  variously  set  ;  the  most  usual  form  being 
a  simple  rattan  noose  set  taut  by  a  stout  wooden 
spring :  with  these  they  catch  rats,  squirrels,  and 
animals  as  large  as  the  porcupine. ' 

Bird-lime  is  also  employed.  The  sap  of  a  "  gutta- 
tree "  is  boiled  down  until  it  attains  the  required 
consistency,  when  it  is  applied  to  a  number  of  thin 
slips  of  rattan,  these  slips  being  thickly  planted  over 
the  ground  to  catch  small  birds  :  of  some  gregarious 
sorts,  like  the  little  padi-bird,  great  numbers  are 
taken.5 

Fishing. 

Perak  Sakai. — Of  the  Kinta  Sakai  Hale  says  that 
they  do  not  trouble  themselves  about  fishing  until 
their  vegetable  food  is  on  the  point  of  exhaustion. 
They  live  on  the  mountain -tops,  and  do  not  go 
down  to  the  big  rivers  for  fish  unless  forced  to  do  so 
by  scarcity  of  food.4  Once  in  about  three  months 
they  will  make  a  journey  to  one  of  the  big  rivers,  and 
there,   by  means  of  fish-dams,'   etc.,   obtain   a    large 

1  Hale,  p.  290.  2  lb.  3  lb.  p.  291.  *  lb. 

5  Cp.  De  M.  in  UH.  ii.  653. 
VOL.   I  P 


210  HUNTING,   TRAPPING,  AND  PI  SUING  pari  ii 

supply  of  fish.  They  do  not,  however,  understand 
the  drying  of  it,  and  hence  even  the  biggest  haul 
only  means  a  few  days'  feasting,  while  the  fish 
remains  good.1 

De  Morgan  states  that  fishing  with  rod  and  line 
(lignes  volantes)  is  practised  by  the  Sakai,  a  very 
primitive  form  of  hook  being  employed,  which  consists 
of  the  "  curved-back  "  thorns  of  certain  kinds  of  rattan 
(Calamus),  the  line  being  made  from  strands  of  tree- 
bark  (the  fibres  of  Artocarpus)? 

De  la  Croix  says  they  are  very  clever  at  making 
11  bow-nets,"  etc.,  and  that  he  and  Mr.  Brooke  Low, 
in  ascending  S.  Kerbu,  saw  many  small  Sakai  fishing- 
huts  on  the  banks.3 

The  Sakai  also  make  much  use  of  "very  beautiful 
casting-nets,"  manufacturing  the  twine  of  which  the 
net  is  made  from  the  inner  bark  of  a  creeper,  by 
twisting  two  strands  together  on  the  thigh  in  the 
usual  way.  These  nets  are  weighted,  according  to 
Hale,  with  chains  manufactured  from  tin,  which  are 
obtained  from  the  Malays,  and  attached  to  the  outside 
edge  of  the  net.4 

De  Morgan,  however,  sawT  some  which  were  of  still 
simpler  construction,  and  weighted  with  stones,-'  the 
twine  of  which  the  net  was  made  being  manufactured 
from  strands  of  bark  of  the  "  t'rap,"  or  wild  bread- 
fruit tree  (Artocarptis). 

1  Hale,  p.  291.  carrying   the   worms  that  they  use  as 

2  L?  Homme,   ii.    653,   655  ;  but,  on       bait.      Cp.  U  Homme,  ii.  619  (illustra- 
the  other  hand,   Hale  (p.   291)  states       tion). 

that    the     Sakai    "do    not   appear    to  3  De     la     Croix,      pp.     322-325; 

know  anything  of  angling."     De    M.  L' Homme,  ii.  655. 

(HH  ii.  655)  also  speaks  of  their  em-  4   Hale,  p.  291. 

ploying  small   bamboo  receptacles  for  5  De  M.  vii.  418. 


.  HAP.  iv  SAKAI  OF  /'/■  A'.  /A 


Fish'dantSy   Weirsy  and  Traps. 

1  he  Sakai  also  commonly  take  fish  by  means  ol 
fish-dams,   weirs,  and    traps   (all    ol    which    are  con- 
structed verj    closel)  in  accordance  with  the  metho 
o\   the    Malays,  from   whom  they  are  most  probably 
to  a   great    extent   copied.      In   the  case  ol   a   wide 

shallow    river,  a  Y-shaped    fish- fence    is  set    across   the 

stream,  and  a  lish-trap  or  "  weel  "  set  at  the  point  of  the 
V  (which  fronts  upstream).  1  )eep  narrow  streams 
are  fenced  or  dammed  across,  and  the  weels  set  in 
the  opening.1 

Hale  describes  in  detail  (p.  291)  an  extensive 
fish-trap  which  he  saw  in  the  Kinta  river,  where  it 
was  about  sixty  yards  (54  m.)  wide  and  rather  swift. 

His  description  is  as  follows  : — 

A  is  a  grating  of  bamboo,  B  a  platform  to  catch 
the  fish.  C  and  D  are  two  rows  of  strong  posts.  This 
grating  is  built  half-way  across  the  river  (30  yards  ?), 
and  being  strongly  made  wall  last  a  year.  During 
flood-time  many  fish  are  taken,  but  most  during  the 
driest  season  of  the  year,  when  the  second  half  of 
the  river  is  dammed  and  all  the  water  made  to  pass 
through  the  grating. 

In  order  to  assist  this  latter  process  the  scrapings 
of  a  certain  poisonous  jungle-root 2  is  thrown  into  the 
river  some  distance  above  the  grating,  the  effect  of 
which  is  to  drive  the  fish  down  half-stupefied.  Several 
hundred  fish  (many  of  a  large  size)  are  often  taken  by 
this  means. 


1  De  Morgan  relates  how  he  passed  for  catching  fish  (De  Morgan,  viii.  160). 
a  night  in  a  deserted   (Sakai)  fishing-  2  Doubtless  Derris  ellipticay   called 

hut  which  fronted    a  huge  dam   (then  "tuba"    by    the    Malays;    v.    Wray, 

half  demolished)  which  had  been  used  Per.  Mies.  N.,  No.  I.  pp.  19-23. 


212  HUNTING,   TRAPPING,  AND  FISHING  i  n 

Hunting  and    Trapping. 

Selangor  Sakai. — The  second  form  of  spring-spear 
trap  ("b'lantek  paut ")  appears  to  be  identical  with 
that  described  as  the  "  p'lantek  "  by  Letessier,  among 
the  Sakai  of  the  Kuala  Lumpor  district. 

Among  the  snares  used  by  these  Sakai,  the  "  p'lan- 
tek "  (he  says)  is  the  commonest  and  most  dangerous, 
being  composed  of  a  strong  springy  rod  furnished 
with  a  bamboo  dart,  which  is  intended  to  pierce  any 
animal  of  sufficient  size  that  disengages  (in  passing) 
the  short  cord  keeping  the  rod  in  position.  Before 
crossing  the  felled  trees  (which  are  always  in  the 
proximity  of  a  Sakai  habitation)  for  the  first  time,  it  is 
just  as  well  to  ascertain  that  there  are  no  traps  of  this 
description  along  the  route.1 

In  a  graphic  account  of  some  Sakai  tribes  of  the 
Ulu  Langat  district,  the  late  Mr.  J.  A.  G.  Camp- 
bell remarked  that  it  was  very  amusing  to  go  out 
hunting  with  the  Sakai  in  the  jungle,  and  to  see 
the  stealthy  way  in  which  they  went  through  it  with- 
out breaking  a  twig.  Although  their  pace  seemed 
slow,  it  was  very  difficult  to  keep  up  with  them,  and 
they  seldom  failed  to  bring  home  some  bird  or  beast 
for  their  evening  meal.  No  other  race  in  the  Malay 
Peninsula  could  be  compared  with  them  in  respect  of 
their  wonderful  knowledge  of  the  jungle.  They  were 
absolutely  at  home  in  it,  and  did  not  mind  sleeping 
out  in  the  rain  either  under  a  tree  or  up  among  its 
branches.  They  had  a  wonderful  instinctive  knowledge 
of  the  presence  of  animals,  and  could  tell,  when  nobody 
else  could,  of  a  bird  or  animal  moving  at  a  great 
distance.     They  were  even  believed  to  be  able  to  track 

1  Letessier,  p.  ioo. 


McG, 
SAk.M  in  Jungle  Accoutrements,   Sungei  Berang,  Seven  Miles  from  Tanjong  Mai.i.v 


Vol.   [.p.   212. 


* 


^^BC^- 


«  n  \r.  iv  \ K Al  OF  Sh  I  ANGOR  I J 

snakes  l>\  their  smell,  ami  could  at  all  events  catch 
any  number  ol  them  without   the  slightest  difficulty. 
The  Sakai  oi  Ulu  Langat  made  a  good  deal  ol  mon< 
l>\    selling  animals  and  birds  to  the   Mali  I  hey 

hunt    with    blowpipes,    spears,    and    knives  ;    but    some 

have  bought  guns,  \\  hich  many  of  them  use  in  common. 

They  seldom    hope  to  get  more  than  two   deer   a    year 
each,    hut    count    on    about    fifteen    pigs.       They    have 

many  modes  of  trapping  game,  a  favourite  one  being 

to  make  game-fences  (made  of  sticks  planted  in  rows 
with  palm-leaves  tied  across  them),  some  of  which  are 
500  yards  (450  m.)  long,  and  then  to  drive  the  game 
against  this  fence,  and  there  shoot  or  spear  it.  They 
have  many  other  snares  which  are  well  known  to  the 
Malays.  They  are  not  particularly  brave.  Many  of 
them  who  have  guns  are  not  brave  enough  to  hunt  the 
elephant  or  bison,  and  are  not  ashamed  to  tell  you  so.1 

Fishing. 

Selangor  Sakai.  —  The  method  of  fishing  which 
the  Sakai  consider  the  most  important  from  their 
point  of  view,  since  it  is  also  the  most  effective, 
consists  in  temporarily  poisoning  small  streams  and 
rivers  in  the  manner  already  described,  by  means  of 
the  powerful  sap  obtained  from  the  pounded  root  of  a 
plant  wahich  the  Malays  call  "  tuba"  (Derris  ellipticd). 
By  means  of  this  poison  which  is  thrown  into  the  river 
fish  are  stupefied  in  large  numbers,-  and  may  then  be 
caught  by  hand  or  transfixed  with  a  sort  of  harpoon  or 
gaff  made  for  the  purpose. 

1  J.  A.  G.  Campbell,  p.  243.  whether    this    method    of  fish-poison- 

2  The  fish  stupefied  by  means  of  ing  is  borrowed  from  the  Malays, 
"  tuba "  are  in  no  case,  I  believe,  killed  or  vice  versa.  It  is  in  any  case  a 
outright  by  the  poison.  I  should  add,  custom  of  exceedingly  wide  distribu- 
perhaps,    that   it    is   impossible  to  tell  tion. 


2i4  HUNTING,   TRAPPING,  AND  PISHING  part  n 


The  following  descriptionof  oneof  the  Fishing  Feasts 
of  the  Selangor  Sakai,  which  was  witnessed  by  the 
writer  in  the  interior  of  Selangor  (Ulu  Langat  district), 
is  taken  from  the  account ]  of  Father  Letessier.  He 
writes  that  the  fishing  at  Ulu  Beranang,  at  which  he 
was  present,  was  a  great  festivity.  Installed  upon  the 
bank  under  a  few  large  leaves  of  the  "  bertam  "  palm, 
which  were  made  to  lean  obliquely  against  a  horizontal 
pole  nine  feet  from  the  ground,  each  family  at  evening 
counted  the  fish  caught,  and  dried  them  upon  a  large 
wooden  grill  built  over  the  fire,  where  a  bountiful 
supper  was  cooking. 

The  children,  one  above  the  other,  holding  on  to 
the  giant  creepers  which  hung  from  the  great  trees, 
swung  themselves  from  bank  to  bank  or  played  in  the 
water,  in  spite  of  their  mothers,  who  feared  that  the 
poison  might  affect  their  little  ones.  Indeed,  one  of 
them  suffered  a  long  time  from  colic  from  having 
drunk  the  water  too  soon. 

After  supper,  which  was  served  on  plates  of  leaves, 
without  spoon  or  fork,  the  children  recommenced  their 
games,  whilst  their  elders  smoked  cigarettes,  stretched 
at  ease  upon  branches  or  mats.  The  women,  who  had 
done  nothing  during  the  day,  continued  drying  the 
fish  far  into  the  night. 

III. — Jakun. 

Htmting  and  Trapping. 

Blandas. — The  Blandas  of  K.  Langat,  like  most 
of  the  tribes  referred  to,  will  eat  everything  that  they 
can  catch,  and  are  very  expert  in  the  use  of  the  blow- 
pipe, and  employ  dogs  to  discover  their  quarry.    They 

1   Letessier,  p.  ioo. 


M  i ,  < 


Sakai  fishing    \i    I'm    Kali,   I'm    Sei  vngor. 


«>• 


* 


Tf^-r  :,\ 


MCG 


Aborigines  Fishing  at  1"li~  Ki.axg. 

Women  in  stream  driving  the  rish,  old  man  r>n  the  bank  with  hand-net  ("  bintoh  "). 


Voh  I.  p.  214. 


Two  Sakai  Women  with  Pet  Jungle-Pigs.     Ulu  Slim,   Perak. 


Cerrnti. 


Sakai  Women  and  Children  with  Pet  Jungle-Pig. 

The  children's  turn  (notice  face-paint  of  woman  feeding  child).      Ulu  Slim.  Perak. 


Vol.  I.  />■  215. 


i  haf,  iv  WAGE    '/.//  AYS  Of     ii  ANGOR  215 


do  not,  however,  in  hunting  trust  merely  to  their  own 
skill,  o\-  to  that  of  their  dogs,  as  the  following  1  harm 
which  vvas  given   me  by  them  as  a  charm  oi  gn 
efficacy  in  bringing  down  monkeys,  will  show: — 

The  Monkey  Chaem. 

(  Inarm  the  lonli  ol  ape   and  Dion! 

Souls  oilotengi  ''•,;"'i  and 
Come  ye  ii«>w  11     01  feed  the  w Ud  bes 
(  (imc  \<-  di ro  11     ' 'i  feed  the  beai -cal  I 
'I  is  the  "lemp'rai"  stem  up-tippling, 
"Pis  the  "lnnp'iai"  stem  down-settling, 
'Tis  the  "kumbang"  item  down-settling  I 
Forward  then,  at  random  stoppin  . 
Though  one  handmaid  be  short  measure — 
Come  ye  down,  with  souls  enchanted, 
Monkeys,  by  my  spells  enchanted. 
Lo,  it  is  no  dew  descending, 
But  the  tears  of  apes  and  monkeys, 
Tears  of  lotong,  /■></,  and  ivcCwcC. 
Maidens,  'tis  your  souls  descending. 
Deem  ye  me  some  tree-stump  walking, 
Deem  ye  me  the  lightning's  shadow. 
Though  your  eyes  may  see  me  walking, 
Walk  I  hid,  as  one  smoke-shrouded. 
Though  I  pass,  may  ye  not  see  me. 

The  Blandas  also  occasionally  keep  wild  animals 
for  future  consumption,  though  they  cannot  exactly  be 
said  to  fatten  them.  I  have  seen  a  young  wild  pig 
kept  in  this  way,  a  strong  cage  being  built  for  it 
underneath  the  raised  hut -floor  of  a  Blandas  man 
who  lived  on  the  river  Langat. 

Besisi. — The  Besisi  of  K.  Langat,  in  hunting,  still 
as  a  rule  use  the  blowpipe,  though  in  many  places  it 
is  fast  becoming  obsolete.  Most  of  them  also  are 
well  provided  with  spears  and  jungle-knives,  but  in  a 
good  many  cases  one  meets  with  men  who  have 
managed  to  barter  or  buy  an  old  Tower  musket  from 
the  Malays,  and  this  gun  is  then  used  in  common  by 
all  members  of  the  tribe. 

The  Besisi,  like  most  of  the  aborigines,  are  won- 


216  HUNTING,   TRAPPING,  AND  FISHING  PARI  n 


derful  woodsmen.  When  I  was  at  Sepang  they 
frequently  brought  me  in  wild  animals  and  birds  that 
they  had  caught  alive,  among  them  being  specimens 
of  the  Malayan  partridge  ("  sorong  lanting "),  the 
"  bertam  "  bird,  the  argus  pheasant  or  "  kuau,"  various 
kinds  of  chevrotain,  and  even,  on  one  occasion,  the 
rare  and  curious  mammal  called  Gymnura  ("  pijat- 
pijat ").  So,  too,  in  his  account  of  the  wild  tribes 
of  the  same  district,  Mr  J.  A.  G.  Campbell  re- 
marked that  the  Besisi  ("  Orang  Laut ")  used  to 
bring  him  as  many  as  ten  "mangrove"  snakes 
("  ular  bakau  ")  at  a  time,  telling  him  they  had  caught 
them  all  that  morning.  Monkeys,  birds,  tiger-cats, 
etc.,  were  sold  by  them  for  very  small  sums,  and  a 
monkey  that  would  bring  ten  dollars  in  Singapore 
could  be  bought  from  them  for  twenty  cents.1 

In  addition  to  spring-traps,  such  as  those  already 
described,  many  kinds  of  fall-traps  and  springes  ol 
various  kinds,  as  well  as  game-fences,  were  used  by 
the  Besisi  for  trapping  game  of  different  sorts  and  sizes. 

For  bird-lime  many  sorts  of  trees  possessing  a 
viscous  sap  were  resorted  to  and  the  sap  mixed  in 
various  proportions,  the  liquid  being  boiled  down  if 
necessary  till  a  proper  consistency  is  reached.  The 
sticky  gum  thus  obtained  was  applied  to  the  ends  of  a 
number  of  short  rattan  sticks  or  slivers  (from  i  ft.  to 
2  ft.  in  length),  and  these  as  a  rule  were  set  in  notches 
cut  for  the  purpose  with  a  jungle-knife  in  the  branches 
of  the  trees  to  which  the  birds  resorted. 

The  bird-lime  was  usually  kept  (by  the  Besisi)  in 
small  bamboo  tubes,  which  were  corked  with  a  section 
of  the  leaf-stalk  of  a  "  bertam  "  palm. 

In  order  to  capture  the  argus  pheasant  the  follow- 

1  J.  A.  G.  Campbell,  p.  243. 


chap,  iv  SAVAGE    MALA  KS  Ok   SEl  A  VGOR 

ing  very  peculiar  though  cruel  method  was  pur  led. 
The  argus  pheasant,  which  is  .1  most  beautiful  bird, 
is  exceedingly  sh)  oi  man,  and  liv«  s,  a  a  rule,  .1  long 
way  off  iii  the  hilly  part  <>i  the  forest,  where  it  maj 
be  heard  calling,  and  sometimes  (but  very  rarelj  \  can 
be  seen  flying  overhead. 

Here  and  there  these  birds  have  regular  dancing- 
grounds  which  they  clear  of  weeds  and  small  shrubs  by 
seizing  the  roots  with  their  beaks  and  twisting  their 
necks  round  the  steins  so  as  to  drag  the  latter  up  out 
of  the  ground. 

The  Besisi  of  Kuala  Langat,  being  aware  ol  this 
habit,  search  for  one  of  their  dancing-grounds  and 
plant  in  the  centre  of  it  one  or  two  long  and  flexible 
slivers  of  bamboo,  bent  double  so  as  to  form  a  stiff 
kind  of  noose  standing  upright  in  the  ground.  The 
edges  of  these  slivers  are  as  sharp  as  knives,  and 
when  the  birds  twist  their  necks  in  the  nooses  (mis- 
taking them,  it  is  alleged,  for  newly-grown  weeds) 
and  try  to  drag  them  out  of  the  ground,  they  generally 
kill  or  choke  themselves  in  doing  so.1 

Fishing. 

Besisi. — The  Besisi  of  Langat  (as  their  claim  to  be 
Orang  Laut  might  lead  us  to  expect)  are  very  expert 
fishers.  Their  bait,-  for  the  most  part,  consists  of 
worms,  especially  the  sand-worm  ("  pumpun  sarang  "), 
which  they  stalk  and  very  adroitly  dig  up  out  of  the 
sand  before  it  has  time  to  bury  itself  too  deeply. 
They   commonly    also    use,    however,    the    "  pumpun 

1  Often,  however,  they  are  taken  markable  process  here  described,  is 
alive  in  one  of  the  many  kinds  of  bird-  contained  in  the  Museum  at  Cambridge, 
traps  used  by  the  Jakun.  A  model,  2  It  is  described  by  Klinkert  as  re- 
made at  my  request  by  a  member  of  sembling  a  millipede,  as  living  in  the 
the   tribe  in   order  to   exhibit   the   re-  sand,  and  as  affording  bait  for  fish. 


218  HUNTING,   TRAPPING,  AND  FISHING  l  M 

ruat,"  which  is  a  mud-worm  of  immense  length  (some 
I  have  seen  measured  upwards  of  three  feet)  living 
deep  down  in  the  mud  of  the  mangrove  swamps.  A 
good  deal,  perhaps  most,  of  the  angling  is  done  by  the 
women,  whom  I  have  often  seen  fishing  in  this  way, 
and  who  become  very  clever  in  the  use  of  the  rod.1 

A  somewhat  unusual  method  of  rod-fishing  in  vogue 
among  some  of  the  Besisi,  as  well  as  among  some 
of  the  local  Malays  (who  are  said  to  have  learnt  it  from 
them),  is  extremely  curious.  The  fisherman  goes  out 
in  a  dug-out  canoe,  at  about  half- tide,  and  paddles 
gently  in  and  out  among  the  mangrove -roots  in  the 
little  salt-water  creeks  of  the  tidal  rivers.  On 
reaching  a  suitable  spot  he  starts  angling,  using  an 
extremely  short  rod  (not  above  two  feet  long),  and  a 
line  not  more  than  three  feet  long  at  the  most.  A 
novice  might  suppose  that  the  only  chance  of  getting 
a  bite  at  all  under  such  circumstances  from  anything 
better  than  a  gudgeon  would  be  to  remain  as  silent  and 
still  as  the  grave.  The  Besisi,  however,  knowing  his 
fish  better,  splashes  the  tip  of  his  rod  vigorously  in 
the  water.  This  has  the  effect  of  making  his  quarry 
(big  mud -fish  such  as  the  "  sembilang "  2  and  the 
"  b'lukang  ")  go  for  the  bait  with  a  greedy  rush  which 
results  in  their  immediate  capture.  The  fisherman, 
however,  cannot  be  too  careful,  as  the  "  sembilang  ': 
is  furnished  with  very  poisonous  spines  (one  at  each 
side  and  one  on  its  back),  and  I  have  known  these  to 
cause  painful  wounds,  the  effects  of  which  continued 
to  be  felt  for  several  days  afterwards. 


1   Mr.  G.  C.  Bellamy  says  :    "  Some  throw  the  bait  similarly  to  fly-fishing, 

of  the   women   are  expert  fishers,  and  whipping  the  fish  out  with  great  skill  " 

make  use  of  a  light  rod  and  a  line  of  (Bellamy,  p.  229). 
about    the    same    length    as    the    rod.  -  Plotosus  canias,  etc.      The  "  b'lu- 

They  stand  in  the  shallow   water  and  kang  "  is  unidentified. 


.!/•  Greg 
Hunting  Party  with  Blowpipes,   Bukit  Prual,   Kepong,  Selangor. 


Vol.  I.  />.  219. 


chap,  iv  SAVAGL    M  \l  A  YS  Ob     I  /' 


1  may  add  that  I  m\ sell  hav  I         mbila 

bj     the    method    described.       The    Mala)  i    i  all    it 
"  kachau  "  or  "  mSngachau  s<  mbilang  "  ( "  splashing"  or 
"dabbling  for  s€mbilang  "),  and  it  is  thought  that  tl 
fish  take  the  splashing  for  thai  made  by  the  crabs  i 
which  they  iced,  and  which  may  often  be  seen  flittin 
like  small  violet  will-o'-the-wisps,  along  the  edg 
the  tidal  waters,  among  the  forked  mangrove-roots. 

The  Besisi  also  make  use  of  the  Malay  casting-i 
("jala"),as  well  as  of  many  kinds  offish-traps,  which  they 

frequently  set  in  dams  or  fish-fences.  They  also  u 
the  fish-spear,  but  the  method  of  poisoning  fish  by 
means  of  "tuba"  [Derris  ellipticd)  is  now  little  practised 
by  them,  as  it  is  discountenanced  by  the  Government. 
In  addition  to  fish,  the  Besisi  (as  Orang  Laut)  live 
largely  on  shell-fish,  which  they  collect  (for  the  most 
part  by  hand)  on  the  sandy  fiats  of  the  foreshore  in 
the  Kuala  Langat  district.  I  have  frequently  seen  them 
collecting  cockles  ("krang"),  "  kepah,"  "  lokan,"  and 
mussels("kijing"),  whose  breathing-holes  are  plentifully 
visible  in  places  where  the  sand  and  the  mud-flats 
meet  and  the  Berembang  and  Api-api  trees  cover  the 
surface  with  their  network  of  surface-roots  and  pointed 
suckers.  The  discarded  shells  are  thrown  away  near 
the  houses,  and  diminutive  kitchen-middens  are  thus 
occasionally  to  be  seen  in  the  actual  process  of  formation. 

Hunting  and  Trapping. 

Mantra.  —  The  Mantra  use  poisoned  bow -traps 
as  well  as  darts  for  killing  their  game.  A  springy 
rod  is  planted  in  the  ground  with  a  short  spike  fixed 
to  it  near  the  point,  at  right  angles.  The  spike  is 
poisoned  with  "  ipoh,"  and  the  point  lightly  pinned  to 
the  ground  with  a  wooden  fork,  so  that  the  slightest 


22o  HUNTING,   TRAPPING,  AND  FISHING  part  ii 


touch  may  release  it,  and  the  spike  strike  its  intended 


victim.1 


Benua-Jakun    (of   Johor).    -According    to    Logan, 
it    was   in    the    forest    that    the    Benua   sought    their 
principal    supplies    of  animal   food.      Their    favourite 
dish — the  flesh  of  the  wild  hog — was  also  that  which 
was   procurable   in   the  greatest   abundance.      Logan 
passed  several  tracts  which  seemed  literally  to  swarm 
with  the  hog.      For  miles  together  the  banks  of  some 
streams  were   covered  with  the  prints  of  their  feet, 
and  in  some  moist  hollows  their  tracks  were  so  abun- 
dant that  it  was  impossible  to  recognise  the  path,  and 
his  guide  repeatedly  lost  it.      In  other  districts,  again, 
they  seemed   to   be  less  numerous.     They  were  par- 
ticularly plentiful  in  some  places  to  the  southward  of 
the   Lulumut  chain,  and   the   men   of  the   settlement 
called  Durian-tree  Village  (Kampong  Pohun  Durian), 
on  the  river  Pines,  a  few  days  before  his  arrival  there, 
had  killed  fifteen.     They  were  killed  by  the  help  of 
dogs  and  spears.     Of  the  two  varieties  of  dog  which 
the   Benua  possessed,  the  larger  one  was  the  proper 
hunter  of  the  hog,  although  the  smaller  used  also  to  be 
joined  in  the  chase.     Their  spear- head,  wThich  was  of 
native  fabrication,  was  broad   and   very  thin   towards 
the   edges.      It  was   set  on  a  shaft   about  eight  feet 
long,  and    formed    a    light    and    serviceable    weapon, 
without   which   the    Benua   never    ventured   into   the 
forest  or  went  upon  a  journey,  and  in  the  efficiency  of 
which,  for   defensive  and  offensive  purposes,  he  had 
much  confidence.     Whenever  he  entered  a  house  his 
spear    was    stuck,   with    the    head   upwards,   into   the 
ground  in  front  of  the  doorway.2 


1  Geiger,  p.  29. 
2  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  256,  257  ;  cp.  ib.  vol.  ii.  p.  2 58. 


m 


*  ■■■*    «v 


'V 


-«r 


McGregor. 

Jakun  Women  (Ulu  Klau,   Pahang),   with  Hunting  Dog  in  Foreground. 


Vol.    I.  p.    221. 


(n\r.  iv  SAVAGE  MALA  V     01   /<>//> '//  ti 


Elsewhere  we  are  t<>l<l  by  the  same  writer  thai  in 
to  the  hog,  deer  were  mosi  sought.  The  roe-deer 
("  kijang  ")  and  the  sambhur  ("  rusa  ")  were  chased  by 
the  larger  variety  oi  dog,  and  the  diminutive  mou  .<  deer 
("  p'landok  ")  by  the  small  variety,  which  was  generally 
reserved  for  that  purpose.     It  had  some  resemblan 

to   the    Bengal  fox,  and  appealed  to  be  allied    to    the 
Chinese  breed.     The  most  common  mode  of  hunting 

the  mouse-deer  was  to  send  the  doe;  into  the  jungle 
on  the  hanks  ot  a  Stream,  the  Benua  either  slowl) 
floating  down  the  current,  or  pulling  against  it  in  his 
canoe,  and  cheering  on  and  guiding  the  dog  with  his 
deep,  long-drawn,  monotonous  cries  of  "  oh  !  oh  !  oh  !  ' 
The  dog,  on  running  down  a  mouse-deer,  was  said  to 
be  in  the  habit  of  breaking  its  leg,  and  then,  by  means 
of  barking,  to  direct  the  hunter  to  the  spot.  The 
only  domestic  animals  besides  the  dogs,  of  which 
several  were  to  be  found  in  every  cottage,  were  fowls 
of  a  larger  breed,  and  the  common  Malay  cat.1 

Trapping. 

Benua-Jakun. — A  formidable  and  effective  snare 
was  used  by  the  Johor  Benua,  as  well  as  by  the 
Berembun  tribes,  for  capturing  or  killing  the  deer 
and  the  hog,  and  even  in  some  cases  the  tiger.  It 
consisted  of  a  slight  and  rude  game-fence  carried  to 
a  considerable  length  across  the  ground  which  the 
animals  were  expected  to  traverse.  At  every  twenty 
or  thirty  feet  openings  were  left,  between  which  spears 
were  fixed  (close  to  and  parallel  with  the  fence),  with 
the  heads  reaching  across  the  openings.  The  end  of 
the  shaft  was  fastened  to  the  extremity  of  a  freshly  cut, 

1y.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  257. 


222  HUNTING,   TRAPPING,  AND  FISHING  PART  n 

and    therefore    highly    elastic,    sapling,    placed    hori- 
zontally, and  measuring  about  fifteen   feet  in  length 
and  two  to  two  and  a  half  inches  in  breadth.     The 
other  extremity  was  fastened  to  a  strong  stake  driven 
into  the  ground,  and  within  a  few  feet  of  this  another 
stake  was  placed  (in  such  a  direction  that  when  the 
sapling  was  forcibly  bent  back  against  it  for  two  or 
three  feet  it  was  perpendicular  to  the  fence).     The 
method   by   which   it   was   retained   so   retracted   was 
equally  simple  and  effective.     A  rough  pole  secured 
by  two  stakes  was  placed  parallel  to  one  of  the  poles 
of  the  fence  (on  the  side  where  the  spear  and  its  other 
apparatus  were),  but  at  a  level  a  little  below  that  of 
the  spear.     A  stick   measuring  a  few  feet   long  was 
then  bound  firmly  to  one  extremity  of  the  sapling  so 
as  to  be  parallel  to,   and  on  the  same  level  as,  the 
spear,  while  the  other  extremity,  well  smoothed,  was 
made  to  pass  under  another  stick  which  was  fixed  at 
right   angles   to  it,   the   ends  of  which   passed  under 
the  two  poles.     The  sticks  retained  their  position  by 
their  mutual  pressure.    To  this  cross-stick  a  black  and 
thin,  but  very  strong,  string  was  fastened.     The  other 
end  of  the  string  was  attached  to  the  further  side  of 
the  opening,  and   the   portion   passing   across  it  was 
made  to  hang  loosely.     When  an  animal  entered  the 
opening  the  pressure  of  its  body  on  this  part  of  the 
string  pulled  the  cross-stick  forwards.     An  advance  of 
less  than  an  inch  released  it,  and  the  instant  the  stick 
which  kept  the  sapling  bent  was  thus  freed  in  its  turn, 
the  latter  sprang  forward  with  immense  force  to  its 
natural  position,  and  the  spear  was  driven  into  the 
body  of  the  animal,  indeed   in   many  cases  probably 
right    through    it.      The    slightness   of  the   pressure 
required  to  release  the  spring,  and  the  rapidity  and 


chap,  iv  ;  JOHOR 

irresistible  force  with  which  the  spear  impelled 

across  th<i  opening  were  admirable.  The  materials 
for  every  part  of  this  contrivance  were  collected  from 
the  lorcsi  around,  Even  the  spear  head  was  made  of 
a  species  oi   bamboo  (the   "buloh   kasap")  and  v 

exceedingly  hard  and  sharp.' 

The  Berembun  tribes  also,  to  capture  wild  animals, 
dug  pits  about  twelve  feet  in  depth,  which  they 
covered  over  with  brushwood." 

Wild  pigeons,  wild  fowl,  and  many  other  birds 
used  for  food  were  caught  by  means  of  bird-lime,  of 
which  they  possessed  several  very  effective  kinds, 
prepared  by  mixing  the  viscid  sap  yielded  by  different 
trees.3 

Fishing. 

Benua-Jakun. — Many  families  had  small  huts  on 
the  bank  of  the  nearest  stream  on  which  they  kept 
canoes,  and  men,  women,  and  children,  one,  as  a  rule, 
to  each  canoe,  were  everywhere  met  with  engaged 
in  the  quiet  occupation  of  angling.  They  had,  how- 
ever, other  methods  of  catching  fish.  The  most 
common  was  by  means  of  small  portable  traps  woven 
from  rattan  creepers  (Calami).  Rows  of  stakes  or  fish- 
fences  were  also  used.  But  the  most  elaborate  form 
of  fish-trap  consisted  of  a  large  framework,  like  the 
skeleton  of  a  bridge,  which  was  thrown  right  across 
the  stream,  and  at  a  level  some  feet  higher  than  the 
banks,  so  as  to  be  above  inundations.  A  line  of  stakes 
was  fixed  across  the  river-bed,  an  opening  being  left 
in  the  middle.  Above  this  the  Benua  took  his  seat 
on  a  small  platform  (sometimes  sheltered  by  a  roof), 

1  /.  /.  A.    vol.    i.     pp.    257,    258.       proved   fatal,  v.   Lake  in  /.  A.  A.  S., 
Accidents  from  these  traps  often  occur       S.  /?.,  No.  25,  p.  4. 
to    human    beings.       For    one    which  2  J,  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  257,  258.      3  lb. 


224  HUNTING,   TRAPPING,  AND  FISHING  part  ii 


and  suspended  a  small  net  in  the  opening.  On  this 
net  he  kept  his  eyes  intently  fixed,  and  as  soon  as  a 
fish  entered  he  raised  the  net  and  extracted  it.  The 
rivers  and  streams  abounded  in  fresh-water  fish,  and 
there  were  about  fifty  species.1 

Udai. — The  Udai  were  described  by  Newbold  as 
preferring  the  delights  of  the  chase  to  the  drudgery  of 
agriculture  ;  they  employed  the  day  in  roaming  the 
forest,  and  subsisted  on  the  flesh  of  the  animals  that 
they  captured.2 

Orang  Laut  or  Sea-Jakun. 

Orang*  Laut,  Sabimba. — To  the  blowpipe  as  their 
principal  weapon  the  Sabimba  owed  all  that  they  could 
obtain  of  the  animals  that  lived  in  the  trees  of  the 
forest,  whilst  with  their  dogs  (a  "  species  of  pariah  ") 
they  hunted  the  wild  hog.3 

Orang"  Laut,  Beduanda  Kallang\  —  The  Beduanda 
Kallang  were  fishermen  and  foresters,  and  divided 
their  time  between  these  two  pursuits.  They  had 
small  fishing-stakes  near  the  mouth  of  the  river  which 
some  of  them  visited  in  the  mornings.4 

Orang*  Laut,  Akik. — The  Akik  were  expert  divers 
and  fishermen,  and  employed  nets  which  they  made 
themselves.5 


1  /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  256.  3  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  347*. 

2  Newbold,  ii.  381,  382.  4  lb.  p.  300. 

5  Newbold,  ii.  413,  414. 


CHAPTER    V. 
Modes  of  Barter. 

Moni'.v  is  not  yet  understood  by  any  but  the  most 
civilised  members  of  the  three  races,  all  of  whom  trade 
to  a  greater  or  less  extent  in  jungle  produce,  the  chid 
articles  bartered  being  gutta,  tree-gum  or  "dammar," 
wood-oils  (camphor,  benzoin,  etc.),  perfumed  wood, 
e.g.  eagle-wood  or  "gharu,"  and  to  a  limited  extent, 
minerals,  more  especially  tin. 

In  return  the  jungle -folk  get  rice,  tobacco,  salt, 
areca-nuts,  cloth,  cooking  utensils,  implements,  tools, 
and  weapons,  and  occasionally  such  luxuries  as  beads 
and  (very  rarely)  looking-glasses. 

They  appear  to  possess  a  decided  preference 
(doubtless  due  to  the  fact  that  neither  are  Mussulmans) 
for  dealings  with  the  Chinese,  who  obtain  for  them 
various  articles  which  have  now  become  necessities 
of  their  existence,  and  who  do  not  cheat  them  so 
mercilessly  as  the  Malays. 

In  many  Malay  legends  reference  is  made  to  the 
alleged  Sakai  and  Semang  practice  of  depositing 
the  objects  that  they  were  willing  to  barter  in  a 
recognised  spot,  and  then  returning  a  few  days  later 
to  take  up  the  articles  that  the  Malays  had  mean- 
while deposited  in  the  same  spot  by  way  of  payment 

VOL.   I  Q 


226  MODES  OF  DARTER  part  11 


— a  method  allowing  plenty  of  scope  for  the  chicanery 
of  which  the  Malays  are  so  generally  accused. 

Logan's  remarks  upon  the  Benua-Jakun  of  Johor 
are,  however,  quite  to  the  point  here,  and  apply 
almost  equally  to  all  branches  of  the  tribes  in  the 
Peninsula. 

At  all  events  (he  says)  it  is  to  the  Malays  that  the 
more  civilised  aborigines  owe  every  departure  from 
their  original  forest  habits.  If  we  deprive  them  of 
those  articles  for  which  the  Malays  have  purposely 
infected  them  with  a  taste,  and  those  they  have  them- 
selves voluntarily  sought  from  the  desire  to  imitate 
and  approximate  to  the  habits  of  the  more  civilised 
appropriators  of  their  country,  there  will  remain  hardly 
anything  to  distinguish  them  from  their  wilder  com- 
patriots. Indeed,  examples  may  still  be  seen  of  men 
whom  indolence  alone  prevents  from  working  up  to 
the  high  prices  that  the  Malays  would  exact  from 
them,  and  who  live  in  a  wild  nomadic  condition,  their 
only  clothing  a  loin  -  cloth,  and  their  food  limited 
during  the  greater  part  of  the  year  to  the  produce  of 
their  clearings  and  of  the  forest.1 

Compared  with  the  labour  that  the  acquisition 
of  the  necessaries  of  life  costs  them,  that  which  is 
required  to  obtain  the  few  luxuries  and  conveniences 
to  which  they  are  now  habituated  is  excessive. 
Instead  of  a  scanty  and  irregular  supply  of  clothing 
and  other  articles,  it  should,  in  view  of  the  fact  that 
their  industry  is  greater,  suffice  to  raise  them  eventually 
to  a  condition  of  greater  plenty  and  comfort  than  has 
been  attained  by  the  Malays  themselves.2 

1  /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  285,  286.  ■  lb. 


(  ii  \r.  \  .\  /  GRI7\ 


1.     Semang, 

Semang"  (no  district  specified).  In  1S35,  the  usual 
method    of    barter    employed     between     the     Semang 

and  the  Malays  was  for  the  latter  to  deposit  their  com- 
modities, consisting  chiefly  of  coarse  cloths,  tobacco, 

and  knives,  in  any  open  space  in  the  vicinity  oi  the 
known  Semang  camping-grounds,  and  then  retire  to  a 
convenient  distance.  The  Semang  would  next  ap- 
proach, and,  having  selected  such  articles  as  they 
fancied,  bear  them  oft",  leaving  in  their  place  what- 
ever they  might  deem  a  fair  equivalent  ;  this  latter 
consisted  chiefly  of  elephants'  teeth,  eagle-wood,  resin, 
canes,  rattans,  and  so  forth,  of  which,  through  ignorance 
of  their  market  value,  the  Semang  always  left  an 
ample  supply.  A  few,  however,  who  had  partially 
overcome  their  timidity,  and  occasionally  ventured  to 
approach  the  Malayan  villages,  speedily  learned  to 
profit  by  the  superstitions  and  fears  of  their  new 
acquaintances,  and  to  demand  a  high  and  exorbitant 
rate  for  the  vegetable  preparations  which  they  were 
wont  to  use  as  medicine.1 

In  a  more  detailed  account  we  are  told  that  a  few 
of  them  who  ventured  to  approach  the  Malayan 
villages  obtained  a  little  cloth  in  exchange  for  elephants' 
teeth,  eagle-wood,  wax,  woods,  gums,  "  dammar,"  and 
canes  which  they  procured  in  the  forest,  but  of  the  in- 
trinsic value  of  which  they  possessed  but  little  know- 
ledge, so  that  they  were  generally  imposed  upon  by 
the  crafty  Malay.  From  the  Malays  also  they  pro- 
cured their  arms,  knives,  and  tobacco,  of  which  last 
they   made  great   use.     In  their  own  turn,  however, 

1  Begbie,  pp.  8,  9. 


228  MODES  OF  BARTER  part  ii 


they  frequently  learnt  to  work  upon  the  superstitions 
of  the  Malays  (when  they  had  no  products  to  barter, 
and  wished  to  procure  a  supply  of  tobacco),  by  pre- 
senting them  with  medicines  which  they  pretended  to 
derive  from  particular  shrubs  and  trees  in  the  woods, 
and  represented  as  efficacious  for  the  cure  of  headache 
and  other  complaints.1 

Pangan. — The  Pangan  or  Eastern  Semang  that 
we  saw  at  Ulu  Aring  in  Kelantan  used  to  depend 
upon  the  Malay  hamlet  of  Kampong  Buntal  for  their 
rice,  as  well  as  for  their  salt  and  their  tobacco,  and 
had  come  down,  in  fact,  at  the  time  when  we  were 
there  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  this  latter  com- 
modity, of  which  I  myself  was  able  to  present  them 
with  a  considerable  supply.  The  only  other  articles 
for  which  they  were  usually  indebted  to  the  Malays 
were  the  cloths  they  wrapped  round  their  waists,  and 
the  blades  of  their  jungle-knives  and  spear-heads.  On 
the  other  hand,  one  of  the  men  that  we  observed  was 
in  possession  of  a  razor  which  had  been  "given"  him 
(doubtless  in  return  for  more  than  its  fair  equivalent 
in  other  commodities)  by  the  Malay  chief  or  "  Peng- 
hulu  "  of  the  village. 

Kedah  Semang*.  —  The  Semang  of  Kedah  had 
themselves  grown  a  small  field  of  rice,  and  to  the 
extent  of  their  harvest  were  independent  of  the  local 
Malays,  so  far  as  their  food-supply  was  concerned. 
Nevertheless  the  scantiness  of  this  stock  made  it 
quite  clear  that  in  a  few  months  they  would  have 
come  to  an  end  of  it,  and  would  either  be  obliged  to 

1  J.  I.  A.    vol.    iv.    pp.    425,    426.  Similar   charges   are,   of   course,   often 

This    account    is    not    quite    just    to  made  by  the  Malays  (from  whom  this 

the  Semang,  who  undoubtedly  offered  idea  may  have  been  derived),  but  on 

to   the   Malays  what   they  themselves  proper  investigation  they  prove  to  be 

regarded      as     efficacious     medicines.  baseless. 


chap,  v  SAKA1  i >/    /'/■  i 

live  again  lor  a  while  on  roots  and  fruit  ..  or  (more 
probably)  to  eke  out  the  shortness  ol  their  own  supply 
with  a  Fresh  store  obtained  from  the  Mala)  I  he 
knives,  spear  heads,  and  even  the  harpoon-heads  used 
by  this  tribe  were  all  of  Mala)-  manufacture,  as  were 
also  all  the  cloths  that  the)-  were  wearing. 

Perak  Semang.      As   to  the  extent   to  which  th< 
simple  ways  of  trade  were  employed,  Me  Morgan  says 

that  the  Semang  obtained  a  "considerable  portion  "  of 
their  livelihood  by  the  barter  of  jungle  produce  with 
the  Malays.1  lake  the  earlier  authorities  quoted,  he 
adds  that  they  were  "  absolutely  ignorant "  of  the 
value  of  money." 

II. — Sakai. 

Perak  Sakai.  —  The  wild  Sakai  of  the  Perak  Hills 
(Sakai  Bukit)  in  trading  with  the  Malays  always 
either  employ  a  "tame"  Sakai  as  their  intermediary, 
or  else  confine  themselves  to  depositing  their  jungle 
products  on  the  banks  of  the  rivers  at  times  and  in 
places  which  are  tacitly  understood.  They  then 
withdraw,  returning  some  time  later  to  fetch  the 
articles  which  the  Malays  offer  them  in  exchange.3 

The  articles  in  which  the  Sakai  usually  trade  are 
enumerated  by  De  la  Croix  as  including  tree-gum,  resin 
(or  "dammar"),  gutta,  caoutchouc,  wax,  honey,  ivory, 
and  rhinoceros  horns.  These  articles  they  dispose 
of  to  the  Malays,  not  for  ready  money,  but  for  cloth, 
salt,  kitchen  utensils,  etc.,  the  Malays  being  too 
clever  to  lose  by  the  exchange.4 

Selangor  Sakai. — The  Sakai  of  Selangor  (Kuala 
Lumpor  district)  appear  to  have  a  decided  preference 

1  De  Morgan,  viii.  296.  3  De  la  Croix,  p.  340. 

~  I*.  *   lb.  p.  337. 


230  MODES  OF  BARTER  part  ii 

for  dealing  with  the  Chinese,  who  supply  them  with 
tobacco,  cloth-stuffs,  rice,  tools,  and  cooking  utensils, 
in  return  for  various  articles  of  jungle  produce,  such 
as  gutta-percha  and  charcoal.  They  do  not  have 
recourse  to  the  Malays  except  when  there  are  no 
Chinese,  as  they  are  frequently  cheated  by  the  former, 
whereas  the  latter  treat  them  not  only  with  scrupulous 
honesty,  but  even  with  a  sort  of  u  fraternal  cordiality."  l 

III. — Jakun. 

Blandas. — The  foregoing  descriptions  of  barter  as 
it  obtains  among  the  Semang  and  the  Sakai  of  Perak 
apply  so  closely  to  the  Blandas  of  Kuala  Langat 
that  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  particularise  further. 
An  interesting  point,  however,  which  is  worth  men- 
tioning is  that  both  the  Blandas  and  the  Besisi,  their 
neighbours,  make  considerable  use  of  incantations  and 
magic  in  collecting  their  jungle  produce.  The  follow- 
ing charm  employed  by  the  collectors  of  wild  honey 
is  a  fair  example  : — 

Honey-gatherers'  Charm. 

"  Mung,  mung,  mung  !  ,;  the  moon-white  apes  cry 

(Apes  of  "  rock  "  and  "  well  "  and  "basil  "), 

Come  ye  out  into  the  moonlight. 

Hearken  to  me  with  affection, 

List  to  me  with  kind  affection, 

Grannies,  hark  to  me,  your  grandchild, 

Who  but  begs  for  you  to  teach  him 

How  to  weave  a  mat — of  rushes  ! 

Grannies,  o'er  the  seas  come  hasting, 

O'er  the  hills  come  hasting,  Grannies  ! 

Swinging,  swaying,  come  ye  hither  ! 

All  I  beg  is,  you  should  teach  me 

How  to  weave  a  mat — of  bees-wax  ! 

Grannies,  hark  to  me  your  grandchild  ! 

When  I  have  explained  that  the  moon -white 
"apes"  in   this   invocation  are  probably  intended   to 

1  Letessier,  p.  ioo. 


i  hap.  v  SAVAGE  MALA  vs  <■/   SELANGOR 

represent   the    Blandas  honey  collectors   themselv< 
and  that  the  word  "  ( rrannies  "  refera  to  the  wild 

who  are  supposed    to  be  deceived  by  tin's  quaint   pi< 
of  fiction,    I    think    the   purport    of   this  (harm   will    be 
Sufficiently  clear  without  further  explanation. 

Besisi. — The  same  remarks  apply  to  the  Besisi ; 
one  of  the  charms  used  by  whom  (in  collecting  wild 

honey)  was  quoted  by  the  present  writer  in  Malay 
Magic}  1  may  add  that  the  Besisi  in  the  Kuala  Langat 
district  often  raised  a  considerable  crop  of  rice,  and 
it  was  the  object  of  the  neighbouring  Malays  to  cajole 
as  much  of  this  out  of  them  as  possible.  On  several 
occasions  I  was  obliged  to  step  in  to  protect  them  as 
far  as  I  could  from  their  rapacious  neighbours.  The 
latter  frequently  charged  the  Besisi  with  using  false 
measures  and  similar  methods  of  deception,  but  I 
never  found  that  the  charge  could  be  fairly  sub- 
stantiated, and  have  little  doubt  that  the  real  object 
of  these  charges  was  to  discredit  and  rob  the  Jakun. 

Mantra. — Of  the  Mantra  we  are  told,  on  the  high 
authority  of  Logan,  that  there  were  "  no  traders,  shop- 
keepers, or  artificers  "  among  them,'2  but  this  does  not, 
of  course,  signify  that  the  Mantra  do  not  engage  in 
the  ordinary  trade  in  jungle  products.  In  addition 
to  this  we  are  informed  that  the  Mantra  have  no 
weights,  but  employ  the  (usual)  coconut-shell  as  a 
measure.3 

Benua-Jakun  of  Johor. — But  by  far  the  clearest  and 
most  circumstantial  statement  of  the  trading  methods 
of  any  of  those  Peninsular  tribes  is  Logan's  report 
upon  the  trade  of  the  Benua-Jakun  of  Johor. 

The  Malays  (according  to  Logan)  have  taught  the 

1  For    this,    and    another    Blandas       App.  p.  611. 
charm  of  the  same  kind,  v.  Mai.  Magic,  -  /.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  330*.         3  lb. 


232  MODES  OF  BARThR  pah  11 

Jakun  to  covet  things  which  he  knows  not  how  to 
procure  save  from  them.  These  are  cloth,  and  certain 
articles  of  earthenware  and  iron,  such  as  coarse  plates, 
pots,  pans,  chopping-knives  or  "  parangs,"  and  axes. 
Sugar  and  coconuts  again  are  both  much  prized. 
The  Jakun's  supply  of  rice  often  fails.  His  tobacco 
is  deficient  in  strength.  Although  he  has  both  wild 
and  cultivated  betel-vines,  he  has  neither  gambier, 
areca-nut,  nor  lime.  Hence  the  Malays  often  ascend 
the  river,  their  canoes  laden  with  a  tempting  variety 
of  these  particular  articles,  and  the  Jakun,  unable  to 
resist  the  desire  of  calling  some  of  them  his  own, 
needs  little  persuasion  to  become  indebted  to  the 
Malay  trader  for  any  amount  the  latter  may  choose  to 
impose  upon  him.  The  Jakun  now  finds  himself  in 
possession  of  a  few  of  those  things  which  bring  him 
nearer  the  Malay,  and  at  the  same  time  under  an 
obligation  to  collect  rattans  for  his  creditor,  various 
kinds  of  eagle -wood,  ("gharu'  and  "  chandan "), 
camphor,  resin  or  "dammar,"  wax,  and  "gutta  taban."  l 
These  articles,  with  the  exception  of  the  "  dammar," 
of  which  he  makes  torches,  are  articles  of  no  value  in 
his  own  eyes,  but  in  which  his  forests  so  abound 
that,  if  a  more  equitable  system  of  exchange  were 
established  between  him  and  the  Malays,  he  would 
not  only  find  himself  in  possession  of  a  large  supply 
of  all  those  articles  which  are  now  sparingly  doled  out 
to  him,  but  actually  also  of  a  growing  capital.  The 
collection  of  the  above  commodities,  however,  does 
not  form  a  constant  or  regular  employment  for  any  of 

1   Hervey,  in/.  R.  A.  S.,S.£.,  No.  I  was  told  they  were  too  busy  getting 

8,  pp.  103,  104,  says,  in  writing  of  the  rattans  for  the  Malays,  which  they  do 

Jakun  of  Johor  :   "  At  this  place,  Kam-  at   a    fixed    price    in    rice    and    other 

pong  Kenalau,  I  found  a  clearing,  but  articles,   such    as    clothing,    crockery, 

no  cultivation  ;  on  asking  the  reason,  parangs  (choppers),  salt,  and  tobacco." 


chap,  v  SAVAGE   MALA  VS  01  JOHOR 

the  [akun,  It  is  only  when  there  ia  an  unusual 
demand  for  any  of  them  in  Singapore  that  the  Mala 

hurry  to  the  interior  and   induce  the  Jakun    to  engage 

for  a  time  in  procuring  ;i  supply  oi  whatever  happens 
to  be  in  request.  At  the  period  of  Logan's  visit 
nearly  every  man  in  the  country  wa  searching  for 
"gutta  taban,"  to  which  the  name  oi  "  gutta-percha/' 
a   gum  yielded   by  a   different    tree,    is   erroneously 

applied  by  Europeans.  This  tree  was  one  oi  the 
commonest  in  the  forests  of  Johor.  It  is  not  found 
in  the  alluvial  districts,  but  in  undulating  or  hilly 
ground  (such  as  that  which  occupies  the  centre*  of 
the  Peninsula  between  the  Endau  and  the  Batu 
Pahat)  it  occurs  frequently,  and  in  some  places 
abundantly.  Wherever  Logan  penetrated  he  found 
that  collectors  of  "  taban  "  had  preceded  him.1 

The  Jakun,  after  felling  the  tree,  "  ringbarks " 
the  trunk  by  making  an  incision  completely  round  it, 
from  which  the  viscous  milk  flows.  Similar  incisions 
are  made  at  distances  of  from  6  to  18  inches  through- 
out the  entire  length  of  the  trunk.  The  rings  are 
no  broader  than  the  blade  of  the  chopper  with  which 
they  are  made,  no  bark  being  removed  save  the 
rough  superficial  coating  for  an  inch  or  two  on  each 
side.  Many  trees  felled  by  Malays  had  rings  of  bark 
to  the  breadth  of  about  an  inch  cut  right  out  instead 
of  a  single  incision.  A  Malay  woodman  who  had  been 
employed  in  different  places  in  procuring  the  gutta 
stated  that  this  was  the  usual  Malayan  system.  The 
bark  is  not  stripped  off  the  tree,  as  has  been  stated. 
Logan  asked  both  the  Malays  and  the  Jakun  in  different 
parts  of  the  country  whether  they  could  not  procure  the 
gutta   in  the  same  way  as  they  collect  the  dammar, 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  260,  261. 


234  MODES  OF  BARTER  part  n 


without  destroying  the  tree.  But  the  answer  always 
was  that  the  "  taban  "  would  not  run  like  dammar, 
or  like  many  other  guttas,  such  as  caoutchouc,  and 
this  is  probably  the  fact.  Varying  statements  were 
made  as  to  the  produce  per  tree,  the  extremes 
mentioned  being  two  kati's  and  fifty  kati's,1  but  it  is 
doubtful  whether  anything  near  the  latter  quantity  is 
ever  obtained  from  a  single  tree.  Many  of  the  Jakun 
who  had  been  engaged  for  some  months  in  collecting 
assured  me  that  they  had  occasionally  obtained  as 
much  as  eighteen  kati's,  but  never  more,  and  that  the 
quantity  obtained  is  usually  nearer  from  three  to  five 
kati's  than  it  is  to  the  maximum  mentioned.  Logan 
described  the  collection  of  "  taban"  at  length,  because 
nearly  the  whole  of  the  Jakun  tribes  had  for  some 
time  past  been  withdrawn  by  it  from  their  usual 
pursuits.  They  were  not,  however,  under  any  ap- 
prehension that  it  could  be  extirpated,  as  it  was 
only  full-grown,  or  nearly  full-grown,  trees  that  repaid 
the  labour  of  felling  them  and  extracting  the  gutta,  and 
the  younger  trees  which  they  were  compelled  to  leave 
would  be  amply  sufficient  (they  believed)  to  keep  up 
the  stock.  They  were,  no  doubt,  to  some  extent  correct, 
but  the  effect  of  thinning  out  the  "  tabans  "  too  rapidly 
had  already  been  to  reduce  the  annual  supply  of  seed 
and  seedlings.  The  seeds  were  eaten  by  the  Jakun, 
but  they  did  not,  like  the  Malays  in  some  countries 
(e.g.  at  Siak),  extract  an  edible  vegetable  tallow  from 
them.2 

Of  the  methods  in  which  the  other  articles  of  traffic 
yielded  by  the  jungle  were  procured,  Logan  con- 
sidered it  unnecessary  to  speak  at  any  length,  because 
he  did  not  learn  that  they  differed  in  any  respect  from 

1  A  "kati"=lj  lbs.  2 /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  262,  263. 


chap,  v  SAVAGE  MALA  )■■■  OF  /<*// 


those  adopted  by   the   Mala)  i.     11<-  mentions,  ho 
ever,  that    both   races   had   very    superstitious   id< 
regarding  the  collection  of  camphor.     When  engaged 
in  searching  for  it  they  abstained  from  certain  kinds 
of  food,  ate  a  little  earth,  and  used  a  kind  ol  artifu  ial 
language,  which  was  called  the  "Camphor  Languag 
("  bhasa  kapor  ").     This  language  Logan  found  to  be 

the  same  on  the  Sedili,  the  Kndau,  and  the  BatU  Pahat. 
From  specimens  which  he  subjoined  it  appears  that 

most  of  the  words  are  formed  from  the  Malayan,  in 
many  cases  by  a  mere  periphrasis,  such  as  "grass- 
fruit"  for  "rice,"  ''far-sounder"  for  "gun,"  "short- 
legs  "  for  "  hog,"  "  leaves"  for  "  hair,"  etc.1 

It  was  believed  that  if  care  were  not  taken  to  use 
this  "  Camphor  Language,"  great  difficulty  would  be 
experienced  in  finding  camphor  trees,  and  that  when 
found  the  camphor  would  not  yield  itself  to  the 
collector.  Whatever  may  have  been  the  origin  of 
this  superstition,  it  was  evidently  based  on  the  fact 
that  although  camphor  trees  were  abundant,  it  very 
frequently  happened  that  no  camphor  could  be  ob- 
tained from  them.  "  Were  it  otherwise,"  said  an  old 
Jakun,  who  was  singularly  free  from  superstition, 
"  camphor  is  so  valuable  that  not  a  single  full-grown 
tree  would  be  left  in  the  forest."  Camphor  was  not 
collected  by  the  Berembun  tribes,  at  least  on  the 
western  side  of  the  Peninsula,  and  they  were,  there- 
fore, unacquainted  with  this  Camphor  Language. : 

But  the  present  sketch  of  the  Jakun  trade  in 
jungle  produce  would  be  incomplete  were  no  reference 
made  to  the  regular  organisation  established  by  the 
Malays  for  the  purpose  of  exploiting  their  unsuspect- 
ing neighbours. 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  263,  264.  2  lb.  pp.  265,  266. 


236  MODES  OF  BARTER  pari  ri 

The  Malayan  Penghulu,  Jinang,'  or  other  head- 
man in  each  river-district  was  also  the  head  of  the 
monopoly  of  trade  with  the  Jakun.  Hence  traders 
entering  the  river  most  commonly  visited  him,  and  he 
either  supplied  them  from  his  own  store,  or  purchased 
what  they  required  from  the  riverain  Malays,  or 
allowed  them  to  do  so  themselves.  This  system  was 
enforced  with  more  or  less  rigour,  according  to  the 
character  of  the  Penghulu,  but  traffic  was  always  to  a 
certain  extent  carried  on  without  his  intervention, 
though  strangers  were  absolutely  prohibited  from 
trading  with  the  Jakun  direct.2 

To  get  a  more  complete  understanding,  however, 
of  the  system  by  which  this  monopoly  was  maintained 
and  worked,  it  is  necessary  to  explain  the  scheme  a 
little  more  fully. 

The  Malays  settled  on  the  rivers  leading  into 
the  country  of  the  Jakun  might  be  divided  into  three 
classes:  (i)  the  Penghulu  and  his  relatives  and 
dependants ;  (2)  the  Johor  Malays  (who  frequently 
belonged  to  Telok  Blanga,  and  enjoyed  a  certain 
consideration  and  prestige  owing  to  their  means  and 
their  Singapore  connexion) ;  and  (3)  miscellaneous 
settlers  who  did  not  possess  these  advantages.  The 
trade  with  the  Jakun  was  chiefly  in  the  hands  of  the 
first  and  second  classes,  who  acted  in  concert.  The 
prices  at  which  purchasable  articles  were  to  be  valued 
was  from  time  to  time  regulated  by  the  Penghulu,  who 
in  this,  as  in  all  other  matters,  consulted  the  principal 
men  of  the  river.  The  Penghulu  next  conferred  with 
the  Jakun  chiefs  or  Batins,  and  so  managed  the  dis- 
cussion as  to  carry  the  point  already  agreed  upon. 
The  principle  on  which  the  sliding  scale  of  prices  was 

1  Cp.  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  273,  274.  2  lb.  p.  286. 


chap.  >  SAVAG1    MALAYS  OF JOHOR 


managed  was  simply  thai  ol  maintaining  a  high  value 
for  anything  that  was  sold  to  the  Jakun,  and  alou  one 
for  what  was  bought  from  them.  When  the  [akun 
rice-harvest  had  been  reaped,  they  were  persuaded 
that  rice  was  everywhere  so  plentiful  that  its  price 

was  very  small,  and  that,  on  the  other   hand,  the  price 

of  cloth  had  advanced  as  much  above  as  the  price  of 

rice  was  depressed  below  that  of  the  Singapore  market. 
The  conclusion  ol'  all  the  inquiries  made  by  Logan,  and 
of  numerous  instances  of  barter  of  which  he  was  a  wit- 
ness, was  that  the  Malays  sold  the  goods  which  they 
purchased  in  Singapore  at  advances  of  from  ioo  to  400 
per  cent,  whilst  they  bought  "  taban,"  camphor, 
dammar,  and  other  produce  of  the  forest  at  from  100 
to  400  per  cent  below  the  prices  which  they  received 
in  Singapore.  Thus  a  voyage  of  two  or  three  days 
enabled  the  Malay  to  double  or  quintuple  the  value 
of  goods  transferred  from  Singapore  to  Johor  and 
from  Johor  to  Singapore.  As  the  trade  was  almost 
entirely  carried  on  by  barter,  the  Malays  had  a  double 
profit  on  every  transaction.  Yet  they  were  not 
satisfied  with  having  established  this  vulture  -  like 
system  of  trade.  They  resorted,  besides,  to  every 
indirect  means  of  enhancing  their  gains  that  was  at  all 
consistent  with  the  preservation  of  the  trade.  They 
made,  for  instance,  advances  of  goods,  and  as  their 
debtors  were  entirely  unacquainted  with  writing  and 
accounts,  they  had  little  difficulty  in  exacting  far  more 
than  the  stipulated  return  from  those  Jakun  whose 
memories  were  not  very  tenacious  ;  for  the  return 
was  made  in  small  quantities  from  time  to  time,  as 
the  jungle  produce  happened  to  be  collected.  But 
the  most  certain  and  constant  mode  of  defrauding  the 
Jakun   was  in  weighing    the    goods   which   were   the 


238 


MODES  OF  BARTER 


M 


PART  II 


subject  of  the  bargain.  This  was  generally  done  very 
hurriedly,  and  when  a  pretence  was  made  of  doing  it 
more  carefully  the  beam  was  brought  into  a  horizontal 
position,  not  by  the  counterpoise  of  the  weights, 
but  by  the  finger  of  the  Malay.  This  method  of 
weighing  had,  at  the  time  of  Logan's  visit,  become  so 
general,  that  although  the  Jakun  generally  were 
aware  that  the  Malays  did  not  weigh  fairly,  and  some 
had  even  acquired  so  much  knowledge  of  the  balance 
as  to  point  out  in  what  the  fraud  consisted,  the  Malay 
would  laugh  it  off,  insist  that  it  was  all  right,  and 
either  deliver  the  article  to  one  of  his  attendants,  or 
toss  it  into  his  canoe.  To  show  more  definitely  the 
extent  to  which  the  Malays  took  advantage  of  the 
ignorance  of  the  Jakun,  Logan  added  the  following 
lists  of  prices  of  various  articles,  as  ascertained  in 
several  localities  : — 1 


Trade  on  the  Sembrong. 
Articles  sold  to  the  Jakun. 


Local  Price. 

Singapore  Price. 

I    c.  • 

$   c. 

Tobacco        . 

per  kati2 

I.OO 

•13 

Salt 

per  gantang 

.18J 

.04 

Coconuts      . 

.    each 

.04 

.01  to    .02 

Common  "sarongs"  or  skirts 

.    each 

2.00 

•  50 

Bugis  "sarongs"  (inferior) 

5.00  to  6.00 

1.00  to  1.25 

White  cotton  jackets  ("  bajus  ") 

.    each 

.38  to    .75 

.10 

Headkerchiefs 

.    each 

.58 

.14 

Common  red  cotton  cloth 

per  yard 

•3«i 

.10 

Large  plate  (common)    . 

.    each 

.38 

.  10 

Small  plate  (common)    . 

.   each 

.09 

.04 

Saucers          .... 

.   each 

•03! 

.01 

Cups    ..... 

.    each 

.09 

.01 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  286,  287.      But  general    are    those    of    articles    of  the 
see  n.  to  p.  95,  ante.  same  quality.       A  "kati"=i^  lbs.  = 

2  These    are    the   actual    prices   ex-  T±$   pikul.     A  "  gantang "  varies,   but 
amined,   and   the  Singapore   prices  in  roughly  =1  gallon. 


C  H  A I 


C  )'/■:  ■ 


.  \rtniis  bought  from  the  Jakun 

i 

i      i 

I  tglc  w  od  (lignum  aloet)          .       pei  kati 

i  amphoi  .....       pei  Vw\             1 6 

1  >.umnar  .....      pel  pikul 

I 

.57  and  up- 

U.il 

Benjamin  (mixed)      .         .         .     per  pikul 

.60  to  .80 

On  the  Lenggiu. 

Articles  sold  to  the  Jakun! 


i'rice. 

1 

Rice  (coarse  and  uncleaned)         per  5  gantai 

1. 00 

•33j 

Tobacco       .             per  kati  (of  about  12  tahils) 

.18 

.09  to  .  IO 

Salt     .....   per  13  gantangs 

1. 00 

•50 

1  small  earthenware  pan  or  "blanga"    . 

.09 

.04 

1  small  rice-pot  or  saucepan  ("  kuali ;')  . 

•  3»i 

•  15 

■77 

•39 

I  chopper  or  parang      ..... 

•  3H 

.11$ 

.20 

.08 

Orang  Laut  or  Sea-Jakun. 

Sabimba. — The  colony  of  Orang  Laut  who  were 
living  (arc.  1850)  near  the  source  of  the  Tembrau 
(which  falls  into  the  "  Selat  Tembrau"  or  "Old 
Strait "  of  Singapore,  opposite  the  most  northerly 
point  of  the  island)  consisted  of  twenty-five  men, 
thirty  women,  and  fifteen  children.  They  were  slaves 
of  the  reigning  Chief  of  Johor  (Temenggong),  being 
under  a  Malay  "  Jinang,"  who  employed  them  in 
collecting  "  taban,"  "dammar,"  rattans,  eagle-wood 
("gharu"),  ebony,  "  chandan,"  and  wax.  In  return 
he  supplied   them  with  rice,  sago,  and  (very  rarely) 


J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  2\ 


lb. 


240  MODES  OF  BARTER  part  ii 

with  a  little  cloth.  Other  Malays  were  also  allowed 
to  carry  on  a  little  trade  (by  barter)  with  them,1  and 
by  this  means  they  obtained  a  supply  of  axes,  hatchets, 
earthenware,  cooking-pots,  iron  pans,  salt,  chillies, 
and  tobacco." 

Elsewhere  we  read  of  the  Sabimba  tribe  as  con- 
sisting of  eighty  individuals,  young  and  old,  and  as 
being  employed  in  cutting  rattans  for  the  Malays, 
who  furnished  them  with  rice,  weapons,  and  utensils 
in  return.3 

Orang  Muka  Kuning\ — The  Orang  Muka  Kuning 
(we  are  told)  were  entrusted  to  the  care  of  a  Malay 
headman  or  Batin,  named  Pajar,  who  lived  on  Pulau 
Loban,and  was  appointed  by  the  chief  (Yam-tuan  Muda) 
of  Rhio.  He  visited  them  from  time  to  time,  bring- 
ing rice  and  other  articles,  and  receiving  in  return  the 
jungle  produce  that  they  had  collected  for  him.  We 
are  further  expressly  told  that  the  Orang  Muka 
Kuning  were  prohibited  from  trading  with  other 
persons  "  under  penalty  of  a  ducking."  Rattans, 
dammar,  and  eagle-wood  they  barter  for  rice,  cloth, 
implements,  tobacco,  and  salt.4 

For  iooo  rattans  they  received  four  "  gantangs  " 
of  coarse  rice;5  for  ioo  dammar  torches,  six  "gan- 
tangs"; and  for  one  basketful  (measuring  ij  foot 
deep  and  broad)  of  eagle-wood,  four  "  gantangs  "  of  the 
same  commodity.6 

Beduanda  Kallang*. — Similarly  we  are  told  that  the 
Beduanda  Kallang  were  fishermen  and  foresters, 
dividing  their  time  equally  between  the  two  pursuits, 
and  that  they  were  in  the  habit  of  collecting  jungle 


1  Except    in    "  taban,"   which   they  2  /.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  298. 

cannot  dispose  of  to  others  under  pain  3  lb.  p.  347*.  4  lb.  p.  337*. 

of  a  ducking.  5  lb.  6  lb.  p.  338*. 


I  HAP.   \  MAI  A  \  A  V    s/-.A  GYPSI1 


produce  for  a  Malay  headman  under  the  reigning 
chid'  (Temenggong)  ol  [ohor,  who  had  charge  ol 
them.1 

Orang  Akik.     The  Orang  Akik  erected  temporary 
sheds  along  the  coast  whenever  they  had  occasion  to 

go  ashore,  to  collect   (laminar   and  wood-oil,    etc.,   etc. 

For  months  together,  however,  they  resided  in  th<  i r 

boats,  employed  not  only  in    fishing,  but    in   collecting 

agar-agar  (Zostera),  and  tripang  or  beche-de-m<! 
[Holothuria)%  etc.  When  the  season  or  the  weather 
did  not  permit  of  this,  they  employed  themselves  in 
gathering  wood  and  pork-oil. ~ 

1   /.  /.  A.  vol.  i,  p.  300.  "hog's     grease,"'     the     Malay     for 

'-'  Sic   in    original,    but    I    cannot    l>e  which    ("  niinyak    babi ")    may    be    so 

sure    what     is    meant    by    "  pork  -oil,"  translated;    v.    anUx    p.    129.       Xeu 

unless,    as    I    think    most   probable,    it  bold,  ii.  413,  414. 


VOL.  I 


CHAPTER   VI. 

Weapons  and   Implements. 

Stone  Implements. 

Stone  implements  are  very  numerous  in  the  Penin- 
sula, especially  in  Perak  and  Pahang,  but  it  is  an 
open  question  whether  any  forms  of  stone  implement, 
except  possibly  chips  or  flakes,  were  ever  manufactured 
by  any  of  the  wild  tribes,  the  weight  of  evidence 
being  decidedly  against  it.  It  is  necessary,  however, 
to  deal  with  this  question  here,  as  it  is  to  the  wild 
tribes  that  their  use  has  perhaps  been  most  generally 
attributed.1 

Captain  J.  Bradley  (a  sportsman  travelling  in  the 
Malay  Peninsula  in  1876)  speaks  of  finding  in  the 
tree-huts  of  the  aborigines  (though  without  giving 
any  details  which  might  identify  either  the  tribe  or 
the  district)  "  a  curious  instrument  made  of  bone,  and 
apparently  intended  to  serve  as  a  knife,  together  with 
a  sort  of  tomahawk  formed  by  fixing  a  pointed  stone 


1  See,    for    instance,    the    tradition  cp.    Swett.    p.    228  :     "It   is   believed 

quoted  by  De  Morgan,  vii.    157,  of  a  that    comparatively    recently    some    at 

tribe  that  was  "  ignorant  of  metals,  and  least   of  these  tribes  used  implements 

employed   nothing   but   implements  of  of  flint  or  slate." 

stone  " ;  and  the  same  story  as  referred  The  prevalence  of  this  tradition  may, 

to  by  Hale,  p.  285  :   "A   Sakai  chief  however,  easily  be  explained  if  any  of 

in  Kinta  told  me  of  a  race  who  did  not  these   aborigines   had   previously   used 

know  anything  about   iron,   but   used  chips  of  flint  (or  other  kinds  of  stone) 

stone  axes  to  cut  down  trees."     And  for  knives. 

242 


(  hap.  vi  GENERAL   remarks 


upon  .1  Btick."  Elsewhere  (p.  331)  the  same  writer 
speaks  oi  finding  (in  the  same  locality)  " a  number  ol 
sharpened  stones,  serving  the  purpose  of  kniv<  But 
both  statements  are  far  too  vague  to  bast  anj  con- 
clusions upon. 

Again,  we  have  the  statement  ol  Vaughan-Stevens 
to  the  effect  that  a  tribe  ol  Negritos  (whom  he  terms 
"  Orang  Pangan,"  and  assigns  to  the  district  that 
he  calls  No.  2)  informed  him  that  they  had  formerly 
been  in  the  habit  of  using  stone  weapons ;  and  that 
they  made,  at  his  request,  wooden  models  of  these  very 
implements.  He  adds,  moreover,  that  the  Pangan 
"  recognised  "  some  stone  implements  which  he  showed 
them  as  their  "old  work-tools."  Unfortunately,  how- 
ever, it  does  not  appear  whether  he  showed  these  stone 
implements  to  the  Pangan  before  or  after  the  models 
were  made  ;  but  the  former  would  probably  have  been 
the  case,  and  at  all  events  Vaughan-Stevens'  own  editor 
very  properly  points  out  that  a  scrutiny  of  these  models 
shows  them  to  be  identical  in  shape  with  iron  tools  of 
the  Malay  type  still  in  use  in  the  Peninsula.1 

Lastly,  one  of  the  facts  that  has  been  much  relied 
upon,  viz.  that  aboriginal  (non-Malay)  names  exist  for 

1   In  the  passage  referred  to,Yaughan-  stone  tools,  it  transpired  that  they  no 

Stevens  remarks  that  it  had  been  especi-  longer  possessed  any,  but  "  from  their 

ally  interesting  to  find  that  the  Pangan  traditional    knowledge"   they   at   once 

knew  that  their  ancestors  had  employed  manufactured    some    wooden    models, 

stone    weapons    before    they    obtained  Vaughan-Stevens,   however,   possessed 

iron  from  the  Siamese  (sic).     Vaughan-  three    or    four    genuine    stone    imple- 

Stevens    was    not,    however,    able     to  ments,   and,    without    saying    a    word, 

properly    establish    this    fact    until    he  laid  them  before  the  Snahut,   who   at 

had  been   formally   received   into    the  once  exclaimed,  "Those  are  Menik  " 

tribe.      When    he    asked    the    Pangan  (i.e.  "Those  belong  to  the  Pangan "). 

what  tools   they  had   used   in   ancient  Other  Pangan,  moreover  (later,  and  in 

times,    before    they   could    obtain    the  other  places),  recognised  these  imple- 

Malayan  chopper  ("parang")  —  since  ments     as     their    "old    work -tools' 

they  themselves  did  not  know  how  to  (Vaughan-Stevens,    iii.    99).      But    see 

work   iron — they  at  once  replied   that  also  p.  437,  n.  2,  infra,  where  the  teeth 

they   had  used   stone.      On   Vaughan-  of  Bamboo-rats  are  mentioned  as  being 

Stevens    further    inquiring    after    such  used  before  the  introduction  of  iron. 


244  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  ii 

such  articles  as  "  axes,"  "  spears,"  and  "  knives,"  '  does 
not,  unfortunately,  prove  that  the  material  of  which 
these  implements  were  made  was  necessarily  any  sort 
of  stone  ;  whereas  the  fact  adduced  by  Wray  that  no 
single  stone  spear-head  or  chopper  (or,  I  may  add, 
arrow-head)  has  ever  yet  been  found  in  the  Peninsula 
(although  in  several  dialects  aboriginal  names  for  them 
occur)  appears  conclusive  in  the  opposite  sense. - 

On  the  general  question,  Grtinwedel,  in  reporting 
the  receipt  of  forty-nine  stone  implements  ("batu  lintar") 
sent  home  by  Vaughan-Stevens  from  the  Malay  Pen- 
insula, remarks  that  these  implements  are  distributed 
throughout  the  entire  Indian  Archipelago,  and  reappear 
even  in  Further  India,  Burma, Cambodia, etc.  Vaughan- 
Stevens  could  not  say  what  race  they  were  once  used 
by,  for  neither  the  (civilised)  Malays  nor  any  of  the 
wild  tribes  knew  anything  certain  either  about  their 
origin  or  their  use.  The  latter  paid  no  attention  to 
them  when  they  met  with  them  on  their  wanderings, 
and  the  superstitious  Malays  only  believed  them  to  be 
the  missiles  of  evil  spirits,  and,  when  they  found  them, 
would  store  them  away  in  their  huts  without  having 

i  Clifford  in/.  R.  A.  S.,  S.  B.,  No.  (5)  Skinning-knife  (?).    It  is  a  "flat, 

24,  p.  27.  thin   lamina    of  diorite  or   greenstone, 

2  Wray,  Per.  M.  N.  iii.  p.  3.      Mr.  slightly    concave     and     convex,     and 

H.  N.  Ridley  informs  me  that  he  has  measures    about   1    foot  in    length    by 

found  about  seven  main  types  of  stone  2  inches  wide  by  about  j  of  an  inch 

implements  in  Kelantan.      The  seven  thick  in  the  thickest  part." 
chief  types  obtained  were  as  follows: —  (6)  Small  knife. 

(1)  Stone  club  (or  mallet?).  (7)  Large  knife  or  chopper. 

(2)  Stone  chisel  or  gouge  (New  According  to  Mr.  Ridley,  the  sup- 
Guinea  type).  [It  may,  however,  be  posed  agate  of  which  these  implements 
doubted  whether  these  so-called  chisels  are  often  said  to  be  made  was  probably 
are  in  reality  chisels  or  axes.     Of  the  a  burnt  diorite. 

latter  there  are  two  types:   (1)  the  axe  Not   a  single   specimen   either   of  a 

whose  head  fits  into  a  socket ;  (2)  the  spear-head   or  of  an  arrow-head   was 

one    whose    long    and    chisel  -  shaped  found, 
head  goes  through  the  helve. — Ed.]  For  a  recent  rind  in  I'ahang,  v.  Swan 

(3)  Stone  adze  (ordinary  Peninsular,  in  Man,  1904,  34  (with  diagrams). 
i.e.  Malayan  type).  The  most  curious  of  these  specimens  is 

(4)  Stone  adze  (New  Guinea  type).  the  stone  ring  here  figured. 


^ 


s 


4 

m  - 


«i 


s 


r 


McGregor. 


Jakun  Max  in  Hunting  Accoutrement-, 

showing  bark  cloth  girdle,  blowpipe,  and  quiver,  with  bone  fastener.     Ulu  Batu,  Selangor. 


Vol.  I.  /•  245. 


chap,  m  GENERAL   REMARKS 

any  idea  oi  their  real  use.     They  are  Found  at  vari< 
depths  below  the  surface,  and  although  nothing  cei 
tain  is  known  .il)out  them  in  the  Peninsula,  yet  as  the 
various  wild  tribes  nevertheless  assert  that  in  former 
daysaraceol  men,  differing  both  from  themselves  and 
the  Malays,  lived  in  the  Peninsula,  it  may  1  >« -  assumed 

that  it  is  to  them  that   the  use   of  stone,   implements  is 

tacitly  attributed,  though  this  evidence  is  altogether 
too  vague  to  rely  upon.1 

By  the  aid  of  the   microscope  traces  oi    Copper  and 

iron  may  he  identified  on  these  stones.  The  stones 
showing  such  traces  are  used  l>y  the  Malays  to  fur- 
nish tips  for  the  metal  spurs  of  their  fighting-cocks, 
since  they  believe  that  tips  thus  furnished  cannot  be 
blunted.  The  Malay  children  play  with  them,  and 
try  to  make  them  smoother  than  they  were  when  first 
found.-  In  no  case  did  Vaughan- Stevens  discover 
them  in  situ,  the  specimens  being  all  obtained  from 
Malays  during  his  twelve  months'  journey  between 
Johor  and  Kelantan.3 

Stone  implements  are  numerous  in  Pahang,  Negri 
Sembilan,  Selangor,  and  South  Perak,  very  rare  in 
Johor  and  Kelantan.  Sometimes  they  occur  in  Kedah 
and  Trengganu,  but  are  very  rarely  found  in  Patani.4 

The  arguments  bearing  upon  this  most  difficult 
subject  were  excellently  stated  many  years  ago  by 
Wray,  who,  in  an  article  on  the  cave-dwellers  of  Perak, 
remarked  that  it  had  been  somewhat  too  rashly  taken 
for  granted  that  the  cave-dwellers  (of  Perak,  etc.)  were 
the  makers  of  the  stone  implements  which  had  been  dis- 

1  /'.  B.  G.  A.  xxiii.  832.  obtained    from    the    eastern    sea-coast 

2  But  their  most  important  use  among       of  the   Peninsula,  and   the  abundance 
the  Malays  is  medicinal.  of  those  found  on  the  western  coast, 

::    V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiii.  833.  point  to  the  possibility  of  their  having 

*  Vaughan-Stevens,   iii.    101.       The       been    introduced    from    some   part    of 
comparative    rarity    of    the    specimens       Sumatra. 


246  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  u 


covered  in  such  abundance  in  Perak  and  the  neighbour- 
ing states.  The  least  reflection  would  have  served  to 
show  that  these  implements  indicated  a  much  higher 
intelligence  than  would  be  compatible  with  the  evidences 
afforded  by  the  remains  discovered  in  the  caves.1 

All  the  stone  implements  were  of  axe  or  chisel 
blades,  and  not  one  single  spear-head  had  ever  been 
found.  The  second  division  of  the  stone  age  was 
divided  from  the  first  by  the  introduction  of  axe- 
pointed  implements  and  all  the  important  advances 
that  were  indicated  by  the  use  of  this  type  of  tool. 
If  the  cave  people  had  been  acquainted  with  the  use 
of  stone,  they  would  almost  certainly  have  employed 
spear-pointed  implements  of  the  rudest  kind  ;  as  when 
they  had  advanced  as  far  as  the  making  of  chisels  and 
axe-pointed  tools,  they  would  have  been  able  to  build 
houses  and  be  independent  of  the  shelter  of  caves, 
and  have  been  in  a  position  to  cultivate  the  soil  and 
raise  food  instead  of  having  to  subsist  on  shell-fish  and 
the  animals  of  the  jungle.  The  multiplicity  of  the 
types  of  stone  implements  found  in  Perak  showed  that 
the  users  of  them  must  have  been  in  a  comparatively 
high  state  of  civilisation.2 

The  remarkable  absence  of  all  palaeolithic  patterns 
might  be  explained  by  supposing  that  there  had  never 
been  a  period  in  this  part  of  the  world  when  the  ruder 
implements  were  in  use,  but  that  the  people  (who- 
ever they  were)  that  employed  them  were  settlers 
from  some  other  locality  who  on  arrival  had  reached 
the  second  stage  of  the  stone  age.  There  was  of 
necessity  no  means  of  fixing,  even  in  the  most  ap- 
proximate manner,  the  date  of  the  introduction  of  the 
use  of  stone  in  Perak,  but  the  similarity  of  the  types 

1   L.  Wray,  Cave-dwellers,  pp.  43,  44.     Cp.  E  Homme,  ii.  494  seq.  2  lb. 


chap  ?i  w  r. I      "/   MARKS 

of  ih<-  implements  uras  quite  sufficient  to  indicate  that 
it  was  a  continuation  erf  the  same  wave  oi  progn 
which  led  to  the  evolution  of  these  tools  in  other 
countries.  This  was,  of  course,  far  from  laying  that 
the  stone  age  in  Malaya  had  been  contemporaneo 
with  that  of  Europe.  The  number  of  the  stone  im- 
plements was,  however,  as  striking  here  as  in  other 
parts  of  the  world,  pointing  indubitably  to  the  long 
continuance  of  the.  use  of  these  lithic  tools.1 

The  finding  of  a  lew  implements  in  the  cave- 
deposits  would  by  no  means  prove  that  the  in- 
habitants of  these  caves  were  the  makers  of  them,  but 
only  that  they  were  of  the  same  age.  For  it  was 
quite  likely  that  there  had  been  two  races  of  different 
degrees  of  advancement  living  in  the  country  at  the 
same  time,  and  that  the  lower  might  occasionally 
acquire  either  by  barter  or  other  means  the  weapons 
of  the  higher  race.  In  the  same  way  the  wild  tribes 
were  now  accustomed  to  the  use  of  iron  axes,  pottery, 
clothes,  and  other  things  bought  from  the  Malays, 
whilst  the  Malays  themselves  in  turn  used  articles  of 
European  manufacture." 

The  aborigines,  again,  might  well  have  been  able 
to  fashion  weapons  out  of  bamboo  with  knives  made  of 
the  same  material  (especially  when  hardened  by  the 
application  of  fire),  and  these  would  be  probably 
supplemented  by  the  use  of  sharp  fragments  of  stone 
[as  well  as  of  bone].  In  this  way  it  would  be  quite 
possible  to  make  bamboo-pointed  spears,  blowpipes, 
darts,  and  bows  and  arrows.  Bamboo  weapons  would, 
of  course,   have   left   no   trace,    in   view   of   the   long 

1   L.  Wray,  Cave-dwellers,  p.  43,  44.        Bozzolo,  about  150  specimens  obtained 
Mr.  Wray  informs  me  that  he  purchased        in  Ulu  Perak,  and  Patani. 
for    the     Perak     Museum,    from     Mr.  2  Ibid.  ;  cp.  Wray,  Journ.  F.  M.  S. 

Mus.  I.  i.  pp.  13-15. 


248  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  j<akt  11 

period  that  must  have  elapsed  since  they  had  been  in 
use.  That  the  aborigines  used  fire  was  abundantly 
evident,  and  this,  in  the  hands  of  other  savages,  had 
been  made  into  a  most  effective  means  of  shaping 
wooden  objects.1 

In  other  words,  the  rudimentary  stage  of  culture 
through  which  these  tribes  have  passed,  and  in  some 
cases  are  still  passing,  may  perhaps  be  more  accurately 
described  as  a  "  wood  and  bone  "  age  than  as  an  age 
of  stone. 

To  sum  up,  we  may  conclude  that  the  wild  tribes 
(Sakai  and  Semang)  were  not  the  manufacturers  of  the 
stone  axes  and  chisels  found  in  the  Peninsula,  and  the 
case  in  fact  appears  to  be  a  close  parallel  to  that  of 
the  Andaman  islanders,  of  whom  Man  has  recorded 
(p.  161)  that  "  they  never,  even  when  iron  was  scarce, 
made  arrow-heads,  axes,  adzes,  or  chisels  of  stone." 

The  following  list  includes,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  stone  implements  which  certainly  are,  or  are  at 
all  likely  to  have  been  formerly  used  by  the  wild 
tribes  of  Malaya.  They  are  the  anvil  and  hammer 
recorded  by  De  Morgan  (consisting  of  an  upper  and 
a  lower  stone),2  the  whetstone,3  chips  or  flakes  used  as 
knives,  and  cooking-stones.4  To  this  list,  which  so 
far  agrees  with  the  list  of  implements  used  by  the 
Andamanese,  may  be  added  the  stone  rasp  or  file, 
consisting  usually  of  a  piece  of  sandstone,5  which  is 
used  especially  for  filing  the  teeth  among  the  Pangan 
of  Kelantan. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  wild  aborigines  of  the 
Hills  (Orang  Bukit)  of  to-day,  who  possess  no  imple- 


1  L.  Wray,  Cave-dwellers,  p.  46.  is  used ;  cp.  Hale,  p.  286. 

2  De  Morgan,  vii.  415.  *    V,  supra,  p.  124,  etc. 

3  Sometimes  a  stone  axe-head  itself  6    V.  infra,  vol.  ii.  55. 


i  haf.  m  GENERAL  REMARKS 


ments   oi    iron,   pel)    almost    entirely   upon   wood   or 
bone  for  ih<-  hi. ides  oi  their  weapon  well  as  for 

all  their  implements. 

Knives  and  Spi  a\  . 

The  most  primitive  form  of  knife,  and  at  the  same 
time  the  most  natural  form  for  the  country,  still  to  be 
found  among  the  wild  tribes  (as  also  on  some  cere 
monial  occasions  among   the    Malays)   consists   of  a 
sharp  sliver  of  bamboo,  which  makes  a  very  fair  knife. 

It  is  possible,  and  perhaps  even  probable,  that 
tlakes  and  chips  of  stone  may  have  been  used  in 
former  times  when  the  knife  of  Malay  civilisation  was 
not  procurable,  and  when  the  work  required  could 
not  be  performed  by  a  knife  of  bamboo,3  or  bone. 

The  Malay  "dagger"  or  "  kris  "  and  other  kinds 
of  Malay  weapons  are  also  occasionally  used  by  the 
wild  tribes,  especially  the  Jakun,  but  wooden  and  bone 
awls  (for  boring  purposes)  are  used  to  this  day.4 

In  its  earliest  form  the  spear  of  the  country 
seems  to  have  been  some  form  of  throwing-stick  or 
11  squailer,"  the  use  of  which  has  been  recorded 
among  the  Jakun  by  Logan,'  whilst  at  least  two 
forms  of  it "  are  certainly   still    known    to    the    Pen- 

1   De    la  Croix,   p.    340,  whore  this  being  more  effective  than  might  at  first 

statement  is,  however,  confined  to  the  be  supposed.      In  Borneo,  for  instance, 

Sakai.  a   bamboo   knife   is   used   by  the   exe- 

"J  Capt.    J.    Bradley,    p.    298,    also  cutioner  for  cutting  off  heads;    being 

mentions   finding  in  one   of  the   tree-  merely  sharpened  whenever  it  is  used, 
huts  which  he  discovered  "a  curious  4  For    examples,  see    pp.    316  and 

instrument  made  of  bone,  and  appar-  329,  infra. 

ently   intended  to   serve   as   a   knife."  ;"'  For  the   spear,  v.  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i. 

And  on  p.  331   he  says  :    "  The  only  p.  257,  and  Lake  in  /.  R.  A.  S.,  S.  B., 

other  articles  found  were  a  number  of  No.  25,  p.  3.      It   is   pre-eminently   a 

sharpened  stones,  serving  the  purpose  "savage  Malay1"  weapon,  and  is  used 

of  knives."      Cp.  p.  269,  n.   1,  infra.  universally  by  the  Jakun. 

3  Such    cases    would,    however,    be  6  One  sharpened    at    one  end,    the 

exceedingly  rare,  these  bamboo  knives  other  at  both. 


250  WEAPONS  ANl>  IMPLEMENTS  part  ii 


insular  Malays.1  The  bamboo  spear  is  still  largely 
used,  especially  by  the  wilder  aborigines.  The  metal 
spears,  which  are  of  several  types  (all  of  them 
Malayan),  are  used  for  fishing  as  well  as  hunting. 

The  fact  that  no  stone  spear-head  has  yet  been 
lound  in  the  Peninsula  is  certainly  a  notable  one,  and 
may  point  to  the  fact  that  the  spear-heads  used  by  the 
men  of  the  Malay  stone  age  were  made  of  bamboo 
or  of  some  other  equally  perishable  material.  There 
is  little  differentiation  of  metal  spear-types  as  between 
the  aborigines,  doubtless  owing  to  the  fact  that  all 
have  borrowed  alike  from  the  Malay.  In  war,  spear- 
heads are  sometimes  lashed  to  the  muzzle-end  of  a 
blowpipe. 

Hatchets. 

The  hatchets  now  used  by  the  wild  tribes 
throughout  the  Peninsula  are  obtained  by  barter  or 
purchase  from  the  Malays,  except,  perhaps,  in  a  few- 
cases  in  which  some  sort  of  rude  substitute  is  roughly 
forged.  Even  in  the  latter  case,  however,  the  blades 
are,  I  believe,  invariably  copied  from  Malay  models, 
and  there  appears  to  be  no  record  of  the  use  of 
an  independent  axe  -  type  among  either  Sakai  or 
Semang,  even  though  they  may  (and  certainly  do) 
have  non- Malay  names  for  them.'- 

On  the  other  hand,  there  is,  I  believe,  a  good 
deal  still  to  be  learnt  from  the  nature  of  the  rattan 


1   Cp.  J.  Bradley,  p.  298  :    "Outside  sticks,  intended,  apparently,  as  missile 

the    (tree-)    huts   a    number   of  spears  weapons.      Several  of  them  had  traces 

were  laid  amongst  the  branches  of  the  of    blood    and    feathers    adhering    to 

trees.      They  consisted  merely  of  long  them,    as  if   they   had    been    used    for 

sticks  of  hard  wood  sharpened  at  both  knocking  down  birds." 
ends."   And  cp.  also  ib.  p.  320:  "Some  -  Capt.    J.    Bradley    (p.    298)  alone 

of   them    (the  wild  men)  seized    their  mentions  finding  in  a  tree-hut   "a  sort 

spears,    or    pointed    sticks."     Also   p.  of    tomahawk,     formed    by     fixing    a 

331  :   "In  the  interior   of  one  of  the  pointed  stone  upon  a  stick." 
huts    were    a    number   of   short    thick 


chap,  vi  VI  HAL   REMAh 

lashings  l>y  means  o(   which   the  adze-head  is  ma 
Fast    to  the  helve,   for  I   was  repeatedly  assured   by 
Malays   living   in    the    Besisi   and     Hlandas   coimtr\ 
(on   the    Langat)   that    the   difference    between    : 
lashings  of  a  Malay  and  a  Jakun  adze-head  could  be 
detected  without  the  least  difficulty  bj  the  expert. 

Firearms, 

All  branches  of  the  wild  tribes  now  generally 
possess  some    form   of  firearm,  which   most   usually 

takes  the  shape  of  an  old  Tower  mesket,  and  is  not 
unfrequently  owned,  or  at  least  used,  in  common  by 
all  the  men  of  the  tribe  who  claim  it. 

These  guns  are  obtained  by  barter  at  extortionate 
rates  from  friendly  Malays  or  Chinamen. 

The  use  of  firearms  by  the  Sakai  and  Semang 
appears,  however,  to  have  been  of  extremely  recent 
date,  as  it  is  only  since  the  establishment  of  a  strong 
government  in  the  Malay  States  that  there  has  been 
any  sort  of  peace  between  them  and  the  Malays,  and 
before  the  establishment  of  this  peace  the  Malays 
were  not  likely  to  be  willing  to  put  such  dangerous 
weapons  in  the  hands  of  their  victims.1 

The  Bow. 

The  use  of  the  bow  in  the  Peninsula  is  confined 
to  those  tribes  which  are  (wholly  or  partly)  of  Negrito 
origin.  It  is  indubitably  their  chief  tribal  weapon,  as 
the  blowpipe  appears  to  be  that  of  the  Sakai,2  and  as 
the  spear  is  that  of  certain  of  the  Jakun  tribes. 

There  are,  it  is  true,  several  references  in  old 
writers  to  the  use  of  the  bow  by  Sakai  and  Jakun, 
but  upon  examination  it  will  easily  be  seen  that  they 


1    R 


See_/.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  272.  2  Cp.  De  Morgan,  vii.  415. 


252  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  pari  11 

are  not  of  such  a  character  as  to  shake  the  statement 
made  in  the  foregoing  sentence.  Some  of  these 
statements,  especially  those  of  M.-Maclay,1  De  la 
Croix,-'  and  perhaps  even  De  Morgan  and  Maxwell, 
are  due  to  the  fact  that  none  of  these  writers  were 
able  to  distinguish  between  the  Sakai  and  the 
Semang,  and  habitually  applied  the  term  "  Sakai  "  to 
groups  of  Negritos.  Pleyte,  therefore,  in  his  great 
monograph  on  "  the  Blowpipe  and  the  Bow,"  was 
perfectly  right  in  correcting  M.-Maclay,  who  is  perhaps 
the  most  typical  example  of  this  class  of  writer.  And 
although  it  must  be  admitted  that  when  all  these 
statements  (based  on  misnomers)  have  been  dis- 
counted, there  still  remain  one  or  two  testimonies 
to  a  knowledge  of  the  bow,  on  unimpeachable  authority 
(not  on  the  part  of  the  Sakai,  but  on  that  of  the 
Jakun),  even  these  latter  yield  to  investigation. 

Logan,  for  instance,  informs  us  that  the  bow  and 
arrow  were  known  to  the  Jakun  (whom  he  calls 
"  Benua ") ;  but  he  immediately  proceeds  to  qualify 
this  statement  by  adding  that  though  they  were 
known  they  were  not  used,  and  I  think  there  can  be 
no  very  great  doubt  that  the  tradition  was  based  on  a 
rumour  of  the  bows  of  the  far-off  Semang.8     Again, 

1  Cp.    M.-Maclay    in    J.  J\.  A.  S.,  latter   point,   see    Pleyte,   loc.   cit.       It 

S.  B.,  No.  2,  p.  214.  is    also    entirely    incorrect    (as    Pleyte 

Miklucho-Maclay  says,  "Another  not  points  out)  to  describe  the  bow  as   a 

so   dangerous,   but  ethnographically   a  Sakai  weapon,  it  being  the  distinctive 

much  more  important  weapon,  is  the  weapon   of   the   Negrito    tribes.      The 

bow  (' loids  ;),  the  use  of  which  I  have  alleged      Sakai     bow     described      by 

only  seen  among  the  unmixed  Orang  Miklucho-Maclay  is,  as  his  map  shows, 

Sakai.     It  is  about  two  metres  long,  is  a  Pangan  bow,  and  it  is  very  unlikely 

made  of  bamboo,  and  the  arrows  have  that  the  arrows,  still  less  the  bow,  would 

iron  points."    This  quotation,  however,  be  of  bamboo.     Lastly,  for  "  loids  "  we 

is  a  tissue  of  misstatements.      The  bow  should  read  "  loidd"  or  "  loydd,"  which 

of  the  aborigines  of  the  Malay  Peninsula  is    the     ordinary    Semang     name    for 

can  neither  be  described  as  more  im-  the  bow. 
portant    ethnographically    nor    as    less  2  De  la  Croix,  p.  331. 

dangerous  than  the  blowpipe,  on  which  3  Logan  in  /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  "p.  272. 


<  KAf.  v.  GENERAL   REMAR 

another  observer  (quoted  by  Pleyte1),  when  Btaying 
in  Singapore,  observed  and  described  in  detail  some 
methods  of  arrow-release  employed  by  the  Temiang 
tribe  (of  the  Orang  Laut),  and  states  that  the  bo*i  oi 
which  he  writes  was  used  for  shooting  small  game  and 
fish  ;  adding  that  the  same  weapon  was  employed  in 

the  magic  ceremonies  ol  the  tribe. 

This  account,  at  first  sight,  seems  clear  enough, 
hut  it  has  to  l>c  noted  that  the  giver  ()f  the  informa- 
tion had  come  from  Sumatra,  and  that  what  he  was 
describing  was  probably  a  Sumatran  custom,  and  had 
nothing  to  do  with  the  customs  of  the  "  Orang  Laut.'' 
If  correct,  it  is  one  of  the  interesting  instances  of 
Semang  influence  in  the  south,  of  which  we  sometimes 
get  examples. 

It  cannot,  therefore,  be  considered  as  yet  estab- 
lished that  the  bow  is  employed  as  a  tribal  weapon 
by  any  tribes  that  are  either  of  Sakai  or  Jakun  ex- 
traction ;  and  I  may  add  that  there  is  very  little  prob- 
ability of  its  ever  being  so  established.  If,  however, 
this  should  ever  prove  to  be  the  case,  it  must  certainly 
be  in  a  mixed  Semang-Sakai  or  Semang-Jakun  tribe,  in 
which  the  Negrito  influence  has  remained  so  strong  as 
to  resist  effectually  the  incursions  of  the  alien  culture. 
A  survival  of  this  kind  is  not  impossible,  even  in  the 
extreme  south  of  the  Peninsula,  where  the  Semang 
influence,  in  small  patches,  is  sometimes  particularly 
strong.  But  apart  from  this  remote  possibility,  I  think 
that  any  idea  of  discovering  the  bow  in  use  either  as  a 
Sakai  or  a  Jakun  weapon  may  once  for  all  be  definitely 
abandoned,  and  that,  if  it  should  ever  happen  to  be  so 
found  among  either  of  these  two  races,  it  will  only  be 
in  the  guise  of  a  "  borrowed  plume." 

1    f titer  not.  Arch.  f.  E.  Bd.  iv.  S.  34  et  seqq.  -  Doubtless  as  a  "fleam.'" 


254  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  ii 


There  is  not  much  more  to  add  with  regard  to 
the  bow,  unless  it  be  to  note  the  fact  that  the  bows 
of  the  Semang  very  closely  resemble  one  figured  by 
Man,  who  describes  it  as  coming  from  the  southern 
group  of  the  Andamans.1  The  bows  from  the  North 
Andamans  appear  to  be  of  a  different  character,  and 
it  is  therefore  in  these  South  Andamans  that  it  might 
be  advisable  to  look  first  for  evidences  of  connexion 
between  Semang  and  Andamanese  culture.  Unfor- 
tunately, however,  these  are  just  the  islands  of  which 
least  is  known,  and  I  am  therefore  only  able  to  draw 
attention  to  the  subject  as  one  that  especially  requires 
to  be  worked  up. 

The  Blowpipe. 

The  distribution  of  the  bamboo  blowpipe  or 
blow-gun,  as  Geiger,  following  Pleyte,  has  recently 
shown,  is  (with  the  possible  exception  of  the  Mentawai 
Islands)  inseparably  bound  up  with  the  use  of  Ipoh 
poison,  the  region  covered  being  in  either  case 
limited,  broadly  speaking,  to  the  confines  of  the 
Malayan  region,  using  that  word  in  its  widest  sense. 

In  the  Malay  Peninsula  itself  the  blowrpipe  is 
found  among  all  tribes,  from  Johor,  in  the  extreme 
south,  to  Singora,  in  the  north.2 

The  blowpipe  is  to  be  seen  in  its  highest  develop- 
ment (as  far  as  the  Peninsula  is  concerned)  among  the 
Sakai,  Besisi,  and  Mantra,  whilst  among  the  Semang 
(and  some  Jakun)  it  is  found  in  its  lowest  and 
roughest  form. 

The  Sakai  and  Jakun,  on  the  other  hand  (as  has 
already  been  shown),  do  not  employ  the  bow,  the  use  of 

1  Cp.  p.  280,  n.  1,  infra.  J.  R.  A.  S.y  S.B.,   No.   25,   p.   3,  and 

2  M.-Maclay  W.J.R. A. S.,  S.B.,  No.       No.  26,  p.  14. 
2,  pp.    213,   214.      For  exceptions,  v. 


CHAP,    vi 


GENERAL  REMARKS 


255 


which  is  confined  to  the  Semang.1  It  is  in  fact  now 
quite  certain  that  the  natural  weapon  oi  the  Semai 
is  the  how,  and  that  they  only  learnt  the  use  oi  the 
blowpipe  from  the  Sakai.  Hence  even  when  they  did 
take  to  it,  they  adopted  it  quite  perfunctorily,  and  at 
no  time  took  such  trouble  over  its  manufacture  or  pride 

in  its  possession  as  the  two  other  races  mentioned. *J 

1 11  the  islands  of  the  Malay  Archipelago  (in 
Borneo,  for  instance),  the  blowpipe  consists  of  a  long 
wooden  barrel  or  tube  the  interior  ot  which  has  to  be 
bored  out.::  This  method  of  manufacture  is  much 
clumsier  and  more  laborious  than  that  by  which  its 
bamboo  fellow  of  the  Peninsula  is  made,  and  it 
stands,  I  think,  more  or  less  to  reason  that  if  the 
wooden  blowpipe  of  Borneo  (or  that  made  by  some  of 
the  savage  Malay  tribes  in  the  Peninsula)  had  had  to 
be  invented  before  the  idea  of  utilising  Bambusa 
Wrayi  for  the  purpose  had  arisen,  the  bamboo 
blowpipe  as  we  know  it  would  never  have  existed.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  sporadic  existence  of  the  wooden 
blowpipe  may  reasonably  be  due  to  the  rarity  or  the 
absence  of  the  particular  species  of  long -jointed 
bamboo  {Bambusa  Wrayi) 4  from  which  the  wild  tribes 
of  the  Peninsula  manufacture  their  blowpipes,  for  it  is 
inconceivable  that  any  intelligent  race  that  had  once 


1  Cp.  Svvett.  p.  228  :  "The  Sakai  use 
no  other  weapons  than  the  blowpipe, 
but  the  Semang  have  a  very  powerful 
bow  and  iron -barbed  arrows,  with 
which  they  can  kill  the  largest  game." 
Cp.  also  De  Quatrefages,  pp.  230,  231. 

2  This  remark  applies  especially  to 
the  Semang  tribes  furthest  removed 
from  Sakai  influence,  e.g.  to  the 
Semang  of  Kedah,  and  perhaps  in 
some  degree  to  the  Pangan  of  Ulu 
Patani  and  Ulu  Kelantan.  On  the 
other  hand,  Mr.   L.    Wray  writes  me 


that  he  has  seen  some  beautifully  made 
blowpipes  among  the  Semang  of 
Upper  Perak  and  Selama. 

3  H.  Ling  Roth,  vol.  ii.  pp.  184-187. 

4  Mr.  Wray  writes  me  that  B. 
Wrayi  is  only  used  by  the  Semang  of 
Upper  Perak  and  Selama,  and  the 
mixed  Sakai  -  Semang  tribes  of  the 
Plus  district  in  Perak.  In  other 
districts  of  Perak  another  species  is 
used,  of  a  kind  not  yet  determined, 
with  internodes  of  3  to  4  ft.  in  length. 
Cp.  Wray,  Per.  M.  N.  iii.  pp.  54-58. 


256  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  ii 

discovered  the  ready-made  blowpipe  of  bamboo  would 
ever  again  have  resorted  to  the  method  of  boring  its 
tube  out  of  wood,  or  to  the  perhaps  still  clumsier 
process  of  uniting  a  couple  of  wooden  half-cylinders, 
which  when  fitted  together  do  duty  as  a  tube. 

Speaking  generally,  it  appears  on  the  whole 
most  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  blowpipe  was 
introduced  into  the  Malay  Peninsula  by  the  Sakai, 
upon  their  first  advent  into  that  region,  that  it  has 
since  been  perfected  by  the  same  race,  and  that  the 
modern  blowpipe  of  the  Malayan  tribes  in  the  Penin- 
sula (as  well  as  that  of  the  Archipelago)  was  either 
an  inferior  imitation  of  the  Sakai  weapon,  or  else  that 
the  wooden  blowpipe  was  an  altogether  independent 
invention,  which  appears  at  the  best  most  improbable. 

The  only  point  in  which  the  Bornean  blowpipe  is 
in  any  way  an  improvement  on  that  of  the  Sakai  is  in 
its  possession  of  a  "  sight,"  which  the  Sakai  blow- 
pipes are,  I  believe,  universally  without.  Yet  even  a 
rifled  blowpipe  has  been  recorded  from  Perak,1  and 
although  the  statement  is  unsupported,  in  all  other  im- 
portant respects — in  the  labour  required  for  its  construc- 
tion, in  the  important  matter  of  weight,  and  in  finish 
— the  Bornean  weapon  is  certainly  inferior,  not  only 
to  the  Sakai  blowpipe,  but  even  to  that  of  the  Semang. 

The  exact  distribution  of  the  various  types  of 
blowpipe  in  the  Malay  Peninsula  yet  remains  to  be 
worked  out.  Some  information  on  this  point  is,  how- 
ever, already  forthcoming.  The  most  highly  devel- 
oped (and  decorated)  type  of  blowpipe  is,  as  has 
already   been    said,   found  among    the    central   Sakai 


1  See  De  Quatrefages,  p.  231  {vote).  "choke-bore"  blowpipe,  such  as  is 
This  must  be  a  mistake  of  M.  Lias.  found  among  the  Besisi  (v.  p.  308, 
I      believe     what     he     saw     was      a       infra). 


,  hap   vi  ,,/•  VERAl   A7  MARKS 


(Senoi),  the   Besisi,  and  the   Mantra,     To  1 1 1< ■.« •  the 

Blandas    Of    southern     Selangor    should,     I     think,    \>< 

added,     In  its  rarest   form,  that  ol  the  jointless  mix-, 

this    blowpipe     is     only     found      within      a     yet     more 

restricted  area,  i.e.  in  parts  of  Perak,1  and  (according 

to  one   writer)  in    the    Nenggiri8   district   ol    Kelantan. 

Outside  the  geographical  area  covered  by  these  trib 

we  find,  as  a  rule,  rougher  and  less-finished  specimens 

()[  this  weapon.  The  Semang  of  the  north,  for  in- 
stance, and,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  the  Semang  alone, 
make  use  of  a  roughly  made  blowpipe  which  bears 
very  little  decoration,  but  which  not  unfrequently  has 
a  mouthpiece  of  native  gutta  or  resin. 

The  most  interesting  type,  the  wooden  split-tubed 
blowpipe,  which  is  identical  with  one  used  in  Peru,  is 
said  to  be  "  only  used  south  of  the  Pahang  river  in  the 
state  of  that  name."3  Yet  the  specimen  now  in  the 
British  Museum  came  from  Kuantan,  which  is  a  good 
way  north  of  the  Pahang  river.  Vaughan-Stevens  is, 
however,  probably  right  in  stating  that  the  tree  from 
which  this  wooden  blowpipe  is  made  (Calophyllum,  sp., 
called  in  Malay  "  Penaga")  is  used  because  it  is  proof 
against  warping,  but  that  it  is  only  of  local  distribution. 

Quiver  and  Darts. 

What  is  true  of  the  blowpipe  in  general,  is  true 
of  the  quiver  and  the  darts.     Thus  the  quiver  of  the 

1   Messrs.  R.  H.  Yapp  and  Laidlaw  between  the  old  and  new  worlds  consist 

(who    were    with    me    in    1899- 1900)  in  stone  and  bronze  implements,  round 

found  the  bamboo   from   which    these  towers,    pyramids,    coins,    methods    of 

blowpipes  are  made  on  Mt.  Inas,  on  the  embalming      and      skull  -  deformation, 

north    Perak    frontier,     and     obtained  circumcision,    early    carvings    of    ele- 

single-jointed    blowpipes    in   the  same  phants    found    in     Central     America, 

district.      Mr.  Yapp  tells  me  that  this  and    prehistoric  tobacco  -  pipes    found 

bamboo  closely  resembles  the  blowpipe-  in  Ireland. — Wray  in  Per.  Mus.  Notes, 

reed    of    S.     America     {Arundinaria  vol.  iii. 
Schomburgkii,  Benth. ,  Bambtisece).  2    V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiii.  834. 

Other  proofs  of  prehistoric  intercourse  3  \  aughan-Stevens,  I.e. 

VOL.  I  S 


258  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  m 

Borneo  natives  presents  several  marked  points  of  con- 
trast with  the  quiver  used  by  the  Sakai.  The  device 
of  having  a  separate  reed  for  each  dart  has  not  been 
adopted  by  the  Borneans,  who  have,  however,  invented 
the  long  wooden  "  hook  "  or  "  prong  "  which  is  attached 
to  the  quiver,  and  is  inserted  through  the  hunter's 
belt  to  keep  the  quiver  in  position.  This  appears  all 
the  more  natural,  since  it  is  more  likely  to  have  been 
invented  by  a  race  wearing  better  and  stronger  loin- 
cloths than  those  of  the  Sakai,  who  may  perhaps  once 
have  gone  naked,  and  who  still  fasten  their  quivers 
about  their  waists  with  a  cord.1 

As  regards  the  dart,  Professor  Tylor  was,  I  think, 
the  first  to  point  out  as  a  general  distinction  that  the 
blowpipe  darts  of  south-east  Asia  do  not  have  the 
butt  made  of  cotton,  whereas  this  is  commonly  the 
case  with  the  dart  of  the  South  American  Indians.2 

Iron  dart-points  are  never  employed  by  Sakai  or 
Semang,  though  they  are  used  by  Borneo  natives,  the 
point  being  always  (among  the  former)  of  one  piece 
with  the  shaft.  The  Semang  dart  is  of  much  coarser 
and  clumsier  construction  than  that  of  the  Sakai,  and 
that  of  the  Bornean  is  clumsier  still,  the  shaft  of  the 
dart  being  driven  right  through  the  butt,  so  that  it 
often  slides  up  and  down,  a  piece  of  bad  workmanship 
not  found  among  the  Semang  or  the  Sakai. 

1   For    an    account    of    the    Borneo  by  the  last-mentioned.    He  adds  that  the 

weapon,  v.  Ling  Roth  (ch.  xxii.).     Here  wooden  cap  is  now  used  by  the  Sakai,  the 

perhaps  maybe  mentioned  the  somewhat  rattan  one  by  the  Mantra,  Besisi,  and 

gratuitous    assumptions    of    Vaughan-  Kenaboi  (V.-St.  ii.  120).     Mr.  Blagden 

Stevens,  who   considers   the   evolution  tells    me     that     the    Malacca    Mantra 

of    the    cap    or    cover    used    for    the  use  wooden  caps  bound  with  rattan, 

quiver    to    have    been   carried    out    as  2  For  a  good  deal  of  miscellaneous 

follows  : — (1)   cover  made  from  cuticle  information    about    the    darts    (which, 

of  trees,   as   used  by  the   O.    Kuantan  however,  is  of  small  value  in  view  of 

and  (formerly)  by  O.  Kenaboi  ;  (2)  cap  the  way  in  which  the  tribes  have  been 

made  of  wood  hollowed  out  by  fire,  as  mixed    up     together),     see    Vaughan - 

used  by  the  O.  Sakai ;   (3)  cap  made  Stevens,  ed.  Griinwedel,  in  V.  B.  G.  A. 

of  wood  hollowed  out  by  a  knife,  as  used  xxiii.  835,  836. 


'    IIAI       VI 


GENERAL  Rh  MARKS 


Use  of  Clay  Pellets. 

Captain  1}.  J.  Begbie,  an  old  and  painstaking  and 
(for  his  time)  fairly    accurate  authority  on  the  Malay 

Peninsula,  records  the  shooting  ol  clay  pellets  (as  well 

as  darts)  from  the  blowpipe  by  the  Jakun  '  at  Mala< 

,n  l$33-  This  statement  is  confirmed  by  Mr.  L. 
Wray,  who  informs  me  that  these  pellets  are  often 
employed  by  bird-collect ors  at  Malacca,  where  they 
have  been  used  from  time  immemorial.  Mr.  Wray 
himself  had  a  Malacca  bird-collector  (an  Eurasian 
Malay)  who  used  these  pellets  for  collecting  purposes 
in  Perak.  Mr.  Douglas,  of  Sarawak,  also  tells  me 
that  boys  in  Borneo  commonly  use  small  clay  pellets 
for  shooting  small  birds,  and  that  these  pellets  are 
shot  out  of  a  small  blowpipe. 


Use  of  the  Blowpipe? 

In  loading,  the  blowpipe  is  held  vertically  in  one 
hand  and  the  pointed  end  of  the  dart  inserted  with 
the  other  into  the  orifice  in  the  centre  of  the  mouth- 
piece.3 The  latter  is  always  fitted  to  the  root-end 
of  the  bamboo.  Into  the  tube  of  the  blowpipe,  and 
behind  the  butt-end  of  the  dart,  is  almost  invariably 
inserted  a  small  wad  for  the  prevention  of  "  windage." 
This   wad    is    made    from    the    flocculent    down    that 


1  Begbie,  pp.  5,  6. 

2  As  an  example  of  the  extreme 
difficulty  of  obtaining  information  from 
the  aborigines  about  the  blowpipe, 
Vaughan-Stevens  remarks  that  many 
Malays  living  near  the  O.  Kuantan 
have  never  seen  their  blowpipes, 
though  they  know  that  they  possess 
them.  In  some  cases  these  weapons 
were  hid  in  the  stems  of  living  bamboos 
in  the  jungle  (the  nodes  being  removed 


for  their  reception),  and  he  was  only 
able  to  obtain  four  specimens  altogether 
(V.-St.  ii.  113). 

3  So  Borie  (tr.  Bourien),  p.  78  : 
"  Into  the  bore  of  the  inner  bamboo,  at 
the  mouthpiece,  is  placed  an  arrow 
several  inches  long."  For  an  unique 
and  questionable  exception  see  Maxwell 
in/.  R.  A.  5.,  S.B.,  No.  4,  p.  48  :  "I 
had  always  regarded  the  blowpipe  as  a 
breechloader,"  etc. 


26o 


WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS 


PART   II 


collects  about  the  leaf-bases  of  certain  palms,  especially 
the  "  tukas  "  (Caryota  Griffitkii  or  C.  mitis),  or  certain 
kinds  of  rattan  (Calamus  geminifloris),  and  results 
from  the  destruction  of  the  softer  tissues.1 

In  shooting,  the  entire  mouthpiece  is,  as  a  rule, 
taken  into  the  mouth,  the  fingers  being  commonly 
crossed  beneath  the  tube  (near  the  mouthpiece). 
Sometimes,  however,  the  edges  of  the  mouthpiece 
alone  are  inserted  between  the  teeth  and  the  lips. 
As  the  dart  leaves  the  tube,  there  is  a  sharp  hollow 
11  ping  "  like  that  of  a  pop-gun.2 


Range  of  Dart. 

The  effective  range  of  the  blowpipe  darts  used 
by  the  best  "  shots  "  of  these  tribes  may  be  put  at  from 
50  to  60  yards  as  an  outside  limit,  but  in  practice  a 
range  of  100  feet  is  seldom  exceeded.3 


1  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.  116.  Really 
the  fibro-vascular  bundles  of  the  leaf- 
sheaths. 

2  Cp.  Newbold,  ii.  pp.  400,  401  : 
"It  is  propelled  by  collecting  a  con- 
siderable quantity  of  air  in  the  lungs, 
and  suddenly  emitting  it  with  a  sharp 
noise  resembling  that  occasioned  by 
the  discharge  of  an  air-gun." 

3  Cp.,  for  example  (of  the  Sakai), 
(1)  Hale,  p.  289,  where  it  is  stated  that 
the  range  is  effective  up  to  60  yards  (55 
m.),  and  that  at  50  yards  (45  m.)  a 
skilled  performer  will  put  five  out  of 
six  darts  into  a  playing  card. 

(2)  De  Morgan  (vii.  417)  says  they 
can  shoot  straight  up  to  80  metres, 
but  in  practice  do  not  shoot  more  than 
30  to  35  paces  (23  m.  to  27  m.). 

(3)  Letessier  puts  the  range  at  28-30 
yards  (25m.  to  27  m.),  but  he  is  no  doubt 
speaking  of  the  ordinary  range  of  their 
shooting.  They  usually  shoot  at  fairly 
short  range,  in  order  to  make  sure  of 
their  aim,  as  they  do  not  wish  to  risk 
wasting  their  arrows. 


(4)  J.  A.  G.  Campbell  says  :  "I  have 
myself  seen  birds  and  monkeys  killed 
on  high  trees  at  a  distance  of  60 
yards"  (55  m.)  ;  and  adds:  "The 
Sakai  seldom  misses  his  shot  "  {S.  J. 
iii.  241). 

Of  the  Jakun — (1)  Logan  (iny.  /.  A. 
vol.  ii.  p.  262)  states  that  the  range 
(of  the  blowpipe-dart)  to  take  proper 
effect  is  about  70  or  80  feet  (21  m. 
to  24  m.).  "  Some  can  reach  140  or 
150  feet  (46  m.  to  49  m.),  but  then 
there  will  be  little  chance  of  their 
inflicting  a  dangerous  wound." 

(2)  Borie  (tr.  Bourien),  p.  78,  says 
50-60  yards  (45  m.  to  54  m.). 

(3)  Newbold,  ii.  400,  401,  puts  the 
effective  range  at  60-70  feet  (20  m.). 

(4)  Vaughan-Stevens,  in  V.  B.  G.  A. 
xxiii.  835,  836,  puts  it  at  20-30  metres 
in  a  horizontal  direction,  and  more 
in  a  vertical. 

(5)  The  Kuantan  blowpipe  is  very 
roughly  made  ;  it  has  a  range  of  40 
paces  (30  m.)  only  (Vaughan-Stevens, 
ii.   113). 


<  hat.  vi  GENl  RAl   REMARKS  t6i 

The  Use  <>/  l/n>/,. 

The  question  whether  the  use  of  Ipoh  is  oi 
Malay  origin  must  (says  Geiger,  |>.  38)  in  all  prob- 
ability be   answered    in    the   negative.      It    is   clear, 

however,  that  he  is  here  using  the  word  Malay  in  its 
narrowest  sense,  as  he  subsequently  points  out  (pp. 
40,  41)  that  the  eastern  boundary-line  between  those 
who  use  the  blowpipe  (and  lpoh)  and  those  who  do 
not  does  correspond  to  the  boundary-line  between  the 
Malay  and  the  Polynesian  languages  (p.  41).  In  this 
latter  case  he  is  clearly  using  the  word  Malay  in  its 
wider  sense,  as  applied  to  what  may  be  called 
44  Greater  Malaya  "  (including  the  countries  inhabited 
by  the  "  savage  Malays  "  of  Wallace).  Moreover,  he 
then  proceeds  to  quote  Brandes'  remark,  that  "  the 
natives  who  use  the  blowpipe  form  one  family  of 
languages." 

The  true  conclusion,  after  all,  appears  to  be  that 
the  use  of  Ipoh  may  be  of  Malay  origin,  but  only  in  the 
wider  sense  of  the  word;  and  in  the  same  way,  it  is  just 
conceivable  that  the  blowpipe  may  be  (in  its  wooden 
form  at  least)  of  "  Greater  Malayan  "  origin.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  wooden  blowpipe  is  so  different  a 
weapon  from  the  blowpipe  of  bamboo  that  it  will 
perhaps  be  maintained  that  the  two  forms  may  have 
arisen  independently.  Even,  however,  if  this  was  the 
case,  the  bamboo  weapon  must  certainly  have  been 
invented  in  some  country  like  the  Malay  Peninsula  or 
Sumatra,  where  Bambusa  Wrayi  or  longinodis  is  known 
to  be  indigenous  ;  and  further,  as  has  been  remarked 
already,  it  is  inconceivable  that  any  intelligent  race 
should  descend  to  using  the  wooden  form  of  blowpipe 
when    it    had    once    known    and    used    the    infinitely 


262  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  ii 

superior  blowpipe  of  bamboo.  The  only  other  possible 
alternative  seems  to  be  to  accept  the  wooden  blowpipe 
as  the  original  form,  and  to  suppose  that  the  race 
which  invented  it  failed  to  improve  upon  it,  the 
invention  of  the  (improved)  bamboo  form  being 
conceded  to  a  race  infinitely  behind  the  Malayan 
race  in  the  matter  of  culture.  To  speak  frankly,  this 
last  alternative  does  not  appear  credible,  and  unless 
on  the  whole  we  prefer  to  concede  the  possibility  of 
the  invention  of  at  least  two  independent  blowpipe 
types  in  the  Malayan  region,  we  are  forced  back  upon 
the  first  of  these  two  alternatives,  viz.  :  the  supposition 
that  the  bamboo  blowpipe  was  introduced  by  the 
Sakai,  who  subsequently  perfected  it,  and  that  it  was 
then  more  or  less  roughly  copied  by  the  aboriginal 
tribes  of  Malayan  origin  in  districts  where  B.  Wrayi 
was  wanting. 

I  have  spoken  mainly  of  the  blowpipe  itself, 
rather  than  of  the  poison  that  was  used  with  its  darts, 
partly  because  I  think  that  Geiger  has  shown  that  for 
all  practical  purposes  the  introduction  of  the  one 
meant  the  introduction  of  the  other,  and  partly  because 
it  is  easier  to  get  at  the  facts  about  the  blowpipe  than 
it  is  to  get  at  those  about  "  Ipoh."  But  I  will  now 
proceed  to  a  discussion  of  the  poison  itself. 

In  remarking  that  the  various  kinds  of  Ipoh  poison 
are,  as  a  rule  (though  not  exclusively),  rather  used  for 
hunting  than  for  warlike  purposes,  Geiger  explains 
that  both  Ipoh  antiar  and  derrid,  taken  internally,  are 
practically  harmless,  whereas  Ipoh  tieute,  on  account 
of  the  strychnine  contained  in  it,  "  might  be  dan- 
gerous." Hence  the  latter  poison  is  usually  em- 
ployed for  the  destruction  of  beasts  of  prey  such  as 
the    tiger    (Newbold    and     Malbec    and    Bourgeois), 


( ■  1 1  \  I 


GENERAL  REMARKS 


though  it  certainly  is  used  for  apes.  And  this  is 
probably,  as  Geiger  suggests,  the  reason  why  the 
part  struck  by  a  poisoned  arrow   is  usually  i      ised 

before  the  game  SO  killed  is  cooked  and  eaten  a 
practice  which  is  doubtless  of  far  more  importance  in 
the  rase  of  some  of  these  poisons  (eg,  tieute)  than  it 
is  in  the  case  o[  the  others. 

The  arrow  and  dart  poison  called  "  Ipoh  '  by  the 
Malays  has  obtained  its  native  name  from  the  fact  that 
the  two  chief  substances  which  (either  separately  or 
in  combination)  form  its  basis  are  derived  from  plants 
distinguished,  the  one  as  the  Ipoh  tree  {Antiaris),  and 
the  other  as  the  Ipoh  creeper  (Strycknos).  Derris 
elliptica  or  "  tuba,"  on  the  other  hand,  is  but  rarely 
used,  so  that  the  poison-mixture  almost  invariably 
contains  one  or  other  of  the  Ipoh's  as  its  main 
ingredient.  The  action  of  these  two  chief  poisons  is 
very  different,  and  the  choice  of  one  or  the  other  is, 
as  has  already  been  pointed  out,  dictated  by  the 
circumstances  of  supply.  Incomparably  the  most 
famous  of  these  two  ingredients  is,  however,  the  sap 
ol  the  Ipoh  or  Upas  tree,  which  owes  its  notoriety 
to  the  inventions  or  exaggerations  with  which  Foersch 
once  "  amused  the  credulity  of  Europe." 

The  deadly  exhalations  attributed  to  the  Ipoh  tree 
(Antiaris)  certainly  have,  as  has  long  been  proved,  no 
foundation  whatever  in  fact,  at  all  events  so  far  as  the 
tree  itself  is  concerned. 

But  it  seems,  on  the  other  hand,  well  worth 
pointing  out  that  the  sap  of  the  "  Rengas "  tree 
certainly  produces  at  the  least  contact  (as  is  well 
known  locally)  an  extraordinary  inflammation  of  the 
skin.  When  I  was  residing  at  Klang  in  Selangor, 
there  was  a  fine  Rengas  tree  growing  at  the  back  of 


264  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  pari  ii 

my  house,  and  one  day,  not  dreaming  of  the  con- 
sequences, I  ordered  my  Boyanese  sais  to  climb  the 
tree  and  lop  off  a  few  small  branches  which  obscured 
the  view.  This  he  did,  not  knowing  the  tree,  the 
result  being  that  both  his  face  and  his  hands  quickly 
became  inflamed  and  swollen  beyond  all  recognition, 
and  I  was  obliged  to  send  him  to  hospital  for  treat- 
ment. This  fact  about  the  Rengas  tree  sap  is  well 
known  in  Malaya,  and  taking  it  in  conjunction  with  the 
fact  that  Rengas  sap  often  forms  one  of  the  ingredients 
of  Ipoh  poison,  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  here  we 
have  a  quite  possible  source  of  the  Upas-tree  fable.1 

Ingredients  of  the  Poison. 

The  proper  proportions  of  the  ingredients  used  in 
making  the  dart-poison  of  the  wild  tribes  have  doubt- 
less been  ascertained  by  centuries  of  trial,  and  are 
now  in  many  cases  handed  down  from  father  to  son. 
Although,  however,  the  basis  of  the  poison  may  be 
the  same  among  all  the  members  of  a  given  tribe,  the 
exact  proportions,  and  even  the  exact  ingredients, 
forming  the  "  blend  "  vary  to  a  very  great  extent  with 
the  individual  and  (of  course)  with  the  locality  and  the 
season,  and  hence  any  conclusions  reached  must  be 
necessarily  general  ones.2 

1  Foranactual  legend  of  the  Upas-tree  got  in  exchange  from  the  Malays,  were 
type,  see  the  Besisi  tradition  in  vol.  ii.  mixed  up  together.      It  thus  came  to 

2  According  to  M.  -  Maclay  the  pass  that  the  dart-poison  not  only  of 
chief  ingredient  of  this  poison  was  every  tribe,  but  of  every  individual  of 
the  juice  of  the  well-known  Upas  tree  each  tribe,  was  made  up  of  different 
of  the  Javanese,  the  Antiaris  toxicaria.  materials,  and  that  in  consequence  of 
With  this  juice  a  great  many  other  sub-  this  the  effects  were  very  various.  The 
stances  were  mixed,  the  number  and  effect  on  man  was  certainly  very  deadly 
nature  of  which  depended  partly  on  and  very  rapid  :  thoroughly  trustworthy 
chance,  and  partly  on  the  science  of  Malays  in  different  parts  of  the  Penin- 
the  preparer.  The  poison  fangs  of  sula  told  him  that  they  knew  from 
different  kinds  of  snakes,  the  juices  of  actual  observation  that  a  man  who  had 
a  number  of  trees  and  fruits,  even  been  wounded  by  it  was  not  able  even 
arsenic,  which  the  "  tame  "  aborigines  to  finish  his   "  sirih  "  (betel-chewing), 


i  kap.  vi  GENERAL  REMARKS 


EvenVaughan  Stevens,  who  talks  ol  the  "realaiw 
poison  "  as  if  it  were  a  certain  definite  composition 
(instead  of  a  set  of  compositions),  states  that  indi 
viduals  of  the  same  tribe  disagree  as  to  the  proper 

composition  of  the  poison,  and  th.it   il  a  man  dreams  of 
killing    a    boast    oven    with     some    perfectly    harmless 

substance,  he  will  in  future  add  this  to  the  ingredients 

which    make   up   his   own    particular    "   blend"    of    the 
poison  in  question.1 

Miscellaneous  Ingredients* 

The  employment  of  pepper,  tobacco,  capsicum, 
onion,  and  other  comparatively  harmless  ingredients 
may  be  due  (vide  Geiger,  p.  18)  to  the  fact  of  their 
pungent  qualities  being  regarded  as  likely  to  produce 
inflammation.  According  to  Van  Hasselt,  on  the 
other  hand,  they  are  added  to  give  the  poison  the 
desired  consistency,  but  this  does  not  seem  very 
probable.  Scorpions'  stings  and  snakes'  fangs,  etc., 
are  also  added  to  the  mixture,  as  well  as  Pangium 
cdnle,  Reinw.,  which  contains  prussic  acid.  In  this  last 
case,  however,  as  well  as  in  that  of  some  of  the  other 
ingredients  just  mentioned,  Geiger  points  out  that  the 
poisonous  principle  is  almost  certainly  evaporated  by 
boiling,  and  it  may  well  be  that  some  of  the  substances 
aforesaid  are  employed  rather  for  magical  than  for 
pharmacological  reasons. 

Use  of  Mineral  Poisons. 

Geiger  further  informs  us(p.  1 8)thatno  single  poison 
(of  all  those  that  he  investigated)  showed  the  slightest 

but    was    seized    with    violent    cramps  very  rapid  effect,  even  when  adminis- 

and  severe  vomitings,  and  so  died.     In  tered    in  very  small  doses  {J.  R.  A.  S., 

some    experiments    that    M.  -  Maclay  S.  B.,  No.  2,  pp.  213,  214). 

made  upon  animals  the  poison  had  a  l  ii.   128.      Cp.  also  ii.   108. 


266  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  ii 


chemical  trace  of  either  arsenic  or  antimony  in  its 
composition.  Hence  he  elects  to  consider  them  as 
pure  plant  poisons.  On  the  other  hand,  the  weight  of 
native  testimony  (of  all  kinds)  as  to  the  addition  of 
arsenic  to  these  poisons  is  so  universal  and  over- 
whelming, that  I  am  inclined  to  think  we  have  not  yet 
quite  got  to  the  bottom  of  the  matter,  though  in  the 
view  of  Mr.  L.  Wray  it  is  the  use  of  arsenic  by  the 
Malays,  in  the  cleaning  of  their  kris  (and  other) 
blades,  that  has  given  rise  to  these  reports.  "  As  a 
dart-poison  ''  (Mr.  Wray  writes  me),  "  arsenic  would 
be  useless,  and  it  is  not  found  in  the  Peninsula  in  a 
state  in  which  even  the  Malays  could  extract  it  from 
its  ores."  It  is  sold  in  the  bazaars,  however,  and  may 
be  used  for  special  purposes  ;  e.g.  in  shooting  tigers. 

Durability. 

As  regards  the  durability  of  Ipoh  poison,  Geiger 
is  doubtless  right  in  ascribing  the  conflicting  reports 
which  characterise  it  in  that  respect  to  the  variability 
of  the  ingredients  composing  the  poison.1  There  is 
almost  certainly  a  great  difference  in  durability 
between  the  poison  obtained  from  the  Upas  creeper 
and  that  of  the  Upas  tree. 

Effect  of  the  Poison. 

Small  birds  or  mammals  when  struck  by  a  dart 
coated  at  the  point  with  poison  of  an  average 
strength  are  killed  almost  instantaneously,  but  bigger 
ones  take,  as  a  rule,  some  minutes  to  die.  In  the 
case  of  the  largest  and  strongest  monkeys  the  effect 
of  the  same  (average)  poison  may  take  a  quarter  of 

1  Geiger,    p.     24.       The    chemical       the  scope  of  this  book,  is  fully  treated 
aspect  of  the  question,  which  is  beyond       by  Geiger,  loc.  cit. 


i  hap.  vi  GENERAL  REMARKS 

an  hour  or  perhaps  rather  longer  In  all  cases  the 
time  which  elapses  before  the  animal  dies  depends 
naturally  upon  the  strength  of  the  poison  which  has 

been  used.1 

In  the  words  of  De   Morgan,  "a  man  or  (big) 

animal,"  struck  by  one  of  these  poisoned  arrows,  feels 
for  several  minutes  nothing  but  the  pain  oi  the  wound. 
This  is  followed  by  muscular  spasms  and  vomiting, 
and  death  follows  in  a  few  (more)  minutes,  if  a  Strong 
preparation  of  the  poison  has  been  used.  If,  how- 
ever, the  poison  is  no  longer  fresh  (or  in  any  way  too 
weak),  the  agony  lasts  for  several  hours,  in  the  course 
of  which  the  wound  inflames  and  acquires  a  bluish 
tinge.-' 

Vaughan-Stevens  says  that  apes  and  gibbons  when 
struck  run  a  little  further  through  the  branches  and 
then  fall  down  in  about  twenty  minutes — less  if  Upas 
(Ipoh)  is  added  to  the  poison.  Old  men  (of  the  wild 
tribes)  say  that  Ipoh  makes  the  poison  spread  more 
rapidly  through  the  blood.  Ipoh  acts  instantaneously 
even  when  hard  and  dry  ;  without  it  the  poison  works 
much  more  slowly.3 

Antidotes. 

The  antidotes  mentioned  by  Geiger  (p.  26  seqq.) 

consist  of  certain  plant-roots,4  the  leaf-stalks  of  a  tree 

called  "  pule,"  5  the  chewed  root  of  Hernandia  sonora, 

L.  ;  as  well  as  that  of  Ophioxylon  serpentinum,  L.,  and 

1  Cp.  J.  A.  G.  Campbell  (p.  241):  arrows  of  the  Semang  bow,  but 
"  For  a  large  bird  (as  a  horn-  the  Upas  poison  is  used  for  these 
bill)  or  a  monkey  it  takes  about  a  as  well  as  for  the  darts  of  the  blow- 
quarter  of  an  hour  for  the  poison  to  pipe. 

work,    after    which    time    the    animal  3  ii.  1 28  ;  and  cp.  Wray,  J.  A.  I.  I.e. 

falls  to  the  ground  ;   with  small  birds  4  E.g.  those  of  Crinum  asiaticurn, 

or    beasts    the     poison    is    almost    in-  L.,  or  Radix  toxicaria,  Dutch, 

stantaneous."  5  Sic  (  ?  sip\\\ih)  =  A/stonia  scholaris, 

2  De  Morgan  (vii.  417;  IJ  Homme,  Br.  In  Malay  "  pulih  ?'—  "  return  to 
ii.  621)  is  here  writing  of  the  poisoned  life." 


268  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  11 


Andira  Horsfieldi,  Lesch.  (Papilionacecz),  as  well  as 
certain  indescribable  emetics  such  as  that  referred  to 
by  Friar  Odoricus.1 

To  these  may  be  added  the  plant  called  "  crab's- 
fat  "  ("  lemak  kepiting  ")2  mentioned  by  Newbold,  and 
common  salt,  which  is  also  (according  to  De  Morgan) 
occasionally  referred  to  as  an  antidote.  According  to 
the  Malays,  a  particular  kind  of  black  maize  if  applied 
to  the  wound  will  act  as  a  remedy.  Some  such 
substance  may  possibly  be  of  use  as  an  absorbent 
where  a  very  mild  preparation  of  poison  is  used,  but  as 
a  rule  the  aborigines  declare  that  the  only  remedy  is  to 
cut  out  the  part  affected  immediately,  whenever  the 
strongest  preparation  of  the  poison  (for  which  there 
is  no  known  antidote)  is  used.  This,  however,  is 
seldom  possible,  because  even  at  a  distance  of  from 
20  to  30  yards  the  aboriginal  can  drive  his  dart  into 
the  flesh  up  to  the  butt.3 

I. — Semang. 

Stone  Implements — Knives  and  Hatchets. 

The  attempt  of  Vaughan- Stevens  to  identify 
certain  stone  implements,  of  which  he  obtained  models, 
with  tools  of  East  Semang  or  Pangan  workmanship, 
can  hardly  be  sustained,  for  the  reasons  already  set 
forth,  and  it  may,  I  think,  be  taken  as  a  certainty  that 
no  branch  of  the  Negrito  race  in  the  Malay  Peninsula 
has  ever  arrived  at  a  sufficiently  advanced  stage  of 
civilisation  to  enable  them  to  produce  the  highly 
finished  neolithic  implements  that  are  so  common  in 
the  Peninsula.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  exceedingly 
probable    that    the   Semang,   like    their   Andamanese 

1    Odorici  Lib.  p.  21.  2  Newbold,  ii.  403. 

3  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.  128. 


chap,  vi  VI  GRITO  i  Oh  h  EDAM 


cousins,  formerly  employed  both  chips  and  flakes  ol 
stone  for  various  cutting  purposes,  as  well  as  the 
simple   two  stone   apparatus   which   with    the    Anda 

manese  takes  the  place  ol  hammer  and  anvil. 

Slivers  of  bamboo,  again,  were  and  still  are  un- 
doubtedly used  by  the  Semang  as  knife-blades  '  and 
spear-heads,  whilst   long    needles  and    other   boring 

instruments  are  made  of  bone  or  wood. 

For  filing  the  teeth  (Malay  fashion)  the  Pangan 
employ  a  piece  of  sandstone. 

The  iron  knives  ("pisau"),  choppers  ("parang" 
or  "  golok  "),  and  hatchets  ("  b'liong  "),  ordinarily 
employed  by  the  Semang,  are  undoubtedly  all  of 
Malay  origin,  and  are  usually  made  by  Malays,  or  by 
Chinamen  following  the  ordinary  Malay  patterns, 
and  have  nothing  particularly  distinctive  about  them, 
which  probably  accounts  for  their  being  omitted  from 
the  accounts  given  by  the  usual  authorities.  I  have 
ventured  to  draw  attention  to  them,  however,  because 
even  in  cases  where  the  blade  may  be  actually  of 
Malay  manufacture,  yet  both  the  helve  (or  shaft)  and 
its  rattan  lashings  may  be,  and  no  doubt  often  are, 
distinctive  of  the  race,  and  as  such  would  repay  any 
attention  that  might  be  given  them.  Indeed,  1  have 
often  been  informed  by  Malays  that  the  axe-fastenings 
of  the  aborigines  could  be  easily  distinguished  from 
those  employed  by  the  Malays  in  the  same  neighbour- 
hood. 

The  Malay  dagger,  or  "  kris,"  and  the  "  Tower 
musket  "  have  both  found  their  way  to  some  extent 
into  the  hands  of  the  Semang,  by  whom  they  — 
especially  the  latter — are  greatly  prized. 


1  Mr.  G.  C.  Bellamy  has  sent  me  a       of   Ulu    Jelei,    Pahang;    cp.    p.    249. 
bone-hafted  knife,  from  the  "  Pangan  "       ante,  n.  2. 


270  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  11 

The  Spear. 

Kedah  Semang'.  —  Hardly  any  writer,  except  De 
Morgan,  mentions  the  use  of  the  spear  by  the  Negritos 
(Semang),  though  many  talk  of  their  bows  and  blow- 
pipes. It  is,  however,  interesting  to  find  that  the 
Semang  of  Kedah  have  a  word  of  their  own  for  the 
spear,  and  that  their  name  for  it 1  is  totally  different 
both  from  the  word  used  by  the  Sakai 2  and  that  used 
by  the  Jakun  and  Malays.3 

A  spear  which  was  collected  among  the  Semang 
tribes  of  Upper  Perak  (Gunong  Sapi)  by  Grubauer, 
and  which  is  now  in  the  Ethnographical  Museum  at 
Cambridge,  measured  53^  in.  ( 1 307  mm.,  over-all  length) 
by  about  1  in.  (25  mm.)  in  diameter  at  the  thickest  part. 

Its  shaft  was  made  of  some  tough  and  heavy 
wood,  and  had  received  a  certain  amount  of  polishing. 
The  upper  end  of  the  shaft  tapered  to  a  point,  which 
its  owner  had  evidently  been  in  the  habit  of  planting 
in  the  ground.  Its  blade,  which  was  of  iron,  measured 
6\  inches  (153  mm.)  from  point  to  shoulder,  and  a 
little  less  than  an  inch  (ca.  20  mm.)  in  width. 

The  Bow. 
Kedah  Semang'. — The  Semang  living  at  Siong  were 
evidently  quite  familiar  with  the  bow,  as  they  described 
it  to  me  minutely  in  every  detail,  but  they  told  me 
that  they  had  now  given  up  using  it.  It  is  quite 
possible,  on  the  other  hand,  that  they  were  concealing 
their  bows,  as  they  are  known  not  unfrequently  to  do. 
The  bow  ("  loydd  ")  that  they  once  used  (and  of  which 

1  "Ad."     For  De  Morgan's  account       support  the  view  that  the  Sakai  learnt 
cp.  U H.  ii.  618.  the  use  of  the  spear  from  the  aboriginal 

2  "  Tarok  "  (Senoi    dialect);    "be-       Malayan  tribes. 

lush  "  (Tembeh  dialect)  :  both  of  which  3   "  Lembing  "    or    "  bolos  "  —  con- 

words  are  of  Malayan  origin,  and  thus       nected  with  Mai.  "  buloh  "  =  bamboo. 


;t= 


Jficjelel, 


i.  Semang  bow. 


Semang  Implements. 


.'/Organ*. 

De  Morgan. 
Arrowhead  with  two  barbs. 


3.  Arrows.  3  a.  Transverse  section  of  shaft. 
5.  Butt-end  of  arrow  showing  vanes  and  notch.  6.  Arrows  in  their  quiver.  7,8.  Bamboo  tubes  used 
as  poison  receptacles.  9,10.  Spears  with  bamboo  heads.  11,12.  Spears  with  iron  heads.  13.  Cane. 
\\a,  146.  Bamboo  fishing  receptacles.  15.  Large  bamboo  water-tube  with  arm.  16,  16a.  Wooden 
plate.  17.  Small  box  or  receptacle  made  from  the  hard  outer  part  of  the  "  kapayang  "  fruit.  18. 
Bamboo  whistle.  19,20.  Flutes.  21.  Bamboo  "  guitar  "  with  strings  made  by  raising  the  skin  of  the 
bamboo  itself,  and  inserting  wedges  beneath  them.  22.  Drum  with  wooden  barrel,  and  headed  with 
skin  tightened  by  wooden  wedges.  23.  Bamboo  Jew's-harp.  24,  24  a,  b.  Flint  and  steel,  with  bamboo 
receptacle.— De  .Morgan  in  L'H.  25th  October  1885,  p.  619. 
Vol.  I.  p.  270. 


,  hap.  vi  NEGRITOS  01  KEDAH  271 


they  made  iu.m  model)  was,  ( I  id, roughly  Bpeaking, 

".1  fathom  and  a  half "  in  height  (probably  2.1   m.  to 

in.),  and    was    made    ot    a   kind    OJ     wood    (ailed,    in 

the  Semang  dialect,  "tfcmakih."      I  he  string  was  oi 
twisted  jungle-fibre  and   the  arrows  ("wong  loydd  ") 

were  of  bamboo  with  barbed  iron  heads. 

I  was  further  informed  that  the  String  was  made  from 

carefully  twisted  st  rands  of  tree-bark,  greased  and  waxed,1 

and  the  arrow-shafts  from  an  internode  ofbamboo. 

The  same  informants  told  me  that  the  shafts  of  the 
arrows  are  often  decorated  with  incised  patterns,  and 
have  barbed-iron  points  which  fit  into  a  socket  at  the 
end  of  the  shaft.  This  part  of  the  shaft  is  bound 
round  with  a  thin  sliver  of  rattan,  and  the  point  is  so 
fitted  into  it  that  any  wounded  animal  that  tries  to 
rid  itself  of  the  arrow  (by  rubbing  itself  against  the 
brushwood)  may  succeed  in  breaking  off  the  shaft,  but 
will  leave  the  point  sticking  in  the  wound.  A  wound 
from  this  point,  moreover  (which  is  crusted  with 
several  coatings  of  Upas  poison),  soon  kills  its  victim. 
The  arrow  is  usually  winged  with  feathers  of  the 
hornbill,  and  the  point  is  rudely  forged  by  pounding 
a  red-hot  piece  of  iron  between  two  large  stones. 

Perak  Semang. — The  Semang  (of  Perak)  have  a 
very  powerful  bow  and  iron-barbed  arrows,  with  which 
they  kill  the  largest  game.2  It  is  usually  about  7  ft. 
(2.1  m.)  in  length,  and  the  iron  heads  of  the  arrows, 
which  are  given  a  high  finish,  are  of  good  workman- 
ship, and  poisoned.3  Mr.  L.  Wray  writes  me  that 
the  arrowT-heads  (of  the  Perak  Semang)  are  made  of 

1  De  M.,  who  confirms  this  {L'H.  ii.  =  feathers  or  "vane";  and  "  go  "  = 
618),  adds  that  sinews  of  wild  animals  quiver.  The  bow  is  of  "ibul"  wood,  and 
(deer  or  bull)  are  also  used  for  the  cord.        2  metres  in  length,  with  a  curvature  of 

2  Swett.  p.  228.  According  to  0.30  m.  The  arrow  is  90  cm.  in 
De  M.  "ak"  =  bow;  "yao"  =  bow-  length.  For  further  details,  cp. 
string;   "  loi  "  =  arrow-point  ;   "preg"       L'H.  ii.  618.  3  Hale,  p.  290. 


272  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  ii 

hard  wood,  of  thin  sheet-iron  cut  from  meat-tins,  etc. 
(mounted  in  wood),  and  also  of  forged  iron,  and  that 
he  has  sent  specimens  of  all  these  kinds  to  the 
British   Museum  from  Selama  and  Upper  Perak. 

Mr.  Wray  further  states  that,  besides  the  blowpipe- 
darts,  the  Semang  used  bows  with  poisoned  arrows. 
These  arrows  had  detachable  fore-shafts,  with  either 
barbed-iron  or  hard  wooden  heads.  The  heads  are 
about  2  in.  in  length  by  \  in.  in  breadth  (50  mm.  by 
19  mm.),  and  are  thickly  coated,  except  near  the  point, 
with  poison.  Mr.  Wray  had  not  seen  the  effect  of 
one  of  these  arrows  on  an  animal,  but  the  Semang 
amongst  whom  he  lived  for  about  three  months  on  one 
occasion  said  that  they  were  able  to  kill  pig,  sambhur 
deer,  wild  oxen,  and  even  rhinoceros  with  them,  and 
as  he  saw  bones  of  these  animals  at  their  camps,  there 
appeared  to  be  no  reason  to  doubt  the  truth  of  the 
statement.  It  was  asserted  that  a  deer  would  drop 
in  from  30  to  40  yards  (27  m.  to  36  m.)  after  being 
struck  by  an  arrow,  the  rapidity  of  the  action  of  the 
poison  depending  on  the  vascularity  of  the  portion 
of  the  body  pierced  by  the  arrow.1 

But  the  best  idea  of  the  Semang  bow  can  be 
formed  from  the  description  of  two  specimens  which 
were  collected  in  Perak  by  Grubauer  on  his  recent 
expedition  to  the  Malay  Peninsula,  and  which  were 
purchased  from  him  by  me  on  behalf  of  the  Cam- 
bridge University  Museum. 

The  first  of  these  two  bows,  the  stock  of  which 
was  made  of  a  light-coloured  but  tough  kind  of  wood, 
measured  Jj  in.  (over-all  length)  by  1  in.  (1957  mm. 
by  25  mm.)  in  thickness  at  the  handle,  and  the 
shoulders,  which  took   the   knots  at  each  extremity  of 

1  J.  A.  /.  vol.  xxi.  (1892),  pp.  477,  478.      Cp.  L Homme y  ii.  618. 


chap,  vi  VBGRITOS  OF  PERAK 


the  bow  cord,  were  3  in,  (76  mm.)  From  the  tip  ol  the 
stock  at  the  lower  end,  and  \\  in.  (38  mm.)  from  the  tip 
at  the  other.  The  length  ol  the  cord,  which  was  made 
of  stout  twisted  jungle-fibre  (probably  manufactured 
from  1  h<*  bark  ol  the  atrtocarpus  or  "t'rap"  tree),  w 

about  OS  in,  (1007  mm.)  from  knot  to  knot. 

The  second  bow  was  made  of  a  dill-  rent  kind  ol 
wood,  which  was  of  a  dark  brown  colour,  and  polished. 
Its  over-all  length  was  yi  in.  (1983  mm.),  and  it  was 
rather  thicker  at  the  handle  (i.1,  in.  =  38  mm.);  the 
distance  from  the  extreme  upper  tip  to  the  shoulder 
taking  the  upper  knot  of  the  bow-cord  was  i£  in. 
(38  mm.) ;  the  corresponding  measurement  at  the 
lower  extremity  being  2  in.  (5  cm.),  and  the  length  of 
the  cord  itself,  from  knot  to  knot,  63  in.  (160  cm.). 

Together  with  the  bows  just  described  were  a 
couple  of  quivers  containing  poisoned  arrows.  Each 
of  these  quivers  was  made  from  a  bamboo  internode, 
the  lower  knot  of  which  formed  the  bottom  of  the 
quiver,  but  neither  had  any  sort  of  cover  or  lid,  the 
projecting  butt-ends  of  the  arrows  preventing  it. 

The  body  of  the  first  quiver  was  made  from  a 
particular  kind  of  bamboo  which  appeared  to  me  to 
resemble  the  kind  called  "  buluh  kasap."  It  bore  no 
decoration  of  any  description,  and  its  diameter  was 
1^  in.  (t,S  mm.),  its  length  being  19I  in.  (484  mm.). 
In  this  latter  measurement,  however,  is  not  included 
a  projecting  spike  which  served  as  a  foot  when 
planted  in  the  ground,  and  which,  in  the  present  case, 
measured  5  in.  (126  mm.)  in.  addition;  so  that  its 
over-all  length  was  24^  in.  (611  mm.). 

Its  contents  were  a  couple  of  arrows  and  one  long 
hornbill  feather  measuring  14^  in.  (344  mm.)  in  length. 

The  length  of  the  first  arrow  (over-all)  was  40  in. 
vol.  1  t 


274  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  ii 


(  ioi  cm.),  and  its  diameter  two-fifths  of  an  inch  ( i  cm.). 
The  shaft  was  of  bamboo,  and  the  arrow  was  made  on 
the  harpoon  principle;  that  is  to  say,  its  head  was  fitted 
into  a  short  wooden  socket-piece  with  a  sharp  upper 
end  which  fitted  into  the  hollow  at  the  lower  extremity 
of  the  shaft  or  "  stele,"  so  that  the  head  could  be 
drawn  out  without  difficulty  when  required.  The 
head  itself  was  of  iron,  and  was  thickly  coated  with  a 
dark  brown  (almost  black)  incrustation  of  Upas  poison. 
It  had  only  a  single  barb,  which  before  it  was  caked 
over  wTith  the  crust  of  poison  must  have  been  about 
an  inch  in  length,  and  had  been  fitted  into  the  socket- 
piece  by  a  whipping  of  some  strong  but  fine  jungle- 
fibre  (probably  the  strong  thread-like  fibres  of  the 
"  langkap "  palm,  or  some  allied  material).  The 
entire  length  of  the  head  (including  the  socket-piece) 
was  ii  in.  (28  cm.),  and  the  latter  was  nicked  all 
round  at  the  point  where  it  joined  the  shaft.1 

At  the  butt-end  of  the  shaft  was  the  rounded  nock, 
about  a  fifth  of  an  inch  (5  mm.)  deep,  and  just  below 
this  nock  was  the  outermost  of  the  two  fastenings  of 
the  feathers,  the  precise  object  of  which  latter  is  not 
very  clear.  The  feathers  used  are  those  of  the  horn- 
bill,  and  only  two  are  used  at  a  time.  The  quill 
having  been  split,  the  feather  is  divided,  half  being 
attached  to  one  side  of  the  shaft  and  half  to  the  other, 
by  means  of  two  lashings,  one  close  to  the  nock  (as 
described)  and  the  other  about  a  quarter  of  the  way 
down  the  shaft,  the  exact  length  of  the  feathering  being 
8^  in.  (204  mm.).  But  the  extraordinary  part  about 
the  feathering  of  these  arrows  is  that  the  web  of  each 

1  For  a  Semang  quiver,  v.  VII.  ii.  could   not  be   ascertained  in  the  case 

618.  of  these    first    two    arrows,    since  the 

-  The  exact   method   by  which  the  juncture     was    entirely    concealed     by 

head  was  fitted  into  the  socket -piece  the  lashing. 


chaf.  vi  NEGRITOS  OF  PERAK 


Feather  is  dipped  right  up  to  the  quill,  bo  that  it  can 
have  only  the  verj  slightest  effect  upon  the  flight  oi  the 
arrow.  Moreover,  the  two  webs  are  affixed  (.ill  that 
is  left  of  them)  at  a  convergent  angle,  and  the  question 
which  at  once  suggests  itself,  in  view  of  this  peculiar 
method  of  fastening  them,  is  whether  the   Semang 

really  understand  the  principle  of  feathering,  and 
whether  they  do  not  rather  employ  it  either  as  the 
mutilated  survival  of  more  intelligent  methods,  or 
perhaps  make  use  of  it  for  solely  magical  reasons. 
At  all  events,  the  probability  that  they  do  not 
understand  the  principle  is  borne  out  by  the  in- 
dependent observations  of  Vaughan-Stevens,  in  con- 
tinuation of  the  passage  quoted  below ;  and  the 
(apparently  inevitable)  conclusion  that  in  the  Semang 
we  have  a  race  of  archers  who  employ  feathering,  but 
do  not  understand  its  elementary  principles,  is  a 
sufficiently  remarkable  fact,  and  one  which  may 
perhaps  be  taken  as  showing  the  extreme  simplicity 
of  the  civilisation  that  we  find  among  them.  I 
should  add  that  the  only  part  of  this  arrow  which  is 
decorated  is  the  part  covered  by  the  feathering,  which 
has  a  large  number  of  incised  rings  cut  round  it. 

The  second  arrow  (of  the  first  quiver)  was  like  to 
the  first,  from  which  it  only  differed  slightly  in 
respect  of  its  measurements.  Its  shaft,  for  instance,. 
was  T)7i  m-  (&97  mm.),  over-all  length,  and  two- 
fifths  of  an  inch  (1  cm.)  in  diameter.  The  length  of  the 
feathering,  including  the  lashings,  was  83%  in.  (210 
mm.),  and  the  web  was  clipped  off  as  above  de- 
scribed. The  iron  head,  which  was  single-barbed,  like 
that  of  the  first  arrow,  was,  however,  a  trifle  shorter. 

The  second  quiver, — which  is  decorated  with  a 
number  of  concentric  rings   and  a  bold   geometrical 


276  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  pari  ii 


design  consisting  of  two  rows  of  triangles,  with  con- 
verging points  (called  "  puchok  rebong  "  or  the  "  bam- 
boo-shoot "  pattern),  and  below  this  with  a  pattern 
consisting  of  a  number  of  the  concentric  and  conterminal 
curves,  known  to  the  Semang  as  the  "  hawk's-eye 
pattern"  ("  mata  lang "),  —  measured  24^  in.  (611 
mm.)  over-all,  the  projecting  spike  or  foot  being  8^ 
in.  (204  mm.),  and  1?  in.  (35  mm.)  in  diameter. 

There  were  no  loose  feathers  inside  it,  but  four 
arrows,  whose  over-all  lengths  were  32*  in.  (814 
mm.),  34^  in.  (864  mm.),  33I  in.  (834  mm.),  and,  again, 
32!  in.  respectively,  with  a  length  of  feathering  varying 
from  7  to  y\  in.  (177  mm.  to  200  mm.).  In  diameter 
they  were  a  fraction  less  than  the  arrows  contained  in 
the  first  quiver,  but  the  only  important  respect  in  which 
they  differed  consisted  in  the  treatment  of  the  head. 

Two  of  these  arrows  were  of  the  same  type 
(roughly  speaking)  as  those  in  the  first  quiver ;  i.e. 
their  iron  points  were  spliced  into  a  short  wooden 
socket-piece,  which  latter  in  its  turn  was  inserted  into 
the  hollow  end  of  the  bamboo  shaft.  Between  these 
two  the  only  noticeable  difference  lay  in  the  manner 
in  which  the  juncture  had  been  effected  between  the 
wooden  socket-piece  and  the  iron  point ;  in  the  first 
case  the  spike  of  the  iron  point  had  been  driven  into 
the  socket-piece  (which  latter  had  been  bored  out  on 
purpose  to  take  it),  the  two  parts  of  the  head  being 
bound  very  firmly  together  at  the  point  of  junction  with 
a  lashing  of  split  rattan  coated  with  resin  ;  in  the  second 
case  the  juncture  was  effected  by  setting  the  spike  of 
the  iron  arrow-head  between  two  short  prong-like 
projections  (of  the  socket-piece),  somewhat  on  the 
w  rat's-tail "  principle,  and  binding  the  two  parts 
round  as  before. 


chap,  vi  NEGRITOS  <>/■  PERAK  277 

Both  these  two  arrows  arc  single  barbed,  and  are 
decorated,  like  those  contained  in  the  first  quiver, 
with  a  number  o(  incised  rings  between  the  two 
extremities  of  the  feathered  portion  ol  the  shaft. 

The  remaining  two  arrows  <>i  the  second  quiver, 
which  have  not  yet  been  described,  arc  much  more 

roughly  made,  and  make  no  pretension  to  any  skill 
of  workmanship.  In  both  of  them  the  iron  spike  of 
the  arrow-head  is  inserted  into  the;  hollow  at  the 
bottom  of  the  shaft  direct,  and  they  are  entirely  un- 
provided with  the  wooden  socket -piece  or  holder 
present  in  all  the  other  specimens.  Also,  they  are 
quite  undecorated. 

I  think  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  these  last  two 
arrows  have  been  hurriedly  made,  for  use,  perhaps, 
in  an  emergency,  and  that  they  are  less  typical  of  the 
arrows  ordinarily  used  by  the  Semang  than  those 
which  have  received  the  greater  care  and  finish. 

According  to  Vaughan  -  Stevens,  the  feathers  of 
the  rhinoceros  bird  ("  tekub  ")  are  used  as  a  charm  to 
make  the  arrow  fatal  when  it  is  employed  against  the 
tiger,  and  only  tiger-arrows  are  so  equipped.1 

Vaughan-Stevens  further  remarks  that  this  feather- 
ing is  not  adopted  to  make  "  the  arrow  fly  straight  as 
in  Europe,"  or  at  least  that  the  Semang  does  not 
understand  the  principle  involved  in  it.  "  The 
feather  is  stuck  in  the  middle  of  the  shaft,  and  its 
vane  may  point  either  forwards  or  backwards,  and 
it  does  not  matter  how*  it  happens  to  be  fastened 
on."  When  Vaughan-Stevens  pointed  out  that  the 
arrow,  when  released  (if  the  vane  pointed  forwards), 
would  offer  resistance  to  the  wind  and  flutter  sharply 
towards    the    left,   the    Semang    replied    that    if    the 

1  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  135. 


278  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  ii 

"  wing "  of  the  feather  pointed  backwards,  it  would 
be  "  compressed  "  (?)  when  in  actual  use.  Vaughan- 
Stevens  further  remarks,  somewhat  naively,  that,  "  at 
all  events,  as  a  tiger  is  always  attacked  at  a  distance 
of  a  few  yards  only,  an  exact  aim  is  of  little  con- 
sequence "  ! ' 

The  feathers  are  of  five  types,  which  are  con- 
sidered to  be  of  varying  values.  In  one  the  full 
breadth  of  the  wing  is  cut  down  whenever  it  is 
required  for  use.  The  least  valuable  kind  is  only 
used  if  the  better  sorts  are  rare  or  unobtainable.  In 
one  sort  the  feather  is  split  with  a  chopper  ("  parang  "), 
an  operation  which  requires  the  greatest  care  and 
precision.2 

In  order  to  make  the  feathers  more  effective,  the 
Putto  is  said  in  ancient  times  to  have  pronounced  a 
charm  over  them,  but  nobody  now  knows  this  charm, 
for  the  Puttos  are  long  ago  dead  and  gone.3 

The  illustrations  which  accompany  the  foregoing 
account  represent  the  following  objects  : — (a)  quiver  as 
used  by  the  Semang,  not  for  hunting  but  on  his 
travels  through  the  jungle.  It  does  not  contain  more 
than  ten  arrows,  which  are,  however,  of  different 
sorts,  two  being  tiger-arrows  ;  (b)  quiver  with  magic 
rings  ;  (c)  obsolete  tiger-arrow,  headed  with  bamboo  ; 
(d)  and  (e)  other  types  of  arrows.4 

The  decorated  bamboo  quiver,  which  holds  only- 
three  or  four  arrows,  terminates  in  a  point  which 
enables  it  to  be  planted  in  the  ground,  and  is  either 
simply  carried  in  the  hand,  or  passed  through  the 
back  of  the  wearer's  belt.5 


1  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  135. 
2345  Ibid. 


diAi'.  vi  NEGRITOS  OF   PERAK 


Preparation  <>/  the  /'< 
Perak  Semang-.      The   methods  employed   in  pre 
paring   the  arrow-poison   of  the    Perak    Semang  a 
identical  with  those  used  for  the  manufacture  ol  poison 

for  their  Mow  pipe-darts. 

I  )c    Morgan    states   that   a  coating   oi    poison    is 

applied  directly  to  the  arrow-head,  which  is  dried  over 
the  fire  like  the  wooden  spatula,  when  it  is  covered 
with  the  dart-poison.  A  considerable  number  ot 
coatings  (of  poison)  are  applied,  so  that  the  arrow- 
head gets  thickly  encrusted  with  it.1 

The  same  writer's  account  of  the  effects  of  the 
poison,  which  of  course  vary  considerably  with  its 
strength  and  that  of  the  victim,  has  already  been 
given,  and  so  need  not  here  be  repeated." 

The  ordinary  range  at  which  the  Semang  bow  is 
used  is  from  30  to  40  paces  (23  m.  to  30  m.) — no 
greater  than  that  of  the  blowpipe.  The  actual 
distance,  however,  to  which  the  arrows  will  carry  is 
something  much  greater  ;  De  Morgan,  in  fact,  places 
it  at  about  150  metres.3 

This  same  authority  states,  and  here  he  is  in 
complete  accordance  with  what  I  have  heard  from 
the  Negritos  myself,  that  these  arrows  are  employed 
by  the  Semang  for  attacking  all  kinds  of  animals,  not 
only  monkeys  and  birds,  but  big  and  dangerous  game 
such  as  the  elephant,  rhinoceros,  and  the  tiger.  And 
although  Vaughan  -  Stevens  alleges  that  they  are 
employed  for  tigers  only,  the  statement  of  De  Morgan 
is  undoubtedly,  I  think,  the  right  one.4 

Patani  Semang-. — Of  the  bow  used  by  the  Eastern 

1   De  Morgan,  vii.  417.  3  De  Morgan,  vii.  415. 

-  Supra,  p.  267.  4  Ibid, 


28o 


WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS 


J' ART   II 


Semang,  or  Pangan,  we  know  little  more  than  what 
is  contained  in  the  account  given  by  De  la  Croix. 
The  Semang  of  Patani  employ  instead  of  the  blow- 
pipe an  immense  bow  of  about  6  to  7  ft.  (1.8  m.  to 
2.1  m.)  in  length,  which  is  made  either  of  bamboo  or 
of  ironwood,  the  bow-string  being  a  cord  of  twisted 
rattan.1  The  arrow,  which  is  0.70  m.  in  length,  is 
made  of  bamboo,  and  carries  at  the  butt-end  a  couple 
of  feathers,  clipped  and  fitted  to  it  longitudinally,  and 
at  the  point  an  iron  blade  sharpened  and  furnished 
either  with  one  or  with  two  barbs.'2 

These  arrows,  like  the  darts  of  the  blowpipe,  are 
always  poisoned  with  "  Ipoh."  3 

The  Blowpipe  and  Darts. 

Kedah  Semang".  —  In  addition  to  their  national 
weapon,  the  bow,  the  Negritos  also  very  frequently 
make  use  of  the  bamboo  blowpipe,  which  they  have 
undoubtedly  borrowed  from  some  of  their  wild  neigh- 
bours, either  Sakai  or  Jakun. 

The  blowpipe  has  received  but  little  elaboration 
among  the  Semang.  It  consists  of  a  long  and  delicate 
inner  tube  (which  is  the  actual  blowpipe),  protected 
by  an  outer  tube  or  casing,  which  serves  the  double 
purpose  of  preserving  the  fragile  inner  tube  from 
damage  and  of  keeping  it  from  warping  as  the  sap 
dries  out  of  it.4 


1  De  M.  (iii.  42)  declares,  and  I 
agree  with  him,  that  bamboo  is  not 
used  for  bows.  It  is  too  weak.  If  the 
illustration  given  by  De  la  Croix  on  p. 
341  of  the  article  here  quoted  be  com- 
pared with  those  of  Negrito  bows  in 
Man's  Andamanese  (Plate  VI.  pp.  174, 
I75)>  it  will  be  seen  that  this  Semang 
bow  is  exactly  similarto  thatof  the  Little 


Andaman  Negritos  (which  differs  widely 
from  that  used  by  the  natives  of  Great 
Andaman)  ;  and  that  even  the  arrows 
(though  the  similarity  is  less  marked 
than  in  the  case  of  the  bow)  never- 
theless show  a  general  resemblance. 

2  De  la  Croix,  p.  331.  3  Ibid. 

4  Cp.  De  Morgan,  vii.  415,  and 
Begbie,  pp.  5,  6. 


-  - 

—  -- 


/.  J- 

f. 

c  z 

7  /• 


X    ." 


M 

.5 

U 

cc 

- 

:r. 

•*, 

|i 

~ 

■~^ 

o 

~, 

.. 

— 

JZ 

-— 

.  ii  mv  vi  NEGRITi  '  >   0/   A  '/■  n.Ml  281 


I  he  inner  pipe  or  blow-tube  naturall)  requires  to 
be  absolutel)  free  from  any  roughness  or  inequalit 
such  as  might  in  the  lea  \\  interfere  with  the  propul  >ion 
of  the  dart,  Hence  it  is  manufactured  when  possible 
from  a  single  internode  ol  a  particular  species  <>i 
bamboo,  whose  stem  combines  the  two  essentials  ol 
eat   length  ol    internode   with  an   extremely   small 

diameter.1  This  plant,  however,  is  verv  rare,  and 
has  only  been  recorded  hitherto  from  one  or  two 
mountains  in  the  Peninsula  (e,gt  (i.  Inasand  Other 
and  bamboos  whose  internodes  are  of  sufficient  length 
to  form  a  single  jointless  tube  are  rarer  still  ;  '  though 
even  these  are  occasionally  met  with. 

Most  usually,  therefore,  the  inner  tube  is  composed 
of  two  internodes.  The  node  or  joint  is  excised,  and 
the  two  extremities  brought  carefully  together  and 
clamped  by  means  of  a  closely-fitting  sheath  (usually 
o{  palm-wood),  which  is  slipped  over  the  two  abutting 
ends  on  what  may  perhaps  be  called  a  sort  of  fish- 
plate system. 

Up  to  this  point  the  method  of  manufacturing  the 
Semang  blowpipe  does  not  differ  in  any  essential  from 
that  employed  by  the  Sakai.  The  Semang,  however, 
apparently  finds  it  too  much  trouble  to  poke  out  the 
central  node  of  the  blowpipe  case,  and  to  polish  it 
within  (Sakai  fashion)  by  drawing  through  it  the 
prickly  whip-ends  of  the  rattan.  Hence  he  simply 
cuts  the  outer  tube  through  at  the  central  knot,  and 
having  excised  the  latter,  slips  the  two  portions 
of  the  now  bisected  casing  over  the  inner  tube,  and 
unites  them  by  a  mere  splice  of  the  roughest 
description.        Again,    he    seldom     takes    any    great 

1   Bambusa  Wrayi  or  longinodis.  are  also  made  by  the  Senoi  and  Tembeh 

-'  Cp.   Hale,  p.  288:   such  weapons       (see  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.   112). 


282  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  u 

trouble  in  decorating  or  giving  a  "  finish  "  to  the 
completed  weapon. 

Perak  Semang. — Another  peculiarity  about  the 
Negrito  blowpipe  is  that  its  mouthpiece  is  frequently 
made  of  gutta-percha  or  resin.1 

One  of  the  blowpipes  that  was  brought  back  by 
Grubauer  from  the  same  district  possessed  a  jointless 
inner  tube  of  Bambusa  Wrayi,  and  measured  85^  in. 
(217  cm.),  over-all  length.2  It  had  a  round  wooden 
mouthpiece  of  the  type  found  among  the  Semang  in 
the  northern  frontier  of  Perak  and  in  Kedah.  This 
specimen  is  now  in  the  Cambridge  Ethnographical 
Museum,  together  with  another  blowpipe,  collected  at 
the  same  place  and  time,  the  peculiarity  of  which  is 
that  its  mouthpiece  is  made  of  a  solid  lump  of  resin, 
apparently  as  a  substitute  for  gutta-percha,  which  is 
more  frequently  used  for  the  mouthpiece  by  Semang 
tribes. 

The  over-all  length  of  this  latter  specimen  is  80 .1 
in.  (204  cm.).  It  has  a  spliced  inner  tube,  joined  in  the 
usual  way,  and  it  also  has  what  one  hardly  expects  to 
find  in  a  Semang  blowpipe,  viz.  the  short  cylindrical 
bamboo  block  inside  the  muzzle-end,  which  is  so 
commonly  used  by  Sakai  tribes,  though  its  exact 
raison  cCetre  is  not  very  clear. 

Pangan  or  East  Semang".  —  Among  the  Eastern 
Semang  (Pangan)  the  shaft  of  the  blowTpipe-dart  is 
generally  of  rougher  workmanship  than  it  is  among 
the  Sakai.  The  former  manufacture  it  from  the  leaf- 
stalk of  the  "  bertam  "  palm  (Eugeissona  tristis),  the 
shaft  being  simply  pared  down  with  a  knife  until  it 
reaches  the  dimensions  of  a  rather  thick  knitting- 
needle  or  "crow  quill,"  when  it  is  generally  polished  with 

1   De  Morgan,  vii.  416  ;  L?H.  ii.  613,  614.  '2  See  p.  255,  n.  4,  supra. 


f 


fokfjt. 


Semang  Blowpipe  Apparatus. 


De  Mi  reatt. 


i,  2.  Negrito  blowpipes.     3.  Dart.     4.   Poison-spatula.     5.  Section  of  mouth-end 

of  a  blowpipe,  showing  dart  in  position  in  centre  of  inner  tube,  with  wad  (£)  behind 
the  butt-end   (.V)  of  the  dart,   /'.   R,  S,   being  the  arrangement   for  splicing    the 

inner  tube,  and  L,  L\  that  for  joining  when  necessary  the  mouthpiece-end  on  to  the 
outer  tube  (6,  7).     3.   Semang  dart-quiver. 
/  W.  /.  /.  282. 


T.     oo 


i  kaf.  vi  /    \S  i  i  OAS  i  NEGRIT\ 

"  tiger's- tongue"  leaves  ("m£mplas  rimau"),  lightl) 
touched  with  resin,  and  fitted  into  a  small  cone-shaped 
butt-end.  It  is  then  .sharpened  to  a  fine  point,  and 
has  .1  slight  incision  or  nick  cut  all  round  the  shaft  ai 
the  commencement  of  the  point.  This  nick  enables 
the  point  (whenev  \x  the  shaft  collides  with  anything) 
to  break  oil  short,  and  thus,  bee-like,  the  dart  l<  its 

sting-  in  the  wound  when  the  quarry  tries  to  escape 
through  the  jungle.  It  is  not,  perhaps,  going  too 
far  to  describe  the  dart  as  a  sort  of  human  bee-sting, 

and  it  is  not  impossible  that  this  feature  of  the  wild 
man's  armoury  may  have  been  copied  from  nature.  It 
is  of  course  only  the  point,  below  the  nick,  that  is 
coated  with  poison. 

The  point  itself  is  as  long  and  fine  as  a  needle, 
but  is  nevertheless  as  a  rule  wonderfully  strong, 
though  this  strength  naturally  depends  upon  the 
qualities  of  the  stem  from  which  it  is  made.  The 
conical  butt,  which  steadies  the  dart  in  its  flight  and 
assists  its  momentum,  is  fitted  on  to  the  thicker  end 
of  the  dart-shaft,  and  is  made  of  a  species  of  rattan 
("  rotan  'lang  "),  which  is  pared  down  with  a  knife  just 
sufficiently  to  allow  it  to  pass  with  freedom  through 
the  tube. 

As  regards  the  length  of  the  darts,  a  Semang 
named  Chintok  told  me  that  the  Pangan  of  Ligeh 
make  use  of  the  foot  (from  heel  to  toe)  as  the  re- 
cognised standard  of  length  for  a  blowpipe-dart,  but 
that  longer  darts  carried  both  further  and  truer  than 
the  shorter  ones.  Another  standard  which  was  said 
to  be  in  use  was  the  bone  of  the  forearm  measured 
from  the  elbow  to  the  little  finger-joint. 

The  quiver  in  which  the  Semang  kept  their 
new-made  darts  was   of  the    simplest   possible    type, 


284  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  n 

consisting  of  nothing  but  an  internode  ("joint")  of 
bamboo,  which  was,  however,  often  highly  ornamented 
exteriorly,'  but  was  nevertheless  entirely  devoid  of  the 
elaborate  fittings  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  quivers 
used  by  the  Sakai. 

Preparation  of  the  Poison. 

Kedah  Semang".  —  The  following  is  a  detailed 
account  of  the  method  employed  by  the  Semang  for 
tapping  the  Upas  tree.  During  my  stay  at  Siong 
(in  the  interior  of  Kedah),  a  Semang  named  Padang 
went  out  one  morning  to  collect  Upas  poison  for  his 
darts,  and  I  was  allowed  to  accompany  him.  He  took 
with  him  a  poison  receptacle  made  out  of  a  bamboo 
internode  (it  was  about  one  foot  long,  and  just  big 
enough  in  diameter  to  admit  a  man's  thumb),  a  jungle- 
knife  or  chopper  ("  golok  "),  and  a  small  lump  of  wax 
obtained  from  the  comb  of  a  small  wild  bee.2  A 
few  yards  away  from  the  hut,  in  heavy  jungle,  he 
stopped  in  front  of  a  fine  tree  from  40  to  60  ft.  (12  m. 
to  18  m.)  high,  and  with  smooth  bark  not  unlike  an 
English  beech.  This  was  a  specimen  of  the  Upas 
tree.  Picking  a  leaflet  of  the  low-growing  "  bertam  " 
palm,3  he  cut  off  a  part  of  it,  taking  a  strip  of  leaf 
about  9  inches  long.  This  strip  he  affixed  by  means 
of  the  wax  to  the  stem  of  the  tree.  He  then  vigorously 
slashed  the  bark  of  the  tree  with  the  chopper, 
cutting  a  succession  of  large  V-shaped  marks,  one 
above  the  other,  in  the  bark.  This  process,  he  de- 
clared, was  dangerous,  from  the  liability  of  the  sap  to 
spurt  into  and  blind  the  operator's  eyes.  The  poison, 
however,  is  a  blood  poison,  and  there  does  not  appear 

1   Cp.  EH.  ii.  617  (illustration).  2  Mai.  "kelulut." 

:;  Etigeissona  t?-istis,  Griff.  (Pa/mtc). 


<  IIAI\     \  I 


NEGRITOS  Ob   KEDAH 


to  be  any  real  danger,  as  even  the  practice  ol  cutti 
out  the  flesh  surrounding  the  wound,  before  eati 
.in  animal    which  has  been    killed   vrith   a  blowpip* 

(I  Hi,  docs  not  appear  to  be  prai  tised  universally,1  and 
there  is  probably  no  great  harm  in  the  poison  unl< 
(as  stated)  when  it  gets  into  the  blood.* 

To  return  to  the  subject,  another  Semang  (named 
Chintok)  showed  me  how  to  apply  the  poison  to  the 

darts.  This  process  was  usually  performed  over  one  oi 
the  numerous  hearth-fires  within  the  palm-leaf  shelter, 
but  On  the  present  occasion  it  was  performed  outside. 
Chintok  took  the  bamboo  containing  the  poison,  and 
borrowing  a  fire-log  from  his  own  hearth,  settled  down 
quietly  to  the  work.  Having  first  poured  the  poison 
into  the  bamboo  tray  (formed  from  a  diagonal  section 
of  a  big  stem  of  bamboo),  he  next  took  up  a  little  of 
the  liquid  in  a  primitive  kind  of  bamboo  ladle,  and 
pouring  it  out  upon  a  broad  wooden  spatula,  com- 
menced to  toast  the  latter  at  the  fire,  working  up 
the  poison  with  a  small  bamboo  spatula.  When  first 
deposited  on  the  spatula,  the  poison  was  very  fairly 
liquid,  and  of  a  light  brown,  liver,  or  coffee  colour,  but 
Chintok  continued  to  heat  it  until  it  became  of  a 
very  rich,  dark  "  Vandyke "  brown,  little  (if  at  all) 
lighter  than  the  dried  poison  which  is  still  to  be  seen 
on  the  darts.  As  soon  as  it  had  sufficiently  thickened 
and  browned,  Chintok  rolled  the  tip  of  each  of  the 


1  For  an  exception  see  Borie  (tr. 
Bourien),  p.  78  (of  the  Mantra). 

2  The  wild  tribes  certainly  appear,  or 
pretend  to  be,  very  much  afraid  of  the 
tree,  but  on  this  point  Vaughan-Stevens 
says  :  "I  have  myself  felled  four,  have 
spent  three  to  four  hours  sitting  on  the 
trunk,  and  waited  till  the  sap  flowed 
out  of  the  cut  rings,  have  had  my 
hands  and  arms  quite  sticky  with  the 


sap,  and  for  experiment  have  lain  along 
the  trunk,  sleeping  there  for  a  whole 
night,  without  its  having  the  slightest 
effect  on  me.  I  have  held  my  head 
close  over  the  boiling  sap  and  breathed 
the  strongly  -  smelling  steam  for  an 
hour  together  without  getting  even  a 
headache,  and  I  never  felt  a  burning  if 
I  put  the  juice  on  my  skin  or  any  irri- 
tation in  the  eyes"  (V. -St.  ii.   112  . 


286  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMEA  TS  i-akt  ii 

darts  in  turn  in  it  until  they  acquired  a  thick,  coagu- 
lated clot  about  the  point,  which  extended  as  high 
as  the  nick  already  referred  to.  The  darts,  thus 
poisoned,  were  dried  in  the  sun,  being  made  to  lean 
against  a  stick  or  log,  with  the  points  directed  upwards. 

It  was  alleged  by  the  Semang  that  the  "blackening" 
of  the  dart  would  render  it  less  visible  when  in  use, 
but  even  if  the  assertion  were  true,  it  seems  hardly 
necessary.  Yet  some  of  the  Semang  maintained  that 
the  dart-point  (when  coated  with  the  poison)  is  regu- 
larly "  blackened  "  by  being  smoked  either  over  a  fire 
or  in  torch-smoke.  Possibly,  however,  the  reason  of 
the  popularity  of  the  black  tint  may  be  merely  that  it 
shows  that  the  dart  has  been  well  dried. 

The  poison  used  is  of  several  strengths,  which 
vary  according  to  the  kind  of  quarry  which  it  is  de- 
signed to  kill.  Chintok  informed  me  that  when  it  was 
used  in  its  full  strength  a  thin  line  was  burnt  across 
the  butt-end  thus,  0 ;  but  that  when  the  poison  used 
is  of  inferior  strength  (as  it  would  be  if  designed  for 
small  game  or  birds),  no  mark  was  made  on  it. 

None  of  the  Kedah  Semang  were  in  the  habit  of 
mixing  anything  with  the  Upas  poison.  This,  how- 
ever, was  due  (they  said)  to  the  fact  that  they  used 
poison  derived  direct  from  the  Upas  tree  (Antiaris), 
which  can  be  utilised  without  any  further  admixture, 
whereas  other  Semang  tribes,  e.g.  those  north  of  the 
Plus,  employed  the  Upas  creeper  ("  ipoh  akar,"  or 
"  ipoh  gunong "),  which  has  been  identified  with 
Strychnos  tieute  (Bl.  Loganiacece)} 

The  cuticle  or  bark  of  this  latter  plant  is  (by  the 
Semang  north  of  the  Plus)  shredded  and  boiled  till  it 

1  See    Ridley's   Plant-List,    s.v.    "Ipoh."       Cp.  also  J.    A.    G.    Campbell, 
p.  241. 


«  hat,  \i  NEGRITOS  <>/    h  I  DAM  287 

becomes  sufficiently  thii  kened  for  use,  but  they  belie 
the  Fumes ol  the  boiling  liquor  to  be  so  poi 
they  sit  yards  awaj  From  the  pot  during  the  operation.1 
According    to    Vaughan  Stevens,    the     Ipoh    by 
itself  does  not  kill  in  twentj  five  cases  out  <>f  thirty, 
and,  in  the  other  five,  does  so  only  through  the  pier 
dug  of  an  artery  or  other  vital  part.     This  statement, 
however,  must  be  received  with  caution,  as  the  poison 
is  not  required  to  kill,  but  merely  to  bring  down  the 

quarry,  which  is  usually  followed  up  and  despatched 
by  hand,  the  strength  oi  the  poison  used  naturally 
varying  greatly  according  to  the  resisting  power  of 
the  object  struck.     If  the  quarry,  eg.  a  small  bird,  were 

allowed  to  fall  dead  in  thick  jungle,  it  would  certainly 
be  hard  to  retrieve,  whereas  when  it  is  wounded  and 
trying  to  escape  through  the  jungle,  it  can  be  tracked 
more  easily  (from  a  native  point  of  view)  by  the  rustling 
it  makes.  Moreover,  the  aborigines  naturally  husband 
their  scanty  stock  of  poison  as  far  as  possible,  and 
seldom  if  ever  waste  their  ammunition.3 

The  question  of  antidotes  has  been  much  debated, 
but  the  only  one  that  the  Semang  of  Kedah  could 
suggest  was  the  eating  of  earth  mixed   with   "  asam 


1  For  a  similar  instance  of  the  based  not  on  the  Ipoh  creeper  {Strychnos) 
use  of  the  tree-Ipoh  poison  alone,  see  but  on  the  tree  Ipoh  ;  and  as  no  men- 
Hale,  p.  289.  See  also  De  Morgan  tion  is  made  of  Strychnos  ("Blay") 
(L'H.  ii.  620),  who  is  perfectly  clear  on  being  added  to  it,  and  Vaughan- 
the  point,  and  bears  out  what  I  my-  Stevens  himself  adds  that  even  for  large 
self  independently  observed.  De  birds  the  "  Ipoh "  itself  was  sufficient, 
Morgan  remarks  that  "if  they  require  the  conclusion  is  obvious.  Moreover, 
a  less  -  powerful  poison,  they  employ  on  p.  107  he  distinctly  implies  that  in 
the  sap  of  the  Ipoh  tree,  with  the  some  cases  only  Antiaris  poison  is  em- 
addition   of  the   sap   of   certain   small  ployed. 

roots  ('  tubercules '),   or  even  the    sap  2  Cp.    Z.  f.    E.    xxvi.    169,    where 

of  the  Ipoh  by  itself."  monkeys  wounded  by  one  of  these  darts 

But  the  most  conclusive  evidence  on  are  described  as  being  despatched  by 

this  point  is  that  of  Vaughan-Stevens  the  chopper  ("parang"), 

himself,  according  to  whose  account  the  3  Cp.  VH.  ii.  617,  where  we  are  told 

poison    of   the    Benua-Jakun   tribes    is  they  never  shoot  at  a  moving  object. 


288  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  iart  ii 

k'lubi  "  (an  acid  jungle  fruit),  but  this  does  not  seem  to 
agree  with  the  Sakai  and  Jakun  prejudice,  which  is 
directed  against  the  eating  of  acid  fruit  with  the  flesh 
of  animals  killed  by  the  dart.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
eating  of  the  earth  would  no  doubt  in  itself  be  good. 

Perak  Semang-.  —  De  la  Croix  quotes ■  from  Sir 
Hugh  Low's  journal  the  results  of  some  experiments 
with  Ipoh  poison  which  Sir  H.  Low  had  carried  out. 
He  quotes,  inter  alia,  Sir  Hugh  Low's  remark  to  the 
effect  that  the  Semang  informed  him  that  in  preparing 
their  poison  they  mixed  the  sap  of  the  tree- Ipoh  with 
that  of  a  particular  kind  of  climbing  plant,  and  that 
they  then  dried  it  immediately  on  a  spatula  over  the 
fire,  no  further  preparation  being  required.2 

Sir  Hugh  Low  is  further  quoted  as  writing  that 
on  a  particular  day  one  Lela  Perkasa  had  just  brought 
him  some  fresh  sap  from  an  Ipoh  tree  growing  near- 
by, the  trunk  of  which  had  been  cut  down,  and  that 
in  view  of  previous  experiences,  he  (Sir  H.  Low)  had 
the  poison  prepared  in  his  own  presence.3 

The  man  began  by  making  a  small  wooden  spatula, 
on  which  he  spread  successive  layers  of  the  poison. 
This  he  dried  gradually  over  a  slow  fire,  or  rather  over 
hot  embers,  the  substance  immediately  turning  a  nut- 
brown  colour.  He  assured  Sir  Hugh  that  the  poison 
was  thus  carried  on  the  spatula,  and  that  when  it  was 
required  for  use  it  was  only  necessary  to  moisten  the 
point  of  the  arrow  and  rub  it  over  the  poison.4 

The  tree  which  furnished  the  sap  had  been  cut 
down,  but  young  branches  had  sprouted  since,  and  those 
that  he  brought  in  proved  that  it  was  essentially  the 
same  as  an  artocarpus,  from  which  Sir  H.  had  obtained 


1  Sir  H.  Low,  quoted  by  De  la  Croix,  p.  331. 
234  Ibid.      Cp.  V Homme,  ii.  620-622. 


*    II    VI".     \  I 


,w  GK1T0     "/■  /'/-.A'. 


some  poison   some   time   bad    on   the  banks  <>t   the 

Plus.1 

Alter   describing    Further    experiments    with    tin 

poison,  Sir    II.    I  .e>\\    remarks    that     Lela    I'erLi  >a    had 
assured   him   that    the    sap   of   the    Ipoh    Creeper,  when 

not  quite  fresh  (as  in  the  previous  day's  experiments), 

Could  not  produce  so  rapid  an  ef!--<  |   as  that  which  had 
been  prepared  the  same  morning. 

Lela  Perkasa  further  stated  that  the  sap  of  th< 

Ipoh  was  absolutely  innocuous  until  it  had  been 
heated  as  above  described.  When  a  Stronger  poison 
is  required,  the  sap  of  the  Ipoh  is  mixed  with  sap 
obtained  from  the  roots  of  a  plant  called  "  lekir  " 
("  lekyer  " — a  common  Amorphophallus),  A  tenth 
part  of  this  latter  added  to  the  mixture  will  make  the 
poison  strong  enough  to  kill  a  rhinoceros  or  a  tiger  ; 
if  it  merely  touches  the  skin  it  will  raise  a  blister,  and 
hence  they  are  afraid  to  keep  it  ready-made  for  fear  of 
accidents.  There  is  another  plant  called  "gadong," 
which  is  described  as  a  species  of  wild  yam,  and 
whose  sap  increases  the  activity  of  the  poisonous 
principle  of  Ipoh ;  yet  Lela  Perkasa  declared  that 
none  of  these  saps  is  poisonous  in  the  state  in  which 
it  is  gathered  from  the  tree,  but  requires  admixture 
and  heating  over  a  slow  fire.  This  operation,  he 
said,  should  only  be  performed  in  the  jungle,  and  in 
the  presence  of  not  more  than  two  persons.4 

The  "  lekir  "  has  a  stem  about  9  feet  high.  The 
leaves,  which  branch  into  three  separate  parts,  are 
from  4-5  feet  long.  The  stem  of  the  biggest,  though 
not  yet  quite  full  grown,  was  4  inches  ("  pouces  ")  in 


1   Sir    H.    Low,   quoted    by  De    la  meant.     For  Vaughan-Stevens'  experi- 

Croix,  p.  331.                          -  lb.  merits  with  the  sap,  see  p.  287,  ;;.  1. 

3  Probably    the    Ipoh    tree    is    here  4  Sir  H.  Low,  be.  cit.  p.  333. 

VOL.  I  U 


290  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  ii 

diameter,  and  was  variously  coloured  with  shades  of 
brown,  green,  and  grey.  The  blossom  is  white,  and 
only  appears  when  the  leaf  and  stem  are  already  dead. 
At  the  moment  of  expansion  it  emits  an  intolerable 
odour,  resembling  that  of  putrefying  matter.  The 
lower  part  of  the  blossom  continues  to  shoot  up  as 
the  ends  ripen.  Sir  Hugh  had  seen  it  reach  a  height 
of  4  feet  and  with  pericarps  (?)  more  than  a  foot 
long.  He  had  also  had  brought  him  a  specimen  of 
"gadong,"  which  was  a  thorny  creeper  with  trefoil 
leaves,  growing  out  of  a  bunch  of  slightly  flattened 
roots.1 

Yet  another  excellent  account  of  the  methods  of 
poisoning  the  dart-points,  as  practised  by  the  Perak 
Semang,  is  that  given  by  Mr.  Wray,  who  states  that 
he  once  visited  Ulu  Selama,  where  some  of  the 
Semang  lived,  and  was  taken  by  them  to  a  place 
called  Kuala  Jah,  at  about  five  hundred  feet  of 
elevation,  where  he  was  shown,  growing  in  the  virgin 
forest,  within  a  hundred  yards  of  one  another,  two 
large  Ipoh  trees.  The  larger  was  about  five  feet  in 
diameter  at  a  height  of  five  feet  from  the  ground,  and 
had  a  trunk  full  a  hundred  feet  in  height  at  the  first 
branch.  It  had  been  tapped  many  times,  the  bark 
being  deeply  scored  up  to  a  height  of  twenty-five  feet 
from  the  ground  ;  the  smaller  tree  was  also  scored  all 
over.  The  bark  externally  was  white,  and  internally 
orange-brown,  and  was  very  thick  and  fibrous.  On 
fresh  scores  being  cut  into  the  bark,  the  dirty  whity- 
brown  sap  ran  very  sparingly  out,  and  was  conducted 
down  palm  leaves,  stuck  on  to  the  trunk  of  the  tree 
with  clay,  into  bamboos.  The  scores  weie  cut  slanting 
alternately    right    and    left,    like    what    is    known    as 

1   Sir  H.  Low,  quoted  by  De  la  Croix,  p.  333. 


CHAP,  vi  \v  GRITOS  <>/    PI  K  I A 

herring-bone  stitching,  with  the  lower  ends  oi  the 
pointing    inwards.       At    the    bottom    <>t    tau  h 

riea  ol  scores  was  put  a  leaf,  Fastened  to  the  bark 
with  clay,  to  lead  the  sap  which  trickled  down  into 
a  bamboo.  Only  about  three  ounces  of  sap  was  got 
the  first  clay;  but  two  clays  afterwards,  by  erecting  a 

iffolding  around  the  tree  and  extending  the  score  i 
up  the  trunk,  about  one  pint  was  obtained,     Three 

Ounces   Of  sap,  the   Semang   declared,  was   enough   to 
poison  a  hundred  blowpipe-darts.1 

The  sap  having  been  collected  from  the  trees,  a 
spatula-shaped  piece  of  wood  was  taken  and  heated 
over  a  clear  wood  fire,  and  a  small  quantity  of  the  sap 
poured  on  to  it  and  spread  out  with  another  but 
smaller  wooden  spatula,  and  held  over  the  fire  till 
nearly  dry,  and  the  process  repeated  till  all  the  sap 
was  evaporated.  There  remained  on  the  spatula  a 
dark  brown  gummy  substance,  on  which  the  points  of 
the  darts  were  rubbed  three  times,  being  dried  over 
the  fire  between  each  application  of  the  poison.  This 
simple  process  completed  the  preparation  of  the 
poison,  with  the  exception  of  the  other  things  that 
are  sometimes  mixed  with  the  Ipoh. 

The  sap,  which  proved  to  be  bitter  and  biting  in 
taste,  and  decidedly  acid  to  test-paper,  on  exposure  to 
the  air  quickly  darkened  to  a  brown  colour,  and 
yielded,  when  dried  on  a  water-bath,  twenty-nine  per 
cent  of  solid  Ipoh.  This  substance,  if  put  thinly  on  a 
slip  of  glass  and  examined  by  a  microscope,  is  seen  to 
contain  numerous  crystals  of  antiarin. 

In  the  course  of  the  same  account  Mr.  Wray 
further  observes  that  what  Griffith  says  about  the 
poisonous  properties  of  the  Ipoh  being  derived  from 

1   L.  Wray  in/.  A.  I.  vol.  xxi.  (1892),  pp.  476,  477. 


292  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  u 

admixture  of  arsenic  was  information  probably  derived 
irom  the  Malays,  for  the  aborigines  are  quite  ignorant 
of  that  poison  ;  and,  as  Professor  Ringer  pointed  out, 
the  action  of  arsenic  is  very  different  from  that  of 
Ipoh,  besides  which  animals  killed  with  arsenic  would 
be  quite  unfit  for  food.1 

Mr.  Wray  here  observes  that  it  is  the  aborigines 
alone  who  use  poisoned  weapons  in  the  Peninsula. 
The  Malays  put  arsenic  on  their  krises  and  spears, 
but  it  is  employed  solely  with  the  view  of  bringing 
out  the  damascening  of  the  blades,  and  not  as  a 
poison." 

Mr.  Wray  once  had  the  opportunity  of  noticing 
the  effects  of  Ipoh  poison  on  a  human  being.  It 
occurred  while  he  was  descending  a  river  in  Upper 
Perak  in  1889,  and  he  made  at  the  time  a  note  to  the 
effect  that,  while  unloading  and  carrying  the  baggage 
over  the  rocks,  a  poisoned  blowpipe-dart  fell  out  of  a 
quiver  and  stuck  into  the  upper  part  of  one  of  the 
men's  feet.  It  was  at  once  pulled  out,  and  a  Semang 
squeezed  the  wound  to  get  as  much  blood  as  possible, 
then  tied  a  tight  ligature  round  the  leg  and  put  lime- 
juice  on  to  the  wound.  The  man  complained  of 
great  pain  in  the  foot,  of  cramp  in  the  stomach,  and 
vomited,  but  these  symptoms  soon  passed  off.  The 
point  only  went  into  the  foot  about  one-third  of  an 
inch,  and  the  dart  was  instantly  pulled  out.  The 
Semang  said  that  had  it  gone  deep  into  a  fleshy  part 
of  the  body  it  would  have  caused  death.3 

As  stated  above,  the  Semang  sometimes  mix 
other  poisons  with  the  Ipoh.  The  plants  from  which 
these  are  derived  are  known  to  the  Malays  as  "  lekir  " 
and  "  gadong."      In  both  cases  it  is  the  expressed  juice 

1  L.  Wray  in/.  A.  I.  vol.  xxi.  (1892),  p.  477.  -  lb.  3  lb. 


i  hap,  vi  w  GRITO&  0/   PER  \h 

of  the  tubers  chat  is  employed,   The  "l<  -l.  an  Aroid 

belonging    to    the    genus      \morphophallusy   and    th( 
11  gadong "  is  a  thorn}  climbing  yam  belonging  to  the 
order    Dtosconacea.      Botanical    specimens   ol    both 

these  plants  had  l»een  sent  t<>  i  In  -  Calcutta  Botanical 
Gardens,  but  identifications  had  not  (when  writing) 
been  received.  It  was  probable  thai  the  specimens  ol 
"lekir"  had  been  transmitted  to  K<w  by  Dr,  King,  in 
which  case  they  would  be  found  numbered  3327.1 

The  tubers  are  rasped  up  fine  with  a  knile,  and 
the  soft  mass   put   into  a  piece'  of  cloth,  which   is   then 

forcibly  pulled  through  two  pieces  of  stick  tied  firmly 

together  .1  short  distance  apart,  SO  that  the  juice, 
which  is  very  acrid,  is  expressed  without  coming  in 
contact  with  the  hands.  The  juice  of  the  lt  lekir  "  and 
"gadong"  tubers  so  obtained  is  mixed  with  the  Ipoh 
sap,  and  the  mixture  dried  on  a  wooden  spatula  over  a 
fire,  and  the  darts  poisoned  in  the  way  that  has  already 
been  described.2 

The  tubers  of  both  these  plants,  which  contain 
starch  in  large  quantities,  are  cut  up  into  thin  slices 
and  suspended  in  a  basket  in  running  water  and 
allowed  to  steep  until  the  poison  contained  in  them 
has  been  dissolved  out.  They  are  then  cooked  and 
eaten  by  the  aborigines,  and  also  occasionally  by  the 
Malays.1' 

The  acrid  juices  of  these  plants  are  said  not  to  be 
fatal  by  themselves,  and  the  part  they  play  when 
mixed  with  the  arrow-poison  is  to  cause  local  irritation, 
which  hinders  wounded  animals  from  escaping  before 
the  antiarin  has  time  to  act ;  but  all  the  Semang  and 
Sakai  encountered  declared  that  the  pure  Ipoh  was 
more  deadly  than  the  mixture.4 

1   L.  Wray  in/.  A.  1.  vol.  xxi.  (1S92),  pp.  47S,  479.  -  3  4  lb. 


294  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  11 


The  juice  of  the  tubers  of  the  "gadong"  is  decidedly- 
acid  when  fresh.  It  smells  somewhat  like  raw 
potatoes,  and  is  bitter  and  astringent,  producing  a 
stinging  sensation  on  the  tongue,  and  a  very  un- 
pleasant dry  feeling  in  the  mouth,  which  persists  for 
a  considerable  time.  The  acidulated  juice  yields  a 
yellowish-brown  precipitate  to  a  solution  of  iodine  in 
iodide  of  potassium.  The  precipitate  redissolved  in 
sulphurous  acid  and  evaporated  yields  long,  branching, 
needle-like  crystals.  The  juice  mixed  with  spirits, 
filtered  and  evaporated  to  dryness  and  redissolved  in 
dilute  sulphuric  acid,  filtered  and  evaporated  again, 
also  yields  long  branching  crystals,  which  have  an 
astringent  taste  like  the  juice,  and  are  possibly  the 
poisonous  principle.1 

The  freshly  expressed  juice  of  the  "  lekir  "  tubers  is 
faintly  acid  to  test-paper.  It  smells  somewhat  like 
beetroot,  and  is  acrid  and  causes  irritation  when 
applied  to  the  skin.  It  appears  not  to  contain  alkaloid, 
as  it  affords  no  precipitate  when  a  solution  of  iodine 
in  iodide  of  potassium  is  added  to  the  filtered  and 
acidulated  juice,  nor  when  the  juice  is  just  rendered 
alkaline  by  potash.  When  distilled,  the  distillate 
smells  like  the  juice,  and  is  slightly  opalescent,  but  it 
does  not  cause  irritation  when  applied  to  the  skin,  or 
even  to  a  wound.  It  tastes  the  same  as  it  smells,  and 
does  not  injuriously  affect  the  tongue.2 

Antidotes. 

The  only  antidote  for  Ipoh  poison  (said  Lela  Per- 
kasa)  was  to  eat  earth.  Any  sort  of  earth  will  do,  and 
the  patient,  however  ill,  will  always  end  by  getting 

!   L.  Wray  in/.  A.  I.  vol.  xxi.  (1892),  p.  479.  2  lb.  pp.  479,  480. 


chap,  yi  EAST  COA  GRITO 

better.     1 le  learned  ol  this  antidote  by  Beeing  a  <  n 
that  be  had  wounded  fly  down  to  the  ground,  swall< 

some  earth,  and  resume  its  flight.1 

Pang'an  or  E.  Semang.     The  following  is  a  summary 
of  Vaughan-Stevens'  description  of  the  preparation  ol 
I  poh  poison   by  the   Pangan.      The   sap  ol   the  u 
(obtained  by  shaving  the  stem  and  bruising  it  with 

tile  hack  of  a  "  parang  ")  is  poured  into  a  vessel  made  ol 
twisted  palm-leaf.  It  is  stirred  till  it  turns  bright 
yellow,  when  it  is  poured  into  a  pot  for  boiling.      The 

hark  of  "  perghoo,"  "  choichoi,"  "  kre<\"  "  lendou  ," 
and  "  garsung  "  is  put  into  a  bamboo  with  the  leaves 
c>\  "  rumpi  "  (sic,  ?  "  rami  ")  and  "  jelatang  "  ~  ;  water  is 
added,  and  the  mixture  heated  for  about  ten  minutes. 
The  liquor  is  then  added  to  the  pot,  the  lees  of  wet 
bark  being  wrapped  in  a  leaf  and  wrung  out  to  extract 
the  remainder  of  the  liquid.  Meanwhile  the  bark  of 
"  Blay  kechil,"  "  Blay  besar,"  "  Blay  hitam,"  and  "  Bhoi " 
is  similarly  boiled  and  added  to  the  liquor.  The  tubers 
of  "gadong"  and  "kepayang"  fruits  are  cut  up  small  and 
boiled  for  four  hours,  when  they  too  are  added  to  the 
mixture.  The  fruit  of  "s'lowung"  and  "chow"  and  the 
roots  of  "  bal,"  "  sedudo',"  and  "  begung  "  are  boiled  in 
yet  another  bamboo  and  put  into  the  pot  with  the  rest. 
The  sap  of  two  rattans  (Riong  and  Butong)  follows, 
and  the  heads  of  centipedes  and  snakes  and  scorpions' 
tails  are  smoked  between  two  knife-blades  and  added 
also.  Fresh  Rengut  ("  ringhut  ")  fruits  may  now  be 
added  if  procurable,  and  the  pot  containing  the  mixture 
is  boiled  till  its  contents  are  reduced  bv  one-half.3 

The  contents  are  then  poured  through  a  palm-leaf 
funnel    into    a    clean    bamboo,    the    pot    washed,    the 

1  Sir    H.    Low,    quoted    by    De     la       The  account  is  probably  (as  usual  with 
Croix,  p.  333.        -  V.-St.  "jelatung."       V.-St.)    eclectic.      For    identifications, 
:;  Vaughan  -  Stevens,    ii.     1 1 1    seqq.       v.  App. 


296  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  PA*]  n 


44  filtered  "  liquor  poured  back  and  the  Ipoh  (Upas)  sap 
added,  the  pot  being  then  boiled  till  the  mixture 
becomes  a  golden-yellow  syrup.  When  sufficiently 
thickened  it  is  poured  off  into  bamboo  tubes,  and  is 
ready  for  use.      Its  preparation  takes  about  2\  hours.1 

II. — Sakai. 
Stone  Implements. 

Perak  Sakai.  —  The  remarks  already  made  with 
regard  to  the  use  of  stone  implements  by  the  Semang 
apply  with  no  less  force  to  the  Sakai  tribes,  none  of 
which,  any  more  than  the  Semang,  has  ever  yet 
reached  a  stage  of  civilisation  at  which  such  implements 
might  have  been  produced,  though  they  may  never- 
theless have  quite  well  been  in  the  habit  of  using 
chips  and  flakes  of  stone  to  do  their  cutting. 

On  the  other  hand,  they  are,  like  the  Semang, 
undoubtedly  acquainted  with  the  use  of  cutting  and 
boring  instruments  made  of  bamboo  or  bone,  and  like 
them  too  they  now  obtain  their  axes  and  spear-heads 
and  choppers  from  the  neighbouring  Malays. 

The  Spear. 

Perak  Sakai. — Of  the  Sakai  of  Perak  Hale 2  says,  in 
fact,  that  they  purchase  spears  and  other  implements 
from  the  Malays,  but  that  though  he  also  saw  spears 
which  they  made  for  themselves,  and  which  were  fur- 
nished with  fire-hardened  bamboo  blades,  the  Sakai 
told  him  the  latter  were  only  used  for  setting  in  spring- 
traps.  This  statement  on  the  part  of  the  Sakai  was 
doubtless  true  as  far  as  the  specimens  that  Mr.  Hale 
saw  were  concerned,  but  in  those  parts  of  the  country 

1  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.   in  seqq.  2   Hale,  p.  288. 


Sakai  of  South  Perak,  with  Blowpipes. 


Vol.  /.  r-  -^ 


•fir$i{tt,JC 


De  Morgan. 


Sakai  Quivers. 


i.  Sakai  dart-quiver  (S.  Kinta.  Perak). 

2.  Sakai  dart-quiver  (S.  Bernam) :  section  showing  darts  (A")  carried  in 
small  bamboo  tubes  or  reeds  (A)  \  also  tbe  node  (Z))  forming  the  bottom  of 
the  (bamboo)  quiver:  a  rattan  ring  (C)  for  holding  back  the  wadding  ;  and 
the  recess  (E)  in  which  the  wadding  is  carried.— De  Morgan  in  L II.  25th 
October  1885,  p.  616. 


Vol.  I.  />.  297. 


.   MAP.    \l  SAh   -//     I    '/       I'l         ./A 

where  iron   Made,  are  scarce,    pear  bladi  i  made  ol 
bamboo  with  palm  wood  shafts  are  neverthele   i  em 
ployed  as  the  most  natural  and  usual  substitute. 

The  />'<'. 

Perak  Sakai.      There  .ire  only  two  cases   known  to 
me  in  which  the  use  of  the  how  has  been  attributed  to 

the  Sakai. 

According   to   De  la  Croix,  the  Sakai  ol    Kenering 
possessed    a   bow1  which  was   similar   to   that   used    by 

the    Semang  of   Patani  ;    and    a  similar   statement    was 
made  by   Miklucho-Maclay,  who  was,   however,  quite 

rightly  corrected  by  Pleyte.  In  both  cases,  however, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  error  arose  entirely 
from  applying  the  name  "  Sakai "  to  Negritos,  and 
that  these  so-called  Kenering  Sakai  of  De  la  Croix, 
no  less  than  Miklucho-Maclay's  Sakai,  were  in  reality 
of  Semang  (or,  at  least,  Semang-Sakai)  origin.5 

The  Blowpipe. 

Perak  Sakai. — The  Sakai  blowpipe  has  the  same 
arrangement  of  an  outer  and  an  inner  tube,  and  is  con- 
structed of  the  same  material  as  that  of  the  Semang. 
The  inner  tube  is  closely  fitted  into  the  outer  tube  or 
casing,  which  (unlike  the  casing  of  the  Semang  weapon) 
is  made  in  one  piece,  the  central  node  (should  a 
jointless  tube  be  unobtainable)  being  knocked  out 
with  a  wooden  spike,  and  the  jagged  edges  rasped 
away  by  means  of  the  prickly  'Teaf-wThips  "  of  a  kind 
of  rattan,  and  finally  polished  so  as  to  allow  the 
inner   tube  or  blowpipe  to  be  fitted   into  it  without 

1   De  Morgan,   vii.    417:   viii.    225,  3  The4' Hill Kreans  "(*.*.  i4 Karens'"), 

and  elsewhere.  whose    "  long   bows   and    arrows  "  are 

-  De  la  Croix,  p.  331  :  cp.  H  Homme,  referred  to  in  /.  I.  A.  (vol.  iv.  pp.  429, 

iii.  4~-  430),  must  certainly  have  been  so  too. 


298  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  fart  11 


injury.  This  doubling  of  the  tube,  as  has  been  said, 
is  intended  to  keep  it  straight  and  to  prevent  warping, 
and  generally  to  protect  the  blowpipe,  which  would 
be  otherwise  too  frail  to  sustain  its  own  weight.1 

The  Sakai  blowpipe  is,  as  a  rule,  far  more  highly 
decorated  (with  incised  rectilinear  designs)  than  that 
of  the  Semang,  and  has  a  wooden  mouthpiece  which, 
for  shooting  purposes,  is  either  placed  between  the  lips 
and  the  teeth  or  taken  directly  into  the  mouth  itself.2 

The  darts,  which  are  not  of  bamboo  but  of  the 
hard  leaf-rib  of  the  "bertam,"  are  of  the  usual  "  knit- 
ting-needle "  type,  and  have  butt-ends  not  of  rattan 
but  of  "  bertam  "  wood,  but  are  more  delicately  finished 
and  symmetrical  than  those  of  the  Semang,  which  in 
comparison  are  very  roughly  made.  They  are  from 
8-1 1  in.  (20  cm.  to  28  cm.)  long.  The  usual  wad  of 
flocculent  palm-down  is  inserted  in  the  tube  behind 
them  to  prevent  windage.3 

This  down  is  obtained  from  the  cuticle  of  a  tree, 
fined  down  with  a  knife,  sun-dried,  and  rolled  in  the 
hand  in  order  to  eliminate  the  harder  tissues.4 

The  quivers  of  the  Sakai  are  much  more  elaborate 
than  those  of  the  Semang.  They  are  made  from  a 
bamboo  (internode),  which  is  highly  decorated,  and 
which  contains  small  bamboo  tubes  or  reeds  in  which 
the  darts  are  kept ;  they  further  contain  all  the  re- 
quisites for  making  new  darts  and  for  poisoning  them.J 

1  For  descriptions  and  illustrations,  5  De  Morgan,  L'H.  ii.  616,  and 
sec  De  Morgan,  vii.  416  ;  L' Homme,  vii.  /.  c.  Hale  (p.  289)  adds,  "At 
ii.  614  ;  and  Male  (who  gives  measure-  the  bottom  of  the  quiver  a  supply  of 
ments),  pp.  288,  289  ;  cp.  also^.  /.  A.  bees-wax  is  always  kept,  with  which  to 
vol.  iv.  pp.  429,  430,  where,  however,  polish  the  quiver  as  well  as  the  blow- 
bamboo  (!)  darts  are  spoken  of.  pipe,  exteriorly  ;    this  polishing,  com- 

2  3  De  M.  and  Hale,  loc.  cit.  bined  with  the  fact  that  they  are  always 
4  De   M.  loc.   cit.       Hale  (p.    289)       suspended    over    the    fire,    where    the 

says  it  is  composed  of  the  natural  fluff  smoke  can  get  at  them,  helps  to  give 
or  down  obtained  from  the  leaf-bases  them  the  rich  red  colour  that  the 
of  certain  rattans  {Calami).  Sakai  admire." 


Cerruti. 


Sakai  of  South   Perak,   carrying  Blowpipe. 


Vol.  I.  /.  29E. 


SAKAi  Men,   One  (standing)  \vr 

'•  /•  299. 


>  with  Blowpipe  and  Quiver,  the  Other 
with  Back-Basket. 


Wray. 


(seated) 


<  II  \l\  \l 


/A   //  OF  PERAK 


A  ring  of  woven  cane  (em  ircling  the  quiver)  affords 
the  means  <>f  attaching  the  quiver  to  the  waist  « ord,  a 
similar  ring  being  used  for  Fastening  the  hinge  oi  the 
lid,  which  latter  isol  basket  work,1  and  is  fitted  interiorl) 
with  a  ring  of  bent  cane  for  holding  the  wadding,  and 
preventing  it  from  falling  out  when  the  lid  is  opened.1 

The  girdle  is  made  from  the  cuticle  of  the  Arto 
carpus  finely  plaited,  and  is  fastened  about  the  waist 
with  a  buckle  made  of  bone. 

The  range  of  a  blowpipe-dart  is  about  So  metres, 
according  to  the  strength  of  the  operator.  But  the 
usual  range  actually  employed  is  never  more  than 
30  to  35  paces  (23  m.  to  27  m.).  At  this  distance, 
however,  they  are  marvellously  clever,  and  a  Sakai 
has  been  seen  to  hit  w-ith  his  first  shot  a  dollar  deposited 
on  the  trunk  of  a  fallen  tree  at  about  30  paces  (23  m.) 
distance.4 

M.  Brau  de  Saint-Pol  Lias  declared  '  that  he  had 
seen  a  blowpipe  wrhich  was  rifled,  but  he  gives  no 
details,  and  until  some  confirmation  comes  to  hand, 
his  statement,  which  is  entirely  unsupported,  cannot 
be  received  with  too  much  caution. 

When  the  Sakai  require  a  very  powerful  poison 
they  mix  together  in  a  bamboo  tube  the  sap  of  a  tree 
called  Ipoh  and  the  sap  of  a  small  root.  They  then 
gently  dry  the  mixture  over  a  slow  fire,  adding 
moisture  from  time  to  time  in  order  to  dry  it  afresh. 


1  Or  of  wood  hollowed  out  by  fire 
and  knife,  that  of  the  Kenaboi  being 
of  basket-work. — V.-St.  ii.  120,  121. 

-  De  M.  loc.  cit. ;  l? Homme,  ii.  620. 

3  Cp.  Hale,  p.  289,  where  we  are 
told  that  the  quiver  is  "supported 
round  the  waist  by  a  cord  of  native 
manufacture,  and  fastened  with  a  buckle 
made  from  the  bone  of  a  monkey,  the 
upper  mandible  of  a  hornbill,''  etc. 


4  De  M.  UH.  ii.  617.  Cp.  Hale, 
p.  289.  The  blowpipe  is  a  very  deadly- 
weapon  for  any  animal  up  to  the  size  of 
a  siamang,  and  up  to  a  distance  of  60 
yards  (55  m.),  whereas  at  50  yards  (45 
m.)  distance  "a  Sakai,  clever  in  the 
use  of  it,  will  put  five  darts  out  of  six 
into  a  common  playing  card."  Cp. 
De  la  Croix,  p.  334. 

5  Lias, pp.  25S,  259  :  cp.  p.  256,  attti. 


300  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  pari  ii 

The  boiling  is  completed  in  four  processes  ;  and  just 
before  the  last  boiling  a  little  poison  obtained  from 
the  poison  glands  of  snakes,  scorpions,  and  centipedes 
is  added.  A  little  of  the  poison  is  then  applied  to  a 
small  spatula,  which  is  dried  slowly  over  a  smoulder- 
ing fire  ;  a  fresh  layer  is  then  applied  and  the  spatula 
moved  slowly  to  and  fro  over  the  fire.  The  poison  thus 
prepared  is  dark  brown,  and  is  very  soluble  in  water. 
If  a  less  powerful  poison  is  required,  the  sap  of  the 
Ipoh  and  the  root  is  alone  employed,  or  else  the  Ipoh 
by  itself;  in  either  case  the  methods  of  preparation 
are  identical.  The  poison  is  now  ready  for  immediate 
use,  the  point  of  the  dart  being  slightly  wetted  and 
rubbed  upon  the  small  spatula  which  is  covered  with 
the  poison.1 

To  complete  his  inquiry  into  the  sources  of  the 
arrow-poisons  of  the  aborigines,  Mr.  Wray  visited  the 
district  of  Batang  Padang,  to  ascertain  how  the  Sakai 
prepared  their  poison.  As  previously  mentioned,  they 
only  used  it  on  their  blowpipe  -  darts,  as  bows  and 
arrows  are  not  employed  by  them." 

Mr.  Wray  visited  two  Ipoh  trees,  both  of  which 
were  deeply  scored  like  those  in  Selama.  The  scoring 
of  the  bark  was  not,  however,  so  regular  as  with  the 
Semang,  and  no  sign  of  the  herring-bone  method  was 
to  be  seen.  The  usual  plan  was  to  cut  detached 
V-shaped  incisions,  and  the  method  of  collecting  the 
sap  differed  also  from  that  already  described.3 

Several  pieces  of  bamboo  were  taken,  and  to  each 
was  fixed  a  piece  of  wood,  which  was  ingeniously  cut, 

1  De  M.  /.  c.     Cp.  Hale,  289.     The  for  use,  it  is  put  on  a  spatula  moistened 

sap  of  the  Ipoh  tree  is  * ;  boiled  down  to  and    warmed  over   the    fire,   and   then 

the  consistency  of  thick  treacle,  a  large  applied  to  the  dart."     Cp.  also  De  la 

quantity  at  a  time.      It  will  then,  in  a  Croix,  p.  334,  as  to  the  varying  strengths 

properly   stoppered   bamboo,   keep  for  of  the  Sakai  poison  (even  on  the  darts 

any   length    of  time.      When    required  of  the  same  quiver).         2  3  Wray,  /.  e. 


.  MAP.   VI  SAKAJ   '  '/■    ! 

so  that  when  its  chisel-shaped  upper  end  was  app 
to  the  bark  ol  the  tree  below  a   icore  the  Bap  flowed 

first  down  its  upper  surface  till   ii   met    with    a   i 
channel  which  conducted  it  round  to  the  under  surfao 
and  then  into  the  bamboo  receptacle. 

The  sap  being  collected,  two  wooden  spatulas  w< 
prepared,  and  a  piece  ol  large  bamboo  split  in  hall 

as  to  form  a  small  trough,  and    the  sap   poured    into  it. 

The  larger  spatula  was  heated  over  a  fire  and  the  sap 

ladled  out  of  the  bamboo  and  spread  on  its  heated 
surface  by  means  ol  tin-  smaller  spatula,  and  dried  b\ 
being  held  with  the  uncoated  side  over  the  tire  ;  it 
was  then  reversed  and  sap  spread  on  its  upper  or 
uncoated  side,  and  when  that  was  in  its  turn  nearh 
dry,  again  reversed  and  a  fresh  supply  of  sap  applied 
to  the  surface  first  coated.  This  was  repeated  until 
all  the  sap  had  been  inspissated. - 

The  darts  are  coated  in  the  manner  before 
mentioned,  and  when  the  poison  is  very  hard  and  dry 
and  will  not  soften  by  being  heated,  a  few  drops  ot 
water  are  put  on  to  the  spatula  and  mixed,  by  means 
of  a  smaller  spatula,  with  the  poison  until  it  acquires 
the  right  consistency  to  apply  to  the  points  of  the  darts/ 

The  Sakai  and  Semang  methods  of  collecting  and 
preparing  the  poison  are  really  the  same,  only  differing 
in  details.  The  Sakai,  however,  do  not  mix  "lekir" 
juice  with  the  Ipoh,and  the  way  they  mix  the  "gadong  * 
juice  with  it  is  not  the  same  as  that  employed  by  the 
Semang.  For  this  purpose  the  Ipoh  sap  is  prepared 
as  just  described,  and  a  piece  of  the  "  gadong  "  tuber  is 
peeled  and  sliced  up  fine  and  placed  in  a  joint  of  a 
bamboo,  and  ground  up  with  water  by  means  of  a 
wooden   pestle.       The  fluid   is   then  poured    off  and 

1  /.  A.  J.  vol.  xxi.  (1892).  pp.  479,  4S0.  -  lb.  3  /^ 


3o2  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  ii 


fresh  water  added  and  the  process  repeated.  The 
fluid  is  then  boiled  and  filtered  through  leaves  in 
which  some  fine  scrapings  of  bamboo  are  put.  It  is 
then  evaporated  in  an  open  vessel  over  a  fire  to  the 
consistency  of  a  thick  syrup,  and  mixed  with  the  Ipoh 
in  the  proportion  of  three  parts  of  Ipoh  to  one  of 
"  gadong."  1 

The  Sakai  living  in  the  plains  employ  the 
Antiaris  poison,  as  a  rule,  since  the  plants  from  which 
it  is  prepared  are  low-country  forms  ;  but  the  Sakai  of 
the  hills  use  a  poison  prepared  from  three  hill  plants 
known  as  "  Ipoh  akar,"  or  root  Ipoh — in  contradistinc- 
tion to  the  Antiaris  or  "Ipoh  kayu"  (tree  Ipoh) — 
"prual,"  and  "lampong."2 

"  Ipoh  akar  "  is  a  large  climbing  Strychnos,  with  a 
stem  often  as  much  as  three  inches  in  diameter.  It 
has  dark  green  glabrous,  opposite  leaves,  with  three 
prominent  longitudinal  veins.  The  fruit  is  said  to  be 
large  and  round,  and  to  contain  seeds  about  half  an 
inch  in  diameter,  and  the  flower  is  stated  to  be  reddish. 
It  grows  on  the  hills,  and  is  to  be  seen  at  over 
4000  feet  elevation.  The  specimens  procured  were 
collected  on  Gunong  Batu  Putih  in  Batang  Padang. 
The  portion  of  this  plant  from  which  the  poison  is 
extracted  is  the  bark  of  the  roots  and  lower  part  of 
the  stem.  It  is  often  employed  without  admixture, 
and  is  then  prepared 3  as  follows  : — 

The  bark,  which  is  burnt  sienna  coloured,  is 
scraped  with  knives  from  the  roots  ;  the  scrapings  are 
put  into  a  pan  with  water  and  boiled,  the  water  is 
poured  off  and  filtered.  Fresh  water  is  added  to  the 
bark,  which  is  again  boiled  for  some  minutes,  and  the 
water  poured    off   a    second   time.       The    exhausted 

1  /.  A.  I.  vol.  xxi.  (1892),  p.  480.  2  lb.  3  lb. 


,  hap.  vi  SAKA1  <>/    PERAK 

shavings  of    bark   are   then    thrown   away,  and    the 

filtered  infusion,  which  is  bright  burnt  sienna  coloured, 

is   reduced    hy  boiling    in   an  open  pan  to  a  syrup.       It 

is    then    poured    while    hot     into    a    bamboo,    where    it 

solidifies.      It  is  applied  to  the  darts  in  the  manner 

already  explained,  and  is  said  to  he  more  powerful 
than  the  Antiaris,  but  is  rendered  quicker  in  its 
action  when  mixed  with  the  poison  derived  from  the 
other  two  plants  above  mentioned.1 

Of  these  "  prual"  '  is  also  a  climber,  growing  on  the 
hills.  The  largest  stem  Mr.  Wray  had  seen  was  one 
and  a  half  inches  in  diameter.  It  has  opposite  bright 
green  entire  leaves,  but  of  its  flowers  and  fruit  he 
had  neither  seen  nor  been  able  to  get  any  description. 
The  young  shoots  contain  a  very  fine  strong  white 
silky  fibre.  His  specimens  were  also  collected  on 
Gunong  Batu  Putih.  The  bark  of  the  roots,  which  is 
rather  pale  yellow  in  colour,  is  the  part  of  the  plant 
which  is  employed  in  making  the  poison.  This 
arrow-poison  is  said  not  to  be  so  strong  as  Antiaris, 
but  to  be  quite  capable  of  killing  when  used  by  itself.3 

The  third  plant  is  called  "  lampong,"  and  is  also  a 
climbing  species  of  Strycknos.*  It  has  opposite  three- 
veined  leaves  like  "  Ipoh  akar"  (only  they  are  consider- 
ably smaller),  and  it  is  stated  to  have  similar  fruit,  but 
grows  lower  down  on  the  hills,  Mr.  Wray's  specimens 
being  collected  on  the  Cheroh  hills.  Like  the  two 
preceding  plants,  the  bark  of  the  roots,  which  is  white, 
is  the  part  from  which  the  poison  is  extracted.  It  is 
said  to  be  not  so  powerful  as  "prual,"  but  is  often 
employed  by  itself.5 

In  making  the  mixed  poison  six  parts  of  scraped 

,     lJ.A.I.  vol.  xxi.  (1892),  p.  481.  2   Coptosapella  flavescens. 

3  WTray,  /.  c.  4  Str,  Maingayi,  Clarke.  6  Wray,  /.  c. 


304  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  ii 


M  Ipoh  akar  "  bark  are  taken,  to  which  is  added  one  part 
of  each  of  "prual"  and  "lampong"  bark,  and  the  mixture 
is  exhausted  with  boiling  water,  filtered  and  evaporated 
in  the  same  way  as  has  already  been  described  when 
simple  "  Ipoh  akar"  is  treated.1 

It  was  stated  by  the  Sakai  that  Antiaris  and  "  Ipoh 
akar  "  are  rarely  if  ever  mixed  with  one  another.  The 
latter  poison  is  said  to  retain  its  virulence,  in  the 
form  of  an  extract,  for  years.2 

III. — Jakun. 

Weapons  and  Implements. 

The  same  remarks  that  have  been  made  with 
regard  to  stone  implements  in  the  case  of  the  Semang 
and  the  Sakai  apply  with  at  least  equal  force  to  the 
third  branch  of  these  aboriginal  tribes,  and  need 
not  therefore  be  recapitulated  here.  The  weapons  and 
implements  of  the  Jakun  at  present  are  the  "parang" 
or  chopping-knife,  the  "seligi  "  or  "squailer,"  the  spear 
(originally  of  bamboo),  the  blowpipe,  and  (finally) 
the  adze,  although  knowledge  of  this  latter  appears  to 
have  been  merely  borrowed  by  the  Jakun  from  their 
more  progressive  neighbours.  As  has  already  been 
recorded,  an  old  writer  declares  that  he  met  a  Jakun  at 
Malacca  in  1833,  who  claimed  to  have  killed  a  man  at 
the  distance  of  40  yards  (36.5  m.)  with  a  clay  pellet 
that  he  had  discharged  from  his  blowpipe.3 

The  Spear. 

Of  the  Jakun  spear,  we  are  told  that  it  consists 

of  an  iron  blade  of  about  1  ft.  long  (30  cm.)  and  1  in. 

(2.5  cm.)  broad  in  the  middle,  attached  to  a  thick,  rudely 

worked  shaft  about  five  or  six  feet  long,  and  sharp  at 

1  Wray  in/.  A.  I.  vol.  xxi.  (1892),  p.  481.  a  lb.         3  Begbie,  pp.  5,  6. 


MfGrego*. 

Man   ufing   Blowphe,   Bukit  Prual,  Selangor  ;  at  his  left  Side  is  the  open 

Quiver  with   Darts. 


Vol.  I.  p.  304. 


McGregor. 


akin  using  Blowpipe,   Lubo'   K'lubi,   Ulu  Langat, 


Selangor. 


V oh  I.  />.'y,o^. 


chap,  vi     SAl   IG1    MALAYS  OF  NEGRI  SEMB I  LAN 

the  inferior  extremity,  in  order  to  enter  easily  into  the 
ground  ;  for  before  the  [akun  enter  a  house  they  stri 
the  end  of  the  spear  into  the  ground,  where  it  remains 
until  they  go  away,  It  is  scarcelj  possible  to  meet  a 
single  Jakun  without  his  spear,1  which  is  both  ;i  sti 
to  walk  with  and  an  offensive  or  defensive  weapon  i  i 
occasion  may  require.    The  "  parang  "  is  an  iron  Made 

of  about    1    ft.  (30  Cm.)  long,  and    2-3    in.  (5  Cm.  to  7.5 

cm.)  broad,  with  a  shall  like  that  of  a  large  knife  ;  they 

use  it  to  cut  trees  employed  in  the  building  of  their 
houses ;  and  to  cut  branches  to  open  a  passage  when 
journeying  through  thick  jungle;  as  well  as  for  a  de- 
fensive weapon  against  wild  beasts.  On  one  occasion 
Logan  heard  of  a  Jakun  who,  being  attacked  by  a 
tiger,  defended  himself  with  a  ''parang"  (the  only 
weapon  he  had  with  him  at  that  time).  Nearly  half 
an  hour  was  spent  in  this  singular  combat ;  the  Jakun 
lost  an  eye  and  was  seriously  wounded  in  the  head  ; 
but  the  tiger  paid  the  forfeit  with  his  life.2 

Jakun,  N.  Sembilan. — Of  the  weapons  of  the  Negri 
Sembilan  tribes  scarcely  any  records  have  been 
published.  Rowland,  however  (Joe.  cit.),  cannot  help 
expressing  his  astonishment  at  the  certainty  with  which 
they  could  hit  a  target  measuring  only  1  ft.  (30  cm.) 
square  at  distances  ranging  up  to  80  m.  At  the  same 
time  he  describes  in  detail  their  method  of  discharging 
the  blowTpipe,  which  was  to  take  the  mouthpiece 
partially  into  the  mouth  (so  that  the  mouthpiece  for 
at  least  2  cm.  was  covered  by  the  upper  lip,  and  to  a 
lesser  extent  by  the  under  one).  And  the  same  wTriter 
has    also   remarked   that    instead   of  the    arms   being 


1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  ii.  p.  262.     Cp. ,  how-  parang,    the    sumpitan    with    poisoned 

ever,  Wray,  who  states  that  "the  Jakun  arrows,  and  a  few  of  them  the  spear." 
of  the    Menangkabau    States   use    the  2  Cp.  vol.  i.  p.  272. 

VOL.   I  X 


3o6  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  if 


stretched  far  forward  to  support  the  shaft  of  the  blow- 
pipe (as  it  might  be  expected  would  be  the  case),  it  is 
the  mouthpiece  itself  that  is  held  (firmly  and  in  both 
hands)  immediately  in  front  of  the  operator's  mouth. 

Blandas. — The  Blandas  (Langat)  blowpipe  is  hardly 
distinguishable  from  the  Besisi  weapon,  and  will  be 
described  more  fully  under  that  head.  The  dart  was 
of  the  midrib  of  a  fan-palm  leaf  ("  serdang  "  or  "  kepau  "), 
its  butt-end  ("basong")  of  "  akar  menitan,"  and  the 
leaf  carried- inside  the  lid  of  the  "  tabong  tela,"  or 
"  dart-quiver,"  as  a  squirrel-charm,  was  "  salerik  tupei." 

The  Spear. 

Besisi.  —  The  Besisi,  like  the  Blandas,  get  their 
spears  from  the  Malays.  A  favourite  form  of  spear 
among  the  Besisi  is  the  fish-spear,  of  which  there  are 
several  varieties  ;  most  of  these  types,  however,  have 
been  borrowed  from  the  Malays,  as  was  their  Besisi 
name  "  tiruk." 

The  Blowpipe. 

The  inner  tube  of  the  Besisi  blowpipe  is  made 
(as  among  all  the  tribes  already  referred  to)  from 
a  couple  of  internodes  of  the  long -jointed  bamboo 
(Bambusa  Wrayi).  The  middle  node  having  been 
excised,  the  abutting  ends  of  the  two  pieces  are 
brought  together  again,  coated  with  a  little  resin  to 
make  them  adhere  better,  and  spliced,  as  among  the 
Sakai  of  Perak,  by  means  of  a  connecting  cylinder  or 
jacket,  which  is  fitted  over  their  abutting  ends. 

One  of  these  pieces  of  the  blowpipe  is  invariably 
longer  than  the  other,  and  is  called  by  the  Besisi  the 
11  man-piece,"  the  shorter  one  being  called  the 
11  woman-piece,"   the   Besisi  women  being,  as  a  rule, 


chap,  vi  //  AGE  MAI  A  KS  01  Si  LANGOR 

markedly  shorter  than  the  men  ol  the  tril  >>  i  ;i  ;ion 

ally,  however,  these   pieces  are  tailed  the  "mother 
piece"  ,iiid    "child-piece      respectively.      The   con- 
necting-piece   is   called    "  cheinal  "     (as    among     the 

Mantra). 

For  making  the  mouthpiece,  which  is  always  ol 
wood,  a  hole  is  bored  right  through  the  piece  oi  wood 

selected  lor  the  purpose  ;  it  is  then  fitted  by  hand 
into  the  butt-end  of  the  inner  tube,  the  end  of 
which  is  cut  off  Hush  with  it.  In  order  to  make  the 
tit  a  tight  one,  the  lips  of  the  mouthpiece;  (which  are 
made  long  and  thin  to  facilitate  their  introduction 
between  the  inner  and  the  outer  tube)  are  in  many 
cases  cut  or  broken  at  one  side,  thus  enabling  a  fine 
slip  of  cane  to  be  pushed  into  the  interstice,  so  as  to 
act  as  a  delicate  wedge.  In  some  cases  leaves  are 
used  as  a  wedge  (instead  of  this  slip  of  cane),  and 
some  of  these  bear  traces  of  fire  at  their  edges,  as  if 
it  had  been  intended  to  dry  or  harden  them.  Thin 
strips  of  cloth  are  also  sometimes  similarly  used  by 
the  more  civilised  tribes. 

The  mouthpiece  when  complete  is  fitted  on  to  one 
end  of  the  inner  tube,  which  then  only  requires  to  be 
fitted  carefully  to  the  bigger  tube  that  forms  the  case  or 
sheathing.  The  latter,  on  account  of  the  connecting- 
piece  or  jacket  that  unites  the  two  inner  parts,  has 
naturally  to  be  rather  larger  than  would  otherwise  be 
necessary. 

The  outer  Tube  or  Casing. 

The  casing  is  manufactured  either  from  Bambusa 
Wrayiox  some  similar  kind  of  long-jointed  bamboo,  by 
poking  out  the  central  node  with  a  sharpened  spike  or 
boring-rod  (  "  jengroh  "  or  "jengrok  "  )  made  of  a  hard 


308  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  ii 


kind  of  palm  -  wood.  The  ragged  portions  of  the 
internode  which  still  remain  are  rasped  down  with  the 
formidably  armed  leaf-whip  ("onak")  of  a  rattan  (or 
"  Wait-a-bit  Thorn  "),  which  is  thrust  down  into  the 
tube  and  worked  to  and  fro  until  the  jagged  remains 
of  the  node  have  been  entirely  removed. 

Both  the  inner  tube  and  its  case  having  thus  been 
prepared  and  cut  to  the  same  length,  it  only  remains 
to  push  the  former  with  great  care  into  its  casing. 

Treatment  of  the  Muzzle-end. 

But  in  order  to  obviate  the  inconvenience  and 
risk  of  a  "  loose  fit,"  several  narrow  and  long  wedge- 
shaped  strips  about  a  foot  and  a  half  long  (like  the 
"  gores  "  in  the  waist  of  a  lady's  skirt)  are  excised  at 
the  muzzle-end  of  the  case,  and  the  inner  tube,  which 
is  now  cut  shorter  than  the  case  (by  about  3  inches), 
is  pushed  down  into  it  as  far  as  it  will  go  (i.e.  to 
within  3  in.  (7.5  cm.)  of  the  muzzle-end  of  the  case). 

The  split  ends  of  the  case  are  now  drawn  together 
till  they  fit  the  blowrpipe  tightly,  and  a  short  thick 
cylinder,  of  a  woody  kind  of  bamboo,  and  measuring 
about  3  in.  (7.5  cm.)  long,  having  been  fitted  into  the 
vacant  space  inside  the  muzzle -end  (to  which  the 
blowpipe  does  not  reach),  the  whole  affair  is  bound 
round  either  by  a  single  long  strip  of  cane,  or  by 
numerous  rings  of  plaited  cane,  and  coated  over  with  a 
thick  crust  of  tree-gum  or  resin  in  order  to  keep  these 
lashings  from  working  loose,  this  elaborate  arrange- 
ment being  finished  off  by  a  small  ring-shaped  piece 
of  coconut-  or  tortoise-shell  which  is  imbedded  in  the 
resin  at  the  muzzle-end  of  the  blowpipe  in  order  to 
protect    the    muzzle    from     fraying    or    from    similar 


chap,  vi  SAVAGE    MAI  A  KS  Of     i  I   i  VGOR  yoq 


injury.1  The  blowpipe  is  1 1 < > \\  ready  for  use, and  if  only 
remains  to  decorate  it  with  the  customary  patterns  or 
magic  emblems  employed  by  the  tribe. 

( Ornamentation. 
The  question   of  ornamentation   will    be   treated 

more   conveniently   elsewhere,    but     I    ma)-    remark    in 

passing    that    although    the    patterns   of    the    Besisi 

blowpipes  were,  with  few  exceptions,  of  the  highly 
conventionalised  rectilinear  incision  type,  I  neverthe- 
less more  than  once  noticed  the  delineation  ol  some 
animal  or  reptile  (e.g.  a  lizard)  upon  their  polished 
shafts.  The  ordinary  motive  in  the  blowpipe  and 
quiver  patterns  of  this  tribe — at  least  as  the  matter 
was  explained  to  me  by  the  Besisi  themselves  — 
consisted  of  the  representation  (in  an  extremely  rudi- 
mentary form)  of  the  limbs  and  body  of  the  spectacled 
monkey  or  "  lotong  "  (Scmnoftithecus). 

The  outer  case  of  the  Besisi  blowpipe  was  divided, 
as  a  rule,  into  two  approximate  halves  by  the  central 
node  or  knot.  Subdividing  it  further,  roughly  speak- 
ing, into  quarters,  the  second  quarter  (counting  from 
the  muzzle-end)  was  almost  invariably  left  undecorated, 
except  perhaps  by  one  or  two  rings  or  zigzags,  this 
being  the  part  by  which   it  was,   I   understood,  most 

1  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  of  blowpipes  in  the  Peninsula  are  with- 

object    of    this    device    is    simply    to  out  this   device,  yet  the  quarry  is   so 

strengthen    the    blowpipe.      Vaughan-  little  disturbed  by  their  "  tone  "  that  a 

Stevens,  in  describing  a  similar  device  bird  sitting  on  a  tree  may  be  shot  at 

among  the  Mantra,  supposes  it  to  be  and  missed  several  times  before  it  will 

due    to    a    wish    on    the    part   of   the  move.      Moreover,    the    sharper     tone 

Mantra    to   obtain  a   sharper   tone   or  would    necessarily    be  heard   further. 

note   from    the   dart    as    it   leaves  the  At    the    same    time    this    device    un- 

tube,  probably  (he  thinks)  because  the  doubtedly    improves    the    weapon    by 

sharper  tone  would  be  less  audible  to  rendering     it     less     liable     to     warp 

the  quarry.     There  does  not,  however,  interiorly,  and  by  weighting   it  better, 

appear   to   be  the  slightest  foundation  It  also  has  the  advantage  of  keeping 

for  any  such  supposition.     The  majority  out  insects. 


3io  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  ii 

generally  held  when  it  was  being  carried  on  a  hunt- 
ing expedition.  I  cannot  say  for  certain  whether 
this  explanation  is  of  wider  application,  but  if  so  it 
would  explain  why  this  part  of  the  bamboo  is  so 
frequently  stripped  of  its  outer  cuticle  and  polished 
with  wax. 

The  Cleaning-rod. 

A  primitive  kind  of  cleaning  -  rod  which  was 
frequently  used  by  the  Besisi  was  called  "jenghek." 
It  was  made  on  the  ramrod  principle,  a  long  rod  of 
palm-wood  being  perforated  at  one  end,  and  strips  of 
palm -leaf  threaded  through  the  perforation.  This 
rod,  when  worked  up  and  down  the  tube,  made  the 
cleaning  of  the  interior  of  the  blowpipe  an  easy 
matter.  The  muzzle  of  the  blowpipe  was  in  addition, 
not  unfrequently,  stoppered  with  leaves  in  order  to 
keep  out  white  ants,  the  small  wild  bees  called 
"  kelulut,"  and  many  other  kinds  of  insect — a  pre- 
caution which  is  of  no  small  importance  in  the  Malay 
Peninsula. 

The  Dart. 

The  following  are  the  names  given  by  the  Besisi 
to  the  different  parts  of  their  blowpipe-dart  ("damak"). 
The  shaft  is  called  "  huyang,"  the  butt-end  "  bentol," 
the  point  "chen,"  and  the  nick  above  the  point  "gret." 

The  conical  butt-end  (also  called  "  torn  bentol  ") 
is  only  made  of  what  is  called  in  Besisi  "long  angkau," 
— which  is  the  stem  of  a  kind  of  creeper  called  in 
Malay  "  akar  lada  luan," — or  of  some  light  wood  such 
as  "  pulai." 

The  stem  or  shaft  of  the  dart  is  made  from  the 
leaf- ribs  of  various  kinds  of  palm,  especially  the 
"  serdang,"  "  ranggam,"  "  kepau,"  "  kumung  "  (?),  and 


i  hap.  m  AVAGh   MAI   iv  i  LANGOR 


"  Ix-rtain,"  though  a  shaft  made  ol  the  last  named 
material  is  generally  considered  tobeoi  inferior  qualit 

The  shaft  ol  the  dart  with  the  point  broken  ofl  i  • 
railed  "  pandong  d£m&k." 

The  polishing  proa  ;s,  which  is  carried  out  very 
carefully  by  the   Besisi  (with  "metnplas"  leaves),  is 

called  "  ehengat." 

The  Poison. 

We  now  come  to  the  Besisi  dart -poison,  the 
ordinary  ingredients  of  which  were  given  me  as 
follows  : — 

(i)  "  Ipoh  batang  "  (in  Besisi,  " ch€s")=  Antiaris 
toxicaria,  the  Upas  tree  (the  Poison-tree  of  Java). 

(2)  "  Malai.'"J 

(3)  "Tenet."3 

(4)  "  Jenu\"  or  "  tuba,"  the  well-known  Malay  fish- 
poison  similarly  used  by  the  Besisi. 

According  to  another  account  that  I  received,  the 
ingredients  of  the  Besisi  poison  4  were  : — 

(1)  "  Chong  ches  "  (root  of  the  "ipoh"  creeper  = 
Strychuos  tieute). 

(2)  "  Ches  (i.e.  "  ipoh  ")  malai." 

(3)  "  Ches  {i.e.  "  ipoh  ")  tenet." 

(4)  "Ches  (i.e.  "ipoh")  kroi." 

(5)  "Jenu  "  (Mai.  "tuba"). 

(6)  "  Pedas,"  or  pepper.5 

(7)  "  Warang,"  or  arsenic. 

1  Occasionally    we    meet    with     the  being  used   at    all    requires  corrobora- 

statement  that  these  darts  are  made  of  tion. 

bamboo.     Darts  made  of  this  material,  2    =  "Blay"  (V. -St.).     For  identifi- 

however,  would  be  of  inferior  quality,  cations,  v.  App. 

and  where  the  report  of  its  use  is  not  3    =  "  Kannet "  (V.-St.). 

due  to  careless  observation,  its  employ-  4  For  identifications,   and  a  similar 

ment   is   doubtless  due   to  some    tem-  receipt  given  by  Bellamy  (p.  229),  v. 

porary  difficulty  of  obtaining  a   better  App. 

material.  This  employment  of  bamboo  5  For  a  suggested  reason  (for  the  em- 
is  not  at  all  usual,  and  the  fact  of  its  ployment  of  pepper),  see  p.  319,  n.  7. 


3 1 2  WE  A  PONS  A  ND  IMPLEMENTS  part  i  i 

(8)  "  Gengang" — a  kind  of  large  millipede. 

(9)  The  "teeth"  ("lemoyn")  of  tigers,  centipedes, 
and  snakes. 

When  the  sap  of  the  Upas  creeper  was  used 
instead  of,  or  in  conjunction  with,  that  of  the  tree 
Upas,  the  roots  of  the  creeper  were  simply  grubbed 
up  and  shredded.  When  the  sap  of  the  tree  Upas  was 
used,  the  collector,  using  his  jungle-knife  ("  parang  "), 
would  slash  the  outer  bark  of  the  Upas  (a  tall  forest 
tree  growing  sometimes  to  100  feet  in  height), 
making  V-shaped  incisions,  at  the  lowest  point  of 
each  of  which  the  sap  would  naturally  accumulate, 
which  was  accordingly  drawn  off  at  will.  When  the 
scar  was  healed  (but  not  before)  a  fresh  supply  of 
sap  may  be  obtained  by  slashing  the  bark  in  a  fresh 
place.  Each  new  incision  was  generally  made  a  little 
higher  up  than  the  last,  and  I  have  seen  a  tree  covered 
with  the  scars,  the  highest  of  which  perhaps  reached 
a  distance  of  at  least  30  or  40  feet  from  the  ground. 

The  sap  thus  collected  was  gradually  reduced  by 
long  and  patient  boiling,  as  among  the  Sakai,  to 
the  consistency  of  treacle,  and  when  sufficiently 
inspissated,  was  poured  off  into  a  small  bamboo 
poison-tube  called  "jelok,"  which  is  carefully  stoppered 
with  a  wooden  stopper  until  required  for  use.  Bellamy 
(I.e.)  says  that  prepared  opium  (" chandu  ")  is  also 
sometimes  added. 

Poisoning  the  Dart. 

When  the  time  arrived,  the  poison  was  applied  to 
the  dart -point  as  usual,  forming  a  thick  clot  about 
the  point,  and  an  entire  quiverful  of  darts  having 
been  poisoned,  they  were  at  once  deposited  upon  a 
highly  ingenious  drying  rack  or  stand,  and  placed  in 


■■ 


-  z 
3  < 


: 


z       "^ 


\± 


h 


4 


— 

0 

O 

-.' 

el 

o 

C 

X 

- 

~ 

t/i 

_- 

/ 

tf 

_^ 

*-* 

o 

"■* 

1 

— 

*~ 

'^. 

£ 

•_ 

5 

j> 

^ 

' : 

c 

- 

(3. 

- 

V 

/ 

-- 

id 

- 

pj 

t> 

.- 

X 

' 

- 

fc 

- 

X 

S* 

- 

3 

u 

T3 

_n 

: 

— 

? 

:/. 

H 

— 

rj 

C5J 

e 

Z 

•/ 

c 

- 

~ 

a 

^ 

.-: 

■~ 

~ 

id 

•/: 

: 

Oj 

: 

£* 

- 

g 

- 


V 


9j      < 


chap,  vi  SAVAGE  MAI  A  YS  OF  SI  I   I  VGOR 

the  sun  to  dry,  the  stand  being  designed  not  only 
to  hold  them  in  position,  but  also  to  prevent  them 
from  being  accidentally  knocked  against,  or  perhap 

blown  away  in  a  high  wind. 

When    the    drying    was    completed    the    darts 

were    fitted    into    the    r<<d-l)imdle    of  the    quiver,   and 
their   butt-ends    branded    or     marked    with    lime    and 
water,  in  order  to  distinguish  the  various  strengths  of 
the  poison,  the  designs  consisting  of  bars,  crosses,  and 
dots. 

The  usual  nick  (as  has  been  said)  was  made  round 
the  dart,  but  there  was  a  belief  among  the  Besisi  that 
no  acid  fruit  should  be  eaten  with  the  flesh  of  animals 
killed  by  these  darts,  as  they  believed  this  would 
bring  out  the  full  effects  of  the  poison  in  the  eater. 

In  addition  to  the  above  must  be  noticed  the 
belief,  which  was  related  to  me  by  the  Besisi,  to  the 
effect  that  even  the  branch  struck  by  a  poisonous  dart 
dies,  not  immediately,  but  slowly  and  surely.1 

The  Quiver. 

The  Besisi  quiver  (like  that  of  the  Sakai)  was 
carried  on  the  left  hip,  and  fastened  about  the 
waist  with  a  cord  of  twisted  tree-bark,  secured  by 
a  buckle  of  bone  or  tortoiseshell. 

The  interior  of  the  quiver  is  fitted  with  a  rolled- 
up  bundle  of  small  tubes  or  reeds  made  of  young 
bamboo  twigs,  about  as  big  as  an  ordinary  lead- 
pencil.  These  reeds  are  united  by  lashings  inside 
the  body  of  the  quiver,  each  reed  holding  a  single 
dart,  the  butt-end  of  which  fits  closely  into  its 
own  individual  reed  at  the  upper  extremity. 

1   I  may  also  mention  that  the  Besisi,       maize  was   the   only  antidote   for  this 
like  many  other  aborigines,  asserted  that       Upas  poison. 


3M  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  paki  ii 


The  cover  or  cap  of  the  quiver,  which  was  made 
of  finely  woven  basket-work  (of  rattan),  was  fitted 
on  to  its  upper  end  or  top.1  It  consisted  of  three 
triangular  sections  of  basket-work,  the  edges  of 
which  overlapped,  and  were  so  brought  together  as  to 
make  a  kind  of  peaked  lid.  Inside  this  cap  was  kept 
a  supply  of  the  usual  palm-down  (or  tinder),*2  the  in- 
teriorly projecting  edges  of  the  cap-sections  being 
left  free  to  hold  this  down  or  fluff  in  its  place.3  An 
additional  supply,  together  with  the  complete  apparatus 
required  for  poisoning  fresh  darts  when  the  supply 
runs  short,  is  sometimes  pushed  down  into  the  centre 
of  the  spiral  formed  by  the  rolled-up  reed-bundle. 
It  was  also  the  rule  among  the  Besisi  to  carry  in  the 
quiver  a  little  beeswax  for  polishing  the  points  of 
their  darts,  so  as  to  prevent  them  from  adhering  to 
the  sides  of  the  reeds.  To  effect  this  polishing  they 
wax  a  rectangular  panel  on  the  front  of  the  quiver, 
after  scraping  off  the  surface  of  the  cuticle,  and  work 
up  the  points  of  their  darts  by  rolling  them  upon  it. 

The  quiver  is  called  "  lok  "  in  Besisi  (  =  "  telak  " 
elsewhere),  and  its  cover  (Mai.  "  tudong ")  was 
called  "  tebong  lok."  Inside  this  cover,  which  was 
hollowed  out  of  a  soft  wood  resembling  "pulai,"  was 
carried  the  tinder  or  palm-fluff  (the  "  rabok  tukas " 
of  the  Malays  =  Bes.  "  barok  "),  which  was  used,  as 
has  been  said,  as  a  sort  of  wadding  for  preventing 
windage  in  shooting  with  the  blowpipe. 

In  addition  to  this  tinder,  two  or  three  leaves  of  a 
creeper  called  the  "  Bringer-down  of  squirrels"4 
("akar  penurun  tupei  "),  or  of  another  creeper  called 

1  Cp.  V.-St.  ii.  121.  4  ?="  Penurun  lotong "  ("Bringer- 

2  Seep.  260,  ante,  n.  1.  down  of  monkeys  "),  Galearia  subulata, 

3  In  the  wooden  cap  a  slight  bamboo  Muell.      It    is   called   by   the   Blandas 
bar  takes  their  place.  "  salerik  tupei." 


- 


-J -a 


JS     "         '       - 


r    (I    R 

*  *5  3 


-a 


g    JS 


■  til 

.c    ~    „    -J 

-.     r     -     >~ 


2  .'-  T> 


-    -  .2 


-  -:  -. 

1  -  o 

=  8  < 

2  S 


—  V    :        _ 


\ 


—    o 
/  "3 


r 

r 

at 

X 

r 

£ 

3 

z 

< 

«- 

"~ ' 

— 

u 

,J 

— 

— 

2 

• 

:; 

~ 

— 

_ 

Q 

U      jj 


ix 


5 

"ill 

i 

MWIII 

mm*m                                   ""*"*"    " 

<•_ 

zested 

bHBH 

»               » 

P| 

|      -<""— iiiniM 

&A 

Skeat  Co,  i 

)rying-Rack  for   Blowpipe  Darts  employed  by  the  Besisi. 


Skccit  Collection. 


Besisi  Apparatus  for  brewing  Dart-Poison. 


i.    Pestle  for  pounding  "ipoh."     2.   Cloth  strainer.     3,4,  5.    Receptacles  for  the  poison. 
6.   Poison-holder  or  tuhe  fur  carrying  "ipoh." 


Brit.  Mux. 


Kuantan  Darts  with  Poison  Spatula. 

Presented  by  Mr.  Douglas  to  the  British  Museum.     (See  p.  326.) 


Vol.  I.  p.  315. 


chap,  vi  VA         MALA  )      01    MAI 


Makar  samQg&V'  are  carried  by  way  oi  a  charm  Ibf 
success  in  hunting,  like  the  "siyap"  ol  the  Dayaks. 
fhe  reeds  (ol  the  reed-bundle  in  the  quiver)  are 

railed  "plet." 

The   />7o;< '/>//>(■. 

Mantra.  The  weapons  of  the  Mantra  are  the 
blowpipe,  spear,  the  Malay  dagger  or  "kris,"  and 
a  kind  of  (Malay)  sword  called  "  ch£nangkas." 

There    is   no   important   difference    between    the 

Mantra  methods  of  manufacturing  the  blowpipe, 
ami  those  practised  by  the  Besisi.  A  few  words 
with  regard  to  the  polishing  and  other  processes 
may,  however,  here  be  added.  The  polishing  of  the 
interior  of  the  blowpipe-tube  is  begun  by  means  of 
bamboo  shavings  fixed  to  the  end  of  a  cleaning-rod." 

The  process  is  then  repeated  a  second  time  with 
"  polishing-  leaves  "  (of  "akar  simplas  "),  and  again 
a  third  time  with  a  small  strip  of  bark-cloth,  which 
is  used  merely  to  give  it  a  "  finish."  8 

The  two  portions  of  the  blowTpipe-tube  are  then 
spliced  in  the  usual  way  (as  among  the  Besisi).  The 
only    difference    lies    in    the    nomenclature    used    by 

1  J.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  330*.  die,  but  they  are  generally  lost  to  the 

23  Vaughan-Stevens,   ii.   114.      For  sportsman,    as    they    are    able    to    run 

the  Mantra  blowpipe,  see  Barbe  :    "To  (after  having  been  wounded)  to  a  great 

procure  (their  food)  they  use  the  sumpi-  distance.      These  savages  seldom  miss 

tan,  which  is  a  bamboo  from  6  to  S  feet  their    aim.       I   have    seen    them    thus 

long  ;  the  arrows  are  slips  of  bamboo  shoot  with  their  arrows  monkeys  seated 

10  inches  long,   with  a   piece  of  light  on  trees  of  70  or  So  feet  high,  when 

wood   at    the   bottom,    shaped    to    the  the  wounded  animal,  after  jumping  on 

bore   of  the   tube,   which   they   propel  some    other    branches,    and    throwing 

by  blowing  hard.       The   point  of  the  away  what  he  was  eating,  immediately 

arrow  being  anointed  with  a  prepared  after    fell    down,    if    the    '  ipoh '    had 

poison  called   'ipoh,'  communicates  it  been  well  prepared"'  (Rev.  M.  Barbe, 

to  the  blood,   and   after   two  or  three  in   the   Bengal   Cathclic  Herald,    12th 

minutes    the  animal   vomits    and    falls  June   1850;   quoted  in  J.I. A.   vol.   v. 

dead.      Should  the  arrow  penetrate  the  pp.  487,  4S8).      Cp.  also  Borie.  ante. 
skin   of  large   animals,   many  of  them 


3 1 6  WE  A  PONS  A  ND  IMPLEMENTS  part  i  i 

the  Mantra,  who  call  the  longer  portion  of  the  inner 
tube  "sulu"  ("sooloo"),  and  the  shorter  one  "tongkat," 
the  outer  shaft  or  case  being  called  "tagu"  ("targoo"). 
As  among  the  Besisi,  the  connecting-piece  or  "jacket" 
(of  "  rappen  "  bamboo)  is  called  "  chemat."  ' 

The  hollow  in  the  mouthpiece  of  this  blowpipe, 
which  is  made  of  "jelotong"  wood,  is  bored  with 
11  a  wooden  awl  " — "jelotong  "  being  a  very  soft  wood, 
which  lends  itself  readily  to  this  treatment.2 

The  knots  of  the  outer  shaft  are  pierced  in  the 
ordinary  way,  and  the  hole  enlarged  as  usual  with 
the  prickly  leaf-  whips  or  "  onak "  of  the  "  Rotan 
tunggal."  Next  the  leaves  of  the  "  Rotan  riong  "  (?) 
are  substituted  and  the  process  continued,  until  the 
enlarging  process  is  complete,  when  the  interior  is 
polished  in  the  usual  way  (as  among  the  Besisi). 
The  bamboos  are  often  dried  and  kept  for  a  con- 
siderable time  before  they  are  made  into  a  blowpipe.3 

The  external  cuticle  is  next  scraped  or  shaved  off 
at  the  muzzle- end  for  a  distance  of  a  short  span 
(measured  from  the  tip  of  the  thumb  to  the  tip  of  the 
forefinger)  to  enable  the  resin  to  adhere  more  securely. 
This  portion  of  the  tube  is  then  split  into  the  desired 
number  of  subdivisions,  one  of  which  is  again  split  to 
take  the  end  of  a  "rattan"  lashing,  which  is  pushed 
home.  A  small  hole  is  made  at  the  upper  end  of 
one  of  the  splits,  and  the  end  (of  the  lashing)  pushed 
through  it  and  fastened  off  there.4 

A  quantity  of  resin  is  then  melted  and  coloured 
with  black  from  the  cooking-pots,  and  poured  round  the 
whole  of  the  split  part.      Before  the  binding  process 


1  Vaughan  -  Stevens,  ii.  114  seqq.  of  it ;  the  sheath  from  tip  of  index-finger 
The  "sulu"  measures  the  maker's  to  the  opposite  thumb.  Both  tube  and 
"full  arm-stretch,"  the  "  tongkat  "  half       case  are  of  "temiang"  bamboo.    234.#. 


<    II  M\     VI 


//     |  U    1  J'-.'   OF  MAI    I'  I  ./ 


has  been  completed,  howe>  ei ,  a    imall  (tubular)  pi< 
of  another  kind  ol  woody  bamboo  c  pagai  ")  ol  small 
calibre  is  inserted  into  the  aperture  ol  the  muzzle.    I  his 
rves  as  an  internal  block  c  tunglork  engl&k") 

for  supporting  and  protecting  this  portion  ol  the  tube, 
and  for  keeping  the  splits  in  their  proper  (relative)  p< 
tion.    It  forms  part  of  the  case,  not  of  the  inner  tub 

The  longer  portion  ol  the  blowpipe-tube  is  fitted 
to  this  block,  and  a  ring  of  coconut-shell  called 
''lfcngait"  ("linghite")  is  imbedded  in  the  resin  it 
the  muzzle-end,  which  is  heated  to  receive  it." 

This  "  muzzle-block  "  produces  an  especially  sharp 

note  as  the  dart  passes  out  at  the  muzzle.  It  is 
difficult  to  describe  this  note,  which,  however,  is  much 
less  audible  than  the  note  produced  when  no  muzzle- 
block  is  used,  and  Vaughan-Stevens  supposes  it  to  be 
the  result  of  an  effort  to  weaken  the  note  and  make  it 
less  audible  to  the  quarry.3 

The  outer  cuticle  of  the  case  is  also  scraped  or 
shaved  off  in  several  places,  part  being  polished  and 
rubbed  with  bees-wax,  which  latter  substance  is  also 
used  for  rubbing  that  part  of  the  case  which  is  neither 
shaved  nor  polished.4 

The  Dart. 

The  darts  are  of  the  thick  outer  rind  of  the 
"kredok"  palm,  the  butts  of  the  soft  inner  wood  of 


1  V. -St.  ii.  1 19.  See  the  Besisi  blow- 
pipe, p.  308,  supra.  The  description  in 
the  original  (p.  119)  is  very  involved 
and  muddled,  owing  to  a  confusion  of  the 
muzzle-end  and  the  mouthpiece.  The 
diagrams,  too,  in  the  original  passage, 
have  evidently  got  mixed.  The  descrip- 
tion of  the"  sunglork  "(probably  "seng- 
lak")  as  being  placed  in  position  "where 


the  curve  of  the  mouthpiece  begins  " 
should  be  corrected  to  "at  the  extremity 
of  the  muzzle-end,"  where  the  "  sung- 
lork  "  is  invariably  placed,  and  indeed 
if  it  were  not  so  how  could  the  darts 
pass  out  of  the  blowpipe  ?  The  muzzle- 
end,  too,  has  no  curve  as  the  mouth- 
piece has.  These  errors  have  been  cor- 
rected in  the  present  text,  2  3  4  lb. 


/ 


318  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  II 

11  habong,"  or  of  "  tarentong."  '  The  butt-end  is  fixed 
on  with  resin,  and  the  shaft  of  the  dart  is  rubbed  with 
beeswax ;  warped  darts  are  straightened  over  the 
fire  by  hand,  and  marks  are  only  added  to  the  butt- 
end  when  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  two  strengths 
of  poison  in  one  quiver  ;  in  which  case  it  is  (as  might 
be  expected)  the  darts  tipped  with  the  stronger  poison 
that  receive  the  marks.2  Various  standards  of  measure- 
ment3 for  the  darts  are  given,  a  dart  of  the  longest 
standard  being  always  used  first  at  the  trial  of  a  blow- 
pipe, and  then  the  next  and  the  next  longest,  until 
the  one  which  appears  most  suitable  is  selected.4 

The  Poison. 

Vaughan-Stevens'  account 5  of  the  Mantra  poison 
appears  to  be  a  jumble  of  several  receipts,  but  is 
given  here  as  the  details  may  be  worth  verifying. 

To  make  a  spoonful  of  poison  fiv&  strips  of  "kroie"6 
bark  are  pounded  with  a  pestle  ("  pomonong,"  sic)  in 
an  iron  pot  which  has  first  been  prepared  by  waxing. 
Water  is  added,  and  the  liquor  boiled  about  ten  minutes. 
The  pot  is  then  taken  off  the  fire  and  deposited  on  a 
stand  consisting  of  a  wooden  fork  which  has  a  cross- 
piece,  intended  to  hold  the  pot,  fastened  across  the 
bifurcated  portion.  The  fork-ends  rest  on  the  ground, 
and  the  upper  end  or  shaft  is  supported  at  a  sharp 
angle  of  about  45  degrees.     The  pot  is  then  tipped  up 

1  Or  of  bamboo,  see  p.  315,  n.  1,  "[arm] -bone,"  from  elbow  to  wrist. 
supra.  '*  Habong  "  is  unidentified  ;  Length  of  the  butt-end  :  shortest  little 
"  kredok"  is  Cyrtostachis  lecca;  "  taren-  finger-joint  ;  thumb  or  thumb-nail  (?)  ; 
tong  "  is  Campnosperma  auriculaia.  thumb-joint ;  breadth  of  forefinger,  or 
See  p.  331,  1.  2.  "  tampong  k'ladi  "   (yam-calix),   about 

2  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.   123.  half  of  the  first-mentioned. 

3  E.g.    "  ukor  susu,"  i.e.   breast  to  4  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.  124. 
breast,  or  elbow   to  nearest  breast  (of  '°  Ibid.  p.  125  seqq. 

the    maker);    and   "  satu  tulang,"    an  6  Lophopetahun  pallidum. — Ridley. 


c  map.  m  |l  AGl   MAI  AYS  0/  MALAi  <  A 

till  the  liquor  Is  <  lose  to  the  brim,  and  one  end  ol  .1 
roll  of  bamboo  shavings  (about    1  inches  loi  in 

serted  in  the  liquor,  the  other  end  being  placed  ii 
special  receptacle  made  oi  bark,  so  as  to  draw  ofl  the 
poison  l>y  suction.      I  he  liquor  thus  drawn  ofl  is  put 
hark  into  the  pot  and  root  shavings  of  the  "umpas 

padi,"  "  koopur, prachek,"  :  "  mundess,"  "  chantong 

badak,"  and  "gadong  "    are  added.     The  pot  is  then 

boiled  for  about  ten  minutes  more,  when  it  is  again 
set  on  the  stand  and  skimmed    with   a   kind    of  woolly 

leaf — that  of  a  plant  called  "  chapa-neng."  4  The 
hark   receptacle   (covered   with   a   species  of   sieve- 

shaped  filter)  is  now  set  on  the  ground  (underneath 
the  forked  stand  on  which  the  pot  is  resting).  A 
funnel  is  made  of  the  woolly  leaves  referred  to,  and 
the  liquor  drawn  off  into  the  funnel  by  the  suction  of 
the  bamboo  shavings  (already  described),  a  few  fine 
punctures  being  made  in  the  bottom  of  the  funnel  to 
facilitate  the  process.5 

The  pot  is  then  rinsed,  the  liquor  put  back,  and 
the  "ipoh"6  and  "tuba"7  added  (the  latter  being 
first,  however,  pounded  and  mixed  in  the  bark  re- 
ceptacle with  a  little  liquor  from  the  pot).s 

The  bark  receptacle  is  then  rinsed  and  the  rinsings 
added  to  the  pot,  together  with  a  pod  of  chillies 
("  Spanish  pepper").9 

After  ten  minutes'  boiling  the  pot  is  again  removed 
and  set  down  on  the  stand,  and  the  process  of  filtra- 
tion repeated  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as  before. 

1  I.e.    "kupor"    ("akar").      Prob.  •">   V.-St  ii.   125. 

Kubas  tnoluccanns,  L.,  the  common  wild  6  Antiaris  toxixaria  (Upas  tree)  or 

raspberry.    For  identifications,  v.  App.  Strychnos  tieute  (Upas  creeper). 

2  Or  "perachet"  =  1 "abertutmontana  7  Derris elliptica,  Benth.  8  V.-St.  I.e. 
malaccetisis,  Hook.  fil.  9  This  is  to  keep  evil   spirits   from 

3  Dioscorea  damonum,  Roxb.  entering  the  poison  and  destroying  its 

4  CUrodendronvelutinum. — Ridley.  power  (Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.   128). 


32o  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  ii 

The  pot  is  once  more  rinsed  and  dried  on  the  fire, 
the  liquor  (in  the  bark  receptacle)  put  back  into  the 
pot,  the  fire  reduced,  and  the  pot  slowly  boiled  till 
a  mere  spoonful  of  gold -brown  syrup  is  all  that 
remains.1 

When  properly  made,  as  described,  the  liquor  can 
(by  dipping  a  spatula  into  it)  be  drawn  out  into  long 
thin  elastic  strings  about  an  inch  in  length,  though 
this  only  happens  when  a  sufficient  quantity  of 
"  tuba  "  is  used.2 

When  the  poison  has  been  transferred  (by  means  of 
the  spatula)  into  the  bamboo  poison-tube  or  poison- 
carrier,3  fresh  poison  obtained  from  snakes,  centipedes, 
and  scorpions  may  be  added  to  it.  A  lemon-  (or  lime  ?) 
pip  is  spitted  upon  the  point  of  a  dart  and  burnt,  the 
charred  pip  being  mixed  with  a  lump  of  arsenic  "  as 
big  as  the  head  of  a  match,"  and  stirred  round  in  the 
poison-tube.4 

Three  drops  of  the  sap  of  "  Rotan  kemanting  " 
may  be  added,  but  this  appears  to  be  an  innova- 
tion. The  Mantra  poison  is  very  sticky,  and  seldom 
dries  properly  unless  "  ipoh  "  is  mixed  with  it.5 

Antidotes. 

In  speaking  of  antidotes,  it  is  interesting  to  note 
Logan's  remark  to  the  effect  that  the  Mantra  were 
in  the  habit  of  saying  that  they  found  resistance  to 
the  Menangkabau  Malays  in  vain,  because  the  latter 
were  armed  with  muskets,  and  had  learned  the  use 
of    antidotes    to    their    "ipoh"    poison,    so    that    the 

1  V.-St.  ii.  127.          2  V.-St.  {ibid.)  called  "  tahi  m'ret "   ["  tahi  meret"  = 

adds  that  when  a  ring  of  lighter  colour  "ants'  dung"  in  the  Jakun  dialect], 

is  seen  at  the  edges  of  the  "ipoh  "during  3  In  original,  "into  the  tube  of  the 

the  boiling,  it  is  believed  to  be  a  sign  quiver"  (sic). 

of   strength    (of    the    poison),    and    is  4  5  V.-St.  /.  c. 


CHAP,    vi 


I  VAGI    MAI  A  YS  OF    MAI  A(  I 


slender  darts  <>f  the  blowpipe  influ  ted  but  little  inji 
upon  them.1 

The  Quiver* 

Their  quiver,  which  isol  "  tSlang  M  bamboo,  is  dried 

at  leisure  when  not  required  for  immediate  use.    ( )ften, 

however,  it  is  merely   tilled   with    hot    ashes   and    dried 

in  the  sun  lor  two  to  three  days  to  expedite  matter 
The  cap   is  manufactured   from  a  small  block  of 

soft  wood  (that  of  the  "  j£lotong  "  tree).  Alter  it  has 
been  roughly  shaped,  a  small  depression  is  made  at 
one  end,  in  which  red-hot  embers  are  laid.  When  it 
has  been  charred  sufficiently  deep  the  hole  is  cleared 
out  and  shaped  with  a  knife,  and  fresh  embers  put  in 
to  complete  the  burning-out  process.  The  outside  is 
shaped  with  a  knife  as  required.^ 

The  Mantra  quiver  alone  has  a  broad  band  woven 
according  to  what  is  called  the  "  bat's-wing  "  pattern, 
near  the  top,  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  rings  or 
lashings.4  The  girdle  is  of  "  t'rap  "  bark,  with  a  knot 
as  buckle. 


1  /.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  273. 
-  Vaughan- Stevens  (ii.  120)  gives 
several  words  for  this  process,  as  used 
by  various  tribes,  but  with  one  prob- 
able exception  they  are  all  bad  Malay 
meaning  "  quick  "  or  "  rapid." 

They  are — 
"chtipat"  (used     by    Sakai)  =  Malay 

"  chepat "  : 
"banghat  "  "J  (used       by  f  "bangat" 
and  V    Kenaboi)     <         and 

"dras"  J  =  Malay  ("dras": 
<;ertjoos"  (used  by  Besisi),  which  is 
merely  a  corrupt  form  of  the  common 
Besisi  word  "jo -joss"  (which  un- 
doubtedly stands  for  "jos-joss"  = 
"  quick-quick  "). 

3  The  description  here  (Vaughan- 
Stevens,  ii.  123)  is  very  obscure  and 
confused.  The  key  to  the  employment 
of  this  process  is  the  use  of  "  jelotong  " 

VOL.   I 


wood,  the  soft  central  portion  of  which 
has  necessarily  to  be  burnt  out  to  pre- 
vent it  from  decaying,  the  hole  being 
then  plugged  with  wax  to  make  the 
cap  water-proof. 

4  This  same  (bat's-wing)  pattern  as 
seen  (in  the  same  position)  on  the 
quiver  of  the  O.  Kuantan  may  per- 
haps be  a  reminiscence  of  the  time 
when  a  woven  band,  similar  to  that 
of  the  Mantra,  occupied  its  place. 
This  woven  band  (of  the  Mantra 
quiver)  encircles  externally  that  part  of 
the  quiver  in  which  is  kept  the  "so- 
called  pintal  tukas." 

[.SzVVaughan-Stevens,  ii.  122.  But 
here  there  seems  to  be  a  considerable 
muddle,  as  on  the  same  page  "  pintal  " 
is  explained  as  the  name  of  the  girdle, 
and  "pintal  tukas"  as  the  name  of  the 
flocculent  wad  which  goes  behind  the 


322  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  n 

The  Mantra,  like  the  Besisi,  make  a  rectangular 
patch  or  panel  ill  front  of  the  quiver  by  scraping  off 
the  surface  of  the  cuticle  and  waxing  it.  It  is  on  this 
patch  that  they  work  up  (by  rolling)  the  points  of 
their  darts.  Vaughan-Stevens  states  that  the  effect 
of  wax  is  also  occasionally  obtained  by  their  rubbing 
the  nose  upon  it,  the  required  effect  being  produced 
by  the  natural  moisture  of  the  skin.  Grotesque  as  this 
statement  sounds,  it  may  yet  have  some  truth  in  it. 
I  myself  have  more  than  once  seen  the  Besisi  rub 
the  nose  upon  the  panels  of  their  quivers,  though  I  have 
never  seen  or  heard  of  the  remainder  of  the  operation 
here  described,  and  at  the  most,  all  that  can  be  safely 
said  against  it  is  that  Vaughan-Stevens'  account  re- 
quires further  corroboration.1 

The  Mantra,  like  most  of  the  other  tribes,  carry 
a  small  stock  of  resin  at  (or  near)  the  bottom  of  the 
quiver,  this  being  chiefly  intended  for  fixing  on  the 
butt-ends  of  the  darts  should  they  work  loose  at  any 
time.     The  interior  is  fitted  with  the  usual  reeds.2 

butt-end    (P/rop/en)    of   the  dart,   and  Stevens'  wretched  orthography  its  cor- 

which  is  the  material  really  referred  to  ruption  into  such  a  form  as  "linghur" 

in  the  last  sentence.    For  "pintal  tukas,"  would  be  more  than  probable.    I  myself 

therefore,  in  this  passage  read  "  tukas  "  have  frequently  seen  these  same  patches 

or    "  rabok    tukas,"    i.e.    fluff   of    the  on  the  quivers  of  the  Besisi. 
tukas-palm  (and  passim  when  this  fluff  is  2  See  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.  105, 106  ; 

referred   to),   but   keep    "  pintal,"  i.e.  122.    Vaughan-Stevens  says  this  resin  is 

plait  or  plaiting,  for  the  girdle.  "Tukas"  obtained    from    a    tree    which    he   has 

has    nothing    whatever     to    do     with  been  unable  to  identify,  but  which  is 

"  tikus,"    as    suggested    by    Vaughan-  called    "  keeji "   {sic).      According    to 

Stevens  (note  to  V. -St.  ii.  121).]  Blagden,    "  kijai  "  is  (properly  speak- 

1  Vaughan-Stevens,     ii.     121 -122.  ing)     the    resin     obtained     from     the 

This  rectangular  patch  was  only  seen  "kedondang"    tree,    and     there    can 

by  Vaughan-Stevens  among  the  Mantra,  be   little   doubt  that   this   is   its    right 

who     use,     he     says,     a     very    sticky  meaning  here.      He  adds  that  it  was 

poison   which    seldom    properly   dries.  formerly  used  for  fixing  on  the  rattan 

The  Mantra,  he  says,  call  it  "linghur,"  rings  which  encircle  the  body  of  the 

which  Vaughan-Stevens' editor  suggests  quiver,    but    that    now    "the    Malay 

may  =  Mai.    "lingga."      The   nearest  cement,"  prepared  " from  buffalo-milk 

word    that     I    can    find,    however,    is  and  chalk,"  is  substituted.    I  am  unable 

Malayo-Javanese   "  lenga"  =  oil.      The  to   corroborate  this,    and  it  should  be 

sense    is    right,    and    with    Vaughan-  quite  unnecessary,  as  the  wedging,  to 


<  hap.  vi  .    \G£   -J/-//  4 }      01    PAHANG  wi 


Blowpipe  and  Quiver    first  fv/><. 

Pahang  Jakun  (Kuantan).  ( )t  the  blowpipes  used 
by  the  ( ).  Kuantan  there  appear  to  be  at  leasi  two 
types,  one  of  which  is  the  roughest  form  of  blowpipe 
made,  and  the  other  resembles  that  of  the  aboriginal 
Malayans.  The  former  is  described  as  being  made 
from  long  internodes  oi  the  " s£m£liang "  ("semi- 
liang")  bamboo,  whose  internodes  arc  much  shorter 
than  those  of  the  Bambusa  Wrayi ("  buluh  t&miang  "). 
The  internal  tube,  therefore,  is  mad'-  in  two  lengths, 
which  are  joined  by  means  of  an  outer  tube  or  sheath 
which  is  manufactured  from  the  midrib  of  the  leaf  of 
the  "  langkap  "  palm,  and  drawn  over  them.1 

When  the  two  abutting  ends  have  been  fitted 
together,  a  piece  of  rag  (formerly,  it  is  said,  it  was  a 
ligature  of  plant-fibre)  is  smeared  with  heated  resin 
and  wrapped  first  round  the  end,  the  wrapping  being 
coated  over  with  a  thin  layer  of  gutta-percha,  which  is 
melted  by  turning  it  round  a  firebrand.  The  mouth- 
piece is  also  made  of  {sic,  ?  covered  with)  gutta-percha 
instead  of  the  more  usual  material,  wood.- 

These  blowpipes  are  the  least  effective  of  all 
those  known  in  the  Peninsula,  and  cannot  propel  a 
dart  above  forty  paces.  They  are  little  used,  and  are, 
according  to  Vaughan-Stevens,  hidden  inside  the 
stems  of  living  bamboos,  the  nodes  of  which  have 
been  knocked  out.  Vaughan-Stevens  was  only  able 
to  obtain  four.3 

The  bamboo  internode  from  which  the  quiver  of 

which  V. -St.  himself  makes  reference,  is  ployed  by  the  O.  Kuantan  is   "  damar 

a  much  simpler  method  of  tightening  tooyoom  "  (Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.    113). 

these  rings.  x  Cp.  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.  112. 

One  of  the  kinds  of  resin  thus  em-  2  Ibid.                      3  Ibid. 


324  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  PAM  n 


the  O.  Kuan  tan  is  manufactured  is  not  slowly  dried 
like  that  of  the  Benua-Jakun,  and  hence  the  rings 
round  it  work  loose  and  require  to  be  tightened  by 
wedges.  The  cap  is  made  by  the  women  of  woven 
(and  untrimmed)  pandanus-leaf  {P.  furcatus).  The 
waist-cord,  which  is  made  of  "  akar  clow  "  (?  "  dauk  ") 
has  no  buckle,  but  a  knot  at  the  cord-end,  and  its 
decoration  is  peculiar  to  itself.  The  interior  of  the 
quiver  is  only  fitted  with  a  small  reed-bundle,  room 
being  left,  whenever  it  is  used,  for  the  insertion  of 
the  bamboo  poison-holder.  At  the  bottom  of  the 
quiver  a  little  resin  ("tuyum")  is  kept  (as  among 
the  Mantra)  and  used  for  making  fast  the  butt-ends 
of  the  darts.  The  arrows,  which  are  made  of  the 
leaf-stem  of  the  "  langkap  '  palm,  are  very  roughly 
made,  and  are  frequently  used,  without  poison,  for 
killing  small  birds,  and  only  rarely  for  killing  apes, 
when  poison  is  obtainable.  Their  length  is  "  from 
elbow  to  wrist,"  but  they  are  often  shorter.1 

Not  more  than  one  out  of  every  five  or  six  of  the 
O.  Kuantan  possesses  poison  at  all,  and  that  which  he 
has  is  frequently  compounded  out  of  ingredients  which 
are  quite  harmless.2 


Blowpipe  and  Quiver — second  type. 

The  second  type  of  blowpipe  used  by  the  Orang 
Kuantan  appears  to  be  peculiar  to  the  Jakun  or 
savage  Malayan  race.  A  specimen  of  this  rare  and 
interesting  blowpipe,  which  has  been  presented  to 
the  Ethnological  Department  of  the  British  Museum 
by  a  member  of  the  Malay  States  Service,  was  de- 

1  Cp.    Vaughan  -  Stevens,    ii.     1 13.       end  is  said  to  be  the  combined  breadth 
The  breadth  (sic,  ?  length)  of  the  butt-       of  the  first  two  fingers.  -  Ibid. 


(  MM-,  vi  WAGE   MALA  KS  <>/■  PAHANC 


scribed  in  Man ,'  whence  the  following  description  by  the 
present  author  has,with  slight  alteration, been  drawn : — 

Mr.  F,  \\ .  Douglas,  of  the  Malay  States  Servi< 
obtained  this  blowpipe  on  the  east  i  oa  it  ol  the  Malay 
Peninsula  in  the  Kuantan  district  of  Pahang,  during 
October  1897,  from  a  man  belonging  to  one  ol  the 
jungle-tribes  dwelling  on  the  borders  oi  Pahang  and 
Kemaman.     Its  measurements  arc  as  follows:  — 

Total  length  (over-all)  ...  5  ft.  2  in.  (157  cm.) 
Interior  diameter  at  mouthpiece  ,v,  in.  (10.9  mm.) 
Interior  diameter  at  muzzle-end  |  in.  (9.37  mm.) 

Hence  the  bore  of  the  tube  at  the  muzzle-end  is 
a  fraction  less  than  it  is  at  the  mouthpiece,  so  that  we 
have  here  an  instance  of  a  wooden  blowpipe  imitating 
the  natural  proportions  that  obtain  in  the  original 
bamboo  blowpipe,  from  which  it  was  copied  ;  for  in 
the  bamboo  blowpipe  it  is  always  the  root-aid  which 
is  placed  nearest  the  mouth,  so  that  the  bore  at  the 
muzzle -end  is  generally  a  fraction  less  than  at  the 
mouthpiece  ;  in  other  words,  this  blowpipe,  like  its 
bamboo  original,  has  a  slight  "  choke"  in  the  bore.2 

The  illustrations  here  given  are  full-size.  They 
show  the  muzzle -end  and  the  mouthpiece  in  two 
positions,  the  mouthpiece  having  been  chipped  in 
transit.  I  had  it  photographed  to  show  the  binding 
before  it  was  mended/' 

This  particular  blowpipe  is  made  of  some  very 
hard  wood,  probably  of  "  penaga "  (Calopkyllum). 
The  cylinder  is  carefully  split  down  the  middle  and 
the  two  halves  grooved  on  the  inner  side  throughout 
their  entire  length,  so  that  when  fitted  together  again 
they   form  a  perfect  tube.      This   tube,  which   forms 

1   Skeat  in  Man,  No.   10S  of  1902.  2  lb.  3  ft 


326  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  ii 

the  blowpipe,  is  bound  round  from  end  to  end  with  a 
long  thin  strip  of  some  kind  of  cane  (Calamus),  over 
which  is  deposited  a  thick  incrustation  of  a  gutta-like 
substance,  the  object  of  which  is  evidently  to  protect  the 
bands  and  prevent  them  from  being  loosened,  as  well 
as  to  hermetically  close  any  cracks  that  might  otherwise 
permit  the  passage  of  air.  The  thickness  of  this  deposit 
is  increased  to  about  ^  in.  (1.2  cm.)  at  the  mouthpiece.1 

In  Vaughan  -  Stevens  (ed.  Grunwedel)'2  a  ver) 
similar  blowpipe  (collected  among  the  "  Benua  "  or 
Jakun  of  East  Johor)  is  described.  It  is  not  abso- 
lutely identical  with  Mr.  Douglas's  specimen,  since 
it  is  longer  (by  about  nine  inches),  and  its  two  half- 
cylinders  of  "  penaga  "  wood  are  protected  by  a  bam- 
boo casing.  Mr.  Douglas's  specimen,  on  the  other 
hand,  corresponds  with  remarkable  fidelity  to  a  Per- 
uvian blowpipe,  described  in  the  second  volume  of 
Reiss  und  Stuebel's  Kultur  und  Industrie  siidameri- 
kanischer  Vblker.  This  Peruvian  specimen  came 
from  the  Huallaya  river,  and  was  described  as  con- 
sisting of  "the  two  halves  of  a  palm-stem  carefully- 
grooved  and  fitted  together  and  bound  round  with 
cipo,  which  was  covered  besides  with  a  layer  of  black 
wax.      It  was  fitted  with  a  short  bone  mouthpiece." 

The  quiver  belonging  to  the  blowpipe  (also  pre- 
sented by  Mr.  Douglas  to  the  museum)  similarly- 
presented  some  new  and  interesting  features  : — 4 

The  body  of  the  quiver  is  made  from  a  bamboo 
internode  measuring  \\\  in.  (29  cm.)  in  length,  and  of 
great  diameter  (4  in.  =  10  cm.).      It  is  covered  with  a 

1  Skeat,  he.  cit.  Kuantan,  but  he  cannot  say  for  certain 

2  Vaughan  -  Stevens,    ii.     102.      Mr.        whether  it  is  indigenous,  or  introduced 
G.  Pfenningwerth  of  Kuantan  writes  me       by  Dayaks. 

that  the  "bored"  blowpipe,  resembling  3  Skeat,  loc.  cit.    Cp.  Oti?T.  Mason, 

that  of  the  Dayaks,  is  certainly  used  in        Origin  of  Invention,  p.  208.        4  lb. 


chaf.  vi  SAVAGE  MALAYS  0/  MALACCA  v-i 

flattish  lour  peaked  cap  made  ol  woven  pandanua  leaf, 
which  is  made  fast  to  a  double  ring  ol  plaited  rattan 
or  Calamus  (which  encircles  the  body  <>i  the  quiver) 
by  means  ol  a  short  cord  of  plaited  tree-bark  (Atith 
carpus?   or   Eugeissona  tristis?\     The   usual  waist 

COrd    of   twisted    tret- -  hark    is    attached    to    the    Same 
rattan-rings.      The  exterior  of  the  quiver  is  decorated 
throughout  by  the  usual  incised  patterns  (  which  are, how 
ever,  unusually   rough   and   irregularly  executed),  and 
there  are  traces  of  resin  at  the  bottom  of  the  quiver.1 

The  interior  is  fitted  with  the  usual  rolled -up 
reed- bundle,  the  number  of  reeds  being  sixty -five. 
Of  these,  however,  only  five  contain  darts,  and  there 
is  one  loose  dart  of  which  the  butt-end  has  been  lost, 
making  six  darts  in  all.  All  of  these  darts  have 
broken  or  (as  I  think  more  probable)  blunt  points,  and 
have  very  probably  been  used  for  knocking  over  small 
birds.  Only  one  (the  loose  one)  has  traces  of  a  coat- 
ing of  poison  upon  it,  and  even  of  this  one  the  extreme 
tip  of  the  point  is  blunt  like  the  rest.2 

Of  the  darts  the  longer  ones  measure  7^  in.  (19  cm.) 
in  length,  and  the  shorter  about  j\  in.  ( 1 8  cm.), and  their 
butt-ends  are  made  of  some  very  light  pith-like  wood 
and  are  of  irregular  length,  two  being  about  1  in.  (2.5  cm.) 
long,  and  the  other  three  being  only  half  that  length. 
But  they  are  all  very  incompletely  rounded,  are  all 
cut  off  square  at  the  lower  end,  and  are  all  pretty 
much  of  the  same  diameter  throughout,  instead  of 
tapering  towards  the  shaft,  as  is  the  case  with  the 
better -made  darts  used  by  the  Sakai,  Besisi,  etc. 
Another  distinction  is  that  in  two  of  them  the  upper 
end  of  the  dart-shaft  is  driven  right  through  the  butt- 
end,  emerging  at  its  extremity  beyond  the  upper  end 

1  Skeat,  he.  cit.  -  Ibid. 


328  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  11 

of  the  butt,  a  peculiarity  which  may  be  seen  in  the 
blowpipe-darts  of  Borneo.1 

The  only  other  contents  of  the  quiver  were  two 
rolled-up  pieces  of  old  chintz  cloth,  and  a  spear-shaped 
wooden  spatula,  still  coated  with  poison.2 

In  view  of  all  the  evidence,  and  in  spite  of  slight 
differences,  I  think  there  need  be  no  hesitation  what- 
ever in  identifying  both  the  blowpipe  and  quiver  as  a 
variety  of  the  "  Benua-Jakun  "  blowpipe  and  quiver 
which  Vaughan-Stevens  obtained  in  the  eastern  part 
of  Johor,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  this  specimen  was  ob- 
tained in  Kuantan,  north  of  the  Pahang,  a  fact  which 
disagrees  with  Vaughan-Stevens'  own  statement  to 
the  effect  that  this  type  of  blowpipe  is  not  found  (in  the 
Malay  Peninsula)  north  of  the  river  in  question.  This 
particular  specimen,  at  all  events,  has  the  additional 
interest  of  more  nearly  approaching  the  blowpipe  of  Peru 
than  any  other  specimen  yet  recorded  from  this  part 
of  the  world — a  fact  which  should  be  of  special  interest 
to  the  students  of  the  problems  of  distribution.3 

The  Blowpipe. 

Benua-Jakun. — One  of  the  Kuantan  types  of  blow- 
pipe is  found  also  among  the  Benua-Jakun.  These 
tribes  use  a  peculiar  form  of  blowpipe,  the  internal  tube 
of  which  is  made  in  a  very  primitive  fashion,  of  wood, 
though  its  outer  casing  is  as  usual  of  bamboo.  Its 
length  and  calibre  vary  with  the  individual  maker.4 

It  is  exceedingly  rare  and  hard  to  obtain,  especi- 
ally as  it  takes  sixteen  days  to  make.  It  is  made 
from  the  wood  of  the  "  penaga "  tree  ("  penaghur," 
sic),  a  sapling  of  which  is  felled  and  split  through- 
out  its    entire    length.       The    two    halves    are    then 

1  Skeat,  loc.  cit.        *  Ih.        3  lb.        4  Cp.  Favre  in  Ann.  P.  F.  xxii.  304. 


niA.-.  vi  WAGE   MALA  K    0/  JOHOR 


roughly    carved    into   shape,    the    flat    parts   planed 
and   fitted    together  with   a   chopping  -  knife,   bound 

round  with  rattan  " ti<        at  intervals,  and  carefully 
rounded.     The  "u<        themselves  are  moved  <"'.i 
sionally,  according  to  necessity,  to  enable  the  work 
to  be  completed.     The  two  halves  are  "trued"  1a 
wetting  oik-  half  and  thru  pressing  the  two  together. 

Next    a   broad    l>lac:k    line    is   drawn    with    charcoal 
clown    the   centre,    and    the   groove    cut    out    with    the 

chopper,  a  quarter  of  the  circumference  at  a  time 
only,  to  prevent  warping.  The  cutting-out  process 
is  continued  until  the  cleaning-rod  ("  bingrot  ")  can 
just  pass  along  within  the  double  groove,  when  the 
two  lengths  are  again  bound  together,  at  short 
intervals,  and  made  fast  at  one  end  within  a 
movable  clamp  or  vice  ("  kahon  "),  the  object  of 
which  is  to  hold  the  two  divided  halves  of  the  tube 
firmly  together  and  at  the  same  time  to  keep  the  blow- 
pipe in  position  till  the  binding  process  is  completed." 
As  soon  as  this  process,  which  is  effected  with  a 
strip  of  cane  ("  rotan  tunggal  ")  is  over,  the  mouthpiece 
is  made.  It  is  said  that  this  was  formerly  made  of  a 
soft  wood  called  "  kelebok"  ("  libut  "),  but  it  is  now 
made  of  harder  wood.  The  orifice  was  first  bored 
out  with  a  4t  bone  awl  "  and  then  gradually  enlarged, 
after  which  the  end  of  the  tube  was  warmed  and 
rubbed  with  resin  and  the  mouthpiece  fitted  on  to  it 
and  shaped  with  the  chopper.  The  outer  case  was 
made  of  bamboo,  the  nodes  being  pushed  out  (as 
usual)  with  a  long  stick.  The  bamboo  wras  then 
heated  over  a  slow  fire  and  bent  downwards  with  a 
constant  pressure,  which  was  applied  by  means  of  a  pair 
of  wooden  pincers.     This  process  was  repeated  about 

1   Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.   102  seqq,  2  lb. 


330  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  part  ii 

a  dozen  times,  the  object  being  to  make  the  bamboo 
case  soft  and  yielding.  The  broken  edges  of  the  nodes, 
which  still  remained  inside  the  bamboo,  were  removed 
in  the  ordinary  way.  The  bottom  node,  however, 
was  left  until  the  completion  of  the  following  process.1 
The  end  of  the  blowpipe  being  pushed  into  the 
bamboo  case  as  far  as  it  will  go  without  forcing,  the 
remainder  is  then  driven  home  by  bringing  down  the 
extremities  smartly  upon  a  block  of  wood.  This  pro- 
cess is  assisted  by  the  warming,  and  the  bottom  node 
already  mentioned  is  then  cut  away.  Use  is  made 
of  the  long  cleaning-rod  ("  bingrot ")  to  give  a 
further  polish  to  the  interior  of  the  tube,  the  thin 
end  being  first  inserted,  and  then  the  thicker  end, 
with  a  piece  of  skate-skin  attached.  The  final  polish  is 
effected  by  substituting  the  leaves  of  the  "  mamp'las  " 
for  the  skate-skin,  this  part  of  the  process  alone  taking 
two  or  three  days  to  complete.  The  mouthpiece  is  then 
made  out  of  soft  wood  smoothened  and  coated  over 
with  a  layer  of  gutta-percha  to  give  it  more  durability. 
A  small  hole  is  made  in  the  centre  of  the  node  (at  the 
lower  end)  to  let  the  air  in,  and  the  shaft  is  softened  by 
steaming  and  straightened  by  eye.  When  the  node  is 
finally  excised,  a  rod  with  twisted  bamboo  shavings 
attached  to  it  is  pushed  down  inside  the  tube,  and 
worked  to  and  fro  to  clear  away  the  remains  of  the 
node.2 

The  Darts  and  the  Quiver. 

The  darts,  which  measure  from  "  breast  to  breast  " 
(of  the  maker),  are  described  as  being  manufactured 
from  the  hard  outer  cuticle  of  a  palm  called  "  kredok  " 
{Cyrtostachis   Iceca)?       Each   of  the   spaces    between 

1  V. -St.  ii.  103  seqq.  2  //;.  dttlcis)  is  also  said  to  be  used  by  the 

3  The    wood    of    tapioca    {Manihot       Benua. —  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.  106. 


«   MAI*.    \  I 


SAVAGE    MAI  A  KS  0/  JOHOR 


the  knots  furnished  on  .in   a^  i  i  ag<    fori )    arrou 
single  day's  work  for   their   maker.      These   arrows 
are  dried  lor  .1  long  time  and  kept  in  re  h  rve,  a  i  thej 
arc  seldom  used  twice.1     When  bent  or  warped,  ili< 
dart-shaft    was   straightened    by    hand    over   a   lire 
They  are  often  used  unpoisoned,  without  nick 

The  quiver  <>f  these  Benua  tribes  is  made  from 
part  of  an  internode  ol  the  large  bamboo,  which  is  cm 
when  green,   filled   with   wet    clay,  and    i         ed    to 

gentle  heat.  As  the  clay  dries,  the  bamboo  is  gradu- 
ally moved  further  from  the  fire,  the  process  often 
taking  several  weeks  to  complete,  though  when  once 
completed  it  effectually  prevents  the  bamboo  Irom 
warping.  After  the  first  heating  it  is  wrapped  in 
bark  to  protect  it  from  the  smoke  of  the  hearth-fire, 
and  thus  gradually  obtains  its  golden-yellow  colour. 
The  cap,  which  is  made  by  the  women,  is  of  woven 
"  nipah  "  or  pandanus-leaves.  The  quiver  itself  is 
fitted  with  reeds  as  usual,  and  the  waist-cord  is  of 
11  t'rap  '  bark,  with  buckle  of  wood,  bone,  tortoise- 
shell,  or  even  cash.  It  is  quite  plain  and  undecorated.4 
An  elaborate  system  of  marking  the  darts,  in 
order  to  distinguish  the  several  strengths  of  the 
poison,  was  employed  by  these  tribes,  as  follows  : — 


Marks. 

Nature  of  Quarry. 

Strength  of  Poison. 

• 

Large  birds 

Squirrels  {i.e.  small 
mammals) 

Civet  -  cats  (medium- 
sized  mammals) 

Ipoh  {Antiaris)  only. 
Ipoh  +  fish-"  stings." 

Ipoh  +  fish-"  stings  " -[-centipedes. 

•    • 

Apes  (large  mammals) 

Ipoh  +  fish-"  stings  "  +  centipedes  + 
snake-poison  {i.e.  "  full  strength  " 
of  poison). 

1  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.  106. 

2  Ibid.   p.    123.      Cp.    Favre,    Ann. 
P.  F.  xxii.  304. 


3  Ibid.  p.   107. 

4  Ibid.  pp.   104,  105. 

5  Ibid.  p.   107. 


332 


WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS 


TART  II 


Unpoisoned  arrows  (for  small  birds)  were  not 
furnished  with  any  distinguishing  mark.1 

The  amount  of  poison  2  made  at  a  time  is  sufficient 
for  a  quiver  containing  ("nominally")  ioo  arrows; 
this,  however,  no  doubt  merely  means  that  the 
poison  -  makers  of  these  tribes  make  rather  more 
poison  at  a  time  than  they  require  to  use,  since  no 
quiver  holds  anything  near  the  number  mentioned.3 


1  Vaughan- Stevens,  ii.  107. 

2  Jb.  There  is  nothing  special  to  note 
as  regards  this  poison,  for  which  see  App. 

3  The  following  account  of  the 
preparation  of  the  poison  of  the 
Benua  is  from  Newbold : — "The 
Benua  employ  three  preparations  of  the 
Ipoh  or  Upas  poison  to  tip  their  arrows 
with,  these  three  kinds  being  distin- 
guished by  the  names  '  Ipoh  krohi,' 
'  Ipoh  tennik  '  or  '  kennik,'  and 
'  Ipoh  mallaye.' 

"  The  •  krohi '  is  extracted  from  the 
root  and  bark  of  the  Ipoh  tree,  the 
roots  of  the  'tuba'  and  'kopah,'  red 
arsenic,  and  the  juice  of  limes. 
The  '  tennik '  is  made  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  'krohi,'  leaving  out  the 
'  kopah  '  root.  The  '  mallaye  '  poison, 
which  is  accounted  the  most  potent  of 
the  three,  is  prepared  from  the  roots  of 
the  'tuba,'  the  'perachi,'  the  'kopah,' 
and  the  '  chey '  ;  and  from  that  of  the 
shrub  '  mallaye '  ;  hence  its  name. 

"  The  process  of  concocting  these 
preparations  is  as  follows  : — The  roots 
are  carefully  selected  and  cut  at  a 
particular  age  of  the  moon  ;  probably 
about  the  full.  The  woody  fibre  is 
thrown  away,  and  nothing  but  the 
succulent  bark  used.  This  is  put  into 
a  *  kuali '  (a  sort  of  earthen  pipkin), 
with  as  much  soft  water  as  will  cover 
the  mass,  and  kneaded  well  together. 
This  done,  more  water  is  added,  and 
the  whole  is  submitted  to  a  slow  heat 
over  a  charcoal  fire  until  half  the  water 
has  evaporated.  The  decoction  is 
next  strained  through  a  cotton  cloth, 
and  again  submitted  to  slow  ebullition 
until  it  attains  the  consistency  of  syrup. 
Red    arsenic    ('warangan'),    which    is 


rubbed  down  in  the  juice  of  the  sour 
lime,  the  'limau  asam'  of  the  Malays, 
is  then  added,  and  the  mixture  poured 
into  small  bamboos,  which  are  care- 
fully closed  up  ready  for  use.  Some 
of  the  tribes  add  a  little  opium,  spices, 
and  saffron  ;  some,  the  juice  of  the 
lancha,  and  the  bones  of  the  sunggat- 
fish  burnt  to  ashes. 

"A  number  of  juggling  incantations 
are  performed,  and  spells  gibbered 
over  the  seething  caldron  by  the  Poy- 
angs,  by  whom  the  fancied  moment  of 
the  projection  of  the  poisonous  prin- 
ciple is  as  anxiously  watched  for  as 
that  of  the  philosopher's  stone  or  the 
elixir  vitae  by  the  alchemists  and  philo- 
sophers of  more  enlightened  races. 
When  recently  prepared  the  Ipoh 
poisons  are  all  of  a  dark  liver-brown 
colour,  of  the  consistency  of  syrup,  and 
emit  a  strongly  narcotic  odour.  The 
deleterious  principle  appears  to  be 
volatile,  as  the  efficacy  of  the  poison  is 
diminished  by  keeping  "  (Newbold,  ii. 
pp.  400,  401). 

Newbold  further  mentions — as  the 
only  antidote  of  which  the  Benuas 
could  tell  him  —  the  fresh  sap  of  a 
shrub  called  "  lemak  kepiting" 
("  Lemmah  kopiting  "  ;  lit.  =  "  crab's- 
fat  "),  rubbed  round  and  into  the 
wound,  and  afterwards  over  the  limb 
in  which  the  puncture  has  been  made. 
— Newbold,  ii.  402. 

[For  identifications,  v.  pp.  318,  319, 
ante,  and  App.  "Krohi"  stands  for 
"kroi"  in  the  Besisi  dialect,  "tennik" 
for  "  tenet,"  "mallaye"  for  "  malai  " 
(  =  "  Blay  "  of  Vaughan  -  Stevens,  ?), 
"Perachi"  for  "  perachek "  (or 
"Perachel"),    and    "chey"  for    Bes. 


ckaf.  vi      SAVAGE   MALAYS  OF  MT   BERl  MBUA 


The  Blowpipi . 

Jakun   of    Berembun.       All    the    Bcrembun    irih 
(visited   by  Logan)  used  the  blowpipe  and  poisoned 
darts.     The  former  was  a  light  and  ncai  instrument, 
and  differed  From  the  "bored'    wooden   blowpipe  ol 
the  Dayaks.     That  ol  the  Berembun  tribes  consisted 

of  two  bamboos  about  7  ft.  (2.1}  in.)  in  length,  the  one 

enclosed  within  the  other,  the  external  one  being  about 
three-fourths  of  an  inch  (19  mm.)  in  diameter,  and 
neatly  decorated  tor  about  1  ft.  (91  cm.)  in  the  centre 
and  at  each  extremity.  To  prevent  it  from  splitting, 
the  fibrous  bark  of  the  Artocarpus  was  bound  around 
6  in.  (45  cm.)  of  the  extremity  and  coated  with  resin 
("dammar").  The  internal  tube  was  of  the  same 
length  as  the  case,  but  its  "bore"  measured  only 
three-fifths  of  an  inch  (15  mm.).  It  was  composed  of 
two  pieces  of  bamboo,  united  by  a  splicing-piece  8  in. 
(20  cm.)  long,  which  embraced  both  ends  tightly  at 
the  point  of  junction.  The  bamboo  used  in  the  manu- 
facture of  this  blowpipe  ("  buluh  temiang  ")  was  very 
light  and  finely  grained.1 

The  darts  ("  damak ")  were  made  from  the  stem 
of  the  bertam-palm  leaf.  They  measured  10  in.  (25 
cm.)  in   length,  and  ^  in.  (1.5    mm.)   in  diameter  at 


"dies"  or  "cheh"(Mal.  "ipoh").  "Ko-  the  milky  sap  drawn  from  the  stem  of 

pah"  =  ? Carapa  malaccensis, but  "limou  Antiaris  thai   is    generally   employed. 

asam"  =  the  lime  (Mai.  "Limauasam").  Of  the  thin  poison  mentioned  by  New- 

Newbold  (/.<-.)  distinguishes  three  kinds  bold,  "Ipoh  malai  "  (or  "  mallaye  "), 

of   poison    in    the    Malay   Peninsula  :  which   is   the  root  of  a   West  Indian 

(1)  "Ipoh  kroi"  ("krohi"),  (2)  "  Ipoh  plant  (Thevetia  neriifolia,  Juss.,  Apocy- 

tenet"  ("tenni"),and  (3)  "Ipoh  malai"  nacea),  is  said  to  be  the  foundation. — 

("mallaye"),  of  which  the  first  two  are  See  Geiger,  p,  20.] 
founded  upon  the  root  and  bark  of  the  l  J.  1.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  272.      From  the 

Ipoh  tree.   Newbold  seems,  however,  to  foregoing  account  it  is  probable  that 

have  confused  "Ipoh  akar"  (Strychnos)  the    Berembun   blowpipe   belonged  to 

with  "Ipoh  batang"  (Antiaris),  for  it  is  the  Sakai  type. 


334  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  paw  ii 

the  base,  from  which  they  gradually  tapered  to  a  very 
fine  and  sharp  point.  The  base  was  inserted  into  a 
conical  butt-end  of  "  kayu  tutu  "  ]  (which  is  very  porous 
and  light),  the  dart  there  measuring  about  i  in.  (25  mm.) 
in  length  and  one-third  of  an  inch  (8  mm.)  in  diameter. 
The  points  of  the  dart  had  been  dipped  for  about  five- 
sixths  (21  mm.)  of  an  inch  in  Ipoh  poison.  This  latter 
is  made  by  taking  the  sap  of  the  Upas  creeper,  the 
Upas  tree  (or  "  kyas  "),~  "  tuba,"  and  limes,  which  are 
then  bruised,  boiled,  and  strained.  Arsenic  is  added, 
and  other  substances,  such  as  "pachet,"3  "  jimardes,"  4 
"  malai,"  and  "gadong,"  are  also  sometimes  added  as 
well.  The  liquid,  which  is  called  "  ipoh,"  having  been 
thus  prepared,  has  the  colour  and  consistency  of 
prepared  opium  ("chandu").  An  incision  is  made 
round  the  point  of  the  dart  just  above  the  poison  to 
ensure  its  breaking  off  and  remaining  in  the  wound. ' 

Each  dart  is  kept  (ready  for  immediate  service)  in  a 
reed  or  case  of  bamboo,  the  diameter  of  which  is  about 
one-fourth  of  an  inch  (6  mm.).  Fifty  of  these  reeds 
are  laid  side  by  side  and  united  by  strings.  They  are 
then  rolled  up  and  inserted  into  a  large  quiver,  which 
is  also  made  of  bamboo,  and  which  has  a  neat  lid  made 
from  the  wood  of  the  "jelotong."  This  quiver  con- 
tains, in  addition,  a  quantity  of  the  wadding  ("  barok  "), 
which  is  of  a  very  light,  spongy  character,  and  is 
also  used  as  tinder,  which  these  tribes  extract  from  a 
tree  called  "runut."6  When  the  dart  has  been  inserted 
into  the  blowpipe  a  little  "  barok  "  is  introduced  behind 
it.  When  the  operator  blows  into  the  blowpipe,  this 
substance  is  pressed  against  the  butt-end  of  the  dart, 

1  Sic,  ?  "  tutok  "  =  Hibiscus    macro-  4  Sic  ?     Unidentified. 
phyllus.  •'  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  272  seqq, 

2  " Kyas"  ="kayas"(' 'ipoh kayu").  G  Sic,  ?  "rengut." 

3  Sic,  ?  "perachet,"  q.v. 


i  hat.  vi  MALA  VAA    SEA-G\  PS/1 


and  effectually   prevents  windaj  In  ihooting,  the 

blowpipe  is  firmly  held  b)  both  hands,  which  are  lightly 
clasped  over  the  near  extremity  ol  the  tube,  which  in 

turn  is  firmly  inserted  into  the  mouthpiece,  which  th 

serves  as  a  species  oi  handl<  . 

//  eaflons. 

Udai.  The     Udai     use     sharpened     palm      wool 

("  nibong  ")  stakes,  hardened  with  fire  at  the  end,  as 

spears,  as  well  as  the  blowpipe  with  poisoned  dart 

Orang  Laut  ok  Sea-Jakun. 

Weapons  and  Implements. 

0.  Laut,  Sletar. — The  Sletar  tribe  of  the  Orang 
Laut  are  described  as  possessing  no  weapons,  whether 
for  offence  or  defence. 

In  the  same  passage,  however,  we  are  told  that 
they  do  employ  a  form  of  fish-spear  called  H  serkap," 
as  well  as  the  Malay  "parang"  or  chopper  (which,  of 
course,  may  on  occasion  be  used  either  as  a  defensive 
or  offensive  weapon).3 

0.  Laut,  Sabimba. — The  Sabimba  use  a  Dayak 
blowpipe,  which  is  also  armed  with  a  spear  -  head, 
bayonet  fashion.  It  is  curious,  says  Logan,  that  this 
weapon  has  been  imported  for  the  Sabimba  from  time 
immemorial,  and  that  they  have  not  acquired  the  art 
of  manufacturing  their  blowpipes  from  bamboo  like 
the  Berembuns.  The  Bornean  sumpitan,  adds  Logan 
(evidently  by  way  of  distinction),  is  artificially  bored.4 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  272,  273.      The  of  the  Keratong[and  Jekati.— -J.R.A.S., 

blowpipe  is  not  used  by  the  Jakun  of  S.  B.,  No.  25,  p.  3  ;  Xo.  26,  p.  14. 

Ulu  Endau,   Ulu  Sembrong,  and  Ka-  a  Newbold,  ii.  381,  382. 

hang,  though  it  is  by  their  neighbours  3  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  342*.      4  lb.  297. 


336  WEAPONS  AND  IMPLEMENTS  pari  ii 

It  is  most  unfortunate  that  this  account  is  so 
meagre,  but  a  contemporary  account  by  Mr.  Thompson 
adds  a  few  more  scattered  facts.  He  describes  the 
Sabimba  as  hunting  the  wild  hog  by  the  aid  of  their 
dogs,  and  as  feeding  on  monkeys,  snakes,  apes,  etc. 
"  Their  blowpipe  is  the  same  as  that  used  by  the  Dayaks 
of  Sambas  in  Borneo,  from  whence  it  is  imported  to 
Singapore,  and  from  thence  finds  its  way  to  the 
Tembrau,  the  river  on  which  they  are  now  located. 
The  dart  of  this  blowpipe  is  delicately  fashioned,  but  the 
Sabimba  make  a  ruder  description  themselves.  The 
darts  are  poisoned  with  the  juice  of  the  Upas  tree,  which 
is  called  'ipoh."  The  admission  that  the  Sabimba 
make  a  ruder  sort  of  dart  themselves,  tallies  entirely 
with  what  we  find  to  be  the  case  among  many  of  those 
tribes  who  are  in  the  habit  of  employing  not  only 
their  own  weapons,  but  those  of  their  neighbours  in 
the  chase,  no  doubt  in  hopes  that  the  latter  would 
bring  them  better  luck.  It  would  be  interesting  to 
know  what  proof  there  was  that  the  blowTpipes  resem- 
bling those  of  the  Dayaks  at  Sambas  were  borrowed.1 

0.  Laut,  Muka  Kuning\ — With  the  help  of  dogs,  the 
blowpipe,  a  kind  of  palm-wood  spear  (the  "  seligi  "  or 
"  spear  of  nibong "),  the  axe,  the  hatchet,  and  the 
knife,  the  O.  Muka  Kuning  procure  their  ordinary 
food  in  the  forest,  together  with  rattans,  resin  or 
"  dammar,"  and  eagle-wood,  which  they  barter  for  rice, 
cloth,  implements,  tobacco,  and  salt.1' 

The  Bow. 

0.  Laut,  Temiang. — The  following  reference  to  a 
form  of  arrow-release  attributed  to  a  less-known  sea- 

1  To  me  the  statement  is  most  unlikely.    J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  347*,  348* 

»  Ibid.  p.  337*. 


i  map.  v)  MALA  VAN  SEA  <>  \  PSJ 

-     ■■■■II  — i— M— i— ^»^^«— ^i  ■         ^ — 

tribe  is,  bo  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  discov<  i 
unique  :  the  bow  (oi  the  Temiang)  was  held  in  a 
horizontal  position  (a  hole  being  made  in  the  centn 
of  th<-  bow,  through  which  the  arrow  passed),  the 
three  fingers  bent  over  the  string,  and  the  arrow 
heltl  between  the  first  and  second  fingers,  th<-  thumb 
straightened,  and  the  little  finger  partially  straight- 
ened.1 


1    Essex  Inst.   Hull.   vol.   xvii.  Oct    Dec.   |>.   21  of   short  copy.       Sir,  however, 

remarks  on  p.  253,  asttt.     The  entire  passage  wants  corroboration. 


VOL.  I 


CHAPTER   VII. 

Cultivation. 

The  most  primitive  form  of  horticulture  (if  so  it  can 
be  called)  employed  by  these  tribes  arises  from  the 
throwing  away  of  the  seeds  of  fruit  that  they  have 
eaten  in  the  jungle.  A  Malay  chief  of  Selangor 
informed  me  that  the  Besisi  were  originally  in  the 
habit  of  eating  the  fruits  of  the  jungle  in  a  small 
shelter  built  upon  the  spot  where  they  had  been 
gathered,  but  on  its  being  pointed  out  that  this 
practice  resulted  in  a  superfluous  number  of  fruit-trees 
all  growing  in  the  same  spot,  the  whole  tribe  took  to 
carrying  their  fruit  to  a  little  distance  before  eating 
it,  and  afterwards  removed  during  the  fruit  season 
to  a  fresh  spot  every  year,  in  order  to  spread  the 
seeds  over  a  wider  region  of  the  country. 

On  the  other  hand,  fruit-seeds  or  seedlings  were 
certainly  planted  by  the  aborigines  from  time  to  time 
among  the  catch-crops  in  their  clearings,  and  the 
ground  round  the  trees  that  were  in  bearing  was 
regularly  cleared  (about  once  a  year)  of  undergrowth. 
This,  however,  was  probably  intended  rather  to 
facilitate  the  collection  of  the  fruit  than  with  any  idea 
of  improving  the  fruit-bearing  capacity  of  the  tree. 

For  the  latter  purpose  magic  was  more  frequently 

338 


lAKl-N    WALKING    UP    A    TREE,     I'll'    BATU,    SELANGOR 


Vol.  I.  A  333- 


( 'crruti. 

Sakaj  Tree-Felling:   One  Max  (on  Staging)  starting  Work,  the  Other 
(on  the  Left)  climbing  up  to  assist  him. 


Vol.  I.  p.  339. 


chaf.  mi  GENERAL   RE  MARKS 


employed,  though   it   is  true  that  various  ingenio 
devices  were  adopted  for  the  purpose  oi  scaring  away 
wild  animals  (such  as  monk-  \  >,  squirrels,  bear-ca 
ami  civet-cats)  which  were  certain  to  assemble  t<>  t< 

upon  the  fruit. 

Amongst     the     animals     that     wen:    fond    oi     the 

durian,  hears  and  tigers  were  always  especially  men- 
tioned, it  being  asserted  that  these  animals  wen*  in 
the  habit  of  tearing  open  the  huge,  green,  spiky  fallen 
fruit  by  inserting  their  sharp  claws  into  the  divisions 
of  its  thick  rind,  and  feasting  upon  the  creamy 
pulp  that  envelops  the  seeds  within.  Whether  this 
be  so  or  not,  it  is  certain  that  both  bears  and  tigers 
are  frequently  met  with  in  the  neighbourhood  of  these 
durian  groves,  and  that  not  a  few  of  the  aborigines 
have  lost  their  lives  through  being  attacked  either  in 
or  near  the  tiny  huts  or  shelters  that  are  built  under 
the  durian  trees,  during  the  fruit  season,  for  the 
watchers.  I  may  add  that  the  number  and  variety  of 
wild  fruits  eaten  by  the  aborigines  were  far  in  advance 
of  those  eaten  by  the  Malays. 

All  the  aborigines  are  adepts  at  tree-felling,  at 
which  even  the  Malays  cannot  beat  them.  Standing 
on  a  lofty  platform  made  of  a  few  crossed  sticks, 
they  cut  the  stem  through  at  the  point  where  the 
buttresses  spring  from  the  trunk.  They  never 
seem  to  miss  their  stroke  even  by  a  hair's-breadth, 
the  cutting  being  so  cleanly  done  that  the  top  of  the 
stump  often  looks  as  smooth  as  a  billiard-table,  a  great 
contrast  to  the  roughly  cut  stumps  left  by  some 
Malays  and  most  Chinese.  In  the  southern  districts 
of  Selangor  the  Jakun,  who  did  a  good  deal  of  felling 
for  the  Protectorate  Government,  proved  cheap  and 
excellent  workers,  though  they  required  management, 


34©  CULTIVATION  patch 

as  they  would  never  work  unless  they  were  in  a 
humour  to  do  so.  Their  favourite  method  of  felling, 
when  a  large  area  had  to  be  cleared,  was  to  select 
a  tree  of  the  largest  size,  and  then  to  fell  it  in 
a  particular  direction  so  as  to  bring  down  with  it  a 
number  of  smaller  trees  in  its  fall. 

In  the  earliest  stages  of  cultivation,  the  first  kind 
of  grain  to  be  planted  by  the  aborigines  is  a  kind  of 
Chinese  millet,  which  is  grown  together  with  a  few 
light  catch-crops,  more  especially  by  tribes  living 
among  the  hills  of  the  Peninsula  at  a  considerable  alti- 
tude. The  last  mode  of  cultivation  introduced  is 
usually  rice,  and  even  when  this  latter  is  cultivated,  it 
is  generally  on  so  small  a  scale  and  with  such  hopelessly 
inadequate  implements,  that  it  could  hardly  be  ex- 
pected (when  the  various  "  enemies  "  of  the  rice  had 
taken  their  toll)  that  there  would  be  any  substantial 
harvest  left  to  gather. 

Magic  rites  play  a  large  part  in  the  rice-planting 
customs  of  the  Sakai  and  the  Jakun,  but  less  so,  I 
believe,  in  those  of  the  Semang,  who  seem  to  be  less 
superstitious  than  their  neighbours. 

Mr.  Blagden  has  shown  that  there  are  several  non- 
Malay  aboriginal  names  for  rice  in  the  Peninsula,  and 
this  fact,  coupled  with  the  existence  of  varieties  of  the 
grain  special  to  the  aborigines,  and  with  the  generally 
aboriginal  character  of  the  harvest -rites,  argues 
against  such  words  being  borrowed  by  the  civilised 
(Mohammedan)  Malays.  The  line  between  pagan 
and  Mohammedan  Malay  is  drawn  at  irrigation. 

The  fact  that  there  have  been  cases  in  which  the 
Jakun  have  taken  even  to  the  cultivation  of  coffee 
shows,  however,  that  they  are  by  no  means  incapable 
of  improvement. 


chap,  vii  \ .  GR/TOS  i  '/■   a  /  DAH 


I.      Sim  \\... 

.  Xgru  ultun 

Kedah  Semang-  and  Pangan.  The  wildest  Semang 
tribes  do  not  <'at  rice,  except  when  they  may  have  sue- 
i  teded  in  obtaining  a  scanty  supply  through  the  medium 
ol  other  Semang  more  conversant  with  Malays. 

They   live,  in    fact,   lor   the    most    part    upon    roots, 

eked  out  by  the  trophies  of  their  skill  in  hunting  and 
fishing,  together  with  the  wild  fruits  of  the  jungle 

I  hey  come  in  season. 

The  Semang,  who  have  reached  the  first  and  most 
rudimentary  stage  of  agriculture,  plant  by  way  of  a 
substitute  for  rice  a  species  of  Chinese  millet  (44  sekoi  ") 
which  is  called  in  Malay  "  cat's  -  tail "  ("  ekor 
kuching "),  and  which  is  perhaps  selected  from  its 
flourishing  better  than  rice  on  the  higher  ranges. 

The  fact  of  these  tribes  being  millet-eaters,  of 
which  I  was  first  informed  by  the  Semang  of  Kedah, 
1  subsequently  found  had  been  already  recorded  by  De 
Morgan  and  several  other  writers.  It  is,  of  course, 
conceivable  that  the  fact  of  their  being  eaters  of  millet 
may  have  given  the  nickname  of  "  Orang  Sekoi,"  or 
44  Millet-men,"  to  the  tribes  who  bear  it.  But  on  the 
other  hand  the  name  might  quite  as  easily  have  been 
derived  from  some  small  stream  or  river  (Sungei 
Sekoi),  since  on  the  whole  this  is  the  more  usual 
method  by  which  these  tribes  get  their  names. 

In  the  next  stage  of  development  (in  which  the 
Negritos  are  still  semi -nomadic,  and  migrate  from 
one  district  to  another  as  soon  as  their  scanty  crop  is 
harvested)  they  actually  begin  to  grow  rice  in  a  primi- 
tive fashion,  as  well  as  a  few  catch-crops,  such  as 
bananas,  sugar-cane,  tapioca,  maize,  and  sweet  potatoes, 


342  CULTIVATION  part  it 

all,  however,  with  a  minimum  expenditure  of  time  and 
trouble.  The  rice  that  they  grow,  at  this  stage,  is 
always  "  hill-rice "  (Mai.  "  huma "),  a  fresh  plot  of 
forest-ground  (usually  the  sloping  side  of  a  hill) 
being  selected  and  cleared  annually.  The  branches 
are  then  lopped  off  from  the  fallen  trees,  the  ddbris  is 
burnt,  and  the  rice  sown  in  the  interstices  between 
the  remaining  tree-stumps,  this  latter  process  always 
necessarily  taking  place  during  the  more  rainy  season. 

A  good  instance  of  this  culture  of  "  hill-rice  "  was 
to  be  seen  at  Siong  (in  Kedah),  where  the  Semang 
had  cleared  a  great  part  of  the  slope  of  Bukit  Temesu, 
and  planted  it  with  rice  and  the  light  catch  -  crops 
mentioned  in  the  foregoing  list,  with  the  exception, 
however,  of  tapioca,  which,  for  some  reason  unknown 
to  me,  they  did  not  plant. 

At  the  time  of  my  arrival  their  scanty  stock  of  rice, 
which  was  of  very  poor  quality,  had  all  been  harvested, 
and  they  had  stored  it  in  a  tiny  hut  or  barn,  built 
upon  very  high  posts  and  no  bigger  than  a  box 
(4  feet  by  4  feet),  in  order  to  remove  its  precious 
contents  beyond  the  reach  of  small  mammals. 

Perak  Semang*. — These  remarks  apply  equally  to 
the  Semang  of  Perak. 

II. — Sakai. 

Fruit-gathering. 

Perak  Sakai.  —  The  Sakai  method  of  gathering 
wild  tree-fruit  is  to  climb  the  trees  in  which  ripe  fruit  has 
been  seen,  and  then  to  lop  off  the  fruit-laden  boughs, 
so  that  the  fruit  itself  may  be  picked  off  the  boughs 
(as  they  lie  on  the  ground)  and  eaten  at  leisure.1 

1  De  Morgan,  viii.  284.     This  method  is  also  practised  by  the  Malays. 


chap.  v..  SAKAI  0/  PERAK 

I     )  hlllt  11),  . 

The  Mill  Sakai  (Sakai   Bukit)  are   aid  to  practi 
no  form  of  agriculture ;  but   those  who  have  reached 
the  earliest  stage  of  it  are  described  as  cultivating 

the  species  of  Chinese  millet  called  "s£koin  (orMel 
kuching ")  already  mentioned.1     Mr.  L.  \\rray  saw   a 
field  of  this  millet  grown  at  an  altitude  of  2400  ft.  (730 

in.)  in    Perak,  and    remarks   that    this  form  of  grain    is 

grown  largely  by  the  Sakai,  both  in  the  hills  of  N.  Perak 
and  of  the  Plus  district,  but  that  no  rice  was  grown 
there,  and  that  their  staple  food  appeared  to  be  tapiot 

Mr.  Wray  adds  that  they  also  grew  sweet  potatoes, 
sugar-cane,  pumpkins,  and  tobacco,  but  no  fruit,  except 
in  the  settlements  near  Malay  villages.8 

Elsewhere  the  Perak  Sakai  are  described  as 
planting  not  only  the  crops  already  named,  but  maize 
and  yams,  etc.,  etc.^ 

According  to  Col.  Low  and  De  Morgan,  the  Sakai 
make  no  sort  of  use  of  ploughing  or  harrowing 
implements,  but  content  themselves  with  making  holes 
in  the  ground  with  a  pointed  stick,  in  the  open  spaces 
between  the  roots  and  tree-stumps,5  to  contain  the  rice- 
seed  which  is  dropped  into  them. 

De  la  Croix,  in  describing  the  Sakai  village  of 
Kampong  Chabang,  on  the  upper  waters  of  S.  Kerbu 
(a  tributary  of  the  Plus  river  in  Upper  Perak),  gives 
a  graphic  description  of  one  of  these  aboriginal 
clearings,  stating  that  the  jungle  had  been  cleared 
tor  an   area  of  about  five  acres  (deux  hectares),  and 

1   De  la  Croix,  p.   340.      Sed  v.  p.  3  Ibid. 

340,  ante.  4  /.  /.  A.  vol.   iv.  p.  429  ;  and  cp. 

1  Wray   in  /.  R.  A.  S.,    S.E.,   No.  Hale,  p.  294. 

21,  p.   163.      For  illustrations  of  clear-  6  Low,y.  /.  A.  vol.  iv.  pp.  429,  430 ; 

ings,  cp.  IS Homme,  ii.  642,  643.  cp.  De  Morgan,  vii.  423;  LH.  ii.  611. 


344  CULTIVATION  part  n 

great  trees  lay  on  all  sides,  the  open  spaces  between 
them  being  planted  with  rice.  Here  and  there  were 
upright  posts  from  which  were  suspended  pieces  of 
bamboo  which  sounded  as  the  wind  shook  them. 
These  were  scarecrows  designed  for  driving  away  the 
crowds  of  birds  which  came  to  rob  the  rice-fields. 
When  the  wind  was  not  strong  enough  to  move  these 
scarecrows,  the  aborigines  did  so  themselves  by  means 
of  an  arrangement  of  cords  or  creepers,  all  of  which  con- 
verged towards  a  small  shelter  in  the  centre,  wherein 
a  watchman  was  always  posted.  It  looked  not  unlike  a 
network  of  telegraph  lines.  The  same  apparatus  was 
used  for  scaring  away  wild  elephants,  which  were  a 
veritable  scourge  to  plantations  in  the  jungle.1 

Vaughan-Stevens,  in  giving  a  very  long  and  full 
account  of  rice-planting  as  practised  by  the  Sakai,'J 
made  out  five  main  divisions  of  their  agricultural 
work — felling,  burning,  sowing,  reaping,  and  the  offer- 
ing of  first-fruits.  To  commence,  he  stated  that  as  a 
rule  only  one  harvest  was  obtained,  unless  the  soil  was 
exceptionally  rich,  when  two  harvests  might  possibly 
be  obtained.  Hence  it  was  the  most  usual  thing  for 
the  clearing  to  be  deserted  as  soon  as  the  harvest  had 
been  reaped.  The  patch  of  forest  which  happened  to 
be  selected  was  cleared  during  the  prevalence  of  the 
drier  season,  by  means  of  the  hatchet  and  the  chopper.3 
A  favourite  method  of  felling  was  to  cut  a  number 
of  small  trees  half-way  through,  and  then   to  fell  a 

1  De  la  Croix,  p.  323(1882).  This  2  Called  by  Vaughan-Stevens 
method  is  common  among  the  Malays,  Blandas,  though,  as  has  already  been 
but  as  Mr.  Blagden  shows,  the  abori-  explained,  Vaughan-Stevens  almost  in- 
gines  themselves  may  have  grown  rude  variably  employed  this  term  for  what 
crops.  Wray  (Per.  Mus.  N.  iii.  pp.  29-  are  throughout  this  book  called  Sakai. 
30)  gives  two  kinds  of  rice,  "  Padi  Mr.  Blagden,  however,  from  internal 
Sakai  "  and  "  Padi  Si  Antah,"  both  linguistic  evidence,  attributes  this  parti- 
described  as  varieties  grown  only  by  cular  account  to  the  Mantra  of  Malacca, 
the  Sakai.  3  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.   146. 


,' . 


A  Sakai  Plantation  at  Changkat  Bertam  on  the  River  Raya  (Perak). 


ZV  Morgan. 

Sakai  Plantations  near  the  Head-waters  of  the  River  Kampar  (Perak), 

SEEN"    FROM    THE    SUMMIT    OF    Mt.    CHABANG. 


Vol.  I.  p.  344 


McGregor. 

ABORIGINAL    HlLL    CLEARING,    WITH    HUTS,     ULU    BATU,    SELANGOR. 


*Z0 


McGregor. 

Aboriginal  Hill  Clearing,   with  mixed  Cultivation  (Tapioca  and 
Bananas),    Ulu  Bate,  Selangor. 

Vol.  I.  p.  345. 


(  mai-.  vji  SAKAl  0/   PERAK  34S 


bigger  one  in  such  a  way  that   n   brought  them  all 

down  in  its  fall. 

The  idled  timber,  alter  being  left  to  dry  for  .1  few 
weeks,  was  then  set  on  fire,  and  with  the  exception  <>i 

some  of  the    thicker  stumps   soon    burnt  to  ashes.       In 

the  spaces  between  these  stumps  the  padi  was  planted, 
just  before  the  commencement  o(  the  wet  season. 
Before  felling,  however,  all  tools,  whether  (hoppers  or 

hatchets,  had  to  he  charmed  to  avoid  accidents  which 
might  he  brought  about  by  evil  spirits.  Women  and 
children,  on  such  occasions,  were  not  allowed  to  be 
present  on  account  of  the  dangers  that  they  might 
incur.  In  every  village  there  was  generally  at  least  one 
man — perhaps  several — who  knew  these  charms.  At 
the  present  day  the  Penglima  or  village  chief  was  as 
a  rule  the  only  one  who  knew  them,  for  since  the 
wizards  had  died  out,  any  one  who  knew  the  charm 
could  work  it. 

The  actual  process  was  as  follows  : — 

Two  forked  uprights  (of  no  stipulated  size  or 
material)  were  planted  vertically  in  the  ground  (a  few 
feet  apart)  and  supported  a  horizontal  pole  running  east 
and  west.  The  handle  or  helve  of  a  hatchet  was  then 
suspended  from  the  pole,  and  just  underneath  it  were 
planted  a  branch  (of  some  kind  of  forest  tree)  and  a 
young  shoot  of  "  bunglei."  To  these  were  added  a 
half  coconut-shell  filled  with  earth,  which  served  as  a 
censer  ("  sangkun  "),  a  chopper,  to  be  deposited  on 
the  ground  beneath  the  pole,  and  the  blade  of  the 
hatchet  whose  helve  was  suspended  as  described.  The 
ceremony  commenced  at  sunrise,  when  the  saplings 
were  cut  and  erected  as  related  above.1 

The  magician  then  strewed  incense  (benzoin)  over 

1  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.  146. 


346  CUL  TIVA  TION  part  i i 


the  embers,  and  facing  the  rising  sun,  knocked  the 
blade  out  of  the  hatchet-helve,  and  suspended  the 
latter  as  described.  Next  he  deposited  the  chopper 
and  hatchet-blade,  and  picking  them  up  again  and 
crossing  his  hands  in  the  smoke,  described  seven 
successive  circles  in  the  smoke,  calling  aloud  seven 
times  in  succession  as  he  did  so. 

He  then  repeated  the  following  charm  : — 

"  O  Spirits  of  every  Hill-locked  Basin,  return  ye 
and  seek  the  Spectral  Huntsman.  It  is  my  desire  to 
open  up  this  clearing.  O  ye  Four  (great)  Magicians, 
unto  all  Four  of  you  I  prefer  my  request.  It  is  my 
desire  to  open  up  this  clearing.  Grant  me  coolness 
of  body,  and  do  me  no  harm  nor  scaith,  but  grant  me 
coolness  and  coldness  within  this  body  of  mine." 

The  harm  and  scaith  referred  to  included  the  risk 
of  being  crushed  by  falling  trees,  of  falls,  and  of 
accidental  wounds  inflicted  by  the  implements  used  by 
the  operator  ;  as  well  as  the  attacks  of  wild  beasts, 
and  fever. 

When  the  charm  was  completed  the  hatchet-head 
was  re-inserted  in  its  helve  and  (along  with  the 
chopper)  returned  to  its  owner.  A  first  clearing  was 
then  made,  in  the  usual  way,  round  the  middle  point 
of  a  circle  which  was  about  twelve  yards  in  diameter. 
The  chopper  and  hatchet  were  then  turned  seven 
times  round  in  the  smoke  in  strict  silence,  after  which 
every  one  returned  home.  The  owner  of  the  tools 
commenced  his  work  on  the  following  day.  To  the 
foregoing  should  be  added  that  the  charm  had  to  be 
said  for  each  of  the  tools  separately.1 

The  burning  ceremony  took  place  as  soon  as  the 
felled    timber  was    dry    enough.      Men,   women,   and 

1  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.   147.  148. 


CHAP.  v,i  SAKAJ   <>l-    /'/  RAh 


children  gathered  together  .it  mid-day  in  an  open 
space  on  the  sheltered  sid<-  of  the  ( learing.  I  [ere  the 
censer  was  set  up,  and  its  smoke  used  to  fumigate  a 
half  coconut-shell  filled  with  coconut-oil.  Before  the 
latter  was  poured  into  the  shell  two  or  three  polishing 
leaves  (of  the  "akar  simplas")  were  put  into  it.      I  he 

oil  was  called  "  minyak   b*rangsang.n  ' 

The  magician  next  turned  his  face  towards  the 
east,  lifted  the  shell  full  of  oil  to  his  lips  and  repeated 

this  charm  : — 

u  O  Lightning,  in  Heaven  and  on  Earth,  I  desire 
to  give  scope  to  the  rage  of  Fire.  I  desire  to  burn  off 
this  clearing.  I  desire  to  summon  the  Four  (great) 
Magicians.  I  desire  to  summon  the  winds  from  their 
seven  coigns,  the  seven  winds  of  equal  rank,  and  to 
summon  the  whirlwind."  2 

After  this  charm  was  spoken  each  took  up  his  tree- 
bark  torch  from  the  heap  in  which  they  had  been 
deposited  and  dipped  the  end  of  it  into  the  oil  in  the 
shell  (which  the  magician  had  replaced  on  the  ground). 
The  women  and  children  did  likewise.  Each 
individual  then  handed  his  torch  to  the  magician,  who 
alone  might  kindle  it  (by  means  of  the  embers  in  the 
censer).  The  company  then  hastened  off  in  various 
directions,  and  each  of  them  kindled  the  fallen  timber 
in  as  many  places  as  possible.  This  charm  was  con- 
cluded at  noon,  as  that  was  the  hour  by  which  the 
leaves  and  twigs  would  all  be  well  dried  by  the  hot 


sun.3 


After  this  "  burning "  ceremony  came  that  for 
planting  the  rice.  When  the  ground  had  been 
cleared  by  the  burning  of  all  but  the  larger  trunks  it 
was  ready,  after  the  first  showers  of  the  wet  season, 

1  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.  148.  2  lb.  pp.  148,  149.  3  lb. 


348  CULTIVATION  i-aki  M 


to  receive  the  seed.  The  men  then  prepared  pointed 
sticks  (or  dibbles)  made  from  the  saplings  of  a  special 
kind  of  hard-wood  tree  called  "  tamun,"  ]  the  bark  of 
which  was  peeled  off,  and  a  hollow  made  at  the  thicker 
end  to  receive  the  seed,  which  was  stored  in  the  huts 
in  sacks. 

The  magician  set  out  at  sunrise  for  the  fields, 
accompanied  by  all  the  men,  women,  and  children 
who  were  going  to  take  part  in  the  sowing.  On 
arriving  at  the  first  available  open  space  near 
the  middle  of  the  field  the  magician  drew  a  circle 
round  himself  with  a  specially  made  staff,  which  like 
the  other  dibbles  was  made  out  of  "  tamun  "  wood, 
and  all  the  planting-sticks  were  heaped  up  inside  the 
circle.  The  whole  of  the  company  sat  outside  the 
circle  in  a  wide  irregular  ring,  forming  what  is  called 
the  Rice-bin  ("  kepuk"  ).2  In  the  centre  the  "  bunglei  " 
plant  already  mentioned  was  planted  in  the  ground, 
and  near  it  a  branch  of  the  "tamun  "  tree  from  which 
the  planting-sticks  had  been  made.3 

The  "  tamun "  wood  was  chosen  because  the 
"  tamun "  tree  bears  its  fruits  in  a  ring  round  the 
base  of  the  trunk  at  a  height  of  only  about  2  dcm. 
from  the  ground,  the  object  of  the  planters  being 
that  the  rice  should  by  sympathy  flower  near  the 
ground,  as  the  "  tamun "  tree  fruits,  instead  of 
growing  long  and  rank  and  weedy.  So,  too,  the 
11  bunglei  "  plant  was  chosen  because  no  animals  ate  it, 
the  hope  being  that  the  rice  might  be  similarly  spared. 
The  censer  having  been  placed  near  this  plant  and 
incense  burned  on  it,  seven  small  holes,  each  about 
an  inch  deep,  were  made  in  the  centre  of  the  circle. 

1   Mai.  "Satambun."  2  Mai.  "kepok/'  a  very  large  circular  "  rice-bin." 

3  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.  149. 


.  1 1  \  r.  VII 


KAJ  OF  PEA 


149 


Each    individual    then    brought   hia  planting-stick 
and  drove  it   firmlj    into   th<-   earth,  inside  the   rii 
C  k£puk  ").     One  oi  t h< *  women's  seed-pouches  m 
then  deposited  within  th<-  ring  and  a  quantity  ol  rii 
grains  (saved  From  th<-  first  seven  ears  cut  .it  the  I 
scar's  harvest)1  were  mixed  with  the  seed  contained  in 
the  pouch.     A  charm  was  then  repeated  as  follows: — 

"()  Dong,  Black  Princess,  who  dwellest  as  a  recluse 

(///.  fastest)  in    the   sea  lor  six    months  (in  the  year),   I 

summon  thee  to  assist  me  in  planting  rice,  so  that 
from  a  fist-full,  from  a  mere  pinch  (of  seed)  may  ^row 
a  hundred-fold,  a  thousand-fold,  a  koyan  or  two." 

Turning  his  lace  to  the  east,  the  magician  then 
took  up  the  pouch  and  waved  it  in  a  circle  seven 
times  through  the  smoke  which  was  still  rising  from 
the  censer,  counting  aloud  as  he  did  so,  "One,  two, 
three,  four,  five,  six,  seven." 

When  the  charm  had  been  said,  a  little  rice-seed 


1  This  is  the  Rice-soul  (or  rather  its 
embodiment),  called  in  Malay  "  anak 
padi  "  or  the  "  Rice  -  baby."'  See 
Malay  Magic,  p.  235  seqq. 

2  Vaughan- Stevens  explains  that 
this  little  Black  sea -Princess  (who 
descends  with  the  wet  monsoon)  had 
the  reputation  of  being  able  to  protect 
the  rice-fields  if  she  wished,  against  all 
other  evil  spirits  except  the  "  Squinting 
Demon,''  who  was  usually  more  or  less 
harmful.  All  evil  spirits  but  the  latter 
feared  this  Princess,  who  was  wont  to 
taunt  them  with  the  misdeeds  they  had 
committed  during  their  lifetime,  and 
on  account  of  which  they  had  been 
condemned  by  "  Granny  Long-breasts  " 
("  Gendui  Lanyut  ")  to  dwell  in  the  sea 
and  pass  their  time  in  squirting  water 
up  at  the  clouds.  [The  full  name  of 
this  Princess  is  Putri  Sadong.  She  is 
frequently  referred  to  in  the  traditions 
of  the  Malays,  who  describe  her  as  the 
Princess  of  the  Limestone  Caves,  and 
as  ruling  over  the  wild  mountain  goats 
("kambing   gurun").      At    the    same 


time  she  is  usually  connected  with  the 
cultivation  of  rice.  See  Skeat's  Fables 
and  Folktales  from  an  Eastern  Forest, 
note  to  p.  49.] 

On  the  subject  of  the  Rice -soul, 
Vaughan-Stevens  further  remarks  that 
the  rice  had  a  soul  which  was  con- 
demned to  wander  for  three  days. 
During  these  three  days  and  nights  the 
body  of  the  rice  was  exposed,  in  a  way 
Vaughan-Stevens  could  not  make  quite 
sure  of,  to  the  attacks  of  evil  demons 
which,  under  cover  of  darkness, 
approached  it  in  the  form  of  mice. 
But  the  demons  could  not  break 
through  the  enchanted  ring  of  plant- 
ing-sticks, nor  could  they  penetrate 
to  the  inner  circle  of  seven  holes  in 
which  the  body  of  the  rice  was 
buried. 

After  the  third  night  the  "semangat" 
or  soul  of  the  rice  returned  to  its  body, 
after  which  it  could  take  care  of  itself, 
so  that  the  protection  of  the  planting- 
sticks  was  no  longer  needed  (Vaughan- 
Stevens,  ii.   151,  152). 


350  CULTIVATION  part  il 

out  of  the  pouch  was  dropped  into  each  of  the  seven 
holes  and  covered  up  with  earth  by  the  magician,  who 
made  use  of  his  stick  for  the  purpose.  The  planting- 
sticks  of  the  company  were  then  waved  round  seven 
times  through  the  smoke  in  a  circle,  the  number  of  the 
completed  circles  being  each  time  counted  aloud  by 
the  magician.  As  soon  as  the  planting-sticks  had  all 
been  fumigated,  each  person  took  up  his  own  pair,  one 
in  each  hand,  and  went  off  with  them  to  the  field. 
The  women  followed,  and  the  pouch  was  taken  as 
well.  The  whole  company  now  proceeded  to  plant  the 
seed,  working  in  a  long  line  or  file,  casting  the  seed 
with  one  hand  and  pricking  holes  with  the  other. 
The  women  then  divided  the  rice-seed  between  them, 
starting  with  that  in  the  pouch,  which  must  be  planted 
first  in  any  case.  They  next  resorted  to  the  main 
stock  of  seed,  all  of  which  they  planted,  dropping  a 
few  grains  into  each  hole,  and  covering  them  up  with 
hand  or  foot.  When  the  day's  work  was  ended  the 
planting-sticks  had  to  be  brought  back  to  the  place 
where  the  ceremony  was  performed  and  restored  to 
their  original  position.  This  ceremony  had  to  be 
repeated  for  three  consecutive  days,  but  after  that 
they  might  be  deposited  anywhere.1 

To  the  foregoing  I  should  add  that  if  the  planting- 
sticks  in  the  course  of  the  work  got  clogged  together 
with  wet  earth  this  might  on  no  account  be  removed 
by  rubbing  the  stick  against  a  tree,  but  had  to  be 
wiped  away  with  the  front  of  the  foot.  If  the  stick 
was  accidentally  knocked  against  a  tree,  the  mouse- 
demons  would  hear  it,  and,  joyfully  exclaiming,  "  Rice- 
planting,  rice-planting,"  set  to  work  to  dig  up  the 
seed.2 

1  Vaughan- Stevens,  ii.  150,  15 1.  -  Ibid. 


(  hap.  vii  sak.ii  <>/■  PBRAA 

As  soon  as  the  rice  began  to  ripen,  all  the  m< 
women,  and  children   set   t<>  work   to  drive   ofl   th< 
birds,  apes,  elephants,  squirrels,  and  other  enemies  ol 
the  rice.      A  small  hut  or  shelter  was  built  in  the 

held  ;   and    part    or   the  whole    of  each    family  went    to 

live  there  while  the  rice  was  ripening.     The  reaping 

was  done  with  the    same    implements   as   are    used    by 

the  Malays.     None  of  the  aborigines  could  remember 

any  other  kind  being  used.       In  default   of  the    Malay 

reaping-knife  ("tuai"),  the  reaper  would  pinch  off  each 

head  of  rice  between  finger  and  thumb.  From  five 
to  twenty  ears,  on  the  other  hand,  according  to  the 
skill  of  the  reaper,  were  seized  between  the  finger 
and  the  thumb  and  cut  off  close  to  the  ear  when  the 
reaping-knife  was  used,  the  stalks  being  left  on  the 
spot,  either  to  be  burnt  or  to  wither.  The  rice-heads 
were  then  collected  together,  and  thrown  upon  a 
threshing  -  floor  to  be  separated  from  the  husks. 
Here  they  were  trodden  to  and  fro  under  foot, 
and  the  stalk- ends  sifted  out.  The  rice  required 
for  immediate  use  was  then  throwm  into  a  massive 
wooden  mortar,  where  it  was  pounded  with  a  heavy 
pestle,  which  split  the  husks,  and  the  husked  rice,  as 
soon  as  the  husks  had  been  separated  from  it,  was 
then  ready  for  cooking.1 

Before  the  commencement  of  the  harvest,  how- 
ever, a  magic  ceremony  had  to  be  performed,  which 
took  place  at  sunrise.  All  who  were  interested  in 
the  harvest  assembled  at  one  of  the  watchers'  huts  in 
the  rice-fields,  and  seated  themselves  in  a  ring  round 
its  walls.  In  the  middle  of  the  hut  stood  a  sack  filled 
with  rice  to  the  brim — an  obvious  piece  of  symbolism. 
One  of  the  reaping-knives  was  then  inserted,  with  the 

1   Vaughan -Stevens,  ii.  151,  152. 


352  CULTIVATION  part  n 


pointed  end  downwards,  in  the  centre  of  the  open 
mouth  of  the  sack  of  rice,  and  to  the  butt-end  of  its 
(projecting)  bamboo  handle  ;  above  the  iron  blade  a 
small  knob  or  clot  of  beeswax  '  was  affixed. 

With  his  face  turned  to  the  rising  sun,  the  magician 
now  crouched  down  in  front  of  the  sack,  and,  placing 
his  lips  close  to  the  knob  of  beeswax,  repeated  aloud 
the  following  charm  : — - 

11  O  thou  that  squintest,  turn  thy  back  to  me  ;  thou 
that  art  blind,  confront  me.  Lo,  I  reap  the  seven 
heads  of  rice,  yea,  and  take  the  soul  of  the  rice,  and 
bear  it  back  with  me  to  the  house." 

The  magician  then  withdrew  the  reaping- knife 
from  the  sack's  mouth,  and  proceeding  to  the  circle  of 
the  seven  holes  and  fastening  seven  rice-plants  (one 
taken  from  each  of  the  holes)  to  the  upper  part  of  the 
handle  of  the  reaping-knife,  turned  his  face  towards 
the  rising  sun,  and  (retaining  meanwhile  the  reaping- 
knife  with  the  rice-plants  attached)  repeated  the  rest 
of  the  charm,  which  consisted  merely  of  the  words  : 
"  I  will  drive  thee  out,  O  Demon,  from  before  me." 
At  this  he  applied  the  edge  of  the  reaping-knife  to 
the  rice-stalks  and  cut  them  through.3 

The  rice-heads  being  still  fastened  to  the  reaping- 
knife,  the  magician  took  them  back  with  him  to  the 


1  Vaughan-Stevens  explains  that  wax  squirrels,  etc.  The  demons  soon  notice 
was  used  in  order  to  symbolise  the  wax-  all  the  unwatched  places,  whenever 
like  nature  of  fresh  rice  when  boiled.  the    attention    happens    to    flag,    and 

2  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.  152.  hence  great  care  is  taken  of  the  grains 
The  squinting  demon  is  represented  which  contain  the  soul  of  the  rice,  and 

as  squinting  because  the  Sakai  believe  the  spirit  is  so  blinded  by  magic  that 

that  a  man  who  squints  can  see  further  they    can     be    collected    together    in 

round   him    than  another   whose    eyes  safety.      The  squinting  spirit  is  always 

are   naturally   formed.      A    large    rice-  spying  round  the  house,  and  looking  out 

field   demands   ceaseless   watchfulness,  for  a  chance  of  playing  off  his  tricks  ;  he 

and  the  eyes  of  the  owner  cannot  look  incites  the  fowls  and  dogs  to  steal  food 

round   far  enough  to  take  note  of  all  out  of  the  hutswhen  the  master  isabsen:. 

the  depredations  committed  by  birds,  3  Vaughan-Stevens,  ibid. 


,J 


Tl 


z 


\- 


Aboriginal  Women  husking  Padi  (showing  End-View  of  Mortar), 

Ulu  Ki.au,   Pahang. 


Vol.  /.A  353- 


i  hat.  vii  SAKAi  OF  n  ,  ■ 

hut,  and  there  untying  them,  wrapped  them  up  in  a 
cloth  or  mat,  and  deposited  them  on  the  top  <>i  the 

rice  in  the  second  sack.  There  they  had  to  stay  for 
three  (lays,  during  which  time  the  women  alone  were 

allowed    to    CUt    the    rice    in    the    field,    alter    which    a 

pause  followed  until  the  end  of  the  rice-feast.     Th< 

rice-heads  thus  collected  were    husked,  hut   the   stalks 

and  husks  might  not  be  thrown  away  before  the  feast 

was  over,  and  were  preserved  in  a  basket  or  sack,  which 
was  kept  in  the  hut.  The  rice  thus  obtained  formed 
the  portion  used  for  the  rice-feast,  it  being  the  rule  that 
whatever  remained  over  must  be  divided  among  the 
gttests  before  they  returned  home  after  the  banquet.1 

The  following  up  of  these  three  days'  reaping  by 
the  offering  to  the  guests  is  considered  as  an  act  of 
hospitality  on  the  part  of  the  chief,  any  omission  of  it 
being  considered  "  mean."  The  reasons  given  to 
Vaughan-Stevens  for  not  throwing  away  the  remains 
of  the  feast  were  (i)  that  the  guests  might  see  how- 
much  had  been  obtained  from  the  harvest,  and  assure 
themselves  that  the  host  had  not  kept  back  any  of 
thejthusked  rice  ;  further,  it  was  asserted  that  the 
Rice-soul,  when  it  returns  from  its  three  days'  wander- 
ings, is  made  welcome  by  means  of  the  feast,  and 
also,  moreover,  fortified  by  the  charms  against  the 
trouble  that  might  be  caused  by  the  demons  later 
on.  It  was  asserted,  too,  that  it  would  be  an  insult 
to  the  Rice-soul  if  its  husk  were  immediately  thrown 
away  as  worthless ;  and  hence  the  husks  were  pre- 
served in  order  that  the  Rice-soul  might  see  them 
upon  its  return.  As  soon  as  it  returned,  the  grain  of 
the  seven  rice-heads  was  collected  together  in  a  cloth 
or  sack  and  hung  up  in  an  out-of-the-way  place,  until  it 

1  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.  152. 
VOL.  I  2  A 


354  CULTIVATION  part  ii 


was  time  for  it  to  be  mixed  with  the  main  stock  of 
seed.  Till  then  it  took  up  its  abode  in  these  seven 
ears.  To  this  it  was  added,  that  fresh  rice  when 
boiled  possessed  a  peculiarly  pleasant  aroma,  which 
was  not  to  be  obtained  from  old  rice.  Hence  when 
the  guests  arrived  they  would  raise  the  husks  to  their 
noses  and  inhale  their  aroma,  as  a  means  of  ascertain- 
ing the  quality  of  the  harvest ;  for,  although  the  rice- 
grains  had  the  same  aroma  as  the  husks,  it  would  not 
be  seemly  to  test  the  grains  themselves  in  this  way.1 

Whilst  the  women  were  engaged  in  reaping  the 
rice  during  the  first  three  days,  the  men  were  em- 
ployed in  procuring  from  the  forests  and  streams  the 
meat  and  fish  required  for  the  feast.  Afterwards, 
however,  both  sexes  took  a  share  in  the  reaping,  since 
the  grains  fall  very  easily  and  quickly  out  of  the  ears 
as  soon  as  they  are  once  fully  ripe.2 

After  the  rice  which  had  been  collected  during  the 
first  three  days  had  been  husked  and  prepared,  a 
sufficient  quantity  was  cooked  for  the  entertainment 
of  the  expected  guests,  the  cooking  taking  place  on 
the  morning  of  the  fourth  day,  by  which  time  the 
supplementary  dishes  that  had  been  procured  by  the 
men  were  available.3 

The  men  now  put  on  their  best  clothes,  and  the 
bachelors  of  the  tribe,  putting  flowers  in  their  head- 
bands, took  their  blowpipes  with  them,  and  prepared 
to  lead  their  guests  to  the  feast-house.4  The  most 
distinguished  guest,  i.e.  the  Batin  or  one  of  the 
subordinate  chieftains  or  the  magician,  was  fetched 
last,  all  the  people  accompanying  him,  and  the  un- 
married men  acting  as  a  kind  of  bodyguard.5 

1  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.   153,  154.  2  Ibid.  3  Ibid. 

4  I.e.  the  "Balai.":  6  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.   153,   154. 


<  hap.  vii  SAKAJ  <>/■  ii  I 

.\".  soon  as  I  he  lasl  guest   had  arrived,  \\  hit  Ii  vi 
usually  about  mid-day,  the  dishe    were  placed  upon  the 
mats.     Nowadays  the  host  provides  the  ric<   and  the 
betel-leaf,  and  every  one  who  receives  the  invitation 
gives  about  ten  cents  towards  the  purchase  ol  luxuri< 
Formerly,  however,  those  ten  cents  were  paid  in  kind, 
.md  consisted  oi  various  supplementary  disl 
fish,  game,  and  vegetables.     Waiting  on  the  guests, 
on  the  other  hand,  was  the  duty  oi  the  householder 
and  his  wife  and  his  grown-up  daughters.1 

Before  the  meal  commenced,  as  soon  as  the  guests 

had  chosen  their  places  (the  women  and  children 
silting  together  in  one  place  and  the  men  in  another), 
the  magician  took  the  censer  and  dispatched  it  seven 
times  round  the  circle  of  guests,  who  continued  to 
pass  it  round  from  hand  to  hand  until  it  returned 
again  to  the  magician,  the  latter  calling  out  "  one, 
two,  three,  four,"  and  so  forth  each  time  that  he 
received  it,  until  the  seven  circuits  were  completed. 
These  were,  however,  the  only  words  uttered  by  the 
magician  during  the  ceremony,  and  he  did  not  turn  in 
any  special  direction.2 

When  this  proceeding  was  over,  the  magician 
waved  the  censer  seven  times  round  the  reaping- 
knives  and  the  cloth  in  which  the  seven  rice-heads 
were  wrapped,  and  both  of  the  latter  being  sus- 
pended from  one  of  the  central  pillars  of  the  house, 
the  censer  was  simply  passed  around  that  pillar. 
Next,  the  censer  was  carried  round  all  the  rice- 
sacks  (which  were  intended  to  receive  the  harvested 
rice),  and,  lastly,  seven  times  round  the  cooking-pots, 
which  stood  apart  by  themselves.  It  was  then 
deposited  at  the  foot  of  the  pillar  at  the  top  of  which 

1   Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.  154.  -   Ibid. 


356  CULTIVATION  i-art  n 

were  suspended  the  Rice-soul  and  the  reaping-knives. 
The  magician  next  took  a  few  boiled  rice -grains 
and  laid  some  of  them  on  the  heads  of  each  of  the 
children  present,  in  order  that  they  might  always 
remember  when  they  were  older  how  to  prepare  rice 
for  their  children.  This  completed  the  ceremony,  and 
the  actual  feast  then  began.1 

After  the  meal  the  guests  washed  their  hands  in 
the  water  which  had  been  placed  in  coconut -shells 
for  every  one  to  quench  his  thirst.  And  when  they 
had  all  washed,  each  person  present  greeted  the  others 
of  his  (or  her)  sex  in  turn,  stretching  out  the  hand 
without  rising.  Betel-leaf  was  then  brought  forward 
and  handed  round,  the  host  and  his  wife  meanwhile 
taking  their  own  share  of  the  repast  in  a  corner  of 
the  hut.  When  they  had  finished  their  meal,  they 
too  greeted  each  of  the  guests  in  the  same  way,  and 
each  guest,  after  responding,  had  to  come  forward  again 
and  return  the  greeting  of  the  host.  Meanwhile  the 
wife  of  the  host,  on  her  own  account,  exchanged 
greetings  with  the  other  women.  The  incense  was 
now  removed  from  the  censer  and  the  smoking  shell 
offered  by  the  magician  once  to  every  adult.  When 
he  had  received  it  back,  he  passed  it  once  more  seven 
times  round  the  pillar  on  which  the  Rice -soul  was 
hung,  and  then  deposited  it  on  the  ground  at  the  foot 
of  the  pillar.  The  unboiled  rice  which  remained  over 
from  the  three  days'  harvest  was  equally  divided 
among  all  the  guests  ;  but  the  boiled  rice  which  had 
not  been  eaten  at  the  feast  was  the  magician's  own 
perquisite.2 

The  guests  who  lived  at  a  distance  now  took  their 
leave,  and  as  before  were  accompanied  on  their  way 

1  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.  154,  155.  2  Ibid. 


chap,  vii  SAKAI  OF  SELANGOR  J57 


l>\'  the  ownersol  the  rice  field.  Before  the)  departed 
the  women  alone  greeted  the  host  leven  time  The 
host,  however,  was  not  permitted  to  accompany  any 
of  them  to  then- homes  until  his  most  distinguished 

guest  had  departed.1 

The  wife  of  the  host,  although  she  sal  near  him, 
received  no  greeting,   except   a  quite    informal    one 

from  some  of  her  special  friends.      All  the   guests   left 

tlie  house  in  time  to  reach  their  dwellings  before 
nightfall. 

Horticulture. 

Selangor  Sakai. — Of  the  devices  employed  by  the 
Sakai  of  Selangor  for  scaring  the  monkeys  away  from 
their  fruit-trees,  an  official  in  Selangor,  some  years 
back,  observed  one  day  as  he  was  walking  along 
the  central  range  a  noise  that  resembled  the  stroke 
of  an  axe  on  a  hollow  tree.  Next  day  the  same 
noise  continued,  and  he  therefore  started  off  to 
investigate  ;  and  in  a  small  creek  or  water-gully  came 
upon  an  ingenious  contrivance  put  up  by  the  Sakai  to 
frighten  monkeys  away  from  some  durian- trees,  of 
which  there  were  a  number  in  full  bearing  in  the 
neighbourhood.  The  contrivance  was  made  out  of 
an  internode  of  bamboo,  some  five  feet  long,  and  had 
a  fairly  big  stone  lashed  to  the  bottom  end  ;  rather 
less  than  half-way  up  a  hole  had  been  bored  and  a 
long  thin  stick  passed  through  it,  the  ends  of  which 
were  made  fast  to  a  couple  of  trees  on  either  side. 
The  bamboo  was  fixed  at  about  half  a  right  angle,  and 
a  second  bamboo  led  a  stream  of  water  into  it ;  as 
soon  as  the  first  bamboo  became  full,  its  top-heaviness 
caused  it  to  tilt  up,  when  the  weighted  end  fell  with 

1  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.   155.  a  Ibid. 


358  CULTIVATION  part  ii 


a  thud  upon  a  third  piece  of  bamboo  which  was  fixed 
ready  to  receive  it.  The  same  writer  added  that  the 
Sakai  employed  the  "whistling"  (or  "  ifcolian  ") 
bamboo  a  good  deal  for  the  same  purpose,  but  said 
that  this  "  fog-bell  "  of  theirs  was  better.1 

III. — Jakun. 

Blandas. — No  record  has  hitherto  been  obtained  of 
the  actual  rice-planting  ceremonies  practised  by  the 
Blandas  in  K.  Langat.  But  the  agricultural  rites  of 
all  these  tribes,  as  might  be  expected,  are  borrowed 
almost  in  their  entirety  from  their  Malay  neighbours, 
and  hence  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  they  cannot 
differ  greatly  from  the  ceremonies  just  described. 
That  this  is  the  case  is  borne  out  to  some  extent  by 
the  text  of  two  padi  -  planting  charms,  which  were 
given  me  by  the  Blandas  in  this  same  district.  The 
first,  which  corresponds  to  the  Malay  tree-felling  in- 
vocations, may  be  rendered  as  follows  : — 

Charm  to  expel  Earth-demons  on  opening  up  2  a  Clearing. 

Leaves  of  "  kreduk  "  and  "  selimbar,"  3 

Tree-shoots  that  entwine  and  dangle, 
Dangle  till  they  reach  down  earthwards, 
Therewith  chase  I  you,  Earth-demons  ; 
Fly  to  leftward,  fly  to  rightward, 
I  have  chos'n  this  spot  as  lodging 
For  Bananas,  Yams,  and  Rice-plants. 
Lords  of  hill,  and  hill-locked  basin, 
Drive  we  back  these  foul  Earth-demons  ! 

The  second  of  these  charms  is  to  be  used  for 
calling  the  Rice-soul  home  at  harvest-time  ("  panggil 
semangat  padi  ").4     It  runs  as  follows  : — 

1  "Queensland"  in   Set.  J.   vol.    i.  3  A    big    climbing    parasite     (Klin- 
No.  15,  p.  230.  kert). 

2  "Menetau";  so-called    in  Malay  4  Cp.  Malay  Magic,  p.  235  seqq. 
also. 


,;  , 


■ 


z 


McGregor. 

Cultivation  of  the  Tapioca-Plant  (on  Left)  and  Sugar-Cane  (in  Centre »-- 
Aboriginal  Woman  in  Foreground,    Y\x  Kali,  Selangor. 


Vol.  I.  p.  359. 


,  ..  \r.  vii  SAl  AGE  MAI  A  KS  Of     •/  I   1  VG0A? 


(   HAH  M    i  "i-    INVOKING     I  HI    RH  I     OUL. 

Rice  boal  '  male  wid  Rice  boal  f<  m  tie  I 
<  Iluck,  elm  k  >  luck  !  jfoui  •""I .  I  lummon, 
Both  the  gii  I  child  and  the  bo)  child 
('linn-,  we  yearn  to  beai  you  homewards, 
SouU  oi  Kit c  |ii:uu -,':  S'lotan,  Boraki 
|.iml>i,  Pulut,8  Maize,  Banan 
Thus  into  the  hou  w  we  beai  you, 
In  the  ioil  no  longei  ilumber, 
Slumber  now  a  ithin  the  cui  ta 

The  directions  given  me  in  connection  with  this 
charm  were  that  the  magician,  on  reaching  the  house 
(when  returning  from  the  rice  -  field),  should  say 
"Coming"  (Mai.  "datang").  As  soon  as  the  people 
in  the  house,  who  ought  to  be  on  the  look-out,  hear 
this  announcement,  they  should  bid  the  Rice -child 
welcome  with  "  Come  hither,  then  !  " 

One  of  the  most  interesting  facts  to  be  deduced 
from  the  above  charm  (which  was  given  me  by  an  old 
Blandas  chief)  is  the  fact  that  by  these  aborigines 
a  soul  is  attributed  to  maize  and  banana  trees,  as  well 
as  to  the  various  kinds  of  rice. 

Horticulture. 

Besisi. — The  Besisi  have  little  that  can  be  termed 
horticulture,  though  by  dispersing  either  in  their  own 
plantations,  or  in  the  jungle,  the  seeds  and  stones  of 
the  fruit  which  they  eat,  and  sometimes  clearing  the 
undergrowth  around  them  afterwards,  they  naturally 
come  to  look  to  some  extent  upon  the  trees  that 
spring  from  these  seeds  as  the  property  of  their  tribe. 

1  The  rice-boat  or  "  puan,"'  as  it  is  "  Borak  "  and  "Jambi,"  are  the  names 
called  in  Malay,  is  a  boat-shaped  of  the  best  kinds  of  rice  ("padi")  grown 
wooden  box   (with   built-out    part    be-       in  the  district. 

hind),  in  which    rice    is   deposited    by  3   "  Pulut "    is    Oryza  glutinosa,   or 

Malays    when     used     ceremonially    on  glutinous  rice,  used  chiefly  with  turmeric 

great  occasions,  or  in  processions,  such  on  ceremonial  occasions, 

as  that  of  a  wedding,  etc.  4  Lit.     "  mosquito  -  curtains  "  —  a 

2  "Sclotan"  or  •'  S'lotan,"  as  well  as  wonderfully  graphic  and  human  touch  ! 


360  CULTIVATION  part  II 

At  the  same  time,  it  should  be  observed  that  their 
claim  when  made,  as  so  often  happens,  by  way  of  pro- 
test against  some  usurping  Malay,  is  not  to  the  owner- 
ship of  the  tree  or  trees,  but  merely  to  a  reasonable 
share  of  their  fruit.  The  Malay  is  frequently  left  in 
possession  by  the  simple  jungle-folk  with  this  express 
proviso,  but  as  frequently  breaks  his  contract,  and  this 
question  of  the  ownership  of  such  trees  has  repeatedly 
received  the  attention  of  the  Government,  the  dis- 
appointment of  the  aborigines  having  repeatedly  led 
to  great  wrangling  between  them  and  the  Malays, 
whilst  the  latter  never  hesitate  to  use  their  power  as 
the  stronger  race  for  the  purpose  of  seizing  the; trees 
entirely  whenever  they  find  an  opportunity  of  doing  so 
unchecked.  The  trees  thus  planted  are  the  durian, 
the  mangostin,  rambutan,  rambai,  lansat,  tampoi, 
and  others,  the  value  of  even  a  small  orchard  of  this 
kind  to  a  Malay  being  very  considerable.  The  late 
Sultan  Abdul  Samad  of  Selangor,  whose  mother  was 
said  to  have  been  of  aboriginal  extraction,  had  several 
such  orchards  in  his  possession,  and  most  of  the  in- 
fluential Malay  chiefs  who  surrounded  him  were  the 
owners  of  similar  property. 

The  collecting  of  the  fruit  is  done  for  the  most 
part  by  women.  A  special  fruit-gathering  implement 
(which  may,  however,  be  copied  from  one  employed  by 
the  Malays)  has  been  described  by  Mr.  Bellamy,  who 
saw  it  in  use  among  the  Besisi,  as  I  have  myself  done. 
It  was  used  mostly  for  fruits  about  the  size  of  an 
apple,  especially  the  mangostin,  and  its  main  object 
was  apparently  to  do  away  with  the  necessity  of  climb- 
ing the  trees.  To  make  it,  the  Besisi  would  procure 
a  long  thin  bamboo,  and  splitting  it  lengthwise  (at 
one   extremity)   between   two  joints  or  nodes,  press 


chap,  vii  SAVAGE  MALAYS  Of  SBLANGOR 

the  split  end  forcibly  down  until  the  section  opened 

out    and    took  shape  not    unlike    that    oi    a    Small    round 

cage.  This  cage  like  Formation  was  then  bound 
round  with  rattan  to  preserve  its  shape,  and  a  portion 
o\    two   or   three   of  the    bars  of  the  (;i.sr<-  ,('- 

sufficient   length  being,  however,  left  in  the  bars  ol 

the  upper  section  to  form  .1  sort  oi  claws.  I  he  fruit- 
gatherer,  alter  Strapping  a  basket  on  to  her  hack, 
then    set    to   work,    and    passing    the   claws    round    the 

st.dk  of  the  first  mangostin,  gave  a  slight  pull  so  as  to 
detach  the  fruit,  which,  instead  o\  falling  to  the  ground 

and  becoming  bruised,  simply  dropped  into  the  cage 
below  the  claws. 

I  may  add  that  the  Besisi  also  occasionally,  like 
the  Malays,  make  use  of  magic  to  cause  their  fruit- 
trees  to  bear  better. 

Agriculture. 

The  Besisi  cultivated  the  usual  catch-crops  (maize, 
tapioca,  yams,  and  sweet  potatoes,  etc.)  as  wrell  as 
rice,  though  the  harvests  that  they  obtained  were 
seldom  very  much  to  boast  of.  Their  settlement  at 
Ayer  I  tarn  stood  in  very  low-lying  ground  which  re- 
mained more  or  less  swampy  throughout  the  year,  so 
that  there  was  no  trouble  about  water- courses  and 
embankments,  a  fact  which  they  evidently  appreciated, 
this  being  the  great  stumbling-block  in  the  way  of 
regular  rice-cultivation,  even  among  the  local  Malays. 
The  following  lines  of  a  song  sung  at  a  Besisi  rice- 
feast  describe  the  various  processes  of  rice-culture  as 
practised  by  their  tribe  : — 

Song  of  the  Rice-planters. 

Go  ye  out  to  fell  your  clearings, 
Burn  ye  then  your  sun-dried  timber, 


362  CULTIVATION  cart  ii 


Marly  plant,  to  make  rice  fruitful,1 
Plant  ye  rice,  yams,  cane,  bananas. 
Build  a  hut  to  shade  the  planters. 
When  your  crop's  ripe,  reap  it  quickly, 
Or  you'll  want,  your  rice  grown  rotten. 
Leave  it  not  then,  reap  it  thoroughly. 

The  operations  of  sowing  and  reaping  were  always 
accompanied  by  the  reciting  of  charms,  which  appear  at 
first  sight  to  be  borrowed,  almost  bodily,  from  the  rice- 
customs  of  the  local  Malays,  though  it  is  more  probable 
that  a  large  portion  of  them  were  of  independent  Jakun 
{i.e.  aboriginal  Malayan)  origin.  Periodical  feasts 
were  also  held  in  the  house  of  the  tribal  chief  or  Batin, 
both  when  the  rice  first  began  to  bloom,  and  also  at 
the  beginning,  middle,  and  end  of  the  harvest. 

The  Besisi  have  a  ceremony  (resembling  that  of 
the  Malays)  for  bringing  the  Rice-soul  back  to  the 
house.  But  on  arrival  at  the  house  the  Rice-soul  is 
suspended  from  the  ridge-pole  of  the  roof  ("tulang  bum- 
bongan  ")  instead  of  being  deposited  (as  by  the  local 
Malays)  in  the  rice-bin  ("  kepok  padi.")2  As  soon  as 
the  Rice-soul  has  been  brought  home  the  Besisi  hold 
one  of  their  great  feasts  or  orgies  ("  main  jo'oh  "),  at 
one  of  which  I  was  fortunate  enough  to  be  present,  and 
of  which  I  accordingly  took  careful  notes  at  the  time. 

This  festival  that  I  attended  took  place  at  the 
Besisi  settlement  at  Ayer  I  tarn  in  the  Kuala  Langat 
district  of  Selangor.  On  reaching  the  Batin's  house 
— which  was  the  largest  house  in  the  village,  and  had 
a  specially  built  "balei"  attached  to  it,  which  could 
have  probably  held  at  one  time  a  hundred  people — we 
found  it  decorated  in  expectation  of  our  arrival,  which 
took  place  at  about  half-past  one.      By  half-past  two 

1  Lines    two    and    three    are   trans-  -  One  of  the  points  that  suggest  for 

posed    in    the    original,    no    doubt    by       this  rite  an  origin  independent  of  the 
accident.  civilised  Malay  customs. 


.  haf,  \  11  SAVAGE   MALA\  i  i '/  \    <  >J? 

the  cooking  ol  the  rice  bj  the  women  ol  the  vill 
was  completed,  and  there  being  aboul  lixtj  pei  sona 
present,  the  men  Bat  down.  Before  the  Feasting  com- 
menced, however,  a  charm  was  recited  by  one  i 
minor  chiefs.  Seating  himself  at  the  head  oi  two  long 
rows  of  banana-leaf  "dish*  (all  of  which  were  well 
heaped  with  rice  as  they  lay  on  the  floor),  he  addressed 
a  friendly  invitation  to  those  beasts  of  the  jungle  and 
noxious  insects  which  at  all  other  times  are  considered 

the  deadliest  foes  o(  rice-planters,  but  which  (on  this 
occasion  only)  were  invited  to  glut  themselves,  and  so 

join  in  the  general  banquet.  This  charm,  which  I 
afterwards  took  down  from  the  chief  who  recited  it, 
was  mostly  in  Malay,  and  ran  as  follows  : — 

Invocation  of  the  Enemies  of  the  Rice-crop. 

Partake,  ()  Round-foot. 

Partake,  < )  Rats. 

Partake,  O  Blight. 

Partake,  ( )  Finches, 

Partake,  O  Stink-bugs. 

Partake,  O  Caterpillars. 

Partake,  ()  (ireen-fly. 

Partake,  ()  Deer. 

Partake,  O  Pig. 

Partake  all  of  you  of  the  year's  Eldest-born. 

We  have  not  eaten  yet. 

But  are  just  about  to  do  so. 

"  Round-foot "  is  euphemistic  for  the  elephant, 
which,  together  writh  the  wild  pig,  deer,  and  rats,  used 
to  work  terrible  havoc  in  the  Besisi  rice-fields  at  times. 
At  the  close  of  the  invocation  a  small  portion  of  rice 
was  carried  out  of  the  house  by  one  of  the  company 
and  deposited  on  the  top  of  an  old  tree-stump  not  far 
from  the  house — in  proof  of  bona  fides. 

The  remaining  banana-leaves  were  now  unfolded  and 
the  feasting  began,  and  lasted  a  considerable  time,  the 
Batin  or  chief  of  the  tribe  feeding  last.     When  it  was 


364  CULTIVATION  pari  ii 


over  we  sat  in  groups  and  conversed  till  nightfall,  when 
our  unsophisticated  orchestra  struck  up  its  liveliest  air, 
and  the  business  of  the  evening  (dancing  and  singing) 
commenced  in  real  earnest.  The  performance  was 
strictly  choral  (in  the  old  Greek  sense  of  the  word),  and 
the  names  of  the  airs  (and  their  accompanying  dances) 
which  were  performed  were  as  follows  : — (i)  "  Radin," 
or  "  The  Prince";  (2)  "  Gubang  Laut,"  or  "The 
Pirateer";  (3)  "  Pukol  Baling";  (4)  "  Ingkau  Badan," 
the  two  last  being  tunes  of  the  Bajau  or  Malayan 
pirates,  with  whom  the  Besisi  claim  kinship.  A  little 
later,  after  an  interval  for  song-dances  of  the  mimetic 
type  (viz.  the  "Siamang,"  "  Bangkong,"  and  "  Gagau  "), 
the  women,  after  considerable  pressing,  were  induced 
to  join  the  entertainment  and  perform  certain  dances 
called  (1)  the  "  P'rang,"  or  the  war-dance;  (2)  the 
"  Bengkalis"; l  and  (3)  the  "  Kopak  "  (the  latter[of  which 
was  said  to  be  a  purely  Jakun  air),  the  men  doing  the 
actual  dancing.  Generally  speaking,  the  motions  of 
the  dancers  were  much  freer  than  is  the  case  with 
the  Malays  ;  indeed,  some  of  the  dances,  such  as  the 
"  Pirateer"  (or  "  Gubang  "),  grew  almost  furious,  and 
roused  great  enthusiasm  on  the  part  of  the  audience. 
The  "  Siamang "  and  its  companion  pieces,  on  the 
other  hand,  were  really  acted  in  character  by  men  of 
the  tribe,  the  actor  repeating  the  words  of  the  poem 
after  the  Batin  or  tribal  chief,  and  suiting  his  gestures 
to  the  words  as  he  did  so.  Some  of  this  acting  was 
particularly  clever. 

I  may  add  that  the  full  dancing  dress  of  the  Jakun 
on  these  occasions  consisted  of  woven  strips  of  "  ser- 
dang  "  (palm)  leaves,  which  were  made  up  into  (1)  a 

1   The   name    of  an    island    off   the       believe,  of  a  fish  after  which  the  island 
opposite  coast  of  Sumatra,  and  also,  I       was  named. 


chak  vii  //  AGl     MAI  i    MALAi 


hc.id  I*. md  with  .1  long  Fringe,  which  wen(  completely 
round  tin-  head  and    partially   hid  the  Face;  (2)  1 
tassels  similarly  constructed,  which  were  attached  to 
the  head-band;  (3)  a  sort  ol  bandolier  made  of  the 

same  leaves ;  and  (  |)  a  "  S( irdang  " -1<  it  belt,    The  full 

dross  was  not  ready  on  our  arrival,  but  it  was  worn  the 

next  morning  at  an  additional  impromptu  performance 
which  was  got  up  for  our  benefit  before  we  left  on  our 
journey  home 

Agriculture, 

Mantra.  -The  Mantra  were  not  so  advanced  in 
cultivation  as  the  Karens  of  the  Tenasserim  coast. 
These  last  cultivated  cotton  and  made  their  own  cloth, 
which  was  not  the  case  with  the  Mantra.  The 
Karens  also  had  vegetables,  which  were  unknown  to 
the  Mantra.  The  latter  contented  themselves  with 
clearing  a  small  piece  of  ground  in  March,  and  in  July- 
set  fire  to  the  (felled)  trees,  wrhich  by  that  time  were 
sufficiently  dry,  and  at  the  beginning  of  September 
planted  their  padi  and  yams  ("  k'ladi "),  etc.  But 
these  clearings  were  usually  so  small  that  their 
harvest  ;of  rice  was  only  enough  to  last  them  for  a 
couple  of  months,  the  yam  being  then  their  only  food 
for  the  remainder  of  the  year.1 

Logan  relates  that  just  as  the  Benua-Jakun  on  com- 
mencing a  new  clearing  made  offerings  to  the  earth- 
genie  ("  Jin  Bumi  "),  so  too  the  Mantra,  when  he  had 
resolved  to  abandon  his  old  plantation,  began  first  of 
all  by  searching  for  a  good  locality.  When  he  had 
found  one,  it  remained  for  him  to  discover  whether  the 
supernatural  powers  were  favourable  to  his  occupation 
of  it.  This  he  did  by  attending  to  his  first  dream 
after  making  the  selection.     Should  he  dream  of  being 

1  Barbe  in/.  /.  A.  vol.  v.  pp.  487,  4S8. 


366  CULTIVATION  part  n 

chased  by  a  dog,  or  by  an  enemy,  or  of  entering  water, 
or  of  water  flooding  the  locality,  or  of  any  other  such 
incident  which  was  considered  a  bad  omen,  he  pro- 
ceeded to  seek  for  another  spot.  Favourable  omens 
were  to  dream  of  felling  or  of  climbing  trees,  of  ascend- 
ing a  hill,  or  of  growing  plants,  and  so  forth.  When 
by  means  of  his  dreams  he  felt  assured  that  he  had 
selected  a  fortunate  place,  he  repaired  to  the  spot,  took 
a  little  betel-leaf,  repeated  a  charm  over  it,  chewed 
it,  and  then  spat  or  rather  blew  it  out  of  his  mouth 
("  sembor  ")  in  the  direction  of  the  four  cardinal  points. 
The  charm  used  was  the  following  : — "  Huma,1  Opener 
of  the  mouth,  Opener  of  me,  open,  and  let  youth  at  the 
river-mouth  be  fostered  by  youth.  I  cast  down  devils,  let 
them  fall  headlong  even  before  I  have  charmed  them. 
I  have  driven  away  the  venom  of  devils.  I  ask  you  to 
expel  and  drive  away  devils  of  every  description."2 

The  ceremony  ended,  he  proceeded  to  fell  a  space 
"  big  enough  to  cook  in  "  ("  tebas  api  dapor  "),  and 
retired.  Three  days  later  he  returned  to  the  spot, 
and  began  his  labour  in  earnest.  Having  cleared  a 
sufficient  space,  he  waited  until  the  trees  he  had  felled 
were  sufficiently  dry,  and  then,  on  some  clear  windy 
day,  set  fire  to  them.  When  the  ground  was  ready  to 
receive  his  plants,  he  prepared  some  rice-flour  mixed 
with  water  (Malay,  "tepong  tawar "),  in  which  he 
dipped  a  brush  made  up  of  leaves  of  the  "  satawar," 
"  gandarusa,"  "  ati-ati,"  and  "  ribu-ribu,"  and  sprinkled 
the  liquid  at  intervals  about  his  clearing.3  He  then 
buried  in  the  ground  some  talisman  that  had  the  pro- 
perty of  driving  away  the  evil  influence  or  bad  demon 
that  lurked  in  the  ground  ("  buang  badi  tanah  ").     The 

1   A  clearing  for  dry  hill-padi.  2  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  320,  321*. 

3  Cp.  Malay  Magic,  pp.  230-233. 


i  h  kF  vii  SAVAGE  M-U  AYS  0/    WALAi  - 


clearing  being  now  completely  prote<  ted,  he  pr<  led 
with  confidence  to  plant  his  potatoes  and  yams.1 

Rice,  however,  required  a  special  charm  ol  its  own, 
and  when  it  was  sown,  about  two  "chupak  measi  re 
of  padi  were  taken  and  mixed  with  the  rice-flour 
water  ("  t£pong  tawar")  and  lime-jui<  This  liquor 
was  carried  to  the  place  where  the  rice  was  to  be 
sown,   together  with  a  Malay  peeling  -  knife  ("pisau 

rant  "),  a  "  sarong,"  a  censer  ( "  perasapan  "),  and  lea\ 

of  the  " ribu-ribu,"  " s&dingin,"  and  "pandan."  The 
padi  was  then  fumigated  in  the  smoke  of  gum  ben- 
jamin or  eagle-wood  ("lignum  aloes"),  and  the  leaves 
placed  over  it,  the  "sarong"  being  stretched  between 
two  erect  poles,  and  the  knife  deposited  on  the  ground. 
The  following  charm  or  invocation  was  then  repeated  : 
— "  In  the  name  of  Allah.  For  good-luck's  sake  give 
cold,  give  coolness.  Lo,  I  deposit  here  this  infant 
(i.e.  the  padi-seed)."  The  leaves  were  now  planted 
in  the  ground,  and  the  padi  was  sown.  Three  days 
afterwards  the  sowing  of  the  entire  field  was  completed, 
the  holes  for  the  seed  having  been  prepared  before- 
hand. In  planting  ''wet"  or  "swamp"  rice  ("padi 
sawah  ")  similar  ceremonies  were  used.- 

When  the  grain  was  ripe,  and  a  day  had  been  fixed 
for  the  commencement  of  the  harvest,  a  large  quan- 
tity of  food  was  collected,  and  guests  invited  to  attend 
the  feast  of  the  New  Year's  Day  of  the  Rice  ("  makan 
sulong  tahun ").  In  the  morning  the  head  of  the 
family,  having  carefully  wrapped  his  clothes  round 
him  so  as  to  conceal  his  entire  person  ("  berselubong  "), 
proceeded  to  the  padi-field  with  a  Malay  reaping-knife 
("  tue  "),  and  repeated  this  invocation  : — "  In  the  name 
of  Allah.      I  take  up  the  soul  of  the  Rice.      Let  it  not 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  321*.  2  Ibid. 


368 


CULTIVATION 


PART  II 


suffer  from  coolness  nor  from  cold.  I  take  up  these 
infants  (the  Rice-souls)  and  bear  them  homewards." 
The  operator  next  cut  (the  first)  seven  ears,  and  carried 
them  away  to  his  house.  He  next  ordered  some  of 
his  household  to  go  to  a  different  part  of  his  field,  and 
cut  a  considerable  quantity  of  padi,  the  grain  of 
which,  when  brought  in,  was  trodden  and  rubbed  out 
of  the  straw  by  foot,1  after  which  it  was  husked  and 
cooked  along  with  the  food  that  had  been  collected  on 
the  preceding  day.  When  the  guests  had  feasted 
and  were  about  to  depart,  each  of  them  received  a 
little  of  the  new  rice  and  food  uncooked  as  a  kind  of 
blessing  or  largess  ("  berkat  ").2 

The  names  given  by  the  Mantra  to  the  different 
varieties  of  padi  cultivated  by  them  were  the 
following  : — 


Kledang 

Mret  (elephant). 

Ribu. 

Hati  kerbau  (buffalo's 

(a  wild  fruit). 

heart). 

Tampoi 

Machin. 

Atap  (palm- 

Sri   gunong    (luck   of 

(a  wild  fruit). 

thatch). 

the  mountains). 

Saring. 

Undan  (pelican). 

Tingol. 

Pulut  itam  (black 
glutinous  rice). 

Koai. 

Lampei. 

Buiak. 

Pulut     putih     (white 
glutinous  rice). 

The  dry-rice  cultivation  is  by  far  the  most  pre- 
valent, but  the  wet  cultivation  is  also  resorted  to  at 
Labu,  Malim,  Serdang,  Payong,  Pasang,  Jugra, 
Rawang  Kechil,  Rawang  Besar,  Kidang,  and  Sepang 
Kechil.3 

Of  other  forms  of  cultivation  the  only  one  which  I 
have  found  ascribed  to  the  Mantra  is  gambier-planting 


1  Cp.  Malay  Magic,  p.  245. 

2  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  322*. 

3  Ibid.  p.  331*. 

It  should  be  explained  that  the  cul- 
tivation of  wet  rice  grown  within  low 
embankments  is  not  practised,  so  far  as 
I  know,  by  any  of  these  Jakun  tribes. 


There  are  in  fact  three  methods  of  rice- 
planting  practised  in  the  country — (1) 
the  dry  hill-rice;  (2)  swamp-grown  rice 
(without  embankments  or  water-course); 
(3)  wet  rice  (with  both  these  latter). 
Most  of  the  places  mentioned  are  in  the 
Kuala  Langat  district  of  Selangor. 


chaf.  vii  SAVAGE   MAI   I  I      Of  fOHOR 


(which  is  mentioned  by  Logan),  though  I  have  little 
doubt  that  many  other  light  crops,  such  ai  tobsio 
ar<-  also  grown  by  them  when  occasion   happens  to 


ve.1 


Horticulture* 

Benua-Jakun  of  Johor.     Although  their  clearings  did 
not  yield  fruit,  the   Benua  often  planted  young  durian 

trees  and    "  chempedak  "    trees    among   their  potato 

and  bananas.  In  after  years  they  would  revisit  the 
place,  and  if  the  trees  had  grown  up  and  bore  fruit 
they  would  cut  down  the  young  jungle  ("b'lukar") 
growing  up  around  them,  and  thus  reclaim  their 
orchard.1'  In  the  forest  Logan  passed  many  of 
these  orchards,  some  of  which  contained  durian  trees 
of  great  size  and  beauty.  The  durian  groves  were 
frequently  at  a  distance  of  one  or  two  days'  walk  (or 
even  more)  from  the  clearing,  and  families  found  it  in 
such  cases  more  convenient  and  agreeable  to  resort  to 
the  groves  themselves  than  to  have  the  fruit  brought 
to  them.  Slight  temporary  huts  were  therefore  con- 
structed beside  the  fruit-trees,  and  here  they  passed 
the  fruit  season,  which  lasted  from  one  to  two  months, 
and  only  returned  home  when  the  last  durian  had 
been  gathered.  In  one  of  these  groves,  that  of 
Danlek,  where  Logan  took  advantage  of  the  hut  to 
rest  and  pass  the  night,  there  were  some  smaller  huts 
on  the  ground,  which  appeared  to  have  been  specially 
devoted  to  durian-eating,  for  while  bushels  of  seeds 
and  husks  were  heaped  around  them,  very  few  were 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  254,  255.  spent   upon   clearing  the  trees  around 

3  These     orchards     generally    con-  them.      See  account  of  Jakun  orchards 

tained  from  ten  to  twelve  large  durian  iny.  /.  A.  vol.  ii.  p.  261. 

trees,  and   great   care  and  trouble  was 

VOL.  I  2  B 


370  CULTIVATION  part  it 

to  be  seen  below  the  raised  hut.  The  durian  feast 
was  the  most  joyous  season  of  the  year,  and  if  the 
wilder  habits  of  their  forefathers  still  had  a  poetical 
charm  for  the  Benua,  as  appeared  to  be  the  case,  it 
would  not  be  easy  to  picture  them  in  a  happier  mood 
than  when  secluded  in  such  a  spot  as  Danlek,  freed 
for  the  while  from  the  intrusions  and  exactions  of  the 
Malays,  and  drawing  from  the  pure  waters  of  the 
Kahang  river,  which  ran  past  the  grove,  and  from  the 
surrounding  forest,  the  cheer  which  recalled  the 
banquets  of  the  olden  time  when  a  traditionary  prince 
of  their  race  ruled  the  land.  A  full-grown  durian 
orchard  was  the  only  kind  of  property  in  any  form  of 
cultivation  which  was  of  permanent  value  to  them,  for 
whilst  neither  houses,  nor  gardens,  nor  rice -fields, 
nor  in  fact  any  land  whatever,  had  sufficient  value  to 
command  a  price,  durian  trees  were  not  unfrequently 
sold.  One  dollar  was  the  standard  price  paid  for 
each  of  the  buttress  -  like  projections  or  "  struts " 
("banir")  which  the  trunk  of  the  durian,  like  that 
of  several  other  Malayan  trees,  throws  out  at  the 
base  of  the  stem.  Those  with  plain  stems  and  no 
buttresses  were  valued  at  two  dollars.  Durian 
groves  were  sometimes  rented  for  a  piece  of  cloth  or 
similar  object  of  the  value  of  a  few  dollars,  and  by 
their  custom  ("  hadat ")  the  renter  was  invariably 
entitled  to  the  produce  for  two  successive  seasons. 
This  was  probably  founded  in  reason,  for  durians 
generally  have  alternate  light  and  heavy  crops.1 

Agriculture. 

Their  method  of  rice-planting  was  to  clear  fresh 
patches  of  jungle  annually,  and  to  build  their  huts  in 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  259,  260. 


chap   vii  LAVAGE   MALAYS  OF JOHOR  j7« 

thr  clearings  so  made,  the  principal  hut  being  built  in 
the  piece  of  ground  that  had  last  been  cleared.  This 
was  usually  at  some  distance  From  the  bank  ol  a  riv<  r 

in    order   to   avoid    the    inundations    which    OO  ur   after 

heavy  rains.  Offerings  were  made,  as  by  the  Malays, 
to  the  Earth  genie  ("Jin  Bumi")  on  commencing  to 
fell   the   forest.     As  soon  as  a  sufficient    space   had 

been  Opened,  the  trees  were  left  for  sonic  months  to 
dry.  They  were  then  burnt,  and  holes  made  with  a 
stick  in  the  ground  (which  was  enriched  by  the  wood- 
ish  produced  by  the  burning)  for  the  reception  of 
plants  and  seeds  brought  from  their  last  clearing. 
The  cultivated  plants  found  in  almost  every  Jakun 
clearing  were  the  sweet  potato  ("  k'ledek "),  the 
potato  ("  ubi  benggala  "),  the  tapioca  ("  ubi  kayu  "), 
the  water  -  melon,  and  the  sugar  -  cane.  Bananas 
occurred  frequently,  but  not  abundantly.  Maize  was 
not  so  common  as  with  the  Berembun  tribes.  The 
wild  leaves  and  shoots  used  as  vegetables  by  these 
tribes1  did  not  appear  to  be  resorted  to  in  Johor.  In 
many  clearings  tobacco  was  cultivated,  and  in  a  few 
some  kinds  of  bean  ("  kachang  bunga',"  etc.).  In  a 
considerable  number  of  the  clearings  a  portion  was 
set  apart  for  the  growth  of  rice.  The  dry  or  wet 
forms  of  cultivation  were  resorted  to  according  to  the 
nature  of  the  locality,  but  the  former  was  most 
general.  Flowers  were  neglected.  Only  a  single 
instance  of  their  cultivation  was  noticed,  and  they 
were  never  worn  in  the  hair.     It  must  be  remembered, 

1  Such    as    the    "lipu,"    "alung,"  and  the  leaves  of  ferns  ("  paku"),  "  je- 

"chinarong,"  "bayan,"and  "maman";  latang,"  "  tuba,"  "  kapaya,"  "kaum," 

the    "cabbage"    of   the    palms   called  "samoma,"  "  papijih  "  ;  and  the  roots 

"  nibong,"       "  langkap,"        "  enau,"  of  the  "  gadong,"  "gupul,"  "  bajon," 

"runut,"    "chacheng,"    "  dempong,"  "k'luna,"    "  lintag,"    "tragel,"    "  da- 

"noin,"  "k'lasak,"   "limpet,"  "  che-  gun,"     "  tukil,"     "kung,"     "wuan," 

che,"    "semambu,"   and    "  serdang  "  ;  '*  woel,"  "  punu,"  "  kapayang,"  etc. 


372  CULTIVATION  parti 


however,  that  the  dwellings  of  these  people  were 
environed  by  one  vast  botanical  garden,  and  that  the 
river-banks  were  hung  and  the  forest  paths  strewed 
with  a  great  variety  of  beautiful  flowers.  All  the 
remarks  in  this  section,  with  the  slight  exceptions 
mentioned,  apply  also  to  the  Berembun  tribes.  The 
clearing  having  once  been  formed,  received  no  culture, 
and  was  left  entirely  to  the  control  of  the  women.1 

The  only  kinds  of  cultivation  in  which  the 
Benua-Jakun  engaged  have  now  been  noticed.  They 
had  no  agricultural  implements.  A  stick  sharpened 
at  one  end  served  as  a  dibble,  and  the  chopper 
("parang")  was  used  for  digging  up  roots,  cutting 
sugar  -  cane,  etc.  Rice  (or  padi)  was  reaped  by 
hand,  and  canoes  were  employed  for  transporting  any 
considerable  quantity  of  it.  A  canoe  from  12  to  15 
feet  in  length  was  able  to  carry  from  400  to  500 
gallons  ("  gantangs ")  of  rice,  besides  the  two  men 
whose  task  it  was  to  manage  it.2 


Orang  Laut  or  Sea-Jakun. 

Orang1  Laut,  Sletar. — The  Orang  Sletar  neither  dug 
nor  planted,  but  lived  nearly  independent  of  their 
fellow-men,  for  to  them  the  staple  of  life  in  the  East, 
rice,  was  a  luxury.  Of  esculent  roots  they  had  the 
"p'rioh"  (?"peria")  and  "k'lana,"3  both  bulbous, 
and  not  unlike  coarse  yams ;  of  fruit  they  ate  the 
"tampui,"  "k'ledang,"  and  "buroh,"  whenever  they 
came  in  season.4 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  255,  256  ;  cp.  doned  and  another  selected  for  the  next 

a    similar    method     of    rice  -  planting  year. 

ascribed    to    the   Jakun,  /.  /.  A.    vol.  2  /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  271,  272. 

ii.    p.    258,    where    we    are    told    that  3  Sic.  ?  "k'luna,"  as  in  note,  p.  371. 

after    the   harvest   the  place  is  aban-  4  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  343*. 


«  hap.  vii  MALA  )  AN  SEA  G  vr  a  \i\ 


Orang  Laut,  Sabimba.     The  Sabimba  also  ab  ttained 
from  planting,  and  consequently  their  vegetables  con 
sis  ted  <>i  the  wild  Fruits  of  the  jungle.1 

Orang     Laut,    Muka    Kuning.      The    Orang    Muka 

Kuning  did  not  cultivate  any  j)lants,  or  breed  any 
animals  save  dogS.s 

Orang*    Laut,    Beduanda    Kallang. —  The    Beduanda 

Kallang  not  only  did  not  cultivate  any  plants,  hut 
asserted  that  their  ancestors  had  made  a  vow  on  the 
part  of  their  tribe  never  to  make  clearings  for  the 
purpose  of  cultivation,  and  stated  that  they  believed 
that  if  any  of  them  were  to  break  it  death  would  be 
the  consequence.3 

1   /.  /.  ./.  vol.  i.  p.  ;,47*.  ■   Ibid.  p.  337*.  3   Ibid.  p.  300. 


CHAPTER    VIII. 

Arts  and  Crafts. 

Division  of  Labour. 

As  a  rule  it  may  be  said  among  all  the  tribes  that  the 
men  perform  the  essential  minimum  of  such  work  as 
requires  brute  force,  and  the  women  do  the  rest. 
Among  the  wildest  Semang  tribes,  the  men  do  the 
hunting,  and  the  women  the  shelter-building  and  the 
cooking,  and  so,  too,  among  tribes  which  have 
reached  the  agricultural  stage1  the  men  do  the 
felling  and  heavy  clearing,  whilst  the  women  do 
the  lighter  clearing  and  lopping  of  branches,  as 
well  as  the  sowing  and  reaping,  and  not  unfrequently 
the  tilling  of  the  soil,  if  the  scratching  of  its  surface 
with  a  pointed  stick  can  be  so  called.  Similarly,  when 
a  regular  house  or  hut  has  to  be  built,  the  men  only 

1  The     following      description,     by  to  collect  sweet  potatoes,   sugar-cane, 

Logan,  of  the  work  of  the  Benua-Jakun  and  so  forth,  for  the  morning  repast, 

women    applies,    generally    speaking,  Breakfast  once  cooked  and  despatched, 

to    all    tribes   that    have   reached    this  they    employ    themselves    in     nursing 

stage  : —  their  children  and  weaving    mats  and 

"  The  plantation,  having  once  been  bags  until  it  is  time  to  go  out  and  fill 
formed,  receives  no  culture,  and  is  left  their  baskets  again  for  the  evening 
entirely  to  the  control  of  the  women,  meal.  If  the  men  are  at  home,  a  slight 
who  are  never  for  a  moment  idle.  In  meal  is  also  prepared  in  the  middle  of 
the  morning,  having  first  refilled  their  the  day.  The  only  employment  at  a 
melon -skins  (or  gourds)  with  water,  distance  from  the  plantation  which 
they  fasten  a  deep  basket  on  to  their  they  share  with  the  men,  and  some- 
backs  by  means  of  straps  passing  over  times  pursue  by  themselves,  is  angling  " 
the  shoulders  and  head,  and  proceed  {J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  256.) 

374 


i  rap.  viu  GENERAL  REMARKS  175 


perform  such  work  as  actually  requires  their  strength 
(<.<;-.  the  felling,  transporting,  and  erection  ol  the 
heavier  timbers),  and  the  women  complete  it.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  men  are  very  generally,  I  believe, 

it  not  invariably,  both  the  makers  and  decorators  oi 
their  own  weapons  [e,g.  the  blowpipe  and  the  bow, 
quivers  and  arrows)  as  well  as  their  own  implements 
((•.;'.  axe-handles,  knife -handles,  and  spear-shafts), 
whilst  the  work  of  making  bags  and  baskets,  mats, 
wallets,  and  pouches,  and  in  fact  all  kinds  of  mat  and 
bark-cloth  making,  and  basket-work,  commonly  fall  to 
the  lot  of  the  women. 

The  men,  again,  do  most  of  the  hunting  and  trap- 
ping, but  the  women  take  a  large  share  in  the  fishing, 
and  in  the  collecting  of  roots  and  fruits.  All  the 
cooking,  on  the  other  hand,  is  performed  by  the 
women  and  girls  of  the  tribe,  as  is  also,  naturally 
enough,  the  nursing  and  care  of  the  children. 

The  catechism  addressed  to  the  bridegroom  at  a 
Besisi  wedding  contains  a  fairly  exhaustive  category 
of  the  duties  of  the  would-be  husband,  and  does  not, 
to  my  mind,  bear  out  the  general  assumption  that  the 
women  are  burdened  with  an  unfair  share  of  the  work. 
On  the  contrary,  it  appears  to  me  that  the  division  of 
labour  among  these  children  of  nature  is  very  fairly 
equitable,  and  that  the  man  cannot  reasonably  be 
expected  to  do  more.  Can  it  be  that  it  is  in  a  more 
advanced  stage  of  civilisation  that  the  real  oppression 
of  the  woman  begins  ? 

Manufacture  of  Bark-cloth. 

The  bark-cloth  which  forms  the  ordinary  worka- 
day wear  of  all  the  wilder  branches  of  these  tribes  is 


376  ARTS  AND  CRAFTS  part  ii 

usually  made  from  the  same  material  as  the  "  tapa  " 
cloth  of  Polynesia,  though  it  is  rarely,  if  ever,  quite 
so  finely  worked  up,  and  is  generally,  in  fact,  somewhat 
roughly  made.  When  stripped  from  the  tree  it  is 
beaten  out  by  means  of  a  wooden  mallet,  either  round 
or  toothed. 

A  specimen  of  the  latter,  which  was  collected  by  the 
writer  among  the  Blandas  of  Selangor,  is  now  in  the 
Cambridge  Museum ;  this  specimen  is  grooved  or 
toothed  transversely,  as  in  Sakai  specimens  from 
Batang  Padang  (Perak),  whereas  in  other  districts, 
more  under  Semang  influence,  the  flat  under-surface 
of  the  mallet  is  subdivided  into  a  large  number  of 
small  squares.  The  direction  of  the  grooves  or  teeth 
must  of  course  depend  upon  the  position  in  which  the 
operator  sits  or  stands  with  respect  to  his  work.1 

The  cloth  when  made  is  often  decorated  with 
designs,  which  again  bear  a  curious  family  resemblance 
to  the  main  designs  sometimes  seen  on  "  tapa  "  cloth. 

The  tree  from  which  the  bark  is  generally  taken  is 
a  kind  of  wild  bread-fruit  tree  (Artocarpus)?  which  is 
called  by  the  Malays  "  terap  "  or  "  t'rap."  But  the  bark 
of  other  trees  (even  that  of  the  Upas  tree,3  which 
furnishes  the  deadly  dart-poison  of  these  tribes)  is  also 
very  generally  used,  the  poisonous  sap  being  merely 
well  washed  out  of  it  with  water.  This  particular 
kind  of  cloth  seems  generally  to  be  recorded  from 
districts  under  some  degree  of  Semang  (Negrito) 
influence. 


1  See  p.  140,  ante.  3  Antiaris  toxicaria^\.{Urticacea). 

2  I.e.  Artocarpus  Kunstleri,  Hook.  The  bark  of  a  kind  of  ficus  (called 
til.  {Urticacece).  It  is  interesting  to  "ara")  was  also  said  to  be  used  for 
note  that  both  this  bread-fruit  tree  cloth  by  the  Negritos  of  Belimbing  (in 
and    the    Upas    belong    to    the   same  Ulu  Kelantan). 

botanical  order. 


Skeat 


Win  1 1    Cloth  oi    U  pas  B  vkk. 


Made  from  the  upas-tree  (  Xntia  irt'd)  by  the  Semang  ol  Kedahi     Bel 

cloth  i^  the  wooden  cudgel  with  whii  h  it  was  made  in  m>  pn 


-  Collection. 


Semang  Baskets. 


i.  One  small  back-basket  found  in  Pangan  hut  (Kuala  Sam, Kelantan).  2.  One  matwork  bag  made  by 
Semang  woman  (Siong,  Kedah).  3.  One  large  pouch  made  by  Semang  woman  (Siong,  Kedah).  4.  5.  Tw  1 
back-baskets  or  wallets  obtained  from  Besis\ 


Vol.  I.  p.  376. 


Cerruti. 

Sakai  Men  with  Back-Basket  and  Blowpipes,   Ui/u  Slim,  S.   Perak. 


Vol.  I.  /.  377. 


chap,  viu  GENERAL  REMARKS  377 


Basket-work* 

The    following    remarks    about    basket-WOrk    iairly 

apply  to  all  three  races  :  Basket-work  is  perhaps  one  oi 
the  most  important  industries  of  the  aboriginal  women. 
It  is  frequently  employed  not  only  for  the  manufacture 

oi  the  all-important  dossier  or  back-basket  in  which  the 
varied  products  of  the  jungle  are  carried  homewards, 
hut  also  for  many  of  the  traps  in  which  birds,  fishes, 
and  some  of  the  smaller  mammalia  are  captured.  The 
work  is  as  a  rule  beautifully  executed,  and  in  plaiting 
the  aboriginal  women  can  rival  the  Malays.  Split 
rattan  and  split  bamboo  are  perhaps  the  most  usual 
materials  employed  for  these  purposes,  as  they  are  not 
only  strong  but  pliant  and  durable.  But  like  all  jungle 
folk,  these  races  naturally  adapt  themselves  to  the 
necessities  of  their  surroundings,  and  of  course  use 
whatever  plant  grows  most  handily  for  their  purpose. 
Thus  not  unfrequently  the  stem  of  the  "bemban"  is 
selected,  even  though  it  lacks  the  durability  of  the 
other  materials  referred  to.  And  the  fibrous  inner 
cuticle  of  several  kinds  of  trees  (such  as  Artocarpus, 
which  furnishes  the  bark  cloth)  is  yet  another  source 
of  supply.1 

Network  and  Weaving. 

Network,  on  the  other  hand,  seems  to  be  but 
scantily  practised  by  any  of  these  tribes,  except,  per- 
haps, where  Malay  influence  is  appreciable,  and  of 
the  actual  weaving  of  any,  even  the  roughest  kind,  of 
cloth,  there  is  no  record  whatever. 

1  See  p.  376,  opp. 


378  ARTS  AND  CRAFTS  part  ii 


Absence  of  Pottery. 

There  is  also  as  yet  no  clear  record  of  any  form  of 
pottery  having  ever  been  manufactured  by  any  of  the 
aborigines,  and  indeed,  so  far  as  is  known,  no  pottery 
of  any  sort  is  at  present  made  by  them.  At  the  same 
time,  we  have  the  generally  reliable  authority  of 
Newbold  for  the  statement  that  a  vessel  of  clay,  called 
"  tammumong,"  was  applied  (by  the  Jakun  or  Benua) 
to  the  purposes  of  cooking,  and  that  it  differed  in  shape 
from  that  used  by  the  Malays} 

Traditions  of  Written  Characters. 

In  spite  of  their  being  one  and  all  universally  and 
absolutely  illiterate,  there  are  nevertheless  among  all 
these  Peninsular  tribes  traditions  of  various  kinds 
relating  to  a  lost  book  or  books  that  are  believed 
to  have  once  contained  their  sacred  writings,  and 
are  alleged  to  have  been  destroyed  by  some  fatality. 
This  belief  is  common  in  Indo- China,  and  we  are 
informed,  for  instance,  that  if  the  Tavoy  Karen 
traditions  are  to  be  credited,  the  ancestors  of  their 
principal  tribe  once  possessed  a  written  book  or  books, 
which  were  given  them  by  one  Kachaklong,  a  very 
sacred  personage,  and  which  were  written  on  cowskin 
parchment? 

1  Newbold,  ii.  405-407.  If  there  is  remarks  that  "this  assumed  use  of 
any  reading  of  this  riddle  to  be  achieved,  parchment  made  from  cow  and  buffalo 
it  may  perhaps  be  that  the  Jakun  or  skin  militates  against  the  idea  of  a 
"savage  Malayans"  alone  of  all  these  Hindu  or  even  of  a  Buddhist  origin 
tribes  once  possessed,  before  the  influx  being  assigned  to  it."  On  this  point, 
of  the  more  civilised  Malays  from  however,  Dr.  Stein,  in  his  "  Prelimin- 
Sumatra,  the  art  of  pottery,  hence  the  ary  Report  on  Archseolog.  Explor.  in 
pots  made  by  them  naturally  took  a  Chinese  Turkestan  "  (London,  1901), 
shape  of  their  own.  p.   47,    notes    with    surprise    that   the 

2  /.  /.  .-4.  vol.  iv.  p.  417.    The  writer  rubbish    heap    near    the    Nuja    River 


(HAT.    VIII 


NEGRITOS  (>/■  KEDAH 


Other  .  trts  and  ( 'rafts. 
Other  kinds  of  arts  and  crafts  practised  by  tin 

tribes  will   be    found    in    Other    parts   of  this   book,  ( 

the  building  of  houses  and  leaf-shelters  in  the  chapter 

On  Habitations,  the  making  of  blowpipes  and  bows  in 
the  chapter  on  Weapons  and  Implements,  the  an  ol 
cooking  as  known  to  the  Semang  in  the,  chapter  on 
Food,  personal  ornaments  under  Dress,  the  construc- 
tion of  traps  and  implements  required  for  the  chase 
or  for  fishing  in  the  chapter  on  Hunting,  Fishing,  and 
Trapping,  the  art  of  agriculture  in  the  chapter  on 
Cultivation,  and  Decorative  Art  under  the  chapter 
so  named. 


I. — Semang. 

General  Industry. 

Kedah  Semang:. — The  Negritos  that  I  visited  at 
Siong  in  Kedah  were  very  lazy  workers,  but  as  it  was 
harvest-time  (the  one  season  of  the  year  when  they 
are  most  free  from  the  pressure  of  want),  they  were 
having  just  then  an  easy  time  of  it.  None  the  less 
they  are  certainly  the  best  and  most  skilful  hunters  in 
the  Peninsula,  and,  as  a  rule,  made  traps  and  weapons, 
collected  the  poison  from  the  Upas  tree  and  applied  it 
to  their  darts,  and  when  game  failed,  went  out  after 


"  yielded  another  writing  material, 
little  suspected  among  a  Buddhist 
population  with  an  Indian  civilisation. 
About  two  dozen  Kharosthl  documents 
on  leather,  mostly  dated  and  appar- 
ently of  official  nature,  prove  that  the 
Buddhists  of  this  region  had  as  little 
objection  to  the  use  of  leather  for  writ- 
ing purposes  as  the  pious  Brahmans 
of  old  Kashmir  had  to  the  leather  bind- 
ings of  their  Sanskrit  codices."  Mr. 
Vincent  A.    Smith,    in    reporting    the 


above  mj.  R.  A.  S.y  Jan.  1902,  p.  232, 
remarks  that  these  leather  documents 
will  probably  prove  to  date  from  the 
second  century  A.D.,  and  quotes  a 
notice  of  an  Indian  official  letter  on 
parchment  sent  to  Augustus  in  Strabo, 
xv-  72>  73>  given  by  M'Crindle,  in 
Ancient  India  as  described  in  Classical 
Literature  (1901),  p.  77. 

For  similar  traditions  (to  that  in  the 
text)  v.  p.  347  of  vol.  ii. 


380  ARTS  AND  CRAFTS  part  ii 

fish    and    turtles,    or    assisted    the    women    in    their 
search  for  roots. 


Manufacture  of  Bark- cloth. 

Kedah  Semang-. — I  have  seen  the  Semang  of  Kedah 
make  cloth  of  Upas-bark  by  cutting  down  young 
saplings  of  the  Upas  tree  (whose  diameter  was 
perhaps  no  more  than  3  or  4  inches).  These  they 
"  ring-barked  "  a  few  feet  from  the  root-end,  and  then 
loosened  the  bark  in  situ  by  hammering  it  with  a 
mere  rounded  (hardwood)  cudgel,  and  then  turning  it 
back  by  hand  in  the  way  that  a  sleeve  is  rolled  back, 
or  a  stocking  taken  off,  the  process  being  continued 
until  all  the  bark  on  each  sapling  has  been  similarly 
treated.  As  soon  as  the  last  of  the  bark  has  been 
thus  stripped  off  it  is  thoroughly  washed  to  remove 
the  poisonous  sap  contained  in  it,  dried  for  a  short 
while  in  the  sun,  and  is  then  ready  for  use  without 
any  further  preparation. 

But  by  far  the  most  interesting  of  all  the  Semang 
articles  of  attire  is  the  black  girdle  woven  from  "  urat 
batu  "  (or  "  rock-veins  ").  This  girdle,  which  is  called 
"  tentom "  in  the  Kedah  dialect  of  Semang,  is  not 
manufactured,  as  usually  stated,  from  a  kind  of  creeper,1 
but  from  the  vegetative  parts  or  rhizomorphs  of  a 
fungus  which  resemble  long,  slender,  black,  leathery- 
looking  shiny  strings,  rather  thinner  than  ordinary 
leather  boot-laces.  A  number  of  these  strings  are 
woven  together  into  a  single  plait,  which  measures 
several  yards  in  length,  the  loose  end,  4  or  5  inches 
of  each   string,  being   allowed  to  hang   down  (when 


1   See  p.   138,  note  I, 


IIIAI'.     \  III 


NEGRITOS  OF  PERAK  \Ki 


the  rest  lias  been  worked  in)  instead  oi  being  fastened, 
so  that  when  the  girdle  is  coiled  round  the  waist  a 
continuous  and  thick  bushy  fringe  is  the  result. 

Perak  Semang*. — The  loin-cloth  of  the  Negrito 
which  constitutes  their  sole  garment,  is  made  (accord- 
ing to  I  )e  Morgan)  from  the  hark  of  a  tree  (Artocarpus). 
The  material  is  thick,  but  Supple  and  soft  to  the  feel, 
and  is  occasionally  painted  yellow  with  the  sap  of 
a  plant,  the  patterns  consisting  simply  of  broken  lines 
{de  lignes  brisies)} 

Of  the  method  of  manufacture  we  are  elsewhere 
told  that  the  bark  (of  the  Artocarpus)  is  either  rendered 
supple  by  being  pounded  between  two  stones,  or  by 
being  beaten  upon  a  tree-trunk  with  a  strong  wooden 
mallet  or  cudgel.  The  strip  of  bark  cut  off  from  the 
tree  measures  from  3-4  metres  in  length,  and  from 
50-60  centimetres  in  breadth." 

In  confirmation  of  the  account  given  above  of  the 
Kedah  Semang,  I  hear  from  Mr.  Wray  that  the  bark  of 
the  Antiaris  was  used  by  both  the  Semang  of  Perak  and 
the  Sakai  as  bark-cloth.  It  was  prepared  as  follows  : — 
A  young  tree  was  felled  and  cut  into  pieces  of  suitable 
length.  The  outer  portion  of  the  bark  was  then 
shaved  off  with  a  knife  and  the  inner  bark  was  beaten 
with  bat-shaped  pieces  of  wood  until  it  would  slip  off 
from  the  stem.  The  bark  was  then  put  into  running 
water,  in  which  it  was  allowed  to  remain  for  the  space  of 
one  month  to  free  it  of  the  poison  ;  then  it  was  beaten 
with  wooden  bats,  on  one  face  of  which  furrows  had 
been  cut  at  right  angles  to  each  other,  to  produce  a 
grain  on  the  finished  cloth.3 

In  a  recent  communication   Mr.  Wray  writes  me 

1  De  Morgan,  vii.  412.  3  L.  Wray   in  J.  A.  I.    vol.  xxi.  (1892), 

2  Ibid,  ii.  5-  PP-  477,  478. 


I'AKT  II 


382  ARTS  AND  CRAFTS 

that  these  mallets  employed  by  the  Semang  of  Perak 
to  beat  out  the  bark  and  give  it  the  grain  (which  it 
retains  even  after  considerable  wear)  are  made  of  hard 
palm-wood.  They  are  bat-shaped,  with  cylindrical 
handles,  and  have  one  surface  of  the  blade  of  the  bat 
scored  with  lines  at  right  angles  to  each  other,  which 
leave  projecting  squares  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch 
across,  divided  by  V-shaped  grooves  of  the  same 
width.  There  are  several  of  these  mallets  from 
Upper  Perak  and  Selama  in  the  Perak  Museum. 

The  fungus  fringe  is  sometimes  supplemented  by 
a  fringe  made  from  small  strips  of  Artocarpus  bark. 
In  a  specimen  from  Selama  the  garment  is  made  up 
as  a  sort  of  belt,  and  ties  behind,  the  fringe  being 
much  fuller  and  deeper  in  front.  Other  specimens 
from  Upper  Perak  are  made  of  long  plaited  cords 
many  yards  in  length,  and  are  wound  round  the  loins. 
This  woman's  garment  Mr.  Wray  considers  to  be 
characteristic  of  the  Semang. 


Mat-making. 

Kedah  Semang. — The  art  of  mat-making  appears 
to  be  natural  to  the  Semang,  although  they  make 
but  limited  use  of  it.  It  is  one  of  the  industries 
which  are  assigned  to  the  women,  the  chief  articles 
thus  made  being  the  mat-work  bags  or  sacks  and  the 
wallets  which  are  used  by  the  Semang  for  holding 
their  husked  rice,  roots,  and  fruits,  and  similar  articles. 
It  is  quite  possible  that  some  kind  of  small  sleeping- 
mat  may  also  be  sometimes  manufactured  by  the 
Semang,  though  I  have  never  seen  it  or  met  with  any 
record  of  its  use  among  the  pure  Negritos. 


ckaf.  viii  NEGRITOS  OF  PERAA 

Substitutes  /<>>'  Pottery* 

Perak  Semang.     ()i  the  art  oi   pottery,  accordi 
to  De  Morgan,1  the  Semang  arc  absolutely  ignorant, 

the     only    vessels    they    use    being     manufactured 

from    big    stems   of    bamboo,    which    they    employ    for 

cooking    purposes  when    green,  and    use    as    water 

vessels   when    the    sap  has   dried    out  oi    them.1       I  I 
Morgan   adds  that  he  only  once   (at    S.   Kerbu)  saw  a 
wooden  howl  used,  this  being  one   which   had   been 
carved  otit  of  the  root  of  a  tree  with  a  knife. 

Raft-making* 

Perak  Semang". — None  of  the  Semang  make  boats, 
hut  the  Semang  (of  Perak)  make  rafts  by  lashing 
together  twenty  or  thirty  bamboos  of  big  diameter, 
and  on  these  they  float  down  the  Perak  River  nearly 
as  far  as  Kuala  Kangsar,  "  though  even  they  walk  back 

M    l 

again. 

Ironwork. 

Perak  Semang. — One  of  the  most  primitive  methods 
of  forging  iron  known  is  recorded  of  the  Perak 
Semang  by  De  Morgan.5  It  consists  simply  in 
heating  the  iron  till  it  gets  red  hot,  and  then  batter- 
ing it  into  the  required  shape  between  two  stones. 
This,  according  to  De  Morgan,  is  the  method  by 
which  they  manufacture  the  iron  heads  of  the  arrows 
that  are  used  with  their  bow. 

It  is  interesting  to  read  that  the  Negritos  of  the 
Andaman  Islands  employed  a  yet  simpler  method,  as 

1  De  Morgan,  vii.  414.  3  De  Morgan,  vii.    414  [i.e.  among 

8  Cp.   Swett.  p.  228:    "Of  pottery  Sakai-Semang  ?] 

they    [the    Negritos]    have    no    know-  4  Hale,  p.  286. 

ledge."  5  De  Morgan,  vii.  415. 


384  ARTS  AND  CRAFTS  part  ii 

although  they  similarly  shaped  the  iron  by  battering  it 
between  stones,  they  did  not  even  previously  heat  it.1 

De  Morgan  adds2  that  the  material  used  by  the 
Semang  for  this  rude  form  of  metal-work  consists  of 
old  tool-iron,  which  they  obtain  from  the  Malays,  and 
that  they  have  no  idea  of  extracting  the  iron  from  the 
ore,  although  the  oxide  of  iron  is  fairly  plentiful  in 
their  part  of  the  country. 

Mr.  L.  Wray  writes  me  that  he  once  saw  some 
Semang  forging  iron  in  Upper  Perak.  They  employed 
the  "  double-piston  bamboo  bellows  "  to  blow  up  their 
charcoal  fire,  and  used  a  piece  of  iron  fastened  to  a 
block  of  wood  as  an  anvil  and  an  iron  hammer.  The 
knives,  spear-heads,  etc.,  made  by  them  were  all  of 
the  shapes  employed  by  the  Malays  of  the  same 
district. 

II. — Sakai. 

General  Industry. 

Perak  Sakai.  —  The  Sakai  rise  early,  strap  on 
their  wallets  after  breakfast,  take  their  jungle-knives 
or  blowpipes,  and  set  off  into  the  jungle  in  search  of 
food  and  firewood,  or  tree-resin  ("dammar")  for  torches, 
etc.  Others  stay  at  home,  and  work  in  and  about  the 
house,  making  blowpipe  -  darts,  ornamenting  their 
bamboo  quivers  and  other  receptacles,  and  so  on.3 

Manufacture  of  Bark-cloth. 

Perak  Sakai.  —  According  to  De  Morgan,  the 
Perak  Sakai,  when  they  wished  to  manufacture  bark- 
cloth,   commenced  by   making  incisions    in    the    bark 

1   Man's  Andamanese,  p.  159  2  De  Morgan,  vii.  415  ;  viii.  296. 

3  Hale,  p.  295. 


Skeat. 


Negri  ro  Industries, 


Semang  nun  at  Siong,  KLedah.  making  blowpipe  dart  (on  left),  rat-trap,  and  flute 
respectively.     Man  on  right  holding  yams  in  i  left  stick  ready  for  cooking. 


Vol  I.  p.  384. 


■J. 


o 


"ft. 


1  hi. 


.  hap,  vim  SAKA1  <>/    PI  RAK 


of  .1  full-grown  Artocarpus^  so  as  to  mark  oul  a 
broad  band  or  strip  ol  bark,  the  size  ol  which  varied 
according  to  the  object  for  which  it  was  required,  an 
average  size  being  from  ilir<-<-  i<>  four  metres  by 
from  sixty  to  eighty  centimetres.1 

When  the  required  strip  had  been  thus  marked 
out,  the  hark  itself  was  hammered  in  situ  until  it  w 

loosened  and  detached  from  the:  trunk.  This  Strip 
was  then  taken  and  laid  upon  a  tree-Stump  or  any- 
thing else  that  might  serve,  and  was  then  pounded 
with  a  wooden  mallet,  and  (occasionally)  decorated 
with  designs  in  yellow  paint  (as  among  the  Semang). 

The  Sakai  of  Batang  Paclang  (Mr.  L.  Wray  informs 
me)  employ  mallets  made  of  a  piece  of  hard  heavy 
wood  about  13  in.  (33  cm.)  long,  by  i!>  in.  ($7  mm.) 
in  diameter.  The  side  of  the  mallet  with  which 
the  bark  is  beaten  is  grooved  transversely,  the  grooves 
extending  about  half-way  round  the  stick. 

Mr.  Wray  writes  me  that  the  Sakai  women  also 
wear  belts  composed  of  a  coil  of  twine  made  from  the 
black  fibre  of  the  sugar  palm  ("  gomuto'  ").  These 
belts  are  about  ij  in.  (31.5  mm.)  thick,  and  of 
such  a  diameter  that  they  can  just  be  passed  round 
the  hips  of  the  wearer.  They  are  often  decorated 
with  flowers  and  sweet-smelling  leaves,  and  with  them 
are  often  worn  two  bunches  either  of  bark-fibre  or  of 
finely-cut  "  pandanus  "-leaves.  These  bunches,  which 
are  about  6  in.  (15  cm.)  long,  are  placed  one  on  either 
hip,  the  upper  (tied)  end  of  each  being  inserted  into 
(and  between)  the  strands  of  the  belt.  Both  these 
belts  and  hip-bunches  are  quite  characteristic  of  the 
Sakai. 

1   De  Morgan,  vii.  413,  of  the  Sakai  of  Changkat  Chabang  in  Perak. 
VOL.   I  2  C 


386  ARTS  AND  CRAFTS  part  ii 

Basket-zvork. 

Perak  Sakai.  —  Baskets  were  made  by  the  Sakai 
women,  of  which  De  Morgan  relates  that  they  were 
"beautifully  executed,"  and  that  their  plait-work  was 
"  fairly  close."  l    They  are  usually  made  of  split  rattan. 

According  to  De  la  Croix,  the  wallet,  or  rather 
back-basket,  in  which  the  Perak  Sakai,  during  their 
journeys  through  the  forest,  carried  their  provisions, 
trophies  of  the  chase,  etc.,  was  made  of  "  artistically 
woven  rattan,"  and  fixed  upon  their  backs  by  straps  of 
tree  -  bark  which  were  passed  round  their  shoulders.2 

Network. 

Perak  Sakai. — The  wilder  Sakai  employed  natural 
fibres  obtained  from  the  "  t'rap  "  tree  (Artocarpus) 
for  the  making  of  their  casting  -  nets,  which  were 
weighted  with  stones.3 

The  nets  used  by  the  more  civilised  Sakai  do 
not,  however,  materially  differ  from  those  used  by 
the  Malays. 

Mat-work. 

Perak  Sakai.  —  Mat-work  was  one  of  the  Sakai 
industries  enumerated  by  De  Morgan,  who  says  that 
it  was  mainly  used  in  the  production  of  small  sleeping- 
or  sitting-mats  (petit s  tapis)  and  rice-bags  or  sacks.4 

Substitutes  for  Pottery. 
Perak  Sakai. — The  same  ignorance  of  the  art  of 
pottery  that  exists  among  the  Semang  is  also  found 

1  De   Morgan,   vii.   415  ;    cp.   UH.  3  De  Morgan,  vii.  418. 

ii.  611,  where  he  gives  specimens  of  4  Ibid.  vii.  415.      For   patterns,  cp- 

both  close  and  open  work.  L' H.  ii.  611. 

2  De  la  Croix,  p.  335. 


,' 


j 

iii 


• 


Semang  Mais  and  Baskets. 


De  .1/ 


1-4.  Mats.  5.  Bag  made  of  matting.  6.  Back-basket  of  open  rattan-work.  7.  Back-basket  of 
close  rattan-work.  8,  9.  Malay  jungle-knife  and  sheath.  10.  Jungle-knife  of  a  different  pattern. 
11,  i2.    Digging  sticks.     13-14.    Hatchets.— De  Morgan  in  /.'//.  25th  October  1885,  p.  611. 


Vol.  I  p    3S6. 


Fakun  Betel- Wallets. 


Skcat  Collection. 


One  betel-wallet  (l'.esisi)  with  small  pouches  (for  holding  betel-leaves   areca-nut,  and  lime)  carried 
inside  it.     Three  other  wallets  (  Besisi  and  Blandas)  showing  various  patterns.     (See  p.  390.) 


Vol.  1.  f.  3S7. 


chap,  viii  IXAJ  <  '/■  PERAi  |8? 


among  the  Sakai.1  For  carrying  water  the  Sakai  employ, 
says  De  Morgan,1  the  largest  bamboo  Btems  they  can 
find,  the  smaller  ones,  when  green,  being  reserved  for 
cooking  purposes.  Ni<-  water  vessels  oi  the  Sakai 
were  Frequently  well  decorated,  and  sometimes  pro- 
vided with  a  loop  lor  <-asc  in  carrying  them  over  the 
shoulder.8    Glutinous  substances,  such  as  grease,  wax 

the  viscid  sap  of  certain  trees  (used  as  bird-lime),  and 
even  poison,  they  kept  in  the  shells  and  husks  ot  big 
nuts  or  fruits.  For  poison,  however,  they  generally 
employed  a  small  bamboo  internode,  which  they  corked 
with  a  small  section  of  the  leaf-stalk  of  the  "  bertam  " 
(  Eugeissona  tristis),  which  is  very  abundant  in  these 
forests. 

Boat-  and  Raft-building. 

Perak  Sakai. — The  inland  Sakai  of  Perak,  accord- 
ing to  Mr.  Hale,  were  essentially  landsmen,  and 
living  as  they  did  near  the  upper  reaches  of  rivers, 
where  it  was  quite  impossible  to  navigate  them, 
they  knew  nothing  of  boat-building,  not  even  to  the 
extent  of  making  a  bamboo  raft.4 

This  statement,  howTever,  does  not  necessarily 
apply  to  all  the  Sakai  of  Perak  (probably  not  to 
those  living  some  way  down-stream),  for  we  are  told 
by  De  la  Croix  that  when  they  were  driven  to  travel 
by  water,  they  would  make  a  rough  kind  of  raft  con- 
structed of  bamboos,  which  were  lashed  together  with 
rattans  or  creepers.  M.  De  la  Croix  continues  that  as 
they  were  naturally  idle,  they  would  not  expose  them- 

1  De  Morgan,  I?H.  ii.  612.  "Many  of   our   Sakai  made  boxes  of 

2  De  Morgan,  vii.  414.  these  bamboos   ('buluh   betong')   and 

3  For  an  instance  of  the  application  crammed  into  them  all  their  clothes,  and 
of  the  big  internodes  of  the  bamboo  henceforth  appeared  clad  only  in  a  two- 
called   "buluh   betong,"  see   Wray  in  inch  wide  strip  of  bark-cloth."    See  also 

J.R.A.S.,   S.B.,    No.    21,    p.     154:       p.  121,  n.  5,  ante.        4  Hale,  p.  286. 


388  ARTS  AND  CRAFTS  part  11 

selves  to  the  hard  labour  of  re-ascending  the  rapids  ; 
and  that,  hence,  when  they  reached  their  destination 
they  preferred  to  return  on  foot  through  the  forest.1 
M.  De  la  Croix  adds  that  he  himself  had  often  met 
with  these  deserted  rafts  drifting  with  the  stream.2 

Mining. 

Perak  Sakai.  —  It  should  be  added  that  a  few 
individuals  of  the  more  civilised  Sakai  tribes  {e.g.  in 
Ulu  Kinta)3  used  to  do  a  little  mining  for  tin  in  a 
primitive  way,  the  process  employed  being  usually 
that  of  washing  out  the  stream  tin  (known  as  "lampan" 
in  Malay).  The  Sakai  were  also  regarded  both  by 
Malays  and  Chinese  as  the  best  prospectors,  and 
often  received  liberal  payment  for  any  work  they 
could  be  induced  to  perform  in  that  capacity. 

Selangor  Sakai. —  The  habits  of  the  Ulu  Langat 
Sakai  are  simple  ;  they  live  nearly  the  same  life  all  the 
year  round.  Up  at  5  a.m.,  and  out  in  the  jungle 
after  eating  some  cold  rice  or  plantains,  hunting  or 
searching  for  jungle  produce  until  about  1 1  a.m.,  and 
then  returning  home  for  a  meal.  A  couple  of  hours 
later  they  go  out  again  to  inspect  their  jungle-traps 
and  fishing-stakes,  and  to  collect  the  birds  or  beasts 
they  had  shot  with  their  blowpipes  in  the  morning. 
They   seldom  use   their  blowpipes   in   the  afternoon. 

1  This  remark  as  to  their  idleness  is,  when  there  are  many  rapids  in  the 
however,  unjust  to  the  Sakai,  and  is  river;  to  get  it  up-stream  would,  in  the 
obviously  based  on  a  misconception.  upper  reaches  of  many  rivers  in  the 
It  is  not  through  mere  idleness  that  Peninsula,  be  a  sheer  impossibility,  to 
the  Sakai  omitted  to  work  their  rafts  say  nothing  of  the  needless  loss  of  time 
up-stream  again.  Not  merely  the  labour  and  trouble  involved.  Moreover,  I  am 
but  the  time  spent  in  such  a  proceeding  informed  by  Machado  that  the  Sakai  of 
would  make  any  such  attempt  little  Ulu  Jelei  in  Pahang  can  pole  a  raft  up- 
short  of  absurd.  It  is  hard  enough  stream  as  fast  as  Malays  can  pole  a  boat, 
work,  as  the  writer  knows  from  ex-  -  De  la  Croix,  p.  335. 
perience,    to    get    a   raft    down-stream  3  See  Hale,  p.  285. 


i  n  v.'.  MH         SAVAGE   MAI  A  I  S  Of  Si  i  A  VGOR 


They   are   most    energetic,  and    never   sleep   in   I 

middle  oi  the  d.i\  ;  they  go  to  bed  early,  and  ri  ic 
early.1 

III.  |  AKIN. 

Blandas.  The  methods  used  bj  the  Blandas  ol 
Kuala  Langat  for  manufacturing  their  bark-cloth  are 

similar   to   those   of  the    Sakai,  the    hark   ol   the  Arto- 

carpus  being  detached  and  pounded  in  the  same  way. 
An  interesting  development  of  the  wooden  mallet 
used  for  pounding  the  cloth  is,  however,  to  be  found 
among  the  Blandas,  this  mallet  being  furnished  with 
transverse  ridges  or  teeth  cut  into  its  under  surface. 
These  teeth  facilitate  the  process  of  separating  the 
fibres,  and  render  the  material  softer  and  more 
flexible."  As  a  rule  the  bark-cloth  of  the  Blandas  is 
quite  undecorated,  though  when  made  from  the  bark 
of  the  Artocarpus  it  is  stained  by  the  sap  of  the  tree 
to  a  sort  of  deep  reddish  tinge.  Their  baskets  are  the 
"  sentong  "  or  back-basket  and  the  "  kampah  "  ;  their 
wallet  patterns  are  copied  by  the  Malays. 

Besisi. — Among  the  chief  articles  of  mat-work  made 
by  the  Besisi  women  of  Kuala  Langat  are  sleeping- 
mats  (made  of  undyed  material,  but  otherwise  not 
unlike  the  ordinary  Malay  type),  small  square  mats 
for  sitting  on,3  mat-work  bags  for  holding  rice  and 
other  objects,  and  the  small  delicately  woven  pouches 
of  pandanus  (or  rush-work)  which  they  continually 
carry  at  their  waists  to  hold  their  tobacco,  their  flint 
and  steel,  their  apparatus  for  chewing  the  betel-leaf, 

1  J.  A.  G.  Campbell,  p.  243.  and  other  non- Mohammedan  tribes  of 

2  This  specimen  is  in  the  Museum  the  Malay  Archipelago.      Among  the 
at  Cambridge  ;  v.  ante,  p.   140.  Peninsular    tribes,    however,    they  are 

3  These  small  square  mats  correspond  never  worn,  but  rolled  up  for  carrying 
to  the  sitting-mats  worn  by  the  Dayaks  whenever  necessary. 


39o  ARTS  AND  CRAFTS  part  ii 

and  similar  articles.  The  material  of  which  their 
mats  are  made  consists  mainly  of  pandanus  or  screw- 
pine  leaves,  which  they  tear  into  longitudinal  strips, 
Malay  fashion,  by  means  of  a  short  wooden  holder  in 
which  iron  teeth  are  set. 

The  pouches  are  often  decorated  either  by  means 
of  raised 1  or  coloured  rush-work,  or  by  means  of 
coloured  threads,  which  latter  are  stitched  on  to  the 
pouch,  following  the  lines  of  the  pattern  required. 

The  Besisi,  not  only  in  Kuala  Langat  but  through- 
out the  region  inhabited  by  them,  are  very  expert  at 
the  building  of  small  dug-out  canoes  {i.e.  "  chem- 
plong  "),  some  of  which  cannot  be  surpassed.2 

Their  paddle -blades  are  as  a  rule  much  longer 
and  narrower  than  those  of  the  Malays,  and  are 
consequently  less  trouble  to  make. 

I  cannot  say  that  I  remember  ever  seeing  a 
Jakun  sail  his  boat,  and  am  inclined  to  believe  that 
on  the  Selangor  coast,  at  all  events,  they  never 
reached  this  point. 

Iron-work. 

Besisi. — The  Besisi  of  Kuala  Langat  have,  moreover, 
made  some  advance  in  metal-work,  of  which  they  have 
picked  up  some  idea  from  the  Malays.  Thus  in  writing 
of  the  fish-spears  used  by  this  tribe,  Mr.  Bellamy 
remarks  that  they  make  them  by  their  own  unaided 
ingenuity,  and  that  in  the  jungle  near  Sungei  Am- 
pang  he  once  saw  a  small  native  forge,  to  which  was 
attached  a  rough  species  of  bellows  made  of  two 
upright  bamboos,  each  of  which  measured  about  three 
inches  in  diameter,  and  that  into  each  of  these  bam- 

1  Like  the  well-known  and  beauti-       are  occasionally  seen  in  this  country, 
fully  made   "Malacca  baskets"  which  2  Cp.  G.  C.  Bellamy,  p.  230. 


i  map.  vim  WAGE   MALA  KS  I '/■  Si  LANGOR  391 


boos  was  fitted  .1  sort  oi  piston-rod,  which  was  bound 
round  with  cloth,  These  rods  were  held  one  in  each 
hand,  and  when  moved  up  and  down  alternately  pro- 
duced a  continuous  current  ol  air.1 

Mantra.      -Of   the    industries   of   the    Mantra,    with 

regard  to  the  subjects  treated  of  in  this  chapter,  nothing 

special  has  been  recorded,  though  we  learn  from 
Logan's  Journal  that  their  girls  were,  taught  to  make 
hags  and  mats.- 

Writing  is  unknown  ;  they  reckon  dates  by  tying 
knots  in  a  string.3 

Jakun  of  Johor. — Like  all  Indian  nations,  the  Jakun 
have  a  propensity  to  idleness  ;  but  to  be  exact  in  this 
account,  and  just  towards  them,  I  must  say  that  they 
are  not  so  lazy  as  either  the  Malays  or  Hindus.  Their 
first  and  principal  occupation  is  the  chase  ;  they  have 
a  great  predilection  for  this  exercise,  it  being  the  first 
means  by  which  they  feed  themselves  and  their 
families  ;  and  from  having  been  brought  up  in  that 
habit,  in  which  the  greater  part  of  their  life  is  spent, 
they  should  be  skilful  hunters,  which  in  fact  they  are, 
both  in  their  way  and  in  the  manner  of  using  their 
weapons,  as  will  be  seen  elsewhere.  In  the  daytime 
they  remain  at  home,  where  they  prepare  their  arrows 
and  other  weapons,  the  substances  with  which  they 
poison  their  arrows,  and  cook  and  eat  the  animals 
caught  the  day  before,  or  build  or  repair  their  houses, 
etc.4  The  Jakun  who  have  no  taste  for  cultivating  rice, 
or  who  are  not  acquainted  with  the  manner  of  doing 
so,  are  generally  very  miserable ;  they  are  then 
obliged  to  look   to   the    Malays  to  provide   for   their 

1  G.  C.  Bellamy,  p.  229.  tradition  of  a   lost   book,  see  p.  536, 

2  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  330.  infra,  and  ii.  346,  347. 

3  Ibid.       For  the  Besisi  and  Mantra  4  J.  /.  A.  vol.  ii.  p.  25S. 


392  ARTS  AND  CRAFTS  part  ii 


livelihood ;  they  traverse  the  jungle  all  the  day 
seeking  after  rattan,  dammar,  eagle-wood,  and  several 
other  articles  of  commerce  ;  the  next  morning  they 
go  to  some  Malay  house,  where  they  dispose  of  the 
produce  of  their  search,  receiving  in  return  a  small 
quantity  of  rice,  sometimes  scarcely  sufficient  to 
support  their  family  for  that  very  day  ;  after  that  they 
return  to  the  same  thing  for  the  purpose  of  in  like 
manner  procuring  food  for  the  next  day,  and  so  on.1 

Baskets. 

Jakun  of  Johor. — Among  the  Jakun  the  panniers 
or  back-baskets  (so  generally  worn  by  all  the  abori- 
ginal tribes)  are  usually  made  either  of  basket-work 
or  of  tree-bark. 

D.  F.  A.  Hervey,  in  writing  of  the  Johor  Jakun, 
describes  a  pannier  of  the  second  kind  mentioned  as 
being  manufactured  from  the  bark  of  the  "  meranti."  2 

Mining. 

Where  the  Chinese  work  tin-mines,  they  some- 
times employ  the  Jakun  as  workmen.  It  is,  however, 
also  alleged  that  there  is  a  place  in  Jelebu  where  the 
Jakun  work  the  mines  by  themselves,  and  bring  the 
tin  to  Pahang,  where  they  sell  it.3 

Boat-  building. 
Benua- Jakun. —  Of  Jakun  boats  we  learn  (also 
from  Logan)  that  their  canoes  were  used  for 
transporting  produce  and  for  fishing,  as  well  as  for 
visiting  every  part  of  the  network  of  rivers  on  which 
they  lived.     These  canoes  varied  in  length  from  8  to 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  ii.  p.  260.  A  fine  hardwood  kind  of  jungle  tree, 

2  J.  R.  A.  S.,   S.  B.y  No.  8,  p.  97.        generally  a  Shorea  {Dipterocarpea). 

3     J.  I.  A.  vol.  ii.  p.  260. 


,  kaf.  vim  SAVAGE   MALA  YS  0/  fOHOR  393 


15  feet,  and  were  always  hollowed  out  ol  one  pi< 
of  wood.  The  most  durable  timber  was  selected,  the 
"kayu  pftnak"  being  preferred  aa  being  capable  ol 
lasting  for  upwards  of  twenty  years,  A  canoe  measur- 
ing from  [2  to  15  feet  in  length,  which  would  carry  from 
400  to  500  gallons  ("  gantang ")  oi  padi,  together 
with  the  two  men  who  would  be  required  to  manage 

it,  was  valued  at  from  10  to  12  dollars.  A  canoe  of 
rather  smaller  size  (8  or  9  feet  in  length)  was  valued 
at  7  or  8  dollars.1 

Divisions  of  lime. 

Benua-Jakun.  —  The  Benua  have  no  divisions  of 
time  save  the  natural  one  of  the  north  and  south 
monsoons,  each  of  which  they  call  a  "  wind  year" 
("  satahun  angin  ").  They  mark  time  (as  the  Mantra 
also  do)  by  the  seasons  when  their  rice-crops  are 
harvested  ("  musim  padi "),  or  when  fruits  ripen 
("  musim  buah  ").  They  indicate  the  progress  of  the 
day  by  the  inclination  of  a  stick.  Early  morning  is 
represented  by  pointing  a  stick  to  the  eastern  horizon.2 
Placed  erect  it  indicates  noon,  inclined  at  an  angle  of 
about  45  degrees  to  the  west  it  corresponds  nearly  with 
3  o'clock,  and  so  on.3  In  this  way  a  guide  familiar 
with  the  path  can  intimate  within  an  hour  the  time 
at  wrhich  a  particular  place  will  be  reached,  and 
describe  with  considerable  accuracy  the  distance  of 
one  place  along  the  route  from  another.  Distances 
exceeding  a  fraction  of  a  day  are  reckoned  by  nights, 
as  in  some  of  the  Polynesian  islands.4 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  271,  272.  4  Ibid.    p.    388  ;    cp.    Newbold    in 

2  The  Malays  use  the  word  "  poker"       vol.    ii.    pp.   417-421  :   "The    Benua 
to  indicate  directions  on  the  horizon.  have  no  written  language  nor  symbols 

3  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  283.  for   articulate    sounds,    as    far    as    my 


394  ARTS  AND  CRAFTS  part  ii 

Orang-  Laut,  Akik. — Of  the  Orang  Laut  or  "  Akik  " 
Newbold  remarks  that  they  were  remarkably  in- 
genious in  handicrafts,  particularly  in  that  of  boat- 
building, and  that  they  frequently  made  long  voyages 
in  their  fragile  vessels.  The  same  writer  informs  us 
that  they  made  use  of  mat-  (or  leaf-)  work  sails  and 
awnings,  and  of  cordage,  all  of  which  were  of  their 
own  manufacture.  And  he  also  tells  us  that  they 
built  temporary  sheds  ("  bagan's ")  along  the  coast, 
whenever  they  had  occasion  to  go  ashore  for  boat- 
building, but  that  otherwise  they  resided,  for  months 
together,  in  their  boats  alone.1 

Net-making, 

The  same  writer  records  the  fact  that  the  O.  Akik 
made  use  of  nets  which  they  similarly  manufactured 
themselves,  for  purposes  of  fishing.2 

personal   knowledge  extends  ;  though,  counting,  the  natural  plan  of  indigita- 

as  previously  mentioned,  I  am  assured  tion  is  adopted,   throwing  the  articles 

by   natives    that   some    of    the     tribes  counted     into     heaps     of     fives     and 

in  Perak   write  on   the  leaves   of    the  tens." 

Stebbal.       The  Benua  are  ignorant  of  !   Newbold,  ii.  413,  414. 

the   simplest   rules  of  arithmetic.       In  2  Ibid. 


CHAPTER    IX. 

Decorative  Art. 

We  now  come  to  what  is  by  far  the  most  difficult 
of  all  the  many  difficult  subjects  that  have  had  to  be 
faced  in  compiling  the  description  of  these  tribes — 
the  much-vexed  question  of  the  interpretation  of 
their  art.  The  subject  in  itself  offers  a  most  fruitful 
field  of  inquiry,  such  as  might  take  years  of  the  most 
patient  and  conscientious  investigation  to  complete. 
The  writer  feels  it  here  necessary  to  remind  his 
readers  that  he  does  not  pretend  to  offer  solutions 
of  the  many  important  questions  involved.  The 
building  of  theories  has  been  kept  outside  the  scope 
of  this  work,  the  object  of  which  is  to  describe  cus- 
toms as  they  are,  and  to  lay  a  foundation  upon  which 
in  years  to  come  a  really  reliable  and  lasting  edifice 
may  be  constructed.  For  we  have  to  face  the  fact 
that  with  reference  to  part  of  this  subject  an  edifice 
has  already  been  reared  upon  a  foundation  of  sand, 
and  that  though  the  bricks  of  which  it  was  com- 
posed may  to  some  extent  be  useful  in  laying  the 
foundation  of  the  new  building,  the  original  edifice 
is  none  the  less  inevitably  doomed  to  irremediable 
destruction. 

395 


396  DECORATIVE  ART  part  n 

The  Flozuer-theory  of  Vaughan- Stevens. 

The  sandy  foundation  to  which  I  refer,  and  on 
which  so  airy  a  superstructure  has  been  built,  is 
Vaughan -Stevens'  so-called  "flower-theory,"  which 
has  been  regarded  by  many  as  a  species  of  master-key 
for  unlocking  the  innermost  secret  recesses  of  Negrito 
art  in  the  Peninsula.  This  astounding  theory,  or 
tissue  of  begged  questions,  for  it  is  nothing  less, 
sets  out  by  ascribing  to  one  of  the  most  backward  and 
undeveloped  races  of  mankind  —  a  race  of  lifelong 
nomads,  who  go  almost  stark  naked  and  live  upon  the 
victims  of  their  bow  and  spear — a  system  of  decorative 
art  based  upon  scientific  principles  which  would  not 
discredit  a  text-book  of  botany. 

Certainly  it  was  not  without  reason  that  one  of 
Vaughan-Stevens'  own  editors  speaks  of  the  "  extra- 
ordinary intellectual  force  of  the  primitive  human 
race "  which  alone  could  have  evolved  the  "  firmly 
welded  flower-system"  ("  discovered "  by  Vaughan- 
Stevens  himself  in  the  Semang  comb  patterns),  as 
meriting  that  a  monument  should  be  erected  to  it  by 
way  of  recognition  ! 

In  order  to  explain  what  we  are  asked  to  believe 
in  the  case  of  this  flower-theory  of  Vaughan-Stevens, 
one  of  the  bamboo  back- combs  which  the  Semang 
women  wear  in  their  hair  must  be  taken,  and  the 
entire  pattern  with  which  the  solid  part  of  the  comb 
is  decorated  carefully  copied  on  to  paper.  The  solid 
part,  as  will  then  be  seen,  is  divided  by  means  of 
straight  lines  running  horizontally  into  a  number  of 
separate  panels.  The  number  of  these  panels  differs 
as  between  comb  and  comb,  but  we  may  take  the  one 
chosen  by  Vaughan-Stevens,  which  has  eight  panels 


,  ha]  GENERAL    REMARK 


in  all     there  being  four  narrow  panels  at  the  top  ol 
the  solid   part,  and   three   more   narrow   panels   r 
above  the  teeth,  with  a  central  panel  oi  great  breadth 
between  them.      By  the  side  ol  this  panel  scheme 
i lower  should  be  drawn  (preferably  an  Ixora,  thai  beii 
the  flower  selected   by   Vaughan- Stevens),   showing 
pistil,  stamens,  petals,  and  sepals     the  smell  o(  the 

(lower  need  not  be  drawn,  but  may  be  understood  | 
Now  we  are  asked  to  believe  that  the  first  panel  (count- 
ing from  the  top  of  the  comb)  represents  the  smell1  ol 
the  flower  in  question  ;  the  upper  edge  '  of  this  first 
panel  the  pistil  and  stamens  \  the  second  panel  th 
"  lengthened  (or  projecting)  spike  above  the  green 
sepals")*  and  the  lowest  horizontal  line,  bounding 
the  eighth  or  lowest  panel,  the  sepals  themselves.4 

The  petals  ("  tapak "),  which  one  would  think 
would  be  one  of  the  most  obvious  parts  of  a  flower  in 
the  eyes  of  a  savage,  have  no  panel  assigned  to  them, 
and  what  other  parts  of  the  flower  are  represented  by 
the  unassigned  panels  we  are  not  informed,  but  we 
have  a  shrewd  suspicion  that  the  botany  text-book 
had  been  unfortunately  mislaid  before  this  part  of  the 
investigation  was  completed.  Otherwise  we  might 
have  been  treated  to  further  ethnological  (and  perhaps 
even  to  botanical)  discoveries  ! 

To  be  just  to  Vaughan -Stevens,  however,  the 
obvious  fact  is  that  as  he  conducted  his  investigations 
in  Malay,  he  must  have  been  early  brought  face  to 
face  with  the  Malay  word  "  bunga,"  a  flower 
(  =  "  bakau  "  in  Semang),  and  as  he  evidently  did  not 

1  The    Semang    "was"    is   said    to  seem  that   the   pistil  is  what  is  really 

=  "  smell,"  but   perhaps   really  means  intended,  but  this  has  been  mentioned 

the  solid  part  of  the  comb  [v.  p.  426,  already  under  another  name. 

infra).                      »  Sem.   "tepi."  4  Sem.     "mos."       For    the    whole 

3  Sem.    "pawer."        It     is    by    no  passage,     see    pp.     426,     427,    infra, 

means  clear  what  this  means  ;  it  would  especially  427,  n.   1. 


398  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ii 

know  that  a  common  secondary  meaning  of "bunga" 
was  a  pattern,  he  was,  most  unfortunately,  started 
upon  the  wrong  tack  from  the  very  outset.  The  fact 
of  the  word  "  bunga,"  which  he  thought  meant 
"  flower,"  being  applied  to  the  whole  pattern,  naturally 
suggested  to  him  the  idea  that  the  series  of  horizontal 
lines  might  perhaps  be  intended  to  divide  the 
various  panels  which  (he  expected)  would  represent 
the  various  parts  of  the  flower  in  question.  He  asked 
his  questions,  we  feel  sure,  in  perfect  bona  fides,  but 
nevertheless  he  must  have  had  some  such  idea  as 
this  in  his  mind,  and  his  accommodating  informants 
naturally  supplied  him  with  the  very  information  that 
he  thought  he  wanted.  Thus  Vaughan-Stevens,  in 
falling  into  the  trap,  has  furnished  us  with  yet  one  more 
of  those  awful  object-lessons  which  are  provided  from 
time  to  time  by  ethnologists  who  rely  too  much  upon 
the  answers  given  by  "  question-worried  savages."  As 
he  is  not  the  first,  so  he  will  not  be  the  last,  and  there 
are  perhaps  none  of  us  who  can  tread  this  thorny  path 
so  securely  as  never  to  come  into  danger  of  a  fall. 

Up  to  this  point  we  know,  I  think,  quite  enough 
to  be  able  to  state  definitely  what  the  "  mos  "  and  the 
"  pawer  "  are  not;  but  our  duty  does  not  stop  here, 
and  a  little  further  consideration  of  Vaughan-Stevens' 
material  will  show  us,  I  am  inclined  to  think,  what 
Vaughan-Stevens  himself  must  have  narrowly  missed 
discovering,  viz.  that  the  "mos"  and  "pawer"  were 
probably  the  names  of  two  flowers — as  indeed,  with 
that  courageous  inconsistency  which  in  such  a  case  may 
be  regarded  as  a  proof  of  honesty,  he  himself  has 
informed  us  in  the  very  same  passage  in  which  he 
states  his  general  flower-theory  of  the  combs.  The 
"mos"    is,    if    as    I    hope   we    may    trust    Vaughan- 


chap  GENERAL   REMARKS 

Stevens  for  the  fkct,  a  strong  scented  kind  ol  Ixoi 
and  the  "pftwCr"  a  similar  flower  with  a  somewhat 
w  aker  scent.1  It  is  therefore  quite  conceivable  that 
the  two  upper  panels  ol  the  pattern  of  the  particular 
comb  that  he  took  tor  his  type,  or  even  of  a  let  ol 
such  combs,  may  represent,  or  at  lea  I  in  some  way 

possess  an  association  with,  two  kinds  of  Ixora. 
That  this  solution  is  more  than  merely  possible  is 
shown  by  the  names  of  the  third  and  fourth  panels, 
whose  names,  as  given  by  Vaughan- Stevens,  are 
partly  Semang  and  partly  Malay,  and  mean  "  rice- 
fruit  "  {i.e.  rice-grains)  and  "  salak  "-fruit  '  respectively. 
This  practice,  in  fact,  of  giving  names  to  patterns  or 
parts  of  patterns,  either  from  something  that  they 
actually  represent,  or  from  something  they  are  supposed 
to  resemble  (or  are  associated  with  in  use),  is  a  very 
usual  and  general  practice  in  the  Malay  Peninsula,  and 
is  so  obvious  a  method  of  describing  a  pattern  that  we 
must  confess  we  see  nothing  very  striking  or  original 
in  the  idea.  For  an  exact  parallel,  see  the  "  cucumber- 
seed  "  pattern  described  below.  Hence  the  parts  of  the 
pattern  would  represent  different  flowers  or  fruit ; — a 
very  different  thing  from  the  elaborate  theory  stated 
above,  which  is  based  tpon  a  botanical  analysis  of  the 
component  parts  of  a  single  flower — this  latter  being  a 

1  The  chief  kinds  of  Ixora  found  species  is  the  Ixora  referred  to  as 
indigenous  to  the  Peninsula,  according  "Tetawar  bindang,"  for  the  Malay 
to  Ridley's  Plant-List,  are  Ixora  fulgens,  word  "padi"  means  simply  rice,  or 
Roxb.,  and  other  species  {Rubiacece),  a  rice  -  plant,  and  "  bendang  "  [not 
large  orange  Ixora  common  in  the  "  bintang  "= "  star  ")  means  "rice- 
jungle  ;  Ixora  opaca,  Br.  ;  Ixora  swamp "  too.  Elsewhere  we  are  told 
grandiflora,  Zoll.  ;  Ixora  parviflora,  by  Vaughan- Stevens  that  it  is  the 
Wall.  ;  Ixora  pendula,  Jack  ;  and  blossoms  of  certain  parasitic  plants 
Ixora  atna-na,  Wall,  (an  orange-red  that  are  especially  efficacious  against 
Ixora).  No  such  name  as  "  Tetawar  diseases  ;  and  hence  they  are  used  in 
bindang"  is  recorded  for  any  of  these,  the  charms  (see  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii. 
but    as    Ixora   pendula    is    sometimes  135). 

called   "  Baratong  padi,"  there  can  be  2   "Salak"     is    a    kind     of    palm 

little  doubt  that  this  or  a  closely  allied  {Zalacca). 


400  DECORATIVE  ART  part  n 

development  which  is  entirely  foreign  to  the  cast  of  mind 
even  of  the  Malays,  who  are  a  race  some  centuries 
ahead  of  the  Semang  in  general  intelligence.1 

Vaughan  -  Stevens,  however,  not  content  with 
applying  this  theory  to  the  combs,  attempted  to  carry 
it  even  further  and  extend  it  to  all  other  patterns 
executed  by  the  Semang,  such  as  the  patterns  on 
their  blowpipes,  their  quivers,  and  their  magic  tubes. 
This  extension,  however,  is  regarded,  even  by 
Vaughan-Stevens'  own  editors,  as  utterly  untenable, 
so  that  we  need  not  trouble  to  waste  any  more  time 
in  following  him  further  away  from  the  track. 

It  is,  unfortunately,  necessary  to  speak  thus  plainly, 
in  order  to  prevent  the  published  work  of  Vaughan- 
Stevens  from  entrapping  scholars  who  use  it,  and  who 
may  not  have  had  the  right  kind  of  field  experience  to 
enable  them  to  use  it  critically.  But  it  is  a  far  more 
congenial  and  grateful  task  for  the  writer — knowing,  as 
he  does,  the  all  but  insuperable  difficulties  of  the  subject 
— to  record  the  fact  that,  setting  apart  all  question  of 
this  absurd  pseudo-botanical  theory,  that  indefatigable 
pioneer  (Vaughan-Stevens)  has  left  behind  him,  not 
only  a  fine  collection  of  specimens  of  Negrito  art  (now 
in  the  Museum  of  Ethnology  at  Berlin),  but  also  a  vast 
mass  of  most  valuable  observations  which  only  require 
critical  revision  and  recension  to  render  them  a  verit- 
able storehouse  of  fresh  and  remarkable  information 
for  the  ethnologist.      From   this  point  of  view,   the 


1   For  other  scarcely  less  grotesque  the   three   concentric  ring -lines   which 

and    far  -  fetched    ideas    of   Vaughan-  separate  the  panels  in  a  pattern  repre- 

Stevens,    see     Vaughan  -  Stevens,     iii.  sent  three  kinds  of  lightning  employed 

136,    and    similar     references,    where  by    Kari  —  the     straight    flash,     the 

we    are     told     that     the     hollow     of  forked  flash,    and    the     "heavy    blue 

a      bamboo      internode     (used     as     a  tropic     lightning    flash"     only      the 

quiver)    represents    a    mountain    with  middle    one   of  which    is  supposed    to 

caves      in      the     interior,     and      that  be  effective  ! 


«  ii  m-.  ix  GENERAL   Rl  MAk 

work  that  has  been  hitherto  au  i  omplished,  not  only  bj 
Vaughan-Stevens  himsell  in  the  collecting  ol   spa  i 
mens  and  information,  but  also  by  his  German  editors 
under  l  1 1  < -  most  difficult  circumstances  imaginable,  is 
worthy  of  nothing  but  the  highest  and  most  generous 

praise.      In   the  light  of  the  fuller  knowledge  that    \\<- 

now    possess,    I    find    nothing     even    where    I    am 

obliged   to  differ  or  to  correct    -but  what  proves  that 
their  work  has  been  done  in  the  best  scientific  spirit 

in  other  words,  with  a  single  regard  to  truth. 

Hence  the  plan  of  the  present  chapter  has  been 
formulated  with  the  object  of  giving  in  as  complete  a 
form  as  possible  the  result  of  the  inquiries  of  Vaughan- 
Stevens,  rescued  as  far  as  possible  from  his  faulty 
classification  and  his  blunders,  and  also  from  the  vitiat- 
ing influence  of  his  "  flower-theory."  Any  readers 
who  wish  to  see  more  of  this  theory  for  themselves 
can  do  so  by  consulting  the  original  articles  in  the 
German  journals  from  which  the  extracts  in  this 
chapter  are  taken.  The  remainder  of  this  chapter 
will  include — (i)  the  detailed  explanations  of  a  few- 
typical  Semang  patterns  which  the  writer  himself 
has  personally  investigated,  and  (2)  the  substance  of 
the  German  articles  based  upon  Vaughan- Stevens' 
material,  from  wThich,  as  I  have  said,  the  fallacious 
"  flower-theory,"  together  with  other  obvious  mistakes 
due  to  bona-fide  ignorance,  have  been  as  far  as  pos- 
sible eliminated. 

Symbolism. 

One  of  the   most   important   features   of  the   art- 
work  of  these    tribes    consists    in    their   practice    of 
representing  an  object  by  means  either  of  one  of  its 
chief  parts  or  of  some   closely   associated   idea.       A 
vol.  1  2  D 


4o2  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ii 

bat,  for  instance,  is  represented  by  a  wavy  pattern, 
indicating  its  wings  ;  a  stag  by  a  small  triangle,  re- 
presenting his  pointed  slot.  These  facts  were  pointed 
out  to  me  both  among  the  Blandas  and  Besisi  of 
Selangor,  before  I  ever  read  a  line  of  Vaughan-Stevens, 
and  subsequently  by  the  Semang  of  Kedah.  The 
principle  has  also  been  noticed  by  other  observers  (apart 
from  Vaughan-Stevens),1  and  may  be  accepted  as 
definitely  established.  It  is,  I  think,  not  unconnected 
in  origin  with  the  general  ideas  underlying  the  practice 
of  sympathetic  magic  or  ''make-believe,"  and  there  is 
therefore  no  reason  why  it  should  not  be  employed 
by  the  members  of  a  race  who,  to  a  not  inconsiderable 
extent,  employ  what  may  be  called  "  sympathetic 
methods"  in  their  "medicinal"  ceremonies. 

Representation  of  Entire  Objects. 

At  the  same  time  it  must  be  insisted  upon  that 
the  powers  of  draughtsmanship  of  the  aborigines  do 
not  by  any  means  stop  at  this  point.  I  have  myself 
seen  perfectly  intelligible  drawings  representing  com- 
plete objects,  both  animals  and  plants,  upon  the  shafts 
of  blowpipes  and  similar  objects,2  and  in  this  respect 
the  fine  collection  got  together  by  Vaughan-Stevens 
is  obviously  rich.  One  of  the  best  of  these  latter  is 
perhaps,  as  Vaughan-Stevens  himself  points  out,  the 
drawing  of  a  spider  by  a  Sakai  upon  a  bamboo 
11  stamper  "  or  "  tuang-tuang." 3 

Geometrical  Patterns. 

But  in  spite  of  their  possessing  the  power  both 
to    conceive    and    to    represent    a    complete    artistic 

1  Z.f.  E.  xxvi.  142.  forbidden  to  the  Mohammedan  Malays, 

2  This  was  among  the  Blandas  and       they  are  probably  of  "  savage  Malayan  " 
Besisi,    and    as   such    zoomorphs    are       origin.  3  Z.f.  E.  xxvi.  143. 


.  map.  in  GENERAL   REMARK 

conception,  these  tribes  employ,  in  the  vasl  majoritj 
of  cases,  patterns  which  are  purely  geometrical,  and 
it  is  in  respect  oi  these  that  the  explanations  collected 
by  Vaughan-Stevens  should  be  subjected,  whenever 
n  may  be  possible,  to  the  closest  scrutiny.     My  own 

experience  has  been,  with  regard  to  these  geometrical 

designs,  that,   as  a   rule,  every  other   native  has  a 

different  explanation  to  oiler  about  them,  and  that, 
on     the     other     hand,    the     same     interpretation    will 

nevertheless   be  frequently  given  with  reference  to 

two,  or  even  perhaps  to  three  or  four  designs  which  arc 
obviously  different.  In  both  of  these  ways  Vaughan 
Stevens  no  doubt  suffered  considerably,  as  will,  I 
think,  be  clear  to  anyone  who  has  the  opportunity 
of  checking  his  work.  Especial  care  should  therefore 
be  exercised  in  dealing  with  this  particular  class  of 
patterns,  and  every  possible  means  of  checking  the 
explanations  given  of  them  by  natives  should  be 
adopted. 

Dividing  Lines  or  Borders. 

A  great  deal  of  emphasis  was  laid  by  the  informants 
of  Vaughan-Stevens  upon  the  ring-lines  ("  keng-oin  ' 
or  "  kening-uin  ")  which  separate  the  various  patterns. 
Exactly  similar  ring-lines  (or  "  party"-lines)  are,  how- 
ever, employed  by  the  Malays  (as  by  many  other  races) 
for  separating  their  patterns,  and  there  can,  I  think, 
be  no  manner  of  doubt  that  the  sole  original  function 
of  these  lines  was  to  divide  the  patterns  and  to  keep  the 
variotis  rows  of  figures  in  their  proper  place.  It  is,  of 
course,  conceivable  that  later  on  (as  Vaughan-Stevens 
in  many  passages  is  made  to  say)  some  superstition  may 
have  arisen  which  postulated  a  particular  number  or 
arrangement  of  these  lines  as  a  charm  against  light- 


4o4  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ii 


ning,  but  I  cannot  personally  believe  this,  and  in  any 
case  it  will  be  evident  to  anybody  who  examines 
this  point  that  these  lines  do,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
divide  and  regulate  the  patterns,  and  this  is  what,  I 
claim,  must  (beyond  doubt)  have  been  their  original 
function. 

Essential  Irregularity  of  the  Patterns. 

A  yet  further  point  in  which,  I  regret  to  say,  I  must 
differ  entirely  from  Vaughan-Stevens  is  his  continual 
insistence  upon  the  completeness  and  regularity  of 
each  (geometrical)  figure  and  row  of  figures.  He 
has  gone  so  far  in  this  respect  as  to  correct  (not 
always  accurately)  his  originals,  a  work  of  entire 
gratuitousness,  to  make  the  best  of  it.  It  cannot,  I 
think,  be  too  strongly  emphasised  that  we  want  to 
collect  and  to  interpret  the  patterns  as  they  are,  and 
not  as  they  might  or  perhaps  even  ought  to  be. 
This  does  not,  of  course,  preclude  the  pointing  out 
of  substantial  irregularities  whenever  they  are  of  any 
interest  and  importance,  but  it  cannot,  I  think,  be  too 
widely  recognised  that  the  designs  of  these  tribes, 
like  those  of  the  Malays  and  of  most  other  tribes  on 
a  similar  or  even  on  a  higher  plane  of  culture,  are 
radically  and  essentially  irregular,  and  that  any  ex- 
cessive regularity  in  a  pattern  might  be  ground  for 
distrusting  the  authenticity  of  the  specimen  in  which 
it  occurred. 

Terminology. 

Before  going  further,  a  clear  understanding  must 
be  arrived  at  about  the  names  used  in  this  section. 
In  spite  of  the  distinction  drawn  by  Vaughan-Stevens 
between  quivers  and  charm-receptacles,  I  confess  that 


.  hap.  ix  GENERAL  RE  MARKS  <  i 

I  have  not  succeeded  in  discovering  the  smallest  diffei 
ence  between  them  from  the  decorative  poini  of  view. 
Vaughan- Stevens    himself,   in  spite  of  his   long 

article  upon   this  subject,   headed  "goh"  and   "gah/M 

is  continually  confusing  them,  and  as  his  own  editor 
points  out,  his  remark  that  "  Others  (sr.  designs)  could 
not  he  reduced  (to  a  size  that  would  suit  the  blow- 
pipe),  and  hence  were  retained  as  'goh'  or  'gah,' 
shows  that  in  his  mind  there  was  no  essential 
difference  between  them.  Elsewhere,  after  comparing 
the  blowpipe  and  "goh"  patterns,  he  derives  the 
blowpipe  patterns  from  a  "  goh,"  whereas,  according 
to  his  own  general  theory,  it  was  from  a  "gah  "  that 
these  patterns  were  evolved.  Elsewhere,  again,  he 
refers  to  both  "goh"  and  "  gah "  together  as  dart- 
quivers.  The  only  conclusion  that  can  be  drawn,  as 
his  own  editor  quite  rightly  points  out,  is  that 
Vaughan- Stevens  really  found  no  specific  difference 
between  his  "  goh  "  and  "gah  "  patterns,  and  that  his 
theory  of  the  evolution  of  the  blowpipe  patterns  from  a 
"gah"  rests  upon  some  misapprehension  of  his  own. 

The  fact  of  the  matter  is  (in  my  own  mind  at  least 
I  am  sure),  that  both  these  forms  of  the  widespread 
bamboo  receptacle  should  be  included  in  one  class 
merely  as  receptacles,  without  any  reference  to  what 
their  contents  might  be.  In  fact  the  word  "  go'  "  in 
Semang  ( =  "  gob  "  in  Andamanese)2  is  the  exact  equi- 
valent of  the  Malay  "  tabong,"  and  merely  signifies  a 
vessel  or  holder  formed  from  a  single  internode  of  a 
large  kind  of  bamboo,  which  had,  as  a  rule,  certain  specific 

1  In  orig.  "gor"  and  "gar"  (sic).  probably  be  "ga"' and" ga\"  The  form 

These  names  of  Vaughan- Stevens  are  "  gu'"  ("guh")  is  probably  identical, 

both  cockney  spellings,  there  being  no  Cp.  p.  448,  infra. 

"r"  whatever  at  the  end  of  either  of  2  Man's  Andamanesey  p.  8. 
these  words.     The  correct  forms  would 


406  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ii 

uses,  but  might  as  easily  be  put  to  half  a  hundred 
others.  Hence  the  Semang  "go'  "  at  times  served  as 
a  quiver,  at  other  times  served  to  carry  magic  herbs 
and  roots,  and  the  general  paraphernalia  of  the  Negrito 
sorcerer.  If  the  fact  is  once  recognised  that,  from  a 
decorative  point  of  view,  there  is  absolutely  no  differ- 
ence between  the  quiver  ("  goh  ")  and  the  charm-tube 
("  gah  "),  and  that  both  alike  are  really  "  go'  "  (the  form 
"  gah"  or  "  ga'  "  being  probably,  if  it  has  any  authority 
at  all,  a  mere  dialectal  variant  of  "  go' "),  the  source  of 
endless  confusion  will  be  avoided. 

Similarly,  the  word  "  gu' '  also  appears  to  be 
applied  indifferently  both  to  bamboo  quivers  and 
burial  bamboos,  etc.  It  probably  signifies,  like  "goh," 
a  bamboo  tube  or  receptacle.  There  does  not  to 
me  appear  sufficient  evidence  of  the  existence  of  what 
Vaughan-Stevens  calls  "  gi  "  to  include  it  in  this  list. 
Vaughan  -  Stevens  himself  could  obtain  no  specimen 
of  it,  and  himself  says  that  they  had  been  completely 
forgotten  and  disused.  What  they  purported  to  be 
was  a  species  of  charm-tube  carried  by  the  women, 
"on  which  all  the  seventy  Disease-patterns  were  cut." 
As,  however,  there  are  (not  seventy  but)  a  hundred 
and  forty  of  these  patterns,  and  as  it  would  be  a 
physical  impossibility  to  crowd  even  the  central  panel 
of  seventy  of  these  patterns  upon  the  surface  of  a 
bamboo  that  was  meant  to  be  portable,  there  can  be 
little  doubt  that  this  was  one  of  the  many  cases  in 
which  Vaughan-Stevens  was  led  altogether  astray. 

Classification  of  the  Patterns. 

The  charm-patterns  employed  by  the  wild  tribes 
of  the  Peninsula  may  be  roughly  classified  according 
to  the  objects  that  they  are  employed  to  adorn. 


<   HAT.    I  \ 


GENERAL    REMARKS 


vn 


i  H  .  i  Iptlon  "i  ( )bj«  I- 

( i )  Bamboo  combs.* 


bamboo  tubes,  cut   from  ;i 
.  i  n  •  ■  I « -  Intemode,  snd  including 
(</)  Bamboo  quivers*  (fur  at 

rows  or  darts). 


(6)  Chann  bamboos.* 
(<■)  Myth  bamboos.* 

{d)    Burial  bamboos.* 
{f)    Birth  bamboos.* 

(/')  Bamboo  " stampers." * 
(.V)  Seed    bamboos    (used    for 
dibbling  rice). 

(3)   Small  bamboo  tubes,  including — 

(a)  Poison-receptacles. 


(/;)  Tobacco-receptacles. 
i4)  Blowpipes.* 

(5)  Miscellaneous  objects,   e.g.   arrows, 

nose-sticks,  fish-hooks,  and  vari- 
ous implements  (ring-lines  only). 

(6)  Mats    and    wallets   (mat-work   and 

embroidery). 

(7)  Bark-cloth  (painting  only). 

(8)  The    human    body    (painting    and 

tattooing  and  scarification  of  the 
person) — v.  vol.  ii.  ch.  ii. 


(i)  Used   chiefly   by  Semang  (V.-St 

h(  .  at.)  |    Chiefly   by       ll    m    I  M  i' 

tin,   703).       Not   11  ■•  <l  bV  Jakun. 


(a) 


Arrow  •  q  by 

Semang       only  ;       dart 
quivers      by     all      three 

rai 

Dg  only. 

Do.  do. 

Do.  do. 

Da  do. 

(/)    Used  by  Sakai  only  (?). 
(g)  Collected  among  Semang. 


(3) 


(a)  Commonly  undecorated 
when  used  by  Semang, 
but  decorated  by  Sakai 
and  to  some  extent  by 
Jakun. 

(b)  Used  especially  by  Semang. 

(4)  Borrowed  in  the  case  of  the  Semang, 
but  decorated  by  all  three  races. 

(5)  Some  of  these  (e.g.  arrows)  are 
used  by  Semang  only,  but  they 
cannot  all  be  specified. 

(6)  Not  used  by  Semang  except  when 
borrowed,  but  found  among  Sa- 
kai, and  still  more  among  Jakun. 

(7)  Decorated  by  Sakai  especially, 
rarely  by  Semang  and  Jakun. 

(8)  Scarification  and  tattooing  (accord- 
ing to  Mr.  L.  Wray)  appear  to  be 
practised  by  the  Sakai  of  Perak  ; 
body-painting  by  all  three  races, 
but  especially  by  the  Sakai. 

The  asterisked  objects  are  the  only  ones  whose 
patterns  have  been  seriously  studied,  and  that  in 
most  cases  for  the  Semang  only. 

Of  these  divisions  the  first  (that  containing  the 
Semang  combs)  includes  prophylactic  patterns  in- 
tended to  protect  the  wearer  against  various  accidents 
and  diseases,  and  must  await  a  fuller  discussion 
below. 

The  Semang  patterns  of  the  second  class  were 
supposed  by  Vaughan-Stevens  to  have  been  originally 


4o8  DECORATIVE  ART  part  n 

copied  from  patterns  on  certain  bamboo  tubes,  which 
were  merely  used  as  charms  (and  not  as  quivers  and 
blowpipe-tubes).  Vaughan-Stevens  asserts  that  the 
former,  when  first  used  as  quivers,  remained  of  the 
same  size  as  the  tubes  from  which  their  patterns  were 
copied,  but  that  in  the  latter  case  the  patterns  on 
being  transferred  to  the  blowpipe-tubes  were  reduced 
in  size.  What  the  truth  may  be  is  hard  to  say.  No 
foundation  for  this  statement  of  Vaughan  -  Stevens 
appears,  and  the  writer  does  not  himself  regard  it 
as  credible. 

There  are  said  to  be  in  all  seventy-three  specimens 
of  these  patterns  (for  quivers  and  charm-tubes)  col- 
lected by  Vaughan  -  Stevens,  who  has  attempted 
to  explain  them  by  means  of  the  "  flower-theory  "  he 
had  employed  in  explaining  the  combs,  but  this 
extension,  as  has  already  been  pointed  out,  is  quite 
untenable  (even  supposing  his  "  flower-theory  "  were 
admitted  for  the  combs). 

The  main  objections  alleged  are  as  follows  : — 
i.  There  are  some  quivers  which  have  no  patterns 
at  all  but  only  a  few  ring-lines  (ex.  Fig.  8). 

2.  Some  quivers  have  the  same  pattern  in  all 
their  panels  (ex.  Fig.  9). 

3.  In  many  quivers  the  central  panel  is  left  vacant, 
and  hence  the  "  Disease-pattern  "  must  necessarily  be 
looked  for  in  some  one  of  the  other  panels  (ex.  Fig.  10). 

4.  Again,  in  some  cases,  in  which  all  the  panels 
are  occupied,  the  central  panel  is  in  no  way  more  pro- 
minent than  the  rest,  so  that  its  special  importance, 
and  in  fact  its  very  place  in  the  scheme,  still  remains 
to  be  proved. 

5.  The  patterns  of  the  two  upper  panels  (which 
according   to  the    theory   should    correspond    to    the 


chaf.  iv  ENERAl   RA  MARKS  J09 

"  was  "    and    "  pawer  "    OJ    the    COITlbs)    are    not    in    all 

cases  divisible  as  they  would  be  011  the  combs.1 

The  chief  difference,  however,  appears  to  be  thai 

in  the  case  of   the    COmbs  the  main    I  )i  ><  .r,e  pattern  is 

always  to  be  found  in  the  centre,  whereas  both  in  the 

blowpipe  patterns  and  in  those  ol  tin-  quivers  and 
charm-tubes  the  central  panel  is  often  a  blank  one. 
The  fact  alleged  by  Vaughan-Stevens,  that  in  blow- 
pipe patterns  of  the  kind  the  upper  pattern  serves  to 
protect  the  men  from  epidemics,  and  the  lower  the 
women  (sic),  suggests  to  his  editor  the*  possible  applica- 
tion of  some  such  explanation  to  the  upper  and  lower 
patterns  of  the  quivers  and  charm-tubes.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  central  patterns  that  some  of  these 
very  quivers  and  charm-tubes  possess  are  explained 
by  the  same  authority  as  charms  directed  against  the 
Diseases  that  attack  the  men  only.  Finally,  even 
the  division  of  the  ring-lines  into  groups  can  be  of 
no  very  special  significance,  as  they  are  sometimes 
distributed  at  equal  distances  over  the  whole  bamboo.2 

Burial  Bamboos. 

The  Semang  "  gu'  "  and  burial  bamboos  are  of 
no  account  as  charms.3  On  the  former  the  mytho- 
logical designs  and  emblems  connected  with  the 
Putto  (of  whom  only  the  tradition  remains  that  they 
were  once  an  order  of  greater  chiefs  and  servants  of 
the  god  Pie)  were  incised,  and  the  latter  have  now 
passed  to  the  Sna-hut.  Four  myth  bamboos  were 
obtained  from  the  Sna-hut  by  Vaughan  -  Stevens, 
together   with    the    interpretation    of  their   patterns. 

1  Z.f.E.  xxv.  71-100.  2  lb.       described  as  being  available  as  a  charm 

3  See,  however,  Gu'  IV.,  which  is       against  water-snakes. 


4io  DECORATIVE  ART  .art  n 


There,  for  instance,  is  represented  the  thunder-god 
Kari,  and  the  symbols  of  his  power,  together  with 
the  god  Pie  and  his  daughter  Simei.  In  addition  to 
these  there  are  certain  fabulous  animals,  described  as 
the  guardians  of  Paradise,  and  a  great  variety  of 
flowers  and  fruits.  A  Putto  is  shown  lying  with  his 
head  upon  a  magic  stone-cushion,  and  receiving  from 
Pie  in  a  dream  instructions  as  to  the  manufacture  of 
mats  and  other  objects.  But  most  unfortunately  there 
is  no  coherence,  and  the  exact  connotation  even  of  the 
word  "  gu  "  itself  is  wanting.  The  designs  themselves 
are  so  vague,  that  one  can  scarcely  distinguish  human 
beings  from  animals,  and  the  same  design,  or  part  of 
a  design,  often  signifies  many  entirely  different  objects.1 
The  burial  patterns  or  "penitah"2  of  the  dead  are 
said  to  be  cut  by  the  Sna-hut  upon  a  bamboo  tube  which 
is  deposited  in  the  grave  (inserted  in  the  deceased's 
girdle).  By  these  patterns  the  life-story  of  the  person 
or  persons  concerned  is  depicted,  so  that  on  their 
appearing  before  the  judgment  throne  of  Kari  the 
bamboo  serves  as  a  kind  of  credentials.  The  patterns 
inscribed  on  these  bamboos  vary  according  to  the  age 
and  sex  of  the  deceased.  Their  import  has  up  to  the 
present  received  no  manner  of  explanation.3 

Birth  Bamdoos. 

The  Semang  "  tahong "  is  a  "birth  bamboo" 
carried  by  the  woman,  which  nobody  but  her  husband 
may  see,  but  which  she  must  never  go  without.  It 
contains,  we  are  told,  "no  flower-patterns."4 


1  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  124.  mand,"   is  of  course  a   possible    one, 

2  The     form    given    by    Vaughan-  though  I  do  not  feel  quite  sure  of  it. 
Stevens    is    "penitor"   ("  peneetor ").  3  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  119,  120. 
The  suggested  derivation  from  "  titah,"  4    V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiv.   466,  467;  cp. 
the    royal    word    meaning    to    "com-  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  1 15. 


c«  \r.  i\  GENl  RAl   RL  MAI  4' ' 

Bamboo  Stamper 

YW  now  come  to  the  Sakai  "tuntong"  (more 
correctly  H tuang-tuang ")  or  M kowei  in..,"  to  which 

recourse  was  had  in  every  emergency  ol  lit'*.     These 

bamboos   always  consisted    of  a    pair  of  tubes,  One   oi 

which  was   somewhat   smaller   than    the   other,  SO  thai 

quite  different  tones  were  produced   by  them  when 

struck.  These  tubes  were  closed  at  the  lower  end 
b)'  the  natural  node  ;  but  they  were  left  open  at  the 
top,  so  that  the  closed  end,  when  struck  upon  the 
ground,  emitted  a  distinct  musical  note.1 

The  illustrations  will  be  treated  in  fuller  detail 
below.  The  first  is  48  cm.  high,  the  second  56  cm. 
high.2 

There  are  also  "  tuang-tuangs "  in  secular  use. 
These,  however,  are  neither  provided  with  incised 
patterns  nor  painted,  but  serve  merely  to  give  a  signal 
for  calling  home  the  inhabitants  of  a  house  or 
village,  since  they  can  be  heard  at  a  great  distance 
through  the  jungle.  These  undecorated  tubes  are 
common  among  tribes  who  live  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  the  Malays.  They  serve  in  this  case,  however, 
only  as  instruments  of  music.3 

The  patterns  of  the  other  objects  classified  call  for 
no  special  remark,  being  mostly  confined  to  ring-lines 
and  plain  geometrical  patterns,  with  the  exception  of 
those  employed  for  decorating  the  person,  which  will 
be  fully  treated  in  another  chapter. 

1  Z.  '/.  E.    xxvi.    140.       Vaughan-  '2  3  Z.f.E.  xxvi.  148.     V. -Stevens 

Stevens  remarks  that  these  "tuntongs"  has  here  evidently  confused  the  "tuang- 

(as  he  calls  them)  are  never  struck  upon  tuang"   of  these  patterns,  which  is  a 

wood.      This    refers,    perhaps,    to  the  mere  "stamper,"  producing  a  note  when 

Sakai  customs,  as  I  myself  have  more  struck  against  the  ground,  with  an  in- 

than  once  seen  and  heard  them  struck  strument  bearing  the  same  name  which 

upon    the    wooden    floor -timbers     of  has  a  mouth-hole  at  one  side,  and  is 

Jakun  huts.  really  used  as  a  species  of  "conch." 


412  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ii 


Bloivpipc  Patterns. 

According  to  Preuss,  the  (129)  specimens  of 
Semang  blowpipe  patterns,  their  dart-quivers  ("go*  "), 
and  charm-tubes  ("  ga' ")  are  intended  to  serve  as 
charms  against  the  various  diseases  and  accidents 
which  are  likely  to  attack  or  affect  the  men.1 

The  tradition  of  the  Semang  about  the  origin  of 
their  blowpipe  patterns  ascribes  them  to  the  invention 
of  their  god  Pie,  who  with  the  aid  of  his  daughter 
Simei  planted  the  flowers  of  their  chief  god  Kari  or 
"Thunder"  near  a  mountain  peak  (Jelmol),  and  evolved 
from  them  the  patterns  which  would  avail  against 
Diseases.  The  Putto 2  incised  these  correct  patterns, 
exactly  as  Pie  had  invented  them,  on  bamboos  which 
were  deposited  in  a  large  cave,  where  they  were  changed 
into  stone 3  by  the  god,  in  order  that  they  might  always 
be  ready  to  serve  as  patterns.  A  set  of  these  patterns 
was  prepared  for  each  of  the  Sna-hut ;  whose  task  it 
was  to  see  that  the  correct  drawings  were  used  by 
the  people.  The  Putto  alone,  however,  knew  where 
the  caves  were.  The  parts  of  the  flowers  represented 
on  the  combs'  in  accordance  with  these  traditions,  viz. 
"  tepi,"  "  was,"  "  pawer,"  and  "  mos,"  are  dealt  with  ac- 
cording to  their  existing  arrangement  on  the  blowpipes, 
without,  however,  any  further  working  out  of  the  details, 
e.g.  the  identification  of  the  remaining  parts  of  the  cor- 
responding patterns  which  are  incised  on  the  combs.4 

In  the  publications  of  the  Berlin  Ethnographical 
Museum,^  mention  is  made  of  the  Semang  explanation 

1  Z.  f.   E.    xxxi.    159.       See    also  which  is,  at  the  best,  a  doubtful  guess. 
Z.f.  E.  xxv.  73  f.     There  seem  to  be,  3  This   is    doubtless    due    to    some 
however,  more  important  uses.  legend     connected     with    one    of    the 

2  Spelt  by  V. -St.   "  Puttow,"  which  limestone   caves,    so    common    in    the 
may  =  "  Pattau,"    though    Griinwedel  north  portion  of  the  Peninsula, 
sviggests  a  connexion  with  "Buddha,"  4   V.-St.  iii.   no.            5  lb.  p.   130. 


I  iiw.   ix  Gl  Ni  RAJ    Rt  MM  41  | 


of  the  patterns  as  derived  exclusivel)  from  one  ol  their 
fundamental  patterns  (i  0),  which  latter  has  a  cL 
resemblance  to  .1  typical  u  motive  "  employed  by  the 
Sakaii  The  Semang  are  even  asserted  to  know  the 
exact  order  in  which  the  simpler  figures  were  suco 
sively  developed  I  The  first  eighteen  stages  of  this 
development  were  described  by   Vaughan  -  Stevens, 

but  in  this  respect  Nos.  1-4  (inclusive)  and  No.  13 
are  all  that  need  he  indicated.  The  fact  that  the 
Semang  arc;  not  acquainted  with  the  development  of 
the  complicated  figures  of  which  they  make  use, 
Vaughan- Stevens  seeks  to  explain — I  confess  un- 
convincingly — by  the  fact  that  these  latter  patterns 
were  formerly  incised  by  the  Sna-hut,  or  even  by  the 
Putto.1 

The  E.  Semang  (Pangan)  have  only  one 
"  pichod  "  pattern,  which  they  are  said  by  Vaughan- 
Stevens  to  have  learnt  from  the  Sakai  (?),  but  this 
pattern  and  its  variants  are  alleged  to  be  used  by  the 
Semang  as  the  groundwork  of  all  their  patterns.- 

Among  the  Semang  the  pyramidal  figure  is  said  to 
be  taken  as  the  basis  of  all  their  decorative  art.  It  is 
an  obvious  and  simple  figure  (possibly  connected  with 
the  zigzag)  which  is  commonly  found  in  the  art  of 
almost  all  other  savage  peoples,  and  there  is  no 
necessity  whatever  for  supposing  that  it  can  only 
have  been  borrowed  from  a  foreign  source.3 

Turning  to  mixed  Semang- Sakai  tribes,  the 
Tembeh  of  the  east  coast  states  used  no  decora- 
tion    for     their     blowpipe     or    quiver ;      later     they 

1   Z.  f.  E.  xxxi.  160.  were  indebted  for  this  form   of   orna- 

-  Vaughan  -  Stevens,      iii.      129     ;;.  ment  to  an  older    stage    ("stadium") 

Vaughan-Stevens'  comment  is  that  this  of  the  common  race,  from  which  they 

figure  must  either  obviously  have  been  were  both  evolved  (sic  f). 
borrowed  from  the  Sakai  or  that  both  3  Ibid.  p.  130. 


4i4  DECORATIVE  ART  part  M 


copied  the  patterns  of  the  E.  Semang  or  Pangan, 
but  very  sparingly.1  Vaughan  -  Stevens  describes 
in  connexion  with  this  tribe  a  strange  "code" 
or  set  of  signs  which  he  calls  the  "  Tembeh 
message-characters,"  and  he  adds  that  these  message- 
characters  are  known  not  only  to  a  section  of  the 
Tembeh,  but  throughout  the  whole  of  the  Malay 
Peninsula  ! 2  The  signs  were  notched  on  a  section  or 
bamboo  or  drawn  upon  it  in  charcoal.  At  the  top 
stood  the  sign  which  represented  the  name  of  the 
sender  (which  all  parties  concerned  would  be  likely 
to  know),  and  underneath  stood  that  of  the  recipient. 
The  characters  employed  represented  such  ideas  as 
"go,"  "return,"  "wait,"  "escape,"  "wood-felling," 
"  man,"  "  woman,"  "  family,"  "  danger,"  "  salt," 
"  tobacco,"  "  day,"  "  night,"  etc.,  and  so  on  down  to  the 
representation  of  the  numbers  i  to  io.3  A  special  sign, 
for  instance,  stands  for  "  night  "  or  "  darkness,"  and 
another  special  sign  for  "  day  "  or  "  daylight."  4 

We  next  come  to  the  magical  designs  of  the 
Sakai,  who  since  they  believed  (unlike  the  Semang) 
in  demons,  naturally  used  these  designs  in  a  way 
that  the  Semang  never  did.  Vaughan-Stevens  here 
tells  us  that  each  tribe  of  the  Sakai  has  a  design 
which  does  for  all  the  members  of  the  tribe. 

Vaughan-Stevens  adds  that  the  designs  were  used 
merely  as  charms  against  certain  evil  spirits,  and  hence 
were  less  numerous  than  the  magical  designs  of  the 
Semang  which  were  intended  for  use  against  all  the 
(personified)  Diseases  that  they  knew  of  or  could 
imagine.5 


1  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  98.  numerals  of  its  own   beyond  three  or 

2  This,  however,  is  certainly  a  stretch  four. 

of  the  imagination.  4  Globus,  lxix.  117,  1896. 

3  No    Semang   or    Sakai    tribe    has  5  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  130. 


u. 


I  \\  :ll  i  I  I! 


»  //\W/A\  V.A  AVX 


'J 


oooo     @£J@^> 


1  M  \  I  l  OPMFN  r    OF    THE    I'  \  l  I  I  RNS    I  R(  >M     1  III 


Chevron  (Z, 


Sktat  Collection. 

Quivers  for  Blowpipe  Darts  employed 
in   the  Semang  of  Kedah. 


1 3  ^V'v'**- 


De  Morgan 

Semang  Quivers. 

l>e  Morgan  in  L'H.  251I1  October  1885,  p.  617. 


V0I.  I.  p.  414. 


I 


-/. 


t 

'8 

■J 

E 

r. 

JO 

■i 

_ 

c 

- 

■z. 

r 

^ 

Ml 

_i 

■i 

D 

1 

^ 

/ 

f. 

- 

—. 

v 

:i. 

Ctf 

z 

-. 

- 

■ 

- 

— 

:> 

J. 

/ 

J. 

>, 

i — 

' 

II 

V 

~z 

1    ££ 

^^^^L- 

lfcWfcBBBS== 

'  .-isssir 

J^^BHta^^^MM 

^SL^^^^^^^^^^H^^^^*- 

■f. 


_      - 


i  ha?   i  .  GENERAL   Rl  MAI  \\  \ 


The  following  is  Vaughan  -  Steven  tatement 
as  to  the  alleged  origin  ol  the  Sakai  charm 
patterns : — 

As  he  (Vaughan-Stevens)  was  anxious  for  further 
explanation  (about  the  patterns)  he  took  a  bamboo 
(■*  tabong ")  belonging  to  one  oi  the  men,  and  asked 
to  be  shown  which  were  Tuhan's  finger-prints.  In- 
stead of  replying,  the  man  seized  a  piece  oi  firewood, 
rubbed  his  finger  ow  the  charred  end,  and   pressed 

his    blackened     finger-tip     upon     the     bamboo,    thus 
producing  a  triangular  pattern.' 

Further  inquiry  elicited  the  information  that  for 
the  interior  portion  of  this  figure  no  fixed  rule 
existed,  and  that  (e.g.)  dots  might  be  introduced 
instead  of  lines.  It  was  further  asserted  that  the 
more  complicated  patterns  were  only  so  many  varieties 
of  the  simple  triangle  or  V-pattern,  duplicated  and 
arranged  X-wise  instead  of  side  by  side.- 

Of  pure  Jakun  (i.e.  Malayan)  designs  very  little 
seems  yet  to  have  been  written,  and  specimen  illus- 
trations of  Jakun  patterns  seem  hardly  less  rare  than 
descriptions  thereof.  The  decorative  art  of  the  Besisi, 
so  far  as  I  have  observed  (like  their  language),  so 
closely  resembles  that  of  the  Sakai  as  to  be  almost 
indistinguishable.  It  is  therefore  among  some  of 
the  Johor  and  Kuantan  tribes  (probably  among  those 
who  still  manufacture  the  wooden  blowpipe)  that  we 
must  look  for  purer  specimens  of  "  savage  Malay  "  art- 
work. On  the  other  hand  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that 
much  decoration  of  Malayan  origin  that  was  probably 
indigenous  in  the  first    place    among    the    Jakun    or 

1  Vaughan-Stevens,   iii.    130.      This  collected  his  information.      Can  we  say 

passage  exhibits,  unfortunately,  the  un-  that   the  mark   made  by   a   blackened 

critical  spirit   (which  in  some  respects  finger-tip  suggests  a  triangle  ? 

was  a  merit !)  in  which  Vaughan-Stevens  -  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  130. 


4i6  DECORATIVE  ART  part  n 


heathen  Malays,  has  undoubtedly  been  incorporated 
in  the  art-work  of  Semang  and  Sakai  tribes.  Un- 
fortunately, as  I  have  said,  practically  nothing  has 
yet  been  done  at  this  subject,  and  all  that  is  possible 
in  the  present  work  is  to  indicate  the  nature  of 
the  inquiry  which,  it  is  most  earnestly  to  be  hoped, 
some  future  investigator  may  find  the  means  to  carry 
out. 

I. — Semang. 

Analysis  of  the  Patterns  of  a  Semang  Quiver  (Siong). 

We  now  come  to  the  interpretation  of  certain 
typical  specimens  of  the  Semang  patterns,  which 
were  explained  to  me  by  the  owners  of  the  objects 
described  as  follows  : — 

(i)  Second  Panel  (a) — 

Blossom  of  the  "p'rah  tree,  with  its  skin  (or 
bark?)." 

(2)  Second  Panel  (6) — 

Hill  tortoise  ("  kura  bukit  "). 

The  "  baning  "  (a  bigger  variety ). 

The  "  kahh  "  (the  biggest  variety). 

Ribbed  breast  of  a  tortoise,  showing  the  bones. 
It  should  be  noted  that  in  the  case  of  the 
smallest  variety  there  are  six  tortoise 
breasts  in  the  field,  whereas  in  that  of 
the  middle-sized  kind  there  are  four,  and 
in  that  of  the  largest  three  only. 

(3)  Third  Panel— 

The  fruit  of  the  "  kelubi." 

(4)  Fourth  Panel — 

Blossom  of  the  "  rotan  senik  "  (a  kind  of  rattan). 
Blossom  of  the  "  rotan  tunggal  "  (another  kind). 


chap,  i.\  NEGRITOS  a   a  /  /'.///  417 

(5)  Bottom  panel  oi  the  quiv<  1 

Deer-slots.  These  are  distinguished  from  the 
rest  of  the  designs  l>y  the  scraping  ofl  ol 
the  outer  cuticle  oi  the  bamboo  over  <  ertain 
parts  of  the  design  tli.u  are  darker  than  the 
rest.  The  parts  thus  scraped  arc  polished 
with  wax,  which  gives  them  a  reddish  tinge. 

(6)  Borders  are  added  to  all  the  panels 

I  lawks'  eyes  ("  mata   lang  "). 

Although  I  was  able  without  much  difficulty  to  get  the 
explanation  of  the  foregoing  details,  I  had  less 
success  with  the  remaining  portions  of  the  patterns, 
though  most  likely  the  objects  in  the  second  panel 
(a)  were  meant  to  attract  the  various  kinds  of  land- 
tortoise  portrayed  in  the  second  panel  (b).  In  the 
case  of  the  fifth  panel  this  intention  is  abundantly 
obvious,  since  it  consists  of  deer-slots  pointing  towards 
the  fruit  of  the  "  kelubi  "  as  well  as  to  that  of  the  rattan 
or  Calamus,  the  object  of  the  design  being,  no  doubt, 
to  attract  the  deer  by  a  suggestion  of  their  favourite 
feeding-grounds,  where  they  would,  of  course,  be  more 
easily  slain  or  captured. 

Analysis  of  the  Patterns  zipon  a  Second  Dart-quiver. 

The  Semang  further  informed  me  that  the  object  of 
their  entire  set  of  quiver  patterns  was  to  bring  down 
various  species  of  monkeys  and  apes  and  other  small 
mammals.  This  particular  set  of  patterns  was 
described  as  possessing  much  magical  virtue  ("  kom 
jasa  "),  the  phrase  being  still  more  clearly  ex- 
plained by  the  comment  of  my  informants,  that  it 
would  be  a  "  slayer  of  many  victims  "  ("  banyak  bunoh- 
nya    ). 

VOL.  I  2  E 


418  DECORATIVE  ART  part  n 

Each  panel  of  the  pattern  contained  some  special 
design  which  was  believed  to  be  of  the  highest 
efficacy  in  bringing  down  a  particular  species  of 
animal.  Thus  the  first,  second,  third,  fourth,  and 
fifth  panels  inclusive  contained  charms  for  bringing 
down  various  species  of  apes  and  monkeys,  e.g. — 

(i)  The  "  kaldos  "  (Mai.  "  sinekah  "  or  "  Chikah"?). 

(2)  The  "talug"  (Mai.  "  lotong  "). 

(3)  The  "  kebofi  "  (Mai.  "  mawah  "  or  "  wa-wa  "). 

(4)  The  "bawad"  (Mai.  "bW"). 

(5)  The  "bateyu"  (Mai.  "  siamang  "). 

The  two  bottom  panels,  on  the  other  hand,  were 
devoted  to  the  bear-cat  ("  chepag  "  or  "  chepog  "  = 
Malay  "  binturong  ")  and  the  civet-cat  or  "  kenseng  " 
(Malay  "  musang  ")  respectively.1 

Analysis  of  the  Decorations  on  a  Third  Dart-quiver. 

(1)  First  Panel — 

Fish-scales. 

Thorns  of  the  rattan  (leaf-whip  and  stem). 

(2)  Second  Panel — 

Python  and  pythons'  bones  ("  ular  sawa  "). 

(3)  Third  Panel- 

Do.  do. 

(4)  Fourth  Panel — 

Do.  do. 

(5)  Fifth  Panel— 

Hawrks'  eyes  and  scales. 

This  appears  to  be  a  food-charm  like  the  last.  In 
fact,. I  cannot  help  thinking  it  more  than  likely  that  the 

1  The  "  lotong  "  is  a  Semnopithecus  the  "siamang,"  Hylobates  lot  (gibbon) ; 
(spectacled  monkey)  ;  the  "  b'ro',"  \hz"v:&-vi?L" Hylobates agilis ;  the"bin- 
Macacus nemestrinus (coconut-monkey);       turong, "  Arctictis  binturong. 


i  hap.  h  NEGRITOS  <>/■  KE  DAH 

proximity  <>i  the  fish  scale  \  and  rattan  thorn  -  may  be  oi 
special  signify  am  e,  sin<  e  these  pri<  kly  leal  whips  ol  the 
rattan  are  frequently  used  i<>  make  a  funnel-shaped 
trap  for  fish,  which  immediately  on  entering  the  mouth 
of  the  trap  are  caught  and  held  fast  by  their  scal< 

Analysis  of  the  Decorative  Symbols  on  a  Comb. 

(i)  First  Panel 

Rattan  thorns  ("duri  rotan  "). 

(2)   Second  (central)  Panel — 

Diamond-shaped  diagram  filled  with  little  pitted 
marks  called  "cucumber  seeds"  ("  bunga 
timun  ").  The  cross-lines  are  called  "  ten- 
weg  "  (  =»  "  tin-weg  "  of  V.-St.). 

The  complete  design  is  meant  to  serve  as  a  charm 
to  protect  the  woman  against  venomous  reptiles  and 
insects.  The  chiefs  wife  informed  me  that  a  similar 
design,  for  a  similar  reason,  was  sometimes  painted 
upon  the  breast  of  women  belonging  to  the  wild 
Semang-Sakai  tribes  in  the  northern  part  of  the 
valley  of  the  Plus. 

The  specimens  above  described  were  all  collected 
by  the  writer  in  the  same  region,  viz.  among  the 
Negritos  of  Siong,  in  the  interior  of  Kedah. 

The  charm-patterns  which  have  been  studied  by 
Vaughan-Stevens  are,  with  one  exception  (that  of  the 
Sakai  "  tuang  -  tuang  "),  all  Semang  patterns,  and 
relate  to  the  following  classes  (as  given  above) : — 

Class  (1).   Bamboo  combs. 

Class  (2).  Large  bamboo  tubes,  including  (a) 
bamboo  quivers,  (b)  medicine  bamboos,  (c)  memorial 
bamboos,  (d)  burial  bamboos,  (e)  birth  bamboos. 

Class  (4).   Bamboo  blowpipes. 


420  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ii 

The  Theories  of  Vaughan-Stevens. 
comb  patterns. 

In  the  following  pages  the  description  of  the 
patterns  employed  by  the  Semang,  although  given  in 
the  form  of  a  summary  of  Vaughan-Stevens'  own  words 
as  reported  by  his  German  editor,1  has  been  revised, 
rearranged,  and  corrected  where  necessary.2 

The  magical  bamboo  back-combs  of  the  Semang 
women  are  worn  throughout  the  entire  Semang  region,3 
though  on  the  western  side  of  the  main  mountain  range 
of  the  Peninsula,  from  Kedah  to  Perak,  rather  for  orna- 
mental than  for  any  other  reasons,  the  rules  for  com- 
posing the  patterns  being  now  forgotten  there.  The 
use  of  these  combs  (the  name  for  which  is  "tin-leig"  or 
"  tela'  ")  is  to  serve  as  a  means  of  protecting  women 
against  the  diseases  (e.g.  fever,  called  "pong"  in  Semang) 
against  which  the  flowers  referred  to  are  of  service. 
For  external  injuries,  such  as  those  caused  by  a  falling 
tree  in  the  jungle,  or  by  the  bite  of  a  centipede,  other 
talismans  are  used,  not  combs.  The  Semang  employ 
no  comb  for  the  purpose  of  dressing  their  stubborn, 
closely  curled  hair,  yet  the  women  often  wear  eight 
back  combs  at  a  time,  and  sometimes  even  as  many 
as  sixteen,  which  in  this  case  form  a  double  row, 
the  one  behind  the  other.  When  eight  combs  are 
worn,  two  are  fixed  side  by  side  facing  frontwards,  two 
backwards,  and  two  towards  each  side,  the  teeth  being 
inserted  right  up  to  the  solid  part  of  the  comb.  The 
choice  of  a  comb  or  set  of  combs  depends  in  each 

1  Z.f.E.  xxv.  71-100  {ed.  Grunwedel).        enclosed  in  square  brackets. 

For  list  of  comb  patterns,  v.  App.  3  Hair-combs    were    also    seen     by 

2  For  the  convenience  of  future  Lapicque  among  the  Semang  of  Ulu 
investigators  passages  that  contain  Selama.  —  Tour  du  Monde,  N.S.,  i. 
statements  requiring  corroboration  are  (1S95).  620. 


(  hap   i  NEGRITO  i  <>/■  PERAK 

i  .1  ,c  upon  three  ( onsiderations      ( i )  the  Di  01 

Diseases  prevalent  anywhere  in  the  neighbourhood 
.it  the  time  of  choice  ;   (2)  tho  •<•  I  M  ^  hi<  h  are 

most   dreaded  at   the  time;  and  (3)  the  presence  or 

Otherwise  oi  other  women. 

I  To   understand    this   last    consideration    it   must 
be    remembered    that    according    to    Semang    id< 
the  winds  bring  Diseases  with  them  as  punishment 

for  any  sins  that  Kari.  the  thunder-god,  desires  to 
avenge  by  their  means.      The  Wind-demon,  who  is 

sent  from  Kari  with  this  message,  passes  over  the 
head  of  the  person  and  deposits  the  Disease  upon  his 
(or  her)  forehead,  from  whence  it  spreads  over  the 
rest  of  the  body.  But  the  god  Pie  ("  Play  ")  pacifies 
Kari  and  turns  aside  the  punishments  decreed  by  him, 
by  giving  the  Semang  a  talisman  that  the  winds  dare 
not  approach.  If,  therefore,  a  woman  is  protected  by 
the  correct  form  of  magic  comb,  the  Wind,  on  touching 
her  head,  encounters  the  scent  of  the  "  was  "  (the  first 
or  uppermost  panel  of  the  comb),  and  thereupon  falls  to 
the  ground  until  the  wearer  of  the  comb  has  passed. 
If  several  women,  each  wearing  a  particular  set  of 
combs,  are  sitting  or  walking  together,  and  a  Disease 
comes  in  the  name  of  Kari  to  punish  one  of  them 
who  is  not  wearing  the  protective  comb  pattern,  yet 
so  long  as  there  is  another  woman  close  by  who  is 
wearing  it,  the  first  panel  pattern  of  the  latter  will 
protect  the  former  woman.  Hence  when  several 
women  are  walking  together  they  wear  different  combs 
for  their  mutual  protection  from  different  Diseases.] 

[The  winds  do  not  bring  every  kind  or  any  special 
kind  of  Disease,  though  every  Disease  has  a  special 
wind  as  its  messenger,  and  hence  comes  the  necessity 
of  varying  first-panel  ("  was  ")  patterns.      It  is  not  as 


422  DECORATIVE  ART  i-art  11 


a  rule  the  case  that  a  "  was  "  should  especially  avail 
against  more  than  one  particular  kind  of  Disease, 
though  many  of  these  patterns  to  a  lesser  extent 
may  avail  against  other  Diseases  as  well.  It  does  not 
therefore  often  happen  (though  it  may  sometimes  do 
so)  that  a  Semang  cuts  a  first-panel  pattern  on  a  comb 
for  any  other  than  its  specific  purpose.  It  is  said  that 
the  profusion  of  first-panel  patterns  which  exists  has 
arisen  occasionally  through  their  being  changed  by 
the  magicians,  who  excused  themselves  on  the  above 
grounds  whenever  it  happened.]  On  the  whole,  a 
Semang  woman  possesses  as  a  rule  from  twenty  to 
thirty  magic  combs,  so  that  in  an  encampment  in  which 
there  are  several  women  a  great  number  of  patterns 
are  present.  The  women  lend  each  other  their  combs 
or  omit  to  wear  them  as  the  case  may  be,  especially 
when,  e.g.,  several  of  them  are  together,  and  one  may 
be  protected  by  the  combs  worn  by  the  others.  In 
the  huts  or  shelters  the  combs  are  taken  out  of  the 
hair  and  inserted  between  the  slats  of  the  roof. 

At  night  the  combs  are  not  worn.  When  a  woman 
is  buried  all  her  combs  are  buried  with  her,  so  that 
the  Diseases  which  have  been  warded  off  from  her 
body  during  her  lifetime  may  not  hurt  her  soul  when 
dead.  The  idea  appears  to  be  that  the  soul  of  the 
deceased  should  have  the  same  protection  secured  to 
it  that  the  living  has  possessed. 

In  the  ways  above  described,  the  encampment  is 
sufficiently  protected,  as  long  as  the  Semang  do  not 
leave  the  place  they  are  in. 

[Concerning  the  origin  of  the  custom,  the  invariable 
explanation  of  the  Semang  is  that  the  patterns  of  the 
magic  comb  were  the  invention  of  their  god  Pie, 
and  that   the  patterns  employed  were  not  borrowed 


chap,  ix  NEGRITOS  OF  PERAK 

from  any  other  people ;  and  they  add   that   in  olden 

times  the  magic  comb  only  p<  <-<l  three  teeth.1] 

The  I-..  Semang  or  Pangan  still  make  their  comlis  with 

only  lour  to  five  teeth  to  them,  their  sole  instrument 
lor  carving  the  bamboo  being  a  rough  chopping-knifc 
("  parang  "),  where. is  the  Semang  oi    l'er.ik  (.it   Bellim), 

who  possess  a  better  class  of  Malay  knives,  give  their 

combs  a  dozen  or  <\en   more  than  a  do/en  teeth.  ' 

At  the  different  places  at  which  it  was  asked,  the 

question,  "What  is  the  use  of  the  teeth?'  always 
received  the  same  answer,  viz.  that  the  combs  would 
soon  fall  out  and  be  lost  but  for  the  long  teeth,  which 
were  the  only  means  of  fastening  them  into  the  hair. 
The  men,  too,  do  not  wear  combs,  because  (as  they 
allege)  their  hair  is  too  short.  Their  talismans  are, 
therefore,  as  stated  above,  incised  on  the  quivers  and 
charm-holders.  [It  was  further  alleged  that  in  very 
ancient  times  the  women  also  very  often  carried  a 
special  charm-tube,  on  which  all  the  seventy  Disease- 
charms  were  incised — in  other  words,  a  "  gi  "  of  a  form 
resembling  that  of  the  modern  dart-quiver.3  This 
special  charm-holder  was  inserted  in  the  loin-cloth  or 
girdle,  in  the  same  way  as  the  quivers  now  carried  by 
the  men.  The  modern  girdle  of  the  Semang  men  is 
said  to  be  based  on  this  old  custom,  whereas]  the 
Sakai  fasten  on  their  quivers  with  special  straps.  It  is, 
moreover,  still  the  custom  for  the  Semang  quivers 
to  lack  any  lid  or  covering ;  for  if  a  quiver  ("  go'  ") 
or  charm -tube  ("gi")  had  a  cover,  the  charms 
being  covered   would  therefore   be  powerless.      The 

1  The  suggestion  is  here  made  that  and    among    the  central    Sakai,    these 

the   multiplication    of   the    number    of  combs  have  far  more  than  three  or  four 

teeth   in   these  combs  may  have  been  teeth, 

due  to  Sakai  influence.      Among  Perak  -  Z.f.  E.  xxv.  75. 

Sakai   who   have    Semang    admixture,  3  See,  however,  p.  406,  ante. 


424  DECORATIVE  ART  paet  II 

M  tahong "  '  of  the  women  is  a  modified  survival  of 
this  custom.  [The  comparative  completeness  of  the 
traditions  of  the  Semang  with  regard  to  their  patterns 
was  ascribed  to  the  fact  of  these  charm-tubes  having 
contained  specimens  of  all  their  forms.-] 

The  Diseases  against  which  the  magic  combs  are  of 
avail  only  attack  women,  and  many  of  these  are  very 
largely  the  result  of  the  imagination.  [Diseases  which 
attack  both  sexes  are  usually  (since  the  women  as  a 
rule  do  not  go  far  away  from  the  men)  arrested  by  the 
quiver  and  blowpipe  patterns  of  the  latter.  On  this 
account,  the  women  do  not  as  a  rule  use  any  quiver 
patterns,  although  they  are  not  prohibited  from 
doing  so.3] 

The  combs,  as  a  rule,  do  not  last  long.  The  teeth 
easily  break  off,  and  the  combs  themselves  are  more 
liable  to  be  lost  than  the  quivers  and  charm-holders  of 
the  men.  As,  moreover,  they  are  buried  with  the 
women  when  they  die,  there  is  always  something  for 
the  young  people  to  do  and  to  learn.  When  they 
know  the  patterns  of  the  quivers  and  charm-tubes, 
they  are  allowed  to  cut  these  for  the  men.  But  the 
men  also  cut  other  patterns  as  well  as  those  of  the 
quivers  and  charm-holders ;  and  the  beautiful  and 
accurately  incised  patterns  of  the  combs  are  the  work 
of  men.  The  kind  of  bamboo  most  used  for  the 
manufacture  of  these  combs  is  a  very  tall  species  which 
the  Semang  call  "  semeng."  The  useless  upper 
portion  is  cut  off,  that  required  for  use  well  dried, 
and  the  process  of  making  the  comb  then  proceeds 
as  follows  : — 

A  single  internode  is  taken,  and  both  knots  (or 
"  nodes  ")  are  excised,  so  carefully  as  not  to  crack  the 

1  Cp.  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiv.  465  seqq.  2  3  Z.  f.  E.  xxv.  75. 


chap,  ix  NEGRITOS  OF  PERAK 


internode.      The   cut    edge    ia    then    mo  refully 

smoothed,  and,  precaution  being  taken  to  ie<  thai  the 
entire  portion  ii>  sufficient  for  "two  comb-lengtl 
the  three  double  ring-lines  are  first  incised  twice 
each  upon  both  sides  oi  the  tube.  These  lin  rve 
not  only  to  divide  up  the  pattern,  1  >ui  themseh 
possess  a  certain  amount  <>i  charm-power.  I  hey  are 
produced  by  laying  the  edge  ol  the  chopper  across  the 
bamboo  at  right  angles  and  rolling  tin-  latter  along 
with  the  left  hand.  Sometimes  these  lines,  it  is  true, 
are  first  incised  separately  on  the  surface  of  the  comb 
after  the  splitting  of  the  internode,  but  this  was  rarely 

the  case,  because  it  was  then  more  difficult  to  make, 
them  parallel.  The  internode;  is  now  split  into  two 
separate  parts  of  equal  size,  which  are  then  split  again 
into  as  many  pieces  as  the  bamboo  allows.  Large 
bamboo  shafts  will  produce  four  or  even  six  laminae, 
but  smaller  ones  as  a  rule  only  yield  three.  The 
pattern  is  now  incised  with  the  point  of  the  chopper  and 
rubbed  over  with  dry  charcoal,  a  drop  of  water  being 
added  to  rub  it  quite  into  the  lines.  The  lamina  is 
then  heated  over  the  fire  and  wax  rubbed  in  with  the 
help  of  bark-cloth  or  something  of  the  kind,  after  which 
the  lamina  is  wiped  clean.  The  hot  wax  not  only  fills 
up  the  incisions  of  the  pattern  and  fixes  the  powdered 
charcoal  in  them,  but  at  the  same  time  takes  away  all 
traces  of  the  charcoal  from  the  smooth,  hard,  unincised 
portions  of  the  comb. 

The  comb  is  now  turned  round  and  a  deep  furrow 
is  cut  on  the  back  corresponding  exactly  to  the  lowest 
line  of  the  pattern  on  the  front,  half  the  thickness  of 
the  bamboo  being  cut  through  and  the  gap  widened 
from  below.  The  woody  part  of  the  interior  is 
then    stripped   off    as    far    as    this    cross-cut,    until 


426  DECORATIVE  ART  pact  h 

the  under  part  of  the  lamina  is  reduced  by  half 
throughout.  Next,  the  comb  is  again  turned  round, 
and  from  the  front,  at  the  bottom  end,  thin  strips 
of  the  outer  cuticle  are  torn  in  order  to  mark  the 
interstices  between  which  the  teeth  are  to  come.  At 
the  bottom  of  the  pattern  an  incision  is  made  to 
prevent  these  strips  from  tearing  away  and  so  spoiling 
the  pattern  ;  these  small  incisions  are  then  deepened, 
and  the  same  process  having  been  repeated  at  the 
back  of  the  comb,  the  teeth  are  thus  entirely  released. 
It  remains  to  polish  the  borders,  to  scrape  away  loose 
fibres,  to  point  the  teeth,  and  the  comb  is  finished.1 

The  process  of  incision  is  called  "  makeii " 
("makiee  "),  the  comb  "tin-leig,"  and  the  entire 
pattern  "  kenaij  "  ("  kenije  "),  i.e.  ''drawing."  The 
whole  of  the  solid  part  of  the  comb  is  sometimes 
also  called  "was."2  The  old  standards  of  measure- 
ment for  these  combs,  though  they  are  certainly  now 
very  little  regarded,  were  :  (i)  for  the  teeth,  a  palm's 
breadth  ("tappar");  (2)  for  the  length  of  the  solid  part, 
from  the  upper  extremity  to  the  teeth,  the  length  of 
the  forefinger  ("  jayi  ") ;  (3)  for  the  width  of  this  same 
part  the  breadth  of  four  fingers  pressed  together  at  the 
tips  ('"  en-chas  ").  The  teeth  of  the  comb  are  called 
"mad,"  which  in  Semang  either  means  "eye"  or 
"  blade."  [The  eight  parts  of  the  pattern  on  the  solid 
part  are  named: — (1)  first  panel  =  "  was  ";  (2)  second 
panel  =  "  pawer  "  ("pawaire  ") ;  (3)  third  panel  = 
"  kabo  saleg"  ("  kabur  salag  ") ;  (4)  fourth  panel  = 
"kabo'  padi"  ("kabur  padi ")  ;  (5)  fifth  or  central 
panel  =  "  tin-weg  "  or  "tin-wag";  (6)  sixth  panel  = 
"ning";  (7)  seventh  panel  ="  bie "  ("beay");  (8) 
eighth  panel  =  "  nos."      The  top  border  or  edge  of  the 

1  Z.f.  E.  xxv.  77-78.  2  See  p.  397,  n.  I,  ante. 


B  Z 


*i  l-Ji^J 


■  ■■ 


Z.  ''.  E.  xxv.  Plate  I. 


Charm-Patterns  on  Combs. 


Vol.  I.  p-  -4-6. 


Vol,  I.  p.  427. 


Charm-Patterns  on  Combs. 


Z./.E.  xxv.  Plate  II. 


(   il  VI'.    l\ 


NEGRITOS  <>/■  PERAK 


comb  above  the  "  vrfts "  (i)  is  called  "  tCpf/1  the 
bottom  border  below  the  eighth  panel  ("nos")  if 
called  "  nios." '  | 

Looking  at  the  prevalent  patterns  o(  the  first  and 

COnd  panels,  it  is  easy  tO  Se<  that  many  o(  them  are 
identical  with  or  form  parts  of  the  patterns  which 
represent  the  Disease  in  the  fifth  panel.  The  ex- 
planation given  was  that  when  the  charm  patterns  were 
being  made,  Pie  wished,  whilst  assigning  a  pattern  to  a 
particular  Disease,  to  make  known  at  the  same  time 
what  flower  was  blooming  most  freely  when  the 
Disease  prevailed,  and  hence  gave  both  a  similar  form. 
But    when   both   the    first   and   second  panel  patterns 


'  These  names  are  in  part  certainly 
of  Malay  origin,  and  not  pure  Semang, 
(i)  -  Mai.  "tapak,"  a  palm's- 
breadth;  (2)  =  Mai.  "jari,"  a  finger; 
"mad '"may  he  connected,  through  Indo- 
Chinese,  with  Malay  "mata"  =  eye  or 
blade  of  an  instrument.  So  too  "kabo' 
saleg"  (Mai.  "  salak  ")  =  fruit  of  the 
"  salak  "-palm  ;  "  kabo'  padi  "  (Mai. 
"padi  ")  =  rice-fruit  ;  "  tepi  "  =  Mai. 
"  tfipi,"  edge.  On  the  other  hand, 
"ning,"  "bie,"  "  nos  "  (?)  =  one,  two, 
four  (in  Semang). 

The  passage  [Z./.E.  xxv.79  )  in  which 
V.-St.  defines  his  flower- theory  {v.  p. 
397)  runs  as  follows  : —  "  '  Was  '  and 
'  pawer  '  are  the  protecting  designs,  the 
power  of  which  keeps  off  the  sickness. 
'Pawer,'  '  kos,'  and  'tepi'  are 
parts  of  a  flower,  of  which  '  was '  is 
the  smell,  and  'tepi'  the  pistil  and 
stamens,  hence  a  supplementary  line 
above  a  '  was '  has  the  same  name. 
The  projecting  spike  above  the  green 
sepals  is  called ;  pawer,'  the  sepals '  mos. " 
To  give  the  rest  of  the  names :  the 
flower  it  self  is  called  '  bakau,'  the 
petals  '  tapak '  ;  of  a  flower  that  has  a 
sweet  smell,  '  ber-pen-hat '  (beer-pen- 
hat  ')  is  the  word  used  by  the  Se- 
mang ;  if  a  disagreeable  smell,  '  hi- 
hid'  ('hee-heed')  is  the  word.  Two 
distinct      jungle      flowers      are      now 


considered  as  '  piiwer  '  —  '  Mos,' 
really  a  kind  of  Ixora,  which 
corresponds  to  the  '  pawer,'  and  a 
flower  called  by  the  Malays  '  tetawar 
bintang,'  or  '  star  tetawar,'  whose 
botanical  name  is  not  yet  known, 
but  which  resembles  the  '  mos. ' 
All  slight  -  scented  flowers  of  the 
Ixora  kind  are  called  'pawer,'  with 
the  addition  of  a  specific  second  name. " 

On  the  foregoing  tissue  of  errors  I 
would  remark  that  "tepl"isa  pure  Malay 
word  ( =  edge  or  border),  and  does  not 
mean  pistil  or  stamens,  for  which  there 
is  no  name  in  Semang,  nor  could  be. 

The  "projecting  spike"  can  only 
be  the  pistil,  which  Vaughan-Stevens 
has  already  told  us  is  called  (with  the 
stamens)  "tepi."  "Pawer"  and  "mos," 
on  the  other  hand,  are  probably  the 
names  of  flowers,  not  parts  of  a  flower, 
as  explained  below.  "  Bakau  "  = 
"flower"  in  Semang  =  Mai.  "bunga," 
a  "flower"  or  "pattern.''' 

The  drawing  of  the  Ixora  (given 
in  Griinwedel's  text)  is,  as  he  there 
states,  a  hypothetical  one  of  the  writer's, 
serving  only  to  help  to  determine  the 
technical  expressions. 

As  regards  the  plant  ' '  tetawar  bin- 
tang "  {sic),  which  is  certainly  a  blunder 
for  "tetawar  (or  '  setawar ')  bendang," 
see  note  to  page  399,  ante. 


428  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ii 

were  to  be  given  an  identical  form,  and  confusion  was 
probable,  he  introduced  certain  special  signs  called 
"  gehab  "  ("  g'hab  "),  "  kos,"  and  "  ob."  *]  No.  39,  for 
example,  shows  in  its  central  panel  reversed  duplicates 
of  its  first  and  second  panel  patterns,  which  in  this 
case  appear  to  be  absolutely  alike  ;  with  this,  however, 
should  be  compared  the  corrected  sketch  of  this  comb 
pattern  in  Fig.  8.  [This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
"was"  and  "pawer"  flowers  bloom  simultaneously,  and 
the  patterns  for  them  are  therefore  almost  identical.2] 

One  reason  for  the  numerous  variations  in  these 
comb  patterns  consists  in  the  fact  that  the  patterns 
of  the  combs  are  mostly  cut  by  young  people  instead 
of  by  the  men,  as  in  the  case  of  the  more  correctly 
cut  quiver  and  blowpipe  patterns.  But  an  error  in 
the  pattern  does  not,  as  a  Pangan  man  said,  take 
away  the  power  of  the  comb.  "  It  is  like  a  break  or  a 
hole  in  a  bird-trap :  the  bird  may  slip  through,  instead 
of  falling  into  the  trap,  but  it  is  always  a  question 
whether  it  will  see  the  hole."  3 

All  the  figures  on  the  combs,  with  the  exception  of 
the  first,  second,  and  fifth  panels,  must  in  every  case  be 
of  the  simplest  kind.  They  are  derived  as  a  rule  from 
a  first  or  second  panel  pattern,  with  the  omission  of  the 
special  marks.  The  young  people  who  copy  the  combs 
often  overlook  this,  and  insert  at  the  sides  the  first 
or  second  panel  patterns  in  full.  But  the  error  is  no 
worse  than,  e.g.,  the  writing  of  capital  letters  instead 
of  small  ones  would  be  to  a  European.4 

As    concerns    the    composition    of    the    patterns, 

1  These  names  want  corroboration.  II.),   62  (PI.   II.),  60  (PL    IV.),   21 A 

See,    for     example,    the    combs    num-  (PI.    III.),    iF  (PI.  III.),  iA  (PI.   I.), 

bered    29   (PI.    III.),    13B    (PI.    II.),  iE    (PI.     L),     13A    (PI.     II.),     12B 

4C    (PI.    I.),    4B    (PI.    I.),    18B   (PL  (PI.  II.),  39  (PI.  III.),  16B  (PI.  II.). 

II.),    50  (PI.    IV.),  42   (PL   IV.),  63  2  Z.f.E.  xxv.  77-79. 

(PL    IV.),    21B   (PL    III.),    14A    (PL  34  Ibid. 


C^^1"' 


Paw. 


..  r 


[Fig. 


/  'augkan-Stevens. 

Hypothetical  Ixora   Blossom    vnd  Comb  (Figs.  2  and  3,  /././•..  xxv.  78* 

EXPLAINING     l'HK    FLOWER-THEOR\    OF    VAUGHAN-STEVENS. 

The  serial  numbers  in  Fig.  2  indicate  the  position  of  the  various  panels  carrying  patterns 

referred  to  in  the  text. 


Vol.  I.  /.  428. 


o 

^ 


-Ul  LU 


S 


V 
?^^ 


^v 


^3 


N 


chap,  iv  NEGRITOS  <>/■  PERAK 


there  are  itrict  rules  for  composing  them   ill,  whether 
combs,  quivers, or  charm  tubes;  these  rules,  however, 
are  not   easy  t<>  set   Forth;    in  the  first   place,  let 
consider : — 

i .  In  wh.it  cases  is  ;i  panel  left  free  ; 

2,   In  what  cases  may  the  designer  insert  what 
patterns  he  pleases  ? 

In  the  quivers  the  blank  portion  (or  panel)  is 
always  in  the  central  part  of  the  bamboo  tube,  but  in 
the  case  of  the  combs  it  must  never  come  in  the 
centre,  where  the  most  important  part  of  the  design 
is  to  go,  but  must  be  confined  to  the  smaller  panels. 
In  many  combs  it  is  the  first  panel  pattern  that  is 
omitted,  in  others  it  is  any  of  the  other  panels  (with 
the  exception  of  the  second).  The  full  description  of 
the  combs  (below)  will  not  only  show  this,  but  will  at 
the  same  time  show  where  partial  or  entire  quiver 
patterns  may  be  inserted.  In  this  latter  respect  it  is 
left  to  the  designer  to  decide  what  pattern  he  will  use, 
and  from  whence  he  will  take  the  design.  He  may 
take  either  entire  or  modified  quiver  or  blowpipe 
designs,  or  even  invent  new  ones,  so  long  as  he  does 
not  choose  first  or  second  panel  patterns. 

The  drawings  and  combs  collected  by  Vaughan- 
Stevens  are  nearly  all  from  the  E.  Semang  or  Pangan, 
and  are  all  very  typical  specimens  of  the  work  of  the 
east  coast  Negritos,  though  they  are  not  all  made  by 
the  men  ;  a  single  specimen  was  obtained  from  the 
Semang  of  Perak  (PI.  IV.),  and  two  others  were  also 
collected  on  the  west  side  of  the  Peninsula  (see  the 
last  three  combs  on  PL  IV.). 

[The  reason  why  the  patterns  of  the  first,  second, 
and  central  panels  alone  are  specifically  laid  down, 
and    not    those  of  the  remaining  panels,  lies  in  the 


43Q  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ii 

fact  (say  the  Pangan)  that  the  women  are  not  able 
to  go  far  enough  alone  into  the  jungle,  to  seek  any 
particular  flower,  when  the  Disease  finds  them  without 
the  appropriate  comb.  In  such  cases  the  woman  looks 
for  "  was  "  or  "  pawer  "  flowers  like  those  depicted  on 
the  comb,  and  takes  the  nearest  match  she  can  get. 
These,  however,  must  not  be  the  same  as  those  for  the 
quiver  and  charm-tube  patterns,  but  may  correspond 
to  the  third,  fourth,  and  fifth  panel  of  the  comb. 
These  plants,  which  are  akin  to  those  of  the  precise 
species  desired,  the  woman  deposits  in  a  bamboo  tube 
filled  with  water,  and  stirs  them  round  to  some  extent 
in  the  water,  and  if  she  can  likewise  obtain  the 
special  "  was  "  and  "pawer"  flowers,  she  adds  these 
also  and  drinks  the  infusion.  She  then  rubs  the  wet 
flowers  on  the  affected  part  of  her  body  before 
throwing  them  away.] 

In  course  of  time  certain  flowers  came  to  be 
looked  on  as  having  more  healing  power  than  others, 
and  in  consequence  the  patterns  derived  from  them 
were  preferred  for  wearing  on  the  combs.  This, 
however,  is  a  matter  of  individual  taste. 

[The  fact  is,  that  although  the  actually  specified 
flowers  would  (it  is  believed)  have  effected  an 
immediate  cure,  yet  even  the  flowers  most  nearly 
related  to  them  will  eventually,  though  much  more 
slowly,  produce  the  desired  result.  If  then,  in  panels 
3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  for  which  no  strict  rules  exist,  a  special 
sign  is  found,  it  is  taken  to  indicate  that  the  Sna-hut 
should  be  summoned  in  case  the  Disease  should  get 
too  strong  a  footing.  In  former  times,  according  to 
tradition,  it  was  the  special  duty  of  the  Sna-hut  to 
see  that  the  incised  figures  were  correct,  and  from 
this  Vaughan-Stevens   concludes    that   the   choice   of 


am 

mi 
turn 


Vj     ^     4.    <n    v^     N> 


^    ^    err 
^    J*,  an 


^       T       ^- 

^       ^      ^      ^      ^ 


u  5?    ^ 


f.      s 


^      3  S*^o 


chap,  it  NEGRITOS  OF  PI  RAK  < 


the  ground  patterns   was  also  left  to  them,  so  far 
they  had   learnt   them   from   the   Putto,1  the    servant 
of  Pic.  I     But   now   the   people   who  cut  the   comb 
choose  these  patterns  themselves,  and  learn  to  inci 
the  quiver  patterns.1 

In  the  case  of  the  individual  panels,  the  following 

observations  may  be  made  :  — 

[Every  separate  sign  repeated  in  the  lirst  panel 

pattern  is  called  "was"  also.  A  distinguish 
stripe,  either  at  the  top  or  bottom  of  the  panel  (in  the 
repetition  of  the  first  panel  pattern)  is  called,  as  already 
stated,  "  gehab  "  ("g'hab") — see,  for  example,  i8K  = 
44  kos  "  in  the  second  panel  pattern.  When  the  first 
panel  pattern  is  blank  it  is  called  "was  picheg."  Where 
and  why  these  blank  panels  were  introduced  is  not 
known  now  —  "the  Puttos  have  so  arranged  it' 
(see  60,  62).]  If  a  supplementary  line  is  introduced 
at  the  top  of  the  first  panel  it  is  called  "  tepi  "  or 
edge-line  (see  8B).  But  this  line  appears  on  all  the 
combs  and  also  on  all  the  quivers  and  charm -tubes  ; 
though  in  very  many  cases  it  is  not  completed  and 
coincides  with  the  line  of  section.  In  certain  cases 
this  edge  -  line  is  represented  by  a  broad,  dark 
stripe.  In  other  cases  {e.g.  on  the  quivers  and  charm- 
tubes)  it  comes  between  the  first  panel  pattern  and 
the  edge  of  the  comb,  and  is,  naturally,  clear  and 
distinct.3 


1   Cp.  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.   III.  (2)  Combs    which    possess   a   blank 

-  3  Z.f.  E.   xxv.    81.       The   combs  first  panel,  e.g.  Nos.  iB,  20A,  20D,  53. 

with  these  clearer  edge-lines  are —  (3)  Combs  which  have  blank  panels 

(i)    Some     combs     which     possess  in  one  or  several  parts  (other  than  the 

common    signs,   but    which  were    thus  "  waV'),    e.g.    in    their    third     panels 

selected    and    grouped    by  the    Puttos  ("  kibo'  saleg  "),  etc.  ;  for  the  second 

without    any   known    reason   for   their  panel   and   the  fifth  are  never    simul- 

being  thus  treated.      These  combs  are  taneously    omitted     from     the    comb. 

Nos.    iC,    8C,   9B,    12C,    14A,   20G,  These  combs  are  Nos.  3A,  3B,  3C,  7C, 

22A,  26,  33,  39,  54.  8B,  18B,  19O,  23,  29,  32A,  50,  60,  62. 


432  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ii 

Second  Panel  (or  "Pdwer").1 

[When  the  second  panel  pattern  is  covered  over 
with  a  number  of  like  figures,  each  figure  is  called 
"yil-toij."  If  a  specially  distinctive  element  is  intro- 
duced into  one  or  several  "  yil-toij,"  such  a  mark  is 
called  "  'ziat  "  (see,  for  example,  F19). 

If  a  distinguishing  stripe  is  introduced  either 
above  or  below  the  panel  in  question  (e.g.  at  7C), 
such  a  stripe  is  called  "  kos,"  and  serves  as  a  token. 
This  token,  however,  appears  on  but  few  combs 
(17A,  19M,  22D,  28B).  It  may  be  at  the  top,  bottom, 
or  either  side.  The  three  lines  shown  in  the  remain- 
ing panels  of  19M  are  due  to  an  error  of  the  cutter's.] 

As  already  stated,  there  are  combs  which  lack  both 
first  and  second  panel  patterns,  but  which  are  never- 
theless of  avail  against  the  approach  of  fatal  Diseases. 

The  "  Palm- fruit"  and  other  Panels. 

[When  the  third,  fourth,  sixth,  seventh,  and  eighth 
panels  are  covered  with  repetitions  of  a  single  separate 
figure,  each  of  these  figures  is  called  . "  yil-toij  "  ;  if 
they  are  covered  with  a  single  figure  which  cannot  be 
subdivided,  but  which  is  of  avail  for  the  whole,  it  is  called 
"  ken  "  (see  No.  61).    Panel  eight  ("  nos  ")  is  bounded 

Nos.   8C,  9B,  12C,  14A,  22A,  26,  "kapal,"  56   "ingkeng,"  64  "sanol," 

33  of  the  first  series  possess  a  broad  65  "mankuing,"  "munlong,"  66  "tel," 

and  black  "edge "-line,  which  extends  67  "bahu,"  "bahur,"  68  "challag,"  69 

from  the  first  panel  to  the  uppermost  "hillog,"  70  "  ballur,"  25C  "lanes." 

border  of  the  comb.      The  outer  cuticle  These  combs  have  no  "was"  or  "  yil- 

of  the  bamboo  is  pared  off  in  order  to  toij,"  except  Nos.  25C  and  25D,  which 

blacken  it  with  charcoal  ("chen-el-us")  have  a  "yil-toij"  sign  above  and  below  it 

["  us  "  is  evidently  the  word  for  fire].  respectively  in  order  to  distinguish  them 

There   appears   to   be   some  unwritten  from  A  and  B  of  these  numbers.      The 

law  as  to  the  width  of  this  blackened  Disease    expelled    by   25A,   25B    may 

portion,    which    also    appears    on    the  perhaps   be   fatal,    but   that   prevented 

blowpipe  patterns.      Cp.  p.  437,  infra.  by  25D  and  25C  is  certainly  fatal  if 

1  Z.  f.  E.     xxv.    81.      Nos.     25D  the  combs  are  not  worn. 


*«*  IV Ml 


innwiRSsit 


Charm-Patterns  on  Combs. 


/..  f.  A',  xxv.  Plate  III. 


/  W.  I.  />.  4  $2. 


Charm-Patterns  on  Combs. 


Z.f.  /■:.  xw.   Plate  IV 


Vol.  !./>.  433. 


.  kai    iv  I  GRITOS  <>/■  PERAK 

by  .m  imaginary  line  ol  juncture  between  the  teeth  and 
the  solid  part  ol  the  comb.      I  he  lowest  oi  the  rii 
lines  comes  above  the  eighth  panel, 


The  (  entral  Panel  ("  T%\  '). 

[The  patterns  for  the  various  1'  primarily 

represent  the  affected  part  of  the  body  ;  when  different 
parts  of  the  body  are  affected  the  patterns  are  com- 
bined, but  the  exact  rules  which  determine  the 
method  of  composition  are  forgotten.  Only  this  is 
certain,  that  in  cases  where  the  "w§  or"p5w€r" 
Sowers  (in  the  case  of  any  particular  Disease)  are  of 
especial  value  for  healing  purposes,  only  repetitions 
ot  the  same  pattern  appear  on  the  comb,  and  no 
others.  If  the  central  panel  shows  a  pattern  which 
covers  the  entire  panel  from  left  to  right,  it  is 
called  <4makeii"  ("  makiee  ") — see,  for  example,  9B. 
If,  however,  panel  five  is  covered  with  a  row  of 
repeated  figures  (as  in  19B),  each  separate  figure 
or  emblem  is  called  "sumpid."2  If  the  fifth  panel  is 
covered  with  an  unrepeated  pattern  which  entirely 
covers  the  solid  part  of  the  comb,  it  is  called  "  ne- 
ning"3 — see,  for  example,  68.  Any  special  sign  in 
one  of  the  central  panels,  or  the  "  sumpid,"  etc.,  is 
called  "  ob."  The  figures  delineated  in  the  plate  are 
the  accepted  emblems  representing  various  parts  of 
the  human  anatomy,  which  appear  in  the  patterns  of 
the  central  panel.4] 

1  Z.f.E.    xxv.    82.      It   is,  hence,        of  Vaughan- Stevens,  =  Mai.  "sumpit," 
clear  that  the  diagram  given  to  illus-       or  "  sumpitan,"  a  blowpipe. 

trate   these   remarks  on   p.    78   of  the  3  In  the  original   spelt   "neningk," 

Zeitschrift   is    incorrectly    drawn,   and  an  impossible  spelling  in  Semang.     All 

that  the  double  line  below  the  eighth  these  terms  lack  corroboration, 

panel  should  be  deleted.  4  Z.f.  E.  xxv.  S3. 

2  Sic,  qiuzre  "sumpit,"  a  confusion 

VOL.   I  2  F 


434  DECORA  TI VE  ART  t  \ it  1 1 

Other  Emblems} 

[The  emblem  representing  the  square  |  is  called 
"  chenewel,"  that  of  the  diamond  (\  "  chut."  The 
triangle  A  is  called  "  kasing "  (which  is  translated 
by  the  Malay  "  dahulu,"  "long  ago"  or  "overpast"). 
The  circle  O  is  called  "  nai  "  ("  ni  "),  i.e.   "  one  "  or 

"  first."     The  straight  line  ( )  is  called  "  pejuag," 

unless  it  is  carried  across  the  entire  solid  part  of  the 
comb,  when  it  is  called  "  win-yuing  "  ("  winyooeng  "). 
An  emblem  formed  by  two  curved  incisions  or 
ring-lines  which  run  parallel  to  each  other  across  the 
solid  part  of  the  comb  is  called  "  enghongye " 2 
("  ng-her-'ngyay  ")  ;  a  dot  (  • )  is  called  "  pawor  "  ;  a 
short  stroke  (  — )  "  bing "  ;  "pawor'1  was  formerly 
the  E.  Semang  (Pangan)  expression  for  both  of 
these  signs,  and  "bing"  an  expression  introduced 
from  the  west  coast  of  the  Peninsula  in  order 
to  distinguish  the  one  from  the  other.  Both  signs 
have  an  identical  significance.  Diagonal  hatching 
is  called  "  chenass,"  rectangular  "  sud."  Between 
straight  parallel  strokes  and  curved  strokes  ~~  y  ^ 
no  difference  is  made.  They  are  all  called  "sud." 
So,  too,  any  kind  of  sloping  diagonal  lines,  whether 
straight  or  otherwise,  //'/  (((  ))),  are  called  "  chenass." 

[The  signs  for  different  parts  of  the  human  body, 
referred  to  above,  include  representations  of  the 
following  parts  of  the  anatomy  : — 

(i)  The  head,  (2)  the  eyes,  (3)  the  nape  of  the 
neck,  (4)  the  breast,  (5)  the  stomach,  (6)  the  back, 
(7)  the  side,  (8)  the  nose,  (9)  the  breasts,  (10)  the 
upper  and  lower  jaws  (with  teeth),  (11)  [wanting],  (12) 
the  forehead,  (13)  the  hand,  (14)  the  fingers  or  toes, 

1  Z.  f.  E.  xxv.  84.  personal    pronoun.      These    terms    are 

-   "Ye"    may    stand     for    the    first       all  uncorroborated. 


B 


C  T> 


w 


A        B 


A        B 


Fig.  6. 
Correction  of  Inaccurate  Drawings  (Figs.  5  and  6,  Z.f.  E  xxv. 


0 
>l< 


iO 

1  1  1  1  1  1 
1  1  1  1  1  1 


3  h  5 

O      X     A 


6        7(\         & 


* 


18 


r^. 


& 


1$ 
s 

/ 


(P  *f  7/  7/ 


Allegro  Representation  of  Parts  of  the  Body. 

(For  explanation-  see  text.) 


© 

\  T 


J  V.  /.  A  4  ?4- 


chap,  ix  NEGRITOS  OF  PERAK  435 


(15)  the  joints  (elbows  or  knees),  (16)  the  hips  (17) 
the  shoulders,  (18)  vagina  and  penis,  (19)  the  anus, 

.)  the  .inns,  (ji)  the  ribs  (seen  from  the  back), 
(2  i )  the  ribs  (seen  from  the  front).1 

Dotted  lines  ( )  or  lines  of  dashes  ( ) 

are  only  used  to  distinguish  one  ordinary  figure  from 
another  which  otherwise  would  be  exactly  like  it. 

Cross-hatching  ("  din  ").~ 

I  Cross-hatching  (on  combs)  has  a  threefold  meaning. 
In  the  representations  of  flowers  it  indicates  a  pro- 
tuberance or  "knobby"  formation.  In  the  case  of 
combs  which    have  their  central    panel  cross-hatched 

;.  that  of  No.  25 B)  the  cross-hatching  indicates  a 
protuberance  of  great  size,  in  this  case  a  hill  (!),  the 
individual  lines  of  the  pattern  being  said  to  represent 
pathways  upon  it.  In  the  "sumpits"  ("  sumpid  ")  or 
repeated  Disease-patterns  this  cross-hatching  typifies 
the  swelling  or  inflammation  which  the  Disease  in 
question  has  caused.  The  cross-lines  may  be  either 
horizontal  or  at  right  angles  to  the  line  bordering 
the  figure  (Fig.  5,  A,  B).  In  the  case  of  a  curve, 
however,  the  cross-lines  slope  downwards  from  right 
to  left  (C).  When  the  figure  is  formed  by  three 
parallel  lines  the  cross-lines  intersect  the  central 
line  of  the  three  (D).  In  certain  cases,  whether  the 
pattern  is  drawn  large  or  small,  the  number  of  these 
cross-lines  must  be  counted.  These  cases,  however, 
will  again  be  referred  to  in  the  course  of  the  descrip- 
tions of  particular  combs.] 

[As  examples  to  show  how  necessary  it  is  that 
the    patterns   should   be  cut   as    exactly   as   possible, 

1  But  these  signs  rarely  occur  where  and  the  whole  of  this  part  of  the  system 
we  might  expect  them  in  patterns  con-  recalls  the  European  investigator.  See 
nected  with  parts  of  the  human  body,        Appendix.  2  Ibid. 


436  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ir 

and  how  the  similarity  of  the  combs  to  one  another 
might  be  exaggerated  through  inexactness,  see  Nos. 
32 B,  22C.  The  patterns  of  the  third,  fourth,  and  sixth 
to  eighth  panels  are  unimportant,  since  their  selection 
was  optional  on  the  part  of  the  designer,  but  the  first 
panel  pattern  in  22C  (Fig.  6)  is  absolutely  wrong.1] 

Private  Marks? 

[The  combs  are  always  said  to  have  once  possessed 
a  particular  name-mark  in  the  seventh  panel  ("  bie  "). 
This  mark,  however,  is  not  to  be  confused  with  the 
special  signs,  which  may  appear  only  in  the  patterns 
of  the  first,  second,  and  central  panels,  but  must 
be  omitted  in  the  next  panel.  The  name-mark 
naturally  has  no  influence  on  the  power  of  the 
pattern.  At  the  present  day  they  very  seldom  appear, 
and  when  they  do,  are  inserted  in  the  third,  fourth, 
and  sixth  to  the  eighth  panels,  and  are  called  "  chor  " 
or  "  name  "-marks. 

Among  all  the  combs  represented  below 3  there 
is  not  a  single  specimen  so  marked.  The  marks 
naturally  differ  with  each  individual,  and  whenever 
a  similarity  of  name-marks  appears  it  is  only  through 
some  misunderstanding  of  the  pattern  copied,  or 
through  some  sign  that  has  been  wrongly  transferred.] 

QUIVERS    AND    CHARM-TUBES.4 

Besides  the  charm-patterns  on  the  combs  of  the 
Pangan  women,  a  corresponding  system  of  charm  - 
patterns  is  employed  by  the  men.  These  are  incised 
upon  bamboos  ("  go  "  and  "  ga  "),  one  of  which  is  the 

1  Z.  f.  E.    xxv.    84.       At    (a)    the  2  Z.  f.  E.  xxv.  85. 

left-hand  side-line,  and  at  {b)  the  third  3  Cp.,  however,  Vaughan  -  Stevens, 

cross-line  is  missing,  and  at  {c)  the  side-  iii.  s.v.    And  for  detailed  list  of  combs, 

lines  do  not  meet.  The  first-panel  pattern  v.  App. 
of  32B  is  a  different  flower  from  22C.  4   Preuss  in  Z.f.  E.  xxxi.  131-147. 


.  .v  w  i, /an is  <>/■  PERAK 


Semang   quiver,   and    the   other   is   described    as   a 
charm-holder  (with  patterns  corresponding  to  tho 
now  .seen  on   the  blowpipe),  which   is  said   to  have 
been  formerly  carried  l>y  the  men, 

[The  Putins'  gave  the  Semang  (in  return  lor  their 

iSents)    certain     slicks     (charred    at     one     end     and 

aring  mysterious  signs  upon  them),  which  protected 
the  wearers  from  particular  Diseases,  when  held  with 
the  charred  end  downwards.     F*or  this  purpose  they 

were  inserted  in  the  waist-cord.  Originally  the 
patterns  were  marked  out  with  charcoal  ;  but  later 
they  were  incised,  when  the  same  material  (charcoal) 
was  rubbed  into  the  incisions. - 

By  degrees  light  bamboo  tubes,  which  received 
the  name  "  ga',"  were  found  more  convenient.  Instead 
of  charring  the  end,  the  Pangan  peeled  off  the  smooth 
outer  cuticle,  and  then  blackened  it  with  charcoal, 
which  adhered  better  in  consequence.]  This  lower 
extremity,  with  its  node  or  knot,  was  called  "  chen- 
el-us."  3  Both  ends,  in  fact,  were  thus  peeled,  although 
the  upper  node  was  cut  off  after  a  few  days.4  The  in- 
cised patterns  were  cut  into  the  bamboo  while  it  was 
still  green,  usually  after  it  had  been  held  for  a  few 
moments  over  a  fire,  to  facilitate  the  cutting.  If,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  cuticle  is  not  removed  from  the 
tube-ends,  the  latter  would  often  split  in  the  course 
of  a  few  days  ;  though  this  is  not  the  case  with  the 
blowpipe  shafts,  which  are  relatively  stronger  and  have 


1  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  131,  is  taken  "dekan''),  was  used  for  incising  bamboo 
as  read  in  what  follows.  before  iron  was  known.   For  lists  v.  App. 

2  According  to  another  passage,  the  3  Cp.   p.    431,   n.    3,  ante,   and  see 
designs  were  in  the  first  instance  in-  Z.f.  E.  xxv.  82,  and  note. 

cised  on  the  bamboos  and  rubbed  over  4  The  (Berlin)  Museum   possesses  a 

with    charcoal.       The    Semang    assert  charm  -  tube     ("gar")     of    Vaughan- 

that  often,  instead  of  a  knife,  the  tooth  Stevens,     which    exhibits     the     upper 

of   a    bamboo-rat,    or    "  om  "    (Malay  (peeled)  node  as  well. 


438  DECORATIVE  ART  n  n 

a  smaller  bore.  To  make  it  more  portable,  the  tube 
("  ga"')  was  of  small  diameter,  and  several  tubes  were 
often  carried  at  the  same  time,  one  fitting  into  the 
other.  They  served  at  the  same  time  to  contain  the 
flowers  and  herbs  that  were  required  for  warding  off 
Diseases.1 

The  quivers  ("  go' "),  which  are  closely  related  to 
the  charm-holders  ("ga  "),  were  cut  and  carried  in  the 
same  way,  only  the  charm-tube  was  usually  carried 
in  the  quiver,  which  latter  was  the  larger  of  the  two. 

When  they  adopted  the  blowpipe  of  the  Sakai, 
the  Semang  kept  their  darts  in  the  "  go',"  2  instead  of 
adopting  the  highly  specialised  Sakai  quiver — the 
Semang  still  retain  a  strong  dislike  to  carrying  any- 
thing slung  around  the  hips.3  This  is  the  reason  why 
the  darts  are  so  much  shorter  than  the  quiver4  con- 
taining them,  i.e.  because  it  was  once  used  for  another 
purpose.  The  Sakai  quiver  had  a  soft  wooden  bed 
at  the  bottom  to  receive  the  dart-points,  and  for  this  (in 
the  "  go'  ")  the  magic  leaves  and  flowers  were  substi- 
tuted. The  Sakai  quivers  had  a  cap  to  protect  the 
contents  from  rain  ;  but  the  Semang  were  prevented 
from  covering  the  orifice,  [because  the  effect  of  the 
magic  flowers  would  in  that  case  have  been  neutralised. 
But  on  the  introduction  of  the  blowpipe,  the  patterns, 
which  (up  to  that  time)  had  been  incised  upon  the 
charm-holders,  were  transferred  to  the  shorter  portion 
("  yoh ")  of  the  inner  tube  of  the  blowpipe.  But 
although  the  lower  part  of  the  pattern  (corresponding 
to  the  "  chenel-us  "  or  charred  end  of  the  charm-tube) 

1  Cf.  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  131.  "  Quivers  for  blowpipe  arrows." 

2  The  proper  name  for  the  quiver  is  3   Cf.  Z.f.  E.  xxv.  75. 

"go',"  or   "goh,"  which  latter  is  De  4  I.e.  28  to  30  cm.  against  the  35 

Morgan's  word  for  quiver  ("carquois");  to  45  cm.  of  the  quivers  (without  the 
cp.   Vaughan-Stevens,   iii.    171,   under       knot). 


i  ,,m.  i3i  NEGRITOS  <>/■  PERAK 


was  occasionally   more  or  less  covered  over  by  the 
resin  thai  coated  the  muzzle  end,  ih<-  virtue  <>!   th- 
eh. inn  was  noi  Impaired  thereby. 

Ii  was  evident  at  once  that  many  oi  the  patter 
on  the  charm-holders  ("  g5/ "),  which  were  originally 
designed   for  a  bamboo  of  larger  diameter,  did  not 
suit  the  reduced  area  available  for  them  in  the  blow- 
pipe.    The  muzzle  part  of  the  latter,  therefore,  * 

shortened  to  correspond  with  the  design. 

The  patterns  now  constructed  are  of  varying 
length  (as  in  Figs.  113,  114,  [21,  etc.),  and  further 
ring-lines  are  either  added  at  the  muzzle-end,  or  are 
omitted  entirely  ;  even  their  pattern  is  varied.  The 
blackened  muzzle -end  of  the  blowpipe  was  soon 
either  altogether  omitted  or  replaced  by  a  band  of 
varying  width,  formed  by  stripping  the  bamboo  of  its 
outer  cuticle  and  smearing  it  with  charcoal.1  It  is 
still  to  be  seen  in  many  specimens  between  the  main 
design  and  the  muzzle-end.] 

The  general  irregularities  of  design  extend  even 
to  the  East  Semang  or  Pangan.  The  Kensiu, 
Kinta,  Bong,  and  Belum  tribes  of  the  west  coast 
have  added  designs  of  their  own  to  the  old  patterns, 
and  employ  them  merely  as  a  form  of  decoration,  both 
for  the  blowpipes  and  the  dart-quivers  that  accom- 
pany them.  [Many  patterns  of  the  charm-holders  could 
not  be  adapted  to  the  blowpipe  tube,  and  hence  were 
retained  for  the  charm-tubes  only.  The  same  patterns 
were  never  employed  in  both  sets,  and  hence  the  two 
sets  (of  charm-tube  and  blowpipe  patterns)  must  be 
combined  to  form  a  complete  series.] 

1  See  illustrations.      The    order    in  to  Yi.     Then  come  (3)  the  blowpipe 

which  they  are  arranged  is  as  follows  :  patterns  from  I  to  128,  where  66A   is 

— (1)  Quivers  and  charm-tubes  inter-  inserted.      The  arrangement  is  that  of 

mixed  from  A  to  Z,  and  (2)  from  Ai  Vaughan- Stevens  himself. 


44o  DECORATIVE  ART  part  n 

Classification  of  the  Patterns  ("  Go  "  and  "  Ga  ").1 

The  patterns  of  the  quivers  and  charm-holders 
usually  present  such  considerable  divergencies  (as 
compared  with  the  combs)  that  there  can  be  no 
question  of  dividing  their  patterns  into  chief  panels 
(first  and  second)  and  subsidiary  panels,  as  could  be 
done  with  the  combs.  In  the  first  place,  their  central 
or  Disease  -  patterns,  when  identifiable  as  such  by 
reason  of  their  special  size,  are  sometimes  exactly  the 
same  (as  appears  in  the  case  of  Nos.  30,  54,  61,  Ni, 
N2,  and  N3  ;  Oi  and  O4  ;  O2  and  O3).  The  central 
Disease -patterns  of  these  quivers  and  charm- tubes 
bear,  it  is  true,  identical  names,  but  it  is  against 
different  forms  of  the  same  Disease  that  they  are 
employed.  In  the  combs,  again,  any  such  varieties 
were  always  strictly  separated  when  indicated  in  the 
design.  In  the  second  place,  the  central  panels,  apart 
from  their  size,  are  not  invariably  identical  either  for 
all  (''go',"  O3)  or  several  panels  (quiver  Di,  blow- 
pipe No.  51)  of  the  same  pattern,  not  to  mention 
the  smaller  panels  oi  other  patterns.  Moreover, 
very  characteristic  patterns  sometimes  occur  even 
in  the  smaller  panels  (Oi,  Ri).  In  the  third  place, 
we  may  note — and  this  is  for  the  present  the  most 
important  item — that  the  two  panels  in  the  same  tube 
(corresponding  to  the  first  and  second  panels  of  the 
combs)  are  in  many  quivers  and  charm-tubes  identical 
(O3,  T2).  They  are  also  sometimes  identical  in 
different  tubes  (e.g.  Nos.  30  and  36  ;  54  and  71). 

[Lastly,  there  are  (apart  from  the  central  patterns 
and  the  first  and  second  panels)  special  designs  that  are 

1  In  original  "  gor  "  and  "gar."     Taken  from  Preuss  in  Z.f.  E.  xxxi.  191-195 
seqq.      For  lists  of  the  patterns,  v.  App. 


i  hap.  i\  NEGRITi  \K  141 

never  repeated  throughout  the  entire  range  oi  the*  harm 
patterns  (e.g.  N         1,66,124,01),  The  first  an  >nd 

panels  so  insisted  on  do  not,  therefore,  ;  the 

1  advantage  o\  er  the  otfo         The  aforesaid  vai 
tions   from   the  comb   patterns    receive  considerable 
emphasis  (in   spite,  of  the  general   similarity  ol    the 
arrangement  in  both  cases)  as  soon  as  one  takes  the 
patterns  in  which  the  central  panel,  being  ol  the  same. 

•  as  the  nst,  cannot  therefore  be  distinguished  with 

ainty.  The  abovc-clescrihed  patterns  almost  all 
belong  to  Class  IA  (see  above)  ;  and  the  following 
come  partially  under  I  A,  'nut  mainly  under  ID,  which 
might  be  expected  to  exhibit  more  or  less  similar 
patterns  in  all  the  panels.  Hence  we  can  maintain 
with  certainty  that,  even  if  it  were  admitted  that  the 
patterns  on  the  tubes  contained  flower-designs  (in 
addition  to  the  Diseases  there  represented),  they 
are  not  at  all  events  based  upon  the  system  employed 
for  the  combs.1  Moreover,  it  is  certain  that  this 
logical  system  is  not  primitive,2  but  is  the  result 
of  a  development  at  w-hich,  from  the  endlessly  varied 
patterns  of  the  tubes,  we  can  perhaps  guess,  but 
oi  which  scarcely  any  stages  can  be  clearly  deter- 
mined. 

[It  is  well  known  that  the  Semang  hold  that  the 
tubes  with  mere  ring-lines  (quivers  A,  B,  and  C ; 
blowTpipe  No.  50)  take  precedence  of  all  tube 
patterns  as  a  foundation  for  the  arrangement  of 
the    charm    patterns    by   the    Puttos.       The    original 

1   It   is  quite  incomprehensible  why  that  Vaughan-Stevens  occupied  himself 

Vaughan-Stevens,    even    in    the     tube  with  the  comb  patterns  first,  and  found 

patterns,  should  hold  so  strictly  to  the  a  solution  of  them  tolerably  satisfactory 

system  of  "was"  and  "  pawer,"  as  it  to  himself. — Note  by  Preuss  (loc.  cit.). 
is  impossible  that  he  should  have  heard  2  There  is,  I   think,   no  doubt  that 

anything  positive  about  them  from  the  the   logic  of  the  system  was  introduced 

Semang.       The    only    explanation     is  by  Vaughan-Stevens. 


442  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ii 

lorm  of  these  designs  is  said  to  be  the  charm  on 
the  arrow  -  quivers  against  lightning  (see  p.  400).] 
The  quivers  in  the  Berlin  Museum  usually  show 
from  five  to  seven  triple  ring-line  groups,  just  about 
equi-distant  from  one  another ;  where  there  are  six 
groups  there  is  often  a  wider  space  left  in  the 
centre  (see  Illustrations).  Apart  from  the  number  of 
groups,  these  two  kinds  correspond  in  fact  to  the 
commonest  arrangement  of  the  panels  on  the  tubes 
and  combs,  and  even  quivers  D  and  E  might  be 
here  reckoned.  Even  a  simple  ring-line  group,  pos- 
sessing no  specific  import,  acts  as  a  general  charm 
against  Diseases  (quivers  B,  C).  There  then  follow 
single  and  double  hatchings  wTithin  the  groups  of 
ring-lines,  the  panels  themselves  being  left  vacant 
(quivers  G,  Mi  to  M3,  blowpipe  No.  50,  etc.). 
Lastly,  the  same  simple  figure  may  occur  in  all  panels 
or  in  the  second  panel  of  any  particular  pattern 
(quivers  I,  O3,  Ti,  blowpipes  ^y  47,  49,  etc.).  This 
fact  may  remind  us  either  of  the  charcoal  stripes 
with  which  sick  persons  bedaub  the  diseased  parts 
of  their  body  in  order  to  recover,  or  the  special 
signs  which  the  Puttos  employed  in  like  fashion 
(see  above),  and  which  may  be  regarded  as  forming 
the  series  of  ring-lines,  which  appear  to  be  greatly 
multiplied  here,  without  any  clear  object.  As 
soon,  however,  as  the  work  of  differentiating  the 
patterns  of  particular  panels  is  approached,  our 
difficulties  begin,  as  positive  data  are  completely 
wanting,  and  no  panel  (with  the  exception  of  the 
middle  one)  is  in  any  way  more  prominent  than  the 
others. 

The  undivided  patterns  intended  as  charms  against 
serious  Diseases,  which  cover  the  whole  tube,  seem 


i  ha]  NEGRITOS  OF  PERAK 


to  make  it  certain  that   the  simpl 

been  accompanied  by  the  complicated  reprea  mtatio 

of  1  lisea         These  two  extremes     simple  rii 

and  complicated  designs     form  the  foundation  oi  the 

subsequent  development, 

[Onlj  with  n  gard  to  the  occasional  Semangpract  i< 
of  inserting  a  pattern  in  the  centre  panel  and  leaving 
the  rest  free,  a  conjecture  may  perhaps  be  offer 
The  centre  panel,  like    the  original   scheme   oi   the 
ring-lines   on    the   arrow-quiver,  is  generally   indis- 
tinguishable from  the  other  panels  in  respect  ol  its 

e  (not  to  mention  the  blowpipes,  where  the  design 
is  generally  much  crushed  together).  It  is  also  often 
quite  indistinguishable  from  the  rest  in  respect  of 
the  special  import  attached  to  the  general  pattern. 
It  is  therefore  quite  possible  that  its  size,  even  when 
unusually  large,  is  not  of  any  special  import,  and 
that  it  was  only  at  a  later  stage  that  it  was  reserved  for 
the  chief  Disease-pattern,  as  indeed  we  find  to  be 
the  case  to  some  extent  in  the  tubes  and  uniformly  in 
the  combs.  One  stage  of  its  development  appears 
to  be  marked  by  a  simple  yet  specialised  central 
pattern,  to  which  other  panels  (with  pairs  of  incised 
lines)  are  added  at  the  top  and  bottom  (see,  e.g.,  N  i 
to  N3,  Oi,  Ri,  R2,  T2,  Nos.  29,  30,  36,  51,  etc.). 

Again,  in  the  description  of  the  patterns  emphasis 
is  often  laid  on  the  fact  that  the  size  of  the  vacant 
centre  panel  is  a  matter  of  entire  indifference.  In  the 
blowpipes  (as  has  been  said)  it  is  usually  so  crushed 
together  that  a  group  is  formed  of  the  ring-lines  which 
serve  as  boundaries,  and  the  alleged  importance  of  the 
size  of  the  centre  panel  appears  to  be  a  mere  fancy. 
On  the  other  hand,  its  separating  effect  is  always 
recognised     and     never    forgotten,     even    though    a 


444  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ii 

particular  pattern  may  be  no  longer  distinguishable 
from  one  with  the  incised  centre  panel.  Now  Vaughan- 
Stevens  in  one  place  says  that  patterns  with  vacant 
centre  panel  prevail  against  epidemics,  and  further, 
that  epidemics  in  the  drawings  are  expressed  by  two 
complete  and  undivided  patterns,  separated  from  each 
other  by  ring-lines,  the  upper  design  being  intended 
to  protect  the  men,  and  the  lower  the  women.  The 
examples  cited — 96,  97,  101,  105,  109 — all  belong  to 
group  IB,1  and  therefore  possess  a  blank  centre 
panel.  It  is  only  with  respect  to  one  specimen 
(quiver  H2)  that  any  further  explanation  is  required, 
as  in  the  quivers  the  large  centre  panels  are  not  com- 
pressed to  the  vanishing  point.  It  may  be  conjectured 
that  these  blank  centre  panels  in  every  case  are  only 
intended  to  separate  the  men's  and  women's  patterns 
from  one  another,  but  that  in  certain  cases  (as  in  that 
of  an  epidemic  which  attacks  men  and  women  alike), 
when  it  was  not  thought  necessary  to  cut  special  comb 
patterns  for  the  women,  the  purpose  was  remembered. 
In  fact  there  is  actually  a  quiver  (Wi)  with  an  empty 
centre  panel,  purporting  to  protect  men  and  women 
alike  from  a  Disease  common  to  both  of  them.2 

The  following  are  the  considerations  which  lead 
us  to  this  conclusion.  Vaughan-Stevens  says 3  that  the 
Diseases  which  may  attack  both  sexes  are,  since  the 
women  as  a  rule  are  not  far  from  the  men,  warded  off 
by  the  patterns  of  the  men's  quivers  and  blowpipes. 
Hence  the  women,  as  a  rule,  do  not  employ  any  quivers 
as  charms,  although  there  is  no  rule  against  it.  We 
see,  however,  that  the  charms  against  epidemics,  and 
indeed  even  the  charm  on  quiver  Wi,  contained  sepa- 
rate and  varying   charm  patterns   both   for   men   and 

1   Z.f.E.  xxxi.  p.   152.  2  lb.  p.   171.    Quiver  Wi.  3  Z.f.  E.  xxv.  75  f. 


,  n  if,  ix  .\v  GRITOS  <>/■  /'/  RAK 

women  on  tl»<-  same  quiver,     We  also  Bee  thai  vari<  I 
ol  quivers  F  and  G  are  allotted  to  the  women  by  w; 
oi   compensation    for   the    fact    thai    the)    have   their 
leventy  main    Disease   patterns   (not    reckoning    the 
varieties)  on  their  combs,  and  thai   these  latter  only 
include  the   Diseases  wind)   may  attack   them  alone. 

Should  we   not    then    inter    th.it    men    and  women    as   a 

rule  have  always  had  different  patterns  for  Di 

common   to  both?   tor  it   is  scarcely  to  he  suppoi 

that   the   seventy,  or  perhaps   one    hundred   and    forty, 

Diseases  of"  the  women  should  be  all  absolutely  different 
from  those  of  the  men  (cf.  quiver  II).  So  the  patterns 
of  the  quivers  and  blowpipes,  if  they  were  to  be 
efficacious  for  both  sexes  at  the  same  time,  must 
possess  two  patterns,  and  these  would  be  the  tubes 
with  the  centre  panel  left  blank.  In  this  connexion 
quivers  H  and  O  are  especially  striking.  In  quivers 
F,  G,  and  H  the  pattern  is  called  "  hu-ju-weg." 
Quivers  F  and  G  possess  no  dividing  centre  panel, 
and  have  special  quiver  patterns  for  the  women. 
Quiver  H  has  not  got  it,  and  therefore  shows  the 
division  alleged  above.  Quiver  O  has  an  empty 
centre  panel,  with  exactly  the  same  pattern  at  top  and 
bottom,  though  in  reverse  order.1] 

Even,  however,  if  this  idea  is  right,  it  does  not 
help  to  make  the  signification  of  the  patterns  any 
more  comprehensible.  The  comb  designs  would, 
however,  appear  to  be  an  imitation  of  the  men's 
quiver  patterns,  with  a  broad  incised  centre  panel. 
[The  signification  of  the  latter  was  said  to  be  ex- 
plained  by   the   patterns  of  the  ancient   "gi."     The 

1  The  patterns  of  the  tubes  are  never  only  exception.    It  is  a  simple  pattern, 

directed  against  Diseases  which  by  their  Thus  no  proof  of  the   point   at   issue 

nature  can  only  attack  the  man.      Si  (apart  from  quiver  Si)  is   possible   in 

against  disease  of  the  testicles  forms  the  this  direction. 


446  DECORATIVE  ART  part  II 

first  and  second  panel  patterns  were  new  additions, 
and  the  other  (narrow)  panels  were  taken  over  as 
mere  meaningless  additions  to  the  patterns  of  the  men. 

There  do  not  appear  to  be  any  fundamental 
differences  in  the  outer  arrangements  of  the  quivers, 
charm-tubes,  and  blowpipes.  The  alleged  reduction 
of  the  charm -tube  patterns  on  the  blowpipes  may 
show  that  the  omission  of  particular  panels  did  not 
have  much  effect.  Classes  IE  and  IF  of  the  blow- 
pipe patterns  are  of  special  importance,  since,  in 
contrast  to  the  quivers  and  charm-tube  patterns, 
they  exhibit  entire  panels,  and  even  entire  designs, 
merely  filled  up  with  dotted  figures.  It  might  be 
inferred  from  this  that  after  the  charm-tube  patterns 
were  transferred  to  the  blowpipes  a  fresh  evolution  of 
patterns  took  place.]  In  the  blowpipe  drawings  we  do 
not  find  spirals  instead  of  the  ring-lines,  as  in  the  case 
of  the  quivers  and  charm-tubes. 

The  names  of  the  tube  patterns  do  no  more  to  help 
their  interpretation  than  those  of  the  first,  second,  and 
fifth  comb  panels  ("  tin-weg,"  ''was,"  and  "  pawer  "). 
In  four  of  the  names  of  the  quivers  and  charm-tubes 
(N,  S,  Vi,  Xi)  are  to  be  found  expressions  for  certain 
parts  of  the  body  (the  Diseases  affecting  which, 
according  to  Vaughan- Stevens,  are  supposed  to  be 
warded  off  by  means  of  the  patterns).  Sometimes, 
however  (besides  the  name  of  the  pattern),  the  actual 
name  of  the  Disease  itself  is  given,  and  one  of  these 
Disease  titles  (Pi)  actually  refers  to  the  affected  part 
of  the  body.  Moreover,  the  name  for  quivers  D  and 
E  ("  lasai  ")  must  (according  to  Vaughan -Stevens)  be 
derived  from  the  black  ring-lines  of  the  design  ;  and, 
besides,  the  patterns,  which  possess  the  same  name 
and  ward  off  similar  sicknesses,  in  some  cases  are  of 


CHAP.    l\ 


NEGRITOS   i  >/■   I'l.i 


identical    form,    but    not    unfrequentl)    arc    entirely 
different  (see  quivers  I  i  and  [2,  I  <  1  and  1 »2,  etc.),     On 
the  other  hand,  the  almost  id<  ntical  patterns  oi  quiv< 
('1  and  c\.\  which  are  both  evidently  directed  aj 
a  similar  I  disease,  have  quite  different  name        Th< 

itradictory  observations  may  be  taken  to  prove  that 
the  names  of  the  quiver  and  charm-tube  patterns  must 
have  been  strung  together  from  conflicting  souro 
Among  the  names  o\   the  blowpipe  pattern  urs 

"pong,"  which  Vaughan- Stevens  (as  in  the  case  of 

comb  1  ")  translates  "  lever."  Whether  the  Other 
names  which  are  not  translated  also  denote-  I)i 
must  remain  undecided.  Every  pattern  here  has  a 
special  name.  There  are,  indeed,  many  points  of  con- 
nection with  Professor  GrUnwedel's  glossary  ;  but  in 
the  entire  absence  of  more  definite  knowledge  as  to 
their  meaning  it  is  not  worth  while  to  follow  them  up.3 


1  Cf.  also  the  names  and  patterns  of 
"  goh,"  Ki  and  Iv2. 

2  Z.f  E.  xxv.  87. 

3  Out  of  the  five  categories  men- 
tioned, the  frequent  complete  agreement 
of  names,  without  their  patterns  betray- 
ing any  special  similarity,  is  very  striking. 
They  run  as  follows  : — "  alteg  "  (blow- 
pipe 32),  cf.  "alteg''  (second  panel  of 
comb  49)  ;  "bil-uing"  (blowpipe  78), 
cf.  "  biling  "  ("  billing,"  second  panel 
of  19N,  etc.);  "buing"  ("boing," 
blowpipe  74),  cf  "  boin "  (first  panel 
of  30),  "  boing  "  (second  panel  of  17B, 
etc.);  "hili"  ("hillee,"  charm-tube 
Z),  cf.  "heli"  ("h'lee,"  comb  63); 
"Is"  (blowpipe  81),  cf  "Is"  (second 
panel  of  comb  iE)  ;  "  let-tud  "  ("let- 
tod,"  quiver  P2),  cf  "let-tod"  (first 
panel  of  7C,  etc.)  ;  "  lig-boid  "  ("lig- 
boid,"  blowpipe  89),  "  lig-bui "  ("lig- 
boi,"  blowpipe  75),  cf.  "lig-boig" 
(second  panel  of  16 A,  etc.) ;  "pa-ham  " 
("pa-hum")  (blowpipe  56),  cf.  "pa- 
hom"  ("pa-herm,"  second  panel  of  iF, 
etc.);  "pasir" (blowpipe  12), cf.  "pasir" 
(first    panel    of    12  A,    etc.);    "  pellg " 


(blowpipe  39),  cf.  "pellg"  (comb  II)  ; 
"  pen-al-dung  "  ("  pen-ul-doorng," 
blowpipe  30),  cf.  "pena-long"  ("pena- 
long,"  second  panel  of  15A,  etc.); 
"sob"  (quiver  C2),  cf.  "sob"  (second 
panel  of  50H,  etc.);  "tak-kor" 
("tukkor,"  blowpipe  92),  cf.  "  te- 
kor  "  ("tukkor,"  comb  60);  "  tls  " 
(blowpipe  35),  cf.  "tls"  (quiver  Ci)  ; 
"  cheg-la(r)pun "  (blowpipe  5),  cf. 
"  chig-la "  ("chiglar,"  comb  52); 
"  chel  -  chinin  "  ("chel  chineng," 
quiver  Q2),  cf.  "  chin-eng "  ("chin- 
eng," second  panel,  22C,  etc.)  ;  "toig 
keling,"  quiver  Ni),  cf.  "tu-eg" 
(blowpipe  24). 

Other  names  agree  with  the  ex- 
pressions for  the  "  gu'  "  (v.  p.  104  f. ). 
"jelabor"  (blowpipe  30),  cf.  "jelabo" 
("jelabor,"  "gu',"  I21,  a  mythical 
animal)  ;  "  kang-kung  "  (blowpipe  98), 
cf.  "  kangkung "  ("gu',"  I20,  a 
mythical  monster) ;  "  keli-char  "  (comb 
62),  cf  "klichar"  ("gu\"  III3,  IV. 
a  flower) ;  "sinai  tepis"  ("seni  tepees," 
blowpipe  117),  cf  "  sinei "  ("seni," 
"  gu',"  I4,  a  rattan  whip). 


448  DECORATIVE  ART  part  n 

This  list  might  no  doubt  be  considerably  increased 
if  parts  of  the  various  expressions  were  compared. 
In  the  complete  absence,  however,  of  Semang  texts 
(and  hence  of  any  knowledge  of  their  grammar)  this 
partial  agreement  would  not  at  present  count  for  much. 
It  may,  however,  be  concluded  from  the  above  list 
that  the  names  of  the  quivers,  charm-tubes,  blowpipes, 
and  combs  must  be  taken  in  close  relationship  with 
those  of  the  first  and  second  panels,  so  that  the  flower- 
symbolism  of  these  patterns  appears  all  the  more 
mysterious  and  obscure. 


MYTH-BAMBOOS    AND    OTHERS.1 

[The  "gu'  "  is  a  bamboo  tube  which  is  described  as 
having  served  originally  for  preserving  records  of  every 
description,  and  as  having  been  in  the  first  instance 
known  only  to  the  Puttos.  The  entire  mythology 
(and  history  ?)  of  the  Semang  is  said  to  have  been 
engraved  upon  them,  and  some  of  these  remarkable 
records  yet  remain  in  the  possession  of  the  descendants 
of  the  ancient  Sna-huts.  These  same  bamboo  tubes 
served,  apart  from  their  mythological  significance,  to 
contain  the  magical  and  medicinal  implements  of  the 
Puttos,  and  were  accordingly  plugged  at  the  orifice 
with  wood  or  bark-fibre.  The  four  myth-bamboos 
here  described  come  from  the  E.  Semang  or  Pangan 
on  the  east  coast  of  the  Peninsula.2] 

1  The  word  "gu'"    is  undoubtedly  hoot,"   "  k'ngoin,"  "lee-eg,"   "aiee," 

identical    with    the    word     "go'"     (in  "  ken-achole,"        "  pinjor       tadook," 

some  dialects   "gu"')  which  we  have  "  Kiee,"    "Play,"    "Chinnoi,"    "ke- 

had   already,   and   merely  signifies,   as  nigh,"    "kelos,"     "seni,"    "  kabote," 

explained  above,  a  bamboo  receptacle.  "jug,"  "Chilleg,"  "Jelabor,"  "Cham- 

The  names  which  here  occur  were  spelt  par,"  "Challog,"   "Semi,"  "  sin-goie- 

by  Vaughan-Stevens  as  follows:  "Guh"  bewar,"  etc. 

(pronounced  "goo"),  "Puttow,"  "Sna-  2  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  104. 


chap  NEGRITOS  OF  PERAK 

Bamboo  No.   \  with  incised  Mythological  D        ■  .' 
Length  <>l  the  original  45  cm. 

1.  The  "lotong"  monkey  (u2Lii"  —  SemnopithecH  ), 

2.  "  Penjok  tacluk." 

3.  "  Kenaij  "  ("  kenigh  "  sict  ?  M  kfinaii "). 

4.  "  Seni." 

5-   "Jag-" 

6.  4t  Kelos." 

7.  Kari,  the  Thunder-god. 

8.  Simei. 

9.  Pie. 

10.  Sna-hut. 

11.  u  Kla-to-ong." 

12,  13.   "  Sin-goi  bewa  "  or  "  kampil." 

14,  15.   "  Chileg  langwe." 

16,  17.   "  Sin-goi  bewa"  or  "  kampil. 

18.  Kari's  throne  and  "  kalcheng. 

19.  "  Kanteh." 

20.  "  Kangkung." 

21.  "  Jelabo'." 

22.  "  Kangkeng." 
22,.   "Champa'." 

24.  Champa's  spear. 

25.  "Chalog." 

26.  Chalog's  spear. 

This  bamboo  is  subdivided  by  the  usual  ring-lines. ~ 

The  topmost  panel  contains  an  unfinished  drawing 

of    a   monkey    called    "  aii "    (Malay    "  lotong "),    for 

1  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  107-124.  the   holes  are  sealed   with  resin,   but 

2  When  a  spiral  is  substituted  for  these  holes,  of  course,  are  entirely 
these  ring-lines,  it  is  called  "li-eg."  devoid  of  significance  (see  Z.  f.  E. 
In  some  cases  the  "  gu's  "  have  been  xxv.  (1893)  71  seqq. 

gnawed  into  by  mice,  in  which   case 

VOL.  I  2  G 


45o  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ii 

which  see  Bamboo  3,  but  why  this  figure  was  left  un- 
finished is  unknown. 

The  second  panel  is  called  "  kenachol "  ("  ken- 
nachole "),  this  name  denoting,  however,  the  panel 
itself  and  not  the  figures  inscribed  upon  it.  The 
figures  in  each  panel  will  be  taken  from  right  to 
left,  beginning  with  Fig.  2.  This  figure  and  those 
following  represent  objects  which  hang  above  the 
judgment  throne  of  the  Thunder-god  Kari  ("Kiee"  = 
11  Kayi  ").1  The  Semang  call  this  figure  (No.  2) 
"penjok  taduk."  The  first  word  means  loin-cloth, 
and  the  second  "  pendant  flower  decorations." 

It  is  difficult  to  explain  exactly  what  is  meant  by 
the  expression,  unless  it  may  either  be  taken  to 
signify  loin-cloth  and  flower-pendants  (the  con- 
junction being  omitted,  as  is  so  frequently  the  case  in 
these  dialects),  or  unless  the  "  taduk  "  may  be  some 
unknown  or  fabulous  material,  in  accordance  with  the 
explanation  given  to  Vaughan-Stevens.2  Kari  alone 
(according  to  the  Semang)  makes  use  of  this  material, 
which,  like  everything  else  he  possesses,  is  prepared 
by  the  Chin-oi  ("  Chinnoi  "),  a  race  of  people  who 
never  die. 

The  object  represented  by  Fig.  3  is  called  by  the 
Pangan  "  kenaij  '  ("  kenigh  "  ?),  a  term  which  is  of 
uncertain  meaning.  In  the  case  of  the  women's 
combs,  it  denotes  the  representation  of  the  Disease 
against  which  the  charm  pattern  is  devised,  but  it 
was  also  applied  to  anything  bright  and  glittering, 
e.g.  a  sunrise  or  sunset,  lamps,  rings,  and  even 
provision   tins  !      It   does   not  seem   to  mean   "  light- 

1  This  god,  who  is  himself  portrayed  play  a  large  part  in  the  traditionary 
by  Fig.  7,  is  the  chief  deity  or  Thunder-  accounts  of  Malay  regalia,  and  this 
god  of  the  E.  Semang  or  Pangan.  may  be  the  case  with  the  Semang  too  ; 

2  Fabulous    objects    and    materials  V. -St.  iii.  106;  v.  pp.  455,  511,  infra. 


» 

ml 

f#4 

taws' 

«w«rt  1 1 

•mum 

WW 

iWP" 

wt 

#i 

Wa 

#*4 

w 

HHippi 

41 

mi 

m 

WW 

f#tl 

"0^ 

f/w%* 

MM 

NfpPI 

unto 

mm 

mm 

•Mil 

uuiUltt 

w/ww. 

/ 


mm 


WNpmttt^  tow* 


/ 


x   : 


2 


C       3 


chap,  ix  NEGRITOS  OF  PERAK  •:   I 


ning,"  however,  for  the  usual  Semang  word  for 
lightning  is  "  kelos." 

Fig,  .}   is  called  "Sinai'    ("Seni").     These  are 

rattan  whips,  the  emblems  oi   kari's  servant,  Sinai,1 

used  to  whip  the  winds  with,  whenever  they  refused 
to  obey  his  master's  commands.  Sinai  is  himself  a 
wind,  ami  invisible  to  all  hut  Kari.  Sinai  has  a 
whip  in  cither  hand.  The  winds  do  not  sit  beside 
Kari,  hut  have  a  place  assigned  to  them  in  the 
clouds  below  him,  at  a  place  called  "  Kabut  " 
("  Kabote ").'-  The  winds  which  refuse  to  obey 
Kari  are  represented  by  the  figure  left  of  Fig.  4  ; 
the  slanting,  waved  lines  represent  the  winds,  whilst 
the  side  lines  represent  their  prison,  where  they 
await  Kari's  sentence. 

The  beaker-shaped  figure  (No.  5)  which  follows  is 
called  "jag,"  and  represents  a  wild  fruit  on  which 
Kari  feeds  ;  it  was  not  known,  however,  whether  the 
fruit  is  represented  by  the  entire  figure  or  by  some 
portion  of  it  ;  it  was  only  known  that  the  Puttos 
intended  it  to  represent  a  fruit. 

All  winds  are  here  personified  ;  they  are  living 
beings,  servants  of  Kari,  but  invisible  to  all  but 
him.3 

The  next  rows  (3,  4,  5,  and  6)  were  called  "n'nam." 

The  zigzag  line  (Fig.  6)  represents  Kari's 
lightning.  Whenever  he  is  wroth  and  wishes  to 
strike  any  one,  he  sends  for  his  servants,  who  bring 
him  a  flower  which  only  grows  at  Kari's  dwelling- 
place,  and  which  consists  of  a  spike  of  bell -like 
flowers.      Kari  then  leans  forward  on  his  throne  and 


1  Vaughan-Stevens'  spelling   of  this  2  Mai.    "kabut,"    or  darkness;    cf. 

name  varies  greatly  :    Sin-ai,   Chin-ai,        Newbold,  ii.  423  ;  V.-St.  iii.  106. 
Sinnoi,  Chinnoi,  etc.  3  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  107. 


452  DECORATIVE  ART  part  n 

shakes  the  flower  -  spike  over  the  sinner,  whereat, 
just  as  when  flint  strikes  steel,  the  lightning  darts 
whithersoever  Kari  desires  it.  Then  from  the  bell- 
like flower  -  cups  themselves,  as  they  strike  against 
each  other,  comes  the  far-rolling  sound  of  thunder, 
whilst  the  mightier  detonations  of  the  storm  are  the 
voice  of  Kari's  wrath.  The  echoes  which  reverberate 
in  the  mountains  are  the  answers  of  Pie,  his  fellow- 
deity,  who  remonstrates  with  him.  In  the  illustration 
the  flower  is  not  visible,  but  only  the  universal  zigzag 
symbol. 

The  Semang  have  an  intense  dread  of  lightning, 
their  charm  against  which,  employed  (it  is  said)  at 
first  by  "  Pie's  command,"  consists  of  three  ring- 
lines,  incised  on  the  quiver  at  short  intervals.1  These 
ring-lines  were  made  in  the  first  instance  by  the 
Puttos,  but  that  is  all  the  Semang  know  about  them, 
though  they  trust  in  them  blindly.2 

Fig.  7  represents  the  god  Kari.  He  is  not  always 
depicted  in  this  form,  but  invariably  has  with  him  as 
his  attribute  the  zigzag  line  which  represents  lightning. 

Fig.  8  is  Simei,  the  daughter  of  Pie. 

Fig.  9  is  Pie. 

It  is  difficult  (says  Vaughan-Stevens)  to  say  in 
what  relationship  the  E.  Semang  (Pangan)  consider 
their  two  gods,  Tuhan  and  Pie,  to  stand  to  Kari,  or 
whether  the  two  former  are  modern  accretions.  It  is 
certain,  however,  that  Kari  represents  the  highest 
power,  and  that  Tuhan,  as  well  as  Pie,  is  compelled 
to  obey  him.3 

Fig.  io  represents  a  Sna-hut. 


1  See,     however,     p.     400,     n.     I,       other  method  of  stopping  lightning  was 
ante.  by  means  of  blood-throwing. 

2  Vaughan-Stevens,   iii.    107.      An-  3  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  109. 


cha?.  ix  NEGRITi  \K 


The  black  indentations  below   these   figures    i 

present    the    rattan    mats   on    K.iri  ',    lloor,  whii.h   wv 

made  for  him  by  the  Chin-oi  or  Sinoi. 

Fig.  it  \\\  the  fourth  row  represents  the  tree 
against  which   Kari's  chair  leans.     In  the  branches  of 

this   tree    tarry  the  still  unborn  souls,  and  on  its  trunk 

Kari  cuts  a  tally  for  each  new-horn  Semang.     This 

tree  is  called  "  kla-tO-Ong,"  and  is  full  of  blossoms.1 
The  figures  hanging  on  the  right  of  the  drawing  are 
the  fruits  of  tin;  tree  which  are  eaten  by  Kari. 

Next  follow  Figs.  12,  13,  16,  17,  which  comprise 
the  flowers  "sin-goi  bewa"  or  "kampll"  ;  and  Figs.  14, 
1 5,  which  represent  the  flowers  called  "chileg  langwe."2 

Fig.  18  represents  Kari's  judgment-seat,  con- 
sisting of  a  short  plank  which  rests  at  an  angle 
against  a  tree.  The  wavy  lines  between  the  branches 
represent  "  kalcheng,"  i.e.  fruits  which  are  eaten  by 
Kari,  and  which  his  servants  have  set  before  him. 
The  waved  line  above  the  seat  represents  the  flowers 
called  "  sin-goi  bewa,"  which  are  suspended  behind  the 
throne  on  which  Kari  sits  to  judge  the  dead.3 

In  the  fifth  row,  Fig.  19  represents  a  gigantic 
spirit  called  "  Kanteh,"  which  resembles  a  Semang. 
His  office  is  that  of  door-keeper  of  Paradise,  and  it 
is  he  who  restrains  the  souls  of  alien  races  from 
entering  into  that  part  of  Paradise  which  is  assigned 
to  the  Semang. 

Beside  him  stands  (at  his  left  hand,  Fig.  20)  a 
powerful  animal,  called  <(  Kangkung,"  4  whose  task  it 
is  to  keep  tiger-souls  out  of  heaven. 

Next  on  the  left  comes  Fig.  21,  an  animal  called 

1  See  p.  455,  infra,  where  "  klatorr'  3  lb.  p.   117. 

is  a  fruit.     Perhaps  "  klatung  "  is  right.  4  Possibly  the  loris  or  Malayan  sloth  ; 

2  V.  -  St.    iii.     112.       Cp.    Bamboo       which  is  in  the  front  rank  as  "  magic. " 
No.  3  (p.  457,  infra).  lb.  p.   122. 


454  DECORATIVE  ART  pari  n 

11  Jelabo',"  whose  function  it  is  to  keep  the  souls  of 
wicked  Semang  from  entering  heaven.1 

Next  again  on  the  left  (Fig.  22)  is  a  beast  called 
M  Kangkeng,"  which  keeps  out  the  souls  of  snakes  and 
scorpions.2 

In  the  sixth  row  follow  Figs.  23  and  25,  the  last 
of  which  has  been  unavoidably  cut  in  two  in  obtaining 
the  illustration.  Fig.  23  is  a  dark-complexioned 
gigantic  spirit  "Champa'"  called  "Abang"  (Mai.  for 
"  elder  brother").  No.  25  represents  his  brother 
"  Chalog,"  who  is  called  "  Adik  "  (Mai.  for  "younger 
brother  ").  The  latter  is  placed  under  the  former's 
authority,  and  both  are  the  joint  guardians  of  Tuhan's 
heaven,  Tasig. 

Figs.  24,  26,  27  represent  the  bamboo  spears  of 
these  two  brothers.  The  zigzag  figures  between  26 
and  27  are  the  lightning  -  carrying  flowers,  which 
belong  to  Kari,  and  whose  custodians  are  the  two 
gigantic  spirits  just  mentioned. 

The  last  row,  or  "  name  "-row,  which  is  called 
"  chor  "  (  =  name  ?),  is  always  placed  at  the  end  of  the 
bamboo,  and  is  covered  with  a  uniform  pattern.  Its 
decoration  varies  according  to  the  other  patterns  on 
the  bamboo,  but  its  real  significance  could  not  be 
explained.  Vaughan-Stevens  regards  it  merely  as  a 
sort  of  finishing  touch  to  the  rest  of  the  figures.3 

Bamboo  ("  Gu  ")  No.   2.     Height  41   cm.A 

Here,  too,  the  order  of  the  figures  is  fixed,  but 
no  definite  explanation  is  forthcoming  of  the  slant- 
ing line  in  the  topmost  panel. 

1  The  nearest  Semang  animal-name  2  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  122. 

known  to  me  is  that  of  "  telabas  "  (?=  3  Ibid.  p.   124. 

dial,  "telabah1'),  the  Malayan  sun-bear.  4  Ibid.  pp.  124,  125. 


ckaf.  ix  NEGRITOS  "/•  PERAK 

The    first    row   ol    figures   is  called  t<  hoi," 

as  in  Bamboo  No.  i . 

Fig.  i  represents  a  sleeping  chief  (Putto)  in  the 
of  receiving  (in  a  dream)  a  communication  from  Pl€, 
who  acts  as   Kari's  go-between  whenever  the  latter 
wishes  to  communicate  with  the  great  chiefs  (Puttos). 

Fig.  2  represents  a  fruit  called  M  klaton,"  which 
the  great  chiefs  or  Puttos  were  in  the  habit  of  eating. 

Piga«    3i    5»   °    arr    flowers    called    "  klai-yau ' 
(4<  kli-yow  "),   Cl  bi-chu-ring  "    ("  bee-choo-ring  "),   and 
11  yawel "  ("yowell");  and  Fig.  4  represents  a  spear 
called     "at"     ("art"),     all     these     representing     the 
insignia  of  the  great  chiefs'  power. 

Fig.  7.  The  smaller  part  of  this  figure  at  the 
top  represents  the  mallet  employed  in  the  manufacture 
of  bark-cloth,  the  larger  part  of  the  figure  at  the 
bottom  represents  the  bark-cloth  itself. 

The  following  panels  are  called  "  n'nam,"  as  in 
Bamboo  No.  1. 

Fig.  8.  These  represent  " taduk  "  flowers  {cf. 
Bamboo  No.  1,  Fig.  2),  p.  450,  ante. 

Fig.  9.  This  object  is  called  "  bu-hu "  ("boo- 
hoo  ") ;  it  represents  a  special  kind  of  bark-cloth  which 
only  the  great  chiefs  wore.2 

Fig.  10  is  a  magic  stone  pillow,  called  "  sni-ding," 
on  which  the  great  chief  lays  his  head  when  he  washes 
to  get  information  by  means  of  dreams. 

Fig.  11.  A  Putto  asleep  writh  his  head  resting 
upon  the  pillow  (Fig.  10). 3 

Fig.  12.  A  mat  called  "  chi-on,"  only  used  by 
the   great   chiefs.      It  was   manufactured  from   rattan 


1  Seep.  453,  ante.  of  Mai.    "  buluh  "  =  bamboo.     Cp.   p. 

2  Quai -c  from  Sem.  "buyu"  =  Mal.        510,  infra. 

"  mengkuang,"  or  rather  a  corruption  3  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  124. 


456  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ii 

("  rotan  sega ").  This  figure,  together  with  Figs. 
10,  ii,  signifies  that  the  Putto  is  receiving  instruc- 
tions in  a  dream  how  a  mat  is  to  be  made. 

Fig.  13.  "  Angkel,"  a  magic  pillow  made  of  wood 
which  serves  the  same  purpose  as  the  stone  pillow 
represented  by  Fig.  10. 

Fig.  14.  A  great  chief  asleep  with  his  head 
upon  the  wooden  pillow  (Fig.  13). 

Fig.  15.  A  spear-point.  This  figure,  together  with 
Figs.  13,  14,  signifies  that  the  great  chief  is  dream- 
ing how  a  spear-point  should  be  made. 

Fig.  16.  A  sleeping  chief  (Putto).  By  his  side 
(Fig.  17)  is  his  servant  (Hala).1 

Fig.  18  represents  two  large  black  stones,  which 
the  great  chiefs  or  Puttos  lay  together  at  an  angle,  so 
as  to  form  a  V-shaped  trough,  into  which  their  magic 
Mowers  and  other  materia  medica  may  be  put.2 

Fig.  19.  A  tree -bark  filter  and  a  water-vessel, 
signifying  the  pouring  of  water  over  the  ingredients, 
so  that  it  passes  through  the  filter  into  the  vessel 
in  question,  which  is  placed  on  a  sort  of  stand 
(Fig.  20).3 

Fig.  16  represents  a  Putto  dreaming  of  sending 
his  servant  (Fig.  17)  to  gather  flowers  and  herbs  for 
medicines  and  to  prepare  them  for  use.  The  servant 
is  shown  pressing  down  the  flowers  into  the  trough 
formed  by  the  two  stones  described  above. 

Figs.  21  and  22  represent  flowers  called  "  tu-ag  " 
and  "jampong,"  the  ashes  of  which  are  used 
medicinally. 

1  In  Semang  "  Hala "="  medicine-  chiefs  (Sna-huts)  of  the  Pangan  use 
man."  bones  and  teeth,  which  they  grate  on 

2  Among  the  medicines  of  the  Puttos  a  stone  with  a  little  water,  as  also  the 
love-potions  were  also  mentioned  to  Sakai  do.  Cf.  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiv.  (1892) 
Vaughan-Stevens  ;  but  the  ingredients  468. 

could  not  be  ascertained.     The  lesser  3  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  124. 


chap,  ix  NEGRITOS  Of  PERAK  457 


The  last  row  with  the  ornamental  border  ia  called 

"  i  hoi,"  as  in  Bamboo  No.  i. 


saun 

2 

3 

4 

5 
6 


Bamboo  ("GV")  A'<>.  3,     Length   \o  cm. 

1.  "Tinjo"  or  "Tin-jui'    ("Tinjoe"),  a  kind  of 
an. 
"  Sin-goi  l)rwa,"  the  name  ol  a  flower. 
-  Kll-cha."8 
44  Chig-eg." 
M  Ah."  4 
11  Sin-goi  bewa." 

Fig.  1  represents  a  terrible  kind  of  saurian,  with 
jaws  shaped  like  those  of  centipedes,  but  which  in 
length  are  equal  to  the  human  arm.  It  is  called 
44  Tin-jui."  No  one  knows  where  the  creature  lives, 
yet  the  great  chiefs  (Puttos)  were  able  to  conjure  it  up. 
Directly  they  were  angry  with  any  one  they  called  this 
beast,  which  killed  the  evil-doer.5  Since  the  Puttos 
have  disappeared,  no  one  has  seen  this  saurian  again. 

Figs.  2  (6)  and  3  are  flowers  called  4'  sin-goi 
bewa"  and  44  kli-cha,"  which  were  of  avail  in  exorcis- 
ing the  reptiles  represented  by  Figs.  1  and  4. 

Fig.  4  represents  a  creature  called  4'  Chig-eg," 
which  performs  the  same  functions  as  the  "  Tin-jui," 
but  only  kills  women. 

Fig.  5  depicts  the  monkey  called  "  Aii  "  :  a  long- 
tailed  monkey  resembling  the  Semnopithecus  or 
44  lotong."  When  the  winds  sent  by  Kari  as 
messengers  to  the  earth  do  not  make  sufficient  haste, 
Aii  comes  and  chastises  them  with  rattan  whips.6 

1  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  125,  126.  5  Evidently  a    "sending"'   of  some 

2  See  p.  453,  ante.  kind.      Lizards  are  often  closely  con- 

3  In  original  "  kli-char  "  (sic).  nected  with  magicians. 

4  See  p.  449,  ante.  6  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  126. 


4  5  8  DECORA  TIVE  AR  T 


TART  II 


Bamboo  ("  Gu' ")  No.  4.     Height,  41   cm} 

Bamboo  No.  4  is  of  quite  a  different  kind  from 
the  foregoing.  The  designs  upon  it  only  represent 
"  kli-cha  "  flowers.  When  the  great  chiefs  or  Puttos 
laid  these  flowers  in  water,  they  could  drive  the 
poisonous  sea-snake  "  Ikub "  back  to  the  bottom  of 
the  sea.2 

BIRTH-BAMBOOS    ("  TAHONG  "). 

[The  "  tahong  M  is  a  bamboo  tube  which  is  worn 
secretly  under  the  girdle  by  expectant  mothers.  The 
interior  of  the  tube,  when  each  extremity  has  been 
stoppered,  is  used  to  contain  flint  and  steel  for  making 
fire  and  so  forth.  The  main  part  of  the  pattern  consists 
of  two  portions,  the  upper  part  of  which  consists  of 
zigzag  ring  -  lines,  which  serve  as  a  charm  against 
nausea  and  vomiting ;  the  lower  part  contains  a 
number  of  rows  or  columns,  each  representing  one  of 
the  stages  through  which  the  woman  has  to  pass  from 
the  moment  of  conception  till  the  birth.3 

As  mentioned,  the  "  tahong  "  is  carefully  concealed 
by  the  Semang  women  under  the  girdle,  and  may  not 
be  seen  by  any  strange  man.     The  husband  cuts  the 

1  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  127.  column-lines  (at  the  end  of  the  black 

2  I.e.  "Ikub  Lingang "  (  =  Mal.  chevroned  line)  represent  the  child  in 
"  ular  berang"),  a  sea-snake  of  a  kind  the  womb.  The  black  chevrons  form 
believed  to  be  most  venomous.  In  the  connection  between  child  and 
case  a  Semang  wished  to  employ  these  mother,  the  latter  being  represented  as 
flowers,  they  did  not  receive  their  much  the  larger.  At  the  right  extremity 
magic  power  until  he  received  the  of  the  vertical  chevroned  line  is  a  row 
"  gu' "  as  well.  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  of  discs,  on  the  side  of  the  mother, 
126.  which  represents  the  loss  of  blood  by 

3  It  is  difficult  to  fix  these  stages  the  tearing  of  the  vessels  at  birth  {ibid.). 
accurately,  as  the  Semang  people  often  [It  is  perhaps  worth  while  adding 
made  mistakes  in  locating  the  exact  that  the  word  "tahong"  is  curiously 
position  of  the  ailment.  The  following,  like  Mai.  "tabong, "  a  bamboo  tube — 
however,  is  certain  :  the  ring -like  a  fact  which  raises  some  doubt  as  to 
marks    at    the    point    of    one    of    the  the  genuineness  of  the  word. — W.  S.] 


.  II  \  I 


VI  GR1T0S  Oh  ri  RAK 


pattern,  and  an  enceinte  woman  who  la<  tahon 

is  regarded  l»\'  other  Semang  women  in  much  the 
same  way  as  .1  mother  without  .1  wedding  ring  would 
be  regarded  in  Europe.1 

The  patterns  of  the  '•  tahongs "  differ  but  slightly 
inter  se ,  according  to  the  skill  oi  the  men  who  engrave 
them.  One  of  the  lesser  chiefs  (Sna-hut)  is  in  pos- 
session oi'  the  orthodox  pattern,  and  is  always  in  a 

position,  in  case  he  is  asked,  to   produce   the   accurate 

design.1 

The  patterns  given  in  the  accompanying  illustration 
are  not,  according  to  Vaughan- Stevens,  altogether 
correct.      He  therefore  supplies  a  commentary.8] 


1  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  115.     2  //>. 

3  The  corrections  run  as  follows  : — 

'•  In    1  "  there  should  he  "a  straight^ 

horizontal  hand  of  double-lined,  gable- 
shaped  figures,  which  do  not  run  spirally 
round  the  hamhoo  as  in  the  case  of 
No.  2.  The  ends  should  not  he 
closed.  In  2"  there  should  be  "four 
.if  bands  of  double -lined,  gable  - 
shaped  figures.  In  3  "  there  should  be 
11  the  same  pattern  as  in  the  case  of  No. 
J  ;  only  that  there  should  be  single-line 
figures  instead  of  two.  In  4 "  there 
should  be  "a  horizontal  row  of  single- 
line  figures  (as  in  3)  as  termination  of 
the  upper  part  of  the  pattern. 

"  In  A"  there  should  be  "a  cross-line 
of  disc-shaped  figures.  B,  These  patterns 
should  have  right  -  angled  hatching. 
C.  The  upper  and  under  part  of  this 
pattern  consists  of  different  figures. 
The  upper  discs  under  the  ring-like 
pattern  resemble  those  of  B  ;  those  run- 
ning down  below  A  should  wind  in 
sinuous  curves  from  one  side  to  the 
other.  D.  The  >  three-cornered 
figures  ought  to  be  exactly  opposite  ; 
the  disc-like  figure  at  A  ought  to  end 
at  the  centre  of  the  angle.  E.  The 
exact  number  of  the  thick  black 
chevrons  on  the  vertical  lines,  as  well 
as  the  adjacent  short  vertical  strokes,  is 
of  no  special  consequence.  F.  The 
same  pattern  as  in  A,  but  in  a  vertical 


direction  ;  the  two  middle  ones  are 
correct,  and  show  what  the  rest  ought  to 
be.      6",  II.  Should  have  right-angled 

hatching  ;  at  //the  right  angles  become 
larger  as  they  approach  the  corners. 
/.  These  figures  are  exactly  like  those 
at  By  but  above  the  disc -figure  at 
A  there  should  only  be  two  figures,  of 
which  the  lower  is  considerably  longer 
than  the  upper.  K.  The  crescent- 
shaped  figures  should  be  one  behind 
the  other,  so  that  the  point  of  the 
upper  is  covered  by  the  end  of  the 
lower  one.  L.  A  part  of  these  figures 
should  show  right-angled  cross-lines. 
M.  These  figures  differ  at  the  top 
and  bottom,  but  all  should  be  regular 
crosses.  The  lower  figures  should  have 
the  points  of  the  inner  square  on  the 
vertical  margin-lines.  N.  The  cross- 
lines  of  these  figures  should  be  right- 
angled.  0.  The  pattern  above  the 
disc-pattern  at  A  is  incorrect.  The 
gable-shaped,  one-lined  figure  over  the 
disc  should  be  obliterated.  The  square 
lying  uppermost  should  have  above  a 
one-lined,  gable-shaped  figure  with  a 
short  one-lined  under-piece,  the  other 
being  triple-lined,  forming  a  double 
strip,  so  as  to  pass  into  the  second  figure 
without  any  dividing  line  at  the  top  of 
the  second  square.  All  other  lines  of 
the  lower  square  are  double.  The 
third  square  must  be  extended  towards 


460  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ii 


BURIAL  BAMBOOS.1 

[The  "  penitah  "  or  burial  bamboo  is  a  bamboo 
tube  covered  with  incised  patterns  which  is  buried 
with  the  deceased,  whose  soul  is  supposed  to  take  it 
to  the  judgment  throne  of  Kari.  If  the  dead  person 
has  been  very  wicked  in  life,  his  tribal  chief  or  Sna- 
hut,  who  alone  is  in  a  position  to  cut  the  patterns  on 
the  burial  bamboo,  refuses  to  do  so,  and  the  soul 
which,  when  interrogated  by  Kari,  cannot  produce 
its  own  burial  bamboo  is  condemned.  The  power 
that  the  chief  (Sna-hut)  exercises  in  consequence  of 
this  belief  is  boundless. 

The  engraved  patterns  differ  for  these  chiefs  (Sna- 
hut)  2  according  to  the  sex  and  age  of  the  deceased  ; 
that  of  the  Sna-hut  himself  differing  from  those  of  the 
other  members  of  the  tribe.  The  Puttos  or  greater 
chiefs,  too,  had  their  own  "  penitah  "  pattern,  but  this 
is  no  longer  known  to  any  one.  Vaughan- Stevens 
failed  to  obtain  a  detailed  explanation  of  these  patterns, 
and  all  he  could  make  out  was  that  the  pattern 
assigned  to  the  chiefs  or  Sna-hut  had  reference  to 
their  functions  as  medicine-men,  and  that  it  had  been 
assigned  to  them  by  Pie  and  the  greater  chiefs  or 
Puttos. 

The  burial  bamboo  of  the  men  is  always  a  larger 
and  longer  tube  than  that  of  the  women.  Formerly 
it  always  bore  a  name-mark  ("chor"),  but  now  it  is 
usually  made  without  any  such  distinction.3 

The  very  different  patterns  which  are  in   use  for 


A,  in  order  that  the  space  may  be  filled  — Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.   1 16. 
out."     All  this   maybe  true,  but  see,  x  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  1 19-123. 

however,  remarks  on  p.  404  as  to  the  2  See  illustrations  (ib.  p.   119). 

essential  irregularity  of  these  patterns.  3  lb.  p.  120.  Cf.  A  in  the  illustrations. 


; 

-     Z 
2 


0     ~ 


— 

— 


A        B 


Vol.  I.  /.  461. 


J  'anghan-St  evens. 

Tube  ("Gor"   and   "Gar")  Patterns,   Plate  I.  (Z.j.  E.  xxxi.  1421. 


,  hap,  ix  NEGRITOS  OF  PERAK  \6\ 

the  grown  women  are  believed  to  be  the  invention  oi 
the  goddess  Simei.1 

The  l)in*i.'il  bamboo  is  inserted  in  the  dead  man  . 

girdle.       The    expression    tO    "receive    a    priiitah  "    i 

equivalent  to  u  dying." l 

The  following  is  the  list  oi  these  burial  bamboo 
collected  by  Vaughan-Stevens : — 

(i)  That  of  a  Semang  Sna-hut.     I  [eight  37  cm; 

(2)  That  of  a  man.  Height  40  cm.  The  hatch- 
ing of  the  figure  A  is  a  name-sign  ("chor").1 

(3)  That  of  a  married  woman.      Height  35  cm/' 

(4)  That  of  a  boy.  Height  3  5  J,  cm.  That  the 
two  hatchings  in  the  middle  are  to  be  regarded  as 
name-signs  is  very  probable,  but  this  is  not  quite  clear 
from  the  notes.0 

(5)  That  of  a  girl.  Height  38^  cm.7  (identical 
with  "Gu\"  No.  2).] 


BLOWPIPE    PATTERNS.8 

The  list  of  the  old  blowpipe  patterns  was  de- 
scribed by  the  Pangan  as  being  practically  complete, 
but  plenty  of  modern  ones  certainly  exist,  to  say 
nothing  of  other  patterns  of  the  quiver  and  charm- 
tube  types.  The  topmost  line  of  the  pattern  of  the 
latter  always  coincides  with  the  upper  edge  of  the 
bamboo,  the  lowest  with  the  commencement  of  the 
peeled  portion  of  the  tube  (muzzle-end  or  "  chenel- 
us ").  The  blowpipe  patterns,  on  the  other  hand, 
with  the  exception  of  the  first  eight,  were  originally 

1  V.-St.  iii.  120.  See  accompanying  3  Ibid.  p.  118.  4  Ibid.  p.  119. 
illustration,  which  differs  completely  5  Ibid.  p.  120.  6  Ibid.  p.  121. 
from  the  others — those  of  a  man,  a  boy,            "'   Ibid.  p.  123. 

and  a  girl  {q.v.).  s  Z.  f.  E.  xxxi.   162-164.      For  list 

2  Ibid.  pp.  118,  121.  of  patterns,  v.  App. 


462  DECORATIVE  ART  part  n 


taken  from  bamboo  tubes,  on  which  the  patterns  of 
the  original  blowpipes  had  been  copied.  The  upper 
end  of  the  design  is  always  remote  from  the  mouth- 
piece, i.e.  from  the  bearer  ;  '  whereas  the  first  panel  or 
"was"  end  may,  as  already  mentioned,  be  either 
above  or  below,  and  its  exact  position  in  each  design 
will  be  given  in  accordance  with  Vaughan-Stevens' 
statements.  No  portion  of  this  tube  is  peeled 
("  chenel-us  ").  Hence  the  uppermost  and  the  lowest 
line  in  the  design  coincides  exactly  with  the  upper  and 
lower  extremities  of  the  tube.2 

[It  is  impossible  to  give  so  much  space  to  the 
description  of  individual  patterns  as  is  done  by 
Vaughan-Stevens.  The  reader  must  ascertain  from 
the  design  on  his  own  account  the  differences  between 
the  various  pattern-bands,  as  well  as  the  "  peculiarities  " 
of  each  individual  band.  For  in  these  Semang  pat- 
terns it  is  a  cardinal  feature  that  where  a  figure  is 
repeated  at  intervals,  there  always  occur  some  slight 
modifications  (e.g.  in  the  matter  of  the  hatching,  etc.) 
of  the  exact  design.  Hence  the  position  only  of  any 
such  peculiarities  will  be  given.  The  number  of  the 
figures  in  any  particular  "row"  or  panel  appears  to 
be  a  matter  of  indifference,  and  to  depend   upon   the 

1  In  making  his  corrections  of  the  exaggerated  demand  for  geometrical 
Semang  drawings  Vaughan  -  Stevens  regularity,  which  the  original  patterns 
himself  (as  his  editor  quite  rightly  themselves  never  show,  must  awaken 
points  out)  is  not  free  from  errors.  many  doubts.  It  is  true  that  so  much 
Moreover,  as  to  Vaughan-Stevens'  ob-  accuracy  must  be  claimed  for  the  ob- 
servation that  the  Semang  knew  no  rect  patterns  as  may  be  necessary  to 
semicircles,  he  himself  allows  that  it  keep  all  the  manifold  figures  distinct, 
is  extremely  difficult  for  them  to  cut  but  in  consequence  of  Vaughan-Stevens' 
curves  on  the  bamboo,  though  semicir-  insistence  on  "accuracy"  one  often 
cular  curves  are,  in  fact,  very  numer-  asks  one's  self  in  vain,  Does  such  and 
ous.  One  might  perhaps  expect  that  such  a  figure  belong  to  the  essence  of 
a  wild  race  should  hesitate  to  attempt  the  pattern  or  not  ? 
to  draw  semicircles,  but  the  idea  that  2  Z.  f.  E.  xxxi.  163.  For  an  ex- 
it "anxiously  avoids"  them  is  absurd,  ception  see,  e.g.,  Nos.  5  and  7,  com- 
and    untrue   as   well.      Moreover,    this  pared  with  the  original  blowpipes. 


'   r 

'/  ■ 

■  ..'■ 

■  H 

■/    :■ 

yk/A/A/A/A/i 


wmmm 


i 

UlXllllllIll: 
Illllllll 1 i j 1 1 1: 


I* 


a 


{EEEEEEFS* 


^JILI'.I.SJ* 


I-I  f -I T  T  T  -T  -TT  T  T  T  T  T  T 

AAJAA aa AA  KJLkAAJu( 


-10 


l  W.  I.  />.  462. 


Vaughan-Stcvens. 

Tube  ("Gor"  and  "Gar")  Patterns,  Plate  II.  [Z.f.E.  xxxi.  143. 1 


[    AAAAA^AAAAA^g 


AH 

I  'avghiui-Stevcns. 

Tube  < "  Gor  "  and  "(;.\k"i  Patterns,   Plate  HI.  (Z.f.E.  xxxi.  1441. 


Vol.  1. t>.  46-,. 


i  HA,  NEGRITOS  OF  PERAK 


actual  circumference  ol  the  bamboo  and  similar  cir- 
cumstances. It  is  not  always  possible  to  tell  whi 
figure  is  the  real  subject  ol  a  panel.  Where,  how- 
ever, nothing  is  said  to  the  contrary,  it  may  generally 
be  taken  to  be  the  figure  furthest  to  the  left  in  each 
of  the  designs.  Main  panels,  however,  have  only  one 
pattern  throughout,  and    hence    an    irregular  figure 

inside  the  same  is  no  "peculiarity'  in  the  alx> 
intended  sense,  and  will  only  occasionally  I)'-  men- 
tioned in  the  description.1  Between  a  u  pecu- 
liarity" and  such  an  irregularity  there  is  a  great 
difference  from  the  Semang  point  of  view  (see  No. 
40).  Besides  these  two  there  is  a  third  kind  of 
"deviation"  or  differentiation  (see  No.  96  and  No. 
112,  etc.)."  Where  there  are  only  spirals  instead 
of  the  ring-lines,  the  exact  position  of  both  extremi- 
ties relatively  to  the  figures  represented  is  always 
exactly  determined.  In  the  case  of  the  repetition  of 
figures  in  a  band,  the  beginning  or  the  end  may  occur 
either  to  the  right  or  left  or  in  immediate  coincidence 
with  one  of  the  figures,  the  aforesaid  "  peculiarities  " 
occurring  relatively  to  a  definite  figure  (see,  e.g.,  spiral 
2  in  charm-tube  M).  T2  may  perhaps  be  taken  as  an 
exception,  as  may  be  inferred  from  its  design.] 

The  widths  of  the  various  pattern-bands  or  panels 
are  not  arbitrary,  but  stand  in  a  certain  fixed  relation- 
ship to  one  another,  very  much  as  is  shown  by  the 
designs.  The  exact  width,  however,  of  the  central 
panel  (when  it  is  left  free)  is  of  no  consequence,  and 
hence  the  Semang  generally  commences  to  cut  the 
pattern  at  the  top  and  bottom  first,  and  so  gradually 

1  Z.f.E.yloc.cit.    It  must  therefore  2  In     the      designs,     however,     no 

be  presupposed  that  the  differentiations  difference    can     be     seen    between     a 

not    mentioned    by    Vaughan  -  Stevens  "peculiarity"    and    a    mere    "  irre<ni- 

belongto  the  class  of  mere  irregularities.  larity."     See  No.  45. 


464  DECORATIVE  ART  part  n 

works  towards  the  middle.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  design  for  the  central  panel  is  usually  the  first  part 
to  be  incised  by  way  of  a  commencement.  The  vari- 
ous kinds  of  cross-lines  have  already  been  partially 
described  in  connection  with  the  comb  patterns.1  [The 
following  rules,  however,  have  also  to  be  observed. 
The  not  uncommon  figure  a  must  never  be  hatched 
at  the  point  of  intersection.2  The  right-angled  cross- 
lines  are  scarcely  ever  inserted,  except  where  they  can 
be  given  their  full  length  (see  figure  b).  Exceptions 
may,  however,  be  seen  in  quiver  A2,  part  3,  in  8  and 
9,  1 1  and  1 2  (lines  counted  from  the  left).  Special 
attention  should  be  given  to  the  cross-lines  of  two 
pairs  of  parallel  lines  in  and  about  the  space  formed 
by  their  intersection  (see,  for  instance,  figure  b,  as 
well  as  quiver  O,  quiver  Q,  parts  3,  4,  and  6).  To 
these  should  be  added  many  other  kinds  of  cross-lines 
which  help  to  produce  a  difference  in  the  patterns  (e.g. 
parallel  and  slanting  cross-lines).  The  effect  of  these 
will  become  evident  through  a  closer  consideration  of 
the  designs.  Their  number  is  usually  quite  arbitrary.] 
Very  short  strokes  have  the  same  significance  as 
dots  :  they  are  produced  by  means  of  a  blunt-pointed 
knife  (see,  e.g.,  No.  24).  The  broad  black  stripes  and 
figures  of  the  designs  here  given  are  produced  in  the 
originals  by  peeling  the  part  and  colouring  it  black.3 

Classification  of  the  Patterns? 

If    the    general    arrangement     of    the    blowpipe 
patterns    is   compared   with   that   of  the   quivers   and 

1  See  Z.  f.  E.  xxv.  85.  nately   only   too    typical    of    the   hair- 

2  These  so-called  "  rules  " — to  taboo       splitting  character  of  much  of  Vaughan- 
the  cross-hatching  of  a  point,   and   to       Stevens'  work. 

say  that  a  line   may   only   be   inserted  3  Z.f.E.  xxxi.   164. 

when  there  is  room  for  it — are  unfortu-  4  Ibid.  pp.  147-159. 


XXX 


urn 


;,.    .     . 


/NIAVAV  r 


AA_  TTT 


/ava     ma   - 


AA 
/A/A 
A/A 


a; 

XXY 


iiiimiiiMin 
uiuuiumu.. 


¥  // 


VVV 


K>XOX 

^  W.'  w 
1   AAA 

\y\T-r 


£/ 


^ 


/7 


Vol.  I.  p.  464. 


Tu 


/  'augJian-Stczens. 

be  ("Gor"  and  "Gar")  Patterns,   Plate  IV.  (Z./.E.  xxxi.  145. 


Vol.  I.  /.  465. 


I  raughan-Stt  vens. 

Tube  t "  Gok  "  and  "Gar")  Patterns,   Plate  V.  [Z.f.E.  xxxi.  1481. 


chap,  ix  VSGRITOS  OF  PERAh 

charm-tubes,  their  similarity  is  evident,  in  spite  ol  the 
differences   between    the    individual   patterns.1     '1  he 

Semang  themselves  appear  tO  classify  both  kinds  Ol 
patterns  in  the  same  general  groups,  and  although 
this   grouping    was    frequently    undertaken    by   wid<l\ 

different  members  of  the  race,  it  has  always  remained 

essentially  the  same,  even  though  the  assigning  ol 
individual  figures  tO  particular  classes  may  have  varied. 
In  the  case  of  the  blowpipe  illustrations  Vaughan- 
Stevens  has  adopted  this  classification,  though  in 
the  case  of  the  "go' '  and  "ga''  he  has  only  occa- 
sionally referred  to  it.'2 

The  blowpipe  patterns,  called  "  tenwad,"  maybe 
separated  into  two  types — (a)  that  of  the  majority, 
which,  as  possessing  ring-lines,  have  each  band  or 
panel  of  figures  separated  from  the  next,  and  (6) 
those  which  have  these  lines  at  the  extremities  alone 
(see,  for  instance,  Nos.  18,  21,  23,  44).  In  the  first 
class,  subdivision  I A  (see,  for  instance,  Nos.  29,  30, 
36)  contained  the  chief  "  motive  "  in  the  central  por- 
tion (called  "  betud "),  just  as  the  combs  contained 
the  pattern  representing  the  Disease  in  the  central 
panel,  and  above  and  below  this  came  alternate  rows 
or  bands  of  figures  and  ring-lines.  Whereas,  how- 
ever, on  the  combs  the  central  (or  Disease-pattern)  is 


1  Vaughan  -  Stevens  here  expresses  "go'"  as  dart  -  quivers.  Cf.  also 
himself  thus:  "Others  (sc.  designs)  V.-St.  iii.  136.  This  is  due  to  the  fact 
could  not  be  reduced  (sc.  to  '  sumpitan  '  that  V.  -Stevens  evidently  found  no  real 
size),  and  consequently  are  retained  difference  of  pattern  between  the  "  go' " 
as  '  gor '  or  «  gar.'  "  Thus  "  go'  "  and  and  the  "  ga',"  whilst  his  account  of  the 
"  gay  so  far  as  the  derivation  of  the  development  of  the  arrow-quiver  ("  cha- 
"cha-nam-pah-i"  is  concerned,  are  used  nam-pah-i  ")  rests  upon  tradition  alone, 
without  distinction.  See  below,  where  2  Of  the  following  classes  IE  to 
V. -Stevens,  after  comparison  of  the  IG  there  appears  at  all  events  in 
"sumpit"  and  "go"' patterns,  declares  the  "go"'  and  "ga"'  a  much  more 
that  the  "  cha-nam-pah-i "  is  developed  limited  number  than  on  the  blow- 
out of  a  "go'."  In  another  place  pipes.  For  Class  IIA  and  IIBofthe 
V.  -Stevens  includes  the  "  ga'  "  with  the  "  go',"  see  below. 

VOL.  I  2  H 


466  DECORATIVE  ART  part  11 


of  relatively  great   width,   the   corresponding   central 
panel  of  the  blowpipes  frequently  seems  to  be  narrow.1 
[Subdivision  IB  of  the  same  class  has  an  empty 
space  in  the  centre  corresponding  to  that  to  be  seen 
in  quivers  Li,  F2,  etc.,  whereas  a  space  of  this  kind 
does  not  occur  on  the  combs.     This  characteristic  is 
one  of  a  kind  that  does  not  usually  strike  the  eye. 
When,   indeed,    the   design   of  the   long   charm -tube 
("  ga' ")   was   adapted   to   the   shorter   portion  of  the 
blowpipe-tube    ("  cha-nam-pah-i "),     the    meaningless 
blank  centre  space,  the  existence  of  which  was  only 
due  to  the  rule  that  the  pattern  must  cover  the  entire 
bamboo,    was   either   altogether   omitted   or  reduced 
to   the   space    between    two   ring- lines.     If  any  one 
wished  to  make  the  intervals  between  the  ring-lines 
as  wide  as  the  vacant  middle  space  (see,  for  instance, 
No.    56),    there    would    be    no    rule    to   hinder   him, 
but    only    custom.       Hence    it     is    difficult    to    know 
whether  any  particular  figure  belongs  to  this  class,*2 
and  Vaughan-Stevens   himself  was   doubtful    how   to 
classify   No.    75   until  a   Semang   cut   the  design   for 
him  on  a  charm-tube  ("  ga'  "),  leaving  the  open  space 
in  the  centre.     It  belongs,  therefore,  to  the  same  type 
as   No.   56,   except  that   the   latter  blowpipe  pattern 
may  be  classified  with  yet  another  group  on  account 
of  the  dotted  lines  of  the  design,  as  we   shall   see. 
Since  the  vacant   centre  space  in   No.    75   was  only 

1  Z.f.E.y  I.e.  152.    Only  comb  20G  does  not  appear  to  be  any  precise  rule, 

has  also  a  small,  scarcely  prominent  as  other  variations  are  also  admissible, 
central  panel  {Z.f.  E.  xxv.  94).    Hence  2  Confusion  with  class  IA  is  especi- 

it  is  frequently  impossible  to  establish  ally  easy  because  of  the  want  of  pro- 

the"betud."  minence  given  to  the  "  betud. "     Again, 

Of  the  remaining  panels  there  may  the  non-multiplication  of  the  ring-lines 

be  either  four  above  and  three  below,  ("kening-uin "),     which     one     would 

or  three  above  and  two  below,  or  in  expect  to  find  there  upon  the  omission 

the  case  of  a  long   "cha-nam-pah-i,"  of   the  vacant  centre  space,  does  not 

five  above  and  five  below.      But  there  point  to  the  omission. 


I'ol.  I.  />.  466. 


Tube  ("Gor"  and  "Gar")  Patterns,   Plate  VI.   (z. 


Vaugh 


[Z.f.  E.  xxxi.    14c,  i. 


*..  .•"•■'.■.:"•..'•  ••..•'■..•' 

T '•.     ."T     .-".        .-._ 

'^1      i     _^ ^_ 

Specimens  of  "Sumpit"   Patterns,  Plate  VII.   (Z.f.  E.  xxxi.  150 


l  'ol.  I.  p.  467. 


I'aughan- 
Stevens. 


(MM'.     I\ 


NEGRITOS  Ob   PERAK 


\'-7 


bounded  on  each  side  by  a  ring  line,  there  was  no 
indication  when  1 1 1  < -  space  was  omitted.  Blank 
panels  in  general  sure  called  "picheg,"  with  tin-  name 
for  the  panel  in  question  prefixed.*] 

This  class  IB  is  used  lor  protection  against  any 

form  of  epidemic,  whether  severe  or  light.1      In  another 

place,  however,  Vaughan-Stevens  restricts  the  patterns 

employed  against  epidemics  to  a  special  subdivision  of 
Class  1  B,  On  this  point  he  says  that  a  Disease  which 
we  should  call  an  epidemic,  and  which,  though  it  only 
appears  occasionally,  attacks  all  or  many  at  the  same 
time  {eg.  influenza,  small-pox,  and  cholera),  is  signified 
by  Nos.  96,  10 1,  105,  109  of  the  blowpipe  patterns 
and  by  quiver  H2,  in  which  cases  a  design  (usually, 
but  not  always,  of  identical  form  for  both  halves) 
fills  the  entire  space,  and  is  only  divided  into  two 
parts  in  the  centre  by  means  of  ring-lines.  The 
upper  half  is  for  the  men,  the  lower  half  for  the 
women.  This  class,  moreover,  is  not  represented 
upon  the  combs,  since  the  Disease  attacks  both  sexes 
equally.  No.  97  at  first  sight  appears  an  exception, 
but  the  single  black  cross-line  of  the  lower  half  is 
not  a  ring-line,  since  these  are  invariably  at  least 
drawn  in  pairs.4 

[Apart  from  these  two  subdivisions,  there  is  a  yet 
further  subdivision  of  the  first  type.5  IC  is  of  avail 
against  Diseases  which  appear  at  different  times  and 
in  different  forms  and  in  different  parts  of  the  body.] 


1  See  the  previous  note. 
Z.f.  E.,/.c.i$2.   Cf.  ' ■ was  picheg " 
on  the  combs  {Z.f.  E.  xxv.  81). 

3  But  the  Diseases  against  which  the 
"  ga'  "  and  "  go'  "  patterns  (which  pos- 
sess a  vacant  centre  space)  are  said  to 
prevail  are  not  epidemics. 

4  Loc.  cit.  153.      Cf.  also  L  II. 

6  In  what    follows    Classes  IC  and 


ID  appear  to  be  arranged  under  I A  ; 
IE  and  IF,  on  the  other  hand,  as  far 
as  externals  go,  are  not  precluded 
from  being  grouped  with  Classes  IA 
and  IB  {cf.  No.  56.).  IG  shows, 
moreover,  an  approach  to  Class  II., 
in  respect  of  the  general  arrange- 
ment of  the  patterns  (see  Nos.  73, 
77,  S8). 


468  DECORA  TI VE  A  R  T  vx  r t  i  i 

A  number  of  short  pillar-like  figures  with  other  figures 
near  one  another  in  the  central  space  are  specially 
characteristic  of  this  class  of  pattern.  These  more 
general  charms  are  called  "  bihe "  ("  beehay ").] 
Above  and  below  the  central  space  are  to  be  found 
spaces  containing  yet  other  figures.  The  blowpipe 
design  No.  127 2  is  an  example;  it  corresponds  to 
quivers  Ai  to  A4,  and  also  to  combs  28A  and  31. 

In  subdivision  ID  the  spaces  separated  by  the 
ring-lines,  including  the  central  space,  are  filled  with 
an  essentially  identical  figure. 

The  dotted  designs  or  "  pichod  "  were  divided  by 
the  Semang  into  two  groups,  which  Vaughan-Stevens 
distinguishes  as  simple  and  compound.  In  answer  to 
his  question  why  these  designs,  especially  those  in 
which  there  were  only  a  few  rows  of  dotted  figures, 
were  not  classified  with  the  designs  which  resembled 
them  in  arrangement,  he  was  told  that  they  were  quite 
another  kind  of  charm  ("  tankor  "  =  Mai.  "  tangkal  "?).i 
Class  IE,  a  simple  series  of  dotted  figures,  protects 
the  owner  against  slight  external  injuries,  and  the 
complicated  pattern  IF  against  more  serious  ones. 
This  latter  was  formerly  cut  by  the  Sna-hut  them- 
selves. 

Finally,  there  is  subdivision  IG,  of  which  the 
narrow  bands  or  spaces,  enclosed  between  one  or 
several  groups  of  ring-lines,  contain  double  cross-lines. 
Those  with  single  cross-lines  are  special  marks  of 
Class  I.4 

1    Cf.     the    Semang    name     "  bie  "  bands  above  or  below  the  central  space 

("beay")  —  which    means    "two" —  (see    No.    127)    although  included    by 

for    the    seventh    space    of   the    comb  Vaughan-Stevens  under  IC. 

pattern.  3  A    talisman     or     amulet  —  dotted 

-  In   the   following  table,  however,  figures  appear   to  a  small  extent  in  all 

No.  127  is  introduced  by  V.-St.  under  classes,  e.g.  95,  118,  125,  etc. 

I  A,   and  Nos.    121    and    123  have  no  4  Loc.  cit.  157. 


I 

'''V'X   i'f y'h.  >  »' 


W  {?>! 


±9 


X  \AAA» 


S6. 


r55 


■# 


Vauzhan-St 


Specimens  of  "Sumpit"  Patterns,  Plate  VIII.  {Z.f.  E.  xxxi.  151). 


/  W.  /.  /.  468 


mnriF, 


61 


xzxmp  ; : 


61 


!»? 


1 


63 


6i 


09 


n 


nr 


WWWfe      '.,■'..  ... 


VtaPfesiWtxiPfe 


•v.    .:•:'•.   2 


7/ 


06A 


Z 


73 


7f 


IS 


#&#$ 


zzz 


.-•  ■•■*•■  •■    >ys^~ 


i^VAVAN  J  ^a&nJ^iy 


ySflT 


7f 


rf°xg»»<^. 


*  i^^r 


zz: 


III"!"'""" - 

JFMW& 

M«««<t"<<< 

11 

w^lk 

fj%£&\ 

^in%p^% 

S3 


Vattehan-Stevens. 


Vol  I.  p.  469. 


Specimens  of   "Sumpit"  Patterns,   Plate  IX.   [Z.f.  E.  xxxL  1541. 


chap,  ix  NEGRITOS  OF  PERAK 

[The  csscnti.il  Features  oi  this  i  lass,  as  declared  b 
the  great  chiefs,  are  as  Follows : 

(i)  The  number  and  position  of  the  ring-line 

(2)  The  figure-rows  or  bands  ol  the  "wis     and 

"  pawer,"  as  well  as  the  I  )is<\i'.<-  pattern  in  all  I  .1  < 
and  in  some  liibe-ligures.  The  ring-lines  denote,  in 
inverse  proportion  to  their  number,  the  seriousness  or 
otherwise  of  the  Disease  in  question.1  The  tradition 
that  the  Putto  only  gave  these  rings  as  charms  to 
protect  the  owner  against  lightning '  appears,  how- 
ever, to  be  an  exception  to  this  rule. 

A  few  remarks  may  here  be  made  with  reference 
to  the  representation  of  these  ring-lines.  Three  such 
parallel  ring-lines  when  in  combination  [are  called 
"keng-uin"  or  "  kening-uin,"  but  the 
ring-line  proper  is  the  middle  line  a,  which  should, 
however,  be  accompanied  by  both  the  others.3  The 
two  outside  lines  are  also  ring-lines,  and  form  the 
usual  dividing  band  or  border  between  each  row  of 
figures  on  the  bamboos.4  If  these  two  latter  are  com- 
pared to  a  full  stop,  the  single  line  would  represent 
a  comma.  The  three  lines  appear  in  many  drawings, 
but  like  the  double,  triple,  and  quadruple  spiral 
ring-lines,  the  double/'  barred,6  and  doubly  barred 7 
ring-lines    are    employed    in     place    of    the    original 


1  In  this  case  the  shorter  blowpipe  dangerous,  but  which  at  the  same  time 
patterns  as  compared  with  the  longer  may  be  averted  by  charms,  whilst  the 
"go"'  patterns  must  invariably  re-  upper  line  represents  the  harmless,  the 
present  more  serious  illnesses,  since  the  lower  the  most  terrible,  which  cannot 
ring-lines  of  the  former  are  relatively  be  averted.  Sic  Vaughan- Stevens  (iii. 
smaller  in  number  than   those   of  the  136).      Cp.  p.  400,  //.   I. 

latter.      This,   however,    is   most    im-  4  E.g.  in  "  go',"  O  and  T2.     Spiral 

probable.  lines  and  rings  are  also  used  in  com- 

2  On  the  arrow  -  quivers  and  on  bination  as  dividing  lines  of  patterns, 
'•go',"  A,    see    Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  e.g.  in  "  go',"  A2. 

136,  and  illustrations.  5  E.g.  No.   117. 

3  It    corresponds    to    the    sort    of  °  E.g.  No.  99. 
lightning    which    is,    to    some    extent,  7  E.g.  No.  73. 


47o  DECORATIVE  ART  part  11 


patterns,  perhaps  as  a  new  kind  of  distinguishing 
mark,  when  the  same  figure  has  been  specialised  to 
such  an  extent  that  it  is  difficult  to  invent  new 
variations.  No  one,  however,  knows  now  why  the 
great  chiefs  originally  chose  these  forms. 

Again,  a  fundamental  difference  may  be  dis- 
tinguished by  observing  whether  the  "  was "  (the 
upper  figure)  reaches  to  the  edge  of  the  bamboo  (as  in 
No.  79  and  in  quiver  O),  or  whether  a  vacant  space 
is  left  separated  by  one  or  more  horizontal  lines  (as 
in  No.  51  and  in  quiver  P).  The  edge-line  above 
the  "  was "  plays  the  same  part  in  the  patterns  of 
these  tubes  ("go'"  and  "ga'")  as  it  did  in  the  case 
of  the  combs,  the  only  difference  being  that  above 
the  "  was  "  there  may  be  one  or  two  bands  of  ring- 
lines.  This  refers  to  the  lower  border  and  to  the 
"  mos  "-line.  The  fact  that  the  quiveriand  blowpipe 
patterns  show  these  same  distinguishing  character- 
istics, is  supported  by  the  assertion  that  the  shorter 
portion  of  the  blowpipe-tube  ("  cha-nam-pah-i  ")  was 
originally  derived  from  a  quiver  pattern.1 

The  second  class  of  these  patterns  contains  two 
further  subdivisions.  The  one  (HA)  goes  with 
comb  pattern  25 D,  the  Disease  connected  with  which 
always  terminates  fatally  except  when  averted  by  the 
patterns.  Here,  too,  belong,  e.g.,  Nos.  107,  112,  115, 
all  of  which  are  without  the  vertical  lines  which  divide 
the  entire  pattern.  In  the  second  subdivision  which 
possesses  these  vertical  lines  (I IB)  the  Disease  is  one 
which  may  cause  death.  The  corresponding  comb 
patterns  are  25 A  and  25 B.  So,  too,  in  the  quivers 
both  classes  are  present  and  both  exhibit  patterns 
either  with  or  without  the  vertical  lines  referred  to. 

1  Z.f.  E.  xxxi.  157,  158. 


M 


W 


tlXW 

y  V\V 

SIS 

8'G 


IS  aa  : 

S/A    /A\/A\  a 


/AV/ 
AVA  - 
AA 


#*- 


/  ~<>/.  i.  p.  470. 


tor 

Vaugkan-St evens. 


Specimens  of  "Sumpit"  Patterns,  Plate  X.  (Z.f.E.  xxxi.  155 


m 


i%i 


12J5 


J  'a  tighan- Stevens. 


Specimens  of   "Sumpit"   Pattern.-,   Plate  XL   {/../.  E.  xxxi.  156). 


Vol.  1.  />.  471. 


M 


Hah 

Sakai   I  [airpins,   Perak. 


SAKA1    (   OMBS,     l'l-  u  \K. 


Hah 


Sakai  Combs,   Perak. 


Vol    I.  />■  470- 


IV' 


Hale  ( 'olfaction. 

Bamboo  Vessels  used  hv 
Perak  Sakai. 


Hale  Collection. 
QUIVEK    USED    BY    PERAK    SAKAI. 


Hale  Collection. 


Bamboo  Vessels  used  hv  Pkkak  Sakai. 


/  'ol.  I .  p.  471. 


CHAP.    I\ 


SAKA1  Oh  PERAK 


47' 


For  instance,  HI*  is  represented  in  quiver  Pi,  Si, 
and  Xi;  but  Vaughan  -  Stevens  was  not  able  to 
obtain  a  pattern  o!'  IIA.  The  significance  ol  the 
patterns  with  regard  to  the  course  of  the  disea  e  is 
the  same  as  that  o\  the  blowpipes.  In  both  sub- 
divisions tin-  same  figures  may  occur,  although  they 

arc  usually  made  smaller  in  1 1  B  than  in  IIA.  The 
chief  difference  does  not  lie  in  the  form  of  the  figures, 

hut  in  their  general  arrangement.1] 

If  these  charm  patterns,  no  matter  of  what  class, 
are  not  worn  till  after  the  Disease  has  got  a  foothold, 
they  do  not  help.  In  that  case  a  decoction  of  the 
materials  denoted  by  the  figures"  must  be  drunk  by 
the  patient.  This  rule  applies  alike  to  the  patterns 
of  combs,  quivers,  charm-tubes,  and  blowpipes. 


II. — Sakai. 

We  shall  now  consider  the  designs  on  some 
musical  instruments  of  the  kind  called  "  tuntong  "  (or,  I 
think,  more  correctly,  "  tuang-tuang  "),  this  being  the 
only  form  of  the  decorative  work  of  the  Sakai  that 
appears  to  have  been  studied  by  Vaughan-Stevens. 


1  Z.f.E.  xx \i.  1 58.  In  fact,  however, 
there  are  in  I  IB  quite  different  figures 
to  those  which  are  grouped  under  IIA, 
at  least  in  the  case  of  the  blowpipe, 
and  in  Class  IIB  there  is  no  sign 
of  any  special  smallness  of  the 
figures. 

The  129  patterns  of  the  blow- 
pipes are  divided  in  the  following  way 
into  the  classes  described  : — 

IA.  5,  13,  28,  30,  35,  36,  51,  53, 
54,  61,  66,  67,  71,  76,  78,  82,  Ss, 
86,  87,  90,  92,  94,  100,  103,  104, 
11 1,  124,  126,  127. 

IB.  2,  7,  27,  34,  68,  84,  96,  97, 
101,  102,  105,  109,  113,  116-118. 

IC.   14,  121,  123. 


ID.  8-10,  16,  20,  25,  33,  37,  41, 
42,  45,  46,  47,  49,  50,  52,  58,  60, 
63,  7o,  72,  74,  75.  So.  99,  106,  108, 
125. 

IE.  11,  15,  17,  19,  26,  29,  31, 
32,  39,  48,  55-57,  62,  66A,  79,  81, 
85,  120. 

IF.  12,  24,  38,  40,  43,  59,  64, 
65,  69,  89,  93. 

IG.   73,  77,  88,  91,  95,  119. 

IIA.  1,  3,  4,  6,  22,  107,  112, 
114,  115. 

IIB.  18,  21,  23,  44,  98,  no, 
122,  128. 

-  Naturally  it  is  quite  different  in 
the  case  of  the  fatal  disease  of  Class 
IIA.      Cf.  Z.f.E.  xxv.  81,  83. 


472  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ii 

STAMPER    ("  TUANG-TUANG  ")    PATTERNS.1 

These  "tuang-tuangs"  were  bamboo  tubes  closed  at 
one  end  by  the  natural  node  or  joint,  but  open  at  the 
other.  They  were  decorated  with  magical  designs, 
and  were  employed  in  the  magic  ceremonies  of  the 
Sakai.  Two  of  these  instruments  were  generally 
used  together,  and  being  held  one  in  each  hand  were 
struck  upon  the  ground  from  time  to  time  in  such  a 
way  as  to  produce  musical  notes.  The  account  given 
by  Vaughan-Stevens  of  the  specimens  he  succeeded 
in  obtaining  is  as  follows  : — 

Bamboo  No.  1 .2 

[The  explanation  of  the  first  of  the  patterns  was 
that  if  the  bamboo  were  held  with  the  knot  down- 
wards, the  two  figures  represented  at  the  bottom 
would  be  seen  to  be  those  of  a  man  and  a  boy,  both 
of  them  in  a  sitting  or  rather  in  a  squatting  posture. 

This  explanation  must  be  taken  for  what  it  may  be 
worth,  though  Vaughan-Stevens  adds  that  his  Sakai 
informant  showed  him  the  exact  posture  that  the 
bottom  design  was  intended  to  represent,  viz.  that  of  a 
man  (as  has  been  said)  in  a  squatting  position,  with 
the  right  leg  drawn  up  and  the  right  knee  resting 
upon  the  knee  of  the  left  leg. 

The  line  of  chevrons  just  above  this  lowest  design 
is  explained  as  being  formed  by  the  angles  of  the 
boy's  knee  and  ankle,  which  motives  are  repeated  all 
round  the  bamboo  in  a  continuous  band  (B). 

So  far,  the  explanation  of  this  pattern  appears  to 

1  For  list,  v.  App.   The  same  criticism  2  Z.f.  E.  xxvi.  146.     Length  of  the 

applies  here  as  at  p.  411,  ;/.  2.  original  bamboo,  42  cm. 


/  ravghan- 

Bamboo  Xo.  i. — Charm  Pattern  of  unknown  use 
(For  explanation  see  text,  i 

Original  length.  4^  cm. 


Vol.  I.  /•  472. 


_ 


SS^^SS^^x-^^^^xx-^^^ 


Bl 


7}nrnnmim7nmmn7mr/MWM/////^^^^^ 


f 


u  : 


£ 'HT'nr-as*' 


mm.  ix  SAKA1  OF  PERAK  473 


be  the  least  convincing  ol  the  series,  there  being  no 
discernible  reason  for  distinguishing  this  chevron  from 

any  other.  | 

At  C  (Vaughan-Stcvens  continues)  is  represented 

a  long  fish-fence  with  a  trap  or  "wed'  in  a  river 
(Mai.  "  serok  "),  the  wavy  line  in  the  centre  repre- 
senting the  movements  of  a  fish  in  the  water.  1  he 
clotted  straight  line  at  C2  represents  the  posts  of 
the  fish- fence  as  seen  from  above.  The  other  three 
parts  are  angles  of  the  fish-fence.  At  D  (Vaughan- 
Stevens  was  told)  a  man  warming  his  hands  at  the  fire 
was  represented,  the  fingers  of  his  two  hands  being 
intertwined,  the  figure  thus  produced  forming  the 
sign  for  "  fire."  But  this  explanation  is  not  very 
convincing,  and  of  the  rest  of  the  pattern  no  explana- 
tion whatever  could  be  obtained.1 

Bamboo  ATo.  2.'1 

Fig.  7. — The  wizards'  staff  proper  was  a  crooked 
bamboo.  The  one  figured  contains  a  charm  against 
the  vampire,  apes  (i.e.  epileptic  attacks),  and  the 
Argus  pheasant  (i.e.  madness).  On  the  upper- 
most internode  is  represented  the  figure  of  a  house 
or  rather  perhaps  fence  (such  as  that  already  men- 
tioned). 

A  ''vampire,"  according  to  the  view  of  the  Sakai, 
is  not  a  demon — even  though  it  is  incidentally  so 
called — but  a  being  of  Mesh  and  blood.  The  ape- 
demon  and  the  Argus-pheasant  demon  ("  kuang  ")  are 
distinguished  from  it  by  the  fact  that  the  demons  can 
come  through  walls  and  hedges,  which  the  vampire 
cannot  do.     The  dots   near   the   figure   of  the   fence 

1  Z.f.E.  xxvi.  146.  -  Ibid.  pp.  167-172. 


474  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ir 


represent  the  upper  extremities  of  the  posts  forming 
the  fence,  as  seen  from  above.  The  projections  at 
A  in  the  fence  pattern  represent  the  feet  of  the 
vampire,  and  hence,  indirectly,  the  vampire  itself.  The 
double  row  of  dots  running  between  the  fence  figures 
represents  the  vampire's  loin-cloth  or  "  chawat."  ] 

The  next  row  shows  (at  B — B)  the  "  seven  bam- 
boos "  of  the  "  Tabong  "  legend,"  which  form  a  favourite 
subject  for  representation.  Between  these  seven 
bamboos  (all  separate)  there  now  remain  the  follow- 
ing alternate  figures:  (i)  a  bamboo -leaf  or  leaves, 
pointing  upwards ;  (2)  the  vampire's  wings ;  (3)  a 
bamboo-leaf  or  several  leaves,  pointing  downwards  ; 
(4)  clouds  ;  (5)  the  vampire's  wings  and  body  ;  (6)  a 
bamboo-leaf,  pointing  downwards  ;  (7)  clouds. 

The  next  division  shows  the  figures  on  the 
feathers  of  the  Argus  ;  the  scale-shaped  figure  which 
is  shown  beside  it  in  the  illustration  representing  the 
scales  on  the  feet  of  the  bird.  The  fourth  division 
contains  the  eyes  on  the  feathers  of  the  Argus 
pheasant's  tail.  The  fifth  division  represents  clouds, 
which,  like  the  vampire,  are  emblematic  of  nocturnal 
life.  The  sixth  division  again  shows  the  eyes  on  the 
tail-feathers  of  the  Argus. 

The  seventh  division  represents  the  elbows  of 
the  ape,  as  emblematic  of  an  entire  ape.  The  dots 
shown  above  at  C  are  the  dots  on  the  blowpipe-dart, 
and  help  to  distinguish  the  figure  from  others,  such 
as  the  elbow  of  an  ape. 

The  broad  stripes  produced  by  stripping  off  the  skin 
in  the  eighth  division  again  represent  bamboo  stems.3 

1  Z.f.E.  xxvi.  170.  is     possible     that     Vaughan  -  Stevens 

2  This  will  be  found  in  vol.  ii.  pp.  may    have     fallen     into     some     trap 
213,  214.  through     misunderstanding      his      in- 

3  Ibid.     p.     171.       Here    again     it  formants. 


chap,  ix  sakai  OF  PERAK  475 

The  figures  in  this  field  are:  (1)  a  bamboo;  (2) 
the  vampire's  claws,  the  double  ro*  oi  dots  between 
the  claws  again  representing  the  "chawaf  (or 
"vampir*  loin-cloth);  (3)  a  bamboo;  (4)  clou< 
(5)  a  bamboo;  (6)  the  wings  of  the  Argus  pheasant; 
(7)  a  bamboo;  (8)  clouds;  (9)  a  bamboo;  (10)  the 
vampire,  hanging  downwards;  (11)  a  bamboo;  (12) 

clouds. 

The  lowest  part  of  the  stem  of  the  instrument 
represents  clouds  and  stars,  as  emblems  of  night, 
during  which  the  demons  are  especially  active. 

It  is  with  a  musical  instrument  of  this  kind  that 
the  magician  conducts  the  ceremony,  his  pupil  mean- 
while sitting  behind  him  with  painted  bamboos,  of 
which  those  portrayed  at  A  and  B  are  specimens. 
The  one  marked  A  is  48  cm.  long,  and  has  a 
diameter  of  5  cm.  ;  B  is  56  cm.  long,  and  has  a 
diameter  of  3-A-  cm.  The  patterns  with  which  they 
are  painted  are  given  again  unrolled  at  the  side  of 
this  text,  from  a  pattern  made  for  Vaughan-Stevens 
himself.1 

[These  particular  bamboos  were  said  to  represent 
in  general  the  oldest  form  of  this  instrument.  The 
figure  marked  A  was  said  to  show  the  hot  finger- 
marks of  Tuhan  impressed  upon  the  bamboo  by  way 
of  ornament,  while  the  seven  bamboos  are  again  said 
to  be  denoted  by  the  peeled  stripes.]  From  its  shape 
the  object  at  A  must  represent  the  chief  bamboo  at 
a  "  tuang-tuang "  ceremony,  and  B  the  second  one. 
The  figures  portrayed  on  the  second  bamboo  represent 
two  sorts  of  rattan,  called  respectively  "  riong  "  (or 
11  rayong  "  ?)  and  "  butong  "  (?  "  betong  "),  which  play 
an  important  part  in  the  preparation  of  the   Pangan 

1  Z.f.  E.  xxvi.  171. 


476  DECORATIVE  ART  pari  11 

arrow-poison.  The  figure  is  an  ordinary  representa- 
tion of  rattan  ;  the  interval  representing  the  tree 
round  which  the  rattans  climb.  The  repetition  of  the 
figures  indicates  multiplicity. 

These  two  bamboos  do  not  form  a  pair,  but  came 
from  quite  different  localities.  Vaughan  -  Stevens, 
however,  adds  that  up  to  the  time  of  writing  he  had 
not  seen  a  painted  pair  really  used.  The  shorter 
of  the  two  is  always  held  in  the  right  hand.1 

Of  the  many  existing  patterns  of  these  instruments 
Vaughan-Stevens  only  succeeded  in  getting  specimens 
of  the  following  : — 

Fig.  8.  A  charm  to  be  used  by  men  as  a  protection 
against  scorpions  and  millipedes. 

Fig.  9.  Against  mice  and  squirrels. 

Fig.  10.  Against  ants. 

Fig.  11.  Against  a  skin-disease. 

Fig.  12.  Against  the  collapsing  of  houses. 

Fig.  13.   Unexplained. 

Fig.  14.  Against  millipedes,  a  charm  intended  for 
the  use  of  women  engaged  in  searching  for  the  fruit 
of  the  "  salak  "-palm. 

Fig.  15.  Against  spiders  supposed  to  be  venomous. 

Fig.  16.  Against  fish  armed  with  poisonous 
spines.2 

Fig.  1 7.  Against  animals  which  destroy  the  rice- 
harvest. 

Fig.  18.  Against  drought. 

The  first  two  of  the  following  illustrations  are 
taken  from  copies  of  designs  incised  upon  bamboo 
staves  by  a  Sakai  who  refused  to  part  with  the  origi- 
nals.    The  rest  are  originals. 

Fig*.   8. — In   the  centre   of  the   pattern   is  seen   a 

1  Z.f.E.  xxvi.  172.  2  E.g.  "sembilang"  fish. 


,  hap,  ix  SAKA1  OF  PERAK  477 


male  Argus  pheasant  ("  kuang ")  with  its  two  long 
tail-feathers  covered  with  '*<\  The  wheel  ihaped 

in. irks  at    A    represent    these    "«\<    .,  '    the    di  .<    shaped 

marks  at    l>  its  wings.     To  the  left  oi  this   bird   is 

portrayed    a    long,    reddish -yellow    millipede,    its    head 

looking  in  the  direction  of  the  Argus's  tail.  The 
dotted  lines  running  parallel  to  the  millipede  on  its 

right    and    left    represent     the    tracrs    that     it     lea\ 
behind   on    the    flesh    of  any  person    whom  it  attacks. 

To  the  right  of  the  Argus  are  shown  two  blue 
scorpions  in  the  act  of  approaching  each  other.  The 
object  confronting  each  of  their  stings  represents  the 
swelling  that  forms  in  the  flesh  of  any  person  stung 
by  them.  The  female  of  this  kind  of  scorpion  is 
considered  more  poisonous  than  the  male,  and  is  said 
to  produce  double  perforations  when  it  stings.1  Hence 
the  double  row  of  dots  at  C  denotes  the  effect  of  the 
female's  sting,  the  single  row  at  D  the  sting  of  the  male. 

The  original  pattern  was  incised  upon  one  of  these 
bamboo  "  tuang-tuang,"  and  the  interpretation  given 
to  Vaughan-  Stevens  was  that,  "  since  the  Argus 
pheasant  lives  on  scorpions  and  millipedes,  its  help 
is  summoned  against  them  by  striking  this  bamboo 
upon  the  ground.'"2 

Fig\  9  (a  copy  like  Fig.  8).3 — The  illustration 
shows  three  rows  of  designs,  separated  by  lines, 
which  ran  completely  round  the  original  bamboo.  The 
man  who  copied  this  drawing  for  Vaughan -Stevens 
took  only  a  half-stem  instead  of  the  whole,  because 
it  was  easier  to  hold  on  the  knee  while  the  figures 
were  being  incised  with  the  chopper  ("parang  "). 

1   This  distinction,  perhaps,  maybe  2  Z.f.E.  xxvi.  173.     For  more  con- 

due  to  a  tradition  of  the  double-stinged  ventionalised  Argus  patterns,  v.  Fast. 
scorpion.  Mai.  17-26.  3  Ibid.  pp.   174,   175. 


47S  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ii 


The  central  row  is  of  special  interest,  as  it  shows 
how  the  Sakai  draw  elevations  as  ground-plans.  The 
central  figure  represents  a  Sakai  house,  the  structure 
being  raised  on  posts  and  lashed  together  with  rattan. 
The  floor  of  these  houses  is  raised,  as  a  rule,  two  or 
three  feet  above  the  earth,  is  of  split  bamboo,  and  a 
roughly  made  wooden  ladder  leads  up  to  it  ;  the 
interior  is  divided  by  a  partition  made  of  split  bamboo 
slivers,  tree-bark,  or  leaves.  One  of  the  rooms  thus 
formed  (at  the  back)  serves  as  a  bedroom  for  the 
married  inmates,  the  other  (the  front  one)  being  set 
aside  for  cooking  purposes,  as  well  as  for  sitting  in, 
and  for  the  reception  of  guests.  At  one  end  of  this 
front  room  is  a  small  square  wooden  box,  which 
is  filled  up  with  earth  to  form  the  hearth.  The 
two  gable-ends  of  the  roof  are  filled  in  with  palm- 
leaves  ("  atap  ")  fastened  to  light  slats  to  prevent  the 
rain  from  entering.  The  sides  of  the  house  consist 
of  upright  sticks,  with  horizontal  cross-pieces,  to  which 
latter  palm -leaves  are  fastened  as  before.  Thus  the 
drawing  is  to  be  explained  as  follows  : — 

A  is  the  track  leading  to  the  house. 

B  is  the  house-ladder. 

C1  the  cooking-room. 

C2  the  sleeping-room. 

D  a  doorway  (without  door). 

E  the  partition. 

F  the  hearth  or  fireplace. 

G  the  side  walls  (except  the  front  one). 

H  H  the  palm-thatched  gables  of  the  roof. 

J  the  back  gable-end. 

The  lowest  panel  with  the  dotted  lines  represents 
a  rice-field  ("  padi  ")  near  the  house.1 

1  Z.f.E.  xxvi.  175. 


I 


^      <o 


« 


5*r 


^-..  •:.■■■■    .^\/V 


R3 


Wj 


Fig.  12. — Hut-Building  Charm  (to 
facilitate  collection  of  materials] 

Original  width.  72  cm. 


/  Taughan-Stevens. 
Fig.   13. — Charm  for  Driving 
away  Demons. 

Original  width,  71  cm. 


Vol.  I.  p.  479. 


<  map.  ix  SAKA1  <  >/■  PERAh 


in  ilit*  upper  panel  .uc  represented  at  Fig.  i  the 
rice-stamper  which  the  Sakai,  like  the  Malays,  use  for 
pounding  rice  out  oi  the  husk  (a)  is  the  rice  mortar, 
(/>)  the  trestles  supporting  the  rice  stamper,  (c) and  (</) 

the    stamper   as    il    falls    into    the    mortar,    and    (r)    the 
extremity  of  the  stamper. 

Fig,  9  portrays  a  tortoise  ;    Fig.  3  a  frog. 

Fig.  4    is    the    sieve    used    lor   winnowing    the    rice 

when  pounded. 

Fig,    5   represents  a   mouse  ;   Fig.    6   a   squirrel — 

recognisable  by  its  bushy  tail. 

The  entire  design  is  a  rain-charm,  the  effect  of 
the  rain  being  symbolised  by  a  tortoise  and  frog, 
which  enter  the  rice-field,  the  mice  and  squirrels  which 
come  after  the  rice  (when  it  is  already  gathered  in) 
being  expelled  thereby. 

Fig-.  10. — Original  drawing  of  a  "  tuang-tuang."  l 

The  seven  long  stripes,  where  the  outer  cuticle 
of  the  bamboo  has  been  peeled  off,  represent  the 
seven  bamboos  already  mentioned.2  The  figures  at 
A  stand  for  a  house-floor  (an  abbreviated  symbol  or 
emblem  standing  for  the  whole  house.)  The  dots  at 
the  bottom  represent  the  hearth. 

At  B  are  shown  the  bristles  of  a  wild  pig,  which 
are  introduced  as  symbolising  game  that  has  been  slain 
and  brought  home.  At  D  is  the  pig's  carcase.  At  C 
are  the  ants  which  devour  its  flesh  ;  and  at  E  the  nest 
in  which  they  live. 

The  general  design  is  intended  to  keep  the  ants 
at  a  distance,  and  the  bamboo  that  bears  it  is  very 
often  given  into  the  charge  of  one  of  the  children, 
who  proceeds  to  strike  it  upon  the  house  -  floor 
whenever  there  is  boar-flesh  about,  if  ants  are  seen 

1  Z.  /  £.  xxvi.  177.  -   Cf.  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  129. 


480  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ii 

approaching.  The  Sakai  believe  that  the  hollow  sound 
of  the  bamboo,  together  with  the  vibration  of  the 
floor-timbers  struck  by  the  instrument,  will  drive 
away  the  insects.1 

Fig*.  11. — Original  drawings  of  a  "  tuang-tuang  " 
intended  for  protecting  the  person  against  two  forms 
of  skin-disease,  one  of  which  produces  white  leprous- 
like  ulcers,  and  the  other  hard  knobs  on  and  under 
the  skin.  To  take  the  bottom  of  the  picture  first 
(the  open  end  of  the  bamboo  being  uppermost) 
—  at  A  are  shown  a  number  of  frog-holes  in  the 
banks  of  a  river.  The  dots  and  lines  represent 
these  holes  as  they  appear  in  the  soft  mud,  some 
(at  A)  being  under  water,  others  (at  B)  above  it. 
Above  this  figure,  from  which  it  is  separated  by  a 
ring-line,  are  portrayed  (at  B)  a  number  of  frogs' 
legs,  which  are  introduced  as  an  abbreviated 
symbol  of  the  frogs  themselves,  completely  con- 
ventionalised. Above  these  frogs  (at  C)  are  a 
number  of  elliptical  figures,  said  to  represent  rows 
of  ant-heaps. 

Other  objects  represented  by  these  figures  are  (i) 
a  Disease  3  whose  effect  is  compared  to  the  biting  of 
ants,  and  (2)  the  torso  of  a  victim  of  the  Disease 
referred  to. 

Out  of  the  ground  (at  D)  grow  creepers,  which  are 
represented  (by  means  of  interlaced  lines)  as  climbing 
round  the  stems  of  trees,  the  short  horizontal  strokes 
between  the  interlacing  figures  symbolising  the  stems 
of  the  lianas.  The  still  shorter  strokes  on  the  outer 
side  of  the  interlaced  creepers  show  if  they  are 
prickles   and   thorns,  or   (when   they   are   mere   dots) 

1  Z.f.E.  xxvi.   176.  2  lb.  pp.  1-77-179. 

3  Probably  Mai.  " semut-semutan,"  or  "  cramp,"  lit.  the  "  creeping  of  ants.'" 


CHAT.     I\ 


SAKA1  OF  PERAK 


the  claw  marks  ol  animals  on  the  baric1  Directly 
under  the  nut;  line,  which  divides  this  panel  from  the 
one  above  it,  >"<'  to  be  seen,  between  the  lianas,  four 
minute  figures  (numbered  i  t<>  4)  which  arc  said  to 
represent  a  bird,  a  butterfly,  a  caterpillar,  and  a  tr 
frog  respectively.  The  panel  (E)  above  the  ring-line 
represents  various  stages  in  the  growth  of  a  tn 
Reading  this  from  right  to  left,  we  commence  with 
the  broad  black  stripe  signifying  the  leafless  tree- 
trunk.  To  the  left  of  this  there  follow  live  similar 
figures,  which  represent  fully  developed  leaves.  1" 
the  left  of  this  again  is  a  black  stem,  with  leaf-drawing 
on  the  right  side  only  ;  these  represent  the  young 
and  undeveloped  leaves  at  the  top  of  the  tree.  Re- 
turning to  the  right  of  the  panel,  we  come  to  a  black 
stem  with  zigzag  figures  (yy)  on  each  side  of  it ; 
these  zigzag  lines  represent  twigs. 

The  cross-hatched  figure  to  the  left  of  this  latter 
stem  (2  2)  represents  the  extremity  of  the  creepers 
(which  are  shown  in  the  panel  next  below),  and  signifies 
that  these  creepers,  starting  from  the  ground,  have 
reached  the  topmost  branches  of  the  tree.2 

Still  further  to  the  left  (next  to  the  stem  with  the 
branches)  is  represented  the  topmost  shoot  of  the 
tree  with  its  leaves  still  undeveloped.  The  lower 
part  of  the  tree  is  of  some  interest. 

The  broad  part  of  the  stem  is  portrayed  by  peeling 
off  a  thin   strip  of  the  outer  cuticle  of  the   bamboo. 


1   In  the  German  original,  a  sentence  a  case  would  necessarily  run  in  a  vert:- 

here  follows  to  the  effect  that  the  short  cal   direction   instead    of   a    horizontal 

cross  -  strokes    between    each    pair    of  one. 

creepers  represent   two  lines    of   ants,  2  Z.f.  E.  xxvi.  178.   Some  of  V.  -St. 's 

which  are  portrayed  as  running  up  and  explanations  in  this  and   the  following 

down    the   creepers.      This  statement,  ten  pages  seem  far-fetched,  and  should 

however,  conflicts  with  what  goes  im-  be  received  with  caution.     He  gives  no 

mediately  before,  as  the  strokes  in  such  localities. 

VOL.  I  2  I 


482  DECORATIVE  ART  part  n 


This  treatment,  however,  is  only  continued  up  to  a 
certain  point,  and  then  the  stem  shrinks  suddenly 
together  to  a  single  line  ;  this  is  to  signify  the  diminu- 
tion in  size  of  the  tree  towards  the  top.  Above  this 
panel  there  is  a  repetition  of  the  pattern  already  de- 
scribed at  C,  but  in  this  case  the  three  rows  of  the 
pattern  are  explained  as  representing  the  spots  on 
the  skin  caused  by  the  Disease,  these  spots  being 
described  as  resembling  "  melon-seeds,"  and  as  break- 
ing out  upon  the  head,  the  body,  and  the  feet,  thus 
necessitating  the  three  rows  of  the  pattern. 

The  topmost  panel  (above  the  one  just  described) 
represents  fish-scales,  which  signify  the  leprous  scales 
caused  by  the  Disease,  and  which  are  again  repeated 
in  three  rows,  corresponding  as  before  to  the  head, 
body,  and  feet  of  the  patient.  They  are  multiplied 
in  order  to  denote  that  if  not  cured  they  will  gradu- 
ally spread  over  the  whole  body.  Near  the  right 
extremity  of  this  panel  are  to  be  seen  a  number  of 
dots  on  the  scales  ;  these  are  meant  to  signify  the 
last  stage  of  the  disease,  which  is  marked  by  incur- 
able ulcers  out  of  which  blood  comes.  They  are 
said  to  resemble  the  sores  which  come  from  wounds 
inflicted  by  the  poisonous  spines  of  a  kind  offish.1 

The  entire  design  is  a  survival  of  a  charm- 
pattern  which  was  employed  by  the  ancient  Sakai 
magicians.2 

Fig.  12. — Pattern  of  a  "  tuang-tuang  "  resembling 
Fig.  ii,  the  open  end  of  the  bamboo  being  in  this 
case  at  the  bottom.3 

1  There  can,  I  think,  be  no  doubt  sented,  too,  may  quite  possibly  re- 
whatever,  from  what  I  myself  saw  of  semble  the  "  bidara  pahit,"  which 
small-pox  on  the  east  coast,  and  from  the  east  coast  Malays  employ  in  their 
what  I  remember  of  native  descriptions  ceremonies  for  warding  off  the  attacks 
of  the  symptoms,  that  this  pattern  was  of  the  Small-pox  Demon, 
a  small-pox   charm.      The  tree   repre-  2  Z.f.  E.  xxvi.  179.  3  Ibid. 


<  map.  ix  SAKA1  OF  PI  RAh 


I  he  hatching  in  the  lowt  Bf  panel  represem  i  the 

wall  oi  a  house,  .is  symbolising  tin-  house  itself.  I  he 
figures  A  A  sure  partially  burn!  trees,  which  have 
remained  standing  alter  the  Felling  and  burning  ol  -» 
clearing.     To   the   left   <>t   these   trees  (at    B)  is   a 

yroung    "  bertam  "-palm     leal     placed     upright    (in     its 

natural  position).  At  C  is  shown  a  branch  or  tree- 
stem  forked  at  both  ends,  stems  of  this  kind  being 
used  as  props  or  trestles. 

The  next  three  figures  to  tile  left  of  these  are 
also  "  beriam  "-leaves  (one  upright  and  two  upside 
down),  the  upright  ones  representing  the  central  or 
inner  leaves  of  the  palm,  and  the  remaining  pair  the 
outer  ones  (which  are  forced  outwards  and  downwards 
as  the  inner  ones  expand).  At  D  there  follows  a  tree 
(either  blown  down  by  the  wind,  or  perhaps  uprooted 
by  human  agency),  which  is  shown  lying  ready  for  its 
stem  to  be  split. 

At  E  we  have  a  leaf  of  the  "  langkap  "-  (Licuala) 
palm,  such  as  is  sometimes  used  for  thatching  in 
substitution  for  "  bertam  "  (Eugeissona).  Above  this 
are  drawings  which  symbolise  house-building  material. 

a.  This  represents  a  creeper  in  full  leaf.  Whenever 
this  creeper  (which  is  used  for  the  house-lashings)  is 
pulled  down  from  the  top  of  the  tree  up  which  it  has 
climbed,  it  falls  in  coils  on  the  ground.  These  are 
symbolised  by  the  duplication  of  the  lower  part  of  the 
figure.1 

b.  Left  of  this  is  the  figure  at  b  ;  the  lower  part  of 
which  represents  a  kind  of  rough  ladder  by  means 
of  which  the  roof  (of  the  half-built  house)  can  be 
reached;  half-way  up  comes  a  break  showing  the 
place  where  the  roof  is  joined  on,  and  above  that  we 

1  Z.f.  E.  xxvi.  179. 


484  DECORATIVE  ART  pari  ii 

see  the  roof-timbers,  which  serve  here  as  a  substitute 
for  the  ladder  by  which  the  ridge  of  the  gable  is 
reached. 

c.  The  figure  at  c  (representing  the  roof-frame  ?) 
is  in  contact  with  the  roof  (6) ;  the  lower  half  repre- 
sents the  thatch-work  ("  atap  ")  of  "  bertam  "-leaves. 

d.  Two  rattans  (cane-creepers)  intertwined  (to- 
gether with  their  leaves)  are  seen  at  d  (cf.  Fig.  13). 

e.  At  e  we  have  rude  steps  which  are  ascended  by 
the  worker  when  he  wishes  to  detach  the  rattans  from 
the  summits  of  the  trees. 

f.  Joined  to  the  thatch  at  f  are  small  figures 
symbolising  the  freshly  cut  leaf  and  the  slat  of  thatch 
made  out  of  it. 

g.  The  figure  at  g  represents  a  long  zigzag  path, 
the  windings  of  which  denote  the  obstacles  round 
which  the  cut  "  ataps "  have  to  be  carried  in  the 
jungle  before  they  can  be  brought  to  their  destination. 

The  complete  design  is  a  charm  to  assist  the 
builder  of  a  house  in  finding  and  using  the  materials 
he  requires. 

Fig.  13. — The  tradition  explaining  the  origin 
of  this  pattern  is  now,  alas  !  no  longer  current,  and 
for  each  of  the  figures  two  different  versions  were 
given.  This  bamboo  had  descended  from  father  to 
son  for  three  generations,  and  was  universally  recog- 
nised as  a  charm  -  pattern  intended  to  drive  away 
demons  seeking  shelter  on  cold  nights  in  the  warm 
upper  story  or  loft  in  the  roof.  The  various  figures 
of  the  pattern  were  still  universally  recognised — 
with  the  exception  of  some  about  which  nothing 
certain  was  known,  and  which  were  only  retained  in 
accordance  with  ancient  custom.  All  that  could  be 
remembered    with    regard    to    the    tradition    of  this 


-    II  A  I'.     IX 


SAKA1  OF  PERAK  4«S 


pattern  was  that  it  was  connected  in  some  way  with 
the  "  tabong  "  legend.     Beginning   at   the  open  end 
of  the  bamboo,  the  second  important  figure  was  the 
rattan  creeper,  but  the  significance  of  the  numero 
triangular  figures  could  not  be  made  out.     Only  in 

one    respect  was  opinion    unanimous.       The    rattan  re 

ferred  to  shows  fruit  and  leaves,  and  a  whip  will  be 
seen   in   the   same   figure.     Hence   the  conventional 

forms  of  the  rattan  depend    iii  each  case  upon    the  i 
which  is  to  be  made  of  it.1 

Fig.  14. — This  is  the  original  pattern  '  of  a  "  tuang- 
tuang"  which  is  sounded  by  those  who  are  about  to 
collect  the  acid  fruit  of  the  "  nipah-  "  or  thatch-palm 
(as  well  as  that  of  a  similar  sort  of  palm  called  "  k'lubi 
asam  "  in  Malay)  before  entering  the  swamp  in  which 
they  grow.  These  particular  fruits  are  employed  as 
spices  by  the  Sakai.  The  palms  in  question  resemble 
the  "  bertam  "-palm  in  being  stemless.  The  leaves 
grow  out  of  the  ground  in  a  great  tuft,  and  the  root- 
clump  itself,  swelling  gradually  as  the  plant  gets 
older,  forms  a  small  hillock  in  the  swampy  ground. 
These  hillocks  are  full  of  scolopendra  attracted  by  the 
fruit,  which  always  grows  upon  a  thick  stem,  suspended 
only  a  few  centimetres  above  the  surface  of  the  ground. 
Because  of  these  scolopendra  the  women  are  not 
allowed,  as  a  rule,  to  pick  the  fruit,  which  is  the 
business  of  the  men. 

The  figures  depicted  at  a  in  the  top  panel  of  the 
design  are  the  typical  "  frogs'-leg  "  pattern,  which  are 
said  to  be  always  used  as  the  symbol  ofa"  swamp." 

The  fact  that  the  figures  are  represented  both  at 
the  top  and  the  bottom  signifies  that  the  entire  region 
where  the  fruit  grows  is  swampy.     The  panel  marked 

1  Z.f.E.  xxvi.  181.  2  Ibid.  pp.  182,  183.  3  Nipa  fruiicans. 


486  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ii 

^  represents  the  interlacing  of  palm -leaves  amid 
vegetation  of  such  luxuriance  that  a  passage  has  to 
be  cut  through  it  with  a  chopper  ("  parang").  At 
each  side  of  the  pattern  a  simple  zigzag  line  (b  b) 
runs  upwards.  This  represents  a  series  of  scattered 
root-hillocks  belonging  to  the  palms  on  the  landward 
side  of  the  swamp.  The  figures  at  c  (the  right-hand 
bottom  corner  of  the  design)  represent  a  slight  rising 
of  the  ground  at  the  point  from  which  the  swamp  has 
been  entered.  The  panel  next  above  d  represents 
clumps  of  dead  palm-stumps,  the  decay  of  which  leaves 
an  open  pathway  composed  of  earth  that  is  soft  on 
the  top.  Such  a  pathway,  however,  often  conceals 
the  pointed  growing  shoots  of  the  palms,  which,  as 
they  near  the  surface,  often  inflict  severe  wounds 
upon  the  naked  foot,  whereas  in  the  case  of  living 
"  nipah  "-palms,  which  have  a  firm  stem  to  support 
the  foot,  this  cannot  happen.  It  is  on  this  account 
that  the  outlines  of  the  hillocks  are  furnished  with 
points  on  the  inner  side.  When,  therefore,  the  fruit- 
gatherer  walks  across  these  hillocks  to  reach  the 
interior  of  the  swamp  (as  indeed  he  always  does  from 
the  land  side,  rather  than,  like  the  Malay,  in  a  boat 
from  the  water)  the  ground  gives  way  beneath  him 
and  he  sinks  in.  The  surface  of  the  hillocks  is 
heaped  with  dead  sticks  and  leaves,  and  if  the  fruit- 
gatherer  happens  to  sink  deeper  still  till  he  reaches 
another  hillock  lying  underneath,  his  foot  is  not  un- 
likely to  come  in  contact  with  sharp  shoot -points 
below  the  surface  (e).  Farther  on  he  comes  to  the 
great  leaf-tufts  and  the  "  nipah  "  fruits,  which  latter 
look  not  unlike  a  gigantic  bunch  of  grapes  protruding 
from  between  the  leaf-stems  on  the  hillocks  round 
the   palm-clumps.      The   figure   at  f  represents   one 


Fig.  14. — Charm  to.  send  Centi- 
pedes    TO     SLEEP     AND     PROTECT 

Gatherers  of  u  Nipah  "-Fruit, 

Original  width.  _>6  cm. 


Vaughan-S: 

Fig.  15. — Charm  against  Venomous  Spiders. 

Oriszinal  width,  28  cm 


Vol.  I.  p.  486. 


■*$fflte^fi^^ 


chap,  ix  SAJCAJ  <>/■  PERAK 

oi  these  bunches  of  fruit  and  that  at  g  the  hillock 
itself.     Over  this  (at  k)  is  portrayed  a  millipede,  and 
at  i  the  track  of  the  same  insect.     The  track  ol  the 
millipede  as  it  creeps  to  and  fro  on  the  leaf-stems 
indicated  l>y  two  drawings  of  millipedes  looking   in 

opposite  directions. 

The  object  of  the  charm  is  to  cause  the  "  milli- 
pedes to  fold  their  legs  together  and  sleep,"  so  as  not 
to  be  able  to  injure  any  one  engaged  in  plucking  tin- 
fruit.  At  the  right  side  of  the  figure  (at  k)  a  sleeping 
millipede  is  shown.1 

Fig*.  15. — Among  the  great  variety  of  spiders  in  the 
Peninsula  there  is  a  poisonous  one  that  spins  its  web 
at  about  a  man's  height  in  the  jungle.'2  According  to 
the  aborigines,  it  is  the  male  that  spins  the  thread  and 
directs  the  prey  towards  the  female,  who  sits  in  the 
web  guarding  it. 

The  angles  (called  "  elbows  ")  at  the  right  of  the 
pattern  (a)  represent  tree- branches,  and  the  female 
spider  (the  lower  figure)  is  seated  upon  them.  The 
female  spider  in  this  case  has  a  superfluous  leg,  which 
extends  to  figure  b  at  the  left  of  the  figure. 

Such  superfluous  limbs  are  not  unusual  in  the 
drawings  of  the  wilder  Sakai.  They  are  not  due  to 
want  of  observation,  but  to  want  of  calculation.  The 
more  Malayized  Sakai  would  never  commit  such  an 
error.3 

1  Z.f.E.  xxvi.  p.  183.  reckon  the  two  additional  legs,  and  it 

2  Ibid.  pp.  184,  1S5.  did  not  occur  to  him  to  help  himself 

3  When  Vaughan- Stevens  saw  the  out  by  means  of  the  other  hand, 
mistake  in  the  figure  he  pointed  it  out  After  two  or  three  failures,  he  took  a 
to  the  Sakai  who  brought  it.  The  number  of  twigs  in  his  hand,  and  laid 
latter,  taken  aback,  counted  the  legs  them  on  each  of  the  legs  of  the  figure 
by  laying  each  of  the  fingers  of  one  in  succession.  Then  he  caught  a  spider 
hand  in  turn  upon  each  of  the  legs  of  and  killed  it,  and  compared  it  for  some 
the  spider.  After  thus  counting  up  to  time  with  the  drawing  without  being 
five,    he   appeared   not   to   be  able   to  able  to  see  clearly  where  the  mistake 


488  DECORATIVE  ART  part  ii 

Other  Sakai  drawings  of  spiders  have  five  legs, 
but  in  this  specimen  we  sometimes  see  seven  and 
sometimes  eight.  Perhaps  the  mistake  may  have 
arisen  from  copying  an  older  pattern.  The  fact  that 
the  male  spider  (in  the  centre  of  the  figure)  has  two 
rows  of  legs,  instead  of  one,  was  explained  as  indicat- 
ing that  these  spiders  do  not  remain  in  one  place,  but 
run  to  and  fro. 

The  Sakai  believe  too  that  the  spiders  have  fangs 
or  jaws  like  the  millipedes,  but  that  they  are  too  small 
to  be  seen.  As  already  mentioned,  the  "  spider's 
feet  "  at  the  edge  belong  to  the  female  ;  the  explana- 
tion being  that  the  spider  is  supposed  to  have  run 
along  the  thread. 

Near  one  of  the  right  feet  of  the  female  is  to  be 
seen  a  small  round  figure  surrounded  by  short  strokes. 
This  is  the  young  one,  which  the  female  is  supposed 
to  be  tending. 

The  figure  on  the  body  of  the  male  is  incorrectly 
drawn,  but  has  no  significance. 

The  upper  part  of  this  pattern  is  of  special 
interest.  It  represents  the  stony  side  of  a  hill — a 
locality  where  these  spiders  are  supposed  to  be 
specially  numerous. 

The  figure  c  towards  the  upper  half  of  the  drawing 
indicates  a  hill  emerging  into  a  sand-covered  plain 
(like  the  plains  which  lie  near  rivers).  Over  this 
again  rise  hill-ridges,  represented  by  a  figure  that 
appears  to  possess  three  separate  types,  denoting 
respectively  (1)  projecting  rocky  masses,  (2)  simple 
rocky  or  stony  ground,  and  (3)  water-courses.1 

was.      At  last  he  tore  off  the  legs  of  were  not  enough   to  go  round.       The 

his  victim,  and  laid  them  in  succession  only  thing  he  then  said  was   "  silap  " 

on  those  of  the  figure,  when   he  was  (mistake), 

highly    astonished    to    find    that   there  1  Z.f.  E.  xxvi.  184. 


i  i.m  (A  .//  0/  PERAK 

The     dots    denote     "  1«m\  I  or    vci'/miioii,    / 

etc.     Slopes  covered  with  forest  ar<  al  oshown, 
wnli  their  summits  bare  oi  vegetation,     The  cun 

|  which  reach  to  the  centre  oi  the  pattern  repn  sent 

a    ravine   which    is  only  wooded  .it  the   upper  part, 

where  the  trees  oi  the  surrounding  jungle  are  shown. 

1  he  vertical   lines  are    the  trunks  of  the  trees,  the 

curves  |  5  |  their  branches,  and  the  dots  their  leav< 

The  boughs  at  the  right  are  leafless.      Then  follow 

tWO  columns  of  leafy  trees,  and  a  third  (leafless)  one 
with  lianas,  orchids,  etc.,  growing  upon  its  dead 
branches.  Above  these,  at  the  rim  of  the  pattern, 
the  signs  [^^]  represent  long  rattans  and  similar 
creepers  climbing  from  tree  to  tree. 

The  figure  is  the  copy  of  a  "  tuang-tuang  "  pattern 
— a  picture  of  the  forest  as  the  draughtsman  had 
probably  often  observed  it.1 

Fig*.  16. — Like  Fig.  15  this  is  only  a  copy  of  one 
of  these  patterns,  with  which  the  owner  absolutely- 
refused  to  part.  The  original  was  intended  to  serve 
as  a  charm  to  assist  the  women  in  catching  small 
fish,  and  at  the  same  time  to  afford  them  some 
slight  protection  against  poisonous  fishes.  Towards 
the  left,  at  the  bottom,  is  depicted  a  big  tortoise  ;  a 
little  to  its  right,  a  small  one  and  a  rather  larger 
one  ;  these  three,  which  typify  a  male,  a  female,  and 
a  young  one,  are  meant  to  symbolise  the  amount 
of  the  booty.  In  the  extreme  left-hand  (bottom) 
corner  is  a  fishing-rod,  which  is  drawn  upside  down. 
The  rather  thicker  black  line  represents  the  rod, 
the  black  spot  near  its  foot  the  reel,  and  the  thinner 
line  the  line  itself.  In  the  centre  of  the  right-hand 
border  are  to  be  seen  three  rice-spoons  of  an  ancient 

1  Z.f.  E.  xxvi.  185. 


490  DECORA  TIVE  ART  part  ii 


type,  consisting  of  a  wooden  handle  with  a  bowl 
made  from  a  kind  of  shell.  A  little  to  the  left  of 
these  spoons  stands  a  water-bird,  the  species  of  which 
could  not  be  ascertained.  It  has,  however,  webbed 
feet  and  a  pouch  under  its  beak.  Further  to  the  left 
are  two  frogs.  Above  the  spoons,  in  the  right-hand 
top  corner,  stands  a  mangrove-bush,  such  as  grows  in 
the  salt-water  swamps.  The  central  figure  of  the 
pattern  is  a  rattan  creeper  of  the  kind  called  "  manau," 
which  frequently  grows  at  the  mouths  of  rivers.  The 
vertical  lines  [==|==]  are  stems  of  this  creeper  with  its 
formidable  thorns,  the  cross  -  strokes  its  leaves. 
Between  these  two  rattan-stems,  and  just  above  them, 
one  of  the  prickly  leaf-whips  of  the  same  plant  is 
shown,  the  prickles  being  so  formidable  as  to  have 
earned  from  the  Malays  the  name  of  "  tiger-claws." 
In  the  left-hand  top  corner  is  depicted  a  scorpion, 
which  serves  as  a  sort  of  hieroglyph  indicating  the 
word  "  scorpion-tail,"  as  the  Sakai  name  these  "  tiger- 
claw  "  thorns.1 

Fig.  17,  like  Figs.  15  and  16,  is  the  copy  of  one 
of  these  instruments  ("  tuang-tuang  ")  with  which  the 
owner  would  not  part.  This  pattern  is  intended  as  a 
charm  to  protect  the  growing  crops  and  the  plantations 
round  the  house  from  injury  by  animals.  In  the 
lowest  (third)  division  of  the  pattern  are  to  be  seen — 
(1)  the  house  itself,  and  (2)  near  the  house  (at  A)  a 
figure  which  looks  like  a  ladder.  This  figure  repre- 
sents the  steps,  which  consist  of  small  logs  thrown 
into  the  mud  and  dirt  in  order  to  make  the  soft 
ground  passable.  Around  the  house  there  is  a  field 
planted  with  sweet  potatoes.  The  round  white 
figures  on  stalks  [ o]  at  B  are  the  leaves  of  the 

1  Z.f.E.  xxvi.  186. 


,  hap.  i\  SAJCAJ  OF  PERAK 


plant  ;  the  dark  ones  the  edible  tubei  The  plant  to 
the  right  at  C  is  supposed  to  be  growing,  as  it  appear .. 
.u  the  loot  of  a  slope,  and  the  smaller  one,  shown  upside 
down  at  the  bottom  (near  I)),  appears  to  be  growing 
nw  the  hill.     The  Sakai  Frequently  clear  the  side  o 

hill  for  their  small  plantations  and   huts.      The  entire 

landscape,  indeed,  is  hilly,  and  the  valleys  are  mostly  so 
overgrown  with  vegetation  that  a  successful  clearing 

Cannot  possibly  be  made  without  good  implements.1 

The  central  division  of  the  pattern  is  occupied   by 
several   kinds  of  plants,   divided    from   each    other    by 
six  dead  trees,  which  arc  denoted  by  vertical  strok' 
Starting    from    the    right,    we    see,    in    the    intervals 
between     these     trees,     (i)     maize,     (2)     yams     or 
"keladi"  (C alodium),  with  their  edible  tubers,  then 
three    sugar-canes,   which    are  throwing  out  (edible) 
shoots  at   the  root.       Next  we  again  see  maize  and 
tapioca  ("  ubi  kayu  "),  the  latter  with  its  edible  root- 
tubers  ;   then  come  two  plants,  one  above  the  other, 
the   upper   one   being  a  species  of  yam  with  tubers, 
and  the  lower  one  a  banana  tree  with  young  banana 
shoots.     The  dots  around   the  plants  denote  a  con- 
siderable growth  of  grass.      The   uppermost  part  of 
the   figure    contains   the   animals   against   which   this 
charm  is  directed.     Above,  at  the  right-hand  corner, 
is  to  be  seen  a  caterpillar,  with  a  rat  underneath  it ; 
then  follow  (on  the  left)  two  monitors  or  "lace-lizards" 
(such    as    steal    hens'    eggs).        Beside    each    of    the 
monitors  stands  a  leafy  tree,  representing  the  favourite 
hiding-place  of  these  reptiles.     The  large  trees,  which 
are  often  left  standing  in  the  clearing,  then  form  the 
hiding-places  referred  to  ;   the  little  strokes  that  cover 
each  side  of  their  stems  represent  the  running  up  and 

1  Z.f.E.  xxvi.  187. 


A9z  DECORATIVE  ART  pari  n 


down  of  these  reptiles  at  night-time.  In  the  left- 
hand  top  corner  a  tortoise  with  her  young  one  is  to 
be  seen.  The  crescent-shaped  figure  is  meant  for  a 
puddle,  denoting  the  home  of  the  reptile  in  question.1 

Fig*.  18. — Copy  of  a  "  tuang-tuang,"  which  the 
owner  refused  to  sell.  It  serves  as  a  charm  to 
produce  rain  when  a  light  monsoon  (and  consequent 
drought)  is  damaging  the  rice -fields.  The  figures 
[//////]  represent  rain  driven  by  the  wind,  the  strokes 
a  violent  downpour,  the  dots  the  drops  ;  [////]  is  the 
north-east,  [///]  is  the  south-west  monsoon.  The 
lines  of  rain  indicated  by  these  curves  typify  a 
tempest.  The  repetition  of  the  rain-motive  denotes 
"  much  rain."  Near  these  rain-figures  is  a  double 
row  of  tortoise  eggs  as  symbols  of  the  tortoise,  which 
in  its  own  turn  represents  moisture,  wet,  dirt,  etc. 
Down  the  centre  there  runs  a  row  of  figures 
representing  young  "kepayang"  ("piyung")  fruits. 
The  "  kepayang "  begins  to  develop  its  fruit  when 
the  rainy  season  commences,  and  its  ripened  fruit  drops 
as  the  season  ends — which  explains  the  symbolism. 
There  are  certainly  some  kinds  of  "  kepayang"  trees 
that  bring  forth  their  fruits  in  other  months,  and  the 
Sakai,  when  shown  these  trees,  remarked  that  the  rainy 
season  was  the  season  in  which  the  "kepayang"  trees 
of  his  ancestors  ripened.  What  the  real  explanation 
may  be  is  not  known,  but  most  probably  the  tradition 
of  the  Sakai  is  quite  correct,  even  if  one  cannot 
explain  it  in  every  detail.2 

Magic  combs  are  also  found  among  the  Sakai,  but 
little  is  known  of  them.  They  usually  have  more 
teeth  than  the  Semang  ones.3 

1  Z.f.E.  xxvi.  1 88.  2  Ibid. 

s  See,  however,  Martin,  703,  and  cp.  p.  423,  n.  I,  ante. 


li»'«>    I     J   :-  — 


Brit.  Mus. 

Kuan  i  ax  Dart-Quiver. 

(See  al>  >  y.  313.) 
For  rubbings  of  Besisi  and  Blan  las  blowpipe  patterns,  vide  Appendix.] 


I  '<»/.  /.  /.  492. 


Blagden. 
K  i.ik.ip  (  hamai  "  :  tln>  "  >>kdi  "  (ornamental  design 
on  the  blowpipe,   Mai.   "  ukir  ")  is  so  called  because  it 
imitates  the  growth  of  the  wild  "sirih"  or  betel-vine 
(••  i  hamai  "). 


Blagden. 
"  Okeh  le-it  hubi,"  Mai.  "ukir  lilit  ubi,"  compared 
to  the  intersecting  branches  of  an  ''  ubi  "  (tuber). 


Mantra  Patterns. 


Skeat  Collection. 


Bksisi  Zoomorphs. 


Centipede  on  Besisi  flute,  bought  from  the  performer.      Lizard  on  shaft  of  Besisi  blowpipe. 

(See  also  p.  309,  ante.) 


Vol.  I.  /.  493. 


i  ha]  A  VAGI     >'  U  A  KS  AND   SEA-G  YP 

111.       |  akun     IN  D   O  RANG     I  •    :    i  . 

.V,  has  already  been  pointed  out  above,  no 
material  is  at  present  available  which  would  enable 
to  come  to  any  conclusion  with  regard  to  the  artistic 
work  of  the  Jakun.  The  patterns  employed  both  by 
the  Blandas  and  the  Besisi  showed  no  appreciable  d<-- 
parture  from  those  employed  by  the  Sakai.  Yet  it  is 
perhaps  worth  while  recording  that  the  same  practice 
that  has  been  recorded  among  the  Sakai  of  drawing 

the  part  of  a  figure  instead  of  the  whole  was  certainly 
well  understood  by  the  Besisi,  who  were  themseh 
the  first  to  inform  me  of  this  fact,  and  who  showed  me 
many  specimens  of  their  work  in  which  this  principle 
was  acted  upon.  The  commonest  Besisi  zoomorphs 
were  lizards,  centipedes,  and  the  "  lotong,"  the  long- 
tailed  "spectacle  monkey"  of  the  Peninsula,  of  which 
I  have  seen  drawings  both  on  their  blowpipes  and 
their  quivers,  and  although  as  a  rule  it  was  only  the 
bones,  or  in  some  cases  the  extremities  ("jari"  = 
fingers  and  toes),  that  were  represented,  every 
member  of  the  tribe  appeared  to  recognise  them, 
without  the  slightest  difficulty,  as  the  symbol  of  the 
Semnopithecus.  The  pattern  representing  it  bore 
some  resemblance  to  a  pattern  recorded  by  Mr. 
Blagden  among  the  Mantra  of  Malacca  ;  these  latter, 
however,  gave  it  the  name  of  "  krakap  chamai,"  or 
"  wild  betel-vine  shoots."  Another  pattern,  which 
Mr.  Blagden  sketched  at  the  same  time,  was  called 
"  le'it  hubf  "  or  "  entwined  tuber-shoots"  ( =  Mai.  "  lilit 
ubi  ").  But  these,  with  a  few  Kuantan  and  Mantra 
patterns  preserved  by  Vaughan-Stevens,  form  about 
all  the  material  at  present  available. 


CHAPTER    X. 

The  Social  Order. 

chiefs,  laws,  and  succession. 

A  striking  difference  between  the  three  races  is 
discernible  the  moment  the  question  of  social  or- 
ganisation is  approached.  The  Semang  have  at 
present  no  organised  body  of  chiefs,  and  though  it 
is  true  that,  according  to  Vaughan- Stevens,  they 
possessed  a  set  of  superior  chiefs  called  "  Putto " 
("  Puttow  "  or  "  Puttau  "),  and  a  set  of  inferior  chiefs 
called  "  Sna-hut,"  neither  title  has  yet  been  recorded  by 
any  other  observer,  and  all  that  we  know  at  present  from 
other  sources  is  that  the  tribal  heads  of  the  Semang 
tribes  were  called  "  Pelima"  (  =  Mai.  "  Penglima").  The 
Sakai,  again,  appear  to  possess  nothing  more  elaborate 
in  the  way  of  social  organisation  than  the  Semang, 
but  among  the  Jakun  of  the  south  we  have,  under 
the  tribal  Chief  or  Batin,  a  series  of  subordinate  chiefs 
called  respectively  "  J inang,"  "  Jukrah,"  "  Penghulu," 
4<  Penglima  " — a  state  of  things  which  points  to  a  com- 
paratively great  advance  on  the  part  of  the  race  in  the 
art  of  self-government.  And  it  is  also  significant  that 
the  titles  of  the  first  three  of  these  offices  (Batin,  Jinang, 
and  Jukrah)  are  very  rarely  found  north  of  Selangor, 
except  perhaps  in  some  of  the  scattered  communities 
of  the  Orang  Laut  on  the  western  sea-board  of  the 
Peninsula.     It  is,  in  fact,  among  these  very  Orang  Laut 

494 


(iiap.  n  Gk  SERAI   REMARK 

or  Sci  (akun  thai  this  system  oi  tribal  <  hiefs  and  mb- 
chiefs  is  most  fully  developed.1  in  other  words,  we 
here  have  evidence  that  the  aboriginal  Malayan  ra 
stands  upon  a  higher  social  plane  l  ban  either  tin-  Sakai 
or  the  Semang  a  tact  which  agrees  very  closely  with 
the  conclusions  derivable  from  other  grounds  of  com- 
parison.     This  fact,  however,  will  appear  still  more 

clearly  from  the  detailed  descriptions  of  social  customs 
to  follow,  i\o\  from  the  evidence  of  their  possessing 
some  knowledge  of  political  boundaries  a  knowledge 
which  both  the  Sakai  and  the  Negritos  fail  to  possess. 

To  sum  up,  every  portion  of  the  primitive  social 
fabric  reared  by  these  tribes  bears  the  clear  impn 
of  the  child -like  simplicity  and  trustfulness  that  lies 
at  the  root  of  their  character  ;  and  in  no  department  is 
this  more  evident  than  in  that  which  pertains  to  law  and 
public  order.  The  evidence  discovers  an  unappreciable 
amount  of  crime,  few  laws,  and  still  fewer  hard-and-fast 
penalties  fixed  for  the  non-observance  of  the  latter. 

De  Morgan  considers  that  the  laws  of  the  Sakai 
should  attract  attention,  not  only  from  the  fact  of  their 
forming  a  rudimentary  system  based  solely  on  customs 
which,  originating  in  the  peculiar  circumstances  and 
habits  of  the  people,  have  grown  to  possess  the 
authority  of  a  legal  code,  but  also  from  the  remark- 
able spirit  of  equality  and  fairness  which  this  primitive 
body  of  custom  exhibits,  and  which  is  calculated  to 
produce  a  high  impression  of  the  intellectual  worth  of 
the  race  that  made  it,  in  spite  of  their  having  always 
lived  apart  from  the  civilisation  of  their  neighbours.2 

1   Most    of    the   Jakun    tribes    have  was  inferior  to  the  Orang  Kaya,  though 

traditions  of  a  great  chief  of  their  own,  superior  to  the   Penghulu,  of  whom  he 

superior    even   to   the   Batin   {e.g.    the  had  several  under  him.     Misc.  Ess.,  I.e. 

Mantra,  Misc.  Ess.  re/.  Ind.,  Sec.  Ser.  p.  288.      It  is  here,  therefore,  that  we 

vol.  i.  p.  301);  and  in  the  old  consti-  must  look  for  the  Batin's  original  status, 
tutionof  the  kingdom  of  Johor  the  Batin  2  De  Morgan,  vii.  419. 


496  THE  SOCIAL  ORDER  pari  ii 

They  live  as  nomads  in  a  densely  forested  region,  in 
which,  as  a  rule,  they  make  small  clearings  or  planta- 
tions, remaining  in  one  place  for  this  purpose  during 
varying  periods  from  about  three  months  to  a  year, 
but  never  more.  When  they  migrate  and  form  fresh 
clearings  they  seldom  move  to  any  distance,  but  remain 
in  the  neighbourhood  in  order  to  gather  the  crops 
which  come  to  maturity  after  their  departure.1  Hence 
their  hunting  is  also  confined  within  definite  areas. 

They  thus  possess  the  characteristics  at  once  of 
nomadic  and  agricultural  races,  shunning  their  more 
civilised  neighbours,  and  only  engaging  in  trade  to  an 
altogether  negligible  extent." 

The  most  rudimentary  of  the  social  systems  that 
obtain  among  these  tribes  is  that  of  the  Semang,  who 
live  under  the  simplest  form  of  patriarchal  government. 

The  Semang  and  Jakun  chiefs  have  a  kind  of  regalia." 


I. — Semang. 

Kedah  Semang. — The  chief  of  each  Semang  tribe 
is  now  called  "  Pelima  "  (  =  Mai.  "  Penglima,"  the  "  Sna- 
hut"  of  Vaughan-Stevens).  Proof  is  still  required  of  the 
statement  that  there  were  till  recently  yet  greater  chiefs, 
who  possessed  a  more  extended  influence  and  were 
called  "  Puttos."  These,  if  they  ever  existed,  seem  to 
have  now  died  out,  at  least  in  name,  if  not  in  function. 

I  was  told  that  the  last  Big  Chief  ("  Pelima  Besar  ") 
of  the  Kedah  tribes  was  called  "  To'  Pelima  Chiak  " 
(or  "Old  Chieftain  Finch").  He  was  reputed  to  be 
invulnerable  ("beketok,"  i.e.  "  pachydermatous  through 
magic"),  and  hence  had  great  influence.  His  tribe  told 
me  he  once  kept  a  Malay  who  had  murdered  a  Semang 

1  De  Morgan,  vii.  419.  Semang);  510,  511  (of  the  Besisi) ;  and 

2  Ibid.  p.  420.  vol.  ii.  pp.  291    and   313,  note  (of  the 

3  See  vol.    i.  pp.   450,    455  (of   the       Jakun  of  Jelebu). 


cha]  NEGRITi  '.'>  "/■  KBDAH 

tied  up  to  a  tree  for  iwo  to  three  months,  until  a 
blood-fine  oi  twentj  three  <loll.ii"'>  was  paid.  I »»' 
Chiak  (though  even  he  died  not  long  afterwards) 
was,  moreover,  the  only  Semang  in  the  whole  country 
who  ever  entered  the  presence  ol  the  Raja  ol  Ked 

In  modern  days  tin-  Pelima's  authority  is  confined 
to  his  official  relations  with  his  people.  He  is,  how- 
ever, still  the  chief  medicine-man  ol  the  tribe,  and 
actively  follows  his  profession.1  His  duties  appear  in 
fact  to  be  practically  identical  with  those  oi  the  obsolete 
l\itto,  his  position  and  authority  being  practically  those 
of  the  head  of  a  family,  which  in  this  case  is  represented 
by  a  larger  family,  the  tribe. 

In  Kedah  the  tribal  chief  of  the  Semang  was  called 
(as  already  mentioned)  "  Pelima,"  but  in  Perak  the 
word  M  Penghulu  "  appears  to  be  more  general. 

Laws. 
Crime  among  the  Semang  appears  to  be  extremely 
rare,  but  I  was  given  by  the  Pelima  the  following  scale 
of  fines.  These,  however,  are  less  by  way  of  illus- 
trating the  precise  amounts  which  would  be  actually 
levied  in  each  case  than  the  general  principles  and 
proportions  according  to  which  the  amount  would  be 
determined. 

Theft  of  a  blowpipe  ....     $5.00 
Theft  of  a  bow  .....       6.00  2 
Theft  of  a  shot-gun  (European  blun- 
derbuss)    .....     10.00 
Abduction  of  a  married  woman  (nom- 
inally) .....     40.00 


3 


1  As    in    a    case    of    which    I    had  was  considered  a  greater  offence  than 
personal     cognizance,      cp.      vol.      ii.  that  of  a  blowpipe. 

p.  230.  3  But  this  is  a  sum  which  no  Semang 

2  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  among  would  usually  be  able  to  pay;  hence  the 
this  Negrito  tribe  the  theft  of  a  bow  idea  was  probably  taken  from  the  law  of 

VOL.  I  2  K 


498 


THE  SOCIAL  ORDER 


PAKT  n 


This  last  was  also  mentioned,  if  I  remember  rightly. 
as  the  fine  for  murder.  In  default  of  paying  the  fine 
the  culprit  should  be  "  flogged  with  a  rattan,"  or 
"  bound  to  a  tree  until  he  paid." 

For  cheating  a  fellow-tribesman  a  man  would  be 
fined,  so  long  as  he  had  money  to  pay  the  fine ; 
otherwise  he  would  come  in  for  a  "  thoroughly  good 
scolding  "  from  all  the  members  of  the  tribe  (in  other 
words,  he  would  have  to  run,  on  a  limited  scale,  the 
gauntlet  of  tribal  opinion). 

Perak  Semang\ — There  were  originally  among  the 
Semang  (according  to  one  account)  thirty  Big  Chiefs 
or  Puttos,  but  these  have  now  all  died  out.1 
Their  duties  were  to  choose  the  inferior  chiefs  from 


the  local  Malays,  with  whom  it  would 
be  the  usual  "blood-money"  (to  be  paid 
by  a  murderer)  ;  in  other  words,  it  is 
the  fine  which  has  to  be  paid,  if  pos- 
sible, in  commutation  of  the  death 
penalty.  These  fines  are  always,  I 
believe,  paid  in  kind. 

1  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.   103. 

There  is  no  confirmatory  record  of 
this  title  yet  to  hand,  and  it  appeared 
quite  unintelligible  to  the  Semang  of 
Kedah.  If  not  Siamese,  the  word 
may  be  due  to  some  mistake  or  con- 
fusion with  some  such  word  as  the 
Malay  "  Dato',"  which  simply  means 
big  chief  (lit.  grandfather),  and  which 
in  its  abbreviated  form  "To"'  is  still 
commonly  applied  to  Sakai  chiefs  as 
well  as  to  Malays.  On  the  other  hand, 
this  does  not  explain  Sna-hut.  [Blagden 
compares  "  patao,"  the  "wizard"  of 
the  Jarai  (Annam),  who  speak  a 
Malayan  language.]  The  full  ac- 
count given  by  Vaughan  -  Stevens 
is  as  follows  : — "  According  to  the 
Pangan,  the  Semang  never  had,  at 
any  time,  a  Raja  or  P-atin,  or  anybody 
corresponding  to  those  functionaries. 
In  ancient  times  the  Puttos  were 
highly  esteemed  as  the  religious 
teachers  of  the  people,  as  well  as 
rulers.      Pie,   the    Semang    deity,   was 


their  chief;  but  whether  he  was  a 
deity  whose  servants  the  Puttos  gave 
themselves  out  to  be,  or  a  chief  chosen 
by  the  Puttos,  and  who  on  his  death 
was  replaced  by  another  Putto,  could 
not  be  clearly  ascertained.  There  were 
1  many  ' — some  say  '  thirty  ' —  Puttos, 
who  met  once  in  every  eight  months 
to  consult.  Each  of  these  thirty  Puttos 
had  a  district  assigned  to  him.  The 
Semang  of  each  district  chose  a  Sna- 
hut  (roughly  corresponding  to  the  Malay 
Penghulu),  who  decided  all  local  ques- 
tions. The  Sna-hut  received  his  direc- 
tions from  the  Putto  of  the  district,  who 
gave  his  instructions  in  the  name  of 
Pie.  The  Puttos  were  dreaded  in  the 
highest  degree  as  the  messengers  of 
the  deity ;  they  formed  a  separate  class, 
and  were  unmarried.  When  one  died, 
Pie  elected  a  successor  from  among  the 
Semang.  The  command  to  move  their 
residence  on  the  fifth  day  did  not  apply 
to  the  Puttos ;  they  lived  at  Pie's  abode, 
on  the  'Jelmol'  mountain,  in  the 
northern  part  of  Perak,  but  are  now 
no  longer  in  existence.  Only  the  Sna- 
huts  are  still  in  possession  of  the  charms 
against  misfortune  and  disease,  and  of 
much  other  knowledge,  which  the 
Puttos  have  communicated  to  them " 
(Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.  103). 


chaf,  \  NEGRITOS  <>/   PERAK 

among  themselves,  and  to  be  teachers  ol  religion  to 
their  people.1 

The)    formerly   had  great    power  as  prie  or 

lerers,  and  medicine-men.1  "The  tribesman  went 
to  the  Sna-hut,  the  Sna-hut  to  the  Putto,  the  Putto 
to  Pie,  and  Plr  to  Kari,"  ■  these  last  two  being  the 
two  chief  deities  of  the  Semang. 

De  Morgan  gives  us  the  following  general 
account  '  of  the  social  constitution  of  the  Semang  of 
Perak.  The  political  and  administrative  organisation 
o[  the  Negritos  is,  like  that  of  the  Sakai,  exceedingly 
simple  In  every  "changkat"  or  village  there  is  a 
functionary  invested  with  full  powers,  who  is  called 
by  the  Malays  M  Penghulu."  These  Penghulus  are  all 
of  equal  standing,  and  own  no  superior,  whether  in 
the  shape  of  a  Raja  or  any  higher  assembly.  Hence 
each  Penghulu  has  absolute  authority  in  his  own 
village. 

On  the  occurrence,  it  is  true,  of  any  dispute 
between  the  villages,  an  assembly  of  the  Penghulus 
of  the  villages  concerned  will  take  place,  and  to  these 
may  be  added  a  few  men  who  are  specially  well  versed 
in  affairs ;  but  these  assemblies  are  altogether  ex- 
ceptional, and  are  only  occasioned  by  the  necessity 
of  composing  private  interests. 

Complete  equality  exists  as  between  individuals, 
and  caste  is  unknown.  Even  the  chief  is  on  an  equal 
footing  with  his  men,  except  when  in  discharge  of  his 
official  duties. 

To  the  foregoing  it  should  be  added  that  all  their 
property  is  in  common.5 

1  Vaughan-Stevens,  iii.   103.  4  De   Morgan,  vii.    420  ;    cp.   L'H. 

2  Ibid.  p.  109.  ii.  558. 

3  Ibid.  p.  107.  5  J.  I.  A.  vol.  iv.  p.  427,  sea  qiazre. 


5oo  THE  SOCIAL  ORDER  pari  n 


II. — Sakai. 
Chiefs. 

Perak  Sakai. — The  only  functionaries  of  the  Sakai 
are  the  Penghulus,  of  whom  there  is  one  to  each 
village,  who  "  is  succeeded  at  his  death  by  his  eldest 
son,  or  by  any  one  else  whom  he  may  have  appointed, 
in  default  of  a  son,  as  his  successor  during  his  life- 
time." l  Over  his  tribe  he  has  every  right  (but  the 
capital  one),  but  the  enforcing  of  his  authority  is  mainly 
due  to  his  position.2 

When  a  village  migrates,  the  Penghulu  conducts 
the  migration  ;  if  more  than  one  village  is  established, 
the  original  Penghulu  appoints  a  chief  (from  among 
his  sons  or  relations)  to  take  charge  of  each  of  them.3 

The  chief  is  the  equal  of  his  fellow  -  tribesmen, 
except  when  he  is  acting  expressly  on  behalf  of  the 
common  interests  of  his  village.4 

Of  the  Ulu  Bertang  (Bujang  Malaka)  Sakai,  Dr. 
Luering  writes  me,  that  they  do  not  employ  the  title 
of  Batin,  their  chieftains  being  called  "  Seruyan." 5 
The  first  "  Seruyan  "  Dr.  Luering's  informant  could 
remember  was  one  Ba-Naun,  who  is  now  dead,  as  is 
his  son  Ba-Jelang.  Ba-Naun  had  authority  over  all 
Chenderiang  and  Dipang. 

Then  there  are  special  titles  given  to  the  Sakai  by 
the  late  Sultans  of  Perak.  "  My  ancestors,"  said  the 
same  informant,  "  were  made  ■  mentri,' 6  and  my  proper 
title  should  be  Singa'  mentri  "  ("  mentri  "  is  a  Malay 
title  of  dignitaries).  Another  title  given  by  the  Sultan 
was  that  of  To'  Sang,  who  died  without  children,  and  a 

1  Women  excepted.      Z.  f.  E.  xxviii.  c  This  title   was  also   given   to   the 

167.  234  De  Morgan,  vii.  420.       chief  of  the  Sakai  at  Slim. — Swett.  in 

5  I  have  no  other  record  of  this  title.       J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  No.  5,  p.  59. 


chap,  x  AKAI  01  PRRAi 

third  title  is  Lda  I'.i  jangga.  The  last  occupant  ol 
tins  latter  iitl<-  had  a  daughter,  who  is  now  alive 
and  is  married  to  Si  [tarn,  the  elder  brother  ol  Dr. 
I  ,uering's  informant  Singa'. 

Laws} 

The  penalty  of  death  is  reserved  for  murder,1  and 
the  execution  ol  the  murderer  is  permitted  to  the 
relatives  of  his  victim,  the  weapon  which  is  to  be  used 
being   that    with    which    the    crime    was    committed. 

As  a  rule    the  criminal   escapes    into    the    forest,  where 

he  is  pursued  and  killed,  frequently  during  his  sleep. 
Crimes  of  this  kind  (murder)  are,  however,  so  exceed- 
ingly rare  as  to  be  a  quantiti  ndgligeablc.  The  penalty 
for  theft,  which  is  equally  rare,  is  exclusion  from  the 
tribe — "a  sort  of  banishment."  The  man  thus  exiled 
has  to  fell  and  plant  a  new  clearing  at  a  distance  from 
the  settlement  of  his  tribe,  and  if  he  refuses,  is  tied 
up  to  a  tree  and  flogged  with  a  rattan. 

In  cases  of  dispute  (about  women),  or  assault,  the 
Penghulu  (who  acts  both  as  civil  and  criminal  judge) 
condemns  the  guilty  party  to  pay  fair  compensation  to 
his  victim. 

For  enticing  awray  a  married  woman,  the  penalty 
is  a  fine  of  seven  dollars  "  at  the  most."  Among 
tribes  which  use  money,  the  fines  vary  from  one  and 
two  to  seven  dollars  ;  among  the  wilder  tribes  they 
are  paid  in  kind  (tapioca,  rice,  etc.).3 

1  De  Morgan,  vii.  25  ;  L'H.  ii.  558.  sidered  a  great  crime,  To'  Lila  told  me, 

2  The  punishment  of  those  who  used  and  often  gives  rise  to  a  fight.  The 
the  blowpipe  to  commit  murder  was  guilty  parties  are  made  to  pay  a  fine  to 
especially  severe  ;  the  murderer  being  the  husband,  generally  thirty  dollars 
compelled  to  eat  a  portion  of  his  each.  (This  well  proves  the  enormity 
victim's  flesh  [no  doubt  in  order  that  it  of  the  fault  !  )  The  woman's  fine  is 
might  poison  him]. — Eth.  Notizbl.'x.  10.  paid  by  her  father  or  brothers.      I  pro- 

3  Cp.  Br.  de  St. -P.  Lias,  p.  281,  secuted  my  researches  on  the  penal 
where    we    find: — "Adultery   is    con-  legislation  of  the  Sakai  : 


502  THE  SOCIAL  ORDER  pari  11 

Elsewhere  De  Morgan  adds  that  in  case  of  banish- 
ment the  condemned  party  has  to  leave  at  two  nights' 
notice,  abandoning  for  ever,  not  only  his  property,  but 
his  wife  and  children.  In  serious  cases  the  Penghulu 
always  takes  counsel  with  the  elders  of  the  tribe.1 

Contracts} 

The  following  is  a  summary  of  what  De  Morgan 
says  about  Sakai  contracts  : — 

There  is  no  form  of  actual  sale  among  the  Sakai, 
who  do  not  use  money  or  any  substitute  for  it.  Fre- 
quently, however,  a  form  of  contract  is  met  with  which 
consists  in  handing  over  some  portable  object,  such  as 
a  blowpipe,  in  return  for  a  promise  to  supply  a  family 
with  food  for  a  specified  period.  Thus  a  blowpipe  and 
quiver  with  darts  are  valued  at  a  fortnight's  food-supply 
for  a  family,  and  a  loin-cloth  of  beaten  tree-bark 
("  t'rap  ")  is  priced  at  a  month's  supply  of  food,  and  so 
on,  according  to  the  character  of  the  object  transferred. 

Leases  are  rare,  on  account  of  the  patriarchial 
system  in  vogue.  The  family  takes  the  place  of  an 
artificially  created  society,  and  is  usually  numerous 
enough  to  cultivate  its  own  lands  without  farming 
them  out  to  strangers.  Such  land  is,  however,  occa- 
sionally leased  in  return  for  a  supply  of  food.  Loans 
for  one  or  more  stated  occasions  are  more  usual ;  e.g. 

"  '  And  when  a  Sakai  kills  a   man  "  '  He  asks  or  buys.' 

.    .    .   ?'  "'  If  he  has  no  money  ?  ' 

"  '  Never  ! '    interrupted     To'     Lila  "  '  That  does  not  matter,  he  is  given 

quickly.  them.      When  a  man   from  a  distance 

"  '  When  he  steals  .    .    .    ?'  enters  the  country,  he  has  only  to  ask 

"  '  Never  !  '    he    replied,    with    the  and  is  given  food.'  " 

same  energy.  See    Notizbl.,    i.    7-1 1,    for    further 

"'What  !     Are  there  no  robbers?'  information  by  Vaughan- Stevens,  who 

"  '  No.'  does  not,  however,  specify  from  what 

"  'When  a  man  is  hungry,  and  he  localities  he  collected  it. 

has  no  yams?'  *   De  M.  viii.  224.        2  lb.  vii.  424. 


«  hap.  s  SAA  AJ  <>/    PERAK 


loans  of  knives,  hatchets,  and  other  obj<  h  the 

Sakai  cannot  make  themselves  and  obtain  from  the 
Malays  as  well  as  loans  of  hou  learings,  or  crops. 
The  Sakai  are  honest  and  always  return  a  loan. 

For  all  these  contracts  consent  alone  is  n<  try, 
and  no  regular  form  is  used. 

The  "contract  of  donation  is  chiefly  applied  to 
some  portable  article,  e.g*  a  knife.     Similar  presents 

were  those  made  by  a  son-in-law  to   his    (prospective) 

father-in-law. 

Debts    may    arise,   <•.<;.,    from    tailing    to    return    a 
borrowed   article    that    has    been    lost,   or    from    fin 
etc. 

The  debtor  and  his  family  work  for  the  creditor 
for  one  or  two  months  (according  to  the  Penghulu's 
decision),  the  creditor  finding  them  food.  They  then 
retire  into  the  forest  until  their  plantation  is  once 
more  able  to  support  them.  A  debtor  is  despised  by 
everybody,  and  is  derisively  given,  when  a  monkey 
is  killed,  the  creature's  muzzle  as  his  portion  of  food. 
Sometimes  the  creditor  is  put  by  the  Penghulu  in 
possession  of  a  debtor's  crops.1 

Property? 

As  has  already  been  pointed  out,  the  petty  chief 
of  each  Sakai  village  (Pelima  or  Penghulu)  has,  as 
De  Morgan  states,  every  right  but  the  capital  one 
over  the  members  of  his  settlement.  His  authority 
is  enforced  (like  that  of  the  father  of  a  European 
family)  by  means  of  the  influence  derived  from  his 
age  and  position  in  the  tribe,  rather  than  by  that 
of  any  legal  sanction.  The  tribe,  in  fact,  merely  forms 
(as  it  were)  a  rather  larger  family  circle. 

1  De  Morgan,  vii.  424.  2  Ibid.  p.  420. 


504  THE  SOCIAL  ORDER  PART  ir 

Individual  property  does  not  exist  ;  its  place  is 
taken  by  family  property.1  So,  too,  cultivation  is 
carried  out  in  common,  and  the  plantation  is  culti- 
vated by  all  the  members  of  the  family  under  the 
directions  of  the  father,  extra  work  being  imposed  in 
default.  The  produce  is  shared  between  all  the 
members  of  the  family  (and,  perhaps,  even  with  a  few 
of  their  neighbours).  What  proves  this  community 
of  cultivation,  is  the  fact  that  as  soon  as  one  of  the 
sons  of  the  family  takes  up  land  elsewhere,  he  is  ex- 
cluded from  his  share  of  the  produce  of  the  plantation, 
although  he  is  nevertheless  very  well  received  when 
he  comes  to  pay  a  visit  to  his  parents.2 

Succession? 

The  order  of  inheritance  is  as  follows: — (i)  De- 
scendants, (2)  ascendants,  and  (3)  collateral  branches 
of  the  same  family.  The  rights  of  the  first  class 
include  representation,  or  the  rights  of  the  children  of 

1   On  the  other  hand    we  have  the  however,    he    was    not    informed,    the 

following    statements    from    Vaughan-  woman's  parents  were  held  responsible. 

Stevens  :  —  "  Women,     though     they  If  the  woman  had  lost  her  parents,  or 

might  not  hold  office,  were  allowed  to  if   she    were   a   widow,    and  gave   her 

possess  land.      At  marriage  such  land  [new]   husband   no   information    about 

passed  to  the  husband,  the  wife  losing  such  debts,  she  was  liable  to  be  pun- 

all    title    to    it.      But    all    durian    and  ished  for  her  deceitfulness  by  a  minor 

other  trees,  if  planted  either  by  herself  chief,  but  the  creditor  dared  not  press 

or  by  her  orders,    were  her  exclusive  his    claim     upon    her    [new]    spouse, 

property,  and  might  be  made  over  to  since    it    was    the    creditor's    business 

any  one  whom   she  chose  in  the  life-  to   see   that    the    prospective    husband 

time  of  her   husband.      In  such  cases  knew    of   it,    as    every    marriage    was 

the  tree  was  marked  in  the  presence  of  spoken    of    far    and    wide    before    it 

the    chief    with   the    sign    of   its    new  actually   took    place.      The    failure   of 

possessor   (such  signs  consisting  of  an  a    crop    which   she    had    sold    before- 

incision),  which  varied   with    each   in-  hand     might     bring     a    woman    who 

dividual,   and  which  was  cut  into  the  owned    land    into   debt,    and  she   was 

bark  of  the  tree  thus  disposed  of.      A  unable   to   work   off   the    debt   as   the 

married   woman   ran   no   great   danger  men   could,   except   by   the   protracted 

of  contracting  debts.      If  she  had  any  process  of  mat-  and  basket-making  ;  so 

such    before    her    marriage,  the   bride-  that  in  the  eyes  of  the  Sakai,  this  was 

groom  was  informed  of  them  ;  and  if  a  [valid]  excuse  for  her  debt''  (Z.f.  E. 

the    marriage    took    place,   he    himself  xxviii.   168). 

became    responsible    for    them.        If,  2  De  Morgan,  vii.  421.      3  lb.  p.  423. 


CHAfc    N  /A    //   "A    SEl  A  V(70j? 

the  deceased  to  take  his  place  in  the  bin        ion.     In 
default  ol  heirs  bel<  mging  to  any  ol  the  thn 
referred  to,  the  house  and  clearing  are  abandoned 
it  accursed. 

[f  the  deceased  has  died  of  an  epidemic  sickne 
everything  is  abandoned  by  his  heirs,  who  fear  thai 
the  very  soil  or  goods  of  the  deceased   may  contain 
the  germs  of  the  disease, 

Property  rights  arc  collective,  not  individual. 

This  flows  from  the  custom  by  which  the  Penghulu 
designates,  in  every  case,  the  limits  of  the  ground 
that  each  member  of  the  tribe  may  occupy.  Even 
abandoned  land  may  not  be  taken  up  again  without 
the  consent  of  the  tribal  chief. 

The  result  is  that  all  the  members  of  the  tribe  are 
guaranteed  against  dispossession. 

Chiefs,  Lazvs,  Succession. 

Selangor  Sakai. — There  is  no  trustworthy  authority 
for  the  title  of  "  Batin "  as  obtaining  among  the 
Sakai  of  Perak.  Whether  we  may  conclude  that  this 
title  is  not  used  at  all  in  Perak  is  doubtful,  but  in  any 
case  the  completest  form  of  the  Sakai  constitution 
(and  that  one  of  Malayan  origin)1  is  to  be  found  in  the 
interior  of  Selangor,  where  the  Batin  is  the  chief  of  a 
group  of  Sakai  villages,  which  as  a  rule  are  fairly  near 
each  other.  Under  the  Batin  are  the  Mentri  or  Jinang, 
Jukrah  (or  Jekra),  Penghulu  Balai,  and  Penglima. 

The  foregoing  is  probably  the  full  list  of  these 
functionaries,    but    it   very   seldom    happens   that  any 

1   Letessier,  p.  99.     Both  forms  Jekra  does  not  seem  altogether  certain,  and  the 

and  Jukra(or  Jukrah)areused.  The  form  form  Jukrah  may  merely  be  an  instance 

Jukrah  is  explained  as  an  abbreviation  of  popular  etymology.      All  these  titles 

of  Juru-krah,  or  "corvie officer"  ( "  super-  are  Malayan,  and  show  the  strong  Jakun 

visor  of  the  corvee'1'1) ;  but  this  derivation  influence  among  the  Sakai  of  Selangor. 


506  THE  SOCIAL  ORDER  part  ii 


group  of  villages  has  a  complete  set  of  them  all  at 
once.  Some  tribes  have  a  Batin,  Jinang,  and  Penghulu, 
others  a  Jinang,  Jukrah,  and  Penghulu,  others  a  Ju- 
krah  only,  and  so  on. 

Three  of  these  six  titles  (Mentri,  Penghulu,  and 
Penglima)  are  used  by  the  civilised  Malays  of  the 
Peninsula,  but  the  other  three  are  otherwise  only 
used  by  the  Jakun,  from  whom  the  Selangor  Sakai 
have  clearly  borrowed. 

The  title  of  Batin  is  hereditary  and  passes  as  a 
rule  to  the  eldest  son  ;  but  if  the  Batin  die  without 
issue,  and  none  of  his  close  relatives  happens  to 
be  a  suitable  person,  the  Jinang  or  Jukrah  appoints 
as  Batin  some  close  relation  of  another  Batin  of  the 
same  tribe.1 

The  Batin  is  the  executive,  and  at  the  same  time 
the  administrative,  head  of  the  tribe,  although  his 
methods  of  performing  his  duties  are  distinctly 
patriarchal  in  character.  In  addition  to  the  duties 
already  mentioned,  he  is  required  especially  to  insist 
on  the  enforcement  of  the  tribal  customs  generally, 
and  the  selection  of  seasons  and  methods  for  the  fishing 
of  the  river.2 

A  fine  is  the  penalty  most  generally  inflicted  on 
the  guilty  parties,  but  for  insubordination  or  serious 
crime  it  commonly  takes  the  form  of  banishment  from 
the  tribe,  or  death  by  the  kris,  in  conformity  with 
ancient  custom.3     Of  these  two  forms  of  punishment 

1  Letessier,  p.  99.  The  rule  among  closely  with  what  I  myself  was  told 
the  Sakai  tribes  of  Selangor  is  on  more  than  one  occasion  by  the 
certainly  as  described,  but  vide  Logan  Jakun  chiefs.  But  from  the  extreme 
in  y.  /.  A.  i.  275:  "At  the  death  of  rarity  with  which  anything  of  this 
a  Batin  his  successor  is  chosen  from  his  sort  happens,  I  am  somewhat  in- 
sisters'  sons."  This  is  probably  among  clined  to  doubt  whether  the  power  of 
tribes  under  Rembau  influence.  inflicting   the  death  penalty,   which   is 

2  Letessier,  p.  99.  claimed  by  the  Batins,  was  not  borrowed 

3  Ibid.     This  last  statement  agrees  by  the  Sakai  from  the  Jakun  or  Malays. 


«  map,  x  /a  //  <>/■  SI  LANGOR 

the  former  alone  appears  to  I"-  an  original  Sakai  pi 
nee     A   small   tribute  ol    ri<  e  (says   Lcte  isier)    . 
paid  annually  to  the  Batin  by  the  members  ol  the  tribe. 
The  finang  is  the  representative  ol  the   Batin  on 
all  occasions  when  the  lattei  is  unable  to  1"-  present  in 
person,   and    not    unfrequently    is   tacitly  allowed    to 
assume  the  government  of  the  tribe,  without  the  eta 
tion  of  a  Batin  at  all.     "  Mentri "  is  probably  only  the 
Malay  equivalent  of"Jinang." 

The  [ukrah  is  the  petty  chief  who  marshals  the 
tribesmen  (tor  any  necessary  work  that  has  to  be  per- 
formed in  common). 

The  Penghulu  (or  P.  Balai)  fills  the  post  of  a 
sort  of  master  of  the  Batin's  household,  and  is  also, 
generally  speaking,  his  administrative  officer.  The 
Penglima  (Letessier  adds)  is  his  executive  officer. 

Selangor  Sakai. — Of  the  Sakai  of  Ulu  Langat,  Mr. 
Campbell  relates  that  they  very  rarely  commit  such 
crimes  as  murder.  He  enquired  (he  says)  what 
punishment  a  murderer  would  probably  receive,  and 
was  told  that  he  would  be  fined  ten  jungle-knives 
("  parangs  "),  ten  hatchets  ("  b'liongs  "),  ten  blowpipes 
("sumpitans"),  ten  saucepans,  and  such-like.  In  a  case 
of  adultery  the  man  was  fined  as  for  a  murder,  but  he 
kept  the  woman.  Very  frequently  no  fine  was  inflicted 
for  adultery,  but  the  woman  was  simply  taken  over. 
But  in  any  case,  the  woman  was  not  punished.  Mr. 
Campbell  adds  that  he  was  told  that  there  were  no 
specific  punishments  for  theft,  which  rarely  occurs. 
Things  taken  out  of  another  person's  house  were  re- 
garded as  "borrowed,  not  stolen."     In  the  case  of  a 

On  the  whole,  it  is  more  probable,   I  seems    pretty    clearly    to    show.      The 

think,  that  the  idea  was  borrowed  from  kris  is  certainly  a  Malay  rather  than  a 

the  Malays,   as  indeed  the  method  of  Jakun  weapon,  and  execution  by  means 

enforcing  it,  by  execution  with  the  kris,  of  it  is  a  typical  Malay  practice. 


5oS  THE  SOCIAL  ORDER  i<aki  n 

hardened   offender,  the    Batin   would  send  him   some 
miles  away  into  the  jungle  to  live  by  himself.1 

III. — Jakun. 

Blandas. — The  Blandas  of  K.  Langat  have  the  same 
system  of  government  as  that  of  the  Selangor  Besisi. 
They  have  further,  however,  condensed  the  description 
of  the  limits  of  their  jurisdiction  in  a  series  of  pro- 
verbial or  legal  "  maxims,"  which  have  all  the  force  of  a 
duly  formulated,  though  unwritten,  code,  and  which  are 
invoked  by  their  chiefs  for  the  purpose  of  settling 
any  disputes  that  may  arise  among  them.  The 
following  are  a  few  examples  which  I  took  down 
from  the  lips  of  one  of  their  chiefs  : — 

1.  The  laws  of  Batin  Tanggong  Gagah  :  2 
By  hill  and  hill-foot,  cave,  hill-basin 
Lies  the  path,  prevail  the  customs, 

Of  the  kin  o'  the  wasting  millet.3 

2.  The  Batin  and  the  Jinang  tarry 
At  the  limits  of  full  flood-tide  ; 

The  Land-folk's  chief  frequents  the  hill-tops, 
His  sway  is  o'er  the  upper  Langat, 
His  are  the  dues  of  yams  and  'gharu,' 
'  Cherok,'  '  los,'  tin-sand,  mine-paddocks  ; 
'Tis  his  to  feed  upon  wild  aroids, 
I  lis  are  rattan  and  gutta  taban. 

3.  To  the  Batin  of  the  Sea-folk  4 
'Longs  the  bellying  sail  of  palm -leaf, 
'Longs  the  swirling  of  the  oar-blade, 
Anchor  dropped  and  spreaded  awning, 
Clearing,  felling  for  fish-fences, 
Hunting  fish,  and  sting-ray  spearing. 

4.  The  laws  are  at  the  top  of  the  trunk, 
The  genealogy  at  the  bottom, 

The  laws  of  our  chiefs  follow  the  Raja's  ruling. 

5.    Where  the  wild-bees'  nest  swings,  where  the  wait-a-bit  creepers  fall  away  from 
their  supports, 

1  J.  A.  G.  Campbell,  p.  242.  probably  means  "  of  the  kinsfolk  who 

2  Said  to  be  a  son  of  To'  Klambu,  live  upon  millet "  (instead  of  rice),  this 
who    lived    and   died   at    Tunggul    Si  being  a  custom  of  the  wilder  tribes. 
Jaga.  4  I.e.  of  the  Besisi  (as  a  Coast  tribe). 

3  The    expression    is    obscure,    but  "  Chtrok  "'  and  "  los  "  are  unexplained. 


i  HA,  SAV  \GE   MAI   /  rv  01      I  LA  VGOR 


wi,ri,   1 1,,    .ii,  .mi .  commence  theii  trickling*,  where  thi    '  wd 

,  \  r  cloter  tog  ther, 
\\ii,  ,,  iii.  ,  im.iI.  i  ro  uV  i  ro  il  In  ■  o    i  urd, 

w  ben  the  e  Ind  follow  i  through  th<  divide 

\n,l  ii,,    .-I.  .mi  i  follow  'i"\\  11  Into  the  vall<  \  . 

il,, ,,-  through  the  iwarapt     iplash-splaih      p  the  chid   of  our  tribe. 

Another  version  of  the  Law,  <>i  .1  slightly  different 

i\  pe,  ran  as  follows  :  — 

( robang  <  iubin,  Buluh  Bona!  ; 

Round   the    Island  ol   Sum. Hi. 1, 

Round  the  Menangkabaus'  Island, 

( lame  we  unto  Pagar  Ruyong, 

Came  vre  i>>  the  land  ol  Jati, 

( lame  we  unto  Tanjong  Pagar,1 

( lame  we  unto  Johoi  Lama. 

Toll  Bombong*  opened  the  Nine  Rivera, 

With  Batin  Chap,  and  Batin  Maruii,8 

Batin  Lengges,  Batin  Bereh, 

liat in  Kantun,  Batin  Galang, 

With  old  To'  Klambu,  Granny  Heoi, 

Batin  Wat,  and  Batin  Minah.4 

Says  the  Law  again  : — 

Where  betel-palms  grew  thick  together, 
Where  coco-palms  grew  thick  together, 
Where  betel-palms  their  crests  were  waving, 
Where  coco-palms  their  crests  were  waving, 
Founded  we  the  Land  Semujong/' 
Ruling  o'er  the  Nine  Streams'  Sources, 
By  the  Fourfold  States  maintained, 
By  the  Fourfold  Clans  sustained. 
Thence  we  spread  to  the  Pass  of  Bidai, 
Thence  we  spread  to  the  Pass  of  Naning, 
Thence  we  spread  to  the  Stream  of  Labu, 
Thence  we  spread  to  Granny  Bern's. 
All  the  land's  To'  Bombong's  country, 
He  it  was  became  To'  Klana, 
Founder  of  the  Land  Semujong. 
Batin  Galang  wended  seawards, 
Seawards  wended  and  turned  pirate, 
(■ranny  Beoi  and  Batak  G'rodok, 
Reaching  Rawang,  went  ashore  there  ; 
At  Rawang,  Big  and  Little  Rawang, 
Dwelt  our  Sires  both  big  and  little. 

A   collection   of  these    Jakun   records,   which   are 


1  At  Singapore.  twelve  of  these  Batins.   See  p.  5 1 3,  ;/.  2. 

2  This  was  the  name  of  To'  Klana  :>  The  older  (and  accurate)  name  of 
before  his  inauguration  ("belum  di-  the  State  that  is  now  (I  believe  through 
lantik ").                             3  Or  Baruis.  a  white  man's  blunder)  called   Sungei 

4  Altogether  there  were  said  to  be  Ujong. 


5io  THE  SOCIAL  ORDER  part  ii 

comparable    to   those   of  the    Rembau    Malays,  would 
prove  of  great  interest. 

Chiefs. 

Besisi. — Among  the  Besisi  of  Langat  the  Batin 
is  the  arbiter  of  all  disputes,  at  least  of  all  such  as  are 
referred  to  him  by  the  subordinate  chiefs  of  the  tribe. 
He  also  acts  as  priest  at  marriages,  as  magician,  and  as 
judge  in  cases  of  wrong-doing,  the  fines  that  he  inflicts, 
in  place  of  money,  usually  taking  the  shape  of  pieces  of 
cloth  ("sarongs,"  etc.)  or  cooking-pots  ("  kuali,"  etc.).1 

The  Jinang  is  their  vice-Batin;  the  Penghulu 
Balei  has  charge  of  the  tribal  feasts  and  the  holding 
of  councils  ;  the  Jukrah  is  the  summoner  of  the  tribe  ; 
the  Penglima  the  Batin's  executive  officer. 

There  are,  I  think,  some  grounds  for  believing  the 
drum  (which  is  not  usually  found  among  the  Semang 
or  Sakai)  to  be  part  of  the  insignia  of  Jakun  chiefs. 

The  Besisi  of  Sepang  more  than  once  described  to 
me  a  strange  sort  of  head-gear  which  had  formed  the 
insignia  of  their  lineal  chiefs  ;  and  I  heard  later  from 
a  local  Malay  chief  that  this  head -gear  had  been, 
within  his  remembrance,  in  the  actual  possession  of 
Batin  Pah  Kasat  (a  former  chief  of  Sepang  Kechil), 
who  showed  it  to  my  informant,  and  who  used  to 
wear  it  on  his  head  whenever  the  tribe  met  in  council. 
My  informant  stated  that  this  head-gear  was  made  of 
some  unusual  material,  which  might  have  been  some 
kind  of  manufactured  tree  -  bark ;  strands  of  this 
material  (whatever  it  might  be)  were  cunningly  inter- 
woven to  form  knots  resembling  the  "  buku  bemban  " 
(a  kind  of  multiple  knot)  of  the  Malays.  This  head- 
gear was  called   the    Buluh    Bohal  (lit.    "  Bamboo   of 

1   Bellamy,  p.  227,  etc. 


& 

^ " 

Skeat  Collection. 
Model  of  Insignia  of  Besisi  Batin  or  Chief. 

A  mystic  knot  (in  foreground)  of  some  unknown  material.     It  is  carried 
in  the  bamboo  receptacle  here  shown  upright  behind  it. 


I'ol.  I.  />.  511. 


chap   x  •  VAGI    MALA  I  S  0/  MALAi  i 

Bohal"),  and  descended  direct  aa  an  heirloom 
("p£saka")  from  father  to  son  in  the  male  line.  It 
w.i',  not  used,  however,  by  any  other  than  this  one 
tribe,  and  although  I  offered  great  rewards,  I  was  never 
able  to  obtain  a  sight  ol  it.  Indeed,  I  was  told  that 
when  the  Batin  who  had  owned  it  died,  it  was  taken 
back  to  Selat  Dumej  in  Sumatra.1 

Mantra.       The  constitution  of  society  was  as  simple 

amongst  the  Mantra  as  amongst  the  Benua  of  Johor. 
Perfect  equality  prevailed.  The  Batin  was  not  dis- 
tinguished in  his  manner  of  life  irom  the  others. 

Of  Batins  the  Mantra  had  Batin  Palimei,  who 
ruled  in  Jempul,  Batin  Chinchang  of  Johol,  Batin 
Puchu  of  Batang  Muar,  Batin  Kechi  of  Ulu  Muar, 
and  Batin  Jedam  (?  Jadam)  on  the  borders  of  Pahang 
and  Muar.  Each  of  these  Batins  had  under  him  a 
Jinang,  a  Jukrah  or  Juru-krah,  and  an  indefinite 
number  of  Penglimas  and  Ulubalangs.  On  the  death 
of  a  Batin  a  successor  was  chosen  from  amongst  the 
sons  of  his  sisters.3 

The  Batin  must  be  called  to  take  part  at  the 
installation  of  every  new  Raja.  This  is  because  all 
rulers,  from  the  Raja  downwards,  were  first  "  in- 
stituted "  by  the  Batin.4 

1   Finding  that  there  was  no  means  described    by    Vaughan -Stevens    (s.z: 

of  seeing  the  thing  itself,  I  had  a  copy  "penjok''),   which  appears,   from    the 

of  it   made  in    cloth    by    one    of  the  name   "buhu"  (sic,   ?  "  buluh "),  and 

Besisi,   on  the  understanding  that  the  from    the    fact     that    "penjok"    is    a 

copy  was    to    be   as    exact    as    it    was  Semang-Sakai   word   for   "loin-cloth."' 

possible  to  make  it.      On  the  whole,  I  to  have  perhaps  been  a  loin-cloth  of  this 

am  inclined  to  believe  that  Buluh  Bohal  very  material.      Vide  p.  455,  ante  •  and 

was  a  place-name  (Pin  Sumatra),  whence  cp.  p.  450,  ante. 

came    a    piece    of   bamboo    "cloth/'  2  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  330*. 

which  was  believed  to  have  been  taken  3  Ibid.     p.     275  ;     compare    Misc. 

from  the  bamboo  out  of  which  the  first  Ess.   rel.    Ind.,    Sec.    Ser.    vol.    i.    pp. 

ancestor  of  the  race  was  said  to  have  301,  302. 

issued.      But  cp.  the  insignia  of  Kari  4  Ibid. 


512  THE  SOCIAL  ORDER  PART  n 

In  the  work  of  government  (added  the  relater), 
the  Batin,  in  the  forest,  was  guided  by  the  ancient 
customs  ("  Selasila'  "),  or  what  used  to  be  done  from 
times  of  old  ;  the  Penghulu,  in  his  Hall  of  Audience 
((<  Balei  "),  by  the  written  laws  ("  Berundang  ") ;  and 
the  Raja,  in  his  Palace  ("Astana"),  by  equity 
(" 'Adilan  ").1 

Laws. 

Crimes  were  very  rare.  Theft  was  unknown, 
and  children  were  carefully  instructed  to  avoid  it.2 

Property  and  Succession. 

Mantra. — Amongst  the  Mantra  the  distribution  of 
property  on  the  death  of  the  husband  was  as  follows  : 
the  goods  which  belonged  to  the  husband  before  the 
marriage  went  to  his  parents  and  brothers  and  sisters. 
Those  acquired  during  the  marriage  were  divided 
equally  between  these  relations  and  his  widow,  who, 
however,  was  considered  as  a  trustee  for  the  children. 
The  clearing  ('Tadang")  was  inherited  by  her.  On 
the  death  of  the  wife,  in  the  event  of  her  husband 
surviving,  her  antenuptial  goods  go  to  her  children, 
and  the  goods  in  common  are  equally  shared  between 
the  husband  and  the  children,  who  leave  their  father 
and  live  with  the  nearest  female  relatives  of  their 
deceased  mother.3 

The  Family. 

Benua-Jakun. — The  Benua  family  was  an  innocent 
and    happy  one,    and    mutual    kindness    prevailed  on 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  327*.     Penghulu       'Adilan  =  Mohammedan  law. 
here  =  the   chief  of  the   State,    Raja=  2  Ibid.  p.  330*. 

head  of  the  confederation  of  States,  and  3  Ibid.  pp.  274,  275. 


chap,  x  SAVAGl   MALA  KS  01  fOHOR 


every  side.  The  authority  oi  the  father  m  >  ab  tolute, 
nor  were  the  sons  Freed  from  it  even  when  they 
had  themselves  become  the  heads  ol  families.     It  i. 

probable    thai    in    the    more    purely    nomadic   ages    the 

family  was  less  subject  to  be  early  broken  up,  and 

that    the    patriarchal    system    prevailed   to   a    yet   fuller 

extent.  In      the      house,      however,     the      husband 

appeared   more  as  an  honoured  guest  than  as  its  lord. 

The  wife    had    the   entire  management.     A    Benua 

expressed  their  ideas  on  this  score  figuratively,  by 
saying  that  the  husband  was  the  captain  of  the  vessel 
(44  Nakhoda  prahu  ")  and  the  wife  captain  of  the  house 
("  Nakhoda  rumah  ").' 

Chiefs} 

Benua- Jakun.  —  The  boundary  between  the  east 
coast  State  of  Pahang  and  Johor  intersects  the  Benua 
country  ;  the  whole  of  the  Anak  Endau  and  the  lower 
part  of  the  Sembrong  being  in  Pahang  (and  conse- 
quently under  the  Bendahara),  and  all  the  other  rivers, 
including  the  Madek,  on  which  the  Benua  are  found, 
appertaining  to  Johor  (so  that  they  are,  consequently, 
under  the  Temenggong).  The  authority  of  the  Benda- 
hara and  the  Temenggong,  however,  was  little  more 
than  nominal,  the  affairs  of  the  Benua  being  entirely 
administered  by  their  own  chiefs,  each  of  whom  had  a 
definite  territorial  jurisdiction.  The  highest  in  rank 
and  in  nominal  authority  was  the  Batin  Anak 
Setia,  the  descendant  of  the  ancient  (traditionary) 
Raja  of  the  Benua.  On  the  Endau,  below  the 
junction  of  the  Sembrong  and  Anak  Endau,  resided 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  266,  267.  into  tribes,  each  under  an  elder,  termed 

2  Ibid.  pp.  273-275  (quoted  by  De  the  Batin,  who  directs  its  movements 
Quatrefages,  pp.  221,  222).  See  and  settles  disputes.  In  the  states  of 
also  Newbold's  account  (vol.  ii.  pp.  Sungei  Ujong  and  Johol  are  twelve 
392*394) :    "The    Benua    are    divided  tribes,  consisting  of  upwards  of  1000 

VOL.   I  2  L 


514  THE  SOCIAL  ORDER  part  ii 

the  Batin  Hamba  Raja.  The  Lenggiu,  a  branch  of 
the  Endau,  was  under  the  Batin  Setia  Raja,  who  was 
also  their  great  executive  officer ;  his  relationship 
to  the  Batin  Anak  Setia  having  some  resemblance  to 
that  between  the  Malay  Temenggong  and  the  Sultan 
of  Johor.  The  Sungei  Selai,  again,  was  under  the 
Batin  Shiga  Dewa.  The  Sembrong  in  the  vicinity 
of  Tanjong  Bongko'  was  under  the  Batin  Setia  Bati, 
higher  up  near  Gagau  under  the  Batin  Jukrah,  and  still 
nearer  its  source  under  Batin  Dewa  Kasuma  (?)  and 
under  the  Batin  Bentara.  All  these,  except  the  two  last, 
were  within  the  Pahang  boundary.  The  local  Malay 
authority,  who,  in  matters  of  government,  possessed 
a  nominal  power,  and  whose  relationship  with  regard 
to  the  Benua  was  properly  that  of  the  maintainer  and 
regulator  of  the  Malayan  trade  monopoly,  was  called 
To'  Jinang.  The  Benua  on  the  Batu  Pahat  and  its 
branches  were  under  the  Bentara  or  Mangki  (sic,  ? 
Mangku)  Pemanggun  of  Bekok.  The  jurisdiction  of 
the  Malay  Penghulu  of  Batu  Pahat  had  once  ex- 
tended to  Ginting  Batu  on  the  eastern  Sembrong,  but 
since  the  waterways  became  obstructed  the  To'  Jinang 

individuals,  under  twelve  Batins,  who,  limpei '),  who  succeeded  his  uncle, 
as  mentioned  in  the  account  of  these  Breyk,  a  short  time  ago  pro  tempore, 
states,  have  the  power  of  electing  the  until  his  son,  now  a  child,  be  old  enough 
Malay  chiefs.  [These  twelve  chiefs  to  take  upon  himself  the  direction  of  the 
were  probably  those  referred  to  in  the  affairs  of  the  tribe.  The  Blandas  have 
Blandas  traditions  (v.  supra).']  Under  four  Jinangs,  viz.  Pawampa  de  Cheyng 
each  Batin  are  two  subordinates,  termed  {sic,  ?),  Ampu  Manis,  '  Palsye  '  (?  Pa' 
Jinang  ('Jennang')  and  Juru  -  krah  Lesai),  and  Rumbong  ;  and  two  Juru- 
('Juroka'),  who  assist  the  former  in  kras.  The  Besisi,  one  Jinang  named 
his  duties.  A  Juru-krah  of  the  Besisi  Mumin ;  one  Juru-krah,  Sekanal  ;  and 
tribe,  named  Tenggin  (?),  from  the  one  Poyang,  Manan  ('  Mannan ').  The 
interior  of  Selangor,  and  a  Poyang  functions  of  their  Batin  resemble  those 
named  Ambui,  of  the  Blandas  tribe,  pertaining  to  the  Malay  Raja ;  the 
informed  me  that  the  latter  had  four  title  of  Jinang  is  equivalent  to  that  of 
Batins  named  Baning  ('Banning')  the  Malay  Penghulu ;  and  that  of  the 
or  the  'Tortoise,'  Lunggeyng,  Singa-  Juru-krah  to  that  of  Mata-Mata. 
kuasa  ('  Singa-quassa')  or  the  '  Mighty  There  is  also  a  war  chief  called 
Lion,'  and  Pakat.  The  Besisi  tribe  Pelima,  identical  with  the  Malay  Peng- 
has  one  Batin  only,  Pa'  Limpei  ('Pa-  lima." 


i  hap.  x  SAl    \Gl    MAI   i  )  5  Oh  fOHOR 


oi  the  Endau  had  engrossed  the  trade  oi  the  fohor 
portion  of  the  Sembrong  river,  The  Benuaoi  Benut 
were  under  a  Jukrah  ("Jum  krah")  and  a  Batin. 
Each   Batin   had  absolute  authority  within    his   own 

jurisdiction,  but  he  referred  difficult  <>r  unusual 
cases    to  .1    Council    composed    pi    all    the    Batins, 

epting  the  Batin  Anak  Setia;  and  matters  in 
which  all  the  Benua  wen-  concerned  appertained 
to  the  same  Council.  Their  deliberations  were  said 
to  be  sometimes  very  prolonged,  particularly  in 
affairs  of  a  novel  character,  when  their  knowledge 
of  the  old  "  'adat '    did    not  supply  them   with   any 

icedents. 

Laws, 

Benua-Jakun. — Offences  against  property  or  person 
were,  from  the  mildness  of  the  race,  of  very  rare  occur- 
rence. Crimes  of  all  kinds  might  be  expiated  by  the 
payment  of  fines,  the  sentences  being  invariably  im- 
posed, not  in  the  form  of  coins,  of  which  very  few 
reached  their  hands,  but  in  coarse  Chinese  plates  or 
saucers  ("  pinggan  ").  Adultery  was  punishable  by  a 
tine  of  from  10  to  20  plates  according  to  circumstances  ; 
theft  the  same  ;  murder,  which,  however,  seems  to  be 
almost  unknown,  by  one  of  60  plates.  One-half  of  the 
fine  went  to  the  Batin  and  the  other  half  to  the  injured 
person.  If  the  offender  failed  to  deliver  the  plates,  he 
became  the  slave  of  his  victim.  Complaints  were 
inquired  into  by  the  Batin,  who  assembled  a  number  of 
the  elders  and  consulted  with  them.  The  Batin  was 
considered  to  be  responsible  for  any  property  that  was 
stolen.  But  he  could  not  convict  the  thief  without 
confession  or  direct  evidence  of  the  theft.     No  regular 

1  So    Logan,    but    no    part    of    the       and  only  part  of  the  left  bank  of  the 
Sembrong    river    is    now    in    Pahang,       Endau. 


516  THE  SOCIAL  ORDER  pari  ii 


tax  was   paid   to   the   Batins,    but   presents  were    fre- 
quently made  to  them.1 

Loans  were  freely  given,  but  no  pledge  was  ever 
taken. - 

Property  and  Succession: 

Benua-Jakun. — On  the  separation  of  husband  and 
wife  by  mutual  consent,  their  hitherto  common  property 
was  divided  into  three  parts,  of  which  the  husband 
took  two  and  the  wife  one.  On  the  husband's  death, 
one-third  of  the  estate  went  to  daughters  and  two- 
thirds  to  sons.  On  the  wife's  death,  the  goods  in 
common  fell  to  the  husband's  share. 

Again,  if  the  wife  happened  to  own  a  clearing 
("  blukar ")  it  descended  to  her  children,  the  father, 
however,  being  an  usufructuary  trustee  during  his  life. 

Chiefs? 

Johop  Jakun.  —  Each  tribe  was  under  an  elder, 
termed  the  Batin,  who  directed  its  movements  and 
settled  disputes. 

Under  each  Batin  were  two  subordinates,  termed 
Jinang  and  Juru-krah,  who  assisted  him  in  his  duties. 

A  fourth  title  was  that  of  Pawang,  but  it  was  rather 
a  title  of  honour  than  of  jurisdiction,  and  indicated 
the  persons  who  were  generally  charged  with  fulfilling 
the  offices  of  physician  and  teacher. 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  274.  {ibid.)   that  adultery  is  punished  with 

Of    the    Benua    Newbold    says    (ii.  death  if  the  parties  are  taken  in  the  act. 

394,   395):   "Capital  crimes  such  as  Cp.      also     Vaughan  -  Stevens       in 

murder  are  punished  by  drowning,  by  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiii.  834.     [The  only  im- 

impaling,   or  by  exposure  to  the  sun,  portant  point   is  that  for  theft  double 

leaving  the  criminal  bound  to  a  Nipah  restitution  had  to  be  made,  etc.     But  no 

{i.e.   thatch-leaf  palm)  to  perish  from  localities  being   given,   it   is   quite   un- 

heat    and    hunger."       [The     penalties  certain  of  what  tribe  Yaughan-Stevens 

mentioned    are    all    practised    by   the  is  speaking.] 

Malays,  from  whom  their  institution  is  2  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  285. 

probably   borrowed.]       Newbold   adds  3  lb.  p.  274.      4  lb.  vol.  ii.  267,  268 


«  'i  \r     \ 


SAVAGE    MALA  YS  I  >J   fOHOR 


5»7 


The  functions  of  the  Batin  resembled  th< 
appertaining  to  the  Malay  Raja.  The  title  ol  Jinang 
was  equivalent  to  tint  of  the  Malay  Penghulu,  and 
tli.it  of  Jurii  krah  was  applied  to  the  inferior  executive 
(police)  officers.  There  was  also  a  war  chiel  called 
Penglima.1 

After  the  death  of  a  Batin  (or  chief  of  the  tribe) 
the  eldest   of  his  sons  would  he   presented    by  his 

nearest  relation  to  the  whole  collected  tribe,  and 
would  then  he  declared  and  publicly  recognised 
the  successor  of  his  lather  in  the  Batinship.  If  the 
people  refused  to  declare  him  Batin,  the  second  son 
of  the  late  Batin  would  be  presented  ;  and  if  this 
second  son  and  his  other  brothers  were  refused  by 
the  people,  a  stranger  to  the  family  would  be  elected. - 


1   /.  /.  A.  vol.  ii.  p.  267. 

-'  Ibid.  It  is  related  by  some  persons 
that  t lie  Jakun  have  great  influence  in 
the  respective  Malay  states  where 
they  are  living,  and  chiefly  in  the 
election  of  Malay  Penghulus  in  the 
Menangkabau  states.  Newbold  too 
says  the  same,  and  confirms  it  by  the 
following  fact : — "  A  few  years  ago  the 
late  Penghulu  of  Sungei  Ujong,  Klana 
Leher,  died,  leaving  two  nephews, 
Kawal  and  Bhair.  It  is  an  ancient 
custom,  prevalent  still  in  the  interior 
and,  I  believe,  generally  throughout 
Malayan  nations,  that  when  a  chief 
dies  his  successor  must  be  elected  on 
the  spot,  and  before  the  interment  of 
the  corpse  (which  is  not  unfrequently 
deferred  through  the  observance  of  this 
usage  to  a  considerable  length  of  time), 
otherwise  the  election  does  not  hold 
good. 

4 '  Now  it  happened  that  Kawal  was 
absent  at  the  time  of  Penghulu  Leber's 
death.  The  three  Sukus  and  one  of 
the  twelve  Batins  took  advantage  of 
Bhair's  being  on  the  spot,  elected  him, 
and  buried  the  body  of  the  deceased 
chief.  Against  this  proceeding  the 
Raja   di   Raja   and    the  remainder    of 


the  elective  body,  the  eleven  Batins, 
protested  ;  a  war  ensued }  which  ter- 
minated in  1828,  pretty  much  as  it 
began.  Kawal,  however,  by  virtue  of 
the  suffrages  of  the  eleven  out  of  the 
twelve  Batins,  and  by  the  support  of  the 
Raja  di  Raja,  is  generally  considered 
the  legitimate  chief.  In  Johol  the 
Batins  have  a  similar  influence  in  the 
election  of  the  Penghulu." 

It  appears  certain  that  in  iormer 
times  the  Batins  exercised  such  an 
influence  in  the  elections  of  the  Malay 
chief ;  but  we  must  say  that  they 
have  at  the  present  time  lost  a  great 
part  of  it  ;  for  in  Johol,  Rembau,  and 
several  other  places  they  are  so  few  in 
number  that  such  a  fact  would  be  im- 
possible, and  the  contempt  which  the 
Malays  have  for  them,  as  well  as  their 
own  natural  disposition  to  tranquillity 
and  peace,  scarcely  permit  us  to 
believe  that  such  is  the  case  now  even 
for  Sungei  Ujong,  where  they  are  the 
most  numerous. — -J.  I.  A.  vol.  ii.  p. 
270. 

Vide,  however,  M.  Lister  {he.  cit.) 
on  the  constitution  of  N.  Sembilan, 
where  this  alleged  influence  of  the 
Batins  is  confirmed. 


518  THE  SOCIAL  ORDER  i-ari  ii 


After  the  death  of  a  Jinang  or  a  Juru-krah,  the 
Initin  would  appoint  the  eldest  son  of  the  deceased  to 
succeed  to  his  office.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
Batin  should  find  the  eldest  son  of  the  late  dignitary 
unfit  for  the  appointment,  he  would  nominate  another 
of  the  same  family,  and  only  when  there  was  no  proper 
person  in  the  family  itself  to  fill  the  office  would  he 
then  appoint  some  one  outside  it.1 

Laws} 

Jakun. — Though  the  Jakun  were  generally  good, 
and  little  inclined  to  evil  ways,  they  showed,  notwith- 
standing, from  time  to  time  (though  seldom)  that 
they  were  in  natura  lapsa,  like  the  rest  of  mankind, 
from  whence  the  necessity  of  establishing  laws 
amongst  them  ;  though  we  can  say,  to  their  praise, 
that  their  laws  rather  prevented  disorder  than 
punished  it.  Their  laws  were  not  everywhere 
uniform  ;  each  tribe  had  its  customs  and  regulations, 
those  here  stated  being  those  more  generally  received. 
They  were  not  written  down  ;  but  might  be  ex- 
pressed in  some  such  way  as  follows  : — 

Murder  and  Assault? 

If  a  person  kill  another  without  just  cause,  he 
shall  be  put  to  death. 

If  a  person  beat  another,  he  shall  be  beaten  in 
the  same  way  ;  if  he  wound  him,  he  shall  be  wounded 
in  the  same  way. 

If  a  person  insult  another,  he  shall  pay  a  fine. 

1  /.  /.  A.  vol.  ii.  p.  268.  *  Ibid.  p.  267.  3  Ibid.  p.  269. 


i  hap,  x  WAGE  MALA  \  S  >  >/■  fOHOR 


Theft} 

1 1  any  person  steals  the  property  ol  his  neigh- 
bour, he  shall  return  it.  and  pay  a  fine  to  the  Batin. 

[f  a  person  has  alread)  itolen  several  times,  the 
Batin  shall  confiscate  .ill  his  property. 

Ii  it  is  recognised  that  a  person  is  in  the  habit 
of  stealing,  he  shall  be  killed;  because  it  is  not  con- 
sidered possible  that  a  man  who  has  given  way  to 
Such  a  habit  can  ever  again  become  an  honest 
man. 

The  laws  about  marriage  and  divorce,  and  the 
disposal  of  children,  will  be  dealt  with  more  fully  in  the 
chapter  on  Marriage.  Suffice  it  to  say,  with  regard  to 
marriage,  that  they  are  strict  monogamists,  the  penalty 
for  conjugal  infidelity  being  the  capital  one  ;  and  that 
the  laws  concerning  divorce  provide  for  the  return  of 
the  dowry  by  the  defaulting  party  ;  and  with  regard  to 
children,  that  they  cannot  be  sold  against  their  will, 
whatever  age  they  may  be,  but  must  be  taken  care  of, 
on  the  death  of  both  parents,  by  the  next  of  kin. 

Inheritance? 

After  the  death  of  the  parents  the  whole  of  their 
property  shall  be  divided  amongst  all  the  children  in 
equal  parts. 

To  the  foregoing  account  it  may  be  added  that 
if  a  Jakun  man  died  in  debt,  his  debts  were  paid  to 
the  extent  of  one  half,  the  creditor  losing  the  other 
half,  even  though  there  were  property  enough  left 
to  pay  the  whole.  The  balance  went  to  the  next  of 
kin  ;  to  the  widow,  if  there  were  one,  in  preference  to 

1  /.  /.  A.  vol.  ii.  p.  269.  ■  Ibid.  p.  270. 


52o  THE  SOCIAL  ORDER  part  ii 


a  grown-up  son,  but  a  man  might  leave  his  property 
to  any  relation  he  pleased.1 

Chiefs. 

Udai. — The  Udai  are  described  by  Newbold  as 
being  "  without  either  laws  or  any  form  of  govern- 
ment,"2  but  this  statement  must  not  be  taken  au  pied 
de  la  lettre. 

Orang  Laut  or  Sea-Jakun. 

The  Orang  Laut  system  of  chiefship  seems  to  have 
been  the  same  as  that  of  the  Jakun,  the  titles  of  the 
tribal  chiefs  including  those  of  Batin,  Jinang,  Jukrah, 
Penglima,  Hulubalang,  etc.  Even  among  the  tribes 
to  be  found  at  the  present  day  on  the  island  of 
Singapore  [e.g.  the  men  of  Kallang),  these  titles  are 
still  preserved,  in  spite  of  the  close  proximity  and 
influence  of  Singapore  itself. 

With  this  exception,  however,  there  is  scarcely  a 
single  remark  extant  to  inform  us  what  were  the 
actual  methods  of  law  and  government  as  practised 
by  the  Orang  Laut,  though  there  can  be  little  doubt 
that  they  were  practically  identical  with  those  of  the 
Jakun.  With  regard  to  the  rule  of  succession  to 
property,  we  may  infer  from  Logan's  remark  about 
the  Sabimba3  [that  the  father's  property  descended 
to  the  sons],  that  it  was  actually  identical  with  the 
Jakun  rule. 

1  /.  R.  A.  S,t  S.  £.,  No.  8,  p.  120.  2  Newbold,  ii.  381,  382. 

3  See  vol.  ii.  p.   116. 


CHAPTER    XI. 
1  )eaungs  with  ( )  rHER   R  u 

The   most    nomadic   of  all   the   wild    tribes   of    the 

Peninsula  are  certainly  the  wilder  Semang,  who 
seldom  stay  more  than  three  days  in  any  one  locality, 
and  spend  their  entire  lives  in  the  hunt  for  wild  roots 
and  game.  These  M  cheery  little  hunters,"  as  they 
have  been  well  described,  travel  continually  in  the 
north  of  the  Peninsula,  but  do  not  usually  appear  to 
go  far  southward,  their  journeys  being  generally 
confined  to  the  interior  of  the  States  of  Perak,  Kedah, 
and  Kelantan,  the  old  Malay  State  of  Patani,  and  a 
portion  of  Trengganu  and  Pahang  (north  of  the 
mouth  of  the  river  Tahan). 

Of  the  Sakai  tribes  of  Perak  Sir  F.  Swettenham 
remarks  that  the  common  idea  that  they  wander  at  large 
all  over  the  hills  is  certainly  a  mistake.  Each  particular 
tribe  keeps  exclusively  to  its  own  valley,  and  is 
frequently  at  feud  with  its  neighbours  on  either  side.1 
Their  habits  are  migratory  within  their  own  districts, 
but  except  when  compelled  by  the  oppression  of  the 
Malays  or  other  causes  they  seldom  leave  their  own 
valleys.'2 

The  Jakun  or  "  savage   Malayan"  tribes,  among 

1   This  does  not  mean  that  they  actually  go  to  war. 
2  Swettenham,  op.  cit. 

521 


522  DEALINGS  WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  ii 

whom  may  be  reckoned  the  Besisi  (the  most  numerous 
of  the  Coast-Jakun  tribes)  are,  on  the  other  hand,  in 
the  habit  of  migrating  to  greater  distances,  such  as, 
for  instance,  to  Batu  Pahat  in  Johor  and  to  the  Strait 
of  Dumei  (Selat  Dumei),  off  the  west  coast  of  Sumatra. 

One  of  the  most  important  causes  which  contribute 
to  these  periodical  migrations  is  their  great  love  of 
fruit,  especially  that  of  the  durian.  The  seasons  at 
which  this  fruit  ripens  vary  in  different  parts  of  the 
Peninsula,  and  the  wild  jungle -dwellers  (when  not 
forestalled  by  Malays),  pass  from  one  fruit-grove  to 
another  as  the  trees  ripen.  But  the  number  of  fruit- 
groves  thus  visited  by  any  given  tribe  is  always 
limited,  and  usually  consists,  I  believe,  of  the  very 
same  series,  no  attempt  being  made  to  poach  upon  the 
preserves  of  other  tribes  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  Sakai 
would  not  visit  a  Semang  fruit-grove  or  vice  versa, 
so  that  their  wanderings  are  thus  confined  within 
certain  well-defined  limits. 

It  has  often  been  stated  by  way  of  demonstrating 
the  low  state  of  their  intellect  that  the  wild  tribes  of 
the  Peninsula  are  unable  to  count  beyond  three. 
This  statement,  however,  is  somewhat  misleading,  as 
although  they  can  only  count  up  to  three  in  many  of 
their  dialects,  higher  numerals  are  still  preserved  in 
some  localities  (e.g.  in  Johor),  and  there  is  besides 
sufficient  evidence  to  make  it  very  fairly  certain  that 
the  Mon-Anam  numerals  up  to  ten  (and  perhaps 
higher)  must  have  formerly  been  known  at  least  to 
some  of  the  tribes  in  question.1 

Many  of  them  can  to  this  day  count  up  to  ten  in 
Malay,  their  knowledge  of  Malay  numerals  being 
doubtless   due   to   their  practice   of  bartering  jungle 

1  Cp.  C.  O.  Blagden,/.  R.  A.  S.,  S.  B.,  No.  27,  p.  40. 


chap  v/  RAl   REMARKS 

produce  with  the  Malays,  From  these  latter  thej 
have  learned  the  higher  numerals,  retaining  only,  in 

their  own  di. ileit,  the  names  <)t  the  first  three  or  lour1 
of  them,  which  ;ire   all    they  would    commonly  require 

lor  everyday  use  among  themselvt 

I n  the  following  pages  w  ill  1  ><•  given  a  few  exam] i 

of  the  inhuman  treatment  that  these  wild  tribes  have 
suffered  in  the  past  at  the  hands  of  their  Malay 
persecutors  —  a  treatment  of  which  several  writers, 
among  them  Mr.  Hugh  Clifford — have-  described  the 
results  in  vivid  and  picturesque  narrative. 

As  an  offset  to  these  cases,  complaints  of  being 
cheated  by  the  Sakai  and  Jakun  are  not  infrequently 
made  by  Malays,  and  some  countenance  is  even  lent 
to  these  statements  by  the  high  authority  of  writers 
like  Logan.  There  are,  however,  the  gravest  reasons 
for  disbelieving,  or  at  the  least  for  heavily  discounting, 
all  tales  of  this  kind,  which  it  is  never  safe  to  accept 
without  the  strictest  investigation.  Having  investi- 
gated a  .good  many  Malay  complaints  of  this  sort,  the 
present  writer  is  convinced  that  in  the  majority  of 
cases,  at  all  events,  there  is  as  little  likelihood  of 
Malays  being  cheated  by  any  of  these  wild  races  as 
there  would  be  of  the  wolf  of  the  fable  being 
deceived  by  the  lamb.2  The  Semang  are  perhaps  an 
exception. 

The  most  carefully  collected  government  statistics 
do  not  (as  has  already  been  stated  in  the  first  part  of 
this  book)  bear  out  the  idea  that  the  aborigines  of  the 
Malay  Peninsula  are  destined  to  be  killed  off  by 
the   kindness   of  civilisation.      Their  actual   numbers 


1  Cp.    Clifford,  J.  R.  A.  S.,    S.  £.,       bearing  on   the  same  subject   will    be 
No.  24,  p.  18.  found   in   an  earlier  chapter — that  on 

2  A   good    deal    more    information       "  Modes  of  Barter." 


524  DEALINGS   WITH  OTHER  RACES  iart  ii 


(especially  when  the  small  but  necessary  allowance  is 
made  for  wastage  through  the  conversion  of  an  in- 
creasing number  to  Islam)  have  certainly  not  decreased 
to  any  appreciable  extent,  and  the  position  of  all  the 
tribes,  as  a  whole,  is  gradually  improving.  The 
policy  of  reserves  is  obviously  unsuited  for  a  race 
in  which  the  nomadic  instinct  is  so  strong  ;  to 
confine  a  head  of  deer  in  a  buffalo-pen  must  needs 
be  fatal  to  the  deer.  A  just  and  strong  govern- 
ment has  already  given  them  what  they  most 
required,  viz.  protection  against  their  most  powerful 
and  aggressive  compatriots  the  Malays.  The  raids  of 
the  latter,  which  were  once  so  common,  have  now  been 
rigorously  repressed,  the  result  being  that  the  relations 
between  the  aborigines  and  their  quondam  persecutors 
are  much  improved,  though  the  necessity  for  constant 
vigilance  has  not  by  any  means  as  yet  been  super- 
seded. In  spite  of  the  devoted  labours  of  the 
missionaries — more  especially  those  of  the  Roman 
Catholic  persuasion,  who  find  in  the  simple  hearts 
of  this  wild  and  untutored  jungle-folk  the  very  best 
possible  soil  for  the  sowing  of  their  seed  —  it  is 
perhaps  most  probable  that  the  ultimate  destiny  of 
the  great  majority  of  these  wild  folk  is  absorption 
into  the  Mohammedan  population.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  fact  is,  and  it  is  but  scant  justice  to  acknowledge 
it,  that  rude  and  uncultivated  as  these  people  are, 
yet  in  some  respects  they  are  vastly  superior  to 
the  races  by  whom  they  are  likely  to  be  absorbed — 
more  honest,  more  truthful,  less  covetous,  more  free 
in  every  way  from  crime ;  and  on  this  account,  as 
well  as  on  others,  they  have  a  foremost  claim  on  the 
consideration  of  the  responsible  Government. 


cmap.  m  NEGRITOS  <>/    PEHAK  525 


I.     Semang. 
Dealings  with  Strut 

Semang*.     The  Negrito  Uvea  by  his  bow  and  bl 
pipe  alone,  .uid  sleeps  in  a  temporary  lean-to  shed  in 
spots  where  game  is  plentiful.     The  Sakai  affects  to 

look    down    upon    the    Negrito,    while    the    latter   is   a 

happy-go-lucky,  cheery  little  hunter  who  looks  down 
on  nobod) .' 

The  Semang  are  very  merry  and  lively,  and  even 
their  women  and  young  girls  arc  much  less  wild  than 
those  of  the  Sakai,  and  assail  the  traveller  with  all 
kinds  of  extraordinary  questions.9 

Kedah  Semang". — A  good  many  years  ago  the 
Bendahara  of  Kedah  sent  two  of  the  Kedah  Semang 
for  the  inspection  of  some  of  his  English  friends 
at  Penang  ;  but  shortly  after  leaving  Kedah,  one  of 
them  whose  fears  could  not  be  appeased  became  very 
obstreperous,  and  endeavoured  to  upset  the  small 
boat  in  which  they  were  embarked.  The  Malays, 
therefore,  with  their  usual  apathy  and  indifference  to 
life,  put  the  poor  creature  to  death,  and  threw  him 
overboard ;  the  other  arrived  in  safety,  was  kindly 
treated,  and  received  many  presents  of  cloth  and 
money.  He  was  taken  to  view  the  shops  in  the 
town,  and  purchased  a  variety  of  spades,  hatchets,  and 
other  iron  implements,  which  he  appeared  to  prize 
above  everything  else.  On  his  return  to  Ian  he 
built  himself  a  small  hut,  and  began  to  cultivate  mace, 
sugar-cane,  and  yams.3 

Pepak  Semang*. — In  exchanging  jungle  produce 
(of  the   intrinsic  value   of  which   they  are   ignorant) 

1  Clifford,/.  R.  A.  S.,  S.  />'.,  No.  24,  p.   14. 
-  De  Morgan,  viii.  297.  :1  Anderson,  p.  427. 


526  DEALINGS   WITH  OTHER  RACES  pari  ii 

for  cloth,  the  Semang  are  generally  imposed  upon 
by  the  crafty  Malay,  but  they  in  turn,  however, 
frequently  impose  upon  the  superstitious  Malays, 
when  they  have  no  products  to  barter  and  wish  to 
procure  a  supply  of  tobacco,  by  presenting  them  with 
medicines  which  they  pretend  to  derive  from  parti- 
cular shrubs  and  trees  in  the  woods,  and  which  they 
represent  as  efficacious  for  the  cure  of  headache  and 
other  complaints.1 

I  am  told  by  Mr.  L.  Wray  that  the  Semang  of 
Upper  Perak  have  large  clearings  in  which  they 
cultivate  rice  and  other  grains,  and  have  quite  good 
well-built  houses.  There  are  others  who  appear  to 
live  in  a  more  nomadic  way,  but  even  these  have 
houses  to  which  they  resort  sometimes.  They  go 
at  times  over  the  mountains  to  Selama  and  to  Kedah. 

The  tribes  of  Upper  Perak  are  in  the  position  of 
dependents  to  the  Malays,  and  appear  to  have  been 
so  for  a  long  time  past.  The  Malays  call  them  in 
and  make  them  fell  the  jungle  and  plant  up  their 
ladangs,  collect  jungle  produce,  and  do  house-build- 
ing, etc.,  for  them.  In  exchange  they  give  them  salt, 
salt-fish,  tobacco,  knives,  axes,  etc. 

They  appear  to  have  been  hunted  and  enslaved 
less  than  the  Sakai,2  but  on  the  other  hand  their 
position  has  apparently  affected  them  more  than  some 
other  subject  races,  and  they  are  untruthful,  cunning, 
and  unreliable  to  a  very  marked  degree.  Mr.  Wray 
was  once  for  three  months  living  amongst  them,  and 
this  was  the  conclusion  that  he  arrived  at,  much 
against  his  will.  It  may  not  apply  to  the  wilder 
Negritos. 

1  Anderson,  pp.  425,  426  ;  cp.  De  Morgan,  L' Homme,  ii.  556, 
'-  For  an  instance,  see  p.  530  infra. 


i  map.  m  SAKAJ  <>/■  PERAK 

II.     Sakai. 

Dealings  with  Strangei  . 

Perak  Sakai.  Clifford  says,1  that  m  contrast  to 
the  Negritos,  who  live  .is  hunters  in  slight  l<*an  -  to 
sheds,  the  Sakai  live  in  houses,  and  plant  as  well 
as  hum  ;  and  adds  Further  that  the  Sakai  tribes  are,  for 

the    most    part,    now   split    up   into   innumerable    clans, 

each    consisting   o\   a   few    families   living   in    pla< 

surrounded  by  the  Malays,  and  thus  cut  off  from 
communication  with  each  other,  these  small  clans 
being  more  advanced  in  civilisation,  and  at  the  same 
time  more  degenerate  than  their  brothers  the  Sakai 
of  the  far  interior. 

De  Morgan  says  that,  thanks  to  their  honesty, 
they  can  do  without  police,  and  that  as  often  as  he 
compared  our  feverish  life  in  Europe  with  the  peace- 
ful existence  (of  the  Sakai),  the  comparison  always 
proved  to  the  advantage  of  the  latter.2 

Hale,  who  saw  a  great  deal  of  the  Sakai  people 
in  Perak,  invariably  found  them  (where  not  demo- 
ralised by  Malay  intercourse)  most  kind  and  simple- 
hearted,  and  always  anxious  to  do  their  best  to 
assist  any  white  man  that  happened  to  be  in  want  of 
assistance.  He  found  this,  moreover,  the  general 
opinion  amongst  those  who  had  had  dealings  with 
these  tribes.  As  has  already  been  stated  in  the  case 
of  the  Semang,  the  Sakai  in  their  natural  state  were 
given  neither  to  lying  or  cheating,  though,  on  the  other 
hand,  they  themselves  are  often  the  victims  of  the 
most  shameless  imposture  on  the  part  of  the  Malays.3 

1  /.  JR.  A.  S.,  S.  B.t  No.  24,  p.  14. 
2  De  Morgan,  vii.  425  ;  cp.  VHomme,  ii.  556-559.  3  Hale,  p.  286. 


528  DEALINGS  WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  n 


Hale  adds  that,  the  Malays  themselves  cheated 
the  Sakai  most  remorselessly.  He  was  informed 
by  one  of  his  men  that  he  could  always  get  tin  ore 
sufficient  to  smelt  ten  kati's  [rather  over  13  pounds] 
of  tin  for  a  jungle-knife  ("  parang")  worth  only  thirty 
cents.1 

They  are  a  most  peaceful  race,  and  now  at  all 
events  never  make  war  on  each  other  or  go  in  for 
any  sort  of  inter-tribal  fighting.  They  are  affectionate 
and  faithful  both  to  their  family  and  friends,  and  will 
treasure  objects  which  belonged  to  the  deceased. - 
For  the  rest  we  may  accept  the  statement  that  they 
are  by  no  means  stupid,  but  very  much  the  reverse 
in  all  matters  that  even  indirectly  concern  their  own 
interests.  They  are  incapable,  however,  of  standing 
any  prolonged  mental  strain,  and  their  inventive 
faculties  seem  dormant  rather  than  non  -  existent. 
When  the  occasion  arises  they  are  by  no  means  want- 
ing in  resource.3 

The  Sakai  of  Perak  (as  Mr.  L.  Wray  writes  me) 
are  quite  independent  except  in  a  few  places.  They 
were,  in  Malay  times,  hunted  like  wild  beasts,  and 
when  captured  enslaved  by  the  Malays.  At  the 
same  time  there  seems  to  have  been  a  certain  amount 
of  intercourse  kept  up  between  the  two  races  in  the 
shape  of  a  traffic  in  jungle  produce  and  tin  ore,  on 
the  one  part,  and  knives,  axes,  cooking-pots,  salt, 
cloth,  etc.,  on   the  other.     A  few  isolated  tribes  are 


1  I    am    not    quite    sure,    however,  Cp.    also     Montano    (quoted    by    De 

that  some  injustice  is  not  done  to  the  Quatrefages,    pp.     226,     227):     "M. 

Malays  in  this  particular    respect,   as  Montano  informs  us  that    they  never 

Mr.    Hale    (p.    287),    himself  records  make  war  on  each  other,  and  that  the 

instances  in  which  articles  were  offered  parents     watch    tenderly     over     their 

to  him  by  the  Sakai  at  a  ridiculously  children,  and  will  even  when  necessary 

low  valuation.  deprive    themselves    of  food    on   their 

23  Hale  mJ.A.I.  pp.   291,  292.  account." 


chai.  xi  /A'.//  OF  Pi  RAA 

still  to  be  found,   Mich  as  the  Sakai  oi    Blanja  and 
those  at    Till. in  Tiga  ("Three   Islands")  in    Bata 
Padang,    both   <>i    which    have    maintained    their    in 
dependence  though  completely  surrounded  l>y  Mala 
The  Sakai  are  very  Bhy,  but  are  truthful  and  hoiv 
Those  oi  Batang   Padang  have  lately  taken  to  ^roin^ 
by  the  railway  down  to    relok  Anson  to  sell  rattans, 
dammar,  and  other  jungle  products  at   better  pri< 
than   they   could   get    From    the   up-country   Malays. 
They  are  now  beginning  to  show  a  fondness  for  dress, 

and    it    is  no  uncommon  sight    to  see   a   party  of  Sakai 

women  coming   into  the   towns  very   much   smarter 

and     better     dressed     than     the     average     of    Malay 
women. 

Mr.  Wray  tells  me  that  he  has  known  several  in- 
stances of  Sakai  living  in  Malay  Kampongs  in  Larut 
and  Kuala  Kangsar,  not  as  slaves  but  as  independent 
land-  and  house-holders. 

Before  the  emancipation  of  the  slaves  in  1882-83, 
there  were  many  Sakai  women  in  the  houses  of 
the  Malays,  and  quite  a  considerable  number  remained 
after  that  date.  The  children  appear  to  be  treated 
just  the  same  as  the  wholly  Malayan  members  of  the 
family. 

Mr.  Wray  adds,  that  the  Sakai  of  Perak,  who  are 
in  touch  with  the  Malays,  employ  the  Malay  numerals 
up  to  quite  high  figures,  and  are  sharp  in  money 
transactions.  In  the  eighties  he  saw  an  excellent 
instance  of  this  at  Batu  Pipis  in  Kinta.  In  paying 
for  some  things  he  gave  some  coppers  to  a  Sakai,  who 
picked  out  a  Sarawak  cent  and  gave  it  back,  asking 
for  a  Straits  cent  in  exchange. 

The   following   passage    by   M.   Maclay  gives  an 
accurate  picture  of  the  hostile  relations  still  subsisting 
vol.  1  2  M 


530  DEALINGS   WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  ii 

in  some  parts  between  the  Malays  and  aborigines.1 
Maclay  remarks  that  if  the  "  tamer  "  Sakai  are  some- 
what dependent  upon  the  Malays,  the  "  wilder"  ones 
remain  decidedly  hostile  to  them,  and  never  lose  an 
opportunity  of  taking  revenge  on  these  foes  of  theirs, 
who  by  continually  laying  out  new  plantations  diminish 
the  territory  of  the  original  inhabitants,  get  the  pro- 
duce of  the  jungle  from  them  for  a  mere  trifle,  and 
also,  whenever  they  can  possibly  do  so,  capture  their 
children  in  order  to  keep  them  or  sell  them  as  slaves. 
This  man-hunting,  which  is  now  very  rarely  practised 
by  the  Malays,  was  formerly  practised  on  a  larger 
scale,  and  in  many  districts  where  numerous  tribes 
of  the  original  inhabitants  used  formerly  to  dwell, 
no  traces  of  them  are  now  to  be  found.  The 
Malays,  however,  in  spite  of  their  superiority  in 
all  respects  to  these  denizens  of  the  jungle,  are 
nevertheless  very  much  afraid  of  them,  and  do  not 
venture  either  alone  or  in  too  small  parties  into  those 
parts  of  the  forest  which  the  wilder  aborigines  are 
known  to  frequent.2 

L.  Wray  has  remarked  that  Sakai  tracks,  where- 
ever  possible,  invariably  follow  the  bed  of  some 
stream,  and  there  is  thus  nothing  to  guide  anybody 
in  attempting  to  follow  them.  This,  he  was  informed, 
was  intentional,  and  in  times  past  wTas  a  necessary 
measure  to  prevent  their  being  followed  and  hunted 
out  of  their  mountain  homes  by  the  Malays.3 


1    Maclay  in  writing  of  the  Pangan,  jurisdiction   of  the   F.  M.  S.       For  an 

whom  he  calls  Sakai.     J.R.A.S.,  S.B.,  instance    in    which    six     Malays    were 

No.   2,    pp.    212,    213.       It    is,    how-  severely    punished,     see     Maxwell     in 

ever,  bare  justice  to  the  Government  of  J.  R.  A.  S.,   S.  B.,  No.  4,  p.  46. 

the     British    Protectorate    to    say   that  2  Miklucho  Maclay   in  J.  R.  A.  S., 

the  raiding  of  the  aborigines  by  Malays  S.  B.,   No.  2,  p.  213. 

has   been  sternly  repressed,   whenever  3  J.  R.  A.  S.,    S.  B.t   No.    21,    pp. 

the  opportunity  has  offered,  within  the  163,  164. 


\i  SAKA1  0/  SE1  4NG0H 

The  "  tamer "  Sakai,  on  the  other  hand,  even 
when  exploited  by  the  Malays,  frequently  stand  on 
somcwh.it  better  terms  with  them.  It  is  in  this  lighter 
vein  that  a   French  traveller  in   Perak  (M.  Brau  de 

Saint-Pol   Lias)1   writes, is  follows  :  — 

"I  approach  an  old  man  with  a  round,  good- 
natured  face,  white  hair,  and  grey  moustache  and 
heard,  and  ask  him  his  age. 

"  He  smiles,  hesitates  a  moment,  and  repli< 

"  4  Sa-ribu  !  '   ('a  thousand  '). 

44  The  Malays  annoyingly  break  out  into  a  great 
shout  of  laughter,  whereupon  I  ask  them  : 

"'Why  do  you  laugh  like  fools?  Perhaps  he 
means  a  thousand  months.  Which  of  you  can  tell  me 
how  many  years  that  makes  ?  ' 

44  They  hold  their  peace. 

44  I  return  to  my  Sakai.  I  am  determined  to  clear 
up  the  point  at  once,  and  to  find  out  if  the  Sakai, 
as  I  have  been  told,  can  really  only  count  up  to 
three. 

44  4  Sa-ribu  !  That  is  perhaps  too  much,'  I  say  to 
the  good-natured  old  man  ;  4  it  is  too  much.  Let  us 
see  about  how  much  it  is  approximately.' 

44  4  Sa-ratus  '  (4  a  hundred  '),  he  replies  quickly. 

44  4  That  is  still  too  much.  Perhaps  you  mean 
sixty  ? ' 

44  4  Yes,  sixty.' 

44 1  have  not  settled  the  point  yet."  ' 

Selangfor  Sakai.  —  The  nomadic  instinct  of  the 
Sakai  dies  hard,  even  among  the  more  settled  tribes, 
and  Letessier  records  the  fact  that  many  Sakai 
who  had  been  enslaved  and  converted  by  the  Malays 
have  taken  the  advantage  of  the  establishment  of  the 

1  Brau  de  Saint-Pol  Lias,  pp.  251-253. 


532  DEALINGS   WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  n 

British  power  in  the  Peninsula  "  and  for  the  most  part 
gone  back  to  their  hunting  of  monkeys  and  wild 
pigs."1  Their  wonderful  knowledge  of  the  jungle 
and  instinct  in  finding  and  capturing  game  has  been 
referred  to  elsewhere. 

It  cannot  be  denied  that  they  are,  generally  speak- 
ing, dirty  to  an  extreme  as  compared  with  the  Malays, 
scarcely  any  of  them  bathe  except  when  caught  in  the 
rain,  and  a  great  number  of  them,  more  especially 
the  members  of  the  inland  tribes,  suffer  from  some 
more  or  less  advanced  stage  of  skin  disease,  which 
is  due,  no  doubt,  entirely  to  their  way  of  living. 
There  is,  however,  a  good  deal  of  difference  in  this 
respect  between  the  inland  tribes  and  those  near  the 
coast  who  have  come  to  a  greater  extent  under  Malay 
influences. 

They  are  also  often  very  lazy,  and,  as  might  be 
expected,  improvident,  both  characteristics  being  due 
to  the  life  which  they  lead. 

In  many  respects  the  Sakai  of  Kuala  Lumpur  are 
far  better  off  than  their  forefathers  were  in  the  days 
when  Malay  influence  was  predominant  in  the  Pen- 
insula. In  those  days,  as  Letessier  says,2  they  had  no 
fixed  abode.  Hunted  by  the  Malays,  who  stole 
their  children,  they  were  forced  to  leave  their  dwell- 
ings and  fly  hither  and  thither,  passing  the  night  in 
caves  or  in  huts  ("  pondok  "),  which  they  burnt  on  their 
departure.  "  In  those  days,"  they  say,  "we  never 
walked  in  the  beaten  tracks  lest  the  print  of  our 
footsteps  in  the  mud  should  betray  us."  For  wherever 
the  Malay  perceived  any  indication  of  their  presence, 
he   would   build   himself  a    small    shelter,  and   never 

1  Letessier,  p.  ioo.      Cp.  Maxwell,  J.  R.  A.  S.,  S.  £.,  No.  I,  pp.  112,  113. 

2  Letessier,  p.  100. 


i  hap.  m  SAKAJ  <>/■  SELANGOR  S33 


leave  it  until  he  bad  disco*  er<ed  tin-  plat  e  ol  ret  n 
where  they  generally  spent  the  night.     Accompanied 
bj  a  lew  accomplices,  he  would  then  repair  to  the  sp 
at  nightfall,  and  the  party,  concealing  them  •  until 

dark,  would  wait  to  commence  their  raid  until  the 
"  1  lill  men  "  were  asleep.  The  Malays  would  then  fire 
several  rifle  shots,  spreading  terror  and  confusion 
in  every  family,  whose  breaking  up  made  them  an 

easy  prey  to  their  assailants,  who  would  promptly 
make  a  rush  lor  the  spot  where  they  heard  the  shrieks 
the  women  and  children.  The  girls  were,  as  a  rule, 
at  once  knocked  on  the  head,  and  the  boys  were  carried 
off  and  sold  as  slaves.  There  is  hardly  a  family  that 
has  not  its  own  especial  calamity  to  relate,  the  result 
being  the  profound  aversion  that  they  avowedly 
cherish  for  the  Malay  ;  no  hatred,  however,  exists  nor 
desire  for  vengeance,  as  such  a  feeling  would  be 
incompatible  with  the  extraordinarily  peaceful  nature 
of  the  race.1 

Any  act  of  vengeance,  moreover,  would  be  fatal  to 
them,  in  view  of  their  insignificant  numbers  and  lack 
of  means  of  defence.  They  prefer  therefore  to 
sacrifice  the  part  for  the  whole,  and  this  is  certainly 
the  only  possible  course  open  to  them,  so  far  as 
regards  the  loss  of  their  property.  Since  the  arrival  of 
the  English,  however,  they  have  grown  much  bolder, 
for  as  the  government  has  always  befriended  them 
whenever  they  have  chosen  to  make  a  complaint,  they 
are  now  able  to  hold  their  own  in  spite  of  the  un- 
ceasing menaces  of  their  enemy.*2 

By  the  Chinese,  on  the  other  hand,  they  are  very 
much  more  kindly  treated,  and  are  consequently  much 

1   Letessier,  p.  ioi.  2  Ibid. 


534  DEALINGS  WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  ii 

more  at  home  with  them,  and  deal  with  them  in 
preference  to  the  Malays.1 

Finally,  we  are  told  by  Letessier  that  what  chiefly 
distinguishes  the  Sakai  from  the  Malays  is  the 
natural  simplicity  of  their  manner.  They  have  a 
childlike  openness  of  speech  and  are  scrupulously  just 
in  their  dealings.  This  uprightness  and  simplicity  is 
so  visibly  expressed  on  their  frank  and  smiling 
countenances,  that  even  when  they  are  attired  like 
Malays  it  is  almost  invariably  possible  to  recognise 
them  when  encountered  on  a  journey.  Both  their 
food  and  clothing  are  as  simple  as  possible  ;  they  find 
all  their  wants  supplied  by  the  forest. 

Sakai  of  Ulu  Langat. — Campbell,  in  writing  of  the 
Ulu  Langat  Sakai,  states  that  their  manners  were 
simple,  and  that  they  were  naturally  liberal,  and 
would  share  anything  in  their  house  with  any  one, 
and  were  hurt  if  their  offer  were  refused.  At  the 
same  time,  they  were  neither  spiteful  nor  vindictive, 
and  though  many  of  them  had  guns,  they  were  not 
brave  enough  to  hunt  the  elephant  or  bison,  and  were 
not  ashamed  to  say  so. 

A  curious  feature  of  their  hospitality,  pointed  out 
by  Campbell,  is  that  whenever  asked  to  do  anything 
they  would  at  once  comply,  but  would  not  as  a  rule 
offer  to  do  it  of  their  own  accord. 

On  the  other  hand,  they  would  not  refuse  any 
gifts  that  might  be  offered  them,  and  indeed  in  most 
cases,  would  look  for  presents  whenever  a  European 
visited  their  settlements. 

Their  mode  of  trading  was  very  simple,  and  they 
never  got  the  best  of  a  bargain.2 

1   Letessier,  p.  99.  2  Campbell,  p.  240. 


chap,  xi  SAVAGE   mm  a  YS  Oh  SELANGOR 

III.       |  \i.i  v 

Besisi.  Like  many  wild  races  in  other  part,,  tl 
are  reticent  and  sh)  ol  Grangers,  and  will  frequently 
hide  in  the  jungle  or  up  trees  when  a  white  man 
visiting  their  settlement  for  the  first  time.  This  shy- 
ness, however,  wears  oil  much  sooner  than  it  does  with 
the  Malay,  so  long  as  the)  are  Well  and  justly  treated  , 
in  lact,  in  many  cases  it  soon  entirely  disappears. 

Their   ignorance   not   unfrequently   takes  a  form 
which    though    natural    enough    in    itself,    appears   « 
ceedingly  comical  to  a  European. 

Batin  Tirus  of  Telok  Pulai  once  asked  Mr.  G.  C. 
Bellamy  if  he  could  take  off  his  boots.  He  apparently 
had  an  idea  that  the  white  man  was  born  with 
boots  on.  Mr.  Bellamy  asked  him  how  old  he 
was,  and  although  he  was  a  great-great-grandfather, 
his  reply  was  "  More  than  ten  years  old"  ("Sapuloh 
tahun  lebih ").  He  put  the  same  question  to  the 
Jinang  at  Sa-jangkang,  and  received  a  similar  reply.1 
I  myself  have  had  exactly  similar  experiences. 

The  Besisi  are  to  a  man  most  hospitable  and 
liberal,  and  their  sense  of  gratitude  is  far  more 
developed  than  is  the  case  with  the  Malays.  Mr. 
Bellamy  adds  that  they  never  forget  a  kindness,  and 
always  remember  the  '  Tuan '  (White  Man)  who 
visited  them  on  such  and  such  an  occasion.2 

If  treated  properly,  they  will  do  almost  anything 
to  oblige.  On  several  occasions  Mr.  Bellamy  had  to 
use  them  as  guides  through  the  jungle,  and  all  that 
he  had  to  do  was  to  state  his  requirements,  when, 
without  any  hesitation  or  bargaining  for  wages,  they 
at  once  afforded  him  the  assistance  required.3 

1  Bellamy,  p.  228.  -  Ibid.  3  Ibid. 


536  DEALINGS   WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  ii 

Mr.  Bellamy  adds  that  although  they  hold  such  a 
low  position  in  the  scale  of  society,  yet  they  are 
perfectly  happy  and  contented.  Their  earthly  bliss  is 
contained,  as  they  themselves  will  tell  you,  in  "  eating, 
working,  and  sleeping,"  and  they  ask  for  nothing  more. 
Meet  them  where  you  will,  either  in  their  wretched 
huts,  in  the  jungle  gathering  fruit  or  honey,  by  the 
seaside  fishing,  or  anywhere  else,  they  are  always 
ready  with  a  cheery  response  to  your  salutation.1 

It  is  certain  that  they  have  never  possessed 
an  alphabet  of  their  own,  though  they  do  possess 
the  tradition  of  a  sacred  volume  ("  Kitab  " 2)  which  is 
said  to  have  been  destroyed  by  fire  many  years  ago. 

But  to  describe  them  as  children,  or  to  assume 
that  their  brain  is  in  a  state  of  arrested  development, 
is  by  no  means  an  adequate  statement  of  the  case. 
They  will  work  very  hard  and  very  rapidly  for  short 
intervals,  even  on  their  own  account,  and  when 
"  sweated  "  by  the  Malays  who  compel  them  to  collect 
jungle  produce,  etc.,  they  will  often  work,  literally 
like  "  slaves,"  for  a  long  while  together.  The  fact 
that  they  have  picked  up  agriculture  when  they  might 
have  got  sufficient  to  supply  all  their  wants  from  the 
forest,  and  had  been  in  the  habit  of  so  doing  for 
hundreds  of  years,  shows  that  they  are  not  incapable 
of  progress.  I  have  even  known  a  small  group  of 
Besisi  families  take  to  the  planting  of  Liberian  coffee, 
whilst  others  have  leased  land  from  the  government, 
have  done  road -work  for  government  officers,  and 
have  even  acquired  such  industries  as  that  of  the 
blacksmith.  I  think,  in  fact,  that  it  can  safely  be  said 
that  the  Malays  can  do  very  little  that  the  Besisi,  if 
taken    young    enough,    and    with    equal    advantages, 

1   Bellamy,  p.  228.  2  Ibid.  p.  227  ;  and  cp.  378,  391,  ante. 


.  mm  SAVAGE    MAI   i  YS  <>/■     I  I  ANGOR  \yi 


could  not  acquire;  though  certainly  tl  oi  them 
vli«>  have  been  spoilt  either  by  opium  smoking  or  other 
M.il.ix  or  (  hineae  vices,  can  hold  their  own  with  their 

achers  in  .1  contest  ol  misapplied  wit         All  the 
facts  help  to  bring  out  what  I  believe  to  be  the  m< 
salient   characteristic  of  these   tribes,   viz.,  their  un- 
rivalled power  of  adaptability. 

Jakun  of  Sungei  Ujong\ — The  [akun  ol  Sungei 
Ujong  were  till  recently  on  no  better  terms  with  the 
Malays  than  the  aborigines  of  Selangor  and  Perak.1 

At  a  Malay  wedding-feast  in  Sungei  Ujong,  some 
of  the  Jakun  guests  (of  whom  nearly  one  hundred 
were  present)  informed  the  Rev.  M.  Iiorie  (a  French 
Roman  Catholic  missionary)  and  Mr.  J.  R.  Logan 
how  unhappy  they  were  in  that  place,  and  what  bad 
treatment  they  experienced  from  the  Malays,  so  much 
so  that  only  a  few  days  before  several  of  them  had 
been  killed  and  wounded  by  order  of  the  Malay  chief. 
They  declared  that  they  intended  to  escape  over  into 
the  Company's  territory,  where  they  hoped  to  find  more 
tranquillity  and  assistance ;  and  asked  the  Europeans 
to  take  them  with  them.  Two  of  them  offered  them- 
selves as  servants  for  ever,  or  rather  as  slaves,  as 
they  intended  not  to  receive  any  pay.  This  was  a 
great  mark  of  confidence,  since  by  so  speaking  they 
took  their  lives  in  their  hands,  for  the  mention  of  their 
design  would  have  undoubtedly  been  the  cause  of 
some  fresh  order  for  killing  the  first  authors  of  this 
resolution,  which  would  have  been  called  a  conspiracy. 
These  requests  were  not  acceded  to,  but  some  advice 
was  given  to  the  aborigines,   the   Europeans  of  the 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  ii.  p.  280.  The  S.  the  tally-stick  as  amnemonic  when  they 
Ujong  tribes,  who  are  no  better  at  want  to  calculate,  v.  Knocker,  Journ. 
counting  than  others  of  their  race,  use       F.  M.  S.  Mus.  vol.  i.  No.  ii.  pp.  60-61. 


538  DEALINGS   WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  ii 

party  intending  to   return  again   to  the  place  after  a 
short  interval.1 

Mantra. — The  Mantra  of  Malacca  have  suffered  like 
other  aboriginal  tribes  from  the  raids  and  incursions  of 
the  neighbouring  Malays,  their  most  implacable  foes 
being  the  members  of  a  Malay  tribe  called  Rawa.  This 
people  are  natives  of  a  country  in  Sumatra  called 
Rawa,  Rau,  and  Ara,  lying  immediately  to  the  north 
of  Menangkabau,  and  penetrated  by  the  large  but 
scarcely  navigable  river  Rakan.  They  are  dis- 
tinguished for  their  trading  character,  and,  as  traders 
and  settlers,  they  have  for  a  long  period,  but  particu- 
larly during  the  last  twenty  or  thirty  years,  annually 
repaired  to  the  Peninsula  opposite,  sometimes  by  way 
of  the  Rakan,  but  more  generally  by  the  river  Siak. 
They  are  bold,  persevering,  and  thrifty,  qualities 
which  have  long  enabled  them  to  engross  the  principal 
internal  traffic  between  Malacca  and  Pahang.  They 
always  go  well  armed,  but  the  chief  source  of  their 
strength  is  their  social  spirit,  which  leads  them  to 
make  common  cause  against  those  who  have  injured 
any  of  their  nation.  They  are  now  settled  in  con- 
siderable numbers  in  Rembau,  Sungei  Ujong,  and 
the  western  part  of  Pahang,  and  their  numbers  and 
power  yearly  increase  and  become  more  formidable. 
Seven  months  before  the  time  of  Logan's  (present) 
memoir,  large  bands  of  them,  under  one  Bata  Bidohom, 
who  was  reputed  invulnerable,  attacked  the  Mantra 
in  several  places,  killing  many  of  the  men  and  carrying 
away  more  than  a  hundred  of  their  women  and  girls 
into  Pahang,  where  they  sold  them  as  slaves.  The 
Rawa  declared  that  they  would  hunt  down  the  Mantra 
everywhere  and  deal  with  them  all  in  the  same  way, 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  ii.  pp.  280,  281. 


I  iia.  f|  .}>,/      MAI  A  YS    Of     MAI  A<  >  A 


in  consequence  ol  which  the  greater  number  oi  Mantra 
left  their  houses  and  became  scattered  far  and  wridc 
about  the  country.1 

At  the  s.unc  time  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the 
enmity  of  the  Malays  is  often  limited  considerably  by 
a  superstitious  fear  of  their  victim 

Amongst  the   Malays   themselves  the  "  tuju,"  or 

Pointing   charm,   and  other  supernatural   arts  are   also 

to  some  extent    practised,    but    their    practitioners    are 

considered  interior  in  power  to  those  of  the  aborigines. 

The  very  circumstance  of  these  tribes  remaining 
unconverted  is  probably  a  principal  cause  of  the  belie! 
crediting  them  with  the  possession  of  unhallowed 
powers.  In  no  country  where  new  creeds  are  received 
is  there  a  total  immediate  abandonment  of  the  ancient 
ones.  So  long  as  the  existence  of  the  old  gods  and 
demons  of  the  land  is  believed  in  there  will  always  be 
multitudes  ready  either  to  ask  their  aid  or  deprecate 
their  wrath,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  they  believe  it 
sinful  to  do  so.  To  this  day  neither  Hinduism,  Islam- 
ism,  nor  Christianity  itself  have  totally  extinguished 
the  ancient  superstitions  of  the  countries  where  they 
prevail.  And  this  same  unreasoning  fear  of  the 
aborigines  has  doubtless  in  numberless  cases  operated 
more  powerfully  in  their  defence  than  the  best  of  laws 
could  have  done.3 

Of  the  visit  of  a  party  of  Mantra  to  Singapore, 
Logan  has  left  a  most  interesting  and  valuable  ac- 
count.4 On  the  occasion  referred  to  his  Malay  writer 
(one  Inche  Mohammed  bin  Haji  Abdul  Fatha,  whom 
he  had  sent  to  Malacca  to  collect  additional  materials 
for  a  comparison  of  the  languages  of  the  aboriginal 

1  J.  1.  A,  vol.  i.  pp.  328*,  329*.  *  3  Ibid.  p.  3 28*. 

4  Ibid.  p.  332*  seqq. 


540  DEALINGS   WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  ii 

tribes)  informed  him  that  he  had  brought  a  party  of 
Mantra  to  his  house  in  Malacca,  and  thought  he  could 
induce  them  to  visit  him  in  Singapore,  so  that  he 
might  be  enabled  to  gain  more  thorough  knowledge  of 
their  character  and  condition.  The  party  in  question 
had  moved  into  British  territory  some  time  previously, 
and  had  settled  at  Rumbiah  on  Mr.  Westerhout's  land. 
Logan  requested  Mohammed  to  bring  them  to  Singa- 
pore, and  they  arrived  there  on  the  1 6th  of  October 
and  remained  till  the  7th  of  November.  The  party 
consisted  of  a  Mantra  named  Pawang  and  his  wife,  a 
second  man  named  Parut  and  his  wife,  and  a  third 
man  named  Tala. 

They  hesitated  much  about  undertaking  the  voyage, 
as  the  members  of  this  race,  like  all  the  tribes  of  the 
interior,  have  a  hereditary  dread  of  the  sea,  and  no 
Mantra  had  ever  ventured  upon  it  from  time  imme- 
morial. When  they  came  on  board  the  "scotchy" 
they  were  at  once  placed  below,  to  prevent  their  being 
frightened  by  the  waves  and  the  motion  of  the  vessel. 
They  soon  became  very  sea-sick,  and  it  was  not  till 
the  boat  was  opposite  Pulau  Pisang  that  one  of  the 
men  had  so  far  recovered  as  to  venture  to  rise  and 
look  round.  But  no  sooner  did  the  rolling  waves 
meet  his  sight  than  he  was  seized  with  fear,  and 
plunged  below  the  deck  again. 

When  they  took  up  their  residence  in  Logan's  com- 
pound they  were  at  first  a  little  reserved,  although  they 
had  evidently  seen  Europeans  frequently.  On  the 
second  and  third  days  their  principal  employment,  while 
their  poisoned  arrows  lasted,  was  to  shoot  birds,  and 
they  soon  discovered  more  species  in  the  "  kampong  " 
than  we  had  ever  observed  ourselves.  On  the  second 
day  they  had  depopulated  all  the  trees.     Amongst  the 


.  mm.   XI  5   //  AG1      MAI  A  V  i    0/    MAI    | 

spoils  which  they  seemed  i<>  prize  most  were  two  om 
and  a  colony  ol  bats.  The  latter  thej  Beized  upon 
with  great  glee,  carried  at  once  to  their  house,  broiled 
slightly,  and  devoured.  Nothing  being  now  left  n 
the  compound,  Logan  took  them  next  evening  along 
the  Garden  Road,  hut  they  <li<l  not  succeed  in  getting 
any  birds,  and  this  mad'-  them  think  Singapore  a  poor 

Country.      Some  clumps  o\~  jungle  on  the  hills    beyond 
Mr.  Caldwell's  villa  redeemed    it  a  little  in    their  ey< 
and    they  were    anxious    to    reach    them,    hut   disliked 

having  to  cross  the  swamps.     Logan  offered  togi 

them  a  small  plantation  if  they  would  remain  in  Singa- 
pore, pointing  to  the  sugar-canes  and  fine  Iruit-tn 
in  the  Chinese  plantations  on  the  side  of  the  road. 
They  said  they  could  not  live  where  there  was  so 
little  forest,  and  as  for  plantations  they  could  make 
clearings  of  their  own  in  Malacca.  They  pointed  to 
Said  Omar's  and  Mr.  Dyce's  hill,  and  asked  what  was 
the  value  of  such  a  house  with  the  hill  and  trees 
around  it.  When  told  that  it  might  sell  for  3000 
dollars,  they  expressed  the  liveliest  astonishment. 
Shortly  afterwards,  when  Pawang  was  describing  the 
mountains  of  his  country,  he  was  asked  for  what  price 
the  Mantra  would  sell  Gunong  Berembun.  He  hesi- 
tated, looked  at  Mr.  Dyce's  hill,  and  at  last  said,  "  Ten 
godowns,"  i.e.  store-houses  ("  sa-puloh  gedong  "). 

Of  all  the  sights  that  they  saw  in  Singapore,  the 
Chinese  Temple  pleased  them  most.  But  after  hav- 
ing visited  the  town,  Telok  Blanga,  Seglap,  and  some 
other  parts  of  the  island,  they  declared  that  Malacca 
was  a  much  finer  place.1 

The  three  men  differed  considerably  in  disposition. 
The   most   remarkable   was    Pawang,    who    displayed 

1  /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  332*,  333*. 


542  DEALINGS  WITH  OTHER  RACES  i  \rt  ii 

much  sense  and  firmness  in  his  character,  and  a  slight 
degree  of  pride  and  reserve  in  his  manner.  He  was 
looked  up  to  by  his  companions  as  a  man  of  superior 
ability  and  knowledge,  and  his  reputed  skill  in  natural 
and  supernatural  medicines  made  him  an  object  of 
much  attention  to  the  Malays  in  the  neighbourhood, 
who  invited  him  to  their  houses  and  visited  him,  to 
solicit  herbs  and  charms.  The  women  in  particular 
regarded  him  as  a  magician  of  undoubted  art,  and 
many,  on  first  approaching  him,  threw  themselves  at 
his  feet.  His  head  was  decidedly  intellectual  in  its 
formation. 

Parut  was  a  picture  of  indolence,  good-nature,  and 
contentedness.  He  seemed  to  enjoy  what  the  passing 
moment  brought,  without  any  intrusion  of  thought  or 
care. 

Tala  was  also  good-natured  and  indolent,  but  more 
lively,  and  not  without  a  little  humour.  He  was 
exceedingly  fond  of  raw  brandy,  and,  when  slightly 
elevated,  danced,  sang,  and  played  on  his  flute — a 
mere  piece  of  bamboo  with  some  holes  in  it.  On  the 
third  evening  he  was  seized  with  melancholy,  his 
thoughts  reverted  to  his  absent  wife,  and  he  sat  for 
some  hours  by  himself  drawing  plaintive  notes  from 
his  flute,  and  singing  of  her,  by  turns,  wThile  the  tears 
coursed  down  his  cheeks.  His  temperament  was 
much  more  excitable  than  that  of  the  others. 

The  women  were  good-natured,  and  one  of  them, 
Pawang's  wife,  was  even  lively.  Whilst  their  con- 
versation was  characterised  by  an  Old  Testament 
simplicity  and  unreserve,  their  manners  were  in  every 
respect  modest. 

The  impression  which  they  made  upon  every  one 
who    saw    much    of  them    was    very   favourable.      In 


i  hap   m  I  VAGI    MAI   I  )  i  0/  MALAi  CA 

manners  the)  w  ere  s< »ti .  simple,  i  andid,  and,  al   l  he 
same  time  independent.     Their  whole  conduct 
m. iikcd  by  a  tone  ol  propriety  and  good  sen         I  bej 
showed  .in  entire  absence  oi  obtrusiveness,  greedine 
deceitfulness,  intolerance,  or  any  other  ol  the  vv 
which  so  often  mar  the  effect  of  the  good  qualities 
possessed  by  many  of  the  races  who  inhabit  Singapore, 

In  a  word,  they  were  perfectly  well  behaved,  and  in- 
spired a  trustfulness  and  liking  which  are  not  often 
awakened  by  Asiatics  in  the  breast  of  the  European.1 

Within  a  fortnight  after  Logan  had  wished  them  a 
safe  voyage  back  to  Malacca,  and  promised  to  visit 
Gunong  Berembun  under  Pawang's  guidance,  a 
rumour  reached  him  that  the  trading  boat  which 
carried  them  away  had  been  wrecked  and  three  of 
them  drowned.  This  most  painful  intelligence  was 
confirmed,  and  the  satisfaction  that  he  had  anticipated 
when  bringing  these  notes  to  a  close,  from  the  hope 
that  some  attention  and  sympathy  might  be  drawn  to 
the  race,  was  embittered  by  the  reflection  that  the 
resolution  of  his  simple  friends  to  overcome  their 
natural  dread  of  the  sea  had  proved  a  fatal  one  to 
them.  It  appears  that  stormy  weather  was  ex- 
perienced from  Pulau  Pisang  to  Padang.  When  off 
the  latter  place,  on  the  14th,  the  boat  being  much 
damaged  and  the  wind  rising  to  a  gale,  the  Malays 
made  for  the  shore.  They  had  nearly  reached  it, 
about  nine  o'clock  at  night,  when,  dreading  that  the 
boat  would  be  dashed  to  pieces,  the  crew  prepared  to 
leap  overboard,  and  wade  to  the  land.  Tala  and 
Pawang's  wife  were  afraid  to  do  so,  but  his  sister  and 
Parut,  her  husband,  consenting,  Pawang  fastened  them 
to  himself  by  their  waist-bands,  saying  that  they  would 

1  /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  333*  334*. 


544  DEALINGS   WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  ii 

live  or  die  together,  and  then  they  all  plunged  into 
the  waves.  They  sank  at  once,  for  it  was  deeper 
than  they  had  believed,  and  the  bottom  being  a  stiff 
mud,  they  never  rose  again.  Next  morning  the 
Malays,  who  had  succeeded  in  reaching  the  shore, 
saw  the  boat  still  holding  together,  and,  on  going  to 
it,  they  found  Tala  and  Pawang's  wife  alive  in  it. 
The  survivors  procured  a  boat  and  arrived  at  Malacca 
on  the  evening  of  the  following  day.1 

Jakun  of  N.  Sembilan. — In  contrast  to  the  bad  treat- 
ment of  these  tribes  is  the  position  of  the  aboriginal 
element  in  Rembau,  of  which  the  late  Mr.  M.  Lister 
has  informed  us  that  the  "  Batins "  or  chiefs  were, 
according  to  ancient  usage,  closely  connected  with 
the  Malay  tribe  from  which  the  Penghulus  of  States 
were  in  nearly  all  cases  elected.  The  four  principal 
Batins  were  those  of  Ulu  Klang,  Sungei  Ujong, 
Jelebu,  and  Johol.  They  had  a  strong  voice  in 
the  election  of  the  Mohammedan  Penghulu.  The 
cause  is  apparent.  The  Menangkabau  colonists 
married  the  daughters  of  Batins.  Their  children 
were  Mohammedans  and  their  female  children  (in 
accordance  with  Menangkabau  law)  inherited  and 
became  the  origin  of  the  "  Waris "  or  tribe  of 
11  Beduanda,"  which  was  declared  to  be  the  inheriting 
civilised  tribe,  whilst  at  they  same  time  they  still  had 
to  recognise  the  Batin  or  Jakun's  powers  in  the 
mountains  and  forests,  and  preserve  their  position 
and  identity  in  connection  with  the  ''Beduanda" 
tribe.2      Hence    came   the   custom   of  female    inheri- 

1  J.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  334*,  335*.  and   other  Malay   pirates  occupying  a 

2  The  reason  for  this  striking  dif-  coast -line,  as  in  the  case  of  Selangor 
ference  in  the  treatment  of  the  Rembau  and  Perak,  driving  back  and  taking  as 
aborigines  are  stated  by  Mr.  Lister  as  slaves  the  non-Mohammedan  aborigines 
follows: — "  First  and  foremost  it  must  of  the  Peninsula  termed  'Semang,' 
be   understood    that  instead    of  Bugis  '  Sakai/   'Jakun,'    and    'Waris   Laut,' 


chap,  \.        SAVAGE    MALA  »      I '/  VBILAN 

tance,  and  according  to  Menangkabau  custom  a  man 
cannot  marry  in  his  own  tribe,  that  is,  in  the  tribe  oi 
his  mother,  Hence  .1  Beduanda  man  must  marry  into 
another  tribe,  and  his  children  b  ilong  to  the  tribe  ol 

tin-  mother.1 

It  is  often  most  interesting  to  converse  with  Batins 
and  [akun  chiefs  on  their  traditions  and  laws,  especially 
in  tracing  the  connection  with  the  Malay  Moham- 
medan customs.  A  Batin  will  invariably  tell  you 
that  all  the  forest  and  waste  lands — called  by  them 
"  Gaung,"  "  Guntong,"  "  Bukit,"  "  Bukau,"  as  inclusive; 
of  everything  uncultivated — belong  to  them.  This  is 
by  origin  correct;  but  there  is  at  the  same  time  no 
doubt  that  they  have  parted  with  their  rights  to  the 
Mohammedan  tribe  of  Beduanda  in  all  cases  of 
government,  concession,  and  taxation.  Still  the 
Dato'  of  Johol  pays  to  the  Batin  of  Johol  a  pro- 
portion of  the  revenues  derived  from  waste  lands 
through  his  minister  the  Jinang  of  Johol,  who  is,  so 
to  speak,  minister  for  the  aborigines.  The  Batins 
often  collect  themselves  where  the  Beduanda  are 
remiss  in  doing  so.  For  instance,  in  Muar  (i.e.  on 
the  reaches  of  the  Muar  river  above  the  Segamat 
boundary),  Batin  Gemala,  who  is  the  principal  Batin 
of  Johol,  declared  that  he  collected  a  fee  that  he  called 


the     people     of     Menangkabau     who  countries  in  which  they  might  quietly 

penetrated    into   the    Negri    Sembilan  settle  and  make  their  home.      Now  it 

vid  Malacca  or  the   Muar  river  came  is   more   than   probable  that  all   these 

as   settlers.       They  came  in  search   of  settlers    came     from     the     interior    of 

pastures   new,   possibly   on   account  of  Sumatra.       They  were  accustomed  to 

troubles  and  disturbances  in  the  State  mountains,  hilly  districts  where  existed 

of  Menangkabau   in   Sumatra,  just   as  rich    alluvial    valleys,    in    which    they 

we  did    in   leaving  English  shores  for  knew    they    would    find     soils    fertile 

the  continent  of  America.      They  were  and   easy   of  irrigation  "   (/.  A\  A.  S., 

no  Rajas  or  warriors  on  the  look-out  .9.  B.,   No.    22,   Dec.    1890,   pp.    299, 

for  conquest  and  plunder,   but  merely  300). 

peaceful     immigrants    from     Sumatra,  *  J.  K.  A.  S.,    S.  £.,     No.     22,    p. 

who    hoped    to    find    fertile    and    rich  302. 

VOL.   I  2  N 


546  DEALINGS  WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  ii 

"  penchong  alas "  from  the  Malays  who  collected 
jungle  produce.  The  amount  of  the  fee  was  insignifi- 
cant, being  one  dollar  per  man  once  in  three  years. 
He  declared  with  pride  that  this  was  the  "  penny-box 
of  the  man  of  the  woods."1  The  simplicity  of  this 
form  of  taxation  was  most  curious,  and  shows  the 
freedom  from  guile  of  the  aboriginal  mind.  He  was 
attempting  at  the  time  of  this  meeting  to  collect  this 
fee  for  the  past  three  years,  not  in  advance.  Lister 
tried  to  assist  him,  but  the  attempt  was  vain.  He  was 
somewhat  indignant  at  the  falseness  of  the  Malay  ;  but 
for  his  own  part,  Lister  was  not  astonished.  In  talking 
of  his  position  with  reference  to  the  Dato'  of  Johol, 
he  said  that  as  between  him  and  the  Dato',  "  custom 
cannot  be  altered,  agreements  cannot  be  changed, 
alliances  cannot  be  revoked." 2  This  is  a  very 
beautiful  expression  of  Malay  fealty  and  loyalty. 
Sometimes  a  Batin  or  Jurukrah,  who  is  minister 
to  the  Batin,  is  very  indignant.  He  will  say,  "  the 
Penghulus3  get  thousands  of  dollars  now  in  selling  our 
forests."  Then  it  is  explained  to  them  how  necessary 
it  is  this  earth  should  be  developed.  They  are  in- 
formed that  they  are  not  able  to  govern  or  regulate 
such  things,  and  that  they  cannot  truly  claim  the  forests 
as  being  theirs  ;  but  that  what  they  can  claim  is  to  have 
all  that  they  require  for  their  maintenance  from  the 
forests.  They  will  then  reply  that  this  is  quite  right, 
and  that  they  are  really  perfectly  happy  as  long  as 
they  have  forests  reserved  to  them,  and  that  they  do 
not  know  what  to  do  with  money.  They  are  delighted 
with  presents  of  tobacco,  stuffs,  and  other  trifles.      If 


1  "Peti  duit  orang  utan."     "Alas"  is  an  obsolete  Malayan  word  for  "jungle." 
2  "  Adat  tiada  berubah,  perjanjian  tiada  beralih,  setia  tiada  bertukar." 

3  I.e.  Lesser  chiefs. 


chap,  m         SAVAGE  MALAYS  "/■   ,\    SE  MB  J  LAN  547 


you  give  them  monej  they  generally  ^«>  home  to  the 
forest  and  bury  it,  never  telling  any  one  where, 
that  on  theirdeath  it  Is  lo        I  here  was  one  man  who 
liked  getting   money,  and  he  alwa)  i  came  alone  to 

Lister  to  ask  for  it.  He  cawu-  .dime  bo  as  to  be 
able  to  bury  the  money  without  difficulty.  II'-  had 
evidently  .1  craving  for  silver,  and  experienced   the 

satisfaction  of  a  miser  in  knowing  that  he  had  money, 
though  he  did  not  make  use  of  it.1 

'ldie  conversation  o(  the  Jakun  is  full  of  proverbs, 
and  they  constantly  quote  sayings  which  have  certainly 
become  Malay,  but  which  often  and  often  are  unknown 
to  Malays  of  the  present  day.  It  is  a  usual  thing  for 
a  Malay  to  exclaim  when  a  Jakun  is  talking,  "  How 
clever  he  is  at  talking!"2  and  to  look  at  him  in 
admiration.  The  Malay,  however,  knows  the  Jakun's 
intense  simplicity  ;  and  if  he  wants  any  advantages 
from  him,  he  will  get  all  he  requires.  He  will  also 
laugh  at  him,  though  in  a  friendly  chaffing  way,  and  it 
is  often  amusing  to  hear  the  Jakun  get  by  far  the  best 
of  the  laugh.3 

The  Jakun  never  object  to  the  collection  of 
revenues  by  British  officials.  They  say  that  the 
English  know  how  to  do  it,  and  that  they  do  it 
rightly,  and  that  it  should  be  so  ;  but  they  say  the 
Malays  know  nothing  about  it,  and  that  when  money 
comes  into  a  Malay  country  it  makes  nothing  but 
difficulties  and  trouble.  They  are  lookers-on,  and  it  is 
hardly  necessary  to  say  howT  correct  their  views  are.4 

A  Jakun  has  the  greatest  dread  of  a  grant  for 
land.  Nothing  will  persuade  him  to  take  out  a 
grant,  and  if  pressed  (which  in  the  Native  States  is 

1  3  4  /.  fi.  A.  S.j  S.  B.,  No.  22,  pp.  302,  303. 
2  "  Pandei  s'kali  chakap." 


548  DEALINGS   WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  ii 

unnecessary),  he  will  leave  the  country  and  travel 
away  into  the  mountains  of  the  interior.  Anything 
binding,  any  direct  taxation  or  registration,  drives 
him  away.1 

The  real  objection  of  the  Jakun  to  taking  out 
grants  for  land  is  because  of  their  custom  that  if  there 
is  a  death  in  the  house,  they  must  leave  the  place  and 
settle  elsewhere,  generally  many  miles  away.2 

The  origin  of  the  land  tenure  in  Rembau  is  very 
curious,  and  probably  unknown  in  any  other  State  of 
the  Malay  Peninsula.  When  the  original  settlers 
arrived  they  ingratiated  themselves  into  the  good  graces 
of  the  aborigines,  and  first  of  all,  no  doubt,  got  free  gifts 
of  forest  land  from  the  Batin.  Later  on  there  probably 
was  competition  for  waste  lands  in  fertile  valleys,  and 
presents  were  given  to  the  Batin  of  the  land.  This 
resulted  later  in  the  sale  of  land  to  the  Mohammedan 
settlers.  The  price  was  a  knife  or  a  weapon,  a  piece 
of  cloth  or  some  article  valued  by  the  Jakun  ;  but  it 
became  an  actual  sale.  According  to  Mohammedan 
law,  land  cannot  be  sold  ;  it  is  God's  land,  and  man 
cannot  sell  it.  Thus  here  we  have  distinctly  the 
aboriginal  origin  in  the  sales  of  waste  lands.  Later, 
as  the  Mohammedans  became  powerful  in  the  country, 
the  Mohammedan  tribe  of  Beduanda  took  up  the  sale 
of  waste  lands  and  made  considerable  profit  by  it  ; 
and  during  the  last  twenty  years  the  Beduanda  chiefs 
have  sold  waste  lands  of,  say,  three  or  four  acres 
in  extent,  for  eight  and  ten  dollars  and  sometimes 
more.3 

As  this  custom  was  against  the  Mohammedan  law, 
it  was  easy  for  the  government  to  put  a  stop  to  an 

1 2  3  j%  Rm  A%  S.,  S.  B.,  No.  22,  pp.  303,  304. 


i  hap,  m        SAVAGE  MALA  I  5  OF  N  SI  \fBJl   I 


usage  which  caused  many  disputes,  much  trouble,  and 
<\  en  bloodshed  in  the  country 

In  an  article  printed  in  this  same  fournal  (i  9) 
Lister  gave  the  dry  Facts  in  connection  with  the 
origin  of  their  constitution.  The  tribes  are  governed 
by  the  " '.Vl.it  Perpatih,"  and  by  the  customs  derived 
from  the  aborigines.  With  the  Raja  Family  this  is 
not  the  case,  and  the  "'Adat  Temenggong"  governs 

property  and  inheritance 

Here   again   is  a  case   that  has   only  been    referred 

to  as  having  created  ill-feeling,  but  which  illustrai 
the  Batin's  influence  in  State  matters.     Batin  Gemala, 

the  principal  Batin  of  Johol,  who  lived  some  miles  in 
the  interior  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Muar  river,  was 
induced,  in  consequence  of  a  number  of  his  people 
becoming  Mohammedans  and  of  other  Mohammedan 
settlers  arriving  in  the  reaches  ("  rantau ")  of  the 
Muar  river  above  Segamat,  to  consider  the  advis- 
ability of  bringing  forward  a  Penghulu.3 

The  Penghulus  of  States  having  by  origin  been 
brought  into  office  by  the  Batin,  this  was  no  doubt 
constitutionally  correct.  Batin  Gemala  brought  the 
individual  whom  he  had  selected  to  the  Dato'  of  Johol 
in  order  that  the  Dato'  should  recognise  this  new 
Penghulu-ship.  The  Dato'  of  Johol  did  so.  He 
thought  it  would  conduce  to  a  settled  population  in 
Muar,  where  formerly,  as  on  many  other  rivers,  the 
people  of  the  "  reaches  "  had  been  nomadic,  moving 
from  reach  to  reach  and  never  permanently  settling. 
The  Penghulu  of  Ladang,  however,  whose  ancestors 
before  him  had  always  ruled  this  district  under  the 
Penghulu  of  Johol,  was  much  annoyed  at  this  new 
departure,  and  the  result  was  quarrels  and  jealousies. 

1  - 3  /.  R.  A,  S.t  S.  B.y  No.  22,  pp.  304,  305. 


55o  DEALINGS   WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  ii 

When  the  Penghulu  of  Muar  subsequently  died,  the 
Dato'  of  Johol  would  not  make  further  experiments 
in  accepting  a  Batin  as  Penghulu.1 

Berembun  Tribes.  —  The  great  superstition  of  the 
Berembun  tribes  is  their  best  safeguard  against  their 
equally  superstitious  though  more  civilised  neighbours. 
The  Malays  and  Chinese  of  Malacca,  with  few  ex- 
ceptions, but  especially  the  Malays  of  Naning, 
Rembau,  and  the  other  States  of  the  interior  of  the 
Peninsula,  have  implicit  faith  in  the  supernatural 
power  of  the  Berembun  Poyangs,  and  believe  that 
many  lay  members  of  the  aboriginal  tribes  are 
imbued  with  it.  Hence  they  are  careful  to  avoid 
offending  the  Berembun  tribes,  because  although 
the  latter  do  not  attempt,  at  the  time,  to  retaliate, 
or  even  use  threats,  they  are  believed  nevertheless 
to  have  taken  the  offence  deeply  to  heart,  with  the 
intention  of  revenging  themselves,  sooner  or  later, 
by  occult  means.  Moreover,  the  Malays,  when  they 
have  the  opportunity,  resort  to  the  Poyang  for  the  cure 
of  various  diseases,  with  which  either  they  themselves 
or  their  relatives  are  troubled.  A  third  motive,  viz., 
revenge,  also  not  infrequently  sends  the  Malays  to 
the  Poyang,  whose  power  is  invoked  with  the  object 
of  causing  disease  and  misfortune,  or  even  death,  to 
any  one  by  whom  they  have  been  injured.2 

War  in  all  its  forms  is  quite  unknown  to  them.3 

Benua-Jakun.  —  But  in  order  to  understand 
thoroughly  the  relationship  between  the  Benua  and  the 
Malayafurtheracquaintance  with  the  Benua  is  necessary. 

To  commence  with,  the  Benua  who  is  not  well 
supplied  with   the  necessaries  of  life  in  considerable 

1  /.  R.  A.  .9.,    S.  £.,    No.    22,    pp.  2  /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  328*. 

310,  311.  3  Ibid.  p.  273. 


i  iim  MAI  A  )  S  i '/    fOHOR  551 

variety  has  nothing  but  his  own  indolence  to  blame. 
As  in  other  communities!  the  condition  ol  individuals 
varies  much,  The  active  and  persevering  do  not 
grudge  their  labour  to  render  themselves  and  their 
families  comfortable.  Their  clearings  are  well  sto<  I 
with  vegetables.  Their  families  are  clothed.  They 
have  their  fishing-hut  and  canoes  on  the  river,  and 
their  durian-grove  and  hut  in  the  forest,  and  they  and 

all  about  them  are  cheerful  and  even  happy.  And  yet 
they  never  have  any  other  capital  than  their  industry. 
Others  again  have!  not  a  tithe  of  their  comforts,  but 
are  so  reconciled  to  their  own  indolence  and  its 
results,  that  they  are  contented  with  their  lot.  I 
soon  found  that  a  large  house  and  a  sufficient  supply 
of  clothing  were  certain  evidences  that  the  head 
of  the  family  was  endowed  with  a  superior  measure 
of  intelligence  and  cheerfulness.  Where  all  are  on 
an  equality,  accumulated  capital  wanting,  and  hardly 
anything  inherited  but  the  common  right  of  taking 
the  produce  of  the  forest,  personal  advantages  are 
the  only  ones  known.  He  who  has  most  intellect 
and  activity  fares  the  best.1 

The  good-humour  and  cheerfulness  of  the  Benua 
are  amongst  their  most  striking  characteristics. 
Their  minds  are  free  from  thought  and  free  from 
care.  They  are  timid,  but  at  the  same  time 
perfectly  independent,  and,  whilst  entirely  exempt 
from  all  servility  of  manner  or  address,  and  want- 
ing in  that  peculiar  courtesy  which  distinguishes 
the  Malay,  they  are  thoroughly  respectful..  Though 
in  address  they  are  abrupt  and  open,  they  have  the 
same  natural  softness  of  manner  and  unwillingness  to 
offend  which  characterise  the  uncontaminated  Malay. 

1  /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  266. 


552  HEALINGS   WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  ii 

Their  plainness  and  modesty  of  manner  is  accompanied 
by  a  mental  candour  and  truthfulness  which  the  Malay 
regards  as  barbarous  simplicity,  but  which  must  attract 
the  sympathy  and  good- will  of  the  European  in  a 
strong  degree,  and  place  them  in  his  estimation  far 
above  all  the  more  civilised  Asiatic  races  with  whom 
he  is  familiar.  Amongst  the  Benua  he  feels  as  if  the 
oppressive  moral  atmosphere  which  surrounds  him 
elsewhere,  were  exchanged  for  a  pure  and  elastic  one, 
in  which  he  can  once  more  breathe  freely.  The 
simplicity  and  openness  of  their  minds,  combined 
with  their  freedom  from  vanity,  levity,  and  any  over- 
weening pride,  communicate  a  tone  of  sense  to  their 
conversation.  In  their  personal  habits  the  Benua 
are  as  cleanly  as  the  Malays.  Their  paucity  of  dress 
even  gives  them  an  advantage  in  this  respect  over 
the  Malay.  They  scrupulously  wash  and  clean  every 
article  of  food  before  cooking  it,  and  reject  meat  that 
is  at  all  tainted.  The  ground  below  the  hut,  as  with 
the  Malays,  is  made  the  receptacle  of  all  the  vegetable 
ddbris  of  their  cookery  and  repasts,  but  it  is  free  from 
the  noisome  smell  which  surrounds  the  dwellings  of 
the  Jakuns.  The  dogs  live  in  the  hut,  but  are  cleanly 
and  receive  their  share  of  wholesome  food.  In  re- 
spect of  the  personal  appearance  of  the  Benua,  it  is 
said  that  the  sensual  predominates  over  the  intellectual 
in  the  expression  of  their  countenances.  In  their 
manners  they  are  perfectly  modest,  while  familiar  and 
open,  and  although  both  sexes  at  all  ages  freely 
associate,  I  did  not  observe  anything  that  could  have 
led  to  the  supposition  that  there  was  not  the  strictest 
reserve  amongst  the  unmarried,  and  fidelity  amongst 
the  married.1 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  267,  268. 


i  kaf,  m  WAGl    MAI   I  KS  Oi   fOH 


To  this  imperfe<  I  sk<  tch  ol  the  <  hara<  ter  ol  l  he 
Benua  it  should  be  added  that  although  le  l  ive 

in   their  feelings  than   the    Berembun   tribes,   who 
pride  takes  offence  .it  the  least  appearance  ol  a  slight 
or  assumption  of  control,  they  would  probably  show 
themselves  reserved,  unsocial,  and  even  sullen  if  tl 

were    HOt    treated    with    kindness    and    respect.       They 

are  less  distrustful,  less  changeful,  and  more  robust  in 

their  character  than  the  Berembun  tribes,  who  require 

to  be  humoured  like  children,  and,  if  they  are  not  80 
treated,  easily  convince  themselves  that  they  are 
wronged,  neglected,  or  treated  with  a  want  of  con- 
sideration. Like  children,  too,  they  are  very  suscep- 
tible to  ilattery.1 

It  is  this  excessive  sensitiveness  both  to  flattery 
and  slight  which  seems  to  supply  that  psychological 
link  between  the  aborigines  and  the  Malays,  which  at 
the  first  contemplation  of  the  great  difference  between 
them,  seems  to  be  wanting.  Civilisation  has  deprived 
the  Malay  of  the  openness  and  simplicity  of  the 
Benua,  and  hardened  him.  But  although  he  has 
substituted  for  a  total  want  of  manner  one  of  the  most 
strongly  marked  manners  possessed  by  any  race,  his 
pristine  sensitiveness  is  covered,  not  conquered.  It 
is  indeed  the  secret  of  much  that  is  peculiar  in  his 
social  deportment.  That  art  of  putting  everything 
in  a  pleasing  point  of  view,  of  softening  and  concealing 
the  natural  asperities  of  a  subject  under  discussion, 
of  rendering  even  that  which  in  other  hands  might 
wound  the  self-love  of  the  person  addressed,  the 
medium  of  a  compliment — an  art  in  which  the  well-bred 
Malay  is  unsurpassed  and  which  the  combined  soft- 
ness, frankness,  and  simple  dignity  of  his  manner  so 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  267,  268. 


554  DEALINGS   WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  11 

well  second, — is  the  growth  of  this  very  sensitiveness. 
He  soothes  and  flatters  others  that  he  himself  may  be 
soothed  and  flattered.  The  command  over  his  own 
passions  and  feelings  which  he  has  obtained  renders 
courtesy  and  politeness  habitual,  but  has  veiled,  not 
subdued,  his  Benua  nature,  and  the  sense  of  wrong, 
when  not  relieved  by  speedy  revenge,  sometimes 
preys  upon  his  mind  till  he  is  goaded  into  fury,  and 
moodiness  becomes  madness.  It  is  another  result  of 
the  inherency  of  the  Benua  disposition  that  many 
Malays,  who  have  not  the  sustained  animal  spirits  or 
firmness  required  by  the  civilisation  and  position 
which  the  race  have  obtained,  are  disposed  to  a 
degree  of  melancholy  which  sometimes  becomes  sullen- 
ness.  Let  the  Benua  be  drawn  from  his  seclusion 
into  intercourse  with  other  nations,  and  his  character 
will  be  emboldened  and  hardened  by  the  change  in 
his  habits,  and  unless  a  more  powerful  and  spiritual 
religion  than  that  of  the  Malays  should  elevate 
him  in  character  as  well  as  in  civilisation,  we  may 
see  him  bring  the  kris  to  the  aid  of  his  spells,  and 
substitute  the  "amok"  for  the  "tuju."  As  yet  the 
race  sits  happy  in  the  ethnic  nursery,  unconscious 
of  the  progress  of  events  which  must  force  it 
from  its  child- like  ignorance  and  peace,  and  teach 
it  to  know  the  corruption  and  the  strife  which 
nations  of  larger  growth  have  found  in  civilisa- 
tion.1 

The  Benua  occasionally  embrace  Islamism,  but 
although  attachment  to  their  old  habits  and  pride  in 
the  antiquity  of  their  race  combine  with  their  want 
of  regard  for  the  Malays  in  rendering  them  averse 
to    this    conversion,   the   Malays  are   persuaded   that 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  269,  270. 


<  map,  \i  WAGE    MAI  A  v     Ok   fOHOR 

they  will  ultimately  l><-  entirely  amalgamated  writh 
them.  This  ii>  .1  fate  which  every  consideration  <<t 
humanity  and  religion  urges  us  i<>  endeavour  to  avert. 
As  yet  ill'-  Benua  preserve  much  <»i  their  natural 
openness  and  honesty  oi  character,  and  their  whole 

disposition     is    such    as    t<>    giv(  HCC    that    they 

would  prove  willing  recipients  <>t   Christianity,  were 

it  presented  to  them  in  its  purity  and  simplicity. 
Were   an    intelligent   and    kindly    missionary    I  tie 

amongst  them,  the  superiority  of  his  character  to  that 
of  the  Malays  would  speedily  gain  for  him  the  in- 
fluence and  authority  of  a  father.  A  great  improve- 
ment in  their  condition  might  be  brought  about  by 
merely  placing  their  intercourse  with  the  Malays  upon 
a  j uster  footing,  to  accomplish  which  the  influence  of 
the  Singapore  government  and  the  authority  of  the 
Temenggong  (the  Sultan  of  Johor)  would,  it  may  be 
anticipated,  be  readily  accorded.1 

To  compare  or  contrast  the  aborigines  of  the  south 
of  the  Peninsula  with  the  Bataks  and  the  Dayaks  and 
the  Malays,  it  need  here  only  be  remarked  that  the 
character  of  the  first  three  races  mentioned  is  essen- 
tially the  same,  and  that  it  may  still  be  recognised 
even  in  the  Malay.'2 

The  Benua  has  less  development  of  intellect,  and 
less  corruption  of  the  passions.  Natural  influences 
are  with  him  greater  than  artificial  ones.  Every 
individual  and  every  family  lives  rather  in  the  pure 
and  fresh  presence  of  nature  than  of  men.  Detached 
in  family  groups  in  the  forest,  Malay  corruption, 
which  would  long  ago  have  reduced  them  to  its  own 
dye  if  it  could  have  operated  on  them  en  masse  in 
villages,  has  found  no  assailable  point.     The  absolute- 

1  /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  291.  2  Ibid. 


556  DEALINGS  WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  ii 

ness  of  the  influence  of  the  family,  and  of  simple  and 
solitary  pursuits,  has  also  prevented  the  internal 
growth  of  vices.  There  is  no  outward  influence  to 
counteract  it.  Society  in  its  turn  contains  no  institu- 
tion or  principle  that  can  interrupt  its  harmony.  Their 
character  and  habits  afford  no  room  for  any  disturb- 
ance of  the  equality  that  reigns  throughout  the  whole 
country.  Hence  there  is  no  appreciable  social  strife 
or  ambition.1 

As  has  been  said,  both  the  Bataks  and  most  of 
the  Dayaks  preserve  the  Benua  character  at  bottom  ; 
but,  unlike  the  Benua,  they  have  elaborated  their 
superstitions  and  their  social  habits,  and  have  acquired 
some  vicious  propensities,  such  as  gambling,  and  the 
unnatural  customs  of  head-hunting  and  cannibalism, 
though  it  is  undeniable  that  the  Bataks  as  a  race 
have  a  greater  prevalence  of  social  virtues  than 
most  European  nations,  and  that  truth,  honesty,  hos- 
pitality, benevolence,  chastity,  absence  of  private 
crimes,  are  here  found  actually  to  co-exist  even  with 
cannibalism.2 

The  Benua  nature,  as  we  have  already  had  occasion 
to  notice,  is  also  very  recognisable  in  the  Malays, 
although  the  pride  and  pretension  engrafted  upon  it 
by  Mohammedanism,  the  bold  and  active  part  which 
they  have  played  in  the  modern  history  of  the  Archi- 
pelago, and  the  influence  of  courts  formed  on  the 
Mohammedan  model  have  obliterated  much  of  its 
simplicity  and  all  its  artlessness.3 

War  is  unknown  to  the  Benua,  as  it  is  to  the 
Berembun  tribes.  The  Menangkabau  Malays  are 
rapidly  increasing  in  the  portion  of  the  Peninsula 
occupied  by  them,  and  are  even  spreading  over  the 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  292,  293.  -  3  Ibid.  p.  293. 


WAGE   .1/  //  A  K!    <>/■  JOHOR  SS7 


interior  of  Pahang,  and,  from  their  (  hinese  like  habit 
of  combining  for  mutual  ends,  are  growing  formidal 
to  the  Pahang  Malays.  It  would  appear  that  they 
deal  more  harshly  with  the  aborigines  than  the  Mala)  i 
of  the  Peninsula,  for  they  are  recorded  to  have 
formerly  attacked  the  Mantra  and  killed  some  oi  their 
Batins.  This  proceeding  drove  many  Mantra  families 
from  the  neighbourhood,  and  small  colonics  found  their 

way  into  the  British  territory  at  the  hack  of  Malacca, 
and  other  places.  The  Mantra  say  that  they  found 
resistance  in  vain,  because,  the  Menangkabau  Malays 
were  armed  with  muskets,  and  had  learnt  the  use 
of  antidotes  to  the  ipoh  poison,  so  that  the  slender 
darts  of  the  blowpipe  inflicted  but  little  injury  upon 
them.1 

Every  outlet  from  the  country  of  the  Benua  is 
occupied  and  guarded  by  Malays,  who,  by  preventing 
the  free  access  of  strangers  and  working  upon  the 
ignorance  and  fears  of  the  Benua,  keep  them  imprisoned 
in  the  interior  of  the  country.  Having  thus  effectually 
locked  them  up  in  the  jungles,  they  prey  upon  them 
in  a  most  unscrupulous  manner.  It  is  probable  that 
if  the  character  of  the  Benua  had  been  weaker  they 
would  have  been  long  since  reduced  to  direct  slavery. 
But  although  timid  and  unwarlike,  they  have  stubborn 
notions  of  right  and  wrong,  and  any  attempt  at  com- 
pulsion is  met  with  an  obstinate  resistance.  The 
Malay,  therefore,  respects  the  independence  and  the 
customs  ("  hadat  ")  of  the  Benua,  adapts  himself  to  his 
notions,  and  has  recourse  to  craft  and  cajolery  to 
attain  his  ends.2     He  treats  his  victims  with  a  great 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  273.  MS.   which  was  forwarded  by  one  of 

-  The  following  passage,  explanatory  the   Selangor   chiefs,   and   purports   to 

of  the  customs  of  the  Benua,  is  trans-  be  the  answer  given  by  the  four  chiefs, 

lated   from   a    copy   of  an   old   Malay  or   Neneks  (i.e.    "  elders,'"   lit.    grand- 


558  DEALINGS  WITH  OTHER  RACES  l  art  ii 

. 

show  of  respect  and  kindness,  and  cheats  them  to 
their  faces  in  the  most  courteous  and  friendly  manner. 
Though  he  himself  dreads  the  power  of  their  Poyangs, 
he  is  well  aware  at  the  same  time  of  the  influence  of 
his  bolder  and  more  energetic  and  reckless  character 
on  the  Benua,  and,  when  occasion  requires  it,  talks  of 
his  good-will  being  abused,  of  the  inadequacy  and 
dilatoriness  of  the  return  that  is  being  made  to  him 
for  his  advance,  and  hints  that  if  his  debtor  does  not 
prove  more  diligent,  he  will  not  be  able  to  restrain  his 
anger.1 

Jakun  of  Johor.  —  The  Jakun  tribes  are  entirely 
inoffensive,  having  an  excellent  temper ;  they  are 
generally  kind,  affable,  inclined  to  gratitude  and  to 
beneficence.  Hospitality  is  much  practised  amongst 
them,  not  only  towards  other  Jakun  but  towards  any 
stranger  who  reaches  their  habitations.  All  Indian 
nations  are  much  inclined  to  begging  ;  and  anything 
they  happen  to  see  that  pleases  them  they  ask  of  the 
owner,  when  they  know  that  there  is  no  means  to 
steal  it,  and  sometimes  their  demands  are  so  frequent 
and  repeated  as  to  appear  very  importunate.  The 
Jakun,  however,  are  not  so  ;  they  differ  much  in  this 
respect  from  other  Indians  ;  they  are  liberal  and 
generous.      When  visited  they  very  seldom  ask  for 

fathers),   who  were  summoned    to   the  lofty   branches,   where   the   '  Kempas ' 

presence   of  Mahomed   Shah,   king   of  links    its    knots,     there    we    love    to 

Johor  : —  sojourn.      Our  weapons  are  the  blow- 

"  We   wish    to    return    to    our    old  pipe  ('temiang'),   and    the   quiver    of 

customs,  to  ascend  the  lofty  mountain,  arrows    imbued    in  the    gum    of    the 

to  dive  into  the  earth's  deep  caverns,  deadly  '  Telak '  (sic).      The  fluid  most 

to    traverse    the    boundless    forest,    to  delicious  to  us  is  the  limpid  water  that 

repose,  with  our  head  pillowed  on  the  lodges   in  the   hollow  of  trees,   where 

knotted   trunk  on   the    '  Durian '  tree,  the    branches   unite   with   the    trunk  ; 

and  curtained  by  '  Resam '  leaves.     To  and  our   food    consists   of   the   tender 

wear  garments  made  from   the  leaves  shoots    of    the    fragrant    'Jemantong' 

of    the    '  Lumbah,"    or    '  T'rap '    tree,  and  the  delicate  flesh  of  the  bounding 

and    a    headdress    of  '  Bajah '   leaves.  deer." — Newbold,  pp.  394,  395. 

Where  the   '  Meranti ;  trees  join  their  1  J.  I,  A.  vol.  i.  p.  285. 


chap,  m  -  I  AGE  MAI  A  I      Of  /<>//<>/: 


anything,  and  will  never  refuse  what  is  islced  From 
them ;  and  when  after  asking  their  visitor  r<  to 

(.ike  anything,  they  will  press  him  todo  Th 

very  seldom  have  quarrels  among  themselves,  and 
their  disputes  are  usually  settled  l>y  their  Batins  or 
chiefs  without  any  display  <>t  malice  or  fighting.  Their 
laws  allow  of  punishments  for  several  sorts  of"  crime, 

but    the     Batin    seldom    has    occasion    to    apply    them. 

Candour  and   honesty,  qualities  verj    rare   in    India, 

and  perhaps  so  in  all  Asia,  are  notwithstanding  found 
amongst  the  Jakun.  It  is  remarkable  that  they  abhor 
lying  and  thieving,  not  in  words  as  the  Malay,  but 
really  and  in  practice.  They  are  never  known  to 
steal  anything,  not  even  the  most  insignificant  trifie. 
These  remarkable  qualities  have  on  more  than  one 
occasion  induced  persons  to  attempt  to  domesticate 
them,  but  the  result  has  generally  been  the  disappear- 
ance of  the  Jakun  upon  the  slightest  coercion.  A  Mr. 
Lewis,  formerly  Assistant  Resident  at  Penang,  had 
for  some  time  a  Jakun  family  in  his  house.  They 
appeared  at  first  to  be  very  glad  of  their  position,  but 
having  been  one  day  employed  in  some  servile  work, 
they  fled  away  and  appeared  no  more.  The  reason 
is  that  the  Jakun  are  extremely  proud,  and  will  not 
submit  for  any  length  of  time  to  servile  offices  or  to 
much  control.  This,  if  it  was  a  defect,  was  the  only 
one  that  Logan  remarked  in  them. 1 

Europeans  are  known  to  the  Jakun,  as  a  rule,  by 
report  only,  the  greater  number  of  them  having  never 
seen  a  European.  But  on  account  of  the  great 
number  of  Chinese  in  the  Peninsula,  few  of  them  are 
unaware  of  the  existence  of  China ;  they  are  told,  too, 

1  J.  I,  A.  vol.  ii.  pp.  266,  267. 


r  560  DEALINGS  WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  11 

of  Bengal,  of  Sumatra,  and  of  Siam  ;  these  are  the 
boundaries  of  their  knowledge  in  geography.  Their 
science  in  astronomy  is  yet  more  limited  ;  they  see 
the  sun  rise  and  set  every  day  ;  that  the  moon  some- 
times appears,  sometimes  not ;  they  use  the  light  of 
the  heavenly  bodies  when  present,  and  sleep  when  it 
is  dark,  but  they  have  never  noticed  or  inquired  about 
the  course  of  the  stars  ;  they  scarcely  know  how  many 
days  go  to  the  duration  of  a  moon,  nor  how  many  moons 
go  to  a  year.  They  are  not  at  all  aware  even  of  their 
own  age,  or  of  that  of  their  children  ;  such  observations 
appear  to  them  mere  superfluities  as  being  not  re- 
quired in  their  way  of  living.1  Their  ignorance  of 
such  matters,  however,  may  be  less  surprising  when 
we  remember  that  those  of  the  Malays  themselves 
who  live  in  the  interior  of  the  Peninsula  are  not 
aware  of  all  these  things,  and  that  on  these  subjects 
many  of  them  are  no  better  informed  than  the  Jakun. 
A  thing  in  which  the  Jakun  (especially  those  of  the 
Menangkabau  States)  are  truly  skilled,  is  the  art  of 
using  the  blowpipe  and  poisoned  arrows  ;  as  has  been 
pointed  out  in  speaking  of  their  weapons.  They  have 
no  knowledge  of  writing,  nor  do  they  make  use  of 
any  symbolical  signs.2 

Both  the  intellectual  faculties  of  the  Jakun  and  the 
knowledge  they  evince  are  very  limited  ;  the  reason 
of  which  is  probably,  however,  not  so  much  the  defect 
of  their  intelligence  itself,  as  the  want  of  the  necessary 
means  to  develop  it.  The  Jakun  are  indeed  very 
ignorant,    but   are   also   certainly   capable    of  acquire- 


1   "  The  Jakun  are  entirely  ignorant  the    decimal    calculation,    the    natural 

of  the  first  principles  of  mathematics,  indigitation,    is    adopted    by    them    in 

nor  do  they  know  the  simplest  rules  of  ordinary  use.'" — Newbold,  ii.  394. 
arithmetic.      The  mathematical  instru-  2  J.  LA.  vol.  ii.  p.  251. 

ment  which    probably   gave   origin   to 


«  bap,  m  '  VAGE  mm  A  Y     "/■  fOHOR 


incut;  the)  are  endowed  with  a  Bound  mind,  a  right 
judgment,  and  a  good  memory,      \\\<-\  are  seldom  if 
ever  either  ins. me  or  idiotical;  all  are  more  or  l< 
intelligent,  and   have  all  their  intellectual  faculties  in 

a   sound   state,   corresponding   t<>   the   common   and 

ordinary  rules  of  natut  There   can    I"'    little   doubt 

that    if  they    we're    to    receive    the    same    care    that    is 

given    to    European    children,    they    would    become 

equally  intelligent,  and  possibly  more  susceptible  of  a 
good  education  than  a  great  part  of  the  natives  of 
India.1 

Relations  between  Jakun  and  Malays. 

When  these  two  races,  whose  common  origin  is  in 
many  respects  clear,  are  compared,  it  is  hard  to  avoid  a 
feeling  of  astonishment  on  perceiving  so  remarkable  a 
difference  between  them.  The  dissimilitude  in  their 
physical  appearance  is  very  slight  when  compared 
with  that  which  exists  in  their  manners,  customs,  and 
moral  qualities." 

The  Jakun  and  Malays,  so  different  in  many  points, 
are  notwithstanding  similar  in  some  respects  ;  both  are 
ignorant  and  consequently  superstitious.  In  these 
two  points  they  resemble  each  other,  with  this  differ- 
ence, that  the  Malays  are  ignorant  and  pretentious, 
whereas  the  Jakun  are  ignorant,  but  awrare  of  their 
ignorance ;  and  though  they  are  proud  and  in- 
dependent, yet  they  think  that  others  know  better 
than  themselves  and  thus  easily  endure  to  be  taught. 
Moreover,  though  both  races  are  superstitious,  the 
Malays  are  certainly  more  so  than  the  Jakun  ;  and 
those  of  the  Jakun  who  have  the  least  to  do  with  the 

1  /.  /.  A.  vol.  ii.  p.  248.  a  Ibid.  p.  274. 

VOL.  I  2  O 


562 


DEALINGS   WITH  OTHER  RACES 


PART   II 


Malays   are    at    the    same    time    the    least    supersti- 
tious.1 

The  Jakun  hates  the  Malay,  and  the  Malay 
despises  the  Jakun.  There  is  a  natural  and  un- 
controllable antipathy  between  the  two  races ;  but 
they  stand  in  need  of  each  other,  and  their  mutual 
intercourse  is  indispensable.  The  Jakun  launch  out 
into  incessant  complaints  against  the  Malays,  as  being 
bad   people,   cruel  murderers  ; 2  and,  what   is  no  less 


1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  ii.  pp.  275,  276. 

2  Some  few  years  back  the  Jakun  on 
the  Endau,  that  is  to  say,  the  Endau, 
Sembrong,  and  their  tributaries,  were 
in  comparatively  comfortable  circum- 
stances, procuring  the  produce  of  the 
jungle  for  traders,  and  receiving  the 
ordinary  returns  in  kind,  or  planting 
tapioca,  sweet  potatoes,  sugar-cane,  and 
plantains ;  they  finding  Johor  rule 
comparatively  quiet,  rather  took  to 
the  Johor  side  of  the  Endau,  to  the 
annoyance  of  the  Pahang  authorities. 
These  latter  in  their  jealousy  issued 
an  attractive  but  deceitful  proclama- 
tion intended  to  draw  back  the  runaway 
Jakun  into  Pahang  territory,  on  pretence 
of  celebrating  some  ancestral  feast, 
but  in  reality  with  the  intention  of 
enslaving  them  ;  the  Jakun  were  in- 
duced to  go  into  Pahang,  but  got 
wind  of  what  was  likely  to  happen  in 
time  for  some  of  them  to  get  away. 
On  another  occasion  some  Pahang 
Jakuns  crossed  over  into  Johor 
territory  ;  Che  Ngku  Da  of  Pianggu, 
who  is  the  local  chief  on  the  Pahang 
side,  ordered  them  to  return,  and  shot 
one  of  them  who  did  so  ;  nor  are  the 
foregoing  solitary  instances  of  the  in- 
human treatment  suffered  by  these 
tribes,  as  by  similar  tribes  in  the  north 
of  the  Peninsula,  at  the  hands  of  the 
Malays  ;  but  it  is  needless  to  multiply 
instances,  the  fact  that  it  is  systematic 
is  already  sufficiently  well  known  and 
authenticated,  though  it  has  been 
hitherto  allowed  (except  in  Perak)  to 
remain  an  unnoticed  fact.  What  is 
required  is  that  steps  should  be  taken 


to  make  the  ruling  powers  in  Malay 
States  aware  that  we  can  no  longer 
view  with  indifference  any  toleration 
by  them  of  misconduct  by  any  of  their 
subjects  towards  the  aborigines  resid- 
ing in  their  territories,  and  that  we 
shall  expect  severe  measures  to  be 
adopted  against  any  one  offending  in 
this  way. 

The  Malays  of  Johor,  though  they 
have  not  imitated  the  brutal  conduct  of 
the  Pahang  Malays,  have  nevertheless 
taken  advantage,  though  not  perhaps 
more  than  is  natural,  of  their  superior 
position  in  their  dealings  with  the 
Jakuns.  They  do  not  give  them  the 
fair  market  value  in  kind  for  the 
jungle  produce  they  receive  from  them, 
and  are  not  content  with  an  exchange 
which  brings  them  less  than  100  to 
200  per  cent  profit ;  by  this  means 
they  keep  the  Jakun  constantly  in 
their  debt ;  he  has  learned  wants  now 
which  he  has  to  work  so  hard  to 
satisfy  that  he  has  little  or  no  time 
left  for  the  cultivation  which  would 
formerly  have  kept  him  in  comfort  ; 
still  more  is  this  the  case,  where  they 
are  forced  to  work  for  a  local  Malay 
official,  not  at  the  ordinary  rates  of 
exchange  in  kind,  but  merely  for 
sufficient  rice  to  keep  body  and  soul 
together,  while  they  toil  to  satisfy  his 
grasping  greed.  Treatment  such  as 
this  elicits  comment  even  from  the 
apathetic  Malay,  especially  when  he  is 
a  fellow-sufferer,  perhaps  a  constable 
on  a  station  drawing  a  monthly  salary, 
which  he  seldom  if  ever  enjoys  the 
sight    of,     though    it     is,     no    doubt, 


CHAP.  Kl  WAGl    MALA  VS  <>/■  JOHOR 

criminal   in  their  eyes,  thi<  pilfi  rei  i,  and   liai 

Some  of  them  made  the  sensible  remark  that  the 
numerous  " s£mbahyangs,"  or  prayers  of  the  Mala)  •. 
could  not  be  of  anj  use  to  them  so  long  as  they  re- 
mained addicted  to  so  many  vices;  but  they  took 
great  care  before  thus  expressing  themselves  to  look 

about,  for  they  knew  that  it'  any  Malay  should   chance 

to  overhear  them,  they  would  not  remain  long  un- 
injured. But  the  Jakun  not  only  hates  and  abhors 
the  Malays,  he  tears  them  as  well  ;  and  what  mal. 
his  position  yet  more  irksome,  is  the  necessity  he  is 
under  of  being  obliged  to  trade  with  them.  The 
44  dammar  "  and  other  products  he  finds  in  the  forest 
cannot  be  disposed  of  except  through  the  medium 
of  Malays,  and  this  establishes  a  daily  intercourse 
between  them.  But  what  is  really  surprising  is  that 
in  these  communications  they  always  remain  on  good 
terms,  and  that  although  the  Jakun  is  rude  and  wild, 
he  yet  knows  how  to  give  the  Malay  de  Veau  bhiite 
de  cour,  and  habitually  keep  great  harmony  and  peace 
in  his  relations  with  them.  But  if  the  Jakun  hates 
and  fears  the  Malays,  the  Malays  in  return  both 
despise  and  fear  extremely  the  Jakun.  The  Malays 
consider  the  Jakun  as  infidels  ("  kafir  "),  and  therefore 
despicable,  and  as  being  in  a  rank  only  a  little  higher 
than  animals ;  but  on  the  other  hand  the  Malays 
themselves  are  superstitious  in  the  extreme.  For 
Malays,  everything  they  do  not  understand  is  a 
mystery  ;  everything  not  common  must  be  endowed 


transmitted  regularly  from   Singapore.  taught  them  the  value,  but  which  was 

But    this    is    merely    by    the   way,    an  not   originally  in  their  list  of  articles 

illustration   of  personal    characteristics  of  food  ;  they  have  gone  so  far  as  to  cul- 

which  do  not  end  with  the  Jakun.  tivate  it  for  the  last  thirty  years  when 

The  Jakun  cannot  now  get  on  with-  allowed   the   needful   leisure. — Hervey 

out    rice,  of  which    the    Malays  have  in_/.  R.  A.  S.,  No.  8,  pp.  120-122. 


564  DEALINGS   WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  n 

with  extraordinary  virtue  ;  and  consequently,  to  a 
Malay,  a  Jakun  is  a  supernatural  being,  endowed  with 
supernatural  power,  and  with  an  unlimited  knowledge 
of  the  secrets  of  nature.  He  must  therefore  be 
skilled  in  the  arts  of  divination,  sorcery,  and  fascina- 
tion, and  able  to  do  either  good  or  evil  according  to 
his  pleasure ;  his  blessing  will  be  followed  by  the 
most  extraordinary  success,  and  his  curse  by  the  most 
dreadful  of  disasters.  Whenever  he  hates  a  person 
he  turns  himself  towards  the  house,  and  strikes  two 
sticks  the  one  upon  the  other,  and  thereupon,  what- 
ever may  be  the  distance  between  himself  and  his 
enemy,  the  latter  will  fall  sick,  and  even  die  if  the 
Jakun  perseveres  with  this  ceremony  for  a  few  days' 
duration.  Moreover,  to  a  Malay  the  Jakun  is  a  man 
who,  by  his  nature,  must  necessarily  know  all  the 
properties  of  every  plant,  and  consequently  must  be  a 
clever  physician,  a  belief  which  explains  the  eagerness 
of  Malays  who  are  sick  to  obtain  their  assistance,  or 
at  least  to  obtain  some  medicinal  plants  from  them  ; 
and  these  they  must  obtain  on  any  terms,  because 
they  are  necessary  for  them  to  preserve  their  life.  It 
is  unnecessary  that  a  physician  of  this  sort  should 
actually  visit  the  patient's  house,  since  he  knows 
everything,  he  can  give  in  his  own  house  the  proper 
remedies  to  cure  the  sickness.  He  is  also  gifted  with 
the  power  of  charming  wild  beasts,  even  the  most 
ferocious.  Such  are  the  effects  of  Malay  superstition  ; 
and  this  is  the  reason  why  though  they  despise  the 
Jakun  they  at  the  same  time  fear  them,  and  will  in 
many  circumstances  refrain  from  ill-treating  them.1 

But  if  the  Jakun  hates  the  Malays  and  fears  them, 
it   is  certainly  not  the  result  of  any  natural   timidity, 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  ii.  pp.  272-274. 


.  hap.  xi  SAVAGl    MALA  I  S  I  '/•  JOHOR 

for  they  do  not  do  so  towarda  other  nations  ;  they  do 
not  dislike  the  Chinese,  and  thej  have  a  remarkable 
sympathy  for  Europeans,  and  plao  unlimited  trust  in 
them  after  a  single  interview.  The  reason  is  that 
Europeans  generally  show  .1  security  and  frankness  in 
their  conversation  which  by  its  great  contrast  with  the 
deceitfulness  of  the  Malays  at  once  catches  the  hearts 
o\  this  childlike  race.  They  love  the  European,  and 
attach  themselves  to  him  as  soon  as  they  know  him, 
and  the  slightest  good  office  received  from  him  is  the 
source  of  the  most  unbounded  gratitude.1 

When  Favre  was  journeying  in  Johor,  every  time 
a  Jakun  settlement  was  reached,  and  one  of  the  houses 
entered,  one  of  the  women  of  the  family  would  at  once 
take  a  basket,  disappear,  and  a  few  minutes  after  re- 
enter with  some  yams  or  other  vegetables,  which  were 
cooked  and  offered  to  their  guests  about  half  an  hour 
after  their  arrival.  When  next  day  a  few  small 
articles  were  offered  them  in  return,  they  were  re- 
ceived with  some  appearance  of  shame  ;  so  much  so, 
that  it  was  necessary  to  explain  to  them  that  they 
were  not  intended  as  a  present,  but  in  settlement  of 
a  debt ;  and  that  they  were  merely  offered  according 
to  European  custom,  by  which  a  traveller  must 
always  give  something  to  the  owner  of  the  house 
where  he  happens  to  have  slept.  On  the  contrary, 
whenever  a  Malay  house  was  entered,  the  chief  of 
the  family,  persuaded  that  this  was  a  lucky  windfall 
and  not  to  be  lost,  would  at  once  commence  by  every 
imaginable  means  to  speculate  upon  his  guests  ;  hence 
the  exaggerated  difficulties  that  would  bealleged  against 
continuing  the  journey,  which  was  made  to  appear  im- 
possible for  want  of  coolies,  guides,  etc.,  the  significa- 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  ii.  pp.  277,  278. 


566  DEALINGS   WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  ii 

tion  of  which  was  that,  "  If  you  do  not  give  me  a 
substantial  present,  you  shall  not  pass  farther."  The 
traveller  may  give  as  much  as  is  in  his  power,  but  yet 
this  will  never  be  sufficient.  The  actions  of  these 
Malays  generally  show  low  and  sordid  sentiments, 
whereas  the  Jakun  are  naturally  proud  and  generous.1 

Udai. — The  Udai  are  said  to  be  of  more  savage 
habits  than  the  (purer-bred)  Jakun,  prefer  following 
the  chase  to  the  drudgery  of  agriculture,  and  are  de- 
scribed as  being  without  religion,2  laws,  or  any  form 
of  government.3 

They  have  no  knowledge  of  letters,  and  are 
accused  by  the  Jakun  of  devouring  their  dead  and  of 
cohabiting  with  the  beasts  of  the  forest,  particularly 
the  siamang.  They  go  nearly  naked,  never  wash 
their  bodies,  wear  no  covering  for  the  head,  and  use 
the  blowpipe,  poisoned  arrows,  and  sharpened  palm- 
wood  stakes  as  spears.4 

Orang  Laut  or  Sea-Jakun. 

Orang  Laut  Sletar. — Thomson  describes  the  Orang 
Sletar  and  their  kindred  tribes  as  wild,  ignorant,  and 
indolent.5  Such  sweeping  criticism  of  unknown  tribes, 
however,  is  seldom  of  any  real  value,  and  is  not  in- 
frequently very  far  from  the  truth.  The  following 
detailed  description  of  his  visit  to  the  locality  in  which 
the  Orang  Sletar  lived  is  infinitely  more  valuable  in 
enabling  us  to  form  an  idea  of  the  race  with  which 
we  are  now  dealing. 

One  day,  when  anchored  close  to  the  shore,  several 
small  boats  and  canoes  were  seen  skirting  the  man- 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  ii.  p.  275.  2  I.e.  in  the  popular  sense  of  the  term. 

3  Newbold,  ii.  381,  382.  4  Ibid.  *  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  346*. 


chat,  m  mai   i  VAA  SEA  GYPSI1 

-- ■ 

groves  and  slowly  approaching,     These  proved  to  b  • 
two  families  of  the  Sletar  tribe.      After  careful  ex« 

animation  it  appeared  that  they  were  known  to  the 

Malays    as    "  Orang     Utan    Sletar."       On     their    first 

approach  it  was  difficult  to  avoid  being  struck  with 

the    extreme    squalidness  ol    their   appearance,    united 

as  it  was  to  a  dull  insensibility  to  what  was  going 
forward,  a  marked  contrast  to  the  pertness  of  their 
Malay  conductors,  who  assumed  over  them  an  air  of 
superiority  and  command  which  is  never  witnessed  in 
Malays  when  in  the  presence  of  Europeans  alone,  and 
which  at  once  afforded  a  convenient  standard  for 
judging  of  the  place  which  the  Orang  Sletar  should 
hold  in  the  ranks  of  civilisation.  The  families  con- 
sisted of  two  men,  three  women,  and  several  children 
of  both  sexes.  They  were  at  first  exceedingly  shy, 
and  could  with  great  difficulty  be  prevailed  on  to 
speak,  but  by  kindness  of  treatment,  and  some  trifling 
presents,  the  men  were  induced  to  throw  off  a  con- 
siderable deal  of  their  reserve,  so  much  so  that  they 
daily  visited  the  gunboat,  bringing  fish  and  a  few 
birds  for  barter,  and  since  a  system  of  fair  dealing 
with  them  was  strictly  maintained  by  the  commander 
and  his  crew,  they  promised  always  in  future  to  visit 
the  gunboat  to  supply  such  necessaries,  should  she 
ever  enter  their  neighbourhood  again,  and  to  tell  the 
people  of  their  tribe  to  do  the  same.  As  the  result 
of  the  visit  of  the  gunboat  they  were  well  supplied 
with  many  necessaries  (luxuries  to  them),  such  as  rice, 
tobacco,  and  cloth,  in  consequence  of  which  they  took 
great  trouble  in  procuring  what  the  gunboat's  company 
were  most  in  want  of,  viz.  fresh  fish,  and  her  departure, 
it  evidently  appeared,  was  attended  with  considerable 
regret  on  their  side.     On  better  acquaintance,  when 


568  DEALINGS   WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  ii 

asked  why  they  always  used  to  run  away  before  the 
gunboat,  their  simple  reply  was,  that  they  were  afraid 
they  would  be  carried  off  to  Gallang,  a  place  noted 
for  the  fierceness  of  its  pirates,  of  whom  they  bore  a 
great  dread.1 

On  likenesses  of  two  of  them  being  taken  (those 
of  a  man  and  a  woman),  the  man  sat  with  great  steadi- 
ness and  composure,  and  seemed  perfectly  aware  of 
the  meaning  of  the  process.  When  the  sketch  was 
completed  and  shown  to  him  it  elicited  a  slight  smile. 
With  the  other  subject,  however,  considerable  difficulty 
was  encountered.  She  at  first  hid  her  face  beneath 
her  shaggy  matted  locks  that  strayed  in  wild  abund- 
ance over  her  shoulders,  and  would  only  now  and 
then  venture  a  glance  at  the  operations  of  the  pencil. 
No  persuasions  would  induce  her  to  show  her  face, 
till  at  last  her  young  child  was  given  her,  when  she 
took  up  a  position  natural  to  a  mother,  and  the  sketch 
was  accordingly  soon  completed.2 

Opangr  Laut  Sabimba. — Thomson  describes  theOrang 
Sabimba  as  forest  nomads,  possessing  no  boats  or 
canoes,  even  of  the  simplest  construction,  and  as  re- 
garding the  water  "  with  a  degree  of  terror."  3  To 
this  he  adds  that  they  show  a  great  detestation  of 
the  Chinese,  removing  always  from  their  vicinity. 

Elsewhere  we  are  informed  that  their  personal 
appearance  is,  to  say  the  least,  pleasing ;  the  well- 
formed  features  of  the  young  and  the  contented 
placidity  of  countenance  of  the  old  seem  at  once  to 
show  them  to  be  an  improvable  race.  Unshackled  with 
the  dogmas  of  Islam,  and  child-like  in  their  perception 


1  /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  341*,  342*.  -  Ibid.  p.  342*. 

3  Ibid.  p.  347'".      This  statement,   however,   is   evidently  due    to    some    mis- 
apprehension. 


,  hap,  \i  MAI  A  YA  \    U  A  '•  \  PS/1 

of  the  things  of  t  i  i  i  ^  world,  the)  stood  .1-  it  wen  on 
the  threshold  <>i  such  a  Faith  as  Christianity  pr< 
in  its  most  humble,  primitive,  and  purest  form.  I  heir 
address  was  open  and  simple,  their  demeanour  re 
spectful.  Yet  the  Malays  spoke  oi  them  as  being 
little  better  than  baboons,  and  treated  them  as  a  class 
much  inferior  to  themselves.  The  Malay  women  ol 
the  house  iii  which  Logan  was  sheltered  ordered  about 

their  less  fortunate  sisters  in  a  manner  not  to  he  mis- 
taken, and  this  was  allowed  as  a  matter  ol  course.      It 

afforded   considerable    amusement    to   see    how    the 

Malay  women  disposed  the  limbs,  straightened  the 
face,  and  directed  the  eyes  of  a  female  that  was  per- 
suaded to  allow  herself  to  be  sketched,  and  when  she 
had  been  placed  in  a  position  pleasing  to  themselves, 
they  seated  themselves  where  they  could  best  gratify 
their  curiosity.1 

Orang-  Laut  Akik. — Of  the  Orang  Akik  it  is  stated 
that  they  were  expert  divers  and  fishermen,  and  fre- 
quently made  long  voyages  in  their  fragile  vessels. 
They  built  houses,  erecting  temporary  sheds  (or 
"  bagans  ")  along  the  coast  whenever  they  had  occasion 
to  go  ashore  to  build  boats,  mend  nets,  or  collect  dam- 
mar, wood-oil,  etc.  Otherwise  they  resided  along  with 
their  families  in  their  boats  for  months  together,  em- 
ployed in  fishing,  collecting  Agar-agar  (the  Zostera 
of  Linnaeus),  beche-de-mer  (trepang),  etc.  When  the 
season  or  state  of  the  weather  did  not  permit  this, 
they  employed  themselves  in  collecting  wood  and  pork- 
oil ; 2  in  making  boat-awnings  ("  kajangs  "),  nets,  sails, 
cordage,  and  so  forth.3 

The  Orang  Akik  were  excessively  proud,  looking 

1  J.  1.  A.  vol.  i.  pp.  349'-,  350*.     2  Probably  hog*s-grease.    Seep.  241,  n.  2.  ante. 

3  Newbold,  ii.  413,  414. 


570  DEALINGS  WITH  OTHER  RACES  part  ll 

down  upon  the  Malays  as  an  inferior  race,  and  disliked 
theterm  "Rayat"  (or  "  subject")  usually  applied  to  them. 
Like  the  (Land)  Jakun,  they  were  of  a  restless  turn  of 
mind,  and  impatient  of  all  control,  but  passionately 
fond  of  music,  especially  that  of  the  violin.  In  handi- 
crafts they  were  remarkably  ingenious,  particularly  in 
boat-building.  They  considered  the  (Land)  Jakun  as 
their  superiors,  and  showed  them  great  respect.  It 
was  said  that  though  a  Jakun  could  take  an  Akik 
woman  to  wife,  the  Akik  were  not  permitted  to  marry 
with  the  Jakun  females.1 

The  Charge  of  Piracy  against  the  Orang  Laut. 

It  has  often  been  questioned  whether  the  Orang 
Laut  of  the  Johor  coast  have  been  rightly  charged 
with  the  crime  of  piracy,  and  it  certainly  is  very 
highly  probable  that  some  part  of  the  burden  of  the 
charge  is  due  to  their  being  confused  (as  Orang  Laut 
or  "  sea-gypsies,")  with  the  Illanum  and  other  more 
powerful  and  formidable  tribes  of  the  Archipelago. 
Yet  it  must  be  noted  that  Begbie  in  his  table  of  the 
Maritime  Tribes  of  the  Empire  of  Johor  (pp.  271-273 
of  his  Malay  Peninsula,  published  in  1833),  specially 
distinguishes  for  their  piratical  propensities  the  tribes 
of  Sekana,  Gonwn  (?),  Booroo,  Kondoor,  Tumboosoo, 
Laboo,  Temiang,  and  Gallang,  of  which  all  but  three 
were  ruled  by  a  Batin  of  their  own.  The  fact  is  that 
the  Johor  "  sea-gypsies "  formed  but  a  limited  and 
somewhat  insignificant  section  of  the  Orang  Laut,  and 
were  probably  only  piratical  in  a  very  small  way. 

1  Newbold,  ii.  413,  414. 


APPENDIX 


A  PPEN  Di  x. 

1"  \  KT    I.      R  \<    I 

SUOOI   (TED    \i  '.'  i  ■       ' 


Page  28. 


1  .ll 

(     ll.ll.U    1 

Andaman* 

Philippine 

Ah                      v.* 

Height  «>c 

1492  mm. 

I480    nun.    (Mon 

[491     mm.    (5) 

\ 

men 

(1  (65    1031) 

tano,  1  I.  and   II), 

(Skeal  and  I. 

Height  of 

\\«>inen 

1  193  mm. 
(13*0   K5XI) 

I473(Guillemard, 
quoted  l>y  Keane) 
1  |  {o  mm.  (Mon- 

tano,  H.  and  11.) 

law).  1525(13) 
N.A. 

.  (Martin) 
[408    mm.    (3) 

(Skc.it  and  I, aid- 
law).      1445  (3) 

N.A. 

13S7  (Martin) 

hud. 
among    the 

Bambute 

(Shrubsall). 

Skull- 

Decidedly 

Decidedly   brachy- 

Mesaticephalic 

Brachycephalic 

index 

brachycephalic' 

cephalic  ,5 

(Skcat,       Laid- 
law,       Martin),  , 
brachycephalic 
in    skull     men- 
tioned   by  Yir- 
chow,7  and    in 
(iiubauer's.8 
Mesaticephalic, 
X.A. 

among  the  Bam- 
bute,   Baamba, 
and       Barjarjde 
(Shrubsall) 

Hair- 

Woolly      and 

Classed   with    that 

Woolly    (in    the 

Woolly  —  de- 

character 

black,   amount- 

of     the       Anda- 

purest type)  clas- 

scribed as"ord-  ■ 

ing  to  "  sooty  " 

manese.0 

sed  with  that  of 

inary          negro 

(E.  H.  Man) 

Andamanese 
and  Philippine 
Negritos.10 
Ditto,  N.A. 

hair  "     (Shrub-  j 
sail). 

Skin- 

Extremely  black, 

Dark  copper  (Mon- 

Dark-brown 

colour 

''resembling  the 

tano,    quoted    by 

passing   into    a 

hue  of  a  black- 

H.  and  H.) 

glossy        black 

leaded     stove  " 

(Martin,  Skeat, 

(E.  H.  Man) 

and  Laidlaw). 
Never      black, 
N.A. 

1  All  the  Andamanese  statistics  are 
taken  from  Man,  The  Andaman  Islands, 
p.  5  et  seqq.,  except  the  skull-char- 
acter, which  is  given  by  Virchow  in 
V.  B.  G.  E.  xxviii.  153. 

2  Montano,  quoted  by  Hovelacque 
and  Herve,  Pricis  d?  Anthropologic,  p. 
38 1  ;  Keane's  Ethnology ,  pp.  259  et  sea. 

3  N.  Annandale  and  H.  C.  Robinson, 
Fasciculi  Malayenses,  Longmans, 
Green,  and  Co.,  for  University  Press, 
Liverpool  (1903). 


4  From  Sir  H.  Johnston's  The 
Uganda  Protectorate,  vol.  ii.  pp.  478 
et  scq. 

5  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxviii.  153. 

6  Ibid.  '  Ibid. 

s  Infr.  p.  580.  A  brachycephalic  skull 
collected  by  Dr.  Grubauer,  and  pur- 
chased by  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons. 
It  was  described  by  Mr.  W.  L.  H.  Duck- 
worth in  Man  (March  1903,  No.   18). 

<J   V.  B.  G.  A.  xxviii.  152. 

10  Ibid. 


574 


APPENDIX 


Page  31. 


Suggested  Dravido-Ausi  rai.ian  Group. 


Physical 
Characters. 

Vedda.i 

Tamil.2 

Australian.* 

Sakai. 

Height  of 

1533  mm. 

1649  mm.  (64) 

Varies    between 

1495-1548    mm. 

men 

[1460- 1 600] 

?  sex  (Deniker) 

17 10  mm.  (West 
Coast,  Dawson, 
H.     and     H.), 
and   1550  mm. 
S.  and  G.  give 
^166391568 

(Martin) 

[1422-1596, 

V.-St.] 

1535(62  <$) 

N.A. 

Height  of 

1433 

•  •  • 

1568  (1630- 

1437  (Martin) 

women 

[1355-1500] 

I5I5)S.  andG. 

[1314-1469, 

V.-St.] 

1397  (4  9)  N.A. 

Skull- 

Dolichocephalic 

Dolichocephalic 

Dolichocephalic 

Dolichocephalic. 

index 

Mesaticephalic, 

N.A. 

Hair- 

Long,  black,  and 

Long,  black,  and 

Long,  black,  and 

Long,  black,  and 

character 

wavy 

wavy 

wavy 

wavy 
Variable,  N.A. 

Skin- 

Very  variable 

Very  dark  brown, 

Dark  chocolate 

Very       variable 

colour 

passing          into 
black  (?) 4 

brown 

(very    light    to 
dark  yellowish- 
brown) 
Ditto,  N.A. 

1  The   Brothers   Sarasin,   Reise    auf 
Ceylon. 

2  Deniker,  Races  of  Man,  p.  579. 

3  Hovelacque  and   Herve,  op.   cit.  ; 
Spencer  and  Gillen,  Native   Tribes  of 


Central  Australia,  App.  C. 

4  Cp.  Virchow  in  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxviii. 
152  et  seqq.  "Many  Sinhalese,  al- 
though of  Aryan  origin,  are  so  dark  that 
they  have  been  called  quite  black." 


RACIAL   Ml  /Mill 


Malayan  Gi 


Pago  33. 


Phj  li  ii  (  ban 

I..I  mi    1  vi".1 

M.il 

l  [eight  of  men 

AIm. ut        i-,J7       inm. 

[\    St.)l  I  (73  1657 
(Logan)  ;       143 
160S  (Martin). 

1 5N  3  nun.  ( Martin). 
1.(36;*       1    rak, 

Mai.),  N..\. 

I  [eight  <>i  women 

A!.. .ut      1  ]jS     mm. 
(V.  -St.);      1504.5 
(Logan). 

1499  (Martin). 

Skiill-iiiiKx 

Brachycephalic 

Bracbycepha] 
Ditto,  N.A. 

Hair-character 

Straight      or      lank, 

Lank,            somewhat 

somewhat     coarsei 

COariei    and    often 

often   with     bluish- 

of    a    bluish -black 

black  tint   of  Mon- 

type. 

goloid  hair. 

Ditto,  N.A. 

Skin-colour     . 

Dark  reddish  or  cop- 

A   coppery    brown. 

pery   brown,   of    a 
darker  shade    than 

Light  olive,  N.A 

the  Malays. 

Comparison  of  the  Three  Main  Types.        Page  34  et  seqq. 


Feature. 

Semang  (Negrito). 

Sakai  (unidentified). 

Jakun  (Savage  Malay). 

1.  Height    of 

1 49 1  mm. 

1495-1548  mm. 

About     1527     mm. 

Man 

(Skeat     and     Laid- 

(Martin). 

(V. -St.);     1657 

law.)    1525,  N.A. 

1535  (62 <J),  N.A. 

(Logan)  ;     1439- 
1608  (Martin). 

2.  Height    of 

1408  mm. 

1437  mm.  (Martin). 

1378     mm.     [1258   ! 

Woman 

(Skeat     and     Laid- 

(V. -St.);     1504  ; 

law. ) 

(Logan)]. 

3.  Cephalic 

Brachycephalic. 

Dolichocephalic. 

Brachycephalic. 

index 

Mesaticephalic,  N.A. 

Mesaticephalic,  N.A. 

4.  Skin-colour 

Chocolate-brown  to 

Varying    from  dark 

Dark  olive-brown  to 

very    dark   sepia, 

brown  up  to  very 

dark     copper     (a  1 

passing      into     a 

light  brown  (much 

shade  darker  than 

"shiny  black." 

lighter    than    the 
Malays). 

the  Malays). 

1  Logan,  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  305,  see  Table,  infra. 
2  Annandale  and  Robinson,  op.  cit. 


576 


APPENDIX 


Comparison  of  the  Thrke  Main  Types — continued. 


Feature. 

Semang  (Negrito). 

Sakai  (unidentified). 

Jakun  (Savage  Malay). 

5.  Hair     .      . 

Woolly  (short,  crisp 

Wavy,     very     dark 

Straight  or  lank  and 

curls      close      to 

brown   to    black, 

bluish-black  (like 

scalp),  and  black 

mostly  the   latter 

that  of  the  Chinese 

in  colour. 

sometimes      with 

or  Malays). 

Ditto,  N.A. 

a    slight    reddish 
tinge  in  reflected 
light.      Variable, 

N.A. 

6.  Forehead  . 

Low  and  rounded. 

Flat,  and  projecting 
greatly    over    the 
root  of  the  nose. 

Inclined  to  be  square. 

7.  Nose    .     . 

Short,  very  wide,  and 

Small      and      often 

"  Stumpy  "     (thick 

flat  or  spreading. 

slightly  tilted,  with 

and     short,      but 

alse  set  deeper  than 

with   wide  -  open 

the   septum,    and 

nostrils). 

very    deep    nasal 

notch  (Martin). 

8.  Cheeks 

Cheek  -  bones     not 

Cheek-bones    much 

Cheek  -  bones    high 

very  broad  or  pro- 

the broadest  part 

and  well  marked, 

jecting,    and    full 

of  the  face,  both 

like       those      of 

cheeks. 

forehead  and  chin 

Chinese.    Face  as 

being    very    nar- 

a whole  inclined 

row  in  proportion. 

to  be  flattish. 

9.  Eyes    . 

Round,   wide-open, 

Very    dark    brown, 

Dark      brown,      of 

and  straight  (not 

small, semi-closed, 

moderate  size,  and 

oblique).      Iris  a 

horizontal.    Black 

rarely  with  some 

very     rich     dark 

to  reddish-brown 

slight  tendency  to 

brown.     Black  to 

(as    in    Semang), 

the  oblique. 

reddish  -  brown, 

N.A. 

N.A. 

10.  Chin    . 

1  •  Feebly  developed  " 

Long  and  pointed. 

Strong  and  inclined 

(rounded  off  and 

to  be  square. 

often  almost   un- 

marked). 

1 1.  Mouth 

Mouth  rather  large, 

Mouth  of  small  size, 

Mouth    often    large 

and     lips     some- 

with    lower     lip 

and    broad,     but 

times  "  everted." 

full,     loose,    and 
often       conspicu- 
ously projecting. 

lips  well-formed. 

12.  Beard  . 

None    to    speak  of. 

As    a    rule,    a    few- 

As  a  rule  extremely 

When  found,  thin 

straggling    frizzly 

scanty. 

and       straggling, 

chin    hairs,     like 

or       occasionally 

that       of       the 

woolly. 

Vedda's,   but   oc- 
casionally,   in    a 
few    individuals 
who   otherwise 
appear    of     pure 
race,    well  devel- 
oped and  almost 

bushy. 

Page  43. 


Measurements  of  E.  Semang  (Pangan)  of  Kf.lantan  by  Messrs.  Skeat  and  Laidlaw,  tabulated  by  Mr.  W.   L.   H.  Duckworth,  and  reprinted  from  /.  A.  /.  vol.  xxxii.  p.  149. 


\_To  face  pap  577. 


5  i 

!= 

X   . 

5  " 

«  £ 

*  i 

5  . 

E 

■f 

•s 

1 

ja 

^ 

1 

1 

i 

U 

1 

» 

M 

1 
& 

| 

T% 

Name. 

Age 

Sex. 

Race. 

1 

;i 

li 

5o 

Ji 

|i3 

"»* 

% 

™ 

it 

's 

■S 

O 

3 

i 

b>U 

J 

a 

1 

Skin  Colour. 

Eye  Colour. 

Hair  Colour. 

Ear  Shape. 

Teeth. 

'•= 

z_ 

S 

z 

X 

X 

X 

is  a 

■5s 

X 

a 

X 

X 

03 

X 

SI 

X 

1 

CO 

CO 

3 

H 

Si 

H 

fc 

■z. 

£ 

J 

Z 

' 

■ 

Pandak  . 

45 

6 

.548 

.285 

970 

704 

510 

895 

44° 

85 

I2£o 

635 

1745 

365 

■95 

■44 

96 

140 

.20 

■34 

105 

■  70 

42 

45 

31 

Lighter  than 
,  3  (a,  b) 
(Topinard) 

Grey  brown  (d) 

Black,  woolly 

Moderately 
large 

missing,  teeth 
stained  with  betel 

Cham    . 

20 

6 

.5.6 

.285 

973 

770 

582 

884 

408 

80 

■  2J2 

625 

1596 

345 

186 

.48 

■  to 

■43 

120 

■44 

105 

171 

40 

42 

29 

Darker  than 
Pandak 

Dark  brown 

Black,  curly 

Moderately 

large,  lobe  not 

distinct 

? 

- 

3 

Badin     . 

25-27 

6 

1466 

1203 

922 

695 

495 

402 

648 

.560 

340 

188 

■4° 

127 

■  25 

4° 

4' 

32 

3  (Topinard) 

Very  dark 
brown 

Very  brown, 
curly 

5 

4 

Ragong  . 

25-27 

6 

1 

1472 

"" 

906 

698 

524 

811 

388 

68 

^ 

730 

■  566 

310 

.84 

■54 

103 

■38 

140 

"75 

4'-5 

41-5 

31-5 

A  little  lighter 
than  (3) 

Dark  brown 

Closely  curled 

? 

Much    filed,    white 

6 

5 

Petai       . 

35 

6 

0, 

1456 

,,93 

925 

708 

564 

840 

402 

66 

"03 

733 

1545 

3>5 

173 

■45 

93 

140 

119 

126 

99 

170 

4' 

38 

28 

Lighter  than 
Ragong 

Dark  brown, 
pupil  large 

Similar  to 
Ragong 

1 

6  filed,  decay 

Bearded  ;  brow 
ridges  prominent 

6 

Average  Male 

>49'(5) 

1286 

939 

7'5 

535 

857(4) 

408 

75(4) 

.2:9 

674 

1602 

335 

■85 

146 

100(4) 

.38 

■.7(4) 

■34 

■  04(4) 

■  7i(4) 

4" 

41.5 

3° 

.. 

78.9 

,0,-2 

-> 

7 

Badin     . 

'4 

6 

,420 

"79 

933 

750 

568 

382 

72 

„52 

05I 

■389 

3»5 

186 

■42 

■»5 

■25 

■  ■5 

■  30 

88 

167 

35-5 

36 

3° 

3  (Topinard) 
chocolate 

1 

! 

* 

? 

" 

8 

W  Bertik       . 

45 

9 

(?)I420 

1181 

896 

682 

524 

835 

389 

65 

1495 

■75 

'33 

90 

126 

116 

■  20 

n 

150 

39 

36 

32 

Darker  than 
3  (Topinard) 

Dark  brown 

? 

, 

Hardly  any  left 

9 

Moll  Lek 

35 

9 

"379 

"43 

875 

676 

485 

«795 

38- 

«4 

600 

1458 

280 

170 

■43 

95 

126 

"9 

■23 

99 

,64 

42 

40 

34 

? 

' 

1 

« 

! 

Kebang  . 

23-'5 

V 

Orang'  1434 

1 166 

875 

842 

,82 

78 

1.86 

■  8[ 

116 

■  63 

36 

Redder  shade 

Very  dark  rich 

Black  lanky, 

of  No.  3  (Top.) 

brown 

like  Malay 

Average  Female 

N°.(3> 

9 

Pan- 
gan 

1408 

1163 

882 

683 

550 

838 

384 

69 

"73M 

657(0 

1478 

295 

■75 

■42 

95 

■  29 

■■7 

■23 

97 

■59 

39 

38 

32 

-■ 

81.1 

97-4 

9 

Kutum    . 

15-17 

9 

832 

444 

757 

297 

45 

1075 

7'5 

1360 

280 

■74 

142 

106 

86 

■53 

3<J 

34 

3° 

Upper  arm  No. 
5  (Top.),  back 
of  neck  No.  3 
(Top.) 

Dark  brown 

Thick,  short, 
woolly 

Small 

6  upper  teeth  filed 

. 

" 

■3 

("fOlCepai    (in. 

9 

Pan- 

992 

773 

592 

460 

325 

508. 

250 

7to 

210 

168 

no 

100 

"4 

82 

3> 

i" 

No.    3    (Top.) 

Brown,  darker 

! 

Teeth  (milk  denti- 

and 

with  more  red 

than  parents 

tion)  quite   regu- 

(   10    J         fant) 

lar,  upper  median 

large,  laterals 
large,    lower    in- 

cisors  small,    but 

_ 

regular. 

xpressed  in  cm.  and  1 


Page  43. 

Measurements 

OF  E.   Semang 

(Pangan) 

OF    KEL. 

in 

Ih 

u 

i 

V 

J= 

A 

£ 

£  c 

£ 

Ja 

3a 

3 

h3 

T3 

be 

bC 

M 

■j.  9 

be  . 

bo 

M 

e 

11 

C 

O 

Name. 

Age. 

Sex. 

Race. 

£ 

3 
5 

c5  • 

SI 

5  2 

3.8- 

5  • 

2* 

5  • 

•4 

C/3 

u 

'8 

'3 

'0         '5 

'5 

5 

3 

X 

S3 

X 

E* 

K 

X 

s 

'3 

I 

I 

Pandak  . 

45 

6 

1548 

1285 

970 

704 

510 

895 

440 

85 

128 

2 

2 

Chatu     . 

20 

about 

6 

1516 

1285 

973 

770 

582 

884 

408 

80 

125 

3 

l 

3 

Badin 

25-27 
about 

6 

1466 

1203 

922 

695 

495 

402 

122 
I2C 

5 

4 

Ragong  . 

25-27 

6 

q 

1472 

1 201 

906 

698 

524 

811 

388 

68 

Sd 

c 

6 

5 

Petai 

35 

6 

ct 

1456 

1198 

925 

708 

564 

840 

402 

66 

IIC 

6 

Average  Male 

I49l(5) 

1286 

939 

715 

535 

857(4) 

408 

75(4) 

12: 

4 

7 

Badin 

14 

6 

1420 

1179 

933 

750 

568 

382 

72 

II" 

7 

8 

Ya'  Bertik       . 

45 

9 

(?)l420 

1181 

896 

682 

524 

835 

389 

65 

•' 

8 

9 

Moh  Lek 

35 
about 

9 

1379 

"43 

875 

676 

485 

(?)795 

381 

64 

•' 

IO 

IO 

Kebang  . 

23-25 

9 

Orang 

Teku 

1434 

1 166 

875 

692 

542 

842 

382 

78 

"5 

ii 

Average  Female     . 

No.(3) 
about 

9 

Pan- 

gan 

I408 

1 163 

882 

683 

55o 

838 

384 

69 

"7: 

9 

12 

Kutum   . 

15-17 

9 

I326 

1071 

832 

620 

444 

757 

297 

45 

10; 

ii 

*3 

Parents  . 

9 

Pan- 

992 

773 

592 

460 

326 

508 

250 

35 

71 

!N^-{Kepar   (in- 
1     f3     i         fant) 

gan 
and 

Orang 

Teku 

RACIAL    AFFINITIES 


$77 


Pages  38,  89 
Return  showing  i  he   Distribui  ion  oi    i  m  .\i. 

\\i>     Skx      in     BACH      I  >i'i  KI<  i      OB      PHI       Fl  DEKA  P»D 

States  in   [901. 


\l  . 

Fern 

State, 

Distri  1. 

under 

under 

M.         1. 

15- 

<v 

15- 

1  jurat. 

Matang. 

Kuala  Kangsar     . 

139 

402 

107 

373 

541        480 

1,021 

Upper  Perax 

73 

198 

7" 

271        244 

515 

l'erik 

Kinta    .... 

257 

628 

229 

567 

885       796 

1,681 

1  lOwei  Perak 

4i 

47 

47 

54 

88        101 

189 

Batang  Padang    • 

502 

1024 

393 

889 

1526      1282 

2,808 

kiian     .... 

Selama .... 

4 

17 

3 

13 

16 

37 

^New  Territory 

Total     . 
C  Kuala  Lumpur 

230 

776 

128 

597 

1006  |     725 

i,73i 

1246 

3092 

935 

2659 

4338      3644 

7,982 

40 

82 

35 

62 

122         97 

219 

1  Ulu  Selangor 

66 

170 

98 

136 

236       234 

470 

Selangor . 

J  Klang   .... 
j  Kuala  Langat 

34 
157 

59 
290 

38 
181 

41 
271 

93          79 
447        45^ 

172 
899 

1  Kuala  Selangor     . 

1 

1 

i 

l  Ulu  Langat  . 
Total     . 
/"Seremban 

14 

46 

14 

40 

60          54 

114 

3" 

648 

366 

55o 

959       9l6 

1,875 

32 

5i 

26 

48 

83          74 

157 

1  Coast     .... 

47 

64 

22 

5i 

101          73 

174 

a  Jelebu  .... 

9 

57 

20 

39 

66  :       59 

125 

Kuala  Pilah  . 

122 

242 

in 

225 

364        336 

700 

vTampin 

Total    . 

f  Ulu            (  Kuala  Lipis 
|    Pahang  \  Raub  . 

44 

84 

29 

64 

128          93 

221 

244 

498 

208 

427 

742        635 

i,377 

372 

902 

343 

850 

1274  '   1 193 

2,467 

95 

256 

86 

232 

35i   ,     3i3 

669 

Pahang    . 

a  Temerloh 

257 

578 

231 

532 

835        763 

i,598 

Pekan    .... 

no 

242 

123 

237 

493        5°i 

2,39t* 

vKuantan 

Total     . 

27 

99 

20 

69 

126  '       89 

215 

861 

2077 

803 

1920 

3079      2864 

7,340 

Grand  Total 

2662 

j  6315 

2362 

5556 

9118      8059 

i8,574* 

1 

*  Includes  1397  sex  not  given. 
From  the  Census  of  the  Population,  Federated  Malay  States,  1901. 


Measurements  of  E.  Semang  of  Kelantan.    Page  43. 

I.  Residence,  Sungei  Bumit  in  Aring.  Formerly  top  teeth  were  filed  down  with 
sandstone  in  Malay  fashion.  Skin  much  scarred.  Lips  thick  ;  slight  straggly 
beard.      Feet  curved  inwards  and  much  splayed,  little  toe  of  left  foot  missing. 

VOL.   I  2  P 


578  APPENDIX 


Non  -  Mohammedan,    stated    his    age    to    be   2   years.       Formerly   married,    no 

children. 

2.  Residence,  Sungei  Bumit.  Slightly  deaf.  Lips  thick.  Feet  contours 
normal.  Head  shaved  with  a  razor  given  him  by  Penghulu  of  Kampong  Buntal. 
Unmarried.      Pandak's  brother-in-law.      Very  restless. 

3.  Slave  living  near  Kampong  Buntal.  Parents  lived  in  jungle  of  Ulu 
Lebih.  Middle  finger  of  right  hand  deformed.  Age  stated  by  himself  to  be  70 
years.  Married,  with  two  children.  Colour,  3  Topinard's  scale.  Eyes  dark 
rich  brown.      Hair  short,  woolly,  very  dark  dull  brown. 

4.  Brother  of  No.  3.  Slave  captured  when  very  young.  Religion, 
Mohammedan.  Colour,  3  Topinard's  scale.  Colour  vision,  normal  or  nearly 
so,  tendency  not  to  distinguish  between  dark  shades,  dark  purples  being  com- 
pared with  dark  reds,  but  rejected.  The  boy  is  very  nervous  and  taciturn. 
Residence,  Kuala  Aring. 

5.  Residence,  Sungei  Sam.  Son  of  No.  7.  Skin  a  little  lighter  than 
Topinard's  No.  3.  Hair  wiry,  very  closely  curled.  Teeth  not  filed,  much  worn, 
but  white  and  undecayed.  Non-Mohammedan.  A  slave.  Parents,  Pangans  of 
Sungei  Lebih.      Has  a  moustache. 

6.  Petai  or  Pelima.  Residence,  Sungei  Sam.  Skin  a  shade  lighter  than 
No.  5,  covered  with  skin  disease  of  a  mild  type.  Eyes  dark  brown  ;  strongly 
marked  superorbital  ridges.  Eyes  very  restless.  Has  a  moustache  and  beard 
of  woolly  hair.  Six  front  teeth  of  upper  jaw  filed,  slightly  decayed.  Has  a 
humorous  expression  about  the  mouth.      Parents  from  Sungei  Galas. 

7.  Slave  at  Sungei  Sam.  Skin  darker  than  3  (Topinard's).  Feet  much 
splayed,  as  in  No.  I.      Eyes  dark  brown.      Skin  diseased. 

8.  Slave  at  Sungei  Sam. 

9.  Slave  girl  at  Kampong  Buntal.  Unmarried,  but  sexually  mature.  Feet 
and  hands  small  and  delicately  shaped.  Hair  short,  thick,  and  woolly.  Parents 
lived  in  Ulu  Aring.      Inclined  to  steatopygia. 

10.  Wife  of  No.  3.  Skin  rather  redder  than  No.  3  Topinard.  Hair 
black  and  lanky  like  a  Malay's.  Eyes  very  dark  brown.  Parents  and  grand- 
parents Pahang  Sakai  living  on  Sungei  Tahan  ;  tribe  now  moved  down- 
stream. No  Malay  admixture  admitted.  Mother  of  No.  II.  Breasts  very 
pendulous. 

11.  Daughter  of  No.  3  and  No.  10.  Skin  colour,  No.  3  Topinard,  but 
rather  redder.  Eyes  dark  brown,  darker  than  in  parents.  Teeth,  milk  teeth, 
perfectly  regular,  the  upper  front  pair  of  incisors  very  large,  two  next  smaller, 
much  as  in  English  children. 


Note  on  Messrs.  Skeat  and  Laidlaw's  Measurements  of  Pangans 
of  Jarum  by  Dr.  W.  L.  H.  Duckworth. 

In  addition  to  the  recorded  measurements  of  Pangan  Semangs  (cp.  Duck- 
worth, J.  A.  I.,  Jan. -June  1902),  Messrs.  Skeat  and  Laidlaw  have  provided 
measurements  of  three  Pangans  of  Jarum,  and  have  appended  the  following 
notes  : — 

A.  Pa'-Gelugor  :  a  grandfather  ;   name  =  father  of   Gelugor  ;   age  about  45-50; 

slightly  bent  owing  to  an  injury.  The  skin  tint  is  rather  darker  than 
No.  2  (Anth.  Notes  and  Queries).  Eyes  dark  brown  :  hair  black  and 
closely  curled.      Five  teeth  are  filed,  one  broken. 

B.  Kechong  :  wife  of  Pedending  ;  with  three  children  ;  enceinte.      Skin  tint  is 

similar  to  that  of  A  ;  eyes  dark  brown  ;  hair  black,  and  closely  cut  all 
round  head,  except  at  the  back,  on  which  a  tuft  or  "jambul"  is  worn. 
Teeth  white  and  good  ;  six  are  filed. 


RACIAL    AFFINIT1 


f> 

1 1  | 

0        " 

fl 

t.n,  , 

i  |   pfjuoij 

M 

G 

M          M          M 

M 

,  1 

fc   -; 

N        :       i 

• 

£■               'U>l,r":l  [*ju< 

o      o»      « 

M           0           W 

M          M           M 

*2         'tppwag  pnuojj  [vmtuj]^ 

in 

■1 

•t|i|.r.u;|  raprafig                     J     £ 

•l|)|)l-.)l;l    n 

N           CO          W 

~                ■«im,»"-1|,.i                         ^    ^     r 

•iii^n.v,  P»H            ^.  $    £ 

siui\'  jo  credg 

in      in      0 

«        CO          l~» 
■*■        m        m 

M           M           M 

o 

•Minns  n;                           »      ^     ; 

I                    -punojo                          ct      5      S 
iuojj  uimuojv;  jo  aouujsiQ           2       2- 

OO 

•pnnojQ                        ^     M      0 
may  ^piuy  J°  soutjjsiq          *°     °°     *° 

t~« 

•punoiQ                            o       r-      o 

IUOJJ  33U^{  JO  dDUClSlQ                   -*■        2-        5- 

VO 

•punojQ                            co     \o       ■<*- 
uiojj  dij-{  jo  aouejsiQ               n     m      « 

•punojf)  iuojj  isSntj] 
3IPP!  JV  J°  &})  )o  33in-]si(  [ 

00         m        o 
O         O         N 
■»+•       in       in 

•ponojg 

iuojj  jsu_\v  JO  wubisiq 

->        >n       o 
O          Ov       vo 
vo        vo          r^ 

ro 

•punoj*} 

UIOJJ  .\\0qi3  JO  SDUCJSIQ 

N         w        OO 

m       n       m 

CO         Ov        Ov 

M 

•(ajnms  pnoj)  luSiaH             ~      S,      £ 

H           M           M 

E 

i) 

lM 

3 

a 

s 

1— 

o 

6 

"rt 

i     1 

<               c 

•— >      1      <-< 

■-              o 

S         =2 

2                     ci 

a,           E 

rt 

<u 

bO 
rt 

O       O 

S  1  "I 

•ri       >v      >y 
!     CU      tai      PQ 

vO 

_ 

ir, 

00 

"J* 

CO 
00 

0 

4 

vO 

r^ 

"rt   M 

11 

M 

-r 

rt — 

ft 

M 

t>. 

Cv 

o< 

fcjg 

u 

8     D 

* 

vO 

VO 

Ov 

- 

-S" 

0 

•H 

OO 

H 

a  b 

r~ 

00 

OO 

r~ 

oo 

^— , 

U 

u 

CI 

•J 

rt 

— 

<n 

CJ 

u 

*o 

V 

n 

|4 

o 

to 

O 

O 

rt 
E 

E 

= 

tr. 

>o 

O 

.— 

be 

"J 

rt 

— 

rt 

o 

V 

•rt 

IV 

>d 

> 

> 

- 

* 

PQ 

< 

< 

;8o  APPENDIX 


C.  Bgrapit :  a  female  ;  skin  tint  closely  corresponding  to  No.  2  (Anth.  Notes 
and  Queries).  Eyes  dark  brown  ;  hair  black  and  closely  curled,  with 
frizzled  "jambul."  Teeth  blackened  :  six  are  slightly  filed.  Subject 
does  not  know  any  Malay  words. 

The  foregoing  notes  afford  no  means  of  distinguishing  these  Pangans  of 
Jarum  from  the  Pangans  of  Kelantan  already  described  (J.  A.  I.  loc.  cit.)  to  whom 
they  are  closely  allied  in  respect  of  skin  colour,  eye  colour,  colour  and  characters 
of  the  hair,  and  in  the  custom  of  filing  the  front  teeth.  The  skin  colour  only  is 
very  slightly  different,  approaching  No.  2  in  place  of  No.  3  of  the  types.  Nor 
do  the  measurements  (which  are  appended)  justify  any  distinction,  as  they  in  no 
case  remove  any  individual  of  the  three  to  any  considerable  distance  from  the 
range  known  to  obtain  among  the  other  Pangans,  and  in  many  instances  they 
fall  within  the  range  of  variation  in  the  several  characters. 

To  complete  this  account  a  few  notes  on  the  measurements  are  now  given. 
Averages  have  not  been  computed  for  the  Jarum  Pangans,  as  in  view  of  the  very 
small  number  (3)  it  is  quite  possible  to  treat  of  each  individual  separately.  The 
most  striking  feature  is  the  very  simian  nature  of  the  proportions  of  the  upper 
limb  in  the  man  Pa'-Gelugor. 

A.  With  regard  to  the  measurements  of  Pa'-Gelugor,  the  stature  (No.  1)  is  small 

and  results  from  an  accident  (cp.  descriptive  notes) ;  the  following  five 
measurements  are  all  small  and  indicate  great  length  of  the  arms,  which  is 
fully  brought  out  by  the  relatively  high  figure  which  represents  the  span. 
Nos.  6,  7,  and  8  (the  dimensions  of  the  lower  limb)  are  not  far  removed 
from  the  average  for  Pangans  (seey.  A.  I.  loc.  cit. :  average  for  ??ien),  but  No. 
9  is  very  small  and  is  modified  in  association  with  the  stature.  Similarly 
the  sitting  height  is  small  (No.  10).  The  breadth  index  (74.4)  shows  a 
value  which  is  low  for  Pangans,  but  is  exceeded  in  this  respect  by  one  of 
the  Kelantan  men  (Pandak  73*8).  The  nasal  index  (1 12. 1)  is  very  large, 
but  is  approached  by  the  Kelantan  Pandak  with  107. 1.  Finally  the 
radio-humeral  index  has  a  large  value,  indicating  that  the  upper  limb  has 
very  simian  characters,  but  here  again  the  figure,  88.6,  is  approached  by 
the  same  Kelantan  Pandak  with  an  index  of  84.4. 

B.  Kechong  :  the  stature  is  distinctly  above  the  average,  but  the  proportions  of 

the  upper  limb  as  deduced  from  measurements  2-5  inclusive  are  well 
within  the  range  of  variation  for  Kelantan  women  (Pangans).  Further, 
while  the  heights  at  hip  and  knee  are  greater,  that  at  the  ankle  is  within  the 
range  again.  The  next  four  dimensions  are  all  greater  than  the  Kelantan 
average,  but  not  very  strikingly  so,  and  the  breadth  index  is  not  without 
the  limits  of  variation  referred  to.  The  proportions  expressed  by  the 
radio-humeral  index  are  within  the  same  range.  Lastly,  the  nasal 
index  must  be  referred  to.  This  yields  a  very  small  figure,  which  points  to 
a  very  narrow  or  proportionately  long  nose.  On  the  whole,  this  feature, 
taken  with  the  number  of  instances  in  which  the  measurements  prove 
greater  than  the  average,  suggest  that  some  admixture  with  another 
stock,  most  probably  Malay,  has  produced  the  observed  differences. 
At  the  same  time  it  must  be  remembered  that  in  other  external 
features  and  in  the  cephalic  index  there  is  nothing  remarkable  about  this 
woman. 

C.  Berapit  :  in  this  instance  we  again  find  the  occurrence  of  several  dimensions 

greater  than  those  of  the  four  Kelantan  women  previously  described  ;  but 
the  increase  is  in  most  cases  very  small.  On  the  other  hand,  the  head 
proportions  (Bi :  81.6)  are  well  within  the  range  of  variation,  though 
the  bi-malar  breadth  is  below  the  average.  The  nose  is  shown  by  the 
nasal  index  (112. 1)  to  be  distinctly  broader  than  the  average  of  the  four 


RACIAL  AFFINITIES 


' 


women  mi  ntioned  (971  1 ».  bul  In  thi 

ed    b)    .1   \  ■  mng   K<  lantai       1  I  torn). 

1  ..1  .ii\ ,   the   1  idi< ■  humei  il   In  reater  (80. 1]   than    the 

ed  by  thai  ol  the   tame   1  ■■ 
ni  Kutuoi  (8.5 1 ). 

1 1   1 .  belies  1  d  thai  \\ nh  regard  to  the  foi 
to  the  close  similarity  ol  the   I'angan  from   Kelantnn  and   [.uum  will  U-    on  to 
be   justified,  especially    In  vien   oi  tfc  With 

ul  to  the  paper  published   In  the  journal  oi  the  Anthropological   [nstitute 
(July  I  tec.    1  indicated)  oi 

ITppei  Perak,  it  is  to  be  noticed  thai   the  figures  foi  the  Jarum   P  ome 

within  ilic  range  of  variation  provided  by  the  largei  numbei 


Page  44. 

Measurements  of  \  Sbmang  skim:,  collei  rsD  by  Grubauer,  and  n 
i\    mi    Museum  of  mm-.  Royai    College  of  s  [bed 

nv  W.  L  11.  Duckworth  in  Man,  No.  [8  (March  1903). 


Measurements  of  Skull. 


w    P08  now  : 
M.i  ctmum  length  . 
Maximum  breadth 
Basi-bregmatic  height  . 
Horizontal      circumfer- 
ence  .... 


mm.  ;  Facial  I\>k  riON  : 


mm.  '  Indices 


167 
132 
128 

482 


96 

Cephalic 

8s 

96+ 

Altitudinal  . 

82.6 

62+ 

Alveolar 

100 

131 

Facial  (Kollmann's) 

47.2 

34 

Orbital 

82.9 

4i 

Nasal  l 

44.8 

48 

21-5 

Basi-nasal  length 

Basi-alveolai  length  . 

Nasi-alveolar  length . 

Bi-zygomatic  breadth 

Orbital  height    . 

Orbital  width     . 

Nasal  height 

Nasal  width 

Capacity  :  —  two  determina- 
tions gave  1245  cc.  and 
1250  cc.  respectively ; 
1245  cc.  is  the  more  correct 
figure. 

The  person  to  whom  it  had  belonged  was  a  member  of  the  tribe  of  Penghulu 
Dahabo  (?),  of  Goyal  (t.e.  "  Mount  ")  Sapi,  eight  hours'  walk  (  Wegestunden)  from 
Kuala  K£n6ring  in  Upper  Perak.  The  skull  was  that  of  an  old  man  who  had 
been  buried  between  three  and  four  years. 

-.-It  presents  some  remarkable  resemblances  to  a  cranium  in  the  Cambridge 
Ethnological  Museum,  which  I  described  in  Man  (1.902,  No.  28)  :  the  shortness 
of  the  cranium  and  the  general  rotundity  are  alike  in  each,  as  is  also  the  small 
figure  of  the  cranial  capacity.  Where  the  Semang  skull  differs  from  the 
Andamanese  skull  just  mentioned,  it  resembles  a  skull  described  by  Turner  as 
that  of  a  Sakai,  and  figured  in  a  communication  to  the  Royal  Society  of 
Edinburgh.2  The  Sakai  skull  agrees  with  the  subject  of  the  present  account 
in  the  possession  of  prominent  brow-ridges,  and  consequently  flattened 
orbits,  the  nasal  bones  and  aperture  have  similar  characters  in  each.  But 
Turner's  "Sakai"  is  dolichocephalic,  so  that  the  correspondence  of  type  is 
not  far-reaching.  No  very  close  resemblance  can  be  traced  between  the  Semang 
here  described  and  the  skull  from  Pahang  described  by  Turner,  or  the  E.  Semang 
("  Pangghan  ")  described  by  Virchow.3 


1  Falsified  by  great  development  of 
the  nasal  spine. 

2  Vol.  zL  Part  i.  No.  6. 

3  See      comparisons      in      "Some 


Anthropological  Results  of  the  Skeat 
Expedition  to  the  Malay  Peninsula," 
fount.  Anthr.  Inst.  vol.  xxxii.  1902, 
p.  142. 


582 


APPENDIX 


Page  45. 

List  of  Measurements  of  Skull  and  other  Parts  of  Skeleton 

of  Semang. 


Measurements  of  Skull. 


Description  :       Pangan 

from 

Malay 

Peninsula,    collected 

by      \V 

.      W. 

Skeat,  M.A. 

Cranial  portion — 

mm. 

Maximum  length    . 

179 

Maximum  breadth  . 

. 

141 

Basi-bregmatic  height 

. 

129 

Horizontal  circumference 

511 

Facial  portion — 
Basi-nasal  length    . 
Basi-alveolar  length 
Nasi-alveolar  length 


Cranial    capacity.      Each    observation    ! 
(2)  gave  1,425  cc.  =  mesocephalic. 


99 

101 

62 


Bi-zygomatic  breadth 
Orbital  height 
Orbital  width 
Nasal  height 
Nasal  width 
Jugo-nasal  arc 
Jugo-nasal  width 

Indices — 
Cephalic     . 
Altitudinal 
Alveolar     . 
Facial  (Kollmann's) 
Orbital 
Nasal 
Naso-malar 


mm. 
134 

33 

40 

47 

26 

107 

97 


78.7 
72 
102 
46.2 
82.2 

55-3 
110.3 


Measuremetits  of  Bones  of  the  Skeleton. 


R. 

L. 

Second 

23 

25 

Bones,  etc. — 

Third    . 

24 

25 

Humerus 

308 

305 

Fourth . 

25 

23 

Radius  . 

? 

239 

Fifth     . 

27 

21 

Femur  . 

426 

425 

Index  given  by   com- 

Tibia    . 

374 

372 

bined  figures. 

97.5 

Ulna      . 

? 

253 

Fibula  . 

365 

361 

Femur,  special  measurements 

for— 

Radio-humeral  index 

? 

78.3 

Tibio-femoral  index 

87.7 

87.5 

R. 

L. 

Inter-membral  index 

? 

68.2 

Platymeria — 

Femero-humeral  indo 

<     72.3 

71.8 

Transv.  diameter  . 
Anterior  -  posterior 

27 

27 

Length. 

Breadth. 

diameter  . 

20 

20 

Sacrum 

93 

IOI 

Platymeric  index  . 

74-7 

74-7 

Scapula-height 

117 

125 

,,       breadth 

102 

IO3 

Platycnemia — 

Sacral  index  . 

108.6 

Transv.  diameter  . 

21 

19 

Scapular  index 

.     87.1 

82.4 

Antero  -  posterior 

Clavicle 

.    119 

I29 

diameter  . 

33 

29 

Claviculo-humeral    in 

- 

Platycnemic  index 

63.6 

65.5 

dex 

.     38.6 

42.3 

Popliteal  region — 

Anterior 
height  of 
centrum. 

Posterior 
height  of 
centrum. 

Transv.  diameter  . 
"M.  N.:'      . 

33 
26 

34 
25 

Lumbar  vertebrae — 

"M.  P."      . 

23 

23 

First 

•       23 

25 

Popliteal  index 

69-6 

67.6 

RACIAL    AFFIN1TI1 


Vik.  ii...\       I  |    |(  i;ii'i  [ON  OF  E.  Si  I  1  ■  Plfl  16 

The  skull  is  that  of  an  elderl)  person,  apparently  tl 

ol   burning       I  he  capa<  it)    is    l  ,,         m.,  the   horizon! 
489,  the  sagittal  364  mm.  ;  in  othei  words,  the  mi  on  the  whol< 

.in. ill.     The  skull  is  remarkably  short,  broad,  .ui< I  high,  it    type  bypaibrachy* 
cephalic  (L.    Br.    [nd.   81.5;  L    11.    1.    76.9);  in  this  connection   ii   ma) 
remarked  that  th<  ;hl   inde  unusually  high, 

occipital  index  (31.2)  is  likewise  large.     <  >n  the  othei   hand,  the  basilai   ii 
;)   proves  to  be  relatively  small.     In  analysii  ircumfei 

it   1-  seen  that  35.1   per  cent   belong  t<>  the  frontal  bone,   ;s-7 
parietal  bone,  and  only  ~*<>.  1  pi  1  ceni  to  the  occipital  bone. 

The  sutures  on  the  vertex  are  simple,  but   behind,  and  at  the   side,  1 
serrated.      The  temporal   surfaces  are   nol    very  high,   cadi  being  bounded    by 
a  double  linea  semicircularis,  of  which  the  upper  component  ps 
parietal  eminenceas  tar  as  the lambdoid  suture,  whilst  the  lower  runs  straight  over 

the  parietal  e:nuu  nee. 

The  brow  is  tolerably  broad  (minimal  frontal  breadth  01  mm.),  low,  and 
somewhat  sloping.    The  brow  ridges  are  prominent,  the  glabella  is  less  prominent. 

The  frontal  eminences  are  ill-defined.  The  transition  from  the  brow  to  the 
\  o\  the  skull  is  gradual,  the  latter  being  flattened.  The  parietal  eminences 
are  large  and  prominent.  Descent  to  the  occiput  is  sudden.  The  upper  part  of 
the  occipital  hone  is  rounded  without  a  distinct  protuberance  or  superior  semi- 
circular line.  The  lower  part  of  the  bone  is  obliquely  placed  but  nearly 
horizontal,  and  is  comparatively  smooth.  The  mastoid  processes  are  small. 
The  external  auditory  meatus  is  compressed  in  the  sagittal  direction.  The 
temporal  sutures  are  normal.  The  squamcous  portions  of  the  temporal  bones  are 
broad  and  prolonged  backwards.  As  regards  the  measurements  of  breadth,  the 
maximum  breadth  is  133,  the  bi-auricular  107,  the  occipital  104,  the  temporal 
99  mm.,  the  intermastoid  diameter  is  119  mm.  At  the  base  of  the  skull  the 
foramen  magnum  is  asymmetrical,  the  right  half  being  fuller  than  the  left  ;  its 
form  is  almost  round,  31  by  29  mm.,  index,  93.5,  and  very  large.  The 
jugular  fossae  are  extremely  large.      The  basilar  process  is  broad  and  flat. 

The  face  is  low  and  broad;  index  (73.8?)  chama?prosopic  ;  the  zygomatic 
arches  but  little  displayed;  the  "tuberositas  ossis  inferior"  reinforced  by  the 
tuberosity  of  the  upper  maxilla.  The  orbits  are  moderately  large,  the  upper 
margin  inclined  downwards  and  outwards,  the  lower  margin  deeply  excavated, 
the  index  80  (chamaekonchic).  The  nose  is  short,  with  the  bridge  flat  and 
rounded,  broad,  the  aperture  asymmetrical  and  narrow.  The  index  is  50, 
mesorrhinc.  The  canine  fossae  are  shallow.  The  upper  jaw  is  strongly  pro- 
gnathic; and  at  the  same  time  asymmetrical,  and  somewhat  deflected  to  the  right  ; 
the  intermaxillary  suture  synostotic.  The  teeth  are  absent  except  the  first 
premolar  on  the  right,  which  is  worn  down  and  brownish  ;  at  the  same  time  the 
edges  of  the  jaw  are  somewhat  weather-wrorn.  In  the  region  of  the  front  molars 
there  are  traces  of  old  alveolar  caries.  The  gums  are  short  and  broad,  but  the 
index  is  leptostaphyline  (68.6).      The  palate  bone  is  wide. 

The  mandible  is  toothless,  the  dental  alveoli  being  obliterated  behind  on 
the  right  and  in  the  middle.  The  alveolar  curve  is  broad  in  front.  The  chin 
not  prominent,  in  consequence  of  which  all  the  lower  part  of  the  mandible  forms 
a  continuous  broad  curve.  The  angles  are  somewhat  splayed,  the  bigonial 
diameter  is  nevertheless  small,  only  89  mm.  The  rami  are  broad,  35  mm.,  set 
on  almost  at  a  right  angle.  The  condylar  processes  are  very  low,  50  mm.  long  ; 
the  joint  surfaces  flattened,  the  right  presenting  clear  evidence  of  arthritis 
deformans.      The  coronoid  processes  are  58  mm.  high. 

So  much  for  the  formation  of  the  skull.  For  many  decades  the  Semang 
tribes  have  been  regarded   as  the  chief  representatives  of  the  lowest  form   of 


584  APPENDIX 


bodily  structure.  When  all  other  "  lower  "  races  had  been  successively  stripped 
of  their  conjectured  resemblance  to  apes,  all  our  hopes  of  discovering  at  least 
some  kind  of  a  Proanthropos  were  directed  to  the  obscurity  of  the  forests  of 
Malacca.  Even  these  hopes,  however,  now  appear  to  be  futile.  At  least  this 
first  specimen  of  a  Semang  skull  possesses  (beyond  its  prognathy  and  the  simple 
formation  of  its  lower  jaw)  nothing  specially  pithekoid.  There  is  present 
neither  platy-  nor  katarhiny,  nor  a  processus  frontalis  squamae  temporalis,  nor  a 
processus  lemurianus.  With  its  capacity  of  1370  ccm.,  its  minimal  frontal 
width  of  91  mm.,  its  well-developed  temporal  region,  it  may  be  ranked  with  the 
skulls  of  civilised  peoples,  than  many  of  which  it  is  certainly  less  pithekoid. 

Now  it  is  indeed  not  improbable  that,  if  Vaughan-Stevens  should  fulfil 
his  promise  and  my  hopes  and  send  us  more  skulls  of  E.  Semang  (Pangan) 
people,  a  few  less  well- formed  and  perhaps  much  smaller  specimens  may  be 
found  among  them.  But  to  this  kind  of  variation  we  have  been  long  accustomed. 
In  discussing  the  skulls  of  the  Philippine  Negritos  (cf.  F.  Jagor,  Keisen  in 
d.  Philip,  p.  374,  plate  II.  figs.  4-6  :  Berlin,  1873)  I  have  already  demon- 
strated this  by  figures.  The  capacity  of  four  specially  selected  Negrito  skulls 
varied  between  1150  and  13 10  ccm.,  on  the  other  hand  they  were  all  hysibrachy- 
cephalic,  like  the  E.  Semang  (Pangan)  skulls. 

The  similarity  of  the  two  races,  which  has  so  often  been  conjectured, 
can  now  be  looked  upon  as  established.  The  most  important  factor  which 
Vaughan-Stevens  has  brought  forward  as  bearing  on  this  point  is  the  hair.  Un- 
fortunately in  this  respect  the  fates  have  not  been  auspicious  to  us.  In  the  box 
of  which  he  speaks  there  are  only  a  few  quite  small  remnants  of  single  hairs 
left.  But  they  are  black,  fine,  and  spiral.  Moreover,  all  doubt  must  disappear 
on  examining  the  top-knot  ("  Bag-i  ")  which  he  took  from  the  head  of  a  man  and 
sent  here.  It  shows  the  same  tendency  to  the  formation  of  entangled  spirals 
that  is  known  to  us  in  the  Negrito  hair,  and  it  is  diametrically  opposite  in  character 
to  the  Sakai  ("Blandas")  hair  which  I  also  received  from  Vaughan-Stevens, 
and  which  I  described  in  detail  at  an  earlier  meeting  {Verh.  1891,  p.  844). 

This  top-knot  consists  of  an  extremely  elegant  combination  of  a  great  number 
of  black  spirals,  which  when  slightly  relaxed  and  held  against  the  light  form  a  loose 
web  of  "  screw-like"  {i.e.  spiral)  hairs  isolated  throughout  their  entire  length.  The 
diameter  of  the  spirals  reaches  to  as  much  as  2  mm.  [sic,  ?  2  cm.].  Under  the 
microscope  each  separate  hair  appears  thin  and  of  a  blackish-brown  colour  ;  the 
pigment,  however,  lies  so  thick  that  the  interior  cannot  be  very  clearly  seen  from 
the  outside.  From  cross-sections  it  is  apparent  that  this  pigment  is  chiefly  accumu- 
lated in  the  outer  layers  of  the  hair  ("  Haarschaft "),  and  is  almost  entirely 
wanting  from  the  inner  part,  which  sometimes  occupies  almost  half  the  cross-section. 
The  cuticle  is  very  delicate  and  pale.  In  almost  every  case  there  is  no  medulla  ; 
when  it  appears  it  is  discontinuous,  weak,  and  but  slightly  coloured.  The  pigment, 
in  thin  layers,  appears  of  a  pure  brown  colour,  one  might  almost  say  light 
brown.  It  consists  of  very  fine  brown  grains,  which,  when  not  quite  sharply 
focussed,  almost  give  the  impression  of  a  diffused  "  infiltration."  In  reality, 
however,  they  form  narrow  spindle-shaped  figures.  The  form  of  the  cross-section 
is  mostly  an  elongated  oval,  which  is  frequently  flattened  or  laterally  compressed.1 

Page  46. 

Note  on  Specimen  of  E.   Semang  (Pangan)  Hair,  by 
W.   L.   H.  Duckworth. 
Provenance,  Kelantan  Province,  Malay  Peninstila. 
Native  described  by  the  collector  (Mr.  F.  Laidlaw)  as  a  Pangan,  "  father  of 
Kepar."     See  Laidlaw's  notes,  Skeat  Expedition,  1899. 

The  hair  is  in  the  form  of  a  ringlet  which  forms  curls  of  a  diameter  from  9 
mm.  to  about  20  mm. 


V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiv.  (V.-St.)  442-444. 


//   mi  i.xii; 


m  blai  I.     undei  naii  i  I     lurfai  ■  i 

Pigi I  ii  en  i"  I"-  unifoi mly  dii  ti ibut<  <l  all ■  i udinal 

sections,      in  ii.in  .\i-i  .•■   cttion  mi  in  the  form  of  fine  granules  ag 

chiefly  about    the   periphery  "i   th  within    tl 

cuticulai  border,      rhere  li  a]  o  a  core  formed  ol  an  ition  "i  • 

m  the  cent  i>-  oi  the  let ' ion,     Thi  » t << m t  ,  j n  mm.  in  <li 

////.""■,  the  sections  vary  from  an  01  at  the  thicker  01  od, 

t.«  almoil  .1  circle  neat  the  tip  <>i  the  hair.     The  in  licei  "t  fi  out 

at  55  1  (these  are  oval),  86.7,  86.9  (the  latter  are   ection         1    be  tip  ol 

tin'  hair).     The  hair  has  thus  negroid  characteri  in  r<  tion. 

Page  53. 
Points  of  Comparison  bn  Semang,  Andama  m  Temple's 

CENS     i  Rl  i'Oi;  1 )  '    AND    PHILIPPINE    Nl 


Sera 

Vndamai 

Philippi 

Jit 

i,    Mom,          i.|di          mm. 

i.  1447-1472  mm. 

[5    mm.  (18)  (Mo 

(W.S.);   1549  (R.M.); 

p.  07. 

tano,    p.    84)  j     1 

1525  (N.A.). 

(Semper,  Phil.  1869, 
p.  49);  ca.  1400  (7) 
(Sawyer,  p.  201 ). 

ii.    Women,     140S     mm. 

ii.  1 360- 1 385  mm. 

1432    mm.   (12)  (Mon- 

(W.S.);   13S7  (R.M.); 

p.  67. 

tano,  do.);  1 408  (Sem- 

1445 (N.A.) 

per,  do.)  ;  ca.  1350 
(Sawyer,  do. 

Shape  of  head 

i.  Mesaticephalie. 

i.  Ditto,  p.  67. 

ii.  Brachycephalic. 

ii.  Ditto,  p.  67. 

Marked  brachycephaly 
(Meyer,  Negr.  p.  25). 

Hair    . 

i.  Black  and  woolly. 

i.  Ditto,  p.  56. 

Black-brown,  Broca  41 
(Meyer,  p.  27).  "Spir- 
alig,  verfilzt.  z.  T.  zu 
kleinen  Quasten  auf- 
gerollt. " 

ii.  Complete    shaving    of 

ii.    Ditto,    p.     56. 

Head  shaved  in   Luzon 

the  head. 

Bojigngiji      com- 

{Globus;  xliii.  378). 

pletely        shaved 

Hair  cut  short  (Meyer, 

heads,  p.  50. 

p.  28). 

iii.  Closely  cropped  hair. 

iii.    Ditto,    p.    50. 
0  n  g  e       J  a  r  a  w  a 

closely  cropped. 

Eyes     . 

i.  Rich  liquid  brown. 

i.  Ditto,  p.  56. 

ii.  Round  and  bright. 

ii.  Ditto,  p.  56. 

Skin     . 

i.  Colour   (black    to   rich 

i.  Ditto,  p.  56. 

Brown      like       Malays 

dark  chocolate  brown). 

(Meyer,  p.  34). 

Food    . 

i.  Roots,  fruit,  and  game. 

i.  Ditto,  p.  50. 

Fruits,  roots,  honey, 
and  game  (Meyer,  p. 
32). 

[Continuation  of  table  and  notes  on  pp.  586,  587- 


586 


APPENDIX 


Points  of  Comparison — continued. 


Huts    . 


Hut  furniture 


Impiem  e  n  ts — 
Stone 


Bows 


Harpoons    . 


Semang. 


Andamanese. 


Tattooing 


Ornamenta- 
t  io  n        of 
Utensils 

Dancing 


ii.  Elaborate  preparation. 

iii.  Heads  of  animals 
killed  in  hunting,  hung 
up  partly  as  trophies 
and  partly  as  ornaments. 

i.  Leaf-shelters  (especially 
beehive-shaped  huts). 

ii.  Communal  huts. 

i.  Bamboo  sleeping  plat- 
forms. 

ii.  Hammer  and  anvil  of 
natural  stones. 

i.    (a)    Chips    and    flakes 

only. 
(5)    No    axe,    arrow,     or 

spear  heads. 
ii.  Ordinary  long  bow  of 

palm-wood  or  bamboo. 

iii.  (a)  Fish  harpoons. 


{b)  Some  Semang  tribes 
have  no  harpoons. 

Never  applied  to  face ; 
practically  unknown  to 
Semang. 

i.  Delicate  and  elaborate. 

ii.  Rough. 

i.  Standing  in  a  ring  and 
alternately  bending  and 
straightening  the  knees. 

ii.  The  practice  called 
"  rentak  Balei  "  or 
"  drumming  on  the  floor 
of  the  tribal  hall," 
practised  by  Jakun 
tribes  mixed  with  Se- 
mang, and  may  be  a 
survival  of  former  Se- 
mang custom. 


ii.  Ditto,  p.  50. 
iii.  Ditto,  p.  66. 


i.  Ditto,     p.      50. 

(cp.  also  Martin, 

p.  668). 
ii.  Ditto,  p.  50. 

i.  Ditto,  p.  51 
(Onge  Jarawa 
only). 

ii.  Ditto,  p.  66. 


Philippine  Negritos. 


Leaf-shelters  (Z.f.  allg. 
Erdk.  x.  253). 


i.  (a)  Ditto,  p.  66. 

(6)  Ditto,  p.  66. 

ii.  Onge  Jarawa 
only,  pp.  66,  67. 

iii.  {a)  Used  by 
Bojigngiji  and 
Yerewas,  p.  50. 

(i>)  Not  used  by 
Onge -Jarawas. 

Not  among  Onge: 
Jarawas,  p.  $0. 

i.  Onge  Jarawa,  p. 

SO- 
ii.  Ditto,  p.  50. 

i.  Onge  Jarawa,  p. 
64. 

ii.  Ditto,  p.  64. 
Bojigngiji  and 
Jarawas  use  a 
special  kind  of 
sounding  board 
for  drumming  on 
with  the  feet 
rhythmically,  with 
song  and  clap- 
ping of  hands  in 
unison. 


Bow  of  bamboo,  93  to 
219  cm.  long  (Meyer, 
pp.   13-24). 

Fish  spear    (Meyer,    p. 

17). 


Keloids  (?)  at  any  rate 
cuts.  Tatooing  (?) 
(Meyer,  p.  26). 


RACIAl   AFF1NITI 


;»7 


Points  01    Compai 


S.    Ill    : 

In    hollowed    trunk 

lun 

i.      CorpiC      luiriol      with 

1.     1  >:!•■,,    p,    65. 

kneel  drawn  up  in  lii 

fool  below  the 

posture. 

(Meyer,  p.  1). 

ii.     Platform    burial    (in 

iii  I  >iit<>,  p.  <»S- 

trees)  ol  chiefs, 

iii.    Formei   disinterment 

iii.   I  HttO,  ]>•   ' 

of    bones    probable    in 

w     oi     tradition 

past  customs. 

1  The  following  instructive  list  of 
points  of  difference  between  Semang 
ami  Andamanese  has  been  drawn  up 

by    Sir    Richard   Temple,  and    is   given 

in     the     above-mentioned     (Census) 
Report  :  — 

Face:  In  the  variation  of  the 
Andamanese  face.  Implements :  In 
the  blow-gun  and  poisoned  arrows  and 
spears.  Hunting:  In  trapping  game. 
Feeding:  Men  before  women.  Quivers : 
In  having  reed  quivers  :  Andamanese 
stick  their  arrows  in  their  waist-belt. 
Ornamentation:  In  quality  and  artistic 
merit.  Ornaments :  In  personal  orna- 
ments and  piercing  the  nose.  Huts  : 
In  rock-shelters,  cave-dwellings,  tree- 
huts,  barricaded  huts.  Clothing:  Of 
hammered  barks  ;  loin-cloth  for  men, 
petticoat  for  women.  Magic :  In  its 
practice  and  in  use  of  magical  designs. 
Music  :  In  nose  -  pipe  and  castanets. 
Songs :  In  their  nature.  Marriage  : 
Based  on  purchase  and  ceremonies. 
Beliefs:  In  Shamanism,  metamorph- 
ism  into  tigers  of  living  men,  in  ideas 
as  to  "God."  Language:  In  its 
mixture  with  Malay  and  Mon  ;  basis 
can  be  proved  perhaps  to  be  (?  Onge 
Jarawa)  Andamanese,  though  the 
specimens  I  have  seen  afford  very  little 
hope  of  this.  Also  a  portion  of  the 
Semangs  have  fixed  habitations  and  a 
rude  agriculture,  this  latter  capacity 
being  entirely  absent  in  the  Andaman- 
ese. 

On  the  foregoing  list  I  would 
remark  that  allowance  must  be  made 
in  many  cases  for  the  fact  that  the 
Semang  in  the  Malay  Peninsula  have 


been  subjected  to  the  predominant 
influence  <>!  Indo-Chinese  and  Malayan 
culture,  which  is  quite  sufficient  to 
account  for  the  Semang  use  of  the 
blowpipe  and  poisoned  arrows  ;  for 
Some,  at  least,  of  their  methods  of 
trapping  game  ;  for  the  feeding  of  men 
before  women  ;  for  the  Semang  use  of 
bamboo  quivers  ;  for  their  cloth  of 
hammered  tree  -  bark,  and  to  some 
extent  for  their  magical  practices  ;  for 
their  use  of  the  nose  -  flute  or  nose- 
pipe,  which  is  a  well  -  known  Indo- 
Chinese  instrument  ;  for  their  basing 
of  marriage  on  purchase  and  its 
attendant  ceremonies  ;  for  the  Semang 
Shamanistic  and  Were-tiger  practices  ; 
and  for  the  Mon-Khmer  affinities  of 
their  language,  as  well  as  for  their 
fixed  habitations  and  rude  agriculture. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  Semang  shelters 
and  tree-huts  are  undoubtedly  due  to 
the  presence  of  the  larger  fauna,  which 
do  not  occur  in  the  Andaman  Islands, 
where  such  shelters  are  therefore  super- 
fluous. As  to  the  variation  of  the 
Andamanese  face,  I  cannot  agree  that 
it  is  a  point  of  difference,  as  the 
variation  in  Semang  features  is  strongly 
marked. — W.  S. 

-  I  have  to  thank  Mr.  X.  W. 
Thomas  for  the  facts  in  this  column. 
In  Folkmar's  Album  of  Philippine 
Types,  the  following  measurements  (of 
three  Northern  and  Southern  Philippine 
Negritos)  are  given  :  height  standing, 
1475  mm-  >  cephalic  index,  So. 45. 

3  Many  profiles  show  a  marked 
resemblance  to  portraits  in  J.  A.  I. 
(v.  Meyer,  PL  be). 


588  APPENDIX 


Page  58. 

Vaughan-Stevens'  Sakai   Measurements  (ed.  Virchow). 

Height  of  the  men  from  1422  to  1596  mm.  (1594  in  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxviii. 
152). 

Height  of  the  women  from  134 1  to  1469  mm. 

The  variation  between  the  men  is  172  mm.,  among  the  women  128  mm. 

Between  the  tallest  man  and  shortest  woman,  253  mm. 

Three  Sakai  men  attained  a  height  of  between  1500  and  1600  mm. 

The  shortest  man  was  a  32-year-old  Sakai  of  1422  mm.,  all  the  men  of  the 
other  tribes  measuring  more  than  1470  mm. 

The  smallest  arm-stretch  (1370  mm.)  was  that  of  a  22-year-old  Sakai  woman 
whose  height  was  1424  mm.,  the  difference  against  the  arm-stretch  being  -  54, 
and  another  whose  height  was  1469  mm.  had  an  arm-stretch  of  1463,  a  difference 
of  —6.  On  the  other  hand,  a  42-year-old  woman  (1341  mm.  in  height)  had  an 
arm-stretch  of  1375,  giving  a  difference  in  favour  of  the  arm-stretch  of  +  34.1 


Page  58.  Sakai  Skull  described  by  Virchow. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  Skull  of  the  Central  Sakai  ("  SenoV)  Woman,  the  first 
of  its  tribe  which  has  reached  Europe.  Without  doubt  it  is  the  skull  of  an  old 
woman,  as  the  description  will  soon  show.  In  capacity  (1350  ccm.)  it  falls  only 
20  ccm.  short  of  the  E.  Semang  (Pangan)  skull  ;  for  a  woman  it  may  be 
considered  well -developed.  Its  horizontal  circumference  (495  mm.)  is  even 
greater  than  that  of  the  E.  Semang  (Pangan)  skull,  and  its  vertical  circum- 
ference (362  mm.)  is  almost  equal  to  the  latter. 

Its  form  is  orthodolichocephalic  (L.  B.  I.  72.6;  L.  H.  I.  73.2;  O.  H.  I. 
61.5).  In  the  norma  verticalis,  as  well  as  in  the  norma  temporalis,  it  appears 
correspondingly  compressed  and  comparatively  narrow.  The  lack  of  prominence 
of  the  tubera,  and  the  marked  curvature  of  the  upper  occipital  bone  largely 
contribute.  The  occipital  index  is  calculated  at  31.2,  the  basilar  index  at  50.2  ; 
to  the  occiput  belong  accordingly  more  than  one-third  of  the  total  length.  The 
percentage  components  of  the  sagittal  arc  are  : — 

Frontal  component,  34.8. 
Parietal  component,  35.9. 
Occipital  component,  29.2. 

The  parietal  development  is  therefore  the  most  marked,  and  in  consequence 
the  occiput  has  the  appearance  of  having  been  driven  backwards. 

In  spite  of  the  age  of  the  individual,  the  condition  of  the  sutures  is  very  good. 
Syntosis  is  entirely  absent.  Most  of  the  sutures  are  simple,  the  lambdoid  alone 
being  strongly  indented  in  its  upper  part.  Here,  however,  an  exception  must 
be  mentioned,  inasmuch  as  the  limbs  of  the  suture  on  each  side  are  interrupted 
in  their  upper  third ;  here  the  suture  runs  inward  almost  horizontally,  sub- 
sequently rising  fairly  steeply  and  forming  a  triangular  projection  at  the 
lambda.2 


1  N.B.   These  measurements  (of  the       across    the    breast    in    the    usual    way 
arm -stretch)   were  taken  by  Vaughan-       (Virchow,  V.B.G.A.  xxiii.  842,  843). 
Stevens   behind    the    back,   instead  of  2    V.  B.  G.  A.  xxvi.  (Virchow)  356. 


RACIAL   AFFINITIl  589 

The  surface  ol  th<-  bona  ii  uniformly  imooth  and  yellowish  in  colour,  on  the 
lighter,  on  the  lefl  with        <      ■  inclination  to  brown;  tl 
ihows  that  the  person  had  not   been  long  buried.     All  muscle  and  line*  atl 
tnenti  an    weak,    ome  uoi   developed  al  alL     M  "plana  tempor- 

■lis      are   bul   little  developed ;   theii   up|  10I   reach   the  pai 

eminent  1 

The  i'i<>\\  ii  1     practically  non  existent,  the  glabella  nol  ,   the 

tubera  but  feebly  Indicated.     The  middle  portion  of  the  brow,  which  is  otherwi 
moderatel]   straight  and  somewhat   narrow  Uy  arched.      At  the 

glabella  there  is  a  small  horizontal  scar.  The  sagittal  arc  has  .1  sharp  return 
curve,  is  on  the  whole  long,  in  front  somewhat  Battened,  descending  from  the 
line  ^i  the  parietal  protuberance  in  1  strongly -marked  curve;  th<  t,  as 

already  remarked,  projects.     Then-  is  no  occipital  protuberance,  but  in  its  1 
a  slightly  irregular  rectangular  depression  marked  by  large  emissary  veins.     The 
foramen    magnum    is   roundly  oval,    32    to    27    mm.    in  diameter,    with   an   index 

of  84.3. 

The  temporal  region  is  somewhat    irregular  ;  stevokrotaphy  is  marked  on  both 
sides,  especially  on  the  left ;  a  shallow,  slightly  funnel-shaped  groove  trai 
the    angulus    parietalis.       The   temporal    alse    are    large,    with    strong    foramina. 
The  sphenoparietal  suture  is  short,  7  mm.      The  temporal  squama?  are  somewhat 
outwardly  arched.      The  external  auditory  meatus  is  large  and  round. 

The  face  is  small  and  noticeably  narrow.  The  index  is  chamceprosopic  (77.7). 
The  zygomatic  arches  are  delicate,  almost  depressed.  The  bi-jugal  diameter  is 
only  117  mm.  The  orbits  are  very  deep  and  high,  arched  inwards  and  above 
(diagonal).  The  index  is  hypsikonchic  (86.1).  The  nose  is  broad  and  much 
flattened.  The  transverse  diameter  measures  at  the  root  12,  in  the  middle  IX, 
below  18  mm.  The  nasal  bones  are  quite  uninjured  and  large.  The  naso-frontal 
suture  projects  upwards.  The  bridge  is  broad,  flattened  in  the  middle,  and 
towards  the  middle  on  each  side  a  large  emissary  foramen  is  seen.  The  aperture 
is  large,  but  at  the  same  time  somewhat  broad  and  low.  The  nasal  spine  is 
moderately  developed.  The  index  is  platyrrhine  (54.3).  The  upper  jaw  is 
delicate,  short,  slightly  prognathic,  but  at  the  same  time  very  atrophied  ;  the 
incisors  and  the  canine  are  absent  on  the  left,  and  their  alveoli  are  filled  up. 
Only  a  few  molars  and  premolars  remain,  and  these  are  thickly  incrusted  with 
lime,  and  are  blackened  with  betel-nut  juice.      The  palate  is  leptostaphyline. 

The  under  jaw  is  very  small  and  atrophied,  all  the  teeth  are  lost  and  the 
alveoli  are  fdled  up,  but  in  the  region  of  the  second  molars  there  are  large,  open 
cavities,  and  in  the  region  of  the  incisors  there  is  a  projection  of  the  alveolar 
margin.  The  chin  is  small,  but  prominent ;  the  rami  are  delicate,  and  the  pro- 
cessus lemuriani  feeble.1 

With  exception  of  the  facial  and  palatal  index,  strong  differences  every- 
where present  themselves,  but  the  face  and  the  maxilla  cannot  be  determined 
exactly  on  account  of  the  great  alteration  which  they  have  undergone.  Mean- 
while, however,  I  wish  to  submit  that  the  calculated  indices  for  these  two 
parts  probably  give  the  correct  relation.  Some  differences  may  be  referable  to 
the  sex.  Thus  the  difference  of  the  orbits  which,  in  the  case  of  the  male  Semang 
(Pangan),  are  chamsekonchic,  in  the  female  Sakai  (Blandas)  are  hypsikonchic. 
But  the  contrast  between  the  cephalic  and  the  nasal  indices  is  so  strongly  marked 
that  a  strongly  marked  distinction  of  the  two  races  must  be  assumed  if  the  two 
skulls  now  lying  before  us  represent  real  tribal  types.  On  this  point  little  can  be 
said.  At  the  meeting  of  21st  November  1891,  at  which  I  communicated  the 
indices  of  living  subjects  calculated  from  the  measurements  of  H.  Vaughan- Stevens 
among  the  ten  Sakai  (Senoi)  measured,  I  could  only  produce  one  dolichocephalic 
and  two  mesaticephalic  ;  on  the   other  hand,   seven  were  brachycephalic.      But 

1    V.  B.  G.  A.  xxvi.  (Virchow)  356. 


5QO 


APPENDIX 


at  that  time  {ibid.  p.  838)  Vaughan-Stevens  was  still  of  the  opinion  that  the 
Sakai  (Blandas)  were  half-breeds,  and  that  all,  although  in  variable  proportions, 
had  Malay  blood.  But  as  he  maintains  the  purity  of  the  blood  of  the  Sakai 
(Senoi)  woman  whose  skull  he  obtained  in  Perak,  it  may  well  be  that  this  skull, 
though  female,  exhibits  the  really  pure  Sakai  (Senoi)  type.  We  shall  have  to 
await  further  material.1 

The  characteristic  which  removes  the  skull  of  the  Sakai  (Senoi)  woman 
farthest  from  that  of  the  Semang(Pangan)  is  the  formation  of the  nose.  This  latter 
is  platyrrhine  to  such  an  extent  that  one  might  be  inclined  to  call  it  pithekoid. 
In  my  academic  treatise  on  some  characteristics  of  the  skull  of  the  lower  human 
races  (Berlin,  1875,  p.  115),  I  have  given  a  detailed  comparison  between  the 
Malay  nose  and  that  of  the  Orang  Utan,  and  have  thus  clearly  demonstrated  that 
the  form  called  katarrhine  is  essentially  dependent  on  the  small  size  of  the  nasal 
bones.  There  can  be  no  question  of  such  katarrhiny  in  the  case  of  this  Sakai 
(Senoi)  woman,  because  in  her  case  the  nasal  bones  are  comparatively  large. 
If,  in  spite  of  this,  the  structure  of  the  nose,  and  especially  the  contour  in  profile, 
reminds  us  of  the  nose  of  the  Malay,  and  perhaps  still  more  of  that  of  the  Negro, 
this  is  attributable  to  the  strongly-marked  impression,  or  rather  depression,  of 
the  bridge  of  the  nose,  which  of  course  must  be  connected  with  a  weaker  de- 
velopment of  the  nasal  septum.  With  this  is  connected  the  higher  position  of  the 
fronto-nasal  suture.  That  such  a  formation  of  the  nose  is  usual  among  the  Sakai 
(Blandas)  appears  to  follow  from  the  description,  unfortunately  not  a  very  detailed 
one,  which  H.  Vaughan-Stevens  formerly  transmitted  to  us  (Verk.  1891,  p.  840, 
Figs.  I  and  3).  The  nose  of  the  Semang  (Pangan)  skull,  on  the  other  hand,  is 
mesorrhine,  and  although  short  and  broad,  slightly  rounded  at  the  bridge  ( Verh. 
1892,  p.  442,  illustr.  ).2 

The  chief  points  in  which  this  Sakai  skull  differs  from  the  former  E.  Semang 
(Pangan)  skull  {Verh.  1892,  p.  438)  may  be  conveniently  seen  by  placing  the 
index  numbers  side  by  side  :  3 — 


Indices. 

E.  Semang  (Pangan). 

Sakai,(Blandas). 

Length-breadth . 

Brachycephalic      81.5 

Dolichocephalic    72.6 

Length-height 

Hypsicephalic       76.9 

Orthocephalic        73.2 

Ear-height     . 

68.2 

61.5 

Occipital . 

30-1 

31-2 

Facial 

Chamseprosopic     73.8? 

Chamseprosopic    77-7 

Orbital     .      . 

Chamaekonchic     80.0 

Hypsikonchic        86. 1 

Nasal . 

Mesorrhine            50.0 

Platyrrhine            54-3 

Palatal     .      . 

i 

Leptostaphyline    68.6 

Leptostaphyline    68.0? 

Finally,  the  fact  should  be  mentioned  that  this  Sakai  skull  exhibits  in  addition 
several  structural  anomalies,  as,  for  instance,  bi-lateral  stenokrotaphy,  an  unusual 
form  of  the  occipital  squama  and  the  processus  lemuriani.  I  waive  the  point 
whether  these  are  rather  individual  variations  or  racial  characteristics. 


1    V.  B.  G.  A.  xxvi.  (Virchow)  358. 


lb.  p.  358. 


3  lb. 


157- 


CIAl   AFFlNITh 


Vim  ii.  >v.      i  m  i  Hah     h  m  \<  ii  i .  Pftf 

All  the  specimens  arc  oi  considerable  length.      i(  r-old 

woman  measures   s'».  'hat   ol  the  old   man  ;-?,  thai  <>(  the  7s  year-old 

man  .•<>  cm.  in  length,  and  from  all  the  i  w<  (nay,  I  think,  ia)  that  the 

I     t.l     the    lira. I    ol     till'    SakaJ     (Mai  lic<l     by   i 

ordinary  length.     This  >  •  parti]  explained  by  the  Sakai  custom  "i  refraining  from 
cutting  the  hah  of  the  head.     Again,  the  pointed  endi  "i  the  hairs  apj 
fine  even  t<>  'in-  naked  eye,  ami  the  tips  when  leen  undei  the  i 
pointed,  bul  an-  worn  ami  broken  >"   indented  at  the  gt>*d 

appearance.     Again,  throughout  each  strand  ol  hair  tin-  cuticle  iely  thin, 

a  fact  which  explains  the  somewhal  dull  (w<///)  appearance  ol  the  hair. 
The  coloui  fi  the  bail  is  very  dark  in  the  coarsei  specimens.     To  tl 
H   resembles  ebony,  and  only  in  reflected  light  is  there  a  slightly  browi 
shimmer  to  be  perceived.     But  in  most  "1  the  specimens  there  i-.  a  very  unequal 
thickness  ol   the  separate  strands,  and  even  with   the  naked  eye  the  thinner 

an  be  seen  to  possess  that  lighter  tinge  from  which  the  "  \\ . 
haii  "  mentioned  by  Vaughan-Stevens  arises.     When,  h  Vaughan-Stei 

speaks  precisely  i>i  a  reddish  tinge,  this  is  a  somewhat  exaggerated  statement  to 

make   in    tin-  case  of  adults,  though    the   hair   of  the  2-year-old  girl  docs,  in  fact, 
show  a  light  reddish-brown  tinge 

Seen  under  the  microscope,  the  pure  black  hair  of  the  Sakai  looks  altogether 
opaque  and  uniformly  black  ;  its  tint,  however,  is  not  the  black  of  the  Negro'.-, 
hair,  which  so  often  shows  a  bluish  tinge,  but  a  tint  which  distinctly  shade- 
into  brownish  black  in  the  thinner  places.  In  the  finer  specimens  a  thin  and 
black  but  frequently  interrupted  medulla  may  be  distinguished.  The  thinnest 
specimens  mostly  show,  when  viewed  from  the  side,  a  faint  yellowish-brown 
colour,  in  which  no  grains  are  distinguishable  ;  the  colour  appearing  rather  to  be 
uniformly  diffused  through  the  whole  of  the  matter.  Here  and  there,  moreover, 
there  appear  single  hairs,  the  matter  of  which  is  uniformly  dark  brown  with  a 
tendency  to  yellow.  This  implies,  therefore,  a  certain  approach  to  blonde  hair. 
Many  o\  these  thin  specimens  have  no  trace  of  a  medulla,  in  others  a  weak 
central  medulla  is  visible,  which  is  frequently  continuous,  but  more  often  inter- 
rupted in  character.  In  the  most  marked  case  of  interruption  the  appearance  is 
that  of  long  spindle-shaped  depressions,  with  more  or  less  grain-like  contents 
which  appear  at  certain  intervals.  In  these  the  medulla  matter  is  quite  colourless. 
These  characteristics  appear  to  a  special  degree  in  the  hair  of  the  2-year-old 
girl  (No.  43),  some  few  of  the  thinnest  specimens  being  absolutely  colourless.1 

In  cross  section  the  formation  of  the  finer  hairs  appears  to  be  circular  (dreh- 
rimdc),  the  coarser  sometimes  approaching  an  oval  formation.  I  have  not  seen 
deeper  flattenings  or  impressions.  In  the  coarser  black  hairs  the  pigment  always 
has  a  dark  brown  appearance  when  strongly  magnified,  and  appears  to  consist 
of  grains  of  varying  size,  which  frequently  exhibit  a  somewhat  "  spindle-shaped," 
or  at  all  events  "stripy"  formation.  Where  the  smaller  grains  predominate 
there  arises  a  somewhat  yellowish  tinge.  The  granular  pigment  is  distributed 
throughout  the  medulla  matter  most  densely  in  the  outer  portions,  and  the  least 
so  towards  the  centre. 

The  hair  of  the  75-year-old  man  (No.  40)  is  specially  interesting.  Even  to 
the  naked  eye  it  appears  of  a  mixed  character ;  thin  reddish  -ye How  hairs,  and  in 
some  places  numerous  grey  or  even  zvhite  ones  are  to  be  seen  blended  with  coarse 
and  absolutely  black  ones.  The  microscope  shows,  moreover,  that  the  latter 
possess  no  medulla  or  air-cells  at  all,  so  that  the  cause  of  their  turning  grey  can 
only  be  ascribed  to  the  failure  of  the  colouring  matter,  in  other  words  to  a  kind 

1   V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiii.  (Virchow)  84 5,  846. 


592  APPENDIX 

of  Leukopathy  (Albinism).  The  yellowish  hairs  again  are  quite  uniform  in  colour, 
and  contain  a  narrow  medulla,  which  is  sometimes  interrupted,  but  as  a  rule 
colourless.  In  a  few  cases  only  in  the  course  of  such  medulloe  were  shorter, 
black-looking  interruptions  {Absatze)  to  be  noticed. 

In  no  case  whatever,  even  in  the  case  of  the  comparatively  short  hair  of  the 
children,  did  there  appear  any  tendency  to  curl  or  even  to  the  formation  of 
spirals.  On  the  contrary,  all  the  specimens  sent  in  show  lanky  ("  gestrecktes") 
hair.  But  in  all  the  specimens  the  tendency  to  waviness  is  noticeable,  and  in 
some  it  amounts  to  "  twisting."  The  ends  especially,  as  Vaughan-Stevens  remarks, 
curl  upwards  in  the  form  of  a  semicircle.  For  the  most  part  this  formation  is 
carried  some  way  up  the  lock,  which  thus  acquires  a  curly  appearance.  In  this 
respect  it  shows  a  marked  divergence  from  the  Mongolian  and  also  from  the 
pure  Malay  hair.  This  is  apparently  to  a  great  extent  owing  to  the  much  finer 
and  thinner  structure  of  the  hair,  which,  moreover,  as  a  rule  is  very  irregularly 
formed. 

The  designation  of  "tufts"  so  repeatedly  used,  refers,  it  appears,  to  the 
peculiar  tendency  often  shown  by  a  large  number  of  hairs  to  grow  together  into 
a  species  of  tuft  or  lock,  which  is  separated  by  small  intervals  from  the  adjoining 
hairs.  This  occurs  mostly  in  the  great  "  hair-tuft"  {Schopf) 1  of  the  Benua  man 
(No.  46),  which  perhaps  does  not  represent  the  entire  hair  of  the  man,  but  only 
the  largest  part  of  it.  Vaughan-Stevens  has  in  this  case  specially  emphasised  the 
presence  of  "tufts."  But  these  tufts  have  not  the  least  resemblance  to  the 
"  Buscheln "  of  the  Melanesians  and  true  Negroes  which  have  been  so  long 
denoted  by  this  name.  Probably,  too,  they  do  not  owe  their  existence  to  the 
growth  of  the  hair  as  it  were  in  separate  groups,  but  to  the  natural  tendency  of 
long  hairs  to  entwine  themselves  together  or  twist  into  strands. 

Page  63-64. 

For  information  concerning  the  sexual  relations  of  the  Sakai,  see  Z.  f.  E. 
xxviii.  181,  182.  The  most  interesting  part  of  the  information  there  given  is 
contained  In  Vaughan-Stevens'  remarks  as  to  the  employment  of  an  apparatus 
resembling  the  "ampallang"  of  the  Sunda  Islands.  Vaughan-Stevens  describes 
it  as  a  small  cylinder  of  wood,  horn,  or  tortoise-shell  which  had  a  knob  at  each 
end,  and  which  was  thrust  through  "a  square  aperture  in  the  glans  penis."  As, 
however,  Vaughan-Stevens  as  usual  gives  no  localities  .or  any  other  sort  of 
information  by  which  his  statements  could  be  checked,  and  as  he  himself  adds 
that  the  custom  was  only  prevalent  among  the  Tembeh,  and  is  now  extinct, 
I  am  afraid  it  is  only  too  probable  that  the  whole  story  will  prove  to  be  one  of 
the  mare's-nests  which  Vaughan-Stevens  has  so  frequently  discovered.  It  is 
significant  that  Vaughan-Stevens  obtained,  on  his  own  admission,  his  specimens  of 
this  apparatus  from  the  "  Senoi "  {i.e.  Central  Sakai)  who,  as  he  is  careful  to 
inform  us,  never  employ  this  apparatus  t/iemselves.  And  it  also  appears  that 
he  was  only  enabled  to  "establish  the  fact"  by  the  aid  of  a  Dayak,  who  knew 
that  Vaughan-Stevens  was  anxious  to  discover  this  apparatus  among  the  Sakai, 
and  had  been  talking  on  the  subject  to  the  very  Sakai  man  from  whom  Vaughan- 
Stevens  derived  his  information  ! 


Page  70.  Vaughan-Stevens'  Kenaboi  Measurements. 

The  height  of  a  Kenaboi  man  was  between  1500  and  1600  mm. 
Height  of  a  28-year-old  woman  1352  mm. 

1  It  is  a  top-knot,  not  a  tuft  (as  the  term  is  applied  to  the  woolly  tufts  of 
Negro  hair). 


A'.h  /.//    Ah  11. \l  III 


He  (ui 


l  dolichocephalic 
Mesaticephalic 
Brach]  cephalic 


\\  omen.  I 


i 
l  I 

I  I 


The  children  are  omitted. 


Vauqhan-Stevbns'  Bxsisi  Mbasuremi 


Page  73. 


Five  Besisi  nun  attained  a  height  of  between  1500  and  1600  nun. 
The  arm-span1  oi  a    |  ild  Besisi  woman,  whose  heighl  was  1440  mm., 

amounted  to  [423,  giving  a  difference  of  -  17  against  the  arm-stretch. 

ffead-Iti 


1 

Men. 

Women. 

2 
2 

Total. 

Dolichocephalic 
Mesaticephalic 

Brachycephalic 

2 
2 

4 

2 
4 

6 

The  children  are  omitted. 


Vaughan-Steyens'  Mantra  Measurements. 
Height. 


Page  74. 


Height  (of  men)  from  147 1  to  1638  mm.3  Logan  gives  them  a  height 
of  between  1484  and  1781  mm.4     The  average  is  put  by  Virchow  at  1553  mm.4 

Height  (of  women)  from  1405  {sic,  1409  in  V.  B.  G.  E.  xxviii.  152)  to  1488 
mm.5 

The  variation  among  the  men  amounts  to  83  mm.  ;  among  the  women  to 
167  mm. 

Between  the  tallest  man  and  shortest  woman  the  variation  is  about  233  mm. 

Two  men  measured  1608  and  1638  respectively,  and  a  third  man  measured 
between  1500  and  1600  mm.  The  greatest  arm-stretch  (1755  mm.)  was  that  of 
a  35-year-old  Mantra  man,  whose  height  was  1538,  the  difference  in  favour  of 
the  arm-stretch  being  +217  mm.6  [Co/it.  on  p.  595. 


1  Measured  (by  V.-St.)  behind  the 
back  instead  of  across  the  breast  in  the 
usual  way,  vide  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiii.  842. 

2  Virchow  in  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiii.  842- 

844. 

3  lb.  p.  842. 

VOL.   I 


4  lb.  xxviii.  p.   152. 

6  lb.  xxiii.  p.  S42. 

6  Measured  by  Vaughan  -  Stevens 
behind  the  back  instead  of  across  the 
breast  in  the  usual  way  ( V.  B.  G.  A. 
xxiii.  842). 

2  Q 


594 


APPENDIX 


bo 

a 


< 

o 
< 

Oi 

o 
p 

< 

< 


z 

<: 

c 
c 


! 

•sao,  ssojob  qipBdjg 

■-•->  mt<-»ti     •      .                      nrrrHh     • 

•aoojjo  -;v 

t>o>o*  |    [               ov  o    [              t^ 

•B|nqy  jo  ajApuoo  jBUjajxa  sijj  oi  jniuaj 
jo  jajuBqoojj  jb3j3  aqi  iuojj  .muiaj  jo  -pj 

M*.-*l 

•squiij  jo  qjSuaq 

n  r-  o   '                      O  0                     vo 

1t(    Cl                                   ri  f>                           CM 

•lunqi  sqi 
jo  sassaoojd  snouids  jouadns  'joij31ub  sq, 
u33A\}3q  pajnscaui  1UOJJ  UI  SI.\pd  jo  qipBajg 

-    0    O     •     •                     &  O     •                    0 

M       —       —                                                                   M                                              M 

•puBq  jo  -pj 

r-vo  vo 

Mt» 

t^- 

•isua\  o]  uub  jo  qiSuaq 

0.    0   0 
OWN 

O  -a- 

8 

'1SIBA\  IB   ~pj 

CO  CO  oo 
cm  cj  cm 

--1 
vO  CO 
CM    N 

•saapinoqs  aqj  Avopq  aouajajumoj^ 

m  mm 

Mt« 

•«-  in 
f.  r*. 

o 

•sjapjnoqs  sqi  usaMisq  }uojj  ui  qjpBajg 

vO   •»*■  •* 

!                  vo   m 

m 

•uiiqpqBjS  oi  uiqo  iuojj  ua\bjp 
auq  puB  a\v(  jsavoj  Xq  pauuoj  uiqo  jo  sjSuy 

"ov"**  o     ■     -                  CM   O  t*-                CO 
t>.  r~  t^    '     '                 vo  ^O   ■*                vo 

•3l3uB  ^iDBj                                 «Vg  :  :           gV.  : 

ubsjo  soyuo  oi  uiq^                                     m~£"l?  :    :             "£'£  '.             'tn 

•A\oaq  jo 
ajBd  ]S3q2iq  oj  uiqo  uiojj  30Bj  jo  qiSusq 

f^  t^  r*.    •     •                vo  r«-    •                oo 

•pi  jo  iq3pH 

ro  M    f)      •      ■                        i-    N    N                        N 

•asBq  IB  A\ojq  jo  qapBSjg 

Hn    •                         hctwH"    •                   Hct 

•pi  Sui;d3Uuod  3Uij  iqSiBJ^g 

^■lOirt     •      •                        -4"  VO     •                        VO 

•sobj  J3AO  paansBaui  saqoaB  oiibuioSaz  sqj  jo 
siuiod  Supoafojd  :soui  sqi  UdS.Yiisq  qipBajg 

CO  CO  00      •      •                      t^.00      •                     oo 

•30UBJ3qn;ojd  jBiidpoo  jo  juiod 
jsaqSiq  puB  (uiqo)  avbJ  j3a\oj  sqj  punoj  •/?/ 

CDC        HM        -**                       HN 
NNNWN                        tSlO-                        C< 

•3DUBJ3qnaoad  p^iidpoo  puB  pcaqajoj  aqj 
punoa  paansBaui  pssq  3q:>  jo  3DU3J3Jujtidji3 

•-•OOOnO                     i-im.                     w 
piwnwn                  nn-                  n 

•sauoq  piauBd  jo  sjppiui  ssojob 

X[p3DUJ3A  p3Jt!SB3UI  SJB3  JO  S3DUUO  U3SA\13g 

MMIH.*                                    MM*                                    M 

•s.wojqaAs 

J3AO  p3jnSB3UI  JB3  JO  S3DUUO  U33A\a3g 

-fcl                                         M« 

(N      M      M         ■         •                                   MM.                                    M 

•JB3  JO  3DUUO  Ol 

aouBJsqmojd  [Bjidpoo  jo  auiod  asaqSiq  uiojjj 

vO  vO  vO                                 vo  vO                           vo 

•jb3  jo  soyuo  oi  ijnjjs 
jo  ajpuBiuoj  jouaauB  jo  jiBd  jsaqSiq  ujojj 

-*•       mm     .      .                           m-?     ■ 

vOvDvC      ■      ■                     nO  vO      ■                      t~» 

Heiglit. 
ft.     in. 

*H     O     M     H                                0**""1                               " 

M      r-      M      M                                                                                                 m 

<     • 

<  *>                   tc        C  O        oo 

<  5-/-  2     g<   5*go 
■*    *  c*n-    in*  5  c  w 

e 

i  ^ 

<     ^ 

CC     J- 

r-. 

H*  -   c 


.S2  m 


c   M 


RACIAL   AFF/A 


Index, 


1  lolichoi  i  phalic 

Mesaticephalic 

Brachycephalic 

Mm. 

u. 

tal 

I 

1 

7 

1 

3 
6 

4 
1 

•3 

The  children  are  omitted. ' 

1  may  add  that  Montano  describes  the  eye-ooloui  of  the  Mantra  as  almost 
always  No,  i  ;  that  of  their  skin  as  No,  37,  though  occasionally  Nos.  21,  22, 
and  30  occur ;  and  that  of  their  hair  as  Nos.  34,  41.- 


VaUGHAN-STEVENS'    Iaki  \    MKASUR]  Ml  NTS. 


Page  82. 


Out  of  35  sdult  Jakuns,  20  (6  men  and  14,  i.e.  all  the  women)  were  under 
1560  mm.  in  height.' 

The  average  for  21  men  was  a  height  of  1527  mm.4 

Three  Jakun  men  attained  a  height  of  between  1500  and  1600  mm.6 

I  !u-  average  for  the  14  women  was  1378  mm.0 

The  shortest  man  (No.  I )  was  1439;  the  next  (No.  10)  was  1476,  two 
others  (Nos.   12  and  17)  were  1488  mm. 

The  shortest  woman  (No.  9)  was  1253  ;  the  next  (No.  8)  was  131 1  ;  a  third 
(No.  14)  1322  ;  a  fourth  (No.  4)  1342  ;  a  fifth  (No.  3)  1365  mm. 

The  arm-stretch7  of  a  21-year-old  Jakun  woman,  whose  height  was  1523, 
amounted  to  1545  mm.,  giving  a  difference  in  favour  of  the  arm-stretch  of  -f  22 
mm.      This  was  the  greatest  arm -stretch  found  among  the  women.8 

Head- Index. 


Men. 

Women. 

Total. 

'■  Dolichocephalic 
Mesaticephalic 
Brachycephalic 

I 
I 
2 

4 

I 
2 

3 

2 
2 
7 

The  children  are  omitted.9 


1  Virchow  in  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiii.  843, 

844. 

-  Arch,  des  Miss.  3rd  s.  xi.  322. 
On  Plate  21  is  given  a  Mantra 
skull,  front  view  and  profile.  On 
Plate  31  hair  -  sections  of  Mantra, 
Kenaboi,  Udai,  Jakun.  On  pp.  354, 
360,  skeletal  and  skull  indices  of  ditto. 

3  Virchow  in  Z.  f.  E.  xxiii.   144. 


.  B.  G.A.xxvw.  151. 

5  lb.  xxiii.  842. 

6  lb.  xxviii.   151. 

7  Measured  by  Vaughan-Stevens  be- 
hind the  back,  instead  of  across  the 
breast.  Fid.  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiii.  842. 
843- 

8  Virchow  in  V,  B.  G.  A.  xxiii.  842. 

9  lb.  pp.  843,  844. 


596  APPENDIX 


Let  us  now  consider  the  three  skulls,1  which  arrived  from  Vaughan-Stevens 
at  the  same  time  (as  the  extremity-bones  of  the  woman). 

No.  i. — The  skull  of  the  young  woman  is  very  light  (452  grm.),  and  unquestion- 
ably nannocephalic ;  its  capacity  is  1032  ccm.  The  horizontal  circumference 
measures  465,  the  sagittal  circumference  342  mm.  Of  the  latter  33,3  fall  to  the 
front  of  head,  35.9  to  the  middle,  and  30.6  per  cent  to  the  back  of  the  head.2 
(Figs.  1  and  2.)  The  form  is  hypsi-mesaticephalic,  or  rather  hypsi-brachycephalic 
(L.  Br.  I.  79.8;  L.  H.  I.  76.7). 

Though  the  skull  is  metopic,  on  the  other  hand  the  basilar  suture  is  closed. 
The  third  molars  in  the  upper  jaw  have  not  quite  erupted;  in  the  lower  jaw 
they  are  still  quite  enclosed.  On  each  side  is  an  epipteric  ossicle.  The  minimal 
frontal  breadth  is  92  mm.,  the  bistephanic  diameter  is  101  mm.,  figures,  that  is, 
of  considerable  magnitude.  On  the  other  hand,  the  bi-asterionic  diameter 
measures  only  93  mm.,  and  the  entire  back  part  of  the  head  appears  laterally 
compressed. 

(Fig-  3-)  Face  index  mesoprosopic  (76.7)  ;  middle  facial  index  chamaprosopic 
(47.4).  Further,  the  orbital  index  is  hypsikonchic  (94.1),  and  the  nasal  index 
platyrrhine  (57.5),  a  new  proof  that  orbital  and  nasal  indices  need  not  necessarily 
be  concordant.  Nose  very  broad,  bridge  deeply  incurved  and  short,  nasal  bones 
cut  off  below  almost  straight.  With  this  position  of  the  nose  the  extreme  prognath- 
ism agrees  very  well,  no  less  than  with  that  of  the  teeth,  which,  together  with 
the  alveolar  processes,  project  strongly,  the  palatal  index  being  leptostaphyline 
(71. 1).  The  teeth  are  encrusted  with  some  black  material  (Sirih,  or  betel-leaf). 
Lower  jaw  weak.  Middle  part  low,  chin  flat  and  rounded,  front  teeth  strongly 
projecting,  covered  at  the  roots  with  tartar,  molar  teeth  but  little  worn  ;  the 
second  left  molar  and  the  right  canine  are  carious.  Ascending  rami  of  mandible 
low,  set  on  very  obliquely,  and  the  angle  very  large. 

No.  2.— A  heavy  (750  grm.)  skull  of  an  oldish  man,  likewise  nannocephalic 
(capacity  1 190  ccm.).  The  horizontal  circumference  is  greater  (485  mm.),  the 
sagittal  circumference  (345  mm.)  but  little  different  from  that  of  No.  I.  The 
several  sections  of  the  latter  dimension  are  distributed  just  as  in  No.  1  :  Front 
of  head  31.8  ;  middle  37.3  ;  back  of  head  30.7  per  cent;  only  that  the  middle 
of  the  head  dominates  still  more.  The  form  is  ortho-mesaticephalic  (L.  Br.  I.  77.2  ; 
L.  H.  I.  74- 3);3 

The  skull  is  that  of  an  elderly  individual  ;  the  molars  are  deeply  worn  away. 
Teeth  strongly  coloured  with  betel.  On  the  right  ah  incomplete  separate 
epipteric  ossicle  ;  alisphenoids  broad.  At  the  asteria,  especially  on  the  left, 
numerous  small  Wormian  bones.  Minimal  frontal  breadth  small  (88  mm.), 
temporal  (106),  and  occipital  transverse  diameters  larger.      All  sutures  open. 

Face  large  and  heavy.  Index  mesoprosopic  (83.3)  ;  the  middle  facial  index 
(47.6)  chamaprosopic;  the  orbital  index  is  likewise  hypsikonchic  (89.4),  and  the 
nasal  index  platyrrhine  (52.0).  Orbits  very  large.  Moderate  prognathism ; 
alveolar  processes  short.  Palatal  index  hyperleptostaphyline  (55.7).  In  the 
upper  jaw  a  low,  but  strongly  projecting,  somewhat  injured  alveolar  process. 
Front  teeth  are  wanting,  on  the  right  three  molars  only,  on  the  left  only  the 
second  molar  retained,  and  rather  worn  down.  Very  heavy  but  powerful 
mandible  with  low  body  (22  mm.),  and  very  broad  ascending  rami  (35  mm.); 
small  and  slightly  projecting  chin.  The  median  teeth  are  wanting,  the  lateral 
ones  large  and  pretty  complete,  strongly  coloured  with  betel,  moderately 
worn. 

No.  3. — According  to  statement,  male  ;  according  to  appearance,  female  skull 
without    lower  jaw,    enrycephalic  (1230    cm.).       The   horizontal    circumference 

1   Either   of   Hill  Jakuns  or   Orang        V.  B.  G.  A.  xxviii.  142. 
Laut     (in    either    case    of    the    same  2  Virchow     in     V.  B.  G.  A.     xxviii. 

Malayan    stock).       Vide    Virchow    in        146.  3  lb.  pp.   146,  147. 


RAi  7  //    AFF1N1TII 


iin   i  .ui  t-  .  4S0,   lli»-  s.i|Mll;il  .  in  mill  ,  nun.       I 

pei  urn  1.1 11  to  the  front,  35.8  to  the  middle,  tad  ji.i  to  th< 
1  lations  therefore  resemble  in  a  high 
the  othei  hand  the  breadth  ol  broa  (87  mm.)  m  well  1    the  temporal  dian 
in.)  1 .  mailer.    Strong  parietal  itenokrotaphy.     Very  broad  baiilai  pro 
form  li  hypst    <..■  :-i  t   kali    (L.    Br.    1.   80.3J   L    H.   I.  76.3)     Smooth, 
small  brow,  without   lupra  '■iImi.iI  ridges,  and  without    nibglabellai  depression. 
Flattened  curve  of  the  vault.     Projecting  occiput. 

Middle  facial  index  ckamaprosopic  (47.4).    Cheek-b  i  whole  d 

marked  tuberositas  temporalis,  rygomatic  arches  moderately  prominent     <  >  1 !  >  i  t .- 1 1 
index  mesokonchic  (84.2);  nasal  index  platyrrhine  (52.2)  j  palatal  index  lepto- 

kyKfu  (77.7).    Strong  prognathism;  short  alveolar  ]  ,  which  are  for 

quite  Like  .1   shovel.     Teeth   are  wanting,   except    th<-   much   worn  and  tartar* 
red  first  molar  of  the  left  si.li-.     Nose  broad  at  root,  bridge  rathex  flattened 
an.l  deeply  indented,  nasal  bones  tolerably  broad,  aperture  wide.     Fronto-c 
suture  placed  very  deeply.     External  auditory  meatus  much  constricted.     Palate 
1     rve  of  teeth  almost  horse-shoe-shaped  ;  slight  torus  palatinus. 

A  comparison  of  these  results  shows  us   that    the  cerebral   portion  of  the  skull 

undergoes  greater  variations  than  the  facial.     As  regards  the  former,  of  the  tl 

skulls,    two    indeed   are    nannocephalic,    and    the   third    reaches   only    the    mo 
cap  1  [230  CCm.,  but  this  latter  is  in  fact  hypsidirachycephalic,  resembling, 

to  speak  more  accurately,  No.  I,  whereas  No.  2,  on  the  other  hand,  is  hypsi- 
mesaticephalic,  on  account  of  its  smaller  breadth.  The  proportions  of  the  face 
inch  more  constant.  The  predominant  character  is  platyrrhiny,  combined 
with  leptostaphyly,  which  is  present  in  all  the  skulls.  In  co-relationship  with 
this  should  be  mentioned  the  lowness  of  the  face,  as  expressed  by  the  middle 
facial  index,  and  the  lowness  of  the  face  in  general,  as  expressed  by  the  total 
facial  index,  the  latter  being  shown  at  least  in  two  out  of  three  skulls.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  orbits  show,  as  they  frequently  do,  greater  individual  variations, 
since  No.  1  and  No.  2  have  a  hypsikonchic  index,  whereas  No.  3,  on  the  other 
hand,  is  mesokonchic.  In  spite  of  this,  the  racial  unity  of  the  tribe  cannot  be 
doubted  ;  the  similarities  are  greater  and  more  numerous  than  the  differences.1 

Jakun  Skulls  described  by  Virchow.  Page  82. 

I.    Measurements.'1 

Capacity        .... 
Greatest  horizontal  length 

breadth 
Vertical  height 
Auricular  height 
Horizontal  circumference 
Sagittal  circumference,  frontal  arc 

,,  ,,  parietal  arc 

,,  ,,  occipital  arc     . 

Entire  sagittal  circumference  . 
Minimal  frontal  breadth 
Temporal  breadth 
Occipital  breadth 
Auricular  breadth 

Height  of  Face  {a)  (Nasion  to  "  Brow  ") 3 
,,  (fr)  (         ,,         Prosthion) 

1    V.  B.  G.  A.  xxviii.  (Virchow)  147,  14S. 
2  lb.  p.   1  56.  3  ?  Bregma. 


I 

2 

3 

9 

6 

6 

ccm. 

1032 

1 190 

1230 

mm. 

163 

171 

173 

;  j 

130 

(Pt) 

132  (pt) 

139 

j> 

125 

127 

132 

?> 

104 

ii5 

113 

5  5 

465 

485 

480 

>> 

114 

100 

120 

>  ? 

123 

129 

130 

)  j 

105 

106 

ii3 

j> 

342 

345 

3*3 

)  ? 

92 

88 

87 

!5 

IOI 

106 

99 

>  » 

93 

107 

102 

5  5 
i  5 

102 

cS9 

IT  I 

I05 

104 

55 

55  (Z  59) 

60 

56 

598 


APPENDIX 


Breadth  of  Face  (a) 
(6) 

(0 
Orbital  height 

,,       breadth 

Nasal  height 

,,       breadth 
Palatal  length 

,,       breadth 


mm. 


II.    Calculated  Indices. 


9 

6 

(J 

n6 

126 

118 

84 

S7 

88 

82 

94 

32 

34 

32 

34 

38 

38 

40 

48 

44 

23 

25 

23 

45 

52 

45 

32 

29 

35 

1 

2 

3 

9 

c? 

6 

79-8 

77.2 

80.3 

76.7 

74-3 

76.3 

63-3 

67-3 

65-3 

76.7 

83-3 

47-4 

47.6 

47-4 

94.1 

89.4 

84.2 

57-5 

52.0 

52.2 

71. 1 

55-7 

77-7 

Length-breadth  index 
Length-height  index 
Ear-height  index 
Facial  index  (a) 
Lower  facial  index  (b) 
Orbital  index 
Nasal  index 
Palatal  index 

Virchow  proceeds  to  describe  the  limb-bones  of  the  female  skeleton  (collected 
by  Vaughan- Stevens). 

Of  the  ar?u-bones  of  this  woman  the  following  measurements  may  here  be 
added  : — 

1.  Os  humeri,  left,  228  mm.  long  ;  circumference  of  the  diaphysis,  45  ; 
diameter  of  the  head,  29.35  >  transverse  diameter  at  the  condyles,  46  mm. 

2.  Radius,  left,  185  mm.  long;  transverse  diameter  of  the  head,  15  ;  of  the 
lower  end  23  mm. 

3.  Ulnae,  each  204  mm.  long;  transverse  diameter  of  the  little  head, 
1 1  mm.1 

The  extremity-bones  of  the  woman  No.  I  sent  by  Vaughan- Stevens  include 
both  the  ossa  femoris,  an  os  humeri,  both  ulnae,  and  a  radius. 

Apparently  all  these  bones  belong  to  the  same  skeleton.  They  agree  as  to 
appearance,  stage  of  development,  and  size.  None  of  them  shows  traces  of  a 
recent  injury  or  of  a  disease  got  over  during  life.  They  are  throughout  of  firm  com- 
position, have  smooth  surfaces,  sharp  outlines,  and  are  of  a  brownish-yellow  colour, 
here  and  there  somewhat  spotted.  They  are  small  and  delicate  like  children's 
bones.  Nevertheless  they  come  without  doubt  from  an  adult  individual ;  the 
blending  of  the  epiphyses  with  the  diaphyses  is  complete  in  all.  Only  in  a  few 
places,  e.g.  at  the  head  of  the  femur  and  at  the  upper  end  of  the  ulna,  is  there 
still  to  be  seen  a  shallow  furrow  in  place  of  the  earlier  intermediary  cartilage.2 

If  with  Mr.  Humphrey  we  take  the  average  proportion  of  the  femur-length 
to  the  stature  as  being  tWtt>  we  should  obtain  for  our  Jakun  woman  a  stature  of 
1229  mm.  ;  that  is  to  say,  24  mm.  less  than  that  of  the  girl  (1253  mm.)  measured 
by  Vaughan-Stevens,  and  estimated  as  being  from  18  to  20  years  old.  In  any 
case  we  can  congratulate  ourselves  on  seeing  before  us  the  most  unmistakable 
dwarf -bones  offered  by  ethnology.3 

Before  I  go  into  further  comparisons  with  neighbouring  tribes,  I  should  like 
to  make  a  few  remarks  on  the  colour  of  the  skin  and  hair  arid  eyes  among  the 
Jakuns.      I  take  these  from  the  registers  of  Vaughan-Stevens  of  the  year  1895.4 


1    V.  B.  G.  A.  xxviii.  (Virchow)  144. 
3  lb.  p.  145. 


2  lb.  p.  144. 
4  lb.  p.   148. 


RACIAL  AFFINlTIi 


in  my  opinion  the  htii  ol  .ill  fakuni  examined  ime  typ< 

the  COntrMi   with  the  Sakais  ami  N  .  <  a*   diaip   .1     <  .in    !•<■  I 

is  the  more  important  u  the  quettion  of  the  i  of  the  Jakuni  to  the  othei 

tribe  •  liai  alwaj  •  bei  n  ■  mal  tei  ol  disp 

The         «  ■      "  i  usuall}  nol   stated  ;  only  in   i  men, 

woman)    is  il   expressl)   described  ai  "black,"  yet   il        doubtless  to   be 
assumed  that  il  the  hah  ol  any  ol  these   people  had  not  been  black,  the 
would  have  been  expressly  mentioned.     Only  once,  in  the  ■  man   forty 

old,  is  u  described  as  grey,     h  is  called  "straight  "  in  the  case  of  fotn  men 
and  thirteen  women  ;  in  the  case  of  one  man  it  is  stated  to  be 
One  man,  of  t  wont  \  to  twenty  five  years  (No.  12),  ily  singled  out  as  an 

ption  ;  his  hail  was  curly  and  much  matted,  mo  t  ol  it   being  cut  short  to  a 
length  ol  70  to  80  mm.,  but  lo  the  crown.     Vaughan-Steves    1  ,  >rti  '.hat 

the    genealogy  Of    this  man  was    known    fol    five    generations,  and    was    free    ' 
crossing  ;   it  was  said  that    he  tame  from    a   stock    which    had    never    intermarried 

with  other  than  Jakun  families  ;  moreover,  he  was  the  only  member  of  his  family 
who  possessed  curly  hair.  In  the  case  of  a  larger  number  of  other  men  no  exact. 
Statement  COUld  be  made,  probably  because  the  hair  was  either  shaved  or  cut 
short  ;  nevertheless  it  is  true  that  in  Spite  o\  cutting  it  still  had  a  length  of 
io,  pei  haps  20,  80,  120,  200  mm.  Often  it  is  described  as  thick,  sometimes  at 
the  same  time  matted.  In  the  case  of  the  women,  the  same  expression  is  used 
throughout,  viz.   "  long  and  straight." - 


The  Colour  0    the  Eyes. 
(The  following  table,  compiled  by  Vaughan-Stevens,  is  given  by  Virchow. )  3 

Nos.  Men.  Women. 

1-2  ...  I 

2  ...  I 
2-3  21  II 

2  (29)  I 

3  •••  2 

As  regards  the  colour  of  the  iris,  this  was  comparatively  dark,  usually  dark 
brown.  The  deepest  shade  (No.  1-2)  is  only  recorded  in  the  case  of  one 
woman  ;  shades  Nos.  2  and  3  were  the  most  frequent,  of  which  No.  3  denotes  a 
lighter  shade  of  brown. 

In  the  eyes  of  the  Jakun  the  conjunctiva  is  generally  more  or  less  bloodshot, 
a  fact  which  they  attribute  to  the  trying  nature  of  their  many  changes  between  a 
jungle  and  a  sea-life  ! 4 

The  teeth  of  the  Jakuns,  not  the  alveolar  continuation,  often  project    12-16 

1  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxviii.  (Virchow)  150,  as  well  as  the  colour  of  it  to  a  more 
1 5  '•  advanced    age    than    the   neighbouring 

2  Z.  f.  E.  xxix.  178.  As  regards  tribes  (V. -St.  mZ.f.E.  xxix.  178). 
the  Jakuns,  and  especially  the  older  The  Jakuns  have  only  a  little  hair 
women  among  them,  grizzled  hair  is  on  the  face  ;  the  beard  is  scanty,  and 
frequent ;  the  total  loss  of  colour  is  not  whiskers  are  scarcely  ever  seen  among 
usual,  and  the  hair  merely  becomes  thin  them,  even  if  they  are  not  intentionally 
more  often  than  it  totally  disappears.  pulled  out  (Z.  /.  E.  xxix.  179). 

This,  however,  is  only  comparative  as  3  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxviii.  (Virchow)  14S. 

between  the  aborigines  (Orang  Hutan)        149. 

themselves,  since  they  retain  their  hair  *  Z.  f.  E.  xxix.  1S0. 


6oo  APPENDIX 


mm.  in  front  of  the  incisors  of  the  under-jaw,  which  are  almost  vertical.  Caries 
rarely  occurs  among  the  forest-dwellers  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  frequently  among 
those  who  live  among  the  Malays.  The  lips  are  well-formed,  thin,  and  the 
upper  one  well  curved. 

The  nose  is  never  perforated,  but  the  ear-lobes  of  the  women  are  always  per- 
forated and  distended  till  the  hole  attains  a  diameter  of  5  mm.  to  5  cm. 

The  fore  part  of  the  head  is  always  full  and  prominent  (Fig.  3). 


Here  is  given  (in  the  original)  Fig.  3. — Profile  of  Chamai,  a  45-year-old 
I  Besisi  woman. 


] 

The  outline  in  Fig.  4  shows  the  typical  form  of  the  breast  of  a  young  12-year- 
old  Mantra  girl  named  Awi  immediately  before  her  marriage.  The  two  breasts 
are  often  unsymmetrical.1 

F       Here  is  given  (in  the  original)  Fig.    4. — Outline  of  the    breast   of   Awi"] 
[_("Owee"),  a  12-year-old  Mantra  girl. 

Skin-Colour. 

The  colour  of  the  skin  was  determined  (by  V.-St.)  in  accordance  with  the 
Parisian  colour-plate.      The  following  numbers  were  determined  : — 


Nos. 

Men. 

Women. 

21 

2 

21-30 

I 

21-37 

I 

22-29 

... 

I 

29-30 

I 

29-J4 

I 

29-37 

8 

I 

30 

1 

30-2/ 

... 

I 

30-37 

4 

2 

37 

3 

6 

37-44 

1 

^-43 

1 

43 

1 

r 

In  two  cases  it  is  noted  that  the  individual  concerned  (Xo.  9  £  ,  No.  15  9) 
was  afflicted  with  a  skin  disease  called  Kurap  {Korab).  In  one  case  (No.  6)  light 
patches  are  mentioned.2 

In  reviewing  these  statements,  it  appears  in  the  first  place  that  the  skin-colour 
in  general  corresponds  to  a  yellowish  or  greyish  tint  of  brown.  The  darkest 
shades  are  the  Nos.  27,  34,  and  42,  which,  however,  were  only  found  in  one 
individual  in  each  case;  No.  27  in  a  woman,  Nos.  34  and  42  in  men;  these 
presented  a  dusky  brown,  approximating  in  Nos.  27  and  34  to  the  negro  colour. 
All  other  individuals  showed  lighter  shades,  especially  Nos.  21,  30,  44,  whereas 
Nos.  22,  29,  37  displayed  a  medium  brown  tint.3  In  this  connection  we  must 
notice  that  No.  37  is  noted  most  frequently,  namely,  in  the  case  of  fifteen  men 
and  ten  women  — 68. 1  per  cent  of  the  men,  and  66.6  per  cent  of  the  women,  or, 

[Continued  on  p.  602. 

1  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxiii.  (Virchow)  840.  G.  A.  xxviii.  150.       It  is  described  as 

2  lb.  xxviii.  (Virchow)  148.  a   fine   "glossy  black"  lock,  and  was 

3  For  a   specimen  (sent  by  V.-St.)  24  cm.  in  length, 
of  a  Jakun  woman's  hair,    vide  V.  B. 


RACJ  1/     \FFINITL 


1    i 


^> 

M                M 

W 

M 

•>• 

•>.      V©           Mt       •" 

*•      »• 

' 

£ 

^s 

•oo     O 

^5 

N-' 

J 

"  i 

VO 

M 

~x-     ■ 

M 

.5 

m 

vO 

ro       0> 

.y 

... 

6> 

*■•    OO        c> 

ix       rx 

H          00 

vX         06 

1 

^ 

/■•x 

*- •. 

*5  x 

•<- 

■*•       co 

w 

4-s 

N 

. 

e-- 

VO 

ro 
i             tx 

B 

Ix     00           t          rx 

tx          (V) 

N 

■«- 

l$l      CO         CO         CO 

tx        vd 

>o 

^ 

ix 

N     N        N        N 

ix       r^ 

fx 

m 

N      •*•       vO         «o 

00        Ov 

Ov 

„-*.           J 

ir»     pi         N         vo 

00         CO 

& 

.-. 

CO 

00      OO         00         00 

/<^ 

^ 

^-^ 

/-x 

u 

*o 

*o     ^ 

*o 

*o 

■5  * 

2  w 

0 

o   ^-x      •«-      o 

IO          /-X 

Ix 

n 

M         O           ***           *" 

-          -r 

CO 

-5"3 

s^.        >-- 

x-^        ^-« 

£•  = 

tx 

m     vO          CO       vo 

tx        co 

CO 

-  t— i 

u 

rx 

CO      tx       OO         Ov 

co        (vi 

rJ 

tx 

rs     N        N        t> 

00       00 

00 

c 

M           M 

IX      O          w           M 

00 

OO           tx 

tx     co        m        vo 

00       ^ 

-<t         co 

■+    •+      m      ■+ 

VO          IO 

■«-     * 

s 

M                M 

M           M                M                M 

M                   M 

" 

x 

O          Cx 

tx      O         00           0 

O                  •* 

CO 

(j 

M           0 

tx     Ov         CO         o~\ 

IX            CM 

^  >• 

IO         VO 

>ci      vo       vo         VO 

vO         vO 

s 

M                11 

H         K             -             H 

M                 - 

H 

co 

^^ 

•-v 

^^ 

V-    Ml 

/-N^-VXQ     ^- 

♦O         '"v^v 

*o     ^ 

♦0 

-O00  V 

'o'  ^      *     ^^ 

vo       *« 

vO 

3  n 

Mh    Ci    N 

m      Ov        co        Ov  ■<*• 

-          ■*■ 

CO 

"i  u 

— -^•^^  p) 

x^         C»- 

rxvo  oo  2" 

Ul      (N           ■*         O    N 

O         O 

-r 

O   tx  N    M 

■fl-      ■*■         N         vo    Ov 

00 

O 

M      M      M    ,*-rr 

\r>     V)        io        in  co 

vO          vo 

10 

MM                M                MM 

M                     M 

M 

_ 

_ 

— 

3 

o  o 

I/)  * 

> 

S  1  u 

O 

>»^ 

O   u 

o 

-                .       «  u 

-    1  ~  ^ 

U 

uj;     - 

-    -      -     *J5 

"      ~7   '-   - 

2C  "O 

_;  — 

^L   r.Vj 

a 

II 

^^ 

V 

u 

i  - 

Cm 

^ 

:          >. 

.3 

ppercorn 
ost  wooll 

"So           SOJ 

4J     ~     0  c  5. 

Lank 
traighl 

traight 
ariable 

z        < 

Variab 

Mor 
tha 

Straig 

CO 

co     > 

3 
O 

o 
U 
3 
1* 

*> 

C           4) 

c              -.       > 

0) 

o 
u 
o 

u 

Paler  tha 
Semang 

Lighter  th 
Po-klo 

Reddish  oli 
brown 

4)         "5 

•S           O 

rv> 

Variable 

ades  of  ol 
ellowei  tl 

S.  lVrak 

co 

■g> 

• 

• 

^: 

rt 

B            . 

_.      ^ 

^J 

,    ir.        rt 

> 

K4          3 

X 

!    E      ^ 

5 

1 

S9    - 

t3 

Q 

^  rt        tvD 

1    rt 

55 

emang- 
Hami 

Grit 

.     ^     h      Q       M 
1     _4     "W       .-         3 

rt      O     >y        „        i- 

^  a.  •— i    ^    0 

O 

M 

c 

Native 
Sams 

Oran 

lalays 
S.  Per 

Upper 

• 

CO 

00 

H 

<*; 

--3    3 


-     '3 


I 


^  3  «  ='  - 


—    .      V  —    v 
Cr    C.3 


-     -    _  "3  u.    3  '-S  -r- 

ill  s.^=3:a 


8.S  ~ 


_ .    ■ 


-  —  "J     tl     -    _'  y,- 

=    *«z. .a     -  E 
m  8  « "S  ^  -S  ^  •/ 

?.,0   =    ?.:      ..<!- 

-  „.:;•—  •—  ^x^ 

5  S     .   -  '-     9 

li    -  -  —  J.  —   -  V 


o  -    --j^^:^ 


3HJ 


3-       H-      -^.J  3 

n       -i  ="o  e 

I  >  C  ai  5  6  CD  « 

?• n   -j  -  — 


1  "      R 


5  - 

< 

2 

Ed  c  ti  «  2.2 


!  S  t/)  «l 

K*  g      r  -'=  z-F- 
...  1-  si  S  g  •"-  .- 

-  5  « w  w  ffi  •-:  M 

l*2 :    ' 


v      -  — 

--    EO'S 


H  -5  — 

~     -  _   v      -    . 

:•  _i    -    3    C*  -»" 


2     "  -i. 

-c  :--.:.£ .i  a : 
'tT -    z  «  -i— .  = : 

=  -j  tj  *o  JTJ  «g  -    3 ' 

<  3.  _>  a  i  f    . 

li  D  £!£-:£  M . 


6o2 


APPENDIX 


in  all,  in  67.5  per  cent  of  the  individuals  examined.  There  can  therefore  be  no 
question  of  their  being  a  black  race.1 

The  skin-colour  of  the  darkest  of  the  Jakuns  corresponded  to  No.  28  of 
Broca's  table.  The  degree  of  admixture  of  Malay  blood  determines  the  colour, 
making  it  lighter  where  the  sun  does  not  affect  it. 

[This  remark,  however,  is  doubtless  based  upon  Vaughan- Stevens's  Pan- 
Negrito  theory,  the  real  interpretation  of  the  facts  being,  no  doubt,  that  the 
lighter  (and  more  nearly  Malay)  colour  is  due  to  the  purer  (aboriginal)  Malayan 
element.]  a 

When  the  skin,  as  is  especially  the  case  among  the  Jakuns,  is  much  affected 
by  cutaneous  disorders  ("  Kurap"),  the  persons  of  both  sexes  emit  an  unpleasant 
rank  odour,  which  is  still  noticeable  after  washing.3 


PART  II.— MANNERS  AND  CUSTOMS. 

Pangan  Dart  Poison.4  Page  295. 


Ingredients  of 
Poison. 

Scientific  Name. 

Description 
of  Plant. 

Part  used. 

Remarks. 

i.  "Taloon" 

Strychnos,  sp. 

Strong- 

Bark  and 

Sir.  pubescens, 

(Mai.  "Blay 

smelling 

sap 

Clarke  {Logani- 

Besar  ") 

plant 

acece),  Ridley  (?) 

2.  "  Kannet  " 

Gnetum    scan- 

1  1 

Bark 

Gnetum     edule, 

(Mai.  "B. 

dens,  Roxb. 

Bl.    ( Gnetacece), 

Kechil") 

Ridley 

3.  "  Greear  " 

Strychnos,  sp. 

5  1 

Bark  and 

Str.     tieitte,     Bl. 

(?)(Mal.  "B. 

(Java) 

sap 

(Loga?iiaceuA, 

Itam  ") 

Ridley    [Mai. 
"  Ipoh  akar"] 

4.  "Tol" 

Coscinucmfenes- 

•  1 

>  j 

=  Koopur  (V.-St. 

("Tole") 

tratutn, 
Colebr. 

P.  124) 

5.  "Pergu" 

Unknown 

>  > 

Bark 

("Perghoo") 

6.  "Bhoi;' 

?  Roucheria, 

1  1 

Bark  and 

Ridley  says  Rou- 

("Boi") 

Griffith?  7 

sap 

cheria  Griffithi- 
ana,   Planch 
(Line<z),   [also 
" ipoh     akar 
putih  "] 

7.  "Choi-choi" 

Unknown 

Tree  ? 

Bark 

8.  "Kri" 

•>  > 

1 1 

» > 

("Kree") 

9.   "  Lendau  " 

?) 

1 1 

11 

("  Lendow") 

10.  "  Garsung" 

J> 

11 

11 

11.  "Chow'' 

11 

5  1 

Fruit 

12.  "  Piyung  " 

Pangium  edu/e, 

>  1 

» 1 

P.    edule,    Mig. 

(Mai. '"Kapa- 

?sp. 

{Bixinecc),  Ridl. 

yang  ") 

1  V.  B.  G.  A.  xxviii.  (Virchow)  149. 

2  lb.  p.  840. 


3  Z.f.  £.  xxix.  174,  175- 

4  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.  109  seq. 


RITO  DART  P(  • 


I  Dart  1 


I     rediei 
Poison. 

11IH1.     Vim.. 

i  |    '■  Slowung" 

Miquilia    . 

Small 

ed- 

i/<i/d,     l . 

c  -limber 

( ( )Uu  in 

Ridl<  \ 

14.  "  Rengul  " 

Epipremnum 

"  Lai 

Fruil 

("ringhut  ■') 

..in  (cum, 

Schott,  p, 

Ridley 

ping 
aroid  with 
leathery 

lea\. 

15.  "  [poh  " 

Antiaris  toxi- 
carta,  151. 
( ( rtica 
Ridley 

Tree 

Sap  from 

bark 

m.  •■  Rotan 

Unknown 

Rattan  or 

Sap 

riong  " 

climbing 

cane 

17.   "  Rotan 

?  =  BStong,  a 

5  > 

>  1 

\  .-St.  describes  it 

butong  " 

kind  of  bam- 
boo {sic) 

as  a  rattan,  but 
no   such    rattan 
is  known 

18.  "Rumpi" 

Bcchmeria 
Nivea, 
Gandich  ; 
Laportea, 
gen.    identi- 
fied with 
Bcchmeria 
tenacissima, 
Urtica  aesti- 
valis 

Nettle 

Leaves 

According     to 
Ridley,  Laportea 
crennlata,  Forst. 
( Urticacece) 
=  "rami"  (?) 

19.  "Jelatang" 

Ctusmone 

Javanica 

•>■> 

<  > 

(Tel.  Badak)  Cnes- 
mone  Javanica, 

-    Bl.    {Euphor- 
biacet?),  Ridley 

20.  ?cBal" 

21.  "Sidudok" 

>  Piper,  sp. 

Pepper- 
vine 

Roots 

22.  "  Begung  :* 

A  morphophallus, 
sp.  (Aroidetf), 
Ridley 

Aroid 

>> 

23.  "Gadong" 

Dioscorea,  sp. 

Yarn 

>> 

Diosc.  Dtzmonum, 
Roxb.  ( Dioscore- 
acece,  Ridley 

24.  Other  sub- 

Scorpion, snake, 

Any  poison-snake 

stances 

and  centipede 
poison 

does 

604 


APPENDIX 


Page  311. 


BESIS1    Dart    POISON. 


Ingredients  of  Poison. 


A.1 

1.  "  Ipoh  akar  "' 

2.  "Tuba" 

3.  Pepper 

4.  "  Rengas  " 


Identification. 


Strychnos    ticute,     Bl. 
{Loganiacea),  Ridl. 

Derris  clliptica,  Benth. 
( Legti m in os<e),  Ridl. 


Description  of 
Plant. 


Creeper 


Part  used. 


Melanorrhoca  Wallachii, 

Hook,  fil.,  or 
Exccecaria  agallocha,  or 
Gluta  rengas,  Migs. 
5.  Non-vegetable    sub-     Arsenic 
stances 


B.2 

1.  "  Ipoh     akar" 

or  "  batang  " 

2.  "Malai" 


3.  "Tenet" 

4.  "Jcmi"    (Mai. 

"  tuba") 

5.  "Kroi" 

6.  Non-vegetable   sub- 

stances 


(As  above) 

Antiaris  toxicaria,  Bl. 
{Urticacea),  Ridley 

Thevetia     neriifolia, 
Juss.   {Cerbera    The- 
vetia, L.)j  ?  Strych- 
nos pubescens,  Clarke 
{Loganiacea),  Ridl. 

?  Gnetum  edule,  Bl. 
{Gnetacece),  Ridley 

Derris  elliptica,  Benth. 
(Leguminosa),  Ridl. 

Lophopetahitn  pallidum , 
Laws,  Ridley 

Arsenic  ;  also  snake, 
scorpion,  and  centi- 
pede poison  when 
available 


Tree 


Creeper  (?) 


Scrapings 

from  root 
?Root 


Fruit 
Sap 


Bark 


1  Collected  by  myself,  but  largely  adds  "chandu" (prepared  opium),  which 
agreeing  with  a  list  by  Bellamy  (p.  229),  may  be  a  mistake  for  "  jenu"  =  "tuba.  ' 
who,    however,   omits   "rengas"    and  2  B.  Collected  by  self. — W.  S. 


MAYA  "/•  POISi  i 


M   x       l  I    A      I  »\l    I      POI 


8  319 


1 


I  dent  ill 


Rotan  k<  ni.uit     i  \i  to  "  R.  i.  i. u  ')       Sap 


I  hantong 

kulak" 

^.  ••  Berni  keejang' 
("  Birah  kiji 


Ditrnoi 

Mart. 

(/W*U  ),    Rldl. 

l  nknown 


rooti 
Sap 

ti>  . 

.  ,  1  .inili. 
4.  "  Umpaa   padi"    StryckncSi  sp. 

(or     any     Oth<  1 

Strychnos) 


5,  "  Umpas    pite  " 
M.il.   "  Upas 
pahit  ") 
6    ••  Mundess  " 

7.    •  Prachek" 


8.  "Koopur" 

9.  "Kroie" 

10.  "  Lada  api  " 

11.  "Ipoh"  (tree) 

12.  "  Gadong  " 

13.  Lemon  (or  lime  ?) 

14.  "Tuba" 


15.  Non-vegetable 
poisons 


Strychnos,  sp. 


Unknown 

Tabtmamontana 
malaccensist  Hook, 
iil.  {Apocyna 
Ridl. 

L  \irapa  tneUaccensis , 
Lam. 

Lophopetalum   pal- 
lidum, Laws. 
[Celastrinece) 

?  Chillies 

Antiaris  toxicaria 


■   (?) 


Bark  (?) 


Roots   and 
bark 


Bark 


Fruit 


Sap 


Dioscorea,  sp.  Knobs 

Citrus,  sp.  ,  Seeds 

Randia   dnmetonun,  '  Root 

Lam.  (T-R.  A.S.  xvi. 

1S86,  414),  V.-St. 

ii.     124,    note;    or 

Derris  elliptica 
!  Centipedes,    snakes, 

scorpions,  arsenic 


In  hh  list  <»f  the  full- 

•  n,\  .  - 

St.  says  "  umpaa "' 
Blay  hit.un  "• 
of  Pangans,  i.e.Str. 
ticutc  (Java) 


=  Newbold's 
"kopah" 

=  Newbold's 
"krohi" 


{Blandas,  "  ternek  " 
Kenaboi,  "  kayas  " 
("kyass") 


I  Derris  elliptica, 
Benth.  (Legumi- 
noser),  Ridl. 


Note. — Ridley  also  identifies  "grow,"  the  name  of  a  fruit  which  when  eaten 
by  an  animal  makes  its  flesh  poisonous  for  men  to  eat.  "  It  ('grow')  looks  like 
a  Xanthophyllum  "  (Ridley).  "  Berar  keejang  "  {although  here  included  by  V.-St. 
in  the  poison  ingredients)  "is  the  aroid  plant  used  if  the  man  eats  acid  fruit  after 
killing  anything  with  the  blowpipe"  (V.-St.).  "  Chapaneng,"  the  leaf  used  for 
straining  the  Ipoh,  is  Clerodendron  velutinum.  "  Chooping "  or  "chupeno-,'" 
mentioned  as  an  antidote  to  "  tuba,"  is,  as  Mr.  Ridley  personally  remarked  to  me, 
"a  Menispermacious  plant,  which  I  know  well"  (it  is  not,  however,  given  in 
Ridley's  List).  "Chapaneng"  (in  Ridley's  List)  is  given  as  Clerodendron 
villosum,  Bl.  [Verbenacece).  l  V.-St.  ii.  124. 


6o6 


APPENDIX 


Page  326. 

The  following  description  of  the  Peruvian  blowpipe  referred  to  is  taken  from 
the  second  volume  of  Reiss  and  Stubel's  monumental  work,  Kultur  und 
Industrie  Sud-Amcrikanischer  Volker. 

It  was  brought  from  the  Huallaga  River  (Peru),  and  consists  of  two  grooved 
and  hollowed-out  halves  of  a  palm-stem,  carefully  fitted  together,  and  wound 
round  with  "cipo,"  which  is  covered  besides  with  a  layer  of  black  wax.  A  short 
bone  mouthpiece  is  fitted  into  it. 

The  quiver  consists  of  a  bamboo  arrow-receptacle  with  a  gourd-shell  bottom, 
and  a  lining  of  dried  palm-leaves  in  which  the  small  blowpipe  arrows  are  firmly 
stuck. 

It  has  a  cap-shaped  covering,  a  gourd-like  receptacle  containing  cotton- wool, 
and  the  half-jaw  of  a  fish  called  "  pana,"  set  with  sharp  teeth. 

The  arrows  measure  24.  5  cm.  in  length,  and  are  made  out  of  palm-leaf  ribs. 


Page  332. 


Benua  Dart  Poison.1 


Ingredients  of  Poison. 

Identification. 

Part  used. 

i.  "  Ipoh" 

Antiaris  toxicaria 

Bark 

2.   "  Babuta" 

Excacaria  agallocha,  L., 
or  Ccrbera  odollam,  P. 
and  C.  Lactaria,  Hani. 

Sap 

3.  "Gurah" 

{Apocynacete),  Rial. 
Sapium  indicum,  L. ,   or 
Eranthemtim     rtialva- 
cense,  Clarke 

Sap 

4.  Non  -  vegetable 

(1)  Centipede  heads  ;  (2) 

substances 

millipedes  ;     (3)      the 
stings  of  scorpions ;  (4) 
spines  offish,  e.g.,  the 
'sembilang,"  "kitang," 
"  lepu,"      "  siong," 
"  pari,"    "  te  -  tuka,"' 
"k'li";  (5)  liver  of  the 
li  buntal  "  fish2 

Page  420  et  seqq. 


Semang  Comb  Patterns. 


[Note  by  Editor. — The  following  list  was  compiled  from  Vaughan-Stevens' 
manuscripts  and  printed  in  Z.f.  E  xxv.  86  et  seq. 

In  the  present  version  the  original  list  has  been  condensed  as  far  as  possible  ; 
Vaughan-Stevens'  faulty  system  of  nomenclature  has  been  eliminated,  and  the 
actual  numbers  of  the  panels  themselves  substituted  ;  the  result  being  that  the 
description  of  the  patterns  is  now  much  easier  to  follow. 

The  numbering  is  that  of  the  original,  but  obvious  corrections  have  been 
made  in  a  few  places  ;  and  all  less  important  details  omitted  to  save  space. — 
W.  S.] 


1  V.-St.  ii.  107  et  seq. 

2  Various  kinds  of  snake-poison  are 
added  by  the  W.  Benua,  e.g.  that  of  the 


black  cobra,  and  a  small  brown  snake 
called  "Ali."  The  E.  Benua  add  that 
of  the  "  ular  berang  "  and  "  gala." 


VI  GR1T0  I  I  'I/A'  /'.////  /•  \ 

Poi  iketchei  oi  the  central  panel  patterns  (No    |)  ol   Noa  i  A  to 

n.ii.    i       •       iii:  I-  19N,  Plat«  1 1. ;   i'K  1  1..    J8,  Plau   III.  1   19  1 

Plate  i\ 

1  \.    Disease,  "  Pong    01  "  Kingkong 

Panel  t  (1)  "  Pen  ping,  '  1  p   1 1  B,  1  \.  ••  Knel  I 

cp.   11B,  1G1     \)  ••  Pin  1     pattern  "I  cp.  1  iA,  6)  the 

I  inic  ;  (8)  ''if  same, 

1  P.    I>i  1.    I     1  A  — 

Panel:  (1)  "Td-hong"       *'  t-inpty,"  in  conjunction  with  (a)  "  1 
t.'niv,-'  which   is   carried  over  the  top  border;    (2)    "  Tink-tonk  " )  (4) 
••  w.  \"  pattern  M  1  I  i,    ;<>v 

1.) A,  10II,  iol".,  A7,  10I,  iSC  (variation!  oi  the  "  Paaii  "  patl  rn)  .  (6) 
the  same  :  (S)  the  same. 
1C1   Disease!  same  as  iA — 

Panel :  (i)  "Jenfisik"  (" Jennassik"),  cp.    [4B,  9A,   i8E,   sA,  iD, 

I I  A,  57,  .)  1,  1  oi- .  toBj  (2)  u  '  Kitteng,'  42  variations  "1  (4)    •  r  11 
pattern  "  Lag<boig}"  cp.  19F1  t6A  (a  dirTerent  pattern  but  with  the   ame 
name);  (0)  '* Piwer "- pattern  " Qmung"  ("Oomoong"),  cp.  10A,  ol:. 
55,  20II,    and  (1)  of  1 1),  57  ;   (S)  identical  with  (4). 

iD.    Disease,  same  as  tA — 

Panel  :   (i)  the  same   as    iQ  but  differing   in    design  ;   (2)  "Hong,"  Cft 
2A  and  (?)   10H  ;  (4)  <k  umung,"  cp.  (6)  of  ic:  ;  with  (6)  cp.  (4)  of  iC  ; 
with  (8)  cp,  (4). 
lE.    Disease,  same  as  1  A — 

Panel:  (1)  "Um"  ("Oom''),  cp.  21A,  21K,  and  (2)  of  21A;  (2) 
"is"  ("Ecs");  (4)  "Pawer  "-pattern,  the  same;  (6)  the  same;  (8) 
"  Pawer  "-pattern"  ;  "  Kneldap,"  cp.   iG,  21B,  and  (?)  iA. 

1  F.    Disease,  same  as  iA — 

Panel:    (1)   "  um,"    cp.    lE;    (2)    "Pahom"    ("  Paherm  "),    cp.    2 1 A 
and  (1)  of  21 A  ;  (4)  the  same,  with  some  variation  ;    (6)  same  as  (1)  ;   (8) 
same  as  (4). 
id.   Disease,  same  as  iA — 

Panel:  (1)  "  Manteng,"  with  upper  border;  (2)  "  Knel-lap,"  cp.  (8) 
of  iE  ;  (4)  cp.  iE  ;  (6)  cp.  lE  ;  (8)  same  as  (2). 

2  A.    Disease,  "  Kadong,"  unidentified — 

Panel:  (1)   "Jenasik"  ("  Jenassik "),  cp.  iC,  iD;  (2)   "Bong,"  cp. 
iD;    (4)  as   in    iD  ;    (6)    "  Chis-kes,"    "  Pawer  "-pattern,    cp.    4P,    4C  ; 
(8)  as  in  (4). 
2B.  Disease,  same  as  2  A — 

Panel:  (1)   "  Led-wod,"  cp.    54,  4B,   49,    17B,    16A,   8A,  4C,  18F  ; 
(2)    "  Sad-an-yet "    ("  Sad-un-yet "),    identical   with    19K,    45,    19J  ;    (4) 
like  (2)  of  1 A  ;   (6)  cp.  (4)  ;   (8)  identical  with  (2). 
3A.    Disease,  "  Kimbu  "  ?  ("  Kimbur  "),  unexplained — 

Panel:   (1)  "  Pen-ying,"  cp.    iA,   4A,  21B,  12C,  20G  ;   (2)  "  Angis," 
cp.  20G;  (6)  like  (2);  (S)  like  (1). 
3B.    Disease,  same  as  3A — 

Panel:  (1)  "  Chig-lag,"  cp.    3C,    20F  ;  (2)    "  Kil-kel,"  cp.    19H  and 
CS  (?).     Panels  (6)  and  (8)  like  ( 1 ). 
3C.    Disease,  same  as  3A — 

Panel  :   (1)  "  Chig-lag,"  cp.  3B  ;   (2)  "  Bakol,"  cp.  20F,  20J  ;   (6)  like 
(2);  (8)  like  (1). 
4A.    Disease,  "  Klasau  "  ("  Klassowr  "),  unidentified — 

Panel  :  (1)   "  Pen-ying,"  cp.  iA,  2lB,  3A,  12C,  20G  ;   (2)  "  Ki-b 
("  Kee-boot"),  cp.    37;  (4)   "  Was  "-pattern   "Tebal-i"?  i"Tebal-I:J), 
cp.  (1)  of  6A,  ISA,  20H,  ^5  ;  (6)  and  (8)  like  (2). 


60S  APPENDIX 


4B.    Disease,  same  as  4 A — 

Panel:   (1)   "  Led-wod,"  cp.    54,   49,   2B,    16A,   8A,    4C,    17B,  18F  ; 
(2)  "  Chis-kes,"  cp.  4C  ;  (4)  and  (6)  like  (1) ;  (8)  like  (2). 
4C.    Disease,  same  as  4A — 

Panel:    (1)    "  Led-wod,"    cp.    4B    (half-size);    (2)    "Chis-kes,"    very 
different  from  that  of  4B  ;   (4)  and  (6)  "  Penalong,"  cp.  15A  and  (?)  18II  ; 
(8)  like  (1). 
5A.    Disease,    "  Pasar  chinbeg "    ("  Passar-chin-beg "),    unexplained,   cp.    "  Li- 
chin-beg  "  ("  Lee-chin-beg  ")=  "  disease  of  the  upper  jaw  " — 

Panel:  (1)  "Let-seig"  ("  Let-saig"),  cp.    35,  6C,   24,  6G,  27,  20B, 
61,    59,  18H;   (2)  "Sil";   (4)  "  Was  "-pattern  "  Tebal-i,"  cp.    4A  ;  (6; 
"  Was  "-pattern  "  Penfdong,"  cp.  18H  and  (?)  15A;  (8)  like  (4). 
5B.    Disease,  same  as  5  A — 

Panel:  (1)  "  Pen-hil,"  cp.   25A,  50,  20A,  19L,  44,  25B,  22A,  19C  ; 
(2)  "  Batchai,"  cp.    18G  ;  (1)  "  Was  "-pattern   "  Tebal-i,"  cp.  6A,  i8A, 
etc.;  (6)   "  Was  "-pattern   "en-let"  ("N'let"),   cp.    28B  ;  (6)   "  Was  "- 
pattern  "  en-let,"  varied  in  28A. 
6 A.    Disease,  "  Kayan  challag,"  undefined — 

Panel:  (1)    "  Tebal-i,"  variation  of  18A,    55,    20H  ;  (2)   "  Makuin " 
("Mukoin"),  varied  in    15B;  (4)  "  Pawer  "-pattern  "  Sil,"  cp.  5A  ;   (6) 
and  (8)  like  (1). 
6B.   Disease,  same  as  6 A — 

Panel:  (1)  "  Let-seig,"  cp.  6D,  15A,  18H,  59,  61,  20B,  5A,  27,  6G, 
24,    6C,    35,    which   show   every    possible   variation   of  "Let-seig"    (2) 
"  ennyangil"  ("  N'nyangil  "),   varied  in  6D,   38;  (4)  like   (2);  (6)  and 
(8)  "  Was  "-pattern  "  Pen-hil,"  cp.  5B,  etc. 
6C    Disease,  same  as  6A — 

Panel  :  (1)  "  Let-seig,"  cp.  6B  ;  (2)  "  Tebal"  ("  Tebal  "),  cp.   I9A(?) 
and  61  (?)  ;  (4),  (6),  (8)  like  (2). 
6D.   Disease,  same  as  6A— 

Panel:   (1)   "Let-seig";  (2)   "ennyangil"  ("N'nyangil"),   varied  in 
6B,  38  ;  (4)  like  (1)  ;  (6)  like  (1) ;  (8)  like  (2). 
6E.    Disease,  same  as  6A — 

Panel:  (1)    "Pen-hil,"  cp.    5B  ;  (2)   "  entei,"  variation  of  6G  ;  (4), 
(6),  "  Pawer  "-pattern  "  A-et  "  ?  ("  Aet  ")  ;  (8)  like  (2). 
6F.   Disease,  same  as  6A — 

Panel:    (1)    "Pen-hil,"   cp.    5B,   6E ;   (2)    "  Al-tong,"  cp.    40,    19B  ; 
(4)    "  Was  "-pattern    "  Chig-lag,"    cp.    3B,    3C,    20F  ;    (6)    "  Pawer  "- 
pattern  "  Kil-kel,"  cp.   19H,  3B,  SC  ;  (6)  as  (2). 
6G.    Disease,  same  as  6A — 

Panel:  (1)  "Let-seig,"  cp.    6B,   etc.;   (2)  "Entei,"  cp.   6E  ;  (4)  and 
(6)    "  Pawer  "-pattern   "  Si-ei-yong  "  ("  See-i-yong") ;   (8)   Keiyong,   cp. 

33,  58,  17C. 
6H.    Disease,  same  as  6 A — 

Panel:  (1)  "  Pen-hil"  (half-size),  cp.  5B  ;  (2)  "  Langut  "  ("  Langhut  "); 
(4)  and  (6)  "  Pawer  "-pattern  "  Angis,"  cp.  3A,  20G  :  (8)  like  (2). 
7 A.    Disease  "  Tan-eg,"  unexplained — 

Panel:  (1)  "  Pasir  "  ("  Passer  ")  =  "  sand,"  cp.  19T,  18C,  19B,  19H, 
19A,  20J,  19N,  12A;  (2)  "Kayap"  ("Kiap");  (3)  "  Pawer  "-pattern 
"Sad-an-yet"  ("  Sad-un-yet "),  cp.  19J  ;  (4)  like  (2);  (6)  and  (7) 
"  Was  "-pattern  "Kasom,"  cp.  20C,  58,  19E,  31,  17C,  19G,  32B, 
22C,  23,  22E,  36,  22D,  17A,  51,  19M,  52,  7B;  (8)  "  Penalong,"  cp. 
18H. 
7B.    Disease,  same  as  7A — 

Panel:  (1)  "Kasom,"  cp.    7A  ;  (2)   "  Kahib "  ;    (3),   (4),  (6),  (7)  like 
(2) ;  (8)  like  (1) ;  (5)  see  p.  90,  Fig.  7. 


/«         '8      <  C    'I 

II 

►  O 

I  l 


/     A  i  S       i  (    tD      t      tP  iQ 


\ 

.K 

3  lr  JC 


i 


io5 


u¥~  IF     Ys     v 


zoC  too  is c  *o h  :o  J  *j*\ 

Central  Panels  of  Comb  Patterns,   Fig.  7  (Z./  E   xxv.  901. 


//a 

J  'auekan-Stevens. 


ol.  I.  A  608. 


*j 


k 


J^_    *v 


<■; 


*r 


^ 


ML 


** 


m^   ,7%^ 


^\N 


"y 


Ui 


S3 


&  - 


<rr  i 


7 


■9 


7" 


.'^ 


■  •  ■  V|»  ■  ■ 

(II 

Vl/ 


•/ 


^^TT-^x 


Sz 


6o 


I  'aughan-StevetA 


Central  Panels  of  Comb  Patterns,  Fig.  8  {Z.f.E.   xxv.  91). 


Vol.  I.  p.  609. 


NEGRITO  COMB  PA  TTl  *><>■> 

y(\   i  >j  «a  io,  tame  i  ■  /  A 

Panel  i  in  ••  Lei  tod,"  -  p  i,  i8B,  but  "  W 

"  K.  mil  "  c  Kara  meet  ").  •  0  "  Piwii  rn  "  P<  n  ll 

i  p.  ism  |  (6)  like  (a) ;  (8)  M  Paw<  >  "  patten  "  Bo  I  ,  17B. 

s.\.   1  liteatfl  "  Bei .  '  unidentified  — 

Panel  1  (1)  "  Led  wod,"  ip.  iB  :  (a)  defective,  ibould  re  emble  12)  ol 
B  \.  I'm  ii  not  quite  the  lame  |  (4)1  (6),  and  (8)  "Piwei  "•pattern"  Kl 
si:.    1  >i  b  1    s  \ — 

Panel:  (i)"i    •u.ip,"  with  uppei  border;  (a)  "  Ni-en-kft  "  ("  Ne-an- 
kar")j  (6),  (7).  (8)  like  (a). 
8C   1  '•  lease,  lame  aa  8  \ — 

Panel  :  (1)  "  Lei  tod,"  cp,  i8B,  3aA,  7C  ;  (a)  "  Kll  Icel,"  cp,  19II  and 
(?)  3H;    (4)   "Pawer  "-pattern   "Kl-bQt,"   cp.    37;    (6)  like  (2);    (8) 
••  Pi iwi  1  "  pattern  "Boing,"cp.  i8F(?)and  1 7 H. 
9  \.   Disease,  "  Kang-keng"?  ("  Kung-keng"),  unidentified — 

Panel  :  (1)   "Jfinasik,"  cp.  2A,  etc.;   {2)  "Chab-lab,"  reverse   of 
"Gau,"  cp.  57;  (4)1  (6)  like  (1);  (S)  like  (2). 
<>r>.    Disease,  same  as  9A — 

Panel:  (1)  " Hir-saydd "  ("Hersaige"),  cp.  26,  43,  10A,  37,  14. \  ; 
(2)  "umung,"  cp,  10;  (4)  "  Was  "-pattern  "T€bal-i,"  cp.  CA  ;  (6)  like 
(2):  (8)  like  (4). 

I  \.    Disease,  "Tak-ui"  ("Tak-oye"),  unidentified- 

Panel  :  (1)   "Her-sei,"  cp.  9B  ;    (2)   "umung,"  cp.  9B  ;  (4)  and  (8) 
"Was "-pattern  "Tebal-i";  (6)  "Pawer "-pattern  " Chab-lab,"  cp.  9A. 
10B.   Disease,  same  as  10A — 

Panel  :  (i)  "  Tcnasik,"  diminishing  from  left  to  right,  cp.  2A  ;  (2)  and 
(6)  "Bong,"  cp."  2A  and  iD  (?)  j  (4)  and  (8)  "  Was  "-pattern  "Tebal-i." 

I I  A.    Disease,  "  P.llg  "  ("  Peleeg")  =  "  Head-ache  "— 

Fanel :  (1)  "Jenasik"  (^  size),  in  conjunction  with  (2);  (2)  and  (8) 
"Lik-tek,"  18E;  (4)  and  (6)  "  Was  "-pattern  "Chig-lag,"  cp.  3B,  3C, 
20F. 

[End  of  patterns  given  on  Plate  I.] 

11B.   Disease,  same  as  11A — 

Panel  :  (l)  "  Pen-hil,"  cp.  5B,  6E  ;  (2)  Pe-nel-tu  ;  (4)  and  (6)  "  Was  "- 
pattern  "Tebal-i,"  cp.  6A,  18A,  55,  20H  ;  (6)  "  Was  "-pattern  "Let- 
seig,"  cp.  5A. 

1 2  A.   Disease,  "  Chas-ai "  ("  Chas-eye  "),  unidentified — 

Panel:    (1)   "  Pasir,"  cp.    7A,  19J,  18C,  19H,  19A,    20T,  19N,  12A  ; 
(2),  (4),  (6),  and(8)«Tabag." 
12B.   Disease,  same  as  12A — 

Panel:    (1)   "Manau";    (2),   (6),   and   (8)    "Lid-da,"  cp.    14A ;    (2) 
"Lid-da." 
12C.   Disease,  same  as  12A — 

Panel:  (1)  "  TepI"  ("Border"),  with  "Pen-ying";  (2)  "Na-pek" 
("Na-pek")  ;  (6)  and  (8)  like  (1) ;  (4)  like  (2).  ["Napek"  means  "pig" 
in  Semang.] 

1 3  A.   Disease,  "  Ung-ag-buig,"  unidentified — 

Panel:   (1)  "  Kan-beng,"  cp.  13B  ;  (2)  "Seg-kit";  (4),  (6),  and  (8) 
"  Pawer  "-pattern  "  Seg-kit." 
13B.   Disease,  same  as  13A — 

Panel:    (1)    "Kan-beng";    (2),  (4),  (6),   (8)   "Kan-beng,"  different 
from  (1). 
14A.   Disease,  "  It-al-ig,"  unidentified — 

Panel  :  (1)  "Her-sayd,"  cp.  9B  ;  (2)  "Lid-da";  (4),  (6),  (8)  "Pawer"- 
pattern  "Lid-da,"  cp.  12B. 

VOL.   I  2  R 


6io  APPENDIX 


14B.   Disease,  same  as  14 A — 

Panel  :  (I)  "Jcnasik,"  cp.  2  A  ;   (2)  and  (6)  "  Pawer  "-pattern  "Bui" 
("  Bool  ")  ;  (4)  and  (8)  "  Pawer  "-pattern  "  Chab-lab,"  cp.  6A. 
15A.   Disease,  "  Makau  kalon  "  ("  Mackow-Kallon  ") — 

Panel:    (1)    and    (6)    "Let-seig";    (2)    and    (4)    "Penalong";    (8) 
"  Penalong"  (varying  from  preceding). 
15B.   Disease,  same  as  15A — 

Panel:  (1)  "  Pen-hil,"  cp.  6A,  6H  ;  (2)  and  (8)   "  Makuin  "  ("  Ma- 
koin  ")  ;  (4)  and  (6)  "  Chig-lag." 
16A.   Disease,  "  Kelak-sog  "?  ("  Klik-sog  ")— 

Panel  :  (1)  "  Led-wod,"  cp.  2B  ;  (2)  and  (8)  "  Lig-boig";  (4)  and  (6) 
"Chig-lag." 
16B.    Disease,  same  as  16A — 

Panel:  (1)  and  (8)  "eng-ah";  (2)  "A-it";  (4)  and  (6)  "  Ki-but." 
17A.    Disease,  "  Tin-weg  Lan-ka  "  ("  Tinwag-lankar  "),  unidentified — 

Panel:  (1)   "  Kasom,"  cp.   22D,   51  ;  (2),  (4),  (6),  and  (8)  "Da-da," 
cp.  23,  22D;  (4)  "Chig-lag,"  cp.  3C;  (7)  "Sl-ei-yong." 
17B.   Disease,  same  as  17A — 

Panel:  (1)  "Led-wod,"  cp.  4B  ;  (2)  and  (8)   "Boing";  (4)  and  (6) 
"  Chig-lag,"  cp.  3B. 
17C.   Disease,  same  as  17A — 

Panel:  (1)  "  Kasom,"  cp.  31,  19E  ;  (2)  and  (6)  "Kei-yong";  (4)  and 
(8)  "  Chig-lag,"  cp.  3B. 
1 8  A.   Disease,  "  Bakau  Timun  "  ("  Bakow-Timoon  "),  unidentified — 

Panel:  (1)  "Tebal-ei";  (2)  and  (6)  "Jenul,"  cp.  43  and  (?)  48  ;  (4) 
and  (6)  "  Was  "-pattern  Tebal-ei.1 
18B.    Disease,  same  as  18A — 

Panel:    (1)   and   (6)    "Let -tod";    (2)   and   (8)    "Bele"   or    "  Belo " 
("B'ler"),  cp.  18C,  22A. 
18C.   Disease,  same  as  18A — 

Panel:   (1)   "  Pasir  "  ("  Passeer  "  =  "  Sand  "),  cp.   19H  ;    (2)  and  (8) 
"  Bele  "  or  "  Belo  "  ("  B'ler  "),  cp.  22A  and  (?)  18B  ;  (4)  and  (6)  "  Bong," 
cp.  ioB(?),  2A,  iD. 
18D.   Disease,  same  as  18A — 

Panel:   (1)  "  Pen-hil,"  cp.  19D,   47,  46,  19C  etc.  ;    (2),  (4),  (6),  (8) 
"Ijueg"  ("Ejooaig"),  cp.  47  5  (3),  (7)  "Chig-lag." 
18E.    Disease,  same  as  18A — 

Panel:   (1)  "Jenasik,"  cp.  9A  ;    (2)  and  (8)  "  Lik-teg,"  cp.  iiA  (?)  ; 
(4)  and  (6)  "covered  with  '  Goh '  patterns." 
18F.    Disease,  same  as  18A — 

Panel:  (1)  "  Led-wod,"  cp.  8A ;  (2)  and  (8)  "Boing";  (4)  and  (6) 
like  (1). 
18G.   Disease,  same  as  18A — 

Panel:   (1)  "Pen-hil";  (2)  and  (6)  "  Bat-teschai "  ?  cp.  5B  (?)  ;  (4)  and 
(6)  "  Ijueg,"  cp.  47. 
18H.   Disease,  same  as  18A — 

Panel:    (1)   "  Let-seig,"  cp.  15A,  6B,  etc.;  (2)  and  (4)  "Penalong," 
cp.  15A  (?)  ;  (6)  and  (8)  "Kasom,"  cp.  32B,  7B. 
19A.   Disease,  "Bakau  timun,"  unidentified  (but  see  18A) — 

Panel  :  (1)  "  Pasir,"  cp.  7 A  ;  (2)  and  (8)  "  Tebal,"  cp.  61  and  6C  (?)  ; 
(4)  and  (6)  "  Chig-lag,"  cp.  3C. 

1  N.B. — The  name  of  this  disease,  disease,  which  covers  the  person  with 

"Bakau   Timun,"  means   literally   (in  small  spots.      "  Cucumber  seed  "  is  the 

Semang)     "cucumber    blossom,"    and  name    given    to    a    common    Semang 

probably  refers  to  some  form  of  skin-  comb  pattern ;  cp.  19 A. 


VEGRITO  COMB  PATTER  (>n 


Panel  i  (I)  u  Past]     |  mall  I,  (4),  (6)  "  Altong,"  1  p.  6F,  40  ; 

i  0  and  i7>  "Chig  lag  "  i  (8)  "  Biling,    cp,  19N. 
1  ■  «iii.        1 9A — 

Panel  i  (1 )  "  Pen  nil,"  cp.  $B  1  (a)  ind  (8)  "  Vang  knil  "  ;  (4)  "  < 

;  (io  "Sad  .in  yii,"  1  p,  [oJC,  [9 

|()1  ».     I  M  i  I  ft,  same  as    l  «)A — 

Panel  :  (1)  "  Pen-hll,"  cp,  si*  I  (~)  "  v.-t    <  "  i  (4)  "  P  «•  1 
"  Kil  kel,"  cp.  8C  ;  (6)  "PR*  ,     pattern  "Chau-ei"  ("Chow-ai"). 
10I'.    I  disease,  lame  as  19A — 

Panel:  (1)  "Kasom, "  cp.  aoC,  58,  31,  17c,  I9G,  pBj  (2),  (4),  (6), 
(8)  "Si-ei-yong." 

1  * >  l- .     Disease,  same  as    l<)A — 

Panels    (I)   and   (6)    "Jenasik";    (2)    " Lig-boig " j     (4)    and    (6) 
"  Hersaydd"  ("  Her-se\i"),  cp.  9H,  10A. 
i<)(.i.   Disease,  same  as  19A — 

Panel:  (1)  uK5som,"  cp,    i«)l';    (2)  and  (8)  "KeMapei,"  cp-  19M, 
19L,  19C  ;  (4)  and  (6)  "Goh"  patterns. 
19H.   Disease,  same  as  19A — 

Panel:   (1)    "  Pasir,"  cp.    12A  ;   (2),  (4),  (6),    (8)    "  Kil-kel"  ;  (3)  and 
(7)  ••  Was  "-pattern  "Chig-lag,"  cp.  3IJ. 
19J.    Disease,  same  as  19A — 

Panel:  (1)  "Pasir,"  cp.  12A;  (2),  (4),  (6)  "  Sad-an-yit "  ;  (3)  and  (7) 
"  Tawer  "-pattern  "  Kelapei,"  cp.  19L. 
19K.    Disease,  same  as  19A — 

Panel  :  (1)  "  ren-hil,"  cp.  6E,  6H,  11H,  etc.     The  remainder  consists 
of  two  variants  of  "  Sad-an-yit." 
19L.  Disease,  same  as  19A — 

Panel :  (1)  "  Pen-hil,"  cp.  19K  ;  (2)  and  (4)  "  Kelapei,"  cp.  19C  ;  (6) 
and  (8)  "  Pawer  "-pattern  "  Ki-but  "  ;  (3)  and  (7)  "  Goh  "  pattern. 
19M.   Disease,  same  as  19A — 

Panel:    (1)   "  Kasom "  ;  (2),   (4),   (6),    (8)    "Kelapei";    (3)   and   (7) 
"  Chig-lag,"  cp.  3C. 
19N.   Disease,  same  as  19A — 

Panel  :  (1)  "  Pasir  "  ;   (2)  and  (8)  "  Biling  "  ;  (4)  and  (6)  "  Chig-lag." 
[End  of  patterns  given  on  Plate  II.] 
19O.   Disease,  same  as  19A — 

Panel:  (1)  "Pen-hil";  (2)  "  Pe-nel-tu,"  cp.  11B  (?)  ;  (8)  "Biling"; 
(4)  "Goh"  pattern. 
20A.    Disease,  "Metan-tau"  ("Met-un-tow"),  probably  a  skin  disease,  like  18A — 

Panel :  (1)  "  Pen-hil"  ;  (4)  and  (1)  like  (2)  ;  (6)  a  "  fancy"  pattern. 
20B.   Disease,  same  as  20A — 

Panel  :  (1)  "  Let-seig,"  cp.  27  ;  (2)  "  Ta'at  "  ;  (4)  and  (8)  "  Halei,"  cp. 
39,  50;  (6)  "  Tink-tonk,"  cp.  iB. 
20C.   Disease,  same  as  20A — 

Panel  :  (1)  "  Kasom  "  ;  (2)  and  (4)  "  Keig  "  ;  (6)  and  (8)  "  Chog." 
20D.   Disease,  same  as  20A — 

_  Panel  :   (1)  "  Boin  "  ;  (2),  (4),  (6),  (8)  "  er-gap." 
20F.1  Disease,  same  as  20A — 

Panel:  (1)  "Chig-lag"  (the  "under  stripes"  =  "  picheg  ") ;   (2),   (4), 
(6),  (8)  "  Bakol,"  cp.  3C(?)- 
20G.   Disease,  same  as  20A — 

Panel  :  (1),  (6),  (8)  "  Pen-ying,"  with  border  ;  (2)  "  Angis,"  cp.  3A  ; 
(4)  "  Pawer  "-pattern  "Pen-hil." 

1   20E  omitted  in  the  original. 


612  APPENDIX 


20H.    Disease,  same  as  20 A — 

Panel:    (1)    "  Tebal-ei " ;    (2),    (6),    (8)    "Sob";    (4),    (7)   "  Gau," 

pp.  57- 

20I.   Disease,  same  as  20A — 

Panel:   (1)   "Pasir";  (2)   "  Bakel"  ;    (3),   (4),    (6)   "  Pawer  "-pattern 
"  Gau  "  ;  (8)  "  Pawer  "-pattern  M  Tink-tonk." 
2lA.    Disease,  "  Au-in  "  ("Ow-in"),  unidentified — 

Panel:    (1)     "urn";    (2),    (4),    (6),     (8)     "  Pahom  "    ("  Paherm "), 
cp.  iF. 
21B.   Disease,  same  as  21 A — 

Panel  :  (1)  "Pen-ying";  (2),  (4),  (6),  (8)  "Knel-lap." 
22A.1   Disease,  "Man-wok  kekil,"  unidentified — 

Panel:  (1)  "  Pen-hil"  ;  (2)  and  (4)  "Bcle"  or  "  Belo  "  ;  (3)  "  Sad- 
an-yit";   (6)  and  (8)  "Boing";  cp.  17B  ;  (7)  "Chig-lag." 
22C.   Disease,  same  as  22A — 

Panel:  (1)  "  Kasom  "  ;  (2),  (4),  (6),  (7),  (8)  "  Chin-eng." 
22D.   Disease,  same  as  22A — 

Panel:   (1)   "  Kasom,"  cp.  17A;   (2)  and  (4)  "  Da-da,"  cp.  23,  17A 
(6),  (8)  «  Chin-eng";  (3),  (7)  "  Chig-lag." 
22E.    Disease,  same  as  22 A — 

Panel:  (1)  "Kasom";  (2),  (4)  "  Chin-eng  "  ;  (4),  (6)  "  Chig-lag  ;:; 
(7),  (8)  "Let-seig"  (two  variants). 

23.  Disease,  "  Cheb,"  unidentified — 

Panel:  (1)  "Kasom";  (2)  "Da-da";  (6),  (7),  (8)  two  variants  of 
"Kasom." 

24.  Disease,  "  Tu-eg,"  unidentified — 

Panel:   (1)  "Let-seig";   (2),  (8)  "Langut"  ("Langut");  (4)  and  (6) 
"  covered  with  '  Goh  '-pattern." 
25A.   Disease,  "  Ka-tam  "  ("  Kattam  ") — 

Panel:  (1)  "Pen-hil";  (2)  "Ing."  The  remaining  designs  are  very 
peculiar  :  they  represent  forest-paths.  The  disease,  a  kind  of  fever,  which 
is  found  in  all  parts  of  the  Peninsula,  attacks  all  parts  of  the  body  in  such 
a  way  that  the  patient  is  unable  to  walk  for  some  time.  This  design  may 
be  borrowed  from  the  Sakai,  since  it  is  found  among  all  four  of  the 
Semang  groups. 

Tribe  :  Semang  of  Kinta  ("  Kintar,"  Ulu  Kinta  being  a  Sakai  locality), 
who  stated  that  this  fever  ("  Katam  ")  is  less  fatal  to  them  than  25C  ;  and 
hence  (1)  and  (2)  are  used. 
25B.   Disease,  same  as  25A — 

Panel :   (1)  "  Pen-hil  "  {\  size)  ;  (2)  "  Yat-ut." 

Tribe  :    Semang  of  Belum  ("Bloom"),  who  made  a  similar  statement 
to  that  attributed  to  the  Kinta  Semang  in  25A  [Plate  IV.]. 
25C.    Disease,  same  as  25A — 

Panel:   (1)  "Pen-hil." 

Tribe  :  Semang  of  Bong,  who  stated  that  they  only  used  (1)  for  reasons 
similar  to  those  just  given  (25A,  B). 
25D.    Disease,  same  as  25 A — 

Tribe:  Stmang  of  Ken-siu  ("Ken-siew")  and  E.  Semang  ("Orang 
Panggang  "),  who  made  similar  statements  to  the  preceding. 

26.  Disease,  "  Yan-tui  hi-li  "  ("  Yan-toe  hillie"),  unidentified — 

Panel:  (1)  "  Hersaydd "  ("Her-sei"),  same  as  (4),  (6),  (8);  (2) 
"Kem-mit." 

27.  Disease,  "  Wing-jang,"  unidentified — 

1   22B  is  wanting  in  the  original,   22C,  22D,  22E  are  described  as  having 
errors  in  their  respective  patterns. 


NEGRITO  com/:  PATT1 

Panel  i   (i)  •■  i.  .   (s),  (4),  (I  •         1.        •  ")■  (3) 

»Goh  '  pattern  i8Hj  (7)      B 

The  llli  i"i  t"  commenct    In  tii<-   region  •  »!    the   nipplei 

pretd  downwards*     |  \,  B,  I  ,  rei  koning  from  the  1 
be  in.iiv  in  iitU  drawn.  | 
i9  \    Di  ■  -  <  .  "  K     11  m  "  (••  Kay  one"),  unidentified — 

Panel  (1)  "En  let M j  (2),  (4),  (6),  (8)  "Blling"|  (3)  "Si  eJ  fou 
(7)  "Chi 
18B.   Diteaee,  A — 

Panel  i  (1)  "  En  let"  ;  (2)  "  hfin  lea"  ;  (4)  "Tebal-ei"  1  (6)  tnd  (8) 

••  I    n.isik." 

19,   1  tisease,  "  Van  tni  man-ka  "  ("  Van  tool  mankar "),  unidentified,  cp.  26 — 
Panel:    (1)    ••  Pen-hil  "  ;     (2)   »•  Yang-knil "  j     (6)    "Kasom"  j     (8) 
••  LangQI  "  ("  Langut "). 

30.  Disease,  M  Pi  d  al-dung"  ("  Pen-ul-doong  "),  unidentified — 

Panel  :  (1).  (6),  and  (8)  "  Been,"  cp,  60  ;    (2)  "Cbog"  ;  (4)  a  pattern 

invented  by  the  maker  of  the  comb. 

31.  Disease,  "  Chab-ok,"  unidentified — 

Panel:    (1)  "Kasom"i   (2)  "Keiap,"  q>.  51  j    (4)  "  Was  "-pattern 
"Tebal-ei,"   cp.    6A ;    (6)    "  Pawer  "-pattern    "  Ijueg,"    cp.    47;    (8) 
44  Pawer  "-pattern  "  Chis-kis,"  cp.  4P. 
\.  Disease,  "Tfcbil"  (,4 Tebeel"),  unidentified — 

Panel:   (1)  "Picheg,"  44  Let-tod";   (2)  "Ka-wt"  ("Kawar")j   (8) 
•'  Pawer  "-pattern  4'  Hoing." 
;:H.    Disease,  same  as  32A — 

Panel:  (1)  "Kasom";  (2),  (4),  (7)  "  Chin-eng  "  ;  (3)  "Chig-lag"; 
(6)  "Kasom"  (variant)  ;  (8)  "  Ijueg." 

33.  Disease,  44  Kau-i,"  unidentified — 

Panel:  (1)    "  Pen-hil,"  with   wide  border;  (2),  (8)  "  Kei-yong  "  ;  (4), 
(6)  "  Pawer  "-pattern  "  Si-ei-yong." 

34.  Disease,  "  Lui,"  unidentified — 

Panel:  (1)   "  Pen-hil"  ;    (2)   and   (8)    "  Min-len "  ;  (4),   (6)  "Was" 
pattern  "  Chig-lag." 

35.  Disease,  "  Chig-lak  "  ( =  "  Chig-lag  "  ?),  unidentified — 

Panel:  (1)  "Let-seig";  (2),  (6)   "Mud-beg"  (Mood-bag");  (4),  (8) 
"  Was  "-pattern  "  Cheg-lag"  (=  "  Chig-lag  "  ?). 

36.  Disease,  "  Kong,"  unidentified — 

Panel:   (1)   "Kasom";  (2),  (8)  "  Selang  dui "  ;    (4),   (6)  "  Pawer  "- 
pattern  "  Ki-but." 

37.  Disease,  "  Kamalij  "  ("  Kamalege  "),  unidentified — 

Panel:  (1)    "  Hersaydd  "  ("  Her-sei  ")  ;  (2),  (8)   "Ki-but";    (4),   (6) 
"  Was  "-pattern  "Chig-lag." 

38.  Disease,  "  Penapit  "  ("  Penappit  "),  unidentified — 

Panel  :  (1)  "  Ken-beng  "  ;  (2),  (8)  "  En.nyangil  "  ;  (4),  (6)  "Pen-hil." 
[End  of  patterns  given  on  Plate  III.] 

39.  Disease,  "  Han-be  "  or  "  Han-bo  "  ?  ("  Hun-ber  "),  unidentified — 

Panel:  (1),  (4),  (6)  "  Kin-sei "  ;  (2)  "Ha-lei." 

40.  Disease,  "  Heit,"  unidentified — 

Panel:     (1)    "Pen-hil";     (2),    (4),    (6),    (8)    "  Al-tong "  ;    (3),    (7) 
"Chig-lag." 

41.  Disease,  "  Selang-dui  "  ("  Salangdoy  "),  unidentified — 

Panel:     (1)     "Jenasik";     (2)    "  Chog "  ;    (4),     (8)    "  Was  "-pattern 
"  Tebal-ei  "  ;  (6)  "  Pawer  "-pattern  "  Ki-but." 

42.  Disease,  "  Kang-wom,"  unidentified — 

Panel  :  (1),  (4),  (6),  (8)  "  Ye-lap-e  "  ("  Yeh-lap-eh  )"  ;  (2)  "  Kit-teng." 

43.  Disease,  "  Tang-tong  "  ("  tung-tong"),  unidentified — 


614  APPENDIX 

Panel:    (i)    "  Ilersaydd  "     ("  Her-sei ")  ;      (2)     "Jenul";      (4),     (8) 
"  Was  "-pattern  "Tebal-ei";  (6)  "  Ki-but." 

44.  Disease,  "  Sad-or,"  unidentified — 

Panel  :   (1)  "  Pen-hll"  ;  (2),  (4),  (6),  (8)  "  U-kap." 

45.  Disease,  "  Ser-sayi  "  or  "  Sa-sayi "  ?  ("  Ser-sayee"),  unidentified — 

Panel:  (1)  "  Pen-hll"  ;   (2)  "  Sad-an-yit  "  ;  (3),  (7)  "  Chig-lag  "  ;   (4), 
(6),  (8)  "Boing,"cp.  17B. 

46.  Disease,  "  Eg-to,"  unidentified — 

Panel:    (1)  and    (6)   "  Pen-hil "  ;    (2)   "  A-bat "  ;     (3),    (7)   "Sad-an- 
yit";  (4),  (8)  "  Was  "-pattern  "  Ka-som." 

47.  Disease,  "  Kam,"  unidentified — 

Panel:  (1)  "Pen-hil";  (2)  "Ijueg";  (3)  and  (4)  "  Let-seig."' 

48.  Disease,  "  Ga-sun  "  ("Gassoon"),  unidentified — 

Panel:    (1)   "  Ta-song "  ;    (2)    "Jenul";    (4),   (6),  (8)   "  Ken-beng," 
cp.  38. 

49.  Disease,  "  Yan-tui  hi-log  "  ("Van-toe  hillog"),  unidentified  — 

Panel:  (1)  "Led-wod";  (2),  (4),  (6),  (8)  "Al-teg." 

50.  Disease,  "  Ka-hib,"  unidentified — 

Panel:     (1)    "Pen-hil";     (2)     "  Ha-lei "  ;     (6)     "Kasom,"     Mark 
"Gehab";  (8)  like  (1). 

51.  Disease,  "  Lang-e  "  or  "  Lang-6  "  ("Lang-er"),  unidentified — 

Panel ;  (1)  and  (7)  "  Kasom  "  (two  forms) ;  (2)   "  Keiap  "  ;  (3)  "  Let- 
tod  "  ;  (4),  (6)  "Ijueg";  (8)  "Da-da." 

52.  Disease,  "Chig-la"  ("  Chig-lar  "),  unidentified — 

Panel:  (1)"  Kasom";  (2),  (8)  "  Biling"  ;  (3),  (7)  "Let-tod";  (4),  (6) 
"Chig-lag." 

53.  Disease,  "  Ye-eng,"  unidentified — 

Panel :  (1)  "  He-ka  "  or  "  H6-kar"  ("  Her-kar  "),  with  "  W.  picheg"  ; 
(2),  (6),  (8)  "Chau-ei." 

54.  Disease,  "  Tag-an,"  unidentified — 

Panel:  (1)  "Led-wod";  (2),  (6),  (8)  "  Bel-ung  "  ("  Bel-oong  "). 

55.  Disease,  "Tan-kwoi"  ("  Tun-kwoy  "),  unidentified — 

Panel:  (1)  "Tebal-ei";  (2),  (4),  (6),  (8)  "Sob." 

56.  Disease,  "  Ye-lar-i  "  ("  Yel-lar-e  "),  unidentified — 

Panel  :  (i)  and  (2)  lacking,  the  illness  being  a  fatal  one. 

57.  Disease,  "  Geltalung  "  or  "Jeltalung"  ("  Gel-taloong"  )  unidentified — 

Panel  :  (1),  (4),  (6)  "  Jenasik  "      (2),  (8)  "  Gau." 

58.  Disease,  "  Pin-ad-yod,"  unidentified — 

Panel:  (1)  "Kasom";  (2)  (4),  (6),  (8)  "Kei-yong." 

59.  Disease,  "  Eng,"  unidentified — 

Panel:    (1)    "  Let-seig "  ;    (2)   "  Ta-at "  ;    (4),   (8)   "Chig-lag";    (6) 
"Yat-ut." 

60.  Disease,  "  Ta-kor "  or   "  Tak-or "   ("  Tukkor,")    a   kind  of  large  tumour, 

carbuncle,  etc.  (cp.  "  Goh  "  patterns). 
Panel  :  (1)  "  Boin,"  cp.  30;  (2),  (6),  (8)  "  Tabag,"  cp.  12A. 

61.  Disease,  "  Mer-oh,"  unidentified — 

Panel:    (i)    "Let-seig";    (2)    "  Tebal " ;    (3),   (7)    "Chig-lag";    (4) 
"  Ki-but  "  ;  (6)  "  Goh  "  pattern  ;  (8)  not  designated. 

62.  Disease,  "  Kli-cha  "  ("  Klee-char  "),  unidentified — 

Panel:    (1)   and    (6)    "  Wah "  ;    (2)    "Jung-ei"   ("Joong-ei";    (8), 
"  Goh  "  pattern.  [Plate  XII. 

63.  Disease,  "  Heli "  ("H'lee"),  unidentified- 

Panel  :  (1),  (4),  (6)  "Heka"  ;  (2),  (8)  "Tabag." 

64.  Disease,  "  Chig-benk  "  ("  Chig-bnk  ").         "j  For     protection     against     fatal 

65.  Disease,  "  Kelau-wong"  ("  Klow-wong  ").  ^     diseases,  and  therefore  without 

66.  Disease,  "  Hajaing."  J      (1)  and  (2). 


.\7  GRITO  COMB  /'-/  I'll  . 


(17.     I  ••    I  .  it.  i, 

68.   i '       e,  ••  Halnj 
69     D 

K<  lang  in  "  ("  Klung  een  "). 


I  1 


iii.    numbers  in  the  following  list  refei  to  the  nui      1  I 

itiom  "i  the  tame  pattern  are  not  given,  bui  only  ti. 


A  kit  (•■  AUut  ")  (.»).'    |<.. 

a  .1  (••  let  ")  (a),  i6B, 

.JO. 

Al  tong  <  ■  1  ,  ioi:. 

Angj 

Ba-chai  i"  Batchai ")  (a),  Gio, 

Bakol  (a),  i<  >i  ,  ;» !,  i<  1  r. 

Bi  Le  '••   "  Be*16"  ("  B'iei  ")  (a),  18B, 

22  A,  18C 
B  1    og  [u  Bel  oong")  (2),  aB,  54. 
Biling("Bil-ling")(a),  5a,  i8A,  19N. 
Boin  (1),  60,  30. 
Boing  (a),  [8F,  17B. 
Bong  (a),  aA,  ioB,  1  D. 
Bi  1  (««  Bool")  (a),  [4B. 
Chab-hib   or   Chab-leb   ("Chub-lab") 

(a),  9  V 
Chau-ai  ("Chow-ai")  (2),  53. 
Chig-lag  or  Chig-leg  ("Chig-lag")(i), 

3B,  3C,  20F. 
Ching-eng  (2),  32B,  22C,  22K. 
Chis-kis  ("  Chis-kes")  (2),  4B,  4C. 
Chog  (2),  41,  30. 


Kan  beng  (i),    1  ;  \.    1  . c.     I 

un  "i   |\    |om  (  ••  I 

some")  (1),  aoC,  58,  [9E,  (I, 

iv..     '  iaD, 

17  \.    51,    i-.M.    52,   ;i:. 
Is..i  w.i  («'  k.i  war '')  ( .' 
Kei-ap  < >r  Kayap?  ("Kiap")  12),  \it 

51,  7  A. 
Keig,  Keg  ("  Kaig")  (2),  20C. 
Kei-yong  or  Kayong?  ("  Ktyong")  (2), 

5*,  33.  I7C. 

•  Klappay  ")   (2), 
iwM,   10L,   19C. 
K<  111-it  ("  Kemmeet")  (2),  26,  7C. 
Ken-beng  (1),  38.     Cp.  Kunbeng. 
Ki-but  ("  Kee-boot")  (2),  $7,  4A. 
Kilkel  (2),  19II,  3B,  - 
Kinsei  or  Kinse  ("  Kinsey  "),  39. 
Kiteng  ("  Kit-teng")  (2),  iC,  42. 
Knel-lap  (2),  1  A,  21B,   iG. 


Da-da  ("  Da-dar")  (2),  17A,  23,  22D       Langut     ("Langhut")     (2),     24,    27, 

[?  breast]. 
Eng-a  ("Eng-ah")  (1),  16B. 
En-let  ("  N'let"  (1),  28B,  28A. 
En-nyangil    ("  N'nyangil")    (2),    6B, 

6D,  38. 
En-tei  ("En-tai")  (2),  6E,  6G. 
Er-gap  ("  ergap  "  (2),  20D. 
Gau("Gow")(a),  57. 
Ha-lei  ("  Hallai ")  (2),  50,  89. 
He-ka  or  "  Ho-kar  "  ?  ("  Herkar  ")  ( I ), 


6H. 
Led-wod    (1),   54,   4B,   49,  2B,    16 A, 

8A,  4C,  17B,  18F. 
Lcgiyap  ("Legeeyap")  (1),  8B. 
Leik-teg    or    Likteg    ("Likteg")   (2), 

11A,  18E. 
Let-seig  or  Let-seg  ("  Let-saig  ")  (1), 

35,  6C,  24,  6G,  27,   5A,  20B,  61, 

59,  18H,  15A,  6B,  6D. 
Let-tod  (1),  18B,  32 A,  7C,  8C. 
Lid-dah?  ("Lid-dar")  (2),  14A,  12B. 


14. 

Hersaydd,     Hersayj,     or     "  Her-sei "      Lig-boig  (2),  19F,  16 A. 

("Hersige")  (1),   26,   43,  9B,  10A,      Makiiin  ("  Mukoin  ")  (2),  6A,  15B 

37,  14A  ;  cp.  "  Ser-sayee,"  infr.  Manau  ("Manow")  (1),  12B 

Ijueg("Ejooaig")  (2),  47,  iSD. 
Ing  (2),  25A. 
Injeng  (2),  20A. 
Is  ("ees")  (2),  iE. 
Jenasik   ("  Jennassik ")  (1),    14B,  iC, 

9A,   18E,   2A,    iD,    11A,    57,   41, 

19F,  19B. 
Jenul  (2),  48,  43,  ISA. 


Man-teng  (1),  iG. 

Min-len  (2),  28B,  34. 

Mud-beg  ("  Mood-bag")  (2),  35. 

Napek  (2),  12C  [  =  pig], 

Ni-en-ka  ("Ne-an-kar"  (2),  SB,   cp. 

8  A. 
Pa-hem  or  Pa-hom  ("  Pa-herm  ")  (2), 

21F,  2 1  A. 


1  In  original  W.  =  Was,  i.e.  first  panel,        i.e.  second  panel,  here  represented  by 
here   represented  by  (1)  ;   P.  =  Pawer,        (2). 


6i6 


APPENDIX 


Pa-sir  ("Passeer")  (i),  12A,  19N, 
20J,  19A,  19II,  19B,  7A,  19J, 
18C. 

Penalong  or  Penaldung  ("  Penalong  '*) 
(2)    15A,  18II. 

PC-nel-tu  ("Peneltoo")  (2),  190,  11B. 

Pen-hil  ("Pen-heel")  (1),  25A,  50, 
20A,  19L,  44,  25B,  22A,  5B,  19C, 
19O,  6H,  29,  11B,  6F,  19K,  19D, 
18D,  40,  34,  18G,  6E,  25C,  33, 
46,  47,  45,  15B. 

Pen-ying  (1),  iA,  21B,  4A,  12C,  3 A, 
20G. 

Sad-an-yit  ("  Sad-un-yet  ")   (2),    19K, 

45>  I9J. 
Seg  (1),  20D. 

Seg-kit  ("Seg-keet")  (2),  13B,  13 A. 
Selang-dui  ("  Slangdoy  ")  (2),  36. 
Si-ai-yongor  Si-ayong  ?  ("See-i-yong") 

(2),  17E. 


Sil  ("Seel")  (2),  5A. 

Sob  (2),  55,  50II. 

Ta-at  (2),  20B,  59. 

Ta-bag  (2),  63,  12A,  60. 

Ta-song  ("Tassong")  (1),  48. 

Tebal  or  Tebal  ("  Tebal ")  (2),  19A, 

6C,  61. 
Tebal-ai   or   "  Tebali' "  ?   ("Tebal-i") 

(1),  6A,  18A,  55,  20H. 
Tink-tonk  (sic)  (2),  iB. 
Tohong  ("Tohong"),  (1),  iB. 
U-kap  or  u-kep  ("oo-kap")  (2),  44. 
Urn  ("Oom")  (1),  iE,  21A,  il. 
Umung  ("Oomoong")  (2),  10A,  9B. 
Wah  (1),  62. 
Yang-knil  (2),  29,  19C. 
Yat-ut    or    Yet-ut    ("Yat-oot")    (2), 

19D,  25B. 
Ye-lap-e    or    Yi-lap-i   ("  Yeh-lap-eh  ") 

(1),  42. 


To  complete   this   list   should   be  added  the  following,    which    includes  all 
names  not  yet  mentioned  from  the  preceding  list  of  comb  patterns  : — 


Ang-ag-boig?  ("  Ung-ag-buig  "),  13A. 

Awin  ("Ow-In"),  21A. 

Awis  ("Awees"),  69. 

Bakau   Timun   (1),    18A  (  =  cucumber 

blossom). 
Bakel  (2),  20J. 
Ba-teschai  (?)  (2)  and  (6),  18G.     Cp. 

5B  (?). 
Ber,  8A. 
Chab-ok,  31. 

Chas-ai  ("  Chas-eye  "),  12  A. 
Cheb,  23. 

Chig-bdnk  ("  Chig-bnk  "),  64. 
Eg-to,  46. 

Eng,  59.      Cp.  25A? 
Ga-sun  ("gassoon"),  48. 
Gel-talung     or     Jel-talung?    ("Gel- 

taloong"),  57. 
Haing,  68. 
Hajaing,  66. 

Hanbe  or  Hanbo?  ("  Hun-ber  "),  39. 
Heli  ("H'lee"),  63. 
It-al-ig,  14A. 
Kadong,  2A. 
Kam,  47. 

Kamalij  ("  Kamalege  "),  37. 
Kang-keng  ?  ("  Kung-keng  "),  9 A. 
Kang-wom,  42. 
Katam,  2  5  A. 
Kau-i  or  Kawi,  33. 

Kayan  chalag  ("  Kayan  challag';),  6A. 
Kelik  sog  ("  Klik-sog"),  16A. 


Kelangin  ("  Klung-een  "),  70  [?  mis- 
print for  "  Kelangez  "  =  heart,  or 
cp.  "Kling-in,"  Quiver  Yi. 

Kelau-wong  or  "Keluwang"  ?  ("Klow- 
wong"),  65  [?  =  bat]. 

Kimbu  or  Kimbo  ?  ("  Kimbur  "),  3  A. 

Kinsei  or  Kinse  ?  39  (  =  tapioca?). 

Klasau  ("Klasow"),  4A. 

Kli-cha  ("  Klee-char  "),  62  (name  of  a 
flower). 

Kong,  36 

Lang-e  or  Lang-o  ("Lang-er"),  51. 

Li  chinbeg  ("  Lee  chinbeg  "),  5A. 

Lig-teg,  iA. 

Lik-teg  (s«  Lig-teg ■  ?),  1 1  A. 

Ma-kau  ka-lon  ("  Mackow  kallon  "), 
1 5  A. 

Manwok  kekil,  22A. 

Mer-oh,  61. 

Met  antau,  20A. 

Pasar  chinbeg  ("Passar  chin-beg :;), 
5A. 

Pel-ig("Pel-eeg"),  11  A. 

Penapit  ("  Penapplt  "),  38 

Picheg,  3  2 A. 

Pin-ad-yod,  58. 

Pong  or  Kingkong  =  fever,  iA. 

Sad-or,  44 

Sersayi  ("  Ser-sayee  "),  45 

Tag-an,  54. 

Ta-kor  or  Tak-or  ("Tukkor"),  60. 

Takui  ("Tak-oye"),  10A. 


VEGRITO  QUIVER  PA  /  v.  617 

Tin  1 .'.  7A.  Wing  Jang, 

I  :,;;  '  '),       |   ;.         (  'p.  \  .U!    till    lull    I 

1 1.  \  .n,    tui   hilog   ("  \ 

Tan               run  kwoy  "1.  pi. 

Teni  \  -in  t ui  man           •,  in-tool  man] 
Tebil  ("  T(  bee!  ")i  ;•"  v 

1  Inweg   langV  in  (•'  Tinwag  lankar,")      \  <                                               mal 

prel 

'in  eg,  14.  \  e  lai  1  ("  VeMar-eM),  $6. 


Sbmanq  Quivbi  and  Charm  n  bi  Pattbi  Pago  436. 

\:    "keng-uin"  ("  k'ng-oin  w)  j    charm  against  lightning.     [1 
plete.1     lor  illustration,  set-  p.  142. 

B  :  "  beb  "  ("  bab  ") ;  1  charm  against  pains  in  the  region  oi 
of  the  spine,      h  appeared  to  Vaughan-Steveni  to  b  I  oi  liver -di* 

Incomplete,  p.  142. 

QtitVirQx   same   name   as  Quiver    B)  chaiin   Against    pains   in   the  vertcbrx. 

Incomplete,  p.  142. 

(,  ':<ir.  >    I )  :     "  lasai  "  ("  Lassai  ")  ;  charm  against  "  nyus-en  "  ("  neaSS-en  ")  or 

toothache.  The  name  "  lasai  '"  refers  to  tin-  black  hands  (stripes).  Kvery 
Quivei  ami  Charm-tube  that  shows  them  is  called  "lasai."  Incomplete, 
p.   1 4 j. 

Quiver  E  :  same  name  as  Quiver  I)  ;  charm  against  "  pelig"  ("  p'leeg  ")  or 
heatlache.      Incomplete,  p.   142. 

{ha've-r  F:  "  hu-ju-weg  "  ("  hoojoowag  ")  ;  charm  against  cyclones,  which 
11  often  tear  a  passage  10-58  m.  broad  through  the  forest.  This  charm  is  specially 
designed  for  protection  against  falling  trees.  Another  Quiver  with  slightly 
different  pattern  is  assigned  to  the  women."     Incomplete,  p.   142. 

Quiver  (i  :  same  name  as  Quiver  F;  charm  against  falling  trees,  such  as 
are  thrown  down  in  an  ordinary  storm.  A  companion  Quiver  is  assigned  to  the 
women,  as  in  the  case  of  Quiver  F.      Incomplete,  p.  142. 

Quiver  H  :  same  name  as  Quiver  F  ;  charm  against  weak,  decayed  and  dead 
branches  of  trees,  which  might  during  a  storm  be  blown  down  upon  those 
walking  below  ;  also  against  heavy  fruits,  like  the  durian  fruit.  For  the  women 
there  is  in  this  case  no  companion  Quiver,  since  they  have  a  comb-pattern  for  it. 
Incomplete,  p.  142. 

Quiver  I  :  u  ket-chau  "  ("  kt'ehow  ")  ;  charm  against  the  violent  rains  of  the 
North-east  Monsoon,  which  cause  sickness  in  those  who  are  exposed  to  them. 
Incomplete,  p.  142. 

Quiver  K  :  same  name  as  Quiver  I  ;  charm  against  the  rains  of  the  South- 
west Monsoon.      Incomplete,  p.  142. 

Quiver  L  :  "met-ches"?  ("metchas");  charm  against  "bi-cha"  ("bee- 
char"),  the  itch.      Complete,  p.  142. 

Charm-tube  M:  "  tin-lai  "  ;  charm  against  "tin-lig"  ("  tingleeg  ")  =  injury 
in  consequence  of  lifting  or  canying  a  heavy  burden.      Complete,  p.  142. 

Charm-tube  N  :  "  pi-as  chan  "  ("  pee-ass-chan  ")  —  "  disease  of  foot  "  ;  charm 
against  soreness  of  the  foot  (through  walking,  etc.).      Complete,  p.  142. 

1   In   order   to   save   room,    only   so  is    constantly    repeated    in    the    band, 

much  of  the  unrolled  patterns  is  drawn  only  the  beginning  of  the  drawing   is 

as  is  actually  necessary  for  the  reader  given,  in   order  to  facilitate  its  exam- 

to  follow.      Hence   the  words   "  com-  ination,  although  the  whole  (unrolled) 

plete"   or    "incomplete"    are   always  circumference  of  the  bamboo  is  repre- 

added.     Again,  where  the  same  motive  sented. 


618  APPENDIX 


Quiver  O  :  "  bung-kong"  ("  boon-kong")  ;  charm  against  poisonous  fruit  or 
food.      The  upper  half  is  the  same  as  the  lower  reversed.      Complete,  p.   142. 

Quiver  V  :  same  name  as  Quiver  O  ;  charm  against  poisonous  or  injurious 
drinking-water.      Complete,  p.  143. 

Quiver  Q  :  "ling-wen";  charm  against  eruptions  of  the  skin  and  pustules, 
e.g.  the  pustules  of  small-pox.      Complete,  p.   143. 

Quiver  R  :  "  pi-as  kyun  "  ("  pee-as-kyung  ")  ;  charm  against  "  tek-kor,"  i.e. 
large  swellings,  e.g.  carbuncles.      Complete,  p.  143. 

Charm-lube  S  :  "  pi-as  kuin  "  ("  pee-ass-kooin  ")  ;  charm  against  influenza  or 
catarrh.      Incomplete,  p.   143. 

Charm-tube  T  :  "  klar-chus-an  "  ("  klar-choos-un  ") ;  charm  againt  "  ka-beb  " 
or  "  cramp"  (?)  ;  stiffness  of  the  limbs  through  exposure  to  the  atmosphere.  In- 
complete, p.  143. 

Quiver  U  :  "  pi-as  kyap  "  ("  pee-ass-keop  ")  ;  charm  against  constipation  and 
suppression  of  urine.      Complete,  p.  143. 

C 'harm-tube  V  :  "ham-mar";  charm  against  "chit-tor"  or  coughing.  In- 
complete, p.  143. 

Chan?i-tube  W:  "  kla-duid  "  ("  kla-dooid  ")  ;  charm  against  "  klin-chang 
kyok  "  ("klin-chang  keok  ")  or  paralysis.      Complete,  p.   143. 

Charm-tube  X.      Complete,  p.  144. 

Charm-tube  Y.      Complete,  p.  144. 

Charm-tube  Z  :  "  hil-lai  "  ("  hilliee  ")  ;  charm  against  injury  to  the  foot  from 
a  thorn,  sharp  stone,  or  the  like.  Wounds  of  this  kind  are  called  "  te-pi-yas  " 
("  tepee-yass  ").      Incomplete,  p.  144. 

Quiver  Ai  :  "  ba-lu  "  or  "  ba-ler  "  ("balloo"  or  "bailer");  charm  against 
many  diseases  or  injuries  of  like  character.      Complete,  p.   144. 

Quiver  A2  :  same  name  and  charm  as  Quiver  Ai.      Complete,  p.  144. 

Quiver  A3  :  same  name  and  charm  as  Quiver  Ai.      Complete,  p.  144. 

Quiver  A4  :  same  name  and  charm  as  Ai.      Complete,  p.  144. 

Quiver  Bi  :  "  chi-chll  "  ("  chee-cheel  ")  ;  charm  against  inability  to  walk. 
Incomplete,  p.  145. 

Quiver  B2  :  same  name  as  Quiver  Bi.  Charm  against  another  form  of  the 
preceeding.      Incomplete,  p.  145. 

Quiver  Ci  :  "  tis "  ("tees");  charm  against  "  til-buig "  ("telboig"),  an 
internal  disease.      Incomplete,  p.  145. 

Quiver  C2  :   "  sob  "  ;  charm  against  an  internal  disease. .    Incomplete,  p.  145. 

Quiver  Di  :  "  li-chin-beg  "  ("  lee  chin  beg")  ;  charm  against  disease  of  the 
upper  jaw.      Incomplete,  p.   145. 

Quiver  D2  :  same  name  as  Quiver  Di  ;  charm  against  disease  of  the  lower 
jaw.      Incomplete,  p.   145. 

Ei  :  "  pennies  "  ("  penooless  ") ;  charm  against  disease  of  the  knee.  In- 
complete, p.  145. 1 

E2  :  same  name  and  charm  as  El.      Complete,  p.  145. 

Fi  :  "  chin-kob  "  ("  chin-kob  ")  ;  charm  against  stone,  "it  appears."  In- 
complete, p.   145. 

F2  :  same  name  as  Fi  ;  charm  against  redness  of  the   urine.     Incomplete, 

P.  145- 

Quiver  G 1  :  "  chis  bos"("chees  bos");  charm  against  stiff  neck.  Com- 
plete, p.  145. 

Quiver  G2  :  same  name  as  Quiver  Gi ;  charm  against  scrofula,  "it  appears." 
Incomplete,  p.   145. 


1  From    this   point   V.-Stevens    fre-       ever  (according  to  his  editor),  "  go' " 
quently  ceases  to  designate  the   tubes       is  always  meant, 
as   "go"'  or   "  ga' "  ;  probably,  how- 


//  BR  PA  i  \ 

III:     "  li,;   ;;il.    k\  li.um     I 

.uin  "  (?)     iii.  omplete,  p.  I 

1 1  • ii  ilvei  Hi  ;  i  harm  .1  ■  ■  •  ■  •*  "'  the 

which  li  often  dangerous  when  ll      i         to  the  rest  ol  the  body.     <  om| 
p.  i  ; 

vet    1 1  :    "  lili  suin  "   (•'  h'l 
a<  romion.     [ncomplete,  p.  I 45. 

[j     nunc  n. line  as  Quivei  li  ;   charm  against  di  ease  of  the  ihoulder.     In 
complete,  p.  1 48. 

K  1  :  "  hi  lei  "  ;  1  li. um  again  it  d  f  the  loins,     [ncomplel 

k :  :    "  hi  lei    i. ml  yu  "  c  lil  lei    towl«yoo")j    charm   against   elephant! 
[ncomplete,  p.  i.jS. 

Li  :  "  bs  kinwad  "  ;  charm  against  dises  le  ol  the  bai  k,     [ncomplete,  p.  148. 

!,j  :  same  name  and  disease  ss  Li.     [ncomplete,  p.  1 .; s . 

Mi  :  *' pob-bi-ob *' (" pob-bee-ob '*) ;  charm  against  disease  <>f  the  ear.      I 

complete,  p.    i.jS. 

Mj  :  tame  name  and  disease  ss  Mi.     [ncomplete,  p.  [48. 

Mj  :    tame  n:\nic  ami  disease  as  Mi.       Ineomplele,  p.    14S. 

Ni  :  "  toig  keling  "  ("  toig  k'eling  ") ;  charm  against  "  pan-gis"  or  "  pan-jis  "  ? 
("  pan-giss  "),  an  internal  disease  under  the  breast-bone.     Incomplete,  i».  148. 
N2  :  same  name  as  N 1  •,    charm  against  "  Kwi-klip"  ("quee-klip"),  on  the 

upper  ['art  of  the  breast-hone.      Incomplete,  p.   148. 

N  ;  :  same  name  as  Ni  ;  charm  against  an  internal  disease.  Incomplete, 
p.   14S. 

Quiver  0\  :  "lib-oh"  ("  leeb-ob") ;  charm  against  sickness  of  the  head. 
Incomplete,  p.  14S. 

O2  to  O4  :  same  name  as  Quiver  Ol  ;  charm  probably  against  disease  of  the 
head.      Incomplete,  p.  148. 

Pi  :  "  lit-tud  "  ("  let-tod  ")  ;  charm  against  "  empo  ka-td  "  ("  um-po  kater  ") 
or  "  scaly  skin."      "  Appears  to  be  a  kind  of  leprosy."     Complete,  p.   148. 

P2  ;  same  name  as  Pi  ;  charm  against  skin  disease.      Complete,  p.   148. 

Qi  :  "  chil  chinin"  ("chel  chineng  ")  ;  charm  against  "  say-i  kluid  "  ("si-ee 
kluid  '')  or  swollen  ankle.      Incomplete,  p.   149. 

Q2  :  same  name  as  Qi  ;  apparently  a  charm  against  dislocation  or  spraining 
of  the  ankle.      Incomplete,  p.  149. 

Quiver  Rl  :  "  senai  yong"  or  "  senayong  "  ?  ("seni  yong");  charm  against 
a  disease  in  the  region  of  the  os  sacrum.      Complete,  p.  149. 

R.2  :  same  name  as  Rl  ;  charm  against  a  disease  in  the  posterior  region.  In- 
complete, p.  149. 

Si:  "  ke-de  heb-deb "  ("kayday  heb-deb");  charm  against  disease  of  the 
testicles.      Complete,  p.  149. 

Ti  :  "  chis-wes  "  ("  chiss-wess  ")  ;  charm  against  disease  in  the  region  of  the 
navel.      Incomplete,  p.  149. 

T2  :  same  name  and  disease  as  Ti.      Incomplete,  p.  149. 

Ui  :  "hej-kel  li-keng  beng "  ("hedgkel  lee-keng-beng ")  ;  charm  against 
inflammation  of  the  eyes.      Incomplete,  p.   149. 

Vi  :  "  pias  kui  "  ("peeass  kooey");  charm  against  "  huig  "  ("hoig?'),  a  kind 
of  ear-ache.  This  specimen  is  said  to  show  one  of  the  special  marks  which  are 
made  by  the  Sakai  on  their  quivers  "  when  the  '  lampoi  '-fruit  is  ripe"  ;  and  by 
the  Semang  during  the  durian-harvest.      Incomplete,  p.   149. 

Quiver  Wi  :  "  chiling  pat "  ("  chilling  part ")  ;  charm  against  a  disease  in  the 
region  of  the  nipples  ;  for  men  and  women.  Incomplete  (part  i.  complete), 
p.  149. 

Xi  :  "  li-kain"  ("  lee-kine  ")  ;  charm  against  "  chim-pid  mu  "  ("chim-peed 
mor"),  which  appears  to  be  a  polypus  in  the  nose  ("mu").  It  was,  however, 
said  that  in  bad  cases  it  caused  death,  if  it  spread  upwards.     Complete,  p.  149. 


620 


APPENDIX 


Yi  :    "  kling-in  "   ("  kling-een  ")  ;    charm   against  disease  of   the   eyebrows. 
Incomplete,  p.  149. 


Page  461  seqq.    Semang  Blowpipe  Patterns. 


1 

2 

-» 

4 

5- 
6. 

7 
8 

9 

10 
1 1 
12 
13 
14 

15 
16 

17 
18 

19 
20 
21 
22 

23 

24 

25 
26 
27 
28 
29 

30 
3i 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 

39 
40 

41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 

47 
48 

49 
5o 
51 


"  Malai  "  ("  mallay  ").      Incomplete,  p.   150. 

"  Chingil  "  ("  ching-eel  ").     Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"Nu"?("n'or").     Complete,  p.  150. 

"  Yuig"  ("yoig").      Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"  Cheg  la  pon  "  ("  chag  lar  pon  ").      Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"Til  us  kus  "  ("  tel  00s  koos  ").      Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"Ka-chel."     Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"  Bi-sut  kan-ling"  ("besoot  kan-ling").      Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"  Kejel  "  or  "Kajal."      Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"Klata."     Incomplete,  p.   150. 

"  Suwen  "  ("  soowen  ").      Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"  Pasir  "  ("  paser  ").      Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"Chib-ber"  or  "chib-bo"  ("  chib-bur  ").     Complete,  p.  150. 

"  Cha-chi"  ("  cha-chee  ").      Complete,  p.  150. 

"Yes"  ("yess").      Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"Bairn  boweig  "  ("bime  bowaig").      Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"  Abeg"?  ("  abag").      Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"Ko-kog"  or  "ko-koj  "?  ("  ker-kerg").      Complete,  p.  150. 

"  Ag-eg"  ("ug-egg  ").      Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"Yal-wig."     Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"Kak-ku"  ("kak-koo").      Complete,  p.  150. 

"  Lig-jeg"  ?  ("lig-jag").      Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"Sebog."     Complete,  p.  150. 

"  Ti-ui  "  ("  tee  oowee  ").      Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"Ong."     Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"  Pu  wai  "  ("  poo-whai  ").      Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"  Cheg-neg  "  ?  ("chag  nag").      Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"Chig-eg."     Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"Wong."     Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"Jelabo"'  or  "jOlaba"  ("jelabor").      Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"  A-chan  "  ?  ("  atchan  ").     Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"Al-teg."     Incomplete,  p.  151. 

"Ta-la"  ("tallar").      Incomplete,  p.  151. 

"  Baling"  ("  balling").      Incomplete,  p.  151. 

"Tis"  ("tees").      Incomplete,  p.  151. 

"Kawe(r)"  or  "  kawo  "  ("kower").      Incomplete,  p.  150. 

"Hu-hau"  ("h'oo  how").      Incomplete,  p.  151. 

"Engjang. "     Complete,  p.  151. 

"  Pelig"  ("  peleeg").      Incomplete,  p.  151. 

"Bem-chem."     Incomplete,  p.  151. 

"  Kam-aij  "  ("  kamaije  ").      Incomplete,  p.  151. 

"Mel-lo"  ("mellow").      Incomplete,  p.  151. 

"  Lip-kap."     Incomplete,  p.  151. 

"Ting-tang."     Incomplete,  p.  151. 

"Kawil"  ("kowil").      Complete,  p.  151. 

"  Kam-tul"  ("kum-tool  ").      Incomplete,  p.  151. 

"  Kad-di-ap"  ("  kad-dee-ap  ").      Incomplete,  p.   151. 

"Yang-im."     Incomplete,  p.  151. 

"  Beng-kem"?  ("benkam  ").      Incomplete,  p.  151. 

"  Te-seng  "?  ("  tay-sang").      Incomplete,  p.   151. 

"  Em-pai"?  ("empi").      Incomplete,  p.  151. 


.\7  GRITO  BLOWPIPE  PA1  / 


52.  •'  Pang-bun "  (" poong-boon ")■     Incomplete,  p,  1 

53.  "  1.1  inn  "  c  le  hoy  ").     Incomplete,  p.  \ 
"hi  ii.i."      in,  ompl<  i'-.  (,.   1 

55.  "  \,  uim  ".j  c  yi-h  ron  ").     Almost  complete,  p    151. 

••  I'.i  lum  "  ox  "  1  ».xii- »ni  "  ("  |.;iluim  ").     Incomplete,  p,  151. 
57.   "  Chcs  |>io  "  c  i  ■)■•  i.     [ncomplete,  p.  is1- 

;iiii  tm  "  ?  ("  chillee  tooey  ").     Incomplete,  p.  [51. 

59,  "  l.is  mis "  ('« Us-noos  ")•     Almost  complete,  p.  15Z1 

60.  "  c'hin-l.u  "  (••  chinli  ").     Incomplete,  p.  151. 
01.   "Knbag*  ("kaboog").     Incomplete,  p.  1    . 

62.  uTsi-ong"?  ("tallong").     Incomplete,  p.  154. 

63.  "Chailed  (or  "chil-ed"?)  bit "?  ("chilled  beet n).     Complete,  p.  1 54 

64.  "Tong."     Incomplete,  p.  154. 

65.  "  Hug-weg"?  ("  hoog-wag  "),     Incomplete,  p.  154. 

66.  "  Yang-un  "  ("  yang  oon  ").     Incomplete,  p.  154. 
66a.   ,c  Gem-ap"  ("gemaap").     Incomplete,  p.  154. 

67.  "Singat"  ("singart").     Incomplete,  p.  154. 

68.  "  Pajet"     Complete,  p.  154. 

69.  "  Buap"  ("  booarp").      Complete,  p.    154. 

70.  " Klang-yu "  (" kkmg-yoo ").     Incomplete,  p.  154. 

71.  "Pang-ot"?  ("pang-ert M).      Incomplete,]).  154. 

72.  "Tilkil."      Complete,  p.   154. 

73.  "  Ing-yes  "  (*' ing  yess ").     Incomplete,  p.  154. 

74.  "  Bu-ing"  ("  bo-ing").      Complete,]).   154. 

75.  "  Lig-bui"  (**  lig-boi  ").      Complete,  p.  151. 

76.  "Tej"  ("ta'je").      Complete,  p.  151. 

77.  "  Chimaking  "  ("  chimarking  ").      Complete,  p.   154. 

78.  "  Bil-uing"  ("  bil-ooing*').      Incomplete,  p.  154. 

79.  "  Pu-lo  "?("  poo-low  ").      Incomplete,  p.   154. 

80.  "  Sabai  yau  "  ("  sabi  yow  ").      Incomplete,  p.   154. 

81.  "Is"("ees").      Incomplete,  p.  154. 

82.  "  Maing-cha  "?  ("  maing  char  ").      Complete,  p.   154. 

83.  "Hong."     Incomplete,  p.  154. 

84.  "As"  ("ass").     Complete,  p.  154. 

85.  "Sing-bep."     Incomplete,  p.  155. 

86.  "Em  bos"  ("em  boss").      Incomplete,  p.  155. 

87.  "  Hi-u"  ("hee-oo").      Incomplete,  p.  155. 

88.  "  Sa-kop  "  ?  ("  sar-kop  ").      Incomplete,  p.  155. 

89.  "Lig-boid."     Incomplete,  p.  155. 

90.  "Kejil."     Complete,  p.  155. 

91.  "  Sudip"  ("sudeep").      Complete,  p.  155. 

92.  "Tak-kor"?  ("tuk-kor").      Incomplete,  p.   155. 

93.  "  Tut-nap"?  ("  toot  knap").      Complete,  p.  155. 

94.  "H'na-pah."     Incomplete,  p.  155. 

95.  "  Gla-wa  "?  ("  gl'r  warv).      Incomplete,  p.  155. 

96     "  Pong."     Fever.     A  severe  form  of  fever  which  appears  at  a  definite 
time  of  the  year.      Incomplete,  p.  155. 

97.  "Pung-pang."      Incomplete,  p.  155. 

98.  "  Kang-kung"  ("  kung-koong").      Incomplete,  p.   155. 

99.  "Sir-i"  ("ser-ee").     Complete,  p.  155. 

100.  "Chil-dul"  ("chil  dool").      Incomplete,  p.   155. 

101.  "Tai-yor"  ("ti  yor").      Complete,  p.  155. 

102.  "Tig-toig."     Complete,  p.  155. 

103.  "  Ni-poi "'  ("  nee-poy  ").      Incomplete,  p.   155. 

104.  "  Yamo  popi  yu  "  ?  ("  yamo  purpee-yoo  ").      Complete,  p.   155. 

105.  "  Chi-chau  "  ("  chee-chow").      Complete,  p.  155. 


622 


APPENDIX 


1 06 
107 
108 
109 
no 

1 1 1 

1 12 

113 

156. 

114 

"5 
116 
117 
118 
119 
120 
121 
122 
123 
124 

125 

126 


"  Hak-kar"  ("hukkar  ").      Incomplete,  p.   155. 

"Kenabil."     Complete,  p.   155. 

"Kaltu"  ("kaltoo").     Complete,  p.  155. 

"  Pig-pau  "  ("pig  povv  ").      Complete,  p.   156. 

"Tig-ja."     Complete,  p.  156. 

"Piik-pug"  ("pook  poog  ").      Incomplete,  p.   156. 

"Ong."     Sideways  complete,  p.  156. 

"  Yap,"  or  "  yop  "  ?  ("  earp  ").      Complete,  except  for  the  middle  part, 

"  Gihar  "  ?  ("  ge  har  ").      Complete  up  to  space  2.     P.  156. 

"Wor,"  or  "wa"  ("wor").      Complete,  p.  156. 

"  Ham-mlng"  ("  hum  meeng  ").      Complete,  p.  156. 

"  Senai  tepls  "  ("seni  tepees").      Complete,  p.  156. 

"  Pap-lif."      Complete,  p.   156. 

"Las,"  or  "les"?  ("las").      Incomplete,  p.  156. 

"Nes-os"  ("nessos").     Complete,  p.  156. 

"  Ta-sai  "  ("tassai").      Complete,  p.  156. 

"  Ni-chip-pip"  ("  nee-chip  peep").     Complete,  p.  156. 

"  Chu-hut "  ("choo  hoot").      Sideways  complete,  p.  156. 

"  Piches  "  ("  pichess  ").      Incomplete,  p.  156. 

"  Betungking  "  ("  betoonking  ").      Complete,  p.   156. 

"Iyor"?  ("eeor").      Charm  against  disease  of  the  ear, 


Complete, 
Charm  against  disease  of  the  nose  (cf.  No. 


p.  156. 

127.  "Tet-per"  ("tet-pur"). 
126).      Complete,  p.  156. 

128.  "  Ing-heng  "  ?  ("  ing  hang").      Sideways  complete,  p.  156. 

[N.B. — In  Globus  lxxv. ,  Nos.  22,  23,  and  also  in  Z.  f.  E.  xxxi.  etc.,  will  be 
found  papers  commenting  on  the  foregoing  lists  of  patterns,  but  as  to  a  great 
extent  they  are  written  under  the  influence  of  the  untenable  flower-theory,  their 
most  valuable  part  consists  in  their  frank  criticism  of  the  weak  spots  in  that 
theory  itself.  Another  point  is  that  the  classification  of  the  patterns  is  greatly 
over-elaborated,  and  that  the  essential  irregularity  of  the  patterns  themselves  is 
frequently  disregarded.  The  first  and  most  important  task  is  to  find  out  the 
meaning  of  the  Semang  names,  and  it  is  to  this  alone  that  we  may  look  to  get 
results  of  permanent  value. — W.S.] 

Critical  Summary  of  Paper  by  Dr.   Preuss  in  Z.f.E.  xxxi.   180. 

This  paper  of  Dr.  Preuss  commences  with  a  discussion  of  the  emblems  said 
by  Vaughan-Stevens  to  be  employed  for  representing  various  parts  of  the  body, 
as  to  which  we  have  to  remark  that  very  few  indeed  of  them  appear  to  be 
actually  used  in  patterns  from  the  names  of  which  the  seat  of  the  disease  can  be 
localised,  and  further  that,  as  is  indeed  quite  rightly  pointed  out  by  Dr.  Preuss 
himself,  many  of  these  special  emblems  do  not  occur  in  any  form  in  any  of  the 
patterns  at  all ;  and  that,  in  addition  to  these  difficulties,  many  of  the  variations 
in  the  patterns  are  absolutely  and  entirely  without  significance. 

A  glaring  instance  of  an  entirely  unacceptable  explanation  given  by  Yaughan- 
Stevens  is  that  the  cross-lines  of  the  "  tin-weg  "  (comb  pattern)  represent  forest- 
paths,  "  probably  because  it  is  from  these  paths  that  a  particular  disease  is  spread 
over  the  Peninsula" — a  statement  which,  apart  from  its  own  grotesquely  far- 
fetched character,  directly  conflicts  with  Vaughan-Stevens'  own  explanation  of 
similar  cross-lines  in  another  place,  viz.  that  they  represent  a  "larger  swelling" 
or  "hill."  We  are  further  asked  by  Yaughan- Stevens  to  believe  (1)  that  many 
flowers  and  other  objects  though  bearing  quite  different  names,  are  nevertheless, 
as  a  rule,  identical ;  (2)  that  the  very  same  (or  quite  similar)  flowers  are — also  as 
a  rule — not  identical.  Whence  it  follows,  as  the  result  of  (i),  and  (2)  that  special 
signs  or  marks  had  to  be  introduced  to  distinguish  the  latter. 


THEORIES  OF  VAUGHAh  STL  VI 


These  patterns,  then  (according  to  Vaughan  ,  represent  Ideogi 

drawn  direct  from  nature  (in  the  first  Instance  al  all  events),  bul  complicated  by 
i  he  .id.  I  it  ion  oi  distinguishing  marks,  which  cannol  l>  separated  from  1 1 1  *  -  patt< 
themselves,     The  Semang  theory  oi  the  evolution  of  these  patterns,  which  they 
are  declared   to  Illustrate  by  s  numb  r  oi      i       proceeding  from   the    imple  I 
to  the  most  complicated   forms,  may  oi   may  not  have  been  [in   Dr.   Preuss 
opinion;  in  ours  most  certainly  musl   have  been]  due  to  Injudicious  " leadii 
questions  put  by  Vaughan-Stevens    at  all  events  it  I    described  very  properly  by 
Dr.  Preuss  .is  i  perfectly  valueless  exercise,  such  as  might  occupy  an  ethnol 
at  his  study-table.      The  same  general   remarks  spply  to  the  "  omewhat  in- 
comprehensible" grouping  of  the  patterns  on  the  quivers  and  charm  baml 

loi    which  \\c    arc    similarly  <;i\cii  a   number   of  sets,  in    this   case    tOO    proceeding 

from  the  simplest  (representing  the  mildest  diseases)  to  the  most   complii 
(representing  the  worst),  although  fas  Vaughan-Stevens  here  quite  rightly  objects] 

it  is  certain  that  the  patterns  for  the  most  serious  diseases  would  naturally  have 
been  developed  before  those  for  the  milder  ones. 

The  classification  of  the  comb  patterns  is  next  discussed  by  Dr.  PreuSS,  and 
Certain  conclusions  drawn  therefrom,  but  as  both  classification  and  conclusions 
are  based  on  the  untenable  "  flower  "-theory,  which  we  have  elsewhere  exposed, 
no  more  need  be  said  on  the  subject  here. 

Finally,  the  markings  on  the  pandanus  leaves  ("  buyu  ")  are  considered  as 
possibly  taken  from  nature,  though  the  alleged  connection  between  the  triple 
ring-lines  and  the  three  kinds  of  lightning  is  somewhat  mildly  described  as 
obscure.  [We  may  add  that  in  our  own  view  there  is  no  proof  whatever  of  the 
former,  and  that  the  latter  statement  is  utterly  absurd.] 

The  comparative  rarity,  if  not  the  complete  absence,  of  any  identity  of 
pattern  as  between  the  various  panels  of  the  140  different  comb-designs  is  then 
touched  on,  and  the  possible  cause  of  those  divergences  considered,  the  use  of 
the  alleged  special  signs  or  marks  ("  gehab,"  "  edziat,"  "  ob,"  and  "  kos  ")  being 
considered  in  this  connection,  and  the  superfluous  character  of  the  "  tepi  "-line 
[for  the  real  explanation  of  which  see  our  text]  is  pointed  out. 

The  classification  of  the  so-called  "was"-  and  "  pawer  "-patterns  is  then 
discussed,  as  to  which  the  same  comments  may  be  made  as  have  been  above 
applied  to  the  theory  of  the  comb  patterns.  Dr.  Preuss  himself  very  justly 
points  out  many  inconsistencies  and  difficulties.  We  ourselves  have  explained 
in  the  text  the  real  signification  of  many  of  the  terms,  notably  "  kabu  salag," 
"  kabu  padi,"  "neing,"  "behai,"and  (as  mentioned  above)  "  tepi,"  and  it  is 
therefore  unnecessary  to  recur  to  the  question  here.  Turning  to  the  patterns  on 
the  charm-tubes,  quivers,  and  blowpipes,  Dr.  Preuss  observes  that  "  on  account 
of  their  greater  lack  of  system  they  appear  to  be  older  than  the  combs,"  although, 
of  course,  according  to  the  Vaughan-Stevens'  theory,  it  was  the  comb  patterns 
that  were  developed  first.  Nevertheless  the  combs  are  treated  first  in  order,  and 
the  legend  of  their  introduction  is  related  in  detail.  The  comb  patterns  are  then 
analysed  and  shown  to  consist,  generally  speaking,  of  a  broad  band  in  the  centre 
called  "tin-weg,"  with  two  narrow  bands  at  the  top,  which  (according  to 
Vaughan-Stevens)  are  called  "  was"  and  "pawer,"  and  two  lower  bands  alleged 
to  be  of  no  special  importance.  [We  have  in  the  text  already  exposed  the 
baseless  character  of  this  imaginary  system.] 

We  are  next  asked  to  believe  that  the  different  parts  of  the  same  comb 
pattern  are  supposed  to  act  independently  of  and  successively  to  each  other  ;  if  the 
"was"  does  not  act,  the  "  pawer  "  will,  and  if  that  fails,  the  "tin-weg."  No 
reasons  are  given  for  this  remarkable  hypothesis,  the  accuracy  of  which  must  be 
challenged  when  we  find  that  certain  of  the  combs,  whose  patterns  are  designed 
to  protect  the  wearer  against  deadly  illnesses,  have  nothing  but  a  "  tin-weg,"  and 
that  the  "was"  and  "pawer"  are  in  themselves  of  no  utility  whatever.  Dr. 
Preuss  himself  "  receives  the  impression  "  that  the  flower-patterns  ("was  "and 


624  APPENDIX 

"pawer")  are  "in  part  borrowed"  from  the  disease-patterns,  even  though  they 
are  seldom  combined  in  one  comb.  Yet  it  is  absolutely  essential  to  suppose  that 
the  flower-patterns  {if  they  really  represent  flowers)  were  taken  direct  from  nature 
and  not  in  any  case  borrowed  from  the  "  tin-weg."  The  simplest  and,  so  far  as 
the  writer  can  see,  the  only  way  out  of  the  whole  coil,  is  to  suppose  that 
Vaughan-Stevens  was  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  the  word  "  bunga,"  as  used  not 
only  by  the  Malays  but  among  these  tribes,  signifies  a  decorative  emblem,  border, 
or  pattern,  as  well  as  a  flower,  without  any  necessary  correlation  between  its  usual 
signification  and  the  object  (or  objects)  represented.  It  can  hardly  be  doubted 
that  in  the  (rare)  cases  in  which  the  flower-  and  disease-patterns  in  the  same 
comb  resemble  each  other,  it  is  the  disease  part  of  the  pattern  that  takes  after 
the  flower  part  of  the  pattern,  and  not  vice  versa,  whilst  in  other  cases  the  disease 
part  of  the  pattern  may  be  taken  from  other  objects  besides  flowers.  At  all 
events  it  is  tenable  to  suppose,  as  is  here  done  by  Vaughan-Stevens'  editor,  that 
"the  object  of  healing  has  always  been  the  chief  thing,"  and  the  working  of  a 
charm  an  accretion  of  secondary  importance,  as  among  these  tribes  at  all  events 
the  two  ideas  are  indistinguishable.  A  yet  further  difficulty  (in  the  way  of  the 
acceptance  of  the  comb-theory)  lies  in  the  existence  of  an  alternative  theory, 
also  promulgated  by  Vaughan-Stevens,  to  the  effect  that  all  patterns  originated 
from  the  charcoal  marks  on  wood  which  were  employed  by  the  Puttos  for  the 
prevention,  expulsion,  and  conjuration  of  diseases. 

Other  narrow  bands  or  panels  on  the  combs  are  supposed  by  Vaughan- 
Stevens  to  represent  such  flowers  as  are  next  best  in  point  of  efficacy  (!),  and  these 
are  said  to  imitate  the  "was"  and  "  pawer  "  pattern  of  other  combs,  or  their 
special  signs  !  Of  these  all  one  can  say  is  that  an  explanation  of  this  kind  (as  to 
the  employment  of  "  second-best "( !)  patterns)  is  totally  at  variance  with  the 
practical  character  of  the  race  to  which  the  practice  is  attributed  ;  and  that  it  is 
quite  inacceptable  !  Dr.  Preuss  himself  sees  that  these  bands  are  too  narrow  to 
represent  anything  effectively,  and  that  their  "purport"  [if  any!]  "would  be 
exceedingly  insignificant "  ! 

Here  follows  a  statement  in  detail  of  the  flower-theory,  which  we  have  shown 
in  the  text  to  be  utterly  untenable — a  mere  house  of  cards  that  falls  with  a  crash 
when  the  lowest  card  has  been  removed.  The  conclusive  arguments  against  it 
are  too  numerous  to  be  repeated  here,  but  we  may  perhaps  be  permitted  to  ask 
a  few  pertinent  questions.  Why  should  a  "tepi"-line  represent  both  pistil 
and  stamens  of  a  flower,  especially  when  the  word  is  nothing  more  than  the  Malay 
word  "tcpi"  =  edge  or  border,  and  neither  pistil  nor  stamens  can  by  any  flight 
of  imagination  be  nominally  regarded  as  the  edge  of  a  flower  ?  To  what  race, 
either  of  savages  or  civilised  men,  would  it  occur  to  represent  the  smell  as  part  of 
a  flower,  and  as  requiring  visible  illustration  ?  What  race  of  savages  on  an 
equally  low  plane  of  culture  is  able  to  distinguish  between  the  pistil,  stamens,  and 
sepals  at  all,  terms  which  have  simply  been  invented  for  the  purposes  of  botanical 
analysis  ?  Why  again  are  the  petals,  which  we  might  fairly  expect  to  rank  as 
the  most  important  part  of  a  flower  in  the  eyes  of  a  native,  and  the  only  part  of 
a  flower,  in  fact,  that  is  recognised  by  the  Malays  (a  race  immeasurably  in  advance 
of  the  Semang  as  regards  culture),  entirely  omitted  and  disregarded  ? 

The  Charm-hieroglyphics  (sic)  of  the  Negritos  in  Malacca. 

In  vol.  lxxv.  (No.  23)  of  Globus  there  is  given  an  account  of  Vaughan-Stevens' 
combs,  with  especial  reference  to  the  signs  said  to  be  used  for  various  parts  of  the 
body  (see  vol.  i.  pp.  434,  435  of  text).  The  "one  hundred  and  forty  combs  are 
divided  into  seventy  pairs,  each  of  which  is  directed  against  a  disease  whose 
name  is  usually  given,  but  not  explained,"  nor  is  there,  as  a  rule,  the  smallest 
clue  to  any  of  the  sicknesses  given.  As  regards  the  signs  for  parts  of  the  body, 
only  one  or  two  of  these  could  (as  Dr.  Preuss  points  out)  be  identified  without 


i a.i/  HEADBAND  PA1  / 

tance.      Many   o!    the  is   *U<  ged    "  hi<  n  »gl)  pi 
\  i  \-  limplesl   geometrical    igns,  cro  tes,  circles,  and  ovals,  chevroni  (with  the 
points  arranged  eithei  vertically  01   horizontally),  parallel    iraighl   lines,  and 
the  like  |  i"i   Instance,  Mo     f6,  ijt  and   19  are  merely  tubdivisions  ol  I 

"  hieroglyph  "  us  No.  .•.  with  which,  In    i  they  have  absolutely  nothing 

to  do  ;  So,  to  being  vertical  Instead  ol  horisontal.     So  too  Not,  i,  5,  l ia  12, 

1  ;,  1  |,  is,  ni.i  si  .in-  all  reducible  to  the  chevron,  which  in  two  ca ■,«••. 

been  drawn  al   the  tide  of  a  straight  line.     Considering  this  and  con 
also  the  extraordinarily  ovei  elaborate  and  unnatural  cfa  tiled 

bodj  ugns     those  foi   the  foot,  foi   Instance,  the  arms,  and  th 
incredibly  complicated     1  can  only  say  thai  tome  they  rail  to  carry  any   ort  ol 
conviction,  and  thai  they  suggest,  as  in  the  case  ol  the  flower-theory,  the  , 
of  the  European  invi  with  nil  (in  this  nthropological)  texl  boos 

and  his  stupefying  succession  of  Injudicious  leading  questions,  fired  off  with  the 
rapidity  and  persistence  of  s  machine-gun]     Even  Dr.  Preuss  himself,  who 
certainly  .shown  .1  considerable  amount  ol  penetration  and  acumen  in  detecting 
flaws  in  the  material  he  was  given  to  work  upon,  has  doubts  as  to  whether  the 
emblem  alleged  to  signify  "  breast  n     s  m<  -is  to  be  interpreted  as  such 

wherever  it  occurs.  Moreover,  many  of  the  alleged  body-symbols  do  not  occur 
at  all  in  Vaughan- Stevens'  collection,  either  on  combs  or  blowpipes.  The  state- 
ment that  follows,  to  the  effect  that  the  cross-hatching  of  certain  combs  represents 
forest -paths,  "probably  because  one  catches  on  them  the  disease,  a  kind  of 
fever,"  is  so  ludicrous  as  to  require  no  comment  whatever.  The  "was"  and 
"  paw.  l  "  patterns  are  next  described.  They  are  collected  into  groups,  under 
unexplained  (disease)-names,  and  their  grouping  which  here  follows:  (1)  as 
panels  with  .single  design,  (2)  as  panels  with  repeated  (regular)  designs,  (3)  a^ 
repeated  designs  showing  certain  irregularities  or  special  signs,  does  not  appear 
to  be  of  any  particular  value,  as  no  conclusions  of  any  weight  are  drawn 
therefrom. 

It  is  a  sufficient  and  significant  comment  on  the  general  wrong-headedness  of 
Vaughan- Stevens'  modus  operandi^  that  his  editor  should  have  to  point  out  that 
Yaughan-Stevens  has  introduced  "parallel  lines"  into  some  of  the  "corrected" 
(sic)  drawings  which  do  not  exist  in  the  originals,  and  that  he  has  done  this 
without  drawing  any  sort  of  attention  to  the  fact.  Finally,  Yaughan-Stevens' 
own  statement  as  to  the  use  of  the  special  signs  (to  distinguish  similar  patterns 
in  certain  circumstances)  cannot,  in  the  opinion  of  his  editor,  be  in  any  way 
substantiated.      Similar  signs  are  used  for  different  things  and  vice  versa. 

Sakai  Head-band  Patterns.  Page  472. 

The  head-bands  of  the  men  are  on  the  average  57  cm.  long  and  6  cm.  broad. 
Patterns  I,  3,  7  runs  through  the  length  of  the  band,  2  is  repeated  eight  times, 
4,  seven  times  ;   5,  six  times  ;  6,  eight  times  ;  8,  five  times. 

The  patterns  of  the  head-bands  of  the  women,  which  are  called  "Rib'* 
("  Reeb")  are  given  on  Plate  X.  Figs.  9-20. 

The  Batin  and  his  substitutes,  the  petty  chiefs,  are  said  to  have  had  each  a 
special  head-band  with  patterns,  which  are  now  forgotten. 

On  ordinary  occasions  the  Sakai  ("  Blandas")  are  said  to  have  formerly  worn 
the  usual  unpainted  head-band  instead  of  that  painted  with  the  "  Dream-name," 
but  it  only  served  to  bind  their  hair. 

At  Fig.  5  is  given  a  name-design  which  represents  the  Argus  pheasant 
("Kuang. ")  The  name  is  said  to  be  derived  from  the  fact  that  the  child's 
motions  appeared  in  the  dream  to  recall  those  of  the  bird  at  pairing-time.  The 
illustration  represents  the  breast  plumage  of  the  bird.  The  length  of  the  original 
is  18  cm. 

This  specimen  is  rare,  since  it  was  not  formerly  the  custom  to  incise  names, 

VOL.  I  2  S 


626  APPENDIX 


but  only  to  paint  them  on  the  head-bands.      Now,  however,  names  of  members 
of  the  Kenaboi  tribe  are  incised  on  the  mouth-piece  of  the  blowpipe. 

The  patterns  (of  head -bands)  represented  are  collected  on  Plate  X.  Nos.  i-S 

1.  Clearing  with  felled  trees  lying  cross-wise,  shortly  before  a  "burn." 

2.  Roots  of  trees  and  creepers  with  fibres  and  side-roots. 

3.  Creepers,  vines,  and  the  like,  which  creep  undulating  over  the  earth. 
The  triangular  figures  are  said  to  represent  the  creepers  as  seen  from  above, 

according  to  the  old  Sakai  ("Blandas")  method,  the  teeth  represent  roots  and 
root-fibres  penetrating  the  earth. 

4.  Star-shaped  forest  flower. 

5.  Interlaced  "rattan-tendrils." 

6.  Under -side  of  a  large  tree -leaf;  the  side -strokes  represent  the  veins 
branching  out  from  the  mid-rib. 

7.  Liana,  with  rattan  wound  round  it.  Only  used  by  magicians.  A  black 
line  replaces  the  usual  dots. 

8.  Young,  budding  palm-leaves  (deeply  furrowed  on  the  open  side). 

Fig.  9.  The  pattern  of  the  midwife's  head-band.  It  arose  not  from  a  dream, 
but  from  the  patterns  of  the  children's  face-paint ;  it  is  in  fact  a  combination  of  the 
pattern  of  the  boy  |  (lower  half)  and  that  of  the  girl  /\  (upper  half),  see  Plate  IX. 
Figs.  10- 1 1.  As  already  mentioned,  not  only  the  magicians  but  the  midwives  of 
the  Senoi,  Besisi,  and  Kenaboi  tribes  only  wore  a  pattern  on  their  head-bands 
on  festival  occasions.  Yet  the  midwife  had  the  right  to  wear  the  pattern  of  her 
dream-name,  though  the  magician  might  never  do  this. 

Length  of  the  band  99  cm.      Breadth  5  cm. 

Fig.  10.  This  pattern  shews  the  conventional  form  of  the  padi-knife,  with 
which  the  women  reap  the  padi. 

Length  of  the  band  66  cm.    Breadth  4  cm. 

Fig.  11.  Tracks  of  wild  pig  in  soft  ground.  The  vertical  figure  at  A  and 
B  is  only  intended  to  complete  the  design. 

Length  of  band  64  cm.      Breadth  3  cm. 

In  the  reproduction  the  pattern  is  abridged. 

Fig.  12.  This  pattern,  called  "  Semut "  ("Smut''),  or  the  "  Ant  "-pattern, 
represents  the  section  of  a  nest  of  white  ants  or  "  termites." 

Length  of  band  114  cm.      Breadth  5  cm. 

Fig.  13.    Side-walls  of  a  house. 

Length  of  band  91  cm.      Breadth  7  cm. 

Fig.  14.    Upright  posts  or  pillars  of  the  house. 

Length  of  the  band  120  cm.      Breadth  5|-  cm. 

Fig.  15.    Extremities  of  a  frog. 

Length  of  the  band  120  cm.      Breadth  5  cm.      Like  Figs.   13,  14. 

Fig.  16.    Tracks  of  a  tiger  on  soft  soil. 

Length  of  the  band  137  cm.      Breadth  6  cm. 

Fig.   17.   Drawing  on  a  tiger's  skin. 

Length  of  the  band  96  cm.      Breadth  7  cm. 

Fig.  18.    Six  kinds  of  butterflies. 

Length  of  the  band  93  cm.      Breadth  5^  cm. 

Fig.  19.  One  half  of  a  house-roof  or  gable  :  the  slope  of  the  timbers  from  the 
roof- ridge  to  the  eaves. 

Length  of  the  band  94  cm.      Breadth  6  cm. 

Fig.  20.  The  forked  posts  which  at  each  corner  of  the  house  are  driven  into 
the  earth  in  order  to  support  the  horizontal  roof-beams. 

Length  of  the  band  94  cm.      Breadth  4  cm. 


//■  \  /   <>/■  NEGRITO     0  \ 


PART    IV. 
i  I  \  i    i  )i      i  MANG  s<  INGS  COLLEi   i  I  D  in    KEDAH     .m< 

I'AT.WI    \:\     W      W      S 

Fruit  -s. 

i  he  fruit  i  lustei  nuns  -  iii  the  wind. 
Tin-   fruit  du  itei    tl    ii'    end '  of  the 
i  ■  j  .  i  > . 

Tin-  Iruil  (  hi  itei   turns  in  the  wind. 

I  he  fruit  <  lustei  we  climb  for  (?). 
The  fruit    clutter  .it   tin-  end  <>f  the 

spray. 
The  fruit-cluster  turns  in  the  wind. 
The  fruit  cluster  waves  l<>  and  fro. 

The  fruit-Cluster  whose  fruit   i>  acid. 
The  fruit-Cluster  sways  to  and  fro  (?). 

The  fruit-clustei  turns  in  the  wind. 

The     fruit  -  cluster     Spins     round     and 
round. 

Frui 

Our  fruit  grows  plump  at   the  end  of 

the  spray. 
We  climb  along  and  cut  it   from    the 

end  of  the  spray. 
Plump,  too,  is  the  bird  (?)  at  the  end 

of  the  spray. 
And  plump  the  young  squirrel  at  the 
end  of  the  spray. 
Fruit  Song. 
Telelpul  wong  bakau.  They  swell  and  swell,  the  fruit-buds. 

O-iyof  wong  bakau.  To  and  fro  wave  the  fruit-buds. 

O-tepos  wong  bakau.  Blown-about  are  the  fruit-buds. 

Ka-angi'n  wong  bakau.  In  the  wind,  the  fruit-buds. 

Angin  me'rgel  4  wong  bakau.  In  the  light  wind,  the  fruit-buds. 

Perelsel  wong  bakau.  They  turn  round  and   round,  the  fruit- 

buds. 
Si-ajoi  wong  bakau.  And  rock  to  and  fro,  the  fruit-buds. 

Song  of  the  Tepzis  {Wild  Ginger). 
Telentor  batang  temenyusun.  The  stem  bends  as  the  leaves  shoot  up. 

Tapag  telentor-gayor.  The  leaf-stems  sway  to  and  fro. 

Telentor  masing-gayor.  To  and  fro  they  sway  in  divers  ways. 

O-gersoydd  telemoyn.  We    rub    them     and    they    lose    their 

stiffness. 
Goyal  Hinas  6  tepos.  On  Mount  Inas  they  are  blown  about. 

Tempat  ye  goyal  Hinas.  On  Mount  Inas  which  is  our  home. 

O  tepos  angin  mergel.  Blown  about  by  the  light  breeze. 


Tan"!..-  bAh     i  AJof. 

T&ngke*  bAh  englang  n 

rdngke  i 'ah  si  a  jot 
Tangke  b&h  6  chinb6nn< 
Tangke  bah  englsng  i 

Tangke  bah  si  ajoi 
rangki  bah  6  iyoi. 
Tangke  bah  se*g  masam. 
Tangke  bah  6  kenyim. 
Tangke  bah  si  ajot 
Tanerke  bah  u-K-lwil. 


mbbng  k^bbk  yl  'lang  reng.il. 
O  tingleng  o  tangkbs   lang  rengal. 
Hckembong  chtnatol  'lang  rengal. 
Bekembdng  kejoh  chereh  'lang  rengal. 


1  These  are  the  texts  of  the  songs 
given  in  vol.  ii.  of  this  work  (chap,  v.), 
under  the  heading  of  Music,  Songs,  and 
Feasts,  and  referred  to  in  Part  iv. 
( Language).  They  are  inserted  here  for 
the  greater  convenience  of  those  who 
may  wish  to  compare  the  two.      These 


songs  were  recorded  on  a  phonograph, 
and  the  accents  here  given  represent 
the  verse-rhythm  as  recorded  by  the 
instrument. 

2  Or  dangles  ? 

3  Lit.  along  the  branch. 

4  Or  "melgelv  {v. I.). 


628 


APPENDIX 


Tepds  ngass,  tcpos  yemyem. 

0  tcpos  chiangul. 

()  tcpos  yemyem  jelmol. 

()  tepos  angin  mergel. 

0  nge£"ng°&  ka-jelmol. 

0  ngeg-ngog  ka-jelmol  Hinas. 

Jelmol  Becking,  Jelmol  Siong. 
Jelmol  Malau,  Jelmol  Kiiwi. 
Jelmol  Mantan,  Jelmol  Lumu'. 
Tempat  ye  sa-genap  gunong. 

Lagu  Kra. 

O  ting-  tung  Kra. 

O  iyoi  Kra. 

O  chip-chop  Kra. 

Balo'ng  nguku  Kra. 

Balo'ng  tangoi  Kra. 

Pederr  seme  Kra. 

Pederr  hamaling  Kra. 

Hau-urr  Kra. 

O  jinjon  Kra. 

O  tingtung  Kra. 

Tingtung  techawog  Kra. 

O  yob-yob  Kra. 
Wong-wong  tangoi  Kra. 
Tekelachoyn  Kra. 
Sa-genap  pengwong  Kra. 
()  yob-yob  Kra. 
Teladhiid  Kra, 
(Te)keladeng  Kra. 


Blown    about    is    the    fog  (?).      Blown 

about  is  the  haze. 
Blown  about  are  the  young  shoots. 
Blown  about  is  the  haze  of  the  hills. 
Blown  about  by  the  light  breeze. 
It  multiplies  (or  nods  ?)  upon  the  hills. 
It  multiplies  (or  nods  ?)  upon  the  Hills 

of  Inas. 
Hills  of  Beching,  Hills  of  Siong, 
Hills  of  Malau,  Hills  of  Kuwi. 
Hills  of  Mantan,  Hills  of  Lumu'. 
Upon  every  mountain  is  our  home. 

Monkey  Song. 

He  runs  along  the  branches,  Kra. 

Carries  (fruit)  with  him,  Kra. 

He  goes  to  and  fro,  Kra. 

Over  the  knotted  "seraya,''  Kra. 

Over  the  knotted  "rambutan,"  Kra. 

Over  the  live  bamboos,  Kra. 

Over  the  dead  bamboos,  Kra. 

Over  the  big  bamboos,  Kra. 

He  hangs  downwards,  Kra. 

He  runs  along  the  branches,  Kra. 

Running  along  the  branches  he  hoots, 

Kra. 
He  peers  forward,  Kra. 
Among  the  young  Rambutans,  Kra. 
And  shows  his  grinning  teeth,  Kra. 
From  every  sapling,  Kra. 
He  peers  forward,  Kra. 
Dressed  for  the  dance,  Kra. 
With  the  porcupine's  quill  through  his 

nose,  Kra. 


The  phonetic  transcription  made  by  Mr.  R.  J.  Lloyd  from  the  phonograph 
records,  and  expressed  in  the  symbols  of  the  Association  Phonetique  Internationale, 
is  subjoined,  as  it  contains  a  few  variants  from  the  above  spelling  and  perhaps 
helps  to  define  the  nature  of  the  sounds  used  more  accurately  in  some  respects. 
For  the  value  of  the  vowel  and  consonant  symbols  used  here  see  the  remarks  on 
the  phonology  of  these  dialects  in  the  chapter  on  Language  in  vol.  ii.  of  this  work. 
The  double  dot  (:)  after  a  sound  has  the  effect  of  making  the  sound  long.  The 
single  dot  (')  has  the  same  effect  as  in  music:  it  makes  the  sound  half  as  long 
again.  Accent  is  marked  with  the  usual  sign,  but  it  is  placed  in  its  logical 
position,  before  the  syllable  to  be  accented. 


'tA7?ke 

'tA^ke 
'tATjke 
'tA^ke 
'tA?7ke 
'tATjke 
'tA??ke 
'tA^ke 
'tATjke 
'tATjke 
'tA^ke 


'bD 

'bo 

'bo 

'bD 

'bo 
'bo 
'bo 
'bo 
'bo 
'bo 
'bo 


'si*  a'd5oi 
Er)'l\7]  re'?7Al 
'si'  a'd50i 
'o-t{in  'bon  : 
£77'1a?7  re'^Ai 
'si'  a'd5oi 
'o'  ij'u'i 
'seg  mA'sAm 
'o'  k£77'ja:m 
'si  a'djoi 
'tdsl'wi:! 


PHONOGRAPH  RECORDS  <>/■  NEGRITO  SONGS 


'l.AkAin'Uir;   IcA  lAlJ   i  a>a1  : 

'<)•    ti"7/'lETj    '•)•    tA7;'ktK    'IAt;    i  A '  t;  A 1  : 
'l)AkAlll'l»07/      Ml    li  i:   I    '1     'lA;/    I A  77AI  j 

h    'IAT7    rA'^Al 

|'pu:1  :   'wOglJ   1'A'kau 

'0  I    i'jiri"    'W3g1j   l'A'i 

'o  :   te'p ■''  •     w  3gq   liA'kau 

'kA  '   A'?;i:n    'wOgij   bA'kau 

'a  "  T/i  •  n    'mer^el    'w3g1|   bA'kau 

'perel'sel  'wogi|  bAlceu 

vi  :    A(l:.>'i    'wOgff    bA'kau 

'telen'ur  'bAtATj  'temerjju'.^u  n 
'tA'pAg  'telen'tor  'gajor 
'telen'or  'mA'si^  'gajdf 
'o*  ger'sojd  :  'tele'mojn 

'gOJAl      hillAS    '()•    te'p0S 
t AllipAt    "]£    'gOJAl    'llillAS 

'o*  te'pds  'A-rjin  'mer:g£l  : 
'tepos  'i].^-s  'tepds  'jemjem 

V  te'pds  'tj"iA'77ul  : 

'o*  te'pds  'jemjem  'ckelmol  : 
'o*  te'pds  'ATjin  'mer:gel  : 
'o*  Tjeg'T/Dg  'kA-  d;el'niol 

V  7?eg'?pg  kA  'chelmol  'hinAs 
'd:elmol  'bet  1 177  'chelmol  'sjo^ 
'd-elmol  'mAlau  'dselmol  'kuwi 
'dselmol  'mAntAn  'dfelmol  'lifmu 
'tAmpAt  'je  'sAgAnAp  'gu:n077 

'o*  tir)'turj  kra: 

V  i'jiri  kra: 

V  tjip'tjdp  kra: 
'bA-log?7  '»;u'ku  kra  : 
'bA-b?7  'tA?pi  kra: 
pA'de:r:  sA'me:  kra: 
pA'de:r:  hA'mA  H77  kra: 
'hau'ur:  kra: 

'o*  (UinVhdn  kra  : 
'o'  tirj'tur}  kra  : 
'ti7?tU77  tA'tJa:\vDg  kra  : 
'o*  job'job  kra  : 
'wog77W3g77  'tArjoi  kra  : 
'tekela'tjojn  kra  : 
'sAgenAp  'pe?7WD77  kra  : 
'o  •  job'job  kra  : 
'telAd'hud  kra  : 
'tAkAlA'de?7  kra  : 


James  Low's  "Sakai  Song."1 

Pirdu  salen  kinnang  ingat  sampei 
Yari  mola  asal  nyite  gyijen 


1   It  is  stated  that  no  satisfactory  trans- 
lation could  be  obtained  ;  and  no  attempt 


is  made  by  Low  to  supply  this  want. 
I  can  make  no  sense  of  this  speci- 


630  APPENDIX 


Ayer  ambun  umbun  muli 
Kiri  baju  layang  mayep  singi. 

.   .    .   remember  until 

Day  first-beginning  .    .    . 

Water  of-dew  from-atone  (?)  begin, 

Send  (?)  jacket  -for-  flying  /0-soar  <?;/-high. 

"  Kiri  v  =  "kirim  "  (Mai.),  and  "singi"  is  probably  a  misprint  for  "  tingi." 


Fragment  of  a  Sakai  Song  (in  the  Korbu  Dialect)  recorded  by 
Brau  de  St.   Pol  Lias.1 

Mano  Fowl  ! 

Bei-mado  Come  here  ! 

Ago-tchip  Don't  go  away  ! 

Tcha-djaroi  Eat  rice, 

Ka  itou  Do  not  fear. 

Chouo  Dog  ! 

Tchip  matoui  Go  away  ! 

Or  in  our  spelling  : — 

Mano,  bei  mado,  ago  chip,  cha  jaroi,  ka  itu,  chuo,  chip  matui. 

Each  line  is  first  sung  as  a  solo  by  the  leader  and  then  repeated  by  the  other 
singers  in  chorus,  without  a  break  between  the  solo  and  the  response. 


Hale's  Specimen  of  a  Sakai  Song  (from  the  Ulu  Kinta  Region). - 

jerlemoi  [=jelmol]  mountain 

jerreboo  hill 

tra-ap  to  descend 

cherook  road 

alour  stream 

moug-alas  [?  mengalas]  hillock 

Yung-bclah  [Yong  belah]  Mount  Riam      • 

Gass-ahr  [?  Gasa]  Mount  Ungus  [?  Angus  or  Hangus] 

Yer-rail  [Yerel]  Mount  Chabbong  [Chabang] 

Mah-wah  [?  Mawah]  mountain  in  Ulu  Burong 

Youg-yup  [Yong  Yup]  do. 

Guss-aal  [?  Gesal]  mountain  in  Ulu  Kerlon  [sic,  qu.  Ulu 

Korbu] 

Cheu-goat  [?  Chegot]  mountain  in  Ulu  Burong 

Laut-urrh  [?  Latoh]  mountain   "two  months'  journey  from 

Kinta  " 
Jel-li  [Jelai] 
Yeu-yeel  [?  Yeyll] 

Ber-rok  [?  Berok]  mountain  at  Sungei  Perrang  [i.e.  Perang] 

Lan-noh  mountain    at    Ulu    Sungei     Riah    [i.e. 

Raya] 
Berrap-pit  [Berapit]  do. 

men,  the  words  of  which  are  apparently  —J.  I.  A.  (1850),  vol.  iv.  p.  431. 

for  the  most  part  Malay,  but  quite  un-  1  PJrak  et  les   Orangs  -  Sakeys,   pp. 

connected  with  one  another.      If  there  270,  271. 

is  any  Sakai  in  it,  it  escapes  my  notice.  2  J.  A.  I.  (1886),  vol.  xv.  p.  296. 


XT  OF  SAKA1 


Ed  |oah      i  jfl] 

|.ih   gOO    [?    | .  i ;  ■  1 1 1 

I  ill 
-I. 

I  ,i.i  dan 
<  li.  b«b  .miIi 
I  .mi  boon  | '  Tambun  | 
B<  i  ■  li.un 
Chab  luih 


mi  tuntain 
do, 


mountain  i     i   I  unbon  (  '  I  an 
mountain  n     r  Kii 


QO. 

do, 


bou  | }  Tambun] 
name  ol  .1  Mala; 

!      <      ll'  ill    ' 


hi     M«  ORGAN'S  SPECIM1    - 

Sakai  Sono  (Di    Mo  ■  ). 

Djelmoul,  batou,  topassl,  allour,  trab,  loghop,  hofi,  ila*  djlhoup,  tcl 
djlhouk,    trAaban,    tcfompok,    r.uikeiu/,    ila,    ^vbouk,    klrop,  bip, 

tchimmar6,   tchimoto,    tchimatOUJf,  tchimatro,   mordjak*pao,   b6k,   kokou  h-16, 
mafiintchol,  dtk,  toughnoun,  rended-pagho,  nisch,  bar*,  b  »k,  tcherAk,  kn.MOul, 

vnoi. 

1  Ii>  translation  is : — 

Montagne,   piern  , ,   colline,   race,  eau,  feuille,   branche, 

liane,   baton,  fourche,  branche  de   broussaille,  branche  d'arbre,  feuille,  graine, 

atape,  chemin, ,  en  baut  du  pays, par-ci,  par-la,  montagne 

attacher, , , ,    grande    poutre 

palissade,  plancher,  murs  des  maisons,  attacher, , , . 


The  above  is  apparently  in   the   Kerbu   (or    Korbu)   dialect   of  Sakai,  and  is  a 
mere  string  of  names  of  natural  objects,  with  a  few  verbs  interspersed. 
In  our  spelling  it  would  be  as  follows  : — 


Jelmul        batU        tepase  alur 

mountain    stone      village  river-bed 

sla  jehup          chanteSng  jehuk 

leaf  (o[)  tree       root  (?)  (of)  tree 

sla          kebuk             kerop  chapchip 

leaf     seed  (fruit)        thatch  to-go 
chi(p)-ma-tui               chi(p)-ma-tro 

to-go-over  there  (?)        to-go-  (?) 

manginchol  (?)           dik  tugnun(g) 

house  (?)  beam 

bok          cherak          knarul  Senoi 

to  bind  men  (?). 


trab 
to  descend  (?) 


chabang 
branch 

chim-ma-re 
to-go-downstream 
mojak  (?)-pao         bok 
peak-of-hill         to  bind 
rended-paga  (?) 
fence 


legop 

valley  (?) 


hong 
water 


chempok  rangkeng  (?) 


chi(p)-mo-te 
to-go-upstream 

kekuah-lo  (?) 


nish 
mat 


bara 
wall 


Specimens  of  Dialects  as  translated  from  a  Page  of  De 
Morgan's  Diary.-' 

The  French  original  is  as  follows  :  — 

Le  soir  nous  arrivons  au  sommet  du  Gounong   Riam  que  je  croyais  le  plus 
eleve  de  tout  le  pays,  mais  je  reconnais  mon  erreur  ;  nous  avons  devant  nous  une 


1  Hale  states  that  the  proper  names 
of  which  the  greater  part  of  this 
"song"  consists  are  all  (except  the 
mountain  Laut-urrh)  of  places  between 
lats.  40  30'  and  50,  and  in  the  Kinta 
watershed. 

The  spelling    is    the    old  -  fashioned 


"English"  spelling  evidently,  and  as 
the  names  are  proper  names  and  can 
only  be  conjecturally  transliterated,  I 
have  not  meddled  with  it  except  by 
giving  the  suggested  interpretations  in 
square  brackets. 

-  Of  these  specimens  the   Sakai  of 


632  APPENDIX 


montagne  immense  dont  la  pointe  couverte  de  nuages  nous  est  invisible.  Voyant 
qu'il  fallait  encore  monter  longtemps,  je  donne  l'ordre  de  tout  preparer  pour  la 
nuit.  Nos  hommes  ont  apporte  de  l'eau,  les  feux  sont  allumes  et  bientot  le  riz 
cuit  dans  les  marmites.  Sakayes  et  Malais  se  pressent  autour  des  feux  car  ils  ont 
froid,  ils  sont  peu  couverts.  L'obscurite  se  leve  un  peu,  j'interroge  le  panghoulou 
d'Oulou  Sougni  Kinta  sur  le  nom  des  montagnes  qui  nous  environnent.  "  Le 
grand  pic  que  vous  voyez  la-bas,"  me  dit-il,  "est  le  Gounong  Kerbou,  c'est  de 
ses  flancs  que  part  le  Sougni  Kerbou  ;  nous  ne  serons  pas  au  sommet  demain 
avant  le  milieu  du  jour  ;  plus  loin  a  droite  est  le  Gounong  Djelignam,  un  peu 
plus  eleve  que  le  Gounong  Kerbou  ;  sur  ces  montagnes  il  n'y  a  pas  d'eau." 

The  Malay  version,  in  De  Morgan's  spelling,  is  : — 

Potan  kita  tiba  poutchou  Gounon  Riam,  sa^aya  pikir  ldbi  tinghi  dalam  negri 
ini,  tetapi  sa//aya  silap  lain  satou  gounon  lobi  bessar  poutchou  dalam  aouan  bantin 
depan  kita,  laghi  djao  na  sampe.  Sa/iaya.  baghi  oukoum  brenti  siap  facel  hari 
malam.  Ada  oran  baoua  ayor,  api  souda  passan  laghi  sikit  nassi  souda  massa 
dalam  blanna,  oran  darat  sama  oran  malayou  brimpoun  dekat  api,  dia  oran  ada 
soudjou  ;  sikit  kain  katop  dia  poufia  badan  ;  tchora  sikit  sa/^aya  tana  dokat  pang- 
houlou Soufii  Kinta  apa  nama  gounon  kouliilin  kita.  "  Itou  gounon  bessar, 
nampa  sama,1  gounon  Kerbou,  deri  dia  poufia  rousso  touroun  Soufii  Kerbou, 
kita  ta  sampe  dia  poufia  poutcho  eso  doulou  stena  hari ;  lobi  djao  sobla  kanan, 
Gounon  Djelinam  lobi  sikit  tinghi  deri  Gounon  Kerbou  ;  atas  somoua  ini  gounon 
tada  ayor." 

"Soman"  Version  in  Original  Spelling. 

Aye  top  tiba  depa,  ghie  djelmol  Riam,  isch  nano  ghie  pa,  a,  tdmpad  no 
konlep,  a.  pa.  tich-kei  nofi  hoi  domod  yis,  ponanak  doda  da  ye  mad  yis  ;  laghi 
dje  migh  hoi  ischk  hogh  biadou  ni  kali  simpak  mad  yis.  hoigh  onol  djelmol  ; 
soman  oui  ouei  hoil  tchom  och,  lagi  esen  nassi  hoigh  in  tchen  kloukom  blaniia 
soma  bji  yob  gop  tchatou  begh  och.  tokat  dia  issik  essen  ouegh  ta  tc/iukoup  essl 
mad  yisamig  pegn  beiii  panghoulou  you  /eontk  la  konma  pa  klilik  ik.  "  Hoch  pa 
tchikei  edak  ydrno  djelmol  koui  kerbou,  eh  yikn  yok  pa  kerbou,  to  eh-hoi  labok 
tchiamo  steiiia  ayi  tiba  lio  yo  houel  djelmol  Djelinam,  lobi  die  yok  pa  koui  kerbou, 
no  pa  to  bo  hon." 

Soman  Version  (Revised  Spelling  with  Tentative  Interlinear 

Equivalents). 

Aye  top  tiba      depa      gie      jelmol      Riam     ish      nano     gie 

We     in-the  evening     arrived  Mt.         Riam 

pa      a     tempad     no  kenlep  a        pa       chikei  (?)        ngong  (?)        hoi 

hill  7x/a^-mistaken  hill  big 

demod       yis       penanak        deda       da        ye     mad        yis       lagi         je  mig 

before  (?)  us  more       far  I 

hoi  ish  (?)  hog  biadu  ni         kali        simpak        mad       yis,       hoig 

to  halt  (?) 
engol  (?)      jelmol ;  semang  wi-wei       hong       chom         osh,         lagi 

mountain  ;  the  men  brought      water     kindled     fire,         more 

esen  nasi       hoig          inchen  klukom     blanga     sema  (?)       byi  ( ?  ? ) 

a  little2       rice  was-cooking  in  the-^ot     men?      of  the  forest  (?) 

S.  Raya  is  the  best,  and  the  "Soman"  spoken    by    a    race   of  partly   Negrito 

{i.e.    dialect    of   mixed    tribes    of    the  origin,  it  is  in  the  main  a  Sakai  dia- 

Sungei     Piah     neighbourhood     called  lect. 

Semang    by    their    neighbours    of   the  1  Misprint   for   sana,    as    the    literal 

Plus  and   Kerbu  valleys)   is   the  most  version  shows. 

corrupt.      Though  called   Semang,  and  2  I.e.  presently. 


//  \  /•  0/  SAKAa 


\  oil 

i  li.tlu 

beg 

i   I 

v 

1               t.  »;■,  1  h<  1 

in  .a 

t/ir-\wr      <  <.i«i       ihey        bod 

little 

i.i 

chukiip 

-   i 

ni.ul                          .in                ;«-n  (?) 

I   liillll-S 

Qi  >i 

eo 

bodic 

(.-')     I           ni'i 

111 

>lu 

)'ii           k    ula 

i.i 

kl  nin.i                         l.lilik           ik 

hosh 

llirl 

Kinta 

wh.it 

MUM            hills        around          us 

, 

1" 

chikei 

i  dak  (?) 

:  11   ■ 

j'liiKil           kui            K-  rim         'li 

yikng 

hill 

big 

mountain                       l\<  1 1  >u 

\nk 

I'-1 

k<  rbu 

in        eh-hol       labok       <  hiano  (.) 

Ki  i  bu 

before  in          half 

g  day 

' 

lio 

yo      hurl 

jelm< 

1         Jelingam  (?)        Mm        j<-  (?) 

yok 

arrive 

tar 

left 

the      Mi. 

Jelingam  (?)        more      high 

P* 

kni 

k<  rhu           no           pa 

to        bo        hong 

l\    il'ii 

hills 

is   (?)          \N 

SAKAI  OF  SUNGBl   "  KERBOU  "  (Ki'.Kltf  OF  KORBU)  in  ORIGINAL  SPELL] 

Ath,\}  ye  /r/mol  tchauok  djelmol  Hiam  Aye  ///mat  higk  di(\Q  te  ado  ;V//oU0l 
ye  oi/0\,  st'no'i  moi  djelmol  bigat  ///cnotl  tchaouak  tkilol  tsbOUtA  dada  ye.  ti 
d|,>r6  tiba  aye  oundjo  oukoum  t'ye  siap  fftens&t  layek  mou  senhoi  en  hok'  goi 
hdeh  ti  menhen  tshana  souda  A7//tchep  enJkblcil  blanfia  senhoi  djelmol  ramei 
ghop  hemyeyo  beg  hoch  ri  sefdioi  ma  dekat  menhen  abat  wenouh  ri  senhoi 
y<  ikol  mahia  menhen.  Aye  soman  bek  f>arighoi<\ou.  go/i/chdl  Gdnta  ldmo  16 
djelmol  rendek  ye.  "  Na  djelmol  /w;/Oull  touh  n^h-touh'  djelmol  Kerbou  der\ 
ye  pouna  tchorous  rik  t^oi/h'  Kerbou  ye  bd\.k  lo/  ye  poufia  dj.il6k  iak&l  men- 
men  djoun  his,  ldbi  djero  mapa  tin  moun  djelmol  Djelinam  djerO  te  bahli  d'erik 
djelmol  Kerbou  empak  /fowboU^h  ana  djelmol  hon  hi  hon." 


Sakai  of  S.  Krrbu  in  Revised  Spelling  with  Interlinear  Translation. 

Atap  ye       ishuol  chawok         jelmol  Riam.      Aye        himat 

In  the  evening     we     arrived       on  the  top       of  Mt.  Riam.         I     thought  (?) 
biga  jelo  ta  add    ishuol  ye    wol  senoi  moi        jelmol     bigat 

more  high  0/"  country  this  arriving  I  turned  (?)  other  (?)  mountain  more 

menu  chawak  ekeloi     tsiiieh       dada  ye        ti       jero     tiba    aye  unjo  ukum  eya 
big       point        in    the  clouds  before  us  more  (?)    far  to-reach  I     give  order 
siap      mensat     layak         mu  senghoi         en        hokh       goi      h5sh        ti 

ready  because  (?)  night  there  were       men       brought  water  kindled    fire   more  (?) 
mengheng   chana  suda  chechap  engkeloi  blanga         senghoi  jelmol 

a-little       rice     was   cooking        in        ///<?-pot   the     men  of  the  mountains 

ramei  gop  hemyayo  beg     h5sh  ri  senghoi 

all-together-w/M  /-fo-strangers  assembled  near  M<?-fire  ^-bodies  (?)  of  the    men 
ma    dekat     mengheng         abat  menuh  ri  senghoi  ye 

were    cold  little  was  the  clothing  big  were  the  bodies  (?)  of       men        our  (?) 
ikol  mahia  mengheng  aye    seman    bak'2  panghulii  gencb.51 

next-morning  when  it  was  daylight     a-little       I    inquired     of    M^-chief 

Genta  lemo  15  jelmol  rendak  ye  na  jelmol  monuh  tuh  nah-tuh 
of  Kinta  name  what  mountains  around  us  that  mountain  big  there  that  is 
jelmol  Kerbu    deri  ye-punya  cherus       rik  teuh  Kerbu   ye         beta 

Mt.      Kerbu  from        its  flank  descends   the  water  of  Kerbu   we   cannot  (?) 

1  Lit.    near?       Cf.     "beg,"  supra,  -  See  the  corresponding  passage  in 

and  the  "  dokat  "  of  the  Malay  version,  the    "Soman"   version,   and  the  note 

from    which     these     translations    were  thereon, 
evidently  made. 


634 


APPENDIX 


loi      ye-punya    jalok  iakal       mengmeng   jung(?)    his,     Ifcbi  jero    ma'  pa' 

ascend        its        summit    to-morrow    before  (?)     mid  (?)    day,   more  far     towards 
ting     mun    jelmol  Jelingam  (?)  jerd        ta  bahlf    dherik  jelnv'jl  Kcrbii  empak 

hand  right  is    Mt.       Jelingam    high  more  (?)  again  (?)  than      Mt.     Kerbu     on 
kembueh    ana       jelmol  hong  he     hong. 

all  (?)     these  mountains  there-is  (?)  no  (?)  water. 

SAKAI    OF    SUNGEl    RAYA    IN    ORIGINAL    SPELLING.1 

DoU  tiba  loun  Riam,  an  peker2  16bi3tchoron  kato  nogri4ado,  kotapi  an 
silap  ghe  lain  nano  loun  lobe  ntoui  poutcho  kato  aouan,  bandin5  nto  kita  laght 
na  lai6  an  ock  oukoum  pon  siap  idji  sonoui ;  mail  loumom  an  tOUeh  osch 
tolash  passafi,  laghi  ghaghe  7  tchiana 8  tchiehem  katou  likomon  senhoi  sama  gop 
bdsatOU  roll  osch,9  ada  loumam  man  sonet,10  ghe  abail  katop  u  isi.  Tchoia 
ghe  entana  nanou  12  poulou  13  to14  Gonta  ayo  15  imo  loun  klilin10  kita.  "  Adja 
loun  ntoi 17  bakou  18  sana  loun  KerboU  ;  deri  ben  tchold  to  KerboU  ; 19  kita  ta  20 
lai  dia  pouna21  poutcho  houpoul 22  tchano  kolighi,23  lobi  na  Ion  kontam  loun 
Djelinam,24  lobi  25  ghe  tsoran  deri  loun  Kerbou  ; 26  atas  somoua  ini  loun  te  ta'27 
tou^h."28 


Sakai  of  Sungei  Raya  in  Revised  Spelling  with  Interlinear 

Translation. 

Du29  tiba  lun  Riam  an   peker  lebi   cherong30  kato 

In  the  evening  we  arrive  on  Mt.  Riam   I  thought   it  was  more       high        in 
negrl     ado   ketapi   an        silap 31  ga 32        lain      nano        lun         lebe   'ntui 

country  this     but       I  was-mistaken   a-little  another  one   mountain  more  big 
puch5       kato      awan       banding       'nto     kita   lag!   nya       lai       an    ok    ukum 
its-peak   in   the   clouds   rears-up(?)   before    us    still    far  to-reach    I  gave   order 
pon 33  siap  iji 34  sengui      mang        lumom 

to-halt   and  make-ready  because  day  was-turning-into  night   there-were  men  (?) 
an 3a     tueh    osh  telash 36  pasang    lag!     gage   chan3      chahem     katii  likemong 
brought  water  fire      was     kindled  more  a-little  rice   was-cooking  in       the  pot 
senghoi    sama       gop  besatu        rii       osh  ada37      lumam    mang  sengat 

men .       with  strangers  assembled  near  the-fire  they-were    men  (?)    were     cold 
ga        aban         katop  isi.  Chera38r         ga      eng  tanya 

little   clothing   covered  their  bodies.      When  it  was  daylight  (?)  a-little     I    asked 


nanu 


38 


pulu 


to 


Genta   ayo 


imo 


lun        killing  40  kita. 


one    chief  of  country  <?/"  Kinta  what  is  the  name  of  the  mountains    around     us. 
"Aja       lun        nt5i  bakii41    sana     lun  Kerbu      deri    beng42      chelo43 

That  mountain  big  that  you    see     there  is  Mt.  Kerbu  ;  from  near  it  descends  (?) 


1  In  the  original  this  version  is  given 
twice,  the  second  time  with  French 
equivalents,  word  for  word.  When 
the  second  version  differs  from  the  first, 
the  variant  is  given  in  these  notes. 
The  French  equivalents,  except  where 
they  seem  to  require  correction,  are 
not  noticed  here. 

2  peker.  3  lobi.  4  nogri.  5  bandin. 
6  lai.  7  ghaghe.  8  tchiana.  9  osch. 
10  sinet,  sonet.  u  katop.  12  manou. 
13  pohoulou.  14  to.  15  ayo.  16  kliliii. 
17  ntou^.  18  bakou.  19  Kerbou. 
80  (to)  ta.        2i  pouna,.        22   houpoul. 


23  (koligh-his)  kolighi.  ^  Djelinam. 
25  15^^  26  Kerbou.  27  te  ta  (teh-to, 
teh-ta).      28  tOU<?//. 

29  De  Morgan   gives    "we"   as   the 
equivalent,  which  is  clearly  wrong. 

30  I.e.  "the  highest." 

31  De    Morgan,     "  to  see,    to    dis- 
tinguish." 32  Ibid,  "lofty,  high." 

33  Ibid,  "for,  in  order  to." 

34  Ibid,  "for."  *  Ibid.  "I." 
36  Ibid,  "to  carry."   37  Qu.  "these"? 
38  De  Morgan,  "again."    39  Ibid,  "of." 
40  Ibid,  "to  see."  41   "lofty." 
42  Ibid,  "its"             43  Ibid,  "flank." 


TEXT  Of  i 

i,)  K(  rbu  I  1 1         I. ii  dii  pnnji   puchfl       bupul       cl 

the  water  (?)  ,'/   K.ii)ii   u«-   mm  no!   reach        Iti         ummit   to«morrow   ; 

ki  lie  i.    Mi  ny.i     inn        ki  ntam      inn  Jelingam  (?),   '• '" 

midday,  more  fai    towardi  the  right  ;>   Mt.  Jeling  lore  a-little      !• 

d    i:       Inn    K.ilni;   .it. i.  lOmiU    i i > i  Inn  l.i  t.i  lu-li. 

than  Mi.  K  rbu  j    on      fcll    these  mountains  there  u  i 


BESIS1  SONGS  C(  >LL1  <   I  l  1 1  in  THE  1.1    \i.  \   I.  \ 
DISTRICT  OF  SELANGOR   B\  w.   \v.  SKl.vi  .» 

Gajah  {Merat\     The  Elephant.6 

Chong  P£ralong  bunyi'  gajah, 

At  the  Hill  of  Peralong  trumpet!  (lit,  of)  the  Elephant, 

Gajah  kawan  gajah  tungal. 

Elephant  of  the  herd  to  the  Elephant  solitary. 

Gajah  tuhah  jet-leh  kawi  n. 

Elephant  old  that  followj-indeed  the  herd. 

Gajah  kramat  gajah  tengkis. 

The  Elephant  sacred,  the  Elephant  shrunk-foct."' 

Gajah  puaka'  dari  Johor. 

The  Elephant  of  magic  that  comes  from  Johor. 
Gajah  nakeh  chelui  ha-bawau. 
Elephant  (hat  descend?  to-Mi-sea. 

Gajah  may  in  di-pante  pasir. 

The  Elephant  that  playj  on-Ml-shore  o/"-sand. 

Gajah  mayin  di-tanah  pasir. 
Z/zc'-Elephant  that-plays  in-ground  of-sand. 

Gajah  yut-leh  ka-hulu  Langat, 

The  Elephant  returns  to-//^-Upper  (lit.  to-head-^/")  Langat, 

Yal-leh  ha-chong  di-tanah  kramat. 

And  climbs-then  to-///<r-hill  in-Z^-land  sacred. 

Atam  chong,  chong  dah  bedok. 

Tramplcr-on  the  hill,  and  the  hill  has  fallen. 

Atam  d'long  d'long  dah  tegdt. 

Tramplei--on  a  tree,  and  the  tree  has  snapp^. 

Kara.'  ti'ii  kara'  tapang. 

77;<?r<?-remain  Air-trackr,  there-iemain  his-footsteps. 


1  De  Morgan,  "lofty."  5  The  common  Malay  elephan     is  a 

2  Ibid,  "than."  variety  of  Elephas  indicus . 

3  Ibid,  "of."  6  A  shrunken  foot  is  regarded  as  the 

4  For  translations  of  these  songs  see  sign  of  a  sacred  animal,  whether 
vol.  ii.  p.  147  et  sea.  I  may  add  that  elephant  or  tiger.  The  former  is  also 
in  setting  them  a  full  stop  has  inad-  indicated  by  stunted  tusks.  An 
vertently  been  placed  at  the  end  of  elephant  with  these  marks  was  killed 
each  line,  and  it  has  not  been  thought  at  Klang  in  Selangor  a  few  years  ago. 
worth  while  to  correct  this  throughout.  Its  death  (at  the  hands  of  a  European) 
Note  :  that  all  Besisi  final  vowels  are  was  regarded  as  the  cause  of  the  failure 
pronounced  long,  and  are  followed  by  of  the  coffee-land  boom  then  at  its 
the  Malay  click  (')  ;  final  "a"  (which  height.  It  used  to  range  through  the 
in  Malay  is  short)  is  marked  long  to  Langat  District,  and  was  probably  the 
help  the  reader.  one  mentioned  in  this  song. 


656 


APPENDIX 


Ddyt-dah  teh  luchar-luchar.1 
Done-for-is  the  land,  it  is  muddy-muddy. 

Kom-dah  chok  ka-nabian. 

Got-has  by  walking  io-the  Prophet's-shrine. 

Odd  kapong  gajah  kramat. 
Do-not  kill  //z<?-Elephant  sacred. 

Kalau  kapong  he  mati  tulah. 

If  yon  kill  htmt  you  will  die  presumptuous. 

Gul  miyan  tuht-leh  kaul-he. 

Take  incense  (benzoin)  and  burn  vows-your. 

Kramat  hayang  ha-kinchu-hi,2 

The  sacred-one  is  fond  of-grandchildren-his. 

Kagar  ngot  nachar  leba'. 

And  desires  not  to-eat  their  plantations. 

Kagar  ngot  nachar  niyu. 

Desires  not  to-teed-on  their  coconuts. 

Chok-leh  gajah  ka-bukit  bukau. 

RoarcW-then  has  the- Elephant  to-hill  and  foot-hill. 

Chok-leh  gajah  ka-gaung  guntong. 

Roam<?</-then  has  /^-Elephant  to-//z<?-cavern  and  tarn. 

Chok-leh  dah  ka-hulu  Langat. 
RoanW-then  has  he  to-the- Upper  Langat. 

Gajah  trek-leh  mah  henom. 

The  Elephant  z's-draw;/-then  ^/-people  many. 

Gajah  trek  ha-teh  lop-lop. 

7"$<?-Elephant  is  draw?/  to-tf-country  far-far. 

Chok-leh  gajah  ka-laut  tawar. 

Roanv^-then  has  M<?-Elephant  to-Mf-sea  ^/-fresh-water.3 

Gajah  kebus  ka-laut  tawar. 

The-  Elephant  dies  at-Mg-sea  of- fresh- water. 

Badak  [Agap).      The  Rhinoceros.* 

Impit-impit  bunyi'  badak. 

'  Impit-impit,'  is  the  cry  0/"-//$<?-rhinoceros. 

Badak  kawan,  badak  tunggal. 

Rhinoceros  of-the-herd,  rhinoceros  that  is  solitary. 

Temong  kawan  telong  nachar. 

It  calls  its  comrade  to  seek-for  food. 


1  Cp.  "  luchar  "  (of  fruit)  in  the  song 
about  the  "  Kledang  "  fruit. 

2  "  Hi  "  seems  to  be  the  form  which 
corresponds  to  Mai.  "dia"  ( =  he, 
she,  it),} whilst  "he"  seems  to  mean 
"you."  In  case  of  inadvertence  in 
italicising  it  may  be  noted  that  the 
difference  between  singular  and  plural  is 
not  expressed  in  the  original  text  of  these 
songs.  3  Probably  a  placename. 


4  It  is  not  yet  certainly  known 
whether  the  two  -  horned  rhinoceros 
exists  in  the  Peninsula,  though  more 
than  one  kind  is  suspected  to  exist. 
Malays  describe  a  special  kind  of 
rhinoceros  which  they  call  "  Badak 
Api,"  the  "Fiery  Rhinoceros,"  which 
is  supposed  to  be  redder  and  more 
fiery  than  the  ordinary  kind.  Nothing 
certain  is  known  about  it. 


/v  \  /'  OF  BES1  •/  SONGS 

l5.id.ik   diok    \.il   h.i  i  linn 

/'/:,-  Uluii         |  ■  nHi{  a.(  th'-  lull  . 

Badak  eholc  <ii  ampa1  |<  mu. 

The  Rhinocei    i  Mo/ walk    at  •'  out*crop  dry." 

Wiiii. i  .ik.il  lawan  bad 
What  * i ■ 

T<  mong  kawan,  kawan  li  i|>. 

/  imII  my  conn. nil'.  my  comrades  an  lacking 

M;ih  gli,  y;il  ha -long, 

./  man9  frightened,  /  climb-up  a  tit    , 

Badak  dudui  di-t£kah  d'l 

luit  //it- Rhinoceros  wait*  at-tht  base  nf-thr  tret-. 

it  th.ik  kawin  ha-teh. 
/  break  a  branch  and  throw  U  to-ground. 

Kageng  b.ul.ik,  badak  bra?t. 

Bitei  it  M#-rhinoceros,  and  Mi-rhinoceros  pasi 

( )yn  chelui  klo,  duh-leh  ha-dong, 

I  descend  too,  an  J  run  then  homewards, 

Yal  ha-dong  jet-leh  badak. 

A)id  climb  into  the  house,  but  followj-then  //^-rhinoceros. 

Gul  snapang  tembak  badak. 

/  take  my-g\xn  and  shoot  //^-rhinoceros. 

Kom  puru  dah,  badak  dah  beddk. 

Hit  him  ///^-bullet  done,  //'t»-rhinoceros  done  fall. 

Dah  layu  bante-leh  badak. 

Done  scorch  him  quarter  then  the  Rhinoceros. 

Jon  nachar  muntet  mulih. 
Give  /0-eat  a-little  to  each  one. 

Chumbu  jual  3  jebah  China'. 
7#<?-horn  sell  /^-foreigners  of  China.. 

A'a.      The  Tiger. 

A'a'  ru'  di-chen  tanjong. 

The  Tiger  roan-  at  the  end  of  the  point. 

Nama  kagar  ?  kagar  nachar. 

What  does  he  want  ?  he  wants  to  eat. 

Nachar  dena'  nachar  ketur. 
To  eat  wild-fowl,  eat  wild-pig. 

Nachar  rusa'  nachar  kanchel. 

To  eat  sambhur-deer,  eat  kanchil. 

A'a'  blang  sebrang  bawau. 

The  Tiger  striped  that  crosses  the  sea. 

Odd  yong  dalam  bilang. 
Do-not  forget  this  in  the  telling. 

Koi-leh  teh  nakeh  teh  a'a*. 

The  head^-indeed  of  the  land  they  are  the  land  of  the  Tiger. 

1    =Mal.  [batu]  ampar  jemor  ?  v.  p.  642,  ;/.  2,  infra. 
2  I.e.  I  am.  3  Better  "juwal." 


638 


APPENDIX 


A'a'  dah  humpah  hangke. 

Ihe  tiger  has  sworn-an-oath  against — Somebody.1 

A'a'  harrtur  lima'  depa'. 
The  Tiger  leap*  five  fathom. 

Fdak  a'a'  lompat  kanan. 

Dodge  the  Tiger  ;  leap  to  the  right. 

A'a'  chok  batang  jelong. 

The  Tiger  walks  along  a  trunk  lengthy. 

A'a'  kayi'  chong  dah  tingi. 
The  Tiger  sees  the  hill  is  lofty. 

A'a'  jetek  pedl'  are'. 

The  Tiger  sleeps  at  noonday. 

Lek-leh  a'a'  chok  meri. 

Rise  up,  O  Tiger,  to  walk  the  forest. 

A'a'  telong  benatang  ris. 

The  Tiger  looks  for  beasts  that  are  living. 

A'a'  chok  ha-gunong  Ledang. 
The  Tiger  walkj-  to  Mount  Ophir. 

Nakeh  tempat  asal  a'a'. 

That  is  the  place  ^/"-origin  of-the  Tiger. 

Takeh  Jinang,  takeh  Datoh. 

There  is  his  Jinang,  there  is  his  Dato'. 

Takeh  Jukrah,  takeh  Batin. 

There  is  his  Jukrah,  there  is  his  Batin. 

Takeh  kara'  Batin  a'a'. 

There  dwellr  ^<?-great-chief  ^-Tigers. 

(Di)dong  Batin  kebus-leh  a'a'. 

At  the  house  of  his  Great-chief  dies-then  the~T\gtx. 

Bruang.      The  Bear. 

Wah  wah  wah  bunyl'  bruang. 

•  Wah- wah- wah,'  is  t he-cry  of-the  bear. 

Bruang  pangong,  bruang  hijak.- 
7^^-bear  "panggong,"  the  bear  "hijak." 

Bruang  nachar  maroyt  shuht.3 

The  Bear  that  feeds  by  tearing-out  wild-bees. 

Yal  sialang' 4  gul  ha-tebol. 

That  climbs  the  bee-tree,  and  seizes  bees. 

Chok  de'-gunong  chelui  ha-bawau. 

That  walks  from  the  crags  and  descends  to-M<?-sea. 

Kagar  nachar  ddyt  ha-tebol. 
That  wants  to-feed  utterly  on-bees. 


1  Lit.    against     "him,"     or     "that  it  at   Pekan.      It  lives  in  sandy    open 
man."  countiy. " 

2  Ridley    says    the    presence    of    a  3   "  Shuht  "  =  "  kelulut."  "Maroyt" 
second    kind     of    bear    (probably    the  =  "  di-tebok "  or  "  ter-kopak." 
Indian)  is  reported.      "  Butler  heard  of  4   "  Sialang  "  =  Bes.  "  long  salang."' 


II    V/    I  ■/■    /:/  S/SJ  rS 

Yal  bakau,  bakau  maro] t. 

Thai  i  liml)s  ///^  mangrove  frw/,  ,//.■,/    '.,  mat 

Y.il  lc<  ni|  .i .,  Is.  11 

/'//<//  din  i 

bh  neneh  l  moyn  bruang. 
Sharp  indeed  i^-the  tooth  oj  the  b< 

( !hOhh  bagai  bi<  n 
Sharp  as  a  hatchel 

Mamat  Solong  ,  gul  hau  i    i 

Mamat  the  Firstborn  take  yout  chopping  knife. 

Ch6lui*leh  bruang,  chftlui  m<  nginte. 

ends-then  th  nds  looking-around*As7w. 

Dali  mini;  hatch,  ludnk-leh  !  bruang. 

lit   \.  round  is,  he  drops  then,  the  B 

Chinchang-leh,  .Mamat  Solong. 
Chop-at-AsVn-then,  Mamat  the  Firstborn. 

Bruang  Lek,  tekam  pula'. 

The  Bear  rises,  and  attacks  you  in-turn. 

Flak  bruang  Mamat  Solong. 

Dodge  /Zv-bear,  Mamat-/// 1-  Firstborn. 

Dah  chinchanL;  -  Mamat  Solong. 

i  have  chopped-at-him,  Mamat  the  Firstborn. 

Kebus-leh,  ai,  bruang  'dab  kebus. 

Dead  then  is  he.      Oho!   the  Bear  is  dead. 

Gul  'pedu:  ubat  mah  beddk. 

Take  you  his  spleen  to  cure  men  who  fall. 


Kusa  .      The  Sambhur. 

Keng  berdengkeng  bunyr  rusa'. 

1  Keng  berdengkeng,'  is  the  cry  of  the  Sambhur-deer. 

Nama  puoi  di-tcngah  pematang. 

What  are  you  doing  in  the  middle  of  the  rise  ? 

Kita'  kaye'  ka-lcba'-mah. 

We  are  XooVing  at  the  plantation  <?/ somebody. 

Doyt-dah  leba'  nachar  rusa'. 

Done-with-is  the  plantation,  eat«/-up-/y  the  deer. 

Kara'  ti'il  bC«kas  rusa'. 

There  remains  the  slot  that  is  mark  of  the  stag. 

Jong  rusa'  tujah-tujah. 

The  hooves  of  the  stag  are  pointed-pointed. 

Kampong-kampong  iku  rusa'. 
Tufted-tufted  is  the  tail  of  the  stag. 

Tdng  rusa'  triang-triang. 

The  ears  of  the  stag  are  pricked-up-pricked-up. 

1    ="  Groyn,"  to  fall.  2  "  Ketong"  or  "  chetong." 


640  APPENDIX 


Tandok  rusa'  jeroka'-jerokih. 

The  horns  of  the  stag  branch-branch. 

Lenga'-lenga'  lcher  rusa'. 

And  slender-slender  the  neck  of  the  stag. 

Rusa'  nakeh,  rusa'  puaka'. 

A  stag  like  that,  w  a  stag  of  magic. 

Mah  pekong  doyt  dah  tuhah. 

A  man  with  an  ulcer,  who  done  is  aged. 

Nakeh  jadi  rusa'  kramat. 

That  is  what  became  a  stag  sacred. 

Rusa'  rangas,  rusa'  menuang.1 
A  stag  of  many  tines,  a  stag  bull. 

Rusa'  hijok,  rusa'  sabut. 

A  stag  ^/"gomuto-twigs,  a  stag  of  coconut  husk. 

Rusa'  umbut,  rusa'  ubi'. 

A  stag  4/"  palm-shoots,  a  stag  of  tubers. 

Rusa'  nachar  lembong  klora'. 

A  stag  that  eaU  ///<?  shoots  of  the  kelorak. 

Rusa'  nachar  lembong  kachang.2 

A  stag  that  eat*  //**  shoots  of  the  cow-itch. 

Nachar  kachang  koi  dah  gatal.3 

That  eats  the  cow-itch,  till  his  head  is  irritable. 

Koi  gatal  asah  tandok! 

His  head  is  irritable  and  he  rub.T 4  his  horns. 

Asah  tandok,  tandok  bedok. 

He  rubi"  his  horns,  and  his  horns  fall. 

Rusa'  amas,  rusa'  puaka'. 

The  stag  of  go\d,    the  stag  of  magic. 

Chok-dah  doyt  paming  jaring. 
Wandered-done  he,  quite  near  the  toils. 

Bongkar  halau  ber-dengkeng  rusa'-ha. 
Rouse  and  drive  him  bellowing  stag  this. 

Rusa'  chok  dalam  sersap. 

A  stag  wanders  among  the  fallen-leaves. 

Rusa'  jetek  dalam  sersap. 

A  stag  that  sleeps  among  the  fallen-leaves. 

Rusa'  terkejut  cherut  ha'  jaring. 

The  stag  starts  up,  and  is  strangled  in  the  toils. 

Oi  mah  pawang  chohh-leh  rusa.'. 

Ho  !  Mr.  Zte^r-wizard,  spear  the  stag. 


1  =  Mai.  "benuang,"'  used  of  big  had  been  eating  it)  might  also  arise 
old  bull  animals — e.g.  of  the  buffalo,  from  his  being  seen  in  the  act  of 
stag,  and  I  think  others.  rubbing    his    head   when   he   loses   his 

2  His    eating    of   "kachang    babi"  horns  annually. — Ridley. 

(?  cow-itch)  might   cause  actual  irrita-  3  "Gatal"  =  Bes.     "  kakaht  "     or 

tion  ;  it  grows  commonly  near  planta-  "kakaJt." 

tions,  but  even  then  the  idea  (that  he  4  Or  sharpens. 


TEXT  OF  BSSISI  SONGS 

i  >.iii  (  bohh  I'U. ui;;  i ..ui r. 

Wktn  y<!t  have  (tabbed  kiw%t  casl  out  the  mischief. 

,11. ill   I'.iw.ui;;  l».mtr  ms.r. 

ii"'  Mi.  /',,  >  wi/.mi,  quartti  tk\ 
Etc.,  etc. 


Kijang*      77u  ■ 
Tinp  p,  empep  busy!'  kijang. 

1  Emp  p,  i  nip  |','  |j  thi  cry  of  the  roe  deer. 

Kijang  chok  di-ujong  p  matang.1 

The  Roe-deei  that  wanders  at  the  end  of  the  rising. 

Kijang  yut  ka*paQgka1  p£matang< 

The  Roe-deer  that  returns  to  the  landwanl-cnd  of  the  rising. 

Diam  di-gunong  Ulu  Langat. 

That  dwells  on  the  crags  of  the  upper  Langat. 

Kijang  nachar  lembong  pcrenchun.2 

The  Roe-deer  that  feeds  <m  the  shoots  of  wild  cinnamon. 

Yek,  ai,3  Mamat  Solong. 

O  brother,  Mamat  the  Firstborn. 

Yek,  ai,:!  guldeh  tohok. 

O  brother,  take  then  your  spear. 

Gul  tohok  tikam  kijang. 

Take  your  spear  and  stab  the  roe-deer. 

Cheliau  lem-lem,  duh-dah  kijang-ha. 

Look  very-carefully,  running  is  Roe-deer  this. 

Klek-leh,  ai  !  kijang  dah  bedok. 

Ho  !  then,  carry  him,  the  Roe-deer  has  fallen. 

Ka'an  ha-dong  machin-leh  kijang. 

Carry  him  homewards  and  cook  then  the  Roe-deer. 

Dah  machin  bente  kijang. 

When  you've  done  cooking,  quarter  then  the  Roe-deer. 

Jon  nachar  muntet  mulih. 
Give  to  eat  a-little  to  each-one. 

Mai  ohok  adik  kakak. 

Come  ye  hither,  sisters-young  and  sisters-old. 

Nachar  daging  kijang  naha. 

To  eat  the  flesh  <?/*  Roe-deer  this. 

Bihih  dah  u'ut  hC. 

When  gorged  is  belly  your. 

Lek-leh  ai  !  Mamat  Solong. 

Rise  then,  ho  !  Mamat  the  Firstborn. 

Main  jo' oh  4  dalam  bale. 

For  the  feast  c?/"  drinking  within  the  tribal-hall. 

1  "  Pematang':  (Mai. )  =  Bes.   '-urn-       ("  lada")  ?  wild  cinnamon. — Ridley, 
bai."  3   V.l.  "Lek,  oi,"  "rise  up,  ho." 

2  "Perenchun"'  =   "  kayu    pedas "  4  Or"jaah"? 

VOL.  I  2  T 


642  APPENDIX 

Bale  panjang,  bale  b£sar. 

The  Hall  that  is  long,  the  Hall  that  is  broad. 

'Nari  kijang  hadat  mah  nyom. 

To-dance  the  Roe-deer  is  the  custom  of  people  young. 

Hukah  lcmol  hukah  kedol. 

To  please  the  men  and  to  please  the  women.1 

Mah  nyom  henom  di-bale. 

People  that  are  young  are  many  in  the  Hall. 

Eso'  j.mah  tahun  jadi. 

To-morrow  and  for  ever  (?)  be  years  of-plenty. 

Jadi  pleh,  jadi  padi. 

Plenteous  be  fruit,  plenteous  be  rice. 

Pleh  .   .   .   Pleh,  Pleh,  Pleh,  oi. 
Fruit  .   .   .   Fruit,  Fruit,  Fruit,  oho. 

Kanchel.      The  Chevrotain. 

Nyau-ganyau  bunyl'  kanchel. 

'  Nyau-ganyau,'  is  the-ciy  of -t he -kanchil. 

Kanchel  telong  pleh  d'long-meri. 

77^-kanchil  that  seeks  M<?-fruit  of  trees  of-the-ioxv-X. 

Pleh  kepau  telong  kanchel. 

Fruit  of  the  kepau  seeks  ^<?-kanchil. 

Kanchel  nachar  di-ampa'  jemu.2 
77^-kanchil  that  feeds  at  bed-rock  dry. 

Kanchel  nachar  daun  ludai. 

7#<?-kanchil  that  eats  //^-leaves  ofthe-lud&i. 

Kanchel  nachar  daun  hila'. 

7^^-kanchil  that  eats  /^<r-leaves  ^/"-M^-sweet-potato. 

Kanchel  nachar  daun  yet. 

77^-kanchil  that  eats  the-lezf  of-the-yam. 

Kanchel  gli  gentah  3  bedok. 

The  kanchil  that  fears  //^-thunderbolt.;  fall. 

Kanchel  gli  binatang  tekam. 

77z<2-kanchil  that  fears  wild-beasts  will  attack  him. 

Kanchel  gli  katop  4  tijau. 

77/if-kanchil  that  fears  M^-bite  of-the-snake. 

Kanchel  chok-leh  chohoi  doi. 

7^(?-kanchil  that  walks-then  by-day  and  night. 

1  Lit.  "  be-pleased  male,  be-pleased  ("when  the  buffaloes  go  down  to  the 
female."  water,"  i.e.  about  5  p.m.),  etc.      Still, 

2  =  "  Ampar  jemur  "  (?)  I  do  not  the  best  translation  seems,  "when  the 
feel  sure  about  the  interpretation  of  bed-rock  (or  outcrop)  dries  (in  the  sun)," 
"  ampa',"  but  "jemu"  is  surely  cp.  Mai.  "  kring  ambun"="at  dew- 
"jemor,"    and   the   whole   phrase  cer-  dry.1' 

tainly  means,  as  I  was  told,  "in  the  3  "Gentah."      N.B.    "Are'  aler " 

early  morning."     Possibly  "  ampa'"  =  ("  ra'")  =  to  lighten  ["ra'"  =  "sehaja"] 

"civet-cat,"  i.e.  "when  the  civet-cat  "  are' garong,"  thunder, 

basks  (in  the  sun),"  a  phrase  analogous  4  "Katop"    or     "  kathop"  =  Mai. 

to    the    Malay     "ktrbau     btrendam  "  "  pagut  "  ("  ular  "). 


XT  OF  insist  SONG 

K.ui.  he!  |<  tek  \>  ■'■■     i 

/'//f  U.nuhil  /':,.•/'  ileep  lay. 

Kanchel  j.  tek  dalam  limit.1 

Icanchil  thai  sl«-t  ;  tk   bra  bn 

Kanchel  jitek  ha  b&ngko'  mok. 
Icanchil  thai  ileep  -  amon 

Kanchel  ji  tek  di  lurabun  rumput.1 

k.uulul  Mi//  sleep,  /;:  tht  t.m.'le  OJ 

M.u  Ich  he  ttlong  kanchel. 
Kithei  then  v<>u,  seek  the  Icanchil. 

Ningket  ;  leh  j  ral  ktnchel. 

Set  then  the  nooee  for  ths  Icanchil. 

Plei  ; >dah,  ;ii  I  kom  dah  j«  rat. 

Release/  is  //,  hurr;ih  !   got  him  has  M^-noose. 

Dah  higap  ka'an  ha-donj 

The  noOH  hai  canght  him  ;  carry  him  homewards, 

Dah  hadong  he  layu.4 

"  Done  "  homewards  do  you  scorch  him. 

Dah  layu  he  bente. 

Done  scorch  him  :  do  you  quarter  him. 

Dah  bente  he  gule. 

Done  quarter  him  ;  do  you  make  cooked -meat. 

Jdn  nachar  muntet  mulih. 
Give  to  eat  a-little  to  each-one. 

PMandok  {Pandok).      The  Mouse-deer. 

Krusau-krusau  6  ru'  pandok. 

•  Krusau-krausau,'  is  the  cry  of  the  mouse-deer. 

Pandok  nachar  iembong  ludai.0 

The  mouse-deer  that  eatj"  the  shoots  oj  the  ludai. 

Pandok  nachar  pleh  kledang. 

The  mouse-deer  that  eatj  M<;-fruit  of  M^-kledang. 

Pandok  nachar  pleh  kepau.7 

The  mouse-deer  that  eat*  Mt'-fruit  of  the  kepau. 

Pandok  nachar  pleh  mangis. 

The  mouse-deer  that  eat*  M^-fruit  of  M<?-mangostin. 

Pandok  nachar  pleh  diyan. 

The  mouse-deer  that  eatr  the-fruit  of  the  durian. 

Kom  bau  pandok  jol-leh  chau. 

When  he  gets  Mt'-scent  of-the  mouse-deer,  barks-then  the  dog. 

Kom  bau  pandok  putih. 

He-has  got  M^-scent  0/"-a-mouse-deer  white. s 


1  Bes.  "  lemat  "  =  secondary  growth.  G  Mai.       "ludai"  =  Bes.      "long 

-    V.l.  "  Rambun  rumput."  maya'." 

3  Pies  =  Mai.  "  terbingkas,"  to  be-  7  "  Kepau"  —  Pholidocarpus  macro- 
come  released  (of  the  catch);  carpus.  V.l.  l *  Serdang"  =  Livistona 
• '  ningket  "  =  M  pasang. "  cochinchinensis. 

4  Or  "singe"?  "Layu"  =  Bes.  8  White  is  the  mark  of  a  "sacred" 
"holoi."           5    V.L  "kuh,  kuh  !"  animal. 


644  APPENDIX 


Jet-leh  bau  pandok  putih. 

Follow-then  M^-scent  of  the  mouse-deer  white. 

Pandok  putih  chclui  ha-dooh. 
7^<?-mouse-deer  white  descends  to-M^-water. 

Dalam  dooh  kom-leh  dah. 
In  M^-water  got-then  has.1 

Dah  kebus  pandok  putih. 

Is  dead  />^-mouse-deer  white. 

Klek-leh  ha-dong  pandok  putih-ha. 

Carry-then  homewards  the  mouse-deer  white  this. 

Bente-leh  pandok  putih. 
Quarter-then  the  mouse-deer  white. 

Jon  nachar  muntet  mulih. 
Give  to  eat  a-little  to  each-one. 

Ketur.      The  Wild  Boar. 

Dret,  dret,  dret,  bunyi'  ketur. 

'  Dret,  dret,  dret,'  is  the  cry  of  the  wild-pig. 

Kenon  ketur  nachar  ha-bois. 

The  young  of  the  wild-pig  that  feed-on  sugarcane. 

Nachar  yet,  nachar  hila'. 

Feed-on  yams,  feed-on  sweet-potatoes. 

Doyt  dah  nachar  leba'-he. 

Utterly  is  eaten-up  this  clearing  of  yours. 

Jong  ketur  tujah-tujah. 

The  feet  of  the  Boar  are  pointed-pointed. 

Tih  ketur  soroi-soroi.2 

The  fore-legs  of  the  Boar  are  sloping-sloping. 

Bulu'  ketur  gerchas-gerchas, 

The  bristles  of  the  Boar  are  stubborn-stubborn  (?  bristling). 

Met  ketur  pelat-pelat.3 

The  eyes  of  the  Boar  are  squinting-squinting. 

Tong  ketur  chanchang-chanchang. 

The  ears  of  the  Boar  are  pricked-up  pricked-up. 

Semuk-leh  pipi  ketur. 

Fat  indeed  are  the  chaps  of  the  Boar. 

Iku  ketur  gewet-gewet. 

And  the  tail  of  the  Boar  is  crisp  and  curly  (?).4 

Chelui  ketur  nachar  ha-be. 

There  descends  the  Boar  to  feed  upon  your  rice. 

Gul  ding  blau  klau  bunga.'. 

Take  your  bamboo  blowpipe  scored  with  patterns. 

1  I.e.  the  dog  has  got  it.  explanation  given  me  it  =  "  curl-curl," 

2  V.I.  "  choroi-choroi."  i.e.  "  inclined  to  be  curly,"  but  is  not  the 

3  "  Perlat-perlat,"  or  "  pelat-pelat  "  wild  pig's  tail  supposed  to  be  straight  (?). 
=  cross- eyed  or  squinting  (?)  (Mai.  Ridley  suggests  "goes  flip-flap,  from 
"  terbliak  ").  the  way  it  flaps  when  he  is  running.'' 

4  Exact  sense    doubtful  :    from   the  I  prefer,  however,  the  former  sense. 


TEXT  (>/■'  BES/SJ  SONC 

I  lu.it  pi  chil  l><  gum  I-  '.'.nil.1 

\\  in.-  an  i it  '.in  I. .  I  :'•:    ,  runt. 

( 'in  li.m  !■<  i  l*iti  i-  in  lei  iiii  I.'  din  <luh. 

I .  iiclullv,  tfu    I  m   IllIHli: 

1  ■ 

A'ok  [t  A'".').'-'     Thr  Cocottut'tnonkty, 

kok,  kok,  kok  ganti 

*  Kok,  kok,'  -  ths  monkey  ' 

kok  gantang,  kok  rangki 

aonkey  "gantang,"  and  ths  monkey    •  ran  ;ki', 

l\ok  buku  rling. ' 

And  tht  monkey  "  buku  "  that  j  : -. 

Muh  kok-keh  rimai-rimai. 

Tht  muzzle  ('/"monkey  yon  is  dimpled-dimpled. 

Tih  kok-keh  rim pang-rimpang. g 

The  fingers  o/" monkey  yon  <7<v  crooked-crooked. 

Paho  kok  pako'-pako'.6 

The  haunches  of  the  monkey  art   bowed -bowed. 

Iku  kok-keh  d'long  prau-prau." 

The  tail  of  monkey-yon  is  a  tree  waving. 

Nachar  pleh  pleh  diyan. 
Eat/;/;--  fruit,  fruit  of  the  durian. 

Hindik8  kok  lek-leh  klo.9 

Shakes  (?)  the  monkey,  rise-then  again. 

Yek,  ai  ! 10  Mamat  Solong. 

Ho,  brother  !   Mamat  the  Firstborn. 

Yek,  ai  !  gul-leh  ding  blau. 

Ho,  brother  !  take-then  bamboo-tube. 

Benchop  seloloyn,  cheliau  ber-lem-lem. 
Stalk  it  craftily,  look  very  carefully. 

Huet  lechlp,11  kom  domok  "dah. 

Whiz  and  it  sticks,  hit  him  the  dart  has. 

Duh-dah  kok  tengong-prengong. 
Run-off-has  the  monkey,  helter-skelter. 

Kuak-kuak  kok  kedim  bedok. 
Vomiting  the  monkey  now  fall.?. 

Denting-denting  bedok  kok-keh. 
With  thud-thud  falls  monkey  yon. 

1   "  Begum  -  begam"  =  ;<  bunyi    am-  kujap  ':  or  "  kangkang  koyak." 
boi,"  explained  as  meaning  "  he  cries  6   "Pako'-pako'"  =  Mal.  "  changko'- 

'  Oh ! '  when  he  is  struck  "  !  changk5'." 

-    =Mal.  "Bro\"  7    =Mal.  "gunchang." 

3  The  "  kok  gantang,"   "rangkak,"  8    =MaL  "  gegar  "  (?). 
and   "  buku  "  appear  to  be  three  kinds  y    =Mal.  "pula." 

of  "  Bro',"  or  coconut  monkey.  10    V.l.     "  lek,    ai  "  =   "  rise    up, 

4  =  Mal.  "kerling."  ho  !" 

6  Explained    as  =  Mai.    "kangkang-  »    =  Mai.  '-'lekat." 


646  APPENDIX 

Klek-leh,  ai  !   Mamat  Solong. 
Pick-it-up,  ho  !   Mamat  the  P'irstborn, 

Ka'an  ha-dong  rongko'-royon. 

And  bear  it  homewards  though  bent  and  bowed. 

Ka'an  ha-dong  champak  pekil. 

Bear  it  homewards  and  throw  it  downwards. 

Inak  Solong,  layu-leh  kok-keh. 

Aunt  Eldest-born,  scorch  monkey-yon. 

Mamat  Solong,  bente-leh  kok-keh. 

And  you,  Mamat  the  Elder-born,  quarter-then  monkey-yon. 

Jon  nachar  muntet  mulih. 
Give  /0-eat  a-little  to  each-one. 

U'ut  he  dah  bihi-leh, 

When  that  belly  of  yours  is  gorges-then, 

Lek-leh,  ai,  Mamat  Solong. 

Rise  then,  ho  !   Mamat  the  Firstborn, 

Lek  jo'oh  dalam  bale. 

Rise  up  and  drink  within  the  Hall. 

Bale  panjang  bale  besar. 

The  Hall  that  is  long,  the  Hall  that  is  broad. 

Esok  jemah  tahun  jadi. 

To-morrow  and  afterwards  shall  be  a  year  plenteous. 

Bilang  kok,  pleh  jadi. 

Tell  of  the  monkey,  and  fruits  shall  be  plenteous. 

Pleh  .   .   .   pleh,  pleh,  pleh,  pleh. 
Fruit  .   .    .   fruit,  fruit,  fruit,  fruit. 

The  Siamang.      The  Gibbon. 

Mong,  mong,  mong,1  bunyi'  Siamang. 

1  Mong,  mong,  mong,'  is  the  cry  0/"-M£-Siamang. 

Siamang  bertembong2  di-ampa'  jemu.3 
The  Siamang  that  hoots  at-outcrop  dry. 

Siamang  menenteng  di-sendoh  4  Kalih,5 

The  Siamang  that  chatters  on-the  upper  Kalih. 

Nimul-leh  Siamang  di-sendoh  Luar. 
Appears-then  the  Siamang  on-the  upper  Luar. 

Lompat  prau  °  di-lembong  b'ranti. 

Leaps  and  rustles  in  the  branches  of  the  meranti. 

Champak  prau  di-lembong  ludan. 

Hurtles  and  rustles  in-the  branches  of  the  ludan. 

Berdak-berdong  7  nachar  Siamang. 
Fallen-fruit-husks  eaU  the  Siamang. 

1  Onomat.  v.  next  line.  ="  upper    end    of  water."       =  Mai. 

2  Onomat.    word,    connected     with       "ulu." 

"mong."  5    V.  "  Bangkong  "  song  and  others. 

3  When  (the  dew  on)   the   outcrop  G    =  Mai.  "berdrau." 

(granite)  dries.      V.  p.  642  ante  (n.).  "    =  Mai.     "  lepok-lepak  "="  fallen 

4  From  "sen   (or   "chen")  dooh "       fruit-husks." 


//  \  i  OF  BSS/SJ  SONG 

Bench*  ip  '   i  loloyn    i  hi  II  u'  Wi  lem  lem. 
Stalk  him  warily,  tool)  very  carefully. 

M.iin.i!  Solongi  M. mi. n  Alang, 

Maui.it   S(  li  iDg  and  M.un.il   Al 
Wk,1  .11  !    Si. mi. mi;;  kl  •  1 1 1 1 1  iluh. 

Bldar-brothcii  oho  I  tkt  Siamang  now  run 

Y*ek,  ai  !  guMeh  ding  blau. 

i  lder*brother,  < >1h>  !  take  then  tki  bamboo  blowpipe. 

( rul  blau  ding  klau  bungi'.' 

'lake  tJu  blowpipe  of  th  bamboo  icored  with  patterns. 

1 1(  lubai  cheh c  kakom. 

Dc  you  try  apat'poiton  fo>implant. 

1  [e  subai "  chch  b£nam. 

Do  you  try  upas-poison  to  insert. 

Lo  lekuis,  kom  domok  dah. 

Shoot  and  it  sticks,  got  him  the  dart  has. 

Yek,  ai,  cheliau  Siamang-nong. 
Elder-brother,  oho  !  watch  Siamang-just. 

Ka-kua',s  kuh-dah  Siamang. 
Cough-cough  vomited-has  the  Siamang. 

Cheliau  Siamang  prom9  perteng.10 
Watch  the  Siamang  fall  with  a  clatter. 

Vek,  ai  !  Siamang  dah  bedok. 
Elder-brother,  oho  !  the  Siamang  has  fallen. 

Klek-leh,  ai  !  rongko-royon.11 

Carry  A/'-w-then,  oho  ?  bent-aW-bowed. 

Klek12  -leh,  ai  !  Siamang  ha-6. 
Carry-then,  oho  !  Siamang  this-indeed. 

Telong-telong  rangas  ludan. 
Seek,  seek  branches  of  the  ludan. 

Telong-telong  rangas  changan. 
Seek,  seek  branches  of  the  changgan. 

Telong  angeng  he  layu  13  Siamang. 
Seek  firelogs  you  to  scorch  the  Siamang. 

Telong-telong  pedas  chanchang. 
Seek-seek^r  seasoning  ^/"chanchang. 


1  "Benchop"  =  "endap,"  to  stalk.  6  "Cheh,"  or   "ches"      (Bes.    for 

2  =  "  P'lahan  -  plahan,"      probably       Mai.  "  ipoh  "). 


.  )> 


reduplicated  from  "  sa-loyn-loyn."  7    =Mal.  "choba 

3  "  Cheliau,"  not  "  chelui,;'  appears  8   =  Mai.  "  bato'  luak. 
to  be  the  correct  reading.                                   9    =MaL  "rebah." 

4  "Yek"  is  a   variant    reading  for  10   =Mal.  "  berdebum  "  ;  or  to  fling 
"  lek,"  here  and  elsewhere.  oneself  with  a  crashing  noise  through 

5  This    passage    depends     on     the  branches. 

meaning    of  the    phrases   "ding  klau  n    =Mal.  "  terbongko'-bongkoV 

bunga.',"  and  "ding  klampenai,"  which  12    =  Mal.  "dokong." 

maybe  kinds  of  bamboo,  or  "decorated"  13  "  Soloi  "    (or     "  holoi  ")  =  Mai. 

and  the  reverse.      V.  p.  648,  n.  10.  "layu,"  to  singe  (?)  or  scorch. 


648  APPENDIX 


T-  Long-telong  p€das  jintan. 
Seek-seek,  for  seasoning  0/jintan. 

Krio'-kria",1  haro-galo.2 
Crackle-crackle,  mix  and  mingle  it. 

Dab  layu,3  bente-leh*  Siamang. 

When  it  is  scorched,  cut-up  the  Siamang. 

He  jon  muntet  mulih. 

Do  you  give  a-little  to  everybody. 

Biar  chukop  dageng  Siamang, 

Let  it  suffice,  yon  flesh  of  the  Siamang, 

Chukop-leh  nachar  kadui  6  hedet. 
Sufficient  for-eating  both  great  and  small. 

UngkbV^  {Tembo'  or  Tehmok).      A  Kind  of  Ape. 

Wong  wong  vvong  bunyi'  ungka'. 

•  Wong,  wong,  wong,'  is  the  cry  of  the  wawa. 

Ungka'  bermain  di  lembong  kepong. 

The  wa'wa'  that  playi-  among  the  sprays  of  the  kepong. 

Ungka'  bermain  di  lembong  seraya'. 

The  wa'wa'  that  plays  among  the  sprays  of  the  seraya'. 

Ungka'  bermain  di  lembong  jelotong. 

The  wa'wa'  that  plays  among  the  sprays  of  the  jelotong. 

Berdak-berdong  nachar  ungka'. 
Crunching  and  crunching  feeds  the  wa'wa'. 

Pleh  angong  nachar  ungka'. 

The  fruit  of  the  anggong  is  the  food  of  the  wa'wa'. 

Pleh  rambai  nachar  ungka'. 

The  fruit  of  the  rambai  is  the  food  of  the  wa'wa'. 

Bulu'  ungka'  putih  kapas. 

The  fur  of  the  wa'wa'  is  white  as  cotton. 

Bulu'  ungka'  sutra'  hitam. 

The  fur  of  the  wa'wa'  is  silk  that  is  black.7 

Kening  ungka'  bagei  andam. 

The  brow  of  the  wa'wa'  is  as-it-were  trimmed. 

Iku  8  ungka'  tombat-tombat. 

The  stern  of  the  wa'wa'  is  flat-and-hard  {lit.  solid-solid).9 

Gul  ding  blau  klampenai.10 

Take^tfMr  bamboo  blowpipe  "klampenai." 

1  Onomat.  prob.  from  the  crack-  7  These  lines  may  refer  either  to 
ling  of  the  firelogs,  or  rather  the  noise  two  different  varieties  of  "  wa'wa',"  or 
of  the  tubers  frying  in  the  pot — "  bunyi  else  to  the  fact  that  the  face  and  hands 
goreng  ubi  di-kuali."  are    white,    whilst   the   body   is    black 

2  =Mal.  "  kachau-kachau-kan."  (and  silky). 

3  *'  Soloi  "  (or  "  holoi  ").  See  note  8  Here  =  stern  or  rump,  the  "wa'wa"' 
13  to  preceding  page.  having  no  tail. 

4  =Mal.  "topah"  (or  "  bantei  "  ?)  9    =  Mai.  "  tumpat  "  (?). 

5  Or"kadoi."  10   "Bl.  klampenai";  explained  to  me 

6  "Ungka"  is  the  J  a  v.  (Malayan?)  as  =  "  ding  Brunei  "  or  "Borneo  bam- 
for  "wa'wa',"  ace.  to  Ridley.  boo,"  possibly  referring  to  the  wooden 


TEXT  OF  BSS/SJ  SONGS 

Bent  hop   ■  l< »1<  13 n  1  h<  liau  i><  1  lem  Itn 
Stalk  11  w.miy,  I... »V  ^<  i\  1  .ii'  fully. 

Tiii  ungkt1  kanUui  kantau. 

..  '  art  Ion;;  an  t  ilea  i 

1        angle!1  buai  bi  1  buai. 

T%4  leg  >  I  /"   vjr.    wu'wa'  <»;/  sw.iy"/     •,..;,:< 
\  1     ,  .11  !   .  In  li.ui  \»  1  li-in  Inn. 

I  [0|  brotha  I  look  n  1  illy. 

(A'. 

/it  1  yd' .       '/'he  C: 

\\  .1'  w.i' -\v;i'  iiakeh  I). ". 

W.i    w.i'  w.r,  that  is  the  crocodile. 

B  \   '  t£lok  baya'  rantau. 

The  crocodile  of  the  bay,  the  crocodile  of  the  reaches. 

Koi  bayi'  tungku-tungku. 

The  head  of  the  crocodile  is  covered  with  lumps. 

Iku  baya'  bage  p£dang. 

The  tail  of  the  crocodile  is  like  a  sword. 

Lemoyn  baya'  kanching-kanching. 

The  teeth  of  the  crocodile  are  clenched  together. 

Mani'  lubok  kar.V  baya'. 

Wherever  is  a  river-pool  dwell*  the  crocodile. 

Baya'  garang  baya'  ganas. 

The  crocodile  that  is  fierce,  the  crocodile  that'is  savage. 

Yal  jemor  atas  tebing, 

That  climbs  up  to  bask  upon  the  river  bank, 

Chelui  ha-dooh  telong  nachar. 

And  descend*  to-thc  river  to  look  for  food. 

Bayang  mah  kayi'-leh  baya'. 

The  reflection  of  a  man  sees-then  the  crocodile. 

Koi  hap,  kom-leh  nachar. 

If  the  head  is  lack?';/^>,  he  gets-then  food. 

Koi  dah,  kom  nachar  ngot. 

If  the  head  is  there ,  he  gets  food  not. 

Nakeh  kra'  atas  d'long. 

That  is  a  monkey  upon  the  timber. 

Kapet  baya',  bedok  ha-dooh. 

It  is  struck  by  the  crocodile,  and  fallr  into  the  water. 

Baya'  benam  dalam  lubok. 

And  the  crocodile  smother*  it  in  the  mud. 


(Kuantan)  type  of  blowpipe,  which  is  Mai.  "  kelar  "  cp.  "  selar,"  etc.]  If  this 

(necessarily)    undecorated,    as   distinct  is  right,  "ding"  (bamboo)  is  applied 

from     "ding    klau    bunga',"    or    the  to  the  rare  wooden  type  in  spite  of  its 

"blowpipe  scored  with  patterns"  (the  material,  otherwise  it  must  be  a  special 

indigenous  variety).    ["  Klau  "  prob.  =  kind  of  bamboo. 


650  APPENDIX 


Dah  kebus  ka'an  ha-teh. 
Done  dead  he  bears  it  ashore. 

Lempeh  ha-d'long  biar  kebus  nenC'. 

And  batters  it  on-limber  to  let  it  die  thoroughly. 

Kebus  nene'  nachar  bulat. 

When  it  is  dead  thoroughly  he  devours  it  whole. 

Jawak.'1     The  Monitor  Lizard. 

Koi  jawak  tungku-tungku. 

The  head  of  the  great-Lizard  is  knobby  and  knotty. 

Met  jawak  met  perting. 

The  eyes  of  the  great- Lizard  are  eyes  narrow  (?). 

Munchong  jawak  munchong  runching. 

The  snout  of  the  great-Lizard  is  a  snout  sharp-pointed. 

U'ut  jawak  biang-biut. 

The  belly  of  the  great-Lizard  sways  and  swaggers. 

Ti'il  jawak  jarang-jarang. 

The  foot-prints  of  the  great-Lizard  are  spread  and  splayed. 

Sisek  chelon  bage  pari'. 

The  scales  of  its  back  are  like  those  of  the  sting-ray. 

Iku  jawak  bage  pedang. 

The  tail  of  the  great-Lizard  is  like  a  sword. 

Ltmoyn  jawak  duri'  pandan. 

The  teeth  of  the  great-Lizard  are  thorns  of  the  screw-pine. 

Lid  ah  Jawak  lidah  chabang. 

The  tongue  of  the  great-Lizard  is  a  tongue  thafs  forked. 

Nakeh  mah  chakap  bohong. 

That  is  the  man  who  telb  falsehoods. 

Jawak  nakeh  Tuhah  2  baya'. 

Of-the-great-Lizard  that  is  Chief  the  crocodile.     - 

Adik  baya'  temai-ttmai. 

//  is  the  younger  brother  of  the  crocodile  since  days-of-old. 

Baya'  teh  Baya'  bawau. 

The  crocodile  of  the  land  ;  and  the  crocodile  of  the  sea. 

Mui  di-teh,  mui  di-bawau. 

One  upon  land,  and  one  in  the  sea. 

Cheliau  berlem-lem  tetak  jawak. 
Look  very-warily  and  chop-at  the  great-Lizard, 
etc.,  etc. 

Ular  Sawa'  {Tijau  Talon).      The  Python  (1). 

Seng,  seng,  seng,  tijau  telon. 
Hiss,  hiss,  hiss,  goes  the  Python. 

Telon  klewen  3  di-atas  kayu. 

The  Python  coiled  in  the  top  of  a  tree. 

1  Or  "giang"  =  "geriyang"(?).  3   =  Mai.  "  belengkar  "  (coiled,  of  a 

2  "Tuhah"  z/./.  "horoh."  snake).      "Telon  =  Mal.  "telan"(?). 


TEXT  OF  ' 

T  I6n  '--I  w  ii  di  itai  '  rambus 

i  |  ■  hon  coiled  In  tkt  top  of  the  bra    p 

i  ..!    W    ii  di  d.d.un  Intnl. vni.  ' 
Tki    Python  eoilol  .unnnL;  (he  ^rass. 

n  lep  lobang  batang. 

Python  thai  ent<  tree  trask. 

ii  lochoyn  *  bilang  hwI'i 

Python  ipotted  thai  it  called  'tawaV 

I ku  ti'l.'ii  bag    gasing.' 

Tki  tail  of  the  Python  is  like  a  peg*top. 

Lidah  tilon  bawang  putih. 

The  tOOgtte  ■"  tki  Python  is  like  garlic. li 

I.einoyn  t6l6n  iluri   pandan. 

teeth  of  the  Python  arc  thorns  of  t  lie  screw-pine." 

Ti  Ion  lemak  dalam  gobuk.1 

The  Python  that  is  fat  in  its  cheeks. 

Koi  telon  bage  lendok. 

The  head  of  the  Python  is  like  a  spoon. 

Sisek  9  koi  bage  amas, 

The  scales  of  its  head  are  like-unto  gold, 

J  are'  mui  ratus  ampat  puloh.10 

And  its  feet  n  arc  one  hundred  and  forty. 

Kret  kadui  bage  niyu. 

Its  body  is  big  as  a  coconut-yWw. 

Tijau  telon  telan  ketur, 

The  Python  that  swallows  the  wild -pig, 

Telan  ketur  higap  pandok.12 

Swallow*  wild-pig  and  captures  the  mouse-deer. 

Telan  pandok,  higap  rusa'. 

Swallows  the  mouse-deer  and  captures  the  sambhur-deer. 

Telan  rusa',  higap  a'a'. 

Swallows  the  deer,  and  captures  the  tiger. 


1    =Bes.  "kulong."  G  White  onions,   i.e.   garlic,   a  very 

-    =  "  Ujong  kayu."  apt    description.      Mai.    "  bawang  "  = 

8    -Mai.  "rumput."  Bes.  "bantut." 

4   "Lochoyn  "  =  Mai.  "rintek."  "  Bes.      "  Hakek      habll "  ;      Mai. 

6  This  seems  to  be  the  right  mean-  "  duri  "  =  Bes.  "jongreng." 

ing.     It  refers,  of  course,  to  the  tip  of  8  "  Lemak"  =  Bes.  "lentoyt";  "go- 

the  Python's  tail.      A  v.l.  is  "  gaweng,"  buk  "  =  Mai.  "  pipi." 

which  was  said  to   mean    the   tip  (of  9    =Bes.  "ketong." 

a    tail),    but    this   is    obviously  wrong,  10  The  ribs  on  which  it  walks,  corre- 

as  there  is  no  sense  in  saying  that  its  sponding  to  the  feet  of  a  centipede. 

"tail''    was    "like    its    tip."      I    am  n  T.e.  ribs.     Lit.  fingers  or  toes, 

convinced    "  gasing"=  "  peg  -  top''   is  12  "  Telan"  =  "  geloyt"  (?)  or  "ge- 

right.  loyn"  v.s. 


652 


APPENDIX 


Ular  Sawd\      The  Python  (2). 

Saw.V  sinde,  sawa'  berante.1 

The  Python  of  the  snake-cloth,  the  Python  wit  h-the -chain. 

Sawa'  sinde  2  jadi'  kramat. 

The  Python  of  the  snake-cloth  become  sacred. 

Sawa'  datang  de'  mata'  ayi. 

The  Python  come  from  the  springs  of  water. 

Kadui  kret  (bage)  batang  niyu. 

Big-ofbody  (like)  the  stem  of  the  coconut-palm. 

Nakeh  gelar  sawa'  (ber)-chula'. 

That  is  the  name  of  the  Python  with-//^-horn. 

Sawa'  sinde  chelui  bawau, 

The  Python  of  the  snake-cloth  that  descend^  to  the-sea, 

Klahe  sama'  kramat  bawau, 

And  fought  with  the  sacred  Python  of  the  Sea, 

Laut  besar  laut  kechil  sudah. 

Till  the  sea  that  was  big  sea  small  became.3 

Kramat  asal  mula'  jadi'. 

The  sacred  Python  that  of  beginning  first  became. 

Kramat  nakeh  'dah  mah  karah.4 

Sacred  Python  yonder  have  people  defeated. 

Lawan  ngot  Sawa'  darat. 

Resist  cannot  the  Python  of  the  land. 

Salah  sembah  Sawa'  darat. 

Wrong  admits  the  Python  of  the  land. 

Alah  mah  chelui  de'  teh. 

Defeated  zvas  t he-one  that  descend^  from  the  land. 

Menang  mah  chelui  de'  bawau. 

Victorious  the-one.  that  descend^  from  the  sea. 

Nakeh  dah  puaka'  alo. 
That-one  has  spirit  more.5 

Sawa'  kebus  yal  ha-plangi'. 

The  Python  dead  ascended  to-lhe  rainbow.6 

Jadi  bage  uis  plangi'. 

Became  like  the  fire  of  the  rainbow. 


1  Probably,  according  to  Ridley, 
from  the  diamond  pattern  on  its  back, 
or  perhaps  from  some  analogous  belief 
to  that  of  the  wild-boar's  chain  ("  rantei 
babi ")  the  animal's  charm  or  talisman. 

2  "  Sinde  "  =  Mai.  "  (kain)  chindai," 
supposed  to  be  an  extremely  valuable 
magic  cloth  of  silk,  with  python- 
patterns  woven  into  it,  which  latter 
came  to  life  when  fumigated. 

3  Or  in  the  big  sea,  after  fighting  in 


the  little  sea. 

4  "Karah"  must  be  a  mistake  of 
mine  for  "kalah."  [  can  make  no 
sense  of  "karah." 
seems  to  suit. 

5  ?  exact  meaning 
still." 

6  "  Plangi'  "  explained  as  =  "sumbu 
buta'  yal  langit "  (?).  The  one  whose 
horn  was  blunted  {lit.  blinded)  ascended 
to  the  heavens. 


The  sense  given 
"  masic-  force 


/v  \  /•  (>/■  BES/SJ 

(    liul.i'  gul  IAW&1   Imu.mi. 

-  h  in.'   taken  ^j'  ///<•  Python  oj  the 

I  h  lui  b  rlem  lem«  bdti  langkah. 

'.  \<  i  \  <  srefull) ,  .1 i  itep  "v<  i  //.' 

k.ii.ui  i.iii-k.ih  timpa'  d<  rh&kfi'. 

I I  you  itep  ovei  it  you  will  be  crushed  for  </  rebel. 

I .iin  kici  pi  nyakil  Sai 

wind  round  your  body  ii  iht  lickneti  •  •/'the  Python. 

(  >do  yong  thtlani  gfl 

I  K)*nol  forget  in  i .  mi  heart. 

I  tok  j. m.ih.'J 

To  tnoi  r .  >w  and  always. 

Boning.      The  Torti . 

Baningi  Baning,  Baning. 

Tortoise,  Tortoise,    Tortoise  ! 

Tih  baning  juntul-juntul, 

'/'//^--fore-paws  (lit.  hands)  of -t he -Toxiohc  are  bent*out-sideways, 

Jong  baning  patul-patul.8 

.-/W-Mc'-himl-paws  (lit.  feet)  of -the  Tortoise  arc  shaped  like  adz 

Koi  baning  kelang-kelup. 

The  head  of  the  Tortoise  shoots-in-and-out  (?). 

Blakang  baning  bage  batu. 

77^-back  of- ///^-Tortoise  is  like  a  rock, 

Hitam-leh  gres  baning, 

And  black  is  ///^-heart  4  0/~-M£-Tortoise, 

Hijau-leh  'pedu'  5  baning. 

.-///(/-green -too  is  the-bWz  ofthe-Toxio'\se. 

Yek,  ai,  Mamat  Solong, 

O  brother,  Mamat  ///^-Firstborn, 

Gul  hau,  gul  ding  blau. 

Take  your  knife,  take  jw/r  bamboo  blowpipe. 

Gul  tohok  chok-leh  (ha)-meri. 

Take  your  spear  and  walk  through  ///^-forest. 

Tclong  baning,  nakeh  ti'il. 

Search-for  /^-Tortoise,  those  are  its  footprints. 

Nakeh  teh  nachar  baning, 

Here  is  ///^'-ground  where  feeds  ///t-Tortoise, 

Lembong  bengkong  (?)  nachar  baning. 
^//-shoots  of  the-11  chemeh  "  feeds  ///^-Tortoise. 

1  The  rainbow's  foot.  turned    sideways,    unlike    the     "  labi- 

-   -'Esok    jemah  "    explained    as=  labi."     According  to  Ridley,  the  paws 

"nisam  jaman  "   or   "  nisam  alo,"  lit.  of    the     "  labi  -  labi  "    {Trionyx)    are 

to-morrow  ("  besok  ")  and  further.  straight,  whilst  those  of  the  "  baning  " 

;{  The    "baning"    or    land  -  tortoise  ( Testudo  emys)  are  turned  sideways. 

was  described  to  me  as  running  on  the  4  Liver. 

joints    of  its    paws,   with  its    flappers  5  Mai.  "  hempedu  "  =  bile. 


654  APPENDIX 


Dah  kayi'  Mamat  Solong. 

You  have  seen  it,  Mamat  the  Firstborn. 

Dah  kayi'  dalam  treng  [d'long].1 

You  have  see«  it,  among  the  buttress^. 

Dah  bongkar  Mamat  Solong. 

Now  you  have  driven -it-oul,  Mamat  the  Firstborn. 

Klekleh  ha-dong  Mamat  Solong. 

Carry  it  then  homewards,  Mamat  the  Firstborn. 

Mamat  Solong  bente-leh  baning. 

Mamat  the  Eldest-born,  cut-up  the  Tortoise. 

Chinchang  2  halus  biar  machin. 
Chop-zV-up  small  and  let  it  be-cooked. 

Dah  machin  hidang  jambar. 

When  it  is  cook^  serve  it  on  /^-plates. 

Jon  nachar  muntet  mulih. 
Give  A?-eat  a  little  to  each-one. 

Oi  Mamat  Solong,  oi  Mamat  Alang. 

Ho,  Mamat  Firstborn  ;  ho  Mamat  Third-born, 

Bihi  u'ut,  rentak  bale. 

When  gorged  is  your  belly,  drum-upon  the  Hadl-floor. 

Katak. 

Kok,  kok,  kok,  bunyl'  rengkong. 

4  Croak,  croak,  croak  '  is  the  cry  of  the  Toad. 

Chemrap-leh  bunyi'  rengkong  tai. 

Loud  was  //^-croaking  of -t he-load  just-now. 

Rengkong  kara'  di-pangkal  d'long. 
77^-Toad  that  dwells  at-M,?-foot  ofixtts. 

Rengkong  kara'  di-hulu  Langat, 
The-Toad  that  dwells  on-//^-upper  Langat, 

Jangkar  hulu  jangkar  hilir. 

Jumping  upstream  and  jumping  downstream. 

U'ut  ramping3  nakeh  rengkong. 

With  the  waist  so  slender,  that  is  the-Tozd. 

Bidang-leh  dada'  rengkong. 
Broad-indeed  is  the  chest  ofthe-Toz.d. 

Chelap4-leh  met  rengkong. 
Goggling-indeed  are  the-eyes  of-the-To&d. 

Katok-leh  5  koi  rengkong. 

And  sharply '-tapering  is  the-htzd  of-the-Toa.d. 

Cherpe-leh  jare'  rengkong. 
Crumpled-indeed  are  M<?-fingers  of-the-Tosid. 

1  "Treng"  =  Mal.  "jangkar  kayu,"  3  V.l.  "u'ut  hat  "  =  Mai.  t4ping- 
or  "treng  d'long"  (also  =  "Triang"(?),  gang  ramping,"  i.e.  small  or  wasp- 
whence  "  Triang  "  in  S.  Ujong).  waisted,  like  the  fish-trap,  q.v. 

2  Mai.    "  chinchang  "  =  Bes.    "  ke-  4    =  Mai.  "  tembil,"  protruding, 
tong"  or  "  chetong."  5   =Mal.  "  renchong  pelurut. " 


TEXT  OF  BBSJ  \ 

Li. Inn  leh  jong  rcngkong. 
/;.- 1  iplay  /  Indeed  <".  //•■<  I  I  i  id. 

EClochol  '  leh  i  h<  l<  "i  rengk  'i>^. 
Rough-indeed  />  t/U  I  I 

Kut  rengkong  gttah  bul  dah. 

./>.•  i  !'-.<■  body  <•/  fVl<  Toed  exudei  i">i 

Katak  rengkong  oachai  Upan. 

i      i  rengkong  feed  i  upon  centipi 

Katak  rengkong  niches  kill'. 

/'/jr-To.ul  rengkong  feeds-up  ■ 

Katak  rengkong  g£loyn  batu'. 
/'/rt--Toad  rengkong  iwallows  gravel. 

•  idti  nachai  Katak  rengkong. 

l)o-not  then  eat  f>!#-Toad  rengkong. 

Bul-leh  nachar  Katak  rengkong. 
Poisonous  A'-cal  is  Mi'-Toad  rengk 

Gul  hau-he,  kabong'  rengkong. 

Take  then  your  knife,  and  chop-at  the-  Toad. 

Hi 4  chok  he  odo  gli. 

If  ha  walks-offyou  do-not  /v-frightened. 

Tetkala'  jaman  esok  jemah, 

From  the  time  of-old,  to-morrow  and  after, 

Tinggal  gaya'  tingal  jaman, 

May  there  remain  this  function,  may  there  remain  this  mem 

Tingal  pleh  jadi. 

May  it  remain  that  fruits-^  plentiful. 

Lang.      The  A'ite.5 

Sek  sek  leau  6  bunyi'  lang. 

*  Sek  sek  leau,'  is  the  cry  of  the  kite. 

Lang  berbiga'  atas  gunong. 

The  kite  that  soars  above  the  crags. 

Lang  berklambau  atas  awan. 

The  kite  that  swoops  above  the  clouds. 

Sarang  lang  di-lembong  jelotong. 

The  nest  of  the  kite  is  in  the  branch^  of  the  jelotong. 

Sarang  lang  di-lembong  kempas. 

The  nest  of  the  kite  is  in  the  branch.?*  of  the  kempas. 

'Nak  beranak  "  di-lembong  kempas. 

For-generations  it  has  been  in  //^-branches  ofthe  kempas. 

Sudah  sampei  sakit  anak, 

And -when  has  arrived  the  sickness  of  its  children, 

i   "  Klochot  "  =  Mai.  "berkrutu."  =Mal.  "  dia  "  (the  toad). 

2  Has  slime  that  is  poisonous.  5   =  Kite,  probably  a.ftshing-kite,v.s. 

3  V.l.  "kapong,"but  v.  next  line,  c    V.L  "  kesek-kleau  "  =  lit.    "  mew- 
the  toad  is  not  killed.  mew." 

4  Here  distinctly  explained  to  me  as  "    =  Mai.  "  Anak-beranak.  ' 


656  APPENDIX 


Tinggi  rendah  layak  lang, 
High  and  low  soars  the  kite, 

Iligap  siakap  jon  kenon-keh, 

And  catchy  the  siakap-fish  to  give  its-young-ones, 

Higap  tijau  jon  kenon-keh. 

And  catchy  snakes  to  give  to  its  young-ones. 

Lalu  lang  ka-Batu  Lalau. 
Passifi-  the  kite  to  Batu  Lalau. 

Lalu  lang  ka-Bukit  Tingi. 
Passer  the  kite  to  Bukit  Tingi. 

Lalu  lang  ka-Batu  Putih. 
Pass^  the  kite  to  Batu  Putih. 

Lalu  lang  ka-Batu  Perhambang. 
Passes  the  kite  to  Batu  Perhambang. 

Sampei  Perhambang  chelui  ha-teh 

On  reachm^-  Perhambang  it  descends  to  earth 

Telong  chinduai  atas  gunong. 

To  seek-for  the  love-plant  upon  the  mountains. 

Kagar  berubat  kenon-keh. 

It  wants  to  cure  z'/j-young-ones-yonder. 

Kom  chinduai  di-atas  gunong, 

When  one  gets  the  love-plant  upon  the  mountains, 

Rindu  bayang l  dalam  badan. 

Yearning  and  longing  ai-e  within  the  body. 

Chinduai  lang  ka'an  ha-dong, 

The  love-plant  of  the  kite  bear  it  homewards, 

Biar  lem  dalam  gres. 

Let  it  make  one  well  at  heart. 

Lek  lem-lem  [cheliau]  2  kenon  lang-keh. 
Rise-up  warily,  watch  the  young  of  the  kite. 

Gres  oyn  hukah  nene'. 

This  heart  ^/"mine  is  pleasured  greatly. 

Oyn  sro  telong  ubat. 

I  know  how  to  search-for  simples. 

Odo  bayang  odo  lengah. 

Do-not  then  yearn  and  do-not  dally. 

Odo  lengah  di-kampong  bunga', 
Do-not  dally  in  //^-Garden  <?/"-Flowers, 

Chokleh  ka-kampong  3  buah, 

But  proceed  to-^^-Garden  of  -Fruits, 

Tingalkan  tetkala' 4  jaman, 

And  let  there  remain,  from-the-time  of-old, 


1  For  "bayang"  in  this  sense,   cp.  seems  most  probable  ;  some  word  seems 
"sayang"    (?).        Or    does     it  =  "of  to  have  dropped  out. 

spirit"?  3  Usually  "pulau"="  island." 

2  Sense  not  quite  clear,  but  above  4  Better  "ta'kala." 


TEXT  OF  BESTS]  rS 

i  •  in  ■  ki  iii  k<  non  lang  keh, 
.  /  debl  i  »nl  to  th 

\  ikeh  i. in. I. r  in. ih  b  ranak. 
Thai  i  women  i  hild 


Hayam  (or  "Dfnd*")  tnfri.      ThtJungL  fowl. 

\  ng  chi fnangkas  bun)  ['  d  n4\ 

'  Nang  chi  nan  gka  j1  -  is  the  cry  of  the  jungle-fowl. 

1  ><  n.r  m.  1 1  di-s<  matai 

Fowl  oj  the  jungle  upon  the  rising  ground. 

Nakeh  g£lar  d£n&'  putih, 

That  w  //;t'  name  3/*  M*  jungle-fowl  white,4 

Nakeh  g€lar  denft'  plkat, 

That  is  the  name  <y /vW'  fowl  "decoy," 

Je'bah  Malayu  kabeh  rachek. 

Wherewith  foreigners  Malay  set  their  snares. 

Je'bah  Malayu  bawa'  plkat. 

Foreigners  Malay  cany  it  for  decoyin 

TliaM-leh  mai  dena'  putih. 

Fly-then  hither,   O  jungle-fowl  white. 

Lawan  ngot  dena'  henom. 

Resist  him  cannot  jungle- fowl  so  many. 

Dah  tuhah  dena'  putih. 

He  is  their  chief,  the  jungle-cock  white. 

Dena'  putih  than  5  ha-dong-keh. 

The  jungle-fowl  white  flier  homeward-yonder. 

Nang  ch£nangkis-leh  dena'  tai. 

'  Nang  chenangkis  '  was  the  cry  of  the  jungle-fowl  just-now. 

Dengar  chakap  temai-temai. 
Listen-to  the  talk  ^/"days-gone-by. 

Esok  jemah. 

To-morrow  and  after,  etc. 

Kluang  {Hampet).*     The  Flying-fox. 

Pe  .   .   .   lompe,"  lompe,  than  hampet. 
Flip-flap,  flip-flap,  flie^r  the  flying-fox. 

Nakeh  bunyi'  than  hampet. 

That  is  the  sound  of  the  frying  of  the  flying-fox. 

1   I.e.  a  debt  of  gratitude.  ated  "  t."     The  usual  sounds  of  "  th,'* 

-    =  Cackle,  cackle.  as  in  "this"  and  "thick,"  do  not  occur 

:{  Variant  for  "pematang."  at  all  in  Besisi. 

4  I.e.  sacred.  °  Also  "hapet"  and  "sapet."       The 

6  Or"tohn."     I  think  that  "than  "  fullest  form  would  perhaps  be" sampet." 

is  nearer  the  actual  pronunciation,   as  7    =  Mai.  "  berkepah-kepah,"  to  use 

given    in    the    Flying-fox    song.      The  the  wings  (or  rather  the  noise  made  in 

"  th  "  in  this  case  is  simply  the  aspir-  doing  so). 

VOL.  I  2  U 


658  APPENDIX 


Hampet  thayt  dari  sebrang. 

The  flying-fox  that  flier  from  over-seas. 

Hampet  thayt  mcri  banglang.1 

The  flying-fox  that  (lies  from  the  jungle  side. 

Hampet  thayt  dari  pulau.2 

The  flying-fox  that  flier  from  the  islets. 

Hampet  thayt  dari  selat. 

The  flying-fox  that  flier  from  the  straits. 

Hampet  mai  nachar  bunga'.3 

The  flying-fox  that  comes  to  eat  the  fruit-buds. 

Telong  pleh  chok  hi. 

To  seek-for  fruit  goes  he. 

Hampet  tha>'t  dah  ka-hulu'. 

The  flying-fox  that  flown  has  to  the  upper --waters. 

Hampet  thaJ't  dah  ka-hilir.4 

The  flying-fox  that  flown  has  downstream.5 

Sieng-mayeng6  bangsa'  hampet. 

Sundry  and  divers  are  the  tribes  of  flying-foxes. 

Hampet  nachar  pleh  buan. 

The  flying-fox  that  eats  the  fruit  of  the  rambutan. 

Hampet  nachar  pleh  duku'. 

The  flying-fox  that  eats  the  fruit  of  the  duku. 

Hampet  nachar  pleh  diyan. 

The  flying-fox  that  eats  the  fruit  of  the  durian. 

Sibang-sibut 7  sayap  hampet. 

Flap  -flap  go  the  wings  of  the  flying-fox. 

Kilat-kilau  sayap  hampet. 

Flash-flash  go  the  wings  of  the  flying-fox. 

Nakeh  gelar  bilang  hampet. 

That  is-called  8  the  tale  <?/" //^-flying-fox. 

Gul  ding  blau  klau  bunga'.9 

Take  your  bamboo  blowpipe,  scored  with  patterns. 

Gul  blau  naloh  hampet. 

Take  your  blowpipe  and  shoot  the  flying-fox. 

'L6  lekuis,10  kom  domok  dah. 
Shoot,  and  it  sticks,  hit  the  dart  has. 

Yek  ai  !  chelui  n  hampet. 

Brother,  oho  !  descends  /-^-flying-fox. 


1  =Mal.  "  deri  seblah  utan."  8  Lit.  name. 

2  "  Pulau  "  =  Bes.  "po'hong"  (?=  9  I  take  "klau"  to  be  =  Mai. 
Mai.  "tokong").  "  kelar,"  i.e.  "scored"  or   "incised," 

3  Bats  (and  flying -foxes)  are  very  as  distinguishing  the  indigenous  (usual) 
fond  of  eating  the  flower-buds  of  fruit-  type  of  decorated  blow-gun  from  "  ding 
trees. — Ridley.  klampenai,"  the  undecorated  Kuantan 

4  I.e.  tothe"kuala"  (Mai.  "kuala"  or  Borneo  type.  But  v.  the  Wa'wa' 
=  Bes.  "  temba' ").  song  (supra). 

5  Lit.  to  the  estuary.  10  Or  "lekuFs." 

6  =Mal.  "  masing-masing."  n  ?  "  Cheliau  "  =see. 

7  =Mal.  "angkap-angkap." 


BESISi  SOW 


|ii,  nr;  jil  ui.  '  bi  <i..i.  'I. iti  hamper, 
I *] i in | >  plump  i  illen  li'    /.■•!!. 

Ku.ik  kuak  kuh  'I. ill  ham  pet. 
Retch  retch,  vomited  hai  tko  il\  ii 

Klek  I'll  lii  dong,  la)  u  ham  pet. 

(  ,ui\  ih.  ii  him  homewards,  and  corch  tJu  rlying-fox« 

I  ).ih  l.iyn  bente*  hampel  '\> 

)\,,i  him,  quarter  the  flying-fox  yonder, 

TSmong  mah  dalam  bale. 

And o»\\  the  people  within  the  Mall. 

Jon  uachai  adik  kakak. 

Give  food  to  our  sisters-young  sisters-old. 

|6n  nachar  kadui  hedst. 

Give  food  to  both  great  and  small. 

Jon  nachar  muntSt  mulih. 
Give  food  <*  little  to  \ 

Bihi  u'm  lek-leh  jmig, 

When  gorged  is  your  holly,  rise-up-then  on  your  feet, 

Mamat  Solong,  Solong  Sidai, 
Mamat  the  Firstborn,  Firstborn  Sidai, 

Chok  beh  jo'oh  he  o'oi  I '-' 

Go-forth  and  brew  drink,  you  there,  hullo  ! 

Rentak  hale,  hale  panjang. 

Drum-upon  the  Wv.W-Jioor,  the  Hall  that  is  long. 

Rentak  hale,  hale  besar. 

Drum-upon  the  Hall^^r,  the  Hall  that  is  hroad. 

Biar  hukah  dalam  bale. 

And  make  merry  within  the  Hall. 

Pleh  jadi  bage  pleh. 

Fruit  is-plentiful  as  fruit  (can  be  ?). 

Pleh  jadi  tihap  are'. 

Fruit  is-plentiful  every  day. 

Pleh  jadi  tihap  hulan. 

Fruit  is-plentiful  every  month. 

Pleh  jadi  tihap  tahun. 
Fruit  is-plentiful  every  year. 

Tahun  nakeh  tahun  reja',3 

A  year  like  that  is  a  year  ^/"plenty  (?). 

Pleh  .   .  .   Pleh,  Pleh,  Pleh. 
Fruit   .   .    .    Fruit,  Fruit,  Fruit. 

1  =Mal.  "  chebak-chebak."  3  The  meaning  of  "reja'"  was  ex- 

2  The  proper  reading  here  may  be  plained  to  me  as  =  "  kabeh  lebeh,"  to 
"he  se-oi   {se'oi)"  =  "  do  you   chant"  "  make  more."    It  may  stand  for  Mai. 
or  "sing,"  especially  as  chanting  always  "  kreja  "  =  "  work." 
accompanied  the  drinking. 


66o  APPENDIX 


Kledang}      The  Kledang  Fruit. 

Gul  hau  Mamat  Solong. 

Take  your  knife,  Mamat  the  Firstborn. 

Ta'oyn  2  ena'  3  Solong. 
Orders  you,  Aunt  Solong. 

Ta'oyn  ena'  Tengah. 
Orders  you,  Aunt  Tengah. 

Kagar  nachar  pleh  kledang. 

Who  want  to-eat  M^-fruit  ^/"-Mtf-Kledang. 

Yal-leh  Mamat  Solong. 
Climb-up-then,  Mamat  //z^-P'irstborn. 

Glu-glai 4  pleh  kledang. 

Swaying  and  waving  are  the  fruits  of  the  Kledang. 

But6-leh  kenon,  muntet  mulih. 
Pick-//z^w-up-then,  children,  a-little  each  of  you. 

Dah  emboyn  6  pleh  kledang. 

They  are  full-ripe,  the  fruits  of  the  Kledang. 

'An  ha-dong  pleh  kledang-ha. 

Bear  homewards  the  fruits  of  the  Kledang-yon. 

Kawin  ha-dong  pleh  kledang. 

Throw-down  at-home  the  fruits  of  the  Kledang. 

Mai-leh  yek,  ibah,  wo,  ninik. 

Hither-then,  grandfathers,7  brothers-in-law,  fathers,  great-grandfathers. 

Mai  gahu'  kenon  kakak  adik. 

Hither  aunts,8  children,  elder-sisters  and  younger. 

He  nachar  pleh  kledang. 

Do  you  feed-upon  the  fruits  of  the  Kledang. 

Kledang  luchar9  odo  punan. 

When  the  Kledang  fruit  is  soft,  go  not  a-craving. 

Kledang  dendang  10  odo  punan. 

Even  for  the  Kledang  crow-black  go  not  a-craving. 

Yek  ai  !  n  Mamat  Solong, 

Brother,  oho  !  Mamat  the  Firstborn, 

Temong  mah  nyom  mai  ha-dong-ki. 

Summon  the  people  young  to  come  to-hut-that. 

Mah  nyom  jo'oh  dalam  bale. 

Let  the  people  young  drink  in  the  Hall. 

Nakeh  tanda'  pleh  henom. 

That  is  the  sign  that  fruit  is  plentiful. 

1  Artocarpus  lancictfolius ,  Ridley.  7  Brothers  (?). 

2  =Mal.  "suroh."  8  Paternal  (?). 

3  =  Mai,  "  Mak  sudara."  9    =  Mai.  "  Ranum,"  over-ripe  ;   cp. 

4  Explained  as  =  waving  about  when  "  luchar-luchar  "  in  Elephant  song, 
poked  with  the  fruit-pole  ("melimpei-  10  The    crow -black    Kledang    is  an 
limpei  dengan  kayu  di-jolok  ").  inferior  variety.      Also  =  "  Kl.  babi." 

5  V.l.  "mut"  =  Mal.  "pungut."  n    V.l.      "Lek     ai  ! "       Rise     up; 
G    =Mal.  "Penoh."                                    ho  ! 


TEXT  I  '/■   HI  si. si  :.      , 


[<  iiMiu  dlyan,  h<  nom  buan< 

•lent  I  '  plenteoi  I 

I  <  1 1  •  >  1 1  l   i.imlui,    Ik  ii'  mi    p    l.i 

'Unir.  iu  .      •  Rum  bid,  plenti  Pula  lan. 

I.  in. in  tampoi,  li  nom  kund 

'lenteous  /A  Tampoi,  plenteous  M*  ECundan 

I  <  1 1<  >m   leh   |'lrli   iKitli.yl. 

'lenteou  !•  indeed  imits  til, 

<  >d..  mungkii  sambilan  ti  li  In. 
Lei  not  •  ht  '>:  fail  for  nine  '     > 


Pic I  '     The  Redan  Fruit, 

(inl  ban  Mamat  Solong. 

Take  j •.-//;■  knife,  Mamat  the  Firstborn. 

Yal  Long  pleh,  pleh  redan. 

Climb  1 1  fruit,  ///<•  fruit  ^/'///t-  Redan. 

Dahan  tutor  broyl  ha-teh. 

branches  lop  and  pass  to-///^-ground. 

Gul-lch  nadoyt  pleh  redan-ki. 

Take-then  every-one  of  the  fruits  #/"  Redan-yon. 

But-leh  pleh  redan-ki. 
Pick-up-then  the  fruit  ^/~  Redan-yon. 

Dah  mut  2  ;an  ha-dong-he. 

When  you  have  picked  them  up,  bear  them  to-hut-your 

Jambar  kachar  niah  henom. 

Serve  them  u/>  as  food  for  people  many. 

Kadui  hedet  nachar  pleh  redan. 

For  big  and  little  to-eat  the  fruits  of  the  Redan. 

Hadat  mah  nyom  nachar  redan. 

It  is  the  custom  of  people  young  to-eat  the  Redan. 

(  Kid  punan  dalam  bale. 
Do-not  go  a-craving  in  the  Hall. 

U'ut  he  dah  bihi, 

When  belly  your  is  gorged, 

Lek  menari  Mamat  Solong. 

Rise  and  dance,  Mamat  the  Firstborn. 

Lek  jo'oh  dalam  bale. 
Rise  and  drink  in  the  Hall. 

Biar  hukah  mah  h;nom. 
Make  merry  people  many. 

Kenon-kenon  odd  gli. 
Children-children,  do-not  be-startled. 


1  A  very  sour,  wild,  hairless  rambutan. — Ridley 
2  "Mut,"  v.l.  "ka-but." 


662  APPENDIX 


Kabau.       The  Kabau  Fruit. 

Yam  kabau  lang-yam.1 

Bends  the  Kabau,  and  bends-about. 

Keau-plakeau  2  batang  kabau. 
Waves-to-and-fro  3  the  stem  of  the  Kabau. 

Putih  panau  antok  4  kabau. 

White  and  mottled  is  the  bark  of  the  Kabau. 

Antok  kabau  (jadi)  hau-chandong.6 

Bark  of  the  Kabau  (becomes)  chopping-knife  (?). 

Tegbt  rhak  jadi  kumbang.0 

Break  its  branch^  become  borer-bee  (?). 

BCdbk  daun  jadi  layang.7 

Fall  its  leaves  become  swallow  (?). 

Bedok  bunga   tabor  mClukut.8 

Falb  its  blossom  like  scatter^  rice-meal. 

Bedok  bunga'  gcmar  panas.9 

Fall j  its  blossom  like  rain  du  ring-sunshine.10 

Odd  nachar  pleh  kabau. 

Do-not  eat  the  fruit  of  the  Kabau. 

Nachar  pleh  kabau  bul-leh. 

If  you  eat  the  fruit  of  the  Kabau  you  will  be  poisoned-indeed.11 

Odd  yong  kapada'  bilang. 
Do-not  forget  this  in-the  telling.12 

Bilang  kabau  esok  jemah. 

Telling  of  the  Kabau  to-morrow  and  for-ever. 

Lalu  ka-bale  jo'oh  bale. 

Pass  to  the-HoW  and  drink  !3  in  the  Hall. 

Gerdah-gerdah  jo'oh  bale. 

Creak-creak  !  ive  drink  in  the  Hall. 

t 

Bale  panjang,  bale  besar 

The  Hall  that  is  long,  the  Hall  that  is  broad. 

1  "  Yam "  was  explained  as  =Mal.  broken  (or  brittle?)  the  borer  -  bee 
"  melentur  "  ("  to  sway  ")  and  "  lang-  develops  or  multiplies  ("jadi").  Orcan 
yam"  as  =  Mai.  "  melempei."  Prob-  it  mean  when  the  branches  are  broken, 
ably  they  are  the  same  word.  it  swells  up  ("kembang")  round  the 

2  "  Ktau  -  plakeau  "    was    also    ex-  break,  as  many  trees  do  ? 

plained  as  =  "  melentur,"  but  it  is  ob-  7  Possibly  in  allusion  to  some  belief 

viously  onomatopoeic  and  hence  should  connecting   swallows  with  the   leaves, 

perhaps   rather    be    rendered    "creak-  But     "layang"     may    also  =  "  mela- 

creak"  (the  noise  made  by  the  swaying).  yang,"  to  flutter  (Bes.  "  tohyt  "). 

3  =  Creaks  (?).  8    =  "  Wen  punai  "  in  Besisi." 

4  ="Lantok"  (Mai.  "  kulit ").  9    V.l.     "hayu"  =  Mal.     "hangat," 

5  I  can  make  no  sense  of  this,  unless  which  is  "  bhasa  halus,"  or  "polite," 
it  is  the  handle  of  the  chopper  that  is  for  "  hayong  "  in  the  "bhasa  kasar  " 
referred  to,  as  made  from  the  bark.  {i.e.  the  "vulgar  speech"). 

6  I  can  make  nothing  of  this.  "Kum-  10  Lit.  heat,  or  hot.  n  Lit.  Vomit, 
bang"  is  the  borer -bee.      If  right,   it  12  Or  "what  is  told  you." 

may  mean  that  where  its  branches  are  l3  Make  merry. 


//■  v/  OF  BES/SJ  663 

M.1I1  nyom  kr jjfl.1  bnl 

I      .plr  JfOUl  11  kill 

I ,  in. 'I  k<  dol  kr<  |.i'  I 1 

Men  ,;/;,/  wnincii   MTOrk    in  thf   I  I. ill. 
\  li   hill  .ill   111. 1I1   h(  noin. 

That  like  people  many. 

Tahun  jadi,  jadi  pleh. 

May  1!  A  ./  yeai  plenteou  plenteoui  are  fruil 

Nachai  pleh,  pleh  buan. 

1  hints,  the  fruil  of  tin-  Rambutan. 

Pleh  ni. in:':'.! -.,  pleh  diyan. 

Fruil  of  thi  Mangos  tin,  fruil  of  the  Durian. 

Nachar  pleh  kadui  hedgt. 
Eal  we  fruil  great  an  t  imall. 

Nachar  pleh  adik  kakak. 

Eat  we  fruit,  younger-sisters  and  elder. 

I  [ukah-leh  Mamal  Solong. 
Make-merry-then,  Mamat  the  Firstborn. 

rich  jadi  tihap  tahun. 

May  fruit  be  plenteous  everj  year, 


Gabang,      The  Gabang  Fruit 

He1  gul  hau  Mamat  Solong. 

Do  you  take  knife  Mamat  the  Firstborn. 

Gul  hau,  katoyt  pleh  gabang. 

Take  knife,  and  lop-off  the-fxvit  of-the  gabang. 

Pleh  gabang  proh  ha-teh. 

Fruit  ^/"-Mf-gabang  that  falls  to-ground. 

Katoyt  raweh,2  raweh  berjihai. 

Lop-off  the  twigs,  the  twigs  that  wave-round-and-round. 

Katoyt  he  dahan  tengah. 

Lop-off  you  the  branches  midmost. 

Katoyt  he  broyt  ha-teh. 

Lop-off  you  and  slip-down  3  to-ground. 

Kita'  pungut  pleh  gabang. 

We  collect  the-ixuxt  <?/*-//f6'-gabang. 

'On-leh  jaras  ambong. 

Bear-then4  the  basket,  and  the  back-basket. 

Ka'an  ha-dong  pleh  gabang-ha. 

Bear  them  homewards,  the  fruits  <?/-gabang-this. 

Tomong-leh  mah  henom, 
Call -then  people  many, 

Jon  nachar  muntet  mulih. 

And  give  to-eat  <z-little  ^-everyone. 


1  V.l.  "hi."  "ranting'').    "  Berjihai  "  =  "  berkirei." 

2  "  Raweh  "     (Bes.)  =  twigs    (Mai.  3  Lit.  pass.  4  ?  Put  them  (into). 


664  Al'l'EXDIX 


I);ili  nachar  pleh  gabang-nong, 

When  you  have  eaten  the  fruits  of  the  gabang-ti 

Lek-leh  he  Maniat  Solong, 

Rise-up  then,  you,  Mamat  //^-Firstborn, 

Jo'oh-leh  dalam  bale. 

And  make-merry-with-drinking  within  thc-lla.]]. 

Nakeh  hadat  datoh-he, 

That  was  the  custom  0/grandfathers-your, 

INI  ah  nyom  kabeh  bale. 

For  people  little  to-work-in  the-HnW. 

Hukah-leh  mah  lemol, 
Zb-please  the  men-folk,1 

Mah  kedol  dalam  bale. 

And  the  women-folk  within  ///<?- Hall. 

Mai-leh  'an  tsuk  jelbng. 
Come-hither-then  bring  your  hair  long. 

'An  hikat  lesoi  tsuk-he. 

Take  comb  smoothen  hair-your. 

Biar  lem-lem  tsuk-he. 

Let  it  be  good-good  2  hair  your. 

Biar  cheliau  mah  lemol. 
Let  see  it  the  men-folk. 

Gul  piok  gul  pren. 
Take  rice-pot  take  rice. 

Machin  pren  nachar  mah  henom. 
Cook  rice  as  food  for  people  many. 

Gul  banga'  beh  jumak. 

Take  pan  and  make,  cooked-meats. 

Nakeh  kabeh  mah  kedol. 

That  is  done  by  the  women-folk. 

Nachar-leh  he  ha-pren. 
Eat-then  you  of  the  rice. 

Nachar  ha  odd  lewar.3 

Eat  you-thexe,  do-not  3^-slow. 

U'ut  bihi  jetek-ka\ 

When  your  belly  is  full,  sleep  also. 

Jiertam  tenting.      The  Solitary  Bertam-palm. 

Bertam  tenung  di-Langkap  Berjunte.4 
7"^-Bertam  solitary  at  Langkap  Berjuntei. 

Bertam  tenung  di-hulu  Langat. 
7$<?-Bertam  solitary  in  Ulu  Langat. 


1  Lit.  like-*V-indeed  folk-men.  palm,  the  name  of  a  place  on  the  upper 

2  I.e.  beautiful.  Langat,  which  was  described  to  me  by 

3  "Lewar"  =  Mai.    "  lengah,"  =  the  Besisiasanold  burying-place  of  their 
"loiter  "  or  "dally."     "Ha"=  "this."  ancestors.      "Tenung"  was  explained 

4  L.B.  =the  overhanging  Langkap-  as  =  Mai.  "tunggal,"  "solitary." 


TEXT  OF  in 


1 1. hi"  iii<  nungkap  '  plch  l»  rtam. 

■  Bend  ov<  i  outward  i  tfu  fruil  I ■      ini. 

Kit.i'  gul  i.i'.ui  ha  di 

\\  i  take  and  beai  hom<  ward  i. 

Blah  |8n  aachai  muntll  mulih. 

//'//, it  spin,    ■  it  a  lntl' 

rich  lx  ii.uu  esok  j<  mah. 

I- 1 mi  ,    .  ':.■  r.<  ii.ihi  to  morrow  and  ato 

I'm  iiam  t< inung  .ii^s  gum 

Tlu-  B£rtam  solitary  upon  th    i 

Nakeh  tanda1  pleh  jadi. 

rii.it  is  the  sign  thai  Fruit  bvstf  A-  plentiful. 

Nakeh  tanda'  tahun  i 

Thai  is  tJki-si\  ii  <•/  plenty. 

I  lukah  nadoyt  k(  uon  In  nom-keh. 
Make  merry  all  children  tnany-that 

I  lukah  doyt  mah  di*bale. 

Make  merry  .ill  people  in-//.v-Ilall. 

Nfachar  doyt  bihi  u'ut-leh. 

Bat  them  up  utterly  till  gorged  is  your  belly-indeed. 

Lek  ai  !  -    Mamat  Alang, 

Rise  up,  ho  !    Mamat  ///, -Second-born, 

Mayin  jo'oh  dalam  hale. 

Make-JWtf-merry-with  drinking  within  tin  -I  lull. 

Bale  panjang,  bale  besar. 

7%*- Hall  that  is  long,  the-W^W  that  is  broad. 

Temong  mah  mayin  tari. 

Call  the  people  to-make-merry  with  dancing. 

Biar  sro  mayin  jo'oh. 

Let  them  know  ive  are  making-merry-with  drinking. 

Nakeh  tahun  henom-leh  pleh. 

That  is  a  year  #/"  abundant -indeed  fruit. 

J/Srbau.3      The  Merbau  Tree. 

Plak-plau  tebang  merbau. 
Crash-crash  ive  fell  the  merbau. 

Merbau  gadeng,  merbau  humbut. 

The  merbau  ivory-white,  the  merbau  of  the  palm-cabbage. 

Merbau  kunyet  kita'  'nak  bahan. 

The  merbau  <?/"  turmeric  we  are-going-to  split-up. 

Oi  tukang  chentong  4  tebang  merbau. 

Ho,  Maker  of  Back  -baskets,  fell  the  merbau. 

1  The     exact     meaning    of     "hang       Afzelia      coriacea  —  a        sea  -  shore 
menungkap "  is  not  clear.  variety.       The   second    is    unidentified 

2  V.i.  "  Yek  ai "?  O  brother.  at    present.  —  Ridley.       The     "mer- 

3  Three    kinds    of    "  merbau  "    are       bau,"  in  Besisi,   is  called   "  apel,"  or 
here  mentioned.      The  first  is  probably       "  a-pell." 

Afzelia    Palembanica,    and    the    third  4   "  Chentong  "      may     either      be 


666  APPENDIX 


Tingi  jelepak  tumbang  merbau. 
Loftily  rocks  (?)  and  falls  the  merbau. 

Bawa'  pahat,  bawa'  rimbas. 
Bring  chisel,  bring  planing-adze. 

Dah  bahan  siap  lante. 

Now  you  have  split  it,  make-ready  the  grating. 

Siap  dandan  siap  kurong. 

Make-ready  a  gallery,  make-ready  a  deckhouse. 

Siap  dayong  siap  kajang. 
Make-ready  oars,  make-ready  awning. 

Muat  gharu  muat  lilin. 
Load  eaglewood,  load  wax. 

Ka'on  kemiyan,  muat  damar. 
Load  benzoin,  load  resin. 

Muat  getah  getah  taban. 
Load  gutta,  gutta  taban. 

Tegak  l  tihang  blayar  ha-bawau. 
Set  up  your  mast  and  sail  to-the  sea. 

Blayar  menuju  bawau  Mambang.2 

Sail  pointing-towards  the  sea  of  the  Mambang. 

Labo'  sauh,  yal  ha-teh. 

Drop  yozir  anchor,  and  climb  to-land. 

Tukar  barang  di-dong-naha\ 
Barter  goods  at  the  houses  here. 

Pahu'  menuju  negri  Malaka'. 

Ottr  boat  points  to  the  land  of  Malacca. 

Laboh  sauh  di-negri  Malaka', 

We  let-fall  our  anchor  oft  the  land' of  Malacca, 

Tukar  lilin  tukar  damar. 

And  barter  our  wax,  barter  our  resin. 

Tukar  getah  3  tukar  kemiyan. 
Barter  our  gutta,  barter  our  benzoin. 

Ka'on4  bras  ka'on  garam. 

And  load  tip  with  husked-rice,  \02A-up-with  salt. 

Pahu  menuju  ka-negri  kita'.5 
Our  boat  points  to-land  of 'ours. 

Laboh  sauh  di-negri  kita', 
Let-fall  our  anchor  at-land  <?/"ours, 

Temong  kawan  kadui  hedet, 

And  call  our  comrades  great  and  small, 


the     man's     name,      or     taken     with  3  There  are  many  kinds  of  "  getah  "- 

"  tukang  "    it    may  —  Basket  -  maker —  producing      trees      in      the      country, 

probably  the  latter.      "  Chentong  "  or  "Getah    taban,"  for   instance  =  gutta- 

"sentong"  is  the  back-basket  used  for  percha,  and   "getah  susu  "  or  "getah 

carrying   jungle -produce   among  these  grip  "  =  caoutchouc. 

tribes.  4   "  Ka'on  "  =  Mai.  "  muat." 

1  =Bes.  "lek  tihang."  5"Ka-n£gri     kita'"  =  Bes.     "  ha - 

2  Doubtless   a    place-name   of   this  dung  he-pape  '." 
region.     Mai.  " Mambang "  =  "Deity." 


I  /'  Oh  BESISI  SONGS 


k.i'.ri    I, .11. in-;   lei    nun. ill    I. Mi'. 

to  hou  ■ 

|  <  •  1 1  Imi.ui:;  DQUntll   nuilili. 

".///.-  :  .:■  ■; I  I  .1   littl  "''• 

Pulai. l     The  Cork-tree. 

Pulai1  :il..i  kilt  kik  kik. 

The  l'ulai  waves  (?)  'creak  creak  creak' (?). 

Pangkal  tengit  tiup :1  angin. 

lis  base  1  M-Mf-blowing  wind. 

Rendang  rampak  birjurei  ' 

Spreading  oik/ thick  leaved  am/ dangling 

I  )aun  pulai  akar  pulai. 

Are  the  loaves  of  the  Pulai,  At*  roots  </M*  Pulai  (?). 

Jangkar  rentang  jangkar  puru 

Roots  that  penetrate,  roots  on-the-surface, 

Jangkar  purus  naga  mengunjam. 

Its  roots  0M-M«-surface  that  are  like  Dragons  contending. 

Buku'  pulai  s'usu  dara'.' 

The  buds  of  the  pulai  are  like  the  nipples  of  a  virgin. 

Daun  pulai  getah  susu. 

The  leaves  of  the  pulai  have  sap  like  milk. 

Batang  pulai  putih  panau.7 

T/itf  stem  of  the  Pulai  is  gray  and  mottled. 

Lembong8  simpulan  lembong  pulai. 

Like  the  peak  of  a  head-cloth  are  the  shoots  of  the  Pulai. 

Sanggul  (di)  hujong0  lembong  pulai. 

Like  scroll-work  tinial  are  the  shoots  of  the  Pulai. 

Tingi  chakih  10  poko'  pulai. 

High  are  the  buttresses  of  the  tree  Pulai. 

Bedok  bunga'  tabor  'lukut. 

Falls  its  blossom  like  scattered  rice-ends. 

Bedok  bunga'  hujan  rinyei.11 

Falls  its  blossom  like  rain  drizzling. 

1  Alstonia  scholaris,  Ridley.  dragons,"  and  which  form  the  Mai.  sub- 

2  =  Bes.  "tingkur."  stitute  for  cork,  being  used  largely  for 

3  =Bes.  "ka'&h  bua'."  fishing-floats. 

4  "  Berjurei,"  perhaps  from  its  long  ■  "Susu    dara'"  =  Bes.     "  tuh   mah 
pendulous  fruit,  or  from  its  aerial  roots  nyom." 

or  streamers.     "  Sengit  "  =  Bes.  "send-  7   "  Panau  "  =  Bes.  "  bechang  "  ;  its 

ing."       "  Rampak  "  =  Bes.   "jelakah"  bark  is  gray  (Ridley.)      In  Besisi  prose 

— ex.  "jelakah  rhak  tengko'-keh."  this  sentence  would  run  "  bechang-leh 

5  Prob.  =  penetrate  (the  ground)   as  lantok  long  tengko'-ke." 

distinct  from  its  streamers.      Cp.  Mai.  8    =  Mai.       "  puchok       sapu  -  tan- 
"ta'rentangpelurudi'lalang."  "Purus"  gan,"  i.e.  "shoot"  or  "peak." 
was  explained  as  =  Mai.  "  mempulor,"  9  T.e.  like  a  piece  of  terminal  scroll- 
referring  to  the  light-wood  root-clumps  work  such  as  is  used  in  Malay  carvings. 
that  project  above   the  surface  of  the  10    =Mal.  "banir." 
soil   under   the   tree    "like    struggling  n    =  Bes.  "  gemar  banchi." 


668  APPENDIX 


Nakeh  gclar  hadat  pulai. 

That  is  called  the  custom  of  the  Pulai-tree. 

Gul  biong  kagah  pulai. 

Take  your  hatchet  and  fell  the  Pulai-tree. 

Beh  pahu'  kayufa  Malaka'. 

Make  a  canoe  and  paddle  to-Malacca. 

Jual  niyu  dagang  barang. 
Sell  coconuts,  barter  goods. 

Bawa'  pulang  sampan  pulai. 

Take  home  your  canoe  of-Vv\vS.-wood. 

Tarek  ka-darat  odd  lek. 

Pull-zV-up  on-to-M^-shore,  do-not  let  it  get-o\d. 

Jual  ka-China'  mui  ratus  ringit.1 

Sell  it  to- ///^-Chinese  for  one  hundred  dollars. 

Lukah.      The  Fish-trap 

Ting  ting  hat 2  lukah  ginting, 

"Ting  ting  hat"  is  //z<?-fish-trap  small-waisted, 

Lukah  ginting  kabeh  Mamat  Alang. 

Fish-trap  small-waisted,  made-by  Mamat  M<?-Second-born. 

Tahan-leh  ddoh-gendeh-ki. 
Set-zV-then  z>z-//^-river-there. 

Ka-lep  kah,  kah  berisi  ketong.3 
Enter  it  fish,  fish  covered-with  scales. 

Kah  henom  kah  bage. 
Fish  many,  fish  various. 

Kah  sebarau,4  kah  tapah. 
77z<?-fish  Sebarau,  the-t\sh  Tapah. 

Kah  'ruan,  kah  bujor. 
The-dsh  Aruan,  the-hsh  Bujor. 

Kah  lembat,  kah  puyu'. 

The-fish  Lembat,  the-fish  Pepuyuh. 

Nakeh  lep  lukah  ginting. 

Those  enter  the- fish-trap  small-waisted. 

Ka'an  ha-dong  kawin  ha-dong. 

Bear  theni  homeward  and  throw  them  down-in-//z<?-hut. 

Siang-leh  kah  henom. 
Slice-up-then  fish  many. 

1  "  Ringgit."       In  Besisi  the  word  3   "  Ketong  "  =  scales  (of  fish). 

"  ting  "  is  sometimes  used  for  "  dollar."  4  Mai.  "ikan  aruan"  =  "kah  bakap" 

Probably  it  is  onomatopoeic  for  silver  (Besisi), 

coins  in  general.    Cp.  our  own  "chink."  "ikan    bujor  "  =  "  kah    bun- 

N.B.  The  small  dug-out  used  by  the  tok  "  {i.e.  round  fish), 

Besisi    is  called  by  them  "pahu  jong-  "ikan    lembat  "  =  "  kah   da- 

kong."  g°n>" 

2  "  Hit  "  =  small-waisted      like     a  "  ikan       pepuyuh  "  =  "kah 
wasp,  hour-glass-shaped.  cheret. :; 


TEX  T  OF  BESIS1 

Ben  jumah  mai  hin  tern  lem. ' 

Make  pra\  \  mm/  cool  refully. 

I  ).ili  machin  ti  mong  kawan. 

a  .  ■:  i. '.v  have  cooked  •'''.  "•■  i  .ill  , 

I   ii  D.u  li.ii  muntll  inulih. 

i  live  to  'it  .i  little  '  >ne. 

Bihi  u'ni  nachai  Icah  nong 

Lek  leh  .ii,  M.im.ii  Sol 

Rise-up  then,  li<»  !  M. un.it  ftb-Fintborn. 

Rentak  bale,  bale  panj 

Drum-upon  tke-HBll-Jloor,  the- 1  hill  that  u  l 

Rentak  bale  bale  besar. 

Drum  on  tht  -llaii-//(v,  Mi-Hall  that  u  broad. 

I  Ink. ih  ch£liau  adik  kakak. 

They  like  to  look-on,  little-sisters  and  elder-sisters. 

N.ikeh  bangsa'  lukah  ginting, 

That  is  /Atf-way-of  ///<•- tish- trap  small-waisted. 


Hum.      Children' 's  Bathu 

limn  mah  h&det,  hum  'gi. 
Bathe  people  little,  bathe-go. 

Biar  sejuk,3  odd  panas. 
Let  be  cool  do-not  ta'-hot. 

Biar  chuchf  kret-he. 
Let  be  clean  body-your. 

Gosok  4  lem-lem  kret-he. 
Rub  very -cai*e fully  body-your. 

Odd  dakf  kret-he. 

Do-not  leave  impurities  on  body-your. 

Vut  ha-dong  gul  hikat. 

Return  homewards  and  take  your  comb. 

Gul  hikat,  hikat  tsuk-he. 

Take  your  comb  and  comb  hair-your. 

Biar  lichau,  biar  linyang. 

Let  it-be  smooth,  let  it  be  glossy. 

Hadat  hum  mah  hedet. 

Such  is  ///t'-custom  A?-bathe  people  little. 

Mah  nyom  chok  ha-bale. 

People  young  proceed  to-the-HaU. 

Gerdak-gerdak  bunyi'  bale, 
'Creak-creak'  is  the-noise  of  the  Hall, 


1  Lit.  well-well.  Mai.     "panas"    =    Bes.      ';rayong" 

2  Bes.     "  nong  "  =   "  hinong  "    =  (of  the   body,    as  well   as   of  the  sun, 
Mai.  "tadi."  etc.). 

3  Mai.     "  sejuk  "  =  Bes.    "  teket  "  ;  4  Mai.  "  Gosok  "  =  Bes.  "  gdsdyt." 


670  APPENDIX 


Bale  panjang  bale  besar. 

The-l Iall  Ma/  u  long,  M^-IIall  that  is  broad. 

Mah  k<  dol  hukah  kayi'. 
Women-folk  like  to-see. 

Mah  nyom  dalam  bale. 
People  little  within  the-HdW. 

Jadi  pleh,  tahun  jadi. 

Plentiful  be  fruits,  year  be  plentiful. 

Jadi  pleh  pleh  bage. 

Plentiful  be  fruits,  fruits  various. 

Jadi  pleh  tihap  are'.1 
Plentiful  be  fruit  every  day. 

Jadi  pleh  tihap  bulan. 
Plentiful  be  fruit  every  month. 

Jadi  pleh  tihap  tahun. 
Plentiful  be  fruit  every  year. 

Odo  mungkir  pada  janji. 

Do-not  go-back  upon  what  is  promised. 

Hadat  surat  dalam  buku', 

7^<r-customs  that  are  written  within  M<?-book. 

Pleh  .   .   .    Pleh,  pleh,  pleh,  pleh. 
Fruit  .   .    .    Fruit,  fruit,  fruit,  fruit. 

Hadat  orang  ber-utan, 

This  is  //^-custom  0/ people  a-jungling, 

Hadat  orang  main  jo'oh. 

77/tf-custom  <?/-people  that  make-merry  with  drinking. 


Bangkong.      The  Bangkong  Fruit.  2 

Hong  kau  barah  hong  ! 
Hong  kau  barah  hong  ! 

Hong  merimpa'  bangkong. 
Hong — we  pluck  //^-bangkong. 

Kong  kau  Bapai  Tunang. 

Kong — reach  (?)-out,  Father  Tunang. 

Nang  kau  Bapai  Sayang. 

Nang — reach -out,  Father  Sayang. 

Yang  kau  Bapai  Odong. 

Yang — reach-out,  Father  Odong. 

Dong  merimpa'  bangkong. 
Dong — we  pluck  //i<?-bangkong. 

Kong  bangkong  kudes.3 
Kong — //^-bangkong  kudes. 

Kong,  bangkong  katel.4 
Kong — the  bangkong  katel. 


1  Mai.  "  tiap  "  (or  "  tihap  "  )  =  Bes.  is  usually  repeated  at  beginning  of  the 
"  ha'in " — ex.     "ha'-in     are',     ha-in  next. 

bulan,"  etc.  3  A   small  variety   of  "bangkong" 

2  A  wild  "chempedak."     It  will  be  or  wild  "chempedak." 

seen  that  the  last  syllable  of  each  line  4  Smaller  than  the  "  b.  kudes." 


//■  XT  <>/■  /■'/   USJ     i    ■ 

oh.1 

I  "li. 

K"!ij;    Imii(;1 •    p.il.is.* 

k"ii  p.il.is. 

Chok  B  ip  u  I  ' 

i  ather  ( Idong, 

i Ihok  I',  apai  Tun 
< .(«.  <  l  Fathei  Tun 

( Ihok  leh  w  ak  Solon] 
( k>i  ( '  Father  Soli 

Chok  m  rimpa'  bangk< 

ami  pluck  the  bangkong. 

Kom  bangkong  dah. 

( lot  t  '.<■  bangkong  you  have. 

I  Ir  ka'an  ha-dong. 

>u  beat  them  homewards. 

T(  mong  Mak  Tunang, 
And  c$\\  to  Mother  Tunang, 

Kom  midas  '  bangkong, 

To  gel  quarter**?  the  bangkong, 

i  'iiil  piok  gompong,' 

And  fo-take  ///«'-pot  that's  chipped, 

Nakeh  mo'oh  bangkong. 

That  is  for-boiling  the  bangkong. 

Ring  subang  biring. 

FoUow-with  ///^-leaf-rings,6  0  follow. 

Iring  ha-dong  iring. 
Follow  home,  0  follow. 

Iring  kawan  Gentoi. 
Follow,  friend  Gentoi. 

Rai  subang  birai. 

Wave  your  leaf-rings,  wave  them. 

Rai  *ku  mengirai. 
/  wave,  I  wave  them. 

*Ku  kirai  mayang  muntet. 
1  wave  palm-blossom  a-little. 

Sih  kakom  tulasih. 
Basil,  plant  holy- Basil. 


1   "  Mengoh  "    or    "  mengdh,"    the       (cp.  "  sumbing  ")  =  chipped,  of  a  pot. 
large  variety.  ■  This   refers   to   the    leaf-rin^s    or 


-  About  same  size  as  (3),  but  long-  artificial  nooses  of  palm-leaf  which  are 

shaped.  made  up  into  bunches  or    tassels  and 

3  Sic:  no  doubt   "Sayang"  should  fastened    to    the   girdle    ("  kabok    ha- 
be  read  here,  as  above.  u'ut  ")  and  headbands,   or    merely  in- 

4  V.l.      "  tongka,"      which  =  Mai.  serted  in  them,  in  which  case  they  are 
"  tetak,  kluarkan  biji-nya."  called   (in    Bes.)    "mayang   sikih  "   or 

5  "  Gompong  "  =  Mai.    "sompong"  '*  sikis  "  =  Mai.  -'sisip." 


672  APPENDIX 


Kakom  di-ruang  batang. 
Plant  it  inW-cranny  of-a-u 

Badan  tidak  kasa', 

If  the  Body  ir-not  capable, 

S;i'  kara'  mulih.1 
Able,  it  remains  alone. 

Lih  nama'  alb, 
Lone,  what  else, 

Lb  hadat  Datoh, 

Else  ?  'Tis  the  custom  of  our  grandfathers, 

Toh  mah  nyom, 

Grandfathers,  for  people  young, 

Nyom  kreja'  bale. 

Young,  /<?-work  in  the  Hall. 

Lai  kmol  kcdol, 

Hall,  both  men  and  women, 

Dol  hadat  Datoh. 

Women,  'tis  the  custom  of  our  grandfathers. 

Toh  mak  Kalih. 

Grandfathers,  and  Mother  Kalis. 

Mak  kalih  pande. 
Mother  Kalis  is  clever. 

De  mak  kalih, 

Clever  is  Mother  Kalis, 

Lih  pande  ngot, 
Kalis,  and  clever  not, 

Ngot  mak  Geboi, 

Not  (clever)  is  Mother  Geboi, 

Boi  kreja'  bale. 

GCboi,  tf^-working  in-//z£-Hall. 

Le  nama'  alb, 
Hall,  what  else, 

Lb  mah  hukah, 
Else  ?     People  like, 

Hukah  pleh  jadi. 
Like  fruits  plentiful. 

Di  tahun  reja'.2 

Plentiful,  a  year  0/"  abundance. 

Reja'  mah  ht-nom. 

Abundance,  (since  ?)  people  are  many. 

Henom  jadi  b§. 

Many,  plenteous-^  rice. 

Be  jadi  pleh. 

Rice,  ^.'-plenteous  fruit. 


1  Or"genar'   (Bes.)  =  alone.  jadi";     so    that    this   interpretation  is 

2  Here  again  "  rejak  "  was  explained       doubtless  right;  and  perhaps  "rejak" 
as  a  good  or  fruitful  year  =  Mai.  "tahun       in  Besisi  =  Mal.  "jadi"  in  all  senses. 


//  XT  OF  /•'/•  ■/.'•/ 

I 'l.  h  i 

Fruit .  w   tr<  td  a*<4  tramp, 

i i      i  bale, 

I  i  imp,   ,ui, i  .Ii  urn  on  .'■':,■    I  I. ill  //, 

I .    I. mi     I.  rl 

1 1. ill.  il i  I.  1 1 .i in . 

i    m  I"  1 1 1 in  beh| 

B    i  Inn,   ..I    t>  it.nn.    I 

Bi  I)  ii. nn. i'  aid, 
Do  \\  li.it  shall  we  <  I 

i     ik  i<  in. ih  jadi, 

I I  i  ni'  i  row  and  alwayi  be  plentcou  i, 
l  >i  |adi  pleh. 

Plenteous,  be  plenteous  fruit 

ii 

Song  oi    mi  Sick  Bov 

A  B/risi  Song  ["&  oi  "  or  "  hiei") 

Chfrabong  bungi'  i  mpei, 

Swelll  the  blossom  of  the  Haru  ^//vr, 

Bi  tasap  bui  so'. 

And  thick  the  blossom  of  the  Tdmbusu. 

I  Klo  k£nang  alo,  gadeh,  ai  ! 
Do-not  care  further  granny,  oh  ! 

Kawen-leh,  kawen  dah. 

Throw  it  down — thrown-down  it  is. 

<  Mo  nodor'2  alo,  gadeh,  ai  ! 

Do-not  mention  it  further,  granny,  oh  ! 

Kara'  tempok  oyn,  gadeh,  ai  ! 
Remains  calyx  mine,  granny,  oh  ! 

Kara'  til  jare'  oyn,  gadeh,  ai  ! 

Remain  prints  0/"  fingers  mine,  granny,  oh  ! 

Kara'  til  jong  oyn,  gadeh,  ai  ! 

Remain  prints  of  feet  mine,  granny,  oh  ! 

Kara'  bilang  seoi  oyn,  gadeh,  ai  ! 
Remains  to-tell  song  mine,  granny,  oh  ! 

Chong  kenang  gres  oyn,  gadeh,  ai  ! 

For  the  hills  yearns  heart  mine,  granny,  oh 

Miong  seoi  oyn  di-dong,3  gadeh,  ai  ! 
Hear  song  mine  in-Mtf-house,  granny,  oh  ! 

Lek  chok,  gadeh,  bungkus  ha-pren, 

/  arise  and  go,  granny,  wrap  up-//fo-rice, 

Oyn  chok  men,  'gar  nCchit  chlm. 
I  go  to  the  forest,  will  snare  birds. 

1  Or  "Bharu"  =  "new."  2  "  Nodor  "  =  Mai.  "monitor." 

3  Or  "  hru-dong." 

VOL.  I  2  X 


674  APPENDIX 

Nechit  chim  bekom  ngot,  gadeh,  ai  ! 
Snaring  birds  /  get  not,  granny,  oh  ! 

Odo  harap-leh,  gadeh,  ai  ! 
Do-not  hope-indeed,  granny,  oh  ! 

Kenon  hun  ngot  yal  kulong. 

Your  child  is  strong  not  to  climb  up-aloft. 

Klet  sentong  chong  ketok-ha,  gadeh,  ai ! 

/bear  a  back-basket,  but  its  lashings  are  broken-these,  granny,  oh  ! 

'An  chim  tates,  ayut  ha-dong. 

/  pick-up  a  bird  hornbill,  and  return  towards-hut. 

Kajoh  neneh  chim  tates,  gadeh,  ai  ! 

Heavy  indeed  is  the  bird  hornbill,  granny,  oh  ! 

'Dah  yut,  machin-leh  chim  tates,  gadeh,  ai  ! 

/have  return^,  cook-then  the  bird  hornbill,  granny,  oh  ! 

Kachar-leh  chim  tates,  gadeh,  ai  ! 
Eat-then  the  bird  hornbill,  granny,  oh  ! 

Jon  kachar  muntet  mulih. 

Give  to-eat  a-little  to  everybody. 

Odo  punan  chim  tates-ha,  gadeh,  ai  ! 

Do-not  go-craving-for  the  bird  hornbill-this,  granny,  oh  ! 

Kachar-leh  chim  tates,  gadeh,  ai  ! 

But  eat-then  the  bird  hornbill,  granny,  oh  ! 

Adik,  kakak,  ipar,  duai. 

Little-sisters,  elder-sisters,  brothers-in-law,  and  sisters-in-law  (?) 

Improvised  Besisi  Song  of  the  Hunting  of  the  Coconut  Monkey. 

Chok-leh  meri  hinong, 
Go-then  to  the  forest  now. 

An  blau  mui  tekah,1 
Take  blowpipe  one  stem, 

'Lok2  mui,  damak  tujuh  tekah, 
Quiver  one,  darts  seven  stem, 

Ha-nalo  kenon  ka'. 

To-shoot  the  young  of  the  coconut-monkey. 

Kaloh  dah,  kom  ha-gres, 
Shot  is-it,  got  to-the-he&rt, 

Bedok  ha-teh  dah  ; 
Fallow  to-the-esath  is  it, 

Toyt  chong,  bok  kenon  ka', 

Cut  a  creeper,  bind  the  young  of  the  monkey, 

Bok  klet  ha-chelofi,  an  yut  ha-dong. 

Bind  and  carry  on-M<?-back,  bear  it  return  to-the -house. 

Nimul  ha-dong,  kokos3-leh  . 
Reach  home,  remove-zV.r-fur-then. 

1  Numeral    coefficient  =  Mai.     "  ba-  "  buangbulu  "  to  remove  the  fur,  prob- 
tang."  ably  in  part   at  least  by  singeing,  and 

2  =Bes.  "  jelok."  then  rubbing  the  skin  with  ashes  (Mai. 

3  Explained  as  =  Mai.    "abu-i"    or  "  abu  ").     Ka'=  "  kok  "  (Mai.  b'ro'). 


/'/■  \ '/■  OF  />/  S/SJ 

I  ».'h  koko  .  chok  lantok '  kiah  ( hi 
l  )ont  n  up  ivi        fur,  poke  ofl 

Kontok  ■'  leh,  I  i  ■  in  ii  i  m  ih  muntl '  mulih.. 
Quartet  then  an  t  give  to  people  i  little  to  «  ach< 

I*,  i  |  iufl    D      1 1 1 <. - i  li.i. 

I  >0  DOl  infill   ll. 

Bo*  tenglep  :  k&paj  i  kubi,  b  Ll  bi , 

I  >u  in. i  insert  fruil  m  I.  lubi  <<>  poi  toned  .'  be% 

I.  ii  ■!  »p  |  Ion  •  I  ulim,  tenglep  kunyit,  tenglep  lift', 

lnscit   ll  Lulhn,   insert   tm  in-,  ric,  in  i 

Tenglep  plong  karong,  tenglep  lempar,  ten  'in,1 

Insert  le  ivei  of  the  "  k<  lal  "to  in.  ' 

<  iul  chongkhe'  nasi',  chongkoh  jumah  ha-  bangku.' 

Take  a  ipoon  for  boiled-rice,  icoop  the  gravy  into  a  palm-theath  vessel. 

\     hax  ramai  muntst  mulih. 

Eat  all-together,  a-little  each-one. 

I  >do  punan  kret  ka'-m 

Do-not  go-craving-for  the  body  <ymonkey-yoncler. 

Iiru  dah  n:\cliar,  lek  gul  nnulut, 
Finished  luive  eating,  rise  get  cigarettes, 

liru  nnulut,  kam-leh  nong, 

Finished  cigarettes,  repose-then  now, 

Bru  kam,  jetek-leh. 
Finished  repose,  sleep-then. 

Besisi  Description  of  a  Storm. 

Luhh-ha,c  duh  lep-lep  7  ddo-gendeh 

The  storm  is  here,  run  and  enter-upon  the  river  ; 

Mudik  sen-doo,  tahan  ngot  buah-ha, 

Ascend  to  the  headwaters,  endure  not  gale-this  ; 

Kedek  8  luhh,  are'  garong9-ha, 

Rages  the  storm,  the  day  thunders-here, 

Lindong  telok-ha. 
Shelter  we  in  cove  this. 


Besisi  Description  of  Padi  (Rice)  Planting10 

Chok  meri  oi  !  menebas  leba'  hinong, 

Go  to  the  jungle,  ho  !  to-clear  your  plantation  now, 

1  Mai.  "  tikamkan  kulit."  palm). 

2  Mai.  "bantai."  '    6  Also  " seluhh "  =  Mai.  "ribut." 

3  Mai.  "  masokkam  "  or  "buboh."  7  Reduplication  of  "  lep  "  =  "to 
The  injunction  refers  to  the  Besisi  enter,"  Mai.  "  masok."  By  fleeing 
superstitious  prejudice  against  eating  upstream  they  escape  the  worst  of  the 
acid  fruits  with  animals  killed  by  storm,  which  is  imagined  as  taking 
poisoned  darts.  place  near  the  river-mouth. 

4  Prob.  =Mal.  "  kasom,"  for  which  8  Qu.  meaning  of  "  kedek." 
see  Ridley's  List.  9  "  Garong  "  =  "  thunder. ' 

5  Mai.  "  upih  "  (of  nibong  or  other  10  See  pp.  361,  362,  supra. 


676  APPENDIX 


Be' x  dV  jos,  be' l  di'  gomo'  ; 

Rice  work  early,  rice  make  fruitful  ; 

Jdjos  jdmu,2  dah  'chin  tuht  kah. 

Quick-quick  dry  the-felled-lrees,  done  cooked  burn  also. 

Tabu  3  be',  petom  yet,  petom  ba>'s, 
Sow  rice,  plant  yams,  plant  sugarcane, 

Petom  hentok,  kachek  dung,  tcduh  mtngubah. 

Plant  bananas,  fix  the  piles  of  a  hut,  for  shelter  when  planting-out. 

Hendum  be',  be' *  tok  hinong, 

When  ripe  the  rice,  the  rice  reap  immediately, 

Nisam  payah  nachar,  be'  lepat 

Else  to-morrow  hard  to-feed  ;  the  rice  will  rot. 

Odd  biar  be'-ha,  tdk  be'  ddyt-doyt. 

Do-not  neglect  rice-this,  reap  the  rice  finished-finished. 

Besisi  Courtship:  an  Imaginary  Dialogue.4 

M.   He        kagar    ha-6yn,  ai  ? 
Do  you     long     for- me,  eh  ? 
F.    Nama'     'to' ?  dyn    jet     kid,    mani  emboh-ho? 

What  is  that  ?  I  follow  also,  how  should  I  be  unwilling. 
M.    Oyn  kagar  kid. 

I     \ong-for  you  too. 
F.    Mani  emboh-ho  ?       lemol    kabeh,   dyn      jet     kid ;    nama' 

How  should  I  be  unwilling  ?  the  man        acts         I     follow  also  ;    because 
dyn  kedol,  dyn     jet     kah. 

I     am  a  woman,    I  follow   too. 

M.   'Dah  neneh,  neneh-leh ;  dyn  ikun  gendek-ah,  laheh 

Is  that  true?  True-be-it  ;     I     will  be  your  father  and  mother,  clear  it 

'dah. 
is. 

F.   Nama'       'to'?    dyn  jet  kid,  mui    hare'-d,         lek     ngot     dah. 

What  is  that  ?     I     will  follow  you  too,  one  day  indeed  long(er)  not  it  is. 
M.   Nakeh    lek  oyn-ha. 
That    long    I   too. 
F.     He  garang  chongkak         langah  bage'  hong  'dah  nisam 

If  you  are    rude       fierce      and  coarse    like  hornet,  when-it-is  to-morrow  / 
tahan  ngot        lek-d ;  beh  dah  dyn,       nisam  tahan  ngot. 

endure  not    long  indeed  ;  done  with  it  have     I,     to-morrow  /  endure  not. 

[Here  the  betel-box  (an  evidence  of  contract  with  Malays  ?)  is  pushed  across, 
and  the  man  makes  his  speech.]5 

M.   Hak  he,  dyn  kagar  telong  tempat  chambai,  dyn  telong  kenon-kuda'r 

Thing    of  you  (?),    I    desire  to-find      a  betel-box,        I      seek  a        filly, 
'gar  kom      ;    dyn    telong     pahu,  hap        tihang,     dyn  ganti 

/  wish  to   have  it ;       I        seek  a    boat,   if  it  has-no       mast,         I   will  provide 

1  Note  that  the  object   be' ("rice,"       riage    formula   which    follows    it,    see 
Mai.    "padi,")   precedes  the  verb,  an       vol.  ii.  p.  69  et  sea. 

unusual  construction.  5  It  would  seem  from  the  next  ver- 

2  Or  "jemur."  3  Or  "  tabur."       sion  that  what  follows  is  addressed  to 
4  As  to  this  dialogue  and  the  mar-       the  girl's  parents. 


BESISJ  Bl  ///   R/Tl 

tins                           hap           l.i'  Dtl            la) 

/     in. i    ,         it    it      hi .  in.            ill  I                    provide     '/     sail,       I 

teiong        salami'          bawau  li.i,  l.i. in     ngot,  n.iii-i     niiiiui    i  .1  do! 

I  tit*  l<  ngth  .1  i!  not  |  here  /                    ntry 

In-,      dah    pioi           bungi',  pioi  ml'              ban 

your,   I »- 1  v  it    flic    Rower,     imcll   //        tin-  length  ,>/       .<-a     this.       'I  mil   /  am 

chol  .ill.  ii  In  dah      bunga*  ah,      an  pleh 

this,    this    is///,'  flow*  /        take  the    fruil     ^/     tin 

tiiiiun  ;  d;ih  lili.i'     bau'  Lin  |e1      kl6,  Kl' 

cucumbei  :  ha    rt  iched  tkt  scent  o/thi  flowei   to  nae,     I    follow   t"",  /p.- 
.ili  ;      .I'n  hap  6yn        p|,!  pepiong    ;  hip    p  pi  ;;ar 

up;    if  desire  nol    I    lo*smell  it  I  should  havewcuAi  it\  Dot  '  smelling  I  >' 

•ilih-kih,  ir      pakmn         h.i  byn 

as-much-as-possible-that,  desiring  you-ind<  ring 

kom  niui   1. ul. m       kom      DgOt,        yut        *  liak  kn 

el  if  in   one  month  /  gel  it  not,  /  return  not-yel  ;  this  thing        /  d 
at. is    he. 
from  you. 

The  following  is  a  variant  of  the  latter  pan  of  the  foregoing  dial*  ich  is 

supposed  to  be  made  by  a  man  to  parents  of  his  beloved. 
[After  pushing  the  betel-stand  towards  them,  say]  : — 

II  tk  -  he',  oyn  handak  teiong,  tempat  sirih. 
Property  of  yont  I  desire  to-seek,  a-stand-for  betel. 

Oyn  tfilong  kenon  kuda',  'gar  sabulih  kom-nya. 

I  am-seeking  the  young  of  a  horse,  /desire  very-much  to-get  it. 

i  >yn  t  long  pahu'. 
I  am-seeking  a  boat, 

Hap  tihang,  oyn  ganti  tlhang, 

If  it  have-no  mast,  I  will  provide  a  mast, 

Hap  layar,  oyn  ganti  layar. 

If  it  have  no  sail,  I  will  provide  a  sail. 

Oyn  teiong  sa-lama'  laut-ha,  kom  ngot. 
I  seek  it  as-far-as  sea-this,  but  got-it  not. 

Naha  tiba'  dol-he',  dah  piong  bunga'  mui  jong.3 

Now  (?)  I  reach  country-your,  have  smelt  blossom  one  foot. 

Piong  sa-lama'  bawau -ha. 
/  smelt  it  as-far-as  sea-this. 

Jan  dah,  chok  salami.'  ha-ah. 

Weary  am  /  with-roaming  as-far-as  this-indeed. 

Naha  dah  bunga' -ah. 
This  is  blossom-indeed. 

Dah  tiba'  bau  bunga'  ha-6yn,  oyn  turut. 

Has  reached  scent  <?/"  blossom  to-me,  I  follow  it. 

Klek-ah,  klek  dah-leh. 

Pick-//-up,  /-picked -//-up  have-then. 

1  I.e.  "  Though  I  had  desired  not  to       explained  to  me  as  referring  to  the  girl 
smell  it,    I   should  have  smelt  it,  and       ("kenon"). 

not  smelling  it,  I  desire  to  smell  it  as  3   "  Mui    jong     (one     foot)  "     is     a 

much  as  possible."  numeral  coefficient. 

2  "Hak"  =  Mal.  "  hak  "  (property), 


678 


APPENDIX 


Agar1  hap  (iyn  pcpiong,  dah  pcpiong. 

//"wanted  not-at-all  I  to-smell  it,  I  should  have  smelt  it. 

I  lap  pcpiong  agar  sabulih-ki  ;  minta'  pa-kom  2  ha-oyn,  atas  he-6. 
Not  smelling  /  want  as-much-as-possible  ;   /  ask  to-possess  it  for-myself,   from 
you-indeed. 

Agar  sabulih,  sabulan  bclum  bulih,  yut  wa. 

/  want  it  very-much,  in  one-month  not-yet  got,  /  return  not-yet. 

'Nak  bcr-hajab  atas  he. 

/  want  to-get-my-desire  from  you. 


Besisi  Marriage  Ceremony. 


The  following  catechising  of  the 
was  carried  on  by  the  Pcnghulu  Balei 

P.   Terbli  pingan  mangko  ? 


B. 

Terbli. 

P. 
B. 

Terbli  piok  banga'  ? 
Terbli. 

P. 

Terbli  hendi  ? 

B. 

Terbli. 

P. 

Terbli  hau  ? 

B. 

Terbli. 

P. 
B. 

Ttrbli  biong  ? 
Terbli. 

P. 
B. 

Kabeh  dung? 
Kabeh. 

P. 
B. 

Kabeh  tanga'  ? 
Kabeh. 

P. 

Kabeh  leba'  ? 

B. 

Kabeh. 

P. 

Kabeh  sendoh  ? 

B. 

Kabeh. 

P. 

Kabeh  timba;  ? 

B. 

Kabeh. 

P. 
B. 

Petom  yet  ? 
Petom. 

P. 

Petom  bays  ? 

B. 

Petom. 

P. 

Petom  be'  ? 

B. 

Petom. 

P. 

Petom  hentok  ? 

B. 

Petom. 

P. 
B. 

Kahun  gah  ? 
Kahun. 

P. 
B. 

Kahun  yal  pi  eh  ? 
Kahun. 

Batin  (acting  on  behalf  of  the  bridegroom) 
(acting  on  behalf  of  the  bride). 

Have-you-bought  [lit.  Bought  ?)  plates 
and  cups  ? 

I  have  [lit.  Bought). 

Have  you  bought  pots  and  pans? 

I  have. 

Have  you  bought  clothing  ? 

I  have. 

Have  you  bought  chopper  ? 

I  have. 

Have  you  bought  hatchet  ? 

I  have. 

Have  you  built  {lit.  Built  ?)  house  ? 

I  have. 

Have  you  made  {lit.  Made  ?)  steps  ? 

I  have. 

Have  you  made  clearing  {i.e.  for  a  planta- 
tion) ? 

I  have. 

Have  you  made  spoon  (of  wood)  ? 

I  have. 

Have  you  made  water-bucket  ? 

I  have. 

Have  you  planted  {lit.  Planted  ?)  yams  ? 

I  have. 

Have  you  planted  sugar-cane  ? 

I  have. 

Have  you  planted  rice  ? 

I  have. 

Have  you  planted  bananas  ? 

I  have. 

Can  fell  (trees)  ? 

I  can. 

Can  climb -for  fruit  ? 

I  can. 


1  "Agar"  appears  to  be  here  a 
shorter  form  of  "kagar,"  which  is 
frequently  abbreviated  to  "gar,"  the 
"  ka"  being  merely  the  verbal  prefix. 

2  "Pakom"  or  "  pa-kom  "  =  Mai. 


"men-dapat."  I  should  have  ex- 
pected "ka-kom,"  but  "pakom"  is 
what  was  given  me.  The  exact  mean- 
ing of  these  last  sentences  is  difficult, 
but  I  believe  it  to  be  as  given  above. 


BESISJ  MARRIAGE   RITl 

/'.    K.iliun  a. ill ■  '  mi  (w nil  the  blow  pip 

/>'.     K.iliun.  I   i   mi 

/'.   Kabeh  1 1 1 1 1 . !  1 1 1  ■  i )..  you  imol  <■  '  [lit,  UM 

/•'.    K.ilich.  I  dOi 

/'.  Klong  ke*poh  v 'I'll  t '  I'  Ind  egg  ■   ^turtle? 

/>".  T(  ! I  find. 

/'.  H61  ?  Trw 

/.'.  Nahol  i  rue. 

( 'I ••.  Singapui  L'  Malaka', 

.  /  hill  in  Singapore  or  Malai 

I'ulau  Pinang  oyn  l>li. 

Or  in  thi'  Isle  oj  Pi  oang  would  I  buy. 

Chong  S  i  ingoi  Peralc  8yn  bli. 

A  hill  in  Si  langoi  ot  Perak  would  1  buy. 

Naha-k&h  ki  oon  tnah. 
This-the-more  the  child  of  &  man. 

/'.   Nahol  tempa'  krep  ? 

True,  fall»upon your  body?* 

/>'.    (  >do  ki  non  mail. 

.ak  not  of  the  child  gfa  man. 

Sikah  lotong  aid  oyn  t£long, 

Chikah  and  lotong-monkeys  even  I  seek, 

Aid  oyn  kakom. 
Even  1  capture. 

Naha-kah  kenon  mah. 
This-the-more  the  child  of  a  man. 

P.    Pun  kledek  pun. 

?  sweet-potatoes         ? 

Tela'  tanaman  Jakun. 

Sweet-potatoes  ^r^-planted  <^-//^-Jakun. 

Hoi  kata'  Batin,  Jinang,  Jukrah. 

"True,"  says  the  Batin,  Jinang  and  Jukrah. 

Mali  horoh  mah  nyom. 

By  men  old  and  men  young. 

Killing  busut  kliling. 

Around  the  mound  and  round  again. 

Besisi  Proverbs. 

(i)   Dah  jon  ;  hap  telong. 

If  yon  have,  give  ;  if  yon  have  not,  seek. 

(2)  Bujam  'mpai  an  meri, 

A  wallet  new  take  to  the  jungle, 

Bujam  If  kara'  ha-dung. 
A  wallet  old  leave  at-home. 

1  Or  "yahh."  This  is  the  most  binding  oath  known 

2  Or  "  kret  "  ;   the  expression  really       to  the  Besisi. 
means,  "  So  may  a  tree  fall  upon  you." 


68o 


APPENDIX 


(3)  Seh  Ulong,  bed  ok  bat, 

If  a  thing  is  lost,  seek  it ;   if  fallen,  pick  it  up, 

Chid  fit  kacham,  k£tok  bok,1 

If  spilt,  dig  it  up  (?)  ;   if  snapped,  bind  it. 


Besisi  Propitiatory  Address  to  the  Enemies  of  the  Padi  (Rice), 

before  the  padi-feast.2 


Santap  jong  lintar,3 
Santap-leh  kane', 
Santap-leh  jisek,4 
Santap-leh  royt,5 
Santap-leh  kapinding, 
Santap-leh  hulat, 
Santap-leh  jangau,G 
Santap-leh  rusa', 
Santap-leh  ketur, 
Santap  he  solong7  tahun, 
Oyn  kachar  wa, 
Naha' 8  nachar  are'. 


Partake,  0  Round-Foot, 

Partake,  0  rats, 

Partake,  0  Blight, 

Partake,  0  Finches, 

Partake,  0  Stink -bugs, 

Partake,  0  Caterpillars, 

Partake,  O  Green-fly, 

Partake,  0  Deer, 

Partake,  0  Wild -Boars, 

Partake  ye  ^/"eldest-born  of-the-year. 

I  eat  not-yet, 

This  eat  immediately. 


Fragment  of  Besisi  Invocation.9 

H61 10  mui  'mbar  empe  'mpat, 
True,  one,  two,  three,  four, 

H61  lima'  anam  tujoh. 
True,  rive,  six,  seven. 

Melelap  sama'  subang  gading.11 
Surround  with  nooses  of  ivory  {colour). 

Melelap  sama'  subang  tinjong. 
Surround  with  nooses  ring-shaped. 

Legeng  beh  jelong  chong  dendan. 

Stretch  make  long  the  creeper  of  decoration. 

Legang  beh  jelong  chong  ki'ip.12 
Stretch  make  long  feet  of  centipedes. 

Bilang  limau  lilang. 
Tell-of  the  limes  wax-like. 


1  V.  infra,  p.  685,  where  some  of 
these  phrases  reappear  in  a  different 
order. 

2  As  to  this  charm,  see  p.  363, 
supra. 

3  I.e.  the  elephant. 

4  A  kind  of  insect,  explained  as  = 
Mai.  "benah." 

5  =Mal.  "pipit." 

6  =Mal.  "pianggang." 

7  I.e.  the  food -offerings. 

8  Lit.  this.  This  line  should  mean, 
"  I  am  just  about  to  eat." 

9  This    invocation    is    used    at    the 


"  bersawei  "  ceremony  for  the  relief  of 
sick  persons,  at  which  the  medicine- 
man invokes  and  is  possessed  by  spirits. 
See  vol.  ii.  p.  306  et  seq. 

10  "H61"  =  "true,"    "approved," 
"  sanctioned." 

11  "Subang"  is  explained  as  de- 
scriptive of  the  decoration  of  the  walls 
with  objects  made  from  strips  of 
"serdang"or  "kepau"  palm-leaf;  "tin- 
jong" is  said  to  refer  to  the  ring  form 
of  decoration  especially. 

12  These  lines  refer  to  the  palm-leaf 
fringes  stretched  round  the  walls. 


IS/  MAGIC  68l 


Bll  HI",    Inn. 1 

Tell  "i  th$  in'"    i' >;i  |h  1  oat 

Rental*  '  bale  l >»iii»l -1111. 
I  > t  viiii  in  tht-  lull 

Rentak  ldi  bale  salon 

1  )imii  mi  the  hall  0)  palm  i 


Be8isi  Charm   igainsi   Divii 

Mui,  'mbar,  mpe'i  'pit,  ''"' •''»  nlrn,  tojoh. 
One,  two,  three,  four,  five,  six,  seven. 

* Tu :i  kla'  jok  '  giyau,8  jok  bingin.* 

May  that  indeed  fa  cool  which  -was  feverish,  be  cool  am/  cold. 

Dalam  dageng,  dalamja'ang,  dalam  nr.it,  dalam  s- nl." 
In  flesh,  in  bones,  in  sinews,  in  joints. 

Chabut  buang  Jin  Shetan  ! 

Pluck-forth  and  cast-oat  both  Jins  and  Devils  ! 

T  rbuka',  arei  Jin  Shetan  ! 

Be-opened,  l)e-unfastened,  both  Jins  and  Devil-.  ! 

Minta'  sunteng,8  minta'  chabut  Jin  Shetan  ! 

/  beg  you  to  expel,  /  beg  jw*  to  pluck-forth  both  Jins  and  Devils  ! 

Bawa'  Busu  9  tepong  p&ngalin  ; 

Bring,  0  Busu,  flour  for  the  sucking-charm  ; 

Bawa'  Busu  tepong  penawar,10 

Bring,  0  Busu,  the  flour  that  is  a  neutralises 

Tawar  sakalian  bisii'  dalam  dageng,  dalam  urat  ! 
To  neutralise  all  venom  in  flesh  and  in  sinews  ! 

Siyau  biar  bingin  ! 

That  which  is  feverish  let-be  cool  ! 

Chabut  Jin  Shetan  dalam  nyawa'  dalam  gres  ! 

Pluck-forth  Jins  and  Devils  from  within  the  spirit  and  from  within  the 
heart  ! 

Bawa'  Busu  bunga'  tenglang  !  n 

Bring,  0  Busu,  the  blossom  of  the  tenglang  ! 

Biar  berbilang  dalam  salong,  dalam  bumbun. 

Let-zV  be-  chanted  within  /^/#////-leaf-cell,  within  the  leaf-chamber.12 

Bawa'  Busu  sakalian  Shetan  ! 
Bring,  O  Busu,  all  the  Devils  ! 

1  "  Rentak "    is    to    drum    on    the  7    =Mal.  "sendi." 

floor  with  the  foot.  8   =MaL     "buang"     (?   cf.    "  sun- 

2  For  this  and  the  next  two  charms       toh  "). 

see  vol.  ii.  pp.  309,  310.  9  Explained  as  =  "  Baba'  Bungsu  " 

3  =Mal.  "itupula."  or  "Busu." 

4  =  Mal.  "sejuk."  10    =  Mai.  "tepong  tawar." 

5  =  Fever-heat.  n   Explained  as  the  name  of  a  rare 

6  =  Mai.     "  dingin,"    explained     as  flower     growing      upon      the      moun- 
"  pini   (or   '  pirei ')  di  tulang,"   "pain  tains. 

in  the  bones."  12  I.e.  that  of  the  medicine-man. 


682  APPENDIX 


Sinta'  pisau  rewang,1  ngilir2  Batu  Perimun.3 

Draw  your  knife  0/ pearl-shell  (?)  and  remove  to  Batu  Perimbun. 

Rimurj  kla'  Shi  tan,  Rimun  kla'  nejis  ! 

At  Perimbun  then  be  the  Devils,  Perimbun  then  be  foul  ! 

Another  Besisi  Charm  against  Devils. 

Hong  hang  jadi  bueh. 
Hong  hang  become  Foam. 

Bueh,  jadi  batu. 
Foam,  become  Rock. 

Batu  jadi  bueh. 
Rock,  become  Foam. 

Perempan  4  kiri,  perempan  kanan. 

Dash  them-to  the  left-hand,  dash  them  to  the  right  hand. 

Perempan  'kan  ku,  shetan  bage. 

Dash  them  down  for  me,  these  devils  divers. 

Hong  plese'  6  mula'  plese'. 

Hong  Pelesit,  that  from-the-first  wert  Pelesit. 

Piyok  lendok,  banga'  lendok. 

The  pot  is  boiling,  the  copper  is  boiling. 

Kiri  perisi,  kanan  perisi. 

On  the  left  hand  I  fill  it,  on  the  right  hand  I  fill  it. 

Pisi-kan  6  aku  shetan  bage'. 

Do  ye  fill  it  for  me,  O  devils  divers. 

Besisi  Charm  used  for  exorcising  the  Spectre  Huntsman 
("  Hantu  Pemburu  "). 

Chongkang-changkeng  7  gul  ha-paut 8  dul 9  buluh. 

I  go  helter-skelter  to-seize  w^-peeling-knife  with  the  handle  0/"  bamboo. 

Hang  kupes  10  pinang  buhr  ; 
For  peeling  the  betelnut  hairy  ; 

Hentak  n  pedang  atam  12  batang  jelang, 

/  draw  my  sword,  and  walk-along  a  tree-trunk  lengthy, 

1  ?  =  Mal.  "gewang,"  pearl  shell.  8   "Paut"  appears  to  be  a  contrac- 

2  ?  =  Mai.  "  gilir."  tion  of  Mai.  "  peraut "  =  "  peeler  "  (the 

3  Locality    unidentified.       (Possibly  usual    name    in    Malay    being    "pisau 
Gunong       Btrembun,       Negri      Sem-  raut "  or  "knife  for  peeling "). 
bilan?)  9   «  Dul"  =  handle   or  hilt  (?  =  Mal. 

4  =Mal.     "hempan,"     "to     dash  "ulu." 

down."  i°  "  Hang-kupes  "  =  Mai.       "  akan 

5  =Mal.     "Pelesit";     also     called  kupas."       "Ha"    is    the    commonest 
"  Pemprat  "  by  the  Besisi,  who  describe  form   used    for   "  to  "   (Mai.    "  akan  ") 
it  as  a  kind  of  vampire  which  "sucks  in  Besisi,  but  before  a   "k"  the  form 
dry    our    blood"     ("mengisap    habis  used  is  "hang-"  (not  "  ha-"), 
mahamkita").  «   "  Hentak  "  =  Mal.  "  sentak,"  the 

6  =Mal.  "perisikan."  proper     Besisi     word     being      "jok" 

7  "Chongkang-changkeng,"     v. I.       (  =  Mal.  "sentak"  or   "chabut,"   "to 
"  chongkah  -  changkeh,"    explained    as       pull  or  draw  "). 

=  Mal.  "  lentang-pukang."  12  Bts.  "  atam  "  =  Mai.  "meniti." 


BES/SJ  MAGIC 


Mam  hap  '  ding  tujoh  ti  I 

'i pen  <v  baml 

m  rojoh  :  gi  ngop  '  I  [antu  Bum. 

/;»  1 1. in  ifix  ///<■  chin  <</  M  1 1 

Sin. ili  I.  ii  i,    .huh  I.  .nun, 

A \ .miii  /,'  the  Irh ,  ,i\ .unit  to  (hi  right, 

sin. ili  1  [antu  Bum  ' 

.\\.uuit,  < )  Spectre  I  [unl  iman  I 

Bbsisi  Charm  fob  expelling   rw    Demon  oi    PainC'Tawab  Bi  i 

( 'h.i.ii  tsuk  "'  hantu  naruL 

Dishevelled  u  the  hail  i  demon  yond 

I.   m;vh  1.  m. ilit   tohuk  ajrs  !  ■ 

Sou  and  wreak  u  you*  spear,  my  fathei  ' 
Ti  k.uu  s  lembong,  chab  il  tav< 

If yOU  attack  ///(■  shoot,   /  pull-OUt  Mr  neutrali      i 

Tftkam  daun,  chabut  taw  i . 

If  you  attack  the  leaf,   /  pull-out  the  neutraliser. 

Chok  bSlenchong10  hantu,  chabut  taw&r. 

When  go-brush-past  the  demons,  /  pull-out  the  neutraliser. 

Tunjok  hantu,  chabut  taw.i. 

Winn  point-o/  mc  [or  (he-patienf\  the  demons,  /  pull-out  the  neutraliser. 

Kalep  hantu,  chabut  tawar. 

When  enter  me  the  demons,  /pull-out  the  neutraliser. 

Kenen  n  hantu,  chabut  tawar. 

When  oppress  me  the  demons,  /  pull-out  the  neutraliser. 

Kapet  hantu,  chabut  tawar. 

When  strike  me  the  demons,  /  pull-out  the  neutraliser. 

Tekam  hantu,  chabut  tawar. 

When  attack  me  the  demons,  /  pull-out  the  neutraliser. 

Hentap  ia  penawar,  tekam  hantu. 

/  draw  forth  the  neutraliser,  when  attack  vie  the  demons. 

Chelui  bisa',  yal  tawar  ! 

Descend,  0  Venom  !  ascend,  0  Neutraliser  ! 

Bukan  oyn  pande  menawar  : 

//  is  not  I  that  is  clever  at  neutralising  : 

1   "Manchap"  =  Mai.        "  meran-  6    V.l.  "shuk." 

chap."  7   "Ajes"  or  "  ajeh,"   explained  as 

8   "  Tekah  "  =  Mai.     "  poko'  "or  =  "  bapa'  "  (cf.  Mai.  "  aji  "). 

"batang."  8   =  Mal.      "ttrkam,"     Bes.      "  ke- 

3  "  Merojoh  "  =  Mai.  "  merojok  "  (?)  tong." 
or  "  menikam,"  "to  transfix."  9  Mai.      "tawar,    penawar,"      Bes. 

4  "Gengop"    (or    "dengop,"    v.l.)  "  hendek "  (?). 
explained  as  =Mal.  "dagu,"  "chin,"  10    V.l.  "  belensong,"  =  Mal.     "me- 
and  as  being  a  word   of   the   "  Bhasa  lintas,"  cf.  Mai.  "  langsong." 
Hantu,"  "  spirit  language."  n  Explained      as     "  tekenyit "      or 

5  For  this  and  the  next  charm  see  "  tepenyit  "="  to  oppress." 
vol.  ii.  pp.  308,  309.  12   =Mal.  "sentak." 


684  APPENDIX 


Guru  tuhah  pande  menawar. 

The  Teachers  aged  were  clever  at  neutralising. 

Datang  chinchili'  bawa'  ptfnawar. 

Come,  0  chinchili'  bird,  bring  a  neutraliser. 

Pcnawar  txkam  hantu. 

A  neutraliser  when  attack  vie  the  demons. 

Datang  guru  pande  bawa'  tCpong  tawar. 

Come,  O  Teacher  clever,  bring  the  flour  neutralising. 

Menawar  dalam  urat. 

To-  neutralise  pain  in  the  sinews. 

Bi:SISI    INWALLING    CHARM    ("  PENDINDING "). 

Ta'  Krusau,  Batu  Putih,  Batu  Ladun  tinggi, 

Ta'  Krusau,  on  Batu  Putih,  on  Batu  Ladun  lofty, 

Tijak  ha-rumpun  serai,1  tijak  Alu  Besi.2 

/  tread  upon  the  grass  citronella,  /  tread-upon  the  Pestle  of-lxon. 

Pcndinding  Shetan  bage  kla'  3  tekam,4 

As  an  inwalling  against  devils  divers  and  foul, 

Chabut  gunong  tujuh,  mendinding  kla'  Shetan. 

/  uproot  the  hill-crags  seven,  to  inwall  me  against  the  devils. 

Blah  rotan  sa-labu,5  sa-blah  jalan  hantu', 

/split  rattan  one-length,  on-one-side  proceed^,  O  demons, 

Sa-blah  jalan-ku.G 

On-the-other  proceed-I. 

Lengkong  kawan  lengkong  trang. 

Be  yonr  rampart,  friends,  a  rampart  of  light." 

Lengkong  'ku  lengkong  g'lap. 

Be  this  rampart  of  mine  a  rampart  0/"  darkness. 8 

Description  of  the  House  of  a  Besisi  Chief.9 

Plung 10  lantok  kepong, 

Its  roof  was  bark  of  the  kepong  tree, 

Dinding  daun  bertam, 

Its  walls  4/"  leaves  of  the  bertam  palm, 

Lantei  batang  bertam, 

Its  floor  the  stems  of  bertam  palms, 

1  Doubtless  in  allusion  to  the  legend  goats,  pestle  and  mortar,  and  how  a 
of  the  seven  clumps  of  magic  lemon-grass  similar  fate  befell  one  Dato'  Antan 
(citronella),  which  are  believed  by  the  Besi  (Chief  of  the  Iron  Pestle),  and  how 
Malays  to  grow  on  the  peaks  of  some  "the  Iron  Pestle  and  Stone  Mortar 
of  the  highest  mountains  in  the  Penin-  are  still  to  be  seenj  it  is  said,  at  Gunong 
sula.  The  exact  sense  of  "  Ta'  Km-  Angsi,"  between  Rembau  and  S. 
sau  "  is  not  clear,  but  it  may  be  con-  Ujong. 

nected  with  "krusau,"  the  cry  of  the  3    ="Pula'." 

mouse-deer,  v.  p.  643  ante.  4    ="Nejis. 

2  "Alu  besi"  ("Iron  Pestle")  clearly  5   =Bes.     "  chong    mui     pontong" 
refers  to  some  special  geological  feature  ("  pontong,"  however,  is  also  Malay), 
on  this  hill,  similar  to,  if  not  identical  6    =Bes.     "  englang    chok    hantu', 
with,    the    Antan    Besi    (also  ="  Iron  englang  chok  dyn." 

Pestle ")    of    Malacca    tradition,     cp.  7  Lit.  visible. 

Hervey  in  Man,  1904,    14,  where  we  8  Lit.  dark, 

are  told  how  Dato  Saiyld   Itam's  ship  9  See  p.   188  supra. 

was  turned  into  stone,  with  his  fowls,  10  Lit.  leaves,  thatch. 


BES/SJ  m.i  UMS 


Till. uij't  long  l< >) l'i 

Its  poitl  i'/  thi-  I  nuik  •>/  thi  \>- 

N.ii.i  li  dung  Batin  Sum  ii, 

Such  cpoj  ?>m  home  oj  Batin  Suntai. 

I ).).>!i  gendeh  i  nni.ui,  dl  «n-doi ih  Kalih. 
.  //  the  rivei  •  niiu',  on  thi  uppei  Kail  i. 

Bantal  113  1  banii  diyani 

I'illow   In.  .f'.r.  (/  I'lillicss  <;/  the  din  i. in 

Siti  daun  lembft'a 

And  hit  mal  M*  Leavei  of  tin-  lemba'. 

I  ic indi  lantok  t<  rap. 

//,\  clothei  .-•■",  ,7  barV  <>/  ///<•  t<  rap  />>r. 

Nakeh  anang  lilah-silah. 

Such  an  thi  laws  <>/  the  genealogy. 

Tali  t< ■ml' aga'  di-ataa  batang. 

£s&  a  wire  ('/'copper  stretched  over  a  tree-trunk. 

Silah  di-bawah  batang. 

Whilst  the  genealogy  is  l)elow  the  tree-trunk. 

Diyan  temba' '  ;  kenen  k£tok  ' ; 

If  it  is  a  durian  it  will  rot  ;  if  it  is  too  slender  it  will  snap  ; 

K.t  itok  bok  :i ;  chidut  kacham4 ; 

If  it  snaps, you  can  bind  //  ,'  if  it  spills  j<?«  raw  dig  fV  ///>. 

Sih  telong6;  bedok  bat.(; 

If  you  lose  1/,  look-for  it;  if  it  drops,  pick  it  up  again. 

BESISI    SrECIMEN,    BELIEVED    TO    BE    AN    IMPROVISATION. 

Telong  pleh  s'ari  tanam.7 
Look-for  fruit  in  one-day  planted. 

Telong  pleh  s'ari  buah. 
Look-for  fruit  in  one-day  fruiting. 

Nakeh  te'  To'  Klana'. 

That  is  the  land  of  To'  Klana. 

Dooh-gendeh  met  semilan  ; 
The  rivers  of  the  springs  nine  ; 

Nakeh  pechah-plchit 

Thence  we  broke  and  scattered 

Ka-laut  ka-darat. 
To-///£-sea  and  to-//fo-land. 

Ulu  Kalis8  tempat  pemuka'. 

Ulu  Kalis  is  the  place  which  was  first  cleared.9 

1  Mal.  "  kalau  durian,  timbus."  8  One   of   the    nine   streams:     it   is 

2  Mal.  "  ginting  putus."  mentioned     in     the      Siamang     song. 

3  Mal,  "  putus  berubong."  "  Ulu  "  means  the  headwaters  or  upper 

4  Mal.  "  tumpah  gali."  part  of  the  course  of  a  river. 

6  Mal.  "hiking  chhari."  9  I.e.  for  habitation.     Mal.  "buka," 
G  Mal.  "  chichir  pungut."                         is  so  used  of  establishing  new  settle- 

7  Bes.  "petom."  ments,  sc.  by  clearing  the  jungle. 


686  APPENDIX 


Nakeh-leh  pGchah-pichit 
Thence  we  broke  and  scattered 

Menjadi  rayat  bawau. 

To  become  the  subjects  of  the  sea. 

Mcnchari  hal-hidup  tibu-tibar. 

To  seek  a  livelihood  in  scattered  parties. 

Jet  hal  chlm,  nakeh  bedok  ha-bawau. 

Those  who  followed  matters  of  birds,1  they  fell  to  the  sea. 

Mcnchari  hal  ka'-untong. 
And  sought  matters  for  profit. 

Menjadikan  kinchu  kinchet. 

And  begat  grandchildren  and  great-grandchildren. 

'Lor  ha-bawau  susor  ngot. 

They  moved -out  to  the  sea  and  skirted  it  not. 

Menjadi  kaidah  2  suku  waris.3 

But  became  by  division  tribes  and  heirs-of-the-soi/. 

Menjadi  ketok.4 

And  became  broken-up. 

Besisi   "Trumba."5 
Tribal  Song  of  Origin. 


/Gobang  Gubin  Buluh  Bohal. 
Gobang  Gubin  Buluh  Bohal. 

Tanah  Jati,  tanah  Hendau. 

The  country  of]dl\,  the  country  of  the  Endau. 

Terjatoh  6  ka-tanah  Johor  Lama'. 
We  come  to-/-fo-land  of  Johor  old. 

Tengki-tengkel  Jeram  Lama'. 
vTengki-tengkel  Jeram  old. 

fNaning  Naneng7  Batin  Baruis. 
At  Naning  Naneng  was  Batin  Baruis. 

Batin  Banggai-punya'  asal. 
Batin  Banggai-his  origin-wax 

Bukit  Nuang,  Bukit  Galah. 
,  Bukit  Nuang,  Bukit  Galah. 


1  Because  birds  were  more  plentiful  lines  except  where  indicated  by  the 
on  the  coast  than  inland.  brackets.       Each     line    is,     however, 

2  Or  assigned  to.  nevertheless   complete   in   itself ;     that 

3  In  the  Negri  Sembilan  the  Malay  is  to  say,  where  there  are  two  or 
Waris,  or  "heirs  of  the  soil,"  claim  more  place-names  occur  in  a  line,  they 
descent  in  the  female  line  from  always  come  together  and  in  the  order 
aborigines.  given,  it   being  only  the  order  of  the 

4  I.e.  divided.  lines    that    varies     (except     as     indi- 

5  As  to  these  genealogical  and  tradi-  cated).  6  Lit.  fell  upon, 
tional  songs  and  sayings,  see  vol.  ii.  p.            7   Oil.   the  Malay  form  of  the  name 
164  seqq.  and  notes  thereupon.   There  is  +  the  Besisi  form  :  cp.  "  turunchelui  " 
no    settled     order     in    singing    these  on  p.  687. 


liESISl  s>  WGS  OF   <  7/A,7  V 


,  Bukil  ( lentel  Batin  Mai  I 

At  Bukil  I  "  mi  i  wa i  Bal in  M 

Punya*  atal  I  k&nt  |  Batin  M  ira, 

h  .  origin  •  •     [b  i  iu  i  of]  Batin  M 

Batin  Baral  [ki  m  |  Batin  Barai. 

.  ///</  Batin  Barai  |  bei  suae  o(  |  Batin  Barai. 

Batin  Suntai  |l.  na]  Batin  Suntai. 
KJitti  Batin  Suntai  [be<  vi  •  oi  |  Batin  Suntai. 

Turun  chftlui  Batin  ( ralan 

\\  cni  d<  '\\  ii  and  dc  icend<  d  Bal  In  <  rail 

Tolak   k.i-lau!,    |.uli   i.i\at   Lint. 

And  pushed  seawards,  and  bei  inn  Subjects  of  the  S 

Rayat  laut  jadi  Bajau. 
K.lnd  tin-  Subjects  <'/  ///'•  Sea  became  EMrates. 

SSlayan  Batang  Niyu, 

At  Selayan  wai  \  Batin]  Stem  of  the  Coconut-palm. 

Si ''lay.m  Batang  Pinang. 

■  At  Sclayan  was  [Batin]  Stem  of  the  Areca-palni.1 

Cherteng  Perteng  Tagun  Brfigo.s 

With  Cherteng,  Perteng,  Tarun,  Bergul. 

Tunggul-si-JagS.'  di-hulu  Langat. 

And  the  "  Stump-of-the-Watcher  "  on-the-upper  Langat. 

Ching  Ecranang  Pejam  Gebok.3 

With  Ching,  Beranang,  Pejam,  Gebok. 

Langkap  Berjuntei,  Bangkong  Menggoh. 

The  Langkap-palm  overhanging  and  Bangkong  Menggoh. 

Bangkong  Gadeng,  Kechau,  Langlang. 
Bangkong  Gadeng,  Kechau,  and  Langlang. 


1  Unexplained.  But  in  the  Kenaboi 
dialect  "scnayan"  or  "senoyon"  = 
coconut  palm,  and  also  banana.  See, 
however,  vol.  ii.  p.  166,  n.  I,  and  id. 
p.  167,  n.  9. 

2  Tarun  and  Birgul,  on  the  border 
of  the  Ulu  Langat  district  of  Selangor 
and  Sungei  Ujong. 

3  Compare  this  with  the  following 
string  of  place-names,  which  according 
to  my  Malay  informant,  one  Mamat 
of  Jus  in  Malacca  territory,  constituted 
the  old  boundaries  of  the  countries  of 
Naning  and  Muar  (round  Malacca 
territory)  : — Chang,  Beranang,  Pajam, 
Gebok,  Lebah  Bergoyang,  Tunggu 
Bersjjaga,  Bukit  Tutus,  Paya  Luas, 
Bangkong  Chondong,  Merebau  Saratus, 
Kuala  Kesang,  Tanjong  Gading.     The 


first  three  were  explained  as  being 
near  Ulu  Klang  (Selangor),  Gebok, 
and  the  next  two  as  near  Ulu  Sungei 
Ujong.  (It  appears  from  the  map 
that  Beranang  and  Gebok  (or  Geboh 
as  the  map  spells  it)  are  places  quite 
close  to  the  present  frontier  of  Sungei 
Ujong  and  Selangor).  "  Bt.  Tunggoh 
S.  Jaga"  also  marked  on  the  map  in 
that  region.  Bukit  Putus  is  close 
to  Tebong,  a  Malacca  border  village  ; 
Paya  Luas  near  Mantai ;  Bangkong 
Chondong  just  under  Mt.  Ophir. 
Merebau  Saratus  lies  between  Mt. 
Ophir  and  Kuala  Kesang  (which  is  at 
present  the  boundary  on  the  sea 
between  the  territories  of  Malacca  and 
Muar).  Tanjong  Gading  is  in  Muar 
territory.— C.  O.  B. 


688  APPENDIX 

Batu  Jamun,  Batu  Lalau. 

The  Rock  ^/"Jamun,  and  the  Rock  of  Lalau. 

Pra'  Charek,  Batu  Btrgentel. 

Pra'  Charek,  and  Batu  Bergentel. 

M   rbau  Karawang,  terjatoh  Ayer  Tawar. 

Merbau  Karawang,  till  yoa  come  to  Ayer  Tawar. 

Lebah  Bt'rgoyang,  Bertam  Tenung. 

The  Bees'-nest  that-sways,  and  the  Bertam-palm  solitary. 

'Ginting  Pauh,  Lantei  Nibong. 

The  Divide  of  the  Wild-Mango,  the  Flooring  of  the  Nibong  Palm-wood. 

Lalu  ka-bukit  Perentian  Rimpun. 

And  pass  to  the  hills  of  the  Halting-place  umbrageous. 

Lalu  ka-bukit  Perentian  Tingi. 

And  pass  to  the  hills  of  the  Halting-place  lofty. 

Lalu  ka-tanjong  Batu  Btl-rdaun. 
\And  pass  to  the  cape  of  the  Rock  leafy. 

Sumah  muka'  Tanah  Stmujong  ?  l 

Who  opened-up  the-lamd  of  Semujong  ? 

Adik  Nyai  Techap  Penghulu  Klambu. 

Little-Sister  Nyai  Techap  and  the  chieftain  Mosquito-curtain. 

Samah  muka'  Tanah  Semujong. 

Together  opened-up  the  land  ^/"Stmujong. 

Lep  baju  jala'  juanda'.2 

They  who  donned  3  the  coat  casting-net-^a/W  became  Men-of-the-Bodyguard. 

Menjadi  Jebah4  Rembau. 

Became  the  Foreigners  of  Rembau. 

Lep  baju  blah  chakap  sisi'. 

Those  who  donned  the  coat  divided  speak  Besisi. 


BELANDAS  OR  B'LANDAS  SPECIMENS.5 

The  B'landas  Trumba. 

Among  the  B'landas  of  Selangor  I  only  succeeded  in  unearthing  a  few  scraps 
of  their  "trumba"  or  genealogical  songs,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  old  Be  sisi 
man  who  gave  me  the  Besisi  version  declared  that  the  latter  was  borrowed  from 
the  B'landas.  Hence  the  only  version  which  has  any  sort  of  completeness  about  it 
remains  that  obtained  from  the  Besisi.  What  scraps  I  could  collect,  however, 
among  the  B'landas  had  the  merit  of  agreeing  pretty  well  with  the  Besisi  version. 
As  a  general  rule,  however,  the  B'landas  appear  to  have  embodied  the  facts  they 
wanted  to  remember  in  maxims  and  proverbial  sayings  rather  than  songs,  and 
these  latter  will  be  found  to  corroborate  the  "  trumba." 

1  I.e.  Sungei  Ujong,  a  state  of  the  of  a  non-Malayan  element.  I  may  add 
Negri  Sembilan.  that    there   is  little  appreciable   differ- 

2  I.e.  Beduanda  or  Biduanda,  now  ence  in  pronunciation  between  "  Belan- 
a  tribal  name  common  to  Malays  and  das,"  "  B'landas,"  and  even  "Blandas," 
aborigines,  but  here  applied  to  Malays.  beyond  a  slight  dwelling  on  the  "Bl," 

3  Lit.  entered.  4  I.e.  Malays.        which    disappears    when   the   word    is 
5  It    will    be    noticed    that    all    the       spoken  quickly.      The  word,  therefore, 

specimens  that  follow  are  almost  purely  may  be  pronounced  '•  Blandas,"  the 
Malayan:  even  Besisi  is  largely  so,  technically  correct  spelling  "  Belandas" 
but  Belandas  shows  hardly  any  traces       being  misleading  to  an  Englishman. 


/;/  I  i  MAXlh 

<  foe  ..i  tl  e  m  raps  obtain*  'I  from  the  B'landas  i 

W  In   h  i. in  as  follows  : — 

I  i   in  M  j  <li  iilu  I 

Ml  i  !■  m 

I 
I 

The  first  <>f  the  : 


B'l  indas  Tradi  noNA 

i.  'Atl.it  tingal  il'-'  Batin   1 

custom  bequeathe  i  \<~ 

Di-bukit  bukau,  gaung,  pint* 

Over  hill  and  foot-hill,  cavern,  andXMXTL 

Latih-kan  jalan,  lorong-kan  'adat, 

Force  your  path,  make-a-channel^/for/wr  cust< 

koi  vang  b£releh,  uarU  yang  k£dim. 
For  tin-  millet  that  w  A'aris  [Heirs]  that  arc  now. 

2.  Singah  Batin  Jinang 

Tarries  the  Batin  and  the  Jinang 

S6ngan  pasangjgna'. 

As-far-as  the  flood-tide  full  (?). 

Batin  bukit  makan  atas  gunong. 

The  chief  of  the  W\\\-me?i  feeds  upon  the  crags. 

Ulu  Langat  perentah  dia, 

The  Upper  Langat  is  domain  his, 

Gharu  dia  ptlgang, 
Eaglewood  he  holds, 

Gadong  los  cherok  bijeh  lumbong. 

As  we /I  as  wild-yams,  los  (?),  chtrok  (?),  ana  tin-sand  of  mines. 

Birah  makan  dia, 
Wild-aroids  eats  he, 

Getah  taban,  rotan  dia  pegang. 
Gutta-percha  taban,  and  rattan  he  holds. 

3.  Batin  Laut  yang  ampunya 

It  is  the  Batin  of  the  sea  /^-whom-belonging 

Layer  nang  mengelembong, 
The  sail  that  bellies, 

Dayong  nang  kirap, 
The  oar  that  swirls, 

Laboh  sauh,  bentang  kajang, 

To  drop  the  anchor,  to  spread  the  awning, 

Tebas  tcbang,  menchhari  ikan, 
To  clear  and  fe\\,  to  hunt-for  fish, 

Buat  belat,  menikam  pari. 

To  make  fishing-stakes,  to  stab  the  sting-ray. 

VOL.  I  2  V 


690  APPENDIX 


4.    Unang  di-atas  batang, 

The  laws  are  on-the-top-of the  tree-trunk. 

Silah  di-bawah  batang, 

The  genealogy  underneath  the  tree-trunk, 

Unang  Pelima  Raja  yang  pegang. 

The  laws  of  the  Pelima  it  is  the  Raja  who  holds. 

5.    Leba'  bcrgoyang  onak  yang  meruntai. 

Where  the  bees'  -nest  sways,  and  the  Wait-a-bit-creepers  that  have  fallen -down. 

Ayer  yang  meleleh,  kasai  yang  bertaup, 

Among  the  streams  which  trickle,  and  the  kassd-trees  that  grow-together, 

Kang  sad£ngkang  bunyi  katak, 

And  croak-croak-croak  is  the  cry  of  the  frog, 

Ginting  di-turut  angin, 

Where  the  Divide  is  followed- through  by  the  wind, 

Lorah  di-turut  ayer, 

And  the  valleys  are  followed- through  by  the  streams, 

Tempat  rinchah-rinchahan  Batin  Jinang. 

Is  the  place  of  the  splash-splashing  of  the  Batin  and  Jinang. 

Gobang  Gubin  Buloh  Bohal, 

Gobang  Gubin  Buloh  Bohal, 

Melengkong  Pulau  Percha,1 

Encircling  the  Island  of  Percha, 

Lilit  Pulau  Mengkabau,2 

Surrounding  the  Island  ^/"Menangkabau, 

Jatoh  3  ka-tanah  Pagar-Ruyong,2 
We  happened  on-//fo?-land  of  Pagar-Ruyong, 
Jatoh  ka-tanah  Jati, 
We  happened  on-Z^-land  of  J  ati, 
Jatoh  ka-Tanjong  Pagar, 
We  happened  on-Tanjong  Pagar,4 

Jatoh  ka-tanah  Johor  Lama. 
We  happened  on-M^-land  of  Johor  Lama. 

To'  Bombong5  muka'  aye  Semilan. 

To'  Bombong  opened-up  the  Nine  Streams. 

Batin  Chap,  Batin  Maruis, 

With  Batin  Chap,  and  Batin  Maruis. 

Batin  Lengges,  Batin  Bereh, 
Batin  Lengges,  and  Batin  Bereh, 

Batin  Kantun,  Batin  Galang, 
Batin  Kantun  and  Batin  Galang, 

To'  Klambu,  Gendeh  Beoi, 

The  Chief  of  the  Mosquito-net,  and  Granny  Beoi, 

Batin  Minah,  Batin  Wat. 
Batin  Minah  and  Batin  Wat.G 

1  Sumatra.  before    his    installation     ("belum    di- 

2  Districts  in  the  upland  country  of       lantik  ").  "Galang"    =    "  Merak 
Central  Sumatra.                                               Galang." 

3  Lit.  fell.  4  At  Singapore.  6  Altogether  there  were  said   to   be 
6  This  was  the  name  of  To'  Klana        twelve  of  these  Batins. 


INDAS  SO  VGS  "/■  ORIG* 


i  undang  : — 

tht   I  ,nv  : 

Rftasap  butang  pinai 

Win )  i-  thii  I.  grow  t  '■■  tht  bet<  I 

B  ta  >ap  batang  niyu, 

Where  tin.  I.  prow  '■'. 

Mi  It  inpei  daun  pinai 

//'//,  ,  wave  thi  Leavet  oj  tht  betel  pall 

Mi  lempei  dami  niyu, 

Wher\  wave  ."/.■.  •  leavi  palm  . 

M  tnuka'  tanah  S<  mujong, 
l'hn<-  weu  opened  //<v  land  g/'Sui 

Kan  wakil  mats  s  tnilan  Suku, 

For  authority  over  the  springs  of  the  Nine  Clans, 

M£mangku  negri  ampat 

//  m  maintained  />r  the  countries  four, 

Nating  yang  ampat  suku. 

And  sustained  by  the  Four  Clans. 

M<  nempob  ka-Ginting  Bidai, 

77/^j'  struck  Ginting  Bidai, 

Menempoh  ka-Ginting  Naning, 
They  struck  Ginting  Naning, 

Menempoh  ka-Batang  I.abu, 
They  struck  Batang  Labu, 

Menempoh  ka-Gendeh  Beoi, 
They  struck  Gendeh  Beoi, 

Pulang  ka-negri  To'  Bombong, 

And  returned  to  the  country  of  To?  Bombong, 

Lantik  To'  Bombong  To'  Klana, 
Was-installed  To'  Bombong  as  To'  Klana, 

Memuka'  tanah  Semujong, 

And  opened-up  the  land  of  Sungei  Ujong, 

Batin  Galang  turun  ka-laut, 

Batin  Galang  descended  to  the  sea, 

Turun  ka-laut  jadi  Bajau, 

Descended  to  the  sea  and  became  a  Pirate, 

Gendeh  Beoi  dengan  Batak  Gerodok, 
And  Granny  Beoi  with  Batak  Gerodok, 

Turun  ka-Ravvang  naik  darat, 

Descended  at-Ra\vang  and  there  went  ashore, 

Ravvang  kechil  Rawang  besar, 

At  Rawang  the  little,  and  Rawang  the  big, 

Jengku  kechil  jengku  bisar. 
Ancestors  little  and  ancestors  big. 


692  APPENDIX 


Proverbial  Sayings,  etc. 

Rimau  mgngaum  di-ujong  tanjong, 
The  tiger  roars  at-the-end  of  the  cape, 

Gajah  meraung  di-atas  gunong, 

The  elephant  trumpets  upon  the  crags, 

Gajah  berentak  scmatang  panjang, 

The  elephant  drums-upon  the  knoll  that  is  long, 

Gajah  ter-dorong  tiga'  depa', 

The  elephant  whose  stride  is  three  fathoms, 

Berapa'  kuat  gajah  [dan  rimau],  kuat  lagi  ungka'. 

No  matter  how  fast  the  elephant  [and  the  tiger],  faster  yet  is  the  ape. 

2.    Chinchang-kan,  belandas, 

If  you  chop-at  any  things  you  want -so?net  king  to-strike-upon, 

Lompat-kan,  tumpu, 

If  you  leap,  you-must-have  a  taking-off-place, 

Buat  sikat  'kan  pendapat. 

If  you  make  a  comb  you  shall  get  (plenty  ?). 

Usui  asal  jangan  di-tinggal, 

Your  beginnings  and  origin  do-not-let  be-desert^, 

Jangan  lupa'  kapada'  bilang. 
Do-not  forget  this  in  the  telling. 

Charm  ("Kemat")  for  catching  Monkeys.1 

Gogul  k'ra  gogul. 

Enchant  (?)  the  Monkey,  enchant  him. 

Gogul-ku,  ai  !  semangat  lotong,  k'ra',  wa'wa'. 
Enchant-I,  oho  !  the  souls  tf/"lotongs  [kra,  etc.]. 

Kalau  ta'  turun,  makan  benturun, 

If  you  do-not  descend,  you  shall  be  toXen  by  the  bear-cat, 

Ta'  datang,  makan  binatang. 

If  you  not  come,  you  shall  be  devoured  by  beasts. 

Jangkit  kayu  lemperai, 

As  tips-up  the  tree  "lemperai," 

Duduk  sama'  lemperai. 
Settles-down  even-so  the  "lemperai." 

Jangkit  kayu  kumbang, 

As  tips-up  the  tree  "kumbang," 

Jalan  kau  menumpang, 

Proceed  you  by  means  of  lodging, 

Berjalan  juga'  mui  dayang  tada'  guna'. 

For  proceeding  moreover  one  handmaid  is-not  sufficient. 

Kalau  gogul  turun  juga',  munyit,  semangat  kau, 
If  enchanted  descend  then,  O  monkeys,  soul  your, 


1    =  Kemat  {Mai.  "  hik'mat")  lotong.      As  to  this  charm  see  p.  215  supra. 


1:1  ,\  WAS  MAGh  • 


n  i r i •  • . 1 1  i  in  munyit. 

Soul  \"iii ,  ( i  in' 'iii  i 

II    ,l\.   I    i   llllillll    luinii, 

lii    not  water  oj  dew  that  d<     ends, 

\ \   i  in  ii. i  ij  mi  hi",  k'ra,  lol  : mi. 

/7  ;,  w.iti  i  oj  i  nang,  kra,  lotong,  thai  de*  ends, 

Si  i n,i 1 1". 1 1  urn  dayang  yang  tui 
Soul  y< mi ,  < >  handmaiden,  thai  di 

l.ii.ni - K 11  ii  pfirti  tunggul, 
\\ .ill.  my  like  a  ■  tump, 

Jalan-ku  s£p£rti  bal 
Walk  my  like  a  tree  trunk] 

Jalan  ku  b<  pi  rti  maj  ang  n  ilat. 

Walk-my  like  shadow  i  oj  lightnir 

Mati'-kau  mimandang  aku  gi  lap  -  y  rti  rabun, 
Eyes-your  looking-al  me  b*  darkened  as-ii  with  fumigation, 

Aku  lain  jangan  kau  m<  mandang  aku. 

As  I  pass,  do-not  yon  look-at  me. 

(Honey-collector's  Chakm  to  quirt  the   Bees  (<  m.i.ed  <(Jermal 
T£bul,"  or  the  Trap  (?)  of  the  Wild  Bees).1 

Mung,  mung,  mung,  siamang  bulan, 

'  Mung,  mung,  mung,'  cry  the  apes  \noon-wlute, 

TSlasih,  telaga',  batu. 

The  apes  of  Basil,  Well,  and  Rock. 

Mari-lah  mOnentang  bulan, 
Cornea-hither  to  confront  the  moon, 

Tundok  sayang  ka-pada'  aku. 
Obey  and  shoxv  fondness  unto  me. 

Tundok  kasih,  tundok  sayang, 

Obey  and  show  affection,  obey  and  show  fondness  t 

Sayang,  gendui,  kapada'  chuchu. 

Show  fondness,  grannies,  unto  yonr  grandchild. 

Anak  chuchu  'nak  belajar 

Your  grandchild  desires  to  learn  [how  to  make  ?] 

Tikar  purun  dengan  2  gendui. 

A  mat  0/' rushes  with  yon,  grannies. 

Datang  gendui  deri  sebrang  laut, 
Come-hither,  grannies,  from  beyond  the  sea, 

Datang  gendui  deri  seblah  gunong, 

Come-hither,  grannies,  from  beyond  the  hill-crags, 

Datang  gendui  buai-berbuai, 
Come-hither,  grannies,  swaying-to-and-fro, 

Anak  chuchu  'nak  belajar 

Yonr  grandchild  desires  to  learn  [how  to  make  ?] 

1   As  to  this  charm  see  p.  230  et  seq.,  supra.  2  I.e.  from. 


694  APPENDIX 

Tikar  sambang  dengan  1  gendui. 

A  mat  of-deserted-^^'-tfaJC  with  you,  grannies. 

Tundok  gendui  kapada'  chuchii'. 
Obey,  grannies,  unto  your  grandchild. 

Rice  Ceremonies  ("  Mknktau  ").3 

Daun  duk,  daun  selimbar,3 

Leaves  of  the  kr£duk  (?)  palm,  leaves  of  the  sdimbar, 

Puchok  kayu  jurei-berjurei, 

Shoots  of  trees  dangling-and-dangling, 

Jurei  sampei  ka-tanah, 

Dangling  so  as  to  reach  to-the-ground, 

Aku  mtngundorkan  jombalang  tanah. 
I  drive-back  the  spirits  of  the  soil. 

Shiah  kiri,  shiah  kanan, 

Avaunt  to  the  left,  avaunt  to  the  right, 

Aku  nak  menumpang  sini. 
I  desire-to  lodge  here. 

Nak  tanam  padi  kladi  pisang. 

I  desire  to  plant  rice,  yams,  bananas. 

Datang  de'  gaung,  datang  de'  guntong, 

Ye  who  came  from  the  hills,  ye  who  came  from  the  tarns, 

Minta'  undorkan  jembalang  tanah. 

/  request  you  to-retire,  ye  spirits  of  the  soil. 

Charm  for  invoking  the  Rice-soul  at  Harvest  ("Panggil 
semangat  padi  "). 

Puan-puan4  'tina',  puan-puan  jantan, 
Rice-boats  female,  rice-boats  male, 

Kur  semangat  'kau, 
Cluck,  souls  of  you, 

Anak  muda',  anak  jantan, 

Child  (i.e.  girl)  young,  child  male, 

'Nak  bawa'  terkendongkan  ka-rumah. 

We  wish  to  bring  you  slung-at-our-waist  homewards. 

Semangat  Padi  S'lotan,  Borak,  Jambi, 

Souls  of  Padi  [of  the  kind  called)  S'lotan,  Borak,  Jambi, 

Semangat  Pulut,  Jagong,  Pisang, 

Souls  <?/"  glutinous- Rice,  Maize,  Bananas, 

Kita  bawa'  naik  ka-rumah. 

We  bear  you  and  climb-up  to-//^-house. 

Jangan  tidor  dalam  tanah, 
Do-not  sleep  within  the  soil, 

1  I.e.  from.  embah "     ("akar")     Uncaria     sclero- 

2  For  this  and  the  next  charm  see  phylla,  Roxb.  (Rtcbiacea),  a  large  wild 
PP*  35S,  359  supra.  gambier. 

3  According     to     Klinkert,     a    big  4  A  rice  receptacle  used  at  weddings, 
climbing    parasite.      Ridley  has    "  sel-  etc. 


i;i  4NDAS  MAGIC 


m  ii i  tidoi  dalam  i.i.iuiiiu'. 

Come  hithei  and  sleep  within  tht  mo  quito  curtain. 

( )n  retching  the  hen  -  1 1  si  mg  "  |  ••  v.  to  whli  h  the 

people  In  the  houK  ihould  in  wei  "  Datang-lah"  ("  Come  hither  tb  i 

Charm  for  Exorci  im  (°  Bi  r  .  \u  u  "     A  r.  "  Bi  r  \i  i 

Satu',  ihi.i',  tig  1','p  It,  Limi'i  nam,  tujuh  ! 
( me,  two,  three,  four,  five,  n  I 

I  £pa .  k<  pala'  tujuh  I 
I  .el  go  head  i  •■  ven  ! 

Si  mangat  di'bayang  bayai 

/.'///  thi  "ul  coming  on  i  nol  lei 

I  laniii  sin  tan  lii.ir  Ii  | 

The  I  Vinous  and  I  )<\  ill  lei 

I  )c'  dalaiii  ural,  dalain  da 

From  within  th  and  within  the  flesh 

Tijuk  -  siyau,  tijnk  dingin. 

Be  cold  what  ions  hot,  be  cold  and  cool. 

Turun  segalU'  bisa',  nails  tawar. 
Descend  all  Venoms,  ascend  Neutralii 

Aku  mi  nawar  si  gala'  hisa'. 
I  neutralise  all  Venoms, 

Naik  tawar. 
Ascend  Neutralisers. 

Charm  used  by  the  B'landas  of  Kuala  Langat  in  the  Bkrjin 

Ceremony. 

O  Guru  sekelian  Guru, 

0  spiritual-guides,  all  spiritual-guides, 

B£sar  kechi'  tuhah  muda', 
Big  and  little,  old  and  young. 

Sahya'  minta'  tolong  ubat, 

1  ask-for  assistance  w-medicine, 

Sakit  dalam  urat. 

For  sickness  in  the  veins, 

[Dalam  tulang,  sendi,  nyawa']. 

In  the  bones,  joints,  or  spirit  [as  the  case  may  be\ 

Charm  for  the  Cramp  (called  "S£mut  Buta'!').  3 

Gerembak  gerembai, 
Gerembak  gerembai, 

1  For  this  and   the  next  charm  see  "semut-an    Buta  "  =  giant's    or   ogre's 

vol.  ii.  p.  296.  2    =  Mai.  "sejuk."  cramp,   i.e.   cramp  caused   by  an  ogre 

3  For  this  charm  see  vol.  ii.  p.  297.  or  giant  which  is  believed  to  feed  upon 

There    seems    to     be    some    play    on,  the   victim.       The   charm    opens   as  if 

or   confusion    between    the    expression  referring  to  ants,  but  "  lahang  Buta'" 

"semut    buta'  "  =  "blind     ants,"    and  can  only  refer  to  the  giant  ("  Bota"). 


696  APPENDIX 


Juntei  kayu  ara', 
Hangs-down  the  tree  "ficus." 

Panjang  janggut,  merah  mata'. 

Long  too  is  your  bearcl,1  scarlet  your  eyes. 

Labuh  2  unta'-unta'. 

Hanging-downwards  in  tatters. 

Buat-apl'  budak  bawa',  patah  manau,3 

Wherefore  do  you  children  luring?  as  /snap  this  rattan, 

Merosoh  melasah  lahang4  Hantu, 

{Even  so)  broken  and  damaged  be  your  jaw-bone,  0  Demon. 

Lahang  buta'  ketuta'  k6tuti', 

Your  jaw-bone,  O  Giant , 

Besi  ketok,  besi  kling, 

Like  iron  that  is  hammered  (?),  like  iron  of  the  Klings, 

Merosoh  melasah  lahang  Hantu,  lahang  Buta'. 

Broken  and  damaged  be  your  yaws,  0  Demon,  your  jaws,  O  Giant. 

Tawar  aku  m^nawar  lahang  Buta'. 

Neutraliser  my  neutralises  your  jaw,  O  Giant. 

Bukan  aku-punya'  pSnawar, 
//  is  not  my-own  Neutraliser, 

Malim  Putih-punya'  penawar, 

It  is  Malim  Putih's-own  Neutraliser, 

Lahang  Buta'. 

For  the  jaws  ^/"Giants. 

Charm  against  the  "Hantu  Uri  "  (Caul  Demon).5 


Puchok  salak,  puchok  ranggam, 

Shoots  of  the  salak,  shoots  of  the  ranggam, 

Uri  jala',  uri  lagam, 

Caul  like  a  casting-net,  caul  like  a  horse's  bit  (?), 

Uri  bSrikat,  tlrbuka'  uri. 

Caul  that  art  bound,  be  unloosened,  0  caul. 

Uri  tertambat,  terbuka'  uri. 

Caul  that  art  tied-up,  be  unloosened,  0  caul. 

Uri  b:r-simpei,  t  rbuka'  uri. 

Caul  that  art  noosed,  be  unloosened,  0  caul. 

Uri  ber-sauh,  terbuka'  uri. 

Caul  that  art  anchored,  be  unloosened,  0  caul. 

Oi  Jin  menumpang,  terbuka'  uri. 

Ho  Jin  that  lodgest  here,  be  unloosed  this  caul. 

Oi  Jin  Shetan,  terbuka'  uri. 

Ho  Jin  and  Devils,  be  unloosed  this  caul. 

Oi  Jin  Rimba',  t: rbuka'  uri. 

Ho  Jin  from  the  Deep-forest,  be  unloosened  this  caul. 


1  I.e.  feelers  (if  applied  to  ants).  beard,    hanging  downwards   in   tatters 

2  The    expression    (1.    u.)    was    ex-  {i.e.  'elf-knots')." 
plained    as  =  like    cobwebs    ("sarang  3    =Mal.  "  rotan  manau." 
laba-laba").      Probably  the  right  read-           4    =Mal.  "rahang." 

ing  is  "  Scarlet  your  eyes,  long  too  your  5  For  this  charm  see  vol.  ii.  p.   15. 


///   \NDA 


<  >i    n,  Batu  Pi  i  | ■  ■  t ,  i  i  mi. 

Ho  |m  from  thi  Rock  i     I'Cr'pat-ti  ml. 

•  >i  |  in  Bukil    \ii',  t<  i  buk  I   ui  I 

il<>  |in  from  thi  I  Iill  oj  fi(  us-ti  ul. 

01  [in  K6mpaa,  tirbul  .'mi. 

Mo  |in  i,om  thi  Kemps    tree,  A  unloosened  thix  cmuL 

l    i  i  I    I  I. uilu    I  .;ml  , 

( '.ml  tpiri/,  1  >em ■/  thi  Sea, 

i  ii  p  tii  kilat,  ujan  bani  hi,  ujan  ■  inj e. 

*  .ml-.v/>/y/V    that    COmtSi    //'<»///     tlmndci.    Ii  .     inn     thai    dn//  'hut 

mizzles. 

in  pii!. in;'  I.  i  Malim  Putih,  Malim  Sidi. 

0  Caul  rpiritt  return  to-Malim  Putih,  Malim  SidL 

Bukan  aku  me'mbuka'  uri, 

//  is  u«>i  i  who  unloosen  thii  caul, 

Malim  Putih  Malim  Sidi  yang  buk&'  uri. 

//  ii  Malim  Putih  and  Malim  Sidi  who  unit  ml. 


Blandas  Charm  againsi    i  kh  Bajan< 

1  lum  Bajang :!  langhw  i,1 
( >M,  0  Bajang  1  angsuir, 

Mati-anak  asal  jadi. 
/  Stillborn-Child  is  the  origin  you  sprang-from. 

Bajang  langhwi, 
O  Bajang  Langsuir, 

S£pah  pinang  Bagina'  Ali.,r> 
Quid  <?/"  betel-nut  0/Baginda  Ali. 

Blandas  Charm  against  the  Langsuir  ("  Skrapah  Langsuir").6 

Langhwi,"  Langhwa. 
Langhwi,  Langhwa. 

Paroh  sapCngetop.8 
Your  beak  is  stumpy. 

Bulu  kain  chindai. 

Your  feathers  are  cloth  q/s\\k. 


1  Explained  as  ="  Hantu  Uri,  yang 
makan  darah  ibu  di-jilat."  The  caul 
has  different  names  according  to  its 
shape. 

2  For  this  charm  see  vol.  ii.  p.   14. 

3  " Bajang "= Mai.  "bajang"  (a 
demon,  as  to  which  see  Skeat's  Malay 
Magic,  p.  321  sec/.). 

4  "Langhwi"  is  the  Blandas  and 
Besisi  form  of  Mai.  "Langsuir'  [ibid. 
p.  325  se/.).  The  initial  "s"  of  a 
syllable  is  often  turned  into  "  h  "  among 


these  tribes.  Cp.  Bes.  "  sapet  "  = 
"  hapet,"  the  flying-fox  ;  Bes.  "  soroh  " 
=  "horoh,"  old  or  aged;  and  many 
other  examples. 

5  This  last  line  is  obviously  due  to 
Mohammedan  influence,  doubtless 
derived  at  second  hand  through  the 
Malay. 

,;  For  this  charm  see  vol.  ii.  p.   13. 

"   Mai.  "  Langsuir.'' 

8  Explained        as  =   "pandak' 
(stumpy). 


698  APPENDIX 


Mata'  mata'  saga'. 
Your  eyes  are  eyes  of  the  crab's-eye-bean. 

Tungkul  pinang  muda'. 

Your  heart  is  an  areca-nut  young. 

Darah  benang  chayar. 

Your  blood  is  thread  watery. 

Urat  benang  bulang. 

Your  veins  are  thread  for-ty'mg-on-cooW  -s/>urs. 

Tulang  ranting  aur. 
Your  bones  are  twigs  of  the  giant-bamboo. 

Ekor  kipas  China'. 

Your  tail  is  a  fan  of  China. 

Turun  bisa',1  naik  tavvar. 

Descend  venom,  ascend  Neutraliser. 

Tawar  dalam  tulang,  tawar  dalam  urat. 

Neutralise  venom  in  the  bones,  neutralise  it  in  the  veins. 

Tawar  dalam  sendi. 
Neutralise  it  in  the  joints. 

Tawar  dalam  rumah,  tawar  dalam  utan. 

Neutralise  it  within  the  house,  neutralise  it  in  the  jungle. 

Turun  bisa',  naik  tawar. 

Descend  venom,  ascend  Neutraliser. 

Kunchi  Langhwi. 
Lock-up-//?:;  Lang-suir. 

Turun  bisa',  naik  tawar. 

Descend  venom,  ascend  Neutraliser. 


Charm  for  expelling  the  Pontianak  (a  Demon).2 

Pontianak  mati  beranak. 
Pontianak  that  didst  die  in-birth. 

Mati  di-timpa'  tambun  tambak. 

Die  and  be-crushed  beneath  the  embankment  of  the  roadway. 

Kalau  damak  panjang  pandak. 
Whether  the  dart  be  long  or  short. 

Akan  melemang-kan  Pontianak,  Jin  Langsuir. 

Let  it  serve  for  cooking  the  Pontianak,  and  the  Demon  Langsuir. 

Diam  Pontianak  di-puchok  kayu. 

Dwell,  0  Pontianak,  in-the  shoots  of  trees. 

Diam  Jin  di-sakat. 

Dwell,  0  Jin,  in  the  epiphytes. 

Jangan  menumpang  Langsuir 
Do-not  lodge  here,  O  Langsuir. 

Jangan  menumpang  Jin. 
Do-not  lodge  here,  O  Jin. 

1  I.e.  pain.  15.  As  to  the  Pontianak  in  Malay  super- 

2  For  this  charm  see  vol.  ii.  pp.  14,       stition,see  Skeat's  Malay  Magic,  p.  327. 


in  I  \  D  IS   MAGIC 


Jan  |  in  m  nump  ing  Pontianak 

I  )q  not  lodge  kin  ,  1 1  Pontl  u 

fangan  mi  nump  in  ■  I  [antu  Riml 

I I  not  lodge  h<-)>\  ( I  i ).  in. .11  oj  in,  1 1 

Jangan  mi  numpang  i  [antu  I  ftan. 

I »"  do)  lodge  ha  <\  ( )  i  lemon  oj  the  fui 

I  [antu  ui. in  pulang  ki  utan. 

Demons  4/*  M#  Jungle,  return  to  tk$  [ungle, 

I  [antu  Rimba'  pulang  ka  rimba'. 
DtmoiAofthe  Deep  Fori   t,  return  to///.-  Deej 

Bl  OOD   i  HRI  »WING    <  'h  » 

Oi  I  [antu  l'i  mburu, 
I  Id,  1  lemon  I  [unter, 

Amhil  darah  sa-chu] 
Accept  oj  blood  one  chupa', 

( '.ulci  di  ngan  chindawan. 

And  rook  it  with  your  mushrooms. 

Jangan-kau  buru  sini. 
Do-not  you  hunt  In  I 

Buru-kau  panchu  wali.- 

Ilunt  you  in  the  marsh  of  All  (?:. 

Buru-kau  panchu  mahang.3 

Hunt  you  in  the  marsh  of  the  mahang  trees. 

Anjing-kau  Tampoi. 
Dog-your  is  Tampoi. 

Anjing-kau  Koing. 
Dog-your  is  Koing. 

Anjing-kau  Sukum. 
Dog-your  is  Sukum. 

Anjing-kau  Langsat. 
Dog-your  is  Langsat. 

Sentak  pisau  katok, 

/  draw-forth  my  knife  for-chopping, 

Nak  meng'rat  akar  tawar. 

In-order-to  sever  the  Creeper  Neutralising. 

Nak  mt'ng'rat  akar  kadam. 
In-order-to  sever  the  Creeper  Big. 

Nak  memadam  Hantu  Buru. 

In-order-to  extinguish  the  Demon  Hunter. 

Jangan  rxrhuru  sini, 
Do-not  hunt  here, 

1  For  this  charm  see  vol.  ii.  p.  297.  is  told  to  go  and  hunt  in  the  forest  of 

2  Sic,  ?  "  panchur  Ali."  Ranchak     Mahang;     see   J.  R.  A.  S. , 

3  In    a  charm  against    the    Spectre  S.  B.,    No.     7,    p.    17    (reprinted    in 
Huntsman  used  by  Malays  in  Perak  he  Skeat's  Malay  Magic,  p.  117). 


7oo  APPENDIX 


]'  rgi  balik  ka-t  mp.it  asal-kau, 

But  go  back  to-the  place  0/origin-your, 

Di  panchu  Ali. 

In  the  swamps  of  Ali. 

B'landas  Charm  for  exorcising  the  Polong.1 

Patah  pahat,  patah  perdah. 

Broken  is  the  chisel,  broken  the  adze-helve. 

Patah  memahat  batang  telentang. 
Broken  in  chiselling  a  tree-trunk  supine. 

Patah  ra'ang,2  patah  lidah. 

Broken  be  your  jaw-bones,  broken  your  tongues. 

Aku  mulang  orang3  datang. 

As  I  go-back,  so  do  you  come-forward. 

Datang  de'  laut,  pulang  ka-laut. 

Ye  who  come  from  the-sea.,  return  to-the-sea. 

Datang  de'  gunong,  pulang  ka-gunong. 

Ye  who  come  from  the  crags,  return  to-//^-crags. 

Datang  de'  tanah,  pulang  ka-tanah. 

Ye  who  come  from  //^-earth,  return  to-^f-earth. 

Asal  m^njadi  hantu  polong. 

Such your-oxxgm,  0  demon  "polong." 

Charm  for  exorcising  the  Pawul  (a  Kind  of  Grave-Demon).4 

Puchok  ulan  daun  ulan. 

Shoots  <?/"  convolvulus,  leaves  of  convolvulus. 

Gintas  5  sa-panjang  lantei 
Brush-past  at-length-tf/V/fo-floor. 

Sa-bulan  dua  bulan 

One  month  a?id  two  months 

Shiah  6  kiri,  shiah  kanan. 

Avaunt  to  the-\eft-ha?id,  avaunt  to  -the  -right-  hand. 

Sial  aku,  Pawul  bangkei. 
Fatal  be  I,  Pawul  be  carrion. 

B'landas  Charm  for  Protection  against  Tigers. 

Trong  wet,  trong  wau.7 
Trong  wet,  trong  wau. 

Sangkut  tunggul  mulang-mulang. 

Be  stuck  among-the-stumps  going-to-and-fro. 

1  For    this    charm    see    vol.    ii.     p.  G  "  Shiah  "  =  Mai.  "Siah." 

14.  7   "  Trong  wet,  trong  wau."     I  could 

2  "  Ra'ang  "  =  Mak  "rahang."  get  no  proper  explanation  of  this,  but 

3  Lit.  people.  the  words  appear  to  be  onomatopoetic, 

4  As   to    this  charm  see  vol.    ii.  p.       probably  intended  to  represent  a  tiger's 
105.  growling.      The   rest   of  the   charm  is 

5  "  Gintas "  =  Mai.  "niilintas."  clear  enough.      See  vol.  ii.  p.  294. 


/:/   i  \7>  I     MAGh 


'Mi  ral  '  aku  tudah  d'hulu. 

\\  eight   jivei  oi  me  hi    bi  en   aid  u>  t. 

Rimau  punan  I.  ; 

(Mi  raving  foi  tk  h  "I  i  •>. 

BCral  lah  It  lV  I  gantong  bumi. 

1 1'  ■  \       .  ur  hind  feel  hung  abonl  -with  fti*  earth. 

Bi  iM  tang  in,  ■  intong  batu. 

Heavy  .'■.  you*  fori  pa*  .  hung  about  with  ra  Ic. 

Tujoh  lapis  di  hadap  aku, 

Seven  folds  be  in  from  ol  me. 

'M<  rat  aku  sudali  d'lmlii. 

w  1 1-.1'!  givei  "i  me  ha  i  been-jwiV  fii  t. 


A  Seconh  B'landas  Tiger-charm  (apparently  consi  imnq  i 
Couple  of  Stanzas  ok  the  Malay  "Panti 


Tambakau  goyang-goyang, 

The  tobacco-plant  waves  and  wav< 

Aku  tanam  di-ruang  batu. 

I  planted  it  \\\-a  hole  of  the  rocks. 

TV  pok,  tarek  tali. 

Clap,  and  pull  //^  string. 

Bage  bulan  dinding  de5  mata-hari.3 
As-vvhen  the  moon  is  fenced -oft"  from  the  sun. 


II. 

[Aku]  minta  ayer  sa-gayong. 
[I]  ask-for  water  a-ladleful. 

Sa-gayong  tepi  p'rigi. 

A-ladleful  from  the  side  of  the  well. 

Aku  btdiri  saperti  payong.4 

May  I  stand-here  as-if  protected  by  aw-umbrella. 

Bagei  anak  bidadari. 

Or  like  a-child  of-the-Fairies. 

1  "  Me  rat,"  contracted  from  Malay  3  The  allusion  is,  of  course,  to  the 
"  Pemberat,"  as  was  explained  to  me  belief  that  the  sun  is  desirous  of  de- 
at  the  time.  It  means  literally  "  weight-  vouring  the  moon,  which,  on  the 
giver "  ;  and  hence,  technically,  a  occasion  of  an  eclipse,  he  is  believed  to 
"  weight  -giving   charm,"    which    it   is  be  actually  attempting  to  do. 

the  object  of  the  threatened  person  to  4   "  Saperti  payong,"  I    take    to  be 

repeat    before    the     tiger    can    get    at  elliptical  for  "  saperti  orang  di-payong- 

him.  kan."     The  object  of  this  part  of  the 

2  As  to  this  charm  see  vol.  ii.  p.  charms  appears  to  be  to  secure  the 
295.  invisibility  of  the  speaker. 


702  APPENDIX 


Si  N i bong. 

A  Blandas  Story.1 

Tihang  nibong,  arap  nibong, 

Its  posts  were  of  nibong,  its  thatch  of  nibong, 

Lantei  nibong,  tinggal  kampong. 

Its  floor  #/"  nibong,  deserted  is  the  village. 

Tinggal  kawas  Busu  Baba', 
Deserted  the  holding  of  Busu  Baba' 

Bujang  Semangan  tinggal  kachip 

And  Bujong  Semangan,  deserted  the  betelnut-scissors 

Tujoh  biji,  tinggal  pinang 

Seven  in-number,  deserted  the  betelnut-trees 

Tujoh  batang,  tinggal  sirih 

Seven  in-number,  deserted  the  betel-vines 

Tujoh  junjong,  dalam  kachip 

Seven  in-number,  in  the  matter  of  betelnut-scissors 

Tujoh  kachip,  dalam  pinang 

Seven  betelnut-scissors,  in  the  matter  of  betelnuts 

Tujoh  biji,  pinang  seluang, 

Seven  seeds,  <?/~betelnut  {of  the  kind  called)  seluang, 

Dalam  sirih  tujoh  lei ; 

In  the  matter  of  the  betel-leaves,  seven  leaves  ; 

Buat  kachip  taring  pjlandok. 

Made  were  the  betelnut-scissors  of  the  eye-teeth  of  a  mouse-deer. 

Kata'  adik  Bujang  Semangan. 

Spake  the  younger-brother  Bujang  Semangan. 

Buka'  ketika'  lima'  2  abang. 

Open  the  Times  Five  elder-brother. 

Kita  jalan  ka-kampong  orang. 

We  will  go  to-^£-village  of  certain  people. 

Baju  di-masok  kain  belum. 

Coat  he  had  put-on,  skirt  not-yet. 

Sapu-tangan  belum  saluar  belum. 
Headcloth  not-yet,  trousers  not-yet. 

Kata'  Bujang  Semangan  simpolan 
Said  Bujang  Semangan  a  headcloth 

Sutra'  muri  sa-ratus  sambilan  puloh 

Of  silk  the  finest  one-hundred  and  ninety 

Lima'  ringgit  herga-nya.3 
And  five  dollars  the  price  of  it. 

1  This  fragmentary  tale  was  collected  2  I.e.  the  Malayan  diagram  of  divina- 

from  an  old  Besisi  man  called  Bedoh  tion   (or    magic   squares),    to   ascertain 

at  Sepang  Kechil.     He  said  that  it  was  the  auspicious  hour  for  starting  on  the 

in  reality  a  Blandas  story,  and  that  no  journey.      See  Skeat,  Mai.  Magic,  pp. 

doubt    accounts    for    its    being    almost  555  sea. 

purely  Malayan   in  language.      For  a  3    V.  /.adds  "rega-nya"  (the  Blandas 

summary  of  it  see  vol.  ii.  p.  312  et  sea.  form)  following  the  Malay  "herga-nya." 


/.'/  ANDAS  STORY  OF  SJ  N1B0 

Ah. Ill      ■        ll       l.llli'.ll.       I..  I       II.     •      I    I       ..| 

Dc  you  1. 1 ..iin  i  go  to       country  of  certain  people. 

BawaV  p  < I . i M •  •    i|ni  i. mi, in. 

Take  vow   iword  th,  "  iwe<  pei  -'/  ///f  coi  i 

BawaV  i  M.   . i [mi  mill. hi. 
Take  your  K 1  is  the  "  iweepei 

lw. ii  baik,  |. hi". in  li  1 1  l \ i . i 

1  ,el  all  be  well,  do  not  give  trouble. 

Ani.ii k.ui  kami,  tukang  final 
( iuide  us,  ( )  craftsman  finang, 

Jalan  ka  i amah  Jul  rah  tuhah. 

•  >  to  ///('-house  Oj  the  Juki. ih  .1;  ed. 

Ti  ogah  jalan  I'  tri  Adah. 
Halfway  [they  met)  Princess  Adah, 

P  n  i  T  pong  kakak-nya  adik-nya, 

And  Princess  T  pong  elder  sister  and  younger  si  ti 

M    nt  i  i  adi'  :inlar   P<  tii 

./   Minister  there-was  escorting  the  Princes 

Jalan  ka-rumah  Jukrah  tuhah. 

To  go  to-///('-house  of  the  Jukrah  aged. 

Simpang  lima?  ka-kampong  bunga', 

By  the  cross-roads  five  to-///t'-village  a/"  flowers, 

Simpang  lima  ka-pulau  buah. 

By  the  cross-roads  five  tO-Mtf-isle  of  fruit. 

Men  Spat  rumah  Jukrah  tuhah 
Opposite  the  house  of  the  Jukrah  aged 

Limau  abong  limau  pagar. 

Grew  the  limes  called  abong,  the  limes  called  pagar. 

Sampei  ka-rumah  Jukrah  tuhah, 

When  they  reached  to-//^-house  of  the  Jukrah  aged, 

Di-habu  hangat  anjing  bangkang.2 
By-M^-ashes  hot  was  a  dog  savage. 

Minta'  ubat  padi  mentri. 

They  asked-for  medicine  from  the  minister. 

Ada'  ubat  ambun  batu,3 

He  had  medicine  the  dew  of  the  rock, 

Nak  menyampak  habu  hangat. 
In-order-to  cast-on  the  ashes  hot. 

Nak  menempoh  anjing  bangkang. 
In-order-to  strike  the  dog  savage. 

Sampei  ka-rumah  Jukrah  tuhah, 

So  they  reached  to-//t<?-house  of  the  Jukrah  aged, 

1  Explained  as  =  Mai.  "  lorat  "  (from  according  to  the  Blsisi  it  also  means 
Arab.  "  tharurat "  ?)  used  in  the  sense  "lying  down"  or  "crouching"  (Mai. 
given  above,  sed  qiuzre.  "  baring  "). 

2  Perhaps  =  Mal.  "bengkeng."    But  3  Or  "dew-like  stone"  {i.e.  hail?). 


7o4  APPENDIX 


Tidor  di-ruiiiah  Jukrah  tuhah. 

Andtlepi  at-/&-house  <y'/^<?  Jukrah  aged. 

T<  Dgah  malani  P<  tri  TV  pong 

Half  through  the  night  the  Princess  Ti  pong 

Tidor  saxna'  abang  Nibong. 
Slept  with  brother  Nibong. 

{'■  ok  pagi  abang  Nibong 
Next-morning  early  brother  Nibong 

Ada'  tingal  Petri  Tcpong. 

lias  deserted  the  Princess  Tcpong. 

Tahi  mata'  sa-k£dang  tungku, 

The  droppings  of  her  eyes  were  as-big-as  fire-stones, 

Tahi  gigi  sa-kedang  dapor. 

The  semirings  of  her  teeth  as-big-as  the  hearth. 

Btlayar  laut  pulau  B£rapi, 

They  l  sailed  to  the  sea  of  the  Island  Fiery, 

Kanchang  jong  di-sakat  pulau  Kedong, 

And  swift  was  their  vessel  till  it  grounded  on  the  Island  0/ Kedong, 

Itu-lah  sa-belah  laut  Pahang. 
That-is  beside  the  sea  of  Pahang. 

B'landas  Charms  according  to  Vaughan-Stevens. - 

First  Birth- Charm. 

Oong  ooree  moolah  ooree-atas  bukit  rumput  labas  dee-chabut  bloong-tuk 
bloong-penowar  menowar  beeser  ooree  nike  towar  toorun  beeser  ooree. 

Ung        uri  mula  uri       atas          bukit  rumput  lepas  (?)    di-chabut 

Om  !  placenta  original  placenta  upon  the  hill       grass     loose        is-pulled  out 

bilang         terbilang3         penawar      menawar  bisa  uri       naik 

saying  and  saying  the  neutraliser  neutralises    the    venom    of  the    placenta  rise 

tawar         turun       bisa  uri. 

neutraliser  descend  venom  0/"  placenta. 

Second  Birth-Charm. 

Galoogal  pasal  lintang  patar  loong-soo  laloo  kattak  treejun  larbie  munkar 
teejak  manow  leechin  booloot  poolang  kar  lumpoo  penang  poolang  kar-ragung 
seeree  poolang  kar-ragung  chaboot  beeloontok  beeloon  towar  menowar  beeser 
ploosoo. 

Gelugor  pasal 4        lintang  patah  bungsu  lalu 

Gelugor    and  pasal    be   crossed    and  broken    when  youngest-born  (?)   passes 

1  I.e.  Si  Nibong  and  his  brother.  first  Vaughan-Stevens' spelling, and  then 

2  These  are  given  on   pp.    143-152       mine,  with  suggested  emendations. 

of  the   first    part  of   the   "  Materialen  3  This   very  doubtful   phrase   recurs 

zur  Kenntniss  der  Wilden  Stamme  auf  elsewhere,  v.  infra,  pp.  714,  715. 
der    Halbinsel    Malaka"     {Ver'bjfentl.  4   "  Gelugor "  is  a  kind  of  sour  wild 

Konigl.  Mus.  f.  Vdlkerk.,  Band  ii.  Heft  mango.        "Pasal,"    Ardisia     odonto- 

3-4  =  "  Vaughan-Stevens,  ii.").      I  give  phylla,  Wall.  {Myrsinea). 


INVOCATIO  \  70$ 


1.  nil.      i'  1  iin         i.ii.i     limn  tiji 

fro  j     jump  down  tortol  le    rcl  in  illpp< 

lUmpOl        pin. in:'        pul  I  li.ll-Ul  l>ll 

I II  ll<  1  .11'  r  1    mil         Itui   I.         tO    <    ll)      '     I 

nr  n.iw.u  bill  I"  lii  •"'' 

neuti  \  11 /  k» '»  mi 

I    \  ■   1  ■  •  1   :  I      rO     I  1 1 1 .     I  > ',  I 

I )  mates  matee  In  janggh  in  ingari   lagee  bapi  m<  - 

iu\'. iii"  mali  <•  iin'mi};  iicc/dup  nu  l  n.il  un. 

O  m.ili  m.ili  I. ill  In 

<)   dying  one,    die    Indeed!      I*11  no!    remembei        boi 

in.M         Mill.  11 1        nenek  moyi  nu  mati 

mothei  brothen  grandfather!  randfathen    btthtmvrho 

1     nang    hidup  menchari  makan. 
go      who  9tt  living     leek        food. 

Charm  of  mm    \         \  1..1 

Oong  matee  matee-anak,  matee  timpah  tannah  tamoon  tamok  apa  aaal  kow 
minyaydy  hantoo  darrar  orang  matee  brannok  eetoo  asal  kow  minyaydy  mal 
anak  dee  tebing,  poolang  kar  tebing  matee-anak  batoo  ampah,  poolang  kar  b 
ampah.     Chaboot  boolong  took-towar  nenowar  hantoo  matee-anak  toorun  bei 
matee-anak  nike  penowar  akoo. 

Ung  mati  mati-anak. 
Om  !   Die  O  Matianak  ! 

Mati  timpah  tanah  tamun  tamak. 

Die,  cnished  by  the  earth  heaped  on  the  roadway. 

Apa  asal  kau  menjadi  ? 

What  is  the  origin  of  thy  being  ? 

Hantu  darah  orang  mati  bcranak, 

Demon  of  the  blood  of  a  person  dead  in-childbirth, 

Itu  asal  kau  mtmjadi ! 

That  is  the  origin  of\hy  being. 

Mati-anak  di-tebing,  pulang  ka-tcbing. 

Matianak  of  the  river-bank,  return  to  the  river-bank. 

Mati-anak  batu-ampa',  pulang  ka-batu-ampa'. 
Matianak  of  the  rock-bed,  return  to  the  rock-bed. 

Chabut  bilang  ter  [bilang  ?]  tawar  menawar  hantu  mati-anak. 

Pluck-out  saying  and  saying  neutralise  and  neutralise  the  demon  Matianak. 

Turun  bisa  mati-anak  ! 


Descend  venom  of  the  Matianak 

Naik  pcnawar  aku  ! 
Rise  neutraliser  mine  ! 


1  This     is    evidently    an    invocation  vocation  is  supposed  to  give  the  neck- 

against  the  Pontianak  demon,   against  lace    the    power    of    an    amulet  :     see 

whom  the  necklace  is  presumably  in-  p.    153   supra,  and   Yaughan- Stevens, 

tended  to  protect  the  wearer.      The  in-  ii.  145. 

VOL.   I  2  Z 


7o6  APPENDIX 


Charm  used  when  clearing  Jungle  for  Planting 

O   hantoo   teeap   goontong  teeap    poolang  chaharoo  hantoo  sebooroo 
nn'ok-natow  nin   tannah.      O    eetoe    powang   naing  brim  pat  akoo  mintar  padar 
powang  naing  brimpat  akoo  nn'ok-natow  nin  tannar  ;  bree  seejok  dallam  badan 
iangghan  rosak,  jangghan  benassar  dallam  badan  bree  seejok  dingin  dee  dallam 
badan  akoo  inee. 

O  hantu  tiap  guntong  tiap, 

0  demon  every  of  tarn  every. 

Pulang  chahari  (?)  hantu  seburu. 
Return  seek  the  demon  huntsman. 

Aku  'nak  natau  nin  tanah. 

1  want  to  clear  this  land. 

O  itu  pawang  neng  berempat. 

0  those  magicians  the  four. 

Aku  minta'  pada  pawang  neng  berempat. 

1  ask  <y"  magicians  the  four. 

Aku  'nak  natau  nin  tanah. 
I  want  to  clear  this  land. 

Beri  sijok  dalam  badan. 
Give  coolness  within  body. 

Jangan  rosak  jangan  binasa  dalam  badan. 
Do-not  ruin  do-not  destroy  within  body. 

Beri  sijok  dingin  didalam  badan  aku  ini. 
Give  coolness  cold  within  body  mine  this. 

Charm  used  before  burning  the  Felled  Clearing. 

Ah  keelat  dee  langit  dee  boohoomey  akoo  nn'ok  lepas  brangsong  apee  nn'ok 
bakkar  oomar  akoo  mow  mangil  powang  naing  brimpat  akoo  mow  mangil  angin 
toojoe  penyuroe  toojoe  sepangkat  mangil  angin  pooting  bleeong. 

Ah  kilat  di-langit  di-buhumi, 

0  lightning  in  the  sky  on  the  earth, 

Aku  'nak  lepas  berangsang  api, 

1  want  completely  to-kindle  lire, 

'Nak  bakar  huma. 

Wishing  to  burn  the  clearing. 

Aku  mau  mangil  pawang  neng  berempat. 
I  wish  to  call  magicians  the  four. 

Aku  mau  mangil  angin  tujoh  penyuru  tujoh  sapangkat. 
I  wish  to  call  wind  seven  corners  seven  in-a-row. 

Mangil  angin  puting  beliong. 
Call  the  whirlwind. 


Charm  used  at  the  Rice-sowing. 

O  partree  dong  heetam  bertapar  dee  lowt  annam  boolan  inee  sayar  mow 
mangil  tannam  padee  sar-gringam  sar-jumpoot  nike-lar  be-ratus  be-rebus  be- 
koyan. 


'  \C/( 


0  1  I  I  i'   .m    I.    il  i;..t  did 

0  Pi  in<  i      I ton     1 1 

\l..MII      bill. Ill      U.I         ,.\     I      II!    l|]      . 

ii. '.nil.  l 

i>  input. 

/  am  plan  tin  handful  .i  pini  b, 

•N'.ui.  I  ii  bei 

I .- ;  ii  .in     a  hundredfol 

(   H 

\  ang  minyooling  meelakkon  ;  yai 
■<■  tanki  tneeambee  imunghui  i  war 

nn'ok  mesai  bantoo  tai  kcee  ar, 

ita  mi  adap. 
n  thai  squintesl   turn-thy-back  to  wi  i  turn -thy  I 

. 

AUu  n. ik  (?)  uu.ii  padi  tujoh  tangkai. 
[  wish  to  reaj 

tnangal  padi  bawa  pulang  ka-rumah.  .  .   . 

i  and  bring  it  home  to-Mf*house.   ■ 
Aku  'nak  misar '  hantu  taki 

I  want  A'  turn-off  demons  haur.' 


LOGAN'S  MANTRA  OR  MENTERA1  CHARMS. 

I'l  NDINDIN 
[The  Pendinding  or  In-walling  charm  is  to  protect  us  from  various  dang-  . 
I  long'  kachula  katumbo  bisl 8  kanduri  iang  limu  kahutan  katungalan* 


1  Probably = Mai.  "mengisar." 

2  In  the  original,  "Mintira."  These 
magic  formulas,  the  translation  oi  which 
will  be  found  in  vol.  ii.  of  this  work,  on 
pp.  329-333,  are  here  given  in  Logan's 
original  spelling,  with  the  slight  modi- 
fication noticed  below.  The  key  to  it, 
as  given  on  p.  39  of  vol.  i.  of  the 
Journal  of  the  Indian  Archipelago,  is 
as  follows  :  a  (as  in  far)  ;  a  (as  u  in 
tub)  ;  e  (as  ty  in  they,  or  a  in  dare)  ; 
1  (as  u  in  see)  ;  i  (as  in  pin)  ;  ci  (as  i 
in  pine)  ;  0  (as  in  no)  ;  u  (as  00  in 
room)  ;  u  (as  in  bull)  ;  eu  (as  u  in 
user  or  eu  in  eulogy). 

Logan's  (')  accents  have  for  con- 
venience been  turned  into  (~)  in  the 
present  reprint.  So  that  his  scheme, 
theoretically,  is  much  the  same  as  the 
one  used  elsewhere  in  this  work.  As 
a  matter  of  fact,  however,  Logan,  be- 
sides confusing  a  and  et  printing  both 
e,  habitually  puts  i  for  e,  while  his  ei 
is  really  a/,  and  he  does  not  use  his 


own  scheme  quite  consistently,  mixing 
up  the  long  and  short  vowels  pretty 
frequently.  He  also  constantly  puts  i 
for  y  (as  in  iang),  and  ;/  for  ng  (as  in 
ankau). 

In  view,  however,  of  the  fact  that 
these  charms  are  not  in  standard  Malay, 
but  in  the  patois  or  dialect  spoken  by 
the  Mentera  (with  the  phonology  of 
which  we  have  but  an  imperfect 
acquaintance),  it  has  been  thought  best 
to  adhere  to  the  original  spelling, 
merely  pointing  out  dialectic  peculi- 
arities and  giving  an  approximate 
Malay  version,  and  equivalents  where  it 
seemed  desirable.  Some  passages  are 
unfortunately  corrupt  or  unintelligible. 

:;  /.  /.  A.  i.  309. 

4  Logan's  note  on  this  word  will  be 
found  on  p.  329  of  vol.  ii. 

6  The  meaning  of  the  next  five  words 
is  very  doubtful,  and  the  text  may  be 
corrupt. 

0  From  "  tungal" (  =  Mai.  "tunggal"), 


7o8  APPENDIX 


tfi'dindlng  l  batu  aku  baring  dedindfng  buml  tlerap  bGrtarap  tutop  angln  salagorl 
kan  lawanku  santa  sabut  didalam  gantong  klam  kabut  mata  orang  mlningo  aku 
dating  klam  kabut  plimun  aku  mallmun  slklian  muso  sltruku  lawanku  guru  sidlk 
turun  berdoa  aku  mlnglnakan  doa  pllmun  sikllan  mata  muso  sitrukan  lawfnku. 

Suggested  Malay  Version. 

Hong,  kachula  katumbo'  besi  kanduri  (?)  yang  'clmu  ka-hutan  ka-tunggalan,  aku 
t£r-dinding  batu,  aku  baring  di-dinding  bhumi,  tiarap-ber-tiarap,  tutop  angin  sela- 
guri  'kan  lawan-ku,  sentak  sabut  didalam  gantong  klam  kabut  mata  orang  men- 
engo'  aku  datang  klam  kabut  pclimun  aku  mclimun  sekelian  musoh  setru  lawan-ku 
guru  sidik  turun  bcrdua  aku  mcngenakan  doa  pglimun  sekelian  mata  musoh  setru 
'kan  lawan-ku. 

Pendinding. 

Heh  pisamin  namanla  bisi  aku  diam  dalam  kandang  maleikat  sablas  diklriku 
aku  diam  dalam  kandong  kandang  maleikat  sablas  dikanan  ko  aku  diam  dalam 
kandang  maleikat  sablas  diblakang  aku,  aku  diam  didalam  kandang  maleikat 
sablas  diadapan  ko  terniaia  Mahamad  mangkal 2  aku  terniaia  bulan  bintang 
mataharl  jlkalau  tida  tirniaia  aku  pun  tida  terniaia  dan  terniaia  bomi  dan  langit 
mengkal 2  aku  pun  terniaia  jikalu  tida  terniaia  bomi  dan  langit  aku  pun  tida 
terniaia  terniaia  mayat  didalam  kubor  mengkal  2  aku  pun  terniaia  blrkat  dekabul 
kan  doa  guruku  kapada  aku  kabulkan  Mahamad  kabulkan  baglnda  rasul  Allah 
maka  kabul  aku  memakel  doa  sarlbu  niawa  tidala  aku  terniaia  saada 3  lang 
bernlawa  diatas  dunla  Inl.4 

Malay  Version. 

Hei,  Pisamin  nama-nya  besi,  aku  diam  dalam  kandang  malaikat  sablas  di- 
kiri-ku,  aku  diam  dalam  kandong  kandang  malaikat  sablas  di-kanan-ku,  aku  diam 
dalam  kandang  malaikat  sablas  di-blakang-ku,  aku  diam  didalam  kandang  malai- 
kat sablas  di-hadapan-ku ;  ter-anyaya  Muhamad  maka  aku  ter-anyaya,  bulan 
bintang  matahari  jikalau  tidak  ter-anyaya,  aku-pun  tidak  ter-anyaya,  dan  ter- 
anyaya  bhumi  dan  langit,  maka  aku-pun  ter-anyaya,  jikalau  tidak  ter-anyaya 
bhumi  dan  langit,  aku-pun  tidak  ter-anyaya,  berkat  di-qabul-kan  doa.  guru-ku 
kapada  aku  ;  qabul-kan  Muhamad,  qabul-kan  Baginda  rasul  Allah,  maka  qabul 
aku  memakai  doa  sa-ribu  nyawa,  tidak-lah  aku  ter-anyaya  sa'-ada  yang  ber-nyawa 
di-atas  dunia  ini. 

Pengaseh. 
[The  Pengasih  is  a  charm  to  make  others  love  us.] 

Minla  aku  sidayong  -  dayong,  aku  tuang  depanchur,  aku  tiga  aku  seplrti 
payong,  aku  berjalan  lebeh  derl  ana  segala  manusla,  berkat  aku  memakel 
pengaseh,  habis  kaseh  segala  manusla  lang  kakl  dua  berjarl  lima,  usakan  antara 
manusla  selangkan  rumput  ranting  kayu  kayan  bomi  dan  langit  tundo  kaseh  sa'- 
ada  tundo  sayiing  tundo  gimar  pada  aku  juga.5 

"solitary."  These  dialects  often  have  must  be  recollected,  is  spoken  in  the 
a  nasal  for  the  nasal  +  sonant  of  the  villages  of  the  inland  district  of  Mai- 
Malay  equivalent.  See  charm  called  acca,  of  which  the  Mentcra  frequent 
"  Chucha,"  infra,  s.v.  "engang."  the  jungles).  -  Mai.  "maka." 
1  Logan  translates  wrongly,  "I  am  3  Apparently  =  "  se  +  ada  ,;  =  "all 
not  walled":  it  should  be,  "I  am  there  are  "  ;  cf.  the  next  charm, 
walled  in"  :  "ta'-"  =  Mal.  "  ter-"  here  4  /.  /.  A.  i.  309,  310. 
(as  in  MSnangkabau  Malay,  which,  it           5  Ibid.  310,  311. 


7Q9 


Mlll).ll.     .ll.ll 

.ll.ll       I. cl     l.ll.lll       |l 

.    htthis 
.mi. n. i  ni.iiu'.  n   rumput   ran 

dole  kasih  u  nil  tnndoli  Htytng  mup!'  >i  juga. 

PlUA  i     . 

I\  111. in.  ■  (firi  iii    •!..  :  isally 

ible, 

Pucho  pimanla  daun  pimanla,  Ilea  tit.-is  iamb  I  duda  pun  aku  ti 

minis,  berdlrl  pun  aku  terlalu  m 
dui  berjarl  llmS  lepirtl  bfilon  dangan  m&taharl,  terlaiu  i 

muka  aku,  biikat  aku  m.ikci  dofl  pimanla  n.ii  cl  IktlJ 

J/,:  /;. 

Puchok    jKinanis,   daun    pun. mis,    aku    tttai    Nimbi]    1  ■•  r-lari,    dudok-pun   aku 

tlu  manis,  Wr-diri-pun  aku  u  r-lalu  manis,  mania  di-pandang  i£gala  manusia, 
aki  dua,  lur-jari  lima,  a€p€rti  bulan  dangan  matahari,  U'r-lalu  manis  m<man- 

dang  chahia  muka  aku,  berkat  aku  memakai  do'a  p^mania,  naik  chahia  mani 

muka  aku. 

Panundo  (PftNl 

The  Penundo'  secures  submission  from  others. 

Paku'-'  rondo,  paku  vinda,  aku  litta  dldalam  sibl,3  aku  dudu  dalam  orang  Iang 
banla,  aku  juga  mintara 4  iang  libbeh  rasul  Allah,  melakukan  aku  simbileh 
minima6  mamu,  aku  dudu  segala  manusia  iang  berniawa  abes6  tundo,  tundokan 
Allah,  tundokan  Mohamad,  ditundokan  baginda  rusul  Allah,  birkat  aku  memakei 
doa  pinundo  aku  nundo"  segala  manusia,  berkaki  dua  berjarl  lima,  kabulkan 
Allah,  kabulkan  Mahamad,  kabulkan  baginda  rasul  Allah,  kabulkan  aku  memakei 
doa  pinundo  aku  memadap  timtong8  berjiwa  segala  manusia  berkaki  dua  berjari 
lima.8 

Malay  Version. 

Paku  rondo',  paku  rendah,  aku  letak  di-dalam  sibai,  aku  dudok  dalam  orang 
yang  banyak,  aku  juga  mentara  yang  lebih  rasul  Allah  melaku-kan  aku  scmVleh 
m.nama  (?)  mamu  (?)  aku  dudok,  segala  manusia  yang  ber-nyawa  habis  tundok, 
[di-]tundok-kan  Allah,  [di-]tundok-kan  Muhamad,  di-tundok-kan  Baginda  rasul 
Allah,  berkat  aku  memakai  do'a  penundo?,  aku  nundok[-kan]  segala  manusia 
ber-kaki  dua,  ber-jari  lima,  [di-]qabul-kan  Allah,  [di-]qabul-kan  Muhamad,  [di-] 
qabul-kan  Baginda  rasul  Allah,  qabul-kan  aku  memakai  do'a  penundo'  aku  meng- 
adap  ttntang  [yang]  ber-jiwa  segala  manusia,  [yang]  bcr-kaki  dua,  ber-jari  lima. 


1  /  LA.  i.  311.  «  Mai.  "ha:  is." 

•  Paku  "  =  "  nail ''   (as   Logan   in-  "  From  tundo  (Mai.  "tundok '*),  ap- 

terprets  it),  or  perhaps  more  probably  parently  by  nasalisation  of  the  initial  : 

rn."  the    form,    being    seemingly    passive, 

8  Mai.  "sibai."1  can  hardly  be  for  "  menundo  "  (Mai. 

4  Mai.  "sementara"  ;  cf.  next  charm.  "menundok"). 

5  Interpreted    by    Logan    as  =  Mai.  N  Mai.  "tentang." 

•'  yang  bernama,"  std  quart.  9  J.  I.  A.  i.  311,  312. 


7io  APPENDIX 


Chucha. 

The  Chucha  causes  enemies  to  lose  their  strength  and  be  humiliated. 

Siluso  padang  siliisa 

Siligi  batfing  sulasch  ] 

Minta  tutop  hati  iang  gusar 

Minta  buka  hati  iang  kasih 

AjG  eje  eche  echa- 

Ana  lalang  tumbo  delimba,;i 

Aku  jehet4  aku  depuji 

Aku  salah  aku  disumbah  '' 

Usakan  samantara  manusia 

Berkaki  dua  berjari  lima 

Sidangkan  gaja  putih 

Gaja  blang  sabrang  laut 

Songsang  bulu  songsang  gading 

Songsang  bulel G  songsang  kaki 

Songsang  tangan  songsang  urat 

Songsang  daging  songsang  dara 

Tundo  minlumba  killngking  kaki  kiriku, 

Minia  aku  terkilang  turun  dipanjuru  lawang" 

Ana  ngang  8  diujong  bulo 

Aku  jolo  dangan  timiang 

Matahari  terkilek  diklning  aku 

Simut  periring  diblbir  aku 

Chucha  Allah  chucha  Mahamad 

Chucha  baginda  rasul  Allah.9 

Malay  Version. 

Selusoh  padang  selasa,  Seligi  batang  selasih,  Minta'  tutop  hati  yang  gusar, 
Minta'  buka  hati  yang  kasih.  Aje  eje  eche  echa  !  Anak  lalang  tumboh  di- 
lembah,  Aku  jahat,  aku  di-puji,  Aku  salah,  aku  di-sembah.  Usah-kan  saman- 
tara manusia,  Berkaki  dua  berjari  lima,  Sedang-kan  gajah  putih,  Gajah  blang 
sebrang  laut,  Songsang  bulu,  songsang  gading,  Songsang  belalei,  songsang  kaki, 
Songsang  tangan,  songsang  urat,  Songsang  daging,  songsang  darah,  Tundok 
menyembah[-kan]  kelingking  kaki  kiri-ku,  Minya'  aku  ter-kilang  (?),  turun  di- 
panjuru lawang,  Anak  enggang  di-ujong  buluh,  Aku  [men-]jolo'  dengan  temiang, 
Matahari  ter-kilek  di-kening  aku,  Semut  ber-iring  di-bibir  aku.  Chucha  Allah  ! 
chucha  Muhamad  !     Chucha  Baginda  rasul  Allah. 

1  Mai.  " selusoh, "means a  specific  for  5  Probably  misprint  for  "  disimbah  *' 
alleviating  the  pains  of  labour.  Mai.  =Mal.  "di-sembah";  so  too  infra, 
"selasih"  is  the  plant  called   "  Holy       "minlumba." 

Basil."  6  Mai.  "bulalai,"  or  "belalei." 

2  This  line  is  unintelligible  and  "  The  word  "  lawang "("  door ")  is 
probably  not  intended  to  convey  any  given  in  Malay  dictionaries  as  being 
meaning  :  perhaps  the  words  are  mere  from  the  Javanese  ;  it  is  not  corn- 
variations  on  the  word  "chucha."  monly  used  in  the  Peninsula,  I  believe. 

3  Mai.  "dilembah."  8  For  "engang,"  Mai.  "enggang." 

4  Mai.  "jahat"  :  the  vowels  are  These  dialects  pretty  frequently  have  a 
characteristic  of  Mentera  and  the  other  nasal  only,  where  Malay,  etc.,  have 
Jakun  dialects.  I  believe  the  e  has  nasal  +  sonant :  e.g.  "henak"  =  Mal. 
the  "open"  sound,  i.e.  a  (in  such  "  hendak "  ;  and  in  the  first  charm, 
cases  where  Malay  has  a),  at  any  rate  supra,  "  Katungalan." 

in  the  first  syllable  of  the  word.  9  J.  I.  A.  i.  312,  313. 


\GIC 


i'i  ma i  \  Lid \  \m  Li dai 

I'hi-  Ivm.ii  i  I  [da  i  ■  ncmii 

Pin 

Dibili  I  .lii    I 

l » - 1 1  .  i  inton  mchi  tul  i 

II  I.   \ll..h  il  h  Mfthamad  II  :  AIL.Ii 

Mini. 1  klbulkan  do  1  pemltl  Udl 

Ai.11  in  lii  i  mu  •  •  litru  I  w 

I. mi  ili  ■'  ink  'u  ki 

La  ill&ha  ilallfth  berkal  al  u  me  n 

I'm. mi;  kring,    pining   kotei,    I  >i  blah   di  tjah,    Darah 

kunchil  kan],  tulang  nj  1  aku  patah  pat ;ihj  kan  J.     Hei   Allah  I   Hei   Muhao 
lli-i  Baginda  rasul  Allah  I     Minta'  qabulkan  do'a  •  tah- 

kan  lidah  musoh  m-uu  lawan*ku.      Lemah  angkau,   kras-lah   aku.     La  il 
ilallah,  luik.it  akum€makai  do*i  pimatah  lidah. 

Pi  :•  -.    HI 

The  Pebinchi  (from    in  hit  hatred)  is  used  to  excite  hatred  in  the  object  ol 
:tion  towards  a  rival. 

Pucho  pebinchi  daun  pebanchi6  aku  rintas  tujo  tfmkeh  tujo  le r>  &ku  gunting 
tujo  kali  aku  megunting '  hati  &ni  siding  si. mo  Itu,  ankau s  memandang  siano  Itu 
bagimlna  angkau  memandang  habu,9  bagiminl  ankau  memandang  ludu 

ankau  binchl,  tidor  ankau  binchl,  berjalan  Inkau  binchl,  mlkln  ankau  binchl, 
mandi  angkau  binchl,  mlnum  ankau  binchl,  kormeimei l"  baying  siding  silno  Itu, 
Sampei  tlga  hurl  putus  binchl  ankau  mellhat  pada  siano  Itu,  memandang  aku 
sa'orang  terlampau  minis  bagi  angkau  memanding  lang  berchaia  muka  aku  dua 
bias  hari    turun  mltahari  sama    turun  smangat  ankau    nal   matlhari    sama    n"i 

ugat  siano  Itu.11 

Malay  Version. 

Puchok  pembenchi,  daun  pembenchi,  aku  rintas  tujoh  tangkai.  tujoh  lai,  aku 
gunting[-kan]  tujoh  kali,  aku  menggunting  hati  anak  sidang  sianu  itu,  angkau 
memandang  sianu  itu  bageimana  angkau  memandang  abu,  bageimana  angkau 
memandang  paya  ;  dudok,  angkau  benchi  ;  tidor,  angkau  benchi  ;  ber-jalan, 
angkau  bench]  :  makan,  angkau  benchi  :  mandi,  angkau  bench]  ;  minum,  angkau 
benchi.     Kur,  mari-mari,  bayang  sidang  sianu  itu,  sampai  tiga  hari  putus  benchi. 


1  Mai.  "di-belah." 

-  Mai,  "patahkan":  Mentera,  like 
some  other  Malayan  languages,  appar- 
ently sometimes  forms  verbs  by  nasal- 
ising an  initial  tenuis  ;  but  this  form 
may  be  an  abbreviation  of  "  mematah- 
kan." 

3  Mai.  "  lemah,"  weak  or  feeble. 

i/.I.AA.  314. 

6  Misprint  for  "  pebinchi,"  i.e.  "  pe- 
benchi."  Mai.  "pembenchi." 

6  Mai.  "helai,  lai"  ;  or  "lei." 

7  Mai.  "  menggunting," 


s  Wrong  spelling  for  "angkau," 
Mat  "  engkau.'" 

9  It  is  characteristic  of  these  dialects 
to  pronounce  an  initial  h-  in  words 
where  Malay  no  longer  pronounces  it 
even  though  preserving  it  in  writing. 

10  =  Mai.  "kur,"  the  word  used  in 
calling  poultry  and  in  addressing  the 
soul  (as  a  bird)  in  charms,  and  Mai. 
"  mari,"  the  Mentera  equivalent  for 
which  is  "mai"  (in  our  spelling:  = 
"  mei  "  in  Logan's). 

*J.I.A.  L315. 


712  APPENDIX 

angkau  mclihat  pada  sianu  itu  ;  mcmandang  aku  sa'-orang  Ur-lampau  manis 
bagei  angkau  mcmandang  yang  bcr-chahia  muka  aku  duablas  hari ;  turun 
matahari,  sama  turun  semangat  angkau  ;  naik  matahari,  sama  naik  semangat 
sianu  itu. 

Pebinchi. 

Pucho  beruwang  ruwang  disilang  daun  pebinchi  Iman  pujo  bawa  pulf.ng  hati 
didalam  terlalu  binchi  ankau  berdiri  binchikan  siano  itu,  ankau  berjalan 
binchikan  siano  itu,  ankau  tldor  binchikan  siano  Itu,  usakan  samantara  man- 
usia sidangkan  rumput  ranting  kayu  kayan  lagi  habis  binchikan  mandang  siano 
Itu,  turun  chahia  pada  muka.  aku  jikalau  berchahia  malam  berchahia  muka 
siano  Itu  jekalau  tiada  berchahia  malam  tiada  berchahia  muka  siano  Itu  aku 
turunkan  minla  pemanis  aku  naikan  doa  pebinchi  binchikan  segala  umat  segala 
manusia  turunla  pemanis  siano  Itu  nai  doa  pebinchi  dimuka  siano  itu  habes  binchi 
sikilian  lang  berniawa  memandang  muka  siano  Itu  meningar  swara  siano  itu.1 

Malay  Version. 

Puchock  bgruang-ruang  di-selang  daun  pembenchi  iman  pujo'  bawa'  pulang 
hati  didalam  terlalu  benchi  angkau  berdiri  benchi-kan  si-anu  itu,  angkau  ber-jalan 
benchi-kan,  si-anu  itu,  angkau  tidor  benchi-kan  si-anu  itu,  usah-kan  sementara 
manusia,  sedang-kan  rumput  ranting  kayu-kayu-an  lagi  habis  benchi-kan  mem  an 
dang  si-anu  itu,  turun  chahia  pada  muka  aku,  jikalau  berchahia  malam  berchahia 
muka  si-anu  itu,  jikalau  tiada  berchahia  malam,  tiada  berchahia  muka  si-anu  itu,  aku 
turun-kan  minya'  pemanis,  aku  naik-kan  do'a  pembenchi,  benchi-kan  segala  ummat 
segala  manusia,  turun-lah  pemanis  sianu  itu,  naik  do'a  pembenchi  di-muka  sianu 
itu,  habis  benchi  sekelian  yang  ber-nyawa,  memandang  muka  sianu  itu,  nvlnengar 
suara  sianu  itu. 

Tankal2  TlKAM  Gaja. 

(A  spell  used  when  about  to  attack  an  elephant. ) 

Hong  !  gampah  badi,  gampah  dah  chimarong,3  dah  chimukar,3  siba.  kiri. 
siba.  kanan,  aku  membuang  badi  gampah  gaja.  mengugnot i  gaja.  mengubang, 
mengubang  disabrang  danau,  prlo  mendide  blanga  mendide  sabrang  tanjong,  siba 
kiri,  siba  kanan,  siba  kumbang  6  badi  nene,  aku  melepaskan  jari  tangan.6 

Malay  Version. 

Hong,  gempar  badi,  gempar  'dah  chimarong,  'dah  chimukar ;  sibar  [ka-] 
kiri,  sibar  [ka-]kanan,  aku  membuang  badi,  gempar  gajah,  mengangut  gajah 
mengubang,  mengubang  di-sebrang  danau  ;  prio'  mendideh,  blanga  mendideh 
sebrang  tanjong ;  sibar  [ka-]kiri,  sibar  [ka-]kanan,  sibar  [ka-]kubang  (?)  badi 
nene'  ;  aku  melepaskan  jari  tangan. 

Tankal  Tikam  Gaja.2 

Iang  ne"ne  kapada  aku,  iang  aku  kapada  nene,  bau  aku  bau  ayer,  bau  aku  bau 
daun,  bau  aku  bau  tana,  bau  aku  bau  nene,  bau  aku  bau  kubang,  santap  simpolan 

1  J.  I.  A.  i.  315,  316.  5  Logan  translates  "  go  to  the  water- 

2  Wrong     spelling     for     "Tangkal  vessel,"  sed  quare.      Perhaps  it  is  for 
Tikam  Gajah."  Mai.  "kubang,"  the  "wallowing  hole" 

3  These  words  are  obscure.  of   big    beasts  such    as  elephants  and 

4  Misprint  for  "  mengungot  "  =  Mai.  buffaloes. 

"  mengangut  "  (?).  G  /.  /.  A.  i.  316. 


MAN1  h 


p m di"  ku,  mAntong  hidong  n  ne\  1 

t.i.it,  i.i  i  .j  I>A1A,  i.  i/i   tljg  i 

ii   ii  n  ,    liergrA    lAmfl   bcr|  rl   tAli  prul  niArnlj  ■ 

!!•    II 

Ma 

\  .Hi  klpadi 

bau  aku,  bau  daun  ;  bau  aku,  bau  t.ui.iii  . 
kubang.     Si  n  mpolan  pinang  i  u,  mai 

kaki  brat  ;  tangan  di  tatii  in  brat,  '  i  l.'lah,  i 

!■  ni|. .i\. in  :   bi  rgral 
tali  prut,  |  m  |  nyambul  jari  tangan  chu<  h 

KAl    RlBi  i. 

The  follow  ing  i  barm  to  allay  itormi  i 

Rambong    pei   rango'on   bfttoi  men&ut  >b&ng   '"' 

sabring  Iftul  sifl  kiri  sifl  kAn&n,  aku  k&mb&ng  nUit.' 

Malay  I 

Rambong       i  an  ijah  mfoaut  melaut  ot  im  ngangut), 

gajah  mengubang,  m£ngubang  si  brang  laut,  uah  [ka-]kiri,  liah  [ka-]kanaa,  aku 
kembang  (?)  ribut. 

On  entering  the  forest  the  following  tdnAdlit  repeated  : — 

SibS  kiri,  sibS  k&n&n,  seg&li  muso  sitru  L&w&nku  mints  buang  pandangan  pads 
aku,  aku  berj&l&n  sa'orang  jui.' 

Malay  Version, 

Sibar  [ka-]kiri,  sibar  [ka-]kanan  segala  musoh  setru  lawan-ku,  minta'  buang 
pandangan  pada  aku,  aku  ber-jalan  sa'orang  jua. 

Charm  against  the  IIantu  Saburu. 

Apa  nama  ankau  anjing  Sokom  nama  ankau  anjing  itam  nama  tuhanko 
nama  tuanko  ridding  nama  tuanko  man  pos  pigi  ankau  pulang  bawci "  anjingku  b 
pulang,  apa  diburu  sini  t&dS  babi  tada  rusa  ditutup  lobang  idong  kabau   idong 
suda  ku  doa  bau  ku  bawa  angin  lalu.° 

Malay  Version, 

Apa  nama  angkau  ?     Anjing  Sokom  nama  angkau,  anjing  Iiam  nama  [ang-J- 
kau,  Ayer  nama   tuan-kau  !      Redang  nama  tuan-kau,  utan  pos  (?)  pcrgi  angkau 

1  Logan  here  again  wrongly  translates  '"'  Mai.  "tuan-kau." 

"  ta'  ;*  (which  —  Mai.  "  ter-")asanega-  ~   Mai.  "bawa.*-     The  form  is  char- 

tive,  and  (what  is  worse)  as  a  prohibi-  acteristic  :     cf.      "  bapai  "      for      Mai. 

tive  :  cf.  the  first  charm.  "bapa."'     But  (conceivably)  ''bawci" 

The  vowel    in  the  final    syllable  is  (i.e.  "bawai")is   for   "bawa-i,*'   with 

characteristic  :  cf.  "jehet,"  supra.  the  transitive  affix,  sed  queere. 

-   Probably  a  misprint  for  "  tern  pa-  8  Mai.     "  anjing-kau."       The   dog's 

yan."  name,    Sokom,   is    that   of  one  of  the 

3  J.  I.  A.  316,  317.  Wild   Huntsman's  dogs,  as  known  to 

4  Ibid.  317.  the  Malays — v.  Malay  Magic,  p.  593. 

5  Ibid.  9  /.  /.  A.  i.  31S. 


714  APPENDIX 


pulang  bawa  anjing-kau  pulang.  Apa  di-buru  sini  ?  Tada  babi,  lada  rusa, 
di-tutop  lobang  hidong-kau,  bau  hidong  sudah-ku  do'a,  bau-ku  bawa  angin 
lalu. 

TANKAL    KAI'IELU. 

Hong  pielu  x  mula  pielu  terbang  jabut  biluntok  bilum  -  tawar,  aku  membuang 
tawar  pielu  dikapala  aku  membuang  diatas  kapala  ilang  pielu  3  minta  buang  diatas 
kapala.4 

Malay  Version. 

Hong  [ka-]pialu,  mula  pialu,  terbang  chabut  beluntok  bilang  {or  ?  bilang 
terbilang)  tawar ;  aku  membuang  tawar  [ka-]pialu  di-kapala  aku,  membuang 
di-atas  kapala,  hilang  [ka-]pialu,  minta  buang  di-atas  kapala. 

Tankal  Kambong/' 

Hong6  jiwa  mula  jiwa  jiwa  sheitan  suda  aku  tawar  jiwa  tompang  suda 
aku  tawar  jiwa  takina7  suda  aku  tawar  aku  membuang  jiwa  kras  smangat 
ankaula  smangat  jiwa  bangket  bunkar  segala  jiwa  dalam  prut  dalam  badan 
terbit  lanchang  aku  memalang  segala  jiwa.8 

Malay  Version. 

Hong  dewa,  mula  dewa-dewa,  setan  sudah  aku  tawar,  dewa  tumpang  sudah 
aku  tawar,  dewa  ter-kena  sudah  aku  tawar,  aku  membuang  dewa  k'ras  semangat 
angkau-lah  semangat  dewa  bangkit-bongkar  segala  dewa  dalam  p'rut,  dalam 
badan  terbit  lanchang  (?),  aku  membalang  segala  dewa. 

Charms  used  by  Mentera  in  Rice-cultivation*. 

(i.)9 

Uma  pemuka  mulut  pemuka  aku  buka-la  blia  di-ilir  dibila  ole  blia  aku 
membuang  seitan  jato  bliinto  bulum  ko  tawar  aku  membuang  bisa  seitan  minta 
buangkan  minta  jaukan  segala  seitan.18 

1  [Sic].  also   the    translation    of   "memalang" 

2  These  two  mysterious  words  occur  (  =  replace),  which  is  probably  Mai. 
in  Vaughan-Stevens' charms,  p.  704  «.,  "membalang,"  "to  throw  away,"  and 
supra',  and  also  in  a  slightly  different  "jiwa"  may  be  for  "clewa,"  in  the  sense 
form  in  the  first  of  the  Mentera  charms  of  "spirits,"  in  this  case  maleficent 
used  in  connection  with  rice-cultivation,  ones.  If  so,  the  meaning  would  be  : 
infra.  Logan  here  translates  "  b.  b.  ' '  Om  !  ye  spirits  primeval,  spirits  and 
tawar  ""  uncharmed  biluntok,"  what-  devils!  I  have  counteracted  the  spirits 
ever  that  may  be,  and  the  version  in  vol.  that  lodge,  the  spirits  that  are  incurred  ; 
"•  P-  333>  assumes  "biluntok"  to  be  I  cast  out  the  spirits  that  are  hard  of 
the  name  of  a  shrub,  and  "bilum"  to  heart.  Ye  souls  of  the  spirits,  arise 
represent  Mai.  "bilang";  sea  queer e.  and  come  forth!   all  ye  spirits  within 

3  [Sic]                      *  J.  I.  A.  i.  318.  the  belly,   within  the  body,  come  out 

5  Mai.  "  kembong."  forthwith  !     I  cast  out  all  spirits  !  " 

6  See  note  on  p.  329  of  9  Used  to  charm  the  uncleared  spot 
vol.  ii.  selected   for    clearing   with   a   view  to 

7  Mai.  "terkena."  planting   rice  there.      A  translation   is 

8  J.  I.  A.  i.  318.  Logan's  trans-  given  on  p.  366  of  this  volume,  differ- 
lation,  on  which  the  version  given  in  ing  somewhat  from  Logan's.  Both  are 
vol.    ii.    p.    333,    is    founded,    assumes       doubtful. 

that    "jiwa"  =  Mal.    "jiwa,"    "life."  10  /.  /.  A.  i.  320.     For  " bliinto  "  v. 

But  this  is  at   least  questionable,  as  is       n.  2  ante. 


\Gh 


1 1  u  1 11  \  (?)  ptmbuka  nolat,  pi  ■ 

ulih     blit  Al.u    in. nil 

( ■  l>il. in"  tirbllani 

jauh  !  .in  mil 

in.)1 
Smillihl  mu  ••:  I  1 1     |u  Imi  dii 

M.i 
millahi  mujoi  i'ii  i6jok,  b'ri  dingin,  ku  mel 

(in 

Smillahi*  aku  mengimbil  imingat   ;  ogan  dibri   >i|"  '"i  dingin 

mengambil  bude  l>ud  ;  lea  rami  aku.,; 

Bismillahi  I  nku  mengambil  semangal  padi,  jangan  di-b'ri  ri  dingin, 

aku  mengambil  budak-budak  ka>rumah  aku. 


Mr.Mi.n  Prayer  said  when  the  Juice  of  the  Daun   Pamanto 
am'  Daun  Pamadam  i>  given  to  the  Child  [ai   Birth].7 

Kurmeimei8  tap&nd&ng8  s  itanbinto,0ianggamu  ankau  sama  padain   - 
kau  suda   trang  nan  suda  ditingo  pandangan  ku  ada  mengikut  tuhan  pamanto  1: 
mints  padamkan  aku  sekali  suda  tabali  u  minta  padamkan  sekali  nan  suda.1' 

Malay  I  'ersion. 

Kur  !  mari-mari,  terpandang  setan  bintoh  ranggam  (?)  angkau  ;  sama  padam, 
padam-kau  ;  sudah  terang  yang  sudah  di-tengo'  pandangan-ku  ada  mengikut  tuan 
pemanto  (?)  ;  minta'  padam-kan  aku  sekali  sudah  ter-balik.  minta'  padam-kan 
sekali  yang  sudah. 


1  Used  before  sowing  the  rice  seed. 
Translated  on  p.  367  of  this  volume. 

-  J.  /.  .-/.  i.  321.  The  vowel  (of 
"bude"')  is  characteristic:  Mai. 
"budak." 

3  Used  before  beginning  the  reaping 
of  the  rice.  The  translation  will  be 
found  on  pp.  367,  368  of  this  volume. 

4  Ar.  "  bismi'llahi."  "in  the  name 
of  God." 

5  "The  infants"  are  the  first  reap- 
ings  of  the  rice,  conceived  as  embodying 
the  soul  or  souls  of  the  rice,  in  accord- 
ance with  the  animistic  theory  which 
pervades  Malayan  folklore.  See  Malay 
Magic,  p.  243. 

8  /.  /.  A.  i.  322. 

7  Logan  offers  no  translation  of  this 
charm,    and   its    meaning   is   doubtful, 


though  most  of  the  words  are  intelli- 
gible by  themselves. 

8  Mai.  "kur."  and  Mai.  "  mari  "  ; 
v.  supra. 

9  Mai.  "terpandang."  "looked 
upon." 

10  Apparently ="  sick." 

11  Perhaps  cf.  Mai.  "rcnggang"  "far 
apart"  ;  or  (as  Mr.  Skeat  suggests)  in 
spirit-language  =  "body."  Trans.  xtIfye 
look,  O  demons,  sick  sh all  be  your  body. " 

12  Mai.  "padam,"  "  dim  (of  light)," 
"  to  extinguish." 

13  There  is  a  word  Mai.  "  mant    \ 
"to  return  home,"  but  it   is   doubtful 
whether   this    is  connected   with   "  pa- 
manto." 

u  Mai.  '•  terbalik." 
*  J.I.A.  i.  I2y 


7 16 


APPENDIX 


Jakun  Charm  for  Protection  against  the  Tiger.1 

Kalau  chfttek,  kalau  chatei 
Sangkut  dahan  pauh 
Matahari  jentei  harlmau  tiiha 
Jauh  jangan  dekat 
Aku  tahu  asal  engkau  " 
Mula  menjadiy*  Fatimah  nama 
Mak,  nabi  Musa  nama  bapa. 
Segriching  segrichang  patah 
Ranting  digonggong  angsa 
Taroh  kunchi  terkanching  x 
Maka  kunchi  nabi  tidak  terawa  x 
TTdak  ternafsu  tc-rkanching  x 
Brat  buangkan  hawa  nafsu 
Aku  tahui  turon  temuron  *  engkau 
Mfda  menjadi. 

[This  charm  being  already  in  Malay  form,  no  Malay  version  is  given.] 

Hervey  s  Translation  of  the  above  Charm. 

Even  though  they  be  withered,  though  they  snap,  may  you  be  entangled  in 
the  boughs  of  the  pauh 2  tree  till  the  sun  falls,  old  tiger,  keep  far  away  and 
approach  not ;  I  know  the  origin  of  your  first  being,  Fatimah  was  your  mother's 
name,  and  the  prophet  Moses3  your  father's.  Snap,  snap  go  the  twigs  in  the 
bill  of  the  goose.  Put  on  the  lock  and  you  are  fastened  up,  once  the  lock  of  the 
prophet  has  been  placed  on  you,  no  longer  can  you  indulge  your  desires,  you  are 
fastened  up  ;  heavy  is  the  restraint  placed  on  your  desires.  I  know  your  original 
descent. 


1  Communicated  to  D.  F.  A.  Hervey 
by  the  Dato'  of  the  Jakuns  of  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Mt.  Belumut  (Johor),  and 
printed  in  Straits  Asiatic  Journal,  No. 
3,  p.  in.  The  spelling  of  the  original 
has  been  preserved,  but  the  long  accent 
(— )  substituted  for  the  circumflex  (A). 
In  the  words  marked  x  the  accent  on 
the  e  should,  however,  be  (w),  not  (— ). 
The  language  of  this  charm  does  not 
differ  apparently  from  that  of  Malay 
charms,  and  the  references  to  Fatimah 
and  Moses  are  of  course  indications  of 
Malay  influence.  It  may  well  be  that 
the  whole  charm  is  borrowed  from  a 
Malay  source. 

A  legend  communicated  at  the  same 
time,  and  printed  (in  Malay)  on  p.  no 
of  the  same  number,  differs  from  the 
charm  in  ascribing  the  origin  of  the 
tiger  (and  also  the  crocodile)  to  the  frog 
and  "  Baginda  Ali "  ;   another  indica- 


tion of  Mohammedan  influence,  so  far 
as  the  name  is  concerned,  though  the 
core  of  the  legend  is  probably  native, 
and  perhaps  really  a  Jakun  idea. 

2  "  Pauh  "  is  a  wild  mango  tree. 

3  Hervey  observes  that  as  Fatimah 
lived  long  after  Moses,  probably  Ali"s 
name  should  be  substituted  for  that  of 
Moses.  But  historical  correctness  is  not 
to  be  expected  in  a  composition  of  this 
sort,  and  the  names  themselves  are  really 
non-essential.  The  root  idea  in  charms 
of  this  type  is  to  "bluff"  the  objects 
aimed  at  by  a  declaration  on  the  part 
of  the  exorcist  that  he  knows  the  origin 
or  descent  of  the  individuals  or  species 
in  question  :  this  idea  runs  through  num- 
bers of  Malay  charms,  and  as  the  versions 
often  differ  inter  se,  it  apparently 
does  not  much  matter  whether  the 
exorcist's  knowledge  of  his  adversary's 
origin  is  real  or  merely  assumed. 


I'LACK   AM)   PERSONAL  NAME 


PLAC1    M  KM] 
Si  mang  of   Kl  dah, 


bin  ;       I'.,  rching,  i  hill. 

■    place    {.  neai    Baling,    in 

Ki  dah). 
I  lanjok,  i  place  neai  B<  lum. 
( radung,  a  stream  (.  neai  Balii 
Gapeh,  a  place  neai  CJlu  Siong,  K-dah. 
( rend'ra,  a  place  neai  Tomo\ 
Hinas  (/  .  rlinass),  Mai.  Gunong  Inas, 

a  mountain  in  Perak. 
K  impoi  ( p  .   KSmpbrr),  an  islet  near 

Bi  lum. 
Kendrong(?  —  Pendrok,  ug/foz),  astream. 
Kuwi,  a  hill. 

Lekob,  a  stream  (?near  Belum). 
Lumu',  a  liill. 


hill. 
Mantan,  a  hill. 

Palbl  .  .  mi). 

. 
[  Kendrong,  mf 

I  iman        ' 

the  Sdan.a  river  in   !     | 

Siong,   a  river  and   bills   in   the 

I.  dah. 

Sitong,  B  place  near  B<  lum. 

Sungke,  a   place   in  the   Ulu    K 

(?  near  Haling). 
TSliang,  the  name  of  a  tribe  of  Pangans. 
T^mengor,  the  name  of  a  tribe  <>f 

gans. 


Sk.mang  of  Kuala  Kknkkinc. 

Bukit  Sapi (Wild-Ox  Hill)!  M  ru         .  . 

,         /is    \       's  Names  of  three  of  their  settlements  visited  bv 
Jepo  (Dschepo)  the  collector. 

Ungual  ) 


PERSONAL  NAMES. 


SfiMANG    AND    PANGAN   (SKE 

N.B. — The  sign  =,  when  preceded  or  followed  by  the  serial  numbei 
for  "married,"  c<xL  means  "unmarried,"'  and  ob.  cctl.  means  "died  unmarried." 
The  meaning  of  some  of  the  names  has  been  given  where  certain  ;  in  other  c 
it  may  be  compared  with  words  in  the  Vocabulary. 

Male. 

i.   Bayok,    i.e.    "Crocodile"    {Mai.         5.   Chabang  [ceel.],  i.e.  "Fork"  (A 

Buaya)  [rtr/.  ]  Chabang). 

2.   Bunga'  [Blossom].  4.    Chak 

1  This  list  is  intended  to  be  representative  but  not  exhaustive. 

"17 


7i8 


APPENDIX 


5.  Chentok  [son  of  34]  =  99. 

6.  Cherwok  [/«•/.] 

7.  I  >£bok  =  77  [d.  109]. 

8.  I '(.rum  [or  Jarum)  [<"a7.]  ;  *ee  44. 

9.  Echak. 


10. 
1 1. 


12. 


Gelugor,  i.e.  "G.-fruit"  [see  37]. 
Graluyd    [another    name    for    15] 

=  101. 
Gureng  or  Curing  :    ( 1 )   see  26  : 

(2)  see  47. 


29.    Marem  [coslj] 


30.  Merlel  [car/.] 

31.  Mi  rah  [Red]. 

32.  Munteng  [see  21]. 

33.  Nangom. 


34- 
35- 
36. 

57- 


13- 

He' j  see  38. 

14. 

Hibor  [?  brother  of  63]  =  86  ;  ch. 

38. 

106,  49,  67,  29,  and  83. 

39- 

is- 

I  pong  [another  name  for  11]  =  101. 

16. 

Jadam  [Bitter  Aloe] :  ( 1 )  son  of  39  ; 

(2)  son  of   36,  =  110  [divorced, 

40. 

no  children]. 

17. 

Jarum    [ca:/.],    [another    name   for 
8]  ;  see  44. 

41. 

18. 

Jelok  =  8s  [son,  47]. 

42. 

19. 

Kang=7S  [child,  113].  _ 

20. 

Kapas    [Cotton]    or     Siren,     son 

of  41. 

43- 

21. 

Kasok  =  i07  [children,  32,  1 1 5]. 

44. 

22. 

Kenanting=72  [no  children]. 

23- 

Kok  [cce/.] ;  see  43. 

45- 

24. 

Kroh  [ca:/.] 

46. 

25. 

Kui  [**/.] 

47- 

26. 

Lembek  [Soft,  Pliant] :   (1 )  [  =  64, 

ch.    12    (2),    and    26    (2)];    (2) 

48. 

see  47. 

27. 

Liwadd  =  103. 

49. 

28. 

Lundor  [ca:/.] ;  see  44. 

50- 

Pa'  Betong  [brother  of  40]  =  90. 

Pa*  Deau,  brother  of  36;  see  114. 

Pa'  Gamer  =  93  [father  of  39,  46, 
16  (1),  and  117]. 

Pa"  Gelugor  [called  Dutu  (?)  before 
birth  of  eldest  son  Gelugor] : 
came  from  S.  Buluh,  on  borders 
of  Ligeh  and  Kelantan  ;  =91  ; 
children  10  and  45. 

Pa'  Halus  [called  He'  before  birth 
of  Halus]  :  =92. 

Pa'  Mani  =  eldest  son  of  36  :  was 
*'  poisoned  by  Mekong  Jamal  " : 
=  (1)  77  ;  ch.  Mani  (116)  ; 
=  (2)  61  ;  ch.  Jadam  (16). 

Pa'  Rating  [brother  of  34]  =  94  ; 
ch.  14  ;  see  118. 

Padang  [Flat-land  or  Plain]  =  106  ; 
ch.  20. 

Pandan  or  Penden  [killed  Halus, 
at  the  instigation  of  a  Malay- 
named  Kadir,  who  himself  slew 
the  slayer  in  turn]. 

Pawah  =  76  ;  ch.  95  and  23. 

Pedendeng  or  Pindeng  =  79  ; 
ch.  28,  in,  and  17. 

Pendra'  or  Pendra'  ;  see  37. 

Penleg. 

Pisang,     i.e.     "Banana"    [of 
jarum]  =70:  ch.   12  (1),  26 


S. 


51 


Rembe     [Pangan     from     Tomo', 

Ligeh]  =89  ;  ch.  66. 
Remeng=io5;  ch.  87. 
Repeneh  or  Rempening    (Pangan 

of  Kelantan)  =  84  or  96. l 
Rengi'  [dead,  son  of  5]. 


1   At  Siong  (Kedah)  Skeat  was  given  the  table  as  follows  : — 
Repeneh  [m.)=.  Penanga'  (f.) 


Tumbi  (m.)      Penlos  (A)     Bunga'  (w.) 

and  at  Jarum  (Raman),  two  or  three  days'  distant  (by  elephant),  the  same  family 
was  given  as  follows : — 

Rempening  =  Kenanga' 


Penlos  (/. )      Bunga'  {m.)     Tumbi  (m.) 


■  \/>    I':  ..If     NA 


7"/ 


|l  imii. i     | 

i)  [anothei  nams  foi  so]  |  •/•■  .  I  Plot)  i 

:.v. 


6 1.    Bill  !  wile]. 

Bi  rftpct    [anothei    name    foi    Ma' 

Gel  .  |- 

i  "i  i.}  |. 
B  w*'  [Wind]     26  (1). 

I  'haliol  [had  tWO  01  lime  hlisbl 

but  was  barren  :  eaten  by  I 
while  Mill  young]. 
66.  Ch«k61  [small  child  ;  d.  of  48]. 
I  betrothed  to  59 

68.  Chenbah  [eaten  by  tiger  when  quite 

imall]. 

69.  Chuyeng  =  58. 

70.  Dulang  [Tray]  =  47« 

71.  Dumke 

72.  Gadung  [//'/.'..'-Yam]  =  22  [no  chil- 

dren]. 

73.  Gagak  [Crow]  :   d,  of  52. 

74.  Gundang  [AV^- Snail]  [died  young 

of  dysentery  ("  sakit  prut  ")]. 

75.  Halus  [Fine,  Thin]:   killed    by  a 

Semang  named  Penden  (?  Pandan) 
at  instigation  of  a  Malay  named 
Kadir,  who  then  killed  Penden 
also. 

76.  Hanggor  [W*7a?-Vine]  =  43,  <?.:•. 

77.  Jinjong  or  Jong  =  39   [first  wife]. 

This   same  Jinjong,   or   another 


So.    I\<  1  j  •    ,       1  . 

87.    Ken  iau  |  mail  child,  <l.  <»f  49). 
1  tten  by  tig< 

1  . 

90.  Ma' 

<n.   M4'  Gelugor  [called  Berapet,  be- 
fore birth  "f  eldest  son  Gelugor] 

92.  Ma'    1  [alus    [also    called    "  ! 

or  »«  Ponn"]*   38. 

93.  Ma*  K   m.  ' 

94.  Ma'  Rating  ^=40. 

95.  Panjang,    i.e.    "Long"    [  <*•/.]; 
see  43. 

96.  Penang.V  =  50,  q.v. 

97.  Penlds  :  d.  of  50. 

98.  Per  tad  [or/.] 

99.  Pisang  [Banana]  =  5. 

100.  Pon  or  Ponn  ;  see  92. 

101.  kebong  [Bamboo-Sprout]  =  1 1     r 

15  [Rebong  was  eaten  by  tiger]. 

102.  Sarok  [«?/.] 

103.  Sensonn  [d.]  =  27. 

104.  Sermoi  [d.] 

105.  Silom  =  49. 


woman  of  the  same  name,   also       106.    Sungsang  [Feet-foremost]  =  41, 
=  7- 


78.  Junu=  19  [child,  1 1 3]. 

79.  Kanchong   or   Kechong    [Water- 

Vessel]  =44. 

So.   Kelarah  =  9  [no  children]. 

81.  Kelawer  [«?/.] 

82.  Keleweng  [dead]. 

83.  Kembis   [died    of    "sakit    perut  " 

(?  dysentery)]. 


107.    Ta'ong  =  2I  [children  32,  115]. 

10S.   Tape. 

109.   Tekah:  daughter  of  7,  </.:: 

no.  Telasih  [Basil  -plant]  =  16  (2) 
[parents,  Semang  of  Kedah  ;  was 
"  seized  by  a  Malay  named  Drah- 
man,  and  divorced  by  Jadam  "]. 

in.  Telemba'  or  Telembok  [caL] ; 
see  44. 


Sex  unrecor 

112.  Betong    [probably   eldest   son  of       114.  Deau  [probably  eldest  son  of  3  C, 
34;  ob.  coel]  q.z\ 

113.  Chengkim  [see  19,  7S].  115.  Lanas  [dead]  ;  see  21,  107. 


720 


APPENDIX 


i  1 6.    Mani  [sex  not  recorded,  but  un-        117.    Nged  [cat.,  youngest  child  of  36, 
doubtedly  eldest  son  of  39  (Pi'  <7-v.] 

Mani),  q.v.  118.    Rating,  i.e.  "Branch"  or  "Twig" 

[probably  eldest  son  of  40]. 

SfiMANG   OF    KUAI.A    K.ENERING    (GRUBAUER). 
Sex  not  stated. 


1.   Belong. 

5.    Daun  [Leaf]. 

2.    Bucho  (Butjo). 

6.    Dumhei  {sic,  ?  Dumkei). 

3.    Bunga  [Blossom]. 

7.    Pagi  [Morning]. 

4.    Dahabo. 

Semang  (Marti.n 

V 

Male. 

1.   Jamu.                     2.    Katim. 

Labang.                     4.    Pah. 

Female. 

5.   Guri.                                     6.   Mandong. 

7.   Tot. 

Sakai  of  Perak 

(J- 

Low).2 

Male. 

1.    Ba-himpun  (Ba-himpoon). 

10. 

Si  Miyan. 

2.    Bassuwait  (Ba-suwait). 

11. 

Si  Rangis. 

3.    Panggil  [Call]. 

12. 

Si  Timor  [East]. 

4.    Si  Bunga  [Blossom]. 

13- 

Si  Tong  (Sittong). 

5.   Si  Busut  [Anthill]. 

14. 

Si  Tupai  [Squirrel]. 

6.    Si  Jaman  (Sijamman). 

15- 

Si  Yadap. 

7.    Si  Kumbal. 

16. 

Si  Yassen  (?). 

8.   Si  Lanchap  (?). 

17- 

Si  Yute  (?). 

9.   Si  Limun  (Silimoon). 

18. 

Yuman. 

Female. 

19.   Bage. 

25- 

Si  Putih  (Si-Pootih)  [White]. 

20.   Itam  Kandul  (Etam  Kundool). 

26. 

Singap. 

21.   Moirse  (?). 

27. 

Sirtus. 

22.   Nus  (Noose). 

28. 

Sungoh. 

23.   Si  Bate  ?  (Si  Barte). 

29. 

Tangam. 

24.   Si  Kechi  (Si-Kiche)  [Little-<?^. 

Sakai  (Senoi) 

Martin. 

Male. 

1.   Baka.                                  4.    Belaham. 

7.    Betrugat. 

2.   Barsep.                             5.   Beprop. 

8.    Bulan  [Moon]. 

3.    Bejam.                               6.    Besingloi. 

9.    Changkoal. 

1  In  these  and  the  subsequent  names, 
extracted  by  permission  from  Martin's 
Inlandstdmme,  the  spelling  of  the 
original  has  been  modified. 


2  J.  A.  I.  vol.  iv.  pp.  431,  432.  The 
spelling  of  the  original  has  been  slightly 
modified  where  shown. 


PLACl    AND  n  i  //    VA  Ml 


1 

oh, 

i 

1 1. 

( !himp  ir 

Kulob. 

1  • 

(  'h.i  ■ 

Dilbul. 

1                il).  1. 

>  1 

1 1 

<  rundot. 

1     n  [Fiah] 

nion  ('In    n 

'7- 

k.iput. 

M.ir 

k-l.il.. 

Pie. 

In 

KcluMi.ii. 

1 

toi, 

! 

Bendon. 

•1  \ 

k.uiiili. 

oi 

40. 

41- 

I  >im.i. 

.,«,. 

1     lud. 

42. 

EUong. 

: 

1  Agip. 

2.  A  num. 

3.  Bentang  [Spread], 

4.  Genong. 

5.  Kaledang  [K. -fruit]. 


15.   Damei. 


:  (M  \i:  1  IN). 

6.  Kepok  1  fit    -Bin]. 

7.  Mahat. 

8.  Saipoi 

9.  Samasa. 

10.  Sauko  [?  Sangko 

Female. 
[6.   Seridiot. 


11.   S 

1  ;.   Sii  am. 
14.   Vep. 


17.  Tirana  [Oyster], 


Bi  sisi.1 
Ma 


I. 

oL 

12.    Kunong. 

22.   Sambilai. 

2. 

Bungsu  [Youngest]. 

13.  Linak. 

23.   Sijah. 

3« 

Gadong  [  Wild-Yam], 

14.   Mot. 

24.    Slat  [  Straits  -of-the- 

4- 

Glawa. 

15.   Mundo. 

Sea\ 

5- 

Jarui. 

16.   Nodo    [?  " 

Nodoh  "' 

25.    Soui     [  ?  Sawi,     i.e. 

6. 

Joui. 

or  "  Nodor,"    i.e. 

"  Lettuc 

7- 

Katung. 

Talker]. 

26.    Sulong  [Eldest]. 

8. 

Kiche  [Little]. 

17.    Pangoh. 

27.   Tannah     [  ?  Tanah, 

9- 

Kol. 

iS.    Raje. 

ue.  ••Earth"]. 

10. 

Kulit  Jawa  [?  name 

19.    Rien. 

28.   To  Ku- 

of  a  tree]. 

20.   Rumpet. 

29.    Ulan  [Convolvulus]. 

1 1. 

Kulou. 

21,   Saleh. 

Female. 

30.    Wan. 

3i. 

Allun   [PAlun,    i.e. 

38.  Jampan. 

46.    Xonia  [?  Nonya]. 

"  Swell  -of-the-Sea"\ 

39.  Jukut. 

47.    Nokalou. 

32. 

Bodo  [Stupid]. 

40.   Kewe. 

4S.   Nuka. 

33- 

Bonglong. 

41.   Kintot. 

49.    Panchong    [Peg    or 

34- 

Chak. 

42.   Klosoi. 

Stake]. 

35- 

Chianti. 

43.   Kolot. 

50.    Pram. 

36. 

Gohom. 

44.    Limong. 

51.   Takoh. 

37- 

Iloi. 

45.    Nabongkok. 

1  /.  I.  A.  vol.  i. 

P-  325* 

VOL.  I 


722 


APPENDIX 


Skcat  adds  : — 

Pa*  Nanti  [m.)  [Father  of  "Wait**],    Ma'  Nanti  (/),  Lempar  (m.)t  Beddh  (m.), 
and  Sauma  (/*.). 


i.   Amat. 

2.   Bertam  [B.-Palm].  6.   Kobal. 


BSlandas  (Martin). 

Male. 
5.   Jewang. 


3.  Damang. 

4.  Deia. 


7.  Lepang. 

8.  Mengong. 

Female. 


12.   Dapat     [Get     or  15.   Laigu. 


Find]. 

13.  Kampik. 

1 4.  Kaseb. 


16.  Lemeh  [?  Soft]. 

17.  Pipeh  [Flat]. 

18.  Posoi. 


9.    Pikat  [Horsefly]. 

10.  Prisak. 

11.  Sampul  [Wrap]. 


19.  Rabot  [Torn], 

20.  Treng. 

21.  Wang. 


Skeat  adds  : — 
Pa'  Pikat  (m.),  Ma'  Pikat  (/.),  Pa'  Bijan  (m.)t  Ma'  Bijan  (/.),  and  Kaseb  (/.). 


Mentra  (Martin). 

Male. 

1.    Baja. 

3.   Itam  [Black]. 

5.   Mannon. 

2.    Budang. 

7- 

4.    Kolob. 
Sulong  [Eldest]. 

Female. 

6.   Manu  [?  Bird]. 

8.   Mani. 

9.    Mori. 

10.   Muna. 

11. 

Panan. 

12.   Semilan  [Nine]. 

Mentra.1 

Male. 

I. 

Bosojulot. 

14. 

Hang    [Disappear 

or 

25- 

Piniunga. 

2. 

Bunga  [Blossom]. 

Lose], 

26. 

Powoh. 

J- 

Chagak. 

15- 

Inat. 

27. 

Pring. 

4- 

Chichar. 

16. 

Jangkang. 

28. 

Ru  [Casuarina-  Tree]. 

5- 

Chimah. 

17. 

Minai. 

29. 

Rumpong. 

6. 

Chiriau. 

18. 

Padan. 

30. 

Sagat  [Scrape-Sago]. 

7- 

Dayong  [Oar" 

• 

19. 

Pa  Daun    [Father 

of 

31. 

Sawaneng. 

8. 

Galla  [?  Boat- 

Pole]. 

Leaf]. 

32. 

Sia. 

9- 

Gigai. 

20. 

Pa  Lokot. 

33- 

Sika. 

10. 

Gimgam  [?  Fistful]. 

21. 

Palsai  [?  Pa'  Lesai]. 

34- 

Singaja  [Intentional, 

11. 

Ginya. 

22. 

Pa  Singan. 

On- Purpose]. 

12. 

Hanas. 

23- 

Peero. 

35- 

Sinya. 

13. 

Ikan  [Fish]. 

24. 

Pines. 
37.    Sungei  [River], 

36. 

Smaroi. 

1  J.  I.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  324*. 


/•/  <   I'l.K 


41. 

It. 
Bung] 

(  ii.i.ip. 

•h. 

1  ...Hi  . 
Mai 

kl    : 

■  n. 

V"|. 

<  ini  . 
I  topoi. 

' 

1  >..... 

57- 

Maklang  [Ma*  Klang]. 

7"- 

:<<[). 

in. 

Maramput  |  M.i'  Rumput, 

7' 

Ilul.it  [Grab]. 

"  Moth  1  0    Gi 

1                      i       '    !.]. 

48. 

-1". 

In  ras. 

fungeh. 

k       ill). 

61. 

Ml   in. 

Mino. 

\  a  |><>n. 

'1    .1111! 

1                                  1 

Kochen. 

Platap. 

7  5- 

d. 

1  I        IN  Ol    JOHOR    (Mil. I  i'cnn-M  v  1 
Male.  /•   m 

1.    Losso,  n-la. 


(  )RANG    MUK  \    Ki  NIN< 

Male. 

1.    Antas.  5.   Jalail  [Path]. 

1.  Aw  a.  6.  Jawak  [Monitor- Lizard]. 

3,  [bo]  [I. -/aim].  7.    Kelut. 

4.  Iras.  S.    Leka. 

13.  Te  [?Tch,  i.e.  "Whil 

Female. 


9.    Majah. 

10.  Nibor. 

11.  Oko. 

12.  Sare. 


14.    Bina.                                 19.    Lima  [Five]. 

23- 

Rabo  [Tinder]. 

15.   Dras  [Quick].                 20.    Limpat. 

24. 

Rina. 

16.   Jodo  [Pair,  Affinity  ].    21.    Mina. 

25- 

Sijo. 

17.    Kassah.                            22.    Pangel      [?Call 

26. 

Tama. 

18.   Kate.                                         or  Summon]. 

27. 

Ulu  [Head-Waters], 

Orang  Sletar  (Thomso> 

0." 

Male. 

1.    Awin.                                 5.    Kassap  [Rough]. 

9.    Nassap. 

2.    Desan.                                6.    Kissah. 

10.   Nosan. 

3.    Dosan.                               7.    Kosan. 

1 1 .    Penis. 

4.   Kadang.                            8.    Masei. 

12.    Sadang. 

is- 
16. 


13.   Singal. 


Bunteh  (Boon  teh). 
Impang. 


14.   Soning. 


Female. 

17.   Neckang. 
iS.   Nongei. 


19.  Sangkang. 

20.  Sookan<j. 


1  Journal  of  Eastern  Asia,   vol.    i. 
No.  1,  pp.  99-100. 


2  /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  339* 

3  Ibid.  p.  346*. 


724 

APPENDIX 

Sam mba  (Thomson).1 

Male. 

I.   Angin  [Wind]. 

8. 

Kassar  [Coarse]. 

14. 

Pang. 

2.    Ayin. 

9- 

Kassaw. 

i5« 

Rama  [Butterfly]. 

3.    Bangas. 

10. 

Lodang. 

16. 

Rinnah  [Low,  Short]. 

4.    Bintang  [Star]. 

1 1. 

Luyut  (Looioot). 

17- 

Serong  [Athwart,  Askew]. 

5.   Butun  (Bootoon). 

12. 

Mulut     (  Mooloot) 

18. 

Solai. 

6.    Deman. 

[Mouth], 

19. 

Talei. 

7.  Jali  (Jalee). 

13- 

Nipis  [Thin,  Flat]. 
Fetnale. 

20. 

Umbu  (Oomboo). 

21.   Asia  [Age]. 

24.    Minah  (Meenal 

i). 

28.   Tawei. 

22.    Bukit  (Bookit)  [Hill]. 

25.    Mangi  ?  (Mungee). 

29.   Tengah  [Half]. 

23.    Dayang  (Dyang)  [H 

and- 

•  26.   Narimah  (Nareemah).       30.   Timah    (Teemah) 

maid]. 

27.    Rini  (Reenee). 

[Tin]. 

1  /.  /.  A.  vol.  i.  p.  349^- 


END    OF    VOL.    I. 


Printed  by  R.  &  R.  Clark,  Limited,  Edinburgh. 


BY  THE   SAME   AUTHORS 

•  1 t.  rut, 

MALAY   MAGIC 

l:l    I  I  III 

FOLKLORE  and  POPULAR   RELIGION  01     I  HE 

M ai.w    PENINS1  i  A 

l:\ 

WALTER   WILLIAM   SKEAT,  M.A 

Willi    \  PRE!  v  i.  BV 

CHARLES  OTTO   BLAGDEN,  M.A. 

SPECTATOR.  -"Most  interesting.  .  .  .   Mr.  Skeat's  book  musl 
and  ranked  with  those  interesting  volumes  of  Sir  Frank  Swettenham  and  Mi. 
Hugh  Clifford,  Lieut.  Newbold  and  Sir  William  Maxwell." 

.  /  THEN*  HUM. — "A  valuable  work  and  a  necessary  addition  to  the  til 
of  the  student  of  anthropology." 

OUTLOOK. — "  One  of  the  most  fascinating  volumes  we  have  come  across  for 
a  long  time." 

OBSER  VER. — "  He  has  gathered  together  a  great  deal  of  curious  and  interest- 
ing matter,  and  has  given  a  really  notable  addition  to  our  later  folklore  literature." 

GLASGOW  HERALD.— "There  is  much  more  in  Mr.  Skeat's  volume  that 
is  of  the  greatest  interest,  not  only  to  the  student  of  folklore,  but  to  the  student  of 
man  and  the  vagaries  of  the  human  mind,  and  we  would  fain  quote  further  from 
his  most  engrossing  pages.  The  book  is  one  of  the  most  important  additions 
made  in  recent  years  to  our  knowledge  of  a  remarkable  race." 

MORNING  POST.— "  A  rich  collection  of  Malayan  practice,  folklore,  and 
religion.  .  .  .  Students  of  Mr.  Tylor's  and  Mr.  Frazer's  works  will  rind  the 
volume  full  of  interest.  .  .  .  There  has  been  no  better  book  of  the  kind  since  that 
of  Messrs.  Spencer  and  Gillen  on  the  natives  of  Central  Australia.'' 

DAILY  NEWS.— "The  book  has  an  interesting  preface  by  Mr.  Charles 
Otto  Blagden,  and  is  pleasantly  illustrated  with  photographs  of  native-made 
puppets  engaged  in  various  rites  and  dances.  There  is  an  excellent  index,  and  the 
whole  work  is  a  model  of  its  kind,  very  unlike  the  many  crude  collections  of  scraps 
at  third  hand,  which  do  so  much  to  discredit  the  science  of  anthropology.  Mr. 
Skeat's  volume  is  an  example  of  sound  and  industrious  research,  and  of  lucid 
statement." 

MACMILLAN   AND  CO.,  Ltd.,   LONDON. 


NEW  WORKS   ON   ANTHROPOLOGY 

ivo.      With  a  Map. 

THE   LOWER   NIGER 
AND  ITS  TRIBES 

BY 

Major   ARTHUR  GLYN  LEONARD 

LATE   2ND    BATT.    EAST   LANCASHIRE   REGIMENT 

AUTHOR    OF 

'THE  camel:   ITS   USES   AND   MANAGEMENT,'   AND   'HOW   WE  MADE  RHODESIA' 

In  his  Preface  to  this  work  Dr.  A.  C.  Haddon  points  out  that  the  author  has  all 
his  life  been  deeply  interested  in  comparative  religion,  and  that  by  the  attention  he 
has  paid  to  Aryan  and  Hindu  mythology,  as  well  as  to  the  natives  of  Asia  and 
Africa,  he  had  prepared  himself  for  the  detailed  study  of  a  particular  people. 
Endowed  with  sympathy  and  an  earnest  desire  to  see  everything  from  the  native 
point  of  view — to  "think  black,"  as  Miss  Kingsley  tersely  put  it — Major  Leonard 
has  studied  the  natives  of  the  Lower  Niger  at  first  hand.  He  draws  a  vivid  picture 
of  the  wonderful  Niger  delta,  and  traces  its  effects  on  the  mind  and  nature  of  its 
inhabitants.  His  studies  have  led  him  to  the  conclusion  that  the  European  has 
never  understood  the  Negro,  and  the  present  volume  is  his  interpretation  of  Negro 
thought  and  expression. 

8vo.      With  Illustrations. 

AT  THE  BACK  OF 
THE   BLACK   MAN'S   MIND 

OR,   NOTES  ON  THE  KINGLY  OFFICE 
IN  WEST  AFRICA 

BY 

R.  E.  DENNETT 

AUTHOR  OF 
'  NOTES  ON  THE  FOLK-LORE  OF  THE  FJORT,'  ETC. 

In  this  work  the  author's  twofold  object  is  to  show  (i)  that,  concurrent  with 
fetichism  or  Jujuism,  there  is  in  Africa  a  religion  which  gives  a  much  higher:  con- 
ception of  God  than  is  generally  acknowledged,  and  (2)  to  make  clear  the  vital 
importance  of  the  kingly  office  to  the  African  communities.  He  believes  that  the 
lasting  effect  of  missionary  effort,  and  the  simplification  of  the  work  of  governing 
the  natives,  depend  to  a  great  extent  on  a  fuller  recognition  of  these  truths  concern- 
ing the  religious  and  political  systems  of  the  African  tribes. 

MACMILLAN  AND  CO,  Ltd.,  LONDON. 


NEW   WORKS   ON    ANTHROPOLOGY 

id 

ADONIS,  ATTIS,  OSIRIS 

STUDIES   in    i  in     in    rOR\  01   ORIEN  I  \i.  11  i  \i.\<>s 


J.  G.   FRAZER,   D.C.L.,   LL.D.,  Lirr.D, 

.1 

AU  Tl 

The  itudiei  contained   in  this  book  are  an  expansion  ol  the  -  ruling 

sections  in  /  l'.y  far  the  inciter  portion  of  then.  »n<l  they 

make  by  themselves  .i  burly  complete  and,  the  author  hopes,  intelligible  whole; 
In  studyi  b  these  thi  atal  worships,  \h.  Frazer  has  paid  more  attention 

than  formerly  to  the  natural  features  of  the  countries  in  which  they  arose,  because 
he  is  more  than  ever  persuaded  that  religion,  like  all  other  institutions,  has  been 
profoundly  influenced  by  physical  environment,  anil  cannot  be  understood  without 
some  appreciation  of  those  aspects  of  external  nature  which  stamp  themselves 
indelibly  on  the  thoughts,  the  habits,  the  whole  life  of  a  people. 


%vo.       With  numerous  Illustrations  and  a  Map. 

THE  TODAS 

BY 

W.   H.   R.  RIVERS,  M.A.,  M.D. 

FELLOW   OF    ST.    JOHN'S   COLLEGE,  CAMBRIDGE 

Dr.  Rivers  recently  spent  some  time  visiting  the  Todas,  a  most  interesting 
pastoral  people  of  Southern  India.  They  are  an  isolated  and  quite  peculiar  people, 
and  have  been  described  several  times  ;  but  Dr.  Rivers  has  obtained  far  fuller 
information  than  any  previous  observer,  especially  with  regard  to  their  mos: 
elaborate  religious  ritual,  which  centres  round  the  dairy.  The  dairy,  in  fac;, 
forms  their  temple.  Dr.  Rivers  obtained  many  interesting  photographs  which 
serve  to  illustrate  his  work. 

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd.,  LONDON. 


IMPORTANT  WORKS  ON  ANTHROPOLOGY 

THE  GOLDEN  BOUGH.  A  Study  in  Magic  and  Religion. 
By  J.  G.  Frazer,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  Litt.D.  Third  Edition, 
revised  and  enlarged.    Three  vols.     8vo.       [In  the  Press. 

LECTURES  ON  THE  EARLY  HISTORY  OF  THE 
KINGSHIP     By  J.  G.  Frazer.      8vo.      8s.  6d.  net. 

THE  HISTORY  OF  HUMAN  MARRIAGE.  By 
Edward  Westermarck,  Ph.D.  With  Preface  by 
Dr.  A.  R.  WALLACE.      Third  Edition.      8vo.      i4s.net. 

THE  ORIGIN  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE 
MORAL  IDEAS.  By  Edward  Westermarck,  Ph.D. 
In  two  vols.      8vo.      Vol.  I.      14s.  net. 

THE  NORTHERN  TRIBES  OF  CENTRAL  AUS- 
TRALIA. By  Baldwin  Spencer,  M.A.,  F.R.S., 
and  F.  J.  GlLLEN.  WTith  numerous  Illustrations.  8vo. 
2  is.  net. 

THE  NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  CENTRAL  AUSTRALIA. 
By  Baldwin  Spencer  and  F.  J.  Gillen.  With 
numerous  Illustrations.      8vo.      21s.  net. 

NATIVE  TRIBES  OF  SOUTH-EAST  AUSTRALIA. 
By  A.  W.  Howitt,  D.Sc.  With  Illustrations  and 
Maps.      8vo.      2 is.  net. 

MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,   Ltd.,   LONDON. 


19    // 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


Iter 


I 


