h'OLlte^lAN 


"t|!S|f 


POLYNESIAN  MYTHOLOGY, 


AND 


ANCIENT  TRADITIONAL  HISTORY 


OF    THE 


NEW    ZEALAND    RACE, 


AS   FURNISHED   BY   THEIR   PRIESTS    AND    CHIEFS. 


BY  SIE  GEOEGE  GREY, 

LATE    GOVEKNOR-IN-CniEF    OF    NEW    ZEALAND. 


LONDON: 
JOHN    MURRAY,    ALBEMARLE    STREET. 

1855. 


J3L 
G7 


LIBRARY 

75724S 

UNIVERSny  OF  TORONTO 


LONDON:     PRINTED  BY   WOODFALL  AND   KINDER, 
ANGBL  COURT,  SKINNBR  STREET. 


PREFACE. 


Towards  the  close  of  the  year  1845  I  was 
suddenly  and  unexpectedly  requu'ed  by  the  British 
Government  to  administer  the  affairs  of  New  Zea- 
land, and  shortly  afterwards  received  the  appoint- 
ment of  Governor-in-Chief  of  those  Islands. 

When  I  arrived  in  them,  I  found  Her  Majesty's 
native  subjects  engaged  in  hostilities  with  the 
Queen's  troops,  against  whom  they  had  up  to  that 
time  contended  with  considerable  success  ;  so  much 
discontent  also  prevailed  generally  amongst  the 
native  population,  that  where  disturbances  had  not 
yet  taken  place,  there  was  too  much  reason  to 
apprehend  they  would  soon  break  out,  as  they 
shortly  afterwards  did,  in  several  parts  of  the 
Islands. 

I  soon  perceived  that  I  could  neither  successfully 
govern,  nor  hope  to  conciliate,  a  numerous  and  tur- 
bulent people,  with  whose  language,  manners,  cus- 
toms, religion,  and  modes  of  thought  I  was  quite 
unacquainted.     In  order  to  redress  their  grievances, 


IV  PEEFACE. 

and  apply  remedies,  which  would  neither  wound 
their  feelings,  nor  militate  against  their  prejudices, 
it  was  necessary  that  I  should  be  able  thoroughly 
to  understand  their  complaints ;  and  to  win  their 
confidence  and  regard,  it  was  also  requisite  that 
I  should  be  able  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places, 
patiently  to  listen  to  the  tales  of  their  wrongs  or 
sufferings,  and,  even  if  I  could  not  assist  them,  to 
give  them  a  kind  reply,  couched  in  such  terms  as 
should  leave  no  doubt  on  their  minds  that  I 
clearly  understood  and  felt  for  them,  and  was 
really  well   disposed    towards  them. 

Although  furnished  with  some  very  able  inter- 
preters, who  gave  me  assistance  of  the  most  friendly 
nature,  I  soon  found  that  even  with  their  aid  I 
could  still  only  very  imperfectly  perform  my  duties. 
I  could  not  at  all  times  and  in  all  places  have  an 
interpreter  by  my  side ;  and  thence  often  when  way- 
laid by  some  suitor,  who  had,  perhaps,  travelled 
two  or  three  hundi'ed  miles  to  lay  before  me  the 
tale  of  his  or  her  grievances,  I  was  compelled  to 
pass  on  without  listening,  and  to  witness  with  pain 
an  expression  of  sorrow  and  keenly  disappointed 
hope  cloud  over  features  which  the  moment  before 
were  bright  with  gladness,  that  the  opportunity  so 
anxiously  looked  for  had  at  length  been  secured. 

Again,  I  found  that  any  tale  of  sorrow  or  suffer- 
ing, passing  through  the  medium  of  an  interpreter, 


PKEFACE.  ir 

fell  much  more  coldly  on  my  ear,  than  what  it 
would  have  done  had  the  person  mterested  ad- 
dressed the  tale  dh^ect  to  myself;  and  in  like 
manner  an  answer  delivered  through  the  interven- 
tion of  a  thii-d  person,  appeared  to  leave  a  very 
different  impression  upon  the  suitor  to  what  it 
would  have  had  coming  direct  from  the  lips  of  the 
Governor  of  the  country.  Moreover,  this  mode 
of  communication  through  a  third  person  was  so 
cumbrous  and  slow,  that,  in  order  to  compensate 
for  the  loss  of  time  thus  occasioned,  it  became 
necessary  for  the  interpreters  to  compress  the  sub- 
stance of  the  representations  made  to  me,  as  also 
of  my  own  repUes,  into  the  fewest  words  possible ; 
and  as  this  had  in  each  instance  to  be  done  hur- 
riedly, and  at  the  moment,  there  was  reason  to  fear 
that  much  that  was  material  to  enable  me  fully  to 
understand  the  question  brought  before  me,  or  the 
suitor  to  comprehend  my  reply,  might  be  uninten- 
tionally omitted.  Lastly,  I  had  on  several  occasions 
reasons  to  believe  that  a  native  hesitated  to  state 
facts,  or  to  express  feelings  and  wishes,  to  an  inter- 
preter, which  he  would  most  gladly  have  done  to  the 
Governor,  could  he  have  addressed  him  direct. 

These  reasons,  and  others  of  equal  force,  made  me 
feel  it  to  be  my  duty  to  make  myself  acquainted, 
with  the  least  possible  delay,  with  the  language  of 
the  New  Zealanders,   as  also   with  their  manners, 

a  2 


Vi  PREFACE. 

customs,  and  prejudices.  But  I  soon  found  that 
this  was  a  far  more  difficult  matter  than  I  had  at 
first  supposed.  The  language  of  the  New  Zea- 
landers  is  a  very  difficult  one  to  understand  tho- 
roughly :  there  was  then  no  dictionary  of  it  pub- 
lished (unless  a  vocabulary  can  be  so  called)  ;  there 
were  no  books  pubhshed  in  the  language,  which 
would  enable  me  to  study  its  construction ;  it 
varied  altogether  in  form  from  any  of  the  ancient 
or  modern  languages  which  I  knew  ;  and  my 
thoughts  and  time  were  so  occupied  with  the 
cares  of  the  government  of  a  country  then  pressed 
upon  by  many  difficulties,  and  with  a  formidable 
rebellion  raging  in  it,  that  I  could  find  but  very  few 
hours  to  devote  to  the  acquisition  of  an  unwritten 
and  difficult  language.  I,  however,  did  my  best, 
and  cheerfully  devoted  all  my  spare  moments  to  a 
task,  the  accomplishment  of  which  was  necessary 
to  enable  me  to  perform  properly  every  duty  to 
my  country  and  to  the  people  I  was  appointed  to 
govern. 

Soon,  however,  a  new  and  quite  unexpected  dif- 
ficulty presented  itself  On  the  side  of  the  rebel 
party  were  engaged,  either  openly  or  covertly,  some 
of  the  oldest,  least  civilised,  and  most  influential 
chiefs  in  the  Islands.  With  them  I  had  either 
personally,  or  by  written  communications,  to  discuss 
questions    which   involved   peace   or   war,   and   on 


PREFACE.  VU 

which  the  whole  future  of  the  Islands  and  of  the 
native  race  depended,  so  that  it  was  in  the  highest 
degTee  essential  that  I  should  fully  and  entirely 
comprehend  their  thoughts  and  intentions,  and  that 
they  should  not  in  any  way  misunderstand  the 
nature  of  the  engagements  into  which  I  entered 
with  them. 

To   my  surprise,   however,   I   found  that   these 
chiefs,  either  in   their  speeches  to  me,  or  in  their 
letters,  frequently  quoted,  in  explanation  of  their 
views  and  intentions,  fragments  of  ancient  poems 
or   proverbs,   or   made   allusions   which    rested   on 
an  ancient  system   of  mythology ;  and  although  it 
was  clear  that  the  most  important  parts  of  their 
communications  were  embodied  in  these  figurative 
forms,   the   interpreters  were   quite   at  fault,   they 
could  then  rarely  (if  ever)  translate  the  poems  or 
explain  the  allusions,  and  there  was  no  pubhcation 
in   existence   which    threw   any   light    npon  these 
subjects,  or  which  gave  the  meaning  of  the  great 
mass   of  the  words   which  the  natives  upon  such 
occasions  made  use  of;  so  that  I  was  compelled  to 
content  myself  with  a  short  general  statement  of 
what  some  other  native  believed  that  the  writer  of 
the  letter  intended  to  convey  as  his  meaning  by  the 
fragment  of  the  poem  he  had  quoted,   or  by  the 
allusions  he  had  made.    I  should  add,  that  even  the 
great  majority  of  the  young  Christian  natives  were 


VIH  PREFACE. 

quite    as  much  at  fault  on  these  subjects  as  were 
the  European  interpreters. 

Clearly,  however,  I  could  not,  as  Governor  of  the 
country,  permit  so  close  a  veil  to  remain  drawn 
between  myself  and  the  aged  and  influential  chiefs, 
whom  it  was  my  duty  to  attach  to  British  interests 
and  to  the  British  race,  whose  regard  and  confi- 
dence, as  also  that  of  their  tribes,  it  was  my  desire 
to  secure,  and  with  whom  it  was  necessary  that  I 
should  hold  the  most  unrestricted  intercourse.  Only 
one  thing  could,  under  such  circumstances,  be  done, 
and  that  was  to  acquaint  myself  with  the  ancient 
language  of  the  country,  to  collect  its  traditional 
poems  and  legends,  to  induce  their  priests  to  im- 
part to  me  their  mythology,  and  to  study  their 
proverbs.  For  more  than  eight  years  I  devoted  a 
great  part  of  my  available  time  to  these  pursuits.  In- 
deed I  worked  at  this  duty  in  my  spare  moments 
in  every  part  of  the  country  I  traversed,  and  during 
my  many  voyages  from  portion  to  portion  of  the 
Islands.  I  was  also  always  accompanied  by  natives, 
and  still  at  every  possible  interval  pursued  my  in- 
quiries into  these  subjects.  Once,  when  I  had  with 
great  pains  amassed  a  large  mass  of  materials  to  aid 
me  in  my  studies,  the  Government  House  was  de- 
stroyed by  fire,  and  with  it  were  burnt  the  mate- 
rials I  had  so  collected,  and  thus  I  was  left  to 
commence  again  my  difficult  and  wearying  task. 


PREFACE.  IX 

The  ultimate  result,  however,  was,  that  I  ac- 
quired a  great  amount  of  information  on  these 
subjects,  and  collected  a  large  mass  of  materials, 
which  was,  however,  from  the  manner  in  which 
they  were  acquired,  in  a  very  scattered  state — for 
different  portions  of  the  same  poem  or  legend  were 
often  collected  from  different  natives,  in  very  dis- 
tant parts  of  the  country ;  long  intervals  of  time, 
also,  frequently  elapsed  after  I  had  obtained  one 
part  of  a  poem  or  legend,  before  I  could  find  a 
native  accurately  acquainted  with  another  portion 
of  it;  consequently  the  fragments  thus  obtained 
were  scattered  through  different  note-books,  and, 
before  they  could  be  given  to  the  public,  required 
to  be  carefully  arranged  and  re-written,  and,  what 
was  still  more  difficult  (whether  viewed  in  refer- 
ence to  the  real  difficulty  of  fairly  translating  the 
ancient  language  in  which  they  were  composed,  or 
my  many  public  duties),  it  was  necessary  that  they 
sliould  be  translated. 

Having,  however,  with  much  toil  acquired  in- 
formation which  I  found  so  useful  to  myself,  I 
felt  unwilling  that  the  result  of  my  labours  should 
be  lost  to  those  whose  duty  it  may  be  hereafter 
to  deal  with  the  natives  of  New  Zealand  ;  and  I 
therefore  undertook  a  new  task,  which  I  liave 
often,  very  often,  been  sorely  tempted  to  abandon  ; 
but  the  same  sense  of  duty  which  made  me  origi- 


X  PEEFACE. 

nally  enter  upon  the  study  of  the  native  language 
has  enabled  me  to  persevere  up  to  the  present  period, 
when  I  have  already  published  one  large  volume 
in  the  native  language,  containing  a  very  extensive 
collection  of  the  ancient  traditional  poems,  religious 
chants  and  songs  of  the  Maori  race,  and  I  now 
present  to  the  European  reader  a  translation  of  the 
principal  portions  of  their  ancient  mythology,  and 
of  some  of  their  most  interesting  legends. 

Another  reason  that  has  made  me  anxious  to 
impart  to  the  public  the  most  material  portions  of 
the  information  I  have  thus  attained  is,  that,  pro- 
bably, to  no  other  person  but  myself  would  many 
of  their  ancient  rythmical  prayers  and  traditions 
have  been  imparted  by  their  priests ;  and  it  is  less 
likely  that  any  one  could  now  acquire  them,  as 
I  regret  to  say  that  most  of  their  old  chiefs,  and 
even  some  of  the  middle-aged  ones  who  aided  me 
in  my  researches,  have  already  passed  to  the  tomb. 

With  regard  to  the  style  of  the  translation  a 
few  words  are  required :  I  fear  in  point  of  care 
and  language  it  will  not  satisfy  the  critical  reader ; 
but  I  can  truly  say  that  I  have  had  no  leisure  care- 
folly  to  revise  it ;  the  translation  is  also  faith- 
fol,  and  it  is  almost  impossible  closely  and  faith- 
fully to  translate  a  very  diiBcult  language,  without 
almost  insensibly  falUng  somewhat  into  the  idiom 
and  form  of  construction  of  that  language,  which, 


PREFACE.  Xi 

perhaps,  from  its  unusualness,  may  prove  unplea- 
sant to  the  European  ear  and  mind,  and  tliis  must 
be  essentially  the  case  in  a  work  like  the  present, 
no  considerable  continuous  portion  of  the  original 
whereof  was  derived  from  one  person,  but  wliich 
is  compiled  from  the  written  or  orally  delivered 
narratives  of  many,  each  differing  from  the  others 
in  style,  and  some  even  materially  fi'om  the  rest 
in  dialect. 

I  have  said  that  the  translation  is  close  and 
faitlifiil :  it  is  so  to  the  full  extent  of  my  powers,  and 
from  the  Kttle  time  I  have  had  at  my  disposal. 
I  have  done  no  more  than  add  in  some  places 
such  few  explanatory  words  as  were  necessary 
to  enable  a  person  unacquainted  with  the  produc- 
tions, customs,  or  religion  of  the  country,  to  under- 
stand what  the  narrator  meant.  For  the  first  time, 
I  beheve,  a  European  reader  wUl  find  it  in  his 
power  to  place  himself  in  the  position  of  one  who 
listens  to  a  heathen  and  savage  high-priest,  ex- 
plaining to  him,  in  his  own  words,  and  in  his  own 
energetic  manner,  the  traditions  in  which  he  ear- 
nestly beheves,  and  unfolding  the  religious  opinions 
upon  which  the  faith  and  hopes  of  his  race  rest. 

That  their  traditions  are  puerile,  is  true ;  that  the 
religious  faith  of  the  races  who  trust  in  them  is 
absurd,  is  a  melancholy  fact ;  but  all  my  expe- 
rience leads  me  to   believe  that  the  Saxon,  Celtic, 


XH  PREFACE. 

and  Scandinavian  systems  of  mythology,  could 
we  have  become  intimately  acquainted  with  them, 
would  be  found  in  no  respects  to  surpass  that  one 
which  the  European  reader  may  now  thoroughly 
understand.  I  believe  that  the  ignorance  which 
has  prevailed  regarding  the  mythological  systems 
of  barbarous  or  semi-barbarous  races  has  too  gene- 
rally led  to  their  being  considered  far  grander  and 
more  reasonable  than  they  really  were. 

But  the  puerility  of  these  traditions  and  bar- 
barous mythological  systems  by  no  means  dimi- 
nishes their  importance  as  regards  their  influence 
upon  the  human  race.  Those  contained  in  the  present 
volumes  have,  with  slight  modifications,  prevailed 
perhaps  considerably  more  than  two  thousand  years 
throughout  the  great  mass  of  the  islands  of  the 
Pacific  Ocean ;  and,  indeed,  tlie  religious  system  of 
ancient  Mexico  was,  probably,  to  some  extent  con- 
nected with  them.  They  have  been  believed  in 
and  obeyed  by  many  milhons  of  the  human  race  ; 
and  it  is  still  more  melancholy  to  reflect  that  they 
were  based  upon  a  system  of  human  sacrifices  to 
the  gods  ;  so  that  if  we  allow  them  to  have  existed 
for  two  thousand  years,  and  that,  in  accordance  with 
the  rites  which  are  based  upon  them,  at  least  two 
thousand  human  victims  were  annually  sacrificed 
throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  numerous 
islands  in  which  they  prevailed  (both  of  which  sup- 


PREFACE.  XIU 

positions  are  probably  much  within  the  truth),  then 
at  least  four  millions  of  human  beings  have  been 
offered  in  sacrifice  to  false  gods  ;  and  to  this  number 
we  should  have  to  add  a  frightful  list  of  children 
murdered  under  the  system  of  infanticide,  which 
the  same  traditions  encouraged,  as  also  a  very  large 
number  of  persons  destroyed  for  having  been  be- 
lieved guilty  of  the  crime  of  sorcery  or  witch- 
craft. 

It  must  fm-ther  be  borne  in  mind,  that  the  native 
races,  who  believed  in  these  traditions  or  supersti- 
tions, are  in  no  way  deficient  in  intellect,  and  in  no 
respect  incapable  of  receiving  the  truths  of  Chris- 
tianity ;  on  the  contrary,  they  readily  embrace  its 
doctrines  and  submit  to  its  rules  ;  in  our  schools 
they  stand  a  fair  comparison  with  Europeans,  and, 
when  instructed  in  Christian  truths,  blush  at  their 
own  former  ignorance  and  superstitions,  and  look 
back  with  shame  and  loatliing  upon  their  previous 
state  of  wickedness  and  credulity  ;  and  yet  for  a 
great  part  of  their  lives  have  they,  and,  for  thou- 
sands of  years  before  they  were  born,  have  their 
forefathers,  implicitly  submitted  themselves  to  those 
very  superstitions,  and  followed  those  cruel  and 
barbarous  rites. 


CONTENTS. 


Page 

The  Childken  op  Heaven  and  Earth      ....       1 

The  Legend  of  Maci 10 

The  Legend  of  Tawhaki 59 

Rupe's  Ascent  into  Heaven 81 

Kae's  Theft  of  the  Whale 90 

The  Mukder  op  Tuwhakararo  and  its  Revenge  .  ,  99 
The  Adventures  op  Rata — the  Enchanted  Tree  .        .  108 

The  Quarrels  at  Hawaiki 123 

The  Discovery  op  New  Zealand 132 

Preparations  to  Emigrate 134 

The  Voyage  to  New  Zealand 136 

The  Curse  op  Manaia 162 

Hatupatu  and  his  Brothers  ..•.,.  182 
The  Emigration  op  Turi  to  New  Zealand      .        .        .  202 

The  Emigration  op  Manaia 221 

HiNE-MOA,  the  Maiden  op  Rotorua  ....  233 

The  Story  of  Maru-tuahu,  and  that  of  Kahureremoa   246 

The  Two  Sorcerers 273 

The  Magical  Wooden  Head 279 

Kahukura  and  the  Fairies 287 

Te  Kanawa's  Adventure  with  the  Fairies  .  .  .  292 
The  Loves  op  Takarangi  and  Rau-Mahora  .  ,  .  296 
The  Stratagem  of  Te  Ponga's  Elopement      .        ,        .301 


Appendix  :  On  the  Native  Songs  op  New  Zealand        .  313 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATTOiNS. 


Engraved  Frontispiece  and  Title-Page. 

The  New  Zealand  Swing Page     72 

Native  House 98 

War  Dance 102 

Launching  a  Canoe 135 

Priestess  performing  Incantations        ....  145 

Chief  Lying  in  State 151 

New  Zealand  Tradition  .        .        .    '   .        .        .        .171 

New  Zealand  Chief 191 

Weeping  oyer  Head  of  deceased  Relative   .        .        .  199 

Tree  Fern 223 

New  Zealand  Vegetation 267 

kohinemutu  rotorna       .......  279 

New  Zealand  Pa 297 


POLYNESIAN  MYTHOLOGY. 


THE  CHILDREN  OF  HEAVEN  AND 
EARTH. 

(kO    NGA    TAMA    A    KANGI — TRADITION    RELATING    TO    THE   ORIGIN   OF 

THE   HUMAN   RACE.) 

Men  had  but  one  pair  of  primitive  ancestors  ;  they 
sprang  from  the  vast  heaven  that  exists  above  us, 
and  from  the  earth  which  hes  beneath  us.  Accord- 
ing to  the  traditions  of  our  race,  Rangi  and  Papa, 
or  Heaven  and  Earth,  were  the  source  from  which, 
in  the  beginning,  all  things  originated.  Darkness 
then  rested  upon  the  heaven  and  upon  the  earth, 
and  they  still  both  clave  together,  for  they  had  not 
yet  been  rent  apart ;  and  the  children  they  had 
begotten  were  ever  thinking  amongst  themselves 
what  might  be  the  difference  between  darkness 
and  light  ;  they  knew  that  beings  had  multiplied 
and  increased,  and  yet  light  had  never  broken 
upon  them,  but  it  ever  continued  dark.  Hence 
these  sayings  are  found  in  our  ancient  religious 
services  :   "  There  was  darkness  from  the  first  divi- 

B 


2  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

sion  of  time,  unto  the  tenth,  to  the  hundredth,  to 
the  thousandth,"  that  is,  for  a  vast  space  of  time ; 
and  these  divisions  of  times  were  considered  as 
beings,  and  were  each  termed  a  Po  ;  and  on  their 
account  there  was  as  yet  no  world  with  its  bright 
light,  but  darkness  only  for  the  beings  which 
existed. 

At  last  the  beings  who  had  been  begotten  by 
Heaven  and  Earth,  worn  out  by  the  continued 
darkness,  consulted  amongst  themselves,  saying, 
"  Let  us  now  determine  what  we  should  do  with 
Rangi  and  Papa,  whether  it  would  be  better  to 
slay  them  or  to  rend  them  apart.  Then  spoke  Tu- 
matauenga,  the  fiercest  of  the  children  of  Heaven 
and  Earth,  "  It  is  well,  let  us  slay  them." 

Then  spake  Tane-mahuta,  the  father  of  forests 
and  of  all  things  that  inhabit  them,  or  that  are 
constructed  fi-om  trees,  "Nay,  not  so.  It  is  better 
to  rend  them  apart,  and  to  let  the  heaven  stand 
far  above  us,  and  the  earth  lie  under  our  feet.  Let 
the  sky  become  as  a  stranger  to  us,  but  the  earth 
remain  close  to  us  as  our  nursing  mother." 

The  brothers  all  consented  to  this  proposal,  with 
the  exception  of  Tawhiri-ma-tea,  the  father  of 
winds  and  storms,  and  he,  fearing  that  his  kingdom 
was  about  to  be  overthrown,  grieved  greatly  at  the 
thought  of  his  parents  being  torn  apart.      Five  of 


THE  CHILDREN  OF  HEAVEN  AND  EARTH.    3 

the  brothers  willingly  consented  to  the  separation 
of  their  parents,  but  one  of  them  would  not  agree 
to  it. 

Hence,  also,  these  sayings  of  old  are  found  in  our 
prayers,  "  Darkness,  darkness,  light,  light,  the  seek- 
ing, the  searching,  in  chaos,  in  chaos  ; "  these  sig- 
nified the  way  in  which  the  offspring  of  heaven 
and  earth  sought  for  some  mode  of  dealing  with 
their  parents,  so  that  human  beings  might  increase 
and  live. 

So,  also,  these  sayings  of  old  time,  "  The  multi- 
tude, the  length,"'  signified  the  multitude  of  the 
thoughts  of  the  children  of  Heaven  and  Earth, 
and  the  length  of  time  they  considered  whether 
they  should  slay  their  parents,  that  human  beings 
might  be  called  into  existence  ;  for  it  was  in  this 
manner  that  they  talked  and  consulted  amongst 
themselves. 

But  at  length  their  plans  having  been  agTeed 
on,  lo,  Rongo-ma-tane,  the  god  and  father  of  the 
cultivated  food  of  man,  rises  up,  that  he  may  rend 
apart  the  heavens  and  the  earth ;  he  struggles,  but 
he  rends  them  not  apart.  Lo,  next,  Tangaroa,  the 
god  and  father  of  fish  and  reptiles,  rises  up,  that 
he  may  rend  apart  the  heavens  and  the  earth  ;  he 
also  struggles,  but  he  rends  them  not  apart,  Lo, 
next,  Haumia-tikitiki,  the  god  and  father  of  the 
food   of   man   which    springs   without    cultivation, 

B   2 


4  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

rises  up  and  struggles,  but  ineffectually.  Lo, 
then,  Tu-matauenga,  the  god  and  father  of  fierce 
human  beings,  rises  up  and  struggles,  but  he,  too, 
fails  in  his  efforts.  Then,  at  last,  slowly  uprises 
Tane-raahuta,  the  god  and  father  of  forests,  of 
birds,  and  of  insects,  and  he  struggles  with  his 
parents  ;  in  vain  he  strives  to  rend  them  apai't 
with  his  hands  and  arms,  Lo,  he  pauses ;  his  head 
is  now  firmly  planted  on  his  mother  the  earth,  his 
feet  he  raises  up  and  rests  against  his  father  the 
skies,  he  strains  his  back  and  hmbs  with  mighty 
effort.  Now  are  rent  apart  Hangi  and  Papa,  and 
with  ciies  and  groans  of  wo  they  shriek  aloud, 
"  Wherefore  slay  you  thus  your  parents  ?  Why 
commit  you  so  dreadful  a  crime  as  to  slay  us,  as  to 
rend  your  parents  apart?"  But  Tane-mahuta 
pauses  not,  he  regards  not  their  shrieks  and  cries  ; 
far,  far  beneath  him  he  presses  down  the  earth  ;  far, 
far  above  him  he  thrusts  up  the  sky. 

Hence  these  sayings  of  olden  time,  "  It  was  the 
fierce  thrusting  of  Tane  which  tore  the  heaven 
from  the  earth,  so  that  tliey  were  rent  apart,  and 
darkness  was  made  manifest,  and  so  was  the 
light." 

No  sooner  was  heaven  rent  from  earth  than  the 
multitude  of  human  beings  were  discovered  whom 
they  had  begotten,  and  v/ho  had  hitherto  lain  con- 
cealed between  the  bodies  of  Rangi  and  Papa. 


THE  CHILDEEN  OF  HEAVEN  AND  EARTH.     5 

Then,  also,  there  arose  in  the  breast  of  Tawhiri- 
ma-tea,  the  god  and  father  of  winds  and  storms,  a 
fierce  desire  to  wage  war  with  his  brothers,  because 
they  had  rent  apart  their  common  parents.  He 
from  the  first  had  refused  to  consent  to  his  mother 
being  torn  from  her  lord  and  children  ;  it  was  his 
brothers  alone  that  wished  for  this  separation,  and 
desired  that  Papa-tu-a-nuku,  or  the  Earth  alone, 
should  be  left  as  a  parent  for  them. 

The  god  of  hurricanes  and  storms  dreads  also 
that  the  world  should  become  too  fair  and  beauti- 
fiil,  so  he  rises,  follows  his  father  to  the  realms 
above,  and  hurries  to  the  sheltered  hollows  in  the 
boundless  skies ;  there  he  hides  and  clings,  and 
nestling  in  this  place  of  rest  he  consults  long  with 
his  parent,  and  as  the  vast  Heaven  hstens  to  the 
suggestions  of  Tawhiri-ma-tea,  thoughts  and  plam 
are  formed  in  his  breast,  and  Tawhiri-ma-tea  also 
understands  what  he  should  do.  Then  by  himself 
and  the  vast  Heaven  were  begotten  his  numerous 
brood,  and  they  rapidly  increased  and  grew. 
Tawliiri-ma-tea  despatches  one  of  them  to  the  west- 
ward, and  one  to  the  southward,  and  one  to  tlie 
eastward,  and  one  to  the  northward  ;  and  he  gives 
corresponding  names  to  himself  and  to  his  progeny 
the  mighty  winds. 

He  next  sends  forth  fierce  squalls,  whirlwinds, 


6  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

dense    clouds,  massy  clouds,  dark    clouds,  gloomy 
thick   clouds,    fiery  clouds,    clouds    which    precede 
hurricanes,  clouds  of  fiery  black,  clouds  reflecting 
glowing  red  light,  clouds  wildly  drifting  from  all 
quarters   and    wildly    bursting,    clouds    of  thunder 
storms,  and  clouds  hurriedly  flying.      In  the  midst 
of  these  Tawhiri-ma-tea  himself  sweeps  wildly  on. 
Alas  !  alas!  then  rages  the  fierce  hurricane  ;   and 
whilst  Tane-mahuta  and  his  gigantic   forests   still 
stand,  unconscious    and  unsuspecting,  the  blast  of 
the  breath  of  the  mouth  of  Tawhiri-ma-tea  smites 
them,  the  gigantic  trees  are  snapt  ofi"  right  in  the 
middle  ;    alas !    alas !    they    are     rent    to     atoms, 
dashed   to  the   earth,  with   boughs   and   branches 
torn   and   scattered,  and  lying  on  the  earth,  trees 
and  branches  all  alike  left  for   the  insect,  for  the 
grub,  and  for  loathsome  rottenness. 

From  the  forests  and  their  inhabitants  Tawhiri- 
ma-tea  next  swoops  down  upon  the  seas,  and  lashes 
in  his  wrath  the  ocean.  Ah  !  ah  !  waves  steep  as 
clifis  arise,  whose  summits  are  so  lofty  that  to  look 
from  them  would  make  the  beholder  giddy ;  these 
soon  eddy  in  whirlpools,  and  Tangaroa,  the  god  of 
ocean,  and  father  of  all  that  dwell  therein,  flies 
afl'righted  through  his  seas  ;  but  before  he  fled,  liis 
children  consulted  together  how  they  might  secure 
their  safety,  for  Tangaroa  had  begotten  Punga,  and 


THE  CHILDEEN  OF  HEAVEN  AND  EAETH.    7 

he  had  begotten  two  children,  Ika-tere,  the  father 
of  fish,  and  Tu-te-wehiwehi,  or  Tu-te-wanawana,  the 
father  of  reptiles. 

When  Tangaroa  fled  for  safety  to  the  ocean,  then 
Tu-te-wehiwehi  and  Ika-tere,  and  their  children, 
disputed  together  as  to  what  they  should  do  to 
escape  from  the  storms,  and  Tu-te-wehiwehi  and 
his  party  cried  aloud,  "  Let  us  fly  inland ;"  but 
Ika-tere  and  his  party  cried  aloud,  "  Let  us  fly  to 
the  sea."  Some  would  not  obey  one  order,  some 
would  not  obey  the  other,  and  they  escaped  in  two 
parties  :  the  party  of  Tu-te-wehiwehi,  or  the  rep- 
tiles, hid  themselves  ashore ;  the  party  of  Punga 
rushed  to  the  sea.  This  is  what,  in  our  ancient 
religious  services,  is  called  the  separation  of  Ta- 
whiri-ma-tea. 

Hence  these  traditions  have  been  handed  down : 
— "  Ika-tere,  the  fiither  of  things  which  inhabit 
water,  cried  aloud  to  Tu-te-wehiwehi,  '  Ho,  ho,  let 
us  all  escape  to  the  sea.'' 

"  But  Tu-te-wehiwehi  shouted  in  answer,  '  Nay, 
nay,  let  us  rather  fly  inland.' 

"  Then  Ika-tere  warned  him,  saying,  '  Fly  in- 
land, then ;  and  the  fate  of  you  and  your  race  will 
be,  that  when  they  catch  you,  before  you  are 
cooked,  they  will  singe  off"  your  scales  over  a 
lighted  wisp  of  dry  fern.' 


&' 


8  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

"  But  Tu-te-wehiwehi  answered  liim,  saying, 
'  Seek  safety,  then,  in  the  sea ;  and  the  future  fate 
of  your  race  will  be,  that  when  they  serve  out  little 
baskets  of  cooked  vegetable  food  to  each  person, 
you  will  be  laid  upon  the  top  of  the  food  to  give  a 
relish  to  it/ 

"  Then  without  delay  these  two  races  of  beings 
separated.  The  fish  fled  in  confusion  to  the  sea, 
the  reptiles  sought  safety  in  the  forests  and 
scrubs." 

Tangaroa,  enraged  at  some  of  his  children  desert- 
ing him,  and,  being  sheltered  by  the  god  of  the 
forests  on  dry  land,  has  ever  since  waged  war 
on  his  brother  Tane,  who,  in  return,  has  waged 
war  against  him. 

Hence  Tane  supplies  the  offspring  of  his  brother 
Tu-matauenga  with  canoes,  with  spears  and  with  fish- 
hooks made  firom  his  trees,  and  with  nets  woven  fi-om 
his  fibrous  plants,  that  they  may  destroy  the  off- 
spring of  Tangaroa ;  whilst  Tangaroa,  in  return,  swal- 
lows up  the  offspring  of  Tane,  overwhelming  canoes 
with  the  surges  of  his  sea,  swallowing  up  the  lands, 
trees,  and  houses  that  are  swept  off  by  floods,  and 
ever  wastes  away,  with  his  lapping  waves,  the 
shores  that  confine  him,  that  the  giants  of  the  forests 
may  be  washed  down  and  swept  out  into  his 
boundless    ocean,    that   he    may   then    swallow   up 


THE    CHILDREN    OF    HEAVEN    AND    EARTH.  9 

the  insects,  the  young  birds,  and  the  various  ani- 
mals which  inhabit  them, — all  which  things  are 
recorded  in  the  prayers  which  were  offered  to  these 
gods. 

Tawhiri-ma-tea  next  rushed  on  to  attack  his 
brothers  Rongo-ma-tane  and  Hauraia-tikitiki,  the 
gods  and  progenitors  of  cultivated  and  uncultivated 
food  ;  but  Papa,  to  save  these  for  her  other  children, 
caught  them  up,  and  hid  them  in  a  place  of  safety  ; 
and  so  well  were  these  children  of  hers  concealed 
by  their  mother  Earth,  that  Tawhiri-ma-tea  sought 
for  them  in  vain. 

Tawhiri-ma-tea  having  thus  vanquished  all  his 
other  brothers,  next  rushed  against  Tu-mata- 
uenga,  to  try  his  strength  against  his  ;  he  exerted 
all  his  force  against  him,  but  he  could  neither 
shake  him  or  prevail  against  him.  What  did  Tu- 
matauenga  care  for  liis  brother's  wrath  ?  he  was 
the  only  one  of  the  whole  party  of  brothers  who 
had  planned  the  destruction  of  their  parents,  and 
had  shown  himself  brave  and  fierce  in  war  ;  his 
brothers  had  yielded  at  once  before  the  tremendous 
assaults  of  Tawhiri-ma-tea  and  his  progeny — Ta- 
ne-mahuta  and  his  offspring  had  been  broken  and 
torn  in  pieces — Tangaroa  and  his  children  had 
fled  to  the  depths  of  the  ocean  or  the  recesses  of 
the    shore  —  Rongo-ma-tane    and    Haumia-tikitiki 

B  3 


10  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

had  been  hidden  from  hhn  in  the  earth — but  Tu- 

matauenga,  or  man,  still  stood  erect  and  unshaken 

upon  the  breast  of  his  mother  Earth  ;  and  now  at 
length   the    hearts   of   Heaven   and  of  the    god  of 

storms  became  tranquil,   and  their   passions   were 

assuaged. 

Tu-matauenga,  or  fierce  man,  having  thus  suc- 
cessfully resisted  his  brother,  the  god  of  hurricanes 
and  storms,  next  took  thought  how  he  could  turn 
upon  his  brothers  and  slay  them,  because  they  had 
not  assisted  him  or  fought  bravely  when  Tawhiri- 
ma-tea  had  attacked  them  to  avenge  the  separa- 
tion of  their  parents,  and  because  they  had  left  him 
alone  to  show  his  prowess  in  the  fight.  As  yet 
death  had  no  power  over  man.  It  was  not  mitil 
the  birth  of  the  children  of  Taranga  and  of  Makea- 
tu-tara,  of  Maui-taha,  of  Maui-roto,  of  Maui-pae,  of 
Maui-waho,  and  of  Maui-tikitiki-o-Taranga,  the 
demi-god  who  tried  to  drain  Hine-nui-te-po,  that 
death  had  power  over  men.  If  that  goddess  had 
not  been  deceived  by  Maui-tikitiki,  men  would  not 
have  died,  but  would  in  that  case  have  lived  for 
ever  ;  it  was  from  his  deceiving  Hine-nui-te-po  that 
death  obtained  power  over  mankind,  and  penetrated 
to  every  part  of  the  earth. 

Tu-matauenga  continued  to  reflect  upon  the 
cowardly  manner  in  wliich  his  brothers  had  acted, 


THE  CHILDREN  OF  HEAVEN  AND  EARTH.   1  1 

in  leaving  him  to  show  his  courage  alone,  and  he 
first  sought  some  means  of  injuring  Tane-mahuta, 
because  he  had  not  come  to  aid  him  in  his  combat 
with  Tawhiri-ma-tea,  and  partly  because  he  was 
aware  that  Tane  had  had  a  numerous  progeny,  who 
were  rapidly  increasing,  and  might  at  last  prove 
hostile  to  him,  and  injure  him,  so  he  began  to 
collect  leaves  of  the  whanake  tree,  and  twisted 
them  into  nooses,  and  when  his  work  was  ended, 
he  went  to  the  forest  to  put  up  his  snares,  and 
hung  them  up — ha  !  ha  !  the  children  of  Tane  fell 
before  him,  none  of  them  could  any  longer  fly  or 
move  in  safety. 

Then  he  next  determined  to  take  revenge  on  his 
brother  Tangaroa,  who  had  also  deserted  him  in 
the  combat  ;  so  he  sought  for  his  offspring,  and 
found  them  leaping  or  swimming  in  the  water ;  then 
he  cut  many  leaves  fi'om  the  flax-plant,  and  netted 
nets  with  the  flax,  and  dragged  these,  and  hauled 
the  children  of  Tangaroa  ashore. 

After  that,  he  determined  also  to  be  revenged 
upon  his  brothers  Rongo-ma-tane  and  Haumia-tiki- 
tiki ;  he  soon  found  them  by  their  peculiar  leaves,* 
and  he  scraped  into  shape  a  wooden  hoe,  and 
plaited  a  basket,  and  dug  in  the  earth  and  pulled 
up  all  kinds  of  plants  with  edible  roots,  and  the 

j  *  See  next  page. 


1 2  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

plants  which  had  been  dug  up  withered  in  the 
sun. 

Thus  Tu-matauenga  devoured  all  his  brothers, 
and  consumed  the  whole  of  them,  in  revenge  for 
tlieir  having  deserted  him  and  left  him  to  fight 
alone  against  Tawhiri-ma-tea  and  Rangi. 

When  his  brothers  had  all  thus  been  overcome 
by  Tu',  he  assumed  several  names,  namely,  Tu-ka- 
riri,  Tu-ka-nguha,  Tu-ka-taua,  Tu-whaka-heke-tan- 
gata,  Tu-mata-wha-iti,  and  Tu-matauenga ;  he  as- 
sumed one  name  for  each  of  his  attributes  dis- 
played in  the  victories  over  his  brothers.  Four  of 
his  brothers  were  entirely  deposed  by  him,  and  be- 
came his  food  ;  but  one  of  them,  Tawhiri-ma-tea, 
he  could  not  vanquish  or  make  common,  by  eating 
him  for  food,  so  he,  the  last  born  child  of  Heaven 
and  Earth,  was  left  as  an  enemy  for  man,  and  still, 
with  a  rage  equal  to  that  of  Mau,  tliis  elder  brother 
ever  attacks  him  in  storms  and  hurricanes,  endea- 
vouring to  destroy  him  alike  by  sea  and  land. 

Now,  the  meanings  of  these  names  of  the  chil- 
dren of  the  Heaven  and  Earth  are  as  follows  : — 

Tangaroa  signifies  fish  of  every  kind ;  Rongo- 
ma-tane  signifies  the  sweet  potato,  and  all  vege- 
tables cultivated  as  food  ;  Haumia-tikitiki  signifies 
fern  root,  and  all  kinds  of  food  which  gi'ow  wild  ; 
Tane-mahuta  signifies  forests,  the  birds  and  insects 


THE    CHILDREN    OF    HEAVEN    AND    EARTH.       13 

■which  inhabit  thera,  and  all  things  fashioned  from 
wood  ;  Tawliiri-ma-tea  signifies  winds  and  storms  ; 
and  Tu-matauenga  signifies  man. 

Four  of  his  brothers  having,  as  before  stated, 
been  made  common,  or  articles  of  food,  by  Tu-mata- 
uenga, he  assigned  for  each  of  them  fitting  incanta- 
tions, that  they  might  be  abundant,  and  that  he 
might  easily  obtain  them. 

Some  incantations  were  proper  to  Tane-mahuta, 
they  were  called  Tane. 

Some  incantations  were  for  Tangaroa,  they  were 
called  Tangaroa. 

Some  were  for  Kongo- ma-tane,  they  were  called 
Ron  go-ma- tane . 

Some  were  for  Haumia-tikitiki,  they  were  called 
Haumia. 

The  reason  that  he  sought  out  these  incantations 
was,  that  his  brothers  might  be  made  common  by 
him,  and  serve  for  his  food.  There  were  also  in- 
cantations for  Tawhiri-ma-tea  to  cause  favourable 
winds,  and  prayers  to  the  vast  Heaven  for  fair 
weather,  as  also  for  mother  Earth  that  she  might 
produce  all  things  abundantly.  But  it  was  the 
great  God  that   taught  these  prayers  to  man. 

There  were  also  many  prayers  and  incantations 
composed  for  man,  suited  to  the  different  times 
and  circumstances  of  his  life — prayers  at  the  bap- 


[i  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

tism  of  an  infant;  prayers  for  abundance  of  food, 
for  wealth;  prayers  in  illness;  prayers  to  spirits, 
and  for  many  other  things. 

The  bursting  forth  of  the  wrathful  fury  of  Ta- 
whiri-ma-tea  against  his  brothers,  was  the  cause  of 
the  disappearance  of  a  great  part  of  the  dry  land ; 
during  that  contest  a  great  part  of  mother  Earth 
was  submerged.  The  names  of  those  beings  of 
ancient  days  who  submerged  so  large  a  portion  of 
the  earth  were — Terrible-rain,  Long-continued-rain, 
Fierce-hail-storms ;  and  their  progeny  were,  Mist, 
Heavy-dew,  and  Light-dew,  and  these  together  sub- 
merged the  greater  part  of  the  earth,  so  that  only 
a  small  portion  of  dry  land  projected  above  the 
sea. 

From  that  time  clear  light  increased  upon  the 
earth,  and  all  the  beings  which  were  hidden  be- 
tween E-angi  and  Papa  before  they  were  separated, 
now  multiplied  upon  the  earth.  The  first  beings 
begotten  by  Rangi  and  Papa  were  not  hke  human 
beings ;  but  Tu-matauenga  bore  the  likeness  of  a 
man,  as  did  all  his  brothers,  as  also  did  a  Po,  a  Ao, 
a  Kore,  te  Kimihanga  and  Kunuku,  and  thus  it 
continued  until  the  times  of  Ngainui  and  his  gene- 
ration, and  of  Whiro-te-tupua  and  his  generation, 
and  of  Tiki-tawhito-ariki  and  his  generation,  and 
it  has  so  continued  to  this  day. 


THE    CHILDREN    OF    HEAVEN    AND    EARTH.        15 

The  children  of  Tu-mataueno-a  were  beefotten 
on  this  earth,  and  they  increased,  and  continued  to 
multiply,  until  we  reach  at  last  the  generation  of 
Maui-taha,  and  of  his  brothers  Maui-roto,  Maui- 
waho,  Maui-pae,  and   Maui-tikitiki-o-Taranga. 

Up  to  this  time  the  vast  Heaven  has  still  ever 
remained  separated  fi-om  his  spouse  the  Earth. 
Yet  their  mutual  love  still  continues — the  soft 
warm  sighs  of  her  loving  bosom  still  ever  rise  up 
to  him,  ascending  from  the  woody  mountains  and 
valleys,  and  men  call  these  mists ;  and  the  vast 
Heaven,  as  he  mourns  through  the  long  nights  his 
separation  from  his  beloved,  drops  frequent  tears 
upon  her  bosom,  and  men  seeing  these,  term  them 
dew-drops. 


16  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 


THE  LEGEND  OF  MAUI.    ' 


One  day  Maui  asked  liis  brothers  to  tell  liim  the 
place  where  their  father  and  mother  dwelt;  he 
begged  earnestly  that  they  would  make  this  known 
to  him  in  order  that  he  might  go  and  visit  the  place 
where  the  two  old  people  dwelt ;  and  they  replied 
to  him,  "  We  don't  know  ;  how  can  we  tell 
whether  they  dwell  up  above  the  earth,  or  down 
under  the  earth,  or  at  a  distance  from  us." 
Then  he  answered  them,  "  Never  mind,  I  think  I  '11 
find  them  out ; "  and  his  brothers  replied,  "  Non- 
sense, how  can  you  tell  where  they  are — you,  the 
last  born  of  all  of  us,  when  we  your  elders  have 
no  knowledge  where  they  are  concealed  from  us  ; 
after  you  first  appeared  to  us,  and  made  yourself 
known  to  us  and  to  our  mother  as  our  brother,  you 
know  that  our  mother  used  to  come  and  sleep  with 
us  every  night,  and  as  soon  as  the  day  broke  she 
was  gone,  and,  lo,  there  was  nobody  but  oui'selves 


THE    LEGEND    OF    MAUI.  17 

sleeping  in  the  house,  and  this  took  place  night 
after  night,  and  how  can  we  tell  then  where  she 
went  or  where  she  lives?"  But  he  answered, 
"  Very  well,  you  stop  here,  and  listen  ;  by  and  by 
you  will  hear  news  of  me." 

For  he  had  found  something  out  after  he  was 
discovered  by  his  mother,  by  his  relations,  and  by 
his  brothers.  They  discovered  him  one  night 
whilst  they  were  all  dancing  in  the  great  House 
of  Assembly.  Whilst  his  relations  were  all  danc- 
ing there,  they  then  found  out  who  he  was  in  this 
manner.  For  little  Maui,  the  infant,  crept  into  the 
house,  and  went  and  sat  behind  one  of  liis  bro- 
ther's, and  hid  himself,  so  when  their  mother 
counted  her  children  that  they  might  stand  up 
ready  for  the  dance,  she  said — "  One,  that 's  Maui- 
taka ;  two,  that  "s  Maui-roto  ;  three,  that's  Maui- 
pae  ;  four,  that's  Maui-waho  ;"  and  then  she  saw 
another,  and  cried  out,  "  Hollo,  where  did  this 
fifth  come  from?"  Then  little  Maui,  the  infant, 
answered,  "  Ah,  I  'm  your  child  too."  Then  the 
old  woman  counted  them  all  over  again,  and  said, 
"  Oh,  no,  there  ought  to  be  only  four  of  you ;  now 
for  the  first  time  I've  seen  you."  Then  little  Maui 
and  his  mother  stood  for  a  long  time  disputing 
about  this  in  the  very  middle  of  the  ranks  of  all 
the  dancers. 


18  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

At  last  she  got  angry,  and  cried  out,  "  Come, 
you  be  off  now,  out  of  the  house  at  once;  you 
are  no  child  of  mine,  you  belong  to  some  one  else." 
Then  little  Maui  spoke  out  quite  boldly,  and  said, 
"  Very  well,  I  'd  better  be  off  then,  for  I  suppose, 
as  you  say  it,  I  must  be  the  child  of  some  other 
person;  but  indeed  I  did  think  I  was  your  child 
when  I  said  so,  because  I  knew  I  was  born  at 
the  side  of  the  sea,*  and  was  thrown  by  you 
into  the  foam  of  the  surf,  after  you  had  wrapped 
me  up  in  a  tuft  of  your  hair,  which  you  cut  off 
for  the  purpose ;  then  the  seaweed  formed  and 
fashioned  me,  as  caught  in  its  long  tangles  the 
ever-heaving  surges  of  the  sea  rolled  me,  folded  as 
I  was  in  them,  from  side  to  side;  at  length  the 
breezes  and  squalls  which  blew  from  the  ocean 
drifted  me  on  shore  again,  and  the  soft  jelly-fish  of 
the  long  sandy  beaches  rolled  themselves  round 
me  to  protect  me ;  then  again  myriads  of  flies 
alighted  on  me  to  buzz  about  me  and  lay  their 
eggs,   that   maggots  might   eat  me,  and   flocks   of 

•  If  a  child  was  born  before  its  time,  and  thus  perished  without 
having  known  the  joj^s  and  pleasures  of  life,  it  was  carefully  buried 
with  peculiar  incantations  and  ceremonies;  because  if  cast  into 
the  water,  or  carelessly  thrown  aside,  it  became  a  malicious  being 
or  spirit,  actuated  by  a  peculiar  antipathy  to  the  human  race,  who 
it  spitefully  persecuted,  from  having  been  itself  deprived  of  happi- 
ness which  they  enjoyed.  All  their  malicious  deities  had  an  origin 
of  this  kind. 


THE    LEGEND    OF    MAUI.  1  9 

birds  collected  round  me  to  peck  me  to  pieces,  but 
at  that  moment  appeared  there  also  my  great  an- 
cestor, Tama-nui-ki-te-Rangi,  and  he  saw  the  flies 
and  the  birds  collected  in  clusters  and  flocks  above 
the  jelly-fish,  and  the  old  man  ran,  as  fast  as  he 
could,  and  stripped  ofl"  the  encircling  jelly-fish,  and 
behold  within  there  lay  a  human  being ;  then  he 
caught  me  up  and  carried  me  to  his  house,  and  he 
hung  me  up  in  the  roof  that  I  might  feel  the  warm 
smoke  and  the  heat  of  the  fire,  so  I  was  saved  alive 
by  the  kindness  of  that  old  man.  At  last  I  grew, 
and  then  I  heard  of  the  fame  of  the  dancincf  of 
this  great  House  of  Assembly.  It  was  that  which 
brought  me  here.  But  ft'om  the  time  I  was  in 
your  womb,  I  have  heard  the  names  of  these  your 
first-born  children,  as  you  have  been  calling  them 
over  until  this  very  night,  when  I  again  heard 
you  repeating  them.  In  proof  of  this  I  wiU 
now  recite  your  names  to  you,  my  brothers.  You 
are  Maui-taha,  and  you  are  Maui-roto,  and  you 
are  Maui-pae,  and  you  are  Maui-waho,  and  as  for 
me,  I  ^m  little  Maui-the-baby,  and  here  I  am  sit- 
ting before  you." 

When  his  mother,  Taranga,  heard  all  this,  she 
cried  out,  "  You  dear  little  child,  you  are  indeed 
my  last-born,  the  son  of  my  old  age,  therefore  I 
now  tell  you  your  name  shall  be  Maui-tiki-tiki-a- 


20  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

Taranga,    or    Maui-formed-in-the-top-knot-of-Taran- 
ga,"  and  he  was  called  by  that  name. 

After  the  disputing  which  took  place  on  that 
occasion,  his  mother,  Taranga,  called  to  her  last- 
born,  "  Conie  here,  my  child,  and  sleep  with  the 
mother  who  bore  you,  that  I  may  kiss  you,  and 
that  you  may  kiss  me,"  and  he  ran  to  sleep  with 
his  mother.  Then  his  elder  brothers  were  jealous,  and 
began  to  murmur  about  this  to  each  other.  "  Well, 
indeed,  our  mother  never  asks  us  to  go  and  sleep 
with  her  ;  yet  we  are  the  children  she  saw  actually 
born,  and  about  whose  birth  there  is  no  doubt. 
When  we  were  little  things  she  nursed  us,  laying  us 
down  gently  on  the  large  soft  mats  she  had  spread 
out  for  us — then  why  does  she  not  ask  us  now  to  sleep 
with  her  ?  when  we  were  little  things  she  was  fond 
enough  of  us,  but  now  we  are  grown  older  she 
never  caresses  us,  or  treats  us  kindly.  But  as  for 
this  little  abortion,  who  can  really  tell  whether  he 
was  nursed  by  the  sea-tangles  or  by  whom,  or 
whether  he  is  not  some  other  person's  child,  and 
here  he  is  now  sleeping  with  our  mother.  Who 
would  ever  have  believed  that  a  little  abortion, 
thrown  into  the  ocean,  would  have  come  back  to 
the  world  again  a  livinoj  human  beinff  ! — and  now 
this  little  rogue  has  the  impudence  to  call  himself  a 
relation  of  ours." 


THE    LEGEND    OF    MAUI.  21 

Then  the  two  elder  brothers  said  to  the  two 
younger  ones,  "  Never  mind,  let  him  be  our  dear 
brother  ;  in  the  days  of  peace  remember  the  pro- 
verb— when  you  are  on  friendly  terms,  settle  yom- 
disputes  in  a  friendly  way — when  you  are  at  war, 
you  must  redress  your  injuries  by  violence.  It  is 
better  for  us,  oh,  brothers,  to  be  kind  to  other 
people ;  these  are  the  ways  by  which  men  gain  in- 
fluence in  the  world — by  labouring  for  abundance  of 
food  to  feed  others — by  collecting  property  to  give 
to  others,  and  by  similar  means  by  which  you  pro- 
mote the  good  of  others,  so  that  peace  spreads 
through  the  world.  Let  us  take  care  that  we  are 
not  like  the  children  of  Raugi-nui  and  of  Papa-tu-a- 
nuku,  who  turned  over  in  their  minds  thoughts  for 
slaying  their  parents  ;  four  of  them  consented,  but 
Tawhiri-ma-tea  had  little  desire  for  this,  for  he 
loved  his  parents ;  but  the  rest  of  his  brothers 
agreed  to  slay  them  ;  afterwards  when  Tawhiri  saw 
that  the  husband  was  separated  far  from  his  wife, 
then  he  thought  what  it  was  his  duty  to  do,  and  he 
fought  against  his  brothers.  Thence  sprang  the 
cause  which  led  Tu-matauenga  to  wage  war  against 
his  brethren  and  his  parents,  and  now  at  last  this 
contest  is  carried  on  even  between  his  own  kindred, 
so  that  man  fights  against  man.  Therefore  let  us 
be  careftil  not  to  foster  divisions  amongst  ourselves. 


22  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

lest  such  wicked  thoughts  should  finally  turn  us 
each  against  the  other,  and  thus  we  should  be  like 
the  children  of  Rangi-nui  and  of  Papa-tu-a-nuku." 
The  two  younger  brothers,  when  they  heard  this, 
answered,  "Yes,  yes,  oh,  eldest  brothers  of  ours,  you 
are  quite  right ;  let  our  murmuring  end  here." 

It  was  now  night ;  but  early  in  the  morning  Ta- 
ranga  rose  up,  and  suddenly,  in  a  moment  of  time, 
she  was  gone  from  the  house  where  her  children 
were.  As  soon  as  they  woke  up  they  looked  all 
about  to  no  purpose,  as  they  could  not  see  her ;  the 
elder  brothers  knew  she  had  left  them,  and  were 
accustomed  to  it ;  but  the  little  child  was  exceed- 
ingly vexed ;  yet  he  thought,  I  cannot  see  her,  't  is 
true,  but  perhaps  she  has  only  gone  to  prepare 
some  food  for  us.  No — no — she  was  off,  far,  far 
away. 

Now  at  nightfall  when  their  mother  came  back 
to  them,  her  children  were  dancing  and  singino^  as 
usual.  As  soon  as  they  had  finished,  she  called  to 
her  last  born,  "  Come  here,  my  child,  let  us  sleep 
together ;"  so  they  slept  together  ;  but  as  soon 
as  day  dawned,  she  disappeared  ;  the  httle  fellow 
now  felt  quite  suspicious  at  such  strange  proceed- 
ings on  the  part  of  his  mother  every  morning. 
But  at  last,  upon  another  night,  as  he  slept  again 
with   his   mother,   the    rest   of    his    brothers    that 


THE    LEGEND    OF   MAUI.  23 

night    also  sleeping  with  them,    the    little   fellow 
crept  out  in  the  night  and  stole  his  mother's  apron, 
her  belt,  and  clothes,  and  hid  them;  then  he  went 
and  stopped  up  every  crevice  in  the  wooden  win- 
dow, and  in  the  doorway,  so  that  the  light  of  the 
dawn  might  not  shine  into   the  house,  and  make 
his   mother  hurry  to   get  up.      But   after  he  had 
done  this,  his   little   heart   still   felt  very  anxious 
and    uneasy   lest  his    mother    should,   in  her    im- 
patience, rise  in  the  darkness  and  defeat  his  plans. 
But  the  night  dragged  its  slow  length  along  with- 
out his  mother  moving  ;    at   last  there   came   the 
faint  light  of  early  morn,  so  that  at  one  end  of  a 
long  house  you  could   see  the  legs  of  the   people 
sleeping  at  the  other   end   of  it,   but   his  mother 
still  slept  on  ;   then  the  sun  rose   up,  and  mounted 
far  up  above  the  horizon  ;  now  at  last  his  mother 
moved,  and  began  to  think  to  herself,  "  What  kind  of 
night  can  this  be,  to  last  so  long?"  and  having 
thought  thus,  she  dropped  asleep  again.    Again  she 
awoke,  and    began  to  think  to  herself,  but  could 
not    tell    that   it   was  broad  daylight  outside,    as 
the  window  and  every  chink  in   the  house  were 
stopped  closely  up. 

At  last  up  she  jumped  ;  and  finding  herself  quite 
naked,  began  to  look  for  her  clothes,  and  apron, 
but  could  find   neither;   then   she  ran   and  pulled 


24  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

out  the  tilings  with  which  the  chinks  in  the  win- 
dows and  doors  were  stopped  up,  and  whilst  doing 
so,  oh,  dear  !  oh,  dear!  there  she  saw  the  sun  high 
up  in  the  heavens  ;  then  she  snatched  up,  as  she 
ran  off,  the  old  clout  of  a  flax  cloak,  with  which 
the  door  of  the  house  had  been  stopped  up,  and 
carried  it  off  as  her  only  covering ;  getting,  at 
last,  outside  the  house,  she  hurried  away,  and  ran 
crying  at  the  thought  of  having  been  so  badly 
treated  by  her  own  children. 

As  soon  as  his  mother  got  outside  the  house, 
little  Maui  jumped  up,  and  kneeling  upon  his  hands 
and  knees  peeped  after  her  through  the  doorway 
into  the  bright  light.  Whilst  he  was  watching  her, 
the  old  woman  reached  down  to  a  tuft  of  rushes, 
and  snatching  it  up  from  the  ground,  dropped 
into  a  hole  underneath  it,  and  clapping  the  tuft 
of  rushes  in  the  hole  again,  as  if  it  were  its  cover- 
ing, so  disappeared.  Then  little  Maui  jumped  on 
his  feet,  and,  as  hard  as  he  could  go,  ran  out  of 
the  house,  pulled  up  the  tuft  of  rushes,  and  peeping 
down,  discovered  a  beautiful  open  cave  running 
quite   deep   into  the  earth. 

He  covered  up  the  hole  again  and  returned  to 
the  house,  and  waking  up  his  brothers  who  were 
still  sleepmg,  said,  "  Come,  come,  my  brothers, 
rouse   up,   you  have  slept  long  enough  ;  come,  get 


THE    LEGEND    OF   MAUI.  25 

up  ;  here  we  are  again  cajoled  by  our  mother/' 
Then  his  brothers  made  haste  and  got  up  ;  alas! 
alas!  the  sun  was  quite  high  up  in  the  heavens. 

The  little  Maui  now  asked  his  brothers  again, 
"  Where  do  you  think  the  place  is  where  .our  father 
and  mother  dwell?"  and  they  answered,  "How 
should  we  know,  we  have  never  seen  it ;  although 
we  are  Maui-taha,  and  Maui-roto,  and  Maui-pae, 
and  Maui-waho,  we  have  never  seen  the  place  ;  and 
do  you  think  you  can  find  that  place  which  you  are 
so  anxious  to  see  ?  What  does  it  signify  to  you  ? 
Cannot  you  stop  quietly  with  us?  What  do  we 
care  about  our  father,  or  about  our  mother  ?  Did 
she  feed  us  with  food  till  we  grew  up  to  be  men  ? — 
not  a  bit  of  it.  Why,  without  doubt,  Rangi,  or 
the  heaven,  is  our  father,  who  kindly  sent  his  off- 
spring down  to  us  ;  Hau-whenua,  or  gentle  breezes, 
to  cool  the  earth  and  young  plants ;  and  Hau-ma- 
ringiringi,  or  mists,  to  moisten  them  ;  and  Hau-ma- 
roto-roto,  or  fine  weather,  to  make  them  grow ;  and 
Touarangi,  or  rain,  to  water  them  ;  and  Tomairangi, 
or  dews,  to  nourish  them:  he  gave  these  his  ofiT- 
spring  to  cause  our  food  to  grow,  and  then  Papa-tu- 
a-nuku,  or  the  earth,  made  her  seeds  to  spring,  and 
grow  forth,  and  provide  sustenance  for  her  children 
in  this  long-continuing  world." 

Little  Maui  then  answered,  "  What  you  say 
is  truly  quite  correct  ;  but  such  thoughts  and  say- 

c 


26  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

ings  would  better  become  me  than  you,  for  in 
the  foaming  bubbles  of  the  sea  I  was  nm-sed  and 
fed :  it  would  please  me  better  if  you  would  think 
over  and  remember  the  time  when  you  were 
nursed  at.your  mother's  breast  ;  it  could  not  have 
been  until  after  you  had  ceased  to  be  nourished  by 
her  milk  that  you  could  have  eaten  the  kinds  of 
food  you  have  mentioned  ;  as  for  me,  oh  !  my  bro- 
thers, I  have  never  partaken  either  of  her  milk  or 
of  her  food ;  yet  I  love  her,  for  this  single  reason 
alone — that  I  lay  in  her  womb  ;  and  because  I 
love  her,  I  wish  to  know  where  is  the  place  where 
she  and  my  father  dwell." 

His  brothers  felt  quite  surprised  and  pleased 
with  their  little  brother  when  they  heard  him  talk 
in  this  way,  and  when  after  a  little  time  they  had 
recovered  from  their  amazement,  they  told  him  to 
try  and  find  their  father  and  mother.  So  he 
said  he  would  go.  It  was  a  long  time  ago  that 
he  had  finished  his  first  labom-,  for  when  he 
first  appeared  to  his  relatives  in  their  house  of 
singing  and  dancing,  he  had  on  that  occasion  trans- 
formed himself  into  the  likeness  of  all  manner  of 
birds,  of  every  bird  in  the  world,  and  yet  no  single 
form  that  he  then  assumed  had  pleased  his  brothers ; 
but  now  when  he  showed  himself  to  them,  trans- 
formed into  the  semblance  of  a  pigeon,  his  bro- 
thers said,   "  Ah !  now  indeed,  oh,  brother,  you  do 


THE    LEGEND    OF   MAUI.  27 

look  very  well  indeed,  very  beautiftil,  very  beau- 
tiful, much  more  beautiful  than  you  looked  in  any  of 
the  other  forms  which  you  assumed,  and  then  changed 
from,  when  you  first  discovered  yourself  to  us." 

What  made  him  now  look  so  well  ia  the  shape 
he  had  assumed  was  the  belt  of  his  mother,  and 
her  apron,  which  he  had  stolen  from  her  while  she 
was  asleep  in  the  house  ;  for  the  very  thing  which 
looked  so  white  upon  the  breast  of  the  pigeon  was 
his  mother's  broad  belt,  and  he  also  had  on  her 
Httle  apron  of  burnished  hair  from  the  tail  of  a 
dog,  and  the  fastening  of  her  belt  was  what  formed 
the  beautiful  black  feathers  on  his  throat.  He  had 
once  changed  himself  into  this  form  a  long  time 
ago,  and  now  that  he  was  going  to  look  for  his 
father  and  mother,  and  had  quitted  his  brothers  to 
transform  himself  into  the  likeness  of  a  pigeon, 
he  assumed  exactly  the  same  form  as  on  the  pre- 
vious occasion,  and  when  his  brothers  saw  him  thus 
again,  they  said,  "  Oh,  brother  !  oh,  brother  !  you  do 
reaUy  look  well  indeed ;"  and  when  he  sat  upon 
the  bough  of  a  tree,  oh,  dear!  he  never  moved,  or 
jumped  about  from  spray  to  spray,  but  sat  quite 
still,  cooing  to  himself,  so  that  no  one  who  liad  seen 
him  could  have  helped  thinking  of  the  proverb — "A 
stupid  pigeon  sits  on  one  bough,  and  jumps  not 
from  spray  to  spray."  Early  the  next  morning,  he 
said  to  his  brothers,  as  was  first  stated,  "Now  do  you 

c  2 


28  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

remain  here,  and  you  will  hear  something  of  me 
after  I  am  gone ;  it  is  my  great  love  for  my 
parents  that  leads  me  to  search  for  them  ;  now 
listen  to  me,  and  then  say  whether  or  not  my 
recent  feats  were  not  remarkable.  For  the  feat  of 
transforming  oneself  into  birds  can  only  be  accom- 
plished by  a  man  who  is  skilled  in  magic,  and  yet 
here  I,  the  youngest  of  you  all,  have  assumed  the 
form  of  all  birds,  and  now,  perhaps,  after  all,  I  shall 
quite  lose  my  art,  and  become  old  and  weakened  in 
the  long  journey  to  the  place  where  I  am  going." 
His  brothers  answered  him  thus  : — "  That  inight  be 
indeed,  if  you  were  going  upon  a  warlike  expedition, 
but,  in  truth,  you  are  only  going  to  look  for  those 
parents  who,  we  aU,  so  long  to  see,  and  if  they  are 
foimd  by  you,  we  shall  ever  after  all  dwell  happily, 
our  present  sorrow  will  be  ended,  and  we  shaU 
continually  pass  backwards  and  forwards  between 
our  dwelling-place  and  theirs,  paying  them  happy 
visits." 

He  answered  them,  "  It  is  certainly  a  very  good 
cause  which  leads  me  to  undertake  this  jom-ney, 
and  if,  when  reaching  the  place  I  am  going  to,  I 
find  everything  agreeable  and  nice,  then  I  shall, 
perhaps,  be  pleased  with  it,  but  if  I  find  it  a  bad, 
di&agreeable  place,  I  shall  be  disgusted  with  it." 
They  replied  to  him,  "  What  you  say  is  exceedingly 
true,  depart  then   upon  your  journey,  with  your 


THE    LEGEND    OF   MAUI.  29 

great  knowledge  and  skill  in  magic."  Then  their 
brother  went  into  the  wood,  and  came  back  to  them 
again,  looking  just  as  if  he  were  a  real  pigeon. 
His  brothers  were  quite  delighted,  and  they  had 
no  power  left  to  do  anything  but  admire  him. 

Then  off  he  flew,  until  he  came  to  the  cave 
which  his  mother  had  run  down  into,  and  he  lifted 
up  the  tuft  of  rushes  ;  then  down  he  went  and  dis- 
appeared in  the  cave,  and  shut  up  its  mouth  again 
so  as  to  hide  the  entrance ;  away  he  flew  very  fast 
indeed,  and  t-vvice  he  dipped  his  wing,  because  the 
cave  was  narrow ;  soon  he  reached  nearly  to  the 
bottom  of  the  cave,  and  flew  along  it ;  and  again, 
because  the  cave  was  so  narrow,  he  dips  first  one 
wing  and  then  the  other,  but  the  cave  now  widened, 
and  he  dashed  straight  on. 

At  last  he  saw  a  party  of  people  coming  along 
under  a  grove  of  ti-ees,  they  were  manapau  trees,* 
and  flying  on,  he  perched  upon  the  top  of  one  of  these 
trees,  under  which  the  people  had  seated  themselves  ; 
and  when  he  saw  his  mother  lying  down  on  the 
grass  by  the  side  of  her  husband,  he  guessed  at 
once  who  they  were,  and  he  thought,-"  Ah  !  there 
sit  my  father  and  mother  right  under  me;"  and  he 
soon  heard  their  names,  as  they  were  called  to  by 

*  The  manapau  was  a  species  of  tree  peculiar  to  the  country 
from  whence  the  people  came,  where  the  priests  say  it  was  known 
by  that  name. 


30  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

their  friends  who  were  sitting  with  them  ;  then  the 
pigeon  hopped  down,  and  perched  on  another  spray 
a  little  lower,  and  it  pecked  off  one  of  the  ber- 
ries of  the  tree  and  dropped  it  gently  down,  and 
hit  the  father  with  it  on  the  forehead  ;  and  some  of 
the  party  said,  "  Was  it  a  bird  which  threw  that 
down  V  but  the  father  said,  "  Oh  no,  it  was  only  a 
berry  that  fell  by  chance." 

Then  the  pigeon  again  pecked  off  some  of  the 
berries  from  the  tree,  and  threw  them  down  ^vith 
all  its  force,  and  struck  both  father  and  mother,  so 
that  he  really  hurt  them ;  then  they  cried  out,  and 
the  whole  party  jumped  up  and  looked  into  the 
tree,  and  as  the  pigeon  began  to  coo,  they  soon 
found  out  from  the  noise,  where  it  was  sitting 
amongst  the  leaves  and  branches,  and  the  whole  of 
them,  the  chiefs  and  common  people  alike,  caught 
up  stones  to  pelt  the  pigeon  with,  but  they  threw 
for  a  very  long  time,  without  hitting  it ;  at  last 
the  father  tried  to  throw  up  at  it ;  ah,  he  struck 
it,  but  Maui  had  himself  contrived  that  he  should 
be  struck  by  the  stone  which  his  father  threw  ;  for, 
but  by  his  own  choice,  no  one  could  have  hit  him  ; 
he  was  struck  exactly  upon  his  left  leg,  and  down 
he  fell,  and  as  he  lay  fluttering  and  struggling  upon 
the  ground,  they  all  ran  to  catch  him,  but  lo,  the 
pigeon  had  turned  into  a  man. 

Then  all  those  who  saw  him  were  frightened  at 


THE    LEGEND    OF   MAUI.  31 

his  fierce  glaring  eyes,  -which  were  red  as  if  painted 
with  red  ochre,  and  they  said,  "  Oh,  it  is  now  no 
wonder  that  he  so  long  sat  still  up  in  the  tree  ;  had 
he  been  a  bird  he  would  have  flown  off  lonor  before, 
but  he  is  a  man :"  and  some  of  them  said,  "  No, 
indeed,  rather  a  god — just  look  at  his  form  and 
appearance,  the  like  has  never  been  seen  before, 
since  Rangi  and  Papa-tu-a-nuku  were  torn  apart." 
Then  Taranga  said,  "  I  used  to  see  one  who  looked 
like  this  person  every  night  when  I  went  to  visit  my 
cliildren,  but  what  I  saw  then  excelled  what  I  see 
now ;  just  listen  to  me.  Once  as  I  was  wandering 
upon  the  sea-shore,  I  prematurely  gave  birth  to  one 
of  my  children,  and  I  cut  off  the  long  tresses  of  my 
hair,  and  bound  him  up  in  them,  and  threw  him 
into  the  foam  of  the  sea,  and  after  that  he  was 
found  by  his  ancestor  Tama-nui-ki-te-Rangi ;"  and 
then  she  told  his  history  nearly  in  the  same  words 
that  Maui-the-infant  had  told  it  to  herself  and  his 
brothers  in  their  house,  and  having  finished  his 
history,  Taranga  ended  her  discourse  to  her  hus- 
band and  his  friends. 

Then  his  mother  asked  Maui,  who  was  sitting 
near  her,  "  Where  do  you  come  firom  ?  fi-om  the  west- 
ward?" and  he  answered,  "No."  "From  the 
north-east  then?"  "No."  "  From  the  south-east 
then?"  "No."  "From  the  south  then?"  "No." 
"  Was   it  the   wind  which  blows  upon  me,  which 


32  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

brought  you  here  to  me  then  ?"  when  she  asked 
this,  he  opened  liis  mouth  and  answered,  "  Yes." 
And  she  cried  out,  "  Oh,  this  then  is  indeed  my 
child  ;"  and  she  said,  "Are  you  Maui-taha?"  he  an- 
swered, "  No.''  Then  said  she,  "  Are  vou  Maui- 
tikitiki-o-Taranga  ? "  and  he  answered,  "  Yes." 
And  she  cried  aloud,  "  This  is,  indeed,  my  child. 
By  the  winds  and  storms  and  wave-uplifting  gales 
he  was  fashioned  and  became  a  human  being ;  wel- 
come, oh  my  child,  welcome ;  by  you  shall  hereafter 
be  climbed  the  threshold  of  the  house  of  your 
great  ancestor  Hine-nui-te-po,  and  death  shall 
thenceforth  have  no  power  over  man." 

Tlien  the  lad  was  taken  by  his  father  to  the 
water,  to  be  baptized,  and  after  the  ceremony 
prayers  were  offered  to  make  him  sacred,  and  clean 
from  all  impurities  ;  but  when  it  was  completed, 
his  father  Makea-tu- tara  felt  greatly  alarmed,  be- 
cause he  remembered  that  he  had,  from  mistake, 
hurriedly  skipped  over  part  of  the  prayers  of  the 
baptismal  service,  and  of  the  services  to  purify 
Maui ;  he  knew  that  the  gods  would  be  certain 
to  punish  this  fault,  by  causing  Maui  to  die,  and 
his  alarm  and  anxiety  were  therefore  extreme.  At 
night-fill  they  all  went  into  his  house. 

Maui,  after  these  things,  returned  to  his  brothers 
to  tell  them  that  he  had  found  his  parents,  and  to 
explain  to  them  where  they  dwelt. 


THE    LEGEND    OF   MAUI.  33 

Shortly  after  Maui  had  thus  returned  to  his 
brothers,  he  slew  and  carried  off  his  first  victim, 
who  was  the  daughter  of  Maru-te-whare-aitu ;  after- 
wards, by  enchantments,  he  destroyed  the  crops  of 
Maru-te-whare-aitu,  so  that  they  all  withered. 

He  then  again  paid  a  visit  to  his  parents,  and 
remained  for  some  time  with  them,  and  whilst  he  was 
there  he  remarked  that  some  of  their  people  daily 
carried  away  a  present  of  food  for  some  person;  at 
length,  surprised  at  this,  he  one  day  asked  them, — 
"  Who  is  that  you  are  taking  that  present  of  food 
to  ? "  And  the  people  who  were  going  with  it 
answered  him, — "  It  is  for  your  ancestress,  for 
Muri-ranga-whenua." 

He  asked  again, — "Where  does  she  dwell?" 
They  answered, — "  Yonder." 

Thereupon  he  says, — "  That  will  do  ;  leave  here 
the  present  of  food,  I  will  carry  it  to  her  myself." 

From  that  time  the  daily  presents  of  food  for  his 
ancestress  were  carried  by  Maui  himself;  but  he 
never  took  and  gave  them  to  her  that  she  might 
eat  them,  but  he  quietly  laid  them  by  on  one  side, 
and  this  he  did  for  many  days.  At  last,  Muri- 
ranga-wheriua  suspected  that  something  wrong  was 
going  on,  and  the  next  time  he  came  along  the 
path  carrying  the  present  of  food,  the  old  chief- 
tainess  sniffed  and  sniffed  until  she  thought  she 
smelt  something  coming,  and  she  was  very  much 

c  3 


S4<  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

exasperated,  and  her  stomach  began  to  distend  itself, 
that  she  might  be  ready  to  devour  Maid  as  soon  as 
he  came  there.  Then  she  turned  to  the  southward, 
and  smelt  and  sniffed,  but  not  a  scent  of  anything 
reached  her ;  then  she  turned  round  from  the  south 
to  the  north,  by  the  east,  with  her  nose  up  in  the 
air  sniffing  and  smelling  to  every  point  as  she 
turned  slowly  round,  but  she  could  not  detect  the 
slightest  scent  of  a  human  being,  and  almost 
thought  that  she  must  have  been  mistaken  ;  but 
she  made  one  more  trial,  and  sniffed  the  breeze 
towards  the  westward.  Ah  !  then  the  scent  of  a 
man  came  plainly  to  her,  so  she  called  aloud — "  I 
know  from  the  smell  wafted  here  to  me  by  the 
breeze  that  somebody  is  close  to  me,"  and  Maui 
murmured  assent.  Thus  the  old  woman  knew 
that  he  was  a  descendant  of  hers,  and  her  stomach, 
which  was  quite  large  and  distended,  immediately 
began  to  shrink,  and  contract  itself  again.  If  the 
smell  of  Maui  had  not  been  carried  to  her  by  the 
western  breeze,  undoubtedly  she  would  have  eaten 
him  up. 

When  the  stomach  of  Muri-ranga-whenua  had 
quietly  sunk  down  to  its  usual  size,  her  voice 
was  again  heard  saying,  "Art  thou  Maui?"  and 
he  answered,  "Even  so.'' 

Then  she  asked  him,  "Wherefore  hast  thou 
served  thy  old  ancestress  in  this  deceitful  way?" 


THE    LEGEND    OF   MAUI.  35 

and  Maui  answered,  "  I  was  anxious  that  thy  jaw- 
bone, by  which  the  great  enchantments  can  be 
wrought,  should  be  given  to  me." 

She  answered,  "  Take  it,  it  has  been  reserved  for 
thee."  And  Maui  took  it,  and  having  done  so 
returned  to  the  place  where  he  and  his  brothers 
dwelt. 

The  young  hero,  Maui,  had  not  been  long  at 
home  with  his  brothers  when  he  began  to  think, 
that  it  was  too  soon  after  the  rising  of  the  sun  that 
it  became  night  again,  and  that  the  sun  again  sank 
down  below  the  horizon,  every  day,  every  day ;  in 
the  same  manner  the  days  appeared  too  short  to 
him.  So  at  last,  one  day  he  said  to  his  brothers, 
"  Let  us  now  catch  the  sun  in  a  noose,  so  that  we 
may  compel  him  to  move  more  slowly,  in  order 
that  mankind  may  have  long  days  to  labour  in  to 
pi-ocure  subsistence  for  themselves  ;"  but  they  an- 
swered him,  "  Why,  no  man  could  approach  it  on 
account  of  its  warmth,  and  the  fierceness  of  its 
heat;"  but  the  young  hero  said  to  them,  "Have 
you  not  seen  the  multitude  of  things  I  have  already 
achieved  ?  Did  not  you  see  me  change  myself  into 
the  likeness  of  every  bird  of  the  forest ;  you  and  I 
equally  had  the  aspect  and  appearance  of  men,  yet 
I  by  my  enchantments  changed  suddenly  from  the 
appearance  of  a  man  and  became  a  bird,  and 
then,  continuing   to    change    my   form,    I    resem- 


36  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

bled  this  bird  or  that  bird,  one  after  the  other,  until 
I  had  by  degrees  transformed  myself  into  every 
bird  in  the  world,  small  or  great ;  and  did  I  not 
after  all  this  again  assume  the  form  of  a  man  ? 
[This  he  did  soon  after  he  was  born,  and  it  was 
after  that  he  snared  the  sun.]  Therefore,  as  for 
that  feat,  oh,  my  brothers,  the  changing  myself 
into  birds,  I  accomplished  it  by  enchantments,  and 
I  will  by  the  same  means  accomplish  also  this 
other  thing  which  I  have  in  my  mind."  When 
his  brothers  heard  this,  they  consented  on  his  per- 
suasions to  aid  him  in  the  conquest  of  the  sun. 

Then  they  began  to  spin  and  twist  ropes  to  form 
a  noose  to  catch  the  sun  in,  and  in  doing  this  they 
discovered  the  mode  of  plaiting  flax  into  stout 
square-shaped  ropes  (tuainaka),  and  the  manner  of 
plaiting  flat  ropes  (paharahara),  and  of  spinning 
round  ropes ;  at  last,  they  finished  making  all  the 
ropes  which  they  required.  Then  Maui  took  up 
his  enchanted  weapon,  and  he  took  his  brothers 
with  him,  and  they  carried  their  provisions,  ropes, 
and  other  things  with  them,  in  their  hands.  They 
travelled  all  night,  and  as  soon  as  day  broke,  they 
halted  in  the  desert,  and  hid  themselves  that  they 
might  not  be  seen  by  the  sun ;  and  at  night 
they  renewed  their  journey,  and  before  dawn 
they  halted,  and  hid  themselves  again ;  at  length 
they  got  very  far,  very  far,  to  the  eastward,  and 


THE    LEGEND    OF    MAUI.  37 

came  to  the  very  edge  of  the  place  out  of  which 
the  sun  rises. 

Then  they  set  to  work  and  built  on  each  side  of 
this  place  a  long  high  wall  of  clay,  with  huts  of 
boughs  of  trees  at  each  end  to  hide  themselves  in  _: 
when  these  were  finished,  they  made  the  loops  of 
the  noose,  and  the  brothers  of  Maui  then  lay  in  wait 
on  one  side  of  the  place  out  of  which  the  sun  rises, 
and  Maui  himself  lay  in  wait  upon  the  other  side. 

The  young  hero  held  in  his  hand  his  enchanted 
weapon,  the  jaw-bone  of  his  ancestress — of  Muri- 
ranga-whenua,  and  said  to  liis  brothers,  "  Mind 
now,  keep  yourselves  hid,  and  do  not  go  showing 
yourselves  foolishly  to  the  sun ;  if  you  do,  you  will 
frighten  him  ;  but  wait  patiently  until  his  head 
and  fore  legs  have  got  well  into  the  snare,  then  I 
will  shout  out ;  haul  away  as  hard  as  you  can  on 
the  ropes  on  both  sides,  and  then  I  '11  rush  out 
and  attack  him,  but  do  you  keep  your  ropes 
tight  for  a  good  long  time  (while  I  attack  him), 
until  he  is  nearly  dead,  when  we  will  let  him  go  ; 
but  mind  now,  my  brothers,  do  not  let  him  move 
you  to  pity  with  his  shrieks  and  screams." 

At  last  the  sun  came  rising  up  out  of  his  place, 
like  a  fii-e  spreading  far  and  wide  over  the  moun- 
tains and  forests ;  he  rises  up,  his  head  passes 
through  the  noose,  and  it  takes  in  more  and  more 
of  his  body,  until  his  fore-paws  pass  through  ;  then 


38  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

are  pulled  tight  the  ropes,  and  the  monster  began 
to  struggle  and  roll  himself  about,  whilst  the  snare 
jerked  backwards  and  forwards  as  he  struggled.  Ah! 
was  not  he  held  fast  in  the  ropes  of  his  enemies  ! 

Then  forth  rushed  that  bold  hero,  Maui-tiki-tiki-o- 
Taranga,  with  his  enchanted  weapon.  Alas !  the  sun 
screams  aloud;  he  roars;  Maui  strikes  him  fiercely 
with  many  blows ;  they  hold  him  for  a  long  time, 
at  last  they  let  him  go,  and  then  weak  from  wounds 
the  sun  crept  slowly  along  its  course.  Then  was 
learnt  by  men  the  second  name  of  the  sun,  for  in 
its  agony  the  sun  screamed  out,  "  Why  am  I  thus 
smitten  by  you  !  oh,  man !  do  you  know  what  you 
are  doing  ?  Why  should  you  wish  to  kill  Tama- 
nui-te-Ra?"  Thus  was  learnt  his  second  name.  At 
last  they  let  him  go.  Oh,  then,  Tama-nui-te-Ra 
went  very  slowly  and  feebly  on  his  course. 

Maui-taha  and  his  brothers  after  this  feat  re- 
turned again  to  their  own  house,  and  dwelt  there, 
and  dwelt  there,  and  dwelt  there  ;  and  after  a  long 
time  his  brothers  went  out  fishing,  whilst  Maui- 
tiki-tiki-o-Taranga  stopped  idly  at  home  doing  no- 
thing, although  indeed  he  had  to  listen  to  the  sulky 
grumblings  of  his  wives  and  children,  at  his  laziness 
in  not  catching  fish  for  them.  Then  he  called 
out  to  the  women,  "  Never  mind,  oh,  mothers,  your- 
selves and  your  children  need  not  fear.  Have  not 
I  accomplished  all  things,  and  as  for  this  little  feat, 


THE    LEGEND    OF   MAUI.  39 

this  trifling  work  of  getting  food  for  you,  do  you 
think  I  cannot  do  that  ?  certainly  ;  if  I  go  and  get 
a  fish  for  you,  it  will  be  one  so  large  that  when 
I  bring  it  to  land  you  will  not  be  able  to  eat  it  all, 
and  the  sun  will  shine  on  it  and  make  it  putrid 
before  it  is  consumed.  Then  Maui  snooded  his  en- 
chanted fish-hook,  which  was  pointed  with  part  of 
the  jaw-bone  of  Muri-ranga-whenua,  and  when  he 
had  finished  this,  he  twisted  a  stout  fishing-line  to 
his  hook. 

His  brothers  in  the  meantime  had  arranged 
amongst  themselves  to  make  fast  the  lashings 
of  the  top  sides  of  their  canoe,  in  order  to  go  out 
for  a  good  day's  fishing.  When  all  was  made 
ready  they  launched  their  canoe,  and  as  soon 
as  it  was  afloat  Maui  jumped  into  it,  and  his 
brothers,  who  were  afraid  of  his  enchantments,  cried 
out,  "  Come,  get  out  again,  we  will  not  let  you  go 
with  us  ;  your  magical  arts  will  get  us  into  some 
difficulty."  So  he  was  compelled  to  remain  ashore 
whilst  his  brothers  paddled  ofi*,  and  when  they 
reached  the  fishing  ground  they  lay  upon  their 
paddles  and  fished,  and  after  a  good  day's  sport 
returned   ashore. 

As  soon  as  it  was  dark  night  Maui  went  down 
to  the  shore,  got  into  his  brothers'  canoe,  and  hid 
himself  under  the  bottom  boards  of  it.  The  next 
forenoon  his  brothers  came  down  to  the  shore  to  go 


40  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

fishing  again,  and  they  had  their  canoe  launched, 
and  paddled  out  to  sea  without  ever  seeing  Maui, 
who  lay  hid  in  the  hollow  of  the  canoe  under  the 
bottom  boards.  When  they  got  well  out  to  sea 
Maui  crept  out  of  his  hiding  place  ;  as  soon  as  liis 
brothers  saw  him,  they  said,  "  We  had  better  get 
back  to  the  shore  again  as  fast  as  we  can,  since  this 
fellow  is  on  board  ; "  but  Maui,  by  his  enchantments, 
stretched  out  the  sea  so  that  the  shore  instantly  be- 
came very  distant  from  tliem,  and  by  the  time  they 
could  turn  themselves  round  to  look  for  it,  it  was 
out  of  view.  Maui  now  said  to  them,  "You  had 
better  let  me  go  on  with  you,  I  shall  at  least  be 
useful  to  bail  the  water  out  of  our  canoe."  To 
this  they  consented,  and  they  paddled  on  again 
and  speedily  arrived  at  the  fishing  ground  where 
they  used  to  fish  upon  former  occasions.  As  soon  as 
they  got  there  his  brothers  said,  "  Let  us  drop  the 
anchor  and  fish  here  ;"  and  he  answered,  "Oh  no, 
don't ;  we  had  much  better  paddle  a  long  distance 
fin'ther  out."'  Upon  this  they  paddle  on,  and  pad- 
dle as  far  as  the  furthest  fishing  ground,  a  long 
way  out  to  sea,  and  then  his  brothers  at  last  say, 
"  Come  now,  we  must  drop  anchor  and  fish  here," 
And  he  replies  again,  "  Oh,  the  fish  here  are  very 
fine  I  suppose,  but  we  had  much  better  pull  right 
out  to  sea,  and  drop  anchor  there.  If  we  go  out  to 
the  place  where  I  wish  the  anchor  to  be  let  go,  be- 


THE    LEGEND    OF   MAUI,  41 

fore  you  can  get  a  hook  to  the  bottom,  a  fish  will 
come  following  it  back  to  the  top  of  the  water. 
You  won't  have  to  stop  there  a  longer  time  than 
you  can  wink  your  eye  in,  and  our  canoe  will  come 
back  to  shore  full  of  fish."  As  soon  as  they  hear 
this  they  paddle  away — they  paddle  away  until 
they  reach  a  very  long  distance  off",  and  his  brothers 
then  say,  "  We  are  now  far  enough/'  And  he  re- 
plies, "  No,  no,  let  us  go  out  of  sight  of  land,  and 
when  we  have  quite  lost  sight  of  it,  then  let  the 
anchor  be  dropped,  but  let  it  be  very  far  oS",  quite 
out  in  the  open  sea." 

At  last  they  reach  the  open  sea,  and  his  brothers 
begin  to  fish.  Lo,  lo,  they  had  hardly  let  their 
hooks  down  to  the  bottom,  when  they  each  pulled 
up  a  fish  into  the  canoe.  Twice  only  they  let 
down  their  lines,  when  behold  the  canoe  was  filled 
up  with  the  number  of  fish  they  had  caught. 
Then  his  brothers  said,  "  Oh,  brother,  let  us  all 
return  now."  And  he  answered  them,  "  Stay  a 
little  ;  let  me  also  throw  my  hook  into  the  sea." 
And  his  brothers  replied,  "  Where  did  you  get  a 
hook?"  And  he  answered,  "Oh,  never  mind,  I 
have  a  hook  of  my  own."  And  his  brothers  re- 
phed  again,  "  Make  haste  and  throw  it  then." 
And  as  he  pulled  it  out  from  under  his  garments, 
the  light  flashed  from  the  beautiful  mother-of-pearl 
shell  in  the  hollow  of  the  hook,  and  his  brothers  saw 


42  POLYNESIAN    IVIYTHOLOGY. 

that  the  hook  was  carved  and  ornamented  with 
tufts  of  hair  pulled  from  the  tail  of  a  dog,  and  it 
looked  exceedingly  beautiful.  Maui  then  asked  his 
brothers  to  give  him  a  little  bait  to  bait  liis  hook 
with  ;  but  they  replied,  "  We  will  not  give  you 
any  of  our  bait."  So  he  doubled  his  fist  and 
struck  his  nose  violently,  and  the  blood  gushed  out, 
and  he  smeared  his  hook  with  his  own  blood  for 
bait,  and  then  he  cast  it  into  the  sea,  and  it  sank 
down,  and  sank  down,  till  it  reached  to  the  small 
carved  figure  on  the  roof  of  a  house  at  the  bottom 
of  the  sea,  then  passing  by  the  figure,  it  descended 
along  the  outside  carved  rafters  of  the  roof,  and 
fell  in  at  the  doorway  of  the  house,  and  the  hook 
of  Maui-tikitiki-o-Taranga  caught  first  in  the  sill  of 
the  doorway. 

Then,  feeling  something  on  his  hook,  he  began 
to  haul  in  liis  hne.  Ah  !  ah  !  there  ascended  on 
his  hook  the  house  of  that  old  fellow  Tonga- 
nui.  It  came  up,  up ;  and  as  it  rose  high,  oh, 
dear  !  how  his  hook  was  strained  with  its  great 
weight ;  and  then  there  came  gurgling  up  foam 
and  bubbles  from  the  earth,  as  of  an  island 
emerging  from  the  water,  and  his  brothers  opened 
their  mouths   and  cried  aloud. 

Maui  all  this  time  continued  to  chaunt  forth 
his  incantations  amidst  the  murmurings  and  wail- 
ings    of    his    brothers,    who    were    weeping     and 


THE    LEGEND    OF   MAUL  43 

lamenting,  and  saying,  "  See  now,  how  he  has 
brought  us  out  into  the  open  sea,  that  we  may  be 
upset  in  it,  and  devoured  by  the  fish."  Then 
he  raised  aloud  his  voice,  and  repeated  the  incan- 
tation called  Hiki,  which  makes  heavy  weights 
light,  in  order  that  the  fish  he  had  caught  might 
come  up  easily,  and  he  chanted  an  incantation 
beginning  thus, — 

"  Wherefore,  then,  oh  !  Tonganui, 
Dost  thou  hold  fast  so  obstinately  below  there  1 " 

When  he  had  finished  his  incantation,  there  floated 
up,  hanging  to  his  line,  the  fish  of  Maui,  a  portion 
of  the  earth,  of  Papa-tu-a-Nuku.  Alas!  alas!  their 
canoe  lay  aground. 

Maui  then  left  his  brothers  with  their  canoe, 
and  returned  to  the  village  ;  but  before  he  went 
he  said  to  them,  "After  I  am  gone,  be  cou- 
rageous and  patient ;  do  not  eat  food  \mtil  I  re- 
turn, and  do  not  let  our  fish  be  cut  up,  but  rather 
leave  it  until  I  have  carried  an  ofiering  to  the 
gods  from  this  great  haul  of  fish,  and  until  I  have 
found  a  priest,  that  fitting  prayers  and  sacrifices 
may  be  ofiered  to  the  god,  and  the  necessary  rites 
be  completed  in  order.  We  shall  thus  all  be  puri- 
fied. I  will  then  return,  and  we  can  cut  up 
this  fish  in  safety,  and  it  shall  be  fairly  portioned 
out  to  tliis  one,  and  to  that  one,  and  to  that  other ; 
and  on  my  arrival  you  shall  each  have  your  due 


44  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

share  of  it,  and  return  to  your  homes  joyfully  ;  and 
what  we  leave  behind  us  will  keep  good,  and  that 
which  we  take  away  with  us,  returning,  will  be 
good  too." 

Maui   had   hardly  gone,  after  saying  all  this  to 
them,  than  his  brothers  trampled  under  their  feet  the 
words  they  had  heard  him  speak.      They  began  at 
once  to  eat  food,  and  to  cut  up  the  fish.    When  they 
did  this,  Maui  had  not  yet  arrived  at  the  sacred 
place,  in  the  presence  of  the  god  ;  had  he  previously 
reached   the   sacred   place,  the   heart  of  the  deity 
would  have  been  appeased  with  the  offering  of  a 
portion  of  the  fish  which  had  been  caught   by  his 
disciples,  and  all  the  male  and  female  deities  would 
have  partaken   of  their  portions  of   the  sacrifice. 
Alas !  alas !  those  foolish,  thoughtless  brothers  of  his 
cut  up  the  fish,  and  behold  the  gods  turned  with 
wrath   upon   them,   on  account  of   the    fish  which 
they  had  thus   cut   up  without  having  made  a  fit- 
ting sacrifice.     Then,  indeed,  the  fish  began  to  toss 
about  his  head  from  side   to  side,  and  to  lash  his 
tail,  and  the  fins  upon  his  back,  and  his  lower  jaw. 
Ah  !  ah  !  well  done  Tangaroa,  it  springs   about   on 
shore  as  briskly  as  if  it  was  in  the  water. 

That  is  the  reason  that  this  island  is  now  so 
rough  and  uneven — that  here  stands  a  mountain — 
that  there  lies  a  plain — that  here  descends  a  vale — 
that   there  rises   a  chff.      If  the  brothers  of  Maui 


THE    LEGEND    OF   MAUI.  45 

had  not  acted  so  deceitfully,  the  huge  fish  would 
have  lain  flat  and  smooth,  and  would  have  re- 
mained as  a  model  for  the  rest  of  the  earth,  for  the 
present  generation  of  men.  This,  which  has  just 
been  recounted,  is  the  second  evil  which  took  place 
after  the  separation  of  Heaven  from  Earth. 

Thus  was  dry  land  fished  up  by  Maui  after  it 
had  been  hidden  under  the  ocean  by  Eangi  and 
Tawhiri-ma-tea.  It  was  with  an  enchanted  fish- 
hook that  he  drew  it  up,  which  was  pointed  with 
a  bit  of  the  jaw-bone  of  his  ancestress  Muri-ranga- 
whenua ;  and  in  the  district  of  Heretaunga  they 
still  show  the  fish-hook  of  Maui,  which  became  a 
cape  stretching  far  out  into  the  sea,  and  now  forms 
the  southern  extremity  of  Hawke's  Bay. 

The  hero  now  thought  that  he  would  extinguish 
and  destroy  the  fires  of  his  ancestress  of  Mahu-ika. 
So  he  got  up  in  the  night,  and  put  out  the  fires 
left  in  the  cooking-houses  of  each  family  in  the 
village ;  then,  quite  early  in  the  morning,  he  called 
aloud  to  the  servants,  "  I  hunger,  I  hunger  ;  quick, 
cook  some  food  for  me."  One  of  the  servants 
thereupon  ran  as  fast  as  he  could  to  make  up  the 
fire  to  cook  some  food,  but  the  fire  was  out ;  and 
as  he  ran  round  from  house  to  house  in  the  village 
to  get  a  light,  he  found  every  fire  quite  out — he 
could  nowhere  get  a  light. 

When  Maui's  mother  heard  this,  she  called  out 


46  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

to  the  servants,  and  said,  "  Some  of  you  repair  to 
my  great  ancestress  Mabu-ika ;  tell  her  that  fire 
has  been  lost  upon  earth,  and  ask  her  to  give  some 
to  the  world  again."  But  the  slaves  were  alarmed, 
and  refused  to  obey  the  commands  which  their  mas- 
ters, the  sacred  old  people,  gave  them ;  and  they 
persisted  in  refusing  to  go,  notwithstanding  the  old 
people  repeatedly  ordered  them  to  do  so. 

At  last,  Maui  said  to  his  mother,  "  Well ;  then 
I  will  fetch  down  fire  for  the  world ;  but  which  is 
the  path  by  which  I  must  go  1"  And  his  parents, 
who  knew  the  country  well,  said  to  him,  "  If  you 
will  go,  follow  that  broad  path  that  lies  just  before 
you  there  ;  and  you  will  at  last  reach  the  dwell- 
ing of  an  ancestress  of  yours ;  and  if  she  asks 
you  who  you  are,  you  had  better  call  out  your 
name  to  her,  then  she  will  know  you  are  a  descen- 
dant of  hers  ;  but  be  cautious,  and  do  not 
play  any  tricks  with  her,  because  we  have  heard 
that  your  deeds  are  greater  than  the  deeds  of  men, 
and  that  you  are  fond  of  deceiving  and  injuring 
others,  and  perhaps  you  even  now  intend  in  many 
ways,  to  deceive  this  old  ancestress  of  yours, 
but  pray  be  cautious  not  to  do  so." 

But  Maui  said,  "  No,  I  only  want  to  bring  fire 
away  for  men,  that  is  all,  and  I  '11  retm'n  again  as 
soon  as  I  can  do  that?"  Then  he  went,  and 
reached  the  abode  of  the  goddess  of  fiii-e ;  and  he 


THE    LEGEND    OF    MAUI.  47 

was  SO  filled  with  wonder  at  what  he  saw,  that  for 
a  long  time  he  could  say  nothing.  At  last  he  said, 
"  Oh,  lady,  would  you  rise  up  ?  Where  is  your  fire 
kept  ?     I  have  come  to  beg  some  from  you."' 

Then  the  aged  lady  rose  right  up,  and  said, 
"  Au-e  !  who  can  this  mortal  be  ?"  and  he  answered, 
"  It 's  I."  "  Where  do  you  come  from  V  said  she  ; 
and  he  answered,  "  I  belong  to  this  country." 
"  You  are  not  from  this  country,"  said  she  ;  "  your 
appearance  is  not  like  that  of  the  inhabitants  of 
this  country.  Do  you  come  fi;om  the  north-east?" 
he  replied,  "  No."  "  Do  you  come  from  the  south- 
east ?"  he  replied,  "  No."  "  Are  you  fi-oni  the 
south  V  he  replied,  "  No."  "  Are  you  from  the 
westward?"  he  answered,  "No."  "Come  you, 
then,  from  the  direction  of  the  wind  which  blows 
right  upon  me  ?"  and  he  said,  "  I  do."  "  Oh, 
then,"  cried  she,  "  you  are  my  grand-child  ;  what 
do  you  want  here  ? "  He  answered,  "  I  am  come 
to  beg  fire  from  you."  She  replied,  "  Welcome,  wel- 
come ;  here  then  is  fire  for  you." 

Then  the  aged  woman  pulled  out  her  nail  ; 
and  as  she  pulled  it  out  fire  flowed  from  it,  and 
she  gave  it  to  him.  And  when  Maui  saw  she  had 
dra^vn  out  her  nail  to  produce  fire  for  liim,  he 
thought  it  a  most  wonderfiil  tiling  !  Then  he  went 
a  short  distance  oftj  and  when  not  very  far 
from  her,  he    put    the    fire    out,    quite    out  ;   and 


48  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

returning  to  her  again,  said,  "  The  light  you 
gave  me  has  gone  out,  give  me  another/'  Then 
she  caught  hold  of  another  nail,  and  pulled  it  out 
as  a  light  for  him  ;  and  he  left  her,  and  went  a 
little  on  one  side,  and  put  that  light  out  also  ; 
then  he  went  back  to  her  again,  and  said,  "  Oh, 
lady,  give  me,  I  pray  you,  another  light,  for  the 
last  one  has  also  gone  out.  And  thus  he  went  on 
and  on,  until  she  had  pulled  out  all  the  nails  of 
the  fingers  of  one  of  her  hands  ;  and  then  she  be- 
gan with  the  other  hand,  until  she  had  pulled  all 
the  finger-nails  out  of  that  band,  too  ;  and  then  she 
commenced  upon  the  nails  of  her  feet,  and  pulled 
them  also  out  in  the  same  manner,  except  the  nail 
of  one  of  her  big  toes.  Then  the  aged  woman  said 
to  herself  at  last,  "  This  fellow  is  surely  playing 
tricks  with  me." 

Then  out  she  pulled  the  one  toe-nail  that  she  had 
left,  and  it,  too,  became  fire,  and  as  she  dashed  it 
down  on  the  ground  the  whole  place  caught  fire. 
And  she  cried  out  to  Maui,  "  There,  you  have  it  all 
now  !"  And  Maui  ran  off,  and  made  a  rush  to 
escape,  but  the  fire  followed  hard  after  liim,  close  be- 
hind him  ;  so  he  changed  himself  into  a  fleet-winged 
eagle,  and  flew  with  rapid  flight,  but  the  fire  pur- 
sued, and  almost  caught  him  as  he  flew.  Then  the 
eagle  dashed  down  into  a  pool  of  water ;  but  when 
he  got  into  the  water  he  found  that  almost  boihng 


THE    LEGEND    OF   MAUI.  49 

too  :  the  forests  just  then  also  caught  fire,  so  that 
it  could  not  alight  anywhere,  and  the  earth  and 
the  sea  both  caught  fire  too,  and  Maui  was  very  near 
perishing  in  the  flames. 

Then  he   called  on  his  ancestors   Tawhiri-iaa-tea' 
...  ^ 

and  Whatitiri-matakataka,  to  send  down  ai^  abun- 
dant supply  of  water,  and  he  cried  aloud,  ''jOh,  let 
water  be  given  to  me  to  quench  this  fire  wlii^h.  pur- 
sues after  me;"  and  lo,  then  appeared  sqUalls7,and 
gales,  and  Tawhiri-ma-tea  sent  heavy  lasting  rain, 
and  the  fire  was  quenched  ;  and  before  Mahuika 
could  reach  her  place  of  shelter,  she  almost  perished 
in  the  rain,  and  her  shrieks  and  screams  became 
as  loud  as  those  of  Maui  had  been,  when  he  was 
scorched  by  the  pursuing  fire  :  thus  Maui  ended 
this  proceeding.  In  this  manner  was  extin- 
guished the  fire  of  Mahuika,  the  goddess  of  fire  ; 
but  before  it  was  all  lost,  she  saved  a  few  sparks 
which  she  tlrrew,  to  protect  them,  into  the  Kaiko- 
mako,  and  a  few  other  trees,  where  they  are  still 
cherished  ;  hence,  men  yet  use  portions  of  the  wood 
of  these  trees  for  fire  when  they  require  a  light. 

Then  he  returned  to  the  village,  and  his  mother 
and  father  said  to  him,  "  You  heard  when  we 
warned  you  before  you  went,  nevertheless  you 
played  tricks  with  your  ancestress ;  it  served  you 
right  that  you  got   into   such  trouble ;"   and  the 

D 


50  POLYNESIAN   MTTnOLOGY. 

young  follow  answered  his  parents,  "  Oli,  what  do 
I  care  for  that ;  do  you  think  that  my  perverse 
proceedings  are  put  a  stop  to  by  this?  certainly 
not ;  I  intend  to  go  on  in  the  same  way  for  ever, 
ever,  ever."  And  his  father  answered  liim,  "  Yes, 
then,  you  may  just  please  yourself  about  living  or 
dying ;  if  you  will  only  attend  to  me  you  will 
save  your  life;  if  you  do  not  attend  to  what  I  say, 
it  will  be  worse  for  you,  that  is  all."  As  soon  as 
this  conversation  was  ended,  off  the  young  fellow 
went  to  find  some  more  companions  for  his  other 
scrapes. 

Maui  had  a  young  sister  named  Hinauri,  who 
was  exceedingly  beautiful ;  she  married  Irawaru. 
One  day  Maui  and  his  brother-in-law  went  down  to 
the  sea  to  fish;  Maui  caught  not  a  single  fish  with 
his  hook,  which  had  no  barb  to  it,  but  as  long  as 
they  went  on  fishing  Maui  observed  that  Irawaru 
continued  catching  plenty  of  fish;  so  he  thought  to 
himself,  "Well,  how  is  this?  how  does  that  fellow 
catch  so  many  whilst  I  cannot  catch  one  ?"  Just  as 
he  thought  this,  Irawaru  had  another  bite,  and  up 
he  pulls  his  line  in  haste,  but  it  had  got  entangled 
with  that  of  Maui,  and  Maui  thinking  he  felt  a  fish 
pulling  at  his  own  line,  drew  it  in  quite  delighted; 
but  when  he  had  hauled  up  a  good  deal  of  it,  there 
were  himself  and  his  brother-in-law  pulling  in  their 


THE    LEGEND    OF   MAUI.  51 

lines  in  different  directions,  one  drawing  the  line 
towards  the  bow  of  the  canoe,  the  other  tow^ards 
the  stern.  ' 

Maui,  who  was  already  provoked  at  his  own  ill- 
luck,  and  the  good  luck  of  his  brother-in-law,  now 
called  out  quite  angrily,  "  Come,  let  go  my  line, 
the  fish  is  on  my  hook."  But  Irawaru  answered, 
"  No,  it  is  not,  it  is  on  mine." 

Maui  again  called  out  very  angrily,  "  Come,  let 
go,  I  tell  you  it  is  on  mine." 

Irawaru  then  slacked  out  his  line,  and  let  Maui 
pull  in  the  fish ;  and  as  soon  as  he  had  hauled  it 
into  the  canoe,  Maui  found  that  Irawaru  was  right, 
and  that  the  fish  was  on  his  hook;  when  Irawaru 
saw  this  too,  he  called  out,  "  Come  now,  let  go 
my  Hne  and  hook.''  Maui  answered  him,  "  Cannot 
you  wait  a  minute,  until  I  take  the  hook  out  of 
the  fish." 

As  soon  as  he  got  the  hook  out  of  the  fish's 
mouth,  he  looked  at  it,  and  saw  that  it  was  barbed  ; 
Maui,  who  was  already  exceedingly  wrath  with 
his  brother-in-law,  on  observing  this,  thought  he  had 
no  chance  with  his  barbless  hook  of  catching  as 
many  fish  as  his  brother-in-law,  so  he  said,  "  Don't 
you  think  we  had  better  go  on  shore  now  ?"  Ira- 
waru answered,  "  Very  well,  let  us  return  to  the 
land  again." 

So  they  paddled   bnck   towards   the   land,    and 

D   2 


52  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

when  they  reached  it,  and  -were  going  to  haul  the 
canoe  vip  on  to  the  beach,  Maui  said  to  his  brother-in- 
law,  "Do  you  get  under  the  out-rigger  of  the  canoe, 
and  lift  it  up  with  your  back ;"  so  he  got  under  it, 
and  as  soon  as  he  had  done  so,  Maui  jumped  on  it, 
and  pressed  the  whole  weight  of  the  canoe  down 
upon  him,  and  almost  killed  Irawaru. 

When  he  was  on  the  point  of  death,  Maui  tram- 
pled on  his  body,  and  lengthened  his  back  bone, 
and  by  his  enchantments  drew  it  out  into  the  form 
of  a  tail,  and  he  transformed  Irawaru  into  a  dog, 
and  fed  him  with  dung.* 

As  soon  as  he  had  done  this,  Maui  went  back  to 

*  This  quarel  of  Maui  with  his  brother-in-law,  Irawaru,  is  some- 
times narrated  in  this  way  : — 

Maui  and  his  brother-in-law  had  been  paying  a  visit  to  the  peo- 
ple of  a  village  not  very  distant  from  where  they  lived;  when  they 
were  about  to  return  home  again,  Maui  asked  his  brother-in-law  to 
carry  a  little  provision  for  them  both  upon  their  short  journey,  but 
Irawaru  answered  surlily — 

"  What  should  I  carry  any  provision  for,  indeed  ?  why  I  have 
just  had  an  excellent  meal :"  they  then  started,  and  Maui,  who  was 
very  angry,  by  his  enchantments  drew  out  the  earth  as  they  pro- 
ceeded, so  as  to  lengthen  exceedingly  the  road  they  had  to  traverse; 
at  last,  being  both  overcome  by  hunger  and  fatigue,  they  sat 
down  to  rest,  and  Maui,  who  knew  what  his  intentions  were  before 
they  started,  and  had  brought  provisions  with  him,  eat  a  good  meal, 
but  gave  none  to  his  brother-in-law.  He  then,  to  throw  Irawaru  off 
his  guard,  asked  him  to  clean  and  dress  his  hair  for  him,  and  laid 
his  head  on  his  lap-  for  that  purpose ;  when  his  own  was  finished 
he  offered  to  do  the  same  for  Irawaru,  who  suspecting  no  harm  laid 
his  head  on  Maui's  lap,  who  threw  him  into  an  enchanted  sleep, 
and  then  by  his  enchantments  changed  him  into  a  dog. 


THE    LEGEND    OF   MAUI.  53 

his  place  of  abode,  just  as  if  nothing  unusual  had 
taken  place,  and  his  young  sister,  who  was  watch- 
ing for  the  return  of  her  husband,  as  soon  as  she 
saw  Maui  coming,  ran  to  him  and  asked  him,  say- 
ing, "Maui,  where  is  your  brother-in-law?"  Maui 
answered,  "  I  left  him  at  the  canoe." 

But  his  young  sister  said,  "  Why  did  not  you 
both  come  home  together,"  and  Maui  answered, 
"  He  desired  me  to  tell  you  that  he  wanted  you  to 
go  down  to  the  beach  to  help  him  carry  up  the  fish  ; 
you  had  better  go  therefore,  and  if  you  do  not  see 
him,  just  call  out,  and  if  he  does  not  answer  you, 
why  then  call  out  to  him  in  this  way,  Mo-i,  mo-i, 
mo-i." 

Upon  learning  this,  Hinauri  hurried  down  to  the 
beach  as  fast  as  she  could,  and  not  seeing  her  hus- 
band, she  went  about  calling  out  his  name,  but  no 
answer  was  made  to  her  ;  she  then  called  out  as  Maui 
had  told  her,  "Mo-i,  mo-i,  mo-i,  mo-oi;"  then  Irawaru, 
who  was  running  about  in  the  bushes  near  tliere, 
in  the  form  of  a  dog,  at  once  recognised  the  voice 
of  Hinauri,  and  answered,  "  Ao  !  ao  !  ao  !  ao-ao-o  !" 
howling  like  a  dog,  and  he  followed  her  back  to  the 
village,  frisking  along  and  wagging  his  tail  with 
pleasure  at  seeing  her  ;  and  from  him  sprang  all 
dogs,  so  that  he  is  regarded  as  their  progenitor, 
and  all  New  Zealanders  still  call  their  dogs  to  then, 
by  the  words,  "  Mo-i,  mo-i,  mo-i." 


54:  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

Hinaiiii,  when  she  saw  that  her  husband  had 
been  changed  into  a  dog,  was  quite  distracted  with 
grief,  and  wept  bitterly  the  whole  way  as  she  went 
back  to  the  village,  and  as  soon  as  ever  she  got 
into  her  house,  she  caught  up  an  enchanted  girdle 
which  she  had,  and  ran  back  to  the  sea  with  it, 
determined  to  destroy  herself,  by  throwing  herself 
into  the  ocean,  so  that  the  dragons  and  monsters 
of  the  deep  might  devour  her ;  when  she  reached 
the  sea-shore,  she  sat  down  upon  the  rocks  at  the 
ocean's  very  edge,  and  as  she  sat  there  she  first 
lamented  aloud  her  cruel  fate,  and  repeated  an 
incantation,  and  then  threw  herself  into  the  sea, 
and  the  tide  swept  her  off  from   the  shore. 

Maui  now  felt  it  necessary  to  leave  the  village 
where  Irawaru  had  lived,  so  he  returned  to  his 
parents,  and  when  he  had  been  with  them  for  some 
time,  his  father  said  to  him  one  day,  "  Oh,  my  son, 
I  have  heard  from  your  mother  and  others  that  you 
are  very  valiant,  and  that  you  have  succeeded  in  all 
feats  that  you  have  undertaken  in  your  own  coun- 
try, whether  they  were  small  or  great ;  but  now 
that  you  have  arrived  in  your  father's  country,  you 
will,  perhaps,  at  last  be  overcome." 

Then  Maui  asked  him,  "  What  do  you  mean,  what 
things  are  there  that  I  can  be  vanquished  by?" 
And  his  father  answered  him,  "  By  your  great  an- 
cestress, by  Hine-nui-te-po,  who,   if  you  look,  you 


THE    LEGEND    OF    MAUT.  55 

may  see  flashing,  and  as  it  were,  opening  and  shut- 
ting there,  where  the  horizon  meets  the  sky."  And 
Maui  replied,  "Lay  aside  such  idle  thoughts,  and 
let  us  both  fearlessly  seek  whether  men  are  to  die 
or  live  for  ever."  And  his  father  said,  "  My  child, 
there  has  been  an  ill  omen  for  us ;  when  I  was  bap- 
tizing you,  I  omitted  a  portion  of  the  fitting 
prayers,  and  that  I  know  will  be  the  cause  of  your 
perishing." 

Then  Maui  asked  his  father,  "  What  is  my  an- 
cestress Hine-nui-te-po  like?"  and  he  answered, 
"  What  you  see  yonder  shining  so  brightly  red  are 
her  eyes,  and  her  teeth  are  as  sharp  and  hard  as 
pieces  of  volcanic  glass ;  her  body  is  like  that  of  a 
man,  and  as  for  the  pupils  of  her  eyes,  they  are 
jasper;  and  her  hair  is  like  the  tangles  of  long  sea- 
weed, and  her  mouth  is  like  that  of  a  barracouta." 
Then  his  son  answered  him,  "  Do  you  think  her 
strength  is  as  great  as  that  of  Tama-nui-te-Ra,  who 
consumes  man,  and  the  earth,  and  the  very  waters, 
by  the  fierceness  of  his  heat  ?  was  not  the  world 
formerly  saved  alive  by  the  speed  with  which  he 
travelled?  if  he  had  then,  in  the  days  of  his  full 
strength  and  power,  gone  as  slowly  as  he  does  now, 
not  a  remnant  of  mankind  would  have  been  left 
living  upon  the  earth,  nor,  indeed,  would  anything 
else  have  survived.  But  I  laid  hold  of  Tama-nui- 
te-Ra,  and  now  he  goes  slowly,  for  I  smote  him 


56  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

again  and  again,  so  that  lie  is  now  feeble,  and 
long  in  travelling  his  course,  and  he  now  gives  but 
very  little  heat,  having  been  weakened  by  the 
blows  of  my  enchanted  weapon  ;  I  then,  too,  split 
him  open  in  many  places,  and  from  the  wounds  so 
made,  many  rays  now  issue  forth,  and  spread  in  all 
directions.  So,  also,  I  found  the  sea  much  larger 
than  the  earth,  but  by  the  power  of  the  last  born 
of  your  children,  part  of  the  earth  was  drawn  up 
again,  and  dry  land  came  forth."  And  his  father 
answered  him,  "  That  is  all  very  true,  O,  my  last 
born,  and  the  strength  of  my  old  age  ;  well,  then, 
be  bold,  go  and  visit  your  great  ancestress  who 
flashes  so  fiercely  there,  where  the  edge  of  the 
horizon  meets  the  sky." 

Hardly  was  this  conversation  concluded  with  his 
father,  when  the  young  hero  went  forth  to  look  for 
companions  to  accompany  him  upon  this  enterprise : 
and  so  there  came  to  him  for  companions,  the  small 
robin,  and  the  large  robin,  and  the  thrush,  and  the 
yellow-hammer,  and  every  kind  of  little  bird,  and 
the  water -wagtail,  and  these  all  assembled  together, 
and  they  all  started  with  Maui  in  the  evening,  and 
arrived  at  the  dwelling  of  Hine-nui-te-po,  and 
found  her  fast  asleep. 

Then  Maui  addressed  them  all,  and  said,  "  My 
little  friends,  now  if  you  see  me  creep  into  this  old 
cliieftainess,  do  not  laugh  at  what  you  see.      Nay, 


THE    LEGEND    OF    MAUI.  57 

nay,  do  not  I  pray  you,  but  when  I  have  got  alto- 
gether inside  her,  and  just  as  I  am  coming  out  of 
her  mouth,  then  you  may  shout  with  laughter  if 
you  please."  And  his  little  friends,  who  were 
frightened  at  what  they  saw,  replied,  "  Oh,  sir,  you 
will  certainly  be  killed."  And  he  answered  them, 
"If  you  burst  out  laughing  at  me  as  soon  as  I  get 
inside  her,  you  will  wake  her  up,  and  she  will  cer- 
tainly kill  me  at  once,  but  if  you  do  not  laugh 
until  I  am  quite  inside  her,  and  am  on  the  point 
of  coming  out  of  her  mouth,  I  shall  live,  and  Hine- 
nui-te-po  will  die."  And  his  little  friends  an- 
swered, "Go  on  then,  brave  sir,  but  pray  take 
good  care  of  yourself." 

Then  the  young  hero  started  off',  and  twisted 
the  strings  of  his  weapon  tight  round  his  wrist, 
and  went  into  the  house,  and  stripped  off  his 
clothes,  and  the  skin  on  his  hips  looked  mottled 
and  beautiful  as  that  of  a  mackerel,  from  the  tattoo 
marks,  cut  on  it  with  the  chisel  of  Uetonga,  and  he 
entered  the  old  chieftainess. 

The  little  birds  now  screwed  up  their  tiny 
cheeks,  trying  to  suppress  their  laughter  ;  at  last, 
the  little  Tiwakawaka  could  no  longer  keep  it  in, 
and  laughed  out  loud,  with  its  merry  cheerful  note; 
this  Avoke  the  old  woman  up,  she  opened  her  eyes, 
started  up,  and  killed  Maui. 

Thus  died  this   Maui  we  have  spoken    of,   but 

D  3 


58  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

before  he  died  he  had  children,  and  sons  were  born 
to  him  ;  some  of  his  descendants  yet  Hve  in  Ha- 
waiki,  some  in  Aotearoa  (or  in  these  ishinds)  ;  the 
greater  part  of  his  descendants  remained  in  Ha- 
"waiki,  but  a  few  of  them  came  here  to  Aotearoa. 
According  to  the  traditions  of  the  Maori,*  this 
was  the  cause  of  the  introduction  of  death  into 
the  world  (Hine-nui-te-po  being  the  goddess  of 
death :  if  Maui  had  passed  safely  through  her, 
then  no  more  human  beings  would  have  died, 
but  death  itself  would  have  been  destroyed),  and 
we  express  it  by  saying,  "  The  water- wagtail  laugh- 
ing at  Maui-tikitiki-o-Taranga  made  Hine-nui-te-po 
squeeze  him  to  death."  And  we  have  this  proverb, 
"Men  make  heirs,  but  death  carries  them  off." 

Thus  end  the  deeds  of  the  son  of  Makeatutara, 
and  of  Taranga,  and  the  deeds  of  the  sons  of  Rangi- 
nui,  and  of  Papa-tu-a-Nuku  ;  this  is  the  narrative 
about  the  generations  of  the  ancestors  of  the  in- 
habitants of  New  Zealand,  and  therefore,  we  the 
people  of  that  country,  preserve  closely  these  tradi- 
tions of  old  times,  as  a  thing  to  be  taught  to  the 
generations  that  come  after  us,  so  we  repeat  them 
in  our  prayers,  and  whenever  we  relate  the  deeds 
of  the  ancestors  from  whom  each  family  is  de- 
scended, and  upon  other  similar  occasions. 

*  Inhabitants  of  "New  Zealand, 


THE  LEGEND  OF    TAWHAKI. 

Now  quitting  the  deeds  of  Maui,  let  those  of  Ta- 
whald  be  recounted.  He  was  the  son  of  Hema 
and  Urutonga,  and  he  had  a  younger  brother 
named  Karihi.  Tawhaki  having  taken  Hinepiri- 
piri  as  a  wife,  he  went  one  day  with  his  brothers- 
in-law  to  fish,  from  a  flat  reef  of  rocks  which  ran 
far  out  into  the  sea ;  he  had  four  brothers-in-law, 
two  of  these  when  tired  of  fishing  returned  towards 
their  village,  and  he  went  with  them  ;  when  they 
drew  near  the  village,  thej'-  attempted  to  murder 
him,  and  thinking  they  had  slain  him,  buried  him  ; 
they  then  went  on  their  way  to  the  village,  and 
when  they  reached  it,  their  young  sister  said  to 
them,  "  Why,  where  is  your  brother-in-law  ? "  and 
they  replied,  "Oh,  they're  all  fishing."  So  the 
young  wife  waited  until  the  other  two  brothers 
came  back,  and  when  they  reached  the  village  they 
were  questioned  by  their  young  sister,  who  asked, 
"Where  is  your  brother-in-law?"  and  the  two  who 
had  last  arrived,  answered  her,  "Why,  the  others 
all  went  home  together  long  since."  So  the  young 
wife  suspected  that  they  had  killed  her  husband, 


60  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

and  ran  off  at  once  to  search  for  him  ;  and  she 
found  where  he  had  been  buried,  and  on  examining 
him  ascertained  that  he  had  only  been  insensible, 
and  was  not  quite  dead  ;  then  with  great  difficulty 
she  got  him  upon  her  back,  and  carried  him  home 
to  their  house,  and  carefully  washed  his  wounds, 
and  staunched  the  bleeding. 

Tawhaki,  when  he  had  a  little  recovered,  said  to 
her,  "Fetch  some  wood,  and  light  a  fire  for  me;" 
and  as  his  wife  was  going  to  do  this,  he  said  to 
her,  "  If  you  see  any  tall  tree  growing  near  you, 
fell  it,  and  bring  that  with  you  for  the  fire."  His 
wife  w^ent,  and  saw  a  tree  growing  such  as  her  hus- 
band spoke  of;  so  she  felled  it,  and  put  it  upon 
her  shoulder  and  brought  it  along  with  her  ;  and 
when  she  reached  the  house,  she  put  the  whole  tree 
upon  the  fire  without  chopping  it  into  pieces  ;  and 
it  was  this  circumstance  that  led  her  to  give  the 
name  of  Wahieroa  (long-log-of-wood-for-the-fire)  to 
their  first  son,  for  Tawhaki  had  told  her  to  bring 
this  log  of  wood  home,  and  to  call  the  child  after 
it,  that  the  duty  of  avenging  his  father's  wrongs 
might  often  be  recalled  to  his  mind. 

As  soon  as  Tawhaki  had  recovered  fi:"om  his 
wounds,  he  left  the  place  where  his  faithless  brothers- 
in-law  lived,  and  went  away  taking  all  his  own  war- 
riors and  their  families  with  him,  and  built  a  for- 
tified village  upon  the  toj)  of  a  very  lofty  mountain, 


THE    LEGEND    OF    TAWHAKI.  61 

where  lie  could  easily  protect  himself;  and  they 
dwelt  there.  Then  he  called  aloud  to  the  Gods,  his 
ancestors,  for  revenge,  and  they  let  the  floods  of 
heaven  descend,  and  the  earth  was  overwhelmed  by 
the  waters  and  all  human  beings  perished,  and  the 
name  given  to  that  event  was,  "  The  overwhelming 
of  the  Mataaho,"  and  the  whole  of  that  race 
perished. 

When  this  feat  was  accomplished,  Tawhaki  and 
his  younger  brother  next  went  to  seek  revenge  for 
the  death  of  their  father.  It  was  a  different  race 
who  had  carried  off  and  slain  the  father  of  Ta- 
whaki ;  the  name  of  that  race  was  the  Ponaturi — the 
country  they  inhabited  was  underneath  the  waters, 
but  they  had  a  large  house  on  the  dry  land  to 
which  they  resorted  to  sleep  at  night ;  the  name  of 
that  large  house  was  "  Manawa-Tane," 

The  Ponaturi  had  slain  the  father  of  Tawhaki 
and  carried  off  his  body,  but  his  father's  wife  they 
had  carried  off  alive  and  kept  as  a  captive.  Ta- 
whaki and  his  younger  brother  went  upon  their  way 
to  seek  out  that  people  and  to  revenge  themselves 
upon  them.  At  length  they  reached  a  place  from 
whence  they  could  see  the  house  called  Manawa- 
Tane.  At  the  time  they  arrived  near  the  house  there 
was  no  one  there  but  their  mother,  who  was  sitting 
near  the  door ;  but  the  bones  of  their  father  were 
hung  up  inside  the  house  under  its  high  sloping  roof. 


62  "  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

The  whole  tribe  of  the  Ponaturi  were  at  that  time 
in  their  country  under  the  waters,  but  at  the  ap- 
proach of  night  they  would  return  to  their  house, 
to  Manawa-Tane. 

Whilst  Tawhaki  and  his  younger  brother  Karihi 
were  coming  along  still  at  a  great  distance  from  the 
house,  Tawhaki  began  to  repeat  an  incantation, 
and  the  bones  of  his  father,  Hema,  felt  the  influence 
of  this,  and  rattled  loudly  together  where  they  hung 
under  the  roof  of  the  house,  for  gladness,  when  they 
heard  Tawhaki  repeating  his  incantations  as  he 
came  along,  for  they  knew  that  the  hour  of  revenge 
had  now  come.  As  the  brothers  drew  nearer,  their 
mother,  Urutonga,  heard  the  voice  of  Tawhaki,  and 
she  wept  for  gladness  in  front  of  her  children,  who 
came  repeating  incantations  upon  their  way.  And 
when  they  reached  at  length  the  house,  they  wept 
over  their  mother,  over  old  Urutonga.  When  they 
had  ended  weeping,  their  mother  said  to  them, 
"  My  children,  hasten  to  return  hence,  or  you  will 
both  certainly  perish.  The  people  who  dwell  here 
are  a  very  fierce  and  savage  race.''  Karihi  said  to 
her,  "  How  low  will  the  sun  have  descended  when 
those  you  speak  of  return  home?'"  And  she  replied, 
"  They  will  return  here  when  the  sun  sinks  beneath 
the  ocean."  Then  Karihi  asked  her,  "What  did 
they  save  you  alive  for?"  And  she  answered, 
"  They  saved  me  alive  that  I  might  watch  for  the 


THE    LEGEND    OF    TAWHAKI.  63 

rising  of  the  dawn ;  they  make  me  ever  sit  watch- 
ing here  at  the  door  of  the  house,  hence  this  people 
have  named  me  'Tatau/  or  'the  door  ;' and  they 
keep  on  throughout  the  night  calling  out  to  me, 
'  Ho,  Tatau,  there  !  is  it  dawn  yet  ?  '  And  then  I 
call  out  in  answer,  '  No,  no,  it  is  deep  night — it  is 
lasting  night — it  is  still  night  ;  compose  yourselves 
to  sleep,  sleep  on/ '' 

Karibi  then  said  to  his  mother,  "  Cannot  we 
hide  ourselves  somewhere  here?" 

Their  mother  answered,  "  You  had  better  return ; 
you  cannot  hide  yourselves  here,  the  scent  of  you 
will  be  perceived  by  them." 

"  But,"  said  Karihi,  "  we  will  hide  ourselves 
away  in  the  thick  thatch  of  the  house." 

Their  mother,  however,  answered,  "  'T  is  of  no 
use,  you  cannot  hide  yourselves  there." 

All  this  time  Tawhaki  sat  quite  silent ;  but 
Karihi  said,  "  We  will  hide  ourselves  here,  for  we 
know  incantations  which  will  render  us  invisible 
to  all." 

On  hearing  this,  their  mother  consented  to  their 
remaining,  and  attempting  to  avenge  their  father's 
death.  So  they  climbed  up  to  the  ridge-pole  of  the 
house,  upon  the  outside  of  the  roof,  and  made  holes 
in  the  thick  layers  of  reeds  which  formed  the  thatch 
of  the  roof,  and  crept  into  them  and  covered  them- 
selves up ;  and  their  mother  called  to  them,  say- 
ing, "  When  it  draws  near  dawn,  come  down  again, 


64  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

and  stop  up  every  chink  in  tlie  house,  so  that  no 
single  ray  of  light  may  shine  in." 

At  length  the  day  closed,  and  the  sun  sank 
below  the  horizon,  and  the  whole  of  that  strange 
tribe  left  the  water  in  a  body,  and  ascended  to  the 
dry  land ;  and,  according  to  their  custom  fi-om  time 
immemorial,  they  sent  one  of  their  number  in  front 
of  them,  that  he  might  carefully  examine  the  road, 
and  see  that  there  were  no  hidden  foes  lying  in 
wait  for  them  either  on  the  way  or  in  their  house. 
As  soon  as  this  scout  arrived  at  the  threshold  of 
the  house,  he  perceived  the  scent  of  Tawhaki  and 
Karihi ;  so  he  lifted  up  his  nose  and  turned  sniffing 
all  round  the  inside  of  the  house.  As  he  turned 
about,  he  was  on  the  point  of  discovering  that 
strangers  were  hidden  there,  when  the  rest  of  the 
tribe  (whom  long  security  had  made  careless)  came 
hurrying  on,  and  crowding  into  the  house  in 
thousands,  so  that  from  the  denseness  of  the 
crowd  the  scent  of  the  strange  men  was  quite  lost. 
The  Ponaturi  then  stowed  themselves  away  in  the 
house  until  it  was  entirely  filled  up  with  them,  and 
by  degrees  they  arranged  themselves  in  convenient 
places,  and  at  length  all  fell  fast  asleep. 

At  midnierht  Tawhaki  and  Karihi  stole  down 
from  the  roof  of  the  house,  and  found  that  their 
mother  had  crept  out  of  the  door  to  meet  them,  so 
they  sat  at  the  doorway  whispering  together. 


THE    LEGEND    OF   TAWHAKI,  Go 

Karihi  then  asked  his  mother,  "  Which  is  the  best 
way  for  us  to  destroy  these  people  who  are  sleeping 
here?"  And  their  mother  answered,  "You  had 
better  let  the  sun  kill  them,  its  rays  will  destroy 
them." 

Having  said  this,  Tatau  crept  into  the  house 
again ;  presently  an  old  man  of  the  Ponaturi 
called  out  to  her,  "  Ho,  Tatau,  Tatau,  there  ;  is  it 
dawn  yet  V  And  she  answered,  "  No,  no,  it  is 
deep  night — it  is  lasting  night ;  't  is  still  night ; 
sleep  soundly,  sleep  on/' 

When  it  was  very  near  dawn,  Tatau  whispered 
to  her  children,  who  were  still  sitting  just  outside 
the  door  of  the  house,  "  See  that  every  chink  in  the 
doorway  and  window  is  stopped,  so  that  not  a 
ray   of  light  can  penetrate  here/' 

Presently  another  old  man  of  the  Ponaturi  called 
out  again,  "  Ho,  Tatau  there,  is  not  it  near  dawn 
yet?"  And  she  answered,  "No,  no,  it  is  night; 
it  is  lasting  night  ;  't  is  still  night  ;  sleep  soundly, 
sleep  on/' 

This  was  the  second  time  that  Tatau  had  thus 
called  out  to  them. 

At  last  dawn  had  broken — at  last  the  sun  had 
shone  brightly  upon  the  earth,  and  rose  high  in  the 
heavens  ;  and  the  old  man  again  called  out,  "  Ho, 
Tatau  there  ;  is  not  it  dawn  yet  ?"  And  she 
answered,  "Yes."      And  then  she  called  out  to  her 


66  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

children,  "  Be  quick,  pull  out  the  things  with  which 
you  have  stopped  up  the  window  and  the  door." 

"  So  they  pulled  them  out,  and  the  bright  rays  of 
the  sun  came  streaming  into  the  house,  and  the 
whole  of  the  Ponaturi  perished  before  the  light ; 
they  perished  not  by  the  hand  of  jnan,  but  withered 
before  the  sun's  rays.* 

When  the  Ponaturi  had  been  all  destroyed, 
Tawhaki  and  Karihi  carefully  took  down  their 
father's  bones  from  the  roof  of  the  house,  and 
burnt  them  with  fire,  and  together  with  the  bodies 
of  all  those  who  were  in  the  house,  who  had 
perished,  scorched  by  the  bright  rays  of  the  sun ; 
they  then  returned  again  to  their  own  country, 
taking  with  them  their  mother,  and  carefully  car- 
rying the  bones  of  their  father. 

The  fame  of  Tawhaki's  courage  in  thus  destroy- 
ing the  race  of  Ponaturi,  and  a  report  also  of  his 
manly  beauty,  chanced  to  reach  the  ears  of  a  young 
maiden  of  the  heavenly  race  who  live  above  in  the 
skies;  so  one  night  she  descended  from  the  heavens 
to  visit  Tawhaki,  and  to  judge  for  herself,  whether 
these  reports  were  true.  She  found  him  lying 
sound  asleep,  and  after  gazing  on  him  for  some  time, 
she  stole  to  his  side  and  laid  herself  down  by  him. 

*  The  New  Zealanders  say  that  the  "  Kanae/'  or  salmon,  had 
come  on  shore  with  the  Ponaturi,  and  escaped  out  of  the  house  by 
its  power  of  leaping,  gaining  the  water  again  by  successive  springs. 


THE    LEGEND    OF   TAWHAKI.  67 

He,  wlien  disturbed  by  her,  thought  that  it  was  only 
some  female  of  this  lower  world,  and  slept  again  ; 
but  before  dawn  the  yovmg  girl  stole  away  again 
from  his  side,  and  ascended  once  more  to  the 
heavens.  In  the  early  morning  Tawhaki  awoke 
and  felt  all  over  his  sleeping  place  with  both  his 
hands,  but  in  vain,  he  could  nowhere  find  the 
young  girl. 

From  that  time  Tango-tango,*  the  girl  of  the 
heavenly  race,  stole  every  night  to  the  side  of 
Tawhaki,  and  lo,  in  the  morning  she  was  gone, 
until  she  found  that  she  had  conceived  a  child,  who 
was  afterwards  named  Arahuta ;  then  full  of  love 
for  Tawhaki,  she  disclosed  herself  fully  to  him  and 
lived  constantly  in  this  world  with  him,  deserting, 
for  his  sake,  her  friends  above ;  and  he  discovered 
that  she  who  had  so  loved  him  belonged  to  the  race 
whose  home  is  in  the  heavens. 

Whilst  thus  living  with  him,  this  girl  of  the 
heavenly  race,  his  second  wife,  said  to  him,  '•  Oh, 
Tawhaki,  if  our  baby  so  shortly  now  to  be  born, 
should  prove  a  son,  I  will  wash  the  little  thing  be- 
fore it  is  baptized  ;  but  if  it  should  be  a  little  girl 
then  you  shall  wash  it."  When  the  time  came 
Tango-tango  had  a  little  girl,  and  before  it  was 
baptized  Tawhaki  took  it  to  a  spring  to  wash  it, 
and   afterwards   held   it   away  from  him    as  if  it 

*  According  to  some  traditions  her  name  was  Hapai. 


68  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

smelt  badly,  and  said,  "  Faugh,  Low  badly  the 
little  tiling  smells."  Then  Tango-tango,  when  she 
heard  this  said  of  her  own  dear  little  baby,  began 
to  sob  and  cry  bitterly,  and  at  last  rose  up  from 
her  place  with  her  child,  and  began  to  take  flight 
towards  the  sky,  but  she  paused  for  one  minute 
with  one  foot  resting  upon  the  carved  figure  at  tlie 
end  of  the  ridge-pole  of  the  house  above  the  door. 
Then  Tawhaki  rushed  forward,  and  springing  up 
tried  to  catch  hold  of  his  young  wife,  but  missing 
her,  he  entreatingly  besought  her,  "  Mother  of  my 
child,  oh  return  once  more  to  me  V  But  she  in 
reply  called  down  to  him,  "  No,  no,  I  shall  now 
never  return  to  you  again." 

Tawhaki  once  more  called  up  to  her,  "  At  least, 
then,  leave  me  some  one  remembrance  of  you." 
Then  his  young  wife  called  down  to  him,  "  These 
are  my  parting  words  of  remembrance  to  you — take 
care  that  you  lay  not  hold  with  your  hands  of  the 
loose  root  of  the  creeper,  which  dropping  from 
aloft  sways  to  and  fro  in  the  air ;  but  rather  lay 
fast  hold  on  that  which  hanging  down  from  on 
high  has  again  struck  its  fibres  into  the  earth." 
Then  she  floated  up  into  the  air,  and  vanished  from 
his  sight. 

Tawhaki  remained  plunged  in  grief,  for  his  heart 
was  torn  by  regrets  for  his  wife  and  his  little  girl. 
One  moon  had  waned   after   her  departure,  when 


THE    LEGEND    OF   TAWHAKI.  69 

Tawhaki,  unable  longer  to  endure  such  sufferings, 
called  out  to  his  younger  brother,  to  Karihi,  saying, 
"  Oh,  brother,  shall  we  go  and  search  for  my  little 
girl  ?"  And  Karihi  consented,  saying,  "  Yes,  let 
us  go."  So  they  departed,  taking  two  slaves  with 
them  as  companions  for  their  journey. 

When  they  reached  the  pathway  along  which 
they  intended  to  travel,  Tawhaki  said  to  the  two 
slaves  who  were  accompanying  himself  and  his 
brother,  "  You  being  unclean  or  unconsecrated  per- 
sons, must  be  careful  when  we  come  to  the  place 
where  the  road  passes  the  fortress  of  Tongameha, 
not  to  look  up  at  it  for  it  is  enchanted,  and  some 
evil  will  befall  you  if  you  do."  They  then  went 
along  the  road,  and  when  they  came  to  the  place 
mentioned  by  TaAvhaki,  one  of  the  slaves  looked  up 
at  the  fortress,  and  his  eye  was  immediately  torn 
out  by  the  magical  arts  of  Tongameha,  and  he 
perished.  Tawhaki  and  Karihi  then  went  upon 
the  road  accompanied  by  only  one  slave.  They  at 
last  reached  the  spot  where  the  ends  of  the  tendrils 
which  hung  down  fi-om  heaven  reached  the  earth,  and 
they  there  found  an  old  ancestress  of  theirs  who 
was  quite  blind,  and  whose  name  was  Matakerepo. 
She  was  appointed  to  take  care  of  the  tendrils,  and 
she  sat  at  the  place  where  they  touched  the  earth, 
and  held  the  ends  of  one  of  them  in  her  hands. 

This  old  lady  was  at  the  moment  employed  in 


70  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

counting  some  taro  roots,  which  she  was  about  to 
have  cooked,  and  as  she  was  bhnd  she  was  not 
aware  of  the  strangers  who  stole  quietly  and  silently 
up  to  her.  There  were  ten  taro  roots  lying  in  a 
heap  before  her.  She  began  to  count  them,  one, 
two,  three,  foui',  five,  six,  seven,  eight,  nine.  Just 
at  this  moment  Tawhaki  quietly  slipped  awaj^  the 
tenth,  the  old  lady  felt  about  everywhere  for  it, 
but  she  could  not  find  it.  She  thought  she  nmst 
have  made  some  mistake,  and  so  began  to  count 
her  taro  over  again  very  carefully.  One,  two, 
three,  four,  five,  six,  seven,  eigbt.  Just  then 
Tawhaki  had  slipped  away  the  ninth.  She  was 
now  quite  surprised,  so  she  counted  them  over 
again  quite  slowly,  one,  two,  three,  four,  five,  six, 
seven,  eight ;  and  as  she  could  not  find  the  two 
that  were  missing,  she  at  last  guessed  that  some- 
body was  playing  a  trick  upon  her,  so  she  pulled 
her  weapon  out,  which  she  always  sat  upon  to 
keep  it  safe,  and  standing  up  turned  round,  feeling 
about  her  as  she  moved,  to  try  if  she  could  find 
Tawhaki  and  Karihi ;  but  they  very  gently  stooped 
down  to  the  ground  and  lay  close  there,  so  that 
her  weapon  passed  over  them,  and  she  could  not 
feel  anybody  ;  when  she  had  thus  swept  her  weapon 
all  round  her,  she  sat  down  and  put  it  under  her 
again.  Karihi  then  struck  her  a  blow  upon  the 
face,  and  she,  quite  frightened,  threw  up  her  hands 


THE    LEGEND    OF    TAWHAKI.  71 

to  her  face,  pressing  tliem  on  the  place  where  she 
had  been  struck,  and  crying  out,  "  Oh  !  who  did 
that?"  Tawhaki  then  touched  both  her  eyes,  and, 
lo,  she  was  at  once  restored  to  siglit,  and  saw 
quite  plainly,  and  she  knew  her  grandchildren  and 
wept  over  them. 

When  the  old  lady  had  finished  weeping  over 
them,  she  asked,  "  Where  are  you  going  to  ? " 
And  Tawhaki  answered,  "  I  go  to  seek  my  little 
girl."  She  replied,  "But  where  is  she?''  He 
answered,  "Above  there,  in  the  skies."  Then  she 
replied,  "  But  what  made  her  go  to  the  skies  ?" 
And  Tawhaki  answered,  "  Her  mother  came  from 
heaven.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Watitiri-mata-ka- 
taka.  The  old  lady  then  pointed  to  the  tendrils, 
and  said  to  them,  "  Up  there,  then,  lies  your  road ; 
but  do  not  begin  the  ascent  so  late  in  the  day, 
wait  until  to-morrow,  for  the  morning,  and  then 
commence  to  climb  up."  He  consented  to  follow 
this  good  advice,  and  called  out  to  his  slave, 
"  Cook  some  food  for  us."  The  slave  began  at 
once  to  cook  food,  and  when  it  was  dressed,  they 
all  pai-took  of  it  and  slept  there  that  night. 

At  the  first  peep  of  dawn  Tawhaki  called  out  to 
his  slave,  "  Cook  some  food  for  us,  that  we  may 
have  strength  to  undergo  the  fatigues  of  this  great 
journey  ;"  and  when  their  meal  was  finished,  Ta- 
whaki took  his  slave,  and  presented  him  to  Mata- 


72  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY 

kerepo,  as  an  acknowledgment  for  her  great    kind 
uess  to  them. 

His  old  ancestress  then  called  out  to  him,  as  he 
was  starting,  '•'  There  lies  the  ascent  before  you, 
lay  fast  hold  of  the  tendrils  with  your  hands,  and 
climb  on ;  but  v/hen  you  get  midway  between 
heaven  and  earth,  take  care  not  to  look  down  upon 
this  lower  world  again,  lest  j^ou  become  charmed 
and  giddy,  and  fall  down.  Take  care,  also,  that 
you  do  not  by  mistake  lay  hold  of  a  tendril  which 
swings  loose  ;  but  rather  lay  hold  of  one  which 
hanging  down  from  above,  has  again  firmly  struck 
root  into  the  earth." 

Just  at  that  moment  Karihi  made  a  spring  at 
the  tendrils  to  catch  them,  and  by  mistake  caught 
hold  of  a  loose  one,  and  away  he  swung  to  the 
very  edge  of  the  horizon,  but  a  blast  of  wind 
blew  forth  from  thence,  and  drove  him  back  to  the 
other  side  of  the  skies  ;  on  reaching  that  point, 
another  strong  land  wind  swept  him  right  up 
heavenwards,  and  down  he  was  blown  again  by 
the  currents  of  air  from  above  :  then  just  as  he 
reached  near  the  earth  again,  Tawhaki  called  out, 
"  Now,  my  brother,  loose  your  hands ;  now  is  the 
time  ! "  and  he  did  so,  and,  lo,  he  stood  upon  the 
earth  once  more  ;  and  the  two  brothers  wept  toge- 
ther over  Karihi's  narrow  escape  from  destruction. 
And   when  they  had   ceased  lamenting,    Tawhaki, 


THE    SWING. 


THE    LEGEND    GF   TAWHAKI.  73 

who  was  alarmed  lest  any  disaster  should  overtake 
his  younger  brother,  said  to  him,  "  It  is  my  desire 
that  you  should  return  home,  to  take  care  of  our 
families  and  our  dependants/'  Thereupon  Karihi 
at  once  returned  to  the  village  of  their  tribe,  as  his 
eldest  brother  directed  him. 

Tawhaki  now  began  to  climb  the  ascent  to 
heaven,  and  his  old  ancestress,  Matakerepo,  called 
out  to  liim  as  he  went  up,  "  Hold  fast,  my  child  ; 
let  your  hands  hold  tight/'  And  Tawhaki  made 
use  of,  and  kept  on  repeating,  a  powerful  incanta- 
tion as  he  climbed  up  to  the  heavens,  to  preserve 
him  from  the  dangers  of  that  difficult  and  terrible 
road. 

At  length  he  reached  the  heavens,  and  pulled 
himself  up  into  them,  and  then  by  enchantments 
he  disguised  himself,  and  changed  his  handsome 
and  noble  appearance,  and  assumed  the  likeness  of 
a  very  ugly  old  man,  and  he  followed  the  road  he 
had  at  first  struck  upon,  and  entered  a  dense  forest 
into  which  it  ran,  and  still  followed  it  until  he 
came  to  a  place  in  the  forest  where  his  brothers-in- 
law,  with  a  party  of  their  people,  were  hewing 
canoes  from  the  trunks  of  trees  ;  and  they  saw  him, 
and  little  thinking  who  he  was,  called  out,  "  Here  's 
an  old  fellow  will  make  a  nice  slave  for  us ;"  but 
Tawhaki  went  quietly   on,  and   when   he  reached 

E 


74  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

them  he  sat  down  with  the  people  who  were  work- 
ino-  at  the  canoes. 

It  now  drew  near  evening,  and  his  brothers-in- 
law  finished  their  work,  and  called  out  to  him,- 
"  Ho  !  old  fellow,  there !  you  just  carry  these 
heavy  axes  home  for  us,  will  you  ? "  *  He  at  once 
consented  to  do  this,  and  they  gave  him  the  axes. 
The  old  man  then  said  to  them,  "  You  go  on  in 
front,  do  not  mind,  I  am  old  and  heavy  laden,  I 
cannot  travel  fist."  So  they  started  off,  the  old 
man  following  slowly  behind.  When  his  brothers- 
in-law  and  their  people  were  all  out  of  sight,  he 
turned  back  to  the  canoe,  and  taking  an  axe  just 
adzed  the  canoe  rapidly  along  from  the  bow  to  the 
stern,  and  lo,  one  side  of  the  canoe  was  finished. 
Then  he  took  the  adze  again,  and  ran  it  rapidly 
alono-  the  other  side  of  the  canoe,  from  the  bow 
to  the  stern,  and  lo,  that  side  also  was  beautifully 
finished. 

He  then  walked  quietly  along  the  road  again, 
like  an  old  man,  carrying  the  axes  with  him,  and 
went  on  for  some  time  without  seeing  anything ; 
but  when  he   drew  near  the  village,  he  found  two 

*  The  European  reader  cannot  at  all  enter  into  the  witty  nature 
of  this  adventure  in  the  estimation  of  a  New  Zealander ;  the  idea 
of  a  sacred  chief  of  high  rank  being  by  mistake  treated  as  a 
common  slave,  conveys  impressions  to  their  minds  of  which  we  can 
form  no  accurate  notion. 


THE   LEGEND    OF   TAWHAKI.  75 

women  from  the  village  in  the  forest  gathering 
firewood,  and  as  soon  as  they  saw  him,  one  of  them 
observed  to  her  companion,  "  I  sa}^,  here  is  a 
curious  looking  old  fellow,  is  he  not?"  and  her 
companion  exclaimed,  "  He  shall  be  our  slave  ;" 
to  which  the  first  answered,  "  Make  him  carry  the 
firewood  for  us,  then."  So  they  took  Tawhaki,  and 
laid  a  load  of  firewood  upon  his  back,  and  made 
him  carry  that  as  well  as  the  axes,  so  was  this 
mighty  cliief  treated  as  a  slave,  even  by  female 
slaves. 

Wlien  they  all  reached  the  village,  the  two 
women  called  out,  "  We  've  caught  an  old  man 
for  a  slave."  Then  Tangotango  exclaimed  in  reply, 
"  That  's  right,  bring  him  along  with  you,  then  ; 
he  'l\  do  for  all  of  us."  Little  did  his  wife  Tantro- 
tango  think  that  the  slave  they  were  so  insult- 
ing, and  whom  she  was  talking  about  in  such  a 
way,  was  her  own  husband  Tawhaki. 

When  Tawhaki  saw  Tangotango  sitting  at  a 
fire-place  near  the  upper  end  of  the  house  with 
their  little  girl,  he  went  straight  up  to  the  place, 
and  all  the  persons  present  tried  to  stop  him, 
calling  out,  "  Ho  !  ho  !  take  care  what  you  are 
doing ;  do  not  go  there  ;  you  will  become  tapued 
from  sitting  near  Tangotango."  But  the  old  man, 
without  minding  them,  went  rapidly  straight  on, 
and  carried  his  load  of  firewood  right  up   to  the 

E  2 


76  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

very  fire  of  Tangotango.  Then  they  all  said, 
"  There,  the  old  fellow  is  iapu ;  it  is  his  own 
fault."  But  Tangotango  had  not  the  least  idea 
that  this  was  Tawhaki ;  and  yet  there  were  her 
husband  and  herself  seated,  the  one  upon  the  one 
side,  the  other  upon  the  opposite  side  of  the  very 
same   fire. 

They  all  stopped  in  the  house  until  the  sun  rose 
next  morning  ;  then  at  daybreak  his  brothers-in-law 
called  out  to  him,  "  Holloa,  old  man,  you  bring  the 
axes  along,  do  you  hear."  So  the  old  man  took 
up  the  axes,  and  started  with  them,  and  they 
all  went  off'  together  to  the  forest,  to  work  at  dub- 
bing out  their  canoes.  When  they  reached  them, 
and  the  brothers-in-law  saw  the  canoe  which 
Tawhaki  had  worked  at,  they  looked  at  it  with 
astonishment,  saying,  "  Why,  the  canoe  is  not  at  all 
as  we  left  it  ;  who  can  have  been  working  at  it  V 
At  last,  when  their  wonder  was  somewhat  abated, 
they  all  sat  down,  and  set  to  work  again  to  dub 
out  another  canoe,  and  worked  until  evening, 
when  they  again  called  out  to  the  old  man  as 
on  the  previous  one,  "  Holloa,  old  fellow,  come 
here,  and  carry  the  axes  back  to  the  village  again." 
As  before,  he  said,  "Yes,"  and  when  they  started 
he  remained  behind,  and  after  the  others  were  all 
out  of  sight  he  took  an  axe,  and  began  again  to 
adze  away  at  the  canoe  they  had  been  working  at ; 


THE    LEGEND    OF    TAWHAKI.  77 

and  LaviDO'  finished  liis  work  he  returned  ao-ain 
to  the  village,  and  once  more  walked  straight  up 
to  the  fire  of  Tango  tango,  and  remained  there 
until  the  san  rose  upon  the  following  morning. 

When  they  were  all  going  at  early  dawn  to 
work  at  theu'  canoes  as  usual,  they  again  called 
out  to  Tawhaki,  "  Holloa,  old  man,  just  bring  these 
axes  along  with  you;"  and  the  old  man  went 
patiently  and  silently  along  with  them,  carrying 
the  axes  on  his  shoulder.  When  they  reached  the 
canoes  they  were  about  to  work  at,  the  brothers- 
in-law  were  quite  astonished  on  seeing  it,  and 
shouted  out,  "  Why,  here  again,  this  canoe,  too,  is 
not  at  all  as  it  was  when  we  left  it ;  who  can  have 
been  at  work  at  it  ?"  Having  wondered  at  this 
for  some  time,  they  at  length  sat  down  and  set 
to  again  to  dub  out  another  canoe,  and  laboured 
away  until  evening,  when  a  thought  came  into  their 
minds  that  they  would  hide  themselves  in  the 
forest,  and  wait  to  see  who  it  was  came  every 
evening  to  work  at  their  canoe;  and  Tawhaki 
overheard  them  arranging  this  plan. 

They  therefore  started  as  if  they  were  going- 
home,  and  when  they  had  got  a  little  way  they 
turned  off  the  path  on  one  side,  and  hid  themselves 
in  the  thick  clumps  of  bushes,  in  a  place  from 
whence  they  could  see  the  canoes.  Then  Tawhaki, 
going  a  little  way  back  into  the  forest,  stripped  off 


78         POLYNESIAN  MYTHOLOGY. 

his  old  cloaks,  and  threw  them  on  one  side,  and 
then  repeating  the  necessary  incantations  he  put 
off  his  disguise,  and  took  again  his  own  appearance, 
and  made  himself  look  noble  and  handsome,  and 
commenced  his  work  at  the  canoe.  Then  his  bro- 
thers-in-law, when  they  saw  him  so  employed,  said 
one  to  another,  "  Ah,  that  must  be  the  old  man 
whom  we  made  a  slave  of  who  is  working  away  at 
our  canoe  ;"  but  again  they  called  to  one  another 
and  said,  "  Come  here,  come  here,  just  watch,  why 
he  is  not  in  the  least  like  that  old  man."  Then 
they  said  amongst  themselves,  "  This  must  be  a 
demi-god ; "  and,  without  showing  themselves  to 
him,  they  ran  off  to  the  village,  and  as  soon  as  they 
reached  it  they  asked  their  sister  Tangotango  to 
describe  her  husband  for  them ;  and  she  described 
his  appearance  as  well  as  she  could,  representing 
him  just  hke  the  man  they  had  seen  :  and  they 
said  to  her,  "  Yes,  that  must  be  he ;  he  is  exactly 
like  him  you  have  described  to  us."  Their  sister 
replied,  "  Then  that  chief  must  certainly  be  your 
brother-in-law." 

Just  at  this  moment  Tawhaki  reappeared  at 
the  village,  having  again  disguised  himself,  and 
changed  his  appearance  into  that  of  an  ugly 
old  man.  But  Tangotango  immediately  questioned 
him,  saying,  "  Now  tell  me,  who  are  you  ? "  Ta- 
whaki made  no  reply,  but  walked  on  straight  to- 


THE    LEGEND    OF   TAWHAKI.  79 

wards  lier.  She  asked  him  again,  "  Tell  me,  are 
you  Tawhaki  ? "  He  murmui-ed  "  Humph "  in 
assent,  still  walking  on  until  he  reached  the  side  of 


« 


his  wife,  and  then  he  snatched  up  his  little  daugh- 
ter, and,  holding  her  fast  in  his  arms,  pressed  her 
to  his  heart.  The  persons  present  all  rushed  out 
of  the  court-yard  of  the  house  to  the  neighbouring 
court-yards,  for  the  whole  place  was  made  tapu  by 
Tawhaki,  and  murmurs  of  gratification  and  surprise 
arose  from  the  people  upon  every  side  at  the  splen- 
dour of  his  appearance,  for  in  the  days  when  he 
had  been  amongst  them  as  an  old  man  his  figure 
was  very  different  from  the  resplendent  aspect 
whicli  he  presented  on  this  day. 

Then  he  retired  to  rest  with  his  wife,  and 
said  to  her,  "  I  came  here  that  our  little  daughter 
might  be  made  to  undergo  the  ceremonies  usual  for 
the  children  of  nobles,  to  secure  them  good  fortune 
and  happiness  in  this  life  ; "  and  Tangotango  con- 
sented. 

When  in  the  morning  the  sun  arose,  they  broke 
out  an  opening  through  the  end  of  the  house  oppo- 
site to  the  door,  that  the  little  girl's  rank  might  be 
seen  by  her  being  carried  out  that  way  instead  of 
through  the  usual  entrance  to  the  liouse  ;  and  they 
repeated  the  prescribed  prayers  when  she  was  car- 
ried through  the  wall  out  of  the  house. 


80  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

The  prayers  and  incantations  being  finished, 
lightnings  flashed  from  the  arm-pits  of  Tawhaki ; 
then  they  carried  tlie  httle  girl  to  the  water,  and 
plunged  her  into  it,  and  repeated  a  baptismal  incan- 
tation over  her. 

*  Tawhaki  is  said  to  still  dwell  in  the  skies,  and  is  worshipped 
as  a  god,  and  thunder  and  lightning  are  said  to  be  caused  by  his 
footsteps  when  he  moves. 


THE  LEGEND  OF  RTJPE. 

HIS   ASCENT   INTO   HEAVEN. 

AVe  left  Hinauri  floating  out  into  the  ocean  ;*  we 
now  return  to  her  adventures  :  for  many  months 
she  floated  through  the  sea,  and  was  at  last  thrown 
up  by  the  surf  on  the  beach  at  a  place  named 
Wairarawa  ;  she  was  there  found,  lying  as  if  dead, 
upon  the  sandy  shore,  by  two  brothers  named  Ihu- 
atamai  and  Ihuwareware ;  her  body  was  in  many 
parts  overgrown  with  seaweed  and  barnacles,  from 
the  length  of  time  she  had  been  in  the  water,  but 
they  could  still  see  some  traces  of  her  beauty,  and 
pitying  the  young  girl,  they  lifted  her  up  in  their 
arms,  and  carried  her  home  to  their  house,  and  laid 
her  down  carefully  by  the  side  of  a  fire,  and 
scraped  off"  very  gently  the  seaweed  and  barnacles 
from   her  body,  and  thus  by  degrees  restored  her. 

When  she  had  quite  recovered,  Ihuatamai  and 
Ihuwareware  looked  upon  her  with  pleasure,  and 
took  her  as  a  wife  between  them  both ;  they  then 
asked  her  to  tell  them  who  she  was,  and  what  was 
her  name ;  this  she  did  not  disclose  to  them,  but 

*  See  page  54. 

E    3 


82  POLYNESIAX    MYTHOLOGY. 

she  changed  her  name,  and  called  herself  Ihungaru- 
paea,  or  the  Stranded-log-of-timber. 

After  she  had  lived  with  these  two  brothers  for 
a  long  time,  Ihuwareware  went  to  pay  a  visit  to 
his  superior  chief,  Tinirau,  and  to  relate  the  ad- 
ventixres  which  had  happened ;  and  when  Tinirau 
heard  all  that  had  taken  place,  he  went  to  bring 
away  the  young  stranger  as  a  wife  for  himself,  and 
she  was  given  up  to  him ;  but  before  she  was  so 
given  to  him,  she  had  conceived  a  child  by  Ihu- 
atamai,  and  when  she  went  to  live  with  Tinirau  it 
was  near  the  time  when  the  child  should  be  born. 

Tinu-au  took  her  home  with  him  to  his  residence 
on  an  island  called  Motu-tapu :  he  had  two  other 
wives  living  there — they  were  the  daughters  of 
Mangamanga-i-atua,  and  their  names  were  Hara- 
taunga  and  Horotata.  .Now,  when  these  two  wo- 
men saw  the  young  stranger  coming  along  in  their 
husband's  company,  as  if  she  was  his  wife,  they 
could  not  endure  it,  and  they  abused  Hinauri  on 
account  of  her  conduct  with  their  husband  ;  at  last 
they  proceeded  so  far  as  to  attempt  to  strike  her, 
and  to  kill  her,  and  they  cursed  her  bitterly.  When 
they  treated  her  in  this  manner  the  heai't  of  Hin- 
auri became  gloomy  with  grief  and  mortification, 
so  she  began  to  utter  incantations  against  them, 
and  repeated  one  so  powerful  that  hardly  had 
she    finished    it    when   the    two    women    fell    flat 


eupe's  ascent  into  heaven.  83 

on  the  ground  with  the  soles  of  their  feet  pro- 
jecting upwards,  and  lay  quite  dead  upon  the 
earth,  and  her  husband  was  thus  left  free  for  her 
alone. 

All  this  time  Hinauri  was  lost  to  her  friends 
and  home,  and  her  young  brother  Mauimua,  after- 
wards called  E,upe,  could  do  nothing  but  think  of 
her ;  and  excessive  love  for  his  sister,  and  sorrow 
at  her  departure,  so  harassed  him,  that  he  said  he 
could  no  longer  remain  at  rest,  but  that  he  must 
go  and  seek  for  his  sister. 

So  he  departed  upon  this  undertaking,  and  visited 
every  place  he  could  think  of  without  missing 
one  of  them,  yet  could  he  nowhere  find  his  sister ; 
at  last,  Rupe  thought  that  he  would  ascend  to  the 
heavens  to  consult  his  great  ancestor  Rehua,  who 
dwelt  there  at  a  place  named  Te  Putahi-nui-o- 
Rehua,  and  in  fulfilment  of  this  design  he  began 
his  ascent  to  the  heavenly  regions. 

Rupe  continued  his  ascent,  seeking  everywhere 
hastily  for  Rehua  ;  at  last,  he  reached  a  place  where 
people  were  dwelling,  and  when  he  saw  them,  he 
spoke  to  them,  saying,  "  Are  the  heavens  above 
this  inhabited?"  and  the  people  dwelling  there 
answered  him,  "  They  are  inhabited."  And  he 
ao-ain  asked  them,  "  Can  I  reach  those  heavens  ? '' 
and   they   replied,    "You  cannot   reach  them,    the 


84  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

heavens   above  these  are   those  the  boundaries  of 
which  were  fixed  by  Tane." 

But  E.upe  forced  a  way  up  through  those 
heavens,  and  got  above  them,  and  found  an  in- 
habited place ;  and  he  asked  the  inhabitants  of  it, 
saying,  "Are  the  heavens  above  these  inhabited?" 
and  the  people  answered  him,  "  They  are  inha- 
bited." And  he  again  asked,  "  Do  you  think  I 
can  reach  them?"  and  they  replied,  "No,  you  will 
not  be  able  to  reach  them,  those  heavens  were  fixed 
there  by  Taue." 

Rupe,  however,  forced  a  way  through  those 
heavens  too,  and  thus  he  continued  to  do  until  he 
reached  the  tenth  heaven,  and  there  he  found  the 
abode  of  Rehua.  When  Rehua  saw  a  stranger 
approaching,  he  went  forward  and  gave  him  the 
usual  welcome,  lamenting  over  him ;  Rehua  made 
his  lamentation  without  knowing  who  the  stranger 
was,  but  Rupe  in  his  lament  made  use  of  prayers 
by  which  he  enabled  Rehua  to  guess  who  he  was. 

When  they  had  each  ended  their  lamentation, 
Rehua  called  to  his  servants,  "  Light  a  fire,  and 
get  everything  ready  for  cooking  food."  The 
slaves  soon  made  the  fire  burn  up  brightly,  and 
brought  hollow  calabashes,  all  ready  to  have  food 
placed  in  them,  and  laid  them  down  before  Rehua. 
AH  this  time  Rupe  was  wondering  whence  the  food 


rupe's  ascent  into  heaven.  85 

was  to  come  from  with  which  the  calabashes,  which 
the  slaves  had  brought,  were  to  be  filled ;  but  pre- 
sently he  observed  that  Rehua  was  slowly  loosen- 
ing the  thick  bands  which  enveloped  his  locks 
around  and  upon  the  top  of  his  head ;  and  when 
his  long  locks  all  floated  loosely,  he  shook  the 
dense  masses  of  his  hair,  and  forth  from  them  came 
flying  flocks  of  the  Tui  birds,  which  had  been 
nestling  there,  feeding  upon  insects  ;  and  as  they 
flew  forth,  the  slaves  caught  and  killed  them,  and 
filled  the  calabashes  with  them,  and  took  them 
to  the  fii'e,  and  put  them  on  to  cook,  and  when 
they  were  done,  they  carried  them  and  laid  them 
before  Rupe  as  a  present,  and  then  placed  them 
beside  him  that  he  might  eat,  and  Reliua  re- 
quested him  to  eat  food,  but  Rupe  answered  him, 
"  Nay,  but  I  cannot  eat  this  food ;  I  saw  these 
bu-ds  loosened  and  take  wing  from  thy  locks ; 
who  would  dare  to  eat  birds  that  had  fed  upon 
insects  in  thy  sacred  head  ?"  For  the  reasons 
he  thus  stated,  Rupe  feared  that  man  of  ancient 
days,  and  the  calabashes  still  stood  near  him  un- 
touched. 

At  last,  Rupe  ventured  to  ask  Rehua,  saying, 
"  0  Rehua,  has  a  confused  murmur  of  voices  fi'om 
the  world  below  reached  you  upon  any  subject  re- 
garding which  I  am  interested  V  And  Rehua  an- 
swered  liim,    "  Yes,   such  a  murmuring  of  distant 


86  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

voices  has  reached  me  firom  the  island  of  Motu-tapu 
in  the  world  below  these." 

"When  Rupe  heard  this,  he  immediately  by  his 
enchantments  changed  himself  into  a  pigeon,  and 
took    flight    downwards     towards     the     island    of 
Motu-tapu ;  on,   on  he  flew,  until  he  reached  the 
island,  and  the  dwelling  of  Tinirau,  and  then  he 
alighted  right  upon  the  window-sill  of  his  house. 
Some  of  Tinirau's  people  saw  him,  and  exclaimed, 
"  Ha  !  ha  !  there  's  a  bird,  there  's  a  bird  ; "  whilst 
some   called  out,    "  Make  haste,   spear   him,   spear 
him;"  and    one    threw   a   spear   at    him,    but    he 
turned  it  aside  with  his  bill,  and  it  passed  on  one 
side    of    him,    and    struck   the   piece    of   wood    on 
which  he  was  sitting,   and  the  spear  was  broken  ; 
then  they  saw  that  it  was  no  use  to  try  to  spear 
the  bii'd,  so  they  made  a  noose,   and  endeavoured 
to  slip  it  gently  over   his  head,  but  he  turned  his 
head  on  one  side,  and  they  found  that  they  could  not 
snare  him.      His  young  sister  now  suspected  some- 
thing, so  she  said  to  the  people  who  were  trying  to 
kill  or  snare  the  bird,   "  Leave  the   bird  quiet  for  a 
minute  until  I  look   at   it ;"    and  when    she   had 
looked  well  at  it,  she  knew  that  it  was  her  brother, 
so   she    asked   him,    saying,    "  What   is   the    cause 
which  has  made  you   thus  come  here  ?"   and  the 
pigeon    immediately   began  to   open    and    shut   its 
little  bill,  as  if  it  was  trying  to  speak.      His  young 


eupe's  ascent  into  heaven.  87 

sister  now  called  out  to  Tinirau,  "  Oh,  husband, 
here  is  your  brother-in-law ; "  and  her  husband  said 
in  reply,  "What  is  his  name?"  and  she  answered, 
"  It  is  my  brother  Rupe."  It  happened  that  upon 
this  very  day,  Hinauri's  little  child  was  born,  then 
Rupe  repeated  this  form  of  greeting  to  his  sister, 
the  name  of  which  is  Toetoetu : — 

"  Hinaiiri, 
Hinauri  is  the  sister. 
And  Rupe  is  her  brother, 
But  how  came  he  here  ] 
Came  he  by  travelling  on  the  earth. 
Or  came  he  through  the  air  1 
Let  your  path  be  through  the  air." 

As  soon  as  Rupe  had  ceased  his  lamentation  of 
welcome  to  his  sister,  she  commenced  hers,  and 
answered  him,  saying, — 

"  Rupe  is  the  brother, 
And  Hina  is  his  young  sister, 
But  how  came  he  here  ] 
Came  he  by  travelling  on  the  earth, 
Or  came  he  through  the  air] 
Let  your  path  be  now  upwards  through  the  air 
To  Rehua." 

Hardly  had  his  young  sister  finished  repeating 
this  poem,  before  Rupe  had  caught  her  up  with  her 
new-born  baby :  in  a  moment  they  were  gone. 
Thus  the  brother  and  sister  departed  together,  with 
the  infant,  carrying  with  them  the  placenta  to 
bury  it  with  the  usual  rites  ;  and  they  ascended  up 


88  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

to  Reliua,  and  as  they  passed  through  the  air,  the 
placenta  was  accidentally  dropped,  and  falling  into 
the  sea,  was  devoured  by  a  shark,  and  this  cir- 
cumstance was  what  caused  the  multitude  of 
large  eggs  which  are  now  found  in  the  inside  of 
the  shark. 

At  length  the  brother  and  sister  arrived  at  the 
dwelling  place  of  Rehua,  which  was  called  Te  Pu- 
tahi-nui-o-Rehua.  The  old  man  was  unable  to 
keep  his  court-yard  clean  for  himself,  and  his 
people  neglected  to  do  so  from  idleness  ;  thus  it  was 
left  in  a  very  filthy  state.  Rupe,  who  was  dis- 
pleased at  seeing  this,  one  day  said  to  Rehua,  "  Oh, 
Rehua,  they  leave  this  court-yard  of  yours  in  a 
very  filthy  state;"  and  then  he  added,  "Your 
people  are  such  a  set  of  lazy  rogues,  that  if  every 
mess  of  dirt  was  a  lizard,  I  doubt  if  they  could 
even  take  the  trouble  to  touch  its  tail  to  make  it 
run  away  •"  and  this  saying  passed  into  a  proverb. 

At  last,  Rupe  thought  that  he  could  clean  and 
beautify,  in  some  respects,  Rehua's  dwelling  for  him, 
so  he  made  two  wooden  shovels  for  his  work,  one 
of  which  he  caEed  Tahitahia,  and  the  other  Rake- 
rakea,  and  with  them  he  quite  cleansed  and  puri- 
fied Rehua's  court-yard.  He  then  added  a  build- 
ing to  Rehua's  dwelling,  but  fixing  one  of  the 
beams  of  it  badly,  Rehua's  son,  Kaitangata,  was 
one   day  killed   from   hanging    on  to    this    beam. 


rupe's  ascent  into  heaven.  89 

which  giving  way  and  springing  back,  he  was 
thrown  down  and  died,  and  his  blood  running 
about  over  part  of  the  heavens,  stained  them,  and 
formed  what  we  now  call  a  ruddiness  in  the  sky ; 
when,  therefore,  a  red  and  ruddy  tinge  is  seen  in 
the  heavens,  men  say,  "  Ah !  Kaitangata  stained 
the  heavens  with  his  blood." 

Kupe's  first  name  was  Maui-mua  ;  it  was  after  he 
was  transformed  into  a  bird  that  he  took  the  name 
of  Rupe, 

*  The  part  of  the  tradition  which  relates  to  the  death  of  Kai- 
tangata is  considerably  shortened  in  the  translation,  as  not  being 
likely  to  interest  the  European  reader. 


THE    LEGEND    OF    KAE'S    THEFT   OF 
THE    WHALE. 

Soon  after  Tuburuhuru  was  bom,  Tinirau  endea- 
voured to  find  a  skilful  magician,  wbo  migbt  per- 
form tbe  necessary  encbantments  and  incantations 
to  render  tbe  cliild  a  fortunate  and  successful  war- 
rior, and  Kae  was  tbe  name  of  tbe  old  magician, 
wbora  some  of  bis  friends  brougbt  to  bim  for  tbis 
purpose.  In  due  time  Kae  arrived  at  tbe  village 
wbere  Tinirau  lived,  and  be  performed  tbe  proper 
encbantments  witb  fitting  ceremonies  over  tbe  infant. 

Wben  all  tbese  tilings  bad  been  rigbtly  con- 
cluded, Tinirau  gave  a  signal  to  a  pet  wbale  tbat 
be  bad  tamed,  to  come  on  sbore  ;  tbis  wbale's  name 
was  Tutunui.  "Wben  it  knew  tbat  its  master  wanted, 
it,  it  left  tbe  ocean  in  wbicb  it  was  sporting  about, 
and  came  to  tbe  sbore,  and  its  master  laid  bold  of 
it,  and  cut  a  sHce  of  its  flesb  off  to  make  a  feast 
for  tbe  old  magician,  and  be  cooked  it,  and  gave  a 
portion  of  it  to  Kae,  wbo  found  it  very  savoury, 
and  praised  tbe  disb  very  mucb. 

Sbortly  afterwards,  Kae  said  it  was  necessar}^  for 
bim  to  return  to  bis  own  village,  wbicb  was  named 
Te  Tibi-o-Manono ;  so  Tinirau  ordered  a  canoe  to  be 
got  ready  for  bim  to  take  bim  back,  but  Kae  made 


kae's  theft  of  the  whale.  91 

excuses,  and  said  he  did  not  Kke  to  go  back  in  the 
canoe,  and  remained  wliere  he  was.  This,  however, 
was  a  mere  trick  u]3on  his  part,  his  real  object 
being  to  get  Tinirau  to  permit  him  to  go  back  upon 
the  whale,  upon  Tutunui,  for  he  now  knew  how 
savoury  the  flesh  of  that  fish  was. 

At  last  Tinirau  lent  Tutunui  to  the  old  magician 
to  carry  him  home,  but  he  gave  him  very  particular 
directions,  telling  him,  "  When  you  get  so  near  the 
shore,  that  the  fish  touches  the  bottom,  it  will  shake 
itself  to  let  you  know,  and  you  must  then,  without 
any  delay,  jump  ofi"  it  upon  the  right  side." 

He  then  wished  Kae  farewell,  and  the  old  magi- 
cian started,  and  away  went  the  whale  through  the 
water  with  him. 

When  they  came  close  to  the  shore  at  Kae's  vil- 
lage, and  the  whale  felt  the  bottom,  it  shook  itself 
as  a  sign  to  Kae  to  jump  ofi"  and  wade  ashore,  but 
it  was  of  no  use ;  the  old  magician  stuck  fast  to 
the  whale,  and  jiressed  it  down  against  the  bottom 
as  hard  as  he  could  ;  in  vain  the  fish  continued 
to  shake  itself;  Kae  held  on  to  it,  and  would  not 
jump  off*,  and  in  its  struggles  the  blow-holes  of 
Tutunui  got  stopped  up  with  sand,  and  it  died. 

Kae  and  his  people  then  managed  to  drag  up  the 
body  of  Tutunui  on  shore,  intending  to  feast  upon 
it ;  and  this  circumstance  became  afterwards  the 
cause  of  a  war  against  that  tribe,  who  were  called 
"  The  descendants  of   Poporokewa."     When   they 


92  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

had  dragged  Tutunui  on  shore,  they  cut  its  body 
up  and  cooked  it  in  ovens,  covering  the  flesh  up 
with  the  fragrant  leaves  of  the  Koromiko  before 
they  heaped  earth  upon  the  ovens,  and  the  fat  of 
Tutunui  adliered  to  the  leaves  of  the  Koromiko,  and 
they  continue  greasy  to  this  day,  so  that  if  Koromiko 
boughs  are  put  upon  the  fire  and  become  greasy, 
the  proverb  says — "  There's  some  of  the  savouriness 
of  Tutunui." 

Tinirau  continued  anxiously  to  look  for  the  re- 
turn of  Tutunui,  and  when  a  long  time  had  elapsed 
without  its  coming  back  again,  he  began  to  say  to 
himself,  "  Well,  I  wonder  where  my  whale  can  be 
stopping  ! "  But  when  Kae  and  his  people  had 
cooked  the  flesh  of  the  whale,  and  the  ovens  were 
opened,  a  savoury  scent  was  wafted  across  the  sea 
to  Tinirau,  and  both  he  and  his  wife  smelt  it  quite 
plainly,  and  then  they  knew  very  well  that  Kae 
had  killed  the  pet  which  they  had  tamed  for  their 
little  darling  Tuhuruhuru,  and  that  he  had  eaten  it. 

Without  any  delay,  Tinirau's  people  dragged 
down  to  the  sea  a  large  canoe  which  belonged  to 
one  of  his  wives,  and  forty  women  forthwith  em- 
barked in  it ;  none  but  women  went,  as  this  would 
be  less  likely  to  excite  any  suspicion  in  Kae  that 
they  had  come  with  a  hostile  object;  amongst  them 
were  Hine-i-te-iwaiwa,  Raukatauri,  Raukatamea, 
Itiiti,  Rekareka,  and  Rua-hau-a-Tangaroa,  and  other 
females  of  note,  whose  names  have  not  been  pre- 


kae's  theft  of  the  whale.  93 

served ;  just  before  the  canoe  started,  Tinirau's 
youngest  sister  asked  him,  "  What  are  the  marks 
by  which  we  shall  know  Kae?"  and  he  answered 
her,  "  Oh,  you  cannot  mistake  him,  his  teeth  are 
uneven  and  all  overlap  one  another," 

Well,  away  they  paddled,  and  in  due  time  they 
arrived  at  the  village  of  the  old  magician  Kae,  and 
his  tribe  all  collected  to  see  the  strangers  ;  towards 
night,  when  it  grew  dark,  a  fire  was  lighted  in 
the  house  of  Kae,  and  a  crowd  collected  inside  it, 
until  it  was  filled ;  one  side  was  quite  occupied 
with  the  crowd  of  visitors,  and  the  other  side  of 
the  house  with  the  people  of  Kae's  tribe.  The  old 
magician  himself  sat  at  the  foot  of  the  main  pillar 
which  supported  the  roof  of  the  house,  and  mats 
were  laid  down  there  for  him  to  sleep  on  (but  the 
strangers  did  not  yet  know  which  was  Kae,  for  it 
did  not  accord  with  the  Maori's  rules  of  politeness 
to  ask  the  names  of  the  chiefs,  it  being  supposed 
firom  their  fame  and  greatness  that  they  are  known 
by  everybody). 

In  order  to  find  out  which  was  Kae,  Tinirau's 
people  had  arranged,  that  they  would  try  by  wit 
and  fun  to  make  everybody  laugh,  and  when  the 
people  opened  their  mouths,  to  watch  which  of  them 
had  uneven  teeth  that  lapped  across  one  another, 
and  thus  discover  which  was  Kae. 

In  order,  therefore,  to  make  them  laugh,  Rauka- 
tauri  exhibited  all  her  amusing  tricks  and  games ; 


94  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

she  made  them  sing  and  play  upon  the  flute,  and 
upon  the  putorino,  and  beat  time  with  castanets 
of  bone  and  wood  whilst  they  sang ;  and  they 
played  at  mora,  and  the  kind  of  ti  in  which  many 
motions  are  made  with  the  fingers  and  hands,  and 
the  kind  of  ti  in  which,  whilst  the  players  sing, 
they  rapidly  throw  short  sticks  to  one  another,  keep- 
ing time  to  the  tune  which  they  are  singing  ;  and  she 
played  upon  an  instrument  like  a  jew's-harp  for 
them,  and  made  puppets  dance,  and  made  them  all 
sing  whilst  they  played  with  large  whizgigs  ;  and 
after  they  had  done  all  these  things,  the  man  they 
thought  was  Kae  had  never  even  once  laughed. 

Then  the  party  who  had  come  from  Tinirau's, 
all  began  to  consult  together,  and  to  say  what  can 
we  do  to  make  that  fellow  laugh,  and  for  a  long 
time  they  thought  of  some  plan  by  which  they 
might  take  Kae  in,  and  make  him  laugh  ;  at  last 
they  thought  of  one,  which  was,  that  they  should 
all  sing  a  droll  comic  song;  so  suddenly  they  all 
began  to  sing  together,  at  the  same  time  making 
most  curious  faces,  and  shaking  their  hands  and 
arms  in  time  to  the  tune. 

When  they  had  ended  their  song,  the  old  magi- 
cian could  not  help  laughing  out  quite  heartily, 
and  those  who  were  watching  him  closely  at  once 
recognised  him,  for  there  they  saw  pieces  of  the 
flesh  of  Tutunui  still  sticking  between  his  teeth, 
and  his  teeth  were  uneven  and  all  overlapped  one 


kae's  theft  of  the  whale.  95 

anotlier.  From  this  circumstance  a  proverb  has 
been  preserved  among  the  Maories  to  the  present 
day — for  if  any  one  on  listening  to  a  story  told 
by  another  is  amused  at  it  and  laughs,  one  of  the 
bystanders  says,  "  Ah,  there  's  Kae  laughing." 

No  sooner  did  the  women  who  had  come  from 
Tinirau's  see  the  flesh  of  Tutunui  sticking  in  Kae's 
teeth  than  they  made  an  excuse  for  letting  the  fire 
burn  dimly  in  the  house,  saying,  that  they  wanted 
to  go  to  sleep — their  real  object,  however,  being  to 
be  able  to  perform  their  enchantments  without 
being  seen  ;  but  the  old  magician,  who  suspected 
something,  took  two  round  pieces  of  mother-of-pearl 
shell,  and  stuck  one  in  the  socket  of  each  eye,  so 
that  the  strangers,  observing  the  faint  rays  of  light 
reflected  from  the  surface  of  the  mother-of-pearl, 
might  think  they  saw  the  white  of  his  eyes,  and 
that  he  was  still  awake. 

The  women  from  Tinirau's  went  on,  however, 
with  their  enchantments,  and  by  their  magical  arts 
threw  every  one  in  the  house  into  an  enchanted 
sleep,  with  the  intention,  when  they  had  done  this, 
of  carrying  off  Kae  by  stealth.  So  soon  as  Kae 
and  the  people  in  the  house  were  all  deep  in  this 
enchanted  sleep,  the  women  ranged  themselves  in  a 
long  row,  tlie  whole  way  from  the  place  where  Kae 
was  sleeping  down  to  their  canoe  ;  they  all  stood 
in  a  straight  line,  with  a  little   interval  between 


96  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

each  of  them  ;  and  then  two  of  them  went  to  fetch 
Kae,  and  lifted  the  old  magician  gently  up,  rolled 
up  in  his  cloaks,  just  as  he  had  laid  himself  down 
to  sleep,  and  placed  him  gently  in  the  arms  of 
those  who  stood  near  the  door,  who  passed  him 
on  to  two  others,  and  thus  they  handed  him  on 
from  one  to  another,  until  he  at  last  reached  the 
arms  of  the  two  women  who  were  standing  in  the 
canoe  ready  to  receive  him  ;  and  they  laid  him 
down  very  gently  in  the  canoe,  fast  asleep  as  he 
was ;  and  thus  the  old  magician  Kae  was  carried 
off  by  Hine-i-te-iwaiwa  and  Raukatauri. 

When  the  women  reached  the  village  of  Tinirau 
in  their  canoe,  they  again  took  up  Kae,  and  carried 
him  very  gently  up  to  the  house  of  Tinirau,  and 
laid  him  down  fast  asleep  close  to  the  central  pillar, 
which  supported  the  ridge-pole  of  the  house,  so 
that  the  place  where  he  slept  in  the  house  of  Tini- 
rau w^as  exactly  like  his  sleeping-place  in  his  own 
house.  The  house  of  Kae  was,  however,  a  large 
circular  house,  without  a  ridge-pole,  but  with  raft- 
ers springing  from  the  central  pillar,  running  down 
like  rays  to  low  side  posts  in  the  circular  wall  ; 
whilst  the  house  of  Tinirau  was  a  long  house,  with 
a  ridge-pole  running  the  entire  length  of  the  roof, 
and  resting  upon   the  pillar  in  its   centre. 

When  Tinirau  heard  that  the  old  magician  had 
been  brought  to  his  village,  he  caused  orders  to  be 


kae's  theft  of  the  whale.  97 

given  to  liis  tribe  that  when  he  made  his  appear- 
ance in  the  morning,  going  to  the  house  where  Kae 
was,  they  should  all  call  out  loud,  "  Here  comes 
Tinirau,  here  comes  Tinirau,"  as  if  he  was  coming 
as  a  visitor  into  the  village  of  Kae,  so  that  the  old 
magician  on  hearing  them  might  think  that  he  was 
still  at  home. 

At  broad  daylight  next  morning,  when  Tinirau's 
people  saw  him  passing  along  througli  the  village 
towards  his  house,  they  all  shouted  aloud,  "  Here 
comes  Tinirau,  here  comes  Tinirau  ;"  and  Kae,  who 
heard  the  cries,  started  up  from  his  enchanted 
sleep  quite  drowsy  and  confused,  whilst  Tinirau 
passed  straight  on,  and  sat  down  just  outside  the 
door  of  his  house,  so  that  he  could  look  into  it, 
and,  looking  in,  he  saw  Kae,  and  saluted  him, 
saying,  "  Salutations  to  you,  0  Kae  ! "  and  then  he 
asked  him,  saying,  "  How  came  you  here  V  and 
the  old  magician  replied,  "  Nay,  but  rather  how 
came  you  here  ? " 

Tinirau  replied,  "  Just  look,  then,  at  the  house, 
and  see  if  you  recognise  it  ? " 

But  Kae,  who  was  still  stupified  by  his  sleep, 
looking  round,  saw  he  was  lying  in  his  own  place 
at  the  foot  of  the  pillar,  and  said,  "  This  is  my 
house." 

Tinirau  asked  him,  "  Where  was  the  window 
placed  in  your  house  ? " 

F 


98 


POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY, 


Kae  started  and  looked ;  the  whole  appearance 
of  his  house  appeared  to  be  changed  ;  he  at  once 
guessed  the  truth,  that  the  house  he  was  in  be- 
longed to  Tinirau ;  and  the  old  magician,  who  saw 
that  his  hour  had  come,  bowed  down  his  head  in  si- 
lence to  the  earth,  and  they  seized  him,  and  dragged 
him  out,  and  slew  him  :   thus  perished  Kae. 

The  news  of  his  death  at  last  reached  his  tribe 
— the  descendants  of  Poporokewa ;  and  they  even- 
tually attacked  the  fortress  of  Tinirau  with  a  large 
army,  and  avenged  the  death  of  Kae  by  slaying 
Tinirau's  son. 


NATIVE  HOUSE. 


7 


THE  LEGEND  OF  TUWHAKARARO, 

HOW  HE  WAS  MURDERED  AND  AVENGED. 

Now  about  this  time  Tuhuruliuru,  the  son  of  Rupe's 
sister,  grew  up  to  man's  estate,  and  he  married 
Apakura,  and  she  gave  birth  to  a  son  whom  they 
named  Tuwhakararo,  and  afterwards  to  a  daughter 
named  Mairatea ;  she  had  then  several  other  chil- 
dren ;  then  she  gave  birth  to  Whakatau-potiki ; 
afterwards  her  last  child  was  born,  and  its  name 
was  Reimatua. 

When  Mairatea  grew  up,  she  was  married  to  the 
son  of  a  chief  named  Poporokewa,  the  chief  of  the 
Ati-Hapai  tribe,  and  she  accompanied  her  husband 
to  his  home ;  but  Tuwhakararo  remained  at  his  own 
village,  and  after  a  time  he  longed  to  see  his  sister, 
and  thought  he  would  go  and  pay  her  a  visit ;  so 
he  went,  and  arrived  at  a  very  large  house  belong- 
ing to  the  tribe  Poporokewa,  the  name  of  which  was 
Uru-o-Manono  ;  all  the  family  and  dependants  of 
Poporokewa  lived  in  that  house,  and  Tuwhakararo 
remained  there  with   them.      It   happened  that  a 

F  2 


100  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

young  sister  of  his  brother-in-law,  wliose  name  was 
Maurea,  took  a  great  fancy  to  him,  and  showed 
that  she  hked  him,  altliough,  at  the  very  time,  she 
was  carrying  on  a  courtship  with  another  young- 
man  of  the  Ati-Hapai  tribe. 

Whilst  Tuwhakararo  was  on  this  \asit  to  his 
brother-in-law,  some  of  the  young  men  of  the  Ati- 
Hapai  tribe  asked  him  one  day  to  wrestle  with 
them,  and  he,  agreeing  to  this,  stood  up  to  wrestle, 
and  the  one  who  came  forward  as  his  competitor 
was  the  sweetheart  of  his  brother-in-law's  young 
sister.  Tuwhakararo  laid  hold  of  the  young  man, 
and  soon  gave  him  a  severe  fall.  That  match  being 
over,  they  both  stood  up  again,  and  Tuwhakararo, 
lifting  him  in  his  arms,  gave  him  another  severe 
fall ;  and  all  the  young  people  of  the  Ati-Hapai 
tribe  burst  out  laughing  at  the  youth,  for  having 
had  two  such  heavy  falls  fi-om  Tuwhakararo,  and 
he  sat  down  ujion  the  ground,  looking  very  foolish, 
and  feeling  exceedingly  sulky  and  provoked  at  being 
laughed  at  by  everybody. 

Tuwhakararo,  having  also  finished  wrestling,  sat 
down  too,  and  began  to  put  on  his  clothes  again, 
and  whilst  he  was  in  the  act  of  putting  his  head 
through  his  cloak,  the  young  man  he  had  thrown 
in  wrestling  ran  up,  and  just  as  his  head  appeared 
through  the  cloak  threw  a  handful  of  sand  in  his  eyes. 
Tuwhakararo,  wild  with   pain,   could   see    nothing, 


THE  MURDER  OF  TUWHAKARAEO.     101 

and  began  to  rub  his  eyes,  to  get  the  dust  out  and 
to  ease  the  anguish ;  the  young  man  then  struck 
him  on  the  head,  and  killed  him.  The  people  of 
the  Ati-Hapai  tribe  then  ran  in  upon  him  and  cut 
his  body  up,  and  afterwards  devoured  it;  and  they 
took  his  bones,  and  hung  them  up  in  the  roof, 
under  the  ridge-pole  of  their  house  Te  Uru-o- 
Manono. 

Whilst  they  were  hung  up  there  the  bones  rat- 
tled together,  and  his  sister  heard  them,  and  it 
seemed  to  her  as  if  they  made  a  sound  like  "Taupa- 
roro,  Tauparoro;"  and  she  hstened  again  to  the 
rattling  of  the  bones,  and  again  she  heard  the 
words  "  Tauparoro,  Tauparoro/'  And  the  sister  of 
Tawhakararo  looking  up  to  the  bones,  said,  "  You 
rattle  in  vain,  O  bones  of  him  who  was  devoured 
by  the  Ati-Hapai  tribe,  for  who  is  there  to  lament 
over  him  or  to  avenge  his  death  ?" 

At  last  the  news  of  the  sad  event  which  had 
taken  place  reached  the  ears  of  his  brother,  Wha- 
katau-potiki,  and  of  his  other  brothers,  and  when 
they  heard  it  they  were  grieved  and  pained  at 
the  fate  of  their  brother,  and  at  last  Whakatau- 
potiki  adopted  a  firm  resolution  to  go  and  avenge 
Tawhakararo's  death,  and  as  the  rest  of  his  tribe 
agreed  in  this  purpose,  they  began  without  delay  to 
build  canoes  for  its  execution. 

They  named  some  of  their  canoes  the  Whiritoa, 


102  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

the  Tapatapaliukarere,  the  Toroa-i-taipakilii,  the 
Hakii-ere,  and  the  Mahunu-awatea,  and  to  all  the 
other  canoes  which  they  prepared  for  this  purpose 
they  also  gave  names  ;  and  when  they  had  finished 
lasliing  on  the  top-boards  of  their  canoes,  their 
mother  Apakura,  with  all  her  female  attendants, 
began  to  beat  and  prepare  fern  root  for  the  war- 
riors to  carry  with  them  as  provisions  for  their 
voyage,  and  whilst  the  females  were  thus  engaged 
in  beating  and  preparing  fern  root  for  the  war 
party  who  were  about  to  start  to  revenge  the 
death  of  Tuwhakararo,  they  kept  on  rej)eating  a 
lament  for  the  young  man  which  might  rouse  the 
feelings  of  the  warriors. 

Lo,  the  army  of  Whakatau-potiki  now  embarked; 
they  started  in  a  thousand  canoes,  and  floated  out 
into  the  open  sea,  and  proceeding  upon  their  course, 
they  landed  at  a  certain  place  which  lay  in  their 
route,  and  there  the  army  of  Whakatau  had  a  re- 
view, to  show  how  well  they  could  go  through 
their  manoeuvres.  They  were  formed  into  columns, 
and  one  column,  with  fierce  shouts  and  yells,  after 
a  war  dance,  sprang  upon  the  supposed  enemy,  and 
whilst  the}''  were  thus  engaged  with  their  imaginary 
foe,  a  second  column,  with  wild  cries,  advanced  to 
their  support  ;  then  the  first  column  of  warriors 
retired  to  re-form,  and  thus  column  after  column 
feigned  to  charge  their  foes. 


THE  MURDER  OF  TUWHAKARARO.     103 

Then  one  body  of  the  warriors  rushed  to  an 
adjoining  creek  and  tried  to  jump  across  it,  but 
they  could  not.  A  band  of  men  under  Wha- 
katau's  immediate  command  were  sitting  upon 
the  ground  watching  the  others,  and  when  the 
first  body  gave  up  in  despair  all  thoughts  of 
overleaping  the  creek,  this  chosen  band  of  Wha- 
katau  rose  from  the  ground,  started  forward, 
reached  in  good  order  the  edge  of  the  creek,  and 
sprang  easily  across  it  (the  whole  body  of  them  to 
the  other  side). 

When  the  review  was  ended,  Whakatau  made  a 
speech  to  the  warriors,  saying,  "  Warriors,  all  of  you 
listen  to  me.  We  will  not  finish  our  voyage  until 
the  dark  night,  lest  we  should  be  seen  by  the  people 
we  are  about  to  attack,  and  thus  fail  in  surprising 
them." 

Just  as  it  was  dark,  Whakatau  ordered  his  own 
chosen  band  of  warriors  to  go  and  pull  the  plugs 
out  of  all  the  canoes  but  their  own,  and  they,  in 
obedience  to  his  orders,  went  round  and  pulled  all 
the  plugs  out  of  the  canoes,  and  thus  they  did  to 
the  whole  of  them  without  missing  a  single  canoe 
of  the  whole  thousand. 

This  having  been  done,  Whakatau  called  aloud 
to  the  whole  force,  "  Now  my  men,  let  us  em- 
bark at  once  this  very  night."  Then  the  warriors 
hurriedly  arose  in  the  darkness,  and  all  was  confu- 
sion and  noise,  and  one  canoe  was  launched,  and  then 


10  4  POLYNESIAN    Ml'THOLOGY. 

another,  and  another,  until  all  were  afloat  on  the 
sea.  Then  they  all  embarked,  and  the  several  crews 
sprang  cheerfully  into  their  own  canoes  ;  but  lo, 
presently  the  canoes  all  began  to  sink,  one  after  the 
other,  and  the  crews  were  compelled  again  to  seek 
the  shore,  and  to  busy  themselves  there  in  repairing 
them.  In  the  meantime  the  chosen  band  of  warriors 
of  Whakatau  urged  on  their  canoes,  leaving  the  others 
behind,  and  when  they  drew  near  the  place  where 
the  house  called  the  Uru-o-Manono  was  situated,  they 
landed.  Then  the  warriors  silently  surrounded  the 
house  in  ranks  throughout  its  whole  circumference, 
and  each  of  the  eight  doors  of  the  house  they 
guarded  by  a  band  of  pa  en,  and  Whakatau  laid  hold 
of  a  man  named  Hioi,  whom  they  caught  outside  of 
the  house,  and  he  questioned  him,  saying,  "  Where 
is  my  sister  now  ?"  And  Hioi  answered  him,  "  She 
is  in  the  house."  And  he  asked  him  again,  "  In 
what  part  of  the  house  does  Poporokewa  sleep?" 
Hioi  replied,  "  At  the  foot  of  the  large  pillar  which 
supports  the  ridge-pole  of  the  house."  Whakatau 
next  asked,  "  Has  he  any  distinguishing  mark  by 
which  we  may  know  him?"  Hioi  answered,  "  You 
may  know  him  by  one  of  his  teeth  being  broken." 
Whakatau  asked  him  one  question  more,  saying. 
"  In  what  part  of  the  house  does  my  sister  sleep  ? 
And  Hioi  answered  him,  "  She  sleeps  close  to  that 
door." 

Whakatau-potiki  asked  him  no  further  questions, 


&5 


THE   MURDER    OF   TUWHAKARARO.  105 

but  took  the  fellow  "and  cut  out  his  tongue,  and 
when  he  had  done  so  he  made  him  talk,  and  he  still 
spoke  quite  distinctly,  although  a  great  part  of  his 
tongue  was  cut  out.  Whakatau  then  took  him 
again,  and  cut  his  tongue  off  quite  close  to  the  root, 
and  he  made  him  try  to  talk  again,  and  nothing 
but  an  indistinct  mumbling  could  be  heard,  so  he 
then  ordered  the  man  into  the  house  to  send  his 
sister  out  to  him. 

Hioi  went  as  he  was  told  to  send  Whakatau's 
sister  to  him,  for  she  was  then  in  the  XJru-o-Manono, 
the  house  of  her  father-in-law,  Poporokewa.  When 
he  got  inside,  the  whole  mass  of  the  Ati-Hapai  tribe 
who  were  sitting  saw  him  come  in,  and  some  of 
them  asked  him  where  he  had  been  to,  and  what 
he  had  gone  for ;  but  what  was  the  use  of  their 
talking  to  him,  since  he  could  do  nothing  but  mum- 
ble out  indistinct  words  in  reply,  and  those  who 
were  sitting  near  him  wondered  what  could  be  the 
matter. 

But  the  sister  of  Whakatau  guessed  in  a  moment 
that  this  was  some  device  of  her  brother's,  and  at 
once  went  out  of  the  house,  and  found  Whaka- 
tau, and  she  and  her  brother  wept  together, .  partly 
from  joy  at  their  meeting,  partly  from  sorrow  in 
thinking  of  the  melancholy  death  of  their  brother 
since  they  had  last  met. 

When  they  had  done  weeping,  Whakatau  asked 

F   3 


106  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

her,  "  In  what  part  of  the  house  does  Poporokewa 
sleep  ?"  And  she  answered  him,  "  He  sleeps  at  the 
foot  of  the  large  pillar  which  supports  the  ridge-pole 
of  the  house."  And  then  she  added,  "  But  oh,  my 
brother,  a  great  part  of  the  Ati-Hapai  tribe  have 
seen  you  before,  and  they  will  know  you."  Her 
brother  then  asked  her,  "  What  then  do  you  think  I 
had  better  do?"  His  sister  answered,  "You  had 
better  cut  your  hair  quite  short  to  disguise  yourself. 

He  consented  to  this  being  done,  so  his  sister 
cut  his  hair  quite  close  for  him,  and  when  she  had 
done  this  she  rubbed  his  face  all  over  with  charcoal, 
and  then  he  and  his  sister  went  together  into  the 
house.  The  fire  ^in  the  house  had  got  quite  low 
some  time  before,  and  when  they  entered,  the  peo- 
ple near  where  they  went  in,  cried  out,  "  Make 
up  the  fire,  make  up  the  fire ;  here 's  a 
stranger,  here  ^s  a  stranger."  So  they  blew  up 
the  fire  and  made  it  burn  brightly,  and  many  of 
them  came  to  see  Whakatau-potiki,  and  when  they 
had  looked  well  at  him,  thej'  broke  out  laughing, 
and  said,  "  What  a  black-looking  fellow  he  is !" 
Even  Poporokewa  burst  out  laughing  at  his  appear- 
ance, and  Whakatau,  when  he  saw  him  laugh,  at 
once  recognised  him  by  his  broken  tooth. 

Whakatau-potiki  had  taken  a  stout  rope  with 
him  when  he  went  into  the  house,  and  he  held  this 
ready  coiled  in  his  hand,  with  a  noose  at  one  end  of 


THE   MURDEE    OF    TUWHAKARARO.  107 

it ;  and  as  soon  as  he  recognised  Poporokewa,  he 
slily  dropped  the  noose  over  his  head,  and  suddenly 
hauling  it  tight,  it  got  fast  round  his  neck :  then, 
still  holding  the  rope  in  his  hand,  and  lengthening  it 
by  degrees  as  he  went,  Whakatau  and  his  sister 
rushed  out  of  the  house ;  and  he  still  hauHng  with 
all  his  strength  on  the  rope,  climbed  up  on  the  roof, 
repeating  a  powerfiil  incantation. 

Then  each  warrior  sprang  up  into  his  place  from 
the  ground,  on  which  they  had  been  lying  down  to 
conceal  themselves,  and  they  set  fire  to  the  house 
in  several  places  at  once,  and  slaughtered  all  those 
who  tried  to  escape.  Thus  they  burnt  the  Uru-o- 
Manono,  and  all  those  who  were  in  it,  and  then 
the  warriors  returned,  and  carried  with  them  joyful 
news  to  Apakura,  the  mother  of  Tuwhakararo. 


THE  LEGEND  OF  RATA, 

HIS  ADVENTURES  WITH  THE  ENCHANTED  TREE  AND  REVENGE 
OF  HIS  father's  MURDER. 


Before  Tawliaki  ascended  up  into  the  heavens,  a 
son  named  Wahieroa  had  been  born  to  him  by  his 
first  wife.  As  soon  as  Wahieroa  grew  to  man's 
estate,  he  took  Kura  for  a  wife,  and  she  bore  him 
a  son  whom  they  called  Rata.  Wahieroa  was  slain 
treacherously  by  a  chief  named  Matukutakotako, 
but  his  son  Rata  was  born  some  time  before  his 
death.  It  therefore  became  his  duty  to  revenge 
the  death  of  his  father  Wahieroa,  and  Rata  having 
grown  up,  at  last  devised  a  plan  for  doing  this;  he 
therefore  gave  the  necessary  orders  to  his  dependants, 
at  the  same  time  saying  to  them,  "  I  am  about  to 
go  in  search  of  the  man  who  slew  my  fatlier.'' 

He  then  started  upon  a  journey  for  this  purpose, 
and  at  length  arrived  at  the  entrance  to  the  place 
of  Matukutakotako  ;  he  found  there  a  man  who 
was  left  in  charge  of  it,  sitting  at  the  entrance  to 
the  court-yard,  and  he  asked  him,  saying,  "  Where 
is  the  man  who  killed  my  father?"     The  man  who 


THE    ADVENTURES    OF    RATA.  109 

was  left  in  charge  of  the  place  answered  him — 
"  He  lives  beneath  in  the  earth  there,  and  I  am  left 
here  by  him,  to  call  to  him  and  warn  him  when 
the  new  moon  appears  ;  at  that  season  he  rises  and 
comes  forth  upon  the  earth,  and  devours  men  as 
his  food." 

Rata  then  said  to  him,  "  All  that  you  say  is  true, 
but  how  can  he  know  when  the  proper  time  comes 
for  him  to  rise  up  from  the  earth?"     The  man  re 
plied,    "  I  call  aloud  to  him." 

Then  said  Rata,  "  When  will  there  be  a  new 
moon  V  And  the  man  who  was  left  to  take  care 
of  the  place  answered  him,  "  In  two  nights  hence. 
Do  3^ou  now  return  to  your  own  village,  but  on  the 
morning  of  the  second  day  from  this  time  come 
here  again  to  me." 

Rata,  in  compliance  with  these  directions,  re- 
turned to  his  own  dwelling,  and  waited  there 
until  the  time  that  had  been  appointed  him, 
and  on  the  morning  of  that  day  he  again  jour- 
neyed along  the  road  he  had  previously  travelled, 
and  found  the  man  sitting  in  the  same  place, 
and  he  asked  him,  saying,  "  Do  you  know  any  spot 
where  I  can  conceal  myself,  and  lie  hid  from  the 
enemy  with  whom  I  am  about  to  fight,  from  Ma- 
tukutakotako  ? "  The  man  replied,  "Come  with 
me  imtil  I  show  you  the  two  fountains  of  clear 
water." 


110  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

They  then  went  together  until  they  came  to  the 
two  fountains. 

The  man  then  said  to  Rata,  "The  spot  that  we 
stand  on  is  the  place  where  Matuku  rises  up  from 
the  earth,  and  yonder  fountain  is  the  one  in  which 
he  combs  and  washes  his  dishevelled  hair,  but  this 
fountain  is  the  one  he  uses  to  reflect  his  face 
in  whilst  he  dresses  it ;  you  cannot  kiU  him 
whilst  he  is  at  the  fountain  he  uses  to  reflect 
his  face  in,  because  your  shadow  would  be  also 
reflected  in  it,  and  he  would  see  it ;  but  at  the 
fountain  in  which  he  washes  his  hair,  you  may 
smite  and  slay  him." 

Rata  then  asked  the  man,  "  Will  he  make  his 
appearance  from  the  earth  this  evening  ? "  And 
the  man  answered,   "Yes.'^ 

They  had  not  waited  long  there,  when  evening 
arrived,  and  the  moon  became  visible,  and  the  man 
said  to  Rata,  "  Do  you  now  go  and  hide  yourself 
near  the  brink  of  the  fountain  in  which  he  washes 
his  hair ;"  and  Rata  went  and  hid  himself  near 
the  edge  of  the  fountain,  and  the  man  who  had 
been  left  to  watch  for  the  purpose  shouted  aloud, 
"  Ho,  Ho,  the  new  moon  is  visible — a  moon  two 
days  old."  And  Matukutakotako  heard  him,  and 
seizing  his  two-handed  wooden  sword,  he  rose 
up  from  the  earth  there,  and  went  straight  to  liis 
two  fountains ;  then  he  laid  down  liis  two-handed 


THE    ADVENTURES    OF    RATA.  Ill 

wooden  sword  on  the  gi'ound,  at  the  edge  of  the 
fountain  where  he  dressed  his  hair,  and  kneeling 
down  on  both  knees  beside  it,  he  loosened  the 
strings  which  bound  up  his  long  locks,  and  shook 
out  his  dishevelled  hair,  and  plunged  down  his-head 
into  the  cool  clear  waters  of  the  fountain.  So  Rata 
creeping  out  ft'om  where  he  lay  hid,  rapidly  moved 
up,  and  stood  behind  him,  and  as  Matuku-takotako 
raised  his  head  from  the  water,  Rata  with  one 
hand  seized  him  by  the  hair,  while  with  the  other 
he  smote  and  slew  him  ;  thus  he  avenged  the  death 
of  his  father  Wahieroa. 

Rata  then  asked  the  man  whom  he  had  found  in 
charge  of  the  place,  "  Where  shall  I  find  the  bones 
of  Wahieroa  my  father  V  And  the  keeper  of  the 
place  answered  him,  "  They  are  not  here ;  a  strange 
people  who  live  at  a  distance  came  and  carried 
them  off." 

Upon  hearing  this.  Rata  returned  to  his  own 
village,  and  there  reflected  over  many  designs  by 
wliich  he  might  recover  the  bones  of  his  father. 

At  length  he  thought  of  an  excellent  plan  for 
this  purpose,  so  he  went  into  the  forest  and  having 
found  a  very  tall  tree,  quite  straight  throughout  its 
entire  length,  he  felled  it,  and  cut  off  its  noble  branch- 
ing top,  intending  to  fasliion  the  trunk  into  a  canoe  ; 
and  all  the  insects  which  inhabit  trees,  and  the 
spirits  of  the  forests,  were  very  angry  at  this,  and 


112  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

as  soon  as  Rata  had  returned  to  the  villao-e  at  even- 
ing,  when  his  day's  work  was  ended,  they  all  came 
and  took  the  tree,  and  raised  it  up  again,  and  the 
innumerable  multitude  of  insects,  birds,  and  spirits, 
who  are  called  "  The  offspring  of  Hakuturi,"  worked 
away  at  replacing  each  little  chip  and  shaving  in 
its  proper  place,  and  sang  aloud  their  incantations 
as  they  worked  ;  this  was  what  they  sang  with  a 
confused  noise  of  various  voices  : — 


Flj'  together,  chips  and  shavings, 
Stick  ye  fast  together, 
Hold  ye  fast  together  ; 
Stand  upright  again,  0  tree  ! 


Early  the  next  morning  back  came  Rata,  intend- 
ing to  work  at  hewing  the  trunk  of  his  tree  into  a 
canoe.  When  he  got  to  the  place  where  he  had 
left  the  trunk  lying  on  the  ground,  at  first  he 
could  not  find  it,  and  if  that  fine  tall  straight  tree, 
which  he  saw  standing  whole  and  sound  in  the 
forest,  was  the  same  he  thought  he  had  cut 
down,  there  it  was  now  erect  again ;  however 
he  stepped  up  to  it,  and  manfully  hewing  away 
at  it  again,  he  felled  it  to  the  ground  once  more, 
and  off  he  cut  its  fine  branching  top  again,  and 
began  to  hollow  out  the  hold  of  the  canoe,  and 
to  slope  off  its  prow  and  the  stern  into  their  proper 
gracefully  curved  forms  ;  and  in  the  evening,  when 


THE    ADVENTURES    OF    RATA.  11 


r) 


it  became  too  dark  to  work,  lie  returned  to  his 
village. 

As  soon  as  he  was  gone,  back  came  the  innu- 
merable multitudes  of  insects,  birds,  and  spirits, 
who  are  called  the  offspring  of  Hakuturi,  and  they 
raised  up- the  tree  upon  its  stump  once  more,  and 
with  a  confused  noise  of  various  voices,  they  sang 
incantations  as  they  wo)'ked,  and  when  they  had 
ended  these,  the  tree  again  stood  sound  as  ever  in 
its  former  place  in  the  forest. 

The  morning  dawned,  and  Rata  returned  once 
more  to  work  at  his  canoe.  When  he  reached  the 
place,  was  not  he  amazed  to  see  the  tree  standing 
up  in  the  forest,  untouched,  just  as  he  had  at  first 
found  it?  But  he,  nothing  daunted,  hews  away  at  it 
again,  and  down  it  topples  crashing  to  the  earth  ; 
as  soon  as  he  saw  the  tree  upon  the  ground,  Rata 
went  off  as  if  going  home,  and  then  turned  back 
and  hid  himself  in  the  underwood,  in  a  spot  whence 
he  could  peep  out  and  see  what  took  place  ;  he  had 
not  been  hidden  lono-  when  he  heard  the  innumer- 
able  multitude  of  the  children  of  Tane  approach- 
ing the  spot,  singing  their  incantations  as  they 
came  along ;  at  last  they  arrived  close  to  the  place 
Avhere  the  tree  was  lying  upon  the  ground.  Lo,  a 
rush  upon  them  is  made  by  Rata.  Ha,  he  has 
seized  some  of  them ;  he  shouts  out  to  them,  saying, 
— "  Ha,  ha,   it  is  you,  is  it,   then,  who  have  been 


114  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

exercising  your  magical  arts  upon  my  tree?"  Then 
the  children  of  Tane  all  cried  aloud  in  reply, — 
"  Who  gave  you  authority  to  fell  the  forest  god  to 
the  ground  ?     You  had  no  right  to  do  so." 

When  Rata  heard  them  say  this,  he  Avas  quite 
overcome  with  shame  at  what  he  had  done. 

The  offspring  of  Tane  again  all  called  out  aloud 
to  him — "  Return,  0  Rata,  to  thy  village,  we  will 
make  a  canoe  for  you." 

Rata,  without  delay,  obeyed  their  orders,  and  as 
soon  as  he  had  gone  they  all  fell  to  work ;  they  were 
so  numerous,  and  understood  each  what  to  do  so 
well,  that  they  no  sooner  began  to  adze  out  a 
canoe  than  it  was  completed.  When  they  had 
done  this.  Rata  and  his  tribe  lost  no  time  in  haul- 
ing it  from  the  forest  to  the  water,  and  the  name 
they  gave  to  that  canoe  was  Riwaru. 

When  the  canoe  was  afloat  upon  the  sea,  140 
warriors  embarked  on  board  it,  and  without  delay 
they  paddled  off  to  seek  their  foes  ;  one  night,  just 
at  nightfall,  they  reached  the  fortress  of  their  ene- 
mies, who  were  named  Ponaturi.  When  they  arrived 
there.  Rata  alone  landed,  leaving  the  canoe  afloat 
and  all  his  warriors  on  board  ;  as  he  stole  along 
the  shore,  he  saw  that  a  fire  was  burning  on  the 
sacred  place,  where  the  Ponaturi  consulted  their 
gods  and  offered  sacrifices  to  them.  Rata,  without 
stopping,   crept   directly  towards  the  fire,  and  hid 


THE    ADVENTUEES    OF    RATA.  115 

himself  behind  some  thick  bushes  of  the  Hara- 
keke  ;*  he  then  saw  that  there  were  some  priests 
upon  the  other  side  of  the  same  bushes,  serving  at 
the  sacred  place,  and,  to  assist  themselves  in  their 
magical  arts,  they  were  making  use  of  the  bones 
of  Wahieroa,  knocking  them  together  to  beat  time 
while  they  were  repeating  a  powerful  incanta- 
tion, known  only  to  themselves,  the  name  of 
which  was  Titikura.  Rata  listened  attentively  to  this 
incantation,  until  he  learnt  it  by  heart,  and  when 
he  was  quite  sure  that  he  knew  it,  he  rushed  sud- 
denly upon  the  priests ;  they,  surprised  and  igno- 
rant of  the  numbers  of  their  enemy,  or  whence  they 
came,  made  little  resistance,  and  were  in  a  moment 
smitten  and  slain.  The  bones  of  his  father  AVahieroa 
were  then  eagerly  snatched  up  by  him ;  he  hastened 
with  them  back  to  the  canoe,  embarked  on  board 
it,  and  his  warriors  at  once  paddled  away,  striving 
to  reach  his  fortified  village. 

In  the  morning  some  of  the  Ponaturi  repaired 
to  their  sacred  place,  and  found  their  priests  lying- 
dead  there,  just  as  they  were  slain  by  Rata.  So, 
without  delay,  they  pursued  him.  A  thousand  war- 
riors of  their  tribe  followed  after  Rata.  At  length 
this  army  reached  the  fortress  of  Rata,  and  an  en- 
gagement at  once  took  place,  in  which  the  tribe  of 
Rata  was  worsted,  and  sixty  of  its  warriors  slain  ; 
*  !N"ew  Zealand  flax. 


IIG  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

at  this  moment  Rata  bethought  him  of  the  spell  he 
had  learnt  fi'om  the  priests,  and,  immediately  re- 
peating the  potent  incantation  Titikura,  his  slain 
warriors  were  by  its  power  once  more  restored  to 
life;  then  they  rushed  again  to  the  combat,  and 
the  Ponaturi  were  slaughtered  by  Rata  and  his 
tribe,  a  thousand  of  them — the  whole  thousand 
were  slain. 

Te  Rata's  ttisk  of  avenging  his  father's  death 
being  thus  ended,  his  tribe  hauled  up  his  large 
canoe  on  the  shore,  and  roofed  it  over  with  thatch 
to  protect  it  from  the  sun  and  weather.  Rata  now 
took  Tongarautawhiri  as  one  of  his  wives,  and  she 
boi'e  him  a  son  whom  he  named  Tuwhakararo ; 
when  this  son  came  to  man's  estate,  he  took  Apa- 
kura  as  one  of  his  wives,  and  fi'om  her  sprang  a 
son  named  Whakatau.  He  was  not  born  in  the 
manner  that  mortals  are,  but  came  into  being  in 
this  way:  One  day  Apakura  went  down  upon  the 
sea-coast,  and  took  off  a  little  apron  wliich  she 
wore  in  front  as  a  covering,  and  threw  it  into  the 
ocean,  and  a  god  named  Rongotakawiu  took  it  and 
shaped  it,  and  gave  it  form  and  being,  and  Wha- 
katau sprang  into  life,  and  his  ancestor  Rongota- 
kawiu taught  him  mao^ic  and  the  use  of  encliant- 
raents  of  every  kind. 

When  Whakatau  was  a  little  lad,  his  favourite 
amusement  was  flying   kites.     Mortals   then   often 


THE    ADVENTURES    OF    RATA.  117 

observed  kites  flying  in  the  air,  and  could  see  no- 
thing else,  for  Whakatau  was  running  about  at  tlie 
bottom  of  the  waters,  still  holding  the  end  of  the 
string  of  the  kite  in  his  hands.  One  day  lie  stole 
up  out  of  the  water  by  degrees,  and  at  length  came 
upon  the  shore,  when  the  whole  of  his  body  was 
quite  plainly  seen  by  some  people  who  were  near, 
and  they  ran  as  fast  as  they  could  to  catch 
him.  When  Whakatau  observed  them  all  running  to 
seize  him,  he  slipped  back  ?igain  into  the  water,  and 
continued  flying  his  kite  as  before;  but  the  people 
who  had  seen  him  were  surprised  at  this  strange 
sight,  and  being  determined  to  catch  him  the 
next  time  he  came  out,  they  sat  down  upon  the 
bank  to  wait  for  him.  At  last  Whakatau  came 
up  out  of  the  water  again,  and  stepped  on  shore 
once  more ;  then  the  people  who  were  watching 
for  him,  all  ran  at  full  speed  to  catch  him.  jWhen 
Whakatau  saw  them  coming  after  him  again,  he 
cried  out,  "  You  had  better  go  and  bring  Apakura 
here,  she  is  the  only  person  who  can  catch  me  and 
hold  me  fast." 

When  they  heard  this,  one  of  them  ran  to  fetch 
Apakura,  and  she  came  with  him  at  once,  and  as 
soon  as  she  saw  little  Whakatau,  she  called  out  to 
him,  "  Here  I  am,  I  am  Apakura."  Whakatau 
then  stopped  running,  and  Apakura  caught  hold  of 
him  with  her  hands,  and  she  questioned  him,  saying, 


118  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

"  Whom  do  you  belong  to  ? "  And  Wliakatau  an- 
swered her,  "  I  am  your  child  ;  you  one  day  threw 
the  little  apron  which  covered  you  on  the  sands  of 
the  sea,  and  the  god  Rongotakawiu,  my  ancestor, 
formed  me  from  it,  and  I  grew  up  a  human  being, 
and  he  named  me  Wliakatau." 

From  that  time  Wliakatau  left  the  water  and 
continued  to  live  on  shore.  His  principal  amusement, 
as  long  as  he  was  a  lad,  was  still  fl3'^ing  kites;  but 
he  understood  magic  well,  and  nothing  was  con- 
cealed from  him,  and  when  he  grew  up  to  be  a 
man  he  became  a  renowned  hero. 


This  second  legend  of  the  destruction  by  Whakatau-potiki  of 
the  house  called  Te  Tihi-o-Manono,  or  Te  Uru-o-Manono,  is  added, 
because  it  diiFcrs  considerably  from  the  other,  and  is  often  alluded 
to  in  ancient  poems. 

Tinirau  determined  to  attempt  to  avenge  the  death  of  his  de- 
scendant Tuwhakararo,  and  he  thought  that  the  best  person  to  do 
this  was  Whakatau,  whom  he  knew  to  be  very  skilful  in  war,  and 
in  enchantments,  so  he  directed  his  wife  Hinc-i-te-iwaiwa  to  find 
Whakatau,  and  she  went  in  search ;  when  she  reached  a  village 
near  where  she  expected  to  find  him,  she  asked  some  people 
whom  she  saw,  where  Whakatau  Avas,  and  they  answered  her, 
"He  is  on  the  top  of  yonder  hill  flying  a  kite."  She  at  once  pro- 
ceeded on  her  way  until  she  came  to  the  hill,  and  seeing  a  man 
there,  she  asked  him,  "  Can  you  tell  me  where  I  can  find  Wha- 
katau!"  and  he  replied,  "  You  must  have  passed  him  as  you  came 
here."  Then  she  returned  to  the  village  where  she  had  seen 
the  people,  and  said  to  them,  "  Why,  the  man  upon  the  hill  says 
that  Whatakau  is  here;"  but  they  told  her  that  the  man  who  had 
spoken  to  her  must  have  been  Whakatau  himself,  and  that  she  had 
better  return  to  him,  and  told  her  marks  by  which  she  might 
know  him ;  she  therefore  returned,  and  he,  after  some  time,  when 
she  showed  him  that  she  knew  certain  marks  about  his  person. 


THE    ADVENTURES    OF    RATA.  119 

admitted  that  he  vras  Whakatau ;  and  he  then  asked  her  what 
had  made  her  come  to  him?  and  she  replied,  "  Tinirau  sent  me  to 
you  to  ask  you  to  come  and  assist  in  revenging  the  death  of  our 
near  relative ;  the  warriors  are  all  collecting  at  the  village  of 
Tinirau,  but  they  fear  to  go  to  attack  this  enemy,  for  it  is  the 
bravest  of  all  the  enemies  of  Tinirau."  Whakatau  then  asked  her, 
"  Have  you  yet  given  a  feast  to  the  warriors?"  and  she  said, 
"  Not  yet."  He  then  spoke  to  her,  saying,  "  Return  at  once  and 
when  you  reach  your  village,  give  a  great  feast  to  the  warriors ; 
give  them  abundance  of  potted  birds  from  the  forests,  but  let  all 
the  oil  in  which  the  birds  were  preserved  be  kept  for  me ;  as  for 
yourself,  do  not  go  to  the  feast,  but,  decking  your  head  with  a 
mourning  di-css  of  feathers,  remain  seated  close  in  the  house  of 
mourning."  Then  Hine-i-to-iwaiwa  at  once  returned  to  Tinirau,  to 
do  as  she  had  been  directed. 

Shortly  after  his  visitor  had  left  him,  Whakatau  called  aloud  to 
his  people,  saying,  "  Let  the  sideboards  be  at  once  fresh  lashed  on 
to  our  canoe,  to  the  canoe  of  our  ancestor  of  Rata."  His  men  were 
so  anxious  to  fulfil  their  chief's  orders,  that  almost  as  soon  as 
he  had  spoken  they  were  at  work,  and  bad  finished  the  canoe 
that  very  day,  and  dragged  it  down  to  the  sea ;  when  night  fell, 
six  of  his  warriors  embarked  in  it,  and  Whakatau  made  the 
seventh  ;  they  then  paddled  oif,  following  a  direct  course,  until 
they  reached  the  village  of  Tinirau ;  where  they  found  Hine-i-te- 
iwaiwa  seated  in  her  house  of  mourning.  Whakatau  then  asked 
her,  "Have  the  warriors  all  left  yet?"  and  she  replied,  "  They  will 
not  do  it,  they  are  afraid."  AVhakatau  then  said  to  her,  "  Farewell, 
then ;  do  you  remain  here  until  you  hear  further  from  me." 

Whakatau  and  his  men  having  re-embarked  in  their  canoe,  made 
a  straight  course  for  the  place  where  was  situated  the  great  house 
called  the  Tihi-o-Manono,  and  they  let  their  anchor  drop,  and 
floated  there. 

When  the  next  morning  broke,  and  some  of  the  people  of  the 
village  coming  out  of  the  house,  and  beyond  their  defences,  saw 
the  canoe  floating  at  the  anchorage,  they  gave  the  alarm,  crying- 
out,  "A  M'ar  party!  a  war  party!"  Then  the  warriors  came 
rushing  forth  to  the  fray  in  crowds,  and  arranged  themselves  in 
bands.  Then  stood  forth  one  of  their  champions  whose  name  was 
Mangohuritapcna,  and  he  defied  Whakatau,  who  was  standing  up 
in  his  canoe,  calling  out,  "  Were  you  fool  enough,  then,  to  come 


# 


120  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY, 

here  of  youi-  own  accorcir'audWhakatau  answered  him,  by  shout- 
ing out,  "  Which  of  the  arts  of  war  do  you  consider  j'ourself 
famous  fori"  and  Mango-huritapena  shouted  out  in  answer,  "I 
am  a  most  skilful  diver."  "  Dive  here,  then,  if  you  dare,"  shouted 
out  Whakatau  in  reply.  Then  the  champion  of  the  enemy  gave  a 
plunge  into  the  water,  and  dived  under  it.  Just  as  he  got  right 
under  the  canoe,  one  of  Whakatau's  men  poured  the  oil  which 
Hine-i-te-iwaiwa  had  given  them  into  the  sea,  and  its  waters  im- 
mediately became  quite  transparent,  so  that  they  saw  the  warrior 
come  floating  up  under  the  canoe,  and  AVhakatau  transfixed  him 
with  a  wooden  spade ;  so  that  champion  perished. 

Then  forward  stepped  another  champion  named  Pitakataka,  and 
he  defied  Whakatau,  shouting  out,  "Ah!  you  only  killed  Mango- 
huritapena  because  he  chanced  to  put  himself  in  a  wrong  position." 
Whakatau  shouted  out  in  replj',  "  Which  of  the  arts  of  war  are 
you  skilled  in,  then?"  and  he  answered,  "Oh!  I  leap  so  skilfully 
that  I  seem  to  fly  in  the  air."  "  Then  leap  here,  if  you  dare,"  an- 
swered Whakatau ;  and  the  champion  of  his  enemies  took  a  run 
and  made  a  spring  high  into  the  air ;  but  Whakatau  laid  a  noose 
on  the  canoe,  and  as  the  warrior  alighted  in  it,  he  drew  it  tight. 
and  caught  him  as  a  bird  in  a  springe,  and  thus  slew  that  warrior 
also. 

And  thus,  one  after  the  other,  he  slew  ten  of  the  most  famous 
warriors  of  his  enemies ;  one  whom  he  had  seized,  he  saved 
alive,  but  he  cut  out  his  tongue,  and  then  said  to  him,  "  Now, 
off  with  you  to  the  shore  again,  and  tell  them  there  hoAV  I  have 
overcome  you  all ;"  having  done  this,  Whakatau  retired  a  little 
distance  back  from  the  place,  so  that  his  canoe  could  not  be  seen 
by  his  enemies. 

In  the  afternoon  Whakatau  landed  on  the  coast,  and  before  eat- 
ing anything,  offered  the  prescribed  sacrifice  of  tlic  hair  and  a  j^art 
of  the  skin  of  the  head  of  one  of  his  victims  to  the  gods ;  and 
when  the  religious  rites  were  finished,  he  eat  food ;  and  having 
done  thi.s,  he  dii'ected  the  people  he  had  with  him  to  return, 
saying,  "Eeturn  at  once,  and  when  you  reach  the  residence  of 
Hine-i-te-iwaiwa,  speak  to  her,  saying,  '  Whakatau  told  us  to  come, 
and  tell  you,  that  he  could  not  return  with  us  ;'  and  he  further 
said,  '  If  heavy  rain  falls  in  large  drops,  it  is  a  sign  that  I  have  been 
killed ;  but  if  a  light,  misty  rain  falls,  and  the  whole  horizon  is 
lighted  up  with  flames,  then  you  may  know  that  I  have  conquered. 


THE   ADVENTURES    OF    RATA.  121 

and  tlicit  I  have  burnt  the  Tihio-Manono  ;'  he  also  said  that  he 
wished  you  to  sit  upon  the  roof  of  your  house  watching  until  you 
saw  the  Tihi-o-Manono  burnt."  Whakatau's  people  at  once  returned 
to  Hine-i-te-iwaiwa  to  deliver  the  message  he  had  given  them. 

Just  before  nightfall,  Whakatau  drew  near  the  great  house,  called 
the  Tihi-o-Manono,  and  as  the  people  of  Whitinakonako,  a  great 
chief,  were  collecting  firewood  at  the  edge  of  a  forest,  he  stealthily 
dropped  in  amongst  them,  pretending  to  be  collecting  firewood  too; 
and  as  they  were  going  home  with  their  loads  of  firewood  upon 
their  backs,  he  managed  to  push  on  in  front  of  them,  and  got  into 
the  house  first  with  a  long  rope  in  his  hand :  one  end  of  this  he 
pushed  between  one  of  the  side  posts  which  supported  the  roof, 
and  the  plank  walls  of  the  house,  and  did  the  same  with  every 
post  of  the  house,  until  the  rope  had  gone  quite  roimd  it,  and  then 
he  made  one  end  of  it  fast  to  the  last  post,  and  held  the  other  end 
in  his  hand. 

By  this  time  the  people  who  lived  in  the  house  all  came  crowd- 
ing on  to  pass  the  night  in  it,  and  soon  filled  it  up  :  the  house  was 
so  large,  and  there  were  so  many  of  them,  that  they  had  to  light  ten 
fires  in  it. 

When  their  fires  had  burnt  up  brightly,  some  of  them  called  out  to 
Mango-Pare,  the  man  whom  Whakatau  had  saved  alive,  and  whose 
tongue  he  had  cut  out,  "  Well,  now,  tell  us  what  kind  of  looking 
fellow  that  was  who  cut  your  tongue  out ;"  and  Mango-Pare  answered, 
"  There  is  no  one  I  can  compare  him  to,  he  was  not  like  a  man  in 
the  proportion  of  his  frame."  One  of  them  then  called  out,  "  Was 
he  at  all  like  me  ]"  But  Mango-Pare  answered,  "There  is  nobody  I 
can  compare  him  to."  Then  another  called  out,  "Was  heat  all  like 
me]"  and  another,  "Was  he  like  me?"  until,  at  length,  Mango-Pare 
cried  out,  "  Have  I  not  already  told  you,  that  there  is  not  one  of 
you  whom  I  can  compare  to  him?" 

Whakatau  himself  then  exclaimed,  "Was  he  at  all  like  me?"  And 
Mango-Pare,  who  had  not  before  seen  him  in  the  crowd,  looked 
attentively  at  him  for  a  minute,  and  then  cried  out,  "I  saj', 
look  here  all  of  you  at  this  fellow,  he  is  not  unlike  the  man,  he 
looks  very  like  him,  perhaps  it  is  he  himself."  But  Whakatau 
coolly  asked  him  again,  "Was  the  man  really  something  like  me?" 
And  Mango-Pare  replied,  "  Yes,  he  was  like  you  ;  I  really  think  it 
was  you;"  and  Whakatau  shouted  aloud,  "  You  are  right,  it  was  I." 
As  soon  as  they  heard  this,  all  of  them  in  a  moment  sprang  to  their 

G 


122  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

feet.  But,  at  the  same  instant,  Whakatau  laid  hold  of  the  end  of  the 
rope  which  he  had  passed  round  the  posts  of  the  house,  and,  rush- 
ing out,  pulled  it  with  all  his  strength,  and  straightway  the  house 
fell  down,  crushing  all  within  it,  so  that  the  whole  tribe  perished, 
and  Whakatau,  who  had  escaped  to  the  outside  of  the  house,  set  it  on 
fire,  and  Hine-i-te-iwaiwa,  who  was  sitting  upon  the  roof  of  her  own 
house  watching  for  the  event,  saw  the  whole  of  one  part  of  the 
heavens  red  with  its  flames,  and  she  knew  that  her  enemies  were 
destroyed.  Whakatau,  having  thus  avenged  the  death  of  Tuwhaka- 
raro,  returned  to  his  o^vn  village. 


THE    LEGEND    OF    TOI-TE-HUATAHI 
AND  TAMA-TE-KAPUA. 

THE   DISSEXSIOXS   WHICH   LED   TO   THE   MIGRATIONS   FEOM   HAWAIKI. 

Our  ancestors  formerly  separated — some  of  them 
were  left  in  Ha^Yaiki,  and  some  came  here  in 
canoes.  Tuamatua  and  Uenuku  paddled  in  their 
canoes  here  to  Aotea ;  again,  at  that  time  some  of 
them  were  separated  from  each  other,  that  is  to  say, 
Uenuku  and  Houmai-tawhiti. 

For  in  the  time  of  Houmai-tawhiti  there  had 
been  a  great  war,  and  thence  there  were  many 
battles  fought  in  Hawaiki ;  but  this  war  had  com- 
menced long  before  that  time,  in  the  days  of  Wha- 
katauihu,  of  Tawhaki,  and  of  Tuhuruhuru,  when 
they  carried  off  Kae  alive  from  his  place  as  a  pay- 
ment for  Tutunui ;  and  the  war  continued  until  the 
time  of  the  disputes  that  arose  on  account  of  the 
body  of  warriors  of  Manaia.  Again  after  that 
came  .the  troubles  that  arose  from  the  act  of  dese- 
cration that  was  committed  by  the  dog  of  Houmai- 
tawhiti  and  of  his  sons  in  eating  the  matter  that 
had  sloughed  from  an  ulcer  of  TJenuku's.  Upon 
this  occasion,  when  Toi-te-huatahi  and  Uenuku  saw 
the  dog,  named  Potaka-tawhiti,  do  this,  they  killed 

G  2 


124  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

it,  and  the  sons  of  Houmai-tawhiti  missing  the  dog, 
went  everywhere  searching  for  it,  and  could  not 
find  it ;  they  went  from  village  to  village,  until  at 
last  they  came  to  the  village  of  Toi-te-huatahi,  and 
as  they  went  they  kept  calling  this  dog. 

At  last  the  dog  howled  in  the  belly  of  Toi', 
"Ow ! "  Then  Tama-te-kapua  and  Whakaturia  called 
their  dog  again,  and  again  it  howled  "  Ow ! " 
Then  Toi'  held  his  mouth  shut  as  close  as  ever  he 
could,  but  the  dog  still  kept  on  howling  in  his 
inside.  Thence  Toi'  said  as  follows,  and  his  words 
passed  into  a  proverb,  "  Oh,  hush,  hush  !  I  thought 
I  had  hid  you  in  the  big  belly  of  Toi',  and  there 
you  are,  you  cursed  thing,  still  howling  away." 

When  Taraa-te-kapua  and  his  brother  had  thus 
arrived  there,  he  asked,  "Why  did  not  jou  kill 
the  dog  and  bring  it  back  to  me,  that  my  heart 
might  have  felt  satisfied,  and  that  we  might  have 
remained  good  friends  ?  Now,  I  '11  tell  you  what 
it  is,  O  my  relations,  you  shall  by  and  by  hear 
more  of  this."  Then  as  soon  as  the  two  bro- 
thers got  home,  they  began  immediately  to  make 
stilts  for  Tama-te-kapua,  and  as  soon  as  these 
were  finished,  they  started  that  night  and  went  to 
the  village  of  Toi'  and  Uenuku,  and  arrived  at  the 
fine  poporo  tree  of  Uenuku,  covered  with  branches 
and  leaves,  and  they  remained  eating  the  fi-uit  of  it 
for  a  good  long  time,  and  then  went  home  again. 


THE    DISSENSIONS    AT    HAWAIKI.  125 

This  they  continued  doing  every  night,  until  at 
last  Uenuku  and  his  people  found  that  the  fruit  of 
his  poporo  tree  was  nearly  all  gone,  and  they  all 
wondered  what  had  become  of  the  fruit  of  the 
poporo  tree,  and  they  looked  for  tra<3es,  and  there 
were  some — the  traces  of  the  stilts  of  Tama'.  At 
night  they  kept  watch  on  the  tree :  whilst  one 
party  was  coming  to  steal,  the  other  was  lying  in 
wait  to  catch  them ;  this  latter  had  not  waited 
very  long,  when  Tama'  and  his  brother  came,  and 
whilst  they  were  busy  eating,  those  who  were  tying 
in  wait  rushed  upon  them,  and  caught  both  of 
them. 

They  seized  Whakaturia  at  the  very  foot  of  the 
tree  ;  Tama'  made  his  escape,  but  they  gave  chase, 
and  caught  him  on  the  sea-shore.  As  soon  as  they 
had  him  firmly,  those  who  were  holding  on  cried 
out,  "  Some  of  you  chop  down  his  stilts  with 
an  axe,  so  that  the  fellow  may  fall  into  the  water;" 
and  all  those  who  had  hold  of  him  cried  out,  "  Yes, 
yes,  let  him  fall  into  the  sea."  Then  Tama'  called 
down  to  them,  "  If  you  fell  me  in  the  water,  I 
shall  not  be  hurt,  but  if  you  cut  me  down  on 
shore,  the  fall  will  kill  me."  And  when  those  who 
were  behind,  and  were  just  running  up,  heard  this, 
they  thought  well  of  it,  so  they  chopped  him  down 
on  shore,  and  down  he  came  with  a  heavy  fall, 
but  in  a  moment  he  was  on  his  feet,  and  off   he 


12T5  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

went,  like  a  bird  escaped  from  a  snare,  and  so  got 
safe  away. 

Then  all  the  village  began  to  assemble  to  see 
Whakaturia  put  to  death ;  and  when  they  were  col- 
lected, some  of  them  said,  "Let  him  be  put  to 
death  at  once;"  and  others  said,  "Oh,  don't  do 
that ;  you  had  much  better  hang  him  up  in  the  roof 
of  Uenuku's  house,  that  he  may  be  stifled  by  the 
smoke,  and  die  in  that  way."  And  the  thought 
pleased  them  all,  so  they  hung  him  up  in  the  roof 
of  the  house,  and  kindled  a  fire,  and  commenced 
dancing,  and  when  that  ceased  they  began  singing, 
but  their  dancing  and  singing  was  not  at  all  good, 
but  indeed  shockingly  bad ;  and  tliis  they  did 
every  night,  until  at  last  a  report  of  their  proceed- 
ings reached  the  ears  of  his  brother  Tama'  and  of 
theu'  father. 

And  Tama'  heard,  "  There  's  your  brother  hang- 
ing up  in  the  roof  of  Uenuku's  great  house,  and  he 
is  almost  stifled  by  the  smoke."  So  he  thought  he 
would  go  and  see  him,  and  ascertain  whether  he 
still  lived  in  spite  of  the  smoke.  He  went  in  the 
night,  and  arrived  at  the  house,  and  gently  climbed 
right  upon  the  top  of  the  roof,  and  making  a  little 
hole  in  the  thatch,  immediately  over  the  spot  where 
his  brother  hung,  asked  him  in  a  whisper,  "  Are 
you  dead  ? "  but  he  whispered  up  to  him,  "  No, 
I  'm  still  alive."     And  his  brother  asked  again  in  a 


THE   DISSENSIONS   AT    HAWAIKI.  127 

whisper,  "How  do  these  people  dance  and  sing, 
do  they  do  it  well?"  And  the  other  rephed,  "No, 
nothing  can  be  worse ;  the  very  bystanders  do 
nothing  but  find  fliult  with  the  way  in  which  they 
dance  and  sing." 

Then  Tama'  said  to  him,  ""Would  not  it  be  a 
good  thing  for  you  to  say  to  them,  '  I  never  knew 
anything  so  bad  as  the  dancing  and  singing  of  those 
people ; '  and  if  they  reply,  '  Oh,  perhaps  you  can 
danc€?  and  smg  better  than  we  do,'  do  you 
answer,  'That  I  can/  Then  if  they  take  you 
down,  and  say,  'Now,  let  us  see  your  dancing,' 
you  can  answer,  'Oh,  I  am  quite  filthy  fi-om  the 
soot ;  you  had  better  in  the  first  place  give  me  a 
little  oil,  and  let  me  dress  my  hair,  and  give  me 
some  feathers  to  ornament  my  head  with  ; '  and  if 
they  agree  to  all  this,  when  your  hair  is  dressed, 
perhaps  they  will  say,  'There,  that  will  do,  now 
dance  and  sing  for  us.'  Then  do  you  answer  them, 
'  Oh,  I  am  still  looking  quite  dirty,  fkst  lend  me 
the  red  apron  of  Uenuku,  that  I  may  wear  it  as 
my  own,  and  liis  carved  two-handed  sword  as  my 
weapon,  and  then  I  shall  really  look  fit  to  dance  ; ' 
and  if  they  give  you  all  these  things,  then  dance 
and  sing  for  them.  Then  I  your  brother  will  go 
and  seat  myself  just  outside  the  doorway  of  the 
house,  and  when  you  rush  out,  I  '11  bolt  the  house- 
door  and  window,  and  when  they  try  to  pursue 


128  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

and  catch  you,  the  door  and  window  will  be 
bolted  fast,  and  we  two  can  escape  without  danger." 
Then  he  finished  talkinsr  to  him. 

Then  Whakaturia  called  down  to  Uenuku,  and 
to  all  his  people,  who  were  assembled  in  the  house, 
"  Oh,  all  you  people  who  are  dancing  and  singing 
there,  listen  to  me."  Then  they  all  said,  "  Silence, 
silence,  make  no  more  noise  there,  and  hsten  to 
what  the  fellow  is  saying  who  is  hanging  up 
there ;  we  thought  he  had  been  stifled  by  the 
smoke,  but  no  such  thing ;  there  he  is,  alive  still." 
So  they  all  kept  quiet. 

Then  those  who  were  in  the  house  called  up  to 
him,  "  Holloa,  you  fellow  hanging  up  in  the  roof 
there,  what  are  you  saying  ;  let 's  hear  you."  And 
he  answered,  "  I  mean  to  say  that  you  don't  know 
any  good  dances  or  songs,  at  least  that  I  have 
heard."  Then  the  people  in  the  house  answered, 
"  Are  you  and  your  tribe  famous  for  your  dancing 
and  singing  then?"  and  he  answered,  "Their  songs 
and  dances  are  beautiful ;"  and  they  asked,  "  Do 
you  yourself  know  how  to  dance  and  sing  ?"  Then 
Uenuku  said,  "  Let  him  down  then  ; "  and  he  was 
let  down,  and  the  people  all  called  out  to  him, 
"  Now  dance  away."  And  he  did  everything  ex- 
actly as  Tama-te-kapua   had   recommended  him. 

Then  "Whakaturia  called  out  to  them,  "  Make 
a  very  bright  fire,  so  that  there  may  be  no  smoke. 


THE    DISSENSIONS    AT    HAWAIKI.  129 

and  you  may  see  well ;"  and  they  made  a  bright 
clear  fire.  Then  he  stood  up  to  dance,  and  as 
he  rose  from  his  seat  on  the  ground,  he  looked 
bright  and  beautiful  as  the  morning  star  appearing 
in  the  horizon,  and  as  he  flourished  his  sword  his  eyes 
flashed  and  glittered  like  the  mother-of-pearl  eyes 
in  the  head  carved  on  the  handle  of  his  two-handed 
sword,  and  he  danced  down  one  side  of  the  house, 
and  reached  the  door,  then  he  turned  and  danced 
up  the  other  side  of  the  house,  and  reached  the  end 
opposite  the  door,  and  there  he  stood. 

Then  he  said  quietly  to  them,  "  I  am  dying  with 
heat,  just  slide  back  the  door,  and  let  it  stand  open 
a  little,  that  I  may  feel  the  cool  air  ;"  and  they 
slid  the  door  back  and  left  it  open.  Then  the 
lookers-on  said,  "  Come,  you  've  rested  enough  ;  the 
fresh  air  from  outside  must  have  made  you  cool 
enough ;  stand  up,  and  dance.''  Then  Whaka- 
turia  rose  up  again  to  dance,  and  as  he  rose  up, 
Tama-te-kapua  stepped  up  to  the  door  of  the  house, 
and  sat  down  there,  with  two  sticks  in  his  hand, 
all  ready  to  bolt  up  the  sliding  door  and  window. 

Then  Whakaturia,  as  is  the  custom  in  the  dance, 
turned  round  to  his  right  hand,  stuck  out  his 
tongue,  and  made  hideous  faces  on  that  side ;  again 
he  turned  round  to  the  left  hand,  and  made  hideous 
faces  on  that  side  ;  his  eyes  glared,  and  his  sword 
and  red   apron   looked  splendid ;   then  he   sprung 

G  3 


130  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

about,  and  appeared  liardly  to  stand  for  a  moment 
at  the  end  of  the  house  near  the  door,  before 
he  had  sprung  back  to  the  other  end,  and  stand- 
ing just  a  moment  there,  he  made  a  spring 
from  the  inside  of  the  house,  and  immediately 
he  was  beyond  the  door.  Up  sprang  Tama-te- 
kapua,  and  instantly  bolted  the  door ;  back  ran 
Whakaturia ;  he  helped  his  brother  to  bolt  up  the 
window,  and  there  they  heard  those  inside  curs- 
ing and  swearing,  and  chattering  like  a  hole  full 
of  young  parrots,  whilst  away  ran  Tama'  and  his 
brother.  A  stranger  who  was  presently  passing 
by  the  house,  pulled  the  bolts  out  of  the  door  and 
window  for  them,  and  the  crowd  who  had  been 
shut  into  the  house  came  pouring  out  of  it. 

The  next  morning  Toi'  and  XJenuku  felt  vexed 
indeed,  for  the  escape  of  those  they  had  taken  as 
a  payment  for  the  fruit  of  their  luxuriant  poporo 
tree,  and  said,  "  If  we  had  had  the  sense  to  kill 
them  at  once,  they  would  never  have  escaped 
in  this  way.  In  the  days  which  are  coming,  that 
fellow  will  return,  seeking  revenge  for  our  having 
hung  him  up  in  the  roof  of  the  house."  And 
before  long  Uenuku  and  Toi-te-huatahi  went  to 
make  war  on  Tama-te-kupua  and  his  people,  and 
some  fell  on  both  sides  ;  and  at  length  a  breach  in 
the  fortifications  of  the  town  of  Houmai-tawhiti 
and  of  his  sons  was  entered  by  a  storming  party  of 


THE    DISSENSIONS    AT    HAWAIKI.  131 

Uenuku's  force,  and  some  of  the  fences  and  obstruc- 
tions were  carried ;  and  the  people  of  Homnai- 
tawhiti  cried  out,  "  Oh,  Hou',  oh,  here  are  the 
enemy  pressing  their  way  in ; "  and  Houmai- 
tawhiti  sliouted  in  reply,  "  That 's  right ;  let  them 
in,  let  them  in,  till  they  reach  the  very  threshold  of 
the  house  of  Houmai-tawhiti."  Thrice  his  men 
called  out  this  to  Hou',  and  thrice  did  he  answer 
them  in  the  same  manner.  At  last  up  rose  Hou' 
with  his  sons  ;  then  the  struggle  took  place ; 
those  of  the  enemy  that  were  not  slain  were 
allowed  to  escape  back  out  of  the  town,  but  many 
of  the  slain  were  left  there,  and  their  bodies  were 
cut  up,  baked,  and  devoured.  • 

Then,  indeed,  a  great  crime  was  committed  by 
Hou'  and  his  family,  and  Ms  warriors,  in  eating 
the  bodies  of  those  men,  for  they  were  their  near 
relations,  being  descended  from  Tamatea-kai-ariki. 
Thence  cowardice  and  fear  seized  upon  the  tribe  of 
Hou':  formerly  they  were  all  very  brave  indeed, 
but  at  last  Hou'  and  all  his  tribe  became  cowardly, 
and  fit  for  nothing,  and  Hou'  and  Whakaturia  both 
died,  but  Tama-te-kapua  and  his  children,  and  some 
of  his  relations,  still  lived,  and  he  determined  to 
make  peace,  that  some  remnant  of  his  tribe  might 
be  saved ;    and  the  peace  was  long  preserved. 


THE    LEGEND    OF    POUTINI    AND 
WHAIAPU. 

THE  DISCOVERY  OF  NEW  ZEALAND. 

Now  pay  attention  to  the  cause  of  the  contention 
which  arose  between  Poutini  and  Whaiapu,  which 
led  them  to  emigrate  to  New  Zealand.  For  a  long 
time  they  both  rested  in  the  same  place,  and  Hine-tu- 
a-hoanga,  to  whom  the  stone  Whaiapu*  belonged, 
became  excessively  enraged  with  Ngahue,  and  with 
^his  stone  Poutini. -j-  At  last  she  drove  Ngahue  out 
and  forced  liim  to  leave  the  place,  and  Ngahue  de- 
parted and  went  to  a  strange  land,  taking  his 
jasper.  When  Hine-tu-a-hoanga  saw  that  he  was 
departing  with  his  precious  stone,  she  followed 
after  them,  and  Ngahue  arrived  at  Tuhua  with 
his  stone,  and  Hine-tu-a-hoanga  arrived  and 
landed  there  at  the  same  time  with  him,  and 
began  to  drive  him  away  again.  Then  Ngahue 
went  to  seek  a  place  where  his  jasper  stones  might 
remain  in  peace,  and  he  found  in  the  sea  this  island 
Aotearoa  (the  northern  island  of  New  Zealand), 
and  he  thought  he  would  land  there. 

*  Green  jasper. 

f  Obsidian,  withwWch  the  natives  grind  down  the  jasper. 


DISCOVERY    OF    NEW    ZEALAND.  133 

Then  lie  thought  again,  lest  he  and  his  enemy 
should  be  too  close  to  one  another,  and  should 
quarrel  again,  that  it  would  be  better  for  him  to  go 
further  off  with  his  jasper,  a  very  long  way  off.  So 
he  carried  it  off  with  him,  and  they  coasted  along, 
and  at  length  arrived  at  Arahura  (on  the  west  coast 
of  the  middle  island),  and  he  made  that  an  ever- 
lasting resting-place  for  his  jasper  ;  then  he  broke 
off  a  portion  of  his  jasper,  and  took  it  with  him 
and  returned,  and  as  he  coasted  along  he  at  length 
reached  Wairere  (believed  to  be  upon  the  east 
coast  of  tlie  northern  island),  and  he  visited  Whan- 
gaparoa  and  Tauranga,  and  from  thence  he  returned 
direct  to  Hawaiki,  and  reported  that  he  had 
discovered  a  new  country  which  produced  the  moa 
and  jasper  in  abundance.  He  now  manufactured 
sharp  axes  from  his  jasper ;  two  axes  were  made 
from  it,  Tutauru  and  Hau-hau-te-rangi.  He  manu- 
factured some  portions  of  one  piece  of  it  into 
images  for  neck  ornaments,  and  some  portions  into 
ear  ornaments  ;  the  name  of  one  of  these  ear  orna- 
ments was  Kaukau-matua,  which  was  recently  in 
the  possession  of  Te  Heuheu,  and  was  only  lost  in 
1846,  when  he  was  killed  with  so  many  of  his 
tribe  by  a  landslip.  The  axe  Tutauru  was  only 
lately  lost  by  Puraliokura  and  his  brother  Reretai, 
who  were  descended  from  Tama-ihu-toroa.  When 
Ngahue,  retm-ning,  arrived  again  in  Hawaiki,   he 


134;  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

found  tliem  all  engaged  in  war,  and  when  they 
heard  his  description  of  the  beauty  of  this  country 
of  Aotea,  some  of  them  determined  to  come  here. 


CONSTRUCTION   OF    CAXOES    TO    ESIIGRATE   TO    NEW    ZEALAND. 

They  then  felled  a  totara  tree  in  Rarotonga, 
which  lies  on  the  other  side  of  Hawaiki,  that  they 
might  build  the  Arawa  from  it.  The  tree  was 
felled,  and  thus  the  canoe  was  hewn  out  from  it  and 
finished.  The  names  of  the  men  who  built  this 
canoe  were,  Rata,  Wahie-roa,  Ngahue,  Paiata,  and 
some  other  skilful  men,  who  helped  to  hew  out  the 
Arawa  and  to  finish  it. 

A  chief  of  the  name  of  Hotu-roa,  hearing  that  the 
Arawa  was  built,  and  wishing  to  accompany  them, 
came  to  Tama-te-kapua  and  asked  him  to  lend  him 
his  workmen  to  hew  out  some  canoes  for  him  too, 
and  they  went  and  built  and  finished  the  Tainui 
and  some  other  canoes. 

The  workmen  above  mentioned  are  those  who 
built  the  canoes  in  which  our  forefathers  crossed  the 
ocean  to  this  island,  to  Aotea-roa.  The  names  of 
the  canoes  were  as  follows  :  the  Arawa  was  first 
completed,  then  Tainui,  then  Matatua,  and  Tald- 
tumu,  and  Kura-hau-po,  and  Toko-maru,  and 
Matawhaorua.  These  are  the  names  of  the  canoes 
in  which  our  forefathers  departed  from  Hawaiki, 


PEEPARATIONS    TO    EVIIGEATE. 


135 


and  crossed  to  this  island.  When  they  had  lashed 
the  topsides  on  to  the  Tainui,  Rata  slew  the  son  of 
Manaia,  and  hid  his  body  in  the  chips  and  shavings 
of  the  canoes.  The  names  of  the  axes  with  which 
they  hewed  out  these  canoes  were  Hauhau-te-Rangi, 
and  Tutauru.  Tutauru  was  the  axe  with  which 
they  cut  off  the  head  of  Uenuku. 

All  these  axes  were  made  from  the  block  of  green 
stone  brought  back  by  Ngahue  to  Hawaiki,  wliicli 
was  called  "The  fish  of  Ngahue/'  He  had  pre- 
viously come  to  these  islands  fi'om  Hawaiki,  when 
he  was  driven  out  from  thence  by  Hine-tu-a-hoanga, 
whose  fish  or  stone  was  Obsidian.  From  that  cause 
Ngahue  came  to  these  islands  ;  the  canoes  which 
afterwards  arrived  here  came  in  consequence  of  his 
discovery. 


lAUHCHlNU   A   CANOE. 


THE  VOYAGE  TO  NEW  ZEALAND. 

When  the  canoes  were  built  and  ready  for  sea. 
they  were  dragged  afloat,  the  separate  lading  of 
each  canoe  was  collected  and  put  on  board,  with 
all  the  crews.  Tama-te-kapua  then  remembered 
that  he  had  no  skilful  priest  on  board  his  canoe, 
and  he  thought  the  best  thing  he  could  do  was 
to  outwit  Ngatoro-i-rangi,  the  chief  who  had 
command  of  the  Tainui.  So  just  as  his  canoe 
shoved  off,  he  called  out  to  Ngatoro,  "  I  say, 
Ngatoro,  just  come  on  board  my  canoe,  and  per- 
form the  necessary  religious  rites  for  me."  Then 
the  priest  Ngatoro  came  on  board,  and  Tama-te- 
kapua  said  to  him,  "  You  had  better  also  call  your 
wife,  Kearoa  on  board,  that  she  may  make  the 
canoe  clean  or  common,  with  an  offering  of  sea- 
weed to  be  laid  in  the  canoe  instead  of  an  offering 
of  fish,  for  you  know  the  second  fish  caught  in  a 
canoe,  or  seaweed,  or  some  substitute,  ought  to  be 


THE    VOYAGE    TO    NEW    ZEALAND.  137 

offered  for  the  females,  the  first  for  the  males  ; 
then  my  canoe  will  be  quite  common,  for  all  the 
ceremonies  will  have  been  observed,  which  should 
be  followed  with  canoes  made  by  priests.  Ngatoro 
assented  to  all  tliis,  and  called  his  wife,  and  they 
both  got  into  Tama's  canoe.  The  very  moment 
they  were  on  board,  Tama'  called  out  to  the  men  on 
board  his  canoe,  "  Heave  up  the  anchors  and  make 
sail ;"  and  he  carried  off  with  him  Ngatoro  and  his 
wife,  that  he  might  have  a  priest  and  wise  man  on 
board  his  canoe.  Then  they  up  with  the  fore-sail, 
the  main-sail,  and  the  mizen,  and  away  shot  the 
canoe. 

Up  then  came  Ngatoro  from  below,  and  said, 
"  Shorten  sail,  that  we  may  go  more  slowly,  lest  I 
miss  my  own  canoe."  And  Tama' replied,  "Oh,  no, 
no  ;  wait  a  little,  and  your  canoe  will  follow  after 
us."  For  a  short  time  it  kept  near  them,  but 
soon  dropped  more  and  more  astern,  and  when 
darkness  overtook  them,  on  they  sailed,  each  canoe 
proceeding  on  its  own  course. 

Two  thefts  were  upon  this  occasion  perpetrated 
by  Tama-te-kapua  ;  he  carried  off  the  wife  of  Ruaeo, 
and  Ngatoro  and  liis  wife,  on  board  the  Arawa.  He 
made  a  fool  of  Ruaeo  too,  for  he  said  to  him,  "  Oh, 
Rua',  you,  like  a  good  fellow,  just  run  back  to  the 
village  and  fetch  me  my  axe  Tutauru,  I  pushed  it  in 
under  the  sill  of  the  window  of  my  house."     And 


138  POLYNESIAN   ItlYTHOLOGY. 

Rua'  was  foolish  enough  to  run  back  to  the  house. 
Then  off  went  Tama'  with  the  canoe,  and  when 
Rua'  came  back  again,  the  canoe  was  so  far  off  that 
its  sails  did  not  look  much  bigger  than  little  flies. 
So  he  fell  to  weeping  for  all  his  goods  on  board 
the  canoe,  and  for  his  wife  Whakaoti-rangi,  whom 
Tama-te-kapua  had  carried  off  as  a  wife  for  himself. 
Tama-te-kapua  committed  these  two  great  thefts 
when  he  sailed  for  these  islands.  Hence  this  pro- 
verb, "  A  descendant  of  Tama-te-kapua  will  steal 
anything  he  can." 

When  evening  came  on,  Rua'  tlu-ew  himself  into 
the  water,  as  a  preparation  for  his  incantations  to 
recover  his  wife,  and  he  then  changed  the  stars  of 
evening  into  the  stars  of  morning,  and  those  of  the 
morning  into  the  stars  of  the  evening,  and  this  was 
accomplished.  In  the  meantime  the  Arawa  scudded 
away  far  out  on  the  ocean,  and  Ngatoro  thought  to 
himself,  "  What  a  rate  this  canoe  goes  at — what  a 
vast  space  we  have  ah*eady  traversed.  I  know 
what  I'll  do,  I'll  climb  up  upon  the  roof  of  the 
house  which  is  built  on  the  platform  joining  the 
two  canoes,  and  try  to  get  a  glimpse  of  the  land  in 
the  horizon,  and  ascertain  whether  we  are  near  it, 
or  very  far  off."  But  in  the  first  place  he  felt  some 
suspicions  about  his  wife,  lest  Tama-te-kapua  should 
steal  her  too,  for  he  had  found  out  what  a  treacher- 
ous person  he  was.      So  he  took  a  string  and  tied 


THE    VOYAGE    TO    NEW    ZEALAND.  139 

one  end  of  it  to  his  wife's  hair,  and  kept  the 
other  end  of  the  string  in  his  hand,  and  then  he 
climbed  up  on  the  roof.  He  had  hardly  got  on  the 
top  of  the  roof  when  Tama'  laid  hold  of  his  wife, 
and  he  cunningly  untied  tlie  end  of  the  string  which 
Ngatoro  had  fastened  to  her  hair,  and  made  it  fast 
to  one  of  the  beams  of  the  canoe,  and  Ngatoro  feel- 
ina;;  it  tiftht  thought  his  wife  had  not  moved,  and 
that  it  was  still  fast  to  her.  At  last  Ngatoro  came 
down  again,  and  Tama-te-kapua  heard  the  noise  of 
his  steps  as  he  was  coming,  but  he  had  not  time  to 
get  the  string  tied  fast  to  the  hair  of  Kearoa's 
head  again,  but  he  jumped  as  fast  as  he  could  into 
his  own  berth,  which  was  next  to  that  of  Ngatoro, 
and  Ngatoro,  to  his  surprise,  found  one  end  of  the 
string  tied  fast  to  the  beam  of  the  canoe. 

Then  he  knew  that  his  wife  had  been  disturbed 
by  Tama',  and  he  asked  her,  saying,  "  Oh,  wife,  has 
not  some  one  disturbed  you  ?"  Then  his  wife  re- 
phed  to  him,  "Cannot  you  tell  that  from  the  string- 
being  fastened  to  the  beam  of  the  canoe?"  And 
then  he  asked  her,  "Who  was  it?"  And  she  said, 
"  Who  was  it,  indeed  ?  Could  it  be  any  one  else  but 
Tama-te-kapua?"  Then  her  husband  said  to  her, 
"  You  are  a  noble  woman  indeed  thus  to  confess 
this  ;  you  have  gladdened  my  heart  by  this  confes- 
sion ;  I  thought  after  Tama'  had  carried  us  both  off 
in  this  way,  that  he  would  have  acted  generously,  and 


140  POLYNESIAN    SnTHOLOGY 

not  loosely  in  this  manner ;  but,  since  he  has  dealt 
in  this  way,  I  will  now  have  my  revenge  on  him." 

Then  that  priest  again  went  forth  upon  the  roof 
of  the  house  and  stood  there,  and  he  called  aloud  to 
the  heavens,  in  the  same  way  that  R.ua'  did,  and  he 
changed  the  stars  of  the  evening  into  those  of  morn- 
ing, and  he  raised  the  winds  that  they  should  blow 
upon  the  prow  of  the  canoe,  and  drive  it  astern,  and 
the  crew  of  the  canoe  were  at  their  wits'  end,  and 
quite  forgot  their  skill  as  seamen,  and  the  canoe 
drew  straight  into  the  whirlpool,  called  "  The  throat 
of  Te  Parata,''*  and  dashed  right  into  that  whirlpool. 

The  canoe  became  engulphed  by  the  whirlpool, 
and  its  prow  disappeared  in  it.  In  a  moment  the 
waters  reached  the  first  bailing  place  in  the  bows, 
in  another  second  they  reached  the  second  bailing 
place  in  the  centre,  and  the  canoe  now  appeared  to 
be  going  down  into  the  whirlpool  head  foremost ; 
then  up  started  Hei,  but  before  he  could  rise  they 
had  already  sunk  far  into  the  whirlpool.  Next  the 
rush  of  waters  was  heard  by  Ihenga,  who  slept 
forward,  and  he  shouted  out,  "  Oh,  Ngatoro,  oh,  we 
are  settling  down  head  first.  The  pillow  of  your 
wife  Kearoa  has  already  fallen  from  under  her 
head  I"  Ngatoro  sat  astern  Hstening ;  the  same 
cries  of  distress  reached  him  a  second  time.      Then 

*  The  people  of  New  Zealand  have  another  name  for  this  whirl- 
pool ;  they  call  it,  "  the  steep  descent  where  the  world  ends."  , 


THE  VOYAGE  TO  NEW  ZEALAND.     141 

up  sprang  Tama-te-kapua,  aud  he  in  despair  shouted 
out,  "  Oh,  Ngatoro,  Ngatoro,  aloft  there !  Do  you 
hear  ?  The  canoe  is  gone  down  so  much  by  the 
bow,  that  Kearoa's  pillow  has  rolled  fi-om  under  her 
head."  The  priest  heard  them,  but  neither  moved 
nor  answered  until  he  heard  the  goods  rolling  from 
the  decks  and  splashing  into  the  water ;  the  crew 
meanwhile  held  on  to  the  canoe  with  their  hands 
with  great  difficulty,  some  of  them  having  already 
fallen  into  the  sea. 

When  these  things  all  took  place,  the  heart  of 
Ngatoro  was  moved  with  pity,  for  he  heard,  too, 
the  slu-ieks  and  cries  of  the  men,  and  the  weeping 
of  the  women  and  children.  Then  up  stood  that 
mighty  man  again,  and  by  his  incantations  changed 
the  aspect  of  the  heavens,  so  that  the  storm  ceased, 
and  he  repeated  another  incantation  to  draw  the 
canoe  back  out  of  the  whirlpool,  that  is,  to  hft 
it  up  again. 

Lo,  the  canoe  rose  up  from  the  whirlpool,  float- 
ing rightly ;  but,  although  the  canoe  itself  thus 
floated  out  of  the  whirlpool,  a  great  part  of  its 
lading  had  been  thrown  out  into  the  water,  a  few 
things  only  were  saved,  and  remained  in  the  canoe. 
A  great  part  of  their  provisions  were  lost  as  the 
canoe  was  sinking  into  the  whirlpool.  Thence 
comes  the  native  proverb,  if  they  can  give  a 
stranger  but  little  food,  or  only  make  a  present  of 


14)2  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY, 

a  small  basket  of  food,  "  Oh,  it  is  the  half-filled 
basket  of  Whakaoti-rangi,  for  she  only  managed  to 
save  a  very  small  part  of  her  provisions."  Then 
they  sailed  on,  and  landed  at  Whanga-Paraoa,  in 
Aotea  here.  As  they  drew  near  to  land,  they 
saw  with  surprise  some  pohutukawa  trees  of  the 
sea-coast,  covered  with  beautiful  i-ed  flowers,  and 
the  still  water  reflected  back  the  redness  of  the 
trees. 

Then  one  of  the  chiefs  of  the  canoe  cried  out  to 
his  messmates,  "  See  there,  red  ornaments  for  the 
head  are  much  more  plentiful  in  this  country  than 
in  Hawaiki,  so  I  Tl  throw  my  red  head  ornaments 
into  the  water  ;"  and,  so  saying,  he  threw  them  into 
the  sea.  The  name  of  that  man  was  Tauninihi  ; 
the  name  of  the  red  head  ornament  he  threw  into 
the  sea  was  Taiwhakaea.  Tlie  moment  they  got 
on  shore  they  run  to  gather  the  pohutukawa 
flowers,  but  no  sooner  did  they  touch  them  than 
the  flowers  fell  to  pieces  ;  then  they  found  out  that 
these  red  head  ornaments  were  nothing  but  flowers. 
All  the  chiefs  on  board  the  Arawa  were  then  troubled 
that  they  should  have  been  so  foolish  as  to  throw 
away  their  red  head  ornaments  into  the  sea.  Veiy 
shortly  afterwards  the  ornaments  of  Tauninihi  were 
found  by  Mahina  on  the  beach  of  Mahiti.  As  soon 
as  Tauninihi  heard  they  had  been  picked  up,  he  ran 
to  Mahina  to  cret  them  a&iin,  but  Mahina  would 


THE    VOYAGE    TO    NEW    ZEALAND.  143 

not  give  them  up  to  him  ;  thence  this  proverb  for 
anything  which  has  been  lost  and  is  found  by 
another  person,  "  I  will  not  give  it  up,  '  t  is  the  red 
head  ornainent  which  Mahina  found." 

As  soon  as  the  party  landed  at  Whanga-Paraoa, 
they  planted  sweet  potatoes,  that  they  might  gTow 
there  ;  and  they  are  still  to  be  found  growing  on 
the  cliffs  at  that  place. 

Then  the  crew,  wearied  from  the  voyage,  wan- 
dered idly  along  the  shore,  and  there  they  found 
the  fresh  carcase  of  a  sperm  whale  stranded  upon 
the  beach.  The  Tainui  had  ah-eady  arrived  in  the 
same  neighbourhood,  although  they  did  not  at  first 
see  that  canoe  nor  the  people  who  had  come  in  it ; 
when,  however,  they  met,  they  began  to  dispute  as 
to  who  had  landed  first  and  first  found  the  dead 
whale,  and  as  to  which  canoe  it  consequently  be- 
longed ;  so,  to  settle  the  question,  they  agreed  to 
examine  the  sacred  place  which  each  party  had  set 
up  to  return  thanks  in  to  the  gods  for  their  safe 
arrival,  that  they  might  see  which  had  been  longest 
built ;  and,  doing  so,  they  found  that  the  posts  of 
the  sacred  place  put  up  by  the  Arawa  were  quite 
green,  wliilst  the  posts  of  the  sacred  place  set  up 
by  the  Tainui  had  evidently  been  carefully  dried 
over  the  fire  before  they  had  been  fixed  in  the 
gi'ound.  The  people  who  had  come  in  the  Tainui 
also  showed  part  of  a  rope  which  they  had  made 


144  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

fast  to  its  jaw-bone.  When  these  things  were  seen,  it 
was  admitted  that  the  whale  belonged  to  the  people 
who  came  in  the  Taimii,  and  it  was  surrendered  to 
them.  And  the  people  in  the  Aravva,  determining 
to  separate  from  those  in  the  Taiimi,  selected  some 
of  their  crew  to  explore  the  country  in  a  north-west 
direction,  following  the  coast  line.  The  canoe  then 
coasted  along,  the  land  party  following  it  along 
the  shore;  this  was  made  up  of  140  men,  whose 
chief  was  Taikehu,  and  these  gave  to  a  place  the 
name   of  Te  E.anga  of  Taikehu. 

The  Tainui  left  Whanga-Paraoa  *  shortly  after  the 
Arawa,  and,  proceeding  nearly  in  the  same  direction 
as  the  Arawa,  made  the  Gulf  of  Hauraki,  and  then 
coasted  along  to  Rakau-mangamanga,  or  Cape  Brett, 
and  to  the  island  with  an  arched  passage  through  it, 
called  Motukokako,  which  lies  off  the  cape  ;  thence 
they  ran  along  the  coast  to  Whiwhia,  and  to  Te 
Aukanapanapa,  and  to  Muri-whenua,  or  the  country 
near  the  North  Cape.  Finding  that  the  land  ended 
there,  they  returned  again  along  the  coast  until  they 
reached  the  Tamaki,  and  landed  there,  and  after- 
wards proceeded  up  the  creek  to  Tau-oma,  or  the 
portage,  where  they  were  surprised  to  see  flocks  of 
sea-gulls  and  oyster-catchers  passing  over  from  the 
westward  ;   so  they  went  off  to  explore  the  country 

*  Whanga-Paraoa,  the  hay  of  the  sperm  whale,  so  called  from  the 
whale  found  there. 


PRIESTESS    PERFORMING     INCANTATIONS. 


THE    VOYAGE    TO    NEW    ZEALAND.  145 

in  that  direction,  and  to  their  great  surprise  found 
a  large  sheet  of  water  lying  immediately  behind 
them,  so  they  determined  to  drag  their  canoes  over 
the  portage  at  a  place  they  named  Otahuhu,  and  to 
launch  them  again  on  the  vast  sheet  of  salt-water 
which  they  had  found. 

The  first  canoe  which  they  hauled  across  was  the 
Toko-maru — that  they  got  across  without  difiiculty. 
They  next  began  to  drag  the  Tainui  over  the 
isthmus ;  they  hauled  away  at  it  in  vain,  they 
could  not  stir  it ;  for  one  of  the  wives  of  Hoturoa, 
named  Marama-kiko-hura,  who  was  unwilhng  that 
the  tired  crews  should  proceed  further  on  this  new 
expedition,  had  by  her  enchantments  fixed  it  so 
firmly  to  the  earth  that  no  human  strength  could 
stir  it ;  so  they  hauled,  they  hauled,  they  excited 
themselves  with  cries  and  cheers,  but  they  hauled 
in  vain,  they  cried  aloud  in  vain,  they  could  not 
move  it.  When  their  strength  was  quite  exhausted 
by  these  efibrts,  then  another  of  the  wives  of  Ho- 
turoa, more  learned  in  magic  and  incantations  than 
Marama-kiko-hura,  grieved  at  seeing  the  exhaustion 
and  distress  of  her  people,  rose  up,  and  chanted 
forth  an  incantation  far  more  powerful  than  that 
of  Marama-kiko-hura ;  then  at  once  the  canoe 
glided  easily  over  the  carefully-laid  skids,  and  it 
soon  floated  securely  upon  the  harbour  of  Manuka, 
The    willing    crews     urged    on    the    canoes    with 


146  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

their  paddles ;  tliey  soon  discovered  the  mouth  of 
the  harbour  upon  the  west  coast,  and  passed  out 
through  it  into  the  open  sea ;  they  coasted  along 
the  western  coast  to  the  southwards,  and  discover- 
ing the  small  port  of  Kawhia,  they  entered  it, 
and,  hauling  up  their  canoe,  fixed  themselves  there 
for  the  time,  whilst  the  Ai-awa  was  left  at  Ma- 
ketu. 

We  now  return  to  the  Arawa.  We  left  the 
people  of  it  at  Tauranga.  That  canoe  next  floated  at 
Motiti ;  *  they  named  that  place  after  a  spot  in  Ha- 
waiki  (because  there  was  no  firewood  there).  Next 
Tia,  to  commemorate  his  name,  called  the  place 
now  known  by  the  name  of  Rangiuru,  Takapu-o- 
tapui-ika-nui-a-Tia.  Then  Hei  stood  up  and  called 
out,  "  I  name  that  place  Takapu-o-wai-tahanui-a- 
Hei  ;''  the  name  of  that  place  is  now  Otawa.  Then 
stood  up  Tama-te-kapua,  and  pointing  to  the  place 
now  called  the  Heads  of  Maketu,  he  called  out, 
"  I  name  that  place  Te  Kuraetanga-o-te-ihu-o-Tama- 
te-kapua/'  Next  Kahu  called  a  place,  after  his 
name,  Motiti- nui-a-Kahu. 

Ruaeo,  who  had  ah-eady  arrived  at  Maketu, 
started  up.  He  was  the  fii'st  to  arrive  there  in  his 
canoe — the  Pukeatea-wai-nui — for  he  had  been  left 
behind  by  the  Arawa,  and  his  wife  Whakaoti-rangi 

*  Kei  Motiti  koe  e  nobo  ana  ; — "  I  suppose  you  are  at  Motiti,  as 
you  can  find  no  firewood." 


THE   VOYAGE   TO    NEW   ZEALAND.  147 

liad  been  cariied  off  by  Tama-fce-Kapua,  and  after 
the  Arawa  had  left  he  had  sailed  in  his  own  canoe 
for  these  islands,  and  landed  at  Maketu,  and  his 
canoe  reached  land  the  first ;  well,  he  started  up, 
cast  his  line  into  the  sea,  with  the  hooks  attached 
to  it,  and  they  got  fast  in  one  of  the  beams  of  the 
Arawa,  and  it  was  pulled  ashore  by  him  (whilst 
the  crew  were  asleep),  and  the  hundred  and  forty 
men  who  had  accompanied  him  stood  upon  the 
beach  of  Maketu,  with  skids  all  ready  laid,  and  the 
Arawa  was  by  them  dragged  upon  the  shore  in  the 
night,  and  left  there  ;  and  Ruaeo  seated  himself 
under  the  side  of  the  Arawa,  and  played  upon  his 
flute,  and  the  music  woke  his  wife,  and  she  said, 
"  Dear  me,  that 's  Rua' ! "  and  when  she  looked, 
there  he  was  sitting  under  the  side  of  the  canoe  ; 
and  they  passed  the  night  together. 

At  last  Rua'  said,  "  O  mother  of  my  children, 
go  back  now  to  your  new  husband,  and  presently 
I  '11  play  upon  the  flute  and  putorino,  so  that  botli 
you  and  Tama-te-Kapua  may  hear.  Then  do  you 
say  to  Tama-te-Kapua,  '  O  !  la,  I  had  a  dream  in 
the  night  that  I  heard  Rua  playing  a  tune  upon 
his  flute,'  and  that  will  make  him  so  jealous  that 
he  will  give  you  a  blow,  and  then  you  can  run 
away  from  him  again,  as  if  you  were  in  a  rage  and 
hurt,  and  you  can  come  to  me/' 

Then   Whakaoti-rangi  returned,    and  lay  down 

H  2 


14:8  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

by  Tama-te-kapua,  and  she  did  everything  exactly 
as  B,ua'  had  told  her,  and  Tama'  began  to  beat  her 
(and  she  ran  away  fi'om  him).  Early  in  the 
morning  E,ua'  performed  incantations,  by  wliicli  he 
kept  all  the  people  in  the  canoe  in  a  profound  sleep, 
and  wliilst  they  still  slept  from  liis  enchantments, 
the  sun  rose,  and  mounted  high  up  in  the  heavens. 
In  the  forenoon,  E,ua'  gave  the  canoe  a  heavy 
blow  with  his  club ;  they  all  started  up ;  it  was 
almost  noon,  and  when  they  looked  down  over  the 
edge  of  their  canoe,  there  were  the  hundred  and 
forty  men  of  Rua'  sitting  under  them,  aU  beau- 
tifully dressed  with  feathers,  as  if  they  had  been 
living  on  the  Gannet  Island,  in  the  channel  of 
Karewa,  where  feathers  are  so  abundant ;  and  when 
the  crew  of  the  Ai'awa  heard  this,  they  all  rushed 
upon  deck,  and  saw  Rua'  standing  in  the  midst  of 
his  one  hundred  and  forty  warriors. 

Then  Rua'  shouted  out  as  he  stood,  "  Come 
here,  Tama-te-kapua  ;  let  us  two  fight  the  battle, 
you  and  I  alone.  If  you  are  stronger  than  I  am, 
well  and  good,  let  it  be  so  ;  if  I  am  stronger  than 
you  are,  I  '11  dash  you  to  the  earth." 

Up  sprang  then  the  hero  Tama-te-kapua  ;  he  held 
a  carved  two-handed  sword,  a  sword  the  handle  of 
wliich  was  decked  with  i-ed  feathers,  Rua'  held  a 
similar  weapon.  Tama'  first  struck  a  fierce  blow  at 
Rua'.      Rua'  parried  it,  and  it  glanced  harmlessly 


THE    VOYAGE    TO    NEW    ZEALAND.  149 

off;  then  E.ua'  threw  away  his  sword,  and  seized 
both  the  arms  of  Tama-te-kapua ;  he  held  his  arms 
and  his  sword,  and  dashed  him  to  the  earth.  Tama' 
half  rose,  and  was  again  dashed  downi ;  once  more 
he  almost  rose,  and  was  thrown  again.  Still  Tama' 
fiercely  struggled  to  rise  and  renew  the  fight.  For 
the  fourth  time  he  almost  rose  up,  then  Rua', 
overcome  with  rage,  took  a  heap  of  vermin  (tliis  he 
had  prepared  for  the  purpose,  to  cover  Tama'  with 
insult  and  shame),  and  rubbed  them  on  Tama-te- 
kapua's  head  and  ear,  and  they  adhered  so  fast 
that  Tama'  tried  in  vain  to  get  them  out. 

Then  Rua'  said,  "  There,  I  've  beaten  you ;  now 
keep  the  woman,  as  a  payment  for  the  insults  I  've 
heaped  upon  you,  and  for  having  been  beaten  by 
me."  But  Tama'  did  not  hear  a  word  he  said  ; 
he  was  ahnost  driven  mad  with  the  pain  and 
itching,  and  could  do  nothing  but  stand  scratcliing 
and  rubbing  his  head ;  whilst  Rua'  departed  with 
his  hundred  and  forty  men,  to  seek  some  other 
dwelling-place  for  themselves ;  if  they  had  tm-ned 
against  Tama'  and  his  people  to  fight  against  them, 
they  would  have  slain  them  all. 

These  men  were  giants — Tama-te-kapua  was 
nine  feet  high,  Rua'  was  eleven  feet  high  ;  there 
have  been  no  men  since  that  time  so  taU  as  those 
heroes.  The  only  man  of  these  later  times  who 
was  as  tall  as  these  was  Tu-hou-rangi :  he  was  nine 
feet  high  ;  he  was  six  feet  up  to  the  arm-pits.    This 


150  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

generation  have  seen  liis  bones,  they  used  to  be 
always  set  up  by  the  priests  in  the  sacred  places 
when  they  were  made  high  places  for  the  sacred 
sacrifices  of  the  natives,  at  the  times  the  potatoes 
and  sweet  potatoes  were  dug  iip,  and  when  the 
fishing  season  commenced,  and  ""when  they  attacked 
an  enemy  ;  then  might  be  seen  the  people  collect- 
ing, in  their  best  garments,  and  with  their  orna- 
ments, on  the  days  when  the  priests  exposed  Tu-hou- 
rangi's  bones  to  their  view.  At  the  time  that  the 
island  Mokoia,  in  tlie  lake  of  Roto-rua,  was  stormed 
and  taken  by  the  Nga-Pulii,  they  probably  carried 
those  bones  ofi",  for  they  have  not  since  been  seen. 

After  the  dispute  between  Tama-te-kapua  and 
Rua'  took  place,  Tama'  and  his  party  dwelt  at 
Maketu,  and  their  descendants  after  a  little  time 
spread  to  other  places.  Ngatoro-i-rangi  went,  how- 
ever, about  the  country,  and  where  he  found  dry 
valleys,  stamped  on  the  earth,  and  brought  forth 
springs  of  water  ;  he  also  visited  the  mountains, 
and  placed  Patupaiarehe,  or  fairies,  there,  and  then 
returned  to  Maketu  and  dwelt  there. 

After  this  a  dispute  arose  between  Tama-te- 
kapua  and  Kahu-mata-momoe,  and  in  consequence 
of  that  disturbance,  Tama'  and  Ngatoro  removed 
to  Tauranga,  and  found  Taikehu  living  there,  and 
collecting  food  for  them  (by  fishing),  and  that  place 
was  called  by  them  Te  Ranga-a-Taihehu  ;  *  it  hes 
•  The  fishing  bank  of  Taikeliu. 


-K'^/^  '  '^^     \i 


CHIEF     LYING    IN     STATE. 


THE    VOYAGE    TO    NEW    ZEALAND.  151 

beyond  Motu-lioa ;  then  they  departed  from  Tau- 
ranga,  and  stopped  at  Kati-kati,  where  they  ate 
food.  Tama's  men  devoured  the  food  very  fast, 
whilst  he  kept  on  only  nibbling  his,  therefore  they 
apphed  this  circumstance  as  a  name  for  the  place, 
and  called  it  "  Kati-kati-o-Tama-te-kapua,"  the  nib- 
bling of  Tama-te-kapua ;  then  they  halted  at  Whaka- 
hau,  so  called  because  they  here  ordered  food  to  be 
cooked,  which  they  did  not  stop  to  eat,  but  went 
right  on  with  Ngatoro,  and  this  circumstance  gave 
its  name  to  the  place ;  and  they  went  on  from 
place  to  place  till  they  arrived  at  Whitianga,  which 
they  so  called  from  their  crossing  the  river  there, 
and  they  continued  going  from  one  place  to  another 
till  they  came  to  Tangiaro,  and  Nga.toro  stuck  up 
a  stone  and  left  it  there,  and  they  dwelt  in  Moe- 
hau  and  Hau-raki. 

They  occupied  those  places  as  a  permanent  resi- 
dence, and  Tama-te-kapua  died,  and  was  buried 
there.  When  he  was  dying,  he  ordered  his  children 
to  return  to  Maketu,  to  visit  his  relations ;  and  they 
assented,  and  went  back.  If  the  children  of 
Tama-te-kapua  had  remained  at  Hau-raki,  that 
place  would  now  have  been  left  to  them  as  a  j)OS- 
session. 

Tama-te-kapua,  when  dying,  told  his  children 
where  the  j^recious  ear-drop  Kaukau-matua  was, 
which  he  had   hidden    under    the    Avindow   of  his 


152  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

house ;  and  his  children  returned  with  Ngatoro  to 
Maketu,  and  dwelt  there  ;  and  as  soon  as  Ngatoro 
arrived,  he  went  to  the  waters  to  bathe  himself,  as 
he  had  come  there  in  a  state  of  tapu,  upon  account 
of  his  having  buried  Tama-te-kapua,  and  having 
bathed,  he  then  became  fi-ee  from  the  tcqyu  and 
clean. 

Ngatoro  then  took  the  daughter  of  Ihenga  to 
wife,  and  he  went  and  searched  for  the  precious 
ear-drop  Kaukau-matua,  and  found  it,  as  Tama-te- 
kapua  had  told  them.  After  this  the  wife  of 
Kahu-mata-momoe  conceived  a  cliild. 

At  this  time  Ihenga,  taking  some  dogs  with  him 
to  catch  kiwi's*  with,  went  to  Paritangi  by  way  of 
Hakomiti,  and  a  kiwi  was  chased  bv  one  of  his 
dogs,  and  caught  in  a  lake,  and  the  dog  eat  some 
of  the  fish  and  shell-fish  in  the  lake,  after  diving  in 
the  water  to  get  them,  and  returned  to  its  master 
carrying  the  captured  kiwi  in  its  mouth,  and  on 
reaching  its  master,  it  dropped  the  kiwi,  and 
vomited  up  the  raw  fish  and  shell-fish  which  it 
had  ea^^n. 

When  Ihenga  saw  liis  dog  wet  all  over,  and  the 
fish  it  had  vomited  up,  he  knew  there  was  a  lake 
there,  and  was  extremely  glad,  and  returned  joy- 
fully to  Maketu,  and  there  he  had  the  usual  reli- 
gious ceremonies  which  follow  the  birth  of  a  child 

^  *  Apterix  Australis. 


THE  VOYAGE  TO  NEW  ZEALAND.      153 

performed  over  his  wife  and  the  child  she  had  given 
birth  to  ;  and  when  tliis  had  been  done,  he  went 
to  explore  the  country  which  he  had  previously 
visited  with  his  dog. 

To  his  gTeat  surprise  he  discovered  a  lake  :  it  was 
Lake  Roto-iti ;  he  left  a  mark  there  to  show  that  he 
claimed  it  as  his  own.  He  went  further  and  dis- 
covered Lake  E.oto-rua  ;  he  saw  that  its  waters  were 
running ;  he  left  there  also  a  mark  to  show  that  he 
claimed  the  lake  as  his  own.  As  he  went  along 
the  side  of  the  lake,  he  found  a  man  occupymg  the 
ground;  then  he  thought  to  himself  that  he  would 
endeavoiu-  to  gain  possession  of  it  by  craft,  so  he 
looked  out  for  a  spot  fit  for  a  sacred  place,  where 
men  could  offer  up  their  prayers,  and  for  another 
spot  fit  for  a  sacred  place,  where  nets  could  be 
hung  up ,  and  he  found  fit  spots  ;  then  he  took 
suitable  stones  to  surround  the  sacred  place  with, 
and  old  pieces  of  seaweed,  looking  as  if  they  had 
years  ago  been  employed  as  offerings,  and  he  went 
into  the  middle  of  the  shrubbery,  thick  with  boughs 
of  the  taha  shrub,  of  the  koromuka,  and  of  the 
karamu ;  there  he  stuck  up  the  posts  of  the  sacred 
place  in  the  midst  of  the  shrubs,  and  tied  bunches 
of  flax-leaves  on  the  posts,  and  having  done  this, 
he  went  to  visit  the  village  of  the  people  who  hved 
there. 

They  saw  some  one  approaching,  and  cried   out, 

H   3 


154  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

'•A  stranger,  a  stranger,  is  coming  here  I"  As  soon 
as  Ihenga  heard  these  cries,  he  sat  down  upon  the 
ground,  and  then,  without  waiting  for  the  people  of 
the  place  to  begin  the  speeches,  he  jumped  up,  and 
commenced  to  speak  tlius  :  "  What  theft  is  tliis,  what 
theft  is  this  of  the  people  here,  that  they  are  taking 
away  my  land  ? "  for  he  saw  that  they  had  their 
store-houses  full  of  prepared  fern-roots  and  of  dried 
fish,  and  shell-fish,  and  their  heaps  of  fishing-nets, 
so  as  he  spoke,  he  appeared  to  swell  with  rage,  and 
his  throat  appeared  to  grow  large  fi'om  passion  as  he 
talked — "Who  authorised  you  to  come  here,  and 
take  possession  of  my  place  ?  Be  ofi",  be  off",  be 
off  I  leave  alone  the  place  of  the  man  who  speaks 
to  you,  to  whom  it  has  belonged  for  a  very  long 
time,  for  a  very  long  time  indeed/' 

Then  Maru-punga-nui,  the  son  of  Tua-Roto-rua, 
the  man  to  whom  the  place  really  belonged,  said  to 
Ihenga,  "  It  is  not  youi-  place,  it  belongs  to  me  ;  if 
it  belongs  to  you,  where  is  your  village,  where  is 
your  sacred  place,  where  is  your  net,  wliere  are 
your  cultivations  and  gardens?" 

Ihenga  answered  him,  "  Come '  here  and  see 
them/'  So  they  went  together,  and  ascended  a 
hill,  and  Ihenga  said,  "  See  there,  there  is  my  net 
hanging  up  against  the  ricks  ;"  but  it  was  no  such 
thing,  it  was  only  a  mark  like  a  net  hanging  ujd, 
caused   by  part  of  a   cliff   having  slipped    away ; 


THE  VOYAGE  TO  NEW  ZEALAND.      155 

"  and  there  are  the  posts  of  the  pine  round  my  \'il- 
lage  ;"  but  there  was  really  nothing  but  some  old 
stumps  of  trees ;  "  look  there  too  at  my  sacred 
place  a  httle  beyond  yours ;  and  now  come  with 
me,  and  see  my  sacred  place,  if  you  are  quite 
sm-e  you  see  my  village,  and  my  fishing-net — come 
along."  So  they  went  together,  and  there  he  saw 
the  sacred  place  standing  in  the  shrubbery,  until  at 
last  he  believed  Ihenga,  and  the  place  was  all  given 
up  to  Ihenga,  and  he  took  possession  of  it  and 
lived  there,  and  the  descendants  of  Tua-Eoto-rua 
departed  from  that  place,  and  a  portion  of  them, 
under  the  chiefs  Kawa-arero  and  Mata-aho,  occu- 
pied the  island  of  Mokoia,  in  Lake  Koto-rua. 

At  this  time  Ngatoro  again  went  to  stamp  on 
the  earth,  and  to  bring  forth  springs  in  places 
where  there  was  no  Avater,  and  came  out  on  the 
great  central  plains  which  surround  Lake  Taupo, 
where  a  j)iece  of  large  cloak  made  of  kiekie-leaves 
was  stripped  ofi"  by  the  bushes,  and  the  strips  took 
root,  and  became  large  trees,  nearly  as  large  as 
the  Kahikatea  tree  (they  are  called  Painanga,  and 
many  of  them  are  growing  there  still). 

Whenever  he  ascended  a  hill,  he  left  marks  there, 
to  show  that  he  claimed  it ;  the  marks  he  left  were 
fairies.  Some  of  the  generation  now  living  have 
seen  these  spirits  j  they  are  mahcious  spirits.  If  you 
take  embers  from  an  oven  in  which  food  has  been 


156  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY, 

cooked,  and  use  them  for  a  fire  in  a  house,  these 
spirits  become  offended ;  although  there  be  many- 
people  sleeping  in  that  house,  not  one  of  them 
could  escape  (the  fairies  would,  whilst  they  slept, 
press  the  whole  of  them  to  death). 

Ngatoro  went  straight  on  and  rested  at  Taupo, 
and  he  beheld  that  the  summit  of  Mount  Tongariro 
was  covered  with  snow,  and  he  was  seized  with  a 
longing  to  ascend  it,  and  he  climbed  up,  saying 
to  his  companions  who  remained  below  at  their 
encampment,  "  Remember  now,  do  not  you,  who  I 
am  going  to  leave  behind,  taste  food  from  the  time 
I  leave  you  until  I  return,  when  we  will  all  feast 
together."  Then  he  began  to  ascend  the  moun- 
tain, but  he  had  not  quite  got  to  the  summit 
when  those  he  had  left  behind  began  to  eat  food, 
and  he  therefore  found  the  greatest  difficulty  in 
reaching  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  and  the  hero 
nearly  perished  in  the  attempt. 

At  last  he  gathered  strength,  and  thought  he 
could  save  himself,  if  he  prayed  aloud  to  the  gods 
of  Hawaiki  to  send  fire  to  him,  and  to  produce 
a  volcano  upon  the  mountain  ;  (and  his  prayer  was 
answered,)  and  fire  was  given  to  him,  and  the 
mountain  became  a  volcano,  and  it  came  by  the 
way  of  Whakaari,  or  White  Island,  of  Mau-tohora, 
of  Okakaru,  of  Eoto-ehu,  of  Roto-iti,  of  Roto-rua, 
of  Tara-wera,  of  Pae-roa,  of  Orakeikorako,  and  of 


THE  VOYAGE  TO  NEW  ZEALAND.     157 

Taupo  ;  it  came  right  underneath  the  earth,  spouting 
up  at  all  the  above-mentioned  places,  and  ascended 
right  up  Tongariro,  to  him  who  was  sitting  upon  the 
top  of  the  mountain,  and  thence  the  hero  was  re- 
vived again,  and  descended,  and  returned  to  Maketu, 
and  dwelt  there. 

The  Ai-awa  had  been  laid  up  by  its  crew  at 
Maketu,  where  they  landed,  and  the  people  who  had 
arrived  with  the  party  in  the  Arawa  spread  themselves 
over  the  country,  examining  it,  some  penetrating  to 
Roto-rua,  some  to  Taupo,  some  to  Whanganui,  some 
to  Ruatahuna,  and  no  one  was  left  at  Maketu  but 
Hei'  and  his  son,  and  Tia  and  his  sou,  and  the 
usual  place  of  residence  of  Ngatoro-i-rangi  was  on 
the  island  of  Motiti.  The  people  who  came  with 
the  Tainui  were  still  in  Kawhia,  where  they  had 
landed. 

One  of  their  chiefs,  named  Baumati,  heard  that 
the  Arawa  was  laid  up  at  Maketu,  so  he  started 
with  all  his  own  immediate  dependants,  and  reacliing 
Tauranga,  halted  there,  and  in  the  evening  again 
pressed  on  towards  Maketu,  and  reached  the  bank 
of  the  river,  opposite  that  on  which  the  Arawa  was 
lying,  thatched  over  with  reeds  and  dried  branches 
and  leaves  ;  then  he  slung  a  dart,  the  point  of 
which  was  bound  round  with  combustible  mate- 
rials, over  to  the  other  side  of  the  river ;  the  point 
of  the  dart  was  hghted,  and  it  stuck   right  in  the 


158  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

dry  thatch  of  the  roof  over  the  Arawa,  and  the 
shed  of  dry  stuff  taking  fire,  the  canoe  was  entirely 
destroyed. 

On  the  night  that  the  Arawa  was  burnt  by 
Raumati,  there  was  not  a  person  left  at  Maketu  ; 
they  were  all  scattered  in  the  forests,  at  Tapu-ika, 
and  at  Waitaha,  and  Ngatoro-i-rangi  was  at  that 
moment  at  his  residence  on  the  island  of  Motiti. 
The  iKi,  or  fortified  village  at  Maketu,  was  left 
quite  empty,  without  a  soul  in  it.  The  canoe  was 
lying  alone,  with  none  to  watch  it ;  they  had  all 
gone  to  collect  food  of  different  kinds — it  hap- 
pened to  be  a  season  in  which  food  was  very 
abundant,  and  from  that  cause  the  people  were  all 
scattered  in  small  parties  about  the  country,  fishing, 
fowling,  and  collecting  food. 

As  soon  as  the  next  morning  dawned,  Raumati 
could  see  that  the  fortified  village  of  Maketu  was 
empty,  and  not  a  person  left  in  it,  so  he  and  his 
armed  followers  at  once  passed  over  the  river 
and  entered  the  village,  which  they  found  entirely 
deserted. 

At  night,  as  the  Arawa  burnt,  the  people,  who 
were  scattered  about  in  the  various  parts  of  the 
country,  saw  the  fire,  for  the  bright  glare  of  the 
gleaming  flames  was  reflected  in  the  sky,  lighting 
up  the  heavens,  and  they  all  thought  that  it  was  the 
village  at  Maketu  that  had  been  burnt ;  but  those 


THE    VOYAGE    TO    NEW    ZEALAND.  159 

persons  who  were  near  Waitaha  and  close  to  the 
sea-shore  near  where  the  Arawa  was,  at  once  said, 
"  That  must  be  the  Arawa  which  is  burning  ;  it 
must  have  been  accidentally  set  on  fire  by  some  of 
our  friends  who  have  come  to  visit  us."  The  next 
day  they  went  to  see  what  had  taken  place,  and 
when  they  reached  the  place  where  the  Arawa  had 
been  lying,  they  found  it  had  been  burnt  by  an 
enemy,  and  that  nothing  but  the  ashes  of  it  were 
left  them.  Then  a  messenger  started  to  all  the 
places  where  the  people  were  scattered  about,  to 
warn  them  of  what  had  taken  place,  and  they  then 
first  heard  the  bad  news. 

The  children  of  Hou,  as  they  discussed  in  their 
house  of  assembly  the  burning  of  the  Arawa,  re- 
membered the  proverb  of  their  father,  which  he 
spake  to  them  as  they  were  on  the  point  of  leaving 
Hawaiki,  and  when  he  bid  them  farewell. 

He  then  said  to  them,  "  0  my  children,  O  Mako, 
O  Tia,  O  Hei,  hearken  to  these  my  words  : — 

"  There  was  but  one  great  chief  in  Hawaiki, 
and  that  was  Whakatauihu.  Now  do  you,  my 
dear  children,  depart  in  peace,  and  when  you 
reach  the  place  you  are  going  to,  do  not  follow 
after  the  deeds  of  Tu',  the  god  of  war;  if  you  do 
you  will  perish,  as  if  swept  off"  by  the  w^inds, 
but  rather  follow  quiet  and  useful  occupations,  then 
you  will  die  tranquilly  a  natural  death.      Depart, 


160  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

and  dwell  in  peace  with  all,  leave  war  and  strife 
behind  you  here.  Depart,  and  dwell  in  peace.  It  is 
war  and  its  evils  which  are  driving  you  from  hence  ; 
dwell  in  peace  where  you  are  going,  conduct  yoiu-- 
selves  hke  men,  let  there  be  no  quarrelling  amongst 
you,  but  build  up  a  great  people." 

These  were  the  last  words  which  Houmai-ta-whiti 
addressed  to  his  children,  and  they  ever  kept  these 
sajdngs  of  their  father  firmly  fixed  in  their  hearts. 
"  Depart  in  peace  to  explore  new  homes  for  your- 
selves." 

Uenuku  perhaps  gave  no  such  parting  words  of  ad- 
vice to  his  children,  when  they  left  him  for  this  coun- 
try, because  they  brought  war  and  its  evils  with  them 
from  the  other  side  of  the  ocean  to  New  Zealand. 
But,  of  course,  when  Raumati  burnt  the  Ai-awa, 
the  descendants  of  Houmai-ta-whiti  could  not  help 
continually  considering  what  they  ought  to  do,  whe- 
ther they  should  declare  war  upon  account  of  the 
destruction  of  their  canoe,  or  whether  they  should 
let  this  act  pass  by  without  notice.  They  kept 
these  thoughts  always  close  in  mind,  and  impatient 
feelings  kept  ever  rising  up  in  their  hearts.  They 
could  not  help  saying  to  one  another,  "  It  was  upon 
account  of  war  and  its  consequences,  that  we  de- 
serted our  own  country,  that  we  left  our  fathers, 
our  homes,  and  our  people,  and  war  and  evil  are 
following  after  us    here.      Yet  we  camiot  remain 


THE  VOYAGE  TO  NEW  ZEALAND.      161 

patient  under  such  an  injury,  every  feeling  urges  us 
to  revenge  this  wrong/' 

At  last  they  made  an  end  of  deliberation,  and 
unanimously  agreed  that  they  would  declare  war, 
to  obtain  compensation  for  the  evil  act  of  Raumati 
in  burning  the  Arawa ;  and  then  commenced  the 
great  war  which  was  waged  between  those  who 
arrived  in  the  Arawa  and  those  who  arrived  in 
the  Tainui. 


THE  CURSE  OF  MANAIA. 

(ko  maxaia,  ko  kuiwai.) 

When  the  Tainui  and  the  Ai'awa  sailed  away 
from  Hawaiki  with  Ngatoro-i-rangi  on  board,  he 
left  behind  him  his  yomiger  sister,  Kuiwai,  who  was 
married  to  a  powerful  chief  named  Manaia.  Some 
time  after  the  canoes  had  left,  a  great  meetmg  of 
all  the  people  of  his  tribe  was  held  by  Manaia,  to 
remove  a  tapu,  and  when  the  religious  part  of  the 
ceremony  was  ended,  the  women  cooked  food  for 
the  strangers. 

When  their  ovens  were  opened,  the  food  in  the 
oven  of  Kuiwai,  the  wife  of  Manaia,  and  sister  of 
Ngatoro-i-rangi,  was  found  to  be  much  under- 
done, and  Manaia  was  very  angry  with  his  wife, 
and  gave  her  a  severe  beating,  and  cursed,  saying, 
"  Accursed  be  your  head  ;  are  the  logs  of  fii-ewood 
as  sacred  as  the  bones  of  your  brother,  that  you 
were  so  sparing  of  them  as  not  to  put  into  the  fire 


THE    CURSE    OF   MANAIA.  163 

iu  which  the  stones  "^ere  heated  enough  to  make 
them  red  hot  ?  Will  you  dare  to  do  the  like 
again  ?  If  you  do  I  '11  serve  the  flesh  of  your 
brother  in  the  same  way,  it  shall  frizzle  on  the  red- 
hot  stones  of  Waikorora." 

And  his  poor  wife  was  quite  overcome  with 
shame,  and  burst  out  crying,  and  went  on  sobbing 
and  weeping  all  the  time  she  was  taking  the  under- 
done food  out  of  the  oven,  and  when  she  had  put 
it  in  baskets,  and  carried  them  up  to  her  husband, 
and  laid  them  before  him,  she  eat  nothing  herself, 
but  went  on  one  side  and  cried  bitterly,  and  then 
retired  and  hid  herself  in  the  house. 

And  just  before  night  closed  in  on  them,  she 
cast  her  garments  on  one  side,  and  girded  herself 
with  a  new  sash  made  from  the  young  shoots  of 
the  toetoe,  and  stood  on  the  threshold,  and  spread 
out  her  gods,  Kahukura,  Itupawa,  and  Rongomai, 
and  she  and  her  daughter,  and  her  sister  Haungaroa, 
stood  before  them,  and  the  appearance  of  the  gods 
was  most  propitious ;  and  when  her  incantations 
were  ended,  she  said  to  her  daughter,  "  My  child, 
your  journey  will  be  a  most  fortunate  one."  TJie 
gods  were  then  by  her  bound  up  in  cloths,  and 
she  hung  tliem  up  again,  and  returned  into  the 
house. 

She  then  said  to  her  daughter,  "  Now  depart, 
and  when  you  reach  your  uncle  Ngatoro,  and  your 


164  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

other  relations,  tell  them  that  they  have  been 
cursed  by  Manaia,  because  the  food  in  my  oven  was 
not  cooked  upon  the  occasion  of  a  great  assembly 
for  taking  off  a  taj^u,  and  that  he  then  said,  '  Axe 
the  logs  in  the  forest  as  sacred  as  the  bones  of 
your  brother,  that  you  are  afraid  to  use  them  in 
cooking ;  or  are  the  stones  of  the  desert  the  kid- 
neys of  Ngatoro-i-rangi,  that  you  don't  heat  them  ; 
by-and-bye  I  '11  frizzle  the  flesh  of  your  brother  on 
red-hot  stones  taken  from  Waikorora/  Now,  my 
child,  depart  to  your  uncle  and  relations ;  be  quick, 
this  is  the  season  of  the  wind  of  Pungawere,  which 
will  soon  waft  them  here," 

The  women  then  took  by  stealth  the  gods  of  the 
people,  that  is  to  say,  Maru,  and  Te  Iho-o-te-rangi, 
and  Rongomai,  and  Itupawa,  and  Hangaroa,  and 
they  had  no  canoe  for  their  jom^ney,  but  these  gods 
served  them  as  a  canoe  to  cross  the  sea.  For  the 
fu'st  canoes  which  had  left  Hawaiki  for  New  Zea- 
land carried  no  gods  for  human  beings  with  them ; 
they  only  carried  the  gods  of  the  sweet  potatoes 
and  of  fish,  they  left  behind  them  the  gods  for 
mortals,  but  they  brought  away  with  them  prayers, 
incantations,  and  a  knowledge  of  enchantments,  for 
these  things  were  kept  secret  in  their  minds,  being 
learnt  by  heart,  one  from  another. 

Then  the  girl  and  her  companions  took  with  them 
Kahukura,  and  Itupawa,  and  Rongomai,  and  Maru, 


THE    CURSE    OF   MANAIA.  165 

and  the  other  gods,  and  started  on  their  journey ; 
altogether  there  were  five  women,  and  they  jour- 
neyed and  journeyed  towards  New  Zealand,  and, 
borne  up  by  the  gods,  they  traversed  the  vast  ocean 
till  at  last  they  landed  on  the  burning  island  of 
Whakaari,  and  when  daylight  appeared,  they  floated 
again  on  the  waters,  and  finally  landed  on  the  north- 
em  island  of  New  Zealand,  at  Tawhiuwhiu,  and 
went  by  an  inland  route,  and  stopped  to  eat  food  at 
a  place  whence  they  had  a  good  view  over  the  plains, 
and  after  the  rest  of  the  party  had  done  eating^ 
Haungaroa  still  went  on,  and  two  of  her  compa- 
nions teased  her,  saying  :  "  Holloa,  Haungaroa,  what 
a  long  time  you  continue  eating ;"  and  those 
plains  have  ever  since  been  called  Kaingoroa,  or 
Kaingoroa-o-Haungaroa  (the  long  meal  of  Haun- 
garoa). Haungaroa,  who  was  much  provoked  with 
the  two  women  who  thus  teased  her,  smote  them 
on  the  face,  whereupon  they  fied  from  her,  and 
Haungaroa  pursued  them  a  long  way,  but  she  pur- 
sued in  vain,  they  would  not  come  back  to  her,  so 
by  her  enchantments  she  changed  them  into  Ti 
trees,  which  stand  on  the  plains  whilst  travellers 
approach  them,  but  which  move  from  place  to  place 
when  they  attempt  to  get  close  (and  the  natives 
believe  that  the  trees  are  there  at  the  present 
day). 

Then  the   other   three   women    continued    their 


166  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

journey,  and  they  at  length  reached  the  summit  of 
a  hill,  and  sat  down  there  to  rest  themselves, 
and  whilst  tlicy  were  resting,  Haungaroa  thought 
of  her  mother,  and  love  for  her  overcame  her,  and 
she  wept  aloud — and  that  place  has  ever  since  been 
called  Te  Tangihanga,  or  the  place  of  weeping. 

After  they  had  rested  for  some  time,  they  con- 
tinued their  journey,  until  they  reached  the  open 
summit  of  another  high  hill,  which  they  named 
Piopio,  and  from  thence  they  saw  the  beautiful  lake 
of  Roto-rua  lying  at  their  feet,  and  they  descended 
towards  it,  and  came  down  upon  the  geyser,  which 
spouts  up  its  jets  of  boiling  water  at  the  foot  of 
the  mountain,  and  they  reached  the  lake  itself,  and 
wound  round  it  along  its  sandy  shores  ;  then  leaving 
the  lake  behind  them,  they  struck  off  towards 
Maketu,  and  at  last  reached  that  place  also,  coming 
out  of  the  forests  upon  the  sea-coast,  close  to  the 
village  of  Tuhoro,  and  when  they  saw  the  people 
there,  they  called  out  to  them — "  Whereabout  is 
the  residence  of  Ngatoro-i-rangi  ? "  And  the  people 
answered  them,  "  He  lives  near  the  large  elevated 
storehouse  which  you  see  erected  on  the  hill 
there ;  and  the  niece  of  Ngatoro-i-rangi  saw  the 
fence  which  surrounded  his  place,  and  she  walked 
straight  on  towards  the  wicket  of  the  fortification  ; 
she  would  not  however  pass  in  through  it  like  a 
common   person,  but  climbed   the  posts,  and  clam- 


THE    CURSE    OF   MANAIA.  167 

bered  into  the  fortress  over  its  wooden  defences, 
and  having  got  inside,  went  straight  on  to  the  house 
of  Ngatoro-i-rangi,  entered  it,  and  going  right  up 
to  the  spot  which  was  sacred,  from  his  sitting  on  it, 
she  seated  herself  down  there. 

When  Ngatori-i-rangi's  people  saw  this,  one  of 
them  ran  off  with  all  speed  to  tell  his  master,  who 
was  then  at  work  with  some  of  his  servants  on  his 
farm,  and  having  found  him  he  said,  "  There  is 
a  stranger  just  arrived  at  your  residence,  who 
carries  a  traA^elling-bao-  as  if  she  had  come  from  a 
long  journey,  and  she  would  not  come  in  at  the 
gate  of  the  fortress,  but  climbed  right  over  the 
wooden  defences,  and  has  quietly  laid  her  travelling- 
bag  upon  the  very  roof  of  your  sacred  house,  and 
has  walked  up  and  seated  herself  in  the  very  seat 
that  your  sacred  person  generally  occupies." 

When  the  servant  had  ended  liis  story,  Ngatoro 
at  once  guessed  who  this  stranger  from  a  distance 
must  be,  and  said,  "It  is  mj^  niece;"  and  he  then 
asked,  "  Where  is  Te  Kehu  ? "  and  they  told  him, 
"  He  is  at  work  in  his  plantation  of  sweet  pota- 
toes." And  he  bid  them  fetch  him  at  once,  and  to 
be  quick  about  it ;  and  when  he  arrived  they  all 
went  together  to  the  place  where  his  niece  was,  and 
when  he  reached  her,  he  at  once  led  her  before  the 
altar,  and  she  gave  them  the  gods  wliich  she  had 
brought  with  her  from  Hawaiki. 


168  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

Then  she  said  to  them,  "  Come  now,  and  let  us 
be  cleansed  by  diving  in  running  water,  and  let 
the  ceremony  of  Whangai-horo  be  performed  over 
us,  for  you  have  been  cursed  by  Manahua  and  liis 
tribe." 

When  they  heard  this  they  cried  aloud,  and  tore 
off  their  clothes,  and  ran  to  a  running  stream  and 
plunged  into  it,  and  dashed  water  over  themselves, 
and  the  priests  chanted  the  proper  incantations, 
and  performed  all  the  prescribed  ceremonies  ;  and 
when  these  were  finished  they  left  the  stream,  and 
went  towards  the  village  again,  and  the  priests 
chanted  incantations  for  cleansing  the  court-yard  of 
the  fortress  fi'om  the  defilement  of  the  curse  of 
Manaia  ;  but  the  incantations  for  this  purpose  have 
not  been  handed  down  to  the  present  generation. 

The  priests  next  dug  a  long  pit,  termed  the  pit 
of  wrath,  into  which  by  their  enchantments  they 
might  bring  the  spirits  of  their  enemies,  and  hang 
them  and  destroy  them  there  ;  and  when  they  had 
dug  the  pit,  muttering  the  necessary  incantations, 
they  took  large  shells  in  their  hands  to  scrape  the 
spirits  of  their  enemies  into  the  pit  with,  whilst 
they  muttered  enchantments  ;  and  when  they  had 
done  this,  they  scraped  the  earth  into  the  pit  again 
to  cover  them  up,  and  beat  down  the  earth  with 
their  hands,  and  crossed  the  pit  with  enchanted 
cloths,  and  wove  baskets  of  flax-leaves,  to  hold  the 


THE    CUESE    OF   MANAIA.  169 

spirits  of  the  foes  which  they  had  thus  destroyed, 
and  each  of  these  acts  they  accompanied  with  pro- 
per spells. 

The  religious  ceremonies  being  all  ended,  they 
sat  down,  and  Ngatoro-i-rangi  wept  over  his  niece, 
and  then  they  spread  food  before  the  travellers  ; 
and  when  they  had  finished  their  meal  they  all 
collected  in  the  house  of  Ngatoro-i-rangi,  and  the 
old  men  began  to  question  the  strangers,  saying, 
"  What  has  brought  you  here  ? "  Then  Kuiwai's 
daughter  said,  "  A  curse  which  Manaia  uttered 
against  you  ;  for  when  they  had  finished  making  his 
sacred  place  for  him,  and  the  females  were  cooking 
food  for  the  strangers  who  attended  the  ceremony, 
the  food  in  Kuiwai's  oven  was  not  well  cooked,  and 
Manaia  cursed  her  and  you,  saying,  *  Is  firewood 
as  sacred  as  the  bones  of  your  bretln-en,  that  you 
fear  to  burn  it  in  an  oven  ?  I  '11  yet  make  the  flesh 
of  your  brothers  hiss  upon  red-hot  stones  brought 
from  Waikorora,  and  heated  to  warm  the  oven  in 
which  they  shall  be  cooked.'  That  curse  is  the 
curse  that  brought  me  here,  for  my  mother  told  me 
to  hasten  to  you." 

When  Ngatoro-i-rangi  heard  this,  he  was  very 
wroth,  and  he  in  his  turn  cursed  Manaia,  saying, 
"  Thus  shall  it  be  done  unto  you — your  flesh  shall 
be  cooked  with  stones  brought  from  Maketu."  Then 
he  told  all  his  relations  and  people  to  search  early 

I 


170  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

the  next  morning  for  a  large  Totara-tree,  from 
"which  they  might  buiicl  a  canoe,  as  they  had  no 
canoe  since  Raumati  had  bm-nt  the  Arawa. 

Then  the  people  all  arose  very  early  the  next 
morning,  and  with  them  were  the  chosen  band  of 
one  hundred  and  forty  warriors,  and  they  went 
out  to  search  for  a  large  Totara-tree,  and  Kuiwai's 
daughter  went  with  them,  and  she  found  a  great 
Totara-tree  fallen  down,  and  nearly  buried  in  the 
earth  ;  so  they  dug  it  out,  and  they  framed  a  large 
canoe  from  it,  which  they  named  "  The  Totara-tree, 
dug  from  the  earth  ;"  and  they  hauled  it  down  to 
the  shore,  and,  launching  it,  embarked,  and  paddled 
out  to  sea,  and  the  favourable  wind  of  Punga- 
were  was  blowing  strong,  and  it  blew  so  for  seven 
days  and  nights,  and  wafted  them  across  the  ocean, 
and  at  the  end  of  that  time  they  had  again  reached 
the  shores  of  Hawaiki. 

The  name  of  the  place  at  which  they  landed  in 
Hawaiki  was  Tara-i-whenua  ;  they  landed  at  night- 
time, and  drew  their  canoe  up  above  high-water 
mark,  and  laid  it  in  the  thickets,  that  none  might 
see  that  strangers  had  arrived. 

Ngatoro-i-rangi  then  went  at  once  to  a  fortified 
village  named  Whaitiri-ka-papa,  and  when  he 
arrived  there  he  walked  carelessly  up  to  the  house 
of  Kuiwai,  and  peeping  in  at  the  door,  said 
that  she  was  wanted  outside  for  a  minute ;    and 


THE    CURSE    OF    MANAIA.  171 

she,  knowing  his  voice,  came  out  to  him  imme- 
diately; and  Ngatoro-i-rangi  questioned  her,  saying, 
"  Have  you  anything  to  say  to  me,  that  I  ought  to 
know?"  And  she  rephed,  "The  whole  tribe  of  Ma- 
naia  are  continually  occupied  in  praying  to  their 
gods,  at  the  sacred  place ;  they  pray  to  them  to 
bring  you  and  your  tribe  here,  dead ;  perhaps 
their  incantations  may  now  have  brought  you 
here."  Then  Ngatoro  asked  her,  "  In  what  part 
of  the  heavens  is  the  sun  when  they  go  to  the 
sacred  place?"  and  she  answered,  "They  go  there 
early  in  the  morning."  Then  Ngatoro-i-rangi  asked 
her  again,  "Where  are  they  all  in  the  evening?" 
and  she  rephed,  "  In  the  evening  they  collect  in 
numbers  in  their  villages  for  the  night,  in  the 
morning  they  disperse  about."  Then,  just  as 
Ngatoro-i-rangi  was  going,  he  said  to  her,  "  At 
the  dawn  of  morning  climb  up  on  the  roof  of  your 
house  that  you  may  have  a  good  view,  and  watch 
what  takes  place."  Having  thus  spoken,  he  re- 
turned to  the  main  body  of  his  party. 

Then  Ngatoro  related  to  them  all  that  his  sister 
had  told  him;  and  when  they  had  heard  this,  Tan- 
garoa,  one  of  his  chiefs,  said,  "  My  counsel  is,  that 
we  storm  their  fortress  this  night ;"  but  then  stood 
up  Rangitu,  another  cliief,  and  said,  "  Nay,  but 
rather  let  us  attack  it  in  the  morning."  Now  arose 
Ngatoro,  and   he  spake    aloud  to   them  and  said, 

I  2 


1V2  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

"  I  agree  with  neither  of  you.  We  must  go  to  the 
sacred  place,  and  strike  our  noses  until  they  bleed 
and  we  are  covered  with  blood,  and  then  we  must 
lie  on  the  ground  like  dead  bodies,  every  man  with 
his  weapon  hid  under  him,  and  their  priests  will 
imao'ine  that  their  enchantments  have  brought  us 
here  and  slain  us;  so  shall  we  surprise  them."  On 
hearing  these  words  from  their  leader  they  all 
arose,  and  following  him  in  a  body  to  the  court- 
yard of  the  sacred  place,  they  found  that  the  foolish 
priests  had  felt  so  sure  of  compelling  their  spirits 
by  enchantments  to  bring  Ngatoro  and  his  tribe 
there,  and  to  slay  them  for  them,  that  they  had 
even  prepared  ovens  to  cook  their  bodies  in,  and 
these  were  all  lying  open  ready  for  the  victims ; 
and  by  the  sides  of  the  ovens  they  had  laid  in 
mounds  the  green  leaves,  all  prepared  to  place  upon 
the  victiivis  before  the  earth  was  heaped  in  to 
cover  them  up,  and  the  fire-wood  and  the  stones 
were  also  lying  ready  to  be  heated.  Then  the 
one  hundred  and  forty  men  went  and  laid  them- 
selves down  in  the  ovens  dug  out  of  the  earth,  as 
though  they  had  been  dead  bodies,  and  they  turned 
themselves  about,  and  beat  themselves  upon  their 
noses  and  their  faces  until  they  bled,  so  that 
their  bodies  became  all  covered  with  blood,  like 
the  corpses  of  men  slain  in  battle  ;  and  then  they 
lay  still  in  the  ovens  :  the  weapons  they  had  with 


THE    CURSE    OF   MANAIA.  173 

them  were  short  clubs  of  various  kinds,  such  as 
clubs  of  jasper  and  of  basalt,  and  of  the  bones  of 
■whales,  and  the  priests  whom  they  had  with  them 
having  found  out  the  sacred  place  of  the  people 
of  that  country,  entered  it,  and  hid  themselves 
there.   :. 

Thus  they  continued  to  lie  in  the  ovens  until  the 
sun  arose  next  morning,  and  until  the  priests  of 
their  enemies,  according  to  their  custom  each  day 
at  dawn,  came  to  spread  leaves  and  other  offerings 
to  the  gods  in  the  sacred  phice,  and  there,  to  their 
surprise,  these  priests  found  the  warriors  of  Ngatoro- 
i-rangi  all  lying  heaped  up  in  the  ovens.  Then  the 
priests  raised  joyful  shouts,  crying — "  At  last  our 
prayers  liave  been  answered  by  the  gods ;  here, 
here  are  the  bodies  of  the  host  of  Ngatoro  and  of 
Tama^,  lying  heaped  up  in  the  cooking  places.  This 
has  been  done  by  our  god — he  carried  them  off, 
and  brought  them  here."  The  multitude  of  people 
in  the  village  hearing  these  cries,  ran  out  to  see 
the  wonder,  and  when  they  saw  the  bodies  of  the 
one  hundred  and  forty  lying  there,  with  the  blood 
in  clots  dried  on  them,  they  began  to  cry  out, — one, 
"  1 11  have  this  shoulder  ;"  another,  "  And  1 11  have 
this  thigh  ;"  and  a  third,  "  That  head  is  mine  ;" 
for  the  blood  shed  from  striking  their  noses  during 
the  previous  night  was  now  quite  clotted  on  their 
bodies  ;   and  the  priests  of  those  who  were  lying 


174  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

in  the  ovens  having  hidden  themselves  in  the 
bushes  of  the  shrubbery  round  the  sacred  jjlace, 
could  not  be  seen  by  the  priests  of  the  town  of 
Manaia  when  they  entered  the  sacred  place,  to 
perform  the  fitting  rites  to  the  gods. 

So  these  latter  cried  aloud,  as  they  offered 
thanksgivings  to  the  gods  for  having  granted  their 
prayers,  and  for  having  fulfilled  their  wishes ;  but  just 
as  their  ceremonies  were  finished,  the  priests  of  the 
war  part}^  of  Ngatoro-i-rangi  rushing  (out  of  their 
hiding  places)  upon  the  other  priests,  slew  them, 
so  that  the  priests  were  first  slain,  as  offerings  to  the 
gods.  Then  arose  the  one  hundred  and  forty  men 
from  the  ovens,  and  rushed  upon  their  enemies:  all 
were  slain,  not  one  escaped  but  Manaia,  and  he  fled 
to  the  town  ;  but  they  at  once  attacked  and  carried 
the  town  by  assault,  and  then  the  slaughter  ceased. 
And  the  first  battle  at  the  sacred  place  was  called  Ihu- 
motomotokia,  or  the  battle  of  "Bruised  Noses;"  and 
the  name  of  the  town  which  was  taken  was  Whai- 
tiri-ka-papa,  but  Manaia  again  escaped  from  the 
assault  on  the  town.  They  entered  the  breaches  in 
the  town  as  easily  as  if  they  had  been  walking  in 
at  the  door  of  a  house  left  open  to  receive  them, 
whence  this  proverb  has  been  handed  down  to  us — 
"  As  soon  as  ever  you  have  defeated  your  enemy, 
storm  their  town.''  The  priests  now  turned  over 
the  bodies  of  the  first  slain,  termed  the  holy  fish, 


NEW     ZEALAND    TRADITION. 


THE    CURSE    OF   MANAIA.  17-5 

as  offerings  set  apart  for  the  gods,  and  said  suitable 
prayers,  and  when  these  ceremonies  were  ended, 
the  conquerors  cooked  the  bodies  of  their  enemies, 
and  devoured  the  whole  of  them  ;  but  soon  after- 
wards the  warriors  of  the  other  towns  of  Manaia 
which  had  not  been  assaulted,  were  approaching  as 
a  foi'lorn  hope  to  attack  their  enemies. 

In  the  meanwhile  Ngatoro-i-rangi  and  liis  war- 
riors, unaware  of  this,  had  retired  towards  their 
canoe,  whilst  the  host  of  warriors  whom  Manaia 
had  again  assembled  were  following  upon  their 
traces.  They  soon  came  to  a  stream  which  they  had 
to  pass,  and  fording  that  they  left  it  behind  them, 
and  gained  their  canoe,  but  by  the  time  they  were 
there,  their  pm-suers  had  reached  the  stream  they 
had  just  left. 

Ngatoro-i-rangi  now  felt  thirsty,  and  remembered 
that  they  had  no  water  for  the  crew  of  the  canoe, 
so  he  said,  "  There  is  no  water  here  for  us  ;"  and 
Kanofitu  hearinof  the  voice  of  his  commander,  an- 
swered  cheerfully,  "  No,  there  is  none  here,  but 
there  is  plenty  in  the  stream  we  have  just  crossed. 
So  they  gave  the  great  calabash  of  the  canoe  to 
Rangitu,  and  he  returned  towards  the  stream,  but 
before  he  got  there  the  host  of  Manaia  had  reached 
it,  and  had  occupied  its  banks. 

Rangitu,  who  did  not  see  them,  as  soon  as  he 
got  to  the  edge  of  the  stream,  dipped  his  calabash 


176  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

to  fill  it,  and  as  it  did  not  sink  easily,  being 
empty  and  very  light,  lie  stooped  down  and 
put  his  hand  upon  it  to  press  it  under  the  water ; 
and  whilst  he  was  holding  it  with  one  hand  to 
press  it  down,  one  of  the  enemy,  stealing  on  him, 
made  a  blow  at  him  with  his  weapon.  Rangitu 
saw  nothing,  but  merely  heard  the  whizz  of  the 
weapon  as  it  was  sweeping  down  through  the  air 
upon  his  head,  and  quick  as  thought  he  jerks  the 
calabash  out  of  the  water,  and  holds  it  as  a  shield 
in  the  direction  in  which  he  heard  the  blow  coming 
down  upon  him ;  the  weapon  is  parried  off  from  one 
side  of  liis  head,  but  the  calabash  is  shattered  to 
pieces,  and  nothing  but  the  mouth  of  the  vessel 
which  he  was  holding  is  left  in  his  hand. 

Then  off  he  darts,  fast  as  he  can  fly,  and  reaches 
before  the  enemy  Ngatoro-i-rangi  and  his  one 
hundred  and  forty  warriors  ;  as  soon  as  he  is  thus 
sm-e  of  support,  in  a  moment  he  turns  upon  his 
foes.  Ha,  ha  !  he  slays  the  first  of  the  enemy,  and 
carries  off  his  victim.  Then  lo !  Tangaroa  has  risen 
up,  he  is  soon  amongst  the  enemy,  he  slays  and  car- 
ries off  the  second  man.  Next,  Tama-te-kapua  kills 
and  carries  off  his  man  ;  thus  is  it  with  each  war- 
rior ;  the  enemy  then  breaks  and  flies,  and  a  great 
slaughter  is  made  of  the  host  of  Manaia,  yet  he 
himself  again  escapes  with  his  life.  The  name 
given  to  this  battle  was  Tarai-whenua-kura. 


THE   CUESE    OF   MANAIA.  177 

Having  thus  avenged  themselves  of  their  enemies, 
they  again  returned  to  these  ishmds  and  settled  at 
Maketu,  and  cultivated  farms  there,  Manaia,  on 
his  part,  was  not  idle,  for  shortly  after  they  had 
left  his  place  of  residence,  he,  with  his  tribe,  set  to 
work  at  refitting  their  canoes. 

Ngatoro-i-rangi^  in  the  meantime,  occupied  the 
island  of  Motiti,  off  Tauranga,  in  the  Bay  of 
Plenty.  There  he  built  a  fortified  village,  which 
he  named  Matarehua,  and  a  large  house  orna- 
mented with  carved  work,  which  he  named  Tai- 
maihi-o-Rongo ;  and  he  made  a  large  under- 
ground store  for  his  sweet  potatoes,  wliich  he  named 
Te  Marihope ;  and  he  and  his  old  wife  generally 
lived  nearly  alone  in  their  village  on  Motiti,  whilst 
the  gTcat  body  of  their  people  dwelt  on  the  main- 
land at  Maketu ;  whilst  the  old  couple  were  in  this 
way  living  on  Motiti,  suddenly  one  evening  Manaia, 
with  a  large  fleet  of  canoes  and  a  whole  host  of 
warriors,  appeared  off  the  coast  of  the  island,  and 
they  pulled  straight  up  to  the  landing-place,  opposite 
to  the  house  of  Ngatoro-i-rangi,  and  lay  on  their 
paddles  there,  whilst  Manaia  hailed  hini,  calling  out, 
"  Ho  !  brother-in-law,  come  out  here  if  you  dare, 
let  us  fight  before  the  daylight  is  gone."  Ngatoro- 
i-rangi  no  sooner  heard  the  voice  of  Manaia,  than 
he  came  boldly  out  of  the  house,  although  he  was 
almost  alone,  and  there  he  saw  the  whole  host  of 

I  3 


178  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

Manaia  lying  on  their  paddles  at  the  anchorage  off 
his  landing-place  ;  but  he  at  once  hailed  them,  shout- 
ing out,  "  Well  done,  0  brother-in-law,  just  anchor 
where  you  are  for  the  night,  it  is  already  getting 
dark,  and  we  shall  not  be  able  to  see  to  meet  the 
edge  of  one  weapon  with  the  other ;  the  warriors 
could  not,  therefore,  parry  one  another's  blows ; 
to-morrow  morning  we  will  fight  as  much  as  you 
like."  Manaia  no  sooner  heard  this  j)roposal,  than 
he  assented  to  it,  saying,  "  You  are  right,  it  has 
already  grown  dark."  And  Ngatoro  answered  him, 
"  You  had  better  bring-to  your  canoes  in  the  an- 
chorage outside  there."  Manaia  therefore  told  his 
army  to  anchor  their  canoes,  and  to  lose  no  time  in 
cooking  their  food  on  board  ;  and  the  priest 
No-atoro-i-rangi   remained   in   his  fortress. 

All  the  early  part  of  the  night  Ngatoro-i- 
rangi  remained  in  the  sacred  place,  performing  en- 
chantments and  repeating  incantations,  and  his  wife 
was  with  him  muttering  her  incantations ;  and 
having  finished  them,  they  both  returned  to  their 
house,  and  there  they  continued  to  perform  reli- 
gious rites,  calling  to  their  aid  the  storms  of 
heaven ;  whilst  the  host  of  Manaia  did  nothing 
but  amuse  themselves,  singing  Hakas  and  songs, 
and  diverting  themselves  thoughtlessly  as  war 
parties  do  :  httle  did  they  think  that  they  were 
so  soon   to  perish ;    no,  they  flattered   themselves 


THE    CURSE    OF   MANAIA.  179 

that    they   -u-ould  destroy  Ngatoro-i-rangi,  ha\dng 
now  caught  hiin  ahinost  alone. 

So  soon  as  the  depth  of  night  fell  upon  the 
world,  whilst  Ngatoro  and  his  aged  wife  were  still 
in  the  house,  and  the  old  woman  was  sitting  at 
the  window  watching  for  what  might  take  place, 
she  heard  the  host  of  Manaia  insulting  herself  and 
her  husband,  by  singing  taunting  war-songs.  Then 
the  ancient  priest  Ngatoro,  who  was  sitting  at  the 
upper  end  of  the  house,  rises  up,  unloosens  and 
throws  off  his  garments,  and  repeats  his  incanta- 
tions, and  calls  upon  the  winds,  and  upon  the 
storms,  and  upon  the  thunder  and  lightning,  that 
they  may  all  arise  and  destroy  the  host  of  Manaia ; 
and  the  p'od  Tawhiri-matea  hearkened  unto  the 
priest,  and  he  permitted  the  winds  to  issue  forth, 
together  with  hurricanes,  and  gales,  and  storms,  and 
thunders  and  lightnings ;  and  the  priest  and  his 
wife  hearkened  anxiously  that  they  might  hear  the 
first  bursting  forth  of  the  winds,  and  thunders  and 
lightnings,  and  of  the  rain  and  hail. 

Then,  when  it  was  the  middle  space  between  the 
commencement  of  night  and  the  commencement  of 
the  day,  burst  forth  the  winds,  and  the  rain,  and 
the  lightning,  and  the  thunder,  and  into  the  har- 
bour poured  all  the  mountainous  waves  of  the  sea, 
and  there  lay  the  host  of  Manaia  overcome  with 
sleep,  and  snoring  loudly  ;  but  when  the  ancient 


180  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

priest  and  liis  wife  heard  tlie  rushing  of  the  winds 
and  the  roaring  of  the  waves,  they  closed  their 
house  up  securely,  and  lay  composedly  down  to  rest, 
and  as  they  lay  they  could  hear  a  confused  noise, 
and  cries  of  terror,  and  a  wild  and  tumultuous 
uproar  from  a  mighty  host,  but  before  very  long, 
all  the  loud  confiision  became  hushed,  and  nothing 
was  to  be  heard  but  the  heavy  rolling  of  the  surges 
upon  the  beach ;  nor  did  the  storm  itself  last  very 
long — it  had  soon  ceased. 

When  the  next  morning  broke,  the  aged  wife  of 
Ngatoro  went  out  of  her  house,  and  looked  to  see 
what  had  become  of  the  host  of  Manaia,  and  as 
she  cast  her  eyes  along  the  shore,  there  she  saw 
them  lying  dead,  cast  up  on  the  beach.  The  name 
Ngatoro-i-rangi  r;ave  to  this  slaughter  was  Maiku- 
kutea ;  the  name  given  to  the  storm  which  slew 
them  all  was  Te  Aputahi-a-Pawa.  He  gave  the 
name  of  Maikukutea  to  the  slaughter,  because  the 
fish  having  eaten  the  bodies  of  Manaia's  warriors, 
only  their  bones,  and  the  nails  of  their  hands 
and  feet,  but  hardly  any  part  of  their  corpses, 
could  be  found. 

Of  the  vast  host  of  Manaia  that  perished,  not 
one  escaped  :  the  body  of  Manaia  himself  they  re- 
cognised by  some  tattoo  marks  upon  one  of  his 
arms,  Ngatoro  now  lighted  a  signal  fire  as  a 
sign  to  his  relations  and  warriors  at  Maketu  that 


THE   CURSE    OF   MANAIA.  181 

he  wanted  them  to  cross  over  to  the  island ;  and 
when  his  chosen  band  of  one  hundi"ed  and  forty 
■warriors  saw  the  signal,  they  launched  their  canoe 
and  pulled  across  to  join  their  chief,  and  on  reach- 
ing the  island,  they  found  that  the  host  of  Manaia 
had  all  perished. 

Thus  was  avenged  the  curse  of  Mutahanga  and 
of  Manaia  ;  however,  it  would  have  been  far  better 
if  the  canoe  Arawa  had  not  been  burnt  by  Raumati, 
then  Ngatoro  and  his  warriors  would  have  had  two 
canoes  to  return  in  to  Hawaiki,  to  revenge  their 
wrongs,  and  the  whole  race  of  Manaia  would  have 
been  utterly  destroyed. 

It  would  also  have  been  far  better  if  Ngatoro 
and  his  people  had  remained  at  Maketu,  and  had 
never  gone  to  Moehau ;  then  the  Arawa  would  not 
have  been  burnt ;  for  from  the  burning  of  that 
canoe  by  Eaumati  sprang  the  war,  the  events  of 
which  have  now  been  recounted. 


THE  LEGEND  OF  HATUPATU  AND  HIS 
BROTHERS. 


When  Tama-te-Kapua  went  with  his  followers  to 
Moe-hau,  the  hill  near  Cape  Colville,  and  Ihenga 
and  his  followers  went  to  Roto-rua,  then  Ha-nui, 
Ha-roa,  and  Hatupatu  went  also  to  Whakamaru, 
to  Maroa,  to  Tuata,  to  Tutuka,  to  Tuaropaki,  to 
Hauhungaroa,  to  Hurakia,  and  to  Horohoro,  the 
districts  which  lie  between  Lakes  Taupo  and  Roto- 
rua,  and  between  Roto-rua  and  the  head  of  the 
Waikato  River,  to  snare  birds  for  themselves,  and 
followed  their  sport  for  many  a  day,  until  they  had 
hunted  for  several  months  ;  but  their  httle  brother 
Hatupatu  was  all  this  time  thinking  to  himself 
that  they  never  gave  him  any  of  the  rare  dainties 
or  nice  things  that  they  got,  so  that  they  might 
all  feast  together,  but  at  each  meal  he  received 
nothing  but  the  lean  tough  birds;  so  when  the 
poor  httle  fellow  went  and  sat  down  by  the  side 
of  the  fire  to  his  food,  he  every  day  used  to 
keep  on  crying  and  eating,  crying  and  eating, 
during    his    meals.       At    last,    saucy,    mischievous 


HATUPATU   AND    HIS    BROTHERS.  183 

thouglits  rose  up  in  his  young  heart.  So  one  day, 
whilst  his  brothers  were  out  snaring  birds,  and 
he,  on  this  as  on  every  other  day,  was  left  at  their 
resting-place  to  take  care  of  the  things,  the  httle 
rogue  crept  into  the  storehouse,  where  the  birds, 
preserved  in  their  own  fat,  were  kept  in  cala- 
bashes, and  he  stole  some,  and  set  resolutely  to 
work  to  eat  them,  with  some  tender  fern-root, 
nicely  beaten  and  dressed,  for  a  relish  ;  so  that  to 
look  at  him  you  could  not  help  thinking  of  the 
proverb,  "  Bravo,  that  throat  of  yours  can  swallow 
anything." 

He  finished  all  the  calabashes  of  preserved 
birds,  and  then  attacked  those  that  were  kept 
in  casks,  and  when  he  had  quite  filled  himself 
he  crept  out  of  the  storehouse  again,  and  there  he 
went  trampling  over  the  pathway  that  led  to  their 
resting-place,  running  about  this  side,  and  that 
side,  and  all  round  it,  that  his  brothers  might  be 
induced  to  think  a  war  party  had  come,  and 
had  eaten  up  the  food  in  their  absence.  Then  he 
came  back,  and  ran  a  spear  into  himself  in  two 
or  three  places,  where  he  could  not  do  himself 
much  harm,  and  gave  himself  a  good  bruise  or  two 
upon  his  head,  and  laid  down  on  the  gromid  near 
their   hut. 

When  his  brothers   came  back  they  found  him 


Ib4<  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

lying  there  in  appearance  very  badly  wounded ; 
they  next  ran  to  the  storehouse,  and  found  their 
j)reserved  birds  all  gone  :  so  they  asked  him  who 
had  done  all  this,  and  he  replied,  "  A  war  party." 
Then  they  went  to  the  pathways  and  saw  the  foot- 
marks, and  said,  "It  is  too  true."  They  melted 
some  fat,  and  poured  warm  oil  on  his  wounds,  and 
he  revived  ;  and  they  all  ate  as  they  used  to  do  in 
former  days,  the  brothers  enjoying  all  the  good 
things,  whilst  Hatupatu  kept  eating  and  crying, 
and  he  went  and  sat  on  the  smoky  side  of  the  fire, 
so  that  his  cruel  brothers  might  laugh  at  him,  saying, 
"  Oh,  never  mind  him ;  those  are  not  real  tears, 
they  are  only  his  eyes  watering  from  the  smoke." 

Next  day  Hatupatu  stopped  at  home,  and  off 
went  his  brothers  to  snare  birds,  and  he  began  to 
steal  the  preserved  birds  again,  and  thus  he  did 
every  day,  every  day,  and  of  course  at  last  his 
brothers  suspected  him,  and  one  day  they  laid  in 
wait  for  him,  when  he  not  foreseeing  this,  again 
crouched  into  the  storehouse  and  began  eating. 
"  Ha,  ha,  ha,  we  've  caught  you  now  then ;  your 
thievish  tricks  are  found  out,  are  they,  you  little 
rogue?"  His  brothers  Idlled  him  at  once,  and 
buried  him  in  the  large  heap  of  feathers  they 
had  pulled  out  from  the  snared  birds ;  after 
this  they  went  back  to  Roto-rua,  and  when  they 


HATUPATU  AND  HIS  BROTHERS.      ]  85 

arrived,  their  parents  asked  them,  "  Where  is 
Hatiipatu  ?  What's  become  of  your  little  brother?" 
And  they  answered,  "  We  don't  know ;  we  have 
not  seen  him/'  And  their  parents  said,  "  You've 
killed  him."  And  they  replied,  "We  have  not;" 
and  they  disputed  and  disputed  together,  and  at 
last  their  parents  said,  "  It  is  too  true  that  you 
must  have  killed  him,  for  he  went  away  with  you, 
and  he  is  missing  now  when  you  return  to  us." 

At  length  Hatupatu's  father  and  mother  thought 
they  would  send  a  spirit  to  search  for  him ;  so  they 
sent  one,  and  the  spirit  went.  Its  form  was  that 
of  a  flag,  and  its  name  was  Tamumu-ki-te-rangi,  or 
He-that-buzzes-in-the-skies,  and  it  departed  and 
arrived  at  the  place  where  Hatupatu  was  buried, 
and  found  him  and  performed  enchantments,  and 
Hatupatu  came  to  life  again,  and  went  upon  his 
way,  and  met  a  woman  who  was  spearing  birds  for 
herself,  and  her  spear  was  nothing  but  her  own 
lips:  and  Hatupatu  had  a  real  wooden  spear,  Tlie 
woman  speared  at  a  bird  with  her  lips,  but 
Hatupatu  had  at  the  same  moment  tlu'own  liis 
spear  at  the  same  bird,  and  it  stuck  into  her 
lips:  and  when  he  saw  this  he  ran  off*  with  all  his 
speed,  but  he  was  soon  caught  by  the  woman, 
not  being  able  to  go  so  fast  as  she  could,  for  her 
feet   bore   her    along,  and    wings   were   upon  her 


186  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

arms,  like  those  of  a  bird,  and  she  brought  him  to 
her  house,  and  they  slept  there. 

Hatupatu  found  that  this  woman  never  ate  any- 
thing but  raw  food,  and  she  gave  the  birds  to 
Hatupatu  to  eat  without  their  being  in  any  way 
dressed,  but  he  only  pretended  to  eat  them,  lifting 
them  up  to  his  mouth,  and  letting  them  fall  shly. 
At  dawn  the  woman  prepared  to  go  and  spear  birds, 
but  Hatupatu  always  remained  at  home,  and  when 
she  had  departed,  he  began  to  cook  food  for  him- 
self, and  to  look  at  all  the  things  in  the  cave  of 
rocks  that  the  woman  lived  in — at  her  two-handed 
wooden  sword — at  her  beautiful  cloak  made  of  red 
feathers  torn  from  under  the  wing  of  the  Kaka — at 
her  red  cloak  of  thick  dog's  fur — at  her  ornamented 
cloak  woven  fi-om  flax  ;  and  he  kept  thinking  how 
he  could  rim  off  with  them  all :  and  then  he  looked 
at  the  various  tame  lizards  she  had,  and  at  her 
tame  little  birds,  and  at  all  her  many  curiosities, 
and  thus  he  went  on  day  after  day,  until  at  last 
one  day  he  said  to  her,  "Now,  you'd  better 
go  a  long  distance  to-day ;  to  the  first  moun- 
tain range,  to  the  second  range,  the  tenth  range,  the 
hundredth  range,  the  thousandth  mountain  range, 
and  when  you  get  there,  then  begin  to  catch  birds 
for  VIS  two."  To  this  she  consented,  and  went. 
He  remained  behind  roasting  birds  for  himself,  and 


HATUPATU    AND    HIS    BROTHEES.  187 

thinking,  "  I  wonder  how  far  she  's  got  now  ; "  and 
when  he  thought  she  had  reached  the  place  he  had 
spoken  of,  then  he  began  to  gather  up  her  cloak  of 
red  feathers,  and  her  cloak  of  dogs^  skins,  and  her 
cloak  of  ornamented  flax,  and  her  carved  two- 
handed  sword ;  and  the  young  fellow  said,  "  How 
well  I  shall  look  when  all  the  fine  feathers  on  these 
cloaks  are  rustled  by  the  wind."  And  he  brandished 
the  two-handed  sword,  and  made  cuts  at  the  lizards, 
and  at  all  the  tame  animals,  and  they  were  soon 
killed.  Tlien  he  struck  at  the  perch  on  which 
the  little  pet  birds  sat,  and  he  killed  them  all  but 
one,  which  escaped,  and  it  flew  away  to  fetch 
back  the  woman  they  all  belonged  to.  Her  name 
was  Kurangaituku.  And  as  the  little  bird  flew 
along,  these  are  the  words  he  kept  singing,  "  Oh, 
Kurangaituku,  our  home  is  ruined,  our  things  are 
all  destroyed ;"  and  so  it  kept  singing  until  it  had 
flown  a  very  long  way.  At  last  Kurangaituku 
heard  it,  and  said,  "  By  whom  is  all  this  done  V 
And  the  little  bird  answered,  "  By  Hatupatu — 
everything  is  gone."  Then  Kurangaituku  made 
haste  to  get  home  again,  and  as  she  went 
along  she  kept  calling  out,  "  Step  out,  stretch 
along ;  step  out,  stretch  along.  There  you  are, 
O  Hatupatu,  not  far  from  me.  There  you  are,  0 
Hatupatu,    not  far  from   me.       Step   out,    stretch 


188  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

along ;  step  out,    stretch  along.      There  you  are,  0 
Hatupatu,  not  far  from  me  now." 

She  only  made  three  strides,  before  she  had 
reached  her  cave,  and  when  she  looked  about, 
she  could  see  nothing  in  it ;  but  the  little 
bird  still  guided  her  on,  as  she  kept  saying,  "  Step 
out,  stretch  along ;  step  out,  stretch  along ;  I  '11 
catch  you  there  now,  Hatupatu ;  I  '11  catch  you 
there  now,  Hatupatu ;"  and  she  almost  caught  Ha- 
tupatu ;  and  he  thought,  I  'm  done  for  now.  So 
he  repeated  his  charm :  "  O  rock,  open  for  me, 
open.''  Then  the  rock  opened,  and  he  hid  himself 
in  it,  and  the  woman  looked  and  could  not  find 
him ;  and  she  went  on  to  a  distance,  and  kept  call- 
ing out,  "  I  '11  catch  you  there,  Hatupatu  ;  I  'U  catch 
you  there,  Hatupatu ;"  and  when  her  voice  had 
died  away  at  a  great  distance,  Hatupatu  came  up 
out  of  the  rock  and  made  ofi";  and  thus  they  went 
on,  and  thus  they  went  on,  the  whole  way,  until 
they  came  to  Roto-rua ;  and  when  they  arrived  at 
the  sulphur-springs  (called  Te  Whaka-rewa-rewa), 
Hatupatu  jumped  over  these ;  but  Kurangaituku 
thinking  they  were  cold,  tried  to  wade  through,  but 
sunk  through  the  crust,  and  was  burnt  to  death. 

Hatupatu  proceeded  on  and  sat  on  the  shore  of 
the  lake,  and  when  the  evening  came,  he  dived 
into   the    water,  and    rose    up    at    the    island    of 


HATUPATU   AND    HIS    BROTHERS.  189 

Mokoia,  and  sat  in  the  warm-bath  there ;  just 
at  this  time  his  father  and  mother  wanted 
some  water  to  drink,  and  sent  their  slave  to 
fetch  some  for  them,  and  he  came  to  the  place 
where  he  found  Hatupatu  lying  in  the  warm- 
bath  ;  Hatupatu  laid  hold  of  him,  and  asked 
him,  "  Whom  are  you  fetching  that  water  for 
at  this  time  of  night  ?"  and  he  answered,  "  For 
so  and  so."  Then  Hatupatu  asked  him,  "Where 
is  the  house  of  Ha-nui  and  of  Ha-roa  ?"  and  the 
slave  answered,  "They  live  in  a  house  by  them- 
selves; but  what  can  your  name  be?"  and  he 
answered  him,  "  I  am  Hatupatu."  So  the  old 
slave  said,  "0  Hatupatu,  are  you  still  alive?" 
and  he  replied,  "  Yes,  indeed."  And  the  old 
slave  said  to  him,  "  Oh,  I  '11  tell  you  ;  I  and  yom- 
father  and  mother  live  together  in  a  house  by 
ourselves ;  and  they  sent  me  down  here  to  fetch 
water  for  them ;"  and  Hatupatu  said,  "  Let  us  go 
to  them  together  ;"  and  they  went :  and  on  coming 
to  them,  the  old  people  began  to  weep  with  a  loud 
voice  ;  and  Hatupatu  said,  "  Nay,  nay ;  let  us  cry 
with  a  gentle  voice,  lest  my  brethren  who  slew  me 
should  hear ;  and  I,  moreover,  will  not  sleep  here 
with  you,  my  parents,  it  is  better  for  me  to  go 
and  remain  in  the  cave  you  have  dug  to  keep  your 
sweet  potatoes  in,  that  I  may  overhear  each  day 


190  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

what  they  say,  and  1 11  take  all  my  meals  there." 
So  he  went,  and  he  said,  "  Lei  my  father  sleep  with 
me  in  the  cave  in  the  night,  and  in  the  daytime 
let  him  stop  in  the  house  ;"  and  his  father  consented, 
and  thus  they  did  every  day  and  every  night,  and 
his  brothers  noticed  that  there  was  a  change  in  their 
food,  that  they  did  not  get  so  much  or  such  good 
food  as  whilst  their  brother  had  been  away  (for 
his  mother  kept  the  best  of  everything  for  him)  ; 
they  had  worse  food  now ;  so  they  beat  their 
mother  and  their  slaves,  and  this  they  did  con- 
tinually. 

At  last,  they  heard  the  people  all  calling  out, 
"  Oh,  oh,  Hatupatu's  here  f  and  one  of  them 
said,  "  Oh,  no,  that  can't  be  ;  why,  Hatupatu  is 
dead ;"  but  when  they  saw  it  was  really  him,  one 
of  them  caught  hold  of  his  two-handed  wooden 
sword,  and  so  did  '  the  others ;  and  Hatupatu 
also  caught  hold  of  his  two-handed  wooden  sword ; 
he  had  decorated  his  head  in  the  night,  and  had 
stuck  it  full  of  the  beautiful  feathers  befittinof  a 
chief;  and  he  had  placed  a  bunch  of  the  soft  white 
down  from  the  stomach  of  the  albatross  in  each 
ear ;  and  when  his  brothers  and  the  multitude  of 
their  followers  dared  him  to  come  forth  from  the 
storehouse  and  fight  them,  he  caught  hold  of  his 
girdle,  and  of  his  apron  of  red  feathers,  and  girding 


HATUPATU  AND  HIS  BEOTHERS.      191 

on  bis  apron,  he  repeated  an  incantation  suited 
for  the  occasion.  When  this  was  finished  his  head 
appeared  rising  up  out  of  the  storehouse,  and  he 
repeated  another  incantation,  and  afterwards  a  third 
-over  his  sword. 

Hatupatu  now  came  out  of  the  storehouse,  and 
as  his  brothers  gazed  on  him,  they  saw  his 
looks  were  most  noble ;  glared  forth  on  them 
the  eyes  of  the  }^ung  man,  and  glittered  forth 
the  mother-of-pearl  eyes  of  the  carved  face  on  the 
handle  of  his  sword,  and  when  the  many  thousands 
of  their  tribe  who  had  gathered  round  saw  the 
youth,  they  too  were  quite  astonished  at  his  noble- 
ness ;  they  had  no  strength  left,  they  could  do 
nothing  but  admire  him  :  he  was  only  a  little  boy 
when  they  had  seen  him  before,  and  now,  when 
they  met  him  again,  he  was  like  a  noble  chief,  and 
they  now  looked  upon  his  brothers  with  very  differ- 
ent eyes  from  those  with  which  they  looked  at  him. 

His  three  brothers  sprang  at  him  ;  three  wooden 
swords  were  at  the  same  time  levelled  at  Hatupatu 
to  slay  him ;  he  held  the  blade  of  his  sword 
pointed  to  the  ground,  till  the  swords  of  his  bro- 
thers almost  touched  him,  when  he  rapidly  warded 
off  the  blows,  and  whirling  round  his  wooden  sword, 
two  of  tlie  three  were  felled  by  the  blade  of  it, 
and  one  by  a  blow  from  the  handle ;  then  they  sprang 
up,  and  rushed  at  him   once  more ;  over  they  go 


192  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

again,  two  felled  by  the  blade  of  his  sword,  and 
one  by  the  handle  ;  it  was  enough' — they  gave  in. 
Then  their  father  said  to  them,  "  Oh  !  my  sons,  I 
would  that  you  were  as  strong  in  peace  as  you 
are  in  attacking  one  another  ;  in  seeking  revenge 
for  your  ancestral  canoe,  Te  Arawa,  which  was 
consumed  in  a  foe  by  the  chief  Raumati.  Long 
have  you  been  seeking  to  revenge  yourselves  upon 
him,  but  you  have  not  succeeded,  you  have  gained 
no  advantage ;  perhaps  you  are  only  strong  and 
bold  when  you  attack  your  young  brother,  my 
last-born  child." 

When  his  sons  Ha-nui,  Ha-roa,  and  Karil^a 
heard  these  words  of  their  father,  they  and  their 
many  followers  felt  their  hearts  grow  sad ;  they 
began  to  prepare  for  a  war  party,  by  beating 
flat  pieces  of  prepared  fern-root ;  and  they  cooked 
sweet  potatoes  in  ovens,  and  mashed  them,  and 
packed  them  up  in  baskets  of  flax,  and  again 
put  them  in  the  ovens,  that  the  food  might 
keep  for  a  long  time  ;  and  they  cooked  shell-fish 
in  baskets,  and  •  thus  collected  food  for  an  expe- 
dition to  Maketu.  Whilst  his  brothers  were 
making  aU  these  preparations  for  the  expedition, 
their  father  was  secretly  teaching  Hatupatu  the 
tattoo  marks  and  appearance  of  Raumati,  so  that 
he  might  easily  recognise  that  chief;  and  when 
the  canoes  started  with  the  warriors,  he  did  not 


HATUPATU  AND  HIS  BROTHERS.      193 

embark  with  them,  but  remained  behind  ;  the 
canoes  had  reached  the  middle  of  the  lake,  when 
Hatupatu  rose  up,  and  taking  thii'ty  cloaks  of 
red  feathers  with  liim,  went  off  to  the  war  ;  he 
proceeded  by  diving  under  the  water — that  was 
the  path  he  chose;  and  when  he  reached  the 
deepest  part  of  the  lake,  he  stopped  to  eat  a 
meal  of  mussels  in  the  water,  and  then  rose  up 
from  the  bottom  and  came  out.  He  had  got  as 
far  as  Ngaukawakawa,  when  his  brothers  and 
the  Wcxrriors  in  the  canoes  arrived  there,  and 
found  him  spreading  out  the  cloaks  he  had 
brought  with  him  to  dry;  and  as  soon  as  their 
canoes  reached  the  shore  they  asked  him,  "Where  is 
your  canoe,  that  you  managed  to  get  here  so  fast?" 
and  he  answered,  "  Never  mind,  I  have  a  canoe  of 
my  own." 

Hatupatu  threw  off  here  the  wreath  of  leaves 
he  wore  round  his  brow,  and  it  took  root,  and 
became  a  pohutukawa-tree,  which  bears  such  beau- 
tiful red  flowers.  His  brothers'  canoes  had  by 
this  time  got  out  into  Roto-iti ;  then  he  again 
dived  after  them,  and  rose  to  the  surface,  and 
came  out  of  the  water  at  Kuha-rua,  where  he 
threw  off  his  wreath  of  totara-leaves,  and  it  took 
root  and  grew,  and  it  is  still  growing  there  at 
this  day ;  when  liis  brothers  and  the  warriors 
arrived  at  Kuha-rua,  they  found  liim  sitting  there, 

K 


194  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

and  tliey  were  astonislied  at  his  doings ;  they 
landed  at  Otaramarae,  and  marching  overland, 
encamped  for  the  night  at  Kaharoa-a-Tauhn,  and 
the  next  day  they  reached  Maketu ;  and  when 
the  evening  came  they  ranged  their  warriors  in 
divisions  ;  three  hundred  and  forty  warriors  were 
told  off  for  each  of  the  divisions,  under  the  com- 
mand of  each  of  Hatupatu's  three  brothers;  but 
no  division  was  placed  under  his  command. 

Hatupatu  knew  that  the  jealousy  of  his  bro- 
thers, on  account  of  their  former  quarrels,  was 
the  reason  they  had  not  told  off  any  men  for 
him  ;  so  he  said,  "  Ob,  ray  brothers,  I  did  not 
refuse  to  hearken  to  you,  when  you  asked  me  to 
come  with  you  ;  but  I  came,  as  you  requested,  just 
as  I  went  readily  with  you  upon  that  occasion 
when  you  killed  me,  and  here  I  am  noAV  left  in  a 
very  bad  position  ;  so  I  pray  you,  let  some  of  the 
warriors  be  placed  under  my  command,  let  there 
be  fifty  of  them."  But  they  said  to  him,  "  Pooh, 
pooh  ;  come  now,  you  be  off  home  again.  What  can 
you  do  ?  The  only  thing  you  are  fit  to  destroy  is 
food."  He,  the  young  man,  said  no  more  ;  but  at 
once  left  his  brothers,  and  on  the  same  night  he 
sought  out  a  rough  thicket  as  his  resting-place  ;  and 
when  he  saw  how  convenient  for  his  purpose  was  the 
place  he  had  selected,  he  turned  to  and  began  to  tie 
together  in  bundles  the  roots  of  the  creeping  plants. 


HATUPATU    AND    HIS    BROTHERS.  195 

and  of  the  bushes,  and  dressed  them  up  with  the 
cloaks  he  had  with  him  ;  and  when  he  had  finished, 
the  war  band  of  these  figures,  which  the  young  man 
had  made,  looked  just  hke  a  band  of  real  warriors. 
The  day  had  hardly  dawned,  when  the  inhabitants 
of  the  place  they  had  come  to  attack  saw  then* 
enemies,  and  sent  off  messengers  to  tell  the  war- 
riors, on  this  side  and  that  side,  that  they  should 
come  and  fight  with  them  against  the  common 
enemy. 

In  the  meantime,  all  the'  warriors  of  the  columns 
of  Hatupatu's  brothers  were  exhorting  their  men, 
and  encouraging  them  by  warlike  speeches  ;  first 
one  chief  stood  up  to  speak,  and  then  another,  and 
when  they  had  all  ended,  Hatupatu  himself  got  up, 
to  encourage  his  mock  party.  He  had  been  sitting 
down,  and  as  he  gracefully  arose,  it  was  beautiful  to 
see  his  plumes  and  ornaments  of  feathers  fluttering 
in  the  breeze  ;  the  long  hair  of  the  young  man  was 
tied  up  in  four  knots,  or  clubs,  in  each  of  which  was 
stuck  a  bunch  of  feathers  ;  you  would  have  thought 
he  had  just  come  from  the  gannet  island  of  Karewa, 
(in  the  Bay  of  Plenty,)  where  birds'  feathers  abound  ; 
and  when  he  had  done  speaking  to  one  party  of  his 
column,  he  unloosened  his  hair,  leaving  but  one 
clump  of  it  over  the  centre  of  liis  forehead,  and 
now  he  wore  a  cloak  of  red  feathers  ;  then  he  made 

K  2 


196  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

another  speech,  encom-aging  his  men  to  be  brave 
then  after  sitting  down  again,  he  ran  to  the  rear, 
and  took  all  the  feathers  and  knots  from  his  hair, 
and  he  this  time  wore  a  cloak  of  flax  with  a  broi- 
dered  border  ;  again  he  addressed  his  men,  and  this 
being  finished,  he  was  seen  again  in  the  centre  of 
the  body,  standing  up  to  speak,  naked,  and  stripped 
for  the  fight.  Once  more  he  appeared  at  the  head 
of  the  column ;  this  time  he  had  the  hair  at  the 
back  of  liis  head  tied  up  in  a  knot  and  ornamented 
with  feathers,  he  wore  a  cloak  made  of  the  skins  of 
dogs,  and  the  long  wooden  war-axe  was  the  weapon 
he  had  in  his  hands.  Having  concluded  this 
speech,  he  appeared  again  in  a  different  place,  with 
his  hair  tied  in  five  bunches,  each  ornamented 
with  feathers,  whilst  a  large  rough  dog-skin 
formed  his  cloak ;  and  the  weapon  in  his  hand 
was  a  mere*  made  of  white  whalebone  :  thus  he 
ended  his  speeches  to  his  party.  When  the  people 
of  the  place  they  had  come  to  attack  saw  how 
numerous  were  the  chiefs  in  the  column  of  Hatu- 
patu,  and  what  clothes  and  weapons  they  had,  they 
di'eaded  his  division  much  more  than  those  of  his 
brothers. 

His   brothers'   divisions   had   many    warriors    in 
them,  although  the  number  of  chiefs  was  only  equal 
*  A  sharp  instrument  of  war  ruade  of  stone. 


HATUPATU    AND    HIS    BKOTHERS.  197 

in  number  to  the  divisions  :  thus  there  were  three 
divisions,  and  also  three  chiefs;  whilst,  although 
Hatupatu  had  only  one  division,  it  appeared  to 
be  commanded  by  a  multitude  of  chiefs,  who  had 
superb  dresses  ;  thence  the  enemy  burnt  with  fear 
of  that  division,  which  they  accounted  to  be  com- 
posed of  men ;  but  no ;  it  was  only  formed  of 
clumps  of  grass  dressed  up. 

Now  the  people  of  the  place  they  were  attacking 
drew  out  to  the  battle,  and  as  they  pressed  nearer 
and  nearer,  they  pushed  forth  long  heavy  sj^ears, 
and  sent  forth  volleys  of  light  spears  made  of  the 
branches  of  manuka-trees,  at  the  column  of  Ha-nui. 
Alas  !  it  is  broken  ;  they  retreat,  they  fly,  they  fall 
back  on  the  division  of  Ha-roa ;  they  are  here 
rallied,  and  ordered  to  charge ;  but  they  do  not — 
they  only  poke  forward  their  heads,  as  if  intend- 
ing to  go  ;  the  enemy  has  reached  them,  and 
is  on  them  again ;  they  are  again  broken  and  dis- 
ordered ;  they  run  in  now  upon  the  third  line, 
that  of  Karika ;  they  are  ralHed,  and  again  order- 
ed to  charge ;  but  they  only  press  forward  the  upper 
part  of  their  bodies,  as  if  intending  to  advance,  when 
the  enemy  is  already  upon  them  in  full  charge.  It 
is  over ;  all  the  divisions  of  Hatupatu's  brothers 
are  broken  and  flying  in  confusion  ;  what  did  it 
matter  whether  they  were  many  or  few,  they  were 


198  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY, 

all  cowards.  Their  enemies  saw  no  brave  men's 
faces,  only  the  black  backs  of  heads  running  away. 
All  this  time  the  division  of  Hatupatu  appears 
to  be  sitting  quietly  upon  the  gi'ound,  and  when 
the  men  in  full  retreat  came  running  in  upon  it, 
Hatupatu  rose  up  to  order  them  to  charge 
again.  He  cried  out :  "  Turn  on  them  again,  turn 
on  them  again  ;"  for  a  long  time  the  enemy  and 
Hatupatu  were  hidden  from  each  other's  view ;  at 
last  they  saw  him.  Then  rushes  forward  Hatu- 
patu from  one  party,  and  a  chief  of  the  enemy, 
named  also  Karika  (like  his  brother),  from  the 
other,  and  the  latter  aims  a  fierce  blow  at  Hatu- 
patu with  a  short  spear  ;  he  parries  it,  and  strikes 
down  Karika  with  his  two-handed  sword,  who  dies 
without  a  struggle ;  motionless,  as  food  hidden 
in  a  bag,  he  draws  forth  his  whalebone  mere, 
cuts  off  Karika's  head,  and  grasps  it  by  the 
hair.  It  is  enough — the  enemy  break, — fall  back, 
— fly  ;  then  his  brothers  and  their  warriors  turn 
again  on  the  foes,  and  slay  them ;  many  thou- 
sands of  them  fill.  Whilst  his  brothers  are  thus 
slaying  the  enemy,  he  is  eagerly  seeking  for 
Raumati ;  he  is  found  ;  Hatupatu  catches  him,  his 
head  is  cut  off;  it  is  concealed.  The  slaughter 
being  ended,  they  return  to  their  encampment ; 
they  cook  the  bodies  of  their  enemies  ;  they  devour 


WEEPING     OVER    HEAD    OF    DECEASED     RELATIVE 


HATUPATU  AND  HIS  BROTHERS.      199 

them ;  they  smoke  and  carefully  preserve  their 
heads  :  aud  when  all  is  done,  each  makes  speeches 
boasting  of  his  deeds ;  and  one  after  the  other, 
vaunting  to  have  slain  the  great  chief  E-aumati. 
But  Hatupatu  said  not  a  word  of  his  having  Ravi- 
mati's  head. 

They  return  to  E,oto-rua ;  tliis  time  he  goes  in 
the  canoe  with  them ;  they  draw  near  to  the  island 
of  Mokoia,  and  his  brothers,  as  they  are  in  the 
canoe,  chant  songs  of  triumph  to  the  gods  of 
war ;  they  cease ;  their  father  inquires  firom  the 
shore,  "  Which  of  you  has  the  head  of  Raumati?" 
and  one,  holding  up  the  head  he  had  taken,  said, 
"I  have;"  and  another  said,  "I  have;"  at  last, 
their  father  calls  out,  "  Alas,  alas  !  Raumati  has 
escaped." 

Then  Hatupatu  stands  up  in  the  canoe,  and 
chants  a  prayer  to  the  god  of  war  over  a  basket 
heaped  up  with  heads,  whilst  holding  up  in  his 
hand  the  head  of  Karika. 

Then  liis  hand  grasps  the  head  of  Raumati,  which 
he  had  kept  hid  under  his  cloak,  and  he  cries — 
"There,  there  ;  I  have  the  head  of  Raumati."  All 
rejoice.  Their  father  strips  off  his  cloak,  rushes 
into  the  lake,  and  repeats  a  thanksgiving  to 
the  gods. 

When  he  had  ended  this,  he  promoted  in  honour 


200  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

his  last-born  child,  and  debased  in  rank  his  eldest 
sons. 

Thus  at  last  was  revenge  obtained  for  the  burn- 
ing of  the  Arawa,  and  the  descendants  of  Tama-te- 
kapua  emigi-ated,  and  came  and  dwelt  in  Pakotore, 
and  Rangitihi  was  born  there,  and  his  children, 
and  one  of  them  came  to  E-angiwhakakapua,  or 
Roto-rua,  and  dwelt  there ;  and  afterwards  one  of 
his  daughters  went  to  the  Whakatohea  tribe,  at 
Apotiki.  After  that  Rangitilii  and  all  his  sons  went 
to  Ahuriri,  to  revenge  the  death  of  the  husband  of 
Rongo-maipapa,  and  she  was  given  up  to  them  as 
a  reward ;  then  grew  up  to  manhood  Uenukuko- 
pako,  and  began  to  \'isit  all  the  people  subject  to 
him  at  Whakamaru,  at  Maroa,  at  Tutukau,  at 
Tuata,  and  he  went  and  afterwards  returned  to 
Pakotore,  and  whilst  going  backwards  and  for- 
wards, he  lost  his  dog,  named  Potakatawhiti, 
at  Mokoia ;  it  was  killed  by  Mataaho  and  Ka- 
waarero. 

He  came  back  from  Whakamaru  to  look  for  it, 
and  when  he  fomid  it  had  been  killed,  a  great 
war  was  commenced  against  Roto-rua,  and  some  were 
slain  of  each  party.  After  this,  Rangi-te-aorere, 
the  son  of  Rangi-whakaekeau,  grew  up  to  man's 
estate ;  in  his  time  they  stormed  and  took  the 
island  of  Mokoia,  and  Roto-rua  was  conquered  by 


HATUPATU  AND  HIS  BEOTHERS.      201 

the  sons  of  Rangitilii,  who  kept  it  still  and  still, 
until  the  multitude  of  men  there  increased  very 
greatly,  and  spread  themselves  in  all  parts ;  and 
the  descendants  of  Ngatoro-i-rangi  also  multiplied 
there,  and  some  of  them  still  remain  at  Eoto- 
rua.  Tumakoha  begat  Tarawhai,  and  Te  Rangi- 
takaroro  was  one  of  his  sons  ;  his  second  son  was 
Tarewa,  and  his  third  was  Taporahitaua. 


K  3 


LEGEND  OF  THE  EMIGRATION  OF  TURI, 

(the  progenitok  of  the  whanganui  tribes.) 

The  following  narrative  shows  tlie  cause  which  led 
Turi,  the  ancestor  of  the  Whanganui  tribes,  to 
emigrate  to  New  Zealand,  and  the  manner  in  which 
he  reached  these  islands. 

Hoiraatua,  a  near  relation  of  Turi,  had  a  little 
boy  named  Potikiroroa ;  this  young  fellow  was 
sent  one  day  with  a  message  to  Uenuku,  who  was 
an  ariki,  or  chief  high-priest,  to  let  him  know 
that  a  burnt-offering  had  been  made  to  the  gods, 
of  which  Uenuku,  as  ariki,  was  to  eat  part,  and 
the  little  fellow  accidentally  tripped  and  fell  down 
in  the  very  doorway  of  Wharekura,  the  house  of 
Uenuku,  and  this  being  a  most  unlucky  omen, 
Uenuku  was  dreadfully  irritated,  and  he  laid 
hold  of  the  little  fellow,  and  ate  him  up,  without 
even  having  the  body  cooked,  and  so  the  poor  boy 
perished. 

Turi  was  determined  to  have  revenge  for  this 
barbarous  act,  and  to  slay  some  person  as  a  pay- 
ment for  little  Potikiroroa,  and,  after  casting  about 


THE    EMIGRATION    OF    TURI.  203 

in  his  thoughts  for  some  time  as  to  the  most  effec- 
tual mode  of  doing  this,  he  saw  that  his  best  way 
of  revenging  himself  would  be  to  seize  Hawepotiki, 
the  little  son  of  Uenuku,  and  kill  him. 

One  day  Turi,  in  order  to  entice  the  boy  to 
his  house,  ordered  the  children  of  all  the  people 
who  dwelt  there  with  him  to  begin  playing  toge- 
ther, in  a  place  where  Hawepotiki  could  see  them ; 
so  tliey  began  whipping  their  tops,  and  whirling 
their  whizgigs,  but  it  was  of  no  use  ;  the  little 
fellow  could  not  be  tempted  to  come  and  play  with 
them,   and  that  plan  failed. 

At  last  summer  came  with  its  heats,  scorching 
men's  skins;  and  Turi,  one  very  hot  day,  ordered 
all  the  little  children  to  run  and  bathe  in  the  river 
Waimatuhirangi ;  so  they  all  ran  to  the  river  and 
began  sporting  and  playing  in  the  water.  When 
little  Hawepotiki  saw  all  the  other  lads  swim- 
ming and  playing  in  the  river,  he  was  thrown  off 
his  guard  and  ran  there  too,  and  Turi  waylaid  him, 
and  killed  him  in  a  moment,  and  thus  revenged 
the  death  of  Potikiroroa. 

After  killing  the  poor  boy,  Turi  cut  the 
heart  out  of  his  body,  which  was  eaten  by  him- 
self and  his  friends;  but  when,  shortly  afterwards, 
a  chieftainness,  named  Hotukura,  sent  up  a  pre- 
sent of  baskets  of  food  to  their  sacred  ^^I'ince,  to 
Uenuku,    carried    in    the    usual   way    by  a   long 


204  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

procession  of  people,  some  of  Turi's  friends 
pushed  into  the  basket  of  baked  sweet  potatoes 
prepared  for  Uenuku  the  heart  of  Te  Hawepotiki, 
cut  up  and  baked  too,  and  so  it  was  carried  up  to 
Uenuku  in  the  basket,  and  laid  before  him,  that 
he  might  eat  it. 

Uenuku,  who  had  missed  his  little  boy,  being  still 
unable  to  ascertain  what  had  become  of  him,  could 
not  help  sighing  when  he  saw  such  an  excellent 
feast,  and  said,  "  Poor  little  Hawepotiki,  how  he 
would  have  liked  this,  but  he  now  no  longer  comes 
running  to  sit  by  my  side  at  mealtime  ;"  and  then 
he  himself  ate  the  food  that  was  laid  before  him. 
He  had  hardly,  however,  ended  his  meal,  when 
one  of  Ills  friends,  who  had  found  what  had  been 
done,  came  and  told  him,  saying,  "  They  have 
made  you  eat  a  part  of  Hawepotiki."  And  he 
answered,  "  "Very  well,  let  it  be ;  he  hes  in  the 
belly  of  Toi-te-huatahi ;"  meaning  by  this  proverb, 
that  he  would  have  a  fearful  revenge ;  but  he 
showed  no  other  signs  of  feeling,  that  he  might  not 
gratify  his  enemies  by  manifesting  his  sorrow,  or 
alarm  them  by  loud  threats  of  revenge. 

At  this  time  Turi  was  living  in  a  house,  the  name 
of  which  was  Rangiatea,  and  there  were  born  two 
of  his  children,  Turangaimua  and  Taneroroa.  One 
evening,  shortly  after  the  death  of  Te  Hawepotiki, 
Rongo-rongo,  Turi's  wife,  went  out  of  the  house  to 


THE    EMIGRATION    OF   TURI.  205 

suckle  her  little  girl,  Taneroroa,  and  she  heard 
Uenuku  in  his  house,  named  Wharekura,  chanting 
a  poem,  of  which  tliis  was  the  biu-den : — 

"  Oh  !  let  the  tribes  be  summoned  from  the  south, 
Oh !  let  the  tribes  be  summoned  from  the  north ; 
Let  Xgati-Ruanui  come  in  force  ; 
Let  Kgati-Eongotea's  warriors  too  be  there, 
That  we  may  all  our  foes  destroy, 
And  sweep  them  utterly  away. 
Oh,  they  ate  one  far  nobler  than  themselves." 

When  Rongo-rongo  heard  what  Uenuku  was 
chanting,  she  went  back  to  her  house,  and  said 
to  her  husband,  "Turi,  I  have  just  heard  them 
chanting  this  poem  in  Wharekm-a."  And  Turi 
answered,  "  What  poem  do  you  say  it  was  V  Then 
she  hummed  it  gently  over  to  her  husband,  and 
Tmi  at  once  divined  the  meaning  of  it,*  and  said 
to  his  wife,  "  That  poem  is  meant  for  me ;"  and  he 

*  The  discovery  of  a  plot  by  guessing  the  meaning  of  a  song 
which  persons  were  overheard  singing  was  a  common  circumstance 
Avith  all  the  races  and  throughout  all  the  islands  of  the  Pacific ; 
for  instance,  in  Pitcaim's  Island,  when  first  occupied  bj'  part  of  the 
crew  of  the  "  Bounty  "  and  some  Tahitian  men  and  women,  we  find  : 

"  Brown  and  Christian  were  very  intimate,,  and  their  two  wives 
overheard  one  night  Williams's  second  wife  sing  a  song,  '  Why 
should  the  Tahitian  men  sharjDcn  their  axes  to  cut  ofi"  the  English- 
men's heads  V  The  wives  of  Brown  and  Christian  told  their  husbands 
what  Williams's  second  wife  had  been  singing;  when  Christian  heard 
of  it,  he  went  by  himself  with  his  gun  to  the  house  where  all  the 
Tahitian  men  were  assembled ;  he  pointed  his  gun  at  them,  but  it 
missed  fire.  Two  of  the  natives  ran  away  into  the  bush." — Pitcann's 
Island  and  the  Islanders. 


206  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

knew  this  well,  because,  as  he  had  killed  the  child 
of  Uenuku,  he  guessed  that  they  meant  to  slay  him 
as  a  payment  for  the  boy,  and  that  the  lament 
his  wife  had  heard  evmced  that  they  were  secretly 
laying  their  plans  of  revenge. 

He,  therefore,  at  once  started  off  to  his  father- 
in-law,  Toto,  to  get  a  canoe  from  him,  in  wliicli  he 
might  escape  from  his  enemies  ;  and  Toto  gave 
him  one,  the  name  of  which  was  Aotea;  the  tree 
from  which  it  had  been  made  grew  upon  the 
banks  of  the  Lake  Waiharakeke.  Toto  had 
first  hewn  down  the  tree,  and  then  split  it, 
breaking  it  lengthways  into  two  parts;  out  of 
one  part  of  the  tree  he  made  a  canoe,  which 
he  named  Matahorua,  and  out  of  the  other  part 
he  made  a  canoe  which  he  named  Aotea.  He 
gave  the  canoe  which  he  had  named  Mata- 
horua  to  Kuramarotini ;  and  the  canoe  which  he 
had  named  Aotea  he  made  a  present  of  to  Rongo- 
rongo ;  thus  giving  a  canoe  to  each  of  his  two 
daughters.  Matahorua  was  the  canoe  in  which  a 
large  part  of  the  world  was  explored,  and  Reti  was 
the  name  of  the  man  who  navigated  it. 

One  day  Kupe  and  Hotm-apa  went  out  upon  the 
sea  to  fish  together,  and  when  they  had  anchored 
the  canoe  at  a  convenient  place,  Kupe  let  down 
his  line  into  the  sea ;  and  he  said  to  his  cousin, 
Hoturapa,  "  Hotu',   my  line  is  foul  of  something ; 


THE    EMIGEATION    OF    TUEI.  207 

do  you,  like  a  good  young  fellow,  dive  down  and 
release  it  for  me  ; "  but  Hoturapa  said,  "  Just  give 
me  your  line,  and  let  me  see  if  I  cannot  pull  it 
up  for  you."  But  Kupe  answered,  "  It 's  of  no 
use,  you  cannot  do  it ;  you  liad  better  give  a 
plunge  in  at  once,  and  pull  it  up."  This  was  a 
mere  stratagem  upon  the  part  of  Kupe,  that  he 
might  obtain  possession  of  Km-amarotini,  who  was 
Hoturapa's  wife ;  however,  Hoturapa  not  suspect- 
ing tliis,  good-naturedly  dived  down  at  once  to 
bring  up  Kupe's  line ;  and  as  soon  as  he  had 
made  his  plunge,  Kupe  at  once  cut  the  rope 
which  was  attached  to  the  anchor,  and  paddled 
off  for  the  shore  as  fast  he  could  go,  to  carry  off 
Hotiu-apa's  wife,  Kuramarotini.  When  Hoturapa 
came  up  to  the  surface  of  the  water,  the  canoe  was 
already  a  long  distance  from  him,  and  he  cried  out 
to  Kupe,  "  Oh,  Kupe,  bring  the  canoe  back  here  to 
take  me  in."  But  Kupe  would  not  listen  to  him, 
he  brought  not  back  the  canoe,  and  so  Hoturapa 
perished.  Kupe  then  made  haste,  and  carried  off 
Kuramarotini,  and  to  escape  from  the  vengeance  of 
the  relations  of  Hoturapa,  he  fled  away  with  her, 
on  the  ocean,  in  her  canoe  Matahorua,  and  dis- 
covered the  islands  of  New  Zealand,  and  coasted 
entirely  round  them,  without  finding  any  inhabi- 
tants. 

As  Kupe  was  proceeding  down  the  east  coast  of 


208  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

New  Zealand,  and  had  readied  Castle  Point,  a 
great  cuttle-fish,  alarmed  at  the  sight  of  a  canoe 
with  men  in  it,  fled  away  from  a  large  cavern 
which  exists  in  the  south  headland  of  the  cove 
there ;  it  fled  before  Kupe,  in  the  direction  of  Rau- 
kawa,  or  Cook's  Straits ;  when  Kupe  arrived  at 
those  straits,  he  crossed  them  in  his  canoe,  to 
examine  the  middle  islands ;  seeing  the  entrance  of 
Awa-iti,  (now  called  Tory  Channel,)  running  deep 
up  into  the  land,  he  turned  his  canoe  in  there 
to  explore  it ;  he  found  a  very  strong  current 
coming  out  from  between  the  lands,  and  named 
the  entrance  Kura-te-au ;  strong  as  the  current 
was,  Kupe  stemmed  it  in  his  canoe,  and  ascended 
it,  until  he  was  just  surmounting  the  crown 
of  the  rapid.  The  great  cuttle-fish  or  dragon, 
that  had  fled  from  Castle  Point,  which  Kupe 
named  Te  Wheke-a-Muturangi,  or  the  cuttle-fish 
of  Muturangi,  had  fled  to  Tory  Channel,  and 
was  lying  hid  in  this  part  of  the  current.  The 
monster  heard  the  canoe  of  Kupe  approaching  as 
they  were  pulling  up  the  current,  and  raised  its 
arms  above  the  waters  to  catch  and  devour  the 
canoe,  men  and  all.  As  it  thus  floated  upon  the 
water,  Kupe  saw  it,  and  pondered  how  he  might 
destroy  the  terrible  monster.  At  last  he  thought  of 
a  plan  for  doing  this;  he  had  already  found  that, 
although  he  kept  on  chopping  off  portions  of   its 


THE    EMIGKATION    OF    TURI.  209 

gigantic  arms,  furnished  with  suckers,  as  it  tried 
to  fold  them  about  the  canoe,  in  order  to  pull  it 
down,  the  monster  was  too  fierce  to  care  for  this  ; 
so  Kupe  seized  an  immense  hollow  calabash  he 
had  on  board  to  carry  his  water  in,  and  threw  it 
overboard ;  hardly  had  it  touched  the  water  ere 
the  monster  flew  at  it,  thinking  that  it  was  the 
canoe  of  Kupe,  and  that  he  would  destroy  it ;  so 
it  reared  its  whole  body  out  of  the  water,  to  press 
down  the  huge  calabash  under  it,  and  Kupe,  as  he 
stood  in  his  canoe,  being  in  a  most  excellent  posi- 
tion to  cut  it  with  his  axe,  seized  the  oppor- 
tunity, and,  striking  it  a  tremendous  blow,  he 
severed  it  in  two,  and  killed  it.* 

The  labours  of  Kupe  consisted  in  this,  that  he 
discovered  these  islands,  and  examined  the  different 
openings  which  he  found  running  up  into  the  coun- 
try. He  only  found  two  inhabitants  in  the  coun- 
try, a  bird  which  he  named  the  Kokako,  and  an- 
other bird  which  he  named  the  Tiwaiwaka ;  he, 
however,  did  not  ultimately  remain  in  these  islands, 
but  returned  to  his  own  house,  leaving  the  oj)en- 
ings  he  had  examined  in  the  country  as  signs  that 
he  had  been  here. 


*  They  show  several  spots  upon  the  east  coast  where  Kupe 
touched  with  his  canoes ;  but  I  have  not  yet  had  time  to  arrange 
and  transcribe  the  various  traditions  connected  with  his  landing  at 
those  places. — G.  G. 


210  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

Thus  he  left  his  marks  here,  but  he  himself  re- 
turned to  his  own  country,  where  he  found  Turi 
and  all  his  people  still  dwelling  ;  although  it  was 
now  the  fourth  year  fi*om  that  one  in  which  he 
had  slain  little  Hawepotiki;  but  Turi  was  then  on 
the  point  of  flying  to  escape  from  the  vengeance  of 
Uenuku,  and  as  he  heard  of  the  discoveries  Kupe 
had  made,  he  determined  to  come  to  these  islands. 
So  he  liad  his  canoe,  the  Aotea,  dragged  down  to 
the  shore  in  the  night,  and  Kupe,  who  happened  to 
be  near  the  place,  and  heard  the  bottom  of  the  canoe 
grating  upon  the  beach  as  they  hauled  it  along, 
went  to  see  what  was  going  on ;  and  when  he 
found  what  Turi  was  about  to  do,  he  said  to 
liim,  "Now,  mind,  Turi,  keep  ever  steering  to  the 
eastward,  where  the  sun  rises  ;  keep  the  bow  of 
your  canoe  ever  steadily  directed  towards  that 
point  of  the  sky."  Turi  answered  him,  "You  had 
better  accompany  me,  Kupe.  Come,  let  us  go  to- 
gether." And  when  Kupe  heard  this,  he  said  to 
Turi,  "  Do  3'ou  think  that  Kupe  will  ever  return 
there  again  V  and  he  then  continued,  "  When  you 
arrive  at  the  islands,  you  had  better  go  at  once  and 
examine  the  river  that  I  discovered  [said  to  be  the 
Patca]  ;  its  mouth  opens  direct  to  the  westward ; 
you  will  find  but  two  inhabitants  there  [meaning 
the  Kokako  and  Tiwaiwaka] ;  one  of  them  carries 
its  tail  erect  and  sticking  out ;    now  do  not  mis- 


THE    EMIGRATION    OF    TURI,  211 

take  the  voice  of  one  of  them  for  that  of  a  man,  for 
it  calls  out  jast  like  one  ;  and  if  you  stand  on  one 
side  of  the  river,  and  call  out  to  them,  you  will 
hear  their  cries  answering  you  from  the  other. 
That  will  be  the  very  spot  that  I  mentioned  to 
you.   * 

Turi's  brother-in-law,  Tuau,  now  called  out  to 
him,  "  Why,  Turi,  the  paddles  you  are  taking  with 
you  are  good  for  notliing,  for  they  are  made  from  the 
huhoe-tree ;"  Turi  replied,  "  Wherever  can  I  get 
other  paddles  now?"  and  Tuau  answered,  "Just 
wait  a  little,  imtil  I  run  for  the  paddles  of  Taipa- 
rae-roa;"  and  he  brought  back,  and  put  on  board 
the  canoe,  two  paddles,  the  names  of  which  were 
E-angihorona  and  Kautu-ki-te-rangi,  and  two 
bailers,  the  names  of  which  were  Tipuahoronuku 
and  Rangi-ka-wdieriko.  Then  Turi  said,  "  Tuau, 
come  out  a  little  way  to  sea  with  me,  and 
then  return  again,  when  you  have  seen  me  fitirly 
started  upon  my  long  voyage."  To  this  Tuau 
cheerfully  consented,  and  got  into  the  canoe, 
which  was  already  afloat ;  then  were  carried  on 
board  all  the  articles  which  the  voyagers  were  to 
take ;    and   their    friends  put  on  board  for  them 

•  It  will  be  Been  that  they  did  not  follow  Kupe'fi  directions,  think- 
ing that  he  was  deceiving  them,  he  being  probably  friendly  to 
Uenuku. 


212  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

seed,  sweet  potatoes,  of  the  species  called  Te  Kakau, 
and  dried  stones  of  the  berries  of  the  Karaka-tree ; 
and  some  live  edible  rats  in  boxes,  and  some  tame 
green  parrots  ;  and  added  some  pet  Pukekos,  or 
large  water-hens ;  and  many  other  valuable  things 
were  put  on  board  the  canoe,  whence  the  proverb, 
"  The  Ao tea's  valuable  freight." 

At  last  away  floated  the  canoe,  whilst  it  was 
yet  night,  and  Tuau  sat  at  the  stern,  gently  pad- 
dling as  they  dropped  out  from  the  harbour" ;  but 
when  they  got  to  its  mouth,  Turi  called  out  to  his 
brother-in-law,  "Tuau,  you  come  and  sit  for  a 
little  at  the  house  amidships,  on  the  floor  of  the 
double  canoe,  and  let  me  take  the  paddle  and  pull 
till  I  warm  myself."  So  Tuau  came  amidships, 
and  sat  down  with  the  people  there,  whilst  Turi 
went  astern  and  took  his  paddle.  Then  Turi  and 
his  people  pulled  as  hard  as  they  could,  and  were 
soon  far  outside  the  harbour,  in  the  wide  sea, 
Tuau,  who  had  intended  to  land  at  the  heads,  at  last 
turned  to  see  what  distance  they  had  got.  Alas  ! 
alas  !  they  were  far  out  at  sea ;  then  he  called 
out  to  Turi,  "  Oh,  Turi,  Turi,  pray  turn  back  the 
canoe  and  land  me."  But  not  the  least  attention 
did  Turi  pay  to  him ;  he  persisted  in  carrying  off 
his  brother-in-law  with  him,  although  there  was 
Tuau  weeping  and  grieviug  when  he  thought  of  his 


THE    EMIGRATION    OF   TUEI.  213 

children  and  wife,  and  lamenting  as  lie  exclaimed, 
"  How  shall  I  ever  get  back  to  my  dear  wife  and 
children  from  the  place  where  you  are  going  to  I" 
But  what  does  Turi  care  for  that ;  he  still  thinks 
fit  to  cany  him  off  with  him,  and  Tuau  cannot  now 
help  himself.  They  were  now  so  far  out  at  sea  that 
he  could  not  gain  the  shore,  for  he  could  scarce^ 
have  seen  where  the  land  was  whilst  swimming  in 
the  water,  as  it  was  during  the  night-time  that 
they  started. 

Lo  !  the  dawn  breaks ;  but  hardly  had  the  day- 
light of  the  first  morning  of  their  voyage  appeared, 
than  one  of  the  party,  named  Tapo,  became  insolent 
and  disobedient  to  Turi.  His  chief  was  therefore 
very  wroth  with  him,  and  hove  him  overboard  into 
the  sea  ;  and  when  Tapo  found  himself  in  the  water, 
and  saw  the  canoe  shooting  ahead,  he  called  out  to 
Turi  quite  cheerfully  and  jocosely,  "  I  say,  old  fellow, 
come  now,  let  me  live  in  the  world  a  little  longfer  ;" 
and  when  they  heard  him  call  out  in  this  manner, 
they  knew  he  must  be  under  the  protection  of  the 
god  Maru,  and  said,  "  Here  is  Maru,  here  is  Maru." 
So  they  hauled  him  into  the  canoe  again,  and  saved 
•his  life. 

At  last  the  seams  of  Turi's  canoe  opened  in  holes 
in  many  places,  and  the  water  streamed  into  it, 
and  they  rapidly  dipped  the  bailers  into  the  water 
and   dashed   it   out  over  the  sides  ;    Turi,  in  the 


214  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY 

meanwhile,  reciting  aloud  an  incantation,  which 
was  efficacious  in  preventing  a  canoe  from  being 
swamped ;  they  succeeded  at  length,  by  these 
means,  in  reaching  a  small  island  which  lies  in 
mid-ocean,  which  they  named  Rangitahua ;  there 
they  landed,  and  ripped  all  the  old  lashings  out  of 
the  seams  of  the  canoe,  and  re-lashed  the  top  sides 
on  to  it,  and  thoroughly  refitted  it. 

Amongst  the  chiefs  who  landed  there  wdth  them 
was  one  named  Porua,  whose  canoe  was  called  Te 
Ririno.  They  were  carrying  some  dogs  with  them, 
as  these  would  be  very  valuable  in  the  islands  they 
were  going  to,  for  supplying  by  their  increase  a 
good  article  of  food,  and  skins  for  warm  cloaks  ; 
on  this  island,  they,  however,  killed  two  of  them, 
the  names  of  which  were  Whakapapa-tuakura  and 
Tanga-kakariki ;  the  first  of  these  they  cooked  and 
shared  amongst  them,  but  the  second  they  cut  up 
raw  as  an  offering  for  the  gods,  and  laid  it  cut  open 
in  every  part  before  them,  and  built  a  sacred  place, 
and  set  up  pillars  for  the  spirits,  that  they  might 
entirely  consume  the  sacrifice  ;  and  they  took  the 
enchanted  apron  of  the  spirits,  and  spread  it  open 
before  them,  and  wearied  the  spirits  by  calling 
on  them  for  some  omen,  saying,  "  Come,  mani- 
fest yourselves  to  us,  O  gods ;  make  haste  and 
declare  the  future  to  us.  It  may  be  now,  that  we 
shall  not  succeed  in  passing  to  the  other  side  of  the 


THE    EMIGRATION    OF   TURI.  215 

ocean  ;  but  if  you  manifest  yourselves  to  us,  and 
are  present  with  us,  we  shall  pass  there  in  safety." 
Then  they  rose  up  from  prayer,  and  roasted  with 
fire  the  dog  which  they  were  offering  as  a  sacri- 
fice, and  holding  the  sacrifice  aloft,  called  over  the 
names  of  the  spirits  to  whom  the  offering  was 
made  ;  and  having  thus  appeased  the  wrath  of  the. 
offended  spirits,  they  again  stuck  up  posts  for  them, 
saying  as  they  did  so — 

"  'T  is  the  post  -n-hich  stands  above  there  ;  ' 
'T  is  the  post  wliicli  stands  in  the  heavens, 
Near  Atutahimarehua." 

Thus  they  removed  all  ill-luck  from  the  canoes, 
by  repeating  over  them  prayers  called  Keuenga, 
Takanga,  Wliakainuinumanga,  &c.   &:c. 

When  all  these  ceremonies  were  ended,  a  very 
angry  discussion  arose  between  Potoru  and  Turi,  as 
to  the  direction  they  should  now  sail  in  ;  Turi  per- 
sisted in  wishing  to  pursue  an  easterly  course, 
saying,  "  Nay,  nay,  let  us  still  sail  towards  the 
quarter  where  the  sun  first  flares  up  \'  but  Potoru 
answered  him,  "  But  I  say  nay,  nay,  let  us  proceed 
towards  that  quarter  of  the  heavens  in  which  the 
sun  sets/'  Turi  replied,  "  Why,  did  not  Kupe, 
who  had  visited  these  islands,  particularly  tell  us  ? 
Now  mind,  let  nothing  induce  you  to  turn  the 
prow  of  the  canoe  away  from  that  quarter  of  the 


216  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

heavens  in  which  the  sun  rises."  However,  Potoru 
still  persisted  in  his  opinion,  and  at  last  Turi  gave 
up  the  point,  and  let  him  have  his  own  way  ;  so 
they  embarked  and  left  the  island  of  Rangitahua, 
and  sailed  on  a  westerly  course. 

After  they  had  pursued  this  course  for  some 
time,  the  canoe  Ririno  getting  into  the  surf,  near 
some  rocks,  was  lost  on  a  reef  which  they  named 
Taputapuatea,  being  swept  away  by  a  strong  cur- 
rent, a  rapid  current,  by  a  swift  running  current, 
swiftly  running  on  to  the  realms  of  death  ;  and  the 
E/irino  was  dashed  to  pieces  :  hence  to  the  present 
day  is  preserved  this  proverb,  "  You  are  as  obsti- 
nate as  Potoru,  who  persisted  in  rushing  on  to  his 
own  destruction."' 

When  the  Ririno  had  thus  been  lost,  Turi,  in  the 
Aotea.,  pursued  his  course  towards  the  quarter  of  the 
rising  sun,  and  wliilst  they  were  yet  in  mid-ocean, 
a  child,  v^^liom  he  named  Tutawa,  was  born  to 
Turi ;  they  had  then  but  nine  sweet  potatoes  left, 
and  Turi  took  one  of  these,  leaving  now  but  eight, 
and  he  offered  the  one  he  took  as  a  sacrifice  to  the 
spirits,  and  touched  with  it  the  palate  of  little 
Tutawa,  born  in  mid-ocean,  at  the  same  time  re- 
peating the  fitting  prayers.  When  they  drew  near 
the  shore  of  these  islands,  one  of  the  crew,  named 
Tuanui-a-te-ra,  was  very  disobedient  and  insolent 
to  Turi,  who,  getting  exceedingly  provoked  with 


THE    EMIGRATION    OF    TURI.  217 

him,  threw  him  overboard  into  the  sea.  When 
they  had  got  near  enough  to  the  shore  to  see  dis- 
tinctly, they  foolishly  threw  the  red  ornaments 
they  wore  on  their  heads,  (named  Pohutukawa,) 
into  the  sea,  these  being  old,  dirty,  and  faded, 
from  length  of  wear,  for  they  thought,  although 
wrongly,  the  red  things  they  saw  in  such  abun- 
dance on  the  shore  were  similar  ornaments. 

At  length  the  Aotea  is  run  up  on  the  beach  of 
these  islands,  and  the  wearied  voyagers  spring  out 
of  her  on  to  the  sands,  and  the  first  thing  they  re- 
mark are  the  footprints  of  a  man ;  they  run  to 
examine  them,  and  find  them  to  be  those  of  Tua- 
nui-a-te-ra,  whom  Turi  had  shortly  before  thrown 
overboard  ;  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  this,  because 
some  of  the  footprints  are  crooked,  exactly  suiting 
a  deformed  foot  which  he  had. 

Turi  having  rested  after  his  voyage,  determined 
to  start  and  seek  for  the  river  Patea,  which  Kupe 
had  described  to  him,  and  he  left  his  canoe  Aotea 
in  the  harbour,  which  he  named  after  it.  He  tra- 
velled along  the  coast-line  from  Aotea  to  Patea, 
having  sent  one  party  before  him,  under  Punga- 
rehu,  ordering  them  to  plant  the  stones  of  the 
berries  of  the  Karaka-tree,  which  they  had  brought 
with  them,  all  along  their  route,  in  order  that  so 
valuable  an  article  of   food   might   be    introduced 


218  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

into  these  islands.  Turi,  who  followed  with  an- 
other party  after  Pungarehu,  gave  names  to  all 
the  places  as  they  came  along ;  when  he  reached 
the  harbour  of  Kawhia,  he  gave  it  that  name  or 
the  awhinga  of  Turi  ;  then  he  came  to  Marokopa, 
or  the  place  that  Turi  wound  round  to  another 
spot ;  the  river  Waitara  he  named  from  the  ta- 
ranga,  or  wide  steps  which  he  took  in  fording  it 
at  its  mouth  ;  Mokau,  or  Mockau,  he  named  from 
his  sleeping  there ;  at  Manga-ti,  they  opened  and 
spread  out  an  enchanted  garment  named  Hunokiko, 
and  as  all  the  people  gazed  at  it,  Turi  named 
the  place  Matakitaki ;  at  another  place  (near  the 
lake  at  the  Gray  institution  at  Taranaki),  Turi  took 
up  a  handful  of  earth  to  smell  it,  that  he  might 
guess  whether  the  soil  was  good  enough,  and  he 
named  that  place  Hongihongi ;  another  i^lace,  six 
miles  to  the  south  of  Taranaki,  he  named  Tapuwae, 
or  the  footsteps  of  Turi ;  another  place  he  named 
Oakura,  from  the  bright  redness  of  the  enchanted 
cloak  Hunokiko ;  another  place  Katikara,  twelve 
miles  south  of  Taranaki ;  another  river  he  named 
Raoa,  from  a  piece  of  food  he  was  eating  nearlj- 
choking  him  there ;  another  spot  he  named  Ka- 
upoko-nui  (a  river  thirty-four  miles  north-west 
of  Patea),  or  the  head  of  Turi ;  when  they  ar- 
rived there,   the  enchanted    cloak    Hunokiko  was 


THE    EMIGRATION    OF    TURI.  219 

twice  opened  and  spread  out,  so  he  called  the  spot 
Marae-kura ;  a  place  that  they  encamped  at  he 
named  Kapuni  (a  river  a^  Waimate),  or  the  encamp- 
ment of  Turi ;  another  place  he  called  Waingon- 
goro,  or  the  place  at  which  Turi  snored ;  another 
spot  he  named  Tangahoe,  after  his  paddle  ;  Ohin- 
gahape,  he  named  after  the  crooked  foot  of  Tua- 
nui-a-te-ra  ;  a  head-land  where  there  was  a  natural 
bridge  running  over  a  cave,  he  named  Whiti-kau, 
from  the  long  time  he  was  fording  in  the  water  to 
turn  the  headland,  because  he  did  not  like  to  cross 
the  bridge  (this  is  five  miles  north  of  Patea). 

At  length  he  reached  the  river  which  Kupe  had 
described  to  him  ;  there  he  built  a  pa,  or  fortress, 
which  he  named  Rangitaawhi,  and  there  he  erected 
a  post  which  he  named  Whakatopea,  and  he  built 
a  house  which  he  named  Matangirie,  and  he  laid 
down  a  door-sill,  or  threshold,  which  he  named 
Paepaehakehake ;  and  he  built  a  small  elevated 
storehouse  to  hold  his  food,  and  he  named  it  Pae« 
ahua;  the  river  itself  he  named  Patea  ;  and  he  dug 
a  well  which  he  named  Parara-ki-te-uru.  The  farm 
he  cultivated  there  he  named  Hekeheke-i-papa ;  the 
wooden  spade  he  made  he  called  Tipu-i-ahuma  : 
then  he  had  his  farm  dug  up,  and  the  chant  they 
sang  to  encourage  themselves,  and  to  keep  time  as 
they  dug,  was — 

L  2 


220  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

"  Break  up  our  goddess  mother, 
Break  up  the  ancient  goddess  earth;] 
We  speak  of  you,  oh,  earth  f  but  do  not  you  disturb 
The  plants  we  have  brought  hither  from  Hawaiki  tlie  noble ; 
It  was  Maui  who  scraped  the  earfh  in  heaps  round  the  sides. 
In  Kuratau." 


There  they  planted  the  farm  ;  they  had  but  eight 
seed  potatoes,  but  tliey  divided  these  into  small 
pieces,  which  they  put  separately  into  the  ground ; 
and  when  the  shoots  sprang  up,  Turi  made  the 
place  sacred  with  prayers  and  incantations,  lest  any 
one  should  venture  there  and  hurt  the  plants  ;  the 
name  of  the  incantation  he  used  was  Ahuaroa ; 
then  harvest-time  came,  they  gathered  in  the  crop 
of  sweet  potatoes,  and  found  that  they  had  eight 
hundred  baskets  of  them.  The  deeds  above  related 
were  those  which  our  ancestor  Turi  performed ; 
Rongo-rongo  was  the  name  of  his  principal  wife, 
and  they  had  several  children,  from  whom  sprang 
the  tribes  of  Ahao-anui  and  the  Ng-ate-mamui 
tiibe. 


LEGEND  OF  THE  EMIGRATION   OF 
MANAIA, 

(the  PEOaENITOR  OF  THE  NGATI-AWA   TRIBES). 

The  cause  which  led  Manaia  to  come  here  from 
Hawaiki,  was  his  being  very  badly  treated  by  a 
large  party  of  his  friends  and  neighbours,  whom, 
according  to  the  usual  custom  when  a  chief  has 
any  heavy  work  to  be  done,  he  had  collected  to 
make  his  spears  for  him,  for  they  violently  ravished 
his  wife  Rongotiki. 

It  chanced  thus — One  day  Manaia  determined 
to  have  his  neighbours  all  warned  to  come  to  a 
gTeat  gathering  of  people  for  the  purpose  of  making 
spears  for  him,  so  he  sent  round  a  messenger  to 
collect  them,  and  the  messenger  arrived  at  the 
place  of  Tupenu,  who  listened  to  his  message,  and 
he  being  chief  of  the  tribe  who  lived  at  that  place, 
encom-aged  his  people  to  go  in  obedience  to  the 
message  of  Manaia ;  they  went  and  set  to  work, 
and  after  some  time  it  happened  that  Manaia  felt 
a  wish  to  go  and  catch  some  fish  for  his  workmen ; 


222  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

SO  he  went  off  in  his  canoe  with  several  of  his 
people.  After  he  had  been  gone  for  some  time  the 
workmen  proposed  amongst  themselves  to  assault 
Rongotiki,  the  Avife  of  Manaia  ;  and  they  carried 
their  intentions  into  execution  without  any  one 
knowing  what  they  were  doing;  all  this  time  Manaia, 
suspecting  nothing,  was  paddling  in  his  canoe  out  to 
sea,  and  when  he  reached  the  fishing-ground,  they 
lay  on  their  paddles.  Manaia's  people  soon  caught 
plenty  of  fish,  but  he  had  not  even  a  single  bite, 
imtil  at  last,  as  they  were  on  the  point  of  return- 
ing, he  felt  a  fish  nibbling  at  liis  hook,  so  he  gave  a 
jerk  to  his  line  to  pull  it  up ;  and  when  he  got  the  fish 
up  to  the  side  of  the  canoe,  to  his  surprise  he  saw 
that  the  hook  was  not  in  the  mouth  of  the  fish,  but 
fast  in  its  tail  ;  and  as  this  had  long  been  esteemed 
as  a  sign  that  your  wife  was  being  insulted  by 
somebody,  he  at  once  knew  how  his  had  been 
treated  by  his  workmen  ;  without  waiting,  there- 
fore, a  moment  longer,  he  said  to  his  crew,  "  Heave 
up  tlie  anchor,  we  will  return  to  the  shore ;"  so 
they  hove  up  the  anchor,  and  shaped  a  course  for 
the  landing-place  on  the  main  ;  whilst  they  were 
pulling  into  the  shore,  Manaia  took  the  fish  he 
had  caught,  and  with  the  hook  still  flist  in  its 
tail,  tied  it  on  to  one  of  the  thwarts  of  the  canoe, 
and  left  it  there,  in  order  that  when  Rongotiki  saw 
it  she  might  know  without  his  telling  her,  that  he 


TEEE    FERN. 


THE    EMIGKATION    OF    MANAIA.  223 

was  aware  that  she  had  been  badly  treated  by  his 
workmen. 

At  length  his  canoe  reached  the  shore,  and  the 
crew  jumping  out,  hauled  it  up  on  the  sandy 
beach,  and  Manaia  leaving  it  there,  walked  home 
towards  his  village  ;  when  he  had  got  near  home, 
his  wife  seeing  him  approach,  arose  and  made  the 
fire  ready  to  roast  some  fern-root  for  her  husband, 
who  she  thought  would  come  back  hungTy  ;  and 
when  he  reached  home  the  fire  was  lighted,  and 
she  was  sitting  by  the  side  of  it  roasting  the 
fern-root,  and  she  made  signs  to  him  by  which  he 
might  know  what  had  happened ;  but  he  knew 
it  already  from  the  manner  in  which  his  hook  had 
caught  in  the  tail  of  the  fish  ;  then  he  sent  his 
wife  to  fetch  the  fish,  saying,  "  Mother,  go  and 
fetch  the  fish  I  have  caught  from  my  canoe  \'  so 
she  went,  and  when  she  got  there,  she  found  that 
there  were  no  fish  but  the  single  one,  hanging  to 
the  thwart  of  the  canoe,  with  a  hook  fast  in  its 
tail ;  then  she  took  that  fish  and  carried  it  home  with 
her,  and  when  she  got  there,  Manaia  said,  "  That  is 
the  fish  I  meant  you  to  bring,  lest  you  should  have 
said  that  I  did  not  know  what  had  taken  place 
until  you  told  me." 

Manaia  then  turned  over  in  his  mind  various 
plans  for  revenging  himself  v;pon  the  people  who 
had  acted  in  so  brutal  a  manner  towards  his  wife. 


224  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

and  he  consulted  with  his  own  tribe  how  they  might 
destroy  those  who  had  thus  injured  him ;  when 
the  tribe  of  Manaia  heard  what  had  taken  place, 
they  all  arose  to  seek  revenge ;  but  before  the 
fighting  which  arose  from  this  affair  broke  out, 
Manaia  went  to  the  people  who  had  wronged  his 
wife,  and  told  them,  "  That  he  hoped  they  would 
make  the  spears  large  and  strong,  and  not  put  him 
off  with  weak  things,  but  rather  make  them  stout 
and  strong  ; "  this  was  a  mere  piece  of  deceit  on 
his  part,  in  order  that  when  he  attacked  them, 
their  weapons  might  be  too  heavy  readily  to 
parry  their  enemies'  blows   with  them. 

All  these  preparations  having  been  made,  Ma- 
naia lay  in  ambush  with  some  of  his  people,  and 
when  the  opportunity  of  rushing  on  their  enemies 
presented  itself,  Manaia  nudged  with  his  elbow  his 
son,  Tu-ure-nui,  who  was  lying  by  his  side,  to 
encourage  him  to  distinguish  himself  by  rusliing 
in,  and  killing  the  first  man  of  the  enemy  ;  but 
being  afraid  to  go  he  did  not  move,  and  whilst 
Manaia  was  encouraging  him  in  vain,  another 
young  man,  the  name  of  whose  father  had  never 
been  told  by  his  mother,  rushed  forward  and  slew 
the  first  of  the  enemy,  and  as  with  his  weapon  he 
struck  him  down,  he  cried  out,  "  The  first  slain  of 
the  enemy  belongs  to  me,  to  Kahu-kaka-m^i,  the 
son  of  Manaia;"    then  for  the  first  time  Manaia 


THE    EMIGKATION    OF    MANAIA.  225 

knew  that  tins  young  man  was  Ms  son,  his  last 
born  son ;  he  had  before  thought  that  Tu-ure-nui 
had  been  his  only  son ;  but  when  the  other  young 
man  called  out  his  name,  he  knew  that  he  also  was 
his  son,  and,  pleased  with  his  courage,  he  loved  him 
very  much.. 

The  people  lying  in  ambush,  all  followed  the 
youth  when  he  rushed  on  their  enemies,  and  slaugh- 
tered them  ;  but  their  chief  Tupenu  fled  by  the  way 
of  the  beach  of  Pikopikoi-whiti,  and  Manaia  pursued 
him  closely,  but  was  not  fleet  enough  of  foot  to 
catch  him  ;  then  he  called  out  to  his  wife,  Rongo- 
tiki,  to  utter  incantations  to  weaken  his  enemy  ; 
and  she  did  so,  repeating  an  incantation  termed 
Tapuwae,  and  when  she  had  finished  that,  by  her 
enchantments  she  rendered  the  flying  warrior  faint 
and  feeble,  so  that  Manaia  rapidly  gained  on  him, 
caught  him,  and  slew  him. 

Thus  perished  Tapenu  and  the  party  of  people 
whom  he  had  taken  with  him  to  work  for  Manaia; 
the  report  of  what  had  occurred  soon  spread 
throughout  the  country,  and  at  last  reached  the 
tribe  of  Tupenu  ;  and  when  they  heard  it,  they  said, 
"  Your  relatives  have  perished."  Their  army  col- 
lected and  started  to  avenge  themselves  on  Manaia 
and  his  tribe,  and  to  destroy  them ;  they  slew 
many  of  them,  and  continued  from  time  to  time  to 

L  3 


226  POLYNESiiUsr  mythology, 

attack  them,  so  that  their  numbers  dwindled  away, 
till  at  length  Manaia  becjan  to  reflect  within 
himself,  saying,  "  Ah,  ah,  my  warriors  are  wasting 
away,  and  by  and  bye,  perhaps,  I  also  shall  be 
slain  ;  rather  than  let  this  state  of  things  continue, 
I  had  better  abandon  this  country,  and,  removing 
to  a  great  distance,  seek  a  new  one  for  myself 
and  my  people." 

Having  made  up  his  mind  to  act  in  this  way,  he 
began  to  repair  a  canoe  and  to  fit  it  for  sea;  the 
name  of  the  canoe  was  Tokomaru,  it  belonged  to 
his  brother-in-law :  when  it  was  fit  for  sea,  he 
asked  his  brother-in-law,  "  Will  you  not  consent  to 
accompany  me  on  this  voyage  ? "  and  the  latter 
asked  in  reply,  "  Where  do  you  want  me  to  accom- 
pany you  to  V  Manaia  said,  "  I  wish  you  to  bear 
"  me  company  on  this  voyage  which  I  am  about  to 
undertake,  to  search  for  a  new  and  distant  country 
for  both  of  us  ■/'  but  his  brother-in-law,  when  he 
understood  what  Manaia  was  pressing  him  to  do, 
3'eplied,  "No,  I  will  not  go  with  you;"  Manaia 
answered,   "  That  is  right,  do  you  remain  here." 

When  the  canoe  was  quite  fit  for  sea,  they 
dragged  it  down  to  the  water,  and  hauled  it  into 
the  sea  until  it  floated  ;  then  they  brought  down 
the  cargo  and  stowed  it  away,  and  Manaia  embarked 
in  it   with  his  wife,  his  children,  and  liis   depend- 


THE    EMIGRATION    OF    MANAIA.  227 

ants,  and  then  he  said  to  some  of  his  warriors, 
"  Let  my  brother-in-law  now  be  slain  as  an  offering 
for  the  gods,  that  they  may  prove  propitious  to  this 
canoe  of  ours." 

So  he  called  to  his  brother-in-law,  who  was 
standing  on  the  shore,  bidding  him  farewell ; 
"  T  say,  wade  out  to  me  for  one  minute,  that  I 
may  tell  you  something,  and  take  my  last  fare- 
well, for  I  am  going  to  part  for  ever  from  you, 
leaving  you  here  behind  me." 

When  Manaia's  brother-in-law  heard  this,  he  be- 
gan to  wade  out  to  him  ;  at  first  the  water  hardly 
covered  his  ankles,  next  it  touched  his  knees,  at  last 
it  came  up  above  his  loins,  and  when  it  had  reached 
so  high  he  said,  "  Shove  the  canoe  in  a  little  nearer 
the  shore,  I  shall  be  under  water  directly  ;"  but 
Manaia  answered  him,  "  Wade  away,  there  is  no 
depth  of  water  ;"  and  to  deceive  him  better,  he  kept 
on  pretending  to  touch  the  bottom  with  a  stick ; 
and  the  poor  fellow  having  no  suspicion,  believed 
what  Manaia  said,  that  the  water  was  not  deep  ; 
but  Manaia  had  spoken  before  to  his  people,  say- 
ing, "  Let  him  come  on,  out  into  the  deep  water, 
until  his  feet  cannot  touch  the  bottom,  then  seize 
him  by  the  head  and  slay  him/'  At  length  his 
feet  could  no  longer  touch  the  bottom,  and  he 
found  himself  swimming  close  to  the  canoe  ;  then 
Manaia  seized  him  by  the  head,  with  one  blow  of 


228  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY 

his  stone  battle-axe  he  clave  it,  and  his  brother-in- 
law  perished. 

Having  thus  slain  his  victim,  he  caught  up  his  dog 
V5^hich  had  swam  out  with  its  master,  and  lifting  it 
into  the  canoe,  he  sailed  away,  to  search  for  a  new 
country  for  himself. 

He  sailed  on  and  on,  and  had  proceeded  very 
far  fi-om  the  land  they  had  quitted,  when  one  day 
the  dog  Manaia  had  taken  into  the  canoe  scented 
land,  and  howled  loudly,  struggling  to  get  loose 
and  jump  overboard  into  the  water ;  the  people 
in  the  canoe  were  much  surprised  at  this,  and 
said,  "  Why,  what  can  be  the  matter  with  the 
dog?''  And  some  of  them  said,  "We'd  better  let 
him  go  if  he  wishes  it,  and  see  what  comes 
of  it ;"  so  they  let  the  dog  loose,  and  he  jumped 
overboard,  and  swam  on  ahead  of  the  canoe, 
howhng  loudly  as  he  went,  and  this  he  continued 
to  do,  till  at  last  night  fell  on  them  :  the  canoe 
still  followed  for  a  long  time  the  low  faint  howl- 
ing of  the  dog,  which  they  could  only  indis- 
tinctly hear  ;  at  last  he  had  got  so  far  off  they 
could  no  longer  distinguish  it,  but  the  dog,  after 
swimming  for  a  long  time,  finally  reached  land. 

In  the  meantime  the  canoe  came  following 
straight  on  the  track  which  the  dog  had  taken, 
and  when  at  length  the  night  ended,  and  the  day 
began  to   break,    they    again    heard    the   howling 


THE    EMIGRATION    OF    MANAIA.  229 

of  the  dog,  which  had  landed  close  to  the  stranded 
carcass  of  a  whale ;  they  pulled  eagerly  to  the 
shore,  and  as  soon  as  they  reached  it,  there  they 
saw  the  whale  lying  stranded,  and  the  dog  by 
its  side ;  and  there  they  landed  on  this  island, — 
on  Aotea. 

They  were  rejoiced,  indeed,  when  they  ascer- 
tained this  was  the  country  for  which  they  had 
been  seeking ;  first,  they  allotted  out  equally 
amongst  them  the  whale  they  had  found ;  but 
first  Manaia  addressed  his  men,  saying,  "  We  must 
now  build  a  house  to  shelter  us,  and  then  we  will 
cut  up  the  whale."  His  people  at  once  obeyed 
their  chief's  directions ;  some  of  them  began  to 
collect  materials  for  building  a  shelter,  and  others 
to  clear  spots  of  ground,  and  to  prepare  them  for 
planting. 

Some  few  of  them  called  out,  "  Here  is  the 
best  place  for  our  village  \"  whilst  others,  on  the 
contraiy,  cried  out,  "  No,  no,  this  is  the  best  place 
for  it;"  and  others  still,  who  had  got  a  little 
further  along  the  beach,  cried  out,  "  Here  is  still  a 
better  place ;"  and  others,  yet  further  ahead, 
said,  "  Here,  here,  this  is  the  best  place  we  have 
yet  seen  \'  thus  all  were  led  to  leave  their  proper 
work,  and  to  wander  a  long  way  along  the  shore, 
exploring  the  new  country,  and  seeking  for  a  site 
for  their  future  home  ;  at  last  they  found  that  little 


230  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

by  little  they  had  been  drawn  a  long  Avay  from  the 
spot  where  they  had  landed,  and  from  the  whale 
which  they  had  found. 

Now  there  were  some  other  canoes  coming  close 
after  the  canoe  Tokomaru,  which  presently  made  the 
land  too,  and  reached  the  shore  just  at  the  point 
where  the  Tokomaru  had  been  drawn  up  upon  the 
beach,  and  they  saw  the  marks  of  the  Tokomaru 
upon  the  sand,  and  the  sheds  that  had  been  put 
up,  and  the  bits  of  land  that  had  been  cleared  ; 
and  they,  without  delay,  began  to  claim  each  one 
as  his  own,  the  sheds,  the  cleared  ground,  and 
the  whale,  which  all  belonged  to  the  people  of  the 
canoe  which  had  first  landed. 

Then  they  went  to  search  for  the  people  who  had 
come  in  that  canoe,  and  when  they  had  found 
them,  each  party  saluted  the  other,  and  when  their 
mutual  greetings  were  over,  those  who  had  come 
in  the  first  canoe  asked  those  who  had  come  in 
the  second,  "When  did  you  arrive  here?"  And 
they  answered  them  by  saying,  "  When  did  you 
arrive  here  ?"  Those  of  the  first  canoe  answered, 
"A  long  time  ago."  Then  the  people  of  the 
second  canoe  answered,  "  And  we  also  arrived  a 
long  time  ago."  Those  who  had  come  in  the  first 
canoe  now  replied,  "  Nay,  nay,  we  arrived  here  be- 
fore you."  Then  those  of  the  second  canoe  answered, 
"Nay,  nay,  but  we  arrived  here  before  you;"  and 


THE    EMIGRATION    OF    MANAIA.  231 

tliey  continued  thus  disputing,  arguing  each  party 
with  the  other. 

At  last  Manaia  asked  them,  "What  are  the 
proofs  you  give  to  show  when  you  arrived  here  V 
And  they  answered,  "  That  is  all  very  well ;  but 
what  proofs  have  you  to  show  when  you  arrived 
here  V  But  Manaia  replied,  "  The  proof  I  have  to 
show  when  I  arrived  here  is  a  whale  of  mine  which 
I  found  upon  the  beach."  Then  the  people  who 
had  come  in  the  second  canoe  answered,  "  No, 
indeed,  that  whale  belongs  to  us.''  But  Manaia 
answered  quite  angrily,  "  No  ;  I  say  that  whale 
belongs  to  me  ;  just  look  you,  you  will  find  my 
sheds  standing  there,  and  my  temporary  encamp- 
ment, and  the  pieces  of  land  which  my  people  have 
cleared.''  But  the  others  answered  him,  "  Nay, 
indeed  those  are  our  sheds,  and  our  pieces  of  cleared 
land  ;  and  as  for  the  whale,  it  is  our  whale ;  now 
let  us  go  and  examine  them." 

So  the  whole  party  returned  together,  until 
they  came  to  the  place  where  they  had  landed, 
and  when  they  saw  all  these  things  there,  Manaia 
said,  "  Look  you,  that  whale  belongs  to  me  ;  as  well 
as  those  sheds  and  the  cleared  pieces  of  land." 
But  the  others  laughed  at  him  and  said,  "AVhy 
you  must  have  gone  mad,  all  these  houses  belong  to-- 
us,  and  the  clearings,  and  that  whale  too."  And 
Manaia,  who  was  now  quite  provoked,  replied,  "  I 


232  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

say  no ;  the  clearings  are  mine,  the  sheds  are  mine,  as 
well  as  the  whale."  The  others,  however,  answered 
him,  "  Very  well,  then,  if  that  is  the  case,  where  is 
your  sacred  place  ? "  But  Manaia  replied,  "  Where  is 
your  sacred  place  also  then  ?"  And  they  answered, 
"  Come  along,  and  see  it."  And  they  all  went  to- 
gether to  see  the  sacred  place  of  these  newly-arrived 
people,  and  when  they  saw  it,  Manaia  believed  them. 

Although  he  gave  credit  to  the  fact  of  their 
having  arrived  first,  Manaia  was  sorely  perplexed 
and  troubled,  and  he  abandoned  altogether  the  part 
of  the  country  he  had  fii'st  reached,  and  started 
again  to  seek  for  another  for  himself,  for  his  rela- 
tions, and  his  people ;  they  coasted  right  along 
the  shores  of  the  island  from  Whangaparoa,  and 
doubled  the  North  Cape,  and  from  thence  made  a 
direct  course  to  Taranaki,  and  made  the  land  at 
Tongaporutu,  between  Panwinihi  and  Mokau,  and 
they  landed  there,  and  remained  for  soine  time, 
and  left  the  god  they  worshipped  there ;  the  name 
of  their  god  was  Eakeiora. 

They  then  turned  to  journey  back  towards 
Mokau  :  some  of  them  went  by  land  along  the 
coast  line,  and  others  in  their  canoe,  the  two 
parties  keeping  in  sight  of  one  another  as  they  exa- 
mined the  coast ;  and  when  they  reached  the  river 
Mokau  those  in  the  canoe  landed,  and  they  left 
there    the    stone   anchor    of  their  canoe  ;  it  is  still 


THE    EillGRATIOX    OF   MANAIA,  233 

lying  near  the  mouth  of  the  river,  on  its  north  side, 
and  the  present  name  of  the  rock  is  the  Punga- 
o-Matori.  Then  they  pulled  back  in  the  Toko- 
maru,  to  Tongaporutu,  and  leaving  the  canoe 
there,  explored  the  country  unto  Pukearuhe, 
thence  they  went  on.  as  far  as  Papatiki,  and 
there  descended  to  the  shore  to  the  beach  of 
Kukuriki,  and  travelling  along  it,  they  reached 
the  river  of  Onaero,  forded  it,  and  passed  the 
plain  of  Motunui,  and  Kaweka,  and  Urenui ; 
that  river  had  a  name  before  Manaia  and  his 
people  reached  it  ;  but  when  Manaia  arrived 
there  with  his  son,  Tu-ure-nui,  he  changed  its 
name,  and  called  it  after  his  son,  Tu-ure-nui ; 
and  they  forded  the  river,  and  travelled  on  until 
they  reached  Kohutu,  at  the  mouth  of  the  river 
Waitara,  and  they  dwelt  there,  and  there  they 
found  people  living,  the  native  inhabitants  of  these 
islands ;  but  Manaia  and  his  party  slew  them,  and 
destroyed  them,  so  that  the  country  was  left  for 
himself  and  for  his  descendants,  and  for  his  tribe 
and  their  descendants,  and  Manaia  and  his  followers 
destroyed  the  original  occupants  of  the  country,  in 
order  to  obtain  possession  of  it. 

Manaia  was  the  ancestor  of  the  Ngati-Awa  tribe  ; 
he  fought  two  great  battles  in  Hawaiki,  the  names 
of  wliich   were    Kirikiriwawa    and   Rotorua ;    the 


234  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

fame  of  his  iveapons  resounded  there — their  names 
were  Kihia  and  Rakea ;  and  there  also  was  known 
the  fame  of  his  son,  of  Kahu-kaka-nui-a-Manaia,  of 
the  youth  who  was  baptized  with  the  baptism  of 
children  whose  fathers  are  not  known. 


THE    STORY    OF    HINE-MOA, 

(the  maiden  of  botokda). 

And  the  man  said  to  him,  "Now,  O  governor, 
just  look  round  you,  and  listen  to  me,  for  there  is 
something  worth  seeing  here  ;  that  very  spot  that 
you  are  sitting  upon,  is  the  place  on  which  sat  our 
great  ancestress  Hine-Moa,  when  she  swam  over 
here  from  the  main.  But  111  tell  you  the  whole 
story. 

"  Look  you  now,  Rangi-Uru  was  the  name  of 
the  mother  of  a  chief  called  Tutanekai ;  she  was, 
properly,  the  wife  of  Wliakaue-Kaipapa  (the  great 
ancestor  of  the  Ngatiwhakaue  tribe) ;  but  she  at 
one  time  ran  away  with  a  chief  named  Tuwharetoa 
(the  great  ancestor  of  the  Te  Heukeu  and  the 
Ngatituwharetoa  tribe)  ;  before  this  she  had  three 
sons  by  Whakaue,  their  names  were  Tawakeheimoa, 
Ngararanui,  and  Tuteaiti.  It  was  after  the  birth 
of  this  third  son,  that  Rangi-Uru  eloped  with 
Tuwharetoa,  who  had  come  to  Rotorua  as  a  stranger 
on  a  visit.  From  tliis  affair  sprang  Tutanekai, 
who  was  an  illegitimate  child ;  but  finally,  "Wha- 
kaue and  Rangi-Uru  were  united  again,  and   she 


236  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

had  another  son  whose  name  was  Kopako ;  and 
then  she  had  a  daughter  whom  they  named  Tupa ; 
she  was  the  last  child  of  Whakaue. 

"  They  all  resided  here  on  the  island  of  Mokoia. 
Whakaue  was  very  kind  indeed  to  Tutanekai, 
treating  him  as  if  he  was  his  own  son  ;  so  they 
gi'ew  up  here,  Tutanekai  and  his  elder  brothers, 
until  they  attained  to  manhood. 

"  Now  there  reached  them  here  a  great  report  of 
Hine-Moa,  that  she  was  a  maiden  of  rare  beauty, 
as  well  as  of  high  rank,  for  Umukaria  (the  great 
ancestor  of  the  Ngati  Unui-karia-hapu,  or  sub- 
tribe),  was  her  father ;  her  mother's  name  was 
Hine-Marii.  When  such  fame  attended  her  beauty 
and  rank,  Tutanekai  and  each  of  his  elder  bro- 
thers desired  to  have  her  as  a  wife. 

"  About  tliis  time  Tutanekai  built  an  elevated 
balcony,  on  the  slope  of  that  hill  just  above  you 
there,  which  is  called  Kaiweka.  He  had  contracted 
a  great  friendship  for  a  young  man  named  Tiki ; 
they  were  both  fond  of  music — Tutanekai  played  on 
the  horn,  and  Tiki  on  the  pipe ;  and  they  used  to 
go  up  into  the  balcony  and  play  on  their  instru- 
ments in  the  night ;  and  in  calm  evenings  the 
sound  of  their  music  was  wafted  by  the  gentle 
land-breeze  across  the  lake  to  the  village  at  Owhata, 
where  dwelt  the  beautiful  young  Hine-Moa,  the 
younger  sister  of  Wahiao. 


THE    MAIDEN    OF    ROTOEUA.  237 

"  Hine-Moa  could  then  hear  the  sweet-sounding 
music  of  the  instruments  of  Tutanekai  and  of  his 
dear  friend  Tiki,  which  gladdened  her  heart  witliin 
her — every  night  the  two  friends  played  on  their 
instruments  in  this  manner — and  Hine-Moa  then 
ever  said  to  herself,  '  Ah !  that  is  the  music  of 
Tutanekai  which  I  hear/ 

"  For  although  Hine-Moa  was  so  prized  by  her 
family,  that  they  would  not  betroth  her  to  any 
chief;  nevertheless,  she  and  Tutanekai  had  met 
each  other  on  those  occasions  when  all  the  people 
of  Rotorua  come  together. 

"  In  those  great  assemblies  of  the  people  Hine- 
Moa  had  seen  Tutanekai,  and  as  they  often  glanced 
each  at  the  other,  to  the  heart  of  each  of  them  the 
other  appeared  pleasing,  and  worthy  of  love,  so 
that  in  the  breast  of  each  there  grew  up  a  secret 
passion  for  the  other.  Nevertheless,  Tutanekai 
could  not  tell  whether  he  miight  venture  to  approach 
Hine-Moa  to  take  her  hand,  to  see  would  she  press 
his  in  return,  because,  said  he,  '  Perhaps  I  may  be 
by  no  means  agreeable  to  her  ; '  on  the  other  hand, 
Hine-Moa's  heart  said  to  her,  '  If  you  send  one  of 
your  female  friends  to  teU  him  of  your  love,  per- 
chance he  will  not  be  pleased  with  you.' 

"  However,  after  they  had  thus  met  for  many, 
many  days,  and  had  long  fondly  glanced  each  at  the 
other,  Tutanekai  sent  a  messenger  to  Hine-Moa,  to 


238  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

tell  of  Ills  love  ;  and  when  Hine-Moa  had  seen  the 
messenger,  she  said,  '  Eh-hu  !  have  we  then  each 
loved  alike?' 

"  Some  time  after  this,  and  when  they  had  often 
met,  Tutanekai  and  his  family  returned  to  their  own 
village  ;  and  being  together  one  evening,  in  the  large 
warm  house  of  general  assembly,  the  elder  brothers  of 
Tutanekai  said,  '  Which  of  us  has  by  signs,  or  by 
pressure  of  the  hand,  received  proofs  of  the  love  of 
Hine-Moa  ?'  And  one  said,  'It  is  I  who  have ;' 
and  another  said,  '  No ;  but  it  is  1/  Then 
they  also  questioned  Tutanekai,  and  he  said,  '  I 
have  pressed  the  hand  of  Hine-Moa,  and  she 
pressed  mine  in  return  •/  but  his  elder  brothers 
said,  'No  such  thing;  do  you  think  she  would  take 
any  notice  of  such  a  low-born  fellow  as  you  are?' 
He  then  told  his  reputed  father,  Whakaue,  to 
remember  what  he  would  then  say  to  him,  because 
he  really  had  received  proofs  of  Hine-Moa's  love  ; 
they  had  even  actually  arranged  a  good  while  be- 
fore the  time  at  which  Hine-Moa  should  run  away 
to  him  ;  and  when  the  maiden  asked,  '  What  shall 
be  the  sign  by  which  I  shall  know  that  I  should 
then  run  to  you?'  he  said  to  her,  'A  trumpet  will 
be  heard  sounding  every  night,  it  will  be  I  who 
sound  it,  beloved — paddle  then  your  canoe  to  that 
place/  So  Whakaue  kept  in  his  mind  this  con- 
fession which  Tutanekai  had  made  to  him. 


THE  MAIDEN  OF  ROTORUA.        239 

"  Now  always  about  the  middle  of  the  night 
Tutanekai,  and  his  friend  Tiki,  went  up  into  their 
balcony  and  played,  the  one  upon  his  trumpet,  the 
other  upon  his  flute,  and  Hine-Moa  heard  them, 
and  desired  vastly  to  paddle  in  her  canoe  to  Tuta- 
nekai ;  but  her  friends  suspecting  something,  had 
been  careful  with  the  canoes,  to  leave  none  afloat, 
but  had  hauled  them  all  up  upon  the  shore  of  the 
lake ;  and  thus  her  friends  had  always  done  for 
many  days  and  for  many  nights. 

"  At  last  she  reflected  in  her  heart,  saying, 
'  How  can  I  then  contrive  to  cross  the  lake  to  the 
island  of  Mokoia ;  it  can  plainly  be  seen  that 
my  friends  suspect  what  I  am  going  to  do/  So 
she  sat  down  upon  the  ground  to  rest ;  and 
then  soft  measures  reached  her  from  the  horn 
of  Tutanekai,  and  the  young  and  beautiful  chief- 
tainess  felt  as  if  an  earthquake  shook  her  to 
make  her  go  to  the  beloved  of  her  heart ;  but  then 
arose  the  recollection,  that  there  was  no  canoe.  At 
last  she  thought,  perhaps  I  might  be  able  to  swim 
across.  So  she  took  six  large  dry  empty  gourds, 
as  floats,  lest  she  should  sink  in  the  water,  three 
of  them  for  each  side,  and  she  went  out  upon  a 
rock,  which  is  named  Iri-iri-kapua,  and  from  thence 
to  the  edge  of  the  water,  to  the  spot  called  Waire- 
rewai,  and  there  she  threw  off"  her  clothes  and  cast 
herself  into  the  water,  and  she  reached  the  stump 


240  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

of  a  sunken  tree  which  used  to  stand  in  the  lake, 
and  was  called  Hinewhata,  and  she  clung  to  it 
with  her  hands,  and  rested  to  take  breath,  and 
when  she  had  a  little  eased  the  weariness  of  her 
shoulders,  she  swam  on  again,  and  whenever  she 
was  exhausted  she  floated  with  the  current  of  the 
lake,  supported  by  the  gourds,  and  after  recovering 
strength  she  swam  on  again ;  but  she  could  not 
disting-uish  in  which  direction  she  should  proceed, 
from  the  darkness  of  the  night ;  her  only  guide  was, 
however,  the  soft  measure  fi'om  the  instrument  of 
Tutanekai ;  that  was  the  mark  by  which  she  swam 
straight  to  Waikimihia,  for  just  above  that  hot- 
spring  was  the  village  of  Tutanekai,  and  swim- 
ming, at  last  she  reached  the  island  of  Mokoia. 

"  At  the  place  where  she  landed  on  the  island, 
there  is  a  hot-spring  separated  from  the  lake  only 
by  a  narrow  ledge  of  rocks  ;  this  is  it — it  is  called, 
as  I  just  said,  Waikimihia,  Hine-Moa  got  into 
this  to  warm  herself,  for  she  was  trembling  all 
over,  partly  from  the  cold,  after  swimming  in  the 
night  across  the  wide  lake  of  Eotorua,  and  partly 
also,  perhaps,  from  modesty,  at  the  thoughts  of 
meeting  Tutanekai. 

"  Whilst  the  maiden  was  thus  warming  herself 
in  the  hot-spring,  Tutanekai  happened  to  feel 
thirsty,  and  said  to  his  servant,  'Bring  me  a  little 
water ; '  so   his   servant  went   to  fetch  water   for 


THE  MAIDEN  OF  EOTOKUA.        241 

him,  and  drew  it  from  the  lake  in  a  calabash,  close 
to  the  spot  where  Hine-Moa  was  sitting ;  the  mai- 
den, who  was  frightened,  called  out  to  him  in  a 
grufl"  voice  like  that  of  a  man,  '  Whom  is  that 
water  for?'  He  replied,  'It's  for  Tutanekai/ 
'  Give  it  here,  then,'  said  Hine-Moa.  And  he 
gave  her  the  water,  and  she  drank,  and  having 
finished  drinking,  purposely  threw  down  the  cala- 
bash, and  broke  it.  Then  the  servant  asked  her, 
'  What  business  had  vou  to  break  the  calabash  of 
Tutanekai  V  But  Hine-Moa  did  not  say  a  word  in 
answer.  The  servant  then  went  back,  and  Tuta- 
nekai said  to  him,  '  Where  is  the  water  I  told  you 
to  bring  me?'  So  he  answered,  'Your  calabash 
was  broken.'  And  his  master  asked  him,  '  Who 
broke  it  ?'  and  he  answered,  '  The  man  who  is  in 
the  bath.'  And  Tutanekai  said  to  him,  '  Go  back 
again  then,  and  fetch  me  some  water.' 

"  He,  therefore,  took  a  second  calabash,  and  went 
back,  and  drew  water  in  the  calabash  from  the 
lake  ;  and  Hine-Moa  again  said  to  him,  '  Whom  is 
that  water  for  ? '  so  the  slave  answered  as  before, 
*  For  Tutanekai.'  And  the  maiden  again  said, 
'Give  it  to  me,  for  I  am  thirsty;'  and  the  slave 
gave  it  to  her,  and  she  drank,  and  purposely  threw 
down  the  calabash  and  broke  it ;  and  these  oc- 
currences took  place  repeatedly  between  those 
two  persons. 

M 


24<2  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

At  last  the  slave  went  again  to  Tutanekai,  who 
said  to  him,  '  Where  is  the  water  for  me  V  and  his 
servant  answered,  '  It  is  all  gone,  your  calabashes 
have  been  broken/  '  By  whom  V  said  his  master. 
'  Didn't  I  tell  you  that  there  is  a  man  in  the  bath  ? ' 
answered  the  servant.  'Who  is  the  fellow?'  said 
Tutanekai.  *  How  can  I  tell?'  replied  the  slave; 
'  why,  he's  a  stranger.'  '  Didn't  he  know  the  water 
was  for  me?'  said  Tutanekai;  'how  did  the 
rascal  dare  to  Ijreak  my  calabashes  ?  why  I  shall 
die  from  rage.' 

"  Then  Tutanekai  threw  on  some  clothes,  and 
caught  hold  of  his  club,  and  away  he  went,  and 
came  to  the  bath,  and  called  out,  '  Where 's  that 
fellow  who  broke  my  calabashes?'  And  Hine- 
Moa  knew  the  voice,  that  the  sound  of  it  was 
that  of  the  beloved  of  her  heart ;  and  she  hid 
herself  under  the  overhanging  rocks  of  the  hot- 
spring  ;  but  her  hiding  was  hardly  a  real  hiding, 
but  rather  a  bashful  concealing  of  herself  from  Tuta- 
nekai, that  he  might  not  find  her  at  once,  but  only 
after  trouble  and  careful  searching  for  her ;  so  he 
went  feeling  about  along  the  banks  of  the  hot- 
spring,  searching  everywhere,  whilst  she  lay  coyly 
hid  under  the  ledges  of  the  rock,  peeping  out,  won- 
dering when  she  would  be  found.  At  last  he 
caught  hold  of  a  hand,  and  cried  out,  '  HoUo, 
who's  this?'     And  Hine-Moa   answered,   'It's  I, 


THE   MAIDEN    OF    ROTORUA.  24)3 

Tutanekai.'  And  he  said,  'But  who  are  you? — 
who^s  I  V  Then  she  spoke  louder,  and  said,  '  It's 
I,  't  is  Hine-Moa/  And  he  said,  '  Ho  !  ho  !  ho  ! 
can  such  in  very  truth  be  the  case  ?  let  us  two 
go  then  to  my  house/  And  she  answered,  '  Yes  ; ' 
and  she  rose  up  in  the  water  as  beautiful  as  the 
wild  white  hawk,  and  stepped  upon  the  edge  of  the 
bath  as  graceful  as  the  shy  white  crane  ;  and  he 
threw  garments  over  her  and  took  her,  and  they 
proceeded  to  his  house,  and  reposed  there  ;  and 
thenceforth,  according  to  the  ancient  laws  of  the 
Maori,  they  were  man  and  wife. 

"  When  the  morning  dawned,  all  the  people  of 
the  village  went  forth  from  their  houses  to  cook 
their  breakfasts,  and  they  all  ate  ;  but  Tutanekai 
tarried  in  his  house.  So  Whakaue  said,  '  This  is 
the  first  morning  that  Tutanekai  has  slept  in  this 
way,  perhaps  the  lad  is  ill — bring  him  here — 
rouse  him  up.'  Then  the  man  who  was  to  fetch 
him  went,  and  drew  back  the  sliding  wooden  win- 
dow of  the  house,  and  peeping  in,  saw  four  feet. 
Oh  !  he  was  greatly  amazed,  and  said  to  himself, 
'  Who  can  this  companion  of  his  be  ?'  However,  he 
had  seen  quite  enough,  and  turning  about,  hurried 
back  as  fast  as  he  could  to  Whakaue,  and  said  to 
him,  '  Why,  there  are  four  feet,  I  saw  them  myself 
in  the  house.'  Whakaue  answered,  'Who's  his 
companion  then  ?  hasten  back  and  see.'     So  back 

M  2 


24^  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

he  went  to  the  house,  and  peeped  in  at  them  again, 
and  then  for  the  first  time  he  saw  it  was  Hine- 
Moa.  Then  he  shouted  out  in  his  amazement, 
'  Oh !  here's  Hine-Moa,  here's  Hine-Moa,  in  the 
house  of  Tutanekai  ;'  and  all  the  village  heard 
him,  and  there  arose  cries  on  every  side — '  Oh  ! 
here's  Hine-Moa,  here's  Hine-Moa  with  Tutanekai.' 
And  his  elder  brothers  heard  the  shouting,  and 
they  said,  '  It  is  not  true  ! '  for  they  were  very 
jealous  indeed.  Tutanekai  then  appeared  com- 
ing from  his  house,  and  Hine-Moa  following 
him,  and  his  elder  brothers  saw  that  it  v/as  in- 
deed Hine-Moa ;  and  they  said,  '  It  is  true  !  it  is 
a  fact  !' 

"  After  these  things.  Tiki  thought  within  him- 
self, '  Tutanekai  has  married  Hine-Moa,  she  whom 
he  loved  ;  but  as  for  me,  alas  !  I  have  no  wife  ;' 
and  he  became  sorrowful,  and  returned  to  his  own 
village.  And  Tutanekai  was  gi'ieved  for  Tiki ;  and 
he  said  to  Whakaue,  '  I  am  quite  ill  from  grief  for 
jny  friend  Tiki;'  and  Whakaue  said,  'What  do 
you  mean?'  And  Tutanekai  replied,  'I  refer  to 
my  young  sister  Tupa,  let  her  be  given  as  a  wife  to 
my  beloved  friend,  to  Tiki ;'  and  his  reputed  father 
Wakaue  consented  to  this  ;  so  his  young  sister  Tupa 
was  given  to  Tiki,  and  she  became  his  wife. 

"  The  descendants  of  Hine-Moa  and  of  Tutanekai 
are  at  this  very  day  dwelling  on  the  lake  of  Rotu- 


THE    MAIDEN    OF    EOTOEUA.  245 

ma,  and  "^never  yet  liave  the  lips  of  the  offspring 
of  Hine-Moa  forgotten  to  repeat  tales  of  the  great 
beauty  of  their  renowned  ancestress  Hine-Moa,  and 
of  her  swimming  over  here ;  and  this  too  is  the 
burden  of  a  song  still  current." 


THE  STORY  OF  MARU-TUAHTJ,  THE  SON 
OF  HOTUNUI,  AND  OF  KAHURARE-MOA, 
THE  DAUGHTER  OF  PAKA. 

HoTUNUi  was  one  of  those  chiefs  who  arrived  in 
New  Zealand  from  a  land  beyond  the  ocean.  The 
Tainui  was  the  canoe  in  which  he  arrived  in  these 
islands.  He  left  Kawhia,  where  he  first  settled, 
and  came  overland  to  Hauraki,  and  finally  took 
up  his  residence  in  a  village  called  Whakatiwai. 
He  had  at  Kawhia,  a  son  called  Maru-tuahu,  but 
Hotunui  was  not  there  when  this  child  was  born. 
The  cause  which  made  him  come  from  Kawhia 
to  Hauraki  was  a  false  accusation  that  was 
brought  against  him  regarding  a  store-house  of 
sweet  potatoes  belonging  to  another  chief,  a  friend 
of  his.  The  accusation  arose  in  this  way.  Ho- 
tunui went  out  of  his  house  one  night,  almost  at 
the  same  moment  that  a  thief  had  gone  out  to  rob 
this  storehouse  ;  it  was  very  unfortunate  that  they 
should  both  have  gone  out  nearly  at  the  same 
moment,  just  about  midnight.  When  day  dawned, 
Hotunui  came  out  of  his  house,  and  people  in  the 
morning  had    seen    his   footsteps,   right  along   the 


STOEY    OF   MARU-TUAHU.  247 

path  by  which  the  thief  had  gone,  and  there  were 
the  sweet  potatoes  dropped  all  along  the  path,  and 
as  the  soles  of  Hotunui's  feet  were  very  large,  his 
footprints  had  quite  erased  those  of  the  thief;  so 
presently  they  brought  an  accusation  against  Ho- 
tunui,  that  he  had  stolen  the  sweet  potatoes.  At 
this  time  Hotunui's  wife  had  just  conceived  Maru- 
tuahu,  but  he  was  so  overcome  by  shame  at  the 
accusation  brought  against  him,  that  the  thought 
came  into  his  mind  to  run  away  from  wife  and 
all,  and  go  to  Hauraki  to  seek  another  resi- 
dence for  himself  His  corn  was  ready,  and  he 
had  dug  his  farm,  and  prepared  the  ground  for 
planting  it,  but  had  not  yet  put  in  the  seed, 
when  he  went  to  his  wife  and  said,  "Now,  re- 
member, when  the  child  is  born,  if  it  is  a  boy  call 
it  Maru-tuahu,  and  if  it  is  a  girl,  call  it  Pare-tuahu 
[either  name  meaning  the  field  made  ready  for 
planting],  in  remembrance  of  that  cultivation  of 
mine,  prepared  for  planting  to  no  purpose."  Then 
Hotunui  went  off  to  Hauraki,  and  resided  at  Wha- 
katiwai,  and  became  the  chief  of  the  people  of  that 
country,  and  he  took  another  wife,  the  young 
sister  of  a  chief  named  Te  Whatu,  and  she  bore 
him  a  child  named  Paka. 

"When  Maru-tuahu  came  to  man's  estate,  he  took 
up  his  club,  and  asked  his  mother,  saying,  "  Mother, 
show   me   the    mountain   range   that   is   near   my 


24)8  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

father's  abode ;"  and  the  mother  said,  "  Look  my 
child  towards  the  place  of  sunrise."  And  her  son 
said,  "What,  there?"  and  he  Avas  answered  by  his 
mother,  "  Yes,  that  is  it — Hauraki ; "  and  Maru- 
tualiu   answered,  "  'T  is   well ;    I   understand." 

Then  Maru-tuahu  started  with  his  slave,  and 
travelled  towards  Hauraki,  and  they  carried  with 
them  a  spear  for  killing  birds ;  this  they  took 
as  a  means  of  procuring  food  on  the  journey, 
as  they  came  by  way  of  the  wooded  moimtains 
where  birds  are  plentiful ;  they  were  a  whole 
month  before  they  arrived  at  Kohukolmnui,  and 
reached  the  outskirts  of  the  forests  thei'e  early  one 
morning,  at  the  same  time  that  two  young  girls, 
the  daughters  of  Te  Whatu,  the  chief  of  Hauraki, 
were  coming  along  the  same  path  from  the  op- 
posite direction.  Maru-tuahu  was  up  in  a  forest 
tree,  spearing  Tui  birds,  at  the  moment  when  the 
two  girls  saw  the  slave  sitting  under  the  tree  in 
which  Maru-tuahu  was  killing  birds,  and  his  master's 
cloak  lying  on  the  ground  by  him.  The  two 
girls  came  merrily  along  the  path ;  the  youngest 
sister  was  very  beautiful,  but  the  eldest  was 
plain ;  and  when  they  saw  the  slave  of  Maru- 
tuahu,  the  youngest  one,  who  had  seen  him  first, 
called  out  playfully,,  "  Ah !  there 's  a  man  will 
make  a  nice  slave  for  me."  "Where?"  said  the 
eldest    sister,    "  where   is   he  ?"   and  the  youngest 


STOKY    OF    MAKU-TUAHU.  249 

replied,  "  There,  there,  cannot  you  see  him  sitting 
at  the  root  of  that  tree  V  Then  up  they  ran  to- 
wards him,  sportively  contesting  with  one  another 
whose  slave  he  should  be ;  and  the  youngest 
got  there  first,  and  therefore  claimed  him  as  her 
slave. 

All  this  time  Maru-tuahu  was  peeping  down  at 
the  two  girls  from  the  top  of  the  tree ;  and  they 
asked  the  slave,  saying,  "Where  is  your  master?" 
he  answered,  "  I  have  no  master  but  hun/^  Then 
the  girLs  looked  about,  and  there  was  the  cloak 
lying  on  the  ground,  and  a  heap  of  dead  birds ; 
and  they  kept  on  asking,  "Where  is  he?"  but  it 
was  not  long  before  a  flock  of  Tuis  settled  on  the 
tree  where  Maru-tuahu  was  sitting ;  he  speared  at 
them,  and  struck  a  Tui,  which  made  the  tree 
ring  with  its  cries ;  the  girls  heard  it,  and  look- 
ing up,  the  youngest  saw  the  young  chief  sitting 
in  the  top  boughs  of  the  tree  ;  and  she  at  once 
called  up  to  him,  "  Ah  !  you  shall  be  my  husband  ;" 
but  the  eldest  sister  exclaimed,  "  You  shall  be 
mine,"  and  they  began  jesting  and  disputing  be- 
tween themselves  which  should  have  him  for 
a  husband,  for  he  was  a  very  handsome  young 
man. 

Then  the  two  girls  called  up  to  him  to  come 
down  from  the  tree,  and  doAvn  he  came,  and 
dropped    upon   the  ground,    and   pressed  his  nose 

M  3 


250  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

against  the  nose  of  each  of  the  young  girls.  They 
then  asked  him  to  come  to  their  village  with  them  ; 
to  which  he  consented,  but  said,  "  You  two  go  on 
ahead,  and  leave  me  and  my  slave,  and  we  will 
follow  you  presently;"  and  the  girls  said,  "Very 
well,  do  you  come  after  us."  Maru-tuahu  then  told 
his  slave  to  make  a  present  to  the  girls  of  the  food 
they  had  collected,  and  he  gave  them  two  .bark 
baskets  of  pigeons,  preserved  in  their  own  fat,  and 
they  went  off  to  their  village  with  these.  Maru- 
tuahu  stopped  behind  with  his  slave,  and  as  soon 
as  the  girls  had  gone,  he  went  to  a  stream,  and 
washed  his  hair  in  the  water,  and  then  came 
back,  and  combed  it  very  carefully,  and  after 
combing  it,  he  tied  it  up  in  a  knot,  and  stuck 
fifty  red  Kaka  feathers  in  his  head,  and  amongst 
them  he  placed  the  plume  of  a  white  heron,  and 
the  tail  of  a  huia,  as  ornaments  ;  he  thus  looked 
extremely  handsome,  and  said  to  his  slave,  "  Now, 
let  us  go." 

It  was  not  very  long  before  the  two  young  girls 
came  back  from  the  village  to  meet  their  so  called 
husband,  that  they  might  all  go  in  together ;  and 
when  they  came  up  to  him,  there  he  was  seated  on 
the  ground,  looking  quite  different  to  what  he  did 
before,  for  he  now  appeared  as  handsome  as  the  large 
crested  cormorant;  he  had  on  outside,  a  Pueru  cloak, 
within  that,  a  cloak  called  the  Kahakaha,  and  under 


STORY    OF   MARU-TUAHU.  251 

that  again,  a  garment  called  the  Kopu  (this  in 
ancient  times  made  up  the  dress  of  a  great  chief)  ; 
the  two  young  girls  felt  deeply  in  love  with  him 
when  they  saw  liim,  and  they  said  to  Maru', 
"Come  along  to  our  father's  village  with  us;" 
and  he  again  consented,  and  told  his  slave  to  keep 
with  them,  and  as  they  all  went  along,  Maru' 
stopped  a  little  until  he  was  some  way  behind, 
for  he  thought  that  the  girls  had  not  found  out 
who  he  was ;  as  they  proceeded,  seeing  that 
Maru  did  not  follow  them  fast,  they  asked  his 
slave,  who  kept  along  with  them,  "  What  is  the 
name  of  your  master?"  and  the  slave  answered, 
"Is  there  no  chief  of  the  west  coast  of  the 
island  whose  ftime  has  reached  this  place?"  and 
the  young  girls  said,  "Yes,  the  fame  of  one  man 
has  reached  this  place,  the  fame  of  Mar-u-tuahu,  the 
son  of  Hotunui;''  and  the  slave  answered,  "This 
is  he;"  and  the  girls  replied,  "Dear,  dear,  we  had 
not  the  least  idea  that  it  was  he."  By  this  time 
Maru  was  coming  up  again  to  join  them,  for  he 
guessed  the  girls  had  asked  his  slave  who  lie  was, 
and  that  they  had  been  told,  but  the  girls  ran  off 
together  to  Hotunui,  and  then-  father  Te  Whatu,  to 
inform  them  who  was  coming,  as  they  had  pre- 
viously left  the  old  men  waiting  for  their  return  ; 
but  pi-esently  the  two  girls  changed  their  plan,  and 
arranged   between   themselves,    that    the   youngest 


252  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

should  run  quickly  to  tell  Hotunui  that  his  son 
was  coming,  and  that  the  eldest  sister  should 
be  left  to  lead  Maru-tuahu  to  the  village ;  and 
in  this  way  they  proceeded,  those  who  were 
going  slowly  to  the  village  loitering  along,  whilst 
the  younger  sister  was  far  ahead,  running  as 
fast  as  she  could,  and  crying  out  as  she  came  near 
the  village,  "  Are  you  there,  O  Hotunui  ?  here 's 
your  son  coming — here  is  Maru-tuahu."  Then  Ho- 
tunui called  out  with  a  loud  voice,  "  Where  is  he  ?" 
and  she  replied,  "  Here  he  comes,  he  is  coming 
alono-  close  behind  me  :  make  haste  and  have  the 
floor  of  the  house  covered  with  fine  mats  for  him, 
so  that  he  may  have  a  fitting  reception." 

Maru-tuahu  soon  came  in  sight,  and  as  he 
was  seen  approaching,  he  looked  as  handsome  as 
the  beautiful  crested  cormorant.  The  people  got 
upon  the  defences  of  the  village,  and  ran  outside 
the  gates,  to  look  at  him  ;  and  the  young  girls  all 
waved  the  corners  of  their  cloaks,  crying  out, 
"  Welcome,  welcome,  welcome,  welcome,  make 
haste,  make  haste ; "  and  he  stepped  boldly  out, 
and  reached  the  village.  As  soon  as  he  had  ar- 
rived there,  they  all  wept  over  him  ;  and  when 
they  had  done  weeping,  they  sat  down,  and 
formed  a  semicircle,  with  Maru-tuahu  at  the 
open  part ;  and  Hotunui  stood  up  to  make  a  speech 
of  welcome  to  his  son,  and  he  spoke  thus  :  "  Wei- 


STORY    OF   MARU-TTTAHU.  253 

come,  welcome,  oh,  my  child,  welcome  to  Hauraki, 
welcome.  You  are  very  welcome.  You  have 
suddenly  appeared  here,  urged  by  yom-  own  affec- 
tions. You  are  very  welcome."  Having  said 
this,  Hotunui  sat  down,  again ;  then  Maru-tuahu 
jumped  up  to  make  a  speech  in  reply,  and  he  said, 
"  That  is  right,  that  is  right,  oh,  my  father,  call 
out  to  your  child,  '  You  are  welcome.'  Here  I  am 
arrived  at  Hauraki,  here  I  am  seeking  out  my 
father's  village  in  Hauraki,  but  I,  who  am  the 
mere  slave  of  my  father,  can  say  nothing  in  answer 
to  his  welcome ;  here  I  am  arrived  at  your  village, 
it  is  for  you  to  speak ;  a  young  man  just  arrived 
from  the  forests  has  no  fitting  word  to  say  in  your 
presence." 

Thus  he  ended  his  speech,  and  a  feast  was  spread 
out,  and  they  all  fell  to  eating,  for  they  had  killed 
ten  dogs  for  the  feast,  and  the  chiefs  all  ate,  and 
the  two  young  girls  ;  but,  although  no  one  knew  it, 
the  two  sisters  were  all  the  time  quarrelling  with 
each  other  as  to  wliich  of  them  should  have  Maru- 
tuahu  for  a  husband:  the  heart  of  one  of  them 
whispered  to  her,  he  shall  be  mine  ;  but  the  heart 
of  tlie  other  young  girl  said  just  the  same  thing 
to  her. 

The  feast  being  ended,  they  left  the  common 
part  of  the  fortress  where  food  was  eaten,  and 
moved  on  one  side,  to  the  sacred  precincts.      When 


254  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

the  evening  came  on  a  fire  was  kindled  in  tlie 
house,  and  the  eldest  girl  not  seeing  her  younger 
sister,  went  to  her  father  to  ask  for  her,  and  was 
told  that  she  had  been  given  as  a  wife  to  Maru- 
tuahu.  At  this  she  was  exceedingly  vexed,  and 
provoked  with  her  sister ;  for  although  she  was 
plain,  she  thought  to  herself,  I  am  very  pretty, 
and  I  am  sure,  there's  not  the  least  reason  why 
Maru-tuahu  should  be  frightened  at  me  ;  and  she 
went  off  to  quarrel  with  her  younger  sister ;  but 
Mara-tuahu  did  not  like  her  upon  account  of  her 
plainness,  and  her  pretty  sister  kept  him  as  her 
husband. 

Te  Paka,  the  son  of  Hotunui,  the  nephew  of  Te 
Whatu,  and  the  younger  brother  of  Maru-tuahu, 
had  grown  up  to  be  a  young  man,  so  they  gave 
him  the  elder  daughter  of  Te  Whatu  to  be  his 
wife  ;  thus  the  elder  sister  was  married,  as  well  as 
the  young  one,  who  was  given  to  Maru-tuahu  for 
his  wife  ;  and  Te  Paka's  wife  bore  him  a  daughter, 
whom  they  called  Te  Kahureremoa. 

The  youngest  daughter  of  Te  Whatu,  whom 
Maru-tuahu  married,  bore  him  three  children, 
Tama-te-po,  Tama-te-ra,  and  Whanaunga ;  from 
Tama-te-po  sprang  the  Ngati-Rongou  tribe  ;  from 
Tama-te-ra  sprang  the  tribe  of  Ngati-Tama-te-ra, 
and  from  Whanaunga  sprang  the  Ngati-Whanaunga 
tribe. 


STORY    OF    MARU-TUAHU.  255 

Whilst  Maru-tuahu  was  living  at  Hauraki,  his 
father  Hotunui  told  him  how  very  badly  some  of 
the  people  of  that  place  had  treated  him  ;  these 
were  the  facts  of  the  case,  as  the  old  chief  related 
them  to  him. — "  One  day,  when  the  canoes  of  the 
tribe  came  in  full  of  fish,  after  hauling  their  nets, 
he  sent  down  one  of  his  servants  from  his  house 
to  the  canoe  to  bring  back  some  fish  for  him, 
and  when  the  servant  ran  down  for  this  purpose, 
the  man  who  owned  the  nets  said  to  him, 
'  Well,  what  brings  you  here  ?'  upon  which  his 
servant  answered,  '  Hotunui  sent  me  down,  to 
bring  up  some  fish  for  him,  he  quite  longs  to  taste 
them/  Upon  which  the  owner  of  the  nets  cursed 
Hotunui  in  the  most  violent  and  offensive  manner, 
saying,  '  Is  his  head  the  flax  that  grows  in  the 
swamp  at  Otoi  ?  or  is  his  topknot  flax,  that  the 
old  fellow  cannot  go  there  to  get  some  flax  to  make 
a  net  for  himself  with,  instead  of  troubling  me?' 
When  Hotunui's  servant  heard  this,  he  returned  at 
once  to  the  house,  and  his  master  not  seeing  the 
fish,  said,  '  Well,  tell  me  what  is  the  matter  ;'  so 
he  replied,  '  I  went  as  you  told  me,  and  I  asked 
the  man  who  had  been  hauling  the  net  for  some 
fish ;  and  he  only  looked  up  at  me.  Again  I 
asked  him  for  some  fish  ;  and  then  he  said.  Who 
sent  you  here  to  fetch  fish,  pray?  Then  I  told 
him,  Hotunui  sent  me   down  to  bring  up  some  fish 


256  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

for  him,  lie  quite  longs  to  taste  them ;  then  the 
man  cursed  you,  saying  to  me,  Is  Hotunui's  head 
the  flax  that  grows  in  the  swamp  at  Otoi ;  or  is 
his  topknot  flax,  that  the  old  fellow  cannot  go 
there,  to  get  some  flax  to  make  a  net  with  for 
himself?' " 

When  Hotuhui  had  told  this  story  to  Maru- 
tuahu,  he  said,  "  Now  oh,  my  son,  this  tribe  is  a 
very  bad  one,  they  seem  bent  upon  lowering  the 
authority  of  their  chiefs." 

The  heart  of  Maru-tuahu  felt  very  gloomy  when 
he  heard  his  father  had  been  treated  thus,  and 
Hotunui  said  to  him,  "  You  may  well  look  sad,  my 
son,  at  hearing  what  I  have  just  said  ;  this  tribe  is 
composed  of  very  bad  people."  And  Maru-tuahu 
replied,  "  Leave  them  alone,  they  shall  find  out  what 
such  conduct  leads  to." 

Then  Maru-tuahu  began  to  catch  and  dry  great 
quantities  offish  for  a  feast,  and  he  worked  away  with 
his  men  at  making  fishing-nets,  until  he  had  col- 
lected a  very  great  number ;  it  was  in  the  winter 
that  he  began  to  make  these  nets,  and  the  winter, 
spring,  summer,  and  part  of  autumn  passed,  before 
they  were  finished  ;  then  he  sent  a  messenger  to 
the  tribe  who  had  cursed  his  father,  to  ask  them  to 
come  to  a  feast,  and  to  help  him  to  stretch  these 
nets ;  and  when  the  messenger  came  back,  Maru- 
tuahu  asked  him,  "  Where  are  they  ? "  and  the  mes- 


STORY    OF   MARU-TUAHU.  257 

senger  answered,  "  The  day  after  to-morrow  they 
will  arrive  here/'  Then  Maru-tuahu  gave  orders, 
saying,  "  To-morrow  let  the  feast  be  ranged  in 
rows,  so  that  when  tliey  arrive  here  they  may  find 
it  all  ready  for  them/'  Upon  this  they  all  retired 
to  rest,  and  when  the  dawn  appeared  tliey  arranged 
the  food  to  be  given  to  the  strangers  in  rows  :  the 
outside  of  the  rows  was  composed  of  fish  piled  up  ; 
but  under  these  was  placed  nothing  but  rotten  wood 
and  filth,  although  the  exterior  made  a  very  goodly 
show.  He  intended  this  feast  to  be  a  feast  at 
which  those  who  came  as  guests  should  be  slaugh- 
tered, in  revenge  for  the  curse  against  Hotunui, 
which  had  exceedingly  pained  his  heart. 

Soon  after  daybreak  the  next  morning  the 
guests  came,  and  seeing  the  piles  of  provisions 
which  were  laid  out  for  them,  they  were  ex- 
ceedingly rejoiced,  and  longed  for  the  time  of 
their  distribution,  and  when  they  might  touch 
this  food,  little  thinking  how  dearly  they  were 
to  pay  for  it.  The  guests  had  all  arrived  and 
taken  their  seats  upon  the  grass,  when  Marutuahu 
and  his  people  came  together ; — they  were  only 
one  hundred  and  forty. 

As  they  were  to  stretch  the  great  net  made  up 
of  all  the  small  ones  upon  the  next  morning,  on 
that  evening  they  put  all  the  nets  and  ropes 
into  the  water  to  soak  them,  in  order  to  soften  the 


258  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

flax  of  wliicli  they  were  made,  so  that  they  might 
be  more  easily  stretched ;  and  when  the  morning 
dawned  those  who  had  come  for  the  purpose  began 
to  draw  out  the  net,  stretching  the  rope  and  the 
bottom  of  the  net  along  the  ground,  and  pegging  it 
tight  down  fi'om  corner  to  corner,  and  thus  whilst 
Maru-tuahu's  people  were  preparing  food  for  them 
to  eat,  the  others  worked  away  at  stretching  the 
net  taut,  and  pegging  it  fast  to  the  ground  to  hold 
it ;  it  was  not  long  before  they  had  finished  this 
and  had  put  on  the  weights  to  sink  it. 

Maru-tuahu  sent  a  man  to  see  whether  they  had 
finished  stretching  the  net,  and  when  the  man 
came  back,  he  said,  "  Have  they  done  stretching  the 
net?"  and  the  man  answered,  "Yes,  they  have 
finished."  Then  Maru-tuahu  said,  "  Let  us  go  and 
lift  the  upper  end  of  the  net  from  the  ground ; — they 
have  finished  the  lower  end  of  it."  Then  the  one 
hundred  and  forty  men  went  with  him,  each  one 
carrying  a  weapon,  carefully  concealed  under  his 
garments,  lest  their  guests  should  see  them  ;  and 
when  they  reached  the  place  where  the  net  was, 
they  found  the  guests,  nearly  a  thousand  in  num- 
ber, had  finished  stretching  the  lower  end  of  the 
net.  Then  the  priest  of  Maru-tuahu  who  was  to 
consecrate  the  net  said,  "  Let  the  upper  end  of  the 
net  be  raised,  so  that  the  net  may  be  stretched 
straight  out ; "  and  Maru-tuahu  said,  "  Yes,  let  it 


STORY    OF    MARU-TUAHU.  259 

be  done  at  once,  it  is  getting  late  in  the  day." 
Then  the  one  hundred  and  forty  men  began  to 
lift  up  the  net,  with  the  left  hand  they  seized 
the  ropes  to  raise  it,  but  with  the  right  hand 
each  fii"mly  grasped  his  weapon,  and  Maru-tuahu 
shouted  out,  "  Lift  away,  lift  away,  lift  it  well 
up  ;"  when  they  had  raised  it  high  in  the  air, 
they  walked  on  with  it ;  holding  it  up  as  if  they 
were  spreading  it  out,  until  tliey  got  it  well  over 
the  strangers,  who  were  either  pegging  the  lower 
end  down,  or  were  seated  on  the  ground  looking 
on  ;  then  Maru-tuahu  shouted  out,  "  Let  it  fall  ; " 
and  they  let  it  fall,  and  caught  in  it  their  guests, 
nearly  a  thousand  in  number ;  they  caught  every 
one  of  them  in  the  net,  so  that  they  could  not 
move  to  make  any  effectual  resistance,  and  whilst 
some  of  the  one  hundred  and  forty  men  of  Maru- 
tuahu  held  the  net  down,  the  rest  slew  with  their 
weapons  the  whole  thousand,  not  one  escaped,  whilst 
they  lost  not  a  single  man  themselves.  Hence 
"  The  feast  of  rotten  wood"  is  a  proverb  amongst 
the  descendants  of  Maru-tuahu  to  this  day.  This 
feast  of  rotten  wood  was  given  at  a  place  which 
was  then  named  Pukeahau,  but  which  was  after- 
wards called  Kariliitangata  (or,  men  were  the 
weio-hts  which  were  attached  to  the  net  to  sink 
it),  upon  account  of  the  thousand  people  who  were 
there  slain  by  treachery  in  the  net  of  Maru-tuahu ; 


260  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

for  men  were  the  weights  that  were  attached  to 
that  net  to  sink  it.  After  the  death  of  all  these 
people,  the  country  they  inhabited  became  the  pro- 
perty of  Maru-tuahu,  and  his  heirs  dwell  there  to 
the  present  day. 

About  the  time  that  Te  Kahureremoa,  Paka's 
daughter,  became  marriageable,  a  large  party  of 
visitors  arrived  at  Wharekawa,  the  village  of  Te 
Paka ;  they  came  from  Aotea,  or  the  Great  Barrier 
Island ;  at  their  head  was  the  principal  chief 
of  Aotea,  and  he  brought  in  his  canoes  a  present  of 
two  hundred  and  sixty  baskets  of  mackerel  for  Te 
Paka,  and  they  became  such  good  friends,  that  they 
thought  they  would  like  to  be  connected  ;  so  it 
was  arranged  that  Te  Paka's  daughter,  Te  Kahu- 
reremoa, should  be  given  as  a  wife  to  the  son  of 
that  chief;  part  of  Te  Paka's  plan  was  to  get 
possession  of  Aotea  for  his  family,  for  he  thought 
when  his  daughter  had  children,  and  they  were 
grown  up,  that  it  was  possible  they  would  secure 
the  island  for  their  grandfather,  or  for  their  mother's 
family. 

When  the  i^arty  of  visitors  was  about  to  return 
to  Aotea,  having  formed  this  connection  with  Te 
Paka's  tribe  through  the  girl,  her  father  gave  her 
up  to  them  to  take  to  Aotea  to  her  husband,  and 
he  told  liis  daughter  to  go  on  board  the  canoe,  and 
to  accompany  them  to  Aotea ;  but  he  told  her  to 


STOEY    OF    KAHUREREMOA.  261 

no  purpose,  for  she  did  not  obey  him  ;  in  short, 
Te  Kahureremoa  refused  to  go.  So  the  old  chief 
to  whom  the  canoes  belonged  said,  "  Never  mind, 
never  mind,  leave  her  alone,  we  shall  not  be  very 
long  away,  we  shall  soon  return,  we  shall  not  be 
long  before  we  are  back  -"  and  they  left  Te  Kahu- 
reremoa with  her  father,  and  paddled  off  in  their 
canoes. 

In  one  month's  time  they  came  back  again,  and 
brought  with  them  a  present  of  thirty  baskets 
of  mackerel,  and  as  soon  as  they  arrived  they 
distributed  these  amongst  their  friends  ;  and  down 
ran  Te  Kahureremoa  from  the  village  to  the 
landing-place  to  take  a  basket  of  mackerel  for 
herself  As  soon  as  Paka  saw  this,  he  gave  his 
daughter  a  sound  scolding  for  going  and  taking 
the  fish  ;  this  is  what  Paka  said  to  his  daughter  : 
"  Put  that  down,  you  shall  not  have  it ;  1  wanted 
you  to  go  and  become  the  wife  of  the  young 
chief  of  the  place  where  these  good  fish  abound, 
and  you  refused  to  go,  therefore  j^ou  shall  not  now 
have  any." 

This  was  quite  enough ;  poor  little  Te  Kahu- 
reremoa felt  entirely  overcome  with  shame,  she  left 
the  basket  of  fish,  dropping  it  just  where  she  was, 
and  ran  back  into  the  house,  and  began  to  sob  and 
cry;  then  her  thouglits  suggested  to  her,  that  after 


262  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

this,  it  would  be  better  that  she  should  be  no 
more  seen  by  the  eyes  of  her  father,  and  that  her 
father's  face  should  be  no  more  seen  by  her,  and 
her  heart  kept  on  urging  her  to  run  away  to 
Takakopiri,  and  to  take  him  for  her  lord  ;  she  had 
seen  him,  and  liked  him  well;  he  was  a  great  chief, 
and  had  abundance  of  food  of  the  best  kind  on- 
his  estates  ;  plenty  of  potted  birds  of  all  kinds  ; 
and  kiwis,  and  Mores  and  wekas,  and  eels,  and 
mackerel,  and  crayfish  ;  in  short,  he  had  abundance 
of  all  kinds  of  food,  and  was  rich  in  every  sort  of 
property. 

As  she  thought  of  all  this,  the  chief's  young 
daughter  continued  weeping  and  sobbing  in  the 
house,  quite  overcome  with  shame,  and  when 
evening  came  she  was  still  crying,  but  at  night, 
she  said  to  herself,  "Now  I'll  be  off,  whilst  all 
the  men  are  fast  asleep ;"  so  she  got  up  and 
ran  away,  accompanied  by  her  female  slave.  The 
next  morning  when  the  sun  rose  they  found 
she  was  gone,  and  she  had  fled  so  far,  that 
those  who  were  sent  to  seek  her  came  to  the  foot- 
prints of  herself  and  her  slave  ;  their  edges  had  so 
sunk  down,  that  the  pursuers  could  not  tell  how 
long  it  was   since   she   had  passed. 

Waipuna  was  the  village  from  which  Te  Kahu- 
reremoa  started,  and  they  had  left  Pukorokoro  behind 


STORY    OF    KAHUREEEMOA.  263 

them,  and  by  the  time  it  was  full  daybreak  they 
had  reached  Waitakaruru,  and  as  the  full  rays  of 
the  sun  shone  on  the  earth,  they  were  passing 
above  Pouarua  ;  then  for  a  little  time  they  travelled 
very  fast  and  reached  Riwaki,  at  the  mouth  of  the 
river  Piako;  this  they  crossed  and  pushed  on  for 
Opani,  and  thence  those  in  pvu'suit  of  them  returned, 
they  could  follow  them  no  further ;  the  tide  also  was 
flowing,  which  stopped  the  j^ursuit. 

Just  then  some  of  the  canoes  of  the  up-river 
country  were  returning  fi'om  E.uawehea,  and 
when  the  people  in  the  canoes  saw  her,  they 
raised  loud  cries  of — "  Ho,  ho  !  here's  Te  Kahu- 
reremoa,  here  's  the  daughter  of  Paka  ;"  she  stepped 
into  one  of  the  canoes  with  them,  and  the  people 
kept  crying  out  the  whole  way  from  the  mouth  of 
the  river  up  its  course  as  they  ascended  it,  "  Here's 
Te  Kahureremoa  ; "  and  they  rowed  very  fast,  feeling 
alarmed  at  having  so  great  a  chieftainess  on  board, 
and  so  confused  Avere  they  at  her  presence,  that 
throughout  the  whole  day  they  kept  on  bending 
their  heads  down  to  their  very  paddles,  as  they 
pulled.  They  stopped  at  Raupa,  where  the  Awa-iti 
branches  off  to  Tauranga,  and  there  they  spent  one 
night ;  and  the  next  day  they  went  over  the  range 
towards  Katikati :  the  people  of  Kaupa  urged  her 
to  stop  there  for  a  little  ;  she,  however,  would  not, 
but  driven  by  the  fond  thoughts  of  her  heart,  sho 


264i  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

pressed  onwards,  and  reached  the  summit  of  the 
ridge  of  Hikurangi,  and  looked  down  upon  Kati- 
kati,  and  saw  also  Tauranga ;  then  the  young  girl 
turned,  and  looked  round  at  the  mountain  at 
Otawa,  and  although  she  knew  what  it  was,  she 
liking  to  hear  his  name,  and  of  his  greatness, 
spoke  to  the  people  of  the  country,  who,  out  of 
respect,  were  accompanying  her,  and  asking,  said, 
"What  is  the  name  of  yonder  mountain?"  and 
they  answered  her,  "  That  is  Otawa."  And  the 
young  girl  asked  again,  "  Is  the  country  of  tliat 
mountain  rich  in  food  ?"  and  they  replied,  "  Oh, 
there  are  found  Mores,  and  hlwis  and  xvekas,  and 
pigeons,  and  tids ;  why  that  mountain  is  famed 
for  the  variety  and  number  of  birds  that  inhabit 
it."  Then  the  young  girl  took  courage,  and  asked 
once  more,  "  Whom  does  all  that  fruitful  country 
belong  to  ?"  and  they  told  her,  "  The  Waitaka  is 
the  name  of  the  tribe  that  inhabit  that  country, 
and  Takakopiri  is  the  chief  of  it.  He  is  the 
owner  of  that  mountain,  and  he  is  the  great  chief 
of  the  Waitaka ;  and  when  the  people  of  that 
tribe  collect  food  from  the  mountains,  they  bear 
everything  to  him  ;  the  food  of  all  those  districts, 
whatever  it  may  be,  belongs  to  that  great  Lord 
alone."  When  the  young  girl  heard  all  this,  she 
said  to  the  people,  ''  I  and  my  female  slave  are 
going  there,  to  Otawa.''      And  the  people  said  to 


STORY    OF    KAHUREREMOA.  265 

her,  "  No ;  is  that  really  the  case  ? "  and  she  said, 
"  Yes,  we  are  going  there.  Paka  sent  us  there, 
that  we  should  ask  Takakopiri  to  j)ay  him  a 
visit  at  "VVharekawa."  She  said  this  to  deceive 
the  people,  and  prevent  them  from  stopping  her  ; 
and  immediately  started  again  upon  her  journey, 
and  came  down  upon  the  sea-shore  at  Katikati. 
The  Waitaha,  tlie  tribe  of  Takakopiri,  inhabited 
that  village  ;  and  as  soon  as  they  saw  the  young 
girl  coming,  there  arose  joyful  cries  of — "  Here  is 
Kahureremoa!  oh,  here  is  the  daughter  of  Paka!" 
and  the  people  collected  in  crowds  to  gaze  at  the 
young  chieftainess  :  she  rested  at  the  village,  and 
they  immediately  began  to  prepare  food,  and  when 
it  was  cooked,  they  brought  it  to  her,  and  she 
partook  of  it,  and  when  she  had  done  it  was  night- 
time ;  then  they  brought  plenty  of  firewood  into  the 
house,  and  made  up  a  clear  fii'e,  so  that  the  house 
might  be  quite  light,  and  they  all  stood  up  to 
dance,  that  she  might  pass  a  cheerful  evening. 

After  they  had  all  danced,  they  continued  soh- 
citing  Te  Kahureremoa  to  stand  up  and  dance 
also,  whilst  the}''  sat  looking  on  to  see  how  grace- 
fully and  beautifully  she  moved.  Upon  which 
she  coyly  said,  "  Ah,  yes,  that 's  all  very  well ; 
do  you  want  me  to  dance  indeed  V  At  last, 
however,  the  young  girl  sprang  up,  and  she  had 

N 


266  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

hardly  stretched  forth  her  lovely  arms  in  the  atti- 
tude of  the  dance,  before  the  people  all  cried  out 
with  surprise  and  pleasure  at  her  beauty  and  gi-ace  ; 
her  arms  moved  with  an  easy  and  rapid  action  like 
that  of  swimming ;  her  nimble  lissom  fingers  were 
reverted  till  their  tips  seemed  to  touch  the  backs  of 
the  palms  of  her  hands ;  and  all  her  motions  were 
so  light,  that  she  appeared  to  float  in  the  air ; 
then  might  be  seen,  indeed,  the  difference  between 
the  dancing  of  a  nobly-born  girl  and  a  slave ;  the 
latter  being  too  often  a  mere  throwing  about  of 
the  body  and  of  the  arms.  Thus  she  danced 
before  them  ;  and  when  she  had  finished,  all  the 
young  men  in  the  place  were  quite  charmed 
with  her,  and  could  think  of  nothing  but  of  Te 
Kahureremoa. 

When  night  came  on,  and  the  people  had  dis- 
persed to  their  houses,  the  chief  of  the  village  came 
to  make  love  to  her,  and  said,  that  upon  account  of 
her  great  beauty  he  wished  her  to  become  his  wife  ; 
but  she  at  once  started  up  with  her  female  slave, 
and  notwithstanding  the  darkness,  they  plunged 
straight  into  the  river,  forded  it,  and  proceeded 
upon  their  journey,  leaving  the  chief  overwhelmed 
with  shame  and  confusion,  at  the  manner  in 
which  Te  Kahureremoa  had  departed  :  however, 
away   she   went,  without  any   fearful  thought,   on 


NEW     ZEALAND     VEGETATION. 


STORY    OF    KAHUREREMOA.  267 

her  road  to  Tauranga,  and  by  daybreak  they 
had  reached  the  Wairoa.  When  the  people  of 
the  vilhxge  saw  her  coming  along  in  the  dawn, 
they  raised  joyful  cries  of — "  Here  is  Te  Kahure- 
remoa  ;"  and  some  of  Takakopiri's  people,  who  were 
there,  would  detain  the  young  girl  for  a  time  :  so 
she  rested,  and  ate,  and  was  refreshed ;  thence  she 
proceeded  along  the  base  of  the  mountains  of 
Otawa,  and  at  night  slept  at  its  foot ;  and  when 
morning  broke,  she  and  her  slave  continued  their 
journey. 

There,  just  at  the  same  time,  was  Takakopiri  com- 
ing along  the  path,  to  sport  in  his  forests  at  Otawa  ; 
his  sport  was  spearing  birds,  and  right  in  the  path- 
way there  stood  a  tall  forest  tree  covered  with  ber- 
ries, upon  which  large  green  pigeons  had  settled  in 
flocks  to  feed.  The  two  girls  came  toiling  along, 
with  their  upper  cloaks  thrown  round  their  shoul- 
ders like  plaids,  for  the  convenience  of  travelling,  the 
slave-girl  carrying  a  basket  of  food  on  her  back  for 
her  mistress.  As  the  girls  drew  near  the  forest 
they  heard  the  loud  flapping  of  the  wings  of  a 
pigeon,  for  the  young  chief  had  struck  one  with  his 
spear ;  so  they  stopped  at  once,  and  Te  Kahurere- 
moa  said  to  her  slave,  "  Somebody  is  there,  just 
listen  how  that  bird  flaps  its  wings  ;"  and  her  slave 
answered,  "Yes,  I  hear  it."  And  Te  Kahureremoa 
said,    "  That  was  the  flapping  of  the   wings  of  a 

N  2 


268  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

bird  wliicli  somebody  has  speared;"  and  her  slave 
replied,  "  Yes,  we  had  better  go  and  see  who  it  is." 
And  they  had  not  gone  far  before  they  heard  a 
louder  flap,  as  the  bird  was  thrown  upon  the 
ground ;  they  at  once  approached  the  spot,  and  see- 
ing a  heap  of  pigeons  which  had  been  killed,  lying 
at  the  root  of  a  tree,  they  sat  down  by  them.  Taka- 
kopiri  had  observed  them  coming  along,  and  as  he 
watched  the  girls  from  the  tree,  he  said  to  himself, 
"  These  girls  are  travelling,  and  they  come  from  a 
lono-  distance,  for  their  cloaks  are  rolled  over  their 
shoulders  like  plaids  ;  they  are  not  from  near  here  ; 
had  they  come  from  the  neighbourhood  they  would 
have  worn  their  cloaks  hanging  down  in  the  usual 
way." 

Then  the  young  chief  came  down  from  the 
tree,  leaving  his  sj^ear  swinging  to  a  bough  :  as 
lie  was  descending,  the  girls  saw  him,  and  the  slave 
knew  him  at  once  at  a  distance,  and  said,  "  Oh, 
my  young  mistress,  that  is  Takakopiri ;"  and  Te 
Kahureremoa  said,  "  No,  no,  it  is  not  indeed ; " 
but  the  slave  said,  "Yes,  it  is  he,  I  saw  him  when 
he  came  to  Hauraki :"  and  the  young  giii  said, 
"  You  are  right,  it  is  Takakopiri ;"  and  her  slave 
said,  "Yes,  yes,  this  is  the  young  chief  who  has 
caused  us  to  come  all  this  distance."  By  this  time 
he  had  reached  the  ground,  and  he  and  the  girls 
cried  out  at  the  same  time  to   each  other,  "  Wei- 


STORY    OF    KAHUREREMOA,  269 

come,  welcome ;"  and  the  young  man  came  up  to 
them,  and  stooped  down,  and  pressed  his  nose  to 
the  nose  of  each  of  them.  Te  Kahureremoa  felt 
and  knew  whose  face  touched  hers,  but  Takako- 
piri  did  not  know  whose  nose  he  had  pressed. 

Then  he  said  to  them,  "  We  had  better  go  to 
my  village,  which  is  on  the  other  side  of  the 
forest ;"  and  he  pressed  them  to  go,  and  the  girls 
consented  to  go  to  the  village  with  him  :  as  they 
went  along  the  path,  he  kept  urging  them  to 
make  haste,  and  Te  Kahureremoa  thought  that  he 
might  still  not  know  who  she  was,  or  he  would 
never  speak  so  impatiently,  and  tell  her  to  make 
haste,  so  she  made  an  excuse  to  arrange  her  dress, 
and  stopped  behind  on  one  side  of  the  path,  in  order 
that  the  young  chief  might  have  an  opportunity  of 
asking  her  slave  who  she  was  :  as  soon  as  he  saw 
she  had  left  the  path,  he  went  on  with  her  slave 
a  little  distance  until  they  had  got  over  a 
rising  ground,  and  then  he  asked  her,  saying, 
"Who  is  your  mistress?"  and  the  slave  answered, 
"  Is  it  my  young  mistress  that  you  are  asking 
about?"  and  the  young  chief  said,  "Yes,  it  is  one 
nobly -born  person  asking  after  another  ; "  and  the 
slave  said,  "Well,  if  it  is  my  mistress  you  are 
aslcing  about,  the  young  lady's  name  is  Te  Kahu- 
reremoa;"  and  he  answered  her,  "What!  is  this 
Te  Kahureremoa,  the  daughter  of  Paka?"  and  the 


270  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

slave  replied,  "Yes,  do  you  think  there  are  more 
Pakas  than  one,  or  more  Te  Kahureremoas  than 
one  ? — this  is  really  she  ;"  and  the  young  chief  said, 
"  Well,  who  would  ever  have  suspected  that  this 
was  she,  or  that  a  young  girl  from  so  distant  a 
place  could  have  reached  this  country  ?  Let  us 
sit  down  here  at  once,  and  wait  until  she  comes 
up."  In  a  very  little  time  she  appeared  com- 
ing along  to  them,  and  the  young  chief  called 
out  to  her,  "  You  had  really  better  make  haste,  or 
you  '11  suffer  from  want  of  food,  for  it  is  still  a 
long  distance  from  this  place  to  my  village  •"  and 
when  she  had  reached  them  he  said,  "  Do  you 
follow  me,  and  pray  do  not  lose  time."  Then  away 
he  ran,  and  as  soon  as  he  got  in  sight  of  his 
own  fortress,  he  began  to  call  loudly  to  his  people 
as  he  ran,  "  Te  Kahureremoa  has  arrived ;  the 
daughter  of  Paka  is  come."  "  Why,"  said  some  of 
them,  "our  master  is  in  love  with  that  girl,  and 
has  lost  his  senses,  and  thinks  she  is  really  here ;" 
but  he  kept  calling  out  as  he  ran,  "  Here  comes 
Te  Kahureremoa,  here  comes  the  daughter  of 
Paka."  Then  some  of  them  said,  "  Why,  after 
all,  it  must  be  true,  or  he  would  not  continue 
calling  it  out  in  that  way ;"  and  others  said,  "  But 
who  could  ever  believe  that  a  young  girl  could 
have  travelled  to  such  a  distance?  the  place  is 
strange  to  her,  and  we  are  all  strangers  to  her  ; 


STORY    OF    KAHUREREMOA.  271 

perhaps,  after  all,  it  is  only  the  wind  wafting  up 
from  afar  this  name  which  we  hear  called  out  in 
our  ears."  However,  they  all  either  climbed  up 
on  the  defences,  or  went  outside  to  see  who  was 
coming ;  and  as  soon  as  they  saw  the  young  girl 
apj)roaching,  they  began  to  wave  their  garments, 
and  to  sing,  in  songs  of  welcome, — 

"  Welcome,  welcome,  thou  who  comest 
From  afar,  from  beroud  the  far  horizon ; 
Our  dearest  child  hath  brought  thee  thence  ; 
Weleome,  oh,  welcome  here." 

And  each  of  the  many  hundreds  of  persons  who 
had  come  out  to  welcome  her,  as  she  passed  his 
residence,  prayed  her  to  stop  there  ;  but  Takakopiri 
continued  to  say  to  her,  "Press  on,  follow  close, 
quite  close,  after  me  ; "  and  so  he  led  her  through 
the  throng  of  people,  each  of  whom  felt  so  moved 
towards  the  young  girl,  that,  although  they  were 
in  the  very  presence  of  their  young  lord,  tliey 
could  not  help  soliciting  her  to  stop  at  each 
house  as  she  came  by.  At  length  she  arrived 
at  Takakopiri's  dwelling,  and  there  for  the  first 
time  she  stopped  and  sat  down,  and  the  people 
came  thronging  in  crowds  to  gaze  upon  her;  and 
they  spread  before  the  two  young  girls  food  in 
abundance,  the  birds  which  the  young  chief  had 
taken  upon  the  mountains  ;  and  a  feast  was  made 
for  the  crowd  that  surrounded  them  ;  thus  they  re- 


272  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

mained  feasting,  and  admiring  that  young  girl,  and 
when  the  sun  sank  below  the  horizon,  they  were  still 
sitting  there  gazing  upon  her  ;  the  youths  of  the 
village  thought  they  could  never  be  weary  of  look- 
ing at  her,  but  none  dared  to  utter  one  word 
of  love  for  fear  of  Takakopiri.  Before  a  month 
had  passed  she  was  married  to  the  young  chief, 
and  she  bore  him  a  daughter,  named  Tuparahaki, 
from  whom,  in  eleven  generations,  or  in  about  275 
years,  have  sprung  all  the  principal  chiefs  of  the 
Ngatipaoa  tribe  who  are  now  alive  (in  1853). 


THE  TWO  SORCERERS, 

(kO   TE   MATENGA  0  KIKI.) 

KiKi  was  a  celebrated  sorcerer,  and  skilled  in 
magical  arts ;  lie  lived  upon  the  river  "Waikato. 
The  inhabitants  of  that  river  still  have  this  proverb, 
"  The  offsprmg  of  Kiki  wither  shrubs."  This  pro- 
verb had  its  origin  in  the  circumstance  of  Kiki 
being  such  a  magician,  that  he  could  not  go  abroad 
in  the  sunshine  ;  for  if  his  shadow  fell  upon  any- 
place not  protected  from  his  magic,  it  at  once  be- 
came tapu,  and  all  the  plants  there  withered. 

This  Kiki  was  thoroughly  skilled  in  the  prac- 
tice of  sorcery.  If  any  parties  coming  up  the 
river  called  at  his  village  in  their  canoes  as  they 
paddled  by,  he  still  remained  quietly  at  home, 
and  never  troubled  himself  to  come  out,  but 
just  drew  back  the  sliding  door  of  his  house, 
so  that  it  might  stand  open,  and  the  strangers 
stiffened  and  died  ;  or  even  as  canoes  came  pad- 
dling down  from  the  upper  parts  of  the  river,  he 
drew  back  the  sliding  wooden  shutter  to  the  win- 

N   3 


274  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

do"w  of  his  house,  and  the  crews  on  board  of  them 
were  sure  to  die. 

At  lengtli,  the  fame  of  this  sorcerer  spread  ex- 
ceedingly, and  resounded  through  every  tribe,  until 
Tamure,  a  chief  who  dwelt  at  Kawhia,  heard  with 
others,  reports  of  the  magical  powers  of  Kiki,  for 
his  fame  extended  over  the  whole  country.  At 
length  Tamure  thought  he  would  go  and  contend 
in  the  arts  of  sorcery  with  Kiki,  that  it  might  be 
seen  which  of  them  was  most  skilled  in  magic  ;  and 
he  arranged  in  his  own  mind  a  fortunate  season  for 
his  visit. 

When  this  time  came,  he  selected  two  of  his 
people  as  his  companions,  and  he  took  his  young 
daughter  with  him  also  ;  and  they  all  crossed  over 
the  mountain  range  from  Kawhia,  and  came  down 
upon  the  river  Waipa,  which  runs  into  the  Wai- 
kato,  and  embarking  there  in  a  canoe,  paddled 
down  the  river  towards  the  village  of  Kild  ;  and 
they  managed  so  well,  that  before  they  were  seen 
by  anybody,  they  had  arrived  at  the  landing-place. 
Tamure  was  not  only  skilled  in  magic,  but  he 
was  also  a  very  cautious  man ;  so  whilst  they 
were  still  afloat  upon  the  river,  he  repeated  an  in- 
cantation of  the  kind  called  "  Mata-tawhito,"  to 
preserve  him  safe  from  all  arts  of  sorcery ;  and  he 
repeated  other  incantations,  to  ward  off  spells,  to 
protect  him  from  magic,  to  collect  good  genii  round 


THE   TWO    SORCERERS.  275 

him,  to  keep  off  evil  spirits,  and  to  shield  him  fi'om 
demons  ;  when  these  preparations  were  all  finished, 
they  landed,  and  drew  up  their  canoe  on  the  beach, 
at  the  landing-place  of  Kiki. 

As  soon  as  they  had  landed,  the  old  sorcerer 
called  out  to  them  that  they  were  welcome  to  his 
village,  and  invited  them  to  come  up  to  it;  so  they 
went  up  to  the  village :  and  when  they  reached 
the  square  in  the  centre,  they  seated  themselves 
upon  the  ground ;  and  some  of  Kiki's  people 
kindled  fire  in  an  enchanted  oven,  and  began  to 
cook  food  in  it  for  the  strangers.  Kiki  sat  in  his 
house,  and  Tamure  on  the  ground  just  outside  the 
entrance  to  it,  and  he  there  availed  himself  of 
this  opportunity  to  repeat  incantations  over  the 
threshold  of  the  house,  so  that  Kiki  might  be  en- 
chanted as  he  stepped  over  it  to  come  out.  When 
the  food  in  the  enchanted  oven  was  cooked,  they 
pulled  off  the  coverings,  and  spread  it  out  upon 
clean  mats.  The  old  sorcerer  now  made  his  ap- 
pearance out  of  his  house,  and  he  invited  Taraure 
to  come  and  eat  food  with  him ;  but  the  food 
was  all  enchanted,  and  his  object  in  asking  Ta- 
mure to  eat  with  him  was,  that  the  enchanted 
food  might  kill  him  ;  therefore  Tamure  said  that  his 
young  daughter  was  very  hungry,  and  would  eat 
of  the  food  offered  to  them  ;  he  in  the  meantime 
kept  on  repeating  incantations  of  the  kind  called 


276  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

Mata-tawliito,  Whakangungu,  and  Parepare^  protec- 
tions against  enchanted  food,  and  as  she  ate  she 
also  continued  to  repeat  them ;  even  when  she 
stretched  out  her  hand  to  take  a  sweet  potato,  or 
any  other  food,  she  dropped  the  greater  part  of  it 
at  her  feet,  and  hid  it  under  her  clothes,  and  then 
only  ate  a  little  bit.  After  she  had  done,  the 
old  sorcerer,  Kiki,  kept  waiting  for  Taraure  to 
begin  to  eat  also  of  the  enchanted  food,  that 
he  might  soon  die.  Kiki  having  gone  into  his 
house  again,  Tamure  still  sat  on  the  ground  out- 
side the  door,  and  as  he  had  enchanted  the 
tlnreshold  of  the  house,  he  now  repeated  incan- 
tations which  might  render  the  door  enchanted 
also,  so  that  Kiki  might  be  certain  not  to  escape 
when  he  passed  out  of  it  By  this  time  Tamure's 
daughter  had  quite  finished  her  meal,  but  neitlier 
her  father  nor  either  of  his  people  had  partaken  of 
the  enchanted  food. 

Tamure  now  ordered  his  people  to  launch  his 
canoe,  and  they  paddled  away,  and  a  little  time 
after  they  had  left  the  village,  Kiki  became  un- 
well ;  in  the  meanwhile,  Tamure  and  his  people 
were  paddling  homewards  in  all  haste,  and  as 
they  passed  a  village  where  there  were  a  good 
many  people  on  the  river's  bank,  Tamure  stopped, 
and  said  to  them,  "  If  you  should  see  any  canoe 
pullinof  after  us,  and  the  people  in  the  canoe  ask 


THE    TWO   SORCERERS.  277 

you,  have  you  seen  a  canoe  pass  up  the  river,  would 
you  be  good  enough  to  say,  'Yes,  a  canoe  has 
passed  by  here  V  and  then  if  they  ask  you,  '  How 
far  has  it  got  ?'  would  you  be  good  enough  to  say, 
'  Oh,  by  this  time  it  has  got  very  far  up  the 
river?'"  and  having  thus  said  to  the  people  of 
that  village,  Tamui-e  paddled  away  again  in  his 
canoe  with  all  haste. 

Some  time  after  Tamure's  party  had  left  the 
village  of  Kiki,  the  old  sorcerer  became  very  ill 
indeed,  and  his  people  then  knew  that  this  had 
been  brought  about  by  the  magical  arts  of  Tamure, 
and  they  sprang  into  a  canoe  to  follow  after  him, 
and  pulled  up  the  river  as  hard  as  they  could;  and 
when  they  reached  the  village  where  the  people 
were  on  the  river's  bank,  they  called  out  and  asked 
them,  "  How  far  has  the  canoe  reached,  which 
passed  up  the  river?"  and  the  villagers  answered, 
"  Oh,  that  canoe  must  have  got  very  far  up  the 
river  by  this  time."  The  people  in  the  canoe  that 
was  pursuing  Tamure,  upon  hearing  this,  returned 
again  to  their  own  village,  and  Kiki  died  from  the 
incantations  of  Tamure. 

Some  of  Kiki's  descendants  are  still  livino- — 
one  of  them,  named  Mokahi,  recently  died  at  Tau- 
ranga-a-Ruru,  but  Te  Maioha  is  still  living  on  the 
river  Waipa.  Yes,  some  of  the  descendants  of 
Kiki,  whose  shadow  withered  trees,  are  still  living. 


278  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

He  was  indeed  a  great  sorcerer:  he  overcame  every 
other  sorcerer  until  he  met  Tamure,  but  he  was 
vanquished  by  him,  and  had  to  bend  the  knee 
before  him. 

Tamure  has  also  some  descendants  living, 
amongst  whom  are  Mahu  and  Kiake  of  the  Ngati- 
Mariu  tribe ;  these  men  are  also  skilled  in  magic  : 
if  a  father  skilled  in  magic  died,  he  left  his  incan- 
tations to  liis  children ;  so  that  if  a  man  was 
skilled  in  sorcery,  it  was  known  that  his  children 
would  have  a  good  knowledge  of  the  same  arts, 
as  they  were  certain  to  have  derived  it  from  their 
parent. 


=^^-^??c<;x,,,_-  '"_^. 


K  0  H  I  N  E  M  U  T  U    R  O  T  O  R  N  A. 


THE  MAGICAL  WOODEN  HEAD, 

(kox  ga  puhi  a  puarata  baua  ko  tautohito.) 


This  head  bewitched  all  persons  who  approached 
the  hill  where  the  fortress  in  which  it  was  kept 
was  situated,  so  that,  from  fear  of  it,  no  human 
being  dared  to  approach  the  place,  which  was  thence 
named  the  Sacred  Mount. 

Upon  that  mount  dwelt  Puarata  and  Tautohito 
with  their  carved  head,  and  its  fame  went  through 
all  the  country,  to  the  river  Taraaki,  and  to  Kai- 
para,  and  to  the  tribes  of  Ngapuhi,  to  Akau,  to 
Waikato,  to  Kawhia,  to  Mokau,  to  Hauraki,  and 
to  Tauranga ;  the  exceeding  great  fame  of  the 
powers  of  that  carved  head  spread  to  every  part 
of  Aotea-roa,  or  the  northern  island  of  New  Zea- 
land ;  everywhere  reports  were  heard,  that  so  great 
were  its  magical  powers,  none  could  escape  alive 
from  them  ;  and  although  many  warriors  and  armies 
went  to  the  Sacred  Mount  to  try  to  destroy  the 
sorcerers  to  whom  the  head  belonged,  and  to  carry 
it  off  as  a  genius  for  their  own   district,  that  its 


280  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

magical  powers  might  be  subservient  to  them, 
they  all  perished  in  the  attempt.  In  short,  no 
mortal  could  approach  the  fortress,  and  live ; 
even  parties  of  people  who  were  travelling  along 
the  forest  track,  to  the  northwards  towards  Muri- 
whenua,  all  died  by  the  magical  powers  of  that 
head ;  whether  they  went  in  large  armed  bodies,  or 
simply  as  quiet  travellers,  their  fate  was  alike — they 
all  perished,  from  its  magical  influence,  somewhere 
about  the  place  where  the  beaten  track  passes  over 
Waimatuku. 

The  deaths  of  so  many  persons  created  a  great 
sensation  in  the  country,  and,  at  last,  the  report  of 
these  things  reached  a  very  powerful  sorcerer  named 
Hakawau,  who,  confiding  in  his  magical  arts,  said 
he  was  resolved  to  go  and  see  this  magic  head,  and 
the  sorcerers  who  owned  it.  So,  without  delay,  he 
called  upon  all  the  genii  who  were  subservient  to 
him,  in  order  that  he  might  be  thrown  into  an 
enchanted  sleep,  and  see  what  his  fate  in  this  under- 
takinof  would  be  ;  and  in  his  slumber  he  saw  that 
his  genius  would  triumph  in  the  encounter,  for  it 
was  so  lofty  and  mighty,  that  in  his  dream  its  head 
reached  the  heavens,  whilst  its  feet  remained  upon 
earth. 

Having  by  his  spells  ascertained  this,  he  at  once 
started  on  his  journey,  and  the  district  through 
which  he  travelled  was  that  of  Akau  ;  and,  confiding 


THE  MAGICAL  WOODEN  HEAD.      281 

in  his  own  enchantments,  he  went  fearlessly  to  try 
whether  his  arts  of  sorcery  would  not  prevail  over 
the  magic  head,  and  enable  him  to  destroy  the  old 
sorcerer  Puarata. 

He  took  with  him  one  fiiend,  and  went  along 
the  sea-coast  towards  the  Sacred  Mount,  and  passed 
through  Whanga-roa,  and  followed  the  sea-shore 
to  Rangikahu  and  Kuhawera,  and  came  out  upon 
the  coast  again  at  Karoroumanui,  and  arrived 
at  Maraetai ;  there  was  a  fortified  village,  the 
people  of  which  endeavoured  to  detain  Hakawau 
and  his  friend  until  they  rested  themselves  and 
partook  of  a  little  food  ;  but  he  said,  "  We  ate  food 
on  the  road,  a  short  distance  behind  us;  we  are 
not  at  all  hungry  or  weary."  So  they  would  not 
remain  at  Maraetai,  but  went  straight  on  until 
they  reached  Putataka,  and  they  crossed  the  river 
there,  and  proceeded  along  the  beach  to  Rukuwai ; 
neither  did  they  stop  there,  but  on  they  went, 
and  at  last  reached  Waitara. 

When  they  got  to  Waitara,  the  friend  who  ac- 
companied Hakawau  began  to  get  alarmed,  and 
said,  "Now  we  shall  perish  here,  I  fear;"  but 
they  went  safely  on,  and  reached  Te  Weta ;  there 
the  heart  of  Hakawau's  friend  began  to  beat  again, 
and  he  said,  "  I  feel  sure  that  we  shall  perish 
here ;"  however  they  passed  by  that  place  too  in 


282  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

safety,  and  on  tliey  went,  and  at  length  tliey 
reached  the  most  fatal  place  of  all — Wainiatuku, 
Here  they  smelt  the  stench  of  the  carcases  of  the 
numbers  who  had  been  previously  destroyed ;  indeed 
the  stench  was  so  bad  that  it  was  quite  suffocating, 
and  they  both  now  said,  "  This  is  a  fearful  place  ; 
we  fear  we  shall  perish  here."  However,  Haka- 
wau  kept  on  unceasingly  working  at  his  enchant- 
ments, and  repeating  incantations,  which  might 
ward  off  the  attacks  of  evil  genii,  and  which  might 
collect  good  genii  about  them,  to  protect  them  from 
the  malignant  spirits  of  Puarata,  lest  these  should 
injure  them  ;  thus  they  passed  over  Waimatuku, 
looking  with  horror  at  the  many  corpses  strewed 
about  the  beach,  and  in  the  dense  fern  and  bushes 
which  bordered  the  path  ;  and  as  they  pursued  their 
onward  journey,  they  expected  death  every  mo- 
ment. 

Nevertheless  they  died  not  on  the  dreadful  road, 
but  went  straight  along  the  path  till  they  came  to 
the  place  where  it  passes  over  some  low  hills,  from 
whence  they  could  see  the  fortress  which  stood  upon 
the  Sacred  Mount.  Here  they  sat  down  and 
rested,  for  the  first  time  since  they  had  commenced 
their  journey.  They  had  not  yet  been  seen  by  the 
watchmen  of  the  fortress.  Then  Hakawau,  with 
his  incantations,  sent  forth  many  genii,  to  attack 


THE  MAGICAL  WOODEN  HEAD.       283 

the  spirits  who  kept  watch  over  the  fortress  and 
magic  head  of  Puarata.  Some  of  his  good  genii 
were  sent  by  Hakawau  in  advance,  whilst  he 
charged  others  to  follow  at  some  distance.  The 
incantations  by  the  power  of  which  these  genii  were 
sent  forth  by  Hakawau  was  a  Whangai.  The  genii 
he  sent  in  front  were  ordered  immediately  to  begin 
the  assault.  As  soon  as  the  spirits  who  guarded 
the  fortress  of  Puarata  saw  the  others,  they  all 
issued  out  to  attack  them ;  the  good  genii  then 
feigned  a  retreat,  the  evil  ones  following  them, 
and  whilst  they  were  thus  engaged  in  the  pur- 
suit, some  of  the  thousands  of  good  genii,  who 
had  last  been  sent  forth  by  Hakawau,  stormed 
the  fortress  now  left  without  defenders  ;  when,  the 
evil  spirits,  who  had  been  led  away  in  the  pursuit, 
tm-ned  to  protect  the  fortress,  they  found  that  the 
genii  of  Hakawau  had  already  got  quite  close  to  it, 
and  the  good  genii  of  Hakawau  without  trouble 
caught  them  one  after  the  other,  and  thus  all  the 
spirits  of  the  old  sorcerer  Puarata  were  utterly 
destroyed. 

When  all  the  evil  spirits  who  had  been  subject 
to  the  old  sorcerer  had  been  thus  destroyed,  Haka- 
wau walked  straight  up  towards  the  fortress  of 
this  fellow,  in  whom  spirits  had  dwelt  as  thick  as 
men  stow  themselves  in  a  canoe,  and  whom   they 


284  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

had  used  in  like  manner  to  cany  them  about.  When 
the  watchmen  of  the  fortress,  to  their  great  sur- 
prise, saw  strangers  coming,  Puarata  hurried  to  his 
magic  head,  to  call  upon  it;  his  supplication  was 
after  this  manner — "  Strangers,  come  here !  strangers 
come  here  !  Two  strangers  come !  two  strangers 
come  ! "  But  it  uttered  only  a  low  wailing  sound  ; 
for  since  the  good  genii  of  Hakawau  had  destroyed 
the  spirits  who  served  Puarata,  the  old  sorcerer 
addressed  in  vain  his  supplications  to  the  magic 
head,  it  could  no  longer  raise  aloud  its  powerful 
voice  as  in  former  times,  but  uttered  only  low  moans 
and  wails.  Could  it  have  cried  out  with  a  loud 
voice,  straightway  Hakawau  and  his  friend  would 
both  have  perished  ;  for  thus  it  was,  when  armies 
and  travellers  had  in  other  times  passed  the  for- 
tress, Puarata  addressed  supplications  to  his  magic 
head,  and  when  it  cried  out  with  a  mighty  voice, 
the  strangers  all  perished  as  they  heard  it. 

Hakawau  and  his  friend  had,  in  the  meantime, 
continued  to  walk  straight  to  the  fortress.  When 
they  drew  near  it,  Hakawau  said  to  his  friend, 
"  You  go  directly  along  the  path  that  leads  by 
the  gateway  into  the  fortress;  as  for  me,  I  will 
show  my  power  over  the  old  sorcerer,  by  climbing 
right  over  the  parapet  and  palisades:"  and  when 
they    reached    the    defences   of   the    place,    Haka- 


THE  MAGICAL   WOODEN    HEAD.  285 

wau  began  to  climb  over  the  palisades  of  the 
gateway.  When  the  people  of  the  place  saw  this, 
they  were  much  exasperated,  and  desired  him,  in 
an  angry  manner,  to  pass  underneath  the  gateway, 
along  the  pathway  which  was  common  to  all,  and 
not  to  dare  to  climb  over  the  gateway  of  Puarata  and 
of  Tautohito;  but  Hakawau  went  quietly  on  over 
the  gateway,  without  paying  the  least  attention  to 
the  angiy  words  of  those  who  were  calhng  out  to 
him,  for  he  felt  quite  sure  that  the  two  old  sorcerers 
were  not  so  skilful  in  magical  arts  as  he  was  ;  so 
Hakawau  persisted  in  going  direct  to  all  the  most 
holy  places  of  the  fortress,  where  no  person  who  had 
not  been  made  sacred  might  enter. 

After  Hakawau  and  his  friend  had  been  for  a 
short  time  in  the  fortress,  and  had  rested  them- 
selves a  little,  the  people  of  the  place  began  to  cook 
food  for  them;  they  still  continued  to  sit  resting 
themselves  in  the  fortress  for  a  long  time,  and  at 
length  Hakawau  said  to  his  friend,  "  Let  us  de- 
part." Directly  his  servant  heard  what  his  master 
said  to  him,  he  jumped  up  at  once  and  was  ready 
enough  to  be  off.  Then  the  people  of  the  place 
called  out  to  them  not  to  go  immediately,  but  to 
take  some  food  first ;  but  Hakawau  answered,  "  Oh, 
we  ate  only  a  little  while  ago  ;  not  far  from  here 
we  took  some  food."  So  Hakawau  would  not  re- 
main longer  in  the  fortress,  but   departed,   and  as 


286  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 

he  started,  lie  smote  his  hands  on  the  thi*eshold  of 
the  house  in  which  they  had  rested,  and  they  had 
hardly  got  well  outside  of  the  fortress  before  every 
soul  in  it  was  dead — not  a  single  one  of  them  was 
left  alive. 


THE    ART    OF     NETTING     LEARNED    BY 
KAHUKURA  FROM  THE  FAIRIES, 

(ko  te  kokeko  mo  nga  patupaiaeehe.) 

Once  upon  a  time,  a  man  of  the  name  of  Kaliu- 
km-a  wished  to  pay  a  visit  to  Rangiaowhia,  a  place 
lying  far  to  the  northward,  near  the  country  of  the 
tribe  called  Te  Rarawa.  Whilst  he  lived  at  his  own 
village,  he  was  continually  haunted  by  a  desire  to 
visit  that  place.  At  length  he  started  on  his 
journey,  and  reached  Rangiaowliia,  and  as  he  was 
on  his  road,  he  passed  a  place  where  some  people 
had  been  cleaning  mackerel,  and  he  saw  the  inside 
of  the  fish  lying  all  about  the  sand  on  the  sea- 
shore :  surprised  at  this,  he  looked  about  at  the 
marks,  and  said  to  himself,  "  Oh,  this  must  have 
been  done  by  some  of  the  people  of  the  district." 
But  when  he  came  to  look  a  little  more  narrowly 
at  the  footmarks,  he  saw  that  the  people  who  had 
been  fishing  had  made  them  in  the  night-time,  not 
that  morning,  nor  in  the  day ;  and  he  said  to 
himself,  "  These  are  no  mortals  who  have  been 
fishing   here — spirits    must   have   done  this ;    had 


288  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

they  been  men,  some  of  the  reeds  and  grass  which 
they  sat  on  in  their  canoe  would  have  been  lying 
about."  He  felt  quite  sure  from  several  circum- 
stances, that  spirits  or  fairies  had  been  there  ;  and 
after  observing  everything  well,  he  returned  to  the 
house  where  he  was  stopping.  He,  however,  held 
fast  in  his  heart  what  he  had  seen,  as  something 
very  striking  to  tell  all  his  fi-iends  in  every  direc- 
tion, and  as  likely  to  be  the  means  of  gaining 
knowledge  which  micfht  enable  him  to  fiud  out 
something  new. 

So  that  night  he  returned  to  the  place  where 
he  had  observed  all  these  things,  and  just  as 
he  reached  the  spot,  back  had  come  the  fairies  too, 
to  haul  their  net  for  mackerel ;  and  some  of  them 
were  shouting  out,  "  The  net  here  !  the  net  here  ! " 
Then  a  canoe  paddled  off  to  fetch  the  other  in 
which  the  net  was  laid,  and  as  they  dropped  the 
net  into  the  water,  they  began  to  cry  out,  "  Drop 
the  net  in  the  sea  at  Eaugiaowhia,  and  haul  it 
at  Mamaku."  These  words  were  sung  out  by 
the  fairies,  as  an  encouragement  in  their  work,  and 
from  the  joy  of  their  hearts  at  their  sport  in 
fishing. 

As  the  fairies  were  dragging  the  net  to  the  shore, 
Kahukura  managed  to  mix  amongst  them,  and 
hauled  away  at  the  rope  ;  he  happened  to  be  a 
very  fair   man,   so    that   his    skin   was    almost    as 


NET  MAKING  ACQUIRED  FEOM  THE  FAIRIES.    289 

white  as  that  of  these  fairies,  and  from  that  cause 
he  was  not  observed  by  them.  As  the  net  came 
close  in  to  the  shore,  the  fairies  began  to  cheer 
and  shout,  "  Go  out  into  the  sea  some  of  you,  in 
front  of  the  rocks,  lest  the  nets  should  be  en- 
tangled in  Tawatawauia  a  Teweteweuia,"  for  that 
was  the  name  of  a  rugged  rock  standing  out  fi-om 
the  sandy  shore  ;  the  main  body  of  the  fairies  kept 
hauhng  at  the  net,  and  Kahukura  pulled  away  in 
the  midst  of  them. 

When  the  fii"st  fish  reached  the  shore,  thi'own  up 
in  the  ripples  driven  before  the  net  as  they  hauled 
it  in,  the  fairies  had  not  yet  remarked  Kahukura, 
for  he  was  almost  as  fair  as  they  were.  It  was 
just  at  the  very  first  peep  of  dawn  that  the  fish 
were  all  landed,  and  the  fairies  ran  hastily  to  pick 
them  up  from  the  sand,  and  to  haul  the  net  up  on 
the  beach.  They  did  not  act  with  their  fish  as  men 
do,  dividing  them  into  separate  loads  for  each,  but 
every  one  took  up  what  fish  he  liked,  and  ran  a 
twig  through  their  gills,  and  as  they  strung  the 
fish,  tliey  continued  calhng  out,  "  Make  haste,  run 
here,  aU  of  you,  and  finish  the  work  before  the  sun 
rises." 

Kahukura  kept  on  stringing  his  fish  with  the 
rest  of  them.  He  had  only  a  very  short  string, 
and,    making  a   slip-knot  at  the  end  of  it,  when 

o 


290  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

he  liad  covered  the  string  with  fish,  he  lifted  them 
lip,  but  had  hardly  raised  them  from  the  ground 
when  the  slip-knot  gave  way  fi-om  the  weight 
of  the  fish,  and  ofi"  they  fell ;  then  some  of  the 
fairies  ran  good-naturedly  to  help  him  to  string 
his  fish  again,  and  one  of  them  tied  the  knot  at 
the  end  of  the  string  for  him,  but  the  fairy  had 
hardly  gone  after  knotting  it,  before  Kahukura 
had  unfastened  it,  and  again  tied  a  slip-knot  at 
the  end  ;  then  he  began  stringing  his  fish  again, 
and  when  he  had  got  a  great  many  on,  up  he 
lifted  them,  and  ofi"  they  slipped  as  before. 
This  trick  he  repeated  several  times,  and  delayed 
the  fairies  in  their  work  by  getting  them  to  knot 
his  string  for  him,  and  put  his  fish  on  it.  At 
last  full  daylight  broke,  so  that  there  was  light 
enough  to  distinguish  a  man's  face,  and  the  fairies 
saw  that  Kahukura  was  a  man ;  then  they  dis- 
persed in  confusion,  leaving  their  fish  and  their 
net,  and  abandoning  their  canoes,  which  were  no- 
thing but  stems  of  the  flax.  In  a  moment  the 
fairies  started  for  their  own  abodes ;  in  their 
hurry,  as  has  just  been  said,  they  abandoned  their 
net,  which  was  made  of  rushes  ;  and  off"  the  good 
people  fled  as  fast  as  they  could  go.  Now  was 
first  discovered  the  stitch  for  netting  a  net,  for  they 
left  theirs  with  Kahukura,  and  it  became  a   pat- 


NET  MAKING  ACQUIRED  FROM  THE  FAIRIES.    291 

tern  for  him.  He  thus  taught  his  children  to 
make  nets,  and  by  them  the  Maori  race  were 
made  acquainted  with  that  art,  which  they  have 
now  known  from  very  remote  times. 


o  2 


TE    KANAWA'S    ADVENTURE    WITH    A 
TROOP    OF    FAIRIES. 

Te  Kanawa,  a  chief  of  Waikato,  -was  the  man  who 
fell  in  with  a  troop  of  fairies  upon  the  top  of  Puke- 
more,  a  high  hill  in  the  Waikato  district. 

This  chief  happened  one  day  to  go  out  to  catch 
kiwis  with  his  dogs,  and  when  night  came  on  he 
found  himself  right  at  the  top  of  Puke-more.  So 
his  party  made  a  fire  to  give  them  light,  for  it  was 
very  dark.  They  had  chosen  a  tree  to  sleep  under — 
a  very  large  tree,  the  only  one  fit  for  their  purpose 
that  they  could  find  ;  in  fact,  it  was  a  very  conve- 
nient sleeping-place,  for  the  tree  had  immense 
roots,  sticking  up  high  above  the  ground :  they 
slept  between  these  roots,  and  made  the  fire  be- 
yond them. 

As  soon  as  it  was  dark  they  heard  loud  voices, 
like  the  voices  of  people  coming  that  way  ;  there 
were  the  voices  of  men,  of  women,  and  of  children, 
as  if  a  very  large  party  of  people  were  coming 
along.  They  looked  for  a  long  time,  but  could  see 
nothing  ;  till  at  last  Te  Kanawa  knew  the  noise  must 
proceed  from  fairies.    His  people  were  all  dreadfully 


TE    KANAWA    AND    THE    FAIRIES.  293 

frightened,  and  would  have  run  away  if  they  could  ; 
but  where  could  they  run  to  ?  for  they  were  in  the 
midst  of  a  forest,  on  the  top  of  a  lonely  mountain, 
and  it  was  dark  night. 

For  a  long  time  the  voices  grew  louder  and  more 
distinct  as  the  fairies  drew  nearer  and  nearer,  until 
they  came  quite  close  to  the  fire  ;  Te  Kanawa 
and  his  party  were  half  dead  with  fright.  At  last 
the  fairies  approached  to  look  at  Te  Kanawa,  who 
was  a  very  handsome  fellow.  To  do  this,  they 
kept  peeping  slily  over  the  large  roots  of  the  tree 
under  which  the  hunters  were  lying,  and  kept  con- 
stantly looking  at  Te  Kanawa,  wliilst  his  compa- 
nions were  quite  insensible  from  fear.  Whenever 
the  fire  blazed  up  brightly,  ofi"  went  the  fairies  and 
hid  themselves,  peeping  out  from  behind  stumps 
and  trees ;  and  when  it  burnt  low,  back  they  came 
close  to  it,  merrily  singing  as  they  moved — 

"  Here  you  come  climbing  over  Mount  Tirangi 
To  visit  tlie  liandsome  chief  of  Ngapuhi, 
Whom  we  have  done  with."* 

A  sudden  thought  struck  Te  Kanawa,  that  he 
might  induce  them  to  go  away  if  he  gave  them 
all  the  jewels  he  had  about  him  ;  so  he  took  off 
a    beautiful    little    figaire,    carved  in  green  jasper, 

*  Te  Wherowhcro  did  not  remember  the  whole  song,  but  that 
this  was  the  concluding  verse  ;  it  was  probably  in  allusion  to  their 
coming  to  peep  at  Te  Kanawa. 


294  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

wliicli  he  wore  as  a  neck  ornament,  and  a  precious 
carved  jasper  ear-drop  from  his  ear.  Ah,  Te  Kanawa 
was  only  trying  to  amuse  and  please  them  to  save 
his  life,  but  all  the  time  he  was  nearly  frightened 
to  death.  However,  the  fairies  did  not  rush  on 
the  men  to  attack  them,  but  only  came  quite  close 
to  look  at  them.  As  soon  as  Te  Kanawa  had 
taken  off  his  neck  ornament,  and  pulled  out  his 
jasper  ear-ring,  and  his  other  ear-ring,  made  of  a 
tooth  of  the  tiger-shark,  he  spread  them  out  before 
the  fairies,  and  offered  them  to  the  multitude 
who  were  sitting  all  round  about  the  place;  and 
thinking:  it  better  the  fairies  should  not  touch  him, 
he  took  a  stick,  and  fixing  it  into  the  ground, 
hung  his  neck  ornament   and    ear-rings  upon  it. 

As  soon  as  the  fairies  had  ended  their  song,  they 
took  the  shadows  of  the  ear-rings,  and  handed  them 
about  from  one  to  the  other,  until  they  had  passed 
through  the  whole  party,  which  then  suddenly  dis- 
appeared, and  nothing  more  was  seen  of  them. 

The  fairies  carried  off  with  them  the  shadows  of 
all  the  jewels  of  Te  Kanawa,  but  they  left  behind 
them  his  jasper  neck  ornament  and  his  ear-rings, 
so  that  he  took  them  back  again,  the  hearts  of  the 
fairies  being  quite  contented  at  getting  the  shadows 
alone ;  they  saw,  also,  that  Te  Kanawa  was  an 
honest,  well-dispositioned  fellow.  However,  the 
next  morning,  as  soon  as  it  was  light,  he  got  down 


TE    KANAWA   AND    THE    FAIRIES.  295 

the  mountain  as  fast  as  he  could  without  stopping 
to  hunt  longer  for  kiwis. 

The  fairies  are  a  very  numerous  people  ;  merry, 
cheerful,  and  always  singing,  like  the  cricket.  Their 
appearance  is  that  of  human  beings,  nearly  resem- 
bling a  European's  ;  their  hair  being  very  fair,  and 
so  is  their  skin.  They  are  very  different  from  the 
Maories,  and  do  not  resemble  them  at  all. 

Te  Kanawa  had  died  before  any  Europeans  ar- 
rived in  New  Zealand. 


296  POLYNESIAN   MYTHOLOGY. 


THE  LOVES  OF  TAKAEANGI  AND 
EAU-MAHOEA. 


There  was,  several  generations  since,  a  chief  of 
the  Taranaki  tribe,  named  Eangirarunga.  His  pa 
was  called  Whakarewa  ;  it  was  a  large  pa,  re- 
nowned for  the  strength  of  its  fortifications.  This 
chief  had  a  very  beautiful  daughter,  whose  name 
was  Eau-mahora  ;  she  was  so  celebrated  for  her 
beauty  that  the  fame  of  it  had  reached  all  parts  of 
these  islands,  and  had,  therefore,  come  to  the  ears 
of  Te  Eangi-apitirua,  a  chief  of  the  Ngati-Awa 
tribes,  to  whom  belonged  the  pa  of  Puke-ariki,  on 
the  hill  where  the  Governor's  house  stood  in  New 
Plymouth,  This  chief  had  a  son  named  Taka- 
rangi ;  he  was  the  hero  of  his  tribe.  He,  too, 
naturally  heard  of  the  beauty  of  Eau-mahora  ;  and 
it  may  be  that  his  heart  sometimes  dwelt  long  on 
the  thoughts  of  such  great  loveliness. 

Now  in  those  days  long  past,  there  arose  a 
war  between  the  tribes  of  Te  Eangi-apitirua  and 
of  the  father  of  Eau-mahora ;  and  the  army  of  the 


NEW     ZEALAND     PA. 


TAKARANGI   AND    RAU-MAHORA.  297 

Ngati-A-wa  tribes  marched  to  Taranaki,  to  attack 
the  pa  of  Rangirarunga,  and  the  army  invested 
that  fortress,  and  sat  before  it  night  and  day,  yet 
they  could  not  take  it ;  they  continued  nevertheless 
constantly  to  make  assaults  upon  it,  and  to  attack 
the  garrison  of  the  fortress,  so  that  its  inhabitants 
became  worn  out  from  want  of  provisions  and 
water,  and  many  of  them  were  near  dying. 

At  last  the  old  chief  of  the  pa,  Rangirarunga, 
overcome  by  thirst,  stood  on  the  top  of  the  de- 
fences of  the  pa,  and  cried  out  to  the  men  of  the 
enemy's  army,  "  I  pray  you  to  give  me  one  drop 
of  water."  Some  of  his  enemies,  pitying  the  aged 
man,  said,  "Yes;"  and  one  ran  with  a  calabash 
to  give  him  water.  But  the  majority  being  more 
hard-hearted,  were  angry  at  this,  and  broke  the 
calabash  in  his  hands,  so  that  not  a  drop  of  water 
reached  the  poor  old  man ;  and  this  was  done  se- 
veral times,  whilst  his  enemies  continued  disputing 
amongst  themselves. 

,  The  old  chief  still  stood  on  the  top  of  the 
earthen  wall  of  the  fortress,  and  he  saw  the  leader 
of  the  hostile  force,  with  the  symbols  of  his 
rank  fastened  on  his  head :  he  wore  a  long  white 
comb,  made  from  the  bone  of  a  whale,  and  a 
plume  of  the  long  downy  feathers  of  the  wliite 
heron,  the  emblems  of  his  chieftainship.  Then  was 
heard   by  all,    the  voice  of  the   aged   man   as   he 

o  3 


298  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

shouted  to  him  from  the  top  of  the  wall,  "  Who 
art  thou?"  And  the  other  cried  out  to  him,  "  Lo, 
he  who  stands  here  before  you  is  Takarangi/' 
And  the  aged  chief  of  the  pa  called  down  to  him, 
"  Young  warrior,  art  thou  able  to  still  the  wrath- 
ful surge  which  foams  on  the  hidden  rocks  of  the 
shoal  of  0-rongo-mai-ta-kupe  ?"  meaning,  "  Hast 
thou,  although  a  chief,  power  to  calm  the  wrath  of 
these  fierce  men?"  Then  proudly  replied  to  him 
the  young  chief,  "  The  wrathful  surge  shall  be 
stilled  ;  this  arm  of  mine  is  one  which  no  dog 
dares  to  bite,"  meaning  that  no  plebeian  hand 
dared  touch  his  arm,  made  sacred  by  his  deeds  and 
rank,  or  to  dispute  his  will.  But  what  Takarangi 
was  really  thinking  in  his  heart  was,  "  That  dying 
old  man  is  the  father  of  Rau-mahora,  of  that  so 
lovely  maid.  Ah,  how  I  should  grieve  if  one  so 
young  and  innocent  should  die  tormented  with 
the  want  of  water."  Then  he  arose,  and  slowly 
went  to  bring  water  for  that  aged  man,  and 
for  his  youthful  daughter  ;  and  he  filled  a  cala- 
bash, clipping  it  up  from  the  cool  spring  which 
gushes  up  from  the  earth,  and  is  named  Fount 
Oringi.  No  word  was  spoken,  or  movement  made, 
by  the  crowd  of  fierce  and  angiy  men,  but  all,  rest- 
ing upon  their  arms,  looked  on  in  wonder  and  in 
silence.  Calm  lay  the  sea,  that  was  before  so 
troubled,   all   timid    and    respectful    in    the     lowly 


TAKARANGI   AND    RAU-MAHORA.  299 

hero's  presence ;  and  the  water  was  taken  by 
Takarangi,  and  by  him  was  held  up  to  the  aged 
chief ;  then  was  heard  by  all,  the  voice  of  Taka- 
rangi, as  he  cried  aloud  to  him,  "  There  : — said  I 
not  to  you,  '  No  dog  would  dare  to  bite  this  hand  of 
mine  ?'  Behold  the  water  for  you — for  you  and  for 
that  young  girl."  Then  they  drank,  both  of  them, 
and  Takarangi  gazed  eagerly  at  the  young  girl, 
and  she  too  looked  eagerly  at  Takarangi ;  long 
time  gazed  they,  each  one  at  the  other ;  and  as 
the  warriors  of  the  army  of  Takarangi  looked  on, 
lo,  he  had  climbed  up  and  was  sitting  at  the  young 
maiden's  side ;  and  they  said  amongst  themselves, 
"  O  comrades,  our  lord  Takarangi  loves  war,  but 
one  would  think  he  likes  Kau-mahora  almost  as 
well." 

At  last  a  sudden  thought  struck  the  heart  of  the 
aged  chief,  of  the  father  of  Rau-mahora ;  so  he  said 
to  his  daughter,  "  O  my  child,  would  it  be  pleasing 
to  you  to  have  tliis  young  chief  for  a  husband  ? " 
and  the  young  girl  said,  "  I  like  him."  Then  the 
old  man  consented  that  his  daughter  should  be 
given  as  a  bride  to  Takarangi,  and  he  took  her  as 
his  wife.  Thence  was  that  war  brought  to  an 
end,  and  the  army  of  Takarangi  dispersed,  and 
they  returned  each  man  to  his  own  village,  and 
they  came  back  no  more  to  make  war  against  the 


800  POLYNESIAN    IVIYTHOLOGY. 

tribes  of  Taranaki — for  ever  were  ended  their  wars 
against  them. 

And  the  descendants  of  Rau-mahora  dwell  here 
in  Wellington.  They  are  Te  Puni,  and  all  his 
children,  and  his  relatives.  For  Takarangi  and 
Rau-mahora  had  a  daughter  named  Kongouaroa, 
who  was  married  to  Te  Whiti ;  and  they  had  a 
son  named  Aniwaniwa,  who  married  Tawhirikm^a  ; 
and  they  had  a  son  named  Rerewha-i-te-rangi,  and 
he  married  Puku,  who  was  the  mother  of  Te  Puni. 


STRATAGEM  OF  PUHIHUIA'S  ELOPEMENT 
WITH  TE  PONGA. 


Theee  was  formerly  a  large  fortified  town  upon 
Mount  Eden;  its  defences  were  massive  and  strong, 
and  a  great  number  of  persons  inhabited  the  town. 
In  the  days  of  olden  time  a  war  was  commenced 
by  the  tribes  of  Awhitu  and  of  Waikato,  against  the 
people  who  inhabited  the  town  at  Mount  Eden  or 
Maunga-whau. 

There  they  engaged  in  a  fierce  war :  one  side 
first  persisted  in  their  efforts  for  victory,  until  they 
were  successfid  in  beating  the  other  party ;  then  the 
othel"  side  in  their  turn  succeeded  in  resisting  their 
enemies,  and  gained  a  victory  in  their  turn  ;  thus 
the  tribes  of  Waikato  did  not  succeed  in  destroy- 
ing their  enemies  as  they  desired. 

After  this  the  people  of  Waikato  thought,  for  a 
long  time,  "Well,  what  had  we  better  do  now 
to  destroy  these  enemies  of  ours  V  And  seeing  no 
way  to  accomplish  this,  they  determined  to  make 


302  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

peace  with  them  ;  so,  at  last,  they  arranged  a  peace, 
and  it  appeared  to  be  a  sure  one. 

When  this  peace  had  been  made,  Te  Ponga,  a 
chief  from  Awhitu,  and  one  of  the  fiercest  ene- 
mies of  the  people  of  that  town,  went,  attended  by 
a  large  company,  to  Maunga-whau,  and  whilst  he 
was  yet  a  long  way  off,  he  and  his  party  were  seen 
coming  along  by  the  people  of  the  fortified  town, 
and  they  ran  to  the  gates  of  the  fortress,  calling 
out,  "  Welcome,  oh,  welcome,  strangers  from  afar ! " 
and  they  waved  their  garments  to  them;  and  the 
strangers,  encouraged  by  these  cries,  came  straight 
on  to  the  town  until  they  reached  it,  and  then 
walked  direct  to  the  large  court-j'ard  in  front  of 
the  house  of  the  chief  of  the  town,  and  there  they 
all  seated  themselves. 

The  inhabitants  being  all  now  assembled  in 
the  town,  as  well  as  the  strangers,  the  chiefs  of 
each  party  stood  up  and  made  speeches,  and  when 
they  had  concluded  this  part  of  the  ceremony,  the 
women  lighted  fires  to  cook  food  for  the  strangers, 
and  when  the  ovens  were  heated,  they  put  the 
food  in  and  covered  them  up.  In  a  very  short 
time  the  food  was  all  cooked,  when  they  opened 
the  ovens,  placed  the  food  in  baskets,  and  ranged 
it  in  a  long  pile  before  the  visitors  ;  then,  sepa- 
rating it  into  shares,  one  of  their  chiefs  called 
aloud  the  name  of  each  of  the  visitors  to  whom  a 


STEATAGEM    OF    TE    PONGA's    ELOPEMENT.     303 

share  was  intended,  and  when  this  allotment  was 
completed  they  fell  to  at  the  feast. 

The  strangers,  however,  ate  very  slowly,  know- 
ing they  had  better  take  but  little  food,  in  order 
not  to  surfeit  themselves,  and  so  that  their  waists 
might  be  slim  when  they  stood  up  in  the  ranks  of 
the  dancers,  and  that  they  might  look  as  slight  as 
if  their  waists  were  almost  severed  in  two  ;  and  as 
the  strangers  sat  they  kept  on  thinking,  "When 
will. night  come  and  the  dance  begin?"  and  the 
thouo-hts  of  the   others  were  of  the   same  kind. 

As  soon  as  it  began  to  get  dark,  the  inhabitants 
of  the  village  rapidly  assembled,  and  when  they  had 
all  collected  in  the  court-yard  of  the  house,  which 
was  occupied  by  the  strangers,  they  stood  up  for 
the  dance,  and  rank  after  rank  of  dancers  was 
duly  ranged  in  order,  until  at  length  all  was  in 
readiness. 

Then  the  dancers  began,  and  whilst  they  sprang 
nimbly  about,  Puhihuia,  the  young  daughter  of  the 
chief  of  the  village,  stood  watching  a  good  oppor- 
tunity to  bound  forward  before  the  assembl}^,  and 
make  the  gestures  usual  with  dancers,  since  she 
knew  that  she  could  not  dance  so  well,  or  so 
becomingly,  if  she  pressed  on  before  the  mea- 
sure was  completed,  but  that  when  the  beating 
time  by  the  assembly  with  their  feet  and  hands, 
and  the  deep  voices  of  the  men,  were  all  in  exact 


804  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

unison,  was  the  fitting  moment  for  her  to  bound 
forward  into  the  dance,  with  the  becoming  ges- 
tures. 

Then,  just  as  they  were  all  beating  time  toge- 
ther, Puhihuia  perceived  the  proper  moment  had 
come,  and  forth  she  sprang  before  the  assembled 
dancers  ;  first  she  bends  her  head  with  many  ges- 
tures towards  the  people  uj)on  the  one  side,  and 
then  towards  those  upon  the  other,  as  she  per- 
formed her  part  beautifully;  her  full  orbed  .eyes 
seemed  clear  and  brilliant  as  the  full  moon  rising 
in  the  horizon,  and  whilst  the  strangers  looked  at 
the  young  girl,  they  all  were  quite  overpowered  with 
her  beauty  ;  and  Te  Pouga,  their  young  chief,  felt 
his  heart  grow  wild  with  emotion,  when  he  saw  so 
much  loveliness  before  him.  In  the  meanwhile  the 
people  of  the  village  went  on  dancing,  until  all  the 
evolutions  of  the  dance  were  duly  completed,  when 
they  paused. 

Then  up  sprang  the  strangers  to  dance  in  their 
turn,  and  they  duly  ranged  themselves  in  order, 
rank  behind  rank  of  the  dancers,  and  began  with 
their  hands  to  beat  time,  and  whilst  they  thus 
gave  the  time  of  the  measure,  the  young  chief, 
Te  Ponga,  stood  peeping  over  them  and  waiting  a 
good  opportunity  for  him  to  spring  forward,  and  in 
his  turn  make  gestures  ;  at  last  forth  he  bounded  ; 
then    he,  too,  bent    his  head  with   many  gestures, 


STEATAGEM    OF   TE   PONGA's    ELOPEMENT.     305 

first  upon  the  one  side  and  then  upon  the  other  ; 
indeed,  he  performed  beautifully!  The  people  of 
the  village  were  so  surprised  at  his  agility  and 
grace,  that  they  could  do  nothing  but  admire  him, 
and  as  for  the  young  girl  Puhihuia,  her  heart  con- 
ceived a  warm  passion  for  Te  Ponga. 

At  length  the  dance  concluded,  and  all  dis- 
persed, each  to  the  place  where  he  was  to  rest ; 
then,  overcome  with  weariness,  they  all  reclined 
in  slumber,  except  Te  Ponga,  who  lay  tossing  from 
side  to  side,  unable  to  sleep,  from  his  great  love 
for' the  maiden,  and  devising  scheme  after  scheme 
by  which  he  might  have  an  opportunity  of  con- 
versing alone  with  her.  At  last  he  formed  a 
project,  or  rather  it  originated  in  the  suggestions 
of  his  private  slave,  who  said  to  his  master,  "  Sir, 
T  have  found  out  a  plan  by  which  you  may  ac- 
complish your  wishes ;  listen  to  me  whilst  I  de- 
tail it  to  you.  To-morrow  evening,  just  at  night- 
fall, as  you  sit  in  the  court-yard  of  the  chief  of  the 
village,  feign  to  be  very  thirsty,  and  call  to  me  to 
bring  you  a  draught  of  water ;  on  my  part,  I 
will  take  care  to  be  at  a  distance  from  the  place, 
but  do  you  continue  to  shout  loudly  and  angrily  to 
me,  '  Sirrah,  I  want  water,  fetch  me  some  ;'  call 
loudly,  so  that  the  father  of  the  young  girl  may 
hear ;  then  he  will  probably  say  to  his  daughter, 
'  My  child,  my  child,  why  do  you  let  our  guest  call 


so  6  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

in  tliat  way  for  water,  without  running  to  fetch 
some  for  him  V  Then,  when  the  young  girl,  in  obe- 
dience to  her  father's  orders,  runs  down  the  hill  to 
fetch  water  from  the  fountain  for  you,  do  you  follow 
her  to  the  spring;  there  you  can  uninterrujjtedly 
converse  together ;  but  when  you  rise  to  follow 
the  young  girl,  in  order  to  prevent  them  from  sus- 
pecting your  intentions,  do  you  pretend  to  be  in  a 
great  passion  with  me,  and  speak  thus — •'  Where  "s 
that  deaf  slave  of  mine?  I'll  go  and  find  the  fellow. 
Ah  !  you  will  not  hear  when  yt)u  do  not  like,  but 
I'll  break  your  head  for  you,  my  fine  fellow.'" 

Thus  the  slave  advised  his  master,  and  they 
arranged  fully  the  plan  of  their  proceedings  ;  the 
next  day  Te  Ponga  went  to  visit  the  chief  of 
the  village,  and  sat  in  his  house  watching  the 
young  girl,  and  before  long  evening  closed  in,  and 
they  retired  to  rest,  and  some  time  afterwards  Te 
Ponga,  pretending  to  be  thirsty,  called  out  loudly 
to  this  slave,  "  Halloa !  sir,  fetch  me  some  water ;" 
but  not  a  word  did  the  slave  answer  him  ;  and 
Te  Ponga  continued  to  call  out  to  him  louder 
and  louder,  until  at  last  he  seemed  to  become 
weary  of  shouting.  When  the  chief  of  the  village 
heard  him  calling  out  in  this  way  for  water,  he  at 
length  said  to  his  young  daughter,  "  My  child,  run 
and  fetch  some  water  for  our  guest  ;  why  do  you 
allow  him  to  go  on  calling  for  water  in  that  way, 


STRATAGEM    OF    TE    PONGA'S    ELOPEMENT.     307 

without  fetching  some  for  him?"  Then  the  maiden 
arose,  and,  taking  a  calabash,  went  off  to  fetch 
water ;  and  no  sooner  did  Te  Ponga  see  her  start- 
ing off  than  he  too  arose,  and  went  out  of  the 
house,  feigning  by  his  voice  and  words  to  be  very 
angry  with  his  slave,  so  that  all  might  think  he 
was  going  to  give  him  a  beating ;  but  as  sooii  as 
he  was  out  of  the  house,  he  went  straight  off  after 
the  young  girl ;  he  did  not,  indeed,  well  know  the 
path  which  led  to  the  fountain,  but  led  by  the  voice 
of  the  maiden,  who  tripped  along  the  path  singing 
blithely  and  merrily  as  she  went,  Te  Ponga  followed 
the  guidance  of  her  tones. 

When  the  maiden  arrived  at  the  brink  of  the 
fountain  and  was  about  to  dip  her  calabash  into  it, 
she  heard  some  one  behind  her,  and,  turning  sud- 
denly round,  ah!  there  stood  a  man  close  behind 
her;  yes,  there  was  Te  Ponga  himself.  She  stood 
quite  astonished  for  some  time^  and  at  length  asked, 
"  What  can  have  brought  you  here?"  He  answered, 
"  I  came  here  for  a  draught  of  water."  But  the  girl 
replied,  "  Ha,  indeed  !  Did  not  I  come  here  to  draw 
water  for  you  ?  Why,  then,  did  you  come  ?  Could 
not  you  have  remained  at  my  father's  house  until  I 
brought  the  water  for  you  ? "  Then  Te  Ponga  an- 
swered, "  You  are  the  water  that  I  tliirsted  for." 
And  as  the  maiden  listened  to  his  words,  she 
thought  within  herself,  "  He,  then,  has  fallen  in  love 


308  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

witli  me  ;"  and  she  sat  down,  and  he  placed  himself 
by  her  side,  and  they  conversed  together,  and  to 
each  of  them  the  words  of  the  other  seemed  most 
pleasant  and  engaging.  Why  need  more  be  said  ? 
Before  they  separated  they  arranged  a  time  when 
they  might  escape  together,  and  then  each  of  them 
returned  to  the  village  to  wait  for  the  occasion  they 
had  agi'eed  upon. 

When  the  apj)ointed  time  had  arrived,  he  desired 
some  chosen  men  of  his  followers  to  go  to  the  land- 
ing-place on  Manuka  harbour,  where  the  canoes 
were  all  hauled  on  shore,  there  to  wait  for  him  ; 
and  Puhihuia  and  he  directed  them  when  they  got 
there  to  prepare  one  canoe  in  which  he  and  all  his 
followers  might  escape  ;  he  desired  that  this  canoe 
should  be  launched  and  kept  afloat  in  the  water 
with  every  paddle  in  its  place,  so  that  the  moment 
they  embarked  it  might  put  off  from  the  shore  ;  he 
further  directed  them  to  go  round  every  one  of  the 
other  canoes,  to  cut  the  lashings  which  made  the 
top  sides  fast  to  the  hulls,  and  to  pull  out  all 
the  plugs,  so  that  those  following  them  might  be 
checked  and  thrown  into  confusion  at  finding  they 
had  no  canoes  in  which  to  continue  the  pursuit. 
Those  of  his  people  to  whom  Te  PoDga  gave  these 
orders  immediately  departed,  and  did  exactly  as 
their   chief  had  directed  them. 

The  next  mornino-  Te  Pono-a  having  told  his  host 

O  C3  O 


STKATAGEM  OF  TE  PONGA'S  ELOPEMENT.  309 

that  lie  must  return  to  his  own  country,  all  the 
people  of  the  place  assembled  to  bid  him  farewell ; 
and  when  they  had  all  collected,  the  chief  of  the 
fortress  stood  up,  and,  after  a  suitable  speech,  pre- 
sented his  jade  mere  to  Te  Ponga  as  a  parting  gift, 
which  might  establish  and  make  sure  the  peace 
which  they  had  concluded.  Te  Ponga  in  his  turn 
presented  with  the  same  ceremonies  his  jade  mere 
to  the  chief  of  the  fortress ;  and  when  all  the  rites 
observed  at  a  formal  parting  were  completed,  Te 
Ponga  and  his  followers  arose,  and  went  upon  their 
way :  then  the  people  of  the  place  all  arose  too,  and 
accompanied  them  to  the  gates  of  the  fortress  to 
bid  them  farewell ;  and  as  the  strangers  quitted  the 
gates,  the  people  of  the  place  cried  aloud  after  them, 
"  Depart  in  peace !  depart  in  peace !  May  you  re- 
turn in  safety  to  your  homes  ! " 

Just  before  the  strangers  had  started,  Puhihuia 
and  some  of  the  young  girls  of  the  village  stole  a 
little  way  along  the  road,  so  as  to  accompany  the 
strangers  some  way  on  their  path ;  and  when  they 
joined  them,  the  girls  stepped  proudly  along  by  the 
side  of  the  band  of  strange  warriors,  laua-hino- 
and  joking  with  them ;  at  last  they  got  some 
distance  from  the  village,  and  Puhihuia's  father, 
the  chief  of  the  place,  seeing  his  daughter  was 
going  so  far,  called  out,  "  Children,  children,  come 
back  here!"      Then  the  other  girls  stopped  and  be- 


310  POLYNESIAN    MYTHOLOGY. 

gan  to  return  towards  the  village,  but  as  to  Pubi- 
huia,  ber  beart  beat  but  to  tbe  one  tbougbt  of 
escaping  witb  ber  beloved  Te  Ponga.  So  sbe  be- 
gan to  run.  She  drew  near  to  some  large  scoria 
rocks,  and  glided  behind  tbem,  and,  when  thus 
hidden  from  the  view  of  those  in  the  village,  she 
redoubled  her  speed ;  well  done,  well  done,  young 
girl !  She  runs  so  fast  that  her  body  bends  low  as 
she  speeds  forward.  When  Te  Ponga  saw  Pulii- 
huia  running  in  this  hurried  manner,  he  called  aloud 
to  his  men,  "  What  is  the  meaning  of  this  ?  let  us 
be  off  as  fast  as  we  can  too.  Then  began  a  swift 
flight,  indeed,  of  Te  Ponga  and  his  followers,  and  of 
the  young  girl ;  rapidly  they  flew,  like  a  feather 
drifting  before  the  gale,  or  as  runs  the  waka  which 
has  broken  loose  from  a  fowler's  snare. 

When  the  people  of  the  village  saw  that  their 
young  chieftainess  was  gone,  there  was  a  wild  rush- 
ing to  and  fro  in  the  village  for  weapons,  and 
wliilst  they  thus  lost  their  time,  Te  Ponga  and  his 
followers,  and  the  young  girl,  went  unmolestedly 
upon  their  way  ;  and  when  the  people  of  the  fortress 
at  last  came  out  ready  for  the  pursuit,  Te  Ponga 
and  his  followers,  and  Puhihuia,  had  got  far  enough 
away,  and  before  their  pursuers  had  gained  any 
distance  from  the  fortress,  Te  Ponga  and  his  people 
had  almost  reached  the  landing  place  at  Manuka 
harbour,  and  by  the  time  the  pursuing  party  had 


STEATAGEM    OF    TE    PONGA's    ELOPEMENT.    311 

arrived  near  the  landing-place,  they  had  embarked 
in  their  canoe,  had  grasped  their  paddles,  and  being 
all  ready,  they  dashed  their  paddles  into  the  water, 
and  shot  away,  swift  as  a  dart  from  a  string,  whilst 
they  felt  the  sides  of  the  canoe  shake  from  the  force 
with  which  they  drove  it  through  the  water. 

When  the  pursuers  saw  that  the  canoe  had 
dashed  off  into  Manuka  harbour,  they  laid  hold  of 
another  canoe,  and  began  to  haul  it  down  towards 
the  water,  but  as  the  lashings  of  the  top  sides  were 
cut,  what  was  the  use  of  their  trying  to  haul  it  to 
the  sea  ?  they  dragged  nothing  but  the  top  sides — 
there  lay  the  bottom  of  the  canoe  unmoved.  Pur- 
suit was  impossible ;  the  party  that  had  come  to 
make  peace  escaped,  and  returned  uninjured  and 
joyful  to  their  own  country,  and  went  cheerfully 
upon  their  way,  carrying  off  with  them  the  young 
chieftainess  j&-om  their  enemies,  who  could  only  stand 
like  fools  upon  the  shore,  stamping  with  rage  and 
threatening  them  in  vain. 


^ 


APPENDIX. 


ON  THE  NATIVE  SONGS  OF  NEW  ZEALAND, 

AND  A  COMPARISON  OF  THE  INTERVALS  DISCERNIBLE  IN  THEM  WITH 
THE  INTERVALS  STATED  TO  HAVE  BEEN  PERFORMED  BY  THE  AN- 
CIENT GREEKS  IN  SOME  OF  THEIR  DIVISIONS  OF  THE  MUSICAL 
SCALE,   CALLED   yivoj   ivx^fiovmov,  OR   BY   OTHERS   aofiovist. 

All  nations,  perhaps,  without  excepting  any,  have  some 
method  of  expressing  the  more  energetic  emotions  bej'ond 
mere  speaking  or  acting ;  a  sense  of  joy  or  pain,  naturally 
calling  forth  ejaculations  and  vociferations  exceeding  in 
limit  the  tone  of  voice  used  in  ordinary  discourse.  The  cry 
of  war,  the  encouraging  to  battle,  the  shout  of  victory,  or 
the  lament  of  the  vanquished,  the  wailing  over  a  deceased 
friend,  grief  at  the  departure  of  a  lover,  each  in  its  turn 
has  prompted  or  suggested  some  modification  of  sound  be- 
yond the  ordinary  range  of  mere  tame  every-day  discourse ; 
and  this  modification  of  voice  we  may  call,  in  a  wide  sense, 
natural  music. 

But  as  the  highest  art  is  to  conceal  the  art,*  and  to 
imitate  nature,  that  mighty  nation,  the  Greeks,  with  an 
art  almost  peculiarly  their  own,  having  observed  these  ex- 
pressions of  sentiment,  thence  deduced  certain  lawsf  of 
interval,  by  which,  while  they  kept  within  the  limits  of 

*  Cicero.  f  Cicero,  Orat. 

P 


314  APPENDIX. 

art,  they  took  care  not  to  transgress  those  of  nature,  but 
judiciously  to  adopt,  and  as  nearly  as  possible  to  define, 
with  mathematical  exactness,  those  intervals  which  the  un- 
cultured only  approach  by  the  irregular  modulation  of 
natural  impulses ;  so  their  art  was  the  schooling  of  nature 
by  the  more  exact  observance  of  her  laws,  and  by  training 
nature  by  perfect  art,  they  made  art  like  nature,  and  cor- 
rected nature  by  art,  as  the  sculptor  or  painter  gives  the 
classic  embodiment  or  personification,  not  the  common- 
place and  often  defective  representation  of  an  object. 

This  I  opine  to  have  been  the  real  nature  of  the  enhar- 
monic scale  of  the  Greeks  ;  and  hence  I  conceive  the  reason 
of  the  remnant  of  that  scale  being  found  among  most  of 
those  nations  who  have  been  left  to  the  impulses  of  a 
"nature-taught"  song  rather  than  been  cramped  by  the 
trammels  of  a  conventional  system — the  result  of  educa- 
tion and  civilisation. 

It  may  not  be  amiss,  before  going  further  into  this 
analogy  of  nature,  and  of  an  art  reciprocally  reflecting 
back  that  nature,  to  endeavour  to  give  the  uninitiated  an 
idea  of  what  is  meant  by  the  "  enharmonic  genus"  of  the 
Greeks. 

I  must  first  remark  that  while  we  have,  properly  speak- 
ing, only  one  scale  of  musical  notes  and  two  genera,  the 
Greeks  had  three  scales  and  five  genera.  For  we  have 
only  the  diatonic  scale,  but  by  a  certain  introduction  of  one 
or  more  semitones,  we  make  what  is  called  the  chromatic. 

Whereas,  the  Greeks  had  three  scales,  comprising  five 
genera, or,  according  to  some,  nine*  all  differing  not  only, 
as  ours  do,  in  the  position  of  intervals,  but  in  the  intervals 
themselves ;  this  difference  of  interval  (rather  than  posi- 

•  Ptolomseus  the  Magian,  Mr.  Vincent's  paper  in  "Notices  et 
Extraits  des  MSS.,"  torn.  xvi.  Paris. 


APPENDIX.  315 

tion  of  interval)  gave  rise  to  the  expression  "  genera  of  a 
system,"  and  depended  on  the  distribution  of  two  interme- 
diate sounds  in  the  tetrachord  or  4th. 

The  principal  scales  and  genera  were  three ;  the  dia- 
tonic, the  chromatic,  and  the  enharmonic.  The  diatonic 
(genus)  consisted  of  a  limma  or  minor  half  tone,  a  major 
tone,  and  a  major  tone  ascending,  this  had  another  modi- 
fication, by  which,  while  it  retained  the  same  semitone,  it 
contracted  the  next  tone,  and  extended  the  last;  the  latter 
was  called  soft  diatonic. 

The  chromatic,  which  consisted  of  semitone,  semitone, 
one  tone  and  a  half  interval,  or  nearly  our  minor  third, 
was  called  tonaceon,  and  had  two  modifications,  one 
called  hemiolion,  and  the  other  malakon  ;  these  shades  or 
modifications  seem  of  later  invention,  and  soon  to  have 
fallen  into  disuse. 

The  enharmonic  consisted  of  a  quarter  tone,  a  quarter 
tone  and  an  interval  of  two  tones,  an  interval  somewhat 
greater  than  our  third  major. 

Wallis  says  that  we  have  no  idea  of  these  intervals  at 
the  present  day,  as  in  any  way  connected  with  a  scale,  since 
they  amount  to  little  more  than  an  imperfect  elevation  or 
depression  of  the  voice  within  the  limits  of  what  we  call  a 
sound  or  harmonic  note ;  though  a  certain  use  is  made  of 
the  term  enharmonic,  and  the  existence  of  the  interval  is 
admitted  in  the  higher  researches  on  music,  and  said  to  be 
apparent  in  the  so-called  tierce  wolf  of  the  organ,  in  un- 
tempered  instruments,  and  in  the  sj'stems  of  equal  tem- 
perament. 

Writers  of  the  present  day  greatly  differ  as  to  the  ex- 
istence or  use  of  these  x?<^«»>  oi'  shades  of  distinction,  some 
wishing  to  modify  them  by  a  modem  application  of  the 
term,  amounting   to   those   shades, '*  nuances"  or   slurs, 

P  2 


816  APPENDIX. 

which  the  best  vocalists  or  performers  are  sometimes  heard 
to  introduce;*  others  again f  declaring  them  to  be  in  prac- 
tice impossible ;  and  all  for  the  most  part  alleging  that, 
whatever  might  have  been  the  case  in  former  times,  no 
such  modifications  do  exist  in  practice  at  the  present  day. 

Now,  with  regard  to  the  existence  of  them  in  ancient 
times,  innumerable  authorities  might  be  quoted  ;  but,  not  to 
exceed  a  reasonable  limit,  I  shall  only  cite  one  or  two  tes- 
timonies, and  shall  confine  myself  to  those  referring  to 
the  enharmonic. 

Vitruvius  (lib.  v.  c.  5)  says  :  "  Diatom  vero  quod naturalis 
est  facilior  est  intervallorimi  distantia;"  of  the  enharmonic 
he  says:  "Est  autem  harmonm  modulatio  ah  arte  con- 
cepta,  et  ea  re  cantio  ejus  maxime  gravem  et  egregiam  liahet 
auctoritatem."  The  graveness  and  seriousness  are  given 
as  the  striking  characteristics  of  this  genus. 

We  may  here  incidentally  remark,  that  though  he  says, 
"  ab  arte  concepta,"  it  does  not  prove  that  it  might  not 
have  been  art  imitating  nature  ;  and  more,  it  is  not  impos- 
sible that  these,  at  present  so-called  uncivilised  and  savage 
nations,  might  have  retained  this  character  of  song  from  a 
period  of  the  highest  state  of  civilisation,  at  an  epoch  of 
great  antiquity. 

Plutarch  (rie^)  Mova-m^i)  remarks,  that  the  most  beautiful 
of  the  musical  genera  is  the  enharmonic,  on  account  of  its 
grave  and  solemn  character,  and  that  it  was  formerly 
most  in  esteem. 

Aristides  Quintilian  tells  us  it  was  the  most  difficult  of 
all,  and  required  a  most  excellent  ear. 

Aristoxenus  observes  that  it  was  so  difficult  that  no  one 
could  sing  more  than  two  dieses  consecutively,  and  yet  the 

*  Smith.  t  Burney. 


APPENDIX.  317 

perceptions  of  a  Greek  audience  were  fully  awake  to,  and 
their  judgment  could  appreciate,  a  want  of  exactness  in 
execution ;  for  Dionysius  of  Halicarnassus  says,  lie  him- 
self has  been  in  the  most  crowded  theatre,  where,  if  a 
singer  or  citharoedist  mistook  the  smallest  interval  (pre- 
sumed to  be  the  enharmonic  diesis),  he  was  hissed  off  the 
stage. 

Isaac  Vossius*  from  a  multitude  of  authorities,  has 
established,  that  transitions  were  made  by  ancient  singers 
and  performers,  from  the  diatonic  to  the  chromatic  and 
enharmonic,  with  the  greatest  facility;  and  he  adds,  •'  which, 
because  the  moderns  cannot  do,  they  even  positively  and  seri- 
ously assert  that  the  ancients  could  not  sing  the  enharmonic." 
Whereas,  continues  he,  "  not  only  did  they  sing  it,  but  ac- 
companied it  roith  instruments." 

So  Plutarch  {Ui^)  Movai^rti),  who  adds  a  remark,  the 
purport  of  which  is,  such  persons  (who  affirm  that  the 
ancients  could  not  accompany  the  enharmonic)  forget  that 
if  they  can  accompany  greater  intervals  which  were  com- 
posed of  less,  there  can  be  no  reason  why  the  scale  of  an 
instrument  might  not  be  so  adjusted  as  to  accompany  the 
less  intervals  which  compose  those  greater. 

The  doubt  of  the  possibility  of  using  the  enharmonic  as 
a  scale  is  not  confined  to  our  own  day,  for  Plutarch,  as  we 
have  seen  (and  in  other  places  also),  speaks  of  the  decline 
of  it;  and  Athenseus  speaks  of  certain  Greeks  who,  from 
time  to  time,  retired  by  themselves  to  keep  up  the  recol- 
lection of  the  good  old  music,  since  the  art  had  become  so 
corrupted. 

In  Plutarch's  time  (de  Musica)  he  bitterly  complains 
that  certain  people  "  affirmed  the  enharmonic  diesis  to  be 
absolutely  undistinguishable,  and  that,  therefore,  it  had  no 

*  "  Dc  poematum  Cantu." 


318  APPENDIX. 

place  in  the  scales  of  nature,  and  that  those  who  attempted 
to  prove  it  were  mere  triflers  (7r£(pAi^a.o-„;isvai).* 

He  then  makes  the  remark  about  the  possibility  of  ac- 
compan3-ing  the  enharmonic  intervals  with  instruments, 
and  adds,  "and  these  very  people  who  talk  about  the  en- 
harmonic having  no  foundation  in  nature,  have  an  extra- 
ordinary attachment  to  dissonances  and  irrational  intervals" 
(its^iTTx  .  .  .  ri  aXoyoc),  wliich  have  no  existence  in  the  real 
science  of  the  proportions  of  natural  intervals,  and  may  be 
compared  to  certain  irregular  tenuities  or  awkward  excres- 
cences on  what  should  be  a  beautiful  tree  or  other  object. 
For  whatever  reason,  it  appears  it  was  wholly  laid  aside  in 
Plutarch's  time,  which  he  attributes  to  the  dulness  of  the 
ears  of  those  of  his  day. 

Wallis  supposes  the  genera  of  the  chromatic  and  enhar- 
monic to  have  fallen  into  disuse  for  many  ages ;  Scaliger, 
not  till  Domitian  :  the  enharmonic,  because  of  the  extreme 
difficulty ;  the  chromatic,  on  account  of  its  softness  and 
effeminacy.  Dr.  Wallis  adds,  "  modern  music  never 
affected  to  appreciate  such  subtilty  and  delicate  nicety,  for 
neither  voice  could  execute,  nor  ear  easily  distinguish  so 
minute  differences,  at  least  so  we  suppose  now-a-da^^s." 

Dr.  Burney  (i.  433),  in  his  History  of  Music,  from  vari- 
ous authorities,  concludes  that  this  genus  (the  close  enhar- 
monic) was  almost  exclusively  in  use  before  Aristoxenus 
(about  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great),  and  we  gather 
from  Aristoxenus  that  there  were  exercises  in  it  for  prac- 
tice, and  this  observation  is  corroborated  in  the  "  Notices 
et  Extraits  des  MSS.,''  t.  xvi.,  in  a  most  elaborate  and  clever 

*  That  the  enharmonic  has  no  foundation  in  nature  is  false,  for 
what  tree  tapers  "  per  saltum  ?" —  what  river  flows  in  heaps  1 — this 
gradation  is  nature's  life-stream ;  the  otiier  scales  may  be  compared 
to  the  proportional  parts,  the  enharmonic  to  the  continuous  proces- 
sion. - 


APPENDIX.  319 

paper,  by  Mr.  Vincent,  from  certain  MSS.  in  the  King  of 
France's  library. 

Dr.  Barney,  in  common  with  most  other  modern  writers 
on  the  subject,  says,  "  the  intervals  of  the  close  enhar- 
monic tetrachord 


z3± 


-TP- 


appear  wholly  strange  and  unmanageable,"  and  hence  it 
has  been  concluded  that  the  enharmonic  was  impossible  in 
practice. 

Dr.  Burney,  however,  one  day  received  a  letter  from  his 
friend  Dr.  Paissell,  regarding  the  "  state  of  music  in  Ara- 
bia, and  to  the  Doctor's  utter  astonishment,  he  learnt  from 
that  letter  that  the  Arabian  scale  of  music  was  divided  into 
quarter  tones ;  and  that  an  octave,  which,  upon  our  keyed 
instruments  is  only  divided  into  12  semitones,  in  the  Ara- 
bian scale  contained  2A,for  all  of  wJiich  they  had  particxdar 
denominations.'' 

This  latter  observation  would  seem  to  tally  very  well 
with  what  Mr.  Lane*  says  of  the  canoon  {y.a.vu))  of  the 
present  Arabs,  which,  he  says,  has  24  treble  notes.  Only, 
that  he  adds,  each  note  has  three  strings  to  it,  which  (later, 
as  we  shall  see)  he  affirms  to  have  been  thirds  of  tones.  If 
so,  the  system  is  a  shade  of  the  chromatic ;  and  if  Mr. 
Lane  is  right  (and  he  gives  a  drawing  of  the  instrument). 
Dr.  Russell  must  err,  or  speak  of  another  instrument.  I 
should  be  inclined  to  give  preference  to  Lane,  because  of 
the  great  pains  he  has  taken  in  describing  the  instrument. 

Mr.  Lay  Tradescant.f  speaking  of  the  Chinese  intervals, 

*  Lane's  "  Modern  Egypt." 

+  Lay  Tradescant's  "  Chinese  as  they  are." 


320  APPENDIX. 

says,  that  "  it  is  impossible  to  obtain  the  intervals  of  their 
scale  on  our  keyed  instruments,  but  they  may  be  perfectly 
effected  on  the  violin." 

Mr.  Vincent*  gives  a  most  scientific  description  of  an 
elaborate  instrument  made  at  Paris,  exhibited  at  the  In- 
stitut,  on  which  the  quarter  tones  were  most  correctly 
illustrated,  and  observes,  that  a  much  less  interval  than 
the  quarter-tone,  perhaps  eight  or  ten  times  less,  is  dis- 
cernible, as  proved  by  a  M.  Delezenne,f  1827;  and  our 
own  ears  attest  that  universally  in  the  modulations  of  the 
voice  of  the  so-called  savage  tribes,  and  in  the  refined  and 
anomalously-studied  Chinese,  there  are  intervals  which  do 
not  correspond  to  any  notes  on  our  keyed  instruments,  and 
which  to  an  untrained  ear  appear  almost  monotonous. 

There  is  another  matter  with  which  incidentally  we  have 
to  do,  namely,  an  apparent  difference  of  opinion  between 
ancient  authors  themselves  about  the  enharmonic.  Plu- 
tarch |  says  that  Aristoxenus  (in  a  book  not  now  extant) 
informs  us  that  Olympus  was  the  inventor  of  an  enhar- 
monic, but  of  a  kind  consisting  of  a  scale  in  which  certain 
notes,  the  "lichaui"  or  "  iudicatrices,"  were  omitted,  and 
that  the  airs  of  Olympus  were  so  simple  and  beautiful, 
that  there  was  nothing  like  them. 


'm 


-^ 


This  Scale  would  approximate  to  the  Scotch,  or  rather 
to  that  given  as  Chinese  by  Dr.  Paissell.  § 

But  there  is  nothing  repugnant  in  this,  to  the  division 
of  the  intermediate  half-note  between  this  saltus ;  and,  as 

*  "  Notices  et  Extraits  des  MSS.,"  torn.  xvi. 
+  "  Memoire  de  la  Societe  Eoyale  de  Lille." 
^  nsgt  Movrixtis.  §  Burney,  vol.  i. 


APPENDIX.  321 

here,  it  is  the  division  of  the  half-note  interval  with  which 
we  have  to  do  ; 


^xJ-^- 


the  discussion  as  to  the  variety  or  difference  introduced  by 
Olympus — (as  to  whether  he  made  use  of  this  design  or 
not) — is  not  of  any  importance  to  our  subject,  our  object 
being  merely  to  show  that  the  smaller  interval,  called  a 
quarter  tone,  has  its  representative  in  modern  times. 

Suffice  it  to  say,  that  many  Chinese  airs,  of  which  I 
have  two,  show  the  diesic  modulation  and  the  saltus 
combined ;  but  the  majority  of  the  New  Zealand  airs 
which  I  have  heard  are  softer  and  more  "  llgate,''  and 
have  a  great  predominance  of  the  diesic  element. 

It  may  not  be  amiss  to  define  in  what  sense  we  wish 
''diesis''  to  be  understood,  for  sometimes,  by  modern 
writers  especially,  it  is  used  for  the  simple  minor  half-tone  of 

24  15 

—  in  contradistinction  to  the  maior  of  — -.  In  Dr.  Smith's 

25  ^  l(j 

Harmonics  it  is  the  limma  of  equal  temperament.  Some- 
times the  moderns  use  the  term  for  the  double  sharp. 
It  was  Rameau's  diese  major ;  Henfliug's  Harmonia ; 
Boyce's  quarter-note;  the  Earl  of  Stamford's  tierce  wolf; 
observed  in  the  tuning  of  an  organ.    Dr.  Maxwell  makes 

2025    ,  .    ,.     .  ,  32768   ,        .       ^       , 

— — —  the  maj.  diesis,  and  „  the  mm.    But  the  sense  m 

which  I  shall  use  it  is  that  of  the  ancient  quarter-tone, 

being  an  approach  to  the  quarter  of  a  tone  major,  or  rather 

243  . 
the  division  of  the  limma  ■-—  into  two  unequal  parts;  this 

is  called  the  Aristoxenian  diesis  quadrantalis ;  which  is  re- 

P  3 


322  APPENDIX. 

presented  nearly   by  120   being  the   lo^^•est   note;  then 

116-60:  ]  13-39. 

I  shall  not  trouble  the  reader  -with  chronological   or 

scholastic  differences  ;  the  diesis  of  Archytas  being  given  by 

Vincent  as  115-5-  :  119|,  that  of  Eratosthenes  as  117  :  114, 

for  keen  indeed  must  be  the  ear  that  could  discern  be- 

15  24 

tweeu  --—  and  —  (except  in  harmony) ;  much  more  difficult 

still  would  it  be  to  discover  a  difference  between  116-60  : 

l]3-39andll4or  —. 
112i        114 

If  any  wish  to  examine  this  matter  more  closely,  they 
can  consult  the  Treatises  on  Harmonics.  Mr.  Vincent  has 
calculated  these  differences  by  logarithms  to  the  60  root 
of  2.    ■ 

My  point  is,  to  prove  that  the  ancients  did  possess  and 
practise  a  modulation  which  contained  much  less  intervals 
than  ours,  and  that  such,  or  an  approach  to  such,  modula- 
tion (though  probably  but  imperfect)  is  still  retained 
among  some  people,  and  that  the  principles  on  which  the 
Greeks  founded  their  enharmonic  genus,  still  survive  in 
natural  song,  though  I  will  not  be  bold  enough  to  assert 
that  sometimes  these  songs  may  not  change  into  one  of 
the  chromatic  x?^^^^  which,  for  want  of  practice,  I  might 
not  be  able  to  decide.  One  thing,  however,  is  certain,  that, 
as  Aristoxenus  tells  us,  no  perfect  ear  could  modulate 
more  than  two  dieses  at  a  time  (and  then  there  was  a 
"  saltus"  or  interval  of  two  tones),  and  as  the  New  Zea- 
land songs  frequently  exhibit  more  than  tivo  close  intervals 
together,  it  is  more  than  probable  that  many  of  these 
songs  are  a  chromatic,  represented  by  120,  114,  108,  or 
120,  112|,  108  ;  but  it  will  not  be  worth  while  for  the  pre- 
sent purpose  to  discuss  this  nicety,  as  all  we  want  is  a 
practical  approximation. 


APPENDIX.  323 

lu  proof  that  a  system  of  modulation  like  the  above 
still  survives,  I  shall  produce,  as  nearly  as  my  ear  could 
discern,  the  modulation  of  some  of  the  New  Zealand 
melodies  ;  and  shall  show  a  still  nearer  approach  to  the 
system  of  the  real  Greek  enharmonic,  in  a  Chinese  air 
which  I  heard  and  noted. 

A  few  remarks  on  the  system  itself,  the  intervals,  and 
the  notation. 

SYSTEM. 

First,  that  an  enharmonic  modulation  might  exist  is 
admitted  by  many  modern  writers.  Mr.  Donkiu,  for  in- 
stance, author  of  the  able  article  on  Ancient  Music  in 
Dr.  W.  Smith's  "Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Roman  Anti- 
quities," observes  (under  the  title  of  "  Music")  of  the  differ- 
ent genera  less  frequently  named,*  "  that  it  would  be 
wrong  to  conclude  hastily  that  the  others  would  be  impos- 
sible in  practice,  or  necessarily  unpleasing ;"  and  of  the  en- 
harmonic he  says,  "but  it  is  impossible  to  form  a  judgment 
of  its  merits  without  a  much  greater  knowledge  of  the 
rules  of  composition  than  seems  now  attainable." 

Mr.  Lay  Tradescant  having  shown  the  differences  of 
interval  of  the  Chinese  instruments  from  the  intervals 
generally  in  use  in  Europe,  adds — "  It  will  therefore 
very  readily  appear  from  the  respective  rules,  that  the 
character  of  the  music,  or,  if  you  please,  the  mood  (he 
should  have  said  "genus"),  must  be  very  different  from 
our  own,  and  that  none  of  our  instruments  (he  should 
have  said  keyed  or  bored)  are  capable  of  doing  jus- 
tice to  any  air  that  is  played  on  the  kin"  (or  scholar's 
lute).  He  subjoins  :  "  In  my  travels  I  sometimes  tvrote 
doirn  the  airs  that  I  had  heard  among  the  natives,  but 
though  I  took  much  pains  to  learn   them  accurately,   I 

•  As  the  soft  diatonic,  the  hemiolion  chromatic,  the  soft  chro- 
matic. 


324  APPENDIX. 

always  found  they  had  lost  something  of  their  peculiarity 
when  played  upon  the  violin. 

"  The  reason  of  this  defect  seems  to  have  been  that  the 
intervals  of  the  Indian  music  did  not  agi-ee  with  those  of 
Europe."* 

Mr.  Tradescant  might  have  added,  that  there  will 
always  be  some  difference  in  an  air  played  on  the  guitar 
and  on  the  violin,  though  the  intervals  used  are  esteemed 
the  same ;  and,  again,  perhaps  the  learned  traveller  did 
not  take  care  to  divide  the  scale  of  his  violin  mathemati- 
cally, like  that  of  the  kin,  before  he  tried  the  eff'ect ;  he 
might  also  not  have  noted  the  right  interval.  He  con- 
cludes :  "  There  is,  however,  a  connection  between  the  Chi- 
nese and  old  Scotch  music,  so  that  when  any  highly-ad- 
mired airs  of  Scotland  happen  to  fall  within  the  compass 
of  the  kin,  they  seem  at  home  when  played  upon  this  in- 
strument." 

Mr.  Lane  says  the  "  canoon"  of  the  Arabians  had  twenty- 
four  notes.  Dr.  Russell  to  Burney  says  that  the  Arab  scale 
of  twenty-four  notes  was  equal  to  one  octave.  But  Mr. 
Lane  adds,  that  "  the  most  remarkable  peculiarity  in  the 
Arab  system  of  music  is  the  division  of  tones  into  tJiirds." 
Hence,  from  the  system  oi  thirds  of  tones,  I  have  heard  the 
Egyptian  musicians  urge  against  the  European  systems  of 
music  that  they  are  deficient  in  the  number  of  sounds. 

The  same  remark  was  made  to  me  by  Selim  A«ar,  a 
Nubian,  when  singing  some  Amharic  songs:  "  Your  instru- 
ment" (piano),  said  he,  "is  very  much  out  of  tune,  and 
jumps  very  much." 

Mr.  Lane  adds:  "These  small  and  delicate  gradations  of 
sound  give  a  peculiar  softness  to  the  performances  of  the 
Arab  musicians,  which  are  generally  of  a  plaintive  cha^ 

*  Lay  Tradescant's  "  Chinese  as  they  Are." 


APPENDIX.  325 

racter;  but  they  are  difficult  to  discriminate  with  exact- 
ness, and  therefore  seldom  observed  in  the  vocal  and 
instrumental  music  of  those  persons  who  have  not  made  a 
regular  study  of  the  art." 

Had  Mr.  Lane  been  describing  the  character  and  diffi- 
culties of  the  ancient  Greek  enharmonic  or  chromatic,  he 
could  not  have  used  other  terms ;  they  are  almost  the 
words  of  Aristoxenus,  Vitruvius,  Plutarch,  and  other  an- 
cient writers  on  these  genera ;  and  yet,  he  adds,  "  he  took 
great  delight  in  the  more  refined  kind  of  music,"  and 
found  "  the  more  he  became  habituated  to  the  style  the 
more  he  was  pleased  with  it."  He  continues  :  "He  was 
perfectly  charmed  with  the  performance  of  some  female 
singers,  and  that  the  natives  are  so  fascinated  as  to  lavish 
considerable  sums  on  them." 

Precisely  so  the  Greeks  of  old. 

INTERVALS. 

We  must  not  suppose  that  the  Greek  enharmonic  was  a 
consecutive  gamut  of  quarter-tones — no  ;  we  are  told  dis- 
tinctly by  all  authors  (except,  perhaps,  Salinas),  that  there 
was  a  quarter-tone,  then  another  quarter-tone,  then  a 
great  interval  completing  the  fourth  ;  or  reversely,  a  great 
interval  of  two  major  tones,  or  about  our  third  major,  the 
quarter-tone,  another  quarter-tone,  thus  completing  the 
fourth. 

So  with  these  nations,  and  especially  in  the  Chinese 
airs  I  have  heard,  thei'e  is  either  the  two  quarter- tones, 
then  an  interval  of  about  a  third  ;  or,  the  interval  of  the 
third,  and  then  the  two  dieses  or  quarter-tones,  or  it  is  a 
mixed  genus,  and  adds  a  tone  or  half-tone  at  either 
extreme. 

I  here  beg  to  state  that,  though  with  great  care  and  the 
assistance  of  a  graduated  monochord,  and  an  instrument 


326  APPENDIX. 

divided  like  the  intervals  of  the  Chinese  kin,  1  have  endea- 
voured to  give  an  idea  of  those  airs  of  New  Zealand  which 
I  heard,  yet  so  difficult  is  it  to  discover  the  exact  interval, 
that  I  will  not  vouch  for  the  mathematical  exactness :  nei- 
ther will  I  pledge  myself  not  to  have  written  a  chromatic 
for  an  enharmonic  interval,  or  vice  versa. 

I  must  also,  in  justice  to  myself,  add,  that  the  singer 
did  not  always  repeat  the  musical  phrase  with  precisely 
the  same  modulation,  though,  without  a  very  severe  test, 
this  would  not  have  heen  discernible,  nor  tlien  to  many 
ears  ;  the  general  effect  heing  to  an  European  ear  very  mo- 
notonous. 

But  I  may  say  that,  when  I  sang  them  from  my  notation, 
they  were  recognised  and  approved  of  by  competent  judges  ; 
and  that  the  New  Zealander  himself  said,  "  he  should  soon 
make  a  singer  of  me." 

I  may  also  add  that  I  have  studied  the  subject  for  more 
than  twenty  years,  and  have  read  something  out  of  almost 
every  book  of  note  that  has  been  written  on  it ;  but  yet  I 
only  offer  these  airs  as  an  approximation,  and  if  any  one 
shall  be  found  who  may  do  more  justice  to  them,  I  shall  be 
delighted  to  hear  of  the  result. 

NOTATION. 

The  notation  that  I  have  adopted  is,  for  the  enharmonic 
diesis,  the  St.  Andrew's  cross  or  saltier  x,  quarter  tone  or 

half  sharp;  the  usual  tt  for  the  sharp;  and  J  for  three- 
quarter  sharp.  In  like  manner,  the  -^  for  quarter  tone 
or  half  flat ;  b  for  the  flat ;  and  '^  (or  I  might  have  said  i^) 
for  the  three-quarter  flat. 

In  the  Arab  ternal  division  I  should  use — one-third 
sharp,  /%  ;  two-third  sharp,  tt/ ;  one-third  flat,  'b  ;  two- 
third  flat,  b/ . 

In  my  notation,  also,  it  must  be  observed,  that  a  sign 


APPENDIX. 


327 


Jl  or  b  never  conveys  its  influence  beyond  the  note  to  which 
it  is  attached ;  thus 


would  read  E  half-flat,  E  natural,  E  half-sharp,  E  natural ; 
and  is  a  delicate  expression  of  the  chromatic 


^\ 


-^ 


^t 


or  of  the  diatonic 


I  now  give  the  airs  as  best  I  can. 

One  word  as  to  time.  Though  I  have  timed  the  airs  I 
have  given,  I  am  free  to  confess  there  was  neither  metre 
nor  rhythm  of  any  marked  character  discernible  in  them  ; 
and  even  in  the  divisions  of  the  lines  or  verses,  the  singer 
seemed  to  stop  indifferently  now  at  one,  now  at  another 
word.  I  have,  however,  followed  in  my  divisions  those  given 
in  the  book,  taking  it  for  granted  that  the  learned  author, 
who  has  given  himself  so  much  pains  about  the  matter, 
will  have  chosen  the  most  authentic. 

James  A.  Davies,* 
Formerly  of  Trin.  Coll.  Camb. 
Late  Private  Sec.  to  H.R.H.  Prince  Leopold, 
Count  of  Syracuse,  Naples. 

17,  Great  Ormond  Street,  Queen  Square, 
September,  1854. 

•  Author  of  the  Papers  on  the  Rhythm  of  the  Ancient  Greek 
Orators,  of  the  Psalms,  Selah,  the  Evil  Eye,  read  before  the  Royal 
Society  of  Literature ;  and  of  Papers  on  Accent  and  Quantity,  dis- 
covering their  true  and  real  dilfcreuce,  from  authentic  sources.  See 
"  English  Journal  of  Education,"  February,  March,  April,  June, 
Jul  J',  and  August;   G.  Bell,  186,  Fleet  Street. 


328 


APPENDIX. 


Mr.  McGregor  gives  the  following  specimens  of  Arabian 
Music. — See  his  "Eastern  Music." 


:fc 


H 


^—4- 


^ 


1^=^ 


-^-U^ 


0     Mo  -  ha  -  meJ 
Which  I  represent  thus : — 

--feJ — -i- 


Al 


lah. 


^ 


or  thus,  perhaps  clearer: — 


:fe^j:^=JE=s^ 


1 


The  run  at  the  end  is  also  met  with  in  the  New  Zealand 
songs.  The  cadence  is  mixed,  i.  e.  enharmonic  and  dia- 
tonic. 

The  Chinese  Air  sung  under  my  window  in  London: — 


2Z='&i=lbl 


1^ 


p 


>— iO-'^ft    b»- 


-JHz^^ 


:m: 


APPENDIX. 


329 


o 

CO 

o 
tic 

03 

CM 


^ 

•^ 

^ 

w 

'A 

Cl 

l-H 

< 

<a 

^ 

? 

o 

4 

Q 

5^ 

CO 

'^ 

H 

■IJ 

« 

^ 

H 

1? 

pq 

Ps 

^ 

t 

.    H 

I— 1 

.       K 

O        O 

Iz;    .. 

^ 

w 

o 

P5 

<5 

<J 

H 

ol 

M 

<! 

^ 

W 

w 

JT 


?imi 


I  I  I 


a 


4^ 


1^ 


\  1 


ID 


03 


^ 


O 

/4 


■»      & 


::> 


i 


im^ 


i!/.- 


-1) 


I 


ICi 


-4 


I  I  I 


03 


03 


:i 


pi 
a 


[i 


ir.. 


JT 


'  =  ^i^^ 


1.   -r; 


.il  ^ 


•a 
a 


+44 


,^4 


'% 

w 

U) 

<s 

a 

<D 

-s 

<u 


03 

to 
a 
o 

03 


> 
o 

60 

a 

,Q 

^ 

o 

03 

CS 

fe^ 

7J 

60 

-IM 

o 

TS 

0) 

U 

g 

o 

^ 

03 

« 

Hff) 

0) 

',' 

Oi 

^ 

N 

c3 

S 

A 

x» 

M 

1s 

^ 

X 

tfi 

"S 

& 

4^ 

a 

o 

03 

03 

03 

!h 

MM. 

HW 

!-l 

Cfi 

C 

to 

60 

>) 

^ 

5? 

a 

\-k 

s 

O 

O) 
60 

o 
<u 

C5 


CO 

o 

*a 
,«» 

<a 

09 

<u 

60 

<A 
Oi 
0} 

H 


330 


APPENDIX. 


A 


i^iL 


03 


XX 


i 


fcD 


Tffe. 


3 


tX 


i  -t 


4^ 


ra 


++i> 


« 


X  -« 


c3         ."S 


ISS      '-- 


I   I   I 


/ 


'X*\J 


CD        I    I    I    I    I 


-++4 


CD 

ft 


o 


as 


05 


/3 


a 


•^  -1-3 

,  o 

'^  cS 

as  & 


03    , 

-t-3 

5-1     <D 

^•3 


sa 


^  & 

.-2  H 

i2  o 

o  -^ 

I  s* 

si 

O  03 


> 

^—      -t-3 

-5   5 


APPENDIX. 


331 


I   I 


6 


O 
I— I 

H 

< 

<! 


00 

03 


IX 


-^ 


i    0^ 
1    ^ 


«t 


f^+^ 


:  (■ 


I  M  I 


1    '^ 


Its 


mh 


o 


3 


O 
J-     *> 


liS 


f 

4^ 


03 


lih 


14^ 


ff: 


I 

-4    c^ 


33 


1.  J 


cq 


^  D 


"3 

01 

i 
0) 

a 


> 
o 


a) 


a 

o 

so 

a 


H 


332 


APPENDIX. 


CO 

6 


fcO 

03 


to 


g 
^ 


o 

<1 
W 

m 


o 

o 


t8 
»       as 


1=L 


** 


C3 


01 


O 


o 


e3 


« 
o 

W 


I: 


\i 


--r-k  « 


iS 


1- 1 


1:1 


X    2 


W    OS 


'--.       -J^ 


i 


'  ^ 


-J    Sh 


.:s  OS 


I 


t4-^ 


'  o 


1t^    1^^    ^^ 


3 


OS 


ii   s 


:;4 


Itnb 


OS 


OS 


APPENDIX. 


333 


S3 


C5 


O 
O 

o 

w. 

P 

w 


1- 


i 


^- 


rji 


I 


OS 
6C 

a 
o 


d 
^ 


03 


i 

+44 


1     ' 

I 

',3 


a 
1 

I 
P4 


o 

S3 


144 


^ 


44 


'  =  .^■5 


a 


•^ 


s 

CU 


3 


LONDON : 
FEINTED     B¥    WOODFALL    AND     KINDEE, 

ANOEL  COURT,  SKINNER  STREET. 


LIST  OF  NEW  WORKS. 


1. 

AN  ENGLISHWOMAN'S  IMPRESSIONS  OP  MANNERS 
AND  SOCIETY  IN  RUSSIA,  DUKING  A  TEN  YEARS'  RESI- 
DENCE.   Woodcuts.    Post  8vo.    10s.  6d. 

2. 
HISTORICAL  MEMORIALS  OP  CANTERBURY.    By  Rev. 
A.  P.  STANLEY,  M.A.    Woodcuts.    8vo.     7s.  6f/. 

3. 

A  HANDBOOK  POR  YOUNG  PAINTERS.  By  C.  R. 
LESLIE,  R.A.    Illustrations.    Post  8vo.    10s.  Gd. 

4. 
THE  ART  OF  TRAVEL  ;  or,  Hints  on  the  Shifts  and  Con- 
trivances available  in  Wild  Countries.  By  FRANCIS  GALTON. 
Woodcuts.    Post  8vo.    6s. 

5. 

POLYNESIAN  MYTHOLOGY,  and  Traditions  of  the  New 
Zealand  Race.  By  Sir  GEORGE  GREY,  late  Governor  of  New 
Zealand.    Woodcuts.    Post  8vo.    10s.  Gd. 

6. 
THE  THEORY  AND  PRACTICE  OF  GUNNERY.     By  Sir 
HOWARD  DOUGLAS.  Fourth  and  entirely-revised  Edition.  Plates. 
8vo.    21s. 

7. 
HISTORY  OP  THE  ENGLISH  POOR  LAW  :  in  connection 
with  the  Condition  of  the  People.    By  Sir  GEORGE  NICHOLLS, 
K.C.B.    2  vols.    8vo.    28s. 

8. 
BIOGRAPHICAL  DICTIONARY  OF  ITALIAN  PAINTERS : 
with  a  Taule  of  the  Contemporary  Schools  of  Italy.  Edited 
by  RALPH  N.  WORNUM.    Post  8vo.    6s.  6c;. 


List  of  New  TVorks. 


9. 
THE  MONASTERY  AND  THE  MOUNTAIN  CHURCH. 

By  Author  of  "  Sunlight  through  the  ]\Iisf."   Woodcuts.   16mo.    45. 

10. 
ORIGIN  AND  PROGRESS  OP    THE    MECHANICAL  IN- 
VENTIONS OF  JAMES  WATT.  With  Introductory  Blemoir.    By 
JAS.  P.  MUIRHEAD,  M.A.    Plates.    3  vols.  8vo.    45s.  ;  or,  large 
paper.    4to.     84s. 

11. 
GIBBON'S    ROMAN    EMPIRE.      The   ttnmtitilated  Text, 
COLLATED  AND  VERIFIED.    Edited  by  De.  WM.  SMITH.    Map. 
Vols.  1  to  6.   8vo.    7s.  6d.  each.  ("  Murray's  British  Classics.") 

12. 
JOHNSON'S  LIVES  OF  THE  ENGLISH  POETS.      Edited 
by   PETER   CUNNINGHAM,   F.S.A.      3   Vols.      8vo.      22s.    Gd. 
("  Murray's  British  Classics.") 

13. 
KNOWLEDGE  IS  POWER;  a  View  of  the  Productive  Forces 
of  Modern  Society  and  the  results  of  Labour,  Capital,  and  Skill. 
By  CHARLES  KNIGHT.    Woodcuts.    Crown  Svo.    7s.  6d. 

14. 
MURRAY'S  OFFICIAL  HANDBOOK ;  An  Historical  Ac- 
count of  the  Duties  and  Powers  of  the  Principal  Authorities 
of  the  United  Kingdom.    An  entirely  new  Edition,    Post  Svo.  6s. 

15. 
NOTES  FROM  LIFE.    By  HENRY  TAYLOR.    Fourth  Edi- 
tion.   Fcap.  Svo.  2s.    ("  Murray's  Railway  Readikg.") 

16. 
REJECTED    ADDRESSES.      By    JAMES    and    HORACE 

SMITH.      24th  Edition,  with  author's  latest  corrections.      Fcap. 
Svo.    Is.    ("  Murray's  Railway  Reading.") 


JOHN  MURRAY,  ALBEMARLE  STREET. 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


BL 

2615 

G7 


Grey,    (Sir)    George 

Polynesian  mythology  &nd 
ancient  traditional  history 
of  the  New  Zealand  race 


