b 
ioo 

'CO 


'CD 


■I 


4 

POPULAR    TALES 


OF 


THE  WEST   HIGHLANDS 


" 


POPULAR  TALES 


OF 


THE   WEST    HIGHLANT 


r>, 


ORALLY   COLLECTED 


tith  a  translation 
By  the  Late  J.  F.  CAMPBELL 


NEW   EDITION 

(Under  the  auspices  of  the  Islay  Association) 


■  j 


K 


Volume  I. 
lit  ,C3 

DATE    OEC  i  9  1989 


Jlt,l>*'-^l'-:  •■-.r.-j_- ..a ._ 


ALEXANDER    GARDNER 

13ttWis.)rr  to  Ifeer  jftajrstg  ttjr  &ttmt 
PAISLEY;     AND    PATERNOSTER    ROW,    LONDON 

1890 


639391. 

a.7.7  sfe 
V. 


CONTENTS. 


Vlll 


CONTENTS. 


NAME. 


Told  by 


I.  THE    YOUNG    KING    OF 
EASAIDH  EUADH. 

2.  The  Tale  or  the  Widow's 

Son.     Abstract. 
Notes 

3.  An  Tuairisgeul  Mor. 

Abstract. 
Notes  and  references 

II.  THE  BATTLE  or  the  BIRDS 
Gaelic 

2.  The  Widow's  Son.  Abstract 

3.  The  Wren.    Abstract 

4.  Reference 

5.  Reference 

6.  Abstract 

7.  Uirsgeul.     Abstract 

8.  NigheanDubhGhealDearg. 

Abstract. 
Notes  and  References 

III.  THE  TALE  of  the  HOODIE 

Gaelic  

2.  Referred  to 

Notes  and  References 

IV.  THE  SEA-MAIDEN 

Gaelic 

2.  A    Mhaighdean    Mhara. 

Abstract. 

3.  Gille  Carrach  Dubh. 

Abstract. 

4.  The  Smith's  Son.    Abstract 

5.  The  Fisher.   Reference 

6.  The  Grey  Lad.      Reference 
Notes  and  References. 

V.  CONALLCRABHUIDHE... 
Gaelic 

VI.  CONALCROVI 

Gaelic 

VII.  THE  TALE  OF  OONNAL  ... 

Gaelic 


James  Wilson,  blind  fiddler 


John  Campbell,  sawyer. 


Donald  MacPhie,  crofter 


John  Mackenzie,  fisherman 

Ann  Darroch 

John  MacGibbon,  stable  boy 

"Old  Woman,"  pauper 

"Old  Man," 

Donald  MacCraw,  drover,  etc. 

John  Dewar,  labourer 

Roderick  Mackenzie,  sawyer 

Ann  MacGilvray 

John  Dewar 


John  Mackenzie,  fisherman, 

Donald  MacPhie,  fisherman 

John  MacGibbon,  farm  ser- 
vant, etc. 

B.  Macaskill , 

A.  MacNeill,  fisherman 

John  Smith,  labourer 

James  Wilson,  blind  fiddler 

Neill  Gillies,  fisherman 

Kenneth  MacLennan 


CONTENTS. 


IX 


Date. 


June  9,  1859 


June  27,  1859 


July  1859 


April  1859 

June  1859 
April  23,  1859 


Sept.  2,  1859 

Oct.  28,  1859 

July  1859 


April  1859 


April  1859 

Sept.  2,  1859 

and  1860 
April  23,  1859 

Aug.  1859 
Do. 
Do. 


June  1859 


May  27,  1859 


June  27,  1859 


Place. 


Islay,  Argyll. 


Strath  Gairloch,  Ross 


South  Uist. 


Near  Inverary 


Islay  

Inverary 

Dalmally 

Sutherland 

South  Uist 

Glendaruail,  Argyll  ... 
Strath  Gairloch,  Eoss 


Islay  Hector  MacLean 


Collector. 


Hector  MacLean 


Hector  Urquhart 


Hector  MacLean 


Hector  Urquhart  ... 

Hector  MacLean  . . . 
J.  F.  C 


C.  D.&  Schoolmaster 

J.  F.  C 

John  Dewar 

Hector  Urquhart  . . . 


Glendaruail 


Near  Inverary. 

South  Uist.' 

Inverary 


Berneray  . . . 
Barra 

South  Uist. 


Islay 


Near  Inverary 


Pool  Ewe. 


John  Dewar. 


Hector  Urquhart 

J.  F.  C. .'.'.'. 

J.  F.  C 


Hector  Maclean 
Do. 
Do. 


Do. 
Do. 

Hector  Urquhart 


Hector  Urquhart 


Page 


12 

19 

21 
22 

23 

25 
38 
48 
49 
52 
52 
52 
53 
59 

61 

64 
68 
70 
70 

72 
86 
95 

98 

100 
102 
102 
103 

105 
108 

127 

139 

147 
152 


CONTENTS. 


NAME. 


4.  Uisdean  Mor.     Abstract.. 

5.  An  Gadaiche  Dubh. 

Reference. 
Notes  and  references 


VIII.  MURCHAG  A  'S  MIONAC- 
HAG. 

Notes 

Gaelic 


IX.  THE    BROWN    BEAR   OF 
THE  GREEN  GLEN. 

Gaelic 

Notes 


X.  THE  THREE  SOLDIERS. 

Gaelic 

2nd  Version 

3rd      Do 

4th      Do 

Notes,  etc 

Am  Bochd  Ruagh 


XL-  THE  WHITE  PET. 

Gaelic 

Notes,  etc 


XII.  THE  DAUGHTER  OF  THE 
SKIES. 

Gaelic 

Notes,  etc 


Told  by 


Alexander  M  'Donald 

Alex.  MacNeill,  fisherman 


Many  narrators. 


XIII.  THE  GIRL  and  the  DEAD 

MAN. 

Gaelic 

Notes,  etc 

XIV.  THE  KING  who  WISHED  to 

MARRY  his  DAUGHTER 

Gaelic 

2d  Morag  a  Chota  Bhain 

Notes,  references,  etc 

XV.  THE  POOR  BROTHER  and 
THE  RICH. 

Gaelic 

Notes 


John  MacDonald,  travelling 
tinker. 


James  MacLachlan,  servant, 

Hector  Mackenzie 

Hector  Boyd,  fisherman 

Kenneth  Mackenzie 

"A  Woman" 

Campbell,  a  servant  maid  . . 


James  MacLauchlan,  servant 


Ann  Darroch. 


Ann  Darroch. 


Donald  MacCraw,  drover 


Flora  Maclntyre 


CONTENTS. 


XI 


Date. 


June  27,  1S59 
Aug.  1859 


April  1859 


May  1859 


July  1859 
June  1859 

June  I860 

Nov.  1859 


Do. 


Do. 


Sept. 


1859 


May  1859 


Place. 


Inverasdale,  Ross 
Barra 

Many  districts.... 


No  where  in  particular 


Islay , 


Dibaig,  Gairloch 
Castlebay,  Barra 
Ross-shire  


Islay  

Port  Ellen,  Islay 


May  1859        Islay 


Islay 


Islay 


Islay 


Collector. 


Mr.  T.  Cameron.. 
Hector  MacLean 


Hector  MacLean 


Hector  Urquhart 


Hector  MacLean 

Angus  MacRae... 
Hector  MacLean 
Hector  Urquhart 


Hector  MacLean. 
Mrs.  MacTavish  . 

Hector  MacLean 
Do. 


Do. 


North  Uist J.  F.  C 


Hector  MacLean 


Page 


156 
157 

157 

161 

164 
165 

168 

174 
179 

181 
18S 
194 
195 
196 
197 
197 

199 
202 
205 

208 

214 
218 

220 

222 
224 

226 

229 
232 
233 

237 

240 
242 


Xll 


CONTENTS. 


NAME. 

Told  by 

XVI.  TheKINGofLOCHLANN'S 

THREE  DAUGHTERS. 

XVII.  MAOL  A  CHLIOBAIN 

2d  

3d  Maol  a  Bhoibean  

4th  Maol  a  Mhoibean 

XVIIa.  FABLES,  etc 

XVII&.  BAILIE  LUNNAIN 

XVIIc.  THE  SLIM  SWARTHY 
CHAMPION. 

2d  Version 

XVIId.  THE  SHIFTY  LAD 

Flora  Maclntvre  , 

Mary,  a  nursemaid   

John  Crawford,  fisherman  ... 

(  John  Mackenzie  

1  Donald  Macintyre  

James  Wilson,  blind  fiddler 

j  J.  Dewar  and 

CONTENTS. 


Xlll 


Date. 

Place. 

Collector. 

Tale 

244 

252 

257 

259 
264 

268 
268 
269 

275 

289 

297 

308 
318 

330 
349 

May  27,  1859 

April  1859 

June  16,  1859 

April  25,  1859 

Feb.  2,  1860 

1859  and  1860 

Aug.  1859-1860 
1859 

1859 

1859 
June  1860 

Inverary 

Kilmeny ,  Islay 

Do. 

Benbecula  

Clachaig,  Dunoon...  \ 

Do. 

Do. 

J.  F.  C 

John  Dewar  

J.  F.  C \ 

Mr.  Donald  Torrie  J 

Hector  MacLean  . . . 
J.  Dewar 

ADVERTISEMENT. 


"Good  wine,"  as  the  old  saying  has  it,  "needs  no  bush"; 
neither  do  the  Popular  Tales  of  the  West  High- 
lands, collected  and  edited  by  Mr.  J.  F.  Campbell, 
need  any  eulogy  to  commend  them  either  to  those  from 
whose  race  they  come  or  to  the  student  or  reader  of 
Folk-lore.  The  work  is  well  known,  and,  though  thirty 
years  have  now  well-nigh  passed  away  since  the  first 
two  volumes  were  published,  the  popularity  of  the 
collection  has  gone  on  increasing.  The  volumes  just 
alluded  to  have  long  been  out  of  print,  and  are  rarely 
to  be  met  with.  In  re-issuing  the  work,  the  Publisher 
has  deferred  to  the  strongly-expressed  opinion  of  Mr. 
Campbell  that  the  stories  ought  to  be  given  as  they 
were  gathered,  in  the  rough.  No  attempt,  therefore, 
has  been  made  to  alter  the  style  or  arrangement,  or  to 
interfere  with  the  text  in  any  way,  so  that,  with  the 
exception  of  giving  effect  to  the  long  lists  of  errata, 
the  present  reprint  is  exactly  the  same  as  the  original 
edition. 

This  edition  is  published  under  the  auspices  of  the 
Islay  Association. 


Do 

Iain  Mac  Sheorais 

Mac  Callen  Mor 

MARQUESS   OF   LORNE. 


My  Dear  Lorne, 

I  dedicate  this  collection  of  West  Country 
Stories  to  you  as  the  son  of  my  Chief,  in  the  hope  that 
it  may  add  to  the  interest  which  you  already  feel  in  a 
people,  of  whom  a  large  number  look  with  respect  on 
"  Mac  Callen  Mor  "  as  the  head  of  their  tribe.  I  know 
that  the  poorest  Highlanders  still  feel  an  honest  pride 
whenever  their  chiefs,  or  men  of  their  name,  earn  dis- 
tinction ;  and  many  of  "  Clan  Dhiarmaid  "  take  a  warm 
interest  in  you. 

Amidst  curious  rubbish  you  will  find  sound  sense  if 
you  look  for  it.  You  will  find  the  creed  of  the  people, 
as  shewn  in  their  stories,  to  be,  that  wisdom  and  courage, 
though  weak,  may  overcome  strength,  and  ignorance, 
and  pride ;  that  the  most  despised  is  often  the  most 
worthy  ;  that  small  beginnings  lead  to  great  results. 

You  will  find  perseverance,  frugality,  and  filial  piety 
rewarded  ;   pride,  greed,  and  laziness  punished.     You 


viii  DEDICATION. 

will  find  much  which  tells  of  barbarous  times  ;  I  hope 
you  will  meet  nothing  that  can  hurt,  or  should  offend. 

If  you  follow  any  study,  even  that  of  a  popular  tale, 
far  enough,  it  will  lead  you  to  a  closed  door,  beyond 
which  you  cannot  pass  till  you  have  searched  and 
found  the  key,  and  every  study  will  lead  the  wisest  to 
a  fast  locked  door  at  last ;  but  knowledge  lies  beyond 
these  doors,  and  one  key  may  open  the  way  to  many  a 
store  which  can  be  reached,  and  may  be  turned  to  evil 
or  to  good. 

That  you  may  go  on  acquiring  knowledge,  selecting 
the  good,  and  rejecting  the  evil ;  that  you,  like  Conal 
in  the  story,  may  gather  gold,  and  escape  unharmed 
from  the  giant's  land,  is  the  earnest  wish  of  your 
affectionate  kinsman, 

J.  F.   CAMPBELL. 

September,   1860. 


INTRODUCTION. 


THE  FAIRY  EGG,   AND   WHAT  CAME   OUT   OF  IT. 

On  the  stormy  coasts  of  the  Hebrides,  amongst  sea- 
weed and  shells,  fishermen  and  kelp-burners  often  find 
certain  hard,  light,  floating  objects,  somewhat  like  flat 
chestnuts,  of  various  colours — grey,  black,  and  brown, 
which  they  call  sea-nuts,  strand-nuts,  and  fairy-eggs. 
Where  they  are  most  common,  they  are  used  as  snuff- 
boxes, but  they  are  also  worn  and  preserved  as  amulets, 
with  a  firm  or  sceptical  belief  in  their  mysterious 
virtues.  Old  Martin,  who  wrote  of  the  Western  Isles 
in  1703,  calls  them  "Molluka  beans,"  and  tells  how 
they  were  then  found,  and  worn,  and  used  as  medicine ; 
how  they  preserved  men  from  the  evil  eye,  and  cured 
sick  cattle  by  a  process  as  incomprehensible  as  mes- 
merism. Practical  Highlandmen  of  the  present  day 
call  the  nuts  trash,  and  brand  those  who  wear  them, 
like  their  ancestors  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago,  as 
ignorant  and  superstitious ;  but  learned  botanists,  too 
wise  to  overlook  trifles,  set  themselves  to  study  even 
fairy-eggs ;  and  believing  them  to  be  West  Indian 
seeds,*  stranded  in  Europe,  they  planted  them,  and 
some  (from  the  Azores)  grew.  Philosophers,  having 
discovered  what  they  were,  used  them  to  demonstrate 
the  existence  of  the  Gulf  Stream,  and  it  is  even  said 

*  Mimosa  scandens,  great  pod-creeper.     Mucuna  ureus. 

A 


ii  INTRODUCTION. 

that  they  formed  a  part  of  one  link  in  that  chain  of 
reasoning  which  led  Columbus  to  the  New  World. 

So  within  this  century,  men  have  gathered  nursery 
tales.  They  set  themselves  earnestly  to  learn  all  that 
they  could  concerning  them  j  they  found  similar  tales 
common  to  many  languages ;  they  traced  them  back  for 
centuries ;  they  planted  them  in  books,  and  at  last  the 
Brothers  Grimm,  their  predecessors  and  their  followers, 
have  raised  up  a  pastime  for  children  to  be  "  a  study  fit 
for  the  energies  of  grown  men  and  to  all  the  dignity  of 
a  science." 

So  at  least  says  the  learned  author  of  the  translation 
of  "  Norse  Tales,"  and  there  are  many  who  agree  with 
him. 

Men  have  now  collected  stories  from  most  parts  of 
the  world.  They  have  taken  them  from  the  dictation 
of  American  Indians,  South  Sea  Islanders,  Lapps  and 
Samoydes,  Germans  and  Russians.  Missionaries  have 
published  the  fables  of  African  savages ;  learned  men 
have  translated  Arabic,  Sanscrit,  and  Chinese  manu- 
scripts ;  even  Egyptian  papyri  have  been  dug  up,  and 
forced  to  yield  their  meaning,  and  all  alike  have  fur- 
nished tales,  very  similar  to  stories  now  told  by  word 
of  mouth.  But  as  some  of  these  are  common  to  races 
whose  languages  have  been  traced  to  a  common  origin, 
it  is  now  held  that  nursery  stories  and  popular  tales 
have  been  handed  down  together  with  the  languages  in 
which  they  are  told ;  and  they  are  used  in  striving  to 
trace  out  the  origin  of  races,  as  philologists  use  words  to 
trace  language,  as  geologists  class  rocks  by  the  shells 
and  bones  which  they  contain,  and  as  natural  philoso- 
phers used  fairy-eggs  in  tracing  the  Gulf  Stream. 

The  following  collection  is  intended  to  be  a  contri- 
bution to  this  new  science  of  "  Story ology."     It  is  a 


INTRODUCTION.  Ill 

museum  of  curious  rubbish  about  to  perish,  given  as 
it  was  gathered  in  the  rough,  for  it  seemed  to  me  as 
barbarous  to  "  polish "  a  genuine  popular  tale,  as  it 
would  be  to  adorn  the  bones  of  a  Megatherium  with 
tinsel,  or  gild  a  rare  old  copper  coin.  On  this,  how- 
ever, opinions  vary,  but  I  hold  my  own,  that  stories 
orally  collected  can  only  be  valuable  if  given  unaltered; 
besides,  where  is  the  model  story  to  be  found  ? 

Practical  men  may  despise  the  tales,  earnest  men 
condemn  them  as  lies,  some  even  consider  them 
wicked ;  one  refused  to  write  any  more  for  a  whole 
estate ;  my  best  friend  says  they  are  all  "  blethers." 
But  one  man's  rubbish  may  be  another's  treasure  ;  and 
what  is  the  standard  of  value  in  such  a  pursuit  as  this  ? 

"  And  what  are  you  going  to  do  with  them  stories, 
Mr.  Carnal?"  said  a  friend  of  mine,  as  he  stood  amongst 
the  brown  sea-weed,  at  the  end  of  a  pier,  on  a  fine 
summer's  evening,  and  watched  my  departure  in  a  tiny 
boat. 

"Print  them,  man,  to  be  sure." 

My  friend  is  famous  for  his  good  stories,  though 
they  are  of  another  kind,  and  he  uses  tobacco  ;  he 
eyed  me  steadily  for  a  moment,  and  then  he  disposed 
of  the  whole  matter  monosyllabically,  but  forcibly, 

"Huch!!" 

It  seemed  to  come  from  his  heart. 

Said  a  Highland  coachman  to  me  one  day,  "  The 
luggage  is  very  heavy.  I  will  not  believe  but  there  is 
stones  in  the  portmanteaus !  They  will  be  pickin'  them 
up  off  the  road,  and  takin'  them  away  with  them ;  I 
have  seen  them  myself ; "  and  then,  having  disposed  of 
geology,  he  took  a  sapient  pinch  of  snuff. 

So  a  benighted  Englishman,  years  ago  in  Australia, 
took  up  his  quarters  in  a  settler's  hut,  as  he  told  me. 


iv  INTRODUCTION. 

Other  travellers  came  in,  and  one  had  found  a  stone  in 
a  dry  river-course  which  he  maintained  to  be  partly  gold. 
The  rest  jeered  at  him  till  he  threw  away  his  prize  in 
a  pet ;  and  then  they  all  devoured  mutton  chops  and 
damper,  and  slept  like  sensible  men. 

So  these  tales  may  be  gold  or  dross  according  to 
taste.  Many  will  despise  them,  but  some  may  take 
an  interest  in  the  pastime  of  their  humble  country- 
men ;  some  may  be  amused ;  those  who  would  learn 
Gaelic  will  find  the  language  of  the  people  who  told 
the  stories ;  and  those  who  would  compare  popular 
tales  of  different  races,  may  rest  assured  that  I  have 
altered  nothing ;  that  these  really  are  what  they  pur- 
port to  be — stories  orally  collected  in  the  West  High- 
lands since  the  beginning  of  1859.  I  have  but  carried 
drift  rubbish  from  the  place  where  I  found  it  to  a 
place  where  it  may  be  seen  and  studied  by  those  who 
care  to  take  the  trouble. 

The  resemblance  which  the  collection  bears  to  others 
already  made,  is  a  strong  argument  for  the  common 
origin  of  the  stories,  and  of  the  people  who  tell  them. 
But,  as  a  foundation  for  argument,  I  am  bound  to  give 
the  evidence  on  which  I  have  formed  my  belief  in  their 
antiquity,  for  the  stories  would  be  rubbish  indeed  if 
they  were  not  genuine  traditions. 

This  is  the  account  given  by  Mr.  Hector  MacLean, 
parish  schoolmaster  at  Ballygrant  in  Islay,  whom  I 
have  known  from  his  boyhood,  and  who,  at  my  request, 
collected  stories  last  summer  in  the  Long  Island  : — 

' '  In  the  Islands  of  Barra,  the  recitation  of  tales  during  the 
long  winter  nights  is  still  very  common.  The  people  gather  in 
crowds  to  the  houses  of  those  whom  they  consider  good  reciters 
to  listen  to  their  stories.  They  appear  to  be  fondest  of  those 
tales  which  describe  exceedingly  rapid  changes  of  place  in  very 


INTRODUCTION.  V 

short  portions  of  time,  and  have  evidently  no  respect  for  the 
unities.  During  the  recitation  of  these  tales,  the  emotions  of  the 
reciters  are  occasionally  very  strongly  excited,  and  so  also  are 
those  of  the  listeners,  almost  shedding  tears  at  one  time,  and 
giving  way  to  loud  laughter  at  another.  A  good  many  of  them 
firmly  believe  in  all  the  extravagance  of  these  stories. 

"They  speak  of  the  Ossianic  heroes  with  as  much  feeling, 
sympathy,  and  belief  in  their  existence  and  reality  as  the  readers 
of  the  newspapers  do  of  the  exploits  of  the  British  army  in  the 
Crimea  or  in  India ;  and  whatever  be  the  extravagance  of  the 
legends  they  recite  respecting  them,  it  is  exceedingly  remarkable 
that  the  same  character  is  always  ascribed  to  the  same  hero  in 
almost  every  story  and  by  almost  every  reciter.  Fingal,  or  rather 
Fionn,  is  never  called  the  king  of  any  country  or  territory,  but 
the  king  of  the  Finn,  a  body  of  men  who  were  raised,  according 
to  the  traditions  current  in  the  Long  Island  and  other  parts  of 
the  Highlands,  in  Ireland  and  in  the  Highlands,  to  defend  both 
countries  against  foreign  invaders,  more  especially  against  the 
Scandinavians.  The  origin  these  illiterate  people  assign  to 
them,  according  to  the  traditions  handed  down  to  them,  is, 
that  the  largest  and  strongest  bodied  young  men  and  women 
were  selected  and  married  together  in  order  to  produce  a  brave 
and  powerful  race  capable  of  withstanding  and  repelling  the 
incursions  of  foreign  foes.  Any  hero  that  came  west,  east,  north, 
or  south,  and  'Cothrom  na  Finne  '  (the  chance  of  the  Finne),  is 
the  term  still  used  for  fair-play  in  the  Highlands. 

"  In  no  tale  or  tradition  related  to  me  regarding  these  heroes 
have  I  heard  the  name,  '  Eigh  Mh6r-bheinn  '  (king  of  Morven), 
ascribed  to  Fionn  ;  nor  have  1  heard  him  described  as  the  king 
of  any  territory  or  country — always  '  High  na  Finne  or  Feinne.' 
Feinn  or  Finn  is  the  plural  of  Fiann,  which  is  probably  derived 
from  Fiadh  dhuine ;  either  a  wild  man,  from  his  strength  and 
bravery,  or  else  the  man  of  deer,  from  their  maintaining  them- 
selves by  hunting  deer,  extensive  tracts  of  land  being  allotted  to 
them  for  that  purpose.  The  last  etymology  I  believe  myself  to 
be  the  correct  one. 

"  The  most  of  the  people  in  Barra  and  South  Uist  are  Roman 
Catholics,  can  neither  read  nor  write,  and  hardly  know  any 
English.  From  these  circumstances  it  is  extremely  improbable 
that  they  have  borrowed  much  from  the  literature  of  other 
nations.     In  North  Uist  and  Harris  these  tales  are  nearly  gone, 


VI 


INTRODUCTION. 


and  this,  I  believe,  to  be  owing  partly  to  reading,  which  in  a 
manner  supplies  a  substitute  for  them,  partly  to  bigoted  religious 
ideas,  and  partly  to  narrow  utilitarian  views. " 

This  clear  statement  is  accompanied  by  a  description 
of  each  of  the  men  who  contributed,  from  which  it 
appears  in  detail  that  the  greater  number  speak  Gaelic 
only,  that  many  of  them  can  neither  read  nor  write, 
and  that  they  are  clever  though  uneducated ;  and  this 
account  1  know  to  be  correct  in  some  cases,  from  my 
own  personal  knowledge  of  the  men.  Hector  Urquhart, 
now  gamekeeper  at  Ardkinglas,  whom  I  have  known 
for  many  years,  agrees  with  MacLean  in  his  account 
of  the  telling  of  these  stories  in  other  districts  in  former 
times. 

This  is  his  account : — 

"  In  my  native  place,  Pool-Ewe,  Ross-shire,  when  I  was  a 
boy,  it  was  the  custom  for  the  young  to  assemble  together  on 
the  long  winter  nights  to  hear  the  old  people  recite  the  tales  or 
sgeulachd,  which  they  had  learned  from  their  fathers  before  them. 
In  these  days  tailors  and  shoemakers  went  from  house  to  house, 
making  our  clothes  and  shoes.  When  one  of  them  came  to  the 
village  Ave  were  greatly  delighted,  whilst  getting  new  kilts  at  the 
same  time.  I  knew  an  old  tailor  who  used  to  tell  a  new  tale 
every  night  during  his  stay  in  the  village  ;  and  another,  an  old 
shoemaker,  who,  with  his  large  stock  of  stories  about  ghosts  and 
fairies,  used  to  frighten  us  so  much  that  we  scarcely  dared  pass 
the  neighbouring  churchyard  on  our  way  home.  It  was  also  the 
custom  when  an  aoidh,  or  stranger,  celebrated  for  his  store  of 
tales,  came  on  a  visit  to  the  village,  for  us,  young  and  old,  to 
make  a  rush  to  the  house  where  he  passed  the  night,  and  choose 
our  seats,  some  on  beds,  some  on  forms,  and  others  on  three-legged 
stools,  etc.,  and  listen  in  silence  to  the  new  tales  ;  just  as  I  have 
myself  seen  since,  when  a  far-famed  actor  came  to  perform  in  the 
Glasgow  theatre.  The  goodman  of  the  house  usually  opened  with 
the  tale  of  Famhair  Mor  (great  giant)  or  some  other  favourite 
tale,  and  then  the  stranger  carried  on  after  that.  It  was  a  com- 
mon saying,  *  The  first  tale  by  the  goodman,  and  tales  to  day- 


INTRODUCTION.  Vll 

light  by  the  aoidh, '  or  guest.  It  was  also  the  custom  to  put 
riddles,  in  the  solving  of  which  all  in  the  house  had  to  tax  their 
ingenuity.  If  one  of  the  party  put  a  riddle  which  was  not  solved 
that  night,  he  went  home  with  the  title  of  King  of  Kiddles. 
Besides  this,  there  was  usually  in  such  gatherings  a  discussion 
about  the  Fein,  which  comes  from  Fiantaidh,  giant;  the 
Fiantaidh  were  a  body  of  men  who  volunteered  to  defend  their 
country  from  the  invasions  and  inroads  of  the  Danes  and  Nor- 
wegians, or  Lochlinnich.  Fiunn,  who  was  always  called  King  of 
the  Fein,  was  the  strongest  man  amongst  them,  and  no  person 
was  admitted  into  the  company  who  was  less  in  height  than  he, 
however  much  taller.  I  remember  the  old  black  shoemaker 
telling  us  one  night  that  Fiunn  had  a  tooth  which  he  consulted 
as  an  oracle  upon  all  important  occasions.  He  had  but  to  touch 
this  tooth,  and  whatever  he  wanted  to  know  was  at  once 
revealed  to  him. 

1 '  The  above  is  all  I  can  at  present  readily  call  to  mind  of  the 
way  in  which  the  evenings  were  spent  in  the  Highlands  thirty 
or  forty  years  ago.  The  minister  came  to  the  village  in  1830, 
and  the  schoolmaster  soon  followed,  who  put  a  stop  in  our 
village  to  such  gatherings  ;  and  in  their  place  we  were  supplied 
with  heavier  tasks  than  listening  to  the  old  shoemaker's  fairy 
tales.  From  that  period  till  I  collected  the  few  in  this  collection, 
I  have  not  heard  a  tale  recited.  On  going  to  visit  my  friends 
last  summer,  I  expected  that  I  would  get  some  old  tales  among 
them,  but  I  found  that  the  most  of  the  old  men  who  used  to 
relate  them  in  my  young  days  had  died,  and  the  few  who  were 
then  alive  of  them  were  so  old  that  they  had  lost  their  memories, 
so  that  I  only  got  but  a  trifle  to  what  I  expected. 

March  1860.  "Hector  Urquhart." 

John  Dewar,  a  labourer,  whom  I  never  saw,  but 
who  has  written  and  sent  me  many  stories,  agrees  with 
the  others.  These  men  have  never  met,  and  have 
acted  independently ;  and  yet,  in  many  cases,  I  have 
received  versions  of  the  same  story  from  each  and  from 
other  sources,  and  I  have  myself  heard  the  same  inci- 
dents repeated   by   their   authorities,   and  by   others 


viii  INTRODUCTION. 

whom  they  had  never  seen ;  sometimes  even  the  very 
words. 

The  name  of  every  narrator  is  given  with  his  story, 
and  I  am  satisfied  on  direct  evidence  that  most  of 
these  were  known  in  the  Highlands  at  least  forty 
years  ago.  Now,  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  know  as 
little  of  the  subject  as  I  did,  let  me  give  the  theory  of 
the  distribution  of  popular  tales,  as  I  have  gathered  it 
from  the  able  introduction  to  the  Norse  Tales  and  other 
sources,  and  then  let  me  point  out  the  bearing  of  this 
collection  on  that  theory. 

It  is  supposed  that  the  races  known  as  Indo- 
European  came  from  Central  Asia  at  some  very  early 
period,  and  passed  over  Europe,  separating  and  settling 
down  as  nations ;  retaining  words  of  their  original 
language,  and  leaving  the  traces  of  their  religion  and 
history  everywhere  as  popular  tales;  and  that  they 
found  the  land  occupied.  Each  wave,  it  is  said, 
"  pushed  onwards  those  who  went  before,"  but,  as  it 
seems  to  me,  each  in  turn  must  have  stopped  as  it 
arrived  at  the  great  sea,  and  there  the  waves  of  this 
stream  of  men  must  have  mingled  and  stagnated. 

As  the  flotsam  and  jetsam  of  American  rivers  and  of 
the  Gulf  Stream  is  constantly  drifting  northwards  and 
eastwards,  and  finds  a  resting-place  on  some  western 
shore,  so  the  traces  of  the  great  human  stream,  which 
is  supposed  to  have  flowed  westwards,  should  be 
found  in  greatest  abundance  stranded  at  the  western 
sea.  If  this  be  correct,  and  if  the  plains  of  Asia  sent 
migratory  hordes  eastwards  as  well  as  westwards,  the 
tales  and  languages  of  the  far  East  and  West  should 
most  resemble  each  other,  and  should  also  resemble 
more  than  others  the  oldest  forms  of  the  myths  and 
languages  of  those  from  whom  they  sprang.     Brittany, 


INTRODUCTION.  IX 

Scandinavia,  Ireland,  and  the  west  of  Scotland,  from 
their  geographical  position,  should  contain  more  of 
this  light  mental  debris  than  Central  Europe  ;  for  the 
same  reason  that  more  of  the  floating  rubbish  of 
American  rivers  is  found  on  the  shores  of  Europe  than 
anywhere  on  the  great  ocean  ;  and  if  mankind  had  a 
common  origin,  and  started  from  the  plains  of  Asia, 
and  if  popular  tales  really  are  old  traditions,  then  the 
tales  of  Ceylon  should  resemble  those  of  Barra,  and 
those  of  Japan  should  resemble  the  others,  because 
men  travelling  eastwards  and  arrived  at  Japan,  could 
not  easily  advance  further.  Mr.  Oliphant  tells  us  that 
both  in  China  and  in  Japan  groups  are  commonly  seen 
listening  to  professional  story-tellers  in  the  streets,  and 
it  is  to  be  hoped  that  some  one  will  enable  us  to  judge 
of  their  talents. 

Be  that  as  it  may,  fairy-eggs  are  not  the  only 
foreign  products  found  on  the  shores  of  the  Hebrides, 
and  the  people  who  dwell  there  know  stories  of  larger 
growth  than  mere  nursery  tales.  Great  logs  of  drift- 
wood find  their  way  to  shore,  and  are  turned  to  use. 
Such  a  log  I  once  found,  and  used  myself,  long 
ago.  It  was  half  buried  in  the  sand  ;  it  had  been 
long  tossed  by  the  sea,  and  battered  against  rocks, 
for  it  was  heavy  with  water,  splintered  and  ground. 
No  tree  like  it  grew  anywhere  near.  There  was  no 
mark  of  a  tool  on  it.  The  stumps  of  its  roots  and 
branches  remained,  and  it  seemed  as  if  it  had  been 
torn  up  and  wafted  to  its  resting-place  by  winds  and 
waves  alone.  I  have  now  no  doubt  that  it  came  from 
America.  Had  it  been  insignificant  and  useless,  like  a 
fairy-egg,  we  might  have  left  it,  or  preserved  it  as  a 
curiosity ;  but  it  was  a  useful  log,  and  we  were  a  party 
of  chilled  otter  hunters,  so,  after  a  few  speculations,  we 


X  INTRODUCTION. 

hoisted  the  prize  on  our  shoulders,  carried  it  to  our 
dwelling,  a  neighbouring  cave,  and  there  we  burned  it. 
I  see  it  often,  hissing  and  spluttering,  and  lighting  up 
the  bivouac  with  its  red  glare.  Its  ashes  may  be  there 
still,  but  that  tree  is  a  tree  no  longer  j  its  origin  and 
wanderings  cannot  now  be  traced ;  it  has  shared  the 
fate  of  many  a  popular  tale.  It  was  found  and  used 
up. 

Such  a  log  I  lately  saw  in  South  Uist.  No  tool 
mark  was  on  it ;  it  had  lost  its  own  foliage,  but  it  was 
eovered  with  a  brown  and  white  marine  foliage  of  sea- 
weed and  dead  barnacles,  and  it  was  drilled  in  all 
directions  by  these  curious  sea-shells,  which  are  sup- 
posed by  the  people  to  be  embryo  geese.  It  was 
sound,  though  battered,  and  a  worthy  Celtic  smith  was 
about  to  add  it  to  the  roof  of  a  cottage,  which  he  was 
making  of  boulders  and  turf.  It  was  about  to  share 
the  fate  of  many  popular  tales,  and  become  a  part  of 
something  else.  It  may  be  recognised  as  an  American 
production  hereafter,  and  its  history  is  deeply  marked 
on  it,  though  if  forms  part  of  a  house  by  this  time. 
So  a  genuine  popular  tale  may  be  recognised  in  a  play 
or  a  romance. 

Another  such  tree  I  saw  in  Benbecula,  with  bark 
still  on  the  roots,  and  close  to  it  lay  a  squared  log,  and 
near  that  a  mast  with  white  paint  and  iron  bindings, 
blocks  and  crosstrees,  still  attached  to  it.  A  few 
miles  off  was  a  stranded  ship,  with  her  cargo  and 
fittings,  a  wreck  about  to  be  sold,  and  turned  to  any 
use  that  the  new  owners  might  think  fit.  All  these 
were  about  to  be  changed,  and  as  it  was  with  drift- 
wood in  the  Highlands,  so,  as  I  imagine,  it  has  been 
with  popular  tales  everywhere.  They  are  as  old  as 
the  races  who  tell  them,  but  the  original  ideas,  like 


INTRODUCTION.  XI 

the  trees  from  which  logs,  masts,  and  ships  are  made, 
have  been  broken  up,  cut,  carved,  and  ornamented — 
lost  and  found — wrecked,  destroyed,  broken,  and  put 
together  again  ;  and  though  the  original  shape  is  hard 
to  find,  the  fragments  may  be  recognized  in  books,  and 
wherever  else  they  may  now  be  found. 

But  as  there  are  quiet  spots  in  the  world  where 
drift-wood  accumulates  undisturbed,  so  there  are  quiet 
spots  where  popular  tales  flourish  in  peace,  because  no 
man  has  interfered  with  them.  In  Spitzbergen,  accord- 
ing to  the  accounts  given  me  by  Norwegian  bear 
hunters  and  adventurous  English  nobles,  trees,  such  as 
those  occasionally  found  in  Scotland,  are  piled  in  heaps. 
Trees,  logs,  broken  spars,  and  wreck,  gather  and  bleach 
and  decay  together,  because  there  are  no  men  on  that 
wild  shore  to  use  them.  So  in  the  islands  where  the 
western  "wanderers,"  "Albanich,"  settled  down,  and 
where  they  have  remained  for  centuries,  old  men  and 
women  are  still  found  who  have  hardly  stirred  from 
their  native  islands,  who  speak  only  Gaelic,  and  cannot 
read  or  write,  and  yet  their  minds  are  filled  with  a 
mass  of  popular  lore,  as  various  as  the  wreck  piled  on 
the  shores  of  Spitzbergen.  If  such  as  these  get  hold  of 
the  contents  of  a  story  book,  they  seem  unconsciously  to 
extract  the  incidents,  and  reject  all  the  rest, — to  select 
the  true  wood,  and  throw  away  foreign  ornament,  just 
as  they  chip  off  the  paint  of  a  stranded  mast,  or  scrape 
the  sea-weed  off  a  log  when  they  build  it  into  a  roof. 
I  have  given  one  specimen  of  a  story,  which  I  believe 
to  be  derived  from  the  "Arabian  Nights,"  though  it  is 
quite  impossible  that  the  man  who  told  it  to  Hector 
MacLean,  and  who  told  it  to  me  also,  in  nearly  the 
same  words,  can  have  got  it  directly  from  any  book ; 


Xll  INTRODUCTION. 

for  he  cannot  read  at  all,  and  he  does  not  understand 
English. 

I  have  found  very  little  notice  of  these  West  High- 
land prose  tales  in  books,  but  they  are  referred  to.  In 
1703,  Martin  says  that  his  countrymen  then  told  long 
tales  about  Fin  MacCoul,  but  he  adds  that  he  will  not 
trouble  the  reader  with  them. 

In  1780,  Dr.  Smith,  in  his  book  on  Gaelic  poetry, 
says,  that  prosaic  tales  should  be  preserved  in  the  same 
manner  may  seem  strange,  but  so  it  is.  He  condemns 
the  "  urskels "  as  "  later  tales,"  unworthy  of  notice, 
probably  because  they  were  different  from  the  poetry 
of  which  he  collected  so  much. 

Gaelic  dictionaries  mention  "  legends "  as  sources 
from  which  words  have  been  taken.  Amongst  the 
Gaelic  MSS.  now  in  the  Advocates'  Library,  there  are 
several  which  contain  tales  similar  to  those  now  told 
in  the  Highlands.  One  passage  about  the  sailing  of  a 
boat,  which  I  have  got,  with  variations,  from  a  great 
many  people  living  in  various  parts  of  the  Highlands, 
I  find  in  a  MS.  which  was  lent  to  me  by  the  secre- 
tary of  the  Celtic  Society  of  London.  It  is  dated 
23d  December  1808,  signed  Alexander  Stewart,  A.M., 
and  marked,  Poems  of  Ossian.  It  contains  7721  lines 
of  Gaelic,  mostly  poetry,  which  by  the  references  seem 
to  have  been  copied  from  something  else.  The  passage 
to  which  I  refer,  occurs  in  a  "Fragment  of  a  Tale," 
p.  17,  which  occupies  thirty-seven  folio  pages,  and  treats 
of  carrying  off  a  lady  from  an  island,  and  her  recovery 
by  her  husband. 

Dr.  MacLeod,  the  best  of  living  Gaelic  scholars, 
printed  one  old  tale,  somewhat  altered,  with  a  moral 
added,  in  his  "Leabhar  nan  Cnoc,"  in  1834,  but  even 


INTRODUCTION.  Xlll 

his  efforts  to  persevere  and  use  this  old  lore  were  un- 
successful. 

Those,  then,  who  understood  Gaelic,  thought  popular 
tales  unworthy  of  notice ;  those  who  did  not  under- 
stand Gaelic,  could  know  nothing  about  them  ;  and 
there  are  many  now  living  in  the  Highlands,  who 
speak  Gaelic  and  yet  believed,  till  they  searched  at  my 
request,  that  stories  had  become  extinct  in  their  dis- 
tricts. One  good  Highlander,  who  has  helped  me 
much,  Mr.  James  Robertson,  living  at  Inveraray,  so 
believed,  till  he  heard  his  own  nursemaid  repeat  No.  17, 
and  a  neighbouring  fisherman  tell  No.  6.  In  the 
Highlands,  as  elsewhere,  society  is  arranged  in  layers, 
like  the  climates  of  the  world.  The  dweller  on  an 
Indian  plain  little  dreams  that  there  is  a  region  of 
perpetual  frost  in  the  air  above  him  ;  the  Esquimaux 
does  not  suspect  the  slumbering  volcano  under  his 
feet ;  and  the  dwellers  in  the  upper  and  lower  strata 
of  society,  everywhere,  know  as  little  of  each  other's 
ways  of  life  as  the  men  of  the  plain  know  of  the  moun- 
taineers in  the  snow. 

Highland  stories  then,  have  been  despised  by  edu- 
cated men,  and  they  are  as  yet  unchanged  popular 
tales.  It  so  happened  that  a  piper  was  the  instructor 
of  my  babyhood.  He  was  a  stalwart,  kindly,  gentle 
man,  whose  face  is  often  before  me,  though  he  has 
long  since  gone  to  his  rest.  From  him  I  first  heard  a 
few  of  the  tales  in  this  collection.  They  had  almost 
faded  from  my  memory,  but  I  remembered  their  exist- 
ence, and  I  knew  where  to  search,  so  I  began  at  the 
beginning  of  1859  by  writing  to  my  Highland  friends, 
of  all  degrees,  for  stories  of  all  kinds,  true  stories 
excepted  ;  and  here  let  me  thank  them  cordially  for  the 


xiv  INTRODUCTION. 

trouble  which  they  have  taken,  for  they  are  too  numer- 
ous to  thank  in  detail. 

I  begged  for  the  very  words  used  by  the  people 
who  told  the  stories,  with  nothing  added,  or  omitted, 
or  altered.  Those  who  could  wrote  Gaelic,  those 
who  could  not  did  their  best  in  English, — translated,  at 
first  or  second-hand,  from  Gaelic ;  and  when  I  had 
so  gathered  many  versions  of  a  story,  I  thought  I 
might  safely  conclude  that  it  had  been  known  in  the 
country  for  many  years,  and  was  essentially  a  popular 
tale. 

My  next  step  was  to  go  at  Easter  to  a  Highland 
district,  near  the  lowlands,  where  a  gamekeeper  had 
marked  down  a  lot  of  tale-tellers,  and  I  was  soon 
convinced  that  there  was  plenty  of  game,  though  hard 
to  get. 

This  difficulty  may  be  worth  some  explanation,  for  it 
exists  elsewhere,  and  bears  on  the  collection  of  tales 
everywhere.  Highland  peasants  and  fishermen,  especi- 
ally those  dwelling  near  the  lowlands,  are  shy  and  proud, 
and  even  more  peculiarly  sensitive  to  ridicule  than 
peasants  elsewhere.  Many  have  a  lurking  belief  in  the 
truth  of  the  stories  which  they  tell,  and  a  rooted  con- 
viction that  any  one  with  a  better  education  will  laugh 
at  the  belief,  and  the  story,  and  the  narrator  and  his 
language,  if  he  should  be  weak  enough  to  venture  on 
English,  and  betray  his  knowledge  of  Sgeultachd  and 
his  creed.  He  cannot  imagine  that  any  one  out  of  his 
own  class  can  possibly  be  amused  by  his  frivolous 
pastimes.  No  one  ever  has  hitherto.  He  sees  every 
year  a  summer  flood  of  tourists  of  all  nations  pouring 
through  his  lochs  and  glens,  but  he  knows  as  little  of 
them  as  they  know  of  him.  The  shoals  of  herrings  that 
enter  Loch  Fyne  know  as  much  of  the  dun  deer  on  the 


INTRODUCTION.  XV 

hill-side,  as  Londoners  and  Highland  peasants  know  of 
each  other.  Each  gets  an  occasional  peep  at  the  other 
as  the  deer  may  see  the  herrings  capering  in  the  loch — 
each  affects  the  other  slowly  but  surely,  as  the  herrings 
do  drive  away  the  wild  deer  by  attracting  men  to  catch 
them;  but  the  want  of  a  common  language  here  as  else- 
where, keeps  Highlands  and  Lowlands,  Celt  and  Saxon, 
as  clearly  separate  as  oil  and  water  in  the  same  glass. 

The  first  step,  then,  towards  the  acquisition  of  a 
story  is  to  establish  confidence.  It  may  be  that  the 
would-be  collector  sees  before  him  a  strapping  lad 
dressed  in  the  garb  of  a  west  country  fisherman — a 
rough  blue  bonnet,  jacket,  and  trousers.  He  steps  out 
and  ranges  up  alongside.  The  Highlander  glances  from 
under  his  bushy  eyebrows,  and  sees  with  his  sharp  grey 
eyes  that  the  new  comer  is  a  stranger.  He  looks  rather 
like  a  Saxon ;  Highland  curiosity  is  strong,  and  he  longs 
to  ask  whence  he  comes;  but  politeness  is  stronger, 
and  it  would  be  uncivil  to  begin  questioning  at  once. 
So  with  a  nervous  kick  of  one  foot,  and  a  quick  shy 
glance,  tl?e  fisherman  jerks  out,  "  It's  a  fine  day." 
"  Tha  n7  latha  briagh  "  (the  day  is  fine),  replies  the 
stranger ;  and  as  he  speaks,  the  whole  face  and  manner 
of  his  companion  change  as  if  by  magic ;  doubt  and 
hesitation,  suspicion  and  curiosity,  become  simple  won- 
der ;  his  eyes  and  his  heart  open  wide  at  the  sound  of 
his  native  tongue,  and  he  exclaims,  "You  have  Gaelic! 
You  will  take  my  excuse  by  your  leave,  but  what  part 
of  the  Gaeldom  are  you  from  ? "  And  then  having 
found  out  all  that  is  to  be  discovered,  the  ice  being 
broken,  and  confidence  established,  it  oozes  out  gradu- 
ally that  the  fisherman  knows  a  story,  and  after  much 
persuasion  he  tells  it,  while  he  rows  the  gentleman  who 
can  talk  Gaelic  across  a  Highland  loch.     At  parting,  he 


xvi  INTRODUCTION. 

adds  that  he  has  only  told  it  to  please  a  "Gael,"  and 
that  he  would  not  have  said  one  word  to  a  Gall 
(stranger).  But  the  man  who  is  fluent  in  his  boat,  is 
shy  and  backward  when  set  down  to  repeat  his  story 
for  transcribing,  and  it  is  only  when  set  with  one  of 
his  neighbours  whom  he  knows,  that  his  story  is  got  on 
paper. 

Or  it  may  be  an  old  dame  in  a  tall  white  mutch 
with  a  broad  black  silk  band,  a  red  cloak,  and  clean 
white  apron.  She  is  70,  and  can  walk  ten  miles ; 
she  has  known  all  the  neighbouring  families  for 
generations.  If  you  can  claim  cousinship  with  any, 
she  is  your  friend ;  but  she  will  praise  the  ancestors 
and  tell  of  the  adventures  of  Rob  Roy  the  Gregorach, 
the  last  of  the  freebooters.  "  But,  Mary,  can  you  say 
Murachag  and  Mionachag  I n  "  Huch  !  my  dear,  that 
is  an  ursgeul  that  is  nonsense.  The  Good  Being  bless 
you,  I  knew  your  grandmother,"  etc.,  etc.  So  one  must 
rest  contented  with  the  fact,  that  old  Mary  knows  one 
tale,  and  probably  many  more,  which  a  week's  per- 
suasion might  perhaps  extract. 

Or  it  may  be  a  pretty  lass,  whose  eye  twinkles  with 
intelligence  at  every  catch-word,  thrown  out  as  a  bait, 
but  whom  nothing  will  induce  to  confess  that  she 
knows  the  foolish  tales  which  the  minister  has  con- 
demned. 

Or  it  is  an  old  wandering  vagabond  of  a  tinker,  who 
has  no  roof  but  the  tattered  covering  of  his  tent.  He 
has  pitched  it  in  a  quarry  under  a  giant  fir,  the  knarled 
roots,  half  bare,  hardly  support  the  tree  on  the  edge  of 
a  red  clay  bank,  and  form  a  kind  of  hollow,  a  "  cos,"  in 
which  the  tinker  and  his  tribe  have  nestled  at  odd  times 
for  years.  A  thin  blue  smoke  is  curling  amongst  the 
blackened  roots,  and  winding  itself  about  the  noble  tree. 


INTRODUCTION.  XV11 

A  stately  mansion  and  a  wide  domain,  and  a  blue 
highland  loch,  with  a  shoal  of  brown  herring  boats,  can 
be  seen  through  the  wood  from  the  door  of  the  tinker's 
tent ;  and  there  he  lies,  an  old  man  past  eighty,  who 
has  been  a  soldier,  and  "  has  never  seen  a  school  "  ;  too 
proud  to  beg,  too  old  to  work ;  surrounded  by  boxes 
and  horn  spoons,  with  shaggy  hair  and  naked  feet,  as 
perfect  a  nomad  as  the  wildest  Lapp  or  Arab  in  the 
whole  world.  It  is  easy  to  make  friends  with  such 
men.  A  kind  word  in  their  native  language  is  all  that 
is  required,  but  to  get  their  stories  is  another  affair. 
"  Donald,  did  you  ever  see  the  like  of  this  ? "  Up 
starts  the  old  man  on  his  elbow, — "  Och !  och  !  that's  a 
fairy  arrow,  I  have  seen  that ;  och  !  och  !  no  fairy  arrow 
will  ever  hit  the  man  who  has  that — no  fire  will  ever 
burn  the  house  where  that  is.  That's  lucky,  well ! 
well !  "  and  the  old  man  sinks  down  on  his  bed  of  fern. 
But  the  elf  shot  has  hit  the  mark,  and  started  a  train  of 
thought,  which  leads  at  last  to  a  wild  weird  story  ;  but 
before  that  story  can  be  written,  the  whole  tribe  decamp, 
and  are  lost  for  a  time. 

The  first  difficulty,  then,  was  the  nature  of  the 
people  who  knew  the  stories ;  and  the  second,  the  want 
of  men  able  and  willing  to  write  Gaelic.  It  was  easy 
to  write  English  versions  of  tales  heard  in  Gaelic,  but 
I  wanted  the  Gaelic  as  it  was  told,  and  I  had  neither 
time  nor  ability  to  write  it  down  myself.  I  therefore 
sought  out  two  men  on  whom  I  could  rely,  to  collect 
and  write  for  me,  and  the  largest  share  of  this  book 
has  been  collected  and  written  by  them.  One  is  Mr. 
Hector  Urquhart,  gamekeeper  at  Ardkinglas  on  Loch 
Fyne  ;  the  other,  Mr.  Hector  MacLean,  schoolmaster 
at  Ballygrant  in  Islay,  who  has  superintended  the  print- 
ing of  the  Gaelic.     They  entered  into  the  spirit  of  the 

B 


XV111  INTRODUCTION. 

work  at  once,  and  they  have  executed  their  share  of 
it  with  the  greatest  fidelity.  But  while  these  are  my 
chief  aids,  I  am  largely  indebted  to  many  others  for 
written  Gaelic;  for  example,  to  one  of  my  earliest 
friends,  Mrs.  MacTavish ;  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  MacLauchlan 
of  Edinburgh ;  to  Alexander  Eraser,  Esq.,  of  Mauld, 
near  Beauly  ;  to  many  of  the  schoolmasters  on  the 
estate  of  Sir  Kenneth  MacKenzie ;  to  Mr.  Donald 
Torrie,  Benbecula ;  and  to  many  others,  including  John 
Dewar,  a  self-educated  man  of  advanced  age,  whose 
contribution  does  him  the  greatest  credit. 

The  next  step  was  to  spend  a  summer  holiday  in 
studying  the  actual  condition  of  this  popular  lore, 
where  I  had  found  that  it  existed  in  the  greatest  pro- 
fusion. I  landed  at  Lochmaddy  in  North  Uist,  and 
walked  with  a  knapsack  to  the  sound  of  Barra,  and 
back  to  Stornoway ;  crossing  the  sound  of  Harris  in  a 
fishing  boat.  I  found  a  population  differing  from  that 
of  the  mainland,  perhaps  the  least  changed  from  their 
old  ways  of  any  people  in  the  kingdom.  Gaelic  is 
their  usual,  often  their  only  language.  Every  English 
word  which  has  crept  in  has  a  Gaelic  head  and  tail. 
Many,  I  know  not  how  many,  "have  no  English"  at  all, 
and  have  never  been  taught  to  read.  In  many  islands 
the  people  are  living  undisturbed,  where  their  ancestors 
have  lived  time  out  of  mind.  They  are  a  small,  active, 
intelligent  race,  with  dark  hair  and  eyelashes,  and  grey 
eyes;  quick,  clever,  and  pugnacious.  I  had  expected 
to  find  traces  of  Norwegian  occupation  in  the  people 
and  their  language.  I  watched  carefully  for  Norwegian 
words  and  features ;  and  I  found  the  people  a  complete 
contrast  to  Norwegian  peasants,  whom  I  know  well, 
who  are  large,  bony,  light-haired  fair  men,  sagacious 
rather  than  quick ;  and  generally  slow  to  anger. 


INTRODUCTION.  xix 

I  could  find  nothing  Scandinavian,  except  certain 
names  of  places,  and  certain  ruins,  which  it  is  the 
fashion  to  attribute  to  the  Lochliners.  Even  the  houses 
and  the  old  agricultural  implements,  where  they  are 
still  used,  are  peculiar.  For  example,  the  old  crooked 
spade  still  used  in  islands  in  the  sound  of  Barra,  and 
elsewhere,  has  no  resemblance  to  any  agricultural  imple- 
ment that  I  have  ever  seen  anywhere  out  of  the  West 
Highlands.  It  is  in  fact  a  foot  plough  used  with- 
out horses.  It  is  remarkable  that  a  steam  plough 
should  be  at  work  at  the  same  time,  on  the  east  coast 
of  Cromarty  at  Tarbert.  Every  horse  I  met  on  the 
road  stopped  of  his  own  accord.  Every  man  asked  my 
news,  "  whence  I  took  the  walking,"  where  I  lived,  and 
why  I  came  ?  Saddles  were  often  sacks,  stirrups  a 
loop  of  twisted  bent,  bridles  the  same,  and  bits  occa- 
sionally wood.  Dresses  were  coarse,  but  good ;  but 
there  was  an  air  of  kindly  politeness  over  all,  that  is 
not  to  be  found  in  homespun  dresses  in  any  other 
country  that  I  know.  When  I  was  questioned,  I 
answered,  and  told  my  errand,  and  prospered.  "  I 
was  not  a  drover  come  to  buy  cattle  at  the  fair ;  " 
"Neither  was  I  a  merchant  though  I  carried  a  pack." 
"  I  was  the  gentleman  who  was  after  Sgialachdan." 
My  collector  had  made  my  name  known.  I  spoke 
Gaelic,  and  answered  questions.  I  am  one  of  themselves, 
so  I  got  on  famously. 

Men  and  women  of  all  ages  could  and  did  tell  me 
stories,  children  of  all  sizes  listened  to  them  ;  and  it 
was  self-evident  that  people  generally  knew  and  en- 
joyed them.  Elsewhere  I  had  been  told,  that  thirty 
or  forty  years  ago,  men  used  to  congregate  and  tell 
stories  ;  here,  I  was  told,  that  they  now  spend  whole 
winter  nights  about  the  fire  listening  to  these  old  world 


XX  INTRODUCTION. 

tales.  The  clergy,  in  some  places,  had  condemned 
the  practice,  and  there  it  had  fallen  into  disuse  ;  stories 
seemed  to  be  almost  exterminated  in  some  islands, 
though  I  believe  they  were  only  buried  alive ;  but  in 
other  places  this  harmless  amusement  is  not  forbidden  ; 
and  there,  in  every  cluster  of  houses,  is  some  one  man 
famed  as  "good  at  sgialachdan,"  whose  house  is  a 
winter  evening's  resort.  I  visited  these,  and  listened, 
often  with  wonder,  at  the  extraordinary  power  of 
memory  shown  by  untaught  old  men. 

It  is  perhaps  beyond  the  province  of  a  mere  col- 
lector of  old  tales  to  be  serious ;  but  surely  Gaelic 
books  containing  sound  information  would  be  a  vast 
boon  to  such  a  people.  The  young  would  read  them, 
and  the  old  would  understand  them.  All  would  take 
a  warmer  interest  in  Canada  and  Australia,  where 
strong  arms  and  bold  spirits  are  wanted,  if  they  knew 
what  these  countries  really  are.  If  they  heard  more  of 
European  battles,  and  knew  what  a  ship  of  war  is  now, 
there  would  be  more  soldiers  and  sailors  from  the  Isles 
in  the  service  of  their  country,  At  all  events,  the  old 
spirit  of  popular  romance  is  surely  not  an  evil  spirit  to 
be  exercised,  but  rather  a  good  genius  to  be  controlled 
and  directed.  Surely  stories  in  which  a  mother's 
blessing,  well  earned,  leads  to  success ;  in  which  the 
poor  rise  to  be  princes,  and  the  weak  and  courageous 
overcome  giants ;  in  which  wisdom  excels  brute  force, — 
surely  even  such  frivolities  are  better  pastime  than  a 
solitary  whisky  bottle,  or  sleep,  or  grim  silence ;  for 
that  seems  the  choice  of  amusements  if  tales  are  for- 
bidden and  Gaelic  books  are  not  provided  for  men 
who  know  no  other  language ;  and  who,  as  men,  must 
be  amused  now  and  then. 

I  have  never  heard  a  story,  whose  point  was  ob- 


INTRODUCTION.  XXI 

scenity,  publicly  told  in  a  Highland  cottage ;  and  I 
believe  that  such  are  rare.  I  have  heard  them  where 
the  rough  polish  of  more  modern  ways  has  replaced 
the  polished  roughness  of  "  wild "  Highlanders  ;  and 
that  where  even  the  bagpipes  have  been  almost 
abolished  as  profane. 

I  have  heard  the  music  of  the  "  Cider  Cellars  "  in  a 
parlour,  even  in  polished  England,  when  I  had  failed 
to  extract  anything  else  from  a  group  of  comfortably- 
dressed  villagers.  A  half-polished  human  gem  is  but 
a  spoiled  crystal  anywhere ;  and  I  prefer  the  rough 
diamond  or  the  finished  jewel. 

But  this  is  foreign  to  my  work ;  my  visits  were  to 
the  tellers  of  old  stories,  and  had  nothing  to  do  with 
political  economy  and  public  morals.  I  paid  my 
visits,  and  heard  the  stories  ;  and  a  goodly  audience 
often  gathered  to  share  the  treat,  and  all  seemed  mar- 
vellously to  enjoy  it.  If  there  was  an  occasional  coarse 
word  spoken,  it  was  not  coarsely  meant. 

Let  me  describe  one  of  these  old  story  men  as  a 
type  of  his  kind.  I  trust  he  will  not  be  offended,  for 
he  was  very  polite  to  me.  His  name  is  MacPhie  j  he 
lives  at  the  north  end  of  South  Uist,  where  the  road 
ends  at  a  sound,  which  has  to  be  forded  at  the  ebb  to 
get  to  Benbecula.  The  house  is  built  of  a  double  wall 
of  loose  boulders,  with  a  layer  of  peat  three  feet  thick 
between  the  walls.  The  ends  are  round,  and  the  roof 
rests  on  the  inner  wall,  leaving  room  for  a  crop  of  yellow 
gowans.  A  man  might  walk  round  the  roof  on  the  top 
of  the  wall.  There  is  but  one  room,  with  two  low  doors, 
one  on  each  side  of  the  house.  The  fire  is  on  the  floor ; 
the  chimney  is  a  hole  above  it ;  and  the  rafters  are 
hung  with  pendants  and  festoons  of  shining  black  peat 
reek.     They  are  of  birch  from  the  mainland,  American 


XX11  INTRODUCTION. 

drift  wood,  or  broken  wreck.  They  support  a  cover- 
ing of  turf  and  straw,  and  stones,  and  heather  ropes, 
which  keep  out  the  rain  well  enough. 

The  house  stands  on  a  green  bank,  with  grey  rocks 
protruding  through  the  turf;  and  the  whole  neigh- 
bourhood is  pervaded  by  cockle  shells,  which  indicate 
the  food  of  the  people  and  their  fishing  pursuits.  In 
a  neighbouring  kiln  there  were  many  cart-loads  about 
to  be  burned,  to  make  that  lime  which  is  so  durable  in 
the  old  castles.  The  owner  of  the  house,  whom  I 
visited  twice,  is  seventy-nine.  He  told  me  nine 
stories,  and  like  all  the  others,  declared  that  there 
was  no  man  in  the  islands  who  knew  them  so  well. 
11  He  could  not  say  how  many  he  knew ; "  he  seemed 
to  know  versions  of  nearly  everything  I  had  got ;  and 
he  told  me  plainly  that  my  versions  were  good  for 
nothing.  "  Huch !  Thou  hast  not  got  them  right  at 
all."  ''They  came  into  his  mind,"  he  said,  "sometimes 
at  night  when  he  could  not  sleep, — old  tales  that  he 
had  not  heard  for  threescore  years." 

He  had  the  manner  of  a  practised  narrator,  and  it 
is  quite  evident  he  is  one ;  he  chuckled  at  the 
interesting  parts,  and  laid  his  withered  finger  on  my 
knee  as  he  gave  out  the  terrible  bits  with  due 
solemnity.  A  small  boy  in  a  kilt,  with  large  round 
glittering  eyes,  was  standing  mute  at  his  knee,  gazing 
at  his  wrinkled  face,  and  devouring  every  word. 
The  boy's  mother  first  boiled,  and  then  mashed, 
potatoes  ;  and  his  father,  a  well  grown  man  in  tartan 
breeks,  ate  them.  Ducks  and  ducklings,  a  cat  and  a 
kitten,  some  hens  and  a  baby,  all  tumbled  about  on  the 
clay  floor  together,  and  expressed  their  delight  at  the 
savoury  prospect,  each  in  his  own  fashion ;  and  three 
wayfarers   dropped   in   and   listened   for  a  spell,  and 


INTRODUCTION.  XX111 

passed  their  remarks  till  the  ford  was  shallow.  The 
light  came  streaming  down  the  chimney,  and  through 
a  single  pane  of  glass,  lighting  up  a  tract  in  the  blue 
mist  of  the  peat  smoke,  and  fell  on  the  white  hair 
and  brown  withered  face  of  the  old  man,  as  he  sat  on 
a  low  stool  with  his  feet  to  the  fire ;  and  the  rest  of 
the  dwelling,  with  all  its  plenishing  of  boxes  and  box- 
beds,  dishes  and  dresser,  and  gear  of  all  sorts,  faded 
away  through  shades  of  deepening  brown,  to  the  black 
darkness  of  the  smoked  roof  and  the  "peat  corner." 
There  we  sat,  and  smoked  and  talked  for  hours,  till 
the  tide  ebbed  ;  and  then  I  crossed  the  ford  by  wading 
up  to  the  waist,  and  dried  my  clothes  in  the  wind  in 
Benbecula. 

Another  man  of  the  same  stamp,  Patrick  Smith, 
lives  near  the  sound  of  Barra j  and  a  third,  "Donald 
MacDonald  MacCharles  Maclntyre,"  in  Benbecula ; 
and  I  heard  of  plenty  more,  whom  I  had  not  time  to 
visit.  I  found  them  to  be  men  with  clear  heads  and 
wonderful  memories,  generally  very  poor  and  old,  living 
in  remote  corners  of  remote  islands,  and  speaking  only 
Gaelic  •  in  short,  those  who  have  lived  most  at  home, 
furthest  from  the  world,  and  who  have  no  source  of  men- 
tal relaxation  beyond  themselves  and  their  neighbours. 

At  Gearrloch  on  the  mainland,  some  old  namesakes 
of  mine  are  of  the  same  stamp,  but  in  these  regions  the 
schoolmaster  has  made  himself  at  home.  Tales  have 
been  forbidden,  but  other  lore  has  been  provided. 
There  are  many  well  attended  English  schools,  so  old 
men  have  access  to  books  and  newspapers  through  their 
children.  Tradition  is  out  of  fashion  and  books  are 
in. 

Farther  east  stories  are  still  rarer,  and  seem  to  be 
told  rather  by  women  than  by  men.    The  long  romances 


XXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

of  the  west  give  place  to  stories  about  ghosts  and 
fairies,  apparitions,  and  dreams — stories  which  would 
be  told  in  a  few  words,  if  at  all,  in  the  islands.  Fairy 
belief  is  becoming  a  fairy  tale.  In  another  generation 
it  will  grow  into  a  romance,  as  it  has  in  the  hands  of 
poets  elsewhere,  and  then  the  whole  will  either  be 
forgotten  or  carried  from  people  who  must  work  to 
"gentles"  who  can  afford  to  be  idle  and  read  books. 
Railways,  roads,  newspapers,  and  tourists,  are  slowly 
but  surely  doing  their  accustomed  work.  They  are 
driving  out  romance ;  but  they  are  not  driving  out  the 
popular  creed  as  to  supernaturals.  That  creed  will 
survive  when  the  last  remnant  of  romance  has  been 
banished,  for  superstition  seems  to  belong  to  no  one 
period  in  the  history  of  civilization,  but  to  all.  It  is  as 
rife  in  towns  as  it  is  amongst  the  hills,  and  is  not 
confined  to  the  ignorant. 

I  have  wandered  amongst  the  peasantry  of  many 
countries,  and  this  trip  but  confirmed  my  old  impres- 
sion. There  are  few  peasants  that  I  think  so  highly  of, 
none  that  I  like  so  well.  Scotch  Highlanders  have 
faults  in  plenty,  but  they  have  the  bearing  of  Nature's 
own  gentlemen — the  delicate,  natural  tact  which  dis- 
covers, and  the  good  taste  which  avoids,  all  that  would 
hurt  or  offend  a  guest.  The  poorest  is  ever  the  readiest 
to  share  the  best  he  has  with  the  stranger.  A  kind 
word  kindly  meant  is  never  thrown  away,  and  whatever 
may  be  the  faults  of  this  people,  I  have  never  found  a 
boor  or  a  churl  in  a  Highland  bothy. 

Celts  have  played  their  part  in  history,  and  they  have 
a  part  to  play  still  in  Canada  and  Australia,  where  their 
language  and  character  will  leave  a  trace,  if  they  do  not 
influence  the  destiny  of  these  new  worlds.  There  are 
hundreds  in  those  distant  lands  whose  language  is  still 


INTRODUCTION.  XXV 

Gaelic,  and  to  whom  these  stories  are  familiar,  and 
if  this  book  should  ever  remind  any  of  them  of  the 
old  country,  I  shall  not  have  worked  in  vain  in  the 
land  which  they  call  "  Tir  nam  Beann,  's  nan  Gleann,  s 
nan  Gaisgeach."  * 

So  much,  then,  for  the  manner  of  collecting  the  tales, 
and  the  people  who  told  them.  The  popular  lore  which 
I  found  current  in  the  west,  and  known  all  over  the 
Highlands  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  amongst  the  poorer 
classes,  consists  of  : — 

1st.  That  which  is  called  Seanachas  na  Finne,   or  \ 
Feinnie,  or  Fiann,  that  is,  the  tradition  or  old  history  of 
the  Feene. 

This  is  now  the  rarest  of  any,  and  is  commonest, 
so  far  as  I  know,  in  Barra  and  South  Uist.  There  are 
first  fragments  of  poems  which  may  have  been  taken 
from  the  printed  book,  which  goes  by  the  name  of  the 
History  of  the  Finne  in  the  Highlands,  and  the  Poems 
of  Ossian  elsewhere.  I  never  asked  for  these,  but  I 
was  told  that  the  words  were  "  sharper  and  deeper  " 
than  those  in  the  printed  book. 

There  are,  secondly,  poetical  fragments  about  the 
same  persons,  which,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  are 
not  in  any  printed  book.  I  heard  some  of  these  re- 
peated by  three  different  men. 

Patrick  Smith,  in  South  Uist,  intoned  a  long  frag- 
ment ;  I  should  guess,  about  200  lines.  He  recited 
it  rapidly  to  a  kind  of  chant.  The  subject  was  a  fight 
with  a  Norway  witch,  and  Fionn,  Diarmaid,  Oscar  and 
Conan,  were  named  as  Irish  heroes.  There  were 
"  ships  fastened  with  silver  chains,  and  kings  holding 
them;5'  swords,  spears,  helmets,  shields,  and  battles, 
were  mentioned ;  in  short,  the  fragment  was  the  same 

*  The  land  of  Hills,  and  Glens,  and  Heroes. 


XXVI  INTRODUCTION. 

in  style  and  machinery  as  the  famous  Poems ;  and  it 
was  attributed  to  Ossian.  The  repetition  began  with 
a  short  prose  account  of  what  was  to  follow.  Smith  is 
sixty,  and  says  that  he  cannot  read.  He  does  not 
understand  English.  He  says  that  such  poems  used  to 
be  so  chanted  commonly  when  he  was  young.  The 
same  account  of  the  manner  of  reciting  similar  poems 
was  given  me  by  a  clergyman  in  Argyllshire,  who  said 
that,  within  his  recollection,  the  ■•  death  of  Cuchullin  " 
used  to  be  so  recited  by  an  old  man  at  the  head  of 
Loch  Awe. 

Donald  Macintyre,  in  Benbecula,  recited  a  similar 
fragment,  which  has  since  been  written  and  sent  to  me. 
The  subject  is  a  dialogue  between  a  lady  and  a  mes- 
senger returning  from  battle,  with  a  number  of  heads 
on  a  withy ;  the  lady  asks  their  story,  and  the  mes- 
senger tells  whose  heads  they  were,  and  how  the  heroes 
fell.  It  sounded  better  than  it  reads,  but  the  tran- 
scriber had  never  written  Gaelic  before. 

John  Campbell,  generally  known  as  "  Yellow  John," 
living  in  Strath  Gearrloch,  about  twelve  miles  west  of 
Flowerdale,  repeated  a  similar  fragment,  which  lasted 
for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  He  said  he  had  known  it  for 
half  a  century.  He  is  a  very  old  man,  and  it  is  diffi- 
cult to  follow  him,  and  the  poetry  was  mingled  with 
prose,  and  with  "  said  he,"  "  said  she."  It  was  the 
last  remnant  of  something  which  the  old  man  could 
only  remember  imperfectly,  and  which  he  gave  in 
broken  sentences  ;  but  here  again  the  combat  was  with 
a  Norway  witch,  and  the  scene,  Ireland.  Fionn,  Diar- 
maid  and  other  such  names  appeared.  Diarmaid  had 
"his  golden  helm  on  his  head;"  his  "two  spears  on 
his  shoulder  : "  his  "  narrow-pointed  shield  on  his  left 
arm  ; "  his  "  small  shield  on  his  right ; "  his  sword  was 


INTRODUCTION.  XXV11 

"  leafy,"  (?)  leaf-shaped.  And  the  old  man  believed 
that  Diarmaid,  the  Irish  hero,  was  his  ancestor,  and 
his  own  real  name  O'Duine.  He  spoke  of  "  his  chief 
MacCalain,"  and  treated  me  with  extra  kindness,  as  a 
kinsman.  "  Will  you  not  take  some  more  "  (milk  and 
potatoes).  "  Perhaps  we  may  never  see  each  other 
again.     Are  we  not  both  Campbells  1 " 

I  heard  of  other  men  who  could  repeat  such  poems, 
and  I  have  heard  of  such  men  all  my  life ;  but  as  I 
did  not  set  out  to  gather  poems,  I  took  no  trouble  to 
get  them. 

Two  chiefs,  I  think  one  was  MacLeod,  sent  their 
two  fools  to  gather  bait  on  the  shore ;  and  to  settle 
a  bet  which  fool  was  the  best,  they  strewed  gold  on 
the  path.  One  fool  stopped  to  gather  it,  but  the 
other  said,  "  When  we  are  at  '  golding,'  let  us  be 
1  golding,'  and  when  we  are  at  bait-making,  let  us  be 
bait-making,"  and  he  stuck  to  his  business.  My  busi- 
ness was  prose,  but  it  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  state 
my  own  opinion  about  the  Ossian  controversy,  for  I 
have  been  asked  more  than  once  if  I  had  found  any 
trace  of  such  poems. 

I  believe  that  there  were  poems  of  very  old  date, 
of  which  a  few  fragments  still  exist  in  Scotland  as  pure 
traditions.  That  these  related  to  Celtic  worthies  who 
were  popular  heroes  before  the  Celts  came  from  Ireland, 
and  answer  to  Arthur  and  his  knights  elsewhere. 
That  the  same  personages  have  figured  in  poems  com- 
posed, or  altered,  or  improved,  or  spoilt  by  bards  who 
lived  in  Scotland,  and  by  Irish  bards  of  all  periods ; 
and  that  these  personages  have  been  mythical  heroes 
amongst  Celts  from  the  earliest  of  times.  That  "  the 
poems"  were  orally  collected  by  Macpherson,  and 
by  men  before  him,  by  Dr.  Smith,  by  the  committee 


XXV111  INTRODUCTION. 

of  the  Highland  Society,  and  by  others,  and  that  the 
printed  Gaelic  is  old  poetry,  mended  and  patched,  and 
pieced  together,  and  altered,  but  on  the  whole  a 
genuine  work.  Manuscript  evidence  of  the  antiquity 
of  similar  Gaelic  poems  exists.  Some  were  printed 
in  1807,  under  the  authority  of  the  Highland  Society 
of  London,  with  a  Latin  translation,  notes,  etc.,  and 
were  reprinted  in  1818.  MacPherson's  "  transla- 
tion"  appeared  between  1760  and  1762,  and  the 
controversy  raged  from  the  beginning,  and  is  growl- 
ing still ;  but  the  dispute  now  is,  whether  the 
poems  were  originally  Scotch  or  Irish,  and  how  much 
MacPherson  altered  them.  It  is  like  the  quarrel 
about  the  chameleon,  for  the  languages  spoken  in  Islay 
and  Rathlin  are  identical,  and  the  language  of  the 
poems  is  difficult  for  me,  though  I  have  spoken 
Gaelic  from  my  childhood.  There  is  no  doubt  at 
all  that  Gaelic  poems  on  such  subjects  existed  long 
before  MacPherson  was  born ;  and  it  is  equally 
certain  that  there  is  no  composition  in  the  Gaelic 
language  which  bears  the  smallest  resemblance  in  style 
to  the  peculiar  kind  of  prose  in  which  it  pleased  Mac- 
Pherson to  translate.  The  poems  have  a  peculiar 
rhythm,  and  a  style  of  their  own  which  is  altogether 
lost  in  his  English  translation.  But  what  concerns  me 
is  the  popular  belief,  and  it  seems  to  be  this — "  Mac- 
Pherson must  have  been  a  very  dishonest  person  when 
he  allowed  himself  to  pass  as  the  author  of  Ossian's 
poems."  So  said  a  lady,  one  of  my  earliest  friends, 
whose  age  has  not  impaired  her  memory,  and  so  say 
those  who  are  best  informed,  and  understand  the 
language. 

The  illiterate  seem  to  have  no  opinion  on  the  sub- 
ject.    So  far  as  I  could  ascertain,  few  had  heard  of  the 


INTRODUCTION.  xxix 

controversy,  but  they  had  all  heard  scraps  of  poems 
and  stories  about  the  Finne,  all  their  lives ;  and  they 
are  content  to  believe  that  "  Ossian,  the  last  of  the 
Finne,"  composed  the  poems,  wrote  them,  and  burned 
his  book  in  a  pet,  when  he  was  old  and  blind,  because 
St.  Patrick,  or  St.  Paul,  or  some  other  saint,  would  not 
believe  his  wonderful  stories. 

Those  who  would  study  "  the  controversy,"  will  find 
plenty  of  discussion  ;  but  the  report  of  the  Highland 
Society  appears  to  settle  the  question  on  evidence.  I 
cannot  do  better  than  quote  from  Johnson's  Poets  the 
opinion  of  a  great  author,  who  was  a  great  translator, 
who,  in  speaking  of  his  own  work,  says  : — 

"  What  must  the  world  think  .  .  .  After  such  a  judgment 
passed  by  so  great  a  critick,  the  world  who  decides  so  often,  and 
who  examines  so  seldom  ;  the  world  who,  even  in  matters  of 
literature,  is  almost  always  the  slave  of  authority  ?  Who  will 
suspect  that  so  much  learning  should  mistake,  that  so  much 
accuracy  should  be  misled,  or  that  so  much  candour  should  be 
biassed  ?  .  .  .  I  think  that  no  translation  ought  to  be  the 
ground  of  criticism,   because  no  man  ought  to  be  condemned 

upon  another  man's  explanation  of   his   meaning " 

(Postscript  to  the  Odyssey,  Pope's  Homer,  Johnson's  Poets,  pp. 
279,  280). 

And  to  that  quotation  let  me  add  this  manuscript 
note,  which  I  found  in  a  copy  of  the  Report  of  the 
Highland  Society  on  the  poems  of  Ossian  ;  which  I 
purchased  in  December  1859  ;  and  which  came  from 
the  library  of  Colonel  Hamilton  Smith,  at  Plymouth. 

"The  Reverend  Dr.  Campbell,  of  Halfway  Tree,  Lisuana,  in 
Jamaica,  often  repeated  to  me  in  the  year  1709,  1801,  and  1802, 
parts  of  Ossian  in  Gaelic  ;  and  assured  me  that  he  had  possessed 
a  manuscript,  long  the  property  of  his  family,  in  which  Gaelic 
poems,  and  in  particular,  whole  pieces  of  Ossian 's  compositions 
were  contained.     This  he  took  out  with  him  on  his  first  voyage 


XXX  INTRODUCTION. 

to  the  West  Indies  in  1780,  when  his  ship  was  captured  by  a  boat 
from  the  Santissima  Trinidata,  flagship  of  the  whole  Spanish 
fleet ;  and  he,  together  with  all  the  other  passengers,  lost  nearly 
the  whole  of  their  baggage,  among  which  was  the  volume  in 
question.  In  1814,  when  I  was  on  the  staff  of  General  Sir 
Thomas  Graham,  now  Lord  Lyndoch,  I  understood  that  Mr. 
MacPherson  had  been  at  one  time  his  tutor  ;  and,  therefore,  I 
asked  his  opinion  respecting  the  authenticity  of  the  Poems.  His 
lordship  replied  that  he  never  had  any  doubts  on  the  subject,  he 
having  seen  in  Mr.  MacPherson's  possession  several  manuscripts 
in  the  Gaelic  language,  and  heard  him  speak  of  them  repeatedly ; 
he  told  me  some  stronger  particulars,  which  I  cannot  now  note 
down,  for  the  conversation  took  place  during  the  action  of  our 
winter  campaign. 

(Signed)        "Charles  Hamn.  Smith,  Lt.-Col." 

The  Colonel  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  great 
antiquary,  and  had  a  valuable  library.  James  Mac- 
Pherson, a  "modest  young  man,  who  was  master  of 
Greek  and  Latin,"  was  tl  procured  "  to  be  a  preceptor 
to  "the  boy  Tommy,"  who  was  afterwards  Lord  Lyn- 
doch (according  to  a  letter  in  a  book  printed  for 
private  circulation).  As  it  appears  to  me,  those  who 
are  ignorant  of  Gaelic,  and  now-a-days  maintain  that 
"  MacPherson  composed  Ossian's  Poems,"  are  like  critics 
who,  being  ignorant  of  Greek,  should  maintain  that 
Pope  wrote  the  Odyssey,  and  was  the  father  of  Homer; 
or,  being  ignorant  of  English,  should  declare  that 
Tennyson  was  the  father  of  King  Arthur  and  all  his 
knights,  because  he  has  published  one  of  many  poems 
which  treat  of  them.  It  was  different  when  High- 
landers were  "  rebels ; "  and  it  was  petty  treason  to 
deny  that  they  were  savages. 

A  glance  at  "Johnson's  Tour  in  the  Hebrides," 
will  show  the  feeling  of  the  day.  He  heard  Gaelic 
songs  in  plenty,  but  would  not  believe  in  Gaelic  poems. 
He  appreciated  the  kindness  and  hospitality  with  which 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXI 

he  was  treated ;  he  praised  the  politeness  of  all  ranks, 
and  yet  maintained  that  their  language  was  "  the  rude 
speech  of  a  barbarous  people,  who  had  few  thoughts  to 
express,  and  were  content,  as  they  conceived  grossly,  to 
be  grossly  understood." 

He  could  see  no  beauty  in  the  mountains  which  men 
now  flock  to  see.  He  saw  no  fish  in  fording  northern 
rivers,  and  explains  how  the  winter  torrents  sweep 
them  away ;  the  stags  were  "  perhaps  not  bigger  than 
our  fallow-deer ; "  the  waves  were  not  larger  than  those 
on  the  coast  of  Sussex ;  and  yet,  though  the  Doctor 
would  not  believe  in  Gaelic  poems,  he  did  believe  that 
peat  grew  as  it  was  cut,  and  that  the  vegetable  part  of 
it  probably  caused  a  glowing  redness  in  the  earth  of 
which  it  is  mainly  composed ;  and  he  came  away 
willing  to  believe  in  the  second  sight,  though  not 
quite  convinced. 

That  sturdy  old  Briton,  the  great  lexicographer,  who 
is  an  honour  to  his  country,  was  not  wholly  free  from 
national  prejudice;  he  erred  in  some  things;  he  may 
have  erred  in  a  matter  of  which  he  could  not  well 
judge ;  he  did  not  understand  Gaelic ;  he  did  not 
believe  in  traditions ;  he  would  not  believe  in  the 
translations ;  and  MacPherson  seems  to  have  ended 
by  encouraging  the  public  belief  that  he  was  the  author 
of  poems  which  had  gained  so  wide  a  celebrity. 

Matters  have  changed  for  the  better  since  those 
days ;  Celt  and  Saxon  are  no  longer  deadly  foes. 
There  still  exists,  as  I  am  informed,  an  anti-Celtic 
society,  whose  president,  on  state  occasions,  wears 
three  pairs  of  trousers ;  but  it  is  no  longer  penal  to 
dispense  with  these  garments ;  and  there  are  Southerns 
who  discard  them  altogether,  when  they  go  north  to 


XXX11  INTRODUCTION. 

pursue  the  little  stags  on  the  ugly  hills,  and  catch  fish 
in  the  torrents. 

There  are  Celtic  names  in  high  places,  in  India,  and 
at  home  j  and  an  English  Duke  is  turning  the  Gaelic  of 
Ossian's  poems  into  English  verse. 

This,  however,  is  foreign  to  my  subject,  though  it 
bears  somewhat  on  the  rest  of  the  traditions  of  the 
Finne.  I  have  stated  my  own  opinion  because  I  hold 
it,  not  because  I  wish  to  influence  those  who  differ 
from  me.  I  have  no  wish  to  stir  up  the  embers  of 
an  expiring  controversy,  which  was  besprinkled  with 
peculiarly  acrid  ink,  and  obscured  by  acid  fumes.  I 
neither  believe  that  MacPherson  composed  Ossian, 
nor  that  Ossian  composed  all  the  poems  which  bear 
his  name.  I  am  quite  content  to  believe  Ossian  to 
have  been  an  Irishman,  or  a  Scotsman,  or  a  myth, 
on  sufficient  evidence. 

Besides  these  few  remnants  of  poetry  which  still 
survive,  I  find  a  great  many  prose  tales  relating  to 
the  heroes  of  the  poems ;  and  as  these  personages 
certainly  were  popular  heroes  in  Ireland  and  in 
Scotland  centuries  ago,  I  give  what  I  have  gathered 
concerning  them,  with  the  conviction  that  it  is  purely 
Celtic  tradition.* 

The  Seannachas  of  the  Fine  consists,  then,  of  poetry 
already  printed ;  fragments  which  are  not  in  print, 
so  far  as  I  know,  and  which  are  now  very  rare  j  and 
prose  tales  which  are  tolerably  common,  but  rapidly 
disappearing. 

*See  page  256  of  "Scotland  in  the  Middle  Ages,"  by  Cosmo 
Innes,  Edmonston  and  Douglas,  1860,  for  evidence  taken  from 
"  The  fathers  of  our  Scotch  literature, "  and  the  Report  of  the 
Highland  Society. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXX111 

In  all  these,  according  to  tradition,  Fionn,  Diar- 
maid,  and  the  rest,  are  generally  represented  as  Irish 
worthies.  The  scene  is  often  laid  in  Ireland  j  but  there 
are  hundreds  of  places  in  Scotland  in  which  some  of 
the  exploits  are  said  to  have  been  performed.  I 
know  not  how  many  cairns  are  supposed  to  contain 
the  bones  of  the  wild  boar,  whose  bristles  wounded 
the  feet  of  Diarmaid  when  he  paced  his  length  against 
the  hair ;  Kyle  Reay,  in  Skye,  is  named  after  a  giant 
warrior  who  leaped  the  strait.  There  are  endless  moun- 
tains bearing  Ossianic  names  in  all  parts  of  Scotland, 
and  even  in  the  Isle  of  Man  the  same  names  are  to 
be  found  mixed  up  with  legends.  In  April  1860, 
I  met  a  peasant  near  Ramsey  who  knew  the  name  of 
Fin  MacCoul,  though  he  would  not  say  a  word  about 
him  to  me.  In  Train's  history  of  the  Island,  published 
by  Mary  Quiggin,  1845,  at  page  359,  is  this  note  : — 

"In  a  letter,  dated  20th  September,  1844,  from  a  highly  re- 
spected correspondent  in  the  Isle  of  Man,  he  says — 'Are  you 
aware  that  the  septennial  appearance  of  the  island,  said  to  be 
submerged  in  the  sea  by  enchantment  near  Port  Soderick,  is  ex- 
pected about  the  end  of  this  month  ? '  Though  the  spell  by  which 
this  fancified  island  has  been  bound  to  the  bottom  of  the  ocean 
since  the  days  of  the  great  Fin  MacCoul,  and  its  inhabitants  trans- 
formed in  blocks  of  granite,  might,  according  to  popular  belief, 
be  broke  by  placing  a  bible  on  any  part  of  the  enchanted  land 
when  at  its  original  altitude  above  the  waters  of  the  deep,  where 
it  is  permitted  to  remain  only  for  the  short  space  of  thirty 
minutes.  No  person  has  yet  had  the  hardihood  to  make  the 
attempt,  lest,  in  case  of  failure,  the  enchanter,  in  revenge,  might 
cast  his  club  over  Mona  also." 

And  in  Cregeen's  Manks  dictionary,  by  the  same  pub- 
lisher, 1835,  is  this  Manks  proverb — 

"  Ny  three  geayghn  s'  feayrey  dennee  Fion  M'Cooil, 
Geay  henneu,  as  geay  huill, 
As  geay  fo  ny  shiauill." 
C 


XXXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

Which  I  understand  to  mean — 

The  three  coldest  winds  that  came  to  Fion  M'Cooil, 
Wind  from  a  thaw,  wind  from  a  hole, 
And  wind  from  under  the  sails. 

In  short,  I  believe  that  the  heroes  of  Ossian  belong  to 
the  race,  not  to  any  one  set  of  poems,  or  to  any  single 
branch  of  the  Celtic  language. 

2d.  There  are  tales,  not  necessarily  about  the  Fin, 
consisting  partly  of  plain  narrative  and  dialogue,  which 
vary  with  every  narrator,  and  probably  more  or  less 
every  time  the  story  is  told ;  and  partly  of  a  kind  of 
measured  prose,  which  is  unlike  anything  I  know  in 
any  other  language.  I  suspect  that  these  have  been 
compositions  at  some  time,  but  at  what  time  I  cannot 
even  guess. 

These  almost  always  relate  to  Ireland  and  Scandi- 
navia ;  to  boats,  knights,  swords,  and  shields.  There 
are  adventures  under  ground,  much  battle,  generally  an 
island  with  fire  about  it  (perhaps  Iceland),  and  a  lady 
to  be  carried  off.  There  is  often  an  old  woman  who 
has  some  mysterious  vessel  of  balsam  which  brings  the 
dead  to  life,  and  a  despised  character  who  turns  out  to 
be  the  real  hero,  sometimes  a  boaster  who  is  held  up  to 
ridicule.  I  believe  these  to  be  bardic  recitations  fast 
disappearing  and  changing  into  prose  ;  for  the  older  the 
narrator  is,  the  less  educated,  and  the  farther  removed 
from  the  rest  of  the  world,  the  more  his  stories  are 
garnished  with  these  passages.  "  Fin  MacCumhal  goes 
go  Graffee,"  published  in  1857,  from  Mayo,  is  evidently 
a  translation  of  a  tale  of  this  kind.  In  all  these,  the 
scene  is  laid  in  Eirinn  and  Lochlan,  now  Ireland  and 
Scandinavia ;  and  these  would  seem  to  have  been 
border  countries.     Perhaps  the  stories  relate  to  the  time 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXV 

when  the  Scandinavians  occupied  part  of  the  Western 
Isles. 

3d.  There  is  popular  history  of  events  which  really 
happened  within  the  last  few  centuries  :  of  this,  I  have 
gathered  none,  but  I  heard  a  great  deal  in  a  very  short 
time,  and  I  have  heard  it  all  my  life.  It  is  a  history 
devoid  of  dates,  but  with  clear  starting  points.  The 
event  happened  at  the  time  of  Shamas  (James)  at  the 
battle  of  Shirra  Muir  j  at  Inverlochy  ;  after  Culloden. 
The  battle  was  between  MacNeill  and  MacLeod. 
MacLeod  came  from  that  castle.  They  met  on  that 
strand.  The  dead  are  buried  there.  Their  descendants 
now  live  in  such  a  place.  He  was  the  last  man 
hanged  in  Harris.  That  is  called  the  slab  of  lamenta- 
tion, from  which  the  MacLeans  embarked  for  Ireland 
when  the  MacDonalds  had  conquered  them,  and  taken 
the  land.  MacLean  exposed  his  wife  on  the  Lady 
Rock  because  she  had  made  his  servant  blow  up  one  of 
the  ships  of  the  Spanish  Armada,  for  jealousy  of  the 
Spanish  lady  who  was  on  board.  The  history  is 
minute  and  circumstantial,  and  might  be  very  interest- 
ing if  faithfully  collected,  but  it  is  rather  local  than 
national,  and  is  not  within  the  scope  of  my  work.  It 
is  by  far  the  most  abundant  popular  lore,  and  has  still 
a  great  hold  on  the  people.  The  decision  of  a  magis- 
trate in  a  late  case  of  "  Sapaid  "  (broken  heads)  was  very 
effective,  because  he  appealed  to  this  feeling.  It  was 
thus  described  to  me  :  "  Ah  !  he  gave  it  to  them.  He 
leant  back  in  his  chair,  and  spoke  grandly  for  half  an 
hour.  He  said  you  are  as  wild  men  fighting  together 
in  the  days  of  King  Shamas." 

4th.  There  are  tales  which  relate  to  men  and  women 
only,  and  to  events  that  might  have  happened  anywhere 
at  any  time.     They  might  possibly  be  true,  and  equally 


XXXVI  INTRODUCTION. 

true,  whether  the  incidents  happened  to  an  Eastern  sage 
or  a  wise  old  Highlander.  Such  tales  as  Nos.  19  and 
20.  These  are  plentiful,  and  their  characteristic  is 
sagacity  and  hidden  meaning. 

5th.  There  are  children's  tales,  of  which  some  are 
given.  They  are  in  poetry  and  prose  as  elsewhere,  and 
bear  a  general  resemblance  to  such  tales  all  over  the 
world.  The  cat  and  the  mouse  play  parts  in  the 
nursery  drama  of  the  Western  Isles,  as  well  as  in 
"  Contes  et  Apologues  Indiens  inconnus  jusqu'  a  ce 
jour,"  etc. ;  a  translation  into  French,  by  Mr.  Stanislaus 
Julien,  in  1860,  of  Chinese  books,  which  were  trans- 
lated into  that  language  from  Sanscrit  in  1565,  by  a 
Chinese  doctor,  and  President  of  the  Ministry  of 
Justice,  who  composed  "  The  Forest  of  Comparisons," 
in  twenty-four  volumes,  divided  into  20  classes,  and 
subdivided  into  508  sections,  after  twenty  years  of 
hard  labour,  during  which  he  abstracted  about  400 
works.  This  is  the  name  of  one  ;  Fo-choue-kiun-nieou- 
pi-king. 

Let  those  who  call  Gaelic  hard,  try  that ;  or  this  : 
Tchong-king-siouen-tsi-pi-yu-king. 

Let  those  who  contemn  nursery  rhymes,  think  of 
the  French  savant,  and  the  Chinese  cabinet  minister, 
and  the  learning  which  they  have  bestowed  on  the  con- 
versations of  cats  and  mice. 

6th.  Riddles  and  puzzles,  of  which  there  are  a  very 
great  number.  They  are  generally  descriptive,  such  as, 
"No  bigger  than  a  barley  corn,  it  covers  the  king's 
board" — (the  eye).  I  have  given  a  few.  If  any 
despise  riddles,  let  them  bear  in  mind  that  the  Queen 
of  Sheba  is  believed  to  have  propounded  riddles  to 
Solomon,  and  that  Samson  certainly  proposed  a  riddle 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXV11 

to  the  Philistines.  I  am  told  that  riddles  are  common 
in  India  now. 

7th.  Proverbs,  in  prose  and  in  verse,  of  which  1515 
were  printed  in  1819,  and  many  more  are  still  to  be 
got.  Many  are  evidently  very  old  from  their  con- 
struction, and  some  are  explained  by  the  stories,  for 
example,  "  Blackberries  in  February "  has  no  very 
evident  meaning,  but  a  long  story  explains  that  diffi- 
culties may  by  vanquished.  A  king's  son  was  sent  by 
a  stepmother  to  get  "  that  which  grew,  and  is  neither 
crooked  nor  straight  " — (sawdust)  ;  "  Blackberries  in 
February,"  which  he  found  growing  in  a  charnel-house ; 
and  a  third  thing,  equally  easy  to  find  when  the  way 
was  known. 

8th.  There  are  songs,  of  which  there  are  a  vast 
number,  published  and  unpublished,  of  all  sorts  and 
kinds,  sung  to  wild  and  peculiar  tunes.  They  are  con- 
demned and  forbidden  in  some  districts,  and  are 
vanishing  rapidly  from  all.  These  used  to  be  sung 
continually  within  my  recollection,  and  many  of  them 
are  wild,  and,  to  my  ear,  beautiful.  There  are  songs 
composed  in  a  particular  rhythm  for  rowing,  for  washing 
clothes  by  dancing  on  them ;  songs  whose  rhythm 
resembles  a  piobroch  j  love  songs ;  war  songs  ;  songs 
which  are  nearly  all  chorus,  and  which  are  composed 
as  they  are  sung.  The  composer  gives  out  a  single 
line  applicable  to  anything  then  present,  and  the 
chorus  fills  up  the  time  by  singing  and  clapping  hands, 
till  the  second  line  is  prepared.  I  have  known  such 
lines  fired  at  a  sportsman  by  a  bevy  of  girls  who  were 
waulking  blankets  in  a  byre,  and  who  made  the  gun 
and  the  dog  the  theme  of  several  stanzas.  Reid's 
Bibliotheca  Scoto-Celtica,  1832,  gives  a  list  of  eighty- 
one  Gaelic  books  of  poetry  printed  since  1785.     There 


XXXV111  INTRODUCTION. 

are  hymn  books,  song  books,  and  poetry  composed  by 
known  and  unknown  bards,  male  and  female.  Of  the 
former,  Mackenzie,  in  his  Beauties  of  Gaelic  poetry, 
gives  a  list  of  thirty-two,  with  specimens  of  their  works 
and  a  short  biography.  Of  the  latter  class,  the  un- 
known poets,  there  are  many  at  the  present  day  ;  and 
who  is  to  guess  their  number  in  times  when  men  did 
nothing  but  fight  and  sing  about  their  battles  ?  A  very 
few  of  these  bards  have  become  known  to  the  world 
by  name,  and,  in  all  probability  their  merits  never 
will  be  known.  Let  any  one  translate  Sir  Patrick 
Spens  or  Annie  Laurie  into  French  or  Greek,  or  read 
a  French  translation  of  Waverley,  and  the  effect  of 
translation  on  such  compositions  will  be  evident. 

9th.  The  romantic  popular  tales  of  which  this 
collection  mainly  consists. 

I  presume  that  I  have  said  enough  as  to  their  col- 
lection, and  that  I  may  now  point  out  what  seems  to 
me  to  be  their  bearing  on  the  scientific  part  of  the  sub- 
ject ;  that  I  may  take  them  as  tradition,  and  argue 
from  them  as  from  established  facts.  I  have  endea- 
voured to  show  how,  when,  and  where  I  got  the 
stories  ;  each  has  its  own  separate  pedigree,  and  I  have 
given  the  original  Gaelic,  with  the  closest  translation 
which  I  was  able  to  make. 

Now,  let  me  mention  the  works  in  which  I  have 
found  similar  tales,  and  which  are  within  the  reach  of 
all  who  can  read  English.  First — Tales  from  the  Norse, 
translated  by  G.  W.  Dasent,  published  1859.  Many  of 
the  Gaelic  tales  collected  in  1859  resemble  these  very 
closely.     The  likeness  is  pointed  out  in  the  notes. 

It  is  impossible  that  the  book  could  have  become 
known  to  the  people  who  told  the  stories  within  the 
time,  but  if  it  were,  a  manuscript  which  has  been  lent 


INTRODUCTION.  XXXIX 

to  me  by  the  translator,  proves  that  the  stories  were 
known  in  Scotland  before  the  translation  from  the 
Norse  was  made  public. 

It  is  a  verbatim  copy  made  by  a  clergyman  from  a 
collection  of  fourteen  tales,  gathered  by  "  Peter 
Buchan,  editor  of  the  Ancient  Ballads  and  Songs  of 
the  North  of  Scotland."  It  is  dated  1848,  Glasgow ; 
and  signed,  Alexander  B.  Grosart.  The  tales  are 
written  in  English,  and  versions  of  all  except  three, 
had  previously  come  to  me  in  Gaelic.  For  example, 
(No.  2),  The  Battle  of  the  Birds  closely  resembles  "The 
Master  Maid "  from  Norway,  but  it  still  more  re- 
sembles Mr.  Peter  Buchan's  "  Greensleeves,"  found  in 
Scotland  thirteen  years  before  the  Norse  tales  were 
translated.  The  manuscript  was  sent  by  Mr.  Grosart, 
after  he  had  read  the  Norse  tales,  and  it  seems  to  be 
clearly  proved  that  these  stories  are  common  to  Nor- 
way and  Scotland. 

I  have  found  very  few  stories  of  the  kind  amongst 
the  peasantry  of  the  low  country,  though  I  have  sought 
them.  I  find  such  names  as  Fingal  in  Mr.  Buchan's 
stories,  and  I  know  them  to  be  common  in  the  islands 
where  the  scene  is  often  laid.  The  language  is  not 
that  of  any  peasantry,  and  I  have  come  to  the  con- 
clusion that  this  collection  is  mostly  derived  from 
Gaelic,  directly  or  indirectly,  perhaps  from  the  shoals 
of  West  Highlanders  and  Irishmen  who  used  to  come 
down  as  shearers  every  harvest,  and  who  are  now 
scattered  all  over  Scotland  as  farm-servants  and  drovers, 
and  settled  in  Edinburgh  and  Glasgow  as  porters.  I 
know  from  one  of  these,  a  drover,  who  goes  every  year 
to  the  south  with  cattle,  that  he  has  often  entertained 
lowland  farm-servants  by  telling  in  English  the  stories 
which  he  learned  as  child  in  South  Uist.      I  know 


xl  INTRODUCTION. 

of  men  in  Paisley,  Greenock,  and  Edinburgh,  who  are 
noted  for  their  knowledge  of  sgeulachd.  But  while 
I  hold  that  this  particular  collection  was  not  told  in 
this  form  by  lowland  Scotch  peasants,  I  know  that  they 
still  do  tell  such  stories  occasionally,  and  I  also  know 
that  Englishmen  of  the  lower  ranks  do  the  same.  I 
met  two  tinkers  in  St.  James's  Street  in  February  with 
black  faces  and  a  pan  of  burning  coals  each.  They 
were  followed  by  a  wife,  and  preceded  by  a  mangy 
terrier  with  a  stiff  tail.  I  joined  the  party,  and  one 
told  me  a  version  of  u  the  man  who  travelled  to  learn 
what  shivering  meant,"  while  we  walked  together 
through  the  park  to  Westminster.  It  was  clearly  the 
popular  tale  which  exist  in  Norse,  and  German,  and 
Gaelic,  and  it  bore  the  stamp  of  the  mind  of  the  class, 
and  of  the  man,  who  told  it  in  his  own  peculiar  dialect, 
and  who  dressed  the  actors  in  his  own  ideas.  A 
cutler  and  a  tinker  travel  together,  and  sleep  in  an 
empty  haunted  house  for  a  reward.  They  are  beset  by 
ghosts  and  spirits  of  murdered  ladies  and  gentlemen, 
and  the  inferior,  the  tinker,  shows  most  courage,  and 
is  the  hero.  "  He  went  into  the  cellar  to  draw  beer, 
and  there  he  found  a  little  chap  a-sittin'  on  a  barrel 
with  a  red  cap  on  'is  'ed  j  and  sez  he,  sez  he,  '  Buzz/ 
1  Wot's  buzz  ? '  sez  the  tinker.  ■  Never  you  mind  wot's 
buzz,'  sez  he.  '  That's  mine  ;  don't  you  go  for  to  touch 
it,'"  etc.,  etc.,  etc. 

In  a  less  degree  many  are  like  the  German  stories 
of  the  brothers  Grimm.  That  collection  has  been 
translated,  and  a  book  so  well  known  may  possibly  have 
found  its  way  into  the  Highlands,  ft  is  impossible  to 
speak  with  certainty ;  but  when  all  the  narrators  agree 
in  saying  that  they  have  known  their  stories  all  their 
lives,  and  when  the  variation  is  so  marked,  the  resem- 


INTRODUCTION.  xli 

blance  is  rather  to  be  attributed  to  common  origin  than 
to  books.  I  only  once  heard  of  such  a  book  in  the 
Highlands.  It  was  given  to  a  gamekeeper  in  Suther- 
land for  his  children,  and  was  condemned,  and  put  out 
of  the  way  as  trash. 

The  Gaelic  stories  resemble  in  some  few  cases  the 
well-known  tales  of  Hans  Andersen,  founded  on  popu- 
lar tales  told  in  Denmark. 

And  they  resemble  sundry  other  books  which  are 
avowedly  founded  on  popular  tales  collected  in  various 
countries. 

Some  are  like  the  French  tales  of  the  Countess 
D'Aulnoy  which  have  been  translated.  One  is  like 
part  of  Shakspeare,  but  it  is  still  more  like  the  Italian 
story  in  Boccaccio,  from  which  part  of  Cymbeline  is 
supposed  to  be  taken.  Perhaps  Shakspeare  may  have 
founded  Cymbeline  on  a  popular  tale  then  current  in 
England  as  well  as  in  Italy. 

A  few  resemble  the  Arabian  Nights,  and  in  some 
cases  I  believe  that  the  stories  have  been  derived  from 
early  English  translations  of  that  well-known  book.  I 
used  myself  to  read  an  edition  of  1815  to  my  piper 
guardian,  in  return  for  his  ursgeuls,  but  he  seemed 
more  inclined  to  blame  the  tyranny  of  the  kings  than 
to  admire  the  Eastern  stories. 

MacLean  has  himself  told  the  story  of  Aladdin  in 
Gaelic  as  his  share  of  a  winter  night's  entertainment, 
and  I  have  heard  of  several  people  of  the  poorer  class 
who  know  the  Arabian  Nights  well.  But  such  stories 
are  easily  known  after  a  little  experience  has  been 
gained.  The  whole  of  a  volume  is  run  together,  the 
incidents  follow  in  their  order,  or  in  something  like  it. 
The  difference  in  style  is  as  marked  as  the  contrast 
between  a  drift  tree  and  a  wrecked  vessel,  but  as  it 


xlii  INTRODUCTION. 

is  curious  to  trace  the  change  from  Eastern  ways  as 
seen  through  an  English  translation  of  a  French  view 
of  the  original  Arabic,  I  give  specimens.  These  contain 
the  incidents  embodied  in  stories  in  the  Arabian  Nights, 
but  the  whole  machinery  and  decoration,  manners  and 
customs,  are  now  as  completely  We3t  Highland  as  if 
the  tales  had  grown  there.  But  for  a  camel  which 
appears,  I  would  almost  give  up  my  opinion,  and  adopt 
that  of  MacLean,  who  holds  that  even  these  are  pure 
traditions. 

In  support  of  his  view  it  may  be  said  that  there 
are  hundreds  of  other  books  as  well  known  in  England 
as  those  mentioned  above,  of  which  neither  I  nor  my 
collectors  have  ever  found  a  trace.  Jack  and  the 
Bean-stalk,  and  Jack  the  Giant-killer,  Beauty  and  the 
Beast,  and  the  Sleeping  Beauty  in  the  Woods,  as  known 
in  England,  are  unknown  in  the  Highlands.  None  of 
the  adventures  of  Mr.  Pickwick,  or  Sam  Weller,  or 
Jack  Shepherd,  or  Gulliver,  or  Robinson  Crusoe,  are 
mixed  up  with  the  prose  tales.  No  part  of  the  story 
of  Wallace,  as  told  in  the  "  Scottish  Chiefs,"  or  of 
"  Waverley,"  is  to  be  found  in  popular  history.  There 
is  nothing  like  "  The  Mysteries  of  London."  There 
are  none  of  the  modern  horrors  of  which  ballads  have 
been  made,  such  as  "  Sad  was  the  day  when  James 
Greenacre  first  got  acquainted  with  Sarah  Gale." 
There  are  no  gorgeous  palaces,  and  elegant  fairies ; 
there  are  no  enchanters  flying  in  chariots  drawn  by 
winged  griffins ;  there  are  no  gentle  knights  and  noble 
dames ;  no  spruce  cavaliers  and  well-dressed  ladies ; 
no  heroes  and  heroines  of  fashionable  novels ;  but,  on 
the  contrary,  everything  is  popular.  Heroes  are  as 
wild,  and  unkempt,  and  savage  as  they  probably  were 


INTRODUCTION.  xliii 

in  fact,  and  kings  are  men  as  they  appear  in  Lane's 
translations  of  the  Arabian  Nights. 

Eastern  tale  tellers  knew  what  Haroun  al  Raschid 
must  have  suffered  when  he  put  on  the  fisherman's 
clothes,  and  Mr.  Lane  has  not  scrupled  to  follow  the 
original  Arabic. 

If  the  people  of  the  West  Highlands  have  added  book 
stories  to  their  traditions,  they  have  selected  those  only 
which  were  taken  from  peasants  like  themselves  in 
other  countries,  and  they  have  stripped  off  all  that  was 
foreign  to  their  own  manners.  The  people  have  but 
taken  back  their  own. 

Besides  books  accessible  to  all  English  readers,  I  find 
similar  stories  in  books  beyond  the  reach  of  the  people. 
I  have  pointed  out  in  the  notes  all  that  were  within  my 
reach,  and  came  under  my  notice,  but  this  part  of  the 
subject  is  a  study,  and  requires  time  to  acquire  know- 
ledge which  I  do  not  possess. 

Such,  then,  is  the  evidence  which  bears  on  the 
immediate  origin  of  the  stories.  I  believe  them  to  be 
pure  traditions,  very  little  affected  by  modern  books, 
and,  if  at  all,  only  by  those  which  are  avowedly  taken 
from  popular  tales.  A  trip  of  five  days  in  the  Isle  of 
Man  in  April  1860  has  but  confirmed  this  opinion. 

That  island,  in  spite  of  its  numerous  rulers,  is  still 
peculiarly  Celtic.  It  has  belonged  to  Norwegians. 
English,  Scotch,  Welsh,  and  Irish  have  fought  for  it. 
It  has  a  Law  Court  with  a  Norwegian  name  held  on  a 
mound ;  half  the  names  in  the  island  are  Norse,  such  as 
Laxey  (Salmon  isthmus),  Langness,  Snafell ;  but  these 
names  are  not  understood  by  the  people  who  live  at 
the  places.  Peel  has  a  descriptive  Gaelic  name,  which 
means  island  port ;  a  Salmon  is  Braddan,  not  Lax  j  and 
of  the  poorer  classes  living  in  the  mountain  farms,  and 


xliv 


INTRODUCTION. 


on  the  points  and  distant  corners  of  the  island,  there 
are  still  many  who  can  hardly  speak  anything  but 
Manks.  Their  hair  is  dark ;  the  sound  of  their  voices, 
even  their  houses,  are  Celtic.  I  know  one  turf  dwelling 
which  might  be  a  house  in  North  Uist.  There  was  the 
fire  on  the  floor,  the  children  seated  around  it,  the  black 
haired  Celtic  mother  on  a  low  stool  in  front, — the  hens 
quarrelling  about  a  nest  under  the  table,  in  which 
several  wanted  to  lay  eggs  at  once. 

"  Get  out,  Polly  !  Drive  her  out,  John  !  "  And  then 
John,  the  son,  drove  out  Polly,  the  hen,  with  a  stick ; 
and  the  hen  said  "  Gurr-r-m ; "  and  ran  in  under  the 
table  again  and  said,  "  Cluck,  cluck,"  and  laid  the  egg 
then  and  there.  There  was  the  same  kindly  hospitable 
manner  in  the  poorest  cottage ;  and  I  soon  found  that 
a  Scotch  Highlander  could  speak  Manks  as  soon  as  he 
could  acquire  the  art  of  mispronouncing  his  own  lan- 
guage to  the  right  amount,  and  learn  where  to  introduce 
the  proper  English  word.  "  La  fine  " — fine  day — was 
the  salutation  everywhere ;  and  the  reply,  "  Fine,  fine." 
But  though  nouns  are  almost  the  same,  and  the  lan- 
guage is  but  a  dialect  of  Gaelic,  the  foreigner  was 
incomprehensible,  because  he  could  not  pronounce  as 
they  did ;  and  I  was  reduced  to  English.  Now  this 
island  is  visited  every  summer  by  shoals  of  visitors 
from  the  mainland  ;  steam -boats  bring  them  from 
Liverpool,  a  thousand  at  a  time,  and  they  sweep  over 
the  whole  country.  If  visitors  import  stories,  here 
there  are  plenty  of  strangers,  and  I  was  a  stranger 
myself.  If  stories  are  imported  in  books,  here  are  the 
books  also.  The  first  picture  I  saw  on  landing  was  a 
magnificent  Bluebeard  in  a  shop  window.  He  was 
dressed  as  an  Eastern  potentate,  and  about  to  slice  off 
his  wife's  head  with  a  crooked  scimitar,  while  the  two 


INTRODUCTION.  xlv 

brothers  rode  up  to  the  gate  on  prancing  steeds,  with 
horror  on  their  faces  and  swords  in  their  hands.  But 
there  was  not  a  trace  of  any  of  that  kind  of  story  to  be 
found  amongst  the  peasants  with  whom  I  spoke  in  the 
Isle  of  Man. 

I  found  them  willing  to  talk,  eager  to  question, 
kindly,  homely  folk,  with  whom  it  was  easy  to  begin 
an  acquaintance.  I  heard  everywhere  that  it  used  to 
be  common  to  hear  old  men  telling  stories  about  the 
fire  in  Manks ;  but  any  attempt  to  extract  a  story,  or 
search  out  a  queer  old  custom,  or  a  half-forgotten  belief, 
seemed  to  act  as  a  pinch  of  snuff  does  on  a  snail. 

The  Manksman  would  not  trust  the  foreigner  with 
his  secrets ;  his  eye  twinkled  suspiciously,  and  his 
hand  seemed  unconsciously  to  grasp  his  mouth,  as  if 
to  keep  all  fast.  After  getting  quite  at  ease  with  one 
old  fellow  over  a  pipe,  and  having  learned  that  a 
neighbour's  cow  had  born  a  calf  to  the  "  Taroo  ustey," 
water  bull,  I  thought  I  might  fish  for  a  story,  and  told 
one  as  a  bait. 

"That  man,  if  he  had  two  pints,  would  tell  you 
stories  by  the  hour,"  said  a  boy.  "  Oh,  yes,  they  used 
to  tell  plenty  of  stories,"  said  the  old  man,  "  Skyll,  as 
we  call  them." 

Here  was  the  very  word  mispronounced,  "  sgeul,"  so 
my  hopes  rose.  "  Will  you  tell  me  a  story  now  % " 
"Have  you  any  churches  in  your  country?"  "Yes, 
and  chapels  ;  but  will  you  tell  me  a  story  V  "  What 
you  got  to  sell  in  your  bag  1 "  "  What  a  shame  now, 
for  you,  an  old  Mananach,  not  to  tell  me  a  story  when 
I  have  told  you  one,  and  filled  your  pipe  and  all." 
"  What  do  you  pay  for  the  tobacco  ?  "  "  Oh,  will  you 
not  tell  the  man  a  story  ?"  said  the  boy.  "I  must  go 
and  saw  now,"  said  the  old  man ;  and  so  we  parted. 


xlvi  INTRODUCTION. 

But  though  this  was  the  usual  thing,  it  was  not 
always  so ;  and  it  soon  became  evident  that  the  stories 
given  in  Train's  history  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  are  nearly 
all  known  to  the  people  now;  and  these  are  of  the 
same  nature  as  some  known  in  the  Highlands  of  Scot- 
land ;  some  are  almost  identical ;  and  nearly  all  the 
Manks  customs  are  common  to  the  Western  Isles. 

Thus  I  heard  of  Fairies,  "  Ferish,"  who  live  in  green 
mounds,  and  are  heard  at  times  dressing  mill-stones  in 
haunted  mills  ;  of  Taroo  Ustey,  the  water  bull ;  of 
Dinny  Mara,  the  sea  man,  and  of  the  Mermaid  j  of 
Caval  Ustey,  the  water  horse  ;  of  Fion  MacCooil ;  of  a 
city  under  the  waves ;  of  a  magic  island  seen  in  the  far 
west.  I  heard  of  giants.  No  one  would  tell  about 
them  j  but  in  a  book  I  found  how  Goddard  Crovan 
threw  a  vast  boulder  at  his  scolding  wife,  and  how  a 
Norman  baron,  named  "Kitter"  and  his  cook  ;  "Eaoch," 
and  his  magic  sword,  "Macabuin,"  made  by  "Loan 
Maclibhuin,  the  dark  smith  of  Drontheim;"  and  "Hiallus- 
nan-urd,  the  one-legged  hammerman," — are  all  woven 
into  a  story,  and  mixed  up  with  such  Norwegian  names 
as  Olave  and  Emergaid,  exactly  as  a  story  is  jumbled 
together  in  the  Western  Isles  of  Scotland. 

I  got  some  stories  which  I  have  not  found  in  the 
Manks  books,  so  I  give  them  here,  in  the  hope  that 
some  Manksman  may  be  induced  to  gather  the  popular 
lore  of  his  own  country.  This  from  a  woman  who  lives 
near  the  Calf  of  Man. 

"  Did  you  ever  hear  tell  of  the  Glashan  1 " 

"No;  tell  me  about  the  Glashan." 

"Well,  you  see,  in  the  old  times  they  used  to  be  keeping  the 
sheep  in  the  folds  ;  and  one  night  an  old  man  forgot  to  put  them 
in,  and  he  sent  out  his  son,  and  he  came  back  and  said  the  sheep 
were  all  folded,  but  there  was  a  year-old  lamb,  oasht,  playing  the 
mischief  with  them  ;  and  that  was  the  glashan. 


INTRODUCTION.  xlvii 

"  You  see  they  were  very  strong,  and  when  they  wanted  a 
stack  threshed,  though  it  was  a  whole  stack,  the  glashan  would 
have  it  threshed  for  them  in  one  night. 

"And  they  were  running  after  the  women.  There  was  one  of 
them  once  caught  a  girl,  and  had  a  hould  of  her  by  the  dress, 
and  he  sat  down  and  he  fell  asleep  ;  and  then  she  cut  away  all 
the  dress,  you  see,  round  about  this  way,  and  left  it  in  his  fist 
and  ran  away  ;  and  when  he  awoke,  he  threw  what  he  had  over 
his  shoulder,  this  way  ;  and  he  said  (something  in  Manks  which 
I  could  not  catch). 

"Well,  you  see,  one  night  the  ould  fellow  sent  all  the  women 
to  bed,  and  he  put  on  a  cap  and  a  woman's  dress,  and  he  sat 
down  by  the  fire  and  he  began  to  spin  ;  and  the  young  glashans, 
they  came  in,  and  they  began  saying  something  in  Manks  that 
means  '  Are  you  turning  the  wheel  ?  are  you  trying  the  reel  ? ' 
Well,  the  ould  glashan,  he  was  outside,  and  he  knew  better  than 
the  young  ones ;  he  knew  it  was  the  ould  fellow  himself,  and  he 
was  telling  them,  but  they  did  not  mind  him  ;  and  so  the  ould 
man  threw  a  lot  of  hot  turf,  you  see,  it  was  turf  they  burned  then, 
over  them  and  burned  them  ;  and  the  ould  one  said  (something 
in  Manks).  'You'll  not  understand  that,  now?'  'Yes,  I  do, 
pretty  nearly.'  'Ah,  well.'  And  so  the  glashans  went  away 
and  never  came  back  any  more." 

"Have  you  many  stories  like  that,  guidwife?"  "Ay,"  said 
she,  ' '  there  were  plenty  of  people  that  could  tell  these  stories 
once.  When  I  was  a  little  girl,  I  used  to  hear  them  telling  them 
in  Manks  over  the  fire  at  night ;  but  people  is  so  changed  with 
pride  now  that  they  care  for  nothing." 

Now  here  is  a  story  which  is  all  over  the  Highlands 
in  various  shapes.  Sometimes  it  is  a  Brollichan  son  of 
the  Fuath,  or  a  young  water  horse  transformed  into  the 
likeness  of  a  man,  which  attacks  a  lonely  woman,  and 
gets  burned  or  scalded,  and  goes  away  to  his  friends 
outside.  In  the  islands,  the  woman  generally  says  her 
name  is  Myself;  and  the  goblin  answers,  when  asked 
who  burned  him,  "Myself."  This  Manks  story  is  mani- 
festly the  same,  though  this  incident  is  left  out.    I  have 


xlviii  INTRODUCTION. 

heard  it  in  Lewis,  and  in  many  places  besides,  and  part 
of  it  is  best  omitted. 

The  Glashan,  as  I  found  out  afterwards,  frequented 
neighbouring  farms  till  within  a  very  late  period.  He 
wore  no  clothes,  and  was  hairy  j  and,  according  to 
Train's  history,  Phynodderee,  which  means  something 
hairy,  was  frightened  away  by  a  gift  of  clothes — exactly 
as  the  Skipness  long-haired  Gruagach  was  frightened 
away  by  the  offer  of  a  coat  and  a  cap.  The  Manks 
brownie  and  the  Argyllshire  one  each  repeated  a  rhyme 
over  the  clothes  ;  but  the  rhymes  are  not  the  same, 
though  they  amount  to  the  same  thing. 

Here,  then,  is  a  Gaelic  popular  tale  and  belief  in 
Man ;  and  close  to  it  I  found  a  story  which  has  a  coun- 
terpart in  Grimm.  I  heard  it  from  my  landlady  at 
Port  Erin,  and  I  met  two  Manksmen  afterwards  who 
knew  it — 

' '  The  fish  all  gathered  once  to  choose  a  king  ;  and  the  fluke, 
him  that  has  the  red  spots  on  him,  stayed  at  home  to  make  him- 
self pretty,  putting  on  his  red  spots,  to  see  if  he  would  be  king, 
and  he  was  too  late,  for  when  he  came  the  herring  was  king  of 
the  sea.  So  the  fluke  curled  his  mouth  on  one  side,  and  said, 
*  A  simple  fish  like  the  herring,  king  of  the  sea  ! '  and  his  mouth 
has  been  to  one  side  ever  since." 

It  seems,  too,  that  the  Manks  version  of  "  Jack  the 
Giant  Killer  "  varies  from  the  English ;  for 
"Jack  the  Giant  Killer, 
Varv  a  Vuchd  in  the  river," 
killed  a  pig  in  the  river  j   and  the  English  hero  did 
nothing  of  the  sort.     In  short,  the  Isle  of  Man  has  its 
own  legends,  which  have  their  own  peculiarities ;  they 
resemble  others,  and  do  not  seem  to  be  taken  from  books. 
The  same  class  of  people  tell  them  there  as  elsewhere  ; 
the  difficulty  of  getting  at  them  is  the  same;  and  the  key 
to  the  secret  is  the  native  language.  From  what  I  gleaned 


INTRODUCTION.  xlix 

in  a  five  days'  walk,  I  am  sure  that  a  good  Manksman 
might  yet  gather  a  large  harvest  within  a  very  narrow 
space.     And  now  to  return  to  my  own  subject. 

I  find  that  men  of  all  ranks  resemble  each  other  j 
that  each  branch  of  popular  lore  has  its  own  special 
votaries,  as  branches  of  literature  have  amongst  the 
learned ;  that  one  man  is  the  peasant  historian  and  tells 
of  the  battles  of  the  clans  \  another,  a  walking  peerage, 
who  knows  the  descent  of  most  of  the  families  in 
Scotland,  and  all  about  his  neighbours  and  their  origin; 
others  are  romancers,  and  tell  about  the  giants ;  others 
are  moralists,  and  prefer  the  sagacious  prose  tales, 
which  have  a  meaning,  and  might  have  a  moral  \  a  few 
know  the  history  of  the  Feni,  and  are  antiquarians. 
Many  despise  the  whole  as  frivolities ;  they  are  practical 
moderns,  and  answer  to  practical  men  in  other  ranks  of 
society. 

But  though  each  prefers  his  own  subject,  the  best 
Highland  story-tellers  know  specimens  of  all  kinds. 
Start  them,  and  it  seems  as  if  they  would  never  stop. 
I  timed  one,  and  he  spoke  for  an  hour  without  pause 
or  hesitation,  or  verbal  repetition.  His  story  was 
Connall  Gulban,  and  he  said  he  could  repeat  fourscore. 
He  recited  a  poem,  but  despised  "  Bardism " ;  and  he 
followed  me  six  miles  in  the  dark  to  my  inn,  to  tell  me 
numbers  19  and  20,  which  I  have  condensed;  for  the 
very  same  thing  can  be  shortly  told  when  it  is  not  a 
composition.     For  example. 

In  telling  a  story,  narrative  and  dialogue  are  mixed  ; 
what  the  characters  have  told  each  other  to  do  is 
repeated  as  narrative.  The  people  in  the  story  tell  it 
to  each  other,  and  branch  off  into  discussions  about 
their  horses  and  houses  and  crops,  or  anything  that 
happens  to  turn  up.     One  story  grows  out  of  another, 

D 


1  INTRODUCTION. 

and  the  tree  is  almost  hidden  by  a  foliage  of  the 
speaker's  invention.  Here  and  there  comes  a  passage 
repeated  by  rote,  and  common  to  many  stories,  and  to 
every  good  narrator.  It  seems  to  act  as  a  rest  for  the 
memory.  Now  and  then,  an  observation  from  the 
audience  starts  an  argument.  In  short,  one  good  story 
in  the  mouth  of  a  good  narrator,  with  a  good  audience, 
might  easily  go  rambling  on  for  a  whole  winter's  night, 
as  it  is  said  to  do. 

The  "  Slim  Swarthy  Champion  used  to  last  for  four 
hours."  Connall  Gulban  "used  to  last  for  three  even- 
ings. Those  that  wanted  to  hear  the  end  had  to  come 
back."  One  of  my  collectors  said  it  would  take  him  a 
month  to  write  it  down,  but  I  am  bound  to  add  that  he 
has  since  done  it  in  a  very  much  shorter  time.  I  have 
heard  of  a  man  who  fell  asleep  by  the  fire,  and  found  a 
story  going  on  when  he  awoke  next  morning.  I  have 
one  fragment  on  which  (as  I  am  told)  an  old  man  in 
Koss-shire  used  to  found  twenty-four  stories,  all  of 
which  died  with  him. 

There  are  varieties  in  public  speakers  amongst  the 
people  as  amongst  their  representatives,  for  some  are 
eloquent,  some  terse,  some  prosy. 

But  though  a  tale  may  be  spun  out  to  any  extent, 
the  very  same  incidents  can  be,  and  often  are,  told  in  a 
few  words,  and  those  tales  which  have  been  written  for 
me  are  fair  representations  of  them  as  they  are  usually 
told.  They  are  like  a  good  condensed  report  of  a 
rambling  speech,  with  extraneous  matter  left  out.  One 
narrator  said  of  the  longest  story  which  I  had  then 
got — "  It  is  but  the  contents ; "  but  I  have  more  than 
once  asked  a  narrator  to  tell  me  the  story  which  he  had 
previously  told  to  one  of  my  collectors,  and  a  collector 
to  write  down  a  story  which  I  had  previously  heard, 


INTRODUCTION.  ll 

and  I  have  always  found  the  pith,  often  the  very  words. 
In  no  instance  have  I  found  anything  added  by  those 
whom  I  employed,  when  their  work  was  subjected  to 
this  severe  test. 

This  is  the  account  which  one  of  my  collectors  gives 
of  the  old  customs  of  his  class — he  is  a  workman  em- 
ployed by  the  Duke  of  Argyll ;  he  tells  me  that  he  is 
self-educated;  and  as  he  repeats  some  of  the  stories 
which  he  has  written,  from  memory,  his  account  of  the 
way  in  which  he  acquired  them  is  valuable. 

I  remember,  upwards  of  fifty  years  ago,  when  I  was  a  boy,  my 
father  lived  in  the  f arest  north  house,  in  the  valley  called  Glen-na 
Callanach.  I  also  used  to  be  with  my  granfather ;  he  lived 
near  Terbert,  Lochlomond  side.  I  remember,  in  the  winter 
nights,  when  a  few  old  people  would  be  togather,  they  would 
pass  the  time  with  telling  each  other  stories,  which  they  had  by 
tradition.  I  used  to  listen  attentively,  and  hear  them  telling 
about  the  ceatharnaich,  or  freebooters,  which  used  to  come  to 
plunder  the  country,  and  take  away  cattle  ;  and  how  their 
ancestors  would  gather  themselves  togather  to  fight  for  their 
property,  the  battles  they  fought,  and  the  kind  of  weapons  they 
used  to  fight  with ;  the  manners  of  their  ancestors,  the  dress  they 
used  to  wear,  and  different  hardships  they  had  to  endure. 

I  was  also  sometimes  amused,  listening  to  some  people  telling 
Gaelic  romances,  which  we  called  sgeulachds.  It  was  customary 
for  a  few  youngsters  to  gather  into  one  house,  and  whither  idle 
or  at  some  work,  such  as  knitting  stockings  or  spinning,  they 
would  amuse  each  other  with  some  innocent  diversion,  or  telling 
sgeulachds.  Us  that  was  children  was  very  fond  of  listening  to 
them,  and  the  servant  maid  that  was  in  my  father's  house  would 
often  tell  us  a  sgeulachd  to  keep  us  queit. 

In  those  days,  when  people  killed  their  Marte  cow  they  keept 
the  hide,  and  tanned  it  for  leather  to  themselves.  In  those  days 
every  house  was  furnished  with  a  wheel  and  a  reel ;  the  women 
spun,  and  got  their  webs  woven  by  a  neighbouring  weaver ;  also, 
the  women  was  dyers  for  themselves,  so  that  the  working  class 
had  their  leather,  their  linen,  and  their  cloth  of  their  own  manu- 
facturing ;  and  when  they  required  the  help  of  a  shoemaker,  or 


Hi  INTRODUCTION. 

of  a  tailor,  they  would  send  for  them.  The  tailors  and  shoe- 
makers went  from  house  to  house,  to  work  wherever  they  were 
required,  and  by  travelling  the  country  so  much,  got  acquaint 
with  a  great  maney  of  the  traditionary  tales,  and  divulged  them 
through  the  country  ;  and  as  the  country  people  made  the  telling 
of  these  tales,  and  listening  to  hear  them,  their  winter  night's 
amusement,  scarcely  aney  part  of  them  would  be  lost.  Some  of 
these  romances  is  supposed  to  be  of  great  antiquity,  on  account 
of  some  of  the  Gaelic  words  being  out  of  use  now.  I  remember, 
about  forty  years  ago,  of  being  in  company  with  a  man  that  was 
watching  at  night ;  he  wished  me  to  stop  with  him,  and  he  told 
me  a  (sgeulachd)  romance ;  and  last  year  I  heard  a  man  telling 
the  same  story,  about  therty  miles  distante  from  where  I  had 
heard  it  told  forty  years  before  that ;  and  the  man  which  told 
me  the  tale  could  not  tell  me  the  meaning  of  some  of  the  old 
Gaelic  words  that  was  in  it.  At  first  I  thought  they  were 
foreign  words,  but  at  last  I  recollected  to  have  heard  some  of 
them  repeated  in  Ossian's  poems,  and  it  was  by  the  words  that 
was  before,  and  after  them,  that  1  understood  the  meaning  of 
them.  The  same  man  told  me  another  story,  which  he  said  he 
learned  from  his  granfather,  and  Denmark,  Swedden,  and 
Nora  way  was  named  in  it  in  Gaelic,  but  he  forgot  the  name  of 
the  two  last-named  places. 

It  appears  likely  to  me,  that  some  of  these  tales  was  invented 
by  the  Druids,  and  told  to  the  people  as  sermons  ;  and  by  these 
tales  the  people  was  caused  to  believe  that  there  was  fairies  which 
lived  in  little  conical  hills,  and  that  the  fairies  had  the  power  of 
being  either  visible  or  invisible,  as  they  thought  proper,  and  that 
they  had  the  power  of  enchanting  people,  and  of  taking  them 
away  and  make  fairies  of  them  ;  and  that  the  Druids  had  charms 
which  would  prevent  that ;  and  they  would  give  these  charms  to 
the  people  for  payment ;  and  maney  stories  would  be  told  about 
people  being  taken  away  by  the  fairies,  and  the  charms  which  had 
to  be  used  to  break  the  spell,  and  get  them  back  again ;  and  others, 
on  account  of  some  neglidgeance,  never  got  back  aney  more. 

Also  that  there  was  witches ;  people  which  had  communica- 
tion with  an  evil  spirit,  from  which  they  got  the  power  of  chang- 
ing themselves  into  aney  shape  they  pleased  ;  that  these  witches 
often  put  themselves  in  the  shape  of  beasts,  and  when  they  were 
in  the  shape  of  beasts,  that  they  had  some  evil  design  in  view, 
and  that  it  was  dangerous  to  meet  them.     Also  that  they  could, 


INTRODUCTION.  liii 

and  did,  sometimes  take  away  the  produce  of  people's  dairy,  and 
sometimes  of  the  whole  farm.  The  Druidical  priests  pretended 
that  they  had  charms  that  would  prevent  the  witches  from  doing 
aney  harm,  and  they  would  give  a  charm  for  payment.  When 
the  first  day  of  summer  came,  the  people  was  taught  to  put  the 
fire  out  of  their  houses,  and  to.  place  it  on  some  emince  near  the 
house  for  to  keep  away  the  witches,  and  that  it  was  not  safe  for 
them  to  kindle  a  fire  in  their  house  aney  more,  until  they  bought 
it  from  beil's  druide.  That  fire  was  called  beil-teine  (beils- 
fire),  and  the  first  day  of  summer  was  called  beil- fires  day  ;  and 
also  when  the  first  night  of  winter  came,  the  people  would  gather 
fuel  and  make  blazing  fire  for  to  keep  away  the  witches,  or  at 
least  to  deprive  them  of  the  power  of  taking  away  the  produce  of 
the  farm,  and  then  they  would  go  to  the  Druid  and  buy  a  kindling 
of  what  was  called  the  holy  fire.  The  Druids  also  caused  the 
people  to  believe  that  some  families  had  been  enchanted  and 
changed  into  beasts,  and  as  the  proper  means  had  not  been  used, 
the  spell  was  never  broken ;  and  that  swans,  seals,  and  mar- 
maids  had  been  different  beings,  familys  that  had  been  enchanted. 

Beil  or  Beul  was  the  name  which  the  Druids  gave  their  god, 
and  the  Druids  of  Beil  pretended  to  be  the  friends  of  the  people  ; 
they  pretended  to  have  charms  to  cure  different  kinds  of  diseases, 
and  also  charms  to  prevent  fairies,  ghosts,  and  witches,  from 
annoying  or  harming  people.  It  is  a  well-known  fact,  that  the 
superstitions  of  the  Druids  has  been  handed  down  from  genera- 
tion to  generation  for  a  great  maney  ages,  and  is  not  wholy 
extinct  yet ;  and  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  some  of  the  tales, 
which  was  invented  in  those  days  for  to  fright  the  people,  has 
been  told  and  kept  in  remembrance  in  the  self  and  same  manner. 
The  priests  of  Beil  was  the  men  that  was  called  Druids,  the 
miracles  which  they  pretended  to  perform  was  called  meur- 
bheileachd  (beil-fingering),  and  their  magic  which  they  pretended 
to  perform  was  called  druichd  (druidisem),  and  we  have  plenty 
of  reason  to  believe  superstitious  tales  as  well  as  superstition, 
originated  among  the  Druids.  John  Dewar. 

"J.Campbell,  Esq. 

"  Sir — I  hope  you  will  correct  aney  errors  that  you  may  find 
on  this  piece  which  I  wrote." 

1  have  corrected  only  two  or  three  errors  in  spelling,  and  the 
writing  is  remarkably  clear,  but  I  have  left  some  words  which 
express  the  Gaelic  pronunciation  of  English. 


liv  INTRODUCTION. 

The  derivation  of  Miorbhuil,  a  marvel,  from  the  finger  of 
Bel,  was  suggested  by  Dr.  Smith  (see  Armstrong's  Die.)  J.F.C. 

Now  let  me  return  to  the  cottage  of  old  Macphie, 
where  I  heard  a  version  of  the  Sea-Maiden,  and  let  me 
suppose  that  one  of  the  rafters  is  the  drift  log  which 
I  saw  about  to  be  added  to  a  roof  in  the  same  island. 

The  whole  roof  is  covered  with  peat  soot,  but  that 
may  be  scraped  away,  and  the  rough  wood  appears. 
There  are  the  holes  of  boring  sea  shells,  filled  with  sand 
and  marine  products.  It  is  evident  that  the  log  came 
by  sea,  that  it  did  not  come  in  a  ship,  and  that  it  was 
long  enough  in  warm  salt  water  for  the  barnacles  to 
live  and  die,  and  for  their  dwellings  to  be  filled  with 
sea  rubbish ;  that  it  floated  through  latitudes  where 
barnacles  live.  The  fairy  eggs,  which  are  picked  up  on 
the  same  shore,  point  to  the  West  Indies  as  a  stage  on 
the  way.  Maps  of  ocean  currents  shew  the  gulf-stream 
flowing  from  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  past  the  Hebrides, 
but  the  tree  is  a  fir,  for  there  is  a  bit  of  bark  which 
proves  the  fact,  and  it  appears  that  pines  grow  between 
40°  and  60°  in  America.  It  is  therefore  possible  that 
the  rafter  was  once  an  American  fir  tree,  growing  in  the 
Eocky  Mountains;  that  it  was  swept  into  the  Mississippi, 
and  carried  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico ;  drifted  by  the  gulf- 
stream  past  the  West  India  Islands  to  the  Hebrides, 
and  stranded  by  a  western  gale  on  its  voyage  to  Spitz- 
bergen.  But  all  this  must  have  happened  long  ago,  for 
it  is  now  a  rafter  covered  with  the  soot  of  generations. 
That  rafter  is  a  strange  fact,  it  is  one  of  a  series,  and 
has  to  be  accounted  for.  There  it  is,  and  a  probable 
account  of  its  journey  is,  that  it  came  from  East  to 
West  without  the  help  of  man,  in  obedience  to  laws 
which  govern  the  world. 

That  smoked  rafter  certainly  was  once  a  seed  in  a 


INTRODUCTION.  lv 

fir-cone,  somewhere  abroad.  It  grew  to  be  a  pine  tree ; 
it  must  have  been  white  with  snow  in  winter,  and 
green  in  summer,  and  glittering  with  rain  drops  and 
hoar-frost  in  bright  sunshine  at  various  times  and  sea- 
sons. The  number  of  years  it  stood  in  the  forest  can 
be  counted  by  the  rings  in  the  wood.  It  is  certain  that 
it  was  torn  up  by  the  roots,  for  the  roots  are  there  still. 
It  may  have  formed  a  part  of  one  of  these  wonderful 
natural  rafts  of  the  Mississippi,  of  which  one  in  1816 
was  "  no  less  than  ten  miles  in  length,  two  hundred  and 
twenty  yards  wide,  and  eight  feet  deep."  *  It  has  been 
to  warm  seas,  and  has  worn  a  marine  dress  of  green 
and  brown  since  it  lost  its  own  natural  dress  of  green 
branches.  Birds  must  have  sat  on  it  in  the  forest, — crabs 
and  shells  have  lived  on  it  at  sea,  and  fish  must  have 
swam  about  it ;  and  yet  it  is  now  a  rafter,  hung  with 
black  pendants  of  peat  smoke.  A  tree  that  grew 
beside  it  may  now  be  in  Spitzbergen  amongst  walrusses. 
Another  may  be  a  snag  in  the  Mississippi  amongst 
alligators,  destined  to  become  a  fossil  tree  in  a  coal 
field.  Part  of  another  may  be  a  Yankee  rocking  chair, 
or  it  may  be  part  of  a  ship  in  any  part  of  the  World,  or 
the  tram  of  a  cart,  or  bit  of  a  carriage,  or  a  wheel-barrow, 
or  a  gate  post,  or  anything  that  can  be  made  of  fir  wood 
anywhere ;  and  the  fate  of  stories  may  be  as  various  as 
that  of  fir  trees,  but  their  course  may  be  guessed  at  by 
running  a  back  scent  overland,  as  I  have  endeavoured 
to  follow  the  voyage  of  a  drift  log  over  sea. 

Macphie's  story  began  thus  : — "  There  was  a  poor  old 
fisher  in  Skye,  and  his  name  was  Duncan ; "  and  every 
version  of  the  story  which  I  have  found  in  the  High- 
lands, and  I  have  found  many,  is  as  highland  as  the 
peat-reek  on  the  rafters.     The  same  story  is  known  in 

*  Lyell's  Principles  of  Geology,  p.  267. 


lvi  INTRODUCTION. 

many  districts  in  Scotland,  and  it  is  evident,  that  it  has 
been  known  there  for  many  years.  It  is  a  curious  fact. 
It  is  worth  the  trouble  of  looking  under  what  is  purely 
highland,  to  see  if  its  origin  can  be  discovered. 

First,  then,  the  incidents  are  generally  strung  to- 
gether in  a  particular  order  in  the  Highlands,  but, 
either  separately  or  together,  every  incident  in  the 
story  is  to  be  found  in  some  shape  in  other  languages. 
Norse  has  it  as  "  Shortshanks."  Irish  has  it.  German 
has  it.  It  is  in  the  Italian  of  Straparola  as  "  For- 
tunio."  In  the  French  of  le  Cabinet  des  Fees,  1785. 
It  is  in  every  language  in  Europe  as  "  St.  George 
and  the  Dragon."  It  is  in  Mr.  Peter  Buchan's  English 
of  1847  as  part  of  " Greensleeves."  It  is  in  "Perseus 
and  Andromeda."  The  scene  of  that  story  is  placed  in 
Syria,  and  it  is  connected  with  Persia.  There  is  some- 
thing in  Sanscrit  about  Indra,  a  god  who  recovered 
the  stolen  cattle  of  the  gods,  but  here  the  scent  is 
very  cold,  and  the  hound  at  fault,  though  it  seems 
that  the  Sanscrit  hero  was  the  sun  personified,  and 
that  he  had  horses  of  many  colours,  including  red  and 
white,  which  were  always  feminine,  as  the  horses  in 
Gaelic  stories  are,  and  which  had  wings  and  flew 
through  the  air.  These  were  "  Svankas,"  with  beautiful 
steps.  "Kohitas,"  red  or  brown;  Gaelic  horses  are 
often  described  as  "  Seang,"  "  Ruadh  "  ;  and  here  seems 
to  be  a  clue  which  is  worth  the  attention  of  Eastern 
scholars. 

There  is  a  mermaid  in  the  story,  and  mermaids  are 
mentioned  in  Irish,  and  in  Arabic,  and  in  Manks,  and 
Italian :  men  even  assert  that  they  have  seen  mermaids 
in  the  sea  within  the  last  few  years,  amongst  the 
Hebrides  and  off  Plymouth. 

There  are  creatures,  Falcon,  Wolf  and  Lion.     Two 


INTRODUCTION.  lvii 

of  them  were  natives  within  historic  times,  one  is  still ; 
but  the  third  is  a  foreigner.  There  is  an  Otter,  and  a 
Sea  Monster,  and  in  other  tales,  there  are  Bears  and 
Doves,  and  other  animals;  but  every  one  of  them, 
except  the  monster,  is  to  be  found  on  the  road  to 
the  land  where  Sanscrit  was  spoken,  and  all  these,  and 
many  more,  played  their  part  in  popular  tales  else- 
where, while  no  real  animal  is  ever  mentioned  which  is 
peculiar  to  lands  out  of  the  road  which  leads  overland 
to  India. 

Nearly  all  these  have  Gaelic  names,  and  most  of 
them  are  still  living  within  a  few  days'  journey  of  the 
Hebrides  under  other  names.  I  saw  a  live  wolf  from 
a  diligence  one  fine  morning  in  Brittany,  and  I  have 
seen  bears  in  Scandinavia  and  in  Germany.  The 
only  far-fetched  animal  is  the  Lion,  and  in  another 
story  a  similar  creature  appears  as  "Cu  Seang."  Here 
is  a  fresh  scent — for  Sing  is  Lion  in  India — and  may 
once  have  meant  Lion  in  Gaelic  ;  for  though  Leomhan 
is  the  word  now  used,  Seang  is  applied  to  anything 
slender  and  active.  Shune  is  a  dog  in  Sanscrit, 
Siunnach  a  fox  in  Gaelic,  and  there  are  many  other 
Gaelic  words  which  point  to  the  "eastern  origin  of 
Celtic  nations."  The  story  cannot  have  crossed  the  sea 
from  the  West.  It  is  therefore  probable  that  it  came 
from  the  East,  for  it  is  not  of  home  growth,  and  the 
question  is,  how  did  it  get  to  Barra  1 

It  seems  to  have  been  known  along  a  certain  track 
for  many  ages.  It  is  possible  that  it  came  from  the 
far  East  with  the  people,  and  that  it  has  survived  ever 
since.  It  is  hard  to  account  for  it  otherwise.  Those 
who  have  most  studied  the  subject  so  account  for 
popular  tales  elsewhere,  and  therefore,  Donald  Macphie's 


lviii  INTRODUCTION. 

story  of  the  Sea-Maiden  acquires  an  interest  not  all  its 
own. 

Much  has  been  written,  and  said,  and  discovered 
about  the  popular  migrations  which  have  poured  from 
East  to  West,  and  which  are  moving  on  still.  Philo- 
logy has  mapped  out  the  course  of  the  human  stream, 
and  here,  in  the  mind  of  an  old  fisherman,  unable  to 
read,  or  to  speak  any  language  but  his  own,  is  the  end 
of  a  clue  which  seems  to  join  Iran  and  Eirinn ;  as  a 
rafter  in  his  hut  may  link  him  with  the  Rocky  Moun- 
tains. 

Admit  that  this  so-called  fiction,  and  others  like  it, 
may  be  traditions,  which  have  existed  from  the  earliest 
of  times,  and  every  word  and  incident  acquires  an 
interest,  for  it  may  lead  to  something  else. 

The  story  certainly  grew  in  the  mind  of  man,  as  a 
tree  grows  from  a  seed,  but  when  or  where  1  It  has 
certainly  been  told  in  many  languages.  It  is  worth 
inquiring  how  many  races  have  told  it. 

The  incidents,  like  drift  trees,  have  been  associated 
with  people  and  events,  as  various  as  birds,  fish, 
alligators,  walrusses,  and  men  j  mountain  ranges,  and 
ocean  currents.  They  have  passed  through  the  minds 
of  Ovid  and  Donald  Macphie.  They  have  been 
adorned  by  poets,  painted  by  artists,  consecrated  by 
priests, — for  St.  George  is  the  patron  saint  of  England; 
and  now  we  find  that  which  may  have  sprung  from 
some  quarrel  about  a  cow,  and  which  has  passed 
through  so  many  changes,  dropping  into  forgetfulness 
in  the  mind  of  an  old  fisherman,  and  surrounded  with 
the  ideas  which  belong  to  his  every-day  life.  Ideas 
differing  from  those  of  the  people  who  first  invented 
the  story,  as  the  snow  of  the  Rocky  Mountains  differs 
from  peat-reek. 


INTRODUCTION.  lix 

Now,  to  look  forwards,  and  follow  in  imagination 
the  shoals  of  emigrants  from  Germany,  Scandinavia, 
France,  Ireland,  and  Scotland,  who  are  settled  in 
clumps,  or  scattered  over  America  and  Australia ;  to 
think  of  the  stories  which  have  been  gathered  in 
Europe  from  these  people  alone,  and  which  they  have 
most  certainly  carried  with  them,  and  will  tell  their 
children;  and  then  the  route  of  popular  tales  here- 
after, and  their  spread  in  former  ages,  can  be  traced 
and  may  be  guessed. 

I  have  inquired,  and  find  that  several  Islanders, 
who  used  to  tell  the  stories  in  Gaelic,  are  now  settled 
in  Australia  and  Canada.  One  of  my  relatives  was 
nearly  overwhelmed  with  hospitality  in  an  Australian 
village,  by  a  colony  of  Argyllshire  Celts,  who  had  found 
out  that  he  was  a  countryman. 

I  was  lately  told  of  a  party  of  men  who  landed  in 
South  America,  and  addressed  a  woman  whom  they 
found  in  a  hut,  in  seven  different  languages;  but  in 
vain.  At  last,  one  of  them  spoke  Gaelic,  which  he  had 
not  done  for  many  years,  and  she  answered,  "  Well,  it 
is  to  thyself  I  would  give  the  speech,"  for  she  was  a 
native  of  Strathglas. 

There  is  a  Gaelic  population  in  Upper  Canada : 
there  are  Highland  regiments  in  India  :  many  of  the 
Arctic  explorers  were  Highlanders,  and  most  of  the 
servants  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company  still  are : 
Dr.  Livingstone  is  in  South  Africa ;  and  what  is  true 
of  Highlanders  is  equally  true  of  Germans  and  Scandi- 
navians, they  are  spread  over  the  world.  In  short, 
the  "  migration  of  races,"  and  "  the  diffusion  of  popular 
tales,"  is  still  going  on,  the  whole  human  race  is 
mingling  together,  and  it  is  fair  w>  argue  from  such 


lx  INTRODUCTION. 

facts,  and  to  try  to  discover  that  which  is  unknown 
from  that  which  is  proved. 

What  is  true  of  one  Gaelic  story  is  true  of  nearly 
all ;  they  contain  within  themselves  evidence  that  they 
have  been  domesticated  in  the  country  for  a  long  time, 
and  that  they  came  from  the  East,  but  they  belong  to 
the  people  now,  wherever  they  came  from  j  and  they 
seem  also  to  belong  to  the  language. 

Poems  and  compositions  clearly  do.  In  the  prose 
tales,  when  animals  speak,  they  talk  in  their  natural 
key,  so  long  as  they  speak  Gaelic,  and  for  that  reason, 
among  others,  I  believe  them  to  be  old  traditions.  The 
little  birds  speak  in  the  key  of  all  little  birds  (ee);  they 
say,  "  beeg,  beeg."  The  crow  croaks  his  own  music 
when  he  says,  "gawrag,  gawrag."  When  driven  to  say, 
"  silly,  silly,"  he  no  longer  speaks  the  language  of 
nature.  Grimm's  German  frog  says,  "  warte,  warte," 
he  sings,  "  mach  mir  auf,"  and  talks  his  own  language. 
So  does  his  Gaelic  relative,  in  No.  33,  when  he  says, — 

11  A  chaomhag,  a  chaomhag, 
An  cuimhneach  leat 
An  gealladh  beag 
A  thug  thu  aig 
An  tobar  dhomh, 
A  ghaoil,  a  ghaoil  ?  " 

He  then  imitates  the  quarking  and  gurgling  of  real 
frogs  in  a  pond  in  spring,  in  sounds  which  no  Saxon 
letters  can  express  ;  but  when  he  sings, — 

"  Open  the  door,  my  hinney,  my  heart, 
Open  the  door,  my  ain  wee  thing, 
And  mind  the  words  that  you  and  I  spak', 
Down  in  the  meadow,  at  the  well  spring," 

he  is  speaking  in  a  foreign  tongue,  though  the  story 
has  been  domesticated  in  the  Lowlands  of  Scotland  for 


INTRODUCTION.  lxi 

many  a  long  day,  and  is  commonly  told  there  still. 
The  Scotch  story  has  probably  been  found  and  polished 
by  some  one  long  ago,  but  when  the  frog  comes 
"  loup,  louping,"  he  is  at  home  in  Low  Country  Scotch, 
and  these  words  are  probably  as  old  as  the  story  and 
the  language. 

If  Motherwell's  beautiful  nursery  songs  were  to 
be  collected  from  oral  recitation  anywhere,  they  would 
prove  themselues  Scotch  by  this  test :  The  watch-dog 
says,  "  wouff,  wouff ;  "  the  hen  is  "  chuckie  ;  "  the 
chickens,  "  wheetle,  wheeties  ;  "  the  cock  is  "  cockie- 
leerie-law ;  "  the  pigeon,  "  croodle-doo  ; "  the  cow  says, 
"  moo."  And  so  also  the  wood-pigeon  who  said,  "  Take 
two  sheep,  Taffy  take  two,"  spoke  English  ;  but  the 
blackcock,  and  cuckoo,  and  cock,  in  the  Norse  tales, 
who  quarrelled  about  a  cow,  are  easily  known  to  be 
foreigners  when  they  speak  English,  for  the  original 
Norse  alone  gives  their  true  note.  The  Gaelic  stories, 
tried  by  this  test,  certainly  belong  to  the  language  as 
they  do  to  the  people  ;  and  now  let  us  see  if  they  can 
teach  us  anything  about  the  people,  their  origin,  and 
their  habits,  past  and  present. 

First,  the  manners  are  generally  those  of  the  day. 
The  tales  are  like  the  feasts  of  the  pauper  maniac, 
Emperor  of  the  world,  who  confided  to  his  doctor  that 
all  his  rich  food  tasted  of  oatmeal  brose.  Kings  live 
in  cottages,  and  sit  on  low  stools.  When  they  have 
coaches,  they  open  the  door  themselves.  The  queen 
saddles  the  king's  horse.  The  king  goes  to  his  own 
stable  when  he  hears  a  noise  those.  Sportsmen  use 
guns.  The  fire  is  on  the  floor.  Supernatural  old 
women  are  found  spinning  "  beyound  "  it,  in  the  warm 
place  of  honour,  in  all  primitive  dwellings,  even  in  a 
Lapland   tent.     The  king's  mother  puts   on   the   fire 


lxii 


INTRODUCTION. 


and  sleeps  in  the  common  room,  as  a  peasant  does.  The 
cock  sleeps  on  the  rafters,  the  sheep  on  the  floor,  the 
bull  behind  the  door.  A  ladder  is  a  pole,  with  pegs 
stuck  through  it.  Horses  put  their  noses  kl  into " 
bridles.  When  all  Ireland  passes  in  review  before 
the  princess,  they  go  in  at  the  front  door  and  out  at 
the  back,  as  they  would  through  a  bothy ;  and  even 
the  unexplained  personage,  the  daughter  of  the  king 
of  the  skies,  has  maids  who  chatter  to  her  as  freely  as 
maids  do  to  Highland  mistresses.  When  the  prince  is 
at  death's  door  for  love  of  the  beautiful  lady  in  the 
swan's  down  robe,  and  the  queen  mother  is  in  despair, 
she  goes  to  the  kitchen  to  talk  over  the  matter. 

The  tales  represent  the  actual,  every-day  life  of  those 
who  tell  them,  with  general  fidelity.  They  have  done 
the  same,  in  all  likelihood,  time  out  of  mind,  and  that 
which  is  not  true  of  the  present  is,  in  all  probability, 
true  of  the  past ;  and  therefore  something  may  be 
learned  of  forgotten  ways  of  life. 

If  much  is  of  home  growth,  if  the  fight  with  the 
dragon  takes  place  at  the  end  of  a  dark,  quiet  Highland 
loch,  where  real  whales  actually  blow  and  splash,  there 
are  landscapes  which  are  not  painted  from  nature,  as 
she  is  seen  in  the  Isles,  and  these  may  be  real  pictures 
seen  long  ago  by  our  ancestors.  Men  ride  for  days 
through  forests,  though  the  men  who  tell  of  them  live 
in  small  islands,  where  there  are  only  drift  trees  and 
bog  pine.  There  are  traces  of  foreign  or  forgotten 
laws  or  customs.  A  man  buys  a  wife  as  he  would  a 
cow,  and  acquires  a  right  to  shoot  her,  which  is  acknow- 
ledged as  good  law. 

Caesar  tells  of  the  Gauls,  that  "  men  have  the  power 
of  life  and  death  over  their  wives,  as  well  as  their 
children."     It  appears  that  an  Iceland  betrothal  was 


INTRODUCTION.  lxiii 

little  more  than  the  purchase  of  a  wife ;  and  in  this  the 
story  may  be  a  true  picture  of  the  past. 

Men  are  bound  with  the  binding  of  the  three  smalls 
— waist,  ankles,  and  wrists — tightened  and  tortured 
The  conqueror  almost  invariably  asks  the  conquered 
what  is  his  "  eirig,"  an  old  law  term  for  the  price  of 
men's  blood,  which  varied  with  the  rank  of  the  injured 
man ;  and  when  the  vanquished  has  revealed  his  riches, 
the  victor  takes  his  life,  and  the  spoil ;  his  arms,  combs, 
basins,  dresses,  horses,  gold  and  silver ;  and  such 
deeds  may  have  been  done.  The  tales  which  treat  of 
the  wars  of  Eirinn  and  Lochlann,  and  are  full  of 
metrical  prose,  describe  arms  and  boats,  helmet,  spears, 
shields,  aud  other  gear ;  ships  that  are  drawn  on  shore, 
as  Icelandic  ships  really  were ;  boats  and  arms  similar 
to  those  which  are  figured  on  old  stones  in  Iona  and 
elsewhere,  and  are  sometimes  dug  out  of  old  graves  and 
peat  mosses.  I  believe  them  to  be  descriptions  of  real 
arms,  and  dresses,  manners,  and  events. 

For  example,  the  warriors  always  abuse  each  other 
before  they  fight.  So  do  the  heroes  of  Ossian  ;  so  do 
the  heroes  of  Homer  ;  so  do  soldiers  now.  In  the  Times 
of  the  29th  of  December  1859,  in  a  letter  from  the 
camp  at  Ceuta  in  this  passage  : — 

"  While  fighting,  even  when  only  exchanging  long  shots,  the 
Moors  keep  up  a  most  hideous  howling  and  shrieking,  vituperat- 
ing their  enemies  in  bad  Spanish,  and  making  the  mountains  re- 
sound with  the  often-repeated  epithet  of  'perros'  (dogs).  To 
this  the  Spaniards  condescend  not  to  reply,  except  with  bullets, 
although  in  the  civil  war  it  was  no  unusual  thing  to  hear  Carlist 
and  Christina  skirmishers  abusing  each  other,  and  especially  in- 
dulging in  unhandsome  reflections  upon  each  others'  Sovereign." 

Again,  the  fights  are  single  combats,  in  which  indi- 
viduals attack  masses  and  conquer.  So  were  the 
Homeric  combats.      What  will  be  the  story  told  in 


Ixiv  INTRODUCTION. 

Africa  by  the  grandson  of  the  Moor  here  described, 
when  he  sits  on  his  flat  roof  or  in  his  central  court  in 
Tetuan,  as  I  have  done  with  one  of  the  Jews  now  ruined; 
he  will  surely  tell  of  his  ancestor's  deeds,  repeat  the 
words  in  which  Achmed  abused  the  unbeliever,  and  tell 
how  he  shot  some  mystical  number  of  them  with  a 
single  ball. 

"  Upon  the  whole  they  stood  their  ground  very  stoutly,  and 
some  of  them  gave  proof  of  great  courage,  advancing  singly  along 
the  ridge  until  they  caught  sight  of  the  first  Spaniards  posted 
below  it,  when  they  discharged  their  espingardas  and  retreated. " 

"  Stories  "  had  begun  in  Morocco,  by  the  9th  of 
January  1860,  when  the  next  letter  appeared  : — 

"  The  Moors  have  been  giving  out  fantastical  histories  of  their 
victories  over  the  Spaniards,  of  their  having  taken  redoubts, 
which  they  might  have  held  had  they  thought  it  worth  while, 
and  in  which  they  would  have  captured  guns  if  the  Christians 
had  not  been  so  prudent  as  to  remove  them  beforehand.  These 
are  mere  fables." 

It  may  be  so,  but  Moors  seem  to  have  fought  as 
wild,  brave,  undisciplined  troops  have  always  fought — 
as  Homer's  Greeks  fought,  as  Highlanders  fought,  and 
as  Fionn  and  his  heroes  fought,  according  to  tradition. 
Omit  the  magic  of  Maghach  Colgar,  forget  that  Moors 
are  dark  men,  and  this  might  be  an  account  of  Diarmid 
and  Conan  in  the  story,  or  of  their  descendants  as  they 
were  described  in  1745  by  those  who  were  opposed  to 
them  : — 

"The  Moors  are  generally  tall  powerful  men,  of  ferocious 
aspect  and  great  agility,  and  their  mode  of  coming  on,  like  so 
many  howling  savages,  is  not  calculated  to  encourage  and  give 
confidence  to  lads  who  for  the  first  time  find  themselves  in  action. 
It  seems  nearly  impossible  to  make  them  prisoners.  In  one  en- 
counter (most  of  these  little  actions  are  made  up  of  a  number  of 


INTRODUCTION.  lxv 

small  fights  between  a  few  companies  of  Spaniards  and  detached 
bodies  of  the  Moors,  who  seem  to  have  no  idea  of  attacking  in 
battalion  or  otherwise  than  irregularly),  in  which  a  number  of 
Moors  were  killed,  one  of  them  was  surrounded  by  four  Caza- 
dores,  who  came  down  upon  him  with  fixed  bayonets,  shouting 
and  signing  to  him  not  to  fire,  and  that  they  would  give  him 
quarter.  The  Moor  took  no  heed  of  their  overtures,  levelled  his 
long  gun,  and  shot  one  of  them,  whereupon  he  was,  of  course, 
put  to  death  by  the  others. " 

So,  looking  to  facts  now  occurring,  and  to  history, 
"traditional  fictions"  look  very  true,  for  battles  are 
still  a  succession  of  single  combats,  in  which  both  sides 
abuse  each  other,  and  after  which  they  boast.  War  is 
rapine  and  cruel  bloodshed,  as  described  by  old  fishermen 
in  Barra,  and  by  the  Times'  correspondent  at  Tetuan ; 
and  it  is  not  altogether  the  chivalrous  pastime  which 
poets  have  sung. 

In  another  class  of  tales,  told  generally  as  plain 
narrative,  and  which  seem  to  belong  to  savage  times,  a 
period  appears  to  be  shadowed  out  when  iron  weapons 
were  scarce,  and  therefore  magical ;  perhaps  before  the 
wars  of  Eirinn  and  Lochlann  began ;  when  combs  were 
inventions  sufficiently  new  and  wonderful  to  be  magical 
also;  when  horses  were  sacred,  birds  sooth - say ers  ; 
apples,  oak  trees,  wells,  and  swine,  sacred  or  magical. 
In  these  the  touch  of  the  cold  steel  breaks  all  spells ;  to 
relieve  an  enchanted  prince  it  was  but  necessary  to  cut 
off  his  head;  the  touch  of  the  cold  sword  froze  the 
marrow  when  the  giant's  heads  leaped  on  again.  So 
Hercules  finished  the  Hydra  with  iron,  though  it  was 
hot.  The  white  sword  of  light  which  shone  so  that  the 
giant's  red-haired  servant  used  it  as  a  torch  when  he 
went  to  draw  water  by  night,  was  surely  once  a  rare 
bright  steel  sword,  when  most  swords  were  of  bronze,  as 

E 


lxvi  INTRODUCTION. 

they  were  in  early  times,  unless  it  is  still  older,  and  a 
mythological  flash  of  lightning. 

This  claidheamh  geal  solus  is  almost  always 
mentioned  as  the  property  of  giants,  or  of  other  super- 
natural beings,  and  is  one  of  the  magic  gifts  for  which 
men  contend  with  them,  and  fight  with  each  other ;  and 
in  this  the  Gaelic  tradition  agrees  with  other  popular 
lore. 

Fionn  had  a  magic  sword  forged  by  a  fairy  smith, 
according  to  a  story  sent  me  from  Islay,  by  Mr.  Car- 
michael.  King  Arthur  had  a  magic  sword.  The  Manks 
hero,  "  Olave  "  of  Norway,  had  a  sword  with  a  Celtic 
name,  "  Macabuin,"  made  by  a  smith  who  was  surely 
a  Celt — "Loan  Maclibhuin,"  though  he  was  "The 
dark  Smith  of  Drontheim "  in  the  story.*  King 
Arthur  and  his  sword  belong  to  the  Bretons  and  to 
many  other  languages,  besides  Welsh  ;  and  the  Bretons 
have  a  wild  war  song,  "  The  wine  of  the  Gauls,  and 
the  dance  of  the  sword,"  which  is  given  in  Barzaz 
Breiz  (1846). t 

There  is  a  magic  sword  in  the  Volsung  tale,  called 
"  Gram,"  which  was  the  gift  of  Odin ;  {  and  a  famous 

*  Train's  History  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  vol.  2,  p.  177. 

t  The  Gaelic  word  for  a  sword  proves  that  English,  French, 
Breton,  and  Gaelic  have  much  in  common — (Eng. )  glave,  (Fr.) 
glaive,  (Breton)  korol  ar  c'  hleze — dance  of  the  sword,  (Gaelic) 
claidheamh — pronounced,  glaive,  the  first  letter  being  a  soft  "c," 
or  hard  "  g,"  the  word  usually  spelt,  claymore.  Languages  said 
to  be  derived  from  Latin  do  not  follow  their  model  so  closely  as 
these  words  do  one  another — (Lat.)  gladius,  (Spanish)  espada, 
(Italian)  spada ;  and  the  northern  tongues  seem  to  have  pre- 
ferred some  original  which  resembles  the  English  word,  sword. 
If  ' '  spada  "  belongs  to  the  language  from  which  all  these  are 
supposed  to  have  started,  these  seem  to  have  used  it  for  a  more 
peaceful  iron  weapon,  a  spade. 

X  Norse  Tales,  Introduction,  62. 


INTRODUCTION.  lxvii 

sword  in  the  Niebungen  lied  ;  and  there  are  famous 
swords  in  many  popular  tales  j  but  an  iron  sword  was  a 
god  long  ago  amongst  the  Scythians.*  "  An  antique 
iron  sword  "  was  placed  on  a  vast  pile  of  brushwood  as 
a  temple  in  every  district,  at  the  seat  of  government, 
and  served  as  the  image  of  Mars.  Sacrifices  of  cattle 
and  of  horses  were  made  to  it,  and  "  more  victims  were 
offered  thus  than  to  all  the  rest  of  their  gods."  Even 
men  were  sacrificed ;  and  it  is  said  that  the  weapons 
found  in  Scythian  tombs  are  usually  of  bronze,  "  but 
the  sword  at  the  great  tomb  at  Kertch  was  of  iron." 
It  seems,  then,  that  an  iron  sword  really  was  once  wor- 
shipped by  a  people  with  whom  iron  was  rare.  Iron 
is  rare,  while  stone  and  bronze  weapons  are  common 
in  British  tombs,  and  the  sword  of  these  stories  is  a 
personage.  It  shines,  it  cries  out — the  lives  of  men 
are  bound  up  in  it.  In  one  story  a  fox  changes  him- 
self into  the  sword  of  light,  and  the  edge  of  the  real 
sword  being  turned  towards  a  wicked  "  muime,"  turned 
all  her  spells  back  upon  herself,  and  she  fell  a  withered 
fagot. 

And  so  this  mystic  sword,  may  perhaps,  have  been 
a  god  amongst  the  Celts,  or  the  god  of  the  people  with 
whom  Celts  contended  somewhere  on  their  long  jour- 
ney to  the  west.  It  is  a  fiction  now,  but  it  may  be 
founded  on  fact,  and  that  fact  probably  was  the  first 
use  of  iron. 

Amongst  the  stories  described  in  the  index  to  the 
Gaelic  MSS.  in  Edinburgh  is  one  in  which  the  hero 
goes  to  Scythia  and  to  Greece,  and  ends  his  adventures 
in  Ireland.  And  in  the  "Chronicles  of  the  Eri,"  1822, 
by  O'Conner,  chief   of   the   prostrated   people  of   his 

*  At  page  54  of  Rawlinson's  Herodotus,  vol.  3,  is  the  transla- 
tion of  the  passages  in  which  this  worship  is  described. 


lxviii  INTRODUCTION. 

nation,  Irish  is  usually  called  "the  Phoenician  dialect 
of  the  Scythian  language."  On  such  questions  I  will 
not  venture.  Celts  may  or  may  not  be  Scythians,  but 
as  a  collector  of  curiosities,  I  may  fairly  compare  my 
museum  with  other  curious  things ;  and  the  worship 
of  the  Scimitar,  2200  years  ago,  by  a  people  who  are 
classed  with  the  Indo-European  races,  appears  to  have 
some  bearing  on  all  magic  swords  from  the  time  of 
Herodotus  down  to  the  White  Sword  of  Light  of  the 
West  Highlands. 

If  iron  weapons,  to  which  supernatural  virtues  are 
ascribed,  acquired  their  virtue  when  iron  was  rare,  and 
when  its  qualities  were  sufficiently  new  to  excite 
wonder — then  other  things  made  of  iron  should  have 
like  virtues  ascribed  to  them,  and  the  magic  should  be 
transferred  from  the  sword  to  other  new  inventions ; 
and  such  is  the  case. 

In  all  popular  tales  of  which  I  know  anything,  some 
mysterious  virtue  is  attributed  to  iron  ;  and  in  many  of 
them  a  gun  is  the  weapon  which  breaks  the  spells.  In 
the  West  it  is  the  same. 

A  keeper  told  me  that  he  was  once  called  into  a 
house  by  an  old  woman  to  cure  her  cow,  which  was 
"  bewitched,"  and  which  was  really  sick.  The  cere- 
mony was  performed,  according  to  the  directions  of  the 
old  woman,  with  becoming  gravity.  The  cow  was  led 
out,  and  the  gun  loaded,  and  then  it  was  solemnly  fired 
off  over  the  cow's  back,  and  the  cure  was  supposed  to 
be  complete. 

In  the  story  of  the  hunter,  when  the  widow's  son 
aims  at  the  enchanted  deer,  he  sees  through  the  spell, 
only  when  he  looks  over  the  sight,  and  while  the  gun 
is  cocked,  but  when  he  has  aimed  three  times,  the  spell 
is  broken  and  the  lady  is  free. 


INTRODUCTION.  lxix 

So  in  a  story  (I  think  Irish)  which  I  have  read 
somewhere,  a  man  shoots  from  his  hip  at  a  deer,  which 
seems  to  be  an  old  man,  whenever  he  looks  over  the 
sight.  He  aims  well,  and  when  he  comes  up  finds 
only  the  body  of  a  very  old  man,  which  crumbles  into 
dust,  and  is  carried  away  by  the  wind,  bit  by  bit,  as 
he  looks  at  it.  An  iron  weapon  is  one  of  the  guards 
which  the  man  takes  into  the  fairy  hill  in  the  story  of 
the  Smith,  No.  28.  A  sharpshooter  fires  off  his  gun 
to  frighten  the  troll  in  "  the  Old  Dame  and  her  Hen  ;■" 
the  boy  throws  the  steel  from  his  tinder  box  over  the 
magic  horse,  and  tames  him  at  once  in  the  Princess  on 
the  Glass  Hill.*  And  so  on  throughout,  iron  is  invested 
with  magic  power  in  popular  tales  and  mythology  j  the 
last  iron  weapon  invented,  and  the  first,  the  gun  and 
the  sword,  are  alike  magical ;  a  "  bit  of  a  rusty  reap- 
ing hook  "  does  equally  good  service,  and  an  old  horse 
shoe  is  as  potent  a  spell  against  the  powers  of  evil  as 
any  known ;  for  one  will  be  found  on  most  stable  doors 
in  England. 

Now  comes  the  question,  Who  were  these  powers  of 
evil  who  cannot  resist  iron  1  These  fairies  who  shoot 
stone  arrows,  and  are  of  the  foes  to  the  human  race  ? 
Is  all  this  but  a  dim,  hazy  recollection  of  war  between 
a  people  who  had  iron  weapons  and  a  race  who  had 
not  1  the  race  whose  remains  are  found  all  over  Europe  ? 

If  these  were  wandering  tribes  they  had  leaders,  if 
they  were  warlike  they  had  weapons.  There  is  a 
smith  in  the  pantheon  of  many  nations.  Vulcan  was 
a  smith  ;  Thor  wielded  a  hammer ;  even  Fionn  had  a 
hammer,  which  was  heard  in  Lochlan  when  struck 
in  Eirinn,  according  to  the  story  found  midway  in 
Barra.     Fionn  may  have  borrowed  his  hammer  from 

*  Norse  Tales,  Nos.  3  and  13. 


lxx 


INTRODUCTION. 


Thor  long  ago,  or  both  may  have  got  theirs  from 
Vulcan,  or  all  three  may  have  brought  hammers  with 
them  from  the  land  where  some  primeval  smith 
wielded  the  first  sledge  hammer,  but  may  not  all  these 
smith  gods  be  the  smiths  who  made  iron  weapons  for 
those  who  fought  with  the  skin-clad  warriors  who  shot 
flint  arrows,  and  who  are  now  bogles,  fairies,  and  demon  1 

In  any  case,  tales  about  smiths  seem  to  belong  to 
mythology,  and  to  be  common  property.  Thus  the 
Norse  smith,  who  cheated  the  evil  one,*  has  an  Irish 
equivalent  in  the  Three  Wishes,!  and  a  Gaelic  story, 
"  The  Soldier,"  is  of  the  same  class,  and  has  a  Norse 
equivalent  in  the  Lad  and  the  Deil.  There  are  many 
of  the  same  class  in  Grimm ;  and  the  same  ideas  per- 
vade them  all.  There  is  war  between  the  smiths  and 
soldiers,  aud  the  devil ;  iron,  and  horses'  hoofs,  ham- 
mers, swords,  and  guns  come  into  play ;  the  fiend  is 
a  fool,  and  he  has  got  the  worst  of  the  fight ;  according 
to  the  people,  at  all  events,  ever  since  St.  Dunstan  took 
him  by  the  nose  with  a  pair  of  tongs.  In  all  probability 
the  fiend  of  popular  tales  is  own  brother  to  the  Gruagach 
and  Glashan,  and  was  once  a  skin-clad  savage,  or  the 
god  of  a  savage  race. 

If  this  theory  be  correct,  if  these  are  dim  recollec- 
tions of  savage  times  and  savage  people,  then  other 
magic  gear,  the  property  of  giants,  fairies,  and  bogles, 
should  resemble  things  which  are  precious  now  amongst 
savage  or  half  civilised  tribes,  or  which  really  have  been 
prized  amongst  the  old  inhabitants  of  these  islands,  or 
of  other  parts  of  the  world  ;  and  such  is  often  the  case. 

The  work  of  art  which  is  most  sought  after  in 
Gaelic  tales,  next  to  the  white  glave  of  light,  is  a  pair 
of  combs. 


*  Norse  Tales,  16,  53. 


t  Carleton.     Dublin,  1846.     P.  330. 


INTRODUCTION.  lxxi 

ClR  MHIN  OIR  AGUS  CIR  GHARBH  AIRGIOD,  a  fine  golden 

comb  and  a  coarse  comb  of  silver,  are  worth  a  deadly 
fight  with  the  giants  in  many  a  story. 

The  enchanted  prince,  when  he  ceases  to  be  a  raven, 
is  found  as  a  yellow  ringletted  beautiful  man,  with  a 
golden  comb  in  the  one  hand  and  a  silver  comb  in  the 
other.  Maol  a'  Chliobain  invades  the  giant's  house  to 
steal  the  same  things  for  the  king.  When  the  coarse 
comb  is  forgotten  the  king's  coach  falls  as  a  withered 
faggot.  In  another  story  which  I  have,  it  is  said  of  a 
herd  who  had  killed  a  giant  and  taken  his  castle,  "  He 
went  in  and  he  opened  the  first  room  and  there  was 
not  a  thing  in  it.  He  opened  another,  and  it  was  full 
of  gold  and  silver  and  the  treasures  of  the  world. 
Then  he  opened  a  drawer,  and  he  took  a  comb  out 
of  it,  and  when  he  would  give  a  sweep  with  it  on  the 
one  side  of  his  head,  a  shower  of  gold  would  fall  out  of 
that  side  ;  and  when  he  would  give  a  sweep  on  the 
other  side,  a  shower  of  silver  would  fall  from  that  side. 
Then  he  opened  another  room,  and  it  was  full  of  every 
sort  of  food  that  a  man  might  think  there  had  ever 
been." 

And  so  in  many  other  instances  the  comb  is  a  trea- 
sure for  which  men  contend  with  giants.  It  is  asso- 
ciated with  gold,  silver,  dresses,  arms,  meat,  and  drink; 
and  it  is  magical. 

It  is  not  so  precious  in  other  collections  of  popular 
tales,  but  the  same  idea  is  to  be  traced  in  them  all. 
There  is  a  water-spirit  in  Grimm  which  catches  two 
children,  and  when  they  escape  they  throw  behind  them 
a  brush,  a  comb,  and  a  mirror,  which  replace  the  stone, 
the  twig,  and  the  bladder  of  water,  which  the  Gaelic 
prince  finds  in  the  ear  of  the  filly,  and  throws  behind 
him  to  arrest  the  giant  who  is  in  pursuit.     In  the  nix  of 


lxxii  INTRODUCTION. 

the  mill  pond  an  old  woman  gives  a  golden  comb  to  a 
lady,  and  she  combs  her  black  hair  by  the  light  of  the 
moon  at  the  edge  of  a  pond,  and  the  water-spirit  shews 
the  husband's  head.  So  also  in  Snow  White  the  wicked 
queen  combs  the  hair  of  the  beautiful  princess  with  a 
poisoned  comb,  and  throws  her  into  a  deadly  magic 
sleep.  That  princess  is  black,  white,  and  red,  like  the 
giant  in  No.  2,  and  like  the  lady  in  Conal ;  and  like  a 
lady  in  a  Breton  story  ;  and  generally  foreign  stories  in 
which  combs  are  mentioned  as  magical,  have  equivalents 
in  Gaelic.  For  example,  the  incidents  in  the  French 
story  of  Prince  Cherie,  in  which  gifted  children  comb 
jewels  from  their  hair,  bear  a  general  resemblance  to 
many  Gaelic  and  German  stories.  Now  there  is  a  reason 
for  everything,  though  it  is  not  always  easy  to  find  it 
out ;  and  the  importance  of  the  comb  in  these  stories 
may  have  a  reason  also. 

In  the  first  place,  though  every  civilized  man  and 
woman  now  owns  a  comb,  it  is  a  work  of  art  which 
necessarily  implies  the  use  of  tools,  and  considerable 
mechanical  skill.  A  man  who  had  nothing  but  a  knife 
could  hardly  make  a  comb ;  and  a  savage  with  flint 
weapons  would  have  to  do  without.  A  man  with  a 
comb,  then,  implies  a  man  who  has  made  some  progress 
in  civilization  ;  and  a  man  without  a  comb,  a  savage, 
who,  if  he  had  learned  its  use,  might  well  covet  such  a 
possession.  If  a  black-haired  savage,  living  in  the  cold 
north,  were  to  comb  his  hair  on  a  frosty  night,  it  is  to 
be  presumed  that  the  same  thing  would  happen  which 
now  takes  place  when  fair  ladies  or  civilized  men  comb 
their  hair.  Crackling  sparks  of  electricity  were  surely 
produced  when  men  first  combed  their  hair  with  a  bone 
comb ;  and  it  seems  to  need  but  a  little  fancy  and  a 
long  time  to  change  the  bright  sparks  into  brilliant 


INTRODUCTION.  lxxiii 

jewels,  or  glittering  gold  and  silver  and  bright  stars, 
and  to  invest  the  rare  and  costly  thing  which  produced 
such  marvels  with  magic  power. 

There  is  evidence  throughout  all  popular  tales  that 
combs  were  needed.  Translations  are  vague,  because 
translators  are  bashful ;  but  those  who  have  travelled 
among  half-civilized  people,  understand  what  is  meant 
when  the  knight  lays  his  head  on  the  lady's  knee,  and 
she  "  dresses  his  hair."  In  German,  Norse,  Breton,  and 
Gaelic,  it  is  the  same. 

From  the  mention  of  the  magic  comb,  then,  it 
appears  that  these  legends  date  from  an  early,  rude 
period,  for  the  time  when  combs  were  so  highly  prized, 
and  so  little  used,  is  remote. 

In  Wilson's  "  Prehistoric  Annals  of  Scotland,"  page 
424,  is  a  drawing  of  an  old  bone  comb  of  very  rude 
workmanship,  found  in  a  burgh  in  Orkney,  together 
with  part  of  a  deer's  horn  and  a  human  skeleton ; 
another  was  found  in  a  burgh  in  Caithness ;  a  third  is 
mentioned  ;  and  I  believe  that  such  combs  are  com- 
monly found  in  old  British  graves. 

At  page  554,  another  drawing  is  given  of  one  of  a 
pair  of  combs  found  in  a  grave  in  Orkney.  The  teeth 
of  the  comb  were  fastened  between  plates  of  bone, 
rivetted  together  with  copper  nails,  and  the  comb  was 
decorated  with  ornamental  carvings.  With  these, 
brooches  of  a  peculiar  form  were  discovered.  Similar 
brooches  are  commonly  found  in  Denmark.  I  have 
seen  many  of  them  in  museums  at  Bergen  and  Copen- 
hagen ;  and  I  own  a  pair  which  were  found  in  an  old 
grave  in  Islay,  together  with  an  amber  bead  and  some 
fragments  of  rusted  iron. 

A  bronze  comb  is  also  mentioned  at  page  300,  as 
having  been  found  in  Queen  Mary's  Mount,  a  great 


Ixxiv  INTRODUCTION. 

cairn  near  the  battlefield  of  Langside,  which  was  pulled 
to  pieces  to  build  stone  dykes,  and  which  was  found 
to  contain  rude  arms,  bones,  rings  of  bituminous  shale, 
and  other  things  which  are  referred  to  very  early  pre- 
historic ages. 

At  page  500  Mr.  Wilson  mentions  a  great  number 
of  monuments  in  Scotland  on  which  combs  are  repre- 
sented, together  with  two-handed  mirrors  and  symbols, 
for  which  deep  explanations  and  hidden  meanings  have 
been  sought  and  found.  Combs,  mirrors,  and  shears 
are  also  represented  on  early  Roman  tombs,  and  hidden 
meanings  have  been  assigned  to  them ;  but  Mr.  Wilson 
holds  that  these  are  but  indications  of  the  sex  of  the 
buried  person.  Joining  all  this  together,  and  placing 
it  besides  the  magic  attributed  to  combs  in  these  High- 
land stones,  this  view  appears  to  be  the  most  reason- 
able. The  sword  of  the  warrior  is  very  commonly 
sculptured  on  the  old  gravestones  in  the  Western  Isles. 
It  is  often  twisted  into  a  cross,  and  woven  with  those 
endless  knots  which  resemble  certain  eastern  designs. 
Strange  nondescript  animals  are  often  figured  about  the 
sword,  with  tails  which  curl,  and  twist,  and  sprout  into 
leaves,  and  weave  themselves  into  patterns.  Those 
again  resemble  illuminations  in  old  Irish  and  Gaelic 
manuscripts,  and  when  the  most  prized  of  the  warrior's 
possessions  is  thus  figured  on  his  tomb,  and  is  buried 
with  him,  it  is  but  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  comb, 
which  was  so  valued  as  to  be  buried  with  its  owner, 
was  figured  on  the  monument  for  the  same  reason ; 
and  that  sword  and  comb  were,  in  fact,  very  highly 
prized  at  some  period  by  those  who  are  buried  in  the 
tombs,  as  the  stories  now  represent  that  they  were  by 
men  and  giants. 


INTRODUCTION.  1XXV 

So  here  again  the  popular  fictions  seem  to  have  a 
foundation  of  fact. 

Another  magical  possession  is  the  apple.  It  is 
mentioned  more  frequently  in  Gaelic  tales  than  in  any 
collection  which  I  know,  but  the  apple  plays  its  part 
in  Italian,  German,  and  Norse  also.  When  the  hero 
wishes  to  pass  from  Islay  to  Ireland,  he  pulls  sixteen 
apples  and  throws  them  into  the  sea,  one  by  one,  and 
he  steps  from  one  to  the  other.  When  the  giant's 
daughter  runs  away  with  the  king's  son,  she  cuts  an 
apple  into  a  mystical  number  of  small  bits,  and  each 
bit  talks.  When  she  kills  the  giant  she  puts  an  apple 
under  the  hoof  of  the  magic  filly  and  he  dies,  for  his 
life  is  in  the  apple,  and  it  is  crushed.  When  the  byre 
is  cleansed,  it  is  so  clean  that  a  golden  apple  would  rnn 
from  end  to  end  and  never  raise  a  stain.  There  is  a 
gruagach  who  has  a  golden  apple,  which  is  thrown  at 
all  comers,  and  unless  they  are  able  to  catch  it  they 
die ;  when  it  is  caught  and  thrown  back  by  the  hero, 
Gruagach  an  Ubhail  dies.  There  is  a  game  called 
cluich  an  ubhail,  the  apple  play,  which  seems  to  have 
been  a  deadly  game  whatever  it  was.  When  the  king's 
daughter  transports  the  soldier  to  the  green  island 
on  the  magic  tablecloth,  he  finds  magic  apples  which 
transform  him,  and  others  which  cure  him,  and  by 
which  he  transforms  the  cruel  princess  and  recovers 
his  magic  treasures.  In  German  a  cabbage  does  the 
same  thing. 

When  the  two  eldest  idle  king's  sons  go  out  to 
herd  the  giant's  cattle,  they  find  an  apple  tree  whose 
fruit  moves  up  and  down  as  they  vainly  strive  to 
pluck  it. 

And  so  on  throughout,  whenever  an  apple  is  men- 


lxxvi  INTRODUCTION. 

tioned  in  Gaelic  stories  it  has  something  marvellous 
about  it. 

So  in  German,  in  the  Man  of  Iron,  a  princess  throws 
a  golden  apple  as  a  prize,  which  the  hero  catches  three 
times  and  carries  off  and  wins. 

In  Snow  White,  where  the  poisoned  comb  occurs, 
there  is  a  poisoned  magic  apple  also. 

In  the  Old  Griffin,  the  sick  princess  is  cured  by  rosy- 
cheeked  apples. 

In  the  Giant  with  the  Three  Golden  Hairs,  one  of 
the  questions  to  be  solved  is,  why  a  tree  which  used  to 
bear  golden  apples  does  not  now  bear  leaves  1  and  the 
next  question  is  about  a  well. 

So  in  the  White  Snake,  a  servant  who  acquires  the 
knowledge  of  the  speech  of  birds  by  tasting  a  white 
snake,  helps  creatures  in  distress,  gets  their  aid,  and 
procures  a  golden  apple  from  three  ravens,  which 
"flew  over  the  sea  even  to  the  end  of  the  world,  where 
stands  the  tree  of  life."  When  he  had  got  the  apple, 
he  and  the  princess  ate  it,  and  married  and  lived  happily 
ever  after. 

So  in  Wolf's  collection,  in  the  story  of  the  Won- 
derful Hares,  a  golden  apple  is  the  gift  for  which  the 
finder  is  to  gain  a  princess;  and  that  apple  grew  on 
a  sort  of  tree  of  which  there  was  but  one  in  the  whole 
world. 

In  Norse  it  is  the  same ;  the  princess  on  the  Glass 
Hill  held  three  golden  apples  in  her  lap,  and  he  who 
could  ride  up  the  hill  and  carry  off  the  apples  was  to 
win  the  prize ;  and  the  princess  rolled  them  down  to 
the  hero,  and  they  rolled  into  his  shoe. 

The  good  girl  plucked  the  apples  from  the  tree 
which  spoke  to  her  when  she  went  down  the  well  to 
the  underground  world  ;  but  the  ill-tempered  step-sister 


INTRODUCTION.  lxxvii 

thrashed  down  the  fruit ;  and  when  the  time  of  trial 
came,  the  apple  tree  played  its  part  and  protected  the 
good  girl. 

So  in  French,  a  singing  apple  is  one  of  the  marvels 
which  the  Princess  Belle  Etoile,  and  her  brothers  and 
her  cousin,  bring  from  the  end  of  the  world,  after  all 
manner  of  adventures ;  and  in  that  story  the  comb, 
the  stars  and  jewels  in  the  hair,  the  talking  sooth- 
saying bird,  the  magic  water,  the  horse,  the  wicked 
step-mother,  and  the  dragon,  all  appear ;  and  there  is 
a  Gaelic  version  of  that  story.  In  short,  that  French 
story  agrees  with  Gaelic  stories,  and  with  a  certain 
class  of  German  tales ;  and  contains  within  itself  much 
of  the  machinery  and  incident  which  is  scattered  else- 
where, in  collections  of  tales  gathered  in  modern  times 
amongst  the  people  of  various  countries. 

So  again  in  books  of  tales  of  older  date,  and  in  other 
languages,  apples  and  marvels  are  associated. 

In  Straparola  is  an  Italian  story  remarkably  like 
the  Gaelic  Sea  Maiden,  and  clearly  the  same  in  ground- 
work as  Princess  Belle  Etoile.  A  lady,  when  she  has 
lost  her  husband,  goes  off  to  the  Atlantic  Ocean  with 
three  golden  apples ;  and  the  mermaid  who  had  swal- 
lowed the  husband,  shews  first  his  head,  then  his  body 
to  the  waist,  and  then  to  his  knees ;  each  time  for  a 
golden  apple  ;  and  the  incidents  of  that  story  are  all 
to  be  found  elsewhere,  and  most  of  them  are  in 
Gaelic. 

So  again,  in  the  Arabian  Nights,  there  is  a  long 
story,  The  Three  Apples,  which  turns  upon  the  stealing 
of  one,  which  was  a  thing  of  great  price,  though  it  was 
not  magical  in  the  story. 

So  in  classical  times,  an  apple  of  discord  was  the 
prize   of   the   fairest ;  and   the  small  beginning  from 


lxxviii  INTRODUCTION. 

which  so  much  of  all  that  is  most  famous  in  ancient 
lore  takes  its  rise ;  three  golden  apples  were  the  prize 
of  one  of  the  labours  of  Hercules,  and  these  grew  in  a 
garden  which  fable  has  placed  far  to  the  westwards, 
and  learned  commentators  have  placed  in  the  Cape 
Verde  Islands. 

So  then  it  appears  that  apples  have  been  mysterious 
and  magical  from  the  earliest  of  times  j  that  they 
were  sought  for  in  the  west,  and  valued  in  the  east  j 
and  now  when  the  popular  tales  of  the  far  west  are 
examined,  apples  are  the  most  important  of  natural 
productions,  and  invested  with  the  magic  which  belongs 
to  that  which  is  old  and  rare,  and  which  may  once  have 
been  sacred. 

It  is  curious  that  the  forbidden  fruit  is  almost  always 
mentioned  in  English  as  an  apple ;  and  this  notion 
prevails  in  France  to  such  a  degree  that  when  that  mad 
play,  La  Propriete  c'est  le  Vol,  was  acted  in  Paris  in 
1846,  the  first  scene  represented  the  Garden  of  Eden 
with  a  tree,  and  a  board  on  which  was  written  "  il  est 
defendu  de  manger  de  ces  pommes." 

And  it  is  stated  in  grave  histories  that  the  Celtic 
priests  held  apples  sacred  j  so  here  again  popular  tales 
hold  their  own. 

Again,  supposing  tales  to  be  old  traditions,  some- 
thing may  be  gleaned  from  them  of  the  past.  Horses, 
for  example,  must  once  have  been  strange  and  rare,  or 
sacred,  amongst  the  Celts,  as  among  other  races. 

The  horses  of  the  Vedas,  which  drew  the  chariot 
of  the  sun,  appear  to  have  been  confused  with  the  sun- 
god  of  Indian  mythology.  Horses  decided  the  fate  of 
kingdoms  in  Persia,  according  to  Herodotus.  They 
were  sacred  when  Phaeton  drove  the  chariot  of  the 
sun.     The  Scandinavian  gods  had  horses,  according  to 


INTRODUCTION.  lxxix 

the  Edda.  They  are  generally  supernatural  in  Grimm's 
German  stories,  in  Norse  tales,  in  French,  and  in  many 
other  collections.     They  are  wonderful  in  Breton  tales. 

When  the  followers  of  Columbus  first  took  horses 
to  America,  they  struck  terror  into  the  Indians,  and 
they  and  their  riders  were  demigods  j  because  strange 
and  terrible. 

Horses  were  surely  feared,  or  worshipped,  or  prized, 
by  Celts,  for  places  are  named  after  them.  Penmarch 
in  Brittany,  means  horse-head  or  hill.  Ardincaple  in 
Scotland  means  the  mare's  height,  and  there  are  many 
other  places  with  similar  names. 

In  Gaelic  tales,  horses  are  frequently  mentioned, 
and  more  magic  properties  are  attributed  to  them  than 
elsewhere  in  popular  lore. 

In  No.  1,  horses  play  a  very  prominent  part ;  and 
in  some  versions  of  that  tale,  the  heroine  is  a  lady 
transformed  into  a  grey  mare.  It  is  to  be  hoped,  for 
the  hero's  sake,  that  she  did  not  prove  herself  the  better 
horse  when  she  resumed  her  human  form. 

In  No.  3,  there  is  a  horse  race.  In  No.  4,  there 
are  mythical  horses ;  and  in  an  Irish  version  of  that 
story,  told  me  in  August,  1860,  by  an  Irish  blind 
fiddler  on  board  the  Lochgoilhead  boat,  horses  again 
play  their  part,  with  hounds  and  hawks.  In  No.  14 
there  are  horses ;  in  one  version  there  is  a  magic 
"powney."  In  22,  a  horse  again  appears,  and  gives 
the  foundation  for  the  riddle  on  which  the  story  turns. 
In  40,  a  horse  is  one  of  the  prizes  to  be  gained.  In 
41,  the  horse  plays  the  part  of  bluebeard.  In  48,  a 
horse  is  to  be  hanged  as  a  thief.  In  51,  the  hero 
assumes  the  form  of  a  horse.  In  many  other  tales 
which  I  have  in  manuscript,  men  appear  as  horses, 
and  reappear  as  men  ;  and  horses  are  marvellous.     In 


1XXX  INTRODUCTION. 

one  tale,  a  man's  son  is  sent  to  a  warlock  and  becomes 
a  horse,  and  all  sorts  of  creatures  besides.  In  another, 
a  man  gets  a  wishing  grey  filly  from  the  wind,  in 
return  for  some  meal  which  the  wind  had  blown  away ; 
and  there  is  a  whole  series  of  tales  which  relate  to 
water-horses,  and  which  seem,  more  than  all  the  rest, 
to  shew  the  horse  as  a  degraded  god,  and  as  it  would 
seem,  a  water-god,  and  a  destroyer. 

I  had  intended  to  group  all  these  stories  together, 
as  an  illustration  of  this  part  of  the  subject,  but  time 
and  space  are  wanting.  These  shew  that  in  the  Isle  of 
Man,  and  in  the  Highlands  of  Scotland,  people  still 
firmly  believe  in  the  existence  of  a  water-horse.  In 
Sutherland  and  elsewhere,  many  believe  that  they  have 
seen  these  fancied  animals.  I  have  been  told  of  English 
sportsmen  who  went  in  pursuit  of  them,  so  circum- 
stantial were  the  accounts  of  those  who  believed  that 
they  had  seen  them.  The  witnesses  are  so  numerous, 
and  their  testimony  agrees  so  well,  that  there  must 
be  some  old  deeply-rooted  Celtic  belief  which  clothes 
every  dark  object  with  the  dreaded  form  of  the  Each 
Uisge.  The  legends  of  the  doings  of  the  water  kelpie 
all  point  to  some  river  god  reduced  to  be  a  fuath  or 
bogle.  The  bay  or  grey  horse  grazes  at  the  lake-side, 
and  when  he  is  mounted,  rushes  into  the  loch  and 
devours  his  rider.  His  back  lengthens  to  suit  any 
number;  men's  hands  stick  to  his  skin ;  he  is  harnessed 
to  a  plough,  and  drags  the  team  and  the  plough  into 
the  loch,  and  tears  the  horses  to  bits ;  he  is  killed,  and 
nothing  remains  but  a  pool  of  water ;  he  falls  in  love 
with  a  lady,  and  when  he  appears  as  a  man  and  lays 
his  head  on  her  knee  to  be  dressed,  the  frightened  lady 
finds  him  out  by  the  sand  amongst  his  hair.  "  Tha 
gainmheach  ann."     There  is  sand  in  it,  she  says,  and 


INTRODUCTION.  lxxxi 

when  he  sleeps  she  makes  her  escape.  He  appears  as 
an  old  woman,  and  is  put  to  bed  with  a  bevy  of  dam- 
sels in  a  mountain  shealing,  and  he  sucks  the  blood  of 
all,  save  one,  who  escapes  over  a  burn,  which,  water- 
horse  as  he  is,  he  dare  not  cross.  In  short,  these  tales 
and  beliefs  have  led  me  to  think  that  the  old  Celts 
must  have  had  a  destroying  water-god,  to  whom  the 
horse  was  sacred,  or  who  had  the  form  of  a  horse. 

Unless  there  is  some  such  foundation  for  the  stories, 
it  is  strange  to  find  the  romances  of  boatmen  and 
fishermen  inhabiting  small  islands,  filled  with  incidents 
which  seem  rather  to  belong  to  a  wandering,  horse- 
riding  tribe.  But  the  tales  of  Norwegian  sailors  are 
similar  in  this  respect;  and  the  Celtic  character  has 
in  fact  much  which  savours  of  a  tribe  who  are  boatmen 
by  compulsion,  and  would  be  horsemen  if  they  could. 
Though  the  Western  islanders  are  fearless  boatmen, 
and  brave  a  terrible  sea  in  very  frail  boats,  very  few  of 
them  are  in  the  royal  navy,  and  there  are  not  many 
who  are  professed  sailors.  On  the  other  hand,  they 
are  bold  huntsmen  in  the  far  north  of  America.  I  do 
not  think  that  they  are  successful  farmers  anywhere, 
though  they  cling  fondly  to  a  spot  of  land,  but  they  are 
famous  herdsmen  at  home  and  abroad.  On  the  misty 
hills  of  old  Scotland  or  the  dry  plains  of  Australia,  they 
still  retain  the  qualities  which  made  a  race  of  hunters, 
and  warriors,  and]  herdsmen,  such  as  are  represented 
in  the  poems  of  Ossian,  and  described  in  history  ;  and 
even  within  the  small  bounds  which  now  contain  the 
Celtic  race  in  Europe,  their  national  tastes  appear  in 
strong  relief.  Every  deer-stalker  will  bear  witness  to 
the  eagerness  of  Highlanders  in  pursuit  of  their  old 
favourite  game,  the  dun  deer ;  the  mountaineer  shews 
what  he  is  when  his  eye  kindles  and  his  nostril  dilates 

F 


lxxxii  INTRODUCTION. 

at  the  sight  of  a  noble  stag ;  when  the  gillie  forgets  his 
master  in  his  keenness,  and  the  southern  lags  behind  ; 
when  it  is  "bellows  to  mend,"  and  London  dinners  are 
remembered  with  regret.  Tyree  is  famous  for  its  breed 
of  ponies  :  it  is  a  common  bit  of  Highland  "chaff"  to 
neigh  at  a  Tyree  man,  and  other  islands  have  famous 
breeds  also.  It  is  said  that  men  almost  starving  rode 
to  ask  for  meal  in  a  certain  place,  and  would  not  sell 
their  ponies ;  and  though  this  is  surely  a  fiction,  it  rests 
on  the  fact  that  the  islanders  are  fond  of  horses.  At 
fairs  and  markets  all  over  the  Highlands  ponies  abound. 
Nothing  seems  to  amaze  a  Highlander  more  than  to  see 
any  one  walk  who  can  afford  to  ride ;  and  he  will  chase 
a  pony  over  a  hill,  and  sit  in  misery  on  a  packsaddle 
when  he  catches  the  beast,  and  endure  discomfort,  that 
he  may  ride  in  state  along  a  level  road  for  a  short  distance. 
Irish  Celts,  who  have  more  room  for  locomotion, 
cultivate  their  national  taste  for  horse  flesh  in  a  higher 
degree.  An  Irish  hunter  is  valued  by  many  an  Eng- 
lish Nimrod ;  all  novels  which  purport  to  represent 
Irish  character  paint  Irishmen  as  bold  riders,  and  Irish 
peasants  as  men  who  take  a  keen  interest  in  all  that 
belongs  to  hunting  and  racing.  There  is  not,  so  far 
as  I  know,  a  single  novel  founded  on  the  adventures 
of  an  Irish  or  Highland  sailor  or  farmer,  though  there 
are  plenty  of  fictitious  warriors  and  sportsmen  in 
prose  and  in  verse.  There  are  endless  novels  about 
English  sailors,  and  sportsmen,  and  farmers,  and  though 
novels  are  fictions,  they  too  rest  on  facts.  The 
Celts,  and  Saxons,  and  Normans,  and  Danes,  and 
Komans,  who  help  to  form  the  English  race,  are  at 
home  on  shore  and  afloat,  whether  their  steeds  are  of 
flesh  and  blood,  or,  as  the  Gaelic  poet  says,  of  brine. 
The  Celtic  race  are  most  at  home  amongst  their  cattle 


INTRODUCTION.  lxxxiii 

and  on  the  hills,  and  I  believe  it  to  be  strictly  in 
accordance  with  the  Celtic  character  to  find  horses  and 
chariots  playing  a  part  in  their  national  traditions  and 
poems  of  all  ages. 

I  do  not  know  enough  of  our  Welsh  cousins  to  be 
able  to  speak  of  their  tastes  in  this  respect;  but  I 
know  that  horse  racing  excites  a  keen  interest  in  Brit- 
tany, though  the  French  navy  is  chiefly  manned  by 
Breton  and  Norman  sailors,  and  Breton  ballads  and 
old  Welsh  romances  are  full  of  equestrian  adventures. 
And  all  this  supports  the  theory  that  Celts  came  from 
the  east,  and  came  overland ;  for  horses  would  be  prized 
by  a  wandering  race. 

So  hounds  would  be  prized  by  the  race  of  hunters 
who  chased  the  Caledonian  boars  as  well  as  the  stags ; 
and  here  again  tradition  is  in  accordance  with  proba- 
bility, and  supported  by  other  testimony.  In  No.  4 
there  are  mystical  dogs;  a  hound,  Gadhar  is  one  of  the 
links  in  No.  8;  a  dog  appears  in  No.  11 ;  a  dog,  who 
is  an  enchanted  man,  in  No.  12;  there  is  a  phantom 
dog  in  No.  23  ;  there  was  a  "  spectre  hound  in  Man  ; " 
and  there  are  similar  ghostly  dogs  in  England,  and  in 
many  European  countries  besides. 

In  19,  20,  31,  38,  and  a  great  many  other  tales 
which  I  have  in  manuscript,  the  hound  plays  an  im- 
portant part.  Sometimes  he  befriends  his  master,  at 
other  times  he  appears  to  have  something  diabolical 
about  him ;  it  seems  as  if  his  real  honest  nature  had 
overcome  a  deeply-rooted  prejudice,  for  there  is  much 
which  savours  of  detestation  as  well  ac  of  strong  affec- 
tion. Dog,  or  son  of  the  dog,  is  a  term  of  abuse  in 
Gaelic  as  elsewhere,  though  cuilein  is  a  form  of  endear- 
ment, and  the  hound  is  figured  beside  his  master,  or  at 
his  feet,  on  many  a  tombstone  in  the  Western  Isles. 


lxxxiv  INTRODUCTION. 

Hounds  are  mentioned  in  Gaelic  poetry  and  in  Gaelic 
tales,  and  in  the  earliest  accounts  of  the  Western  Isles ; 
and  one  breed  still  survives  in  these  long-legged,  rough, 
wiry-haired  stag-hounds,  which  Landseer  so  loves  to 
paint. 

In  one  story,  for  which  I  have  no  room,  but  which 
is  well  worthy  of  preservation,  a  step-mother  sends  two 
step-children,  a  brother  and  sister,  out  into  the  world 
to  seek  their  fortune.  They  live  in  a  cottage  with 
three  bare  yellow  porkers,  which  belong  to  the  sister. 
The  brother  sells  one  to  a  man  for  a  dog  with  a  green 
string,  and  so  gets  three  dogs,  whose  names  are  Know- 
ledge, Fios;  Swift,  Luath;  Weighty,  Trom.  The 
sister  is  enraged,  and  allies  herself  with  a  giant  who 
has  a  hot  coal  in  his  mouth.  Knowledge  tells  his 
master  the  danger  which  awaits  him  :  how  the  giant  and 
his  sister  had  set  a  venomous  dart  over  the  door. 
Swiftness  runs  in  first,  and  saves  his  master  at  the 
expense  of  his  own  tail,  and  then  the  three  dogs  upset 
a  caldron  of  boiling  water  over  the  giant,  who  is  hid  in 
a  hole  in  the  floor,  and  so  at  the  third  time  the  giant 
is  killed,  and  the  only  loss  is  a  bit  of  the  tail  of  Luath. 

Then  the  king's  son  goes  to  dwell  with  a  beautiful 
lady ;  and  after  a  time  he  goes  back  to  visit  his  sister, 
armed  with  three  magic  apples.  The  sister  sets  three 
venomous  porkers  at  him,  and  he,  by  throwing  the 
apples  behind  him,  hinders  them  with  woods,  and  moors, 
and  lakes,  which  grow  up  from  the  apples ;  but  they 
follow.  The  three  dogs  come  out  and  beat  the  three 
pigs,  and  kill  them,  and  then  the  king's  son  gets  his 
sister  to  come  with  him,  and  she  was  as  a  servant-maid 
to  the  prince  and  the  fine  woman  with  whom  he  lived. 
Then  the  sister  put  Gath  nimh,  a  poisonous  sting  or 
thorn,  into  the  bed,  and  the  prince  was  as  though  he 


INTRODUCTION.  1XXXV 

were  dead  for  three  days,  and  he  was  buried.  But 
Knowledge  told  the  other  two  dogs  what  to  do,  and 
they  scraped  up  the  prince,  and  took  out  the  thorn ; 
and  he  came  alive  again  and  went  home,  and  set  on  a 
fire  of  grey  oak,  and  burned  his  sister.  And  John 
Crawfurd,  fisherman  at  Lochlong-head,  told  John 
Dewar  "  that  he  left  the  man,  and  the  woman,  and  the 
dogs  all  happy  and  well  pleased  together."  This 
curious  story  seems  to  shew  the  hog  and  the  dog  as 
foes.  Perhaps  they  were  but  the  emblems  of  rival 
tribes,  perhaps  they  were  sacred  amongst  rival  races ; 
at  all  events,  they  were  both  important  personages  at 
some  time  or  other,  for  there  is  a  great  deal  about  them 
in  Gaelic  lore. 

The  boar  was  the  animal  which  Diarmid  slew,  and 
which  caused  his  death  when  he  paced  his  length 
against  the  bristles, — the  venomous  bristles  pierced  a 
mole  in  his  foot.  It  was  a  boar  which  was  sent  out  to 
find  the  body  of  the  thief  in  that  curious  story,  an  gillie 
currach ;  and  in  a  great  many  other  stories,  boars  ap- 
pear as  animals  of  the  chase.  The  Fiantaichean  or 
Feen,  whomsoever  they  were,  are  always  represented 
as  hunting  wild  boars,  as  tearing  a  boar  to  bits  by  main 
force,  or  eating  a  whole  boar.  Cairns,  said  to  have 
been  raised  over  boars,  are  shewn  in  many  parts  of 
Scotland  still.  I  myself  once  found  a  boar's  tusk  in  a 
grave  accidentally  discovered,  close  to  the  bridge  at 
Pool-Ewe.  There  were  many  other  bones,  and  a  rough 
flint,  and  a  lot  of  charcoal,  in  what  seemed  to  be  a 
shallow  human  grave,  a  kind  of  stone  coffin  built  up 
with  loose  slabs. 

"Little  pigs"  play  their  part  in  the  nursery  lore 
of  England.  Everybody  who  has  been  young  and  has 
toes,  must  know  how 


lxxxvi  INTRODUCTION. 

"  This  little  pig  went  to  market, 
And  this  little  pig  staid  at  home — 
This  little  pig  got  roast  beef, 
And  this  little  pig  got  none  ; 
And  this  little  pig  went  wee,  wee,  wee,  all  the  way  home. " 

There  is  a  long  and  tragic  story  which  has  been 
current  amongst  at  least  three  generations  of  my  own 
family  regarding  a  lot  of  little  pigs  who  had  a  wise 
mother,  who  told  them  where  they  were  to  build 
their  houses,  and  how,  so  as  to  avoid  the  fox.  Some 
of  the  little  pigs  would  not  follow  their  mother's  counsel, 
and  built  houses  of  leaves,  and  the  fox  got  in  and  said, 
"I  will  gallop,  and  I'll  trample,  and  I'll  knock  down 
your  house,"  and  he  ate  the  foolish,  little,  proud  pigs  ; 
but  the  youngest  was  a  wise  little  pig,  and,  after  many 
adventures,  she  put  an  end  to  the  wicked  fox  when 
she  was  almost  vanquished,  bidding  him  look  into  the 
caldron  to  see  if  the  dinner  was  ready,  and  then  tilting 
him  in  headforemost.  In  short,  pigs  are  very  impor- 
tant personages  in  the  popular  lore  of  Great  Britain. 

We  are  told  by  history  that  they  were  sacred 
amongst  the  Gauls,  and  fed  on  acorns  in  the  sacred  oak 
groves  of  the  Druids,  and  there  is  a  strong  prejudice 
now  amongst  Highlanders  against  eating  pig's  flesh. 

So  oak  trees  are  mythical.  Whenever  a  man  is  to  be 
burned  for  some  evil  deed,  and  men  are  always  going 
to  be  roasted,  fagots  of  "grey,"  probably  green  oak, 
are  fetched.  There  is  a  curious  story  which  the  Rev. 
Mr.  MacLachlan  took  down  from  the  recitation  of  an 
old  man  in  Edinburgh,  in  which  a  mythical  old  man  is 
shut  up  in  an  oak  tree,  which  grows  in  the  court  of  the 
king's  palace ;  and  when  the  king's  son  lets  his  ball 
roll  into  a  split  in  the  tree  by  chance,  the  old  man 
tells  the  boy  to  fetch  an  axe  and  he  will  give  him  the 


INTRODUCTION.  lxxxvii 

ball,  and  so  he  gets  out,  and  endows  the  Prince  with 
power  and  valour.  He  sets  out  on  his  journey  with  a 
red-headed  cook,  who  personates  him,  and  he  goes  to 
lodge  with  a  swine-heard  ;  but  by  the  help  of  the  old 
man  of  the  great  tree,  Bodach  na  Craoibhe  moire,  he 
overcomes  a  boar,  a  bull,  and  a  stallion,  and  marries  the 
king's  daughter,  and  the  red-headed  cook  is  burnt. 

So  then,  in  these  traditions,  swine  and  oak  trees  are 
associated  together  with  mythical  old  men  and  deeds  of 
valour,  such  as  a  race  of  hunters  might  perform,  and 
admire,  and  remember.  Is  it  too  much  to  suppose  that 
these  are  dim  recollections  of  pagan  times  1  Druidh  is 
the  name  for  magician,  Draochd  for  magic.  It  is 
surely  not  too  much  to  suppose  that  the  magicians  were 
the  Druids,  and  the  magic  their  mysteries ;  that  my 
peasant  collectors  are  right,  when  they  maintain  that 
Gruagach.  the  long-haired  one,  was  a  "  professor  "  or 
"  master  of  arts,"  or  "  one  that  taught  feats  of  arms ;  " 
that  the  learned  Gruagach,  who  is  so  often  mentioned, 
was  a  Druid  in  his  glory,  and  the  other,  who,  in  the 
days  of  Johnson,  haunted  the  island  of  Troda  as 
"  Greogaca,"  who  haunted  the  small  island  of  Inch, 
near  Easdale,  in  the  girlhood  of  Mrs.  Mactavish,  who 
is  remembered  still,  and  is  still  supposed  to  haunt 
many  a  desolate  island  in  the  far  west,  is  the  phantom 
of  the  same  Druid,  fallen  from  his  high  estate,  skulking 
from  his  pursuers,  and  really  living  on  milk  left  for  him 
by  those  whose  priest  he  had  once  been. 

"  The  small  island  of  Inch,  near  Easdale,  is  inhabited  by  a 
brownie,  which  has  followed  the  Macdougalls  of  Ardincaple  for 
ages,  and  takes  a  great  interest  in  them.  He  takes  care  of  their 
cattle  in  that  island  night  and  day,  unless  the  dairymaid,  when 
there  in  summer  with  the  milk  cattle,  neglects  to  leave  warm 
milk  for  him  at  night  in  a  knocking-stone  in  the  cave,  where  she 
and  the  herd  live  during  their  stay  in  the  island.     Should  this 


lxXXV'iii  INTRODUCTION. 

perquisite  be  for  a  night  forgot,  they  will  be  sure  in  the  morning 
to  find  one  of  the  cattle  fallen  over  the  rocks  with  which  the  place 
abounds.  It  is  a  question  whether  the  brownie  has  not  a  friend 
with  whom  he  shares  the  contents  of  the  stone,  which  will,  I 
daresay,  hold  from  two  to  three  Scotch  pints. " 

Mrs.  MacTavish,  1859,  Islay.  , 

If  the  manners  and  customs  of  druids  are  described 
as  correctly  as  modern  manners  really  are,  then  some- 
thing may  be  gathered  concerning  druidical  worship ; 
but  without  knowledge,  which  I  have  no  time  to 
acquire,  the  full  bearing  of  traditions  on  such  a  subject 
cannot  be  estimated. 

The  horse  and  the  boar,  the  oak  tree  and  the 
apple,  then,  are  often  referred  to.  Of  mistletoe  I  have 
found  no  trace,  unless  it  be  the  sour  herb  which  brings 
men  to  life,  but  that  might  be  the  "  soma,"  which  plays 
such  a  part  in  the  mythology  of  the  Vedas,  or  the 
shamrock,  which  was  sacred  in  Ireland. 

Wells  are  indicated  as  mysterious  in  a  great  many 
tales — poison  wells  and  healing  wells — and  some  are 
still  frequented,  with  a  half  belief  in  their  virtue ; 
but  such  wells  now  often  have  the  name  of  some  saint 
affixed  to  them. 

Birds  are  very  often  referred  to  as  soothsayers — in 
No.  39  especially  ;  the  man  catches  a  bird  and  says  it 
is  a  diviner,  and  a  gentleman  buys  it  as  such.  It  was 
a  bird  of  prey,  for  it  lit  on  a  hide,  and  birds  of  prey  are 
continually  appearing  as  bringing  aid  to  men,  such  as 
the  raven,  the  hoodie,  and  the  falcon.  The  little  birds 
especially  are  frequently  mentioned.  I  should  therefore 
gather  from  the  stories  that  the  ancient  Celts  drew 
augury  from  birds  as  other  nations  did,  and  as  it  is  as- 
serted by  historians  that  the  Gauls  really  did.  I  should 
be  inclined  to  think  that  they  possessed  the  domestic 


INTRODUCTION.  lxxxix 

fowl  before  they  became  acquainted  with  the  country  of 
the  wild  grouse,  and  that  the  cock  may  have  been  sacred, 
for  he  is  a  foe  and  a  terror  to  uncanny  beings,  and  the 
hero  of  many  a  story  ;  while  the  grouse  and  similar 
birds  peculiar  to  this  country  are  barely  mentioned. 
The  cat  plays  a  considerable  part,  and  appears  as  a 
transformed  princess ;  and  the  cat  may  also  have  been 
sacred  to  some  power,  for  cats  are  the  companions  of 
Highland  witches,  and  of  hags  all  the  world  over,  and 
they  were  sacred  to  gods  in  other  lands ;  they  were  made 
into  mummies  in  Egypt,  together  with  hawks  and  other 
creatures  which  appear  in  Highland  tales.  Ravens  were 
Odin's  messengers ;  they  may  have  been  pages  to  some 
Celtic  divinity  also.  Foxes,  and  otters,  and  wolves,  and 
bears  all  appear  in  mythical  characters.  Serpents  were 
probably  held  in  abhorrence,  as  they  have  been  by 
other  races,  but  the  serpent  gave  wisdom,  and  is  very 
mythical. 

Old  Macdonald,  travelling  tinker,  told  me  a  long 
story,  of  which  one  scene  represented  an  incantation 
more  vividly  to  me  than  anything  I  have  ever  read  or 
heard.  "  There  was  a  king  and  a  knight,  as  there  was 
and  will  be,  and  as  grows  the  fir  tree,  some  of  it 
crooked  and  some  of  it  straight,  and  he  was  a  king  of 
Eirinn,"  said  the  old  tinker,  and  then  came  a  wicked 
stepmother,  who  was  incited  to  evil  by  a  wicked  hen- 
wife.  The  son  of  the  first  queen  was  at  school  with 
twelve  comrades,  and  they  used  to  play  at  shinny 
every  day  with  silver  shinnies  and  a  golden  ball.  The 
henwife,  for  certain  curious  rewards,  gave  the  stepdame 
a  magic  shirt,  and  she  sent  it  to  her  step-son,  "  Sheen 
Billy,"  and  persuaded  him  to  put  it  on  ;  he  refused  at 
first,  but  complied  at  last,  and  the  shirt  was  a  beithir 
(great  snake)  about  his  neck.     Then  he  was  enchanted 


XC  INTRODUCTION. 

and  under  spells,  and  all  manner  of  adventures  followed  j 
but  at  last  he  came  to  the  house  of  a  wise  woman  who 
had  a  beautiful  daughter,  who  fell  in  love  with  the  en- 
chanted prince,  and  said  she  must  and  would  have  him. 

"It  will  cost  thee  much  sorrow,"  said  the  mother. 

"I  care  not,"  said  the  girl,  "I  must  have  him." 

"It  will  cost  thee  thy  hair." 

"  I  care  not." 

"  It  will  cost  thee  thy  right  breast." 

"I  care  not  if  it  should  cost  me  my  life,"  said  the 
girl. 

And  the  old  woman  agreed  to  help  her  to  her 
will.  A  caldron  was  prepared  and  filled  with  plants  j 
and  the  king's  son  was  put  into  it  stripped  to  the  magic 
shirt,  and  the  girl  was  stripped  to  the  waist.  And  the 
mother  stood  by  with  a  great  knife,  which  she  gave  to 
her  daughter. 

Then  the  king's  son  was  put  down  in  the  caldron, 
and  the  great  serpent,  which  appeared  to  be  a  shirt 
about  his  neck,  changed  into  its  own  form,  and  sprang 
on  the  girl  and  fastened  on  her ;  and  she  cut  away 
the  hold,  and  the  king's  son  was  freed  from  the  spells. 
Then  they  were  married,  and  a  golden  breast  was 
made  for  the  lady.  And  then  they  went  through  more 
adventures,  which  I  do  not  well  remember,  and  which 
the  old  tinker's  son  vainly  strove  to  repeat  in  August, 
1860,  for  he  is  far  behind  his  father  in  the  telling  of 
old  Highland  tales. 

The  serpent,  then,  would  seem  to  be  an  emblem  of 
evil  and  wisdom  in  Celtic  popular  mythology. 

There  is  something  mysterious  about  rushes.  The 
fairies  are  found  in  a  bush  of  rushes  ;  the  great  caldron 
of  the  Feen  is  hid  under  a  bush  of  rushes ;  and  in  a 
great  many  other  instances  tom  luacharach  appears. 


INTRODUCTION.  XC1 

I  do  not  know  that  the  plant  is  mentioned  in  foreign 
tales,  but  it  occurs  several  times  in  border  minstrelsy. 

If  the  Druids  worshipped  the  sun  and  moon,  there 
is  very  little  direct  reference  to  such  worship  in  high- 
land stories  now.  There  are  many  highland  customs 
which  point  to  solar  worship,  but  these  have  been 
treated  of  by  abler  pens,  and  I  have  nothing  to  add  on 
that  head. 

There  is  yet  another  animal  which  is  mythical — 
the  water-bull.  He  certainly  belongs  to  Celtic  my- 
thology, as  the  water-horse  does,  for  he  is  known  in 
the  Isle  of  Man  and  all  over  the  islands. 

There  are  numerous  lakes  where  the  water-bulls  are 
supposed  to  exist,  and  their  progeny  are  supposed  to 
be  easily  known  by  their  short  ears.  When  the 
water-bull  appears  in  a  story  he  is  generally  repre- 
sented as  friendly  to  man.  I  have  a  great  many  accounts  '/ 
of  him,  and  his  name  in  Skye  is  Tarbh  Eithre. 

There  is  a  gigantic  water  bird,  called  the  Boobrie, 
which  is  supposed  to  inhabit  the  fresh  water  and  sea 
lochs  of  Argyllshire.  I  have  heard  of  him  nowhere 
else  ;  but  I  have  heard  of  him  from  several  people. 

He  is  ravenous  and  gigantic,  gobbles  up  sheep 
and  cows,  has  webbed  feet,  a  very  loud  hoarse  voice, 
and  is  somewhat  like  a  cormorant.  He  is  reported  to 
have  terrified  a  minister  out  of  his  propriety,  and  it  is 
therefore  to  be  assumed  that  he  is  of  the  powers  of 
evil.  And  there  are  a  vast  number  of  other  fancied 
inhabitants  of  earth,  air,  and  water,  enough  to  form  a 
volume  of  supernatural  history,  and  all  or  any  of 
these  may  have  figured  in  Celtic  mythology ;  for  it  is 
hard  to  suppose  that  men  living  at  opposite  ends  of 
Scotland,  and  peasants  in  the  Isle  of  Man,  should  in- 


XC11  INTRODUCTION. 

vent  the  same  fancies  unless  their  ideas  had  some 
common  foundation. 

Besides  these  animals,  there  is  a  whole  supernatural 
world  with  superhuman  gigantic  inhabitants. 

There  are  continual  fights  with  these  giants,  which 
are  often  carried  on  without  arms  at  all — mere  wrestling 
matches,  which  seem  to  have  had  certain  rules.  It  is 
somewhere  told  of  the  Germans  that  they  in  their  forests 
fought  with  clubs,  and  the  Celtic  giants  may  once  have 
been  real  men.  Hercules  fought  with  a  club.  Irish- 
men use  shillelahs  still,  and  my  west  country  friends, 
when  they  fight  now-a-days,  use  barrel  staves  instead 
of  swords,  and  use  them  well,  if  not  wisely ;  but 
whether  giants  were  men  or  myths,  they  are  always 
represented  as  strange,  lubberly  beings,  whose  dealings 
with  men  invariably  end  in  their  discomfiture.  There 
are  giants  in  Herodotus  and,  I  believe,  in  every  popular 
mythology  known.  There  are  giants  in  Holy  Writ. 
They  spoke  an  unknown  tongue  everywhere  They 
said  "Fee  fo  fum "  in  Cornwall.  They  say  "Fiaw 
flaw  foaghrich "  in  Argyll,  and  these  sounds  may 
possibly  be  corruptions  of  the  language  of  real  big 
burly  savages,  now  magnified  into  giants. 

The  last  word  might  be  the  vocative  of  the  Gaelic 
for  stranger,  ill  pronounced,  and  the  intention  may  be 
to  mimic  the  dialect  of  a  foreigner  speaking  Gaelic. 

An  Italian  organ-grinder  once  found  his  way  to  the 
west,  and  sang  "  Fideli,  fidela,  fidelin-lin-la."  The 
boys  caught  the  tune,  and  sang  it  to  the  words,  "  Deese 
creepe  Signaveete  ha,"  words  with  as  much  meaning 
as  "  Fee  fo  fum,"  but  which  retain  a  certain  resem- 
blance to  an  Italian  sound. 

If  the  giants  were  once  real  savages,  they  had  the 
sense  of  smell  peculiarly  sharp,  according  to  the  Gaelic 


INTRODUCTION.  XC111 

tales,  as  they  had  in  all  others  which  treat  of  them,  and 
they  ate  their  captives,  as  it  is  asserted  that  the  early 
inhabitants  of  Scotland  did,  as  Herodotus  says  that 
Scyths  did  in  his  time,  and  as  the  Feejee  islanders  did 
very  lately,  and  still  do.  A  relative  of  mine  once  offered 
me  a  tooth  as  a  relic  of  such  a  feast ;  it  had  been 
presented  to  him  in  the  Feejee  islands  by  a  charming 
dark  young  lady,  who  had  just  left  the  banquet,  but 
had  not  shared  in  it.  The  Highland  giants  were  not  so 
big  but  that  their  conquerors  wore  their  clothes ;  they 
were  not  so  strong  that  men  could  not  beat  them,  even 
by  wrestling.  They  were  not  quite  savages;  for  though 
some  lived  in  caves,  others  had  houses  and  cattle,  and 
hoards  of  spoil.  They  had  slaves,  as  we  are  told  that 
Scotch  proprietors  had  within  historic  times.  In 
"Scotland  in  the  Middle  Ages,"  p.  141,  we  learn  that 
Earl  Waldev  of  Dunbar  made  over  a  whole  tribe  to  the 
Abbot  of  Kelso  in  1170,  and  in  the  next  page  it  is  im- 
plied that  these  slaves  were  mostly  Celts.  Perhaps  those 
Celts  who  were  not  enslaved  had  their  own  mountain 
view  of  the  matter,  and  looked  down  on  the  Gall  as 
intrusive,  savage,  uncultivated,  slave-owning  giants. 

Perhaps  the  mountain  mists  in  like  manner  impeded 
the  view  of  the  dwellers  on  the  mountain  and  the 
plain,  for  Fin  MacCoul  was  a  "God  in  Ireland,"  as 
they  say,  and  is  a  "  rawhead  and  bloody  bones  "  in  the 
Scottish  lowlands  now. 

Whatever  the  giants  were  they  knew  some  magic 
arts,  but  they  were  always  beaten  in  the  end  by  men. 

The  combats  with  them  are  a  Gaelic  proverb  in 
action : — 

' '  Theid  seoltachd  thar  spionnaidh. " 
Skill  goes  over  might,  and  probably,  as  it-  seems  to 


XC1V  INTRODUCTION. 

me,  giants  are  simply  the  nearest  savage  race  at  war 
with  the  race  who  tell  the  tales.  If  they  performed 
impossible  feats  of  strength,  they  did  no  more  than 
Rob  Roy,  whose  "putting  stone"  is  now  shewn  to 
Saxon  tourists  by  a  Celtic  coachman,  near  Bunawe,  in 
the  shape  of  a  boulder  of  many  tons,  though  Rob 
Ruadh  lived  only  a  hundred  years  ago,  near  Inverary, 
in  a  cottage  which  is  now  standing,  and  which  was 
lately  inhabited  by  a  shepherd. 

The  Gaelic  giants  are  very  like  those  of  Norse  and 
German  tales,  but  they  are  much  nearer  to  real  men 
than  the  giants  of  Germany  and  Scandinavia,  and 
Greece  and  Rome,  who  are  almost,  if  not  quite,  equal  to 
the  gods.  Famhairan  are  little  more  than  very  strong 
men,  but  some  have  only  one  eye  like  the  Cyclops. 

Their  world  is  generally,  but  not  always,  under 
ground ;  it  has  castles,  and  parks,  and  pasture,  and 
all  that  is  to  be  found  above  the  earth.  Gold,  and 
silver,  and  copper,  abound  in  the  giant's  land ;  jewels 
are  seldom  mentioned,  but  cattle,  and  horses,  and  spoil 
of  dresses,  and  arms,  and  armour,  combs,  and  basins, 
apples,  shields,  bows,  spears,  and  horses,  are  all  to  be 
gained  by  a  fight  with  the  giants.  Still,  now  and  then 
a  giant  does  some  feat  quite  beyond  the  power  of  man  j 
such  as  a  giant  in  Barra,  who  fished  up  a  hero,  boat 
and  all,  with  his  fishing-rod,  from  a  rock,  and  threw 
him  over  his  head,  as  little  boys  do  "  cuddies  "  from  a 
pier-end.     So  the  giants  may  be  degraded  gods  after  all. 

But  besides  "popular  tales,"  there  are  fairy  tales, 
which  are  not  told  as  stories,  but  facts.  At  all  events, 
the  creed  is  too  recent  to  be  lightly  spoken  of. 

Men  do  believe  in  fairies,  though  they  will  not 
readily  confess  the  fact.  And  though  I  do  not  myself 
believe  that  fairies  are,  in  spite  of  the  strong  evidence 


INTRODUCTION.  XCV 

offered,  I  believe  there  once  was  a  small  race  of  people 
in  these  islands,  who  are  remembered  as  fairies,  for  the 
fairy  belief  is  not  confined  to  the  Highlanders  of  Scot- 
land. I  have  given  a  few  of  the  tales  which  have 
come  to  me  as  illustrations  in  No.  27. 

"  They "  are  always  represented  as  living  in  green 
mounds.  They  pop  up  their  heads  when  disturbed  by 
people  treading  on  their  houses.  They  steal  children. 
They  seem  to  live  on  familiar  terms  with  the  people 
about  them  when  they  treat  them  well,  to  punish  them 
when  they  ill  treat  them.  If  giants  are  magnified, 
these  are  but  men  seen  through  the  other  end  of  the 
telescope,  and  there  are  such  people  now.  A  Lapp  is 
such  a  man — he  is  a  little,  flesh-eating  mortal — having 
control  over  the  beasts,  and  living  in  a  green  mound — 
when  he  is  not  living  in  a  tent,  or  sleeping  out  of 
doors,  wrapped  in  his  deer-skin  shirt.  I  have  lived 
amongst  them  and  know  them  and  their  dwellings 
pretty  well.  I  know  one  which  would  answer  to  the 
description  of  a  fairy  mound  exactly.  It  is  on  the 
most  northern  peninsula  in  Europe,  to  the  east  of  the 
North  Cape,  close  to  the  sea,  in  a  sandy  hollow  near  a 
burn.  It  is  round — say,  twelve  feet  in  diameter — and* 
it  is  sunk  three  feet  in  the  sand ;  the  roof  is  made  of 
sticks  and  covered  with  turf.  The  whole  structure,  at 
a  short  distance,  looks  exactly  like  a  conical  green 
mound  about  four  feet  high.  There  was  a  famous  crop 
of  grass  on  it  when  I  was  there,  and  the  children  and 
dogs  ran  out  at  the  door  and  up  to  the  top  when  we 
approached,  as  ants  run  on  an  ant  hill  when  disturbed. 
Their  fire  was  in  the  middle  of  the  floor,  and  the  pot 
hung  over  it  from  the  roof.  I  lately  saw  a  house  in 
South  Uist  found  in  the  sand  hills  close  to  the  sea.  It 
was  built  of  loose  boulders,  it  was  circular,  and  had 


XCVi  INTRODUCTION. 

recesses  in  the  sides,  it  was  covered  when  found,  and 
it  was  full  of  sand ;  when  that  was  removed,  stone 
querns  and  combs  of  bone  were  found,  together  with 
ashes,  and  near  the  level  of  the  top  there  was  a  stratum 
of  bones  and  teeth  of  large  grass-eating  animals.  I 
know  not  what  they  were,  but  the  bones  were  splintered 
and  broken,  and  mingled  with  ashes  and  shells,  oysters, 
cockles,  and  wilks  (periwinkles),  shewing  clearly  the 
original  level  of  the  ground,  and  proving  that  this  was 
a  dwelling  almost  the  same  as  a  Lapp  "Gam"  at 
Hopseidet. 

Now,  let  us  see  what  the  people  of  the  Hebrides 
say  of  the  fairies.  There  was  a  woman  benighted 
with  a  pair  of  calves,  "and  she  went  for  shelter 
to  a  knoll,  and  she  began  driving  the  peg  of  the 
tether  into  it.  The  hill  opened,  and  she  heard  as 
though  there  was  a  pot  hook  'gleegashing,'  on  the 
side  of  the  pot.  A  woman  put  up  her  head,  and  as 
much  as  was  above  her  waist,  and  said,  '  What  business 
hast  thou  to  disturb  this  tulman,  in  which  I  make  my 
dwelling.' "  This  might  be  a  description  of  one  of  my 
Lapp  friends,  and  probably  is  a  description  of  such  a 
dwelling  as  I  saw  in  South  Uist.  If  the  people  slept 
as  Lapps  sleep,  with  their  feet  to  the  fire,  a  woman 
outside  might  have  driven  a  peg  very  near  one  of  the 
sleepers,  and  she  might  have  stood  on  a  seat  and  poked 
her  head  out  of  the  chimney. 

The  magic  about  the  beasts  is  but  the  mist  of  anti- 
quity ;  and  the  fairy  was  probably  a  Pict.  Who  will 
say  who  the  Pict  may  have  been  ?  Probably  the  great 
Clibric  hag  was  one,  and  of  the  same  tribe. 

"  In  the  early  morning  she  was  busy  milking  the 
hinds ;  they  were  standing  all  about  the  door  of  the 
hut,  till  one  of  them  ate  a  hank  of  blue  worsted  hang- 


INTRODUCTION.  XCVii 

ing  from  a  nail  in  it."  So  says  the  "fiction,"  which  it 
is  considered  a  sin  to  relate.  Let  me  place  some  facts 
from  my  own  journal  beside  it. 

"Wednesday,  August  22,  1850.  Quickjok,  Swedish 
Lapland. — In  the  evening  the  effect  of  the  sunlight 
through  the  mist  and  showers  was  most  beautiful.  I 
was  sketching,  when  a  small  man  made  his  appearance 
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river  and  began  to  shout  for 
a  boat.  The  priest  exclaimed  that  the  Lapps  had  come 
down,  and  accordingly  the  diminutive  human  specimen 
was  fetched,  and  proved  to  be  a  Lapp  who  had  estab- 
lished his  camp  about  seven  miles  off,  near  Vallespik. 
He  was  about  twenty-five  years  old,  and  with  his  high 
blue  cap  on  could  stand  upright  under  my  arm." 

I  had  been  wandering  about  Quickjok  for  a  week, 
out  on  Vallespik  frequently,  searching  for  the  Lapps, 
with  the  very  glass  which  I  had  previously  used  to 
find  deer  close  to  Clibric,  which  is  but  a  small  copy  of 
the  Lapland  mountain. 

"Thursday,  23rd.— Started  to  see  the  deer,  with  the 
priest  and  the  Clockar,  and  Marcus,  and  the  Lapp. 
The  Lapp  walked  like  a  deer  himself,  aided  by  a  very 
long  birch  pole,  which  he  took  from  its  hiding  place  in 
a  fir  tree.  I  had  hard  work  to  keep  up  with  him. 
Marcus  and  the  priest  were  left  behind.  Once  up 
through  the  forest,  it  was  cutting  cold,  and  we  walked 
up  to  the  'cota'  in  two  hours  and  a  quarter.  The 
deer  was  seen  in  the  distance,  like  a  brown  speck  on 
the  shoulder  of  Vallespik ;  and  with  the  glass  I  could 
make  out  that  a  small  mortal  and  two  dogs  were  driv- 
ing them  home.  The  cota  is  a  permanent  one,  made 
in  the  shape  of  a  sugar  loaf,  with  birch  sticks,  and  long 
flat  stones  and  turf.  There  are  two  exactly  alike,  and 
each  has  a  door,  a  mere  narrow  slit,  opening  to  the 

a 


XCV111  INTRODUCTION. 

west,  and  a  hole  in  the  roof  to  let  out  the  smoke.  I 
crept  in,  and  found  a  girl  of  about  fifteen,  with  very 
pretty  eyes,  sitting  crouched  up  in  a  corner,  and  look- 
ing as  scared  as  one  of  her  own  fawns.  The  priest 
said,  that  if  we  had  come  without  our  attendant  genius, 
the  small  Lapp,  she  would  have  fainted,  or  run  away 
to  the  hills.  I  began  to  sketch  her,  as  she  sat  looking 
modest  in  her  dark  corner,  and  was  rejoicing  in  the 
extreme  stillness  of  my  sitter,  when,  on  looking  up 
from  some  careful  touch,  I  found  that  she  had  vanished 
through  the  door-way.  I  had  to  bribe  her  with 
bread  and  butter  before  she  could  be  coaxed  back. 
A  tremendous  row  of  shouting  and  barking  outside 
now  announced  the  arrival  of  the  deer,  so  I  let  my 
sitter  go,  and  off  she  ran  as  fast  as  she  could.  I  fol- 
lowed more  leisurely  to  the  spot  where  the  deer  were 
gathered,  on  a  stony  hillside.  There  were  only  about 
200 ;  the  rest  had  run  off  up  wind  on  the  way  from  the 
mountains,  and  all  the  other  Lapps  were  off  after  them, 
leaving  only  my  pretty  sitter,  the  boy,  and  a  small 
woman  with  bleared  eyes,  as  ugly  as  sin,  his  sister. 

"How  I  wished  for  Landseer's  pencil  as  I  looked 
at  that  scene  !  Most  of  the  deer  were  huddled  close 
together ;  hinds  and  calves  chewing  the  cud  with  the 
greatest  placidity,  but  here  and  there  some  grand  old 
fellows,  with  wide  antlers,  stood  up  against  the  sky 
line,  looking  magnificent.  I  tried  to  draw,  but  it  was 
hopeless  j  so  I  sat  down,  and  watched  the  proceedings 
of  my  hosts. 

"First,  each  of  the  girls  took  a  coil  of  rope  from 
about  her  neck,  and  in  a  twinkling  it  was  pitched  over 
the  horns  of  a  hind.  The  noose  was  then  slipped  round 
the  neck,  and  a  couple  of  turns  of  rope  round  the 
nose,  and  then  the  wild  milkmaid  set  her  foot  on  the 


INTRODUCTION.  XC1X 

halter  and  proceeded  TO  milk  the  hind,  into  a  round 
birch  bowl  with  a  handle.  Sometimes  she  sat,  at 
others  she  leant  her  head  on  the  deer's  dark  side,  and 
knelt  beside  her.  I  never  saw  such  a  succession  of 
beautiful  groups. 

"Every  now  and  then  some  half-dozen  deer  would 
break  out  of  the  herd  and  set  off  to  the  mountain,  and 
then  came  a  general  skurry.  The  small  Lapp  man, 
with  his  long  birch  pole,  would  rush  screaming  after 
the  stragglers  j  and  his  two  gaunt,  black,  rough,  half- 
starved  dogs  would  scour  off,  yelping,  in  pursuit.  It 
generally  ended  in  the  hasty  return  of  the  truants,  with 
well-bitten  houghs  for  their  pains ;  but  some  fairly  made 
off,  at  a  determined  long  trot,  and  vanished  over  the 
hill.  It  was  very  curious  to  be  thus  in  the  midst  of  a 
whole  herd  of  creatures  so  like  our  own  wild  deer,  to 
have  them  treading  on  my  feet  and  poking  their  horns 
against  my  sketch-book  as  I  vainly  tried  to  draw  them, 
and  to  think  that  they  who  had  the  power  to  bid 
defiance  to  the  fleetest  hound  in  Sweden  should  be  so 
perfectly  tame  as  to  let  the  small  beings  who  herded 
them  so  thump,  and  bully,  and  tease  them.  The  milk- 
ing, in  the  meantime,  had  been  progressing  rapidly  ; 
and  after  about  an  hour  the  pretty  girl,  who  had  been 
dipping  her  fingers  in  the  milk-pail  and  licking  up  the 
milk  all  the  time,  took  her  piece  of  bread  and  butter, 
and  departed  with  her  charge,  munching  as  she  went. 

"The  blear-eyed  one,  and  the  boy,  and  our  party, 
went  into  the  cota,  and  dined  on  cold  roast  reiper  and 
reindeer  milk.  The  boy  poured  the  milk  from  a  small 
keg,  which  contained  the  whole  product  of  the  flock ; 
aud  having  given  us  our  share,  he  carefully  licked  up 
all  that  remained  on  the  outside  of  the  keg,  and  set  it 
down  in  a  corner.      It  was  sweet  and  delicious,  like 


C  INTRODUCTION. 

thick  cream.  Dinner  over,  we  desired  the  Lapp  to  be 
ready  in  the  morning  (to  accompany  me),  and  with  the 
docker's  dog,  'Gueppe,'  went  reiper-shooting.  The 
docker  himself,  with  a  newly-slaughtered  reindeer  calf 
on  his  shoulders,  followed  ;  and  so  we  went  home." 

A  few  days  afterwards,  I  was  at  another  camp, 
on  another  hill,  where  the  same  scene  was  going  on. 
11  In  a  tent  I  found  a  fine-looking  Lapp  woman  sitting 
on  a  heap  of  skins,  serving  out  coffee,  and  handing 
reindeer  cream  to  the  docker  with  a  silver  spoon.  She 
had  silver  bracelets,  and  a  couple  of  silver  rings ;  and 
altogether,  with  her  black  hair,  and  dark  brown  eyes 
glittering  in  the  fire-light,  she  looked  eastern  and  mag- 
nificent." Her  husband  had  many  trinkets,  and  they 
had,  amongst  other  articles,  a  comb,  which  the  rest 
seemed  much  to  need. 

Her  dress  was  blue,  so  were  most  of  the  dresses, 
and  one  of  her  possessions  was  a  bone  contrivance  for 
weaving  the  bands  which  all  wore  round  their  ankles. 
She  must  have  had  blue  yarn  somewhere,  for  her  garters 
were  partly  blue. 

I  spent  the  whole  of  the  next  day  in  the  camp,  and 
watched  the  whole  operations  of  the  day. 

"  After  dinner,  the  children  cracked  the  bones  with 
stones  and  a  knife,  after  they  had  polished  the  outside, 
and  sucked  up  the  marrow ;  and  then  the  dogs,  which 
did  not  dare  to  steal,  were  called  in  their  turn,  and  got 
the  remains  of  the  food  in  wooden  bowls,  set  apart  for 
their  especial  use." 

The  bones  in  the  hut  in  South  Uist  might  have  been 
the  remains  of  such  a  feast  by  their  appearance. 

"  The  cota  was  a  pyramid  of  sods  and  birch  sticks, 
about  seven  feet  high,  and  twelve  or  fourteen  in  diameter. 
There  were  three  children,  five  dogs,  an  old  woman, 


INTRODUCTION.  CI 

M  cus,  and  myself,  inside;  and  all  day  long  the  hand- 
some lady  from  the  tent  next  door,  with  her  husband, 
and  a  couple  of  quaint-looking  old  fellows  in  deer- 
skin shirts,  kept  popping  in  to  see  how  I  got  on.  It 
was  impossible  to  sit  upright  for  the  slope  of  the  walls, 
as  I  sat  cross-legged  on  the  ground." 

This  might  be  a  description  of  the  Uist  hut  itself, 
and  its  inhabitants,  as  I  can  fancy  them. 

"The  three  dogs  (in  the  tent),  at  the  smallest 
symptom  of  a  disturbance,  plunged  out,  barking,  to 
add  to  the  row ;  they  popped  in  by  the  same 
way  under  the  canvas,  so  they  had  no  need  of  a 
door." 

So  did  the  dogs  in  the  story  of  Seantraigh ;  they 
ran  after  the  stranger,  and  stopped  to  eat  the  bones. 
And  it  is  remarkable  that  all  civilized  dogs  fall  upon 
and  worry  the  half-savage  black  Lapp  dogs,  and  bark 
at  their  masters  whenever  they  descend  from  their 
mountains,  as  the  town  dogs  did  at  the  fairy  dogs.  In 
short,  these  extracts  might  be  a  fair  description  of  the 
people,  and  the  dwellings,  and  the  food,  and  the  dogs 
described  as  fairies,  and  the  hag,  and  the  tulman,  in 
stories  which  I  have  grouped  together  ;  told  in  Scotland 
within  this  year  by  persons  who  can  have  no  know- 
ledge of  what  is  called  the  "Finn  theory,"  and  given 
in  the  very  words  in  which  they  came  to  me,  from 
various  sources. 

Lord  Reay's  forester  must  surely  have  passed  the 
night  in  a  Lapp  cota  on  Ben  Gilbric,  in  Sutherland,  when 
Lapps  were  Picts ;  but  when  was  that  1  Perhaps  in 
the  youth  of  the  fairy  of  whom  the  following  story  was 
told  by  a  Sutherland  gamekeeper  of  my  acquaintance. 

Thk  Herds  of  Glen  Odhar. — A  wild  romantic 
glen  in  Strath  Carron  is  called  Glen  Garaig,  and  it  was 

H 


Cll  INTRODUCTION. 

through  this  that  a  woman  was  passing  carrying  an  in- 
fant wrapped  in  her  plaid.  Below  the  path,  overhung 
with  weeping  birches,  and  nearly  opposite,  run  a  very 
deep  ravine,  known  as  Glen  Odhar,  the  dun  glen.  The 
child,  not  yet  a  year  old,  and  which  had  not  spoken  or 
attempted  speech,  suddenly  addressed  his  mother  thus : — 

S  lionmhor  bo  mhaol  odhar,  Many  a  dun  hummel  cow, 

Le  laogh  na  gobhal  With  a  calf  below  he, 

Chunnaic  mise  ga'm  bleoghan  Have  I  seen  milking 

Anns  a'  ghleann  odhar  ud  thai],  In  that  dan  glen  yonder, 

Gun  chu,  gun  duine,  Without  dog,  without  man, 

Gun  bhean,  gun  ghille,  Without  woman,  without  gillie, 

Ach  aon  duine,  But  one  man, 

'S  e  liath.  And  he  hoary. 

The  good  woman  flung  down  the  child  and  plaid 
and  ran  home,  where,  to  her  great  joy,  her  baby  boy 
lay  smiling  in  its  cradle. 

Fairies  then  milked  deer,  as  Lapps  do.  They  lived 
under  ground,  like  them.  They  worked  at  trades 
especially  smith  work  and  weaving.  They  had  hammers 
and  anvils,  and  excelled  in  their  use,  but  though  good 
weavers,  they  had  to  steal  wool  and  borrow  looms. 
Lapps  do  work  in  metal  on  their  own  account ;  they 
make  their  own  slrin  dresses,  but  buy  their  summer 
clothes.  A  race  of  wanderers  could  not  be  weavers  on 
a  large  scale,  but  they  can  and  do  weave  small  bands 
very  neatly  on  hand-looms ;  and  they  alone  make 
these.  There  are  savages  now  in  South  Africa,  who  are 
smiths  and  miners,  though  they  neither  weave  nor  wear 
clothes.  Fairies  had  hoards  of  treasure — so  have 
Lapps.  A  man  died  shortly  before  one  of  my  Tana 
trips,  and  the  whole  country  side  had  been  out  search- 
ing for  his  buried  wealth  in  vain.  Some  years  ago 
the  old  silver  shops  of   Bergen  and  Trondhjem  over- 


INTRODUCTION.  Clll 

flowed  with  queer  cups  and  spoons,  and  rings,  silver 
plates  for  waist  belts,  old  plate  that  had  been  hidden 
amongst  the  mountains,  black  old  silver  coins  that  had 
not  seen  the  light  for  years.      I  saw   the   plate   and 
bought  some,  and  was  told  that,  in  consequence  of  a 
religious  movement,   the  Lapps  had  dug  up  and  sold 
their    hoards.      Fairies   are    supposed    to    shoot   flint 
arrows,    and   arrows    of   other   kinds,    at   people  now. 
Men  have  told  me  several  times  that  they  had  been 
shot  at :  one  man  had  found  the  flint  arrow  in  an  ash 
tree ;  another  had  heard  it  whiz  past  his  ear ;  a  third 
had  pulled  a  slender  arrow  from  a  friend's  head.     If 
that  be  so,  my  argument  fails,  and  fairies  are  not  of 
the  past ;  but  Californian  Indians  now  use  arrow-heads 
which  closely  resemble  those  dug  up  in  Scotland,  in 
Denmark,  and,  I  believe,  all  over  Europe.     Fairies  are 
conquered  by  Christian  symbols.     They  were  probably 
Pagans,  and,  if  so,  they  may  have  existed  when  Chris- 
tianity was  introduced.      They  steal  men,  women,  and 
children,  and  keep  them  in  their  haunts.      They  are 
not  the  only  slave  owners   in   the   world.     They  are 
supernatural,  and  objects  of  a  sort  of  respect  and  won-" 
der.     So  are  gipsies  where  they  are  rare,  as  in  Sweden 
and  Norway  ;  so  are  the   Lapps  themselves,   for  they 
are  professed  wizards.     I  have  known  a  terrified  Swe- 
dish lassie  whip  her  horse  and  gallop  away  in  her  cart 
from  a  band  of  gipsies,  and  I  have  had  the  advantage 
of  living  in  the  same  house  with  a  Lapp  wizard  at 
Quick j ok,    who  had   prophesied   the   arrival   of   many 
strangers,   of  whom  I  was  one.     Spaniards  were  gods 
amongst  the  Indians  till  they  taught  them  to  know 
better.    Horses  were  supernatural  when  they  came,  and 
on  the  whole,  as  it  appears,  there  is  much  more  reason 
to  believe  that  fairies  were  a  real  people,  like  the  Lapps, 


CIV  INTRODUCTION. 

who  are  still  remembered,  than  that  they  are  "creatures 
of  imagination"  or  "spirits  in  prison,"  or  "fallen  angels;" 
and  the  evidence  of  their  actual  existence  is  very  much 
more  direct  and  substantial  than  that  which  has  driven, 
and  seems  still  to  be  driving,  people  to  the  very  verge 
of  insanity,  if  not  beyond  it,  in  the  matter  of  those 
palpable-impalpable,  visible-invisible  spirits  who  rap 
double  knocks  upon  dancing  deal  boards. 

I  am  inclined  to  believe  in  the  former  existence  of 
fairies  in  this  sense,  and  if  for  no  other  reason,  because 
all  the  nations  of  Europe  have  had  some  such  belief, 
and  they  cannot  all  have  invented  the  same  fancy. 
The  habitation  of  Highland  fairies  are  green  mounds, 
they  therefore,  like  the  giants,  resemble  the  "  under 
jordiske  "  of  the  north,  and  they  too  nury  be  degraded 
divinities. 

It  seems  then,  that  Gaelic  tales  attribute  super- 
natural qualities  to  things  which  are  mentioned  in 
popular  tales  elsewhere,  and  that  Gaelic  superstitions 
are  common  to  other  races  ;  and  it  seems  worth  inquiry 
whether  there  was  anything  in  the  known  customs  of 
Celtic  tribes  to  make  these  things  valuable,  and  whether 
tradition  is  supported  by  history. 

In  the  first  place,  then,  who  are  Celts  now  ?  Who 
were  their  ancestors  1  Who  are  their  relations  ?  and 
where  have  Gaelic  tribes  appeared  in  history. 

I  believe  that  little  is  really  known  about  the 
Gael ;  and  in  particular,  the  origin  of  the  West  High- 
landers has  been  very  keenly  disputed.  One  thing 
is  clear,  they  speak  a  language  which  is  almost  iden- 
tical with  the  Irish  of  the  north  of  Ireland,  and  they 
are  the  same  people.  The  dialect  of  Irish,  which  varies 
most  from  Scotch  Gaelic,  is  clearly  but  another  form  of 
the  same  tongue.     Manks  is  another ;  and  these  three 


INTRODUCTION.  CV 

arc  closely  related  to  Welsh  and  Breton,  though  the 
difference  is  very  much  greater.  Gaelic,  Irish,  and 
Manks  vary  from  each  other  about  as  much  as  Norse, 
Swedish,  and  Danish.  Welsh  and  Breton  vary  from 
the  rest  about  as  much  as  German  and  Dutch  do  from 
the  Scandinavian  languages.  There  are  variations  in 
Gaelic,  and  I  believe  there  are  in  all  the  five  surviv- 
ing Celtic  dialects,  as  there  are  in  the  languages  of 
different  counties  in  England,  of  every  valley  in  Nor- 
way and  Sweden,  of  every  German  district,  and  of  every 
part  of  France,  Spain,  and  Italy.  But  one  who  knows 
Gaelic  well,  can  make  himself  understood  throughout 
the  Highlands,  as  freely  as  an  Englishman  can  in  Eng- 
land, though  he  may  speak  with  a  Northumbrian  burr, 
or  a  west  country  twang,  or  like  a  true  Cockney. 

These,  then,  form  the  Celtic  clan,  the  people  of  the 
west  of  Scotland,  the  Irish,  the  Manks,  the  Welsh,  and 
the  Breton.  Who  their  relations  are,  and  who  their 
ancestors,  are  questions  not  easily  answered,  though 
much  has  been  written  on  the  subject.  The  following 
is  a  brief  outline  of  what  is  given  as  Celtic  history  by 
modern  writers  whose  works  I  have  consulted  lately: — 

According  to  Henri  Martin,  the  French  historian,* 
the  whole  of  Central  Europe,  France,  and  Spain,  were 
once  overrun  by  a  race  calling  themselves  Gael,  and 
best  known  as  Gauls.  This  people  is  generally  admit- 
ted to  have  been  of  the  same  stock  as  Germans,  Latins, 
Greeks,  and  Slavonians,  and  to  have  started  from  Cen- 
tral Asia  at  some  unknown  epoch.  They  are  supposed 
to  have  been  warlike,  to  have  been  tatooed  like  modern 
New  Zealanders,  and  painted  like  North  American 
Indians,  to  have  been  armed  with  stone  weapons  like 

*  Histoire  de  France,  par  Henri  Martin  ;  1835. 


CV1  INTRODUCTION. 

the  South  Sea  Islanders  and  Californian  Indians ;  but 
shepherd,  as  well  as  hunters,  and  acquainted  with  the 
use  of  wheat  and  rye,  which  they  are  supposed  to  have 
brought  with  them  from  Asia.  One  great  confedera- 
tion of  tribes  of  this  race  was  known  to  ancient  histo- 
rians, as  KeXroi.  They  were  represented  as  fair  and 
rosy-cheeked,  large-chested,  active,  and  brave,  and 
they  found  the  Euskes  settled  in  the  south  of  France, 
who  were  dark-complexioned,  whose  descendants  are 
supposed  to  be  the  Euscualdonec  or  Basques  of  the 
Pyrennees,  and  who  are  classed  with  the  Lapps  of  the 
north  of  Europe,  and  with  tribes  now  dwelling  in  the 
far  north  of  Asia.  I  have  seen  faces  in  Barra  very  like 
faces  which  I  had  seen  shortly  before  at  St.  Sebastian 
in  Spain.  A  tribe  of  Gauls  made  their  way  into  Italy, 
and  have  left  traces  of  their  language  there,  in  the 
names  of  mountain  chains  and  great  rivers.  These 
are  named  "  Amhra,"  or  "Ombres,"  and  Amhra  is 
translated  Valliant.  This  invasion  is  calculated  to  have 
taken  place  about  1500  B.C. 

The  Gael  were  followed  by  Kimri  or  Cimbri,  a  kin- 
dred people  of  a  darker  complexion,  speaking  a  kindred 
language,  and  their  descendants  are  supposed  to  be  the 
"Welsh  and  Bretons.  These  in  turn  occupied  the 
interior  of  eastern  Europe,  and  were  followed  by  the 
Scyths,  and  these,  says  the  French  historian,  were 
Teutons. 

According  to  the  learned  author  of  the  essay  on 
the  Cimmerians,  in  the  third  volume  of  Eawlinson's 
Herodotus,  p.  184,  it  is  almost  beyond  doubt  that  a 
people  known  to  their  neighbours  as  Cimmerii,  Gimiri, 
or  probably  Gomerini,  attained  a  considerable  power 
in  "Western  Asia  and  Eastern  Europe  within  the  period 
indicated  by  the  dates  B.C.  800,  600,  or  even  earlier. 


INTRODUCTION.  CV11 

These  people  are  traced  to  the  inhabitants  of  Wales, 
and  Gael  and  Cymri  are  admitted  by  all  to  be  KeA-roi; 
and  still  keep  up  their  old  character  for  pugnacity  by 
quarrelling  over  their  pedigrees. 

Celts  were  undoubtedly  the  primitive  inhabitants 
of  Gaul,  Belgium,  and  the  British  Islands,  possibly  also 
of  Spain  and  Portugal ;  but  no  word  of  the  language 
spoken  by  these  ancient  Cimbri  has  been  preserved 
by  ancient  authors,  except  the  name,  "and  perhaps 
the  name  Cimmerii  may  have  included  many  Celtic 
tribes  not  of  the  Cymric  branch."  These  Gauls  ap- 
peared everywhere  in  Europe ;  and,  in  particular,  they 
who  had  probably  been  driven  out  by  the  Scythians 
invaded  Scythia,  intermixed  with  the  people,  and 
formed  the  people  known  in  history  as  Celto-Scythians ; 
who  the  Scyths  were  (according  to  the  author)  appears 
to  be  uncertain.  All  that  remains  of  their  language  is 
a  list  of  words,  picked  out  of  the  works  of  ancient 
authors ;  and  knowing  what  modern  authors  make  of 
words  which  they  pick  up  by  ear,  such  a  list  is  but  a 
narrow  foundation  on  which  to  build.  Still  on  that 
list  it  has  been  decided  that  Scyths  spoke  a  language 
which  has  affinity  with  Sanscrit,  and  in  that  list,  as 
it  seems  to  me,  there  are  several  words  which  resemble 
Gaelic  more  closely  than  the  Sanscrit  words  given  with 
them.  And  so,  according  to  this  theory,  the  Basques 
were  found  in  Europe  by  the  first  Gael,  and  these  were 
driven  westwards  by  Kimri,  and  these  again  by  Scy- 
thians, and  these  by  Teutons,  and  all  these  still  occupy 
their  respective  positions.  The  Basques  and  Lapps 
pushed  aside;  the  Gael  in  Scotland  and  Ireland,  driven 
far  to  the  westwards;  the  Kimri  driven  westwards 
into  Wales  and  Brittany;  the  Scyths  lost  or  ab- 
sorbed;  and  the  Teutons   occupying  their  old  posses- 


CV111  INTRODUCTION. 

sions,  as  Germans,  Saxons,  English,  Scandinavians, 
and  all  their  kindred  tribes;  and  of  all  these  the 
Basques  and  their  relatives  alone  speak  a  language 
which  cannot  be  traced  to  a  common  unknown  origin, 
from  which  Sanscrit  also  came. 

Whatever  then  throws  light  on  the  traditions  of 
the  first  invaders  of  Europe  is  of  interest  to  all  the 
rest,  for,  according  to  this  theory,  they  are  all  of  the 
same  clan.  They  are  all  branches  of  the  same  old 
stock  which  grew  in  Central  Asia,  and  which  has 
spread  over  great  part  of  the  world,  and  whatever  is 
told  of  Gauls  is  of  interest  to  all  branches  of  Celts. 

Rome  was  taken  by  Gauls  about  390  B.  c. ;  Greece 
was  invaded  by  Gauls  about  297  B.C.,  and  they  are  then 
described  as  armed  with  great  swords  and  lances,  and 
wearing  golden  collars,  and  fighting  savagely.  At  the 
end  of  the  third  century  B.C.,  according  to  the  French 
historian,  Gaul  might  have  been  a  common  name  for  the 
greatest  part  of  Europe,  for  Gauls  were  everywhere. 

Xow,  what  manner  of  men  were  these  Gauls,  when 
men  saw  them  who  could  describe  them  ? 

All  the  Gauls  kept  their  hair  untouched  by  iron, 
and  raised  it  like  a  mane  towards  the  top  of  the  head. 
As  to  the  beard,  some  shaved  it,  others  wore  it  of  a 
moderate  length.  The  chiefs  and  the  nobles  shaved 
the  cheeks  and  the  chin,  and  let  their  mustache  grow 
to  all  their  length.     (Histoire  de  France,  page  33.) 

Their  ej^es  were  blue  or  sea-green,  and  shone  under 
this  thick  mass  of  hair,  of  which  the  blond  hue  had  been 
changed  by  lime-water  to  a  flaming  tint. 

Their  mustaches  were  "Rousses,"  which  is  the  only 
word  I  know  which  will  translate  ruadh. 

The  warrior  was  armed  with  an  enormous  sabre  on 
his  left  thigh ;  he  had  two  darts  in  his  hand,  or  a  long 


INTRODUCTION.  C1X 

lance  ;  he  carried  a  four-cornered  shield,  painted  of 
various  brilliant  colours,  with  bosses  representing  birds 
or  wild  animals  ;  and  on  his  head  was  a  helmet  topped 
with  eagles'  wings,  floating  hair,  or  horns  of  wild  ani- 
mals ;  his  clothes  were  particoloured  and  he  wore 
'•  brighis ;  "  he  was  always  fighting  at  home  or  abroad  ; 
he  was  a  curious  inquiring  mortal,  always  asking  ques- 
tions ;  and  truly  he  must  have  been  a  formidable 
savage  that  old  French  Gaul.  Men's  heads  were  nailed 
at  the  gates  of  his  towns  and  his  houses,  beside  tro- 
phies of  the  chase,  much  as  modern  Gael  now  hang 
up  the  trophies  of  their  destructive  skill,  in  the  shape 
of  pole-cats  and  crows. 

The  chiefs  kept  human  heads  embalmed  and  pre- 
served, like  archives  of  family  prowess,  as  the  Dyaks 
of  Borneo  and  the  New  Zealanders  still  do,  or  did  very 
lately.  The  father  had  the  power  of  life  and  death  over 
his  wife  and  children,  and  exercised  it  too  by  burning 
the  guilty  wif e ;  and,  though  some  chiefs  had  several 
wives,  and  there  are  some  scandalous  stories  of  the 
manners  and  customs  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  islands  ; 
women  were  consulted  together  with  men  by  the  chiefs 
on  matters  of  moment,  and  held  a  high  place  amongst 
the  Gauls  of  France. 

Xow,  this  short  description  of  the  Gauls,  rapidly 
gleaned  from  the  pages  of  two  modern  books'  of 
high  authority  and  great  research,  after  my  Gaelic 
stories  were  collected,  agrees  with  the  picture  which  the 
Gaelic  tales  give  of  their  mythical  heroes  in  many 
particulars.  They  have  long  beautiful  yellow  hair, 
Leadanach,  Buidh,  Boidheach.  They  are  Ruadh,  Rous- 
They  have  large  swords,  claidheamh,  sometimes 
duileagach,  leaf-shaped.  They  cast  spears  and  darts, 
Sleadh.     They  are  always  asking  questions,  and  their 


CX  INTRODUCTION. 

descendants  have  not  lost  the  habit  yet.  Their  dwell- 
ings are  surrounded  by  heads  stuck  on  staves,  stob. 
They  have  larders  of  dead  enemies.  When  a  man  is 
described  as  ragged  and  out  of  order,  it  is  almost  always 
added  that  his  beard  had  grown  over  his  face ;  and 
though  beards  are  coming  into  fashion  now,  it  is  not  a 
highland  fashion  to  wear  a  beard ;  and  many  a  stinging 
joke  have  I  heard  aimed  at  a  beared  man  by  modern 
Highlanders.  The  shields  of  the  warriors  are  Bucaid- 
each,  bossed ;  Balla-bhreachd,  dotted  and  variegated ; 
Bara-chaol,  with  slender  point ;  "  with  many  a  pic- 
ture to  be  seen  on  it,  a  lion,  a  cremhinach,  and  a  deadly 
snake ; "  and  such  shields  are  figured  on  the  Iona 
tombs.  The  ancient  Gauls  wore  helmets  which 
represented  beasts.  The  enchanted  king's  sons,  when 
they  came  home  to  their  dwellings,  put  off  cochal, 
the  husk,  and  become  men ;  and  when  they  go  out, 
they  resume  the  cochal  and  become  animals  of  vari- 
ous kinds.  May  this  not  mean  that  they  put  on 
their  armour.  They  marry  a  plurality  of  wives  in 
many  stories.  In  short,  the  enchanted  warriors  are, 
as  I  verily  believe,  nothing  but  real  men,  and  their 
manners  real  manners,  seen  through  a  haze  of  cen- 
turies, and  seen  in  the  same  light  as  they  are  seen  in 
other  popular  tales,  but,  mayhap,  a  trifle  clearer,  because 
the  men  who  tell  of  them  are  the  descendants  of  the 
men  described,  and  have  mixed  less  with  other  men. 

I  do  not  mean  that  the  tales  date  from  any  parti- 
cular period,  but  that  traces  of  all  periods  may  be  found 
in  them — that  various  actors  have  played  the  same 
parts  time  out  of  mind,  and  that  their  manners  and 
customs  are  all  mixed  together,  and  truly,  though  con- 
fusedly, represented — that  giants  and  fairies,  and 
enchanted  princes  were  men ;   that  Bob  Boy  may  yet 


INTRODUCTION.  CXI 

wear   many   heads  in  Australia,  and  be  a  god  or  an 

ogre,  according  to  taste — that  tales  are  but  garbled 
popular  history,  of  a  long  journey  through  forests  and 
wilds,  inhabited  by  savages  and  wild  beasts  :  of  events 
that  occurred  on  the  way  from  east  to  west,  in  the 
year  of  grace,  once  upon  a  time. 

Tales  certainly  are  historical  in  this  sense  when  they 
treat  of  Eirinn  and  Lochlann,  for  the  islands  were  the 
battlefield  of  the  Celts  and  Scandinavians,  and  though 
they  lack  the  precision  of  more  modern  popular  history, 
they  are  very  precise  as  to  Irish  names  and  geography. 
"They  went  to  Cnoc  Seannan  in  Ireland."  Conall 
was  called  Gulbanach  from  Beinn  Gulbain  in  Ireland. 
There  is  the  "king  of  Newry,"  and  many  other  places 
are  named  according  to  their  Gaelic  names,  never  as 
they  are  named  in  English.  The  same  is  true  of  the 
manuscript  tales  in  the  Advocates'  Library.  Places 
about  Loch  Awe  are  named,  and  the  characters  pass 
backwards  and  forwards  between  Ireland  and  Argyll, 
as  we  are  told  they  really  did  when  the  Irish  Celts  in- 
vaded and  possessed  that  part  of  the  west  of  Scotland, 
and  that  invasion  is  clearly  referred  to  in  more  than 
one  popular  tradition  still  current.  When  Lochlann  is 
mentioned,  it  is  further  off,  and  all  is  uncertain.  The 
king's  son,  not  the  king  himself,  is  usually  the  hero. 
Breacan  MacRigh  Lochlainn  is  named,  or  the  son  of 
the  king  of  Lochlann,  without  a  name  at  all,  but  the 
Irish  kings  often  have  a  whole  pedigree  ;  thus  Connall 
Gulbanach  Maclulin  MacArt  Mac  some  one  else,  king  of 
Ireland,  and  I  lately  heard  a  long  story 'about  "  Magnus." 

This  again  is  like  distorted,  undated  popular  history 
of  true  events.  They  are  clearly  seen  at  home,  the 
very  spot  where  the  action  took  place  is  pointed  to ; 
less  clearly  in  Ireland,  though  people  and  places  are 


CX11  INTRODUCTION. 

named  ;  they  are  dimly  seen  in  Lochlann,  and  beyond 
that  everything  is  enlarged,  and  magical,  and  mysterious 
and  grotesque.  Real  events  are  distorted  into  fables 
and  magnified  into  supernatural  occurrences,  for  the 
Gaelic  proverbs  truly  say,  "There  are  long  horns  on 
cattle  in  mist"  or  "in  Ireland,"  and  "Far  away  fowls 
have  fine  feathers." 

But  whether  the  stories  are  history  or  mythology,  it 
is  quite  clear  that  they  are  very  old,  tha-  they  belong  to 
a  class  which  is  very  widely  spread,  and  that  they  were 
not  made  by  living  men. 

All  story-tellers  agree  in  saying  that  they  learned 
them  as  traditions  long  ago  ;  and  if  all  those  whose  names 
are  given  had  been  inclined  to  tell  "  stories  "  in  another 
sense,  they  could  not  have  made  and  told  the  same 
stories  at  opposite  ends  of  Scotland,  almost  simultane- 
ously, to  different  people.  James  Wilson  could  not  have 
told  Connall  Cra-bhuidhe  to  Hector  MacLean  in  Islay, 
about  the  same  time  that  Neil  Gillies  was  telling  Conal 
Oobhi  to  me  at  Inverary,  and  a  very  short  time  before 
Hector  Urquhart  got  No.  8  from  Kenneth  MacLean  in 
Gairloch.  An  old  fisherman  and  an  old  porter  could 
not  have  combined  to  tell  a  "  story "  which  was  in 
Straparola,  in  Italian,  in  1567,  to  Hector  MacLean  in 
Barra,  in  1859,  and  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  MacLauchlan  in 
Edinburgh,  in  1860,  unless  these  stories  were  popular 
facts,  though  despised  as  fictions ;  and  they  are  curious 
facts  too,  for  the  frame  of  Conal  is  common  to  old 
German  manuscripts,  and  some  of  the  adventures  are 
versions  of  those  of  Ulysses.  There  are  many  proverbs 
which  are  only  explained  when  the  story  is  known  ;  for 
example,  "  blackberries  in  February  "  means  nothing ; 
but  when  explained  by  the  story,  the  meaning  is  clearly 
the  idea  which  an  acquaintance  of  mine  once  embodied 


INTRODUCTION.  CX111 

in  a  French  toast,  as  "  les  impossibility  accomplies." 
The  stories  do  not  change  rapidly,  for  I  have  gone 
kick  to  a  reciter  after  the  lapse  of  a  year,  and  I  have 
heard  him  again  repeat  in  Gaelic,  what  I  had  trans- 
lated from  his  dictation,  with  hardly  a  change  (vol.  1, 
p.  93). 

I  have  now  no  doubt  that  the  popular  tales  are  very 
old  ;  that  they  are  old  "  Allabanaich,"  Highlanders  and 
wanderers ;  that  they  have  wandered,  settled,  and 
changed,  with  those  who  still  tell  them ;  and  call  them- 
selves "  Albannaich,"  men  whose  wandering  spirit  is 
not  yet  extinct,  though  they  were  settled  in  their  pre- 
sent abodes  "  before  the  memory  of  man." 

There  was  and  is,  a  wandering  spirit  in  the  whole 
race,  if  Celts  are  Indo-Europeans.  In  the  people  who 
delighted  in  the  adventures  of  Ulysses  and  ./Eneas,  a 
longing  spirit  of  western  adventure,  which  was  shewn 
in  the  fabled  Atalantis,  and  the  Island  of  the  Seven 
Cities  and  St.  Brandon — the  spirit  which  drove  the 
hordes  of  Asia  to  Europe,  and  urged  Columbus  to  dis- 
cover America,  and  which  still  survives  in  "the  Green 
Isle  of  the  great  deep,"  "Eilan  uaine  an  iomal  torra 
domhain,"  of  which  so  much  is  told,  which  Highland 
fancy  still  sees  on  the  far  western  horizon,  and  which 
as  "flathinnis,"  the  Isle  of  Heroes,  has  now  been 
raised  from  an  earthly  paradise  to  mean  Heaven. 

Much  has  been  said  about  highland  superstitions,  and 
highlanders  of  the  east  and  west,  like  their  southern 
neighbours,  have  many,  but  they  are  at  least  respectable 
from  their  age  ;  and  because  they  are  so  widely  spread 
over  the  world,  I  believe  them  to  be  nearly  all  fictions 
founded  on  facts. 

Thirteen  Highlanders  would  eat  their  potatoes  to- 
gether without  fear,  and  one  of  them  might  spill  the 


CX1V  INTRODUCTION. 

salt  without  a  shudder.  I  never  heard  of  a  Celtic  pea- 
sant consulting  his  table  as  an  oracle,  or  going  to  a 
clairvoyant ;  but  plenty  of  them  dream  dreams  and  see 
visions,  and  believe  in  them  as  men  in  Bible  history  did 
of  old. 

A  man  had  been  lost  in  crossing  the  dangerous  ford, 
five  or  six  miles  of  sand  or  rock,  between  Benbecula 
and  North  Uist,  shortly  before  I  was  there  in  1859.  I 
was  told  the  fact,  and  it  was  added  incidentally,  "And 
did  he  not  come  to  his  sister  in  a  dream,  and  tell  her 
where  to  find  him  ?  and  she  went  to  the  place,  and  got 
him  there,  half  buried  in  sand,  after  the  whole  country 
side  had  been  looking  for  him  in  vain."  Here  is  a 
similar  story  from  Manchester  : — 

"  Fulfilment  of  a  Dream. — An  inquest  was  held  last  even- 
ing at  Sheffield,  before  Mr.  Thomas  Badger,  coroner,  on  the 
body  of  Mr.  Charles  Holmes,  button  manufacturer,  Clough  House 
Lane,  who  had  been  found  drowned  on  Monday  morning,  in  the 
Lead-mill  dam  in  that  town.  The  deceased  left  his  home  on 
Saturday  night  in  company  with  his  wife  ;  they  walked  through 
the  town  together,  and  about  nine  o'clock,  at  which  time  they 
were  at  the  top  of  Union  Street,  he  said  to  her,  '  I'm  going  to 
leave  thee  here,  Fanny.'  She  said,  '  Are  jrou  ? '  and  he  replied, 
1  Yes,  I  want  to  see  an  old  friend  who  is  going  to  Birmingham  on 
Monday,  and  he  is  to  be  here.'  She  said  to  him,  'Well,  Charlie, 
don't  stop  long,  because  I  do  feel  queer  about  that  dream,'  and 
he  replied,  'Oh,  don't  say  that  ;  I'll  just  have  a  glass,  and  then 
come  home.  Go  and  get  the  supper  ready,  and  I'll  come  directly.' 
She  then  left  him.  When  he  got  into  the  house  he  wras  invited 
to  drink  with  his  friend,  but  he  exhibited  some  reluctance,  saying 
that  on  the  night  before  his  wife  had  dreamed  that  she  saw  him 
dead  in  a  public-house,  and  that  she  had  dreamed  a  similar  dream 
about  a  week  before.  Unfortunately,  however,  he  yielded  to  the 
temptation,  got  drunk,  and  did  not  leave  the  public-house  till  after 
twelve.  He  was  accompanied  part  of  the  way  home  by  his  friend, 
and  was  never  afterwards  seen  alive.  Near  his  house  are  the 
Lead-mill  dams,  and,  in  consequence  of  his  not  returning  home 


INTRODUCTION.  CXV 

his  w  ife  felt  convinced  that  he  had  fallen  in  and  got  drowned.  A 
search  was  made,  and  on  Monday  morning  his  body  was  found 
in  the  water,  and  was  removed  to  the  Royal  Standard  public- 
house,  where  his  wife  saw  the  body,  and  identified  it  as  that  of 
her  husband;  The  jury  returned'a  verdict  of  'Found  drowned,' 
and  recommended  that  an  opening  in  the  wall,  near  the  dam, 
through  which  it  is  supposed  he  had  fallen,  should  be  built  up." — 
Munchester  Examiner. 

There  are  plenty  of  lowlanders  as  well  as  "ignorant" 
Highlanders  who  think  that  they  are  seers,  without  the 
aid  of  a  deal  board  through  which  to  look  into  futurity, 
by  the  help  of  a  medium,  and  it  is  by  no  means  uncom- 
mon, as  I  am  told,  for  the'Astronomer-Koyal  to  receive 
English  letters  asking  his  advice,  ex  officio. 

It  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  add  a  word  as  to  the 
spoken  Gaelic  of  these  tales ;  the  mode  of  writing  it ; 
and  the  English  of  the  translation.  First,  then,  it  is 
admitted  by  all  that  the  Gaelic  of  the  West  Highlands 
is  a  branch  of  the  old  Celtic  stock,  that  is.  to  say,  the 
language  of  some  of  the  oldest  invaders  or  inhabitants 
of  Europe  of  whom  anything  is  known.  Why  it  is  I 
know  not,  but  from  works  on  philology  it  appears  that 
the  Highland  dialect  has  been  least  studied,  and  for 
that  reason,  if  for  no  other,  it  is  perhaps  best  worth 
the  trouble.  I  thought  it  best  to  ignore  all  that  had 
been  said  or  written  on  the  subject,  to  go  direct  to 
those  who  now  speak  the  language,  especially  to  those 
who  speak  no  other  tongue ;  to  men  who  use  words  as 
they  use  their  feet  and  hands,  utterly  unconscious  of 
design ;  who  talk  as  nature  and  their  parents  taught 
them;  and  who  are  as  innocent  of  philology  as  their 
own  babies  when  they  first  learn  to  say  "  Abbi." 

I  requested  those  who  wrote  for  me  to  take  down 
the  words  as  they  were  spoken,  and  to  write  as  they 
would  speak  themselves ;   and  the  Gaelic  of  the  tales 


CXV1  INTRODUCTION. 

is  the  result  of  such  a  process.  The  names  of  the 
writers  are  given,  and  I  am  satisfied  that  they  have 
done  their  work  faithfully  and  well.  The  Gaelic  then 
is  not  what  is  called  "  classical  Gaelic."  It  is  generally 
the  Gaelic  of  the  people — pure  from  the  source. 

Xext,  as  to  orthography.  I  chose  one  man,  Mr. 
Hector  MacLean,  whom  I  know  to  be  free  from  prejudice, 
and  who  knows  the  rules  of  Gaelic  spelling,  to  correct 
the  press,  and  I  asked  him  to  spell  the  sounds  which 
he  heard,  according  to  the  principles  of  Gaelic  ortho- 
graphy, whenever  he  wrote  anything  down  himself  j  and 
in  correcting  the  press  for  the  work  of  others,  to  cor- 
rect nothing  but  manifest  mistakes,  and  this  he  has 
done,  as  it  appears  to  me,  very  well. 

In  Gaelic  there  are  certain  vowels,  and  combinations 
of  them,  which  represent  certain  sounds ;  and  they  are 
all  sounded,  and  always  in  the  same  manner,  according 
to  theory,  but  in  practice  it  is  a  very  different  matter. 
In  speaking  Gaelic,  as  is  the  case  in  other  lan- 
guages, various  modes  of  pronouncing  the  same  vowels 
exist  in  various  districts.  The  consonants  meet  and 
contend  and  extinguish  each  other,  and  change  the 
sound  of  the  vowels  in  Gaelic  more  than  in  any  other 
language  which  I  know  j  but  they  fight  by  rule,  and 
the  conquered  and  the  slain  encumber  the  words  which 
are  their  battlefields,  as  dead  or  dying  consonants  stand- 
ing beside  the  silent  h  which  kills  or  controls  them. 
One  difficulty  in  writing  Gaelic  from  dictation  is  to 
ascertain,  in  words  of  doubtful  meaning,  whether  the 
sound  v  is  to  be  expressed  by  bh  or  mh.  The  first 
letter  was  once  at  the  head  of  a  small  regiment  of  let- 
ters, and  sounded  his  own  note  m  or  b,  and  so  he 
regulated  the  meaning  of  the  rest,  but  having  fallen 
in  with  an  h  in  an  oblique  case,   and   being  changed 


INTRODUCTION.  CXV11 

thereby  to  v,  the  whole  history  of  the  word  must  be 
known  before  it  can  be  settled  whether  it  should  begin 
with  nth  or  bh,  and  it  is  much  more  difficult  in  other 
cases,  where  the  letter  is  silenced  altogether.  My 
mother,  if  Gaelic,  might  become  vy  vother — father,  ather, 
but  the  sounds  would  be  spelt  mhother,  flutther.  The 
meaning  in  a  book  depends  on  the  spelling,  but  in 
speaking,  it  is  a  different  matter.  There  are  shades  of 
sound  which  an  ear  used  to  a  language  can  detect,  but 
which  letters  are  wholly  unfitted  to  express. 

Gaelic  scholars,  then,  who  have  a  standard  for  Gaelic 
writing,  and  who  adhere  to  it  strictly,  will  probably  find 
much  which  will  appear  to  them  erroneous  spelling. 

An  English  scholar  reading  Sir  Walter  Scott's 
novels  will  find  plenty  of  words  which  are  not  in 
Johnson's  Dictionary,  and  a  student  of  Pickwick  will 
find  much  in  Sam  Weller's  conversation  which  he  will 
not  discover  in  that  form  in  Shakspeare. 

Had  I  found  stories  in  the  Isle  of  Wight  I  should 
have  spelt  good  morning  good  marnin,  because  it  is  so 
pronounced;  falbh  is  spelt  folbh  when  a  story  comes 
from  some  of  the  Western  Islands,  because  it  is  so 
pronounced  there ;  and  for  the  same  reason  iad  is  spelt 
end.  I  have  no  doubt  there  are  errors.  I  can  only 
vouch  for  having  chosen  men  who  did  their  best  in  a 
very  difficult  matter ;  for  I  do  not  believe  that  there 
are  ten  men  now  living  who  would  write  a  hundred 
lines  of  Gaelic  off  hand  and  spell  them  in  the  same 
way.  I  very  much  doubt  if  ten  men  ever  did  live  at 
the  same  time  who  would  have  agreed  as  to  Gaelic 
spelling ;  and  I  know  that  I  find  forms  of  words  in 
books  which  I  have  very  rarely  heard  in  conversation. 
For  example,  the  plural  in  ibh  (iv)  is  very  rare ;  the 
common  form  is  AN. 

I 


CXV111  INTRODUCTION. 

The  spelling  of  the  first  book  printed  in  the  Gaelic 
language,  Bishop  Carswell's  Prayer-book,  1567,  is  not 
the  same  as  the  spelling  of  the  Gaelic  Bible.  The  Gaelic 
names  in  old  charters  are  not  spelt  according  to  modern 
rule.  The  old  Gaelic  manuscripts  in  the  Advocates' 
Library  are  spelt  in  various  ways.  Every  man  who 
has  written  Gaelic  for  me,  spells  words  variously. 
Manks  spelling  is  phonetic.  Irish  spelling  is  different; 
and  where  there  is  so  little  authority,  I  hope  to  be  for- 
given if  I  have  ventured  to  ask  men  to  follow  their  own 
own  road.  I  hope  they  will  be  forgiven  if  they  have 
taken  a  short  cut  to  obtain  a  certain  object,  and  if  they 
have  left  the  beaten  path. 

For  the  translation  I  am  responsible,  and  I  feel 
that  the  English  needs  excuse.  It  has  been  the  fashion 
so  far  to  translate  Gaelic  freely  j  that  is,  to  give  the 
sense  of  the  passage  without  caring  much  for  the  sense 
of  words.  One  result  is,  that  dictionaries  give  so 
many  meanings  that  they  are  almost  useless  to  any  one 
ignorant  of  Gaelic.  There  are  many  words  in  these 
tales  which  were  new  to  me,  and  I  have  repeatedly 
been  driven  to  gather  their  meaning  from  the  context, 
or  to  ask  for  it  at  the  source,  because  of  the  multitude 
of  contradictory  explanations  given  in  dictionaries. 
Let  me  take  one  word  as  an  example.  In  the  first  tale 
the  hero  meets  Cu  seang  na  coill'  uaine,  and  the 
meaning  turned  on  the  word  Seang.  To  that  word 
the  following  meanings  are  attached  :  —  Slender, 
slender-waisted,  hungry,  hungry -looking,  lank,  lean, 
active,  handsome,  strong ;  (applied  to  a  shirt-front), 
fine ;  "  Sad  am  I  this  day  arising  the  breast  of  my 
shirt  is  not  seang  ;  "  (applied  to  food  in  a  proverb),  meat 
makes  men  "seang;"  (applied  to  hinds  in  an  ode),  neat; 
(applied  to  a  horse),  spirited ;  also  slim,  small,  small- 


INTRODUCTION.  CX1X 

bellied,  gaunt,  nimble,  agile ;  (applied  to  lady),  slender- 
waisted.  On  looking  further  it  appears  that  Seangan 
is  an  ant ;  that  Shunka  is  the  Dakotah  for  all  animals 
of  the  dog  species,  and  that  the  word  came  to  be  applied 
to  a  horse,  as  spirit  dog,  when  horses  came  first  to 
that  country  ;  and  it  further  appears  that  there  is  a 
word  in  broad  Scotch  which  nearly  fits  the  Gaelic, 
Swank  ;  that  Sing  means  a  lion  in  India  ;  and  that  the 
horses  of  the  sun  were  swankas  with  beautiful  steps  in 
Sanscrit.  It  seemed  to  me  that  the  phrase  might  be 
thus  freely  translated  "  The  Forest  Lion." 

But  though  it  seemed  to  me  possible  I  might  be 
entirely  wrong,  so  I  gave  the  meaning  of  the  words, 
about  which  there  could  be  no  mistake  : — 

CU      SEANG      NA      COILL'      UAINE. 

Dog     slim   of  the   wood     green. 

My  belief  is,  that  the  word  was  an  adjective,  descrip- 
tive of  the  qualities  of  a  lion  wherever  their  likeness  is 
to  be  found — as  strength,  activity,  high  courage,  bold 
bearing,  slender  form,  hunger,  satiety ;  but  I  did  not 
venture  to  translate  CU  SEANG  by  "  lion"  nor  by  "grey 
liound"  as  I  was  advised  to  do.  I  translated  it  by  those 
words  which  seem  to  give  the  present  meaning  of  the 
Gaelic.  Cu,  a  dog;  SEANG,  slim;  and  the  phrase  stands, 
"  The  slim  dog  of  the  green  wood." 

And  so  throughout  I  have  aimed  at  giving  the  pre- 
sent real  meaning  of  every  separate  word,  but  so  as  to 
give  its  true  meaning  in  the  passage  in  which  it  occurs. 
Where  I  have  not  been  able  to  do  both,  I  have  tried 
to  keep  as  close  as  I  could  to  the  original  idea  involved. 
For  example,  "  In  the  mouth  of  night "  is  new  to  Eng- 
lish, but  it  is  comprehensible,  and  it  is  the  exact  mean- 
ing of  the  phrase  commonly  used  to  express  the  first 


CXX  INTRODUCTION. 

coming  on  of  darkness.  The  expression  is  poetical.  It 
seems  to  refer  to  some  old  mythical  notion  that  the 
sun  went  into  a  cave  or  a  tent  to  sleep,  for  "  Take  thy 
sleep  in  thy  cave"  is  a  line  in  Ossian's  "Address  to 
the  Sun,"  and  though  it  was  suggested  to  me  to  alter 
this  translation,  and  make  it  "good  English,"  I  thought 
it  best  to  adhere  to  my  original  plan.  Generally  where 
the  phrase  occurs  it  is  translated  "in  the  mouth  of 
night,"  though  I  was  advised  to  write,  "in  the  dusk," 
"in  the  evening,"  "at  nightfall,"  "in  the  mantle  of 
night,"  "at  twilight,"  "in  the  grey  of  the  evening." 

I  admit  that  all  these  phrases  express  ideas  which 
might  be  attached  to  the  words ;  but  what  could  an 
unfortunate  student  make  of  a  passage  in  which  a  word 
meaning  mouth  according  to  all  dictionaries,  should 
seem  to  mean  mantle,  or  fall,  or  grey.  It  is  very  much 
easier  to  write  naturally  and  translate  freely ;  and  as 
I  have  tried  hard  to  make  my  translation  a  close  one,  I 
hope  the  bad  English  will  be  forgiven. 

Those  only  who  have  tried  to  turn  Gaelic  into  Eng- 
lish can  understand  the  difficulty.  There  are  in  fact 
many  Gaelic  phrases  which  will  not  go  into  English  at 
all.  For  example,  tha  so  agam  (I  have  this),  is  this 
at  me,  or  with  me,  or  by  me,  is  a  phrase  which  cannot 
be  rendered  for  want  of  a  word  equivalent  to  AG  or  AIG, 
which  expresses  position  and  possession,  and  is  com- 
bined with  am,  ad,  e,  inn,  ibh,  and  changed  to  aca  to 
express  the  persons.  Gaelic  will  not  bear  literal  trans- 
lation into  English,  but  I  have  tried  to  give  the  real 
meaning  of  every  word  as  nearly  as  I  could,  and  to 
give  it  by  using  the  English  word  which  most  resembled 
the  Gaelic ;  and  thus  I  have  unexpectedly  fallen  in 
with  a  number  of  English  words  which  seem  to  have  the 
same  origin  as  Gaelic,  if  they  are  not  survivors  of  the 


INTRODUCTION.  CXxi 

language  of  the  ancient  Britons.  I  have  translated  Claidh- 
eamh,  pronounced  Claiv,  by  glave,  Traill  by  thrall, 
and  so  throughout  wherever  I  have  thought  of  an  Eng 
lish  word  that  resembled  a  word  admitted  to  be  Gaelic. 

It  is  my  own  opinion,  and  it  is  that  of  Mr.  Mac- 
Lean,  that  the  Gaelic  language  is  the  same  from  Cape 
Clear  in  Ireland  to  Cape  Wrath  in  Scotland,  though 
there  are  many  dialects,  and  there  is  much  variety. 
The  language  was  taught  to  me  by  a  native  of  Lorn, 
and  he  was  chosen  by  the  advice  of  men  well  able  to 
judge,  as  a  native  of  the  district  where  the  best  Gaelic 
was  then  supposed  to  be  spoken.  Speaking  from  my  own 
experience,  I  can  converse  freely  in  Lorn  Gaelic  with 
Scotch  Highlanders  in  every  district  of  Scotland,  and 
with  natives  of  Rathlin.  I  can  make  my  way  with 
natives  of  the  North  of  Ireland,  but  I  cannot  converse 
with  the  natives  of  some  Irish  districts.  I  could 
not  make  the  Manksmen  understand  me,  but  I  can 
readily  understand  most  of  the  words  in  Manks  and  in 
Irish,  when  pronounced  separately. 

There  are  a  very  great  many  words  in  Welsh  and 
in  Breton  which  I  can  understand,  or  trace  when  they 
are  separately  spoken,  but  the  difference  in  these  is 
much  wider.  Peasants  come  from  Con  naught  to  Islay, 
and  in  a  very  short  time  converse  freely,  though  their 
accent  betrays  them;  but  an  Argyllshire  Highlander 
is  known  in  the  north  by  his  accent,  just  as  a  York- 
shireman  would  be  found  out  in  Somersetshire.  An 
Islay  man  is  detected  in  Mull,  and  a  native  of  one 
parish  in  Islay  is  detected  when  he  speaks  in  another ; 
but  though  there  are  such  shades  of  difference,  a  High- 
lander used  to  hear  languages  variously  spoken  should 
have  no  difficulty  in  understanding  any  dialect  of 
Gaelic  spoken  in  Scotland,  and  most  of  the  Irish  dialects. 


CXX11  INTRODUCTION. 

But  which  of  all  these  is  the  best,  who  is  to  decide  ? 
The  author  of  a  very  good  dictionary  says,  under  the 
word  COIG,  that  "in  the  islands  of  Argyllshire  every  word 
is  pronounced  just  as  Adam  spoke  it."  Dr.  Johnson  pro- 
nounced the  whole  to  be  the  rude  speech  of  a  barbarous 
people  ;  and  the  Saxon  knew  as  much  of  Gaelic  as  the 
Celt  did  of  Adam.  One  Gaelic  scholar  wished  to  change 
the  island  words  ;  a  good  Highlander  told  me  that  Dal- 
mally  was  the  best  place  for  Gaelic,  another  was  all  for 
Western  Koss.  Nobody  has  a  good  word  for  Suther- 
land Gaelic,  but  it  is  very  pure  nevertheless  in  some 
districts ;  north  country  men  are  all  for  Inverness.  I 
have  heard  excellent  Gaelic  in  the  Long  Island.  On 
the  whole,  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  dialect  the  best 
which  resembles  the  largest  number  of  others,  and 
that  is  the  dialect  spoken  by  the  most  illiterate  in  the 
islands,  and  on  the  promontories  furthest  to  the  west. 
I  will  not  venture  to  name  any  district,  because  I  have 
no  wish  to  contend  with  the  natives  of  all  the  others. 

The  spirit  of  nationality  is  one  which  has  a  large 
development  amongst  my  countrymen,  and  the  subject  of 
language  brings  it  out  in  strong  relief.  It  is  but  a 
phase  of  human  nature,  a  result  of  the  quality  which 
phrenologists  describe  as  combativeness,  and  it  seems 
to  be  common  to  all  the  races  classed  as  Indo-European. 

It  is  a  common  opinion  in  England  that  one  English- 
man can  thrash  three  Frenchmen ;  and  I  have  no  doubt 
that  a  similar  opinion  prevails  in  France,  though  I  do 
not  know  the  fact.  Highlanders  believe  that  lowlanders 
generally  are  soft  and  effeminate;  lowlanders  think  that 
mountaineers  are  savages.  An  Irish  Celt  detests,  his 
brother  Celt  over  the  water.  A  Scotch  Celt  calls 
another  Eireannach  when  he  abuses  him,  but  let  a  com- 
mon foe  appear  and  they  will  all  combine. 


INTRODUCTION.  CX  X  i  i  i 

England,  Ireland,  and  Scotland  are  up  in  arms,  with 
rifles  on  their  shoulders,  at  a  hint  of  the  approach  of  a 
Frenchman ;  but  they  joined  France  with  heart  and 
hand  to  fight  the  Russian  and  the  Chinese ;  and  as  soon 
as  the  battle  was  over,  they  came  back  and  fought  at  home. 

The  English  lion  stirred  up  the  Scotch  lion  in  the 
English  press,  and  the  northern  lion  growled  over  his 
wrongs.  Ireland  began  to  tell  of  the  tyrant  Saxon, 
and  a  stranger  might  think  that  the  Union  was  about 
to  fall  to  pieces.  It  is  not  so ;  it  is  but  a  manifes- 
tation of  superfluous  energy  which  breaks  out  in  the 
other  "  union "  over  the  water,  and  makes  as  much 
noise  there  as  steam  blowing  off  elsewhere. 

I  maintain  that  there  is  chronic  war  in  every  part 
of  her  Majesty's  dominions.  Not  long  ago  a  dispute 
arose  about  a  manner  of  catching  herrings.  One  set  of 
men  caught  them  with  drift-nets,  another  with  drag- 
nets, and  one  party  declared  that  the  other  violated  the 
law  ;  blood  got  up,  and  at  last  a  whole  fleet  of  fishing- 
boats  left  their  ground  and  sailed  twenty  miles  down 
to  attack  the  rival  fleet  in  form.  A  gun-boat  joined  the 
party,  and  peace  was  preserved ;  but  it  was  more  the 
result  of  a  calm,  which  enabled  the  light  row-boats  to 
escape  from  the  heavier  sailing  fleet.  Both  parties  spoke 
the  same  language,  and  on  any  subject  but  herrings, 
they  would  have  backed  each  other  through  the  world. 

The  purchase  of  an  orange,  and  a  box  on  the  ear, 
grew  into  a  serious  riot  in  a  northern  town  last  year. 
The  fight  spread  as  from  a  centre,  and  lasted  three 
days ;  but  here  it  developed  itself  into  a  fight  between 
Celt  and  Saxon.  Both  sides  must  have  been  in  the 
wrong,  and  I  am  quite  sure  they  were  both  ignominiously 
defeated,  although  they  may  hold  the  contrary. 

Every  election  in   the  three  kingdoms  is  a  shame- 


CXX1V  INTRODUCTION. 

ful  riot,  according  to  some  public  organ,  whose  party 
get  the  worst  of  it. 

There  is  a  regular  stand-up  fight  in  Paris  periodi- 
cally, the  rest  of  Europe  goes  to  war  in  earnest  at 
every  opportunity,  and  when  there  are  no  national  or 
class  wars,  men  fight  as  individuals  all  over  the  world. 
I  was  once  at  Christmas  at  a  hurling  match  in  Ireland. 
The  game  was  played  on  ice  on  a  lake,  and  after  some 
hours  the  owner  of  the  lake  sent  down  a  Scotch  butler 
with  bread  and  cheese  and  whisky  for  the  players. 
They  gathered  about  the  cart  in  perfect  good  humour, 
when   suddenly,    without   cause,  an    excited    banker's 

clerk  shouted,  "  Hurro  for "  (the  nearest  post  town), 

and  performed  a  kind  of  war  dance  on  the  outside  edge 
of  his  skates,  flourishing  a  stick  wildly,  and  chanting 
his  war  song,  "  I'll  bet  ere  a  man  in  England,  Ireland, 
or  Scotland."  A  knobby  stick  rose  up  in  the  crowd, 
and  the  Scotch  butler  was  down;  but  an  Irish  boy 
who  had  not  opened  his  mouth  was  the  next.  He 
went  head-foremost  into  a  willow  bush  amongst  the 
snow,  and  three  men  in  frieze  great-coats  kicked  him 
with  nailed  shoes.  In  ten  minutes  the  storm  was 
over,  the  butler  was  up  again  in  his  cart  dispensing 
the  refreshments,  the  man  in  the  bush  was  consoling 
himself  with  a  dram,  and  all  was  peace.  But  that 
night  the  country  party  took  up  a  position  behind  a 
stone  wall,  and  when  the  others  came,  they  sallied  forth 
and  there  was  a  battle-royal. 

So  I  have  seen  a  parish  shinty  match  in  the  High- 
lands become  so  hot  and  furious,  that  the  leaders  were 
forced  to  get  two  pipers  and  march  their  troops  out  of 
the  field  in  opposite  directions,  to  prevent  a  civil  war 
of  parishes. 

And  so,  a  part  of  her  Majesty's  guards  having  gone 


INTRODUCTION.  CXXV 

out  to  exercise  at  Clewer,  and  being  stationed  as  "  the 
enemy  "  at  some  point,  obstinately  refused  to  "  retreat 
in  disorder ; "  but  stood  their  ground  with  such  deter- 
mination, that  the  officers  had  to  sound  the  retreat  on 
both  sides  to  prevent  a  serious  battle. 

So  at  Eton,  shins  were  broken  in  my  tutor's  foot- 
ball match  against  my  dame's ;  and  boys  injured  them- 
selves in  rowing  frantically  for  the  honour  of  upper  or 
lower  sixes. 

Two  twins,  who  were  so  like,  that  one  used  to  skip 
round  a  pillar  and  answer  to  his  brother's  name,  and 
who  probably  would  have  died  for  each  other,  still  fought 
in  private  so  earnestly,  that  one  carried  the  mark  of  a 
shovel  on  his  forehead  for  many  a  long  day ;  and  so 
boys  fight,  and  men  fight,  individually  and  collectively, 
as  parties,  races,  and  nations,  all  over  Europe,  if  not 
all  over  the  world. 

I  decline  to  state  my  opinion  as  to  which  Gaelic  is  the 
best,  for  that  is  a  peculiarly  delicate  subject,  my  country- 
men having  ceased  to  use  their  dirks,  are  apt  to  fight 
with  pens,  and  I  would  rather  see  the  children  of  the 
Gael,  in  this  as  in  other  matters,  fighting  shoulder  to 
shoulder  against  foes,  and  working  side  by  side  with 
their  friends. 

The  Gaelic  language  is  essentially  descriptive,  rich  in 
words,  which  by  their  sound  alone  express  ideas.  The 
thundering  sound  of  the  waves  beating  on  the  shore  is 
well  expressed  by  Tonn,  a  wave;  Lunn,  a  heavy 
Atlantic  swell. 

The  harsh  rattling  and  crushing  of  thunder  by  Tair- 

NEANACH. 

The  plunge  of  a  heavy  body  thrown  into  deep 
water  by  Tunn,  plunge. 

The  noise  of  small  stones  and  fine  gravel  streaming 


CXXV1  INTRODUCTION. 

seawards  from  a  beach  in  the  undertow  is  heard  in 
Scrithean,  gravel. 

The  tinkling  of  shells  as  they  slip  and  slide  on  the 
sand  at  the  edge  of  the  sea  is  heard  in  Sligean,  shells. 

The  hard  sharp  knocking  of  stones  in  clach,  a 
stone,  and  thence  all  manner  of  compound  ideas  follow 
as  clachan,  a  village;  clachair,  a  mason;  clacharan, 
a  stone-chat. 

The  names  of  domestic  animals  usually  resemble 
their  notes.  Bo,  a  cow;  gobhar,  a  goat;  caora,  a 
sheep;  laogh,  a  calf.  Words  such  as  barking,  growl- 
ing, squealing,  coughing,  sneezing,  suggest  the  idea  by 
the  sound,  as  they  do  in  English.  Many  names  of 
beasts  and  birds,  which  are  not  of  this  class,  are  de- 
scriptive in  another  sense.  The  grouse  are  the  reddish 
brown  cock  and  hen ;  the  fox,  the  reddish  brown  dog ; 
the  wolf,  the  fierce  dog;  the  sandpiper,  the  little 
driolichan  of  the  strand.  The  crow  is  the  flayer,  the 
falcon,  the  darter ;  the  otter  the  brown  or  black  beast. 

It  is  a  language  full  of  metaphorical  and  descriptive 
expressions.  "  He  went  to  the  beginning  of  fortune ; " 
"he  put  the  world  under  his  head;"  '"he  took  his  own 
body  home ; "  "he  went  away  " — that  is,  he  went  home 
sick,  and  he  died.  "There  were  great  masses  of  rain, 
and  there  was  night  and  there  was  darkness."  "Ye 
must  not  be  out  amidst  the  night,  she  is  dark." 

It  is  rich  in  words  expressive  of  war,  by  no  means 
rich  in  words  belonging  to  the  arts.  Crann,  a  tree, 
means  a  mast,  the  bar  of  a  door,  a  plough,  and  many 
other  things  made  of  wood.  Beairt  means  a  loom, 
a  block  and  tackling,  and  engines  of  various  kinds. 

It  seems  to  contain  words  to  express  the  great 
features  of  nature,  which  can  be  traced  in  the  names 
of  rivers  and  mountains  in   a  great  part  of   Europe, 


INTRODUCTION.  CXXvii 

such  as  eas,  a  rapid  (pr.  ace) ;  ath  (pr.  A.  and  Av.),  a 
ford ;  amhainn,  OBHAINN,  ABHAINN,  a  river,  variously 
pronounced,  avain,  a-wen,  ovain,  o-in,  o-un,  o-n.  Calais 
I  take  to  be  cala,  a  harbour ;  the  word  has  no  mean- 
ing in  French.  Boulogne  might  be  Beul  Obhainn, 
river's  mouth ;  Donau,  the  Danube,  might  mean  the 
brown  river.  Tana  might  mean  the  shallow,  and  both 
are  descriptive. 

Rhine  might  mean  the  division,  and  there  is  a  dis- 
trict in  Islay  whose  name  is  pronounced  exactly  as  the 
name  of  the  great  German  river.  Balaclava  is  exceed- 
ingly like  the  name  of  an  Islay  farm,  and  might  mean 
kite's  town,  Baile  Chlamhain;  but  though  such  re- 
semblances can  hardly  fail  to  occur  to  any  one  who 
knows  the  Gaelic  language,  it  requires  time  and  care- 
ful study  to  follow  out  such  a  subject,  and  it  is  foreign 
to  my  purpose.  There  are  plenty  of  Gaelic  words 
which  closely  resemble  words  in  other  European  lan- 
guages. Amongst  the  few  Sanscrit  words  which  I  have 
been  able  to  glean  from  books,  I  find  several  which  re- 
semble Gaelic  words  of  similar  meaning — Jwala,  light 
flame,  has  many  Gaelic  relations  in  words  which  mean 
shining,  fire,  lightning,  the  moon,  white,  swan. 

Dyu,  day,  is  like  an  diugh,  to-day;  Mirah,  the 
ocean,  like  muir,  mara,  the  sea ;  but  this  again  is  foreign 
to  my  purpose. 

My  wish  has  been  simply  to  gather  some  specimens 
of  the  wreck  so  plentifully  strewn  on  the  coasts  of  old 
Scotland,  and  to  carry  it  where  others  may  examine  it ; 
rather  to  point  out  where  curious  objects  worth  some 
attention  may  be  found,  than  to  gather  a  great  heap.  I 
have  not  sought  for  stranded  forests.  I  have  not 
polished  the  rough  sticks  which  I  found;  I  have  but 
cut  off  a  very  few  offending  splinters,  and  I  trust  that 


CXXViii  INTRODUCTION. 

some  may  be  found  who  will  not  utterly  despise  such 
rubbish,  or  scorn  the  magic  which  peasants  attribute  to 
to  a  fairy  egg. 


POSTSCRIPT. 


September  1860. 
The  stories  marked  xvn.a,  xvii.b,  xvn.c,  xvii.d,  in  the 
first  volume  were  intended  for  the  second,  but  it  has 
been  found  more  convenient  to  place  them  in  Vol.  I. 
Those  which  were  to  have  been  given  as  specimens  of 
tales  probably  derived  from  the  "Arabian  Nights," 
have  been  left  out  to  make  room  for  others. 

In  August  and  September  1860  I  again  visited  the 
We stern  Highlands,  carrying  with  me  nearly  the  whole 
of  these  two  volumes  in  print.  I  have  repeatedly 
made  the  men  who  told  the  stories  to  my  collectors 
repeat  them  to  me,  while  I  compared  their  words  with 
the  book.  In  two  instances  I  have  made  men  repeat 
stories  which  I  had  myself  written  down  in  English 
from  their  Gaelic,  and  I  have  found  no  important 
variation  in  any  instance.  I  find  that  the  story  is 
generally  much  longer  as  told,  but  that  it  is  lengthened 
by  dialogue,  which  has  often  little  to  do  with  the  inci- 
dents, though  sometimes  worth  preservation.  I  have 
now  seen  most  of  the  men  whose  names  are  mentioned, 
and  I  have  myself  heard  versions  of  nearly  every  story 
in  the  book  repeated,  either  by  those  from  whom  they 
were  got,  or  by  people  who  live  'ar  from  them, — for 
instance,  John  Mackinnon,  stableman  at  Broadford,  in 
Skye,  told  me  in  September  a  version  of  No.  18,  which 


CXXX  POSTSCRIPT. 

contains  nearly  all  the  incidents   which  I  had   before 
got  from  Islay,  and  several  which  were  new  to  me. 

Including  those  which  are  printed,  I  have  more 
than  two  hundred  stories  written  down  in  Gaelic.  I 
have  about  an  equal  number  written  in  English  from 
Gaelic,  and  I  have  heard  a  great  many  more,  while 
Mr.  Hector  MacLean,  Mr.  Dewar,  Mr.  Carmichael, 
Mr.  Torrie,  Mr.  Fraser,  and  others,  are  still  writing 
down  for  me,  in  the  Long  Island,  in  Argyllshire,  and 
elsewhere. 

If  I  have  time  and  opportunity,  I  hope  hereafter  to 
arrange  these  materials ;  to  place  the  incidents  in  each 
story  according  to  the  majority  of  versions,  and  so 
strive  to  get  the  old  form  of  the  legends ;  for  I  am 
convinced  that  much  is  to  be  learned  from  this  despised 
old  rubbish,  though  it  must  be  sifted  before  it  can  be 
turned  to  proper  use. 

In  conclusion,  I  would  tender  my  thanks  once 
more  to  all  those  who  have  given  me  their  assistance. 
In  particular,  I  wish  to  express  my  sense  of  obligation 
to  the  Rev.  Thomas  Maclauchlan,  Free  Church  Gaelic 
minister  in  Edinburgh,  who  has  contributed  many 
stories,  written  down  by  himself  from  the  dictation  of 
one  of  his  parishioners,  and  who  has  himself  published 
a  volume  of  Celtic  gleanings. 

I  am  also  much  indebted  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Beatson, 
minister  of  Barra,  who  aided  Mr.  MacLean  in  his  search 
for  legends,  and  who  showed  much  kindness  to  myself ; 
and  I  have  received  assistance  from  other  clergymen  of 
various  persuasions,  including  the  Rev.  Thomas  Patti- 
son  in  Islay.  I  am  happy  to  have  it  in  my  power  to 
mention  such  names ;  for  the  strange  idea  possesses  the 
people  in  many  districts,  that  to  repeat  the  most  harmless 
sgeulachd  is  a  grievous  sin,  and  that  fables,  and  poems, 


POSTSCRIPT.  CXXX1 

and  novels  of  every  sort  ought  to  be  put  down  and 
exterminated,  because  they  are  fictions.  That  spirit,  if 
strong  enough  and  put  in  action,  would  sweep  away 
much  of  the  literature  of  ancient  and  modern  times ; 
and  it  seems  strange  to  have  to  remonstrate  against  it 
now-a-days.  Still,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  the  spirit 
exists,  and  I  am  grateful  for  the  support  of  enlightened 
liberal  men.  Surely  the  best  treatment  for  "  Super- 
stition," if  this  be  superstition,  is  to  drag  it  into  light, 
the  very  worst  to  dignify  it  by  persecution,  and  strive 
to  hide  it. 


POPULAR  TALES 


OF 


THE  WEST  HIGHLANDS 


THE  YOUNG  KING  OF  EASAIDH  RUADH. 

From  James  Wilson,  blind  fiddler,  Islay.  *>>  «    —  \ 

rpHE  young  king  of  Easaidh  Kuadh,  after  he  got  tlie\p  **£*&'***., 
-*-     heirship  to  himself,  was  at  much  merry  making,    C*yvv#kX 
looking  out  what   would   suit  him,   and   what   would 
come  into  his  humour.     There  was  a  Gruagach  near      *-.  •,  ^ 
his  dwelling,  who  was  called  Gruagach  carsalach  donn —       UM& 
(The  brown  curly  long-haired  one.) 

He  thought  to  himself  that  he  would  go  to  play  a 
game  with  him.  He  went  to  the  Seanagal  (soothsayer) 
and  he  said  to  him — "  I  am  made  up  that  I  will  go  to  •^ 
game  with  the  Gruagach  carsalach  donn."  "Aha!" 
said  the  Seanagal,  "  art  thou  such  a  man  1  Art  thou 
so  insolent  that  thou  art  going  to  play  a  game  against 
the  Gruagach  carsalach  donn  ?  'Twere  my  advice  to 
thee  to  change  thy  nature  and  not  to  go  there."  "  I 
wont  do  that,"  said  he.  "'Twere  my  advice  to  thee,  if 
thou  shouklst  win  of  the  Gruagach  carsalach  donn,  to 

K 


WEST   HIGHLAND    TALES. 


.  get  the  cropped  rough-skinned  maid  that  is  behind  the 
door  for  the  worth  of  thy  gaming,  and  many  a  turn  will 
he  put  off  before  thou  gettest  her."  He  lay  down  that 
night,  and  if  it  was  early  that  the  day  came,  'twas 
earlier  than  that  that  the  king  arose  to  hold  gaming 
against  the  Gruagach.  He  reached  the  Gruagach,  he 
blessed  the  Gruagach,  and  the  Gruagach  blessed  him. 
Said  the  Gruagach  to  him,  "  Oh  young  king  of  Easaidh 
Ruadh,  what  brought  thee  to  me  to-day  1  Wilt  thou 
game  with  me?"  They  began  and  they  played  the 
game.  The  king  won.  "  Lift  the  stake  of  thy  gaming  J 
so  that  I  may  get  (leave)  to  be  moving."  "  The  stake 
of  my  gaming  is  to  give  me  the  cropped  rough-skinned 
girl  thou  hast  behind  the  door."  "Many  a  fair  woman 
have  I  within  besides  her,"  said  the  Gruagach.  "  I 
will  take  none  but  that  one."  "  Blessing  to  thee  and 
cursing  to  thy  teacher  of  learning  "  They  went  to  the 
house  of  the  Gruagach,  and  the  Gruagach  set  in  order 
twenty  }Toung  girls.  "Lift  now  thy  choice  from 
amongst  these."  One  was  coming  out  after  another, 
and  every  one  that  would  come  out  she  would  say,  "I 
v*  w/A  .  am  she  ;  art  thou  not  silly  that  art  not  taking  me  with 
thee  ? "  But  the  Seanagal  had  asked  him  to  take  none 
but  the  last  one  that  would  come  out.  When  the  last 
one  came  out,  he  said,  "This  is  mine."  He  went  with  1 
her,  and  when  they  were  a  bit  from  the  house,  her  form 
G/3T  altered,  and  she  is  the  loveliest  woman  that  was  on 
earth.  The  king  was  going  home  full  of  joy  at  getting 
such  a  charming  woman. 
^jtZtK^  )****&  He  reached  the  house,  and  he  went  to  rest.  If  it 
ll*<*  was  early  that  the  day  arose,  it  was  earlier  than  that 
that  the  king  arose  to  go  to  game  with  the  Gruagach. 
"  I  must  absolutely  go  to  game  against  the  Gruagach 
to-day,"  said  he  to  his  wife.      "Oh '"said  she,  "that's 


f_*>^  w^ 


THE  YOUNG   KING   OF  EASAIDH   RUADH.  3 

my  father,  and  if  thou  goest  to  game  with  him,  take 
nothing  for  the  stake  of  thy  play  but  the  dun  shaggy 
filly  that  has  the  stick  saddle  on  her." 

The  king  went  to  encounter  the  Gruagach,  and  surely 
the  blessing  of  the  two  to  each  other  was  not  beyond 
what  it  was  before.  "Yes  !  n  said  the  Gruagach,  "how 
did  thy  young  bride  please  thee  yesterday  1 "  "  She 
pleased  fully."  "Hast  thou  come  to  game  with  me 
to-day  ?"  "I  came."  They  began  at  the  gaming,  and 
the  king  won  from  the  Gruagach  on  that  day.  "Lift 
the  stake  of  thy  gaming,  and  be  sharp  about  it."  "  The 
stake  of  my  gaming  is  the  dun  shaggy  filly  on  which  is 
the  stick  saddle." 

They  went  away  together.  They  reached  the  dun 
shaggy  filly.  He  took  her  out  from  the  stable,  and  the 
king  put  his  leg  over  her  and  she  was  the  swift  /Z 
heroine !  He  went  home.  His  wife  had  her  hands 
spread  before  him,  and  they  were  cheery  together  that 
night.  "I  would  rather  myself,"  said  his  wife,  "that 
thou  shouldest  not  go  to  game  with  the  Gruagach  any 
more,  for  if  he  wins  he  will  put  trouble  on  thy  head." 
"I  won't  do  that,"  said  he,  " I  will  go  to  play  with  him 
to-day." 

He  went  to  play  with  the  Gruagach.  When  he 
arrived,  he  thought  the  Gruagach  was  seized  with  joy. 
"  Hast  thou  come  1 "  he  said.  "  I  came."  They  played 
the  game,  and,  as  a  cursed  victory  for  the  king,  the 
Gruagach  won  that  day.  "  Lift  the  stake  of  thy  game," 
said  the  young  king  of  Easaidh  Ruadh,  "and  be  not 
heavy  on  me,  for  I  cannot  stand  to  it."  "  The  stake  of 
my  play  is,"  said  he,  "  that  I  lay  it  as  crosses  and  as 
spells  on  thee,  and  as  the  defect  of  the  year,  that  the 
cropped  rough-skinned  creature,  moro  uncouth  and  un- 
worthy than  thou  thyself,  should  take  thy  head,  and  thy 


v.   -rH 


>yyt>U , 


4  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES.  ._^  U- 

neck,  and  thy  life's  look  off,  if  thou  dost  not  get  for  me 


the  Glaive  of  Light  of  the  king  of  the  oak  windows 
The  king  went  home,  heavily,  poorly,  gloomily.  The 
young  queen  came  meeting  him,  and  she  said  to  him, 
"  Mohrooai !  my  pity  !  there  is  nothing  with  thee  to- 
night." Her  face  and  her  splendour  gave  some  pleasure 
to  the  king  when  he  looked  on  her  brow,  but  when  he 
sat  on  a  chair  to  draw  her  towards  him,  his  heart  was 
so  heavy  that  the  chair  broke  under  him. 

"  What  ails  thee,  or  what  should  ail  thee,  that  thou 
mightest  not  tell  it  to  me  1 "  said  the  queen.  The  king 
told  how  it  happened.  "  Ha  !  "  said  she,  "  what  should'st 
thou  mind,  and  that  thou  hast  the  best  wife  in  Erin, 
and  the  second  best  horse  in  Erin.  If  thou  takest 
my  advice,  thou  wilt  come  (well)  out  of  all  these  things 

yet." 

If  it  was  early  that  the  day  came,  it  was  earlier  than 
that  that  the  queen  arose,  and  she  set  order  in  every- 
thing, for  the  king  was  about  to  go  on  his  journey. 
She  set  in  order  the  dun  shaggy  filly,  on  which  was 
the  stick  saddle,  and  though  he  saw  it  as  wood,  it  was 
full  of  sparklings  with  gold  and  silver.  He  got  on  it ; 
the  queen  kissed  him,  and  she  wished  him  victory  of 
battlefields.  "  I  need  not  be  telling  thee  anything. 
Take  thou  the  advice  of  thine  own  she  comrade,  the 
filly,  and  she  will  tell  thee  what  thou  shouldest  do." 
He  set  out  on  his  journey,  and  it  was  not  dreary  to  be 
on  the  dun  steed. 

She  would  catch  the  swift  March  wind  that  would 
be  before,  and  the  swift  March  wind  would  not  catch 
her.  They  came  at  the  mouth  of  dusk  and  lateness,  to 
the  court  and  castle  of  the  king  of  the  oak  windows. 

Said  the  dun  shaggy  filly  to  him,  "  We  are  at  the 
end  of  the  journey,  and  we  have  not  to  go  any  further ; 


»w     *VV^ 


THE  YOUNG   KING  OF  EASAIDH   RUADH.  5 

take  my  advice,  and  I  will  take  thee  where  the  sword 
of  light  of  the  king  of  the  oak  windows  is,  and  if  it 
comes  with  thee  without  scrape  or  creak,  it  is  a  good 
mark  on  our  journey.  The  king  is  now  at  his  dinner, 
and  the  sword  of  light  is  in  his  own  chamber.  There 
is  a  knob  on  its  end,  and  when  thou  catchest  the  sword, 
draw  it  softly  out  of  the  window  'case.'"  He  came 
to  the  window  where  the  sword  was.  He  caught  the 
sword  and  it  came  with  him  softly  till  it  was  at  its 
point,  and  then  it  gave  a  sort  of  a  "  sgread."  "  We  will 
now  be  going,"  said  the  filly.  "It  is  no  stopping  time 
for  us.  I  know  the  king  has  felt  us  taking  the  sword 
out."  He  kept  his  sword  in  his  hand,  and  they  went 
away,  and  when  they  were  a  bit  forward,  the  filly  said, 
"  We  will  stop  now,  and  look  thou  whom  thou  seest 
behind  thee."  "I  see"  said  he,  "a  swarm  of  brown 
horses  coming  madly."  "  We  are  swifter  ourselves  than 
these  yet,"  said  the  filly.  They  went,  and  when  they 
were  a  good  distance  forward,  "  Look  now,"  said  she ; 
"whom  seest  thou  coming  ? "  "I  see  a  swarm  of  black 
horses,  and  one  white-faced  black  horse,  and  he  is  com- 
ing and  coming  in  madness,  and  a  man  on  him." 
"  That  is  the  best  horse  in  Erin ;  it  is  my  brother,  and 
he  got  three  months  more  nursing  than  I,  and  he  will 
come  past  me  with  a  whirr,  and  try  if  thou  wilt  be  so 
ready,  that  when  he  comes  past  me,  thou  wilt  take  the 
head  off  the  man  who  is  on  him ;  for  in  the  time  of 
passing  he  will  look  at  thee,  and  there  is  no  sword  in  ^  ] 
his  court  will  take  off  his  head  but  the  very  sword  that 
isjn  thy  hand."  When  this  man  was  going  past,  he 
gave  his  head  a  turn  to  look  at  him,  he  drew  the  sword 
and  he  took  his  head  off,  and  the  shaggy  dun  filly  o  £&,. 
caught  it  in  her  mouth. 

This  was   the   king   of   the   oak   windows.      "Leap 


tk 


b  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

on  the  black  horse,"  said  she,  "and  leave  the  carcass 
there,  and  be  going  home  as  fast  as  he  will  take  thee 
home,  and  I  will  be  coming  as  best  I  may  after  thee." 
He  leaped  on  the  black  horse,  and,  "  Moire !  "  he  was 
the  swift  hero,  and  they  reached  the  house  long  before 
day.  The  queen  was  without  rest  till  he  arrived.  They 
raised  music,  and  they  laid  down  woe.  On  the  morrow, 
he  said,  "I  am  obliged  to  go  to  see  the  Gruagach 
to-day,  to  try  if  my  spells  will  be  loose."  Mind  that 
it  is  not  as  usual  the  Gruagach  will  meet  thee.  He 
will  meet  thee  furiously,  wildly,  and  he  will  say  to  thee, 
didst  thou  get  the  sword  ?  and  say  thou  that  thou  hast 
got  it ;  he  will  say,  how  didst  thou  get  it  ?  and  thou 
shalt  say,  if  it  were  not  the  knob  that  was  on  its  end 
I  had  not  got  it.  He  will  ask  thee  again,  how  didst 
thou  get  the  sword  1  and  thou  wilt  say,  if  it  were  not 
tjie  knob  that  was  on  its  end,  I  had  not  got  it.  Then 
Tie  will  give  himself  a  lift  to  look  what  knob  is  on  the 
. u  sword,  and  thou  wilt  see  a  mole  on  the  right  side  of 

SI  f% ,  his  neck,  and  stab  the  point  of  the  sword  in  the  mole; 
and  if  thou  dost  not  hit  the  mole,  thou  and  I  are  done. 
His  brother  was  the  king  of  the  oak  windows,  and  he 
knows  that  till  the  other  had  lost  his  life,  he  would 
not  part  with  the  sword.  The  death  of  the  two  is  in 
the  sword,  but  there  is  no  other  sword  that  will  touch 
them  but  it."  The  queen  kissed  him,  and  she  called 
on  victory  of  battlefields  (to  be)  with  him,  and  he  went 
away. 

The  Gruagach  met  him  in  the  very  same  place 
where  he  was  before.  "  Didst  thou  get  the  sword  1 " 
"  I  got  the  sword."  "  How  didst  thou  get  the  sword  1 " 
"If  it  were  not  the  knob  that  was  on  its  end  I  had  not 
got  it,"  said  he.  "Let  me  see  the  sword."  "It  was 
not  laid  on  me  to  let  thee  see  it."     "  How  didst  thou 


THE  YOUNG   KING   OF  EASAIDH   RUADH.  7 

get  the  sword  ?  "  "  If  it  were  not  the  knob  that  was 
on  its  end,  I  got  it  not."  The  Gruagach  gave  his  head 
a  lift  to  look  at  the  sword;  he  saw  the  mole ;  he  was 
sharp  and  quick,  and  he  thrust  the  sword  into  the  mole, 
and  the  Gruagach  fell  down  dead. 

He  returned  home,  and  when  he  returned  home,  he 
found  his  set  of  keepers  and  watchers  tied  back  to  back, 
without  wife,  or  horse,  or  sweetheart  of  his,  but  was 
taken  away. 

When  he  loosed  them,  they  said  to  him,  "A  great 
giant  came  and  he  took  away  thy  wife  and  thy  two 
horses."     "  Sleep  will  not  come  on  mine  eyes  nor  rest 

*  on  mine  head  till  I  get  my  wife  and  my  two  horses 

•  back."  In  saying  this,  he  went  on  his  journey.  He 
took  the  side  that  the  track  of  the  horses  was,  and  he 
followed  them  diligently.  The  dusk  and  lateness  were 
coming  on  him,  and  no  stop  did  he  make  until  he 
reached  the  side  of  the  green  wood.  He  saw  where 
there  was  the  forming  of  the  site  of  a  fire,  and  he  thought 

jjLo ;  •  that  he  would  put  fire  upon  it,  and  thus  he  would  put 
the  night  past  there. 

He  was  not  long  here  at  the  fire,  when  "  Cu  Seang  " 
of  the  green  wood  came  on  him. 

He  blessed  the  dog,  and  the  dog  blessed  him. 

"  Oov  !  oov !  "  said  the  dog,  "  Bad  was  the  plight 
of  thy  wife  and  thy  two  horses  here  last  night  with 
the  big  giant."  "It  is  that  which  has  set  me  so  pained 
and  pitiful  on  their  track  to-night ;  but  there  is  no  help 
for  it."  "Oh!  king,"  said  the  dog,  "thou  must  not 
be  without  meat."  The  dog  went  into  the  wood.  He 
brought  out  creatures,  and  they  made  them  meat 
contentedly.  "  I  rather  think  myself,"  said  the  king, 
"  that  I  may  turn  home ;  that  I  cannot  go  near  that 
giant,"     "Don't  do  that,"  said  the  dog.     "There's  no 

-^ 


i  *nv* 


i  .   7, 


8  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES. 

fear  of  thee,  king.  Thy  matter  will  grow  with  thee. 
Thou  must  not  be  here  without  sleeping."  "Fear  will 
not  let  me  sleep  without  a  warranty."  "Sleep  thou," 
said  the  dog,  "  and  I  will  warrant  thee."  The  king  let 
himself  down,  stretched  out  at  the  side  of  the  fire,  and 
he  slept.  When  the  watch  broke,  the  dog  said  to  him, 
"  Rise  up,  king,  till  thou  gettest  a  morsel  of  meat  that 
will  strengthen  thee,  till  thou  wilt  be  going  on  thy 
journey.  Now,"  said  the  dog,  "if  hardship  or  difficulty 
conies  on  thee,  ask  my  aid,  and  I  will  be  with  thee  in 
an  instant."  They  left  a  blessing  with  each  other,  and 
he  went  away.  In  the  time  of  dusk  and  lateness,  he 
came  to  a  great  precipice  of  rock,  and  there  was  the 
forming  of  the  site  of  a  fire. 

He  thought  he  would  gather  dry  fuel,  and  that  he 
would  set  on  fire.  He  began  to  warm  himself,  and  he 
was  not  long  thus  when  the  hoary  hawk  of  the  grey 
rock  came  on  him.  "Oov  !  oov  !"  said  she,  "Bad  was 
the  plight  of  thy  wife  and  thy  two  horses  last  night 
with  the  big  giant."  "There  is  no  help  for  it,"  said 
he.  "  I  have  got  much  of  their  trouble  and  little  of 
their  benefit  myself."  "Catch  courage,"  said  she. 
"  Thou  wilt  get  something  of  their  benefit  yet.  Thou 
must  not  be  without  meat  here,"  said  she.  "  There  is 
no  contrivance  for  getting  meat,"  said  he.  "  We  will 
not  be  long  getting  meat,"  said  the  falcon.  She  went, 
and  she  was  not  long  when  she  came  with  three  ducks 
and  eight  blackcocks  in  her  mouth.  They  set  their 
meat  in  order,  and  they  took  it.  "  Thou  must  not  be 
without  sleep,"  said  the  falcon.  "How  shall  I  sleep 
without  a  warranty  over  me,  to  keep  me  from  any  one 
evil  that  is  here."  "  Sleep  thou,  king,  and  I  will 
warrant  thee."  He  let  himself  down,  stretched  out,  and 
he  slept. 


THE   YOUNG   KING   OF  EASAIDH   RUADH.  9 

In  the  morning,  the  falcon  set  him  on  foot.  "  Hard- 
ship or  difficulty  that  comes  on  thee,  mind,  at  any 
time,  that  thou  wilt  get  my  help."  He  went  swiftly, 
sturdily.  The  night  was  coming,  and  the  little  birds  of 
the  forest  of  branching  bushy  trees,  were  talking  about 
the  briar  roots  and  the  twig  tops;  and  if  they  were,  it 
was  stillness,  not  peace  for  him,  till  he  came  to  the  side 
of  a  great  river  that  was  there,  and  at  the  bank  of  the 
river  there  was  the  forming  of  the  site  of  a  fire.  The 
king  blew  a  heavy,  little  spark  of  fire.  He  was  not  long 
£  here  when  there  came  as  company  for  him  the  brown 
otter  of  the  river.  "  Och !  och ! "  said  the  otter, 
"  Bad  was  the  plight  of  thy  wife  and  thy  two  horses 
last  night  with  the  giant."  "  There  is  no  help  for  it. 
I  got  much  of  their  trouble  and  little  of  their  benefit." 
"Catch  courage,  before  mid-day  to-morrow  thou  wilt 
see  thy  wife.  Oh  !  king,  thou  must  not  be  without 
meat,"  said  the  otter.  "  How  is  meat  to  be  got 
here  ? "  said  the  king.  The  otter  went  through  the 
river,  and  she  came  and  three  salmon  with  her,  that 
were  splendid.  They  made  meat,  and  they  took  it. 
Said  the  otter  to  the  king,  "  Thou  must  sleep."  "  How 
can  I  sleep  without  any  warranty  over  me  1 "  "  Sleep 
thou,  and  I  will  warrant  thee."  The  king  slept.  In 
the  morning,  the  otter  said  to  him,  "  Thou  wilt  be  this 
night  in  presence  of  thy  wife."  He  left  blessing  with 
the  otter.  "Now,"  said  the  otter,  "if  difficulty  be  on 
thee,  ask  my  aid  and  thou  shalt  get  it."  The  king- 
went  till  he  reached  a  rock,  and  he  looked  down  into  a 
^  chasm  that  was  in  the  rock,  and  at  the  bottom  he  saw 
his  wife  and  his  two  horses,  and  he  did  not  know  how 
he  should  get  where  they  were.  He  went  round  till  he 
came  to  the  foot  of  the  rock,  and  there  was  a  fine  road 
for  going  in.     He  went  in,  and  if  he  went  it  was  then 


10  WEST   HIGHLAND    TALES. 

she  began  crying.  "  Ud  !  ud  !  "  said  he,  "this  is  bad  ! 
If  thou  art  crying  now  when  I  myself  have  got  so  much 
trouble  coming  about  thee."  "Oo  ! "  said  the  horses, 
"set  him  in  front  of  us,  and  there  is  no  fear  for 
him,  till  we  leave  this."  She  made  meat  for  him, 
and  she  set  him  to  rights,  and  when  they  were  a  while 
together,  she  put  him  in  front  of  the  horses.  When 
■  the  giant  came,  he  said,  "  The  smell  of  the  stranger  is 

(within."  Says  she,  "  My  treasure  !  My  joy  and  my 
cattle !  there  is  nothing  but  the  smell  of  the  litter  of 
the  horses."  At  the  end  of  a  while  he  went  to  give 
meat  to  the  horses,  and  the  horses  began  at  him,  and 
they  all  but  killed  him,  and  he  hardly  crawled  from 
them.  "Dear  thing,"  said  she,  "they  are  like  to  kill 
thee.  "If  I  myself  had  my  soul  to  keep,  it's  long 
hw*''     since  they  had  killed  me,"  said  he.     "Where,  dear,  is 


thy  soul  1     By  the  books  I  will  take  care  of  it."     "  It 
is,"  said  he,  "in  the  Bonnach  stone."     When  he  went^T 
on  the  morrow,  she  set  the  Bonnach  stone  in  order  >  IS*1 
!^u.'  exceedingly.     In  the  time  of  dusk  and  lateness,  the  **  UL 
giant  came  home.     She  set  her  man  in  front  of  the  /  .J^ ;  h 
horses.     The  giant  went  to  give  the  horses  meat  and 
they  mangled  him  more  and  more.     "  What  made  thee 
set  the  Bonnach  stone  in  order  like  that  ? "  said  he. 
"Because  thy  soul  is  in  it."     "I  perceive  that  if  thou' 

*  U&9  \r~)  didst  know  where  my  soul  is,  thou  wouldst  give  it  much 
respect."  " I  would  give  (that),"  said  she.  "It  is 
not  there,"  said  he,  "my  soul  is ;  it  is  in  the  threshold." 

)Co  rt>dL  She  set  in  order  the  threshold  finely  on  the  morrow. 
When  the  giant  returned,  he  went  to  give  meat  to  the 
horses,  and  the  horses  mangled  him  more  and  more. 
"  What  brought  thee  to  set  the  threshold  in  order  like 
that  ?  "  "  Because  thy  soul  is  in  it."  "  I  perceive  if 
thou  knewest  where  my  soul  is,  that  thou  wouldst  take 

^  L*. *n —  — ; — 


THE    FOUNG  KING  OF  EASAIDH  RUADII.  11 

care  of  it."  "I  would  take  that,"  said  she.  "It  is 
not  there  that  my  soul  is,"  said  he.  "  There  is  a  great 
flagstone  under  the  threshold.  There  is  a  wether  under 
the  flag.  There  is  a  duck  in  the  wether's  belly,  and 
an  egg  in  the  belly  of  the  duck,  and  it  is  in  the  egg 
that  my  soul  is."  When  the  giant  went  away  on  the 
morrow's  day,  they  raised  the  flagstone  and  out  went 
the  wether.  "If  I  had  the  slim  dog  of  the  green- 
wood, he  would  not  be  long  bringing  the  wether  to 
me."  The  slim  dog  of  the  greenwood  came  with  the 
wether  in  his  mouth.  When  they  opened  the  wether, 
out  was  the  duck  on  the  wing  with  the  other  ducks. 
"If  I  had  the  Hoary  Hawk  of  the  grey  rock,  she  would 
not  be  long  bringing  the  duck  to  me."  The  Hoary 
Hawk  of  the  grey  rock  came  with  the  duck  in  her 
mouth ;  when  they  split  the  duck  to  take  the  egg  from 
her  belly,  out  went  the  egg  into  the  depth  of  the  ocean. 
"  If  I  had  the  brown  otter  of  the  river,  he  would  not 
be  long  bringing  the  egg  to  me."  The  brown  otter 
came  and  the  egg  in  her  mouth,  and  the  queen  caught 
the  egg,  and  she  crushed  it  between  her  two  hands. 
The  giant  was  coming  in  the  lateness,  and  when  she 
crushed  the  egg,  he  fell  down  dead,  and  he  has  never 
yet  moved  out  of  that.  They  took  with  them  a  great 
deal  of  his  gold  and  silver.  They  passed  a  cheery 
night  with  the  brown  otter  of  the  river,  a  night  with 
the  hoary  falcon  of  the  grey  rock,  and  a  night  with  the 
slim  dog  of  the  greenwood.  They  came  home  and 
they  set  in  order  "  a  cuirm  curaidh  cridheil,''  a  hearty 
hero's  feast,  and  they  were  lucky  and  well  pleased  after 
that. 

Received  June  9,  1859. 

An  old  man,  of  the  name  of  Angus  MacQueen,  who  lived  at 
Ballochroy,  near  Portaskaig,  in  Islay,  "who  could  recite  Ossian's 

J*     tyy**,      h£«V       >*Xt        (Jt 


j- 


12  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

Poems,"  taught  this  more  than  forty  years  ago  (say  1820)  to 
James  Wilson,  blind  fiddler  in  Islay,  who  recited  it  to  Hector 
MacLean,  schoolmaster,  Islay. 

The  Gaelic  is  dictated  and  written  by  Islay  men. 


EIGH  OG  EASAIDH  EUAGH. 

Bha  righ  6g  Easaidh  Ruagh  an  deigh  dha'n  oighreachd  fhaotainn 
da  fein  ri  moran  abhachd,  ag  amharc  a  mach  de  a  chordadh  ris, 
's  de  thigeadh  r  'a  nadur.  Bha  gruagach  fagus  d'a  chomhnuidh 
ris  an  abradh  iad  a  ghruagach  charsalach  dhonn.  Smaointich  e 
ris  fein  gun  rachadh  e  a  dh'  iomairt  cluiche  ris.  Dh'  fhalbh  e 
thun  an  t-seanaghail,  's  thubhairt  e  ris,  "Tha  mi  air  a  dheanadh 
suas  gun  d'th&d  mi  dh'  iomairt  cluiche  ris  a'  ghruagach  charsal- 
ach dhonn."  "  Aha,"  arsa  'n  seanagheal,  "  an  duine  mar  so  thu  ? 
am  bheil  thu  cho  uaibhreach  's  gu  bheil  thu  a'  dol  a  dh'  iomairt 
cluiche  ris  a  a'  ghruagach  charsalach  dhonn  ?  B'e  mo  chomhairle 
dhuit  do  nadur  atharrachadh  's  gun  dol  ann."  "  Cha  dean  mi 
sin."  "B'e  mo  chomhairle  dhuit  ma  bhuidhneas  thu  air  a' 
ghruagach  charsalach  dhonn,  an  nighean  mhaol  charrach  a  tha 
cul  an  doruis  fhaotainn  air  son  brigh  do  chluiche,  's  cuiridh  e 
ioma  car  dheth  mu'm  faigh  thu  i."  Chaidh  e  laidhe  'n  oidhche 
sin,  's  ma  's  moch  a  thainig  an  latha  's  moiche  na  sin  a  dh'  eirich 
an  righ  a  chumail  cluiche  ris  a'ghruagaich.  Rainig  e  a  ghruagach. 
Bheannaieh  e  do'n  ghruagaich  's  bheannaich  a  ghruagach  da. 
Thuirt  a  ghruagach  ris,  "A  righ  og  Easaidh  Ruagh,  de  thug  a' 
m'ionnsuidh  an  diugh  thu  ?  an  iomair  thu  cluiche  rium  ? " 
Thoisich  iad's  dh'  iomair  iad  an  cluiche.  Bhuidhinn  an  righ. 
**  Tog  brigh  do  chluiche  's  gu'm  faighinn  a  bhi  'g  imeachd."  ". 'S 
e  brigh  mo  chluiche  thu  thoirt  domh  na  nighin  maoil  carraich  a 
th'  agad  air  cul  an  doruis."  "  'S  iomad  boireannach  maiseach  a 
th'agamsa  stigh  a  bharrachd  urra. "  "Cha  ghabh  mi  gin  ach  i 
siod."  "  Beannachd  dhuitse  's  mollacbd  do  d'  oid-ionnsachaidh." 
Chaidh  iad  gu  tigh  na  gruagaich  's  chuir  a'  ghruagach  an  ordugh 
fichead  nighean  6g.  "Tog  a  nis  do  roghainn  asda  sin."  Bha 
t6  'tighinn  a  mach  an  deigh  te,  's  a  h-uile  te  'thigeadh  a  mach, 
theireadh  i,  "is  mis'  i,  's  amaideach  thu  nach  'eil  'g  am  thobh- 
airtse  leat ; "  ach  dh'iarr  an  seanaghal  air  gun  gin  a  ghabhail 


RIGH   OG  EASAIDH   RUAGH.  13 

ach  an  t£  mu  dheireadh  a  thigeadh  a  mach.  'Nuair  a  thainig  an 
te  mu  dheireadh  a  mach,  thuirt  e  "So  mo  the-sa."  Dh' 
fholbh  e  Jeatha  's  'nuair  a  bha  iad  statuinn  o'n  tigh  dh'atharraich 
a  cruth,  agus  's  i  boireannach  a  b'aille  'bha  air  thalamh.  Bha'n 
rlgh  'dol  dachaidh  Ian  toil-inntinn  leithid  de  bhoireannach  mais- 
each  fhaotainn.  Rainig  e'n  tigh.  Chaidh  e  laidhe.  Ma  's  moch  a 
thainig  an  latha,  is  moiche  na  sin  a  dh'eirich  an  rlgb,  'dhol  adh'iom- 
airt  cluicbe  ris  a  ghruagaich.  "Iseigin  domh  dol  a  dh'iomairt 
cluiche  ris  a  ghruagaich  an  diugh,"  ars'  e  r'a  bhean.  "  Oh,"  ars' 
ise,  "sin  m'athair  's  ma  theid  thu  dh'iomairt  cluiche  ris,  na  gabh  ni 
sam  bith  airson  brigh  do  chluiche  ach  an  loth  pheallagach  odhar 
a  tha  'n  diollaid  mhaid'  urra.  Dh'  fholbh  an  rlgh,  's  choinnich  a 
ghruagach  e,  's  gu  cinnteach  cha  robh  'm  beannachadh  na  bu  taire 
na  bha  e  roimhe  aig  an  dithis  ri  cheile.  "  Seadh, "  ars'  a  ghruagach 
"  demur  a  chord  do  bhean  bg  riut  an  de  ? "  "Chord  gu  h-iomlan." 
"An  d'  thainig  thu  dh'iomairt  cluiche  rium  an  diugh?" 
"Thainig."  Thoisich  iad  air  a'  chluiche,  's  bhuidhinn  an  righ 
air  a'  ghruagaich  an  latha  sin.  '  f  Tog  brlgh  do  chluiche  :s  bi 
ealamh  leis."  " 'S  e  brlgh  mo  chluiche  gum  faigh  mi  an  loth 
pheallagach  odhar  air  a'  bheil  an  diollaid  mhaide."  Dh'  fholbh 
iad  cqmhla.  Rainig  iad  an  loth  pheallagach  odhar,  thug  e  mach 
as  an  stabull  i,  's  chuir  an  righ  a  cbas  thairte,  's  b'e  'n  curaidh  i. 
Chaidh  e  dhachaidh  ;  bha  lamhan  sgaoilt'  aig  a'  bhean  roimhe ; 
's  bha  iad  gu  sunndach  comhla  an  oidhche  sin.  "  B'  fhearr  learn 
fein,"  ursa  'bhean,  "  nach  rachadh  thu  'dh'iomairt  cluiche  ris  a' 
ghruagach  tuillidh,  chionn  ma  bhuidhneas  e  cuiridh  e  dragh  ann 
ad  cheann."  "  Cha  dean  mi  sin  ;  theid  mi  dh'iomairt  cluiche  ris 
an  diugh. "  Chaidh  e  dh'iomairt  cluiche  ris  a'  ghruagaich.  'N 
uair  a  rainig  e,  thar  leis  gun  do  ghabh  a  ghruagach  boch.  "  An 
d'  thainig  thu  ?"  "Thainig."  Dh'iomair  iad  an  cluiche,  's  mar 
bhuaidh  mhollachd  do'n  rlgh  bhuidhinn  a'  ghruagach  an  latha 
sin.  "  Tog  brigh  do  chluiche,"  arsa  rlgh  6g  Eas  Ruagh,  "  's  na 
bi  trom  orm,  chionn  cha-n  urrainn  mi  seasamh  ris."  "  S'  e 
brlgh  mo  chluiche-sa,"  urs'  esan,  "  gu  bheil  mi  'cur  mar  chroisean, 
'us  mar  gheasan  ort,  'us  mar  slieisecui  na  bliadhna,  am  beathach 
maol,  carrach  is  mithreubhaiche  's  is  mi-thre6naiche  na  thu  fein, 
a  thoirt  do  chinn  's  do  mhuineil  's  do  choimhead-beatha  dhiot, 
mar  am  faigh  thu  dhomhsa  claidheamh  soluis  rlgh  nan  uinneagan 
daraich."  Chaidh  an  rlgh  dachaidh  gu  trom,  bochd,  duibh- 
thiamhasach.  *  Thainig  a  bhanrighinn  6g  na  chornhdhail's 
thubhairt  i  ris,  "Mo  thruaighe  !  cha  'n  oil  ni  'sam  bith  leat  a 


14  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

nochd."  Thug  a  h-aoidh  agus  a  h-ailleachd  rud-eigin  de  thoil- 
inntinn  do  n  rlgh,  nur  a  dh'  amhairc  e  air  a  gnuis  ;  ach 
nur  a  shuidh  e  air  cathair  a  tharruinn  ed'a  ionusuidh,  thug  e 
osann  as,  is  sgoilt  a  chathair  fodha.  "  De  th'  ort,  na  bhiodh  ort, 
nach  fhaodadh  thu  innseadh  dhomhsa  ?  "  ars'  a  bhanrigh.  Dh' 
innis  au  righ  demur  a  thachair.  "Ud,"  ars'  ise,  "  de  amhail  a 
chuireas  thu  air,  's  gur  ann  agad  a  tha  'bhean  is  fhearr  'an  Eirinn, 
's  an  darra  each  is  fhearr  'an  Eirinn.  Ma  ghabhas  thu  mo 
chomhairle-sa  thig  thu  as  gach  ni  dhiubh  sin  fhathasd."  Ma  's 
moch  a  thainig  an  latha  's  moiche  na  sin  a  dh'  eirich  a  bhanrigh- 
inn,  's  a  chuir  i  uidheam  air  gach  ni  chum  gum  bitheadh  an 
rlgh  'dol  air  a  thurus.  Chuir  i  'n  5rdugh  an  loth  pheallagach, 
odhar,  air  an  robh  'n  dlollaid  mhaide ;  's  ged  a  chitheadh  esan  'na 
maid'  i,  bha  i  Ian  dhealrach  le  6r  is  airgeid.  Chaidh  e  air  a 
muin.  Phog  a'  bhanrigh  e,  's  ghuidh  i  buaidh  larach  leis.  Cha 
ruig  mise  leas  a  bhi  'g  innseadh  ni  sam  bith  dhuit,  gabh  thusa 
comhairle  do  bhana-chompanaich  f6in,  an  loth,  's  innsidh  i  duit 
de  's  c5ir  dhuit  a  dheanamh.  Ghabh  e  mach  air  a  thurus ;  's 
cha  bu  chianalach  a  bhi  air  muin  na  steud  odhar.  Bheireadh  i 
air  a'  ghaoth  luath  Mhairt  a  bhitheadh  roimhpe,  's  cha  bheireadh 
a  ghaoth  luath  mhairt  urra.  Thainig  iad  am  beul  an  athaidh 
's  an  anamoich  gu  cuirt  agus  cathair  rlgh  nan  uinneagan  daraich. 
Urs'  an  loth  pheallagach  odhar  ris,  '  •  Tha  sinn  aig  ceann  ar 
turuis,  's  cha-n'  eil  againn  ri  dol  na  's  fhaide,  gabh  thusa  mo 
chomhairle-sa  's  bheir  mi  thu  far  am  bheil  claidheamh  soluis 
rlgh  nan  uinneagan  daraich,  's  ma  thig  e  leat  gun  sgread  gun 
sgrioch,  's  comharradh  maith  air  ar  turus  e.  Tha  'n  rlgh  nis  aig 
a  dhinneir,  's  tha  'n  claidheamh  soluis  'n  a  sheombar  fein  ;  tha 
cnap  air  a  cheann,  's  nur  a  bheireas  thu  air  a  chlaidheamh 
tarruinn  gu  reidh  mach  a  "  case"  na  h-uinneig  e."  Thainig  e 
gus  an  uinneig  far  an  robh  an  claidheamh.  Rug  e  air  a  elaidh- 
eamh  's  thainig  e  leis  gu  r6idh  gus  an  robh  e  aig  a  bharr,  's 
thug  e  se6rsa  sgread  as  an  sin.  ' '  Bithidh  sinn  a  nis,  arsa  'n 
loth,  aig  imeachd,  cna-n  am  stad  duinn  e,  tha  fios  agam  gun  do 
mhothaich  an  righ  dhuinn  a  toirt  a  chlaidheimh  a  mach.  Ghleidh 
esan  an  claidheamh  'n  a  laimh  's  dh'  fholbh  iad,  's  'n  uair  a  bha 
iad  treis  air  an  aghaidh,  thuirt  an  loth,  "  Stadaidh  sinn  a  nis  's 
amhaircidh  thu  co  'chi  thu  'd  dheigh."  "Chi  mi,"  ars' esan, 
"  sgaoth  dh'  eachaibh  donna  'tighinn  air  bhainidh."  "  'S  luaithe 
sinn  fein  na  iad  sin  fathasd. "  Dh'  fhalbh  iad  's  'n  uair  a  bha  iad 
astar  maith  air  an  aghaidh,  "  amhairc  a  nis  "  ars'  ise  "  co  'chi  thu 


RIGH   OG  EASAIDH   RUAGH.  15 

teachd."  "Chi  mi  sgaoth  dh'  eacha  dubha,  agus  aon  each  blar 
dubh,  'sea  tigbinn  air  a  chuthach,  's  duin'  air  a  mhuin."  "'S 
e  sin  an  t-each  is  fhearr  an  Eirinn,  's  e  mo  bhrathair  a  th'  ann,  's 
fhuair  e  raidhe  banaltrachd  a  bharrachd  ormsa,  agus  thig  e 
seachad  ormsa  le  sreann,  's  feuch  am  bi  thu  cho  tapaidh  's  'nur 
a  thig  e  seachad  ormsa  an  d'  thoir  thu  'n  ceann  de  'n  fhear  a  th' 
air  a  mhuin  ;  chionn  an  am  dol  seachad  amhaircidh  e  ortsa,  's 
cha-n  'eil  claidheamh  'n  a  chuirt  a  bheir  an  ceann  deth,  ach  a 
'cheart  chlaidheamh  a  tha'd  laimh."  'N  uair  a  bha  'm  fear  so 
'dol  seachad  thug  e  amhadh  air  a  cheann  a  dh'  amharc  air  ; 
tharruinn  esan  an  claidheamh  'us  thug  e  'n  ceann  deth,  's  cheap 
an  loth  pheallagach  'n  a  beul  e.  B'  e  so  righ  nan  uinneagan 
daraich.  "  Leum  air  muin  an  eich  dhuibh,"  urs'  ise,  "  's  fag  a 
chlosach  an  siod,  's  bi  'dol  dachaidh  cho  luath  's  a  bheir  e 
dachaidh  thu,  's  bithidh  mise  'tighinn  mar  is  fhearr  a  dh'  fhaodas 
mi  'n  'ur  deigh."  Leum  e  air  muin  an  eich  dhuibh,  's  am  Moire 
b'  e  'n  curaidh  e,  's  rainig  iad  an  tigh  fada  roimh  latha.  Bha 
'bhan-righ  gun  laidhe  gus  an  d'  rainig  e.  Thog  iad  ceol  's  leag  iad 
bron.  An  la'r  na  mhaireach  thuirt  esan,  "  's  eigin  domhsa  dol  a 
dh'amharc  na  gruagaich  an  diugh,  feuch  am  bi  mo  gheasan  ma 
sgaoil."  "  Cuimhnich  nach  ann  mar  a  b-abhaist  a  dh'  amaiseas 
a  gruagach  ort.  Coinnichidh  e  thu  gu  feargach  fiadhaich  's  their 
e  riut,  '  an  d'fhuair  thu  'n  claidheamh  ?  '  's  abair  thusa  gun 
d'f huair.  Their  e  riut  ciod  e  mar  a  fhuair  thu  e  ?  'us  their  thusa, 
'mar  b'e  an  cnap  a  bh'air  a  cheann  cha  d'fhuair  mi  e.'  Foigh- 
nichidh  e  rithisd  diot,  'demur  a  fhuair  thu  'n  claidheamh,'  's 
their  thusa,  '  mar  b'e  an  cnap  a  bh'  air  a  cheann  cha  d'  fhuair  mi 
e.'  Bheir  e  'n  so  togail  air  a  dh'  amharc  ciod  e  'n  cnap  a  th'  air 
a  chlaidheamh  's  chi  thu  ball-dorain  taobh  deas  a  mhuneil,  agus 
stob  barr  a  chlaidheimh  anns  a  bhall-dorain  's  mar  ainais  thu  air 
a  bhall-dorain,  tha  thuso  's  mise  reidh.  B'  e  'bhrathair  righ  nan 
uinneagan  daraich  e,  's  tha  fhios  aige  gus  an  cailleadh  am  fear 
eile  'bheatha  nach  dealaicheadh  e  ris  a  chlaidheamh.  Tha  bas 
an  dithis  's  a  chlaidheamh  ;  ach  cha-n  'eil  claidheamh  eile  dhear- 
gas  orr'  ach  e."  Phog  a  bhanrigh  e,  's  ghuidh  i  buaidh  larach 
leis,  's  dh'  fholbh  e.  Thachair  a  gruagach  air  aims  cheart  ait' 
an  robh  e  roimhid.  ' '  An  d'  fhuair  thu  'n  claidheamh  ? "  "  Fhuair 
mi  'n  claidheamh."  "Demur  a  fhuair  thu  'n  claidheamh?" 
"  Mur  b'e  an  cnap  a  bh'  air  a  cheann  cha  n'  fhaighinn  e."  "Leig 
fhaicinn  domh  an  claidheamh."  "Cha  robh  e  mar  fhiachaibh 
orm  a  leigeil  fhaicinn  duit."      "Demur  a  fhuair  thu  'n  claidh- 


16 


WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 


eamh?"  "  Mur  b'e  an  cnap  a  bh'  air  a  cheonn  cha  d'  fhuair 
mi  e. "  Thug  a  gruagach  togail  air  a  chearm  a  dh'  amharc  air  a 
chlaidheamh.  Chunnaic  esan  am  ball-dorain.  Bha  e  urrant' 
ealamh ;  shath  e  'n  claidheamh  amis  a  bhall-dorain,  's  thuit'  a 
ghruagach  sios  marbh.  Thill  e  dhachaidh,  's  'n  uair  a  thill  e 
dhachaidh,  fhuair  e  luchd  gleidhidh  agus  coimhead  ceangailt'  an 
sin  ciil  ri  eul  ;  's  gun  bhean,  no  each,  no  leannan  aige,  gun  a  bhi 
air  an  toirt  air  folbh.  'N  uair  a  dh'  fhuasgail  e  iad,  thubhairt 
iad  ris,  "Thainig  famhair  m6r.  agus  thug  e  air  folbh  do  bhean 
agus  do  dha  each."  "Cha  d'  theid  cadal  air  mo  shuil  no  fois  air 
mo  cheum,  gus  am  faigh  mi  mo  bhean  agus  mo  dha  each  air  an 
ais.  Le  so  a  radh  dh'  fholbh  e  air  a  thurus  ;  ghabh  e  'n  taobh  a 
bha  lorg  nan  each,  's  lean  e  gu  dian  iad.  Bha  'n  t-athadh  's  an 
t-anamoch  a  tighinn  air,  's  cha  d'  rinneadh  stad  leis  gus  an  d' 
rainig  e  taobh  na  coill'  uaine.  Chunnaic  e  far  an  robh  larach 
cruthachadh  gealbhain,  's  smaointich  e  gun  cuireadh  e  tein'  air, 
's  gun  cuireadh  e  seachad  an  oidhch'  ann.  Cha  b'  fhad  'a  bha  e 
'n  so  aig  a  ghealbhan  gus  an  d'  thainig  cu  seang  na  coill'  uain' 
air.  Bheannaich  e  do  'n  chii,  's  bheannaich  an  cu  da.  "  Ubh  ! 
ubh  !  "  ars'  an  cii  "  b'  olc  diol  do  mhnatha  's  do  dha  each  an  so 
an  raoir  aig  an  fhamhair  mhor."  '"Se  sin  a  chuir  mise  cho 
peanasach  truagh  air  an  toir  a  nochd,  ach  cha-n'  'eii  arach'  air." 
"A  righ,"  ars'  an  cu,  "cha-n'  fhaod  thu  bhi  gun  bhiadh." 
Chaidh  an  cu  stigh  do  'n  choille,  thug  e  mach  beathaichean,  's 
rinn  iad  am  biadh  gu  tlachdmhor.  "  Tha  duil  again  fein,"  ars' 
an  righ,  "  gum  faod  mi  tilleadh  dhachaidh,  nach  urrainn  mi  dol 
a  choir  an  fhamhair  sin."  M  Na  dean  sin,"  ars'  an  cu  ;  "  cha-n' 
eagal  duit  a  righ,  cinn'idh  do  ghnothuch  leat.  Cha-n  'fhaod  thu 
bhi  so  gun  chadal."  "Cha  leig  an  t-eagal  domh -cadal 's  gun 
bharantas  orm."  "Caidil  thus',"  ars'  an  cu,  "  's  barantachaidh 
mis'  thu."  Leig  an  righ  e  fein  na  shlneadh  taobh  an  teine  's 
chaidil  e.  Nur  a  bhrisd  an  fhaire  thubhairt  an  cu  ris,  "Eirich," 
a  righ,  "  'us  gun  gabhadh  thu  greim  bidh  a  neartaicheas  thu,  's 
gum  bitheadh  thu  dol  air  do  thurus.  Nis,"  ars'  an  cu,  "ma 
thig  cruadhchas  no  cas  ort,  iarr  mo  chuideachadh,  's  bithidh  mi 
agad  a  thiotadh. "  Dh'  fhag  iad  beannachd  aig  a  cheile  's  dh' 
fholbh  e.  An  am  an  athaidh  's  an  ammoich,  thainig  e  gu  h-ailbh- 
iun  mhor  creige,  agus  bha  cruthachadh  larach  gealbhain  ann. 
Smaointich  e  gun  cruinneachadh  e  connadh,  's  gun  cuireadh  e 
air  teine.  Thoisich  e  air  a  gharadh,  's  cha  b'  fhada  bha  e  mar  so 
'n  uair  a  thainig  seobhag  liath  na   creige  glais'  air.      "  Ubh  ! 


RIGH  OG   EASAIDH  RUAGH.  17 

i\bh  !  "  ars'  ise,  "  b'  olc  diol  do  mhnatha  's  do  dha  each  an  rair 
aig  an   fhamhair  mh6r."      "Chan'  'eil   arach'  air,"  ars'  esan, 
"fhuair  mi   f&n  m6ran  d' an  dragh  is  beagan  d'  an  abhachd. 
"  Glac  misneach,"  ars'  ise,  "  gheobh  thu  rudeigin  d'  an  abhachd 
fhathasd.    Cha  n'  fhaod  thu  bhi  gun  bhiadh  an  so,"  ars'  ise. 
"  Cha-n'  'ell  seol  air  biadh  fhaotainn  ars'  esan."     "  Cha-n  fhada 
bhitheas  sinn  a  faotainn  bldh."     Dh'  fholbh  i  's  cha  b'fhada  bha 
i  n'  uair  a  thainig  i  's  tri  lachan  's  ochd  coilich  dhubha  'n  a  beul. 
Chuir  iad  an  ordugh  am  biadh  's  ghabh  iad  e.     "  Cha-n  fhaod 
thu  bhi  gun  chadal,"  ars'  an  t-seobhag.    "  Demur  a  chaidleas  mi 
gun  bharantas  'sam  bith  orm  gu  mo  dhion  o  aon  olc  a  tha  'n  so  ?  " 
"Caidil  thusa,  righ,  's  barantachaidh  mis'  thu."     Leig  e  e  fein  'n 
a  shlneadh,    's  chaidil  e.     Anns  a  mhaidinn  chuir  an  t-seobhag 
air  a  chois  e.     Cruadhchas  no  cas  a  thig  ort,  cuimhnich  aig  am 
sam  bith  gum  faigh  thu  mo  chuideachadhsa.     Dh'  fholbh  e  gu 
dian,  foghainteach,  luath,  laidir.     Bha  'n  latha  folbh  's  an  oidh- 
che  tighinn,  's  eunlaith  bheaga  na  coille  craobhaich,   dosraiche, 
dualaich,  a'  gabhail  ma  bhun  nam  preas  's  ma  bharr  nan  dos  ;  's 
mu  bha,  cha  bu  tamh  's  cha  bu  chlos  dasan  e,  gus  an  d'  thainig 
e  gu  taobh  aimhne  mh6r  a  bha  sin,  agus  aig  bruach  na  h-aimhne 
bha  cruthachadh  larach  gealbhain.     Sheld  an  rlgh  srachdanach 
ti'om  teine.     Cha  b'fhada  bha  e  'n  so  'n  uair  a  thainig  ann  an 
companas  ris  doran  donn  na  h-aimhne.     "  Och,"  ars'  an  doran, 
"  b'olc  diol  do  mhnatha  'n  so  an  rair  aig  an  fhamhair."     "  Cha-n 
'eil  arach'  air,  fhuair  mise  moran  d'  an  dragh  is  beagan  d'  an 
abhachd."    "  Glac  misneach,  fo  mheadhon  latha  maireach  chl  thu 
do  bhean.     A  righ,  cha  'n  fhaod  thu  bhi  gun  bhiadh,"  ars'  an 
doran.     "Demur  a  gheibhear  biadh  an  so,"  ars'  an  righ.     Dh 
fholbh  an  doran  feadh  na  h-abhann,  's  thainig  e  's  tri  bradain 
leis  a  bha  ciatach.     Einn  iad  biadh  is  ghabh  iad  e.     Thuirt  an 
doran  ris  an  righ,  "  feumaidh  tu  cadal."     "Demur  a  chaidleas 
mi  's  gun  bharantachadh  sam  bith  orm  ?  "     "  Caidil  thusa  's  bar- 
antachaidh mis' thu  an  nochd."     Chaidil  aa  rlgh.     Anns  a  mha- 
duinn,  thuirt  an  doran  ris,  bithidh  thu  an  nochd  an  lathair  do 
mhnatha.     Dh  fhag  e  beannachd  aig  an  doran.     "Nis,"  ars'  an 
doran,  "  ma  bhitheas  cas  ort,  iarr  mo  chuideachadh-sa,  's  gheobh 
thu  e."    Dh  'fholbh  an  righ  gus  an  d'  rainig  e  creag,  's  dh'  amh- 
airc  e  slos  ann  an  glomhas  a  bha  's  a  chreig,  's  aig  a  ghrunnd 
chunnaic  e  a  bhean  agus  a  dha  each,  's  cha  robh  fios  aige  demur 
a  gheobheadh  e  far  an  robh  iad.     Ghabh  e  mu  'n  cuairt  gus  an  d' 
thainig  e  gu  bun  na  creige,  's  bha  rathad  ciatach  a  dhol  a  stigh. 

L 


18  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

Chaidh  e  stigh,  's  ma  chaidh,  's  ann  a  thoisich  is'  air  caoineadh. 
"  Ud  !  ud !  "  ars'  esan,  "'s  olc  so,  mi  fein  a  dh'  fhaotainn  na 
huibhir  de  dhragh  a  tighinn  ma  d'  thuaiream,  ma  's  ann  a  caoin- 
eadh a  tha  thu  nis."  "  U,"  arsa  na  h-eich,  "  cuir  thus'  air'  ur 
beulthaobh-ne  e,  's  cha-n  eagal  da  gus  am  fag  sinne  so."  Rinn  i 
biadh  da,  's  chur  i  air  doigh  e,  's  'n  nair  a  bha  iad  treis  comhla 
chuir  i  air  beulthaobh  nan  each  e.  'N  uair  a  thainig  am  famhair 
thubbairt  e,  "Tha  boladh  af  fharbhalaich  a  stigh.  Ars' 
ise,  "M'  ullaidh,  is  m'aighear,  is  m'  fheudail,  cha-n'  eil  ann  ach 
boladh  a  bhalaidh  bhreuna  de  na  h-eachaibh."  An  ceann  treis 
chaidh  e  'thoirt  bidh  do  na  h-eich,  's  thoisicli  na  h-eich  air,  's  cha 
mhor  nach  do  mharbh  iad  e,  's  cha  d'  rinn  e  ach  snagan  air  £igin 
uatha.  "  Ghraidh,"  ars'  ise,  "  tha  iad  a  brath  do  mharbhadh." 
"  Na'm  b'  ann  agam  fein  a  bhitheadh  m'  anam  g'a  ghleidheadh 
's  fhad'  o'n  a  mharbh  iad  mi,"  ars'  esan.  "  C  ait'  a  ghraidh  am 
bheil  d'  anam?  An  leobhra,  gabhaidh  mise  curam  deth."  "Tha 
e,"  ars'  esan,  "aim  an  clach  nam  bonnach."  Nur  a  dh'  fholbh 
esan  an  l'ar  na  nihaireach,  chuir  ise  an  ordugh  clach  nam  bonnach 
gu  f uathasach.  An  am  an  athaidh  's  an  anmoich  thainig  am  famh- 
air a  stigh.  Chuir  ise  a  fear  air  beulthaobh  nan  each.  Chaidh 
am  famhair  a  thoirt  bldh  do  na  h-eich,  's  leadair  iad  e  na  bu 
mhotha  's  na  bu  mhotha.  "  Ciod  e  'thug  ort  clach  nam  bonnach 
a  chur  an  ordugh  mur  sin?"  ars'  esan.  "Chionn  gu  bheil  d' 
anam  innte'"  "  Tha  mi  'g  aithneachadb  nam  bitheadh  fios  agad 
e'  aite  'bheil  m'  anam,  gun  d'  thugadh  thu  t'aire  mhaith  dha." 
"  Bheireadh."  "  Chan  ann  an  ain  a  tha  m'anam  's  ann  a  tha  e 
'sa  starsaich."  Chuir  ise  an  ordugh  an  starsach  gu  gasd'  an  la  'r 
na  mhaireach.  Nur  a  thill  am  famhair  chaidh  e  thoirt  bldh  do 
na  h-eich,  's  leadair  na  h-eich  e  na  bu  mhotha  's  na  bu  mhotha. 
"  De  'thug  ort  an  starsach  a  chuir  an  ordugh  mar  sud?" 
" Chionn  gu  bheil  d'  anam  innte."  "Tha  mi  'g  aithneachadh  na 
'in  bitheadh  fios  agad  far  am  bheil  m'  anam  gun  gabhadh  tu 
curam  dheth."  " Ghabhadh, "  ars'  ise.  "Cha-n'  ann  an  sin  a 
tha  m'  anam,  ars'  esan.  Tha  leac  mhor  fo  'n  starsaich,  tha  molt 
fo  'n  leachd,  tha  lach  'am  broinn  a  mhuilt,  agus  tha  ubh  am  bro- 
inn  na  lacha,  agus  's  ami  aims  an  ubh  a  tha  m'  anam.  'N  uair  a 
dh'  fholbh  am  famhair  an  la'r  na  mhaireach  thog  iad  an  leac,  's 
a  mach  a  thug  am  molt.  Na  'm  bitheadh  agamsa  cu  seang  na 
coill'  uaine,  cha  b'  fhad  'a  bhitheadh  e  'toirt  a'  mhuilt  a  m'  ionn- 
suidh.  Thainig  cu  seang  na  coill'  uaine  ugus  am  molt  'n  a  bheul. 
'N  uair  a  dh'fhosgail  iad  am  molt,  a  mach  a  bha  'n  lach  air  iteag- 


THE  YOUNG  KING  OF  EASAIDH   RUADH.  19 

ach  leis  na  lachan  eile.  Na'm  bitheadh  agamsa  seobhag  liath  na 
creige  glaise,  cha  b'  fhada'  bhitheadh  i  'toirt  na  lach  a  m'ionnsuidh. 
Thainig  seobhag  liath  na  creige  glaise  's  an  lach  'n  a  beul.  'N 
uair  a  sgoilt  iad  an  lach  a  thoirt  an  uibhe  a  'broinn,  mach  a 
ghabh  an  t-ubh  ann  an  doimhneachd  a  chuain.  Na'in  bitheadh 
agamsa  doran  donn  na  h-amhann,  cha  b'fhada  bhitheadh  i  'toirt 
a  m'  ionnsuidh  an  uibhe.  Thainig  an  doran  donn  's  an  t-ubh  na 
beul,  's  rug  a  bhanrigh  air  an  ubh  's  phronn  i  eadar  a  da  laitnh  e. 
Bha  'm  fainhair  a  tighinn  anns  an  athamanachd,  's  'n  uair  a 
phronn  ise  'n  t-ubh  thuit  e  slos  marbh,  's  cha  do  charaich  e  as  a 
sin  fhathasd.  Thug  iad  ni6ran  leo  de  dh  'or  's  de  dh'  airgeid. 
Chuir  iad  oidhche  shunndach  seachad  aig  doran  donn  na  h-abhann, 
oidhch'  aig  seobhag  liath  na  creige  glaise,  agus  oidhch'  aig  cu 
seang  na  coill'  uaine.  Thainig  iad  dachaidh  's  chuir  iad  an 
6rdugh  cuirm  chridheil,  's  bha  iad  gu  sona,  toilichte  'n  a  dheigh 
sin. 

2.  I  have  another  version  of  this  tale,  written  by  Hector 
Urquhart,  told  by  John  Campbell,  living  at  Strath  Gairloch, 
Ross-shire,  received  June  27,  1859.  It  is  very  well  told.  It 
varies  a  little  from  the  Islay  version,  but  the  resemblance  is  so 
close,  that  to  print  it  entire  would  be  repetition.  It  contains 
many  characteristic  phrases  which  the  other  has  not  got,  so  I 
give  this  abstract.     The  Gaelic  is  as  it  came  to  me. 

The  "Sgeulachd"  of  the  Widow's  Son. — There  was  once 
a  widow's  son,  and  he  was  often  stalking  (sealg).  On  a  day  of 
days  and  he  stalking,  he  "  sits"  at  the  back  of  a  knoll,  before 
the  sun  and  behind  the  wind  (ri  aghaidh  greine  's  ri  cul  na 
gaoithe),  and  there  came  the  way  a  youth,  like  a  picture  (oganach 
dealbhanach),  riding  a  blue  filly  (failore  gorm),  and  he  sits 
beside  him.  They  played  at  cards,  and  the  widow's  son  won, 
and  when  evening  came  the  youth  said,  "What  is  the  stake  of 
thy  gaming  ?"  (ce  dhe  buidh  do  chluiche  ?)  and  he  said,  "  the 
blue  filly  under  thee."  He  took  her  home,  and  she  changed  into 
the  finest  woman  that  man  ever  saw.  Next  day  he  went  stalk- 
ing, and  on  coming  home  in  the  mouth  of  night  (am  beul  na 
•  hdhche),  he  learned  that  the  big  giant  had  taken  away  his 
sweetheart — cha  neil  comas  air  as  eise  ach  na  bo  mhise  bo 
treasa  cha  mhealladh  eise  FAD  I.  "  There  is  no  help  for  it," 
said  he,  "  but  were  I  the  stronger,  he  would  not  allure  her  far." 

Dh'  erich  mac  na  banntrich.     The  widow's  son  arose,  's 


20  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

CHAIDH  E  NA  CHRIOSIBH  IALLA  s'  NA  IALLA  GAISGICH,  and  he  went 

into  his  belts  of  thongs  and  his  thongs  of  warrior,  's  dh'fhalbh 

E  LE  CEUMANIBH  GU  TUISLEAG  DOMH  MHEANMNACH,    and  he  Went 

with  leaping  strides,  cheerful  to  me  (or  ?  Doimhainneachd — of 
deepness)  s'  dheanadh  b  mile  thoran  na  sleibh  leis  na  h 
uille  ceum  a  dheanadh  e,  and  he  would  make  a  thousand  knolls 
of  the  hill  with  every  step  he  made,  's  b'  fhear  dha  namhaid  a 

SHEACHANADH  NA   TACHAIRT   AN   LATHA  SIN    RIS,  and  his  foe  had 

better  avoid  him  than  meet  that  day  with  him.  He  saw  a  little 
hut  "  in  the  mouth  of  night,"  and  though  far  away,  not  long  to 
reach  it,  Air  a  thubhadh  le  iteagan  garbha  nan  eun  a  muigh 
s  le  iteagan  mine  nan  eun  a  steach,  thatched  with  coarse 
feathers  of  the  birds  without,  and  with  fine  feathers  of  the  birds 
within,  agus  ruithag  an  t  ubhal  bhon  darna  cean  dhon  a 
chin  eile  le  cho  comhrad  s'a  bha  e,  and  the  apple  would  run 
from  one  end  to  the  other  end,  so  even  it  was.  He  went  in  and 
found  no  man,  but  two  great  fires  on  the  fire-place  (chagailt)  on 
the  floor.  Suil  da  dug  e,  glance  that  he  gave  he  saw  a  falcon 
coming  in  with  a  heath  hen  in  her  claws,  and  the  next  glance  it 
was,  gille  briagh  buidh,  a  braw  yellow  lad,  who  spoke  as  in 
the  Islay  version,  entertained  him  and  told  him  in  the  morning  to 
call  on  Seabhag  suil  ghorm  ghlenna  feist — the  blue-eyed 
falcon  of  Glen  Feist.  Next  day  it  was  the  same,  and  he  came, 
air  ciaradh  don  fheisgar,  at  the  turning-dun  of  the  evening, 
to  a  second  hut,  thatched  like  the  other,  s'  bha  snathnean  beag 
suarach  sioda  cumail  dion  A  dhroma  ris,  and  there  was  a  little 
sorry  silken  thread,  keeping  the  thatch  of  its  back  on.  Dobhran 
donn,  otter  brown,  come  in  with  a  salmon,  aud  became  a  man, 
and  spoke  as  the  other,  and  told  him  in  the  morning  to  call  on 
dobhran  donn  sruth  an  t'  shiul — Brown  otter  of  sail  stream. 
The  third  day  was  the  same,  the  hut  was  the  same,  but  that 
there  were  two  great  fires  on  each  fire-place,  and  there  came  in, 
madadh  mor,  big  dog,  with  a  hare  by  the  throat,  who  became 
the  finest  man,  air  an  dug  e  rosk  riamh,  he  ever  turned  face 
to ;  who  said  as  the  others  did — "  It  was  late  when  the  big  giant 
went  past  with  thy  sweetheart  on  his  shoulder. "  At  parting  he 
told  him  to  call  on  madadh  glas  driom  an  t-shleibhe — grey  dog 
of  mountain  back  in  time  of  need.  That  night  he  saw,  Tigh 
mor  geal  an  an  gleann  fada  faisich,  a  big  white  house  in  a 
long  desert  glen,  and  saw  his  sweatheart  with  a  golden  comb  in 
her  hand,  and  she  would  take  a  while  at  combing  her  hair,  and 


THE   YOUNG   KING   OF  EASAIDH   RUADH.  21 

a  while  at  weeping,  and  when  she  saw  him  she  said — "  My  pity, 
what  brought  thee  here?  the  giant  will  kill  thee."  "  Two  shares 
of  fear  on  him,  and  the  smallest  share  on  me,"  said  the  widow's  son. 

She  had  laid  it  as  crosses  and  as  spells  on  the  giant,  not  to 
come  near  her  for  a  day  and  a  year,  and  they  were  together  in 
the  giant's  house  till  evening. 

She  hid  him,  and  had  a  long  talk  with  the  giant  when  he 
came  home,  who  was  wheedled,  as  in  the  other  story,  into  tell- 
ing first  that  his  life  (betha)  was  in  (carn  glas  ud  thall) 
yonder  grey  cairn.  The  lady  was  addressed  as  Nighistn  righ 
choige  mugh — 0  daughter  of  king  of  coige  mugh,  which  king- 
dom is  not  wdthin  my  geographical  studies. 

The  giant  came  home,  and  found  the  grey  cairn  dressed  out 
and  ornamented,  and  after  a  deal  of  persuasion,  gave  out  that  his 
life  was  in  seann  stoc  darrich — an  old  oak  stump  on  the  bank 
of  yonder  river.  So  the  next  day  that  was  dressed  out,  and  when 
he  came  home  he  said,  "  Do  thou  make  the  stock  braw,  briagh, 
every  day.  On  the  third  day  they  split  the  oak  stump  with  an 
axe,  and  a  hare  leaped  out.  "There  now  is  the  giant's  life 
away,"  said  the  king's  daughter,  "and  he  will  come  without 
delay  and  kill  thee,  and  not  spare  me."  Grey  dog  of  mountain 
back  was  called,  and  brought  the  hare,  and  a  salmon  leaped  out 
into  the  river.  Brown  otter  of  sail  stream  brought  the  salmon, 
and  a  heath  hen  sprang  out.  Blue-eyed  falcon  of  Glen  Feist 
brought  the  bird,  and  the  giant  came  roaring — "King's  daughter, 
let  me  have  my  life  and  thou  shalt  have  the  little  chest  of  gold 
and  the  little  chest  of  silver  that  is  in  yonder  grey  cairn."  The 
widow's  son  answered,  •'  I  will  have  that,  and  I  will  have  this  ;" 
and  he  seized  the  axe,  and  the  stock  fell,  and  the  giant  was  dead. 
And  the  widow's  son  and  the  daughter  of  King  Coige  Mugh,  in 
Erin,  staid  in  the  house  and  the  land  of  the  giant,  and  their  race 
was  there  when  I  was  there  last. 

The  warrior's  dress  of  thongs  is  remarkable,  and  something 
like  it  is  described  in  another  tale.  There  is  a  curious  picture 
at  Taymouth  of  a  man,  supposed  to  be  the  Regent  Murray,  in  a 
Highland  dress,  which  may  be  the  dress  described.  The  upper 
part  is  composed  of  strips  of  some  ornamental  material,  which 
might  be  stamped  gilded  leather  ;  the  rest  of  the  dress  is  a  linen 
shirt,  with  ruffles,  and  a  plaid  wrapped  about  the  body  in  the 
form  of  a  modern  kilt,  and  belted  plaid  ;  he  wears  stockings  and 


>AJfV    - 


22  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

shoes  of  a  peculiar  pattern  :  the  head-dress  is  a  bonnet  with  an 
ostrich  plume  ;  the  arms,  a  dirk  and  a  long  ornamented  gun. 

There  is  another  picture  at  Dytchley,  in  Oxfordshire,  which 
represents  an  ancestor  of  Lord  Dillon  in  an  Irish  costume.  The 
dress  consists  solely  of  a  very  short  garment  like  a  shirt,  coloured, 
and  very  much  ornamented  with  tags,  which  might  be  leather. 
The  gentleman  is  armed  with  a  spear,  and  the  dress  is  probably 
a  masquerade  representation  of  a  real  Irish  dress  of  some  period. 

I  would  here  remark  that  the  personages  and  places  in  all 
these  tales  are  like  the  actors  in  a  play  and  the  scenes.  The 
incidents  vary  but  little,  but  the  kings  and  their  countries  vaiy 
with  every  version,  though  there  is  a  preference  for  Erin, 
Ireland  ;  Lochlain,  Scandinavia,  or  rather  Denmark  and  Nor- 
way ;  and  Greuge,  the  Greekdom,  Greece. 

3.  I  have  a  third  version  of  this  written  by  MacLean,  told  by 
Donald  MacPhie,  in  South  Uist.  The  old  man  was  very  proud 
of  it,  and  said  it  was  "  the  hardest"  story  that  the  transcriber 
had  ever  heard.     He  told  me  the  same. 

As  often  happens  with  aged  reciters,  when  he  repeated  it  a 
second  time  slowlj7  for  transcribing,  nearly  all  the  curious,  ' '  im- 
passioned, and  sentimental  "  language  was  left  out.  This  is 
MacLean's  account,  and  it  entirely  agrees  with  my  own  expe- 
rience of  this  man,  who  is  next  thing  to  a  professional  reciter  (see 
introduction).  This  version  is  the  most  curious  of  the  three.  I 
hope  some  day  to  get  it  better  copied,  so  I  do  not  abstract  it  now 
It  is  nearer  the  Ross-shire  version  than  the  Islay  story,  and 
carries  the  scene  to  Greece  from  Ireland.  The  reciter  is  79,  and 
says  he  learned  it  in  his  youth  from  an  old  man  of  the  name  of 
John  MacDonald,  Aird  a  Mhachair. 

The  principle  on  which  gaming  is  carried  on  in  this  and  in 
other  tales  is  peculiar.  The  stake  is  rather  a  ransom,  for  it  is 
always  settled  after  the  game  is  decided. 

The  game  played  is  taileasg,  which  Armstrong  translates  as 
sport,  game,  mirth,  chess,  backgammon,  draughts. 

This  story  resembles  in  some  particulars — 

1.  The  Gaelic  tale  published  by  Dr.  MacLeod,  printed  page 

30,  Leobhar  Nau  Cnoc.     1834 

2.  The  Sea  Maiden,   in   present   collection,    and   the   stories 

referred  to  in  the  notes. 

- 


THE  YOUNG   KING   OF   KASAIDII    RUADH.  23 

3.  The  Giant  who  had  no  Heart  in  his  Bod}'.      Norse  Tales. 

1859. 

4.  The  Seven  Foals,  where  a  horse  advises  his  rider.     Norse 

Tales. 

5.  Dapplegrim,  where  the  same  occurs,  where  there  are  two 

horses,  and  where  the  rider  hides  about  the  horses.    Norse 
Tales. 

6.  Fortunio,  where  the  horse  also  advises  his  rider. 

7.  This  also  resembles  a  part  of  the  "Arabian  Nights,"  where 

the  Calender  is  changed  into  a  monkey,  and  the  princess 
fights  a  genius  in  various  shapes. 

8.  "The  Ball   of  Crystal,"  Grimm,  where  the  power  of  an 

enchanter  is  in  a  crystal  ball,  in  an  egg,  in  a  fiery  bird,  in 
a  icild  ox. 

9.  The  Three  Sisters,  page  52,  where  a  little  key  is  found  in 

an  egg,  in  a  duck,  in  a  bull.  This  book  is  an  English 
translation  (1845)  of  Volks  Marchen,  by  Musaeus, 
1872.  Said  to  have  been  published  in  English  in 
1790. 
10.  Another  version  of  the  Sea  Maiden  recited  to  me  in  South 
Uist.  The  soul  of  the  Sea  Maiden  was  in  an  egg,  in  a 
goose,  in  a  ram,  in  a  wild  bull,  and  was  got  by  the  help  of 
an  otter,  a  falcon,  a  wolf  and  a  lion. 

Lempriere — JEgyptus — Kneph  or  Knouphis — A  God  repre- 
sented as  a  ram.  He  was  the  soul  of  the  world  ;  his  symbol  a 
circle,  in  the  centre  of  which  is  a  serpent  with  the  head  of  a 
hawk,  or  a  globe  with  a  serpent  turned  round  it.  Together  with 
mind,  the  primitive  matter  was  given,  both  produced  from  the 
same  great  principle,  existing  in  it  from  all  eternity,  imperish- 
able. The  primitive  matter  was  rude  and  shapeless  when  the 
spirit  imparted  to  it  the  power  of  motion,  and  'gave  it  the  form 
of  a  sphere.  This  became  the  sphere  or  egg  of  the  world  which 
Kneph  let  fall  from  his  mouth,  when  he  wished  to  form  all  things. 

It  is  warmly  contended  by  Irish  writers  that  the  religion  of 
the  Celts,  and  the  Celts  themselves,  came  from  Phoenicia  and 
Carthage. 

If  this  story  be  mythological,  here  is  something  like  it. 

We  have  the  haick,  ram,  and  a  bird  ;  and  in  the  Inverary  ver- 
sion we  have  a  fish  and  the  egg,  with  the  life  of  bird,  beast,  fish, 
and  man  in  it. 


24  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

There  is  a  place  called  Loh  Maaien-her,  in  Morbihan,  Brit- 
tany, a  long,  dark,  underground  passage,  at  the  end  of  which  are 
certain  rudely  sculptured  stones.  On  one  of  these  is  something 
which  bears  some  faint  resemblance  to  the  snake,  who  appears 
in  the  next  tale. 

There  is  one  word  in  this  tale,  ' '  Seang,  "  which  is  not  given 
in  dictionaries  as  a  substantive.  Sing,  applied  to  an  Indian 
prince,  means  lion,  and  the  beast  here  described  might  be  one. 
Seang,  as  an  adjective,  means  thin,  slim,  slender,  gaunt,  and  is 
the  root  of  Seangan,  an  ant. 

In  Prichard's  "Celtic  Nations,"  by  Latham,  1856,  a  Dacota 
word  is  quoted — "Sungka,"  which  originally  comprehended  the 
idea  of  Dog,  Fox,  and  Wolf. 
%  The  word  Gruagach,  which  here  means  some  male  person- 
age, generally  means  a  maiden.  It  also  means  "A  female 
spectre  of  the  class  of  Brownies  to  which  the  Highland  dairy- 
maids made  frequent  libations  of  milk — rarely  the  chief  of  a 
place." — Armstrong  die.  This  word,  which  has  not  its  common 
meaning,  may  help  to  trace  the  language.  The  root  is  Gruag, 
the  hair  of  the  head. 

A  Gruagach  used  to  haunt  Skipness  Castle,  and  is  still  remem- 
bered there  as  a  supernatural  female  who  did  odd  jobs  about  the 
house  for  the  maids,  and  lived  in  the  ruin. 

"There  was  also  a  Gruagach  in  Kerrisdale,  in  Gairloch,  in 
Ross-shire,  once  upon  a  time." 

This  may  be  the  same  word  as  Groacli  or  Grac'li,  a  name 
given  to  the  Druidesses,  who  had  colleges  in  an  island  near  the 
coasts  of  Brittany  (p.  155,  vol.  i.,  Foyer  Breton).  The  story 
given  has  many  incidents  common  to  the  Gaelic  stories. 

The  sword  of  light  is  common  in  Gaelic  stories  ;  and,  stripped 
of  supernatural  qualities,  the  whole  thing  seems  very  like  an 
account  of  some  race  contending  with  another,  whose  chief  wore 
long  hair,  who  had  horses  and  bright  (?  steel)  swords,  to  which 
extraordinary  virtues  were  attributed,  and  who  were  at  the  same 
time  beset  by  savages  who  lived  in  caves,  and  were  assisted  by 

other  savages  represented  by  creatures. 

-i  /^ 

" ' A    / c'    '  -  J  /w 

/fly*    u!>ii     A*»     f>*Mh*    H  sr  La  el  *.   7  fk.i     fcoy 


II. 

THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIEDS. 

From  John  Mackenzie,  fisherman,  near  Inverary. 

rpHERE  was  once  a  time  when  every  creature  and  bird 
■*■  was  gathering  to  battle.  The  son  of  the  king  of 
Tethertown*  said,  that  he  would  go  to  see  the  battle, 
and  that  he  would  bring  sure  word  home  to  his  father 
the  king,  who  would  be  king  of  the  creatures  this  year. 
The  battle  was  over  before  he  arrived  all  but  one 
(fight),  between  a  great  black  raven  and  a  snake,  and 
it  seemed  as  if  the  snake  would  get  the  victory  over 
the  raven.  "When  the  King's  son  saw  this,  he  helped 
the  raven,  and  with  one  blow  takes  the  head  off  the 
snake.  When  the  raven  had  taken  breath,  and  saw 
that  the  snake  was  dead,  he  said,  "  For  thy  kindness  to 
me  this  day,  I  will  give  thee  a  sight.  Come  up  now  on 
the  root  of  my  two  wings."  The  king's  son  mounted 
upon  the  raven,  and,  before  he  stopped,  he  took  him 
over  seven  Bens,  and  seven  Glens,  and  seven  Mountain 
Moors. 

"  Now,"  said  the  raven,  "seest  thou  that  house  yonder  ? 
Go  now  to  it.  It  is  a  sister  of  mine  that  makes  her 
dwelling  in  it ;  and  I  will  go  bail  that  thou  art  welcome. 
And  if  she  asks  thee,  Wert  thou  at  the  battle  of  the 
birds  ?    say  thou  that  thou  wert.     And  if   she   asks, 

*  Na  Cathair  Shlomain.  Heather  ropes  are  used  for  binding 
thatch  on  Highland  cottages. 


*vw     In     KH.       '  **    ^UAC>  *>      q 


K  viCPfll 


26  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

Didst  thou  see  my  likeness  1  say  that  thou  sawest  it. 
But  be  sure  that  thou  meetest  me  to-morrow  morning 
here,  in  this  place."  The  king's  son  got  good  and  [right 
good  treatment  this  night.  Meat  of  each  meat,  drink 
of  each  drink,  warm  water  to  his  feet,  and  a  soft  bed 
for  his  limbs. 

On  the  next  day  the  raven  gave  him  the  same  sight 
over  seven  Bens,  and  seven  Glens,  and  seven  Mountain 
moors.  They  saw  a  bothy  far  off,  but,  though  far  off, 
they  were  soon  there.  He  got  good  treatment  this 
night,  as  before — plenty  of  meat  and  drink,  and  warm 
water  to  his  feet,  and  a  soft  bed  to  his  limbs — and  on 
the  next  day  it  was  the  same  thing. 

On  the  third  morning,  instead  of  seeing  the  raven  as 
at  the  other  times,  who  should  meet  him  but  the  hand- 
somest lad  he  ever  saw,  with  a  bundle  in  his  hand. 
The  king's  son  asked  this  lad  if  he  had  seen  a  big  black 
raven.  Said  the  lad  to  him,  "  Thou  wilt  never  see  the 
raven  again,  for  I  am  that  raven.  I  was  put  under 
spells;  it  was  meeting  thee  that  loosed  me,  and  for 
that  thou  art  getting  this  bundle.  Now,"  said  the  lad, 
"thou  wilt  turn  back  on  the  self-same  steps,  and  thou 
wilt  lie  a  night  in  each  house,  as  thou  wert  before ;  but 
thy  lot  is  not  to  lose  the  bundle  which  I  gave  thee,  till 
thou  art  in  the  place  where  thou  wouldst  most  wish  to 
dwell." 

The  king's  son  turned  his  back  to  the  lad,  and  his 
face  to  his  father's  house ;  and  he  got  lodging  from  the 
raven's  sisters,  just  as  he  got  it  when  going  forward. 
When  he  was  nearing  his  father's  house  he  was  going 
through  a  close  wood.  It  seemed  to  him  that  the 
bundle  was  growing  heavy,  and  he  thought  he  would 
look  what  was  in  it. 

When   he   loosed   the   bundle,  it  was   not  without 


THE   BATTLE   OF  THE  BIRDS.  27 

astonishing  himself.  In  a  twinkling  he  sees  the  very- 
grandest  place  he  ever  saw.  A  great  castle,  and  an 
orchard  about  the  castle,  in  which  was  every  kind  of 
fruit  and  herb.  He  stood  full  of  wonder  and  regret  for 
having  loosed  the  bundle — it  was  not  in  his  power  to 
put  it  back  again — and  he  would  have  wished  this  pretty 
place  to  be  in  the  pretty  little  green  hollow  that  was 
opposite  his  father's  house ;  but,  at  one  glance,  he  sees  a 
great  giant  coming  towards  him. 

"Bad's  the  place  where  thou  hast  built  thy  house, 
king's  son,"  says  the  giant.  "  Yes,  but  it  is  not  here  I 
would  wish  it  to  be,  though  it  happened  to  be  here  by 
mishap,"  says  the  king's  son.  "What's  the  reward  thou 
wouldst  give  me  for  putting  it  back  in  the  bundle  as  it 
was  before  V  "  What's  the  reward  thou  wouldst  ask  ?  " 
says  the  king's  son.  "  If  thou  wilt  give  me  the  first  son 
thou  hast  when  he  is  seven  years  of  age,"  says  the 
giant.  "  Thou  wilt  get  that  if  I  have  a  son,"  said  the 
king's  son. 

In  a  twinkling  the  giant  put  each  garden,  and  orchard, 
and  castle  in  the  bundle  as  they  were  before.  "  Now," 
says  the  giant,  "take  thou  thine  own  road,  and  I  will 
take  my  road ;  but  mind  thy  promise,  and  though  thou 
shouldst  forget,  I  will  remember." 

The  king's  son  took  to  the  road,  and  at  the  end  of  a 
few  days  he  reached  the  place  he  was  fondest  of.  He 
loosed  the  bundle,  and  the  same  place  was  just  as  it  was 
before.  And  when  he  opened  the  castle-door  he  sees 
the  handsomest  maiden  he  ever  cast  eye  upon.  "Advance, 
king's  son,"  said  the  pretty  maid;  "everything  is  in 
order  for  thee,  if  thou  wilt  marry  me  this  very  night." 
"It's  I  am  the  man  that  is  willing,"  said  the  king's  son. 
And  on  the  same  night  they  married. 

But  at  the  end  of  a  day  and  seven  years,  what  great 


28  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

man  is  seen  coming  to  the  castle  but  the  giant.  The 
king's  son  minded  his  promise  to  the  giant,  and  till  now 
he  had  not  told  his  promise  to  the  queen.  "Leave 
thou  (the  matter)  between  me  and  the  giant,"  says  the 
queen. 

"Turn  out  thy  son,"  says  the  giant;  "mind  your 
promise."  "Thou  wilt  get  that,"  says  the  king,  "when 
his  mother  puts  him  in  order  for  his  journey."  The 
queen  arrayed  the  cook's  son,  and  she  gave  him  to  the 
giant  by  the  hand.  The  giant  went  away  with  him ; 
but  he  had  not  gone  far  when  he  put  a  rod  in  the  hand 
of  the  little  laddie.  The  giant  asked  him — "  If  thy 
father  had  that  rod  what  would  he  do  with  it  ? "  "  If 
my -father  had  that  rod  he  would  beat  the  dogs  and  the 
cats,  if  they  would  be  going  near  the  king's  meat,"  said 
the  little  laddie.  "Thou'rt  the  cook's  son,"  said  the 
giant.  He  catches  him  by  the  two  small  ankles  and 
knocks  him — "  Sgleog  " — against  the  stone  that  was 
beside  him.  The  giant  turned  back  to  the  castle  in  rage 
and  madness,  and  he  said  that  if  they  did  not  turn  out 
the  king's  son  to  him,  the  highest  stone  of  the  castle 
would  be  the  lowest.  Said  the  queen  to  the  king,  "we'll 
try  it  yet ;  the  butler's  son  is  of  the  same  age  as  our 
son."  She  arrayed  the  butler's  son,  and  she  gives  him 
to  the  giant  by  the  hand.  The  giant  had  not  gone  far 
when  he  put  the  rod  in  his  hand.  "  If  thy  father  had 
that  rod,"  says  the  giant,  "  what  would  he  do  with  it  % " 
"  He  would  beat  the  dogs  and  the  cats  when  they  would 
be  coming  near  the  king's  bottles  and  glasses."  "  Thou 
art  the  son  of  the  butler,"  says  the  giant,  and  dashed  his 
brains  out  too.  The  giant  returned  in  very  great  rage 
and  anger.  The  earth  shook  under  the  sole  of  his  feet, 
and  the  castle  shook  and  all  that  was  in  it.  "  Out 
here  THY  Son,"  says  the  giant,  "or  in  a  twinkling  the 


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.  29 

stone  that  is  highest  in  the  dwelling  will  be  the  lowest." 
So  needs  must  they  had  to  give  the  king's  son  to  the 
giant. 

The  giant  took  him  to  his  own  house,  and  he 
reared  him  as  his  own  son.  On  a  day  of  days  when 
the  giant  was  from  home,  the  lad  heard  the  sweetest  !.. 
music  he  ever  heard  in  a  room  at  the  top  of  the  giant's 
house.  At  a  glance  he  saw  the  finest  face  he  had  ever 
seen.  She  beckoned  to  him  to  come  a  bit  nearer  to  her, 
and  she  told  him  to  go  this  time,  but  to  be  sure  to  be  at 
the  same  place  about  that  dead  midnight. 

And  as  he  promised  he  did.  The  giant's  daughter 
was  at  his  side  in  a  twinkling,  and  she  said,  "To- 
morrow thou  wilt  get  the  choice  of  my  two  sisters  to 
marry  ;  but  say  thou  that  thou  wilt  not  take  either,  but 
me.  My  father  wants  me  to  marry  the  son  of  the 
king  of  the  Green  City,  but  I  don't  like  him."  On  the 
morrow  the  giant  took  out  his  three  daughters,  and  he 
said,  "  Now  son  of  the  king  of  Tethertown,  thou  hast 
not  lost  by  living  with  me  so  long.  Thou  wilt  get  to 
wife  one  of  the  two  eldest  of  my  daughters,  and  with 
her  leave  to  go  home  with  her  the  day  after  the  wed- 
ding." "If  thou  wilt  give  me  this  pretty  little  one," 
says  the  king's  son,  "I  will  take  thee  at  thy  word." 

The  giant's  wrath  kindled,  and  he  said,  "Before 
thou  gett'st  her  thou  must  do  the  three  things  that  I 
ask  thee  to  do."  "Say  on,"  says  the  king's  son.  The 
giant  took  him  to  the  byre.  "  Now,"  says  the  giant, 
"the  dung  of  a  hundred  cattle  is  here,  and  it  has 
not  been  cleansed  for  seven  years.  I  am  going  from 
home  to-day,  and  if  this  byre  is  not  cleaned  before 
night  comes,  so  clean  that  a  golden  apple  will  run  from 
end  to  end  of  it,  not  only  thou  shalt  not  get  my  daugh- 
ter, but  'tis  a  drink  of  thy  blood  that  will  quench  my 


30  WEST   HIGHLAND    TALES. 

thirst  this  night."  He  begins  cleaning  the  byre,  but 
it  was  just  as  well  to  keep  baling  the  great  ocean. 
After  mid-day,  when  sweat  was  blinding  him,  the 
giant's  young  daughter  came  where  he  was,  and  she 
said  to  him,  "Thou  art  being  punished,  king's  son." 
"I  am  that,"  says  the  king's  son.  "Come  over," 
says  she,  "and  lay  down  thy  weariness."  "I  will  do 
that,"  says  he,  "there  is  but  death  awaiting  me,  at 
any  rate."  He  sat  down  near  her.  He  was  so  tired 
that  he  fell  asleep  beside  her.  When  he  awoke,  the 
giant's  daughter  was  not  to  be  seen,  but  the  byre  was 
so  well  cleaned  that  a  golden  apple  would  run  from  end 
to  end  of  it.  In  comes  the  giant,  and  he  said,  "  Thou 
hast  cleaned  the  byre,  king's  son  ? "  "I  have  cleaned 
it,"  says  he.  "Somebody  cleaned  it,"  says  the  giant. 
"Thou  didst  not  clean  it,  at  all  events,"  said  the  king's 
son.  "  Yes,  yes  !  "  says  the  giant,  "  since  thou  wert  so 
active  to-day,  thou  wilt  get  to  this  time  to-morrow  to 
thatch  this  byre  with  birds'  down — birds  with  no  two 
feathers  of  one  colour."  The  king's  son  was  on  foot 
before  the  sun ;  he  caught  up  his  bow  and  his  quiver  of 
arrows  to  kill  the  birds.  He  took  to  the  moors,  but  if 
he  di  ],  the  birds  were  not  so  easy  to  take.  He  was 
running  after  them  till  the  sweat  was  blinding  him. 
About  mid-day  who  should  come  but  the  giant's  daugh- 
ter. "Thou  art  exhausting  thyself,  king's  son,"  says 
she.  "I  am,"  said  he.  " There  fell  but  these  two  black- 
birds, and  both  of  one  colour."  "Come  over  and  lay 
down  thy  weariness  on  this  pretty  hillock,"  says  the 
giant's  daughter.  "It's  I  am  willing,"  said  he.  He 
thought  she  would  aid  him  this  time,  too,  and  he  sat 
down  near  her,  and  he  was  not  long  there  till  he  fell 
asleep. 

When   he   awoke,    the   giant's    daughter   was   gone. 


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.  31 

He  thought  he  would  go  back  to  the  house,  and  he  sees 
the  byre  thatched  with  the  feathers.  When  the  giant 
came  home,  he  said,  "Thou  hast  thatched  the  byre, 
king's  son?"  "I  thatched  it,"  says  he.  "Somebody 
thatched  it,"  says  the  giant.  "Thou  didst  not  thatch 
it,"  says  the  king's  son.  "Yes,  yes !"  says  the  giant. 
"  Now,"  says  the  giant,  "there  is  a  fir-tree  beside  that 
loch  down  there,  and  there  is  a  magpie's  nest  in  its 
top.  The  eggs  thou  wilt  find  in  the  nest.  I  must 
have  them  for  my  first  meal.  Not  one  must  be  burst 
or  broken,  and  there  are  five  in  the  nest."  Early 
in  the  morning  the  king's  son  went  where  the  tree 
was,  and  that  tree  was  not  hard  to  hit  upon.  Its 
match  was  not  in  the  whole  wood.  From  the  foot  to 
the  first  branch  was  five  hundred  feet.  The  king's 
son  was  going  all  round  the  tree.  She  came  who  was 
always  bringing  help  to  him;  "  Thou  art  losing  the 
skin  of  thy  hands  and  feet."  "Ach!  I  am,"  says  he. 
"  I  am  no  sooner  up  than  down."  "  This  is  no  time 
for  stopping,"  says  the  giant's  daughter.  She  thrust 
finger  after  finger  into  the  tree,  till  she  made  a  ladder 
for  the  king's  son  to  go  up  to  the  magpie's  nest. 
When  he  was  at  the  nest,  she  said,  "  Make  haste  now 
w*,  with  the  eggs,  for  my  .father's  breath  is  burning  my 
Imck."  In  his  hurry  she  left  her  little  finger  in  the  top 
of  the  tree.  "Now,"  says  she,  "thou  wilt  go  home 
with  the  eggs  quickly,  and  thou  wilt  get  me  to  marry 
to-night  if  thou  canst  know  me.  I  and  my  two  sisters 
will  be  arrayed  in  the  same  garments,  and  made  like 
each  other,  but  look  at  me  when  my  father  says,  Go  Jh^a*y  *&&. 
to  thy  wife,  king's  son ;  and  thou  wilt  see  a  hand 
without  a  little  finger."  He  gave  the  eggs  to  the  giant.  ,.^  f  y*>«j 
"  Yes,  yes  !  "  says  the  giant,  "be  making  ready  for  thy  j,  .„  v**^ 
marriage." 


c^ 


32  WEST   HIGHLAND  TALES. 

Then  indeed  there  was  a  wedding,  and  it  was  a 
wedding !  Giants  and  gentlemen,  and  the  son  of  the 
king  of  the  Green  City  was  in  the  midst  of  them. 
They  were  married,  and  the  dancing  began,  and  that 
was  a  dance  1  The  giant's  house  was  shaking  from 
top  to  bottom.  But  bed  time  came,  and  the  giant 
said,  "  It  is  time  for  thee  to  go  to  rest,  son  of  the  king 
of  Tethertown ;  take  thy  bride  with  thee  from  amidst 
those." 

She  put  out  the  hand  off  which  the  little  finger  was, 
and  he  caught  her  by  the  hand. 

"  Thou  hast  aimed  well  this  time  too ;  but  there  is 
no  knowing  but  we  may  meet  thee  another  way,"  said 
the  giant. 

But  to  rest  they  went.  "Now,"  says  she,  "sleep  not, 
or  else  thou  diest.  We  must  fly  quick,  quick,  or  for 
certain  my  father  will  kill  thee." 

Out  they  went,  and  on  the  blue  gray  filly  in  the 
stable  they  mounted.  "  Stop  a  while,"  says  she,  "  and 
I  will  play  a  trick  to  the  old  hero."  She  jumped  in,  and 
cut  an  apple  into  nine  shares,  and  she  put  two  shares  at 
the  head  of  the  bed,  and  two  shares  at  the  foot  of  the 
bed,  and  two  shares  at  the  door  of  the  kitchen,  and  two 
shares  at  the  big  door,  and  one  outside  the  house. 

The  giant  awoke  and  called,  "Are  you  asleep?" 
"  We  are  not  yet,"  said  the  apple  that  was  at  the  head 
of  the  bed.  At  the  end  of  a  while  he  called  again. 
"We  are  not  yet,"  said  the  apple  that  was  at  the  foot 
of  the  bed.  A  while  after  this  he  called  again.  "  We 
are  not  yet,"  said  the  apple  at  the  kitchen  door.  The 
giant  called  again.  The  apple  that  was  at  the  big  door 
answered  "You  are  now  going  far  from  me,"  says  the 
giant.  "  We  are  not  yet,"  says  the  apple  that  was 
outside  the  house.     "You  are  flying,"  says  the  giant. 


V-"> 


t/if   '* 


TJuTl^'^M  ■*%  top***  •****": 


1 


THE  BATTLE   OF  THE  BIRDS.  33 

The  giant  jumped  on  his  feet,  and  to  the  bed  he  went, 
but  it  was  cold — empty 

"My  own  daughter's  tricks  are  trying  me,"  said  the 
giant.     "Here's  after  them,"  says  he.  vi^Li  ^iCi 

In  the  mouth  of  day,  the  giant's  daughter  said  that      ^  if  Q*>f*s^** 
her  father's  breath  was  burning  her  back.     "  Put  thy  f  #»    »      ^t)Lo  fcd£ 
hand,  quick,"  said  she,  "in  the  ear  of  the  gray  filly,  and  ^^  x^rAJiL^utm 
whatever   thou   findest  in  it,  throw  it  behind   thee."  -u^/^Jj 
"There  is  a  twig  of  sloe  tree,"  said  he.      "Throw  it*v>..  a^,    lLi  LxI 
behind  thee,"  said  she. 

Xo  sooner  did  he  that,  than  there  were  twenty  miles 
of  black  thorn  wood,  so  thick  that  scarce  a  weasel  could    y*ff— 
go  through  it.     The  giant  came  headlong,  and  there  he 
is  fleecing  his  head  and  neck  in  the  thorns.  s 

"  My  own  daughter's  tricks  are  here  as  before,"  said 
the  giant;  "but  if  I  had  my  "own  big  axe  and  wood 
knife  here,  I  would  not  be  long  making  a  way  through 
this."  He  went  home  for  the  big  axe  and  the  wood 
knife,  and  sure  he  was  not  long  on  his  journey,  and  he 
was  the  boy  behind  the  big  axe.  He  was  not  long 
making  a  way  through  the  black  thorn.  "  I  will  leave 
the  axe  and  the  wood  knife  here  till  I  return,"  says  he. 
,'If  thou  leave  them,"  said  a  Hoodie"*  that  was  in  a 
tree,  "  we  will  steal  them." 

"You  will  do  that  same,"  says  the  giant,  "but  I  will 
set  them  home."  He  returned  and  left  them  at  the 
house.  At  the  heat  of  day  the  giant's  daughter  felt  her 
father's  breath  burning  her  back. 

"  Put  thy  finger  in  the  filly's  ear,  and  throw  behind 
thee  whatever  thou  findest  in  it."     He  got  a  splinter  of  \±  ^  ^tf&f 
gray  stone,  and  in  a  twinkling  there  were  twenty  miles,  rcc**^  *J 


*  The  principal  Gaelic  vowels  bear  some  resemblance  to  the 
cawing  of  a  hoodie.     They  are  all  broad  A. 

M 


Mte$ft 


V 


34  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

by  breadth  and  height,  of  great  gray  rock  behind  them. 
The  giant  came  full  pelt,  but  past  the  rock  he  could  not 
go. 

"The  tricks  of  my  own  daughter  are  the  hardest 
things  that  ever  met  me,"  says  the  giant;  "but  if  I 
had  my  lever  and  my  mighty  mattock,  I  would  not  be 
long  making  my  way  through  this  rock  also."  There 
was  no  help  for  it,  but  to  turn  the  chase  for  them ; 
and  he  was  the  boy  to  split  the  stones.  He  was  not 
long  making  a  road  through  the  rock.  "  I  will  leave 
the  tools  here,  and  I  will  return  no  more."  "If  thou 
leave  them,"  says  the  hoodie,  "  we  will  steal  them." 
"  Do  that  if  thou  wilt ;  there  is  no  time  to  go  back." 
At  the  time  of  breaking  the  watch,  the  giant's  daughter 
said  that  she  was  feeling  her  father's  breath  burning 
her  back.  "  Look  in  the  filly's  ear,  king's  son,  or  else  we 
are  lost."  He  did  so,  and  it  was  a  bladder  of  water 
that  was  in  her  ear  this  time.  He  threw  it  behind  him 
and  there  was  a  fresh-water  loch,  twenty  miles  in  length 
and  breadth,  behind  them. 

The  giant  came  on,  but  with  the  speed  he  had  on 
him,  he  was  in  the  middle  of  the  loch,  and  he  went 
under,  and  he  rose  no  more. 

On  the  next  day  the  young  companions  were  come 
in  sight  of  his  father's  house.  "Now,"  said  she,  "my 
father  is  drowned,  and  he  won't  trouble  us  any  more ; 
but  before  we  go  further,"  says  she,  "  go  thou  to  thy 
father's  house,  and  tell  that  thou  hast  the  like  of  me ; 
but  this  is  thy  lot,  let  neither  man  nor  creature  kiss 
thee,  for  if  thou  dost  thou  wilt  not  remember  that  thou 
hast  ever  seen  me."  Every  one  he  met  was  giving  him 
welcome  and  luck,  and  he  charged  his  father  and  mother 
not  to  kiss  him  ;  but  as  mishap  was  to  be,  an  old  grey- 
hound was  in  and  she  knew  him,  and  jumped  up  to  his 


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.  .°>.~> 

mouth,  and  after  that  he  did  not  remember  the  giant's 
daughter. 

She  was  sitting  at  the  well's  side  as  he  left  her,  but 
tin1  king's  son  was  not  coming.  In  the  mouth  of  night 
she  climbed  up  into  a  tree  of  oak  that  was  beside  the 
well,  and  she  lay  in  the  fork  of  the  tree  all  that  night. 
A  shoemaker  had  a  house  near  the  well,  and  about 
mid-day  on  the  morrow,  the  shoemaker  asked  his  wife 
to  go  for  a  drink  for  him  out  of  the  well.  When 
the  shoemaker's  wife  reached  the  well,  and  when  she 
saw  the  shadow  of  her  that  was  in  the  tree,  thinking 
of  it  that  it  was  her  own  shadoAv — and  she  never  thought 
till  now  that  she  was  so  handsome — she  gave  a  cast  to 
the  dish  that  was  in  her  hand,  and  it  was  broken  on  the 
ground,  and  she  took  herself  to  the  house  without  vessel 
or  water. 

"  "Where  is  the  water,  wife  J "  said  the  shoemaker. 
"Thou  shambling,  contemptible  old  carle,  without 
grace,  I  have  stayed  too  long  thy  water  and  wood 
thrall."*  "I  am  thinking,  wife,  that  thou  hast  turned 
crazy.  Go  thou,  daughter,  quickly,  and  fetch  a  drink 
for  thy  father."  His  daughter  went,  and  in  the  same 
way  so  it  happened  to  her.  She  never  thought  till 
now  that  she  was  so  loveable,  and  she  took  herself 
home,  "  Up  with  the  drink,"  said  her  father.  "  Thou 
hume-spun  f  shoe  carle,  dost  thou  think  that  I  am  fit  to 
be  thy  thrall."  The  poor  shoemaker  thought  that  they 
had  taken  a  turn  in  their  understandings,  and  he  went 
himself  to  the  well.  He  saw  the  shadow  of  the  maiden 
in  the  well,  and  he  looked  up  to  the  tree,  and  he  sees 
the  finest  woman  he  ever  saw.  "  Thy  seat  is  wavering, 
but   thy   face   is   fair,"  said   the    shoemaker.     "Come 

*  Traill,  a  slave.  t  Peillag,  felt,  coarse  cloth. 


36  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

down,  for  there  is  need  of  thee  for  a  short  while  at  my 
house."  The  shoemaker  understood  that  this  was  the 
shadow  that  had  driven  his  people  mad.  The  shoe- 
maker took  her  to  his  house,  and  he  said  that  he  had 
but  a  poor  bothy,  but  that  she  should  get  a  share  of  all 
that  was  in  it.  At  the  end  of  a  day  or  two  came  a 
leash  of  gentlemen  lads  to  the  shoemaker's  house  for 
shoes  to  be  made  them,  for  the  king  had  come  home, 
and  he  was  going  to  marry.  The  glance  the  lads  gave 
they  saw  the  giant's  daughter,  and  if  they  saw  her, 
they  never  saw  one  so  pretty  as  she.  "  'Tis  thou  hast 
the  pretty  daughter  here,"  said  the  lads  to  the  shoe- 
maker. "  She  is  pretty,  indeed,"  says  the  shoemaker, 
"  but  she  is  no  daughter  of  mine."  "  St.  Nail ! "  said  one 
of  them,  "I  would  give  a  hundred  pounds  to  marry 
her."  The  two  others  said  the  very  same.  The  poor 
shoemaker  said  that  he  had  nothing  to  do  with  her. 
"  But,"  said  they,  "  ask  her  to-night,  and  send  us  word 
to-morrow."  When  the  gentles  went  away,  she  asked 
the  shoemaker — "  What's  that  they  were  saying  about 
me  % "  The  shoemaker  told  her.  "  Go  thou  after 
them,"  said  she ;  "I  will  marry  one  of  them,  and  let 
him  bring  his  purse  with  him."  The  youth  returned, 
and  he  gave  the  shoemaker  a  hundred  pounds  for 
tocher.  They  went  to  rest,  and  when  she  had  laid 
down,  she  asked  the  lad  for  a  drink  of  water  from  a 
tumbler  that  was  on  the  board  on  the  further  side  of 
the  chamber.  He  went ;  but  out  of  that  he  could  not 
come,  as  he  held  the  vessel  of  water  the  length  of  the 
night.  "  Thou  lad,"  said  she,  "  why  wilt  thou  not  lie 
down  ? "  but  out  of  that  he  could  not  drag  till  the 
bright  morrow's  day  was.  The  shoemaker  came  to  the 
door  of  the  chamber,  and  she  asked  him  to  take  away 
that  lubberly  boy.     This  wooer  went  and  betook  him- 


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.  37 

self  to  his  home,  but  he  did  not  tell  the  other  two  how 
it  happened  to  him.  Next  came  the  second  chap, 
and  in  the  same  way,  when  she  had  gone  to  rest — 
"Look,"  she  said,  "if  the  latch  is  on  the  door."  The 
latch  laid  hold  of  his  hands,  and  out  of  that  he  could 
not  come  the  length  of  the  night,  and  out  of  that  he 
did  not  come  till  the  morrow's  day  was  bright.  He 
went,  under  shame  and  disgrace.  No  matter,  he  did 
not  tell  the  other  chap  how  it  had  happened,  and  on 
the  third  night  he  came.  As  it  happened  to  the  two 
others,  so  it  happened  to  him.  One  foot  stuck  to  the 
floor  ;  he  could  neither  come  nor  go,  but  so  he  was 
the  length  of  the  night.  On  the  morrow,  he  took  his 
soles  out  (of  that),  and  he  was  not  seen  looking  behind 
him.  "Now,"  said  the  girl  to  the  shoemaker,  "thine 
is  the  sporran  of  gold;  I  have  no  need  of  it.  It  will 
better  thee,  and  I  am  no  worse  for  thy  kindness  to  me." 
The  shoemaker  had  the  shoes  ready,  and  on  that  very 
day  the  king  was  to  be  married.  The  shoemaker  was 
going  to  the  castle  with  the  shoes  of  the  young  people, 
and  the  girl  said  to  the  shoemaker,  "  I  would  like  to 
get  a  sight  of  the  king's  son  before  he  marries." 
"Come  with  me,"  says  the  shoemaker,  "I  am  well 
acquainted  with  the  servants  at  the  castle,  and  thou 
shalt  get  a  sight  of  the  king's  son  and  all  the  company." 
And  when  the  gentles  saw  the  pretty  woman  that  was 
here  they  took  her  to  the  wedding-room,  and  they 
filled  for  her  a  glass  of  wine.  When  she  was  going  ro 
drink  what  is  in  it,  a  flame  went  up  out  of  the  glass, 
and  a  golden  pigeon  and  a  silver  pigeon  sprung  out  of 
it,  They  were  flying  about  when  three  grains  of  barley 
fell  on  the  floor.  The  silver  pigeon  sprang,  and  he 
eats  that.  Said  the  golden  pigeon  to  him,  "  If  thou 
hadst  mind  when  I  cleared  the  byre,  thou  wouldst  not 


38  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

eat  that  without  giving  me  a  share."  Again  fell  three 
other  grains  of  barley,  and  the  silver  pigeon  sprang, 
and  he  eats  that,  as  before.  "If  thou  hadst  mind 
when  I  thatched  the  byre,  thou  wouldst  not  eat  that 
without  giving  me  my  share,"  says  the  golden  pigeon. 
Three  other  grains  fall,  and  the  silver  pigeon  sprang, 
and  he  eats  that.  "  If  thou  hadst  mind  when  I  harried 
the  magpie's  nest,  thou  wouldst  not  eat  that  without 
giving  me  my  share,"  says  the  golden  pigeon ;  "I  lost 
my  little  finger  bringing  it  down,  and  I  want  it  still." 
The  king's  son  minded,  and  he  knew  who  it  was  he 
had  got.  He  sprang  where  she  was,  and  kissed  her 
from  hand  to  mouth.  And  when  the  priest  came  they 
married  a  second  time.     And  there  I  left  them. 

This  version  of  the  Battle  of  the  Birds  was  recited  by  John 
Mackenzie,  April  1859,  and  written  in  Gaelic  by  Hector  Urquhart. 
The  reciter  is  a  fisherman,  and  has  resided  for  the  last  thirty-four 
years  at  Ceanmore,  near  Inverary,  on  the  estate  of  the  Duke  of 
Argyll.  He  is  a  native  of  Lorn.  He  says  he  has  known  it 
from  his  youth,  and  he  has  been  in  the  habit  of  repeating  it  to 
his  friends  on  winter  nights,  as  a  pastime,  "  He  can  read 
English  and  play  the  bagpipes,  and  has  a  memory  like  Oliver  and 
Boyd's  Almanac."  He  got  this  and  his  other  stories  from  his 
father  and  other  old  people  in  Lorn  and  elsewhere.  He  is  about 
sixty  years  of  age,  and  was  employed,  April  1859,  in  building 
dykes  on  the  estate  of  Ardkinglas,  where  Hector  Urquhart  is 
gamekeeper.  In  reciting  his  stories  he  has  all  the  manner  of  a 
practised  narrator  ;  people  still  frequent  his  house  to  hear  his 
tales.  I  know  the  man,  and  I  have  heard  him  recite  many.  The 
Gaelic  has  some  few  north  country  words. 


CATH  NAN  EUN. 

Bha  am  ann  uair,  anns  an  robh  na  h'  uile  beathach  's  eun  a 
cruinneachadh  gu  cath.  Thubhairt  mac  rlgh  Cathair  Shiomain, 
"Gu'n  rachadh  e  a  dh'  fhaicinn  a  chath,  agus  gun  d'  thugadh  e 


CATH   NAN   EUN.  39 

fios  cinnteach  dhachaidli  do  dh'  athair  an  rlgh,  co  a  bhiodh  'na 
rlgh  air  na  beathaichcan  air  a  bhliadhna  so."  Bha  'n  cath 
seachad  mu  'n  drainig  e,  ach  eadar  aon-fhitheach  m6r  dubh  agus 
nathair,  agus  bha  aogas  gu'm  faigheadh  an  nathair  buaidh  air  an 
fhitheach.  'Nuair  a  chunnaic  mac  an  rlgh  so,  chuidich  e  'm 
fitheach,  agus  le  aon  bhuille  thugar  an  ceann  do  'n  nathair. 
'Nuair  a  leig  am  fitheach  anail,  'sa  chunnaic  e  gu'n  robh  an 
nathair  marbh,  thubhairt  e,  ".  Air  son  do  choimhneis  dhomhsa 
an  diugh,  bheir  mise  sealladh  dhuit ;  thig  a  nios  a  nis  air  bun 
mo  dha  sgeithe."  Chaidh  mac  an  righ  suas  air  muin  an  fhithich 
agus  mu  'n  do  stad  e,  thug  e  thairis  e  air  seachd  beanntaibh, 
seachd  gllnn,  agus  seachd  monaidhean.  "  A  nis,"  ars'  am  fith- 
each, "am  bheil  thu  faicinn  an  tigh'  ud  thall  ;  falbh  a  nis  d'a 
'ionnsuidh  ;  's  i  piuthar  dhomhsa  a  tha  gabhail  comhnuidh  ann 
agus  theid  mis  'an  urras  gu'r  e  do  bheatba,  agus  ma  dh'  fhoigh- 
neachdas  i  dhiot,  'an  robh  thu  aig  Cath  nan  eun  ?  abair  thusa, 
'gu'n  robh'."  "Agus  ma  dh'  fheoraicheas  i  dhlot,  'am  faca  tu 
mo  choltas-sa,  abair  thusa  'gu  'm  faca,  ach  bi  cinnteach  gu'n 
coinnich  thu  mise  moch  am  maireach  anns  an  aite  so." 
Fhuair  mac  an  rlgh  gabhail  aige  gu  maithe  's  gu  ro 
mhaith  air  an  oidhche  so,  biadh  dheth  gach  biadh,  's  deoch 
dheth  gach  deoch,  uisge  blath  d'a  chasan  's  leaba  bhog  d'a 
leasan.  Air  an  ath  latha,  thug  am  fitheach  an  sealladh  ceudna 
dha  thairis  air  seachd  beanntaibh,  seachd  glinn,  agus  seachd 
monaidhean.  Chunnaic  iad  bothan  fad'  uatha  ach  ge  b'  fhad 
uatha,  cha  b'  fhada  'ga  'ruigheachd.  Fhuair  e  gabhail  aig'  air 
an  oidhche  so  gu  maith  mar  an  ceudna  ;  pailteas  biadh  's  deoch, 
's  uisge  blath  d'a  chasan,  's  leaba  bhog  d'a  leasan.  Air  an  treas 
maduinn  an  ait  an  fhithich  fhaicinn,  mar  air  na  h-uairean  roimhe, 
co  thug  coinneamh  'dha,  ach  an  t-6ganach  a  bu  dhreachmhoire  a 
chunnaic  e  riamh,  agus  pasgan  aige  na  laimh.  Dh'  fhoighneachd 
mac  an  righ  do  'n  oganach  so,  "  Am  fac  e  fitheach  mor  dubh  ?  " 
Thubhairt  an  t-6ganach  ris,  "  Cha  'n  'fhaic  thu  'm  fitheach  tuil- 
lidh,  oir  s  mise  am  fitheach  a  bha  'sin  ;  bha  mi  air  mo  chuir  fo 
gheasaibh  agus  'se  thusa  a  choinneachadh  a  dh'  fhuasgail  mi,  air 
son  sin,  tha  thu  a'  faotainn  a  phasgain  so."  "Nis,"  ars'  an 
t-6ganach,  "pillidh  tu  air  t'ais  air  a  chois-cheum  cheudna,  agus 
bithidh  tu  oidhche  anns  gach  tigh  mar  a  bha  thu  roimhe  ;  ach 
am  bonn  a  tha  agad  ri  dheanamh,  'na  f  uasgail  am  pasgan  sin  a 
thug  mi  dhuit,  gus  am  bi  thu  anns  an  aite  bu  mhiannaiche  leat  a 
bhith  chomhnuidh."     Thug  mac  an  righ  a  chul  air  an  oganach, 


40  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

agus  thug  e  aghaidh  air  tigh  Athar,  agus  fhuair  e  aoidheachd 
aig  peathraichean  an  fhithich  ceart  mar  a  fhuair  e  'dol  air 
aghaidh.  Nuair  a  bha  e  dluthachadh  ri  tigh  athar,  bha  e  'dol 
troimhe  choille  dhiimhail ;  air  leis  gu  'n  robh  am  pasgan  a'  fas 
trom,  agus  smaoinich  e  gu  'n  sealladh  egudea  bh'  ann.  'Nuair 
a  dh'  fhuasgail  e  'm  pasgan,  cha  b'  ann  gun  iongantas  a  chur  air 
fhein.  Ann  am  prioba  na  sula,  faicear  an  aon  aite  bu  bhreagha 
a  chunnaic  e  riamh  caisteal  m6r,  agus  lios,  anns  an  robh  na 
h-uile  seorsa  meas  is  luibhean  mun  cuairt  air  a'  chaisteal.  Sheas 
e  Ian  iongantais,  agus  aithreachais  air  son  am  pasgan  fhuasgladh. 
Cha  robh  'na  chomas  a  chur  air  ais  a  rithist,  agus  bu  mhiann  leis 
an  t-aite  boidheach  so  a  bhith  air  an  lagan  bhoidheach  uaine  a 
bha  fa  chombair  tigh  athar.  Ach  siiil  do  'n  d'  thug  e,  faicear 
famhair  m6r,  's  e  gabhail  d'a  'ionnsuidh.  "'S  olc  an  t-aite  anns 
an  do  thog  thu  do  thigh,  a  mhic  an  rlgh,"  ars'  am  famhair. 
"Seadh,  ach  cha  b'  ann  an  so  bu  mhiannaiche  leam  e  'bhith,  ge 
do  thachair  e  'bhith  ann  gu  tabaisteach,"  arsa  mac  an  righ. 
"  Ciod  an  duais  a  bheireadh  tu  air  son  a  chur  air  ais  sa  phasgan 
mar  a  bha  e  roimhe  ?  "  "  Ciod  an  duais  a  dh'  iarradh  tu  ?  "  arsa 
mac  an  righ.  "  Ma  bheir  thu  dhomhs'  a  cheud  mhac  a  bhitheas 
agad,  'nuair  a  bhitheas  e  seachd  bliadhna  dh'  aois,"  ars'  am  famh- 
air. "  Gheibh  thu  sin  ma  bhitheas  mac  agam,"  thubhairt  mac 
an  righ.  Ann  am  prioba  na  sula  chuir  am  famhair  gach  lios  is 
garradh  is  caisteal 'sa  phasgan  mar  a  bha  iad  roimhe.  "Nis," 
ars' am  famhair,  "gabh  thusa  do  rathad  fein,  's  gabhaidh  mise 
mo  rathad  fein,  ach  cuimhnich  do  ghealladh  's  gcd  nach  cuimh- 
nich  thusa,  cha  di-chuimhnich  mise."  Thug  mac  an  righ  an 
rathad  air,  's  an  ceann  beagan  laithean  rainig  e  'n  t-aite  bu 
mhiannaiche  leis  ;  dh'  fhuasgail  e  'm  pasgan,  agus  bha  'n  t-aite 
ceudna  dlreach  mar  a  bha  e  roimhe,  agus  a  nuair  a  dh'  fhosgail  e 
dorus  a  chaisteail,  faicear  an  oigh  bu  dhreachmhoire  air  an  d' 
thug  e  siiil  riamh.  "Thlg  air  t-aghaidh,  a  mbic  an  righ,"  ars' 
an  nighean  bh5idheach,  "  tha  gach  ni  an  ordugh  air  do  shon,  ma 
phosas  tu  mise,  an  nochd  fein."  "  'S  mis'  an  duine  a  bhitheas 
toileach,"  thubhairt  mac  an  righ;  agus  air  an  oidhche  sin  fein 
phos  iad.  Ach  an  ceann  latha  's  seachd  bliadhna  co  'm  fear  m6r 
a  chithear  a  tighinn  a  dh'  ionnsuidh  a  chaisteail  ach  am  famhair. 
Chuimhnich  mac  an  righ  a  ghealladh  do  'n  famhair,  agus  gus  a 
so,  cha  d'  innis  e  do 'n  bhan-righ  a  ghealladh.  "Leig  thus' 
eadar  mise  's  am  famhair,"  ars'  a  bhan-righ.  "  Cuir  a  mach  do 
mhac,"  ars'  am  famhair  ;  "  cuimhnich  do  ghealladh."    "  Gheibh 


CATH   NAN   EUN.  41 

thu  sin,"  ars'  an  righ,  "  'nuair  a  chuireas  a  mhathair  an  ordugh 
e  air  son  a  thurais."  Sgeadaich  a  bhan-righ  mac  achbcaire  agus 
thug  i  do  'n  fhamhair  air  laimh  e.  Dh'  fhalbh  am  famhair  leis, 
ach  cha  b'  fhada  a  chaidh  e,  'nuair  a  chuir  e  slatag  ann  an  laimh 
a  ghille-bhig.  Dh'  fheoraich  am  famhair  dheth,  "Na'm  bith- 
eadh  an  t-slatag  sin  aig  t-athair,  de  'dheanadh  e,  leatha?  "  "Na 
'm  biodh  an  t-slat  so  aig  m'  athair,  ghabhadh  e  air  na  coin  's  air 
na  cait  na  'm  biodh  iad  a  dol  a  ch6ir  biadh  an  righ,"  ars'  an  gille 
beag.  "  'S  tusa  mac  a  chdcaire,"  ars'  am  famhair.  Beirear  air 
dha  chaol  cois'  air,  agus  sgleogar  e  ris  a  chloich  a  bha  ri'  thaobh. 
Thill  am  famhair  air  ais  a  dh'  ionnsuidh  a  chaisteail  ann  am  feirg 
is  cuthach,  's  thubhairt  e,  "Mar  cuireadh  iad  a  mach  dhasan 
mac  an  righ,  gu  'm  b'e  'chlach  a  b'  airde  a  chlach  a  b'lslebhiodh 
do  'n  chaisteal."  Thubhairt  a  bhan-righ  ris  an  righ,  "Feuchaidh 
sinn  fathast  e,  tha  mac  a  bhuidealair  an  aon  aois  ri  ar  mac  fein." 
Sgeadaich  i  mac  a  bhuidealair,  agus  thugar  do  'n  fhamhair  e  air 
laimh.  Cha  deach  am  famhair  ach  goirid,  nuair  a  chuir  e  'n 
t-slatag  'na  laimh,  "Na  'm  bitheadh  an  t-slat  so  aig  t-athair," 
ars'  am  famhair,  "  de  a  dheanadh  e  leatha  ?  "  "Ghabhadh  e  air 
na  coin  's  air  na  cait  'nuair  a  bhiodh  iad  a  tighinn  dluth  air 
botail  's  air  gloinneachan  an  righ."  "  'S  tusa  mac  a  bhuidealair," 
ars'  am  famhair,  is  spad  e  'n  t-eanchainn  as  air  an  d6igh  cheudna. 
Thill  am  famhair,  ann  am  feirg  is  corruich  ro  mhor.  Chrith  an 
talamh  fo  'bhonn,  's  chrith  an  caisteal  's  na  bh'  ann. "  ' '  Mach  an 
so  do  mhac,"  ars'  am  famhair,  "  oir  ann  nam  prioba  na  sula  's  e 
chlach  is  airde,  'chlach  is  isle  bhitheas  do  'n  aitreabh. "  'S  e  bh' 
ann  gu  m  b'  eiginn  mac  an  righ  thabhairt  do  'n  fhamhair.  Thug 
am  famhair  e  d'a' thigh  fern,  agus  thog  e  mar  mhac  dha  fein  e. 
Latha  do  na  laithibh  's  am  famhair  bho  'n  bhaile,  chuala  am 
toganach  an  ceol  bu  bhinne  a  chual  e  riamh,  ann  an  seomar  a 
bha  'm  mullach  tigh  an  fhamhair.  Siiil  do  'n  d'thug  e, 
chunnaic  an  aghaidh  bu  bhreagha  a  chunnaic  e  riamh.  Smeid 
i  air  e  thighinn  ni  bu  dluithe  dhc,  agus  thubhairt  i  ris, 
"  E'  dh'  fhalbh  air  an  am  so  ach  e  bhith  cinnteach  e  'bhith 
anns  an  aite  cheudna  mu  mharbh  mheadhain-na  h-oidhche 
so  ;"  agus  mar  a  gheall,  choimhlion.  Bha  nighean  an  fhamhair 
ri'  thaobh  ann  am  prioba  na  sula  agus  thubhairt  i  ris,  "Am 
maireach  gheibh  thu  do  roghainn  ri  phosadh  dheth  mo  dha  phiu- 
thar  ;  ach  abair  thusa  nach  gabh  thu  a  h-aon  dhiubh  ach  mise  ; 
tha  m'  athair  air  son  gu  'm  pos  mi  mac  righ  na  Cathair  uaine, 
ach  's  coma  learn  e."    Air  an  latha  maireach,  thug  am  famhair  a 


42  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

mach  a  thriuir  nighean  's  fchubhairt  e,  'Nis,  a  mhic  righ  na  Cath- 
air  Shlomain,  cha  do  chaill  thu  air  a  bhith  leamsa  cho  fada  : 
gheibh  thu  air  son  bean  aon  do  'n  dithis  is  sine  do  m'  nigheanaibh, 
agus  bithidh  cead  agad  dol  dhachaidh  leatha,  an  deigh  na 
bainnse."  "Ma  bheir  thu  dhoinh  an  te"  bheag  bhoidheach  so," 
arsa  mac  an  righ,  "gabhaidh  mi  air  t-fhacal  thu."  Las  fearg  an 
fhamhair,  agus  thubhairt  e,  "Ma'ra  faigh  thu  sin,  feumaidhtu  na 
tri  nitheanana  a  dh'  iarras  mis'  ort  a  dheanamh."  "  Abair  romh- 
ad,"  arsa  mac  an  righ.  Thug  am  famhair  do  'n  bhathaich  e. 
"Nis,"  ars'  am  famhair,  " tha  innear  nan  ceud  damh  an  so,  agus 
cha  deach  a  chartadh  o  cheann  seachd  bliadhna.  "Tha  mise 
'dol  o  'n  bhaile  'n  diugh  agus  mar  bi  'm  bathach  so  air  a  chartadh 
mu  'n  d'thig  an  oidhche  cho  ghlan  's  gu'n  ruith  ubhall  6ir  o 
cheann  gu  ceann  dith,  cha  'n  e  mhain  nach  faigh  thu  mo  nighean, 
ach  's  e  deoch  dhe  d'fhuil  a  chaisgeas  mo  phathadh  a  nochd." 
Toisichear  air  cartadh  na  bathaich,  ach  bu  cheart  cho  maith 
teannadh  ri  taomadh  a  chuain  mhoir.  'N  deigh  mheadhoin-latha 
's  am  fallus  'ga  'dhalladh  thainig  nighean  6g  an  fhamhair  far  an 
robh  e  's  thubhairt  i  ris,  ' '  Tha  thu  'ga'd'  phianadh,  a  mhic  an 
righ."  "Tha  mi  'n  sin,"  arsa  mac  an  righ.  " Thig  a  nail,"  ars' 
ise,  "agus  leig  do  sglos."  "  Ni  mi  sin,"  ars  esan,  "cha  'n  'eil 
ach  am  bas  a  feitheamh  orm  co  dhiu."  Shuidh  e  sios  l&imh 
rithe.  Bha  e  cho  sglth,  agus  gu  'n  do  thuit  e  'na  chadal  ri  'taobh. 
'Nuair  a  dhuisg  e,  cha  robh  nighean  an  fhamhair  ri  fhaicinn  ;  ach 
bha  bhathaich  cho  glan  cairte  's  gu  'n  ruitheadh  ubhall  6ir  bho 
cheann  gu  ceann  dhith.  'Steach  thigear  am  famhair,  's  thubhairt 
e,  "  Chairt  thu  'm  bathaich,  a  mhic  an  righ."  "  Chairt  mi,"  ars' 
esan.  "Chairt  neach  eiginn  i,"  ars'  am  famhair.  "Cha  do 
chairt  thus'  i  co  dhiu,"'  thubhairt  mac  an  righ.  "  Seadh ! 
Seadh!"  ars'  am  famhair,  "  bhon  a'  bha  thu  co  tapaidh  an 
diugh,  gheibh  thu  gus  an  am  so  am  maireach  gu  tubhadh  a  bhath- 
aich so  le  cloimh  e6in  gun  da  ite  air  an  aon  dath."  Bha  mac  an 
righ  air  a  chois  roi'n  ghrein.  Ghlac  e  a  bhogha  's  a  bhalg-saigh- 
ead  a  mharbhadh  nan  eun.  Thug  e  'm  monadh  air,  ach  ma 
thug,  cha  robh  na  h-eoin  cho  furasda  ri  'm  faotainn.  Bha  e  a 
ruith  'nan  deigh,  gus  an  robh  am  fallus  'ga  'dhalladh.  Mu 
mheadhon-la  co  'thigeadh  ach  nighean  an  fhamhair.  "Tha  thu 
ga'd'  phianadh,  a  mhic  an  righ,"  ars'  ise.  "  Tha  mi,"  thubhairt 
esan,  "  cha  do  thuit  ach  an  da  Ion  dubh  so,  agus  iad  air  aon 
dath."  "Thig  a  nail,  's  leig  do  sgios  air  a  chnocan  bhoidheach 
so,"  arsa  nighean  an  fhamhair.     "  'S  mi  tha  toileach,"  thubhairt 


CATH  NAN   EUN.  43 

esan.  Sinaoinich  e  gu  n  cobhaireadh  i  air  air  an  am  so  cuideachd. 
Shuidh  e  slos  laimh  rithe,  's  cha  b'fhad'  a  bha  e  'n  sin  gus  an  do 
thuit  e  'na  chadal ;  agns  a  nuair  a  dhuisg  e,  bha  nighean  an  fham- 
hair air  falbh.  Smaoinich  e  tilleadh  thun  an  tighe,  's  faicear  am 
bathaich  tughte  leis  na  h-itean.  'Nuair  a  thainig  am  fambair 
dhachaidh  thubhairt  e,  "  Thubh  thu  'm  bathaich,  a  mhic  an 
rlgh."  "Thubh  mi,"  ars'  esan.  "Thubh  cuid-eiginn  i,"  ars' 
am  famhair.  "Cha  do  thubh  thusa  i,"  arsa  mac  an  rlgh. 
"  Seadh  !  Seadh  !"  ars'  am  famhair.  "  'Nis,"  ars'  am  famhair, 
"tha  craobh  ghiubhas  ri  taobh  an  loch  ud  shios  agus  tha  nead 
pioghaid  'na  mullach. "  "  Na  h-uibhean  a  gheibh  thu  anns  an 
nead,  feumaidh  iad  a  bhi  agamsa  gu  mo  cheud-lon,  gaidh  ;  cha  'n 
fhaod  a  h-aon  a  bhith  sgainte  no  briste,  agus  's  e  coig  a  tha  'san 
nead. "  Moch  'sa  mhaduinn,  dh'fhalbh  mac  an  righ  far  an  robh 
a  chraobh,  's  cha  robh  sin  duilich  amas  oirre.  Cha  robh  a  leith- 
bhreac  'sa  choill'  air  fad.  Bho  'bonn  gu  ruig  a  ceud  mheanglan, 
c6ig  ceud  troidh.  Bha  mac  an  rlgh  a  dol  ceithir  thimchioll  air 
a  chraoibh.  Thainig  ise  'bha  daonnan  a  deanamh  furtachd  dha  : 
"  Tha  thu  air  call  craiceann  nan  lamb,  's  nan  cas,  a  mhic  an  rlgh." 
11  Ach  tha,"  ars'  esan,  "  cha  luaithe  shuas  na  shios  mi."  "  Cha 
'n  am  fuireachd  so,"  arsa  nighean  an  fhamhair.  Snath  i'  meur 
an  deigh  meur,  gus  an  d'  rinn  i  faradh  do  mhac  an  righ  gu  dol 
suas  do  nead  na  pioghaid.  'Nuair  a  bha  e  aig  an  nead,  thubhairt 
ise,  "Deancabhag  a  nuas  leis  na  h-uibheam,  oir  tha  anail  m' 
athar  a'  losgadh  mo  dhrorna. "  Leis  a  chabhaig  a  bh'  air-san,  dh' 
fhag  ise  'ludag  am  mullach  na  craoibhe.  "Nis,"  ars'  ise, 
"  th£id  thu  dhachaidh  leis  na  h-uibhean  gu  luath,  agus 
gheibh  thu  mise  ri  phosadh  a  nochd  ma  dh'aithnicheas  tu  mi  ; 
bithidh  mis'  agus  mo  dha  phiuthar  air  ar  n-eideadh  anns  an  aon 
trusgan,  agus  air  ar  deanamh  coltach  ri'  cheile.  Ach  seall  thus 
ormsa  'nuair  a  their  m'  athair  'falbh  le  d'  mhnaoi,  a  mhic  an 
rlgh  ;  agus  chi  thu  laimh  gun  ludag."  Thug  e  na  h-uibhean  do'n 
fhamhair.  "Seadh!  Seadh!"  ars'  am  famhair,  "bi'  deanamh 
deas  chum  do  phosadh."  'S  ann  an  sin  a  bha  bhanais,  's  b'e 
bhanais  i,  famhairean  's^daoine^  uaisle,  's  mac  rlgh  na  Cathair 
uaine  'nam  meadhon.  Chaidh  am  posadh,  's  thoisich  an 
damhsa,  's  b'e  sin  an  damhsa.  Bha  tigh  an  fhamhair  air  chrith 
bho  'mhullach  gu  'bhonn.  Ach  thainig  am  dol  a  luidhe,  's 
thubhairt  am  famhair,  "Tha  'n  t-am  dhuit  dol  a  luidhe, 
a  mhic  rlgh  na  Cathair  Shlomain ;  thoir  leat  do  bhean  as  am 
meadhon  sin."     Chuir  ise  mach  a  laimh  dheth  'n  robh  an  ludaor 


44  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

agus  rug  e  oirre  air  laimh.  "  Dh'  amais  ttm  gu  maith  air  an  am 
so  cuideachd,  ach  cha  'n'eil  fios  nach  coinnich  sinn  thu  air  d5igh 
eile,"  thubhairt  am  famhair.  Ach  a  luidhe  chaidh  iad.  "A 
nis,"  thuirt  ise  ;  "cadal  cha  dean  thu,  air  neo  basaichidh  tu  ; 
feumaidh  sinn  teicheadh  gu  luath,  oir  gun  teagamh  marbhaidh 
m"  athair  thu."  A  mach  ghabh  iad,  agus  air  an  loth  dhuinn  a 
bha  anns  an  stabull,  chaidh  iad.  "  Dean  socair  beagan,"  ars'  ise, 
"agus  cluichidh  mise  cleas  air  an  t-seann  laoch."  Leum  i  stigb, 
agus  ghearr  i  ubhall  'na  naoi  earannan,  's  chuir,  i  da  earrann 
dhith  aig  ceann  na  leapa,  agus  da  earrann  aig  casan  na  leapa  ;  da 
earrann  aig  an  dorus-chadha,  agus  da  earann  aig  an  dorus  mhor, 
agus  a  h-aon  air  taobh  a  mach  an  tighe.  Dhusig  am  famhair, 
agus  ghlaodh  e,  "  'M  bheil  sibhse  'nur  cadal."  "Cha  'n  'eil 
fathast,"  ars'  an  ubhall  a  bha  aig  ceann  na  leapa.  An  ceann 
ghreis  ghlaodh  e  rithist,  "Cha  'n  'eil  fathast,"  ars'  an  ubhall  a 
bha  aig  casan  na  leapa.  Greis  an  deigh  sin,  ghlaodh  e  rithist, 
"Cha  'n  'eil  fathast,"  thubhairt  an  ubhal  aig  dorus  a  chadha. 
Ghlaodh  am  famhair  a  rithist,  's  fhreagair  an  ubhal  a  bha  aig  an 
dorus  mhor.  "  Tha  sibh  a'  dol  ni's  faide  uam,"  ars'  am  famhair. 
"  Cha  'n  'eil  fathast,"  ars'  an  ubhal  a  bha  air  taobh  a  mach  an 
doruis.  "Tha  sibh  a  teichadh,"  ars'  am  famhair.  Leum  am 
famhair  air  a  chasan,  agus  gu  ruig  an  leabaidh  chaidh  e;  ach  bha 
i  gu  fuar,  fas.  "Tha  cuilbheartan  mo  nighean  fein  a  feuchainn 
rium,"  thubhairt  am  famhair.  Air  an  toir  ghabh  e,"  Am  beul 
an  latha,  thuirt  nighean  an  fhamhair,  "  Gu  'n  robh  anail  a 
h-athair  a  losgadh  a  droma."  "  Cuir  do  lamh  gu  luath,"  ars' 
ise,  "annan  cluais  na  loth  dhuinn,  agus  ge  be  ni  gheibh  thu 
innte  tilg  'na  d'  dheigh  e."  "Tha  bior  do  sgitheach  an  so," 
thubhairt  esan.  "  Tilg  as  do  dheigh  e."  Cha  luaithe  rinn  e  so, 
na  bha  fichead  mile  do  sgitheach  cho  tiugh  ann  's  gum  bu 
ghann  do  neas  dol  troimhe.  Tbainig  am  famhair  'na  dhian  's 
siud  e  'n  coinneamh  a  chinn  's  amhach  anns  an  sgitheach  !  ! 
"Tha  cuilbheartan  mo  nighean  fein  an  so  mar  an  ceudna," 
thubhairt  am  famhair;  "ach  na  'm  biodh  agamsa  mo  thuagh 
mhor  's  mo  chore  choille  an  so,  cha  b'  fhad'  a  bhithinn  a  dean- 
amh  rathad  troimhe  so."  Thill  e  dhachaidh  air  son  na  tuaidh 
m5ire  's  na  core  choille,  agus  gun  teagamh  cha  robh  e  fad  a' 
deanamh  rathad  troi  'n  sgitheach.  "  Fagaidh  mi  'n  tuadh  's  a 
chore  choille  'n  so,  gus  am  till  mi,"  ars'  esan.  "Ma  dh' 
fhagas,  thuirt  feannag  a  bha  ann  an  craobh,"  goididh  sinne  iad." 
"  Ni   sibh    sin   fhein,"   ars'   am    famhair,    "ach    cuiridh    mise 


CATH  NAN   EUN.  45 

dhachaidh  iad."  Thill  e  agus  dh'  fhag  e  iad  aig  an  tigh.  Ann 
an  teas  an  lntha  mhothaich  ise  anail  a  h'athar  a  losgadh  a  droma. 
"  Cuir  do  mheur  ann  an  cluais  na  lotha,  agus  tilg  na  gheibh  thu 
innte  as  do  dheigh.''  Fhuair  e  sgealb  do  chlach  ghlais  's  thilg  e 
as  a  dheigh  i.  Ann  am  prioba  na  sula,  bha  fichead  mile  do 
chreag  mh6r  ghlas  air  leud  's  air  airde  as  an  d&gh.  Thainig  am 
famhar  'na  dheann,  ach  seachad  air  a'  chreag  cha  robh  comas  dha 
dol.  '"Se  cuilbheartan  mo  nighinn  f&n  rud  as  cruaidh'  a 
thachair  riamh  rium,"  ars'  am  famhair.  "Ach  na  'm  biodh 
agamsa  mo  gheamhlag  's  mo  mhatag  mh5r.  cha  b'  fhada  a 
bhithinn  a  deanamh  rathad  roitnh  'n  chreig  so  cuideachd." 
B'fheudar  tilleadh  air  an  son,  agus  b'e  f&n  gille  sgoltadh  nan 
clach.  Cha  robh  e  fada  a  deanamh  rathad  troimh  'n  chreag. 
M  Fagaidh  mi  an  acfhuinn  an  so,  's  cha  thill  mi  tuillidh."  "  Ma 
dh' fhagas,"  ars' an  fheannag,  "goididh  sinn' iad."  "Tha  sin 
's  a  roghainn  agad  ;  cha  'n'eil  tlom  tilleadh  ann."  Ann  am 
bristeadh  na  faire  thubhairt  nighean  an  fhamhair,  "  gu'n  robh  i 
mothachainn  anail  a  h-athar  a  losgadh  a  droma."  "  Seall  ann  an 
cluais  na  lotha,  a  mhic  an  righ,  air  neo  tha  sinn  cailte."  Rinn  e 
so,  agus  's  e  aotroman  Ian  uisge  a  bha  'na  cluais  air  an  am  so. 
"Tilg'na  d'  dheigh  e,"arsa  nighean  an  fhamhair.  Rinn  e  so, 
agus  bha  loch  uisge  fichead  mile  air  fad  's  air  leud  'nan  deigh. 
Thainig  am  famhair  air  aghaidh,  ach  leis  an  astar  a  bh'  aige,  bha 
e  ann  am  meadhoin  an  loch,  agus  chaidh  e  foidhe,  's  cha  d'  eirich 
e  ni's  md.  Air  an  ath  latha,  bha  a  chuideachd  6g  air  tighinn  am 
fradharc  tigh  athar-san.  "Nis."  ars'  ise,  "  tha  m'athair  baite, 
's  cha  chuir  e  dragh  tuillidh  oirn.  "Ach  mu  'n  d'  theid  sinn  ni 
's  faide,"  ars'  ise,  "  rach  thusa  gu  tigh  t'athar,  agus  innis  gn 
'bheil  mo  leithid-sa  agad  ;  ach  am  bonn  a  tha  agad  ri  'dheanamh, 
na  leig  le  duine  na  creutair  do  phogadh  ;  oir  ma  ni  thu  sin,  cha 
bhi  cuimhn'  agad  gu  'faca  tu  riamh  mi."  Chuir  gach  neach  mar 
a  bha  tachairt  air  failte  is  furan  air,  's  thug  e  aithne  d'a  athair  's 
d'a  mhathair,  gun  esan  a  phogadh  ;  ach  mar  a  bha  'n  tubaist  'an 
dan,  bha  sean  mhial-chu  do  ghalla  'steach  's  dh'  aithnich  i  e,  's 
leum  i  suas  ri  bheul,  agus  na  dheigh  sin  dhi-chuimhnich  e  nigh- 
ean an  fhamhair.  Bha  ise  'na  suidhe  aig  taobh  an  tobair  mar  a 
dh'  fhag  e  i,  ach  cha  robh  mac  an  righ  a'  tighinn.  Ann  am  beul 
na  h-oidhche,  streap  i  suas  ann  an  craobh  do  dharach  a  bha'ri 
taobh  an  tobair.  Luidh  i  ann  an  gobhall  na  craoibhe  fad 
na  h'oidhche  sin.  Bha  tigh  aig  greusaiche  dluth  do  'n 
tobar,  agus  mu  mheadhon  la  a'  maireach,  dh'  iarr  an  greusaich 


46  WEST   HIGHLAND    TALES. 

air  a  mhnaoi,  i  'dhol  airson  deoch  dha  as  an  tobar.  'Nuair 
a  rainig  bean  a  ghreusaiche  an  tobar,  's  a  churmaic  i  faileas 
na  t6  a  bha  anns  a  chraoibh,  air  saoilsinn  dh'ise  gu  'm  b'e 
faileas  fein  a  bh'  ann  ('s  cha  do  shaoil  leatha  gu  so  gu  'n  robh  i  co 
breagha),  thug  i  tilgeil  do'n  chuman  a  bha  'na  laimh,  's  bhrist  i 
ris  an  talamh  e,  's  thug  i  'n  tigh  oirre  gun  chuinneag  gun  uisge  ! 
"  Cait'  am  bheil  an  t-uisge,  a  bhean,"  thubhairt  an  greusaiche. 
"A  bhodaich  leibidich,  shuaraich,  gun  mhaise,  dh'  fhan  mi 
tuilidh  's  fada  'n  am  thraill  uisge  's  connaidh  agad."  "Tha  mi 
fein  a  smaoineachadh,  a  bhean,  gu'n  deach  thu  air  bhoile  ;  falbh 
thusa  a  nighean,  gu  luath  's  faigh  deoch  do  d'  athair.  Dh'  fhalbh 
a  nighean,  agus  air  an  doigh  cheudna  thachair  dhi.  Cha  do 
shaoil  leatha  gu  so  gu  'n  robh  i  co  tlachdmhor,  's  thug  i  'n  tigh 
oirre.  "  Nios  an  deoch,"  ars'  a  h-athair.  "A  pheallaig  bhod- 
iach  nam  brog,  an  saoil  thu  gu  'bheil  mise  gu  bhi  'm  thraill  uisge 
agad. "  Smaoinich  an  greusaiche  bochd  gu  'n  d'  thug  iad  car  as 
am  beachd,  's  dh  'fhalbh  e  fein  do  'n  tobar.  Chunnaic  e  faileas 
na  gruagaiche  san  tobar,  's  dh'  amhairc  e  suas  do  'n  chraoibh  's 
faicear  am  boirionnach  bu  bhreagha  a  chunnaic  e  riamh.  " 'S 
corrach  do  shuidheachan  ach  's  maiseach  do  ghnuis,"  thubhairt 
an  greusaiche.  "  Thig  a  nuas,  oir  tha  feum  dhuit  car  iiine  ghearr 
'nam  thigh-sa."  Thuig  an  greusaiche  gu'm  b'e  so  am  faileas  a 
chuir  a  chuideachdsan  air  bhoile.  Thug  an  greusaich  i  gu  thigh 
's  thubhairt  e  rithe,  "nach  robh  aige-san  ach  bothan  bochd,  ach 
bothan  bochd,  ach  gu  'm  faigheadh  i  a  cuid  dhe  na  bh'  ann." 
An  ceann  latha  na  dha,  'na  dheigh  so,  thainig  triiiir  fhleasgach 
uasal  gu  tigh  a  ghreusaiche,  airson  brogan  a  dheanamh  dhoibh, 
's  an  righ  air  tighinn  dhachaidh,  agus  e  'dol  a  phosadh.  Ach 
suil  do  'n  d'  thug  na  neasgaicb,  chunnaic  iad  nighean  an  fhamh- 
air,  's  ma  chunnaic,  cha  'n  fhac  iad  riamh  te  co  bfridheach  rithe. 
"  'S  ann  agad  a  tha  'n  nighean  bhoidheach  an  so,"  thubhairt  na 
fleasgaich  ris  a  ghreusaiche.  "Ach  cha  'n  e  mo  nighean-sa  th' 
ann."  "Naile!"  arsa  fear  dhiubh,  "bheirinn  fern  ceiid  punnd 
air  son  a  posadh."  Thubhairt  an  dithis  eile  a  leithid  cheudna. 
Thubhairt  au  greusaiche  bochd,  "  nach  robh  gnothuch  aige-san 
ri  a  dheanamh  rithe."  "Ach,"  ars'  iadsan,  "farraid  thusa  dhith 
'n  nochd,  agus  leig  fios  thugainne  'maireach."  Nuair  a  dh' 
fhalbh  na  h'-uaislean,  dh'  fharraid  i  do'n  ghreusaiche,  "gu  de 
sud  a  bha  iad  ag  radh  mu  'm  dheibhinnse  ?  "  Dh'  innis  an  greu- 
saiche dhith.  "Falbh  'nan  deigh,"  ars'  ise,  "  posaidh  mi  fear 
aca  a  nochd  fern,  's  thugadh  e  leis  a  sporan  airgid."     Dh'  fhalbh 


CATH   NAN   EUN.  47 

an  greusaiche  'nan  d&gh,  's  dh'  innis  e  'n  sin  fein.  Thill  e'n 
mach.  Thug  e  ceud  punnd  do  'n  ghreusaiche,  air- son  tochar. 
"  Chaidh  i  a  luidhe,  agus  an  nair  a  bha  aodach  an  6ganaich  dheth, 
dh'  iarr  i  air  deoch  uisge  as  a  ch6rn  a  bha  air  a  bhord  air  taobh 
thall  an  t-seomair  ;  dh'  fhalbh  e,  ach  as  a'  sin  cha  d'  thigeadh  e 
fad  na  h'-oidhche,  is  greini  aig  air  an  t-soitheach  uisge."  "  Og- 
laich  thu,"  thubhairt  ise,  "  cairson  nach  dig  thu  a  luidhe  ?  "  ach 
as  a'  so  cha  diongadh  e,  gus  an  robh  an  latha  geal  am  maireach 
ann.  Thainig  an  greusaiche  gu  dorus  an  t-seomair,  agus  dh'  iarr 
i  air,  "an  slaodaire  ballaich  sin  a  thabhairt  air  falbh."  Dh' 
fhalbh  an  suiriche  so,  's  thug  'e  'n  tigh  air,  ach  cha  do  dh'  innis 
e  mar  dh'  uirich  dha  do  'n  dithis  eile.  Air  an  ath  oidhche, 
thainig  an  darna  fleasgach,  agus  air  an  doigh.  cheudna  nuair  a 
chaidh  i  a  luidhe,  "  Seall,"  thuirt  ise,  "  am  bheil  an  crann  air  an 
dorus."  Air  a  chrann  ghabh  a  lamhan  greim,  agus  as  a'  sin  cha 
d'  thigeadh  e  fad  na  h-oidhche,  as  a'  so  cha  d'  thigeadh  e  gu  latha 
geal  am  maireach.  Dh'  fhalbh  e  fo  sprochd  is  naire.  Coma  co 
dhiu,  cha  d'innis  e,  mar  thachair,  do  'n  fhleasgach  eile,  agus  air 
an  treas  oidhche,  thainig  am  fear  eile,  agus  mar  a  thachair  do'n 
dithis  eile  thachair  dha  ;  bha  cas  air  an  leabaidh  's  cas  eile  air  an 
urlar,  cha  d'thigeadh  's  cha  rachadh  e,  ach,  air  an  doigh  so  bha  e 
fad  na  h'oidhche.  Am  maireach  thug  e  'bhuinn  as,  's  cha  'n 
fhacas  e'  sealltainn  'na  dh&gh.  "Nis,"  arsa  'n  nighean  ris  a 
ghreusaiche,  "  's  leatsa  an  sporan  6ir,  cha  'n'eil  feum  agam-sa  air,'s 
ft-aird  thus'  e,  agus  cha  mbiosde  mis'  e,  airson  do  chaoimhneis 
dhomh. "  Bha  na  brogan  ullamh  aig  a  ghreusaiche,  agus  air  an 
latha  sin  fein,  bha  an  righ  gu  posadh.  Bha  'n  greusaiche  dol  do  'n 
chaisteal  le  brogan  nan  oganach,  's  thubhairt  an  nighean  ris  a 
ghreusaiche,  "  bu  mhaith  learn  sealladh  fhaicinn  dhe  mac  an  righ, 
mu  'm  posadh  e. "  "  Thig  leamsa,"  ars'  an  greusaiche,  "tha  mi 
mion  eolach  air  seirbheisich  a'  chaisteail,  agus  gheibh  thu  sealladh 
air  mac  an  righ  's  na  cuideachd  uile."  Agus  a  nuair  a  chunnaic 
na  h-uaislean  am  boireannacb  boidheach  a  bha  'n  so,  thug  iad  i 
do  sheomar  na  bainnse,  agus  li6n  iad  gloinne  flon  dhi.  'Nuair  a 
bha  i'  dol  a  dh'  61  na  bha  sa  ghloinne,  chaidh  lasair  suas  aiste, 
agus  leum  caiman  oir  's  caiman  airgid  as  a'  ghloinne.  Bha  iad 
ag  itealaich  mu  'n  cuairt,  'nuair  a  thuit  tri  ghrainnean  eorna  air 
an  urlar.  Leum  an  caiman  airgiod,  agus  ithear  sud.  Thubhairt 
an  caiman  oir  ris,  na'm  biodh  cuimhn'  agad  'nuair  a  chairt  mi  'm 
bathaich,  cha  'n  'itheadh  tu  siud  gun  chuid  a  thoirt 
dhomhsa.      A  rithist  thuit  tri  grainnean  e6rn'  eile,  's  leum  an 


48  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

caiman  airgiod  agus  ithear  siud  mar  an  ceudna.  "Na'mbith- 
eadh  cuimhn'  agad  'nuair  a  thubh  mi  'm  bathaich  cha  'x  itheadh 
tu  siud,  gun  mo  chuid  a  thoirt  dhomhsa,"  ars'  an  caiman  6ir. 
Tuitear  tri  ghra  innean  eile,  s  leum  an  caiman  airgiod,  agus  ithear 
siud  cuideachd.  "  Na  'm  biodh  cuimhn'  agad  'nuair  a  chreach 
mi  nead  na  pioghaid,  cha  Vitheadh  tu  siud  gun  mo  chuid  a 
thoirt  dhomhsa,"  ars'  an  caiman  dir.  "  Chaill  mi  'n  ludag  'gad' 
thabhairt  a  nuas,  agus  tha  i  dhlth  orm  fathast."  Chuimhnich 
mac  an  righ,  's  dh'  aitnich  e  co  a  bh'  aige.  Leum  e  far  an  robh 
i,  's  pbog  e  i  bho  laimh  gu  i  beul,  agus  a  nuair  a  thainig  an  sag- 
airt  phos  iad  an  darna  h-uair  !  !     Agus  dh'  fhag  mis'  an  sin  iad. 

Hector  Urquhart. 

2.  There  is  another  version  of  this  tale  current  in  Islay.  It 
was  taken  down  from  the  recitation  of  Ann  Darroch  by  Hector 
Maclean.  It  is  called  the  "  Widow's  Son."  He  goes  to  seek 
his  fortune,  and  comes  to  a  giant's  house,  where  he  engages 
himself  as  servant  for  a  peck  of  gold  and  a  peck  of  silver.  He 
is  sent  first  to  cleanse  the  seven  byres  that  have  never  been 
cleansed  for  seven  years.  All  he  puts  out  at  one  door  comes  in 
at  the  other.  The  giant's  daughter  comes ;  he  promises  to 
marry  her,  and  she  says,  "Gather,  oh  shovel,  and  put  out,  oh 
grape,"  and  the  tools  work  of  themselves,  and  clear  the  byres. 
Next  he  has  to  thatch  the  byres  with  feathers,  no  quills  to  be 
upwards.  He  gets  ouly  one  feather,  and  the  giant's  daughter 
takes  three  grains  of  barley,  and  throws  them  on  the  roof.  The 
birds  of  the  air  gather,  and  thatch  the  byres  in  a  minute.  Next 
day  he  has  to  catch  the  steed  that  had  never  seen  a  blink  of 
earth  or  air.  The  girl  gives  him  a  little  rusty  bridle,  and  the 
steed  comes  and  puts  her  head  into  it.  She  makes  six  little 
cakes,  which  she  places  at  the  fire,  the  foot  water,  the  door  of 
the  chamber,  the  side  of  the  bed,  and  the  kitchen  door,  and  they 
mount  the  steed  and  ride  off.  The  giant  lies  down  and  calls  to 
his  daughter.  The  cakes  answer  till  there  are  none  left  to  reply. 
Then  he  rises,  takes  his  clothes,  his  boots,  and  his  sword  of 
light ;  he  makes  seven  miles  at  each  step  ;  he  sees  seven  miles 
by  the  light  of  the  sword — he  follows  ;  they  hear  him  coming  ; 
the  girl  gives  the  widow's  son  a  golden  apple,  and  tells  him  to 
throw  it  at  a  mole  on  her  father,  where<  alone  he  is  vulnerable  ; 
he  fears  that  he  will  miss  so  small  a  mark,  so  she  throws  it  her- 
self, and  the  giant  is  dead  in  an  instant. 


THE  BATTLE   OF  THE  BIRDS.  49 

They  reach  a  big  town.  He  is  told  to  kiss  nothing,  or  he  will 
forget  the  girl  and  his  promise.  A  big  dog  comes  to  meet  him, 
and  puts  his  paws  on  his  shoulder  and  kisses  him.  He  takes 
service  with  the  king,  and  at  last  he  is  to  be  married  to  the 
king's  daughter. 

She  takes  service  with  a  smith,  disguised  as  a  man,  and 
"comes  on  famously."  The  smith's  daughter  falls  in  love  with 
her,  and  wants  to  marry  her.  She  tells,  at  last,  that  she  is  a  girl 
in  search  of  her  own  lover.  On  a  day  of  days  the  smith  and  his 
daughter  and  his  servant  are  invited  to  the  wedding  of  the 
widow's  son  with  the  king's  daughter.  They  go,  and  the  giant's 
daughter  sets  a  golden  cock  and  a  silver  hen  on  the  board  before 
the  bridegroom.  She  takes  a  grain  of  barley  from  her  pocket 
and  throws  it  before  them.  The  cock  pecks  the  hen  and  eats  the 
barley  ;  and  the  hen  says,  "Gog,  Gog,  if  thou  hadst  mind  when 
I  cleansed  the  seven  byres  for  thee,  thou  wouldst  not  do  that  to 
me."  She  does  this  three  times,  and  the  birds  remind  him  of 
what  has  been  done  ;  then  he  knows  her,  leaps  over  the  board, 
catches  her  by  the  arm,  leaves  the  king's  daughter,  and  marries 
her. 

3.  There  is  another  version  current  at  Inverary,  repeated  to 
me  by  a  stable  boy  who  was  then  employed  at  the  ferry  of  St. 
Katharines,  and  who  repeated  it  in  Gaelic  while  rowing  the  boat 
to  Inverary.  It  began  thus  : — I  will  tell  you  a  story  about  the 
wren.  There  was  once  a  farmer  who  was  seeking  a  servant, 
and  the  wren  met  him,  and  he  said,  "  What  art  thou  seeking 
for ?  "  "I  am  seeking  a  servant,"  said  the  farmer.  "Wilt  thou 
take  me?"  said  the  wren.  "Thee,  thou  poor  creature; 
what  good  wouldst  thou  do  ? "  "Try  thou  me,"  said  the  wren. 
So  he  engaged  him,  and  the  first  work  he  set  him  to  was  thresh- 
ing in  the  barn.  The  wren  threshed  (what  did  he  thresh  with  ? 
— a  flail  to  be  sure),  and  he  knocked  off  one  grain.  A  mouse  came 
out  and  she  eats  that.  "I'll  praise  thee,  and  don't  do  that 
again,"  said  the  wren.  He  struck  again,  and  he  knocked  off  two 
grains.  Out  came  the  mouse  and  she  eats  that.  So  they  arranged 
a  contest  that  they  might  know  which  was  the  strongest,  and 
there  was  neither  mouse  nor  rat  on  earth  that  did  not  gather, 
nor  was  there  bird  under  heaven  that  did  not  come  to  the  battle. 
The  son  of  a  gentleman  heard  of  the  fight,  and  he  came  also,  but 
he  slept  before  it  was  over,  and  when  he  awoke  there  was  neither 
"  mouse  nor  rat  to  be  seen ;  there  was  but  one  great  black  raven." 

N 


50 


WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 


The  raven  and  the  man  agreed  to  travel  together,  and  they  come 
to  an  inn.  The  gentleman  goes  in,  but  the  raven  is  sent  to  the 
stable,  because  the  porters  and  waiters  object  to  the  like  of  a 
raven.  Here  he  picks  out  all  the  horses'  eyes,  and  in  the  morn- 
ing there  is  a  disturbance.  The  gentleman  pays  and  scolds,  and 
they  go  to  another  inn,  where  the  raven  is  sent  to  the  byre,  and 
picks  out  all  the  cows'  eyes.  Then  they  part.  The  raven  takes 
out  a  book,  and  gives  it  to  his  companion  with  a  warning  not  to 
open  it  till  he  gets  home  to  his  father's  house.  He  breaks  the 
charge,  looks,  and  finds  himself  in  a  giant's  house.  There  he 
takes  service,  and  is  sent  to  clean  the  byre.  It  had  seven  doors, 
it  had  not  been  cleaned  for  seven  years,  and  all  that  he  put  out 
at  one  door  came  in  at  the  other.  Then  came  the  giant's  red- 
haired  daughter,  and  said,  "If  thou  wilt  marry  me  I  will  help 
thee."  He  consents  ;  and  she  sets  all  the  grapes  and  forks 
about  the  place  to  work  of  themselves,  and  the  byre  is  cleansed. 
Then  the  giant  sets  him  to  thatch  the  byre  with  feathers,  and 
every  feather  he  put  on  the  wind  blew  away.  Then  came  the 
giant's  girl,  and  the  promise  was  repeated ;  and  she  played  a 
whistle  that  she  had,  and  he  laid  his  head  in  her  lap,  and  every 
bird  there  wras  came,  and  they  thatched  the  byre. 

Then  the  giant  sent  him  to  the  hill  to  fetch  the  gray  horse 
that  was  seven  years  old  ;  and  she  told  him  that  he  would  meet 
two  black  dogs,  and  she  gave  him  a  cake  of  tallow  and  half  a 
cheese,  and  a  tether ;  and  she  said  that  the  dogs  and  the  horse 
would  kill  him  unless  he  gave  the  dogs  the  food,  and  put  the 
tether  on  the  horse.  When  the  dogs  ran  at  him,  he  put  the 
tallow  in  the  mouth  of  one,  and  the  cheese  in  the  throat  of  the 
other ;  and  when  the  horse  came  down  the  hill  to  kill  him  with 
his  mouth  open,  he  put  the  tether  in  his  mouth  and  he  followed 
him  quietly  home.  "Now,"  said  she,  "we  will  be  off."  So 
they  mounted  and  rode  away,  but  first  she  took  four  apples, 
three  she  placed  about  the  house,  which  spoke  as  in  the  other 
tales,  the  fourth  she  took  with  her.  When  the  last  of  the  apples 
had  spoken,  the  giant  rose  and  followed.  Then  the  girl  felt  her 
father's  breath  on  her  back,  and  said,  "Search  in  the  horse's 
ear."  And  he  found  a  twig.  "  Throw  it  behind  you,"  said  she  ; 
and  he  threw  it,  and  it  became  the  biggest  wood  that  ever  was. 
The  giant  came,  and  returned  for  his  ' '  big  axe  and  his  little 
axe,"  and  he  hewed  his  wTay  through  ;  and  the  red-haired  girl 
said  that  she  felt  her  father's  breath.     "Now,"  said  she  to  the 


THE   BATTLE   OF   THE   BIRDS.  51 

king's  son  (here  the  narrator  remembered  that  he  was  a  prince 
instead  of  a  young  farmer),  "  see  in  the  filly's  ear"  (here  he  re- 
membered that  it  was  a  filly).  So  he  looked,  and  found  a  bit  of 
stone,  threw  it,  and  it  became  a  mountain.  The  giant  came, 
looked  for  his  big  hammer  and  his  little  hammer,  and  smashed 
his  way  through  the  hill,  and  she  felt  his  breath  again.  Then 
he  sought  in  the  ear,  and  found  a  (something)  of  water,  and 
threw  it,  and  it  became  a  loch  of  fresh  water.  The  giant  came, 
and  returned  for  his  big  scoop  and  his  little  scoop,  and  baled  the 
water  out,  and  he  was  after  them  again.  Then  she  said,  "My 
father  is  coming  now,  and  he  will  kill  us.  Get  off  the  filly, 
king's  son,"  and  he  got  off,  and  she  gave  him  the  apple,  and  she 
said,  "  Now  put  it  under  the  filly's  foot."  And  he  did  so  ;  and 
the  filly  put  her  foot  on  it,  and  it  smashed  to  bits  ;  and  the 
giant  fell  over  dead,  for  his  heart  was  in  the  apple.  So  they 
went  on  to  his  father's  house,  and  she  was  made  house-keeper, 
for  they  were  not  married  ;  then  in  a  short  time  she  became 
house-maid,  then  kitchen-maid,  and  then  hen-wife  ;  and  then 
the  king  was  to  be  married  (he  had  now  become  a  king)  ;  and 
then  first  the  porter,  then  the  head  waiter,  and  theu  some  other 
servant,  came  and  courted  her.  They  promise  to  let  her  in  to 
the  wedding,  and  give  her  a  fine  dress  each  ;  and  each  in  turn  is 
admitted  into  the  hen-wife's  room  ;  but  the  first  goes  to  put  the 
lid  on  the  kettle,  and  is  fast  by  the  hands  all  night ;  the  second 
is,  in  like  manner,  fast  to  a  window  which  he  goes  to  shut ;  and 
the  feet  of  the  third  stick  to  the  floor.  Then  she  comes  to  the 
porter  in  her  dirty  dress.  He  drives  her  away,  but  he  is  at  last 
obliged  to  give  her  a  fine  dress,  and  let  her  in.  Then  she  comes 
to  the  head  waiter,  who  does  the  same.  Then  she  comes  to  the 
servant,  who  does  the  same,  but  is  forced  to  let  her  in  to  the 
wedding.  Then  she  takes  out  a  golden  cock  and  a  silver  hen, 
which  she  had  brought.  She  sets  them  on  the  floor,  and  they 
talk.  "  Dost  thou  remember  how  I  cleansed  byre  ?  Dost  thou 
mind  how  I  thatched  the  barn  ?  Dost  thou  remember  how  I 
saved  thy  life?  "  And  so  on,  till  they  repeat  the  whole  story, 
reminding  the  king  how  she  had  been  the  house-keeper,  house- 
maid, and  hen-wife,  and  faithful  throughout.  And  the  king 
said,  "Stop,  I  will  marry  thee."  And  when  she  said  that,  she 
showed  the  fine  dresses  that  she  had  got  from  the  porter,  and 
the  head  -waiter,  etc.,  and  they  were  married  ;  and  if  they  have 
not  died  since  then,  they  are  alive,  merry,  and  rich. 


52  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

4.  The  stable  boy  said  that  he  had  learned  this  from  a  very 
old  man,  now  living  near  Lochgilphead,  who  could  tell  it  much 
better  than  he  could.  A  gentleman  at  the  inn  said  that  an  old 
woman,  now  dead,  used  to  tell  something  like  this,  and  that  her 
raven  was  the  son  of  the  king  of  Lochlin.  The  old  woman  lived 
near  Dalmally,  and  her  daughter  is  said  to  be  there  still,  but  I 
have  been  unable  to  find  her  out.  On  asking  for  her,  and  giving 
my  reason,  I  was  told  by  a  waiter  that  "light  had  dawned  in 
that  district,  and  that  ignorance  was  banished." 

5.  A  very  similar  story  is  well  known  in  South  Uist,  and  a 
fragment  of  it  is  still  told  in  Sutherland. 

6.  The  Uist  story  told  to  me  by  Donald  MacCraw,  as  we  walked 
along  the  road  last  September,  is  called  "  Mother's  Blessing." 
The  lad,  so  called  because  he  is  so  good,  goes  to  seek  his  fortune. 
He  plays  cards,  and  wins  from  some  gentles  ;  then  stakes  seven 
years'  service  against  so  many  thousands,  and  loses  to  a  black  dog 
who  comes  in  with  a  looking-glass  on  every  paw.  He  goes  to  serve 
the  dog,  and  is  shown  a  cave  where  there  are  a  hundred  stakes 
and  ninety-nine  heads  on  them.  He  is  set  to  cleanse  the  byre, 
to  catch  the  steed,  and  to  rob  the  nest.  The  black  dog's  daughter 
helps.  She  throws  out  one  spadeful,  and  the  litter  flies  out, 
"seven  spadefuls  at  each  of  seven  doors  for  every  one  he  throws 
out."  She  gives  a  rusty  bridle  for  the  steed.  She  strikes  the  sea 
with  a  rod,  and  makes  a  way  to  the  island  where  the  nest  is,  and 
gives  her  toes  to  make  a  ladder  to  climb  up.  He  leaves  one,  and 
offers  one  of  his  own  instead.  She  refuses,  because  "her  father 
always  washes  her  feet  himself. "  They  ride  off  on  the  horse — the 
dog  and  his  company  follow.  A  wood  grows  and  a  river  flows 
from  things  found  in  the  horse's  ear,  and  the  dog  is  defeated  but 
not  killed.  She  gives  the  lad  a  treasure  which  is  found  under  a 
tuft  of  rushes.  He  goes  home,  speaks  to  his  mother,  and  forgets 
all.  He  builds  a  palace,  and  is  to  be  married  to  a  lady,  but  she 
is  so  proud  that  she  will  have  the  widow's  hut  pulled  down. 
Mother's  Blessing  will  not,  so  the  match  is  off,  but  after  a  time  it 
is  on  again.  The  door  opens,  and  in  walks  the  black  dog  smoking 
a  pipe.  He  goes  to  the  priest  and  forbids  the  ceremony.  The 
priest  says,  "Begone  to  thine  own  place  down  below."  "It's 
many  a  long  day  since  thou  art  wanted  there,"  says  the  dog.  The 
priest  defies  all  fiends,  and  will  marry  the  pair.  The  dog  says, 
"If  I  tell  all  I  know  thou  wilt  not. "  Then  he  whispers,  and  the 
priest  is  silenced.     Then  he  brings  in  a  fine  gentleman,  and  says 


THE   BATTLE   OF   THE   BIRDS.  53 

to  the  bride — "  There  is  thy  first  lover;  marry  him."  And  they 
are  married  then  and  there.  The  dog  brings  in  his  own  daugh- 
ter ;  Mother's  Blessing  marries  her,  and  the  dog  danced  at  the 
wedding  with  the  priest.  MacCraw  said  there  was  something 
left  out  which  his  informant  would  not  tell. 

7.  I  have  received  yet  another  version  of  this  tale,  very  well 
written  in  Gaelic,  from  John  Dewar,  who,  according  to  his  own 
account  of  himself,  is  now  (October  1859)  residing  in  Glendaruail, 
and  is  about  to  proceed  to  Roseneath,  where  he  used  to  get  em- 
ployment in  making  stobbs  for  the  fences.  He  heads  his  story — 
"  Tales  of  the  Gael  in  the  Winter  Nights,"  and  promises  to  send 
more.  Uirsgealn  nan  Gael  s'  na  oidhchenan  geamhraidh. 
— His  Gaelic  spelling  is  rather  phonetic — 

He  heard  it  from  his  mother,  told  nearly  as  the  stable-boy  gave 
it ;  and  has  heard  it  lately  in  Glendaruail.  He  first  heard  an 
abridgement  four  or  five  years  before  1812  or  1813,  when  he 
learned  this  from  Mary  MacCalum,  a  native  of  Glen  Falloch,  at 
the  head  of  Loch  Lomond. 

It  begins  with  a  quarrel  between  a  mouse  and  a  wren  in  a  barn 
about  a  grain  of  oats,  which  the  mouse  will  eat.  The  wren 
brings  his  twelve  birds — the  mouse  her  tribe.  The  wren  says, 
"Thou  hast  thy  tribe  with  thee  " — "As  well  as  myself, "  says  the 
mouse.  The  mouse  sticks  out  her  leg  proudly,  and  the  wren 
breaks  it  with  his  flail.  The  creatures  of  the  plain  and  of  the  air 
all  joined  the  quarrel,  and  there  was  a  pitched  battle  on  a  set  day. 
They  fought  the  battle  in  a  field  above  a  king's  house ;  and  the  fight 
was  so  fierce,  that  there  were  left  but  a  raven  and  a  snake.  The 
king's  son  looked  out  of  a  window,  and  saw  the  snake  twined  round 
the  raven's  neck,  and  the  raven  holding  the  snake's  throat  in  his 
beak — gob — and  neither  dared  to  let  go.  Both  promised  friend- 
ship for  help,  and  the  king's  son  slew  the  serpent — Nathair. 

The  raven  lived  for  a  year  and  a  day  in  the  palace,  then  took 
the  king's  son  hunting  for  the  first  time,  and  when  he  was  tired, 
carried  him.  "And  he  put  his  hands  about  the  raven  before  his 
wings,  and  he  hopped  with  him  over  nine  Bens,  and  nine  Glens, 
and  nine  Moors. "  They  go  to  the  three  sisters,  and  the  king's 
son  gets  hospitality,  because  he  comes  from  the  land  where  the 
birds  set  the  battle,  and  brings  news  of  the  raven,  who  is  yet 
alive,  and  lived  with  him  for  a  year  and  a  day.  Each  day  the 
number  of  glens,  and  hills,  and  moors  passed  over,  falls  from  nine 
to  six  and  three.     The  same  thing  is  said  by  each  of  the  three 


54  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

sisters  :  "  That  is  a  year  and  a  day  for  thee  in  this  place,  and  a 
piece  in  thy  purse  on  the  day  when  thou  goest ;"  but  he  keeps 
tryst,  and  returns  to  the  raven.  On  the  third  day  came  a  mist, 
and  the  raven  was  not  to  be  found ;  but  when  the  king's  son  was 
nearly  beat,  he  looked  over  a  rock,  and  saw  Fear  leadanach 

BU1DHE   BOIDHEACH   AGUS   CIS,   OIR  ANSA   N'  DARNA   LAIMH,  AGUS 

CiR  airgid  san  laimh  eile,  a  beautiful  yellow  ringletted  man, 
with  a  golden  comb  in  the  one  hand,  and  a  silver  comb  in  the 
other,  who  asked  if  he  would  take  him  instead  of  the  raven.  He 
would  not,  "nor  half-a-dozen  such."  So  the  yellow  ringletted 
man  told  him  that  he  was  the  Fitheach  crom  dubh — the  black 
humpy  raven  that  was  laid  under  spells  by  a  bad  druidh  that 
knew  how  to  put  under  spells.  Hs  had  been  set  free  by  coming 
to  his  father's  house  with  the  king's  son.  Then  he  gave  him  a 
book,  and  told  him  to  go  with  the  wind  the  way  it  might  blow, 
and  to  look  in  the  book  when  he  wished  to  see  his  father's  house, 
but  always  from  a  hill  top. 

The  king's  son  soon  got  tired,  and  looked  in  the  book  at  the 
bottom  of  a  glen,  and  saw  his  father's  house  at  the  bottom  of  a 
peat  hag,  with  all  the  doors  and  windows  shut,  and  no  way  to  get 
to  it. 

Then  came  a  giant,  who  shewed  him  the  way  for  the  promise 
of  his  first  son.  He  shewed  him  his  father's  house  on  the  top  of 
a  hill,  with  each  door  and  window  open,  aud  got  the  promise. 
"And  it  was  the  giant  who  had  cast  drutdheachd  upon  him, 
that  he  might  see  his  father's  house  in  the  bottom  of  a  peat  hag." 

"  Long  after  that  the  old  king  died,  and  the  son  got  the  kingly 
chair.  He  married  ;  he  had  a  son  ;  and  he  was  coming  on  to  be 
a  brave  lad,  and  they  were  dwelling  happily  in  the  castle.  The 
giant  came  to  them,  and  he  asked  that  the  king's  son  should  be 
sent  out  to  him  there,  and  they  were  not  very  willing  to  do  that; 
but  the  giant  said,  unless  they  sent  him  out,  that  the  highest 
stone  of  the  castle  would  be  the  lowest  presently ;  and  they 
thought  of  arraying  the  cook's  son  bravely,  and  sending  him  out; 
and  they  did  that.  The  giant  went  away  with  him,  and  he  had  a 
rod  in  his  hand,  and  when  they  were  a  little  bit  from  the  house, 
the  giant  asked  the  cook's  son — 'What  would  thy  father  do  with 
this  little  rod  if  he  had  it?'  'I  don't  know  myself,'  said  the  cook's 
son,  '  unless  he  would  beat  the  dogs  away  from  the  meat. '  With 
that  the  giant  understood  that  he  had  not  got  the  right  one,  and 
he  turned  back  with  him,  and  he  asked  that  the  king's  son  should 


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.  55 

be  sent  to  him.  Then  they  put  brave  clothes  on  the  son  of  the 
Stiuard,  and  they  sent  him  out  to  the  giant,  but  the  giant  was 
not  long  till  he  did  to  him  as  he  had  done  to  the  cook's  son,  and 
he  returned  with  him  full  of  heavy  wrath.  He  said  to  them,  un- 
less they  sent  out  to  him  there  the  king's  son,  that  the  highest 
stone  in  the  castle  would  be  the  lowest  presently,  and  that  he 
would  kill  all  who  were  within  ;  and  then  they  were  obliged  to 
send  out  the  king's  son  himself,  though  it  was  very  grievous  ; 
and  the  giant  went  away  with  him.  When  they  were  gone  a 
little  bit  from  the  castle,  the  giant  showed  him  the  rod  that  was 
in  his  hand  and  he  said — 'What  would  thy  father  do  with  this 
rod  if  he  were  to  have  it  ?  '  And  the  king's  son  said — '  My  father 
has  a  braver  rod  than  that.'  And  the  giant  asked  him — ■  Where 
will  thy  father  be  when  he  has  that  brave  (briagh)  rod?'  And 
the  king's  son  said — '  He  will  be  sitting  in  his  kingly  chair  ; '  and 
the  giant  understood  that  he  had  the  right  one.  [This  passage  is 
translated  entire,  because,  as  I  am  told,  there  is  a  similar  passage 
in  the  Volsung  tale.]  The  giant  took  him  home,  and  set  him  to 
clean  the  byre  that  had  not  been  cleansed  for  seven  years  ;  and  in 
case  of  failure,  threatened  's  e  t'  fhuil  urar  aluin  ghrinn  a 

BHITHIS   AGUM   A   CHASGA  M'  IOTADH   AGUS  t'  FHEOIL  UR  GHRINX 

MAR  mhillistain"  fhiacal.  It  is  thy  fresh  goodly  beautiful 
blood  I  will  have  quenching  my  thirst,  and  thy  fresh,  beautiful 
flesh  as  sweetening  of  teeth  ;  "  and  he  went  to  bed. 

The  king's  son  failed  of  course  ;  all  that  went  out  at  one  door 
came  in  at  another.  Then  came  Mari  Ruadh,  Auburn  Mary, 
the  giant's  daughter,  and  made  him  promise  to  marry  her,  and  he 
gave  his  hand  and  his  promise.  She  made  him  set  all  the  caibe 
and  shovels  in  order,  waved  her  hand,  and  they  worked  alone, 
and  cleaned  the  byre.  "  She  took  an  apple  from  her  pocket — a 
golden  apple — and  it  would  run  from  end  to  end,  and  would  raise 
no  stain  in  any  place,  it  was  so  clean." 

The  daughter  "  had  been  in  sewing  all  day,"  when  her  father 
came  home  from  hunting,  and  asked  his  housewife.  Next  came 
the  thatching  of  the  barn  with  ' '  the  feathers  of  all  the  birds  the 
giant  had  ever  killed,  to  be  laid  as  close  as  ever  they  lay  on  the 
back  of  a  heather  hen  or  a  black  cock."  The  wind  blew  them  a 
new  promise,  "  chathudh,  "  she  shook  them  as  chaff  (is  shaken 
on  hill  tops  now),  with  the  wind,  and  the  wind  blew  them 
straight  to  their  own  place.  The  giant  came  home  from  his  hunt- 
ing as  usual,  and  asked — "Housewife,  was  Auburn  Mary  out  at 


56  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

all  to-day?"  "No,  she  was  within  sewing."  He  went  out, 
and  brought  in  Sri  an  bhriagh  shoileir  dearrsach,  a  brave, 
clear,  shiny  bridle,  and  ordered  the  king's  son  to  catch  the 
Falaire,  filly,  on  yonder  hill,  and  tie  her  in  the  stable,  or 
else,  &c. 

The  fine  bridle  would  not  do.  Then  the  daughter  brought 
from  the  stable,  sean  srian  dubh  meirgach,  an  old,  black, 
rusty  bridle  that  was  behind  one  of  the  turf  seats,  and  shook  it, 
and  the  filly  came  and  put  her  nose  into  it. 

The  giant  had  the  usual  talk,  but  gave  no  more  orders,  and  his 
daughter  told  the  king's  son  that  he  would  kill  him  that  night, 
but  that  she  would  save  him  if  he  would  promise  to  marry  her. 

"  She  put  a  wooden  bench  in  the  bed  of  the  king's  son  ;  two 
wooden  benches  in  her  own  bed.  She  spat  at  the  front  of  her 
own  bed,  and  spat  at  the  side  of  the  giant's  bed,  and  spat  at  the 
passage  door,  and  she  set  two  apples  above  the  giant's  bed,  ready 
to  fall  on  him  when  he  should  wake  and  set  him  asleep  again." 
And  they  mouted  and  rode  away,  and  set  the  filly  "  running 
with  might." 

The  giant  awoke,  and  shouted — "Rise,  daughter,  and  bring 
me  a  drink  of  the  blood  of  the  king's  son."  "I  will  arise,"  said 
the  spittle,  in  front  of  his  bed  ;  and  one  of  the  apples  fell  and 
struck  him  between  the  two  shoulders,  and  he  slept.  The  second 
time  it  was — M  Rise,  wife  ; "  and  the  same  thing  happened. 
The  third  time  he  shouted — "Art  thou  rising  to  give  me  a  drink 
of  the  blood  of  the  king's  son,  Oh  wife  ?"  "  Coming  with  it," 
said  the  spittle,  "  behind  the  door  of  the  cabh." 

Then  he  lay  a  while,  and  got  up  with  an  axe,  and  struck  it 
into  the  bench  in  the  bed  of  the  king's  son.  [So  did  a  giant  to 
Jack  the  giant-killer,  and  so  did  Skrymir  to  Thorr  in  Gylfi's  mock- 
ing. Edda  (translated  by  G.  W.  Dasent,  page  54)].  And  when 
he  saw  what  he  had,  he  ran  to  his  daughter's  bed,  and  struck  his 
axe  into  the  two  things  which  he  found  there.  Then  he  ran  into 
the  stable,  and  then  he  ran  after  the  fugitives.  At  the  mouth  of 
day,  the  daughter  said — "  I  feel  my  father's  breath  burning  me 
between  the  two  shoulders  ;  "  and  the  king's  son  took  a  drop  of 
water  from  the  filly's  right  ear,  and  threw  it  over  his  shoulder, 
and  it  became  a  lake  which  the  giant  could  not  cross.  Then  he 
said — This  is  a  part  of  my  own  daughter's  tricks  ;  and  he  called 
out,  fire  faire,  a  Mhari  Ruadh,  agus  na  thug  mise  dhuitsa 

DO  DH'  FHOLUM  AGUS  DO  IONNSACHADH,  N'  E  SO  MAR  A  RINN   THU 


THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  BIRDS.  57 

orm  ma  dheireadh.  "  Feere  Faire,  Auburn  Mary,  and  all  the 
learning  and  teaching  I  have  given  thee,  is  it  thus  thou  hast  done 
to  me  at  last  ?  "  And,  said  she,  chan  eile  agud  air  ach  a  bhi 
nas  glic  A  rithisd.  "  Thou  hast  for  it  but  to  be  wiser  again." 
Then  he  said,  if  Iliad  mo  bhata  dubh  dionach  fhein  nach  faca 

GAOTH  NA  GRIAN  O  CHEAN  SEACHD  BLIADHNA.     My  OWn  tight  black 

boat  that  saw  neither  wind  nor  rain  since  seven  years'  end.  And 
his  daughter  said — "Thou  has  for  it  but  to  go  and  fetch  her  then.'' 

Next  time  it  was  a  little  stone  that  was  found  in  the  left  ear 
which  became  a  great  crag,  and  was  broken  through  with  the  big 
hammer  and  the  little  hammer,  ord  mor  agus  ord  beag,  which 
broke  and  pounded  a  breach  through  the  rock  in  an  instant  by 
themselves.  The  third  time  it  was  the  seed  of  a  tree  which  became 
a  wood,  and  was  cut  through  by  the  axes  tuathan  of  the  giant, 
which  he  set  to  work,  and  his  wife  brought  up  the  black  dogs. 

The  fourth  time  it  was  a  very  little  tiny  drop  of  water  that  was 
found  in  the  left  ear,  which  became  a  narrow  loch,  but  so  deep 
that  the  giant  could  not  cross  it.  He  had  the  usual  talk  with  his 
daughter,  and  got  the  same  reply  ;  tried  to  drink  the  water,  but 
failed,  for  a  curious  reason,  then  he  thought  he  would  leap  it, 
but  his  foot  slipped  and  he  was  drowned. 

Then  came  the  incident  of  the  kiss  and  the  old  greyhound. 

She  went  to  the  house  of  a  seamstress,  and  engaged  herself, 
and  was  a  good  workwoman.  When  the  king's  son  was  to  be 
married  to  another,  the  cook  sent  one  of  his  underlings  to  the 
well  for  water.  She  stood  on  a  branch  of  the  tree  above  the 
fuaran  cold  spring,  and  when  the  maid  saw  her  shadow  in  the 
well  she  thought  she  had  grown  golden  herself,  for  there  was 
"  golden  weaving  "  on  the  dress  of  Auburn  Mary.  And  she  went 
back  to  the  cook  and  said  :  "  Thou  art  the  lad  to  send  me  to 
fetch  thee  water,  and  I  am  a  lump  of  gold."  He  sent  another, 
with  the  same  result,  so  he  went  himself  and  saw  Mary  go  to  the 
house  of  the  seamstress.  The  cook  told,  and  they  asked  about 
the  stranger,  but  no  one  knew  anything  about  her,  till  the  hen 
wife  went  to  the  seamstress  and  found  out  "  that  she  had  come 
from  a  shore  afar  off ;  that  she  never  saw  her  like  for  sewing  nor 
for  shape,  and  if  they  had  her  at  the  wedding,  she  would  make 
Feartan  miracles  that  would  astonish  them." 

The  hen  wife  told  the  queen,  and  she  was  engaged  to  help  to 
make  the  dresses.     They  were  pleased  with  her,  and  asked  her 


58 


WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 


to  the  wedding,  and  when  there  they  asked  her  to  show  some  of 
her  wonderful  tricks. 

' '  Then  she  got  a  pock,  and  showed  that  it  was  empty ;  and 
she  gave  it  a  shake,  and  it  grew  thick,  and  she  put  in  her  hand 
and  took  out  a  silver  hen,  and  she  set  it  on  the  ground,  and  it 
rose  and  walked  about  the  house.  Then  came  the  golden  cock, 
and  the  grain  of  corn,  and  the  pecking,  and  the  hen  said — 

"Leig  ma  choir  learn, 
Ma  chuid  do  n'  eorna." 

Leave  me  my  right,  my  share  of  the  corn  ;  and  the  cock  pecked 
her ;  and  she  stood  out  from  him,  and  said — 


Geog  Geog  Geoa. 

An  cuimhne  leat  an  latha 

chuir  mi  m'  bathach  falamh 

air  do  shon  ? 

'S  an  cuimhne  leat  an  latha 

a  thubh  mi  n'  sabhal 

air  do  shon  ? 

'S  an  cuimhne  leat  an  latha 

ghlac  mi  n'fhailair 

air  do  shon  ? 

'S  an  cuimhne  leat  an  latha 

bhath  mi  m'athair 

air  do  shon  ? 


Geog  Geog  Ge5a. 
Dost  thou  remember  the  day 
that  I  emptied  the  byre 
for  thee  ? 

Dost  thou  remember  the  day 
that  I  thatched  the  barn 
for  thee  ? 

Dost  thou  remember  the  day 
that  I  caught  the  filly 
for  thee  ? 

Dost  thou  remember  the  day 
that  I  drowned  my  father 
for  thee  ? 


Then  the  king's  son  thought  a  little  and  he  remembered 
Auburn  Mary,  and  all  she  had  done  for  him,  and  he  asked  a 
voice  with  her  apart,  and  they  had  a  little  talk,  and  she  told  the 
king  and  the  queen,  and  he  found  the  "gin  "  kin  good,  and  he 
turned  his  back  on  the  other  one,  and  he  married  Auburn  Mary, 
and  they  made  a  wedding  that  lasted  seven  years  ;  and  the  last 
day  was  no  worse  than  the  first  day — 

S'ma  bha  na  b'fhearr  ann,  bha, 
S'mar  robh  leig  da 

And  if  there  were  better  there  were, 
And  if  not,  let  them  be. 

The  tale  is  ended. 
Tha  crioch  air  *n  sgeul. 


THE   BATTLE   OF   THE   BIRDS.  59 

This  version  is  probably  the  oldest.  It  is  the  most  pic- 
turesque ;  it  contains  nearly  all  that  is  in  the  others,  and  it  is 
full  of  the  quaint  expressions  which  characterize  the  telling  of 
Gaelic  tales.  The  quarrel  is  remarkably  like  a  fable  aimed  at  .the 
greedy  castle  mouse  and  the  sturdy  country  wren,  a  fable  from 
the  country  side,  for  the  birds  beat  the  beasts  of  the  plain,  the 
raven  beat  the  snake. 

8.  I  have  still  another  version,  told  by  Roderick  Mackenzie, 
sawyer,  Gairloch,  and  written  by  Hector  Urquhart.  It  is  called, 
NigheanDubh  Gheal  Dearg,  The  Daughter  of  Black-white  Red. 

Three  sons  of  the  king  of  Erin  were  on  a  day  playing  shinny 
on  a  strand,  and  they  saw  birds  whose  like  they  had  never  seen, 
and  one  especially.  Their  father  told  them  that  this  was  Mac 
Samhladh  Nighinn  Dubh  Gheal  Dearg,  and  the  eldest  son 
said  that  he  would  never  rest  till  he  got  the  great  beautiful  bird 
for  himself.  Then  his  father  sent  him  to  the  king  of  France 
(na  Frainge),  and  he  struck  palm  on  latch,  and  it  was  asked 
who  it  was,  and  he  said  that  he  was  the  son  of  Erin's  king,  going 
to  seek  the  daughter  of  Black-white  Red.  He  was  entertained, 
and  next  day  set  off  to  the  king  of  Spain  (na  Spainde),  and  did 
the  same;  and  thence  he  went  to  the  king  of  Italy  (na  h'Eadilt). 
He  gave  him  an  old  man,  Bodach,  and  a  green  boat,  and  they 
sailed  (and  here  comes  in  a  bit  of  the  passage  which  is  common 
to  so  many  stories  about  hoisting  the  sails,  etc.,  with  one  or  two 
liues  that  I  have  found  nowhere  else,  and  here  the  three  kings 
seem  to  replace  the  three  old  women,  who  are  always  appearing, 
for  they  know  where  the  lad  is  going,  and  help  him  on).  The 
old  man  sailed  the  boat  on  shore,  and  up  to  the  door  of  Black- 
white  Red,  a  giant,  who  as  usual  said  Fiu  fa  foagraich,  and 
threatened  to  make  a  shinny  ball  of  his  head,  and  eat  him  unless 
he  performed  the  tasks  set  him.  The  giant's  eldest  daughter 
came,  and  he  knew  her  at  once,  and  they  played  at  cards  all 
night.  She  gave  him  a  tether  to  catch  the  little  dun  shaggy 
filly,  which  he  would  lose  unless  he  put  it  on  the  first  time. 

Next  he  had  to  kill,  Tarbh  mor  na  Tanich,  the  great  bull  of 
the  cattle,  (or  perhaps  of  the  earth,  Tan).  The  daughter  gave 
him  her  father's  Bogha  saighead,  arrow  bow,  with  which  he 
pushed  at  the  bull,  and  he  followed  him.  He  put  the  big  black 
arrow  in  his  forehead  when  he  got  to  the  house. 

The  third  task  was  to  cleanse  the  great  byre  of  the  seven 
stalls  that  had  not  been  cleansed  for  seven  years,  or  his  head  to 


T. 


A 


60  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

be  a  football.  The  daughter  came  at  night  as  usual  and  gave  him 
Bara  agus  Croman,  a  barrow  and  a  crook,  and  told  him  to  say 
Cab  Cab  a  Chromain,  Cuir  air  a  bhara  a  shluasaid,  cuir  a 
mach  a  bhara,  and  the  tools  worked  of  themselves. 

Then  he  had  three  more  tasks  set.  The  three  daughters  put 
three  needles  through  three  holes  in  a  partition,  he  caught  the 
one  without  "  Chro."  (?)  They  put  out  three  great  pins,  and  he 
caught  the  one  that  had  two  "  Phloc  "  heads.  Then  they  pushed 
out  their  little  fingers,  and  he  took  the  one  with,  Cab  as  an 
IONGA,  a  notch  in  the  nail. 

"Hugh  !  huh  !  "  said  the  giant,  "thou  hast  her  now,  but  to 
Erin  thou  goest  not  ;  thou  must  stay  with  me. "  At  last  they 
got  out  the  barge  (Birlinn).  The  giant  awoke  and  asked,  what 
was  that  sound  ?     One  of  the  daughters  answered,  that  it  was  a 

OIDHCHE  UAMHASACH  LE   TEIN-ADHAIR  'S  TAIRNEANACH,  a  fearful 

night  with  heaven-fire  and  thunder.  "It  is  well  to  be  under 
the  shelter  of  a  rock,"  said  the  giant.  The  next  scrape  of  the 
boat  it  was  the  same  thing,  and  at  the  third  the  barge  was  out 
and  under  sail,  but  the  giant  was  on  foot,  aud  he  threw  A 
CHEARTLEADH  dhubh,  his  black  clue,  and  the  boat  sailed  stern 
foremost.  The  giant  sat  down  in  the  gravel  to  haul  the  boat,  and 
the  daughter  shot  an  arrow,  ann  am  bonn  dubh  an  fhamhair, 
into  the  giant's  black  sole,  and  there  he  lay. 

Then  they  got  to  Erin.  He  went  home  first  :  she  staid  in  the 
barge,  till  tired  of  waiting,  she  went  to  a  smith's  house  where 
she  staid  with  the  smith  and  his  mother. 

One  day  the  smith  heard  that  the  Bidir  was  going  to  be 
married,  and  told  her.  She  sent  him  to  the  palace  to  tell  the 
cook  that  the  finest  woman  he  ever  saw  was  living  with  him,  and 
would  marry  him  if  he  would  bring  her  part  of  the  wedding 
feast. 

The  cook  came,  and  when  he  saw  her,  brought  a  back  load  of 
viands.  Then  they  played  the  same  trick  to  the  butler,  and  he 
brought  a  back  load  of  wine  every  day.  Then  she  asked  the 
smith  to  make  her  a  golden  cock,  and  a  silver  hen  ;  and  when  he 
could  not,  she  made  them  herself.  Then  she  asked  the  butler  if 
she  could  get  a  sight  of  the  king's  son  and  the  bride,  "  and  the 
butler  was  very  much  pleased  that  she  had  asked  him,  and  not 
the  cook,  for  he  was  much  afraid  that  the  cook  was  looking  after 
her  also."  When  the  gentles  saw  her  they  asked  her  to  the 
dancing  room,  and  then  came  the  cock  and  hen  play,  in  which 


THE  BATTLE   OF  THE  BIRDS.  61 

the  hen  said — A  choilich  dhurdanich  dhuibh,  Thou  black, 
murmuring  cock,  dost  thou  remember,  etc.  The  prince  remem- 
bers, marries  the  true  girl,  "  and  there  I  left  them." 

This  version  varies  considerably  from  the  others.  It  is  very 
well  told,  and  I  much  regret  that  space  will  not  allow  me  to  give 
it  entire,  the  more  so  because  the  reciter  has  braved  the  prejudices 
of  some  of  his  neighbours  who  object  to  all  fiction.  I  hope  I 
have  said  enough  to  show  that  this  story  is  worth  preservation. 

If  stories  be  mythological  this  contains  a  serpent.  Nathair, 
pronounced  Na-ir>  and  a  raven,  Fitheach,  pronounced  Feeach, 
who  seem  like  transformed  divinities,  for  they  appear  only  to 
start  the  other  characters,  and  then  vanish  into  some  undescribed 
kingdom.  There  is  one  passage  (referred  to)  which  resembles 
Norse  mythology. 

So  far  as  I  can  make  out,  it  seems  to  be  best  known  near 
Cowal  in  Argyllshire,  though  it  is  known  throughout  the  High- 
lands. 

It  would  have  been  easy  to  construct  one  version  from  the 
eight  here  mentioned,  but  I  have  preferred  to  give  the  most 
complete,  entire,  and  full  abstracts  of  the  rest.  Many  more 
versions  can  be  got,  and  I  shall  be  grateful  to  anyone  who  will 
throw  light  on  the  story  and  its  origin. 

One  of  the  tasks  resembles  one  of  those  imposed  on  Hercules. 
It  might  have  been  taken  from  classical  mythology  if  it  stood 
alone,  but  Norwegian  peasants  and  West  Highlanders  could  not 
so  twist  the  story  of  Hercules  into  the  same  shape. 

All  the  Gaelic  versions  are  clearly  versions  of  the  same  story 
as  the  Master  Maid,  in  Dasent's  Norse  Tales  ;  and  there  are 
other  traits  in  other  Norse  stories,  which  resemble  the  Gaelic. 

Of  the  forty-three  heroes  called  Hercules,  and  mentioned  in 
ancient  lore,  one,  at  least,  is  said  to  have  made  long  voyages  in 
the  Atlantic  beyond  his  own  pillars.  Another,  or  the  same,  was 
prevented  from  being  present  at  th^  hunting  of  the  Caledonian 
boar,  having  killed  a  man  in  "Calydo,"  which,  by  the  way,  is 
Gaelic  for  Black  Forest.  Another  was  an  Indian,  and  this  may 
be  one  of  the  same  clan. 

If  stories  be  distorted  history  of  real  events,  seen  through  a 
haze  of  centuries,  then  the  giants  in  this  tale  may  be  the  same 
people  as  the  Gruagach  and  his  brother  in  the  last.  They  are 
here  described  as  a  wise  learned  race,  given  to  magic  arts,  yellow 
or  auburn  haired.     (Ruadh)  possessing  horses,  and  knowing  how 


62  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

to  tame  them — able  to  put  the  water  between  them  and  their 
pursuers — able  to  sew  better  than  the  others — better  looking — 
musical — possessing  treasure  and  bright  weapons — using  king's 
sons  of  other  races  as  slaves,  and  threatening  to  eat  them.  If 
the  raven  was  one,  they  were  given  to  combing  their  own  golden 
ringlets  with  gold  and  silver  combs  and  the  giant  maidens 
dressed  the  hair  of  their  lovers  who  laid  their  heads  in  their 
laps,  as  I  have  often  seen  black  haired  Lapland  ladies  dress  the 
hair  of  Lapland  swains,  and  as  ladies  in  popular  tales  of  all 
lands  always  do.  I  will  not  venture  to  guess  who  this  race  may 
have  been,  but  the  race  who  contended  with  them  would  seem 
to  have  been  dark  complexioned.  Nearly  all  the  heroines  of 
Gaelic  songs  are  fair  or  yellow  haired.  Those  are  dark  who  now 
most  admire  yellow  locks.  A  dark  Southern  once  asked  if  a 
golden  haired  youth  from  the  north  had  dyed  his  hair,  for  nothing 
natural  could  be  so  beautiful.  Dark  Celts  and  fair  northmen 
certainly  met  and  fought,  and  settled  and  intermarried,  on  the 
western  isles  and  coasts,  where  this  tale  is  current,  but  I  am 
told  that  it  has  traits  which  are  to  be  found  in  Eastern  manu- 
scripts, which  were  old  long  before  the  wrars  of  the  Northmen, 
of  which  we  know,  began.  The  task  I  have  undertaken  is  to 
gather  stories,  not  to  account  for  them,  but  this  much  is  sure, 
either  Norway  got  this  from  Scotland  or  Scotland  from  Norway, 
when  they  were  almost  one  country,  or  both  got  it  from  the 
same  source.  The  Gaelic  stories  resemble  each  other  about  as 
much  as  they  all  resemble  the  Norse.  The  translation  was  pub- 
lished in  1859,  and  this  story  has  been  current  in  the  islands  at 
least  for  40  years.  I  can  remember  to  have  heard  part  of  it  my- 
self more  than  20  years  ago.  I  believe  there  is  an  Irish  version, 
though  I  have  not  met  with  it  in  any  book.  I  have  traced  the 
story  amongst  Irish  labourers  In  London,  who  have  told  me  that 
they  used  in  their  young  days  to  sit  about  the  fire  whole  winter 
nights,  and  tell  about  the  fight  between  the  raven  and  the  snake ; 
about  the  giants,  Fin  MacCoul  and  Conan  Maol,  "who  had 
never  a  good  word  for  any  one,"  and  similar  tales.  My  infor- 
mants were  from  Cork,  their  language,  though  difficult,  could  be 
made  out  from  a  knowledge  of  Gaelic  only. 

The  bridle  described  seems  to  be  the  old  Highland  bridle 
which  is  still  common.  It  has  no  bit,  but  two  plates  of  wood  or 
iron  are  placed  at  right  angles  to  the  horse's  mouth,  and  are 


THE   BATTLE   OF   THE   BIRDS.  63 

joined  above  and  below  by  a  rope,  which  is  often  made  of  horse- 
hair, leather,  or  twisted  bent.     The  horse's  nose  goes  into  it. 

The  ladder  is  also  the  Highland  ladder  still  common  in  cot- 
tages.    It  consists  of  a  long  stick  with  pegs  stuck  through  it. 

There  are  many  stories  in  Grimm's  German  collection  which 
resemble  the  Battle  of  the  Birds.  They  have  incidents  in  com- 
mon, arranged  somewhat  in  the  same  order ;  but  the  German 
stories,  taken  together,  have  a  character  of  their  own,  as  the 
Gaelic  versions  have  :  and  both  differ  from  the  Norwegian  tale. 
Each  new  Gaelic  version  which  comes  to  me  (and  I  have  received 
several  since  this  was  written),  varies  from  the  rest,  but  re- 
sembles them  ;  and  no  single  version  is  like  any  one  of  the  Ger- 
man tales,  though  German,  Norse,  and  Gaelic  all  hang  together. 


III. 

THE  TALE  OF  THE  HOODIE. 

From  Ann  MacGilvray,  Islay. — April  1859. 

FTlHEKE  was  ere  now  a  farmer,  and  he  had  three 
-*-  daughters.  They  were  waulking*  clothes  at  a  river. 
A  hoodie  f  came  round  and  he  said  to  the  eldest  one, 
'M-POS-U-MI,  "Wilt  thou  wed  me,  farmer's  daughter?" 
"  I  won't  wed  thee,  thou  ugly  brute.  An  ugly  brute  is 
the  hoodie,"  said  she.  He  came  to  the  second  one  on 
the  morrow,  and  he  said  to  her,  "  M-POS-U-MI,  wilt 
thou  wed  me?"  "Not  I,  indeed,"  said  she;  "an  ugly 
brute  is  the  hoodie."  The  third  day  he  said  to  the 
youngest,  M-pos-u-mi,  "  Wilt  thou  wed  me,  farmer's 
daughter?"  "I  will  wed  thee,"  said  she;  "a  pretty 
creature  is  the  hoodie,"  and  on  the  morrow  they  married. 

The  hoodie  said  to  her,  "Whether  wouldst  thou 
rather  that  I  should  be  a  hoodie  by  day,  and  a  man 
at  night ;  or  be  a  hoodie  at  night,  and  a  man  by  day  ?  " 
"  I  would  rather  that  thou  wert  a  man  by  day,  and  a 
hoodie  at  night,"  says  she.  After  this  he  was  a  splendid 
fellow  by  day,  and  a  hoodie  at  night.  A  few  days  after 
they  married  he  took  her  with  him  to  his  own  house. 

At  the  end  of  three  quarters  they  had  a  son.     In 

*  Postadh.  A  method  of  washing  clothes  practised  in  the 
Highlands — viz.,  by  dancing  on  them  barefoot  in  a  tub  of  water. 

t  Hoodie — the  Koyston  crow — a  very  common  bird  in  the 
Highlands  ;  a  sly,  familiar,  knowing  bird,  which  plays  a  great 
part  in  these  stories.     He  is  common  in  most  parts  of  Europe. 


Til  i   HOODIE.  65 

the  night  th£,ie  came  the  very  finest  music  that  ever      ;^.,,v-  /  r}^ 

was  heard  a/bout  the  house.     Every  man  slept,  and  the 

child  wajs'taken  away.     Her  father  came  to  the  door  in 

the  rooming,  and  he  asked  how  were  all  there.     He 

T.  as  very  sorrowful  that  the  child  should  be  taken  away, 

for  fear  that  he  should  be  blamed  for  it  himself. 

kCU.  At  the  end  of  three  quarters  again  they  had  another 
son.  A  watch  was  set  on  the  house.  The  finest  of  music 
came,  as  it  came  before,  about  the  house ;  every  man 
slept,  and  the  child  was  taken  away.  Her  father  came 
to  the  door  in  the  morning.     He  asked  if  every  thing 

>'  was  safe  ;  but  the  child  was  taken  away,  and  he  did  not 

V    know  what  to  do  for  sorrow. 

Again,  at  the  end  of  three  quarters  they  had  another 
>n.  A  watch  was  set  on  the  house  as  usual.  Music 
came  about  the  house  as  it  came  before ;  every  one  slept, 
and  the  child  was  taken  away.  When  they  rose  on  the 
morrow  they  went  to  another  place  of  rest  that  they  had, 
himself  and  his  wife,  and  his  sister-in-law.  He  said  to 
them  by  the  way,  "See  that  you  have  not  forgotten  any 
thing."  The  wife  said,  "  I  forgot  my  coarse  comb.;' 
The  coach  in  which  they  were  fell  a  withered  faggot, 
and  he  went  away  as  a  hoodie. 

Her  two  sisters  returned  home,  and  she  followed  after 
him.  When  he  would  be  on  a  hill  top,  she  would  follow 
to  try  and  catch  him  ;  and  when  she  would  reach  the 
top  of  a  hill,  he  would  be  in  the  hollow  on  the  other  side. 
When  night  came,  and  she  was  tired,  she  had  no  place 
of  rest  or  dwelling ;  she  saw  a  little  house  of  light  far 
from  her,  and  though  far  from  her  she  was  not  long  in 
reaching  it. 

When  she  reached  the  house  she  stood  deserted  at 
the  door.  She  saw  a  little  laddie  about  the  house, 
and  she  yearned  to  him  exceedingly.     The  housewife 

o 


66  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

told  her  to  come  up,  that  she  knew  her'  cheer  and 
travel.  She  laid  down,  and  no  sooner  die?  the  day 
come  than  she  rose.  She  went  out,  and  when  Sihe  was 
out,  she  was  going  from  hill  to  hill  to  try  if  she  couU(i 
see  a  hoodie.  She  saw  a  hoodie  on  a  hill,  and  when  she 
would  get  on  the  hill  the  hoodie  would  be  in  the  hollow, 
when  she  would  go  to  the  hollow,  the  hoodie  would  be 
on  another  hill.  When  the  night  came  she  had  no 
place  of  rest  or  dwelling.  She  saw  a  little  house  of 
light  far  from  her,  and  if  far  from  her  she  was  not  long 
reaching  it.  She  went  to  the  door.  She  saw  a  laddie 
on  the  floor  to  whom  she  yearned  right  much.  The 
housewife  laid  her  to  rest.  No  earlier  came  the  day 
than  she  took  out  as  she  used.  She  passed  this  day 
as  the  other  days.  When  the  night  came  she  reached 
a  house.  The  housewife  told  her  to  come  up,  that 
she  knew  her  cheer  and  travel,  that  her  man  had  but 
left  the  house  a  little  while,  that  she  should  be  clever, 
that  this  was  the  last  night  she  would  see  him,  and  not 
to  sleep,  but  to  strive  to  seize  him.  She  slept,  he  came 
where  she  was,  and  he  let  fall  a  ring  on  her  right  hand. 
2fYw^Now  when  she  awoke  she  tried  to  catch  hold  of  him, 
and  she  caught  a  feather  of  [his  wing.  He  left  the 
feather  with  her,  and  he  went  away.  When  she  rose 
in  the  morning  she  did  not  know  what  she  should  do. 
The  housewife  said  that  he  had  gone  over  a  hill  of 
poison  over  which  she  could  not  go  without  horse- 
shoes on  her  hands  and  feet.  She  gave  her  man's 
clothes,  and  she  told  her  to  go  to  learn  smithying  till 
she  should  be  able  to  make  horse  shoes  for  herself. 

She  learned  smithying  so  well  that  she  made  horse- 
shoes for  her  hands  and  feet.  She  went  over  the  hill 
of  poison.     That  same  day  after  she  had  gone  over  the 


THK   TALK   OF   THE   HOODIK  67 

hill  of  poison,  her  man  was  to  be  married  to  the  daughter 
of  a  great  gentleman  that  was  in  the  town. 

There  was  a  race  in  the  town  that  day,  and  every 
one  was  to  be  at  the  race  but  the  stranger  that  had 
come  over  to  poison  hill.  The  cook  came  to  her,  and 
he  said  to  her,  Would  she  go  in  his  place  to  make  the 
wedding  meal,  and  that  he  might  get  to  the  race. 

She  said  she  would  go.  She  was  always  watching 
where  the  bridegroom  would  be  sitting. 

She  let  fall_iJlfi__ring  and  the  feather  in  the  broth  t4£4v2v*  i 
that  was  before  him.     With  the  first  spoon  he  took  up    n*f~*%  ^n 
the  ring,  with  the  next  he  took  up  the  feather.     When  **Y  I      < 
the  minister  came  to  the  fore  to  make  the  marriage,  he  *&  z!Z    'I  - 
would  not  marry  till  he  should  find  out  who  had  made 
ready  the  meal.      They  brought  up  the  cook  of  the 
gentleman,  and  he  said  that  this  was  not  the  cook  who 
mad  3  ready  the  meal. 

They  brought  up  now  the  one  who  had  made 
ready  the  meal.  He  said,  "  That  now  was  his  married 
wife."  The  spells  went  off  him.  They  turned  back 
over  the  hill  of~poison,  she  throwing  the  horse  shoes 
behind  her  to  him,  as  she  went  a  little  bit  forward,  and 
he  following  her.  When  they  came  back  over  the 
hill,  they  went  to  the  three  houses  in  which  she  had 
been.  These  were  the  houses  of  his  sisters,  and  they 
took  with  them  the  three  sons,  and  they  came  home  to 
their  own  house,  and  they  were  happy. 

Written  down  by  Hector  Maclean,  schoolmaster  at  Ballygraut, 
in  Islay,  from  the  recitation  of  "Ann  MacGilvray,  a  Cowal 
woman,  married  to  a  farmer  at  Kilmeny,  one  Angus  Macgeachy 
from  Campbelltown."     Sent  April  14,  1859. 

The  Gaelic  of  this  tale  is  the  plain  everyday  Gaelic  of  Islay 
and  the  West  Highlands.  Several  words  are  variously  spelt,  but 
they  are  variously  pronounced — falbh,  folbh,  tigh,  taighe,  taigh^-. 


68  WEST   HIGHLAND    TALES. 

ean.     There  is  one  word,  Tapaidb,  which  has  no  English  equi- 
valent ;  it  is  like  Tapper  in  Swedish. 


URSGEUL  na  feannaig. 

Bha  tuathauach  ann  roimhc  so  ;  agus  bha  triuir  nighean  aige. 
Bha  eud  a'  postadh  aig  obhainn.  Thainig  feannag  mu'n  cuairt  's 
thuirt  e  ris  an  te  bu  shine,  "Am  pos  thu  mise  a  nighean  an 
tuathanaich."  "Cha  phos  mis'  thu  'bheathaich  ghrannda  :  is 
grannda  am  beathach  an  fheannag,"  ars'  ise.  Thainig  e  thun  na 
darna  te  an  la  'r  na  mhaireach,  's  thuirt  e  rithe,  "  Am  pos  thu 
mise."  "Cha  phos  mi  fein,"  ars'  ise  ;  "  's  grannda  am  beathach 
an  fheannag."  An  treas  la  thuirt  e  ris  an  te  b'dige,  "Am  pos 
thu  mise,  a  nighean  an  tuathanaich."  "P6saidh,"  ars' ise  ;  "s 
boidheach  am  beathach  an  fheannag."  An  la'r  na  mhaireach 
phos  eud.  Thuirt  an  fheannag  rithe,  "C6  'ca  is  fhearr  leat  mise 
a  bhith  am  fheannag  'san  latha  'sam  dhuine  'san  oidhche,  na 
bhith  'san  oidhche  am  fheannag  's  am  dhuine  'san  latha  ?  "  "  'S 
fhearr  learn  thu  bhith  a'd'  dhuine  'san  latha  's  a'd'  fheannag  'san 
oidhche,"  ars'  ise.  As  a  dh&gh  so  bha  e  na  6ganach  ciatach  'san 
latha,  's'na  fheannag  's  an  oidhche.  Am  beagan  laithean  an  deigh 
dhaibh  posadh  thug  e  leis  i  'ga  'thigh  fein.  Ann  an  ceann  tri 
laithean  bha  mac  aca.  Anns  an  oidhche  thainig  an  aon  cheol 
timchiol  an  taighe  bu  bhoidhche  'chualas  riamh.  Chaidil  a 
h-uile  duine,  's  thugadh  air  folbh  am  paisde.  Thainig  a  h-athair 
thun  an  doruisd  sa  mhadainn.  Dh'  fheoraich  e  de  mur  a  bha 
h-uile  h-aon  an  siod  ;  's  bha  duilichinn  mhor  air  gun  tugadh  air 
folbh  am  paisde,  eagal  agus  gum  biodh  coir'  air  a  dheanadh  air 
fein  air  a  shon.  Ann  an  ceann  tri  raithhean  a  rithisd  bha  mac 
eile  aca.  Chuireadh  faire  air  an  tigh.  Thainig  ceol  ra  bhoidheach 
mar  a  thainig  roimhid  timchoill  an  taighe  ;  chaidil  a  h-uile  duine 
's  thugadh  air  folbh  am  paisde.  Thainig  a  h-athair  thun  an 
doruisd  sa  mhaidainn  dh'  fheoraich  e  an  robh  gach  ni  ceart ;  ach 
bha  'm  paisde  air  a  thoirt  air  folbh,  's  cha  robh  fhios  aige  d&  a 
dheanadh  e  leis  an  duilichiun.  Ann  an  ceann  tri  raithean  a 
rithi>d  bha  mac  eile  aca.  Chaidh  faire  'chur  air  an  tigh  mar  a  b' 
abhaist.  Thainig  ceol  timchioll  an  taighe  mar  a  thainig  roimhid  ; 
chaidil  gach  neach,  's  thugadh  am  paisde  air  folbh.  Nur  a  dh' 
eiridh  iad  an  la  'r  na  mhaireach  chaidh  iad  gu  haite  tamh  eile  a 


URSGEUL  NA  FEANNAIG.  69 

bha  aca,  e  fein  's  a'  bhean,  's  a'  phiuthar  cheile.  Thuirt  e  riu  air 
an  rathad,  "Feuch  nach  do  dhichuimhnich  sibh  ni  'sam  bith." 
Urs'  a'  bhean,  "  Diiiochuimhnich  mi  mo  chih  ghakbh."  Thuit 
an  carbad  anns  an  robh  eud  'na  chual  chrionaich,  s  dh'  fhalbh 
esan  'na  fheannag.  Thill  a  dha  phiuthair  dhachaidh  's  dh' 
fholbh  ise  'na  dheighsan.  Nur  a  bhiodh  esan  air  mullach  cnoic 
leanadh  ise  e  feuch  am  beireadh  i  air,  's  nur  a  ruigeadh  ise 
mullach  a  chnoic  bhiodh  esan  san  lag  an  taobh  eile.  Nur  a 
thaing  an  oidhche  's  i  sgith,  cha  robh  aitetamh  na  fuireachd  aice. 
Chunnaic  i  tigh  beag  soluisd  fada  uaithe  's  ma  b' fhada  uaithe 
cha  b'  fhada  a  bha  ise  'ga  ruigheachd.  Nur  a  rainig  i  an  tigh 
sheas  i  gu  dlblidh  aig  an  dorusd.  Chunnaic  i  balachan  beag 
feadh  an  taighe,  s  the6igh  i  ris  gu  h-anabarrach.  Thuirt  bean  an 
taighe  rithe  tighinn  a  nios,  gu  robh  fios  a  seud  's  a  siubhail  aice-se. 
Chaidh  i  laidhe,  's  cha  bu  luaithe  thainig  an  latha  na  dh'  eiridh  i. 
Chaidh  i  'mach,  's  nur  a  bha  i  'mach  bha  i  o  chnoc  gu  cnoc  feuch 
am  faiceadh  i  feannag.  Chunnaic  i  feannag  air  cnoc,  's  nur  a 
rachadh  ise  air  a'  chnoc  bhiodh  an  fheannag  'san  lag,  nur  a 
rachadh  i  do'n  lag  bhiodh  an  fheannag  air  cnoc  eile.  Nur  a 
thainig  an  oidhche  cha  robh  aite  taimh  na  fuireachd  aice.  Chun- 
naic i  tigh  beag  soluisd  fada  uaithe  's  ma  b'  fhada  uaithe  cha  b' 
fhada  'bha  ise  'g  a  ruigheachd.  Chaidh  i  gus  an  dorusd.  Chun- 
naic i  balachan  air  an  urlar  ris  an  do  theoigh  i  gu  ra  mhor. 
Chuir  bean  an  taighe  a  laidhe  i.  Cha  bu  mhoich'  a  thainig  an 
latha  na  ghabh  i  'mach  mar  a  b'abhaist.  Chuir  i  seachad  an 
latha  so  mar  na  laithean  eile.  Nur  a  thainig  an  oidhche  rainig  i 
tigh.  Thuirt  bean  an  taighe  rithe  tighinn  a  nlos  ;  gu  'robh  fios 
a  seud  's  a  siubhail  aice-se  ;  nach  d'  rinn  a  fear  ach  an  tigh 
fhagail  bho  cheann  tiota  beag ;  i  'bhith  tapaidh,  gum  b'  i  siod  an 
oidhche  ma  dheireadh  dhi  fhaicinn,  's  gun  i  'chadal,  ach  strl  ri 
greim  a  dheanadh  air.  Chaidil  ise,  's  thainig  esan  far  an  robh  i, 
's  lig  e  tuiteam  do  dh'  fhainn,  air  a  laimh  dheas.  Nur  a  dhuisg 
i^e  an  so  thug  i  lamh  air  breith  air,  's  rug  i  air  ite  d'a  sgeith. 
Leig  e  leatha  an  ite,  's  dh'  fhalbh  e.  Nur  a  dh'  eiridh  i  'sa 
mhadainn  cha  robh  fios  aice  de  a  dheanadh  i.  Thuirt  bean  an 
taighe  gu'n  deach  e  thairis  air  cnoc  neamh  air  nach  b'urrainn  ise 
do!  thairis  gun  ehruidhean  d'a  lamhan  agus  d'a  casan.  Thug  i 
dhi  aodach  fir  's  thuirt  i  rithe  dol  a  dh'  ionnsacbadh  na  goibh- 
neachd  gus  am  biodh  i  comasach  air  cruidhean  a  dheanadh  dhi 
fein.  Dh'  ionnsaich  i  'ghoibhneachd  cho  math  's  gun  d'  rinn  i 
criiidhean  d'a  lamhan  agus  d'a  cnsui.     Via.  'fholbh  i  thairis  air  a 


70  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

chnoc  neamh.  An  latha  sin  fein  an  deigh  dhi  dol  thairis  air  a 
chnoc  neamh  bha  p6sadh  ri  bhith  aig  a  fear  ri  nighean  duine 
uasail  mhoir  a  bha  'sa  bhaile.  Bha  reis  aims  a  bhaile  an  latha 
sin,  s  bha  h-uile  h-aon  ri  bhith  aig  an  reis  ach  an  coigreach  a 
thainig  thairis  air  a'  chnoc  neamh.  Thainig  an  c6caire  a  h-ionns- 
uidh,  's  thuirt  e  rithe  an  rachadh  i  'na  aite  a  dheanadh  biadh  na 
bainnse,  's  gu  'faigheadh  e  dol  thun  na  reise.  Thnirt  i  gu' 
rachadh.  Bha  i  furachail  daonnan  caite  am  biodh  fear  na  bainnse 
'na  shuidhe.  Lig  i  tuiteam  do  'n  fhainne  agus  do  'n  ite  'sa  bhrot 
a  bha  air  a  bheulaobh.  Leis  a  chiad  spain  thog  e'm  fainne,  s  leis 
an  ath  spain  thog  e  'n  ite.  Nur  a  thainig  am  ministir  a  lathair  a 
dheanadh  a  phosaidh  cha  ph6sadh  esan  gus  am  faigheadh  e  fios  co 
a  rinn  am  biadh.  Thug  iad  a'  lathair  cocaire  an  duine  uasail,  's 
thuirt  esan  nach  b'  e  siod  an  cocaire  a  rinn  am  biadh.  Thug 
iad  an  lathair  an  so  an  t-aon  a  rinn  am  biadh.  Thuirt  esan  gum 
b'e  siod  a'  bhean  phosda-san  a  nis.  Dh'  fholbh  na  geasan  dheth. 
Thill  iad  air  an  ais  thairis  air  a'  chnoc  neamh  ;  ise  a  tilgeil  nan 
cruidhean  as  a  deigh  da  'ionnsuidhsan  nur  a  thigeadh  i  treis  air  a 
h-aghaidh,  's  esan  'ga  leantainn.  Nur  a  thainig  eud  air  an  ais 
thar  a'  chnoic,  chaidh  iad  thun  nan  tri  taighean  anns  an  robh  ise. 
B'e  sin  tri  taighean  a  pheathraichean-san,  thug  iad  leo  an  tri  mic. 
Thainig  iad  dhachaidh  g'an  tigh  fein,  's  bha  iad  gu  toilichte. 

Hector  MacLean. 

2.  I  have  a  great  many  versions  of  this  tale  in  Gaelic  ;  for 
example,  one  from  Cowal,  written  from  memory  by  a  labourer, 
John  Dewar.  These  are  generally  wilder  and  longer  than  the 
version  here  given. 

This  has  some  resemblance  to  an  infinity  of  other  stories.  For 
example — Orpheus,  Cupid  and  Psyche,  Cinderella's  Coach,  The 
Lassie  and  her  Godmother  (Norse  tales),  East  o'  the  Sun  and 
West  o'  the  Moon  (ditto),  The  Master  Maid  (ditto),  Katie 
Wooden  Cloak  (ditto),  The  Iron  Stove  (Grimm),  The  Wood- 
cutter's Child  (ditto),  and  a  tale  by  the  Countess  d'Aulnoy, 
Prince  Cberie. 

If  this  be  history,  it  is  the  story  of  a  wife  taken  from  an  in- 
ferior but  civilized  race.  The  farmer's  daughter  married  to  the 
Flayer  "Feannag,"  deserted  by  her  husband  for  another  in 
some  distant,  mythical  land,  beyond  far  away  mountains,  and 
bringing  him  back  by  steady,  fearless,  persevering  fidelity  and 
industry. 


THE  TALE   OF  THE   HOODIE.  71 

If  it  be  mythology,  the  hoodie  may  be  the  raven  again,  and  a 
transformed  divinity.  If  it  relates  to  races,  the  superior  race 
again  had  horses — for  there  was  to  be  a  race  in  the  town,  and 
every  one  was  to  be  at  it,  but  the  stranger  who  came  over  the 
hill ;  and  when  they  travelled  it  was  in  a  coach,  which  was 
sufficiently  wonderful  to  be  magical,  and  here  again  the  comb  is 
mixed  up  with  the  spells. 

There  is  a  stone  at  Dunrobin  Castle,  in  Sutherland,  on  which 
a  comb  is  carved  with  other  curious  devices,  which  have  never 
been  explained.  Within  a  few  hundred  yards  in  an  old  grave 
composed  of  great  slabs  of  stone,  accidentally  discovered  on  a 
bank  of  gravel,  a  man's  skeleton  was  found  with  teeth  worn 
down,  though  perfectly  sound,  exactly  like  those  of  an  old  horse. 
It  is  supposed  that  the  man  must  have  ground  his  teeth  on  dried 
peas  and  beans — perhaps  on  meal,  prepared  in  sandstone  querns. 
Here,  at  least,  is  the  comb  near  to  the  grave  of  the  farmer.  The 
comb  which  is  so  often  found  with  querns  in  the  old  dwellings  of 
some  pre-historic  race  of  Britons  ;  the  comb  which  is  a  civilized 
instrument,  and  which  in  these  stories  is  always  a  coveted  object 
worth  great  exertions,  and  often  magical. 


IV. 
THE  SEA-MAIDEN. 

From  John  Mackenzie,  fisherman,  near  Inverarv. 

rpHERE  was  ere  now  a  poor  old  fisher,  but  on  tin's 
'     year  he  was  not  getting  much  fish.     On  a  i 
of  days,  and  he  fishing;  there  rose  a  sea  maiden  at  the 

side  of  his  boat,  and  she  ashed  him  if  he  was  getting 
fish.  The  old  man  answered,  and  he  said  that  he  WSJ 
nnt.     M  What  reward  wouldsl  thou  give  mo  for  sending 

plenty  of  fish  to  thee?"  "Ach!"  said  the  old  man, 
"I  have  not  much  to  spare."  "Wilt  thou  give  me 
tin-  first  son  thou  hast?"  said  she.  "It  is  I  that 
would  give  thee  that,  if  I  were  to  have  a  son:  there 
I  not,  and  theiv  will  not  be  a  son  of  mine,"  said 
he,  "I  and  my  wife  are  grown  so  old."  "Name  all 
thou  hast."  "I  have  hut  an  old  mare  of  ahorse,  an 
old  dog,  myself  and  my  wife.  There's  for  thee  all  the 
creatures  of  the  great  world  that  are  mine."  "II 
then,  are  three  grains  for  thee  that  thou  shalt  give  thy 
wife  this  very  night,  and  three  others  to  the  dog,  and 
these  tin*  e  to  the  mare,  and  these  three  likewise  thou 
shalt  plant  behind  thy  house,  and  in  their  own  time 
thy  wife  will  have  three  sons,  the  mare  three  foals,  and 
the  dog  three  puppies,  and  there  will  grow  tin  > 
behind  thy  house,  and  the  trees  will  be  a  sign,  when 
one  of  the  sons  dies,  one  of  the  trees  will  wither. 
Now,  take  thyself  home,  and  remember  me  when  thy 


THE  sKA-v 

three  years  of  od  thou  thyself  wilt  get 

plenty  of  fish  after  this."  Everything  happened  as  the 
maiden   snid,  and  he  himself  \  ;ting  plenty  of 

fish  ;  but  when  the  end  of  the  three  years  was  nearing, 
the  old  mail  was  growing  sorrowful,  heavy  hearted, 
while  he  failed  each  day  as  it  came.  On  the  namesake 
of  the  day,  he  went  to  fish  as  he  used,  but  he  did  not 
take  his  son  with  him. 

The  sea-maiden  rose  at  the  side  of  the  boat,  and 
asked,  "  Didst  thou  bring  thy  son  with  thee  hither  to 
me  1 M     "  Och  !  I  did  not  bring  him.     I  forgot  that  this 

-  the  day."  "Yes  !  yes  !  then,"'  said  the  sea-maiden; 
M  thou  shalt  get  four  other  years  of  him,  to  try  if  it  be 
easier  for  thee  to  part  from  him.  Here  thou  hast  his 
like  age,"  and  she  lifted  up  a  big  bouncing  baby.  "Is 
thy  son  as  line  as  this  one  ? "  He  went  home  full  of 
and  delight,  for  that  he  had  got  four  other  years 
of  his  son,  and  he  kept  on  fishing  and  getting  plenty  of 
fish,  but  at  the  end  of  the  next  four  years  sorrow  and 
woe  struck  him,  and  he  took  not  a  meal,  and  he  did 
not  a  turn,  and  his  wife  could  not  think  what  was  ailing 
him.  This  time  he  did  not  know  what  to  do,  but  he 
it  before  him,  that  he  would  not  take  his  son  with 
him  this  time  either.  He  went  to  fish  as  at  the  former 
times,  and  the  sea-maiden  rose  at  the  side  of  the  boat, 
and  she  asked  him,  "  Didst  thou  bring  thy  son  hither 
to  me  ? "  "  Och  !  I  forgot  him  this  time  too,"  said  the 
old  man.  "Go  home  then,"  said  the  sea-maiden,  "and 
at  the  end  of  seven  years  after  this,  thou  art  sure  to 
remember  me,  but  then  it  will  not  be  the  easier  for  thee 
to  pari  with  him,  but  thou  shalt  get  fish  as  thou  used 
to  do," 

The  old  man  went  home  full  of  joy  ;  he  had  got 
n  other  years  of  his  son,  and    before  seven  years 


74  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

passed,  the  old  man  thought  that  he  himself  would  be 
dead,  and  that  he  would  see  the  sea-maiden  no  more. 
But  no  matter,  the  end  of  those  seven  years  was  near- 
ing  also,  and  if  it  was,  the  old  man  was  not  without 
care  and  trouble.  He  had  rest  neither  day  nor  night. 
The  eldest  son  asked  his  father  one  day  if  any  one 
were  troubling  him  1  The  old  man  said  that  some  one 
was,  but  that  belonged  neither  to  him  nor  to  any  one 
else.  The  lad  said  he  must  know  what  it  was.  His 
father  told  him  at  last  how  the  matter  was  between 
him  and  the  sea-maiden.  "Let  not  that  put  you  in 
any  trouble,"  said  the  son ;  "I  will  not  oppose  you." 
"  Thou  shalt  not ;  thou  shalt  not  go,  my  son,  though 
I  should  not  get  fish  for  ever."  "  If  you  will  not  let  me 
go  with  you,  go  to  the  smithy,  and  let  the  smith  make 
me  a  great  strong  sword,  and  I  will  go  to  the  end  of 
fortune."  His  father  went  to  the  smithy,  and  the  smith 
made  a  doughty  sword  for  him.  His  father  came  home 
with  the  sword.  The  lad  grasped  it  and  gave  it  a 
shake  or  two,  and  it  went  in  a  hundred  splinters.  He 
asked  his  father  to  go  to  the  smithy  and  get  him 
another  sword  in  which  there  should  be  twice  as  much 
weight ;  and  so  did  his  father,  and  so  likewise  it  hap- 
pened to  the  next  sword — it  broke  in  two  halves. 
Back  went  the  old  man  to  the  smithy ;  and  the  smith 
made  a  great  sword,  its  like  he  never  made  before. 
"There's  thy  sword  for  thee,"  said  the  smith,  "and 
the  fist  must  be  good  that  plays  this  blade."  The  old 
man  gave  the  sword  to  his  son,  he  gave  it  a  shake  or 
two.  "This  will  do,"  said  he;  "it's  high  time  now 
to  travel  on  my  way."  On  the  next  morning  he  put 
a  saddle  on  the  black  horse  that  the  mare  had,  and  he 
put  the  world  under  his  head,*  and  his  black  dog  was 

*  Took  the  world  for  his  pillow. 


THE   SEA-MAIDEN.  75 

by  his  side.  When  he  went  on  a  bit,  he  fell  in  with 
the  carcass  of  a  sheep  beside  the  road.  At  the  carrion 
were  a  great  dog,  a  falcon,  and  an  otter.  He  came  down 
off  the  horse,  and  he  divided  the  carcass  amongst  the 
three.  Three  third  shares  to  the  dog,  two  third  shares 
to  the  otter,  and  a  third  share  to  the  falcon.  "For 
this,"  said  the  dog,  "if  swiftness  of  foot  or  sharpness 
of  tooth  will  give  thee  aid,  mind  me,  and  I  will  be  at 
thy  side."  Said  the  otter,  "  If  the  swimming  of  foot 
on  the  ground  of  a  pool  will  loose  thee,  mind  me,  and 
I  will  be  at  thy  side."  Said  the  falcon,  "  if  hardship 
comes  on  thee,  where  swiftness  of  wing  or  crook  of  a 
claw  will  do  good,  mind  me,  and  I  will  be  at  thy  side." 
On  this  he  went  onward  till  he  reached  a  king's 
house,  and  he  took  service  to  be  a  herd,  and  his  wages 
were  to  be  according  to  the  milk  of  the  cattle.  He 
went  away  with  the  cattle,  and  the  grazing  was  but 
bare.  When  lateness  came  (in  the  evening),  and  when 
he  took  (them)  home  they  had  not  much  milk,  the 
place  was  so  bare,  and  his  meat  and  drink  was  but  spare 
this  night. 

On  the  next  day  he  went  on  further  with  them  ;  and 
at  last  he  came  to  a  place  exceedingly  grassy,  in  a  green 
glen,  of  which  he  never  saw  the  like. 

But  about  the  time  when  he  should  go  behind  the 
cattle,  for  taking  homewards,  who  is  seen  coming  but 
a  great  giant  with  his  sword  in  his  hand.  "  HlU ! 
Hau  ! !  Hogaraich  !  ! ! "  says  the  giant.  "It  is  long 
since  my  teeth  were  rusted  seeking  thy  flesh.  The 
cattle  are  mine  ;  they  are  on  my  march  ;  and  a  dead 
man  art  thou."  "I  said,  not  that,"  says  the  herd; 
"  there  is  no  knowing,  but  that  may  be  easier  to  say 
than  to  do." 

To  grips  they  go — himself  and  the  giant.     He  saw 


76  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

that  he  was  far  from  his  friend,  and  near  his  foe.  He 
drew  the  great  clean-sweeping  sword,  and  he  neared 
the  giant ;  and  in  the  play  of  the  battle  the  black 
dog  leaped  on  the  giant's  back.  The  herd  drew  back 
his  sword,  and  the  head  was  off  the  giant  in  a  twink- 
ling. He  leaped  on  the  black  horse,  and  he  went  to 
look  for  the  giant's  house.  He  reached  a  door,  and  in 
the  haste  that  the  giant  made  he  had  left  each  gate  and 
door  open.  In  went  the  herd,  and  that's  the  place 
where  there  was  magnificence  and  money  in  plenty,  and 
dresses  of  each  kind  on  the  wardrobe  with  gold  and 
silver,  and  each  thing  finer  than  the  other.  At  the 
mouth  of  night  he  took  himself  to  the  king's  house,  but 
he  took  not  a  thing  from  the  giant's  house.  And  when 
the  cattle  were  milked  this  night  there  was  milk.  He 
got  good  feeding  this  night,  meat  and  drink  without 
stint,  and  the  king  was  hugely  pleased  that  he  had 
caught  such  a  herd.  He  went  on  for  a  time  in  this 
way,  but  at  last  the  glen  grew  bare  of  grass,  and  the 
grazing  was  not  so  good. 

But  he  thought  he  would  go  a  little  further  forward 
in  on  the  giant's  land ;  and  he  sees  a  great  park  of 
grass.  He  returned  for  the  cattle,  and  he  puts  them 
into  the  park. 

They  were  but  a  short  time  grazing  in  the  park  when 
a  great  wild  giant  came  full  of  rage  and  madness.  "Hiu ! 
Haw  ! !  Hoagraich  ! ! !  "  said  the  giant.  "It  is  a  drink 
of  thy  blood  that  quenches  my  thirst  this  night." 
"There  is  no  knowing,"  said  the  herd,  "but  that's  easier 
to  say  than  to  do."  And  at  each  other  went  the  men. 
There  was  the  shaking  of  blades !  At  length  and  at 
last  it  seemed  as  if  the  giant  would  get  the  victory 
over  the  herd.     Then  he  called  on  his  dog,  and  with 


THE   SEA-MAIDEN.  77 

one  spring  the  black  dog  caught  the  giant  by  the  neck, 
and  swiftly  tin*  herd  struck  off  his Jiead. 

He  went  home  very  tired  this  night,  but  it's  a 
wonder  if  the  king's  cattle  had  not  milk.  The  whole 
family  was  delighted  that  they  had  got  such  a  herd. 

He  followed  herding  in  this  way  for  a  time  ;  but  one 
night  after  he  came  home,  instead  of  getting  "  all  hail " 
and  "good  luck"  from  the  dairymaid,  all  were  at  crying 
and  woe. 

He  asked  what  cause  of  woe  there  was  this  night. 
The  dairymaid  said  that  a  great  beast  with  three  heads 
was  in  the  loch,  and  she  was  to  get  (some)  one  every 
year,  and  the  lots  had  come  this  year  on  the  king's 
daughter,  "  and  in  the  middle  of  the  day  (to  morrow) 
she  is  to  meet  the  Uile  Bheist  at  the  upper  end  of  the 
loch,  but  there  is  a  great  suitor  yonder  who  is  going  to 
rescue  her." 

"  What  suitor  is  that  ? "  said  the  herd.  "  Oh,  he  is  a 
great  General  of  arms,"  said  the  dairymaid,  "and  when 
he  kills  the  beast,  he  will  marry  the  king's  daughter, 
for  the  king  has  said,  that  he  who  could  save  his 
daughter  should  get  her  to  marry." 

But  on  the  morrow  when  the  time  was  nearing, 
the  king's  daughter  and  this  hero  of  arms  went  to  give 
a  meeting  to  the  beast,  and  they  reached  the  black  corrie 
at  the  upper  end  of  the  loch.  They  were  but  a  short 
time  there  when  the  beast  stirred  in  the  midst  of  the 
loch ;  but  on  the  general's  seeing  this  terror  of  a  beast 
with  three  heads,  he  took  fright,  and  he  slunk  away, 
and  he  hid  himself.  And  the  king's  daughter  was 
under  fear  and  under  trembling  with  no  one  at  all  to 
save  her.  At  a  glance,  she  sees  a  doughty  handsome 
youth,  riding  a  black  horse,  and  coming  where  she  was. 
He  was  marvellously  arrayed,  and  full  armed,  and  his 


78  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

black  dog  moving  after  him.  "There  is  gloom  on 
thy  face,  girl,"  said  the  youth.  "What  dost  thou 
here?"  "Oh!  that's  no  matter"  said  the  king's 
daughter.  "  It's  not  long  I'll  be  here  at  all  events." 
"I  said  not  that,"  said  he.  "A  worthy  fled  as  likely 
as  thou,  and  not  long  since,"  said  she.  "He  is  a 
worthy  who  stands  the  war,"  said  the  youth.  He  lay 
down  beside  her,  and  he  said  to  her,  if  he  should  fall 
asleep,  she  should  rouse  him  when  she  should  see 
the  beast  making  for  shore.  "  What  is  rousing  for 
thee  1 "  said  she.  "  Rousing  for  me  is  to  put  the  gold 
ring  on  thy  finger  on  my  little  finger."  They  were 
not  long  there  when  she  saw  the  beast  making  for 
shore.  She  took  a  ring  off"  her  finger,  and  put  it  on 
the  little  finger  of  the  lad.  He  awoke,  and  to  meet 
the  beast  he  went  with  his  sword  and  his  dog. 
But  there  was  the  spluttering  and  splashing  between 
himself  and  the  beast !  The  dog  was  doing  all  he 
might,  and  the  king's  daughter  was  palsied  by  fear 
of  the  noise  of  the  beast.  They  would  now  be  under, 
and  now  above.  But  at  last  he  cut  one  of  the  heads 
off  her.  She  gave  one  roar  Raivic,  and  the  son  of 
earth,  Mactalla  of  the  rocks  (echo),  called  to  her 
screech,  and  she  drove  the  loch  in  spindrift  from  end 
to  end,  and  in  a  twinkling  she  went  out  of  sight. 
"  Good  luck  and  victory  that  were  following  thee, 
lad  ! "  said  the  king's  daughter.  "  I  am  safe  for  one 
night,  but  the  beast  will  come  again,  and  for  ever, 
until  the  other  two  heads  come  off  her."  He  caught 
the  beast's  head,  and  he  drew  a  withy  through  it,  and 
he  told  her  to  bring  it  with  her  there  to-morrow.  She 
went  home  with  the  head  on  her  shoulder,  and  the 
herd  betook  himself  to  the  cows,  but  she  had  not  gone 
far  when  this  great  General  saw  her,  and  he  said  to 


THE   SEA-MAIDEN.  79 

her  that  he  would  kill  her,  if  she  would  not  say  that 
'twas  he  took  the  head  off  the  beast.  "  Oh  !  "  says  she, 
"  'tis  I  will  say  it,  Who  else  took  the  head  off  the 
beast  but  thou  !  "  They  reached  the  king's  house, 
and  the  head  was  on  the  General's  shoulder.  But  here 
was  rejoicing,  that  she  should  come  home  alive  and 
whole,  and  this  great  captain  with  the  beast's  head 
full  of  blood  in  his  hand.  On  the  morrow  they  went 
away,  and  there  was  no  question  at  all  but  that  this 
hero  would  save  the  king's  daughter. 

They  reached  the  same  place,  and  they  were  not  long 
there  when  the  fearful  Uile  Bheist  stirred  in  the  midst 
of  the  loch,  and  the  hero  slunk  away  as  he  did  on 
yesterday,  but  it  was  not  long  after  this  when  the  man 
of  the  black  horse  came,  with  another  dress  on.  No 
matter,  she  knew  that  it  was  the  very  same  lad.  "  It  is 
I  am  pleased  to  see  thee,"  said  she.  "  I  am  in  hopes 
thou  wilt  handle  thy  great  sword  to-day  as  thou  didst 
yesterday.  Come  up  and  take  breath."  But  they  were 
not  long  there  when  they  saw  the  beast  steaming  in  the 
midst  of  the  loch. 

The  lad  lay  down  at  the  side  of  the  king's  daughter, 
and  he  said  to  her,  "  If  I  sleep  before  the  beast  comes, 
rouse  me."  "  What  is  rousing  for  thee  ? "  "Kousing  for 
me  is  to  put  the  ear-ring  that  is  in  thine  ear  in  mine." 
He  had  not  well  fallen  asleep  when  the  king's  daughter 
cried,  "rouse  !  rouse  !"  but  wake  he  would  not;  but  she 
took  the  ear-ring  out  of  her  ear,  and  she  put  it  in  the 
ear  of  the  lad.  At  once  he  woke,  and  to  meet  the 
beast  he  went,  but  there  was  Tloopersteich  and  Tlaper- 
stich,  rawceil  s'tawceil,  spluttering,  splashing,  raving  and 
roaring  on  the  beast !  They  kept  on  thus  for  a  long 
time,  and  about  the  mouth  of  night,  he  cut  another  head 
off  the  beast.      He  put  it  on  the  withy,  and  he  leaped 


80  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

on  the  black  horse,  and  he  betook  himself  to  the  herd- 
ing. The  king's  daughter  went  home  with  the  heads. 
The  General  met  her,  and  took  the  heads  from  her,  and 
he  said  to  her,  that  she  must  tell  that  it  was  he  who 
took  the  head  off  the  beast  this  time  also.  "  Who  else 
took  the  head  off  the  beast  but  thou  1 "  said  she.  They 
reached  the  king's  house  with  the  heads.  Then  there 
was  joy  and  gladness.  If  the  king  was  hopeful  the  first 
night,  he  was  now  sure  that  this  great  hero  would 
save  his  daughter,  and  there  was  no  question  at  all 
but  that  the  other  head  would  be  off  the  beast  on  the 
morrow. 

About  the  same  time  on  the  morrow,  the  two  went 
away.  The  officer  hid  himself  as  he  usually  did.  The 
king's  daughter  betook  herself  to  the  bank  of  the  loch. 
The  hero  of  the  black  horse  came,  and  he  lay  at  her 
side.  She  woke  the  lad,  and  put  another  ear-ring  in 
his  other  ear ;  and  at  the  beast  he  went.  But  if  rawceil 
and  toiceil,  roaring'and  raving  were  on  the  beast  on  the 
days  that  were  passed,  this  day  she  was  horrible.  But  no 
matter,  he  took  the  third  head  off  the  beast;  and  if  he 
did,  it  was  not  without  a  struggle.  He  drew  it  through 
the  withy,  and  she  went  home  with  the  heads.  When 
they  reached  the  king's  house,  all  were  full  of  smiles, 
and  the  General  ;vvas  to  marry  the  king's  daughter  the 
next  day.  The  wedding  was  going  on,  and  every  one 
about  the  castle  longing  till  the  priest  should  come. 
But  when  the  priest  came,  she  would  marry  but  the 
one  who  could  take  the  heads  off  the  withy  without 
cutting  the  withy.  "Who  should  take  the  heads  off 
the  withy  but  the  man  that  put  the  heads  on  1 "  said 
the  king. 

The  General  tried  them,  but  he  could  not  looso 
them ;  and  at  last  there  was  no  one  about  the  house 


THE  SEA-MAIDEN.  81 

but  had  tried  to  take  the  heads  off  the  withy,  but  they 
could  not.  The  king  asked  if  there  were  any  one  else 
about  the  house  that  would  try  to  take  the  heads  off 
the  withy  ?  They  said  that  the  herd  had  not  tried 
them  yet.  Word  went  for  the  herd ;  and  he  was  not 
long  throwing  them  hither  and  thither.  "  But  stop  a 
bit,  my  lad,"  said  the  king's  daughter,  "the  man  that 
took  the  heads  off  the  beast,  he  has  my  ring  and 
my  two  ear-rings."  The  herd  put  his  hand  in  his 
pocket,  and  he  threw  them  on  the  board.  "  Thou  art 
my  man,"  said  the  king's  daughter.  The  king  was  not 
so  pleased  when  he  saw  that  it  was  a  herd  who  was  to 
marry  his  daughter,  but  he  ordered  that  he  should  be 
put  in  a  better  dress ;  but  his  daughter  spoke,  and 
she  said  that  he  had  a  dress  as  fine  as  any  that  ever 
was  in  his  castle ;    and  thus  it  happened.      The  herd 

put  on  the  giant's  golden  dress,  and  they  married  that 

•  ^  &  £** 

same  night. 

They  were  now  married,  and  everything  going  on  -*♦/*■ 
well.      They  were  one  day  sauntering  by  the  side  of 
the   loch,   and   there  came  a  beast  more  wonderfully 
terrible  than  the  other,  and  takes  him  away  to  the  loch  w  *$* 
without  fear,  or  asking.     The  king's  daughter  was  now  **** 
mournful,  tearful,  blind-sorrowful  for  her  married  man ;  ^* 
she  was  always  with  her  eye  on  the  loch.      An  old 
smith  met  her,  and  she  told  how  it  had  befallen  her 
married  mate.     The  smith  advised  her  to  spread  every- 
thing that  was  finer  than  another  in  the  very  same 
place  where  the  beast  took  away  her  man  j  and  so  she 
did.     The  beast  put  up  her  nose,  and  she  said,   "  Fine  n 
is  thy  jewellery,  king's  daughter."     "Finer  than  that 
is  the   jewel   that   thou  tookest   from  me,"  said   she.  m 
"  Give  me  one  sight  of  my  man,  and  thou  shalt  get  any 
one  thing  of  all  these  thou  seest."     The  beast  brought  : 


82  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

him  up.  "Deliver  him  to  me,  and  thou  shalt  get  all 
thou  seest,"  said  she.  The  beast  did  as  she  said.  She 
threw  him  alive  and  whole  on  the  bank  of  the  loch. 

A  short  time  after  this,  Avhen  they  were  walking  at 
the  side  of  the  loch,  the  same  beast  took  away  the 
king's  daughter.  Sorrowful  was  each  one  that  was  in 
the  town  on  this  night.  Her  man  was  mournful,  tear- 
ful, wandering  down  and  up  about  the  banks  of  the 
loch,  by  day  and  night.  The  old  smith  met  him.  The 
smith  told  him  that  there  was  no  way  of  killing  the 
Uille  Bheist  but  the  one  way,  and  this  is  it — "In  the 
island  that  is  in  the  midst  of  the  loch  is  Eillid  Chais- 
fhion — the  white  footed  hind,  of  the  slenderest  legs, 
and  the  swiftest  step,  and  though  she  should  be  caught, 
there  would  spring  a  hoodie  out  of  her,  and  though 
the  hoodie  should  be  caught,  there  would  spring  a  trout 
out  of  her,  but  there  is  an  egg  in  the  mouth  of  the 
trout,  and  the  soul  of  the  beast  is  in  the  egg,  and  if  the 
egg  breaks,  the  beast  is  dead. 

Now,  there  was  no  way  of  getting  to  this  island, 
for  the  beast  would  sink  each  boat  and  raft  that  would 
go  on  the  loch.  He  thought  he  would  try  to  leap  the 
strait  with  the  black  horse,  and  even  so  he  did.  The 
black  horse  leaped  the  strait,  and  the  black  dog  with 
one  bound  after  him.  He  saw  the  Eillid,  and  he  let  the 
black  dog  after  her,  but  when  the  black  dog  would  be 
on  one  side  of  the  island,  the  Eillid  would  be  on  the 
other  side.  "  Oh  !egood  were  now  the  great  dog  of  the 
carcass  of  flesh  here ! "  No  sooner  spoke  he  the  word 
than  the  generous  dog  was  at  his  side ;  and  after  the 
Eillid  he  took,  and  the  worthies  were  not  long  in 
bringing  her  to  earth.  But  he  no  sooner  caught  her 
than  a  hoodie  sprang  out  of  her.  "'Tis  now,  were 
good   the   falcon   grey,   of   sharpest   eye   and   swiftest 


ZU-  <f*"0™   1%  :\f*b 


t    t-     t  r  ■  it    *  t**JL  a     j 


I 


jv  %     -WW    K  #v 


THE   SEA-MAID  EN.  83 

wing ! "  No  sooner  said  he  this  than  the  falcon  was 
after  the  hoodie,  and  she  was  not  long  putting  her  to 
earth ;  and  as  the  hoodie  fell  on  the  bank  of  the  loch, 
out  of  her  jumps  the  trout.  "  Oh,  that  thou  wert  by 
me  now,  oh  otter  !  "  No  sooner  said  than  the  otter  was 
at  his  side,  and  out  on  the  loch  she  leaped,  and  brings 
the  trout  from  the  midst  of  the  loch ;  but  no  sooner 
was  the  otter  on  shore  with  the  trout  than  the  egg 
came  from  his  mouth.  He  sprang  and  he  put  his  foot  «f  *  fl> 
on  it.  'Twas  then  the  beast  let  out  a  roar,  and  she 
said,  "Break  not  the  egg,  and  thou  gettest  all  thou 
askest."  "Deliver  to  me  my  wife?"  In  the  wink  of 
an  eye  she  was  by  his  side.  When  he  got  hold  of  her 
hand  in  both  his  hands  he  let  his  foot  (down)  on  the  egg 
and  the  beast  died. 

The  beast  was  dead  now,  and  now  was  the  sight  to 
be  seen.  She  was  horrible  to  look  upon.  The  three 
heads  were  off  her  doubtless,  but  if  they  were,  there 
were  heads  under  and  heads  over  head  on  her,  and 
eyes,  and  five  hundred  feet.  But  no  matter,  they  left 
her  there,  and  they  went  home,  and  there  was  delight 
and  smiling  in  the  king's  house  that  night.  And  till 
now  he  had  not  told  the  king  how  he  killed  the  giants. 
The  king  put  great  honour  on  him,  and  he  was  a  great 
man  with  the  king. 

Himself  and  his  wife  were  walking  one  day,  when 
he  noticed  a  little  castle  beside  the  loch  in  a  wood ;  he 
asked  his  wife  who  was  dwelling  in  it  ?  She  said  that 
no  one  would  be  going  near  that  castle,  for  that  no  one 
had  yet  come  back  to  tell  the  tale,  who  had  gone  there. 

"The  matter  must  not  be  so,"  said  he;  "this  very 
night  I  will  see  who  is  dwelling  in  it."  "Go  not, 
go  not,"  said  she;  "there  never  went  man  to  this 
castle  that  returned."      "Be  that  as  it  pleases,"  says 


'?& 


84  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

he.     He    went  j    he   betakes    himself    to    the    castle. 

When  he  reached  the  door,  a  little  nattering  crone  met 

%*M    '•'  Of  him  standing  in  the  door.      "  All  hail  and  good  luck 

to   thee,    fisher's    son;    'tis   I   myself    am    pleased   to 

=oU.  ^'Lsee  thee;  great  is  the  honour  for  this  kingdom,  thy 

like  to  be  come  into  it — thy  coming  in  is  fame  for 

this  little  bothy ;  go  in  first ;  honour  to  the  gentles ;  go 

on,  and   take   breath."     In   he   went,  but  as   he  was 

a    -  A.  &omS  UP>  sfe?.  drew  the  Slachdan  druidhach  on  him,  on 

the  back  of  his  head,  and  at  once — there  he  fell. 

On  this  night  there  was  woe  in  the  king's  castle, 
and  on  the  morrow  there  was  a  wail  in  the  fisher's 
house.  The  tree  is  seen  withering,  and  the  fisher's 
middle  son  said  that  his  brother  was  dead,  and  he  made 
a  vow  and  oath,  that  he  would  go,  and  that  he  would 
know  where  the  corpse  of  his  brother  was  lying.  He 
put  saddle  on  a  black  horse,  and  rode  after  his  black 
dog  ;  (for  the  three  sons  of  the  fisher  had  a  black  horse 
and  a  black  dog),  and  without  going  hither  or  thither 
he  followed  on  his  brother's  step  till  he  reached  the 
[\<4J<  u^'J      king's  house. 

This  one  was  so  like  his  elder  brother,  that  the  king's 
daughter  thought  it  was  her  own  man.  He  stayed  in 
the  castle.  They  told  him  how  it  befell  his  brother  ; 
and  to  the  little  castle  of  the  crone,  go  he  must — hap- 
pen hard  or  soft  as  it  might.  To  the  castle  he  went ; 
and  just  as  befell  the  eldest  brother,  so  in  each  way  it 
befell  the  middle  son,  and  with  one  blow  of  the  Slach- 
dan druidhach,  the  crone  felled  him  stretched  beside  his 
brother. 

On  seeing  the  second  tree  withering,  the  fisher's 
youngest  son  said  that  now  his  two  brothers  were  dead, 
and  that  he  must  know  what  death  had  come  on  them. 
On  the  black  horse  he  went,  and  he  followed  the  dog  as 


;V, 


THE   SEA-MAIDEN.  85 

his  brothers  did,  and  he  hit  the  king's  house  before  he 
stopped.  'Twas  the  king  who  was  pleased  to  see  him  ; 
but  to  the  black  castle  (for  that  was  its  name)  they  would 
not  let  him  go.  But  to  the  castle  he  must  go  ;  and  so 
he  reached  the  castle. — "  All  hail  and  good  luck  to  thy- 
self, fisher's  son  :  'tis  I  am  pleased  to  see  thee ;  go  in 
and  take  breath,"  said  she  (the  crone).  "  In  before  me 
thou  crone :  I  don't  like  flattery  out  of  doors ;  go  in  and 
let's  hear  thy  speech."  In  went  the  crone,  and  when 
her  back  was  to  him  he  drew  his  sword  and  whips  her 
head  off;  but  the  sword  flew  out  of  his  hand.  And  c>  '-'«*-,*. pj 
swift  the  crone  gripped  her  head  with  both  hands,  and  v\. 
puts  it  on  her  neck  as  it  was  before., :  jThe  dog_sprung 
on  the  crone,  and  she  struck  the  generous  dog  with  the 
clubofmagjc ;  and  there  he  lay.  But  this  went  not  to  r 
make  the  youth  more  sluggish.  To  grips  with  the  crone 
he  goes  ;  he  got  a  hold  of  the  Slachan  druidhach,  and 
with  one  blow  on  the  top  of  the  head,  she  was  on  earth 
in  the  wink  of  an  eye.  He  went  forward,  up  a  little, 
and  he  sees  his  two  brothers  lying  side  by  side.  He  gave 
a  blow  to  each  one  with  the  Slachdan  druidhach  and  on 
foot  they  were,  and  there  was  the  spoil !  Gold  and 
silver,  and  each  thing  more  precious  than  another,  in  the 
crone's  castle.  They  came  back  to  the  king's  house,  and 
then  there  was  rejoicing  !  The  king  was  growing  old. 
The  eldest  son  of  the  fisherman  was  crowned  king,  and 
the  pair  of  brothers  stayed  a  day  and  a  year  in  the 
king's  house,  and  then  the  two  went  on  their  journey 
home,  with  the  gold  and  silver  of  the  crone,  and  each 
other  grand  thing  which  the  king  gave  them ;  and  if 
they  have  not  died  since  then^  they  are  alive  to  this 
very  day. 

Written,  April  1850,  by  Hector  Urqubart,  from  the  dictation 
of  John  Mackenzie,   fisherman,   Kenmore,  near  Inverary,  who 

t  77  . 


86  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

says  that  lie  learned  it  from  an  old  man  in  Lorn  many  years  ago. 
He  has  lived  for  thirty-six  years  at  Kenmore.  He  told  the  tale 
fluently  at  first,  and  then  dictated  it  slowly. 

The  Gaelic  is  given  as  nearly  as  possible  in  the  words  used  by 
Mackenzie,  but  he  thinks  his  story  rather  shortened. 


A  MHAIGHDEAN  MHARA. 

Bha  ann  roimhe  so,  sean  iasgair  bochd,  ach  air  a  bhliadhna  so, 
cha  robh  e  faotainn  a  bheag  do  dh'iasg.  Latha  do  na  laithean  's 
e  'giasgach,  dh'  eirich  maighdean-mhara  ri  taobh  a  bhata,  's  dh' 
f he6raich  i  dheth,  An  robh  e  faotainn  a  bheag  do  dh'iasg  ?  Fhreag- 
air  an  seann  duine,  's  thubhairt  e  nach  robh.  "De  'n  duais  a 
bheireadh  tu  dh6mhsa  airson  pailteas  &sg  a  chuir  thugad?"  '  'Ach I" 
ars'  an  seann  duine,  "  Cha  'n  'eil  a  bheag  agamsa  ri  sheachnadh. " 
"  An  toir  thu  dhomh  an  ceud  mhac  a  bhitheas  agad  ?  "  ars'  ise. 
4"S  mise  a  bheireadh  sin  dhuit  na  'in  biodh  mac  agam  ;  cha  robh 
's  cha  bhi  mac  agamsa,"  ars'  esan  ;  "tha  mi  fein  's  mo  bhean  air 
cinntinn  co  sean.  '  Ainmich  na  bheil  agud.'  Cha 'n 'eil  agamsa 
ach  seann  lair  eich,  seana  ghalla  choin,  mi  fein  's  mo  bhean ;  sin 
agadsa  na  tha  chreutairean  an  t-saoghail  mhor  agamsa."  "So 
agad,  mata,  tri  spilgeanan  a  bheir  thu  do  d'  mhnaoi  air  an  oidh- 
che  nochd,  agus  tri  eile  do  'n  ghalla,  agus  an  trl  so  do  'n  chapull, 
agus  an  trl  so  mar  an  ceudna,  cuiridh  tu  air  ciil  do  thighe  ;  agus 
'nan  am  fein  bithidh  triiiir  mhac  aig  do  bhean,  tri  searraich  aig 
an  lair,  tri  cuileanan  aig  a  ghalla,  agus  cinnidh  tri  chraobhan  air 
cul  do  thighe,  agus  bithidh  na  craobhan  'nan  samhladh  ;  'nuair  a 
bhasaicheas  a  h-aon  do  na  mic  seargaidh  te  do  na  craobhan.  Nis, 
thoir  do  thigh  ort,  agus  coinnich  mise  dur  a  bhitheas  do  mhac 
tri  bliadhna  'dh'  aois,  's  gheibh  thu  fein  pailteas  eisg  an  d&gh. 
so."  Thachair  na  h-uile  ni  mar  a  thubhairt  a  mhaighdean-mhara ; 
agus  bha  e  fein  a  faotainn  pailteas  eisg,  ach  a  nuair  a  bha  ceann 
nan  tri  bliadhna  a  dliithachadh  bha  an  seann  duine  a  fas  cianail, 
trom-chridheach,  's  e  'dol  uaithe  na  h-uile  latha  mar  bha  teachd. 
Air  comhainm  an  latha,  chaidh  e'  dh'  iasgachd  mar  a  b'abhaist, 
ach  cha  d'-thug  e  mhac  leis. 

Dh'  eirich  a  mhaighdean-mhara  ri  taobh  a  bhata,  's  dh'  fharraid 
i,  "an  d'-thug  thu  leat  do  mhac  thugam  ?  "  "  Ach  !  cha  d'-thug, 
dhi-chuimhnich  mi  gu  'mi  b'e  so  an  latha."     "  Seadh  !  seadh  ! 


A  MHAIGHDEAN   MHARA.  87 

mata,"  ars'  a  mhaighdean-mhara,  "gheibh  thu  ceithir  bliadbn' 
eile  dheth  ;  faodaidh  gur  ann  is  usa  dhuit  dealachadh  ria  ;  so 
agad  a  chorahaoise,"  'si  togail  suas  leanabh  breagha  sultmhor, 
"am  bheil  do  mhac-sa  cho  breagha  ris  ?  "  Dh'  fhalbh  e  dhach- 
aidh  Ian  sodain  is  s61ais,  a  cbionn  gu  n  d'  fhuair  e  ceithir  bliadhn' 
eile  d'a  mhac  ;  's  bha  e'g-iasgach  'sa'  faotainn  pailteas  eisg.  'Aeh 
an  ceann  na  h-ath  cheithir  bliadhna,  bhuail  mulad  's  br6u  e,  !s 
cha  ghabhadh  e  15n  's  cha  deanadh  e  turn,  's  cha  robh  a'  bhean  a 
tuigsinn  de  a  bha  cur  air.  Air  an  am  so,  cha  robh  fios  aige  de 
'dheanadh  e,  ach  chuir  e  roimhe,  nach  d'-thugadh  e  leis  a  mhac 
air  an  uair  so  nis  md.  Dh'-fhalbh  e  dh'  iasgach  mar  air  na 
h-uairean  roimhe,  's  dh'eirich  a  mhaighdean-mhara  ri  taobh  a 
bhata,  's  dh'  fhe5raich  i  dheth,  "An  d'  thug  thu  thugam  do 
mhac?"  "Ach  dhi-chuimhnuich  mi  e  air  an  uair  so  cuideachd, " 
ars'  an  seann  duine.  "Falbh  dhachaidh,  mata,"  ars'  a  mhaigh- 
dean-mbara,  "  agus  an  ceann  seachd  bliadhna  na  dheigh  so,  tha 
thu  cinnteacb  mis'  a  choinneachadh  ;  ach  cha  'n  ann  an  sin  is  usa 
dhuit  dealachadh  ris ;  ach  gheibh  thu  iasg  mar  a  b-abhaist 
dhuit." 

Chaidh  an  seann  duine  dhachaidh  lau  aoibhneis  :  fhuar  e 
seachd  bliadhn'  eile  d'a  mhac  !  agus  mu'n  rachadh  seachd  bliadh- 
na seachad,  bha  'n  seann  duine  a  smuaineachadh  gu  'm  biodh  e 
fein  marbh,  agus  nach  faiceadh  e  'mhaighdean-mhara  tuillidh. 
Ach  coma  co  dhiu,  bha  ceann  nan  seachd  bliadhna  so  a  dluth- 
achadh  cuideacbd,  agus  ma  'bha  cha  robh  an  seann  duine  gun 
churam  a's  trioblaid.  Cha  robh  fois  aige  a  latha  na  dh'  oidhche. 
Dh'  fhe6raich  am  mac  bu  shine  d'a  athair,  aon  latha,  an  robh  ni 
air  bith  a'  cuir  dragh  air  ?  Thubhairt  an  seann  duine  gu'n 
robh,  ach  nach  buineadh  sin  dhasan,  na  do  neach  air  bith  eile. 
Thubhairt  an  t-oganach  gu  'm  feuinadh  e  fios  fhaotainn  air,  's 
dh'innis  athair  dha  mu  dheireadh  mar  a  bha  chuis  eadar  e  fein 
'sa  mhaighdean-mhara.  "  Na  cuireadh  sin  curam  'sam  bith 
oirbh,"  ars*  am  mac  :  "Cha  teid,  mise  na  'r  n-aghaidh."  u  Cha 
teid,  cha  teid,  a  mhic,  ged  nach  faighinn  iasg  achaoidh."  "Mur 
leig  sibh  dhomh  dol  maille  ribh,  racbaibh  do'n  cheardach,  agus 
deanadh  an  gobha  claidheamh  m6r  laidir  dbomhsa,  's  falbhaidh 
mi  air  ceann  an  fhortain."  Chaidh  athair  do  'n  cheardaich,  's 
rinn  .in  gobha  claidheamh.  Rug  an  t-6ganach  air  's  thug  e 
crathadh  na  dha  air,  's  dh'  fhalbh  e  'na  cheud  spealg.  Dh'  iarr 
e  air  'athair  dol  do'n  cheardaich,  agus  claidheamh  eile  fhaotainn 
deanta,  anns  am  bitheadh  a  dha  uiread  do  chudthrom  ;  agus  mar 


88  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

so  rinn  athair,  agus  air  an  doigh  cheudna  thachair  do  'n  chlaidh- 
eamh  ;  bhrist  e  na  dha  leth.  Air  ais  chaidh  an  seann  duine 
^o'n  cheardaich,  agus  rinn  an  gobha  claidheamh  mor ;  a  leithid, 
cha  d'  rinn  e  riamh  roimhe.  "  So  agad  do  chL,idheamh,"  ars' 
an  gobha,  "  's  feumaidh  an  dorn  a  bhi  maith  a  chluicheas  an 
lann  so."  Thug  an  seann  duine  an  claidheamh  d'a  mhac  ;  thug 
e  crathadh  na  dithis  air;  "Ni  so  feum,"  ars'  am  mac,  "  's 
mithich  a  nis  triall  air  mo  thuras,"  ars'  esan.  Air  maduinn  an 
ath  latha,  chuir  e  diollaid  air  an  each  dubh  a  bha  aig  an  lair, 
agus  thug  e  'n  saoghal  fuidh'  cheann  's  an  cuth  dubh  ri  thaobh. 
'N  uair  a  chaidh  e  greis  air  aghaidh,  thachair  carcais  caora  ris 
aig  taobh  an  rathaid.  Aig  a  chai'cais  bha  madadh  mdr,  seabhag, 
agus  dobhran.  Theirin  e  bhar  an  eich,  agus  roinn  e  a'  chlosach 
eadar  an  triuir.  Tri  trianan  do'n  mhadadh,  da  thrian  do'n 
dobhran,  agus  trian  do'n  t-seabhag.  "  Airson  so, "  ars'  am  madadh, 
"Ma  ni  luathas  chas  na  geire  fiacail  cobhair  dhuit,  cuimhnich 
orinsa,  agus  bithidh  mi  ri  d'  thaobh."  Thubhairt  an  dobhran, 
"Ma  ni  snamh  coise  air  grunnd  linne  fuasgladh  ort,  cuimhnich 
ormsa  agus  bithidh  mi  ri  'd'  thaobh."  Ars'  an  t-seabhag, 
"Ma  thig  cruaidh  chas  ort,  far  an  dean  luathas  itean  na  crom 
ionga  feum,  cuimhnich  ormsa,  's  bithidh  mi  ri  'd'  thaobh." 
Ghabh  e  'n  so  air  aghaidh,  gus  an  d'raiuig  e  tigh  rlgh,  's  ghabh  e 
muinntearas  gu  bhi  'na  bhuachaille,  agus  's  ann  a  reir  's  na  bhith- 
eadh  do  bhainne  aig  a  chrodh  a  bhiodh  a  thuarasdal.  Chaidh  e 
air  falbh  leis  a  chrodh,  ach  cha  robh  an  t-ionaltradh  ach  lom. 
'Nuair  a  thainig  an  t-anmoch,  's  a  thug  e  dhachaidh  iad,  cha 
robh  'bheag  do  bhainn'  aca,  bha  'n  t-aite  co  lom,  's  cha  robh 
'bhindh  na  'dheoch  ach  suarrach  air  an  oidhche  so.  Air  an  ath 
latha,  ghabh  e  air  adhart  ni  b'  fhaide  leo,  agus  mu  dheireadh 
thainig  e  gu  aite  anabarrach  feurach,  ann  an  gleann  uaine  nach 
fac  e  riamh  a  leithid.  Ach  mu  am  dha  dol  mu  chul  a  chruidh  gn 
'n  tabhairt  dhachaidh,  co  a  chithear  a'  tighinn  ach  famhair  m6r, 
'sa  chlaidheamh  'na  laimh.  "Hiu!  Hau  !  Hoagraich  ! "  ars* 
am  famhair,  "  's  fada  bho  'n  bha  meirg  air  m'  fhiaclan  ag  iarraidh 
do  chuid  feola  :  's  leamsa  'n  crodh,  tha  iad  air  mo  chrich,  agus  is 
duine  marbh  thusa."  "Cha  dubhairt  mi  sin,"  ars'  am  buach- 
aille  ;   "cha  'n  'eil  fios  nach  usa  sin  a  radh  na  dheanamh." 

Ann  am  badaibh  a'  cheile  gabhar  e  fein  's  am  famhair.  Chun- 
naic  e  gu  'n  robh  e  fada  bho  a  charaid  's  dlu  d'a  namhaid. 
Tharruing  e  'n  claidheamh  mor  nach  fhagadh  fuigheal  beum,  agus 
dhluthaich  e  ris  an  fhamhair,  agus  ann  am  mireadh  a  chatha 


A  MHAIGHDEAN   MHARA.  89 

leum  an  cu  dubh  air  cul  an  fhamhair,  's  tharruing  am  buachaill' 
a  chlaidheamh  's  bha  'n  ceann  do  'n  fhamhair  ann  am  prioba  na 
sail.  Leum  e  air  muin  an  eich  dhuibh,  agus  chaidh  e  shealltainn 
airson  tigh  an  fhamhair.  Rainig  e  'n  dorus,  agus  leis  a'  chabhaig, 
a  bha  air  an  fhamhair,  dh'  fhag  e  gach  geata  's  gach  dorus 
fosgailte.  'Steach  chaidh  am  buachaille,  agus  'sann  an  sin  a  bha 
'n  greadhnachas,  6r  's  airgiod  ann  am  pailteas,  's  trusgain  dheth 
gach  se6rsa  air  am  faitheam  le  6r  's  airgiod,  's  gach  ni  bu 
rlomhaiche  na  cheile.  Am  beul  na  h-oidche  thug  e  caisteal  an 
rlgh  air,  ach  cha  d'  thug  e  dad  air  bith  leis  a  tigh  an  fhamhair ; 
agas  a  nuair  a  chaidh  an  crodh  a  bhleoghan,  's  ann  an  sin  a  bha 
'm  bainne.  Fhuair  e  de  bheatha  mhaith  air  an  oidhche  so,  biadh 
's  deoch  gun  ghainne,  agus  bha  an  rlgh  anabarrach  toilichte,  gu 
'n  d'  fhuair  e  greim  air  a  leithid  do  bhuachaille.  Chaidh  e  air 
aghaidh  air  son  uine  air  an  ddigh  so,  ach  mu  dheireadh,  dh'  fhas 
an  gleann  lorn  do  dh'  fheur,  agus  cha  robh  an  t-ionaltradh  cho 
maith.  Ach  smaoinich  e  gun  rachadh  e  air  aghaidh  beagan  ni 
b'fhaide  a'  stigh  air  cdir  an  fhamhair,  agus  faicear  pairce  mh6r  do 
fheur.  Thill  e  airson  a  chruidh  agus  cuirear  a  stigh  do  'n 
pbairce  iad.  Cha  robh  iad  ach  goirid  ag  ionaltradh  'sa  phairce, 
'nuair  a  thainig  famhair  m6r,  fiadhaich,  Ian  fearg  agus  corruich 
"  Heu  !  h6  !  hoagraich ! "  ars'  am  famhair,  "  'se  deoch  do  d' 
fhail  a  chaisgeas  mo  phathadh  a  nochd."  "  Cha  'n'  eilfios,"  ars' 
am  buachaille,  "nach  fasa  sin  a  radh  na  dheanamh."  Ach  na 
cheile  ghabh  na  fir,  's  ann  an  sin  a  bha  'n  crathadh  lann.  Mu 
dheireadh  thall  bha  coltas  air  gu'm  faigheadh  am  famhair 
buaidh  air  a  bhuachaille.  'N  sin  ghlaodh  e  air  a  chu,  agus  le 
aon  leum,  rug  an  cii  dubh  air  amhaich  air  an  fhamhair,  's  ghrad 
bhuail  am  buachaille  an  ceann  de. 

Chaidh  e  dhachaidh  gle  sglth  air  an  oidhche  so,  ach  nu'r 
thaing,  mar  a'  robh  bainne  aig  crodh  an  righ  !  's  bha  'n  teaglach 
air  fad  co  toilichte  air  son  gun  d'  fhuair  iad  a'  leithid  so  do 
bhaachaille.  Lean  e  air  a  bhuachailleachd  air  an  doigh  so  re 
uine  ;  ach  oidhche  's  e  air  tighinn  dhachaidh,  an  aite  do  'n 
bhanaraich  furan's  failte  'chur  air,  's  ann  a  bha  iad  air  fad  ri 
cumha  's  ri  br6n.  Dh'  fhoighneachd  e  de  'n  t-aobhar  broin  a 
bha'  so  an  nochd.  Thubhairt  a  bhanarach,  gu  V  robh  beist 
mh6r  le  tri  chinn  'san  loch,  agus  gu  'n  robh  i  ri  aon  fhaotainn  a 
h-uile  bliadhna,  agus  gu  'n  d'  thainig  an  crannchur  am  bliadhna 
air  nighean  an  rlgh,  "'s  mu  mheadhon  latha  'maireach,  tha  i 
ri  coinneachainn  na  huile-bheist  aig  ceann  shuas  an  loch  ;  ach  tha 


90  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

suiriche  mor  an  siud  a  tha  'dol  g'a  tearnadh."  "  De  'n  suiriche 
a  tha  ann  ?  "  thubhairt  am  buachaille.  "  0  !  tha  Seanalair  mor 
airm,"  thubhairt  a'  bhanarach,  "agus  a  nuair  a  mharbhas  e 
'bheist,  posaidh  e  nighean  an  rlgh ;  oir  thubhairt  an  righ  'ge  b'e 
thearnadh  a  nighean,  gu  'faigheadh  e  i  ri  phosadh."  Ach  air  an 
latha  'maireach,  'nuair  a  bha  an  t-am  a  dluthachainn,  dh'  fhalbh 
nighean  an  righ  's  an  gaisgeach  airm  so  gu  coinneamh  a  thabhairt 
do  'n  bheist,  's  rainig  iad  an  Coire  dubh  aig  ceann  shuas  an  loch. 
Cha  robh  iad  ach  goirid  an  sin  'nuair  a  ghluais  a  bheist  ann  am 
meadhon  an  loch  ;  ach  air  do'n  t-Seanalair  an  t-uamhas  beiste  so 
fhaicinn  le  tri  chinn,  ghabh  e  eagal,  's  sheap  e  air  falbh  's  dh' 
fhalaich  e  e  fein,  's  bha  nighean  an  righ  fo  chrith  's  fo  eagal,  gun 
neach  ann  a  thearnadh  i.  Suil  do  'n  d'  thug  i  faicear  dganach 
foghainteach,  dreachmhor  a  marcachd  each  dubh  's  a'  tighinn  far 
an  robh  i.  Bha  e  air  a  sgeadachdainn  gu  h-anabarrach  's  fo  Ian 
armachd  's  an  cu  dubh  a'  siubhal  'na  dheigh.  "Tha  gruaim  air 
do  ghnuis,  a  nighean,"  ars,  an  t-6ganach  ;  "  de  tha  thu  deanadh 
an  so?"  "0!  's  coma  sin,  thubhairt  nighean  an  rlgh,  cha  'n 
fhad'  a  bhitheas  mi  ann  co  dhiu."  "Cha  dubhairt  mi  sin,"  ars' 
esan.  "  Theich  laoch  cho  coltach  riutsa,  's  cha  'n  'eil  facia 
uaidhe,"  thubhairt  ise.  "  'Se  laoch  a  sheasas  cath,"  ars'  an 
t-dganach.  Shuidh  e  slos  laimh  rithe  's  thubhairt  e  rithe,  "  Na 
'n  tuiteadh  esan  'na  chadal,  i  ga  'dbusgadh  'n  uair  a  chitheadh  i 
'bheist  a'  deanamh  air  son  tlr."  "  De  's  dusgadh  duit,"  thubhairt 
ise  ?  "  'S  dusgadh  dhomh  am  fainne  th'  air  do  mheur  a  chur  air 
mo  lughdag."  Cha  b'  fhada  bha  iad  an  sin,  'n  uair  a  chunnaic  i 
bheist  a  deanamh  gu  tir.  Thug  i  'm  fainne  bhar  a  meur,  's  chuir 
i  air  lughdag  an  6ganaich  e.  Dhiiisg  e,  agus  an  coinneamh  na 
beiste  ghabh  e,  le  'chlaidheamh  's  le  chii ;  ach  's  ann  an  sin  a  bha 
__'n  t-slupartaich  's  an  t-slapartaich  eadar  e  fern  's  a'  bheist ;  's 
bha  'n  cu  deanamh  na  b'  urrainn  e,  's  bha  nighean  an  rlgh  air 
bhall-chrith  eagail  le  fuaim  na  beiste.  Bhiodh  iad  uair  fuidhe  'a 
uair  an  uachdar,  ach  ma  dheireadh,  ghearr  e  fear  do  na  cinn  di ; 
thug  i  aon  raibheic  aiste,  's  ghoir  mac-talla  nan  creag  d'a  sgreuch, 
's  chuir  i  'n  loch  'na  lasair  bho  cheann  gu  ceann,  agus  ann  am 
prioba  na  siila,  chaidh  i  as  an  t-sealladh.  "  Piseach  's  buaidh 
gu  'n  robh  ga  d'  leantainn,  oganaich,"  arsa  nighean  an  righ, 
"  tha  mise  sabhailt  air  son  aon  oidhche ;  ach  thig  a  bheist  a 
rithist,  gu  brath  gus  an  d'  thig  an  da  cheann  eile  dhi."  Rug  e 
air  ceann  na  beiste,  agus  tharruing  e  gad  roimhe  's  thubhairt  e 
rithe,  i  ga'  thabhairt  leatha  'm  maireach  an  sud.     Dh'  fhalbh 


A   MHAICHDEAN   MHARA.  91 

i  dhachaidh  's  an  ceann  air  a  guallainn,  's  thug  am  buachaille  na 
mairt  air.  Ach  cha  b'  fhada  bha  i  air  a'  rathad  'n  uair  a  choin- 
nich  an  Seanalair  m6r  so  i,  agus  thubhairt  e  rithe  gu  marbhadh 
e  i  mur  canadh  i  gur  esan  a  thug  an  ceann  do  'n  bheist.  M  O  ! 
ars'  ise,  's  mi  their  !  co  eile  'thug  an  ceann  do  'n  bheist  ach  thu." 
Kainig  iad  tigh  an  rlgh  's  an  ceann  air  guallainn  an  t-Seanalair  ; 
ach  's  ann  an  so  a  bha  'n  t-aoibhneas,  i  'thighinn  dhachaidh  bed 
slau,  agus  ceann  na  b&ste  Ian  fola  aig  a  Chaiptean  mh6r  so  'na 
laimh.  Air  an  latha  'maireach,  dh'fhalbh  iad,  agus  cha  robh 
teagamh  sam  bith  nach  tearnadh  an  gaisgeach  so  nighean  an  rlgh. 
Rainig  iad  an  t-aite  ceudna,  's  cha  robh  iad  fad'  an  sin,  'n  uair  a 
ghluais  an  uile- bheist  oillteil  ann  am  meadhDn  an  loch,  's  sheap 
an  gaisgeach  air  falbh  mar  a  rinn  e  air  an  lath'  de.  Ach  cha  b' 
fhad  an  deigh  so,  dur  a  thainig  fear  an  eich  dhuibh  's  deis  eile 
air.  Coma  co  dhiu,  dh'aithnich  i  gur  e  cheart  oganach  a  bh'  ann. 
"  'S  mise  tha  toilichte  d'  fhaicinn,"  ars'  ise,  "tha  mi  'n  dbchas 
gu  laimhsich  thu  do  chlaidheamh  mor  an  diugh  mar  a  rinn  thu 
'n  de  ;  thig  a  uins  's  leig  t-anail."  Ach  cha  b'  fhada  bha  iad  an 
sin,  'n  uair  a  chunnaic  iad  a  bheist  a  totail  am  meadhon  an  loch. 
Luidh  an  t-dganach  slos  ri  taobh  nighean  an  rlgh,  's  thubhairt 
e  rithe,  "Ma  chaidleas  mise  mu  'n  d'thig  a  bheist,  duisg  mi." 
"  De  as  dusgadh  dhuit?"  "  'S  dusgadh  dhomh  a  chluais-fhail 
sin  a  tha  'na  d'  chluais,  a  choir  'na  mo  the  fein."  Cha  mhath  a 
chaidil  e  'n  uair  a  ghlaodh  nighean  an  rlgh,  "  Duisg  !  duisg  !  " 
Ach  dusgadh  cha  deanadh  e  ;  ach  thug  i  chluas-fhail  as  a  cluais, 
agus  chuir  i  'n  cluas  an  6ganaich  e,  's  air  ball  dhuisg  e,  's  an  car 
na  b£iste  chaidh  e  ;  ach  's  ann  an  sin  a  bha  'n  t-slupartaich  's  an 
t-slapartaich,  raoiceil,  's  taoiceil  air  a  bheist.  Lean  iad  mar  so 
re  iiine  fada,  's  mu  bheul  na  h-oidhche,  ghearr  e  'n  ceann  eile  do 
'n  bheist.  Chuir  e  air  a'  ghad  e  's  leum  e  air  muin  an  eich  dhuibh, 
's  thug  e  'bhuachailleachd  air.  Dh'  fhalbh  nighean  an  rlgh 
dhachaidh  leis  na  cinn  :  thachair  an  Seanalair  rithe  's  thug  e 
uaipe  na  cinn,  's  thubhairt  e  rithe,  '  Gu  'm  feumadh  i  chantainn 
gu  'm  b'  esan  a  thug  au  ceann  do  'n  bheist  air  an  uair  so 
cuideachd."  "Co  eile  a  thug  an  ceann  do  'n  bheist  ach  thu?  " 
thuirt  ise.  Rainig  iad  tigh  an  rlgh  leis  na  cinn,  ach  's  ann  an  sin 
a  bha  'n  t-aoibhneas  's  an  t-aighear.  Mha  bha  an  righ  subhach 
an  ceud  oidhche,  bha  e  nis  cinnteach  gu  'n  tearnadh  an  gaisgeach 
m6r  so  a  nighean,  's  cha  robh  teagamh  sam  bith  nach  bitheadh 
an  ceann  eile  do  'n  bheist  air  an  latha  maireach.  Mu  'n  am 
cheudna,  dh'  fhalbh  an  dithis  air  an  latha  'maireach.  Dh'  fhalaich 


92  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

an  t-oifigir  e  fein  mar  a  b-abhaist  :  thug  nigbean  an  rlgh  bruaich 
an  loch  oirre,  's  thainig  gaisgeach  an  eich  dhuibh,  's  luidh  e  ri' 
taobh.  Dhuisg  i  'n  t-61ach  's  chuir  i  cluas-fhail  'na  chluais  eile 
agus  ann  am  bad  na  belste  ghabh  e.  Ach  ma  bha  raoiceil,  is 
's  taoiceil  air  a  bheist  air  na  laithean  a  chaidh  seachad,  's  ami  an 
diugh  a  bha  'n  t-uamhas  oirre.  Ach  coma  co  dhiu,  thug  e  'n 
treas  ceann  do  'n  bheist,  's  ma  thug  cha  b'  ann  gun  spairn. 
Tharruing  e  ro  'n  ghad  e,  's  dh'  fhalbh  i  dhachaidh  leis  na  cinn. 
'N  uair  a  rainig  iad  tigh  an  righ,  bha  na  h-uile  Ian  gairdeachas,  's 
bha  'n  Seanalair  ri  nighean  an  rlgh  a'  phosadh  air  an  ath  latha. 
Bha  bhanais  a  dol  air  a  h-aghaidh  's  gach  neach  mu  'n  Chaisteal 
's  fadal  air  gus  an  d'  thigeadh  an  sagairt.  Ach  a  nuair  a  thainig 
an  sagairt,  cha  ph6sadh  i  ach  an  neach  a  bheireadh  na  cinn  do  'n 
ghad  gun  an  gad  a  ghearradh.  "Co  bheireadh  na  cinn  do  'n 
ghad  ach  am  fear  a  chuir  na  cinn  air,"  thuibhairt  an  righ.  Dh' 
fheuch  an  Seanalair  iad,  ach  cha  b-urrainn  e  na  cinn  fhuasgladh  ; 
's  mu  dheireadh,  cha  robh  a  h'aon  mu  'n  tigh  nach  d'  fheuch  ris' 
na  cinn  a  thoirt  do  'n  ghad,  ach  cha  b-urrainn  iad.  Dh'  fhoigh- 
neachd  an  righ,  "  An  robh  neach  air  bith  eile  mu  'n  tigh  a  dh' 
fheuchadh  ris  na  cinn  a  thoirt  bhar  a  ghaid."  Thubhairt  iad 
nach  d'  fheuch  am  buachaille  fathast  iad.  Chaidh  flos  air  a' 
bhuachaille,  's  cha  b'  fhada  bha  esan  a  tilgeadh  fear  a  null  's  a 
nail  diubh.  "Ach  fan  beagan  oganoich,"  arsa  nighean  an  righ  : 
"  am  fear  a  thug  na  cinn  do  'n  bheist,  tha  'm  fainne  agamsa  aige, 
agus  mo  dha  chluais-fhail."  Chuir  am  buachaille  'laimh  'na 
phoca,  's  thilig  e  air  a  bhord  iad.  "  S'-tusa  mo  dhuine-sa,"  arsa 
nighean  an  rlgh.  Cha  robh  an  rlgh  cho  toilichte,  'n  uair  a 
chunnaic  e  gu  'm  b'e  'bhuachaille  a  bha  ri'  nighean  a  phdsadh  ; 
ach  ;  dh'  orduich  e  gu  feumt'  a  chur  ann  an  trusgan  ni  b'fhearr. 
Ach  labhair  a  nighean,  's  thubhairt  i,  "  Gun  robh  trusgan  aige 
Gho  rlomhach  'sa  bha  riamh  'na  chaisteal ;  agus  mor  so  thachair  ; 
chuir  am  buachaille  deis'  oir  an  fhamhair,  air,  agus  ph6s  iad  air 
an  oidhche  sin  fein. 

Bha  iad  a  nis  posda  's  na  h-uile  ni  dol  air  aghaidh  gu  maith. 
Bha  iad  aon  lath'  a  spaisdearachd  mu  thaobh  an  locha,  's  thainig 
b6ist  a  b-uamhasaiche  na  'n  te  eile,  's  thugar  air  falbh  e  gun  athadh 
gun  fhoighneachd.  Bha  nighean  an  righ  an  so  gu  dubhach, 
deurach,  dalla-bhronach  air  son  a  fear-posda.  Bha  i  daonnan  'sa 
suil  air  an  loch.  Thachair  seana  ghobha  rithe,  's  dh'  innis  i  dha 
mar  thachair  da  ceile-p6sda,  Chomhairlich  an  gobha  dhi  i 
'sgaoileadh  gach  ni  bu  bhreagha  na  ch6ile  anns  a  cheart  aite  'san 


A  MHAICxHDEAN   MHARA.  93 

'd'  thug  a  bheist  air  falbh  a  duine  ;  agus  mar  so  rinn  i.  Chuir  a 
bh&st  suas  a  sr6n,  's  thubhairt  i,  "  'S  breagh  'd'  ailleas  a  nighean 
an  rlgh."  " 'S  breagha  na  sin  an  t-ailleagan  a  thug  thu  uam," 
thubhairt  ise.  "Thoir  dhomh  aon  sealladh  do  m'  dhuine,  's 
gheibh  thu  aon  ni  do  na  tba  thu  'faicinn."  Thug  a'  bheist  suas 
e.  "  Aisig  dhomh  e,  's  gheibh  thu  na  tha  thu  'faicinn,"  ars'  ise. 
Rinn  a'  bheist  mar  a  thubhairt  i  ;  thilig  i  beo  slan  e  air  bruach 
an  locha.  Goirid  'na  dheigh  sud,  's  iad  a  sraidimeachd  ri  taobh 
an  loch,  thug  a  bheist  cheudna  air  falbh  nighean  an  rlgh.  Bu 
bhronach  gach  neach  a  bha  'sa  bhaile  air  an  oidhche  so.  Bha  a 
duine  gu  dubhach,  deurach,  a'  siubhal  slos  agus  suas  mu  bhruach- 
an  an  locha  a  iatha  's  do  dh'  oidhche.  Thachair  an  seana 
ghobha  ris.  Dh'  innis  an  gobha  dha,  Nach  robh  doigh  air  an 
uile-bheist  a  mharbhadh,  ach  aon  doigh,  agus  's  e  sin — "  Anns  an 
eilean  'tha  am  meadhon  an  locha  tha  eilid  chaisfhionn  as  caoile 
cas  's  as  luaithe  ceum,  agus  ge  dorachadh  beirsinn  oirre,  leumadh 
feannag  aisde,  agus  ged  a  rachadh  beirsinn  air  an  fheannag, 
leumadh  breac  aisde  ;  ach  tha  ubh  am  beul  a  bhric,  agus  tha 
anam  na  beiste  'san  ubh  's  ma  bhristeas  an  t-ubh,  tha  a  bheist 
marbh."  Nis  cha  robh  doigh  air  faotainn  do  'n  eilean  so,  bho  'n 
chuireadh  a  bheist  foidh  gach  bata  's  gach  rath,  a  rachadh  air  an 
loch.  Smaoinich  e  gu  'm  feuchadh  e  'n  Caolas  a  leum  leis  an 
each  dhubh,  agus  mar  so  fhein  rinn  e.  Leum  an  t-each  dubh  an 
Caolas,  's  an  Cu  dubh  le  aon  leum  as  an  deigh.  Chunnaic  e'  n 
eilid,  's  leig  e  'n  cii  dubh  'na  deigh,  ach  an  uair  a  bhiodh  an  cu 
air  aon  taobh  do  'n  eilean  bhiodh  an  eilid  air  an  taobh  eile.  "O  ! 
bu  mhath  a  nis  madadh  m6r  na  closaiche  feola  an  so."  Cha 
luaithe  'labhair  e  'm  facal  na  bha  'm  madadh  c6ir  ri  thaobh,  agus 
an  deigh  na  h-eilid  ghabh  e  's  cha  b'  fhada  'bha  na  laoich  ga  cuir 
ri  talainh ;  ach  cha  bu  luaithe  a  rug  e  oirre,  na  leum  feannag 
aisde  ;  "  'S  ann  a  nis  a  bu  mhath  an  t-seobhag  ghlas  as  geire  suil 
's  is  laidire  sgiath."  Cha  luaithe  thubhairt  e  so,  na  bha  'n 
t-seobhag  as  d6igh  'na  feannaig,  's  cha  b'  fhada  'bha  i  ga  cuir  ri 
talamh  ;  agus  air  tuiteam  do  'n  fheannaig  air  bruach  an  locha,  a 
mach  aisde  leumtar  am  breac.  "  0  !  nach  robh  thus'  agamsa  a 
nis  a  dhobhrain."  Cha  luaith'  thubhairt  na  bha  'n  dobhran  ri 
thaobh,  agus  a  mach  air  an  loch  leum  i,  's  thugar  am  breac  a 
meadhon  an  loch ;  Ach  cha  luaithe  bha  'n  ddran  air  tlr  leis  a 
bhreac  na  thainig  an  t-ubh  a  mach  as  a  bheul.  Ghrad  leum  esan, 
's  chuir  e  'chas  air,  's  ann  an  sin  a  leig  a  bheist  raoic  aisde,  's 
thubhairt  i,  "  Na  brist  an  t-ubh,  's  gheibh  thu  na  dh'  iarras  tu." 


94  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

"  Aisig  dhomhsa  rao  bhean."  Ann  am  prioba  na  siila  bha  i  ri 
'thaobh.  Nuair  a  fhuair  e  greim  air  a  laimh  'na  dha'  laimh, 
leig  e  chas  air  an  ubh,  's  bhasaich  a  bheist.  Bha  'bheist  marbh 
a  nis,  agus  'sann  a  nis  a  bha  'n  sealladh  ri  fhaicinn.  Bha  i 
uamhasach  ri  sealltainn  oirre,  bha  na  tri  chinn  di  gun  teagamh, 
ach  ma  bha,  bha  ceann  os-ceann  cheann  oirre,  agus  suilean,  's 
cuig  ceud  cas.  Coma  co  dhiu,  dh'  fhaig  iad  ann  a  'sud  i,  's  chaidh 
iad  dhachaidh.  Bha  s51as  is  gairdeachas  ann  an  tigh  an  rlgh  air 
an  oidhche  so,  's  cha  d'  innis  e  do  'n  rlgh  gu  so  mar  a  mharbh  e 
na  famhairean.  Chuir  an  righ  urram  mor  air,  's  bha  e  'na  dhuine 
mor  aig  an  rlgh. 

Bha  e  fein  's  a'  bhean  a'  sraidimeachd  aon  latha,  'n  uair  a  thug 
e  fainear  caisteal  beag  ri  taobh  an  loch,  ann  an  coille.  Dh'  fhar- 
raid  e  do  'n  mhnaoi  co  bha  gabbail  comhnuidh  ann  ?  Thubhairt 
i  nach  robh  neach  air  bith  a'  dol  a  choir  a  chaisteal  ud,  bho  nach 
d'thainig  neach  air  ais  fathast  a  chaidh  ann  a  dh'  innseadh  sgeuil. 
"  Cha  'n  fhaod  a  chuis  a  bhi  mar  sin,"  ars'  esan  ;  "  a  nochd  fein 
chi  mi  co'  tha  gabhail  comhnuidh  ann."  "Cha  d'  theid,  cha  d' 
theid,"  thubhairt  ise,  "cha  deach  duine  riamh  do  'n  chaisteal  so 
a  phill  air  ais."  "Biodh  sin  's  a  roghainn  aige,"  ars'  esan.  Dh' 
fhalbh  e,  agus  gabhar  do  'n  chaisteal  's  nuair  a  rainig  e  'n  dorus, 
thachair  cail leach  bheag,  bhrosgulach  ris  'na  seasamh  san  dorus. 
1  Furan  's  failte  dhuit,  a  mhic  an  iasgair  's  mi  fein  a  tha  toilichte 
d'  fhaicinn  ;  's  mor  an  onair  do  'n  rloghachd  so  do  leithid  a 
thighinn  innte  ;  's  urram  do  'n  bhothan  bheag  so  thu  thighinn  a 
stigh  ;  gabh  a  stigh  air  thoiseach,  onair  na  h-uaisle,  's  leig  t' 
anail  :  "  's  a  steach  ghabh  e ;  ach  a  nuair  a  bha  e  air  tl  dol  suas, 
tharruing  i  an  slacan-dhruidheachd  air  an  cul  a  chinn,  's  air  ball 
thuit  e  'n  sin.  "  Air  an  oidhche  so  bha  bron  ann  an  caisteal  an 
rlgh  agus  air  an  latha  maireach  bha  tuireadh  ann  an  tigh  an 
iasgair.  Chunnacas  a  chraobh  a  seargadh  's  thubhairt  mac 
meadhonach  an  iasgair,  "gu  'n  robh  a  bhrathar  marbh,"  's  thug 
e  boid  is  briathar  gu  falbhadh  e  s  gu  'm  biodh  flos  aige  cait'  an 
robh  corp  a  bhrathar  na  luidhe.  Chuir  e  diollaid  air  each  dubh, 
5s  mharcaich  e  an  deigh  a  choin  duibh  (oir  bha  each  dubh  's  cu 
dubh  aig  triuir  mhac  an  iasgair)  agus  gun  dol  a  null  na  nail,  lean 
e  air  ceum  a  bhratbair  bu  sine,  gus  an  drainig  e  tigh  an  rlgh.  Bha 
e  so  co  coltach  ri  'bhrathair  's  gu  'n  d'  shaoille  nighean  an  rlgh  gu 
'm  be  duine  fein  a  bh'  ann.  Dh'  fhan  e  'n  so  'sa  chaisteal,  's  dh' 
innis  iad  dha  mar  thachair  d'a  brathair,  agus  do  chaisteal  beag  na 
caillichedh'fheumadh  e'dolbognacruaidhmarthachradh, 's  do  'n 


THE   SEA-MAIDEN.  95 

chaisteal  chaidh  e,  agus  ceart  mar  a  thachair  do  'n  bhrathair  bu 
sine,  anns  gach  d6igh  thachair  do  'n  mhac  mheadhonach,  's  le  aon 
bhuille  do  'n  t-slacan-dhruidheachd,  leag  a'  chailleach  e  na  shln- 
eadh  ri'  taobh  a  bhrathar.  Air  faicinn  an  darna  craobh  a'  sear- 
gadh  do  mhac  6g  au  iasgair  thubhairt  e,  gu  'n  robh  a  nis  a 
dhithis  bhraithrean  marbh,  agus  gu'  feumadh  fios  a  bhi  aigesan 
de  'm  bas  a  thainig  orra.  Air  muin  an  eich  dhuibh  ghabh  e.  's 
lean  e  'n  cu  mar  a  rinn  a  bhrathair,  agus  tigh  an  rlgh  bhuail  e 
mu  'n  do  stad  e.  'Se  'n  rlgh  bha  toilichte  fhaicinn,  ach  do  'n 
chaisteal  dubh  (oir  'se  so  ainm)  cha  leigadh  iad  e,  ach  do  'n  chais- 
teal dh'  fheumadh  e  dol,  's  mur  sin  rainig  e  'n  caisteal.  "Failte 
'a  furan  dhuit  fein,  a  mhic  an  iasgair,  's  mi  tha  toillichte  d'fhaic- 
inn  ;  gabh  a  steach  's  leig  t-anail,"  thuirt  ise.  "'Stigh  romham 
thu,  a  chailleach,  's  coma  leam  sodal  a  muigh."  "  Each  a  steach 
's  cluinneam  do  chomhradh."  A'  steach,  ghabh  a  chailleach,  agus 
a  nuair  a  bha  a  cul  ris,  tharruing  e  a  chlaidheamh  's  spadar  a  ceann 
dhi,  ach  leum  an  claidheamh  as  a  laimh,  's  ghrad  rug  a  chailleach 
air  a  ceann  le  a  da  laimh,  s  cuirear  air  a  h-amhaich  e  mar'  bha  e 
roimhe.  Leum  an  cu  air  a  chaillich,  's  bhuail  i  'm  madadh  coir 
leis  an  t-slacan-dhruidheachd,  's  luidh  esan  an  sin,  ach  cha  deach 
so  air  mhithapadh  do  'n  olach,  's  an  sas  sa  chaillich  gabhar  e. 
Fhuair  e  greim  air  an  t-shlacan-dhruidheachd,  agus  le  aon  bhuille 
am  mullach  a  cinn  bha  i  ri  talamh  ann  am  prioba  na  sul.  Chaidh 
e  beagan  air  aghaidh  suas,  's  faicear  a  dha  bhrathair  na  'n  luidhe 
taobh  ri  taobh.  Thug  e  buille  do  gach  fear  dhiubh,  leis  an  t-sla- 
can  dhruidheachd  's  air  an  cois  bha  iad.  Ach  's  ann  so  a  bha  'n 
spuill  6ir  's  airgid,  's  gach  ni  bu  luachmhoire  na  cheile  ann  an 
caisteal  na  cailliche.  Thainig  iad  air  an  ais  do  thigh  an  rlgh,  's 
ann  an  sin  a  bha  :n  gairdeachas.  Bha  'n  rlgh  a  fas  seann,  agus 
chaidh  mac  bhu  shine  an  iasgair  a  chrunadh  'na  ilgb,  's  dh'  fhan 
an  dithis  bhraithrean  latha  's  bliadhna  ann  an  tigh  an  rlgh,  's  dh' 
fhalbh  an  dithis  a  nis  dhachadh  le  or  's  airgiod  na  cailliche,  's 
gach  ni  rlomhach  eile  'thug  an  rlgh  dhoibh  ;  's  mar  do  shiubhail 
iad  uaidh  sin  tha  iad  beo  gus  an  latha  'n  diugh. 

Hector  Urquhart. 

2.  Another  version  of  this  was  told  to  me  in  South  Uist,  by 
Donald  MacPhie,  aged  79,  in  September  1859. 

There  was  a  poor  old  fisher  in  Skye,  and  his  name  was  Duncan. 
He  was  out  fishing,  and  the  sea-maiden  rose  at  the  side  of  his 


96  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

boat,  and  said,  "  Duncan,  thou  art  not  getting  fish."  They  had 
a  long  talk,  and  made  a  bargain  ;  plenty  of  fish  for  his  first  son. 
But  he  said,  "I  have  none."  Then  the  sea-maiden  gave  him 
something,  and  said,  "Give  this  to  thy  wife,  and  this  to  thy 
mare,  and  this  to  thy  dog,  and  they  will  have  three  sons,  three 
foals,  and  three  pups,"  and  so  they  had,  and  the  eldest  son  was 
Iain.  When  he  was  eighteen,  he  found  his  mother  weeping,  and 
learned  that  he  belonged  to  the  mermaid.  "Oh,"  said  he,  "I 
will  go  where  there  is  not  a  drop  of  salt  water."  So  he  mounted 
one  of  the  horses  and  went  away.  He  soon  came  to  the  carcase 
of  an  old  horse,  and  at  it  a  lion  (leon),  a  wolf  (matugally),  and  a 
falcon  (showag).  Le6mhan,  Madadh-alluidh,  Seabhag  or 
Seobhag. 

The  lion  spoke,  and  she  asked  him  to  divide  the  carcass.  He 
did  so,  and  each  thanked  him,  and  said,  "When  thou  art  in 
need  think  of  me,  and  I  will  be  at  thy  side  (or  thou  wilt  be  a  lion, 
a  wolf,  or  a  falcon,  I  am  uncertain  which  he  meant),  for  we  were 
here  under  spells  till  some  one  should  divide  this  carcass  for  us." 

He  went  on  his  way  and  became  a  king's  herd.  He  went  to  a 
smith  and  bade  him  make  him  an  iron  staff.  He  made  three. 
The  two  first  bent,  the  third  did  well  enough.  He  went  a-herd- 
ing,  and  found  a  fine  grass  park,  and  opened  it  and  went  in  with 
the  cattle.  Fuath  of  the  seven  heads,  and  seven  humps,  and 
seven  necks,  came  and  took  six  by  the  tails  and  went  away  with 
them  (so  Cacus  dragged  away  cows  by  the  tail).  "Stop,"  said 
the  herd.  The  Fuath  would  not,  so  they  came  to  grips.  Then 
the  fisher's  son  either  thought  of  the  lion,  or  became  one,  but  at 
all  events  a  lion  seized  the  giant  and  put  him  to  earth.  "Thine 
is  my  lying  down  and  rising  up,"  said  he.  "  What  is  thy  ran- 
som ?  "  said  the  herd.  The  giant  said,  "  I  have  a  white  filly  that 
will  go  through  the  skies,  and  a  white  dress  ;  take  them."  And 
the  herd  took  off  his  heads. 

When  he  went  home  they  had  to  send  for  carpenters  to  make 
dishes  for  the  milk,  there  was  so  much. 

The  next  day  was  the  same.  There  came  a  giant  with  the 
same  number  of  heads,  and  took  eight  cows  by  their  tails,  and 
slung  them  on  his  back.  The  herd  and  the  wolf  (or  as  a  wolf) 
beat  him,  and  got  a  red  filly  that  could  fly  through  the  air,  and 
a  red  dress,  and  cut  off  their  heads.  And  there  were  still  more 
carpenters  wanted,  there  was  so  much  milk. 

The  third  day  came  a  still  bigger  giant  and  took  nine  cows, 


THE    SEA-MAIDEN.  97 

and  the  herd  as,  or  with  a  falcon,  beat  him,  and  got  a  green 
filly  that  would  go  through  the  sky,  and  a  green  dress,  and  cut 
his  heads  off,  and  there  was  more  milk  than  ever. 

On  the  fourth  day  came  the  Carliu,  the  wife  of  the  last  giant, 
and  mother  of  the  other  two,  and  the  fisher's  son  went  up  into  a 
tree.  "Come  down  till  I  eat  thee,"  said  she.  "Not  I,"  said 
the  herd.  "Thou  hast  killed  my  husband  and  my  two  sons, 
come  down  till  I  eat  thee."  "  Open  thy  mouth,  then,  till  I  jump 
down,"  said  the  herd.  So  the  old  Carlin  opened  her  gab,  and  he 
thrust  the  iron  staff  down  her  throat,  and  it  came  out  at  a  mole 
on  her  breast  [this  is  like  the  mole  of  the  Gruagach  in  iVo.  1],  and  'bfUfrtf 
she  fell.     Then  he  sprang  on  her,  and  spoke  as  before,  and  got  a  -  s^f 

basin,  and  when  be  washed  himself  in  it,  he  would  be  the  most 
beautiful  man  that  was  ever  seen  on  earth,  and  a  fine  silver  comb, 
and  it  would  make  him  the  grandest  man  in  the  world ;  and  he 
killed  the  Carlin  and  went  home. 

[So  far  this  agrees  almost  exactly  xoith  the  next  version,  but  there 
is  a  giant  added  here  and  a  coarse  comb  left  out]. 

When  the  fisher's  son  came  home,  there  was  sorrow  in  the 
king's  house,  for  the  Draygan  was  come  from  the  sea.  Every 
time  he  came  there  was  some  one  to  be  eaten,  and  this  time  the 
lot  had  fallen  on  the  king's  daughter. 

The  herd  said  that  he  would  go  to  fight  the  draygan,  and  the 
king  said,  "No;  I  cannot  spare  my  herd."  So  the  king's 
daughter  had  to  go  alone.  [The  incident  of  the  cowardly  knight 
is  here  left  out].  Then  the  herd  came  through  the  air  on  the  white 
filly,  with  the  white  dress  of  the  Fuath.  He  tied  the  filly  to  the 
branch  of  a  tree  and  went  where  the  king's  daughter  was,  and 
laid  his  head  in  her  lap,  and  she  dressed  his  hair,  and  he  slept. 
When  the  draygan  came  she  woke  him,  and  after  a  severe  battle 
he  cut  off  one  head,  and  the  draygan  said,  "A  hard  fight  to- 
morrow," and  went  away.  The  herd  went  off  in  the  white  filly, 
and  in  the  evening  asked  about  the  battle,  and  heard  his  own 
story.  Next  day  was  the  same  with  the  red  filly  and  the  red 
dress,  and  the  draygan  said,  "  The  last  fight  to-morrow,"  and  he 
disappeared.  On  the  third  day  she  scratched  a  mark  on  his 
forehead  when  his  head  was  in  her  lap  :  he  killed  the  draygan, 
and  when  he  asked  about  it  all,  there  was  great  joy,  for  now  the 
draygan  was  dead.  Then  the  king's  daughter  had  the  whole 
kingdom  gathered,  and  they  took  off  their  head  clothes  as  they 
passed,  but  there  was  no  mark.     Then  they  bethought  them  of 

Q 


98  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

the  dirty  herd,  and  when  he  came  he  would  not  put  off  his  head 
gear,  but  she  made  him,  and  saw  the  mark,  and  said,  "  Thou 
mightest  have  a  better  dress."  He  used  his  magic  comb  and 
basin,  and  put  on  a  dress,  and  was  the  grandest  in  the  company, 
and  they  married.  It  fell  out  that  the  king's  daughter  longed 
for  dulse,  and  he  went  with  her  to  the  shore  to  seek  it.  The 
sea-maiden  rose  up  and  took  him.  She  was  sorrowful,  and  went 
to  the  soothsayer  and  learned  what  to  do. 

And  she  took  her  harp  to  the  sea  shore  and  sat  and  played 
and  the  sea-maiden  came  up  to  listen,  for  sea-maidens  are  fonder 
of  music  than  any  other  creatures,  and  when  she  saw  the  sea- 
maiden she  stopped.  The  sea-maiden  said,  "  Play  on ;  "  but  she 
said,  "  No,  till  I  see  my  man  again."  So  the  sea-maiden  put  up 
his  head.  (  Who  do  you  mean  ?  Out  of  her  mouth  to  be  sure.  She 
had  swallowed  him.)  She  played  again,  and  stopped,  and  then 
the  sea-maiden  put  him  up  to  the  waist.  Then  she  played  again 
and  stopped,  and  the  sea-maiden  placed  him  on  her  palm.  Then 
he  thought  of  the  falcon,  and  became  one  and  flew  on  shore. 
But  the  sea-maiden  took  the  wife. 

Then  he  went  to  the  soothsayer,  and  he  said,  "  I  know  not 

Swhat  to  do,  but  in  a  glen  there  is  Tarbh  nimh,  a  hurtful  bull, 
and  in  the  bull  a  ram,  and  in  the  ram  a  goose,  and  in  the  goose 
an  egg,  and  there  is  the  soul  of  the  sea-maiden." 

Then  he  called  on  his  three  creatures,  and  by  their  help  got 
the  goose,  but  the  egg  fell  out  in  the  loch. 

Then  the  lion  said  she  knew  not  what  to  do,  and  the  wolf  said 
the  same.  The  falcon  told  of  an  otter  in  an  island,  and  flew  and 
seized  her  two  cubs,  and  the  otter  dived  for  the  egg  to  save  her 
cubs.  He  got  his  wife,  and  dashed  the  egg  on  the  stones,  and 
the  mermaid  died.  And  they  sent  for  the  fisher  and  his  sons, 
and  the  old  mother  and  brothers  got  part  of  the  kingdom,  and 
they  were  all  happy  and  lucky  after  that. 

I  asked  if  there  was  anything  about  one  brother  being  taken 
for  the  other  and  the  naked  sword,  and  was  told  that  the  incident 
was  in  another  story,  as  well  as  that  of  the  withering  of  the 
three  trees.  These  incidenis  were  in  the  version  of  the  stable 
boy  ;  and  as  they  are  in  Mackenzie's,  they  probably  belong  to 
the  story  as  it  was  known  in  Argyllshire. 

3.  Another  version  of  this  was  told  in  April  1859,  by  John 
MacGibbjn,  a  lad  who  was  rowing  me  across  Loch  Fyne,  from 
St.  Katharine's  to  Inverary;  he  said  he  had  heard  it  from  an  old 


THE    SEA-MAIDEN.  99 

man  living  near  Lochgilphead,  who  could  tell  many  stories,  and 
knew  part  of  the  history  of  the  Feine. 

The  hero  was  the  son  of  a  widow,  the  youngest  of  ten ;  black- 
skinned  and  rough  "carrach."  He  went  to  seek  his  fortune,  and 
after  adventures  somewhat  like  those  of  the  heroes  in  the  other 
versions,  he  became  like  them  a  king's  herd,  and  was  in  like 
manner  beset  by  giants  who  claimed  the  pasture.  Each  fight 
was  preceded  by  a  long  and  curious  parley  across  a  ditch.  The 
giants  got  larger  each  day,  and  last  of  all  came  the  wife  of  one, 
and  mother  of  the  other  two,  who  was  worst  of  all. 

He  got  spoil  from  each,  which  the  conquered  giant  named  as 
his  ransom,  and  which,  as  usual,  the  herd  took  after  killing  his 
foe.  From  the  mother  he  got  a  ' '  golden  comb,  and  when  he 
combed  his  hair  with  the  fine  side,  he  was  lovely,  and  when  he 
combed  it  with  the  coarse  side,  he  was  hideous  again, "  and  a 
magic  basin  which  made  him  beautiful  when  he  washed  in  it. 
And  he  got  wonderful  arms,  and  dresses,  and  horses  from  the 
giants. 

Then  the  king's  daughter  was  to  be  given  to  a  giant  with 
three  heads  who  came  in  a  ship.  When  he  leaped  on  shore,  he 
buried  himself  to  the  waist,  he  was  so  heavy.  The  herd  was 
asleep  with  his  head  in  the  lap  of  the  princess,  and  dressed  in 
the  giant's  spoil,  combed  with  the  fine  gold  comb,  and  washed 
in  the  magic  basin,  and  beautiful,  but  nevertheless  the  princess 
dressed  his  hair. 

He  was  awakened  each  day  by  biting  a  joint  off  his  little 
finger — cutting  a  patch  from  the  top  of  his  head — and  a  notch 
from  his  ear.  Each  day  he  cut  off  a  head,  and  the  giant,  when 
he  leaped  from  the  ship  on  the  third  day,  only  sunk  to  his  ankles 
in  the  sand,  for  he  had  lost  two  heads. 

The  third  head  jumped  on  again  as  fast  as  it  was  cut  off,  but 
at  last,  by  the  advice  of  a  hoodie,  the  cold  steel  of  the  sword 
was  held  on  the  neck  till  the  marrow  froze,  and  then  the  giant 
was  killed,  and  the  herd  disappeared  as  usual. 

A_  red-headed  lad,  who  went  to  guard  the  princess,  ran  away 
and  hid  himself,  and  took  the  credit  each  day,  but  he  could  not 
untie  the  knots  with  which  the  heads  were  bound  together  on  a 
withy  by  the  herd.  Then  when  all  the  kingdom  had  been 
gathered,  the  herd  was  sent  for,  but  he  would  not  come,  and  he 
bound  three  parties  of  men  who  were  sent  to  biing  him  by  force. 
At  last  he  was  entreated  to  come,  and  came,  and  was  reco^- 


100  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

nized  by  the  marks,  and  then  he  combed  his  hair,  and  washed  in 
the  magic  basin,  and  dressed  in  the  giant's  spoils,  and  he  married 
the  princess,  and  the  Gille  Ruadh  was  hanged. 

Here  the  story  ended,  but  so  did  the  passage  of  the  ferry. 

4.  I  have  another  version  written  by  Hector  Maclean,  from 
the  dictation  of  a  woman,  B.  Macaskill,  in  the  small  island  of 
Berneray,  Aug.  1859. — Mac  a  Ghobha,  The  Smith's  Son. 

A  smith  takes  the  place  of  the  old  fisherman.  The  mermaid 
rises  beside  his  boat,  gets  the  promise  of  the  son,  and  sends  him 
fish.  ( The  three  mysterious  grains  are  omitted. )  One  son  is  born 
to  the  fisher,  and  the  mermaid  lets  him  remain  till  he  is  fourteen 
years  of  age. 

Bha  'n  gille  'n  so  cho  mor  an  ceaunn  nan  ceithir  bliadh- 
na  diag  !  cha  robh  leithid  re  ihaighin  cho  mor  's  cho 
garbh  's  cho  foghainteach  ris. 

The  lad  was  now  so  big  at  the  end  of  the  14  years  !  His  like 
was  not  to  be  found,  so  big,  so  rugged,  so  formidable  as  he. 

Then  he  asked  his  father  not  to  go  in  the  wind  of  the  shore  or 
the  sea,  for  fear  the  mermaid  should  catch  him,  and  to  make  him 
a  staff  in  which  there  should  be  nine  stone  weight  of  iron  ;  and 
he  went  to  seek  his  fortune.  His  father  made  him  the  staff,  and 
he  went,  and  whom  should  he  meet  but  madadh  ruadh  the  fox, 
madadh  alluidh  the  wolf,  agus  an  fheannag,  and  the  hoodie, 
agus  othaisg  aca  ga  h'itheadh,  and  eating  a  year  old  sheep. 
He  divided  the  sheep,  and  the  creatures  promised  to  help  him, 
and  he  went  on  to  a  castle,  where  he  got  himself  employed  as  a 
herd,  and  was  sent  to  a  park  ;  "no  man  ever  came  alive  out  of 
it  that  ever  went  into  it." 

A  big  giant  came  and  took  away  one  of  the  cows,  and  then 
(Sabaid)  a  fight  began,  and  the  herd  was  undermost,  agus  de 

BUEN  AM  BUACHAILL'  ACH  CUIMHNEACHADH  ATR  A  MHADADH 
ALLUIDH  AGUS  GHRAD  !  BHA  'M  BUACHAILL  AN  AIRD  AGUS  AM 
FUAMHAIR  FODHA  AGUS   MHARBH   E    'm   FUAMHAIR,  and  what  did 

tbe  herd  but  remember  the  wolf,  and  swift !  the  herd  was  above 
and  the  giant  below,  and  he  killed  the  giant,  and  went  home  with 
the  cattle,  and  his  master  said  to  the  banachagan,  "Oh,  be 
good  to  the  herd."  {The  spoil,  the  dresses,  and  the  horses  are 
here  all  left  out).  The  second  day  it  was  the  same,  and  he  again 
thought  of  the  wolf,  and  conquered  after  he  was  down. 

The  third  day  it  was  again  the  same.  On  the  fourth  day 
Cailleach  mhor  a  great  carlan  came.     They  fought,  and  he  was 


THE    SEA-MAIDEN.  101 

undermost  again,  but  thought  of  the  wolf  and  was  up.     Bas  as 

DO  CHIONN  A  CHAILLEACH  ARS  AM  BUACHAILLE  DE'  t'  EIRIG  ?  * 

"Death  on  thy  top,  Carlin,"  said  the  herd,  "what's  thy 
value  ?  "  " That  is  not  little,"  said  the  Carlin,  "if  thou  gettest 
it.  I  have  three  truncannan  (an  English  word  with  a  Gaelic 
plural)  full  of  silver.  There  is  a  trunk  under  the  foot-board, 
and  two  others  in  the  upper  end  of  the  castle."  "  Though  that 
be  little,  its  my  own,"  said  he  as  he  killed  her. 

On  the  morrow  the  king's  daughter  was  to  go  to  the  great 
beast  that  wras  on  the  loch  to  be  killed,  and  what  should  the 
herd  do  but  draw  the  cattle  that  way,  and  he  laid  his  head  in 
her  lap  and  slept,  but  first  told  the  lady,  when  she  saw  the  loch 
trembling,  to  take  off  a  joint  of  his  little  finger.  She  did  so.  He 
awoke,  thought  of  the  fox,  and  took  a  head,  a  hump,  and  a  neck 
off  the  beast,  and  he  went  away,  and  no  one  knew  that  he  had 
been  there  at  all.  Next  day  was  the  same,  but  he  had  a  patch 
cut  from  his  head. 

The  third  day  she  took  off  the  point  of  his  ear,  he  awoke,  was 
again  beaten  by  the  beast,  thought  of  the  fox,  and  was  uppermost, 
and  killed  the  beast  (s'  bha  i  na  loch  uisge  n'  uair  a  mharbh 
e  i)  and  she  was  a  fresh  water  lake  when  he  had  killed  her. 

(The  cowardly  general,  or  knight,  or  lad,  or  servant,  is  here  left 
out.)  Then  the  king's  daughter  gave  out  that  she  would  marry 
the  man  whose  finger  fitted  the  joint  which  she  had  cut  off  and 
kept  in  her  pocket.  Everybody  came  and  cut  off  the  points  of 
their  little  fingers,  but  the  herd  staid  away  till  it  was  found  out 
by  the  dairymaids  that  he  wanted  the  joint,  and  then  he  came 
and  married  the  lady. 

After  they  were  married  they  wrent  to  walk  by  the  shore,  and 
the  mermaid  rose  and  took  him  away.  "It  is  long  since  thou 
wert  promised  to  me,  and  now  I  have  thee  perforce,"  said  she. 
An  old  woman  advised  the  lady  to  spread  all  her  dresses  on  the 
beach,  and  she  did  so  in  the  evening,  and  the  mermaid  came, 
and  for  the  dresses  gave  back  her  companion,  "and  they  went  at 
each  other's  necks  with  joy  and  gladness." 

*  Eirig,  a  fine  for  bloodshed,  a  ransom.  Fine  anciently  paid 
for  the  murder  of  any  person.  Scottish  Laws — Regiam  Majestatem 
(Armstrong  die.)  The  Laws  of  the'  Brets  and  Scots,  in  which 
every  one  was  valued  according  to  his  degree  (Innes's  ' '  Scotland 
in  the  Middle  Ages  "). 


102  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

In  a  fortnight  the  wife  was  taken  away,  "and  sorrow  was  not 
sorrow  till  now — the  lad  lamenting  his  wife."  He  went  to  an  old 
man,  who  said,  "  There  is  a  pigeon  which  has  laid  in  the  top  of 
a  tree ;  if  thou  couldst  find  means  to  break  the  egg  anail,  the 
breath  of  the  barmaid  is  in  it. "     Smaointich  e  air  an  fhean- 

NAIG     'S    CHAIDH    E    NA    FHEANNAIG     's    LEUM     E    GO    BARR    NA 

CRAOIBHE.  He  thought  on  the  hoodie,  and  he  became  a  hoodie 
{went  into  his  hoodie),  and  he  sprang  to  the  top  of  the  tree,  and 
he  got  the  egg,  and  he  broke  the  egg,  and  his  wife  came  to  shore, 
and  the  mermaid  was  dead. 

It  is  worth  remarking  the  incidents  which  drop  out  of  the 
story  when  told  by  women  and  by  men.  Here  the  horses  and 
armour  are  forgotten,  but  the  faithful  lover  is  remembered.  The 
sword  is  a  stick,  and  the  whole  thing  savours  strongly  of  the 
every-day  experience  of  the  Western  Isles,  which  has  to  do  with 
fishing,  and  herding  sheep  and  cattle.  It  is  curious  also  to 
remark  the  variations  in  the  incidents.  The  hero  seems  to  acquire 
the  qualities  of  the  creatures,  or  be  assisted  by  them. 

5.  1  have  another  version  from  Barra,  but  it  varies  so  much, 
and  has  so  many  new  incidents,  that  I  must  give  it  entire,  if  at 
all.  It  most  resembles  MacGibbon's  version.  It  is  called  an  't 
iasgajr  the  fisher,  and  was  told  by  Alexander  MacNeill, 
fisherman. 

6.  I  have  a  sixth  version  told  by  John  Smith,  labourer,  living 
at  Polchar  in  South  Uist,  who  says  he  learned  it  about  twenty 
years  ago  from  Angus  Macdonald,  Balnish.  It  is  called  An  gille 
Glas,  the  Grey  lad.  He  is  a  widow's  son,  goes  to  seek  his 
fortune,  goes  to  a  smith,  and  gets  him  to  make  an  iron  shinny 
(that  is  a  hockey  club),  he  becomes  herd  to  a  gentleman,  herds 
cattle,  and  is  beset  by  giants  whom  he  kills  with  his  iron  club  ; 
he  gathers  the  skirt  of  his  grey  cassock  (which  looks  like  Odin),  he 
gets  a  copper  and  a  silver  and  a  golden  castle,  servants  (or  slaves) 
of  various  colour  and  appearance,  magic  whistles,  horses,  and 
dresses,  and  rescues  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  Greece.  The 
part  of  the  cowardly  knight  is  played  by  a  red  headed  cook. 
The  language  of  this  is  curious,  and  the  whole  very  wild.  Un- 
less given  entire,  it  is  spoilt. 

In  another  story,  also  from  Berneray,  the  incident  of  meeting 
three  creatures  again  occurs. 

There  is  a  lion,  a  dove,  and  a  rat.     And  the  lion  says  : — 


THE    SEA-MAIDEN.  103 

"What,  lad,  is  thy  notion  of  myself  being  in  such  a  place  as 
this  ?  " 

"  Well,"  said  he,  "  I  have  no  notion,  but  that  it  is  not  there 
the  like  of  you  ought  to  be  ;  but  about  the  banks  of  rivers." 

It  is  impossible  not  to  share  the  astonishment  of  the  lion,  and 
but  for  the  fact  that  the  rat  and  the  dove  were  as  much  surprised 
at  their  position  as  the  lion,  one  would  be  led  to  suspect  that 
Margaret  MacKinnon,  who  told  the  story,  felt  that  her  lion  was 
out  of  his  element  in  Berneray.  Still  he  is  there,  and  it  seems 
worth  inquiring  how  he  and  the  story  got  there  and  to  other 
strange  places. 

1st.  The  story  is  clearly  the  same  as  Shortshanks  in  Dasent's 
Norse  Tales,  1859.  But  it  is  manifest  that  it  is  not  taken  from 
that  book,  for  it  could  not  have  become  so  widely  spread  in  the 
islands,  and  so  changed  within  the  time. 

2d.  It  resembles,  in  some  particulars,  the  Two  Brothers,  the 
White  Snake,  the  Nix  of  the  Mill  Pond,  the  Ball  of  Crystal,  in 
Grimm  ;  and  there  are  similar  incidents  in  other  German  tales. 
These  have  long  been  published,  but  I  never  heard  of  a  copy  in 
the  west,  and  many  of  my  authorities  cannot  read.  It  is  only 
necessary  to  compare  any  one  of  the  Gaelic  versions  with  any  one 
German  tale,  or  all  together,  to  feel  certain  that  Grimm's  collec- 
tion is  not  the  source  from  which  this  story  proceeded. 

3d.  A  story  in  the  latest  edition  of  the  Arabian  Nights  (Lane's, 
1839),  contains  the  incident  of  a  genius,  whose  life  was  not  in  his 
body,  but  in  a  chest  at  the  bottom  of  the  Circumambient  Ocean, 
but  that  book  is  expensive,  and  quite  beyond  the  reach  of 
peasants  and  fishermen  in  the  west,  and  the  rest  of  the  story  is 
different. 

4th.  There  is  something  in  Sanscrit  about  a  fight  for  cattle 
between  a  herd  and  some  giants,  which  has  been  compared  with 
the  classical  story  of  Cacus. — (Mommsen's  Roman  History). 

5th.  lam  told  that  there  is  an  Irish  "fenian"  story  which 
this  resembles.  I  have  not  yet  seen  it,  but  it  is  said  to  be  taken 
from  a  very  old  Irish  MS.     (Ossianic  Society). 

6th.  It  is  clearly  the  same  as  the  legend  of  St.  George  and  the 
Dragon.  It  is  like  the  classical  story  of  Perseus  and  Andromeda, 
but  Pegasus  is  multiplied  by  three,  and  like  the  story  of  Her- 
cules and  Hesione,  but  Hercules  was  to  have  six  horses.  On  the 
whole,  I  cannot  think  that  this  is  taken  from  any  known  story 
of  any  one  people,  but  that  it  is  the  Gaelic  version  of  some  old 


104  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

myth.  If  it  contains  something  which  is  distorted  history,  it 
seems  to  treat  of  a  seafaring  people  who  stole  men  and  women, 
and  gave  them  back  for  a  ransom,  of  a  wild  race  of  "giants  " 
who  stole  cattle  and  horses,  and  dresses,  and  used  combs  and 
basins,  and  had  grass  parks  ;  and  another  people  who  had  cattle 
and  wanted  pasture,  and  went  from  the  shore  in  on  the  giants* 
land. 

If  it  be  mythical,  there  is  the  egg  which  contains  the  life  of 
the  sea-monster,  and  to  get  which  beast,  bird,  and  fish,  earth, 
air,  and  water,  must  be  overcome.  Fire  may  be  indicated,  for 
the  word  which  I  have  translated  Spindrift,  lasair,  generally 
means  flame. 

1  am  inclined  to  think  that  it  is  a  very  old  tale,  a  mixture  of 
mythology,  history,  and  every-day  life,  which  may  once  have 
been  intended  to  convey  the  moral  lesson,  that  small  causes  may 
produce  great  effects  ;  that  men  may  learn  from  brutes,  Courage 
from  the  lion  and  the  wolf,  Craft  from  the  fox,  Activity  from  the 
falcon,  and  that  the  most  despised  object  often  becomes  the 
greatest.  The  whole  story  grows  out  of  a  grain  of  seed.  The 
giant's  old  mother  is  more  terrible  than  the  giants.  The  little 
flattering  crone  in  the  black  castle  more  dangerous  than  the  sea 
monster.  The  herd  thought  of  the  wolf  when  he  fought  the 
giants,  but  he  thought  of  the  fox  when  he  slew  the  dragon.  I 
can  but  say  with  the  tale  tellers,  "  dh'  fhag  mise  n'  sin  eud.'r 
M  There  I  left  them,"  for  others  to  follow  if  they  choose.  I  can- 
not say  how  the  story  got  to  the  Highlands,  and  the  lion  into 
the  mind  of  a  woman  in  Berneray. 

u.Lfiu'+u  ix  w**-  ^irf  Scs  tZ.. 


V. 
CONALL  CEA  BHUIDHE. 

From  James  Wilson,  blind  fiddler,  Islay. 

pONALL  CRA  BHUIDHE  was  a  sturdy  tenant  in 
^  Eirinn  :  lie  had  four  sons.  There  was  at  that  time  a 
king  over  every  fifth  of  Eirinn.  It  fell  out  for  the  children 
of  the  king  that  was  near  Conall,  that  they  themselves 
and  the  children  of  Conall  came  to  blows.  The  children 
of  Conall  got  the  upper  hand,  and  they  killed  the  king's 
big  son.  The  king  sent  a  message  for  Conall,  and  he 
said  to  him — "  Oh,  Conall  !  what  made  thy  sons  go  to 
spring  on  my  sons  till  my  big  son  was  killed  by  thy 
children  ?  but  I  see  that  though  I  follow  thee  revenge- 
fully, I  shall  not  be  much  the  better  for  it,  and  I  will 
now  set  a  thing  before  thee,  and  if  thou  wilt  do  it,  I 
will  not  follow  thee  with  revenge.  If  thou  thyself,  and 
thy  sons,  will  get  for  me  the  brown  horse  of  the  king  of 
Lochlann,  thou  shalt  get  the  souls  of  thy  sons."  "  Why," 
said  Conall,  "  should  not  I  do  the  pleasure  of  the  king, 
though  there  should  be  no  souls  of  my  sons  in  dread  at 
all.  Hard  is  the  matter  thou  requirest  of  me,  but  I 
will  lose  my  own  life,  and  the  life  of  my  sons,  or  else  I 
will  do  the  pleasure  of  the  king." 

After  these  words  Conall  left  the  king,  and  he  went 
home  :  when  he  got  home  he  was  under  much  trouble  and 
perplexity.  When  he  went  to  lie  down  he  told  his  wife 
the  thing  the  king  had  set  before  him.  His  wife  took 
much  sorrow  that  he  was  obliged  to  part  from  herself, 


106  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

while  she  knew  not  if  she  should  see  him  more.  "  Oh, 
Conall,"  said  she,  "  why  didst  not  thou  let  the  king  do 
his  own  pleasure  to  thy  sons,  rather  than  be  going  now, 
while  I  know  not  if  ever  I  shall  see  thee  more  1 "  When 
he  rose  on  the  morrow,  he  set  himself  and  his  four  sons 
.  in  order,  and  they  took  their  journey  towards  Lochlann, 
and  they  made  no  stop  but  (were)  tearing  ocean  till 
they  reached  it.  When  they  reached  Lochlann  they  did 
not  know  what  they  should  do.  Said  the  old  man  to 
his  sons — "  stop  ye,  and  we  will  seek  out  the  house  of 
the  king's  miller." 

When  they  went  into  the  house  of  the  king's  miller, 
the  man  asked  them  to  stop  there  for  the  night.  Conall 
told  the  miller  that  his  own  children  and  the  children 
of  the  king  had  fallen  out,  and  that  his  children  had 
killed  the  king's  son,  and  there  was  nothing  that  would 
please  the  king  but  that  he  should  get  the  brown 
horse  of  the  king  of  Lochlann.  "  If  thou  wilt  do  me  a 
kindness,  and  wilt  put  me  in  a  way  to  get  him,  for 
certain  I  will  pay  thee  for  it."  "The  thing  is  silly 
that  thou  art  come  to  seek,"  said  the  miller  ;  "for  the 
king  has  laid  his  mind  on  him  so  greatly  that  thou  wilt 
not  get  him  in  any  way  unless  thou  steal  him ;  but  if 
thou  thyself  canst  make  out  a  way,  I  will  hide  thy 
secret."  "This,  I  am  thinking,"  said  Conall,  "since 
thou  art  working  every  day  for  the  king,  that  thou  and 
thy  gillies  should  put  myself  and  my  sons  into  five 
sacks  of  bran."  "  The  plan  that  came  into  thy  head  is 
not  bad,"  said  the  miller.  The  miller  spoke  to  his 
gillies,  and  he  said  to  them  to  do  this,  and  they  put 
them  in  five  sacks.  The  king's  gillies  came  to  seek  the 
bran,  and  they  took  the  five  sacks  with  them,  and  they 
emptied  them  before  the  horses.  The  servants  locked 
the  door,  and  they  went  away. 


CONALL  CRA  BHUIDHE.  107 

When  they  rose  to  lay  hand  on  the  brown  horse, 
said  Conall,  "  You  shall  not  do  that.  It  is  hard  to  get 
out  of  this  ;  let  us  make  for  ourselves  five  hiding  holes, 
so  that  if  they  perceive  us  we  may  go  in  hiding."  They 
made  the  holes,  then  they  laid  hands  on  the  horse.  The 
horse  was  pretty  well  unbroken,  and  he  set  to  making  a 
terrible  noise  through  the  stable.  The  king  perceived 
him.  He  heard  the  noise.  "  It  must  be  that  that  was 
my  brown  horse,"  said  he  to  his  gillies ;  "try  what  is 
wrong  with  him." 

The  servants  went  out,  and  when  Conall  and  his  sons 
perceived  them  coming  they  went  into  the  hiding  holes. 
The  servants  looked  amongst  the  horses,  and  they  did 
not  find  anything  wrong ;  and  they  returned  and  they 
told  this  to  the  king,  and  the  king  said  to  them  that  if 
nothing  was  wrong  that  they  should  go  to  their  places 
of  rest.  When  the  gillies  had  time  to  be  gone,  Conall 
and  his  sons  laid  the  next  hand  on  the  horse.  If  the  >  ■  > 7. 
noise  was  great  that  he  made  before,  the  noise  he  made 
now  was  seven  times  greater.  The  king  sent  a  message 
for  his  gillies  again,  and  said  for  certain  there  was  some- 
thing troubling  the  brown  horse.  "  Go  and  look  well 
about  him."  The  servants  went  out,  and  they  went  to 
their  hiding  holes.  The  servants  rummaged  well,  and 
did  not  find  a  thing.  They  returned  and  they  told  this. 
"That  is  marvellous  for  me,"  said  the  king:  "go  you  to 
lie  down  again,  and  if  I  perceive  it  again  I  will  go  out 
myself."  When  Conall  and  his  sons  perceived  that  the 
gillies  were  gone,  they  laid  hands  again  on  the  horse, 
and  one  of  them  caught  him,  and  if  the  noise  that  the 
horse  made  on  the  two  former  times  was  great,  he  made  W 
more  this  time. 

"Be  this  from  me,"  said  the  king;  "it  must  be  that 
some  one  is  troubling  my  brown  horse."    He  sounded  the 


\ 


108  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

bell  hastily,  and  when  his  waiting  man  came  to  him,  he 
said  to  him  to  set  the  stable  gillies  on  foot  that  something 
was  wrong  with  the  horse.  The  gillies  came,  and  the  king 
went  with  them.  When  Conall  and  his  sons  perceived 
the  following  coming  they  went  to  the  hiding  holes. 
The  king  was  a  wary  man,  and  he  saw  where  the  horses 
were  making  a  noise.  "Be  clever,"  said  the  king, 
"  there  are  men  within  the  stable,  and  let  us  get  them 
somehow."  The  king  followed  the  tracks  of  the  men, 
and  he  found  them.  Every  man  was  acquainted  with 
Conall,  for  he  was  a  valued  tenant  by  the  king  of 
Eirinn,  and  when  the  king  brought  them  up  out  of  the 
holes  he  said,  " Oh,  Conall  art  thou  here  V  "I  am,  O 
king,  without  question,  and  necessity  made  me  come. 
I  am  under  thy  pardon,  and  under  thine  honour,  and 
under  thy  grace."  He  told  how  it  happened  to  him, 
and  that  he  had  to  get  the  brown  horse  for  the  king  of 
Eirinn,  or  that  his  son  was  to  be  put  to  death.  "  I  knew 
that  I  should  not  get  him  by  asking,  and  I  was  going  to/ 
steal  him."  "Yes,  Conall,  it  is  well  enough,  but  co^iie 
in,"  said  the  king.  He  desired  his  look-out  men  Wset 
a  watch  on  the  sons  of  Conall,  and  to  give  thepzi'  meat. 
And  a  double  watch  was  set  that  night  on  the  sons  of 
Conall.  "Now,  0  Conall,"  said  the  king,  5*wert  thou 
ever  in  a  harder  place  than  to  be  seeing  tfyy  lot  of  sons 
hanged  to-morrow  ?  But  thou  didst  set/it  to  my  good- 
ness and  to  my  grace,  and  that  it  was  necessity  brought 
it  on  thee,  and  I  must  not  hang  thee.  Tell  me  any  case 
in  which  thou  wert  as  hard  as  this,  and  if  thou  tellest 
that,  thou  shalt  get  the  soul  of  thy  youngest  son  with 
thee."  "I  will  tell  a  case  as  hard  in  which  I  was,"  said 
Conall. 

"I   was   a   young    lad,    and   my   father   had   much 
land,  and  he  had  parks  of  year-old  cows,  and  one  of 


CONALX,  CRA  BHUIDHE.  109 

them  had  just  calved,  and  my  father  told  me  to  bring 
her  home.  I  took  with  me  a  laddie,  and  we  found 
the  cow,  and  we  took  her  with  us.  There  fell  a  shower 
of  snow.  We  went  into  the  herd's  bothy,  and  we 
took  the  cow  and  the  calf  in  with  us,  and  we  were 
letting  the  shower  (pass)  from  us.  What  came  in  but 
one  cat  and  ten,  and  one  great  one-eyed  fox-coloured 
cat  as  head  bard*  over  them.  When  they  came  in,  in 
very  deed  I  myself  had  no  liking  for  their  company. 
'Strike  up  with  you,'  said  the  head  bard,  'why  should 
we  be  still  ?  and  sing  a  cronan  to  Conall  Cra-Bhui.' 
I  was  amazed  that  my  name  was  known  to  the  cats 
themselves.  When  they  had  sung  the  cronan,  said  the 
head  bard,  'Now,  0  Conall,  pay  the  reward  of  the 
cronan  that  the  cats  have  sung  to  thee.'  'Well  then,' 
said  I  myself,  '  I  have  no  reward  whatsoever  for  you, 
unless  you  should  go  down  and  take  that  calf.'  No 
sooner  said  I  the  word  than  the  two  cats  and  ten 
went  down  to  attack  the  calf,  and,  in  very  deed,  he 
did  not  last  them  long.  '  Play  up  with  you,  why 
should  you  be  silent  ?  Make  a  cronan  to  Conall 
Cra-Bhui,'  said  the  head  bard.  Certainly  I  had  no 
liking  at  all  for  the  cronan,  but  up  came  the  one  cat 
and  ten,  and  if  they  did  not  sing  me  a  cronan  then  and 
there!  'Pay  them  now  their  reward,'  said  the  great 
fox-coloured  cat.  '  I  am  tired  myself  of  yourselves  and 
your  rewards,'  said  I.  'I  have  no  reward  for  you  unless 
you  take  that  cow  down  there.'  They  betook  them- 
selves to  the  cow,  and  indeed  she  did  not  stand  them 
out  for  long. 

"  'Why  will  you  be  silent  ?    Go  up  and  sing  a  cronan 
to  Conall  Cra-Bhui,'  said  the  head  bard.     And  surely, 

*  Or  commander-in-chief. 


110  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

oh,  king,  I  had  no  care  for  them  or  for  their  cronan, 
for  I  began  to  see  that  they  were  not  good  comrades. 
When  they  had  sung  me  the  cronan  they  betook  them- 
selves down  where  the  head  bard  was.  'Pay  now 
their  reward,'  said  the  head  bard ;  and  for  sure,  oh, 
king,  I  had  no  reward  for  them ;  and  I  said  to  them, 
1 1  have  no  reward  for  you,  unless  you  will  take  that 
laddie  with  you  and  make  use  of  him.'  When  the 
boy  heard  this  he  took  himself  out,  and  the  cats  after 
him.  And  surely,  oh,  king,  there  was  "  striongan  "  and 
catterwauling  between  them.  When  they  took  them- 
selves out,  I  took  out  at  a  turf  window  that  was  at  the 
back  of  the  house.  I  took  myself  off  as  hard  as  I 
might  into  the  wood.  I  was  swift  enough  and  strong  at 
that  time ;  and  when  I  felt  the  rustling  '  toirm '  of  the 
cats  after  me  I  climbed  into  as  high  a  tree  as  I  saw  in 
the  place,  and  (one)  that  was  close  in  the  top ;  and  I 
hid  myself  as  well  as  I  might.  The  cats  began  to 
search  for  me  through  the  wood,  and  they  were  not 
finding  me ;  and  when  they  were  tired,  each  one  said 
to  the  other  that  they  would  turn  back.  'But,'  said 
the  one-eyed  fox-coloured  cat  that  was  commander-in- 
chief  over  them,  'you  saw  him  not  with  your  two 
eyes,  and  though  I  have  but  one  eye,  there's  the  rascal 
up  in  the  top  of  the  tree.'  When  he  had  said  that, 
one  of  them  went  up  in  the  tree,  and  as  he  was  coming 
where  I  was,  I  drew  a  weapon  that  I  had  and  I  killed 
him.  '  Be  this  from  me  ! '  said  the  one-eyed  one—'  I 
must  not  be  losing  my  company  thus;  gather  round 
the  root  of  the  tree  and  dig  about  it,  and  let  down 
that  extortioner  to  earth.'  On  this  they  gathered 
about  her  (the  tree),  and  they  dug  about  her  root,  and 
the  first  branching  root  that  they  cut,  she  gave  a  shiver 
to  fall,  and  I  myself  gave  a  shout,  and  it  was  not  to  be 


CONALL  CRA  BHUIDHE.  Ill 

wondered  at.  There  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
wood  a  priest,  and  he  had  ten  men  with  him  delving, 
and  he  said,  '  There  is  a  shout  of  extremity  and  I  must 
not  be  without  replying  to  it.'  And  the  wisest  of  the 
men  said,  '  Let  it  alone  till  we  hear  it  again.'  The  cats 
began,  and  they  began  wildly,  and  they  broke  the  next 
root ;  and  I  myself  gave  the  next  shout,  and  in  very 
deed  it  was  not  weak.  'Certainly,'  said  the  priest,  'it 
is  a  man  in  extremity — let  us  move.'  They  were  set- 
ting themselves  in  order  for  moving.  And  the  cats 
arose  on  the  tree,  and  they  broke  the  third  root,  and 
the  tree  fell  on  her  elbow.  I  gave  the  third  shout.  The 
stalwart  men  hasted,  and  when  they  saw  how  the  cats 
served  the  tree,  they  began  at  them  with  the  spades ; 
and  they  themselves  and  the  cats  began  at  each  other, 
till  they  were  killed  altogether — the  men  and  the  cats. 
And  surely,  oh  king,  I  did  not  move  till  I  saw  the  last 
one  of  them  falling.  I  came  home.  And  there's  for 
thee  the  hardest  case  in  which  I  ever  was ;  and  it  seems 
to  me  that  tearing  by  the  cats  were  harder  than  hanging 
to-morrow  by  the  king  of  Lochlann. 

"Od  !  Conall,"  said  the  king,  "thou  art  full  of  words. 
Thou  hast  freed  the  soul  of  thy  son  with  thy  tale ;  and 
if  thou  telle st  me  a  harder  case  than  thy  three  sons  to 
be  hanged  to-morrow,  thou  wilt  get  thy  second  youngest 
son  with  thee,  and  then  thou  wilt  have  two  sons." 
"  Well  then,"  said  Conall,  "  on  condition  that  thou  dost 
that,  I  was  in  a  harder  case  than  to  be  in  thy  power  in 
prison  to-night."  "  Let's  hear,"  said  the  king. — "  I  was 
there,"  said  Conall,  "  as  a  young  lad,  and  I  went  out 
hunting,  and  my  father's  land  was  beside  the  sea,  and  it 
was  rough  with  rocks,  caves,  and  geos.*     When  I  was 

*  Rifts  or  chasms,  where  the  sea  enters. 


112  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

going  on  the  top  of  the  shore,  I  saw  as  if  there  were  a 
smoke  coming  up  between  two  rocks,  and  I  began  to 
look  what  might  be  the  meaning  of  the  smoke  coming 
up  there.  When  I  was  looking,  what  should  I  do  but 
l  fall ;  and  the  place  was  so  full  of  manure,  that  neither 
bone  nor  skin  was  broken.  I  knew  not  how  I  should 
get  out  of  this.  I  was  not  looking  before  me,  but  I  was 
looking  over  head  the  way  I  came — and  the  day  will 
never  come  that  I  could  get  up  there.  It  was  terrible 
for  me  to  be  there  till  I  should  die.  I  heard  a  great 
clattering  '  tuarneileis  '  coming,  and  what  was  there  but 
a  great  giant  and  two  dozen  of  goats  with  him,  and  a 
buck  at  their  head.  And  when  the  giant  had  tied  the 
goats,  he  came  up  and  he  said  to  me,  '  Hao  0  !  Conall, 
it's  long  since  my  knife  is  rusting  in  my  pouch  waiting 
for  thy  tender  flesh.'  'Och!'  said  I,  'it's  not  much 
thou  wilt  be  bettered  by  me,  though  thou  should'st  tear 
me  asunder ;  I  will  make  but  one  meal  for  thee.  But  I 
rk  6&tUv  odr  .  /  see  that  thou  art  one-eyed.  I  am  a  good  leech,  and  I 
will  give  thee  the  sight  of  the  other  eye.'  The  giant 
went  and  he  drew  the  great  caldron  on  the  site  of  the 
fire.  I  myself  was  telling  him  how  he  should  heat  the 
water,  so  that  I  should  give  its  sight  to  the  other  eye. 
I  got  heather  and  I  made  a  rubber  of  it,  and  I  set  him 
upright  in  the  caldron.  I  began  at  the  eye  that  was 
well,  pretending  to  him  that  I  would  give  its  sight  to 
the  other  one,  till  I  left  them  as  bad  as  each  other ;  and 
surely  it  was  easier  to  spoil  the  one  that  was  well  than 
to  give  sight  to  the  other. 

"When  he  'saw'  that  he  could  not  see  a  glimpse, 
and  when  I  myself  said  to  him  that  I  would  get  out  in 
spite  of  him,  he  gave  that  spring  out  of  the  water,  and 
he  stood  in  the  mouth  of  the  cave,  and  he  said  that  he 
would  have  revenge  for  the  sight  of  his  eye.     I  had 


CONALL  CRA  BHUIDHE.  113 

but  to  stay  there  crouched  the  length  of  the  night, 
holding  in  my  breath  in  such  a  way  that  he  might  not 
feel  where  I  was. 

"  When  he  felt  the  birds  calling  in  the  morning,  and 
knew  that  the  day  was,  he  said — '  Art  thou  sleeping  1 
Awake  and  let  out  my  lot  of  goats."  I  killed  the  buck. 
He  cried,  '  I  will  not  believe  that  thou  art  not  killing 
my  buck.'  'lam  not,'  said  I,  'but  the  ropes  are  so 
tight  that  I  take  long  to  loose  them.'  I  let  out  one  of 
the  goats,  and  he  was  caressing  her,  and  he  said  to  her, 
'There  thou  art  thou  shaggy,  hairy  white  goat,  and  thou 
seest  me,  but  I  see  thee  not.'  I  was  letting  them  out  by 
the  way  of  one  and  one,  as  I  flayed  the  buck,  and  before 
the  last  one  was  out  I  had  him  flayed  bag  wise.  Then 
I  went  and  I  put  my  legs  in  place  of  his  legs,  and  my 
hands  in  place  of  his  fore  legs,  and  my  head  in  place  of 
his  head,  and  the  horns  on  top  of  my  head,  so  that  the 
brute  might  think  that  it  was  the  buck.  I  went  out. 
AY  hen  I  was  going  out  the  giant  laid  his  hand  on  me, 
and  he  said,  '  There  thou  art  thou  pretty  buck ;  thou 
seest  me,  but  I  see  thee  not.'  When  I  myself  got  out, 
and  I  saw  the  world  about  me,  surely,  oh,  king !  joy  was 
on  me.  When  I  was  out  and  had  shaken  the  skin  off 
me,  I  said  to  the  brute,  'I  am  out  now  in  spite  of  thee.' 
'  Aha  ! '  said  he,  '  hast  thou  done  this  to  me.  Since  thou 
were  so  stalwart  that  thou  hast  got  out,  I  will  give  thee 
a  ring  that  I  have  here,  and  keep  the  ring,  and  it  will 
do  thee  good.'  'I  will  not  take  the  ring  from  thee,'  said 
I,  'but  throw  it,  and  I  will  take  it  with  me.'  He  threw 
the  ring  on  the  flat  ground,  I  went  myself  and  I  lifted 
the  ring,  and  I  put  it  on  my  finger.  When  he  said  me 
then.  '  Is  the  ring  fitting  thee  1 '  I  said  to  him,  '  It  is.' 
He  said,  '  Where  art  thou  ring  ? '  And  the  ring  said,  '  I 
am  here.'   The  brute  went  and  he  betook  himself  towards  f 

R 


114  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

where  the  ring  was  speaking,  and  now  I  saw  that  I  was 
in  a  harder  case  than  ever  I  was.  I  drew  a  dirk.  I  cut 
the  finger  off  from  me,  and  I  threw  it  from  me  as  far  as 
I  could  out  on  the  loch,  and  there  was  a  great  depth  in 
the  place.  He  shouted,  '  Where  art  thou,  ring  1 '  And 
the  ring  said,  'I  am  here,'  though  it  was  on  the  ground 
of  ocean.  He  gave  a  spring  after  the  ring,  and  out  he 
Avent  in  the  sea.  And  I  was  as  pleased  here  when  I  saw 
him  drowning,  as  though  thou  shouldst  let  my  own  life 
and  the  life  of  my  two  sons  with  me,  and  not  lay  any 
more  trouble  on  me. 

"  When  the  giant  was  drowned  I  went  in,  and  I  took 
with  me  all  he  had  of  gold  and  silver,  and  I  went  home, 
and  surely  great  joy  was  on  my  people  when  I  arrived. 
And  as  a  sign  for  thee,  look  thou,  the  finger  is  off  me." 

"Yes,  indeed,  Conall,  thou  art  wordy  and  wise,"  said 
the  king.  "  I  see  thy  finger  is  off.  Thou  hast  freed  thy 
two  sons,  but  tell  me  a  case  in  which  thou  ever  wert 
that  is  harder  than  to  be  looking  on  thy  two  sons  being 
hanged  to-morrow,  and  thou  wilt  get  the  soul  of  thy 
second  eldest  son  with  thee." 

"Then  went  my  father,"  said  Conall,  "and  he  got 
me  a  wife,  and  I  was  married.  I  went  to  hunt.  I 
was  going  beside  the  sea,  and  I  saw  an  island  over  in 
the  midst  of  the  loch,  and  I  came  there  where  a  boat 
was  with  a  rope  before  her  and  a  rope  behind  her,  and 
many  precious  things  within  her.  I  looked  myself  on 
the  boat  to  see  how  I  might  get  part  of  them.  I  put 
in  the  one  foot,  and  the  other  foot  was  on  the  ground, 
and  when  I  raised  my  head  what  was  it  but  the  boat 
over  in  the  middle  of  the  loch,  and  she  never  stopped 
till  she  reached  the  island.  When  I  went  out  of  the 
boat  the  boat  returned  where  she  was  before.  I  did 
not   know   now   what   I  should  do.      The  place   was 


CONALL  CRA   BHUIDHE.  115 

without  meat  or  clothing,  without  the  appearance  of  a 
house  on  it.  I  raised  out  on  the  top  of  a  hill.  I  came 
to  a  glen ;  I  saw  in  it,  at  the  bottom  of  a  chasm,  a  woman 
who  had  got  a  child,  and  the  child  was  naked  on  her 
knee,  and  a  knife  in  her  hand.  She  would  attempt  to 
put  the  knife  in  the  throat  of  the  babe,  and  the  babe 
would  begin  to  laugh  in  her  face,  and  she  would  begin 
to  cry,  and  she  would  throw  the  knife  behind  her.  I 
thought  to  myself  that  I  was  near  my  foe  and  far  from 
my  friends,  and  I  called  to  the  woman,  '  What  art  thou 
doing  here  ? '  And  she  said  to  me,  '  What  brought  thee 
here  1 '  I  told  her  myself  word  upon  word  how  I  came. 
'Well  then,'  said  she,  'it  was  so  I  came  also.'  She 
showed  me  to  the  place  where  I  should  come  in  where 
she  was.  I  went  in,  and  I  said  to  her,  '  What  was  in 
fault  that  thou  wert  putting  the  knife  on  the  neck  of 
the  child.'  'It  is  that  he  must  be  cooked  for  the  giant 
who  is  here,  or  else  no  more  of  my  world  will  be  before 
m^.'  I  went  up  steps  of  stairs,  and  I  saw  a  chamber 
full  of  stripped  corpses.  I  took  a  lump  out  of  the 
corpse  that  was  whitest,  and  I  tied  a  string  to  the 
child's  foot,  and  a  string  to  the  lump,  and  I  put  the 
lump  in  his  mouth,  and  when  it  went  in  his  throat  he 
would  give  a  stretch  to  his  leg,  and  he  would  take 
it  out  of  his  throat,  but  with  the  length  of  the  thread 
he  could  not  take  it  out  of  his  mouth.  I  cast  the  child 
into  a  basket  of  down,  and  I  asked  her  to  cook  the 
corpse  for  the  giant  in  place  of  the  child.  '  How  can  I 
do  that  % '  said  she,  '  when  he  has  count  of  the  corpses/ 
'  Do  thou  as  I  ask  thee,  and  I  will  strip  myself,  and  I 
will  go  amongst  the  corpses,  and  then  he  will  have  the 
same  count,'  said  I.  She  did  as  I  asked  her.  We  put 
the  corpse  in  the  great  caldron,  but  we  could  not  put 
on  the  lid.     When  he  was  coming  home   I   stripped 


116  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

myself,  and  I  went  amongst  the  corpses.  He  came 
home,  and  she  served  up  the  corpse  on  a  great  platter, 
and  when  he  ate  it  he  was  complaining  that  he  found  it 
too  tough  for  a  child. 

'"I  did  as  thou  asked  me,'  said  she.  'Thou  hadst 
count  of  the  corpses  thyself,  and  go  up  now  and 
count  them.'  He  counted  them  and  he  had  them.  '  I 
see  one  of  a  white  body  there,'  said  he.  '  I  will  lie 
down  a  while  and  I  will  have  him  when  I  wake.' 
When  he  rose  he  went  up  and  gripped  me,  and  I 
never  was  in  such  a  case  as  when  he  was  hauling  me 
down  the  stair  with  my  head  after  me.  He  threw  me 
into  the  caldron,  and  he  lifted  the  lid  and  he  put  the  lid 
into  the  caldron.  And  now  I  was  sure  I  would  scald 
before  I  could  get  out  of  that.  As  fortune  favoured 
me,  the  brute  slept  beside  the  caldron.  There  I  was 
scalded  by  the  bottom  of  the  caldron.  When  she  per- 
ceived that  he  was  asleep,  she  set  her  mouth  quietly  to 
the  hole  that  was  in  the  lid,  and  she  said  to  me  '  was  I 
alive.'  I  said  I  was.  I  put  up  my  head,  and  the  brute's 
forefinger  was  so  large,  that  my  head  went  through  easily. 
Everything  was  coming  easily  with  me  till  I  began  to 
bring  up  my  hips.  I  left  the  skin  of  my  hips  about 
the  mouth  of  the  hole,  and  I  came  out.  When  I  got 
..  out  of  the  caldron  I  knew  not  what  to  do ;  and  she 
i  said  to  me  that  there  was  no  weapon  that  would  kill 
him  but  his  own  weapon.  I  began  to  draw  his  spear, 
and  every  breath  that  he  would  draw  I  would  think  I 

T  ^Jl    would  be  down  his  throat,  and  when  his  breath  came 
out  I  was  back  again  just  as  far.     But  with  every  ill 

jj^t  that  befell  me  I  got  the  spear  loosed  from  him.  Then 
I  was  as  one  under  a  bundle  of  straw  in  a  great  wind, 
for  I  could  not  manage  the  spear.  And  it  was  fear- 
ful  to   look    on    the    brute,    who    had    but    one    eye 


CONALL   CRA  BHUIDI1K.  117 

in  the  midst  of  his  face;  and  it  was  not  agreeable 
for  the  like  of  me  to  attack  him.  I  drew  the  dart  as 
best  I  could,  and  I  set  it  in  his  eye.  When  he  felt 
this  he  gave  his  head  a  lift,  and  he  struck  the  other  end 
of  the  dart  on  the  top  of  the  cave,  and  it  went  through 
to  the  back  of  his  head.  And  he  fell  cold  dead  where 
he  was ;  and  thou  may  est  be  sure,  oh  king,  that  joy 
was  on  me.  I  myself  and  the  woman  went  out  on 
clear  ground,  and  we  passed  the  night  there.  I  went 
and  got  the  boat  with  which  I  came,  and  she  was  no 
way  lightened,  and  took  the  woman  and  the  child  over 
on  dry  land;  and  I  returned  home." 

The  king's  mother  was  putting  on  a  fire  at  this  time, 
and  listening  to  Conall  telling  the  tale  about  the  child. 
"Is  it  thou,"  said  she,  "that  were  there?"  "Well 
then,"  said  he,  "  'twas  I."  "  Och  !  och  !  "  said  she, 
"  'twas  I  that  was  there,  and  the  king  is  the  child  whose 
life  thou  didst  save  j  and  it  is  to  thee  that  life  thanks 
might  be  given."     Then  they  took  great  joy. 

The  king  said,  "Oh  Conall,  thou  earnest  through  great 
hardships.  And  now  the  brown  horse  is  thine,  and  his 
sack  full  of  the  most  precious  things  that  are  in  my 
treasury." 

They  lay  down  that  night,  and  if  it  was  early  that 
Conall  rose,  it  was  earlier  than  that  that  the  queen  was 
on  foot  making  ready.  He  got  the  brown  horse  and  his 
sack  full  of  gold  and  silver  and  stones  of  great  price, 
and  then  Conall  and  his  four  sons  went  away,  and  they 
returned  home  to  the  Erin  realm  of  gladness.  He  left 
the  gold  and  silver  in  his  house,  and  he  went  with  the 
horse  to  the  king.  They  were  good  friends  evermore. 
He  returned  home  to  his  wife,  and  they  set  in  order  a 
feast ;  and  that  was  the  feast,  oh  son  and  brother ! 


118  WEST   HIGHLAND    TALES. 

This  story,  told  by  a  blind  man,  is  a  good  instance  of  the  way 
in  which  a  popular  tale  adapts  itself  to  the  mind  of  everybody. 
The  blinding  of  the  giant  and  his  subsequent  address  to  his  \  et 
goat — "There  thou  art,  thou  shaggy,  hairy,  white  goat:  thou 
seest  me,  but  I  see  thee  not  " — comes  from  the  heart  of  the  nar- 
rator. It  is  the  ornament  which  his  mind  hangs  on  the  frame  of 
the  story. 

"James  Wilson  learnt  it  from  John  MacLachlan,  an  old  man 
at  Kilsleven,  upwards  of  forty  years  ago.  The  old  man  would 
be  about  eighty  years  of  age  at  the  time." 

Cra-Bhuidhe  is  probably  a  corruption  of  some  proper  name. 

Crag  is  a  paw,  a  palm.     Buidhe,  yellow. 


CONALL  CRA-BHUIDHE. 

Bha  Conall  cra-bhuidhe  na  thuathanach  foghainnteach  ann  an 
Eirinn.  Bha  ceathrar  mhac  aige.  Bha  aims  an  am  sin  righ  air 
a  h-uile  coigeamh  do  dh'  Eirinn.  Thuit  e  maeh  do  chlann  an 
rlgh  a  bha  fagus  do  Chonall  gun  deach  iad  fein  agus  claim 
Chonaill  thar  a'  cheile.  Fhuair  clann  Chonaill  lamh  an  uacbdar, 
's  mharbh  iad  mac  mor  an  rlgh.  Chuir  an  rlgh  fios  air  Conall  's 
thuirt  e  ris,  "A  Chonaill,  de  thug  do  d'  mhicsa  dol  a  leum  air 
mo  mhicsa  gns  an  do  mharbhadh  mo  mhac  m6r  le  d'  chloinnsa  ? 
Ach  tha  mi  faicinn  ged  a  leanuinn  le  dioghaltas  thu  nach  m6r  is 
fheairde  mi  e,  agus  cuiridh  mi  nis  ma  d'  choinneamh  ni,  agus  ma 
ni  thu  e  cha  lean  mi  le  dioghaltas  thu.  Ma  gheobh  thu  fein  agus 
do  mhic  domhsa  each  donn  riyh  Lochlann,  gheobh  thu  anamanna 
do  mhac. "  "  Carson, "  arsa  Conall,  "nach  deanainnsa  toil  an 
righ  ged  nach  biodh  anamanna  mo  mhac  air  a  sgath  idir.  Is 
cruaidh  an  gnothach  a  tha  thu  'g  iarraidh  orm,  ach  caillidh  mi 
mo  bheatha  fein  agus  beatha  mo  mhac  air  neo  ni  mi  toil  an  rlgh." 
An  deigh  nam  briathran  so  dh'  fhag  Conall  an  righ  's  chaidh  e 
dhachaidh.  Nur  a  thainig  e  dachaidh  bha  e  fo  mhoran  trioblaid 
agus  duibh-thiamhas.  Nur  a  chaidh  e  laidhe  dh'  innis  e  d'a 
bhean  an  ni  chuir  an  righ  ma  choinneamh.  Ghabh  a'  bhean 
m6ran  duilichinn  gum  b'  £igin  da  dealachadh  rithe  f6in,  's  gun 
fhios  aice  'm  faiceadh  i  tuillidh  e.  "A  Chonaill,"  ars'  ise, 
'•  carson  nach  do  leisr  thu  leis  an  risfh  a  thoil  fein  a  dheanadh  ri 


CONALL   CRA-BHUIDHK.  119 

d'  mhic,  seach  a  bhi  folbh  a  nis  's  gun  fhios'am  am  faic  mi  tail- 
lidh  thu." 

Kara  dh'  eiridh  iad  an  la'  r  na  mhaireach  cliuir  e  e  fein  's  a 
cheitliir  mic  an  ordugh,  's  ghabb  iad  an  turas  ma  tbuaiream 
Loc.hlann,  's  cba  d'  rinneadb  stad  leo  ach  a  reubadb  cuain  gus  an 
d'  rainig  iad  e.  Nur  a  rainig  iad  Lochlann  cha  robb  fios  aca  de 
'dheanadh  iad.  Arsa  'n  seann  duine  ra  mhic,  "  Stadadh  sibhse 
agus  iarraidb  sinn  a  macb  tigb  muillear  an  rlgh."  Nur  a  chaidh 
iad  a  stigh  do  thigh  muillear  an  rlgh  chuir  an  duine  iad  a  dh' 
fhantuinn  anns  an  oidhche.  Dh'  innis  Conall  do  'n  mhuillear 
gun  deach  a  chlann  fein  's  clann  an  rlgh  thar  a  cheile  's  gun  do 
mharbh  a  chlannsan  mac  an  rlgh  's  nach  robh  ni  sam  bith  a 
thoileachadh  an  rlgh  ach  e  'dh'  fhaotainn  each  donn  rlgh  Loch- 
lann. "  Ma  ni  tbusa  run  orm  's  gun  cuir  thu  air  ddigh  mi  gum 
faigh  mi  e,  gu  diongalta  paighidh  mi  air  a  shon  thu,"  orsa 
Conall.  "  'S  amaideach  an  ni  a  thainig  thu  'dh'  iarraidh,"  ars' 
am  muillear,  "chionn  tha  'n  rlgh  air  leagail  inntinn  air  cho  mor 
's  nach  fhaigh  thu  air  doigh  sam  bith  e  mar  an  goid  thu  e  ;  ach 
ma  ni  thu  fein  doigh  a  mach  ceilidh  mise  run  ort."  "  'S  e  tha 
mi  smaointeachadh,"  ars'  Conall,  "  o'n  a  tha  thu  'g  obair  h-uile 
latha  do  'n  rlgh,  gun  cuireadh  thu  fein  's  do  ghillean  mi  fein  's 
mo  mhic  ann  an  coig  saic  pruinn."  "  Cha  dona  'n  seol  a  thainig 
a'd'  cheann,"  orsa  'm  muillear. 

Bhruidhinn  am  muillear  r'  a  ghillean,  's  thuirt  e  riu  so  a 
dheanadh,  's  chuir  iad  ann  an  coig  saic  iad.  Thainig  gillean  an 
righ  a  dh'  iarraidh  a  phruinn,  's  thug  iad  leo  na  c6ig  saic,  's 
dhoirt  iad  air  beulthaobh  nan  each  iad.  Ghlais  na  seirbheisich 
an  dorusd,  's  dh'  fholbh  iad.  Nur  a  dh'  eirich  iad  a  thoirt  lamh 
air  an  each  dhonn,  orsa  Conall,  "Cha  dean  sibh  sin,  tha  e  doirbh 
faotainn  as  a'  so  ;  deanamaid  dhuinn  f6in  coig  tuill  fhalaich,  air 
alt 's  ma  mhothachas  iad  duiun  gun  d' theid  sinn  am  falach.'' 
Einn  iad  na  tuill.  Thug  iad  an  sin  lamh  air  an  each.  Bha  'n 
t-each  gu  math  uaibhreach,  's  chaidh  e  gu  stararaich  fhuathasach 
feadh  an  stabuill.  Mhothaich  an  rlgh  dha;  chual  e  'n  stararaich. 
"  'S  eigin  gur  h-e  siod  an  t-each  donn  agamsa,"  urs'  e  r'a  ghillean, 
"feuchaibhde  tha  cearr  air."  Chaidh  na  seirbheisich  a  mach, 
's  nur  a  mhothaich  Conall  's  a  mhic  daibh  a  tighinn  chaidh  iad  's 
na  tuill  fhalaich.  Dh'  amhairc  na  seirbheisich  feadh  nan  each, 
's  cha  d'  fhuair  iad  ni  sam  bith  cearr.  Thill  iad  's  dh'  innis  iad 
so  do  'n  rlgh,  's  thuirt  an  righ  riu,  mar  an  robh  stugh  cearr  iad  a 
dhol  d'  an  aite  taimh.     Nur  a  bha  uine  aig  na  gillean  a  bhith  air 


120  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

folbh  thug  Conall  's  a  mhic  an  ath  lamh  air  an  each.  Ma  bu 
mhor  an  stararaich  a  rinn  e  roimhe,  bu  sheachd  motha  an  stara- 
raich  a  rinn  e  nis.  Chuir  an  righ  fios  air  a  ghillean  a  ris  's  thuirt 
e  gu  cinnteach  gun  robh  rudeigin  a  cur  dragh  air  an  each  dhonn. 
"  Folbhaibh  agus  amhaircibh  gu  math  timchioll  air,"  ors'  esan. 
Chaidh  na  seirbheisich  a  mach,  's  chaidh  iadsan  do  na  tuill 
fhalaich.  Euraich  na  seirbheisich  gu  math,  's  cha  d'  fhuair  iad 
ni.  Thill  iad  's  dh'  innis  iad  so.  "Tha  sin  iongantach  leamsa," 
ars'  an  rlgh.  "  Theirigeadh  sibse  'laidhe  rithisd,  's  ma  mhotha- 
chas  mis'  a  rithisd  e,  theid  mi  fein  a  mach."  Nur  a  mhothaich 
Conall 's  a  mhic  gun  robh  na  gillean  air  folbh  thug  iad  lamh  a 
rithisd  air  an  each,  's  rug  fear  ac'  air,  's  ma  bu  mhor  an  stararaich 
a  rinn  an  t-each  an  da  shiubhal  roimhid,  rinn  e  barrachd  air  an 
t-siubhal  so.  "  Bhuam  so,"  urs'  an  righ;  " 's  eigin  gu 'bheil 
nitheigin  a'  cur  dragh  air  an  each  dhonn  agamsa."  Dh'  fhuaim 
e  'n  clag  gu  deifireach,  's  nur  a  thainig  a  theachdaire  da  'ionn- 
suidh  thuirt  e  ris  gillean  an  stabuill  a  chur  air  ghluasad,  gun 
robh  rudeigin  cearr  air  an  each.  Thainig  na  gillean,  's  dh' 
fholbh  an  righ  leo.  Nur  a  mhothaich  Conall  's  a  mhic  an  toir 
a'  tighinn  chaidh  iad  do  na  tuill  fhalaich.  Bha  'n  righ  'na  dhuine 
furachail,  's  chunnaic  e  far  an  robh  na  bha  toirt  air  na  h-eich  a 
bhi  a'  deanadh  stararaich.  "  Bithibh  tapaidh,"  urs'  an  righ, 
"tha  daoine  a  stigh  's  an  stabull,  's  faigheamaid  iad  air  alteigin." 
Lean  an  righ  faileachd  nan  daoine,  's  fhuair  e  iad.  Bha  h-uile 
duine  e61ach  air  Conall ;  chionn  bha  e  'na  thuathanach  measail 
aig  righ  Eireann,  's  nur  a  thug  an  righ  nlos  as  na  tuill  iad 
thuirt  e  "U  !  Chonaill  a'  bheil  thu  'n  so?"  "Tha,  rlgh,  mi  'n 
so  gun  cheist,  's  thug  an  eigin  orm  tighinn  ann.  Tha  mi  fo  d' 
mhathas  agus  fo  d'  onair  agus  fo  d'  ghras. "  Dh'  innis  e  mar  a 
thachair  da,  's  gun  robh  aige  'n  t-each  donn  r'a  fhaotainn  do  rlgh 
Eireann  no  'mhac  a  bhi  air  a  chur  gu  bas.  "Bha  fhios'am  nach 
fhaighinn  e  le  iarraidh,  's  bha  mi  'dol  g'  a  ghoid."  "  Seadh,  a 
Chonaill,  tha  e  gle  mhath,  ach  thig  a  stigh,"  ars  an  righ.  Dh' 
iarr  e  air  a  luchd  coimhead  faire  chur  air  mic  Chonaill,  's  biadh 
a  thoirt  dhaibh  ;  's  chuireadh  faire  dhubailt'  an  oidhche  sin  air 
mic  Chonaill.  "Nis  a  Chonaill,"  ars'  an  righ,  "an  robh  thu 
'n  aite  riabh  na  bu  chruaidhe  na  'bhith  'faicinn  do  chuid  mac  'gan 
crochadh  am  maireach  ;  ach  chuir  thusa  gum'  mhathas  agus 
gum'  ghras  e,  's  gur  e  'n  eigin  a  thug  ort  e,  's  cha  'n  fhaod  mi 
thusa  a  chrochadh.  Innis  domh  cas  'sam  bith  'san  robh  thu  cho 
cruaidh  ris  a'  so,  's  ma  dh'  innseas  thu  sin  gheobh  thu  anam  do 


CONALL  CRA-BHUIDHE.  121 

mhic  is  oige  lcat."      "Innsidh  mi  cas  cho  cruaidh  anus'  an  robh 
mi,"  orsa  Conall. 

'*  Bha  mi  ann  am  ghill'  6g,  's  bha  m6ran  fearainn  aig  m'  athair, 
's  bha  paircean  bhiorach  aige,  's  bha  te  dhiu  an  deigh  breith. 
Thuirt  mo  mhathair  rium  a  toirt  dhachaidh.  Dh'  fholbh  mi 
agus  thug  mi  learn  balachan,  agus  fhuair  sinn  a'  bho,  's  thug 
sinn  leinn  i.  Shil  fras  shneachda ;  chaidh  sinn  a  stigh  do  bhoth- 
ag  airidh,  's  thug  sinn  a  bhd  's  an  laogh  a  stigh  leinn,  's  bha 
sinn  a'  leigeil  dhinn  na  froise  ;  de  'thainig  a  stigh  ach  aona  chat 
deug  's  cat  mor  ruagh  cam  na  cheannabhard  orra.  Nur  a 
thainig  iad  a  stigh,  gu  dearbh,  cha  robh  tlachd  sam  bith  agam 
fein  d'  an  cuideachd.  "Suas  sibh,"  ursa  'n  ceannabhard, 
"  carson  a  bhiodh  sibh  'nar  tamh,  agus  seinnibh  cr6nan  do 
Chonall  Cra-bhuidhe."  Bha  iongantas  orm  gum'  V  aithne  do  na 
cait  fein  m'  ainm.  Nur  a  sheinn  iad  an  cronan,  urs'  an  ceanna- 
bhard, "  Nis,  a  Chonaill,  paigh  duais  &'  chronain  a  sheinn  na 
cait  duit."  "  Mata,  ursa  mi  fein  "cha  'n  'eil  duais  agamsa 
dhuibh  mar  an  d'  theid  sibh  sios  agus  an  laogh  sin  a  ghabhail. " 
Cha  bu  luaithe  thuirt  mi  'm  facal  na  ghabh  an  da  chat  deug  a 
sios  an  dail  an  laoigh,  's  gu  dearbh  cha  do  sheas  e  fada  dhaibh. 
"  Suas  sibh,  carson  a  bhiodh  sibh  'nar  tosd  seinnibh  cronan  do 
Chonall  Cra-bhuidhe,"  ars  an  ceannard.  Gu  diongalta  cha  robh 
tlachd  'sam  bith  agam  fein  d'an  cronan,  ach  a  nios  a  ghabh  an 
t-aon  chat  deug,  's  mar  an  do  sheinn  iad  domhsa  cronan  an  sin 
agus  an  sin. 

"Paigh  a  nis  'nan  duais  iad,"  ars  an  cat  mor  ruadh.  "  Tha  mi  fein 
sgith  dhibh  fein  's  de  'r  duais, "  arsa  mise,  "cha  'n  'eil  duais  agamsa 
dhuibh  mar  an  gabh  sibh  am  mart  sin  shios."  Thug  iad  thun  a 
mhairt,  's  gu  dearbh  cha  do  sheas  i  fada  dhaibh.  "  Carson  a 
bhios  sibh  'nur  tosd  theirigibh  suas  agus  seinnibh  cronan  do 
Chonall  Cra-bhuidhe,"  ars  an  ceannard.  Gu  cinnteach  a  rlgh  cha 
robh  amhuil  agam  dhaibh  fein  no  d'  an  cronan,  chionn  bha  mi 
faicinn  nach  bu  chompanaich  mhath  iad.  Nur  a  sheinn  iad 
domhsa  'n  cronan  thug  iad  a  sios  orra  far  an  robh  an  ceannard. 
"Paidh  a  nis  an  duais,"  urs'  an  ceannabhard,  "'s  gu  cinnteach  a 
righ  cha  robh  duais  agamsa  dhaibh,  's  thuirt  mi  riu,  "  cha  'n  'eil 
duais  agamsa  dhuibh  mar  an  d'  thoir  sibh  am  balach  sin  leibh,  's 
feuni  a  dheanadh  dheth."  Nur  a  chual  am  balach  so  thug  e  'mach 
air,  's  thug  na  cait  as  a  dheigh  ;  's  gu  cinnteach  a  rlgh  bha  strion- 
gan  eatorra.  Nur  a  chaidh  iad  a  mach  ghabh  mise  mach  air 
uinneag  sgroth  a  bha  air  taobh  cuil  an  tighe.     Thug  mi  as  cho 


122  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

cruaidh  's  a  dh'  fhaodainn  a  stigh  do  'n  choille.  Bha  mi  gle 
luatb,  laidir  'san  am  sin.  Agus  nur  a  mhothaich  mi  toirm  nan 
cat  a'  m'  dheigh  streap  mi  ann  an  craoibh  cho  ard  's  a  chunnaic 
mi  'san  aite  agus  a  bha  diimhaill  anns  a  bharr,  's  dh'  fhalaich  mi 
mi  fein  cho  math  's  a  dh'  fhaodainn.  Thoisich  na  cait  air 
m'iarraidh  feadh  na  coille,  's  cha  robh  iad  'gam'  fhaotainn,  agus 
nur  a  bha  iad  sgith  thuirt  gach  fear  r'a  cheile  gun  tilleadh  iad, 
ach  thuirt  am  cat  cam,  ruadh  a  bha  'n  cheannabhard  orra,  "  Cha  'n 
fhaca  sibhs'  e  le  'ur  da  shuil,  's  gun  agams'  ach  an  aon  suil.  Siod 
an  slaightire  shuas  am  barr  na  craoibhe  !  "  Nur  a  thuirt  e  sin 
chaidh  fear  dhiu  suas  'sa  chraoibh,  's  nur  a  bha  e  tigh'n  far  an 
robh  mi  tharruinn  mi  arm  a  bh'  agam,  agus  mharbh  mi  e.  "  Bhuam 
so,"  urs'  am  fear  cam,  "  cha  'n'  fhaod  mise  'bhi  call  mo  chuideachd 
mur  so.  Cruinnichibh  ma  bhun  na  craoibhe,  agus  cladhachaibh 
timchioll  urra,  agus  leagaibh  an  nuas  an  rogaire  gu  talamh." 
Chruinnich  iad  an  so  timchioll  urra,  agus  chladhaich  iad 
ma  'bun,  agus  a  chiad  fhreumh  a  ghearr  iad  thug  i  uileann 
urra  gu  tuiteam,  's  thug  mi  fein  glaodh  asam  's  cha  b- 
ioghnadh  e.  Bha  ann  an  iomall  na  coille  sagairt  agus  deich 
daoin'  aig  a  ruamhar,  's  thuirt  e.  "Tha  n'  siod  glaodh  soraichte 
cha  n  'fhaod  mise  gun  a  fbreagairt."  Thuirt  fear  a  bu  ghlice  de 
na  daoine,  ' '  Leigeamaid  da  gus  an  cluinn  sin  a  rithisd  e. "  Thoisich 
na  cait  's  thoisich  iad  gu  fiadhaich,  's  bhrisd  iad  an  ath  fhreumh, 
's  thug  mi  fein  an  ath  ghlaodh  asam,  's  gu  dearbh  cha  robh  e 
fann.  ' '  Gu  cinuteach, "  ors'  an  sagairt,  "  's  duine  'na  eigin  a  th'ann ; 
gluaisemaid."  Bha  iad  a'  cuir  an  ordugh  gu  gluasad,  's  dh'  eiridh 
na  cait  air  a  craoibh  gus  an  do  bhrisd  iad  an  treas  freumhach, 
's  thuit  a  craobh  air  a  h-uileann.  Thug  mi  'n  treas  glaodh  asam. 
Dheifirich  na  daoine  foghainteach,  's  nur  a  chunnaic  iad  an  dlol  a 
bh'  aig  na  cait  air  a  chraoibh;  thoisich  iad  urra  leis  na  spadan,  's 
thoisich  iad  fein  's  na  cait  air  a  cheile,  gus  an  do  mharbhadh  gu 
leir  iad,  na  daoin'  agus  na  cait ;  agus  gu  cinnteach  a  righ  cha  do 
charaich  mise  gus  am  faca  mi  'n  t-aon  ma  dheireadh  a'  tuiteam 
diu.  Thainig  mi  dachaidh,  agus  sin  agad  an  cas  an  cruaidhe  'n 
robh  mise  riabh,  's  air  learn  gum  bu  chruaidhe  'bhith  gam' 
leobadh  aig  na  cait  na  bhith  'ga  m'  chrochadh  aig  righ  Lochlann 
a  maireach." 

"  Od  a  Chonaill,"  ars  an  righ,  "  's  briatharach  thu  ;  shaor  thu 
anam  do  mhic  le  d'  naigheachd,  agus  ma  dh'  innseas  thu  dhoinh 
cas  is  cruaidhe  na  do  thri  mic  a  bhi  'gan  crochadh  a  maireach 
gheobh  thu  do  dharna  mac  is  oige  leat  's  bidh  an  sin  da  mhac 


CONALL   CRA-BHUIDHE.  123 

agad."  "  Mata,"  orsa  Conall,  air  chumhnant  gun  dean  thu  sin, 
bha  mi  'n  cas  a  bu  chruaidhe  na  'bhi'  agadsa  'nochd  am  prlosan." 
"  Cluinneam  e,"  urs'  an  righ.  "  Bha  mi  'n  siod,"  orsa  Connall, 
"  am  ghill'  6g  's  chaidh  mi  mach  a  shealgaireachd,  's  bha  crioch 
m'  athar  taobh  na  fairge,  's  bha  i  garbh  le  creagan,  uamhachan, 
agus  geothachan.  Nur  a  bha  mi  folbh  aig  braigh  a'  cladaich 
chunnaic  mi  mar  gum  biodh  toit  a'  tighinn  a  nlos  eadar  da  chreag, 
's  thug  mi  lamh  air  amharc  de  bu  chiall  do'n  toit  a  bhi  tighinn  a 
nios  an  siod.  Nur  a  bha  mi  'g  amharc  de  rinn  mi  ach  tuiteam 
sios,  's  bha  'n  t-aite  cho  Ian  do  leasachadh  's  nach  do  bhrisdeadh 
cnaimh  na  craicionn.  Cha  robh  fios'am  de  mur  a  gheobhainn  a 
mach  as  an  so.  Cha  robh  mi  'g  amharc  romham  ach  bha  mi  'g 
amharc  as  mo  chionn  an  rathad  a  thainig  mi,  's  cha  d'  thig  an 
lath'  a  gheobhainn  suas  an  sin.  Bha  e  uamhasach  learn  a  bhi  'n 
sin  gus  am  basachainn.  Chuala  mi  tuairneileis  mh6r  a'  tighinn, 
's  de  bha  'n  sin  ach  famhair  mdr,  's  da  dhusan  gobhar  leis,  agus 
boc  air  an  ceann,  's  nur  a  cheangail  am  famhair  na  gobhair 
thainig  e  nlos  's  thuirt  e  rium,  "  Haobh  a  Chonaill  's  fhada  mo 
chore  a'  meirgeadh  ann  a'  m'  ph6ca  a  feitheamh  air  t-fheoil 
mhaoth."  "  Oh,"  arsa  mise,  "cha  mhor  is  fheaird  thu  mise  geda 
reubas  thu  mi  as  a'  cheile,  cha  dean  mi  ach  aon  trath  dhuit ;  ach 
tha  mi  faicinn  gu  'bheil  thu  air  aon  suil,  's  leigh  math  mise  's 
bheir  mi  sealladh  na  shuil  eile  dhuit."  Dh'  fholbh  am  famhair  's 
tharrainn  e  'm  brothadair  mor  air  larach  a  ghealbhain,  's  bha  mi 
fein  aig  ionnsachadh  dha  demur  a  theoigheadh  e  'n  t-uisge,  chum 
gun  d'  thngainn  a  sealladh  do  'n  t-suil  eile.  Fhuair  mi  fraoch, 
's  rinn  mi  rubair  dheth  's  chuir  mi  'na  sheasamh  anns  a'  broth- 
adair e.  Thdisich  mi  air  an  t-suil  a  bha  gu  math,  a'  cur  mar 
fhiachaibh  air  gun  d'  thugainn  a  sealladh  do  'n  te  eile  gus  an  d' 
fhag  mi  cho  dona  r'a  cheil'  iad  ;  agus  gu  cinnteach  b'  fhasa  'n  te 
a  bha  gu  math  a  mhilleadh  na  sealladh  a  thoirt  do  5n  te 
eile.  Nur  a  chunnaic  e  nach  bu  leur  dha  leus,  's  a  thuirt  mi 
fein  ris  gum  faighinn  a  mach  gun  taing  dha,  thug  e  'n  leum  sin 
as  an  uisge  's  sheas  e  ann  am  beul  ,na  h-uamha,  's  thuirt  e  gum 
biodh  dloghladh  aig  airson  sealladh  a  shuil.  Cha  robh  agam  ach 
fantainn  ann  am  pilleag  an  sin  fad  na  h-oidhche,  'cumail  m'  anail 
a  stigh  air  dhoigh  's  nach  mothchadh  e  cait'  an  robh  mi.  Nur  a 
mhothaich  e  na  h-e6in  a'  gairm  anns  a  mhaidinn,  's  a  dh'  aithnich 
e  gun  robh  an  lath'  ann,  thuirt  e,  "Bheil  thu  'd  chadal,  diiisg agus 
leig  a  mach  mo  chuid  ghobhar. "  Mharbh  mi  'm  boc.  Ghlaoidh 
esan,  "Cha  chreid  mi  nach  'eil  thu  marbhadh  mo  bhuic."  "Cha n' 


124  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

eil,"  orsa  mise,  "ach  tha  na  r6paichean  cho  teann  's  gun  d'  thoir  mi 
fad'  air  am  fuasgladh.  Leig  mi  mach  te  de  na  gobhair,  's  bha  e 
ga  crlodachadh,  's  thuirt  e  rithe.  "  Tha  thus'  an  sin  a  ghobhar, 
bhan,  riobagach,  roineach,  's  chi  thusa  mise,  ach  cha  'n  fhaic 
mis'  thusa."  Bha  mi  'gan  cuir  a  mach  a  lion  te  's  te  's  a 
feannadh  a  bhuic  's  ma'n  robh  'n  te  ma  dheireadh  dhiu  'mach 
bha  feannadh-builg  agam  air.  Dh'  fholbh  mi  'n  so  's  chair  mi 
mo  chasan  ann  an  aite  'chasan-deiridh  's  mo  lamhan  an  aite 
'chasan-toisich,  agus  mo  cheann  an  aite  'chinn,  's  na  h-adhaircean 
air  mullach  mo  chinn,  air  alt  's  gun  saoileadh  a  bheisd  gur  e  'm 
boc  a  bh'  ann.  Chaidh  mi  'mach.  Nur  a  bha  mi  'dol  a  mach 
chuiram  famhair  a  lamb,  orm,  's  thuirt  e,  "Tha  thus'  an  sin  a  bhuic 
bhdidhich,  chi  thusa  mise  ach  cha  'n  fhaic  mis'  thusa."  Nur  a 
fhuair  mi  fein  a  mach,  's  a  chunnaic  mi  'n  saoghal  ma  'n  cuairt  orm, 
gu  cinnteach  a  righ  bha  boch  orm.  Nur  a  bha  mi  mach,  's  a  chrath 
mi  dhiom  an  craicionn,  thuirt  mi  ris  a  bheisd,  "  Tha  mi  mach  a 
nis  gantaing  duit."  "Aha,"  urs'  esan,  "an  d'rinn  thu  so  orm?  0  'n 
a  bha  thu  cho  foghainteach  's  gun  d'  fhuair  thu  mach,  bheir  mi 
dim  it  fainn'  a  th'  agam  an  so,  's  gleidh  am  fainne  's  ni  e  feum 
dhuit."  "Cha  ghabh  mi  'm  fainne  uait,"  arsa  mise,  "ach  tilg  e,  's 
bheir  mi  learn  e. "  Thilg  e  'm  fainn'  air  a  bhlar,  chaidh  mi  fein  's 
thog  mi  'm  fainne,  's  chuir  mi  air  mo  mheur  e.  Nur  a  thuirt  e 
rium  an  sin,  "A'  bheil  am  fainne  freagairt  duit?  "  thuirt  mi  ris, 
"Tha."  Urs'  esan,  "Ca'  'bheil  thu  fhainne?"  's  thuirt  am  fainne. 
"  Tha  mi  'n  so."  Dh'  fholbh  a'  bheisd  's  thug  e  ionnsuidh  air  far 
an  robh  'm  fainne  bruidhinn,  agus  chunnaic  mi  'n  so  gun  robh 
mi  'n  cas  na  bu  chruaidhe  na  bha  mi  riabh.  Tharruinn  mi 
biodag  ;  ghearr  mi  dhiom  a'  mheur  ;  's  thilg  mi  nam  i  cho  fhada 
's  a  b'  uri*ainn  mi'  mach  air  an  loch,  's  bha  doimhneachd  mhor  's 
an  aite.  Ghlaoidh  esan,  "  Cait'  a'  bheil  thu  fhainne  ?  's  thuirt  am 
fainne,  "  Tha  mi  'n  so,"  ged  a  bha  e  'n  grunnd  a  chuain.  Thug  e 
leum  as  deigh  an  fhainne,  's  a  mach  a  ghabh  e  aims  an  fhairge  's 
bha  mi  cho  toilichte  an  so  nur  a  chunnaic  mi  e  'ga  bhathadh,  's 
ged  a  leigeadh  thusa  mo  bheatha  fein  agus  beatha  mo  mhac  leam 
gun  mir  dragh  a  chuir  orm.  Nur  a  bhathadh  am  famhair  chaidh 
mi  stigh  's  thug  mi  leam  na  bh'  aige  'dh'  6r  's  do  dh'  airgiod,  's 
chaidh  mi  dhachaidh,  's  gu  cinnteach  bha  toilinntinn  mhor  air 
mo  mhuinntir  nur  a  rianig  mi  's  mar  chomharra  dhuit  fhaic  thu 
'mheur  dhiom. 

"  Seadh  a  Chonaill  's  briathrach  seolt'  thu,"  ars  an  righ,  "  tha 
mi  faicinn  do  mheur  dhiot.  Shaor  thu  do  dha  mhac  a  nis  ach  innis 


CONALL  CRA-BHUIDHE.  125 

domh  cas  is  cruaidhe  an  robh  thu  riabh  na  bhi'g  amharc  air  do 
dha  mhac  'gan  crochadh  a  maireach  's  gbeobh  thu  anam  do  dharna 
niic  is  sine  leat.'' 

"  Dh'  fholbh  an  siod  m'  atbair,"  arsa  Conall,  "  agus  fhuair  e 
dhomh  bean,  's  bha  mi  air  mo  phosadh.  Dh'  fholbh  mi  shealg. 
Bha  mi  folbh  taobh  na  fairge  's  chunnaic  mi  eilean  thall  am 
meadhon  an  loch,  agus  tbainig  mi  far  an  robh  bata  an  sin,  's 
ropa  roimpe  's  ropa  na  deigh,  's  moran  do  nithean  luachmhor  an 
taobh  a  stigh  dhi.  Dh'  amhairc  mi  fein  air  a  bhata  feuch  demur 
a  gheobhainn  pairt  diu.  Chuir  mi  stigh  an  darna  cas  's  bha  'chas 
eile  air  a  ghrunnd,  's  nur  a  thog  mi  mo  cheann  de  ach  a  bha  'm 
bata  nunn  am  meadhon  an  loch,  's  cha  do  stad  i  gus  an  d'  rainig 
i  'n  t-eilean.  Nur  a  chaidh  mi  mach  as  a  bhata  thill  am  bata  far 
an  robh  i  roimhid.  Cha  robh  fiosam  an  so  de'  dheanainn.  Bha 
'n  t-aite  gun  bhiadh,  gun  aodach,  gun  choltas  tighe  air.  Thog  mi 
mach  air  mullach  cnoic.  Thainig  mi  gu  gleann.  Chunnaic  mi 
aim  an  grunnd  glomhais  bean  agus  leanabh  aice,  's  an  leanabh 
ruisgt'  air  a  gliiinean,  agus  sgian  aice  'na  laimh.  Bheireadh  i 
lamh  air  an  sgian  a  chuir  air  muineal  an  leinibh,  's  thoiseachadh 
an  leauabh  air  gai  reach  daich  na  h-aodann,  's  thoiseachadh  ise  air 
caoineadh,  's  thilgeadh  i  'n  sgian  air  a  h-ais.  Smaointich  mi 
fein  gun  robh  mi  fagus  do  m'  naimbdean  's  fad  o  rn'  chairdean,  's 
ghlaoidh  mi  ris  a  bhoireannach.  "  De'  tha  thu  'deanadh  an  so  ?  " 
's  thuirt  i  rium,  "  De  thug  thus'  an  so  ?"  Dh'  innis  mi  fein  di  facal 
air  an  fhacal  mar  a  tbainig  mi.  "  Mata,"  ors'  ise,  "  's  ann  mar  sin  a 
thainig  mise  cuideachd."  Sheol  i  mi  gus  an  aite  'n  d'  thiginn  a 
stigh  far  an  robh  i.  Chaidh  mi  stigh,  's  thuirt  mi  rithe,  "  De  bu 
choireach  thu  bin'  cur  na  sgian  air  muineal  a  phaisde  ?"  ' '  Tha  gu 
'feum  mi  e  'bhi  l>ruich  airson  an  fhamhair  a  tha  'n  so,  air  no  cha 
bhi  tuillidh  do  m'  shaoghal  romham. "  Chaidh  mi  suas  ceumanna 
staighreach,  's  chunnaic  mi  seomar  Ian  do  chuirp  ruisgte.  Thug 
mi  plaibean  as  a  chorp  a  bu  ghile,  agus  cheangail  mi  sreang  ri 
cas  a  phaisde  's  streang  ris  a  phlaibean,  's  chuir  mi  'm  plaibean 
'na  bheul,  's  nur  a  bhiodh  e'  dol  'na  mhuineal  bheireadh  e  slueadh 
air  a  chois,  's  bheireadh  e  as  a  mhuineal  e,  ach  leis  an  fhad  a  bha 
's  an  t-snathainn  cha  b  urrainn  e  thoirt  as  a  bheul.  Thilg  mi  'm 
paisd'  ann  am  baraille  cloimhe,  's  dh'  iarr  mi  urra  'n  corp  a  bhruich 
do  n  fhamhair  an  aite'  phaisde.  "  Demur  is  urrainn  mi  sin  a  dhea- 
Dadh, "  ars'  ise,  "  's  gu  bheil  cunndas  aig  air  na  cuirp?"  "Dean  thusa 
mar  a  tha  mise  'g  iarraidh  ort,  's  ruisgidh  mise  mi  fein,  's  theid  n:i 
'measg  nan  corp,  's  bidh  an  cunndas  aig  an  sin,"  ursa^mise.    Rinn 


126  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

i  mar  a  dh'  iarr  mi  urra.  Chuir  sin  an  corp  arms  a  bhrothadair 
mh6r,  ach  chu  b-urrainn  duinn  am  broil  a  chur  air.  Nur  a  bha 
esan  a  tigh'n  dachaidh  ruisg  mise  mi  fein  's  chaidh  mi  measg 
nan  corp.  Thainig  esan  dacbaidh,  's  chuir  ise  'n  corp  air  mias 
mhdr,  's  nur  a  dh'  ith  e  e  bha  e  a'  gearan  gun  robh  e  tuillidh  is 
righinn  leis  do  phaisde.  "  Rinn  mise  mar  a  dh'  iarr  thu,"  urs'  ise, 
"bha  cunndas  agad  fein  air  na  cuirp,  's  theirig  suas  a  nis  agus 
cunnd  iad."  Chunnd  e  iad  's  bha  iad  aige.  "  Tha  mi  'faicinn  fear 
corp  geal  an  siod,"  urs'  esan  '"s  th£id  mi  'laidhe  treis,  's  bidh  e 
agam  nur  a  dhuisgeas  mi."  Nur  a  dh'  eiridh  e  chaidh  e  suas  's 
rug  e  oim,  's  cha  robh  mi  na  leithid  do  chas  riamh,  's  nur  a  bha 
e  'gam  shlaodhadh  sios  an  staighir  's  mo  cheann  as  mo  dheigh. 
Thilg  e  anns  a'  choire  mi.  Thog  e  'm  brod,  's  chuir  e  'm  brod 
anns  a  choire.  Bha  mi  'n  so  cinnteach  gum  bithinn  saglte  ma  'm 
faighinn  as  an  siod.  Mar  bhuaidh  fhortain  domhsa  chaidil  a 
bheisd  taobh  a  choire.  Bha  mi  'n  sin  'gam  sgaltadh  le  mas  a* 
choire.  Nur  a  mhothaich  ise  gun  robh  e  'na  chadal  chuir  i  'beul 
gu  reidh  ris  an  toll  a  bha  's  a'  bbrod,  's  thuirt  i  rium  an  robh  mi 
beo.  Thuirt  mi  gun  robb.  Chuir  mi  suas  mo  cbeann,  's  bha 
corrag  na  beisde  cho  m6r  's  gun  deach  mo  cbeann  roimhe  gu 
poirbh.  Bha  h-uile  ni  tigh'n  leam  gu  soirbh  gus  an  do  th6isich 
mi  air  toirt  a  nios  mo  chruacban.  Dh'  fhag  mi  craicionn  nan 
cruachan  ma  bheul  an  tuill,  's  thainig  mi  avS.  Nur  a  fhuair  mi 
'mach  as  a  choire  cha  robh  fhios'am  de'  dheanainn,  's  thuirt  ise 
rium  nach  robh  arm  sam  bith  a  mharbbadh  e  ach  arm  fein. 
Thoisich  mi  air  tarruinn  na  sleagh,  's  a'  h-uile  tarruinn  a  bheir- 
eadh  e  air  anail  shaoilinn  gum  bithinn  slos  'na  mhuineal,  's  nur 
a  chuireadh  e  'mach  anail  bha  mi  cho  fad'a  rithisd  air  m'  ais. 
H-uile  h-olc  g'  an  d'  fhuaireadh  mi  fhuair  mi  n  t-sleagh  fhuas- 
gladh  uaidh.  Bha  mi  'n  sin  mar  gum  bithinn  fo  ultach  conlaich 
aim  an  gaoith  mhor,  's  nach  b-urrainn  mi  'n  t-sleagh  iomachar, 
's  b-oillteil  a  bhi  'g  amharc  air  a  bheisd,  's  gun  ach  aon  suil  an 
clar  aodainn,  's  cha  b-aobhach  do  m'  leithidsa  dol  'na  dhail. 
Tharruinn  mi  'n  t-sleagh  mar  a  b'fhearr  a  b'urrainn  mi,  's  chuir 
mi  'na  shuil  i.  Nur  a  mhothaich  e  so  thug  e  togail  air  a  cheann, 
's  bbuail  e  ceann  eile  na  sleagh  ri  driom  na  h-uamha,  's  chaidh  i 
roimhe  gu  ciil  a  chiun,  's  thuit  e  fuar,  marbh  far  an  robh  e,  's  gu 
cinnteach  dhuitse  a  righ  bha  boch  ormsa.  Chaidh  mi  fein  's  am 
boireannach  a  mach  air  fearann  glan,  's  chuir  sin  seachad  an 
oidhche  an  sin.     Dh'  fholbh  mi  agus  fhuair  mi  m  bata  leis  an  d* 


CON  ALL  CRA-BHUIDHK.  127 

tha'nig  mi,  agus  cha  robh  iodramanachd  sam  bith  urra,  's  thug 
mi  'bhean  agus  am  paisde  nunn  air  talamh  tioram,  agus  thill  mi 
dhachaidh." 

Bha  mathair  an  rlgh  a'  cur  air  gealbhan  'san  am,  's  ag  eisdeachd 
ri  Conall  aig  innseadh  an  naigheachd  ma  'n  phaisde.  "Antus'," 
urs'ise  "bha  'sin."  "  Mata,"  ursesan,  •'  's  mi."  "  Och  !  och  !  " 
ors'  ise,  "  's  mise  'bha  'n  sin,  agus  's  e  'n  rlgh  am  paisde  d'an  do 
shabhail  thu  'bheatha,  agus  's  ann  ort  a  dh'  fhaodar  buidhea- 
chas  a  bheatha  thobhairt."  Ghabh  iad  an  so  toilinntinn  mh6r. 
Urs'  an  rlgh,  "  A  Chonaill  thainig  thu  ro  chasan  m6r  agus  's  leat 
a  nis  an  t-each  donn,  agus  a  shachd  do  na  nitheannan  is  luach- 
mhoire  'th'  ami  a'm'  ionmhas."  Chaidh  iad  a  laidhe  'n  oidhche, 
sin  's  ma  bu  mhoch  a  dh'  eiridh  Conall  bu  mhoiche  na  sin  a  bha 
bhanrigh  air  a  cois  a  'dheanadh  deas.  Fhuair  e  an  t-each  donn, 
's  a  shachd  do  dh'  6r,  's  do  dh'  airgiod,  's  do  chlacha  luachmhor, 
's  dh'  fholbh  an  sin  Conall  's  a  cheathrar  mac,  's  thill  iad  dach- 
aidh  do  rloghachd  aighearach  Eirinn.  Dh'  fhag  e  'n  t-6r  's  an 
t-airgiod  aig  an  tigh,  's  chaidh  e  leis  an  each  thun  an  rlgh. 
Chord  a  fein  's  an  rlgh,  's  bha  iad  'nan  cairdean  math  a  tuillidh. 
Thill  e  dhachaidh  thun  a  mhnatha  's  chuir  iad  an  ordugh  cuirm, 
's  b'i  chuirm  i  a  mhic  's  a  bhrathair. 


VI. 
THE  TALE  OF  CONAL  CROVI. 

From  Neill  Gillies,  fisherman,  near  Inverary. 

fTlHERE  was  a  king  over  England  once,  and  he  had 
-*•  three  sons,  and  they  went  to  France  to  get  learn- 
ing, and  when  they  came  back  home  they  said  to  their 
father  that  they  would  go  to  see  what  order  was  in  the 
kingdom  since  they  went  away ;  and  that  was  the  first 
place  to  which  they  went,  to  the  house  of  a  man  of  the 
king's  tenants,  by  name  Conal  Crobhi. 

Conal  Crovi  had  every  thing  that  was  better  than 
another  waiting  for  them  ;  meat  of  each  meat,  and 
draughts  of  each  drink.  When  they  were  satisfied, 
and  the  time  came  for  them  to  lie  down,  the  king's  big 
son  said — 

"  This  is  the  rule  that  we  have  since  we  came  home 
— The  goodwife  must  wait  on  me,  and  the  maid  must 
wait  on  my  middle  brother,  and  the  guidman's  daughter 
on  my  young  brother."  But  this  did  not  please  Conal 
Crovi  at  all,  and  he  said — "  I  won't  say  much  about 
the  maid  and  the  daughter,  but  I  am  not  willing  to 
part  from  my  wife,  but  I  will  go  out  and  ask  them- 
selves about  this  matter ; "  and  out  he  went,  and  he 
locked  the  door  behind  him,  and  he  told  his  gillie  that: 
the  three  best  horses  that  were  in  the  stable  were  to 
be  ready  without  delay ;  and  he  and  his  wife  went  on 
one,  his  gillie  and  his  daughter  on  another,  and  his  son 


THE  TALE  OF  CONAL  CROYI.         129 

and  the  maid  on  the  third  horse,  and  they  went  where 
the  king  was  to  tell  the  insult  his  set  of  sons  had  given 
them. 

The  king's  watchful  gillie  was  looking  out  whom  he 
should  see  coming.  He  called  out  that  he  was  seeing 
three  double  riders  coming.  Said  the  king,  ha !  hah  ! 
This  is  Conal  Crovi  coming,  and  he  has  my  three  sons 
under  cess,*  but  if  they  are,  I  will  not  be.  When 
Conal  Crovi  came  the  king  would  not  give  him  a  hear- 
ing. Then  Conal  Crovi  said,  when  he  got  no  answer, 
"I  will  make  thy  kingdom  worse  than  it  is,"  and  he 
went  away,  and  he  began  robbing  and  lifting  spoil. 

The  king  said  that  he  would  give  any  reward  to  any 
man  that  would  make  out  the  place  where  Conal  Crovi 
was  taking  his  dwelling. 

The  king's  swift  rider  said,  that  if  he  could  get  a  day 
and  a  year  he  would  find  out  where  he  was.  He  took 
thus  a  day  and  a  year  seeking  for  him,  but  if  he  took 
it  he  saw  no  sight  of  Conal  Crovi.  On  his  way  home 
he  sat  on  a  pretty  yellow  brow,  and  he  saw  a  thin 
smoke  in  the  midst  of  the  tribute  wood. 

Conal  Crovi  had  a  watching  gillie  looking  whom  he 
should  see  coming.  He  went  in  and  he  said  that  he  saw 
the  likeness  of  the  swift  rider  coming.  "  Ha,  ha  ! "  said 
Conal  Crovi,  "  the  poor  man  is  sent  away  to  exile  as  I 
went  myself." 

Conal  Crovi  had  his  hands  spread  waiting  for  him, 
and  he  got  his  choice  of  meat  and  drink,  and  warm 
water  for  his  feet,  and  a  soft  bed  for  his  limbs.  He 
was  but  a  short  time  lying  when  Conal  Crovi  cried, 
"Art  thou  asleep,  swift  rider?"  "I  am  not,"  said  he. 
At   the    end   of   a   while   again   he   cried,   "Art   thou 

*  Cis,  cess,  tax,  subjection. 
S 


130  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

asleep  1 "  He  said  he  was  not.  He  cried  again  the 
third  time,  but  there  was  no  answer.  Then  Conal  Crovi 
cried,  "  On  your  soles !  all  within,  this  is  no  crouching 
time.  The  following  will  be  on  us  presently."  The 
watchman  of  Conal  Crovi  was  shouting  that  he  was  see- 
ing the  king's  three  sons  coming,  and  a  great  company 
along  with  them.  He  had  of  arms  but  one  black  rusty 
sword.  Conal  Crovi  began  at  them,  and  he  did  not 
leave  a  man  alive  there  but  the  three  king's  sons,  and 
he  tied  them  and  took  them  in,  and  he  laid  on  them 
the  binding  of  the  three  smalls,  straitly  and  painfully 
and  he  threw  them  into  the  peat  corner,  and  he  said 
to  his  wife  to  make  meat  speedily,  that  he  was  going 
to  do  a  work  whose  like  he  never  did  before.  "  What 
is  that,  my  man  !  "  said  she.  "Going  to  take  the  heads 
off  the  king's  three  sons."  He  brought  up  the  big  one 
and  set  his  head  on  the  block,  and  he  raised  the  axe. 
"Don't,  don't,"  said  he,  "and  I  will  take  thy  part  in 
right  or  unright  for  ever."  Then  he  took  the  middle 
one,  he  set  his  head  on  the  block  and  he  raised  the 
axe.  "  Don't,  don't,"  said  he,  "  and  I  will  take  with 
thee  in  right  or  unright  for  ever."  Then  he  brought  up 
the  young  one,  and  he  did  the  very  same  to  him. 
"Don't,  don't,"  said  he,  "and  I  will  take  with  thee  in 
right  or  unright  for  ever."  Then  he  went,  himself  and 
the  king's  three  sons,  where  the  king  was. 

The  watching  gillies  of  the  king  were  looking  out 
when  they  should  see  the  company  coming  with  the 
head  of  Conal  Crovi.  Then  one  called  out  that  he 
was  seeing  the  likeness  of  the  king's  three  sons  coming, 
and  Conal  Crovi  before  them. 

"Ha,  ha!"  said  the  king,  "Conal  Crovi  is  coming, 
and  he  has  my  three  sons  under  cess,  but  if  they  are  I 
won't  be."     He  would  give  no  answer  to  Conal  Crovi, 


THE  TALE  OF  CONAL  CROYI.  131 

but  that  he  should  be  hanged  on  a  gallows  in  the  early 
morning  of  the  morrow's  day. 

Now,  the  gallows  was  set  up  and  Conal  Crovi  was 
about  to  be  hanged,  but  the  king's  big  son  cried,  "  I 
will  go  in  his  place."  The  king's  middle  son  cried,  "  I 
will  go  in  his  place  ; "  and  the  king's  young  son  cried, 
"  I  will  go  in  his  place."  Then  the  king  took  con- 
tempt for  his  set  of  sons.  Then  said  Conal  Crovi, 
"  We  will  make  a  big  ship,  and  we  will  go  steal  the 
three  black  whitefaced  stallions  that  the  king  of  Eirinn 
has,  and  we  will  make  the  kingdom  of  Sasunn  as  rich 
as  it  ever  was.  When  the  ship  was  ready,  her  prow 
went  to  sea  and  her  stern  to  shore,  and  they  hoisted 
the  chequered  flapping  sails  against  the  tall  tough 
masts ;  there  was  no  mast  unbent,  nor  sail  untorn, 
and  the  brown  buckies  of  the  strand  were  "  glagid"ing 
on  her  floor.  They  reached  the  "  Paileas  "  of  the  King 
of  Eirinn.  They  went  into  the  stable,  but  when  Conal 
Crovi  would  lay  a  hand  on  the  black  whitefaced  stal- 
lions, the  stallions  would  let  out  a  screech.  The  King 
of  Eirinn  cried,  "  Be  out  lads  ;  some  one  is  troubling 
the  stallions."  They  went  out  and  they  tried  down 
and  up,  but  they  saw  no  man.  There  was  an  old 
hogshead  in  the  lower  end  of  the  stable,  and  Conal 
Crovi  and  the  king's  three  sons  were  hiding  them- 
selves in  the  hogshead.  When  they  went  out  Conal 
laid  hands  on  the  stallion  and  the  stallion  let  out  a 
screech,  and  so  they  did  three  times,  and  at  the  third 
turn,  one  of  those  who  were  in  the  party  said,  that 
they  did  not  look  in  the  hogshead.  Then  they  re- 
turned and  they  found  the  king's  three  sons  and  Conal 
in  it.  They  were  taken  in  to  the  king,  "Ha,  ha, 
thou  hoary  wretch,"  said  the  king,  "many  a  mischief 


132  WEST   HIGHLAND    TALES. 

thou  didst  before  thou  thoughtest  to  come  and  steal 
my  three  black  stallions." 

The  binding  of  the  three  smalls,  straitly  and  pain- 
fully, was  put  on  Conal  Crovi,  and  he  was  thrown 
into  the  peat  corner,  and  the  king's  three  sons  were 
taken  up  a  stair.  When  the  men  who  were  above 
had  filled  themselves  full  of  meat  and  drink,  it  was 
then  that  the  king  thought  of  sending  word  down  for 
Conal  Crovi  to  tell  a  tale.  'Twas  no  run  for  the  king's 
big  son,  but  a  leap  down  to  fetch  him.  Said  the 
king,  '  Come  up  here,  thou  hoary  wretch,  and  tell  us  a 
tale."  "I  will  tell  that,"  said  he,  "if  I  get  the  worth 
of  its  telling  ;  and  it  is  not  my  own  head  nor  the  head 
of  one  of  the  company."  "Thou  wilt  get  that,"  said 
the  king,  "  Tost !  hush  !  over  there,  and  let  us  hear 
the  tale  of  Conal  Crovi "  : — 

"  As  a  young  lad  I  was  fishing  on  a  day  beside  a 
river,  and  a  great  ship  came  past  me.  They  said  to 
me  would  I  go  as  *  pilot '  to  go  to  Rome.  I  said 
that  I  would  do  it ;  and  of  every  place  as  we  reached 
it,  they  would  ask  was  that  Rome  ?  and  I  would  say 
that  it  was  not,  and  I  did  not  know  where  in  the  great 
world  Rome  was. 

"We  came  at  last  to  an  island  that  was  there,  we 
went  on  shore,  and  I  went  to  take  a  walk  about  the 
island,  and  when  I  returned  back  the  ship  was  gone. 
There  I  was,  left  by  myself,  and  I  did  not  know  what 
to  do.  I  was  going  past  a  house  that  was  there,  and 
I  saw  a  woman  crying.  I  asked  what  woe  was  on 
her  ;  she  told  me  that  the  heiress  of  this  island  had 
died  six  weeks  ago,  and  that  they  were  waiting  for  a 
brother  of  hers  who  was  away  from  the  town,  but  that 
she  was  to  be  buried  this  day. 

"They  were  gathering  to   the   burying,   and  I  vras 


THE  TALE  OF  CONAL  CROVI.         133 

amongst  them  when  they  put  her  down  in  the  grave ; 
they  put  a  bag  of  gold  under  her  head,  and  a  bag  of 
silver  under  her  feet.  I  said  to  myself,  that  were 
better  mine ;  that  it  was  of  no  use  at  all  to  her.  When 
the  night  came  I  turned  back  to  the  grave.*  When  I 
had  dug  Tip  the  grave,  and  when  I  was  coming  up 
with  the  gold  and  the  silver  I  caught  hold  of  the  stone 
that  was  on  the  mouth  of  the  grave,  the  stone  fell 
down  and  I  was  there  along  with  the  dead  carlin.  By 
thy  hand,  oh,  King  of  Eirinn  !  and  by  my  hand,  though 
free,  if  I  was  not  in  a  harder  case  along  with  the  carlin 
than  I  am  here  under  thy  compassion,  with  a  hope  to 
get  off." 

"  Ha !  ha !  thou  hoary  wretch,  thou  earnest  out  of 
that,  but  thou  wilt  not  go  out  of  this." 

11  Give  me  now  the  worth  of  my  ursgeul,"  said 
Conal. 

"What  is  that  1 "  said  the  king. 

"  It  is  that  the  big  son  of  the  King  of  Sasunn,  and 
the  big  daughter  of  the  King  of  Eirinn,  should  be 
married  to  each  other,  and  one  of  the  black  white-faced 
stallions  a  tocher  for  them." 

"Thou  shalt  get  that,"  said  the  king. 

Conal  Crovi  was  seized,  the  binding  of  the  three 
smalls  laid  on  him  straitly  and  painfully,  and  he  was 
thrown  into  the  peat  corner ;  and  a  wedding  of  twenty 
days  and  twenty  nights  was  made  for  the  young  couple. 
When  they  were  tired  then  of  eating  and  drinking, 
the  king  said  that  it  were  better  to  send  for  the  hoary 

*  The  same  word  means  cave  and  grave  ;  the  grave  is  dug 
because  western  graves  are  dug  ;  but  the  stone  falls  on  the  mouth 
of  the  grave,  probably  because  the  story  came  from  some  country 
where  graves  were  caves.  There  is  an  Italian  story  in  which 
this  incident  occurs — Decameron  of  Boccacio. 


134  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

wretch,  and  that  he  should  tell  them  how  he  had  got 
out  of  the  grave. 

'Twas  no  run,  but  a  leap  for  the  king's  middle 
son  to  go  to  fetch  him ;  he  was  sure  he  would  get  a 
marriage  for  himself  as  he  had  got  for  his  brother.  He 
went  down  and  he  brought  him  up. 

Said  the  king,  "  Come  up  and  tell  to  us  how  thou 
gottest  out  of  the  grave."  "  I  will  tell  that,"  said  Conal 
Crovi,  "if  I  get  the  worth  of  telling  it ;  and  it  is  not 
my  own  head,  nor  the  head  of  one  that  is  in  the  com- 
pany."    "Thou  shalt  get  that,"  said  the  king. 

"  I  was  there  till  the  day.  The  brother  of  the 
heiress  came  home,  and  he  must  see  a  sight  of  his 
sister ;  and  when  they  were  digging  the  grave  I  cried 
out,  oh  !  catch  me  by  the  hand ;  and  the  man  that 
would  not  wait  for  his  bow  he  would  not  wait  for  his 
sword,  as  they  called  that  the  worst  one  was  there ; 
and  I  was  as  swift  as  one  of  themselves.  Then  I 
was  there  about  the  island,  not  knowing  what  side  I 
should  go.  Then  I  came  across  three  young  lads,  and 
they  were  casting  lots.  I  asked  them  what  they  were 
doing  thus.  They  said  '  what  was  my  business  what  they 
were  doing  ? '  '  Hud  !  hud  ! '  said  I  myself,  '  you  will  tell 
me  what  you  are  doing.'  Well,  then,  said  they,  a  great 
giant  took  away  our  sister.  We  are  casting  lots  which 
of  us  shall  go  down  into  this  hole  to  seek  her.  I  cast 
lots  with  them,  and  there  was  but  that  the  next  lot 
fell  on  myself  to  go  down  to  seek  her.  They  let  me 
down  in  a  creel.  There  was  the  very  prettiest  woman 
I  ever  saw,  and  she  was  winding  golden  thread  off 
a  silver  windle.  Oh  !  said  she  to  myself,  how  didst 
thou  come  here  1  I  came  down  here  to  seek  thee  ;  thy 
three  brothers  are  waiting  for  thee  at  the  mouth  of  the 
hole,  and  you  will  send  down  the  creel  to-morrow  to 


THE  TALE  OF  CONAL  CROVI.         135 

fetch  me.  If  I  be  living,  'tis  well,  and  if  I  be  not, 
there  's  no  help  for  it.  I  was  but  a  short  time  there 
when  I  heard  thunder  and  noise  coming  with  the 
giant.  I  did  not  know  where  I  should  go  to  hide 
myself;  but  I  saw  a  heap  of  gold  and  silver  on  the 
other  side  of  the  giant's  cave.  I  thought  there  was 
no  place  whatsoever  that  was  better  for  me  to  hide  in 
than  amidst  the  gold.  The  giant  came  with  a  dead 
carlin  trailing  to  each  of  his  shoe-ties.  He  looked 
down,  and  he  looked  up,  and  when  he  did  not  see  her 
before  him,  he  let  out  a  great  howl  of  crying,  and  he 
gave  the  carlins  a  little  singe  through  the  fire  and 
he  ate  them.  Then  the  giant  did  not  know  what 
would  best  keep  wearying  from  him,  but  he  thought 
that  he  would  go  and  count  his  lot  of  gold  and  silver  ; 
then  he  was  but  a  short  time  when  he  set  his  hand  on 
my  own  head.  '  Wretch  ! '  said  the  giant,  '  many  a  bad 
thing  didst  thou  ever  before  thou  thoughtest  to  come  to 
take  away  the  pretty  woman  that  I  had ;  I  have  no 
need  of  thee  to-night,  but  'tis  thou  shalt  polish  my  teeth 
early  to-morrow.'  The  brute  was  tired,  and  he  slept 
after  eating  the  carlins ;  I  saw  a  great  flesh  stake  beside 
the  fire.  I  put  the  iron  spit  in  the  very  middle  of  the 
fire  till  it  was  red.  The  giant  was  in  his  heavy  sleep, 
and  his  mouth  open,  and  he  was  snoring  and  blowing. 
I  took  the  red  spit  out  of  the  fire  and  I  put  it  down  in 
the  giant's  mouth;  he  took  a  sudden  spring  to  the 
further  side  of  the  cave,  and  he  struck  the  end  <?r  the 
spit  against  the  wall,  and  it  weno  right  out  through  him. 
I  caught  the  giant's  big  sword,  and  with  one  stroke  I 
struck  the  head  off  him.  On  the  morrow's  day  the  creel 
came  down  to  fetch  myself  ;  but  I  thought  I  would  fill 
it  with  the  gold  and  silver  of  the  giant ;  and  when  it 
was  in  the  midst  of  the  hole,  with  the  weight  of  the 


136  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

gold  and  silver,  the  tie  broke.  I  fell  down  amidst 
stones,  and  bushes,  and  brambles  ;  and  by  thy  hand, 
oh,  King  of  Eirinn !  and  by  my  hand,  though  free,  I 
was  in  a  harder  case  than  I  am  to-night,  under  thy 
clemency,  with  the  hope  of  getting  out." 

"  Ah !  thou  hoary  wretch,  thou  earnest  out  of  that, 
but  thou  wilt  not  go  out  of  this,"  said  the  king. 

"Give  me  now  the  worth  of  my  ursgeul." 

'  What's  that  ¥  "  said  the  king. 

"  It  is  the  middle  son  of  the  King  of  Sasunn,  and  the 
middle  daughter  of  the  King  of  Eirinn  to  be  married  to 
each  other,  and  one  of  the  black  white-faced  stallions  as 
tocher." 

"  That  will  happen,"  said  the  king. 

Conal  Crovi  was  caught  and  bound  with  three  slender 
ends,  and  tossed  into  the  peat  corner ;  and  a  wedding 
of  twenty  nights  and  twenty  days  was  made  for  the 
young  couple,  there  and  then. 

When  they  were  tired  of  eating  and  drinking,  the 
king  said  they  had  better  bring  Conal  Crovi  up,  till  he 
should  tell  how  he  got  up  out  of  the  giant's  cave. 
'Twas  no  run,  but  a  spring  for  the  king's  young  son  to 
go  down  to  fetch  him;  he  was  sure  he  would  get  a 
"  match  "  for  him,  as  he  got  for  the  rest. 

"Come  up  here,  thou  hoary  wretch,"  said  the  king, 
"  and  tell  us  how  thou  gottest  out  of  the  giant's  cave." 
"  I  will  tell  that  if  I  get  the  worth  of  telling ;  and  it  is 
not  my  own  head,  nor  the  head  of  one  in  the  company." 
"Thou  wilt  get  that,"  said  the  king.  "Tost!  silence 
over  there,  and  let  us  listen  to  the  sgeulachd  of  Conal 
Crovi,"  said  the  king. 

"  Well !  I  was  there  below  wandering  backwards 
and  forwards ;  I  was  going  past  a  house  that  was  there, 
and  I  saw  a  woman  there,  and  she  had  a  child  in  one 


THE  TALE  OF  CONAL  CROYI.         137 

hand  and  a  knife  in  the  other  hand,  and  she  was 
lamenting  and  crying.  I  cried  myself  to  her,  'Hold 
on  thy  hand,  woman,  what  art  thou  going  to  do  1 ' 
'  Oh  ! '  said  she,  '  I  am  here  with  three  giants,  and 
they  ordered  my  pretty  babe  to  be  dead,  and  cooked 
for  them,  when  they  should  come  home  to  dinner/ 
'I  see,'  said  I,  'three  hanged  men  on  a  gallows  yon- 
der, and  we  will  take  down  one  of  them ;  I  will  go 
up  in  the  place  of  one  of  them,  and  thou  wilt  make 
him  ready  in  place  of  the  babe.'  And  when  the 
giants  came  home  to  dinner,  one  of  them  would  say, 
'  This  is  the  flesh  of  the  babe ; '  and  another  would 
say,  '  It  is  not.'  One  of  them  said  that  he  would  go 
to  fetch  a  steak  out  of  one  of  those  who  were  on  the 
gallows,  and  that  he  would  see  whether  it  was  the 
flesh  of  the  babe  he  was  eating.  I  myself  was  the  first 
that  met  them ;  and  by  thy  hnnd,  oh,  King  of  Eirinn, 
and  by  my  hand,  were  it  free,  if  I  was  not  in  a  some- 
what harder  case,  when  the  steak  was  coming  out  of 
me,  than  I  am  to-night  under  thy  mercy,  with  a  hope 
to  get  out." 

"Thou  hoary  wretch,  thou  earnest  out  of  that,  but 
thou  wilt  not  come  out  of  this,"  said  the  king. 

"  Give  me  now  the  reward  of  my  ursgeul  ? " 

"  Thou  wilt  get  that,"  said  the  king. 

"My  reward  is,  the  young  son  of  the  King  of 
Sasunn,  and  the  young  daughter  of  the  Kiny  of 
Eirinn,  to  be  married,  and  one  of  the  black  stallions  as 
tocher." 

There  was  catching  of  Conal  Crovi,  and  binding  him 
with  the  three  slender  ends,  straitly  and  painfully,  and 
throwing  him  down  into  the  peat  corner ;  and  there 
was  a  wedding  made,  twenty  nights  and  twenty  days 
for  the  young  pair.     When  they  were  tired  eating  and 


138  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

drinking,  the  king  said  that  it  were  best  to  bring  up 
that  hoary  wretch  to  tell  how  he  came  off  the  gallows. 
Then  they  brought  myself  up. 

"Come  up  hither,  thou  hoary  wretch,  and  tell  us 
how  thou  gottest  off  the  gallows."  "I  will  tell  that," 
said  I  myself,  "if  I  get  a  good  reward."  "Thou  wilt 
get  that,"  said  the  king. 

"  Well !  when  the  giants  took  their  dinner,  they  were 
tired  and  they  fell  asleep.  When  I  saw  this,  I  came 
down,  and  the  woman  gave  me  a  great  flaming  sword 
of  light  that  one  of  the  giants  had ;  and  I  was  not  long 
throwing  the  heads  off  the  giants.  Then  I  myself,  and 
the  woman  were  here,  not  knowing  how  we  should  get 
up  out  of  the  giant's  cave.  We  went  to  the  farther  end  of 
the  cave,  and  then  we  followed  a  narrow  road  through  a 
rock,  till  we  came  to  light,  and  to  the  giant's  '  biorlinn  ' 
of  ships.  *  What  should  I  think,  but  that  I  would 
turn  back  and  load  the  biorlinn  with  the  gold  and 
silver  of  the  giant ;  and  just  so  I  did.  I  went  with 
the  biorlinn  under  sail  till  I  reached  an  island  that  I 
did  not  know.  The  ship,  and  the  woman,  and  the  babe 
were  taken  from  me,  and  I  was  left  there  to  come  home 
as  best  I  might.  I  got  home  once  more  to  Sasunn, 
though  I  am  here  to-night." 

Then  a  woman,  who  was  lying  in  the  chamber,  cried 
out,  "  Oh,  king,  catch  hold  of  this  man ;  I  was  the 
woman  that  was  there,  and  thou  wert  the  babe."  It 
was  here  that  value  was  put  on  Conal  Crovi ;  and  the 
king  gave  him  the  biorlinn  full  of  the  giant's  gold  and 
silver,  and  he  made  the  kingdom  of  Sasunn  as  rich  as  it 
ever  was  before. 


*  Bior,  a  log ;  Linn  a  pool ;  Luingeanach,  of  ships  ;  naval 
barge ;  or  Luxx,  handle  of  an  oar,  oared  barge. 


SUKULACHD   CHONAIL  CHROBHIE.  139 

Told  by  Neill  Gillies  a  fisherman  at  Inverary,  about  fifty-five 
years  old,  who  says  that  he  has  known  the  story,  and  has  repeated 
it  for  many  years :  he  learned  it  from  his  parents.    Written  down  by 

Hector  Ukquhart. 


SGEULACHD  CHONAIL  CHROBHIE. 

Bha  righ  air  Sasunn  aon  uair,  agus  bha  triuir  mhac  aige,  's  chaidh 
iad  do  I'n  Fhraing  a  db'  f  haotainn  ionnsachadh,  agus  an  uair  a 
thill  iad  dhachaidh,  thuirt  iad  ri  'n  athair  gun  rachadh  iad  a 
shealltainn  de  'n  riaghailt  a  bha  san  rioghachd  o  n'  a  dh'  fhalbh 
iad,  agus  b'e  a  cheud  aite  do  'n  deaeh  iad  do  thigh  fear  do 
thuathanaich  an  righ  do  'm  b'  ainn  Conal  Crdbhi.  Bha  gaeh  ni 
'b  'fhearr  na  cheile  aig  Conal  Crdbhi  a  feitheamh  orra,  biadh 
dheth  gach  biadh,  's  deoch  dheth  gach  deoch.  'Nuair  a  bha  iad 
subhach  'sa  thainig  am  dhoibh  dol  a  luidhe,  thuirt  mac  m6r  an 
righ,  "  'Se  so  an  riaghailt  a  th'  againne  bho  thainig  sinn 
dhachaidh,  gu  'm  bi  mise  le  bean  an  tighe  nochd,  agus  mo 
bhrathair  meadhonacn  leis  an  t-searbhanta,  's  mo  bhrathair  6g  le 
nighean  fir  an  tighe."  Ach  cha  do  thaitinn  so  idir  ri  Conal 
Crdbhi,  's  thubhairt  e,  "  Mu  'n  nighean  's  mu'n  t-searbhanta  cha 
'n  abair  mi  mdran,  ach  cha  'n-'eil  mi  toilichte  dealachadh  ri  m' 
bhean,  ach  theid  mise  mach  agus  fe6raichidh  mi  dhiubh  fhein  mu 
thimchioll  na  cuise  so  ;  "  agus  a  mach  ghabh  e,  's  ghlais  e  'n 
dorus  na  dheigh  's  dh'  iarr  e  air  a  ghille  na  tri  eich  a  b'  fhearr  a 
bha  anns  an  stabull  a  bhi  deas  gun  dail.  Chaidh  e  fein  's  a' 
bhean  air  fear,  's  a  ghille  's  a  nighean  air  fear  eile,  a  mhac  's  an 
searbhanta  air  an  treas  each,  's  dh'  fhalbh  iad  far  an  robh  an 
righ,  a  dh'  innseadh  am  masladh  a  thug  a  chuid  mac  dhoibh. 
Bha  gille  furachail  an  righ  ag  amharc  a  mach  co  a  chithe-^dh  e 
tighinn.  Ghlaodh  e  gun  robh  e  'faicinn  triuir  mharcaiche 
dubailte  a'  tighinn.  Thuirt  an  righ,  "Ha!  hath!  so  Conal 
Crdbhi  a'  tighinn,  's  mo  thriuir  mhacsa  fo  chis  aige,  ach  ma  tha 
iadsan,  cha  bhi  mise."  'Nuair  a  thainig  Conal  Crdbhi,  cha  d' 
thugadh  an  righ  eisdeachd  dha.  Thuirt  Conal  Crdbhi  an  sin, 
'nuair  nach  d'  fhuair  e  freagairt,  "  Ni  mise  do  rioghachd  na  's 
miosa  na  tha  i,"  's  dh'  fhalbh  e  s'  dh'  f hag  e  e,  's  thdisich  e  air 
robaireachd,  's  air  togail  ch reach. 

Thuirt  an  righ,  gu'n  d'  thugadh  e  duais  air  bith  do  dhuine  a 


140  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

gheibhadh  a  mach  an  t-aite  anns  an  robh  Conal  Crobhi  a' 
gabhail  c6mhnuidh.  Thuirt  marcach  gemeartach*  an  righ,  na 
'in  faigheadh  esan  latha  's  bliadhna,  gu  'm  faigheadh  esan  a  mach 
far  an  robh  e.  Thug  e  mar  so  latha  's  bliadhna,  ga  'iarraidh,  ach 
ma  thug,  cha  'n  fhac  e  sealladh  do  Chonal  Cr6bhi.  Air  an 
rathad  dhachaidh,  shuidh  e  air  maolan  boidheach  buidhe  's 
chunnaic  e  caol  smuid  ann  am  meadhom  na  Ooille  ubhlaidh. 
Bha  gille  furachail  aig  Conal  Crdbhi  a'  sealltainn  co  'chitheadh  e 
'tighinn.  Chaidh  e  stigh,  's  thuirt  e  gun  robh  e  'faicinn  coslas  a 
mharcaich  ghemeartaich  a'  tighinn.  "Tha,  tha,"  thuirt  Conal 
Crdbhi,  "tha  'n  duine  bochd  air  a  chuir  air  falbh  air  fogradh  mar 
chaidh  mi  fein."  Bha  a  lamhan  sgaoilte  aig  Conal  Crobhi  a' 
feitheamh  air,  's  fhuair  e  rogha  biadh  's  deocha,  's  burn 
blath  d'a  chasan,  's  leaba  bhog  d'a  leasan,  Cha  robh  e 
ach  goirid  'na  luidhe  'nuair  a  ghlaodh  Conal  Cr6bhi,  "Am 
bheil  thu  'd  chadal,  a  mharcaich'  ghemeartaich?"  "Cha 
n'eil,"  thuirt  esan.  'N  ceann  tacain  a  rithist,  ghlaodh  e, 
"M  bheil  thu  'n  ad'  ehadal."  Thuirt  e,  nach  robh.  Ghlaodh  e 
'rithist  an  treas  uair,  ach  cha  robh  freagradh  ann.  Ghlaodh 
Conal  Crobhi  an  so,  "  Air  bhur  bonn  na  tha  stigh  ;  cha  'n  am 
cruban  a  th'  ann,  bithidh  an  t6ir  oirnn  an  ceartair."  Bha  'm 
fear  faire  aig  Conal  Cr6bhi  a  glaodhaich  gun  robh  e  'faicinn  triuir 
mhac  an  righ  a'  tighinn  le  cuideachd  mh6r  maille  riu."  Cha 
robh  do  dh'  airm  aig'  ach  claidheamh  meirgeach  dubh.  Th6isich 
Conal  Crobhi  orra,  's  cha  d'  fhag  e  duine  beo,  ach  triuir  mhac 
an  righ.  Cheangail  e  triuir  mhac  an  righ  an  sin  's  thug  e  stigh 
iad.  Chuir  e  ceangal  nan  tri  chaoil  orra  gu  daor  's  gu  docair,  's 
thilg  e  ann  an  cuil  na  m6n'  iad,  's  thuirt  e  ri  'bhean  biadh  a 
dheanamh  gu  luath,  gu  'n  robh  e  'dol  a  dheanamh  obair  nach  d' 
rinn  e  riamh  roimhe  a  leithid.  "  Gu  de  sin  a  dhuine?"  thuirt 
ise.  "  Dol  a  thoirt  nan  ceann  do  thriuir  mhac  an  righ."  Thug 
e  nios  am  fear  mor,  's  chuir  e  'cheann  air  an  ealaig  's  thog  e  'n 
tuadh.  "  Na  dean  !  na  dean,"  thuirt  esan,  " 's  gabhaidh  mi 
leat  fbein  an  coir  's  an  eucoir  gu  brath."  Thug  e  nios  an  sin  am 
fear  meadhonarh  ;  chuir  e  cheann  air  an  ealaig,  's  thog  e  'n 
tuadh.  "  Na  dean  !  Na  dean  !  "  thuirt  esan,  "  's  gabhaidh  mi 
leat  fhein  an  c6ir  's  an  eucoir  gu  brath. "     Thug  e  nios  an  sin  am 


*  Gemeartach,  swift  {not  in  dictionaries)-,  probably  from  Ceum, 
a  pace. 


SGEULACHD  CHONAIL   CHROBIIIK.  141 

fear  6g,  's  rinn  e  'leithid  eile  air.  "  Na  dean!  Na  dean!" 
thuirt  esan,  "  's  gabhaidh  mi  leat  an  coir  \s  an  eucoir  gu  brath." 
Dh'  fhalbh  e  fhein  an  sin  's  triuir  mhac  an  righ  far  an  robh  an 
righ.  Bha  gillean  furachail  an  righ  a'  sealltainn  a  mach,  cuin  a 
chitheadh  iad  a'  tighinn  a  chudeachd  le  ceann  Chonail  Chrohhi. 
Ghlaodh  fear  amach,  gun  robh  e  'faicinn  coslas  triuir  mhac  an 
righ  a'  tighinn,  's  Conal  Cr6bhi  air  an  toiseach.  "Ha!  ha!" 
thuirt  an  righ,  "tha  Conal  Cr6bhi  a'  tighinn  's  mo  thriuir  mhac 
aige  fo  chis,  ach  ma  tha  iadsan,  cha  bhi  mise. "  Cha  d'thugadh 
e  freagradh  do  Chonal  Crdbhi,  ach  gu  'm  bitheadh  e  air  a 
chrocbadh  air  croich  air  moch  maduinn  an  latha  maireach.  Nis 
chaidh  a  chroich  a  chuir  suas,  's  bha  Conal  Cr6bhi  gu  bhi  air  a 
chrochadh  ;  ach  ghlaodh  mac  mor  an  righ,  "Th&d  mise  na  aite." 
Ghlaodh  mac  meadhonach  an  righ,  "Theid  mise  'na  aite." 
Ghlaodh  mac  og  an  righ,  "  Theid  mise  na  aite."  Gbabh  an  righ 
miothlachd  an  so  ri  'chuid  mac.  Thuirt  Conal  Cr6bhi  an  sin, 
"Ni  sinn  long  mh6r  agus  theid  sinn  a  ghoid  nan  tri  digeach 
bhlara,  dhubha  a  tha  aig  righ  Eirinn,  's  ni  sinn  rioghachd 
Shasuinn  co  beartach  sa  bha  i  riamh. 

'Nuair  a  bha  'n  long  deas,  chaidh  a  toiseach  ri  muir  's  a 
deireadh  ri  tir,  's  thog  iad  na  siuil  bhreaca,  bhaidealach  ri 
aghaidh  nan  crann  fada,  fulannach,  's  cha  robh  crann  gun  lubadh 
na  seol  gun  reubadh,  's  bha  taochagan  ruadh  a  chladaich  a  glaga- 
daich  air  a  h-urlar.  Eainig  iad  paileas  righ  Eirinn  ;  chaidh  iad 
a  stigh  do  'n  stabull,  ach  a  nuair  a  chuireadh  Conal  Cr6bhi  a 
lamh  air  na  h-6igeich  bhlara,  dhubha,  leigeadh  na  h-oigeich 
sgreuch  asda.  Ghlaodh  righ  Eirinn,  "Bithibh  a  mach,  fhearaibh, 
tha  cuideiginn  a  cur  dragh  air  na  h-6igeich."  Chaidh  iad  a 
mach,  's  dh'  fheuch  iad  shios  as  shuas  ach  cha  n'  fhac  iad  duine. 
Bha  seann  togsaid  an  ceann  shios  an  stabuill,  agus  bha  Conal 
Cr6bhi  's  triuir  mhac  an  righ  'gam  folach  fhein  's  an  togsaid . 
'Xuair  a  chaidh  iadsan  a  mach,  chuir  Conal  a  lamh  air  an 
oigeach,  ach  leig  an  t-6igeach  sgreuch  as.  Rinn  iad  so  tri 
uairean,  agus  air  an  treas  tromh,  thuirt  fear  do  na  bha  sa  chuid- 
eachd,  nach  do  sheall  iad  san  togsaid.  Sheall  iad  an  sin  's 
fhuair  iad  triuir  mhac  an  righ  agus  Conal  anns  an  togsaid. 
Chaidh  an  tabhairt  a  stigh  a  dh'  ionnsaidh  an  righ.  "  Ha  !  ha  ! 
a  bheist  liath,"  thuirt  an  righ,  "  's  iomadh  cron  a  rinn  thu.  mu 
'n  do  smaoinich  thu  tighinn  a  ghoid  nan  oigeach  dhubh  agamsa. " 
Chaidh  ceangal  nan  tri  chaoil  gu  daor  's  gu  docair  a  chur  air 
Conal  Crobhi,  's  thilgeadh  an  ciiil  na  moine  e,  's  chaidh  triuir 


142  WEST   HIGHLAND    TALES. 

mhac  an  righ  a  thoirt  an  aird  staiclhir.  'Nuair  a  lion  na  fir  a 
l)ha  gu  h'ard  iad  fein  Ian  do  bhiadh,  's  do  dheoch,  's  ann  a 
smaoinich  an  righ  fios  a  chur  a  nios  air  Conal  Crobhi,  a  dh' 
innseadh  sgeulachd.  Cha  bu  ruith  do  nihac  mor  an  righ  ach 
leum  sios,  g'a  iarraidh.  Thuirt  an  righ,  "Thig  a  nios  an  so,  a 
bheist  liath,  's  innis  dhuinn  sgeulachd."  "Innsidh  mi  sin," 
thuirt  esan,  "ma  gheibh  mi  fiach  innseadh,  's  cha  'n  e  mo 
cheann  fhein  na  ceann  aon  do  'n  chuideachd. "  "Gheibh  tbu 
sin,"  thuirt  an  righ.  "  Tosd  !  thall  an  sin,  's  eisdibh  ri 
sgeulachd  Chonail  Chrobhi,"  thuirt  an  righ  !  "'Nam'  ghill'  6g, 
bha  mi  'g  iasgach  latha  aig  taobh  aibhne,  's  thainig  long  mlior 
seachad  orm  ;  thuirt  iad  rium  'an  gabhainn  a'  m'  pJiilot  gu 
dhol  an  Roimh  ;  thuirt  mi  gu  'n  deanainn  e,  agus  na  h-uil'  aite, 
do  'n  ruigeamaid,  dh'  fheoraicheadh  iad,  am  b'e  siud  an  Roimh  ? 
's  theirinn-sa  nach  b'i,  's  cha  robh  fios  agam,  c'ait'  air  an 
t-saoghal  mhor  an  robh  an  Roimh.  Thainig  sinn  mu  dheireadh 
gu  h-eilean  a  bha  'n  sin.  Chaidh  sinn  air  tir  agus  chaidh  mise  a 
ghabhail  sraid  feadh  an  eilean,  agus  dur  a  thill  mi  air  m'  ais,  bha 
'n  long  air  falbh.  Bha  mi  'n  sin  air  m'  fhagail  leam  fhein,  's  cha 
robh  fios  agam  de  a  dheanainn.  Bha  mi  'dol  seachad  air  tigh  a 
bha  'n  sin,  's  chunnaic  mi  bean  ri  caoineadh.  Dh'  fheoraich  mi 
dhi  de  'm  bron  a  bha  orra  ?  Thuirt  i  rium  'gu  'n  do  bhasaich 
ban-oighre  an  eilean  so  bho  cheann  sea  seachduinnean  agus  gu  'n 
robh  i  ri  'tiodhlacadh  an  latha  so.  Bha  iad  a'  cruinneachadh  gus 
an  tiodhlacadh,  's  bha  mise  'nam  measg,  's  'nuair  a  chuir  iad 
sios  aims  an  uaigh  i,  chuir  iad  poc'  oir  fuidh  'ceann,  's  poc' 
airgid  fuidh  casan.  Thuirt  mise  rium  fheim,  gu  'm  b'fhearr 
sud  agam  fhein,  nach  robh  e  gu  feum  sam  bith  dh'  ise. 
'Nuair  a  thainig  an  oidhche  thill  mi  air  m'  ais  gus  an  uaigh. 
An  uair  a  chladbaich  mi  'n  uaigh,  's  a  bha  mi  tighinn  a  nios  leis  an 
6r  's  leis  an  airgiod,  rug  mi  air  a  chlach  a  bha  air  beul  na  h- 
uaighe.  Thuit  a  chlach  a  nuas,  's  bha  mise  comhladh  ris  a 
chailleach  mharbh  an  sin.  Air  do  laimhsa,  a  righ  Eirinn,  's  air 
mo  laimh-sa,  ge  saor  e,  mur  robh  mi  ni  bu  chruaidh  comhladh 
ris  a  chaillich  na  tha  mi  'n  so  fo  t'iochd-sa,  's  diiil  ri  dol  as  agam." 
"Ha!  Ha  !  a  bheist  liath,  thainig  thu  as  an  sin,  ach  cha  teid 
thu  as  an  so."  "  Thoir  dhomh  a  nis  fiach  m'  ursgeul,"  arsa 
Conal.  "  Gu  de  sin,"  thuirt  an  righ.  "Tha  mac  mor  righ 
Shasuinn,  agus  nighean  mhor  righ  Eirinn  a  bhi  air  am  posadh  ri 
'cheile,  agus  fear  do  na  h -oigeich  bhlara,  dhubha  nathocharadh." 
"Gheibh  thu  sin,  thuirt  an  righ."     Chaidh  beireachd  air  Conal 


SGEULACHD   CHONAIL   CHROBHI!:.  143 

Crobhi,  's  ceangal  nan  tri  chaoil  a  chuir  air  gu  daor  's  gu  docair, 
's  a  thilgeil  an  cnil  na  moine,  's  chaidh  banais  fichead  oidhche  's 
fichead  latha  a  dheanamh  do  'n  charaid  6g.  'Nuair  a  bha  iad 
sgith  an  sin  ag  itheadh  's  ag  61,  thuirt  an  righ,  gu  'm  b'  fhearr 
fios  a  chuir  air  a  bheist  liatb,  's  gu  'n  innseadh  e  gu  de  mar 
fhuair  e  as  an  uagh.  Cha  bu  ruith  ach  leum  le  mac  meadhonach 
an  righ  gu  dol  g'a  iaraidh.  Bha  e  cinnteach  gu  'faigheadh  e 
posadh  dha  fhein,  mar  fhuair  e  d'a  bhrathair.  Chaidh  e  sios  's 
thug  e  nios  e.  Thuirt  an  righ,  "  Thig  a  nios  's  innis  dhuinn 
cionnas  a  fhuair  thu  as  an  uaigb."  "  Innsidh  mi  sin,"  thuirt 
Conal  Crobhi,  "ma  gheibh  mi  nach  innseadh,  's  cha  'n  e  mo 
cheann  fein,  na  ceann  h-aon  a  tha  sa  chuideachd."  "Gheibh 
thu  sin,"  thuirt  an  righ. 

Bha  mise  an  sin  gus  an  latha.  Thainig  brathair  na  ban-oighre 
dhachaidh,  's  dh'  fheumadh  e  sealladh  d'a  phiuthar  fhaicinn  agus 
darabhaiad  a  cladhach  na  h-uaighe,  ghlaodh  mise,  "0,  beir  air 
laimh  orm  !"  'S  am  fear  nach  fanadh  ri  'bhogha  cha  'n  fhanadh  ri 
'chlaidheamh,  's  iad  a  glaodhaich  gu  'n  robh  am  fear  bu  mhiosa 
an  siud,  's  bha  mise  cho  luath  ri  h-aon  aca  fhein.  Bha  mi  'n  sin 
air  feadh  an  eilean  gu  'n  fhios  de  'n  taobh  a  rachainn.  Thainig 
mi  'n  sin  tarsuinn  air  triuir  ghillean  oga,  's  iad  a  cuir  chrann. 

Dh'  fheoraich  mi  dhiubh,  de  a  bha  iad  a  deanamh  mar  siud. 
Thuirt  iad  de  mo  ghnothuchsa  de  bha  iad  a  deanamh.  "Hud  ! 
Hud!"  arsa  mi  fhein,  "innsidh  sibh  dhomh  de  tha  sibh  a 
deanamh."  "Mata,"  thuirt  iadsan,  "thug  famhair  mor  air 
falbh  ar  piuthar  's  tha  sin  a  cuir  chrann  feuch  co  againn  a  theid 
sios  do  'n  toll  so  g'a  h-iarraidh."  Chuir  mise  crann  leo  's  cha 
robh  ami  ach  gu'n  d'  thainig  an  crann  orm  fhein  gu  dol  sios  g'  a 
h-iarraidh.  Leig  iad  sios  mi  ann  an  cliabh.  Bha  an  sin  an  aon 
bhoirionnach  bu  bhoidhche  a  chunnaic  mi  riabh,  's  i  tochras  snath 
oir  far  eachan  airgid.  "  0  !  "  thuirt,  ise  rium,  fhein,  "  de  mar 
thainig  thusa  an  so  ?  "  "  Thainig  mise  a  nuas  gu  d'  iarraidh  ;  tha 
do  thriuir  bbraithrean  a  feitheamh  ort  aig'beul  an  tuill,  agus 
cuiridh  sibh  a  nuas  an  cliabh  am  maireach  gu  m'  iarraidh-sa. 
Ma  bhitheas  mi  beo  's  maith,  's  mar  bi  cha  'n  'eil  atharrach 
aii\"  Cha  robh  mi  ach  goirid  an  sin  a  nuair  a  chuala  mi  stairum 
's  stararaich  a  tighinn  aig  an  fhamhair.  Cha  robh  fios  agam 
caite  an  rachainn  am  falach  ;  ach  chunnaic  mi  dim  oir  's  airgid 
an  taobh  thall  uamh  an  fhamhair.  Smaoinich  mi  nach  robh  aite 
air  bith  a  b'  fhearr  dhomh  dol  am  folach  na  'measg  an  oir. 
Thainig  am  famhair  a  stigh,   's  cailleach  mharbh  slaodadh  ris 


144  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

gach  barrall  broig'  aige.  Sheall  e  shios  's  sheall  e  shuas,  's  dar 
nach  fac  e  is'  air  thoiseach  air,  leig  e  burrall  mor  caoinidh  as. 
Thug  e  dathadh  air  na  cailleachan  roimh  'n  ghealbhan's  dh'  ith  e 
iad.  Cha  robh  fhios  aig  an  fhamhair  an  so  de  'n  rud  a  b'  fhearr 
a  chum  ad  h  fhadal  deth,  ach  sinaointich  e  gu  'n  rachadh  e  a 
chunntas  a  chuid  6ir  a's  airgid.  Cha  robh  e  ach  goirid  an  sin 
'nuair  a  chuir^e  lamh  air  mo  cheann  fhein.  "  A  bheist  !  "  thuirt 
am  famhair,  "  's  ioma  droch  rud  a  rinn  thu  riamh  mil  'n  do 
smaoinich  thu  tighinn  an  so  a  thoirt  air  falbh  a'  bhoirinnaich 
bhoidheach  a  bh'  agam-sa.  Cha  'n  'eil  feum  agamsa  ort  an 
nochd,  ach  's  tu  ghlanas  m'  fhiaclan  moch  am  maireach."  Bha  a 
bheist  sglth  's  chaidil  e  'n  deigh  na  caillich  itheadh.  Chunnaic 
mi  bior  mor  feola  ri  taobh  a  ghealbhain.  Chuir  mi  'n  teis- 
meadhoin  an  teine  am  bior  iaruinnn,  gus  an  robh  e  dearg.  Bha 
'm  famhair  'na  throm  chadal,  's  a  bheul  fosgailte,  's  e  'ruchdail  's 
a  seideil.  Thug  mi  'm  bior  dearg  as  an  teine,  's  chuir  mi  sios  am 
beul  an  fhamhair  e.  Thug  e  grad  leum  gu  taobh  thall  na 
h-uaimh,  's  bhuail  e  ceann  a  bhior  ris  a'  bhalla  's  chaidh  e  mach 
roi  'n  cheann  eile.  Rug  mi  air  claidheamh  mor  an  fhamhair, 
agus  le  aon  bheum  chuir  mi  'n  ceann  dheth.  Air  an  latha 
maireach,  thainig  an  cliabh  a  nuas  gum  m'  iarraidh  fhein.  Ach 
smaoinich  mi  gu  'n  liouainn  an  cliabh  do  dh'  or  's  do  dh'  airgiod 
an  fhamhair,  's  dar  a  bha  e  'm  meadhon  an  tuill,  le  cudthrom  an 
6ir  's  an  airgid,  bhris  an  iris,  thuit  mi  nuas  a  measg  chlachan,  's 
phris,  's  dhris,  's  air  do  laimhsa,  a  rlgh  Eirinn,  's  air  mo  laimhs 
ge  saor  e,  bha  mi  'n  cas  bu  chruaidhe  na  tha  mi  nochd  fo 
t'iochdsa  's  dull  agam  ri  dol  as."  "Ah!  a  bheist  liath,  thainig 
thu  as  an  sin,  ach  cha  teid  thu  as  an  so,"  ars'  an  rlgh.  "Thoir 
dhomh  a  nis  fiach  m' ursgeul,"  arsa  Conal.  "  De  sin  ?  "  thuirt 
an  righ.  "Tha  mac  meadhonach  righ  Shasuinn  's  nighean 
inheadhonach  rlgh  Eirinn  a  bhi  air  am  posadh  ri  'cheile  's 
fear  do  na  h-6igeich  bhlara,  dhubha  mar  thochradh." 
"  Tachraidh  sin,"  thuirt  an  righ.  Chaidh  beireachd  air 
Conal  Crobhi  's  a  cheangal  le  tri  chinn  cbaoil,  sa  thilgeadh 
an  cuil  na  mdine,  's  chaidh  banais  fichead  oidhche  's  fich- 
ead  latha  a  dheanamh  do  'n  charaid  oig.  An  sin,  'nuair 
a  bha  iad  sgith  'g  itheadh  's  ag  61,  thuirt  an  righ,  gu  'm 
b'fhearr  dhoibh  Conal  Crobhi  a  thoirt  a  nios  gus  an  innseadh  e 
cionnas  a  fhuair  e  nios  a  uamh  an  fhamhair.  Cha  bu  ruith  ach 
leum  le  mac  6g  an  rlgh  dol  sios  g'  a  iarraidh.  Bha  e  ciunteach 
gu  'faigheadh  e  posadh  dha  fhein  mar  fhuair  e  do  chach.     "Tbig 


SGEULACHD   CHONAIL  CHROBHIE.  145 

a  nlos  an  so,  a  bheist  liath,"  thuirt  an  r\gh,   "'s  innis  duinn 
ciamar  a  fhuair  thu  a  uaigh  an  fhamhair."     "Innsidh  mi  sin, 
ma  gheibh  mi  fiach  innseadh,   's  cha  'n  e  mo  cheann  fhein  no 
ceann  h-aon  do  na  'bheil  sa  chuideachd."     "Gheibh  thu  sin," 
thuirt  an  righ.     "Tosd  !  thall  an  sin,  's  eisdeamaid  ri  sgeulachd 
Chonail  Chrobhi,"  thuirt  an  righ  !     (Well),  bha  mise  gu  h-losal 
an  sin,  's  mi  spaisdeireachd  air  m'  ais  's  air  m'  aghaidh.     Bha  mi 
Mol  seachad  air  tigh  a  bha  'n  sin  's  chunnaic  mi  bean  an  sin,  's 
leanabh  aice  san  darna  laimh,  's  sgian  aice  san  laimh  eile,  's  i 
'caoinneadh.      Ghlaodh  mi  fhein  rithe,    "Cum  air  do  lamh  a 
bhean;  de  tha  thu  dol  a  dheanamh  mar  sin?  "     "0  !"  thuirt  ise, 
"tha  mi  aig  tri  famhairean  an  so,  agus  dh'  iarr  iad  orm,  mo 
leanabh  boidheach  a  bhi  marbh  's  air  a  bhruich  air  an  cionn 
'nuair  a  thigeadh  iad  dhachaidh  gu  'n  dinneir.     Chi  mi,"  arsa 
mise,  "triuir  dhaoine  crochta  air  croich  thall  an  rind,  bheir  sinn 
a  nuas  fear  dhiubh,  agus  theid  mise  suas  na  aite,  's  deasaichidh 
tu  esan  an  aite  do  leinibh. "    Agus  a  nuair  a  thainig  na  famhairean 
dhachaidh  gu  'n  dinneir,  theireadh  fear  dhiubh,  "'S  e  so  feoil  an 
leinibh,"  's  theireadh  fear  eile,  "cha  'n  e."     Thuirt  fear  dhiubh, 
gu  'n  rachadh  e  a  thoirt  staoig  a  fear  do  na  bha  air  a  chroich, 
agus  gu  'faiceadh  e  co  dhiu  's  e  feoil  an  leinibh  a  bha  iad  ag 
itheadh.     'S  mi  fhein  a  cheud  fhear  a  thachair  orra,  's  air  do 
laimh,  a  righ  Eirinn,  's  air  mo  laimhsa,  ge  saor  e,  mur  robh  mi 
ann  an  cruaidh-chas  ni  bu  mho  'nuair  a  bha  'n  staoig  a  tighinn 
asam,  na  tha  mi  nochd  fo  t'iochdsa  's  duil  ri  dol  as  agam.     "A 
bheist  liath,  thainig  thu  as  an  sin,  ach  cha  d'  thig  thu  as  an  so," 
ars'  an  righ.     "  Thoir  dhomh  a  nis  duais  m'  ursgeul."     "  Gheibh 
thu  sin,"  ars'  an  righ.     "'Se  mo  dhuais,  mac  bg  righ  Shasuinn, 
's  nighean  6g  righ  Eirinn  a  bhi  posda,   's  fear  do  na  h-6igeich 
dhubha  mar  thochradh."   Chaidh  beireachd  air  Conal  Crobhi,  'sa 
cheangal  le  cinn  nan  tri  chaoile  gu  daor  's  gu  docair,  's  a  thil- 
geadh  slos  an  cuil  na  moine,  's  chaidh  banais  fichead  latha  's 
fichead  oidhche  a  dheanamh  do  'n  charaid  6ig.     'Nuair  a  bha  iad 
sglth  'g  itheadh  'sag  61,  thuirt  an  righ,  gu  b'  fhearr  a  bheist 
liath  ad  a  thoirt  a  nlos,  a  dh'  innseadh  de  mar  thainig  e  bharr 
na  croiche.     Thug  iad  an  so  a  nios  mi  fhein.     "Thig  a  nlos,  a 
bheist  liath  an  so,  's  innis  dhuinn  de  mar  fhuair  thu  bharr  na 
croiche."      "Innsidh  mi  sin,"  arsa  mi  fhein,    "ma  gheibh  mi 
duais  mhaith."     "Gheibh  thu  sin,"  thuirt  an  righ.     (Well)  a 
nuair  a  ghabh  na  famhairean  an  dinneir  bha  iad  sglth,  's  thuit 
iad  'nan  cadal.     'Nuair  a  chunnaic  mise  so,  thainig  mi  nuas  's 

T 


146  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

thug  a'  bhean  dhomh  claidheamh  mor,  lasrach  soluis  a  bha  aig 
fear  do  na  famhairean,  's  cha  robh  mi  fada  a  tilgeadh  nan  ceann 
do  na  famhairean.  Bha  mi  fhein  's  am  boirionnach  an  so  gun 
fhios  againn  cionnas  a  gheibheamaid  a  nlos  a'  uamh  an  fhamhair. 
Dh'  fhalbh  sinn  gu  ceann  shios  na  h-uaimh  's  lean  sinn  an  sin 
rathad  cumhang  roi  chreag  gus  an  d'  thainig  sinn  gu  solus  's  gu 
bior-linn  luingeanach  an  fhamhair.  Smuainich  mi  fhein  gum 
pillinn  air  m'  ais  agus  gu  'n  luchdaichinn  a  bhior-linn  le  or  's  le 
airgiod  an  fhamhair,  agus  mar  so  fhein  rinn  mi.  Dh'  fhalbh  mi 
leis  a  bhior-linn  fo  sheol  gus  an  d'  thainig  mi  gu  h-eilean  nach  b' 
aithne  dhomh.  Chaidh  an  long,  's  am  boirionach,  's  an  leanabh 
a  thoirt  uam,  's  fagar  mise  an  sin  gu  tighin  dhachaidh  mar  a 
b'fhearr  a  dh'  fhaodainn.  Fhuair  mi  dhachaidh  aon  uair  eile  do 
Shasunn,  ged  tha  mi  'n  so  a  nochd. 

Ghlaodh  boirionnach  a  bha  na  luidhe  san  t-seomar,  "Oa  righ, 
beiribh  air  an  duine  so.  Bu  mhise  am  boirionach  a  bha  'n  sin, 
's  bu  tusa  an  leanabh."  'S  ann  an  so  a  bha  'm  meas  air  Conal 
Cr6bhi,  's  thug  an  righ  dha  a  bhior-linn  Ian  oir  's  airgid  an  fhamhair 
's  rinn  e  rioghachd  Shasuinn  cho  beartach  's  a  bha  i  riamh. 

This  story  was  told  to  me  at  Inveraray,  April  25,  1859,  by 
Gillies.  It  was  told  with  the  air  of  a  man  telling  a  serious 
story,  and  anxious  to  tell  it  correctly.  The  narrative  was  inter- 
larded with  explanations  of  the  words  used,  and  the  incidents 
described.  Those  who  sat  about  the  fire  argued  points  in  the 
story.  These  were  John  MacKenzie,  fisherman  ;  John  Mac- 
Donald,  travelling  tinker  ;  John  Clerk,  our  host,  formerly  miller 
to  the  Duke  of  Argyll ;  and  some  others,  whose  names  I  have 
foi^gotten.  The  story  is  very  correctly  written.  I  took  notes  at 
the  time,  and  they  agree  with  the  Gaelic  as  written  by  Hector 
Urquhart,  from  the  dictation  of  Gillies. 


VII. 
THE  TALE  OF  CONNAL. 

From  Kenneth  MacLennan,  Pool  Ewe. 

rTlHERE  was  a  king  over  Eirinn  once,  who  was  named 
-*-  King  Cruachan,  and  he  had  a  son  who  was  called 
Connal  MacRigh  Cruachan.  The  mother  of  Connal 
died,  and  his  father  married  another  woman.  She  was 
for  finishing  Connal,  so  that  the  kingdom  might  belong 
to  her  own  posterity.  He  had  a  foster  mother,  and  it 
was  in  the  house  of  his  foster  mother  that  he  made  his 
home.  He  and  his  eldest  brother  were  right  fond  of 
each  other ;  and  the  mother  was  vexed  because  Connal 
was  so  fond  of  her  big  son.  There  was  a  bishop  in 
the  place,  and  he  died;  and  he  desired  that  his  gold 
and  silver  should  be  placed  along  with  him  in  the 
grave.  Connal  was  at  the  bishop's  burying,  and  he 
saw  a  great  bag  of  gold  being  placed  at  the  bishop's 
head,  and  a  bag  of  silver  at  his  feet,  in  the  grave. 
Connal  said  to  his  five  foster  brothers,  that  they 
would  go  in  search  of  the  bishop's  gold ;  and  when 
they  reached  the  grave,  Connal  asked  them  which  they 
would  rather ;  go  down  into  the  grave,  or  hold  up  the 
flagstone.  They  said  that  they  would  hold  up  the 
flag.  Connal  went  down  ;  and  whatever  the  squealing 
was  that  they  heard,  they  let  go  the  flag  and  they  took 
to  their  soles  home.  Here  he  was,  in  the  grave  on 
top  of  the  bishop.     When  the  five  of  foster  brothers 


148  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

reached  the  house,  their  mother  was  somewhat  more 
sorrowful  for  Connal  than  she  would  have  been  for  the 
five.  At  the  end  of  seven  mornings,  there  went  a 
company  of  young  lads  to  take  the  gold  out  of  the 
bishop's  grave,  and  when  they  reached  the  grave  they 
threw  the  flag  to  the  side  of  the  further  wall ;  Connal 
stirred  below,  and  when  he  stirred  they  went,  and  they 
left  each  arm  and  dress  they  had.  Connal  arose,  and 
he  took  with  him  the  gold,  and  arms  and  dress,  and  he 
reached  his  foster  mother  with  them.  They  were  all 
merry  and  lighthearted  as  long  as  the  gold  and  silver 
lasted. 

There  was  a  great  giant  near  the  place,  who  had  a 
great  deal  of  gold  and  silver  in  the  foot  of  a  rock  ;  and 
he  was  promising  a  bag  of  gold  to  any  being  that 
would  go  down  in  a  creel.  Many  were  lost  in  this 
way ;  when  the  giant  would  let  them  down,  and  they 
would  fill  the  creel,  the  giant  would  not  let  down  the 
creel  more  till  they  died  in  the  hole. 

On  a  day  of  days,  Connal  met  with  the  giant,  and 
he  promised  him  a  bag  of  gold,  for  that  he  should  go 
down  in  the  hole  to  fill  a  creel  with  the  gold.  Connal 
went  down,  and  the  giant  was  letting  him  down  with 
a  rope  ;  Connal  filled  the  giant's  creel  with  the  gold, 
but  the  giant  did  not  let  down  the  creel  to  fetch 
Connal,  and  Connal  was  in  the  cave  amongst  the  dead 
men  and  the  gold. 

When  it  beat  the  giant  to  get  another  man  who 
would  go  down  in  the  hole,  he  sent  his  own  son  down 
into  the  hole,  and  the  sword  of  light  in  his  lap,  so  that 
he  might  see  before  him. 

When  the  young  giant  reached  the  ground  of  the 
cave,  and  when  Connal  saw  him  he  caught  the  sword  of 
light,  and  he  took  off  the  head  of  the  young  giant. 


THE   TALE   OF  CONNAL.  149 

Then  Connal  put  gold  in  the  bottom  of  the  creel, 
and  he  put  gold  over  him ;  and  then  he  hid  in  the 
midst  of  the  creel,  and  he  gave  a  pull  at  the  rope. 
The  giant  drew  the  creel,  and  when  he  did  not  see  his 
son,  he  threw  the  creel  over  the  top  of  his  head. 
Connal  leaped  out  of  the  creel,  and  the  black  back  of 
the  giant's  head  (being)  towards  him,  he  laid  a  swift 
hand  on  the  sword  of  light,  and  he  took  the  head  off 
the  giant.  Then  he  betook  himself  to  his  foster 
mother's  house  with  the  creel  of  gold  and  the  giant's 
sword  of  light. 

After  this,  he  went  one  day  to  hunt  on  Slianih  na 
leirge.  He  was  going  forwards  till  he  went  into  a 
great  cave.  He  saw,  at  the  upper  part  of  the  cave,  a 
fine  fair  woman,  who  was  thrusting  the  flesh  stake  at  a 
big  lump  of  a  baby ;  and  every  thrust  she  would  give 
the  spit,  the  babe  would  give  a  laugh,  and  she  would 
begin  to  weep.  Connal  spoke,  and  he  said, — "  Woman, 
what  ails  thee  at  the  child  without  reason?"  "Oh," 
said  she,  "since  thou  art  an  able  man  thyself,  kill  the 
baby  and  set  it  on  this  stake,  till  I  roast  it  for  the 
giant."  He  caught  hold  of  the  baby,  and  he  put  a  plaid 
that  he  had  on  about  the  babe,  and  he  hid  the  baby  at 
the  side  of  the  cave. 

There  were  a  great  many  dead  bodies  at  the  side  of 
the  cave,  and  he  set  one  of  them  on  the  stake,  and  the 
woman  was  roasting  it. 

Then  was  heard  under  ground  trembling  and  thunder 
coming,  and  he  would  rather  that  he  was  out.  Here  he 
sprang  in  the  place  of  the  corpse  that  was  at  the  fire, 
in  the  very  midst  of  the  bodies,  The  giant  came,  and 
he  asked,  "  Was  the  roast  ready  1 "  He  began  to  eat, 
and  he  said,  "Fiu  fau  hoagrich ;  it's  no  wonder  that 
thy  own  flesh  is  tough  ;  it  is  tough  on  thy  brat." 


150  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

When  the  giant  had  eaten  that  one,  he  went  to  count 
the  bodies ;  and  the  way  he  had  of  counting  them  was, 
to  catch  hold  of  them  by  the  two  smalls  of  the  leg,  and 
to  toss  them  past  the  top  of  his  head ;  and  he  counted 
them  back  and  forwards  thus  three  or  four  times ;  and 
as  he  found  Connal  somewhat  heavier,  and  that  he  was 
soft  and  fat,  he  took  that  slice  out  of  him  from  the  back 
of  his  head  to  his  groin.  He  roasted  this  at  the  fire, 
and  he  ate  it,  and  then  he  fell  asleep.  Connal  winked 
to  the  woman  to  set  the  flesh  stake  in  the  fire.  She  did 
this,  and  when  the  spit  grew  white  after  it  was  red,  he 
thrust  the  spit  through  the  giant's  heart,  and  the  giant 
was  dead. 

Then  Connal  went  and  he  set  the  woman  on  her  path 
homewards,  and  then  he  went  home  himself.  His 
stepmother  sent  him  and  her  own  son  to  steal  the 
whitefaced  horse  from  the  King  of  Italy,  "Eadailt;" 
and  they  went  together  to  steal  the  whitefaced  horse, 
and  every  time  they  would  lay  hand  on  him,  the  white- 
faced  horse  would  let  out  an  ialt  (neigh?).  A  "com- 
pany "  came  out,  and  they  were  caught.  The  binding 
of  the  three  smalls  was  laid  on  them  straitly  and 
painfully.  "Thou  big  red  man,"  said  the  king,  "wert 
thou  ever  in  so  hard  a  case  as  that  1 "  "A  little 
tightening  for  me,  and  a  loosening  for  my  comrade,  and 
I  will  tell  thee  that,"  said  Connal. 

The  Queen  of  the  Eadailt  was  beholding  Connal. 

Then  Connal  said  : — 

"  Seven  morns  so  sadly  mine, 
As  I  dwelt  on  the  bishop's  top, 
That  visit  was  longest  for  me, 
Though  I  was  the  strongest  myself. 
At  the  end  of  the  seventh  morn 
An  opening  grave  was  seen, 


THE  TALE   OF  CONNAL.  151 

And  I  would  be  up  before 
The  one  that  was  soonest  down. 
They  thought  I  was  a  dead  man, 
As  I  rose  from  the  mould  of  earth  ; 
At  the  first  of  the  harsh  bursting 
They  left  their  arms  and  their  dresses. 
I  gave  the  leap  of  the  nimble  one, 
As  I  was  naked  and  bare. 
'Twas  sad  for  me,  a  vagabond, 
To  enjoy  the  bishop's  gold.'' 

"Tighten  well,  and  right  well,"  said  the  king;  "  it 
was  not  in  one  good  place  that  he  ever  was ;  great 
is  the  ill  he  has  done."  Then  he  was  tightened  some- 
what tighter,  and  somewhat  tighter ;  and  the  king 
said,  "  Thou  great  red  man,  wert  thou  ever  in  a  harder 
case  than  that  ? "  "  Tighten  myself,  and  let  a  little 
slack  with  this  one  beside  me,  and  I  will  tell  thee 
that." 

They  did  that.     "  I  was,"  said  he, 

"  Nine  morns  in  the  cave  of  gold  ; 
My  meat  was  the  body  of  bones, 
Sinews  of  feet  and  hands. 
At  the  end  of  the  ninth  morn 
A  descending  creel  was  seen  ; 
Then  I  caught  hold  on  the  creel, 
And  laid  gold  above  and  below  ; 
I  made  my  hiding  within  the  creel ; 
I  took  with  me  the  glaive  of  light, 
The  luckiest  turn  that  I  did. " 

They  gave  him  the  next  tightening,  and  the  king 
asked  him,  "  Wert  thou  ever  in  case,  or  extremity,  as 
hard  as  that  1 "  "A  little  tightening  for  myself,  and  a 
slack  for  my  comrade,  and  I  will  tell  thee  that." 

They  did  this. 

"  On  a  day  on  Sliabh  na  leirge, 
As  I  went  into  a  cave, 


152  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

I  saw  a  smooth,  fair,  mother-eyed  wife, 

Thrusting  the  stake  for  the  flesh 

At  a  young  unreasoning  child.      •  Then,'  said  I, 

'  What  causes  thy  grief,  oh  wife, 

At  that  unreasoning  child  ? ' 

1  Though  he's  tender  and  comely,'  said  she, 

*  Set  this  baby  at  the  fire.' 

Then  I^caught  hold  on  the  boy, 

And  wrapped  my  '  maundal '  around  ; 

Then  I  brought  up  the  great  big  corpse 

That  was  up  in  the  front  of  the  heap  ; 

Then  I  heard,  Turstar,  Tarstar,  and  Turaraich, 

The  very  earth  mingling  together  ; 

But  when  it  was  his  to  be  fallen 

Into  the  soundest  of  sleep, 

There  fell,  by  myself,  the  forest  fiend  ; 

I  drew  back  the  stake  of  the  roast, 

And  I  thrust  it  into  his  maw." 

There  was  the  Queen,  and  she  was  listening  to  each 
thing  that  Connal  suffered  and  said ;  and  when  she 
heard  this,  she  sprang  and  cut  each  binding  that  was 
on  Connal  and  on  his  comrade :  and  she  said,  "  I  am 
the  woman  that  was  there  ; "  and  to  the  king,  "  thou  art 
the  son  that  was  yonder." 

Connal  married  the  king's  daughter,  and  together 
they  rode  the  whitefaced  horse  home  ;  and  there  I  left 
them. 

From  Hector  Urquhart,  June  27,  1859.  Recited  by  Ken- 
neth Maclennan  of  Turnaig,  Pool  Ewe,  Ross-shire,  aged  70, 
who  learned  it  from  an  old  man  when  he  was  a  boy. 


SGEULACHD  CHONAILL. 

Bha  righ  air  Eirinn  aon  uair  da  'm  b-ainm  righ  Cruachan,  's  bha 
mac  aige,  ris  an  abradh  iad  Conall,  mac  righ  Cruachan.  Chaochail 
mathair  Chonaill,  agus  phos  athair  bean  eile.    Bha  i  air  son  cuir  as 


SGEULACHD   CHONAILL.  153 

do  Chonall,  chum  's  gu'm  biodh  an  rloghachd  aig  a  sliochd  fein. 
Bha  muime  chlche  aige-san,  agus  's  ann  an  tigh  a  mhuime  bha  e 
'deanamh  a  dhachaidh.  Bha  e  fhein  's  a  bhrathair  bu  shine  ro 
mheasail  aig  a'  cheile,  agus  bha  mhathair  gamhlasach  air  son  gu 
robh  Conall  cho  measail  aig  a  mac  m6r.  Bha  Easbuig  anns  an 
aite,  agus  chaochail  e,  agus  dh'  iarr  e  'n  t-6r  's  an  t-airgiod  aige, 
a  chuir  cuide  ris  anns  an  uaigh.  Bha  Conall  aig  tlodhlacadh  an 
Easbuig,  agus  chunnaic  e  p6c  mor  6ir  a  dol  aig  ceann  an  Easbuig, 
agus  p6c  airgid  aig  a  chasan  's  an  uaigh.  Thubhairt  Conall  ri 
chuignear  chomh-dhaltan,  "  gu  'rachadh  iad  air  th6ir  6r  an 
Easbuig,"  agus  nur  a  rainig  iad  an  uaigh,  dh'  fheoraich  Conall 
dhiubh-san.  "Co  b'  fhearr  leo  dol  sios  do  'n  uaigh  na  'n  leac  a 
chumail  suas?"  Thuirt  iadsan  gu  cumadh  iad  an  leac  suas. 
Chaidh  Conall  slos,  agus  ge  b'  e  sgiamhail  a  chual'  iadsan,  leig 
iad  as  an  leac,  agus  thug  iad  na  buinn  asda  dhachaidh.  Bha  e  'n 
so  's  an  uaigh  air  mum  an  Easbuig.  'Nuair  a  rainig  na  cuignear 
bhraithrean  altrum  an  tigh,  bha  'm  mathair  ni  bu  bhronaiche 
airson  Chonaill  na  bhitheadh  i  airson  a  Chuigear.  An  ceann 
seachd  traithean,  dh'  fhalbh  Cuideachd  do  ghillean  oga  a  thoirt 
an  6ir  a  uaigh  an  easbuig'  agus  nur  a  rainig  iad  an  uaigh,  thilg 
iad  an  leac  ri  taobh  a  bhalla  thall.  Ghluais  Conall  shlos,  agus 
nur  a  ghluais,  dh'  fhalbh  iadsan  :  dh'  fhag  iad  gach  arm  's  aodach 
'bha  aca  ;  dh'  eirich  Conall,  's  thug  e  leis  gach  or,  's  gach  arm,  's 
rainig  e  mhuime  chiche  leis.  Bha  iad  uile  gu  subhach,  sblasach, 
cho  fad,  's  a  mhair  an  t-5r  's  an  t-airgiod.  Bha  famhair  mor 
dhluth  do'n  aite,  aig  an  robh  moran  6ir  's  airgid  ann  an  Cois 
Creige,  agus  bha  e  'gealltainn  poc  oir  do  neach  sam  bith  a  rachadh 
slos  ann  an  cliabh.  Bha  m6ran  air  an  call  mar  so.  Nur  a  leigeadh 
am  famhair  slos  iad,  's  a  lionadh  iad  an  Cliabh,  cha  chuireadh  am 
famhair  sios  an  cliabh  tuillidh,  gus  am  basaicheadh'iadsan  'san 
toll.  Latha  do  na  laithean,  thachair  Conall  ris  an  fhamhair,  agus 
gheall  e  poc  6ir  dha  airson  a  dhol  slos  do  'n  toll  a  lionadh  cliabh 
do'n  6r.  Chaidh  Conall  slos,  agus  bha  'm  famhair  'ga  leigeil  slos 
le  r6p.  Lion  Conall  cliabh  an  fhamhair  do  'n  6r,  ach  cha  do  leig  am 
famhair  slos  an  cliabh  air  thoir  Chonaill,  's  bha  Conall  'san  uaigh 
measg  nan  daoine  marbha,  's  an  6ir.  'Nuair  a  dh'  fhairslich  air 
an  fhamhair  duine  tuiliidh  fhaotainn  a  rachadh  slos  do  'n  toll, 
chuir  e  'mhac  fhein  sios  do  'n  toll  's  an  claidheamh  soluis  air 
uchd,  chum  's  gu  'faiceadh  e  roimhe.  Nur  a  rainig  am  famhair 
6g  grund  na  h-uaimh,  'sa  chunnaic  Conall  e,  rug  e  air  a  chlaidh- 
eamh  sholuis,  agus  thug  e  'n  ceann  do  'n  fhamhair  6g.     Chuir 


154  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES. 

Conall  an  so  6r  aim  am  mas  a'  chleibh,  agus  chuir  e  6r  os  a 
cheann  :  rinn  e  'n  so  fhalach  am  meadhon  a'  chleibh  :  thug  e 
tarruing  air  an  rop ;  tharruing  am  famhair  an  cliabh,  agus  dur 
nach  fac  e  'mhac  'sa  chliabh,  thilg  e  'n  cliabh  thar  mullach  a 
a  chinn.  Leum  Conall  as  a'  chliabh,  's  dubh  chul  cinn  au  fham- 
hair  ris  :  thug  e  grad  lamh  air  a'  chlaidheamh  sholuis,  agus  thug 
e  'n  ceann  do  'n  fhamhair.  Thug  e  'n  so  tigh  a  mhuime  chich' 
air,  leis  a  chliabh  oir,  's  claidheamh  soluis  an  fhamhair.  'Na 
dheigh  so,  chaidh  e  latha  a  shealg  do  Shliabh  na  leirge.  Bha  e 
gabhail  air  adhart,  gus  an  deach  e  stigh,  do  dh'  uaimh  mh6r. 
Chunnaic  e  'n  uachdar  na  h-uaimh  bean  bhan,  bhreagha  's  i 
putadh  bior  na  feola  ri  ultach  mor  do  leanabh,  's  na  h-uile  putadh 
a  bha  ise  'toirt  do  'n  bhior,  dheanadh  an  leanabh  gaire,  's 
thoisicheadh  ise  air  caoineadh.  Labhair  Conall,  's  thubhairt  e, 
"  De  fath  do  bhr5in,  a  bhean,  ris  an  6ganach  gun  chiall."  "  0  ! " 
os  ise,  "  bho  'n  is  duiue  tapaidh  thu  fhein,  marbh  an  leanabh,  's 
cuir  air  a  bhior  so  e,  gus  an  roist  mi  e  do  'n  fhamhair."  Rug  e 
air  an  leanabh,  's  chuir  e  'n  cleoc  a  bha  air  mu  'n  leanabh,  's  dh' 
fholuich  e  'n  leanabh  am  taobh  na  h-uaimh.  Bha  moran  do 
chuirp  mharbh'  an  taobh  na  h-uaimh,  's  chuir  e  fear  dhiubh  air 
a'  bhior,  's  bha  'm  boirionnach  'ga  r6stadh.  Chualas  fo  'n  talamh, 
crith  's  toirm  a'  tighinn,  's  b'  fhearr  leis  gun  robh  e  'muigh  : 
leum  e  'n  so  an  aite  'chuirp  a  bha  ris  an  teine,  an  teis-meadhon 
nan  Corp.  Thainig  am  famhair  's  dh'  fheoraich  e,  "  'n robh rosta 
bruich."  Thoisich  e  air  itheadh,  's  thubhairt  e,  "fiu  fou  ! 
hoagrich  !  cha  'n  ioghnadh  feoil  righinn  a  bhi  ort  fhein,  's  righinn 
air  d'isean  i."  Dur  a  dh'  ith  am  famhair  am  fear  ud,  dh  fhalbh 
e  chunntadh  nan  corp,  agus  se  'n  doigh  chunntais  a  bh'  aig  orra, 
beireachd  air  dha  chaol  cois'  orra,  agus  'gan  tillgeadh  seachad 
thar  mullach  a  chinn,  agus  chunnt  e  oir  ais  's  air  adhart  iad  mar 
so  tri  no  ceithir  do  dh'  uairean ;  agus  bho  m  a  fhuair  e  Conall  ni 
bu  truime,  'se  bog  reamhar,  thug  e  'n  stiall  ud  as  bho  chul  a 
chinn  gu  mhanachan.  R6isd  e  so  ris  an  teine,  's  dh'ith  e  i.  Thuit 
e  'n  sin  'na  chadal.  Smeid  Conall  air  a  bhoirionnach,  bior  na 
fe61a  chuir  'san  teine.  Rinn  i  so,  agus  dur  a  dh'  fhas  am  bior 
geal  an  deigh  bhi  dearg,  shath  e  'm  bior  troi'  chridhe  an  fhamhair, 
's  bha  'm  famhair  marbh.  Dh'  fhalbh  Conall  an  so,  's  chuir  e 
'bhean  air  a  slighe  dhachaidh.  Chaidh  e  'n  so  dhachaidh  e  fhein. 
Chuir  a  mhuime  air  falbh  e  sa'  mac  fhein  a  ghoid  a  Bhlar-aghan 
bho  rlgh  na  h-Eadailt,  agus  dh'  fhalbh  iad  a  ghoid  a  bhlar-aghan 
le  cheile,  agus  na  h-uile  uair  a  chuireadh  iad  an  laimh  air  a 


SGEULACHD   CHONAILL.  155 

bhlar-aghan,  leigeadh  am  blar-aghan  (ialt)  as.  Thainig  cuideachd 
a  mach  's  chaidh  an  glacadh.  Chaidh  ceangal  nan  tri  chaoil  a 
chuir  orra  gu  daor  's  gu  daingean.  "  Fhir  mh5r  ruaidh,"  ars'  an 
rkrh,  'n  robh  thu  'n  cas  riamh  cho  cruaidh  an  sin  ?  "  "Tean- 
nachadb  beag  dhomh  fh&n,  agus  lasachadh  do  m'  cbompanach 
's  innsidh  mi  sin,"  arsa  Conall.  Bha  banrigb  na  h-Eadailte  'ga 
fhaicinn.     Thubhairt  Conall  an  sin. 

"  Seachd  trath  gu  bronach  dhomh, 
'S  mi  chomhnuidh  air  muin  an  easbuig. 
'Sann  leamsa  'b'  fhad'  a'  ch&lidh  sin, 
Ged  'sann  learn  fh&n  bu  treise. 
An  ceann  na  seachdamh  trath, 
Chunnacas  uaigh  'ga  fosgladh, 
'S  ge  b'e  bo  luaithe  bhiodh  a  nuas  aca, 
'S  mise  a  bhiodh  suas  air  thoiseach. 
Shaoil  leosan  gu  'm  bu  mharbhan  mi, 
Bho  'n  uir  thalmhaidh  's  mi  'g  eiridh, 
Ann  an  toiseach  a  gharbh-bhristidh, 
Dh'  fhag  iad  an  airm  's  an  eudach, 
Thug  mise  leum  an  Uisleagan, 
'Smi  ruisgte,  nochdta, 
Bu  bhochd  dhomh sa  's  mi  'm  fhogarrach, 
Bhi  maitheadh  or  do  'n  Easbuig." 

"  Teannaichibh  e  gu  maith  's  gu  ro  mhaith,"  ars'  an  righ,  "cha 
b'  ann  an  aon  aite  maith  a  bha  e  riamh,  's  mor  an  t-olc  a  rinn  e." 
Chaidh  an  sin  a  theannachadh  ni  bu  teinne,  's  ni  bu  teinne,  's 
thubhairt  an  righ,  "  Fhir  mhoir  ruaidh,  'n  robh  thu  'n  cas  riamh 
bu  chruaidh  na  sin."  "  Teannaich  mi  fh£in,  's  leig  lasachadh  do 
'n  'fhear  so  laimh  rium,  's  innsidh  mi  'n  sin."  Rinn  iad  so.  Bha 
mise  os  esan. 

"  Naoi  tratha  ann  an  uaimh  an  6ir, 
'Se  bu  bhiadh  domh  a'  cholainn  chnamh, 
Feithean  chas  agus  lamh. 
An  ceann  an  naoidheadh  trath, 
Chunnacas  cliabh  a'  tighinn  a  mhan  ; 
Rug  mi  'n  sin  air  a'  chliabh' 
'S  chuir  mi  or  fotham  's  6r  tharam, 
'S  rinn  mi  'm  fholach  ann  sa  'chliabh, 
'S  thug  mi  leam  an  claidheamh  soluis 
Turn  is  sona  rinn  mi  riamh." 


156  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

Thug  iad  an  ath  theannachadh  dha,  s'  dh'  fhoighneachd*an 
righ  dheth,  "  An  robh  thu  'n  cas  na  h-eiginn  riamh  cho  chruaidh 
'sin?"  "Teannachadh  beag  dhomh  fhein,  's  lasachadh  do  m' 
chompanach,  's  innsidh  mi  'n  sin."     Rinn  iad  so. 

11  Latha  air  sliabh  na  leirge  dhomh 
'S  mi  dol  a'steach  do  dh'  uamh, 
Chunnaic  mi  bean  mhln,  bhan,  mhathair-shuileach 
'Si  putadh  bior  na  fedla        , 
Ri  6ganach,  'se  gun  chiall. 
Thubhairt  mlse  an  sin, 
De  fath  do  bhroin,  a  bhean, 
Ris  an  6ganach  's  nach  eil  ceillidh, 
1  Oir  a  mhin  oir  a  mhaise, '  ars'  ise 
'  Cuir  an  leanabh  so  ri  teallach  ' 
Rug  mi  'n  sin  air  a  mhacan 
'S  shuain  mi  mo  mhanndal  uime 
'S  thug  mi  nios  an  rod  m5r  colainn 
A  bha  shuas  an  tus  na  tuime 
Chuala  mi  'n  sin,  turtar,  tartar,  agus  turaraich 
Fior  thalamh  dol  am  measg  a  cheile 
Ach  air  bhith  dhasan  tuiteam 
Anns  an  t-suain  chadail 
'S  an  do  thuit  fuathan  na  coille 
Thug  mi  tarruing  air  bior  an  rostaidh 
'S  sheol  mi  sud  ri  corr  a  ghoile." 

Bha  a'  bhanrigh  faicinn  's  ag  eisdeachd  gach  ni  bha  Conall  a' 
fulang  's  ag  radh,  agus  dur  a  chual  i  so,  leum  i  's  ghearr  i  gach 
ceangal  a  bha  air  Conall  's  air  a  chompanach,  agus  thubhairt  i, 
"  'S  mise  'm  boirionnach  a  bha  'n  sin,  agus  ris  an  righ  's  tusa  a 
mac  a  bha  'n  siud. "  Ph6s  Conall  nighean  an  righ,  's  mharcaich 
iad  le  cheile  am  blaradhan  dachaidh.  'S  dh  fhag  mise  ann  a  sin 
iad. 

Recited  by  Kenneth  MacLennan,  Turnaig,  Pool  Ewe,  Ross- 
shire.     Written  by  Hector  Urquhart,  June  27,  1859. 

4.  Another  story,  which  seems  to  be  a  fragment  of  this  tale 
made  reasonable,  forms  part  of  a  collection  very  well  written  in 
the  Gaelic  of  Gearrloch,  Ross-shire,  from  the  telling  of  old  men, 


THE  TALE   OF  CONNAL.  157 

by  Mr.  Thomas  Cameron,  schoolmaster,  at  the  request  of  Osgood 
H.  MacKenzie,  Esq.,  July  1859. 

Alexander  MacDonald,  Inverasdale,  tells  how  Uisdean 
Mor  Macllle  Phadraig,  a  local  hero,  famous  for  slaying  "  Fuath- 
an  "  (bogles),  in  a  winter  that  was  very  cold,  on  a  day  of  hail- 
ing and  snowing  (sowing  and  winnowing)  was  taking  the  way  of 
"  A  Bhratghe  Mhoir  "  (the  great  top),  and  was  determined  to 
reach  as  far  as  Lochbhraoin.  Coming  through  a  place  called 
Lead  leachacachan  mu  Thuath  (na  Fuath  ?),  he  fell  in  with  a 
woman,  and  he  soon  fell  in  with  a  new-born  child.  No  house 
was  near,  so  he  killed  his  horse,  put  the  mother  and  child  inside, 
and  left  them  in  the  snow.  He  went  for-  help,  and  when  he 
came  back  he  found  them  warm  and  well.  He  took  care  of  them 
till  the  woman  could  do  for  herself,  and  the  child  grew  to  be  an 
able  lad.  He  was  named  "  MacMhuirich  a  curach  an  Eich," 
which  name  has  stuck  to  his  race  to  this  day. 

After  this  Uisdean  came  to  poverty.  On  a  cold  winter's  night 
of  hailing  and  snowing,  he  was  going  on  a  street  in  Dun  Edin 
(Edinburgh),  a  woman  put  her  head  out  of  a  window  and  cried, 
"  It  is  cold  this  night  on  Leathad  leachachan  mu  Thuath."  "It 
is,"  said  he.  When  she  heard  his  Gaelic,  she  thought  she  was 
not  far  wrong,  and  asked  him  in.  "  What  is  the  hardest  '  Cath  ' 
that  ever  befel  thee  ?  "  said  the  woman.  He  repeated  the  story, 
and  ended  with, — "And  though  I  am  this  night  in  Dun  Edin, 
many  is  the  hard  fight  that  I  have  wrestled  with."  "  I  am  the 
woman  that  was  there,  and  this  is  the  child,"  said  she  ;  and  she 
offered  him  shelter  for  the  rest  of  his  days. 

Surely  these  are  Connal,  the  robber  ;  and  the  king  and  his 
mother  ;  and  the  king's  horse  put  to  a  new  use,  transferred  to 
the  Cowgate  from  Eirinn  and  Lochlann,  and  the  forests  of  Ger- 
many ;  brought  down  from  the  days  of  Sindbad,  or  of  Ulysses, 
or  from  the  fifteenth  century,  from  the  age  of  romance  to  the 
nineteenth  century  and  to  prose. 

5.  1  have  another  version  of  this  story,  called  An  Gadaiche 
Dubh,  The  Black  Robber,  told  by  Alexander  MacNeill,  fisher- 
man in  Barra,  and  written  by  Hector  MacLean  in  August  1859. 
It  varies  much  from  the  others.  The  outline  is  nearly  the  same, 
but  the  pictures  are  different.     I  hope  to  find  room  for  it. 

The  story  resembles — 

1st.  The  Robber  and  his  Sons,  referred  to  in  Grimm's  third 
volume,  as  taken  from  a  MS.  of  the  fifteenth  century.     An  old 


158  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

robber  desires  to  become  an  honest  man,  but  his  three  sons 
follow  their  profession,  and  try  to  steal  the  queen's  horse.  They 
are  caught,  and  the  old  robber  tells  three  stories  of  his  own 
adventures  to  rescue  them. 

In  the  first  he  is  caught  by  a  giant  and  about  to  be  eaten,  but 
escapes  by  putting  out  the  giant's  eyes  with  "  destructive  in- 
gredients." He  gets  out  of  a  cave  by  putting  on  the  skin  of  a 
sheep.  He  puts  on  a  gold  ring  which  the  giant  gave  him,  which 
forces  him  to  call  out  "here  I  am."  He  bites  off  his  own  finger, 
and  so  escapes. 

Next — In  a  wilderness,  haunted  by  strange  creatures,  he  finds 
a  woman  about  to  kill  her  child  as  a  dinner  for  some  wild  men. 
He  makes  her  cook  a  hanged  thief  instead  ;  hangs  himself  on  a 
tree  in  place  of  the  cooked  thief,  and  has  a  slice  cut  from  his  side. 

Lastly,  the  giants,  frightened  by  a  clap  of  thunder,  run  away ; 
he  returns  to  a  civilized  country,  and  the  queen,  as  a  reward  for 
his  stories,  liberates  the  three  sons. 

2d.  Part  of  this  is  manifestly  the  same  as  the  Adventures  of 
Ulysses  in  the  Cave  of  the  Cyclop. — (Odyssey,  book  ix. ) 

3d.  And  the  adventure  of  Sindbad  with  the  giants  and  dwarfs, 
on  his  third  voyage  (Arabian  Nights).  The  Cat  adventure,  in 
the  Islay  version,  may  be  compared  with  Sindbad's  meeting  with 
the  serpents  and  with  the  elephants.     And 

4th.  With  a  Highland  story,  of  some  laird  of  Easa,  whose 
boat  was  upset  by  a  company  of  cats,  headed  by  one  large  black 
cat ;  supposed  to  be  a  troop  of  witches  headed  by  their  master. 

6.  The  incident  of  being  buried  in  a  treasure  cave  with  the 
dead,  is  common  to  the  Arabian  Nights.  See  Sindbad's  Fourth 
Voyage,  and  Aladdin  ;  and  also, 

7.  To  the  Decameron,  second  day,  novel  5  ;  where  a  man,  after 
a  number  of  adventures,  is  lowered  into  a  well  by  two  thieves. 
He  is  hauled  up  with  a  wheel  and  a  rope  by  the  watch,  who  are 
frightened  and  run  away,  leaving  their  arms. 

The  three  meet  once  more  ;  go  to  the  cathedral,  and  raise  up 
a  marble  slab  laid  over  the  grave  of  an  archbishop.  When 
"  Andreuccio  "  has  gone  in  and  robbed  the  grave,  they  send  him 
back  for  a  ring,  and  drop  the  slab.  The  priests  come  on  the 
same  errand  as  the  thieves  ;  he  frightens  them,  gets  out  with  the 
ring,  and  returns  to  Perugia  from  Naples — "  having  laid  out  his 
money  on  a  ring,  whereas  the  intent  of  his  journey  was  to  have 
bought  horses." 


THE   TALE   OF  CONNAL.  159 

In  all  these,  Greek,  Italian,  Arabic,  German,  and  Gaelic,  there 
is  a  general  resemblance,  but  nothing  more. 

I  have  given  three  versions  of  the  same  story  together,  as  an 
illustration  of  the  manner  in  which  popular  tales  actually  exist ; 
and  as  specimens  of  language.  The  men  who  told  the  story  live 
as  far  apart  as  is  possible  in  the  Highlands.  I  heard  one  of 
them  tell  it ;  each  has  his  own  way  of  telling  the  incidents  ;  and 
each  gives  something  peculiar  to  himself,  or  to  his  locality,  which 
the  others  leave  out.  Ewan  MacLachlan,  in  discussing  the  MSS. 
in  the  Advocates'  Library  in  1812,  referring  to  Dean  MacGreg- 
gor's  MS.,  written  about  1526,  says  : — "MacDougall  is  compared 
to  MacRuslainn,  the  Polyphemus  of  our  winter  tales."  It  would 
seem,  then,  that  this  story  has  been  long  known,  and  it  is  now 
widely  spread  in  the  Highlands. 

The  manners  and  customs  of  the  king  and  his  tenant  are  very 
highland,  so  far  as  they  can  be  referred  to  the  present  day.  Pro- 
bably they  are  equally  true  pictures  of  bygone  days.  The  king's 
sons  probably  visited  their  vassals,  and  got  into  all  manner  of 
scrapes.  The  vassals  in  all  probability  resented  insults,  and  re- 
belled, and  took  to  the  wild  woods  and  became  outlaws.  So  the 
mill  was  probably  the  resort  of  idlers  and  the  place  for  news,  as 
it  still  is.  The  king,  in  all  likelihood,  lived  very  near  his  own 
stable,  for  there  are  no  ruins  of  palaces  ;  and  it  seems  to  have 
been  the  part  of  a  brave  man  to  submit,  without  flinching,  to 
have  his  wrists  and  ankles  tied  to  the  small  of  his  back,  and  be 
"  tightened  "  and  tortured  ;  and  then  to  recite  his  deeds  as  an 
Indian  brave  might  do. 

It  seems,  too,  that  "Lochlann,"  now  Scandinavia,  was  once 
within  easy  sail  of  England  and  Ireland  ;  and  that  the  King  of 
Lochlann  knew  the  tenants  of  the  neighbouring  king.  From  the 
history  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  it  appears  that  there  really  was  a 
king  called  "Crovan,"  who  is  also  mentioned  by  Worsaae  (page 
287)  as  the  Norwegian  Godred  Crovan  who  conquered  Man, 
a.d.  1077.  And  in  this,  the  stories  are  probably  true  recollec- 
tions of  manners  and  events,  so  far  as  they  go.  When  it  comes 
to  giants,  the  story  is  just  as  likely  to  be  true  in  the  same  sense. 
There  probably  was  a  race  of  big  man-eating  savages  somewhere 
on  the  road  from  east  to  west,  if  not  all  along  the  route  ;  for  all 
popular  tales  agree  in  representing  giants  and  wild  men  as  living 
in  caves,  hoarding  wealth,  eating  men,  and  enslaving  women. 
In  these  stories  the  caves  are  described  from  nature.     When 


160  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

Conal  walks  along  the  top  of  the  high  shore,  "  rough  with  caves 
and  goes,"  and  falls  into  a  cave  which  has  an  opening  below,  he 
does  that  which  is  not  only  possible  but  probable.  I  know  many- 
caves  on  the  west  coast,  where  a  giant  might  have  walked  in 
with  his  goats  from  a  level  sandy  beach,  near  a  deep  sea,  and 
some  where  a  man  might  fall  into  the  further  end  through  a  hole 
in  a  level  green  sward,  and  land  safely  ;  many  are  full  of  all  that 
belongs  to  a  sheep-fold,  or  a  shelter  used  by  goats  and  cattle, 
and  by  the  men  who  take  care  of  them. 

I  know  one  where  a  whole  whisky  distillery  existed  not  very 
long  ago  ;  I  first  landed  in  it  from  a  boat  to  pick  up  a  wild 
pigeon  ;  I  afterwards  scrambled  into  it  from  the  shore  ;  and  I 
have  looked  down  into  it  from  smooth  green  turf,  through  a  hole 
in  the  roof,  into  which  there  flowed  a  little  stream  of  water.  An 
active  man  might  drop  into  the  far  end  on  a  heap  of  fallen  earth. 
And  here  again  comes  the  notion,  that  the  so-called  giants 
had  swords  so  bright,  that  they  shone  in  the  dark  like  torches, 
and  that  they  owned  riches  hid  underground  in  holes. 

Perhaps  we  may  believe  the  whole  as  very  nearly  true.  It 
may  be  that  there  were  really  such  people,  and  that  they  were 
miners  and  shepherds  ;  when  those  who  now  tell  stories  about 
them,  were  wandering  huntsmen  armed  with  stone  weapons. 

The  third  version  is  remarkable  as  an  instance  of  the  way  in 
which  poems  of  greater  merit  used  to  be  commonly,  and  still  are 
occasionally  recited.  "  Cuchullin  "  was  partly  told,  partly  re- 
cited, by  an  old  man  near  Lochawe,  within  the  memory  of  a 
clergyman  who  told  me  the  fact.  I  heard  Patrick  Smith,  in 
South  Uist,  and  other  men,  so  recite  stories  in  alternate  prose 
and  verse,  in  1859  ;  and  it  appears  that  the  Edda  was  so  com- 
posed. Poems  of  the  same  nature  as  "  the  poems  of  Ossian,"  if 
not  the  poems  themselves,  were  so  recited  by  an  old  man  in 
Bowmore  more  than  sixty  years  ago,  when  my  friend  Mr.  John 
Crawford,  late  Governor  of  Singapore,  and  a  well-known  linguist, 
was  a  school  boy,  who  spoke  little  but  Gaelic  ;  and  when  it  was 
as  rare  to  find  a  man  amongst  the  peasantry  in  Islay  who  could 
speak  English,  as  it  is  now  remarkable  to  find  one  who  cannot. 


VIII. 
MURCHAG  A'S  MIONACHAG. 

From  Ann  Darroch,  James  Wilson,  Hector  MacLean,  Islay,  and 
many  others  in  other  parts  of  the  Highlands. 

MOORACHUG  and  Meenachug  went  to  gather  fruit, 
and  as  Moorachug  would  gather  Meenachug  would 
eat.  Moorachug  went  to  seek  a  rod  to  lay  on  Meena- 
chaig,  and  she  eating  his  share  of  fruit. 

"  What's  thy  news  to-day,  oh  Voorachai  ?"  said  the 
rod.  "  Tis  my  own  news,  that  I  am  seeking  a  rod  to 
lay  on  Meenachug,  and  she  eating  my  share  of  fruit." 

"  Thou  wilt  not  get  me  until  thou  gettest  an  axe  that 
will  reap  me."  He  reached  the  axe.  "What's  thy 
news  to-day,  oh  Voorachai  ?."  "'Tis  my  own  news  that 
I  am  seeking  an  axe  to  reap  rod — rod  to  lay  on  Meena-  p^it/t 

chug — and  she  eating  my  share  of  fruit." 

"  Thou  wilt  not  get  me  until  thou  gettest  a  stone  to 
smooth  me."  He  reached  a  stone;  "  What's  thy  news 
to-day,  oh  Voorachai  ?"  said  the  stone.  "  'Tis  my  own 
news  that  I  am  seeking  stone  to  smooth  axe — axe  to 
reap  rod — rod  to  lay  on  Meenachaig — and  she  eating 
my  share  of  fruit." 

"  Thou  wilt  not  get  me,"  said  the  stone,  "  till  thou 
gettest  water  will  wet  me."     He  reached  the  water.  W*Av 

"What's  thy  news  to-day,  oh  Voorachai?"  said  the 
water.  "  'Tis  my  own  news  that  I  am  seeking — water 
to  stone — stone  to  smooth  axe — axe  to  reap  rod — rod 

u 


162  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

to  lay  on  Meenachaig — and  she  eating  my  share  of 
fruit." 

"Thou  wilt  not  get  me,"  said  the  water,  "till  thou 
gettest  a  deer  to  swim  me."  He  reached  the  deer. 
"What's  thy  news  to-day,  oh  Voorachai  ?"  said  the  deer. 
"  Tis  my  own  news,  that  I  am  seeking — deer  to  swim 
water — water  to  stone — stone  to  smooth  axe — axe  to 
reap  rod — rod  to  lay  on  Meenachaig — and  she  eating 
my  share  of  fruit." 

"Thou  wilt  not  get  me,"  said  the  deer,  "until  thou 
gettest  a  dog  to  run  me."  He  reached  the  dog. 
"What's  thy  news  to-day,  oh  Voorachai  ?"  said  the  dog. 
"  'Tis  my  own  news  that  I  am  seeking — dog  to  run  deer 
— deer  to  swim  water — water  to  stone — stone  to  smooth 
axe — axe  to  reap  rod — rod  to  lay  on  Meenachaig — and 
she  eating  my  share  of  fruit." 

"Thou  wilt  not  .get  me,"  said  the  dog,  "till  thou 
gettest  butter  to  be  rubbed  to  my  feet."  He  reached 
the  butter.  "What's  thy  news  to-day,  oh  Voorachai  V 
said  the  butter.  "  'Tis  my  own  news,  that  I  am  seeking 
— butter  to  feet  of  dog — dog  to  run  deer — deer  to  swim 
water — water  to  stone — stone  to  smooth  axe — axe  to 
reap  rod — rod  to  lay  on  Meenachaig — and  she  eating 
my  share  of  fruit." 

"  Thou  wilt  not  get  me,"  said  the  butter,  "  till  thou 
gettest  a  mouse  will  scrape  me."  He  reached  the 
mouse.  "What's  thy  news  to-day,  oh  Voorachai  ?"  said 
the  mouse.  "  'Tis  my  own  news,  that  I  am  seeking — 
mouse  to  scrape  butter — butter  to  feet  of  dog — dog  to 
run  deer — deer  to  swim  water — water  to  stone — stone 
to  smooth  axe — axe  to  reap  rod— rod  to  lay  on  Meena- 
chaig— and  she  eating  my  share  of  fruit." 

"Thou  wilt  not  get  me,"  said  the  mouse,  "till  thou 
gettest    a    cat    to   hunt   me."      He   reached   the   cat. 


MURCHAG  A'S   MIONACHAG.  163 

*  What's  thy  news  to-day,  oh  Voorachai  ?"  said  the 
cat.  "Tis  my  own  news,  that  I  am  seeking — cat  to 
hunt  mouse — mouse  to  scrape  butter — butter  to  feet  of 
dog — dog  to  run  deer — deer  to  swim  water — water  to 
stone — stone  to  smooth  axe — axe  to  reap  rod — rod  to 
lay  on  Meenachaig — and  she  eating  my  share  of  fruit." 

"Thou  wilt  not  get  me,"  said  the  cat,  "until  thou 
gettest  milk  for  me."  He  reached  the  cow.  "  What's 
thy  news  to-day,  oh  !  Voorachai  1 "  said  the  cow.  "  'Tis 
my  own  news,  that  I  am  seeking — milk  for  the  cat — 
cat  to  huut  mouse — mouse  to  scrape  butter — butter  to 
feet  of  dog — dog  to  run  deer — deer  to  swim  water — 
water  to  stone — stone  to  smooth  axe — axe  to  reap  rod 
— rod  to  lay  on  Meenachaig — and  she  eating  my  share 
of  fruit." 

"  Thou  wilt  not  get  milk  from  me  till  thou  gettest  a 
whisp  from  the  barn  gillie."  He  reached  the  barn 
gillie.  "  What's  that  news  to-day,  oh,  Voorachai  ? " 
said  the  barn  gillie.  "'Tis  my  own  news  that  I  am 
seeking — a  whisp  for  the  cow — a  cow  will  shed  milk  for 
the  cat — cat  to  hunt  mouse — mouse  to  scrape  butter — 
butter  to  feet  of  dog — dog  to  run  deer — deer  to  swim 
water — water  to  stone — stone  to  smooth  axe — axe  to 
reap  rod — rod  to  lay  on  Meenachaig — and  she  eating 
my  share  of  fruit." 

"  Thou  wilt  not  get  a  whisp  from  me,"  said  the  barn 
gillie,  "till  thou  gettest  a  bonnach  for  me  from  the 
kneading  wife."  He  reached  the  kneading  wife. 
"  What's  thy  news  to-day,  oh,  Voorachai !  "  said  the 
kneading  wife.  "  Tis  my  own  news,  that  I  am  seeking 
— bonnach  to  the  barn  gillie — whisp  to  the  cow  from 
the  barn  gillie — milk  from  the  cow  to  the  cat — cat  will 
hunt  mouse — mouse  will  scrape  butter — butter  to  feet 
of  dog — dog  to  run  deer — deer  to  swim  water — water 


164  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES. 

to  stone — stone  to  smooth  axe — axe  to  reap  rod — rod 
to  lay  on  Meenachaig— and  she  eating  my  share  of 
fruit." 

"  Thou  wilt  not  get  bonnach  from  me  till  thou  bringest 
in  water  will  knead  it." 

"  How  will  I  bring  in  the  water  ?  There  is  no  vessel 
but  that  sowen's  sieve." 

Moorachug  took  with  him  the  sowen's  sieve.  He 
reached  the  water,  and  every  drop  he  would  put  in  the 
sowen's  sieve  it  would  go  through.  A  hoodie  came  over 
his  head,  and  she  cried,  "Gawr-rag,  gawr-rag,  little 
silly,  little  silly."  "Thou  art  right,  oh  hoodie,"  said 
Moorachug.  "  Creah  rooah  s'  coinneach,  creah  rooah  s' 
coinneach,"  said  the  hoodie. 

Moorachug  set  creah  rooah  s'  c6inneach,  brown  clay 
and  moss  to  it,  and  he  brought  in  the  water  to  the 
kneading  wife — and  he  got  bonnach  from  the  kneading 
wife  to  barn  gillie — whisp  from  the  barn  gillie  to  the 
cow — milk  from  the  cow  to  the  cat — cat  to  hunt  mouse 
— mouse  to  scrape  butter — butter  to  feet  of  dog — dog 
to  run  deer — deer  to  swim  water — water  to  stone — ■ 
stone  to  smooth  axe — axe  to  reap  rod — rod  to  lay  on 
Meenachaig — and  she  eating  his  share  of  fruit.  And 
when  Moorachug  returned  Meenachag  had  just  BURST. 

This  is  the  best  known  of  all  Gaelic  tales.  It  is  the  infant 
ladder  to  learning  a  chain  of  cause  and  effect,  and  fully  as  sensible 
as  any  of  its  kind.  It  used  to  be  commonly  taught  to  children 
of  five  or  six  years  of  age,  and  repeated  by  school  boys,  and  it  is 
still  remembered  by  grown-up  people  in  all  parts  of  the  High- 
lands. There  are  few  variations.  In  one  version  the  crow  was 
a  light  bird  ;  in  another  a  gull  was  introduced,  wThich  advised 
the  use  of  the  sand  to  stuff  the  riddle. 

The  tale  has  sixteen  steps,  four  of  which  contain  double  ideas. 
The  English  house  that  Jack  built  has  eleven.  The  Scotch  old 
woman  with  the  silver  penny  has  twelve.     The  Norsk  cock  and 


MURCHADH  A's   MIONACHAG.  165 

hen  a-nutting  twelve,  ten  of  which  are  douhle.  The  German 
story  in  Grimm  has  five  or  six,  all  single  ideas.  All  these  are 
different.  In  Uist  the  actors  are  Biorachan  mor  agus  Biorchan 
Beag ;  in  Sutherland,  Morachan  agus  Mionachan. 

The  speech  of  the  Hoodie  is  always  a  very  close  imitation  of 
his  note.  In  another  version  she  says,  "  Cuir  criadh  righin 
ruadh  ris—  Put  tough  red  clay  to  it  ;"  and  the  gull  said,  "  Cunt 
poll  bog  rts — Put  soft  mud  to  it ;  "  which  is  rather  the  speech 
of  some  other  bird.  There  are  several  rare  words  in  this  ;  for 
example,  "  Gadhar,"  a  dog. 


MURCHADH  A'S  MIONACHAG. 

Dh'fholbh  Murchadh  a's  Mionachag  a  bhuain  sugh,  's  mar  a 
bhuaineadh  Murchadh  dh'  itheadh  Mionachag.  Dh  'fholbh 
Murchadh  a  dh'  iarraidh  slat  a  ghabhail  air  Mionachaig  's  i  'g 
itheadh  a  chuid  sugh — "De  do  naigheachd  an  diugh  a  Mhurch- 
aidh?"  urs'  an  t-slat.  "  'Se  mo  naigheachd  fein  gu  'bheil  mi  'g 
iarraidh  Slat  a  ghabhail  air  Mionachag  's  i  'g  itheadh  mo  chuid 
sugh."  "Cha  'n  fhaigh  thu  mise  gus  am  faigh,  thu  tuagh  a 
bhuaineas  mi."  Rainig  e  'n  tuagh.  "  De  do  naigheachd  an 
diugh  a  Mhurchaidh  ?  "  "  Se  mo  naigheachd  fein  gu  'bheil  mi  'g 
iarraidh  Tuagh  a  bhuaineas  slat — Slat  a  ghabhail  air  Mionachaig 
's  i  'g  itheadh  mo  chuid  sugh  " —  "  Cha  'n  fhaigh  thu  mise  gus  am 
faigh  thu  clach  a  llobhas  mi."  Rainig  e  'chlach.  "De  do 
naigheachd  an  diugh  a  Mhurchaidh  ? "  urs'  a'  chlach.  "  'Se  mo 
naigheachd  fein  gu  'bheil  mi  'g  iarraidh  Clach  a  liobhadh  tuagh — 
Tuagh  a  bhuain  slat — Slat  a  ghabhail  air  Mionachaig  's  i  'g  itheadh 
mo  chuid  sugh."  "  Cha  n  fhaigh  thu  mis',"  urs'  a'  chlach,  "gus 
am  faigh  thu  uisge  a  fhliuchas  mi."  Rainig  e  'n  t-uisge — "  De 
do  naigheachd  an  diugh  a  Mhurchaidh  ?  "  urs'  an  t-uisge.  '"Se 
mo  naigheachd  fein  gu  bheil  mi  'g  iarraidh  Uisge  ma  chloich — 
Clach  a  liobhadh  tuagh — Tuagh  a  bhuain  slat — Slat  a  ghabhail 
air  Mionachaig  's  i  'g  itheadh  mo  chuid  sugh. "  '*  Cha  'n  fhaigh  thu 
mis',"  urs'  an  t-uisge,  "  gus  am  faigh  thu  fiadh  a  shnamhas  mi." 
Rainig  e  'm  fiadh.  "  De  do  naigheachd  an  diugh  a  Mhurchaidh  ?  " 
urs'  am  fiadh.  "  'Se  mo  naigheachd  fein  gu  'bheil  mi  'g  iarraidh 
Fiadh  a  shnamh  uisg'.     Uisge  ma  chloich.     Clach  a  liobhadh 


166  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

tuagh.  Tuagh  a  bhuain  slat.  Slat  a  ghabhail  air  Mionachaig  's 
i  'g  itheadh  mo  chuid  sugh. "  "  Cha  'n  fhaigh  tliu  mis',''  urs'  am 
fiadh,  "gus  am  faigh  thu  gadhar  a  ruitheas  mi."  Rainig  e  'n 
gadhar.  "De  do  naigheachd  an  diugh  a  Mhurchaidh  ?"  urs'  an 
gadhar.  "Se  mo  naigheachd  fein  gu  'bheil  mi  'g  iarraidh  Gadhar 
a  ruith  fiadh.  Fiadh  a  shnamh  uisg'.  Uisge  ma  chloich.  Clach 
a  liobhadh  tuagh.  Tuagh  a  bhuain  slat.  Slat  a  ghabhail  air 
Mionachaig  's  i  'g  itheadh  mo  chuid  sugh."  "  Cha  'n  fhaigh  thu 
mis,"  urs'  an  gadhar,  "  gus  am  faigh  thu  im  a  rubar  ri  m'  chasan. " 
Rainig  e  'n  t-im.  "  De  do  naigheachd  an  diugh  a  Mhurchaidh  ?  " 
urs'  an  t-im.  '"Se  mo  naigheachd  fein  gu  'bheil  mi  'g  iarraidh 
Im  chasa  gadhair.  Gadar  a  ruith  fiadh.  Fiadh  a  shnamh  uisg'. 
Uisge  ma  chloich.  Clach  a  liobhadh  tuagh.  Tuagh  a  bhuain 
slat.  Slat  a  ghabhail  air  Mionachaig  's  i  'g  itheadh  mo  chuid 
sugh."  "Cha  'n  fhaigh  thu  mis',"  urs'  an  t-im,  "gus  am  faigh 
thu  luch  a  sgrlobas  mi."  "  Rainig  e  'n  luch.  "  De  do  naigheachd 
an  diugh  a  Murchaidh  ?  "  urs'  an  luch.  "  Se  mo  naigheachd  fein 
gu  bheil  mi  'g  iarraidh.  Luch  a  sgriobadh  im.  Im  chasa  gadhair. 
Gadhar  a  ruith  fiadh.  Fiadh  a  shnamh  uisg'.  Uisge  ma  cloich. 
Clach  a  liobhadh  tuagh.  Tuagh  a  bhuain  slat.  Slat  a  ghabhail 
air  Mionachaig  's  i  'g  itheadh  mo  chuid  sugh."  "  Cha  'n  fhaigh 
thu  mis',"  urs'  an  luch,  "gus  am  faigh  thu  cat  a  shealgas  mi." 
Rainig  e  'n  cat.  "  De  do  naigheachd  an  diugh  a  Mhurchaidh  ?  " 
urs'  an  cat.  "  'Se  mo  naigheachd  fein  gu  'bheil  mi  'g  iarraidh  Cat 
a  shealg  luch.  Luch  a  sgriobadh  im.  Im  chasa  gadhair.  Gadhar 
a  ruith  fiadh.  Fiadh  a  shnamh  uisg'.  Uisge  ma  chloich.  Clach 
a  liobhadh  tuagh.  Tuagh  a  bhuain  slat.  Slat  a  ghabhail  air 
Mionachaig  's  1  'g  itheadh  mo  chuid  sugh."  "  Cha  'n  fhaigh  thu 
mis',"  urs'  an  cat,  "  gus  am  faigh  thu  bainne  dhomh."  Rainig  e 
'bho.  "De  do  naigheachd  an  diugh  a  Mhurchaidh?"  urs'  a' 
bho.  "  'Se  mo  naigheachd  fein  gu'  bheil  mi  'g  iarraidh  Bainne 
do  'n  chat.  Cat  a  shealg  luch.  Luch  a  sgriobadh  im.  Im  chasa 
gadhar.  Gadhar  a  ruith  fiadh.  Fiadh  a  shnamh  uisg'."  Uisge 
ma  chloich.  Clach  a  liobhadh  tuagh.  Tuagh  a  bhuain  slat.  Slat 
a  ghabhail  air  Mionachaig  's  i  'g  itheadh  mo  chuid  sugh.  "  Cha 
'n  fhaigh  thu  bainne  uamsa,  gus  am  faigh  thu  sop  o  'n  ghille- 
shabhaill.  Rainig  e  'n  gille-sabhaill.  "De  do  naigheachd  an 
diugh  a  Mhurchaidh  ?  "  urs'  an  gille-sabhaill.  " 'Se  mo  naigh- 
eachd fein  gu  'bheil  mi  'g  iarraidh.  Sop  a  gheobh  bd.  Bo 
bhligheadh  bainne  do  'n  chat.  Cat  a  shealg  luch.  Luch  a 
sgriobadh  im.     Im  chasa  gadhar.     Gadhar  a  ruith  fiadh.     Fiadh 


MURCHADH  A's   MIONACHAG.  167 

a  shnamh  uisg'.  Uisge  ma  chloich.  Clach  a  liobhadh  tuagh. 
Tuagh  a  bhuain  slat.  Slat  a  ghabhail  air  Mionachaig  's  i  'g  itheadh 
mo  chuid  sugh.  "  Cha  'n  fhaigh  thu  sop  uamsa,"  urs'  an  gille- 
sabhaill,  "  gus  am  faigh  thu  Bonnach  dhomh  o  'n  Bhean-fhuinne." 
Rainig  e  'bhean-fhuinne.  "  De  do  naigheachd  an  diugh  a  Mhurch- 
aidh  ? "  urs'  a'  bhean-fhuinne.  ' '  'Se  mo  naigheachd  f ein  gu  'bheil 
mi'  g  iarraidh  Bonnach  do  'n  ghille-shabhaill.  Sop  do  'n  Bho 
o  'n  Ghille-shabhaill.  Bainn'  o  'n  Bho  do  'n  chat.  Cat  a  shealgas 
luch.  Luch  a  sgrlobas  im.  Im  chasa  gadhair.  Gadhar  a  ruith 
fiadh.  Fiadh  a  shnamh  uisg'.  Uisge  ma  chloich.  Clach  a 
liobhadh  tuagh.  Tuagh  a  bhuain  slat.  Slat  a  ghabhail  air 
Mionachaig  's  i  'g  itheadh  mo  chuid  sugh.  "  Cha  'n  fhaigh  thu 
bonnach  uamsa  mar  an  d'  thoir  thu  stigh  uisg'  a  dh'  fhuinneas  e." 
"  De  mar  a' bheir  mi  stigh  an  t-Uisge?  Cha  'n  'eil  soitheach 
ann  ach  an  Criathar  Cabhrach  sin."  Thug  Murchadh  leis  an 
Criathar  Cabhrach,  's  rainig  e  n  t-uisge,  's  a  h-uile  deur  a  chuir- 
eadh  e  5s  a'  Chriathar  Chabhrach  rachadh  e  roimhe.  Thainig 
Feannag  as  a  chionn  's  ghlaoidh  i  "  Gorrag,  gorrag."  "  Tha  thu 
oeart,  fheannag,"  ursa  Murchadh.  "  Creadh  ruagh  's  coinneach, 
creadh  ruagh  's  coinneach."  Chuir  Murchadh  creadh  ruagh  's 
coinneach  ris,  's  thug  e  'stigh  an  t-Uisge,  's  fhuair  e  Bonnach  o  'n 
Bhean-fhuinne  do  'n  Ghille-shabhaill.  Sop  o  'n  Ghille-shabhaill 
do  'n  Bho.  Bainn'  o  'n  Bho  do  'n  chat.  Cat  a  shealg  luch. 
Luch  a  sgrlobadh  im.  Im  chasa  gadhair.  Gadhar  a  ruith  fiadh. 
Fiadh  a  shnamh  uisg'.  Uisge  ma  chloich.  Clach  a  liobhadh 
tuagh.  Tuagh  a  bhuain  slat.  Slat  a  ghabhaill  air  Mionachaig 
's  i  'g  itheadh  a  chuid  sugh.  'S  nur  a  thill  Murchadh  bha 
Mionachag  an  deigh  Sgaineadh  !  ! 


IX. 
THE  BEOWN  BEAR  OF  THE  GREEN  GLEN. 

From  John  MacDonald,  Travelling  Tinker. 

THERE  was  a  king  in  Erin  once,  who  had  a  leash 
of  sons.  John  was  the  name  of  the  youngest  one, 
and  it  was  said  that  he  was  not  wise  enough ;  and 
this  good  worldly  king  lost  the  sight  of  his  eyes,  and 
the  strength  of  his  feet.  The  two  eldest  brothers  said 
that  they  would  go  seek  three  bottles  of  the  water  of 
the  green  Isle  that  was  about  the  heaps  of  the  deep.* 
And  so  it  was  that  these  two  brothers  went  away.  Now 
the  fool  said  that  he  would  not  believe  but  that  he 
himself  would  go  also.  And  the  first  big  town  he 
reached  in  his  father's  kingdom,  there  he  sees  his  two 
brothers  there,  the  blackguards  !  "  Oh!  my  boys,"  says 
the  young  one,  "it  is  thus  you  are?"  "With  swift- 
ness of  foot,"  said  they,  "  take  thyself  home,  or  we 
will  have  thy  life."  "  Don't  be  afraid,  lads.  It  is  no- 
thing to  me  to  stay  with  you."  Now  John  went  away 
on  his  journey  till  he  came  to  a  great  desert  of  a  wood. 
"  Hoo,  hoo  ! "  says  John  to  himself,  "It  is  not  canny 
for  me  to  walk  this  wood  alone."  The  night  was  com- 
ing now,  and  growing  pretty  dark.  John  ties  the 
cripple  white  horse  that  was  under  him  to  the  root  of 
a  tree,  and  he  went  up  in  the  top  himself.      He  was 

*  "  Eilean  uaine  a  bha  'n  iomal  torra  domhain." 


THE  BROWN  BEAR  OF  THE  GREEN  GLEN.  1&9 

but  a  very  short  time  in  the  top,  when  he  saw  a  bear 
coming  with  a  fiery  cinder  in  his  mouth.  "Come  down, 
son  of  the  king  of  Erin,"  says  he.  "  Indeed,  I  won't 
come.  I  am  thinking  I  am  safer  where  I  am."  "But 
if  thou  wilt  not  come  down,  I  will  go  up,"  said  the  bear. 
:'  Art  thou,  too,  taking  me  for  a  fool  V  says  John.  "A 
shaggy,  shambling  creature  like  thee,  climbing  a  tree  ! " 
':But  if  thou  wilt  not  come  down  I  will  go  up,"  says  the 
bear,  as  he  fell  out  of  hand  to  climb  the  tree.  "Lord  ! 
tiou  canst  do  that  same  V'  said  John  ;  keep  back  from 
the  root  of  the  tree,  then,  and  I  will  go  down  to  talk  to 
thee."  And  when  the  son  of  Erin's  king  drew  down, 
they  came  to  chatting.  The  bear  asked  him  if  he  was 
hungry.  "  Weel !  by  your  leave,"  said  John,  "  I  am  a 
little  at  this  very  same  time."  The  bear  took  that 
wonderful  watchful  turn  and  he  catches  a  roebuck. 
"Now,  son  of  Erin's  king,"  says  the  bear,  "whether 
wouldst  thou  like  thy  share  of  the  buck  boiled  or  raw  1 " 
"The  sort  of  meat  I  used  to  get  would  be  kind  of 
plotted  boiled,"  says  John  ;  and  thus  it  fell  out.  John 
got  his  share  roasted.  "Now,"  said  the  bear,  "lie  down 
between  my  paws,  and  thou  hast  no  cause  to  fear  cold 
or  hunger  till  morning."  Early  in  the  morning  the 
Mathon  (bear)  asked,  "Art  thou  asleep,  son  of  Erin's 
king?"  "  I  am  not  very  heavily,"  said  he.  "It  is  time 
for  thee  to  be  on  thy  soles  then.  Thy  journey  is  long 
— two  hundred  miles ;  but  art  thou  a  good  horseman, 
John  ?"  "  There  are  worse  than  me  at  times,"  said  he. 
"Thou  hadst  best  get  on  top  of  me,  then."  He  did  this, 
and  at  the  first  leap  John  was  to  earth. 

"Foil !  foil !"  says  John.  "What !  thou  art  not  bad 
at  the  trade  thyself.  Thou  hadst  best  come  back  till 
we  try  thee  again."  And  with  nails  and  teeth  he 
fastened  on  the  Mathon,  till  they  reached  the  end  of 


170  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES. 

the  two  hundred  miles  and  a  giant's  house.  "Now, 
John,"  said  the  Mathon,  "  thou  shalt  go  to  pass  the 
night  in  this  giant's  house ;  thou  wilt  find  him  pretty 
grumpy,  but  say  thou  that  it  was  the  brown  bear  of  the 
green  glen  that  set  thee  here  for  a  night's  share,  and 
don't  thou  be  afraid  that  thou  wilt  not  get  share  and 
comfort."  And  he  left  the  bear  to  go  to  the  giant's 
house.  "  Son  of  Ireland's  King,"  says  the  giant,  "  thy 
coming  was  in  the  prophecy  ;  but  if  I  did  not  get  tly 
father,  I  have  got  his  son.  I  don't  know  whether  I  will 
put  thee  in  the  earth  with  my  feet,  or  in  the  sky  with 
my  breath."  "  Thou  wilt  do  neither  of  either,"  said 
John,  "for  it  is  the  brown  bear  of  the  green  glen  that 
set  me  here."  "Come  in,  son  of  Erin's  king,"  said  he, 
"  and  thou  shalt  be  well  taken  to  this  night."  And  as 
he  said,  it  was  true.  John  got  meat  and  drink  without 
stint.  But  to  make  a  long  tale  short,  the  bear  took 
John  day  after  day  to  the  third  giant.  "  Now,"  says 
the  bear,  "I  have  not  much  acquaintance  with  this 
giant,  but  thou  wilt  not  be  long  in  his  house  when  thou 
must  wrestle  with  him.  And  if  he  is  too  hard  on  thy 
back,  say  thou,  '  If  I  had  the  brown  bear  of  the  green 
glen  here,  that  was  thy  master.'"  As  soon  as  John 
went  in — "  Ai !  ai ! !  or  ee  !  ee  ! !"  says  the  giant,  "  If  I 
did  not  get  thy  father,  I  have  got  his  son ;"  and  to  grips 
they  go.  They  would  make  the  boggy  bog  of  the 
rocky  rock.  In  the  hardest  place  they  would  sink  to 
the  knee ;  in  the  softest,  up  to  the  thighs ;  and  they 
would  bring  wells  of  spring  water  from  the  face 
of  every  rock.  The  giant  gave  John  a  sore  wrench  or 
two.  "Foil!  foil!"  says  he,  "if  I  had  here  the 
brown  bear  of  the  green  glen,  thy  leap  would  not 
be  so  hearty."  And  no  sooner  spoke  he  the  word 
than  the  worthy  bear  was  at  his  side.     "Yes!  yes!" 


THE  BROWN  BEAR  OF  THE  GREEN  GLEN.  171 

says  the  giant,  "son  of  Erin's  king,  now  I  know 
thy  matter  better  than  thou  dost  thyself."  So  it  was 
that  the  giant  ordered  his  shepherd  to  bring  home  the 
best  wether  he  had  in  the  hill,  and  to  throw  his  car- 
cass before  the  great  door.  "Now,  John,"  says  the  giant, 
"an  eagle  will  come  and  she  will  settle  on  the  carcass  of 
•^  /  this  wether,  and  there  is  a  wart  on  the  ear  of  this  eagle 
which  thou  must  cut  off  her  with  this  sword,  but  a  drop 
of  blood  thou  must  not  draw."  The  eagle  came,  but  she-j^,^  ^Ji.  (clJJ* 
was  not  long  eating  when  John  drew  close  to  her,  and 
with  one  stroke  he  cut  the  wart  off  her  without  draw- 
ing one  drop  of  blood.  ("  Och  !  is  not  that  a  fearful 
lie?")  "Now,"  said  the  eagle,  "come  on  the  root  of 
my  two  wings,  for  I  know  thy  matter  better  than 
thou  dost  thyself."  He  did  this ;  and  they  were  now 
on  sea,  and  now  on  land,  and  now  on  the  wing,  till 
they  reached  the  Green  Isle.  "  Now,  John,"  says  she, 
"  be  quick,  and  fill  thy  three  bottles ;  remember  that 
the  black  dogs  are  away  just  now."  ("  What  dogs?" 
"  Black  dogs ;  dost  thou  not  know  that  they  always  had 
black  dogs  chasing  the  Gregorach  ! ")  When  he  filled 
the  bottles  with  the  water  out  of  the  well,  he  sees 
a  little  house  beside  him.  John  said  to  himself  that 
he  would  go  in,  and  that  he  would  see  what  was  in 
it.  And  the  first  chamber  he  opened,  he  saw  a  full 
bottle.  ("  And  what  was  in  it  ?  "  "  What  should  be  in 
it  but  whisky.")  He  filled  a  glass  out  of  it,  and  he 
drank  it ;  and  when  he  was  going,  he  gave  a  glance, 
and  the  bottle  was  as  full  as  it  was  before.  "I  will 
have  this  bottle  along  with  the  bottles  of  water,"  says 
he. 

Then  he  went  into  another  chamber,  and  he  saw  a 
loaf ;  he  took  a  slice  out  of  it,  but  the  loaf  was  as 
whole   as  it  was   before.      "  Ye   gods  !  I  won't  leave 

3  .....  ^t^^jj  ' £"•"•  Tofvl,fl 


172  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

thee,"  says  John.  He  went  on  thus  till  he  came  to 
another  chamber.  He  saw  a  great  cheese  ;  he  took  a 
slice  off  the  cheese,  but  it  was  as  whole  as  ever.  "  I 
will  have  this  along  with  the  rest,"  says  he.  Then  he 
went  to  another  chamber,  and  he  saw  laid  there  the 
very  prettiest  little  jewel  of  a  woman  he  ever  saw.  "It 
were  a  great  pity  not  to  kiss  thy  lips,  my  love,"  says 
John. 

Soon  after,  John  jumped  on  top  of  the  eagle,  and  she 
took  him  on  the  self  same  steps  till  they  reached  the 
house  of  the  big  giant,  and  they  were  paying  rent  to 
the  giant,  and  there  was  the  sight  of  tenants  and  giants 
and  meat  and  drink.  "  Well !  John,"  says  the  giant, 
"  didst  thou  see  such  drink  as  this  in  thy  father's  house 
in  Erin  ?  "  "  Pooh,"  says  John,  "  Hoo  !  my  hero  ; 
thou  other  man,  I  have  a  drink  that  is  unlike  it." 
He  gave  the  giant  a  glass  out  of  the  bottle,  but  the 
bottle  was  as  full  as  it  was  before.  "  Well !  "  said  the 
giant,  "  I  will  give  thee  myself  two  hundred  notes,  a 
bridle  and  a  saddle  for  the  bottle."  "  It  is  a  bargain, 
then,"  says  John,  "  but  that  the  first  sweetheart  I  ever 
had  must  get  it  if  she  comes  the  way."  "  She  will  get 
that,"  says  the  giant;  but,  to  make  the  long  story  short, 
he  left  each  loaf  and  cheese  with  the  two  other  giants, 
with  the  same  covenant  that  the  first  sweetheart  he  ever 
had  should  get  them  if  she  came  the  way. 

Now  John  reached  his  father's  big  town  in  Erin, 
and  he  sees  his  two  brothers  as  he  left  them — the 
"  blackguardan  ! "  "  You  had  best  come  with  me,  lads," 
says  he,  "  and  you  will  get  a  dress  of  cloth,  and  a  horse 
and  a  saddle  and  bridle  each."  And  so  they  did ; 
but  when  they  were  near  to  their  father's  house,  the 
brothers  thought  that  they  had  better  kill  him,  and  so 
it  was  that  they  set  on  him.     And  when  they  thought 


THE  BROWN  BEAR  OF  THE  GREEN  GLEN.     173 

he  was  dead,  they  threw  him  behind  a  dike  ;  and  they 
took  from  him  the  three  bottles  of  water,  and  they 
went  home.  John  was  not  too  long  here,  when  his 
father's  smith  came  the  way  with  a  cart  load  of  rusty 
iron.  John  called  out,  "  Whoever  the  Christian  is  that 
is  there,  oh  !  that  he  should  help  him."  The  smith 
caught  him,  and  he  threw  John  amongst  the  iron ; 
and  because  the  iron  was  so  rusty,  it  went  into  each 
wound  and  sore  that  John  had  ;  and  so  it  was,  that 
John  became  rough  skinned  and  bald.  Here  we  will 
leave  John,  and  we  will  go  back  to  the  pretty  little 
jewel  that  John  left  in  the  Green  Isle.  She  became 
pale  and  heavy ;  and  at  the  end  of  three  quarters,  she 
had  a  fine  lad  son.  "  Oh  !  in  all  the  great  world,"  says 
she,  "how  did  I  find  this?"  "Foil!  foil!"  says  the  hen- 
wife,  "  don't  let  that  set  thee  thinking.  Here's  for 
thee  a  bird,  and  as  soon  as  he  sees  the  father  of  thy 
son,  he  will  hop  on  the  top  of  his  head."  The 
Green  Isle  was  gathered  from  end  to  end,  and  the 
people  were  put  in  at  the  back  door  and  out  at  the 
front  door ;  but  the  bird  did  not  stir,  and  the  babe's  ' 
father  was  not  found.  Now  here,  she  said  she  would 
go  through  the  world  altogether  till  she  should  find  the 
father  of  the  babe.  Then  she  came  to  the  house  of 
the  big  giant  and  sees  the  bottle.  "  Ai !  ai ! ! "  said 
she,  "  who  gave  thee  this  bottle  % "  Said  the  giant,  "  It 
was  young  John,  son  of  Erin's  king,  that  left  it."  r<rx  Lt**^  r 
"Well,  then,  the  bottle  is  mine,"  said  she.  But  to  ij^  $  k^Ai 
make  the  long  story  short,  she  came  to  the  house  of  ^^  wvy>A  ~*> 
each  giant,  and  she  took  with  her  each  bottle,  and  each 
loaf,  and  each  cheese,  till  at  length  and  at  last  she  came 
to  the  house  of  the  king  of  Erin.  Then  the  five-fifths 
of  Erin  were  gathered,  and  the  bridge  of  nobles  of  the 
people  ;  they  were  put  in  at  the  back  door  and  out  at 


174  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

the  front  door,  but  the  bird  did  not  stir.  Then  she 
asked  if  there  was  one  other  or  any  one  else  at  all  in 
Erin,  that  had  not  been  here.  "  I  have  a  bald  rough- 
skinned  gillie  in  the  smithy,"  said  the  smith,  "but," — 
"Rough  on  or  off,  send  him  here,"  says  she.  No  sooner 
did  the  bird  see  the  head  of  the  bald  rough-skinned 
gillie,  than  he  took  a  flight  and  settles  on  the  bald  top 
of  the  rough-skinned  lad.  She  caught  him  and  kissed 
him.     Thou  art  the  father  of  my  babe." 

"But,  John,"  says  the  great  king  of  Erin,  "It  is 
thou  that  gottest  the  bottles  of  water  for  me."  "  In- 
deed, 'twas  I,"  says  John.  "Weel,  then,  what  art  thou 
willing  to  do  to  thy  two  brothers  ?  "  "  The  very  thing 
they  wished  to  do  to  me,  do  for  them ; "  and  that 
same  was  done.  John  married  the  daughter  of  the 
king  of  the  Green  Isle,  and  they  made  a  great  rich 
wedding  that  lasted  seven  days  and  seven  years, 
and  thou  couldst  but  hear  leeg,  leeg,  and  beeg,  beeg, 
solid  sound  and  peg  drawing.  Gold  a-crushing  from 
the  soles  of  their  feet  to  the  tips  of  their  fingers,  the 
length  of  seven  years  and  seven  days. 


SGEULACHD  AIR  MATH-GHAMHAINN  DONN  A 
GHLLNN  UAINNE. 

Bha  rlgh  air  Eirinn  aon  uair,  aig  an  robh  triiiir  mhac,  's  b'  ainm 
don  fhear  a  b'  oige  Iain,  's  bha  e  air  a  radh  nach  robh  e  glic  na 
leoir,  agus  chaill  an  righ  saoghalta  so  sealladh  a  shiiilean,  's  lugh 
nan  cas.  Thubhairt  an  da  bhrathair  bu  shine  gun  rachadh  iadsan 
air  t6ir  tri  botuil  usige  do'n  eilean  uaine  a  bha  'n  iomall  torra 
domhain,  agus  'se  bh'  ann  gun  d'  fhalbh  an  da  bhrathair  so. 
Thubhairt  an  t-amadan  nach  creideadh  e  fein  nach  falbhadh  e 
cuideachd,  agus  a  cheud  bhailem6r  do  'n  d'  thaing  e  ann  an 
rloghachd  athar,  faicear  a  dha  bhrathair  an  sin  'nam  blaigeartan  ! 
"  0  a  bhalacha  !  "  ars'  am  fear  6g,  "  an  ann  mar  so  a  tha  sibhse.'> 


MATH-GHAMHAINN  DONN  A  GHLINN  UAINNE.         175 

"  Air  luathas  do  chas,"  ars'  iadsan,   "thoir  an  tigh  ort  air  neo 
bithidh  do  bheatha  againn."     "  Na  bitheadh  eagal  oirbh  romham 
cha  'n  fhiach  leamsa  fanachd  maille  ribh."     Dh'fhalbh  Iain  an  so 
air  a  thurus,  gus  an  d'  thainig  e  gu  fasaeh  m6r  do  cboille.     Hu  ! 
Huth  !  ars'  Iain  ris  fein,  "  Cha  'neil  e  cneasda  dhornhsa  a'  choille 
so  a  choiseachd  leam  f  hem. "     Bha  'n  oidhche  a'  tighinn  a  nis,  's  i 
fas  gu  math  dorcha.     Ceangailear  Iain  an  t-each  bacach,  ban  a 
bha  foidhe  ri  bun  craoibhe  's  chaidh  e  fern  suas  'na  barr.     Cha 
robh   e  ach  goirid  'na  barr  gus  am  fac  e  math-ghamhainn  a* 
tighinn  's  eibhleag  theine  na  bheul.     "  Thig  a  nuas,  a  mhic  rlgh 
Eirinn,"  ars' esan.      "  Gu  dearbh,  cha  d'  thig,   tha  mi  smaoin- 
teachadh  gu'  bheil  mi  nis  tearuinte  far  am  bheil  mi."     "Ach 
mur  d'  thig  thusa  nuas  th£id  mise  suas,"  arsa  'm  math-ghamh- 
ainn.    "  'M  bheil  thusa  'gam  ghabhail  'nam  amadan  cuideachd," 
thuirt  Iain.     Creutair  robagach,  liobarta  coltach  riutsa  a  strea- 
padh  chraobh.     "  Ach  mur  d'  thig  thusa  nuas,  theid  mise  suas,'* 
ars'  am  math-ghamhainn  's  e  'toirt  a  ghrad  laimh  air  streapadh 
na  craoibhe.     "  'S  dia  ni  thu  sin  fh&n,"  thuirt  Iain.     "  Fan  air 
t'  ais  fo  bhun  na  craoibhe,  mata,  's  theid  mi  sios  a  bhruidhinn 
riut."     Agus  dur  a  theirinn  mac  righ  Eirinn  a  nuas,  thainig  iad 
gu  cracaireachd.     Dh'  fhe6rich  a'  mhath-ghamhainn  dheth,  'an 
robh  an  t-acras  air?     u  Uill  le  'r  cead,"  ars'  Iain,  "tha  beagan 
orm  dheth  'sa  cheart  am  so  fein."     Thug  am  math-ghamhainn  an 
sgriob  uallach,  aighearach  'ud,  's  beirear  air  boc  earba.     "A nis, 
a  mhic  righ  Eirinnn,"  arsa  am  math-ghamhainn,  "  Co  's  fearr  leat 
do  chuid  do  'n  bhoc  bruich  na  amh."     "  An  seorsa  bidh  a  b' 
abhairt  dhornhsa  fhaotainn,  bhitheadh  seorsa  plotadh  bruich  air,:> 
ars'  Iain.     Agus  'sann  a  so  mar  thachair.     Fhuair  Iain  a  chuid 
fhein  r6iste.     "A  nis,"  arsa  'm  math-ghamhainn,   "  luidh  sios 
eadar  mo  sp5gan-sa,   's  cha  'n  eagal  fuachd  no  acrais  dhuit  gu 
madainn."    Moch   'sa  mhadainn,    dh'  fhoighneachd   am   math- 
ghamhainn,    "Am  bheil  thu  'd  chadal,   a  mhic  rlgh  Eirinn?'* 
"  Cha  'n  'eil  anabarrach  trom,"  thuirt  esan.     "  Tha  'n  t-am  dhuit 
a  bhi  air  do  bhuinn  mata,  tha  'n  t-astar  fada,  da  cheud  mile  ;  ach 
am  bheil  thu  'nad  'mharcaiche  math,  Iain  ?  "     "  Tha  na'  s  miosa 
na  mi  air  amannan,"  thuirt  esan.     "  'S  fearr  dhuit  tighinn  air 
mo  mhuinn  mata."     Kinn  e  so,  agus  air  a  cheud  leum,  bha  Iain 
ri  talamh.     "  Foil  !  Foil !  "  ars'  Iain,  "  de  'cha  'n   'eil  thu  fhein 
dona  air  a  cheaird  !     'S  fearr  dhuit  tighinn  air  t-ais  gus  am  feuch 
sinn   a  rithist   thu  ; "  's  le  iongan  's  fiaclan  ghreimich  e  ris  a 
mha'ghan,  gus  an  d'  rainig  iad  ceann  an  da  cheud  mile,  's  tigh. 


176  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

famhair.  "  Nis  Iain,"  arsa  'm  ma'ghan,  "  theid  thu  chuir 
seachad  na  h-oidhche  ann  an  tigh  an  fhamhair  so."  Gheibh  thu 
e  gu  maith  gno,  ach  abair  thusa  gur  e  mathgamhainn  donn  a' 
ghlinn  uaine,  a  chuir  thusa  an  so  air  son  cuid  oidhche,  agus  na 
biodh  eagal  ort  nach  fhaigh  thu  cuid  'us  comhnadh.  'S  dh' 
'fhag  am  mathgamhainn  e  'dol  gu  tigh  an  fhamhair.  "  A  mhic 
rlgh  Eirinn,"  ars'  am  famhair,  bha  'san  targradh  thu  bhi  tighinn, 
ach  mar  d'  fhuair  mi  t'  athair,  fhuair  mi  'mhac  ;  cha  'n  'eil  fios 
agam  co  dhiu  chuireas  mi  'san  talamh  thu  le  m'  chasan,  no  'san 
adhar  le  m'anail."  *'  Cha  dean  thu  aon  chuid  do  'n  da  chuid," 
thuirt  Iain,  oir  se  mathghamhainn  donn  a'  ghlinn  uaine  a 
chuir  mise  'n  so."  "  Thig  a  stigh,  a  mhic  rlgh  Eirinn,"  thuirt 
esan,  ' '  's  gheibh  thu  gabhail  agad  gu  maith  a  nochd  ; "  agus  mar 
thubhairt  b  'fhlor.  Fhuair  Iain  biadh  's  deoch  gun  ghainne  ;  ach 
gus  an  sgeulachd  fada  a  dheanamh  goirid,  thug  am  mathgamhainn 
Iain  latha  an  deigh  latha  gus  an  treas  famhair.  "A  nis,"  ars' 
am  mathgamhainn,  ' '  cha  'n  'eil  mdran  e61ais  agamsa  air  an 
fhamhair  so,  ach  cha  bhi  thu  fada  'na  thigh  dar  a  dh'  fheumas  tu 
dol  a  ghleachd  ris,  agus  ma  bhitheas  e  tullidh  's  cruaidh  air  do 
shon,  abair  thusa  na  'm  biodh  agamsa  ma'ghan  donn  a  ghlinn 
uaine,  b'e  sin  do  maighstir."  Co  luath  'sa  chaidh  Iain  a  stigh, 
"  Ai !  Ai  !  ars'  am  famhair  m6r,  mar  d'fhuair  mi  t'  athair,  fhuair 
mi  'mhac,  agus  'sa  cheile  ghabh  iad  ;  's  dheanadh  iad  a  bhogan 
don  chreagan — an  t-aite  bu  chruaidhe  rachadh  iad  foidhe  gu  'n 
gluinean  's  an  t-aite  bu  bhuige  gu  'n  sleisdean,  's  bheireadh 
iad  fuaranan  fior-uisge  a  h-aodann  gach  creagain.  Thug  am 
famhair  fasgadh  goirt  na  dithis  do  dh'  Iain.  "Foil!  Foil!" 
thuirt  esan,  "  na'm  biodh  agamsa  an  so  mathgamhainn  donn  a' 
ghlinn  uaine,  cha  bhiodh  do  leum  co  sunndach  ;  "  agus  cha  luaith 
a  labhair  e  'm  facal  na  bha  am  ma'ghan  c6ir  ri  'thaobh.  "  Seadh ! 
Seadh  ! "  ars'  am  famhair,  "  a  mhic  righ  Eirinn,  tha  fios  agam  a  nis 
air  do  ghnothach  n'  is  fearr  na  tha  agad  fhein. "  'Se  bh'  ann  gun 
d-6rduich  am  famhair  do  'n  chiobair  aige  am  molt  a  b'  fhearr  a 
bha  's  a'  bheinn  a  thoirt  dhachaidh,  agus  a'  chlosach  a  thilgeadh 
ma  choinneamh  an  doruis  mhoir.  "  A  nis,  Iain,  ars'  am  famhair, 
thig  iolaire,  agus  luidhidh  i  air  closach  a  mhuilt  so,  agus  tha 
foiuneamh  air  cluais  na  h-iolaire  so,  a  dh'  fheumas  tusa  a 
ghearradh  dhi  le  aon  bheum  leis  a'  claidheamh  so,  ach  deur  fola 
cha  'n  'fheud  thu  tharruinn."  Thainig  an  iolaire,  's  cha  robh  i 
fada  'g  itheadh  dar  a  theann  Iain  rithe,  's  le  aon  bheum  ghearr  e 
"m  foiuneamh  dhi  gun  aon  deur  fola  a  tharruinn.      "  Anis  arsa  'n 


UATH-GHAMHAINN  DONN  A  GHLINN  UAINNE.         177 

iolaire,  thig  air  bhun  mo  dlia  sgeithe,  bho  'n  a  tha  fios  agam  air 
do  ghnothuch  n'  is  fearr  na  th'  agad  fein."  Rinn  e  so,  agus  bha 
iad  uair  air  muir,  's  uair  air  talamh,  's  uair  air  an  sgiathan,  gus 
an  d'  rainig  iad  an  t-Eilean  uaine.  "  Nis  Iain,  ars'  ise,  bi  ealamh, 
's  lion  do  bhotuil ;  cuimhnichgu  bheil  na  coin  dhubha  air  falbh 
an  ceartair."  Nuair  a  lion  a  na  botuil  do  'n  uisge  as  an  tobar, 
faicear  tigb  beag  laimh  ris.  Thuirt  Iain  ris  fein  gu'n  rachadh  e 
stigh,  s  gu  'm  faiceadh  e  de  bh'  ann,  agus  a  cbeud  s6mar  a  dh' 
fhosgail  e,  chunnaic  e  botuil  Ian  do  dh-uisge  beatha,  lion  e  gloinne 
as,  's  dh'  61  e  'san  uair  a  dh'  61,  thug  e  suil,  's  bha  'm  botuil  cho 
Ian  sa  bha  e  roimhe.  "Bithidh  'ra  botuil  so  agam  comhla  ris 
na  botuil  uisge,"  ars'  esan.  Cliaidh  e  'n  sin  a  stigh  do  sheomar 
eile,  's  chunnaic  e  builionn ;  thug  e  sliseag  as,  ach  bha  'm 
builionn  cho  slan  sa  bha  e  roimhe.  "  Dia  cha  'n  fhag 
mi  thus',"  ars'  Iain.  Chaidh  e  air  aghaidh  mar  so  gus  an  d' 
rainig  e  seomar  eile  ;  chunnaic  e  mulachag  mhor  chaise,  thug 
e  sliseag  do  'n  mhulachaig,  ach  bha  i  cho  slan  sa  bha  i  roimhe. 
"  Bithidh  so  agam  c6mhla  ri  each,"  ars'  esan.  Chaidh  e  'n  sogu 
seomar  eile,  's  faicear  'na  luidhe  an  sin  ant-aon  ailleagan  boirionn- 
aich  bu  bhoidhche  a  chunnaic  e  riamh.  "  Bu  mh6r  am  beud  gun 
phog  beoil  a  thoirt  dhuit,  a  ghaoil,"  ars'  Iain.  Beagan  'na  dheigh 
so,  leum  Iain  air  muin  na  h-iolaire  's  thug  i  e  air  a  chas  cheum 
cheudna,  gus  an  d-rainig  iad  tigh  an  fhamhair  mhoir,  's  bha  iad 
a  paidheadh  a  mhail  do  'n  famhair,  agus  's  ann  an  sin  a  bha  'n 
sealladh  air  tuathanaich,  's  famhairean,  's  biadh,  's  deoch.  "  Uil, 
Iain,"  ars'  am  famhair,  "am  fac  thu  'leithid  so  do  dheoch  ann 
an  tigh  t'  athar  an  Eirinn."  "  Puth  ! "  ars'  Iain,  "  hu  ;  a  laochain, 
a  dhuine  eile,  tha  deoch  agamsa  nach  ionann."  Thug  e  gloinne 
do  'n  fhamhair  as  a  bhotul,  ach  bha  'm  botul  cho  Ian  'sa  bha  e 
roimhe.  "Mata,  ars'  am  famhair,  "  bheir  mi  fhein  da  cheud  nott 
dhuit  air  son  a'  bhotuil,  srian,  agus  diollaid."  '"S  bargain  e 
mata,"  ars'  Iain,  "ach  gu  'feum  an  ceud  leannan  a  bha  agamsa 
f haotainn  ma  thig  i  'n  rathad. "  ' '  Gheibh  i  sin, "  ars'  am  famhair, 
ach  gus  an  sgeulachd  fada  a  dheanamh  goirid,  dh'  fhag  e  gach 
builionn 's  gach  mulachag  aig  an  da  fhamhair  eile,  air  a'chumhnant 
cheudna  gu'  faigheadh  an  ceud  leannan  bha  aige-san  iad  na  'n  d' 
thigeadh  i  'n  rathad.  Rainig  Iain  an  so  baile  mor  athar  ann  an 
Eirinn,  's  faicear  a  dha  bhrathair  mar  dh'  fhag  e  iad  'nam  blaig- 
eartan.  *"S  fearr  dhuibh  tighinn  dhachaidh  leamsa,  'illean," 
ars'  esan,  's  gheibh  sibh  deis'  eudaich,  's  eaoh,  's  diollaid,  'a  srian 
am  fear  ;  agus  mur  so  rinn  iad  ;  ach  dar  a  bha  iad  dluth  do  thigh 

W 


178  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

an  athair,  smaoinich  a  bhraithrean  gum  b'fhearr  dhoibh  a 
mbarbhadh,  agus  's  e  bh'ann  gun  do  thoisich  iad  air,  's  dar  a 
sbaoil  leo  e  bbi  marbb,  thilg  iad  e  air  ciil  garraidh,  's  tbug  iad 
uaidb  na  tri  botuil  uisge,  's  dh'  fbalbb  iad  dbachaidh.  Cba 
robb  Iain  ro  fhada  an  so,  nuair  a  thainig  an  gobba  aig  atbair  an 
ratbad  le  Ian  cairt  do  db'  iarunn  meirgeach.  Ghlaodh  Iain  a 
macb  co  air  bith  an  criosduidh  bba  'n  sin,  0  !  e  dbeanamh  cobbair 
dhasan.  Rug  an  gobba  air,  's  thilg  e  Iain  am  measg  an  iaruinn, 
agus  leis  cho  meirgeach  'sa  bba  'n  t-iarrunn,  chaidb  e  aim's  gacb 
lot 's  creuchd  a  bb'  air  Iain,  agus  's  e  bb'  ann,  gun  do  cbinn  Iain 
maol,  carrach.  Fagaidb  sinn  Iain  an  so,  agus  tillidb  sinn  ris  an 
ailleagan  bhoidheach  a  dh'fhag  Iain  'san  eilean  uaine.  Cbinn  i 
'n  so  trom,  torracb,  breac,  ballacb.  'san  ceann  tri  raithean,  bha 
mac  breagh  gille  aice.  "0  air  an  t-saoghail  mhor,"  ars'  ise,  "  cia 
mar  a  fbuair  mise  so?"  "Foil!  Foil!"  ars'  a'  cbailleacb 
chearc,  "  na  cuireadb  sin  smaointeach  ort ;  so  dbuit  eun,  agus  co 
luath  sa  chi  e  athair  do  mhic,  leumaidb  e  air  mullach  a  chinn. 
Chaidb  an  t-eilean  uaine  a  chruinneachadh  bbo  cbeann  gu  ceann, 
's  an  sluagb  a  chur  a  stigh  air  an  dorus  chuil  's  amacb  air  an 
dorus  bheoil,  ach  cha  do  gbluais  an  t-eun,  's  cba  d'  fhuaireadh 
athair  an  leinibh.  Thubbairt  i  'n  so  gu  falbhadh  i  feadh  an  t- 
saogbail  gu  leir,  gus  am  faigbeadh  i  athair  a  leinibh.  Thainig  i 
'n  so  gu  tigh  an  fhambair  mhoir,  agus  faicear  am  botul.  "  Ai  ! 
Ai  !"  deir  ise,  "  co  thug  dhuit  am  botul  so  ?  "  Tbuirt  am  famhair, 
"  'Se  Iain  6g  mac  righ  Eirinn  a  db'  fhag  e."  "  Mata  's  leamsa  am 
botul,"  tbuirt  ise,  ach  gu  an  sgeulachd  fad'  a  dbeanamh  goirid, 
thainig  i  gu  tigh  gach  famhair,  's  thug  i  leatha  gacb  botul 's  gach 
builionn  's  gach  mulachag  chaise ;  gas  ma  dheireadh  thall, 
thainig  i  gu  tigh  righ  Eirinn.  Chaidb  'n  so  cuig  cuigeamh  na  h- 
Eirinn  a  cbruinneacbadh  s  drochaid  cheudan  namaith.  Chaidh 
an  cur  a  stigh  air  an  dorus  chuil,  's  a  mach  air  an  dorus  bhe6il, 
ach  cha  do  gbluais  an  t-eun.  "  Dh'  fbeoraich  i  'n  so,  an  robh  a 
h-aon  na  h-aon  idir  eile  ann  an  Eirinn  nach  rubh  'n  so  ? "  "  Tha 
gille  maol,  carrrch  aims  a'  cbeardach  agamsa,"  thuirt  an  gobba 
ach  ;  "  "  Car  air  na  dbeth,  cuir  an  so  e  "  deir  ise  ;  's  cha  bo  luaithe 
a  chunnaic  an  t-eun  ceann  a  gbille  mhaoil  charraich  na  'thug  e 
itea^  s  luidhear  air  maul  mhullaich  a'  gbille  charrich.  Rug  i  air 
's  pbdg  i  e."  "  'S  tusa  atbair  mo  leinibh."  "  Ach  Iain,"  arsa 
righ  mor  Eirinn,  " 's  tusa  a  fbuair  na  botuil  uisge  dhombsa." 
"Ach  gu  dearbh  's  mi,"  ars'  lain.  "  Uil,  mata,  de  tha  thu 
toileach  a  dbeanamh  ri  M'  dhitbis  bbraithrean  ? "     "A  cheart 


THE  BROWN  BEAR  OF  THE  GREEN  GLEN.     179 

rud  a  bha  iadsan  toileach  a  dheanamh  ormsa,  cur  as  doibh  ; " 
agus  's  e  sin  fein  a  rinneadh.  Phos  Iain  'a  nighean  righ  an  Eilean 
Uaine,  's  rinn  iad  banais  mhor  ghreadlmach  a  mhair  seachd  lathan 
's  seachd  bliadhna  's  cha  chluinneadh  tu  ach  lig,  lig,  's  big,  big, 
fuaim  tail  's  tarruing  pinne,  or  'ga  phtonnadh  bhobhonu  an  coise 
gu  barr  am  me6ir  fad  sheachd  bliadhna  's  sheachd  lathan. 

Written  from  the  recitation  of  John  MacDonald,  travelling 
tinker.  He  wanders  all  over  the  Highlands,  and  lives  in  a  tent 
with  his  family.  He  can  neither  read  nor  write.  He  repeats 
some  of  his  stories  by  heart  fluently,  and  almost  in  the  same 
words.  I  have  followed  his  recitation  as  closely  as  possible,  but 
it  was  exceedingly  difficult  to  keep  him  stationary  for  any  length 
of  time.  Hector  Urquhart. 

The  tinker's  comments  I  got  from  the  transcriber.  John  him- 
self is  a  character ;  he  is  about  fifty  years  of  age  ;  his  father,  an 
old  soldier,  is  alive  and  about  eighty  ;  and  there  are  numerous 
younger  branches  ;  and  they  were  all  encamped  under  the  root 
of  a  tree  in  a  quarry  close  to  Inveraray,  at  Easter  1859. 

The  father  tells  many  stories,  but  his  memory  is  failing.  The 
son  told  me  several,  and  I  have  a  good  many  of  them  written 
down.  They  both  recite  ;  they  do  not  simply  tell  the  story,  but 
act  it  with  changing  voice  and  gesture,  as  if  they  took  an 
interest  in  it,  and  entered  into  the  spirit  and  fun  of  the  tale. 
They  belong  to  the  race  of  "  Cairds, "and  are  as  much  nomads  as 
the  gipsies  are. 

The  father,  to  use  the  son's  expression,  "never  saw  a  school." 
He  served  in  the  42d  in  his  youth.  One  son  makes  horn  spoons, 
and  does  not  know  a  single  story  ;  the  other  is  a  sporting  cha- 
racter, a  famous  fisherman,  who  knows  all  the  lochs  and  rivers 
in  the  Highlands,  makes  flies,  and  earns  money  in  summer  by 
teaching  Southerns  to  fish.  His  ambition  is  to  become  an  under- 
keeper. 

This  bear  story  is  like  a  great  mauy  others  which  I  have  got 
elsewhere  in  the  Highlands,  but  I  have  none  told  exactly  in  the 
same  way.  It  should  be  much  longer,  but  the  wandering  spirit 
of  the  man  would  not  let  him  rest  to  dictate  his  story.  They  had 
to  move  to  an  outhouse  and  let  him  roam  about  amongst  the 
shavings,  and  swing  his  arms,  before  this  much  was  got  out  of 
him. 


180  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

I  have  found  the  same  restlessness  amongst  wanderers  else- 
where. I  could  never  get  Lapps  to  sit  still  for  ten  minutes  when 
I  tried  to  draw  them  ;  and  the  air  of  a  house  seemed  to  oppress 
them.  I  have  hitherto  failed  in  catching  an  English  tinker, 
whom  I  let  slip  one  day  in  London,  and  to  whom  I  promised  good 
pay  if  he  would  come  and  dictate  a  story  which  he  had  told  me. 
There  is  a  similar  wandering  population  in  Norway  and  Sweden. 
They  own  boats  and  carts,  and  pretend  to  magic  arts  ;  and  are 
feared  and  detested  by  householders  as  wizards  and  thieves.  It 
is  said  that  these  Norwegian  wanderers  hold  a  meeting  on  a  hill 
near  Christiania,  once  a  year,  and  barter  and  sell,  and  exchange 
whatever  they  may  have  acquired  in  their  travels.  I  have  heard 
a  great  deal  about  them  from  peasants.  I  have  seen  them,  but 
very  seldom  in  Norway.  I  once  met  a  party  in  the  gloaming  on 
a  Swedish  road,  and  a  little  girl,  who  was  following  and  driving  a 
gentleman  in  a  posting-cart,  when  she  met  them,  flogged  her 
horse  and  galloped  for  dear  life. 

There  is  a  similar  race  in  Spain,  and  though  they  are  not  all 
gipsies,  they  are  classed  with  them.  The  history  of  these  wan- 
derers would  be  curious  if  it  could  be  learned.  Borrow's  Bible  m 
Spain  gives  some  insight,  but  there  is  still  much  to  be  known 
about  them.  "London  Labour  and  the  Poor,"  and  reports  on 
"  Ragged  Schools,"  treat  of  similar  people. 

This  story  may  be  compared  with  Grimm's  Water  of  Life. 


C         r       ( 


>«?& 


>ui&#&& 


OrfWJvtf 


a) 


THE  THREE  SOLDIERS. 

From  James  MacLachlan,  servant,  Islay. 

THERE  was  before  a  regiment  in  Dublin  in 
Erin,  and  it  was  going  a  long  journey.  There 
was  a  sergeant,  a  corporal,  and  a  single  soldier,  who 
had  sweethearts  in  the  town.  They  went  to  see  them 
on  the  day  that  they  were  to  go,  and  they  stayed  too 
long,  and  the  regiment  left  them ;  they  followed  it, 
and  they  were  going  and  going  till  the  night  came  on 
them.  They  saw  a  light  a  long  way  from  them ;  and 
if  it  was  a  long  way  from  them,  it  was  not  long  they 
were  in  reaching  it.  They  went  in,  the  floor  was 
ready  swept,  and  a  fire  on  it,  and  no  one  in ;  they 
sat  at  the  fire  toasting  themselves  ;  they  were  not  long 
there  when  the  single  soldier  rose,  to  whom  was  the 
name  of  John,  to  look  what  was  in  the  chamber,  be- 
cause there  was  a  light  in  it.  There  was  there  a  board 
covered  with  every  sort  of  meat,  and  a  lighted  candle 
on  it ;  he  went  up,  he  began  to  eat,  and  the  rest  be- 
gan to  hinder  him,  for  that  he  had  no  business  with  it. 
When  they  saw  that  he  did  not  stop,  they  went  up 
and  they  began  themselves.  There  were  three  beds  in 
the  chamber,  and  one  of  them  went  to  lie  in  each  bed  ; 
they  had  not  laid  long  when  three  great  red  girls 
came  in,  and  one  of  them  stretched  herself  near  each 
one  of  the  beds  ;  and  when  they  saw  the  time  fitting 


hr*y?& 


182  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES. 

in  the  morning,  they  rose  and  went  away.  When  the 
girls  rose,  it  could  not  be  known  that  a  bit  had  ever 
come  off  the  board.  They  sat  and  they  took  their 
meat.  The  sergeant  said  that  they  had  better  follow 
the  regiment ;  and  John  said  that  they  should  not  fol- 
low it ;  as  long  as  he  could  get  meat  and  rest  that  he 
would  not  go.  When  dinner  time  came  they  sat  and 
they  took  their  dinner.  The  sergeant  said  they  had 
better  go;  and  John  said  that  they  should  not  go. 
When  supper  time  came  they  sat  and  they  took  their 
supper ;  after  supping  they  went  to  lie  down,  each  one 
to  his  own  bed.  The  girls  came  this  night  too,  and 
went  to  lie  down  as  before.  In  the  morning  when 
they  saw  the  time  fitting,  they  rose  and  they  went 
away.  W  en  the  lads  rose  the  board  was  covered, 
and  it  could  not  be  known  that  a  bit  had  ever  come 
off  it.  They  sat  and  they  took  their  meat ;  and  when 
they  took  their  meat,  the  sergeant  said  that  they  would 
go  at  all  events.  John  said  that  they  should  not  go. 
They  took  their  dinner  and  their  supper  as  they  used  ; 
they  went  to  lie  down ;  the  girls  came  and  they  lay 
down  after  them.  In  the  morning  the  eldest  gave  the 
sergeant  a  purse,  and  every  time  he  would  unloose  it, 
it  would  be  full  of  gold  and  silver. 

She  said  to  the  middle  one,   "  What  wilt  thou  give 

,  t~U/. "W  to   thine  1 "      "I   will   give   him   a   towel,    and   every 

)!**!»•  ^'time  he  spreads  it  it  will  be  full  of  every  sort  of  meat." 

j^-e^.She  gave  the  towel  to  the  corporal;  and  she  said  to 

the  youngest,  "  What  wilt  thou  give  to  thine  own  1 " 

i    "  I  will  give_  him  a  whistle,  and  every  time  he  plays 

it  he  will  be  in  the  very  micldle  of  the  regiment."     She 

gave  him  the  whistle ;  they  left   their   blessing   with 

them,    and    they   went   away.       "  I   wont    let   it   rest 

here,"  said  John;    "I  will  know  who  they  are  before 


THE  THREE   SOLDIERS.  183 

I  go  further  forward."  He  followed  them,  and  he 
saw  them  going  down  a  glen  ;  and  when  he  was  about 
to  be  down,  they  came  to  meet  him,  crying.  "  What  is 
the  matter  with  you  ! "  says  he.  "  Much  is  the  matter 
with  us,"  said  they,  "that  we  are  under  charms,  till 
we  find  three  lads  who  will  spend  three  nights  with 
us  without  putting  a  question  to  us  ;  and  if  thou  hadst 
stayed  without  following  us  we  were  free."  Is  there 
any  way  that  you  can  get  free  but  that !  "  said  he. 
"  There  is,"  said  they.  "  There  is  a  tree  at  the  end  of 
the  house,  and  if  you  come  at  the  end  of  a  day  and 
year  and  pluck  up  the  tree,  we  were  free."  John 
turned  back  where  the  rest  were,  and  he  told  them 
how  it  happened  to  him ;  and  they  gave  this  ad- 
vice to  each  other  that  they  should  return  back  to 
Dublin  again,  because  it  was  not  worth  their  while 
to  follow  the  regiment.  They  returned  back  to 
Dublin. 

That  night  John  said, — "  I  had  better  go  to  see 
the  king's  daughter  to-night."  "  Thou  had'st  better 
stay   in   the   house,"   said  the  rest,   "  than  go  there." 

"  I  will  go  there,  at  all  events,"  says  he.  He  went 
and  he  reached  the  king's  house ;  he  struck  at  the 
door,  one  of  the  gentlewomen  asked  him  what  he 
wanted;  and  he  said  that  he  wished  to  be  speaking 
to  the  king's  daughter.  The  king's  daughter  came 
where  he  was,  and  she  asked  what  business  he  had 
with  her.  "I  will  give  thee  a  whistle,"  said  he,  "and 
when  thou  playest  it  thou  wilt  be  in  the  middle  of  such 
a  regiment."  When  she  got  the  whistle  she  drove 
him  down  stairs,  and  she  shut  the  door  on  him. 
1  How  went  it  with  thee  ?"  said  they.  "  She  wheedled 
the  whistle  from  me,"  said  he.  He  did  not  stop 
till   he   had   beguiled   a  loan   of   the  purse   from  the 


184  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

sergeant.  "I  had  better,"  said  he,  "go  to  see  the 
king's  daughter  again."  He  went  away  and  he 
reached  the  house ;  he  saw  the  king's  daughter ;  she 
wheedled  the  purse  from  him,  and  drove  him  down 
stairs,  as  she  did  before  ;  and  he  turned  back.  He  did 
not  stop  till  he  beguiled  a  loan  of  the  towel  from  the 
corporal.  He  went  again  where  the  king's  daughter 
was.  "  "What  wilt  thou  give  me  this  journey  ? "  said 
she.  "  A  towel,  and  when  it  is  opened  it  will  be  full 
of  every  sort  of  meat."  "Let  me  see  it,"  said  she. 
"  We  will  spread  it  out,"  said  he.  He  spread  it  out, 
and  there  was  a  corner  that  would  not  lie  right.  He 
said  to  her  to  stand  on  the  corner ;  she  stood  on  it ; 
he  stood  himself  on  another  corner,  and  he  wished  to 
be  in  the  uttermost  isle  of  the  deep ;  and  himself 
and  the  king's  daughter,  and  the  towel,  were  in  it  in 
five  minutes.  There  was  the  very  prettiest  island  that 
man  ever  saw,  and  nothing  in  it  but  trees  and  fruits. 
There  they  were,  going  through  the  island  backwards 
and  forwards,  and  sleep  came  on  him.  They  came  to  a 
pretty  little  hollow,  and  he  laid  his  head  in  her  lap ; 
and  he  took  a  death  grip  of  her  apron,  in  order  that 
she  should  not  get  away  without  his  perceiving  her. 
When  he  slept  she  loosed  the  apron  j  she  left  him 
there  ;  she  took  the  towel  with  her ;  she  stood  on  it ; 
3  ^^^{Lr«^  she  wished  herself  to  be  in  her  father's  house,  and  she 
frf"  was  in  it.  When  he  awoke  he  had  nothing  to  get,  he 
had  nothing  to  see  but  trees  and  birds ;  he  was  then 
keeping  himself  alive  with  the  fruits  of  the  island,  and 
hit  upon  apples ;  and  when  he  would  eat  one  sort  of 
them  they  would  put  a  deer's  head  on  him ;  and  when 
he  would  eat  another  sort  of  them,  they  would  put  it 
off  him. 

One  day  he  gathered  a  great  many  of  the  apples, 


THE   THREE   SOLDIERS.  185 

and  he  put  the  one  sort  in  the  one  end  of  the  pock, 
and  the  other  sort  in  the  other  end.  He  saw  a  vessel 
going  past,  he  waved  to  her ;  a  boat  came  to  shore, 
and  they  took  him  on  board.  The  captain  took  him 
down  to  meat,  and  he  left  the  pock  above.  The  sailors 
opened  the  pock  to  see  what  was  in  it;  when  they 
saw  that  apples  were  in  it,  they  began  to  eat  them. 
They  ate  the  sort  that  would  put  deers'  horns  on  them, 
and  they  began  fighting  till  they  were  like  to  break 
the  vessel.  When  the  captain  heard  the  row,  he  came 
up ;  and  when  he  saw  them,  he  said,  "  Thou  bad  man, 
what  hast  thou  done  to  my  men  now  V1  "  What," 
said  John,  "made  thy  men  so  impudent  that  they 
would  go  and  look  into  any  man's  pock  ? "  "  What 
wilt  thou  give  me,"  said  John,  "if  I  leave  them  as 
they  were  before  1 "  The  skipper  took  fright,  and  he 
said  that  he  would  give  him  the  vessel  and  cargo  at 
the  first  port  they  reached.  Here  he  opened  the  pock, 
and  he  gave  them  the  other  sort,  and  the  horns  fell  off 
them.  It  was  a  cargo  of  gold  was  on  the  ship,  and 
it  was  to  Dublin  she  was  going.  When  they  ar- 
rived the  captain  said  to  him  to  be  taking  care  of  the 
vessel  and  cargo,  that  he  was  done  with  it.  "Be 
patient,"  said  John,  "till  we  see  how  it  goes  with  us 
at  the  end  of  a  few  days."  He  went  away  on  the 
morrow  to  sell  the  apples  about  the  town  with  nothing 
on  but  torn  clothes.  He  went  up  through  the  town, 
and  he  came  opposite  the  king's  house,  and  he  saw  the 
king's  daughter  with  her  head  out  of  the  window.  She 
asked  that  a  pound  of  the  apples  should  be  sent  up  to 
her.  He  said  she  should  try  how  they  would  agree 
with  her  first.  He  threw  up  an  apple  to  her  of  the 
sort  that  would  put  a  deer's  head  on  her ;  when  she 
ate  the  apple  there  came  a  deer's  head  and  horns  on 


186  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

her.  The  king  sent  forth  word,  that  if  any  man  what- 
soever could  be  found,  who  would  heal  his  daughter, 
that  he  should  get  a  peck  of  gold,  and  a  peck  of  silver, 
and  herself  to  marry.  She  was  thus  many  days  and 
no  man  coming  that  could  do  any  good  at  all.  John 
came  to  the  door  with  the  torn  clothes,  asking  to  get 
in ;  and  when  they  saw  his  like,  they  would  not  let 
him  in ;  but  she  had  a  little  brother  who  saw  them 
keeping  him  out,  and  he  told  it  to  his  father ;  and  his 
father  said,  "Though  it  were  the  beggar  of  the  green  !  " 
AVord  went  after  him  that  he  should  return,  and  he 
returned.  The  king  said  to  him,  "  Could  he  heal  his 
daughter  ? ''  and  he  said  "that  he  would  try  it."  They 
took  him  up  to  the  chamber  where  she  was.  He  sat, 
and  he  took  a  book  out  of  his  pocket,  with  nothing  in 
it,  pretending  that  he  was  reading  it.  "Didst  thou," 
said  he,  "  wheedle  a  whistle  from  a  poor  soldier  ;  when 
he  would  play  it,  it  would  take  him  to  the  middle  of 
the  regiment  ? "  "I  wheedled,"  said  she.  " If  that 
is  not  found,"  said  he,  "  I  cannot  heal  thee."  "  It  is," 
~Z7  says  she.      They  brought  the  whistle  to  him.     When 

he  got  the  whistle  he  gave  her  a  piece  of  apple,  and 
one  of  the  horns  fell  off  her.  "I  can't,"  said  he,  "do 
more  to-day,  but  I  will  come  here  to-morrow.  Then  he 
went  out,  and  his  old  comrades  met  him.  The  trade 
they  had  was  to  be  slaking  lime  and  drawing  water  for 
stone  masons.  He  knew  them,  but  they  did  not  know 
him  ;  he  noticed  nothing  at  all,  but  he  gave  them  ten 
shillings,  and  he  said  to  them,  "Drink  the  health  of  the 
man  who  gave  them."  He  left  them  there,  and  he 
returned  to  the  ship.  On  the  morrow  he  went  where 
the  king's  daughter  was ;  he  took  out  the  book, 
and  he  said  to  her,  "  Didst  thou  wheedle  a  purse 
from  a  poor  soldier,   that  would  be  full  of  gold  and 


(jbt  v*^* 


Wi6i\ 


THE   THREE   SOLDIERS.  187 

silver  every  time  it  was  opened?"  "I  wheedled,"  said 
she.  "If  that  is  not  found,"  said  he,  "I  cannot  heal 
thee."  "  It  is,"  said  she ;  and  they  gave  him  the 
purse.  When  he  got  the  purse  he  gave  her  a  piece  of 
the  apple,  and  another  horn  fell  off  her.  "  I  can  do 
no  more  to-day,"  said  he,  "  but  I  will  come  the  next 
night."  He  went  where  his  old  comrades  were,  and 
he  gave  them  other  ten  shillings,  and  he  said  to  them, 
"  To  drink  the  health  of  the  man  who  gave  them." 
Then  he  returned  to  the  vessel.  The  captain  said  to 
him,  "  AVas  he  going  to  take  charge  of  the  vessel 
now  ? "  Said  he,  "  Catch  patience  till  the  end  of  a 
day  or  two,  till  we  see  how  it  goes  with  us."  He  re- 
turned the  next  night  to  see  the  king's  daughter.  He 
gave  a  pull  at  the  book  as  he  used  to  do, — "  Didst 
thou  wheedle,"  said  he,  "a  towel  from  a  poor  soldier, 
that  would  be  full  of  every  kind  of  meat  every  time  it 
was  undone?"  "I  wheedled,"  said  she.  "If  that 
towel  is  not  to  be  found,  I  cannot  cure  thee,"  says  he. 
"It  is,"  says  she.  They  gave  it  to  him;  as  quick  as 
he  got  it,  he  gave  her  a  whole  apple ;  and  when  she 
ate  it  she  was  as  she  was  before.  Here  he  got  a  peck 
of  gold  and  a  peck  of  silver ;  and  they  said  to  him 
that  he  would  get  herself  to  marry.  "I  will  come 
to-morrow,"  said  he.  He  went  the  way  of  his  old 
comrades  this  time  too;  he  gave  them  ten  shillings,  and 
Tie  said  to  them,  "  To  drink  the  health  of  the  man  who 
gave  them."  Said  they,  "  It  would  be  pleasing  to  us 
to  know  what  kind  friend  is  giving  us  the  like  of  this 
every  night."  "Have  you  mind,"  said  he,  "when  we 
w^ere  in  such  a  place,  and  that  we  promised  to  the  three 
girls  that  we  would  go  there  again  a  year  from  the 
time."  Then  they  knew  him.  "  That  time  has  gone 
past  long  ago,"  said  they.     "It  is  not  gone,"  said  he; 


188  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

"  next  night  is  the  night."  He  returned  where  the 
captain  was ;  he  said  to  him  that  himself  and  his 
cargo  might  be  off;  that  he  would  not  be  troubling 
him ;  that  he  had  enough.  On  the  morrow  he 
went  past  the  king's  house,  and  the  king's  daughter 
said  to  him,  "Art  thou  going  to  marry  me  to-day?" 
"No,  nor  to-morrow,"  said  he.  He  returned  where  the 
rest  were,  and  he  began  to  set  them  in  order  for  going 
where  they  promised.  He  gave  the  purse  to  the 
sergeant,  the  towel  to  the  corporal,  and  the  whistle  he 
kept  himself.  He  bought  three  horses,  and  they  went 
riding  with  great  haste  to  the  place  to  which  they  had 
promised  to  go.  "When  they  reached  the  house  they 
caught  the  tree,  and  it  came  with  them  at  the  first  pull. 
The  three  girls  came  so  white  and  smiling  where  they 
were,  and  they  were  free  from  the  spells.  Every  man 
of  them  took  his  own  with  him ;  they  came  back  to 
Dublin,  and  they  married. 


URSGEUL. 

Bha  roimhe  so  reiseamaid  ann  am  Bailcliath  an  Eirinn,  's  bha  i 
'folbh  air  turas  fada.  Bha  seirdsean,  corporal,  agus  saighdear 
singilte  aig  an  robh  leannain  aims  a'  bhaile.  Chaidh  iad  a'm 
faicinn  an  latha  bha  iad  ri  folbh,  ?s  dh'  fhan  iad  tuillidh  is  fada, 
's  dh'  fhag  an  reiseamaid  iad.  Lean  iad  i  's  bha  iad  a'  folbh  's  a* 
folbh  gus  an  d'  thainig  an  oidhche  orra.  Chunnaic  iad  solus  fada 
uatha,  's  ma  b'  fhada  uatha  cha  b'  fhada  bha  iadsan  'ga  ruigheachd. 
Chaidh  iad  a  stigh.  Bha  'n  t-urlar  reidh,  sguabte,  's  gealbhan 
air,  's  gun  duine  stigh.  Shuidh  iad  aig  a'  ghealbhan  'gan  garadh. 
Cha  b'  fhada  'bha  iad  mur  sin  nur  a  dh'  eiridh  an  saighdear 
singilte,  d'  am  W  ainm  Iain,  a  dh'  amharc  de  'bha  'san  t-seombar, 
a  thaobh  gun  robh  solus  ann.  Bha  'n  sin  bord  air  a  chuirneachadh 
leis  a  h-uile  sedrsa  bidh,  's  coinneal  laist'  air.  Chaidh  e  suas  ; 
th6isich  e  air  itheadh  ;  's  thoisich  each  air  a  bhacail,  o  nach 


URSGEUL.  189 

robli  gnothach  aige  ris.  Nur  a  chunnaic  iad  nach  do  stad  e, 
chaidh  iad  suas,  's  thoisich  iad  fein.  Bba  tri  leapaichean  anns 
an  t-seombar,  's  chaidh  fear  dhiu  'laidhe  anns  gach  leaba. 

Cba  b'  fbada  a  bha  iad  'nan  laidhe  nur  a  thainig  tri  nigheanan 
mora  ruagha  stigh,  's  shin  te  aca  i  fein  aig  beulthaobh  gach  te 
de  na  leapaichean,  's  nur  a  chunnaic  iad  an  t-am  iomchuidh  anns 
a'  mhaidinn  dh'  eirich  iad,  agus  dh'  fholbh  iad. 

Nur  a  dh'  eirich  na  saighdearan  cha  'n  aithnichte  gun  d' 
thainig  mir  bhar  a'  bhuird  riamh.  Shuidh  iad,  's  ghabh  iad  am 
biadh.  Thuirt  an  seirdsean  gum  b'  fhearra  dhaibh  an  reiseamaid 
a  leantainn,  's  thuirt  Iain  nach  leanadh.  Fhad  'sa  gheibheadh  e 
bhiadh  na  thamh  nach  folbhadh  e.  Nur  a  thainig  an  t-am 
dinnearach,  shuidh  iad  's  ghabh  iad  an  dinneir.  Thuirt  an 
seirdsean  gum  b'  fhearra  dhaibh  folbh,  's  thuirt  Iain  nach 
folbhadh.  Nur  a  thainig  am  sioparach,  shuidh  iad  's  ghabh  iad 
an  siopair.  An  deigh  an  sioparach  chaidh  iad  a  laidhe,  gach  fear 
d'a  leaba  fein. 

Thainig  na  nigheanan  an  oidhche  so  cuideachd,  's  chaidh  t^ 
laidhe  anns  a'  h-uile  leaba  dhiu.  Anns  a'  mhaidinn,  nur  a 
chunnaic  iad  an  t-am  iomchuidh,  dh'  eirich  iad  's  dh'  fholbh  iad. 

Nur  a  dh'  eirich  na  gillean  bha  'm  bord  cuirniehte,  's  cha  'n 
aithnichte  gun  d'  thainig  mir  riamh  dheth.  Shuidh  iad  's  ghabh 
iad  am  biadh,  's  nur  a  ghabh  iad  am  biadh  thuirt  an  seirdsean 
gum  folbhadh  iad  codhiu.  Thuirt  Iain  nach  folbhadh.  Ghabh 
iad  an  dinneir  's  an  siopair  mur  a  b'  abhaist.  Chaidh  iad  a 
laidhe. 

Thainig  na  nigheanan  's  laidh  iad  as  an  deigh.  Anns  a' 
mhaidinn  thug  an  t6  'bu  shine  sporan  do  'n  t-seirdsean,  's  a'  h- 
uile  h-uair  a  dh'  fhosgladh  e  e  bhiodh  e  Ian  oir  is  airgid.  Urs'  i 
ris  an  te  mheadhonaich,  "De  'bheir  thusa  do  t'  fhear  fein?" 
"Bheir  mise  dha  tuthailt,  's  a'  h-uile  h-uair  a  sgaoileas  e  i  bidh 
i  Ian  de  na  h-uile  se6rsa  bidh."  Thug  i  'n  tuthailt  do  'n  chorporal, 
's  thuirt  i  ris  an  te  b'  oige,  "  D6  'bheir  thusa  do  t'  fhear  fein?  " 
"  Bheir  mi  dha  fldeag,  's  a'  h-uile  h-uair  a  sheinneas  e  i  bidh  e  'n 
teis  meadhoin  na  reiseamaid."  Thug  i  dha  an  fhideag.  Dh'fhag 
iad  beannachd  aca  's  dh'  fholbh  iad. 

"Cha  leig  mi  leis  an  so  e,"  urs'  Iain,  "bidh  fhios'am  co  iad 
ma  'n  d'  theid  mi  na  's  faide  air  m'  aghaidh."  Lean  e  iad,  's 
chunnaic  e  iad  a'  dol  sios  le  gleann,  's  nur  a  bha  e  thun  a  bhi 
shios  thainig  iad  'na  choinneamh,  's  iad  a'  caoineadh.  "  De  th' 
oirbh  ?  "  urs'  esan.     "  'S  mdr  a  th'  oirnn,"  urs'  iadsan  ;  "  tha  sinn 


190  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

fo  gheasan  gus  am  faigh  sinn  tri  gillean  a  laidheas  leinn  tri 
oidchean  gun  cheisd  a  chur  oirnu,  's  nam  fanadh  thusa  gun  ar 
leantainn  bha  sinn  ma  sgaoil."  "Am  bheil  doigh  sam  bith  air 
am  faigh  sibh  ma  sgaoil,"  urs' esan,  "ach  sin?"  "Tha,"  iirs' 
iadsan  ;  "  tha  craobh  aig  ceann  an  tighe,  's  na'n  d'  thigeadh  sibh, 
an  ceann  la  is  bliadhna,  's  a'  chraobh  sin  a  splonadh  bha  sinne 
ma  sgaoil." 

Thill  Iain  air  ais  far  an  robh  each  ;  dh'  innis  e  dhaibh  mar  a 
thachair  dha ;  's  chuir  iad  an  combairle  r'a  cheile  gun  tilleadh  iad 
air  an  ais  do  Bhailecliath  a  rithisd,  chionn  nach  b'  fhiach  dhaibh 
an  reisemaid  a  leantainn.  Thiall  iad  do  Bhailecliath  air  an  ais. 
An  oidhche  sin  urs'  Iain,  " 'S  fhearrr  dhomh  dol  a  dh'  amharc 
nighean  an  rlgh  a  nocbd."  "  'S  fhearra  dhuit  fantainn  aig  an 
tigh,"  arsa  each,  "na  dol  aim."  "Theid  mi  ami  codhiu,"  urs* 
esan. 

Dh'  fholbh  e  's  rainig  e  tigh  an  righ.  Bhuail  e  aig  an  dorus. 
Dh'  fhe6raich  h-aon  de  na  mnathan  uaisle  de  'bha  dhith  air,  's 
thuirt  e  gun  robh  toil  aige  'bhi  'bruidhinn  ri  nighean  an  righ. 
Thainig  nighean  an  rlgh  far  an  robh  e,  's  dh'  iheoraich  i  de  'n 
gnothuch  a  bh'  aige  rithe.  "  Bheir  mi  dhuit  fideag,"  urs'  esan, 
"  's  nur  a  sheinneas  thu  i  bidh  thu  ami  am  meadhon  a  leithid  so 
do  reiseamaid."  Nur  a  fhuair  ise  an  fhideag  bhreab  i  leis  an 
staighir  e,  's  dhuin  i  'n  dorus  air.  "  Demur  chaidh  dhuit  ? " 
urs'  iadsan.  "Mheall  i  'n  fhideag  uam,"  urs'  esan.  Cha  do 
stad  e  gus  an  do  mheall  e  coingheall  de  'n  sporan  o  'n  t-seirdsean. 
"*S  fhearra  dhomh,"  urs'  esan,  "dol  a  dh'  fhaicinn  nighean  an 
righ  a  rithisd." 

Dh'  fholbh  e  's  rainig  e  'n  tigh.  Chunnaic  e  nighean  an  righ  ; 
mheall  i  'n  sporan  uaidhe  ;  bhreab  i  leis  an  staighir  e  mar  a  rinn 
i  roimhid  ;  's  thill  e  air  ais.  Cha  do  stad  e  gus  an  do  mheall  e 
coingheall  de  'n  tuthailt  o  'n  chorpnral. 

Chaidh  e  'rithisd  far  an  robh  nighean  an  righ.  "  De 'bheir 
thu  dhomh  air  an  t-siubhal  so?"  uis'  ise.  "Tuthailt,  's  nur  a 
dh'  fhosglar  i  bidh  i  Ian  de  na  h-uile  se6rsa  bidh."  "  Leig 
fhaicinn  domh  i,"  urs'  ise.  "  Sgaoilidh  sin  a  mach  i,"  urs'  esan. 
Sgaoil  e  mach  i,  's  bha  oisean  di  nach  laidheadh  gu  ceart.  Thuirt 
e  rithe  seasamh  air  an  oiseau.  Sheas  i  air.  Sheas  e  fein  air 
oisean  eile,  's  ghuidh  e  bhi  aim  an  eilean  iomallach  na  doimhne. 
'S  bha  e  fein,  is  nighean  an  >igh,  'a  an  tuthailt  ami  aim  an  coig 
mionaidean.  Bha  'sin  an  aon  eilean  a  bu  bh6idhche  a  chunnaic 
duine  riamh,  's  gun  ni  aim  ach  craobhan  is  measan.     Bha  iad  an 


URSGEUL.  191 

sin  a'  folbh  feaclh  an  eilean  air  an  ais  's  air  an  aghaidh,  's  thainig 
an  cadal  airsan.  Thainig  iad  gu  lagan  boidheacb,  's  chuir  esan 
a  clieann  'na  h-uchdse  's  rinn  e  greira  bais  air  a  h-apran,  air  alt  's 
nach  fhaigheadh  i  air  folbh  gun  e  mhothchuinn  di.  Nur  a 
chaidil  esan  dh'  fhuasgail  ise  an  t-apran  ;  dh'  fhag  i  'n  sin  e  ;  thug 
i  leatha  an  tuthailt ;  sheas  i  una  ;  ghuidh  i  bhi  'n  tigh  a  h-atbar  ; 
's  bha  i  ann. 

Nur  a  dhuisg  esan  cha  robh  ni  ri  fhaotainn  aige,  's  cha  robh  ni 
ri  fhaicinn  aige,  ach  craobhan  is  eunlaith.  Bha  e  'n  sin  a'  tighiun 
beo  air  measan  an  eilean,  's  dh'  amais  ubhlan  air,  's  nur  a  dh' 
itheadh  e  aon  seorsa  dhiu  chuireadh  iad  ceann  feidh  air,  's  nur  a 
dh'  itheadh  e  seorsa  eile  dhiu  chuireadh  iad  deth  e.  Aon  latha 
chruinnich  e  moran  de  na  h-ubhlan,  's  chuir  e  'n  darna  seorsa  ann 
an  aon  cheann  do  'n  phoca,  's  an  seorsa  eile  anns  a'  cheann  eile. 
Chunnaic  e  soitheach  a'  dol  seachad  ;  chrath  e  rithe  ;  thainig 
bata  gu  tir  ;  's  thug  iad  air  bord  e.  Thug  an  caibhtinn  sios  e  gu 
biadh,  's  dh'  fhag  e  'm  poca  gu  h-ard.  Dh'  fhosgaill  na  seolad- 
airean  am  poca  a  dh'  amharc  de  'bh  'ann.  Nur  a  chunnaic  iad 
gur  h-ubhlan  a  bh'  ann  thoisich  iad  air  an  itheadh.  Dh'  ith  iad 
an  seorsa  'chuireadh  adhaircean  feidh  orra.  Chinn  adhaircean 
feidh  orra,  's  thoisich  iad  air  leum  air  a  cheile  gus  an  robh  iad  a> 
brath  an  soitheach  a  bhrisdeadh.  Nur  a  chuala  an  caibhtin  an 
starum  thainig  e  nios,  s  nur  a  chunnaic  e  iad  thuirt  e,  "  'Dhroch 
dhuine  de  tha  thu  an  deigh  a  dheanadh  air  mo  dhaoine  nis  ? " 
"  De,"  urs' Iain,  "a  chuir  do  dhaoine-sa  cho  miomhail  's  gun 
rachadh  iad  a  dh'  fhaicinn  de  bhiodh  aun  am  poca  duine  sam 
bith  ?  De  bheir  thu  dhomh,"  urs'  Iain,  "  ma  dh'  fhagas  mi  iad 
mur  a  bha  iad  roimhid?"  Ghabh  an  sgiobair  eagal,  's  thuirt  e 
gun  d'  thugadh  e  dha  an  soitheach  agus  an  luchd  aig  a'  chiad 
phort  a  ruigeadh  iad.  Dh'  fhosgail  e  'n  so  am  poca,  's  thug  e 
dhaibh  an  se6rs'  eile,  's  thuit  na  h-adhaircean  diu.  'S  e  luchd 
oir  a'  bh'  air  an  t-soitheach,  agus  's  ann  a  Bhailecliath  a  bha  i 
'dol.  Nur  a  rainig  iad  thuirt  an  caibhtinn  ris,  e  'bhi  'gabhail 
ciiram  de  'n  t-soitheach  's  de  'n  luchd,  gun  robh  esan  reidh  is  i. 
"  Dean  faighidinn,"  urs'  Iain,  "gus  am  faic  sinn  demur  a  theid 
duinn  ann  an  ceann  beagan  laithean." 

Dh'  fholbh  e  'n  la  'r  na  mhaireach  a  reic  nan  ubhlan  feadh  a' 
bhaile,  's  gun  air  ach  aodach  srachdte.  Chaidh  e  suas  feadh  a* 
bhaile,  's  thainig  e  ma  choinneamh  tigh  an  righ,  's  chunnaic  e 
nighean  an  righ  's  a  ceann  a  mach  air  uinneag.  Dh'  iarr  i  punud 
de  na  h-ubhlan  a  cbur  suas  a  'h-ionnsuidh.      Thuirt  esan  i  dh* 


192  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

fheacainn  demur  a  chordadh  iad  rithe  an  toiseach.  Thilg  e  'suas 
ubhal  urra  de  'n  t-se5rsa  'chuireadh  ceann  feidh  urra.  Nur  a  dh' 
ith  i  'n  ubhal  thainig  ceann  feidh  urra.  Chuir  an  righ  fios  a 
mach  nam  faighte  duine  sam  bith  a  leighseadh  a  nighean  gum 
faigheadh  e  peic  oir  is  peic  airgid,  's  i  fein  r'a  phosadh.  Bha  i  mur 
sin  moran  laithean,  's  gun  duine  'tighinn  a  bha  deanadh  math 
sam  bith.  Thainig  Iain  gus  an  dorusd  leis  an  aodach  shrachdte 
'g  iarraidh  a  stigh,  's  nur  a  chunnaic  iad  a  choslas  eha  leigeadh 
iad  a  stigh  e,  ach  bha  brathair  beag  aicise  a  chunnaic  iad  'ga 
chum  ail  a  mach  's  dh'  innis  e  d'a  athair  e,  's  tbuirt  a  h-athair  ged 
ab'e  bleidire  an  loin  a  bhiodh  ann  a  leigeil  a  stigh.  Chaidh 
fios  as  a  dheigh  a  'thilleadh,  agus  thill  e.  Thuirt  an  righ  ris  an 
leighseadh  e  'nighean,  's  thuirt  e  gum  feuchadh  e  ris.  Thug 
iad  suas  e  do  'n  t-seombar  far  an  robh  i.  Shuidh  e,  's  thug  e 
'mach  leobhar  a  phoca  's  gun  ni  sam  bith  ann,  a'  leigeil  air  gun 
robh  e  'ga  'leubhadh.  "  An  do  mheall  thusa,"  urs'  esan,  "fideag 
o  shaighdear  bochd,  nur  a  sheinneadh  e  i  'bheireadh  e  gu 
meadhon  a  reiseamaid."  "Mheall,"  urs'  ise.  "Mar  a'  bheil 
sin  air  faotainn,"  urs'  esan,  "cha  'n  urrainn  mise  do  leigheas." 
"Tha,"  urs'  ise.  Thug  iad  a'  ionnsuidh  an  fhideag.  Nur  a 
fhuair  e  'n  fhideag  thug  e  dhi  piosa  de  dh'  ubhal,  's  thuit  fear  de 
na  cabair  dhi.  "Cha  'n  urrainn  mi,"  urs'  esan,  "  tuillidh  a 
dheanadh  an  diugh,  ach  thig  mi  'in  maireach." 

Dh'  fholbh  e  'n  sin  a  mach,  's  thaehair  a  sheana  chompanaich 
air,  's  e  cheaird  a  bh'  aca  'bhi  buacadh  aoil,  's  a'  tarruinn  uisge 
do  chlachairean.  Dh'  aithnich  esan  iadsan,  ach  cha  d'  aithnich 
iadsan  esan.  Cha  do  leig  e  rud  sam  bith  air,  ach  thug  e  dhaibh 
deich  tasdain,  's  thuirt  e  riu,  "61aibh  deoch  slainte  an  fhir  a  thug 
dhuibh  e." 

Dhealaich  e  'n  sin  riu,  's  thill  e  gus  an  t-soithich.  An  la  'r 
na  mhaireach  chaidh  e  far  an  robh  nighean  an  righ.  Thug  e 
mach  an  leabhar,  's  thuirt  e  rithe,  "An  do  mheall  thusa  sporan 
o  shaighdear  bochd,  a  bhiodh  Ian  6ir  is  airgid  h-uile  h-uair  a  dh' 
fhosgailt'  e?"  "Mheall,"  ars'  ise.  "Mar  a'  bheil  sin  air 
faotainn,"  urs'  esan,  "  cha  'n  urrainn  mise  do  leigheas."  "Tha," 
urs'  ise,  's  thug  ian  dha  an  sporan.  Nur  a  fhuair  e  e  thug  e  dhi 
plosa  do  'n  ubhal,  's  thuit  cabar  eile  dhi.  "  Cha  'n  urrainn  mi 
tuillidh  a  dheanadh  an  diugh,"  urs'  esan,  "ach  thig  mi  'n  ath 
oidhche. " 

Chaidh  e  far  an  robh  'sheana  chompanaich,  's  thug  e  dhaibh 
deich  tasdain   eile,  's  thuirt  e  riu  deoch  slainte  an  fhir  a  thug 


URSGEUL.  193 

dhaibh  e  61.  Thill  e  'n  sin  thun  an  t-soithich.  Thuirt  an 
caibhtin  ris  an  robh  e  'dol  a  ghabhail  curam  do  'n  t-soitheach  a 
nis.  Thuirt  esan,  "  Glac  faighidinn  gu  ceann  latha  na  dha  gus 
am  faic  sinn  demur  a  theid  duinn."  Thill  e  an  ath  oidhche  a  dh' 
fhaicinn  nighean  an  righ.  Thug  e  tarrainn  air  a  leabhar  mar  a  b' 
abhaist  dha.  "An  do  mheall  thusa,"  urs'  esan,  "  tuthailt  o 
shaighdear  bochd,  a  bhiodh  Ian  de  na  h-uile  seorsa  bidh  a'  h-uile 
h-uair  a  dh'  fhosgailt  i?"  "Mheall,"  urs'  ise.  "Mar  a' bheil 
an  tuthailt  sin  air  faotainn  cha  'n  urrainn  mise  do  leigheas, "  urs' 
esan.  "  Tha,"  urs'  ise.  Thug  iad  dha  i.  Cho  luath  's  a  fhuair 
esan  i  thug  e  ubhal  shlan  dhi,  's  nur  a  dh'  ith  i  i  bha  i  mar  a  bha 
i  roimhid.  Fhuair  e  'n  sin  peic  oir  is  peic  airgid,  's  thuirt  iad  ris 
gum  faigheadh  e  i  fern  ri  'posadh,  "Thig  mi  'm  maireach,'' 
urs'  esan. 

Ghabh  e  rathad  a  sheaua  chompanach  air  an  t-siubhal  so  cuid- 
eachd  ;  thug  e  deich  tasdain  daibh ;  's  thuirt  e  riu  deoch  slainte 
an  fhir  a  thug  dhaibh  e  61.  Urs'  iadsan,  "Bu  mhail  leinn  fios  a 
bhi  againn  co  an  caraid  caoimhneil  a  tha  'toirt  duinn  a'  leithid'  a' 
h-uile  h-oidhche  ? "  "Am  bheil  cuimhn'  agaibh,"  urs'  esan, 
"  nur  a  bha  sinn  'na  leithid  so  do  dh'  kite,  's  a  gheall  sin  do  na 
tri  nigheanan  gun  rachamaid  ann  bliadhna  o  'n  am  sin  a  rithisd  ?  " 
Dh'  aithnich  iad  an  sin  e.  "  Chaidh  an  tune  sin  seachad  o  chionn 
fada,"  urs'  iadsan.  "Cha  deachaidh,"  urs'  esan;  "'s  i  an  ath 
oidhche  an  oidhche."  Thill  e  far  an  robh  an  caibhtinn,  's  thuirt 
e  ris  gum  faodadh  e  fern  's  a  luchd  a  bhi  folbh,  nach  biodh  esan  a' 
cur  dragh  air,  gun  robh  na  leoir  aige. 

An  la  'r  na  mhaireach  -chaidh  e  seachad  tigh  an  righ,  's  thuirt 
nighean  an  righ  ris,  "Am  bheil  thu  dol  am'ph6sadh  an  diugh?" 
"  Cha  'n  'eil  na  'maireach,"  urs'  esan.  Thill  e  far  an  robh  each, 
's  thoisich  e  air  cur  an  6rdugh  air  son  dol  far  an  do  gheall  iad. 
Thug  e  'n  sporan  do  'n  s&rdsean,  an  tuthailt  do  'n  chorporal,  's 
ghleidh  e  fein  an  fhideag.  Cheannaich  e  tri  eich,  's  dh'  fholbh 
iad  air  mharcachd  ann  an  cabhaig  mhoir  do  'n  aite  an  do  gheall 
iad  dol.  Nur  a  rainig  iad  an  tigh  rug  iad  air  a'  chraoibh,  is 
thainig  i  les  air  a'  chiad  spionadh.  Thainig  na  tri  nigheanan  gu 
geal,  gaireachdach  far  an  robh  iad,  's  bha  iad  saor  o  na  geasan. 
Thug  a'  h-uile  fear  dhiu  leis  a  the  fein,  's  thainig  iad  air  an  ais 
do  Bhailecliath,  's  phos  iad. 

Got  this  tale  from  a  young  lad  of  the  name  of  James  M'Lachlin, 
who  is  at  present  in  my  own  employment.     I  have  had  the 

X 


194  WEST   HIGHLAND    TALES. 

preceding  tale  from  him  also.  He  has  had  them  from  an  old 
woman  that  lives  somewhere  up  the  way  of  Portaskaig,  who,  he 
says,  can  repeat  several  more,  and  to  whom  I  intend  immediately 
to  apply. 

May  27,  18G0. — After  speaking  to  the  old  woman  MacKerrol, 
I  find  that,  from  age  and  loss  of  memory,  she  is  unable  now  to 
tell  any  of  the  tales  she  was  wont  to  repeat. 

Hector  MacLean. 

Another  version  of  this  has  been  sent  by  Mr.  Osgood 
Mackenzie  from  Gairloch.  It  was  recited  by  Hector  Mackenzie 
at  Dibaig,  who  learned  it  some  years  ago  from  Kenneth 
Mackenzie  at  Dibaig  ;  and  it  was  written  by  Angus  MacRae  at 
Dibaig.     This  Dibaig  version  tells  how — 

1.  There  was  a  soldier,  by  name  Coinneach  Buidhe,  Kenneth 
the  Yellow,  in  the  army  of  old,  and  he  belonged  to  Alba.  He 
deserted,  and  his  master  sent  a  "corpaileir  "  after  him  ;  but  the 
corporal  deserted  too  ;  and  so  did  a  third.  They  went  on  till 
they  reached  the  "yearly  wood,"  in  America.  After  a  time, 
they  saw  on  a  certain  night,  a  light  which  led  them  to  a  large 
house  ;  they  found  meat  and  drink,  and  all  that  they  could 
desire.  They  saw  no  one  for  a  year  and  a  day,  except  three 
maidens,  who  never  spoke,  but  called  in  at  odd  times  ;  and  as 
they  did  not  speak,  the  soldiers  were  silent. 

At  the  end  of  the  year  the  maidens  spoke,  and  praised  them 
for  their  politeness,  explained  that  they  were  under  spells,  and 
for  their  kindness,  gave  to  the  first  a  cup  that  would  be  ever  full, 
and  a  lamp  of  light ;  to  the  second,  a  table-cover  on  which  meat 
was  ever  ;  and  to  the  third,  a  bed  in  which  there  would  ever  be 
rest  for  them  at  any  time  they  chose  ;  and  besides,  the  "  tiadh- 
laicean  "  would  make  any  one  who  had  them  get  anything  he 
wished.  They  reached  a  certain  king,  whose  only  daughter  pre- 
tended to  be  fond  of  Kenneth  the  Yellow,  and  wheedled  him  till 
he  gave  her  the  tiadhlaicean,  when  she  ordered  him  to  be  put 
in  an  island  in  the  ocean.  When  there  alone  he  grew  hungry, 
and  ate  "abhlan,"  and  a  wood  like  thatch  grew  through  his 
head,  and  there  remained  till  he  ate  "  abhlan  "  of  another  kind, 
when  the  wood  vanished.  He  got  off  in  a  ship  with  "  Abhlan  " 
of  each  sort,  and  reached  the  big  town  of  the  king  where  he  had 
been  before,  where  he  set  up  a  booth.  On  a  certain  day  a  fair  lad 
came  in  to  sell  abhlan,  and  through  him  the  other  kind  were 


THE   THREE   SOLDIERS.  195 

sold  to  the  king's  daughter,  and  a  wood  grew  on  her  head. 
Kenneth  the  Yellow  got  back  the  tiadhlaicean,  and  found  his 
two  companions  agus  bha  iad  uile  tuilleadh  ann  am  meas 
agus  soirbheachadh  gus  a  CHRiociT.  And  they  were  all  after 
In  worship  and  prosprousness  till  the  end. 

This  is  manifestly  the  same  story  shortened,  and  made  rea- 
sonable.    It  is  very  well  written  and  spelt  according  to  rule. 

3.  I  have  another  version  of  this  told  by  Hector  Boyd,  fisher- 
man, Castle  Bay,  Barra,  who  says  he  learned  it  from  John  Mac- 
Neill,  who  has  left  the  island  ;  and  from  Neill  MacKinnon, 
Ruagh  Lias.  In  this  the  three  soldiers  are  English,  Scotch,  and 
Irish.  The  two  last  desert  ;  and  the  first,  a  sergeant,  is  sent 
after  them.  They  persuade  him  to  desert  also,  and  they  come 
to  a  castle.  The  Irishman  acts  the  part  of  John  in  the  Islay  ver- 
sion ;  and  the  first  night  they  eat  and  go  to  sleep,  and  find 
dresses  v\  hen  they  wake.  In  the  morning  they  get  up  and  put 
on  their  dresses  ;  and  the  board  was  set  over  with  meat  and  with 
drink,  and  they  took  their  trath  madaix,  breakfast.  They  went 
to  take  a  walk  without.  The  Englishman  had  a  gun,  and  he 
saw  three  BWans  swimming  on  a  loch,  and  he  began  to  put  a 
charge  in  his  gun.  The  swans  perceived  him,  and  they  cried  to 
him,  and  they  were  sure  he  was  going  to  shoot  at  them.  They 
came  on  shore  and  became  three  women.  "How  are  these 
dresses  pleasing  you  ?"  said  they.  "  The  like  will  be  yours  every 
day  in  the  year,  and  your  meat  as  good  as  you  got ;  but  that  you 
should  neither  think  or  order  one  of  us  to  be  with  you  in  lying 
down  or  rising  up."  And  so  they  remained  for  a  year  in  the 
castle.  One  night  the  Irishman  thought  of  the  swans,  and  in  the 
morning  they  had  nothing  but  their  old  dresses. 

They  went  to  the  loch  ;  the  swans  came  on  shore,  became 
women,  and  gave  a  purse  that  would  always  be  full  of  gold  and 
jewels,  to  the  Englishman  ;  a  knife  to  the  Scotchman,  and  when- 
ever it  was  opened  he  would  be  wherever  he  wished  ;  and  to  the 
Irishman  a  horn,  and  when  he  blew  in  the  small  end  there  would 
be  a  thousand  soldiers  before  him  ;  and  when  he  blew  in  the  big 
end  none  of  them  would  be  seen. 

They  go  to  a  big  town,  and  build  a  house  on  a  green  hill  with 
money  from  the  purse  ;  and  when  the  house  was  built,  one  about 
went  to  the  town  to  buy  meat.  The  Irishman  fell  in  love 
with  the  king's  daughter,  and  was  cheated  out  of  his  magic  horn  ; 
borrowed  the  purse,  and  lost  that ;  and  then,  by  the  help  of  the 


196  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

knife,  transported  himself  and  the  king's  daughter  to  an  island 
which  could  hardly  be  seen  in  the  far  ocean.  And  there  they 
were,  and  there  they  stayed  for  seventeen  days,  eating  fruits. 
One  day  he  slept  with  his  head  on  her  knee,  and  she  looked  at  her 
hands  and  saw  how  long  the  nails  had  grown ;  so  she  put  her  hand 
in  his  pocket  and  took  out  the  knife  to  pare  them.  "  Oh,"  said 
she,  M  that  I  were  where  the  nails  grew  on  me,"  and  she  was  in 
her  father's  house.  Then  he  found  red  apples  and  grey  apples  ; 
and  no  sooner  had  he  eaten  some  of  the  red  apples  than  his  head 
was  down,  and  his  heels  were  up,  from  the  weight  of  the  deer's 
horns  that  grew  on  his  head.  Then  he  bethought  him  that  one 
of  the  grey  apples  might  heal  him  ;  and  he  stretched  himself  out 
with  his  head  downwards,  and  kicked  down  one  of  the  apples 
with  his  feet,  and  ate  it,  and  the  horns  fell  off  him.  Then  he 
made  baskets,  and  filled  them  with  the  apples  ;  climbed  a  tree, 
saw  a  ship,  tore  his  shirt  and  waved  it  on  a  stick,  and  was  seen. 
The  skipper  was  under  an  oath  that  he  would  never  leave  a 
.  i  man    in  extremity.      They  came  on  shore  for  him,   and  were 

terrified  at  his  beard,  thinking  that  he  was  the  evil  spirit.  When 
(t>L»-  he  got  on  board,  a  razor  was  got,  and  (as  the  narrator  said) 

SHEUbhaig  e  he  was  shaved.  The  ship  sailed  straight  to  the 
king's  house.  The  lady  looked  out  of  a  window'.  He  sold  her  a 
tifrfa^fr"*  re(l  aPple  f°r  a  guinea.  She  ate  it,  the  horns  grew,  and  there 
were  not  alive  those  who  could  take  her  from  that.  They  thought 
of  saws,  and  they  sent  for  doctors  ;  and  he  came,  and  then  there 
is  a  scene  in  which  he  pretends  to  read  a  divining  book,  and  tries 
saws  on  the  horns,  and  frightens  the  lady  and  recovers  the  lost 
gifts.  Then  he  went  to  his  friends,  and  they  went  to  the  swans  ; 
and  the  spells  went  off  them,  and  they  married  them. 

The  story  is  very  well  told,  especially  the  last  scene  ;  but  it  is 
too  like  the  Islay  version  to  make  it  worth  translating  at  full 
,  length. 

4.  I  have  another  story,  from  a  Ross-shire  man,  now  in  Glas- 
gow, which  begins  in  the  same  manner,  but  the  incidents  are 
very  different. 

This  story  has  a  counterpart  in  German,  Der  Krautesel ;  and 
it  has  a  very  long  pedigree  in  Grimm's  third  volume.  It  seems 
to  be  very  widely  spread,  and  very  old,  and  to  belong  to  many 
languages  ;  many  versions  are  given.  In  one  a  soldier,  one  of 
£t.->'ii  f-^tmn  ]\  three,  eats  apples  in  a  forest,  and  his  nose  grows  right  through 
the  forest,  and  sixty  miles  beyond  it ;  and  the  king's  daughter's 

J^p        ...... :;  -^.M^f^^j 


THE  THREE   SOLDIERS.  197 

nose  is  made  to  grow,  exactly  as  horns  are  made  to  grow  on  the 
princess  in  the  Highlands  ;  and  she  is  forced  to  give  up  the  things 
which  she  had  got  from  the  soldiers  ;  and  which  are  a  purse,  a 
mantle,  and  a  horn  of  magic  power. 

In  another  version,  it  is  a  young  huntsman  who  changes  a 
with  and  her  daughter  into  donkeys,  by  giving  them  magic 
cabbages,  which  had  previously  transformed  him. 

The  swans  in  the  third  version  seem  to  belong  to  Sanscrit,  as 
well  as  to  Norse  and  other  languages.  In  "  Comparative  Mytho- 
logy," by  Max  Muller,  Oxford  Essays,  1856,  a  story  is  given  from 
the  Brahmana  of  the  Yagurveda,  in  which  this  passage  occurs — 
"  Then  he  bewailed  his  vanished  love  in  bitter  grief  ;  and  went 
near  Kurukshetra.  There  is  a  lake  there  called  Anyatahplaksha, 
full  of  lotus  flowers  ;  and  while  the  king  walked  along  its  border, 
the  fairies  were  playing  there  in  the  water  in  the  shape  of  birds  : 
and  Urvasi  discovered  him,  and  said,  '  That  is  the  man  with 
whom  I  dwelt  so  long.'  Then  her  friends  said,  'Let  us  appear 
to  him,'"  etc.,  etc. 

The  rest  of  the  Eastern  story  has  many  Western  counterparts, 
such  as  "  Peter  Wilkins  and  the  Flying  Ladies,"  and  a  story 
which  I  have  from  Islay.  The  incident  of  birds  which  turn  out 
to  be  enchanted  women,  occurs  in  a  great  many  other  Gaelic 
stories;  and  is  in  Mr.  Peter  Buchan's  "Green  Sleeves"  (see 
introduction) ;  and,  as  I  am  told,  in  the  Edda. 

Bailecliath  is  Dublin,  and  takes  its  Gaelic  name  from  a 
legend.  The  name  should  be  Baile  ath  Cliath,  the  town  of 
Wattle  Ford  ;  either  from  wattled  boats,  or  a  bridge  of  hurdles  ; 
and  as  it  appears,  there  was  a  weaver,  or  tailor,  residing  at  Ath 
Cliath,  Wattle  Ford,  who  got  his  living  by  making  creels  or 
hurdles,  cliathan,  for  crossing  the  river.  There  was  a  fluent, 
gabby  old  man,  who  was  a  friend  of  his  ;  and  from  his  having 
such  a  tongue,  the  maker  of  the  creels  advised  him  to  become  a 
beggar,  as  he  was  sure  to  succeed.  He  began,  and  got  plenty  of 
money.  He  wore  a  cap  or  currachd,  and  all  the  coin  he  got  he 
buried  under  a  stone,  at  the  end  of  the  wattle  bridge.  The 
bridge  maker  died  ;  the  beggar  got  ill  and  kept  his  cap  on,  and 
never  took  it  off ;  and  when  he  was  dying  he  asked  his  wife  to 
bury  him  in  it  ;  and  he  was  buried  with  his  cap  on.  The  widow's 
son  found  out  about  the  buried  treasure,  and  dug  it  up  ;  but  the 
beggar's  ghost  so  tormented  the  boy,  that  he  had  to  go  to  the 
minister,  who  advised  them  to  build  a  bridge  with  the  money  ; 


198  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

so  tliey  built  Dkociiaid  ath  Cliath,  and  there  it  is  to  this  very- 
day. 

I  do  not  know  which  of  the  Dublin  bridges  is  meant,  but  the 
story  was  got  from  a  woman  at  Kilmeny  in  Islay,  and  this  is  a 
mere  outline  of  it.  It  is  known  as  the  story  of  the  red-haired 
beggar,  Am  Bochd  Ruagh. 

Bailecliath  is  a  great  place  in  Gaelic  songs. 

The  story  of  the  Three  Soldiers  is  one  of  which  I  remember 
to  have  heard  a  part  in  my  childhood.  I  perfectly  remember  con- 
triving with  a  companion  how  we  would  have  given  the  cruel 
princess  bits  of  different  kinds  of  apples,  mixed  together,  so  as  to 
make  the  horns  grow,  and  fall  off  time  abjut ;  but  I  cannot  re- 
member who  told  me  the  story.  The  version  I  have  given  is  the 
most  complete,  but  the  language  of  the  Barra  version  is  better. 

There  are  two  or  three  inconsistencies.  They  travel  on  the 
towel  which  had  the  commissariat,  and  do  not  use  the  locomotive 
whistle  at  all.  But  there  are  touches  of  nature.  The  mason's 
labourers  thought  the  time  had  passed,  but  the  adventurer  did 
not  find  time  so  long ;  and  he  alone  remembered  the  day. 

4   ^  0  s***.  ■>./,,).  /vu*  iU./  ^  «<<*-+> 


XL 


THE  STORY  OF  THE  WHITE  PET. 

From  Mrs.  MacTavish,  widow  of  the  late  minister  of  Kildalton, 

Islay. 

rpHERE  was  a  farmer  before  now  who  had  a  White 
-*-  Pet  (sheep),  and  when  Christmas  was  drawing  near, 
he  thought  that  he  would  kill  the  White  Pet.  The 
White  Pet  heard  that,  and  he  thought  he  would  run 
away ;  and  that  is  what  he  did. 

He  had  not  gone  far  when  a  bull  met  him.  Said  the 
bull  to  him,  "All  hail!  White  Pet,  where  art  thou 
going?"  "I,"  said  the  White  Pet,  " am  going  to  seek 
my  fortune ;  they  were  going  to  kill  me  for  Christmas, 
and  I  thought  I  had  better  run  away."  "It  is  better 
for  me,"  said  the  bull,  "to  go  with  thee,  for  they  were 
going  to  do  the  very  same  with  me." 

"I  am  willing,"  said  the  White  Pet ;  "the  larger  the 
party  the  better  the  fun." 

They  went  forward  till  they  fell  in  with  a  dog. 

"All  hail!  White  Pet,"  said  the  dog.  "All  hail! 
thou  dog."     "  Where  art  thou  going  1 "  said  the  dog. 

"  I  am  running  away,  for  I  heard  that  they  were 
threatening  to  kill  me  for  Christmas." 

"  They  were  going  to  do  the  very  same  to  me,"  said 
the  dog,  "and  I  will  go  with  you."  "Come,  then," 
said  the  White  Pet. 

They  went  then,  till  a  cat  joined  them.  "  All  hail ! 
White  Pet,"  said  the  cat.     "All  hail !  oh  cat." 


200  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

"Where  art  thou  going?"  said  the  cat.  "I  am 
going  to  seek  my  fortune,"  said  the  White  Pet,  "because 
they  were  going  to  kill  me  at  Christmas." 

"  They  were  talking  about  killing  me  too,"  said  the 
cat,  "  and  I  had  better  go  with  you." 

"  Come  on  then,"  said  the  White  Pet. 

Then  they  went  forward  till  a  cock  met  them.  "All 
hail !  White  Pet,"  said  the  cock."  "  All  hail  to  thyself! 
oh  cock,"  said  the  White  Pet.  "Where,"  said  the  cock, 
"art  thou  going?"  "I,"  said  the  White  Pet,  "am 
going  (away),  for  they  were  threatening  my  death  at 
Christmas." 

"They  were  going  to  kill  me  at  the  very  same  time," 
said  the  cock,  "  and  I  will  go  with  you." 

"  Come,  then,"  said  the  White  Pet. 

They  went  forward  till  they  fell  in  with  a  goose. 
"All  hail!  White  Pet,"  said  the  goose.  "All  hail  to 
thyself!  oh  goose,"  said  the  White  Pet.  "Where  art 
thou  going  ?"  said  the  goose. 

"  I,"  said  the  White  Pet,  "  am  running  away  because 
they  were  going  to  kill  me  at  Christmas." 

"  They  were  going  to  do  that  to  me  too,"  said  the 
goose,  "and  I  will  go  with  you." 

The  party  went  forward  till  the  night  was  drawing 
on  them,  and  they  saw  a  little  light  far  away;  and 
though  far  off,  they  were  not  long  getting  there.  When 
they  reached  the  house,  they  said  to  each  other  that 
they  would  look  in  at  the  window  to  see  who  was  in 
the  house,  and  they  saw  thieves  counting  money ;  and 
the  White  Pet  said,  "Let  every  one  of  us  call  his  own 
call.  I  will  call  my  own  call ;  and  let  the  bull  call  his 
own  call ;  let  the  dog  call  his  own  call ;  and  the  cat  her 
own  call ;  and  the  cock  his  own  call ;  and  the  goose  his 


THE   STORY   OF   THE   WHITE   PET.  201 

own  call."  "With  that  they  gave  out  one  shout — 
Gaire  ! 

When  the  thieves  heard  the  shouting  that  was  with- 
out, they  thought  the  mischief  was  there;  and  they  fled 
out,  and  they  went  to  a  wood  that  was  near  them. 
When  the  White  Pet  and  his  company  saw  that  the 
house  was  empty,  they  went  in  and  they  got  the  money 
that  the  thieves  had  been  counting,  and  they  divided 
it  amongst  themselves ;  and  then  they  thought  that 
they  would  settle  to  rest.  Said  the  White  Pet, 
"  Where  wilt  thou  sleep  to-night,  oh  bull?"  "I  will 
sleep,"  said  the  bull,  "behind  the  door  where  I  used  " 
(to  be).  "  Where  wilt  thou  sleep  thyself,  White  Pet  ?" 
"  I  will  sleep,"  said  the  White  Pet,  "  in  the  middle  of 
the  floor  where  I  used "  (to  be).  "  Where  wilt  thou 
sleep,  oh  dog?"  said  the  White  Pet.  "I  will  sleep 
beside  the  fire  where  I  used "  (to  be),  said  the  dog. 
"  Where  wilt  thou  sleep,  oh  cat  ?"  "I  will  sleep,"  said 
the  cat,  "in  the  candle  press,  where  I  like  to  be." 
"Where  wilt  thou  sleep,  oh  cock?"  said  the  White 
Pet.  "I,"  said  the  cock,  "will  sleep  on  the  rafters 
where  I  used"  (to  be).  "Where  wilt  thou  sleep,  oh 
goose?''  "I  will  sleep,"  said  the  goose,  "on  the 
midden,  where  I  was  accustomed  to  be." 

They  were  not  long  settled  to  rest,  when  one  of  the 
thieves  returned  to  look  in  to  see  if  he  could  perceive  if 
any  one  at  all  was  in  the  house.  All  things  were  still, 
and  he  went  on  forward  to  the  candle  press  for  a 
candle,  that  he  might  kindle  to  make  him  a  light ;  but 
when  he  put  his  hand  in  the  box  the  cat  thrust  her 
claws  into  his  hand,  but  he  took  a  candle  with  him,  and 
he  tried  to  light  it.  Then  the  dog  got  up,  and  he 
stuck  his  tail  into  a  pot  of  water  that  was  beside  the 
fire  ;  he  shook  his  tail  and  put  out  the  candle.     Then 


202  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

the  thief  thought  that  the  mischief  was  in  the  house, 
and  he  fled  ;  but  when  he  was  passing  the  White  Pet, 
he  gave  him  a  blow ;  before  he  got  past  the  bull,  he 
gave  him  a  kick ;  and  the  cock  began  to  crow ;  and 
when  he  went  out,  the  goose  began  to  belabour  him 
with  his  wings  about  the  shanks. 

He  went  to  the  wood  where  his  comrades  were,  as 
fast  as  was  in  his  legs.  They  asked  him  how  it  had 
gone  with  him.  "  It  went,"  said  he,  "  but  middling  ; 
when  I  went  to  the  candle  press,  there  was  a  man  in  it 
who  thrust  ten  knives  into  my  hand ;  and  when  I  went 
to  the  fireside  to  light  the  candle,  there  was  a  big 
black  man  lying  there,  who  was  sprinkling  water  on  it 
to  put  it  out ;  and  when  I  tried  to  go  out,  there  was  a 
big  man  in  the  middle  of  the  floor,  who  gave  me  a 
shove ;  and  another  man  behind  the  door  who  pushed 
me  out ;  and  there  was  a  little  brat  on  the  loft  calling 
OUt    CUIR-ANEES-AN-SHAW-AY-S-FONI-MI-HAYN-DA — Send 

him  up  here  and  I'll  do  for  him ;  and  there  was  a 
Gree-as-ich-e,  shoemaker,  out  on  the  midden,  be- 
labouring me  about  the  shanks  with  his  apron." 

When  the  thieves  heard  that,  they  did  not  return  to 
seek  their  lot  of  money ;  and  the  White  Pet  and  his 
comrades  got  it  to  themselves ;  and  it  kept  them 
peaceably  as  long  as  they  lived. 


SGEULACHD  A  PHEATA  BHAIN. 

Bha  Tuathanach  aim  roimhe  so  aig  an  robh  Peata  ban  ;  agus  'n 
uair  a  bha  an  NoHaig  a'  teannadh  air  smuaintich  e  gu  'marbhabh 
e  'm  Peata  ban.  Chuala  am  Peata  ban  sin  agus  smuaintich  e  gun 
teichadh  e,  agus  'se  sin  a  rinn  e.  Cha  deachaidh  e  fada  'n  uair  a 
thachsir  Tarbh  air.  Thubhairt  an  tarbh  ris,  "  Failte  dhuitse  a' 
Pheata  bhain  ;  caite  am  bheil  thusa  a'  dol  ?  "    "  Tha  mi,"  ars'  am 


SGEUIACHD  A  PHEATA  BHAIN.  203 

peata  ban,  "a'  falbh  a  dh'  iarridh  an  fhortain,  bha  iad  a'  dol  a 
m'  mharbhadh  a  dh'  ionnsuidh  na  Nollaig  agus  smuaintich  mi 
gum  b'  fhearr  domh  teicheadh."  "  S'  fearr  dombsa  ars'  an 
Tarbh  falbh  leat :  oir  bha  iad  a'  dol  a  dhianadh  a  leithid  eile 
ormsa."  "Tha  mi  toileach,"  ars'  'm  Peata  ban;  mar  is  mo  a' 
chuideachd  'sann  is  fhearr  'n  lan-aidhir. "  Ghabh  iad  air  'n 
aghaidh  gus  au  do  thachuir  Cu  orra.  "Failte  dhuit  a  Pheata 
bhain,"  ars'  an  Cu  "  Failte  dhuit  fhe'  'choin."  "  Caite  'm  bheil 
thu  a'  dol  ?  "  ars'  an  Cu.  "  Tha  mi  aig  teicheadh  bho  'n  a  chuala 
mi  gun  robh  iad  a'  brath  mo  mhai'bhabh  air  son  na  Nollaig." 
"  Bha  iad  a'  dol  a  dhianadh  a  leithid  cheudna  ormsa,"  ars'  an 
Cu,  "  agus  falbhaidh  mi  leibh."  "  Thig,"  mata  ars'  am  Peata 
ban?  Dh'  fhalbh  iad  an  sin  gus  an  do  chomhlaich  Cat  iad? 
"Failte  dhuit  a  Pheata  bhain  ars'  an  cat.  Failte  dhuit  fhe'  a 
Chait."  "  Caite  am  bheil  thu  a'  dol  ? ':  ars'  an  Cat.  "  Tha  mi 
a'  dol  a  dh'  iarridh  an  fhortain, "  ars'  am  Peata  ban,  ' '  a  chionn 
gu'n  robh  iad  a'  dol  am'  mhaz-bhadh  air  an  Nollaig."  "  Bha  iad 
aig  iomradh  air  mise  mharbhadh  cuideachd,"  ars  an  Cat,  "  agus  's 
fearr  dhomh  falbh  leibh."  "Thugainn  mata,"  ars'  'm  Peata  ban. 
Ghabh  iad  an  sin  air  an  aghaidh  gus  an  do  choinnich  Coileach 
iad.  "  Failte  dhuit  a  Pheata  bhain,"  ars'  an  Coileach.  "Failte 
dhuit  fhe',"  ars'  am  Peata  ban.  "  Caite,"  ars'  an  Coileach,  "  am 
bheil  thu  a  dol  ?  "  "  Tha  mi,"  ars'  am  Peata  ban,  "  a'  falbh  o  'n 
a  bha  iad  a  moidhadh  mo  mharbabh  aig  an  Nollaig."  "  Bha  iad 
a'  dol  am'  mharbhabh-sa  aig  an  am  cheudna,"  ars'  an  Coileach, 
"agus  theid  mi  leibh."  "Thig  mata,"  ars'  am  Peata  ban. 
Ghabh  iad  air  an  aghaidh  gus  an  do  tbachair  giadh  orra.  "  Failte 
dhuit  a  Pheata  bhain,"  ars'  an  geadh.  "Failte  dhuit  fhe'  a 
gheoidh,"  ars'  am  Peata  ban.  "  Caite  am  bheil  thu  a  dol  ?  "  ars' 
an  geadh.  "  Tha  mise,"  ars'  am  Peata  ban,  "a'  teichadh,  a  chionn 
gu  'n  robh  iad  a  dol  am'  mharbhadh  aig  an  Nollaig."  "  Bha  iad 
a  dol  a'  dheanadh  sin  ormsa  cuideachd,"  ars'  an  Geadh,  "agus 
falbhaidh  mi  leibh."  Ghabh  a' chuideachd  air  an  aghaidh  gus 
an  robh  an  oidhche  'teannadh  orra,  agus  chunnaic  iad  solus  beag 
fada  bhuatha  's  ge  b'  fhada  bhuatha  cha  bh'  fhada  'ga  ruigheachd. 
An  uair  a  rainig  iad  an  tigh,  thubhairt  iad  ri  'cheile  gun  amhair- 
ceadh  iad  a  stigh  air  an  uinneag  a  dh'  fhaicinn  co  a  bha  anus  an 
tigh  ;  agus  chunnaic  iad  meairlich  a'  cunntas  airgid  ;  agus 
thubhairt  am  Peata  ban,  ''Glaoidhidh  na  uile  aon  aguinn  a 
ghlaodh  fein  ;  glaoidhidh  mise  mo  ghlaodh  ;  agus  glaoidhidh  an 
Tarbh  a  ghlaodh  fein  ;  glaoidhidh  an  Cii  a  ghlaodh  fein  ;  agus  an 


204  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

Cat  a  ghlaodh  fein  ;  agus  an  Coileach  a  ghlaodh  fein  ;  agus 
an  Geadh  a  ghlaodh  fein. "  Leis  sin  thug  iad  aon  ghair  asda. 
An  uair  a  chuala  na  meairlich  a'  ghair  a  bha  muidh  shaoil 
iad  gun  robh  an  donas  ann,  agus  theich  iad  amach,  agus  dh' 
falbh  iad  do  choille  a  bha  dluth  daibh.  An  uair  a  chunuaic  am 
Peata  ban  agus  a  chuideachd  gun  robh  an  tigh  falamh  'chaidh 
iad  a  stigh,  agus  fhuair  iad  an  t-airgid  a  bha  aig  na  meairlich 
'ga  chunntas,  agus  roinn  iad  eatorra  fein  e.  An  sin  smuain- 
tich  iad  gun  gabhadh  iad  mu  thamh.  Thubhairt  am  Peata 
ban,  "Caite  an  caidil  thus'  an  nochd  a  Thairbh."  "Caidlidh 
mise,"  ars'  an  tarbh,  "cul  an  doruis  far  an  abhaist  domh." 
"  Caite  an  caidil  thu  fein  a  Pheata  bhain  ?"  "Caidlidh  mise," 
ars'  am  Peata  ban  am  meadhan  an  ulair  far  an  abhaist  domh." 
"  Caite  an  caidil  thus'  a  Choin  ?"  ars'  am  Peata  ban.  "  Caidlidh 
mise  taobh  an  teine  far  an  abhaist  domh,"  ars'  an  Cu,  "Caite 
an  caidil  thus' a  Chait?"  "Caidlidh  mis',"  ars' an  Cat,  "ann 
am  preas  nan  coinnleaun  far  an  toil  learn  a  bhith."  "  Caite  an 
caidil  thus'  a  Choilich  ?"  ars'  am  Peata  ban.  "  Caidlidh  mise," 
ars' an  Coileach,  "air  an  sparr  far  an  abhaist  domh."  "Caite 
an  caidil  thus  a  Gheoidh  ?"  "  Caidlidh  mise,"  ars'  an  G6adh  air 
an  dunan  far  an  robh  mi  cleachte  ri  bhith." 

Cha  robh  iad  fada  air  gabhail  mu  thamh  an  uair  a  thill  fear  do 
na  meairlich  a  dh'  amharc  a  stigh  feuch  am  moicheadh  e  an  robh 
aon  sa'  bith  'san  tigh.  Bha  na  uile  ni  samhach  agus  dh'  ealuith  e 
air  aghaidh  gu  preas  nan  coinnlean  airson  coinneal  a  lasadh  e 
dheanadh  soluis  da,  ach  an  uair  a  chuir  e  lamh  'sa  bhocsa  shabh 
an  cat  Inean  na  laimh,  ach  thug  e  leis  a'  choinneal  agus  dh'  fheuch 
e  ri  'lasadh.  An  sin  dh'  eirich  an  cu  agus  chuir  e  earball  ann  am 
poit  uisge  bha  aig  taobh  an  teine  ;  chrath  e  earball  agus  chuir  e 
as  a  choinneal.  Shaoil  am  meairleach  an  sin  gu  robh  an  donus 
'san  tigh  agus  theich  e  ;  ach  an  uair  a  bha  e  dol  seachad  air  a' 
Pheata  bhan  thug  e  buille  dha  ;  mun  d'  fhuar  e  seachad  air  an 
tarbh  thug  e  breab  dha  ;  agus  thoisich  an  coileach  air  glaoidhich  ; 
agus  an  uair  a  chaidh  e  mach  thoisich  an  geadh  air  a  ghreadadh 
le  'sgiathan  mu  na  luirgnean.  Chaidh  e  don  choillidh  far  an 
robh  a  chompanich,  co  luath  'sa  bha  'na  chasan.  Dh'  fhe6raich  iad 
dheth  cia  mar  chaidh  dha.  "Cha  deachaidh,"  ars'  esan,  "ach 
meadhonach  ;  an  uair  a  chaidh  mi  gu  preas  nan  coinnlean  bha 
fear  ann  a  shath  deich  sgeanan  ann  am  laimh,  agus  an  uair  a 
chaidh  mi  gu  taobh  an  teine  a  lasadh  na  coinneal  bha  fear  mor, 
dubh  'na  luidhe  ann  a  bha  spreadadh  uisge  urra  'ga  cuir  as,  agus 


THE  STORY   OF  THE   WHITE   PET.  205 

an  uair  a  thug  mi  lamb,  air  dol  amach  bha  fear  mor  am  meadhan 
an  urlair  a  tbug  utag  domb,  agus  fear  eil'  aig  cul  an  doruis  a  pbut 
amacb  mi,  agus  bha  ablach  beag  air  an  fbaradh  aig  glaoidbich 
amach,  "  cuir  an  nioi  an  so  e  'sfoghnaidhmifhein  dha,"  agus  bha 
Oriasaich  amach  air  an  dunan  'gam  gbreadatlh  mu  na  casan  le 
apran.  A  nuair  a  chual  na  meairlich  sin  cha  do  phill  iad  a  dh' 
iarridh  an  cuid  airgid,  agus  fhuair  am  Peata  ban  agus  a  chom- 
panaich  dhaibh  fein  e,  agus  chum  e  socair  iad  am  feadh  'sa  bha 
iad  beo. 

Mrs.  MacTavish  got  this  story  from  a  young  girl  in  her  service, 
November  1859,  who  learned  it  in  Oa,  a  district  of  Islay,  last 
year,  when  she  was  employed  in  herding  cattle. 

It  is  a  version  of  the  same  tale  as  Grimm's  "Bremer  Stadt 
Masikanten,"  which  appears  to  have  been  long  known  in  Germany 
in  various  shapes. 

The  crowing  of  the  cock  is  imitated  in  Gaelic  and  in  German. 
The  Gaelic  is  closer.  "Bringt  mir  den  Schelm  her"  is  not  so 
close  to  "  kikeriki  "  as  the  Gaelic  words — which  I  have  tried  to 
spell  phonetically — are  to  the  note  of  a  cock.  There  is  a  bull  in 
the  Gaelic  tale,  instead  of  an  ass  ;  and  a  sheep  and  a  goose,  in 
addition  to  the  dog,  cat,  and  cock,  which  are  common  to  both. 
There  are  six  creatures  in  the  one  tale,  commonly  found  about 
the  Highland  cottage,  which  is  well  described  :  four  in  the  other, 
common  about  German  cottages,  My  own  opinion  is,  that  the 
tale  is  common  to  both  languages  and  old,  but  it  might  have 
been  borrowed  from  a  book  so  well  known  in  England  as  Grimm's 
Stories  are.  It  is  worth  remark,  that  the  dog  and  the  cat  were 
to  die  at  Christmas,  as  well  as  the  sheep  and  bull,  who  might 
reasonably  fear  to  be  eaten  anywhere,  and  who  have  been 
sacrificed  everywhere  ;  the  goose,  who  is  always  a  Christmas 
dish  in  the  Highlands  ;  and  the  cock,  who  should  die  last  of  his 
family,  because  the  toughest.  The  dog  was  once  sacrificed  to 
Hecate  on  the  30th  of  every  month  ;  and  there  -was  a  dog 
divinity  in  Egypt.  Cats  drew  the  car  of  Freya,  a  Norse  divinity  ; 
they  were  the  companions  of  Scoteh  witches,  and  did  wondrous 
feats  in  the  Highlands.  See  "  Grant  Stewart's  Highland  Super- 
stitions. "  To  roast  a  cat  alive  on  a  spit  was  a  method  of  raising 
the  fiend  and  gaining  treasure,  tried,  as  it  is  asserted,  not  very 
long  ago.  I  myself  remember  to  have  heard,  with  horror,  of  a 
cruel  boy,  who  roasted  his  mother's  cat  in  an  iron  pot  on  a  Sun- 


206  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

day,  while  the  rest  were  at  church,  though  it  was  not  said  why 
he  did  it.  A  cock  has  been  a  sacrifice  and  sacred  amongst  many 
nations  ;  for  instance,  a  cock  and  a  ram's  head  were  emblems  of 
.ZEsculapius.  The  crowing  of  a  cock  is  a  terror  to  all  super- 
natural, unholy  beings,  according  to  popular  mythology  every- 
where. When  the  mother,  in  these  stories,  sends  her  children 
into  the  world  to  seek  their  fortune,  she  bakes  a  cake,  and  kills 
a  cook.  A  fowl,  as  I  am  informed  by  a  minister  in  one  of  the 
Orknej's,  is  still,  or  was  lately,  buried  alive  by  nurses  as  a  cure 
for  certain  childish  ailments.  In  short,  the  dog,  the  cat,  and  the 
cock  may  possibly  have  had  good  reason  to  fear  death  at  a  reli- 
gious festival,  if  this  part  of  their  history  came  "from  the  East 
with  the  Celts.  The  goose  also  has  been  sacred  time  out  of 
mind.  Bernacle  geese  are  supposed  to  be  hatched  from  a  sea- 
shell.  The  goose  was  the  great  cackler  who  laid  the  egg  of  the 
world,  according  to  Egyptian  inscriptions  on  coffins.  He  was 
the  emblem  of  Seb  ;  he  is  sacred  at  the  present  day  in  Cejdon. 
He  was  sacred  in  Greece  and  at  Rome  ;  and  the  Britons  would 
not  eat  his  flesh  in  the  days  of  Csesar.  Perhaps  the  custom  of 
eating  a  goose  at  Christmas,  which,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge, 
is  peculiar  to  the  Scotch  Highlands,  may  be  a  custom  begun  by 
the  British  Christians  to  mark  their  conversion,  and  carried  on 
ever  since.  Much  will  be  found  on  this  subject  in  "  Bawlinson's 
Herodotus,"  p.  122,  etc.  ;  in  "Mill  and  Wilson's  History  of 
British  India  ; "  and  in  books  on  Ceylon.  At  all  events,  this 
Gaelic  story  is  well  known  in  Islay,  for  MacLean  writes  that  he 
has  often  heard  it,  and  all  the  creatures  mentioned  in  it  have 
had  to  do  with  mythology  at  some  period  somewhere. 

I  suspect  that  it  is  one  of  the  class  given  in  "  Contes  et  Apo- 
logues Indians  "  (Paris,  1860),  a  class  which  includes  such  well 
known  stories  as  "  The  Goose  icith  the  golden  Eggs,"  &s  a  man 
who  cut  down  a  tree  to  get  at  the  fruit  (No.  45)  ;  "  The  Belly 
and  the  Members"  as  a  quarrel  between  the  head  and  tail  of  a 
serpent  (No.  40),  a  story  wdiich  somewhat  resembles  that  which 
is  quoted  in  the  introduction,  as  "MacLeod's  Fool,"  "  Le  Sage 
et  le  Fou  "  (No.  18)  ;  "The  two  Geese  that  carried  a  Tortoise  " 
(No.  14)  ;  "  Le  Jeune  Bramane  qui  c'  est  sali  le  Doight  "  (No.  64), 
which  is  a  schoolboy  story  in  Scotland  in  another  shape  ;  "The 
Ass  in  the  Lion's  Skin  "  (No.  59)  ;  "  Les  Choses  impossibles  et 
les  Reliques  du  Bouddha "  (No.  110),  wdrich  has  a  parallel  in 
Gaelic,  in  broad  Scotch,  and  in  Norse.    The  Gaelic  poet  describes 


THE   STORY   OF  THE  WHITE  PET.  207 

impossibilities,  such  as  shell-fish  bringing  heather  from  the  hill, 
and  the  climax  is  a  certain  great  laird  dressed  in  homespun. 
The  Scotch  rhyme  came  to  me  from  a  little  boy  of  five  year's  old, 
and  is  called  "  The  Mantle  Joe."  It  begins  "  'Twas  on  a  Mon- 
day Mornin'  when  the  Cat  crew  Day  ;  "  There  are  "Twenty-four 
Weavers  riding  on  a  Paddock  ;"  "A  Hare  and  a  Haddie  racin' 
owre  the  Lea,"  and  such  like  ;  and  it  ends,  "  Frae  Beginning  to 
the  End  it's  a'  big  Lees."  The  Norse  song  was  written  out  for 
me  by  an  officer  on  board  a  steamer,  and  includes  "  Two  Squirrels 
taming  a  Bear,"  and  other  such  events  ;  and  the  Sanscrit,  which 
Chinese  and  French  savants  have  translated,  names  similar 
absurd  events  which  might  sooner  happen  than  the  discovery  of 
the  reliques  of  Buddha.  In  short,  European  stories  are  to  be 
traced  in  the  east,  and  this  White  Pet  may  be  one  of  the  kind. 


XII. 
THE  DAUGHTER  OF  THE  SKIES. 

From  James  MacLauchlan,  servant,  Islay. 

rpHERE  was  there  before  now  a  farmer,  and  he  had  a 
■*•  leash  of  daughters,  and  much  cattle  and  sheep.  He 
went  on  a  day  to  see  them,  and  none  of  them  were  to 
be  found ;  and  he  took  the  length  of  the  day  to  search 
for  them.  He  saw,  in  the  lateness,  coming  home,  a 
little  doggy  running  about  a  park. 

The  doggy  came  where  he  was — "  What  wilt  thou 
give  me,"  said  he,  "if  I  get  thy  lot  of  cattle  and  sheep 
for  thee  ? "  "I  don't  know  myself,  thou  ugly  thing ; 
what  wilt  thou  be  asking,  and  I  will  give  it  to  thee  of 
anything  I  have  ? "  "  Wilt  thou  give  me,"  said  the 
doggy,  "  thy  big  daughter  to  marry?"  "  I  will  give 
her  to  thee,"  said  he,  "if  she  will  take  thee  herself." 

They  went  home,  himself  and  the  doggy.  Her  father 
said  to  the  eldest  daughter,  Would  she  take  him?  and 
she  said  she  would  not.  He  said  to  the  second  one, 
Would  she  marry  him  ?  and  she  said,  she  would 
not  marry  him,  though  the  cattle  should  not  be  got  for 
ever.  He  said  to  the  youngest  one,  Would  she  marry 
him?  and  she  said,  that  she  would  marry  him.  They 
married,  and  her  sisters  were  mocking  her  because  she 
had  married  him. 

He  took  her  with  him  home  to  his  own  place.  When 
he  came  to  his   own   dwelling-place,  he   grew  into  a 


THE  DAUGHTER  OF  THE   SKIES.  209 

splendid  man.  They  were  together  a  great  time,  and 
she  said  she  had  better  go  see  her  father.  He  said  to 
her  to  take  care  that  she  should  not  stay  till  she  should 
have  children,  for  then  she  expected  one.  She  said  she 
would  not  stay.  He  gave  her  a  steed,  and  he  told  her 
as  soon  as  she  reached  the  house,  to  take  the  bridle  from 
her  head  and  let  her  away  ;  and  when  she  wished  to 
come  home,  that  she  had  but  to  shake  the  bridle,  and 
that  the  steed  would  come,  and  that  she  would  put  her 
head  into  it. 

She  did  as  he  asked  her  j  she  was  not  long  at  her 
father's  house  when  she  fell  ill,  and  a  child  was  born. 
That  night  men  were  together  at  the  fire  to  watch. 
There  came  the  very  prettiest  music  that  ever  was  heard 
,  about  the  town ;  and  every  one  within  slept  but  she. 
He  came  in  and  he  took  the  child  from  her.  He  took 
himself  out,  and  he  went  away.  The  music  stopped, 
and  each  one  awoke ;  and  there  was  no  knowing  to  what 
side  the  child  had  gone. 

She  did  not  tell  anything,  but  so  soon  as  she  rose  she 
took  with  her  the  bridle,  and  she  shook  it,  and  the  steed 
came,  and  she  put  her  head  into  it.  She  took  herself 
J  off  riding,  and  the  steed  took  to  going  home  j  and  the 
\  swift  March  wind  that  would  be  before  her,  she  would 
catch  ;  and  the  swift  March  wind  that  would  be  after 
her,  could  not  catch  her. 

She  arrived.  "  Thou  art  come,"  said  he.  "I  came," 
said  she.  He  noticed  nothing  to  her ;  and  no  more  did 
she  notice  anything  to  him.  Near  to  the  end  of  three 
quarters  again  she  said,  "I  had  better  go  see  my  father." 
He  said  to  her  on  this  journey  as  he  had  said  before. 
She  took  with  her  the  steed,  and  she  went  away ;  and 
when  she  arrived  she  took  the  bridle  from  the  steed's 
head,  and  she  set  her  home.  „      j    j^ 


210  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

That  very  night  a  child  was  born.  He  came  as  he 
did  before,  with  music ;  every  one  slept,  and  he  took 
with  him  the  child.  When  the  music  stopped  they 
all  awoke.  Her  father  was  before  her  face,  saying  to 
her  that  she  must  tell  what  was  the  reason  of  the 
matter.  She  would  not  tell  anything.  When  she 
grew  well,  and  when  she  rose,  she  took  with  her  the 
bridle,  she  shook  it,  and  the  steed  came  and  put  her 
head  into  it.  She  took  herself  away  home.  When 
she  arrived  he  said,  "  Thou  art  come."  "  I  came," 
said  she.  He  noticed  nothing  to  her  ;  no  more  did 
she  notice  anything  to  him.  Again  at  the  end  of  three 
quarters,  she  said,  "  I  had  better  go  to  see  my  father." 
"Do,"  said  he,  "but  take  care  thou  dost  not  as  thou 
didst  on  the  other  two  journeys."  "I  will  not,"  said  she. 
He  gave  her  the  steed  and  she  went  away.  She 
reached  her  father's  house,  and  that  very  night  a  child 
was  born.  The  music  came  as  was  usual,  and  the 
child  was  taken  away,  Then  her  father  was  before 
her  face ;  and  he  was  going  to  kill  her,  if  she  would 
not  tell  what  was  happening  to  the  children ;  or  what 
sort  of  man  she  had.  With  the  fright  he  gave  her, 
she  told  it  to  him.  When  she  grew  well  |"she  took  the 
bridle  with  her  to  a  hill  that  was  opposite  to  her,  and 
she  began  shaking  the  bridle,  to  try  if  the  steed  would 
come,  or  if  she  would  put  her  head  into  it ;  and  though 
she  were  shaking  still,  the  steed  would  not  come. 
When  she  saw  that  she  was  not  coming,  she  went 
out  on  foot.  When  she  arrived,  no  one  was  within 
but  the  crone  that  was  his  mother.  "  Thou  art  with- 
out a  houseman  to-day,"  said  the  crone ;  and  if  thou 
art  quick  thou  wilt  catch  him  yet.  She  went  away, 
and  she  was  going  till  the  night  came  on  her.  She 
saw   then  a  light  a   long  way   from  her;   and   if   it 


THE  DAUGHTER  OF  THE   SKIES.  211 

was  a  long  way  from  her,  she  was  not  long  in  reach 
ing  it.  When  she  went  in,  the  floor  was  ready  swept 
before  her,  and  the  housewife  spinning  up  in  the  end  of 
the  house.  "Come  up,"  said  the  housewife,  "I  know 
of  thy  cheer  and  travel.  Thou  art  going  to  try  if  thou 
canst  catch  thy  man ;  he  is  going  to  marry  the  daughter 
of  the  King  of  the  Skies/  "He  is!"  said  she.  The 
housewife  rose ;  she  made  meat  for  her ;  she  set  on 
water  to  wash  her  feet,  and  she  laid  her  down.  If  the 
day  came  quickly,  it  was  quicker  than  that  that  the 
housewife  rose,  and  that  she  made  meat  for  her.  She 
set  her  on  foot  then  for  going  ;  and  she  gave  her  shears 
that  would  cut  alone  ;  and  she  said  to  her,  "  Thou  wilt 
be  in  the  house  of  my  middle  sister  to-night."  She  was 
going,  and  going,  till  the  night  came  on  her.  She  saw 
a  light  a  long  way  from  her  ;  and  if  it  was  a  long  way 
from  her,  she  was  not  long  in  reaching  it.  When  she 
went  in  the  house  was  ready  swept,  a  fire  on  the 
middle  of  the  floor,  and  the  housewife  spinning  at  the 
end  of  the  fire.  "Come  up,"  said  the  housewife,  "I 
know  thy  cheer  and  travel."  She  made  meat  for  her, 
she  set  on  water,  she  washed  her  feet,  and  she  laid  her 
down.  No  sooner  came  the  day  than  the  housewife  set 
her  on  foot,  and  made  meat  for  her.  She  said  she  had 
better  go ;  and  she  gave  her  a  needle  would  sew  by 
itself.  "  Thou  wilt  be  in  the  house  of  my  youngest 
sister  to-night,"  said  she.  She  was  going,  and  going, 
till  the  end  of  day  and  the  mouth  of  lateness.  She 
saw  a  light  a  long  way  from  her  ;  and  if  it  was  a  long 
way  from  her,  she  was  not  long  in  reaching  it.  She 
went  in,  the  house  was  swept,  and  the  housewife 
spinning  at  the  end  of  the  fire.  "  Come  up,"  said  she, 
"  I  know  of  thy  cheer  and  travel."  She  made  meat  for 
her,  she  set  on  water,  she  washed  her  feet,  and  she  laid 


212  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES. 

her  down.  If  the  day  came  quickly,  it  was  quicker 
than  that  that  the  housewife  rose  ;  she  set  her  on  foot, 
and  she  made  her  meat ;  she  gave  her  a  clue  of  thread, 
and  the  thread  would  go  into  the  needle  by  itself  ;  and 
as  the  shears  would  cut,  and  the  needle  sew,  the  thread 
would  keep  up  with  them.  "Thou  wilt  be  in  the  town 
to-night."  She  reached  the  town  about  evening,  and 
she  went  into  the  house  of  the  king's  hen  wife,  to  lay 
down  her  weariness,  and  she  was  warming  herself  at 
the  fire.  She  said  to  the  crone  to  give  her  work,  that 
she  would  rather  be  working  than  be  still.  "  No  man 
is  doing  a  turn  in  this  town  to-day,"  says  the  hen  wife  ; 
"  the  king's  daughter  has  a  wedding."  "  Ud  !  "  said  she 
to  the  crone,  "give  me  cloth  to  sew,  or  a  shirt  that  will 
keep  my  hands  going."  She  gave  her  shirts  to  make  ; 
she  took  the  shears  from  her  pocket,  and  she  set  it  to 
work  ;  she  set  the  needle  to  work  after  it ;  as  the  shears 
would  cut,  the  needle  would  sew,  and  the  thread  would 
go  into  the  needle  by  itself.  One  of  the  king's  servant 
maids  came  in ;  she  was  looking  at  her,  and  it  caused 
her  great  wonder  how  she  made  the  shears  and  the 
needle  work  by  themselves.  She  went  home  and  she 
told  the  king's  daughter,  that  one  was  in  the  house  of 
the  hen  wife,  and  that  she  had  shears  and  a  needle  that 
could  work  of  themselves.  "If  there  is,"  said  the  king's 
daughter,  "go  thou  over  in  the  morning,  and  say  to 
her,  'what  will  she  take  for  the  shears.'  "  In  the  morn- 
ing she  went  over,  and  she  said  to  her  that  the  king's 
daughter  was  asking  what  would  she  take  for  the 
shears.  "  Nothing  I  asked,"  said  she,  "but  leave  to  lie 
where  she  lay  last  night."  "Go  thou  over,"  said  the 
king's  daughter,  "and  say  to  her  that  she  will  get 
that."  She  gave  the  shears  to  the  king's  daughter. 
When  they  were  going  to  lie  down,  the  king's  daughter 


THE  DAUGHTER  OF  THE   SKIES.  213 

gave  him  a  sleep  drink,  so  that  he  might  not  wake.  He 
did  not  wake  the  length  of  the  night ;  and  no  sooner 
came  the  day,  than  the  king's  daughter  came  where  she 
was,  and  set  her  on  foot  and  put  her  out.  On  the  mor- 
row she  was  working  with  the  needle,  and  cutting  with 
other  shears.  The  king's  daughter  sent  the  maid 
servant  over,  and  she  asked  "  what  would  she  take  for 
the  needle  ? "  She  said  she  would  not  take  anything, 
but  leave  to  lie  where  she  lay  last  night.  The  maid 
servant  told  this  to  the  king's  daughter.  "  She  will  get 
that,"  said  the  king's  daughter.  The  maid  servant  told 
that  she  would  get  that,  and  she  got  the  needle.  When 
they  were  going  to  lie  down,  the  king's  daughter  gave 
him  a  sleep  drink,  and  he  did  not  wake  that  night. 
The  eldest  son  he  had  was  lying  in  a  bed  beside  them ; 
and  he  was  hearing  her  speaking  to  him  through  the 
night,  and  saying  to  him  that  she  was  the  mother  of  his 
three  children.  His  father  and  he  himself  was  taking 
a  walk  out,  and  he  told  his  father  what  he  was  hearing. 
This  day  the  king's  daughter  sent  the  servant  maid  to 
ask  what  she  would  take  for  the  clue ;  and  she  said  she 
would  ask  but  leave  to  lie  where  she  lay  last  night. 
"  She  will  get  that,"  said  the  king's  daughter.  This 
night  when  he  got  the  sleep  drink,  he  emptied  it,  and 
he  did  not  drink  it  at  all.  Through  the  night  she  said 
to  him  that  he  was  the  father  of  her  three  sons ;  and  he 
said  that  he  was.  In  the  morning,  when  the  king's 
daughter  came  down,  he  said  to  her  to  go  up,  that  she 
was  his  wife  who  was  with  him.  When  they  rose  they 
went  away  to  go  home.  They  came  home  j  the  spells 
went  off  him,  they  planted  together  and  I  left  them,  and 
they  left  me. 


214  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 


NIGHEAN  HIGH  NAN  SPEUR. 

Bha  siod  ann  roimhe  so  tuathanach,  's  bha  triuir  nigheanan  aige, 
's  moran  cruidh  is  chaorach.  Dh'  fholbh  e  la'  a'm  faicinn  's  cha 
robh  gin  r'a  fhaotainn  dhiu,  's  thug  e  fad  an  latha  'gan  iarraidh. 
Chunnaic  e,  anns  an  anamoch  a'  tighinn  dachaidh,  cuilean  beag 
a'  ruith  feadh  pairce.  Thainig  an  cuilean  far  an  robh  e,  "  De 
bheir  thu  dhomhs',"  urs'  esan,  "ma  gheobh  mi  do  chuid  cruidh 
is  caorach  dhuit  ?  "  "  Cha  'n  'eil  fhios'am  fein  a  ruid  ghrannda. 
De  bhios  thu  'g  iarraidh  ?  's  bheir  mise  dhuit  e  de  ni  sam  bith 
a  th'  agam."  "An  d'  thoir  thu  dhomh,"  urs'  an  cuilean, 
"do  nighean  mh5r  r'a  posadh."  "Bheir  mise  dhuit 
i,"  urs'  esan,  "ma  ghabhas  i  f6in  thu."  Chaidh  iad  dhach- 
aidh,  e  fein  's  an  cuilean.  Dh'  fhoighneachd  a  h-athair 
d'a  nighean  bu  shine  an  gabhadh  i  e,  's  thuirt  i  nach 
gabhadh.  Thuirt  e  ris  an  darna  te  am  posadh  ise  e,  's  thuirt 
i  nach  gabhadh.  Thuirt  e  ris  an  darna  te  am  pdsadh  ise  e,  's 
thuirt  i  nach  p6sadh,  ged  nach  faighte  an  crodh  gu  brath. 
Thuirt  e  ris  an  te  b'  6ige  am  pdsadh  ise  e,  's  thuirt  i  gum  p6sadh. 
Ph6s  iad,  's  bha  'peathraichean  a'  magadh  urra  airson  gun  do 
phds  i  e.  Tbug  e  leis  dhachaidh  i  d'a  aite  f£in.  Nur  a  thainig 
e  g'  a  aite  comhnuidh  fein  dh'  fhas  e  'na  dhuine  ciatach.  Bha 
iad  comhla  uine  mhor,  's  thuirt  ise  gum  b'  fhearra  dhi  dol  a  dh' 
amharc  a  h-athar.  Thuirt  esan  rithe  i  thoirt  an  aire  nach 
fhanadh  i  gus  am  biodh  clan  aice.  Bha  i  torrach  'san  am. 
Thuirt  i  nach  fanadh.  Thug  e  dhi  steud,  's  thuirt  e  rithe,  cho 
luath  's  a  ruigeadh  i  'n  tigh  an  t-srian  a  thoirt  as  a  ceann,  's  a 
leigeil  air  folbb,  's  nur  a  bhiodh  toil  aice  tighinn  dachaidh  nach 
robh  aic'  ach  an  t-srian  a  chrathadh,  's  gun  d'  thigeadh  an  steud 
's  gun  cuireadh  i  'ceann  innte.  Rinn  i  mar  a  dh'  iarr  e  urra. 
Cha  robh  i  fad'  an  tigh  a  h-athar  nur  a  dh'  fhas  i  gu  bochd  'sa 
chaidh  a  h-asaid.  An  oidhche  sin  bha  daoine  cruinn  aig  a' 
ghealbhan  'ga  'faire.  Thainig  an  aona  che6l  a  bu  bhinne  chualas 
riamh  feadh  a'  bhaile,  's  chaidil  a'  h-uile  duine  stigh  ach  ise. 
Thainig  esan  a  stigh  's  thug  e  uaithe  am  paisde.  Ghabh  e  'mach 
's  dh'  fholbh  e.  Stad  an  ceol,  's  dhuisg  gach  duine,  's  cha  robh 
fios  de  'n  taobh  a  chaidh  am  paisde.  Cha  d'  innis  i  ni  sam  bith, 
ach  cho  luath  's  a  dh'  'eiridh  i  thug  i  leatha  an  t-srian,  's  chrath 
i  i,  's  thainig  an  steud,  's  chuir  i  'ceann  innte.  Ghabh  i  air 
mharcachd  urra,  's  ghabh  an  steud  air  folbh  dhachaidh ;  bheir- 


NIGHEAN   RIGH  NAN   SPEUR.  215 

eadh  ise  air  a  ghaoitk  luath  Mhart  a  bh'  air  thoiseach  orra,  's 
cha  bheiseadh  a  ghaoth  luath  Mhart  a  bha  na  deigh  orra. 
Rainig  i. 

"Thainig  thu,"  urs'  esan.  "Thainig,"  urs'  ise.  Cha  do  leig 
e  rud  sam  bith  air  rithe,  's  cha  mhotha  leig  ise  rud  sam  bith  orra 
risan.  Dluth  air  ceann  tri  raithean  a  rithisd  thuirt  ise,  *"S 
fhearra  dhomh  dol  a  dh'  amharc  m*  athar."  Thuirt  e  rithe  air 
an  t-siubhal  so  mar  a  thuirt  e  roimhid.  Thug  i  leatha  an  steud 
's  dh'  fholbh  i.  Nur  a  rainig  i  thug  i  'n  t-srian  a  ceann  na  steud, 
's  leig  i  dhachaidh  i,  's  an  oidhche  sin  fein  chaidh  a  h-asaid. 
Thainig  esan  mar  a  rinn  e  roimhid  le  cedl.  Chaidil  a'  h-uile 
duine,  's  thug  e  leis  am  paisde.  Nur  a  stad  an  ceol  dhiiisg  iad 
air  fad.  Bha  'h-athair  air  a  h-aodann  ag  radh  rithe  gum  feumadh 
i  innseadh  de  bu  chiall  de  'n  ghnothach.  Cha  'n  innseadh  ise  ni 
sam  bith.  Nur  a  dh'  fhas  i  gu  math,  's  a  dh'  eirich  i,  thug  i 
leatha,  an  t-srian,  chrath  i  i,  's  thainig  an  steud,  's  chuir  i  ceann 
innte.  Ghabh  i  air  folbh  dhachaidh.  Nur  a  rainig  i  thuirt  esan. 
"Thainig  thu."  "Thainig,"  urs'  ise.  Cha  do  leig  e  rud  sam 
bith  aire  rithe,  's  cha  mhotha  'leig  ise  urra  risan.  An  ceann  tri 
raithean  a  rithisd  thuirt  i,  "  'S  fhearra  dhomh  dol  a  dh'  amharc 
m' athar."  "Dean,"  urs'  esan,  "ach  thoir  an  aire  nach  dean 
thu  mar  a  rinn  thu  an  da  shiubhal  roimhid."  "  Cha  dean,"  urs' 
ise.  i  Thug  e  dhi  an  steud,  's  dh'  fholbh  i.  Rainig  i  tigh  a  h- 
athar,  's  dh'  asaideadh  i  'n  oidhche  sin  fein.  Thainig  an  ceol  mar 
a  b'  abhaist,  's  thugadh  am  paisd'  air  folbh.  Bha  'h-athair  air  a 
h-aodann  an  sin,  's  e  'dol  a  'marbhadh  mar  an  innseadh  i  de  'bha 
tachairt  do  na  paisdean,  no  de  'n  se6rsa  duine  a  bh'  aice.  Leis 
an  eagal  a  chuir  e  urra  dh'  innis  i  dha  e.  Nur  a  dh'  fhas  i  gu 
math,  thug  i  leatha  an  t-srian  gu  cnoc  a  bha  ma  'coinneamh,  's 
thoisich  i  air  crathadh  na  sreine  feuch  an  d'thigeadh  an  steud, 
na'n  cuireadh  i  'ceann  innte,  's  ged  a  bhiodh  i  'crathadh  fhathasd 
cha  d'  thigeadh  an  steud.  Nur  a  chunnaic  i  nach  robh  i  'tighinn 
ghabh  i  mach  'na  cois.  Nur  a  rainig  i  cha  robh  duine  stigh  ach 
a' chailleach  a  bu  mhathair  dha.  "  Tha  thusa  gun  f hear  tigh e 
an  diugh,"  urs'  a'  chailleach,  "  's  ma  bhios  thu  tapaidh  beiridh 
thu  air  fhathasd." 

Ghabh  i  air  folbh,  's  bha  i  'folbh  gus  an  d'  thainig  an  oidhche 
orra.  Chunnaic  i  'n  sin  solus  fada  uaithe,  's  ma  b'  fhada  uaithe 
cha  b'  fhada  bha  ise  'ga  'ruigheachd.  Nur  a  chaidh  i  stigh  bha 
urlar  reidh  sguabte  roimhpe,  's  bean  an  tighe  'sniomh  shuas  an 


216  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES. 

ceann  an  tighe.  "Thig  a  nlos,"  ursa  bean  an  tighe,  M  tha  fios  do 
sheud  's  do  shiubhail  agamsa.  Tha  thu  folbh  feuch  am  beir  thu 
air  t-f hear.  Tha  e  'folbh  a  phosadh  nighean  rlgh  nan  speur." 
"  Tha  !  "  urs'  ise.  Dh'  eirich  bean  an  tighe  ;  rinn  i  biadh  dhi ; 
chuir  i  air  uisge  'ghlanadh  a  cas  ;  's  chuir  i  'laidhe  i.  Ma  bu 
luath  a  thainig  an  latha  bu  luaithe  na  sin  a  dh'  eirich  bean  an 
tighe  'sa  rinn  i  biadh  dhi.  Chuir  i  air  a  cois  i  'n  sin  airson  folbh, 
's  thug  i  dhi  siosar  a  ghearradh  leis  fein,  's  thuirt  i  rithe. 
"  Bidh  thu  ann  an  tigh  mo  phiuthar  mheadhonachsa  nochd." 
Bha  i  'folbh  's  a'  folbh,  gus  an  d'  thainig  an  oidhche  urra. 
Chunnaic  i  solus  fada  uaithe,'  s  ma  b'  fhada  uaithe  cha  b'  fhada 
bha  ise  'ga  ruigheachd.  Nur  a  chaidh  i  stigh  bha  'n  tigh  reidh, 
sguabte  ;  gealbhan  air  meadhon  an  urlair,  'a  bean  an  tighe 
'snlomh  an  ceann  a'  ghealbhain.  "Thig  a  nlos,"  ursa  bean  an 
tighe,  "  tha  fios  do  sheud  's  do  shiubhail  agamsa."  Rinn  i  biadh 
dhi  ;  chuir  i  air  uisge ;  ghlan  i  'casan  's  chuir  i  laidhe  i.  Cha 
bu  luaithe  a  thainig  an  latha  na  'chuir  bean  an  tighe  air  a  cois  i, 
's  a  rinn  i  biadh  dhi.  Thuirt  i  rithe  gum  b'  fhearra  dhi  folbh,  's 
thug  i  dhi  snathad  a  dh'  fhuaigheadh  leatha  f&n.  Bidh  thu  ann 
an  tigh  mo  pheathar  is  dige  a  nochd,"  urs'  ise. 

Bha  i  folbh  's  a'  folbh  gu  deireadh  latha  's  beul  anamoich. 
Chunnaic  i  solus  fada  uaithe,  's  ma  b'  fhada  uaithe  cha  b'  fhada 
bha  ise  'ga  ruigheachd.  Chaidh  i  stigh.  Bha  'n  tigh  sguabte,  's 
bean  an  tighe  'snlomh  os  ceann  a'  ghealbhain.  "Thig  a  nlos," 
urs'  ise,  "tha  fios  do  sheud  's  do  shiubhail  agamsa."  Rinn  i 
biadh  dhi,  chuir  i  air  uisge,  ghlan  i  'casan,  's  chuir  i  laidhe  i. 
Ma  bu  luath  a  thainig  an  latha,  bu  luaithe  na  sin  a  dh'  eirich  bean 
an  tighe  ;  chuir  i  air  a  cois  i,  's  rinn  i  biadh  dhi.  Thug  i  dhi 
ceairsle  shnath  's  rachadh  an  snathainn  anns  an  t-snathad  leis 
f&n,  's  mur  a  ghearradh  an  siosar,  's  mur  a  dh'  fhuaigheadh  an 
t-snathad,  chumadh  a  cheairsle  snath  ruitha.  "Bidh  thu  anns 
a'  bhaile  nochd. " 

Rainig  i  'm  baile  ma  fheasgar  's  chaidh  i  stigh  do  thigh  chaill- 
each  chearc  an  rlgh.  Shuidh  i  'leigeil  a  sglos  ;  bha  i  ga  garadh 
aig  a'  ghealbhan  ;  thuirt  i  ris  a'  chaillich  obair  a'  thoirt  dhi,  gum 
b'  fhearr  leatha  'bhi  'g  obair  na  bhi  'na  tamh.  "  Cha  'n  'eil  duine 
deanadh  turn's  a' bhaile  soji  diugh,"  ursa  a' chailleach  ;  "tha 
posadh  aig  nighean  an  rlgh."  "  Ud  !  "  urs'  ise  ris  a'  chaillich, 
"  thoir  dhomh  aodach  r'a  fhuaghal,  na  leine  'chumas  mo  lamh 
air  folbh."    Thug  i  dhi  16intean  r'a  dheanadh.     Thug  i  mach 


NIGHEAN   RIGH  NAN   SPEUR.  217 

siosar  a  a  poca  ;  chuir  i  dh'  obair  e;  chuir  i  'n  t-snathad  a  dh' 
obair  as  a  dheigh.  Mar  a  ghearradh  an  siosar  dh'  fhuaigheadh 
an  t-snathad,  's  rachadh  an  snath  anns  an  t-snathaid  leis  fein. 
Thainig  te  do  shearbhantan  an  rlgh  stigh  ;  bha  i  'g  amharc  urra ; 
's  bha  e  cur  ioghnadas  mor  urra  demur  a  bha  i  'toirt  air  an  t- 
siosar  's  air  an  t-snathad  oibreachadh  leotha  fein.  Chaidh  i 
dhachaidh,  's  dh'  innis  i  do  nighean  an  rlgh  gun  robh  te  ann  an 
tigh  chailleach  nan  cearc,  's  gun  robh  siosar  agus  snkthad  aice  a 
dh'  oibreachadh  leotha  fein.  "  Ma  tha,"  ursa  nighean  an  rlgh, 
"  theirig  thusa  nunn  anns  a'  mhaidinn,  's  abair  rithe  de  'ghabhas 
i  air  an  t-siosar."  Anns  a'  mhaidinn  chaidh  i  'nunn,  's  thuirt  i 
rithe  gun  robh  nighean  an  rlgh  a'  foighneachd  d£  ghabhadh  i  air 
an  t-siosar.  "  Cha  'n  iarr  mi,"  urs'  ise,  "  ach  cead  laidhe  far  an 
do  laidh  i  fein  an  rair."  "Theirig  thusa  nunn," ursa  nighean  an 
rlgh,  ' '  's  abair  rithe  gum  f aigh  i  sin. "  Thug  i  'n  siosar  do 
nighean  an  rlgh. 

Nur  a  bha  iad  a'  dol  a  laidhe  thug  nighean  an  righ  deoch 
chadail  dasan,  air  alt  's  nach  dtiisgeadh  e.  Cha  do  dhuisg  e  fad 
na  h-oidhche,  's  cha  bu  luaithe  a  thainig  an  latha  na  thainig 
nighean  an  rlgh  far  an  robh  ise,  'sa  chuir  i  air  a  cois  i.  An  la  'r 
na  mhaireach  bha  i  'g  obair  leis  an  t-snathaid,  's  a'  gearradh  le 
siosar  eile.  Chuir  nighean  an  rlgh  an  searbhanta  nunn  a  dh' 
fhoighneachd  de  ghabhadh  i  air  an  t-snathaid.  Thuirt  i  nach 
gabhadh  ni  sam  bith  ach  cead  laidhe  far  an  do  laidh  i  rair.  Dh' 
innis  an  searbhanta  so  do  nighean  an  rlgh.  "  Gheobh  i  sin," 
ursa  nighean  an  righ.  Dh'  innis  an  searbhanta  gum  faigheadh  i 
siod,  's  fhuair  i  'n  t-snathad.  Nur  a  bha  iad  a'  dol  a  laidhe  thug 
nighean  an  righ  deoch  chadail  da,  's  cha  do  dhuisg  e  'n  oidhche 
sin.  Bha  'm  mac  a  bu  shine  bh'  aige  ann  an  leaba  lamh  riutha, 
's  bha  e  'ga  'cluinntinn  a'  bruidhinn  ris  feadh  na  h-oidhche,  's  ag 
radh  ris  gum  b'i  mathair  a  thriuir  chloinn'  i.  Bha  athair  's  e  fein 
a'  gabhail  sraid  a  mach,  's  dh'  innis  e  d'a  athair  de"  'bha  e  'cluinn- 
tinn. An  latha  so  chuir  nighean  an  rlgh  an  searbhanta  a  dh' 
fhe6raich  de'  ghabhadh  i  air  a'  cheairsle,  's  thuirt  i  rithe  nach 
iarradh  i  ach  cead  laidhe  far  and  do  laidh  i  'n  rair,  "Gheobh  i 
sin,"  ursa  nighean  an  rlgh.  An  oidhche  so  nur  a  fhuair  e  'n 
deoch  chadail  thaom  e  i,  's  cha  d'  61  e  idir  i.  Feadh  na  h-oidhche 
thuirt  ise  ris  gum  b'  e  athair  a  triuir  mac,  's  thuirt  esan  gum  b'  e. 

Anns  a  mhaidinn,  nur  a  thainig  nighean  an  rlgh  nuas,  thuirt  e 
rithe  i  'dhol  suas,  gum  bi  'bhean  a  bha  leis.   Nur  a  dh'  eiridh  iad 


218  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

clh'  fholbh  iad  airson  dol  dachaidh.  Thainig  iad  dachaidh  ;  dh' 
f  holbh  na  geasan  deth.  Chuir  iad  c5mhla  's  dhealaich  mise  riutha, 
's  dhealaich  iadsan  riumsa. 

This  is  but  another  version  of  No.  III.,  "The  Hoodie  ; "  but 
it  has  certain  magic  gifts  which  I  have  not  found  in  any  other 
Gaelic  story  ;  and  the  little  dog  who  goes  to  the  skies,  and  is 
about  to  marry  the  daughter  of  the  king,  and  is  transformed  into 
a  man  at  home,  may  turn  out  to  be  a  Celtic  divinity.  When  so 
little  is  known  of  Celtic  mythology,  anything  may  be  of  use.  The 
raven,  the  crow,  and  the  serpent,  have  appeared  as  transformed 
beings  of  superior  power.  Now,  the  little  dog  appears,  and  there 
are  mystic  dogs  elsewhere  in  Gaelic  stories,  and  in  other  Celtic 
countries.  In  the  Isle  of  Man  is  the  well-known  "Modey  dhu," 
black  dog  which  used  to  haunt  Peel  Castle,  and  frightened  a  sol- 
dier to  death. 

In  a  curious  book,  written  to  prove  Gaelic  to  be  the  original 
language  (History  of  the  Celtic  Language,  by  L.  MacLean,  1840), 
there  is  a  great  deal  of  speculation  as  to  the  Farnese  Globe ;  and 
the  dog-star  in  particular  is  supposed  to  have  been  worshipped  by 
the  Druids.  Without  entering  into  such  a  wide  field,  it  is  worth 
notice  that  "Anubis,"  the  dog-star,  was  son  of  Osiris  and 
Nephthys,  had  the  nature  of  a  dog,  and  was  represented  with  the 
head  of  one.  He  was  a  celestial  double  deity,  and  watched  the 
tropics.  The  servant  lad  who  told  this  story  ;  and  the  old 
woman,  MacKerrol,  from  whom  he  learned  it,  are  not  likely 
persons  to  have  heard  of  Anubis,  or  the  Farnese  Globe  ;  so  any- 
thing got  from  them  may  be  taken  at  its  value,  whatever  that 
may  be.  The  opinion  that  Celts  came  from  the  East  by  way  of 
Phoenicia,  has  been  held  by  many,  and  some  one  may  wish  to 
follow  the  trail  of  the  little  dog  ;  so  I  give  his  history  as  it  came 
to  me,  rather  than  fuse  it  into  one  story  with  the  Hoodie,  as  I 
was  at  first  tempted  to  do  before  the  plan  of  this  work  was 
decided  on. 

The  beginning  of  this  tale  is  the  Gaelic  "Once  upon  a  time." 

Bha  siod      ann  roimhe  so. 
Was  yonder  in  it   ere      this. 

Triur  is  a  collective  noun  of  number  for  three,  and  answers 
to  leash  ;  or  to  pair,  brace,  dozen,  for  two  ;  twelve. 

Steud  is  clearly  the  same  word  as  steed.    It  is  commonly  used 


NIGHEAN   RIGH  NAN   SPEUR.  219 

in  these  stories,  and  I  have  never  beard  it  used  in  conversation. 
It  is  feminine,  like  falaire,  the  other  word  commonly  used  for 
a  horse  in  stories  and  poetry  ;  and  hardly  ever  in  ordinary 
speech. 

Many  words  are  derived  from  steud,  and  I  do  not  think  that 
it  is  imported. 


XIII. 
THE  GIRL  AND  THE  DEAD  MAN. 

From  Ann  Darroch,  Islay. 

rpHERE  was  before  now  a  poor  woman,  and  she  had 
-*-  a  leash  of  daughters.  Said  the  eldest  one  of  them 
to  her  mother,  "I  had  better  go  myself  and  seek  for 
fortune."  "  I  had  better,"  said  her  mother,  "  bake  a 
bannock  for  thee."  When  the  bannock  was  ready, 
her  mother  said  to  her,  "  Whether  wouldst  thou  like 
best  the  bit  and  my  blessing,  or  the  big  bit  and  my 
curse  I "  "I  would  rather,"  said  she,  "the  big  bit  and 
thy  curse."  She  went  away,  and  when  the  night  was 
wreathing  round  her,  she  sat  at  the  foot  of  a  wall  to 
eat  the  bannock.  There  gathered  the  sreath  chuilean- 
ach  and  her  twelve  puppies,  and  the  little  birds  of 
the  air  about  her,  for  a  part  of  the  bannock.  "  Wilt 
thou  give  us  a  part  of  the  bannock,"  said  they.  "I 
won't  give  it,  you  ugly  brutes ;  I  have  not  much  for 
myself."  "My  curse  will  be  thine,  and  the  curse  of 
my  twelve  birds ;  and  thy  mother's  curse  is  the  worst 
of  all."  She  rose  and  she  went  away,  and  she  had  not 
half  enough  with  the  bit  of  the  bannock.  She  saw  a 
little  house  a  long  way  from  her ;  and  if  a  long  way 
from  her,  she  was  not  long  reaching  it.  She  struck 
in  the  door.  " Who's  there  1 "  "A  good  maid  seek- 
ing a  master."     "  We  want  that,"  said  they,  and  she 


THE  GIRL  AND  THE  DEAD  MAN.  221 

got  in.  She  had  now  a  peck  of  gold  and  a  peck  of 
silver  to  get ;  and  she  was  to  be  awake  every  night  to 
watch  a  dead  man,  brother  of  the  housewife,  who  was 
under  spells.  She  had  besides,  of  nuts  as  she  broke, 
of  needles  as  she  lost,  of  thimbles  as  she  pierced,  of 
thread  as  she  used,  of  candles  as  she  burned,  a  bed  of 
green  silk  over  her,  a  bed  of  green  silk  under  her, 
sleeping  by  day  and  watching  by  night.  The  first 
night  when  she  was  watching  she  fell  asleep ;  the  mis- 
tress came  in,  she  struck  the  magic  club  on  her,  she 
fell  down  dead,  and  she  threw  her  out  at  the  back  of 
the  midden. 

Said  the  middle  one  to  her  mother,  "I  had  better 
go  seek  fortune  and  follow  my  sister."  Her  mother 
baked  her  a  bannock ;  and  she  chose  the  big  half  and 
her  mother's  curse,  as  her  elder  sister  did,  and  it  hap- 
pened to  her  as  it  happened  to  her  sister. 

Said  the  youngest  one  to  her  mother,  "I  had  bet- 
ter myself  go  to  seek  fortune  too,  and  follow  my 
sisters."  "  I  had  better  bake  a  bannock,"  said  her 
mother.  "  Whether  wouldst  thou  rather  the  little 
bit  and  my  blessing,  or  the  big  bit  and  my  curse  1 " 
11 1  would  rather  the  little  bit  and  your  blessing." 
She  went,  and  the  night  was  wreathing  round  her,  and 
she  sat  at  the  foot  of  a  wall  to  eat  the  bannock.  There 
gathered  the  sreath  chuileanach  and  the  twelve  pup- 
pies, and  the  little  birds  of  the  air  about  her.  "  Wilt 
thou  give  us  some  of  that  1"  "I  will  give,  you  pretty 
creatures,  if  you  will  keep  me  company."  She  gave 
them  some  of  the  bannock ;  they  ate  and  they  had 
plenty,  and  she  had  enough.  They  clapped  their 
wings  about  her  till  she  was  snug  with  the  warmth. 
She  went,  she  saw  a  little  house  a  long  way  from  her ; 
and  if  it  was  a  long  way  from  her,  she  was  not  long 


222  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

reaching  it.  She  struck  in  the  door.  "Who's 
there?"  "A  good  maid  seeking  a  master."  "We 
have  need  of  that."  The  wages  she  had  were  a  peck 
of  gold  and  a  peck  of  silver ;  of  nuts  as  she  broke,  of 
needles  as  she  lost,  of  thimbles  as  she  pierced,  of 
thread  as  she  used,  of  candles  as  she  burned,  a  bed  of 
the  green  silk  over  her,  and  a  bed  of  the  green  silk 
under  her.  She  sat  to  watch  the  dead  man,  and  she 
was  sewing ;  on  the  middle  of  night  he  rose  up,  and 
screwed  up  a  grin.  "If  thou  dost  not  lie  down  properly, 
I  will  give  thee  the  one  leathering  with  a  stick."  He 
lay  down.  At  the  end  of  a  while,  he  rose  on  one 
elbow,  and  screwed  up  a  grin ;  and  the  third  time  he 
rose  and  screwed  up  a  grin.  When  he  rose  the  third 
time,  she  struck  him  a  lounder  of  the  stick ;  the  stick 
stuck  to  the  dead  man,  and  the  hand  stuck  to  the 
stick ;  and  out  they  were.  They  went  forward  till 
they  were  going  through  a  wood ;  when  it  was  low  for 
her  it  was  high  for  him ;  and  when  it  was  high  for 
him  it  was  low  for  her.  The  nuts  were  knocking 
their  eyes  out,  and  the  sloes  taking  their  ears  off,  till 
they  got  through  the  wood.  After  going  through  the 
wood  they  returned  home.  She  got  a  peck  of  gold 
and  a  peck  of  silver,  and  the  vessel  of  cordial.  She 
rubbficLihe  vessel  of  cordialto  her_Jtwo  sisters,  and 
brought  them  alive.  They  returned  home;  they  left 
me  sitting  here,  and  if  they  were  well,  'tis  well ;  and 
if  they  were  not,  let  them  be. 


AN  NIGHINN  AGUS  AN  DUINE  MARBH. 

Bha  bean  bhochd  ann  roimhe  so,  's  bha  triuir  nighean  aice. 
Thuirt  an  t£  bu  shine  dhiu  r'a  mathair,  "  'S  fhearra  dhomh  fhem 
dol  a  dh'  iarraidh  an  fhortain."     "  'S  fhearra  dhomhs,"  ursa  a 


AN   NIGHINN   AGUS  AN   DUINE  MARBH.  223 

mathair,  "  bonnach  a  dheasachadh  dhuit."  Nur  a  bha  'm  bonn- 
ach  reidh  thuirt  a  mathair  rithe,  c6'ca  's  fhearr  leat  a'  bhlaidh 
bheag  's  mo  bheannachdna  'bhlaidh  mhor  's  mo  mhollachd."  "  'S 
fhearr  leam,"  urs'  ise,  "a'  bhlaidh  mh6r  's  do  mhollachd."  Dh' 
fholbh  i.  Nur  a  bha  'n  oidhche  'casadh  urra  shuidh  i  'chois 
ff&rraidh  a  dh'  itheadh  a'  bhonnaich.  Nur  a  shuidh  i  'dh'  itheadh 
a'  bhonnaich  chruinnich  an  t-sreath  chuileanach,  's  a  da  chuilean 
deug,  's  e6in  bheag  an  athar  timchioll  urra  airson  pairt  de  'n 
bhounach.  "  An  d'  thoir  thu  dhuinne  pairt  de 'n  bhonnach," 
urs' iadsan.  "  Cha  d'  thobhair  a  bheathaichean  grannda ;  cha 
mhor  a  th'  agam  dhomh  fein.  "  Biodh  mo  mhollachds'  agadsa, 
's  mollachd  mo  dha  eun  deug,  's  e  mollachd  do  mhathar  is  measa 
dhuit  air  fad." 

Dh'  &rich  i  's  dh'  fholbh  i,  's  cha  robh  leith  a  leoir  ?s  a' bhlaidh 
bhonnaich.  Chunnaic  i  tigh  beag  fada  uaithe,  's  ma  b'  fhada 
uaithe  cha  b'  fhada  bha  ise  'ga  ruigheachd.  Bhuail  i  'san  dorusd. 
"Co  thasiod?"  "  Searbhantha  math  aig  iarraidh  maighstir." 
"Thasin  a  dhith  oirnne,"  urs'  iadsan,  's  fhuair  i  'stigh.  Bha 
peic  6ir  is  peic  airgid  aice  r'a  fhaotainn,  's  i  ri  aithreachach  a' 
h-uile  h-oidhch'  a'  faire  duine  marbh,  brathair  do  bhean  an  tighe 
'bha  fo  gheasan.  Bha  aice  cuideachd  de  chnuthan  mar  a  bhris- 
deadh  i ;  de  shnathadan  mar  a  chailleadh  i ;  's  do  mheurain  mar 
a  tholladh  i ;  de  shnath  mar  a  chosdadh  i ;  de  choinnlean  mar  a 
loisgeadh  i ;  leaba  do  n  t-siod'  uaine  thairte  ;  leaba  de  'n  t-sioda 
uaine  foiche  ;  codal  'san  latha,  's  aithreachadh  'san  oidhche. 

A'  chiad  oidhche,  nur  a  bha  i  'faire,  thuit  i  'na  cadal.  Thainig 
a  banamhaighstir  a  stigh  ;  bhuail  i  'n  slachdan  draoidheachd 
urra  ;  thuit  i  slos  marbh  ;  's  thilg  i  mach  cul  an  dunain  i. 

Thuirt  an  t&  mheadhonach  r'a  mathair,  "  'S  fhearra  domh  dol 
a  dh' iarraidh  an  fhortain,  's  mo  phuithar  a  leantainn."  Dhea- 
saich  a  mathair  bonnach,  's  roighnich  ise  an  leith  mh6r  is 
mollachd  a  mathar,  mar  a  rinn  a  piuthar  a  bu  shine.  Thachair 
dhi  mar  a  thachair  d'a  piuthar. 

Thuirt  an  te  b'  6ige  r'a  mathair,  "  S  fhearra  dhomh  fein  dol  a 
dh'  iarraidh  an  fhortain  cuideachd,  's  mo  pheathraichean  a  lean- 
tainn." •' 'S  fhearr  dh5mhsa  bonnach  a  dheasachadh,"  urs' a 
mathair.  "  C6'ca  's  fhearr  leat  a'  bhlaidh  bheag  's  mo  bhoaun- 
achd,  na  'bhlaidh  mhor  's  mo  mhollachd."  "  'S  fhearr  leam  a 
bhlaidh  bheag  's  bhur  beannachd."  Dh'  fholbh  i.  Bha  'n  oidhche 
'casadh  urra,  's  shuidh  i  'chois  garraidh  a  dh'  itheadh  a  bhonn- 


224  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

aich.  Chruinnich  an  t-sreath  chuileanach,  's  an  da  chuilean 
deug,  's  eoin  bheag  an  athar  timchioll  urra.  ' '  An  d'  thobhair 
thu  dhuinne  rud  dheth  sin?"  "Bheithir  a  bheathaichean 
boidheach,  ma  ni  sibh  comaith  rium  fein."  Thug  i  dhaibh  rud  de 
'n  bhonnach  ;  dh'  ith  iad  e  ;  's  bha  na  leoir  acasan  's  na  le6ir 
aice  fein.  Chlap  iad  an  sgiathan  timchioll  urra,  's  bha  i  'na  falas 
leis  a'  bhlathas. 

Dh'  fholbh  i.  Chunnaic  i  tigh  beag  fada  uaithe,  's  ma  b'  fhada 
uaithe  cha  b'  fhada  'bha  ise  'ga  'ruigheachd.  Bhuail  i  'san  dorusd. 
"  Co  siod  ?"  "  Searbhanta  math  aig  iarraidh  maighstir."  "  Tha 
sin  a  dhlth  6irnne."  Se  'n  tuarasdal  a  bh'  aice  peic  oir  is  peic  air- 
gid  ;  de  chnuthan  mar  a  bhrisdeadh  i ;  de  shnathadan  mar  a 
chailleadh  i ;  de  mheurain  mar  a  tholladh  i  ;  de  shnath  mar  a 
chosdadh  i ;  de  choinnlean  mar  a  loisgeadh  i  ;  leaba  de  n  t-siod' 
uaine  thairte,  's  leaba  de  'n  t-slod  uaine  foiche. 

Shuidh  i  'faire  an  duine  mhairbh,  's  bha  i  fuaghal.  Air  a 
mheadhon  oidhche  dh'  eirich  esan,  's  chas  e  braoisg  air.  "  Mar 
an  laidh  thu  sios  mar  a  th'  agad  bheir  mise  aon  straoileadh  dhuit 
de  bhata."  Laidh  e  sios.  Ann  ceann  tacan  beag  a  rithisd  dh' 
eirich  e  air  a  leith-uilinn,  's  chas  e  braoisg  air,  's  an  treas  uair 
dh'  eirich  e  's  chas  e  braoisg  air  !  !"  Nur  a  dh'  eirich  e  'n  treas 
uair  bhuail  i  straoileadh  de  'n  bhat'  air.  Lean  am  bata  ris  an 
duine  mharbh  ;  lean  an  lamh  ris  a'  bhata  !  's  a  mach  a  bha  iad. 
Ghabh  iad  air  an  aghaidh  gus  an  robh  iad  a'  dol  romh  choille. 
Mar  a  b'  iseal  dise  b'  ard  dhasan  e,  's  mar  a  b'  ard  dhasan  e  b' 
iseal  dise  e.  Bha  na  cnuthan  a'  toirt  nan  sul  asda,  's  na  h-airnean 
a'  toirt  nan  cluas  dhiutha,  gus  an  d'  fhuair  iad  romh  'n  choille. 
An  deigh  dol  romh  'n  choille  thill  iad  dachaidh.  Fhuair  i  peic 
6ir  is  peic  airgid,  'sam  ballan  locshlaint.  Rub  i  'm  ballan  ioc- 
shlaint  r'a  da  phiuthar,  's  thug  i  be6  iad.  Thill  iad  dhachaidh. 
Dh'  fhag  iad  mise  a'm  'shuidhe  so,  's  ma  bha  iad  gu  math  's  math, 
's  mar  an  robh  leigsar  dhaibh. 

This  story  has  some  relation  to  "The  man  who  travelled  to 
learn  what  fear  was  ;"  but  I  know  nothing  quite  like  it  in  Gaelic, 
or  in  any  other  language.  Ann  Darroch,  who  told  it  to  Hector 
MacLean  in  May  1859,  learned  it  from  an  old  woman,  Margaret 
Conal,  of  whom  MacLean  writes — 

"I  have  some  recollection  of  her  myself  j  she  was  wont  to 
repeat  numerous  '  ursgeuln '  (tales).     Her  favourite  resorts  were 


AN   NIGHINN  AGUS  AN  DUINE  MARBH.  225 

the  kilns,  where  the  people  were  kiln-drying  their  corn  ;  and 
where  she  was  frequently  rewarded,  for  amusing  them  in  this 
manner,  by  supplies  of  meal.  She  was  paralytic  ;  her  head  shook 
like  an  aspen  leaf,  and  whenever  she  repeated  anything  that  was 
very  exciting,  her  head  shook  more  rapidly  ;  which  impressed 
children  with  great  awe." 

Some  of  the  phrases  are  evidently  remembered,  and  said  by 
heart ;  the  maid's  wages,  for  instance  ;  and  the  creatures  that 
came  to  the  wandering  daughters.  The  vessel  of  Balsam  occurs 
often  in  Gaelic  stories,  and  I  cannot  make  out  what  it  really 
means,  Ballan  iocshlaint,  teat,  of  ichor,  of  health,  seems  to 
be  the  meaning  of  the  words. 

In  former  days  the  kilns  were  not  always  used  for  drying  corn. 
It  is  related  that  one  of  the  first  excisemen  who  went  to  the 
West,  found  and  caught  a  large  party  of  men  kiln-drying  malt. 
He  made  a  seizure  of  course,  and  was  not  a  little  surprised  when 
he  was  seized  himself,  and  his  arms  tied  fast  behind  him.  His 
eyes  were  bound  also ;  and  then  he  was  led  to  the  kiln  and  set 
down  near  the  fire  ;  and  they  gave  him  the  malt  to  smell  and 
taste  ;  and  then  they  told  him  it  was  to  be  used  in  making 
whiskey  ;  and  then  they  gave  him  a  drop,  and  then  a  dram,  till 
the  gauger  was  so  drunk  that  they  left  him  there,  and  departed 
with  their  malt  kiln-dried  and  ground. 

This  I  have  heard  told  of  the  very  place  which  Margaret 
Conal  used  to  haunt,  and  of  a  time  when  she  might  have  been  a 
little  girl ;  I  cannot  vouch  for  the  truth  of  my  story,  but  the  kiln 
and  the  men  about  it  may  be  seen  now  ;  and  such  scenes  may 
well  account  for  the  preservation  of  wild  stories.  A  child  would 
not  easily  forget  a  story  learned  amongst  a  lot  of  rough  farmers, 
seated  at  night  round  a  blazing  fire,  listening  to  an  old  crone 
with  palsied  head  and  hands  ;  and  accordingly,  I  have  repeatedly 
heard  that  the  mill,  and  the  kiln,  were  the  places  where  my 
informants  learned  their  tales. 

There  is  a  word  in  this  tale  which  the  narrator,  the  translator, 
the  transcriber,  the  dictionary,  and  the  "old  men,"  have  failed 
to  explain. 

Sreath  [?]  Soigh,  a  bitch  (Ross-shire,  etc.)  chuileanach 
means  some  kind  of  bird,  and  she  has  twelve  "  puppies,"  da 
CHUiLEA>f  deug.  The  narrator  maintains  that  the  words  are 
right  as  she  heard  them. 


XIV. 

THE  KING  WHO  WISHED  TO  MARRY  HIS 
DAUGHTER. 

From  Ann  Darroch,  Islay. 

rpHERE  was  a  king  before  now,  and  he  married,  and 
■*■  he  had  but  one  daughter.  When  his  wife  departed, 
he  would  marry  none  but  one  whom  her  clothes  would 
fit.  His  daughter  one  day  tried  her  mother's  dress  on, 
and  she  came  and  she  let  her  father  see  how  it  fitted 
her.  It  was  fitting  her  well.  When  her  father  saw 
her  he  would  marry  no  woman  but  her.  She  went, 
crying  where  her  muime  was ;  and  her  foster  mother 
said  to  her,  "  What  was  the  matter  with  her  ? "  She 
said,  "That  her  father  was  insisting  that  he  would 
marry  her."  Her  muime  told  her  to  say  to  him,  "That 
she  would  not  marry  him  till  he  should  get  her  a  gown 
of  the  swan's  down."  He  went,  and  at  the  end  of  a  day 
and  a  year  he  came,  and  the  gown  with  him.  She  went 
again  to  take  the  counsel  of  her  muime.  "  Say  to 
him,"  said  her  muime,  "that  thou  wilt  not  marry  him 
till  he  gets  thee  a  gown  of  the  moorland  canach."  She 
said  this  to  him.  He  went,  and  at  the  end  of  a  day 
and  year  he  returned,  and  a  gownjof  the  moorland 
canach  with  him.  "Say  now  to  him,"  said  her  muime, 
"that  thou  wilt  not  marry  him  till  he  brings  thee  a 
gown  of  silk  that  will  stand  on  the  ground  with  gold 
and  silver."    At  the  end  of  a  day  and'year  he  returned 


THE  KING  WHO  WISHED  TO  MARRY  HIS  DAUGHTER.      227 

with  the  gown.  "Say  to  him  now,"  said  her  mnime, 
"that  thou  wilt  not  marry  him  till  he  brings  thee  a 
golden  shoe,  and  a  silver  shoe."  He  got  her  a  golden 
shoe  and  a  silver  shoe.  "  Say  to  him  now,?'  said  her 
muime,  "  that  thou  wilt  not  marry  him  unless  he  brings 
thee  a  kist  that  will  lock  without  and  within,  and  for 
which  it  is  all  the  same  to  be  on  sea  or  on  land."  When 
she  got  the  kist,  she  folded  the  best  of  her  mother's 
clothes,  and  of  her  own  clothes  in  it.  Then  she  went 
herself  into  the  kist,  and  she  asked  her  father  to  put  it 
out  on  the  sea  to  try  how  it  would  swim.  Her  father 
put  it  out ;  when  it  was  put  out,  it  was  going,  and 
going,  till  it  went  out  of  sight. 

It  went  on  shore  on  the  other  side ;  and  a  herd  came 
where  it  was,  intending  to  break  it,  in  hopes  that  there 
were  finding  in  the  chest.  When  he  was  going  to 
break  it  she  called  out,  "Do  not  so;  but  say  to 
thy  father  to  come  here,  and  he  will  get  that  which 
will  better  him  for  life."  His  father  came,  and  he  took 
her  with  him  to  his  own  house.  It  was  with  a  king 
that  he  was  herd,  and  the  king's  house  was  near  him. 
"  If  I  could  get,"  said  she,  "  leave  to  go  to  service  to 
this  great  house  yonder."  "  They  want  none,"  said 
the  herd,  "unless  they  want  one  under  the  hand  of 
the  cook."  The  herd  went  to  speak  for  her,  and  she 
went  as  a  servant  maid  under  the  hand  of  the  cook. 
When  the  rest  were  going  to  the  sermon ;  and  when 
they  asked  her  if  she  was  going  to  it,  she  said  that  she 
was  not ;  that  she  had  a  little  bread  to  bake,  and  that 
she  could  not  go  to  it.  When  they  went  away,  she 
took  herself  to  the  herd's  house,  and  she  put  on  a 
gown  of  the  down  of  the  swan.  She  went  to  the  ser- 
mon, and  she  sat  opposite  the  king's  son.  The  king's 
son  took  love  for  her.      She  went  a  while  before  the 


228  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

sermon  skailed,  she  reached  the  herd's  house,  she 
changed  her  clothes,  and  she  was  in  before  them. 
When  the  rest  came  home,  it  was  talking  about  the 
gentlewoman  that  was  at  the  sermon  they  were. 

The  next  Sunday  they  said  to  her,  "  Was  she 
going  to  the  sermon ; "  and  she  said,  "  That  she  was 
not,  that  she  had  a  little  bread  to  bake."  When  they 
went  away,  she  reached  the  herd's  house,  and  she  put 
on  a  gown  of  the  moorland  canach  ;  and  she  went  to 
the  sermon.  The  king's  son  was  seated  where  he  was 
the  Sunday  before,  and  she  sat  opposite  to  him.  She 
came  out  before  them,  and  she  changed,  and  she  was 
at  the  house  before  them ;  and  when  the  rest  came 
home,  it  was  talking  about  the  great  gentlewoman 
that  was  at  the  sermon  they  were.  The  third  Sunday, 
they  said  to  her,  "  Was  she  going  to  the  sermon  ;  "  and 
she  said,  "  That  she  was  not,  that  she  had  a  little 
bread  to  bake."  When  they  went  away,  she  reached  the 
herd's  house ;  she  put  on  the  gown  that  would  stand  on 
the  ground  with  gold  and  silver,  and  the  golden  shoe 
and  the  silver  shoe,  and  she  went  to  the  sermon.  The 
king's  son  was  seated  where  she  was  the  Sunday  before, 
and  she  sat  where  he  was.  A  watch  was  set  on  the 
doors  this  Sunday.  She  arose,  she  saw  a  cranny,  and 
she  jumped  out  at  the  cranny ;  but  they  kept  hold  of 
one  of  the  shoes. 

The  king's  son  said,  "  Whomsoever  that  shoe  would 
fit,  she  it  was  that  he  would  marry." 

Many  were  trying  the  shoe  on,  and  taking  off  their 
toes  and  heels  to  try  if  it  would  fit  them ;  but  there 
were  none  whom  the  shoe  would  fit.  There  was  a 
little  bird  in  the  top  of  a  tree,  always  saying  as  every 
one  was  trying  on  the  shoe,  "  Beeg  beeg  ha  nan  doot 
a  heeg  ach  don  tjay  veeg  a  ha  fo  laiv  a  hawchkare." 


THE  KING  WHO  WISHED  TO  MARRY  HIS  DAUGHTER.      229 

"  Wee  wee,  it  comes  not  on  thee  ;  but  on  the  wee  one 
under  the  hand  of  the  cook."  When  he  could  get 
none  whom  the  shoe  would  fit,  the  king's  son  lay 
down,  and  his  mother  went  to  the  kitchen  to  talk 
over  the  matter.  "  Wont  you  let  me  see  the  shoe  ?  " 
said  she ;  "I  will  not  do  it  any  harm  at  all  events." 
"  Thou  !  thou  ugly  dirty  thing,  that  it  should  fit  thee." 
She  went  down,  and  she  told  this  to  her  son.  "  Is  it 
not  known,"  said  he,  "  that  it  wont  fit  her  at  all 
events  1  and  can't  you  give  it  her  to  please  her  1 "  As 
soon  as  the  shoe  went  on  the  floor,  the  shoe  jumped 
on  her  foot.  "  What  will  you  give  me,"  said  she,  "  to 
let  you  see  the  other  one  1 "  She  reached  the  herd's 
house,  and  she  put  on  the  shoes,  and  the  dress  that 
would  stand  on  the  floor  with  gold  and  silver.  When 
she  returned,  there  was  but  to  send  word  for  a  minis- 
ter, and  she  herself  and  the  king's  son  married. 

URSGEUL. 

Bha  'siod  rlgh  ann  roimhe  so,  's  phds  e,  's  cha  robh  aige  ach  an 
aon  nighean.  Nur  a  shiubhail  a'  bhean  cha  phdsadh  e  gin  ach  te 
'fhreagradh  a  h-aodach  dhi.  Dh'  fheuch  a  nighean  latha  aodach 
a  mathar  urra,  's  thainig  i  's  leig  i  fhaicinn  d'a  h-athair  mar  a 
fhreagradh  e  dhi.  Bha  e  'freagairt  dhi  gu  math.  Nur  a  chunn- 
aic  a  h-athair  i,  cha  phdsadh  e  bean  ach  i.  Chaidh  i  'caoineadh 
far  an  robh  a  muime,  's  thuirt  a  muime  rithe  de  bh'  urra.  Thuirt 
i  gun  robh  a  h-athair  a'  cur  roimhe  gum  posadh  e  i.  Thuirt  a 
muime  rithe  'radh  ris  nach  p6sadh  e  i  gus  am  faigheadh  e  dhi 
guthann  de  chl6imhe  na  h-eala. 

Dh'  fholbh  e  's  an  ceann  la  is  bliadhna  thainig  e,  's  an  guthann 
leis.  Chaidh  i  'rithisd  a  ghabhail  comhairP  a  muime.  "  Abair 
ris,"  ursJ  a  muime,  "  nach  p6s  thu  e  gus  am  faigh  e  dhuit  guthann 
de  chanach  an  t-sleibhe."  Thuirt  i  so  ris.  Dh'  fholbh  e,  's  an 
ceann  la  is  bliadhna  thill  e  's  guthann  de  chanach  an  t-sleibhe 
leis.  "  Abair  ris  a  nis,"  urs'  a  muime,  "  nach  p5s  thu  e  gus  an 
d'  thoir  e  't'  ionnsuidh  guthann  siod  a  sheasas  air  an  lar  le  h-6r  's 
le   airgiod."    An  ceann  la  is  bliadhna  thill  e  leis  a  ghuthann. 


230  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

"  Abair  ris  a  nis,"  urs'  a  muime,  "  nach  p6s  tliu  e  gus  an  d'  thoir 
e  't  ionnsuidh  brog  oir  is  brog  airgid."  Fhuair  e  dhi  br6g  5ir  is 
brdg  airgid.  "Abair  ris  a  nis,"  ursa  a  muime,  "nach  p6s  thu  e 
mar  an  d'  thoir  e  't'  ionnsuidh  cisde  a  ghlaiseas  a  mach  's  a  stigh, 
's  is  coingeis  leatha  bhi  air  muir  na  air  tir. " 

Nur  a  fhuair  e  chisde  phaisg  i  chuid  a  b'  fhearr  de  dh'  aodach 
a  mathar  's  d'a  h-aodach  fein  innte.  Chaidh  i  fein  an  sin  a  stigh 
's  a'  chisde,  's  dh'  iarr  i  air  a  h-athair  a  cur  a  mach  air  an  fhairge 
feuch  demur  a  shnamhadh  i.  Chuir  a  h-athair  a  mach  i.  Nur  a 
chaidh  a  chisd'  a  mach,  bha  i  folbh  's  a'  folbh  gus  an  deach  i  as 
an  t-sealladh.  Chaidh  i  air  tlr  air  an  taobh  eile,  's  thainig  buach- 
aille  far  an  robh  i  airson  a  brisdeadh,  an  ddil  gun  robh  feudail 
anns  a'  chisde.  Nur  a  bhu  e  'dol  a  'brisdeadh  ghlaoidh  ise,  "Na 
dean;  ach  abair  ri  t'  athair  tighinn  an  so,  's  gheobh  e  na  's  fheaird 
e  r'a  bheo. "  Thainig  'athair  's  thug  e  leis  g'a  thigh  fein  i.  'S  ann 
aig  righ  bha  'm  buachaille,  's  bha  tigh  an  righ  dluth  air.  "  Nam 
faighinn,"  urs'  ise,  "dol  air  fasdadh  do  'n  tigh  mhor  so  thall.'' 
"  Cha  'n  'eil  gin  a  dhith  orr',"  urs'  am  buachaille,  "  mar  am  bheil 
te  dhith  orra  fo  laimh  a'  ch6caire."  Chaidh  am  buachaille  's 
bhruidhin  e  air  a  son,  's  chaidh  i  'na  searbhanta  fo  laimh  a' 
ch6caire. 

Nur  a  bha  each  a'  dol  do  'n  t-searmoin,  's  a  dh'  fheoraidh  iad 
dhise  an  robh  i  dol  ann,  thuirt  i  nach  robh  gun  robh  beagan  arain 
aice  r'a  dheasachadh,  's  nach  b'  urrainn  i  dol  ann.  Nur  a  dh' 
fholbh  iadsan  thug  i  urra  tigh  a'  bhuachaille,  's  chuir  i  urra 
guthann  de  chl6imhe  na  h-eala.  Chaidh  i  do  'n  t-searmoin,  's 
shuidh  i  ma  choinneamh  mac  an  righ.  Ghabh  mac  an  righ  gaol 
urra.  Dh'  fholbh  ise  tacan  ma'n  do  sgaoil  an  t-searmoin  ;  rainig 
i  tigh  a'  bhuachaille  ;  dh'  atharraich  i  h-aodach  ;  's  bha  i  stigh 
rompa.  Nur  a  thainig  each  dhachaidh  's  ann  aig  iomradh  air  a' 
bhean  uasal  mhor  a  bha  's  an  t-searmoin  a  bha  iad.  An  ath 
Dh6mhnach  thuirt  iad  rithe,  an  robh  i  dol  do  'n  t-searmoin,  's 
thuirt  i  nach  robh,  gun  robh  beagan  arain  aice  r'a  dheasachadh. 
Nur  a  dh'  fholbh  iadsan  rainig  i  tigh  a'  bhuachaille,  's  chuir  i 
urra  guthann  de  chanach  an  t-sleibhe,  's  chaidh  i  do  'n  t-sear- 
moin. Bha  mac  an  righ  'na  shuidhe  far  an  robh  ise  an  Domhnach 
roimhid,  's  shuidh  ise  ma  choinneamh.  Thainig  i  mach  air 
thoiseach  orra  ;  dh'  atharraich  i,  's  bha  i  aig  an  tigh  rompa  ;  's 
nur  a  thainig  each  dhachaidh  's  ann  aig  iomradh  air  a'  bhean 
uasal  mhor  a  bha  'san  t-searmoin  a  bha  iad.     An  treas  Ddmhnach 


URSGEUL.  231 

thuirte  iad  rithe  an  robh  i  dol  do  'n  t-searmoin,  's  thuirt  i  nach 
robh  'gun  robh  beagan  arain  aice  r'a  dheasachadh.  Nur  a  dh' 
f  holbh  iadsan  rainig  i  tigh  a  bhuachaille  ;  chuir  i  urra  an  guthann 
a  sheasadh  air  an  lar  le  h-6r  's  le  h'  airgiod  ;  's  a'  bhrog  airgid  ; 
's  chaidh  i  'n  t-searmoin.  Bha  mac  an  rigb  'na  sbuidhe  for  an 
robh  ise  an  D6mhnach  roimhid  's  shuidh  ise  far  an  robh  esan. 
Chaidh  faire  'chur  air  na  dorsan  an  Dduihnach  so.  Dh'  eirich 
ise.  Chunnaic  i  fruchag,  s'  leum  i  mach  air  an  fhruchaig,  ach 
ghl&dh  iad  gr&m  air  t6  de  na  br6gan.  Thuirt  mac  an  righ  t£ 
sam  bith  d'am  freagradh  a'  bhr6g  gur  h'  i  'ph6sadh  esan.  Bha 
moran  a'  feuchainn  na  broig  orra,  's  a'  toirt  dhiu  nan  ladharan 
agus  nan  sailtean  feuch  am  freagradh  i  dhaibh,  ach  cha  robh  gin 
d'an  robh  a'  bhrog  a'  freagairt.  Bha  eun  beag  am  bar  craoibhe, 
's  e  daonnan  ag  radh,  h-uile  te  bha  feuchainn  na  broig  urra — 
"Big,  big,  cha  'n  ann  duit  a  thig,  ach  do  'n  te  bhig  a  tha  fo 
laimh  a'  chdcaire."  Nur  nach  robh  iad  a'  faotainn  gin  d'am 
freagradh  a'  bhrog  laidh  mac  an  righ,  's  chaidh  a'  mhathair  do  'n 
chidsin  a  dh'  iomradh  air  a'  ghnothach.  "  Nach  leig  sibh  fhaicinn 
d6mhs'  a'  bhrdg,"  urs'  ise;  "cha  dean  mi  coire  urra  co  dhiu." 
"Thusa  a  ruid  ghrannda,  shalaich  !  gum  freagradh  i  dhuitse  !" 
Chaidh  i  sios  's  dh'  innis  i  so  d'a  mac.  "Nach  'eil  fhios,"  urs' 
esan,  ' '  nach  freagair  i  dhi  co  dhiu,  's  nach  f haod  sibh  a  toirt  dhi 
a  'toileachadh. "  Cho  luath  's  a  chaidh  a'  bhr6g  air  an  urlar, 
leum  a'  bhrog  air  a  cois  !  "  De  'bheir  sibh  dh5mhs',"  urs'  ise, 
"  's  an  te  eile  'leigeil  fhaicinn  duibh  ?  "  Rainig  i  tigh  a  bhuach- 
aille, 's  chuir  urra  na  br6gan,  's  an  trusgan  a  sheasadh  air  an 
lar  le  6r  's  le  airgiod.  Nur  a  thill  i  cha  robh  ach  fios  a  chur  air 
ministir,  's  phos  i  f£in  is  mac  an  righ. 

Ann  Darroch  got  this  tale  from  Margaret  Connel. 

The  chest  meant  by  the  narrator  of  this  version  is  clearly  the 
kist,  which  every  well  provided  highland  lass  takes  to  service. 
Such  kists,  and  such  lassies  seated  on  them,  may  be  seen  in 
every  highland  steam-boat  ;  and  still  finer  kists  may  be  seen  in 
every  cottage  in  Norway,  where  wood  is  more  plentiful,  and  kists 
are  on  a  larger  scale.  The' contents  of  all  are  alike  ;  the  clothes 
of  generations.  The  mother's  Sunday  dresses,  and  the  grand- 
mother's, with  some  fine  shawl,  or  cap,  or  bonnet,  or  something 
hideous,  modern,  and  fashionable,  more  prized  far  than  the 
picturesque  old  plaid,  or  bright  red  cloak  of  Scotch  women,  or 


232  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

the  endless  Norse  costumes,  which  are  going  out  of  fashion  in 
the  same  way.  The  little  bird's  note  is  imitated,  and  I  have 
tried  to  spell  the  speech  in  English. 

2d.  I  heard  a  version  of  this  in  the  island  of  South  Uist,  in 
September  1859,  from  my  companion  MacCraw,  who  got  it  from 
a  girl  then  in  the  inn  at  the  Sound  of  Benbecula,  Morag  a  chota 
Bhain,  Margery  White  Coats.  A  king  had  four  daughters,  and 
his  wife  died,  and  he  said  he  would  marry  any  one  whom  his 
dead  wife's  clothes  would  fit.  One  day  the  daughters  tried,  and 
the  youngest  only  could  wear  them.  The  king  saw  them  from  a 
window,  and  wished  to  marry  her,  and  she  went  for  advice  to 
her  mother's  brother.  He  advised  her  to  promise  to  marry  the 
king  if  he  would  bring  her  a  gown  of  birds'  down,  and  a  gown  of 
the  colours  of  the  sky,  woven  with  silver  ;  and  when  he  got  that, 
a  gown  of  the  colours  of  the  stars,  woven  with  gold,  and  glass 
shoes.  When  he  had  got  them,  she  escaped  with  all  her  clothes, 
by  the  help  of  her  uncle,  on  a  filly,  with  a  magic  bridle,  she  on 
one  side,  and  her  chest  of  clothes  on  the  other.  She  rode  to  a 
king's  palace,  hid  the  chest  in  a  hill  under  a  bush  of  rushes, 
turned  the  filly  loose,  and  went  to  the  palace  with  nothing  on 
but  a  white  petticoat  and  a  shift.  She  took  service  with  the 
cook,  and  grew  dirty  and  ugly,  and  slept  on  a  bench  by  the 
kitchen  fire,  and  her  work  was  to  blow  under  the  great  caldron 
all  day  long.  One  day  the  king's  son  came  home,  and  was  to 
hold  a  feast ;  she  went  to  the  queen  and  asked  leave  to  go,  and 
was  refused  because  she  was  so  dirty.  The  queen  had  a  basin  of 
water  in  her  hand,  and  threw  it  at  her,  and  it  broke.  She  went 
to  the  hill,  took  out  the  dress  of  down  and  silver,  and  shook  her 
magic  bridle  ;  the  filly  came,  and  she  mounted,  and  rode  to  the 
feast.  ' '  The  king's  son  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  took  her  up 
as  high  as  any  there,  and  set  her  on  his  own  lap  ;  and  when  the 
feast  was  over,  there  was  no  reel  that  he  danced  but  he  gave  it 
to  her. "  He  asked  her  whence  she  came,  and  she  said,  from  the 
kingdom  of  Broken  Basins ;  and  the  prince  said  that  he  had 
never  heard  of  that  land,  though  he  had  travelled  far.  She 
escaped  and  returned  to  the  cook,  and  all  were  talking  about  the 
beautiful  lady.  She  asked  about  her,  and  was  told  not  to  talk 
about  what  she  did  not  understand,  "a  dirty  little  wretch  like 
her."  Then  the  prince  had  another  feast ;  and  she  asked  leave 
again,  and  the  queen  refused,  and  threw  a  candlestick  at  her, 
and  it  broke,  and  she  did  as  before.     She  put  on  another  dress 


URSGEUL.  233 

and  went ;  the  king's  son  had  eight  men  on  each  side  of  the  door 
to  catch  her.  The  same  scene  went  on,  and  she  said  she  came 
from  the  country  of  Candlesticks—  "  Tir  nan  Coillearan,"  and 
escaped,  leaving  a  glass  shoe.  Then  the  king's  son  fell  sick  (of 
course),  and  would  only  marry  the  woman  whom  the  shoe  would 
fit ;  and  all  the  ladies  came  and  cut  off  their  toes  and  heels,  but 
in  vain.  Then  he  asked  if  there  was  none  other.  Then  a  small 
creature  put  his  head  in  at  the  door  and  said,  "If  thou  didst  but 
know,  she  whom  thou  seekest  is  under  the  cook."  Then  he  got 
the  history  of  the  basin  and  candlestick  from  his  mother.  The 
shoe  was  tried  and  fitted,  and  he  was  to  marry  Morag.  All  were 
in  despair,  and  abused  her  ;  but  she  went  out  to  her  chest,  shook 
the  magic  bridle,  and  arrayed  herself,  and  came  back  on  the 
filly,  with  a  "powney  "  behind  with  the  chest.  Then  all  there 
that  had  despised  her  fell  on  their  knees,  and  she  was  married  to 
the  prince.  "  And  I  did  not  get  a  bit  there  at  the  wedding," 
said  the  girl. 

This  was  told  as  we  walked  along  the  road,  and  is  but  a  short 
outline  of  what  was  told  me,  written  from  notes  made  in  the 
evening.  The  man  said  that  the  girl  told  it  with  a  great  deal  of 
the  queer  old  language,  which  he  could  not  remember. 

The  girl  and  her  chest  on  the  same  horse  may  be  seen  in  the 
Highlands.  The  girl,  in  her  white  coats  and  short  gown,  may  be 
seen  blowing  the  fire  in  highland  inns,  the  queen's  likeness  might 
be  found ;  and  the  feast  is  a  highland  ball ;  the  filly  and  the 
magic  bridle  are  common  in  other  stories  ;  the  incidents  of  the 
basin  and  candlestick  have  an  equivalent  in  Norse ;  and  I  got 
them  from  a  woman  at  the  Sound  of  Barra  afterwards,  in  another 
story.  This  shows  what  may  be  lost  by  dignified  travelling. 
While  the  man  was  enjoying  himself  in  the  kitchen,  the  employer 
was  smoking  in  solitary  dignity,  up  stairs  in  his  bed-room, 
writing  a  journal,  and  utterly  unconscious  that  the  game  he 
pursued  was  so  near. 

I  have  other  versions  of  this  tale  from  other  sources,  and  may 
find  room  for  them  hereafter. 

The  beginning  is  clearly  the  same  as  the  French  story  of 
"  Peau  d'  Ane,"  and  the  end  of  it  is  the  same  as  the  Norse  "  Katie 
Wooden  Cloak  ;  "  that  is  the  same  as  Mr.  Peter  Buchan's 
11  Rashen  Coatie  "  (MSS.  collection)  ;  and  that  again  has  some- 
thing of  "The  Sharp  Grey  Sheep"  in  Gaelic  ;  and  that  has  to 
do  with  half  a  dozen  stories  in  Grimm  ;  and  this  is  like  "  Cinder- 


234  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

ella, "  and  like  a  Scotch  story,  quoted  in  a  review  of  Chambers' 
Nursery  Rhymes  in  Tait's  Edinburgh  Magazine. 

In  fifteen  volumes  which  I  explored  one  fine  day,  to  see  if 
Tait  could  account  for  highland  stories,  I  found  few  popular 
tales ;  and  of  these  taken  from  the  German,  which  I  did  find,  I 
have  found  none  in  the  west,  so  far  as  I  can  remember.  Tait's 
stories  are  polished,  but  in  some  of  the  original  poetry  legends 
can  be  traced. 

"  Finette  Cendron,"in  the  collection  of  the  Contesse  d'Aulnoy, 
belongs  to  the  same  class ;  and  the  story  exists  in  Straparola,  a 
book  which  is  now  very  little  known,  and  which  deserves  to  be 
forgotten,  but  which  contains  useful  information  nevertheless. 
Those  who  hold  that  popular  tales  are  derived  from  books,  will 
look  on  Straparola's  story  as  the  original.  It  was  printed  at 
Venice  in  Italian  in  1567,  that  is  293  years  ago.  Those  who  hold 
that  popular  tales  are  preserved  in  all  countries,  and  in  all 
languages  alike,  will  hold  that  the  Italian,  German,  French, 
Norse,  English,  and  Gaelic,  are  all  versions  of  the  same  story, 
and  that  it  is  as  old  as  the  common  stock  from  which  all  these 
races  sprang. 

After  working  for  a  year,  and  weighing  all  the  evidence  that 
has  come  in  my  way,  I  have  come  to  agree  with  those  who  hold 
that  popular  tales  are  generally  pure  traditions  ;  but  in  order 
that  others  may  judge,  I  give  the  following  short  outline  of  the 
story  in  Straparola.     Favola  iv. 

Tebaldo,  prince  of  Salerno,  promises  to  his  dying  wife,  that  he 
will  only  marry  another,  if  he  can  find  one  whom  a  certain  ring 
will  fit.  After  a  time  the  promise  becomes  known,  and  it  is 
noised  abroad  that  the  prince  wishes  to  marry  again.  Ladies 
come  ;  but  the  ring  is  too  small  for  one,  too  large  for  another, 
and  fits  no  one.  One  da}'-,  Doralice,  the  daughter  of  Tebaldo, 
tries  on  her  mother's  ring,  and  shows  her  father  that  it  fits,  and 
then  the  same  strange  unnatural  wish  to  marry  his  daughter 
seizes  the  Prince  of  Salerno  that  seizes  the  fathers  in  the  French 
and  Gaelic  stories,  and  caused  the  Cenci  tragedy  ;  but  the  French 
and  Gaelic  stories  have  something  about  dresses,  which  the 
Italian  has  not. 

Doralice  goes  to  her  old  nurse  for  advice,  and  hides  herself  in 
a  wardrobe  which  none  could  open  from  without  but  the  nurse, 
who  puts  in  a  supply  of  a  certain  liquor,  of  which  a  spoonful, 
however  small,  would  keep  a  person  alive  for  a  long  time.     The 


URSGEUL.  235 

wardrobe  is  described,  and  it  is  such  a  one  as  would  be  found  in 
an  Italian  palace.  The  father,  having  missed  the  daughter, 
cannot  abide  the  sight  of  the  wardrobe,  orders  it  to  be  carried  to 
the  piazza  by  servants,  and  it  is  sold  to  a  Genoese  merchant.  He 
carries  it  over  sea  in  a  ship  to  Britannia,  and  there  sells  it  to  the 
king  "  Genese." 

Here  let  me  remark  that  the  form  of  the  popular  tale  was 
exactly  the  same  as  it  is  now,  nearly  three  hundred  years  ago. 
The  scene  is  laid  somewhere  a  long  way  off ;  the  names  are  those 
which  the  narrator  happens  to  know,  misapplied  ;  the  ornaments 
are  those  about  him  ;  and  the  incidents,  within  a  certain  range, 
are  preserved  entire.  The  story  is  an  old  play,  with  new  scenery, 
and  decorations  in  every  country,  and  with  fresh  actors  in  every 
age. 

King  Genese  of  England  comes  on  board  the  ship,  and  is  taken 
with  the  beauty  of  the  wardrobe,  buys  it,  and  has  it  taken  to  bis 
own  chamber.  The  hidden  lady  comes  out  when  she  is  left 
alone,  adorns  the  chamber,  sweeps  it  and  keeps  it  neat,  and  at 
last  she  is  discovered,  and  the  king  marries  her. 

And  here  the  Italian  story  goes  off  on  quite  a  different  road. 
It  does  as  popular  tales  seem  to  do  everywhere  else.  No  sooner 
has  a  seeming  origin  been  discovered  for  one  bit,  than  the  whole 
changes  into  something  else.  It  is  as  if  some  convulsion  were  to 
overturn  the  Vatican,  and  break  the  statues  once  more,  and  some 
future  antiquary  were  to  try  to  fit  the  heads,  legs,  and  arms  to 
the  proper  bodies.  The  head  of  Apollo  would  not  do  for  the 
Torso  Farnese,  but  it  might  seem  to  fit  some  strapping  Venus, 
and  her  arms  might  go  on  to  some  Apollino  ;  and  so,  when  only 
a  few  fragments  of  popular  tales  are  known,  it  is  perfectly  hope- 
less to  try  to  restore  them.  If  all  the  fragments  of  all  the  statues 
in  the  Vatican  were  gathered  together,  then  there  might  be  some 
hope  of  mending  them  ;  but  some  are  strongly  suspected  not  to 
wear  their  own  heads  even  now.  If  all  the  fragments  of  all  the 
popular  tales  in  the  world  were  gathered,  something  might  be 
reconstructed  ;  but,  unless  each  collector  is  content  to  bring  his 
gatherings  without  alteration,  the  restorer  will  have  hard  work. 

But  to  return  to  Straparola.  The  king  marries  the  beautiful  lady 
who  keeps  his  room  so  tidy  in  so  mysterious  a  manner,  and  they 
have  two  sons.  The  wicked  Tebaldo,  wandering  over  the  world 
in  disguise,  arrives  in  Britain,  knows  his  daughter,  obtains 
access  to  the  palace,  murders  the  two  children,  and  leaves  a 


236  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

bloody  knife  in  the  Queen's  possession.  An  astrologer  is  con- 
sulted, tells  that  the  knife  will  be  found,  and  it  is  found  in  the 
Queen's  keeping  ;  and  she  is  to  die.  The  astrologer,  who  knows 
everything,  goes  off  to  the  old  nurse,  who  conies  at  once  to  Eng- 
land, and  tells  the  king  all  that  has  happened.  Tebaldo  is 
caught,  and  torn  to  pieces  by  four  horses,  and  his  flesh  given  to 
rabid  dogs. 

So  end  the  wicked  in  many  Gaelic  tales.  "  He  was  torn  be- 
tween horses,  burned  amongst  fires,  and  his  ashes  let  fly  with  the 
wind,"  is  the  end  of  one. 

The  French  story,  "Peau  d'  Ane,"  is  in  "les  Contes  des  Fees 
de  Charles  Perrault,"  the  wicked  father  was  sent  for  "Robes," 
"  Couleur  du  temps,"  "  Couleur  du  soleil,"  "Couleur  de  la 
Lune,"  and  got  them  ;  and  then  for  a  donkey's  skin,  in  which 
the  lady  disguised  herself.  But  then  the  French  story  goes  off 
on  another  road,  for  the  donkey  was  precious  and  magical,  and 
pieces  of  gold  were  found  in  his  stall ;  and  he  belongs  to  another 
class  of  stories,  which  have  Gaelic  relations.  (Perrault  died 
1703). 

And  so  popular  tales  are  woven  together  in  a  network  which 
seems  to  pervade  the  world,  and  to  be  fastened  to  everything  in 
it.  Tradition,  books,  history,  and  mythology,  hang  together  ; 
no  sooner  has  the  net  been  freed  from  one  snag,  and  a  mesh 
gained,  than  another  mesh  is  discovered  ;  and  so,  unless  many 
hands  combine,  the  net  and  the  contents  will  never  be  brought 
to  shore. 


XV. 
THE  POOR  BROTHER  AND  THE  RICH. 

From  Flora  Maclntyre,  Islay. 

rpHERE  was  a  poor  brother  and  a  rich  brother  before 
*-  now.  The  work  that  the  poor  one  had,  was  to  be 
at  drains ;  he  hired  a  gillie,  and  they  had  nothing  with 
their  mealtime  but  to  take  it  without  sauce.  "Had'nt 
we  better,"  said  the  gillie,  "  steal  a  cow  of  thy  brother's 
lot  % "     They  went  and  they  did  this. 

The  rich  brother  was  taking  a  notion  that  it  was 
they  who  stole  his  cow ;  and  he  did  not  know  in  what 
way  he  could  contrive  to  find  out  if  it  were  they  who 
stole  her.  He  went  and  he  put  his  mother-in-law  in 
a  kist,  and  he  came  to  seek  room  for  the  kist  in  his 
brother's  house ;  he  put  bread  and  cheese  with  the 
crone  in  the  kist ;  and  there  was  a  hole  in  it,  in  order 
that  she  might  find  out  everything.  The  gillie  found 
out  that  the  crone  was  in  the  kist ;  he  wetted  sacks  and 
put  them  on  top  of  the  kist ;  the  water  was  streaming  out 
of  the  sacks  on  the  crone,  and  she  was  not  hearing  a 
word.  He  went,  in  the  night,  where  the  crone  was,  and 
he  said  to  her,  "  Was  she  hearing ?"  "I  am  not,"  said 
she."  "  Art  thou  eating  a  few  V  "I  am  not."  " Give 
me  a  piece  of  the  cheese,  and  I  will  cut  it  for  thee.',, 
He  cut  the  cheese,  and  he  stuffed  it  into  her  throat  till 
she  was  choked.     The  kist  was  taken  home,  and  the 


238  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

dead  crone  in  it.     They  buried  the  crone,  and  they  laid 
out  but  little  on  her. 

In  the  night,  said  the  poor  man's  gillie  to  his  master, 
"  Is  it  not  lamentable  that  such  and  such  linen  should 
go  with  the  crone  to  the  cell,  *  while  the  children  are  so 
*  "Kill,"  cell  a  small  church  ;  hence  applied  to  church-yards, 
much  in  want  of  shirts  1 "  He  went,  and  he  took  a 
spade  with  him,  and  he  reached  the  church-yard.  He 
dug  the  grave,  and  he  took  the  crone  from  the  coffin ; 
he  took  off  her  the  tais  dress,  he  threw  her  on  his  back, 
and  he  came  to  the  house  of  the  rich  brother ;  he  went 
in  with  her,  and  he  placed  her  seated  at  the  fireside,  and 
the  tongs  between  her  two  feet.  When  the  maid  servant 
rose  in  the  morning,  she  fell  in  a  faint  when  she  saw  the 
crone  before  her.  The  rich-  brother  thrashed  his  wife 
because  of  her  mother  saying,  "  that  she  was  about  to 
bring  him  to  bare  ruin."  He  went  to  the  house  of  his 
poor  brother  and  told  that  the  crone  had  come  home. 
"  Ah  ha  !  "  said  the  gillie,  "  because  thou  didst  not  spend 
enough  on  her  living,  thou  wilt  spend  it  on  her  dead ;  I 
saw  the  like  of  this  before ;  thou  must  lay  out  a  good 
deal  on  her." 

They  bought  a  good  lot  of  things  for  the  funeral, 
and  they  left  the  one  half  of  it  in  the  house  of  the  poor 
brother  and  they  buried  the  crone  again.  "Is  it  not 
lamentable,"  said  the  poor  brother's  gillie  to  his  master, 
"that  such  a  lot  of  linen  should  go  on  the  crone, 
while  thou  art  so  much  in  want  of  a  shirt  thyself  1 " 
He  went  to  the  cell  that  night  again,  he  raised  the 
crone,  he  took  off  her  the  tais  clothes,  and  he  took  her 
with  him  on  his  back ;  he  went  into  the  house  of  the 
rich  brother,  as  was  usual,  and  he  set  the  crone  stand- 
ing at  the  end  of  the  dresser,  with  her  claw  full  of 
seeds  from  the  dish  of  so  wens,  as  if  she  were  eating  it 


THE  POOR  BROTHER  AND  THE  RICH.  239 

When  the  man  of  the  house  saw  her  back  in  the 
morning,  he  thrashed  his  wife  soundly,  because  of  her 
mother.  He  went  then  to  the  house  of  his  poor 
brother,  and  he  told  that  the  crone  had  come  home 
again.  "Aha!"  said  the  gillie,  "because  thou  didst  not 
spend  money  on  her  living,  thou  wilt  spend  it  on  her 
dead  ;  I  saw  the  like  of  this  before."  "  Go  thou,  then, 
and  lay  out  a  good  deal  on  her,  for  I  am  tired  of  her," 
said  the  man.  He  bought  a  good  lot  for  the  crone's 
funeral,  and  he  took  the  one  half  to  his  master's 
house.  They  buried  the  crone.  In  the  night,  said 
the  gillie  to  his  master,  "Is  it  not  lamentable  that 
such  linen  should  go  with  the  crone  to  the  cell,  while 
I  myself  am  in  such  want  of  a  shirt."  He  took  him- 
self to  the  cell,  he  raised  the  crone,  he  took  off  her  the 
tais  dress,  he  put  her  on  top  of  him,  and  he  reached 
the  rich  brother's  house.  He  did  not  get  in  this 
journey,  so  he  went  with  her  to  the  stable,  and  he  tied 
her  on  top  of  a  year-old  colt.  When  they  rose  in  the 
morning,  they  were  well  pleased  when  they  did  not  see 
the  crone  before  them.  He  was  going  from  home ;  he 
went  out  to  the  stable,  and  he  took  the  mare  with  him ; 
but  he  never  perceived  that  the  crone  was  on  top  of  the 
year-old.  When  he  went  away  on  top  of  the  mare,  after 
him  went  the  year-old  with  the  crone  clattering  on  top 
of  him.  He  turned  back  when  he  saw  the  crone,  and  he 
was  like  to  kill  his  wife  this  time.  He  went  to  his 
brother's  house  and  he  told  that  the  crone  had  come 
back  again. 

"As  thou  didst  not  spend  money  on  her  living,"  said 
the  gillie,  "thou  must  spend  it  on  her  dead." 

"Go  and  lay  out  as  thou  wilt  on  her,"  said  he  to  the 
gillie,  "but  keep  her  away." 

He  went  this  time  and  he  bought  a  good  lot  for  the 


240  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

crone's  funeral,  and  he  invited  every  one  in  the  place. 
They  buried  the  crone  again  ;  and  the  poor  brother  was 
as  wealthy  as  the  other,  by  reason  of  the  funerals. 


URSGEUL. 

Bha  brathair  bochd  agus  brathair  beairteach  ann  roimhe  so.  'Se 
'n  obair  a  bh'  aig  an  fhear  bhochd  a  bhi  d^anadh  dhraintan.  Dh' 
fhasdaidh  e  gille,  's  cha  robh  mlr  aca  le  am  biadh  ach  'ga 
'ghabhail  tur.  "  Nach  fhearra  dhuinn,"  urs'  an  gille;  "bode 
chuid  do  bhrathar  a  ghoid."  Dh'  fholbh  iad  agus  rinn  iad  so. 
Bha  'm  brathair  beairteach  a'  gabhail  amharuis  gur  h-iad  a  ghoid 
a'  bh6,  's  cha  robh  fhios  aige  de  'n  d6igh  a  dheanadh  e  air  faotainn 
a  mach  an  iad  a  ghoid  i. 

Dh'  fholbh  e  's  chuir  e  'mhathair-ch^ile  ann  an  cisde,  's  thainig 
e  dh'  iarraidh  rum  de  'n  chisde  ann  an  tigh"  a  bhrathar.  Chuir  e 
aran  is  caise  leis  a'  chaillich  anns  a'  chisde,  's  bha  toll  urra,  air 
alt  gu'  m6chadh  ise  do  na  h-uile  gnothuch.  Mhothaich  an  gille 
gun  robh  a'  chailleach  anns  a'  chisde.  Fhliuch  e  saic,  is  thilg  e 
air  muinn  na  cisd'  iad.  Bha  'n  t-uisge  'sruthadh  as  na  saic  air  a' 
chaillich,  's  cha  robh  i  'cluinntinn  smid.  Chaidh  e  anns  an 
oidhche  far  an  robh  a'  chailleach,  's  thuirt  e  rithe  an  robh  i 
cluinntinn.  "  Cha  'n  'eil,"  urs'  ise.  "  Am  bheil  thu  'g  itheadh 
a'  bheag  ?  "  "  Cha  'n  'eil. "  "  Thoir  dh6mhsa  plosa  de  'n  chaise 
's  gearraidh  mi  dhuit  e."  Ghearr  e  'n  caise,  's  dhinn  e  'na 
muineal  e  gus  an  do  thachd  e  i.  Chaidh  a'  chisde  'thoirt 
dachaidh,  's  a'  chailleach  marbh  innte.  Thlolaic  iad  a'  chaill- 
each, 's  cha  d'  rinn  iad  ach  cosdas  beag  urra.  Anns  an  oidhche 
thuirt  gille  an  fhir  bochd  r'a  mhaighstir,  "  Nach  deisneach  a 
leithid  siod  de  dh'  anart  a  dhol  leis  a'  chaillich  do  'n  chill,  's  cho 
feumail  's  a  tha  na  paisdean  air  leintean." 

Dh'  fholbh  e  's  thug  e  leis  spad  ;  rainig  e  'n  clagh  ;  chladhaich 
e  'n  uaigh  ;  thug  e  'chailleach  as  a  chiste-luidh ;  thug  e  dhi  an 
t-ais-aodach ;  thilg  e  air  a  mhuinn  i ;  's  thainig  e  gu  tigh  a' 
bhrathair  bheairteach.  Chaidh  e  stigh  leatha,  's  chuir  e  i  'na 
suidhe  aig  a'  ghealbhan,  's  an  clotha  eadar  a  da  chois.  Nur  a  dh' 
eiridh  an  searbhanta  anns  a'  mhaidinn  thuit  i  ann  am  paiseanadh, 
nur  a  chunnaic  i  'chailleach  roimpe.  Ghabh  am  brathair  beart- 
each  air  a'  bhean  airson  a  mathar  ag  radh  gun  robh  i  brath  a 


URSGEUL.  241 

sgrios.  Chaidh  e  gu  tigk  a'  bhrathair  bhochd,  'a  dh'  innis  e  gun 
d'  thainig  a'  chailleach  dhachaidh.  "Aha!  "  urs'  an  gille,  "  0 
nach  do  chosd  thu  r'a  be6  e  cosdaidh  thu  r'a  marbh  e  !  Chunnaic 
mise  ieithid  so  roimhid.  Feumaidh  tu  cosdas  math  a  dheanadh 
urra." 

Cheannaich  iad  cuid  mhath  de  ghnothuicbeau  airson  an 
t6rraidh,  's  dh'  fhag  iad  an  darna  leith  dheth  ann  an  tigh  a' 
bhrathair  bhochd.  Thlolaic  iad  a'  chailleach  a  rithisd.  "  Nach 
deisneach,"  ursa  gille  'bhrathair  bhochd  r'a  mhaighstir,  "a 
Ieithid  siod  do  dh'  anart  a  dhol  air  a'  chaillich,  's  cho  feuraail  's 
a  tha  thu  fein  air  leine." 

Chaidh  e  do  'n  chill  an  oidhche  sin  a  rithisd.  Thog  e  'chaill- 
each, 's  thug  e  dhith  an  t-ais-aodach,  's  thug  e  leis  air  a'  mhuinn 
i.  Chaidh  e  stigh  do  thigh  a'  bhrathair  bheairtich  mar  a  b' 
abhaist,  's  chuir  e  'chailleach  'na  seasamh  aig  ceann  an  dresseir, 
's  a  crdg  Ian  do  chaith  as  an  t-soitheach  chabhrach,  mar  gum 
biodh  i  'ga  itheadh.  Nur  a  chunnaic  fear  an  tighe  air  a  h-ais  i 
anns  a  mhaidinn,  ghabh  e  air  a'  bhean  gu  h-iomlan  airson  a 
mathar.  Chaidh  e  'n  sin  do  thigh  a'  bhrathar  bhochd,  's  dh' 
innis  e  gun  d'  thainig  a'  chailleach  dhachaidh  a  rithisd.  "A 
ha  !  "  urs'  an  gille,  "  0  nach  do  chosd  thu  r'a  be5  e,  cosdaidh  thu 
r'a  marbh  e.  Chunnaic  mise  'Ieithid  so  roimhid."  "  Folbh  thusa 
mata  's  dean  cosdas  math  urra  chionn  tha  mise  sgith  dhi. " 

Cheanuaich  e  cuid  mhath  thun  t6rradh  na  caillich,  Js  thug  e  'n 
darna  leith  thun  tigh  a'  mhaighstir.  Thlolaic  iad  a'  chailleach. 
Anns  an  oidhche  urs'  an  gille  r'a  mhaighstir,  "Nach  deisneach 
a'  Ieithid  siod  do  dh'  anart  a  dol  leis  a'  chaillich  do  'n  chill,  's  mi 
fein  cho  feumail  air  leine."  Thug  e  'chill  air  ;  thog  e  chailleach  ; 
thug  e  dhi  an  t-ais-aodach  ;  chuir  e  air  a  mhuinn  i ;  's  rainig  e 
tigh  a'  bhrathar  bheairteach.  Cha  d'  fhuair  e  stigh  air  an  t- 
siubhal  so.  Chaidh  e  leatha  do  'n  stabuU,  's  cheangail  e  i  air 
muinn  bliadhnach  eich.  Nur  a  dh'  6iridh  iad  's  a'  mhaidinn  bha 
iad  gu  toilichte,  nur  nach  fhac  iad  a'  chailleach  romhpa.  Bha 
esan  a'  dol  o'n  tigh.  Chaidh  e  mach  do  'n  stabull,  's  thug  e  leis 
an  capull,  ach  cha  do  mhothaich  e  gun  robh  'chailleach  air  muinn 
a  bhliadnaich  ;  nur  a  dh'  fholbh  esan  air  muinn  a  chapuill,  as  a 
dheigh  a  bha  'm  bliadhnach,  's  a'  chailleach  a'  glaigeileis  air  a 
mhuinn.  Thill  e  air  ais  nur  a  chunnaic  e  chailleach,  's  theab  e 
bhean  a  mharbhadh  air  an  uair  so.  Chaidh  e  do  thigh  a' 
bhrathar,  's  dh'  innis  e  gun  d'  thainig  a'  chailleach  dhachaidh  a 
rithisd.     "  0  nach  do  chosd  thu  r'a  beo  e,"  ars'  an  gille,  "  feum- 

A  2 


242  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

aidh  tu  'chosd  r'a  marbh."  "  Theirig  agus  dean  do  rogha  cosdus 
rithe,"  ars'  esan  ris  a'  ghille,  "ach  cum  air  folbh  i."  Chaidh  e 
air  an  t-siubhail  so  agus  cheannaich  e  cuid  mhath  airson  t6rradh 
na  caillich  's  chuir  e  gach  duine  bha  'san  aite.  Thiolaic  iad  a* 
chailleach  a  rithisd,  's  bha  'm  brathair  bochd  cho  beairteach  ris 
an  fhear  eile  air  tailleabh  nan  tdrradh. 

One  James  MacQueen,  who  lived  at  Tirneagan,  near  Kil- 
meny,  but  who  is  not  living  now,  gave  this  to  one  Flora  Mac- 
Intyre,  at  Kilmeny,  who  told  it  to  Hector  MacLean. — May  1859. 

This  story  is  not  like  any  other  that  I  know.  It  is  one  of  a 
kind  which  is  common,  in  which  mortals  alone  play  a  part. 
Some  are  humorous,  and  some  free.  One  such  has  been  versified 
by  Allan  Ramsay,  page  520,  vol.  2  ;  and  is  nearly  the  same  as 
Tom  Totherhouse,  the  Norse  tale. 

The  expensive  funeral  was  once  truly  highland ;  and  the  in- 
vitation to  all  the  world  characteristic.  It  used  to  be  told  of 
one  such  funeral  party,  that  they  dropped  the  coffin  out  of  a 
cart  on  the  way  over  a  strand,  and  never  found  it  out  till  they 
got  to  the  churchyard.  They  returned  and  finished  the  funeral, 
but  went  home  afterwards  very  drunk ;  the  sons  shouting 
"  Horo  !  it's  the  carlin's  wedding."  The  funeral  dinner  was 
within  my  memory,  and  still  may  be,  a  solemn  feast.  Such 
toasts  as  "  Comfort  to  the  distressed,"  and  "The  memory  of  the 
deceased,"  were  drank  in  solemn  silence  ;  and  the  whole  matter 
was  conducted  with  gravity  and  decorum,  but  with  profuse  and 
necessary  hospitality,  for  the  funeral  guests  had  often  to  travel 
great  distances,  and  the  coffin  had  to  be  carried  many  miles. 
No  Highlander,  if  his  friends  can  help  it,  is  buried  anywhere 
but  at  home  ;  coffins  may  be  seen  on  board  the  steamers,  con- 
veying to  the  outer  islands  the  bodies  of  those  who  have  died  on 
the  main  land.  It  is  a  poetic  wish  to  be  buried  amongst  friends, 
and  one  that  is  in  full  force  in  the  Highlands  to  this  day.  The 
curse  of  Scotland  may  occasionally  intrude  even  on  such  solemn 
occasions  ;  but  a  funeral  is  almost  always  decorously  conducted. 
In  some  places,  as  I  am  told,  a  piper  may  still  be  seen  at  the 
head  of  the  funeral  procession,  playing  a  dirge.  There  is  no 
want  of  reverence,  but  death  is  treated  as  an  ordinary  event.  I 
have  seen  a  man's  tombstone,  with  a  blank  for  the  date,  standing 
at  the  end  of  his  house,  while  he  was  quite  well. 


THE  POOR  BROTHER  AND  THE  RICH.  243 

It  was  lately  said  of  a  man  who  went  home  to  die,  "  He  took 
his  own  body  home  ; "  and  so  he  did. 

There  is  something  mythological  about  the  old  woman  who 
will  not  rest,  because  enough  has  not  been  laid  out  on  her 
funeral.  It  may  be  some  remnant  of  a  notion  of  purgatory  ;  but 
I  suspect  it  is  something  heathen. 

Romans  had  to  pay  their  passage,  perhaps  Celts  had  to  do  so 
likewise. 


tf*~WOWA>  {'*K*AXYL*»  ******,'%*** 

THE  KING  OF  LOCHLIN'S  THREE 
DAUGHTERS. 

From  Neill  Gillies,  fisherman,  near  Inverary. 

rpHERE  was  a  king  over  Lochlin,  once  upon  a  time, 
■*■  who  had  a  leash  of  daughters ;  they  went  out  (on) 
a  day  to  take  a  walk ;  and  there  came  three  giants, 
and  they  took  with  them  the  daughters  of  the  king, 
and  there  was  no  knowing  where  they  had  gone. 
Then  the  king  sent  word  for  the  sheamichy,  and  he 
asked  him  if  he  knew  where  his  lot  of  daughters  had 
gone.  The  sheanachy  said  to  the  king  that  three 
giants  had  taken  them  with  them,  and  they  were  in 
the  earth  down  below  by  them,  and  there  was  no  way 
to  get  them  but  by  making  a  ship  that  would  sail  on 
sea  and  land ;  and  so  it  was  that  the  king  set  out  an 
order,  any  one  who  would  build  a  ship  that  would  sail 
on  sea  and  on  land,  that  he  should  get  the  king's  big 
daughter  to  marry.  There  was  a  widow  there  who  had 
a  leash  of  sons ;  and  the  eldest  said  to  his  mother  on 
a  day  that  was  there,  "  Cook  for  me  a  bannock,  and 
roast  a  cock ;  I  am  going  away  to  cut  wood,  and  to 
build  a  ship  that  will  go  to  seek  the  daughters  of  the 
king."  His  mother  said  to  him,  "Which  is  better 
with  thee,  the  big  bannock  with  my  cursing,  or  a 
little  bannock  with  my  blessing  ? "  "  Give  me  a  big 
bannock,  it   will   be   small   enough   before   I   build  a 


THE  KING  OF  LOCHLIN'S  THREE  DAUGHTERS.  245 

ship."  He  got  a  bannock  and  he  went  away.  He 
arrived  where  there  was  a  great  wood  and  a  river,  and 
there  he  sat  at  the  side  of  the  river  to  take  the  ban- 
nock. A  great  Uruisg  came  out  of  the  river,  and 
she  asked  a  part  of  the  bannock.  He  said  that  he 
would  not  give  her  a  morsel,  that  it  was  little  enough 
for  himself.  He  began  cutting  the  wood,  and  every 
tree  he  cut  would  be  on  foot  again  ;  and  so  he  was  till 
the  night  came. 

When  the  night  came,  he  went  home  mournful, 
tearful,  blind  sorrowful.  His  mother  asked,  "How 
went  it  with  thee  to-day,  son  ? "  He  said  "  That  it 
went  but  black  ill ;  every  tree  I  would  cut  would  be  on 
foot  again."  A  day  or  two  after  this  the  middle 
brother  said  that  he  himself  would  go ;  and  he  asked 
his  mother  to  cook  him  a  cake  and  roast  him  a  cock ; 
and  in  the  very  way  as  happened  to  his  eldest  brother, 
so  it  happened  to  him.  The  mother  said  the  very 
same  thing  to  the  young  one  j  and  he  took  the  little 
bannock.  The  Uruisg  came,  and  she  asked  a  part  of 
the  cake  and  the  cock.  He  said  to  her,  "That  she 
should  get  that."  When  the  Uruisg  had  eaten  her  own 
share  of  the  cake  and  of  the  cock,  she  said  to  him 
"  That  she  knew  what  had  brought  him  there  as  well 
as  he  himself,  but  he  was  to  go  home ;  but  to  be  sure 
to  meet  her  there  at  the  end  of  a  day  and  year ;  and 
that  the  ship  would  be  ready  at  the  end. 

It  was  thus  it  happened  :  At  the  end  of  a  day 
and  a  year  the  widow's  young  son  went,  and  he  found 
that  the  Uruisg  had  the  ship  floating  on  the  river,  fully 
equipped.  He  went  away  then  with  the  ship,  and  a 
leash  of  gentlemen,  as  great  as  were  in  the  kingdom, 
that  were  to  marry  the  daughters  of  the  king.  They 
were  but  a  short  time  sailing  when  they  saw  a  man 


246  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

drinking  a  river  that  was  there.  He  asked  him, 
" What  art  thou  doing  there  1 "  "I  am  drinking  up 
this  river."  "  Thou  hadst  better  come  with  me,  and  I 
will  give  thee  meat  and  wages,  and  better  work  than 
that."  "I  will  do  that,"  said  he.  They  had  not 
gone  far  forward,  when  they  saw  a  man  eating  a  stot 
in  a  park.  "  What  art  thou  doing  there  ?  "  said  he. 
"  I  am  here  going  to  eat  all  the  stots  in  this  park." 
"  Thou  hadst  better  go  with  me,  and  thou  wilt  get 
work,  and  wages  better  than  raw  flesh."  "I  will  do 
*#£»>>)  i  tnat>"  said  he.  They  went  but  a  short  distance  when 
they  saw  another  man  with  his  ear  to  the  earth.  "  What 
art  thou  doing  there  1 "  said  he.  "  I  am  here  hearing 
the  grass  coming  through  earth."  "Go  with  me,  and 
thou  wilt  get  meat,  and  better  wages  than  to  be  there 
with  thy  ear  to  the  earth."  They  were  thus  sailing 
back  and  forwards,  when  the  man  who  was  listening 
said,  "That  this  was  the  place  in  which  were  the 
king's  daughters  and  the  giants."  The  widow's  son, 
and  the  three  that  had  fallen  in  with  them,  were  let 
down  in  a  creel  in  a  great  hole  that  was  there.  They 
reached  the  house  of  the  big  giant.  "Ha!  ha!"  said 
he,  the  giant,  "I  knew  well  what  thou  art  seeking 
here.  Thou  art  seeking  the  king's  daughter,  but  thou 
wilt  not  get  that,  unless  thou  hast  a  man  that  will 
■         drink  as  much  water  as  I."     He  set  the  man  who  was 


^  U>  fi*X  -         drinking  the  river  to  hold  drinking  against  the  giant ; 
and  before  he  was  half  satisfied  the  giant  burst.     Then 
fl^J})tow  <4>v->    they  went  where  the  second  giant  was.     " Ho,  hoth  ! 
»4L  r  /»JrX&v9  ha,  hath ! "  said  the  giant,    "  I   know  well  what  sent 
tt  <k  LwvJ^"j^£'7&]thee  here;  thou  art  seeking  the  king's  daughter;    but 
thou  shalt  not  get  her,  if  thou  hast  not  a  man  who  will 
eat  as  much  flesh  as  I."     He  set  the  man  who  was  eat- 
ing the  stot  to  hold  the  eating  of  flesh  against  the 


THE  KING  OF  LOCHLIN'S  THREE  DAUGHTERS.  247 

giant ;  but  before  he  was  half  satisfied  the  giant  burst. 
Then  he  went  where  the  third  giant  was.  "  Haio ! " 
said  the  giant,  "  I  know  what  set  thee  here ;  but  thou 
wilt  not  get  the  king's  daughter,  by  any  means,  unless 
thou  stay  est  a  day  and  a  year  by  me  a  sgalag  "  (slave, 
servant).  "  I  will  do  that,"  said  he ;  and  he  sent  up 
in  the  basket,  first  the  three  men,  and  then  the  king's 
daughters.  The  three  great  men  were  waiting  at  the 
mouth  of  the  hole  till  they  should  come  up,  and  they 
went  with  them  where  the  king  was;  and  they  told 
the  king  that  they  themselves  had  done  all  the  daring 
deeds  that  there  were. 

When  the  end  of  a  day  and  year  had  come,  he  said 
to  the  giant,  "that  he  was  going."  The  giant  said, 
"  That  he  had  an  eagle  that  would  set  him  up  to  the 
top  of  the  hole."  The  giant  set  the  eagle  away  with 
him,  and  five  stots  and  ten  for  a  meal  for  her ;  but  the 
eagle  went  not  half  way  up  through  the  hole  when  she 
had  eaten  the  stots,  and  she  returned  back  again. 

Then  the  giant  said  to  him,  "Thou  must  remain 
by  me  another  day  and  year,  and  then  I  will  send  thee 
away."  When  the  end  of  this  year  came  he  sent  the 
eagle  away  with  him,  and  ten  stots  and  twenty.  They  9^>x 
went  this  time  well  further  on  than  they  went  before, 
but  she  ate  the  stots  and  she  turned  back.  "  Thou 
must,"  said  the  giant,  "stay  by  me  another  year,  and 
then  I  will  send  thee  away."  The  end  of  this  year 
came,  and  the  giant  sent  them  away,  and  three  score  of  £0* 
stots  for  the  eagle's  meat ;  and  when  they  were  at  the 
mouth  of  the  hole  the  stots  were  expended,  and  she 
was  going  to  turn  back ;  but  he  took  a  steak  out  of  his 
own  thigh,  and  he  gave  this  to  the  eagle,  and  with  one 
spring  she  was  on  the  surface  of  the  earth. 

At  the  time  of  parting  the  eagle  gave  him  a  whistle, 


248  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

and  she  said  to  him,  "Any  hard  lot  that  comes  on 
thee,  whistle  and  I  will  be  at  thy  side."  He  did  not 
allow  his  foot  to  stop,  or  empty  a  puddle  out  of  his 
shoe,  till  he  reached  the  king's  big  town.  He  went 
where  there  was  a  smith  who  was  in  the  town,  and  he 
asked  the  smith  if  he  was  in  want  of  a  gillie  to  blow 
the  bellows.  The  smith  said  that  he  was.  He  was 
but  a  short  time  by  the  smith,  when  the  king's  big 
daughter  sent  word  for  the  smith.  "I  am  hearing,"  said 
she,  "  that  thou  art  the  best  smith  in  the  town  j  but  if 
thou  dost  not  make  for  me  a  golden  crown,  like  the 
golden  crown  that  I  had  when  I  was  by  the  giant,  the 
head  shall  be  taken  off  thee."  The  smith  came  home 
sorrowfully,  lamentably;  and  his  wife  asked  him  his 
news  from  the  king's  house.  "  There  is  but  poor 
news,"  said  the  smith ;  "  the  king's  daughter  is  asking 
that  a  golden  crown  shall  be  made  for  her,  like  the 
crown  that  she  had  when  she  was  under  the  earth  by 
the  giant ;  but  what  do  I  know  what  likeness  was  on 
the  crown  that  the  giant  had."  The  bellows-blowing 
gillie  said,  "  Let  not  that  set  thee  thinking  j  get  thou 
for  me  enough  of  gold,  and  I  will  not  be  long  making 
the  crown."  The  smith  got  of  gold  as  he  asked,  with 
the  king's  order.  The  gillie  went  into  the  smithy, 
and  he  shut  the  door ;  and  he  began  to  splinter  the 
gold  asunder,  and  to  throw  it  out  of  the  window. 
Each  one  that  came  the  way  was  gathering  the  gold, 
that  the  bellows  lad  was  hurling  out.  Here,  then, 
he  blew  the  whistle,  and  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye 
the  eagle  came.  "Go,"  said  he  to  the  eagle,  "and 
bring  here  the  golden  crown  that  is  above  the  big 
giant's  door."  The  eagle  went,  and  she  was  not  long 
on  the  way,  and  the  crown  (was)  with  her.  He  gave 
the  crown  to  the  smith.  ,t  The  smith  went  so  merrily, 


W    fry    J*J>i   £**>_<***•    * 


£4  r^u  ******     ^ 


flaJzj  w  *dfc  L*  oJr  1  tlfitcM^ 


THE  KING  OF  LOCHLIN'S  THREE  DAUGHTERS.  249 

cheerily  with  the  crown  where  the  king's  daughter 
was.  "  A  Veil  then,"  said  she,  "  if  I  did  not  know  that 
it  could  not  be  done,  I  would  not  believe  that  this  is 
not  the  crown  I  had  when  I  was  with  the  big  giant." 
The  king's  middle  daughter  said  to  the  smith,  "Thou 
wilt  lose  the  head  if  thou  dost  not  make  for  me,  a 
silver  crown,  like  the  one  I  had  when  I  was  by  the 
giant."  The  smith  took  himself  home  in  misery  :  but 
his  wife  went  to  meet  him,  expecting  great  news  and 
flattery  ;  but  so  it  was,  that  the  gillie  said  that  he 
would  make  a  silver  crown  if  he  could  get  enough  of 
silver.  The  smith  got  plenty  of  silver  with  the  king's 
order.  The  gillie  went,  and  he  did  as  he  did  before.  He 
whistled  :  the  eagle  came.  "Go,"  said  he,  "and  bring 
hither  here  to  me,  the  silver  crown  that  the  king's 
middle  daughter  had  when  she  was  by  the  giant." 

The  eagle  went,  and  she  was  not  long  on  the 
journey  with  the  silver  crown.  The  smith  went 
merrily,  cheerily,  with  the  silver  crown  to  the  king's 
daughter.  "Well,  then,"  said  she,  "it  is  marvel- 
lously like  the  crown  I  had  when  I  was  by  the  giant." 
The  king's  young  daughter  said  to  the  smith  that 
he  should  make  a  copper  crown  for  her,  like  the  copper 
crown  she  had  when  she  was  by  the  giant.  The  smith 
now  was  taking  courage,  and  he  went  home  much  more 
pleasantly  this  turn.  The  gillie  began  to  splinter  the 
copper,  and  to  throw  it  out  of  each  door  and  window ; 
and  now  they  were  from  each  end  of  the  town  gathering 
the  copper,  as  they  were  gathering  the  silver  and  gold. 
He  blew  the  whistle,  and  the  eagle  was  at  his  side. 
"Go  back,"  said  he,  "and  bring  here  hither  to  me  the 
copper  crown  that  the  king's  young  daughter  had  when 
she  was  by  the  giant."  The  eagle  went,  and  she  was 
not  long  going  and  coming.     He  gave  the  crown  to  the 


250  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

smith.  The  smith  went  merrily,  cheerily,  and  he  gave 
it  to  the  king's  young  daughter.  "  Well,  then  !  "  said 
she,  "  I  would  not  believe  that  this  was  not  the  very 
crown  that  I  had  when  I  was  by  the  giant  underground, 
if  there  were  a  way  of  getting  it."  Here  the  king  said 
to  the  smith,  that  he  must  tell  him  where  he  had  learned 
crown  making,  "for  I  did  not  know  that  the  like  of  thee 
was  in  the  kingdom."  "Well,  then,"  said  the  smith, 
"  with  your  leave,  oh  king,  it  was  not  I  who  made  the 
crowns,  but  the  gillie  I  have  blowing  the  bellows." 
"I  must  see  thy  gillie,"  said  the  king,  "till  he  makes 
a  crown  for  myself." 

The  king  ordered  four  horses  in  a  coach,  and  that 
they  should  go  to  seek  the  smith's  gillie ;  and  when 
the  coach  came  to  the  smithy,  the  smith's  gillie  was 
smutty  and  dirty,  blowing  the  bellows.  The  horse 
gillies  came,  and  they  asked  for  the  man  who  was 
going  to  look  on  the  king.  The  smith  said,  "  That  was 
he  yonder,  blowing  the  bellows."  "  Oov  !  oov  !  "  said 
they ;  and  they  (set)  to  catch  him,  and  throw  him  head 
foremost  into  the  coach,  as  if  they  had  a  dog. 

They  went  not  far  on  their  journey  when  he  blew 
the  whistle.  The  eagle  was  at  his  side.  "  If  ever 
thou  didst  good  for  me  take  me  out  of  this,  and  fill  it 
full  of  stones,"  said  he.  The  eagle  did  this.  The  king 
was  out  waiting  on  the  coach;  and  when  the  king 
opened  the  door  of  the  coach,  he  was  like  to  be  dead 
with  the  stones  bouncing  on  top  of  him.  There  was 
catching  of  the  horse  gillies,  and  hanging  them  for 
giving  such  an  affront  to  the  king. 

Here  the  king  sent  other  gillies  with  a  coach  j  and 
when  they  reached  the  smithy,  "  Oov !  oov ! "  said 
they.  "Is  this  the  black  thing  the  king  sent  us  to 
seek  1 "     They  caught  him,  and  they  cast  him  into  the 


THE  KING  OF  LOCHLIN'S  THREE  DAUGHTERS.  251 

coach  as  if  they  had  a  turf  peat.     But  they  went  not 

far  on  their  way  when  he  blew  the  whistle,  and  the 

eagle  was  at  his  side;  and  he  said  to  her,   "Take  me 

out   of   this,   and   fill   it   with   every   dirt   thou   canst 

get."     When  the  coach  reached  the  king's  palace,  the 

king  went  to  open  the  door.     Each  dirt  and  rubbish 

fell  about  the  king's  head.      Then  the  king  was  in  a 

great  rage,  and  he  ordered  the  horse  gillies  to  be  hanged 

immediately.     Here  the  king  sent  his  own  confidential 

servant  away;    and  when  he  reached  the  smithy,  he 

caught  the  black  bellows-blowing  gillie  by  the  hand. 

"The  king,"  said  he,   "sent  me  to  seek  thee.     Thou 

hadst  better  clean  a  little  of  the  coal  off  thy  face." 

The  gillie  did  this ;  he  cleaned  himself  well,  and  right 

well ;  and  the  king's  servant  caught  him  by  the  hand,    j  %!i\ 

and  he  put  him  into  the  coach.     They  were  but  a  short  ^  fjfc 

timeje^ing,  when  he  blew  the  whistle.    The  eagle  came  ;  V     t$fc*$ 

and  he  asked  her  to  bring  the  gold  and  silver  dress 

that  was  by  the  big  giant  here  without  delay,  and  the 

eagle  was  not  long  going  and  coming  with  the  dress.  A 

He  arrayed  himself  with  the  giant's  dress.     And  when 

they  came  to  the  king's  palace,  the  king  came,  and  he 

opened  the  door  of  the  coach,  and  there  was  the  very 

finest  man  the  king  ever  saw.      The  king  took  him 

in,  and  he  told  the  king  how  it  happened  to  him  from 

first  to  last.     The  three  great  men  who  were  going  to 

marry   the   king'^    daughters   were    hanged,    and    the 

king's   big   daughter   was   given   him   to  marry ;    and 

they   made   them  a  wedding    the   length   of    twenty 

nights  and  twenty  days ;  and  I  left  them  dancing,  and 

I  know  not  but  that  they  are  cutting  capers  on  the 

floor  till  the  day  of  to-day. 


tf. 


252  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 


SGEULACHD  AIR  NIGHEANAN  EIGH  LOCHLAINN. 

Bha  rlgh  air  Lochlainn  aon  uair  aig  an  robh  triuir  nigheanan. 
Chaidh  iad  a  raach  latha  ghabhail  sraid,  agus  thainig  trl  famh- 
airean,  's  thug  iad  leo  nigheanan  an  rlgh,  's  cha  robh  fios  c'aite 
an  deach  iad.  Chuir  an  righ  fios  an  sin  air  an  t-seanachaidh 
aige,  's  dh'  fhe6raich  e  dheth,  "An  robh  fios  aige  c'aite  an  deach 
a  chuid  nigheanan  ?  "  Thuirt  an  seanachaidh  ris  an  rlgh  gu  'n 
d-thug  tri  farnhairean  leo  iad,  agus  gun  robh  iad  anns  an  talamh 
gu  h-losal  aca,  's  nach  robh  doigh  air  am  faotuinn,  ach  le  long  a 
dheanamh  a  she61adh  air  muir  's  air  tir."  Agus  'se  bh'ann  gun 
do  chuir  an  rlgh  6rdugh  a  rnach,  "Co  air  bith  a  thogadh  long  a 
she61adh  air  muir  's  air  tir,  gu'  faigheadh  e  nighean  mhor  an  rlgh 
ri  phbsadh."  Bha  bantrach  an  sin  aig  an  robh  triuir  mhac,  agus 
thubhairt  am  fear  'bu  shine  ri  'mhathair  latha  bha  'n  sin, 
"  Bruich  dh6mhsa  bonnach  's  r6ist  coileach  ;  tha  mi  falbh  a 
ghearradh  coille  's  athogail  long,  a  theid  a  dh'  iarraidh  nigheanan 
an  rlgh."  Thuirt  a  mhathair  ris,  "  C6'ca  's  fearr  leat  am 
bonnach  mor  le  m'  mhallachd  na  'm  bonnach  beag  le  m'  bheann- 
achd."  "  Thoir  dhomhsa  'm  bonnach  mor;  bithidh  e  beag  na 
leoir  mu  'n  tog  mi  long."  Fhuair  e  'm  bonnach  's  dh'  fhalbh  e. 
Rainig  e  far  an  robh  coille  mhor  agus  abhuinn.  Shuidh  e  an  sin 
ri  taobh  na  h-abhunn  a  ghabhail  a'  bhonnaich.  Thainig  uruisg 
mh6r  a  mach  as  an  abhuinn,  agus  dh'iarr  i  pairt  do  'n  bbonnach. 
Thubhairt  esan  nach  d'  thugadh  e  mir  dhi,  gun  robh  e  beag  na 
le6ir  dha  f6in.  Th6isich  e  air  gearradh  na  coille,  's  na  h-uile 
craobh  a  ghearradh  e,  bhiodh  i  air  a  bonn  a  rithist ;  's  bha  e 
mur  3in  gus  an  d'  thainig  an  oidhche.  Nuair  a  thainig  an 
oidhche  chaidh  e  dhachaidh,  dubhacb,  deurach,  dalla-bhronach. 
Dh'  fhoighnichd  a  mhathair  dheth,  "  De  mar  a  chaidh  dhuit  an 
diugh,  a  mhic."  Thubhairt  esan,  nach  deach  ach  gu  dubh  dona 
"  Na  h-uile  craobh  a  ghearrainn,  bhiodh  i  air  a  bonn  a  rithist." 
Latha  na  dha  an  deigh  so,  thubhairt  am  brathair  meadhonach, 
"gu'  falbhadh  e  fhein,  's  dh'  iarr  e  air  a  mhathair,  bonnach  a 
bhruich  's  coileach  a  rostadh  ;  agus  air  a'  cheart  d6igh  mar 
thachair  d'a  bhrathair  a  bu  shine,  thachair  dhasan.  Thubhairt 
a  mhathair  a'  cheart  ni  ris  an  fhear  6g,  agus  ghabh  e  'm  bonnach 
beag.  Thainig  an  uruisg,  's  dh'iarr  i  pairt  do  'n  bhonnach  's  do 
'n  choileach.  Thubhairt  e  rithe,  "  Gu  'm  faigheadh  i  sin." 
Nuair  a  dh'ith  an  uruisg  a  cuid  fhein  do  'n  bhonnach  's  do  'n 


SGEULACHD  AIR  NIGHEANAN  RIGH  LOCHLAINN.      253 

choileach,  thubhairt  i  ris,  "Gun  robh  fios  aice-se  d6  thug  an  sud 
e  co  maith  ris  fhein,  ach  esan  a  dhol  dachaidh,  ach  a  bhi  cinnteach 
ise  a  choinneachainn  an  sud  an  ceann  latha  's  bliadhna,  agus  gu 
'm  bitheadh  an  long  deas  air  a  cheann."  'Sann  mar  so  athachair. 
An  ceann  latha  's  bliadhna  dh'  fhalbh  mac  6g  na  bantraich, 
agus  fhuair  e  'n  long  air  snamh  air  an  abhuinn  fuidh  Ian 
uidheam  aig  an  uruisg.  Dh'  fhalbh  e  an  sin  leis  an  luing,  agus 
triuir  dhaoine  uaisle  cho  m6r  'sa  bha  'san  ri6ghachd,  a  bha  gu 
nigheanan  an  rlgh  a  phosadh.  Cha  robh  iad  ach  goirid  a 
sedladh  an  uair  a  chunnaic  iad  fear  ag  61  suas  abhuinn  a  bha  'sin 
Dh'  fheoraich  iad  dheth,  "  De  'tha  thu  deanamh  an  sin  ?  "  "  Tha 
ag  61  suas  na  h-aibhne  so."  "  'S  fearr  dhuit  falbh  learn  fh&n,  's 
bheir  mi  dhuit  biadh,  's  tuarasdal,  's  obair  a's  fearr  na  sin." 
"Ni  mi  sin,"  ars'  esan.  Cha  deachaidh  iad  fad  air  an  aghaidh 
gus  am  fac  iad  fear  eile  ag  itheadh  dhamh  ann  am  pairc.  "  De 
'tha  thu  deanamh  an  sin?  "  Thubhairt  esan,  "  Tha  mi  'n  so  a' 
dol  a  dh'  itheadh  na  tha  dhaimh  anns  a'  phairc  so."  "  'S  fearr 
dhuit  falbh  learn  fh£in,  's  gheibh  thu  obair  's  tuarasdal  a's  fearr 
na  feoil  amh."  "  Ni  mi  sin,"  thubhairt  esan.  Cha  deach  iad 
ach  goirid  dar  *  a  chunnaic  iad  fear  eile 's  a'  chluas  ris  an  talamh. 
"  De  tha  thu  deanamh  an  sin?"  Thubhairt  esan,  "Tha  mi  an 
so  a'  cluintinn  an  fheoir  a'  tighinn  troi  'n  talamh."  "Falbh 
leam  fhein  's  gheibh  thu  biadh  's  tuarasdal  a's  fearr  na  bhi  'n  sin, 
's  do  chluas  ris  an  talamh."  Bha  iad  mur  so  a'  se61adh  air  an 
ais  's  air  an  aghaidh  nuair  a  thubhairt  am  fear  a  bha'  g  eisteachd, 
"Gu  'm  be  sud  an  t-aite  anns  an  robh  nigheanan  an  righagus  na 
famhairean."  Chaidh  mac  na  bantraich  agus  an  triuir  a  thachair 
orra  a  leigeil  slos  ann  an  cliabh,  ann  an  toll  mor  a  bha  'n  sin. 
Rainig  iad  tigh  an  fhamhair  mh6ir.  "Ha  !  ha  !"  thuirt  esan, 
"  tha  fios  again  gu  maith  de  'tha  thu  'g  iarraidh  an  so  ;  tha  thu 
'g  iarraidh  nighean  an  rlgh,  ach  cha  'n  'fhaigh  thu  sin  mar  'eil 
fear  agad  a  dh'  6las  uiread  uisge  riumsa."  Chuir  esan  am  fear  a 
bha  ag  61  na  h-aibhne  a  chumail  61  ris  an  fhamhair,  's  mun  robh 
esan  leith  bhuidheach,  sgain  am  famhair.  Chaidh  iad  an  sin  far 
an  robh  an  darna  famhair.  "  Ho  !  Hoth  !  Ha  !  Hath  !  "  thubhairt 
am  famhair,  "  tha  fios  agamsa  gu  maith,  de  chuir  an  so  thu  ;  tha 
thu  'g  iarraidh  nighean  an  rlgh,  ach  cha  'n  fhaigh  thu  i  mar  'eil 
fear  agad  a  dh'  itheas  uiread  feola  riumsa."     Chuir  esan  am  fear 

*  Dar,  from  an  troth,  the  time. 


254  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

a  bha  'g'  itheadh  nan  damh  a  chumail  itheadh  feola  ris  an  fhamhair 
so  :  ach  raun  robh  esan  leith  bhuidheach,  sgain  am  famhair. 
Chaidh  iad  an  sin  far  an  robh  an  treas  famhair.  "  Haio  !  "  ars' 
am  famhair,  "  tha  fios  agamsa  de  chuir  an  so  thu,  ach  cha  'n 
fhaigh  thu  nighean  an  rlgh,  idir  mur  fan  thu  agamsa  latha,  's 
bliadhna  ann  ad  sgalaig."  "  Ni  mi  sin,"  thubhairt  esan.  Chuir 
e  suas  ann  an  cliabh  an  toiseach  na  tri  daoine,  agus  an  sin  nigh- 
eanan  an  righ.  Bha  'n  triuir  dhaoine  m6ra  aig  beul  an  tuill  a' 
feitheamh  gus  an  d'  thigeadh  iad  a  nios,  agus  dh'  fhalbh  iad  leo 
far  an  robh  an  rlgh,  's  dh'  innis  iad  do  'n  righ  gu  'm  b'  iad  fein  a 
rinn  gach  uile  thapachd  a  bha  ann. 

"Nuair  a  thainig  ceann  latha  's  bliadhna,"  thubhairt  esan  ris 
an  fhamhair,  "gun  robh  e  'falbh."  Thubhairt  am  famhair,  "  Gun 
robh  fiolaire  aige-san  a  chuireadh  suas  e  gu  mullach  an  tuill." 
Chuir  am  famhair  an  iolaire  air  falbh  leis,  agus  cuig  daimh  dheug 
air  son  Ion  dhi ;  ach  cha  deach  an  iolaire  leith  suas  troi  'n  toll, 
nuair  a  dh'ith  i  na  daimh,  agus  thill  i  air  a  h-ais  a  rithist. 
Thubhairt  am  famhair  ris  an  sin,  "  Feumaidh  tu  fantainn  agamsa 
latha  's  bliadhna  eile,  agus  cuiridh  mi  'n  sin  air  falbh  thu."  Nuair 
a  thainig  ceann  na  bliadhna  so,  chuir  e  air  falbh  an  iolaire  leis, 
agus  deich  daimh  fhichead.  Chaidh  iad  air  an  am  so  gu  maith 
ni  b'  fhaide  air  an  aghaidh,  na  chaidh  iad  roimh,  ach  dh'ith  i  na 
daimh,  's  thill  i  air  a  h-ais.  "Feuma  tu,"  ars'  am  famhair, 
"  fantainn  agamsa  bliadhna  eile,  agus  an  sin  cuiridh  mi  air  falbh 
thu."  Thainig  ceann  na  bliadhna  so,  agus  chuir  am  famhair  air 
folbh  iad,  agus  tri-fichead  damh  air  son  biadh  do  'n  iolaire.  An 
uair  a  bha  iad  aig  beul  ard  an  tuill,  theirig  na  daimh,  's  bha  i  'dol 
a  thilleadh  ;  ach  thug  esan  staoig  as  a  leis  fhein,  's  thug  e  so  do 
'n  iolaire,  agus  le  aon  leum  bha  i  air  uachdar  talamh.  An  am 
dealachaidh  thug  an  iolaire  dha  feadag  agus  thubhairt  i  ris, 
"  cruaidh-chas  sam  bith  a  thig  ort,  leig  fead  agus  bithidh  mise  ri 
d'  thaobh." 

Cha  do  leig  esan  stad  d'a  chois  na  lodan  as  a  bhroig  gus  an  d' 
rainig  e  bailie  mor  an  righ.  Chaidh  e  far  an  robh  gobhainn  a 
bha  's  a'  bhaile,  's  dh'  f he6raich  e  do  'n  ghobha,  ' '  An  robh  gille 
a  dhlth  air,  airson  seideadh  a'  bhuilg  ?  "  Thubhairt  an  gobha 
u  Gu'n  robh."  Cha  robh  e  ach  goirid  aig  a'  ghobha,  nuair  a  chuir 
nighean  mhor  an  righ  fios  air  a'  ghobha.  "  Tha  mi  'cluintinn," 
ars'  ise,  "  gur  tusa  gobhainn  a's  fearr  's  a'  bhaile  ;  ach  mur  dean 
thu  dhomhsa  crun  6ir  coltach  ris  a'  chrun  6ir  a  bh'  agam  nuair  a 
bha  mi  aig  an  fhamhair,  theid  an  ceann  a  thoirt  dhlot."    Thainig 


SGEULACHD  AIR  NIGHEANAN  HIGH  LOCHLAINN.      255 

an  gobha  dhachaidh  gu  dubhach,  bronach,  's  dh'  fhoighneachd  a 
bhean  detb,  de  a  naigheachd  a  tigh  an  rlgh  ?  "  Cba  'n  eil  ach 
naigheachd  bhocbd,"  thuirt  an  gobha  "Tha  'nighean  ag  iarraidh 
crun  6ir  a  dheanamh  dhi  coltach  ris  a  chrun  a  bha  aice  an  uair  a 
bha  i  fo  'n  talamh  aig  an  fhamhair  ;  ach  gu  de  'fios  a  tha  agamsa 
de  'n  coslas  a  bha  air  a'  chrun  a  bha  aig  an  fhamhair."  Thubhairt 
gille  seididh  a'  bhuilg,  "Na  cuireadh  sin  smaointinn  ort.  Faigh 
thusa  dh6mhsa  nis  gu  le6ir  do  dh'  6r,  's  cha  bhi  mise  fada  a' 
deanamh  a  chruin."  Fhuair  an  gobha  na  dh'  iarr  e  dh'  6r  le 
drdugh  an  rlgh.  Chaidh  an  gille  stigh  do  'n  cheardaich,  's  dhuin 
e  'n  'dorus,  agus  thoisich  e  air  spealgadh  an  oir  as  a'  cheile,  's  a 
thilgeadh  a  mach  air  an  uinneig.  Bha  gach  neach  a  thigeadh  an 
rathad  a'  tional  an  6ir  a  bha  gille  a'  bhuilg  a'  smuideadh  a  mach. 
Sh&d  e  'n  so  an  fheadag,  agus  ann  am  prioba  na  suil,  thainig  an 
iolaire.  "  Falbh,"  thubhairt  esan  ris  an  iolaire,  "  agus  thoir  an 
so  an  crun  6ir  a  tha  fos  ceann  an  doruis  aig  an  fhamhair  mh6r." 
Dh'  fhalbh  an  iolaire,  's  cha  b'  fhada  bha  i  air  a  turus,  'san  crun 
aice.  Thug  e  'n  crun  do  'n  ghobhainn.  Dh'  fhalbh  an  gobhainn 
gu  subhach,  sunndach  leis  a'  chrun  far  an  robh  nighean  an  righ. 
"Mata,"  thubhairt  ise,  "mur  b'e  gum  bheil  fios  agam  nach 
gabhadh  e  deanamh,  cha  chreidinn  nach  e  so  an  crun  a  bha  agam 
an  uair  a  bha  mi  leis  an  fhamhair  mh6r."  Thubhairt  nighean 
mheadhonach  an  rlgh  ris  a'  ghobhainn,  "  Caillidh  tu  'n  ceann  mar 
dean  thu  crun  airgid  dhomhsa  coltach  ris  an  fhear  a  bh'  agam  an 
uair  a  bha  mi  aig  an  fhamhair."  Thug  an  gobha  an  tigh  air  fo 
sprochd,  ach  chaidh  a  bhean  'na  choinneamh  an  dul  ri  naigheachd 
mor  's  brosguil ;  ach  'se  bh'  ann  gun  d'  thubhairt  an  gille, 
"gun  deanadh  esan  crun  airgid,  na  'm  faighadh  e  na  leoir  do  dh' 
airgiod."  Fhuair  an  gobha  ni's  leoir  do  dh'  airgiod  le  drdugh  an 
rlgh.  Chaidh  an  gille  's  rinn  e  mar  a  rinn  e  roimhe.  Leig  e 
fead  ;  thainig  an  iolaire.  "  Falbh,"  thubhairt  esan,  "  agus  thoir 
thugam-sa'an  so  an  crun  airgid  a  bha  aig  nighean  mheadhonach 
an  righ  an  uair  a  bha  i  aig  an  fhamhair."  D'  fhalbh  an  iolaire, 
's  cha  b'  fhada  bha  i  air  a  turus  leis  a'  chrim  airgid.  Dh'  fhalbh 
an  gobhainn  gu  subhach,  sunndach  leis  a'  chrun  airgid  gu  nighean 
an  rlgh.  "Mata,"  thubhairt  ise,  "tha  e  anabarrach  coltach  ris 
a'  chrun  a  bh'  agam  dar  a  bha  mi  aig  an  fhamhair."  Thubhairt 
nighean  6g  an  rlgh  ris  a  ghobha,  "  E  a  dheanamh  cruncopairdh 
ise,  coltach  ris  a  chrun  chopair  a  bha  aice,  nuair  a  bha  i  aig  an 
fhamhair.  Bha  'n  gobha  an  so  a'  gabhail  misnich,  's  chaidh  e 
dhachaidh  m6ran  ni  bu  toilichte  air  an  tro  so.     Thoisich  an  gille 


256  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

air  spealgadh  a'  chopair,  's  air  a  thilgeadh  a  mach  air  gach  dorus 
's  uinneag.  Bha  iad  an  so  as  gach  ceana  do  'n  bhaile  a'  tional  a' 
chopair  mar  a  bha  iad  a'  tional  an  6ir  's  an  airgid.  Sheid  e  'n 
fheadag,  's  bha  'n  iolaire  ri  'thaobh.  "Rach  air  t'  ais,"  thubhairt 
esan,  "agus  thoir  an  so  thugamsa  an  crim  copair  a  bha  aig 
nighean  bg  an  righ  an  uair  a  bha  i  aig  an  fhamhair."  Dh' 
fhalbh  an  iolaire,  's  cha  robh  i  fada  'dol  'sa'  tighinn.  Thug 
e  'n  crim  do  'n  ghobhainn  ;  dh'  fhalbh  an  gobhainn  gu  subhach, 
sunndach,  's  thug  e  do  nighean  bg  an  righ  e.  "Mata," 
thubhairt  ise,  "cha  chreidinn  nach  b'e  so  an  dearbh  chrun  a  bha 
agam  an  uair  a  bha  mi  aig  an  fhamhair  fo  'n  talamh,  na'm  biodh 
doigh  air  fhaotainn."  Thubhairt  an  righ  an  so  ris  a'  ghobhainn, 
Gu'  feumadh  e  innseadh  dhasan,  caite  an  d'  ionnsaich  e  deanamh 
nan  crim,  "oir  cha  robh  fios  agam  gun  robh  do  leithid  'san 
rioghachd."  "Mata,"  thubhairt  an  gobha,  "  le  'r  cead,  a  righ, 
cha  mhise  a  rinn  na  cruin,  ach  an  gille  'tha  agam  a'  seideadh  a' 
bhuilg."  "  Feumaidh  mi  do  ghill'  fhaicinn,"  thubhairt  an  righ, 
"gus  an  dean  e  crim  dhomh  fhein. "  Dh'  ordaich  an  righ  ceithir 
eich  ana  an  choidse,  's  iad  a  dhol  a  dh'  iarraidh  gille  a'  ghobha. 
An  uair  a  thainig  an  ch6idse  a  dh'  ionnsaidh  na  ceardach,  bha 
gille  a'  ghobha  gu  dubh,  salach  a'  seideadh  a'  bhuilg.  Thainig  na 
gillean  each,  's  dh'  fheoraich  iad  air  son  an  duine  a  bha  'dol  a 
shealltainn  an  righ.  Thubhairt  an  gobha  gu'm  b'e  sud  e  thall  a' 
seideadh  a'  bhuilg.  "  Ubh  !  Ubh  !"  thuirt  iadsan,  's  iad  a 
beireachd  air,  's  ga  thilgeadh  an  comhair  a  chiun  a  stigh  don 
ch6idse,  mar  gum  bitheadh  cii  aca.  Cha  deach'  iad  fada  air  an 
turus  dar  a  sheid  esan  an  fheadag.  Bha  'n  iolaire  ri  'thaobh. 
*4  Ma  rinn  thu  feum  riamh  dhomh,  thoir  mise  a  mach  as  so,  agus 
lion  e  Ian  chlach,"  thubhairt  esan.  Rinn  an  iolaire  so.  Bha  'n 
righ  a  mach  a  feitheadh  a  choidse,  agus  an  uair  a  dh'  fhosgail  an 
righ  dorus  a'  chdidse,  theab  e  bhi  marbh  leis  na  clachan  a' 
dortadh  air  a  mhnin.  Chaidh  beireachd  air  na  gillean  each,  'san 
crochadh  airson  a  leithid  do  thamailt  a  thabhairt  do  'n  righ. 
Chuir  an  righ  an  so  air  falbh  gillean  le  c6idse,  agus  an  uair  a 
raiuig  iad  a'  cheardach,  "Ubh  !  Ubh  !  "  thuirt  iadsan,  "n'e  so 
an  rud  dubh  a  chuir  an  righ  sinn  a  dh'  iarraidh."  Rug  iad  air, 
's  thilg  iad  a  stigh  do  'n  choids'  e,  mar  gum  bitheadh  fdid  m6ine 
aca.  Ach  cha  deach  iad  fada  air  an  slighe,  nuair  a  sheid  esan  an 
fheadag,  's  bha  'n  iolaire  ri  'thaobh,  's  thubhairt  e  rithe,  "  Thoir 
mise  as  a'  so,  agus  lion  e  do  gach  salachar  a  gheibh  thu." 
Nuair  a  rainig  an  c6idse  paileis  an  righ,  chaidh  an  righ  a  dh' 


THE  KING  OF  LOCHLIN'S  THREE  DAUGHTERS.  257 

fhosgladh  an  doruis.  Thuit  gach  salachar  's  gach  baggaist  mu 
cheann  an  righ.  Bha  fearg  ro  mhor  air  an  righ,  's  dh'  6rdaich  e 
na  gillean  each  a  bhi  air  au  crochadh  air  ball.  Chuir  an  righ  a' 
ghille  cinnteach  fhein  air  falbh,  agus  an  uair  a  rainig  e  a'  cheardacb, 
rug  e  air  laimh  air  gille  dubh  seadidh  a'  bhuilg.  "  Chuir  an 
righ,"  thuirt  esan,  "  raise  gu  d'  iarraidh  's  fearr  dhuit  beagan  do 
'n  ghual  a  ghlanadh  dheth  t'  aodann."  Rinn  an  gille  so,  ghlan  e 
e  fein  gu  maith  's  gu  ro  mhaith,  's  rug  gille  an  righ  air  laimh  air, 
's  chuir  e  stigh  do  'n  choids'  e.  Cha  robh  iad  ach  goirid  air 
falbh,  dar  a  sheid  e  'n  fheadag.  Thainig  an  iolaire,  's  dh'  iarr 
esan  oirre  an  deise  oir  's  airgid  a  bha  aig  an  f hamhair  mhor  a 
thoirt  an  sud  gun  dail ;  's  cha  robh  an  iolaire  fada  "dol  's  a'  tighinn 
leis  an  deise.  Sgeadaich  esan  e  fem  le  deise  an  fhamhair,  's  an 
uair  a  thainig  iad  gu  paileas  an  righ,  thainig  an  righ,  's  dh' 
fhosgail  e  dorus  a  eboidse  's  bha  'n  sin  an  aon  duine  bu  bhreagha 
a  chunnaic  an  righ  riamh.  Thug  an  righ  stigh'e,  's  dh'  innis  e  do 
'n  righ  mar  a  dh'  eirich  dha  fo  thus  gu  deireadh.  Chaidh  an 
triuir  dhaoine  mora  bha  'dol  a  phosadh  ;  's  rinn  iad  banais  dhoibh 
fad  fichead  oidhche  's  fichead  latha,  's  dh'  fhag  mise  a'  dannsa 
iad,  's  cha  'n'eil  fios  agamsa  nach  'eil  iad  a'  cur  nan  car  air  an 
urlar  gus  an  latha  'n  diugh. 

This  story  was  written,  May  1859,  by  Hector  Urquhart, 
gamekeeper,  from  the  dictation  of  Neil  Gillies,  a  fisherman  and 
builder  of  stone  dykes,  who  lives  near  Inverary.  He  is  now 
about  fifty-five,  and  says  he  learned  the  story  from  his  father, 
who  used  to  tell  it  when  he  was  about  sixteen  or  seventeen. 

It  has  something  of  many  other  Gaelic  tales.  In  particular, 
one  called  "  Bolgum  Mor,"  in  which  there  are  more  gifted  men. 
It  has  some  resemblance  to  Fortunio  ;  and  the  part  which  goes  on 
under  ground  resembles  part  of  many  other  popular  tales.  The 
Three  Giants,  with  their  gold,  silver,  and  copper  crowns,  are 
like  the  Gnomes  of  the  Mine.  Similar  Giants,  ruling  over  metals, 
and  living  in  castles  made  of  gold,  silver,  and  copper,  are  men- 
tioned in  a  story  from  South  Uist,  which  resembles  the  Sea 
Maiden. 

As  a  whole,  No.  16  is  unlike  anything  I  know,  but  nearly 
every  incident  has  a  parallel  woven  in  with  something  else,  and 
it  most  resembles  Grimm's  Golden  Goose. 

The  Enchanted  Ship,  which  could  sail  on  sea  or  land,  belongs 

b2 


258  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

to  Norse  tales  and  to  Norse  mythology.  The  gods  had  such  a 
ship. 

The  Eagle  is  peculiarly  eastern  :  he  is  but  a  genius  in  another 
shape ;  the  underground  treasures  are  also  eastern ;  and  it  is 
worth  remark,  that  two  of  the  daughters  are  not  provided  for  at 
all.  The  three  gentlemen  were  hanged,  and  the  smith's  servant 
married  the  eldest  princess  with  the  golden  crown,  so  the  two 
youngest  remain  spinsters.  It  is  suggested  by  the  author  of 
Norse  Tales,  that  similar  incidents  may  show  the  change  from 
Eastern  to  Western  manners.  There  would  be  no  hitch,  if  it 
were  lawful  to  marry  the  three  ladies  in  this  story  ;  and  in  the 
Norse  story  of  Shortshanks,  it  is  suggested  that  the  second 
brother  is  added,  to  make  all  things  proper.  In  No.  22,  a  man 
marries  a  round  dozen. 

The  clothes  of  these  giants  fit  the  lad,  so  they  were  but  under- 
ground men. 

There  is  the  usual  moral.  The  least  becomes  the  greatest ; 
but  there  is  a  dash  of  character  in  the  pride  of  the  smith's  lad, 
who  will  not  come  till  he  is  taken  by  the  hand  by  the  king's  own 
confidential  servant.  And  this  is  characteristic  of  the  race.  A 
Celt  can  be  led  anywhere,  but  he  will  not  be  driven.  The  king, 
who  opens  his  own  coach  door,  is  somewhat  like  a  farmer.  The 
coach  and  four  is  but  the  grandest  of  the  vehicles  seen  in  the 
neighbourhood — one  of  which  was  compared  by  a  friend  of  mine, 
to  "  a  packing  box  upon  wheels,  lined  with  an  old  blanket."  In 
the  mouth  of  a  city  narrator,  it  would  have  been  a  lord  mayor's 
coach,  and  it  probably  was  a  palanquin  at  one  time. 

This  story  may  be  compared  with  "The  Big  Bird  Dan," 
Norse  Tales,  No.  55.  Gifted  men  are  to  be  found  in  "The 
Master  Maid,"  No.  11.  Such  men  are  also  in  German,  "How 
six  travelled  through  the  World  ;  "  and,  according  to  the  notes 
in  the  third  volume  of  Grimm,  the  story  is  widely  spread,  and 
common  to  Italian. 


XVII. 


se^z*    1   ^^A  „  46  %4«**ll  *o- 


MAOL  A  CHLIOBAIN. 

From  Ann  MacGilvray,  Islay. 

rpHERE  was  a  widow  ere  now,  and  she  had  three 

-*-     daughters ;  and  they  said  to  her  that  they  would 

go  to  seek  their  fortune.     She  baked  three  bannocks. 

She  said  to  the  big  one,  "Whether  dost  thou  like  best  fyytx^  HOt 

the  half   and   my  blessing,   or   the   big   half   and   my 

curse?"      "I  like  best,"  said  she,   "the  big  half  and 

thy  curse."     She  said  to  the  middle  one,  "Whether 

dost  thou  like  best  the  big  half  and  my  curse,  or  the 

little  half  and  my  blessing  ?"     "I  like  best,"  said  she, 

"the  big  half  and  thy  curse."     She  said  to  the  little 

one,  "Whether  dost  thou  like  best  the  big  half  and 

my  curse,  or  the  little  half  and  my  blessing  %  "  "I  like  . 

best  the  little  half  and  thy  blessing."     This  pleased  her 

mother,  and  she  gave  her  the  two  other  halves  also. 

They  went  away,  but  the  two  eldest  did  not  want  the 

youngest  to  be  with  them,  and  they  tied  her  to  a  rock 

of  stone.     They  went  on;   but  her  mother's  blessing 

came  and  freed  her.     And  when  they  looked  behind 

them,  whom  did  they  see  but  her  with  the  rock  on 

top  of  her.     They  let  her  alone  a  turn  of  a  while,  till 

they  reached  a  peat  stack,  and  they  tied  her  to  the  peat 

stack.     They  went  on  a  bit  (but  her  mother's  blessing 

came  and  freed  her),  and  they  looked   behind  them, 

and  whom  did  they  see  but  her  coming,  and  the  peat 


260  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

stack  on  the  top  of  her.  They  let  her  alone  a  turn  of  a 
while,  till  they  reached  a  tree,  and  they  tied  her  to  the 
tree.  They  went  on  a  bit  (but  her  mother's  blessing 
came  and  freed  her),  and  when  they  looked  behind 
them,  whom  did  they  see  but  her,  and  the  tree  on  top 
of  her. 

They  saw  it  was  no  good  to  be  at  her ;  they  loosed 
her,  and  let  her  (come)  with  them.  They  were  going 
till  night  came  on  them.  They  saw  a  light  a  long 
way  from  them ;  and  though  a  long  way  from  them,  it 
was  not  long  that  they  were  in  reaching  it.  They 
went  in.  What  was  this  but  a  giant's  house  !  They 
asked  to  stop  the  night.  They  got  that,  and  they  were 
put  to  bed  with  the  three  daughters  of  the  giant.  (The 
giant  came  home,  and  he  said,  "  The  smell  of  the 
foreign  girls  is  within.")  There  were  twists  of  amber 
knobs  about  the  necks  of  the  giant's  daughters,  and 
strings  of  horse  hair  about  their  necks.  They  all  slept, 
but  Maol  a  Chliobain  did  not  sleep.  Through  the 
night  a  thirst  came  on  the  giant.  He  called  to  his 
bald,  rough-skinned  gillie  to  bring  him  water.  The 
rough-skinned  gillie  said  that  there  was  not  a  drop 
within.  "Kill,"  said  he,  "one  of  the  strange  girls, 
and  bring  to  me  her  blood."  "How  will  I  know 
them  1 "  said  the  bald,  rough-skinned  gillie.  "  There 
are  twists  of  knobs  of  amber  about  the  necks  of  my 
I  daughters,  and  twists  of  horse  hair  about  the  necks  of 

fcw^i     1   ^       therest-" 

\rLo         Maol  a  Chliobain  heard  the  giant,  and  as  quick  as 


she  could  she  put  the  strings  of  horse  hair  that  were 

hi  VI*V^    akout  ner  own  ne°k  ana  about  the  necks  of  her  sisters 

P     kt  &    about  the  necks  of  the  giant's  daughters;  and  the  knobs 

.    that   were  about   the  necks  of   the  giant's   daughters 

about  her  own  neck  and  about  the  necks  of  her  sisters ; 


MAOL  A  CHLIOBAIN.  261 

and  she  laid  down  so  quietly.  The  bald,  rough-skinned 
gillie  came,  and  he  killed  one  of  the  daughters  of  the 
giant,  and  he  took  the  blood  to  him.  He  asked  for 
more  to  be  brought  him.  He  killed  the  next.  He 
asked  for  more  ;  and  he  killed  the  third  one. 

Maol  a  Chliobain  awoke  her  sisters,  and  she  took 
them  with  her  on  top  of  her,  and  she  took  to  going. 
(She  took  with  her  a  golden  cloth  that  was  on  the  bed, ' 
and  it  called  out.) 

The  giant  perceived  her,  and  he  followed  her.  The 
sparks  of  fire  that  she  was  putting  out  of  the  stones 
with  her  heels,  they  were  striking  the  giant  on  the 
chin ;  and  the  sparks  of  fire  that  the  giant  was  bring- 
ing out  of  the  stones  with  the  points  of  his  feet,  they 
were  striking  Maol  a  Chliobain  in  the  back  of  the 
head.  It  is  this  was  their  going  till  they  reached  a 
river.  (She  plucked  a  hair  out  of  her  head  and  made 
a  bridge  of  it,  and  she  run  over  the  river,  and  the  giant 
could  not  follow  her.)  Maol  a  Chliobain  leaped  the 
river,  but  the  river  the  giant  could  not  leap. 

"Thou  art  over  there,  Maol  a  Chliobain."  "I  am, 
though  it  is  hard  for  thee."  "  Thou  killedst  my  three 
bald  brown  daughters."  "  I  killed  them,  though  it  is 
hard  for  thee."  "  And  when  wilt  thou  come  again  ? " 
"  I  will  come  when  my  business  brings  me." 

They  went  on  forward  till  they  reached  the  house  of 
a  farmer.  The  farmer  had  three  sons.  They  told  how 
it  happened  to  them.  Said  the  farmer  to  Maol  a 
Chliobain,  "I  will  give  my  eldest  son  to  thy  eldest 
sister,  and  get  for  me  the  fine  comb  of  gold,  and  the 
coarse  comb  of  silver  that  the  giant  has."  "  It  will  cost 
thee  no  more,"  said  Maol  a  Chliobain. 

She  went  away ;  she  reached  the  house  of  the  giant ; 
she  got  in  unknown;   she  took  with  her  the  combs, 


262  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

and  out  she  went.  The  giant  perceived  her,  and  after 
her  he  was  till  they  reached  the  river.  She  leaped  the 
river,  but  the  river  the  giant  could  not  leap.  "Thou 
art  over  there,  Maol  a  Chliobain."  "I  am,  though  it 
is  hard  for  thee."  "Thou  killedst  my  three  bald  brown 
daughters."  "I  killed  them,  though  it  is  hard  for  thee." 
"Thou  stolest  my  fine  comb  of  gold,  and  my  coarse 
comb  of  silver."  "  I  stole  them,  though  it  is  hard  for 
thee."  "When  wilt  thou  come  again  ? "  "I  will  come 
when  my  business  brings  me." 

She  gave  the  combs  to  the  farmer,  and  her  big  sister 
and  the  farmer's  big  son  married.  "I  will  give  my 
middle  son  to  thy  middle  sister,  and  get  me  the  giant's 
glave  of  light."  "  It  will  cost  thee  no  more,"  said  Maol 
a  Chliobain.  She  went  away,  and  she  reached  the 
giant's  house ;  she  went  up  to  the  top  of  a  tree  that 
was  above  the  giant's  well.  In  the  night  came  the 
bald  rough-skinned  gillie  with  the  sword  of  light  to 
fetch  water.  When  he  bent  to  raise  the  water,  Maol  a 
Chliobain  came  down  and  she  pushed  him  down  in  the 
well  and  she  drowned  him,  and  she  took  with  her  the 
glave  of  light. 

The  giant  followed  her  till  she  reached  the  river; 
she  leaped  the  river,  and  the  giant  could  not  follow 
her.  "Thou  art  over  there,  Maol  a  Chliobain."  "I 
am,  if  it  is  hard  for  thee."  "  Thou  killedst  my  three 
bald  brown  daughters."  "I  killed,  though  it  is  hard 
for  thee."  "Thou  stolest  my  fine  comb  of  gold,  and 
my  coarse  comb  of  silver."  "I  stole,  though  it  is 
hard  for  thee."  "  Thou  killedst  my  bald  rough-skinned 
gillie."  "I  killed,  though  it  is  hard  for  thee."  "Thou 
stolest  my  glave  of  light."  "I  stole,  though  it  is  hard 
for  thee."  "  When  wilt  thou  come  again  ? "  "I 
will  come  when  my  business  brings  me."     She  reached 


MAOL  A  CHLIOBAIN.  263 

the  house  of  the  farmer  with  the  glave  of  light ;  and 
her  middle  sister  and  the  middle  son  of  the  farmer 
married.  "I  will  give  thyself  my  youngest  son,"  said 
the  farmer,  "  and  bring  me  a  buck  that  the  giant  has." 
"  It  will  cost  thee  no  more,"  said  Maol  a  Chliobain. 
She  went  away,  and  she  reached  the  house  of  the 
giant ;  but  when  she  had  hold  of  the  buck,  the  giant 
caught  her.  "What,"  said  the  giant,  "wouldst  thou 
do  to  me :  if  I  had  done  as  much  harm  to  thee  as 
thou  hast  done  to  me,  I  would  make  thee  burst  thy- 
self with  milk  porridge ;  I  would  then  put  thee  in  a 
pock  !  I  would  hang  thee  to  the  roof-tree ;  I  would 
set  fire  under  thee  ;  and  I  would  set  on  thee  with 
clubs  till  thou  shouldst  fall  as  a  faggot  of  withered 
sticks  on  the  floor."  The  giant  made  milk  porridge, 
and  he  made  her  drink  it.  She  put  the  milk  porridge 
about  her  mouth  and  face,  and  she  laid  over  as  if  she 
were  dead.  The  giant  put  her  in  a  pock,  and  he  hung 
her  to  the  roof-tree ;  and  he  went  away,  himself  and 
his  men,  to  get  wood  to  the  forest.  The  giant's  mother 
was  within.  When  the  giant  was  gone,  Maol  a 
Chliobain  began — "  'Tis  I  am  in  the  light !  'Tis  I  am 
in  the  city  of  gold  !  "  "  Wilt  thou  let  me  in  ? "  said 
the  carlin.  "  I  will  not  let  thee  in."  At  last  she 
let  down  the  pock.  She  put  in  the  carlin,  cat,  and 
calf,  and  cream-dish.  She  took  with  her  the  buck 
and  she  went  away.  When  the  giant  came  with  his 
men,  himself  and  his  men  began  at  the  bag  with  the 
clubs.  The  carlin  was  calling,  "'Tis  myself  that's  in 
it."  "  I  know  that  thyself  is  in  it,"  would  the  giant 
say,  as  he  laid  on  to  the  pock.  The  pock  came  down 
as  a  faggot  of  sticks,  and  what  was  in  it  but  his  mother. 
When  the  giant  saw  how  it  was,  he  took  after  Maol 
a  Chliobain ;  he  followed  her  till  she  reached  the  river. 


264  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES. 

Maol  a  Chliobain  leaped  the  river,  and  the  giant  could 
not  leap  it.  "  Thou  art  over  there,  Maol  a  Chliobain." 
"  I  am,  though  it  is  hard  for  thee."  "  Thou  killedst  my 
three  bald  broAvn  daughters."  "I  killed,  though  it  is 
hard  for  thee."  "Thou  stolest  my  golden  comb,  and 
my  silver  comb."  I  stole,  though  it  is  hard  for  thee." 
"  Thou  killedst  my  bald  rough-skinned  gillie."  "  I 
killed,  though  it  is  hard  for  thee."  "  Thou  stolest  my 
glave  of  light."  "  I  stole,  though  it  is  hard  for  thee." 
'Thou  killedst  my  mother."  "I  killed,  though  it  is 
hard  for  thee."  "  Thou  stolest  my  buck."  "  I  stole, 
though  it  is  hard  for  thee."  "  "When  wilt  thou  come 
again?"  "I  will  come  when  my  business  brings  me," 
"  If  thou  wert  over  here,  and  I  yonder,"  said  the  giant, 
"what  wouldst  thou  do  to  follow  me?"  "I  would 
stick  myself  down,  and  I  would  drink  till  I  should  dry 
the  river."  The  giant  stuck  himself  down,  and  he  drank 
till  he  burst.  Maol  a  Chliobain  and  the  farmer's  youngest 
son  married. 


f 


MAOL  A  CHLIOBAIN. 

Bha  bainntreach  arm  roimhe,  so  's  bha  tri  nigheanan  aice,  's  thuirt 
iad  rithe  gun  rachadh  iad  a  dh'  iarraidh  an  fhortain.  Dheasaieh 
i  tri  bonnaich.  Thuirt  is  ris  an  te  mhoir,  "Co'ca  's  fhearr  leat, 
an  leith  bheag  's  mo  bheannachd,  na'n  leith  mh6r  's  mo  mholl- 
achd?" " 'S  fhearr  leam,"  urs'  ise,  "an  leith  mh6r  's  do 
mhollachd."  Thuirt  i  ris  an  te  mheadhonaich,  "  Co'ca  is  fhearr 
leat  an  leith  mh6r  's  mo  mhollachd  na'n  leith  bheag  's  mo 
bheannachd,?"  "  'S  fhearr  leam,"  urs'  ise,  "  an  leith  mhor  's  do 
mhollachd."  Thuirt  i  ris  an  te  bhig,  "  C6'ca  is  fhearr  leat  an 
leith  mhor  's'mo  mhollachd  n'an  leith  bheag  's  mo  bheannachd?" 
'S  fhearr  leam  an  leith  bheag  's  do  bheannachd.  Ch6rd  so  r'a 
mathair,  's  thug  i  dhi  an  da  leith  eile  cuideachd. 

Dh'  fholbh  iad,  ach  cha  robh  toil  aig  an  dithisd  a  bu  shine  an 


MAOL  A  CHLIOBAIX.  265 

to  b'  6ige  'bhi  le6,  's  cheangail  iad  i  ri  carra  cloiche.  Ghabh  iad 
air  an  aghaidb,  's  nur  a  dh'  ambairc  iad  as  an  deigh,  co  a 
cbunnaic  iad  acb  ise,  's  a'  cbreag  air  a  muin.  Leig'iad  leatha  car 
treis  gus  an  d'  rainig  iad  cruacb  mhonadh,  's  cheangail  iad  i  ris 
a'  chruaich  mhonadh.  Ghabh  iad  air  an  aghaidh  treis,  's  dh' 
amhalre  iad  'nan  deigh,  's  co  a  chunnaic  iad  ach  ise  a'  tighinn,  's 
a'  chrnach  mbimadh  air  a  muin.  Leig  iad  leatha  car  tacan  gus 
an  d'  rainig  iad  craobb,  's  cheangail  iad  ris  a'  chraobh  i.  Ghabh 
iad  air  an  aghaidh  treis,  's  nur  a  dh'  amhairc  iad  'nan  d&gh,  co  a 
chunnaic  iad  ach  ise  a'  tighinn,  's  a'  chraobh  air  a  muin. 
Chunnaic  iad  nach  robh  math  a  bhith  rithe.  Dh'  fhuasgail  iad 
i,  's  leig  iad  leo  i.  Bha  iad  a'  folbh  gus  an  d'  thainig  an  oidhche 
orra.  Chunnaic  iad  solus  fada  uatha,  's  ma  b'fhada  uatha  cha 
b'fhada  a  bha  iadsan  'ga  'ruigheachd.  Chaidh  iad  a  stigh.  De 
a  bha  'so  ach  tigh  famhair.  Dh'  iarr  iad  fuireachd  'san  oidhche. 
Fhuair  iad  sin,  's  chuireadh  a  laidhe  iad  le  tri  nigheanan  an 
fhamhair. 

Bha  carau  de  chneapan  ombair  ma  mhuinealan  nigheanan  an 
fhamhair.  agus  sreanganan  gaoisid  ma'm  muineilsan.  Chaidil 
iad  air  fad,  ach  cha  do  chaidil  Maol  a:  chliobain.  Feadh  na 
h-oidhche  thainig  paghadh  air  an  fhamhair.  Ghlaoidh  e  r'a 
ghille  maol  carrach  uisge  thoirt  a  'ionnsuidh.  Thuirt  an  gille 
maol,  carrach,  nach  robh  deur  a  stigb.  "Marbh,"  urs'  esan, 
"  te  de  na  nigheanan  coimheach,  's  tboir  a  m'  ionnsuidh  a  fuil." 
"Demur  a  dh'  aithneachas  mi  eatorra?"  urs'  an  gille  maol, 
carrach.  "Tha  caran  de  chneapan  ma  mhuinealan  mo  nighean- 
ansa,  's  caran  gaoisid  ma  mhuineil  chaich."  Chuala  Maol  a' 
chliobain  am  famhair,  's  cho  clis  's  a  b'urrainn  i,  chuir  i  na 
sreangannan  gaoisid  a  bha  ma  'muineal  f6in  's  ma  mhuineail  a 
peathraichean  ma  mhuineil  nigheanan  an  fhamhair,  agus  na 
cneapan  a  bha  ma  mhuineil  nigheanan  an  fhamhair  ma  'muineal 
fein,  's  ma  mhuineil  a  peathraichean,  's  laidh  i  slos  gu  samhach. 
Thainig  an  gille  maol  carrach,  's  mharbh  e  te  de  nigheanan  an 
fhamhair,  's  thug  e'n  fhuil  a  'ionnsuidh.  Dh'  iarr  e  tuillidh  a 
thoirt  a  'ionnsuidh.  Mharbh  e  an  ath  te.  Dh'  iarr  e  tuillidh,  's 
mharbh  e  'n  treas  te.  Dhuisg  Maol  a'  chliobain  a  peathraichean, 
's  thug  i  leath'  air  a  muin  iad,  's  ghabh  i  air  folbh.  Mhothaich 
am  famhair  di,  's  lean  e  i. 

Na  spreadan  teine  a  bha  ise  cur  as  na  clachan  le  a  sailtean,  bha 
iad  a'  bualadh  an  fhamhair  'san  smigead  ;  's  na  spreadan  teine  a 
bha  'in  famhair  a'  toirt  as  na  clachan  le  barraibh  a  chas,  bha  iad  a' 


266  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

bualadh  Mhaol  a'  chliobain  an  cul  a'  chinn.  "'Se  so  a  bu 
dual  daibh  gus  an  d'rainig  iad  obhainn.  Leum  Maol  a  chliobain 
an  obhainn,  s  cha  b'urrainn  am  famhair  an  obhainn  a  leum." 
"  Tha  thu  thall  a  Mhaol  a  chliobain."  "  Tha  ma  's  oil  leat  e." 
11  Mharbh  thu  mo  thri  nigheanan  maola,  ruagha."  "  Mharbh 
ma  's  oil  leat  e."  "  *S  cuin  a  thig  thu  'rithisd  ? "  "  Thig  nur  * 
bheir  mo  ghnothach  mi." 

Ghabh  iad  air  an  aghaidh  gus  an  d'  rainig  iad  tigh  tuathanaich. 
Bha  aig  an  tuathanach  tri  mic.  Dh'  innis  iad  mar  a  thachair 
dhaibh.  Urs'  an  tuathanach  ri  Maol  a  chliobain,  "  Bheir  mi  mo 
mhac  is  sine  do  'd  phiuthar  is  sine,  's  faigh  dhomh  cir  mhin  oir 
's  clr  gharbh  airgid  a  tha  aig  anfhamhair."  "Cha  chosd  e 
tuillidh  dhuit,"  ursa  Maol  a  chliobain.  Dh'  fholbh  i,  's  rainig  i 
tigh  an  fhamhair.  Fhuair  i  stigh  gun  fhios.  Thug  i  leatha  na 
clrean,  's  ghabh  i  'mach.  Mhothaich  am  famhair  di  ;  is  as  a 
deigh  a  bha  e  gus  an  d'  rainig  e  'n  obhainn.  Leum  ise  an 
obhainn,  's  cha  b'urrainn  am  famhair  an  obhainn  a  leum.  "  Tha 
thu  thall  a  Mhaol  a  chliobain."  "Tha  ma's  oil  leat  e."  "Mharbh 
thu  mo  thri  nigheauan  maola,  ruagha."  "  Mharbh  ma's  oil  leat 
e.  Ghoid  tbu  mo  chlr  mhin  6ir  's  mo  chir  gharbh  airgid." 
"  Ghoid  ma's  oil  leat  e."  "Cuin  a  thig  thu  'rithisd  ? "  "  Thig 
nur  bheir  mo  ghnothach  mi." 

Thug  i  na  clrean  thun  an  tuathanaich,  's  phos  a  piuthar  mhor 
's  mac  mor  an  tuathanaich. 

"  Bheir  mi  mo  mhac  meadhonach  do  'd  phiuthar  mheadhonach, 
's  faigh  dhomh  claidheamh  soluis  an  fhamhair."  "  Cha  chosd  e 
tuillidh  dhuit,"  ursa  Maol  a  chliobain.  Ghabh  i  air  folbh,  's 
rainig  i  tigh  an  fhamhair.  Chaidh  i  'suas  ann  am  barr  craoibh'  a 
bha  as  cionn  tobar  an  fhamhair.  Anns  an  oidhche  thainig  an 
gille  maol,  carrach,  's  an  claidheamh  soluis  leis,  a  dh'  iarraidh 
uisge.  Nur  a  chrom  e  'thogail  an  uisge  thainig  Maol  a  chliobain 
a  nuas,  's  phut  i  sios  'san  tobar  e,  's  bhath  i  e,  's  thug  i  leatha 
an  claidheamh  soluis.  Lean  am  famhair  i  gus  an  d'  rainig  i  an 
obhainn.  Leum  i  an  obhaim,  's  cha  b'urrainn  am  famhair  a 
leantainn.  "  Tha  thu  thall  a  Mhoal  a  chliobain."  "  Tha  ma's 
oil  leat  e."  "Mharbh  thu  mo  thri  nigheanan  maola,  ruagha." 
"  Mharbh  ma's  oil  leat  e."  "Ghoid  tha  mo  chir  mhin  oir  's  mo 
chlr  gharbh  airgid."     "  Ghoid  ma's  oil  leat  e. "     "  Mharbh  tha 


Nur.,  from  an  trath,  or  an  uair,  the  time. 


MAOL  A  CHLIOBAIN.  267 

mo  ghille  maol,  carrach."  "  Mharbh  ma's  oil  leat  e."  "  Ghoid 
tha  tha  mo  chlaidheamh  soluis. "  "Ghoid  ma's  oil  leat  e. " 
"  Cuin  a  thig  thu  'rithisd."  "  Thig  nur  bheir  mo  ghnothach 
mi."  Rainig  i  tigh  an  tuathanaich  leis  a' chlaidheamh  sholuis, 
's  ph6s  a  piuthar  mheadhonach,  's  mac  mcadhonach  an  tuathan- 
aich. 

11  Bheir  mi  dhuit  fein  mo  mhac  is  oige,"  urs'  an  tuathanach,  's 
thoir  am'  ionnsuidh,  boc  a  tha  aig  an  fhamhair."  "  Cha  chosd 
e  tuillidh  dhuit,"  ursa  Maol  a'  chliobain.  Dh'  fbolbh  i  's  rainig 
i  tigh  an  fhamhair,  ach  nur  a  bha  greim  aic'  air  a'  bhoc  rug  am 
famhair  urra.  "  De,"  urs'  am  famhair,  "  a  dheanadh  tus  ormsa 
na'n  deanainn  uibhir  coir'  ort  's  a  rinn  thus'  ormsa."  "  Bheirinn 
ort  gu  'sgaineadh  thu  thu  fein  le  brochan  bainne  ;  chuirinn  an 
sin  arm  am  poc'  thu  ;  chrochainn  thu  ri  drlom  an  tighe  ;  chuirinn 
teine  fodhad  ;  's  gbabhainn  duit  le  cabair  gus  an  tuiteadh  thu  'd 
chual  chrlonaich  air  an  urlar.  Rinn  am  famhair  brochan  bainne, 
's  thuge  uire  61.  Chuir  ise  am  brochan  bainne  m'a  beul  's  ma 
h-aodann,  's  luidh  i  seachad  mar  gum  biodh  i  marbh.  Chuir  am 
famhair  am  poc'  i,  's  chroch  e  i  ri  driom  an  tighe,  's  dh'  fholbh  e 
fein  's  a  dhaoine  a  dh'  iarraidh  fiodh  do  'n  choille.  Bha  mathair 
an  fhamhair  a  stigh.  Theireidh  Maol  a'  chliobain  nur  a  dh' 
fholbh  am  famhair,  "  'S  mise  a  tha  ann  'san  t-solas  's  mise  a  tha 
ann  's  a'  chathair  6ir. "  ' '  An  leig  thu  mis'  ann  ?  "  urs'  a'  chailleach. 
"Cha  leig  gu  dearbh."  Ma  dheireadh  leig  i  'nuas  am  poca; 
chuir  i  stigh  a'  chailleach,  is  cat,  is  laogh,  is  soitheach  uachdair ; 
thug  i  leatha  am  boc  ;  's  dh'  fholbh  i.  Nur  a  thainig  am  famhair 
thdisich  e  fein  's  a  dhaoine  air  a'  phoca  leis  na  cabair.  Bba 
'chailleach  a'  glaodhach,  "'S  mi  fein  a  th'  ann."  "Tha  fios 
agam  gur  tu  fein  a  th'  ann,"  theireadh  am  famhair,  's  e  'g  eiridh 
air  a'  phoca.  Thainig  am  poca  'nuas  'na  chual  chrlonaich,  's  de 
'bha  ann  ach  a  mhathair.  Nur  a  chunnaic  am  famhair  mur  a 
bha,  thug  e  as  d&gh  Mhaol  a'  chliobain.  Lean  e  i  gus  an  d' 
rainig  i  'n  obhainn.  Leum  Maol  a'  chliobain  an  obhainn,  's  cha 
b'urrainn  am  famhair  a  leum.  "  Tha  thu  thall  a  Mhaol  a 
chliobain."  "Tha  ma  's  oil  leat  e."  "Mharbh  thu  mo  thri 
nigheanan  maola,  ruagha."  "  Mharbh  ma  's  oil  leat  e."  "  Ghoid 
thu  mo  chir  mhin  oir  's  mo  chlr  gharbh  airgid."  "  Ghoid  ma  's 
oil  leat  e."  "  Mharbh  thu  mo  ghille  maol,  carrach."  "  Mharbh 
ma  's  oil  leat  e."  "  Ghoid  thu  mo  chlaidheamh  soluis."  "Ghoid 
ma  's  oil  leat  e."  "  Mharbh  thu  mo  mhathair."  "  Mharbh  ma 
's  oil  leat  e."    "  Ghoid  thu  mo  bhoc."    "  Ghoid  ma  's  oil  leat  e." 


268  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

"  Cuin  a  thig  thu  rithisd?  "  "  Thig  nur  bheir  mo  ghnothach  mi." 
"  Na'm  biodh  thusa  bhos  's  mise  thall,"  ursa  am  famhair,  "  de 
'dheanadh  thu  airson  mo  leantainn?"  "  Stopainn  mi  fein,  's  dh' 
olainn  gus  an  traoighinn  an  obhainn."  Stop  am  famhair  e  fein, 
's  dh'  61  e  gus  an  do  sgain  e.  Phos  Maol  a  chliobain  mac  bg  an 
tuathanaich. 

This  story  came  to  me  from  four  sources.  First,  the  one 
which  I  have  translated,  into  which  several  passages  are  intro- 
duced (in  brackets)  from  the  other  versions.  This  was  written 
down  by  Hector  MacLean. 

2d.  A  version  got  by  the  same  collector  from  Flora  Macin- 
tyre,  in  Islay  ;  received  June  16,  1859.  In  this  the  whole  of  the 
first  part  is  omitted  ;  it  begins  at  the  giant's  house.  The  inci- 
dents are  then  nearly  the  same  till  she  runs  away,  when  she 
leaps  the  river  with  her  sisters  under  her  arms.  The  farmer  or 
king  is  omitted.  She  returns,  is  caught  by  the  giant,  tied  to  a 
peat-stack,  and  a  rock,  which  she  takes  away,  and  she  makes 
the  giant  kill ;  the  three  cropped  red  girls  :  and  she  kills  the 
cropped  rough-skinned  gillie  :  she  steals  the  white  glave  of  light, 
a  fine  comb  of  gold,  and  a  coarse  comb  of  silver.  She  makes  the 
giant  kill  his  mother,  and  his  dog  and  cat  enticed  into  a  sack ;  at 
last  she  sets  the  giant  to  swill  the  river ;  he  bursts,  and  she  goes 
home  with  the  spoil.  The  bit  about  the  sack  is  worth  quoting. 
She  put  the  crone  in  the  pock,  and  a  cat,  and  a  dog,  and  a  cream- 
dish  with  her.  When  the  giant  and  his  men  came,  they  began 
laying  on  the  pock.  The  crone  cried  out,  "It's  myself  thou 
hast;"  and  the  giant  said,  "I  know,  thou  she  rogue,  that  it's 
thou."  When  they  would  strike  a  stroke  on  the  dog,  he  would 
give  out  a  sgol  ;  when  they  would  strike  a  stroke  on  the  cat,  he 
would  give  out  a  miog  ;  and  when  they  would  strike  a  stroke  on 
the  cream-dish,  it  would  give  out  a  steall  (a  spurt).     I  have, 

3rd.  A  version  very  prettily  told,  at  Easter  1859,  by  a  young 
girl,  nursemaid  to  Mr.  Robertson,  Chamberlain  of  Argyll,  at  In- 
verary.  It  was  nearly  the  same  as  the  version  translated,  but 
had  several  phrases  well  worth  preservation,  some  of  which  will 
be  found  in  brackets  ;  such  as,  "but  her  mother's  blessing  came 
and  freed  her."  The  heroine  also  stole  a  golden  cover  off  the 
bed,  which  called  out ;  and  a  golden  cock  and  a  silver  hen, 
which  also  called  out.  The  end  of  the  giant  was  thus  :  At  the 
end  of  the  last  scolding  match,  the  giant  said,  "If  thou  wert 


MAOL  A  CHLIOBAIN.  269 

here,  and  I  yonder,  what  wouldst  thou  do  ?"  "I  would  follow 
thee  over  the  bridge, "  said  she.  So  Maol  a  chliobain  stood  on 
the  bridge,  and  she  reached  out  a  stick  to  him,  and  he  went 
down  into  the  river,  and  she  let  go  the  stick,  and  he  was  drowned. 
"  And  what  become  of  Maol  a  chliobain?  did  she  marry  the 
farmer's  youngest  son?"  "Oh,  no;  she  did  not  marry  at  all. 
There  was  something  about  a  key  hid  under  a  stone,  and  a  great 
deal  more  which  I  cannot  remember.  My  father  did  not  like 
my  mother  to  be  telling  us  such  stories,  but  she  knows  plenty 
more," — and  the  lassie  departed  in  great  perturbation  from  the 
parlour. 

The  4th  version  was  got  by  John  Dewar  from  John  Craw- 
fort,  herring-fisher,  Lochlonghead,  Arrochar,  and  was  received 
on  the  2d  of  February  1860.  Dewar's  version  is  longer  than  any, 
but  it  came  too  late.  It  also  contains  some  curious  phrases 
which  the  others  have  not  got,  some  queer  old  Gaelic  words,  and 
some  new  adventures.  The  heroine  was  not  only  the  youngest, 
but  "  maol  carrach  "  into  the  bargain,  and  the  rest  called  her 
Maol  a  Mhoibean  ;  but  when  they  went  on  their  travels  she  chose 
the  little  cake  and  the  blessing.  The  others  tied  her  to  a  tree, 
and  a  cairn  of  stones,  which  she  dragged  away.  Then  they  let 
her  loose,  and  she  followed  them  till  they  came  to  a  burn. 
"  Then  the  eldest  sister  stooped  to  drink  a  draught  from  the 
burn,  and  there  came  a  small  creature,  named  Bloinigain,  and  he 
dabbled  and  dirtied  the  burn,  and  they  went  on.  The  next  burn 
the}'  came  to  the  two  eldest  sisters  stooped,  one  on  each  side  of 
the  burn,  to  drink  a  draught ;  but  Bloinigain  came  and  he 
dabbled  and  dirtied  the  burn ;  and  when  they  had  gone  on 
another  small  distance,  they  reached  another  burn  ;  and  the 
youngest  sister,  whom  the  rest  used  to  call  Maol  a  Mhoibean, 
was  bent  down  drinking  a  draught  from  the  burn,  and  Bloinigain 
came  and  stood  at  the  side  of  the  burn  till  she  had  drank  her 
draught,  and  the  other  two  came  ;  but  when  they  stooped  to 
drink  their  draught,  Bloinigain  dabbled  the  burn,  and  they  went 
on ;  and  when  they  came  to  another  burn,  the  two  eldest  were 
almost  parched  with  thirst.  Maol  a  Mhoibean  kept  Bloinigain 
back  till  the  others  got  a  drink  ;  and  then  she  tossed  Bloinigain 
heels  over  head,  car  a  mhuiltean,  into  a  pool,  and  he  followed 
them  no  more." 

This  Bloinigain  plays  a  great  part  in  another  story,  sent  by 


270  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

Dewar ;  and  his  name  may  perhaps  mean  "  fatty  ;"  Blonag,  fat, 
suet,  lard  ;  Bloinigean-Garaidh,  is  spinnage. 

The  next  adventure  is  almost  the  very  same.  The  giant's 
three  red  haired  polled  daughters  had  paidireanan  of  gold  about 
their  necks  (which  word  may  be  derived  from  pater,  and  a  name 
for  a  rosary),  and  the  others  had  only  strings. 

When  they  fled  they  came  to  a  great  eas,  cataract,  and  "there 
was  no  way  of  getting  over  it,  unless  they  could  walk  on  two 
hairs  that  were  as  a  bridge  across  the  cataract ;  and  their  name 
was  Drochaid  an  da  roineag,  the  two-hair  bridge  ;  and  Maol 
a  Mhoibean  ran  over  the  eas  on  the  two  hairs  ;  but  her  sisters 
could  not  walk  on  the  two  hairs,  and  Maol  a  Mhoibean  had  to 
turn  back  and  carry  her  sisters,  one  after  one,  over  the  eas  on 
the  two-hair  bridge."  The  giant  could  not  cross,  and  they 
scolded  each  other  across  the  river  as  in  the  other  stories.  The 
giant  shouted,  "  Art  thou  yonder,  Maol  a  Mhoibean  ?  "  and  she 
said  "  Air  mo  nodaig  tha  ;"  and  when  she  had  told  her  deeds, 
she  said,  "  I  will  come  and  go  as  my  business  brings  me  ;"  and 
the  three  sisters  went  on  and  took  service  with  the  king. 

This  two-hair  bridge  over  the  fall  may  possibly  be  a  double 
rainbow  ;  many  a  time  have  I  sat  and  watched  such  a  bridge 
over  a  fall ;  and  the  idea  that  the  rainbow  was  the  bridge  of 
spirits,  is  old  enough. 

"  Still  seem  as  to  my  childhood's  sight 

A  midway  station  given, 
For  happy  spirits  to  alight 

Betwixt  the  earth  and  heaven." 

The  Norse  gods  rode  over  the  bridge,  Bif-raust,  from  earth  to 
heaven  ;  and  their  bridge  was  the  rainbow  which  the  giants  could 
not  cross.  There  is  also  a  bridge,  as  fine  as  a  hair,  over  which 
the  Moslem  pass  to  Paradise  ;  and  those  who  are  not  helped,  fall 
off  and  are  lost. 

The  sisters  took  service  ;  one  was  engaged  to  sew,  the  other 
to  mind  the  house,  and  the  youngest  said  she  was  good  at  run- 
ning errands  ;  so  at  the  end  of  a  day  and  year  she  was  sent  for 
the  giant's  cabhran  full  of  gold,  and  cabhran  full  of  silver  ;  and 
when  she  got  there  the  giant  was  asleep  on  a  chest  in  which  the 
treasure  was. 

"Then  Maol  a  Mhoibean  thought  a  while,  in  what  way  she 
should  get  the  giant  put  off  the  chest ;  but  she  was  not  long  till 


MAOL  A  CHLIOBAIN.  271 

she  thought  on  a  way  ;  and  she  got  a  long  broad  bench  that  was 
within,  and  she  set  the  bench  at  the  side  of  the  chest  where  the 
giant  was  laid  ;  she  went  out  where  the  burn  was,  and  she  took 
two  cold  stones  from  the  burn,  and  she  went  in  where  the  giant 
was,  and  she  would  put  one  of  the  stones  in  under  the  clothes, 
and  touch  the  giant's  skin  at  the  end  of  each  little  while  with  the 
stone  ;  and  the  giant  would  lay  himself  back  from  her,  till  bit  by 
bit  the  giant  went  back  off  the  chest  on  to  the  bench  ;  and  then 
Maol  a  Mhoibean  opened  the  chest,  and  took  with  her  the  cabhran 
of  gold,  and  the  cabhran  of  silver."  The  rest  of  the  adventure  is 
nearly  the  same  as  in  the  other  versions  ;  and  the  eldest  sister 
married  the  king's  eldest  son. 

The  next  was  the  Claidheamh  Geal  Soluis,  white  glave  of 
light. 

She  got  in  and  sat  on  a  rafter  on  a  bag  of  salt ;  and  as  the 
giant's  wife  made  the  porridge,  she  threw  in  salt.  Then  the 
giant  and  his  son  sat  and  supped,  and  as  they  ate  they  talked  of 
how  they  would  catch  Maol,  and  what  they  would  do  to  her  when 
they  had  her  ;  and  after  supper  they  went  to  bed.  Then  the 
giant  got  very  thirsty,  and  he  called  to  his  son  to  get  him  a 
drink  ;  and  in  the  time  that  the  giant's  son  was  seeking  a  cuman 
(cup),  Maol  a  Mhoibean  took  with  her  the  fill  of  her  sguird 
(skirt)  of  salt,  and  she  stood  at  the  outside  of  the  door  ;  and  the 
giant's  son  said  to  him  "  that  there  was  no  water  within  ;  "  and 
the  giant  said  "That  the  spring  was  not  far  off,  and  that  he 
should  bring  in  water  from  the  well ;"  and  when  the  giant's  son 
opened  the  door,  Maol  a  Mhoibean  began  to  throw  salt  in  his 
face  ;  and  he  said  to  the  giant,  "  That  the  night  was  dark,  and 
that  it  was  sowing  and   winnow7ing  hailstones  (gun  robh  an 

OIDHCHE  DORCHA  AGUS  CUR  'S  CABHADH  CLACH-A-MEALLAIN  ANN); 

and  the  giant  said,  "Take  with  thee  my  white  glave  of  light, 
and  thou  wilt  see  a  great  distance  before  thee,  and  a  long  way 
behind  thee." 

When  the  young  giant  came  out,  it  was  a  fine  night ;  and  he 
went  to  the  well  with  the  brigtit  sword,  and  laid  it  down  beside 
him  ;  while  he  stooped  to  take  up  the  water,  Maol  followed  him, 
and  picked  up  the  sword,  and  sguids  I  an  ceann,  she  whisked 
the  head  off  the  giant's  son.  Then  came  the  flight  and  pursuit, 
and  escape,  and  scolding  match,  and  the  second  son  of  the  king 
married  the  second  sister. 

The  next  adventure  was  the  theft  of  Boc  cluigeanach,  the 


272  WEST   HIGHLAND    TALES. 

buck  with  lumps  of  tangled  hair  and  mud  dangling  about  him. 
She  went  over  the  bridge  and  into  the  goats'  house,  and  the 
goats  began  at  beuchdaich,  roaring  ;  and  the  giant  said,  "  Maol 
a  Mhoibean  is  amongst  the  goats  ; "  and  he  went  out  and  caught 
her  ;  and  he  said,  "What  wouldst  thou  do  to  me  if  thou  shouldst 
find  me  amongst  thy  goats,  as  I  found  thee?"  And  she  said, 
"It  is  (this)  that  I  would  kill  the  best  buck  that  I  might  have, 
and  I  would  take  out  the  paunch,  and  I  would  put  thee  in  the 
paunch,  and  I  would  hang  thee  up  till  1  should  go  to  the  wood  ; 
and  I  would  get  clubs  of  elder,  and  then  I  wrould  come  home, 
AGUS  shlaoainn  GU  bas  THU,  and  I  would  belabour  thee  to 
death."     "  And  that  is  what  I  will  do  thee,"  said  the  giant. 

Then  comes  the  bit  which  is  common  to  several  other  stories, 
in  various  shapes  ;  and  which  is  part  of  a  story  in  Straparola. 

When  she  was  hung  up  in  the  goat's  paunch,  and  the  giant 
gone  for  his  elder-wood  clubs,  Maol  a  Mhoibean  began  to  say  to 
the  giant's  wrife,  "  Oh  !  it's  I  that  am  getting  the  brave  sight  ! 
Oh  !  it's  I  that  am  getting  the  brave  sight  !"  as  she  swayed  her- 
self backwards  and  forwards  ;  and  the  giant's  wife  wrould  say  to 
her,  "Wilt  thou  let  me  in  a  little  while  ?"  and  Maol  a  Mhoibean 
would  say  (I  will)  not  let  (thee  in)  cha  leig,  and  so  on  till  the 
wife  was  enticed  into  the  paunch,  and  then  Maol  took  the  belled 
buck  and  went  away  with  him.  "  Agus  ax  uair  a'  b  aird  ise 
b'  isle  easan,  s'  an  nuair  a  b'  aibd  asan  b'  isle  ise  ;  "  and  the 
time  she  was  highest  he  was  lowest,  and  the  time  he  was  highest 
she  was  lowest,  till  they  reached  the  two-hair  bridge.  The  giant 
came  home  and  belaboured  his  wife  to  death,  and  every  blow  he 
struck,  the  wife  would  say,  "  is  mi  fhein  a  tha  ann,  o  's  mi 
fhein  a  tha  ann — It  is  myself  that  is  in  it  :  Oh  !  it  is  myself 
that  is  in  it ;"  and  the  giant  would  say,  "  I  know  it  is  thyself 
that  is  in  it." 

[And  in  this  the  giant  is  like  the  water-horse  in  another  story, 
and  like  the  cyclop  in  the  Odyssey,  and  like  all  other  giants 
throughout  mythology.  He  was  a  great,  strong,  blundering 
fool,  and  his  family  were  as  stupid  as  himself.] 

Maol  married  the  king's  third  son,  and  the  king  said,  "  There 
is  one  other  thing  yet  of  what  the  giant  has  that  I  want,  and 
that  is,  a  sgiath  bhallabhreac  agus  a  bhogha  s  a  dhorlach — 
his  lumpy  bumby  shield,  and  his  bow  and  his  quiver,  or  in  poeti- 
cal language,  his  variegated  bossy  shield,  and  his  bow  and  quiver 
— and  I  will  give  thee  the  kingdom  if  thou  wilt  get  me  them." 


-MAOL  A  CHDIOBAIN.  273 

This  is  a  good  instance  of  what  may  happen  in  translating  Gaelic 
into  English,  one  language  into  another,  which  is  far  removed 
from  it,  both  in  construction  and  meaning.  Bhallabhreac 
applies  to  almost  anything  that  is  round  or  spotted.  The  root  of 
the  epithet  is  ball,  which,  in  oblique  cases,  becomes  bhall,  vail, 
and  means  a  spot,  a  dot,  and  many  other  things.  It  is  the  same 
as  the  English  word  ball.  A  shield  was  round,  and  covered  with 
knobs  ;  a  city  wall  was  round,  and  it  was  the  shield  of  the  town  ; 
an  egg  was  round,  and  the  shell  was  the  shield  or  the  wall  of  the 
egg  ;  a  skull  is  round,  and  the  shield  of  the  brain,  and  a  head  is 
still  called  a  knob  in  English  slang  ;  a  toad-stool  is  round, — and 
so  this  word  ball  has  given  rise  to  a  succession  of  words,  which 
at  first  sight  appear  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  each  other,  and 
the  phrase  might  be  translated  speckled- wings.  The  epithet  is 
applied  to  clouds  and  to  many  things  in  Gaelic  poetry,  and  has 
been  translated  in  many  ways,  according  to  the  taste  of  each 
translator.  Those  who  felt  the  beauty  of  the  passages  used  the 
words  which  they  found  applicable.  Those  who  do  not,  may,  if 
they  choose,  search  out  words  which  express  their  feeling  ;  and 
so  a  poem  which  stands  on  its  own  merit,  in  its  own  language,  is 
at  the  mercy  of  every  translator  ;  and  those  who  work  at  Gaelic 
with  dictionaries  for  guides,  may  well  be  puzzled  with  the  multi- 
tude of  meanings  assigned  to  words. 

So  Maol  went,  and  the  giant's  dog  barked  at  her,  and  the 
giant  came  out  and  caught  her,  and  said  he  would  cut  her  head 
off ;  and  she  said  she  would  have  done  worse  to  him  ;  and  "  What 
was  that  ?  "  "  Put  him  in  sack  and  roast  him  ;  "  so  he  said  he 
would  do  that,  and  put  her  in,  and  went  for  wood.  She  got  her 
hand  out,  untied  the  string,  and  put  in  the  dog  and  cat,  and  fled 
with  the  arms,  and  the  giant  roasted  his  own  dog  and  cat,  agus 

BHA    AM    MADADH   AN    's   AX    SGALAILLE  AGUS    AN    CAT    ANNS   AN 

SGIABHUIL — and  the  dog  was  in,  and  the  squalling  ;  and  the  cat 
(was)  in,  and  the  squealling,  and  the  giant  would  say,  "Feuch 
ruit  A  nis — Try  thyself  now. "  When  he  found  out  the  trick, 
he  pursued,  and  when  they  got  to  the  bridge,  his  hand  was  on  her 
back,  and  he  missed  his  step  and  fell  into  the  eas,  and  there  he 
lay.  And  the  king's  son  and  Maol  a  Mhoibean  were  made  heirs 
in  the  kingdom,  and  if  they  wanted  any  more  of  the  giant's 
goods,  they  got  it  without  the  danger  of  being  caught  by  the 
giant. 

The  Gaelic  given  in  De war's  version  is  spelt  as  it  came,  and  is 

C  2 


274  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

somewhat  Phonetic.  The  writer  knows  his  own  language  well, 
but  has  had  very  little  practice  in  writing  it.  As  he  spells  in 
some  degree  by  ear,  his  phonetics  have  their  value,  as  they  have 
in  his  English  letter  given  in  the  introduction. 

5.  A  gentleman  at  the  inn  at  Inverary  remembered  to  have 
heard  a  similar  story  "long  ago  about  a  witch  that  would  be 
running  in  and  out  of  a  window  on  a  bridge  of  a  single  hair." 

6.  "  Kate  ill  Pratts  "  is  referred  to  in  a  review  of  Chambers' 
Nursery  Rhymes,  at  page  117,  vol.  10  ;  1853 — Tait's  Edinburgh 
Magazine.  The  story  is  mentioned  as  told  in  Perthshire,  and 
seems  to  be  of  the  same  kind  ;  with  a  bit  of  Cinderella,  as  known 
in  the  west,  with  the  advice  of  the  hoodie  in  Murchadh  and 
Mionachag  put  in  the  mouth  of  a  little  bird — 

"  Stuff  wi'  fog,  and  clem  wi'  clay, 
And  then  ye'll  carry  the  water  away." 

These  sounds  are  not  imitations  of  any  bird's  note,  and  the 
Gaelic  sounds  are  ;  so  I  am  inclined  to  think  the  Gaelic  older 
than  the  low  country  version. 

The  story  is  well  known  as  Little  Thumb.  It  is  much  the 
same  as  Boots  and  the  Troll,  Norse  Tales,  p.  247.  It  is  some- 
what like  part  of  Jack  and  the  Bean-stalk.  Part  of  it  is  like  Big 
Peter  and  Little  Peter,  Norse  Tales,  p.  395  ;  and  that  is  like 
some  German  Stories,  and  like  a  story  in  Straparola.  The  open- 
ing is  like  that  of  a  great  many  Gaelic  Stories,  and  is  common  to 
one  or  two  in  Grimm. 

There  is  something  in  a  story  from  Polynesia,  which  I  have 
read,  in  which  a  hero  goes  to  the  sky  on  a  ladder  made  of  a  plant, 
and  brings  thence  precious  gifts,  much  as  Jack  did  by  the  help 
of  his  bean-stalk.  In  short,  this  story  belongs  to  that  class 
which  is  common  to  all  the  world,  but  it  has  its  own  distinctive 
character  in  tbe  Highlands  ;  for  the  four  versions  which  I  have, 
resemble  each  other  much  more  than  they  do  any  other  of  which 
I  know  anything. 


XVII«. 
FABLES. 

1.    From  J.  MacLeod,  fisherman  on  the  Laxford,  Sutherland. 

AXE  day  the  fox  succeeded  in  catching  a  fine  fat 
goose  asleep  by  the  side  of  a  loch,  he  held  her  by 
the  wing,  and  making  a  joke  of  her  cackling,  hissing 
and  fears,  he  said, — 

"  Xow,  if  you  had  me  in  your  mouth  as  I  have  you, 
tell  me  what  you  would  do  ?  " 

"Why,"  said  the  goose,  "that  is  an  easy  question.  I 
would  fold  my  hands,  shut  my  eyes,  say  a  grace,  and 
then  eat  you." 

"Just  what  I  mean  to  do,"  said  Kory,  and  folding 
his  hands,  and  looking  very  demure,  he  said  a  pious 
grace  with  his  eyes  shut. 

But  while  he  did  this  the  goose  had  spread  her 
wings,  and  she  was  now  half  way  over  the  loch ;  so  the 
fox  was  left  to  lick  his  lips  for  supper. 

"  I  will  make  a  rule  of  this,"  he  said  in  disgust, 
"  never  in  all  my  life  to  say  a  grace  again  till  after  I 
feel  the  meat  warm  in  my  belly." 

The  wild  goose  in  the  Highlands  has  her  true  character  ;  she 
is  one  of  the  most  wary  and  sagacious  of  birds,  and  a  Gaelic 
proverb  says  :  — 

Sealgair  thu  mar  a  mharbhas  thu  Geadh  a's  Corr'  a's  Crotach. 

Sportsman  thou,  when  killest  thou  goose,  and  heron,  and 
curlew  ? 


276  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

Rory  is  a  corruption  of  a  Gaelic  proper  name,  which  means, 
one  whose  hair  is  of  the  colour  of  the  fox  "  Ruadh."  The  fox  is 
called  by  various  descriptive  and  other  names.  Balgair,  he 
with  the  "  balg,"  bag  or  quiver,  from  which  the  shape  of  the 
quiver  may  be  surmised  to  have  resembled  the  foxes'  brush. 
Madadh  Ruadh,  the  red-brown  dog.  Gille  Martuinn,  the 
servant  of  Martin,  or  perhaps  the  Martinmas  lad,  but  the  true 
Gaelic,  according  to  my  instructor,  a  Lorn  man,  is  Sionnach, 
pronounced  Shunach,  which  is  surely  the  same  as  the  Sanscrit 
Svan,  dog.     Sunuh  Shuni,  dog-bitch. 

2.  From  John  Campbell,  piper  ;  and  many  other  sources  lately. 

The  fox  is  much  troubled  by  fleas,  and  this  is  the 
way  in  which  he  gets  rid  of  them.  He  hunts  about 
till  he  finds  a  lock  of  wool,  and  then  he  takes  it  to  the 
river,  and  holds  it  in  his  mouth,  and  so  puts  the  end 
of  his  brush  into  the  water,  and  down  he  goes  slowly. 
The  fleas  run  away  from  the  water,  aud  at  last  they 
all  run  over  the  fox's  nose  into  the  wool,  and  then  the 
fox  dips  his  nose  under  and  lets  the  wool  go  off  with 
the  stream. 

This  is  told  as  a  fact.  The  place  where  an  "  old  grey  fellow  " 
was  seen  performing  this  feat,  was  mentioned  by  one  of  my  in- 
formants.    The  fox  was  seen  in  the  sea  near  the  Caithness  hills. 

3.  "Tha  biadh  a's  ceol  an  seo,"  as  the  fox  said  when 
he  ate  the  pipe  bag. 

This  saying  I  have  known  from  my  childhood,  and  the  story 
attached  to  it  is  that  the  fox  being  hungry  one  day,  found  a  bag- 
pipe, and  proceeded  to  eat  the  bag,  which  is  generally,  or  was  till 
lately,  made  of  hide.  There  was  still  a  remnant  of  breath  in  the 
bag,  and  when  the  fox  bit  it  the  drone  gave  a  groan,  when  the 
fox  surprised  but  not  frightened,  said  : — 

11  Here  is  meat  and  music  !  " 


FABLES.  277 

4.  From  D.  M.  and  J.  Macleod,  Laxford,  Sutherland. 

One  day  the  fox  chanced  to  see  a  fine  cock  and  fat 
hen,  off  which  he  much  wished  to  dine,  but  at  his 
approach  they  both  jumped  up  into  a  tree.  He  did  not 
lose  heart,  but  soon  began  to  make  talk  with  them, 
inviting  them  at  last  to  go  a  little  way  with  him. 
"There  was  no  danger,"  he  said,  "nor  fears  of  his 
hurting  them,  for  there  was  peace  between  men  and 
beasts,  and  among  all  animals."  At  last  after  much 
parleying  the  cock  said  to  the  hen,  "My  dear,  do  you 
not  see  a  couple  of  hounds  coming  across  the  field  ? " 

"Yes,"  said  the  hen,  "and  they  will  soon  be  here." 

"If  that  is  the  case,  it  is  time  I  should  be  off, '  said 
the  sly  fox,  "for  I  am  afraid  these  stupid  hounds  may 
not  have  heard  of  the  peace." 

And  with  that  he  took  to  his  heels  and  never  drew 
breath  till  he  reached  his  den. 

This  fable  is  very  well  'known,  and  is  probably  derived  from 
iEsop,  though  the  narrator  did  not  know  the  fact.  I  give  it 
because  the  authority  cannot  be  impeached,  and  because  equally 
well-known  fables  are  found  in  old  Chinese  books,  and  are  sup- 
posed to  be  common  property.  This  may  be  pure  tradition, 
though  1  suspect  it  to  be  derived  indirectly  from  some  book.  I 
myself  lately  told  the  fable  of  the  Monkey  and  the  Cats,  in 
Gaelic,  to  a  highlander  who  was  going  to  law ;  and  it  is  im- 
possible to  be  sure  of  the  pedigree  of  such  well-known  fables. 

The  next  two  are  of  the  same  kind,  and  were  new  to  me  when 
they  arrived. 

• 

5.    THE   FOX   AND   THE   FOX-HUNTER. 

Once  upon  a  time  a  Tod-hunter  had  been  very 
anxious  to  catch  our  friend  the  fox,  and  had  stopped 
all  the  earths  in  cold  weather.  One  evening  he  fell 
asleep  in  his  hut;  and  when  he  opened  his  eyes  he 


278  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES. 

saw  the  fox  sitting  very  demurely  at  the  side  of  the  fire. 
It  had  entered  by  the  hole  under  the  door  provided  for 
the  convenience  of  the  dog,  the  cat,  the  pig,  and  the  hen. 

"Oh!  ho!"  said  the  Tod-hunter,  "now  I  have  you." 
And  he  went  and  sat  down  at  the  hole  to  prevent 
Reynard's  escape. 

"Oh!  ho!"  said  the  fox,  "I  will  soon  make  that 
stupid  fellow  get  up."  So  he  found  the  man's  shoes, 
and  putting  them  into  the  fire,  wondered  if  that  would 
make  the  enemy  move. 

"I  shan't  get  up  for  that,  my  fine  gentleman,"  cried 
the  Tod-hunter. 

Stockings  followed  the  shoes,  coat  and  trousers 
shared  the  same  fate,  but  still  the  man  sat  over  the 
hole.  At  last  the  fox  having  set  the  bed  and  bedding 
on  fire,  put  a  light  to  the  straw  on  which  his  jailor  lay, 
and  it  blazed  up  to  the  ceiling. 

"No!  That  I  cannot  stand,"  shouted  the  man, 
jumping  up;  and  the  fox  taking  advantage  of  the  smoke 
and  confusion,  made  good  his  exit. 

Note  by  the  Collector. — This  is  the  beginning  of  Eeineke 
Fuchs  in  the  Erse.  I  cannot  get  any  one  to  write  them  down  in 
Gaelic,  which  very  few  people  can  write.  Most  of  the  tales  are 
got  from  my  guide,  the  gamekeeper ;  but  I  have  got  them  from 
many  others.  C  D. 

Having  told  this  story  to  a  man  whom  I  met  near  Oban,  as  a 
bait,  I  was  told  the  following  in  return. — J.  F.  C. 

6.  "  The  fox  is  very  wise  indeed.  I  don't  know 
whether  it  is  true  or  not,  but  an  old  fellow  told  me 
that  he  had  seen  him  go  to  a  loch  where  there  were 
wild  ducks,  and  take  a  bunch  of  heather  in  his  mouth, 
then  go  into  the  water,  and  swim  down  with  the  wind 
till  he  got  into  the  middle  of  the  ducks,  and  then  he 
let  go  the  heather  and  killed  two  of  them." 


FABLES.  279 

7.    THE   FOX   AND   THE  .WRENS. 

A  fox  had  noticed  for  some  days,  a  family  of  wrens, 
off  which  he  wished  to  dine.  He  might  have  been 
satisfied  with  one,  but  he  was  determined  to  have  the 
whole  lot, — father  and  eighteen  sons, — and  all  so  like 
that  he  could  not  tell  one  from  the  other,  or  the  father 
from  the  children. 

"It  is  no  use  to  kill  one  son,"  he  said  to  himself, 
"because  the  old  cock  will  take  warning  and  fly  away 
with  the  seventeen.  I  wish  I  knew  which  is  the  old 
gentleman." 

He  set  his  wits  to  work  to  find  out,  and  one  day 
seeing  them  all  threshing  in  a  barn,  he  sat  down  to 
watch  them ;  still  he  could  not  be  sure. 

"Now  I  have  it,"  he  said;  "well  done  the  old  man's 
stroke  !     He  hits  true,"  he  cried. 

"  Oh ! "  replied  the  one  he  suspected  of  being  the 
head  of  the  family,  "  If  you  had  seen  my  grandfather's 
strokes,  you  might  have  said  that." 

The  sly  fox  pounced  on  the  cock,  ate  him  up  in  a 
trice,  and  then  soon  caught  and  disposed  of  the  eighteen 
sons,  all  flying  in  terror  about  the  barn. 

C.  D. 

This  is  new  to  me,  but  there  is  something  like  it  in  the  Battle 
of  the  Birds,  where  the  wren  is  a  farmer  threshing  in  a  barn. 
Why  the  wren  should  wield  the  flail  does  not  appear,  but  I 
suppose  there  was  some  good  reason  for  it  "  once  upon  a  time." 

J.  F.  C. 

t 

8.  From  John  Dewar,  Inveraray,  August  27,  1860. 

A  fox  one  day  met  a  cock  and  they  began  talking. 
"  How  many  tricks  canst  thou  do  1 "  said  the  fox  1 " 
"Well,"  said  the  cock,  "I  could  do  three;  how  many 
canst  thou  do  thyself  1 " 


280  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

"  I  could  do  three  score  and  thirteen,"  said  the  fox. 

"  What  tricks  canst  thou  do  1 "  said  the  cock. 

"Well,"  said  the  fox,  "my  grandfather  used  to  shut 
one  eye  and  give  a  great  shout." 

"I  could  do  that  myself,"  said  the  cock. 

"Do  it,"  said  the  fox.  And  the  cock  shut  one  eye 
and  crowed  as  loud  as  ever  he  could,  but  he  shut  the 
eye  that  was  next  the  fox,  and  the  fox  gripped  him  by 
the  neck  and  ran  away  with  him.  But  the  wife  to 
whom  the  cock  belonged  saw  him  and  cried  out,  "  Let 
go  the  cock  ;  he's  mine." 

Say  thou,  "  'Se  mo  choileach  fhein  a  th'  ann"  (it 
is  my  own  cock),  said  the  cock  to  the  fox. 

Then  the  fox  opened  his  mouth  to  say  as  the  cock 
did,  and  he  dropped  the  cock,  and  he  sprung  up  on  the 
top  of  a  house,  and  shut. one  eye  and  gave  a  loud  crow ; 
and  that's  all  there  is  of  that  sgeulachd. 

I  find  that  this  is  well-known  in  the  west. 

9.    HOW  THE  WOLF  LOST  HIS   TAIL. 

One  day  the  wolf  and  the  fox  were  out  together, 
and  they  stole  a  dish  of  crowdie.  Now  the  wolf  was 
the  biggest  beast  of  the  two,  and  he  had  a  long  tail  like 
a  greyhound,  and  great  teeth. 

The  fox  was  afraid  of  him,  and  did  not  dare  to  say 
a  word  when  the  wolf  ate  the  most  of  the  crowdie,  and 
left  only  a  little  at  the  bottom  of  the  dish  for  him,  but 
he  determined  to  punish  him  for  it ;  so  the  next  night 
when  they  were  out  together  the  fox  said : 

"I  smell  a  very  nice  cheese,  and  (pointing  to  the 
moonshine  on  the  ice)  there  it  is  too." 

"  And  how  will  you  get  it  ? "  said  the  wolf. 

"Well,   stop   you   here  till  I  see  if   the  farmer   is 


FABLES.  281 

asleep,  and  if  you  keep  jTour  tail  on  it,  nobody  will  see 
you  or  know  that  it  is  there.  Keep  it  steady.  I  may 
be  some  time  coming  back." 

So  the  wolf  lay  down  and  laid  his  tail  on  the  moon- 
shine in  the  ice,  and  kept  it  for  an  hour  till  it  was  fast. 
Then  the  fox,  who  had  been  watching  him,  ran  in  to 
the  farmer  and  said  :  "  The  wolf  is  there;  he  will  eat  up 
the  children, — the  wolf  !  the  wolf  !  " 

Then  the  farmer  and  his  wife  came  out  with  sticks 

to  kill  the  wolf,  but  the  wolf  ran  off  leaving  his  tail 

behind  him,  and  that's  why  the  wolf  is  stumpy  tailed  to 

this  dav,  though  the  fox  has  a  long  brush. 

CD. 

This  is  manifestly  the  same  as  the  Norse  story, — "Why  the 
bear  is  stumpy  tailed  ?  "  and  it  errs  in  ascribing  a  stumpy  tail 
to  the  wolf.  There  was  not  time  for  the  "  Norse  Tales  "  to  be- 
come known  to  the  people  who  told  the  story,  so  perhaps  this 
may  be  a  Norse  tradition  transferred  from  the  bear  to  the  wolf. 
There  is  another  wolf  story  in  Sutherland,  which  was  told  to  me 
by  the  Duke  of  Sutherland's  head  forester  in  1848.  It  was  told 
in  Gaelic  by  a  fine  old  Highlander,  who  is  now  dead.  His  sons 
have  succeeded  him,  and  will  probably  remember  this  story  which 
I  quote  from  recollection.  J.  F.  C. 

10.    HOW  THE  LAST  WOLF  WAS   KILLED  IN   SUTHERLAND. 

There  was  once  a  time  when  there  were  wolves  in 
Sutherland,  and  a  woman  that  was  living  in  a  little  town 
lost  one  of  her  children.  Well,  they  went  all  about  the 
hills  looking  for  the  lad,  but  they  could  not  find  him  for 
three  days.  Well,  at  the  end  of  that  time  they  gave  up, 
but  there  was  a  young  lad  coming  home  late  through  a 
big  cairn  of  stones,  and  he  heard  the  crying  of  a  child, 
and  a  kind  of  noise,  and  he  went  up  to  the  cairn,  and 
what  should  he  see,  in  a  hole  under  a  big  stone,  but  the 
boy  and  two  young  wolves  with  him. 


282  "WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

Well  he  was  frightened  that  the  old  wolf  would  come, 
so  he  went  home  to  the  town,  and  got  two  others  with 
him,  and  in  the  morning  they  went  back  to  the  cairn 
and  they  found  the  hole. 

Well,  then,  one  of  the  lads  stopped  outside  to  watch, 
and  the  other  two  went  in,  and  they  began  to  kill  the 
young  wolves,  and  they  were  squealing,  and  the  old 
one  heard  them,  and  she  came  running  to  the  place,  and 
slipped  between  the  legs  of  the  lad  who  was  watching, 
and  got  her  head  into  the  hole,  but  he  held  her  by  the 
tail. 

"What,"  said  the  lad  who  was  inside,  "is  keeping  the 
light  from  us.'' 

Ma  bhristeas  bun  Fionn  bithidh  fios  agad. 

"  If  the  root  of  Fionn  (or  if  the  hairy  root)  breaks, 
thou  wilt  know,"  said  the  man  outside. 

Well,  he  held  on,  and  the  lads  that  were  inside  killed 
the  wolf  and  the  young  ones,  and  they  took  the  boy 
home  to  his  mother,  and  his  family  were  alive  in  the 
time  of  my  grandfather,  and  they  say  they  were  never 
like  other  people. 

This  is  manifestly  the  same  as  the  story  of  Romulus  and 
Reinus,  but  it  appears  on  very  strong  evidence  that  wolves  really 
carry  off  and  suckle  children  in  Oude  now,  and  that  these 
children  grow  up  to  be  half  savages.  It  is  either  a  fact  in  natural 
history,  or  a  tradition,  believed  to  be  a  fact  in  Sutherland  and 
in  Oude.  I  have  heard  the  same  story  told  in  the  Highlands  of 
a  wild  boar,  but  the  boar's  tail  would  be  but  a  slippery  hold. 

J.  F.  C. 

According  to  Innes  (Scotland  in  the  Middle  Ages,  Pp.  125),  in 
1283,  there  was  an  allowance  for  one  hunter  of  wolves  at  Stirling  ; 
and  there  were  wild  boars  fed  at  the  King's  expense  in  1263,  in 
Forfarshire.  There  are  plenty  of  wolves  now  in  Scandinavia, 
and  in  Brittany,  and  wild  boars  in  Germany,  and  elsewhere  in 
Europe.  The  Gaelic  names  for  wolf  are  Madadh  Alluidh, 
commonly  used  ;  Faol  Chu,  Alla  Mhadadh,  all  of  which  are 


FABLES.  283 

composed  of  an  epithet,  and  a  word  which  now  means  dog.  Die. 
etc.     Mac  tire,  Earth's  Son  ;  Faol,  Armstrong. 

A  Boar  is  Torc,  Cullach,  Fiadh  chullach 

The  Fox  appears  as  a  talking  creature  in  several  stories.  So 
does  the  Bear  in  No.  IX.,  and  the  Wolf  and  Falcon,  No.  IV. 
The  Dog  oppears  in  No.  XII. ;  the  Sheep,  Cat.  Cock,  Goose,  Dog, 
and  Bull,  in  No.  XL  ;  the  Frog  in  !No.  XXXIII.  ;  the  Cat  and 
the  mouse  in  No.  XLIX.  The  Rat  and  the  Lion,  and  the  Dove, 
appear  in  a  story  to  which  I  have  referred  in  No.  IV.  Other 
creatures,  also,  not  mentioned  in  stories,  are  gifted  with  speech, 
but  their  speech  is  generally  but  a  translation  of  their  notes  into 
Gaelic. 

11.  Bi  Glic,  Bi  Glic,  Bee-Gleechk,  be  wise,  say  the 
Oyster-catchers,  when  a  stranger  comes  near  their 
haunts. 

12.  Gorach,  GdRACH,  Gciwmch,  "silly,"  says  the 
Hoodie,  as  he  sits  on  a  hillock  by  the  way  side  and  bows 
at  the  passengers. 

13.  Here  is  another  bit  of  crow  language, — a  conver- 
sation with  a  frog.  When  it  is  repeated  in  Gaelic  it  can 
be  made  absurdly  like  the  notes  of  the  creatures. 

"Ghille  Criosda  mhic  Dhughail  cuir  a  nois  do  mhag, 

Christ's  servant,  son  of  Dugald,  put  up  thy  paw. 

"  Tha  eagal  orm,  tha  eagal  orm,  tha  eagal  orm." 

I  fear. 

"  Gheibh  thu  cdta  gorm  a's  leine.  Gheibh  thu  c6ta 
gorm  a's  leine." 

Thou  shalt  have  a  blue  coat  and  a  shirt. 

Then  the  frog  put  up  his  hand  and  the  hoodie  took 
him  to  a  hillock  and  began  to  eat  him,  saying, 

"Biadh  dona  lorn  !  's  bu  dona  riabh  thu." 

Bad  bare  meat  and  bad  wert  thou  ever. 

"Caite  bheil  do  ghealladh  math  a  nis?"  said  the  frog. 

Where  is  thy  good  promise  now  ? 


284  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

"  Sann  ag  ol  a  bha  sinn  an  latha  sin.  Sann  ag  ol  a 
bha  sinn  an  latha  sin." 

It  is  drinking  we  were  on  that  day. 

"  Toll  ort  a  ruid  ghrannda  gur  beag  feola  tha  air  do 
chramhan." 

"  Toll  ort !  "  said  the  hoodie. 

A  hole  in  thee,  ugly  thing  !  how  little  flesh  is  on  thy 
bones. 

Why  the  frog  is  called  Gilchrist  MacDugald,  unless  the  story- 
was  made  to  fit  some  real  event,  I  do  not  know.  The  story  used 
to  be  told  by  an  old  Islay  man,  Donald  Macintyre,  to  Hector 
MacLean  ;  and  I  remember  to  have  heard  part  of  it  in  my  child- 
hood. 

The  Hoodie  has  appeared  in  many  places  already,  and  he  and 
his  family,  the  Crows,  have  been  soothsayers  time  out  of  mind, 
and  in  many  lands.  A  more  mischievous,  knowing  bird  does  not 
exist,  or  one  that  better  deserves  his  character  for  wisdom. 

The  old  fable  of  the  bird  which  dropped  a  tortoise  on  a  stone, 
is  enacted  every  day  by  Hoodies.  Any  one  who  will  take  the 
trouble  to  watch,  may  see  hoodies  on  the  shores  of  the  Western 
Isles,  at  low  tide,  flying  up  into  the  air  and  dropping  down 
again. 

It  will  be  found  that  they  are  trying  to  drop  large  stranded 
mussels  and  other  shells,  on  the  stones  on  the  beach  ;  and  if  left 
to  their  own  devices,  they  will  go  on  till  they  succeed  in  cracking 
the  shell,  and  extracting  the  inhabitant. 

Keepers  who  trap  them  most  successfully,  do  it  by  beating 
them  at  their  own  weapons.  They  put  a  bait  into  a  pool  of  water, 
and  make  a  show  of  hiding  it,  and  set  the  trap  on  a  knoll  at  some 
distance.  The  Hoodie  makes  a  gradual  approach,  reconnoitering 
the  ground  as  he  advances,  and  settling  on  the  knolls  which 
command  a  view,  perhaps  repeating  his  song  of  silly,  silly,  till 
he  settles  on  the  trap,  and  next  morning  his  head  is  on  the  kennel 
door  with  the  mortal  remains  of  other  offenders. 

I  suspect  that  the  Hoodie  was  made  a  soothsayer  because  of 
his  natural  wisdom. 

14.  The  Grouse  Cock  and  his  wife  are  always  disput- 
ing and  may  be  heard  on  any  fine  evening  or  early 


FABLES.  285 

morning  quarrelling  and  scolding  about  the  stock  of 

food. 

This  is  what  the  hen  says, — 
"Faic  thusa  'n  la  ud  's  an  la  ud  eile." 
And  the  cock,  with  his  deeper  voice,  replies, — 
"Faic  thusa  'n  cnoc  ud  's  an  cnoc  ud  eile." 
See  thou  yonder  day,  and  yon  other  day. 
See  thou  yonder  hill,  and  yon  other  hill. 

Of  all  the  stories  I  have  gathered  and  heard,  this  is  all  I  have 
about  the  Grouse.  It  is  remarkable  ;  for  if  these  stories  were 
home-made,  and  in  modern  times,  they  would  surely  treat  of  the 
only  bird  whose  births,  deaths,  and  marriages  are  chronicled  in 
the  newspapers, — and  which  is  peculiar  to  the  British  Isles. 

15.  The  Eagle  and  the  Wren  once  tried  who  could  fly 
highest,  and  the  victor  was  to  be  king  of  the  birds.  So 
the  Wren  flew  straight  up,  and  the  Eagle  flew  in  great 
circles,  and  when  the  Wren  was  tired  he  settled  on  the 
Eagle's  back. 

When  the  Eagle  was  tired  he  stopped  and 

"  C  AITE  BHEIL  THU  DHREOLAIN  ?  "  URS'  AN  IOLAIR. 
"  THA  MISE  AN  SO  OS  DO  CHEANN,"  URS'  AN  DREOLAN. 

"  Where  art  thou,  Wren  1 "  said  the  Eagle. 
"I  am  here  above  thee,"  said  the  Wren. 
And  so  the  W'ren  won  the  match. 

This  was  told  to  me  in  my  childhood,  I  think,  by  the  Rev.  Mr. 
MacTavish.  There  is  a  much  better  version  of  the  story  in 
Grimm's  "King  Wren,"  in  which  the  notes  of  many  creatures 
are  made  into  German  ;  but  this  describes  the  flight  of  eagle  and 
wren  correctly  enough.     I  lately,  Sept.  I860,  heard  it  in  Skye. 

16.  Tha  Fios  Fithich  agud.  Thou  hast  ravens' 
knowledge,  is  commonly  said  to  children  who  are 
unusually  knowing  about  things  of  which  they  have  no 
ostensible  means  of  gaining  knowledge. 


286  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

Odin  had  two  ravens  whose  names  meant  Mind  and  Memory, 
which  told  him  everything  that  passed  in  the  world. 

17.  Nead  air  Bride;  Ubh  air  Inid;  Eun  air  caisg. 
mur  am  bi  sin  aig  an  fhitheach  bithidh  am  bas. 

Nest  at  Candlemas,  egg  at  Inid,  bird  at  Pash. 
If  that  hath  not  the  Kaven,  death  he  hath. 

This  is  rather  a  bit  of  popular  natural  history  than  anything 
else,  but  it  shews  that  the  raven  is  at  least  as  important  a  per- 
sonage amongst  Celts  as  the  grouse  is  amongst  Saxons. 

18.  'S  BIGEAD  THU  SIOD,  ARS  AN  DREOLAN  'N  UR 
THUM  E  GHOB  ANNS  AN  FHAlRlGE. 

Thou'rt  lessened  by  that,  said  the  Wren,  when  he 
dipped  his  beak  in  the  sea. 

There  are  a  great  number  of  similar  stories  current  in  the 
islands,  but  it  is  very  hard  to  persuade  any  one  that  such  trifles 
can  be  of  any  value.  I  have  lately  heard  of  a  number  of  stones 
of  the  kind.     For  example — 

19.  John  Mackinnon,  stable-boy  at  Broadford  in  Skye, 
tells  that  "  a  man  was  one  day  walking  along  the  road 
with  a  creel  of  herrings  on  his  back,  and  two  foxes  saw 
him,  and  the  one,  who  was  the  biggest,  said  to  the  other, 
'Stop  thou  here,  and  follow  the  man,  and  I  will  run 
round  and  pretend  that  I  am  dead.'  So  he  ran  round, 
and  stretched  himself  on  the  road.  The  man  came  on, 
and  when  he  saw  the  fox,  he  was  well  pleased  to  find  so 
fine  a  beast,  and  he  picked  him  up,  and  threw  him  into 
the  creel,  and  he  walked  on.  But  the  fox  threw  the 
herrings  out  of  the  creel,  and  the  other  followed  and 
picked  them  up;  and  when  the  creel  was  empty,  the  big 
fox  leaped  out  and  ran  away,  and  that  is  how  they  got 
the  herrings." 

Well,  they  went  on  together  till  they  came  to  a  smith's 


FABLES.  287 

house,  and  there  was  a  horse  tied  at  the  door,  and  he 
had  a  golden  shoe,  and  there  was  a  name  on  it. 

".Twill  go  and  read  what  is  written  on  that  shoe/ 
said  the  big  fox,  and  he  went ;  but  the  horse  lifted  his 
foot,  and  struck  a  kick  on  him,  and  drove  his  brains  out. 

"  '  GhilP  ghill'  ars  an  siunnach  beag  cha  sgolair  mi  's 
cha  'n  aill  learn  a  bhi.' 

"'Lad,  Lad,'  said  the  little  fox,  'no  scholar  me,  nor 
wish  I  to  be;'"  and,  of  course,  he  got  the  herrings,  though 
my  informant  did  not  say  so. 

20.  A  boy,  Alexander  Mackenzie,  who  walked  with 
me  from  Carbost,  in  Skye,  told  that  a  bee  (seillean)  met 
a  mouse  and  said, 

"Teann  a  nail  'us  gun  deanamaid  tigh." 
"  Come  over  till  we  make  a  house." 
"I  will  not,"  said  Luchag,  the  mousie. 

Fear  dha  'n  dug  thusa  do  mhil  shamraidh, 
Deanadh  e  tigh  gheamhraidh  dhuit. 
Tha  tigh  agamsa  fo  thalamh, 
Nach  ruig  air  gallian  na  gaoith. 
Bith  tusa  an  ad  isean  pheallach 
A  ruidh  air  barradh  nan  craobh. 

He  to  whom  thou  gavest  thy  summer  honey, 
Let  him  make  a  winter  house  for  thee  j 
I  have  a  little  house  under  the  ground, 
That  can  reach  neither  cold  nor  breeze, 
Thou  wilt  be  a  ragged  creature, 
Running  on  the  tops  of  the  trees. 

21.  The  same  boy  told  that  there  was  a  mouse  in  the 
hill,  and  a  mouse  in  a  farm. 

"It  were  well,"  said  the  hill  mouse,  "to  be  in  the 
farm  where  one  might  get  things." 


288  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES. 

Said  the  farm  mouse,  "'S  fhearr  an  t-sith."  Better  is 
peace. 

22.  The  following  is  not  strictly  speaking  a  fable,  but 
it  is  a  sort  of  moral  tale,  and  may  be  classed  with  fables. 
It  seems  to  inculcate  a  lesson  of  self-reliance  and  self- 
help.  I  wrote  it  in  English  from  the  Gaelic  repetition 
of  John  Mackenzie  at  Inveraray  in  1859,  and  made  him 
repeat  it  in  1860,  when  I  made  up  several  omissions. 
Other  versions  have  come  to  me  from  other  sources,  and 
the  tale  seems  to  be  well  known  in  the  Highlands.  If 
it  is  in  any  book,  I  have  not  been  able  to  find  it.  Mac- 
kenzie says  he  learned  it  from  a  native  of  Uist,  and  I 
have  a  very  well  written  version  of  it,  told  by  Macintyre 
in  Benbecula,  to  Mr.  Torrie.  It  is  called  the  "  Provost 
of  London,"  and  begins  with  the  family  history  of  the 
hero  of  the  tale.  A  great  lady  fell  in  love  with  a  poor 
Highland  lad,  and  he  was  ashamed  of  the  love  she  had 
taken  for  him,  and  went  away  to  an  uncle  who  was  a 
colonel,  and  who  got  him  made  a  major.  The  lady  took 
to  black  melancholy,  and  he  was  sent  for,  and  they 
married.  He  went  to  the  wars,  bought  a  small  estate, 
was  killed,  and  his  brother-in-law  brought  up  his  son. 
Then  comes  the  dream,  the  journey  for  three  years  in 
Scotland,  Ireland,  and  England;  the  meeting  with  "one 
of  the  people  of  Cambridge,"  and  the  rest  of  the 
incidents  nearly  as  they  were  told  to  me  by  Mackenzie, 
but  in  different  words. 


xvm. 

BAILIE  LUNNAIN, 

Told  by  John  Mackenzie,  at  Inverary,  to  J.  F.  C.     August  1859 

and  1860. 

rpHERE  were  at  some  time  of  the  world  two  brothers 
■*-  in  one  farm,  and  they  were  very  great  friends,  and 
they  had  each  a  son;  and  one  of  the  brothers  died,  and 
he  left  his  brother  guardian.  When  the  lad  was  near 
to  be  grown  up,  he  was  keeping  the  farm  for  his  mother 
almost  as  well  as  his  father  could  have  done.  One  night 
he  saw  a  dream  in  his  sleep,  the  most  beautiful  lady 
that  there  was  in  the  world,  and  he  dreamed  of  her  three 
times,  and  he  resolved  to  marry  her  and  no  other  woman 
in  the  world ;  and  he  would  not  stay  in  the  farm,  and 
he  grew  pale,  and  his  father's  brother  could  not  think 
what  ailed  him ;  and  he  was  always  asking  him  what 
was  wrong  with  him.  "Well,  never  mind,"  one  day  he 
said,  "  brother  of  my  father,  I  have  seen  a  dream,  the 
most  beautiful  woman  that  there  is  in  the  world,  and  I 
will  marry  no  other  but  she ;  and  I  will  now  go  out  and 
search  for  her  over  the  whole  world  till  I  find  her." 

Said  the  uncle,  "Son  of  my  brother,  I  have  a  hundred 
pounds ;  I  will  give  them  to  thee,  and  go ;  and  when 
that  is  spent  come  back  to  me,  and  I  will  give  thee 
another  hundred." 

So  the  lad  took  the  hundred  pounds,  and  he  went 
to  France,  and  then  he  went  to  Spain,  and  all  over  the 
world,  but  he  could  not  find  the  lady  he  had  seen  in 

D  2 


290  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

his  sleep.  At  last  he  came  to  London,  and  he  had  spent 
all  his  money,  and  his  clothes  were  worn,  and  he  did 
not  know  what  he  should  do  for  a  night's  lodging. 

Well,  as  he  was  wandering  about  the  streets,  whom 
should  he  see  but  a  quiet-looking  respectable  old  woman; 
and  he  spoke  to  her;  and,  from  less  to  more,  he  told  her 
all  that  had  happened  to  him;  and  she  was  well  pleased 
to  see  a  countryman,  and  she  said, 

"  I,  too,  am  a  Highland  woman,  though  I  am  in  this 
town."  And  she  took  him  to  a  small  house  that  she 
had,  and  she  gave  him  meat  and  clothes. 

And  she  said,  "  Go  out  now  and  take  a  walk  ;  maybe 
thou  mayest  see  here  in  one  day  what  thou  mightest 
not  see  in  a  year." 

On  the  next  day  he  was  out  taking  a  walk  about  the 
town,  and  he  saw  a  woman  at  a  window,  and  he  knew 
her  at  once,  for  she  was  the  lady  he  had  seen  in  his 
sleep,  and  he  went  back  to  the  old  woman. 

"  How  went  it  with  thee  this  day,  Gael  ? "  said  she. 

"  It  went  well,"  said  he. 

"  Oh,  I  have  seen  the  lady  I  saw  in  my  sleep,"  said 
he.     And  he  told  her  all  about  it. 

Then  the  old  woman  asked  about  the  house  and  the 
street;  and  when  she  knew — "Thou  hast  seen  her," 
said  she.  "  That  is  all  thou  wilt  see  of  her.  That  is 
the  daughter  of  the  Bailie  of  London;  but  I  am  her 
foster  mother,  and  I  would  be  right  glad  if  she  would 
marry  a  countryman  of  my  own.  Now,  do  thou  go  out 
on  the  morrow,  and  I  will  give  thee  fine  highland  clothes, 
and  thou  wilt  find  the  lady  walking  in  such  a  street : 
herself  and  three  maidens  of  company  will  go  out  to- 
gether ;  and  do  thou  tread  on  her  gown  ;  and  when  she 
turns  round  to  see  what  is  the  matter,  do  thou  speak  to 
her." 


BAILIE   LUNNAIN.  ,  291 

Well,  the  lad  did  this.  He  went  out  and  he  found 
the  lady,  and  he  set  his  foot  on  her  dress,  and  the  gown 
rent  from  the  band ;  and  when  she  turned  round  he 
said,  "I  am  asking  you  much  grace — it  was  an  accident." 

"  I  was  not  your  fault ;  it  was  the  fault  of  the  dress- 
maker that  made  the  dress  so  long,"  said  she. 

And  she  looked  at  him ;  and  when  she  saw  how 
handsome  he  was,  she  said,  "  Will  you  be  so  kind  as  to 
come  home  with  me  to  my  father's  house  and  take 
something?" 

So  the  lad  went  and  sat  down,  and  before  she  asked 
him  anything  she  set  down  wine  before  him  and  said, 
"  Quicker  is  a  drink  than  a  tale." 

When  he  had  taken  that,  he  began  and  he  told  her 
all  that  happened,  and  how  he  had  seen  her  in  his  sleep, 
and  when,  and  she  was  well  pleased. 

"And  I  saw  thee  in  my  sleep  on  the  same  night," 
said  she. 

He  went  away  that  day,  and  the  old  woman  that  he 
was  lodging  with  asked  him  how  he  had  got  on,  and  he 
told  her  everything  that  had  happened ;  and  she  went 
to  the  Bailie's  daughter,  and  told  her  all  the  good  she 
could  think  of  about  the  young  lad ;  and  after  that  he 
was  often  at  the  Bailie's  house;  and  at  last  the  daughter 
said  she  would  marry  him.  "But  I  fear  that  will  not 
do,"  said  she.  "  Go  home  for  a  year,  and  when  thou 
comest  back  I  will  contrive  to  marry  thee,"  said  she, 
"  for  it  is  the  law  of  this  country  that  no  one  must  be 
married  unless  the  Bailie  himself  gives  her  by  the  hand 
to  her  bridegroom,"  said  she ;  and  she  left  blessing  with 
him. 

Well,  the  lad  went  away  as  the  girl  said,  and  he  was 
putting  everything  in  order  at  home ;  and  he  told  his 
father's  brother  all  that  had  happened   to  him ;    but 


292  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

when  the  year  was  nearly  out  he  set  off  for  London 
again,  and  he  had  the  second  hundred  with  him,  and 
some  good  oat-meal  cakes. 

On  the  road,  whom  should  he  meet  but  a  Sassanach 
gentleman  who  was  going  the  same  road,  and  they  began 
to  talk. 

"  Where  art  thou  going  ?  "  said  the  Saxon. 

"Well,  I  am  going  to  London,"  said  he 

"When  I  was  there  last  I  set  a  net*  in  a  street,  and 
I  am  going  to  see  if  it  is  as  I  left  it.  If  it  is  well  I  will 
take  it  with  me ;  if  not,  I  will  leave  it." 

"Well,"  said  the  other,  "that  is  but  a  silly  thing. 
How  can  lintseed  be  as  thou  hast  left  it  1  It  must  be 
grown  up  and  trodden  down  by  ducks  and  geese,  and 
eaten  by  hens  long  ago.  I  am  going  to  London,  too ; 
but  I  am  going  to  marry  the  Bailie's  daughter." 

Well,  they  walked  on  together,  and  at  long  last  the 
Saxon  began  to  get  hungry,  and  he  had  no  food  with 
him,  and  there  was  no  house  near ;  and  he  said  to  the 
other,  "  Wilt  thou  give  me  some  of  thy  food  1 " 

"Well,"  said  the  Gael,  "I  have  but  poor  food — oaten 
bread ;  I  will  give  you  some  if  you  will  take  it ;  but  if 
I  were  a  gentleman  like  you  I  would  never  travel  with- 
out my  own  mother." 

"How  can  I  travel  with  my  mother1?"  said  the  Saxon. 
"  She  is  dead  and  buried  long  ago,  and  rotting  in  the 
earth ;  if  not,  why  should  I  take  her  with  me  1 " 

And  he  took  the  oat  cake  and  ate  it,  and  they  went 
on  their  way. 

They  had  not  gone  far  when  a  heavy  shower  came 


(*  To  set  a  net  and  to  sow  lint  are  expressed  by  the  same 
words.) 


BAILIE   LUNNAIN.  293 

on,  and  the  Gael  had  a  rough  plaid  about  him,  but  the 
Saxon  had  none ;  and  he  said  to  the  other, 

"  Wilt  thou  lend  me  thy  plaid  1 " 

"I  will  lend  you  a  part  of  it,"  said  the  Gael :  "but  if 
I  were  a  gentleman  like  you,  I  would  never  travel  with- 
out my  house,  and  I  would  not  be  indebted  to  any  one 
for  favours." 

"  Thou  art  a  fool,"  said  the  Saxon ;  "  my  house  is 
four  storeys  high.  How  could  any  man  carry  a  house 
that  is  four  storeys  high  about  with  him  ?" 

But  he  wrapped  the  end  of  the  Highlander's  plaid 
about  his  shoulders,  and  they  went  on. 

Well,  they  had  not  gone  far  till  they  came  to  a  small 
liver,  and  the  water  was  deep  after  the  rain,  and  there 
was  no  bridge,  and  in  those  days  bridges  were  not  so 
plentiful  as  they  are  now ;  and  the  Saxon  would  not 
wet  his  feet,  so  he  said  to  the  Highlander, 

"Wilt  thou  carry  me  over?" 

"Well,"  said  the  Gael,  "I  don't  mind  if  I  do;  but  if 
I  were  a  gentleman  like  you,  I  would  never  travel  with- 
out my  own  bridge,  and  I  would  not  be  in  any  man's 
debt  for  favours." 

"Thou  art  a  silly  fellow,"  said  the  Saxon.  "How  can 
any  man  travel  about  with  a  bridge  that  is  made  of 
stone  and  lime.  Thou  art  but  a  '  burraidh,'  and  weighs 
as  much  as  a  house  1 " 

But  he  got  on  the  back  of  his  fellow-traveller  never- 
theless, and  they  travelled  on  till  they  got  to  London. 
Then  the  Saxon  went  to  the  house  of  the  Bailie,  and 
the  other  went  to  the  little  house  of  his  old  country- 
woman, who  was  the  foster-mother  of  the  Bailie's 
daughter. 

Well,  the  Saxon  gentleman  began  to  tell  the  Bailie 


294  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

all  that  had  happened  to  him  by  the  way ;  and  he 
said — 

"  I  met  with  a  Gael  by  the  way,  and  he  was  a  perfect 
fool — the  greatest  booby  that  man  ever  saw.  He  told 
me  that  he  had  sown  lint  here  a  year  ago  in  a  street, 
and  that  he  was  coming  to  fetch  it,  if  he  should  find  it 
as  he  left  it,  but  that  if  he  did  not,  he  would  leave  it ; 
and  how  should  he  find  that  after  a  year  1  He  told  me 
I  should  never  travel  without  my  mother,  and  my  house, 
and  my  bridge  ;  and  how  could  a  man  travel  with  all 
these  things  1  But  though  he  was  nothing  but  a  fool, 
he  was  a  good-natured  fellow,  for  he  gave  me  some  of 
his  food,  and  lent  me  a  bit  of  his  plaid,  and  he  carried 
me  over  a  river." 

"I  know  not  but  he  was  as  wise  as  the  man  that  was 
speaking  to  him,"  said  the  Bailie ;  for  he  was  a  wise 
man.     "I'll  tell  you  what  he  meant,"  said  he. 

"  Well,  I  will  shew  that  he  was  a  fool  as  great  as  ever 
was  seen,"  said  the  Saxon. 

"He  has  left  a  girl  in  this  town,"  said  the  Bailie, 
"and  he  is  come  to  see  if  she  is  in  the  same  mind  as  she 
was  when  he  left  her ;  if  so,  he  will  take  her  with  him, 
if  not,  he  will  leave  her;  and  he  has  set  a  net,"  said  he. 
"  Your  mother  nourished  you,  and  a  gentleman  like  you 
should  have  his  own  nourishment  with  him.  He  meant 
that  you  should  not  be  dependent  on  him.  It  was  the 
booby  that  was  with  him,"  said  the  Bailie.  "A  gentle- 
man like  you  should  have  his  own  shelter,  and  your 
house  is  your  shelter  when  your  are  at  home.  A  bridge 
is  made  for  crossing  a  river,  and  a  man  should  always 
be  able  to  do  that  without  help ;  and  the  man  was 
right,  and  he  was  no  fool,  but  a  smart  lad,  and  I  should 
like  to  see  him,"  said  the  Bailie;  "and  I  would  go  to 
fetch  him  if  I  knew  where  he  was,"  said  he.     [According 


BAILIE  LUNNAIN.  29-") 

to  another  version,  the  house  and  bridge  meant  a  coach 
and  a  snddle-horse.] 

Well,  the  next  day  the  Bailie  went  to  the  house 
where  the  lad  was,  and  he  asked  him  to  come  home  to 
his  dinner ;  and  the  lad  came,  and  he  told  the  Bailie 
that  he  had  understood  all  that  had  been  said. 

"'Now,"  said  he,  "as  it  is  the  law  that  no  man  may 
be  married  here  unless  the  Bailie  gives  him  the  bride  by 
the  hand,  will  you  be  so  kind  as  to  give  me  the  girl  that 
I  have  come  to  marry,  if  she  is  in  the  same  mind  1  I 
will  have  everything  ready." 

And  the  Bailie  said,  "  I  will  do  that,  my  smart  lad, 
to-morrow,  or  whenever  thou  dost  choose.  I  would  go 
farther  than  that  for  such  a  smart  boy,"  said  he. 

"  Well,  I  will  be  ready  at  such  a  house  to-morrow," 
said  the  lad ;  and  he  went  away  to  the  foster-mother's 
house. 

When  the  morrow  came,  the  Bailie's  daughter  dis- 
guised herself,  and  she  went  to  the  house  of  the  foster- 
mother,  and  the  Gael  had  got  a  churchman  there ;  and 
the  Bailie  came  in,  and  he  took  his  own  daughter  by  the 
hand ;  but  she  would  not  give  her  hand  to  the  lad. 

"Give  thy  hand,  girl,"  said  the  Bailie.  "It  is  an 
honour  for  thee  to  marry  such  a  smart  lad."  And  he 
gave  her  to  him,  and  they  were  married  according  to 
law. 

Then  the  Bailie  went  home,  and  he  was  to  give  his 
daughter  by  the  hand  to  the  Saxon  gentleman  that  day ; 
but  the  daughter  was  not  to  be  found ;  and  he  was  a 
widower,  and  she  was  keeping  the  house  for  him,  and 
they  could  not  find  her  anywhere. 

"  Well,"  said  the  Bailie,  "I  will  lay  a  wager  that  Gael 
has  got  her,  after  all."  And  the  Gael  came  in  with  the 
daughter,  and  he  told  them  everything  just  as  it  had 


296  WEST   HIGHLAND  TALES. 

happened,  from  beginning  to  the  end,  and  how  he  had 
plenty  in  his  own  country. 

And  the  Bailie  said,  "Well,  since  I  myself  have  given 
thee  my  daughter  by  the  hand,  it  is  a  marriage,  and  I 
am  glad  that  she  has  got  a  smart  lad  like  thee  for  a 
husband." 

And  they  made  a  wedding  that  lasted  a  year  and  a 
day,  and  they  lived  happily  ever  after,  and  if  they  have 
not  died  since  then  they  are  alive  yet. 


XVIIr. 
THE   SLIM   SWARTHY   CHAMPION. 

From  James  Wilson,  blind  fiddler,  Islay,  1859. 

rpHERE  was  a  poor  man  dwelling  in  Ard  na  h-Uamh, 
•*•  and  a  son  was  born  to  him,  and  he  gave  him  school 
and  learning  till  he  was  fourteen  years  of  age.  When 
he  was  fourteen  years  of  age,  he  said  to  his  father, 

"  Father,  it  is  time  for  me  to  be  doing  for  myself,  if 
thou  wouldst  give  me  a  fishing-rod  and  a  basket." 

The  poor  man  found  every  chance  till  he  got  a  fishing- 
rod  and  a  basket  for  him.  When  he  got  the  fishing-rod 
and  the  basket,  he  went  round  about  Loch  Aird  na  h- 
Uamh,  and  took  down  (by)  Loch  Thorabais ;  and  after 
he  had  fished  Loch  Thorabais  closely,  he  came  to  Loch 
Phort  an  Eillean ;  *  and  after  he  had  fished  Loch  Phort 
an  Eillean  before  him,  he  took  out  by  Loch  Allalaidh. 
He  stayed  the  night  in  Aird  Eileastraidh,  and  every 
trout  he  had  he  left  with  a  poor  woman  that  was  there. 

On  the  morrow  he  thought  that  he  would  rise  out, 
and  that  he  would  betake  himself  to  Eirinn.  He  came 
to  the  garden  of  Aird  Inneasdail,  and  he  plucked  with 
him  sixteen  apples,  and  then  he  came  to  Mull  of  Otha.  f 
He  threw  an  apple  out  into  the  sea,  and  he  gave  a  step 

*  The  lake  in  which  is  the  island  where  the  Lords  of  the  Isles 
had  their  dwelling. 

t  The  nearest  point  to  Ireland. 


298  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

on  it :  he  threw  the  next  one,  and  he  gave  a  step  on  it : 
he  threw  thus  one  after  one,  until  he  came  to  the 
sixteenth,  and  the  sixteenth  took  him  on  shore  in  Eirinn. 
When  he  was  on  shore  he  shook  his  ears,  and  he 
thought  that  it  was  in  no  sorry  place  he  would  stay. 

"  He  moved  as  sea  heaps  from  sea  heaps, 
And  as  playballs  from  playballs — 
As  a  furious  winter  wind — 
So  swiftly,  sprucely,  cheerily, 
Right  proudly, 
Through  glens  and  high-tops, 
And  no  stop  made  he 
Until  he  came 

To  city  and  court  of  O'Domhnuill. 
He  gave  a  cheery,  light  leap 
O'er  top  and  turret 
Of  court  and  city 
Of  O'Domhnuill."* 

O'Domhnuill  took  much  anger  and  rage  that  such  an 
unseemly  ill  strippling  should  come  into  his  court, 
while  he  had  a  doorkeeper  for  his  town. 

"I  will  not  believe,"  said  the  Champion,  but  "that 
thou  art  taking  anger  and  rage,  O'Domhnuill." 

"Well,  then,  I  am,"  said  O'Domhnuill,  "if  I  did  but 
know  at  whom  I  should  let  it  out." 

"My  good  man,"  said  the  Champion,  "coming  in  was 
no  easier  for  me  than  going  out  again  would  be." 

"Thou  goest  not  out,"  said  O'Domhnuill,  "until  thou 
tellest  me  from  whence  thou  earnest." 

"  I  came  from  hurry-skurry, 
From  the  end  of  endless  spring. 

*  The  only  authority  for  writing  this  as  poetry  is  the  rhythm 
and  alliteration  of  the  original. 


THE   SLIM   SWARTHY   CHAMPION.  299 

From  the  loved  swanny  glen — 
A  night  in  Islay  and  a  night  in  Man, 
A  night  on  cold  watching  cairns. 
On  the  face  of  a  mountain 
to     In  the  Scotch  king's  town 
Was  I  born. 

A  soiled,  sorry  Champion  am  I, 
Though  I  happened  upon  this  town." 

"What,"  said  O'Domhnuill,  "canst  thou  do,  oh 
Champion  ?  Surely,  with  all  the  distance  thou  hast 
travelled,  thou  canst  do  something." 

"  I  was  once,"  said  he,  "  that  I  could  play  a  harp." 

"Well,  then,"  said  O'Domhnuill,  "it  is  I  myself  that 
have  got  the  best  harpers  in  the  five-fifths  of  Eirinn,  or 
in  the  bridge  of  the  first  of  the  people,  such  as — 
Ruairidh  O'Cridheagan,  Tormaid  O'Giollagan,  and  Thaog 
O'Chuthag." 

"Let's  hear  them  playing,"  said  the  Champion. 

"  They  could  play  tunes  and  "uirt"  and  "  okgain," 
Trampling  things,  tightened  strings, 
Warriors,  heroes,  and  ghosts  on  their  feet. 
Ghosts  and  spectres,  illness  and  fever, 
They'd  set  in  sound  lasting  sleep 
The  whole  great  world, 
With  the  sweetness  of  the  calming  tunes 
That  the  harpers  could  play." 

The  music  did  not  please  the  Champion.  He  caught 
the  harps,  and  he  crushed  them  under  his  feet,  and  he 
set  them  on  the  fire,  and  made  himself  a  warming,  and 
a  sound  warming  at  them. 

O'Domhnuill  took  much  lofty  rage  that  a  man  had 
come  into  his  court  who  should  do  the  like  of  this  to 
the  harps. 

"  My  good  man,  I  will  not  believe  that  thou  art  not 
taking  anger,"  said  the  Champion. 


300  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

"  Well,  then,  I  am,  if  I  did  but  know  at  whom  I 
should  let  it  out." 

"Back,  my  good  man;  it  was  no  easier  for  me  to 
break  thy  harps  than  to  make  them  whole  again,"  said 
the  Champion. 

"I  will  give  anything  to  have  them  made  whole 
again,"  said  O'Domhnuill. 

"  For  two  times  five  marks  I  will  make  thy  harps  as 
good  as  they  were  before,"  said  the  Champion. 

"Thou  shalt  get  that,"  said  O'Domhnuiil. 

O'Domhnuill  gave  him  the  marks,  and  he  seized  on 
the  fill  of  his  two  palms  of  the  ashes,  and  he  made  a 
harp  for  Euairidh  O'Cridheagan ;  and  one  for  Tormaid 
O'Giollagan ;  and  one  for  Thaog  O'Chuthag ;  and  a 
great  choral  harp  for  himself. 

"Let's  hear  thy  music,"  said  O'Domhnuill. 

"Thou  shalt  hear  that,  my  good  man,"  said  the 
Champion. 

The  Champion  began  to  play,  and  och !  but  he  was 
the  boy  behind  the  harp. 

"  He  could  play  tunes,  and  uirt  and  orgain 
Trampling  things,  tightened  strings, 
Warriors,  heroes,  and  ghosts  on  their  feet, 
Ghosts  and  souls,  and  sickness  and  fever, 
That  would  set  in  sound  lasting  sleep 
The  whole  great  world 
With  the  sweetness  of  the  calming  tunes 
That  the  champion  could  play." 

"  Thou  art  melodious,  oh  Champion  !  "  said  O'Domh- 
nuill. 

When  the  harpers  heard  the  Champion  playing,  they 
betook  themselves  to  another  chamber,  and  though  he 
had  followed  on,  still  they  had  not  come  to  the  fore. 


THE   SLIM   SWARTHY   CHAMPION.  301 

O'Domhnuill  went  away,  and  he  sent  a  bidding  to 
meat  to  the  Champion. 

"  Tell  the  good  man  that  he  will  not  have  that  much 
to  gloom  on  me  when  I  go  at  mid-day  to-morrow,"  said 
the  Chimpion. 

O'Domhnnill  took  much  proud  rage  that  such  a  man 
should  come  into  his  court,  and  that  he  would  not  take 
meat  from  him.  He  sent  up  a  fringed  shirt,  and  a 
storm  mantle. 

"  Where  is  this  going  ?"  said  the  Champion. 

"  To  thee,  oh  Champion,"  said  they. 

"Say  you  to  the  good  man  that  he  will  not  have  so 
much  as  that  to  gloom  on  me  when  I  go  at  mid-day 
to-morrow,"  said  the  Champion. 

O'Domhnuill  took  much  anger  and  rage  that  such  a 
man  had  come  into  his  court  and  would  not  either  take 
meat  or  dress  from  him.  He  sent  up  five  hundred 
Galloglachs  to  watch  the  Champion,  so  that  O'Domh- 
nuill might  not  be  affronted  by  his  going  out  by  any 
way  but  by  the  door. 

"  Where  are  you  going  ?"  said  the  Champion. 

"To  watch  thee,  Champion,  so  that  thou  shouldst  not 
go  to  affront  O'Domhnuill,  and  not  to  let  thee  out  but 
as  thou  shouldst,"  said  they. 

"  Lie  down  there,"  said  the  Champion,  "and  I  will 
let  you  know  when  I  am  going." 

They  took  his  advice,  and  they  lay  down  beside  him, 
and  when  the  dawn  broke,  the  Champion  went  into  his 
garments. 

"Where  are  my  watchers,  for  I  am  going  V  said  the 
Champion. 

"If  thou  shouldst  stir,"  said  the  great  Galloglach,  "I 
would  make  a  sharp  sour  shrinking  for  thee  with  this 
plough-board  in  my  hand." 


302  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

The  Champion  leaped  on  the  point  of  his  pins,  and 
he  went  over  top  and  turret  of  court  and  city  of 
O'Domhnuill. 

The  Galloglach  threw  the  plough-board  that  was  in 
his  hand,  and  he  slew  four  and  twenty  persons  of  the 
very  people  of  O'Domhnuill. 

Whom  should  the  Champion  meet,  but  the  tracking 
lad  of  O'Domhnuill,  and  he  said  to  him — 

"  Here's  for  thee  a  little  sour  grey  weed,  and  go  in 
and  rub  it  to  the  mouths  of  those  whom  it  killed  and 
bring  them  alive  again,  and  earn  for  thyself  twenty 
calving  cows,  and  look  behind  thee  when  thou  partest 
from  me,  whom  thou  shalt  see  coming." 

When  the  tracking  lad  did  this  he  saw  no  being 
coming,  but  he  saw  the  Champion  thirteen  miles  on  the 
other  side  of  Luimineach  (Limerick). 

"  He  moved  as  sea-heaps  o'  sea-heaps, 
And  as  playballs  o'  playballs. 
As  a  furious  winter  wind — 
So  swiftly,  sprucely,  cheerily, 
Right  proudly, 
Through  glens  and  high  tops, 
And  he  made  no  stop 
Until  he  reached 
MacSeathain,*  the  Southern  Earl." 

He  struck  in  the  door.  Said  MacSeathain,  the 
southern  Earl,  "Who's  that  in  the  door  ?" 

"I  am  Duradan  o'  Duradan,  Dust  of  Dust,"  said  the 
Champion. 

"Let  in  Dust  of  Dust,"  said  MacSeathain,  the 
southern  Earl ;  "  no  being  must  be  in  my  door  without 
getting  in." 

*  Seathain  is  supposed  to  be  John,  therefore  Johnson. 


THE   SLIM   SWARTHY   CHAMPION.  303 

They  let  him  in. 

"What  couldst  thou  do,  Duradan  o'  Duradan  ?"  said 
the  southern  Earl. 

11 1  was  on  a  time,  and  I  could  play  a  juggle,"  said  he. 

"  Well,  then,  it  is  I  myself  that  have  the  best  juggler 
in  the  .five-fifths  of  Eirinn,  or  the  bridge  of  the  first 
of  the  people,  as  is  Taog  Bratach  Mac  a  Cheallaich, 
rascally  Toag,  the  son  of  Concealment." 

They  got  up  the  juggler. 

"  What,"  said  the  southern  Earl,  "  is  the  trick  that 
thou  canst  do,  Dust  of  Dust  1 " 

"  Well,  I  was  on  a  time  that  I  could  bob  my  ear  off 
my  cheek,"  said  he. 

The  Champion  went  and  he  takes  the  ear  off  the 
cheek. 

Said  rascally  Taog,  the  son  of  Concealment :  "  I  could 
do  that  myself." 

He  went  and  he  took  down  his  ear,  and  up  he  could 
not  bring  it !  but  the  Champion  put  up  his  own  ear  as 
it  was  before. 

The  Earl  took  much  anger  and  rage  that  the  ear 
should  be  off  his  juggler. 

"  For  five  merks  twice  over,"  said  the  Champion,  "I 
would  set  the  ear  as  it  was  before." 

He  got  the  five  merks  twice  over,  and  he  put  the  ear 
on  the  juggler  as  it  was  before. 

"I  see,"  said  the  Earl,  "that  the  juggling  of  this 
night  is  with  thee." 

Rascally  Taog  went  away  ;  and  though  they  should 
have  staid  there  the  length  of  the  night,  he  would  not 
have  come  near  them. 

Then  the  Champion  went  and  he  set  a  great  ladder 
up  against  the  moon,  and  in  one  place  of  it  he  put  a 
hound  and  a  hare,  and  in  another  place  of  it  he  put  a 


304  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

carl  and  a  girl.  A  while  after  that  he  opened  first 
where  he  had  put  the  hound  and  the  hare,  and  the 
hound  was  eating  the  hare  ;  he  struck  him  a  stroke  of 
the  edge  of  his  palm,  and  cast  his  head  off.  Then  he 
opened  again  where  were  the  carl  and  the  girl,  and  the 
carl  was  kissing  the  girl.  He  struck  him  a  stroke  of 
the  edge  of  his  palm,  and  he  cast  his  head  off. 

"  I  would  not  for  much,"  said  the  Earl,  "  that  a  hound 
and  a  carl  should  be  killed  at  my  court. 

"  Give  five  merks  twice  over  for  each  one  of  them, 
and  I  will  put  the  heads  on  them,"  said  the  Champion. 

"  Thou  shalt  get  that,"  said  the  southern  Earl. 

He  got  the  five  merks  twee  over,  and  he  put  the  head 
on  the  hound  and  the  carl  as  they  were  before ;  and 
though  they  should  be  alive  till  now,  the  hound  would 
not  have  touched  a  hare,  nor  the  carl  a  girl,  for  fear 
their  heads  should  be  taken  off. 

On  the  morrow,  after  their  meat  in  the  morning, 
he  went  hunting  with  the  Earl.  When  they  were 
amongst  the  wood,  they  heard  a  loud  voice  in  a  knoll 
(or  a  bush). 

"  Be  this  from  me,"  said  Dust  of  Dust,  "  I  must  go 
to  see  the  foot  of  the  carl  MacCeochd."    He  went  out — 

"  And  moved  as  sea-heaps  o'  sea-heaps, 
And  as  playballs  o'  play  balls  ; 
As  a  furious  winter  wind — 
So  swiftly,  sprucely,  cheerily, 
Right  proudly, 
Through  glens  and  high  tops, 
And  no  stop  made  he 
Until  he  reached 
The  house  of  the  Carl  MacCeochd." 

He  struck  at  the  door.  "  Who's  that  ?  "  said  the  car 
MacCeochd. 


THE  SLIM  SWARTHY   CHAMPION,  305 

"  I,"  said  he,  "  am  the  leech's  lad." 

"Well,"  said  the  carl,  "many  a  bad  black  leech  is 
coming,  and  they  are  not  doing  a  bit  of  good  to  me." 

"Give  word  to  the  carl  that  unless  he  will  not  let  me 
in,  I  will  be  going,"  said  the  Champion. 

"  Let  in  the  leech's  lad ;  perhaps  he  is  the  one  in 
whom  is  my  help,"  said  the  carl  MacCeochd. 

They  let  him  in. 

"Rise  up,  carl  MacCeochd,  thou  art  free  from  thy 
sores,"  said  the  Champion. 

Carl  MacCeochd  arose  up,  and  there  was  not  a  man 
in  Eirinn  swifter  or  stronger  than  he. 

"Lie  down,  carl  MacCeochd,  thou  art  full  of  sores," 
said  the  Champion. 

The  carl  MacCeochd  lay  down,  and  he  was  worse 
than  he  ever  was. 

"Thou  didst  ill,"  said  the  carl  MacCeochd,  "to  heal 
me  and  spoil  me  again." 

"Thou  man  here,"  said  the  Champion,  "I  was  but 
shewing  thee  that  I  could  heal  thee." 

"I  have,"  said  the  carl  MacCeochd,  "but  the  one 
daughter  in  the  world,  and  thou  shalt  get  her  and  half 
of  all  I  have,  and  all  my  share  when  I  go  way,  and  heal 
my  leg." 

"It  shall  not  be  so,  but  send  word  for  every  leech 
that  thou  hast  had,  that  I  might  get  talking  with  them," 
said  the  leech's  lad. 

They  sent  word  by  running  lads  through  the  five- 
fifths  of  Eirinn  for  the  leeches  that  were  waiting  on  the 
carl,  and  they  came,  all  thinking  that  they  would  get 
pay,  and  when  they  came  riding  to  the  house  of  the 
carl,  the  Champion  went  out  and  he  said  to  them, 

"  What  made  you  spoil  the  leg  of  the  carl  MacCeochd, 
and  set  himself  thus  ? " 

E  2 


306  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

"Well  then,"  said  they,  "if  we  were  to  raise  the 
worth  of  our  drugs,  without  coming  to  the  worth  of  our 
trouble,  we  would  not  leave  him  the  worth  of  his  shoe 
in  the  world. 

Said  the  leech's  lad,  "  I  will  lay  you  a  wager,  and 
that  is  the  full  of  my  cap  of  gold,  to  be  set  at  the  end 
of  yonder  dale,  and  that  there  are  none  in  Eirinn  that 
will  be  at  it  sooner  than  the  carl  MacCeochd." 

He  set  the  cap  full  of  gold  at  the  end  of  the  dale, 

and  the  leeches  laid  the  wager  that  they  could  never 

be. 

He  went  in  where  the  carl  MacCeochd  was,  and  he 

said  to  him, 

"  Arise,  carl  MacCeochd,  thou  art  whole  of  sores,  I 
have  laid  a  wager  on  thee." 

The  carl  got  up  whole  and  healthy,  and  he  went  out, 
and  he  was  at  three  springs  at  the  cap  of  gold,  and  he 
left  the  leeches  far  behind. 

Then  the  leeches  only  asked  that  they  might  get 
their  lives.  Promise  of  that  they  got  not  (but)  the 
leech's  lad  got  in  order. 

He  snatched  his  holly  in  his  fist,  and  he  seized  the 
grey  hand  plane  that  was  on  the  after  side  of  his 
haunch,  and  he  took  under  them,  over  them,  through 
and  amongst  them ;  and  left  no  man  to  tell  a  tale,  or 
earn  bad  tidings,  that  he  did  not  kill.* 

When  the  carl  was  healed  he  sent  word  for  the 
nobles  and  for  the  great  gentles  of  Eirinn  to  the  wed- 
ding of  his  daughter  and  the  Champion,  and  they  were 
gathering  out  of  each  quarter. 

"  What  company  is  there  ? "  said  the  leeches'  lad. 

*  This  seems  like  mock  heroics,  an  imitation  of  such  tales  as 
the  Knight  of  the  Red  Shield  and  Murachadh  MacBrian. 


THE   SLIM   SWARTHY   CHAMPION.  307 

"  There  is  the  company  of  thine  own  wedding,  and 
they  are  gathering  from  each  half  and  each  side,"  said 
the  carl  MacCeochd. 

"Be  this  from  me  ! "  said  he ;  "  O'Conachar  the  Shelly 
(or  of  Sligo)  has  a  year's  service  against  me,"  and  he 
put  a  year's  delay  on  the  wedding. 

11  Out  he  went  as  Voorveel  o  Voorveel 
And  as  Veerevuil  o  Veerevuill, 
As  a  furious  winter  wind, 
So  swiftly,  sprucely,  cheerily, 
Right  proudly, 
Through  glens  and  high  tops. 
And  no  stop  did  he  make 
Till  he  struck  in  the  door 
Of  Conacharof  Sligo." 

"  Who's  that  ?  "  said  O'Conachar  of  Sligo. 

"I,"  said  he,  "Goodherd." 

"Let  in  Goodherd,"  said  O'Conachar  of  Sligo,  for 
great  is  my  need  of  him  here." 

They  let  him  in. 

"What  couldst  thou  do  here  1 "  said  O'Conachar. 

"I  am  hearing,"  said  he,  to  O'Conachar  of  Sligo, 
"  that  the  chase  is  upon  thee.  If  thou  wilt  keep  out 
the  chase,  I  will  keep  in  the  spoil,"  said  Goodherd. 

"  What  wages  wilt  thou  take  ?  "  said  O'Conachar  of 
Sligo. 

"  The  wages  I  will  take  is  that  thou  shouldst  not 
make  half  cups  with  me  till  the  end  of  a  day  and  year," 
said  Goodherd. 

O'Conachar  made  this  covenant  with  him,  and  the 
herdsman  went  to  herd. 

The  chase  broke  in  on  O'Conachar  of  Sligo,  and 
they  betook  themselves  to  where  the  herdsman  was,  to 
lift  the  spoil.     When  the  herdsman  saw  that  they  had 


308  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

broken  in,  he  took  the  holly  in  his  fist,  and  seized  the 
grey  hand-plane  that  was  on  the  after  side  of  his 
haunch,  and  left  no  man  to  tell  a  tale,  or  earn  bad 
tidings,  that  he  did  not  kill.  He  went  into  a  herd's 
bothy,  and  he  (was)  hot,  and  he  saw  O'Conachar 
Sligheach  just  done  drinking  a  boyne  of  milk  and 
water. 

"  Witness,  gods  and  men,  that  thou  hast  broken  thy 
promise,"  said  Goodherd. 

"That  fill  is  no  better  than  another  fill,"  said 
O'Conachar  Sligheach. 

"  That  selfsame  fill  thou  didst  promise  to  me,"  said 
Goodherd. 

He  took  anger  at  O'Conachar  Sligheach,  and  he 
went  away,  and  he  reached  the  house  of  the  carl 
MacCeochd.  The  daughter  of  the  carl  made  him  a 
drink  of  green  apples  and  warm  milk,  and  he  was 
choked. 

And  I  left  them,  and  they  gave  me  butter  on  a 
cinder,  porridge  kail  in  a  creel,  and  paper  shoes;  and 
they  sent  me  away  with  a  big  gun  bullet,  on  a  road  of 
glass,  till  they  left  me  sitting  here  within. 


AN  CEATHAIRNEACH  CAOL,  RIABHACH. 

Bha  duine  bochd  a  bha  ann  an  Aird  na  h-Uamha  a  chomhnuidh, 
agus  rugadh  mac  dha,  's  thug  e  sgoil  a's  ionnsachadh  dha  gus  an 
robh  e  ceithir  bliadhna  deug  a  dh'  aois  thuirt  e  r'a  athair, 
"Athair,  's  mithidh  domhsa  'bhith  deanadh  air  mo  shon  fhein  ; 
na'n  d'  thugadh  thu  domh  slat-iasgaidh  as  basgaid."  Fhuair  an 
duine  bochd  a'  h-uile  cothrom  gus  an  d'  fhuair  e  slat-iasgaidh  as 
basgaid  da. 

Nur  a  fhuair  e'n  t  slat-iasgaidh  's  bhasgaid  chaidh  e  ma'n  cuairt 
Loch  Aird  na  h-Uamha,  's  ghabh  e  'nuas  Loch  Thdrabais,  's  an 


AN    (  KATIIAIRNEACH  CAOL,    RIABHACH.  309 

deigh  dha  Loch  Th6rabais  a  chliabairt  thainig  e  gu  Loch  Phort 
an  Eilean,  's  an  deigh  dha  Loch  Phort  an  Eilean  iasgach  roimhe 
ghabh  e  'mach  Loch  Allalaidh.  Dh'  fhan  e  'san  oidhche  'n  Aird 
Eileastraidh,  's  a'  h-uile  breac  a  bh'  aige  dh'  fhag  e  aig  boir- 
eannach  bochd  a  i>ha  'n  sin  eud. 

An  la'r  na  mliaireach  smaointich  e  gu'n  togadh  e  'mach  agus 
gun  d'  thugadh  e  Eirinn  air.  Thainig  e  gu  garadh  Aird  Inneas- 
dail  agus  splon  e  leis  se  ubhla  deug,  's  thainig  e'n  sin  gu  Maol  na 
h-Otha.  Thilg  e  ubhal  a  mach  's  an  fhairge  's  thug  e  ceum  urra. 
Thilg  e  'n  ath  te  agus  thug  e  ceum  eil'  urra.  Thilg  e,  mur  seo, 
te  an  deigh  te,  gus  an  d'  thainig  e  gus  an  t-seathamh  te  deug,  's 
thug  an  t-seatho  te  deug  air  tir  an  Eirinn  e. 

Nur  a  bha  e  air  tir  chrath  e  chluasan,  a's  smaointich  e  nach  b' 
aim  an  aite  suarrach  a  dh'  fhanadh  e. 

Ghluais  e  mar  mhuir-mhill  o  mhuir-mhill, 

'S  mar  mhire-bhuill  o  mhire-bhuill  ; 

Mar  ghaoith  ghailbheach  gheamhraidh, 

Gu  sitheach,  sothach,  sanntach, 

Sar-mheamnach, 

Ti  id  ghleanntann  as  ard-mhullach  ; 

'S  cha  d'  rinneadh  stad  leis 

Gus  an  d'  thainig  e 

Gu  cuirt  agus  cathair  0  Domhnuill. 

Thug  e  leum  sunndach,  soilleir 

Thar  barr  agus  baideil 

Cuirt  agus  cathair 

O  Domhnuill. 

Ghabh  0  Domhnuill  moran  feirg  agus  corruich  a  leithid  de 
shrutha  dhona,  ao-dhealbach  a  tighinn  a  stigh  d'  a  chuirt,  agus 
dorsair  a  bhith  aige  feiu  r'a  bhaile. 

"  Cha  chreid  mi  fein,"  ars'  an  ceathairneach,  "nach  'eil  thu 
'gabhail  feirg  agus  corruich  0  Domhnuill?" 

"  Mata  tha,"  ors'  0  Domhnuill,  "  na'm  biodh  fios  agam  co  ris 
a  liginn  a  mach  e  ? " 

"A  dhuine  mhath,"  ors'  an  Ceathairneach,  "cha  b'  fhasa 
dhomhsa-tighinn  a  stigh  na  dol  e  mach  a  rls." 

"Chad'theid  thu  'mach,"  ors' 0  Domhnuill,  "gus  an  innis 
thu  dhomhsa  co  as  a  thainig  thu." 


310  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

Thainig  mi  o  ghriobhaill  o  ghrabhaill, 

0  bhun  an  tobair  dhilinn, 

0  ghleann  aluinn  ealaich  ; 

Oidhch'  an  He  's  oidhch'  am  Manainn  ; 

Oidhch'  air  charna  fuara  faire  ; 

An  aodann  monaidh 

Am  baile  righ  Alba 

Rugadh  mi ; 

Cearnach  suarrach,  salach  mi, 

Gad  tharladh  air  a'  bhaile  seo  mi. 

"  D6,"  urs'  0  Domhnuill,  "  a  cheathairnich  a  dheanadh  thusa? 
's  cinnteach,  's  na  'shiubhail  thu  'dh'  astar  gu'n  deanadh  thu 
rudeigin." 

"  Bha  mi  uair,"  urs'  esan,  "agus  sheinninn  cruit." 

"Mata,"  urs'  0  Domhnuill,  " 's  ann  agam  fein  a  tha  na 
cruitearan  a's  fhearr  ann  an  coig  choigeamh  na  h-Eireann,  na'n 
Drochaid-cheudan  na  Mith  ;  mar  a  tha  Ruairidh  0  Cridheagan, 
Tormaid  0  Giollogan,  agus  Taog  O  Chuthag." 

"Cluinneam  a' seinn  eud,"  urs'  an  Ceathairneach.  Thoisich 
na  clarsairean. 

Sheinneadh  eud  puirt,  agus  uirt,  agus  orgain, 
Nitheanna  tearmad,  teudan  tairteil ; 
Curaidhean,  laoich,  as  aoig  air  an  casan  ; 
Aoig,  as  ainn,  as  galair,  as  fiabhrais  ; 
Chuireadh  eud  'nan  sion  sioram  suain 
An  saoghal  mor  gu  leir, 
Le  binnead  nam  port  shlogaidh 
A  sheinneadh  na  clarsairean. 

Cha  do  chord  an  ceol  ris  a'  Cheathairneach.  Eug  e  air  na 
clarsaichean,  's  phronn  e  f o  a  chasan  eud,  's  chuir  e  air  teinidh 
eud,  's  rinn  e  gharadh,  's  a  chruaidh-gharadh  riu. 

Ghabh  0  Domhnuill  moran  ardain  gun  d'  thanaig  duine  'stigh 
do  'n  chuirt  aige  'dheanadh  a  leithid  seo  air  na  clarsaichean. 

"  Cha  chreid  mi  fhein  a  dhuine  mhath  nach  'eil  thu'  gabhail 
corruich,"  ars'  an  Ceathairneach. 

"  Mata  tha,  nam  biodh  fhios'am  co  ris  a  liginn  a  mach  e." 

"Air  'ur  n-ais  a  dhuine  mhath  !  Cha  b'  fhasa  dhomhsa  do 
chlarsaichean  a  brisdeadh  na'n  slanachadh  a  ris  ! "  ars'  an  Ceath- 
airneach. 


AN   CEATHAIRNEACH  CAOL,    RIABHACH.  311 

"  Bheir  ini  ui  sam  bith  seachad  airson  an  slanachadh  arls," 
ars'  0  Domhnuill. 

"  Air  choig  mhairg  da  uair,  ni  mise  do  chlarsaichean  cho  math 
sa  bha  eud  roimhid,"  urs'  an  Ceathairneach. 

"  Gheibh  thu  sin,"  ars'  0  Domhnuill. 

Thug  0  Domhnuill  na  mairg  da  agus  rug  e  air  Ian  a  dha  bhoise 
do  'n  luaith,  's  rinn  e  clarsach  do  Ruairidh  0  Cridheagan,  's  te 
do  Thormaid  0  Giollagan,  's  te  do  Thaog  0  Chuthag  agus  clars- 
ach mhdr,  choirealach  da  fhe. 

11  Cluinneam  do  che61,"  ars'  O  Domhnuill. 

"  Cluinnidh  tu  sin  a  dhuine  mhath,"  urs'  an  Ceathairneach. 

Thoisich  an  Ceathairneach  air  seinn,  as,  och  !  b'  e  'm  balach 
air  chid  na  clarsaich  e  ! 

Sheinneadh  e  puirt,  agus  uirt,  agus  orgain, 
Nitheanna  tearmad  ;  teudan  tairteil ; 
Curaidhean,  laoich,  as  aoig  air  an  casan  ; 
Aoig,  as  ainn,  as  galair,  as  fiabhrais. 
'S  gun  cuirte  'nan  sion  sioram  suain, 
An  saoghal  mor  gu  leir, 
Le  binnead  a'  phuirt  shiogaidh, 
A  sheinneadh  an  Ceathairneach. 

M  'S  binn  thus'  a  Cheathairnich,"  ars'  O  Domhnuill. 

Nur  a  chuala  na  clarsairean  an  Ceathairneach  a'  seinn  thug 
eud  seombar  'eil'  orra,  's  gad  a  leanadh  e  fhathasd  cha  d'  thigeadh 
eud  an  lathair. 

Dh'  fhalbh  0  Domhnuill  's  chuir  e  comhnainn  bhidh  thun  a 
Ceathairnich. 

"  Abraibh  ris  an  duine  mhath  nach  bi  'n  uibhir  sin  aige  r'a 
mhuigheadh  ormsa  nur  a  dh'  fholbhas  mi  air  a'  mheadhon  lath' 
am  maireach,"  urs'  an  Ceathairneach. 

Ghabh  0  Domhnuill  moran  ardain  a  leithid  de  dhuine  'tighinn 
a  staigh  d'a  chuirt,  's  nach  gabhadh  e  biadh  uaidh.  Chuir  e  nios 
lein  air  ialtan  's  madal  donnain.  "  Ca'  'bheil  seo  a'  dol  ? "  urs'  an 
Ceathairneach.  "A  t'  ionnsuidh-sa,  'Cheathairneach,"  urs' 
eudsan.  "  Abraibh-se  ris  an  duine  mhath  nach  bi  'n  uibhir  sin 
aige  r'a  mhuigheadh  ormsa  nur  a  dh'  fholbhas  mi  air  a'  meadhan 
lath'  an  la'r  na  maireach,"  urs'  an  Ceathairheach.  Ghabh  0 
Domhnuill  moran  feirg  agus  corruich,  a  leithid  de  duine  'thighinn 
a  staigh  d'a  chuirt,   's  nach  ghabhadh  e  aona-chuid,  biadh  na 


312  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

aodach  uaidh.  Ckuir  e  'nios  c6ig  ciad  galloglach  a  dh'  fbaire 
'Cheathairnicb,  air  alt  's  nach  biodh  masladh  air  a  thoirt  do  dh' 
0  Domhnuill  le  e  'dhol  a  mach,  ratbad  sam  bitb  ach  air  an 
dorus." 

"  Ca'  'bheil  sibhse  'dol  ?  "  ars'  an  Ceathairneach. 

"  A  t'  fbaire-sa  'Cbeathairnicb,  air  alt  's  nacb  fhalbb  tbu, 
'tboirt  masladb  do  db'  0  Domhnuill,  gun  do  ligeil  a  mach  ach 
mar  is  c6ir  duit,"  urs'  eudsan. 

"  Laidhibh  sios  ann  an  sin,"  ars'  an  Ceatbairneach,  "  's  nur  a 
bbios  mise  'g  imeacbd  bbeir  mi  fios  duibb." 

Ghabh  eud  a  chomhairle,  's  laidh  eud  sios  lamh  ris,  's  nur  a 
bhrisd  am  faire  chaidb  an  Ceathairnich  'na  eideadh. 

"  Caite  'bheil  mo  luchd  faire-sa,  tba  mi  'g  imeacbd,"  ars' na 
Ceathairneacb. 

"  Na  'n  carachadh  thu,"  urs'  an  gall-oglach  mor,  "  dheanainn 
crupan  geur,  goirt  dbiot  leis  a'  bhdrd-urchair  so  a'm'  laimh." 

Leum  an  Ceathairneacb  air  barraibh  a  phutbag  's  chaidh  e  tbar 
barr  agus  baideil  cdirt  agus  catbair  0  Domhnuill.  Thilg  an 
galloglach  am  bord-urcbair  a  bba  'na  laimb,  's  mbarbh  e  ceithir 
pearsanna  fichead  de  dh'  fbior-mhuinntir  O  Domhnuill. 

Co  'choinnicb  an  Ceathairneach  ach  gille-leantainn  0  Domh- 
nuill, 's  thuirt  e  ris,  "Seo  dhuit  luigh  bheag,  bhiorach,  ghlas,  's 
tbeirig  a  staigh,  's  rub  ri  bilean  na  fheadhnach  a  mharbbadh  i,  's 
thoir  be6  eud,  's  coisinn  duit  fhein  fichead  mart  laoigh,  's 
amhairc  as  do  dheigh,  nur  a  dhealachas  tu  riumsa,  co  'chi  tbu 
teachd." 

Nur  a  rinn  an  gille-leantainn  seo  cha  'n  fbac  e  neach  a'  teachd  ; 
ach  cbunnaic  e  'n  Ceathairneach  tri  mile  deug  an  taobb  thall  de 
Luimineach. 

Ghluais  e  mar  mhuir-mhill  o  mhuir-mhill, 

'S  mar  mhire-bhuill  o  mhire-bhnill  ; 

Mar  gbaoith  ghailbheach  gheamhraidh, 

Gu  sitbeach,  sotbacb,  sanntacb, 

Sar-mheamnach, 

Trid  gbleanntan  as  ard-mhullach  ; 

'S  cha  d'  rinneadh  stad  leis, 

Gns  an  d'  rainig  e 

Mac  Seatbain,  an  t-Iarl  deas. 

Bhuail  e  amis  an  dorusd.  Thuirt  MacSeathain  an  t-Iarl  Deas 
ris,  "  Co  siod  'san  dorusd  ? " 


AN    CEATHAIRNEACH   CAOL,    RIABHACH.  313 

"Tha  mise,  Diiradan  0  Diiradan,"  urs'  an  Ceathairneach. 

Thnirt  MaeSoathan,  an  t-Iarl  Deas,  "Ligibh  a  staigh  Diiradan 
0  Diiradan  ;  cha  'n  fhaod  neach  a  bhith  a'm'  dhorusd-sa  'bualadh 
gun  faotainn  a  staigh." 

Lig  eud  a  staigh  e.  "  De"  'dh&anadh  thusa'  Dhuradain  O 
Diiradan  ?"  ars'  an  t-Iarl  Deas. 

11  Bba  mi  uair  's  dheanainn  cleas,"  ars  esan. 

"Mata  's  ann  agam  fhein  a  tha  'n  aona  chleasaiche  's  fhearr 
aim  an  coig  choigeamh  na  h-Eireann,  na  'n  Drochaid  cheudan  nam 
Mith,  mar  a  tha  Taog  pratach  Mac  a  Cheallaich." 

Fhuair  eud  a  nios  an  cleasaiche.  "  De,"  ursa  'n  t-Iarl  Deas, 
"  an  cleas  a  dheanadh  thusa,  Dhuradain  0  Diiradan. 

Mata  bha  mi  uair  's  bhogainn  a'  chluas  bhar  mo  leithcheinn," 
ars'  esan. 

Dh'  fholbh  an  Ceathairneach  's  thugar  a'  chluas  bhar  a  leith- 
cheinn. 

Orsa  Taog  pratach  a'  Cheallaich,  "  Dheanainn  fh^in  sin." 

Dh'  fholbh  e  's  thug  e  'nuas  a  chluas,  's  a  suas  cha  d'  thugadh 
e  i  !  ach  chuir  an  Ceathairneach  a  suas  a  chluas  fhein  mar  a  bha 
i  roimhid  ! 

Ghabh  an  t-Iarla  m6ran  feirg  agus  corruich  a'  chluas  a  bhith 
d'a  chleasaiche. 

"Air  choig  mhairg  da  uair,"  ars' an  Ceathairneach,  "  chuirinn- 
sa  'chluas  mar  a  bha  i  roimhid." 

Fhuair  e  na  coig  mhairg  da  uair,  's  chuir  e  'chluas  air'  a  chleas- 
aiche mar  a  bha  i  roimhid. 

"Tha  mi  'faicinn,"  ars'  an  t-Iarla,  "  gur  leat  fh&n  cleasachd 
na  h-oidhche  "nochd." 

Dh'  fholbh  Taog  pratach,  's  gad  a  dh'  fhanadh  eud  an  sin  fad 
na  h-oidhche,  cha  d'  thigeadh  e  a  'n  coir. 

Dh'  fholbh  an  Ceathairneach  an  sin,  's  chuir  e  dreumaire  mor 
suas  ris  a'  ghealaich  ;  's  chuir  e  ann  an  aon  aite  dheth  cu  agus 
gearraidh  ;  's  chuir  e  ann  an  aite  eile  dheth  bodach  agus  caile. 
Treis  as  a  dheigh  seo  dh'  fhosgail  e  'n  toiseach  far  an  do  chuir 
e  'n  cu  agus  an  gearradh  ;  's  bha  'n  cu  'g  itheadh  a'  ghearraidh. 
Bhuail  e  buille  de  dh'  oir  a  bhois'  air  a'  chu,  's  thilg  e  'n  ceann 
deth.  Dh'  fhosgail  e'  rithisd  far  an  robh  am  bodach  's  a'  chaile  ; 
's  bha  'm  bodach  a'  pogadh  na  caile.  Bhuail  e  buille  de  dh'  oir 
a  bhois'  air  's  thilg  e  'n  ceann  deth. 

"  Cha  bu  gheamha  learn,"  ars'  an  t-Iarl,  "  air  moran,  cu  agus 
bodach  a  bhith  air  am  marbhadh  ann  a'  m'  chuirt." 


314  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

"  Thoir  coig  mhairg  da  uair  airson  gach  aon  diu  's  cuiridh  mise 
na  cinn  orra  'ris,"  urs'  an  Ceathairneach. 

"Gheibh  thu  sin,"  ars'  an  t-Iarl  Deas. 

Fhuair  e  na  c6ig  mhairg  da  uair,  's  chuir  e  'n  ceann  air  a'  chu 
's  air  a'  bhodach  mar  a  bha  eud  roimhid  ;  'a  gad  a  bhiodh  eud 
be6  gus  an  seo,  cha  d'  thugadh  a  cu  lamh  air  gearraidh,  na  !m 
bodach  air  caile,  air  eagal  gun  tug-te  na  cinn  diu. 

An  la  'r  na  mhaireach,  an  deigh  am  bidh,  anns  a5  mhaidinn, 
chaidh  e  'shealgaireachd  leis  an  Iarla.  Nur  a  bha  eud  feadh  na 
coille  chual  eud  coireal  ann  an  torn. 

"Bhuam  seo,"  ursa  Duradan  0  Duradan  !  feumaidh  mi  dol  a 
dh'  amhare  cas  a'  Bhodaich  'Ic  Ceochd. 

Ghabh  e  'mach, 

'S  ghluais  e  mar  mhuir-mhill  o  mhur-mhill, 

'S  mar  mhire-bhuill  o  mhire-bhuill  ; 

Mar  ghaoith  ghailbheach  gheamhraidh, 

Gu  sitheach,  sothach,  sanntach, 

Sar-mheamnach, 

Trid  ghleanntan  as  ard-mhullach  ; 

Agus  stad  cha  d'  rinneadh  leis, 

Gus  an  d'  rainig  e, 

Taigh  a'  Bhodaich  'Ic  Ceochd. 

Bhuail  e  anns  an  dorusd.  "  Co  siod  ?  "  urs'  am  Bodach  Mac 
Ceochd. 

"  Mis  ?  "  urs'  esan,  "  Gill'  an  Leigh." 

"  Mata,"  urs'  am  bodach,  "  's  iomadh  leigh  dugh,  dona  'tighinn, 
's  cha  'n  'eil  eud  a'  deauadh  mir  feum  domhsa." 

"  Thugaibh  fios  do  'n  bhodach,  mar  an  lig  e  'staigh  mi,  gu'm 
bi  mi  'g  imeachd,"  ars'  an  Ceathairneach. 

"  Ligibh  a  staigh  Gill'  an  Leigh,  cha  lughaide  gur  h-ann  ann  a 
tha  mo  chobhair,"  ars'  am  Bodach  Mac  Ceochd. 

Lig  eud  a  staigh  e. 

"  Eirich  suas  a  Bhodaich  'Ic  Ceochd,  tha  thu  saor  o  chreuch- 
dan,"  urs'  an  Ceathairneach. 

Dh'  eiridh  am  Bodach  Mac  Ceochd  suas,  's  cha  robh  duin'  an 
Firinn  a  bu  luaithe  's  a  bu  laidireacha  na  e  ! 

"Laidh  slos  a  Bhodaich  'Ic  Ceochd  tha  thu  Ian  chreuchdan," 
ars'  an  Ceathairneach.  Laidh  am  Bodach  Mac  Ceochd  sios,  's 
bha  e  na  bu  mhiosa  na  bha  e  riabh  ! 


AX   CEATHAIRXEACH  CAOL,    RIABHACH.  315 

11  'S  olc  a  rinn  thu,"  urs'  am  Bodach  Mac  Ceochd,  "  mo  leigheas 
agus  mo  mhilleadh  a  rls." 

"A  dhuine  seo,"  ursa  Gill'  an  L6igh  ;  "cha  robh  mi  ach  a' 
ligeil  fhaicinn  duit  gum  b'urrainn  mi  do  leigheas  !  " 

"Cha  'n  'eil  agam,"  urs'  am  Bodach  Mac  Ceochd,  "ach  an 
aon  nighean  rls  an  t-saoghal,  's  geobh  thu  i,  's  leith  'sna  th'agam, 
's  mo  chuid  air  fad  nur  a  shiubhlas  mi,  agus  leighis  mo  chas." 

"  Cha'n  e  sin  mar  a  bhitheas,  ach  cuir  fios  air  a'  h-uile  leigh  a 
bh'agad,  's  gum  faighinn-sa  'bhith  bruidhinn  riutha,"  arsa  Gill' 
an  Leigh  ! 

Chuir  eud  fios  le  gillean-ruith,  feadh  ch6ig  choigeamh  na  h- 
Eireann,  airson  nan  lighichean  a  bha  'feitheamh  air  a'  bhodach  ; 
's  thainig  eud  air  fad,  a  saoilsinn  gu'faigheadh  eud  paigheaclh. 
Agus  nur  a  thainig  eud,  a'marcachd  gu  taigh  a'  Bhodaich,  chaidh 
an  Ceathairneach  a  mach  's  thuirt  e  riu. 

"  De  'thug  dhuibhse  cas  a'  Bhodaich  'Ic  Ceochd  a  mhilleadh, 
's  e  fhein  a  chur  fo  ainbheach  mur  seo  ?  " 

"Mata,"  urs'  eudsan,  "na'n  togamaide  luach  ar  cungan,  gun 
tighinn  air  luach  ar  saoithreach,  cha  'n  fhagamaid  luach  a  bhrog 
aige  ris  an  t-saoghal." 

Ursa  Gill'  an  Leigh  !  "  Cuiridh  mi  geall  ruibh  ;  agus  's  e  sin 
Ian  mo  churraichd  do  dh'  or  a  chur  aig  ceann  na  dalach  ud  shuas, 
's  nach  'eil  gin  an  Eirinn  a  bhios  aige  na  's  luaithe  na'm  Bodach 
Mac  Ceochd  ! " 

Chuir  e'n  currachd  Ian  6ir  aig  ceann  na  dalach  ;  's  chuir  na 
leighean  geall  ris  nach  b'urrainn  siod  a  bhith. 

Chaidh  e  'staigh  far  an  robh  'm  Bodach  Mac  Ceochd,  's  thuirt 
e  ris. 

"  Eirich  a  Bhodaich  'Ic  Ceochd,  tha  thu  slan  'o  chreuchdan  ! 
Chuir  mi  geall  as  do  leith."  Dh'  eiridh  am  Bodach  Mac  Ceochd 
gu  slan,  fallan,  s'  chaidh  e  mach,  's  bha  e  thri  ceumannan  aig  a' 
churrachd  oir,  's  dh'  fhag  e  fad'  air  deireadh  na  leighean. 

Cha  d'  iarr  na  leighean  an  seo  ach  na  'm  faigbeadh  eud  am 
beatha  leo  !  Gealladh  air  a'  siod  cha  d'  fhuair  eud  !  Chaidh 
gill'  an  leigh  air  doigh  ! 

Sparr  e  'chuilionn  'na  dhorn,  as  ghlac  e'n  lamh-lochdair  liath  a 
bh'  air  taobh  piar  a  tboine,  's  thug  e  focha  's  tharta,  's  frid  as 
rompa  ;  's  cha  d'  fhag  e  fear  innseadh  sgeoil  na  chosnadh  tuaras- 
dail  nach  do  mharbh  e  ! 

Nur  a  bha  'm  bodach  leighiste  chuir  e  fios  air  maithibh  's  air 


316  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

m6r-uaislean  na  h-Eireann  thun  banais  a  nighinn  's  a'  Cheathair- 
nich,  's  bha  eud  a'  cruinneachadh  as  gach  cearn. 

"  De  'chuideachd  a  tha  'n  siod  ?  "  arsa  Gill'  an  Leigh  !  "  Tha 
'n  siod  cuideachd  na  bainns'  agad  fhein,  's  eud  a  cruinneachadh 
as  gach  Jeith  agus  as  gach  taobh,"  urs'  am  Bodach  Mac  Ceochd. 
"  Bhuam  seo,"  ars'  esan,  "  tha  fasdadh  bliadhn'  aig  0  Conachar 
an  Sligeach  orm  ; "  's  chuir  e  dail  bliadhna  's  a'  phosadh. 

Ghabh  e  'mach  mar  mhuir-mhill  o  mhuir-mhill, 

'S  mar  mhire-bhuill  o  mhire-bhuill ; 

Mar  ghaoith  ghailbheach  gheamhraidh  ; 

Gu  sitheach,  sothach,  sanntach, 

Sar-mheamnach, 

Trld  ghleanntan  as  ard-mhullach  ; 

'S  cha  d'  rinneadh  stad  leis, 

Gus  an  do  bhuail  e  ann  an  dorusd 

0  Conachar  Sligeach. 

"Co  siod  ?"  urs'  0  Conachar  Sligeach. 

"Mis',"  urs'  esan,  "  Buachaille  Math."  "  Ligibh  a  staigh 
Buachaille  Math,"  ars'  0  Conachar  Sligeach  ;  "  chionn  tha  feum 
m6r  agams'  air  anns  an  am  seo." 

Lig  eud  a  staigh  e. 

11  De  'dheanadh  thusa  'Bhuachaill  ?  "  ors'  0  Conachar  Sligeach. 

"Tha  mi  'cluinntinn,"  ors'  e  ri  0  Conachar  Sligeach,  "gu 
'bheil  an  toir  ort."  "Tha,"  urs'  O  Conachar  Sligeach.  "Ma 
chumas  tusa  mach  an  tdir  ;  cumaidh  mise  staigh  a'  chreach  ?  " 
arsa  Buachaille  Math  !  "  De  'n  tuarasdal  a  ghabhas  tu  ?  "  ars' 
O  Conachar  Sligeach. 

"  Se  'n  tuarasdal  a  ghabhas  mi,  nach  dean  thu  leath-chomaith 
orm  gu  ceann  lath'  as  bliadhna,"  arsa  Buachaille  Math  ! 

Rinn  O  Conachar  Sligeach  an  cumhnanta  seo  ris.  Chaidh  am 
buachaille  'bhuachailleachd. 

Bhrisd  an  toir  a  staigh  air  0  Conachar  Sligeach,  's  thug  eud 
orra  far  an  robh  'm  buachaill'  a  thogail  na  creiche.  Nur  a 
chunnaic  am  buachaille  gun  do  bhrisd  eud  a  staigh,  ghabh  e 
'chuilionn  'na  dhorn,  as  ghlac  e  'n  lamh-lochdair  liath  a  bh'  air 
taobh  piar  a  th6ine  ;  's  cha  d'  fhag  e  fear  innseadh  sgeoil  na 
'chosnadh  tuarasdail  an  sin  nach  do  mharbh  e  !  Chaidh  e  staigh 
do  bhothag  airich,  agus  e  teith,  's  chunnaic  e  0  Conachar  Sligeach 
an  deigh  miodar  bairn  agus  bainne  'chriochanachadh  d'a  61. 


AN    CKATIIAIRNEACH  CAOL,    RIABHACH.  317 

"Fliiannis  air  Dia  's  air  daoine  gu  'n  do  bhrisd  thu  do  gheal- 
ladh  !  "  arsa  Buachaille  Math  ! 

"  Cha  'n  fhearr  an  Ian  'ud  na  Ian  eile,"  ars'  0  Conachar  Slig- 
each. 

"  An  Ian  ud  fhein  gheall  thu  dhorahsa,"  arsa  Buachaille  Math  ! 

Ghahh  e  corruich  ri  0  Conachar  Sligeach,  's  dh'  fholbh  e  's 
rainig  e  taigh  a'  Bhodaich  'Ic  Ceochd.  Binn  nighean  a'  bhodaich 
deoch  dha  de  dh'  ubhlan  reim  's  de  bhainne  blath,  's  thachdadh  e. 

'S  dhealaich  mise  riu  ;  s  thug  eud  dhomh  im  air  eibhleig,  's 
brochan-cail  an  creileig,  'a  broga  paipeir,  's  chuir  eud  air  folbh 
mi  le  peileir  gunna-mhoir  'air  rathad-mdr  gloine  gus  an  d'  fhag 
eud  a'm'  shuidhe  'staigh  an  seo  mi. 


SECOND  VERSION. 
THE  HISTOEY  OF   THE  CEABHAKNACH. 

From  John  Campbell,  Strath  Gearloch,  Ross-shire. 

AN  the  day  when  O'Donull  came  out  to  hold  right 
^  and  justice,  he  saw  a  young  chap  coming.  His 
two  shoulders  were  through  his  old  Suainaiche  (sleep- 
ing coat  ?)  his  two  ears  through  his  old  aide,  hat,  his 
two  squat  kick-er-ing  tatter-y  shoes  full  of  cold  road- 
way-ish  water,  three  feet  of  his  sword  sideways  on  the 
side  of  his  haunch,  after  the  scabbard  had  ended. 

He  blest  with  easy  true-wise  maiden's  words. 

O'Donull  blest  him  in  the  like  of  his  own  words. 

O'Donull  asked  him  what  was  his  art  ? 

"I  could  do  harping,"  said  the  Ceabharnach. 

"There  are  twelve  men  with  me,"  said  O'Donull, 
"  and  we  will  go  to  look  on  them." 

"  I  am  willing  to  do  that,"  said  the  Ceabharnach. 

When  they  went  in  O'Donull  asked  them  to  begin. 
"  Hast  thou  ever  heard  music,  oh  Ceabharnach,  finer 
than  that  1 " 

"  I  came  past  by  the  Isle  of  Cold,  and  I  did  not  hear 
a  screech  in  it  that  was  more  hideous  than  that." 

"  Wouldst  thou  play  a  harp  thyself,  Ceabharnach  ?  " 
said  O'Donull. 

"  Here  is  her  player,  and  who  should  not  play  !  " 

"  Give  him  a  harp,"  said  O'Donull. 

"  Well  canst  thou  play  a  harp,"  said  O'Donull. 


THE   HISTORY   OF  THE   CEABHARNACH.  319 

"It  is  not  as  thou  pleascst  but  as  I  please  myself, 
since  I  am  at  work." 

The  music  of  the  Ceabharnach  put  every  harper 
O'Donull  had  asleep. 

"  I  will  be  taking  fare  thee  well,"  said  the  Ceabhar- 
nach to  O'Donull. 

"  Thou  wilt  not  do  that  to  me,"  said  O'Donull, 
"  thou  must  awaken  my  men." 

"  I  am  going  to  take  a  turn  through  Eirinn,"  said  the 
Ceabharnach  ;  "  if  I  come  the  way  they  will  see,  and  if 
I  come  not  they  will  be  thus  with  thee." 

He  left  him,  and  he  met  with  one  herding.  "  Thy 
master's  harpers  are  asleep,  and  they  will  not  wake  till 
they  are  awakened.  Go  thou  and  awaken  them,  and 
thou  wilt  get  what  will  make  a  rich  man  of  thee  !  " 

"  How  shall  I  do  that  ? "  asked  the  herd. 

"  Take  a  tuft  of  that  grass  and  dip  it  in  water,  and 
shake  it  on  them,  and  thou  wilt  awaken  them." 

He  left  the  man,  and  he  reached  Seathan  mor  mac 
AN  Iarle,  great  Seathan  the  son  of  the  Earl,  thirteen 
miles  on  the  western  side  of  Lumraig. 

He  saw  a  young  chap  coming;  his  two  shoulders 
were  through  his  old  coat,  his  two  ears  through  his  old 
hat,  his  shoes  full  of  cold  roadway-ish  water,  three  feet 
of  his  sword  sideways  on  the  side  of  his  haunch  after 
the  scabbard  was  ended. 

He  asked  him  what  was  his  trade  1  He  said  that  he 
could  do  juggling. 

"  I  have  jugglers  myself ;  we  will  go  to  look  on 
them.*' 

"  I  am  willing  enough,"  said  the  Ceabharnach. 

"Shew  thy  juggling,"  said  the  great  Seathan,  "till 
we  see  it." 


320  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

He  put  three  straws  on  the  back  of  his  fist  and  he 
blew  them  off  it. 

"  If  I  should  get  half  five  marks,"  said  one  of  the 
king's  lads,  "  I  would  make  better  juggling  than  that." 

"  I  will  give  thee  that,"  said  the  Ceabharnach. 

He  put  three  straws  on  the  back  of  his  fist  and  the 
fist  went  along  with  the  straws. 

"  Thou  art  sore,  and  thou  wilt  be  sore,"  said  his 
master  ;  "my  blessing  on  the  hand  that  gave  it  to  thee." 

"  I  will  do  other  juggles  for  thee,"  said  the  Ceabhar- 
nach. 

He  caught  a  hold  of  his  own  ear,  and  he  gave  a 
pull  at  it. 

"  If  I  could  get  half  five  marks,"  said  another  of  the 
king's  lads,  "  I  would  make  a  better  juggle  than  that." 

"  I  will  give  thee  that,"  said  the  Ceabharnach. 

He  gave  a  pull  at  the  ear  and  the  head  came  away 
with  the  ear. 

"  I  am  going  away,"  said  the  Ceabharnach. 

"  Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  set  of  men  so." 

"  I  am  for  taking  a  turn  through  Eirinn.  If  I 
come  the  way  I  will  see  them,  and  if  I  come  not  they 
will  be  so  along  with  thee." 

He  went  away,  and  he  met  with  a  man  threshing  in 
a  barn.  He  asked  him  if  his  work  could  keep  him 
up. 

"It  was  no  more  than  it  could  do." 

"I,"  said  the  Ceabharnach,  "will  make  thee  a  free 
man  for  thy  life.  There  are  two  of  thy  master's  lads, 
one  with  his  fist  off,  and  one  with  his  head  off.  Go 
there  and  put  them  on  again,  and  thy  master  will  make 
thee  a  free  man  for  life." 

"With  what  shall  I  bring  them  alive  ?" 


THE    HISTORY   OF  THE   I  EABHARNACH.  321 

"Take  a  tuft  of  grass,  hold  it  in  water,  shake  it  on 
them,  and  thou  wilt  heal  them." 

He  went  away  and  he  came  to  Fear  chuigeamh 
MUGHA,*  a  nasty  man  that  could  not  bear  a  man  to  go 
the  way  of  his  house,  to  look  at  him  when  he  was 
taking  his  food.  There  were  twelve  men  with  axes  at 
the  outer  gate,  and  twelve  men  of  swords  on  the  inner 
gate ;  a  porter  at  the  great  door. 

They  saw  a  young  chap  coming,  his  two  shoulders 
through  his  old  coat,  his  two  ears  through  his  old  hat, 
his  two  squat  kick-ering  tatter-y  shoes  full  of  cold 
roadway-ish  water. 

He  asked  their  license  in  to  see  Fear  Chuigeamh 
Mugha. 

One  of  them  raised  his  axe  to  drive  his  head  off,  but 
so  it  was  that  he  struck  it  on  his  own  comrade. 

They  arose  on  each  other  till  they  killed  each  other ; 
and  he  came  to  the  men  of  the  sword,  one  raised  his 
sword  to  strike  off  his  head,  but  he  cut  the  head  off  his 
comrade  with  it,  and  they  all  fell  to  slaying  each  other. 

He  reached  the  porter ;  he  caught  him  by  the  small 
of  the  legs,  and  he  struck  his  head  on  the  door. 

He  reached  the  great  man  as  he  sat  at  his  dinner ;  he 
stood  at  the  end  of  the  board. 

"Oh  evil  man,"  said  the  king,  "great  was  thy  loss 
before  thou  earnest  here,"  as  he  rose  to  catch  hold  of  his 
sword  to  strike  his  head  off.  His  hand  stuck  to  the 
sword,  and  his  seat  stuck  to  the  chair,  and  he  could  not 
rise;  no  more  could  his  wife  leave  her  own  place. 
When  he  had  done  all  he  wished  he  went  away,  and  he 
met  a  poor  man  that  was  travelling  the  world. 

"If  thou  wilt  take  my  advice,"  said  the  Ceabharnach, 

*  The  man  of  Munster,  Cuige  mumhe. 
F  2 


322 


WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 


" 1  will  make  a  lucky  man  of  thee  as  long  as  thou  art 
alive." 

"  How  wilt  thou  do  that  ?"  said  the  man. 

"  The  king  and  the  queen  are  fast  in  their  chairs ;  go 
thou  and  loose  them,  and  the  king  will  make  a  great 
man  of  thee." 

"  How  shall  I  loose  them  V1 

"  Shake  water  on  them  and  they  will  arise." 

He  went  out  of  that,  and  he  reached  Rob  Mac 
Sheoic  Mhic  Lagain  with  a  pain  in  his  foot  for  seven 
years. 

He  struck  palm  to  bar.  The  porter  asked  "Who 
was  there  V1 

He  said  there  was  a  leech. 

"  Many  a  leech  has  come,"  said  the  porter.  "  There 
is  not  a  spike  on  the  town  without  a  leech's  head  but 
one,  and  may  be  it  is  for  thy  head  that  one  is." 

"It  might  not  be,"  said  the  Ceabharnach.  "Let  me 
in." 

"What  is  putting  upon  thee,  Rob?"  said  the 
Ceabharnach. 

■ '  My  foot  is  taking  to  me  these  seven  years.  She 
has  beat  the  leech  and  leeches." 

"Arise  and  stretch  out  thy  foot  with  the  stitch,"  said 
the  Ceabharnach;  "and  let's  try  if  thou  canst  catch 
the  twelve  leeches,  or  if  the  twelve  leeches  will  catch 
thee." 

He  arose,  no  man  could  catch  him ;  and  he  himself 
could  catch  every  other  one. 

"  I  have  but  one  begotten,  a  champion  of  a  girl,  and 
I  will  give  her  to  thee  and  half  my  realm." 

"Be  she  good  or  bad,"  said  the  Ceabharnach,  "let 
her  be  mine  or  thine." 

An  order  was  made  for  a  wedding  for  the  Ceabh- 


THE   HISTORY  OF  THE  CEABHARNACH.  323 

arnach ;  but  when  they  had  got  the  wedding  in  order, 
he  was  swifter  out  of  the  town  than  a  year-old  hare. 
He  came  to  Taog  O-Ceallaidh,  who  was  going  to 
raise  the  spoil  of  Cailliche  Buidhnk  hi:. 

A  young  chap  was  seen  coming,  his  two  shoulders 
through  his  old  coat,  his  two  ears  through  his  old  hat, 
his  two  squat  kick-ering  tatter-y  shoes  full  of  cold  road- 
way-ish  water,  three  feet  of  his  sword  sideways  on  the 
side  of  his  haunch  after  the  scabbard  was  ended. 

"  What's  this  that  puts  on  thee  ? "  said  the  Ceabh- 
arnach.     "  Hast  thou  need  of  men  ?  " 

"Thou  wilt  not  make  a  man  for  me,"  said  O-Ceal- 
laidh. 

"Shall  I  not  get  a  man's  share  if  I  do  a  man's 
share?" 

"  What's  thy  name  1 "  said  Taog. 

"There  is  on  me  (the  name  of)  Ceabharanach 
Saothrach  Suarach  Siubhail — the  servile,  sorry,  strolling 
kern." 

"  What  art  thou  seeking  for  thy  service  ? " 

"  I  am  but  asking  that  thou  shouldst  not  forget  my 
drink." 

"  Whence  earnest  thou  ?  " 

"  From  many  a  place  ;  but  I  am  an  Albanach." 

They  went  to  raise  the  raid  of  the  carlin.  They 
raised  the  spoil,  but  they  saw  the  following  coming. 

"Be  stretching  out,"  said  great  Taog  to  the  Ceabh- 
arnach,  "  Thou  wilt  not  make  thy  legs  at  least. 
Whether  wouldst  thou  rather  turn  the  chase  or  drive 
the  spoil  with  thy  set  of  men  1 " 

"  I  would  not  turn  the  chase,  but  if  the  chase  would 
turn,  we  would  drive  the  spoil  at  least." 

The  Ceabharnach  cut  a  sharp,  hard  whistle,  and  the 
drove  lay  down  on  the  road. 


324  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

He  turned  to  meet  them.  He  caught  each  one  of 
the  slenderest  legs,  and  the  biggest  head,  and  he  left 
them  stretched  legs  on  head.  He  returned  after  the 
spoil. 

"  Thyself  and  thy  lot  of  men  can  hardly  drive  the 
spoil." 

"  The  spoil  will  never  get  up,"  said  Taog. 

He  cut  a  whistle  :  the  drove  got  up,  and  he  drove  it 
home. 

It  happened  that  the  great  man  forgot  to  give  the 
first  drink  to  the  Ceabharnach. 

"Mine  is  the  half  of  the  spoil,"  said  the  Ceabharn- 
ach. 

"  That  is  more  than  much  for  thee,"  said  the  king. 

"Many  a  time  was  I,"  said  the  Ceabharnach,  "and 
Murcha  MacBrian  hewing  shields  and  splitting  blades ; 
his  was  the  half  of  the  spoil,  and  mine  was  the  other 
half." 

"If  thou  art  a  comrade  of  that  man,  thou  shalt  have 
half  the  spoil,"  said  Taog. 

But  he  went  away,  and  he  left  themselves  and  the 
sp  il. 

"Health  be  with  thee,  oh  Ceabharnach.  Arise  not 
for  ever." 


EACHDRAIDH  A'  CHEABHARNAICH. 

An  latha  'n  d'  thainig  0  Domhnuill  a  mach  a  chumail  c6ir  agus 
ceartais,  chunnaic  e  dglach  a'  tighinn.  Bha  'dha  ghuallainn  trld 
a  sheann  suanaiche  ;  a  dha  chluais  trid  a  slieann  aide  ;  a  dha 
bhroig  cheigeanach.  bhreabanach,  riobanach,  Ian  a  dh'  uisge  fuar 
rodanaeh  ;  tri  triodhean  dhe'n  chlaidheamh  air  an  taobh  siar  dhe 
'thoin,  an  deign  dh'an  scabard  teireachduinn.  Bheannaich  e  le 
briathraibh  farasda,  fior-ghlic,   mine,  maighdeana.     Bheannaich 


EACHDRAIDH  A'  CHEABHARNAICH.       325 

0  Domhnuill,  dha  air  chomain  a  bhriathraibh  fein.  Dh'  fheoraich 
O  Domhnuill  deth  ciod  bu  nos  da.  "  Dheanainn  clarsaireachd,' 
ars'  an  Ceabharnach.  "  Tha  da  fhear  dheug  agam  fh&n,"  ars'  O 
Domhnuill,  "  's  theid  sinn  a  shealtainn  orra."  "  Tha  mi  toileach 
sin  a  dheanamh,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach. 

An  uair  a  chaidh  iad  a  steach  dh'  iarr  0  Domhnuill  orra 
toiseachadh,  's  thoisich  iad.  "  An  cual  thu  ceol  riamh,  a 
Ceabharnaich  a  's  breagba  na  sin  V  ars'  O  Domhnuill.  "  Thainig 
mi  seachad  air  Ifrinn  ;  's  cha  chuala  mi  sgread  innte  's  grainnde 
na  sin  !"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach. 

"  An  seinneadh  tu  f&n  cruit,  a  Cheabharnaich,"  ars'  0 
Domhnuill. 

"So  a  sheinneadair  ! — agus  co  nach  seinneadair  ! !  ars'  an 
Ceabharnach  ! 

"Thugaibh  cruit  dha,"  ars'  0  Domhnuill. 

"  Is  math  a  sheinneas  tusa  cruit  !  "  ars'  0  Domhnuill. 

"  Cha'n  ann  mar  thogras  tusa,  ach  mar  a  thogras  mi  fein  ;  oir 
is  mi  'tha  'g  obair,"  ars'  esan. 

Chuir  ceol  a  Cheabharnaich  na-h-uile  clarsair  a  bh'  aig  O 
Domhnuill  'na  chadal. 

"  Bithidh  mis' a  gabhail  slan  leat,"  ars  an  Ceabharnach  ri  O 
Domhnull. 

"  Cha  dean  thu  sin  ormsa,"  ars'  0  Domhnuill ;  "feumaidh  tu 
mo  dhaoine  'dhusgadh." 

"  Tha  mi  'dol  a  thoirt  sgriob  feadh  Eirinn,"  ars'  an  Ceabhai- 
nach ;  "ma  thig  mi  'n  rathad  chi  iad,  agus  mur  d' thig  biodh 
iad  mar  sin  agad  f&n." 

Dh'  fhag  se  e  agus  thachair  e  air  fear  a  buachailleachd. 

"Tha  clarsairean  do  mhaighstir  'nan  cadal,"  ars'  an  Ceabhar- 
nach ris  a'  bhuachaille,"  agus  cha  duisg  iad  gus  an  duisgeariad. 
Falbh  thus'  agus  duisg  iad,  's  gheibh  thu  na  ni  duine  beartach 
dhiot." 

"  Cionnus  a  ni  mi  sin  ?"  thuirt  am  buachaille. 

"  Gabh  bad  de'n  fheur  sin,  agus  turn  ann  an  uisg'  e,  agus  crath 
orr' e,  's  duisgidh  tu  iad,"  ars' an  Ceabharnach.  Dh'  fhag  e'n 
duine,  's  rainig  e  Seathan  m6r  Mac  an  Iarla,  tri  mile  deug  an 
taobh  siar  de  Lumraig. 

Chunnaic  e  oglach  a'  tighinn.  Bha  'dha  ghualainn  trid  a 
sheann  suanaiche,  a  dha  chluais  trid  a  sheann  aide,  a  dha  bhroig 
Ian  a  dh'  uisge  fuar,  rodanach,  tri  troidhean  dhe  'n  chlaidheamh 
air  an  taobh  siar  dhe  thoin,  an  deigh  dli'an  scabard  teireachdainn. 


326  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

Dh'  fheoraich  e  dheth  ciod  bu  nos  dha.  Thuirt  e  gu'n  deanadh 
e  cleasachd. 

"  Tha  cleasaichean  agam  fein  ;  theid  sinn  a  dh'  amharc  orra." 

"  Tha  mi  gle  dhe6nach,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach. 

"Nochd  do  chleasachd,"  ars'  an  Seathan  m5r,"  ach  am  faic 
sinn  e.  Chuir  e  tri  strabhan  air  cul  a  dhuirn  agus  sheid  e  dbeth 
iad. 

"Na  'm  faigbinn-sa, "  orsa  fear  de  gbillean  an  righ,"  leith 
chuig  mhairg,  dheanainn  cleasachd  a  b'  fhearr  na  sin. 

"Bheir  mise  sin  duit,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach. 

Chuir  e  tri  straibhean  air  cul  a  dhuirn,  agus  dh'  fhalbh  an  dorn 
maille  ris  na  straibhean. 

"  Tha  thu  goirt,  agus  bidh  tu  goirt,"  ars'  a  mhaighstir.  "  Mo 
bheannachd  air  an  laimh  a  thug  dhuit  e." 

*'  Ni  mi  cleasachd  eile  dhuit,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach. 

Rug  e  air  a'  chluais  aige  fein,  agus  thug  e  tarruinn  oirre. 

"Na  'm  faighinn-sa  leith  chuig  mheirg,"  arsa  fear  eiP  de 
ghillean'  an  righ,  "  dheannain  cleasachd  a  b'  fhearr  na  sin." 

"  Bheir  mise  sin  duit,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach. 

Thug  e  tarruinn  air  a  chluais,  's  thainig  an  ceann  leis  a  chluais. 

"  Tha  mi  'falbh,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach. 

"Cha  'n  fhag  thu  mo  chuid  daoine-sa  agam  mar  sin." 

"Tha  mi  'dol  a  thoirt  sgriob  feadh  Eirinn  ;  ma  thig  mi  'n 
rathad  chi  mi  iad,  agus  mar  d'  thig  biodh  iad  mar  sin  agad  fein," 
ars'  an  Ceabharnach. 

Dh'  fhalbh  e  agus  thachair  e  air  duine  'bualadh  ann  an  sabbal, 
agus  dh'  fheoraich  e  dheth  am  b'  urrainn  'obair  a  chumail  suas. 

"  Cha  mhor  nach  b'  uilear  dhomh  e,"  ars'  am  fear  bualaidh. 

"  Ni  mis',"  ars  an  Ceabharnach,  "  duine  saor  dhlot  ri  d'  bhe6. 
Tha  dithis  de  ghillean  do  mhaigstir,  's  fear  's  an  dorn  dheth,  agus 
fear  eile  's  an  ceann  deth  ;  falbh  thus'  agus  cuir  orr'  iad,  's  ni  do 
mhaighstir  duine  saoibhir  dhiot  ri  d'  bheo." 

"Co  leis  a  bheir  mi  bed  iad  ? "  ars'  am  fear  a  bha  'bualadh. 

"Gabh  bad  fodair  ;  turn  ann  an  uisg  'e,  crath  orr'  e,  agus  ni 
thu  'n  leigheas,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach. 

Dh'  fhalbh  e,  agus  thainig  e  gu  fear  chuigeamh  Mhumha,  duine 
mosach  nach  fuilingeadh  do  dhuine  'dhol  rathad  a  thaighe  ;  gu 
h-araid  an  uair  a  bhiodh  e  'gabhail  a  bhidhe.  Bha  dha  dheug  a 
luchd-thuadhan  air  a'  gheata  'muigh ;  a  dha  dheug  a  luchd- 
chlaidhean  air  a'  gheata  'staigh  ;  dorsair  air  an  dorus  mhdr. 
Chunnaic  iad  6glach  a'  tighinn ;  a  dha  ghualainn  tiid  a  sheann 


KACHDRAIDH  A'   CHEABHARNAICH.  327 

suanaicbe  ;  a  cilia  chluais  trid  a  sheann  aide ;  a  dha  bhroig 
cheigeanach,  bhreabanach,  riobanach,  Ian  a  dh'  uisge  fuar,  rodan- 
ach. 

Dh'  iarr  e  'chead  orra  'staigh  a  dh'  fhaicinn  Fear  Chuigeamh 
Mhumha.  Thog  fear  dhiu  a  thuadh  gus  an  ceann  a  chur  dhetb, 
ach  's  ann  a  bhuail  e  air  a  chompanach  i.  Dh'  eirich  iad  air  a 
chcile,  gus  an  do  mharbh  iad  a  ch&le.  Thainig  e  gu  luchd  nan 
claidhean.  Thog  fear  a  chlaidhe  gus  an  ceann  a  chur  dheth,  ach 
ghearr  e  'n  ceann  d'a  chompanach,  agus  dh'  eirich  iad  uile  'mhar- 
bhadh  a  cheile.  Rainig  e  'n  dorsair.  Rug  e  air  chaol  chasan  air 
agus  bhuail  e  cheann  ris  an  dorus.  Rainig  e  'n  duine  m5r,  agus 
e  'na  shuidhe  aig  a  dhithit.     Sheas  e  aig  ceann  a'  bhiiird. 

"O'Dhroch  Dhuine  !"  ars'  an  rlgh,  "  bu  mhor  do  chall  mu  'n 
d'  thainig  thu  'n  so  !  "  agus  e  'g  eiridh  's  a'  breith  air  a'  chlaidhe, 
gus  a'  cheann  a  thoirt  deth.  Lean  a  lamh  ris  a  chlaidhe,  agus 
lean  a  mhas  ris  a'  chaithir,  agus  cha  b'  urrainn  a  bhean  a  h-aite 
fein  f  hagail. 

An  uair  a  rinn  e  na  h-uile  ni  'bu  mhiann  leis  dh'  fhalbh  e,  agus 
thachair  e  air  duine  bochd  a  bba  'falbh  an  t-saoghail.  "Ma 
ghabhas  tu  mo  chomhairle-sa,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach  ris  an  duine 
bhochd,  "ni  mi  duine  soria  dhiot  fhad  's  is  beo  thu." 

"  Cionnus  a  ni  thu  sin  ? "  ars'  an  duine  bochd. 

"  Tha  'n  rlgh  agus  a'  bhan-righ  le  'm  masan  ceangailte  ri 'n 
caithrichean  ;  falbh  thus'  agus  fuasgail  iad,  agus  ni  n  rlgh  duine 
m6r  dhlot,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach. 

"  Cionnus  a  dh'  fhuasglas  mis'  iad?"  ars'  an  duine  bochd. 

11  Crath  uisg'  orra  agus  eiridh  iad,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach. 

"  Dh'  fhalbh  e  as  a'  sin,  agus  rainig  e  Rob  Mac  Sheoic  Mhic  a' 
Lagain,  agus  e  fuidh  eucail  'na  chois  fad  sheachd  bliadhna. 
Bhuail'  e  bas  ri  crann.  Dh'  fhedraich  an  dorsair  co  'bh'  ann. 
Thuirt  esan  gu  'robh  leighiche. 

"  'S  iomadh  leighiche  'thainig,"  ars'  an  dorsair;  "cha'n'eil 
ceann  stop  's  a'  bhaile  gun  cheann  leighich'  ach  an  t-aon  ;  agus, 
dh'  fhaododh  e  'bhith  gur  h-ann  airson  do  chinn-sa  'tha  'm  fear 
shin." 

"  Cha  'n  fhaodadh,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach  ;  "  leig  a  stigh  mi." 

"  Ciod  a  tha  'cur  ort  a  Rob  ?  "  ars'  an  Ceabharnach. 

"  Tha,  mo  chas  a'  gabhail  rium  o  cheann  sheachd  bliadhna. 
Dh'  fhairtlich  i  air  leigh  agus  leighichean,"  arsa  Rob  Mac  Sheoic 
'Ic  a'  Lagain. 


328  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES. 

"Sin  do  chas  uait,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach,  "dh'  fheuchainn  am 
beir  thu  air  an  da  leigh  dheug,  no  'm  beir  an  da  leigh  dheug  ort." 

Dh'  eirich  e.  Cha  bheireadk  duine  sam  bith  airsan,  agus 
bheireadh  e  fein  air  nan  h-uile  fear  eile  ! 

"Cha  'n  eil  agam  ach  aon-ghin  buadhach  nighinn,"  orsa  Rob, 
"agus  bheir  mi  dhuit  i,  agus  leith  mo  rioghachd." 

"  Math  no  olc,"  i,  ars'  an  Ceabharnach,  "bidh  agamsa  no  agad 
fein." 

Chaidh  ard  a  chur  air  banais  do  'n  Cheabharnach  ;  ach  'nuair 
a  bha  iad  an  deigh  a'  bhanais  ullachadh,  bu  luaith'  e  as  a'  bhaile 
na  gearr-bhliadhnach.  Thainig  e  gu  Taog  m6r  0  Ceallaidh,  agus 
e  'dol  a  thogail  ereach  na  cailliche  Buidhniche. 

Chuncas  6glach  a'  tighinn, 

A  dha  ghualainn  trid  a  sheann  suanaiche  ; 

A  dha  chluais  trid  a  sheann  aide  ; 

A  dha  bhroig  cheigeanach,  bhreabanach,  riobanach, 

Lan  a  dh'  uisge  fuar,  rodanach  ; 

Tri  troidhean  dhe  'n  chlaidheamh 

Air  an  taobh  siar  d'a  dheireadh. 

An  d&gh  do  'n  truaill  teireachdainn. 

"Ciod  so  'tha  'cur  ort?"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach  ri  Taog  mor  O 
Ceallaidh,  "  Am  bheil  feum  dhaoin'  ort  ?  " 

"Cha  dean  thusa  duine  dhomh,"  ars'  0  Ceallaidh. 

"Nach  faigh  mi  cuid  fir  ma  ni  mi  cuid  fir?  "  ars'  an  Ceabh- 
arnach. 

"  C  ainm  a  th'  ort  ?  "  arsa  Taog. 

"Tha  Ceabharnach  saothrach,  suarach  siubhail  orm,"  ars'  esan. 

"Ciod  a  tha  thu  'g  iarraidh  airson  do  sheirbhis?"  arsa  Taog. 
"  Cha  'n  'eil  ach  gun  thu  dheanamh  dearmad  dibh'  orm,"  ars'  an 
Ceabharnach. 

"  Co  as  a  thainig  thu?"  arsa  Taog. 

"  A  iomadh  ait',  ach  is  Albannach  mi,"  ars'  esan. 

Dh'  fholbh  iad  a  thogail  ereach  na  cailliche.  Thog  iad  a' 
chreach,  ach  chunnaic  iad  an  toir  a'  tighinn. 

"Bi  'sineadh  as,"  arsa  Taog  m6r  ris  a'  Cheabharnach.  "  Cha 
dean  thusa  do  chasan  co-dhiu.  Co  'is  fearr  leat  an  toir  a  phill- 
eadh  na  'chreach  iomain  le  d'  chuid  daoine." 

"Cha  phillear  an  toir  ach  na  'm  pilleadh  an  toir  dh'  iom- 
aineamaid  a'  chreach  co-dhiu." 


EACHDRAIDH  A'  CHEABHARNAICH.       329 

Ghearr  an  Ceabharnach  fead  chaol,  chruaidh,  's  luidh  a  chreach 
air  an  rathad-mhor.     Phill  e  'n  coineamh  na  toir. 

Kug  c  air  na  h-uile  fear  a  bu  chaoile  cas  agus  a  bu  mho  ceann, 
's  dh'  fhag  e  iad  'nan  slneadh  cas  air  cbeann.  Phill  e  'n  deidh 
na  creiche. 

"  Is  dona  'dh'  iomaineas  tu  f&n  agus  do chuid daoine  chreach," 
ars'  an  Ceabharnach. 

"  Cha  'n  eirich  a'  chreach  gu  brath,"  arsa  Taog. 

Ghearr  e  fead,  's  dli'  eirich  a'  chreach,  's  dh'  iomain  e  dhach- 
aidh  iad. 

Thachair  gu  'n  do  dhearmaid  an  duine  mor  an  dibh  a  thoirt 
air  tus  do  Cheabharnach. 

"Is  leamsa  leith  na  creiche,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach. 

"  Tha  'n  sin  tuilleadh  a's  cus  duit,"  ars'  an  rlgh. 

"  Is  minig  a  bha  mis',"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach,  "  agus  Murchadh 
MacBrian  a  gearradh  sgiath  's  a'  sgoltadh  lann  ;  bu  leis-san  leith 
na  creiche,  agus  bu  leam-sa  an  leith  eile,"  ars'  an  Ceabharnach. 

1 '  Ma  's  companach  thu  do  'n  duine  sin  gheibh  thu  leith  na 
creiche, "  arsa  Taog. 

Ach  dh'  fhalbh  e,  's  dh'  fhag  e  iad  fein  agus  a  chreach. 

Slan  leat  a'  Cheabharnaich  ;  na  eirich  gu  brath. 

3.  A  third  version  of  this  curious  tale  was  told  to  me  in  South 
Uist,  by  MacPhie.  It  was  very  like  the  version  told  by  James 
Wilson,  blind  fiddler  in  Islay. 

It  is  evidently  a  composition  fallen  to  bits,  and  mended  with 
prose,  and  it  is  equally  clear  that  it  points  to  Ireland,  though  the 
hero  was  made  a  Scotchman  by  the  three  old  men. 

As  a  picture  of  bygone  manners,  this  is  curious,  and  I  know 
nothing  at  all  like  it  in  any  collection  of  popular  tales. 

I  believe  it  to  be  some  bardic  recitation  half-forgotten.  It  is 
said  that  in  the  mouth  of  one  reciter  in  Islay,  the  story  used  to 
last  for  four  hours. 

I  lately  (September  1860)  heard  MacPhie  repeat  his  version  in 
part.  It  was  a  mixture  of  the  two  versions  here  given,  and  a 
fifth,  Irish  grandee,  was  added. 


XVlld. 

THE  TALE  OF  THE  SHIFTY  LAD, 
THE  WIDOW'S  SON. 

From  John  Dewar,  Arrochar,  June,  1860. 

npHEKE  was  at  some  time  or  other  before  now  a 
-*■  widow,  and  she  had  one  son.  She  gave  him  good 
schooling,  and  she  was  wishful  that  he  should  choose  a 
trade  for  himself ;  but  he  said  he  would  not  go  to  learn 
any  art,  but  that  he  would  be  a  thief. 

His  mother  said  to  him  :  "  If  that  is  the  art  that  thou 
art  going  to  choose  for  thine  ownself,  thine  end  is  to  be 
hanged  at  the  bridge  of  Baile  Cliath,*  in  Eirinn." 

But  it  was  no  matter,  he  would  not  go  to  any  art, 
but  to  be  a  thief ;  and  his  mother  was  always  making 
a  prophecy  to  him  that  the  end  of  him  would  be,  hanging 
at  the  Bridge  of  Baile  Cliath,  in  Eirinn. 

On  a  day  of  the  days,  the  widow  was  going  to  the 
church  to  hear  the  sermon,  and  was  asking  the  Shifty 
Lad,  her  son,  to  go  with  her,  and  that  he  should  give 
over  his  bad  courses ;  but  he  would  not  go  with  her ; 
but  he  said  to  her  :  "  The  first  art  of  which  thou  hearest 
mention,  after  thou  hast  come  out  of  the  sermon,  is  the 
art  to  which  I  will  go  afterwards." 

She  went  to  the  church  full  of  good  courage,  hoping 
that  she  would  hear  some  good  thing. 

*  Dublin. 


THE   TALE   OF  THE  SHIFTY   LAD.  331 

He  went  away,  and  he  went  to  a  tuft  of  wood  that 
was  near  to  the  church  j  and  he  went  in  hiding  in  a 
place  where  he  could  see  his  mother  when  she  should 
come  out  of  the  church  ;  and  as  soon  as  she  came  out  he 
shouted,  "  Thievery  !  thievery  !  thievery  !  "  She  looked 
about,  but  she  could  not  make  out  whence  the  voice 
was  coming,  and  she  went  home.  He  ran  by  the  way 
of  the  short  cut,  and  he  was  at  the  house  before  her, 
and  he  was  seated  within  beside  the  fire  when  she 
came  home.  He  asked  her  what  tale  she  had  got ;  and 
she  said  that  she  had  not  got  any  tale  at  all,  but  that 
"  thievery,  thievery,  thievery,  was  the  first  speech  she 
heard  when  she  came  out  of  the  church." 

He  said  "  That  was  the  art  that  he  would  have." 

And  she  said,  as  she  was  accustomed  to  say  :  "  Thine 
ending  is  to  be  hanged  at  the  bridge  of  Baile  Cliath,  in 
Eirinn." 

On  the  next  day,  his  mother  herself  thought,  that  as 
nothing  at  all  would  do  for  her  son  but  that  he  should 
be  a  thief,  that  she  would  try  to  find  him  a  good 
aid-to-learning ;  and  she  went  to  the  gadaiche  dubh  of 
Aachaloinne,  the  black  gallows  bird  of  Aachaloinne,  a 
very  cunning  thief  who  was  in  that  place  j  and  though 
they  had  knowledge  that  he  was  given  to  stealing,  they 
were  not  finding  any  way  for  catching  him.  The  widow 
asked  the  Black  Rogue  if  he  would  take  her  son  to 
teach  him  roguery.  The  Black  Rogue  said,  "  If  he 
were  a  clever  lad  that  he  would  take  him,  and  if  there 
were  a  way  of  making  a  thief  of  him  that  he  could  do 
it ; "  and  a  covenant  was  made  between  the  Black  Rogue 
and  the  Shifty  Lad. 

When  the  Shifty  Lad,  the  widow's  son,  was  making 
ready  for  going  to  the  Black  Rogue,  his  mother  was 
giving  him  counsel,  and  she  said  to  him  :   "  It  is  against 

^-4  «Q 


332  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

my  will  that  thou  art  going  to  thievery ;  and  I  was 
telling  thee,  that  the  end  of  thee  is  to  be  hanged  at  the 
bridge  of  Baile  Cliath,  Eirinn ; "  but  the  Shifty  Lad 
went  home  to  the  Black  Rogue. 

The  Black  Rogue  was  giving  the  Shifty  Lad  every 
knowledge  he  might  for  doing  thievery ;  he  used  to 
tell  him  about  the  cunning  things  that  he  must  do,  to 
get  a  chance  to  steal  a  thing ;  and  when  the  Black 
Rogue  thought  that  the  Shifty  Lad  was  good  enough 
at  learning  to  be  taken  out  with  him,  he  used  to  take 
him  out  with  him  to  do  stealing ;  and  on  a  day  of  these 
days  the  Black  Rogue  said  to  his  lad — 

"  We  are  long  enough  thus,  we  must  go  and  do 
something.  There  is  a  rich  tenant  near  to  us,  and  he 
has  much  money  in  his  chest.  It  was  he  who  bought 
all  that  there  was  of  cattle  to  be  sold  in  the  country, 
and  he  took  them  to  the  fair,  and  he  sold  them ;  he 
has  got  the  money  in  his  chest,  and  this  is  the  time  to 
be  at  him,  before  the  people  are  paid  for  their  lot  of 
cattle ;  and  unless  we  go  to  seek  the  money  at  this 
very  hour,  when  it  is  gathered  together,*  we  shall  not 
get  the  same  chance  again." 

The  Shifty  Lad  was  as  willing  as  himself  ;  they  went 
away  to  the  house,  they  got  in  at  the  coming  on  of  the 
night,  and  they  went  up  upon  the  loft,  f  and  they  went 
in  hiding  up  there  ;  and  it  was  the  night  of  Samhain, 
Halloween;  and  there  assembled  many  people  within 
to  keep  the  Savain  hearty  as  they  used  to  do.  They 
sat  together,  and  they  were  singing  songs,  and  at  fun 
burning  the  nuts  ;J  and  at  merry-making. 

*  Round  to  each  other. 

t  The  loft  meant,  is  the  space  in  the  roof  of  a  cottage  which  is 
above  the  rafters,  and  is  used  as  a  kind  of  store. 

t  See  Dewar's  note  at  the  Gaelic  for  his  account  of  this. 


THE   TALE   OF  THE  SHIFTY   LAD.  333 

The  Shifty  Lad  was  wearying  that  the  company  was 
not  scattering ;  he  got  up  and  he  went  down  to  the 
byre,  and  he  loosed  the  bands  off  the  necks  of  the 
cattle,  and  he  returned  and  he  went  up  upon  the  loft 
again.  The  cattle  began  goring  each  other  in  the  byre, 
and  roaring.  All  that  were  in  the  room  ran  to  keep  the 
cattle  from  each  other  till  they  could  be  tied  again  j  and 
in  the  time  while  they  were  doing  this,  the  Shifty  Lad 
went  down  to  the  room  and  he  stole  the  nuts  with  him, 
and  he  went  up  upon  the  loft  again,  and  he  lay  down  at 
the  back  of  the  Black  Rogue. 

There  was  a  great  leathern  hide  at  the  back  of  the 
Black  Rogue,  and  the  Shifty  Lad  had  a  needle  and 
thread,  and  he  sewed  the  skirt  of  the  Black  Rogue's 
coat  to  the  leathern  hide  that  was  at  his  back;  and 
when  the  people  of  the  house  came  back  to  the  dwelling 
room  again,  their  nuts  were  away ;  and  they  were  seek- 
ing their  nuts ;  and  they  thought  that  it  was  some  one 
who  had  come  in  to  play  them  a  trick  that  had  taken 
away  their  nuts,  and  they  sat  down  at  the  side  of  the 
fire  quietly  and  silently. 

Said  the  Shifty  Lad  to  the  Black  Rogue,  "I  will 
crack  a  nut." 

"  Thou  shalt  not  crack  (one),"  said  the  Black 
Rogue ;  "  they  will  hear  thee,  and  we  shall  be 
caught." 

Said  the  Shift}^  Lad,  "I  never  yet  was  a  Savain  night 
without  cracking  a  nut,"  and  he  cracked  one. 

Those  who  were  seated  in  the  dwelling-room  heard 
him,  and  they  said, 

"  There  is  some  one  up  on  the  loft  cracking  our  nuts, 
we  will  go  and  catch  them." 

When  the  Black  Rogue  heard  that,  he  sprang  off  the 
loft  and  he  ran  out,  and  the  hide  dragging  at  the  tail 


334  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

of  his  coat.  Every  one  of  them  shouted  that  there  was 
the  Black  Eogue  stealing  the  hide  with  him.  The 
Black  Rogue  fled,  and  the  people  of  the  house  after 
him;  and  he  was  a  great  distance  from  the  house  before 
he  got  the  hide  torn  from  him,  and  (was  able)  to  leave 
them.  But  in  the  time  that  the  people  of  the  house 
were  running  after  the  Black  Rogue,  the  Shifty  Lad 
came  down  off  the  loft;  he  went  up  about  the  house,  he 
hit  upon  the  chest  where  the  gold  and  the  silver  was  ; 
he  opened  the  chest,  and  he  took  out  of  it  the  bags  in 
which  the  gold  and  silver  was,  that  was  in  the  chest ; 
and  he  took  with  him  a  load  of  the  bread  and  of  the 
butter,  and  of  the  cheese,  and  of  everything  that  was 
better  than  another  which  he  found  within ;  and  he  was 
gone  before  the  people  of  the  house  came  back  from 
chasing  the  Black  Rogue. 

When  the  Black  Rogue  reached  his  home,  and  he  had 
nothing,  his  wife  said  to  him,  "How  hast  thou  failed 
this  journey  V 

Then  the  Black  Rogue  told  his  own  tale ;  and  he  was 
in  great  fury  at  the  Shifty  Lad,  and  swearing  that  he 
would  serve  him  out  when  he  got  a  chance  at  him. 

At  the  end  of  a  little  while  after  that,  the  Shifty  Lad 
came  in  with  a  load  upon  him. 

Said  the  wife  of  the  Black  Rogue,  "  But,  I  fancy  that 
thou  art  the  better  thief !" 

The  Black  Rogue  said  not  a  word  till  the  Shifty  Lad 
shewed  the  bags  that  he  had  full  of  gold  and  silver; 
then,  said  the  Black  Rogue,  "  But  it  is  thou  that  wert 
the  smart  lad  !" 

They  made  two  halves  of  the  gold  and  silver,  and  the 
Black  Rogue  got  the  one  half,  and  the  Shifty  Lad  the 
other  half.  When  the  Black  Rogue's  wife  saw  the  share 
that  came  to  them,   she  said,    "  Thou  thyself  art  the 


THE   TALE   OF  THE   SHIFTY   LAD.  335 

worthy  thief  ! "  and  she  had  more  respect  for  him  after 
that,  than  she  had  for  the  Black  Rogue  himself. 

At  the  end  of  a  few  weeks  after  that,  a  wedding 
was  to  be  in  the  neighbourhood ;  and  it  was  the  cus- 
tom of  the  country,  when  any  who  were  well  off  were 
asked,  that  they  should  send  some  gift  or  other  to  the 
people  of  the  wedding.  There  was  a  rich  tenant,  and 
he  was  asked ;  and  he  desired  his  herd  to  go  to  the 
mountain  moor  and  bring  home  a  wether  for  the  people 
of  the  wedding.  The  herd  went  up  the  mountain  and 
he  got  the  wether,  and  he  was  going  home  with  it ;  and 
he  had  it  on  his  back  when  he  was  going  past  the  house 
of  the  Black  Rogue. 

Said  the  Shifty  Lad  to  his  master,  "  What  wager  wilt 
thou  lay  that  I  do  not  steal  the  wether  from  the  back 
of  that  man  yet,  before  he  reaches  the  house." 

Said  the  Black  Rogue,  "  I  will  lay  thee  a  wager  of 
a  hundred  marks  that  thou  canst  not ;  how  shouldst 
thou  steal  the  thing  that  is  on  his  back ! " 

"  Howsoever  I  do  it,  I  will  try  it,"  said  the  Shifty  Lad. 

"Well,  then,  if  thou  dost  it,"  said  the  Black  Rogue, 
"  I  will  give  thee  a  hundred  marks." 

"  It  is  a  bargain,"  said  the  Shifty  Lad ;  and  with  that 
he  went  away  after  the  herd. 

The  herd  had  to  go  through  a  wood,  and  the  Shifty 
Lad  took  the  ground  that  was  hidden  from  him  until 
he  got  before  him ;  and  he  put  some  dirt  in  his  shoe, 
and  he  set  his  shoe  on  the  road  before  the  herd,  and  he 
himself  went  in  hiding ;  and  when  the  herd  came  for- 
ward, and  he  saw  the  shoe,  he  said,  "But  thou  art 
dirty,  and  though  thou  art,  if  thy  fellow  were  there  I 
would  clean  thee ; "  and  he  went  past. 

The  Shifty  Lad  lifted  the  shoe,  and  he  ran  round 
about  and  he  was  before  the  herd,  and  he  put  his  other 


336  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

shoe  on  the  road  before  him.  When  the  herd  came 
forward  and  saw  the  other  shoe  on  the  road  before 
him,  he  said  to  himself,  "  But  there  is  the  fellow  of  the 
dirty  shoe." 

He  set  the  wether  on  the  ground,  and  he  said  to 
himself,  "I  will  return  back  now,  and  I  will  get  the  dirty 
shoe,  and  I  shall  clean  it,  and  I  shall  have  two  good 
shoes  for  my  trouble;"  and  he  ran  swiftly  back  again. 

The  Shifty  Lad  ran  swiftly,  and  he  stole  with  him 
the  wether,  and  he  took  with  him  the  two  shoes ;  and 
he  went  home  to  his  master,  and  he  got  a  hundred 
marks  from  his  master. 

The  herd  went  home  and  he  told  his  own  master 
himself  how  it  had  befallen  him.  His  master  scolded 
the  herd;  and  the  next  day  he  sent  him  again  up 
the  mountain  to  seek  a  kid,  instead  of  the  wether  he 
had  lost. 

The  herd  went  away  to  the  hill  and  he  got  hold  of 
a  kid,  and  he  tied  it ;  he  put  it  on  his  back,  and  he  went 
away  to  go  home  with  it.  The  Shifty  Lad  saw  him,  and 
he  went  to  the  wood,  and  he  was  there  before  the  herd; 
and  he  went  in  hiding,  and  he  began  at  bleating  like 
the  wether.  The  herd  thought  that  it  was  the  wether 
that  was  in  it ;  and  he  put  the  kid  off  him,  and  he  left 
it  at  the  side  of  the  road,  and  he  went  to  seek  the 
whether.  At  the  time  when  the  herd  was  seeking  the 
wether,  the  Shifty  Lad  went  and  he  stole  the  kid  with 
him,  and  he  went  home  with  it  to  the  Black  Rogue. 

When  the  herd  went  back  to  where  he  had  left 
the  kid,  the  kid  was  gone,  the  kid  was  not  in  it ;  he 
sought  the  kid,  and  when  he  could  not  find  the  kid,  he 
went  home  and  he  told  his  master  how  it  had  befallen 
him ;  and  his  master  scolded  him,  but  there  was  no 
help  for  it. 


THE  TALE   OF  THE   SHIFTY   LAD.  337 

On  the  next  day  the  tenant  asked  his  herd  to  go  up 
the  mountain  and  bring  home  a  stot ;  to  be  sure  that 
he  did  not  lose  it.  The  herd  went  up  the  mountain, 
and  he  got  a  good  fat  stot,  and  he  was  driving  it  home. 
The  Shifty  Lad  saw  him,  and  he  said  to  the  Black  Rogue, 
"  Tiugain,  come  along,  and  we  will  go  and  try  to  steal 
the  stot  from  the  herd  when  he  is  going  through  the 
wood  with  it." 

The  Black  Rogue  and  the  Shifty  Lad  went  away  to 
the  wood  before  the  herd;  and  when  the  herd  was 
going  through  the  wood  with  the  stot,  the  Black  Rogue 
was  in  one  place  baa-ing,  and  the  Shifty  Lad  in 
another  bleating  like  a  goat.  The  herd  heard  them, 
and  he  thought  that  he  would  get  the  wether  and  the 
kid  again.  He  tied  the  stot  to  a  tree,  and  went  all 
about  the  wood  seeking  the  wether  and  the  kid,  and  he 
sought  them  till  he  was  tired.  While  he  was  seeking 
the  wether  and  the  kid,  the  Shifty  Lad  went,  and  he 
stole  with  him  the  stot,  and  he  took  it  home  with  him 
to  the  house  of  the  Black  Rogue.  The  Black  Rogue 
went  home  after  him,  and  they  killed  the  stot,  and  they 
put  it  in  hiding,  and  the  Black  Rogue's  wife  had  good 
puddings  for  them  that  night.  When  the  herd  came 
back  to  the  tree  where  he  had  left  the  stot  tied,  the  stot 
was  not  there.  He  knew  that  the  stot  had  been  stolen. 
He  went  home  and  he  told  his  master  how  it  had 
happened,  and  his  master  scolded  him,  but  there  was  no 
help  for  it. 

On  the  next  day  his  master  asked  the  herd  to  go 
up  the  mountain  and  to  bring  home  a  wether,  and  not 
let  it  come  off  his  back  at  all  till  he  should  come  home, 
whatever  he  might  see  or  hear.  The  herd  went  away, 
and  he  went  up  the  mountain  and  he  got  the  wether, 
and  he  succeeded  in  taking  that  wether  home. 

G  2 


338  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

The  Black  Rogue  and  the  Shifty  Lad  went  on 
stealing  till  they  had  got  much  money,  and  they  thought 
that  they  had  better  buy  a  drove  (of  cattle)  and  go  to 
the  fair  with  it  to  sell,  and  that  people  would  think  that 
it  was  at  drovering  they  had  made  the  money  that  they 
had  got.  The  two  went,  and  they  bought  a  great  drove 
of  cattle,  and  they  went  to  a  fair  that  was  far  on  the 
way  from  them.  They  sold  the  drove,  and  they  got 
the  money  for  them,  and  they  went  away  to  go  home. 
When  they  were  on  the  way,  they  saw  a  gallows  on 
the  top  of  a  hill,  and  the  Shifty  Lad  said  to  the  Black 
Rogue,  "  Come  up  till  we  see  the  gallows ;  some  say 
that  the  gallows  is  the  end  for  the  thieves  at  all 
events." 

They  went  up  where  the  gallows  was,  and  they 
were  looking  all  about  it.  Said  the  Shifty  Lad, 
"Might  we  not  try  what  kind  of  death  is  in  the 
gallows,  that  we  may  know  what  is  before  us,  if  we 
should  be  caught  at  roguery.    I  will  try  it  myself  first." 

The  Shifty  Lad  put  the  cord  about  his  own  neck, 
and  he  said  to  the  Black  Rogue,  "  Here,  draw  me  up, 
and  when  I  am  tired  above  I  will  shake  my  legs,  and 
then  do  thou  let  me  down." 

The  Black  Rogue  drew  the  cord,  and  he  raised  the 
Shifty  Lad  aloft  off  the  earth,  and  at  the  end  of  a  little 
blink  the  Shifty  Lad  shook  his  legs,  and  the  Black 
Rogue  let  him  down." 

The  Shifty  Lad  took  the  cord  off  his  neck,  and  he 
said  to  the  Black  Rogue,  "  Thou  thyself  hast  not 
ever  tried  anything  that  is  so  funny  as  hanging.  If 
thou  wouldst  try  once,  thou  wouldst  have  no  more  fear 
for  hanging.  I  was  shaking  my  legs  for  delight,  and 
thou  wouldst  shake  thy  legs  for  delight  too  if  thou 
wert  aloft." 


THE  TALE  OF  THE  SHIFTY  LAD.        339 

Said  the  Black  Rogue,  "  I  will  try  it  too,  so  that  I 
may  know  what  it  is  like." 

"Do,"  said  the  Shifty  Lad;  "and  when  thou  art 
tired  above,  whistle  and  I  will  let  thee  down." 

The  Black  Rogue  put  the  cord  about  his  neck,  and 
the  Shifty  Lad  drew  him  up  aloft ;  and  when  the 
Shifty  Lad  found  that  the  Black  Rogue  was  aloft 
against  the  gallows,  he  said  to  him,  "  Now,  when  thou 
wantest  to  come  down,  whistle,  and  if  thou  art  well 
pleased  where  thou  art,  shake  thy  legs." 

When  the  Black  Rogue  was  a  little  blink  above,  he 
began  to  shake  his  legs  and  to  kick ;  and  the  Shifty  Lad 
would  say,  "  Oh !  art  thou  not  funny !  art  thou  not 
funny  !  art  thou  not  funny  !  "When  it  seems  to  thee 
that  thou  art  long  enough  above  whistle." 

But  the  Black  Rogue  has  not  whistled  yet.  The 
Shifty  Lad  tied  the  cord  to  the  lower  end  of  the  tree  of 
the  gallows  till  the  Black  Rogue  was  dead  ;  then  he 
went  where  he  was,  and  he  took  the  money  out  of  his 
pouch,  and  he  said  to  him,  "Now,  since  thou  hast  no 
longer  any  use  for  this  money,  I  will  take  care  of  it  for 
thee."  And  he  went  away,  and  he  left  the  Black  Rogue 
hanging  there.  Then  he  went  home  where  was  the 
house  of  the  Black  Rogue,  and  his  wife  asked  where 
was  his  master  ? 

The  Shifty  Lad  said,  "I  left  him  where  he  was, 
upraised  above  the  earth." 

The  wife  of  the  Black  Rogue  asked  and  asked  him 
about  her  man,  till  at  last  he  told  her,  but  he  said  to 
her,  that  he  would  marry  her  himself.  When  she  heard 
that,  she  cried  that  the  Shifty  Lad  had  killed  his 
master,  and  he  was  nothing  but  a  thief.  When  the 
Shifty  Lad  heard  that  he  fled.  The  chase  was  set  after 
him  ;  but  he  found  means  to  go  in  hiding  in  a  cave,  and 


340  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

the  chase  went  past  him.  He  was  in  the  cave  all  night, 
and  the  next  day  he  went  another  way,  and  he  found 
means  to  fly  to  Eirinn. 

He  reached  the  house  of  a  wright,  and  he  cried  at  the 
door,  "  Let  me  in." 

"  Who  art  thou  ?"  said  the  wright. 

"I  am  a  good  wright,  if  thou  hast  need  of  such,"  said 
the  Shifty  Lad. 

The  wright  opened  the  door,  and  he  let  in  the  Shifty 
Lad,  and  the  Shifty  Lad  began  to  work  at  carpentering 
along  with  the  wright. 

When  the  Shifty  Lad  was  a  day  or  two  in  their 
house,  he  gave  a  glance  thither  and  a  glance  hither 
about  the  house,  and  he  said,  "  0  choin  !  what  a  poor 
house  you  have,  and  the  king's  store-house  so  near 
you." 

"What  of  that,"  said  the  wright. 

"It  is,"  said  the  Shifty  Lad,  "that  you  might  get 
plenty  from  the  king's  store-house  if  you  yourselves 
were  smart  enough." 

The  wright  and  his  wife  would  say,  "They  would 
put  us  in  prison  if  we  should  begin  at  the  like  of 
that." 

The  Shifty  Lad  was  always  saying  that  they  ought 
to  break  into  the  king's  store-house,  and  they  would 
find  plenty  in  it ;  but  the  wright  would  not  go  with 
him ;  but  the  Shifty  Lad  took  with  him  some  of  the 
tools  of  the  wright,  and  he  went  himself  and  he  broke 
into  the  king's  store-house,  and  he  took  with  him  a  load 
of  the  butter  and  of  the  cheese  of  the  king,  and  he  took 
it  to  the  house  of  the  wright.  The  things  pleased  the 
wife  of  the  wright  well,  and  she  was  willing  that  her 
own  husband  should  go  there  the  next  night.  The 
wright  himself  went  with  his  lad  the  next  night,  and 


THE  TALE   OF  THE   SHIFTY   LAD.  341 

they  got  into  the  store-house  of  the  king,  and  they  took 
with  them  great  loads  of  each  thing  that  pleased  them 
best  of  all  that  was  within  in  the  king's  store-house. 

But  the  king's  people  missed  the  butter  and  the 
cheese  and  the  other  things  that  had  been  taken  out 
of  the  store-house,  and  they  told  the  king  how  it  had 
happened. 

The  king  took  the  counsel  of  the  Seanagal  about 
the  best  way  of  catching  the  thieves  and  the  counsel 
that  the  Seanagal  gave  them  was  that  they  should  set  a 
hogshead  of  soft  pitch  under  the  hole  where  they 
were  coming  in.  That  was  done,  and  the  next  night 
the  Shifty  Lad  and  his  master  went  to  break  into  the 
king's  storehouse. 

The  Shifty  Lad  put  his  master  in  before  him,  and  the 
master  went  down  into  the  soft  pitch  to  his  very  middle, 
and  he  could  not  get  out  again.  The  Shifty  Lad  went 
down,  and  he  put  a  foot  on  each  of  his  master's  shoulders, 
and  he  put  out  two  loads  of  the  king's  butter  and  of  the 
cheese  at  the  hole ;  and  at  the  last  time  when  he  was 
coming  out,  he  swept  the  head  off  his  master,  and  he 
took  the  head  with  him,  and  he  left  the  trunk  in  the 
hogshead  of  pitch,  and  he  went  home  with  the  butter 
and  with  the  cheese,  and  he  took  home  the  head,  and  he 
buried  it  in  the  garden. 

When  the  king's  people  went  into  the  storehouse, 
they  found  a  body  without  a  head  into  the  hogshead  of 
pitch ;  but  they  could  not  make  out  who  it  was.  They 
tried  if  they  could  find  any  one  at  all  that  could  know 
him  by  the  clothes,  but  his  clothes  were  covered  with 
pitch  so  that  they  could  not  make  him  out.  The  king 
asked  the  counsel  of  the  Seanagal  about  it;  and  the 
counsel  that  the  Seanagal  gave  was,  that  they  should 
set  the  trunk  aloft  on  the  points  of  the  spears  of  the 


342  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

soldiers,  to  be  carried  from  town  to  town,  to  see  if  they 
could  find  any  one  at  all  that  would  take  sorrow  for  it ; 
or  to  try  if  they  could  hear  any  one  that  would  make 
a  painful  cry  when  they  should  see  it ;  or  if  they  should 
not  see  (one  crying)  one  that  should  seem  about  to  make 
a  painful  cry  when  the  soldiers  should  be  going  past 
with  it.  The  body  was  taken  out  of  the  hogshead  of 
pitch,  and  set  on  the  points  of  the  spears ;  and  the 
soldiers  were  bearing  it  aloft  on  the  points  of  their  long 
wooden  spears,  and  they  were  going  from  town  to  town 
with  it ;  and  when  they  were  going  past  the  house  of 
the  wright,  the  wright's  wife  made  a  tortured  scream,, 
and  swift  the  Shifty  Lad  cut  himself  with  the  adze ; 
and  he  kept  saying  to  the  wright's  wife,  "The  cutis  not 
so  bad  as  thou  thinkest." 

The  commander-in-chief,  and  his  lot  of  soldiers,  came 
in  and  they  asked, 

"  What  ailed  the  housewife  1 " 

Said  the  Shifty  Lad,  "It  is  that  I  have  just  cut  my 
foot  with  the  adze,  and  she  is  afraid  of  blood  ;  "  and  he 
would  say  to  the  wife  of  the  wright,  "  Do  not  be  so 
much  afraid ;  it  will  heal  sooner  than  thou  thinkest." 

The  soldiers  thought  that  the  Shifty  Lad  was  the 
wright,  and  that  the  wife  whom  they  had  was  the  wife 
of  the  Shifty  Lad ;  and  they  went  out,  and  they  went 
from  town  to  town  J  but  they  found  no  one  besides,  but 
the  wife  of  the  wright  herself  that  made  cry  or  scream 
when  they  were  coming  past  her. 

They  took  the  body  home  to  the  king's  house ;  and 
the  king  took  another  counsel  from  his  Seanagal,  and 
that  was  to  hang  the  body  to  a  tree  in  an  open  place, 
and  soldiers  to  watch  it  that  none  should  take  it  away, 
and  the  soldiers  to  be  looking  if  any  should  come  the 
way  that  should  take  pity  or  grief  for  it. 


THE  TALE   OF  THE   SHIFTY   LAD.  343 

The  Shifty  Lad  came  past  them,  and  he  saw  them  ; 
he  went  and  he  got  a  horse,  and  he  put  a  keg  of  whisky 
on  each  side  of  the  horse  in  a  sack,  and  he  went  past 
the  soldiers  with  it,  as  though  he  were  hiding  from  them. 
The  soldiers  thought  that  it  was  so,  that  he  had  taken 
something  away  from  them,  or  that  he  had  something 
which  he  ought  not  to  have ;  and  some  of  them  ran  after 
him  and  they  caught  the  old  horse  and  the  whisky  j  but 
the  Shifty  Lad  fled,  and  he  left  the  horse  and  the 
whisky  with  them.  The  soldiers  took  the  horse  and 
the  kegs  of  whisky  back  to  where  the  body  was  hang- 
ing against  the  mast.  They  looked  what  was  in  the 
kegs ;  and  when  they  understood  that  it  was  whisky 
that  was  in  them,  they  got  a  drinking  cup,  and  they 
began  drinking  until  at  last  every  one  of  them  was 
drunk,  and  they  lay  and  they  slept.  When  the  Shifty 
Lad  saw  that,  that  the  soldiers  were  laid  down  and 
asleep  and  drunk,  he  returned  and  he  took  the  body  off 
the  mast.  He  set  it  crosswise  on  the  horse's  back,  and 
he  took  it  home ;  then  he  went  and  he  buried  the  body 
in  the  garden  where  the  head  was. 

When  the  soldiers  awoke  out  of  their  sleep,  the 
body  was  stolen  away ;  they  had  for  it  but  to  go  and 
tell  it  to  the  king.  Then  the  king  took  the  counsel  of 
the  Seanagal ;  and  the  Seanagal  said  to  them,  all  that 
were  in  his  presence,  that  his  counsel  to  them  was,  to 
take  out  a  great  black  pig  that  was  there,  and  that 
they  should  go  with  her  from  town  to  town ;  and  when 
they  should  come  to  any  place  where  the  body  was 
buried,  that  she  would  root  it  up.  They  went  and 
they  got  the  black  pig,  and  they  were  going  from  farm 
to  farm  with  her,  trying  if  they  could  find'  out  where 
the  body  was  buried.  They  went  from  house  to  house 
with  her  till  at  last  they  came  to  the  house  where  the 


344  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

Shifty  Lad  and  the  Wright's  widow  were  dwelling. 
When  they  arrived  they  let  the  pig  loose  about  the 
grounds.  The  Shifty  Lad  said  that  he  himself  was  sure 
that  thirst  and  hunger  was  on  them ;  that  they  had 
better  go  into  the  house  and  that  they  would  get  meat 
and  drink;  and  that  they  should  let  their  weariness 
from  off  them,  in  the  time  when  the  pig  should  be 
seeking  about  his  place. 

They  went  in,  and  the  Shifty  Lad  asked  the 
^right's  widow  that  she  should  set  meat  and  drink  be- 
fore the  men.  The  widow  of  the  wright  set  meat  and 
drink  on  the  board,  and  she  set  it  before  them ;  and  in 
the  time  while  they  were  eating  their  meat,  the  Shifty 
Lad  went  out  to  see  after  the  pig  ;  and  the  pig  had  just 
hit  upon  the  body  in  the  garden  ;  and  the  Shifty  Lad 
went  and  he  got  a  great  knife  and  he  cut  the  head  off 
her,  and  he  buried  herself  and  her  head  beside  the  body 
of  the  wright  in  the  garden. 

When  those  who  had  the  care  of  the  pig  came  out, 
the  pig  was  not  to  be  seen.  They  asked  the  Shifty  Lad 
if  he  had  seen  her ;  he  said  that  he  had  seen  (her),  that 
her  head  was  up  and  she  was  looking  upwards,  and 
going  two  or  three  steps  now  and  again ;  and  they  went 
with  great  haste  to  the  side  where  the  Shifty  Lad  said 
that  the  pig  had  gone. 

When  the  Shifty  Lad  found  that  they  had  gone  out 
of  sight,  he  set  everything  in  such  a  way  that  they 
should  not  hit  upon  the  pig.  They  on  whom  the  care 
of  the  pig  was  laid  went  and  they  sought  her  every  way 
that  it  was  likely  she  might  be.  Then  when  they  could 
not  find  her,  they  had  nothing  for  it  but  to  go  to  the 
king's  house  and  tell  how  it  had  happened. 

Then  the  counsel  of  the  Seanagal  was  taken  again ; 
and  the  counsel  that  the  Seanagal  gave  them  was,  that 


THE   TALE   OF  THE   SHIFTY  LAD.  345 

they  should  set  their  soldiers  out  about  the  country  at 
free  quarters ;  and  at  whatsoever  place  they  should  get 
pig's  flesh,  or  in  whatsoever  place  they  should  see  pig's 
flesh,  unless  those  people  could  show  how  they  had  got 
the  pig's  flesh  that  they  might  have,  that  those  were 
the  people  who  killed  the  pig,  and  that  had  done  every 
evil  that  had  been  done. 

The  counsel  of  the  Seanagal  was  taken,  and  the 
soldiers  sent  out  to  free  quarters  about  the  country ; 
and  there  was  a  band  of  them  in  the  house  of  the 
wright's  widow  where  the  Shifty  Lad  was.  The 
Wright's  widow  gave  their  supper  to  the  soldiers,  and 
some  of  the  pig's  flesh  was  made  ready  for  them  ;  and 
the  soldiers  were  eating  the  pig's  flesh,  and  praising  it 
exceedingly.  The  Shifty  Lad  understood  what  was  the 
matter,  but  he  did  not  let  on.  The  soldiers  were  set  to 
lie  out  in  the  barn  ;  and  when  they  were  asleep  the 
Shifty  Lad  went  out  and  he  killed  them.  Then  he 
went  as  fast  as  he  could  from  house  to  house,  where  the 
soldiers  were  at  free  quarters,  and  he  set  the  rumour 
afloat*  amongst  the  people  of  the  houses,  that  the 
soldiers  had  been  sent  out  about  the  country  to  rise  in 
the  night  and  kill  the  people  in  their  beds ;  and  he 
found  (means)  to  make  the  people  of  the  country  believe 
him,  so  that  the  people  of  each  house  killed  all  the  sol- 
diers that  were  asleep  in  their  barns ;  and  when  the  sol- 
diers did  not  come  home  at  the  time  they  should,  some 
went  to  see  what  had  happened  to  them  ;  and  when  they 
arrived,  it  was  so  that  they  found  the  soldiers  dead  in 
the  barns  where  they  had  been  asleep ;  and  the  people 
of  each  house  denied  that  they  knew  how  the  soldiers 
had  been  put  to  death,  or  who  had  done  it. 

*  Cuir  e  an  ceil. 


346  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

The  people  who  were  at  the  ransacking  for  the  sol- 
diers, went  to  the  king's  house,  and  they  told  how  it 
had  happened  ;  then  the  king  sent  word  for  the  Seana- 
gal  to  get  counsel  from  him ;  the  Seanagal  came,  and 
the  king  told  how  it  had  happened,  and  the  king  asked 
counsel  from  him.  This  is  the  counsel  that  the  Seana- 
gal gave  the  king,  that  he  should  make  a  feast  and  a 
ball,  and  invite  the  people  of  the  country ;  and  if  the 
man  who  did  the  evil  should  be  there,  that  he  was  the 
man  who  would  be  the  boldest  who  would  be  there,  and 
that  he  would  ask  the  king's  daughter  herself  to  dance 
with  him.  The  people  were  asked  to  the  feast  and  the 
dance  ;  and  amongst  the  rest  the  Shifty  Lad  was  asked. 
The  people  came  to  the  feast,  and  amongst  the  rest 
came  the  Shifty  Lad.  When  the  feast  was  past,  the 
dance  began ;  and  the  Shifty  Lad  went  and  he  asked 
the  king's  daughter  to  dance  with  him ;  and  the 
Seanagal  had  a  vial  full  of  black  stuff,  and  the  Seanagal 
put  a  black  dot  of  the  stuff  that  was  in  the  vial  on  the 
Shifty  Lad.  But  it  seemed  to  the  king's  daughter  that 
her  hair  was  not  well  enough  in  order,  and  she  went  to 
a  side  chamber  to  put  it  right ;  and  the  Shifty  Lad  went 
in  with  her;  and  when  she  looked  in  the  glass,  he 
also  looked  in  it,  and  he  saw  the  black  dot  that  the 
Seanagal  had  put  upon  him.  When  they  had  danced 
till  the  tune  of  music  was  finished,  the  Shifty  Lad  went 
and  he  got  a  chance  to  steal  the  vial  of  the  Seanagal 
from  him  unknown  to  him,  and  he  put  two  black  dots 
on  the  Seanagal,  and  one  black  dot  on  twenty  other 
men  besides,  and  he  put  the  vial  back  again  where  he 
found  it. 

Between  that  and  the  end  of  another  while,  the 
Shift}?"  Lad  came  again  and  he  asked  the  king's  daugh- 
ter to  dance.     The  king's  daughter  had  a  vial  also,  and 


THE   TALE    OF   THE   SHIFTY    LAD.  347 

she  put  a  black  dot  on  the  face  of  the  Shifty  Lad  ;  but 
the  Shifty  Lad  got  the  vial  whipped  out  of  her  pocket, 
unknown  to  her ;  and  since  there  were  two  black  dots 
on  him,  he  put  two  dots  on  twenty  other  men  in  the 
company,  and  four  black  dots  on  the  Seanagal.  Then 
when  the  dancing  was  over,  some  were  sent  to  see  who 
was  the  man  on  whom  were  the  two  black  dots, 
"When  they  looked  amongst  the  people,  they  found 
twenty  men  on  whom  there  were  two  black  dots,  and 
there  were  four  black  dots  on  the  Seanagal ;  and  the 
Shifty  Lad  found  (means)  to  go  swiftly  where  the 
king's  daughter  was,  and  to  slip  the  vial  back  again 
into  her  pocket.  The  Seanagal  looked  and  he  had  his 
black  vial ;  the  king's  daughter  looked  and  she  had 
her  own  vial ;  then  the  Seanagal  and  the  king  took 
counsel ;  and  the  last  counsel  that  they  made  was  that 
the  king  should  come  to  the  company,  and  say,  that 
the  man  who  had  done  every  trick  that  had  been  done, 
must  be  exceedingly  clever  j  if  he  would  come  forward 
and  give  himself  up,  that  he  should  get  the  king's 
daughter  to  marry,  and  the  one  half  of  the  kingdom 
while  the  king  was  alive,  and  the  whole  of  the  king- 
dom after  the  king's  death.  And  every  one  of  those 
who  had  the  two  black  dots  on  their  faces  came 
and  they  said  that  it  was  they  who  had  done  every 
cleverness  that  had  been  done.  Then  the  king  and 
his  high  council  went  to  try  how  the  matter  should 
be  settled;  and  the  matter  which  they  settled  was, 
that  all  the  men  who  had  the  two  black  dots  on 
their  faces  should  be  put  together  in  a  chamber,  and 
they  were  to  get  a  child,  and  the  king's  daughter  was 
to  give  an  apple  to  the  child,  and  the  child  was  to  be 
put  in  where  the  men  with  the  two  black  dots  on  their 
faces   were  seated    and  to  whatsoever   one   the   child 


348  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

should  give  the  apple,  that  was  the  one  who  was  to  get 
the  king's  daughter. 

That  was  done,  and  when  the  child  went  into  the 
chamber  in  which  the  men  were,  the  Shifty  Lad  had 
a  shaving  and  a  drone  (sliseag  us  dranndan),  and  the 
child  Avent  and  gave  him  the  apple.  Then  the  shaving 
and  the  drone  were  taken  from  the  Shifty  Lad, 
and  he  was  seated  in  another  place,  and  the  apple 
was  given  to  the  child  again ;  and  he  was  taken  out 
of  the  chamber,  and  sent  in  again  to  see  to  whom 
he  would  give  the  apple  ;  and  since  the  Shifty  Lad 
had  the  shaving  and  the  drone  before,  the  child  went 
where  he  was  again,  and  he  gave  him  the  apple.  Then 
the  Shifty  Lad  got  the  king's  daughter  to  marry. 

And  shortly  after  that  the  king's  daughter  and  the 
Shifty  Lad  were  taking  a  walk  to  Baile  Cliabh  ;  and 
when  they  were  going  over  the  bridge  of  Baile  Cliabh, 
the  Shifty  Lad  asked  the  king's  daughter  what  was 
the  name  of  that  place  ;  and  the  king's  daughter  told 
him  that  it  was  the  bridge  of  Baile  Cliabh,  in  Eirinn ; 
and  the  Shifty  Lad  said — 

"  Well,  then,  many  is  the  time  that  my  mother  said 
to  me,  that  my  end  would  be  to  be  hanged  at  the  bridge 
of  Baile  Cliabh,  in  Eirinn  j  and  she  made  me  that 
prophecy  many  a  time  when  I  might  play  her  a  trick." 

And  the  king's  daughter  said,  "  Well  then,  if  thou 
thyself  shouldst  choose  to  hang  over  the  little  side 
(wall)  of  the  bridge,  I  will  hold  thee  aloft  a  little  space 
with  my  pocket  napkin." 

And  they  were  at  talk  and  fun  about  it ;  but  at 
last  it  seemed  to  the  Shifty  Lad  that  he  would  do  it  for 
sport,  and  the  king's  daughter  took  out  her  pocket 
napkin,  and  the  Shifty  Lad  went  over  the  bridge,  and 
he  hung  by  the  pocket  napkin  of  the  king's  daughter 


SGEULACHD   A  GHILLE   CHARAICH.  349 

as  she  let  it  over  the  little  side  (wall)  of  the  bridge,  and 
they  were  laughing  to  each  other. 

But  the  king's  daughter  heard  a  cry,  "The  king's 
le  is  going  on  fire!"  and  she  started,  and  she 
lost  her  hold  of  the  napkin ;  and  the  Shifty  Lad  fell 
down,  and  his  head  struck  against  a  stone,  and  the 
brain  went  out  of  him ;  and  there  was  in  the  cry  but 
the  sport  of  children ;  and  the  king's  daughter  was 
obliged  to  go  home  a  widow. 


SGEULACHD  A  GHILLE  CHARAICH  MAC  NA 
BANTRACH. 

Bha.  uair  eigeinn  ann  roimh  so  Bantrach,  agus  bha  aona  mnac 
aic.  Thug  i  d  a  sgoil  mhath,  agus  bha  i  los  gu  'n  taghadh  e 
ceaird  air  a  shon  fein,  ach  thubhairt  esan,  nach  rachadh  e  a  dh' 
iounsaidh  ealdhain  air  bith,  ach  gu  'm  bitheadh  e  na  mhearlach. 

Thubhairt  a  mhathair  ris,  "  Ma  is  e  sin  an  ealdhain  a  tha  thu 
a  dol  a  thaghadh  dhuit  fein,  is  e  is  deireadh  dhuit,  a  bhi  air  do 
chrochadh  aig  drochaid  Bhaile-cliabh  an  Eirinn."  Ach  bu  choma 
co  dhuibh,  cha  rachadh  esan  gu  ealdhain  air  bith,  ach  gu  a  bhith 
ann  na  mhearlach.  Agus  bhitheadh  a  mhathair  daonnan  a  dean- 
amh  faisinneachd  da,  gu  'm  e  bu  deireadh  dhasan  a  bhith  air  a 
chrochadh  aig  drochaid  Bhaile-cliabh  an  Eirinn.  Latha  do  na 
laitheanan  bha  a  Bhantrach  a  dol  do  'n  eaglais,  a  dh'  eisdeachd 
searmoin,  agus  bha  i  ag  iarraidh  air  a''  ghille-charrach  a  mac  e  a 
dhol  leatha,  'sea  thoirt  thairis  do  a  dhroch  stiuireanan,  ach 
cha  rachadh  e  leatha,  ach  thuirt  e  rithe,  "Isea  chiad  ealdhain 
air  an  cluimn  thusa  iomradh,  an  deigh  dhuit  tighinn  a  mach  o  'n 
t-searmoin,  an  ealdhain  gu  's  au  teid  mise  a  rithis." 

Dh  fhalbh  ise  do  'n  eaglais,  's  i  Ian  misnich  an  duil  gu  'n 
cluinneadh  i  rud-eiginn  math.  Dh'  fhalbh  esan  's  chaidh  e  do 
bhad  coille  a  bha  dluth  do  'n  eaglais,  's  chaidh  e  'm  fallach  ann 
an  aite  far  am  faiceadh  e  a  mhathair,  a  nuair  a  thigeadh  i  a  mach 
as  an  eaglais.  Agus  cho  luath  is  a  thainig  i  a  mach,  ghlaodh 
esan;  ''Meirle,  nieirle,  meirle. "  Sheall  ise  ma'n  cuairt,  ach  cha 
b'  urrainn  di  aithneachadh  cia  as  a  bha  'n  guth  a  tighinn,  's  dh' 


350  WEST   HIGHLAND   TALES. 

fhalbh  i  dachaidh.  Ruith  esan  rathad  ath-ghiorra,  's  bha  e  aig 
an  tigh  air  thoiseach  oirre  's  bha  e  na  shuidhe  a  stigh  taobh  an 
teine  fcra  a  thainig  i  dachaidh.  Dh'  fharraid  e  di,  cia-de  an  sgeul 
a  fhuair  i  ?  Thubhairt  ise,  nach  d-f huair  i  sgeul  air  bith,  ach  gu 
'in  b'e  meirle,  meirle,  rneirle,  a'  chiad  chainnt  a  chual'  i  tra 
thainig  i  a  mach  as  an  eaglais.  Thubhairt  esan,  gu  'm  b'e  sin  an 
ealdhain  a  bhitheadh  aigesan,  s  thubhairt  ise  mar  a  b'  abhaist 
di  a  ghradh,  "Is  e  is  deireadh  dhuit  a  bhith  air  do  chrochadh 
aig  drochaid  Bhaile-cliabh  an  Eirinn."  An  ath  latha  smuaintich 
a  mhathair,  bho  nach  deanadh  nl  air  bith  tuille  gnothach  le  a 
mac,  ach  e  a  bhith  ann  na  mheirlach,  gu  'm  feuchadh  i  ri  oide- 
ionnsaich  math  fhaotuinn  da.  Agus  chaidh  i  a  dh'  ionnsaidh 
gadaiche  dubh  Achaloine,  meirleach  anbharra  seolta,  a  bha  ann 
'san  aite  sin.  Agus  ged  a  bha  fios  aca  gu  'n  robh  e  ri  goid,  eh  a 
robh  iad  a  faotuinn  doigh  air  bith  air  beireachd  air.  Dh'  fharraid 
a'  bhantrach  do  'n  ghadaiche  dhubh  an  gabhadh  e  an  gille-carrach 
a  mac  gus  a  ghadachd  ionnsachadh  dha.  Thubhairt  an  gadaiche 
dubh,  ma  bha  e  'na  ghille  tapaidh  gu  'n  gabhadh,  agus  ma  bha 
doigh  air  meirleach  a  dheanamh  dheth,  gu  'n  deanadh  esan  e, 
agus  chaidh  cumhnant  a  dheanamh  eadar  an  gadaiche  dubh,  a's 
an  gille-carrach.  Tra  bha  an  gille-carrach  mac  na  bantraich  a 
deanamh  deis  gu  dol  chun  a'  ghaduiche  dhuibh,  bha  a  mhathair 
a  toirt  chomhairlean  air,  agus  thuirt  i  ris.  "  Is  ann  an  aghaidh 
mo  thoil-sa  a  tha  thu  a'  dol  thun  na  meirle,  agus  tha  mi  ag  innse 
dhuit,  gur  e  is  deireadh  dhuit  a  bhith  air  do  chrochadh  aig  dro- 
chaid Bhaile-cliabh  an  Eirinn."  Ach  chaidh  an  gille  carrach 
dachaidh  thun  a'  ghadaiche  dhuibh. 

Bha  an  gadaiche  dubh  a  tabhairt  na  h-uile  foghlum  a  dh' 
fhaodadh  e  do  'n  ghille-charrach  air  meirle  a  dheanamh.  Bhith- 
eadh e  ag  innse  dha  ma  'n  t-seoltachd  a  dh'  fheumadh  e  a  dhean- 
amh, gus  an  coram  fhaotuinn  air  rud  a  ghoid.  Agus  tra  bha  leis 
a'  ghadaiche  dhubh,  gu  'u  robh  an  gille-carrach  gle  mhath  air 
fhoghlum,  gu  e  a  bhith  air  a  thoirt  a  mach  leis,  bhithearlh  e  ga 
thoirt  a  mach  leis  gu  goid  a  dheanamh.  Agus  latha  do  na 
laithean  sin  thubhairt  an  gaduiche  dubh,  ri  a  ghille — 

"  Tha  sinn  gle  fhada  mar  so,  is  fheudar  duinn  dol  a  dheanamh 
rudaiginn  ;  tha  tuathanach  beartach  dluth  dhuinn,  agus  tha 
m6ran  airgid  aige  'na  chiste,  is  e  a  cheannaich  na  bha  do  chrodh 
ri  reic  ann  'san  duthaich,  agus  thug  e  chum  na  faidhir  iad,  's 
chreic  e  iad,  tha  an  t-airgiod  aige  'na  chiste,  agus  'se  so  an  t-am 
gu  bhith  aige,  ma'n  teid   na  daoine  a  phaidh  air  son  an  cuid 


SGEULACHD   A  GHILLE   CHARAICH.  351 

cruidh,  's  mur  teid  sinn  a  dh  iarraidh  an  airgiod  an  ceart  uair, 
tra  a  tha  e  cruinn  ri  cheile,  cha'n  fhaigh  sinn  an  coram  ciadna 
a  rithis." 

Bha  an  gille-carrach  cho  toileach  ris  fein.  Dh'  fbalbh  iad  chum 
an  taigh  'us  fhuair  iad  a  stigh  aig  tighinn  na  h-oidhche,  agus 
cbaidh  iad  an  aird  air  an  fharadh,  's  chaidh  iad  am  fallach  gu 
h-ard  ann  an  sin.  Agus  is  e  oidhche  Shamhnadh  a  bha  'nn,  agus 
chruinnich  moran  do  fheadhainn  a  stigh  a  ghleidheadh  na  Samh- 
uinn  gu  cridheil  mar  a  b'  abhaist  doibh.  Shuidh  iad  comhla, 
agus  bha  iad  a  seinn  oran,  a  's  ri  aighear,  agus  a'  losgadh  nan 
cno,*  agus  ri  abhachd. 

Bha  an  gille-carrach  a  gabhail  fadail  nach  robh  a  chuideachd  a 
sgaoileadh ;  dh'eirich  e  's  chaidh  e  sios  do'n  bhathaich,  's  dh  fhuas- 
gail  e  na  naisg  far  amhaichean  a  chruidh,  's  thill  e  's  chaidh  e  air 
an  fharadh  a  rithis.  Thoisich  an  crodh  air  purradh  a  cheile  ann 
'sa  bhathaich,  's  air  raoiceadh,  ruidh  na  bha  anns  a  chearnadh,  a 
chumail  a'  chruidh  o  'cheile  gus  an  rachadh  an  ceangal  a  rithis. 
An  tiom  a  bha  iadsan  a  deanamh  sin,  chaidh  an  gille-carrach  sios 
do  'n  chearnadh,  's  ghoid  e  leis  na  cno'n,  's  chaidh  e  an  aird  air 
an  fharadh  a  rithisd,  agus  luidh  eair  culamh  a  ghadaiche  dhuibh. 

Bha  seiche  mhor  leathraich  aig  culamh  a  ghadaiche  dhuibh,  's 
bha  snathad  agus  snathainn  aig  a  ghille-charrach  agus  dh'  fhuaigh 
e  iomall  cota  a  ghadaiche  dhuibh,  ris  an  t-seiche  leathraich  a  bha 
aig  a  culamh,  agus  tra  thainig  muinntir  an  taighe  air  an  ais  do  'n 
chearnadh  a  rithisd,  bha  na  cno'n  aca  air  falbh,  agus  bha  iad  ag 
iarraidh  nan  cno'n,  agus  shaoil  iad  gu  'm  b'e  cuid-eiginn  a  thainig 


*  One  of  the  amusements  which  Highland  people  used  to 
entertain  themselves  with,  is  what  they  call  burning  nuts  on 
Hallow-eve,  the  last  night  of  October.  A  party  of  young  people 
would  collect  together  in  one  house  for  to  make  merry ;  one  of 
their  amusements  was,  they  would  propose  a  marriage  between 
some  lad  and  lass,  and  they  would  name  a  nut  for  each  of  them. 
The  two  nuts  would  be  placed  beside  each  other  in  the  fire.  If 
the  two  nuts  burned  together,  and  blazed  over  each  other,  that 
was  called  a  good  omen  ;  it  was  a  sign  that  the  party  for  whom 
the  nuts  was  named  were  to  be  married  yet,  and  live  happy 
together  ;  but  if  either  of  the  nuts  puffed,  or  flew  away,  that 
was  a  sign  that  the  person  for  whom  that  nut  was  named  was 
proud,  and  would  not  accept  of  the  other  party. 


352  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES. 

a  stigh  a  dheanarah  chleas  orra,  a  thug  air  falbh  na  cno'n,  agus 
shuidh  iad  aig  taobh  an  teine  gu  samhach  tosdach. 

Thubhairt  an  gille-carrach  ris  a  ghadaiche  dhubh,  "  Cnacaidh 
mi  cno." 

"Cha  chnac,"  thuirt  an  gadaiche-dubh,  "cluinnidh  iad  thu  's 
theid  beireachd  oirnn." 

Thubhairt  an  gille-carrach,  "cha  robh  mi-fein  riamh  roimh 
oidhche  Shamhnadh  gu  'n  chno  a  chnacadh."   Agus  chnachd  e  te. 

Chuala  an  fheadhainn  a  bha  'nan  suidhe  's  a  chearnadh  e,  's 
thubhairt  iad,  "  Tha  cuid-eiginn  gu  h-ard  air  an  fharadh,  a 
cnacadh  nan  cn5'n  again,  theid  sinn  agus  beiridh  sinn  orra." 

Tra  chuala  an  gadaiche — dubh  sin,  leum  e  far  an  fharaidh,  's 
ruith  e  a  mach,  's  an  t-seiche  an  slaodadh  ris.  Theich  an 
gadaiche-dubh  's  muinntir  an  taighe  as  a  dheigh,  's  bha  e  astar 
mor  o'n  tigh  ma'n  d'  fhuair  e  an  t-seiche  a  reubadh  deth  agus  a 
fagail.  Ach  an  tiom  a  bha  muinntir  an  taighe  a  ruith  a 
ghadaiche-dhuibh,  thainig  an  gille-carrach  a  nuas  far  an  fharaidh, 
chaidh  e  air  feadh  an  taighe,  dh'  amais  e  air  a  chiste  far  an  robh 
an  t-6r  's  an  t-airgiod  aig  an  tuathanach  ga  ghleidheadh  dh'  f hos- 
gail  e  a  chiste,  's  thug  e  a  mach  aiste  na  builg  ann  'san  robh  an 
t-airgiod  a  bha  innte,  agus  thug  e  innte,  agus  thug  e  leis  eallach 
do  'n  aran  's  do'n  chaise,  a's  do  na  h-uile  nl  a  b'  fhearr  na  cheile  a 
fhuair  e  a  itigh,  Agus  bha  esan  air  falbh,  ma  'n  d'  thainig 
muinntir  an  taighe  air  an  ais  o  bhith  a  ruith  a  ghadaiche-dhuibh. 

Nuair  a  rainig  an  gadaiche-dubh  dachaidh,  's  nach  robh  nl  air 
bith  aige,  thubhairt  a  bhean  ris: — "  Cia-mar  a  chaidh  fairs- 
leachadh  ort  air  an  turus  so  ?" 

An  sin  dh'  innis  an  gadaiche-dubh  a  sgeul  fein,  agus  bha  fearg 
mor  air  ris  a  ghille-charrach,  'sea  boideachadh,  gu  'n  deanadh  e 
dioltas  tra  gheibheadh  e  coram  air.  Aig  ceann  uine  ghoirid  na 
dheigh  sin  thainig  an  gille-carrach  a  stigh,  agus  eallach  air. 
Thubhairt  bean  a  ghadaiche  dhuibh,  "Ach  tha  duil  agam  gur 
tusa  meirleach  is  fhearr." 

Cha  dubhairt  an  gadaiche-dubh  diog,  gus  gu'n  do  leig  an  gille- 
carach  fhaicinn  na  builg  a  bha  aige  Ian  do  or  s  do  airgiod,  an  sin 
thubhairt  an  gadaiche-dubh  "  Ach  bu  til  an  gille  tapaidh  !" 

Rinn  iad  da  leth  air  an  or,  's  air  an  airgiod,  's  fhuair  an  gadaiche 
dubh  an  darna  leth,  agus  an  gille  carrach  an  leth  eile.  Tra  a 
chunnaic  bean  a  ghadaiche  dhuibh  an  roinn  a  thainig  oirre  thubh- 
airt i,  "  Is  tu  fein  am  meirleach  fiachail,"  s  bha  tuille  meas  aic 
air  na  dheigh  sin  na  bha  aic  air  a  ghadaiche-dhubh  e  fein." 


SGEULACHD  A  GHILLE   CHARAICH.  353 

Aig  ceann  beagan  sheachdainnean  na  dheigh  sin,  bha  banais  gu 
bhith  ann  sa  coimhearsnachd  agus  b'  e  fasan  na  duthcha,  tra 
rachadh  feadhainn  a  bhitheadh  saoibhir  a  chuireadh,  gu  'n 
cuireadh  iad  tabhartas  a  thaobhaiginn  a  dh  ionnsaidh  muinntir  na 
bainse.  Bha  tuathanach  beartach  ann  a  chaidh  a  chuireadh,  agus 
dh'  iarr  e  air  a  bhuachaille  aige  e  a  dhol  ris  a  mhonadh,  'sea 
thoirt  dachaidh  molt  air  son  muinntir  na  bainse.  Chaidh  am 
buachaille  ris  a  mhonadh,  's  fhuair  e  am  molt  's  bha  e  a  dol 
dachaidh  leis,  's  e  aige  air  a  dhruim,  a  nuair  a  bha  e  a  dol  seachad 
air  tigh  a  ghadaiche  dhuibh.  Thubhairt  an  gilie  carrach  ri  a 
mhaighstir  "  Cia-de  an  geall  a  chuireas  tu  nach  goid  mi  am  molt 
far  druim  an  fhir  sin,  ma  'n  ruig  e  an  tigh  fhathasd  ?"  Thubhairt 
an  gadaiche  dubh,  "Cuiridh  mi  geall  ciad  marg  nach  urrainn 
duit,  ciamar  a  ghoideadh  tu  an  rud  a  tha  air  a  dhruim  ?  " 

"  Cia  air  bhith  mar  a  nl  mi  e  feuchaidh  mi  ris,"  orsa  an  gille- 
carrach. 

"  Ma  ta  ma  ni  thu  a,  thuirt  an  gadaiche  dubh,  bheir  mise  dhuit 
ciad  marg."  "  Is  bargain  e,"  orsa  an  gille  carrach,  a's  le  sin  dh' 
fhalbh  e  an  deigh  a  bhuachaille.  Bha  aig  a  bhuachaille  ri  dol 
troimh  choille,  agus  ghabh  an  gille  carrach  falacba-talmhainte 
air,  gus  gu'n  d'  fhuair  e  air  thoiseach  air,  agu3  shalaich  e  'na 
bhr6ig,  's  chuir  e  a  bhrog  air  an  rathad  air  thoiseach  air  a  buach- 
aille, 's  chaidh  e  fein  am  fallach.  •  An  uair  a  thainig  am  buachaille 
air  aghaidh,  a's  a  chunnaic  e  a  bhrog  thubhairt  e,  "  Ach  tha  thu 
salach  's  ged  do  tha,  na  'in  bitheadh  do  leth-bhreac  ann,  ghlanainn 
thu,"  's  chaidh  e  seachad. 

Thog  an  gille  carrach  a'  bhr6g,  's  ruidh  e  ma  'n  cuairt,  's  bha  e 
air  thoiseach  air  a'  bhuachaille,  's  chuir  e  bhr6g  eile  air  an  rathad 
air  thoiseach  air.  Thubhairt  e  ris  fhein,  "  ach  tha  ann  an  sin 
leth-bhreac  na  broige  salaiche." 

Chuir  e  am  molt  air  lar,  agus  thubhairt  e  ris-fein,  "  Tillidh  mi 
an  nis  's  ghoibh  mi  a  bhrog  shalach,  's  glanaidh  mi  i,  's  bithidh 
da  bliroig  mhath  again  air  son  mo  shaoireach,"  's  ruith  e  gu  luath 
air  ais.  Ruith  an  gille-carrach  gu  luath  's  ghoid  e  leis  am  molt, 
's  thug  e  leis  an  da  bhroig,  's  chaidh  e  dachaidh  chum  a 
mhaighistir,  's  fhuair  e  a  chiad  marg  o  a  mhaighistir. 

Chaidh  am  buachaille  dachaidh,  's  dh'  innis  e  do  a  mhaighistir 
fein  mar  a  thachair  da.  Throid  a  mhaighistir  ris  a  bhuachaille. 
Au  ath  latha  chuir  an  tuathanach  a  rithis  ris  a  mhonadh  e  a  dh- 
iarraidh  eirionnach  an  aite  a  mhuilt  a  chaill  e.  Dh'  fhalbh  am 
buachaille  ris  a  mhonadh,  's  fhuair  e  greim  air  eirionnach,  chean- 

H  2 


354  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

gail  se  e,  chuir  e  air  a  dhruim  e,  's  dh-fhalbh  e  gu  dol  dachaidh 
leis.  Chunnaic  an  gille  carrach  e,  's  chaidh  e  do'n  choille,  's  bha 
e  an  sin  air  tboiseach  air  a  bhuachaille,  's  chaidh  e  am  falach,  's 
th6isich  e  air  meilich  coltach  ris  a'  mholt.  Shaoil  am  buachaille 
gu  'm  b'e  am  molt  a  bha  ann,  's  chuir  e  deth  an  t-eiriounach,  5s 
dh'  fhag  se  aig  taobh  an  rathaid  e,  's  chaidh  e  a  dh  iarraidh  a 
mhuilt.  An  tiom  a  bha  am  buachaille  ag  iarraidh  a'  mhoilt' 
chaidh  an  gille  carrach  's  ghoid  e  leis  an  t-eirionnach,  's  dh'  fhag 
se  aig  taobh  an  rathaid  e,  's  chaidh  e  dachaidh  leis  chum  a 
ghadaiche-dhuibh.  Tra  chaidh  am  buachaille  air  ais  far  an  d' 
fhag  e  an  t-eirionnaeh,  bha  an  t-eirionnach  air  falbh,  cha  robh  an 
t-eirionnach  ann,  dh'  iarr  e  air  son  an  eirionnach  ann.  Dh'  iarr  e 
air  son  an  eirionnach,  's  a  nuair  nach  b'urrainn  d'a  an  t-eirionnach 
fhaotuinn,  chaidh  e  dachaidh  's  dh'  innis  e  do  a«mhaighistir  mar 
a  dh'  eirich  da,  agus  throid  a  mhaighistir  ris,  ach  cha  robh  comas 
air.  An  ath  latha  dh'  iarr  an  tuathanach  air  a  bhuachaille  aige, 
e  a  dhol  ris  a  mhonadh,  agus  e  a  thoirt  dachaidh  damh,  e  a  bhith 
cinnteach  nach  cailleadh  se  e.  Chaidh  am  buachaille  ris  a 
mhonadh,  's  fhuair  e  damh  math  reamhar,  's  bha  e  ga  iomain 
dachaidh.  Chunnaic  an  gille  carrach  e,  s'  thubhairt  e  ris  a' 
ghadaiche-dhubh,  "  Tiugainn,  's  theid  sinn  a  dh  fheuchainn  ris 
an  damh  a  ghoid  o'n  bhuachaille,  tra  a  bhitheas  e  a  dol  troimh 
an  choille  leis." 

Dh'  fhalbh  an  gadaiche-dubh  as  an  gille-carrach  do  'n  choille 
air  thoiseach  air  a  bhuachaille.  Agus  tra  bha  am  buachaille  a 
dol  troimh  an  choille  leis  an  damh,  bha  an  gadaiche  dubh  an  aon 
aite,  sea  meailich,  's  an  gille-carrach  an  aite  eile,  sea  migear- 
taich  coltach  ri  gabhar.  Chula  am  buachaille  iad,  's  shaoil  e  gu 
'm  faigheadh  e  am  molt,  agus  an  t-eirionnach  a  rithisd.  Cheangail 
e  an  damh  ri  craoibh,  's  chaidh  e  air  feadh  na  coille,  ag  iarraidh 
a'  mhuilt  agus  an  eirionnaich.  'S  dh'  iarr  e  iad  gus  gu  'n  robh  e 
sglth.  An  tiomsa  bha  esan  ag  iarraidh  a  mhuilt 's  an  eirionnaich, 
chaidh  an  gille-carach  's  ghoid  e  leis  an  damh  's  thug  e  leis 
dachaidh  e  chum  tigh  a  ghadaiche  dhuibh.  Chaidh  an  gadaiche 
dubh  dachaidh  as  a  dheigh,  's  mharbh  iad  an  damh,  's  chuir  iad 
am  fallach  e,  's  bha  maragan  math  aig  bean  a  ghadaiche  dhuibh 
an  oidhche  sin.  Tra  thainig  am  buachaille  air  ais  thun  na 
craoibh,  far  an  d'  fhag  e  an  damh  ceangailte,  cha  robh  an  damh 
ann.  Dh'  aithnich  e  gu  'n  deach  an  damh  a  ghoid,  chaidh  e 
dachaidh  's  dh'  innis  e  do  a  mhaighistir  mar  a  thachair,  agus 
throid  a  mhaighistir  ris,  ach  cha  robh  comas  air. 


SGEULACHD  A  GHILLE  CHARAICH.  355 

An  ath  latha  dh'  iarr  a  mhaighistir  air  a  bhuachaille  aige  e  a 
dhol  ris  a  mhonadh,  'sea  thoirt  dachaidh  molt,  's  gu  'n  e  ga 
leigidh  far  a  dhruim  idir,  gus  gu  'n  tigeadh  e  dachaidh,  cia  air 
bith  a  chiteadh  na  a  chluinneadh  e.  Dh'  fhalbh  am  buachaille, 
's  chaidh  e  ris  a  mhonadh,  's  fhuair  e  am  molt,  's  chaidh  aige  air 
a  mholt  sin  a  thoirt  dachaidh. 

Ghabh  an  gadaiche-dubh  's  an  gille-carrach  air  an  aghaidh  ri 
goid  gus  gu  'n  robh  moran  airgid  aca,  agus  smuaintich  iad  gu  'm 
b'  fhearr  doibh  dr5bh  a  cheannach,  's  dol  chum  faidhir  leo  gu'n 
creic,  agus  gu  'n  saoileadh  feadhainn  gu'm  b'ann  air  an  drobh- 
aireachd  a  rinn  iad  an  t-airgiod.  Chaidh  an  dithis  agus  cheann- 
aich  iad  drobh  mor  cruidh.  Agus  chaidh  iad  a  dh'  ionnsaidh 
faidhir  a  bha  fad  air  astar  leo.  Chreic  iad  an  dr6bh,  's  fhuair 
iad  an  t-airgiod  air  an  son,  's  dh'  fhalbh  iad  gu  dol  dachaidh. 
Tra  a  bha  iad  air  an  rathad,  chunnaic  iad  croich  air  mullach  cnoic 
agus  thubhairt  an  gille-carach  ris  a'  ghadaiche  dhubh,  "  Tiugainn 
an  aird  is  gu  'm  faic  sin  a'  chroich,  tha  feadhainn  ag  radh,  gur 
h-i  a'  chroich  is  deireadh  do  na  meirlich  co-dhiubh." 

Chaidh  iad  an  aird  far  an  robh  a'  chroich,  's  bha  iad  a'  sealltuinn 
ma  'n-cuairt  oirre.  Thubhairt  an  gille-carach,  ' '  Nach  fhaodamaid 
fheuchainn  cia-de*  an  se6rsa  bais  a  tha  ann  sa'  chrochadh,  gu  'm 
bl  fios  againn  cia-de  a  a  tha  romhainn  ma  bheirear  oirnn  ri 
gadachd  ;  feuchaidh  mi-fein  an  toiseach  e." 

Chuir  an  gille-carach  an  cdrd  ma  amhaich  fein,  's  thubhairt  e 
ris  a'  ghadaiche-dhubh,  "So  tarruing  an  aird  mi,  's  tra  bhitheas 
mi  sglth  gu  h-ard  crathaidh  mi  mo  chas'n,  's  an  sin  leig  thusa  a 
nuas  mi." 

Tharruing  an  gadaiche-dubh  an  c6rd,  's  thog  e  an  gille-carach 
an  aird  far  an  talmhainte,  agus  aig  ceann  seal  beag  chrath  an 
gille  carach  a  chas'n,  's  leig  an  gadaiche-dubh  a  nuas  e. 

Chuir  an  gille  carach  an  cord  far  amhaich,  's  thubhairt  e  ris  a' 
ghadaiche-dhubh,  "  Cha  d'  fheuch  thu-fhein  nl  riamh,  a  tha  cho 
eibhinn  ris  a'  chrochadh,  na  'm  feuchadh  tu  aon  uair  e  cha 
bhitheadh  eagal  ort  romh  'n  chrochadh  tuille,  bha  mise  a  crathaidh 
mo  chasan  leis  an  a'  oibhinneas  's  chrathadh  tusa  do  chasan  leis  an 
aoibhneas  cuideachd  na  'm  bitheadh  tu  gu  h-ard." 

Thuirt  an  gadaiche  dubh,  "  Feuchaidh  mise  e  cuideachd,  's  gu 
'm  bith  fios  agam  co  ris  a's  coltach  e." 

"Dean,"  orsa  gille-carach,  "'s  tra  a  bhitheas  tu  sglth  gu  h- 
ard,  dean  fead  's  leigidh  mise  an  nuas  thu." 

Chuir  an  gadaiche-dubh  an  cord  ma  amhaich,  's  tharruing  an 


356  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

gille-carach  an  aird  e,  's  tra  fhuair  an  gille-carach  gu  'n  robh  an 
gadaiche-dubh  gu  h-ard  ris  a'  chroich,  thuirt  e  ris,  "  An  nis  tra 
bhitheas  tu  ag  iarraidh  a  nuas  dean  fead,  's,  ma  tha  thu  toilichte 
far  am  bheil  thu,  crath  do  chas'n. " 

Tra  a  bha  an  gadaicbe  dubh  seal  beag  gu  h-ard,  thoisich  e  air 
crathadh  a  chasan,  's  air  breabadh,  's  theireadh  an  gille-carach, 
"0  !  nach  aighearach  thu,  nach  aighearach  thu.  0,  nach  aigh- 
earach  thu,  tra  bhithis  leat  gu  'm  bheil  thu  gle  fhada  gu  h-ard 
deau  fead." 

Ach  cha  do  rinn  an  gadaiche-dubh  fead  fhathast ;  cheangail  an 
gille-carach  an  cdrd  ri  iochdar  crann  na  croicbe,  gus  gu  'n  robh 
an  gadaicbe-dubh  marbh.  An  sin,  chaidh  an  gille-carach  far  an 
robh  e,  '■  thug  e  as  a  ph6c  an  t-airgiod,  's  thubhairt  se  ris,  "An 
nis  bho  nach  eil  feum  agadsa  air  an  airgiod  so  na  is  faide,  gabh- 
aidh  mise  ciiram  deth  air  do  shon. "  'S  dh'  fhalbh  e  's  dh  f hag  e 
an  gadaiche-dubh,  a  crochadh  ann  an  sin.  An  sin  chaidh  e 
dachaidh  far  an  robh  tigh  a  ghadaiche  dhuibh,  's  dh'  fharraid 
bean  a  ghadaiche-duibh  deth,  c'aite  an  robh  a  mhaighistir  ? 
Thuirt  an  gille-carach,  "  Dh'  fhag  mise  e  far  an  robh  e  air  ardach- 
adh  os-ceann  an  talaimh."  Dh'  fharraid,  agus  dh'  fharraid  bean 
a'  ghadaiche  deth  ma  dheidhinn  a  fir,  gus  ma  dheireadh  gu  'n  d' 
innis  e  d'  i,  ach  thuirt  e  rithe  gu  'm  p6sadh  e-fhein  i.  Tra 
chuala  ise  sin  ghlaodh  i  gu  'n  do  mharbh  an  gille-carach  a 
mhaighistir  is  nach  robh  ann  ach  mearlach.  Tra  chuala  an  gille- 
carach  sin  theich  e.  Chaidh  an  toir  a  chuir  air  a  dheigh,  ach 
fhuair  esan  dol  am  falach  ann  an  uaimh,  's  chaidh  an  t6ir  seachad 
air.  Bha  e  'san  uaimh  fad  na  h-oidhche,  agus  an  ath  latha 
chaidh  se  rathad  eile,  's  fhuair  e  teicheadh  do  dh'  Eirinn. 

Rainig  e  tigh  saoir,  's  ghlaodh  se  aig  an  dorus,  "  Leigibh  a 
stigh  mi." 

"  Co  thusa  ?  "  orsa  an  saor. 

"  Tha  saor  math,  ma  tha  a  leithid  a  dhlth  ort,"  orsa  an  gille 
carach. 

Dh'  fhosgail  an  saor  an  dorus  's  leig  e  a  stigh  an  gille-carach, 
's  th6isich  an  gille-carach  air  obair  air  an  t-saorsaineachd  comhla 
ris  an  t-saor. 

Tra  a  bha  an  gille-carach  latha  na  dha  anns  an  tigh  aca,  thug 
e  sealladh  a  null,  's  sealladh  an  nail  air  feadh  an  taighe  's  thubh- 
airt e,  "  0  choin  is  bochd  an  tigh  agaibh  a's  tigh-taisg  an  righ  cho 
dluth  oirbh." 

"  Cia-de  dheth  sin  ?"  orsa  an  saor. 


SGEULACHD  A  GHILLE   CHARAICH.  357 

"Tha,"  arsa  an  gille  earach,  "gu  'm  faodadh  sibh  am  pailteas 
fhaotuinn  as  tigh  st6ir  an  righ  na  'm  bitheadh  sibh  fein  gl6 
thapaidh." 

Theireadh  an  saor  's  a  bhean,  "Chuireadh  iad  ann  priosan  sinn 
na  'n  toisicheadh  sinn  air  a  leithid  sinn." 

Bha  an  gille-carach  daonnan  ag  radh  gu  'm  bu  choir  doibh  dol 
a  bhristeadh  a  stigh  do  thigh-taisg  an  righ,  's  gu  'm  faigheadh  iad 
am  pailteas  ann,  ach  cha  rachadh  an  saor  leis.  Ach  thug  an 
gille-carach  leis  pairt  do  dh'  acfhuinn  an  t-saoir,  a's  chaidh  e 
fbein  is  bhrisd  e  a  stigh  do  thigh-taisg  an  righ,  's  thug  e  leis 
ealach  do  'n  im  's  do  'n  chaise  aig  an  righ,  's  thug  e  do  thigh  an 
t-saoir  e.  Thaitinn  na  gnotbaichen  gu  math  ri  bean  an  t-saoir,  's 
bha  i  toileach  gu  'n  rachadh  am  fear  aic'  e  fhein  ann  an  ath 
oidhche.  Chaidh  an  saor  e-fhein  le  a  ghille  an  ath  oidhche,  's 
fhuair  iad  a  stigh  do  thigh-taisg  an  righ,  's  thug  iad  leo  eallachan 
m6ra  d6  gach  ni  a  b'fhearr  a  thaitinn  riu  do  na  bha  stigh  ann  an 
tigh  taisg  an  righ.  Ach  dh'  ionndrainn  muinntir  an  righ  an  t-im 
's  an  caise,  's  na  rudan  eile  a  chaidh  a  thoirt  as  an  tigh-thaisg,  's 
dh'  innis  iad  do  'n  righ  mar  a  thachair. 

Ghabh  an  righ  comhairle  an  t-seanaghail  ma  'n  doigh  a  b'  fhearr 
gu  beireachd  air  na  meirleich.  Agus  is  e  a  chomhairle  a  thug  an 
seanghall  orra,  iad  a  chuir  togsaid  Ian  do  phic  bhog  fo'n  toll  far 
an  robh  iad  a'  tighinn  a  stigh.  Chaidh  sin  a  dheanamh.  Agus 
an  ath  oidhche  chaidh  an  gille-carach  's  a  mhaighistir  a  bhrisd- 
eadh  a  stigh  do  thigh-taisg  an  righ.  Chuir  an  gille-carrach  a 
mhaighistir  a  stigh  air  thoiseach  air,  agus  chaidh  am  maighistir 
sios  anns  a'  phic  bhog  gu  a  theis-meadhoin,  's  cha  n  fhaigheadh 
e  as  a  rithisd.  Chaidh  an  gille  earach  sios,  's  chuir  e  cas  air  gach 
gualann  aig  a  mhaighistir,  's  chuir  e  a  mach  da  eallach  do  'n 
chaise  aig  an  righ  air  an  toll,  's  an  uair  ma  dheireadh  tra  a  bha  e 
a  tighinn  a  mach  sgiud  e  an  ceann  far  a  mhaighistir,  's  thug  e 
leis  an  ceann,  's  dh  fhag  e  a  cholunn  anns  an  togsaid  phic,  a's 
chaidh  e  dachaich  leis  an  im  's  leis  a'  chaise,  agus  thug  e  dach- 
aidh  an  ceann,  agus  dh'  adhlaic  e  anns  a  gharradh  e. 

Tra  a  chaidh  muinntir  an  righ  a  stigh  do  'n  tigh-thaisg 
fhuair  iad  colunn  gu  'n  cheann  anns  an  togsaid  phic.  Ach  cha 
b'  urrainn  doibh  aithneachadh  c6  e*.  Dh'  fheuch  iad  am  faigh- 
eadh iad  h-aon  air  bith  a  dh'  aithneachadh  air  aodach  e,  ach  bha 
aodach  comhdaichte  le  pic,  air  doigh  is  nach  b'  urrainn  doibh 
aithneachadh.  Dh  fharraid  an  righ  comhairle  an  t-sheanghal 
ma  dheidhinn.     Agus  is  e  a  chomhairle  a  thug  an  seanaghall 


358  WEST  HIGHLAND  TALES. 

orra  iad  a  chuir  na  coluinn  an  aird  air  bharr  shleaghan,  's  na 
saighdearan  gu  a  giullan  o  bhaile  gu  baile,  a  sheall  am  faiceadh 
iad  h-aon  air  bith  a  ghabhadh  truadhas  deth,  na  a  dh'  fheuchaifin 
an  cluinneadh  iad  a  h-aon  air  bith  a  dheanamh  glaodh 
gointe  tra  chithcadh  iad  £,  na  ged  nach  faiceadh,  gu  m  bitheadh 
iad  ealamh  gu  glaodh  gointe  a  dheanamh,  tra  bhitheadh  na 
saighdearan  a  dol  seachad  leis.  Chaidh  a  choluinn  a  thoirt  as 
an  togsaid  phic,  's  a  cuir  air  bharr  nan  sleaghan,  's  bha  na 
saighdearan  g'a  ghiulan  an  aird  air  bharr  nan  sleaghan  fada 
crannach  aca,  's  iad  a  dol  o  bhaile  gu  baile  leis.  Agus  tra  bha 
iad  a  dol  seach  tigh  an  t-saoir,  rinn  bean  an  t-saoir  sgreuch 
ghointe,  agus  ghrad  ghearr  an  gille-carach  e-fein  leis  an  tal,  's 
theireadh  e  ri  bean  an  t-saoir,  "  Cha  'n  'eil  an  gearradh  cho  dona 
is  a  tha  thu  a  smuainteachadh." 

Thainig  an  ceannard  's  cuid  do  na  saighdearan  a  stigh  agus  dh' 
fharraid  iad,  "  Cia  de  a  dh'  aithrich  bean  an  taighe."  Thubhairt 
an  gille-carach,  "  Tha  gu  'm  bheil  mise  air  gearradh  mo  choise 
leis  an  tal,  agus  tha  eagal  aice  romh  fhuil."  Agus  theiridh  e  ri 
bean  an  t-saoir,  "  Na  bitheadh  na  h-uibhir  eagail  ort,  leigheisidh 
e  na  is  luaith  na  tha  thu  a  smaointeachadh." 

Shaoil  na  saighdearan  gu  'm  b'e  an  gille-carach  an  saor,  agus 
gu  'm  e  a  bhean  a  bha  aig  an  t-saor  bean  a  ghille-charaich,  agus 
dh'  fbabh  iad  a  mach,  's  chaidh  iad  o  bhaile  gu  baile,  ach  cha  d' 
fhuair  iad  a  h-aon  tuille,  ach  banntrach  an  t-saoir  i  fhein  a  rinn 
glaodh  na  sgreuch  tra  a  bha  iad  a  tighinn  seachad  orra. 

Thug  iad  a  cholunn  dachaidh  chum  tigh  an  righ.  Agus  ghabh 
an  righ  comhairle  eile  on  t-seanaghail  aige,  's  b'e  in  a  cholunn  a 
chrochadh  ri  crann  ann  an  aite  follaiseach,  agus  saighdearan  a 
chuir  a  thabhairt  aire  air  nach  tugadh  gin  air  falbh  e,  as  na 
saighdearean  gu  a  bhith  a  sealltinn  an  tigeadh  feadhainn  air 
bith  an  rathad  a  ghabhadh  truaigheas  na  doilghios  deth. 

Thainig  an  gille-carach  seachad  orra,  agus  chunnaic  se  iad, 
chaidh  e  agus  fhuair  e  each,  agus  chuir  e  buideal  uisge-bheatha 
air  gach  taobh  do  'n  each,  ann  an  sachd,  's  chaidh  e  seach  na 
saighdearan  leis,  's  e  mar  gu  'm  bitheadh  e  a'  fuireachd  am  falach 
orra.  Shaoil  na  saighdearan  gu  'in  b'  ann  a  thug  se  rudaiginn 
air  falbh  orra,  na  gu  'n  robh  rudaiginn  aige  nach  bu  choir  d'a  a 
bhith  aige,  agus  ruith  cuid  diubh  air  a  dheigh,  's  bheir  iad  air  an 
t-seann  each  s  air  an  uisge-bheatha,  ach  theich  an  gille-carach, 
's  dh'  fhag  e  an  seann  each  's  an  t  uisge-beatha  aca. 

Thug  na  saigheearan  an  t  each  's  na  buideil  uisge-bheath'  air 


SGEULACHD   A  GHILLE   CHARAICH.  359 

ais  far  an  robh  a'  cholunn  an  crochadh  ris  a'  chrann.  Sheall  iad- 
cia-de  a  bha  anns  na  buideil,  's  tra  thuig  iad  gur  e  uisge-beatha 
a  bha  aim  fhuair  iad  c6rn,  's  thoisich  iad  air  61,  gus  ma  dheireadh, 
gu  'n  robh  na  h-uile  h-aon  diubh  air  mhisg,  's  luidh  's  chaidil  iad. 
Tra  chunnaic  an  gille-carach  gu  'n  robh  na  saighdearean,  'nan 
luidh  's  nan  cadal  air  a  mhisg,  thill  e  's  thug  e  a  nuas  a'  cholunn 
far  a'  chroinn,  chuir  e  crosgach  air  druim  an  eich  e  's  thug  e 
dachaidh  e,  chaidh  e  an  sin  agus  dh'  adhlaic  e  a'  cholunn  anns  a 
gharadh  far  an  robh  an  ceann. 

Tra  a  dhuisg  na  saighdearan  as  an  cadal,  bha  a  cholunn  air  a 
goid  air  falbh.  Cha  robh  aca  air  ach  dol  's  Innse  do  'n  righ.  An 
sin  ghabh  an  righ  comhairle  an  t-seanaghal.  Agus  thubhairt  an 
seanaghal  riutha,  na  bha  anns  an  lathair,  gu  'm  b'-e  a  chomh- 
airle  doibh,  iad  a  thoirt  a  mach  muc  mhor  dhubh  a  bha  an  siod, 
a  iad  a  dh'  fhalbh  leatha  o  bhaile  gu  baile,  agus  tra  thigeadh  iad 
thun  an  aite  far  am  bitheadh  a'  cholunn  adhlaicte,  gu  'm  buraich- 
eadh  i  an  aird  e.  Chaidh  iad  's  fhuair  iad  a  mhuc  dhubh,  's  bha 
iad  a  dol  o  bhaile  gu  baile  leatha,  a  dh'  feuchainn  am  faigheadh 
i  am  mach  caite  an  robh  a'  cholunn  air  a  h-adhlac.  Chaidh  iad 
o'  thigh  gu  tigh  leatha,  gus  ma  dheireadh  gu'n  d'  thainig  iad  gus 
an  tigh  far  an  robh  an  gille-carach  agus  banntrach  an  t-saoir  a 
chomhnuich.  A  nuair  a  rainig  iad,  leig  iad  a  mhuc  mar  sgaoil 
air  feadh  an  talmhuinn.  Thubhairt  an  gille-carach  riutha,  gu 
'n  robh  e-fein  cinnteach  gu  'm  bitheadh  paghadh  's  acras  orra, 
gu  'm  b'  fhearr  doibh  dol  a  stigh  do  'n  tigh,  's  gu  'm  faigheadh 
iad  biadh  's  deoch,  's  iad  a  leigeil  an  sgitheas  dhiubh,  an  tiom  a 
bhitheadh  a  mhuc  ag  iarraidh  ma  thimchioll  an  aite  aige-san. 
Chaidh  iadsan  a  stigth,  's  dh'  iarr  an  gille-carach  air  bantrach  an 
t-saoir  i  a  chur  biadh  's  deoch  air  beulamh  nan  daoine.  Chuir 
bantrach  an  t-saoir  biadh  's  deoch  air  bord,  's  chuir  i  air  am 
beulamh  e,  's  an  tiom  a  bha  iadsan  ag  itheadh  am  biadh,  chaidh 
an  gille-carach  a  mach  a  shealltuinn  an  deigh  na  muice,  's  bha  a 
mhuc  air  amas  air  a  choluinn  anns  a  gharadh,  's  chaidh  an  gille- 
carach  agus  fhuair  e  sgian  mhor,  agus  ghearr  e  an  ceann  di, 
agus  dh'  adhlaic  e  i-fein  a  's  a  ceann,  lamh-ris  a  choluinn  aig  an 
t-saor  anns  a  gharradh.  Tra  a  thainig  an  fheadhainn  air  an 
robh  curam  na  muic'  a  mach,  cha  robh  a  mhuc  ri  fhaicinn.  Dh' 
fharraid  iad  do  'n  ghille-charach  am  faca  e  i.  Thubhairt  esan 
gu  'm  faca,  gu  'n  robh  a  ceann  an  aird  agus  i  ag  am  hare  suas, 
agus  a  dol  da  na  tri  a  cheumannan  an  drasda  is  a  rithisd.  Agus 
dh'  fhalbh  iadsan  le  cabhaig  mhoir,  an  taobh  a  thubhairt  an  gille- 


360  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

carach  a  chaidh  a'  mhuc.  Tra  fhuair  an  gille-carach  gu  'n  deach 
iadsan  as  an  t-sealladh,  chuir  e  gach  nl  air  doigh  nach  amaiseadh 
iadsan  air  a  mhuic.  Chaidh  an  fheadhainn  air  an  robh  curam  na 
muic  e  agus  dh  iarr  iad  i  na  h-uile  rathad  anns  am  bu  coltach  i 
a  bhith.  An  sin  tra  nach  b'  urrainn  doibh  a  faotuinn,  cha  robh 
aca  air  ach  dol  gu  tigh  an  righ,  agus  Innse  mar  a  thachair. 

An  sin  chaidh  comhairle  an  t-seanaghail  a  ghabhail  a  rithisd. 
Agus  is  e  a'  chomhairle  a  thug  an  seanaghal  orra,  iad  a  chuir 
nan  saighdeirean  a  mach  air  feadh  na  duthcha  air  cheithearnan, 
agus  cia  aite  air  bith  am  faigheadh  iad  muic-fheoil,  na  cia  aite  air 
bith  am  faiceadh  iad  muic-fheoil ;  mar  b' -urrainn  da  n  fheadhainn 
sin,  a  leigeadh  fhaicinn  cia  mar  a  fhuair  iad  a  mhuic-fhcoil  a 
bhitheadh  aca,  gu  'm  b'  iad  sin  an  fheadhainn  a  mharbh  a  mhuc 
's  a  rinn  na  h-uile  cron  a  chaidh  a  dheanamh.  Chaidh  comhairle 
an  t-seanaghail  a  ghabhail  's  na  saighdearan  a  chur  a  mach  air 
cheithearnan  air  feadh  na  duthcha,  's  bha  bhuidheann  diubh  aim 
an  tigh  banntrach  an  t-saoir  far  an  robh  an  gille-carach.  Thug 
banntrach  an  t-saoir  an  t-suipeair  do  na  saighdearan,  's  bha  cuid 
do  'n  mhuic-fheoil  air  a  deanamh  deas  doibh,  agus  bha  na  saigh- 
dearan ag  itheadh  na  mhuic-fheoil,  agus  ga  sar  mholadh.  Thuig 
an  gille-carach  cia-de*  a  bha  air  an  aire,  ach  cha  do  leig  e  air. 
Chaidh  na  saighdearan  a  chuir  a  luidh  a  mach  anns  an  t-sabhal, 
agus  tra  bha  iad  'nan  cadal,  chaidh  an  gille-carach  a  mach  agus 
mharbh  se  iad.  An  sin  chaidh  e  cho  luath  as  a  b'  urrainn  da  o 
thigh  gu  tigh  far  an  robh  na  saighdeirean  air  cheithearnan,  agus 
chuir  e  an  ceill  do  mhuinntir  nan  taighean,  gu  'm  b'  ann  a  chaidh 
"na  saighdearan  a  chuir  a  mach  air  feagh  na  duthcha,  gu  iad  a 
dh'eiridh  air  feadh  na  h-oidhche,  agus  an  sluagh  a  mharbhadh 
anns  na  leapaichean  aca,  agus  fhuair  e  a  thoirt  air  muinntir  na 
duthcha  chreidsinn  gun  do  mharbh  muinntir  gach  tighe  na  bha 
do  shaighdeirean  'nan  cadal  anns  na  sabhailean  aca.  Agus  an 
uair  nach  d'  thainig  na  saighdeirean  dachaidh  aig  an  tiom  bu 
choir  doibh,  chaidh  feadhainn  a  shealltuinn  cia-d6  a  thainig 
riutha.  Agus  tra  rainig  iadsan  is  ann  a  fhuair  iad  na  saighdeirean 
marbh  aims  na  saibhlean,  far  an  robh  iad  'nan  cadal.  Agus  dh 
aicheidh  muinntir  gach  tighe  gu  'n  robh  fios  aca  cia  mar  a  chaidh 
na  saighdeirean  a  chur  gu  bas,  na  c6  a  rinn  e. 

Chaidh  na  daoine  a  bha  ris  an  rannsachadh  air  son  nan  saigh- 
deirean gu  tigh  an  righ,  agus  dh'  innis  iad  mar  a  thachair.  An 
sin  chuir  an  righ  nos  air  an  t-seanaghal,  a  dh'  fhaotuinn  comhairle 
uaidh.     Thainig  an  seanaghal,  agus  dhinnis  an  righ  dha  mar  a 


SGEULACHD  A  GHILLE   CHARAICH.  361 

thachair,  agus  dh'  iarr  au  righ  comhairle  air.  Agus  is  e  a  chomh- 
airle  a  thug  an  seanaghal  air  an  righ,  e  a  dheanamh  cuirm  agus 
iob-dannsa  (a  ball)  's  e  chuireadh  sluagh  na  duthcha,  agus  nam 
bitheadh  am  fear  a  rinn  an  cron  an  sin,  gu  'm  b'e  am  e  fear  bu 
dana  a  bithidh  an  sin,  agus  gun  iarradh  e  nighean  an  righ  fein  a 
dhannsa  leis.  Chaidh  an  sluagh  iarraidh  a  chum  na  cuirm,  's  an 
dannsaidh.  Agus  a  raeasg  chaich  chaidh  an  gille  carach  iarraidh. 
Thainig  an  sluagh  a  chum  na  cuirm,  agus  a  measg  chaich  thainig 
an  gille-carach.  Tra  a  bha  a'  chuirm  seachad  th6isich  an  dannsa, 
agus  chaidh  an  ghille-carach  is  dh'  iarr  e  nighean  an  righ  gu 
dannsa  leis,  agus  bha  searrag  Ian  do  rudh  dubh  aig  an  t-seanaghal, 
agus  chuir  an  seanaghal  ball  dubh  de'n  rud  a  bha  anns  an  t-searrag 
air  a  ghille-charach,  ach  bha  le  nighean  an  righ  nach  robh  a  fait 
gle  mhath  ann  an  ordugh,  's  chaidh  i  do  shedmar  taobhaidh  gus 
a  chuir  ceart,  agus  chaidh  an  gille-carach  a  stigh  leatha,  's  tra 
sheall  ise  anns  a  ghloine  sheall  easan  cuideachd  ann,  's  chunnaic 
e  am  ball  dubh  a  chuir  an  seanaghal  air.  Tra  dhanns  iad  gus 
an  robh  am  port  ciuil  seachad  chaidh  an  gille  carach  agus  fhuair 
e  cothrom  air  an  t-searag  aig  an  t-seanaghall  a  ghoid  uaidh  gun 
fhios  d'a,  agus  chuir  esan  da  bhall  dubh  air  an  t  sheanaghal,  agus 
aon  a  bhall  dubh  air  fichead  fear  eile  g'a  thuile,  's  chuir  e  an  t- 
shearag  air  ais  a  rithis  far  an  d'  fhuair  se  i.  Eadar  sin  's  ceann 
a  ghreis,  thainig  an  gille-carach  a  rithis  's  dh'  iarr  e  nighean  an 
righ  gu  dannsa.  Bha  searag  aig  nighean  an  righ  cuideachd,  's 
chuir  i  ball  dubh  air  aodann  a  ghille-charaich  ach  fhuair  an  gille- 
carach  an  t-searag  a  thiulpa  as  a  poca  gu  'n  fhios  di,  agus  bho  'n  a 
bha  da  bhall  aire-san,  chuir  e  da  bhall  air  fichead  fear  eile  anns  a 
chuideachd,  agus  ceithir  buill  dhubh  air  an  t-seanaghal.  An  sin 
tra  a  bha  an  dannsa  seachad,  chaidh  feadhainn  a  chuir  a  dh' 
fhaicin  co  e  am  fear  air  an  robh  an  da  bhall  dhubh.  Tra  sheall 
iadsan  air  feadh  an  t-sluaigh  fhuair  iad  fichead  fear,  air 
an  robh  da  bhall  dhubh,  agus  bha  ceithir  buill  dhubh,  air 
an  t-seanaghal,  's  fhuair  an  gille-carach  ealadh  far  an  robh 
nighean  an  righ,  agus  an  t-searag  a  thiulpa  na  poca  a  rithis. 
Sheall  an  seanaghal  agus  bha  searagan  diubh  aige,  sheall 
nighean  an  righ  's  bha  a  searaig  fein  aicse,  an  sin  ghabh  an 
seanaghal  a's  an  righ  comhairle,  agus  is  e  a  chomhairle  sinn  a  rinn 
iad,  an  righ  a  thighinn  do  'n  chuideachd,  agus  e  a  ghradh  gu  'm 
b'  anabharra  tapaidh  a  dh  fheumadh  am  fear  a  rinn  na  n-uile 
cleas  a  chaidh  a  dheanamh  a  bhith,  na  n  tigeadh  e  air  aghaidh  s 
e  fein  a  thoirt  suas,  gu  'm  faighidh  e  nighean  an  righ  ri  phosadh 

I   2 


362  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

agus  darna  leth  na  rioghaclid  an  fheadh  is  a  bhithidk  an  an  righ 
beo,  agus  an  t  iomalain  do  n  rioghchd  an  deigh  bas  an  righ.  Agus 
thainig  na  h-uile  gin  do  n  fheadhainn  aig  an  robh  an  da  bhall 
dhubh  air  an  aodann,  agus  thubbairt  iad  gu'm  b'  iadsan  a  rinn  na 
b-uile  tapadb  a  cbaidh  a  dheanamh.  An  sin  chaidh  an  righ  's 
an  ard  chomhairle,  a  dh'  fheuchainn  cia-mar  a  ghabhadh  a  chuis 
socrachadh,  agus  is  e  a  chuis  a  shocruich  iad,  na  h-uile  fear  aig 
an  robh  an  da  bhall  dubh  air  an  aodann  a  chuir  comhla  ami  an 
seomar,  agus  bha  iad  gu  paisde  fhaotuinn,  agus  bha  nighean  an 
righ  gus  ubhall  a  thoirt  do  'n  phaisde  agus  bha  am  paisde  gus  a 
chuir  a  stigh  far  an  robh  na  fir  aig  an  robh  na  buill  dhubh  air  an 
aodann,  nan  suidh,  agus  ge  b'e  h-aon  air  bith  do  'n  tugadh  am 
paisde  an  t-ubhall,  b'e  sin  an  t-aon  a  bha  gus  nighean  an  righ 
fhaotuinn. 

Chaidh  sin  a  dheanamh,  agus  tra  chaidh  am  paisde  a  chuir  a 
stigh  do  'n  t  seomar  aims  an  robh  na  fir,  bha  sliseag  's  dranndan 
aig  a  ghille-charrach  's  chaidh  am  paisde  's  thug  se  an  t-ubhall 
d'a.  Chaidh  an  sin  an  t-sliseag  's  an  dranndan,  a  thoirt  o  'n 
gille-charach  agus  a  chuir  na  shuidh  aim  an  aite  eile,  agus  chaidh 
an  t-ubhall  a  thoirt  do  'n  phaisde  a  rithis,  agus  a  thoirt  a  mach 
as  am  t-seomar,  's  a  chuir  a  stigh  a  rithis  a  sheall  c6  dh'a  a 
bheiridh  e  an  t-ubhall,  agus  fun  a  bha  an  t  sliseag  's  an  dranndan 
aig  a  ghille-charach  roimh,  chaidh  am  paisde  far  an  robh  e  a 
rithis,  s  thug  se  dh  a  an  t-ubhall.  An  sin  f  huair  an  gille-carach 
nighean  an  righ  ri  phosadh. 

Agus  goirid  na  dheigh  sin  bha  nighean  an  righ  's  an  gille- 
carach  a  ghabhail  sraide  do  Bhaile-cliabh,  agus  a  nuair  a  bha 
iad  a  dol  thairis  air  drochaid  Bhaile-chiabh,  dh'  fharraid  an  gille 
carach  de  nighean  an  righ,  cia  ainm  a  bha  air  an  aite  sin,  agus 
dh  innis,  nighean  an  righ  gun  robh  drochaidh  Baile-cliabh  ami  an 
Eirinn,  agus  thubbairt  an  gille-carach — 

"  Ma  ta  is  trie  a  thubbairt  mo  mhathair  riumsa  gu  am  bu  e  bu 
deireadh  dhomh  a  bhith  rir  mo  chrochadh  aig  drochaid  Bhaile- 
cliabh  an  Eirinn,  's  rinn  i  an  fhaisineachd  sin  domh  iomadh  uair, 
tra  bhithinn  a  deanamh  phrat  oirre." 

Agus  thubhairt  nighean  an  righ,  "Mata  mo  shanntaich  thu  fein 
crochadh  thairis  air  taobhann  an  drochaid,  cumaidh  mise  an 
aird  thu  tacan  beag  le  mo  napaigean  poca." 

Agus  bha  iad  ri  cainnt  's  ri  aighear  ma  deidhinn,  ach  ma- 
dheireadh  bha  leis  a  ghille-charach  gu  'n  deanadh  se  e,  air  s  on 
abhachd,  agus  thug  nighean  an  righ  a  mach  a  neapai-ean  poca, 


SGEULACHD  A   GHILLE   CHARAICH.  363 

agus  chaidh  an  gille-carach  thair  an  clrochaid,  agus  chroch  e  ri 
neapaignean  poca  nighean  an  righ,  's  i  ga  leigeadh  fhein  thairis 
air  taobhan  na  drochaid,  's  iad  a  gairichdeich  ri  cheile. 

Ach  chuala  nighean  an  righ  eubh,  "  Tha  caisteal  an  righ  a  dol 
ri-theine,"  agus  chlisg  i,  agus  chaill  i  a  greim  air  an  neapaigean 
agus  thuit  an  gille-carach  sios,  agus  bhuail  a  cheann  ri  cloich,  's 
chaidh  an  eanchainn  as,  's  cha  robh  anns  an  eubh  ach  falrasg 
claoine  's  b'  eiginn  do  nighean  an  righ  dol  dachaidh  na  banntraich. 

From  Kate  Macfarlane,  in  or  near  the  year  1810  ;  A.  Campbell, 
Roseneath,  1860  ;  and  J.  M'Nair,  Clachaig,  1860. 

Some  incidents  in  this  story  I  have  known  as  long  as  I  can 
remember.  They  used  to  be  told  me  as  a  child  by  John  Campbell, 
piper.  Some  of  them  were  told  me  in  1859  by  John  Mackenzie 
at  Inverary,  who  said  they  were  part  of  a  long  story  of  which  he 
could  not  repeat  the  rest.  Others  are  alluded  to  in  the  Suther- 
land collection  as  known  in  that  county.  The  version  given 
came  to  me  with  the  pedigree  given  above,  and  is  unaltered, 
except  in  orthography  and  punctuation  here  and  there. 

It  may  be  compared  with  a  very  great  many  stories  in  many 
languages,  but  I  know  none  exactly  like  it.  (See  note  on  No.  40, 
vol.  ii.) 

Some  of  the  incidents  are  very  like  part  of  the  story  of 
Rampsintus  (Rawlinson's  Herodotus,  vol.  ii.  p.  191),  which  were 
told  to  Herodotus  more  than  two  thousand  years  ago  by  priests 
in  Egypt,  and  the  most  natural  conclusion  to  arrive  at  is,  that 
these  incidents  have  been  spread  amongst  the  people  by  those 
members  of  their  families  who  study  the  classics  at  the  Scotch 
universities,  and  who  might  well  repeat  what  they  had  learned 
over  a  winter  fire  in  their  father's  cottages,  as  their  share  of  a 
night's  entertainment. 

But  the  incidents  of  this  story,  which  resemble  the  classical 
tale,  are  associated  with  a  great  many  other  incidents  which  are 
not  in  Herodotus.  Some  of  these  have  a  resemblance  to  incidents 
in  the  Norse  story  of  "  The  Master  Thief  ;  "  and,  according  to 
Mr.  Dasent's  introduction,  these  have  a  resemblance  to  Sanscrit 
stories,  which  are  not  within  my  reading.  They  have  a  relation 
to  Italian  stories  in  Straparola,  and,  according  to  a  note  in 
Rawlinson's  Herodotus,  the  story  of  Rampsintus  "has  been 
repeated  in  the  Pecorone  of  Ser  Giovanni,  a  Florentine  of  the 


364  WEST  HIGHLAND   TALES. 

fourteenth  century,  who  substitutes  a  Doge  of  Venice  for  the 
king." 

I  am  told  that  the  barrel  of  pitch  and  the  marks  on  the  men 
are  introduced  into  an  old  German  story  ;  but  there  are  several 
incidents  such  as  that  of  the  pig  which  was  to  discover  the  dead 
body,  as  pigs  now  do  truffles,  and  the  apple  which  as  usual  is 
mystical,  which  so  far  as  I  know  are  in  Gaelic  only. 

On  the  whole,  then,  there  seems  to  me  nothing  for  it  but  to 
admit  this  to  be  the  Gaelic  version  of  a  popular  tale,  traditionally 
preserved  for  ages,  altering  as  times  roll  on,  and  suiting  itself  to 
the  manners  of  the  narrators  of  the  time. 

To  suppose  it  to  be  derived  from  books  is  to  suppose  that  these 
books  have  all  been  read  at  some  time  so  widely  in  Scotland  as 
to  have  become  known  to  the  labouring  population  who  speak 
Gaelic,  and  so  long  ago  as  to  have  been  forgotten  by  the 
instructed,  who  speak  English  and  study  foreign  languages. 

Either  this  is  a  traditional  popular  tale,  or  learning  must  have 
been  much  more  widely  spread  in  the  west  at  some  former  period 
than  it  is  at  present. 

My  own  opinion  is  that  the  tale  is  traditional,  but  there  is  room 
enough  for  speculation.  On  the  25th  and  27th  of  August,  I 
heard  parts  of  the  story  told  by  Dewar,  and  MacNair,  and  John 
Mackenzie.  Hector  Urquhart  told  me  that  his  father  used  to  tell 
it  in  Ross-shire  when  he  was  a  child.  In  his  version,  the  store- 
house was  a  treasury  full  of  gold  and  silver,  and  the  entrance  a 
loose  stone  in  the  wall ;  the  man  was  caught  in  "  cep,"  a  gin  for 
catching  foxes.  The  pig  was  a  hungry  boar,  and  the  lad  killed 
him  with  an  arrow.  Even  John  the  tinker,  who  was  present, 
knew  the  story,  though  not  well  enough  to  repeat  it.  It  is 
manifestly  widely  spread  in  the  Highlands. 

The  Gaelic  is  somewhat  peculiar,  and  there  are  some  errors  in 
it  which  have  not  been  corrected. 


END   OF  VOL.   I. 


(3) 

162 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


