Google 


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world’s books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that’s often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book’s long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 


Usage guidelines 


Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 


+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 


+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google’s system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 


+ Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 


+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can’t offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book’s appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 


About Google Book Search 


Google’s mission is to organize the world’s information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world’s books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 
ai[http: //books . google. com/| 


RADCLIFFE COLLEGE LIBRARY 


Grimm ULtbhrarp 


No. 9 


THE PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Che Grimm Librarp. 


I. GEORGIAN FOLK-TALES. Translated by MARJORY WARDROP. 
Cr. 8vo, pp. xii +175. 55. net. 


II. THE LEGEND OF PERSEUS. By Epwin SIDNEY 
HARTLAND, F.S.A. 
Vout. 1 THE SUPERNATURAL BIRTH. 
Cr. 8v0, Pp. xxxiv+228. 75. 6d. net. 


Ill. THE LEGEND OF PERSEUS. By Epwin SIDNEY 
HARTLAND, F.S.A. 
Vow. 1. THE LIFE-TOKEN. 
Cr. 8v0, pp. viiit445. as. 6d. neb. 


IV. THE VOYAGE OF BRAN, SON OF FEBAL. Edited by Kuno 
MEYER. With an Essay upon the Happy Otherworld in Irish 
Myth, by ALFRED Nutr. Vol. 1. 

Cr. 8v0, pp. xvii+ 331. ros. 6d. net. 


V. THE LEGEND OF PERSEUS. By Epwin SIDNEY 
HARTLAND, F.S.A. 
Vou. mt. ANDROMEDA. MEDUSA. 
Cr. 8v0, pp. xxxvii+225. 75. 6d. net. 


VI. THE VOYAGE OF BRAN, SON OF FEBAL. Edited by 
Kuno MEYER. With an Essay on the Celtic Doctrine of Rebirth, 
by ALFRED Nutt. Vol. U1. 

Cr. 8vo, pp. Xiit+ 352. 105. 6d. net. 


VII. THE LEGEND OF SIR GAWAIN. = Studies upon its Original 
Scope and Significance. By Jessrzt L. WeEsTON, translator of 
Wolfram von Eschenbach's ‘ Parzival.’ 

Cr. 8vo, pp. xiv+-III. 45. net. 


All rights reserved 


nou 
THE® 90 


Pre- and Proto-historic Finns 


BOTH EASTERN AND WESTERN 
WITH 


The Magic Songs 


OF THE WEST FINNS 


By the Honourable 
JOHN ABERCROMBY 


COR, MEMBER OF THE FINNO-UGRIAN SOCIETY 


IN TWO VOLUMES 
vol. Ll 


Published by David Nutt 
in the Strand, London 
1898 


13567 


Edinburgh : T. and A, ConsTasie, Printers to Her Majesty 


PREFACE 


IN this country the term Finn is generally restricted 
to the natives of Finland, with perhaps those of 
Esthonia thrown in. But besides these Western 
Finns there are other small nationalities in Central 
and Northern Russia, such as the Erza and MokSa 
Mordvins, the Ceremis, Votiaks, Permians, and 
Zirians, to whom the term is very properly applied, 
though with the qualifying adjective — Eastern. 
Except by Folklorists, little attention is paid in 
Great Britain to these peoples, and much that is 
written of them abroad finds no response here, the 
‘silver streak’ acting, it would seem, as a non-con- 
ductor to such unsensational and feeble vibrations. 
Although the languages of the Eastern and 
Western Finns differ as much perhaps among them- 
selves as the various members of the Aryan group, the 
craniological and physical differences between any 
two Finnish groups is very much less than between 
the Latin and the Teutonic groups, for instance. All 
the Finns live nearly under the same latitudes, and 
in pre- and proto-historic times, which are not so very 


vi PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


remote, the differences in customs, religious and other 
beliefs, could not have been very great. This is 
important; it allows us to supplement what is 
missing or defective in one Finnish group by what is 
more complete in another, with far greater certainty 
than when dealing under similar circumstances with 
the Aryan-speaking groups. In the first five chapters 
of the first volume I have tried, with the combined 
aid of craniology, archzology, ethnography, and 
philology, brought up to date, to sketch as succinctly 
as possible the pre- and proto-historic history of the 
Eastern and Western Finns, showing the various 
stages of civilisation to which they successively 
advanced after contact with higher civilisations, at 
different periods of their evolution from neolithic 
times to the middle ages. Chapters six and seven 
contain an analysis of the beliefs of the Western 
Finns, so far as they can be gathered from the text 
of the Magic Songs in the second volume; and a 
perusal of them will facilitate the comprehension 
of the Magic Songs themselves. The second volume, 
containing 639 magic songs, some of considerable 
length, classed under 233 headings, is a translation 
of a very large portion of the Sxomen kansan 
muinaisia Lottsurunoja, edited and published by the 
late Dr. Lénnrot in 1880. As the translation was 
made for Folklorists it is as literal as possible, 


PREFACE vii 


without additions, without subtractions, and the 
vocabulary employed is in conformity with the 
subject, with the humble social status and homely 
surroundings of the original composers. The metre 
of the original is the same as in the Kalevala, which 
cannot be reproduced in a language like English, 
where the ictus of the metre has to coincide with 
the natural stress-accent of the words. But where 
it could be done without loss of exactness a certain 
rhythm, generally three beats to a line, is given in 
the translation, though to save space the lines are 
printed in prose form. 

In the work of translating the Magic Songs I owe 
a debt of gratitude to Lektor Raitio, with whom I 
. first began to study them a good many years ago, 
for much friendly assistance. Finally, I acknowledge 
with thanks the reproduction of four illustrations 
borrowed from Mr. J. R. Aspelin’s Antiquités du 
Nord Finno-ougrien, four from Mr. Kudriavtsev, 
three from Mr. Inostrantsev, one from Mr. Spitsin, 
and twelve from photographs given me by Mr. 
NovokreSéennikh. The six illustrations from sketches 
made by myself were made hurriedly, and are not 
absolutely correct, though adequate, I hope, for the 
purpose. 


EDINBURGH, August 1898. 


CONTENTS 


Value of Additional Letters of the Alphabet . 
Full Titles of Books consulted and referred to 
Illustrations . 


CHAPTER I 


GEOGRAPHICAL POSITION AND CRANIOLOGY 
OF THE FINNS 


Geographical Position of the Western Finns . 
Geographical Position of the Eastern Finns 
The Cudes . . 
Physical Features of the Country . 
Physical and Mental Characteristics of the Finns 
The Mordvins 

The Ceremis . 

The Votiaks . 

Permians and Zjrians 

Table I. . 

Finnish Crania 

Tables IT. and III. 

Crania from the Baltic Provinces 

Table IV. 

Table V. . . . . . 
Table VI... ° . . . ; 


PAGE 
xill 
xiv 

xxiii 


X PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


CHAPTER II 

; PAGE 
The Neolithic Age in Finland oe 53 
Neolithic Man on the Shores of Lake Ladoga and Bastwards . 538 
Table VII. . . . . . . . . . 59 
The Station of Kolomts} : . . . . . . 65 
Finds in Olénets . . . . . . : . . 66 
The Valley of the Oké& . . . . . . . . 68 
The Valley of the Volga. . . . . . . . 73 
The Government of Viatka . . . . . . . 76 
The Government of Perm . . : . . 78 
Neolithic Period in the Baltic Provinces . . . . . 80 


General Conclusions . . . . . . . . 84 
The Bronze Age in Finland . . . . . . . 87 


The Bronze Age in Northern Russia. . . . . 89 
Fatianovo Crania . . . . . . . 92 
The Bronze Age in the Baltic Provinces . . . . . 95 
The Transition from Bronze to Iron . . . . . 96 
The Earlier Iron Age in Finland . . . . . . IOI 
The Earlier Iron Age in the Baltic Provinces . 2  » 103 
Table VIII. . . . . . facing 109 
The Earlier Iron Age in Eastern Russia . . . . . 117 


CHAPTER III 
Historical Notices of Classical Authors, etc. . . . . 126 


CHAPTER IV 
THE PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION OF THE FINNS 
The Gods and Divinities © 26 «© © « «6 -¢ 150 
ClanGods . .~ .© +-© «© +» 2© «© «6. 4 162 
Beliefs, Wizards . «© © » 6+ eee 168 


Ancestral Worship - 8 so 8 ew . 176 


CONTENTS 


The Family . . 

Classifactory System of Relationship 

Mutual Avoidance . . : . 

Personal Names 

The House, Domestic Occupations, etc. . 

The Metals . . . . 

Domestic Animals . 

Tree-Names . 

Reasons for supposing that the Finns have ‘been in Europe 
since the beginning of the Neolithic Period in North 
Central Russia . : 

Table IX., showing the Range of forty-nine Culture-Words 


CHAPTER V 
The Third or Iranian Period . . . : . . . 
The Volga, the old Trade Route 


The Fourth or Lithuanian Period . 

The Fifth or Proto-Scandinavian Period . 
Geographical Position of the West Finns at this time 
The Sixth or Early Slav Period 

The Seventh or Tatar Period . 

Loan- Words of the Mordvins . 

Loan-Words of the Ceremis . 

Loan- Words of the Votiaks . 


CHAPTER VI 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS AS EXHIBITED 
IN THE MAGIC SONGS 


Spirits . : ; . ° 2 . . . . 
Ukko . 
Ilmarinen . . . . . . . . : . 


271 


273 
278 


xi oPRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Vainamdinen . ‘ ‘ 
Tapio and the Divinities of the Forest 
Hiisi . 
Lempo . ‘ 
Water-Spirits—Ahti, Vellamo, ete. 
Earth-Spirits, Sdmpsd Pellervoinen 
Luonto (Nature)—Luonnotar . : 
Maidens of the Air, of Spring® etc. . 
Pohjola. . . ‘ 
Lapland, Turja 
Personifications of Death—Kalme, Tuoni, Mana 
Sun, Moon, Great Bear . . : 
Elves, Brownies . . 
Giants—Tursas, Turilas . 
Rahkoi . e . 
Perkele, Piru 
God, the Creator . 
Jesus, Mary . 
Saints 
Kaleva . . ; . 
Wizards, Sorcerers, etc. . 
Disease . ‘ . . 
Inducements to depart - 
Places whither Diseases are conjured . 
Instruments . . . 


Defensive Precautions 
Helpers. . ‘ ° 
Precedents . 


Blessing and Cursing . . 
Offerings, Worship 


THE VALUE OF ADDITIONAL LETTERS OF 
THE ALPHABET 


¢ in East Finnish =?¢s. 

@ =Eng. ch in choose. 

£ =. 

J =Eng. / in joke. 

#, #= Eng. ag in bring. 

3 =Eng. s& in shall. 

4 =French 7 in jour. 

x =k or ch in Sc. loch. 

Consonants with a dash over or beside them, «.g. 3’, ¢’, a’, 
are soft and followed by a slight y sound. 

g=a thick guttural s, the Russian yersé. 

y in Finnish words=4%. 

é before another vowel in Russian words=y in yam, yield. 


FULL TITLES OF BOOKS CONSULTED AND 
REFERRED TO 


ABou-EL-CassIM, Voyage d’, par M. C. D’Ohsson. Paris, 1828. 
AHLOQVIST, A. (1) Unter Vogulen u. Ostjaken. Hielsingfors, 1883. 


. (2) Muistelmia matkoilta Vendjilla vuosina 1854-58. 
Helsingissi, 1859. 

9 (3) Journ. de la Société Finno-ougrienne viii. Hel- 
singfors, 1890. 


AKIANDER, M. Utdrag ur Ryska annaler. Suomi, 1848. Helsing- 
fors, 1849. 
muinaismuisto-yhdistyksen aikakaus kirja V. Helsingissd, 1882. 
ARVOITUKSIA (Suomen Kansan). Helsingissii, 1851. 
ASPELIN, J. R. (1) Suomi, 1883. 


9 (2) Antiquités du nord Finno-ougrien. Helsingfors, 
1877-1884. 

” (3) Suomalais-ugralaisen muinaistutkinnon alkeita. 
Helsingissi, 1875. 

a (4) Du groupe arctique et les Lapons. Congrés 
intern. d’anthrop. et d’archéol. préhist. Buda- 
pest, 1876. 

- (5) Sur VPage de la pierre, etc. Congrés intern. 


d’anthrop. et d’archéol. Stockholm, 1874. 


BIELENSTEIN, Dr. A. Die Grenzen des Lettischen Volkstammes in d. 
Gegenwart u. in 13 Jabrhund. St. Petersburg, 1892. 
BoGDANOV, A. Congrés internat. d’archéol. préhist. et d’anthrapo- 
logie & Moscou. 1892, vol. i. pp. 1-23 (Supplément). 
BOHTLINGK, O. Ueber d. Sprache der Jakuten. St. Petersburg, 
1848. 
xiv 


=o — - 


BOOKS CONSULTED xv 


BRENNSOHN, Is. Zur anthropologie der Litauer. Dorpat, 1883. 

Bucu, Dr. Max. Die Votjaken, eine ethnolog. Studie. Helsingfors, 
1882. 

BucceE, Sopuus. Norges Indskrifter med. de zldre Runer. Chris- 
tiania, 1891. 


CasTrin, A. (1) Vorlesungen tiber die Finnische Mythologie. St. 
- Petersburg, 1853. 
(2) Nordiska Resor och forskingar. Helsingfors, 1852. 
CHWOLSSON Vv. KHVOLSON. 


De Frieury, ComTe Louis. Les cimetieres 4 compartiments de 
Pancien pays des Jadzwingues. Congr. intern. d’archéol. et 
d’anthropol. préhist., T. ii. Moscou, 1893. 

De HarRwzz, Cu. La religion nationale des Tatares orientaux, etc. 
1887. 

DONNER, QO. Suomalaisten ja Mordvalaisten yhteinen sivistyskanta 
ennen heidan eroamistaan toisistansa. Suomi, toinen jakso, 15 Osa. 
Helsingissa, 1882. 

Don, B. Mélanges asiatiques tirés du bull. de l’Acad. imp. des 
sciences de St. Pétersbourg, T. vii. 1873. 

DUsen, BARON von. Om Lappland och Lapparne. Ethnograf. 
Studier. Stockholm, 1873. 


Eprist, géographie d’, trad. par P. Amddée Jaubert. Paris, 1836. 


ForsMAN, A. V. Tutkimuksia suomen kansan persoonallisen nimis- 
ton alalla. Suomi, 1894. 
Friss, J. A. Lappisk Mythologi. Christiania, 1871. 


GANANDER, Cok. Mythologia Fennica. Abo, 1879. 

GAVRILOV, B. (1) Proizvedeniya narodnoi slovesnosti, obriadj i 
povieria Votiakav Kazanskoi i Viatskoi 
gubernii. Kazan, 1880. 

9 (2) Povieria, obriadi, i objéai Votiakov Mamadiésk. 

uiezda. Trudj tetvert. arkheolog. siezda v 
Rossii, Tom ii. Kazan, 1891. 

GENETZ, ARVID. (1) Worterbuch d. Kola-Lapp-Dialekte. Helsing- 
fors, 1891. 


xvi PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


GENETZ, ARVID. (2) Ost Tcheremissische Sprachstudien. Journ. 
de la Société Finno-ougrienne, Tom. vii. 
Helsingfors, 1889. 
» (3) Ensi tavaun vokaalit suomen, lapin ja mordvan. 
Suomi, Osa 13. Helsingissd, 1897. 
GEORGI. Description de toutes les nations de l’Empire de la Russie. 
2vols. St. Pétersbourg, 1776. 
GREWINGK, C. (1) Die Neolithische Bewohner v. Kunda in Estland. 
Verhandl. d. Gel. Est. Gesell. zu Dorpat. 
Bd. xii. Dorpat, 1884. 
” (2) Der schifformige Aschenfriedhof bei Tirsel in 
Estland. Verhandl. d. g. Est. Ges. Bd. xiii. 
Dorpat, 1888. 
- ' (3) Erliuterungen zur Karte d. Stein-, Bronze-, und 
ersten Eisenalters von Liv-, Est-, und Kurland. 
Dorpat, 1884. 
(4) Verhandl. d. g. Est. Gesell. Bd.ix. 1879. 
GRIEsBACH, A. La végétation du globe, trad. par P. de Tchihatcheff. 
Paris, 1875. 
GROTENFELD, K. Herra Martin maanlain suomennos. Virittaja 
ii. Porvossa, 1886. 


HARKAVI, A. Y. Skazaniya musulmansk. pisatelef o Slavianakh i 
Russkikh. S,. Peterburg, 1870. 
HAUSMANN, Dr. (1) Grabfunde aus Estland. Revel, 1896. 


»» (2) Katalog d. Ausstellung z, X archdolog. Kon- 
gress in Riga, 1896. 
HEIKEL, Dr. A. O. (1) Suomen Museo, 1894. Helsingissi, 1894. 
> (2) Antiquités de la Sibérie occidentale dans les 
musées de Tomsk, Tobolsk, etc. Hel- 
singfors, 1894. 
HEIN, RICHARDOS. Incantamenta magica graca latina. Lipsiee, 
MDCCCXCII. 


HYLTEN-CAVALLIUS, G. O. Warend och Wirdarne. Stockholm, 
1864. 


InN BATUTA’S Travels in Egypt. Translated by Professor Lee. 1829. 
INOSTRANTSEV, A. Doistori¢eskii ¢eloviek kamennago vieka pober- 
eZia ladotskago ozera. S. Peterburg, 1882. 


BOOKS CONSULTED xvii 
Jaxnes, A. Virittaja ii. p. 171. Porvossa, 1886. 


KALEVALA. Stereotyped edition with notes. Helsingsfors, 1894. 

Kyarouzin, A. Obzor doistorideskol arkheologii v Estlandskol, 
Liphlandskof i Kurlandsko! guberniakh. Vremennik Estlandsk. 
Gubernii, Kn. i. Revel, 1894. 

KHVOLSON. (Ibn Dasta, izdal, perevel i obiasit D, A.) S. Peter- 
burg, 1869. 

KILLINEN, K. Muinaisjannéksid ja muistoja Sortavalan Kihlakun- 
nassa, Suomen muinaismuisto-Yhdistyksen Aikauskirja, xi. 
Helsingfors, 1890. 

Kress, Dr. R. Der Bernsteinschmuck d. Steinzeit v. Schwartsort, 
etc. Kénigsberg, 1882. , 

KosertT, Dr. RUDOLF. Historische Studien aus d. Pharmakolog. 
Institute d. K. Univers. Dorpat. Halle a. S., 1894. 

KOSKINEN, Y. Suomalaisten heimokuntain siirtymisestd Itameren 
rannikoille, historialliset tiedot. Suomi, Toinen jakso, 15 Osa. 
Helsingissa, 1882. 

KuprgiavTsev. Les Vestiges de l’homme préhist. de l’Age de pierre 
prés du Volosovo. Congres intern. d’arch. et d’anthrop. préhist., 
vol. ii. Moscou, 1893. . 


LissavgER, Pror. (1) Crania Prussica.  Zeitschr. f. Ethnologie, 
Berlin. Bd. vi. 1874. 

3° (2) Crania Prussica. Zeitschr. f. Ethnologie, 
Berlin. Bd. x. 1878. 


Marxov, L. N. Velikorusskiya zaklinaniya. Zapiski imp. russk. 
geogr. obitestva, Tom ii. S. Peterburg, 1869. 
Marnov, V. (1) Rezult. antrop. izslied. sredi Mordvj-Erzi. Zapiski 
imp. russk. geogr. ob&testva, Tom xi. S. Peter- 
burg, 1883. 
- (2) Mordvalaiset kisitteet sukulaisuuksista. Suomi, 
1890. Helsingissa. 
» (3): O&erk yuridiéesk. vita Mordvj. S. Peterburg, 


1874. 
MAa.igv, N. (1) Antropologiteskif oferk plemeni Permiakov. Kazan, 
1887. 
I 


xviii PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


MALIRv, N. (2) Materiali dlia sravitelnoi antropologii. Kazan, 
1874. 
MANNHARDT, W. (1) Der Baumkultus d. Germanen u. ihrer Nach- 
barstimme. Berlin, 1885. 
(2) Antike Wald- und Feld-Kulte. Berlin, 1877. 

MARCIANUS, HERAKLEOT#. Periplus. Geog. minores Greci, Edid. 
Hoffmann. Lipsis, 184r. 

MARTIN, F. R. (1) L’age du bronze au Musée de Minoussinsk. 

Stockholm, 1893. 
* (2) Die Sammlung F. R. Martin. Stockholm, 
1895. 

MIKHAILOVSKII, Pror. V. M. Shamanism in Siberia and Europ. 
Russia. Journ. of the Anthrop. Institute, vol. xxiv. London, 
1894. 

MIKKOLA, Dr. J. J. Beriihrungen zwischen d. West Finnisch. u. 
Slavischen Sprachen. Helsingfors, 1894. 

MIKLOSICH, Fr. Etymolog. Worterbuch d. Slavischen Sprachen. 
Wien, 1886. 

MONTELIUs, O. (1) Les temps préhistoriques en Suéde, trad. par 

S. Reinach. Paris, 1895. 


” (2) Congrés intern. d’anthrop. et d’archéol. préhist. 
Stockholm, 1876. 
9 (3) Sur le prem. Age du fer dans les prov. Baltiques 


et en Pologne. Congrés intern. d’anthrop. et 
d’archéol. préhist. Budapest, 1876. 
MULLER, S. Vor oldtid, en populzr fremstilling af Danmarks arkeo- 
logi. Kobenhavn, 1894. 
MonkKAcsi, Dr. B. (1) Ueber die heidn. Religion d. Vogulen. 
Ethnolog. Mitteilungen aus Ungarn, 
Bd. iii. Budapest, 1894. 
(2) Prehistorisches in d. magyarisch. Metall- 
namen, Eth. Mitt. aus Ungarn. Bd. iv. 
Budapest, 1895. 
(3) Votjak nyelvmutatvdnyok. Budapest, 1884. 


Nyman, A. L. Kuinka Suomen kivikauden kalusto jakaantuu 
muototutkimusten mukaan. Suomi, Helsingissi, 1882. 


O, K.=(OLD) KALEVALA, Ist edition. Helsingfors, 1835. 


BOOKS CONSULTED xix 


Osrrovsx!. Votjakit. Kieletir, toinen nidos. 1 annos. Helsingissd, 
1875. 


PAASONEN, H. (1) Kielellisid lisii suomalaisten sivistyshistoriaan. 
Suomi 3 jak. 13 Osa. Helsingissd, 1897. 
* (2) Die tiirkischen Lehnworter im Mordwinischen. 
Journ. de la Soc. Finno-ougrienne xv. Hel- 
singfors, 1897. 
> (3) Proben d. mordwin. Volkslitteratur. Journ. de 
la Soc. Finno-ougrienne xii. Helsingfors, 
1894. 
PApal, Dr. Der Typus der Ugrier. Ethnolog. Mitteilungen aus 
Ungar, Bd. iii. Budapest, 1894. 
Paris, L. La chronique de Nestor. Paris, 1834. 
PATKANOV, S. (1) Tip ostiatskago bogatjria po ostiatsk. bjlinam i 
geroicesk. skazaniyam. S. Peterburg, 1891. 
9 (2) Die Irtysch Ostjaken. Th. i. St. Peterburg, 
1897. 
PERVUKHIN, N. G. Materiali po arkheologii vostoénjkh gubernii 
Rossii, Vipusk ii. Moskva, 1896. 
Pourakov, J. S. (1) Ethnog. nabliud. na yugo-vostok Olonets. 
gub. Zapiski I. Russk. geogr. obédéestva, 
Tom iii. S. Peterburg, 1873. 

” (2) Izsliedovania po kamenn. vieku v Olonetsko! 
gubernii. Zap. imp. Russk. geog. obséestva 
po otd. Etnog. Tom x. S. Peterburg, 
1882. 

PorRKKA, V. Tscheremissische Texte mit Uebersetsung. Journ. de 
la Société Finno-ougrienne xiii. Helsingfors, 1895. 

PTOLEM#I, CLAUDII. Geographiz. Edid. Dr. Fr. G. Wilberg. 
Essendiz, MDCCCXXXVIII. 


Raptorr, Dr. Wm. Aus Siberien. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1884. 
Retsius, G. (1) Finska kranier. Stockholm, 1878. 

” (2) Matériaux pour servir 4 la connaissance des cha- 
ractéres ethniques de la race Finnoise. Congrés 
intern. d’anthrop. et d’archéol. préhist. 7° session. 
Stockholm, 1874. 


XX PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


RyGH, O. Sur la groupe arctique de l’4ge de la pierre polie en 
Norvége. Congrés intern. d’anthrop. et d’archéol. préhist. 
Stockholm, 1874. 


SAVENKOV, J. Congrés intern. d’archéol. et d’anthrop. préhist. & 
Moscou, Tom. ii. 1893. 

SCHIEMANN, Dr. CH. Russland Polen u. Livland bis ins 17 Jahrh., 
vol. i. Berlin, 1886. 

SEMENOV, T. Ceremisj. Etnograficeski oterk. Moskva, 1893. 

SETALA, E. N. (1) Yhteissuomalaisten klusiilien historia. Hel- 


singissi, 1890. 

(2) Ueber quantitatswechsel im finnisch-ugrischen. 
Journ. de la Soc. Finno-ougrienne, xiv. 
1896. 

SrEvers, Count C. G. (1) Ausgrabungen des Rinnehiigels. Zeit- 
schr. f. Ethnologie. Bd. vii. (1875). 
Berlin. 

(2) Forschungstour im Lett. Gebiet an der 
Oger u. Ewst. Zeitschr. f. Ethnologie. 
Bd. xi. (1879). Berlin. 

SJGGREN, J. AND. Gesammelte Schriften. St. Petersburg, 1861. 

SMIRNOV, J. N. (1) Ceremisj. Istoriko-etnograf. oerk. Kazan, 1889. 


2» (2) Votiaki. 9 » » 1890. 
” (3) Permiaki. ry) ” », 189%. 
” (4) Mordva. ”9 Y) » 1895. 


SNELLMAN, A. H. Itameren suomalaiset itseniisyytensd aikana. 
Suomen muinaismuisto-yhdistyksen aikakauskirja, xvi. Helsin- 
gissd, 1896. 

SOMMIER, S. (1) Sirieni, Ostiacche e Samoiedi dell’ Ob. Firenze, 

1887. 
(2) Note di viaggio (Arch. per l’antrop. e la Etnologia, 
xviii. and xix.), Firenze, 1889. 
” (3) Un’ estate in Siberia. Firenze, 1885. 

SPITs{N, A. Materialj po arkheologiY vostoénjkh gubernif Rossif- 
Priuralskii kraY¥. Moskva, 1893. 

SpROGIS, J. Pamiatniki latiiskago narodnago tvordcestva. Vilna, 
1868. 

Sruxenperc, A. iN. Vjsotskji. Materialj dlia izuceniya kamen- 
nago vieka v Kazanskof gubernii. Kazan, 1885. 


BOOKS CONSULTED xxi 


TaRgneTzKY, A. Beitrage zur Craniologie d. Grossrussischen Be- 
volkerang. Mém. de l’Acad. imp. des sciences de St. Péters- 
bourg, vii serié., Tom. xxxii. No. 13. St. Pétersbourg, 1884. 

TEPLOUKHOV, TH. A. (1) VeSéestvennie pamiatniki kamenn. i 

bronzov. vieka v zapad. éasti Permsk. 
gubernii. Trudj Permsk. Uéen. Arkhiv. 
Komissii, vjp. 1. 1892. 

” (2) Drevnosti Permsk. ¢Cudi iz serebra i 
zolota i eya torgov. puti. Permskif 
Krai, Tom. iii. Perm, 1895. 

99 (3) Drevnosti Permsk. cudi v vidie bas- 
nolovnikh liudel i Zivotnjkh. Permskil 
Krai, Tom. ii. Perm, 1893. 

Texnvo, W. M. Metsastys tietoja Kajaanin kihlakunnasta ja etinkin 
Sotkamon pitajasta. Helsingissa, 1893. 

THOMSEN, VILH. (1) Beréringer mellem de finske og de baltiske 

(litauisk-lettiske) Sprog. Kébenhavn, 1890. 
» (2) Ueber d. Einfluss d. german. Sprachen auf d. 
Finnisch-Lappischen. Halle, 1870. 

TiscHLER, Dr. O. Die neuesten Entdeckungen aus d. Steinzeit im 
ostbaltisch. Gebiet. Schrift. d. phys.-dkonom. Gesells. xxiii. 

TOMASCHEK, WM. (1) Sitsungs Berichte d. k. Ac. d. Wissensch. 

phil. hist. Classe Bd. cxvi. (1888). Wien. 
” (2) Bd. cxvii. (1889). Wien. 


UsraLvy De Mxrz6-K6vesp, E. pz. Les Bachkirs, les Vépses et les 
antiquités finno-ougriennes et altalques. Paris, 1880. 


VERESCAGIN, G. Votiaki sosnovskago kraya. S. Peterburg, 1886. 
VircHow, Dr. (1) Archdolog. Reise nach Livland. Zeitschr. f. 
Ethnologie, Bd. ix. (1877). Berlin. 
- (2) Livlandischer Schidel. Z. f. Ethnol., Bd. x. 
(1878). Berlin. 
. (3) Zeitschrift f. Ethnologie, Bd. xi. (1879). Berlin. 
VisKOVATOV, P. Piukhtitskoe drevnee kladbi&e. Vremennik Est- 
liandsk. gubernii. Revel, 1894. 


WICHMAN, Y. (1) Tietoja Votjaakien Mytologiiasta. Suomi. Hel- 
singissa, 1893. 


xxii PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


WIcHMAN, Y. (2) Suom. vaski sanan vastineet permiliisissé Kielissa. 
Virittaja, 2. Helsingissa, 1897. 
» (3) Wotjakische Sprachproben. Journ. de la Soc. 
Finno-ougrienne, xi. Helsingfors, 1893. 
YANTCHOUK, N. L’Anthropologie, Tome 3 (1892). Paris, 1892. 


YuLE, COLONEL H. The Book of Ser Marco Polo, the Venetian. 
London, 1875. 


Zeuss, K, Die Deutschen u. die Nachbarstamme. Milinchen, 1837. 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


. Silhouette of a Seal from Ladoga. Inostrantsev, Table x1. No. 1. 


Muzzle of a Dog or Bear from Ladoga. Inostrantsev, p. 210. 

A Carved Piece of Bone from Ladoga. Inostrantsev, Table x1. 
No. 2. 

Human Silhouette in Flint from Volésovo. Kudriavtsev, Fig. 17. 

Human Silhouette in Flint from Volésovo. Kudriavtsev, Fig. 18. 

Silhouette of a Goose in Flint from Volésovo. Kudriavtsev, Fig. 19. 

Silhouette of a Badger in Flint from Volédsovo. Kudriavtsev, 
Fig. 20. 


- Modern Vogul Idol in Wood. From a Sketch by the Author. 


Copper Human Mask from Galit. From Aspelin, No. 299. 

Bird-God from a Grave in the Government of Tomsk. Sketch 
by the Author. 

Copper Statuette of a Man from Galig. From Aspelin, No. 299. 


- Copper Statuette of a Man from the Government of Perm. 


Aspelin, No. 304. 
Ormmamented Bronze Knife. From a Photograph. 


. Bronze Button from Ananino. From a Sketch by the Author. 
. Bronze Button from Koban. From a Sketch by the Author. 

. Earring from Gliadénova. From a Photograph. 

. Head of a Man in Bronze. From a Sketch by the Author. 

. Ornamented Stone Whorl. Spitsjn, Table x. No. 12. 

. Bronze Cheek of a Bit from Ananino. From Aspelin, No. 474. 
. Two Human Figures in Bronze. From a Photograph. 

. Human Figure. 

. Head and Shoulders of a Bear. From a Photograph. 

. Bird with Human Face on its Breast. ,, ” 

. A Bear in Bronze. From a Sketch by the Author. 

. Upper Part of a Water-Bird. From a Photograph. 


xxiii 


XXIV PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


FIG. 

26. Bird with Human Face on its Breast. From a Photograph. 
27. Double Bird. » y 

28. Three-headed Bird (?). - ys 

29. Double Bronze Button. ” - 

30. Man on Horseback. - ¥ 

31. Man riding on an Animal. " - 

32. Circular Disc with Rings. ” 


33. Circular Bronze Disc, with incised Ornaments. 
Excavations at Gliadénova, with Mr. Novokre&ennjkh in Middle | 
Distance. From a Photograph by the Author. (Opp. p. 68.) 
Excavations at Gliadénova, with the Kama in the Distance. From 

a Photograph by the Author. (Opp. p. 118.) 
The Sand-Dunes of Volésovo. From a Photograph by the Author. 


(Opp. p. 118.) 


MAPS 


. Finland. 

. The Baltic Provinces, showing where Crania have been discovered . 
. The Baltic Provinces, showing Archzological Finds. 

. Russia in Europe. 


PW WH om 


ak 
FINLAND 
Scale of Miles 
= = | 
» ad 
3 7 on, 
- iar 


Foes 
. 
% 
$ 
i 


N ° ; 
° ; . 


Best 26 of Greenwich 2A 


WRAs -ometen Raeveh 


STA Fo Seog 


AGAI oy wasqe pana weeq axed wyUBE) OTK 


SAHONIAOUd OLLTVE 


or Margrwi, af A " 
ant. —t~—- -- _ ~~ On A) 


Fic. 1 


Fic. 2. Fie. 3. 


Fic. « 


Fic. 5. 


Fic. 8. 


Fic. 9. 


Fic, 10. 


Fis. 


13 


Fi. 14. 


Fra 


Fic. 17. 


Fig. 15. 


Fic, 38. 


Fic. 19. 


Fie. 23. 


Fic. 25. 
Fie. a4. 


Fig 26. 


Fic, 28. 


Fic. a7. 


Fic. 29. 


Fig. 30. 


Fic. 31. 


Fic. 32. 


op (| 


PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


CHAPTER I 


GEOGRAPHICAL POSITION AND CRANIOLOGY OF 
THE FINNS 


As the main object of this work is an examination of the 
magic songs of the Finns, it may seem at first sight that 
most of the first volume is little more than a superfluity, 
unnecessarily heavy baggage that had better have been 
left behind. But from a point of view that may quite 
legitimately be held this is not the case. The Finns of 
Finland form only a large fraction of the Western 
Finns, and eastward of these live several groups that are 
commonly termed Eastern Finns, such as the Ceremis, 
Mordvins, Votiaks, and Zirians. Philologists maintain, 
that to account for a certain community of structure and 
vocabulary, the different languages spoken by these peoples 
must originally derive from a common source; that once 
they must have lived much closer together than they do 
at present. But as community of speech does not 
necessarily carry with it community of race, it Is necessary 
to give some of the craniological data that have accumu- 
lated during the last few years, not only to show how far 
race and language coincide, but also to help to determine 
whether certain prehistoric skulls, found in an area now 
inhabited by Finns, belonged to a Finnish or to a 
I A 


2 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


European race. It is a commonplace remark that to 
understand and appreciate the present we must know as 
much as possible about the past. Properly to understand 
the magic songs of the Finns, to be able to separate the 
contents into something like a chronological series, to be 
able to say for certain that such and such a portion is 
of genuine Finnish origin and growth, while another is 
merely a Finnish graft on a foreign stock, necessitates 
some general notion of the past history of the Eastern 
and Western Finns. In the narrower sense of the word 
history this is impossible. But with the help afforded by 
philology and archeology it is possible to distinguish 
certain broad phases in their past career. Merely with 
their aid we are enabled to discriminate seven epochs, 
each marking some advance in ideas and civilisation in 
the past history of the Eastern and Western Finns. The 
first of these epochs may take us back some three thousand 
years, whereas documentary history only accounts for about 
a quarter of that time, and for our purpose can almost be 
left out of consideration. In Folk-lore the Finns take an 
important place, and as I believe that in this country 
not very much is known about the Eastern groups and 
their exact relation to the Western, the first volume of 
this work may serve as a general introduction to a 
knowledge of all the pre- and proto-historic Finns in 
Europe, viewed as an organic whole, though now broken 
up into isolated groups. It need hardly be said that in 
trying to reconstruct the unrecorded history of a people 
on the basis of facts furnished by philology, archeology, 
and other branches of knowledge, there is nearly always 
an ill-starred vein of uncertainty traversing every con- 
clusion at which we may arrive; and it affords only a 


GEOGRAPHICAL POSITION OF THE FINNS 3 


modicum of comfort to remember that the same is true 
of nearly all documentary history that reposes on the 
evidence of only one or two witnesses. All that we can 


_generally expect, then, is to reach conclusions that are 


probable from the present standpoint of knowledge, and 
to feel fortunate when that humble aim can be attained; 
for in the course of our inquiry many questions will present 
themselves that can only be answered, if at all, with many 
reserves. The only consolation is that it will not always 
be so. The work of the trained students now labouring in 
the fields of prehistoric archeology and Finnish philology 
will some day bear fruit, and to future generations much 
that is now obscure, or even quite dark, in the history of 
the past, will become distinct, or at least comparatively 
clear. 


GEOGRAPHICAL POSITION OF THE WESTERN FINNS. 


The Finns of Finland (Swom#) call themselves Suoma- 
faiset, and are broadly divided into two branches, the 
Tavastlanders (Hdmdldiset) and the Karelians (Xarya- 
faiset). The former occupy the south-west of Finland; 
the latter fill not only the northern and eastern parts of 
the country, but stretch into Russia as far east as the 
west coast of Lake Onega, and thence in a straight line 
northwards to the White Sea. The Finns, however, are 
not the only inhabitants of the Grand Duchy. Along 
the west coast from Bothnia, southwards and along the 
south coast as far as the Russian frontier, there is a 
fringe of country inhabited by a Swedish-speaking people, 
forming about 14 per cent. of the whole population, the 
descendants, for the most part, of Swedish settlers that 


4 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


have arrived at various unrecorded periods. Though there 
is no natural boundary to the north between the Finns and 
Lapps, the latter are not now found within the limits of the 
Grand Duchy save in the district round Lake Enare. 

Formerly the Finns covered a still larger area than at 
present. In the middle of the ninth century we learn 
from Ohthere’s account to King Alfred that Qvens (Kainu- 
daisef, a Karelian tribe) lived somewhere in the north of 
Sweden. Using light portable boats, they took advantage 
of the long narrow lakes to get far up country, then crossed 
the Fells and made raids upon the Northmen, who some- 
times retaliated. In the north of Sweden the old name 
survives in the Kalix river, which is known to the Finns as 
Kainuhunjoki, or the Qven river. Far to the east the same 
explorer found the mouth of the Northern Dvina well 
populated by a people he calls Beormas, who are generally 
believed to have been Karelians. At any rate, according 
to Sjogren an examination of the place-names in the 
government of Archangel reveals the fact that Karelians 
once resided not only at the mouth of the river, and as far 
south as the district of Senkursk, the most southern district 
in the above government, but also as far east as the basins 
of the Pinega and the Mezen, and that as late as the 
fifteenth century the south coast of the White Sea was 
termed by the Russians ‘the Karelian coast.’?! Under 
various names three small groups of Karelians are found 
in Ingria, which forms the northern and north-western part 
of the government of St. Petersburg. They are believed 
to have migrated from Finland at the end of the eleventh 
or the beginning of the twelfth century. 

Beyond the limits of the Grand Duchy live three other 


1 Sjogren, pp. 290, 292, 323, 390. 


oe 


GEOGRAPHICAL POSITION OF THE FINNS 5 


divisions of the Finns: the Vepsas or Northern Cudes, the 
Votes (Vatjalaiset) or Southern Cudes, and the Esthonians 
(Virolaiset). The Northern Cudes occupy the north-west of 
the Bielozersk and the west of the Tikhvinsk districts, all 
the upper basin of the Ojat, and eastwards into Vitegorsk. 
Sjogren estimated their number at fully 21,000, though 
formerly they were more numerous. From documentary 
and other evidence there is reason to believe, that, in the 
eleventh century, Finns, known to the Russian chronicler 
as Em, Yem, lived on the east side of Lake Onega, where 
abundant traces of their presence have been left in local 
names. There is written testimony to the effect that as late 
as the middle of the thirteenth century Cudes (Vepsas) and 
Karelians lived on the north-east of Lake Kubinsk, in the 
government of Vologda. And in the middle of the four- 
teenth century a Russian monk, who founded a monastery 
at the south-east corner of Lake Onega, mentions that 
Cudes and Lapps lived in the vicinity of the lake.? 

It is generally believed that the Vepsas, from their 
name and geographical position, represent the Ves of the 
Russian chronicle, a people that dwelt near Lake Bielozero. 
This seems probable enough, but since the time of Fraehn’s 
edition of Ibn Fozlan they are also identified with the 
Visu of Arab travellers of the tenth and eleventh centuries. 
Fraehn, however, was misled by the similarity of the names 
Ves, Visu (Isu, Isui). Ibn Fozlan merely says that the 
Visu lived at a distance of three months’ journey from 
Bolgari, but Abu el Kassim, who visited Bolgari later, 
relates that he had been informed by the king of the 
Bolgars that a people called Visu lived at a distance of 
three months’ journey to the orth of his country, and that 

1 Sjgren, pp. 469, 292, 507, 509. 


6 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


with them the night in summer did not last even an hour 
He adds that the Visu are adjacent to the country of the 
Yura (Ugra, Ugrians), which is bounded by the Sea ot 
Darkness.! The only possible route to the north from 
Bolgani lay up the Kama, the Kolva, the ViSerka, through 
Lake Cusovoe to the head of the Vogulka, where a short 
portage (volok) of about four and a half miles brings the 
traveller to the Voldsnitsa, a navigable tributary of the 
Petéra. Descending the river, he would at length reach 
the Usa, about lat. 66° N. As at lat. 66° 19’ the night at 
the summer solstice is just about an hour long, the position 
of the Usa suits to a nicety the position of the Isu or 
Visu, according to the indications of Abu el Kassim. It 
may also be observed that up the Usa lies the regular route 
to Obdorsk, at the mouth of the Ob, then in the hands 
of the Yura or Ugrians of whom he makes mention. In 
all probability, then, the Isu or Visu were the same as the 
Petérans of Nestor and early Russian chroniclers, and are 
now represented by the Zirians. 

The Votes are now restricted to about thirty parishes in 
the north-west of Ingria. They are first mentioned by 
Nestor in 1069, and probably occupied the whole of Ingna 
till partly dispossessed by Karelians from Finland and by 
Russians from the south. The Esthonians call themselves 
‘Country people’ (ma més, ma rakvas), and are found in 
Esthonia (Vivo) and the north of Livland nearly as far 
south as the river Salis, as well as in the islands of Dago 
and Oesel. The old Finnish inhabitants of West Livland 
and North Kurland have been almost entirely absorbed by 
the Letts, and their language is almost extinct, save along a 
narrow fringe of coast between Domesness and Lyserort. 

1 Abou el Cassim, pp. 8r, 82. 


GEOGRAPHICAL POSITION OF THE FINNS 7 


GEOGRAPHICAL POSITION OF THE EASTERN FINNS. 


From a linguistic point of view the Mordvins (Mordod) 
stand nearest to the Western Finns. Though now in a 
highly dispersed condition they occupy a considerable area 
in the governments of Nizegorod, Kazdn, Tambov, Penza, 
Simbirsk, and Sardtov on the west side of the Volga, and 
of Ufa and Orenburg on the east side. They are divided 
into two great divisions, the Mok&a and the Erza, who 
predominate numerically. The latter occupy the south 
part of Nizegorod and Simbirsk, and extend into the govern- 
ments of Tambov and Penza. They also constitute the 
principal contingent of the Mordvin population in the 
steppes beyond the Volga in the governments of Samara, 
Ufa, and Orenburg. The country on the west side of the 
Volga, where the Mordvins dwell, is still partly covered 
with huge forests, largely composed of deciduous trees, such 
as the oak, lime, maple, ash, etc.; and as late as the 
seventeenth century elks were hunted in the forest and 
beavers tenanted the streams.! 

From an examination of the place-names Professor 
Smimov has arrived at the conclusion that the original 
territory of the Mordvins was bounded on the north by the 
Volga, on the west by the Oka, the MokSa, and the Tsna, 
on the east by the Sura, while southwards they once 
occupied the governments of Orél, Kursk, and Vordénez.? 
Under the form ‘Mordens’ the Mordvin name first 
appears about the middle of the sixth century in a catalogue, 
given by Jordanes, of the peoples subjugated by Ermanaric, 
king of the Goths, about two hundred years earlier. 
Though their geographical position is in no way defined, it 

4 Smirnov, (4) pp. 117, 118. 3 Jbsd. (4) p. 15; (x) p. 12. 


8 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


seems likely that at any rate as early as the fourth century 
the Mordvins lived west of the Volga, though perhaps a 
little further south than at present. A proof that they 
have long been settled in the vicinity of the Volga is the 
fact that they call it the Rav, evidently the same as the 
Rha of Ptolemy. 

The Ceremis call themselves Mari, ‘people.’ According 
to Zolotnitski the word Ceremis is from the Turkish 
Cirmes, ‘warlike,’ which corresponds formally with the 
Cuva’ Syarmis, the term this people applies to the Ceremis. 
This name, under the form Tsarmis, is believed to occur 
for the first time in a letter addressed by Joseph, prince of 
the Khozars, to the vezir of the Khalif Abdurrahman 11. in 
the year 960. No details, however, are given; they are 
merely mentioned in a list of tributary peoples living 
along the Volga! For the most part they live on the 
left or low bank of the Volga, with the Vetluga as their 
western boundary; along the Volga they extend nearly to 
Kazan, then northwards to the Vidtka in the neighbour- 
hood of Urzum, and thence westwards to the Vetluga. 
The Hill Ceremis, so called from living on the high or right 
bank of the Volga, are confined to the south-west corner 
of the government of Kazan. Besides these there are 
small isolated groups on the Kama in the districts of 
Elabuga and Sarapul; also in the government of Perm, as 
well as on the Biélaya and its tributaries. Altogether they 
are believed to number over 242,000 souls. Their name 
for the Volga is the Yul. 

Professor Smirnov, basing himself on the chronicle of 
Nestor, places the original seat of the Ceremis on the Okd, 
and brings them as far southwards as Spask (Riazan), and 

1 Semenov, p. 1. 


GEOGRAPHICAL POSITION OF THE FINNS 9 


eastwards as far as Saransk (Penza). Their eastern boundary 
was the Sura. Within this area he finds a number of 
place-names ending in -mar, ‘people,’ -nur, ‘field,’ -iner, 
-ener, ‘tavine, river,’ and Aust, which he ascribes to this 
people. From this position he supposes they were 
gradually pushed north by the Mordvins, who lay imme- 
diately to the south of them; for an examination of the 
place-names shows that the Ceremis formerly covered 
almost the whole of the existing government of Kostroma 
north of the Volga at a time when their eastern boundary 
was the Vetluga. In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries 
some of the Geremis probably still lived in the northern 
part of the government of Kostroma, but from the four- 
teenth century they began to be dislodged by the in- 
coming Russians. The new country finally settled by the 
is was not a desert. Before their arrival all larger 
rivers had received names which are not Ceremisian.? 

The Votiaks, who call themselves Ud-murt, or Urt-murt, 
occupy a large tract of county east of the Vidtka, in 
the upper basin of the river Ceptsa as far west as the 
Kosa, and a large portion of the south-east corner of the 
government of Vidtka. They are also found in the govern- 
ment of Ufd, but appeared as new-comers from the banks 
of the Kama not earlier than the sixteenth century. An 
examination of the placenames shows, according to 
Smirnov, that the Votiaks originally lived further north, 
south, and west than we find them at present; within the 
government of Vidtka as far north as the district of 
Slobodsk, and west of the Vidtka as far as Yaransk, where 

mis are now found. Their villages extended even be- 
yond the limits of Vidtka as far north as Sisolsk (Vologda) 


1 Smirnov, (1) pp. 10-19. 


10 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


and as far west as Nikolsk (Kostroma). From their 
older positions west of the river Vidtka and the adjoining 
districts in the governments of Vologda and Kostroma, they 
gradually moved east and south-east, where they met Cudes, 
whom they partly absorbed and partly drove beyond the 
western limit of Perm. The appearance of Russian 
colonists in the government of Vologda belongs to the end 
of the eleventh century, and probably caused the eastward 
migration of the Votiaks.} 

The Permians and Zirians to all intents and purposes 
may be treated as one people. They speak a language 
mutually intelligible, and both call themselves Xoms. 
But Permian is more strictly applied to those settled on 
the right bank of the Upper Kama, in the districts of 
Cérdin and Solikamsk, called Great Perm collectively, 
but by the natives Kom-mu, or ‘land of the Komi.’ 
Zirlans are met with at various points on the upper course 
of the Vitegda, with its tributaries as far west as Ust-Vim, 
formerly known as Old Perm ; in a north-westerly direction 
on the upper course of the Mezen and its tributary the 
VaSka ; also on the [Sma and the Petéra as far north as 
Ust-I8ma. There are also some on the Lower Ob beyond 
the Ural chain. According to older estimates they num- 
bered over 162,000, but Dr. Sommier only allows them 
about 85,000 on this side the Urals and ro0o on the Ob. 

Formerly the Zirians seem to have extended much 
further west and north-west than at present. Both Sjogren 
and Smirnov, relying mainly on river-names, find traces of 
the Permians in the south-west corner of the government 
of Vologda in the districts of Totma, Vologda, Gridzovets, 
and Velsk, though mixed with Finnish traces; northwards 

1 Smirnov, (2) pp. 8-13. 


GEOGRAPHICAL POSITION OF THE FINNS 11 


in the basin of the Pinega, where Sjogren found Permian 
names that were afterwards altered by Finns; and thence 
northwards to the ocean. Both authors find Permian 
names attached to western tributaries of the Dvina; in fact 
SjOgren would derive the Finnish name for it—Viena— 
from a Zir. ovina, ‘powerful.’ Everywhere in the region 
of the Lower Dvina Finnish and Permian names seem to 
be found side by side. The southern boundary of the 
Permians is harder to fix, though towards the east there 
are no traces of them south of the Silva or of the Volga. 
In a south-westerly direction the difficulty really begins. 
Smirnov, who receives some support from Sjogren, believes 
that river-names in the government of Kostroma, Vlad{mir, 
and Moscow, such as Kostroma (there is another in the 
government of Vidtka), Vidzma, Ukhtoma, Klidzma, Moskva, 
Protva (another in Ust-Sisolsk), etc., are of Permian origin.? 
Though it is very unsafe to rely solely on terminations like 
-ma and -va in attempting to fix ethnic boundaries, it is a 
fact that a bone arrow-head, metallic brooches, beads, and 
other objects reminding us of those found in graves in the 
government of Viatka, Perm, and Kazan, have been dis- 
covered in the prehistoric fort of Didkovo near Moscow.? 
That the Zirians were not the only inhabitants of the 
eastern part of the government of Vologda when the 
Russians first came to know the province, is shown by the 
fact that the same river may bear two names; for instance, 
the Vitegda is in Zirian the Ezva, 


99 Vim 99 9 Yemva, 

» sisola ,, ” Siktilva, 
» Ukhta  ,, 9 Sikva, 

» Keltma ,, » Kot-jem. 


1 Sjégren, pp. 300, 316, 320; Smirnov, (2) pp. 91, 93. 
3 L Anthropologie (Paris, 1892), p. 499: 


12 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Without necessarily ascribing the names in the left-hand 
column to Ugrians, we know that at any rate as early as 
the end of the eleventh century there were Ugrians in the 
north-east of European Russia, for Nestor, who died about 
1112,mentions them with the Petérans and Yems as occupy- 
ing part of ‘Japhet’s portion’ ; if they had inhabited Asia 
he would certainly have placed them in ‘Shem’s portion.’ 
In 1185 they are mentioned as living on the Petéra, and 
with the Petérans (Zirians) paying tribute to Novgorod. 
In the fifteenth century Voguls and Ostiaks carried on 
constant war with the Permians and Russians. In 1445 
the Novgorodans were beaten by the Ugrians through 
treachery, and ten years later the Voguls are mentioned 
as fighting on the banks of the Vitegda and killing the 
missionary bishop Pitirim, who had converted certain 
Voguls to Christianity, at his residence at Ust-Vim.! That 
the Voguls lived permanently in the neighbourhood of Ust- 
Vim, and did not merely make forays from beyond the 
Urals, is proved by documentary evidence. As the Russians 
advanced eastwards they continued to encounter Voguls, 
for in 1481 Andrew MiSnev beat them in an engagement 
below Cérdin, in Great Perm, and a document of 1607 
proves that the Voguls along the banks of the ViSera in 
the above district were then paying tribute. After a time, 
however, they found such difficulty in paying it that they 
dispersed, and some crossed over into Siberia. From the 
life of Trifon it is clear that Ostiaks nomadized on the spot 
where the town of Perm now stands, and possessed the 
whole of the Cusovaya. Ostiaks as well as Voguls are 
mentioned in the district of Cérdin, and the name of the 
later people is given to a tributary of the Inva and of the 


1 Sjégren, pp. 308, 309; Smirnov, (3) p. 110; (2) p. 5. 


GEOGRAPHICAL POSITION OF THE FINNS 13 


Kosva. In fine, undoubted proofs exist that at any rate 
from the middle of the fifteenth to the end of the seventeenth 
century, Ugrians resided in the region situated between 
Ust-Vim and the Urals, on the Vitegda, the Petéra and 
the eastern tributaries of the Kama, such as the Kolva, 
ViSera, Yaiva, Kosva, and Cusovaya.! But at what period 


the Ugrians first appeared in Europe cannot now be 
decided. 


Tur CupEs. 


With regard to the Cudes much uncertainty exists. 
There are historical and mythical Cudes. The term was 
first applied by the Russians to the Esthonians. Then 
by extension it was used of another Finnish tribe, more 
especially of one behind the vo/ok, or portage across a 
watershed, which seems to refer to the Karelians on the 
Lower Dvina. The word vo/ok also means ‘a great unin- 
habited forest,’ and that was the sense preferred by Sjogren, 
but ‘portage’ is the older meaning, and Nestor in his in- 
troduction uses it in that sense. He mentions that there 
was a road from the Variags to the Greeks, and from the 
Greeks along the Dniepr and across the portage (20/02) of the 
Dniepr to the Lovat, and so to Lake Ilmen—or IImer, as he 
calls it. As the Russians gradually extended eastwards the 
term Cude, Cudish, by degrees lost its ethnic signification 
and became far more general. It could now be applied 
to any non-Russian people that seemed to be aborigines ; 
ancient mining-shafts, ‘wué, and prehistoric forts far into 
Siberia, far beyond any region that could have been in- 
habited by a Finnish people, were now called Cudish, and 


1 Sjégren, pp. 308, 309; Smirnov, (3) pp. 108, 109. 


14  PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


assigned to an extinct race of people. Legends were told 
of them, of their manner of life, and how they had vanished. 
To avoid error it is evident that we must distinguish clearly 
between the historical and the mythical or semi-mythical 
Cudes. The first were Finns, the second may sometimes 
have been so, but not necessarily. In the mouth of illiter- 
ate Russians the word had no ethnic value. The types of 
antiquities termed ‘Permian’ by Mr. J. R. Aspelin and 
‘Cudish’ by Russian archzologists, are attributed by the 
former, and by all Finnish archeologists, to the Permian 
groups, the Votiaks and Zirians, because they are found in 
the government of Perm in districts occupied by these 
peoples. The distribution of these archzological types is 
limited to certain areas. They are found in the govern- 
ment of Perm, on the Petora, on the right bank of the 
Kama in the government of Vidtka, on the upper course 
of the Ceptsa and on the Pizma, both in the government of 
Vidtka, but not in other parts of the government. They 
are therefore not co-extensive with the diffusion of the 
Zirians by any means. Mr. Teplotikhov of Ilinsk (Perm), 
who possesses the largest collection of Permian antiquities 
in Russia, attributes them to the Permian Cudes, by whom 
he understands Ugrians, more especially Voguls. In a 
paper published by him in 1893 he believed that he had 
proved that the Permian Cudes already existed on the 
Central and Upper Kama in the fifth century a.p.! But 
since the recent finds at Gliadénova, near Perm, described 
in the next chapter, it becomes possible to maintain that 
the Cudes were in Perm about the second century. If 
his arguments hold good, as I believe they do, it means 
that the eastern frontier of Russia in Europe from about 


1 Teploukhov, (3) p. 37. 


GEOGRAPHICAL POSITION OF THE FINNS 15 


lat. 57° N. northwards was in the hands of Ugrians as early 
as the second or third century, and therefore that all the 
eastern Finns must have occupied territory to the west of 
them. In the preceding pages it has been seen that the 
Russians have gradually pushed the Eastern Finns further 
and further eastward, their original seat having been nearer 
the centre of European Russia than nowadays. Later 
on we shall find craniological and archeological reasons 
which make it probable that several centuries before the 
present era a small body of Ugrians had established them- 
selves as far west as the government of Yaroslav. 


PHYSICAL FEATURES OF THE COUNTRY. 


As regards the physical features of North Central Russia 
from Finland and the Baltic Provinces to the Urals, the 
immense region inhabited by Finnish tribes in bygone 
days, must have been tolerably uniform. Everywhere the 
country was a broken, undulating plain, densely covered 
with trackless forests of pine and fir, interspersed with birch 
and alder, a gloomy wilderness only relieved by open 
tracts of swamp and morass, impassable save when frozen 
hard in winter. In summer the only possible means of 
communication was by water, as is still the case in the 
northern governments. Only in the south-east of the 
region, in what are now the southern parts of the govern- 
ments of Kazd4n and Nizegorod, and in those of Simbirsk, 
Samdara, and Tambov, were there any natural open plains, 
occasionally broken, where water was abundant, by large 
forests of useful trees like the oak and the lime. In early 
times the immense plain of European Russia, so beset with 
forests and natural obstacles as to be wellnigh impassable 


16 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


for large bodies of men travelling by land with all their 
belongings, was nevertheless provided by nature with two 
royal highways from east to west, and vice versa. Along 
the south was the grassy steppe fringing the north coast 
of the Black Sea, with room enough for a whole nation 
to march abreast. By a nomad people this route could 
best be traversed in summer, as there was then abundance 
of grass for their horses and cattle ; rivers were more easily 
crossed than in spring, and the clumsy wagons were less 
likely to stick in the mud of the soft, earthy ravines that 
seamed the steppe. The other highway was the treeless 
tundra that borders the Arctic Ocean ; winter was the best 
time for using it, when the rivers and morasses were frozen, 
the snow hard and fairly smooth. The only means of 
transport was a sleigh drawn by reindeer or by dogs, but 
when the Jatter were employed their masters had to follow 
on snow-shoes. The winters were long and rigorous, 
lasting nearly half the year. But for a hardy race of men, 
whose only desire was to live, there were compensations : 
the rivers and lakes were full of fish, some of them, like 
the sterlet, so foolish as to allow themselves to be taken 
with a bare, unbaited hook. The forests were well stocked 
with large game, such as elks, wild oxen, bison, bears, 
beavers, and other smaller animals. As fish are obtained 
more easily and with less trouble than large game, all 
_ human habitations were disposed along the banks of the 
larger rivers or on the shore of a lake. The watersheds 
and the tracts traversed merely by small streams were 
untenanted by man. And the permanent settlements along 
the rivers had always to be at some height above the 
ordinary surface of the water, as every spring, with the 
melting of the snow and ice, the rivers were enormously 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE FINNS 17 


swollen, and rose many feet above their normal level, inun- 
dating the low land for a very considerable distance. 

With regard to metals the region is decidedly poor. All 
the best gold and copper mines lie on the east side of the 
Urals, where the ore is found in lodes. On the west side 
there are copper-bearing beds of sedimentary origin, and 
sometimes the metal is found in a native state. But there 
is no copper west of the mines near TaiSevo, between 
Mamadis and Malmiz on the Vidtka, or of a parallel of 
longitude drawn through it; none, indeed, till we come to 
Pitkaranta, on the north coast of Lake Ladoga. In insig- 
nificant quantities oxide of tin with galena is also found 
there, but there is no tin or silver in the Urals. Iron is 
worked near Murom and in the neighbourhood of Petro- 
zavodsk, on the west side of Lake Onega. 


THE PHYSICAL AND MENTAL CHARACTERISTICS 
OF THE FINNS. 


Having briefly described in general outlines the geo- 
graphical distribution of the East and West Finns now 
and in the past, so far as it can be inferred from place- 
names, we have now to pass on to their physical and 
mental characteristics. 

Professor Retsius defines the Tavastland or Hame type 
as follows :— 

‘In physique it is strong, solid, broad-shouldered ; in 
general, thickset and plump, with coarse limbs ; of medium 
height, though individuals are found above and below the 
average. 

‘The flesh is firm, generally without disposition to fat 
or to leanness ; the muscular system is strong. 

I B 


18 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


‘The skin is white, but often greyish inclining to olive 
grey; it is rarely as clear and pure with a transparent rosy 
hue as among blonde Teutons (Scandinavians and English). 

‘The head is usually large, short and broad (brachy- 
cephalous), but not particularly high, often rather square 
with well-developed ‘udera parietalia. 

‘The face is large, long, but above all comparatively 
broad both in the frontal region and still more so in those 
of the zygomatic arch and the jaws; the lower jaw is 
strongly developed. 

‘The nose is small, rather wide, obtuse, or more often 
with a small point, just a little refroussé; the nostrils are 
rather wide. The mouth is also rather wide. 

‘The eyes have small slits, are rather narrow, and some- 
times slightly oblique. The iris is light, grey-blue, or more 
often blue-grey, even grey or bluish-white. The eyebrows 
are feebly developed and light. 

‘The expression is rather morose and little sympathetic. 

‘The hair on the crown is blonde, oftener flaxen, other- 
wise ash-grey ; in women it is often yellow or yellowish-red 
at the tips, straight, never curly, and very silky. In children 
it is nearly always flaxen, sometimes almost whity-yellow; 
in adults it often becomes darker, assuming an ashy hue ; 
it maintains, however, very often a dark flaxen hue. 

‘The beard as a rule is small, with hair that is relatively 
sparse, short, coarse, and light, with a tendency to red, 
especially on the chin; in general, the beard is shaven, and 
therefore rarely seen at its full length. 

‘From a psychological point of view the characteristic 
Tavastlander is serious, manly, melancholy, meditative, 
little communicative, taciturn, neither enthusiastic, lively, 
or alert physically or morally; but on the contrary slow, 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE FINNS 19 


torpid, ungainly, and heavy in his movements, very con- 
servative in all respects, and little inclined to reforms and 
changes ; he is not the man to take the initiative for a good 
or bad undertaking, and is not inclined to rebel against 
authority. He is suspicious and does not appear to be 
exempt from jealousy or vindictiveness; he cherishes a 
grudge for a long time, and postpones his revenge till the 
propitious moment arrives; hence grave, premeditated 
crimes are not altogether uncommon. In a high degree 
he is a fatalist; he is content with very little, enduring 
suffering and privation with admirable fortitude and 
patience. Though slow by nature he is very assiduous at 
his work, and with inborn tenacity never gives in so long 
as he sees a possibility of gaining his point. He is inclined 
to assist a neighbour, and is hospitable when civilly treated. 
Taken all in all he is an honest fellow. He is absolutely 
faithful, even if not lavish in his expressions of tenderness 
and goodwill, preferring to translate them into deeds rather 
than into words and demonstrations; in general he never 
expresses himself in the superlative, or in a positive and 
peremptory manner, but with diplomatic prudence and 
reserve. As regards his other psychical qualities he is not 
hasty, but sure in his judgment ; he goes to the root of the 
matter slowly but thoroughly. He is neither musical nor 
poetical, at least he is not creative in these directions, and 
he is seldom heard to sing. 

‘Thus in spite of its sterling merits the Hame type does 
not as a rule possess an exterior either beautiful or at- 
tractive ; at least one seldom meets persons that answer to 
our ideas of beauty. This remark applies not only to men, 
but also to women ; the latter have generally less angular and 
more rounded features, but beauties are extremely rare ; at 


20 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


least we have not found a single woman that merited this 
name among the thousands that we have seen. If then 
this Hame race is not distinguished by external beauty, it 
possesses at any rate, owing to its physical and moral 
solidity, its tenacity and meditative nature, the traits of 
character that make it a strong race that can hold its own 
in the struggle for existence. It is also on the whole 
fertile ; from the point of view of sexual morality it is not, 
however, commendable, but rather the contrary. 

‘The Karelian type is distinguished as follows :— 

‘The physique is less strong than that of the Hame; it 
is less broad-shouldered, less thickset and plump, with less 
powerful limbs, but more slender, and the proportions more 
comely. As a rule it exceeds the average height, and often 
presents individuals of considerable stature. 

‘The flesh is tolerably firm, with little disposition to fat, 
rather to leanness. 

‘The colour of the skin is darker brunette, or rather ash- 
grey. 

‘The head is not large, but in proportion, rather short 
(brachycephalous), but less so than the Hame type. The 
length of the neck is proportionate. 

‘The face is in length proportionate, generally with a 
relatively small breadth both in the frontal and zygomatic 
regions and in the maxillary parts; these, however, are 
rather strongly developed, chiefly in height, especially the 
lower jaw. 

‘The nose is long, straight, proportionate, and pointed. 

‘The mouth is well proportioned. 

‘In the eyes the apertures are in good proportion, and 
never or very seldom oblique. The iris is dark-grey blue. 

‘ The eyebrows are dark, strongly developed, often slightly 
bushy. 


ria, ‘ad 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE FINNS 21 


‘The expression is generally animated, open, and attrac- 
tive, though with a certain air of seriousness. 

‘The hair on the crown is dark, usually chestnut, some- 
times dark ash, neither straight nor rough, but generally 
curly, and often abundant. 

* The beard seems to be rather small, but is usually shaved 
off. 

‘From a psychological point of view the Karelian is more 
lively, brisk, and enterprising ; he is not reserved, but expan- 
sive, gayer, and inclined to take the initiative, but less 
persevering and tenacious; less deep, penetrating, and 
fatalistic ; he is more friendly, attentive, and obliging. He 
conducts himself like a gentleman, has a good, often a 
noble deportment, moves with a certain elegance, and 
produces in general an agreeable impression. Handsome 
types of men and women are often met; the latter, with 
usually an oval face, very regular features, a straight, pointed 
nose, large blue eyes, a pretty mouth, a rather animated 
expression, and a well-proportioned, sometimes slim figure, 
are decidedly pretty ; and genuine beauties may sometimes 
be found among them.’! 


THE MOoRDVINS. 


According to Mr. Mainov, who measured 225 Erza 
Mordvins of both sexes, in several districts and govern- 
ments, the average height of the men is 5 ft. 6 in.; of the 
women 5 ft. 2# in.; 86 per cent. of the men and 7o per 
cent. of the women have dark hair—he recognises three 
shades—but the shade is generally less dark in the fair sex. 
The lightest shade is found in 12°6 per cent. of the women, 
and in only 2°4 per cent. of the men. With regard to 

1 Retsius (1), pp. 161, 162. 


22 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


colour 86 per cent. of the men and 81 per cent. of the 
women have cinnamon-coloured hair; the remainder ig 
nearly equally divided between olive and dark mud-colour, 
and none is reddish. And 8g per cent. of the people have 
straight hair; 8°2 per cent. wavy, and only 2°7 per cent. 
have really curly hair. Dr. Sommier, who only visited 
one village—probably Mok&an, though he does not say 
so—in the government of Saratov, found two types among 
the Mordvins, corresponding to the Hame and Karelian 
types in Finland. The former was blonde, broad, and 
squat ; the latter type was darker and brisker, with more 
Aryan features. On the whole, blonde hair predominated, 
and the beard was usually scanty. The colour of the iris 
was usually grey, inclining to blue or chestnut. He found 
the people extremely shy and difficult to deal with. But 
the women were less coy than the men, for none of the 
latter would let themselves be measured, while seven of the 
fair sex allowed him to take a few measurements. ‘Though 
Pallas termed the Mordvins the dirtiest people in Russia, 
Dr. Sommier’s experience led him to believe that in this 
respect they are surpassed by several others, such as the 
Ostiaks, BaSkirs, Votiaks, and Ceremis. Besides being 
cleaner than the last two, the Mordvins are healthier, more 
robust, more wide-awake and less intellectually torpid. In 
fact he assigns them the second place after the Zirians, 
who stand first among the Eastern Finns in activity of 
mind and body.? According to Professor Smirnov, the 
MokSas offer greater variety of types than the Erzas, and 
contain a considerable percentage of persons with black 
hair, dark eyes, and a swarthy, yellowish skin. They are 
more thickset, and consequently more clumsy in their 
1 Mainov, pp. 186, 386, 103, 104. 2 Sommier, (2) pp. 118-122. 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE FINNS 23 


movements. Without displaying any grace of movement, 
the MokSan girls and women exhibit in their gait, speech, 
and gestures a remarkable self-confident strength and 
energy. The excellent physique of the Mordvins, their 
stature, and the healthy colour of the skin, which dis- 
tinguishes them sharply from the Ceremis, Votiaks, and 
Permians, is the result of having lived for centuries in 
a fertile region where food is abundant.1 At the last 
census they numbered rather less than 800,000 souls. 


It has been supposed by some that the Erza Mordvins, by 
others that the Biarmians, are referred to by various Arab 
travellers and writers of the tenth century. They mention 
nearly in the same words that the Rus were divided into three 
tribes. The first lived nearer to Bolgar, and its king had his 
seat at Kuyaba (v. Kutaba, Karbaya), a town larger than 
Bolgar ; the second were called Slawiya, or Salawiya ; and the 
third were the Arthaniya, the king of which dwelt at Artha 
(v. Arta, Arba, Abarka, Abarma). This latter people killed 
any foreigners that entered their country, but did a good trade 
with Kiev, the Khozars, and Bolgars, the exports being the fur 
of the black sable, the black fox, and lead. Dorn and Fraehn 
read Artha, Arthaniya as Erza, Ertsa, and identified the people 
with the Erza Mordvins, who, if they had black sables, had 
certainly no lead to export. Chwolson thought the name of 
the third tribe should be read Barmaniya, and identified it 
with the Biarmians of Scandinavian legend; Mr. Snellman, 
the latest Finnish writer on the early history of the Finns since 
the beginning of the present era, is inclined to agree with him. 
But apart from the fact that by Rus we generally have to 
understand Swedes and Northmen, not Finns, there are other 
notices of the Arthaniya which show that they dwelt far to the 
South, at no great distance from the coast of the Black Sea. 
Istakhri vaguely states that Artha lay between the Khozars 


1 Smirnov, (4) pp. 115, 121. 


24 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


and Great Bulgaria, which bounds Rum to the north.’ Idrisi 
is more explicit, though some of his geographical statements 
are hard to reconcile, and his place-names still more difficult to 
identify. Starting from Trebizond, he describes what seems to 
be a coasting journey round the east end of the Black Sea as 
far as the large town of Matrika, or Matrakha, by which 
Tmutarakhan, or Old Taman, is intended. Nevertheless it is 
said to be situated on the river Sakir, which branched off from 
the Athil (the Volga), the chief affluent of which passed near 
Athil, a town near the Caspian. One day’s sail, or 100 miles 
before reaching Matrika, he places the considerable town of 
Matluka or White Comania. Its situation weuld therefore be 
near the port of Novorossisk. He then mentions four towns in 
Comania: Kirah, Narus, Nui, and Kiniow or Kiniu, and their 
relative positions may be given diagramatically as follows :— 


Nai Kirah Naruf Slava 
25m. 50 Mm. 335 mM. 
Kiniu 
N roo|m. 100 /m. 
w—fi—_——E 
“ 
Nui. 
m. 
Matluka 


1 Chwolson, pp. 171-176; Harkavi, pp. 193, 199, 200, 220, 276; Dorn, 
Pp. 57; Snellman, p. 54. 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE FINNS = 25 


Before proceeding further, we must hear what Idrisi has to 
say of the Rus. ‘Kokania,’ he says, ‘is inhabited by the Turks 
known as Rusa. They are divided into three hordes, one of 
which is called Beraws, and its king resided at Kokania; the 
second is called Slawia, and its king resided at Slava, a town 
on the top of a hill; the third is the Arthania, and its king 
lived at Arthan, a pretty town built on an abrupt hill between 
Slawa and Kokania, that is to say, four days (100 m.) from 
each. Musulman merchants went to Kokania, but it was 
reported that any stranger entering Arthania was infallibly put 
to death. One of their exports was lead.’ Referring back to 
the diagram, we have to imagine Artha as situated 100 miles 
from Slava, though the direction is not mentioned, and 100 
miles beyond this was Kokania. Further on, Kokania is stated 
to be about twenty stations from Bolgar, though I do not know 
what this distance implies. With regard to Nai, the most 
westerly point, in mentioning some of the towns on the 
Danabros or Dniepr, Idrisi states that from Kaw (Kiev?) to 
Nai, ‘a town of Comania,’ was six days’ journey, apparently in 
a southerly direction, as he describes the places in a descending 
order. Though the position of the Arthaniya cannot be 
exactly laid down from the indications given by Idrisi, it could 
not have been far removed from the coast, and lay somewhere 
in Comania, in the steppe between the Dniepr and the Don, 
or not far from it, so that the idea that these people were 
Biarmians or Erza Mordvins is without foundation. The next 
witness is Ibn Batuta, who made a land journey from Astra- 
khan to Constantinople. He mentions that at one day’s 
journey from Ukak are the Hills of the Russians, who are 
Christians with red hair and blue eyes, an ugly and perfidious 
people. They possessed silver mines, and from their country 
were brought ingots of silver called sum, som, each weighing 
five ounces. He gives the position of Ukak as ten days’ 
journey from Sardi (near Tsarev, and east of Tsarftsin), and 
ten days from Sudak on the east coast of the Crimea. Colonel 


1 Erisi, vol, ii, pp. 399-402, 405, 398. 


26 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Yule has shown that there were two places called Ukak; one 
lay about six miles south of Sardtov, and the other on the Sea 
of Azov, a little to the east of Mariipol. In some medizval 
maps it appears as Locac, #.e. L’Ocac. He also mentions that 
there are mines of argentiferous lead ore, containing 60 per cent. 
of lead, near the river Mius, which. falls into the Sea of Azov 
about twenty-two miles west of Taganrog.! As mines of silver 
and lead, so far as my knowledge extends, are found in no 
other part of European Russia, save in the Central Caucasus, 
it seems extremely likely that the Arthaniya, or however the 
name is to be written, occupied the valley of the Mius. The 
steep and craggy sides of this valley are composed of stratified 
limestone, and afford admirable sites for a town such as Artha 
or Arthan, which was perched on the top of a precipitous hill, 
while the landscape, as a whole, corresponds with Ibn Batuta’s 
expression, ‘the Hills of the Russians.’ 


THe CEREMIS. 


Dr. Sommier describes the Ceremis as for the most part 
of slender build, and in appearance weak, though there are 
also sturdy fellows among them that reminded him of the 
Hame type. After eliminating what he considered to be 
the result of a Slav and Tatar intermixture of blood, he 
believed he could find in the pure Ceremis the Hime and 
Karelian types of Retzius. They are generally of low stature; 
the average of twenty-eight men was 1°60 m. (5 ft. 2} in.) ; 
of eight women 1°50 m. (4 ft. rof4in.). Their hands and feet 
are small, and the skin is white. Their hair is soft and 
abundant, neither curly nor stiff, and in colour from blonde 
to dark chestnut. A light blonde inclining to red is not 
uncommon, but black is very rare. Small children have 
nearly always light flaxen hair. The beard is scanty, 

1 Ibn Batuta; Yule, vol. ii. pp. 488, 489. 


_— 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE FINNS 27 


appears late, and is usually blonde. The colour of the 
iris varies from blue to dark chestnut, but is more often 
yellowish grey and chestnut. The eyes are usually small, 
and sometimes a little oblique. In character the Ecremis 
are mild and of a good disposition ; the Russians praise 
their honesty ; but they are poor and dirty, shy, mistrustful, 
extremely obstinate, and endowed with a slow, limited 
intellect.1_ Dr. Papai observed that their skin is white, and 
in uncovered places bronzed. Their hair is dark, and very 
dark tones predominate, though lighter ones often occur. 
The eyes are generally dark, though medium and lighter 
tones are common, and among women predominant.? 

There is a marked difference between the Hill Ceremis 
and those on the left bank of the Volga, the former being 
taller and stronger. Yet the type of face on the whole is 
the same, and in both we find prominent cheek-bones, with 
the same admixture of dark- and light-haired persons with 
dark or light skins. The difference of physique between 
the two groups is entirely due to physical causes. The 
Ceremis on the left bank live among huge swamps and 
boundless forests, drink bad water, suffer from insufficient 
and improper food, and are consequently subject to fevers, 
lung disorders, goitre, and premature old age.® 

From the resemblance between the names M/é7i and 
Méria, as well as from their geographical position, it is 
generally believed that the latter people, whose name is 
now extinct, were of the same stock as the Ceremis. 
About the end of the eleventh century they are mentioned 
by Nestor as paying tribute to Novgorod, and having their 
centres at Lake Rostov and Lake KleStino. But their 

1 Sommier, (2) pp. 245-250, 238. 
2 PApai, p. 264. 3 Smirnov, (x) pp. 84, 85. 


28 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


territory embraced a far larger area, and included at least 
the whole of the governments of Vladimir, Yaroslav, and 
the western part of Kostroma. Their old position, there- 
fore, lay between the Ceremis and Mordvins to the east, 
and the Finns to the west or north-west. The earliest 
mention of them is in the catalogue of names given by 
Jordanes in the middle of the sixth century, where, under 
the name of Merens, they are placed immediately before 
the ‘ Mordens.’ 


THe VOoTIAKS. 


The Votiaks number about 276,000 persons. According 
to Dr. Buch their muscular system is only moderately 
developed, and their muscular force is small, though of 
course there are exceptions, and strong-built men are not 
uncommon. The trunk compared with the legs is longer 
than among Europeans. The skin is white, though in | 
about twenty per cent. of instances it is brown; it is 
smooth and comparatively hairless on the body and the 
extremities. As regards colour, the hair of the head is 
of various shades of brown, but is sometimes reddish 
or yellow, very rarely black. The growth of the beard is 
scanty, and in colour usually reddish. The eyes, which 
are of average size, are generally blue, but also brown, grey, 
and occasionally green. The face is oval ; the forehead low 
and narrow; the mouth of average size, with lips not 
unduly thick; the nose is usually straight and not very 
wide. Sometimes the younger women are not bad-looking, 
but the older ones are hideous. In general, the Votiaks are 
said to bear a great resemblance to the Esthonians. 

In character they are described as extremely peaceful, 
very industrious and hard-working. Amongst themselves 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE FINNS = 29 


they hardly ever come to blows, even in their cups. They 
are of a very retiring disposition, and keep themselves as 
much as possible apart from the other stranger nations that 
surround them, such as, Tatars, Bagkirs, Ceremis, etc., but 
especially from the Russians. On the whole, they struck 
Dr. Buch as being a dull, heavy people, for they take a 
long time to answer a very simple question. On feast-days 
the men drink to excess, but the women, though far from 
being teetotalers, manage to keep sober.! The low 
stature and feeble frame of the Votiak lies in close 
connection with his physical surroundings. It has been 
observed that inhabitants of low marshy ground are every- 
where of lower stature than those living on high ground. 
The contrast already noticed between the Hill Ceremis and 
those on low ground is found between the Votiaks in the 
Viatka government and those in the government of Ufa. 
When the latter migrated into the fertile black soil of the 
BaSkirs, they became physically regenerated and in no 
way inferior in appearance to their Russian and Baskir 
neighbours.? 


PERMIANS AND ZJRIANS. 


From measurements taken by Dr. Sommier the average 
height of twenty male adult Zirians was found to be 1°636 m. 
(5 ft. 4 in.), and of eight women 1°536 m. (5 ft. 4in.). Both 
sexes are well made, well fed, muscular and healthy. The 
colour of the skin is white, and the young people have 
fresh, rosy cheeks. Dark eyes are rare, the prevailing 
colour being grey. The hair is abundant and often curly, 
the predominant colour being blonde, which often tends to 


1 Buch, pp. 21-29. 3 Smirnov, (2) pp. 81, 83. 


30 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


reddish or golden. None had black hair. After twenty- 
five years the beard never fails to appear on men; some- 
times it is scanty, but more often thick and abundant, and 
nearly always curly. The face is sometimes broad and 
somewhat massive, with large cheek-bones and a small but 
well-formed nose. It reminded him of the Hime type in 
Finland, and seems to be more frequent in women than in 
men. Sometimes, however, the face is oval, with cheek- 
bones neither large nor prominent; with a long, high nose, 
either straight or aquiline, and deep-set eyes, a type that 
resembles the Scandinavian rather than the Finnish face. 
In men this type is oftenest seen with a thick curly beard. 
The young women are rather pleasing, though they can 
rarely be termed pretty. All have the impression of being 
smart and intelligent; they seem well-to-do, clean and 
well dressed, especially when contrasted with the Ostiaks 
among whom they live.} 

Another observer also gives them a very good character, 
as being religious, obedient, peaceful and reliable, sober, 
of few words, and, above all, honest. Thieving is detested. 
They are slow, but not lazy; on the contrary, they are 
diligent, laborious, and not dirtier than their Russian 
neighbours.? 

Assuming that the above inventories of the physical, 
moral, and mental qualities of the East and West Finns are 
accurate, or not less incorrect than all generalisations must 
necessarily be, we find remarkable correspondences and 
yet considerable differences. Except the Karelians, and 
to a less extent the Zirians, all branches of the Finns are 
distinguished by a certain sluggishness of mind and body, 
by shyness and suspicion of strangers, by obstinacy, great 


1 Sommier, (1) pp. 10-14. 2 Sjogren, pp. 436, 437. 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE FINNS 31 


tenacity of purpose, and an unfailing power of enduring 
privations and suffering as a matter of course. With these 
are united honesty and fidelity. No doubt it is chiefly on 
account of these qualities that they have been able to 
maintain themselves for many centuries in the inhospitable 
climate of North Central Russia before civilisation made 
life comparatively easy. The brisker, more wide-awake, 
nature of the Karelians and Zirians may be due to local 
causes—the latter, for instance, were civilised and Chris- 
tianised more than a hundred years earlier than the 
Votiaks and Permians,—which have sharpened their wits 
to a greater extent than other Finns; yet the darker, 
curly hair of the former, compared with the straight towy 
hair of the Hame, suggests a blending of different stocks. 
The hair of the Mordvins is also dark, but only a small 
percentage have wavy, and a very small number curly hair. 
With the Ceremis, too, darkish hair prevails, and the eyes 
are generally dark, though lighter tones are common, and 
predominate among women. 

In Table I. (p. 32) are brought together the height and 
cephalic index of living Finns, and for purposes of com- 
parison they are placed between the Ugrians that lie to 
the east of them, and the Letto-Lithuanians to the south- 
west. It shows that stature increases towards the west, 
and it may be assumed that till civilisation improved the 
physique of the more advanced Finns, like the Mordvins, 
the Hame, and the Karelians, they were all an under-sized 
people. It appears, further, that all the Finns are sub- 
brachycephalous (Broca), save the Ceremis, Esthonians, 
and Livs, who are mesocephalous. The presumption lies 
near at hand, therefore, that the Finns are not quite 
homogeneous, but that at some period two different stocks 


32 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


came in collision and amalgamated. The almost exact 
correspondence, as regards stature and cephalic index 
between the Hime and the Lithuanians on the one hand, 


TABLE I. 


bos] 


SM Pirie 


ie Be: 


5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 7 
5 


a 


and the Karelians and Letts on the other, is worth noting, 
as it shows what small value stature and a single index 
possess when attempting to solve an ethnological pro- 
blem. 


1 Pépai, pp. 257, 261. 2 Maliev, pp. 51-69. 
3 Sommier, (1) pp. 62, 65. 4 Sommier, (2) pp. 246-248. 
5 Mainov, pp. 186, 386. 6 Retzius, (x) pp. 163-165. 


? Brennsohn, pp. 27, 28, 42. 8 Yantchouk, p. 476. 


CRANIOLOGY OF THE FINNS 33 


FINNISH CRANIA. 


Though the results to be gained by craniological 
measurements for ethnological purposes are not very 
satisfactory, they cannot be passed over in silence, and 
I have felt bound to lay before the reader some little of 
the material collected by G. Retzius, Virchow, Maliev, 
and others, with regard to Finnish crania. It is certainly 
an important matter to try to form some idea of a 
typical Finnish skull, as a considerable number of ancient 
crania have been unearthed in the Baltic Provinces, and 
elsewhere in Russia, in regions that have been or still 
are inhabited by Finns. From a historical point of view 
it is needful to decide, if possible, whether they are 
Finnish or otherwise. Professor G. Retzius has described 
and measured 94 adult West Finnish crania, preserved 
partly at Helsingfors, partly at Stockholm. The Hel- 
singfors collection consists of 68 crania from various 
parts of Finland, except Karelia; of these, 41 are of 
males, chiefly malefactors; 3 are of women; the sex 
of the remainder, which came from old cemeteries, is 
not stated, but if the sexes were equally divided, 
about 72 per cent. of the 68 skulls may be considered 
male. The Stockholm collection consists of 26 adult 
West Finnish crania, obtained chiefly from parts of the 
country inhabited by Hame or people of Tavastland.! In 
comparing his measurements with those of Russian 
anthropologists it must be remembered that he uses the 
maximum height to obtain the vertical index, whereas the 
Russians use the bregma height recommended by Broca ; 
his vertical index is therefore higher than it would be if 

1 Retzius, (2) Table v. ; (1) p. 176, Table v. 

T Cc 


* wed 
sTUI219-) 


* woos 
* S10jZUIS|O}{ 


wma As WH 


* WTOTIIOIS 
* SIOJSUISTOH 
* FENSO 
* wed 
SIMI9I9-) 


HN ECONO A 


° wWOTPOS 
* si0j3uTspoH 


| 


I 
4 
I 
€ 
4 
¥ 
L 


* Wied 
sTulela) 
* wyjoqyD0IS ° 
* siojZulspayy | Teqdsooorop-qns ° 


PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


° SIUIAI9 : 
: srodunspoyy * yeydssogorod ° 


MOMADI ONAAW HAD 


ese gg. €Z ean . bg I . 
439A XL) ‘ONs0, | Teqded | 3ySpPH “CIpwerg(“qI3U97] 
“SHIIANI 


34 


‘II Fav LE 


35 


CRANIOLOGY OF THE FINNS 


ES | es | Ne 


‘HAMIXVPE ZOVURAY 


TIT T1avVL 


AUS OMO MM ; 


t 


e 6é cé s J°2POH Ft 4 
°  - guoynay, Seawld-MOY S.-H “OZ 
qsinay| ° ‘oysop “= = “61 
ceé "yoeig-qus é¢ 8 I 
&¢ *ydoo0seur ¢ e Z I 
“s "yoyop-qns ff = “91 
ft *oysijop ce ¢ I 
if r Cf “by 
droqzuaney yonessry “fr 
“Goyop *ssny s a | 
cé ¢é "YI 
O9l| BssnYy TUON * Aysyouorey, ‘or 
qsraur yg MOUDITA “6 
« 6¢ c¢ °g 
6¢ e fj e yA 
° ws d ° ce 2 
sju1a19°) . AIS ° 
66 * ¢¢ > 
° 6¢é e 6é ¢ 
. W]OYAIOIS e e te 4 
* s1ojdurspayy |} * 0 * 0 SAIZIOY “FT 


36 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


using the French method. Maliev has measured 17 
Ceremis crania from an old burial-place at the village of 
Little Sundir in the district of Kozmodemiansk (Kazan), 
and 26 Permian taken from a cemetery at Kudimkor 
in the district of Solikamsk (Perm).! Dr. Sommier has 
measured 36 Ostiak crania.? All these I have arranged 
in Table II. in five groups according to the classifica- 
tion of Broca, while the totals are given on the upper 
part of Table III. In the lower part, I add, for the purpose 
of comparison, 184 North Russian crania measured by 
Dr. Tarenetsky ; on line 12 the dolichocephals are shown 
separately. On lines 13-18 are the indices of 23 skulls—3 
hyperdolichos are omitted—from a row-grave cemetery at 
Laurenzberg on the right bank of the Vistula, near Kaldus 
in the district of Kulm, all of which were measured by Dr. 
Lissauer. Their date may be placed at the end of the last 
millennium, and to judge from the funeral furniture and 
pottery they belonged to a Slav-speaking population.® 

An inspection of the two Tables shows that the Finns are 
not a homogeneous race, as it includes both dolichocephals 
and brachycephals. Beginning with the former class, and 
comparing the Hime with the Ceremis, we see that the 
former have shorter, narrower heads; that comparing the 
Hime with the Ostiak, taking the sexes together, there is 
little difference in the length and breadth of the head, 
though the former have a much higher head ; that, taking 
both sexes together, the head of the Ceremis is rather 
larger and broader, and about 12 mm. (4 in.) higher than 
that of the Ostiak; that in length and breadth the crania 
of Permian and Ostiak women are almost the same, but 

1 Maliev, (2) xvii. Table xi.; (1) Appendix, § 2% Sommier, (1) pp. 90-93. 

3 Lissauer, (2) Table opp. p. 134, 106. 


CRANIOLOGY OF THE FINNS 37 


the latter are platycephalous. Comparing next the Hame 
with the dolichocephalous Russians in Table ITI. |. 12, we 
see that the length and breadth of the skull, and, therefore, 
the cephalic index is the same; the vertical index unfor- 
tunately is not given, but the orbital index of the Hame is 
a little higher. Compared with the above Russians the 
Ceremis head is longer, broader, and higher, but compared 
with the Teutonic crania (Table ITI. 1. 20) it is consider- 
ably shorter, nearly the same breadth, but lower. 

In the sub-dolicho group we find a change. Instead of 
being longer and broader than the Hime head, the 
Ceremis skull is now considerably shorter and rather 
narrower, though about the same height. Compared with 
the Permian male, the Hime head is longer and broader, 
but not so high; yet in the female skull the Hame is 
higher than the Permian. As regards the orbital index 
the Hame is mesoseme, but the Permian megaseme. 

In the mesocephalous group the same relation between 
the Hime and the Ceremis is perhaps maintained, though 
there is only one skull to judge by. Though the Permian 
female skull is higher than the Hame it 1s decidedly 
shorter and narrower. In the sub-brachycephalous class 
the male Hame skull is longer and broader than any 
other in the group, and is only exceeded in height by the 
Permian ; but the female head is much shorter, narrower, 
and higher than the Permian female head. In the 
brachycephalous group the male Hame head is longer and 
higher than the Permian, while both are nearly equally 
wide ; the female Hime head is about the same length as 
the Permian, but narrower and lower, though after all the 
observation is made on a single instance. 

The main difference on the average between North 


38 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Russian crania and those of the West Finns, seems to be that 
the latter have a lower cephalic but rather higher vertical 
index—in the case of female crania the difference is very 
decided—and considerably higher transverse vertical and 
orbital indices; though in the three sub-brachycephalous 
crania of Laurenzberg Slavs, the vertical and transverse 
vertical indices are even higher than the Hame, yet the 
orbital index of the latter always remains higher. It is 
perhaps the best test of all the indices here given. The 
Permian crania, taken on an average, in spite of the 
differences we have noticed above in the separate groups, 
have indices a little higher than the Hame, but on the 
whole agreeing with the latter, save in having a lower 
orbital index. But when the sexes are taken separately 
a great difference is observable; the males are brachy- 
cephalous, the women mesocephalous; whereas, taken on 
the average, the sex-differences in the Hame type are nearly 
smoothed over. The Ceremis being dolichocephalous, in 
the wider sense of the term, have maturally a low vertical 
index, which agrees nearly with that of the purely dolicho- 
cephalous Letts and Russians (Table ITI. ll. 9, 11), but is 
still far removed from the platycephaly of the Ostiaks. 

As the West Finns contain a percentage of long-heads 
that cannot entirely be accounted for by crossing with 
Scandinavians, and the Permians and Votiaks also contain 
a few, while the Ceremis may be regarded as mainly long- 
headed, the question arises, How did they acquire this 
dolichocephaly, and what was the race with which they 
were crossed? Later on, when dealing with the archzology 
of North Russia, we shall find that a small tribe of small- 
headed dolichocephalous people lived on the Lower 
Volkhov, where it debouches into Lake Ladoga, far back 


- we ower 


CRANIOLOGY OF THE FINNS 39 


in the neolithic period; that at the source of the river 
the tribe included at least one short-headed member; 
that on the Okd two crania, one sub-brachycephalous 
and the other sub-dolichocephalous, belonging to the 
same early period, were found in two graves in the 
neighbourhood of Murom; that several short-headed and 
one long-headed cranium belonging to a much later time, 
though still in the neolithic age, have been taken from a 
shell mound in Livland. I shall be able to show, I hope, 
the considerable likeness that exists between the Ladogan 
and the Ceremisian crania, and to establish the probability 
that the Ceremis are in part descended from this pre- 
historic tribe. 

As the Ladogan population was, comparatively speaking, 
small-headed, and had probably dark chestnut, not blonde, 
flaxen hair, it could not have been an Eastern prolongation 
of the Scandinavian blonde dolichocephals, though it had 
been so long in Europe that it almost deserves the term 
European. It will be seen, too, later on, that archeology 
speaks in the same sense. From the distant affinity 
between the Finnish or Ugrian languages, it is natural to 
suppose there might also be affinity of blood between this 
long-headed race, that seems to survive in the Ceremis, 
and the Ostiaks. It is true the latter are, almost without 
exception, chamecephalous, but this perhaps is only a 
local variation, for in other respects these two peoples 
agree in possessing a white skin, dark chestnut hair, 
darkish eyes, short stature, small hands and feet. The 
question can be settled only by experts, though it may be 
pointed out that Virchow has measured fifteen male and 
female platycephalous crania, presumably Teutonic, from 
@ row-grave cemetery near Alsheim (Rheinhessen), with 


qo 


40 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


which were found a coin of Antoninus Pius and one of 
Constantine the Great. The indices were as follows :— 
Cephalous index 6M. 72°7 9F. 74°2 
Vertical 5, ry) 67°95,  68°9! 
Platycephalous crania have also been found in the long 
barrows in England and elsewhere. 

If the Ceremis are really the descendants in part of the 
old Ladogan population, and the short-headed men of the 
neolithic period were of a different stock, the latter may 
have been Finns, and, if so, may be regarded as having 
lived for a very long time in Europe. The question then 
presents itself: To which race belonged originally the 
languages now known as Finnish and Ugrian? In other 
words, did the short-headed men impose their tongue on 
the long-headed men, or was it vice vers4? The question 
cannot at present be answered. Yet considering the great 
interval of time during which these two types of crania 
have been in close contact, it is possible to believe that 
the original congeries of human beings, from which by 
hypothesis sprang the united Finno-Ugrians or the united 
Finns alone, was not composed of a homogeneous cranial 
type. Even if this period is set back for a myriad of years 
there were still several myriads of years behind the human 
race, during which several allophyl elements had time to 
unite. 


CRANIA FROM THE BALTIC PROVINCES, 


The whole of Esthonia is and has been inhabited by 
Finns, at any rate in part, since the beginning of the later 
Iron Age, or about 500 a.p. The north of Livland is still 


1 Virchow, (x) p. 495. 


CRANIOLOGY OF THE FINNS 41 


peopled by Esthonians, but in the middle of the thirteenth 
century, when the German knights took possession of the 
country, the Finns or Livs, as they were called, extended 
further south, and also occupied the western portion of 
the province ; the central and south-eastern divisions being 
at that time in the hands of the Letts. In Kurland the 
Kurs held the northern part of the great promontory that 
ends in Domesness, and perhaps a strip along the sea-coast 
that united them with the Livs. The rest of the province 
was and still is tenanted by Letts and Lithuanians. The 
question to be settled is whether Finns were the first 
occupants of Esthonia and Livland, or whether they were pre- 
ceded by another people. Now that we have learnt a few 
facts concerning the Hame skull in Finland, it is possible 
to take a glance at the crania that have been brought to 
light in the Baltic Provinces, so as to form an opinion how 
far they belong to the Hame type of Western and Central 
Finland. 

In Table IV. are brought together the indices of 91 
crania; 87 of them measured by Professor Virchow, 
4 by Dr. Kharuzin, who uses Broca’s method, and all 
arranged in geographical order from north to south, 
Though no age is assigned to several of these crania, 
the presumption is that none of them belong to a very 
remote age, for, on the whole, before the introduction of 
Christianity cremation prevailed. Hence it is more than 
probable that they belong to a time when the population 
was the same as in the thirteenth century. The only 
certain prehistoric crania are those of the lower series, 
found in excavating the Rinnekaln in Livland, while the 
upper series from the same mound can only be from three 
hundred to four hundred years old. 


PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


42 


Lg oo. 
#389 57 9s mr 
-éqoun-ang |{ coe «oe 
ompeqd: a I{ ey “ “ 
vopnop-ans |{ 172 “oe 
soup 6.gh (sours 
Dev sakes |{ 98.96 Joddn) upeyouupy 
Ben pena 
£59 woe 
(sous 
90.82 FaKo}]) UTEASUUTY 
21g g TMP PUB sTES 
1 . 
ae : H “ed 
sees ; |; pues 
*. ; 1| x FA 
sono 26] tat] © rio : “ 
ssmpra toy ca] 0g] res] gisj rf fe |e a 
*g.98| ogb| 1.06 | £14] Lec} a] ca | & 1 PRO! OTT 
spor | oog| ~~ | 96 | pec} oss) r}-a| «|: -  « 
vor 1938] g.vg| 69h] ooor] Ze] 2EZ} 1 | wl] “ 
soyspunys Tq] y0.2g| 0.6¢| g.Sor] ofé| Let) 1] wat): * enue 
“reas | Teen | aa ak | onsen |oneedea| 
cerevers swy| os | ona sworn 
‘soIaNT 


“AI 21EVL 


43 


CRANIOLOGY OF THE FINNS 


Sex -d (2) ‘sonessr] , orzx “d (£) ‘pugz 9 "039 ‘seb “dd (1) ‘MOqINA ¢ 
063-Eb: “dd (8) “prey » "1gE “d (1) “pros ¢ ELE-2LE “dd (1) ‘moqon,a ¢ 6$e-t6e ‘dd ‘uznsmyy _ 


EE a Kem Re as 


oB1oquinzjoyy 
MOU Ud}2AII 


* daqqzis 
é¢ €é 
BInqlP?sS UV 


gees 9 ee | ee | eeewen § come | oem 9 ecommerce 


oe £.96 | 0.2) 6.22] 1 
6.gb| 9.06 | 9.14] 9.94] 8 
1.18} 9.66 | 6.2£| 2.££] g 
se | $.Zor] £19] 092] 1 
8.09 eee eee 1.2 I 
00S} £.10r| 92] z.£2) 1 
eb) ve 120.82) 2 
ae 8:86 | 9. sf 5.94 I 
982 | 9- 8 8:94) I 
ove e ZvL| L&g| 1 


"OSZI Ur 


pur mou 4513327] 


oSz1 eof ayy 


jhoqe pues MoU YsNIF] 


VINOAT‘I 


44  PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


The Lettish and Lithuanian crania are given without 
indication of sex, though probably both sexes are included. 
For purposes of comparison it is often useful to know the 
average maximum length, breadth, and height of a set of 
crania, and as there was no room for this in Table IV. the 
measurements are appended below :— 


Mod Lettish Length. Breadth. Height. Ceph. ind. Vert.ind. Tr. vert. 
50 Skulls $4796 140° 130°9 78S 72°99 93°43 


15 Modern Lithus- \i79°3 1406 133°4 78°45 74°45 94°87 


Both sets of crania seem very similar in length and 
breadth, but the Lettish is about an eighth of an inch 
lower, and therefore its vertical and transverse vertical 
indices are also lower than the Lithuanian. For a meso- 
cephalous type 72°9 or 73° is a low vertical index, since about 
one unit must be subtracted to reduce them to the scale 
of Broca, which seems to imply that the group contains a 
large proportion of dolichocephals. Though the vertical 
index of two sub-dolichocephalous men of Hame type is 
only 72's, the actual average height of their crania is 
7 mm. higher than the Lettish; on the other hand, 
the vertical index of two sub-dolichocephalous Hame 
women is as much as 77°6. As the sub-dolichocephalous 
Ceremis and Permians have also a rather high vertical 
index, a low sub-dolichocephalous head in the Baltic 
Provinces cannot be regarded as Finnish, but must be 
considered as belonging either to a Lett or to a Finnicised 
Lett. 

Though the modern Lettish skull is mesocephalous, it 
would seem that this has not always been the case. Pro- 
fessor Virchow, basing his opinion on crania of almost 


CRANIOLOGY OF THE FINNS 45 


certain Lettish attribution, such as the 16 from the 
Gulbern district, 3 from Terveten, 2 from Alt Pebalg, 
and 2 from elsewhere, arrives at the conclusion that the 
Lettish type is dolichocephalous, as the following Table 
exhibits : !— 

TABLE V. 


Comparing these indices with the modern crania above, 
we see that the vertical index is practically unchanged, but 
that the transverse vertical index is lower in the latter. To 
account for this difference, supposing the actual height to 
have remained constant, the older skull must have been 
narrower than the modern one. No doubt it was also a 
little longer. What is true of the onginal Lettish type 
seems to be true of the old Lithuanian type. In the large 
and numerous Pagan cemeteries of the eleventh century 
that exist in the neighbourhood of Bielsk and Drohiczyn 
(government of Grodno), between the Bug and the Narev, 
that is to say, in a region inhabited at that time by 
Yatvings, a Lithuanian tribe, dolichocephalous crania alone 
have been disinterred.? 

To the crania in Table IV. must be added ro more 
from the three Baltic Provinces, for which there was 
no room before, as they are drawn up in another form. 


1 Sievers, (2) pp. 122-128, with observations by Virchow. 
2 Count Louis de Fleury, pp. 331-334. 


46 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


They were measured by Dr. Weinberg, and were taken 
from burial-places dating from the tenth to the twelfth 
century.! As he has calculated the vertical and trans- 
vertical indices from the maximum height of Virchow, I 
have added two columns in which the dregma height is 
used, and enclosed the figures in square brackets. 

It is now time to pass in review the contents of Tables 
IV. and VI. to ascertain how far the Finnish type of skull 
prevails in the northern half of the Baltic Provinces. 
Beginning with Esthonia, we find that out of 23 adult 
crania, from seven different places, not one accords 
with the average Hame type in Table III.; either the 
cephalic or the vertical index is too low, though the high 
orbital indices from 86 to 88x in some instances are 
certainly an indication of Finnish rather than of Lettish 
origin. Yet on that account alone we are not to suppose 
that the owners of these crania, when alive, did not speak 
a Finnish dialect. In all probability they did so; at any 
rate most of them. With regard to the 4 crania from 
Piihtitsa, which lies near the Russian frontier, Dr. Kharuzin, 
who measured them, is almost sure they could not have 
belonged to a Finnish people, and Professor Viskovatov, 
who conducted the excavations, says there is no doubt, 
judging from their family names, that the present in- 
habitants are Esthonianised Russians.* The high orbital 
index of the Hallist group may perhaps be attributed to 
crossing with Finns, while that of the Fellin triplet is low— 
rather lower, in fact, than the average Lettish male orbital 
index in Table V. That miscegenation on a great scale 
between Finns and a long-headed orthocephalous popula- 
tion, like the Letts, has taken place, seems quite evident. 


1 Weinberg, pp. Ir-13. 2 Viskovatov, p. 239. 


47 


CRANIOLOGY OF THE FINNS 


g.£5 | g.1g | §.98 |[4.£6 


Se eel eee! le Cree eed feel 


eco 


6. ZS +61 


Lg | ¢.96 
ce | 458 ce 6.28 


6.1 | | ¥-08 


eco eee ¥.08 og 


g-66 


1.96 
¥.68 


6.zZ01 


1L} €.%2 | 6z1| rE 


8.99 | £.49 | zz1 | Sz1 
. ee 1 ofr | 6E1 
02) S.£2 | Lex | Let 
-69 | 6.42 | ver | 921 


v.S£ | 6.€2 | o€1 


1.92 | £.92 | 11 
g.94| 9.€2 | rb1 


a | AS | a | | oS fc 
epee | eee | 


| ee | ee | ee | ee | ee fe Fe 


IA Fave 


* Popuaqqn’] 


' asway 


Hopspouramyy 
*  STTOy 


° AD-SEITY 


“HSIATI 


"NVINOHLSG | “HSILLGT 


48 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


We know that in the twelfth century, when the Livs ha:ried 
the Letts, they killed the men, and generally carried off the 
women and children as prisoners.1_ No doubt they were in 
the habit of doing so in still earlier times. Such a practice 
would lead not only to frequent crossing of blood between 
the two races, but to the incorporation of a considerable 
number of pure Letto-Lithuanians into the Finnish popula- 
tion, for the Lett boys and girls that were spared no doubt 
became Finnicised before they became adults. Though 
we have already found reason to believe that from a very 
remote time there must have been a certain percentage of 
long-heads among the brachycephal Finns, it would not 
account for the absolute absence of even a single sub- 
brachycephalous skull in the province of Esthonia. The 
only inference seems to be that Esthonia, before the arrival 
of the Finns in any great body, had already been colonised, 
though not very densely, by a long-headed orthocephalous 
people like the ancient Letts and Lithuanians. Another 
fact pointing in the same direction is the name of 
Esthonians, applied to the Finns of Esthonia. By the 
Scandinavians they were termed Zis#r. This name is 
identical with that of the Aistii of Tacitus, the Estas of 
Wolfstan, a people that lived on the Baltic coast, east of 
the Vistula, and are identified with the Old Prussians, who 
were of Lithuanian stock. Letto-Lithuanian tribes may 
therefore be supposed to have held East Prussia and the 
Baltic Provinces, and to have been collectively known to 
the older Scandinavians as Aistiz, to those of the Viking 
period as Eistir. When the Finns made their way into the 
northern part of the provinces, and absorbed the native 
population, they also inherited the name of Eistir, and the 
1 Wiedemann, p. Lxiii, 


CRANIOLOGY OF THE FINNS 49 


country they occupied received the name of Estland, or the 
land of the Lists. 

Crossing the political, though not the linguistic, fron- 
tier into Livland, and leaving aside for the moment the 
crania from Rinnekaln, we find 5 crania from Salis and 
2 from Ikul See that certainly belong to the Lettish type 
established by Professor Virchow. ‘The low vertical and 
orbital indices seem decisive on this point. The 
four Livish skulls in Table VI. are of varied types, but 
Finnish blood may well have run through the veins of at 
least one of these brain-pans. So far then as the scanty 
evidence goes, the Livs must have been a mixed breed, 
at any rate in later times, when we first hear of them in 
history. 

The crania from Rinnekaln in Liviand require special 
notice and attention, for, if Professor Virchow is correct, 
a Finnish people frequented the spot in a neolithic period 
when all instruments were of stone or bone. On the south 
bank of the Salis, where it issues in a stream about 25 
feet wide from Lake Burtneek, is a natural elevation about 
198 feet long, 49 feet wide, and 8 feet high, known as the 
Rinnekaln. Its upper surface for a depth of about 3 feet 
is composed of mussel-shells, bones and scales of fish, 
with other food refuse. The archzological contents will be 
described in greater detail in another chapter. For the 
present it is sufficient to say that the upper part of the 
mound consists of the débris left by a prehistoric people that 
went there periodically to fish, to eat mussels, to hunt, and to 
trap beavers. With the exception of three or four stone 
implements, including a polished diorite axe found on the 
upper layer of mussel-shells, the harpoons, scrapers, arrow- 
heads, etc., were all of bone. The remains of wild mam- 

x D 


50 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


malia included those of the Greenland seal, the beaver, 
elk, boar, Bos primigenius, the bison, etc., but not the rein- 
deer. The domestic animals were the dog and the sheep, 
it being uncertain whether the few bones of a larger and 
smaller breed of cattle had belonged to domesticated 
animals or not. The presence of the horse is somewhat 
doubtful, as only one tooth was found near the top of the 
mound. A few sherds of pottery indicate that the potter’s 
art was known and practised. In excavating the mound 
two series of crania were uncovered. The upper series lay 
at a depth of from 1 to 2 feet, and had been deposited 
there not more than three or four centuries ago, as coins 
and other objects lying beside the skeletons abundantly 
proved. The six crania of the lower series lay at different 
depths from 4 feet 2 inches to 2 feet 5 inches below the 
surface. Three of them reposed in the black earth under- 
lying the shell-mound, and below layers of mussels and 
refuse that had not previously been broken through with 
pickaxe and spade. With one exception these six crania 
were brachycephalous. The indices of these five short- 
headed skulls, without distinction of sex—in Table IV. the 
sexes are given separately—were :— 
Ceph. ind. Vert. ind. Orbit. ind. Nasal ind. 
83°0 74°1 82°7 48°3 


In some instances the skeletons were preserved. Two 
of those in the black earth below untouched layers of 
shells, and one in the lower part of the shell-mound, had 
been deposited with the head to the north-east and the 
feet to the south-west. This last skeleton lay surrounded 
by quantities of splinters of bone and sherds of pottery. 
On the breast of the long-headed skeleton, which belonged 


CRANIOLOGY OF THE FINNS 51 


to a woman, lay a curious-looking ornament of bone; at 
her head was a bone arrow-head, at her feet lay two others, 
one of bone, the other of mica schist. 

Out of the 29 crania of the upper series only 5 were 
sub-brachycephalous. Taking both sexes together—in 
Table IV. they are given separately—the indices were :— 


Trans. 
* | vert. Nasal. Orbit. 


48°7 


76°9 | 94°2 | [2 p.J85°0 se 
Pp 


73°7 937 [5 plt9"2 (5 
93°6 


Comparing the short-headed crania of the upper and 
lower series, Professor Virchow finds they closely resemble 
each other; that they do not differ ethnologically, and 
there is nothing to prevent their being classed together. 
With regard to nationality he believes we need hardly 
hesitate to consider the short heads as the Finnish and the 
long heads as the Lettish element. The first stand very 
near the Saarhof skull, the second closely resemble the 
crania from Alt Selburg, Alt Pebalg, Gulbern, and Ter- 
veten. With regard to the mesocephals he is uncertain 
whether they belong to a pure or to a hybrid race, and also 
whether the Livs are of mixed blood or not. The meso- 
cephalous crania from Rinnekaln are not separable from 
those of Launekaln, Ascheraden, and Gulbern. If these 
are held to be Livish something is to be said in favour of 
the belief. But it must be remembered that Lithuanian 
and Lettish skulls, such as those, for instance, in Table IV., 
are also mesocephalous. For the present it is an open 


52 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


question whether the Livs are a mixed Letto-Finnish people 
or not.! 

Assuming with Professor Virchow that the brachycephals 
of the lower series were Finns at a neolithic stage of 
civilisation, though the vertical and orbital indices of the 
males are lower than might be expected, it does not follow 
that they were the first settlers in what is now Livland. 
It would seem they were not permanently living on the 
shore of the lake, and one of the skulls of the series 
appears to have belonged to a sub-dolichocephalous old 
woman of Lettish type. Whether a captive or not, after 
death she was treated with respect. She was buried with 
a curious carved bone ornament on her breast, arrow-heads 
at her head and feet, and her body was laid in the same 
direction as a genuine member of the tribe. It is im- 
possible to fix a precise date to the shell-mound at Rinne- 
kaln, but it was rather late in the neolithic period, as the 
presence of sheep and of two breeds of oxen sufficiently 
show. It is also later than the stations at Kunda in 
Esthonia, of which we shall have to speak in another 
chapter. 


1 Virchow, (1) pp. 411-432; Sievers, (1) pp. 217-222. 


CHAPTER II 
THE NEOLITHIC AGE IN FINLAND 


By a brief study of the archeology of Finland and the 
north centre of Russia, we may form an idea when man 
first came into these northern climes, and make more or 
less well-founded conjectures as to his manner of life and 
civilisation, as well as the quarter of the compass from 
which he proceeded. The north of Russia must have been 
habitable for a long time before man thought it worth while 
to try his fortunes in the wintry land, for traces of the 
mammoth have been found in almost every part of 
European Russia, from north to south and from east to 
west. Yet no handiwork of man is found associated 
with the tusks of Eiephas primigenius in any part where 
it is likely that Finns have ever resided. It is true 
the late Count Uvarov believed he had discovered flint 
implements of palzolithic type with tusks of the mammoth 
at Kara¢drovo, near Mirom, but the antiquity of the flint 
implements has been disputed, and the presence of sherds 
of pottery clearly relegates the find to the neolithic period. 
The history of man in the north and centre of Russia 
begins with the neolithic age, when he had learnt to grind 
and polish his stone implements, though he often neglected 
to do so. _ As illustrations of archzological objects would 


be somewhat out of place in a work of this sort, I have 
68 


54 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


referred, whenever possible, to the well-known and very 
useful atlas of Mr. J. R. Aspelin, Antiguités du nord finno- 
ougrien, under the shorter form of Asp. No. 

Perhaps the earliest type of stone implement found in 
Finland is a crowbar-shaped tool, a foot or two long, 
the point alone of which is usually ground smooth. 
This simple tool, supposed to have been used for boring 
holes in ice, is found in greatest abundance just above 
and below the arctic circle on the banks of the Kemi, 
on the shores of Lake Kemi, and even further northwards. 
In smaller numbers it is met with across the centre of 
Finland, in Karelia and Oldénets, but not in the south-west 
of Finland, nor in Sweden and Norway (Asp. No. 28, 29). 
Another hacking instrument, sometimes as much as 17 in. 
long by 24 in. wide, with one side carefully ground flat, the 
back rounded like a keelless boat, and the two ends ter- 
minating in a point (Asp. No. 34) or a short straight edge, 
seems to have had its focus of manufacture in Oldnets. 
Thence it spread in no great numbers westwards, though 
not so far as Satakunta or to the south-west corner of 
Finland, and northwards without reaching lat. 64° N. 
Examples have also been found near the mouth of the 
Volkhov in the great Ladogan find, and there is a broken 
specimen in the University Museum at Kazan from the 
district of UrZum (Vidtka). In a variety of this instru- 
ment, found in Oldnets, the upper flat surface is concave 
(Asp. No. 32, 33). A flat, wedge-shaped axe of oblong 
section, made of the native stone of the country, and of the 
same type as one widely distributed in the centre and 
south of Sweden, in the south of Norway, and the north of 
Germany, is also found in the Grand Duchy (Asp. No. 17, 
19). It occurs in greatest profusion in the south-west 


THE NEOLITHIC AGE IN FINLAND 55 


corner of the country ; it does not extend so far north as 
lat. 64° N., or further east than the western shore of 
Lake Ladoga, occurring there in only trifling quantities. A 
longer axe, generally of quadrangular but also of oval 
section, is also thinly distributed over much the same 
area, though reaching eastwards into Oldnets (Asp. No. 31). 
Some of the chisels are of almost triangular section, and are 
mainly confined to Karelia and Oldnets; they are not 
found in Scandinavia or on the Baltic coast. Chisels no 
doubt were mainly used for cutting wood, though they 
could serve for other purposes, for stone chisels were still 
used not many years ago by the Lapps, in the parish of 
Kuusamo (Kemi), for removing the hair from the moistened 
hides of reindeer.! Of gouges there are two types. The 
first has a flat face, in which the groove is made at one end, 
and the short sides and back are rounded. With the 
exception of the extreme south-west corner, such gouges 
are common over the whole of Finland up to the Arctic 
Circle, but most of all in Karelia and Hame or Tavastland. 
They are also common enough in the governments of 
Kazdn and Vidtka ; and one from Andnino, near Elabuga, 
in the University Museum at Kazan, may serve in dating 
some of these instruments. The other type has a flat back, 
does not taper, and the short sides are also flat and 
parallel. It is chiefly confined to Central Finland, and 
hardly touches Karelia (Asp. No. 47, 48). 

The most interesting archzological objects, however, 
are the perforated, boat-shaped hammer-axes of the same 
general forms, though with slight differences, as those 
known in Sweden (Asp. No. 64, 65). More than a 
hundred are recorded, and their distribution is worthy of 

1 Montelius, (2) p. 197. 


56 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


notice. They occur only in the south-west angle of the 
Grand Duchy, and are not found east of a line drawn from 
about the mouth of the Kymmene, on the south coast, to 
Ny Karleby, on the west coast.! A couple of flint daggers 
with neat serrated ridges along the haft, of well-known 
Scandinavian type (Asp. No. 57), have likewise been found 
in the south-west of Finland. As there is no flint in the 
country, they must have been imported from Sweden. 
Like the boat-shaped hammer-axes, they belong to the 
fourth or latest period of the neolithic age, according to the 
classification of Mr. O. Montelius. 

Very different from the perforated hammer-axe of South- 
west Finland is a rude perforated instrument, pointed at 
both ends, the body of which may be lozenge-shaped, or 
more or less elongated, but is always provided with a pivot- 
like protuberance, on each side of the hole, at right angles 
to the long diameter (Asp. No. 66-70). It has its chief 
development in Olénets, but it has also been found in 
Bothnia and in Satakunta, where both the lozenge and the 
narrow type occur. A lozenge-shaped axe or double pick, 
but without the lateral pivots, was found near the village 
of Volédsovo near Mifrom.? Not unconnected with these 
are the perforated picks of various forms, including that 
of the lozenge, but all terminating in the head of an animal. 
Five are known from Olénets, one from Karelia, and two 
from the government of Archangel, of which one came 
from as far north as the district of Mezen (Asp. 71, 
73-76).8 Though these instruments certainly belong to a 
stone age, it is very probable, as Mr. J. R. Aspelin supposes, 
that they are imitated from bronze weapons of the later 


1 Nyman, pp. 303-337. 3 Uvirov, vol. ii. Pl. 25, No. 369 
8 Jbid., vol. ii. Pl. 34, No. 4736. 


a 


THE NEOLITHIC AGE IN FINLAND 57 


bronze period, such as are found on the Lower Kama. 
Stone lance- and arrow-heads have also been found in 
small numbers, chiefly in Bothnia and Hame. 

The art of pottery was also practised in the later stone 
age. At Hankasalmi, east of Jyvaskyla, in the heart of 
Finland, were discovered by Dr. Heikel in 1894 several 
large fragments of an urn which he found possible to re- 
unite, and so to restore in part the original vessel. In 
diameter it was about 15 inches, and the bottom was 
evidently round. It was ornamented with several alternate 
bands of holes in three rows and diagonally arranged 
punch-marks, made with a square-toothed, comb-like in- 
strument, and the inner edge of the rim, which was bevelled, 
was adorned with similar punch-marks. In the neighbour- 
hood of Lake Ule& ornamented clay vessels, partly finished, 
partly incomplete, were found with stone chisels, and at least 
two clay moulds for celts of East Russian and Siberian type. 
The ornament on the sherds consisted of rows of impressed 
points and diagonal punctured grooves, a very character- 
istic ornament often observed in the neolithic pottery from 
the mouth of the Volkhov, from Oldénets, the Valdai, and the 
Oka. Sherds have also been discovered elsewhere, in the 
parish of Virdois north of Tammerfors, near Lake Kynsivesi 
in Hime, and in some profusion on the Vuoksi river.! 

From the above résumé several important deductions can 
be drawn with more or less probability. It is evident that 
during the stone period, which lasted to all intents and 
purposes to the beginning of the Christian era, Finland was 
inhabited by two, if not three, distinct peoples. Which of 
these first appeared upon the scene it is impossible to 
conjecture. Finnish archeologists are unanimous in be- 

2 Heikel, (x) p. 13x, Fig. 16; Hackman, pp. 368, 369. 


58 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


lieving that the south-west part of the country, where the 
flat wedge-shaped axes and the boat-shaped hammer-axes 
are found, was inhabited by a Scandinavian people that 
arrived there from Sweden. According to Mr. O. Montelius, 
the beginning of the Bronze Age in Sweden may be dated 
about 1700 B.c., and these hammer-axes belong to the 
period immediately previous. But as doubtless they were 
in use for a long time after the introduction of bronze, the 
first appearance of the Swedish colonists might be placed 
about 1500 B.c. Yet as the wedge-shaped axes are of a 
still older type, the hardy adventurers may have found their 
way to the coast of Finland at a still earlier date. The 
second people are generally supposed to have been the 
ancestors of the Lapps. But as the Ladogan people at 
the mouth of the Volkhov were certainly not Lapps, and 
the hacking instrument with a back like a keelless boat 
was known to them, and has not been found very far to the 
north, it seems likely that some of their tribes made at 
least hunting expeditions and fishing excursions to the fishy 
lakes and rivers of Finland. 


NEOLITHIC MaN ON THE SHORES OF LAKE LADOGA 
AND EASTWARDS. 


As no crania of neolithic man are known in Finland, 
it is fortunate that several have been brought to light in a 
region so near at hand as the south shore of Lake Ladoga. 
In 1878, while digging the new Sids canal from the mouth 
of the Volkhov eastwards to the river Sids, 10 crania, 8 
portions of skeletons, numerous bones of animals, and 
many specimens of human industry, were uncovered. The 
majority of these lay on the level of the bottom of the 


59 


THE NEOLITHIC AGE IN FINLAND 


S 


"dQ0UQ) VIR] 


1.$Z[€]] 6.92 | e€: [€] vLt bv |* oyorop-qns 
EZ [£)| S.1Z | 9€1 [z] €g1 9 | feqdssoyo0g 
qdep)] WPH | Tpecg | -qBu9] oFesy | -on 


* qyauey] 

°  —« Xopuy 

. ape | 

>  peag) EB 
eee eee eve eon e Tea} e 
601 | °" “ * — * PRIEQIOIT J 9 
zos ‘~~: Feyaozr0yy 
eee ore | eee * Suey ‘oUNe sidns 
gof *  —-Feqrd1990-03001,7 
PII 7% * peqtdra9 
gel "8  * [eee 
gzr e e e [sza01 | 
- 16.69 | * 
zg.1Z |02.29 |Lb.9£ 


or 
9 


* [enn 
QSIDASUBI] 


cal 
JOLI9}s0d-or9]uy 


JoWIVIGG °*x9 


 & 


VINVE) NVOOaV] 


"40085 GKxOoES 


TIA 318v.L 


60 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


canal, in a thin bed of alluvial peat overlying a thin layer 
of red clay, itself overlaid by about ten feet of strati- 
fied sand and peat, which was again covered by seven feet 
of blown sand. The depth at which these human remains 
were found is therefore very considerable. 

The crania have been described and figured by the 
late Professor Bogdanov, some of whose measurements 
are reproduced on Table VII.! Prehistoric Ladogan man 
was distinguished by the thickness of the walls of the skull 
in male crania ; by small development of the forehead and 
by small-headedness. The femoral bones were also of 
small dimensions, but the attachments of the muscles show 
that his muscular system generally, especially in the upper 
part of the body, was well developed. Though Bogdanov 
found indubitable traces of relationship between the 
Ladogan crania and those of the Aurgan type of Central 
Russia, yet in his opinion the former belonged to a type 
that was neither Slav, nor Finnish, nor Mongol.? 

Comparing the Ladogan dolichocephals with those on 
Tables ITI. and ITI., we find their indices agree best with 
the Ceremisian dolichocephals, though the latter have a 
longer and broader head, the height being nearly the same. 
In actual size these small Ladogan skulls come very near 
those of three Permian women, though the indices work 
out differently. Taking next the sub-dolichocephalous 
Ladogans, we again find an agreement, but still more 
close, with the indices of the sub-dolichocephalous Ceremis 
and with a single Permian man, though in all respects 
the Ladogans have a much smaller head—about the same 
size, in fact, as that of sub-dolichocephalous Permian 
women. ‘Though we have only 10 Ladogan and 12 Cere- 


1 Inostrantsev, pp. 105, 106, 3 Jéid. pp. 221-223; PP. 128, 237. 


THE NEOLITHIC AGE IN FINLAND 61 


misian crania to compare, yet taking into consideration 
the difference of size between the two sets, and that they 
are separated in time by fully three thousand years, it is 
remarkable that four pairs should be found that are not 
sO very dissimilar. 


Ant. post. diam..|179 180 |170 172 |x8r 184 | 183 187 


Transverse ,, ./|137 137 |130 132 [130 133 [132 135 
Vertical » © {332 126 -- 138 we 140 |137 134 
Horizont. circum. | 485 509 | 470 484 |502 503 | 495 SI3 
Cephalic index . | 76°5 76°31] 76°4 76°7| 71°82 70°7| 72°t 72°2 
Vert. rT) 73°'7 7° woe see 748 71 6 
Trans. vert. ,, 96°3 91°9 103°7. 99°9 


As I am not an anthropologist myself, it must be left to 
experts to decide whether a sufficient case has been made 
out for connecting these two series of crania—though, of 
course, it is not contended that the Ladogans were Ceremis, 
but merely that the latter are partly descended from the 
same stock as the former, though, with lapse of time and 
crossing, it may be, with other stocks, they have gradually 
acquired a longer and broader skull. 

When prehistoric man lived on the south shore of Lake 
Ladoga, the dense forests and the broad swamps that 
hemmed it in to the south were better stocked with game 
than is now the case. Sos lati/rons, bison, elk, reindeer, 
wild boar, beaver, and the tiny sable, tenanted the region. 
The two former are nearly extinct species, the others have 
disappeared into remoter districts; the northern limit of 
the wild boar, which grew to a large size, is now five degrees 
further south. Of dogs there were two breeds, a larger and 
a smaller; the former might have been used for draught, 


62. PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


the latter for purposes of the chase—though it should 
be mentioned that Count Uvdrov doubted whether the 
dog was domesticated and was not used only as an article 
of food. Though seals are still found in the lake, they 
are small compared with the prehistoric phoce. To find 
the puffin, which formerly frequented the solitudes of 
Ladoga, we must go to the extreme north of Norway. 
The climate, on the whole, must have been rather milder 
than now, for the predominant hard wood was the oak, 
which grew to a large size; at present it does not thrive so 
far north, but remains scrubby and stunted. As beavers 
live on hard wood, and elks prefer the foliage of such 
trees, the forests must have been largely composed of 
deciduous trees such as the oak, maple, willow, poplar, 
and alder. 

The objects of human industry made of bone are more 
than twice as numerous as those of stone, though this was 
usually a kind of slate, and not difficult to work. There is 
no flint in the vicinity. Of bone and horn the Ladogans 
made lance- and arrow-heads, daggers, knives, scrapers, 
shovels, hooks (1), harpoons, needles, awls, and ornaments. 
Of stone they made scrapers, carefully ground axes, short 
flat-sided chisels with parallel sides of ,various types, that 
show symmetry and signs of care in their manufacture, 
gouges, wedges, mallets, whetstones, awls, knives, and 
ornaments. Some of the bones show clear traces of saw- 
ing, which was probably effected by a stone wedge with 
the assistance of coarse quartz sand and water. That 
these tools were well fitted for their purpose is shown by 
a dug-out canoe of oak, which must have given some 
trouble to hew, and by heads and outlines of animals 
carved in bone. 


THE NEOLITHIC AGE IN FINLAND 63 


From the illustrations given by Inostrantsev, it is not 
very easy to say how far the Ladogan objects agree with 
those found in Finland, though the chisels, with straight 
short sides, and some of the gouges, seem tolerably similar 
in both regions, as well as the hacking instrument men- 
tioned above. Some of the carved work is specially deserv- 
ing of notice, as it may be supposed to possess a distinct 
ethnological value. One piece, Fig. 1, represents what is 
supposed to be the silhouette of a seal, carved in bone, 
with short strokes upon the surface to represent the fur. 
The eye is formed by a hole of suspension, and the plaque 
may have been worn as an amulet to bring luck to the 
bearer. The next, Fig. 2, is the muzzle of a dog or a bear 
carved at the end of a bone-scraper; the illustration, un- 
fortunately, is not very distinct, but is interesting as the 
precursor of the stone picks with animal heads. Fig. 3 
was compared by Inostrantsev to the handle of a dagger, 
but it was afterwards recognised by Dr. Tischler as ‘the 
figure of a man, without a shadow of a doubt.’ He con- 
sidered these Ladogan carvings as belonging to the same 
category as the sculptured figures in bone and amber from 
East Prussia and Galicia, and regarded them as the begin- 
ning of plastic art in the north and east of Europe.’ If 
this view is correct, it militates against the theory that the 
Ladogans were not a European people in the ordinary 
usage of the word; but I see very little likeness between 
the amber carving of East Prussia and the bone carving 
of Ladoga. The main likeness lies in this, that the human 
figures in both regions have a hole of suspension under 
each armpit, though the Prussian examples have sometimes 
another pair of holes on the level of the wrist, but never 

1 Tischler, p. 116, 


64 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


is the head rendered as it is in the Ladogan figure. The 
carving of the human figures and of two horses’ heads in 
amber is coarse, rude work, clumsy in the last degree, 
without a shadow of skill or taste in design or execution. 
The art and technique of the Cracow figure is on a par 
with that of East Prussia. The firm, clear outlines of the 
Ladogan carving, the careful handling of the fur on the 
seal, and the general symmetry of Fig. 3, point to qualities 
that the amber-cutters never possessed. That Fig. 3 is 
intended for a human figure seems to me doubtful, for if 
the double row of vertical dots is taken to represent the 
separation of the arms and legs, how are the diagonals that 
connect these, and the vertical line through the centre of 
the neck, to be explained ? 

The pottery was coarse, thick, uneven in thickness, and 
the clay was often mixed with pounded granite or mussel- 
shells. The size of the vessels was considerable, for the 
largest must have had a diameter of 224 inches at the 
top and the smallest 13 inches, but the idea of attaching 
a handle to a clay pot had not yet occurred. Only about 
ten per cent. of the sherds were ornamented, which pro- 
bably means that the lower part of the vessel was left 
undecorated. The ornamentation consisted of single and 
double rows of holes, arranged horizontally ; of diagonal 
rows of punch-marks; of parallel grooves; and of com- 
binations of these elements. We have already seen that 
the Ladogan pottery has a great resemblance to that of 
Finland. 

No date can be assigned to the Ladogan station, though 
It is certainly very ancient, and is prior to the introduction 
of perforated axes and hammers. 


THE NEOLITHIC AGE IN FINLAND | 65 


THE STATION OF KOLOMTsI. 


More than one hundred miles to the south, at Kolomtsi, 
on the right bank of the Volkhov where it issues from Lake 
Ilmen, Mr. Peredolsky found abundant traces of prehistoric 
man. Though he considers the station to belong to the 
palzolithic age, there is no doubt it is neolithic. Several 
crushed and broken skulls were found, eight of which he 
was able to restore, with the result that seven proved to be 
dolichocephalous and one brachycephalous. Unfortunately 
no details are given. The bed of dark earth in which the 
crania lay was about 5 feet thick, and rested partly on a 
glacial deposit, partly on blue clay. This bed was itself 
covered by a stratum of brick-clay about 64 feet thick, and 
above it came layers of sand and vegetable earth from 
3 to 4 inches thick. In his opinion the remains of man 
and his industry present an evident resemblance to what 
was found at the Ladogan station. They were evidently 
of the same primitive tribe, and their crania show features 
of likeness with those from the Xurgans of Novgorod, and 
generally of Western and Southern Russia. But here again 
details are wanting. Like the Ladogans, they had a taste 
for carving. One piece of bone was carved into the head 
of a bird; another represented the head of a man witha 
pointed chin, a very long nose, and a head-dress in shape 
like a fez. The clay of the pottery was mixed with gravel, 
bits of quartz, and broken shells, and was often orna- 
mented. One design is the same as on a Ladogan sherd ; 
another is found on sherds from Lake Onega. The bottom 
of the pots was either round or flat. The implements con- 
sisted of knives, scrapers, flat wedge-shaped axes, hammers, 
straight and concave saws, arrow-heads of various types 

I E 


66 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


with and without a tang, and awls of flint; axes, chisels, 
arrow-heads, and whetstones of schist; lance- and arrow- 
heads, awls, harpoons, hooks, gouges, and small axes of 
bone. Small pieces of cornelian, jade, agate, etc., with 
traces of having been used by man, must have been brought 
from a distance. Perforated teeth of the bear, lynx, and 
other carnivore were worn as ornaments or amulets.! 


FINDS IN OLONETs. 


More than two hundred miles east of the Volkhov, on the 
south-east shore of Lake Onega, on Lakes Tud, Kumbas, 
Laé, and other places in the south-eastern part of the govern- 
ment of Oldnets, numerous articles of human industry, 
some perhaps earlier, some certainly later than the Ladogan 
station, have been brought to light. They were found in 
recent deposits of peat formed on the site of dried-up lakes, 
or in sand and clay on the shores of existing lakes and 
river valleys. No human remains were ever found with or 
near them. As flint is found on the east side of Lake 
Onega the arrow-heads were made of that miineral. 

These weapons are very abundant, and of various types, 
very generally lancet- or almond-shaped ; they show various 
degrees of skill from very coarse to very fine workmanship. 
The knives and scrapers are also of flint. Other instru- 
ments, such as axes, hammers, chisels, and gouges were 
made usually of hard clay slate, or of diorite, greenstone, 
or quartzite. The axes were often flat with the two faces 
ground and the short sides also ground flat, others were 
of nearly triangular section, like those in Finland and at 
KartaSikha on the Volga, in the government of Kazan. 

1 Peredolsky, pp. 139-144. 


THE NEOLITHIC AGE IN FINLAND _ 67 


Some of the gouges are characteristic of Olénets and 
Finland, and one very narrow type is met with at Karta- 
Sikha. At the Ladogan station no instruments perforated 
to receive a handle were discovered, but on the Kinema 
river, and a few other places in Oldénets, a few polished 
and perforated axe hammers and round hammers were 
found belonging to a later time. Poliakov states that two 
instruments—the material is not mentioned—have been 
found in Olénets, one ornamented with the head of an elk, 
the other with the head of a bear in relief. He gives 
references, to which I am unable to refer, but I suspect 
these instruments are of the same class and material as 
the picks ornamented with animal heads, already mentioned 
at p. 56 as having been found in Olénets. 

The clay of which the pottery was made was largely mixed 
with sand, and at Lake Tud they strengthened the mass by 
the addition of some strong fibrous mineral which toughened 
it, so that the pattern is scarcely visible on such vessels. 
As none were ever found entire, their original shape cannot 
be determined. The exterior of the pots was decorated 
with diagonal, parallel rows of squarish impressions made 
with a comb-like instrument. Sometimes these bands 
were separated by a belt of small pit-holes from two to five 
deep. At other times the impressed lines or furrows took 
the form of a zigzag round the rim of the vessel. In 
character this style of ornament greatly resembles what is 
found in Finland and at the Ladogan station. Only one 
bone instrument seems to have been found, a lance-head 
6 inches long, that was picked up at the mouth of the 
river Kinema. An indication of the age of some of 
these finds is given by the fact that at the mouth of the 
Tikhmangia, which falls into Lake Lat, not far from sherds 


68 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


of pottery, broken bones of beavers, elks, reindeer, birds, 
and fish, were also found the bones of a seal, of a breed 
as large as a Greenland seal. Hence when neolithic man 
lived on the banks of the river there must have been large 
seals in that lake, which, though united by the river Onega 
with the White Sea, is more than 180 miles distant from it 
as the crow flies, and the lake must have been larger and 
deeper than is now the case.! 


THE VALLEY OF THE OKA. 


Several stations of the neolithic age are known in the 
valley of the Oka, on both sides the river, above and below 
the historic town of Mtrom. The most important and 
richest of all is that of Voldsovo on the right bank of the 
river, some five or six miles to the east of Miirom, which 
lies on the left bank. The station lies on a ridge of white 
blown sand of sufficient altitude to protect the inhabitants 
from the spring floods which cover the level ground be- 
tween the ridge and the Oka to a considerable height. A 
few years ago the ridge was covered with fir-trees, and in 
front of it runs a brook, so that at all times the inhabitants 
could get water, fish,and mussels without much trouble. 
On removing the white sand is found a stratum of black 
sand up to 34 feet thick, in which an immense number of 
stone implements have been discovered. On the ridge, 
but at a little distance to the south of the great area where 
these objects of neolithic man lay, the late Count Uvarov 
found five graves and several sepulchral urns. 

The bodies lay east-south-east, and west-north-west, 
and the head was turned so that the left cheek was sup- 


1 Poliakov, (1) pp. 340, 364, 367, 368; (2) pp. 32, 35, 36, 19, 10. 


THE NEOLITHIC STATION AND SAND-DUNES OF VOLOSOVO. 


To face page 63. 


THE NEOLITHIC AGE IN FINLAND _ 69 


ported by the palm of the right hand. The depth of the 
graves was from 1°20 to 1°30 m., and the skeletons lay ina 
bed of wood ashes. On this layer, at the place where the 
head lay, was placed a clay urn filled to the brim with the 
burnt bones of animals and surrounded also with burnt 
bones of like nature. In the centre of the bones in the 
urn was laid a flint arrow-head of beautiful workmanship. 
The graves were filled up to the level of the ground, and 
there was nothing on the surface to betray their pre- 
sence below. No trace of human handiwork was to be 
found in the immediate vicinity of the graves, but never- 
theless they are probably neolithic. 

Three crania, two of them very imperfect, were measured 
by Bogdanov, who compared them with three from the 
government of Smolensk, and found points of likeness 
between them. But below I have compared the complete 
skull with a male Permian skull, in which the points of 
likeness are much greater :— 


Volésovo. Kudimkor (Perm). 

Horizontal curve . . 530 ove wee 529 
Long diameter . . 180 180? ~=169? 180 
Trans. diameter . - 144 140? eee 146 
Vertical diameter - 135? wee oes 134 
Cephalous index . - 80 £~497°77 ese Sr°1 
Vertical index . - 75 ev eee 74°4 
Trans. verticalindex . 93°7_ ... see gI°7 
Orbital index . . 8182... eee 78 
Nasal index . » §6°52! ... ose 56°5? 


So far as I can offer an opinion, the Volésovan popula- 
tion contained a sub-brachycephalous element that has 
analogies in the existing Permian Finns; of the other 


1 Uvarov, pp. 299, 300, 309. + Maliev, (1) Appendix, skull No. 1. 


7o PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


element nothing definite can be said, though it seems to 
have had a tendency towards dolichocephaly. 

Sherds of pottery are extremely numerous, and can still 
be picked up in quantities. As all fragments show a 
curved surface, they were certainly more or less globular, 
and some of considerable size, the diameter of the largest 
being about 18 inches in diameter and the smallest 1} 
inches. But none were found intact save the sepulchral 
urns, which are very small, almost without ornament, and 
flat-bottomed. In size and shape, though ruder in manu- 
facture, one of these urns resembles somewhat two 
sepulchral urns from a2 much later neolithic station near 
Kazan, where again the great difference between sepulchral 
and household pottery is also observable.! Before being 
used the clay was mixed with gravel, broken shells, and 
feathers. The walls of the vessels were thick, but unequal 
in thickness ; the top was always wide, and the lip seems 
sometimes to have turned a little inwards or was slightly 
everted. No ears or handles were attached, for these 
means of lifting or suspending were replaced by holes 
through which a cord was run, but this only in the case of 
the larger vessels. When finished, the bow! was burnt, 
but only incompletely. The decoration presents consider- 
able variety of design, combined with a certain regularity 
and symmetry; in many ways it recalls that of Oldnets. 
There is no trace of the cord ornament as at the Ladogan 
station and the neolithic stations on the Central Volga; nor 
of simple or concentric circles and semicircles like the 
neolithic pottery of the amber coast in East Prussia, where 
the amber figures referred to by Dr. Tischler were dis- 
covered. The axes were wedge-shaped, made of diorite, 


1 Uvarov, vol. ii. Pl. 16, No, 4053-4. 


THE NEOLITHIC AGE IN FINLAND _ 71 


and were usually very carefully polished, the chipped and 
unground specimens, of which there were many, being 
merely unfinished. The largest was 94 inches long, and 
in section ellipsoidal. Hammer-axes perforated to receive 
a handle were very rare, and the hole was unskilfully bored. 
Besides boring they also knew how to saw stones, for some 
of the flat, schiefer pendants were evidently produced by 
such means. The flint arrow-heads were very numerous, 
and sometimes of beautiful finish; the chief forms being 
oval, lancet-shaped, rhomboidal, and tanged: a few were 
triangular, or with a notch at the base. Out of about thirty 
flint saws one was semicircular. 

Of particular interest are silhouettes of men, birds, and 
animals chipped out of a piece of flint. I reproduce four 
from the drawings of Mr. Kudriavtsev ; Figs. 4 and 5 are 
human figures ; another, almost the same as Fig. 4, and also 
from Voldésovo, is figured by Count Uvadrov;! Fig. 6 
represents a goose, and Fig. 7 might be a boar or a badger; 
Fig. 8 is a modern Vogul idol of wood in the Museum at 
Ekatrinburg, which may be compared with Fig. 4. The 
practice of chipping flattish pieces of flint into something 
approaching an animal shape is not confined by any means 
to the valley of the Oka. Far to the north, near the mouth 
of the Zolotitsa, which falls into the White Sea some hun- | 
dred miles north of Archangel, there was a neolithic work- 
shop for the manufacture of flint implements, and among 
the small saws, knives, and arrow-heads there was found 
the silhouette of a seal in flint, now in the Historical 
Museum at Moscow. And two flint outlines are figured 
by the Count Uvarov, the actual finding-place of which is 
unknown, though they were bought in the government of 

1 Uvarov, vol. ii. Pl. 14 A, described vol. i. p. 324. 


42 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Kaz4n.! One has a large thick neck and head, a short 
thick body, four short legs, and a broad tail. It might be 
taken for the skin of an animal, such as a beaver, dried 
and stretched. What the other represents I cannot even 
hazard a guess, though it is doubtless an animal form. 
The Voldésovans also carved in bone. Mr. Kudriavtsev 
has in his collection the head of a swan in full relief, carved 
at the end of a long bone, the rest of which was left 
untouched. Another piece represents the head of a duck ; 
a third a very small fish with a small hole of suspension 
through the tail. As it is difficult to believe that neolithic 
man in a low state of civilisation, when it is not certain 
that even the dog was domesticated, should take the 
trouble to hew out of flint and bone representations of 
men and animals merely to satisfy his artistic and creative 
instincts and faculties, some other reason must be sought 
for. It is more consonant with the extreme laziness of 
uncivilised man to sappose that he had a practical object 
in view, that the human and animal figures served as 
household gods or as personal amulets to secure luck when 
fishing or hunting. 

Bone implements, such as awls of bird- or fish-bone, har- 
poons barbed on one side only, axes, knives, fish-hooks— 
though some of these were of flint made in two parts and 
tied together—and perforated teeth, were very numerous, 
though bone arrow-heads were rare. Besides fish-hooks 
they must also have had nets, as the impression of one has 
been found on a sherd of pottery. The commonest animal 
bones found were those of the martin, fox, hare, wild boar, 
and beaver ; less common were the remains of the badger, 
wolf, bear, elk, wild ox, otter, reindeer, and dog. In fact, 

1 Uvarov, vol. ii. Pl. 14 C D. 


THE NEOLITHIC AGE IN FINLAND _ 73 


canine bones were only found once, and then as an entire 
skeleton that resembled the smaller Ladogan dog. This 
makes it doubtful whether the dog was domesticated at all.! 

A good many miles down the Oka from Murom is the 
station of Plekhanov Bor. The people lived largely on 
mussels ; in fact, no animal bones were found there at all. 
But the identity of the ceramic ornament with that at 
Voldésovo shows that people of the same tribe lived at both 
places synchronously.” 


THE VALLEY OF THE VOLGA, 


On the left bank of the Volga from Kazan to a little 
south of the inflow of the Kama several neolithic stations 
are known, eight of them not very far from Kazan itself. 
Neolithic instruments, pottery, and animal bones are also 
found in considerable abundance above Kazan, but on the 
right bank near the mouth of the Sviaga. Most of the 
implements are of flint, which is very plentiful, but a few 
are of eocene sandstone, which is not found in the govern- 
ment of Kazan, but might be obtained by descending the 
Volga to the Singilei river in the adjoining government of 
Simbirsk. Either the stone or the ready-made instruments 
must, therefore, have been imported, and these it should 
be noted are of excellent work and beautifully ground. 
In places the sherds are extremely numerous; near Novo 
Mordovo, in the district of Spassk, they are spread over an 
area of about eighty-one acres, where they can be collected 
by the bushel. The clay was generally mixed with com- 
minuted fresh-water shells, small stones, feathers, and at 


1 Kudriavtsev, pp. 234-255; Uvarov, pp. 314, 322. 
* Uvarov, pp. 329, 318. 


74 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Novo Mordovo with mica; in place of mica, talc is found 
in the neolithic pottery from Galkina near the mouth of 
the Cusovaya and from Turbina on the right bank of the 
Kama nearly opposite, as well as in numerous sherds from 
the district of Ekaterinburg beyond the Ural chain.! After 
completion the vessels were either left unbaked or the 
burning was incomplete. The decoration is endlessly 
varied, very complicated at times, and consists of different 
combinations of linear ornament. It is generally placed 
below the rim, and never covers the whole height of the 
vessel ; the inner surface is seldom decorated. A curious 
but very rare method of adornment was to impress the 
clay with a small spiral shell, probably that of a snail, and 
thus form horizontal bands of spiral depressions, separated 
by horizontal lines of small dots. This novel mode of 
decoration is also found on neolithic sherds from Le&vina, 
a mile and a half above the junction of the Cusovaya with 
the Kama.? The cord ornament was also used as at 
LeSvina and beyond the Urals. No handles were used, 
but sometimes a vessel could be suspended by means of 
two large round holes placed opposite each other. The 
bottom was always flat, and, with one exception, never 
rounded. The commonest implements were scrapers, 
knives, axes, chisels, mallets, spear- and arrow-heads; the 
scarcest were picks, awls, saws, and hammers. The arrow- 
heads were of various types—leaf-shaped, lancet-shaped, 
rhomboidal, tanged, and triangular, the latter being very 
rare. Some of the arrow-heads are so tiny—from 8 mm. 
(4 inch) to ro mm. long—that Professor Visotski supposes 
they would have been useless unless poisoned. 
1 Teplotkhov, (1) p. 24. 2 Teplotkhov, (1) p. 15. 
® Stukenberg i Visotski, pp. 10, 13, 15, 18, 28, 37. 


THE NEOLITHIC AGE IN FINLAND 75 


Practically nothing is known of the people who left these 
traces of their presence behind them. For although at 
two places interments have been brought to light that are 
supposed to belong to the neolithic period, the human 
remains were so shattered that almost nothing can be learnt 
from them. Near the village of Novo Mordovo was found 
the skeleton of a woman who had been laid with her head 
to the north and her feet to the south ; near her right wrist 
lay the upper shell of a tortoise, on the inside of which 
were traces of red colour. The skull was round-headed, 
and showed marks of a primitive type. At the station of 
Great Bugér, near Kazan, traces of three interments were 
found, but so destroyed that only fragments of two 
skeletons and the funeral urns could be recovered. The 
bodies had been buried at a depth of about three feet, and 
had been placed on their backs with the head to the west 
and feet to the east, and in each grave was a small urn. 
There was nothing above ground to indicate the presence 
of graves. At this station, as well as flint implements, there 
were found bones of the domestic horse, cow, sheep, and 
swine, also of the elk; at two other stations bones of the 
horse, cow, and swine ; at Tabaevo, near the junction of the 
Kama, those of the horse, bull, and swine.! The fact that 
neolithic man had now become acquainted with the most 
important domestic animals shows that these stations 
belong to a latish period. It is unfortunate, however, that 
we have no particulars about these animal bones, as 
something might be learnt from them. At present we 
have no clue as to whence the animals originally came, 
whether from the south or from the east. It would be in- 
structive to know whether the Volgan horse of those days 


1 Stukenberg i Visotski, pp. 53, 54, 56, 65, 72. 


76 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


was at all like the horse the remains of which have been 
found in many places in the east part of the government 
of Perm, beyond the Urals, sometimes as deep as ten feet 
and more below the surface, and which are now preserved in 
the Museum at Ekaterinburg. But as no vestiges of the 
domestic sheep or pig have been found in that region, 
it seems likely that the domestic animals came from the 
south or south-east. 


THE GOVERNMENT OF VIATKA. 


As flint of good quality is nowhere found in masses, the 
inhabitants made use of an inferior kind of whitish, clayey 
flint or chert, but never turned to use the erratic blocks 
which occur in the northern half of the province. In fact, 
the extreme north of it does not seem to have been in- 
habited at all, for no stone implements of any sort or kind 
have as yet been found along the course of the Vidtka above 
Slobodsk, or on its upper tributaries, the Velfkaya, the 
Letka, and the Kobra. Very few too are known from the 
valley of the Ceptsa, and these are chiefly wedges and 
nuclei. On the other hand, on the upper course of the 
Kama, where it flows through the province, finds of flint 
implements are so numerous as to induce Mr. Ivanov to 
believe the district was thickly inhabited during the 
neolithic period. The west of the province too was not 
without its inhabitants. A few arrow-heads of triangular 
and quadrangular section, and considerable quantities 
of knives, scrapers, and nuclei, have been unearthed at 
the mouth of the Moloma and higher up its course near 
the village of Okdtievo, as well as at several places on the 
upper and central course of the Yum, and the central 


THE NEOLITHIC AGE IN FINLAND 77 


course of the Pizma, into which the Yum falls. On the 
central course of the Vidtka a few finds have also been 
made, which increase at its junction with the Kilmez 
and further southwards. At none of the above-mentioned 
places and districts have any polished stone implements 
been brought to light. They are not however unknown 
in the province; in the southerly districts of Urfum and 
Yaransk a considerable number of polished flint and stone 
axes, wedges, chisels, and gouges have been discovered. 
At Origut near Ernur, close to the boundary between the 
governments of Vidtka and Kazdn, was a workshop, the 
most typical instrument of which was a stone chisel with 
one side flat or slightly convex, while the opposite side 
had three faces like certain bronze celts, which are in 
Mr. Spitsin’s opinion the prototypes of these stone chisels. 
Along the right bank of the Central Kama, where it forms 
the southern boundary of the province, isolated finds of 
polished stone implements have also been made. But the 
only station is at the mouth of the Toima, not far from 
Elabuga, over which in later times accumulated the great 
cemetery of Andnino, so that Mr. Spitsin believes that 
many of the stone implements said to have come from 
the graves at Andanino really belong to the underlying 
neolithic station. Here have been found flint arrow- 
heads, a fragment of a stone chisel of the OriSut type, 
bones, and sherds of pottery. The pottery is of two sorts: 
one is of thick yellow clay, the other of black clay, often 
mixed with bits of shells, for vessels of smaller dimensions. 
These sherds seem to be the only examples of neolithic 
pottery in the whole province, and from this it may almost 
be concluded that there were no real permanent settlements 
1 Spitsjn, pp. 11-23. 


78 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


in it during the earlier neolithic age, though it was traversed 
by hunters, who made flint implements of the simplest kind 
as occasion required. 


THE GOVERNMENT OF PERM. 


Up to the present the finds of the neolithic stage in the 
Upper Kama have been very few, leading us to suppose 
that the population was very scanty. In fact, settlements 
that can be exclusively attributed to this age have not 
been discovered. The flint and other stone implements 
are of local stone, and the workmanship 1s often very good. 
Beginning from the north, on the banks of the little river 
Velva, a left-hand tributary of the Kama in the district 
of Solikamsk, there have been found at various places 
scrapers, flakes, some of which are slightly toothed and 
could be used as a knife or a saw, nuclei, a well-made, 
tanged arrow-head, two spear-heads, a well-polished flat axe 
tapering towards the butt-end, a well-polished net-sinker, 
a gouge with a flat face in which the groove was made 
and with a rounded back. From the description it seems 
to resemble a type common in the Volga district of the 
last section, and is also found at Andnino near Eldbuga, 
on the Kama; lastly a chisel of quadrangular section, 
the upper end of which is worked round like a handle 
2 cm. long and 2 cm. wide. Further south near Sdrdin 
on the Inva, a westerly tributary of the Kama, were found 
a leaf-shaped arrow- or spear-head, 9 cm. long, with a 
notch at the base, and another of similar shape, but 
smaller, and with a flat truncated base. Its long edges 
were distinctly toothed. In the valley of the Obva a bone 
harpoon, stuck into a log of wood, which probably belongs 


THE NEOLITHIC AGE IN FINLAND 79 


to this period, was washed up from the bed of the river 
by the spring floods. It had four barbs on one side and 
a fifth reversed on the opposite side to facilitate attachment 
to a handle. In the same valley was also found a heavy 
stone hammer, weighing eight lbs., near one end of which 
was a shallow transverse groove running round the body of 
the hammer, the better to fasten it to a forked handle. 
From Ust Gareva, further south, comes a perforated axe- 
hammer of serpentine. At LeSvina, on the right bank of 
the Cusovaya, near its junction with the Kama, were found 
three arrow-heads, one of them leaf-shaped and greatly 
resembling another from the station of KartaSikha (Kazan) 
on the Volga; flint flakes with a serrated edge to serve as 
a saw; a broken, polished, flat axe, and a flat roundish 
hand-mallet with a hollow on each flat side to allow the 
stone to be held easier. It is very like a similar tool from 
Great Bugér near Kazan. 

About thirty sherds of earthenware were ornamented 
with different patterns. From their small degree of 
curvature some must have belonged to large vessels ; 
others of thinner clay were more curved, and probably 
belonged to vessels more or less spherical. But it is 
impossible to say what the shape of the bottom might 
have been. The patterns ran in zones parallel to the 
rim, and were produced with a stamp toothed like a 
comb. The cord-pattern was also in use, and less often 
the ornament consisted of a row of holes; on two sherds 
it consisted of diagonal impressions.of a small spiral object, 
evidently the shell of a snail. Not far off is the pre- 
historic fort (gorodisce) of Galkina, in which a nucleus, 
splinters, and a net-sinker were found. At no great 
distance outside were flint flakes and a couple of arrow- 


80 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


heads, one of bone, and not differing from those found in 
the so-called Cudish ‘ossiferous areas’ that are generally to 
be dated from the eighth to the eleventh centuries. The 
sherds of pottery differ in material and pattern from those 
at LeSvina, and were partly baked. The last settlement 
is at Turbina, on the right bank of the Kama, nearly 
opposite the inflow of the Cusovaya. It belongs, at any 
rate in part, to a late period. Here were found a scraper, 
a narrow chisel, merely formed by chipping and fragments 
of glass beads with an inside layer of gold-leaf, like those 
found in large quantities in the ossiferous areas on the 
Obva, at Gliadénova near Perm, and the north side of the 
Caucasus. The sherds of pottery resemble those from 
Galkina both in material and pattern. Generally the 
clay was unmixed with foreign substances, but one sherd 
contained largish pieces of talc, which had probably been 
brought from the other side of the Ural chain.! 


NEOLITHIC PERIOD IN THE BALTIC PROVINCES. 


In the north of Esthonia, about two miles inland from 
the Gulf of Kunda, and about 180 miles west of the mouth 
of the Volkhov, remains of human industry were found in 
excavating the marl beds that once formed the bottom of 
what was formerly a lake. The harpoons, barbed on one 
side only, the spear- and arrow-heads, the daggers, knives, 
scrapers, and chisels, are all of bone, generally that of the 
elk. With the exception of one well-chipped flint arrow- 
head and a knife, no bone implements were discovered. 
But small, narrow flakes of flint were inserted into grooves 
cut into the sides of bone arrows, and were firmly cemented 

1 Teplodkhov, (1) pp. 5-26. 


THE NEOLITHIC AGE IN FINLAND _ 81 


with a preparation of pitch. Similar weapons are known 
from Lake Sigir in the district of Ekaterinburg (Perm), 
in East Prussia, Denmark, and the south of Sweden. The 
almost total absence of flint is easily accounted for. It is 
not found in beds anywhere in the Baltic provinces, save 
on the east shore of Lake Burtneek, and even there in no 
great quantity. No pottery or personal ornaments were 
unearthed, but this may be explained by the fact that all 
the objects lay from 100 to 200 yards from the shore, and 
were lost either in the water or on the ice. Reindeer still 
roamed in the neighbourhood as well as the bison and 
the elk, but no trace was found of the dog. Grewingk 
calculated for these finds an age of only 1650 years, which 
would place them in the third century of the present 
era.! But little confidence can be placed in calculations 
founded on the rate at which deposits accumulate under 
water, and he himself believed that the date must be 
increased. 

About 140 miles in a bee-line to the south-south-west 
of Kunda, on the left bank of the Salis, where it issues 
from Lake Burtneek, is Rinnekaln. In connection with 
the crania exhumed there this station has already been 
mentioned. Comparatively few fishing implements and 
weapons were found. The spear-heads and daggers of 
bone were of coarser make than at Kunda; the harpoons 
were smaller, with only one or two barbs on one or both 
sides. Stone implements and arrow-heads were in incon- 
siderable quantities, the more remarkable as a flint work- 
shop is known to exist near Sveineck on the opposite side 
of the lake. The coarse, gritty pottery, the clay of which 
was mixed with broken mussel-shells, was either not baked, 

1 Grewingk, (1) pp. 1-36. 

I F 


82 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


or but slightly. In form the vessels were probably more 
or less cylindrical, and seem sometimes to have been 
furnished with a lid; but apparently they had no handles, 
neck, or feet, and were of considerable dimensions. The 
ornament had some variety of design. It consisted of 
double and triple horizontal rows of holes alternating with 
diagonal lines of prick-marks ; of short incisions at intervals, 
made sometimes with the finger-nail, and distributed either 
over the whole surface or in zones round the vessel. 
Decoration was also applied to the inner side of the rim, 
as at Hankasalmi. -Grewingk remarks that the design is 
much more varied than at Ladoga, and resembles what has 
been found at Volésovo. Needles were made of bird-bone, 
chiefly of the swan. Carving in bone was practised with a 
skill and talent superior to that of the Ladogans, and the 
figures were either in full relief at the end of a long bone or 
silhouettes incised out of a flat plaque. Among the former 
are the head and neck of swans and geese, which remind 
one of Volésovan work, and the heads of a bear and an 
elk carved at the end of a bone, as at the Ladogan station. 
Among the latter are two silhouettes of birds, one of 
which has two holes of attachment. Some of the bone 
arrow-heads are of a very peculiar make. The upper part 
consists of a sharp-pointed cone, to which is attached a stalk 
of lesser diameter than the base, and somewhat flattened. 
In the other type the pointed cone projects from a four- 
sided base rather larger than the base of the cone, and this 
quadrangular base gradually reduces in size till it passes 
into a short flat stalk. The only analogies for such arrow- 
heads, so far as I know, are found in the sub-district of 
the Upper Isset in the district of Ekaterinburg. One quite 
like the first is in the University Museum of Kazan, but 


THE NEOLITHIC AGE IN FINLAND 83 


came from the Upper Isset. Inthe Museum at Ekaterinburg 
there is another like it, but with a long stalk; others are 
more like the second type, but the upper cone rises from 
a reversed cone, which passes into a long thin stalk 
of circular section, which gradually becomes flattened. 
Wooden arrow-heads shaped like a double cone are still 
used by Ostiak children.! Several pieces of amber, one 
of them bored with a hole, were lying in the shell- 
mound; the usual ornament, however, seems to have 
been the perforated teeth of animals strung on a string. 
Grewingk considered the station at Rinnekaln to be younger 
than that at Kunda, as no reindeer-bones were found at the 
former, the presumption being that the animal was extinct 
in Livland when the shell-mound was formed.? During 
one period of the neolithic period the reindeer seem to 
have ranged as far south as the district of Preusisch Eylau, 
or about lat. 54°30° N. 

Considering the great area of the Baltic Provinces, the 
neolithic age is not very strongly represented. The chisels 
so common in Finland are rare; gouges, knives, spear- and 
arrow-heads are almost wanting. The infrequence of spear- 
and arrow-heads is doubtless owing to the rarity of flint, 
and the few well-formed lance-heads and daggers of such 
material were probably imported. Nearly all the axes are 
perforated for a shaft, and number about five hundred, of 
which about twenty are boat-shaped. The latter may have 
been imported from the south-west of Finland or from 
Sweden. Virchow believes the majority of the polished 
stone implements in the Baltic provinces belong to the 
Iron Period, for they are sometimes found in the same 

1 Martin, (2) p. ro, Fig. 5-13. 

2 Grewingk, (1) pp. 36, 37: Virchow,(z) pp. 398-433; Kharuzin, pp. 100-103. 


84 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


grave with bronze and iron as late as the younger Period of 
Iron. The distribution of stone tools and weapons over 
the three provinces is far from uniform. With the ex- 
ception of the islands of Oesel and Mohn, few finds have 
been made in Esthonia. They become more numerous in 
Livland, especially on the banks of the Dvina, but are 
more plentiful in Kurland, especially in the central and 
eastern districts. With regard to their type, Mr. J. R. 
Aspelin considers that the stone implements of the older 
and newer periods in the Baltic provinces so resemble 
those from Lithuania, Vitebsk, Kovno, Grodno, and. Minsk, 
that they can scarcely be distinguished.} 

Though the evidence is scanty, there seems reason to 
believe that in the earlier part of the neolithic age the 
Baltic Provinces were uninhabited, at least permanently. 
No one had thought it worth while to peg out tribal claims 
to any part of them; they formed a sort of No Man’s 
Land into which short-headed men from the east or long- 
headed men from the south could make temporary hunting 
or fishing excursions, but they did not come to stay. 


GENERAL CONCLUSIONS. 


The results, then, ofa survey of the archzology of Northern 
and North Central Russia from the Gulf of Finland to the 
foot of the Ural chain may be summed up as follows. 
Along the lower course of the Oka dwelt a people whose 
pottery, sculpture, and methods of art connect them with 
tribes inhabiting what is now the government of Oldnets, 
the west coast of the White Sea, part of Finland, the course 


1 Aspelin, (3) p. 6; Grewingk, (4) pp. 92-96. 


THE NEOLITHIC AGE IN FINLAND 85 


of the Volkhov, the north coast of Esthonia, and Lake 
Burtneek in Livland. But though the civilisation of this 
huge region is practically the same, it covers a great space 
in time. It is difficult for us, who live in an age of new 
discoveries of the most extraordinary kind, and of great 
social changes, to realise that bodies of men can live 
century after century, millennium after millennium, with- 
out any sensible change in their mode of life. But it is so. 
Uncultivated human nature is so constituted that having 
once accommodated itself to circumstances, and shaken 
down into a groove, it is content to rub on as best it can, 
and to pass on the heritage of life to another generation 
without further thought. Isolated as the tribes were that 
inhabited Central Russia, empires might and did rise and 
fall without their knowledge; nations might and did pass 
along the great natural highway of the steppe that fringes 
the Black Sea, but no echo of the event reached the 
solitudes of Central Russia. It is not surprising, then, that 
we must believe that a long interval existed between the 
first settlement of Voldsovo and the temporary station at 
Lake Burtneek, just as a great space of time must be 
imagined between the former and the stations on the 
Volga below Kazdn. In the south-west of Finland we 
seem to have a Scandinavian people that could hardly 
have arrived later than 1500 B.c., a period when bronze 
was already known in ‘Scandinavia and Central Europe. 
The Ladogan station may be quite as ancient, while 
the settlements on the Oka have all the appearance of 
being considerably older. About s00 B.C. is perhaps not 
too early to set the animal-headed picks of Oldénets and 
Mezen. As perforated stone implements seem unknown 
at Rinnekaln this station is older than that date; while the 


86 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


station at Kunda is still older than the last, but less ancient 
than that on the south shore of Lake Ladoga. The 
stations on the Volga, and certainly some in the Upper 
valley of the Kama, are very much later than that at 
Volésovo. The Volgan pottery differs from that found on 
the Oka and further west ; it seems to have more affnity 
with the ceramic products of the Kama valley, and the 
people of the Volga may have been somewhat different 
from those on the Oka and to the west of it. It is not 
unlikely that the domestic animals came from the steppe to 
the north and north-east of the Caspian, and with them 
would naturally come the owners, who might belong to 
different, though not absolutely alien, tribes. Though the 
civilisation and arts of the fishers and hunters on the Oka, 
as well as to the north and to the west of it, were at such a 
low stage that they were almost the same everywhere, the 
aborigines were not all of the same stock: some were 
long-headed, others short-headed. Yet considering the 
antiquity of man on the globe, an amalgamation of stocks 
could have taken place ages before any tribes took posses- 
sion of any part of Eastern Europe. What language or 
languages, if more than one, these aborigines spoke it is 
impossible to say, though no doubt it belonged to the 
agglutinating class, and if there were several they had 
much in common. That some of the direct descendants 
of these people, both the long-headed and the short- 
headed, still exist among the Eastern Finns, I have tried to 
make highly probable. That both stocks originally issued 
from Asia seems almost certain, though we cannot prick 
off on the map the course of their migrations by pointing 
to a succession of archzological finds. 


THE BRONZE AGE IN FINLAND 87 


THe Bronze AGE IN FINLAND. 


The belief that a Scandinavian population existed in the 
south-west of Finland in neolithic times is strengthened by 
finding objects of the Bronze Age in that part of the 
country, though they are few in number. With the 
exception of two useful omaments, all of them are weapons, 
consisting of five swords, seven daggers, one lance-head, 
two knives, six palstaves, eight socketed celts, two spectacle 
fibulz, all of bronze, and one large copper arrow-head. As 
all are quite Swedish in character, and no moulds have been 
found, they must have been imported from Sweden. The only 
apparent exceptions are three swords of Central European 
type, but as these types are also known in Sweden, the 
weapons were probably brought to Finland by way of 
Scandinavia. Nearly all the objects came from the south- 
west corner of Finland, including the Aland Islands ; from 
near the lower course of the river Kumo; from the lower 
course of the river Kyro in the district of Vasa; or 
between Viborg and the west coast of Lake Ladoga. All 
were found south of lat. 64° N., save the large copper 
arrow-head, which was picked up as far north as about 
lat. 69°30° N., only about a couple of dozen miles south 
of the Varanger Fjord. Nearly a third of these bronzes 
were found in cairn graves. Using the classification of Mr. 
O. Montelius, twelve of the weapons belong to his second 
period (1450-1250 B.c.); one socketed celt to the third 
period (1250-1050); four socketed celts to the fourth period 
(1050-850); and the remainder, including the spectacle 
fibulz, to the fifth period (850-650). It is evident, then, 
that there existed an intermittent communication between 


88 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Finland and Sweden for several centuries, and it is to be 
noted that all the weapons of the second period, with one 
exception, came from the Aland Islands or from the 
extreme south-west angle of the country, from what is 
called Proper Finland. But these importations are not 
the only reasons for believing the south-west of Finland to 
have been settled by a Scandinavian people. Hundreds 
of cairn graves are found in a broad belt along the coast 
of the gulfs of Bothnia and Finland, in the islands of the 
southern and south-western coast, and in the Aland Islands. 
In smaller numbers they occur along the shores of lakes 
in the interior. The correspondence in external form, and 
partly in the internal structure, of these cairn graves in 
Finland and Sweden, especially in Uppland, is very strik- 
ing. The cairns are found singly, in groups, or in a long 
row; they vary in size and height, the diameter ranging 
from 20 feet to 81 feet, and the height from 3 feet to 10 feet. 
In internal structure there are also differences. Many 
are disposed round a tall upright central stone, quite the 
same as in Uppland, Sweden, where the arrangement is 
characteristic of the Bronze Age. Others contain one 
or more kists of flagstones or of largish angular stones. 
Cineration was practised as a rule, if not always. At 
least, no skeletons have been found in any exploration 
conducted in a scientific manner, though in 1896 some 
peasants reported that on removing eighteen cairns pre- 
paratory to ploughing, two kists were laid bare containing 
unburnt human skeletons. In opening cairns unburnt 
bones of domestic and wild animals have often been met 
with, but unfortunately they have never been sufficiently 
examined. Not nearly all the cairns, however, are to be 
attributed to the Bronze Age, for a number of finds prove 


THE BRONZE AGE IN FINLAND 89 


that such sepulchres were still used in the older Iron 
Age.! 

As in neolithic times we found stone implements of 
certainly two distinct peoples, occupying on the whole 
different areas of Finland, so in the Bronze Age we find a 
few implements of a totally different type from anything in 
Scandinavia. They consist of two socketed celts with a 
socket of quadrangular or hexagonal section of Uralian or 
Siberian type, and at least four moulds, whole or frag- 
mentary, for casting celts of similar type. Beginning 
from the north, one mould, resembling the type of celts 
from Andnino, was found almost on the Polar Circle, in the 
parish of Upper Tornea; half of another about half-way 
down the Ulea; and fragments of at least two moulds for 
celts, together with fragments of three other moulds, stone 
implements, flint flakes, sherds of pottery, and traces of fire- 
places, were discovered near Lake Ule4. One celt comes 
from Lucksele on the Umeda in Swedish Lapmark (Asp. 
No. 158), and another from the parish of Laukas in the 
government of Wasa, in the very centre of the country. 
But this last and most southerly example is much less 
characteristically Uralian or Siberian than any of the 
others.? 


THE BRONZE AGE IN NORTHERN RUSSIA. 


Though in Russia, as in Finland, there was no Bronze 
Age, strictly speaking, yet a few objects of this period have 
been discovered there, of which it is right to take notice. 


? Hackman, pp. 355-359, 361-364, 400. 
® 1did. pp. 367, 368, 394-399 


90 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


There were found on the banks of the Pinega, not far 
from the White Sea, two socketed bronze battle-axes, 
ornamented with the head of a dragon at the hammer end, 
and at the end of the socket the head of a bird, probably 
an eagle, with its head turned in an opposite direction 
from that of the dragon (Asp. No. 240, 241). Though 
extremely alike, these weapons are not exactly the same. 
Another, hardly differing from No. 241, now in the collec- 
tion of Count Uvarov, came from Eldbuga,! where a fine 
socketed bronze pick, one end terminating in a boar’s 
head (Asp. No. 242), was also found. In form none of 
these weapons, so far as I know, are quite like any that 
have been found in Siberia. But a head not unlike the 
dragon’s is to be seen on a carved piece of wood from a 
grave of the early Iron Age in the Altai,? also on the 
handle of a knife from Baikalova on the Yenisei, and 
the ears are similarly treated on a double head forming 
the loop of a pendant, also from the district of Minus- 
sinsk.§ 

Not far from the village of Fatidnovo, about twenty-four 
miles north of Yaroslav, on the Volga, an ancient settlement 
and cemetery were uncovered, where all the implements 
were of stone, though the presence of a green stain of 
oxide of copper, a piece of bronze wire, a round copper 
disk, and three pieces of glass, show that it did not belong 
to the genuine neolithic age. The skeletons lay on their 
backs on a layer of ashes; at the head and feet were urns, 
generally placed mouth downwards. On investigation it 
turned out that the copper disk, which was thinner in the 


1 Uvarov, Katalog, Fig. 90, opp. p. 80. 
2 Radloff, vol. ii. Tafel 9, No. 1. 
3 Martin, PL. 15, No. 20; Pl. 30, No. rz. 


7 hee 


THE BRONZE AGE IN N. RUSSIA gt 


middle and thicker at the rim, and about the size of a thick 
halfpenny, contained a core of iron, and that the copper 
was alloyed with 1°90 per cent. of lead. The copper wire 
seemed to have been hammered out without preparatory 
fusion, and then curled into a loop and passed through a 
bear’s tooth (Asp. No. 132). Grinding and polishing stone 
had reached a high degree of development. Most of the 
perforated hammer-axes have a cutting edge that curves 
under in such a way that it terminates much nearer the 
axis of the hole than the upper angle (Asp. No. 97, 98). 
In form and decoration the pottery is very different from 
any that has hitherto been described. The urns have no 
handles or holes for suspension, and are generally globular, 
with a short neck of less diameter than across the centre 
of the greatest swell, and an everted lip. The largest found 
entire was 5°5 in. high, but some fragments must have 
belonged to much larger vessels. The decoration is con- 
fined to the upper part of the vessel, and consists of 
horizontal rows of short diagonal strokes, each row at a 
different angle from the one above and below it; of short 
vertical strokes in horizontal rows; rows of dog-tooth or 
of short crossed lines ; sometimes the lines are made with 
a comb-like punch. The skulls were measured by Bog- 
danov, who remarked that as regards dimensions the 
Fatidnovan crania are nearer the long-headed Kurgan 
type than the small heads of the Ladogan station. The 
vertical diameter could only be measured in three instances, 
and these show a platycephalous skull. These crania are 
not essentially different from the long skulls in the Merian 
graves, though they do not belong to the type he considers 
Merian.! 


1 Uvarov, pp. 399-411, 416-419. 


92 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


In consequence of the platycephaly of the Fatidnovan 
crania I have compared them with three Ostiak crania 
measured by Dr. Sommier. The second female skull 


Fatr£novo CRania. Osriax Crania. ! 
No1F. 2F. 3M. 4M. 5 M./2726 F. 2727M. 2729M. 

Horizontal curve . 515 495 530 540 520] 506 s17_ SaZ 
Long diameter - x2 182 196 192 194/ 183 I9gr 19% 
Trans. diameter . 137 134 +4136 13146 134| #41395 133% 135 
Vert. diameter. - %ray7 <u a... . 133) 20 134 128 
Orbit. width . - 40 4 4m 4 ..,. 4! 41 39 
Orbit. height . . 33 37 38 38 ~... 36 35 35 
Nasal width . - 47 #«§r #58 53 .«. 5 
Nasal height . - 24 2 25 =a... 3 24 
Cephal. index . - 752 736 69°3 760 69'0| 73°7 68°5 706 
Vert. index. - 697 63°r ... 3... 68°5| 65°5 o'r 67°0 
Trans. vert. index . 92°7 858... ... 99'2| 88°83 102°2 94°8 
Orbit. index. . 82°5 go'2 92°6 83°93... 87°8 85°3 89'7 
Nasal index . - §52°O 49°0 43°% 4572... 57°70 §648°549°5 


seems to be very like the female Ostiak skull, save that the 
latter is platyrhine and mesoseme, while the former is 
mesorhine and megaseme. But as the oscillations of 
orbital and nasal indices in a given group of crania are 
generally very considerable, too great stress need not be 
laid on these differences. The first Ostiak male skull is 
the only orthocephalous example in the twelve measured 
by Sommier, their average height being 127 mm. and the 
vertical index 67°5; the average height of the female skull 
is 122 mm. and the vertical index is the same as in the 
male skull. On the whole, then, there seems to be a kin- 
ship between the two sets of crania. The pottery is 
certainly not European. In form, and even in ornament, 
these small globular pots resemble the small globular pots 
found by Mr. Heikel in excavating Kurgans on the river 
Tobol and at the old fort of Cuva’, close to Tobolsk, just 


1 Sommier, (x) pp. 90-93. 


THE BRONZE AGE IN N. RUSSIA _ 93 


below the junction with the Irtis,! though these latter 
belong to a much later time than the pots from Fatidnovo. 
The district in which they were found is very near the 
Ostiak country still, and in former days the Ostiaks 
probably occupied it. The peculiar form of the cutting 
edge of the axe-hammers mentioned above was also noticed 
on an example or two from a prehistoric fort on the Sar in 
the same government of Yaroslav ; another came from the 
district of Rietitsk (Minsk) ;?7 from Insarsk (Penza) ;* from 
Yaransk (Vidtka) ;° from LaiSebsk (Kazan) ;* and from 
Bobruisk (Mogilev),‘ though this last differs from the 
others in the rapid slope backwards of the cutting edge 
from its upper angle. The backward curve of the cutting 
edge is also characteristic of the battle-axes of the copper 
period in Hungary® and of the axes from Koban in the 
Caucasus. The presence of an Ugrian people resembling 
the modern Ostiaks so far to the west in Russia at so early 
a date, before the end of the last era, has hardly been 
suspected hitherto; at least any belief of the sort was based 
on more or less doubtful etymologies of place-names, but 
now it seems to me fairly well established both on cranio- 
logical and archeological grounds. 

About eighty miles due east of Fatidnovo, near the town of 
Galié, in the adjacent government of Kostroma, there were 
found in a clay pot six objects of pure copper of non- 
European types. They consist of a human figure (Fig. 11) ; 
a human mask surmounted by what looks like a flat disk, 

1 Cf. Uvaérow, Pl. 28, figs. 322, 315, 316, with Heike], Pl. xxvii. No. 
11, 12; Pi. v. No. 6, ro, 

2 Uvarov, Pl. 40, No. 5078. 3 In the University Museum at Kazan. 
4 Historical Museum, Moscow, Zala 2, Skaf 9, No. 340. 


5 Fr. von Pulszky, Die Kupferzeit in Ungarn, pp. 404-406. 
6 E, Chantre, Recherches antropol, dans le Caucase, vol. ii. Pl. i. ii. iii. 


94 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


on which are reclining two animals with their heads turned 
outwards (Fig. 9); a knife with a handle ending in the 
head of a reptile, the grip being @ jour and ornamented with 
horizontal and diagonal incisions; a long-backed, smooth, 
long-headed animal with a short tail, short legs, an open 
mouth and hollow inside (Asp. No. 299-303) ; a long, solid 
bead ; a bracelet of round wire pointed at the ends and 
not closed ; and an axe of a type found in several places 
in Eastern Russia. The human figure is ithyphallic, with 
arms bent and the hands meeting in front§ of the body; 
the knees are also bent and separated, being united at the 
feet by a cross bar. The head is large, the chin rather 
pointed and beardless, the mouth somewhat open, the eyes 
staring to the front, and the general expression is satur- 
nine. The ears are projecting and pointed ; on the top of 
the head lies what looks like a circular disk or a broad 
fillet, and from the centre of this, and on each side of the 
head, above the ears, issue projections shaped somewhat 
like the head of an axe. 

A figure very similar to the above was found some- 
where in the government of Perm, whether on the west or 
east side of the Urals is equally unknown (Fig. 12) (Asp. 
No. 304). The attitude is the same, the hands meeting in 
front of the body, the legs separated, the knees bent and 
the feet united by a transverse bar as in the last. The 
head is also large, with a pointed beardless chin ; the mouth 
is also somewhat open, but the eyes seem to be shown by 
two lense-shaped holes. The ears are more like projecting 
knobs. The head is also surmounted by what looks like a 
flat disk or a fillet, out of which spring three broad ray-like 
projections, as well as on each side of the head above the 
eyes, at the point of each shoulder, and from the outside of 


_ FF 


THE BRONZE AGE IN N. RUSSIA 95 


each upper arm about half-way down. It is of ruder and 
probably later work than the figure from near Gali¢, but it 
belongs to the same type, and no doubt was made by people 
of common origin, probably Ugrian, like those we seem to 
have found at Fatidnovo. A head-dress, the lower part of 
which resembles that of the two figures and the human 
mask, is also found on a semi-human-headed bird-god 
from a grave in the government of Tomsk (Fig. 10). Very 
similar representations of birds with a human face, some- 
times with a full-length human figure on the breast of the 
bird, are far from uncommon in the government of Perm, 
where they are attributed to the Eudes. These _bird- 
idols have been well discussed in great detail by Mr. 
Teplotkhov. 

In the government of Perm no settlement has been found 
belonging to the period of Bronze ; only a few objects have 
been found, several of which are of copper, and none of 
them come from places north of the Obva, or about lat. 
58° 30°. N. The only remarkable piece is a large, slightly 
curved bronze knife, the haft of which terminates in figures 
of three mountain sheep (Fig. 13). It belongs to a Yeni- 
sean type, and as it was found at Turbina, nearly opposite 
the inflow of the Cusovaya, it may have been imported 
by way of that river. The other objects are mostly of rude 
work and of local manufacture.} 


THE Bronze AGE IN THE BALTIC PROVINCES. 


Strictly speaking there was no age of Bronze in the Baltic 
Provinces, for there was no metal in the country from 
which it could be made. But the nine objects assigned 

1 Teplodkhov, (z) pp. 26-29. 


96 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


to this period are interesting, in so far that they prove the 
country was visited by foreigners several centuries before 
the present era, and at various times. All the objects, 
consisting of a flanged celt, a palstaff, a socketed celt, 
two lance-heads, a tutulus, a spiral, and two massive arm- 
rings, were found near the coast, including the islands of 
Oesel and Mohn, or on the Dvina. Not all of them are 
of Scandinavian type. The flanged celt, with a cutting 
edge like a cheese-knife, from Altona on the Dvina (Asp. 
No. 401), is exactly like one from the Kurische Nehrung, 
and like another from Schillingen in the district of Tilsit. 
This, the palstaff of Swedish type from the island of Oesel 
(Asp. No. 399), the eared and socketed celt from Tuckum 
in Kurland, and perhaps the tutulus from Thula in Esthonia, 
belong to the second period of Montelius. The others 
are later, and perhaps the two massive arm-rings do not 
belong to the Bronze Period at all. From the rarity of 
bronze objects in the Baltic Provinces, as well as in East 
Prussia, though in a less degree, it is evident the stream 
of material civilisation, that flowed from south to north 
and fertilised Scandinavia to such a wonderful degree, left 
* the north-east of Europe to all intents and purposes un- 
touched. The little that found its way into the Baltic 
Provinces seems to have come for the most part from 
Scandinavia. 1 


THE TRANSITION FROM BRONZE TO IRON. 


In Finland, the Baltic Provinces, and Central Russia 
west of the longitude of Kazdn, there are no cemeteries 
in which we’ can trace a distinct passage from the use of 

3 Hausmann, (2) pp. xii, xiii. 


TRANSITION FROM BRONZE TO IRON 097 


bronze to the use of iron. But eastwards, in that part of 
the valley of the Kama which forms the southern boundary 
of the government of Vidtka, the case is otherwise. Near 
the old mouth of the Toima, where it fell into the Kama 
a little below the town of Eldbuga, is the cemetery of 
Andnino, the approximate date of which is placed by Mr. 
Aspelin in the fourth century B.c. Here objects both of 
bronze and iron are found together, and, what is most 
important, with hardly an exception the types of the iron 
weapons and instruments are simply continuations of the 
older bronze forms. As we have seen above, the cemetery 
seems to overlie or, at any rate, to be in very close juxta- 
position with, a still older neolithic settlement. Externally 
the site presented the appearance of an irregularly-shaped 
ridge of no great height or size, lying east and west, and 
without any indication that there were graves below; 
though the surface seems to have been strewn with flat 
slabs, on some of which human figures and inscriptions 
were carved. The first excavations were unfortunately 
executed in the most haphazard manner by persons ignor- 
ant of archzology and of the vast importance of the finds. 
In 1859 Mr. Alabin commenced operations by unearthing 
about fifty skeletons, most of them lying in groups of two 
and three. With four exceptions all had been laid with 
the head to the south, and only six were inhumed, while 
the others had undergone incomplete cremation. Traces 
of the action of fire on some of the objects showed that 
the deceased had been cremated with his clothes, weapons, 
and ornaments upon him. By the side of the male skeletons 
was placed a knife and a bronze socketed celt or a spear- 
head, on the breast arrow-heads; with women were de- 
posited necklaces, beads, and other ornaments. Some had 
I G 


98 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


bronze, others iron weapons, and the knife was usually at 
the left side, while the celt lay near the right hand. In the 
poorer graves only a knife and some clay vessels were 
found. In 1881 excavations were resumed, when an un- 
touched sepulchre was opened containing ten skeletons, 
by the side of which were objects of stone, bronze, iron, 
and even silver, but no detailed account of the find has 
as yet been published.! The bronze axes and picks, the 
bronze and iron daggers, the bronze socketed celts and 
arrow-heads, the bronze and iron snaffles, the bronze 
scabbard-tips, and the small iron rather sickle-shaped 
knives, have all a Siberian facies, and all or most of them 
can be matched by types or examples from the valley of 
the Yenisei. Bronze buttons, ornamented almost as in 
Fig. 14, are also found at Koban, at the north end of the 
pass of Dariel (Fig. 15). The pottery is made of a black, 
rather compact clay, often with an admixture of com- 
minuted shells. The vessels are bowl-shaped, with a 
rounded bottom, and the ornament is disposed below the 
rim. The decoration is given by a row of small holes at 
intervals ; by several rows of short gashes; by a zone of 
punch-marks alternately vertical and horizontal; by 
parallel lines of fine prick-marks arranged in zigzags or 
horizontally. On one small bowl, however, in the Univer- 
sity Museum at Kazan, below the cord pattern and a 
row of small holes that run under the rim, is a row of 
quadrupeds, perhaps horses, with their heads to the right. 
The form of the animals is rendered by lines that imitate 
the cord pattern, and in shape the animals are perfectly 
geometrical, as if they had been copied from a piece of 
embroidery. The head is triangular, connected by two 
1 Spitsin, pp. 26-30. 


TRANSITION FROM BRONZE TO IRON 99 


vertical lines with a parallelogram, which represents the 
body, and the whole is supported by four vertical lines 
to represent the legs. The tail is formed by a vertical 
prolongation of the hindmost leg. A few bone arrow- 
heads and flint implements seem also to have been found 
in the graves. Two partly polished whitish flint gouges, 
now in the University Museum at Kazan, are quite like 
others from the neolithic settlements on the Volga below 
Kazan, but there appears to be a doubt whether they may 
not belong to the older neolithic station that underlay the 
cemetery. 

So far as metallic objects are concerned, the finds at 
Andnino still stand alone in the valley of the Kama, but 
along that portion of the river that fringes the southern 
boundary of the government of Vidtka, and up the Vidtka 
river as far as the junction of the PizZma, there is a series 
of prehistoric forts, where the instruments and ornaments 
are almost entirely of bone, which, in Mr. Spitsin’s opinion, 
belong to the same civilisation as that of Andnino, and 
approximately to the same period. The inhabitants of 
these forts seem to have been chiefly hunters, though they 
were partly pastoral, and from the immense accumulation 
of bones within the forts these are distinguished by the 
term ‘ossiferous’ forts. The commonest bones are those of 
the reindeer, elk, horse, bear, and beaver ; less frequent are 
those of the pig, horned cattle, hare, otter, fox, wolf, martin, 
sheep, dog, of birds and fish. Though by far the greater 
number of archzological objects, such as battle-hammers, 
arrow-heads, knives, knife-handles, spoons, awls, fish-hooks, 
needles, combs, beads, and playthings, were of bone, yet 
bronze, copper, and iron were not unknown. Six bronze, 
earless, socketed celts, one of Andnino type, and most of 


100 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


them devoid of ornament were found; also several iron 
knives and awls of quadrangular section, but only one 
arrow-head and one lance-head of that metal. Part of 
a mould for a celt and crucibles of clay show that metal- 
lurgy was understood, though little practised from dearth 
of metal ; for there are no indications that the copper mines 
in the government of Vidtka were worked in prehistoric 
times. Bone arrow-heads were in great abundance; the 
commonest were of quadrangular or triangular section with 
a short stem. Fish-hooks were not uncommon, but har- 
poons were rare, and of different forms. Spoons and combs 
were also rare, but the latter were always decorated. For 
ornament they used bear’s teeth, small knuckle-bones, per- 
forated bone beads, as well as beads of bronze, glass, and, 
at one place, of nephrite. The carving in bone is very skil- 
fully executed, and is even artistic. For decorating a knife- 
handle or other object the favourite animal head was that of 
the elk, though also of the bear, fox, boar, horse, and even 
of the dragon. In the forts along the river Vidtka objects 
of stone were few in number, and chiefly confined to flint 
arrow-heads, but the forts along the Kama were much richer 
in this respect, and yielded a considerable number of wedge- 
shaped axes and chisels of the OriSut type. Yet no flint 
scrapers, knives, or nuclei were found, showing that the 
genuine neolithic civilisation was a thing of the past. In 
Mr. Spitsin’s opinion, the stone chisels, the bone battle- 
hammers, the bone arrow-heads, especially those of trian- 
gular section, and the bone awls, are simply reproductions 
in bone of bronze prototypes, more especially of Andnino 
type. Be this as it may, it cannot be denied that one of 
the perforated stone disks or whorls, on which an animal 
is carved (Fig. 18) bears a wonderful likeness to the bronze 


TRANSITION FROM BRONZE TO IRON 1or1 


cheek of a bit from Andnino (Fig. 19) (Asp. No. 474). Yet 
the pottery from the forts is very unlike what is found at An- 
anino; the former is large, strong, resonant when struck, and 
coarse as regards ornament, while the latter is fine, fragile, 
and often provided with a complicated and ingenious design. 
The vessels found in the forts have a round bottom, a 
mouth like a caldron, with a diameter of from 34 feet 
to 2 feet, though there were also smaller vessels, the 
smallest of which had a diameter of only 24 inches. 
The ornament on the large vessels was usually made 
with a six-cogged punch; the cord pattern was rarely 
used, and was sometimes accompanied by small circles. 
Mr. Spitsin gives no illustrations of these designs, but 
probably the small circles are the same as are sometimes 
found on the pottery of the so-called Cudish forts in the 
upper part of the Ceptsa valley, where they have a diameter 
of from 6 to 7 mm., and seem to be formed by hand with 
a pointed tool. Small circles of similar dimensions, but 
formed by small dots, are to be seen on a sherd from 
Kudimkor, in the district of Solikamsk, Perm. But other- 
wise no antiquities of ‘Cudish’ type are found in the 
ossiferous forts, showing that they belong to an earlier 
period,! that approximately corresponds with the older 
Iron Age in Finland and the Baltic Provinces, though it 
may have begun rather earlier. 


THE EARLIER [RON AGE IN FINLAND. 


In the earlier Iron Age of Europe, what is known as 
the Hallstadt and La Téne periods, extending from about 
Soo B.C. to about the end of the last era, though fairly well 


1 Spitsin, pp. 41-47. 


102 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


represented in Denmark and Scandinavia, scarcely touched 
East Prussia, and never penetrated into the Baltic Pro- 
vinces or into Finland. Except in Finland, it was not till 
after the beginning of the present era that these outlying 
countries began to be regularly visited by traders, who 
bartered arms and ornaments for the products of the 
country, which must have mainly consisted in furs and 
pelts. By means of this trade these remote regions were 
ultimately won over to a completely European civilisation. 
The oldest objects of the Iron Age are three bronze neck- 
rings from the village of Panelia in the government of Abo. 
Similar rings are known in Uppland, Oland, Gotland, and 
also in Denmark. In Sweden they belong to the begin- 
ning of the Age of Iron (S00—300 B.c.).!_ Then there is a 
gap till the beginning of the Christian era. 

In J. R. Aspelin’s opinion the population whose cairn 
graves are found in the south-west of Finland must be 
considered a branch of the contemporary inhabitants of 
Sweden.?, The oldest relics of the Iron Age in Finland 
are so similar to those of the Iron Age in Scandinavia 
before 700 a.p. that it is impossible to explain the fact 
otherwise than by a Gothic settlement. For no people 
can borrow a completely foreign civilisation without modi- 
fying the forms in some way or other in conformity with 
their own peculiar genius. These forms may be improved 
upon, or they may become deteriorated, but they cannot 
remain exactly the same.’ It was formerly believed that 
from about the seventh to the middle of the ninth century 
a gap existed in the archeological record, for there were 
no finds to connect the older with the totally new types of 
the later Iron Age. This barren interval was explained 


1 Hackman, pp. 402-404. % Aspelin,(z)p.355. 3 Aspelin, (3) p. 140. 


THE EARLIER IRON AGE IN FINLAND 103 


by supposing that a great change had taken place in the 
population; that the old Scandinavian population had 
migrated and their place had been taken by the ancestors 
of the existing Finns, who now entered the country for 
the first time. But Mr. Hackman, writing in 1897, and 
well conversant with the unceasing discoveries of new 
archzological material in Finland, says that a study of the 
antiquities of the Iron Age shows us a continual local 
development, and therefore no break that might be referred 
to a sudden and tumultuous immigration of a foreign 
people. We can only prove in the later finds a gradual 
weakening of Scandinavian characteristics. Yet the finds 
of the latest heathen period still exhibit a Scandinavian 
influence. The immigration of the Finns can therefore 
have only taken place slowly in the course of several 
centuries. The old Scandinavian culture that existed since 
the Stone and Bronze Ages was therefore not abruptly 
broken and replaced by a new civilisation. Archzologically 
speaking, the Finns have far rather appropriated in part 
the forms of the first and then further developed them 
during continual contact with Scandinavian neighbours.? 


THE EARLIER [RON AGE IN THE BALTIC PROVINCES, 


Here, as in Finland, Roman coins from Augustus to the 
- year 364 A.D. occasionally assist the archzologist in 
approximately dating some of the finds. No more money 
is found till the eighth century, when Arabic coins between 
725 and ro11 A.D. begin to make their appearance. These 
are followed by Anglo-Saxon coins from 802 to 1040; by 
Byzantine coins from 868 to 1014; and by German money 
1 Hackman, pp. 366, 367. 


104 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


struck at Utrecht, Cologne, Tréves, Strasburg, etc., dating 
from 823 to1180. For the most part the Roman coins were 
found in places near the coast, as at Reval, at Werder opposite 
the Isle of Mohn, in the islands of Mohn, Oesel, and Filsund, 
at Dreimannsdorf north of the Salis, at the mouth of the 
Dvina, at Hasau, Kapseden, Grobin, and Libau; or along 
the banks of the larger rivers that served as water-ways into 
the interior, as at Kabbina on the Lower Embach, near 
Treyden on the Livlandish Aa, at Riga, at Lennewaden on 
the Dvina, and at Bornsmiinde on the Kurlandish Aa. 

In Esthonia, the most northerly of the Provinces, the 
archzological record of the first Iron Period, dating from 
about 100 to 600 A.D. is still lamentably incomplete, the 
entire western half of it being practically a blank sheet. 
But in the north-east corner of the province four interest- 
ing finds have been made at Malla, Tiirpsal, Kuckers, and 
Tiirsel ; at Facht, a few miles east of Reval; at Ottenkiill 
in the east centre, and at Waetz in the south centre. All 
these finds, save the one from Malla, came from ancient 
cemeteries. According to Dr. Hausmann, Director of the 
Museum at Dorpat, the cemetery at Kuckers belongs to the 
second century, and perhaps partly to the third ; Ottenkiill 
to the second; Tiirpsal was used from the second to the 
fifth century ; the greater part of the find at Malla belongs 
to the third and fourth centuries,? and Tiirsel also begins 
about the third century. 

As considerable ethnological importance is attached to 
the manner in which a people disposes of its dead and 
constructs its graves, it is necessary to give a brief account 
of one or two of the burial-places. For it must be pre- 
mised that only the one at Tiirpsal has been explored and 

1 Grewingk, (4) map; Kharuzin, p. 94. | 2 Hausmann, (1) pp. 48, 53. 


EARLIER IRON AGE IN BALTIC PROVINCES 105 


recorded with anything like scientific accuracy. The burial- 
place found here was ina low natural mound, running east 
and west, about 4o yards long, 12 yards wide, and close 
to the high-road from Reval to Narva. On removing the 
upper layer of soil were disclosed three areas, marked off by 
large blocks of granite. The easterly compartment was 
oblong, the central one was of irregular form, but approxi- 
mated a narrow oblong figure, and was the smaller of the 
three ; the westerly area was also of irregular form, the 
north side being considerably longer than the south side, 
so that the long sides, running north and south, were not 
parallel. The eastern compartment measured 19 feet 
6 inches long by 9 feet 9 inches wide, and all three were 
paved with blocks of stone. Between the three compart- 
ments were borders of gravel about 3 feet 3 inches wide, 
containing no sepulchral remains. 

In the western and central compartments the dead were 
buried at no great depth, almost without any accompany- 
ing ornaments, sometimes singly, sometimes piled one on 
the top of the other. Over them was laid a pavement of 
large stones. In the eastern and probably later area there 
were no skeletons, but between the stones of the pavement 
ornaments and numerous bones and teeth of young and 
old were scattered in confusion. Most of these had not 
been cremated, though a few burnt bones were found 
among them. In the case of two skeletons in the western 
and central compartments it was possible to observe that 
they had been laid with the head to the south and the feet 
to the north, and that one of them, a robust man of 
about thirty years of age, only measured 4 feet 104 inches 
in height. The skulls, unfortunately, were all crushed.! 

1 Hausmann, (1) pp. 3-7. 


106 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


The cemetery of Tiirsel, about sixteen miles west of 
Narva, and less than a mile from the coast, lies by the 
side of the highway from Narva to Reval. It consisted of 
an oval stone heap, lying east and west, about 50 feet 
long by 20 feet wide and 3 feet high, overgrown with 
turf. The area over which the mound was raised seems 
first to have been paved with stones, for between them 
were found cremated human remains, as well as the orna- 
ments and other objects they had used when alive. The 
outline of the cemetery appears to have been marked 
by a row of stones, and two rows of stones running north 
and south divided it into compartments.! From an 
archeological point of view the finds from the two con- 
tiguous cemeteries of Tiirpsal and Kuckers are closely 
related, though also distinguished by well-marked differ- 
ences; so too those of Tiirsel and Malla. The most 
interesting fact connected with Kuckers and Tiirpsal is the 
geographical distribution of some of the fibulze found there. 
Most of them are absent from contemporary grave-finds in 
Livland and Kurland, are hardly known in Sweden, but 
were common in the Roman provinces north of the Alps 
in the first century, are plentiful in the island of Bornholm, 
and not infrequent in West Prussia. Again, one fibula from 
Tiirpsal is not known elsewhere in the Baltic Provinces, 
nor apparently in East Prussia, but analogies are to be 
found for it at Darzau in Hannover. So too object No. 6 
in Table VIII.,? a bangle of thick bronze wire, thicker in 
the middle, terminating in round knobs, ranging as far 
south as Auzeem in Livland, only recurs at Rondsen, near 
Graudentz in West Prussia, in a grave of the second cen- 
tury. And a semicircular knife or razor from Tiirpsal, 


1 Grewingk, (2) pp. 9, ro. 2 Opp. p. 110. 


Ni ae Cae 


EARLIER IRON AGE IN BALTIC PROVINCES 107 


though the only one known in the Baltic Provinces, is 
common in Prussian graves.1 This has suggested the idea 
that some of the objects found near the north coast of 
Esthonia were imported by a sea route from the south-west 
part of the Baltic as early as the second century. That 
this is not impossible will be touched upon in a subsequent 
chapter. But some of the articles may have come by land 
from the south. In Table VIII. it will be seen that object 
No. 1, a hook fibula of the earliest type known in the 
Baltic Provinces, is found at several intermediate stations 
in Livland, as well as at Santen in Kurland. In the 
Museums at Konigsberg and Dantzig I have noticed 
several of the same type, with the same ornamentation on 
the arch, only differing in having the upper end of the’ 
fibula undecorated and more splayed at the top—the foot, 
according to the quaint but erroneous terminology of the 
late Dr. Tischler,—from Kainsvikus (Insterburg), Hol- 
landerie (Wehlau), from three places in Samland, and from 
Kleschkau near Dantzig. They are also found elsewhere 
in East Prussia. 

None of the graves in the province show any signs of 
transition from a stone to an iron age. Of course it is 
possible that future exploration may introduce us to graves 
in which stone weapons are also present, but so far as the 
evidence as yet goes the change seems to have been made 
by totally discarding the old order and plunging headlong 
into the new civilisation with all the fervour of new con- 
verts. The presence of the tooth of a sheep and a pig at 
Tiirpsal shows that these domestic animals were bred in 
the country, no doubt before the introduction of iron; and 
the fibulz, apart from a shred or two of cloth from Malla, 


1 Hausmann, (z) pp. 25-29, 35, 39- 


108 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


are enough to prove that the natives wore woollen clothes, 
and that the women could spin, weave, and sew. Pottery 
was little used; only a very few sherds, one piece orna- 
mented with very shallow irregular lines, were picked up 
at Tiirsel, but not elsewhere. The chief objects deposited 
with the dead were ornaments: fibule of diverse forms, 
finger-rings in abundance, neck- and arm-rings of different 
patterns and sizes for children and adults, but pendants 
and glass beads were few in number. The traders that 
brought them had probably parted with most of their stock 
before getting so far north. Arms and tools of iron were 
rare. At Kuckers there were only knives of simple form, 
but at Tirpsal, Tiirsel, and Ottenkill, besides these, were 
one or two lance-heads and celts, a semicircular knife or 
razor, an awl and a needle of iron, but no axes. Perhaps 
the stone axe was still in use, though none was deposited 
with the dead. About the fifth century arms were more 
abundant ; at Haakhof, nearly half way between Tiirsel and 
Kunda, a hoard of that period was discovered, buried 
about a foot below the surface. It consisted of forty-eight 
socketed lance-heads, twenty-two sickle-shaped knives, 
with short, bent tangs, nine celts, two axes, and a fragment 
of a double-edged sword. So, even as late as the fifth 
century, the iron axe seems to have been far from common. 

From Dr. Hausmann’s Catalogue of the Archeological 
Congress, held at Riga in 1896, I have compiled Table VIII. 
to give an idea of the distribution over the three provinces 
of various types of fibulz, neck- and finger-rings, arm-rings 
or bangles, large pins, etc., ranging in date from about the 
second to the fifth or sixth century. From this it appears 
that out of twenty-one objects from finds in Esthonia, five 
are confined to that province, sixteen pass the modern 


Poe ge 


an 
- a mw wewcewny woe sus e . eo If .s . | . e . 
. Unnipiht, src 8 . . . |e | He (ed. 
. Camby, s.7.c. . . ~Jefedie del. 
Ayakar, s.7.¢. . . ~|- | it. 


1 
| 
| 
. Langensee, s.7.¢. . . otebeW ed et ede feted ede]e,-]- 
. Strickenhof, s.s.¢. . . ~|Xle| lebetetetefepede | ol. 
- Ronneburg Kangar, 1.5.5. . | -| + |||. | . . 
| 


. Gr. Roop, $.7.¢. . . - |X). | . 
. Auzeem, 5.7.6. ; . . x | . ! . 

. Golgovsky . . . efefeiedede fel fet pede 
. Eschenhof . . . wfefefixlyepey eee te|- 
 Kajenhof rere sae 

. Selsau . . . . we 

. Praulen . . ale 

. Dahlen. 

. Alt Kalzenau 

. Lennewaden. 

. Odsen ry | 


. Santen, ms. . 

. Frauvenburg . 

. Kapseden. . . ~feleli, 
. Dobelsberg . . . olele 

. Fockenhof . . . ~ lel. 

. Selbur . . ~ fel. 
. N. Selburg, 7.2. . . - |. . 


. Herbergen, 7.2. . 


Gertrudenof, s.7.¢. 


* » ii. S.5. oll]epetedel. 
» Strante, s.5.c. a eo ee) | en ed 
” Vellakravand,s.s.c.|X|-|/ix|.]- 
Slavek, s.5.¢. offletededede|. 
» Viksnas . efededi et. -}.[xr. 
Muhsin 


e e s 
oe 
e e e 
e 


Pixten . . . 
Gr. Sonnaxt, ms.4.. 
Renneburg, .% . 


EARLIER IRON AGE IN BALTIC PROVINCES 1ro9 


frontier, though two of these do not go far beyond it; only 
two reach the south of Livland, and only two cross over 
into Kurland. In Livland, out of thirty-nine objects, 
seventeen are confined to the province, sixteen are likewise 
common to Esthonia, and only eight also occur in Kurland. 
But in Table VIII. both the objects No. 18, 20, one of 
which stops at Vellakravand and the other at Dahlen, 
after skipping Kurland, reappear at Oberhof in East 
Prussia, in the district of Memel. And the pendant No. 26, 
which stops short at Ayakar, crops up with very slight 
change at Heydenkrug in East Prussia, but north of the 
Niemen. Lastly, in Kurland, out of twelve objects, four 
are peculiar to the province, seven also belong to Livland, 
and only two to Esthonia. Hence we find from the very 
beginning of the new Iron Age civilisation certain provincial 
differences in the ornamental objects used in the three 
provinces, and that the connection between Esthonia and 
Livland was closer than between Livland and Kurland. 
As there are no iron ores in the Baltic Provinces, and none 
nearer than in the government of Vilna, all the earlier 
objects of iron or bronze, now alloyed with zinc and lead, 
must have been imported from abroad. After a time the 
natives learnt to work.in metal on their own account, but 
before they began to do so objects of the second century 
that are special to one province—such as Table VIII. 
Nos. 8,.9, 10, 11,—can only be accounted for on the sup- 
position either that they came from quite different trade 
centres, or from the same centre on different occasions 
separated by a few years. 

In Livland the sepulchral arrangements are not quite 
the same as in Esthonia. Lying mainly in the north and 
centre of the province, there are cemeteries from 80 feet to 


110 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


325 feet long, running east and west, surrounded by a low 
wall of dry stones, and divided into a good many compart- 
ments by parallel rows of stones, running north and south, 
that were successively added as occasion required.! The 
cremated remains, and the objects damaged by fire that 
accompanied them, seem sometimes to have been paved 
over with stones, over which was heaped a low cairn from 
4 feet to 5 feet high. Grewingk termed these ‘ship-graves,’ 
under the mistaken impression that the external form of these 
burial-places had the form of a hull, and that the shorter 
transverse rows were intended to represent rowing benches. 
More accurate measurements and more exact plans have 
now shown that he was mistaken, and archzologists have 
therefore abandoned the term. They are now termed 
stone row-graves with cremation, and stone settings with 
cremation. No cinerary urns are found in these cemeteries, 
though there are sometimes sherds of pottery. An ex- 
ception to this mode of burial is known at Auzeem (Gr. 
Roop), where a kist grave was opened containing merely 
an amber button. 

In Kurland there are again differences. In the north- 
west corner of the province, not far from the coast of the 
Gulf of Riga, at Musching, Widser, and Nogallen (parish of 
Erwahlen) there are cairns about 60 feet long, 18 feet broad, 
and from 1 to 4 feet high, running north-west and south-east, 
and known to the natives as Vella /aiva, or Devil’s Ships. 
When some of them were explored by Professor Grewingk 
they were found to contain small kists about 10 inches 
square, in each of which stood a cinerary urn containing ashes 
and fragments of charred human bones. The only object 
found with them lay in an urn at Widser, and was supposed 


1 Hausmann, (3) p. xix. 


EARLIER IRON AGE IN BALTIC PROVINCES 111 


to be a metallic blade about a finger in length. But it is now 
lost, and doubts are thrown upon its existence at all.! At 
New Selburg mention is also made of a kist grave, covered 
with a large stone, in which stood eighteen cinerary urns 
containing burnt bones, while at Santen (Kandau district) 
the uncremated skeleton lay on the level of the ground in 
the direction from west to east under a mound from 5 feet to 
6 feet high, and each body had a grave to itself.2, But onthe 
whole our knowledge of sepulchral arrangements in Kurland 
is very uncertain and incomplete. It is certain that graves 
were sometimes surrounded or covered over with stones, 
and though cremation is proved at some places, such as 
Kapseden and Schlagunen, yet on the whole inhumation 
under mounds, such as are found at Herbergen, Renneberg, 
Selburg, and Sonnaxt, seems to have prevailed in the 
province.* So too further south, in the district of Memel, 
in the great cemeteries of Oberhof and Schernen, inhuma- 
tion was practised in the first five centuries of the Christian 
era. But here the cemeteries present a network of stone 
circles and compartments, sometimes touching each other, 
and with the enclosed areas unpaved, wherein they differ 
from the cemeteries in Samland, in which the areas are 
paved with stones. All these places of burial are flat fields 
without any mound to mark the presence of a grave. 

It has already been noticed that very little pottery 
was used in Esthonia. ‘The same remark applies not 
only to Livland and Kurland, the urns at Kapseden and 
Musching being a rare exception, but also to the cemetery 
of Oberhof on the north side of the Niemen. It is quite 
otherwise in the rest of East Prussia south of that river; 


1 Grewingk, (4) PP. 227. ¥ Kharuzin, PP. 154, 159. 
ausmann, (2) p. xix. 


112 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


there large, well-made urns of many diverse shapes are of 
constant occurrence in the graves of the first four or five 
centuries of the present era. 

From about 600 to 800 a.p. there is almost a gap in 
the archzological record of the Baltic Provinces, just as 
in East Prussia, though in each of the three provinces 
there are common places of burial in which objects of the 
earlier and later period are found. For instance, the 
cemetery of Tiirsel in Esthonia was used for many centuries. 
Subsequent excavations to those already mentioned showed 
that cremation, which prevailed in the older period, was 
gradually replaced by inhumation, and coincident with this 
there was a change, of course, in the character of the objects 
deposited with the dead. Mr. Viskovatov, who conducted 
the excavation, came to the conclusion that Tiirsel was 
used as late as the thirteenth, perhaps down to the fifteenth 
century,! though we have seen that it originated in the 
third century. It is possible, however, that the place was 
not used quite uninterruptedly for ten or more centuries as 
a place of burial, for the area over which it extends is of 
small size. ‘The stone row-grave with cremation at Waetz 
has also furnished objects belonging to both periods.? 

In North Livland, in the part inhabited by Finns in the 
twelfth century, there are likewise cemeteries with a mixed 
inventory of old and new. The northern part of the great 
cairn grave at Pajus showed two or three distinct stone rows, 
and within them were objects dating from about the third 
to the fifth century. The larger remaining sepulchral area 
was surrounded by a very strong dry wall of large stones, 
and within it no transverse rows could be traced. This 
enclosed space was afterwards heaped over with stones. 

1 Kharuzin, pp. 149, 1785. 2 Hausmann, (2) p. Lxiii. 


EARLIER IRON AGE IN BALTIC PROVINCES 113 


Though a few articles of the older period were found here, 
the great majority of them belonged to the later period. 
At Allats-Kivi there is a large stone-row cemetery with 
cremation, the long axis of which lies east and west, while 
most of the transverse rows run north and south. Between 
these lay many bones, most of them showing marks of 
fire. But here there were few objects of the older time; all 
the other numerous ornaments, etc., belonged to the newer 
period. This cemetery is of great interest, as it is the 
latest known of its class. Close beside this cemetery lay 
another, belonging entirely to the later period (700-1200 
A.D.), in which one or more bodies were laid uncremated 
in a shallow grave over which a mound was raised. One 
male skeleton lay with the head to the north and the feet 
to the south, another was orientated from west to east.! 
Two skulls from this cemetery have already been spoken 
of at p. 47, and shown to be far removed from the 
Finnish type. Although Dr. Hausmann attributes this 
cemetery positively to the Ests, it seems to me somewhat 
doubtful, not only on account of the skulls, but also of the 
mode of burial, which resembles that found on undoubted 
Lettish territory, such as at Ludsen in the government of 
Vitebsk and in Kurland. 

Transition finds which seem to point to uninterrupted 
occupation in Lettish Livland have been found at Kaipen 
and Kajenhof, both in the district of Sissegal, at Ronneburg 
Strante, Odensee, and Odsen, as well as at JasmuiSa and 
Ludsen in the government of Vitebsk, which formed part 
of Livland till 1660. In Kurland, too, they are known in 
several places, such as Preekuln, Autz, Ilen, Fockenhof, 
Schlagunen, Alt Raden, Zeemalden, and Selburg. At all 

1 Hausmann, (2) pp. Ixi, 1xii. 

I H 


114 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


these places, so far as is known, the mode of burial was 
inhumation, which helps to connect them with the older 
graves, where a similar method of interment was practised.? 

It is unnecessary to pursue the subject further, for during 
the later period there were certainly Finns in the Baltic 
Provinces. The problem to be solved is, When did they 
arrive? and does the archeology of this region for the first 
five centuries of the present era lead us to suppose they 
made their first appearance during that interval of time or 
subsequently? Grewingk attributed to Goths and Scandi- 
navians the Vella latva at Musching and the thirty or 
more ‘ship-graves’ in Esthonia and Livland. But as the 
‘ship-grave’ theory was founded on inexact plans and 
preconceived ideas, apart from the fact that the Scandi- 
navian ‘ship-graves’ belong to much later time, his 
arguments fall to the ground. Mr. O. Montelius and 
J. R. Aspelin believe the Baltic Provinces to have been 
solely inhabited by a Gothic or Teutonic people till about 
the year 400 A.D., because on the whole the types of the 
archeological objects found in these Provinces are also 
known on Teutonic soil. Professor Hausmann considers 
this theory unproved, and Dr. Kharuzin is inclined to 
believe some of the graves in Esthonia belonged to an 
Esthonian (Finnish) people. It is clear, however, that, 
in a non-metalliferous country, when a new civilisation 
that includes the use of metals is introduced, the natives 
for a long time must depend on strangers for every 
metallic object they possess, for it would not be in the 
interest of strange traders to teach the natives the art 
of metallurgy. As from a study of archeological objects 
alone we cannot solve the question, we must next take 

1 Hausmann, (2) pp. xlvii, xlviii, xxv. 


EARLIER IRON AGE IN BALTIC PROVINCES 115 


into consideration the modes of burjal that prevailed 
in various parts of the Provinces. Comparing the descrip- 
tion given above of the cairn graves in Finland, that 
lasted through the Bronze into the Iron Age, and were 
constructed by a Scandinavian people, with the description 
of the compartment graves at Tiirpsal and Tiirsel in 
Esthonia, we find little in common, and many important 
differences. But the structure of the graves in North 
Livland does not seem to differ much from those in 
Esthonia, and the method prevalent in Livland can be 
traced as far south as Ronneburg to the east and Auzeem 
to the west. A line drawn between these two places is 
only about twenty miles south of the boundary between 
the Esthonians and the Letts about the year 1250. An 
inspection, too, of Table VIII. shows there was considerably 
more intercourse between Esthonia and Livland north of 
this line than between the northern and southern halves 
of the latter province. Unfortunately little or nothing 
seems to be known of the mode of sepulchre south of this 
line till we reach Kurland, though the single kist grave at 
Auzeem points to a very different type from that which 
exists in the northern half of Livland. Though contem- 
porary, the mound graves with inhumation in Kurland are 
evidently of a very different character from the compart- 
ment graves in Esthonia and the northern half of Livland. 
We seem then to be in the presence of two distinct 
peoples, that divided the Baltic Provinces nearly equally 
between them. And what is more, they seem tranquilly 
to have remained there from the beginning of the Christian 
era till the present time. For the passage from the older 
to the younger Iron Age brought with it no change of 
sepulchral construction at Allats-Kivi, while at Tiirsel, 


116 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Waets, and Pajus the old places of interment were used 
in the younger period. In Kurland, too, there are transition 
finds that seem to attest that no alteration had taken place 
in the native population. With regard to this province, 
and perhaps the south of Livland, it seems highly probable 
that the population was of Letto-Lithuanian stock, as is 
now the case. With regard to the northern half of the 
Provinces, the population was probably Finnish—at any 
rate in part. Though this view is entirely opposed to 
that held by Finnish historians and archeologists of the 
highest repute, it does not seem to me impossible, when 
we remember that, if Dr. Virchow is correct, there were 
Finns at Rinnekaln, though only temporarily, in the 
neolithic age, at a time to which we have found reason to 
assign a date earlier than 500 B.c. The main objection 
to this theory is that nothing attributable to the earlier 
Iron Age has been found east of the Narva, though Finns 
were probably living near the head of the Gulf of Finland 
all the time. But it may be there was an uninhabited 
tract for a considerable distance east of the Narva, which 
prevented trade articles from being distributed in that 
direction. And at any rate, in the future, finds of this 
period may be brought to light. That a Finnish people 
were not the earliest settlers in this region was shown in 
the last chapter, and also that from their practice of 
carrying off the women and children there must have been 
in every clan a certain percentage of Finnish-speaking 
lads and grown-up girls that had no Finnish blood in 
their veins at all. A practice of this kind carried on for 
generations, till the whole non-Finnish people had been 
absorbed, would work immense changes on the craniology 
of the invaders. The Finns that first entered the province 


EARLIER IRON AGE IN BALTIC PROVINCES 117 


probably filtered in silently and imperceptibly in small 
parties round both ends of Lake Peipus, the country being 
so spacious and thinly populated that they could live in 
many parts of it without even attracting the attention of 
the original inhabitants. But in course of time, when 
their numbers increased, they began to attack the earlier 
settlers, and eventually supplanted them altogether. If, as 
I believe probable, the population of the northern half of 
the Baltic Provinces was partly, perhaps predominantly, 
Finnish in the second century a.pD., the first appearance 
of the Finns must be placed earlier. Corroboration of this 
view will be found in a subsequent chapter. 


Tue EARLIER IRON AGE IN EASTERN RUSSIA. 


So far as our present knowledge extends, traces of the 
early Iron Age in that part of Russia proper where we have 
found remains of a neolithic, and bronze or copper period, 
are very scanty. Isolated specimens may have been dis- 
covered here and there, but no cemetery, no great hoard 
of objects. At MokSansk and Saransk, in the government 
of Penza, Roman coins of the first two centuries have 
been dug up at various times, showing that the inhabitants, 
who may possibly have been Mordvins, were not quite out 
of touch with the outer world. With Roman money no 
doubt other products of civilisation found their way into 
the country. But on the whole the huge region stretching 
diagonally from the head of the Gulf of Finland to the 
great bend of the Volga seems to have been destitute of 
iron, or nearly so, till introduced by a trade that may have 
arisen about the seventh or eighth century, which flourished 
vigorously in the ninth and tenth centuries, and was 


118 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


directed along the Volga from Bolgari westwards to the 
head of the Gulf of Finland. Before this time the Finnish 
population that lived between these two geographical points 
were probably in a transition state, such as we have found 
on the river Vidtka and on a portion of the Kama. We 
may suppose that mainly they still employed instruments 
of stone and bone, though they were glad to acquire at 
rare intervals articles of copper and iron from more ad- 
vanced Eastern neighbours, for they had not yet learned 
to extract iron directly from the ore. The find at Diakovo, 
near Moscow, already referred to, belongs perhaps to this 
period. That iron was known earlier on the Kama than 
elsewhere in Northern and Central Russia we have already 
seen. So it is not surprising that on the same river, 
though a good deal higher up, and on the opposite bank, 
is the only station of the earlier Iron Age as yet known 
in the centre and east of Russia in Europe. It is situated 
close to the hamlet of Gliadénova, some fifteen miles west 
of Perm. Within the ditch and rampart of a prehistoric 
or Cudish fort constructed on a projecting tongue of high 
ground with precipitous slopes on all sides but one, the 
northern slope being formed by the ancient bank of the 
Kama, now some two miles to the north, is an open space, 
covering about 270 square metres, thickly covered with 
ashes and burnt animal bones. 

During the excavations conducted by Mr. NovokreS- 
éennikh in 1896 and 1897 about 23,000 objects were brought 
to light. They were found at no great depth, amid 
_ fragments of bone and the ashes of burnt wood. The site 
seems to have been a place of sacrifice, and the objects dis- 
covered may have been votive offerings ; they were of gold, 
bronze, iron, flint, bone, and included innumerable glass 


‘THE EXCAVATIONS 


AT GLIADENOVA: MR. NOVOKRESCENNIKH IN 
MIDDLE DISTANCE. 


SGLIADENOVA WITH THE KAMA IN THE DISTA} 


\CE-LOOKING NORTH. 


To face page 118 


EARLIER IRON AGE IN E. RUSSIA rig 


beads. The most interesting discovery consisted in two 
Indo-Bactrian coins. One is of Kadphises 1., whose reign 
is placed in the last half of the century preceding the 
Christian era, the other is of later date, but they allow the 
finds to be placed in the second or third century A.D. 
The gold objects were only three in number, the last found 
being a small ear-ring. The bronze ear-rings were generally 
of thin wire. In one of them the pendant is of wire coiled 
into a slightly truncated cone (Fig. 16). Most of the 
bronze objects are of the rudest possible art, consisting of 
human and animal figures, or representations of birds, 
snakes, and bees cut out of sheet bronze. Those in cast 
bronze are greatly superior. Sometimes the figure of 
two human figures, or of an animal, is given in low relief 
on a round flat disk of bronze provided with a ring of 
suspension. The best of the cast objects is the head of 
a beardless man (Fig. 17) with a singular head-dress and 
two—one is broken off—depending bands, ornamented 
with horizontal grooves at intervals. Were it not for the 
horizontal direction of the grooves one might be tempted 
to take them for two plaits of hair, such as are given ina 
ruder form in Fig. 20. Formerly the Ostiaks and Voguls 
wore their hair in two tails, men as well as women. 
There are also several good castings, such as Fig. 22, 
representing the head and shoulders of a bear in high relief, 
enclosed in a frame with a cord pattern running round the 
outer edge. ‘These figures are of various dimensions, and 
some have aring of suspension. One of these, in which 
none of the metal is cut through, resembles, as indeed 
they all do in general type, a bear’s head and shoulders, 
figured by Aspelin, No. 569, also from Perm. The con- 
ventional mode of showing the muscles of the fore-arm and 


120 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


hind-quarters of a bear (Fig. 24) is also found in two later 
and still more conventionalised Permian examples figured 
by Aspelin, No. 551, 552, both from the Petora. The best 
of the representations of birds, generally with a human face 
on its breast, are also cast. The horned owl (Fig. 23) with 
a human face on its breast, the single bird (Fig. 26), and 
the double birds (Fig. 27), all belong to the same general 
type as the single-headed birds (Asp. No. 529-531) from 
the district of Perm and from the Petora, the two-headed 
bird (Teplotkhov, (1) Fig. 3) from the district of Cerdin 
(Perm), and Fig. 10 from Tomsk. Fig. 28, though difficult 
to make out, when complete may have represented a triple- 
headed bird, though the head on the right is more like 
that of an animal—with a human face between its two 
legs, and two clawed feet. Mr. Teplovikhov also figures 
a three-headed bird with a human face between its 
legs, and taloned feet, which was found in the district of 
Cerdin. Fig. 25 is the upper part of a water-bird in full 
relief, and resembles a form that is not unusual in the 
Cudish antiquities of a much later time. Other bird- 
forms cut out of sheet bronze might stand for the proto- 
types from which highly debased forms such as Aspelin 
No. 588-sgo originally sprang. There are several repre- 
sentations of men on horseback (Fig. 30), but all of very 
rude workmanship ; the bar that unites the feet of the 
horse is noteworthy, as it recalls the bar that unites the feet 
of the human statuettes from Galit and the government of 
Perm (Figs. 11 and 12). Sometimes the rider is shown 
sitting sideways, as in Fig. 31, though here the animal is 
not a horse, and the rider has a boss on his chest in 
the form of a coiled snake. One of the large circular 
disks with a ring of suspension represents a human figure 


EARLIER IRON AGE IN E. RUSSIA 121 


with his hair in two thick plaits, like two ropes, on each 
side of his head, holding in his arms a large fish and 
standing on a quadruped of very uncertain species. In 
one instance two detached human figtres, cast in full 
relief, are enclosed in a frame slightly arched at the top. 
The human figures cut out of sheet bronze are very rude, 
e.g. Fig. 21; sometimes they are in pairs of a man and 
woman ; sometimes singly, when the phallus is occasionally 
a salient feature. In the same material are silhouettes of 
bears, horses, elks without horns, nondescript animals, 
snakes coiled and in other positions, birds and bees or 
large flies. Other objects of bronze are arrow-heads ; flat 
buttons of various sizes with loop underneath; double 
buttons coupled by a short bar, each boss of the button 
being surrounded by a cord pattern in relief (Fig. 29); 
round metal disks about an inch in diameter with a hole in 
the centre, and occasionally ornamented with a few incised 
lines (Fig. 33) or a rude human figure. One ornament isa 
circular disk with seven small rings distributed round its 
circumference (Fig. 32). Flat bronze ribbons rolled into 
spiral cylinders an inch or more long were also destined 
for ornament. 

The iron objects were arrow-heads, some with three 
flanges, and very small iron knives with a straightish back, 
a blade that curved slightly inwards, and a short tang. 
Similar knives are found at Cmi, near Vladikavkas, and 
they closely resemble a type very common at a later 
period in the government of Perm, as well as at Bolgari 
and Bilidrsk. The large and small glass beads, containing 
a film of gold leaf, are quite like those from the Cudish 
finds of a later period in the government of Perm, and 
have also been met with at Kombulta and Digori on the 


122 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


north side of the Caucasus. The bone arrow-heads are 
of types found in other parts of the government. 
Comminuted shells were generally, if not always, mixed 
with the clay of which vessels were made. The pieces 
found entire are of small size, with a round bottom, no 
handle, and generally have but little decoration, which is 
disposed horizontally below the rim. In one or two 
instances the rim forms a wavy line, as is also the case 
in an example from the neolithic station of Great Bugdr 
near Kazan. The ornament consists of a row of short 
diagonal or curved incisions in pairs; or of small oval 
depressions to the right and left of an imaginary line, like 
small leaves issuing from a stalk, as on a sherd from the 
neolithic station of Novo Mordovo near the site of Old 
Bolgari; or of a couple of rows of small triangular 
depressions at intervals; or of rows of shallow, nearly 
parallel lines; or of a couple of rows of bold zigzags 
made with a pointed instrument, etc. In the opinion of 
Mr. NovokréS¢ennikh, the site he excavated was a Cudish 
place of sacrifice, and the Cudes were probably Voguls. 
A statement made by Dr. B. Munkacsi with regard to 
the modern Voguls seems to throw light on the numerous 
small and rude representations of animal forms, cut out 
of thin bronze leaf, it may be on the spur of the moment. 
He says that when the will of the gods is once known 
through a Shaman it must be executed at once. ‘The 
offering I demand in the evening do not postpone till 
morning ; the offering I demand in the morning do not 
postpone till evening,’ is the exhortation of the gods in 
the invocation songs of the Shamans. If the rapid fulfil- 
ment is impossible, a figure of the animal to be sacrificed 
(horse, reindeer) is cut out of a piece of birch bark and 


EARLIER IRON AGE IN E. RUSSIA 123 


placed near the idol as an I.0.U., and destroyed when 
the vow is fulfilled.1 Why these promises to pay, if such 
they were, were not destroyed at Gliadénova, can be 
explained by supposing that the vows were often made 
before going on a dangerous journey or raid, and that 
many of those that had made vows lost their lives and 
were thus unable to fulfil their promise. 

Most of the metallic objects enumerated or described 
above are of local manufacture, but now it becomes 
necessary to notice briefly a series of silver vessels and 
coins, all of which were imported from a great distance 
during the fifth, sixth, and seventh centuries, and are found 
solely in the government of Perm. The silver vessels, 
some sixty in number, consisting of large dishes, bowls, 
ewers, chargers, etc., are for the most part specimens of 
Persian art during the Sassanide dynasty. A very few 
are of late Greek or of Greco-Roman work, somewhat 
earlier than the Persian. The former can be dated in 
some measure by the Sassanide coins struck in the reigns 
of seven kings from Yezdegerd I. (397-417) to Chosroes 11. 
(590-628), the last of the dynasty. Though it is unknown 
in what spot most of the vessels were found, in some 
instances the places are ascertained, and it is well to 
enumerate them, as it is an important point of history to 
determine, if possible, the routes by which they were 
brought within reach of the natives of the province. 
Beginning from the south, silver coins have been found 
near Sestakova in the district of Krasnouffmsk; silver 
vessels near Kliiti in the above district; silver vessels 
and coins near Vereino in the sub-district of Cusovsk 
on the Cusovaya; coins near Kovina, sub-district of Ust 

1 Munkdcsi, (1) p. 68. 


124 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Gdreva in the district of Perm; coins from the sub- 
district of Sludsk in the district of Perm; coins from the 
sub-district of Filatovsk in the district of Perm; a silver 
dish from the sub-district of RoZdestvensk in the district 
of Solikamsk; silver vessels from the sub-district of 
Kuvinsk in the above district ; coins from the sub-district 
of Koéebsk in the district of Cerdin; coins near Glazov 
in the government of Viadtka, a district that was formerly 
occupied by Cudes. The commerce that brought these 
precious commodities from Persia to Perm was interrupted 
for a time by the fall of the Sassanide dynasty, but was 
afterwards resumed by the victorious Arabs, and lasted for 
four centuries longer. This last fact is only mentioned 
because if the Arab trade-route can be ascertained the 
older Persian route was probably the same. Mr. Teplot- 
khov, from whom I have taken the information with regard 
to the finds of Sassanide treasures in the province of Perm, 
considers it probable that in the ninth and tenth centuries 
the merchandise of the Arabs was chiefly transported by 
water across the Caspian and up the Volga, but that in 
the eighth century, when this route was partly in the hands 
of the Khozars, they most likely used a road that actually 
existed to the east of the Caspian. Starting from the 
Amu Daria it skirted the Sea of Aral, passed through 
Ust Urt, the Kirgiz steppe, and then through the country 
of the BaSkirs to Bolgari. By this caravan route arrived 
Ibn Fozlan with a mission to the king of the Bolgars in 
922; and Abu Ahmed Andalusi, speaking of mammoth 
tusks, says they were brought from Bolgari to Khwaresm 
(Khiva), whither caravans constantly arrived from the 
above town. Mr. J. R. Aspelin, who was the first to call 
attention to the route by which such a number of objects 


C—O 


EARLIER IRON AGE IN E. RUSSIA 125 


of Persian art found their way to Perm, believes that the 
prehistoric trade-route from Persia to the Upper Kama led, 
not by the Volga, but along the IrtiS, that is to say through 
South-western Siberia. But Mr. Teplotikhov opines it is 
more probable the Persian wares came by the same caravan 
route, leading from the south of the Sea of Aral to the 
north-west, which was afterwards used by the Arabs. Start- 
ing somewhere near the Sea of Aral, it led through Ust Urt 
and the Kirgiz steppe, then went west to the Urals through 
the land of the BaSkirs, keeping along the northern course 
of the Biélaya and up the valley of its tributary the Ufa. 
The find of Sassanide vessels at Kliuti, in the district of 
Krasnoufimsk, where other Cudish antiquities are not 
found, evidently points to the latter direction.) From 
the last-named locality it was not far to the Silva, which 
falls into the Cusovaya at no great distance from the con- 
fluence of the latter with the Kama. 


1 Teplotikhov, (2) pp. 5-25, 39-42. 


CHAPTER III 
HISTORICAL NOTICES OF CLASSICAL AUTHORS 


‘As the sections on the earlier Iron Age in Russia have 
brought us down to historic times in the south of Europe, 
it is well, before proceeding to sketch the prehistoric 
history of the Finnish peoples, so far as it can be deduced 
from the culture-words in their vocabularies, to see what 
light the brief notices of classical and post-classical authors 
throw upon the huge territory in which we are interested, 
or upon its inhabitants. Herodotus, about the middle 
of the fifth century B.c., is the earliest writer that deals 
with any part of Russia, but as his knowledge was almost 
entirely confined to the north coast of the Euxine, he is 
of no great assistance. Indeed, it would be quite out of 
place to mention him at all here, were it not for the fact 
that several writers, including so well known and good a 
scholar as W. Tomaschek, identify several nations named 
by Herodotus with different Finnish peoples. For instance, 
the Budini are often identified with the Votiaks, who call 
themselves Ud-murt. W. Tomaschek does so, brings them 
as far south as Sardtov, and supposes they extended north- 
wards as far as the lower course of the Kama and the 
Biélaya, eastwards to the Urals and westwards to the Sura. 


Yet, except in the passage in which Herodotus assigns the 
126 


NOTICES OF CLASSICAL AUTHORS 127 


Budini a geographical position three hundred geographical 
miles north of the Sauromate and east of the Don, the 
context of the other places in which they are mentioned 
all point to a ‘more westerly position, somewhere near the 
upper waters of the Dniester or the Bug, where Ptolemy 
locates the Bodini The father of history expressly states 
the Budini dwelt in a densely wooded country, though in 
his time, just as now, from Sardtov northwards and west- 
wards the country for a great distance must have been very 
bare of timber. Along the banks of streams, and where 
the subsoil was damp, trees doubtless flourished, but it is 
well known that the ‘black earth’ districts were never 
covered with primeval forest. On these two grounds it 
seems to me doubtful if the Budini lived east of the Don 
at all. To connect the vocable Budini either with Votiak 
or Ud-mort seems questionable for several reasons. First, 
we do not know that this was the name they applied to 
themselves. Secondly, there is no assignable cause for 
dropping the 4, which itself is an impossible initial sound 
in original Finnish. Thirdly, an original Permian dental, 
unless supported by another consonant, seems to fall out 
or turns into /: eg. Ai=F. kale-; ku=F. hele-; ma, 
mu=F¥. mete-; va, vu=F. vete-; ku-ni=¥. kuto-a; s'ulem 
=F, sydame-, etc. 

W. Tomaschek also connects the name Thyssagetse with 
the Cusovaya, and identifies the people with the Voguls. 
The identification is ingeniously worked out, though hardly 
convincing, while to explain the four rivers that flowed 
through their territory into the Mzotis he has to do great 
violence to the text he is trying to elucidate. Nor can I 
find sufficient ground for believing that the Melanchlaine 
were Ceremis and that the Cannibals were Mordvins, for 


128 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


both these nations seem to have lived too far south to be 
connected with any Finnish people.} 

The next authority is Ptolemy, who wrote about the 
middle of the second century a.D., but sometimes in- 
corporated into his geography information of considerably 
earlier date. By this time the interior of Russia must have 
been partly explored. The geographical position of the 
sources of the Volga or Rha, a name still preserved by the 
Mordvins, and of the Don are given, as well as the points 
where they make a sharp, protracted bend, and the course 
of the Kama is also laid down. If, as seems probable, 
Ptolemy has taken the source of the Mologa for that of 
the Volga, his longitude is nearly right, though the latitude 
is a full degree too far north. But the point where the 
Kama falls into the Volga is 2}° too far west, and over 3° 
too far north, while the length he assigns to the Kama falls 
short of its real length, though it may reach to the con- 
fluence of the Cusovaya. The length of the Don is also 
too short, though the lower course below the bend is fairly 
exact. The neck where the Don and the Volga approach 
nearest each other was known, though it was placed fully 
7° too far north and about 24$° too far west. The mouth 
of the Volga is fairly accurate as regards longitude, but a 
full degree too far, north, while the mouth of the Don is 
about 24° too far west, and fully 7° too far north. 

At the bend made by the Don were the Perierbidi, who 
were a great people; above them Ptolemy names three 
others ; above them Royal Sarmatians, Modocz, and Horse- 
eating Sarmatians, and north of these the Hyperborean 
Sarmatians. All these tribes, including the most northerly, 
are expressly said to be a pastoral people, so that, starting 

1 Tomaschek, Bd. cxvii. pp. 8-r0, 17, 19-aI, 32-34. 


ar 


NOTICES OF CLASSICAL AUTHORS 129 


from the bend of the Don northwards, they could not have 
extended beyond the Volga, and, if the information is 
correct, some of these tribes roamed over a region where 
Mordvins are now found. Whether any of them are 
ancestors of the Mordvins is a question that cannot be 
answered, though it does not seem impossible. Near the 
supposed source of the Kama, but really about the con- 
fluence of the Cusovaya, were the Robosci, and to them 
perhaps belonged the objects of stone and copper that 
have been found near its mouth (p. 79), as well as the 
place near Gliadénova where they sacrificed to their gods. 
East of the Volga, but south of the Kama, were the Lice- 
eaters, the Materi, and the district Nesiotis. 

Although nothing definite can be learnt from a perusal 
of the ethnic names of Ptolemy, we have the assurance that 
the Don, the Volga, and the Kama were known for the 
greater part of their respective lengths by the middle of 
the second century, and possibly earlier. That means they 
had been traversed by persons of sufficient intelligence to 
measure roughly the length of the rivers on which they 
were travelling, and to note down the names of the nomadic 
tribes that lived on the banks. Along the Volga the note- 
book seems not to have been used after reaching the Okd, 
for pastoral tribes, owing to the forests, could hardly have 
pastured large herds west of that river. The left bank of 
the Volga appears to have been imperfectly known, which 
may mean that all the stopping-places were on the right 
or high bank. Along the banks of the Kama, which must 
have been thickly wooded, no notice is taken of the in- 
habitants, not even of the people who buried their dead in 
the cemetery at Andnino, till we reach the supposed source 
of the river. East of the Urals Ptolemy knew of no rivers 

I I 


130 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


that drain into the Siberian Ocean, a sufficient proof that 
his knowledge did not extend much beyond the 55th parallel 
of north latitude, and that no caravan route could have 
existed in the time of Herodotus that led up the valley of 
the Kama, across the Urals and up the IttiS, as W. Toma- 
schek maintains! 

As nothing was known of Central Russia, taking Moscow 
as a centre and describing a circle with a radius of at least 
two hundred miles, it is more convenient to leave Ptolemy for 
a while and hear what Tacitus at the end of the first century 
has to relate about the Atstii and the Fenni. He places 
the Asti, or Aistii, on the coast to the right of the Suevian 
Ocean, by which we have to understand somewhere on the 
east side of the Vistula, for his descriptive geography is 
hazy in the extreme. In dress and manners they resembled 
the Suevi, but they cultivated the earth with a patience 
that was hardly consistent with the natural laziness of 
Germans. They searched the sea for amber, which they 
termed g/ésum, and were the only people that gathered it. 
Being possessed of little iron, their favourite weapon was 
the club. They worshipped the mother of the gods, and 
in war placed the greatest reliance on carrying about with 
them the figure of a wild boar; by doing so they were 
perfectly secure. With regard to their language it had 
more affinity with that of Britain. 

In this brief account there are certainly discrepancies. 
In one breath the 4éstii are classed with Germans, in 
another their language is said to resemble rather that of 
Britain, while the only word quoted is a genuine Teutonic 
vocable. In the next section, however, Tacitus hesitates 
whether to collocate the Venedi and the Fenni with Ger- 

1 Tomaschek, (1) p. 780. 


ae 


NOTICES OF CLASSICAL AUTHORS | 131 


mans or Sarmatians, though he finally arrives at the con- 
clusion that the former must be ascribed to Germany, since 
they had settled habitations, knew the use of shields, and 
travelled on foot, while the Sarmatians lived on horseback 
or in wagons. His classification of ethnic groups was 
based therefore more on ethnography than on language. 
But if the introduction of the word g/sum was made 
through inadvertence, as might well be the case, the sub- 
stantial fact remains that the language of the Aéstii and 
the Suevi differed more than dialectically ; it belonged, in 
fact, to a different group. Tacitus further mentions in 
order from north to south the Fenni, the Venedi, and the 
Peucini without defining exactly their geographical position, 
though all must certainly be placed to the east of the 
Vistula. The Venedi led a wandering life and supported 
themselves by plunder, but at the same time they had 
settled abodes, used shields, and travelled on foot, not 
on horseback like the Sarmatians. The Fenni were ex- 
tremely ferocious, poor, and dirty; they possessed no 
weapons, save bows and arrows tipped with bone, no 
horses, and no fixed abode. They slept on the ground, 
lived partly on herbs, and dressed in the skins of wild 
animals. As Tacitus hesitated whether to class the Fenni 
among the Germans or not, there may be some exaggera- 
tion in his picture of them, and it does not correspond 
with what we have reason to believe was the civilisation 
of the Finns at the beginning of the present era. 

To Ptolemy the Vistula was the boundary between Ger- 
many and Sarmatia. He places the Venedic Gulf east of 
the mouths of the Vistula, and continues the coast in an 
easterly and north-easterly direction for several hundred 
miles. Along this stretch of sea coast he mentions four 


132 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


rivers—the Khronos, Rhubon (Rhudon), Turuntos, and 
Khesinos (Khersinos, Khesynos). In contradistinction to 
the rivers west of the Vistula, most of which bear names 
that recall the ancient designations, none of these four 
can now be recognised. This circumstance might arise 
either from a complete migration of the older population, 
which was succeeded by another that renamed the rivers, 
or from the information that Ptolemy used having been 
obtained from a foreign, perhaps a German, source. To 
the watershed, lying 800 to goo feet above the sea, from 
which these rivers descended, the Greek geographer and 
his successors gave several names; east of the Vistula it 
was termed the Venedic Hills; further east, but on the 
same parallel, it bore the name of Bodinon, and still further 
east, of Alaunon ; 24 degrees north and a little to the east 
came the hills called Rhipaia. According to Marctan of 
Heracleia the Khronos was the smallest of the four rivers, 
and both it and the Rhudon debouched into the Venedic 
Gulf, but the first rose in the Venedic Hills and the other 
in the hill Alanos (Alaunos). The two other rivers had 
their rise in the Rhipaian Hills. Smaller tribes near the 
Vistula and south of the Venedai were the Guthones, then 
the Phinnoi, then the Sulones. East of these, and also 
south of the Venedai, were the Galindai, Sudinoi, and 
Stavanoi. It has been suggested that the names Galindai, 
Sudinoi are perhaps preserved in the old Prussian districts 
of Galindia and Sudovia, the first lying west, the other 
north-east, of the Spirding See, though Ptolemy seems to 
place them south of the watershed. On the coast adjoin- 
ing the Venedic Gulf were the Veltai, north of them the 
Ossioi (Hosioi), and north of all the Carbones. East of 
the latter were the Karestai and Saloi, south of them the 


NOTICES OF CLASSICAL AUTHORS 133 


Agathursoi. Marcian makes the remark that the Agathosoi 
(Agathursoi) were a Sarmatian people in Europe that lived 
on the Khesynos. 

As the longitude of the mouth of the Vistula given by 
Ptolemy is only a little east of the true longitude, it may 
be the result of an astronomic observation ; but he places 
its latitude more than a degree and a half too far north. 
Every point on his map east of this river is extremely 
doubtful, for when his data are protracted to scale on a 
modern map his furthest point falls to the west of the 
north end of Lake Onega. As this point was supposed 
to be in the same latitude as Thule, which Ptolemy placed 
three degrees of latitude too far north, it must be lowered 
by that amount and set on the 6oth parallel, which runs 
through the head of the Gulf of Finland. And as the base 
point at the mouth of the Vistula is too far north, another 
degree or so must be subtracted, which places the furthest 
known point somewhere on the north-west coast of Esthonia. 
That Ptolemy’s knowledge should have extended so far 
north, if not further, is corroborated by the archeological 
objects found in Esthonia, some of which had evidently 
been brought there by a maritime route. Between the 
furthest point on the Esthonian coast and the Vistula 
the four rivers above mentioned must be sought. As 
the Khronos was the smallest of the four, and rose in the 
Venedic Hills, it might be the Pregel, which at various 
times has been known as the Pregora, Lipza, Lipsa, and 
Skarra ; the Rhubon, which also fell into the Venedic Gulf, 
must be the Niemen, Lith. NemG6nas ; the Turuntos is very 
difficult to identify, but I suppose it to be the Windau, 
Lith. Venta, though it does not rise anywhere near the 
Rhipaian Hills; the Khersinos is probably the Dvina. 


134 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


The Venedai occupied the south coast of the Gulf of 
Dantzig as far, perhaps, as the Niemen, a territory that 
in historic times belonged to the Old Prussians, a people 
of Lithuanian stock. The Veltai, who came next, may 
have been on the coast of Kurland, the Ossioi in Livland, 
and the Carbones in Esthonia. The only evidence we 
have regarding the nationality of the tribes hereabouts is 
of a negative nature, the chance remark that the Agathyrsi 
on the Khesynos (Dvina ?) were a Sarmatian people imply- 
ing at any rate that they were not Germans. Of course it 
is astonishing to find such well-known ethnical names as 
Agathyrsi and Aorsi, who came next below them, so far to 
the north, but a probable explanation is that local names 
resembling these in form have been transmuted into the 
above by a rash and thoughtless scribe. As the Agathyrsi 
were not on the coast, they may have lived about the 
Drissa, a northern affluent of the Dvina, and the four 
tribes mentioned by Ptolemy as occupying the country 
between the Agathyrsi and the Rhipaian Hills, in which 
the Khersinos or Khesynos took its rise, were possibly 
cantoned along its banks. If that is so the Dvina was 
navigated in boats that may have been taken as far as the 
site of Bieli in the government of Smolensk, where naviga- 
tion begins, and some, if not all, of the inhabitants of the 
valley were Sarmatians. 

If Ptolemy is to be credited, most, if not all, of the in- 
habitants of East Prussia in the middle of the second 
century were Slavs, for he calls them Venedai, or Wends. 
As he omits the Atstii he probably included them among 
the Venedai, who are expressly stated to have been a very 
great people. South of these, and presumably south of 
the Venedic Hiils, he sets Guthones, who are generally 


NOTICES OF CLASSICAL AUTHORS 135 


taken to be Goths, and whose position would therefore be 
in the north of Poland. South of them were the Phinnoi. 
Zeuss did not accept the Ptolemian account; he assumed 
that the name of Venedic Gulf was an entire misnomer, 
placed the Guthones on the coast instead of the Venedai, 
and affirmed it was impossible Ptolemy could have located 
the Phinnoi in their true position.! If by these we have 
to understand Lapps or Finns, it may certainly be granted 
that they never permanently lived near the right bank of 
the Vistula, and this position does not quite tally with that 
assigned to them by Tacitus. His Peucini inhabited the 
region north of the Carpathians, what is now Galicia ; north 
of them were plundering Venedi, who may be placed in 
Volhynia, and north of them were the Fenni, in what is 
now the government of Minsk. Both authorities place the 
latter people in the same latitude, or nearly so, but Ptolemy 
sets them about two degrees further west. Although it is 
difficult to believe that any Western Finns ever resided 
permanently so far to the west and south as the govern- 
ment of Minsk, and although their civilisation in the 
second century A.D. was very different from that portrayed 
by Tacitus, it is not impossible to suppose that they made 
hunting or predatory excursions in that direction. To 
judge from the practice of modern Zirians and Samoyedes, 
a hunting or trading expedition to a place several hundred 
miles distant from their headquarters is no great matter ; 
and the former, even in winter, travel very lightly attired, 
with no more property than can be placed on a light sledge 
and dragged along by its owner. At certain seasons, when 
wild fowl were in abundance, the Pinsk marshes may have 
presented great attractions, and they were well within 
1 Zeuss, pp. 266, 274. 


136 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


reach of Finns near the sources of the Volga, the Valda 
Hills, and other places where they can with certainty be 
postulated. On these excursions all the members of a 
large family or small clan would not take part ; some would 
be left behind to look after the few horses and cattle they 
possessed, to protect the huts, and till the ground. As 
iron was scarcely known, at any rate was very rare, the 
arrow-heads were tipped with bone. Supposing, as we are 
bound to do, that such respectable authorities as Tacitus 
and Ptolemy had sufficient warrant for the statements they 
advanced, it is only by a hypothesis of this kind that we 
can explain the presence of Finns not more than one 
hundred geographical miles from the banks of the Vistula. 

To return to the Aistii: they are mentioned in the sixth 
century by Jordanes, who speaks of them as a very peaceful 
people, living on the coast to the east of the Vidivarii, an 
aggregate of diverse nationalities that dwelt between the 
three mouths of the Vistula. They were therefore posted 
along the amber coast of East Prussia. In the ninth 
century, under the name of Estas, they are mentioned by 
Wulfstan in the description he gave to King Alfred of his 
voyage along the south coast of the Baltic. He sets them 
east of the mouth of the Vistula, and speaks of the Frische 
Haf as the Estmere. Estland is said to be very extensive, 
and to contain many towns, with a king over each. Honey 
and fish were there in abundance. The kings and the 
richest people drank mare’s milk, while the poor had to 
content themselves with mead, as beer was entirely un- 
known.! When a man died his body was left unburnt 


1 Ibn Dustah, about the year 912, says much the same of the Slavs. 
Only the great prince drank mare’s milk, the rest of the people drank 
mead (Khvolson, pp. 31, 32). 


Ne re i tel COCs 


NOTICES OF CLASSICAL AUTHORS | 137 


with his relations for a month, or even six months, accord- 
ing to the wealth and status of the defunct. During the 
whole of this interval the friends and relations were con- 
tinually feasting and amusing themselves till the day of 
cremation. All that was left of the deceased’s property 
after the long jollification was divided into several lots, 
and placed at different distances from the dead man’s 
home. The relatives and friends then raced for the 
lots, and the man with the best horse carried off the 
best share, which was also the furthest off. When this 
excitement was over the corpse was burnt with the 
weapons and clothing. As neither drinking mare’s milk 
nor racing in connection with funeral rites have been 
recorded as Teutonic customs, but are compatible with 
a people of Sarmatian descent or mode of life, the Aéstii 
of Tacitus may be regarded as the progenitors of the 
Estas of the ninth century. And as the Est name was 
eventually transferred to the Finnish Esthonians, it is 
probable that, taken in connection with the craniological 
and archzological data of previous chapters, the whole 
of the Baltic Provinces were once possessed by tribes of 
Lithuanian or Lettish stock. 

In a previous chapter it was mentioned that some of 
the best archeologists believe that the Baltic Provinces 
up to the fifth century were occupied by a Teutonic 
people who disappeared without leaving any trace of their 
presence, save the archeological finds of the earlier Iron 
Age. But as Ptolemy and other authorities make the 
Vistula the boundary between Germany and Sarmatia, 
and several indications seem to show that part of the 
information was received from German sources, such as 
words like Fenni, Asti, glesum, Khronos, Khersinos, 


138 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


it is singular that none of the intelligence from such 
sources led Ptolemy to suppose that Germans lived along 
the Baltic coast east of the Vistula. It is remarkable, 
too, that the so-called ‘face-urns’ of the Hallstadt period, 
so common and characteristic of the region west and 
south of Dantzig, are only known in one place east of 
the Vistula, quite close to the right bank. This is easily 
explained by the hypothesis that the river was the 
boundary between two distinct nationalities, though not 
otherwise. The question whether the Lithuanian peoples 
are recent intruders might be definitely answered, if we 
knew of any grounds for believing them to have been 
settled for a very long time on the south-east shores of 
the Baltic, where they can certainly be traced for the 
last eighteen centuries. Two words show they have not 
materially changed their abode for a long period of time. 
They have native words for the ‘eel’ and the ‘salmon,’ 
both of which have to migrate annually to the sea, and 
are found ir rivers that drain into the Baltic, but not in 
those that find an outlet in the Black Sea. This places 
the old home of the Lithuanian peoples north of the - 
watershed of all rivers that run southwards; an area that 
includes East Prussia, Poland, the Baltic Provinces, and 
the governments of Kovno, Suvalki, Vilna, Vitebsk, Pskov, 
and Petersburg. But Poland and East Prussia west of 
the Pregel may be excluded, as the word for ‘beech’ is 
a Teutonic loan word, and the eastern limit of the tree 
at present is formed by a line drawn from Konigsberg 
to Podolia. The original home of the Letto-Lithuanians 
may be sought chiefly in the valleys of the Niemen and 
the Dvina, with their tributaries. Though there are eels, 
there are no salmon in the Velfkaya, the Embach, or 


NOTICES OF CLASSICAL AUTHORS 139 


Lake Peipus, as their progress is stopped by the Falls 
of the Narva; but they are caught in the Narva below 
the Falls, in the Salis, and all other rivers that fall into 
the Baltic. Whether salmon are found in Lake Ilmen 
or the Volkhov I have no information, but a variety of 
the salmon frequents Lake Ladoga, and there is no 
obstacle to prevent their ascending the Volkhov to Lake 
Ilmen. Yet it is curious that at the prehistoric station 
on Lake Ladoga no salmon bones were observed. 
According to Professor Y. Koskinen, the first reliable 
information of a Finnish people being settled in the Baltic 
Provinces belongs to the middle of the ninth century. 
In his Life of St. Ansgarius, Rimbert mentions that the 
Kurs (Cori) had formerly been subjected to Sweden, 
though they had shaken off her yoke a long time ago. 
He then narrates how the Danes, about 853 a.p., had 
made an unlucky raid into the land of the Kurs, which 
was divided into six districts (evifates), and how after- 
wards the Swedes with better luck and the aid of Christ 
had again brought them into subjection. This shows 


- that in Rimbert’s time the Kurs were already settled on 


the Baltic coast, and this settlement must have occurred 
at least by the end of the eighth century, probably earlier. 
There is no doubt that the Livs and Kurs were one and 
the same people, and evidently about the same period the 
Ests settled in Esthonia and the Finns proper in Finland.! 
Against part of this statement Pastor Bielenstein raises an 
objection. Though he grants that the Kurs were un- 
doubtedly Finns, and that the name was probably given 
them by the Scandinavians, he considers it a mistake to 
suppose that a Finnish people must have covered the 
1 Koskinen, p. 360. 


140 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


whole area where the name Kur is found. For instance, 
the Kurs of the Kurische Nehrung have always been 
Letts, and the Lithuanians call the Letts that live among 
the Finnish Kurs—KurSei. In his opinion the Cori of 
St. Ansgarius, who fought with King Olaf in Apulia, not 
far from Schoden on the Bartau, were most likely Letts 
or Lithuanians, as no Finnish place-names occur in that 
part of Kurland.} 

This seems rather to invalidate the proposition that 
in the middle of the ninth century the Scandinavians 
knew of a Finnish people in the north-west of Kur- 
land. But as about 12 per cent. of Finnish place- 
names are to be found in the old province of Bihavelanc, 
through which the lower half of the Bartau flows, some 
Finnish Kurs must have been settled there. It is possible 
then that the Finnish (?) Cori on this occasion, when 
attacked by a stronger force of Swedes, were compelled 
to retire up the river, and were actually on Lithuanian 
ground when, feeling themselves cornered, they delivered 
battle. 

Although the first reliable notice of the Kurs is by 
Ansgarius, they are named by Saxo as having taken part in 
the great battle of Bravalla between the Swedes and 
Danes about the year 775, in which the former were 
victorious. On this notable occasion Kurlanders and 
Esthonians are said to have fought on the side of the 
Swedes, while Livonians and Slavs had sided with the 
Danes. It is possible, perhaps likely, that these names 
are the additions of a later time, but it shows the Finns 
were a fighting people and were accustomed to face the 
sea at the time when these names became attached to the 


1 Bielenstein, pp. 350, 351. 


a 3 


NOTICES OF CLASSICAL AUTHORS 141 


legend of the great battle. The Slavs here mentioned are 
the Wends of Pomerania, and it is to be remarked that 
the Letts and Lithuanians are passed over in silence; 
either they were not a very warlike people, or they were 
not distinguished from the Wends, as Ptolemy seems also 
to have done. 

Almost contemporaneous with the first notice of the 
Cori is the mention of the Ests, or Esthonians, under 
the name of Cudes, by Nestor, the earliest Russian 
annalist. In 859 he records that the Variags came from 
the other side of the sea and levied on the Cudes, Slavs, 
Merians, etc., a tribute of one white squirrel-skin per 


-head. Three years later they again visited Russia. But 


on this occasion the above-mentioned peoples refused to 
pay the tax, drove the enemy back across the sea, and 
made an interesting experiment in self-government. It 
did not however prove a success, Internal quarrels were 
so numerous that a deputation of Cudes, Slavs, etc., was 
sent to the country of the Variags to solicit the loan of an 
impartial prince, strong enough to keep the peace. The 
result was that Rurik and his two brothers came to Russia, 
built the town of Ladoga, and became the founders of the 
Russian Empire.! So far as we can judge from the brief 
entries of the annalist, the Cudes and Slavs were apparently 
on a footing of equality. Both peoples rose against the 
Variags, and both took part in the council that determined 
to summon a foreign prince who could hold the balance 
evenly between the conflicting interests of Finns, Slavs, 
etc. - The Cudes were probably as well, if not better, 
armed than the Slavs. If Ibn Dustah’s information is to 
be relied upon, the latter fought on foot, and were only 
1 Akiander, pp. 12-24. 


142 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


armed with javelins, spears, and shields. In addition 
to these, the Cudes might have had swords as well as 
bows and arrows. At any rate they and the Merians 
took part with the Variags and Slavs, not only in Oleg’s 
expedition that led to the capture of Smolensk in 882, 
but also in his far more important campaign against the 
Greeks in Constantinople in 907. Those of the Finns 
that lived to return to their homes no doubt brought back 
their share of the ransom that the Greeks had to pay 
to Oleg to avoid the complete sack of the imperial city. 
He had demanded and obtained twelve grivnas, or about 
six lbs., of silver for each of his fighting men. For more 
than a hundred years afterwards the Finns and Slavs seem 
to have lived together on friendly terms. It is not till the 
year 1030 that this happy state of things was disturbed by 
Yaroslav, who invaded the country of the Cudes, conquered 
them, and laid the foundations of Yiiriev (Dorpat). Twelve 
years later his son Vladimir made a campaign against the 
Yems, now mentioned for the first time, subdued them, 
and took many prisoners. The Russians were not however 
always successful, for in 1054, when Ostromir and his 
Novgorodan soldiers made an incursion upon the Cudes, 
he was killed, and many of his followers. Generally 
speaking, however, the Cudes came off second-best, and 
no doubt were greatly outnumbered.! As the entries in 
the Chronicle are extremely brief, and tell us nothing of 
the customs or social life of the Finnish tribes, and often 
leave their geographical position uncertain, it is unneces- 
sary to pursue them further. 

Though mentioned earlier, not much is known of the 
Livs till the arrival of the Germans at the mouth of the 


1 Akiander, pp. x5, 19; Paris, i. pp. 35, 36 


NOTICES OF CLASSICAL AUTHORS 143 


Dvina in 1159. When Meinhart arrived in 1186 he found 
them paying tnbute to King Vladimir of Polotsk, and the 
same winter the Lithuanians devastated the country and 
carried away many captives. His well-intentioned efforts 
to convert the Pagan Livs were not crowned with im- 
mediate success; when by promises of protection against 
their enemies a few had been enticed to accept baptism, 
even these few persons took the first convenient oppor- 
tunity of washing it off in the waters of the Dvina. The 
German chroniclers tell us almost nothing of the Paganism 
of the Livs. A Bull of Pope Innocent in 1190 avers that 


_the Livs paid the honour due to God to brute beasts, to 


leafy trees, to clear water, to verdant herbs, and to unclean 
spirits. ‘They seem to have cut the images of their gods 
on the boughs of the sacred trees, and it is known that the 
Esthonians had images of their gods in a beautiful wood 
in Wierland. The offerings to the gods consisted of a dog 
or a ram, occasionally of a man. ‘To discover the will of 
the gods before important undertakings different modes of 
sortilege were employed; and to this punctilious observ- 
ance of the Livs a German missionary bishop once owed 
his life. They were under the impression that the sacrifice 
of the bishop would have a beneficial effect upon the 
crops. But they first consulted the oracle by making a 
horse step over a lance. As it crossed the spear with the 
foot that showed the victim was unsuitable—probably the 
left foot—the life of Bishop Theodorich was spared. How 
the Livs disposed of their dead is not recorded, but the 
Kurs practised cremation, and the funeral ceremony was 
accompanied with loud lamentation. The Livs did not 
form a connected state under a common head, but were 
under a number of small elders, whom Henry of Lettland 


144 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


generally terms ‘senzores.’ Besides these there was a class 
of wealthier people, called by the chronicler ‘frimores, 
meliores,’ from whose families hostages were taken. Some of 
the elders were entitled kings—without meaning, however, 
that they exercised authority over the other elders. And 
the district over which an elder ruled was termed ‘f7o- 
vincia, or in the language of the Ests— ‘ kylegunda,’ 
originally a loan word from the Scandinavians. The 
Livs were armed with swords, lances, javelins, bows, and 
shields, and fought both on foot and on _ horseback. 
Their many wars were chiefly predatory expeditions 
against their neighbours; at first against the Letts, whom 
they despised, and in later times against the Esthonians, 
Zemgalls, Lithuanians, and Russians. These incursions 
were carried on with great barbarity and devastation of 
property, the men being all killed, while the women and 
children were generally led captive. In this, however, they 
were no worse than their neighbours, and not so bad as 
the Letts, whom Henry describes as the most cruel of all 
people. The Livs, when not fighting and marauding, 
occupied themselves with agriculture, fishing, hunting, 
cattle-rearing, and bee-keeping. Before the arrival of the 
Germans they had some trade to boast of, for Adam of 
Bremen, writing of Livland some one hundred years before 
that event, says that it was rich in gold. Henry, too, relates 
that the sons of Lettish elders, after a raid into Esthonia, 
brought back three lispunds (sixty lbs.) of silver, besides 
other booty. Though the Livs used ships and boats, it 
is never mentioned that they used them for piratical ex- 
peditions. In this they differed from the Kurs, who, before 
the advent of the Germans, had the reputation of being 
noted pirates, and in conjunction with the islanders of 


—————— OO 


NOTICES OF CLASSICAL AUTHORS 145 


Oesel extended their depredations as far as Denmark and 
Sweden.? 

Although the Kurs are mentioned earlier than the Letts 
in Kurland, it does not follow that they were the older 
inhabitants. There is ground for believing them to be 
intruders. Both in Kurland and Livland, to judge from 
the evidence of place-names, the Finns only occupied a 
fringe of territory along the coast, for Finnish names on 
the map gradually diminish in number as we recede from 
the sea. Their name, too, for the Dvina (Véna, Viaina) 
seems borrowed from a Slav dialect.? 


1 Wiedemann, pp. xxx, lvi, 1xi-lxiv. 
3 Bielenstein, pp. 348, 357, 365. 


CHAPTER IV 
THE PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION OF THE FINNS 


Havinc reviewed some of the craniological, archxological, 
and historical facts that bear more or less directly on the 
Finns, we have now to turn to comparative ethnography 
and philology for any help they may afford towards 
enabling us to form a slight picture of their prehistoric 
condition. Theoretically the prehistoric past may be 
divided into two divisions, hereafter to be mentioned as 
the first and second periods. To the first belong words 
that are common to the Ugrian and the various Finnish 
groups ; these originated in Asia, when Finns and Ugrians 
seem to have lived in close contact, for the physical and 
craniological differences between the Finns and Ugrians 
are too great to allow us to suppose they are descended 
from a common stock. But they were neighbours, living 
under conditions of life precisely similar. Though we 
have to believe that once the remotest ancestors of the 
Finnish peoples lived in Asia, it is, I think, impossible to 
trace them there; the inference is made purely on lin- 
guistic grounds. In the craniological chapter we have 
found that the crania at Voldésovo, and at the Ladogan 
station seem to have analogies with existing Eastern 
Finnish skulls. So there is ground for assuming that 


the earliest neolithic inhabitants of Central Russia were 
146 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 147 


ancestors of Finns that had somehow reached Europe 
and settled on the Oka. Having done so, it is difficult 
to imagine any external cause that could oblige them to 
leave it. For though they had nomadic instincts, like 
all other nomads they did not roam at large, but over 
a certain more or less defined district, which they regarded 
as their own. They were so isolated from the rest of the 
world that no direct outside pressure could be brought to 
bear upon them. The only influences that could touch 
them and induce some of them to move were of an internal 
nature: the natural increase of population, famine, pestil- 
ence. Of these the most efficient factor would be the first ; 
to a people living only on fish, shell-fish, and wild animals, 
famine of a very severe kind would probably be of rare 
occurrence ; but when too many members of a clan died 
at one time the remainder would very likely abandon the 
locality, at any rate for a time, and migrate elsewhither. 
I assume, therefore, for the present—the reasons can best 
be brought forward at the end of this chapter,—that at 
the end of the first period the undivided Finns had 
entered Europe, bringing with them, of course, various 
simple notions embodied in the language they had 
acquired in Asia; and that the earliest neolithic settle- 
ments in the Volga region of Central Russia belong to 
this time. As the settlements on Lake Ladoga and the 
Upper Volkhov are later than those on the Oké, the move- 
ment of the Finns was evidently westward, and the finds 
at Fatidnovo and Galit seem to show that, even on Euro- 
pean soil, Finns and Ugrians lived at no great distance 
from each other for part of the second period. 

The second period embraces the time between the first 
settlements in Europe and the first contact with an Iranian 


al 


148 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


civilisation, which may have taken place from four hundred 
to six hundred years before the present era. It covers a 
long lapse of time, and may be divided into an earlier and 
later half. The first half is characterised by a series of 
words common to all, or nearly all, the East and West 
Finnish groups, and we have to suppose they had not yet 
split into different linguistic groups, though various frac- 
tions of the united body may have lived at very consider- 
able distances apart. The second half is marked by words 
that are confined to two or three members of the Finnish 
family. As all know, numerous words in every language 
die out and are replaced by others for reasons that can 
only be guessed at. So it would be wrong to maintain 
that all new additions to a language exactly coincide with 
the new ideas conveyed by these new words. For instance, 
the Lapps have borrowed a word for ‘moon’ from the 
Scandinavians, the Finns a word for ‘neck’ from the 
Lithuanians, and yet these new words conveyed no new 
ideas. Sometimes in certain classes of words, such as the 
names of spirits, divinities, sacred animals, animals and 
fish caught for food, we can perceive a reason for borrowing 
a new term from a foreign language. There was a distinct 
reluctance, amounting to fear, that prevented a native from 
using these names, so that either an epithet or allusive 
term was employed, or a word borrowed from a foreigner. 
Hence we readily understand how it came to pass that to 
certain powerful spirits, whose real name the Lapps were 
afraid to use, were given the Norwegian name of Svor 
Junkare, and why the Finns gave a name of Scandinavian 
origin to their spirits of nature—Aa/fa, It is probably 
some such reason that has caused the want of common 
terms for sun, moon, sky, spirits, and for most of the 


ee aA 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 149 


common wild animals among the Eastern and Western 
Finns. But nevertheless on the whole the new words of 
the second period must be taken to mean increase of ex- 
perience, modification of the ancient mode of life, and a 
slight forward development of the different groups made 
independently of each other during the latter half of it. 
They are also to be considered as older than the first 
contact with an Iranian or European civilisation. But of 
many genuine words confined to the West Finns alone we 
cannot always be quite sure whether they came into use 
before or after this event in the history of their civilisation. 

The late Professor Ablayist.has.already drawn us a picture 
of the prehistoric civilisation of the Finns that has often 
been referred to, but now I propose to supplement it in 
some respects by drawing upon the existing customs and 
beliefs of the Eastern Finns, and laying more emphasis on 
the psychological element. But in doing so it must be 
borne in mind that they too are more or less civilised, for 
the most part Christianised, and living under conditions 
very different from those of their prehistoric ancestors. 
From about the eighth to the thirteenth century they were 
exposed to the civilising influence of Bolgars and Turks, 
who have left many traces of their superior civilisation and 
higher religion in a series of loan words. All that is known 
of their sacrificial rites, their ‘divinities, their ideas about 
the phenomena of nature, cannot therefore be accepted 
without considerable reduction and allowance for sub- 
sequent growth and accretion. The mere passage from a 
hunting and fishing stage to one that is almost purely 
agricultural, the change from a nomad to a settled mode 
of life, undoubtedly affected the class of gods to whom 
they paid especial worship. ‘To a hunting nomad the idea 


150 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


of a great and benevolent earth-mother that gave forth of 
the fruits of the earth in due season, of a beneficent sun- 
god that ripened them, could never occur. Hence all 
notice of gods whose being and worship entirely depends 
on the practice of agriculture by their worshippers may be 
excluded from our survey. The beliefs, customs, and so 
forth, of the Ostiaks, Voguls, Samoyedes, and Altaian Turks 
are on the whole more likely to tally with those of the 
prehistoric Finns than any other people on the globe, 
though they too have been subjected to various civilising 
influences for which allowance must be made. 


THE Gops AND DIVvINITIES. 


Had the Finns of the first and second periods any notion 
of the supernatural? This question, as it seems to me, 
must be answered in the negative. At the first beginning 
of humanity on the globe there could have been no such 
notion, for before it can be formed at all some idea must 
exist of nature and the natural. As an idea, Nature is so 
complex that a long time must have elapsed before man 
could form the least conception of it. Yet at a very early 
period the human mind, working unconsciously, must have 
framed categories and separated the phenomena of nature 
into those of daily occurrence and those that happen at 
longer or shorter intervals. Under the first category would 
fall the relative weights of common things, such as stones 
and feathers, the fact that if a thing dropped from one’s hand 
it fell to the ground, the recurrence of night and day, the 
heat of the sun, etc. These being facts of daily experience 
excited no astonishment. Under the second category 
would come the distinction between a hot and cold or dry 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 151 


and wet portion of the year; the phases of the moon; the 
fact that fish run up rivers at a certain season and return at 
another ; that certain animals frequent particular parts of 
the country at one time more than other. These and 
many other similar observations that they made would 
seem to them, no doubt, what we should now call natural ; 
that is to say, these phenomena excited no astonishment. 
But others of uncertain periodicity, and recurring at long 
intervals, such as eclipses, earthquakes, comets, famines, 
and the like, would certainly create wonder, sometimes 
fear, and might therefore be termed wonders, marvels, or 
miracles in the old sense of the word, but not supernatural, 
for they had no conception of nature as a starting-point 
from which the idea of supernatural could be deduced. 
Their gods even, conceived probably as invisible beings 
with purely human attributes, the attributes of humanity at 
a very slow stage, could in no sense be considered super- 
natural. Men could also render themselves invisible. 
The gods too were so human that they could be forced to 
act in accordance with the wishes of their worshippers, 
and could likewise be punished. But in course of time, 
though not everywhere at the same time, to the worship of 
the older gods, that resided chiefly in trees, wells, rivers, 
and animals, was added the worship of a higher order of 
divinity whose seat was in the sky. This was the result 
of the gradual development of a new order of ideas. Just 
as a man in need of anything applies first to his friends or 
neighbours nearest at hand before turning to a distant 
stranger, sO man in the early stages of his history had 
recourse, when in danger or trouble, to the helpers that 
seemed nearest at hand, that dwelt, as he believed, in the 
trees and waters at his very door, rather than to the distant 


152. PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


heaven, to which no human voice could be expected to 
reach. 

At last a change took place in this respect. Some men, 
resolving to leave no stone unturned, ventured to seek aid 
from the sky-god, who in time would gain a large circle of 
worshippers. The intellectual energy and development 
of these adherents of the new god would no doubt be 
superior to that of the adherents of the older gods. Yet 
to them the sky-god was not supernatural, though a step 
was taken in that direction; he was now supermundane: 
Partly from his elevated position, partly perhaps from 
regarding the sun as his eye, the sky-god would in time 
acquire the attribute of omniscence; though at first this 
would merely be superhuman, not supernatural knowledge ; 
it would exceed the knowledge of any one man, but would 
only be equal to the sum of knowledge of all men, what 
each man knew of his own actions. Again, instead of attri- 
buting storms, thunder, lightning, rain, and drought to the 
anger of witches, sorcerers, or of the inferior order of gods 
that dwelt in trees and stones, these phenomena were now 
ascribed to the will of the god in the sky above. This 
tended to produce the impression that he was all-powerful 
as well as omniscient. Still, with all this, his power was 
merely superhuman in the sense that it exceeded the 
capacity of any one man or body of men. The idea of 
his being a supernatural personage could only arise when 
his omnipotence was raised to such a pitch that he became 
thought of as the creator of the world, of nature as we 
perceive it. As the creator is necessarily greater than the 
created, it now for the first time became possible to regard 
him as a being transcending nature in every conceivable 
way—as supernatural, in fact. The notion ofa supernatural 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 153 


being or god, wielding supernatural power, must, if this 
view is correct, be of late origin. It never could develop 
among a people in whose pantheon there was no creator 
of the world. If such a people possess a notion of the 
supernatural they must have borrowed it. 

It cannot be doubted that the prehistoric Finns, when 
they stood in the open air and gazed around, were under 
the impression that nearly every object in nature was the 
habitation of a spirit. This cosmological theory naturally 
accounted for the life and movement they perceived around 
them ; even inanimate objects, like rocks and stones, re- 
quired an active cause to account for their presence, for 
their difference in size, and for their often strange shapes. 
Of course, all spirits were not of equal value or of equal 
strength: that would depend in some measure on the size 
of their habitation. The spirit of the sky was greater than 
an ordinary tree, stone, or house spirit. So a Samoyede 
wizard in addressing his familiar spirit says: ‘I cannot 
approach Num’ (the god or spirit of the sky), ‘he is too 
far away; if I could reach him I should not beseech thee, 
but should go myself, but I cannot.’? The Samoyedes 
of the government of Tomsk, who are partly Christianised, 
fear Num to such an extent that they pronounce his name 
with evident trembling, and prefer the use of an epithet 
meaning ‘the watcher over reindeer.’ Tiirm, the sky- 
god of the Northern Ostiaks, who only speaks in thunder 
and the angry voice of the storm, is an inexorable being 
whom no prayers can reach, whom no offerings can pro- 
pitiate. He is therefore not the object of any worship, and 
Ostiaks in need of help must turn to a spirit of lower 
degree. Here we see that the physical remoteness of 


2 Castrén, (2) i. 207. 9 [bid., (2) ii, 162. 3 /did., (2) i. 30%, 909. 


154 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


the sky from the earth gave rise to the idea of an inacces- 
sible god. Like the Ostiaks, the Turks of the Altai do 
not turn for help to the highest god, but to deities of lower 
rank.! Some Votiaks allege another reason for not paying 
full honour to Inmar, the god of the sky. He is very good, 
‘and so they do not fear him, worshipping him with prayers, 
but not with sacrifices. Though, in the above instances, 
the sky is conceived mainly as a spirit, the latter was not 
quite incorporeal. To the Samoyede the rainbow is ‘Num’s 
mantle’; to a Ceremis it is ‘the bow of Jumo’ (sky, god), 
the thunderbolt is his stone (/umon ki); to a Vogul the 
lightning is ‘the arrow of Tarim.’ Compared with the 
Northern Ostiaks, the Voguls have greatly modified their 
view of the sky-god Numi Tarim. He is a great hunter, 
the bear is his dear daughter, and they pray to him as ‘our 
father’ to let down fish and wild animals from above.’ He 
is therefore no longer inaccessible to direct entreaty, which 
shows a later stage in religious development ; the fear of 
using his name has passed away, and the feeling of distance 
from him is removed or lessened. The ascription of the 
epithet ‘father’ is not, as might be supposed, the result of 
Christian influence, for in the heroic poems of the Irti§ 
Ostiaks, which go back to about the thirteenth or fourteenth 
century, a prince who is hard pressed in battle calls to his 
god in the following terms: ‘Is it possible the Golden 
Light (the Sky-god), my father, has decreed that common 
soldiers should take my iridescent scalp?’* Judging from 
their poetry, the Tiirim of the Southern Ostiaks on the 
IrtiS was very different from the Tiirm of the Northern 
Ostiaks described by Castrén. The former is rather a 


1 Radloff, ii. 8. 2 Ostrovski, p. 33. 
3 Munkacsi, (1) pp. 185, 186.' 4 Patkanov, (1) pp. 48, 49. 


ee 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 155 


mild god ; ‘father’ is his constant epithet, and he dispenses 
good solely from his merciful nature and his love for man. 
And judging from the epic poetry he does not seem to 
have demanded any worship, sacrifice, or prayers. Even 
animals in danger cry for help to him, and never in vain. 
It would be interesting to know whether this revolution 
of ideas with respect to the character of the sky-god was 
independent of all foreign influence ; it is difficult to believe 
that it could have taken place spontaneously. 

Num, like the Turk. fefirs, means ‘sky’ and ‘god,’ and 
among the Finns we find the same confluence of two 
distinct ideas in a single word. 


1 sky. 4 god. 3 air. 4 Prop. name. 


Though F. jumala now means ‘god,’ the. corresponding 
word in Ceremis also means ‘sky,’ and the Mordvin for 
‘lightning,’ jondo/, stands for jom-dol, ‘the fire of jom.’? 
On the other hand, the F. s/ma, ‘air,’ corresponds with 
the Permian words for ‘air,’ ‘sky,’ ‘god,’ and the proper name 
Ilmari, lL. Iimaris, who is sometimes substituted for the 
native wind-god, is formally the equivalent of V. s#mar, 
‘sky,’ ‘god.’ It can hardly be doubted that ‘sky’ is the older 
meaning, though it may always have been associated with 
the idea of ‘sky-spirit,’ and that ‘god’ is secondary. It 
would be interesting to know at what stage in the history 
1 Patkanov, (2) pp. 100, ro. 2 Paasonen, (x) p. 12. 


156 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


of the Finns this differentiation of meaning took place. 
With the Western Finns it seems to have taken place as 
early as the fourth period, for otherwise it is unintelligible 
why they should have borrowed from the Lithuanians a 
word for the physical sky, /aévas, unless Jumala had ceased 
to bear this meaning, and meant only the sky-spirit, the 
personality that seemed to be behind all aérial phenomena. 
At first, there was only one god, jumala, jumo, inmar, the 
spirit of the sky, but in course of time these words were 
used in the plural, and employed as epithets to a number 
of deities. As god of the sky, Jumala, like Num, no doubt 
sent forth thunder, rain, snow, and wind on luckless mortals, 
but whether he received worship is doubtful; at any rate, 
most of the worship appears to have been reserved for 
deities that seemed nearer at hand. 

The question may be raised whether all aérial pheno- 
mena, such as thunder, lightning, wind, snow, and rain, 
were Originally attributed to the will of the one sky-spirit, 
or whether the earlier belief was that they were due to the 
action of separate and independent spirits. At present 
the Eastern Finns specialise most of these phenomena, 
so that each has its father, mother, ruler, or other function- 
ary who directs its activity. They also specialise their 
‘domestic tutelary deities in the minutest way; there is 
one for the hearth, another for the courtyard, one for the 
cowhouse, another for the stable, for the sheep-pen, etc. 
As the names for these buildings are for the most part 
loan words of comparatively recent origin, the specialisa- 
tion of guardian spirits goes hand in hand with the increase 
of civilisation. But the Samoyedes, whose lack of culture 
is much greater than that of the most backward of the 
Eastern Finns, take the above phenomena en d/o, and 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 157 


. refer all to the will of a single spirit. Hence there is 


reason to assume that in prehistoric times the Finns gene- 


. rally attributed these diverse operations of nature to the 


active will of a single being, the spirit that dwelt in the 
sky. In fact, to some of them, such as rain and wind, 
short of a hurricane, they must have been from their mode 
of life comparatively indifferent. 

What conception the prehistoric Finns had of the 
spirits of nature we do not know, and there is no common 
term by which they were designated. By the Eastern 
Finns at present they are simply called the ‘father, mother, 
uncle, aunt, ruler, prince, or god’ of each particular 
element, which shows that they are generally thought of as 
anthropomorphic, and they do sometimes appear in human 
shape. Once when a Votiak shot a water-spirit, ou-murt, 
the water was tinged with his blood.! And if the blood of 
a forest spirit, known as favs murt, is shed, from each 
drop a fresh spirit comes into existence.? The Mordvins 
sometimes picture to themselves the water-mother as a 
beautiful woman with silky hair and girt with a silver 
girdle ; but sometimes she is seen in the shape of a huge 
fish, surrounded by much smaller fish, which she sends 
away to different rivers and lakes. At times her children 
fall into the fisherman’s net, and if he has pity on the 
weeping water-spirit he will be rewarded with a good catch 
of fish. At other times she has been seen as a bird 
skimming over the surface of the water. The ‘forest- 
wife’ of the Mordvins may appear as a beautiful woman, 
but she can change her shape and become manifest in the 
form of fire or a whirlwind ; occasionally she comes to a 


1 Smirnov, (2) p. 20. # Wichman, (1) p. 9. 
3 Smirnov (4), p. arr. 


158 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


village as a cat, dog, horse, or wolf.! By the Votiaks the 
vu-murt or water-spirit is sometimes seen as a huge pike,? 
a fish that is held sacred by the Voguls,® and was probably 
sacred to the prehistoric Finns. But these anthropomor- 
phic and animal shapes assumed by spirits may be later 
developments, for originally spirits seem to have been 
invisible. ‘Transition forms of the belief are seen in the 
Votiak house-spirit, korka murt, who is an aged man in 
a sheepskin coat, whom it is possible to feel and to seize, 
and who yet is invisible ; # as also in the Lapp belief that the 
spirits of the dead are visible, but not in corporeal form ; and 
that they cannot be squeezed or tired, and move at a terrible 
rate.5 The Permian superstition that a man can steal 
without being seen, if he provide himself first with the 
hand, tooth, or shirt of a dead man, is only explicable by 
a belief that the spirits of the dead are invisible. But 
the Samoyede belief is that spirits, for which there are 
several names, are only visible to wizards, not to ordinary 
mortals, except so far that some of them have their habita- 
trons in queer-looking stones, trees, natural objects, or in rude 
dolls dressed like aSamoyede.’ Toacertain extent it would 
seem that all spirits were not considered immortal, for the 
Samoyedes in the government of Tomsk have each a 
special idol god, who, at the death of his worshipper, is 
supposed to die too, and at any rate is thrown into the 
river.2 So too the household and clan gods of the Ostiaks 
are to all appearance merely artificial dolls, decked out in 
their best. But that originally the spirit was thought of as 


1 Smirnov, (4) p. 218. 2 Verestagin, p. 79. 
3 Munkacsi, (x) pp. 67, 186. 4 Smirnov, (2) p. 194. 
5 Von Diiben, p. 247. 6 Smirnov, (3) p. 247. 


7 Castrén, (2) i, 209; ii, 162. 8 Castrén, (2) ii. 164. 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 159 


distinct from the stone, branch, or idol in which he was 
located, is shown by the belief of the Voguls. According 
to this, the ghosts or manes of the heroes dwell in the 
place of their former exploits, where they are represented 
under the form of images. These images are called pupy, 
while the indwelling spirit, which appears with lightning 
speed when summoned by the magic power of an incanta- 
tion, is termed aafiy, ‘the prince,’ or #ai, ‘the princess.’ 
The images of the gods are often replaced by a natural 
stone or rock formation, which the people believe to be 
transformations of the heroes. And when the Voguls are 
preparing a place of sacrifice, they set up in the front part 
of it a birch sapling to serve as a sacred resting-place for 
the god who is to be invoked.! So too the Votiak house- 
hold god, vorsud, ‘the giver of luck,’ is supposed to live 
either in a special chest or basket, in which the offerings 
are laid, or in branches of fir specially strewn in a particu- 
lar place, but is otherwise invisible. The household spirit 
of the Ceremis is also embodied in a fagot of sticks,? and 
the se#fa of the Lapps, as a rule, are only to be seen in a 
pile of stones or in a human figure rudely blocked on a 
wooden post. Yet in spite of the invisibility of the spirits, 
they were so far cast in a human mould that they needed 
to be fed, though not with the same regularity as human 
beings. The Samoyedes, Ostiaks, Voguls, and Lapps all 
smear the mouths of their idols with blood and fat. If the 
spirit was not embodied in an idol, the food-offerings had 
to be made in other ways. For instance, when the fishing 
on the Ob is bad, the Ostiaks throw a reindeer into it to 
propitiate the spirit. Generally speaking, when an animal 
is sacrificed, most of the flesh is eaten by the worshippers, 
1 Munkacsi, (1) p. 67, 68. 3 Smirnov, (1) 174. 


160 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


though some is set aside for the god. The sacrifice is in 
the nature of a feast, at which the god is an invited guest. 
Among the Southern Ostiaks, when a god has received an 
offering he is bound to fulfil the request of the Ostiak. If 
he refuses he must be chastised by man. Thus the shaman 
exhorts the tribal god to be compliant, and its owner does 
the same to his house-god. If the warning is of no avail, 
and the god remains obdurate, he is threatened with pun- 
ishment, and this is executed forthwith. The image is 
thrown on the ground, beaten, and trampled under foot; 
sometimes it is burnt and replaced by a new one that has 
witnessed the chastisement.! Little wonder then that 
prayers and offerings were made by preference to the lower 
divinities who could thus be coerced by worshippers, whose 
actions were regulated by the Bismarckian maxim, do ut 
des. 

To a people that lives. by fishing and hunting the 
elements are clearly of far less importance than to an 
agricultural people. To the former wind, snow, and rain 
come as a matter of course, and are regarded with stoicism 
and indifference. The spirit that lives in a large river, 
that gives or withholds fish; the spirit of the forest that 
owns the wild animals with which it abounds; the house- 
hold spirit that looks after the welfare of the family ;—these 
are the divinities the hunter and fisherman is most inclined 
to worship with sacrifices and offerings. So it is not sur- 
prising the Ostiaks should esteem the river Ob above all 
other gods, should address it with their warmest prayers, 
and approach it with their richest offerings.2 The Lapps 
made prayers and offerings to the water-spirits, cacZe olmak, 
to obtain fish, though in East Finmark there was a special 

1 Patkanov, (2) p. 112, 2 Castrén, (2) ii. 108. 


, 


Oe ee, A 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION | 161 


fish-god, eu/s shme/,1 a term which is evidently of later date. 
As the household god looked after the general interests of 
the family he could be prayed to give so important an 
article of food as fish, and accordingly the Samoyedes turn 
to their Aake when they want a good haul? But a water- 
spirit can be looked upon from another point of view: he 
it is that causes people to be drowned. To the Ostiaks, 
the water-spirit, Xu/’, is an evil and destructive being ;® to 
the Votiaks the ou-murt (water-man) is a thoroughly evil 
spirit.4 The water-spirits, vu-murt, ou-kuo, who live in 
rivers, brooks, and lakes, are a numerous family, and their 
number is increased by men that are drowned, who sub- 
sequently become their servants ® or have to act as their 
horses.6 After bathing the Mordvins say: ‘Thanks to 
the Ved afa (water-father), the silver-bearded,’ and in a 
story he is represented as seizing by the beard a man who 
was drinking, and not releasing him till he had promised 
to give his son to his assailant.’ 

The forest-god of the Lapps, Zaid olmat, ruled over all 
forest animals, which were regarded as his herds, and luck 
in hunting, or the reverse, depended on his will. His favour 
was so important that, according to one author, they made 
prayers and offerings to him every morning and evening. 
Under his special protection was the bear.’ The ‘forest 
men’ of the Votiaks send game to the hunter and food to 
cattle.® All the forest animals are in the power of the 
‘forest-uncle’ or the ‘forest-man.’ He is of human shape, 
and is inclined to be bad-tempered ; to see him brings mis- 


1 Friis, p. 100, 3 Castrén, (2) i. 209. 3 {bsd., (2) i. 307. 

4 Ostrovski, p. 33. 5 Wichman, (1) p. 10. 

6 Smirnov, (2) p. 202. 7 Smirnov, (4) pp. 210, 2x1, 213. 

8 Friis, pp. 94, 95; Von Diiben, p. 244. ® Smirnov, (2) p. 198, 
I L 


162 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


fortune, usually sickness or death. In time of old sacrifices 
were made to him oftener than now, but in the district of 
Sarapul they are still made in autumn under a pine in the 
forest. The offerings consist of brandy, bread, a bull, and 
a greyram. In some places the bread is placed on the 
branches of a tree for the master of the forest, and he is 
implored to give of his forest animals, his squirrels, foxes, 
or wild boars. The Ceremis bring offerings to the forest- 
spirit that he shall not entangle them in the forest.? 

Like the Samoyedes, the Ostiaks are divided into many 
small clans (séégt), each composed of a number of families, 
having a common ancestry, that do not intermarry. Each 
clan has a common cult, and from time immemorial has had 
its own images, which are worshipped by the clan with offer- 
ings and other religious ceremonies.® The separate families, 
and even individuals, have also their little wooden images, 
rudely representing a male or female personage, but not 
differing from the clan images, except in being less elabor- 
ately dressed. The clan keeps its images in a house or a 
tent, or on some remote hill in the forest. The private 
and family gods, however, are not always small wooden 
images with a human face and a pointed head. They are 
sometimes odd-looking stones, or some other natural object. 
Every family and individual owns one or more such idols, 
which serve as tutelary gods, and when on the march they 
are transported on a special sleigh. Often each image is 
credited with a special function: one protects the reindeer, 
another provides a good haul of fish, others care for the 
health, the wedded life, etc., of the family. When wanted 
they are set up in the tent, on the pasture-ground, or at the 


1 Wichman, (1) pp. 9, 10, 31; Veres¢agin, p. 53. 
§ Smirnov, (1) p. 187. 3 Castrén, (3) i. 299, 300. 


———— 


rr 


eee ee a To —_ 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 163 


places where animals and fish are caught.! Professor De 
Harlez thinks it possible that the small domestic idols of 
felt and rags, used by the Mongols, and mentioned as early 
as the year 1200 by Armenian authors, may have been 
introduced by the Buddhist preachers, as Vartan states 
without hesitation.2 Household gods of this description 
may have passed from the Mongols to the Ostiaks. But, 
be this as it may, the doll-like idols of the Ostiaks are 
certainly of later date than the queer stones and other 
natural objects that serve the same purpose. The house- 
hold gods, Aake, of the Samoyedes are curious-looking 
stones, trees, or other natural objects, or they may 
consist of rude images. Of these they ask help in all 
undertakings, especially when they want a good catch of 
fish, and the idols follow the migrations of the family on 
a sleigh.® 

The clan and family gods of the Lapps seem to have 
been known in different parts of the country under the 
name of Seita or Storjunkare. Each family or clan (s/ég?) 
had its Sforyunkare standing in the district where it lived. 
Every Lapp settlement had its ses¢a, which had no regular 
shape, and might consist of smooth or odd-looking stones 
picked out of a stream, of a small pile of stones, of a tree- 
stump, or of a simple post. They were set up on a high, 
prominent place, or in a rich meadow. Under and round 
such seifas they strewed green fir twigs in winter, and in 
summer green leaves. The sesfas protected their wor- 
shippers against misfortune to the herds of reindeer, gave 
instructions how to catch wild reindeer, and in return 
offerings were made to them of the hides and hoofs of 


1 Castrén, (2) i. 301-303. 3 De Harlez, pp. 178, 179. 
3 Castrén, (2) i. 208, 209. 


164 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


reindeer, calves, and sometimes of a dog. But a private 
person might also have his own sesfa, to whom he prayed 
for good luck. The Storjunkare are described sometimes 
as stones, having some likeness to a man or an animal, 
that were set up on a mountain top, or in a cave, or 
near rivers and lakes. Honour was done to them by 
spreading fresh twigs under them in winter, and in 
summer leaves or grass. The Storjunkare had power 
over all animals, fish, and birds, and gave luck to those 
that hunted or fished for them. Reindeer were offered up 
to them, and every clan and family had its own hill of 
sacrifice.! 

The Votiaks have a family and clan god, known generi- 
cally as the Vorsud, or ‘ protector of good luck,’ who protects 
the fortunes of the family. His clan character is shown by 
the fact that two persons bearing the same Vorsud name 
cannot marry, or, what comes to the same thing, if they 
worship in the same large 4ua/a or hut where the clan vorfud 
is kept.2, The vorsud is represented in different places in 
different ways. In one place it is described as an idol 
placed on a shelf or raised place in the front corner of the 
kuala or outhouse used in summer for cooking purposes. 
The idol itself is a roughly made wooden head, with a beard 
of marsh grass. In another Aua/a it is a box, with a small 
opening like a window on one side, in which stands an 
image made of dough, the box being placed on a table or 
stand. Elsewhere it is a small quadrangular basket, con- 
taining a bundle of birch or fir twigs, a few bits of money, 
squirrel-skins, a pie, honey, etc., and sometimes the box is 
laid upon fresh branches of pine. The bundle of birch 


1 Von Diiben, pp. 233-235. 3 Smirnov, (2) p. 145. 
3 Smirnov, (2) pp. 212, 213. 


Ne 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 165 


twigs, and sometimes the squirrel-skins and the pie, are 
changed annually in spring.’ It is evident that the wooden 
head and the dough image are later modifications: the 
vorsud was originally thought of as an invisible spirit, but 
residing in the bundle of twigs instead of in a stone, like 
the house gods of the Lapps, Ostiaks, and Samoyedes. 
By the Ufimsk Ceremis the term uda vodid, or ‘house- 
spirit,’ is applied to a fagot of twigs kept in the front 
corner of the house. By the Vidtkan Ceremis the twigs 
are renewed annually. Towards evening on a fixed day 
in spring all the men of the village mount their horses, and 
carry away from each house in the place the old fagot, 
and transport it separately to a certain field, where it is 
left. A new fagot is cut and taken home. The}master 
of the house then says: ‘Old one, go away! let another, 
a good one, come! Whenever anything happens, preserve 
me, do not bring evil!’? But to return to the Votiaks: the 
most important family sacrifices are those held in the kuala 
which each family possesses, and is the home of the vorsud. 
Besides the family Aua/a there is a clan kuala in every 
village. If there is more than one clan in a village, an 
event of rare occurrence, there is a corresponding number 
of additional £ua/as. The clan 4ua/a forms part of the 
farm-buildings of the oldest man directly descended from 
the ancestor of the clan, but differs in nothing from a 
family Auala. Sacrifices in these buildings are held 
on fixed and on accidental occasions. The family and 
clan sacrifices are held regularly twice a year, at the 
beginning of summer, and autumn when the field-work is 
over. The offerings consist of bread, groats, beer, spirits, 
1 Wichman, (1) p. 20; Gavrilov, (1) pp. 161, 162. 
2 Smirnov, (1) pp. 174, 175- 


166 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


and a duck. The man on whose farm the clan sacrifice is 
made acts as priest, and the office is hereditary.1 Though 
these facts seem clear enough there is much uncertainty as 
to the origin of the vorsud names. Only a few of them 
can now be explained by the modern Votiak and Zirian 
languages, which is not surprising if they are family or clan 
names. Out ofa short list given by Gavrilov, Bigva might 
be explained as the adjective of Biger, ‘a Tatar,’ ‘a Bolgar.’ 
Durga is a ‘beetle,’ Selfa might be a derivative of se/#, ‘a 
horse-hobble,’ Ufa, of #/ ‘a branch’; Purga is (1) a tributary 
of the Vitegda, (2) the name of a village, (3) a snow- 
storm. The other names he gives are inexplicable. Out 
of a list of Votiak patronymics written down at the end of 
the last century occur Birgin, Z’um‘in, Kibin, Sudziir, 
derived from the still existing Vorsud names Birga, Z’um’a, 
Kib’a, Sudz’a. Some river-names are identical with voriud 
names, such as Lekma, Yumia, Cabia, Dokia, Niria, Modga, 
which last is also a village name.? As rivers were 
worshipped by the Votiaks, it is possible that the spirits of 
these rivers had been adopted as tutelary spirits, and so 
became clan names, though other equally plausible reasons 
might be urged for other explanations. And as village 
names are often called after their founder, there is no 
difficulty in explaining the similarity of village and voriud 
names. But still it remains uncertain whether the vorsud 
took its name from the clan that worshipped it, or whether 
it gave its name to the clan. 

The Mordvins being more civilised than the other 
Eastern Finns, seem to have no tutelary family and clan 
gods corresponding to those above mentioned, though they 
have several divinities that protect the house, the hearth, 

1 Wichman, pp. 20, 21. * Smirnov, (2) pp. 38, 39. 


-"C - 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 167 


the threshing-floor, the corn-kiln, etc., to whom small 
sacrifices are made. 

From the above examples of existing beliefs among the 
Ugrians and Eastern Finns, we may safely assume that the 
prehistoric Finns also had gods of the family and the clan, 
who were supposed to be domiciled in quaint-looking 
stones, in small stone piles, in fagots of twigs, and in 
sacred trees. Further, that they worshipped the spirit that 
inhabited and personified every large river. Whether they 
revered a god of the forest is not certain, for, as we have 
seen, all that he could bestow could also be given by the 
personal or family god. 

As in the course of the second period the Finns be- 
came acquainted with domestic animals, to which grass is 
essential, and practised a little agriculture, it is possible 
they occasionally paid homage and made sacrifices to the 
sun. The Samoyedes at dawn and sunset turn towards 
the sun and utter a few words of prayer, though otherwise 
they do not seem to pay any special regard to it.1 But the 
Lapps offered white male animals to it so that it should 
shine and promote the growth of grass. Every year the 
sun ought to have the so-called ‘sun’s groats,’ which both 
sexes ate in honour of the sun when they prayed it to 
cast a gracious sunshine on their reindeer. After the feast 
they fell a second time on their knees, and begged the sun 
to give them a good milking year, and to let their herds of 
reindeer thrive. It was only to the sun that burnt-offerings 
were made, and, being a male deity, only male animals were 
sacrificed to him. The moon was also a male divinity, for 
to him likewise only male animals were offered.2 The 
Votiaks pray to the ‘sun-mother’ to give warm days; but 

1 Castrén, (2) i. 207. 4 Friis, pp. 81, 151. 


168 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


she is not an important divinity. On the other hand, to 
the purely agricultural Mordvins the sun-god, E.M. Cipas, 
M.M. Sf davas, is the supreme deity.? 


BELIEFS, WIZARDS. 


A brief mention of some of the beliefs of the Ugrians 
and Eastern Finns will help to show what the general 
mental attitude of the prehistoric Finns might have been 
when face to face with the incidents and vicissitudes of 
daily life. ‘The Samoyedes think that if a hunter eat bear’s 
flesh he would run the risk of being eaten himself. At 
any rate fish and bear’s meat must not be eaten at the same 
meal, or all the fish would disappear from the river. The 
Ostiaks suppose that any one who has been eaten by a bear, 
who has been drowned, injured by fire, or has met with any 
accident, most likely has committed perjury, a crime always 
punished during a man’s lifetime.* The Votiaks say that 
the bear originated from man, and so understands human 
speech, though he cannot speak himself. In their opinion 
the dog is so tenacious of life that if you kill one with a 
stick, and do not leave the weapon upon its body, it will 
come to life again. And if it were not for the milky way, 
the wild geese flying from west to north, and vice versé, 
would lose their way and perish. The Samoyedes are of 
opinion that sickness can be sent by an evilly disposed 
man as well as by God.5 The Votiaks hold that fever 
and ague are sent by an evil spirit, Per2ino, who has to be 
appeased with offerings of bread, butter, and gruel, and is 
entreated not to be angry. The Ceremis imagine that 

2 ‘Wichman, (1) pp. 7, 124; Smirnov (4), p. 212. 3 Castrén, (2) ii. 18s. 


8 Castrén, (2) i. 309.  VereStagin, pp. 70, 77, 79. 
5 Castrén, (2) i. 206. 6 Wichman, p. 33. 


——ee | eee 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 169 


the spirits that cause illness, especially fever and ague, are 
continually recruited on the death of old maids, murderers, 
and those that have died a violent death.! The Mordvins 
suppose that sterility, or the sickness of a member of the 
family without apparent cause, results from having neglected 
his ancestors. Plague among the cattle is attributed to 
the same cause. When any one becomes dangerously ill 
the Lapps feel sure that one of his deceased relatives wants 
his company in the region of the dead, /Jadms atmo, either 
from affection or to punish him for some trespass.* The 
Turks of the Altai have a similar belief. The soul after 
death willingly lingers for some time in the house, leaves 
it unwillingly, and often takes with it other members of the 
family or some of the cattle.‘ 

The Votiaks of Sarapul say that the body after being 
committed to the earth sees visions, as persons that are 
asleep do.5 A dead Votiak is believed to hear all that is 
said around him till he has been washed and buried. The 
Ceremis imagine that the dead still preserve the sensations 
of heat and cold, and can see until lowered into the grave. 
If a lad or a girl dies unmarried, it is thought they can 
marry in the next world.’ When a respected Ostiak dies 
his nearest relations make a figure of him, which is kept 
in the tent of the deceased, and enjoys the same honour as 
himself when alive. At every meal the figure is brought 
in; every evening it is undressed and put to bed; every 
moming it is dressed and set in the usual seat of the 
deceased. The figure is honoured in this way for three 


: Smimov, (7) P. 164. ‘ Smimors (4) PP. 193, 194. 
riis, pp. 126, 127. off, ii. 52. 
$ Smirnov, (2) p. 180. 6 Wichman, (1) p. 39. 


7 Smirnov, (1) pp. 148, 149. 


170 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


or four years and then thrown into the grave. By that time 
the corpse is supposed to have mouldered into dust, and 
when that is accomplished even immortality comes to an 
end.! 

The prehistoric Finns, judging from the beliefs of their 
descendants and successors, were a simple folk. By them, 
no doubt, sudden sickness was attributed to any cause but 
the right one,—to the ill wishes of a neighbour, to the 
violation of an oath or a taboo, to inattention to the 
legitimate needs of deceased ancestors. When a man was 
dead they probably supposed, knowing nothing to the 
contrary, that he continued to see, hear, and feel for a 
considerable time. Something of the man lived on, but not 
for ever. When his memory was forgotten, when food 
supplies failed, or when the body had turned into dust and 
ashes, the spirit was thought to perish likewise, and nothing 
of the man remained. It would seem too that the stuff of 
which spirits were composed was much the same whether 
they were human spirits or the spirits that give apparent 
vitality to the phenomena of nature. After death some 
human spirits increased the host of spirits of disease, or 
became the servants of water-spirits, and when a worshipper 
died his private tutelary spirit became functionless and 
ceased to exist. 

Believing as they did in various supernatural, invisible 
powers who were inaccessible to ordinary men, the pre- 
historic Finns no doubt had recourse to wizards and 
exorcists, who were credited with possessing the power 
of communicating with the unseen world, and of interpret- 
ing and explaining the will of the gods and the invisible 
spirits. ‘The reason why this power was attributed to 

1 Castrén, (2) i. 308. 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 171 


certain men was simply the fact that they were partially 
demented, were queer in their behaviour and appearance, 
and when young were subject to fits, spasms, hysteria, 
incoherent raving, and other signs that clearly showed they 
were possessed by a spirit, and therefore fit and natural 
interpreters of the invisible world of spirits. Such are the 
signs by which the Buriats, the Turks of the Altai, and the 
Yakuts know that a youth has been specially chosen by 
the gods to act as a Jaman, a ham, or an ojun.' As partial 
mental alienation is apt to run in families, the wizard’s 
power would generally be handed down from father to 
son, as is the case with the above-mentioned Siberian 
peoples ; and judging from what is related of it, the amount 
of education given to the young saman was not very great. 
But he had to be a good mimic; he must know how to 
imitate the screech of the eagle, the cackle of the goose, 
the croak of the raven, the hissing of the snake, the neigh- 
ing of the horse, and many other natural sounds, when 
pretending to ascend to the sky or to descend to the 
lower regions. For such journeys were not related in mere 
words; they were vivid dramatic representations of a 
primitive kind, in which the saman played the part of many 
invisible characters and animals, changing his voice to suit 
each part. Such a performance could not fail to leave on 
the simple unquestioning minds of the spectators a deep 
impression of the reality of the whole affair. These ex- 
hibitions are best preserved by the Turks of the Altai, 
but considerable traces of similar performances were to be 
found among the Lapps a couple of centuries ago. 
Originally the wizards and seers were not what we should 
nowadays call magicians: they did not employ magic 
1 Mikhailovskij, pp. 85, 86, 90; Radloff, fi. 16. 


172 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


means to thwart the will of a god, or even to exert external 
force upon him. From their own point of view, their 
actions were perfectly rational, and their words both natural 
and harmless in themselves. Their functions were to find 
out why any one had been taken ill; whether a certain 
animal destined for sacrifice would be acceptable to the 
god, where lost animals were to be found, and practical 
questions of that sort. To fulfil their tasks they had at 
their beck and call certain friendly familiar spirits who 
could inquire of the higher spirits with whom even the 
wizard was unable to converse. To summon the familiar 
spirits who lived a long way off a drum had to be used, 
and when they arrived they were supposed to place 
themselves inside the drum. It was a most important 
instrument, and in the hands of a skilful wizard produced 
a variety of tones: hollow, muffled sounds that seemed to 
come from the depths of the earth; sharp incisive raps 
showing that a decisive point had been reached in the 
dramatic performance ; loud, rapid, tumultuous sounds that 
pictured a terrible conflict. But the drum, perhaps only 
in later times, was also used as a divining instrument, and 
so the Altaian Turks, the Ostiaks, and the Lapps drew rude 
designs in red on the surface of their drums. The figures 
on the upper part pictured the gods and the sky, those in 
the lower part referred to the lower world, while a central 
horizontal band represented the earth. By causing a ring 
or something of the sort to move freely over the surface of 
the drun, and observing on what figure it stopped, a wizard 
could manage to give information about persons and things 
both above, below, or upon the surface of the earth. 
Speaking of the Samoyedes,’ Castrén tells us that the 
wizard can do little of himself, he is only the interpreter of 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION § 173 


the spirit-world, and his whole power consists in being able 
to place himself in correspondence with certain spirits, and 
receive from them the necessary information. At the 
same time he must be young and strong, or the spirits will 
make a fool of him. His office is hereditary, and the sound 
of his drum penetrates to the world of spirits, and awakens 
them from sleep. 

The clan gods of the Ostiaks are often kept in a certain 
house which is under the charge of a spiritual man, who 
is at once seer, priest, doctor, and enjoys a religious 
respect. The advice of such seers or shamans is taken 
in all doubtful cases, but the seer answers no question 
directly. He refers it first to the decision of the gods, 
and explains the reply to the interrogator. Questions 
however cannot be put to Tiirm, who is inaccessible to 
mortals. In the event of a general sacrifice to the gods, 
or when their advice is asked, a shaman is necessary, as 
he alone can open the hearts of the gods and converse 
with them. The drum is indispensable, for an ordinary 
voice does not reach the ear of the gods. Sometimes 
the image of the god, placed in front of the seer, speaks, 
but only the seer can understand what is said.? 

When the Voguls desire to sacrifice to a divinity, the 
sort and quality of the offerings are determined by the 
wizard (“dji=F. noifa), who serves as a medium between 
god and man. He is prepared for his office from earliest 
childhood, not only by strict observance of religious 
precepts, and taking part in ceremonies, but also by 
learning religious songs, legends, and the proper con- 
jurations. In all important religious acts he is the leader, 
and among the instruments he uses are the drum (hoi, cf. 


1 Castrén, (2) i. 199-201. 3 Jbéd., (2) i. 300-303. 


174 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


L. kobdas, khomdas, ¥. kannus >*kamdus), the drumstick, 
swords, arrows, and other weapons. His hardest work 
is conjuring the gods. It is he that leads out the animal 
to be sacrificed and cries forth his entreaties towards the 
sky, though the actual slaughter of the animal is performed 
by assistants on his giving the sign.! 

In very important matters the Lapps summoned a 
wizard (scaide=F. noifa), who, using his drum as a 
divining apparatus, explained the will of the gods and 
answered different questions. But when necessary he 
was also able to make a journey to the house of the 
dead, Jabmi atmo, to appease its inhabitants, and engage 


them not to pursue a sick man down to the grave, On 


to get a deceased relative to come up to the earth again 
to tend the reindeer. Striking his drum, and singing as 
loud as he could, he began to summon his sazvvo 
followers or helpful spirits. First he summoned the 
satovo bird, and told it to bring from that region some 
of its inhabitants, but first of all the satvvo fish or snake. 
When all who intended to assist at the ceremony had 
arrived, the wizard took off his cap, loosened his belt, 
placed his hands on his face, knelt down, swayed to 
and fro on his knees, and began, drum in hand, to run 
round on his knees with wonderful rapidity and with 
curious gestures. Now and then he cried out: ‘ Harness 
the reindeer! launch the boat!’ Then he threw hot 
ashes from the fire with his naked hands, pretending fire 
did not hurt him, drank brandy, and struck himself on 
the knee with an axe. Finally, from the effects of previous 
fasting and his violent exertions he fell into a swoon, 
during which no one might touch him, for his spirit 
1 Munkacsi, (1) p. 68, 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 175 


was now travelling on the sazvvo fish to Saivvo or to 
Jabmi aimo. When he came to himself he related what 
he had seen, what arrangements he had made with the 
dead, and announced in an oracular manner what ought 
to be done.! 

Among some Votiaks the seer (funo) enjoys great 
authority ; the animals to be sacrificed are selected on 
his recommendation; he shows the spot where the 
sacrifice to each god is to be made; where an illness 
has seized a sick man, who is guilty of it, who it was 
that damaged the invalid, what he is like and the colour 
of his hair, etc. And in general he is respected by 
the people.? In other places he has a bad reputation, 
is a habitual sot, and is therefore despised. Of less 
importance is the exorcist, pe//askis’, so called because 
while pronouncing his exorcisms he accompanies the words 
with blowing, fe//‘askon.® 

As regards the Samoyedes and Ostiaks, it does not 
seem certain who or what the spirits were that assisted 
and protected the wizards. Among the Lapps, however, 
these spirits were called sazevo people, who lived in a 
saivvo home, which was said to lie close under the surface 
of the ground. Directly after death souls were believed 
to pass into sasvvo atbmo, the inhabitants of which lived 
exactly as on earth, but in a higher degree of prosperity 
and happiness, and they became the guardian spirits of 
the living. Every adult Lapp, especially moaides, could 
have several sasvvo people as tutelary spirits. If this 
is correct, the helpful spirits of the Lapp wizards were 
really those of their deceased ancestors, though perhaps 


1 Friis, pp. 24, 129, 130. 2 VereStagin, p. 37. 
3 Buch, pp. 126, 127. 4 Friis, pp. 113, 115. 


176 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


the Saizvo people were not wholly composed of human 
spirits, and certainly not of all human souls, for most 
of the dead went to /Jabmi aihmo, which is sometimes 
confused with satvvo aibmo, though the places were 
different. It seems to have been the same with the 
Altaian Turks. The intermediaries between the am 
or wizard and the lower spirits, the /@r-sw, are the spirits 
of ancestors. But not all can give help; only shamans 
that transmit their power from father to son are able 
through the power of their ancestors to invoke these 
lower spirits of nature, the /dr-su.1 So too with the 
Jakuts, the emekhet or helpful spirit of the wizard, ojus, 
is generally a defunct shaman, though occasionally a 
secondary deity, who comes at call, helps, defends, and 
gives him advice.? 


ANCESTRAL WORSHIP. 


There is reason to believe that at any rate to some 
extent the prehistoric Finns worshipped their deceased 
ancestors. Castrén mentions that the Ostiaks and Samo- 
yedes make offerings to the dead, and that this service 
is founded on the belief that the dead retain the same 
needs and follow the same occupations as in life.® Among 
the Lapps the dead were held in great honour. The 
relatives sacrificed reindeer in memory of them for several 
years, and believed themselves to be still in such close 
relations that the luck they enjoyed was regarded as a gift 
from the deceased.* At the annual commemoration the 
Votiak priest invites the deceased to take part, in the 

1 Radloff, ii. 8. # Mikhailovskij, p. 133. 
3 Castrén, (2) i. 308. 4 Von Diiben, p. 249. 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 177 


following words: ‘Thy anniversary has arrived, we give 
thee a bloody sacrifice, a roan stallion with a thick mane. 
Don’t be angry ; look well after our good cattle, and do not 
lay hold of us from before or behind. Gather all the dead 
around thyself. Be healthy. Come forward to eat and 
drink with the people around thee. Your grandfathers 
and grandmothers came forth to eat and drink.’! The 
Permians in the district of Glazov bring food in birch 
baskets to the cemetery, hang them on branches of the 
trees there, and call to the deceased to come and eat.? 

Among the Mordvins, on the eve of the day for com- 
memorating the deceased, forty or forty-nine days after 
death, the nearest relative who most resembles the 
defunct is asked to personify him on the following day. 
Next day he comes to the house, puts on the clothes in 
which the dead man died, and sits on the bed on which 
he breathed his last. All the relations assemble to 
welcome him. Each brings a present of flour, bread, 
pancakes, or mutton, lays it with a bow on the table in 
front of the impersonator, and inquires how he is getting 
on in the other world. At night a very noisy feast is held, 
during which the personator tells of the life beyond the 
grave, and about the crops there. To the visitors that 
inquire after their dead relatives he gives the most circum- 
stantial news. ‘Your relation keeps good horses, and drives 
about the forest in a carriage’; ‘Yours ruined himself? ; 
‘Yours keeps bees’; ‘ Yours is given to drink’; ‘ Yours has 
married a beautiful wife.’ About midnight all gather 
round to listen to the wishes of the dead man. His 
personifier then advises them to live peacefully, to look 
after the cattle, not to thieve, and hopes they will have 

1 Smirnov, (2) p. 183. 9 /bid., (3) p. 245. 

I M 


178 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


abundance of beer and brandy. Later on a bull is 
slaughtered with some ceremony, its flesh is boiled in 
kettles, and the whole is consumed by the guests. When 
‘this repast is over the personator announces it is time to 
re-enter the grave. All present kneel down and beg his 
blessing. A cart is made ready, on which is placed a vat 
containing viands of various kinds. The personifier, after 
being embraced by the old women, is laid on the bed, 
which is now placed in the cart, and the whole company 
goes off to the cemetery. Here they set him and the bed 
on the grave, then lay a variety of food before him, and beg 
him to eat for the last time. To keep him company the 
escort also partakes. They then take leave of the imper- 
sonator and invite him to return in summer when the 
corn is ripe and they will reap his share. The ceremony 
is now over; the personifier makes a bow, suddenly 
springs up from the grave, throws the bed upon the cart, 
and vanishes from the scene.! The Mordvins ask the 
deceased ancestors to give them a long life, to increase 
their prosperity, to give a good harvest, increase of cattle, 
etc.—in fact, to accomplish all that is usually the function 
of the gods. Sometimes it happens that the ancestors 
are neglected and left to starve. Such conduct is not 
left unpunished. They warn the relations in a dream, 
and, taking the hint, the latter bake pancakes, kill a hen 
and make a feast, the greater part of which they eat them- 
selves, but the remains are taken to a place near the 
cemetery.2_ The ascription by the Mordvins of what may 
be called divine power to their ancestors, such as the ability 
to dispense prosperity, health, increase of cattle, etc., is 
closely paralleled by the capabilities in this respect of the 
1 Smirnov, (4) pp. 176-179. 3 {bid., (4) pp. 184, 193. 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 179 


family and clan gods of the Ostiaks and Lapps mentioned 
above. It opens up the question whether the latter are 
not, at any rate partly, the spirits of ancestors, though 
there is not enough evidence to arrive at a definite 
conclusion. 


THe FamMILy. 


Though the Eastern and Western Finns seem to have 
no word for ‘clan,’ ‘tribe,’ we have already found reason 
to believe that the prehistoric Finns were acquainted 
with these ideas, and it must be supposed that the words, 
being no longer wanted, have fallen into disuse, and are 
buried in oblivion. Georgi, in the last century, says the 
Votiaks were formerly divided into tribes, and we have 
already seen that those that worship the same voriud 
cannot intermarry, and that the Ostiaks are divided into 
many small clans, composed of several families descended 
from a common ancestor. Unfortunately Castrén nowhere 
gives the Ostiak word which he translates by séég¢. There 
is also no word for ‘family’ common to the Eastern and 
Western Finns. The latter use ferhke, which has been 
adopted by the Lapps, while the Permian group and the 
other eastern groups generally employ loan words from 
Russian or Tatar. In fact there is a great difference at 
present between the two branches in the constitution of the 
family. The usual conception of a family among the West 
Finns is a household consisting of a man and wife with 
their children, as in Western Europe. But among the East 
Finns it is different. With them the family is large, con- 
sisting of from twenty to forty, and even sixty, persons 
living under the same roof and governed by a single head. 
Among the Votiaks it is not uncommon to find ten or 


180 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


more adults in a single family, not including children ; for 
there may be three or four married brothers living with 
their parents in one large family.! A family of from twenty- 
five to thirty persons in one house is not uncommon, and 
north of the Ceptsa, in the government of Vidtka, there are 
families of even forty persons.2 Among the Mordvins 
several families live together in one house, though this is 
composed of several buildings, and constitute a large family. 
Though households consisting of a single family are to be 
found, they are still uncommon, and are the result of 
Russian influence. Not long ago there were families 
among the Erza of from fifty to sixty souls.? Although 
there are obvious economic reasons that may account for 
the enormous size of some Mordvin families that live 
entirely on agriculture, these would hardly hold good for 
the smaller but still large families of the Votiaks on the 
Ceptsa, where soil and climate place agriculture in a 
subordinate position as a means of subsistence. The 
modern practice of several married sons living together 
as one family must be referred to an older instinctive 
feeling of greater security that kept all those of the same 
stock together. It is not too much to assume that in 
prehistoric times the family was also large, consisting of 
three or four generations, living, if not under one roof, 
yet in huts so contiguous as to form a single home- 
stead. 

At the. present time the family is everywhere on a patri- 
archal basis. Though the head of a Votiak family has 
unlimited power over the other members of it, we are 
told that the natural good-nature of the people is such 


Ostrovski, p. 26. ® Smirnov, (2) p. x51. 
 Mainov, (2) p. 58; (3) p. 153. 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 181 


that his authority is wielded in a milder fashion than we 
should expect, and the members of the family, even the 
women, enjoy greater freedom than in a Russian family.? 
Among the Mordvins, too, there are, properly speaking, 
no bounds to the power of the husband over the wife, so 
that he can beat her at pleasure and no one blame him for 
doing so as a punishment. Though the power of the father 
over his children is specially great, it never exceeds certain 
bounds. A Mordvin takes great care that no member of 
the family shall become estranged, but, on the contrary, 
shall feel solidarity with it, and he reluctantly eliminates 
members really guilty of crimes. Nor is the parental 
authority of short duration. Even among the Erza it lasts 
till a son is thirty years of age, for a father can always 
make himself so respected that sons of that age do not 
usually think of evading his wishes. And the Mordvin 
like the Votiak father does not misuse his authority.? 

The position of women among the prehistoric Finns 
could have been neither high nor enviable. An Ostiak 
woman is a slave in the strictest sense of the word; she is 
regarded as unclean, and lives in the deepest degradation. 
She gives no expression to her own will, but must humbly 
submit to every caprice of her husband. Her wishes are 
never consulted ; she is treated like a piece of goods, and 
can never inherit property. Vogul women in general may 
not approach idols or holy places. If a woman treads upon 
or steps over a man’s clothes, weapons, or instruments of 
any sort, they are rendered unclean, and must be purified 
by fumigation with castoreum.4 Among the Lapps woman 
still takes a very low place in the social organisation. 


1 Ostrovski, p.27.  ® Mainov, (2) pp. 23, 23-35; (3) PP. 12%, 13%, 132 
3 Castrén, (2) i. 310, 312. 4 Munkacsi, (i) p. 70. 


182 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Formerly she might not touch a soaia’s drum, or eat the 
least bit of any offering made to the thunder-god, Hora- 
gales; nor might she look in the direction of the sef#a on 
the holy places.! Similarly a Votiak woman may not be 
present at the sacrifices made to the /vd, or evil spirit that 
dwells in certain groves, nor may she approach such a 
grove.?_ Even with the more civilised Mordvins the power 
of the house-mother while her husband is alive is not very 
great; when he dies it ceases altogether.? And as late as 
the eighteenth century there was a lively recollection of 
a time when a man could sell his wife and the children 
begotten by her, if she ceased to please him.‘ 

At present the Eastern and Western Finns, as well as 
the Ostiaks, are exogamous, though Mainov argues that, 
as the gods of the Mordvins marry their own daughters, 
the nearest: relationship was no bar to marriage, and that 
only a deficient supply of women led the Mordvins to seek 
wives among strange clans. Among the Erza of the 
district of Sergatésk in the government of Nizegorod, as 
well as in the government of Simbirsk, a tradition is pre- 
served that in the old days a brother could marry a sister. 
Not long ago there lived in the village of Dubensk a very 
pretty and hard-working girl. Her parents were reluctant 
to part with her and give her in marriage to a stranger. 
So they sent her to pay a long visit to her relatives at a 
distance, and on her return they received her as a com- 
plete stranger. From that day forth they obliged her to 
consider her brother as her husband.® In answer to a 
direct question, a heathen Ceremis told Professor Smirnov 


1 Friis, pp. 86, 27, 70, 137. 2 Wichman, (x) p. 17. 
> Mainov, (2) pp. 35, 36; (3) p. 133. 4 Smirnov, (4) p. 158. 
5 Mainov, (3) p. 6, 6 Smirnov, (4) pp. 144, 145 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 183 


that it was possible to marry a sister, though it was not 
done, from which he draws the conclusion that formerly 
the Ceremis were endogamous, there being no formal pro- 
hibition against marrying sisters. He also quotes a custom 
that iorbids a Ceremis marrying a girl from a place where 
the women wear a costume different from that worn in his 
own village. He finds traces, too, of endogamy in some 
of the marriage customs.! With regard to the Permians, 
one author states that in out-of-the-way places cases occur 
of brothers and sisters cohabiting, and another writer 
mentions that in the district of Glazov sexual relations 
between very near kindred are not uncommon, while it is 
not considered blameworthy to have children begotten in 
incest2 Among the Votiaks in some places there is a 
custom that forbids a girl walking with a lad from another 
village. Yet, in spite of these exceptions, the probability 
is great that in the main the prehistoric Finns were exo- 
gamous, though under stress of circumstances the nearest 
relationship was no bar to cohabitation. 

Before attempting to discover the constitution of the 
Finnish family in prehistoric times by an examination of 
the words that denote relationship, it may be mentioned 
that not one of these ranges through all the groups. Some 
are widely diffused, but none universally. Still, from this 
it would be erroneous to argue that in the second period 
something like group-marriage or general hetairism pre- 
vailed. The absence of common terms for natural pheno- 
mena like ‘sun’ and ‘moon,’ etc., are enough to show that 
old words could be discarded and new terms substituted. 
It may also be noted that as a rule no distinction is drawn 
between boy and son, girl and daughter, woman and wife, 

1 Smirnov, (z) p. 128. 3 bid. , (3) p. 209. 3 Jééd., (2) p. 145. 


4 
} 
{ 


184 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


woman and mother; each doublet is usually expressed by 
a single word. As a rule, too, there is no word for brother 
or sister, only for elder brother, elder sister, and these are 
nearly always coupled with the connotations of uncle and 
aunt. Native words, too, for nephew, grandson, and Arst- 
cousin are generally absent. Professor Smirnov maintains 
that these facts can only be explained by assuming the 
existence of communal marriage or general hetairism as 
the basis of the family, and presupposes a state of society 
in which every adult woman of a group was the concubine 
or potential wife of every adult man in it; the chidren 
being children of the group, no distinction could be crawn 
between boy and son, girl and daughter, woman and wife. 
In his opinion, the absence of a word for ‘widow’ shows 
that a woman was never left without a husband, while the 
want of a juridical term for ‘adultery’ proves that regular 
marriage did not exist. He finds a corroboration of his 
theory in the freedom of sexual relations that exists 
between lads and girls before marriage in all branches of 
the Eastern Finns. But Darwin, Dr. Westermarck, and 
others, have pointed out and laid stress on the fact 
that jealousy, especially in sexual matters, is and always 
must have been a very strong passion in man, as it 
in all the higher gregarious animals. The strongest men 
in each small group would therefore always keep their 
women to themselves so long as they were able to do so. 
Their children would therefore have a known father as well 
as a mother, and could not be regarded as merely children 
ofa group. As the supply of women became restricted by 
the action of the stronger men, the weaker ones were forced 
to have recourse to various expedients, and thus polyan- 
drous types of marriage or concubinage, and incestuous 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 185 


intercourse, would arise simultaneously with the polygamy 
of the stronger men. 

The oldest type of family that we can trace among the 
Finns is one composed of several adult males, probably 
related by blood, living with several women and their 
children in one hut. With the exception of his two 
parents, to any member of the dwelling all male and female 
members older than himself were his elder brothers and 
sisters; all younger than himself were younger brothers 
or sisters, or some analogous term. Traces of a classifi- 
catory system, founded on seniority, are still found among 
the Eastern Finns. It is best displayed among the 
Ceremis. Exclusive of the father and mother, all blood- 
relations are divided, with regard to oneself or to a 
given person, into two categories of older and younger 
persons, 

Zs'a designates and is the term ot address for an uncle 
younger than one’s father, an elder brother, his son if older 
than oneself, and a first cousin if also older. 

Solé is a younger brother, a nephew, a grand-nephew, a 
younger first cousin, and the son of a first cousin. 

| @ka is an aunt younger than one’s father, an elder sister, 
a niece, and a first cousin older than oneself. 

Susar is a younger sister, a niece, a grand-niece, a first 
cousin younger than oneself, and the daughter of a first 
cousin. 

The wife of an #s’a is addressed as engai; of a solo— 
Seske. 

The husband of an aka is called kurska; of a Susar— 
verge} 

As it stands this nomenclature is probably not very 

1 Smirnov, (1) pp. 122, 123. 


186 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


ancient, for some of the terms seem to be loan words of ne) 
very ancient date; but the principle on which it is based ‘s 
undoubtedly old. 

The nomenclature of the modern Ceremis exactly fits the 
case of a father, mother, and their married sons with their 
families, living under a single roof and numbering say 
twenty persons. It may be illustrated by the following 
diagram :— 


A——A’ 5 c a’ 
| | | | 
b ée i n 
c f k o 
d g§ 1 p 
h m q 


Here A J’ represents a man and wife with their three 
sons b, c, d. In course of time their wives J’, ¢, d’, bear 
families, shown in three columns to the right and lettered 
from e—g, the italics marking the girls. It is possible, and 
we therefore suppose that niece ¢ is older than her uncle d; 
that 1 is older than his first cousin h, and that n is older 
than his first cousins h,m. Then with regard to d, we see 
that b, c are his elder brothers (és’a), his niece e is his 
elder sister (4a), and his remaining nephews and nieces 
from f—g are younger brothers (fo/¢) and younger sisters 
(susar). With regard to h his two uncles c, d, and his first 
cousins 1, n are his elder brothers, his full sisters ¢, g are 
his elder sisters, and his first cousins &, 0, g are his younger 
sisters. In conversation 4 would be addressed as engaz’, 
and c,d as Sefke. As there is no native term for grandson 
in the Finnish groups, the father must have called his 
grandsons ‘sons,’ but all the grandchildren from e—g 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 187 


address A, 4’ as the ‘ great father,’ the ‘great mother.’ In 
a family circle of this description the terminology of the 
family may be reduced to a minimum, though in course of 
time it will gradually enlarge; we see, too, that words 
for nephew, niece, grandson, granddaughter, first cousin, 
and even younger sister—younger aunt answers the pur- 
pose,—can easily be dispensed with, and need only develop 
after a long period of time, or after contact with a more 
civilised people. It is manifest, of course, that the above 
diagram can be adapted to a stage of family life far less 
advanced than that of the modern Ceremis, and at the 
beginning of the second period no doubt the relations be- 
tween the sexes was different from what nowholds. Very 
likely when the head of the household died, or became 
infirm, if he was ever allowed to reach that stage, his 
eldest or strongest son inherited his wife or wives, if 
young enough. And until the sons were strong enough 
for each to keep a wife to himself, they may have kept 
one in common, so that for a season polygyny and 
polyandry might exist under the same roof. The girls, . 
too, in a household, till appropriated by a single man, 
may often have had intercourse with the younger men 
who had no households of their own. But the principle 
always remained that there was a head of each house- 
hold, however humble the dwelling might be, and any 
children born under his roof were regarded as his and 
formed his family. 

Hitherto we have only found in the prehistoric family 
a certain number of males living with a certain number of 
females, but we have not learnt how the women were 
acquired, whether by violence or in some peaceful manner, 
such as exchange, early betrothal, purchase, or personal 


188 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


service; or what sort of relations existed between the 
families of the husband and wife. If we could find wide- 
spread terms for any of the bride’s relations, that imply 
marriage of some sort, we might reasonably infer that 
after taking a wife the relations between the husband 
and wife’s families were not hostile, implying that she 
had been obtained on the whole by pacific means. 
There are two words that point in this direction, those 
for ‘son-in-law’ and ‘ father-in-law,’ though the latter 
is a dubious term meaning ‘ wife’s father’ and ‘ husband’s 
father’ :— 


Fin Lapp Mord. | Cer. | Ost. | Vog. | Magy. 

F ather-in- apps | vuoppa ase oba | up | up ip 
aw 

Son-in-law | vavy | oivva, 0j5 | ov woe | ee | DGPS | vO 


In the above equations, though four of the words for 
father-in-law are used in the double sense, yet to the 
Voguls and Ostiaks the word #f only means ‘ wife’s father,’ 
hence there is the presumption that this was the original 
meaning of the others. It is evident that to a household 
framed on the Ceremisian system there could never be 
occasion for one member to address another as ‘son-in- 
law,’ though there might be several in the family. The 
term could only be used by a man or woman in a different 
dwelling—by the father and mother, in fact, of one of the 
wives in the first-mentioned household. The fact that the 
word for ‘son-in-law’ covers nearly the same area as that 
for ‘father-in-law,’ and that the first necessarily connotes 
the existence of a wife and her parents, immensely increase 


/ 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 189 


the probability that the words for ‘father-in-law’ once 
meant ‘ wife’s father’ and nothing else, for then both words 
point in the same direction, towards the old home of the 
wife. If this is so, we find tewms for ‘wife’s father’ and 
‘son-in-law’ among the Western Finns, the Lapps, some of 
the Eastern or rather Central Finns, and the Ugrian groups 
in what at first sight seems to be the first period, though 
probably, for reasons that will be exhibited at the close of 
the chapter, not before the middle of the second period. 
Now if the method of obtaining a wife had been solely by 
hostile capture it seems hardly likely she would ever see 
her father again, even if he had not been killed in the 
affray, and so her husband’s family would have no occasion 
to give him a special name; and as he would have no 
occasion to speak of his son-in-law, such a term would 
never arise. The probability is, therefore, that in pre- 
historic times wives were largely, though not exclusively, 
obtained without fighting. So far as can be learnt from 
language, the mother-in-law was subordinate to the father- 
in-law, for in Vogul and Ostiak the bride’s mother is merely 
known as the ‘wife of the « (father of the bride),’ and in 
N. Ostiak the bridegroom’s mother is distinguished as the 
‘great woman,’ showing that the young husband’s mother 
was regarded with greater respect than the bride’s. So 
too the Finnish avop#i, ‘mother-in-law,’ seems to mean 
‘wife of the off: (father-in-law),’ or something of the sort, 
and so to indicate a position in the family that derived all 
its authority from the man. In fact, there is nothing in 
these words for ‘ father- and mother-in-law,’ or in the other 
terms used by the East Finnish groups, to lead us to sup- 
pose that the headship of the family rested in other hands 
than those of a male. 


190 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Another word with a wide range is that for ‘ daughter- 
in-law,’ ‘ bride’ :— 


Fin. Lapp. Votiak. Zr. Ost. Vog. Magy. 
minté manna itsimon' ifmon' men ii man’ meny 


There is a remarkable difference in the distribution of 
this word compared with the terms for father- and son- 
in-law. It is unknown to the Mordvins and Ceremis, 
and retained by the Permian groups, unless indeed they 
have borrowed from the Voguls (#, #s¢=little), as I 
think is probable, for reasons to be stated hereafter. 
The next to be noticed has several meanings: (1) wife of 
brother, (2) wife of husband’s brother, (3) sister of wife, 
(4) daughter-in-law :— 


Fin. M.M.  Erza. Votiak. Zirian. Ost. 
Kaly 1,3,| Kel2 Kijalo2 | Kaliag Keli, Keljaz | Kili3 


Here the third meaning is interesting, as it implies that 
friendly relations were maintained between the families 
of the husband and of the wife, so that a term of address 
for her sisters had to be formed, which is identical with 
that for a ‘brothers wife’ or the ‘wife of a husband’s 
brother.’ Yet this meaning, though found in groups so 
widely separated as the West Finns and Ostiaks, cannot 
reach back to the first period, for the Mordvins, Ostiaks, 
and Zirians have borrowed an expression for ‘ wife’s sister’ 
from the Turkish, Cuva’, and Russian respectively. 
Though F. Xé/y can also be used in the sense of ‘husband’s 
sister,’ it is a later usage, for the West Finns and the 
Ceremis have a special term for this: F. nato,C. nuda. A 


eh 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 191 


term for ‘uncle’ is widely distributed, though it does 
not extend to the Ugrians :— 


Fin. Lapp. Enza. Cer. Votiak. Zir. 
selé cacce (ie CUE Cuz cos} 


The first three mean ‘father’s brother,’ the last ‘mother’s 
brother,’ and the remaining two refer to either uncle. 

Not much light is thrown on the method of obtaining 
a wife by examining the various verbs for ‘to marry’ in 
the Finno-Ugrian groups, for on the whole they are 
ambiguous. The Voguls say ‘to take a wife,’ the Ostiaks 
‘to take as wife,’ which might mean after paying for her, 
or after capture, or after her parents’ consent. In the epic 
poetry of the Ostiaks the word for ‘to marry a daughter’ 
is Omdem, literally ‘to cause to sit, to seat,’ a meaning 
which Mr. Patkanov believes may have arisen from the 
father seating his daughter in the boat or sleigh of his 
son-in-law when taking her home after the marriage feast.” 
For ‘to marry’ the Zirlans use several verbs derived from 
the nouns ‘woman, wife, bride,’ which do not in the least 
explain the mode in which the action takes place; ‘to 
marry a daughter’ is ‘to give behind a man,’ and when 
a woman marries she is said ‘to go behind or after a man.’ 
When a Votiak parent marries his daughter he is said ‘to 
give (her) to a man,’ and of a woman marrying she is said 
‘to go away to a man,’ or ‘to run away to a man,’ or simply 
bisini, ‘to run away.’ Here, at any rate, there is no trace 
of capture; a girl flies to her lover’s arms and saves him 
all further trouble. For a man marrying, the Erza and the 
MokSa Mordvins use a derivative of the noun ‘ wife, woman,’ 
which gives us no information ; for a woman, the Erza use 

1 Paasonen, (1) p. 30. 3 Patkanov, (1) p. 60. 


192 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


the expression ‘to go out or away to a man’ or ‘to go toa 
man.’ The Western Finns also use a colourless derivative 
of nat-, ‘woman,’ when speaking of a man marrying, but of a 
woman they say mennd michelle, ‘to go to a man or husband.’ 
Though not much enlightened by this survey, it seems on 
the whole to corroborate the view expressed above, that in 
the second period wives were obtained by pacific means. 

Though of course monogamy is now the rule among the 
Eastern and Western Finns, the Ceremis in certain districts 
of the governments of Perm and Ufa, when circumstances 
permit, are polygamous, and take two, more rarely three, 
wives. With the wealthy each wife has a separate house; 
the position of the wives is identical, and in their rights no 
distinction is made between the children of the different 
wives. For though those of the eldest wife enjoy greater 
respect, in the matter of inheritance they have no privilege. 
In the eighteenth century polygamy was the custom among 
the Ceremis, and it still happens with them that several 
sisters live with one husband.! In an indirect manner 
polygamy was also practised by the Ceremis, Votiaks, 
Zirians, Mordvins, and Ostiaks, for it was not unusual as 
late as the last century for a father to acquire for his infant 
son an adult wife who lived in the same house as himself. 
This of course led to concubinage with the father-in-law, 
for which the Russians have a special term—snokhacestvo.* 
The levirate also existed, for in the year 1501 Bishop 
Simon reprehended the newly converted Zirians for break- 
ing the ecclesiastical law, and instances that a brother 
married his deceased brother’s wife.® 


1 Smirnov, (1) pp. raz, 124. 


2 /bid., (1) p. 124; (2) pp. 142, 143; (3) p. 21a; (4) pp. x52, x55; 
Ablqvist, (x) p. 160. 8 /bd., (3) p. xz. 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 193 


The usual mode of obtaining a wife among the Eastern 
Finns at present is by purchase, for which the Mordvins 
have a native word, though some of the Eastern Finns have 
borrowed the word kafim from the Turks. This loan word, 
however, is insufficient to prove that the custom was first 
introduced with the new word. In the thirteenth or four- 
teenth century, before the Ostiaks came in contact with the 
Tatars, marriage by purchase was a recognised institution, 
and forcible capture was only resorted to when the paternal 
claims were too exorbitant. Yet marriage by hostile and 
formal capture still exists, and was still more in vogue a 
couple of centuries ago. Among the Ceremis, in the 
governments of Viatka, Perm, and Ufa, capture is still 
practised, and marriage by match-making in the govern- 
ment of Ufa is extremely rare. In fact all the terms used 
in arranging a marriage by contract are said to be of Cuva’ 
origin. In the district of MalmizZ (Vidtka) the bride is 
carried off from the dance at a festival, or in the woods 
while picking berries and mushrooms, or from the bank of a 
stream while engaged in washing clothes.1_ But among the 
Votiaks in the district of Sarapul capture only takes place 
to avoid the expense of a wedding ; or if the girl is willing, 
but the parents refuse their consent ; or if the parents wish 
to marry their daughter to a rich suitor whom she detests.? 

Though hostile capture as a means of obtaining a wife has 
no doubt existed from the earliest times, it was only a con- 
current method for attaining the end, and only undertaken 
under stress of circumstances as a last resort. Among the 
Yakuts, whose mode of living and habitat greatly resembles 
that of the ancient Finns, marriage is by purchase, though 
the husband cannot bring his wife home till he has paid 


1 Smirnov, (1) pp. 129, 133. 3 Verestagin, p. 27. 
I N 


194 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


the whole price. If he is a poor man he pays by instal- 
ments, and is allowed to visit his wife at her home till the 
balance is paid; sometimes three years may elapse before 
he is able to do so.!_ Writing in the last century, Georgi 
relates of the Barabints Tatars that instead of giving 
money for his wife, a man might work for his father-in-law, 
hunting, fishing, and ploughing with him for a certain 
length of time. Of the Katints Tatars he relates that 
if a suitor is too poor he guards his father-in-law’s herds 
for from three to five years, hunts, and gets wood for him, 
etc.2 Though it is of rare occurrence for a Zirian son-in- 
law to settle for good in his wife’s home, it is sometimes 
done in the government of Viatka. In such cases he 
severs connection with his own people, abandons his family 
name, and assumes that of his wife’s father. His children 
augment the family of his father-in-law, and bear the name 
of the latter. Though not expressly stated, it is probable 
that some economic motive, such as inability to pay the 
bride’s price, induces the Zirian to abandon his home and 
take up house entirely with his father-in-law. It is im- 
possible to say whether such a custom was ever the rule, 
but it may point to an older state of things when the bride- 
groom had to live at his father-in-law’s house for a limited 
time in a menial capacity, and under special circumstances 
prolonged the period for life. The only other sign-post 
that points in the same direction is the custom of ‘mutual 
avoidance,’ as Dr. Tylor terms it, by which the wife 
avoids her husband’s relations and he hers. He regards 
it as having arisen in the transition period between the 
maternal and paternal system, when the husband, after a 


1 Béhtlingk, p. 73. 2 Georgi, vol. ii. pp. 130, 190. —~enth 


3 Smirnov, (3) p- 215. 4 Jour. of Anth. Inst., Feb. 1889, pp. 246-252. 


— ~« 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 195 


limited residence in the wife’s house, subsequently shifts 
to his father’s abode. But it was continued into the later 
period, when a man takes his wife home at once, and it 
is in this last stage that we find it among the Votiaks. 
Among them a bride must hide from her father-in-law, 
and in his presence must conceal her face with a kerchief. 
For a whole year she must not say a word to him, or even 
mention his name. In his presence, or in that of her elder 
brother-in-law and the eldest sister-in-law, she may not 
appear bare-headed or bare-footed. The same takes place 
in the behaviour of the son-in-law towards his wife’s father 
and mother.! 


PERSONAL NAMES. 


Though the prehistoric Finns had no surnames or family 
names, no doubt they had something corresponding to 
clan names, and gave names to their children. It is not 
easy to ascertain on what principle they did so, as the 
light thrown on the subject by existing or recent practice 
is far from clear. But, on the whole, it would seem that 
the element of chance was an important factor in deciding 
the momentous question how a child was to be called. 
The first person or natural object fortuitously encountered 
by the name-giver was accepted as a supernatural coincid- 
ence, so that the imposition of his or its name on the new- 
born child would naturally be accompanied by luck. In 
the middle of the last century, according to Le Brun, a 
Samoyede child was named after the first man or beast 
that entered the hut, or after the first they met on going 


en (Out, OF after the first object they set eyes upon, whether 


1 Smirnov, (2) p. 160. 


196 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


beast, bird, river, or tree.! In the heroic ballads of the 
Ostiaks the name of an old prince was, ‘The rotten elderly 
hero, the chick of a large grebe, a little grebe’s chick that 
has rotted for three hundred years.’? But a name of this 
sort could not have been given at birth. More than one 
hundred years ago, speaking of the Ceremis, Georgi states 
that a name was given toa male child by the first. male 
friend that arrived, and to a female infant by the first 
female friend or neighbour that looked in. Further, that 
a husband never called his wife by her name, but simply 
‘woman,’ vata, and she called him mari, ‘man, Ceremis.’® 
To the Mordvins of former times the naming of a child 
was a very important matter, and one had to be chosen 
that would bring luck. The father went out of the house, 
and the first living or inanimate object that caught his eye 
was given as a name. Hence such names as ‘Splinter,’ 
‘Leaf,’ ‘Grass,’ etc. The name Smith is common enough, 
which shows the first person met was of that trade; Fiddle, 
for a similar reason, is likewise common.* Among the 
Votiaks the name of a new-born child was formerly given 
by the midwife. At present this has fallen into desuetude 
in the district of Glazov, unless the babe is female. In that 
case the midwife gives it the name of the vorsud to which 
the child’s father belongs. Till her marriage she is never 
called by this name, but at her husband’s house she is 
always called by it till death, and her children are called 
after the vorsud of their father. In the government of 
Kazan a child born in the ploughing season might be 
called Gere, from geri, ‘a plough’; if in harvest-time, a 
suitable name is Uvakat, from surak, ‘a sickle.’ To break 
1 Le Brun, p. 14. 2 Patkanov, (x) p. 11. 
3 Georgi, ii. 840. 4 Mainov, (2) pp. 13, 14; (3) pp. r2, 13. 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 197 


the run of ill-luck, when several children have died in 
succession, the name Zukéar, ‘Stay!’ is given.! Another 
author mentions that Wolf, Bear, Squirrel, Thrush are 
common male names, and are given to children born at 
the season when these are hunted or caught; but that 
nowadays women, till married, are called by their Russian 
baptismal names, and after that by the name of the village 
they come from.? In some parts of the district of Glazov 
the practice is different. The husband does not call his 
wife by her own name—a woman has two names—but by 
a maternal one that she inherited from her mother, and 
she in turn from hers. At birth the midwife who gives 
the name to the new-born daughter says, for instance: 
‘Be good Cabia, Ebga’ (the mother’s name). Professor 
Smirnov sees here an undoubted survival of the maternal 
system. The mother yields her right to the father to 
transmit his name to his son, but keeps her right to hand 
down her name to his daughter.’ But as the second name 
is of the nature of a surname, and the wife in ancient times 
had practically no rights, this use has all the appearance 
of a very modern development, dating from a time when, 
with the increase of civilisation, some freedom of will was 
allowed to married women. If a Lapp child became ill, 
or cried excessively, the reason was that it had been given 
a wrong name. It was therefore rebaptized, and from this 
cause a Lapp might have three or four additional names.‘ 


THE Hovusst, DoMEsTic OCCUPATIONS, ETC. 


The settlements of the prehistoric Finns must always 
have been on or near the bank of a river, or along the 


t Gavrilov, (1) pp. 168, 169. 2 Buch, p. 108. 
8 Smirnov, (2) pp. 137, 138 . 4 Friis, p. 127. 


198 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


shore of a lake, as everywhere traces of neolithic man are 
found in such obviously suitable localities. The dwelling 
in which the prehistoric patriarch lived and ruled his family 
was far from luxurious. That used in summer was little 
more than a screen for the fire that burned in the centre. 
It was a more or less conical structure of light poles, cut 
or broken from trees, the lower ends of which rested on 
the ground, while the upper ends inclined towards the top, 
leaving an aperture for the escape of the smoke. This 
framework was covered with bark, hides of wild animals or 
with sods of turf and was entered by a door that very likely 
faced towards the south. Such a primitive dwelling still 
survives as an Outhouse for cooking in the F. ofa and 
the portable Lapp tent, goatfe. The name, though not 
the original shape and structure of the house, is still 
preserved by the Mordvins, Ceremis, the Permian group, 
and the Ostiaks, and therefore takes us back to the first 
period. For the rngorous winters of the north such a 
habitation was manifestly quite insufficient, and to protect 
themselves better against cold they lived in winter in huts 
that were partly underground. An excavation of suitable 
size was dug with some kind of rude implement to a 
. sufficient depth, was roofed over with poles and then 
covered with sods of turf. Such a dwelling is termed gort 
by the Permian and is found in great numbers in the 
government of Vologda in groups of from ten to fifteen ; 
it is also known to the Ostiaks under the name of ¢a/ 
xot or ‘winter hut.’ As the F. Auone ‘a house, a room,’ 
seems to have meant ‘a warm, snug place,’! it may 
originally have been an underground winter hut. 

Though there is no common word for village, it is not 


1 Settill, (x) p. 270. 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 199 


likely the ancient Finns lived permanently in isolated 
dwellings far from neighbours. 

As a word for ‘fire’ (F. sss) is common to all the 
Ugrians, the East and West Finns, it may almost be 
inferred that it was neither sacred nor an object of worship, 
though its warmth must have been appreciated. For 
‘door’ there are two sets of words: F. 00%, Vog. dvs, ex, 
Ost. ow, and F. wkst, Lap. wks, ufsa, Z. 6ds'ds, 0s, 6bds, V. Os. 
The only common words for an enclosure of any sort 
outside the house seems to be F. piha ‘courtyard,’ C. pede 
‘a fence.’! For outhouses and storehouses, though there 
are often native words, yet each term is confined to a single 
group. Ai place fortified by a rampart and ditch to serve 
as a refuge from attack was unknown in remote prehistoric 
times, though in the protohistoric period forts were much 
used by the Ugrians and by both branches of the Finns. 
The furniture of the hut was almost #7; tables, chairs, 
stools, etc., were unknown, but they had prepared skins 
of animals to spread on the ground for sleeping and sitting 
upon, and were therefore not so badly off after all. 

Besides looking after the children the women had a 
variety of occupations. With half-closed eyes smarting 
from the smoke that filled the hut, they plied their coarse 
bone needles (F. dima, L. athme, C. im, Z. jem) threaded 
with sinew, (F. suonz, L. suodna, M. san, V. and Z. sén, 
Vog. tan) while making boots (F. kenkd, L. gam, M. 
hima, C. hem, Z. kém) or other articles of dress. Or 
taking up a bundle of fibre made from some kind of nettle 
by means of a spindle and whorl, (F. etyd, M. istir, 

. Sidir, V. ers, Z. dors) they span (F. punoa, L. padnam, 
M. fonan) it into thread (F. syy. V. and Z. s#) and wound 

1 Settila, (1) p. 274. 


zoo PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


it into a ball (F. Revd, M. kirnd). This could be used 
in two ways; for ‘sewing with wide stitches,’ (F. Aseria, 
E. M. &urje)! or for weaving (F. kutoa, L. godse4, M 
hodams, C. kuo, V. kuni, Z. kini). The loom of cours 
was a very rude and simple apparatus, but they attached 
the threads of the warp (F. /oimi, M. ima) to one end of 
it, worked in the woof (F. Aude, L. goda, V. kuon, 1. 
hian; M. afks=ats in Esth. ats-gol ‘a shuttle’*) and thus 
manufactured woven stuff (F. kutéama, M. kotf, V. zuon, 
Z. kian). Perhaps the shuttle was not used as there is 
no common term for it, though several native ones are 
to be found. Though sewing and making boots must have 
been practised in the first period, the existing words all 
belong to the first half of the second period, as well as the 
terms for spinning and weaving. 

The cookery was decidedly plain. Fish and flesh were 
generally eaten raw, but fat meat must have formed the 
basis of the ‘ broth’ (F. dems, L. Hebma, M. M. dim, E. M. 
lem ‘grease,’ Vog. lom) they had learnt to prepare, and 
this must have been boiled in some kind of pot that would 
resist fire or into which hot stones could be dropped. For 
holding liquids there were wooden bowls (F. mafa, M. 
mal'anka),’ and for solids they had plaited baskets (F. vakka, 
M. vakan(?)). Like all inhabitants of the north the pre- 
historic Finns of the first period, when they could get it, 
ate fat (F. v0%, M. vat, C. ad, V. 06%, Z. vii, O. vot, Vog. 
vot); in later times the word was also used for ‘butter.’ 
There is no common word for ‘milk,’ showing there were 
no domestic milking animals in the first period. But 
before the end of the second period the Mordvins and 


1 Paasonen, (1) p. 316. 2 /bid., (1) p. Be 
8 /did., (1) p. 20. 


ag 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 201 


West Finns had learnt how ‘to milk’ (F. 4saé, Z. 
listint'=M. lofsa, ‘milk’), and to churn (F. pydhtad, M. 
pistoms)* the milk into butter. 

The oldest prehistoric weapons were the bow and arrow, 
the words for which with little change are found in the 
Ugrian, East and West Finnish languages. Whether the 
bow was simple or compound we do not know. At any 
rate the Ostiaks, who are far from being a progressive 
or inventive people, used in the thirteenth or fourteenth 
century and still use a bow composed of two kinds of 
wood fastened together with fish glue and then bound 
round with birch bark. The lower half was of very hard 
pine, the upper part of birch. Though the string is now 
made of hemp, in ancient times it was doubtless of sinew.® 
Besides the pointed arrow they also used the blunt-headed 
kind, F. vasama, though there is no common word for it. 
F. veitst ‘a knife,’ which corresponds with M. z#ks ‘a 
scraper,’* and F. ora, M. ura, uvo ‘an awl’ or instrument 
for boring holes may originally have been flint or bone 
instruments. 

In winter the hunting expeditions were made on long 
wooden snow-skates (F. suksi, M. soks, Ost. fox, Vog. tout). 
In summer they travelled in ‘boats’ (F, veneh, L. vanas, 
M. vens) which they ‘rowed’ (F. soutaa, Vog. tovantam) 
and steered with a ‘paddle or steering oar,’ (F. mela, L. 
mlle, M. mila). But this class of boat and paddle belongs 
to the later half of the second period. The sleigh appears 
to have come into use at a much later time as there is 


1 The original meaning of these words, preserved in Zjrian, is ‘to press 
out,’ so that ‘to milk’ is a secondary and more specific meaning. 

2 Paasonen, (1) p. 22. 

3 Patkanov, (1) p. 29 4 Paasonen, (1) p. 41. 


202 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


nothing in common between the East and West Finns in 
this respect, though F. ofja, M. vogja, ‘a rein’ if genuine 
and not loan words,! indicate that driving was known by 
the close of the second period. A primitive mode of 
catching fish would be to dam up a small stream with a 
‘dam or weir’ (F. pato, N. Ost. pot), and capture them as 
they passed through a small opening. Nets were probably 
unknown in the first period, but in the first half of the 
second they invented ‘wicker traps’ (F. merta, M. mereta, 
C. murda, V. murdo, Z. morda) for catching fish, which 
undoubtedly formed a most important article of food. 
About the middle of the second period agriculture began 
to be practised, for though there are no common terms to 
express ploughing and sowing, those employed are taken 
from the native stock of words. The earliest grain may 
have been the humble variety of wheat known as ‘spelt’ 
(M. of5, C. vist < * vi¥n, V. vaz’), forms that correspond 
with F. vehnd, ‘wheat,’ though the Hame have another 
word for the same grain, #fsv. Besides these the East and 
West Finns have several apparently native words for 
cereals, which are confined to one, or at most two groups : 
M. fo72'uro, ‘ wheat,’ is evidently a compound of s‘wro, ‘corn’; 
M. sus, C. sok, ‘barley’; Vtk. sid, Zir. id, ‘barley,’ perhaps 
connected with F. ide, ‘a growing shoot’; F. ofva, okra, 
‘barley’; M. pineme, ‘oats,’ and Vtk. s‘est, ‘oats.’ As 
Mr. Paasonen equates F. swurima, ‘groats,’ with M. s‘uvo, 
s‘ora, ‘corn, grain,’ (Zir. sdér, ‘oats’); F. sét-kanen, ‘the 
beard on grain, chaff,’ with M. s‘iva, C. s'w, ‘chaff,’ and 
Z. s', ‘corn, rye’; F. Ayrsd, ‘a loaf, bread,’ with M. &sa, 
ki, ‘bread,’? there can be little doubt that one or two 
cereals were known and used as food about the middle of 
1 Paasonen, (x) p. az. 2 [bid., (x) pp. 34, 30, 17. 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 203 


the second period. The cultivation of the soil must have 
been of a very primitive description and no doubt was left 
to the women and ‘slaves’ (F. ovja, M. M. u#é), who 
scratched the surface of a plot of ground near the dwelling 
with a pointed stick, threw in a few handfuls of grain, 
covered it over with earth and waited till it grew up. When 
ripe the grain was separated from the ‘straw’ (F. ofkt, 
M. olgo) and ‘ground’ (F. jaukoa, M. jazams) between a 
couple of stones. : 

In the first period the year was only divided into ‘ winter’ 
(F. talvi, L. daluve, M. fala, C. tele, V. tol, Z. tél, Vog. and 
Ost. fa/) and ‘summer’ (F. esd, suvi, L. gesse, M. hiza, 
Z. gosim, Vog. tuv). It was only in the second period 
when the state of the crops drew their attention to it that a 
word for ‘autumn’ (F. syésy, L. cakéa, M. soks) was found 
to be necessary. Some of the natural measures of length 
seem to have been in use at a very early period. The 
‘fathom’ has a very wide range (F. sy, L. sai, M. sel, 
V. and Z. s#/, Vog. tal, Ost. dal); the ‘ell’ (F. kyyndrd, 
M. kener, C. kun‘er, V. gir (?)) and the ‘span’ (F. vaaksa, 
L. vuopse, M. vaksa, Z. ves't) have a less range. In the first 
period they could only count up to seven; by the time 
they needed a term to express ten, they were already 
divided into four groups—a West Finnish-Mordvin, a Lapp- 
Ceremis-Vogul, a Votiak-Zirian, and an Ostiak group. The 
last two groups borrowed their terms from a Persian and 
Turkish source respectively. It was only at a later time 
that much was done in the way of ‘counting’ (F. dskea, 
L. lokkat, M. luvan), ‘paying’ (F. maksaa, L. makset, M. 
maksan (I give), and ‘selling’ (F. myydé, L. mieggaé, M. 
mijan, Vog. migam). 


204 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


THE METALS. 


One of the great turning-points in the history of a people 
is the introduction of the use of metal and the gradual 
disuse of stone implements. The first metal that became 
known to the Finns may have been copper, though no 
distinction was made between this and bronze. 


Copper, 1 

Metal, 2 F. Lapp. Mord. Vog. Ost. Magy. 
Wire, 3 [| vaski,1,2 vetk, us'k'd, VOX, 2 vax, vase 
Iron, 4 vetkke,1,2 vis'k'a,) 3 vex, 2,4 val,4 


At the present time the Ostiaks use vax, vox in the 
general sense of ‘metal, money,’ and in some places ‘iron.’ 
When they wish to be explicit they prefix patar or vosta, 
‘green, yellow,’ when they mean ‘copper’; sav#, ‘ white,’ 
when they mean ‘silver’ ; and ef, which Castrén translated 
by ‘simple,’ when speaking of iron.’ Among the Voguls 
vox has also the meaning of ‘money, metal,’ though in 
some places it means ‘copper.’ Taking everything into 
consideration it seems best to suppose that the original 
meaning of vox, vax was ‘bronze,’ with its necessary con- 
notation of ‘metal.’ Another word for ‘copper’ alone is 
confined to Vogul, Ceremis and the Permian group. 

Cer. Vik. Zir. Vog. 
voirgen'e i7g0n ivgin Grgin 

As this set of words has only one meaning and is 
never used in the sense of metal it is probably of later 
origin than the vashs-group. 

The next metal to be noticed is ‘silver,’ for which the 
West Finns have a special name, Aogea < Sopeda, not 
found, however, in the Eastern groyps or among the 

1 Paasonen, (1) p. 40; Wichman, (3) p. 23. 


ee Se 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 205 


Ugrians. But the Permian and Ugrian groups have a 
very interesting and puzzling series of words for this metal 
which cannot well be separated from the terms for ‘tin, 
lead.’ Some of them have the appearance of being com- 
pounds, the last part of which is believed by Mr. Wichman 
to be of the same origin as F. vaskz, Vog. Ost. vox.} 


Ost. 


navi-vox, in| dlin ash, exist dvteste, 


avusist 


atued, atkues | dlom, én \<asvist 
gaim atuci | dn 


Dr. Munkacsi maintains that the Osetan is the original 
source from which the Permian group and the Magyars 
obtained their word for ‘silver,’ but this is denied by 
Schrader, Hiibschmann, and Wichman, who consider, on 
the contrary, that the Osetan form is borrowed from an East 
Finnish source. The latter, starting from the Vtk. asves’, 
analyses it into az, ‘ white,’ and ves’, ‘ metal,’ the equivalent 
of F. vaskt. But the grounds on which he makes az to 
mean ‘white’ seem to me very precarious. Dr. Munkdcsi 
took down a Votiak magic song in which the word aziz 
occurred as an epithet of a ‘hill’ and a ‘prince.’ The 
word was unintelligible to him, but his Votiak teacher 
explained it by what looks very much like a piece of folk- 
etymology. As #z means a ‘stone,’ he explained that zz 
was a ‘stone’ and az ‘a very heavy white stone.’ The ex- 
planation not being very intelligible, Mr. Wichman supposes 
that as must mean ‘white,’ and azés ‘white stone.’? But it 
seems to me that the teacher did not really understand the 


1 Wichman, (2) p. 23. 9 /id., (2) pp. 23, 24. 


206 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


word and merely hazarded a guess. As a good many 
Arabic and Persian words have crept into Votiak through 
a Tatar source, I rather suspect this is the Arabic-Persian- 
Turkish ’azsz, ‘precious, respected, powerful,’ a fitting 
epithet for a ‘prince’ and one that under certain circum- 
stances might be applied to a ‘hill.’ 

Referring back to the list above, we notice: (1) that the 
word for ‘silver,’ common to the Permian group, to 
Magyar and Osetan, is not found in Vogul or Ostiak ; (2) 
that the Ostiaks use a compound word meaning ‘white 
metal’ instead, and the Voguls a word that corresponds 
with the Magyar for ‘lead’; (3) that in the Permian group, 
lead and tin are either distinguished as black and white 
usves or no distinction is made at all; (4) that the Vogul 
for ‘lead’ seems to be the same as the Permian, Magyar 
and Osetan for ‘silver,’ as Vog. # is often the equivalent of a 
common Finnish s, s; (5) that the Permian, Magyar, and 
Osetan for ‘silver’ seem to be compound words; (6) and, 
that as the words for ‘tin’ in Vogul-Ostiak mean ‘white 
lead,’ ‘male lead,’ much as in the Permian groups, we may 
neglect the word for ‘tin,’ and confine our attention to 
‘silver’ and ‘ lead.’ 

From the fourth observation we are led to suppose that 
the older meaning of Vog. atves was ‘silver,’ not ‘lead,’ 
though it is by no means certain. It might also be 
imagined that afves was borrowed from the Vtk. asves, s 
being replaced by 4, a phonetic change that certainly might 
take place. But this does not account for the form atkues, 
where ues seems to be the Ost. Sam. mes ‘iron, metal,’ a 
word that in other Samoyede dialects appears as ese’, vese, 
bese, basa, basa. In the short excursus at the end of this 
section it will be seen that all these forms, including ues, 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION = 207 


go back to an original form beginning with vor 7. The 
Osetan and Permian forms seem to show that the original sibi- 
lant was an s not an s sound, as in Magy. ezist, Vog, atveé. 
If this is so, still the probability that Vog. atves< atves is 
a loan from the Votiak is considerably lessened by the con- 
sideration that there is also a Sam. vese. 

Corresponding to and probably of the same origin as 
the Samoyede words for ‘iron, metal,’ are ‘Magyar vas 
‘iron,’ Vog. Ost. vox ‘copper, metal’ and F. vas&i ‘ copper.’ 
The word in Northern Asia and Siberia that corresponds 
best with the Samoyede forms is undoubtedly the Turk. 
jes, Mong. dzes, Burj. sef (<jes, jet) ‘bronze, copper, 
metal.’ As the Turks have a word for ‘copper’ only, the 
oldest meaning may have been ‘bronze’; and as in one 
Samoyede dialect we find that initial 7, v, are equipollent, 
it seems possible to suppose that ;@se’ was borrowed directly 
from a T. es and dialectically became vese, vasa. 

If this is correct the West Finnish, Vogul, and Ostiak 
for ‘copper, metal,’ the Magyar for ‘iron’ and the second 
part of the words for ‘silver’ in Permian are all referrible 
ultimately to a common form jes, which is also found in 
Turkish and Mongolian. Whether the last two peoples 
obtained it from a still more remote source must be left 
undecided. I imagine that the diffusion of the word took 
place in this way. From the Altai region, where copper is 
abundant and tin is also found, jes, with the meaning 
‘bronze,’ gradually spread through the medium of Samo- 
yede tribes to the Ugrians living chiefly on the east side, 
but also in considerable numbers on the west side of the 
Urals, reaching them not later than the sixth century B.c. 
and possibly a good deal earlier. From the Ugrians, under 
the form vas, it was passed on to the West Finns, Mordvins 


208 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


and Lapps, who added the suffix-ke, 4'é, perhaps merely a 
diminutive that did not essentially affect the meaning. 
This hypothesis receives support from the facts recorded 
in chapter ii., for the earliest bronze socketed celts, found 
in the north of Finland, in Lapland, at Andnino, as well 
as in other parts of the government of Viatka, are all of 
transuralian form, the aperture of the socket being always 
angular, never circular in section. The battle-axes from 
the coast of the White Sea and Andnino are also of 
Siberian type. While the crania from Fatidnovo, associated 
with minute pieces of copper and iron, seem to be Ugrian. 

As the Magyar for iron is vas, and the Vogul-Ostiak for 
‘copper, metal,’ is vox, vuax, it is clear that the second 
part of their words for ‘silver,’ ‘lead’ (-sést, -ves) are 
borrowed. And if Vog. -ves, -kues are borrowed, as sug- 
gested above, from Samoyede dialects, they do not stand 
alone. Ahlqvist has noted eighteen Vogul or Ostiak words 
borrowed from the Samoyedes and among them aftkues.} 
Perhaps, too, the Ost. satay, which has no meaning by 
itself, in pafar-vox ‘copper’ is the Ost. Sam. pada/ ‘ green,’ 
probably ‘yellowish green’ as it is a derivative of fad ‘the 
gall.’ The Mordvin word for copper also means ‘green.’ 
It still remains to explain the suffix -/e, -¢ found in the 
Magyar and Osetan words for silver. In Samoyede, the 
breathing marked by ’ as in ;ése’? can sometimes be traced 
back to lost dental as in the Jur. 7#’. Tav. 42’, Jen. 32’, 
‘water’ compared with Knd. os¢. O. wt ‘water.’ The 
older forms of 7ése’, vese may therefore have been *jese¢, 
*yeset, or *jesete, *vesefe, and from this would arise the 
Magyar -tést < *veste, which occurs as a loan from the 
Magyar in the Osetan -vs¢, -veste. 


1 Ahiqvist, (3) pp. 5-8. 


———_—~ ir 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 209 


The origin of the prefixes ¢s-, az-, a¢-, in the words for 
‘silver’ requires explanation, if we reject that of Mr. 
Wichman, and I offer the following suggestion instead. 

Castrén explained the Ost. e#-v0x ‘iron’ as ‘simple metal.’ 
Owing to its form and meaning it is difficult to separate 
this from the Ost. s¢-vuay ‘steel,’! the first part of which 
is evidently connected with Vog. semfan, Vtk. andan, Os. 
andan ‘steel,’ all from a N. Pers. hAundwani, hindawani, 
hindi, ‘Indian steel,’ see p. 234. As initial 4 is regularly 
dropt in Osetan, and the Permian group has no 4, it is 
uncertain whether Vtk. andan is a direct loan from Osetan 
or vice versé, or whether both borrowed from a common 
source. Here the za#-is clearly adapted from one of the 
N. Pers. forms, and i#t-vway is a folk-etymology containing 
as an ingredient wuay ‘metal,’ the s## being unintelligible. 
This being the case it is possible to suppose that dialectically 
the # may have dropt out and the result was efvox ‘iron,’ 
‘steel(?)’ The first member of this compound is perhaps 
the same as the af- in Vog. atves, atkues ‘lead.’ If the 
last part of this is a loan from the Samoyede, and a¢?- is 
not of Samoyede origin we must suppose that at one time 
the Voguls used ves, *ves, *veste concurrently with vox as an 
independent word, and the Magy. wsf ‘silver’ seems to 
confirm this, though the old meaning is changed. The 
loans voy <<* vas, ve¥<* vesfe must also have been made 
at different epochs, From some such form as *efvesfe the 
Magyars formed ezveste, in which form it was taken by 
the Osets, and subsequently ezii7. If there is anything | 
in this suggestion, the Magyar word for ‘silver’ once meant 
‘Indian metal,’ and the Permian equivalents of F. vaskz 

1 Tomaschek, (2) p. 42, gives this form, which was unknown to Castrén 
and Ahlqvist. 

I O 


210 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


viz. -ves’, is’ were introduced quite independent of the 
Finnish and at a much later date, but also through an 
Ugrian channel. 

To account for the Permian words for ‘lead,’ ‘tin,’ there 
is the N. Pers. arsiz, ‘lead, tin,’ from which they might 
be borrowed with the loss of 7, as in Vtk. Juges, ‘an eagle,’ 
from Os. cdérgds (¢=ts), N. Pers. kargas. In this case the 
inserted » in seves’ would have followed the analogy of 
asves’, while the original is better preserved in the Zir. 
osis, As the N. Pers. arsiz is itself a loan word from the 
Ar. vasas, ‘lead, tin,’ the Permian words, if this view is 
correct, cannot be older than the seventh century a.D. 
There is no silver or tin in the Ural Mountains, so that in 
any case the East Finns and Ugrians can only have seen 
these metals as imported articles. Galena, on the contrary, 
is found in a good many places in the above region, though 
it does not appear to have been utilised in prehistoric times, 
all the so-called Cudish mines being of copper or gold. 

The next metal that followed in the wake of bronze and 
copper in North-eastern Russia was probably iron, how 
long after we cannot say, though the interval may not have 
been very great, for a small piece, evidently very precious 
and embedded in a disk of copper, was discovered at 
Fatidnovo. As all the names for it are borrowed, they will 
be mentioned in a later section. Gold may have followed 
next, as the loan words for it in East Finnish and Ugrian 
were borrowed about the same time as those for ‘iron’ and 
from the same source. On @ frtori grounds we should 
expect gold to be known much earlier than silver, the ore 
of which is difficult to reduce, while the other metal is 
often found in nuggets. But at present the place at 
which the earliest finds of gold objects have been made is 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 11 


Gliadénova, though only to the number of three out of about 
23,000, while a few silver articles were obtained not only 
there, but also at Andnino. The introduction of terms for 
‘metal,’ ‘bronze,’ and ‘copper’ may therefore be set in the 
latter part of the second period ; for ‘iron,’ ‘gold,’ ‘silver,’ 
and ‘lead’ in the third period for the East Finns, but not 
till the fifth period for the West Finns, with the exception 
perhaps of silver. 

Though there are forms in Mordvin and Ugrian cor- 
responding to F. vaéaa, ‘to cast (metal), to pour out 
(any fluid),’ there are no common words for ‘mine,’ 
‘crucible, ‘ bellows,’ ‘moulds,’ and other apparatus neces- 
sary for an artificer in bronze, when casting alone was 
employed. This is to be explained by the very simple 
appliances used, which scarcely required a technical expres- 
sion, and by working as a rule on a small scale. For 
instance Ostiak women still cast their own tin ornaments 
in moulds of pine bark made by themselves,! and a recent 
English visitor of the Island of Kolguev describes how he 
saw a Samoyede make a ring. Round a stick he cut a 
groove, fitted a piece of paper over it, and then ran in 
some white-looking metal which he had heated in the fire 
in a hollow piece of wood. The wood of the stick was cut 
away, the ring removed, and finished with a knife and sand. 
He worked away till he had a ring as well and accurately 
shaped as any plain gold signet ring. Though this mould 
was of wood, the Samoyedes use bullet moulds of stone set 
in a pair of wooden scissors. As the anvil, the sledge- 
hammer, the forge-fire, and the smith himself only became 
a necessity when iron was abundant, it is not surprising 


1 Martin, (2) Tafel, 4. 
2 Trevor-Battye, /cebound on Kolguev (Westminster, 1895), pp. 172, 298. 


212 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


that though for some of these expressions there are native 
words, none of them are common to two groups unless 


they are loan words. . 

It might be supposed that Aves is either a different word or 
that it retains an original 4 that the other dialects have lost. 
This, however, is not the case. There are at least a dozen 
words in which Jurak 7, v, Jenisei, Tavgj, and Kamasin 4 are 
represented in Sam. Ostiak by 2 And@ first it must be observed 
that the Tavgj and Jenisei dialects have no wv, J, so that the 
equivalent of an initial v, f, in Jurak is perforce 4, 7, in these 
two dialects. In Sam. Ostiak no word can begin with a soft 
consonant or with 7. In Kamasin v is not an initial sound, 
and sonant stop consonants in that position are rare. The 
instances in which Ost. & correspond with Jur. /, v, Jen. Tav. 
Kam. 4 are to be explained by 4 being exchanged for g which 
hardened initially into &. There are a good many words in 
which Jur. has initial 4 and all the others 4, showing that the 
latter was the original sound. There are also a good many in 
which Jur. Jen. Tav. begin with 7, but Ost. with 7, & and Kam. 
with 7; here the original initial was doubtless 7. 


| Jurak. | Jenes. | Tevei. | Kamasin on | 
r. Fish-hook bat buda kote 


2. Dog . _| ganda, ) tn buno bafi | men<ben! kanak 


jéd’u, . 
3. Bowel, gut vet je bere<bede | beatufi | bedti kiite 
4. Ten. . ane br bied kt 
s. Sturgeon {ten \! bean bakuna kuagan 
6. Ariver .j| jaha jaba bigoi ‘aga ki’, kege 
7. Superfluous| vata, va' | bodadde badatua kue, kuefi 


8. Left (side) | vadisei | bodi'o badi'e kuedagi 
9. Acrow . | varia bari kuere 


id 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 213 


No. I is an interesting example, the original being the White 
Russian vuda, Gr. Rus. uda, ‘fish-hook.’ Fish-hooks were 
probably early import articles of the Great-Novgorodian mer- 
chants trading in Siberia, and were found more serviceable 
than the old native ones of bone. 

No. 3 may be compared with M. gefesdn, Burj. gefehef, ‘bowel, 
guts,’ but the relations between Mongol and Samoyede have not 
yet been worked out, so that it proves nothing. No. 6 is not 
quite regular; the Kam. “aga and Jen. jaka come from aga, 
not from vaga as we should expect; all the forms may be 
compared with N.O. jogan, F. jokt. In No. 9 varfia is the 
same as N.O. vorga, vorfia, ‘a crow’; the Vog. uerex, judging 
from the vowels, is borrowed from the Sam. Ost. éuere, and 
this may be compared with Mng. éertje, ‘a raven,’ though the 
resemblance is possibly accidental. From the above it is quite 
evident that the initial £ in 4ues is not original, and that most 
likely it was v, as initial 7 in a number of instances becomes in 
Kam. 7, in Sam. Ost. #, 2, and even occasionally &. There is 
just one exception in the 7 and the ~ series. 


Water j,uvit bb bf bu wut, ot. 
Fat jer jo jir uér, Or. 
Comparing the first set with Mng. usus, ‘ water’<*ufun (?), it is 


likely that the original initial was «, #, which has been retained 
by Sam. Ostiak intact ; the same may be true of the next line. 


DoMESTIC ANIMALS. 


The animal first domesticated or enslaved, and that in 
the first period, was the dog. There is a term for him 
common to all the East and West Finns as well as to all 
the Ugrians. Whether he was used for drawing burdens 
cannot be stated with certainty as there is no common 
expression for ‘sledge,’ but every hunter must have been 
followed by a woolly-haired, sharp-nosed, savage, and ill- 


ne 


214 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


fed dog. If he was used for draught the burden was 
probably attached to two light poles, the upper ends of 
which were fastened to a sort of collar, while the lower | 
ends trailed along the snow. 

In the archzological chapter we learnt that before the | 
close of the neolithic age, that is to say, towards the end | 
of the second period, the principal domestic animals, the ~, 
horse, ox, sheep, and pig were known to the settlers on | 
the Central Volga, between Kaz4n and the mouth of the 
Kama, and that at the Station of Burtneek in the far west, 
the ox, sheep, and, perhaps, the horse, were also known. 

As by hypothesis the East and West Finns were in pos- 
session of the upper Volga valley at a still earlier PCT ries 
it follows they must have acquired the knowledge of ~ 
domestic animals from some other more civilised people, 
for though there were wild cattle and wild swine in the 
region they inhabited, there were no wild sheep or wild 
horses. If the Finns had brought the domestic animals 
with them from Asia into Europe, they must have entered 
the country by a much more southerly route than is 
generally supposed. The country east of the Urals, in 
the governments of Perm and Tobolsk, was densely 
forested, was studded with impassable morasses, and was 
quite unsuited for sheep, horses, and horned cattle. Even 
at the present day the Ostiaks hardly keep any, and in 
their epic poetry, though much is related of lifting herds 
of reindeer as well as of feasting, the sheep is never once 
mentioned, and the horse appears rather as a legendary 
animal. In fact, till the Finns became civilised and pro- 
vident enough to cut and stack a supply of hay for the 
long winters they could have kept neither sheep, cattle, 
nor horses in such a region. The only possibility of keeping 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 215 


these animals in high latitudes is when certain conditions 
are fulfilled. It is necessary that large tracts of pasture 
should be free from snow all the year round. In a flat, 
forested region like the valleys of the Central Ob and the 
Irtish the snow lies far too deep for horses and cattle to 
reach the herbage below. It is only in mountainous tracts 
like the Altai, where hillside terraces and shallow valleys 
are exposed to violent blasts of wind, that sweep away the 
snow, that animals can be maintained in the winter months 
without the necessity of providing them with artificial 
fodder. The northern limit of the sheep under natural 
conditions starts from near the north corner of the Caspian 
and passes through the intersections of Lat. 50° N. Long. 
60° E. and Lat. 57° N. Long. go” E.}, or roughly speaking 
from the north-east corner of the Caspian to Yeniseisk. 

Next to the dog the name for ‘sheep’ has the widest 
range among the Finno-Ugrians, and its natural habitat 
shows the Finns could not have known it before they 
entered Europe. 


Fin. |M. M.| E. M. | Vtk.| Zjr. | N.’Ost.| S. Ost. | Vog. | Magy. 


ee | ES | 


Sheep 1] ué#éu 2 | wcax | utsat 


Ewe2 | uxuhi< | ... oe «| $32 Bx o}, os OF, ax of | wht 
ase 2 


The Ostiaks and Voguls used of as a generic term, and 
to distinguish the sexes prefix ‘male,’ ‘female,’ while a 
lamb is a ‘sheep’s young one.’ Asa rule such a nomen- 
clature is not that of a pastoral people, who generally 
have a special term for each sex and each age, though 


Murray, map 35. 


216 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


it is true the sheep-breeding Turks use a compound 
of koi ‘sheep’ to denote a ‘ewe.’ The Ceremis seem 
to have borrowed all their words from a Cuva’ and 
Turkish source, and in Zirian, with the one exception of 
#¥, all the words have a CuvaS, Iranian and Russian origin. 
The Mordvins have perhaps borrowed a word for ‘lamb’ 
from an Iranian people, and certainly for ‘ram’ from a 
Turkish and a Russian source. The West Finns borrowed 
a term for ‘ram’ in the fourth or Lithuanian period, but 
they have two native words for ‘lamb,’ one of which 
merely means a ‘yearling,’ and the other (aritsa) is 
evidently formed from avi, a call-word used for attract- 
ing lambs, so neither of these terms is necessarily of 
any great age. It is clear then that sheep-breeding at 
first was on a very small scale, and the Finns could in 
no sense be called a pastoral people. It is also to be 
noted that the West Finns borrowed a special term for 
‘wool’ at the same time that they adopted a new term 
for ‘ram.’ 
The terms for ‘horse’ have a much narrower range :— 


Mord. | Vtk. | Zjr. 


Professor Setaéla connects the Permian #3 with F. sveh, 
while Dr. Munkacsi equates the former with Os. urs, ours, 
‘a stallion.’! The West Finns have another native word 
for ‘stallion,’ 0774, as well as for ‘mare’ (samma), and 


1 Setiili, (2) p. 6; Munkacsi, (2) p. 195¢ 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 217 


‘colt’ (varsa), but they are not found in the Eastern 
branches. The origin of F. Aevonen, ‘a horse,’ is not 
quite certain, though it is probably a loan word. As 
L. alddo could hardly have been borrowed from the 
Mordvins, I suspect it was really taken from the West 
Finns, who subsequently lost the word, and that the 
older meaning of F. Zhmd was ‘horse,’ not ‘cow.’ The 
Mordvins have also a native word for a ‘foal,’ vase, vasend. 
The Ceremis Bu/o ‘mare,’ Vtk. val, Zir. vél ‘horse,’ if 
not connected with M. d/dé, L. alddo, might be compared 
with Tat. wlak, ula, Cuv. vilix, ‘a draught animal, a 
post horse,’ and if Bz/o is really a loan word, as I 
suppose, then the Ceremis have no native word for a 
horse, for imne ‘a horse,’ jaBaga ‘a foal,’ are of Tatar 
Origin and the Permian group have only one term, all 
the others being Turkish or Russian loan words. The 
Ugrian groups have a special word for ‘horse’ which 
never penetrated westwards :— 
Ost. Vog. Magy. 
fovi, lox, fau (f{=#) bu, lo, & lg 


Perhaps these are remotely connected with Mong. fagi, 
‘a wild horse,’ otherwise they stand alone. Dr. Munkacsi 
believes that the rich equine terminology of the Voguls 


and Ostiaks, their preference for horse-sacrifices and horse- 


flesh shows that once they lived further south in the wilder- 
ness between the Urals, the Caspian and the Sea of Aral.? 
The northern limit of the extinct horse in Europe, is said 
to be a line drawn from the mouth of the Elbe, to where 
Lat. 50° N. cuts the Ural River. Where it has not been 
introduced, the northern limit of the horse is from near 


1 Munkacsi, (2) pp. 156, 187. 


218 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


the point where Lat. 44° N. cuts the Caspian Sea to the 
source of the Yenisei and then eastwards.! If this is 
correct it shows that, till they arrived in Europe, the Finns 
could never have seen a horse. 

Though it is probable that horned cattle became known, 
at any rate to some of the Finnish peoples, as early as 
the horse, the terms for ‘ox, cow’ have only a limited 
extension. 


ee | ee | eee | eee fee | oe 


Cow r Reindeer 
calf (m. or f.) 2 


Cowr Horse2_ | lekomnd: ee difmd 2 
Ox, bull . 


Calfx Reindeer 
calf s Maer OGS2 1,2 oe Vasa I 


iJ Est. 
Heifer . {| ese. .. |vedaka 


Dr. Munkdcsi compares Vog. Ost. mis with Zend macst 
N.P. mes, ‘a ewe,’ but as he also compares Zir. med, ‘a 
sheep’ with the same Iranian forms, and the Zinan term 
for ‘cow’ is més, these two Zirian words cannot have a 
common origin, unless Z. més is a direct loan from the 
Ugrian mis Though Z. me¥ might easily be referred 
to a N.P. mes, with the same meaning, the difficulty of 
comparing Ost. Vog. mis ‘a cow’ with N.P. mef is con- 
siderable, apart from the difference of meaning, and I 
suppose it has an independent origin, though borrowing 
may have taken place from Ugrian to Permian, or wice 
vers. He also compares the Permian 05, of, Vog. uska, 
us'ka ‘ox,’ with a Kabardin v5, ‘young bull’ and Znd. 


1 Murray, map 42. 2 Munkacsi, (2) pp. 186, 192, 196. 


oe ee 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 219 


ukhéan, Gth. athsa, ‘ox, bull,’ adding that these indo- 
European words agree with the common Turk. dkéz, dgiis 
‘ox, bull.’! As Ost. uges is certainly a loan from the 
Turk. dgis, it is probable that Vog. w#ska, us'ka has 
the same origin, either by metathesis or by contraction 
(us <dgiis) with a diminutive sufix—a. In that case the 
Permian forms seems to be derived from the Ugrian and 
not vice-versa, as the original final s is preserved in the 
latter, while the Permians have first borrowed a softened form 
us'ka and further changed it into oS, of, ofka. Another 
word for ‘cow’ is perhaps also of Turkish origin :— 


E. Mord. Cer. Vik. S. Ost.  Vog. Turk. 
Cow skal wuthal  sthkaljiskal sadgar sajr <sigir 


The Ugrian words are certainly Turkish; the East 
Finnish forms are less certain, but if borrowed, the group 
that turned the final » into 4, perhaps the Erza, must 
have handed on the word to the other groups. ‘Tomaschek 
compares with hesitation F. vasa, M. vasa ‘calf’ with Skr. 
vatsa, Ost. vdss ‘calf,’ but as the medial consonant s, 2 
is single, the equation must be considered doubtful.? 
Professor Thomsen is inclined to believe that F. Aechho, 
hehvo, Vote dhkva ‘a heifer’ may be derived from the 
Lith. asva (gen. -ds) ‘horse,’ an older form of which was 
efva, though an intermediate form *ehvo, ehva.2 The West 
Finns have a native word for ‘bull’ sozms, which in 
Esthonian carries the meaning of ‘stallion colt,’ but it does 
not extend further. 

The Permians have also several isolated words: Vtk. vais, 
‘a cow in calf’? which may have the same origin as Vtk. 


1 Munkacsi, (2) p. 186. 2 Tomaschek, p. 13. 
3 Thomsen, (1) p. 146, note 4. 


220 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


val ‘a horse’; Zir. foros ‘a bull,’ 4i#* ‘a small ox,’ 
probably from the Russian, and s#/’um, ‘an ox, a boar.’ 

The words for ‘reindeer’ are not widely diffused and in 
some instances borrowing from a neighbour is tolerably 
certain. 


eee | eee fl ef ee | eee 


Rein. «i sarda, | vordo 
see wee x, 2 


The West Finns have several words for reindeer; foro 
‘a tame reindeer,’ fetva, peura ‘a wild reindeer, a stag,’ 
which last with great reservation and a note of interrogation 
is derived by Professor Thomsen from Lith. évédts ‘elk’ ;1 
the equation is therefore doubtful. Fin. Aévvas ‘ male rein- 
deer, stag,’ and Fin. Airvé ‘elk’ are referred by him with a 
note of interrogation to a hypothetical Lith. *sirvss, 
Strvas, based on O. Pr. sirvis (or sirnis) ‘a roe.’ He 
regards Lap. serva ‘stag, elk,’ as undoubtedly a loan from 
Fin. Aévvi and Lap. sarves ‘a reindeer bull’ as a loan from 
Fin. Airvas.2 The Fin. vaadin gen. vaatmen, ‘a three or 
four-year-old reindeer calf,’ is connected with Lap. uaj. 
gen. vacem ‘a reindeer cow’ and with Lap. saja, gen. 
vacama ‘a two-year-old reindeer calf? Whether Vtk. 
pusei ‘a reindeer’ is a loan word or not I am not sure, 


1 Thomsen, (rz) p. 162. 9 Jbéd., (1) Pe 225 


*o — 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 221 


but Zir. pes ‘a reindeer calf,’ and Zir. fiy ‘a reindeer’ are 
almost certainly borrowed from a Ugrian source. The 
Lap. a/ddo, ‘a reindeer cow’ has already been mentioned ; 
the Mordvin and Ceremis forms seem to standalone. At 


_the present time Finland cannot be termed a reindeer 


country, though in winter wild ones wander as far south as 
the central districts and the north shore of Lake Ladoga, 
so that they are known to hunters and to the Finns who 
live as neighbours of the Lapps in the extreme north 
of the country. But they are not bred by the Finns unless 
perhaps in Lapland. Further east and north of the Volga 
they are not kept by the Ceremis, the Votiaks, or the 
Zirians, save such of the latter as have got possession by 
foul or by fair means of the herds of the unfortunate Samo- 
yedes. The Mordvins live too far south for reindeer, and 
can only know of them by hearsay. At the present time 
reindeer are not kept in the valley of the Ob, south of 
Berezov, or about Lat. 64° N., though a few centuries 
ago when the epic songs were composed these animals were 
bred along the whole central course of the Irtish to within 
200 miles north of Tobolsk or about Lat. 59° N., perhaps 
even further to the south.! According to Andrew Murray 
the southern limit of the reindeer, starting from about 
Lat. 62° N. on the west coast of Finland, takes a line 
about a degree north of the general course of the Volga 
before it turns south, about as far as where Lat. 55° N. 
cuts Long. 60° E., thence it continues eastwards towards 
Akmolinsk, but south of it, as far as Kobdo, north of the 
great Altai mountains.? The southern limit east of the Urals 
is certainly brought too far south, though it may correspond 
fairly well with the range of this animal in prehistoric 
1 Patkanov, (1) pp. 34, 35. 3 Murray, map 32, 


222 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


times. From the above we may conclude that the reindeer 
was never a domestic animal of the prehistoric Finns. 

The only other domestic animal to which the East and West 
Finns can lay claim is the ‘pig,’ Fin. sika, Mord. tuva,! though 
Professor Genetz refers it eventually to an Indo-European 
*swi- with a Finnish diminutive suffix -ka.2_ The Permian 
group, the Voguls and Ostiaks have all borrowed from the 
Russian, though the Zirians have three native words for 
‘boar,’ of which one has also the meaning of ‘bull.’ The 
West Finns have also native words for ‘boar’ (kavyu, 
uvosa); for ‘a gelded boar’ (Fin. ovas, Mord. uris), which 
has been compared with the Zd. vareza and for ‘a sow’ Fin. 
tmiséd. In a wild state the pig must have been known 
to the Finns from the very beginning of their history. 


TREE-NAMES. 


Beside the above culture words there is yet another small 
series to consider, as they show the class of trees that grew 
in the country inhabited by the Finns in the second period. 
Soft-wood trees and indeed a good many hard-wood trees 
being of no use in this inquiry, it is only necessary to 
enumerate a few of the latter. 


LS | a | | ES fp f wrateite 


Bird- } tuomt fom | lomba fim |Fim | Lom, lom 
Elm . vee salt Sole | str-pu?| str-pu? wee sil-fa 


Lime .| ntint-puu| ... ves vee nin- 
noe ee pekse | piiti ose "oe 


| | 


1 Setil#, pp. 8, 9; Paasonen, p. 31. 2 Genetz, (3) p. 42. 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 223 


The ‘bird-cherry’ no doubt belongs to the first period 
and therefore was known to the Finns before they left Asia. 
The same cannot be said of the ‘elm,’ even if the above 
equations are correct, as this tree does not grow on the 
eastern slopes of the Urals, For this tree the West Finns 
have another word—ja/ava, In the West Finnish dialects 
there are several names for the ‘lime’ and more than one 
in Mordvin, so there is no doubt it was known during the 
whole of the second period. In the Zirian country both 
this and the elm grow along the Sisola about as far north 
as Latitude 62° N., but the trees are stunted and of small 
size. The lime however grows well in the neighbourhood 
of Perm and in the south-western part of the government 
is a forest tree, yet the finest forests are found on the right 
bank of the Volga in the country of the Mordvins. The 
northern limit of the ‘oak’ passes along the south coast 
of Finland at no great distance from the sea, then 
approximately through St. Petersburg and Vologda east- 
wards to Long. 50° where it turns south-east to about Slato- 
ust in the Urals and from here it turns south-west to about 
Orenburg. As it does not cross the Urals and does not 
reappear in Siberia till we reach the distant valley of the 
Amur, the Finns who know the tree must have named it 
after their arrival in Europe. The Zirians have borrowed 
their word from the Russian and the Vtk. #%1-f% seems 
to have the same origin. The northern limit of the 
maple, which does not grow east of the Urals, and of 
wheat, is nearly the same as that of the oak. The ‘ash,’ 
which appears to be only known to the West Finns, 
covers a much more restricted area than the oak. Its 
northern limit skirts the south coast of Finland, passes 
through St. Petersburg and about 1° north of Moscow to 


224 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


half or quarter of a degree north of Penza and thence, 
passing about 1° north of Saratov to the river Ural. All 
these indications seem to point to some district in the 
valley of the Volga from the mouth of the Kama west- 
wards as the original home of the undivided Finns. 
Archeological considerations had previously led us to a 
similar conclusion. As the Permian group gradually 
pushed northwards they would lose their word for oak 
and possibly, nay probably, they never lived within the 
area where the ash flourishes. 

At the beginning of the chapter it was mentioned that 
reasons would be given at the close of it in support of the 
propositions that at the end of the first period the Finns 
were in Europe and formed the earliest settlers in the 
valley of the Oka, and therefore that the life of the still 
undivided Finns, embraced by the first portion of the 
second period, was passed in the valley of the Volga. 
During this epoch the Finns of course were at a stage 
of pure neolithic civilisation without knowledge of any 
domestic animals but the dog. In order to make the 
matter clearer forty-nine of the words already discussed 
above are arranged in Table [X. in a way that displays 
at a glance the range that each possesses. We have first 
to show that the lapse of time between the beginning of 
the second period and the beginning of the Christian era 
cannot be less than one thousand years, and that about 
fifteen hundred years is a better estimate ; secondly, that 
though absolute proof is wanting that the whole of this 
period was passed in Europe, there is proof that a large 
portion of it was so spent, and a considerable probability 
that this whole epoch was European not Asiatic. The 
table shows that a word for ‘ten’ was not found necessary 


eT 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 
TABLE IX. 


1. Winter ° 


OP SY ANHY Pt 
> 


Fire. 
Fat (butter) . 


Cloth oat 
pelt (wheat 
An ell 


. Oak and maple 


. Astallion . 
. To spin 

. To count 

. To pa 

. To sel 

. An awl 

. A boat 


. A paddle 


Autumn 
Cow (horse). 
Ten . 


Ten 


Ten a 8 sister . 
Knife scraper) 


s e . e e e 
errs ce en re a Sa PS eS 


Perr: Pee: : 


ir Bo Be Be Ao BO BB a BG BA BG BG BB BSB BB 


88 NN Od dd: 


Pere: Pere: Pr 


et Ore 


DP PE PSeereer: : 


"S| SSSSS55: Bi SESSESREE: : 


Zi SERRESEEREE: : : 


SS55 


SEEREKE! : 


~~ 


SSASSSS) SSS<e 
: NNNNNNNN: NNN: N 


CH: 


a 
: NNNNN:: : 


NOME 2 O&K : 


CML LLPiipi::egdi: 


i SAS: : 


Ni: 


: IN: 


7 9: OOOO99S 


OO: iii: 


225 


< 
0 
: RRSSSSS 


Vg e 


Ve. 


226 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


till the Finns had broken up into three larger groups. In 
the third period, which may have begun between 400~—600 
B.C., a term for ‘one hundred’ was borrowed. It is not 
too much to suppose that the word for ‘ten’ became 
current a hundred years earlier, or about 500-700 B.C. 
Then for the first half of the second period and the earlier 
part of the second half, during which time they taught 
themselves to weave, to make wicker fish-traps, to cultivate 
spelt on a small scale and to give a name to the horse, 
not less than five hundred years can be assigned, thereby 
bringing the beginning of the second period to 1000-1200 
B.C. But this is a low estimate; the interval between 
learning a word from ‘ten’ and for ‘100’ might well be 
increased, as well as the period of the undivided life and 
the interval between this and the genesis of a term for ‘ten.’ 
So that from 1500 to 1800 B.c. does not seem to me an 
excessive estimate, and that is probably sufficient to meet 
all archzeological requirements. The reason for supposing 
that the whole of this time was passed in Europe is based 
on the nearly undivided Finns having learnt the use of 
spelt, which it seems impossible to believe could have 
been cultivated in their Asiatic home, and in the fairly 
wide range of the word for ‘oak,’ a tree that could not 
have been seen beyond the Urals and may once have been 
known to the Permian groups, though they subsequently 
lost it in a way that can very naturally be explained. 

It is generally supposed that the West Finns knew 
‘copper’—the ‘sheep’ may be added—before leaving 
Asia, as the terms employed are common to the Ugrian 
family. But in that case the words must have come into 
use more than eleven hundred, more likely fifteen hundred, 
years before the present era, a date that no one will try 


THEIR PREHISTORIC CIVILISATION 227 


to justify. The conclusion therefore is that though a 
word is common to West Finnish and to one or more 
members of the Ugrian group it does not necessarily 
belong to the first period. Some other explanation must 
be offered. With regard to ‘copper’ I have already tried to 
show that the West Finns borrowed their word from an 
Ugrian source and the same may hold true, though I do 
not absolutely assert it, for ‘bride, father-in-law, son-in- 
law, sheep,’ which must otherwise be referred to the first 
period. 


CHAPTER V 


Tue THIRD OR IRANIAN PERIOD. 


Tue third or Iranian period is of special interest. Now, 
for the first time, the Finns and Ugrians, emerging from 
their sombre, impenetrable forests and trackless swamps, 
came in contact with a civilised people, speaking an Iranian 
dialect, and now for the first time it becomes possible to 
assign an approximate date to the epoch. The new things 
and the new ideas now introduced may be divided into two 
categories ; those found in West Finnish and those confined 
to the East Finns and Ugnrians. The first list of words, 
on the whole, favours the idea that these civilised foreigners 
had no hostile intentions, but were rather traders who 
wished to do business with the natives. ll that the latter 
would have to barter at first would be the pelts of wild 
animals, though after they had been taught the art of bee- 
keeping, wax and honey may have been added to the list. 
The earliest trading-place would be the banks of a large 
river, and a survival of this fact is found in the Vogul vaéa- 
kum, ‘a trader,’ literally the ‘bank of a river man.’ Small 
trading-posts or factories may also have been established 
in various parts of the country by the foreign merchants, 
just as used to be done a couple of centuries or so ago 
in the territory of the Hudson’s Bay Company, of the Niger 
Company, and by the Russians in Siberia. But if all the 
228 


THIRD OR IRANIAN PERIOD 229 


words of the second category were certain, which, however, 
is not the case, we should rather have to suppose that the 
civilised foreigners formed part of the wandering Scythians 
and Skolots that nomadised along the north shores of the 
Black Sea, of the Caspian, and for a considerable distance 
inland. ‘These Scythians are believed by the most reliable 
authorities to have been in the main an Iranian people, 
a few of whom still survive as the Osets of the north central 
Caucasus. Wm. Tomaschek has noted over thirty words 
in Mordvin, and about thirteen in the Permian group, 
which he believes have an Iranian origin. Dr. Munkacsi 
gives a list of forty-two words in the Ugrian and Finnish 
languages which, in his opinion, are derived from a similar 
source.! Some of these are very doubtful, others are con- 
fined to the Ugrian branches, others have no cultural signi- 
ficance, so that it is only necessary here to give a selection. 

These words, it would seem, were not all adopted exactly 
at the same time. Some are older loans than others, and 
if taken from an [Iranian people, the language was at an 
earlier stage than any existing record of it. For instance, 
judging from the first vowel in the West Finnish and 
Mordvin words for ‘honey,’ these are supposed to go back 
to an Indo-Eur. médhu, while the other East Finnish forms 
might come from a Zend or Bactrian form, and therefore 
be of later date. So, too, the front vowels in all the words 
for ‘name’ correspond best with the O. Sl. [#]#me", though 
the wide diffusion of the word makes it probable that the 
loan is earlier than any distinctly Slav word, besides the fact 
that it is unknown to the Letto-Lithuanian branch of the 
Slavs. It may strike one at first as singular that an Iranian 
word for ‘fly’ should be uniformly accepted as an appro- 

1 Tomaschek, pp. 12-14; Munkacsi, (2) pp. 191-197. 


PRE- ANB PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


230 


| | 


suns DASDB oes ace see eee eee ese | 2498R | DAvsvn iY 
-"° nANS| DAs ‘nAS| asvas| °* °re ans| ans Ans | DANS 22408 * 
mee ¥2g04 "te ssunva| °° 7° na |\ 1913p $7924 sae ogas 


I synus vem { t “nou 


nus 


4 
geen | eee | ee 9 eee | eee, | ee ee | eee | ee ee ee 


THIRD OR IRANIAN PERIOD 231 


priate term for ‘bee.’ The explanation is that in Sanskrit 
and Osetan, so probably in Old Bactrian as well, ‘bee’ is 
expressed by ‘honey-fly’; the Finns therefore adopted the 
word in an apocopated form. It is hardly to be supposed 
that traders would bring bees with them, but they may 
have taught the natives how to domesticate wild bees, or 
at any rate how best to take their wax and honey, which 
may subsequently have become an article of barter as 
well as the skins of black foxes. As the words for ‘100, 
horn, hammer (axe)’ come directly from an Iranian source 
at the same stage as the Zend, supposing, of course, that 
the latter two equations are correct, they must either be 
later than the words for ‘honey, bee, fox,’ or they were 
introduced by strangers speaking a different and _ less 
ancient dialect. The original meaning of the Z. vasra, 
‘mace, club,’ is best preserved by the West Finns; whether 
the head was of stone or metal it is impossible to say. 

The second list embraces a still larger number of words. 
(Table on next page.) 

The special interest attached to the words in the first 
line 1s that if they really are derived from zarayafh, the 
borrowing must have taken place at a time when the 
original final s had not developed into #4. The same 
remark applies to lines 3 and 4. If Vg. s‘ofery stands for 
s‘oser, as it might do, the 4 and # in Aasafira must have 
sounded s, as in the Skr. sahkasra, ‘1000’; and ahkura must 
have been pronounced aswva. Dr. Munkacsi estimates 
that these loan words may be placed as far back as 
the sixth or seventh century B.c. If that is true, the 
words for ‘ro’ and ‘100’ must be quite as old, though 
from their present form they might easily be taken for : 
comparatively recent loans. It is odd, though, that if the 


PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


232 


{ 
os & pass © vyands) “| gpgusos] x apgog xsagn2| °° aes {ile Sug AN 


1 Wwaqyy 61 
€ mony 
€ 47 € seysisy | ecg) a 1492| 1 43} & 1383¢ec7 
I axV ‘gt 
* pred 
pars- | oysay- "Ug | Leay| opavy | — njsvy yoos  yanS| ee ~um07) 
* asnopzy ‘Zr 
I ogame Losspml | esta | oe sim I gous} **° noe ne {. Tomy or 
(3803) pfo 14S] yrl| go ‘sp | = so ‘so] #2 sz] ron} * days Sr 
upyyn | - pysn, {2 go} wee 8 "XG 
earat wee  papnt wee wee pana|aopna| = - + pO tz 
pysrs vee eee eee aes eee ses one nee pips ° 3e0r) ‘EI 
Sisva DL40Q soaaf qurvy ‘Ir 
ak ese vavhi - vee ose ees nl ves eee *  ureis ‘or 
‘suapun unjutal \Xonaguz uopusal | unpun “te “ve ‘ * pos 6 
psvy vjaevy |(pavy)| 49y | Davy 1497 | psoy| o,spany | (t74P7)| * * Uosy ‘g 
CT 40% Dhuvevs | Auviv| 8us0s| 4uADdi $ULDE | Su4DE| VuMpeOS| Buses} * * pros) <2 
paous { phanw ‘dO. aes oe ves ysons| yanse| | ppamel + + weg 
(ey, } eee t0sy TIS 428490 eee oes isy¥o rasyo eon ooe ry . p10-] ¢ 
cea DYRD "ITd DARYD eee 4340 74n eee eee ene OLOED Py e ploy] od 
“7 AUEDY Daypspy | 43%3| 49705 | sv4vZ $a4n,s| sans|  °"° 7 * * 9001 € 
asop spp uDsop 3,13 see eee SDp sop @acs aes e e . or at 4 
eee visvp ¥YHDADADS eee $2405 $2408 4408 ‘E05 fa4a08 ooo eas e ° BIS "ry 


eles | | eG ee | i | eee 9 ee | es] ES | oo | 


THIRD OR IRANIAN PERIOD 233 


Ostiaks had learned to count up to a thousand some 2500 
years ago, their arithmetical ideas should still be so hazy ; 
a single word does duty for 80 and 800, another for go 
and goo. A thousand, therefore, can seldom be used 
except as a round number, and perhaps was never more 
than that. In the last chapter I made a rough calculation 
that the West Finnish and Mordvin words for ‘10’ may 
have originated about 500 B.c., but if they borrowed a term 
for ‘100’ between 600 and 700 B.c. the ‘1o’-word must 
be still older. Online 5 Dr. Munkdcsi traces the Permian 
words for ‘lord, master’ to a Skolotan or Scythian 4sai, 
preserved by Herodotus in the words Leipo-xais, Arpo-xais 
the old Bactrian equivalent of which is 4Afaya ‘ powerful, 
master’ from &4S# ‘to rule.” In Hiibschmann’s opinion 
the connection between Zir. £457 and Os. dysin ‘a lady’ is 
very problematical, so the equation of the Permian words 
with an Osetan or Scythian form is not thoroughly estab- 
lished, though the identification is attractive. The words 
for ‘gold’ in line 7 are evidently a good deal later than 
those in line 1, 3, 4, for now the initial O. B. is repro- 
duced as s, s not by §, as the older aspirated %, from which 
z originated, would lead us to expect. A term for ‘iron’ 
came into use about the same time no doubt; and the 
new metal was introduced in the form of a ‘knife or short 
sword,’ for that is the meaning of the O. B. kavefa, from 
which are derived most of the East Finnish and Ugrian 
terms for ‘iron.’ The Magyars have retained the original 
sense of the word, but the Mordvins, more peaceably 
inclined, have turned the sword into a ‘plough-share.’ 
The latter have a special word for ‘iron,’ &£§#'é which may 
have an East Persian origin. In the Pamir dialects we 
find i”, spin ‘iron’; an older form of the first would be 


234 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


*¢§$in, *o§pinaand from this by rejection of the initial vowel, 
by metathesis of #, § and mutation of # into &, all which 
phenomena are possible in Mordvin, we should obtain 
hiina king. The word for ‘steel’ is later and probably 
belongs to the end of the Iranian period. Professor 
Schrader believes the origin of the Osetan word is to be 
found in East Finnish, Dr. Munkdcsi on the contrary 
regards the Osetan as the original word ; but Colonel Yule 
has pointed out that the ondanigue of Marco Polo, and- 
anicum in the Latin text, is to be referred to the N. P. 
hundwénty, ‘Indian steel’ and quotes an Arabic dictionary 
of about 1200 a.D. in which Hunduwdn is explained by 
ensts.1 The identity of Os. dadén with the ondanique of 
Marco Polo is certain and the Osetan form is therefore 
from the N. P. kundwani, hindawdnt ‘made of Indian 
steel; a sword’; Osetan always rejects initial 4. The 
Permian words for ‘otter’ may go back to an Iranian form, 
‘but might equally well be referred to a European word. 
It is tempting to believe that in line 14 Vg. #s-2@ comes 
from an O. B. “san > us, which became #s in consequence 
of the & of the suffix (cf. pesken<R. puska) and perhaps 
it is so rather than the explanation given in the last chapter. 
But in the next line the equation is very doubtful as we 
can hardly suppose a Sanskrit-speaking people, even as 
traders, were ever in contact with the protohistoric Finns- 
ugrians, and the O. Bactrian equivalent is za. Still the 
possibility of a Scythian original for the word is by no 
means excluded, for nothing is known of the Scythian 
dialects. Forms like Lith. o%¢s ‘he-goat,’ ofka ‘she-goat’ 
leave room for the presumption, till positive proof to the 
contrary is adduced, that the Finno-ugrian words for 


1 Yule, vol. i. pp. 93, 94- 


THIRD OR IRANIAN PERIOD 235 


‘sheep’ and very likely for ‘ox, bull’ were borrowed from 
some of the nomads that wandered over the s#effe on the 
north side of the Black Sea and perhaps far inland. The 
equation, however, of Z. me¥ ‘sheep’ with N. P. mesa, 
hardly with an older maézfa, seems tenable. Munkdacsi 
further connects the words in line 17 with a Parthian-Zerza 
found in place-names, but it is more likely they belong to 
a much later time and were borrowed from the Cuwas or 
some Tatar source. The attempt to derive the Permian 
words for ‘wheat’ from a Persian word for ‘white’ is, I 
think, certainly wrong. By ‘ wheat-coloured’ the modern 
Persians understand ‘brown,’ the colour of the grain when 
ready to be cut. A fuller and better Vtk. form is /ad/i 
which is evidently borrowed from the Tatar 4af/2 ‘ spelt,’ 
an inferior sort of wheat. 

From the above we deduce the conclusion that the 
Iranian period may have begun about 600 B.c., and lasted 
for several centuries. In the east of Russia we have 
already learnt that intercourse was kept up with Persia 
till the overthrow of the Sassanide dynasty in the seventh 
century. For the West Finns however its duration was 
very much shorter, perhaps not more than 100 or 200 
years. When the Finno-ugrians first came in contact with 
Indo-Europeans though they had particular names for 
many things, they had no word for the abstract idea of 
‘name’ apart from a particular object. The more advanced 
Finns, having already taught themselves a word for ‘ro,’ 
now learnt to count up to ‘100,’ while the more backward 
Permians had even to borrow a word for ‘10’ though 
apparently they and some of the Ugrians, outstripping the 
more advanced West Finns and Mordvins, borrowed a 
word for ‘1000’ several hundred years earlier than the 


236 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


latter. About the same time they took to beekeeping 
and their foreign superiors were given a title of honour for 
which they had no native term and accordingly had to 
borrow one. The westerly Finns became acquainted with 
a new and better form of hammer or hammer-axe which I 
imagine was only of polished stone and all the Finns 
borrowed a term for ‘horn,’ which perhaps may be taken 
to mean that up to that time they had no knowledge of 
horned cattle. A good deal later, perhaps about 300 
B.Cc., gold and iron were introduced among the East Finns 
and Ugrians, who thus became acquainted with these 
metals several centuries earlier than the West Finns, The 
trade in iron swords seems to have continued for a long 
time. Abu el Kassim relates that it was said the Bolgars 
conveyed to the Yugra (Voguls, or Ostiaks) swords fabricated 
in Mohammedan countries. Though these swords had no 
handles or ornament, and were simply blades as they left 
the hands of the blacksmith, they were bought at a great 
price by the Yugra, who threw them into the Sea of 
Darkness. God then causes a huge fish, the size of a 
mountain, to issue from the bosom of the ocean anda 
still larger fish to pursue it. The first fish directs its flight 
towards the coast of the Yugra and gets into shoal water 
near the shore. Those that threw the sword into the sea 
surround the fish in their boats and cut off its flesh. They 
maintain that if they did not throw a sword into the sea 
no fish would come and they would suffer famine. 

We have now to consider the questions whether in all 
cases the East Finns and the Ugrians received the same 
word from the fountain-head independently, or whether 
only one received and then passed it on, perhaps after a 

1 Abu el Kassim, p. 83. 


THIRD OR IRANIAN PERIOD 237 


considerable lapse of time; and whether the East Finns 
and Ugrians were both on the east side of the Urals. Dr. 
Munkacsi holds that, at the beginning of the Iranian period 
when the Persian civilising element was introduced, the 
Magyars and the people nearest them, especially the 
Voguls, Ostiaks, Zirlans and Votiaks, formed a connected 
whole, and that this separation had not taken place in the 
sixth or seventh century B.c. And as the beginning of the 
Iranian influence affected the West Finns and Lapps, but 
did not bring them a knowledge of gold and iron, the 
separation of the West Finnish-Lapp branch from the 
original home and communion with the Ugrians cannot 
be later than the third century B.c. at the latest. A glance 
down the columns of Ugrian words in two lists above, 
shows not only a good many words common to the 
Permians and the Vogul-Ostiaks that are wanting in 
Magyar, but that when there are corresponding words in 
Magyar their form is so different that the Vogul-Ostiaks 
and the Magyars must have borrowed at different times 
and presumably in different places. As it seems to me, 
the separation of the Magyars from the rest of the Ugrians 
had already taken place before the commencement of the 
Iranian period. The Mordvin loan-word for ‘lord, master’ 
being also found in Vogul-Ostiak, suggests that the latter 
were also on the west side of the Urals when they borrowed 
the word ; though I do not suppose the whole body of 
them lived in Europe, only that they wandered on both 
sides of the Chain. Certainly the reverse could not have 
been the case, that the Mordvins dwelt east of the Urals. 
For earlier than this loan the Mordvins and West Finns 
had invented a word for ‘10,’ and presumably about the 


1 Munkdcsi, (2) p. 88. 


238 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


same time the Voguls, Ceremis, and Lapps agreed upon 
another word. Some two hundred or three hundred years 
later the West Finns, after adopting a word for ‘100,’ 
were so far to the west, that the words for gold and iron 
never reached them. So short a space of time would not 
allow of the West Finns traversing the great extent of 
country that stretches between Western Siberia and the 
region of the Waldai Hills or thereabouts. The West 
Finns and Mordvins were therefore certainly in Europe 
before the beginning of the Iranian period. No doubt the 
Permians have for a long time been nearer to the general 
mass of the Ugrians than other members of the Finnish 
family, and this, together with their living on the same 
trade route, accounts for the greater number of words they 
have in common, compared with the Central Finns. Still 
it is possible that sometimes a word has been borrowed 
by the Ugrians and subsequently passed on to the Permians 
or vce versé. In the term for ‘1000,’ apparently one of 
the oldest loan-words, the Voguls have preserved the old 
form best in so far that metathesis has taken place in 
: Ostiak and in the Permian groups. The probability is that 
this only once took place, and most naturally among the 
Ostiaks ; the conclusion being that in this instance the 
Permians borrowed from the Ostiaks and not directly from 
an Iranian source. So too the exact likeness between the 
Ostiak and Permian words for ‘gold’ makes it probable 
that both were not drawn from the fountain-head. The 
fact that the Permian forms show what looks like the 
original initial z proves nothing, for initial s can in 
Permian readily become 3, a sound with which no Vogul- 
Ostiak word can begin; and in the word for ‘sea’ the 
Zirian form begins with s, the Votiak with s, which is 


THIRD OR IRANIAN PERIOD 239 


therefore to be considered a later change. The adoption 
of a word for ‘man’ by both Mordvins and Permians, 
though perhaps at different times, also tends to the belief 
that the Permians lived west of the Urals. 

If we could show that the Volga and the Kama were 
the most likely routes by which Iranian traders penetrated 
among the Finns and Ugrians, we should go far to prove 
that on the Volga, at the beginning of the new period, 
there were Mordvins who may in fact have borrowed their 
name for it from Iranians; that there were Permians and 
Ugrians partly perhaps on the Volga, partly on or near 
the Kama. About 500 B.c. Hecatzus and, about three 
hundred years later, Eratosthenes were both under the 
impression that the Caspian was connected with the cir- 
cumambient ocean. In geographical, as in other myths, 
there is often a substratum of truth or of physical fact. 
In this instance it really exists. With the exception of a 
short portage of a little over four miles, it is possible to 
travel by natural waterways from the north coast of Persia 
to the Arctic Ocean, by ascending the Volga, the Kama, 
and its tributaries, to the watershed between it and the 
basin of the Petéra. The myth seems to repose on the 
fact that before 500 B.c. the Volga and the Kama had been 
previously ascended for a very considerable distance by 
traders, for no one else travelled in those days, who 
learnt from the reports of the natives, that at the north 
end of the world there was a great Sea of Darkness 
which was accessible by water. In a previous chapter 
it was made clear that the works of Arabian art found 
in the province of Perm came there by a road leading 
along the west side of the Urals, and the presumption was 
great that the Arabs followed the old route of the Persian 


240 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


merchants whom they had supplanted. Arab writers hint 
at two routes to Bolgari—one by water, the other by land 
—but both of course lay west of the Urals, which is the 
really important point. As it is nearly certain that from 
the fourth century A.D. for several hundred years there was 
a trade between Persia and the valley of the Kama either 
by the Volga or by a land route a little to the east of it, 
but west of the Urals, it is more likely than not that any 
earlier traffic between these two regions must have followed 
the same routes. The Yugra mentioned by Abu el Kassim 
were probably living at the mouth of the Ob. Yet all their 
swords came @ Bolgari, though actually manufactured, as 
another writer mentions, in Aderbaijan, where they cost 
four pieces of gold. The same author states it was the Isu 
or Zirians of the Petora basin who acted as middlemen 
and transmitted the swords to the Yugra. Here we have 
direct evidence that an Ugrian tribe on the east side of the 
Urals obtained Persian wares wid the Volga, not sé the 
IrtiS or the Ob valley. 

The earliest known settlement on the Kama belong- 
ing to this period is at Andnino. Though most of the 
objects found there are of Central Siberian type, some 
are Kobanian, and it is not impossible that the place was 
at first a small Iranian trading post established among 
natives of uncertain affinities. A very late Arab writer, 
Sherif ed din, mentions that the old name of Eldbuga, 
which lies close to Andnino, was suddum or sodum, and 
that in the Yunani language it meant a ‘perch-fish,’ in 
Tatar alabuga.! Though yunani means ‘ Greek’ in Arabic, 
it cannot have that meaning here, but possibly it meant 
the language of the Bolgars, some of whom clung to the 


Spitsjn, p. 88. 


THIRD OR IRANIAN PERIOD 241 


baseless belief that Bolgari had been founded by Alexander 
of Macedon. Otherwise it must have referred to the 
natives of the neighbourhood. Though suddum, sodum 
does not mean ‘a perch’ in any Finnish or Ugrian lan- 
guage, Wiedemann catalogues a Zir. Suim as ‘ein Fisch (?)’, 
a word which comes near it in form. As the name of a 
fish is compatible with a river-name, we may note here 
a Sodom-ka river in the district of Kotelnits (Vidtka), and 
the Ostiak name for the Salim, a tributary of the Irti§, is 
the Sodom. Though Spitsin does not quote the word in 
Arabic, the double d@ may be a transcription of the letter 
dad, which does not correspond, I believe, with any Finno- 
ugrian dental, yet might be used perhaps to represent an 
Ugrian d/sound. With regard to the late tradition of the 
Bolgars that their chief town was founded by Alexander of 
Macedon, it seems just credible that when they first arrived 
there they found a tradition current that the spot had 
previously been occupied as a trading post by some Iranian 
people whom the Bolgars, after acquiring a knowledge of 
Arabic, identified with the Greeks and Alexander of Mace- 
don. None of the above inferences to demonstrate that 
the Iranian influence penetrated to the Permians and 
Ugrians by the valley of the Volga may be very conclusive 
in themselves, yet on the other hand, so far as I am aware, 
there is no evidence, archzological or historical, to indicate 
the existence of any trade route northwards from Khor- 
asmia, Sogdiana, or Bactria to the ISim, the Irtis, or any 
other great tributary of the Ob, into the heart of the 
Ugrian territory. The ancient geographers knew nothing 
of these rivers. 


242 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


THE FouRTH OR LITHUANIAN PERIOD. 


In the Iranian period it is not necessary to believe that 
the West Finns ever came personally into contact with 
Iranians. All the words in the first list might have been 
transmitted to them by some intermediate tribe like the 
Mordvins, even though the West Finns have sometimes 
preserved an older form than the tribe from whom they 
borrowed can now show. In the fourth period it was quite 
different. The general mass of the West Finns seem to 
have shifted their centre of gravity somewhat west or north- 
westwards and broken away from the Mordvins before 300 
B.C., or whenever it was that the words for ‘iron’ and 
‘gold’ reached the latter. In course of time the West 
Finns had become neighbours for the first time in their 
history with a so-called Indo-European people speaking a 
Lithuanian dialect. 

The Europeans whom the West Finns now met could 
not have been very highly civilised themselves, though in 
most respects they were certainly more advanced than the 
latter. It is not certain that the former knew iron or even 
bronze, for we have already seen that iron was unknown 
in the Baltic Provinces before the second century, and 
there was strictly speaking no bronze age at all in that 
part of the world. So the inland tribes that lived far from 
trade routes would most likely to all intents and purposes 
be still in a neolithic stage of civilisation. The Baltic 
people possessed flocks and herds of sheep and goats, 
cattle and horses, and led to a great extent a roving life. 
In winter they travelled in sledges, but in summer they 
seem to have used carts or wagons, the wheels of which 
no doubt were solid, being made of two or more thick 


FOURTH OR LITHUANIAN PERIOD 243 


planks clamped together with wooden pegs. Such cum- 
brous vehicles could only have been drawn by several yoke 
of oxen. When a deep and narrow water-course had to 
be traversed, they knew how to throw a light bridge of 
planks across it. 

Professor W. Thomsen estimates that the date of the 
first contact between the two peoples certainly cannot be 
later than the first centuries of the present era, perhaps 
rather earlier. And they may have been in touch till about 
500 A.D., at all events not later than 800 ap.) It is to 
his labours that we are indebted for the best and most 
thorough explanation of the loan words made by the Finns 
from the Letto-Lithuanian or Baltic peoples, and from him 
I have taken all those that are found in this section ;? 
those marked with an * are not quite certain. 

Into the nomenclature of the family several new terms 
were now introduced, such as ‘sister,’ ‘ daughter,’ ‘ cousins,’ 
‘bride,’ and * ‘son-in-law.’ None of these words were 
accompanied by wholly new ideas. There had always 
been a term for ‘elder sister,’ but it was associated with 
other meanings, while ‘younger sister’ may have been 
included under ‘girl’; but now blood relationship was 
emphasised, and the mere rank or status that the sister 
held in the family fell into the background. A ‘daughter,’ 
too, was now distinguished from a mere ‘girl,’ and a ‘bride’ 
from a ‘young daughter-in-law.’ Here the first instance 
again shows a greater insistance on blood kinship, and the 
second might point to some change in the marriage cere- 
monies in which the bride played a more important part 
than before. ‘Relationship’ eimo; ‘a comrade, a person 
of the same name’ haima ; * ‘society, company’ sezva, and 


1 Thomsen, (1) pp. x51, 152. * Jdid., (x) pp. 145-148. 


244 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


‘a social gathering at which neighbours, in consideration 
of being supplied with food and drink, give their help on 
certain occasions’ ¢a/ka, were partly new ideas, partly old 
ones from new points of view. 

The Finns had never been without a knowledge of ‘ fire,’ 
though apparently without attaching any sacred quality to 
it; now they borrowed a fresh term (anu), which has 
acquired a personal and mythical character, though the 
original word from which it comes seems to have been of 
the neuter gender. The ‘hut’ maja, ‘bath or out-house’ 
pirtti; *‘room’ tupa, ‘wall’ seind, all constructed of 
** boards’ /auéa, with a ‘wooden roofing’ madka, outside 
which lay an ‘enclosure’ farhka, fenced round with ‘stakes’ 
seivas, as well as the wooden ‘bridge’ ss//a, were certainly 
additions to the civilisation of the Finns. 

Some of the instruments now introduced may have been 
of new forms, or better in some respect than those that 
they supplanted, such as the ‘axe’ 2ivves, and its * ‘shaft’ 
varsi, the * ‘ice-pick’ tuura ; ‘ distaff’ kuontalo,! and ‘comb, 
brush, curry-comb’ suka, as well as ‘string or ribbon,’ for 
tying things together. But the ‘wedge’ vaaja, * ‘spade’ 
lapio, ‘besom’ Justa, for sweeping out the house, ‘ladle’ 
kauha, and ‘butter-dash’ mdnfd, were probably new ; for 
though butter was known the more primitive way of making 
it is to shake the milk and cream ina leather bag. Though 
weaving was also an old occupation, the ‘thrums’ 251, 
received a name for the first time. For transport purposes 
they had now a ‘sledge’ vedi, and an unwieldy ‘cart or 
wagon, as the word for ‘wheel’ rafas has that meaning 
when used in the plural. 

Articles of dress were the ‘tall cap’ dyfdrd, of a new 

1 Mikkola places this loan in the Proto-Slav or sixth period. 


een 


FOURTH OR LITHUANIAN PERIOD 245 


shape, * ‘boots of raw hide’ kurpponen, and some sort of 
‘trimming’ paarre. 

Without our being able to explain exactly why, the 
Finns of the fourth period borrowed terms for various 
parts of the body, such as, ‘tooth,’ ‘ neck,’ navel,’ * ‘ thigh,’ 
‘the tendon Achilles,’ ‘the os sacrum,’ and * ‘ beard.’ 

In relation to out-door life stand words for ‘forest’ 
meisé, ‘woody island’ sal/o, ‘branch’ haara, ‘birch-bark’ 
tuohi, ‘tar’ terva, ‘juniper’ kafaja, *‘lichen’ arve, 
* ‘moss’ sammal, and ‘burdock or thistle’ ¢akiainen. 
New varieties of instruments for catching birds and wild 
animals were the ‘snare’ asa, and the ‘bird-trap’ /ahéo. 
Among the new names for wild animals, birds, and insects 
were *‘elk’ hirvi, petra, ‘wild ox (?)’ farvas, the exact 
meaning of which in old Finnish is now lost, but the 
Lithuanian word from which it is taken means ‘Jos prims- 
genius,’ and sometimes the ‘buffalo’; ‘goose,’ ‘magpie,’ 
‘cuckoo,’ ‘thrush,’ ‘heath-cock,’ ‘snake’ £édrme, though 
there was already a native word, ‘hornet’ and ‘ wasp.’ 

In connection with domestic animals the following terms 
were now introduced: ‘ox’ Adrké@—the Lithuanian word 
means ‘horse ’—‘ram’ sdédrd, ‘wether’ oinas, ‘pig’ porsas, 
‘goat’ ouoki, *‘draught-ox, or horse’ juhkfa; ‘a grey 
animal’ 4al/i, ‘an animal with a star on its forehead’ 
laukki, ‘a polled ox’ mulii; *‘udder’ uéar, ‘fresh milk’ 
rieska ; ‘blubber, fat’ ihra, ‘mane’ havja; ‘hair, colour’ 
karva; ‘thong’ hikna, ‘wool’ villa, and ‘hide’ ouota. 
The animals were put in charge of a ‘herdsman or shep- 
herd’ aimen, who may have been provided with a 
*‘herding-horn’ forvi. During the long winters the 
beasts could now be fed on ‘hay’ 4eiad, in connection 
with making which the Finns learnt what the ‘aftermath’ 


246 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


dtelé, meant; also the ‘water-meadow’ /véfa, ‘rushes’ 
whoa, * ‘clover’ afi/a, and * ‘ dried-up grass’ Rudo. 

The adoption of several of these new terms which are 
not evidence of increased civilisation may be explained by 
a change in the mode of life of many of the Finns. They 
had become more pastoral, and now observed things that 
formerly escaped their notice. It was not necessary to 
be in the neighbourhood of the Baltic to hear the thrush 
and the cuckoo; in the valley of the Volga they might 
have listened to the song of these birds. And if they had 
looked they might have observed hornets and wasps, clover, 
burdocks, juniper, rushes, and water-meadows, ages ago. 
But evidently they had cared for none of these things ; 
they were of no use. 

In agricultural matters improvements were also effected. 
A regular ‘furrow’ vako, was now made, into which the 
‘seed’ stemen, of some kind of ‘corn or grain’ jyudf, was 
sown. The grain had a ‘beard’ oka, and outside the 
kernel was the ‘husk’ fedut. ‘Peas’ 'herne, were quite a 
new article of food and now came into use. After the 
sowing was completed the furrows may have been filled in 
with a * ‘harrow’ des, or a ‘bush-harrow’ 4ava. Out of 
barley or millet they may also have brewed * ‘ale’ olut, which 
Professor Thomsen now refers to the Lithuanian period, 
though formerly and, I think, with greater probability, to 
the Proto-Scandinavian or fifth period, when they learnt 
the use of ‘hops’ and how to make ‘malt.’ According to 
Wulfstan the Eastas knew mead, but not ale, and the final 
# is better explained by a Teutonic than by a Lithuanian 
original. 

Connected with boating and fishing we find terms for 
such words as ‘sea’ meri, ‘ship’ éaiva, ‘sail’ ‘purye,’ 


_— pe, 


FOURTH OR LITHUANIAN PERIOD 247 


*‘coracle’ kavvas, *‘the side of a ship’ /atfa; ‘crab,’ 
‘eel,’ and ‘salmon’ which could now be caught with a 
‘leister’ and ‘torch’ or by a new sort of ‘fish wear’ /ve, 
and perhaps *‘a pole for driving fish into the net’ /avfa, 
was also employed. The first three words, however, do 
not necessarily imply that the Finns had reached the sea, 
for the Lithuanian mares can be applied to a large inland 
lake, and in fact usually means the Frische Haf. For the 
‘sea’ the Lithuanians use a different word. 

With regard to external nature, the Finns now noticed 
things from a different point of view and began to differen- 
tiate. They had always known the sun, but the word also 
meant ‘day’; now they seem to have borrowed a word 
that meant * ‘dawn’ or the * ‘morning star’ and used that 
for ‘the sun’ aurinko, alone. So, too, they had always 
known night frosts and hoar frost, but till they took more 
seriously to agriculture such natural phenomena hardly 
attracted notice; at any rate they were harmless. But now 
all this was changed; premature ‘night frost’ Aa//a, and 
‘hoar frost’ Adrmd, resulting in hard ‘frozen ground’ 
routa, could, and often did, ruin their prospects of harvest 
in a single night; the new experience demanded a new set of 
terms. Having good sleighs, too, they now noticed whether 
‘the state of the road’ 4e/s, was propitious for travelling 
upon or the reverse. From time immemorial they had 
seen the sky above their heads and had given ita name 
that perhaps always included a personality or spirit in- 
habiting it. But at the very beginning of the fourth period 
the physical aspect of the sky seems to have dropt out of 
sight and they now borrowed from the Lithuanians a new 
word that meant ‘ god,’ but which is now used by the Finns 
simply as the ‘physical sky or firmament’ Zatvas. No 


248 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


doubt the Lithuanian word implied ‘the god that dwells in 
the sky,’ and was therefore at first almost synonymous with 
F. Jumala and Jimavi; but the personality implied by the 
native words prevailed in the native mind, so that even- 
tually nothing was left of the foreign divinity but his 
tabernacle, the physical sky. Another personal name of 
foreign origin has also entirely changed its meaning without 
leaving a trace of its ancient signification. F. jerkele 
‘devil,’ is borrowed from L. serkunas, the thunder-god of 
the Baltic peoples, who is still regarded as a beneficent 
being. To the Letts he is of little less importance than 
God himself; he drives away evil spirits; is invoked to 
strike and destroy a stitch in the side; to hurl forth light- 
ning and close a dam that has been made to stop the 
bleeding of a wound; to break and reduce a swelling or 
tumor; and in a song he is addressed quite like a national 
god and the defender of his people :-— 


Thunder, thunder, Pérkoniti, 

Split the bridge o’er the Daugava, (Dvina) 
Lest the Poles and the Lithuanians 
Should cross to my father-land.’? 


Various abstract terms, adjectives, etc., were also intro- 
duced during the fourth period, such as ‘custom, manner’ 
fapa, ‘order, state, condition, quality’ /afa, ‘a turn, a 
time’ kerfa, ‘narrow, tight’ akdas, ‘greyish, green’ Aalea, 
‘grey’ harmaa, ‘yellow’ kelia, ‘loose, unbound’ srfainen, 
‘thin,’ ‘lazy,’ ‘flat,’ ‘wet,’ *‘skew’ arsas, ‘empty,’ ‘all,’ 
‘always,’ ‘still, yet,’ and the important word for ‘ 1000.’ 

A Lithuanian influence can also be traced among the 
Mordvins and Ceremis. Professor W. Thomsen gives a 


1 Kobert, pp. 172, 270, 245, 251, 259, 260; Sprogis, p. 326. 


FOURTH OR LITHUANIAN PERIOD 249 


list of twenty Lithuanian words which seem to be found as 
loan words in one or other or both the above peoples. Of 
these all but three were also adopted by the West Finns. 
The more important Mordvin loans are ‘ daughter,’ ‘ younger 
sister’—the original of which is simply ‘sister’—“‘stall, 
courtyard,’ ‘ pig,’ ‘ udder,’ ‘ thong,’ ‘knife,’ ‘ millet ’—neither 
of these two last are found in W. Finnish ;—‘ goose,’ and 
‘tooo.’ The Ceremis have also borrowed * ‘heath-cock’ and 
‘ out-house’ or, a word that has travelled as far east as the 
country of the Cuva’.!_ Whether these words came directly 
or indirectly to the East Finns is necessarily uncertain. 
Some of the links that once served to connect the East and 
West Finns, such as the Meriens and the people of Murom, 
no longer exist. There is nothing improbable in supposing 
that the words were transmitted mediately through these 
now vanished tribes. Articles like knives and millet, which 
are easily carried, may have found their way to the Mord- 
vins directly through the medium of Lithuanian traders ; 
though, possibly, as Professor Thomsen suggests, in’ a 
southerly direction the Lithuanians and Mordvins may 
once have been in contact. 


THE FirtH OR PROTO-SCANDINAVIAN PERIOD. 


Though, as Professor W. Thomsen supposes, the Lithu- 
anian and the Proto-Scandinavian or East Teutonic 
influence may have been partly contemporaneous, both 
belonging to the early centuries of the present era, the 
former certainly began earlier and the new civilisation it 
introduced was far less important. In loan-words of the 
fourth period the voicless explosives 2, 4, 9, and the voiced 

1 Thomsen, (rz) p. 153. 


250 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


& @, 6, were treated as identical and reproduced in the 
Finnish by &, 4, 9. But in the fifth period a difference 
made itself felt. Now a Teutonic g, d, 4, was rendered 
in Finnish by &, 4, 9, while a Teutonic 2, 4 /, was, when 
possible, doubled, appearing as &&, t#, £p, each explosive 
being sounded twice. This gemination also took place 
exceptionally in the fourth period, showing that its duration 
was considerable. In the fourth period there-are several 
examples of a passage from # to st, as in F. st/fa<L. 
tslias ‘a bridge,’ a phonetic change which is not found in 
loan-words of the fifth period. But though on the whole 
the Proto-Scandinavian loan-words are later than the 
Lithuanian, they nevertheless belong to a stage of East 
Teutonic as old, often older than the Gothic of the -fourth 
century. They show no trace of the vowel change caused 
by ¢ or # in the second syllable reacting on the vowel or 
diphthong in the root syllable; the original diphthongs az, 
au, tu, as well as initial 7, v, are retained; where a Gth. 
é answers to O. N. a, the Finnish agrees with the former ; 
and in a word like F. aufuas<Gth. dudags<*audagas 
‘blessed,’ the original final -as is retained, while in the 
Gothic the @ has disappeared. Dialectically however 
the vowel maintained itself much later than in Gothic; in 
the runic inscription on the By stone, Buskerud Amt, in the 
south of Norway, attributed by Professor Bugge to about 
the middle of the seventh century, the nominative of 
masculine nouns still ends in -2®.2? According to Pro- 
fessor Bugge the um/aut caused by 7 had already taken 
place about 500 a.p.; the final s did not become , till 
after that time; initial 7 was already lost in the sixth 
century, and initial v had vanished by the middle of the 


Thomsen, (1) pp. 72-76, 151. 3 Jbid., (2) p. 118; Bagge, p. 115. 


FIFTH OR PROTO-SCANDINAVIAN PERIOD 251 


seventh century.1 It may be assumed then that most of 
the loan-words about to be enumerated? are earlier than 
600 A.D. or thereabouts. 

For the first time in their history the West Finns began 
to acquire the notion of a ‘king’ with persons of lower 
dignity, such as ‘princes’ and local ‘governors’ (Aa/ha), 
whose prerogative it was ‘to govern’ and ‘to judge’ the 
‘nation’ and the ‘state,’ which for convenience was 
divided into smaller ‘ provinces or administrative districts’ 
(kihlakunta), the various villages of which were bound 
together for mytual protection by giving ‘ pledges or hos- 
tages’ (A:h/a) to that effect. In connection with these 
dignitaries was the ‘herald’ and the ‘guard.’ The judge 
dealt with cases of ‘ murder,’ had to pass sentence on the 
‘thief,’ perhaps on the ‘harlot,’ had to decide on the 
merits of the case when two men were at ‘strife’ and one 
brought an ‘action’ against the other, and had authority 
to inflict a ‘fine.’ If a ‘trader’ in order to promote and 
augment ‘trade’ obtained a ‘loan’ from a ‘rich’ neighbour 
he had now to pay ‘interest’ for it. Communication was 
rendered easier over marshy ground by laying down a 
‘bridge of felled trees or planks’ and ‘rafts of timber’ 
were now floated down stream. In the family circle it 
was now considered derogatory to use the old native word 
for mother, as that was also used for the females of animals, 
and a new term for ‘mother,’ free from such a stigma, was 
accordingly adopted. The ‘bride’ was also distinguished 
from the new daughter-in-law and a more formal ‘betrothal’ 
(kikla) belongs perhaps to this period, though it is not the 
earliest sense in which the word was used. 


1 Bugge, pp. 107, 71, 103. 
2 These will be found in Thomsen, (3) pp. 121, 128, 18s. 


252 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Among the new arms introduced were the ‘spear’ and 
the ‘sword’ (miekka). As the Gothic meékeis translates 
paxaipa the new weapon must have been a short, one- 
edged sword about two feet long, such as was used in 
Scandinavia and the East Baltic area during the first four 
centuries of the present era. The natural complement of a 
sword was its ‘sheath.’ 

Besides giving each article of dress a special name, a 
general term for ‘clothes’ was now introduced as well as 
words for ‘coat, petticoat,’ ‘shirt,’ ‘ breeches,’ ‘ gloves,’ the 
‘upper shoe-leather’ of a boot as well as its ‘sole.’ The 
‘combs’ and ‘rings’ now introduced were doubtless im- 
provements on the old ones, were more ornamental, were 
of new shapes, and far more fashionable. 

The ‘farm-house’ (4artano) was now built of ‘beams,’ 
contained ‘rooms’ and ‘sleeping-rooms,’ was provided with 
a ‘floor,’ a ‘hearth’ of improved construction, and if need 
be the door could be fastened with a ‘lock.’ Inside the 
house stood a ‘chest’ or two for keeping clothes; at the 
head of the bed lay a ‘bolster,’ and on the hearth was the 
‘kettle.’ In other parts of the house stood the ‘churn’ 
which might have ‘hoops’ round it, the ‘milk-pail,’ the 
‘weavers reed,’ and, if the house belonged to 2 small 
merchant, ‘weighing scales’ which registered a ‘pound 
weight.’ Outside the house was the ‘well,’ and on the 
roof of the house the ‘stork’ may now have perched. It 
is hardly likely the ‘hawk’ was trained for hawking as the 
country was too forested. In summer when the house 
was oppressively hot they could take refuge in a ‘tent.’ 

Among the instruments that came into use were the 
*axe-hammer,’ which was certainly of iron and so required 
a new name, the * ‘wedge,’ ‘borer,’ ‘saw,’ and ‘needle,’ 


FIFTH OR PROTO-SCANDINAVIAN PERIOD 253 


all of which would now be of metal. In connection with 
the needle was the ‘seam.’ 

Fresh names were adopted for the ‘he-goat,’ the ‘bullock’ 
and the ‘sheep,’ which was now ‘shorn’ instead of being 
plucked, as was probably the case in the fourth period. 
Plucking, it may be remarked, instead of shearing was 
resorted to by the Shetlanders as late as the last century. 
The horse was already known, but the ‘ headstall,’ ‘ halter,’ 
and ‘saddle’ made riding more comfortable. By means 
of a ‘yoke’ the oxen were attached to a ‘plough’ of a 
better description than the old native one, the coulter being 
doubtless of iron. ‘ Uncultivated or desert’ land was now 
distinguished from the ‘field,’ on which ‘manure’ was also 
thrown, and after being ploughed could be sown with 
‘oats,’ ‘rye,’ ‘hops,’ ‘flax,’ or ‘hemp,’ from which last 
‘ropes’ and ‘hawsers’ were manufactured. In the ‘mould’ 
of the garden, which was already known, they planted 
‘leeks’ and borrowed a general term for a ‘shoot or 
sprout.’ After being threshed and freed from ‘chaff’ the 
grain was gathered into a ‘barn.’ In hay-making, after 
cutting the grass it was piled up in ‘hay-cocks.’ Barley 
was already known; now they learnt to make ‘malt,’ and 
with the addition of ‘hops’ to brew it into ‘ale.’ The 
‘wine’ must have been imported. From ‘dough’ they 
made a better kind of ‘bread’ than before, and it could 
also be eaten with ‘honey,’ though this certainly was no 
new luxury. 

Although the ‘cod’ frequents the Baltic, the ‘whale,’ I 
believe, is unknown in those waters. The introduction 
of the latter term seems to show that some of the West 
Finns had by this time penetrated as far as the ‘shore’ 
of the White Sea and the Arctic Ocean. Boats had 


254 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


now ‘seats,’ well-defined ‘bows,’ and were propelled 
by regular ‘oars.’ Fishing was practised with a ‘line’ or 
with a ‘net.’ Now they became acquainted with the 
special dangers of the sea, its great ‘waves,’ its ‘rocks,’ 
and ‘reefs,’ its narrow ‘sounds’ and ‘high tides,’ as well 
as with its more or less fabulous ‘ monsters’ (¢#rsas). 

The new metals were ‘iron,’ ‘gold,’ and ‘tin,’ and it 
may be observed that the Finns did not borrow the 
ordinary word for iron, but one that meant ‘red iron ore, 
hematite.’ It looks rather as if the West Finns first 
learnt to know the ore before seeing the metal, which was 
ultimately extracted from it, and that may mean that the 
Scandinavians compulsorily employed their Finnish cap- 
tives in the hzematite mines. The prisoners, after becoming 
familiar with the term for ore, subsequently transferred the 
meaning to the metal extracted from the hzematite, for at 
first they would not know that a metal could be obtained 
from it. On the escape or release of some of the cap- 
tives, the word gradually would reach the main body of the 
West Finns. Besides learning these new metals the heat 
of the ‘forge fire’ was augmented by the use of ‘ bellows.’ 

To various parts of the body were now given fresh 
names, such as ‘bosom,’ ‘the back of the shoulders,’ 
‘ belly,’ the ‘hips.’ And the body became subject, though 
not for the first time in the history of the Finns, to 
‘disease,’ ‘pain,’ ‘sudden spasms,’ ‘wounds’ and the 
‘scars’ that accompany them. If, in course of time, 
pursued by a remorseless fate, the ‘sick man’ died, the lot 
of the ‘ deceased’ (vainaja) was regarded as wretched, for 
Professor Setali derives the word from the Gth. vainags 
‘unhappy, miserable!’ The Finns were no pessimists, 


2 Setili, p. 60. 


FIFTH OR PROTO-SCANDINAVIAN PERIOD 255 


they preferred to live as long as possible; the life beyond 
the grave was anticipated with anything but pleasure. 

Some confused notion of a spirit distinct from the body 
the Finns always possessed ; towards the end of the period 
they adopted a more distinctive word for ‘soul.’ Various 
abstract terms also became current, such as ‘necessity’; 
the notion of making a ‘mistake’ or falling into ‘error’; 
asking ‘permission’ from a superior and ‘ vexation’ of any 
kind. By natural disposition it was recognised that a man 
might be ‘just,’ ‘wise,’ ‘merciful,’ ‘gracious,’ ‘ willing,’ 
‘assiduous or eager’; that he might be ‘blessed,’ deserve 
‘merit’ and be worthy of ‘renown’; on the other hand, he 
might also be ‘timid.’ Other abstract terms were appli- 
cable to man, and to natural or artificial objects such 
as ‘rich,’ ‘abundance,’ ‘worth,’ ‘precious,’ ‘beautiful,’ 
‘unique.’ Though some sort of singing must have accom- 
panied the zither in the previous period, a new word was 
introduced for a ‘song’ runo. 

The word for ‘ Russia’ ( Vendjd) is very interesting as it 
represents the Venedi of Tacitus, the A. Sax. Wined and 
the modern Wend, In Ohthere’s time Wendland meant 
Pomerania, but in the second century there were Venedi 
on the east side of the Vistula and along the north of 
the Carpathians. By the sixth century some of these had 
pressed northwards, though without coming into contact 
with the West Finns. As the word Wend is not applied 
by the Slavs to themselves, but only by Teutons to their 
Slav neighbours, the Finns borrowed the term from the 
East Teutons, and originally, though not now, F. vendja 
must have meant the Wendish people as well as Wendland. 
The Scandinavians in their journeys to and fro between 
their native land and the country occupied by the Goths, 


256 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


that lay north of the lower Danube, or in the south-west 
corner of modern Russia, would have to pass through the 
land of the Wends, In this way it came to pass that the 
Finns heard of Wends and a great Wendland to the south 
of themselves, and in course of time, as the Slavs or Wends 
pressed closer upon them from the south, the idea of 
Vendjaé expanded, till it included the whole area occupied 
by the people they had learnt to call Wends from the 
Eastern Teutons, but whom we call Russians. 

Partly to account for the Proto-Scandinavian influence 
several writers on the subject have supposed that the Baltic 
Provinces were inhabited by Scandinavians, at any rate in 
part, but the most recent results of archzology lend a very 
uncertain support to this theory. With much greater show 
of reason, archzeology can point to the south-west of Fin- 
land as having been inhabited by a prehistoric Scandi- 
navian people from a very early date down to about the 
sixth century. It also leads us to conclude that before 
they took their departure—they may have gone south to 
join their kinsmen the Goths—they had taught so much 
metallurgy to the West Finns that there is no absolute 
breach of continuity between the civilisation of the first 
and second periods of iron in that region. The passage 
is gradual, clearly showing the Finns had entered far 
enough into Finland to get within reach of the new civilisa- 
tion at an early date, perhaps as early as the second or 
third century a.D. Before reaching Finland the Finns had 
lived further south, had apparently touched on Lithuanians 
in Esthonia and eventually dispossessed them altogether, 
though they may have migrated with the East Teutons of 
Finland to the sunny south, to the great Eldorado where 
plunder was easily obtained. But this event, if it ever 


FIFTH OR PROTO-SCANDINAVIAN PERIOD 257 


really took place, is still very obscure. How far inland 
the West Finns were spread cannot of course be deter- 
mined, but probably as far as the Waldai Hills. It is not 
necessary to suppose that more than the outer fringe of 
the main body were in actual contact either with the 
Lithuanians or with the East Teutons. If a sufficient 
length of time is allowed, all the culture-words of the new 
civilisations would gradually permeate and leaven the 
whole mass of the people. The Finns still lived an un- 
settled, half-roving life, and no doubt annually there were 
great gatherings for some special object to which some 
members of the most remote clans inevitably flocked. To 
people that live such a mode of life, a journey of several 
weeks’ duration to attend a national festival is nothing ; 
time has absolutely no value. Another way in which new 
ideas with corresponding new words could travel very far 
from their source is to suppose that escaped prisoners, or 
even such as voluntarily had entered the service of the 
foreigners, eventually returned to their native homes. 
Again, the Finns, when they had an opportunity, would 
make prisoners of their enemies, who might be sent far 
inland, and from them the Finns living at a distance would 
learn many new arts of civilisation. 


Tue SIxtH OR EARLY SLAV PERIOD. 


Although there are no actual records of the event, it 
is certain that for several centuries after the present era 
various Slav tribes, subsequently known collectively as 
Russians, were gradually pushing up from the south in the 
direction of Lake Ilmen. In course of time they met 
some of the West Finns, such of them as still lived outside 


q R 


258 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Finland and formed the southern fringe of the nation. 
The date of this occurrence cannot of course be accurately 
fixed, but it was later than the fifth period and earlier than 
the earliest literary documents of the Slavs. The test of 
the antiquity of the loan-words of the sixth period lies in 
the retention of a vowel + instead of the nasal vowel of 
the earliest manuscripts and the treatment of the vowels 
yert, yer. Mr. Mikkola, who has collected and discussed 
the loan-words of this period, and from whom I have taken 
all the words given below, is of opinion that they were 
borrowed before the Finns entered Finland, an event 
which was completed at any rate about a.p. 800.2 This 
statement is, I believe, far too sweeping. If there is any 
truth in what has been advanced in the last section, some 
of the West Finns were in Finland perhaps as early as 
the second or third century, while the more southerly 
tribes may have extended as far as the Waldai Hills and 
Lake Ilmen. According to my interpretation these more 
southerly Finns borrowed a considerable number of new 
words from the Slavs, but ultimately were pushed north- 
wards, partly into Finland to amalgamate with the earlier 
settlers there, partly north-westwards to swell the numbers 
of the Esthonians, and partly perhaps to the north-east in 
the direction of Lake Bielézero. The result of this late 
movement was that a number of words of Slav origin 
passed into all groups of the West Finns much quicker 
than they otherwise would have done. 

As a social body the Finns lived in different ‘communi- 
ties or parishes,’ separated from each other by definite 
‘boundaries,’ From time to time they assembled in the 
‘market-place,’ which might be several ‘versts’ from their 

1 Mikkola, pp. 32, 36-180. 3 /bid., pp. 28, 29. 


SIXTH OR EARLY SLAV PERIOD 259 


respective homes, and there transacted business, not by 
barter, but in silver currency, using the old Russian erivna 
(F. riuna). Originally this was a silver torque, or collar, 
worn round the neck; then it was used as a unit of value 
with a weight, at Novgorod, of thirteen ounces ; finally it 
became a coin, and now has a value of only ten kopeks, 
or about threepence. For buying and selling there was a 
definite ‘measure’ of quantity or of weight ; ‘goods’ were 
distinguished by their ‘quality or sort,’ and agricultural 
produce could be kept or transported in ‘sacks.’ 

The house was now provided with a regular ‘ window’ 
and an outside ‘ gate’ ; besides stools there was the ‘bench’ 
and the ‘bench fixed into the wall’ in the vicinity of the 
‘stove.’ As an offset to this increasing comfort they had 


‘now to put up with ‘cockroaches.’ Outside in the court- 


yard was the ‘cow-house,’ and the ‘sparrow’ for the first 
time seems to have attracted notice. Inside the house the 
women plied the ‘distaff,’ the ‘spindle,’ and a new sort of 
‘weavers reed,’ with which they wove ‘linen,’ and perhaps 
* ‘homespun cloth’ and * ‘sackcloth.’ It would be their 
business, too, to make the ‘footless socks’ to protect the 
feet in walking through snow, the ‘linen drawers’ and 
‘cloaks’ that now became the fashion. ‘Boots’ were now 
sewed with ‘waxed or pitched thread,’ and for summer wear 
‘bast-shoes’ were found advantageous. 

The only new weapon was a ‘battle-axe’ of iron; for 
lopping off branches ‘twigs’ and ‘ rods’ they used a ‘bill- 
hook’; for carpenters’ work a * ‘chisel’; for reaping a 
‘sickle,’ and for spearing fish a new kind of ‘leister.’ 
The hunter was followed by some new breed of ‘hunting dog.’ 

The boatmen perhaps navigated the inland waters and 
narrow ‘sounds’ in * ‘barges,’ and learnt the use of the 


260 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


‘fire beacon.’ The ‘walrus’ could only have been known 
by hearsay, though they may have seen its tusks or the 
strong ropes and tackle that were made from its hide. 

Although the Finns had already borrowed a number of 
words for various parts of the body, they now augmented 
the number by re-naming the ‘throat.’ 

New articles of food from the kitchen garden were 
‘beans’ and ‘carrots.’ On feast days the bill of fare was 
increased by the addition of a ‘pie or pasty.’ After a 
drinking bout they learnt, hardly for the first time in their 
history, the disastrous effects of ‘drunkenness and hot 
coppers.’ 

Murder as a crime was known in the previous epoch, 
now they borrowed a term for the ‘thief’ and the ‘ wizard.’ 
A new ailment, or one with a fresh name, was the ‘itch.’ 

Among the new abstract ideas were the sensations of 
feeling ‘free,’ of being ‘clean and decent’ or ‘sorrowful’ ; 
the deeper-seated sensations of ‘pity’ and ‘anguish’; and 
the more advanced conceptions involved in the notions of 
‘insight, comprehension,’ and ‘counsel, reflection.’ 

Among the very latest of the loan-words are several 
ecclesiastical terms, showing that Christianity had been 
preached at a fairly early date, though hardly before the 
beginning of the tenth century. The words are ‘cross,’ to 
‘christen,’ ‘ priest,’ the ‘ Holy Scriptures,’ and ‘ heathen.’ 


THE SEVENTH OR TATAR PERIOD. 


Between the third or Iranian, and the seventh or Tatar 
Period, there seems to have been an interregnum of stag- 
nation among the East Finns, though the former may have 
lasted to the fall of the Sassanide empire. The oldest 


i ———”,l SS 


¢ 


SEVENTH OR TATAR PERIOD 261 


Mordvin loan-words of this period, according to Mr. 
Paasonen, to whom I am indebted for all the loan-words 
given below,! seem to have been taken from the Cuva3, 
some of them when it was at an older stage than at 
present.2 Dr. Radloff, Vambéry, and Paasonen all hold 
that the Cuvas are descendants of the ancient Bolgars. They 
speak a strongly marked Tatar dialect, presenting certain 
phonetic peculiarities which led Dr. Radloff to believe 
that they are a Tatarised people; the physical aspect of 
the people points to the same conclusion. Several Arab 
authors aver that the language of the Bolgars and Khozars 
was the same, and was different from the Turkish and 
Persian. ‘The former first appeared in Europe in the fifth 
century, and, if they called themselves Bolgars or Bulgars, 
must have been Tatarised before entering Europe. They 
may have settled on the central Volga as early as the sixth 
or seventh century, where they maintained themselves till 
the capture of Bolgari in 1238 by the Mongols. The earlier 
CuvaS loans are about sixteen in number, and are indicated 
below by a (C.) in brackets; the later ones date from the 
thirteenth century onwards, and were made from the MiSar 
Tatars, now found in the governments of NiZni, Simbirsk, 
Penza, and Saratov. 

The Mordvins now adopted two fresh terms for digni- 
taries, the ‘prince’ and the ‘Kan.’ The ‘assembly of the 
community’ took place in the street, for that is the meaning 
of the Tatar original. Hospitality seems to have been a 
new ‘custom,’ and was marked by receiving the ‘stranger’ 
and treating him as a ‘guest’ or as a ‘ friend or comrade.’ 
As a counterpoise to the exercise of this virtue the ‘glutton’ 
came into existence. 

1 Paasonen, pp. 26-57. 3 Jdid., p. S. 


262 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Merchants and traders, braving ‘storms’ and ‘ waves,’ 
assembled in the ‘ market-place or bazar,’ and had ‘scales’ 
weighing up to a ‘weight of ro lbs.’ They ‘tested’ the 
quality of an article to see if it was ‘ bad or spoilt,’ and it was 
‘good luck’ for them to buy ‘cheap.’ Among the foreign 
articles they traded in were ‘pepper,’ ‘paper,’ ‘brass,’ 
‘chains,’ ‘silk,’ and many other articles. 

In the family new terms were borrowed for ‘(C.) mother, 
wife, woman,’ and ‘(C.) elder sister or aunt (on either side).’ 
Marriage customs took a new turn or were conducted with 
greater ceremony and etiquette, for ‘match-makers’ appear 
on the stage, and haggling took place over the ‘ price of the 
bride’ or the bridal feast, as the word means in the original. 
Fresh terms of address and respect were adopted for the 
‘husband’s sister older than the husband,’ ‘husband of 
elder sister or brother-in-law,’ ‘husband of sister’s wife,’ 
‘wife’s younger sister,’ ‘ younger brother,’ ‘son, young man,’ 
and ‘child.’ A ‘sense of shame or decorum in girls’ was 
now required, and a stigma was attached to ‘leading an 
immoral life.’ 

Men wore a ‘(C.) long coat or kaftan,’ with a ‘ pocket’ 
in it, as well as a ‘cap.’ The ‘pretty’ women adorned 
themselves with ‘necklaces of glass beads’ and ‘coins worn 
as an ornament.’ The best clothes of both sexes might be 
of ‘ (C.) suk,’ embroidered with ‘gold and silver thread,’ 
and the colour of their garments was sometimes ‘ white.’ 
Against ‘cold, wind, or weather,’ they had ‘coverings of 
felt.’ 

A ‘ beard,’ when it could be grown, was now the fashion, 
and fresh terms were borrowed for the ‘lower part of the 
back,’ and the ‘left (hand).? They now suffered from 
‘skin disease’ and ‘itch,’ and the ‘blind’ excited com- 


SEVENTH OR TATAR PERIOD 263 


passion ; in the old days they were perhaps put away as 
soon as the blindness was remarked. 

The ‘house’ no doubt was an improvement on the 
older dwelling ; the furniture included a ‘chest’ and part 
of the building could be partitioned off with a ‘curtain.’ 
The warmth and comfort of the establishment however 
invited the ‘(C) bug.’ Increased notions of cleanliness 
necessited the use of ‘soap.’ Outside was the ‘enclosed 
courtyard,’ where ‘turkey cocks’ now displayed themselves, 
the ‘cultivated field’ and the ‘ portion of a field or forest.’ 
In the cultivated ground grew ‘(C.) hops,’ ‘cucumbers,’ 
‘horse radish,’ ‘male hemp,’ and ‘fruit’ as well ‘dry 
grass’ and weeds like ‘darnel.’ Beyond the cultivated 
fields by the ‘steep bank’ of some stream grew the ‘(C.) 
willow’ and the “e) elm or ash,’ the original of which last 
meant the alder; a fresh term too became current for a 
‘(C.) branch or twig.’ In the open fields the ‘hare’ 
crouched in its form and the ‘ mole’ threw up mole-hills. 
With regard to wild birds they borrowed a name for the 
‘hawk’ and two for the ‘ jackdaw.’ 

The dietary was improved by the introduction of 
‘dumplings,’ ‘(C.) round cakes’ which could be eaten with 
‘honey-comb,’ ‘cream,’ and ‘sour milk’; ‘pepper’ was used 
as a seasoning. With the hops ‘small beer’ was brewed 
which sometimes would lead to ‘intoxication’ and fighting 
with ‘clubs.’ For holding liquids there was the ‘trough.’ 

As the Tatars were a horse-loving people, the Mordvins 
adopted new terms for ‘stallion,’ ‘gelding,’ a ‘refractory 
horse’ and a ‘hired horse and conveyance’ as well as for 
a ‘saddle girth’ and ‘halter.’ 

‘(C.) Brass’ was the only new metal, and this as well as 
iron could be wrought into ‘chains.’ 


264 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


In the religious life, besides learning ‘to fast’ and to 
keep ‘pure and holy,’ they were taught the existence of 
‘Satan,’ of an ‘evil spirit of Keremet,’ of a ‘sorcerer or 
evil spirit,’ and they acquired some new way of ‘divining’ 
the future to see what their ‘luck’ would be. 

Among the more abstract ideas were ‘free will, freedom,’ 
‘clean, well, strong,’ ‘to assist,’ ‘to prepare,’ ‘to despise,’ 
and a ‘contour or outline,’ the original word meaning the 
ghost of a dead person. 

The Ceremis were quite as much indebted to the Cuvas 
and to the Tatars. All the loan-words below are taken from 
Professor Smirnov.! The new civilisation introduced the 
‘chimneyless hut’ with its ‘hearth’ and ‘escape for the 
smoke.’ Inside the house was a ‘loft’ and the furniture 
consisted of ‘stools,’ ‘chairs,’ ‘cushions,’ ‘featherbeds,’ 
and even ‘bed curtains’ to keep out the midges and mos- 
quitoes. New ideas of cleanliness led the people to adopt 
the ‘tub’ and the use of ‘soap.’ Women span thread 
with a ‘distaff,’ and learnt ‘to embroider.’ Round the 
house were distributed the ‘cellar,’ the ‘bath house,’ and 
the ‘cattle shed,’ and these were contained within a ‘ com- 
pound or fenced enclosure,’ in one side of which was a 
‘gate.’ They bred ‘ cattle,’ ‘horses,’ and ‘sheep,’ for which 
there are several names. ‘The hay was kept in a ‘ covered 
structure’ for that purpose, and ‘ enclosures for cattle’ were 
now made in the woods or in the fields. The ‘herds’ were 
in charge of a ‘herdsman,’ and a ‘trough’ for the cattle 
to drink out of in winter was found useful. 

Agriculture took a new development. The ‘ploughed 
fields’ were manured with ‘dung,’ and ploughed with a 
‘hook plough’ into ‘strips,’ with a ‘boundary’ between 

1 Smirnov, (1) pp. 24-29. 


SEVENTH OR TATAR PERIOD 265 


each, and might be sown with ‘oats.’ After being reaped 
the corn was bound into ‘sheaves’ and the ‘straw’ was 
separated from the grain by threshing. ‘Hay’ was cut 
with a ‘scythe’ and turned with a ‘fork’ before being 
housed. Near the house was the ‘kitchen garden’ in which 
vegetables and fruit such as ‘onions,’ ‘garlic,’ ‘radishes,’ 
and ‘apples’ were cultivated. For transporting the corn 
and agricultural produce there was a ‘wagon’ to which 
horses were attached by means of a ‘collar,’ and to 
separate the shafts they used a ‘bow or arch’ which rose 
immediately above the collar. The horses were ridden 
and driven with a ‘bit’ and in connection with the wagon 
and its harness they made use of ‘nails,’ ‘hooks,’ ‘chains,’ 
and ‘cords.’ 

As a consequence of turning their attention largely to 
agriculture the Ceremis were now able to indulge in 
‘ porridge’ and to eat ‘ pancakes.’ 

The people were no longer on an equal level of modest 
competence ; they had to recognise the difference between 
‘rich’ and poor,’ between ‘master and mistress’ on the 
one hand and ‘work-people’ on the other. A trader 
brought his ‘goods’ to the ‘ bazaar or market place,’ put a 
sufficient ‘ price’ upon them to make a ‘profit’ and secure 
himself against ‘loss’ and was ‘paid’ in ‘money.’ If 
his stock ran short he could apply to a ‘usurer’ for a 
‘loan.’ 

From Mohammedan missionaries, who first came to 
Bolgari in’ the tenth century, the Ceremis imbibed a 
number of totally new ideas, such as ‘religion’ and ‘sin.’ 
He trembled at the idea of the ‘ Judge in the other world,’ 
of ‘hell’ and of ‘Satan.’ Their immediate surroundings, 
they heard, were only a small part of the ‘world’ and the 


266 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS - 


sky itself only formed a part of ‘nature’ asa whole. They 
adopted a word for ‘man,’ which placed him in a new 
light ; which differentiated him entirely from animals and 
made him a special creation of the Almighty with whom 
he might ultimately expect to dwell in ‘paradise.’ For 
man was possessed of a ‘soul’ and ‘spirit’ which directed 
his ‘mind’ and ‘ will.’ 

The Votiaks have borrowed still more largely than the 
Ceremis and the Mordvins from their Tatar and Cuva% 
neighbours. Dr. Munkdcsi, from whom I have taken all 
the words given below,! has enumerated a list of over 800 
Votiak words of Tatar, Persian, and Arabic origin, many 
of them verbs. But as they all came through a Tatar 
source and belong to the same period as the loan-words in 
Mordvin and Ceremis, it is not necessary to separate them 
into three categories or to enumerate the whole of them. 

In their social life the Votiaks now recognised a ‘lord’ 
and ‘prince’ in ‘authority’ over them, to whom they paid 
‘tribute’ and ‘taxes,’ who would preside at their ‘assem- 
blies,’ issue his ‘commandments’ and govern a ‘district.’ 
The ‘judge’ administered the ‘law’ and the ‘statutes,’ 
tried the ‘robber,’ and the ‘thief,’ the ‘debtor’ and the 
‘calumniator’ that had ‘told lies’ about the prosecutor ; 
and heard the ‘ witnesses’ ‘give evidence’ on ‘ oath.’ 

Of lower rank than the prince was the ‘master,’ for 
which there are a couple of terms. The mass of the 
‘people’ was still lower in the social scale and they were 
subdivided according to their vocation. There was now 
the ‘artisan or handicraftsman,’ the ‘workman,’ ‘herds- 
man,’ ‘watchman,’ ‘messenger,’ ‘servant,’ and also the 
‘harlot.’ A distinction was thus drawn between ‘rich’ 


1 Munkacsi, (3) pp. 79-152. 


SEVENTH OR TATAR PERIOD 267 


and ‘poor,’ and in other ways the old social equality 
was impaired, for a ‘strong man or hero’ could now 
make a name for himself and raise himself above his 
fellows in a way that formerly had not been possible. 
The new laws of hospitality brought in a word for a 
‘guest,’ who was treated as a ‘friend’ and ‘comrade.’ 

In the ‘family’ a considerable number of new terms 
were adopted, showing that its old constitution had 
undergone a change. Such were ‘grandmother,’ ‘elder- 
brother,’ ‘brother,’ ‘elder sister,’ ‘elder sister on the 
father’s side,’ ‘elder sister or aunt,’ ‘husband of wife’s 
sister,’ ‘ wife’s brother or sister’; ‘step-father, step-mother ; 
‘relation.’ Marriages were arranged by a ‘match-maker’; 
the young couple were formally ‘betrothed’ and the ‘ price 
of the bride’ was agreed upon beforehand. With the 
stricter marriage laws a definite, legal term for ‘ adultery’ 
was added to the vocabulary. At the wedding feast and 
other festivities was to be heard the ‘singer’ accompany- 
ing himself on the ‘zither,’ as well as the player on the 
‘ fiddle,’ ‘ bagpipes,’ and ‘horn.’ 

The new ‘farm-house’ was built on a ‘foundation,’ and 
was provided with a ‘hearth’ and a ‘chimney flue,’ besides 
being divided into separate ‘rooms’; a ‘staircase’ led to 
the upper chambers. As furniture there were ‘mats,’ 
‘cushions,’ ‘ pillows,’ and ‘coverings.’ Outside, enclosed 
by a ‘fence’ of some sort for which there are two words, 
was the ‘courtyard,’ ‘bath-house,’ ‘shed’: and ‘granary,’ 
including the ‘well’ and ‘bucket’ for drawing water. 
Within the yard, to which there was access by a ‘gate,’ 
could be heard the gobbling of the ‘turkey-cock,’ the 
crowing of the ‘cock,’ the cackling of the ‘hens’ and 
‘chickens,’ the cooing of the ‘dove,’ the lowing of the 


268 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


‘calf’ and bleating of the ‘sheep, lambs’ and ‘he-goats.’ 
Some birds were kept in ‘ cages.’ 

As a means of transport there was the ‘wagon’ to which 
a ‘gelding’ could be harnessed. Some riders preferred the 
‘ambling horse’ with ‘a saddle,’ ‘stirrups,’ and ‘halter,’ 
Others the ‘ass.’ Excepting as a name and by vague 
report the ‘camel’ could hardly have been known. For 
fodder in winter they made hay which was heaped into 
‘ hay-cocks’ with a ‘ pitch-fork.’ 

The ‘fields,’ for which there are two expressions, were 
tilled and might be sown with ‘flax’ or ‘corn’ of some 
kind such as ‘millet’; when cut it was tied up in ‘sheaves’ 
and the ‘grain’ was separated from the ‘straw’ by thresh- 
ing. In the ‘kitchen garden’ they grew ‘lentils,’ ‘ gourds,’ 
‘radishes,’ ‘turnips,’ ‘onions’ and ‘garlic,’ as well as 
‘ fruit,’ such as ‘apples’ and ‘cherries.’ They even took 
a fancy to ‘roses,’ perhaps to other ‘flowers’ by reason of 
their ‘colour’ and smell. Agriculture of a more advanced 
type was introduced and with it the artificial ‘ beehive’ in 
which better ‘honey-combs’ were produced. 

‘Bread’ was now baked and the above vegetables, 
including ‘rice’ which of course was imported, could now 
be made into ‘soup and food’ of various sorts by cooking 
them in a ‘pan’; ‘meat’ was ‘roasted’ before the fire. 
The meal was washed down with ‘beer’ and ‘brandy,’ 
drunk out of a ‘glass’ or ‘bowl’; the results of drinking 
too much led to ‘drunkenness and hot coppers.’ 

Spinning and weaving had already been learnt, but a 
different sort of ‘weaver’s sley’ was introduced. The 
dress for great occasions was of greater splendour than of 
yore. ‘Women’s cloaks’ could be of ‘silk,’ embroidered 
with ‘gold thread,’ for ‘gold’ was now known. They also 


SEVENTH OR TATAR PERIOD 269 


wore ‘pearls,’ ‘shoes,’ ‘stockings,’ and a ‘cap.’ Men let 
their ‘ moustaches’ grow, and new terms were substituted for 
various parts of the body, such as ‘foot or leg,’ ‘loin,’ 
* throat,’ ‘cheek,’ and ‘ belly.’ 

New instruments, all of course of metal, were ‘shears,’ 
‘saws,’ ‘knives,’ ‘wire,’ ‘anvils,’ and ‘weighing scales.’ 
With the latter was associated a ‘weight of 24 drachms’ 
(miskal); Munkdcsi does not give the word, but it is 
certainly the Ar. méithgal, which weighed about 74 
grains, or nearly ro grains in excess of the modern 
weight. Metallic ‘money’ was now current and with it 
came the ideas of ‘gain’ and ‘profit.’ ‘Paper’ was used 
for writing and drawing upon, for some of the natives had 
learnt ‘to read’ and could recognise a ‘picture or portrait.’ 
Formerly the divisions of ‘time’ were of ample dimensions, 
nothing less than a month; now they divided the month 
into ‘ weeks.’ 

Though the Votiaks had always lived in a cold country 
and were acquainted with meteorological and other natural 
phenomena, they thought fit to enlarge their vocabulary 
by new terms such as ‘frost and cold,’ ‘fog,’ ‘storms’ (two 
words), the ‘s/epe,’ ‘steep bank,’ ‘island,’ ‘chalk’ and ‘reeds.’ 

So too they found it advisable to incorporate into their 
language several words for animals, some of which they 
knew before, and in certain instances they have changed 
the original meaning of the loan-word. Such are ‘elk’; 
‘beaver or otter,’ but musk-rat in Tatar; ‘rat,’ but beaver 
in Tatar ; ‘squirrel,’ but hare in Tatar ; ‘ martin’ and ‘lion.’ 
New bird-names are ‘eagle,’ the ‘great horned owl,’ ‘gull,’ 
‘jackdaw,’ ‘crane,’ ‘lark,’ and ‘quail.’ Among cold- 
blooded animals are the ‘serpent’ as a mythological fancy,- 
‘leech,’ ‘frog,’ besides two words for ‘ flies.’ 


270 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


A new malady may have been ‘small-pox’: a man 
might be ‘ deaf,’ ‘blind,’ ‘crippled,’ or in ‘pain’ from a 
‘wound,’ but instead of the old charms for banishing the 
evil spirits of disease he could now resort to the use of 
‘medicine.’ 

In the ‘street’ besides ‘shops’ could now be seen the 
‘mosque’ with its slender and picturesque ‘minaret.’ 
Here was proclaimed the ‘religion or creed’ of the 
‘Prophet,’ bringing with it new notions of the nature of 
‘sin’ and ‘guilt’; of the deceptions of ‘Satan’ and the 
manifold ‘evil spirits’ which pervade the ‘world,’ though 
their machinations could be thwarted by the good offices 
of ‘angels’; of the virtues of ‘fasting,’ ‘alms,’ ‘offerings,’ 
‘ prayer,’ ‘ penance,’ and ‘compassion’ for the ‘poor.’ Now 
they cherished a ‘hope’ of ‘eternal life’ in ‘ Paradise’ and 
shuddered at the idea that their ‘fate’ should lead them 
to ‘Hell’ to abide with the ‘accursed.’ The ‘place of 
sacrifice’ of their own native gods also acquired a new 
name. 

Lastly, the mental horizon of the Votiaks was enlarged 
by abstract terms such as ‘honour,’ ‘duty,’ ‘true and right,’ 
‘good,’ ‘righteous,’ ‘ generous,’ ‘ beautiful,’ ‘joyful,’ ‘ peace,’ 
‘friend,’ ‘friendly,’ ‘freedom’ and ‘free.’ The opposites of 
these were ‘treachery,’ ‘treacherous,’ ‘deceit,’ ‘deception,’ 
‘ dissolute,’ ‘ lust,’ ‘wickedness,’ ‘ hatred,’ ‘derision,’ ‘enemy ’ 
‘unclean’ and ‘unfree.’ They also borrowed words de- 
noting ‘intelligence,’ ‘insight,’ ‘advice, counsel,’ ‘ watchful, 
careful’ and many verbs such as ‘to remember,’ ‘to for- 
give,’ ‘to honour,’ ‘to advise,’ ‘to take counsel,’ ‘to make a 
vow,’ ‘to boast,’ ‘to regret,’ ‘to fall in love or to take up 
with any one,’ ‘to bless’; ‘to rob,’ ‘to be vexed,’ ‘to curse 
and to swear.’ 


CHAPTER VI 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS AS EXHIBITED IN 
THE MAGIC SONGS 


SPIRITS. 


In the previous chapters enough has been said to allow us 
to gain some idea of the civilisation of the Finns as a 
whole at various stages of their history. And now that 
our attention has to be turned solely to the West Finns we 
shall be in a better position to estimate the amount of 
change and evolution that has taken place in their ideas 
_ from their first appearance in Europe to the beginning of 
‘the present century. For the sake of convenience no notice 
was taken of the West Finns in that part of chapter iv. 
relating to the existing beliefs of the Eastern Finns and 
Ugrians. The reason is that as the following chapters contain 
an analysis of the beliefs of the West Finns, so far as they 
can be extracted from the Magic Songs in vol. ii., it is 
better to keep this matter together, referring back, when 
necessary, to any coincidences of belief and practice in 
chapter iv. The references in brackets refer to the 
numbered sections of the Magic Songs in vol. ii. 

Till recent times it may be said that the West Finns 
held the same belief in spirits as the East Finns. They 
were of opinion that every lake, stream, forest, heath and 
swamp, every tree and flower, as well as every living being, 

o71 


a 
_ “ 

272 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 

was inhabited or ruled by a spirit, sometimes called a 
haltia, who might be of either sex, as among the East 
Finns. We have already learnt that Aa/ia is an early 
Scandinavian loan-word meaning ‘governor, ruler.’ For 
instance, in Genesis, Joseph is termed the Aa/#ta or steward 
of Pharaoh’s household. In the Magic Songs it occurs 
several times as the spirit-ruler, or wielder of authority. 
An exorcist declares that God is his Aa/tra, who assisted 
him against sorcerers (2 f). The Creator is the 4a/ta of 
the heavens (59 2). Old mother Zine, life’s kalfta, is in- 
voked to rouse herself before a sorcerer rises, to help a 
beloved son, by whom the exorcist himself is intended 
(176 a). A hunter begs Annikki, Tapio’s daughter, to 
awake with shouts the king of the forest, the Aaltia of the 
backwoods (139 2). A herdsman beseeches ‘the old wife’ 
of cattle, the Aa/fia of kine, to awake before any sorcerer 
or jealous person rises (132 ¢). A treasure-seeker exclaims : 
‘Kinsmen of Hiisi, now arise! awake, thou mountain 
haltia\’? (111). A prayer begins: ‘Welcome! O Earth, 
welcome! Earth’s Aa/#ia’ (102 a). A hunter sadly com- 
plains that with other men luck does the work, their Aa/ta 
fetches them coin, but his luck, his 4a/f#a, lies confused 
under a stone with gloves on his hands, or as we should 
express it colloquially, with his hands in his pockets (89 e). 
A snake is addressed as a ghost or phantom that looks like 
a haltia (29 c). Again, a wizard in working himself into an 
ecstasy invokes his Aa/fia to rise from its hole, from under 
a fallen tree, or stone, or moss, or wherever it may be, and 
mentions its brilliant eyes and spotted cheek, as if he had 
a snake in his mind’s eye (12 a, 4). The technical term for 
being in an ecstasy (olla haltiossansa 1. ‘haltioisansa) means 
literally ‘to be in one’s Aa/tia or among one’s halta,’ in 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 273 


other words, ‘to be in the spirit or among the spirits.’ 
From the above examples we see that the heavens, the 
earth, the forest, the mountain, and individual men, have 
each their spirit, ruler, or guardian. Such an idea goes 
back to the earliest times. That the word ‘hal#a’ is a 
loan-word is of no moment, it merely related to function 
and carried with it no connotation of spirit. Nearly 
parallel with this is the usage of the native terms sania, 
emdnta, ‘house-father, master,’ ‘ house-mother, mistress.’ 


” 
a 


“ 
UKKo. 


Ukko, the ‘old man,’ was the anonymous air- and thunder- 
god. In the text his usual epithets are ‘the god (lord, 
father) on high,’ ‘the god above the clouds,’ ‘the aerial 
god,’ ‘the great lord of the air,’ ‘the god that rules over 
journeys,’ ‘the god known everywhere,’ ‘the golden king,’ 
‘the mighty father of the sky,’ ‘the father of the rulers of 
the sky,’ ‘the ancient father of the sky’ ‘who lives at the 
midpoint of the sky,’ ‘ at the edge of a thunder-cloud,’ ‘the 
ruler of thunder-clouds,’ ‘the white-headed.’ The Finns, 
therefore, assigned him many honorific epithets, but no 
wife or children. He remained a spirit almost without any 
anthropomorphic tendency. He is not, like the thunder- 
god of the Mordvins, amorously inclined, first making love 
to and then carrying off the fair maidens that live on the 
earth. 

In the older period Ukko appears armed with a club or 
axe, uSually of gold, and it is by no means certain that 
these were intended to symbolise the thunderbolt. He 
merely carries the indispensable weapons used by the 
ordinary Finns of that period. It might be supposed that 

I S 


274 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


the club was 2 metaphorical expression for a thunderbolt 
when he is said to strike down with his club the spirit of 
disease (17 x), or when he splits with it the head of rust in 
corn (95 4). But it cannot be so when he is invoked in 
child-birth to bring his golden axe or club to remove 
obstructions and allow a child to be delivered in safety 
(166 a, 5); or when a wizard asks for the loan of his golden 
scraping knife or his silver axe to remove a tumour with 
(129 a); or when a trapper wants the loan of his axe to fell 
a honeyed aspen with which to make an attractive trap 
(151 a). Instead of a scraping knife Ukko, on one occa- 
sion, is requested to drop his pincers from the clouds into 
the right hand of an exorcist, who will then proceed to 
extract the arrows of a sorcerer (149 @). And as the 
golden king he is begged by a hunter to take his golden 
club and beat the woods, so that pine branches may turn 
into squirrels and the wooded wilds into otters (139 7). In 
these last six examples it is clear the speaker is not think- 
ing of a thunderbolt, but of some appropriate instrument 
which Ukko would be sure to have. 

When armed with a sword, which became known in the 
fifth Period, Ukko appears more clearly as a god of light- 
ning, though not always. By striking fire in the sky with 
his fiery-pointed sword he gave humanity the great blessing 
of household fire (226 a). Another time when the great 
lord of the air struck fire, a spark shot down into the sea 
and turned into rock-salt for the benefit of man (223). As 
ruler of thunder-clouds he is asked to thresh out his fiery 
barns, to thunder and clatter in the bellows of the air, and 
to pour down fire to destroy jealous persons and witches 
(176 p). Sitting on the edge of a thunder-cloud he is 
implored to destroy with his fiery sword all injuries caused 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 275 


by spells (154 4); or to lend an exorcist his fiery sword 
with which to scatter and destroy such injuries (154 a); or 
to give a sufferer a fiery sword with which he can slash and 
for ever destroy the spirit of disease (154 ¢). 

As god of the air he causes snow to fall (89 4), and is 
invoked to let fresh snow descend and form a good road 
for a sleigh to glide along (152). By a cautious soldier he 
is requested to bring the clouds together to rain on the 
touch-holes or let snow cover up the locks of the enemies’ 
guns (162 a). As golden king of the air he is begged to 
raise a storm to destroy the boats of a dreaded enemy 
(180 a). With drops from the clouds, with iron hail Ukko 
condescends to break the head of the destructive cabbage 
grubs (119); and with sharp needles and iron hail he is 
invoked to pain the head of disease (17 /). As the kindly 
god, Ukko is implored by a husbandman to create a cloud 
and let water and honey drizzle down on the newly-sown 
seed (130 a). On the other hand when too much rain has 
fallen he is besought to take his clouds to Russia, his 
rainbows to Karelia where they want water to baptize a 
child (156). As powerful father of the sky he is asked to 
join the clouds and rain down honey and water to make 
a goodly salve (181 ¢); or to bring a bottle of pure water 
and luscious juice to make a salve to promote the delivery 
of a child (166 ¢). As god above the clouds he is prayed 
to roll a huge cloud down on the foaming surge of certain 
rapids, that the boatman may not be observed and eaten 
up by witches or sorcerers (127 ¢). From always having 
water at command Ukko is invited to fling himself into a 
fire with water in his mouth and a water-hat on his neck ; 
to throw water on burns and cause an icy blast to blow on 
the burnt skin to prevent suppuration (171 2). As god 


276 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


of the air it is within his province to protect cattle; 
accordingly he is invoked to watch over the herds at 
pasture (123 5); or to make the summer beautiful, the 
marshes placable and the forest amiable; to hide the 
flock under a cloud and if a greedy bear comes prowling 
round to turn the cdws temporarily into stumps and stones 
(123 2). 

Hitherto Ukko has been asked to do nothing more that 
is compatible with the character of a god or spirit ruling 
over the air and the thunderbolts. But in the instances 
that follow Ukko is rather regarded as an all-powerful god 
that can grant any request, a mode of viewing him that 
may be attributed partly to the Scandinavian belief in an 
all-father, partly to the permeation of Christian doctrine. 
There is a gradual confusion perceptible between him and the 
Almighty which ended in complete amalgamation. Ukko, 
the god that rules over journeys and governs the clouds is 
invoked by the leader of a bridal party to come as quick 
as fire from the sky, and having the size of a huge forest 
fir to protect the procession against enemies (117 4); or 
to give away a maiden’s hand and lead a man about to 
be betrothed (117 2). A prudent soldier going into battle 
implores the ancient father of the sky to give him fiery furs 
and a flaming shirt, and further to build a wall of six fathoms 
in each direction to protect him against the enemy’s shot 
(162 5); or to bring him the swords of roo men of such 
sort that they will not glance off a bone, nor break against 
a skull (163 a). A suppliant begs him to build an iron 
fence reaching from the sky to the earth to shelter him 
and his people from sorcerers (176 m, ”); or to let fall 
from the sky a copper horn, a golden shield which the 
petitioner can put on and guard himself with against the 


Meme —e-- 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 277 


arrows of sorcerers (176 0). The dear father in the sky is 
invoked to free a man from the effects of spells (165 4); 
or to watch jealous people, remove witches, and take care 
that the supplicant is not killed before his time (176 /). A 
hunter asks him for a straight and swift pair of snow- 
skates, on which he can scud rapidly to the heaths of 
the north where game is to be found (164). Ukko of the 
air is besought to stop a flow of blood with turf; failing 
that he is to thrust his thick thumb into the wound to 
serve as a stopper (177g). Or as the white-headed one, 
he is asked to plough up a bit of turf to staunch the flow 
of blood, and then let skin grow over the wound during 
the night (177 4). As the Creator up above, Ukko is 
desired to boil water and honey to make a goodly salve. 
He is to take a bit of salmon, some butter, fat and a rasher 
of bacon, and make of the compound a potent ointment 
for healing fractures (181 @). Lastly, it was Ukko, the 
aerial god, the Creator on high, that by rubbing his hands 
against his left knee gave birth to three Luonnatars that 
they should become the mothers of iron (214 a). Here 
we find Ukko with the new epithet of Creator, an attribute 
that was not applied to him in purely heathen times. 

Among the Voguls, Ostiaks, and some of the Votiaks, 
as we have already learnt, no sacrifices are made to the 
sky god, Num, Inmar, and there was no special worship 
of him. The same seems to have held true of the West 
Finns. Ukko is asked to assist, but nothing is offered 
or promised him in return and that was the old traditional 
standpoint. The idea of appealing to him at all is perhaps 
not earlier or not much earlier than the fourth period. 


278 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


ILMARINEN. 


As the name implies, Ilmarinen, the diminutive of Imari, 
was connected with the air and weather -(//ma). And 
there is reason, I think, to believe that he was the old air 
and sky god of the Finns before they ever came in contact 
with Europeans. J/mari corresponds formally with the 
Votiak /nmar, whose name is now used to denote the 
monotheistic god of the Russians and of the Tatars, but 
in one district the word has its older meaning of the ‘sky 
or heaven’ as well, just as ¢dngri signifies ‘god and sky’ 
among the Turkish tribes of the Altai. In other places 
in(m) is employed without the suffix -ar for ‘God’ and ‘sky.’? 
Inm is therefore the equivalent of s/ma, which, before the 
Lithuanian term faivas ‘sky’ was borrowed, included this 
meaning as well as ‘air’ and ‘weather.’ Then the Lapps 
at a comparatively recent period borrowed the name of 
Ilmarinen under the form of Ilmaris, and sometimes drew 
his portrait on their magic drums. But it is to be observed 
that they did not regard him as a smith, but as a god that 
could produce storms and bad weather. On a magic drum 
he takes the place usually occupied by the native wind 
god.2 This conception of him agrees on the whole with 
Bishop Agricola’s description in the middle of the sixteenth 
century. He terms him a god of the Tavastlanders who 
made calm and weather (s/ma) and led travellers forward. 

It would seem then that though Ilmarinen was best 
known as the wonderful smith, he was still regarded as 
an air and storm god as late as the middle of the sixteenth 
century. The transference from one character to another 
is not difficult to imagine. We may suppose that at some 

1 Wichmann, (1) p. 5. ? Friis, p. 37. 


a ne 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS ~~ 279 


time not earlier than the fourth or fifth century, when 
the Finns had become familiar with the smith’s craft, the 
clang of the hammer on the anvil and the sparks flying 
from the hot iron struck some one as something like the 
rattling of thunder accompanied by flashes of lightning. 
So the air god, when thundering in the clouds and 
launching forth his fire, became gradually assimilated with 
a human smith working in his forge. In this way he 
acquired a new anthropomorphic character and eventually 
became more and more separated from his aspect of the 
thunder and storm spirit, which was continued under the 
newer appellation of Ukko the ‘old man.’ 

The original character of Ilmarinen comes out when he, 
together with Vaindmoinen and the aerial god, is invoked 
by an exorcist to come to crush a malady, personified as 
the evil spirit, Hiisi (15 @). Again, fire is said to have 
originated from a spark struck in the sky by Ilmarinen and 
Vainimoinen, which afterwards fell to the earth (226 ¢). 
And a riddle runs thus: ‘Ilmarinen struck fire, Vaindmoinen 
caused a flash? Answer. A flash of lightning.’! These 
two companions together with Lemminkdinen are mentioned 
as rowing in a red boat towards the north, Ilmarinen taking 
the bow oar and Vainamdinen steering (107 d). The story 
is recited as a charm by persons travelling by water and 
so has a certain mythological character, but otherwise it 
has only a slight bearing upon I]marinen as an air god. 

In the remaining instances in which he is mentioned 
in the text he appears only in the character of a smith, 
though not as a man living on the earth at the time he is 
invoked. He is appealed to rather as a divinity. The 
weapons and instruments he is asked to forge are purely 

1 Arvoituksia, No. 245. 


tls, 


280 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


imaginary and unreal. The exorcist uses his own instru- 
ments, but assumes by a figure of speech that they are the 
manufacture of the divine smith. This mere assumption 
imparted all the virtue of reality. As the everlasting 
hammerer he is implored to make little pincers with which 
a wizard can extract ‘Lempo’s arrow,’ that is some physical 
ailment or disorder, from a man’s body (149 4); or as 
the skilful hammerer, to forge a new sword, a dozen pikes 
and several spears for a soldier going to the wars (163 4). 
A best-man boasts that Ilmarinen himself shod the horse 
that was to carry him to woo the girls in Hiisi’s castle 
(65). An exorcist threatens to place ‘Tuoni’s grub,’ which 
generally means the tooth-worm, under the forge of 
Ilmarinen (21 ¢). Once upon a time the smith Ilmarinen 
was walking along a ‘tinkling’ road when he saw a variegated 
stone. He threw it into his forge fire, plied the bellows 
for three days, and ultimately saw the ore pouring out as 
copper. This he moulded into kettles (227 a). Again 
he finds iron sprouts in the tracks of a bear or a wolf, sets 
up his bellows, makes white iron, and forges it into axes, 
spears, etc., (214 @). In a couple of variants it is a god 
or else Vainadmoinen that finds the iron sprouts, or seeds, 
and takes them to Ilmarinen to be forged into iron (214 
bd, e). On one occasion Pakkanen (sharp frost) attempted 
to freeze the smith Ilmari, but the latter plunged him into 
the fire till he swore that he would not do so again (93 a); 
in the Kalevala R. 30, 174 this fact is related of Ahti. 


VAINAMOINEN. 


What part Vaindmoinen played originally in the myth- 
ology of the Finns it is hard to determine. There is evi- 


a 


— 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 281 


dence, however, that he was more than a personification 
and embodiment of magic wisdom and of song. He 
possessed these attributes certainly, especially in the later 
tradition, but various functions are attributed to him that 
cannot be explained by supposing him to have been an 
ideal wizard and nothing more. Writing in 1551, Bishop 
Agricola spells the name Ainimidinen, and simply records 
that he was a god of the Tavastlanders, who hammered out 
z.e. composed songs. From this, it would appear that 
about 350 years ago he was looked upon chiefly as the 
divinity of magic song, which would likewise include 
supernatural wisdom. In current ballads relating his 
adventures, he is generally a human hero endowed with 
wonderful magic power. He must either have been a 
real, historical wizard of whom were related wondrous 
stories, which gradually became so overlaid with fabulous 
matter that the hero of them became a completely mythical 
personage; or he was the spirit of some natural phenomenon 
that in course of time became anthropomorphized like 
Ilmarinen. I hold to the latter opinion, and suspect that 
he is the sky-god under a new appellation. The differ- 
entiation would come about in this way. The sky-god was 
also the Thunderer; thunder is the voice of the god 
speaking; but speaking can easily be turned, if the god 
is thought of as in a joyous mood, into singing. In fact 
one Cuvas expression for thundering is As? ad¢ avdat ‘the 
great father (or old man) is singing’; more common, how- 
ever, are such phrases as ‘the cock is crowing,’ ‘the 
cuckoo on the top of a golden post is cuckooing.’! The 
Creator's golden wattled cock mentioned in the Magic 
Songs (124) is perhaps a recollection of the old thunder- 
1 Zolotnitski, pp. 199, 200. 


282 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


bird. We have already seen that he and Ilmarinen gave 
fire to mankind, which seems to connect him with the sky- 
god. As the diviner as ‘old as time’ he is besought to 
utter incantations on behalf of an exorcist and to bring an 
iron-coloured dog to eat up the spells of sorcerers. Or he 
is to send some of the old folk that have long been dead 
and buried, to support and assist the exorcist. And he is 
to bring the fiery-edged sword of the air with which the 
supplicant will chase away corpses and frighten Hiisi’s 
people (176s). Here Vainimdinen is almost identified 
with the thunder-god, for the fiery-edged sword of the air 
in this passage can only mean a thunderbolt. In the next 
example he receives the same title of skho, ‘the old man.’ 
As the old man, the diviner as old as time, Vainadmoinen 
is begged to bring a scythe from Esthonia, a reaping-hook 
from hell with which the exorcist can facilitate a child-birth 
(166 7). We have seen above, that Ukko is desiretto 
perform a similar function with his golden axe or his golden 
club. In the next example he appears rather as a god or 
spirit of vegetation or of trees, though he retains the 
stereotyped epithet of the ‘diviner as old as time.’ He is 
said in a variant to have put six or seven seeds into a 
martin-skin bag and then gone to sow the earth with trees 
(212 a). In one riddle he figures rather as the sun. ‘Once 
upon a time VaindmGinen’s milk-bowl upset upon a rock, 
its contents can never be picked up? Ans. Sunshine.’?! 
On the other hand, in popular language the streamers that 
form on the sea after a storm are called ‘the tracks of 
Vainamdinen’s boat,’ or ‘the path of Vainimdinen,’ as though 
he were regarded as a storm-god. In various parts of the 
parish of Sordavala there are sandy heaths where the surface 
1 Arvoituksia, No. 2006. 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 283 


presents huge natural ridges and furrows, like the waves 
of the sea. These are termed the ‘ploughing of the 
Vaindmoinens,’ the word being used in the plural. In 
this part of the country Vdindmdinens, giants, Hiisis and 
Lapps all mean the same supernatural beings.! His name, 
too, is borne by two celestial bodies. Orion’s belt is his 
scythe ; the Pleiades are his bast-shoe. When he and his 
wife set to work to sweep the sea, to mop the waves with 
a broom (185 4), a figure of speech is used which seems to 
refer to a storm sweeping over it. 

He was clearly regarded as a god of the healing art, which 
was mainly exercised by reciting incantations, but not 
always. He was therefore the special friend of the wizard or 
exorcist summoned to eject the evil spirits that cause disease. 
Accordingly his strength and assistance are very justifiably 
invoked by exorcists when they are about to set to work 
(2 5,3 a). He is implored to help a well-beloved son (i.e. 
the exorcist) to be the comrade of a famous man, when the 
latter is about to divine a ‘deep origin’ or to battle with 
disease (157 a). A fisherman invokes Ahti, the god of the 
sea, to send a swarm of fish to listen to the music of 
Vadindmoinen (120 a), which evidently means the charms 
and incantations sung by the fisherman himself, but at- 
tr uted to the immortal singer. There is much virtue in 
w at belongs to him. The Virgin Mary is requested to 
t. ce Vadindmdinen’s belt and his yellow cloak with which 
tu bind up a cut vein (177 4). A bee is told to fly to old 
Vadinamoinen’s residence and snatch from his belt a honeyed 
wing with which to stroke a sick man (1817). An exorcist 
in raising steam to make a vapour bath, salutes the steam 


- as ‘Vdindmdinen’s sweat’ (87 ¢), a figure of speech which 


1 Killinen, p. 88. 


284 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


implies that it possessed highly remedial qualities. Kivu- 
tar (sickness and pain personified as a woman) is invoked 
to take a plume from the Creator’s mouth or a feather 
from Vainamdinen’s belt with which to sweep away pains 
and sores (128 ¢). A soldier bound for the wars prays for 
old Vadindmoinen’s cloak, for the mantle of the distant 
Lapp (99), an expression which only means a wizard in 
this instance. In the last five examples we note that cures 
or protection from danger were anticipated from the use 
of external means independent of Vdindmdinen’s power of 
magic song. In the next three instances he himself is 
expected to heal and protect from harm by purely physical 
agencies. Reliable old Vainamdinen, the diviner as old 
as time, is invited to raise his paddle [v. sword] from the 
sea and destroy the abscesses and scabs on a human body 
(146 d); or to clip wool from a stone, hair from a rock 
and make of it a shirt of war in which a soldier can fight 
in safety (162 ¢); or to take a bath-switch and a honied 
wing from his belt with which to sweep away to the land 
of Lapps the fearful pains of a sufferer (157 4). But it is 
purely as a magician that the reliable old diviner makes 
a boat from the fragments of an oak by singing a series of 
magic songs, one for each part of the boat (229) In 
another passage the outside chip of a gigantic oak, when 
struck with an axe, flew into the sea to serve as a boat for 
Vaindmoinen, the singer, without further ado on his part 
211 0). 
‘ He Is also known as Vainé, and his daughter is coupled 
with Kivutar, the Pain-maiden, (10 ¢) because both were 
helpful in removing all sorts of pains and diseases. A 
soldier begs Vaino’s girl, who wears golden ornaments on 
her temples, a copper petticoat, and a silver belt, to dash 


~—w* 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 285 


water on the pan of a touch-hole to prevent his enemy’s 
gun going off (162 f/). Their home is Vainold, which is 
collocated with Pohjola, Ulappala, Lapland or Turja (17 <, 
26 5, 149 d, 154 ¢, 198 a), for the far north was pre-eminently 
the land of wizards, sorcerers, and magic. But it is as a 
warrior and the old son of Kaleva, not as a singer relying 
on the force of magic songs, that Vainimoinen sharpens 
his spears and arrows before going into battle (205 /) or 
when he tests his sword by striking it against an iron hill 
(202 0). 


TAPIO AND THE DIVINITIES OF THE FOREST. 


One of the most popular of Finnish gods was certainly 
Tapio. The hunter depended on him for game; not so 
much for consumption as for their valuable furs which 
could be sold or bartered. The sheep and cattle, of which 
every family had a few, were pastured in the forest and 
their welfare and safety from wild beasts was therefore 
largely contingent on the goodwill of the forest divinities. 
The chief of these was Tapio, the golden king of the 
forest with a mossy beard and who wears a hat of fir twigs ; 
though also known as old Ukko with the rumpled beard, 
the feather-hatted lord of the woods. Sometimes he was 
simply called ‘the Forest’ (139 a, c) or Kuippana ‘the long- 
necked,’? Kuitua, Kuittola, Nikki Nakki, or Hitsi Hatsi. 
The wild animals that belong to him are figuratively spoken 
of as his flocks and herds, his ewes and rams, or ‘ drooping 


1 So it is explained in Renvali's Dict. who adds that it is the same as 
Kuikkana. It seems to mean something long and hollow for there is a 
riddle: ‘Kuippana on the stove-bench? Ans. A dough-trough or tub,’ 
Arvoituksia, No. 544. 


286 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


ears’; as his ‘gold and silver,’ and even as his ‘sheaves 
of flax.’ But in a riddle ‘Tapio’s bull’ is a ‘ fir-tree.’? 

His wife has several appellations which depend partly 
on her frame of mind as it seemed to a suppliant hunter 
when invoking her. When kindly disposed she was 
Mielikki (the amiable) and was pictured as wearing rings 
and bracelets of gold ; when unkind and deaf to his prayers 
she was Kuurikki (the deaf), was black and terrible in 
appearance, being horribly dressed in rags while the rings 
and bangles on her arms were mere withes (89 /). The 
name of Hiiletar (the charcoal wife) may have been assigned 
her for a similar reason as the last, though perhaps it 
was given her by charcoal-burners as she is not connected 
with wild animals in the one passage where she is men- 
tioned (52 d). Hongas or Hongatar ‘Fir’s daughter’ was 
a natural name for the wife of the king of the forest, who 
himself seems to be described as a ‘ hollow fir’ with a fir- 
twig hat (139 &). This hollowness is also a feature in 
Teutonic folklore. In Sweden, Denmark, and Stiermark, 
the Forest-wife (Skogsnufva) or Elf-girl (Ellepige) or ‘ Wild- 
frau’ is pictured in the popular imagination as being 
hollow behind like a hollow tree-stem or a dough-trough.? 
As Simanter she wears a tin sheath and a silver belt; the 
word perhaps is another form of Simatar (virgin honey 
wife), an epithet that would be given to show her sweet 
disposition. Mimerkki is dressed in the same way and 
was also of a conciliatory nature. When out of spirits and 
dejected she may have acquired the name of Nyrkitar. 
As directress of the droves (juont) of forest cattle, the 
mistress of the forest receives the appellation of Juonetar. 


1 Aruvottuksia, No. 1745. 
2 Mannhardt, (1) pp. 120-126 ; Hyltén-Cavallius, vol. i. p. 19. 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 287 


As ermines, stoats, and other furry animals frequent stony 
places, it was natural enough to call the chief in charge of 
the ‘money’ by the name of their favourite haunts, 
Raunikko (full of stone heaps) (153 4). As Elina, she is 
invoked by a snarer of hares (118 a). And another name 
for her is Kuuritar. 

Tapio does not seem to have had many sons, as only three 
are mentioned. Nyypetti is asked to act as herding-boy 
to a herd of cattle on the summer pasturage (123 /). 
Nyyrikki, so called, perhaps, from being slow in his move- 
ments, is pictured as wearing a blue cloak and a tall red 
hat, and on one occasion as having a white beard. Pinneys 
is desired not to hold back the wild animals from a hunter 
in search of them (139 7); for his name seems to imply 
that he was likely to keep a firm grip (pinne) on the 
paternal property. 

.Tapio’s daughters are more numerous. ‘Tellervo tinkles 
in a gold and silver dress. Lumikki is so called because in 
charge of snow-white animals, such as the ermine, and she 
is besought to let them wander towards the trap of a hunter 
(118 4). Ristikko seems to receive her name from animals 
with a white cross (7is#z) on their breast which were under 
her special care. ‘Flax-stalk’ (pdrstdér), as a figurative 
name for a long-backed and small furry animal like the 
ermine or the weasel, is the basis of the name Paistarys. 
She is requested to strew her ‘ flax-stalks’ and ‘cloaks’ 
about, and let them run without ‘suspicion into a peti- 
tioner’s trap (153 ¢). Vitsari (the whipper) is the lively 
woman who drives out game from Tapio’s Hill. Tuulikki, 
the famous beauty of the woods, must have been compared 
in some sort of way with the wind (fs). Annikki is a 
diminutive of the christian name Anni, ‘ Anne,’ but it may 


288 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


have been selected from suggesting the idea of a gift (ax#) 
giver. Two other daughters were Tapiotar and Tyytikki. 
The tiny lassie Pihlajatar (Rowan), the lovely Katajatar 
(Juniper), and the short Tuometar (Birdcherry) are three 
tree-spirits, but also daughters of Tapio, whose office some- 
times is to herd cattle. 

The daughters-in-law of the forest are Mikitar—the 
daughter of Mikki (Michael), a word also used as an 
epithet for the fox—and Varvutar (Twig’s daughter), who 
give game to the hunter (118 ¢). Miiritar, whose name 
seems to mean that she was a very small creature, is asked 
by a hunter to get up a tree and listen to his songs and 
tell him if they are suitable (139 @). Huijutar and Siilikki, 
from s#tls, ‘a hedgehog,’ take charge of the wasps that 
haunt the woods (113). Two other forest-spirits, who are 
not directly connected with Tapio, should be mentioned 
here. The chosen Kunnotar, or the golden Kdrehetar 
is asked to leave off melting gold or silver as a trapper 
has already put some into her bowl (173 a). According 
to Ganander (p. 36), Kareitar was the patroness of foxes 
who brought them to the hunter’s traps. 

Tapio’s abode is Tapiola or Metsola (Forest-home) or 
Havulinna (Brushwood Castle) or the famous village of 
the woods (17 4, 89 a). It was sometimes imagined 
that in the forest there were three forts or castles 
of wood, bone, and stone. In the first lived the forest 
lassies, in the second the mistresses and the master of the 
forest in the fort of stone (89 /). A mere prayer was not 
always enough to propitiate Tapio and his numerous family ; 
he needed an offering. Accordingly a trapper asks them 
to take a fancy to his groats and salt, and in return to 
send quantities of animals into his traps (153 4). Kuippana, 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 289 


the king of the forest, the brisk man of the woods, with 
a beard of tree-moss, or the liberal mistress of the forest, 
is desired to accept the hunter's tribute of salt and groats 
and send game into his traps (153 @). A hunter beseeches 
the grey-bearded old man of the forest and his wife, 
Mimerkki, to make an exchange of gold. The hunter’s 
is Swedish gold obtained by fighting in the wars, while 
Tapio’s, as we have seen, consists in his wild animals with 
precious furs (173 4, ¢). 

The bear, as a forest animal, was naturally enough 
nursed by Hongatar and rocked by Tuometar at the foot of 
a stunted fir (193 4). And the woodland sprites, Mielikki, 
Annikki, and Tellervo, are requested by a bear-hunter to 
muzzle their ‘dogs’ (#.¢. bears) till he can approach them 
(121). In order to obtain the game he covets, the hunter 
is ready to adopt any device. He is willing to go as 
Tapio’s man-servant, or even as the boy who picks up 
the arrows, if Tapio will only be propitious (139 @). Or 
he asks the forest to marry his (the hunter’s) men to the 
pleasant daughters of the woods, to the downy-breasted 
little chicks (139 ¢). If Tapio happens to be asleep he 
desires Annikki of the fair complexion, who wears a down- 
like shirt, to awake the king of the forest, or to wake up 
the forest-mistress by playing a tune in her ear (139 2). 
On one occasion he invites the forest to play the zither 
(Aantele), so that the wild animals shall lend an ear and 
be attracted towards himself (139 4). He invokes the old 
man of_the knoll with a golden breast and who wears a 
hat of twigs, Mielikki, Tellervo, and Nyyrikki with the 
tall red cap, to show him the direction he ought to take 
by setting up posts and landmarks (139 ¢). He implores 
old Ukko with the rumpled beard, the ‘hollow fir’ with 

I T 


290 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


a fir-twig hat, to beat the wilderness and make the trees 
resound with thuds in order to drive out the game for 
him (139 4). Or Tuulikki, the delightful forest-girl, is 
invited to chase out the animals from the slopes of the 
Forest Fort, and to make a fence with her hands on each 
side of them to keep them on the right track. If obstacles 
intervene she is to remove them (139 0). He beseeches 
the famous beauty Tuulikki, Pihlajatar, short Tuometar, 
and kindly Hongatar to chase wild animals in front of 
him, and if none are near to fetch them from Lapland 
(139 £). He desires the forest-youth with a golden hat 
and the forest-mistress Juonetar to send the best of their 
flock to his trapping places (139 #). If the animals are 
sluggish he implores the lively Vitséri and Tellervo to take 
from Tapio’s Hill a whip of rowan, or a cattle-scourge of 
juniper, with which to drive out the game (139 7). Lastly, 
he prays Mielikki to send plenty of animals so near him 
that he can knock them over with a stick, or seize them 
with his hands. If that is out of the question she is to 
support his bow or steady his gun, and thus enable him 
to shoot a squirrel and pay his tax (144 4). 

The wild animals are represented as being kept in a 
magazine or storehouse. So Mielikki, the famous ‘golden 
buckle of the woods,’ is invoked to take the golden key 
at her side, to open Tapio’s storehouse, and let the ‘silver’ 
and ‘gold’ escape towards a hunter dressed in white (139 /). 
Or Mielikki, the mother with the lovely face, is asked to 
open the honeyed chest and let loose a file of animals 
in front of a hunter. Should she be disinclined to do this 
herself, she is to send one of her servants (139 g). The 
queen of the forest, Kuuritar, is requested to open her 
money magazine and let out the animals for a hunter to 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 29! 


catch in his traps (139 4). Annikki, the girl with honeyed 
mouth, is asked to open the storehouse door and throw 
out the hunter’s share on the bough of a tree. Then she 
is to spin a thread along which an arrow can travel straight 
to the brow of a little squirrel (144 2). The forest mistress, 
Simanter, is begged to make a din in the copper hills, and 
to let the mountain storehouse be opened for the ‘moun- 
tain cattle’ to run out and enter the hunter’s traps (151 ¢). 
Annikki, who keeps the keys, and Eva, the little serving- 
maid, are desired to open the magazine and let out the 
animals (139 #). In one instance, Tapio is humorously 
represented as carrying the game about with him on his own 
person.. The good and splendid old man, the golden 
forest king, is implored to take his best and fattest ‘ewes 
and rams’ from out of his shirt or his waistcoat, and to 
poke his ‘sheaves of flax’ into the traps of the supplicating 
hunter (151 4). 

In a lesser degree Tapio, as lord of wild beasts, or one 
o. his people, was implored to watch over flocks and herds 
gr: ing in the woods, and protect them from the attacks 
of L:ars. Thus Mielikki and Tuonetar are requested to 
anoint a bear’s paws with wort and its teeth with honey 
that it may not hurt the cattle (122 4). The king of the 
forest, Kuitua, and the benevolent Hongas are solicited 
to restrain their ‘dog’ (#.¢. a bear) from injuring the herds 
(122 6, 123.¢). The forest king, Kuippana, is supplicated 
to control his ‘bastard son’ (%.e. a bear), and to stick a 
mushroom up its nose to prevent its getting scent of the 
pasturing kine (122 ¢). The good mistress, Hongatar, and 
the observant Tapiotar are urged to keep a bear in check 
and prevent it doing harm (122 @). . The forest Nikki 
Nakki [v. Hitsi Hatsi], the golden king of the woods, and 


292 PRE AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


the kindly mistress are invoked to take care of the herds 
grazing in the forest (123 g). In the capacity of herd- 
girls the tiny lassie Pihlajatar and the lovely Katajatar 
are desired to cut a branch from the back of Tapio’s Hill, 
and with it drive the cattle from the woods back to their 
own home (123 /). 

Although evil might come from Metsola (17 2), its usual 
epithet is the delightful Metsola, and it was full of honey. 
A bee is asked to fetch honey from Metsola, luscious stuff 
from Tapiola from which an ointment may be made (181 /). 
And Vuotar, the maker of salves, concocted them a whole 
summer in Metsola, for delightful honey is there from which 
she made the unguents (232 /). 


Huis. 


Originally Hiisi was a spirit of the forest that dwelt in 
wooded hills. In the middle of the sixteenth century 
Bishop Agricola describes him as a Karelian god ‘who 
allowed profit to be made out of the beasts of the forest.’ 
But the Bishop also used the word in the plural (Ase?) to 
translate ‘high places’ in the passage: ‘And the Asgh 
places of Isaac shall be desolate’ (Amos vii. 9); and 
‘groves’ in the passage: ‘I will cut off the groves out of 
the midst of thee’ (Micah v. 14). When the Bishop wrote, 
the word was therefore applicable to a ‘sacred grove’ 
where sacrifices were made. The corresponding word in 
Esthonian, 43’, is also used in the sense of a sacred grove 
or thicket, which is usually on elevated ground. In several 
passages in the Magic Songs, Hiisi is found as a parallel 
word to ‘hill, mountain,’ showing that the two words are 
in a certain measure synonymous (9 4, 14 #, 65, 187). 


en 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 293 


He is often represented as dwelling in or being connected 
with a hill. Thus a treasure-seeker invokes a kinsman of 
Hiisi, the ruler (4a/#a) of the mountain, to show him where 
to go (111). A best-man boasts that he has wooed the 
girls of Hiisi’s fort, the cousins of Rakko Vuori (65). And 
the origin of the horse is said to be from Hiisi, that of the 
splendid foal from the mountain (187). The recollection 
that Hiisi was a forest divinity is retained in the following 
examples. Hiisi’s little boy, that rides a good two-year- 
old, is told to take a golden spur from a golden chest, and 
with it to tickle and prick the flanks of wild animals to 
make them run in the direction of the hunter (139 a). In 
order to quicken the pace of the sluggish animals of the 
forest another hunter desires that Hiisi’s hottest coals may 
be placed under their hind feet (151 ¢). And to the hare is 
given the nickname of ‘the bandy-legged of Hiisi’ (67 4). 
That Hiisi in the popular mind was intimately associated 
with trees and forest is shewn by various riddles in which 
‘ Hiisi’s elk’ or his ‘elk with one hundred horns’ is a ‘ pine 
tree,’ and ‘Hiisi’s land’ is the ‘forest.’ And though in 
three others ‘the neighing of Hiisi’s horse in Hiisi’s land’ 
stands for ‘thunder,’ we must not connect him in any 
vay with the thunder-god. The noise made by wind 
rushing through trees, thought of as horses, had sufficient 
resemblance to the whinnying of a horse and to thunder, 
to invite a concocter of conundrums to regard them as 
identical. So too Hiisi’s elk, horse, and ox, mentioned in 
the Magic Songs, seem to have been originally playful 
names for a large coniferous tree, though the terms were 
sometimes employed with only a faint or more usually 
complete want of perception of their proper signification. 
1 Arvottuksia, No. 176, 257, 1586; 129-131. 


294 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


The original animal assigned to Hiisi must have been the 
elk, reindeer, or ox; the horse is manifestly a later 
substitution. For instance, Hiisi’s ox, that ascends the 
Hill of Pain, has one hundred horns on his forehead and 
one thousand nipples on its breast, each full of ointments 
(109 #); here the branches and multitudinous small pro- 
jections on a resinous pine-tree seem to form the basis of 
the imagery. Hiisi’s chestnut horse with a fire [coloured} 
forelock and an iron [coloured] mane is so tall that it 
must be bridled from the top of a house and saddled 
standing ona fence. On its croup is a lake from which 
sorcerers drink, and it does not sweat (9 4) or slip on the 
ice-like path of the air (9 a, 65). Several points in this 
description appear to be reminiscences of a dendrous 
prototype; the chestnut or reddish brown colour, the 
extraordinary height and the quality of not sweating, while 
the lake on the croup suggests the idea that the tree was 
partly hollow like Tapio. A pond of water on the croup 
is, however, characteristic of other horses (14 4, 52 @) 
besides Hiisi’s, and in modern songs has become a 
commonplace epithet for a wonderful horse. Again, in 
Hiitola there is an ox [v. elk] with one hundred horns, 
with a mouth one hundred fathoms wide, and a throat like 
three cataracts that can extract the arrows of a sorcerer 
(37 ¢). Here the mouth and awful throat are amplifica- 
tions of the singing exorcist, while the meaning of an elk 
with one hundred horns is found in the riddles. In the 
next example the imagination of the singer has carried him 
so far that only in describing the back does he remain 
faithful to the prototype. The head of Hiisi’s horse is 
said to be of stone, its shanks of copper, its back of tarry 
wood, its feet of iron, and its muzzle of fire (9 a). Ina 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 295 


' still later example, as I suppose, Hiisi’s elk or reindeer is 
invoked to drive away the snakes and adders that drink the 
ale of the mistress of the house (91), where nothing is 
remembered but the fact that he owns such animals. 

In course of time Hiisi acquired a very bad character, 
and in modern times he is more or less synonymous with 
the devil. The date of this change is to be placed, I 
imagine, in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, when 
Christianity began to spread. That the missionaries 
fixed upon him specially is an indication that he was held 
in great estimation by the heathen Finns, and that his 
worship in the sacred groves was a special thorn in the 
sides of the preachers of the new religion. Sacrifices to 
Hiisi would be placed under a ban, and the native converts 
would gradually come to think of him as a very evil spirit, 
hardly distinguishable from the devil himself. In the 
Magic Songs he is sometimes called the humpback from 
the home of gods (1 ¢, 128 4, 166 g). The spirit of 
disease, or sickness of any kind, is addressed as ‘ Hiisi!’ 
(5 5, 8 5, 22, 56) or as ‘hound of Hiisi!’ (8 d). A tumour 
is his toadstool; a snake is Hiisi’s scourge or Piru’s whip ; 
a spell-sent injury is his cancerous sore (154 4); toothache 
is his son or his cat (114 @, ¢); a stye in the eye is Hiisi’s 
blemish (46 2); and rash owes its origin to a water-Hiisi 
(206 4). As a bird of ill-omen the body, legs and guts of 
the raven are made of Hiisi’s glove, spinning-staff, and 
belt appendages (200 4). The snake originated from his 
saliva (203 a); or he gave life to the spittle of Syojatar 
and made it into a black snake (203 ¢). The tremulous 
aspen is his harlot son (212%). And nightmares are 
termed ‘ Hiisi’s corpses.’ 

As diseases and maladies were often thought of as the 


296 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


bolts, spears, arrows, or Jagged spikes of a sorcerer or of 
some evil spirit like Hiisi, Lempo and Piru, this armoury 
of weapons had to be forged somewhere. Accordingly, 
Hiisi’s home, Hiitola, is provided with a smithy where 
such instruments are manufactured. There Piru, Aijé’s 
son, forges bolts and jagged spikes to launch into some 
wretched man’s body, and even there an exorcist can give 
an order for pincers for extracting them again (37 a). In 
a charm against pleurisy it is related that Hiisi’s little girl 
saw the chips of a huge oak floating on the sea and carried 
them home. In reply to her brothers’ question she says 
that sorcerer’s arrows might be made of them. Hiisi 
overheard this, and sent his son to the smithy to make 
them into spears and arrows (211 4). In a variant Hiisi’s 
iron-toothed dog sees an oak-chip floating on the water, 
snaps it up and brings it to Hiisi’s daughter who thought 
that arrows for a sorcerer might be made of it if taken to a 
smith (211 a). Once when the people of Hiitola celebrated 
a wedding and held a drinking-bout, they killed a horse 
and sprinkled the blood at the back of the forge of Hiitola 
(z10¢). The idea of a smithy of course suggested coals 
and soot. So a man wishing to ward off a jealous eye 
expresses a hope that it may be filled with Hiisi’s slag and 
soot or flow like butter into Hiisi’s bin of coals (3 64). 
From his coals and fire comes the whooping-cough (23). 
An exorcist consigns the toothache into Hiisi’s coals, into 
the fire of the evil power (114 4). A jealous person 
adjures Hiisi to poke his pole for stirring coals between 
two lovers in order to separate them (134). And a hunter 
desires that Hiisi’s hottest coals may be put under the 
hind feet of reluctant wild animals to hasten their move- 
ment towards himself (151 ¢). 


‘ BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 297 


This association of Hiisi with fire and coals made the 
transition ‘easy to identify Hiitola with Hell and Hiisi with 
Piru and the Evil Power. And in the following examples 
it is rather as an infernal power, perhaps in despair of other 
assistance, that he is invoked as a helper, just as the devil 
was invoked by witches and sorcerers in other parts of 
Europe in the Middle Ages. The old man and old wife of 
Hiisi, the fiery-bearded of Hell, is requested to bring people 
from the hill to hold down a horse about to be castrated 
(158 a). An exorcist invokes the aid of the terrific heroes 
of Hiitola, the tall men of Pirula, to extract ‘arrows’ 
(37 ¢). Fiery Hiisi is desired to come from fiery Hell 
with his three sons and two daughters and to press his 
shaggy glove against a torn vein ; failing that he is to tear 
a collop from his fleshy thigh to plug the hole with (177 &). 
Hiisi, the Pirulainen (devil’s son), is asked to remove his 
‘sting’ or ‘goad’ from a human skin and plunge it instead 
into the hard bones of a bear (149 g). As the humpback 
he is invited to come from Hiitola, from the home of gods 
with his sons and servant girls to destroy an evil. He is 
to bring a scythe from Hell and give it to an exorcist who 
will then cut out the evil that causes the sick man pain 
(128 4). Again the humpbacked of Hiitola is asked to 
come in a golden sleigh in which is a golden axe and with 
it to remove obstructions and facilitate a child-birth (166 g). 
A man wishes that the bloody cloak of Hiitola, that Huisi’s 
gory rug, needing five men to lift, may be bound across the 
eyes of an envious person (3 4d). Hiisi or Lempo is re- 
quested by a soothsayer to lend his linen cap, his broad- 
brimmed hat, into which to throw the alder slips used for 
divining (59 ¢). Hiisi is invoked to close a dog’s mouth 
with his tall hat, or Lempo is to do so with his broad- 


298 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FIN?S 


brimmed hat (126 ¢). A man wishing to pass a ‘Sg unob- 
served desires that the bloody cloak of Hiitola « Lempo’s 
gory rug may envelop its head and ears so t.iat it shall 
neither see nor hear (72 a). A man hoping to render an 
enemy’s gun useless desires that the hide of an elk from 
Hiisi’s land may take possession of the gun, may twist the 
touch-hole pan, and smash the ‘egg,’ #.¢. the bullet, so that 
it shall do him no harm (150). Probably to account for 
something bad in the nature of copper, its origin is derived 
from Hilahatar, Hiisi’s girl, Huisi’s old wife, or Hiisi’s mare 
having staled on a rock. The stale dried up and became 
copper ore (227 4). 

His daughter Hippa, and his cat Kipinatar, are requested 
to tear and torture a thief till he restores the stolen pro- 
perty (174). His maiden Hiki-tytto is implored by an 
operator to sharpen a knife with sweat (4242), so that he 
may excise a tumour without hurt to the patient (135). 
But his girl Hiki-tukka (sweaty hair) steals milk, and takes 
it to Mana or to Tuonela (88 a). 

Though originally Hiisi had nothing to do with water, an 
evil water-spirit could be called a water-Hiisi. As we have 
seen before, a water-Hiisi was the cause of rash (206 4). 
An exorcist asks whether a certain malady has come from 
the homes of Nixies (/umme-koiva, ‘dog with ears like a 
water-lily leaf’), from the dens of water-Hiisis (5 4). 
And the daughter of Tuoni (Death), when in the pangs of 
labour, rushes into the sea, into the den of a water-Hiisi 

216 3). 

It is not quite certain whether the word Hiisi can be 
identified formally with the Lapp Sies#e, Seta (p. 163). 
Whether they have the same origin or not, they have 
several points in common. The position of the seséa was 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 299 


often on high ground like Hiisi’s Hill, and consisted of a 
tree-stump, post, or small pile of stones, which in a treeless 
district might be taken to represent the stump of a tree. 
The fresh twigs and leaves spread under them, and renewed 
annually, might also be taken to mean the seifa was origin- 
ally a tree-spirit. The same may be said of the birch or fir 
twigs, changed every spring, that sometimes represent the 
Votiak vorsud ; and of the fagot of twigs, also replaced by a 
new fagot once a year, in which the £uda vodi% or house- 
spirit of the Ceremis had his habitation. Before becoming 
a forest-spirit, Hiisi no doubt was a tree-spint. Judging from 
the Lappish, Ceremisian, and Votiak analogies, it is pro- 
bable that at one time he was a very favourite divinity of 
the protohistoric West Finns, and in some measure a family 
or clan god, like the Seitas and the Stor Junkares of the 
Lapps, who give liberally of the wild animals of the bound- 
less forests, or, as they expressed it in later days, of his 
‘forest gold and silver.’ 


LEMPO. 


Though there is no direct trace of it in the Magic Songs, 
Lempo seems to have been originally a forest-spirit of a 
malignant kind. For among the Vepsas living between 
Lakes Ladoga and Onega the Lempos are still regarded as 
evil spirits of the forest, in stature as tall as trees, who do 
their best to lead travellers astray. As the Vepsish form 
of the word, /emdot, means not only ‘devil’ but also ‘ fire, 
flame,’} it is possible that Lempo was at one time a per- 
sonification of an ignis fatuus, or Will o’ the Wisp, a 
phenomenon that in Finnish is generally termed virva, 

1 Ujfalvy, pp. 82, 125. 


300 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


virva-tuls. In many respects he is synonymous, or nearly 
so, with Hiisi, Piru, and Evil in general. Disease is ad- 
dressed as ‘Lempo’ (5 ¢); a tumour is Lempo’s lump 
(28 4, 129 a), or his whorl, his ball (zor); a hornet is his 
cat or Hiisi’s bird (214) ; stitch and pleurisy are termed the 
arrows of Piru, the leaf-headed spears of Lempo (37 2), or 
it is his arrow, his bloody knife (149 4); toothache is 
Lempo’s dog or Hiisi’s cat (114 4). Piru made arrows, 
Lempo leaf-headed spears from the boughs of a fiery oak, 
from the splinters of an evil tree, and then shot them into 
a human body (211 ¢). Lempo, Piru the limping fellow, 
is asked to extract his arrows, made perhaps from an evil 
oak, and shoot them down the throat of a raven, which 
will carry them to Lempo’s family and place of birth, never 
to be seen again (149 f). For the raven is also Lempo’s 
bird, and its breast-bone, tail and guts were made of his 
spinning-wheel, sail, and needle-case (200 a). If a knife 
slips in the hand of an operator, it is the work of Lempo, 
though he is made to suffer for it by being cut in two with 
a knife made by himself even though sitting at the time on 
his mother’s knee (31, 55 a, 4). Homma, the most brisk 
of kings, is invoked to take a piece of flesh from Lempo’s 
thigh, from the groin of the evil spirit, and with it plug a 
severed vein (177 /). 


WATER-SPIRITS—AHTI, VELLAMO, ETC. 


Living so much as they did either on the sea or near 
large lakes the Finns had often occasion to invoke the aid 
of the chief water-spirit, Ahti, or of his wife Vellamo. Thus 
a man travelling by water implores Ahti and Vellamo to 
tranquillise the waves and the force of the water (107 3). 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 301 


When descending dangerous rapids a boatman prays the 
golden king of the water, the gracious Ahti of the waves, 
to come and steer with his sword, so that the boat may 
keep clear of rocks (127 5). Litvetti or Livetti, the king 
of the waters beneath the stream, is invoked to make the 
rocks that lie in the rapids as soft as moss (127 a). If, 
when journeying by water, the oars are too short, the 
rowers feeble, and the coxswain is as helpless as a babe, 
Ahti is besought to give better oars. And if the waves run 
too high, he and his sons are to still them (178 a). The 
old woman below the waves, that lives near foam, is asked 
to ascend to the surface to collect the foam and take 
charge of the foam-capped waves in front of a sailing boat 
(178 c). But danger at sea, or on a lake or river, did 
not arise solely from storms and rapids; peril was to be 
anticipated from spells and witchcraft. Hence a man 
beseeches Ahti, the master of the water, to give him his 
oars and a boat before the petitioner ventures to cruise 
over waters inhabited by witches, and also to allow the 
boat to glide smoothly along (178 4). Melatar (Oar-wife), 
the gracious woman, is asked for her steering oar (me/a) to 
steer with, while passing along spell-bound streams (127 a). 

Help in other ways was also to be obtained from water- 
spirits. An exorcist implores the blue-capped mistress of 
the waters to rise from the waves to strengthen and support 
a weak, unsupported man. She is to raise men from the 
sea and land-locked lakes, bowmen from streams, and 
swordsmen from wells, to help the petitioner against his 
enemies (176 7). Another exorcist invokes the men of the 
sea, the heroes of inland lakes, the ‘scaly cloaks’ from the 
gravel, the ‘sandy shirts’ from the pool, who are as tall as 
pillars of cloud or as huge forest firs, and a thousand 


302 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


armed men to follow him and overthrow his enemies 
(176 4). 

As lord of the waters Ahti and his wife ruled over the 
fish, and were therefore invoked by fishermen. Thus 
foam-mantled Ahti of the sea, the reedy-bearded old man, 
is requested to put on his gift-giving clothes and draw a 
crowd of fish to listen to Vainimdinen’s music (120 a2), by 
which we have to understand the magic songs of the fisher- 
- man. Another man desires Ahti, the master of the waves, 
the ruler of a hundred caves, to send fish into his net 
(x20 5). Or a fisherman implores the damp-bearded, 
golden king of the water, who wears a slouching hat, to 
come and fish with him as a sure means of getting plenty 
(120 d). The old wife of the sea with a reedy breast is 
besought to send perch to tug the lines set by the petitioner 
(r20¢). Another fisherman asks the assistance of Vellamo, 
who has a reedy breast and wears a shirt of reeds, and he 
will give her in return a beautiful linen shirt spun by the 
daughters of the Moon and Sun (120 ¢). Lastly, the 
beautiful old wife Juolehetar, the benevolent mistress of 
the water, is implored to send shoals of fish in the direc- 
tion of the fisherman’s nets (120 /). 

On one occasion it is related that when Sharp Frost 
tried to freeze the sea, the warship of Ahti remained un- 
affected. It then tried to freeze the god, who however 
knew a trick or two, for he shore moss and fluff from a 
stone, made it into socks and mitts, and so was able to 
hold Sharp Frost and prevent his getting away (93 4). 


EARTH SPIRITS, SAMPSA PELLERVOINEN. 


The earth spirits were not very prominent personalities 
in the mythology of the Finns and are not often invoked. 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 303 


When this happens it is sometimes to obtain the assistance 
of the dead, who had been buried in the earth, but whose 
spirits still continue to live. So Earth’s daughter, the girl 
of dry land (manwue), is asked to listen to the golden words 
of an exorcist and to raise from the earth 100 men without 
swords and 1000 men with swords to help him against 
wizards and sorcerers (176 4). The old crone beneath the 
earth (manner), the boy of the lowest depths of the earth, 
is invoked to extract the arrows ofa sorcerer with her fingers 
or her back teeth. If that is of no avail she is to raise her 
men from the earth, her heroes from the hard dry land 
(mantu), (149 ¢). The old man of the earth is invited to 
rise from out the earth, the son of the field from out the 
headrig, or from the side of a church with roo planks, to 
help a man to work, to make a fence, or to row over the 
water (176 #). A wayfarer implores the old wife of dry 
land (manfw) and the primeval master ( fert-isdénta) to rise 
from the earth to aid a well-beloved son and to be his 
comrade while travelling (138). Before lying down to 
sleep a man salutes the earth, the dry land (manner), and 
_ the master of the dry land (137). 

As the earth also causes trees, herbage and seed to grow, 
we find it stated that grass is made to sprout by Peler- 
moinen, to grow from the earth by the soil, mantu (45 5). 
A tree is the creation of God, a shoot made to sprout by 
earth’s daughter, Maatar (87 ¢). A sower beseeches the 
old wife below the ground (manner), the earth’s mistress, 
the old wife of the soil (m#antu) to cause herbage to grow ; 
for the earth never fails if the food-mothers (einetfen emda?) 
so desire (130 ¢). Skin eruptions (maahinen) were 
popularly supposed to result from the anger of an insulted 
earth-elf (maakinen), who revenged himself by sending a 


304 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


rash on his insulter. An exorcist declares that a rash is 
from the earth by birth and arises from the anger of the 
earth or of water. Its legs are even shorter than those of 
a worm or snake. If it has come from the earth, fire or 
water, it is to return there (206). Again, a rash (maa- 
hinen) took its origin from a water-Hiisi, who was rowing 
in a boat, reached the land like a strawberry, #.e. unob- 
trusively, bashfully, and fell down like a lump of wheaten 
dough, #.e. helplessly and clumsily (206 4). 

The earth’s mistress, Manuhutar, is said to have made a 
dog’s head from a grassy knoll, its legs from stakes, its 
nose of wind, etc. (198 3). 

Among the earth-spirits must be included, as a later de- 
velopment after the introduction of agriculture, Peller- 
voinen or Pellermoinen—a diminutive of fe/fo ‘a ploughed 
field,’ who is solely associated with the growth of vegetation. 
Thus grass is made to grow from the earth by Mantu (the 
soil), and to sprout or become bushy by Pellermoinen 
(45 4). The Fir, the useless boy, was brought forth by 
Sydjatér, was formed from the earth by Maajatar, was 
made bushy by Pellervoinen and nailed down, #.e. fast 
rooted, by Naservoinen or Natulainen (212 g). Bent-grass 
is said to have sprung from a pearl that fell from the Lord, 
from the hand of Jesus on the unploughed edge of Peller- 
voinen, on the edge of Osmo’s field (220). 

In the remaining examples he appears rather as a 
spirit of vegetation who performs his functions by sowing 
the ground. Thus Pellervoinen, the boy or son of the 
field, Sampsa the tiny little boy, sowed swamps and firm 
land and succeeded in getting other trees to grow, but not 
the oak. At last, after the lapse of a week it struck root, 
was drawn upwards by Jesus and made to grow by the soil 


A ee ee a ee oe) 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 305 


(224 ¢). Again, Sampsa, the boy Pellervoinen, put six or 
seven grains or seeds into a mafrtin-skin bag and went to 
sow the land. He sowed firm land, swamps, sandy clear- 
ings run to waste, and stony places. ll sorts of different 
trees grew up, each adapted to the soil on which it was 
sown (212 a2). The same is told in different words of 
Semmer, the limping or stooping boy—an epithet that 
probably has reference to the action of sowing—who is 
evidently Sampsa or Pellervoinen under a different name 
(212 3). 

In an interesting song, collected in Ingria by the late 
Mr. V. Porkka, Sampsa Pellervoinen appears very clearly 
as the spirit of vegetation that sleeps all winter, but is 
awoke in summer by the genial warmth. I give it here in 
a slightly curtailed form:— 

‘Why do our oats and rye not grow at all in the clearings 
and in the vales, on the hillock of Sdmpsi, on the hill of 
Pellervo ? 

‘Sampsa is asleep in bed with seven crosses on his back 
with ten finger rings at his side. His shins are visible in 
the bed, his red stockings in the straw. 

‘There is no one to awake Saémpsa, to cause Pellervo to 
rise. 

‘The manly Winter-lad jumped up to awake Sampsi, to 
cause Pellervo to rise. 

‘He took a horse of the Wind, a young horse of Ahava 
and began to drive with the Wind, to dash forwards with 
Ahava. 

‘He drove up to Sampsa’s bed: “Get up, Simpsa, from 
your bed to excite the rye, to hurry the growing corn.” 

‘Sampsa forthwith replied: “I shan’t get up for you. I 
shall get up for another man. You did wrong to come, 

I U 


306 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


did worse when you returned. You blew the leaves off 
the trees, the catkins off the grass, and blood from the 
maidens.” 

‘Who summoned Sampsa to appear, who cause Pellervo 
to rise? 

‘The manly Summer-lad jumped up, etc. 

‘He took a horse, etc. 

‘He drove up, etc. 

‘Sampsa forthwith replied: “I shall get up for you, but 
not for another man. You did well to come, better when 
you went away. You blew leaves upon the trees, catkins 
upon the grass, and blood into the maidens.” ’! 


Luonto (NATURE)—LUONNOTAR. 


The word for nature (/uonto), like /uoja ‘ Creator,’ is a 
derivative of /uo ‘to make a beginning,’ ‘to throw up or 
off,’ ‘to create.’ And by ‘nature’ we have to understand, 
not external nature, but, the force behind it, a female 
personification of the energy of nature. An abstract idea 
of this kind is far from original and no great age can be 
assigned to the passages in which /vonto or Luonnotar 
‘the daughter of nature’ occur. As personifications of a 
creative energy the birch-tree is said to have been created 
by three Luonnotars (212 4). And Ukko, the aerial god, 
the Creator on high, after rubbing his palms against his 
left knee, produced three Luonnotars to be mothers of 
iron, which they afterwards milked from their breasts 
(214 a). The daughter of nature (/sonfo), Udutar, and the 
sharp maiden Terhetar sifted mist in a sieve at the end of 
a misty promontory, thereby giving origin to fevers and 

1 Kuvalehti, 1894, p. 91. 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 307 


pleurisy (211 @). The three sisters have a home given 
them in the sky in a story in which the bear is said to have 
been born on the horns of the moon, on the back of the 
seven stars, beside the maidens of the air, near Nature’s 
daughters (193 4). But the original idea underlying their 
name is quite lost in the narrative in which three Luon- 
notars walking by the sea observe the spittle of Syojatar 
on the shore and wonder what would become of it if the 
Creator gave it life. Eventually Hiisi—not the sisters— 
turns it into a snake (203 ¢). 

The recuperative power of nature would naturally occur 
to exorcists and wizards when healing the sick, and in a 
more objective form would be appealed to for assistance. 
Old mother Kave (the woman), the daughter of nature 
(4uonto), the oldest of womankind, the first mother of 
individuals, is therefore invoked to come and see pains 
and remove them (128 g). Almost in the same terms she 
is implored to help an exorcist (1 ¢). And under the same 
title she is invited to allay the pains of child-birth because 
she formerly freed the moon from imprisonment in a cell, 
and the sun from a rock (166 @). But the original idea is 
on the wane in a charm for relieving pain, in which it is 
related that three Luonnotars sit where three roads meet 
and gather pains into a speckled chest or a copper box, 
and feel annoyed if pains are not brought to them (10 4). 
And the old idea of her functions is missing where the 
the woman (ave), the old wife Luonnotar, the darling and 
beautiful, is asked to point out the path to a bridal pro- 
cession (117 a). Or when she is invited to bewitch 
sorcerers and crush witches; to weave a cloth of gold and 
silver, and make a defensive shirt under which an exorcist 
can live safely with the help of the good God (176 ¢). In 


308 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


the next two examples Nature can scarcely be separated 
from God the Creator and seems only another term for 
him. A soldier in time of war implores the Creator, 
Nature (/vonfo), the God on high, to save men armed with 
swords, and crews with their freights from the murderous 
waves of men (162 ¢). And to avert danger from spells 
a man beseeches the Creator, Nature, the God on high, to 
save him from the spells of villagers with words (s.¢. counter- 
spells) framed by the Creator and prescribed by the Holy 
Ghost (165 a). 

She appears in a very different character when described 
in two instances as the furious old wife, the portly woman 
Luonnotar, who began to sweep the sea, to mop the waves 
with a broom, with a cloth of sparks on her head and with 
a cloak of foam over her shoulders. Eventually some of 
the sweepings stick in her teeth and become the origin of 
toothache (185 4, c). Ina variant, as we have seen above, 
the same is told of Vdindmdinen and his wife. Perhaps 
in both instances we should rather read Louhiatar, the 
mistress of Pohjola, as the events related would be in 
harmony with her character. 

In another group of instances the wife or daughter of 
Nature appears as the personification of the warm, genial, 
growing weather that accompanies a southerly wind and re- 
ceives the appellations of Suvetar ‘the wife or daughter of 
summer, or of the south wind,’ and Etelatar ‘the wife or 
daughter of the south (wind).’ She is invoked in this 
capacity by the husbandman and the owner of herds. Thus 
Etelatar the youthful, the boisterous and jolly girl, is asked to 
cause a honeyed cloud in the sky and to rain honey and water 
down on the growing corn (130 4). Suvetar and Etelatar, 
the old wife of nature, is implored to bring her horn from 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 309 


the sky or from the depths of the earth and then blow it, so 
that lakes of milk and streams of butter may issue forth. 
By blowing she is to beflower knolls, make beautiful the 
sandy heaths and turn swamps into honey on which the 
supplicant can feed his herds (123 ¢). Excellent Suvetar, 
Nature’s old wife Etelatar, is besought to bore holes in the 
fields and cause liquid honey to flow on each side of the 
pasturage ; she is further to sink a splendid well from 
which the herd can drink and then give rivers of milk 
(132 a). The same personalities are requested to feed the 
cows from the moist hillocks and verdant knolls that they 
may yield abundance of milk. If the milk has been 
carried away she is to blow a horn that came from the sky 
and let the milk run back through the horn (132 4). The 
distinguished Suvetar, Nature’s old wife Etelatar, is desired 
to feed and tend a herd of swine when it is sent into 
the woods (161). In the last example the original 
conception of Nature is quite obliterated though she still 
remains beneficent. The distinguished woman Suvetar, 
Nature’s old wife Etelatar, that watches herds, is in- 
voked to clean out the byre and to bring good luck. 
She is then to make a golden comb or a silver brush 
and attach it to the doorpost for the cattle to rub against 


(123 2). 


MAIDENS OF THE AIR, OF SPRINGS, ETC 


The Maidens of the air, of springs, dells, swamps, etc., are 
beneficent beings, and were often invoked for extinguish- 
ing fire and cooling burns. The four anonymous maidens 
first mentioned are perhaps the Luonnotars. Four maidens, 
three celebrated daughters, were formerly mowing grass on 


310 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


a misty cape in a foggy island and making it into hay. 
After spreading it out a fiery Tursas from Turjaland came 
and burnt it to ashes. It happened opportunely that they 
were short of ash and in need of lie to wash the head of the 
sun’s son, but before they could collect the ash a north-easter 
whisked it away to the banks of a holy stream and from it 
a splendid oak sprang up (224 a). In another version 
the four maidens, a triplet of brides, are making hay when 
a boy from Pohjola or an eagle from Turja came and 
burnt the hay, put the ash into his wallet and carried it to 
Lapland where it was sown in black mud and from it 
sprang a huge oak (224 4). Again, four maidens find a 
sapling oak and plant it in an island formed where 
three rivers had flowed from a tear shed by a Kyytdéldinen 
(224 ¢). , 

In a charm against injuries from fire, Ismo, one of the 
daughters of the air, is asked to come with the speed of 
thought and pour herself out like foam upon her son’s evil 
work and throw water from her apron on the bums (140 6). 
Nunnus or Munnus of the daughters of the air is requested 
to bring frost and ice, as there is frost enough in the air, 
to freeze the fingers of an exorcist and allow him to handle 
fire unhurt (172 @). After Ukko had struck fire in the sky 
and put it into a golden bag he gave it to an Air-maiden to 
rock, who carelessly let it fall to the earth (226 a). Aholy 
maiden on a cloud, a woman (4aZo) on the rim of a rainbow 
with a golden box under her arm and a golden wing in her 
hand,wiped away the pain caused by burns and salved the 
injuries of fire (52 ¢). A maiden standing by a little pond 
in a drop of water in a cloud carries slush and ice in her 
arms with which she extinguished fire and cooled the 
burns it had caused (52 /). Again, in order to extinguish 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS Kpe 


fire an exorcist says he will raise up Sumutar (daughter of 
Mist), the portly woman, from the swamp and she will 
repair the injury done (52 4). In the next example the 
character of the Air-maiden changes, though she still 
belongs to cloud-land. A little girl, a woman (kao), 
appeared on the edge of a rainbow and while smoothing 
her hair the milk in her breast overflowed, fell on a honey- 
dropping meadow, and from it salves and ointments are 
obtained (232 @). In the next two examples her function 
is entirely different. A maiden lives in the air, on the 
edge of a little cloud, with a skein of veins on her lap and 
a roll of skin under her arm. She let them fall on the 
earth and from them bits of skin are taken to place on 
wounds from the tooth of a wolf or the claws of a bear 
*(25). A maiden from above the air, from the middle of 
the sky, is desired to come in a copper boat and row with 
honeyed oars round a wound caused by iron; to row in a 
boat made of veins through the bones and joints; to 
lengthen short veins, shorten those that are too long and 
arrange them in their proper places. Then with a needle and 
silk thread she is to stitch up the ends of the veins (140 4). 
These last two Air-maidens cannot be very different from 
Suonetar, where the beauteous woman of veins (soni), the 
beautiful Suonetar, who spins veins from a golden tuft on 
a copper spinning-rock and weaves a cloth of veins, 
is invoked to approach and tie up the ends of broken 
veins (140 ¢). 

An exorcist requests a maiden to rise from a dell, from 
inside a frosty spring, with her clothes all over frost and 
rime in order to gag Fire’s mouth and weigh down the 
head of Panu (171 f). A dear, clean-faced girl is desired 
to rise from a dell, from the corner of a swamp, and bring 


312 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


some cooling stuff to lay upon a burn (171 g). A frosty 
maiden, an icy girl crouching at the mouth of a frosty spring 
with a golden ladle in her hand is invoked to throw water 
upon burns (171 4). In a charm to excite love a grey-eyed 
maiden is besought to rise from a spring and help a 
darling wife. She is to fetch water from the spring of 
Love that the wife may wash her baby, her little bullfinch, 
and make it very beautiful so as to be admired by every 
one (133 ¢). Ina charm to fortify water and give it virtue 
a slender-fingered maiden is invoked to rise from a spring 
or from the gravel and to fetch energetic serviceable water 
from Jordan in which Christ was baptized (179). Lastly, a 
maiden from a dell, from the humid earth, or a warm 
maiden from a spring, a ‘blue socks’ from a swamp, a 
swarthy girl with shaven head and skinless teats was hold 
ing a copper box containing a golden comb. One of the 
teeth of the comb fell out and from it sprang a splendid 
oak the head of which seized the sky and its branches held 
the clouds (224 4). 

The Mist- and Fog-Maidens differ considerably from 
their sisters of the air. The Mist- and Fog-Maiden and 
the Air-maiden Auteretar is asked to sift down mist and 
fog to prevent an enemy seeing either to attack or to 
escape (180 4). The Maid of Mist and Fog is invited to 
clip wool from a rock and make a shirt of mist, a copper 
cloak, which an exorcist can wear day and night as a 
protection against sorcerers and Lapps (168 /). With the 
epithets of ‘leaf-bud,’ ‘ ship-borne yarn,’ #.e. dressed in fine 
linen, she is invoked to scatter fog from a sieve before 
the wild animals of the forest, when they approach a 
hunter, so that he may have time to get his bow ready 


(139 5). 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 313 


Fire is the offspring of Hoyhenes of the Panutars (Fire’s 
daughter), of Lemmes of the Lentohatars, who gave birth 
to her child in the sea. She could not hold or touch it 
and from that she knew it must be fire (226 2). Hdyhenes 
of the Panutars is invoked with Nunnus mentioned above 
to bring frost and ice to freeze an exorcist and allow him 
to handle fire without hurt (172 d). Panutar, the best of 
girls, is asked to come and quench a fire by putting 
it into her clothes and keeping it safe there (172 ¢). An 
anonymous Maid of Fire is desired to extinguish Fire 
and repair Panu’s work. She is to bring frost, ice, and 
iron hail to apply upon the burns. If that is not enough 
she is to poke a heifer’s hide into Fire’s mouth or throw it 
over Panu’s head (171 &). 

The Maid of Pain and Sickness, Kivutar, in spite of her 
name, is always invoked as a kindly, benevolent person- 
ality. Kivutar has a kettle, the daughter of Vaino a pot, 
in which she boils pains on the Hill of Pain and then 
flings them into a hole nine fathoms deep, so that they 
cannot possibly escape (10 ¢). The vehement maid of 
Kipula, sitting on a speckled stone, spins pains on a 
copper spindle, winds them into a ball and hurls them into 
the sea (10 ¢). The good mistress Kivutar, the dis- 
tinguished Vammotar (daughter of Wounds), is asked to 
take a feather, and sweep away wounds, to put them into 
her glove, which she is then to throw down on the Hill 
of Pain, on which is a big stone. Then she is to break 
the stone, to poke the glove inside and roll it into the depths 
of the sea (128 ¢). The lovely old wife of Pains, the good 
mistress Kivutar is requested to come and see the suffer- 
ings in a human body and make them cease. She is to 
wrap them up in a bundle and throw them into a mountain 


314 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


cleft, into a blue stone, into a liver-coloured chink, where 
they will never be heard of again (128 ¢). Kirsti, the 
maid of Pains, sits on a stone of pain where three rivers 
flow, grinding the stone of pain, twirling the hill of pain. 
She is asked to gather the pains into a hole of a blue or 
speckled stone and then roll them into the water (128 a). 
An exorcist wishes that certain pains may be shot into the 
cup of Kivutar, into the box of Vammotar, into the bed of 
Vaivatar (daughter of Suffering), or down on the pillow of 
Paivatar (17 s). The Maid of Swellings, Kullatar, the 
active girl, the packer-up, is desired to pack up her pack- 
ages, to remove her needless and monstrous things and take 
them to an apple or an oak tree (129 4). The beautiful 
old mother of Pains, the great mistress of the Hill of Pain, 
the old maker of Salves, that makes the best of magic 
cures, is requested to try if certain ointments are good 
and if so to bring them and anoint a sick man’s wounds 
(181 ¢). It is only when we come to origins that the old 
wife or daughter of pain and sickness is regarded as an evil 
spirit. Inflammatory wounds result from the fire that fell 
from a fiery horn which Kivutar, the old wife of Pain, was 
carrying (10 @). The daughter of Pain, the daughter of 
Death, fell asleep on a meadow, was made pregnant by an 
east wind and gave birth to a snake (203 d). And the 
daughter of Pain and Tuoni’s son are the parents of 
snails (184). 


POHJOLA. 


The word Pohjola means‘ the home of the north (#04/a),’ 
though the term is quite vague, indeterminate, and without 
geographical significance. Another and older meaning of 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 315 


pohja is ‘the bottom or lower end of anything,’ for instance, 
of a cask, sack, or haystack. Pohjola is described as 
murky, and with a speckled lid, where there is neither sun 
nor moon; the gate of the north is immense, the pass 
of the atmosphere (s/ma) is hingeless (17 m). In dark 
Pohjola, in strong Sarentola, there is a fiery river throwing 
off sparks, and this is drunk by a dry-throated man of 
Pohjola (52 2). But there is an eternal bridge across the 
river of Pohjola for a traveller to reach that gloomy place. 
It is formed by a gigantic oak felled by a little man who 
emerged from the sea (211 2). 

Though this dark, gloomy land of the north is quite 
mythical and unreal, it was a fact that the farther north a 
hunter penetrated, the more likely he would be to find 
game, for there the country was wild and uninhabited. 
From this point of view Pohjola would naturally be associ- 
ated with wild animals and regarded much in the same 
way as Tapiola and Metsola. So a hunter desires that the 
scent of game may reach the nose of his dog from gloomy 
Pohjola, from under the window of Tapio (125). Another 
hunter requests Laaus, the master of Pohjola, to give him 
a bird to take home, for if so he will be thanked (136 c). 
Annikki, the daughter of Tapio, is asked to twist a red 
thread on her rosy cheek and draw it across the stream of 
Pohjola for wild animals to run along and so reach the 
hunter (139 #). The open-handed wife of Pohja, Laaus, 
master of Pohjola, Sinisirkki, maid of Pohja, the son and 
daughter of Pohja, and others, are desired by a hunter to 
frighten away the animals sleeping in the forest that they 
may come in great quantities in his direction (139 5). 
Raunikko, that regulates the ‘money,’ Louhi, mistress of 
Pohjola, is requested to rattle her hand that is full of 


316 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


‘money’ and to send plenty animals to a trapper (153 4). 
A bear-hunter implores Louhi, mistress of Pohjola, to 
thrust out her woolly fist, her hairy palm, in front of him 
(121). If Jokiatar has no otters to give a trapper, she is 
to get some from Lake Imatra, or from a river of Pohjola 
(155). 

The women of Pohjola have also to do with dogs, 
especially sporting-dogs. Louhi, mistress of Pohjola, the 
distinguished Penitar, ‘Puppy’s daughter,’ is desired to 
remove impediments from her son, 7.e. from the hunter’s 
dog (125). Another hunter implores Raani, mistress of 
Pohjola, to prevent his dog giving tongue at the wrong 
time (126 a). And the best maiden in Pohjola smeared the 
teeth of a dog with sweet stuff, and thereby rendered it 
tame, useful, and not liable to bite (198 a) It was possibly, 
however, that from bad qualities in a dog its origin is 
attributed to the old woman Louhiatar, the harlot mistress 
of Pohjola, having slept with her back to the wind, become 
pregnant thereby, and eventually giving birth to a pup 
(198 a). For under the name of Loveatar, the harlot 
mistress of Pohjola also gave birth to a wolf (222 ¢). 
Perhaps from her connection with animals the blind whore 
of Pohjola, the wholly blind of Ulappala, is invoked to let 
fall some of her milk on the wound caused by the opera- 
tion of castration (158 8). 

As the north is by nature a cold region, Sharp Frost, 
after narrowly escaping destruction in the forge of Ilmari 
the smith, very naturally moved off to Pohjola, to strong 
Sarentola (93 4). And cold can sometimes be turned to 
good account. A boy is desired to come from Pohjola, 
from the cold village, and bring ice with him to cool 
burns (171 #). The Virgin Mary is requested to go to 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 317 


murky Pohjola, to a snowy mountain top, and bring with 
her ice and snow to apply upon a burn (171 4). Porotytts, 
a maid of Pohjola, who had burnt herself, cooled and 
healed the injury with slush taken from the mouth of a 
stallion of Pohjola that had on its croup a pool of slush 
(52 d). The crone of the north, with crooked jaw and 
scanty teeth, is asked to bring slush and ice to lay upon 
injuries from fire (171 4). And it was a girl from Pohjola, 
from the middle of an icy spring, that stood godmother to 
Fire, as she alone could hold him (226 c). 

In other ways, too, assistance was obtainable in Pohjola. 
A boy from there, with iron knees, is invoked to crush and 
shoot down the tooth-worm that produces toothache (114 a). 
The blind old wife of Pohjola, the blind hag of Ulappala, is 
asked to extract spears and arrows, #.¢e. pleurisy from a 
naked skin. Failing her, an old man in the land of the 
north, who has strong nails and iron teeth, 1s requested to 
draw out the spears and arrows and then break them (149 @). 
A boy from Pohjola, from the real land of Lapps, is invited 
to poke his fleshy thumb down the barrel of a gun to 
prevent the bullet being discharged against the petitioner 
(150). An exorcist, that feels himself weak, asks the help 
of a boy from Pohjola, of a tall man from Pimentola, to 
prevent his being overwhelmed with shame when near 
sorcerers (176 7). Or an old woman is invited to come 
from Pohjola with a basket containing a dish, in which is 
a golden feather, to anoint wounds (159 4). Lastly, Louhi, 
mistress of Pohjola, is implored by an exorcist to help 
him (x ¢). But in this, as in the examples immediately 
preceding, it is possible that these helpful personages were 
invoked for the same reason that Hiisi was sometimes 
appealed to; because they were strong, and, though of an 


318 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


evil disposition, might be appeased and mellowed by suit- 
able offerings. 

Pohjola had also a bad aspect, for all sorts of evils could 
come from it.. What is said of Tuonela, ‘the home of 
Death,’ in one version, may be told of Pohjola in a variant 
(216 4). The powerful Louhiatar, mistress of Pohjola, 
was made pregnant by a violent east wind and gave birth 
to Boil, Scab, Pleurisy, Gout, Gripes, Fits, Sudden Death, 
Rickets, a nameless boy, and a daughter Tuuletar (216 a). 
Raani, the swarthy old wife of Pohja, was got with child 
by a wind, was confined in an outhouse of Pohjola, and 
gave birth to Tuuletar, Viimatar, and Pakkanen, ‘Sharp 
Frost’ (210 6). The cold-throated old wife of Pohja, after 
sleeping a long time in the cold, rubbed her hands together 
so hard that blood was produced, and from it originated 
rust in corn (217). A furious old crone fv. the strong 
woman Louhiatar] ate iron groats, pounded by Tuoni’s girl, 
became heavy with child and brought forth a numerous 
progeny consisting of all sorts of maladies and injuries 
(216 @). And when the huge Pain-maiden, Akahatar, whose 
hair-plait reached to her heels and whose breasts hung 
down to her knees—like those of a Swedish Skogsnufva, 
of a Danish sea-woman, or of a Wildfraulein of the Eifel 1— 
was about to be confined she goes to Pohjola, to a bath- 
house in Sariola, where she was delivered of Wind, Fire, 
Sharp Frost, Snow-fall, Atrophy, Worms, Cancer, Heart- 
eater, Gout, and Pleurisy (216 ¢). 


LAPLAND, TURJaA. 


Though Lapland is a real country the term is generally 
used in quite a vague sense as the dark, northern land of 
Mannhardt, (x) pp. 88, 123, 128; Hyltén-Cavallius, vol. i. p. 14. 


ae 0. 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 319 


sorcery and magic, in a pre-eminent degree. And the 
word Lapp is often only another term for a wizard or 
sorcerer. Turja also has a place on the map. It is the 
eastern portion of the Kola Peninsula, the Tarje of the 
Russian Lapps. In the narrative, recorded by King Alfred 
of Ohthere’s voyage of discovery in the ninth century to 
the White Sea and the mouth of the Dvina, mention is 
made of the Ter-Finnas or Lapps of the Tarje district. 

From their remote northern situation, Lapland and 
Turja were both thought of as abounding in game and 
sometimes as densely wooded. If game is not to be found 
near at hand, a hunter desires the forest divinities to bring 
some from Lapland’s gloomy wooded wilds, from near 
Lake Imantra, or from the boundary of the Turja Fells 
(139 £). The origin of the reindeer is to be found in 
Lapland, and the old crone of the north is requested to 
send plenty of game from the north, from Lapland’s level 
tracts, into the traps of a supplicating hunter (148). 

More usually help was expected from these countries 
because their inhabitants were associated in the popular 
mind with the practice of magic arts. It is related that 
an old man from Turja, a little man from Pimentola 
(home of darkness), came with a roll of skin, a skein 
of sinews, some spare flesh and a ladle of blood, and 
repaired the injured portions of a wounded man (32 2). 
A maiden from Turja, from Lapland, sails in a red boat 
all over icicles and with a kettle full of ice, which she is 
asked to give to a person that has been burnt or scalded 
(52 &). An eagle dwells in Turja, in Lapland, with a beak 
of steel and iron claws; with one wing it grazed the water, 
with the other the sky; its beak is like five sickles. It is 
invoked to devour the pain from which a man is suffering 


320 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


(128 2). An eagle from Turja with five talons like sickles, 
with eyes at the tips of its wings, is besought to come and 
extract Keito’s spears from the body of a sick man (149 e). 
Again, in the north-east, in Turja, dwells a famous eagle. 
Under its wings are a hundred men, at the tip of its tail 
a thousand men all girt with swords. It is invoked to 
remove injury caused by spells (154 ¢). A fiery-throated 
Lapp, that has drunk up rivers of fire, is invited to come 
to sip blood and stop a flow of blood. He is to fetch a 
stopper from the Fells or a nail from Pohjola to serve as 
a plug ; then he is to make a copper or tin pipe and draw 
back the blood to its proper place, to the lungs and heart 
(177 #). Only once is Turja connected with violence or 
outrage; that is when a fiery Tursas, a Lapp, came from 
Turja and burnt some hay that four celebrated maidens 
were in process of making (224 a). 


PERSONIFICATIONS OF DEATH—KALMA, TUONI, MANA. 


Though Kalma may sometimes be taken as a proper 
name, it signifies ‘a grave, the smell of a corpse, a corpse,’ 
and a cemetery or collection of graves is a kaénisto. In 
the sense of grave the word may belong to the end of the 
second period, for the Mordvin £a/ma also means a ‘grave,’ 
and there is a verb ka/man, ‘I bury.’ As a proper name, 
then, Kalma is a mere abstraction or personification of the 
grave, and therefore of no great antiquity. Tuoni origin- 
ally meant the ‘ deceased,’ and is the same as the Lapp 
duodna, ‘miserable.’ From TZwonela, ‘the place of the 
dead or miserable,’ was afterwards formed by analogy a 
personal name, Tuoni. Mana was also formed by analogy 
from Manala, ‘the place of the dead under ground,’ which 


A eee = en See 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 321 


is shortened from maan ala, ‘under ground, below the 
ground,’ Léonnrot seems to have been the first to use it 
in the nominative as a proper name.! 

The abode of Death was under ground, and a river is 
sometimes mentioned in connection with it. Some chips 
of an awful oak, felled by a boy from Pohjola, drifted into 
the black river of Tuoni, into the subterranean waters of 
Manala (211 ¢). An old witch rolls fire up into a ball and 
hurls it along through the earth and soil (manue) into the 
river of Tuonela, into the depths of Manala (226 4). But 
a man must not go there without being killed by disease 
or removed by ordinary death (149 4). The huts of 
Manala are eternal (5 a). 

Disease in general, sometimes toothache in particular, 
is termed ‘Tuoni’s hound’ (13, 15 @, 21 5), or his ‘grub,’ 
or the ‘worm of Manala’ (21 ¢). But a snake is also the 
‘worm of Manala,’ or ‘Tuoni’s grub,’ or a ‘grub the 
colour of Tuoni’ (29 a), while a real grub or caterpillar 
is ‘Tuoni’s rag.’ Injuries from spells are ‘ the bit of death 
(surma),’ ‘the chains of Manala,’ or ‘ Tuont’s reins’ (154 ¢). 
Disease or sickness sometimes comes from the house of 
the spectral host (4a/malaiset) (5 a), from the armpit of 
a spectral form (ka/malainen), from Kalma’s heath (5 3), 
or it rushes forth from a grave (alma) (17 ¢). A place 
of burial is ‘Kalma’s heath’ (5 4), ‘Kalma’s sleeping- 
chambers,’ ‘the huts of the manalaiset’ (17 5). Ukko is 
invoked to fix Tuoni’s lock on the jaws of a bear, or to 
thrust a stone of Manala down its throat (123 7). When 
milk had been taken by means of spells from some owner 
of cows it was said to have gone to Tuonela or to Mana 
(132 ¢). 

Kalevala, vol. ii. pp. 165, 171. 

I x 


322 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Although the personifications of death were naturally 
dreaded as evil beings, they were also invoked to remove 
harm. Tuoni’s short girl is requested to take her cur, the 
toothache, from a sufferer’s jaws, and to press her injuries 
down into Hiisi’s coals (114 4). And Tuoni’s girl, the 
Maid of Pains or Sickness, collected pains with gloved 
hands and boiled them in a small kettle that no one should 
receive hurt from them in future (10 d). Tuoni’s girl 
Kipu-tytto, ‘the Pain-maiden,’ the huge Akahatar, is asked 
to winnow and sift torments, and to make stones suffer 
instead of human beings (128 d). An exorcist requests 
Tuoni’s red-cheeked boy to twist a red cord against his 
left thigh that the petitioner may tie up a severed vein 
with it. If he is unsuccessful Tuoni’s son is to perform 
the operation for him (140 d). Again Tuoni’s son, wear- 
ing a red hat, with eyes askew and crooked-jawed, is 
invited to knock down sorcerers, to shoot them in the 
belly, to gouge out the eyes of the envious and drag a 
gory rug over their eyes (176 2). And a son asks his 
dead mother to rise from the earth, from the cemetery, 
and to bring him from Tuoni’s land a fur coat, which he 
will put on to protect himself against sorcerers and witches 

176 5). 
‘ When the origin of anything possessed of evil qualities 
is related, its parentage, or origin, is sometimes ascribed 
to the evil spirits of the lower world. The blind daughter 
of Tuonela, the hideous child of Manala, was made preg- 
nant by a wind, was with child for nine years, and sub- 
sequently gave birth to Wolf, Snake, Cancer, Ringworm, 
Thrush, Cripple, Toothworm, Heart-eater, and Woman’s 
Enemy (216 4). Once when Tuoni’s iron-toothed old wife, 
the crooked-fingered and crumpled-jawed, was spinning, 


- ee 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 323 


some blood spirted from the distaff and turned into a 
snake (203 f). Iron is capable of doing harm, because 
when Holma came from Tuonela, the son of Manala from 
under the earth, he found purple melic grass growing on 
a swamp, and took it to Ilmarinen, who forged it into iron 
implements (214). Probably because nets are deadly to 
fish the origin of nets is assigned to Tuoni’s three-fingered 
girl, to a three-fingered crone of Lapland, who span a net 
of one hundred fathoms in a summer’s night (230 ¢). 
Again, because flax can be turned to bad uses, a huge flax 
plant is said to have grown up from a flax seed found in 
the storage place of Tuoni’s grub, and sown in the ashes 
of an incinerated boat (204 a). 


Sun, Moon, GREAT BEAR. 


The heavenly bodies received some attention from the 
Finns, and were personified; but there is not much in 
the Magic Songs to suggest that the sun and moon were 
held in any special honour, or were regarded as very 
powerful personalities, though Agricola mentions that the 
Finns in his time served the sun, moon, and stars. There 
is a vague reference in the text to a share being offered 
to the moon, sun, and Great Bear, while nothing is given 
to the disease called thrush (44). And the sun is asked 
to rise in proper time, to give gifts, health, success in 
hunting and fishing (110). This, of course, may be due 
to losses of traditional material incurred during the lapse 
of centuries ; for there are passages in the songs that seem 
to be fragments of older nature myths that have otherwise 


_ disappeared, but were formerly current. For instance, it 


is twice mentioned that after the son of the sun (fazva) 


324 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


had been enclosed in a rock, in an iron mountain, and the 
moon shut up in an enclosure, in an iron barn by Kuume, 
by a Pirulainen, they were released by a woman (fave), 
by Paivatdér (8 d, 42 4). In another passage the release 
is effected by the daughter of nature (166 d@), and it is 
quoted as a precedent why another release of a different 
nature—the delivery of a child—~should take place. The 
exorcist in this as in the two other instances must there- 
fore be apptaling to a well-known myth, though he has 
only occasion to refer to a small portion of it. Ina much 
more modern version it is vaguely stated that the Creator 
formerly freed moons, released suns, and with a curse sent 
Satan away to hills of steel, to rocks of iron (42 a). None 
of these passages seem to refer to an eclipse, or to the 
waning of the moon, for the Finns express that by Aus 
syddéan, ‘the moon is being eaten.’ And Agricola men- 
tions that ‘animals (afee?) ate the moon,’ by which 
expression one or both of these phenomena must be 
intended. As Finnish poetical art requires the two lines 
in each pair to be synonymous, or nearly so, it is quite 
possible that though two different heavenly bodies are 
named, only one is intended. It is, therefore, not im- 
probable that the sun alone is referred to, and its relative 
concealment in winter is the natural phenomenon really 
hinted at. But when it is related that half the sun and 
a third of the earth were darkened and concealed by a 
gigantic oak (211 a), or that the sun and moon were 
hidden by the growth of a lovely oak (211 4), it is not 
at all certain that we are in presence of a nature myth. 
Evidently the same tree is intended in a variant, in which 
no mention is made of its extreme height, or of its obscur- 
ing the heavenly bodies (211 ¢). So all this may simply be 


| 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 325 


due to the lively personal imagination of individual singers, 
and not be in the least mythical. No more so than in a 
lyrical Lettish ballad, where a girl says:—‘I would not 
enter a village where oaks grow on the ploughed fields ; 
the oak has thick foliage, you don’t see when the sun 
rises.’ } 

In her character of the ‘releaser,’ Paivatar, the doughty 
maiden, together with other powers, is invoked by an 
exorcist to effect deliverance and to release a sufferer 
from the effects of spell-sent sickness (1 ¢). As givers 
of light the sun, moon, and the great bear (ofava) are 
not unnaturally requested to guide a child from the womb 
into the open air that it may see and rejoice at the sun, 
moon, and stars (166 #). And Otavatar, the maid of 
night, the steady watcher during the night, is desired to 
watch over the petitioner’s property, to notice if anything 
is stolen, and if so to have it returned (175). 

Their primitive character is less evident when Kuutar 
and Pdivatér are implored by a hunter to bake a suet 
cake, a honeyed bannock, with which he may propitiate 
the forest (139 4). Indeed, the appeal to Kuutar may 
have been suggested by a play of words, for Aus means 
both ‘moon’ and ‘suet,’ and in offering a suet cake, it 
would: be only a playful figment of the imagination to 
aver that it was baked by the moon’s daughter. Or when 
a fisherman promises to give Vellamo a linen shirt, woven 
by Kuutar and spun by Paivatar, as an inducement to her 
to give him a good haul of fish (120 ¢). It is less easy 
to understand why in a charm against wasps the same 
pair are desired to conceal their children, #.e. wasps, and 
not to follow the wish of a sorcerer, or be made jealous 


1 Sprogis, p. 92. 


326 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


by jealous people (113). Once when Paivatér was be- 
wailing her gold, and Kuutar her silver, a tear trickled 
from her eyes and rolled into a dell. From it sprang a 
lovely oak (205 ¢). 

In what appears to be a song of late date, Fire (Pans) 
is said to be the offspring of the Sun (Auringo), and to 
have been made in the centre of the sky, on the shoulder 
(z.e. close to, near) of the Great Bear (226 f). Elsewhere 
Panu is the son of Aurinkoinen and Auringatar, and lives 
under forge-fires (172 5). Three or four famous maidens 
are credited with washing with lie the head of the son of 
the sun ( parva) (224 a). 


ELVES, BROWNIES. 


There is a class of beings occasionally mentioned in the 
Magic Songs for whom the Finns seem to have had no 
special name, but who may be grouped under the com- 
prehensive title of Elves or Brownies. Though they are 
always pictured as emerging from the sea they do not 
appear to be water-sprites. The stone boots and hat they 
sometimes wear belong rather to earth- or stone-elves, and 
the power of suddenly assuming a gigantic height is a 
characteristic of the Russian LieSi or forest-spirits, who 
change their stature according to circumstances.!_ Perhaps 
the fact that one of them is summoned to fell a gigantic 
tree, being the only person capable of doing so, points in 
the same direction. 

Once when a huge oak hid the sun and moon from 
shining and obstructed the course of the stars, a man 
was sought for from all parts to fell it, but none was to 

1 Mannhardt, (2) p. 145. 


oe  ,,lC—ri— EE, | 6|Oee eee.  li—i™ 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 327 


be found. At last there emerged from the sea a [z.2. 
small, black, old, iron} man, a quarter of an ell high, as 
tall as a woman’s span, who could stand under a sieve. 
His hair reached to his heels, his beard to his knees) He 
wore a hat, boots, sleeves and a belt, all of them of iron, 
and he also had an iron axe and shaft. He sharpens his 
axe for a long time on five or six whetstones. By this trme 
he had become huge; his head touched the clouds and 
his beard shone like a leafy grove upon aslope. Then in 
three blows he felled the gigantic oak (211 4). In another 
version a swarthy or black man rises from the sea, who is 
as tall as a straightened thumb, three fingers high [v. the 
height of an ox’s hoof]. He carries on his shoulder an 
ornamented axe with a decorated shaft; on his head he 
wears a tall stone hat, on his feet stone boots. With 
three blows of his axe he fells the gigantic oak (211 a). 
From the sea rose a wee man, scarcely a quarter ell in 
height and carrying an axe. With it he fells the oak that 
sprang from a tear shed by Paivatér or Kuutar (205 ¢). 
Once a huge ox was bred up in Finland. With its head 
it roared in Tavastland, it wagged its tail in Tornio. A 
swallow took a day to fly from its withers to the end of its 
tail, and in a month a squirrel could not run from one 
horn to the other. No one could be found to slaughter 
it, tilla swarthy man emerged from the sea, who was but 
a quarter of an ell high, the height of a woman’s span. 
He overturned and killed the ox, from the carcase of 
which ointments and salves were obtained (232 g). On 
the other hand, a small man rose from the sea, only three 
fingers high, wearing an icy hat and gloves, who knew 
how to recite ‘the ravages of fire,’ and by doing so healed 
burns (52 7). 


_ 328 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


The origin of toothache is twice attributed to the 
Brownie. A black or swarthy (2. iron) man the length 
of a thumb, rose from the sea; from his beard a worm 
grew which became a tooth-worm (185 a). A wee man, 
axe in hand, emerged from the sea. He came across an 
oak which he felled. In doing so a chip stuck in his teeth 
and became a tooth-worm (185 /). 


GIANTS—TuRSAS, TURILAS. 


( 


Like elves, giants play but a small part in the Magic 
Songs. Tursas as a proper name is derived by Thomsen 
from O. N. ¢hurs ‘a giant.’ But the word has also a 
meaning in Finnish. According to Lonnrot it signifies 
‘tumid, swollen’; according to Renvall ‘a snout or muzzle,’ 
as that of a horse, an ox, or a pig. In acouple of riddles 
tursas and turtlas are both used with reference to a pig 
routing up the earth with its snout.! In the middle of the 
sixteenth century Martin uses /wri//as in the sense of ‘a 
dog that bites animals.’ 2 

Once upon a time a lovely girl rose from a damp dell, 
who gave no heed to suitors. Soa giant (4uri/as), a sea- 
Tursas in shirt-sleeves sent a nightmare upon her, and 
while she slept ravished her. He then took his departure 
(215). On another occasion there came from Turja a 
Lapp, named the fiery Tursas, who burnt the hay that had 
been cut by three celebrated maidens (224 a). From 
these two brief references it would seem that giants were 
destructive rather than stupid, the character they have 
assumed in later Scandinavian folklore. And the action 
of the first mentioned is quite in accordance with the 


Arvoituksia, No. 1849, 1853. 2 Grotenfelt, p. 19. 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 329 


lustful nature assigned to many half-brutish forest-spirits 
in European folklore. 

The somewhat similar name of Turisas is ascribed by 
Agricola to a god of the Tavastlanders who gave victory 
in war. 


RAHKOI. 


According to Agricola Rahkoi was a god of the Tavast- 
landers who darkened the moon, but the Rahko of the 
Magic Songs seems to be a different person. In a couple 
of charms against nightmare Rahko, who wears iron boots 
and makes a ‘stony hill revolve,’ is desired to put the night- 
mare under a beam, an iron roof, a tongueless bell (35, 
145). Almost in the same terms he is mentioned in two 
riddles, but in a way that throws little light upon the 
subject. ‘Rahko in iron boots makes a stony hill revolve, 
it bows to the rapids?’ Aas. ‘A mill-wheel, a mill-sail.’ 
Or ‘Iron-booted Rahko hurries over a stony hill, he treads 
on a gravelly one?’ Ans. ‘A plough—a poker.’! The 
‘stony hill’ of the text seems to mean a mill-stone, and the 
exorcist probably wishes Rahko to put the nightmare under 
the stone of his mill which is termed a_ tongueless 
‘bell’ from the clatter it makes. As vakk means ‘gravel, 
hard limestone’ in Esthonian, it seems likely that Rahko 
was a stone-ha/fia. 


PERKELE, PIRU. 


Perkele< Perkene is from the Lith. Perkunas, ‘the god 
of thunder,’ and Piru from the Russ. Perin ‘a thunderbolt, 


1 Arvoituksia, No. 1508, 1509, 


330 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


lightning,’ but formerly ‘the thunder-god.’ The Mordvins 
at an early period have also borrowed the word under the 
form Purgene, and use it in its old sense. But in the 
Magic Songs Perkele, Piru only signifies an evil spirit and 
answers more particularly to the biblical and modern devil. 
There is not the slightest trace of the older meaning ; and 
in estimating the approximate period to which the Magic 
Songs in the main belong, this complete change of front 
cannot be overlooked. It may also be observed that the 
Letts have retained the old tradition of Pérkons and still 
regard him as beneficent, though capable of doing harm 
when asked to do so. A couple of stanzas of a modern 
Lettish ballad run thus :— 


Thundering gently, gently, 
Pérkons crosses the sea, 
He hurts not the bloom of the bird cherry tree 
Nor the work of the husbandman. 
O Pérkons, rumble and thunder, 
Split the bridge o’er the Daugava, 
That no Poles or Lithuanians 
Shall enter my fatherland.! 


Perkele, often coupled with Piru, Hiisi or Juutas, is a 
name given to the fearful spirit of disease that an exorcist 
is summoned to combat and exorcise (1 @, 5 4, 13, 17 ™, 
1544). Ina charm to silence a dog, Perkele is invoked 
to do so (126). Ina variant Hiisi is invited to rise from 
Hell, Perkele from Pimentola to crush or devour the 
violent pain a wretched man is suffering (128 4). Here 
he is desired to perform a benevolent action, perhaps from 
the old feeling that seems to have prevailed among the 
Finns that no spirit was by nature entirely good or entirely 


1 Sprogis, p. 316. 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 331 


bad even though bad on the whole. But Tuoni’s girl is 
invoked to fling toothache into an iron baking-pan or at 
the end of Piru’s tongs or among Hiisi’s coals (114 4). 
And in the ‘ origins’ Piru is regarded as a source of evil. 
Piru made arrows in a steel mountain, in a smithy without 
a door and windowless. He made the heads of steel, the 
shafts of oak, and plumed them with swallow’s plumes 
bound on with locks of Hiisi’s girl, and poisoned with the 
venom of a snake. He then shot his arrows and the third 
recoiled against a steel mountain and entered a human 
being (211 a). The alder buckthorn was made from the 
hair of a Pirulainen’s beard and the rowan is the creation 
of Piru (212 2). 


GoD, THE CREATOR. 


We have already seen in Chapter rv. that the term ‘ god,’ 
F, Jumala, originally meant the ‘sky, the sky-spirit,’ and 
that in course of time it came to mean ‘god’ in a general 
sense, applicable to a variety of deities. Thus Ahti is 
termed a god (93 4). Hiisi is the humpback from the 
home of gods (1 ¢). An exorcist exclaims: ‘may help 
from the gods arrive, from the nourishing mother aid’ 
(102 a). In acharm to be used when heating a vapour- 
bath it is said that the gods above and the earth-mothers 
down below use hot baths (87 a). The Virgin Mary is 
implored to restore health before the rising of the sun, 
the dawning of the god of dawn (169 a). And the lord 
of horses, Tahvanus [v.2. Timanter, Rukotiivo] is called 
a god that cleans out mangers (115 4). 

Asarule, however, the word god, especially when qualified 
by the terms Creator, Almighty, seems to refer to the 


332. PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Christian God. Whenever this is so the exorcism is not 

older than the middle of the twelfth century, unless the 

term is a substitution for an older heathen name, as 

undoubtedly is sometimes the case. A fragment of some 

lost legend appears to be preserved in a charm against 

hemorrhage where it says: when countries were upheaved, 

when hard dry land was lifted up from beneath the sea, 

our great Creator then made an incision in his flesh, in 

his left foot (55 /). This perhaps includes a reminiscence 

of Vainaiméinen who cut his left knee when making a boat 

--+—*» also was said to have taken part in the creation 

‘orld. When a hunter exclaims: ‘Why is the great 

wroth, the giver of game enraged, that he never 

all’ (89 ¢), he is probably thinking of Tapio, though 

ne of the forest god is replaced by that of the 

Or, when another hunter beseeches dearest God, 

ar of the earth, to give him abundance of wild 

, Mentioning at the same time that he does not 

e himself merely to be given stumps of trees ; he 

ve animals (139 m). Again, when God the Creator 

ed to watch over a herd at pasture (123 d), it is 

sible that new names have been worked into an 
cantation. 

of the songs in which the name of God is em- 

ippear to belong to the transition period between 

dom and Christianity. For His name is invoked 

y that clearly shows the exorcist was no profes- 

‘eologian. The aerial God, the spirit Lord Jesus, 

d to harness his colt, to take a seat in his orna- 

sleigh, and drive through bones and loosened 

order to join them together, and where a bone 

ten to fasten in another (140 a). God the father, 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 333 


Jesus the Lord of air, that knows how to throw a bullet 
and to recite a charm for stopping bullets, is invited to 
let water fall on the touch-hole of an enemy’s gun so that 
it will not flash and go off (150). God the Creator is 
desired to recite a charm to heal a sick man, and to 
assuage his pain with formulas that are holy and well 
arranged (157 @). Ina charm for making a healing vapour- 
_ bath, God, the father of the air, is asked to enter the 
steam, to restore health to the sick person and give him 
repose. But he is to do it secretly, without being heard 
by a worthless wretch, and without the knowledge of the 
village people (169 ¢). God the Creator is prayed to give 
luck and contentment. He is to build round the sup- 
plicant’s property an iron fence, a stone castle, reaching 
from the earth to the sky (143). God is called the oldest 
of spell-reciters, and the Creator the oldest of wizards 
(106). The Creator is desired to come and exorcise, God 
to come and speak, and aid a man in overthrowing his 
enemies and envious persons (176 @). And the Creator’s 
cock with golden wattles is implored to come and speak 
on a man’s behalf, but it is also to stop the judge’s ears, 
to bribe the jurymen, and bind silk across the sheriff’s eyes 
(124). Why the Creator has a cock with golden wattles 
is explained perhaps by a riddle. ‘One cock is an iron 
cock, the second a copper cock, the third a golden cock. 
The iron cock split the ground, the copper cock cut the 
sea, the golden one divided the sky?’ Answer—‘A plough, 
a ship, the sun.’ Though it may be a reminiscence of 
the thunder-bird, as mentioned above. 

At a later period in order to staunch blood an exorcist 
could say: ‘May the word of God become a bar, may 

Arvoituksia, No. 2026. 


334 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


trust in the Maker be a plug. If blood should flow in 
rapid drops, may the Creator hold it fast, may God seize 
hold of it (55 ¢). But when he continues: ‘Let some of 
kindly Jesus’ flesh, a bit from the side of the Lord be a 
plug for the fearful hole, a dam for the evil gap,’ he is only 
adapting an older heathen formula to the new terminology. 
So, too, when the Lord is asked to fling his gloves down 
as a stopper on the fearful hole from which ‘the milk’? is 
flowing, the idea was not a newone. But the end of the 
charm certainly belongs to the new faith, ‘May the 
Maker’s lock be a lock, may the Lord’s word be a bar, 
that the “milk” to the ground shan’t flow nor the guiltless 
blood upon the dirt, despite the nature of God, against the 
intention of the Blest’ (1777). An exorcist declares he 
can do nothing without the grace and help of God the 
Creator (1 a, 42 5). He throws himself on his God, who 
abandons not the good and virtuous (5 a). He declares 
that the arrows of a sorcerer can be extracted by virtue of 
the word of God, by the spirit of the Lord’s decree (37 ¢). 
The breath that he exhales is the breath of the Lord, the 
warmth that he emits is that of the Creator, the water he 
employs is the blood of Jesus (102 a). And he asks, Isa 
man to be put to death without God’s mercy, without the 
true Creator’s leave? (42 a). <A diviner begins: ‘I crave 
from the Creator leave, assistance from the Lord I beg. 
Tell the divining gear, O God. Divining gear! declare to 
me whence the calamity has come’ (59 a). And he 
finishes: ‘If the divining gear speaks truth, its reputation 
is enhanced, the divining gear is raised aloft to the knees 
of the holy God’ (59 4). A charm to quiet a child begins: 
‘Lull the child to sleep, O God, cause it to slumber, Mary 
dear’ (79). On going to bed one may repeat a /orica like 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 335 


the following: ‘May the Earth be a good defence, the 
Omnipotent a guard, may the Creator lock the door, may 
a saint draw-to the bolt, may Jesus be a shield, Mary 
a sword’ (137). In preparing a bandage an exorcist says: 
‘Let the Maker's silk be a ligature, the cloak of the Lord 
be a covering, let the word of God be a bolt, the furs of 
the Lord be a coverlet; may the Creator’s mercy grant, 
may God’s word bring about that the wound shall not 
inflame’ (159 a). The Creator, Nature, God that dwells 
above, is invoked to save a person from incantations and 
spells by means of words framed by the Creator prescribed 
by the Holy Ghost (165 a). Fire is said to have been 
created by God, to be born of Jesus’ word and rocked by 
the Virgin Mary (226 ¢). And as salves are said to be 
prepared behind the stars, they are desired to trickle down 
from the mouth of the gracious God or from the beard of 
the Blessed One (2332 ¢). 


Jesus, Mary. 


The names of Christ and of Jesus are often mentioned, 
but never together. Jesus is desired to consecrate the 
flocks and watch the herds of the petitioner when they are 
sent out to graze (123 4). Christ is said to have christened 
Tapio’s son, Pinneys, in the middle of the forest field to 
tend the animals of the forest (139 7). Jesus is asked to 
send a good barley year that the people of Bothnia and 
Savolax may have plenty of good ale to drink (182). 
Jesus is invoked to wash a small child clean with water 
made by the Creator and ordained by the ‘ Holy Birth,’ a 
term used in Karelia for Christ (168). Or he is to wash 
a girl clean from the harm caused by evil gossip and bad 


336 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


reports (133 a2, 4). The water an exorcist uses for healing 
purposes is feigned to be taken from Jordan, in whic 
Christ was baptized (106, 228 ¢). Or it is the washing 
water of Jesus, the tears of the Son of God, brought from 
Jordan by the Virgin Mary (228 d). A maiden from a 
spring is requested to bring serviceable water from Jordan, 
in which Christ was baptized (179). An exorcist declares 
that he uses the guiltless blood of Jesus, the sweet milk 
of Mary, which had come rippling down from the sky, as 
an ointment for wounds (109 a). As lord of the air, the 
God that dwells in the sky, Jesus is desired to come and 
see his son who is sick, and to spit some of his spittle on 
him as an ointment and thus to restore him to health 
(157 ¢). Jesus is besought to take anxious care of a child 
created by himself, to build a wall of stone, an iron 
enclosure, behind which a soldier can shelter himself 
against the weapons of an enemy (162 d@). He is implored 
to help a man in danger, who addresses him: ‘ Lord Jesus, 
do not cast me off, do not abandon me, good God, to 
the magic spells of whores,’ but ‘bring him a fiery sword 
with which he will slash the wicked men and crush the 
foul persons at a blow’ (176 ¢). Once when Jesus was 
travelling over a red sea in a red sloop with red sails, a 
red ointment trickled from the sails and yards and formed 
the best of salves for every kind of injury (10g 4). Jesus 
and Mary are asked to taste and see whether certain salves 
are the magic remedies of the Almighty with which the 
Creator was salved, the Omnipotent was healed when 
pierced and tortured by a devil (181 #). Once when Jesus 
and Mary were driving to church the horse fell and 
sprained its leg, which was healed by Jesus (34a). A 
cow-house snake bit Christ’s horse, killed the foal of the 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 337 


Almighty, through the bony floor of the stall (205 ¢). If 
a snake will not remove its venom from a bite, an exorcist 
will loudly shout to his father, to Jesus, and to his mother 
Mary (29 d). Once when Jesus was walking along a road 
with Peter he encountered a Cancer. He asked the Cancer 
where it was going, and on learning that it was bent on 
visiting a village to bewitch people’s bones and make their 
flesh putrify, he ordered it under a thick flat stone, to 
shriek and yell where the sun and moon never shine (39 4). 

The ordinary epithets of the Virgin Mary are the dear 
mother, the compassionate, or the holy handmaid of the 
sky, the holy little serving-maid. In some instances she 
merely replaces the Air, Spring, or other maidens of an 
older period. The Virgin Mary, the pure mother, beauti- 
ful of shape, wandering along the edge of the air witha 
skein of veins on her back, a can of blood under her arm, 
a longish piece of bone in her hand, and a lump of flesh 
on her shoulder, came and spliced a vein, poured in blood 
where some had leaked, fastened a bone that was loose, 
and added flesh where a bit had been removed (32 4). 
The Virgin Mary, the holy little serving-maid, sits on the 
surface of the sea, wearing a golden ring on which are six 
horns full of magic cures, with which she once salved the 
Creator and healed the best of Lords (109 d). Once the 
dear mother, the Virgin Mary, threw herself down to sleep 
on a turfy knoll. Milk exuded from her breasts, and 
became an ointment good to apply upon a wound (109 ¢). 
As the dear mother she is invoked to bring a golden cup 
and a honeyed wing, and then to prepare a healing vapour- 
bath (169 4). As the holy handmaid of the sky, she is 
asked to weave a gold or silver belt to serve as a bandage 
(159 a). As the kind, compassionate mother, she is desired 

I Y 


338 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


to go to gloomy Pohjola to fetch snow with which to 
quench fire (172 a). As the compassionate mother, or as 
the holy little serving-maid, she is asked to stop a flow of 
blood with her thumb, or with turf, or with a handful of 
flax, or with a slice of birch-bark, and then to sew up the 
wound with a needle and silk thread (177 a, 5,c). The 
beloved and merciful mother, the Virgin Mary, is implored 
to come in her fleet shoes to seize pains, to remove plagues, 
etc.; then to throw them into the sea or to the wind 
(128 f). As the dear, compassionate mother, she is re- 
quested to give a soft fur coat as a protection against bitter 
cold, and to throw fire into the socks and tatters of the 
suppliant so that he may not be nipt by the frost. The 
frost-bites she is to anoint with butter and fat (147 4). As 
the eternal mother of the earth, the benefactor of all time, 
she is to let water pour from a rock by means of her golden 
staff and wash a girl in it in order to remove the effects of 
spells and to make her irresistibly attractive to young men 
(133 @). The Virgin Mary, the dear mother, is desired to 
heal a sufferer by virtue of the word of God, through the 
mercy always of the Lord (169 a2). She is invoked too to 
bring honey and water from the sky, or to take milk from 
her breasts and anoint a sick man; if that is insufficient, 
she is to anoint him with the blood of Jesus (181 a). Or 
she is to use the salves with which Jesus was salved, with 
which the Omnipotent was healed when tortured by Pilate 
(18: 4). An operator beseeches the beloved and com- 
passionate mother to let her skilful fingers be transformed 
into his, that he may snatch a bit of chaff out of a person’s 
eye (160 a). Or she is to take from her golden box a 
golden hook, and with it fish out the chaff that irritates a 
man’s eye (160 4). To get rid of an attack of gout it is 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 339 


addressed with flattering words: ‘Good Gout, thou lovely 
Gout, Mary’s sweet Gout, depart!’ (30). Before going to 
bed one may repeat at the end of other formulas: ‘ May 
Mary lull to sleep, may Jesus raise me up to thank my 
God, to give Jesus praise’ (137). Dear Mary and good 
Peter are implored to give a man a small plot of ground 
gratis, on which he may build a new house (167). After 
gelding a horse the operator gives it water, and says: ‘ Now 
of this water drink, of Mary’s washing-water sip’ (96). 


SAINTS, 


In an ale-charm it is related that a little boat was being 
rowed on a little pond in a drop of water ina cloud. St. 
Andrew (Antti) pulled, little Peter steered, and Jesus sat 
in the middle. There they were occupied in combing 
Hiisi’s elks, and the housewife reciting the charm invokes 
these animals to drive away the snakes that are drinking 
her ale (91). Christopher, the river chief, the golden king 
of rivers, together with Nokiatar [v. Jokiatar] is desired to 
send a whole host of otters into the traps of a trapper 
(155). St. Anni, the gracious maid, the beauteous maiden 
of the veins, span a red thread and bound it round the 
sprained or dislocated limb of man or beast (34d). The 
dear mother St. Catharine is asked to come in her best 
attire and see the harm her creature, the ram, has done 
by butting some unfortunate fellow (141). Expert St. 
Stephen (Tapani) or Tahvanus, lord of horses, a god that 
cleans out mangers, is desired to watch carefully over 
horses sent out to grass (115 a, 5). As the father and - 
mother of a boy that has been gored by an ox, St. Saitari 


340 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


and the lovely Pullukka are invoked to take care that the 
lad does not die of the injury before his time (116). 

Besides these references to saints there are allusions to 
biblical subjects and persons as well as to ecclesiastic 
ceremonies, which it is well to record. Man is made of a 
cake of mould to which the Lord gave breath and life 
(191.) Kalma is asked if he is of the stock of Adam and 
Eve (24). The Creator cursed the snake to crawl on its 
belly along the ground (29 a). Hecursed Satan and made 
him enter hills of steel, rocks of iron (42 a). There is a 
vague mention of the temple of the Lord (102 a), and to 
stand still like the wall of Jerusalem, is used as a simile 
to express the utmost immobility (61). A hunter declares 
that he does not praise a stone or worship a boulder-stone, 
or hunt on holy days or exert himself on Sabbath days 
(89 d). Juhannes, the priest of God, concocted unguents 
for a year in a tiny kettle, and with them he stroked and 
healed the wound of the Lord while being tortured by 
Pilate (109 ¢). The same priest of God plucked herbs by 
the thousand, boiled them all summer and thus made 
useful salves (232 4). An old man in riding to church on 
an elk-like horse as fat as a seal, crosses the brook Kedron 
(34 4). A stone is described as being as high as a church 
(28 5, 99). In expelling an evil spirit, an exorcist says : 
‘now is the precious time of grace, the solemn festival of 
God, the priests are going to the Mass, proceeding to the 
preaching-house’ (8 ¢). Another exorcist asks the evil 
spirit of disease if it has been torn from the base of a cross, 
has been conjured up from women’s graves (5 4). 

To an evil spirit an exorciser exclaims: ‘If thou should 
injure a Christian man, destroy a man that is baptized, 
christening perhance will injure thee, thee will a baptism 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 341 


destroy’ (16 4), And he banishes another spirit to priest- 
less places, to unchristian lands (17 w). He tells an evil 
spirit of disease to cease injuring a Christian man, destroy- 
ing one that is baptized (22, 36 2, 39 a). Ukko is asked 
to let rain fall in Russia, in Karelia, where a woman has a 
child of two months, that has not been baptized for want 
of water (156). The bear was christened by the king of 
Himmerkki (é.¢e. the kingdom of heaven) himself, while 
the Virgin Mary not only carried him to baptism, but also 
stood godmother (193 2). Juhannes, the priest of God, 
the holy knight, was desired by Louhiatar to christen her 
children, but as he absolutely declined to do so, she pro- 
fanely did it herself (210 2). But it was Juhannes, the 
best of priests that christened Fire and gave him the name 
of Panu (226 ¢). Raani, the old wife of Pohjola, asked 
God the Creator to baptize and name her children, but as 
he riever came, she, too, did it herself (210 4). Tuoni’s 
girl also baptized her children as the two priests and the 
sacristans, whom she had asked to perform the ceremony, 
firmly declined the invitation (216 4). After searching in 
ten villages, the mother of Rickets, being unable to find 
any one to baptize him does it herself on a water-girt stone, 
but in filthy water (215). Sharp Frost was christened by 
his mother at a bubbling stream in the centre of a golden 
cliff (219 a). Or, according to another version in a silver 
stream, in a golden spring (210 ¢). 


KALEVA, 


There is so little to be learned from the text about 
Kaleva, that we may suppose either that the tradition 
about him was dying out, or that his importance has been 


342 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


exaggerated. In the last century, he is described by 
Lencqvist as a giant, the father of twelve sons, all the 
names of whom were not remembered, though Hiuisi, Soint, 
Vainiméinen and Ilmarinen were among the number. 
Their great height, according to popular imagination, 1s 
the notion that underlies a couple of riddles. ‘Two sons 
of Kaleva reside in the bath-house, their heads are washed 
in the yard.’ ‘The sons of Kaleva are in the bath-house, 
their heads are washed in the yard.’ Ans. ‘The rafters of 
the roof,’ the projecting ends of which are well soused by 
falling rain.} 

In the middle of the sixteenth century, Agricola regarded 
the sons of Kaleva as benevolent divinities of the Tavast- 
landers, who mowed meadows and suchlike. In this 
they resemble the Selige Fraulein of the Tyrol who mow 
grass and cut corn for upland farmers and are comparable 
with the gigantic Fanggen or Wild Women of the Tyrol, 
who are willing to enter man’s service and to perform work 
for him. An anonymous author who wrote in 1778 tells 
us ‘the good Kaleva covered fields with verdant grass and 
filled the barns of country people with new hay.’ And 
sheet-lightning, which in folk-belief is often considered 
beneficial to growing corn, is termed in the south of 
Finland ‘the sword of Kaleva.’ He seems, therefore, in 
one aspect at least to have favoured the growth of vegeta- 
tion, before helping to cut it down. Several passages in 
the Magic Songs, in which he is coupled, and therefore 
more or less identified with Osmo, favour this view. Hops 
were planted at the side of Kaleva’s well, on the headland 
of Osmo’s field and grew flourishingly. An old man sowed 
Osmo’s barley in Osmo’s new field and splendidly it grew 

1 Arvottuksia, No. 334, 1368. 2 Mannhardt,’(r) pp. 107, ga 


— 


ee EEE et ee 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 343 


in Osmo’s new field, in the clearing of Kaleva’s son (209 a). 
The origin of bent-grass is said to be from a pearl that 
fell from the Lord, from Jesus’ hand, on the edge of 
Osmo’s field, on Pellervoinen’s unploughed edge (220). 
Osmotar is described as the brewer of ale, who took barley, 
hops and water, and began making beer. In the course 
of the narrative she is aided by Kalevatar (209 a). On 
the other hand, when Jesus and Mary were driving to 
church, they crossed the heath of Kaleva, the unploughed 
edge of Osmo’s field (34 a). In the parish of Ilamants in 
Finnish Karelia a ‘field of Kaleva’ (Xa/evan pelto) means 
a place where nothing grows. 

In the text, the sons of Kaleva are Vainimdinen [o. 
Kullervo] in his capacity of a warrior, and Suoviitta 
(Swamp-cloak). In giving the origin of water, it is said 
that Vesiviitta (Water-cloak) the son of Vaitta, (or) 
Suoviitta, the son of Kaleva, dug water from a rock, let 
water gush from a mountain, with a golden staff (228 a). 
In a variant, that Vesiviitto, son of Vaito, (or) the offspring 
of Sinervatér [v. Suoviitta, son of Kaleva], slept a while 
in a mountain, grew for a long time in a rock while bring- 
ing forth water, though at last it spirted forth to be the 
death of fire (228 4). In a charm to quench fire Vesiviitta, 
the son of a mountain, the lovely offspring of a rock [z. 
Suoviitta, the son of Kaleva], that has slept for a year in 
the mountain, is asked to tether himself to the glowing ash 
and to cast himself down on Fire, so as to render him 
powerless for doing harm (171 m). In the last example 
Kaleva is coupled with God. Iron swears his solemn oath 
in the presence of the well-known God on the shoe of 
Kaleva, not to harm his brother (40 ¢). 


344 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


WIZARDS, SORCERERS, ETC. 


The Finns possess a considerable number of words and 
epithets for wizard, sorcerer, witch, seer, ecstatic and the 
like. Some of these are native words like motfa ‘a sor- 
cerer,’ fsefo-mies or tetaja ‘the knower,’ Joitsija ‘the reciter 
of a magic song (doitss), arpoja ‘a diviner,’ ndkija ‘a seer,” 
myrrys-mies OY into-mies ‘an ecstatic,’ dumoja ‘a stupefier, 
lukija ‘a reciter,’ katse#ija ‘an observer,’ dau/u-mies ‘a song: 
man,’ ampuja ‘an archer,’ Aukkaro-mies ‘a bag-man.’ Othes 
are of foreign origin like mahti-mies or mahtaja< Goth. 
mahts or Sw. magt ‘might,’ tatkuri ‘he that uses fatka’< 
Goth. faikns ‘a token, a wonder,’ ve/hko ‘a witch,’ is pro- 
bably an early Slav loan, while a latter one is poppa-mies 
‘priest-man’ from the Rus. fof. Though between these 
appellations no hard and fast line can be drawn, dividing 
them into good and bad categories, yet on the whole, 
injurious or black magic would generally be the work of 
the otfa, the ampuja, the velko, and the kukkavro-mies. 
Beneficial or white magic, like the great bulk of the Magic 
Songs, was used for ejecting evil spirits of disease, etc., and 
would be practised by a Josfstja, a Hetdjd, a lukija, or a 
laulu-mies ; in some instances by a dumoja, ndkijaé or an 
arpoja. Yet we have an example of an exorcist terming 
himself a zoifa and a Lapp (12 4). As a rule there is 
nothing in a Magic Song to show what sort of wizard the 
reciter of it might be; so as his function is to drive away 
disease, I shall term him the exorcist. 

The sorcerer (#o##a), the fortune-teller (arfoja), is said 
to have been born behind the limits of the north, on the 
flat land of the Lapps, on a bed of fir boughs, on a pillow 
of stone (207). The sorcerer has a nose like an eagle’s 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 345 


beak (2 @) and wears a tall hat (14 ¢, ce), as the Lapps do 
still. Sorcerers, when they exercise their arts, are naked 
and without a stitch of clothes (14 2). They are said to 
drink water from a pool in the croup of Hiisi’s horse, and 
in drinking to make it hiss (9 4, 14 4). The offensive 
weapons of the sorcerer, the wizard (#e/djé) and the 
‘archer,’ are knives of iron, pointed iron and shooting 
instruments (2 a, 5, 14 ¢, 37 4, 6). Sorcerers and wizards 
use arrows, and witches (ve/io) have knives of steel (176 0). 
But these expressions are not usually to be understood 
literally ; they imply sickness, disease, or any injury caused 
by the spells of a sorcerer at the instigation of some 
jealous neighbour; though, sometimes, a sorcerer no 
doubt would drive a knife or a nail into the footprint of 
an enemy to do him harm, and there is a vague allusion 
to roasting and melting an image (46), into which pins or 
nails would first be stuck. The arrows of a sorcerer are 
said to be made of the wood of a tall fir growing on the 
Hill of Pain, and he is quite indifferent where he shoots 
them (208 a). Or they were made from chips of a huge 
oak that were taken to a smithy by a scoundrel, who made 
the arrows to be stitch and pleurisy in men, sudden 
sickness in a horse and elf-shots (F. jagged spikes) in 
kine (211 a). Or from the chips of a fiery oak they were 
made into arrows by Hiisi’s son (211 4). Wizards, sorcerers, 
witches, and diviners, are to be found at every gate, at 
every fence, along every road, in damp dells, near water, 
and in fact everywhere (2 ¢, @). 

A cursing spell may be repeated in a whining or a 
mumbling voice and is said to be bitten off with the 
teeth (46), just as one might bite off a length of thread 
from a clew held in the mouth. Words, #.e. spells or 


346 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Magic Songs, are brought from the north, from Lapland 
(28 a). 

An exorcist requires a fluent mouth, a ready tongue and 
pliant fingers (1 2). In order to make him into a wizard, 
a wkilful man and a singer, an exorcist was washed naked 
three: times one summer night on the nether stone of a 
handmill by his mother (14 ¢), probably to harden and 
strengthen him, the stone itself being hard and strong. 
Another bomsts that he is the son of a Northerner 
(Pohjolainen), was rocked by a girl of Turja, and was 
cradled by a Lapya (14). The vaunt of another is that 
he is the youngest sin of a sorcerer, the ‘calf’ of an old 
diviner (14 @). He cah repeat a spell learnt from his 
father to obtain a favourable winch (107 a). He depends 
on his father’s strength of mind and ents (12 4, 14 8). 
But he also inherits power from his mofger- An exorcist’s 
mother could bring back stolen milk from Mana, from 
Tuonela, from sorcerers, etc., and what sh& did he can 
do likewise (88 ¢). Another brags that Shar,} Frost has 
no effect on him or on any of his family an kin. In 
fact he kills Frost and takes from it clothing with which 
to protect himself (93 2). If he has need of Magic Songs 
he will go and learn them from the old wife of }Pohjola 
and also how to use an eagle’s claws (28 a): At, @ later 
date an exorcist wishes the Creator, whose wo 
phrases are holy and well-arranged, to speak fv 
(157 2). And God is asked to save a person fr 
effect of village spells and incantations with words , 
by the Creator and prescribed by the Holy Ghost 
By his song an exorcist boasts he can split the sh 
of a witch or of a sorcerer, by his lay can bisect hi 
bone and feed him on snakes and toads (14.4). By 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 347 


ing he can bring a pigskin over the eyes of sorcerers and 
a dogskin over their ears (14 ¢). By means of his song 
he turns the best singers into the worst and puts strong 
gloves and shoes on their hands and feet (14 ¢), meaning 
that they are now bound and helpless. He sings sorcerers, 
wizards, witches and ‘archers’ with their knives, arrows, etc.’ 
into the mighty Rutja or Turja Rapids (14 ¢). By the 
power of his song a wolf is bitted or a bear is chained 
(16 4). He boasts that he can milk adders, handle snakes, 
can arm one thousand men in one night, can bit wolves 
and shackle bears (14 /). As a comrade he has one of 
Hiisis’s people, who is of great strength and will give him 
hardness of body (14 4). Elsewhere he brags that he has a 
sandy skin, a hide of iron slag, a body made of steel, or one 
taken from the branches ofa fir (14 ¢). In fact, from his 
possessing a sandy skin, an iron-coloured hide, it is useless 
for a wasp to try to sting him (19 a). One exorcist 
describes how skilful he is at surgical operations (31); 
another vaunts that he is a man without his like and a 
famous son (176 2). 

But the exorcist is not always in a boasting mood, and 
does not rely solely upon bounce. Sometimes he is far 
from being over-confident (1 2, 38 a). In his diffidence 
he refers to himself as an unfortunate lad, as a poor boy, 
(28 a). He lays great stress on the difficulty of the task 
of ejecting evil spirits of disease (1 @, 4, d, 3 a, 15 @, 65, 
75). He asks how he is to proceed (1 a, 13, 1§ a, 37 ¢ 
etc.), how he is to protect himself (2 a). He pleads com- 
plete ignorance of the cause of an illness or accident 
(5 a, 5, ¢, 23). And if he is not afraid it is because he 
has put on a shirt of defence (2 ¢) or something of the 
sort (12 4, 14 4). In the latest period he can do nothing 


348 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


without the grace and aid of God the true Creator. Or 
he speaks with the Lord’s good breath and washes the sick 
man with the blood and tears of Jesus (ror). He acts 
with the Creator’s leave and by the mercy of the Lord 


(1 a, 42 4). 


DISEASE. 


The disease an exorcist has to drive away is either sent 
by God the Creator—an idea evidently of late date—or is 
caused by the spells of a sorcerer for reward (§ 2), which 
is undoubtedly the older belief. When an illness is 
effected by the spells of an enemy it is said to be the 
result of human art (17 g, 4, 7, &) and is thus distinguished 
from a natural malady. Disease in general is pictured as 
a huge and hideous devil (1 a) or as a bogie, riend (1 €). 
It is termed a Hiisi, a devil (5 4,8 4, 13, 15a), a filthy 
Lempo (5 ¢), an uninvited shape, msdfo (8 c), a hound of 
Hiisi, a monster of the earth (8 2). An exorcist is quite 
astonished that a mouthless, eyeless, toothless, tongueless 
creature like Rickets can see to suck or to eat (41). 

Sometimes an illness may have been ordered to attack 
a man by its father, mother, brothers or sisters (11). On 
the other hand it is invited to approach and recognise the 
evil it has done, on pain of a report being made to its 
mother, who would be greatly vexed thereby (6 a). For, 
after seeing the harm it has wrought, it is capable of 
feeling ashamed (6 4, 8 d@), and of repairing and making 
amends for it (6 4, 36a). An exorcist may even treat it 
as he would a boy and threaten to flog it with rowan 
shoots and tips of fir (16 a). The person who sends an 
illness or disease by means of spells is called its master or 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 349 


mistress, and so the malady may be told to go home and 
break the head of its master or mistress (17 g). Or to 
injure in some terrible way the individual that sent it, such 
as by ‘giving her veins a sudden squeeze, making her 
blood-pipes pipe a tune’ (17 4). A sickness may also 
come from a grave or from the spirits of the departed 
(17 4, ¢). From this may be inferred that the Finns 
sacrificed to the manes of their ancestors, who were 
occasionally dissatisfied and then avenged themselves 
by sending disease etc., on their descendants. Ailments 
are also brought by wind and water (17 9). Once upona 
time three attacks of sickness came along a swamp, along 
firm ground and by water. The first had a neck like a 
pole, the second a neck like an arch, the third was the 
worst attack, but is not further described (14 4). Or three 
attacks of sickness came along a swamp, along a winter- 
road and along springs of water, but on this occasion the 
worst had come along the swamp (20 8). 

Though pain, disease and sickness of any kind were 
generally thought of as evil spirits with human propensities, 
yet they can be wound up into a ball and thrown into 
the sea (10 a). An exorcist puts them into his wallet and 
takes them to three Luonnotars who collect them in a 
copper box (10 4). And Kivutar, the maid of pains and 
sicknesses, boils these in a little kettle on the top of the 
Hill of Pain (10 ¢, d). 


Inducements to depart. 


When an exorcist did not feel quite strong enough to 
drive away a disease by force he sometimes parleyed with 
it, tried the arts of persuasion and offered a substantial 
inducement to it to retire to some other place. If it will 


350 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


only go he will provide it with a splendid horse (9 a, 4) 
and he urges that the road is good and there is moonlight 
to travel by (8 4). But as it was regarded as a ravenous, 
flesh-eating monster an appeal is generally made to its 
grosser appetites. It is invited to go to a cemetery where 
there is plenty bread of sifted flour, plenty elbows and 
much fat flesh (17 ¢); to Pohjola, where there is a sea 
beach to scamper along, both cooked and raw flesh, 
the boneless meat of an elk, a fat ox or of a reindeer 
already slaughtered and only waiting to be eaten (17 ms) ; 
to the North, as blazes have been cut on the trees making 
it easy to find the way, and once there it will find a good 
bed, plenty to eat and drink, boneless flesh, blood to drink, 
elk, reindeer, and bear’s meat and to crown all a pig stye 
to sleep in (17 #); to battlefields, where it is easy to visit 
relatives, to eat raw flesh and drink warm blood in 
abundance (17 0); in front of a cannon, where there is 
blood to drink and flesh to eat, that never grows less 
(17 £); to the sea, to be gently swayed by it, where there 
is plenty fish and roast meat for a hungry fellow to eat 
(17 y). To Metsola, to the stone heap of a bear, to eat 
a bear or a horse (27 4). To Lapland, where it is nice 
and cold and where it can eat reindeer meat without 
trouble (36 4). To go home, where a bitch has littered 
two pups, the heart’s core of which Colic is welcome to 
devour (58). To Hell, where a horse has died, the foot 
of which Small-Pox can bite (27 4). To Metsola where 
there is a butter bed, a milky sleeping-place, a bacony 
resting-place and a soft pillow (17 2). 

Occasionally an appeal is made to the finer feelings. A 
disease ought to go home because his family is alarmed 
and vexed at his absence and his son is lying sick (17 3): 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 351 


Or a Pain ought to go into the sea where all his relatives, 
his brothers and sisters, his nephews and nieces reside 
(45 a). If there is any vanity in him, he may go to the 
stars ‘to flame like a fire, to sparkle like a spark’ (17 ¢). 
The principle of offering an inducement to pursue a 
certain line of action is extended by exorcists or other 
reciters of Magic Songs to birds and animals as well as to 
spirits of disease. A raven, instead of injuring snares, is 
advised to fly to Pohjola, to Lapland, where there is elk 
meat and boneless flesh for a hungry fellow to devour (94). 
Instead of attacking cows, a bear is advised to mature his 
claws and strengthen the muscle of his forearm by shaking 
a rotten tree, by throwing down trees and twisting bushes 
(69 ¢). Or he should retire into the forest where there is 
always a bed ready for a bear (69 @). An ermine is re- 
commended to enter a trap because the bait is made with 
cunning skill, tastes salty and is honey to the mind (73). 
A game bird should not fly away at the sight of a hunter’s 
snares or it will certainly be killed by a hawk (83 a). A 
cabbage grub is advised to go into the sea where there is 
plenty sea-sand and water to eat and drink (66 5). A bug 
ought to withdraw into the crevices of a wall where there 
is plenty of fat, instead of biting the tarry back of a man 
(85). An attempt is even made to persuade Ukko, the 
god of the sky, to send rain to some other place on the 
ground that a mother is there with a child of two months 
old that has seen no water and is still unbaptized (156). 


Places whither Diseases are conjured. 


The exorcist conjured the spirits of disease to all sorts 
of localities, and at times gave the reins to his fancy in im- 


352 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


agining out-of-the-way places. And once there they cannot 
escape unless the exorcist comes himself to set them free 
(18 a, 6),a most unlikely event. He banishes them to ther 
own country (9 a, 17 g, #); to Metsola (17 /); todeep gloomy 
forests whence no man returns (50); to the north (17 #, 
36 a); to a snowy mountain peak (17 5); to the Hill of 
Pain (9 4); to the top of a copper hill, into the rift in an 
iron mountain (17 7); below the earth, under a copper 
mountain (15 4); to Manala’s eternal huts (43) ; to Sariola, 
to unploughed land, to a nameless meadow (17 a); to 
damp dells and swamps (17 a, #); to the sky (17 ¢, 36 4); 
into a variegated stone (17 #); into stones that feel no 
pain, to swamps, deserted clearings, into moving gravel and 
sand (17 #); to priestless places, to unchristened lands 
(17 w); into the hole of an ermine (17 a); into a nine- 
fathom deep hole in a stone lying in a spring in a field 
(10 ¢); to the middle of the open sea (10 a4); into the 
violent rapids of Ihari, Kalari, Vuoksi, Turja or Rutja 
(17 4, ¢, f, 43) ; down the mouth of Antero Vipunen (17 a); 
into the sleigh of a brindled cat, the cart of a black cock 
to be carried to gaol, or into the sleigh of a fox to be 
carried into the water (17 @); into the skin of a kindly 
seal to be carried out to sea (17 #); into the eye of a blue 
gwyniad, to the tail of a red salmon or into the mouth of 
an iron burbot (17 x); into the mouth of an iron stallion, 
of a wolf or a crow, under the tongue of a reindeer or 
under the tail of a black dog (17 a); to fiery rapids, to a 
holy stream, where there is a reef on which stands a bull 
with a burning mouth that will carry the disease to Tuonela 
(17 @); or into an apple or an oak tree (129 4), as is 
common enough in European folklore. 


a 


, ane 
rn eS ee 


BELIEFS. OF THE WEST FINNS 353 


Instruments. 

The belief in the power of magic song was great, but it 
did not preclude the use of instruments, either real or 
imaginary. If the voice of an exorcist is not strong enough, 
he takes a horn or a pipe and blows on it towards the sky 
in order to be better heard (1 @). He thrusts his herding- 
horn towards the sky and brings down milk from there 
(88 ¢). In order to claw Disease, the hideous thing, he 
uses the claws of a bear or of an eagle (14 4, 16 a, 20 4, 28 a), 
or the hands of a dead man (15 4, 16 a). To extract the 
‘arrows of a sorcerer’ or ‘Tuoni’s grub,’ he employs little 
tongs or pincers made expressly by a smith (15 4, 21 ¢, 37 a). 
He asks Ukko to drop into his hand pincers, the points 
and shafts of which are made of snakes, that he may draw 
out the ‘arrows’ and ‘bloody needles’ of a sorcerer 
(1494). Smith Ilmarinen is desired to make tiny tongs and 
pincers for him that he may extract Lempo’s arrow or his 
bloody knife from the body of a sufferer (149 4). In order 
to bite Colic, he goes for the teeth of a bear and squeezes 
the ailment with its paws (58). Before tackling Disease 
he puts on his viperous gloves, his snaky mitts, and smears 
his hands with the fat of snakes (16 4). He has a willow 
bough and an alder shaft with which he shoots down 
Tuoni’s grub, or he grinds the animal with his pestle and 
mortar (21 ¢). To press down tumours he uses three 
stones taken from the river of Tuonela, or one as high as 
a church and as thick as a tower (28a). He lops off 
tumours and excrescences with his axe (28 a), or uses a 
knife with a silver blade and a golden haft that fell into 
his hand from the sky (31). He requests Hiisi to bring a 
scythe from Esthonia or from Hell and lend it to him that 
he may cut out the disorder from which a patient is suffer- 

I Z 


354 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


ing (128 4). Nightmares he places on his steelyard (35) | 
that they may exhaust themselves in weighing it down. 


Defensive Precautions. 


Besides employing instruments, an exorcist has often to 
take measures to protect his person, but their description 
also must not be understood too literally. From his point 
of view the mere recitation of a magic formula, in which 
he describes himself as putting on armour, was tantamount 
to really doing so. He drew no hard and fast line between 
fact and figment ; the simulation of performing a certain 
act was potentially equivalent to its performance in reality. 
For at one period it is very possible that he, like the 
Shamans of Siberia, actually donned a particular dress for 
the occasion, and during the operation repeated a charm, 
such as one of those termed ‘ Taking defensive measures.’ 
In the first of these the exorcist says he will put on an iron 
shirt, an iron helmet, iron gloves, copper socks, and iron 
boots, so that neither the arrows of a sorcerer nor the 
knives of a witch can injure him (2 a). These instruments, 
as we have often remarked, are figurative expressions, not 
to be taken in their ordinary sense. Again, he wishes the 
fiery shirt of his father and mother may be brought from 
Tuonela and put on him to guard him against the ‘shoot- 
ing instruments’ of an ‘archer’ (2 4). He asks his dead 
mother to rise from the grave and bring from Tuoni’s land 
a fur coat, which he will don, to protect himself against 
sorcerers, witches, etc. (176 4). Old wife Kave, Nature’s 
daughter, is invoked by him to weave a cloth of gold and 
silver and make a shirt of defence, a copper cloak, which 
he can wear as a protection against spells and witches 
(176 ¢). He himself clips wool and fluff from a stone, hair 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 355 


from a rock, and makes of them a shirt of defence against 
sorcerers and witches (2c). Or he asks the Maid of Mist 
and Fog to pluck wool from a rock and make a shirt of 
mist, a copper cloak, which he can wear day and night as 
a defence against sorcerers and Lapps (176 /). Ukko, the 
old father of the sky, is to build an iron fence, a steel 
screen, reaching from the sky to the earth, to shelter an 
exorcist and his people. It is to be interlaced with lizards 
and snakes, which will keep an eye on sorcerers and eat up 
spells, etc. (176 m, 2). Ukko is further requested to let 
fall from the sky a pipe, a copper horn, a golden shield 
which the exorcist will use to prevent the arrows of a 
sorcerer from sticking into him (176 0). Lastly, he im- 
plores the Virgin Mary to give him her blue silk scarf to 
bind round his hand, that he may be able to quench a fire 
unhurt (172 a). 


Helpers. 


When an exorcist, or other reciter of magic songs, felt 
himself powerless and in need of assistance he had no lack 
of helpers. He received or hoped to obtain aid not only 
from the multitude of spiritual beings that seem to animate 
nature, but also from animals, birds, fish, insects, and trees. 
Sufficient examples of aid from the former class have 
already been given. Before enumerating instances that 
come under the latter headings, it is only necessary to add 
that help was to be expected from ancestors, from forests 
with their men, and from lakes with their armed men 
(15 a, 124); from a deceased mother (176 4); from horse- 
men and swordsmen in the sand, that have lain for long in 
the earth (1 4, 15 a). 

An exorcist avers that he saddles snakes, and puts a bit 


356 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


in the mouth of a bear and a wolf, that they may run along- 
side him and gobble up the spells sent by village people 
(14g). He threatens to raise a ram with twisted horns, or 
an ox with horns, to butt at and push away a disease or 
ailment such as colic (16 a, 58). He wishes an iron- 
hoofed mare, reared in Karelia, to kick a Hiisi away (22). 
The powerful black Vento ox, or a wolf of Manala, a bear 
of Kalma’s, is invoked to extract the arrow of a sorcerer 
(37 ¢). He threatens to set his father’s voracious, hairy- 
nosed, black dog at Disease—a dog with fiery mouth, 
with teeth like rakes, and with an iron heart that ere now 
has devoured a thousand men (16 4). And Hiisi’s elks 
and reindeer, after being combed by Jesus, St. Andrew, 
and St. Peter, are desired to drive away the snakes and 
adders that drink the mistress’s ale (gr). 

According to his own account, an exorcist owns three 
eagles, with iron, copper, and silver claws respectively, that 
will eat up the pain caused by burns (52 4). An eagle 
from Turjaland, with five talons like sickles, with a burning 
mouth, and eyes at the tip of its wings, is invoked by him 
to extract Keito’s spears from the body of a suffering man 
(149 e). A famous eagle with a beak like five scythes, a 
throat like three cataracts, with iron claws, and eyes at the 
ends of its wings, is invited to come from Turja, from Lap- 
land, to devour the pain caused by burns (128 #). An eagle 
from Turja is asked to lend three feathers to serve as a 
bulwark to a boat when about to shoot rapids (107 ¢). In 
the north-east, in Turjaland, dwells a famous eagle, under 
its wings are a hundred men, above them another hundred, 
at the tip of its tail are a thousand men, all girt with swords. 
This wonderful bird is invoked by an exorcist to remove the 
harm caused by spells (154 ¢). An iron-crested cock is 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 357 


desired to claw Dropsy, here spoken of as ‘toads’ and 
‘ Hiisis’ (56). An iron cock and hen are invited to rise 
from the ground to eat up burns and sip ‘fire’s broth,’ 
another name for scalds and injuries from fire (171 @). A 
black cock and an iron hen are told to rise from the earth 
to help an exorcist by pecking out the eyes of jealous 
people and tearing the noses of sorcerers (176 #). The 
Creator's golden wattled cock is requested to come to speak 
on behalf of a defendant, to stop the judge’s ears, to bribe 
the jurymen, and bind silk across the eyes of the sheriff 
(124). And a yellow wren is sent on an unsuccessful 
mission to Pohjola to fetch an old woman who could heal 
burns, though the errand was afterwards effected by a bee 
(52g). Another bee is sent to a distant island to fetch 
honey for fermenting beer (142 a). And a spider is re- 
quested to spin a web to staunch a flow of blood (55 ¢). 
A golden burbot is to come from the mouth of a copper 
burbot to restore health and seize the pains from which a 
sick man is suffering, so that he may sleep in peace (102 4). 
In folklore-medicine it is a well-known remedy to catch 
a fish, convey to it symbolically the malady from which a 
patient is suffering, and then return it to the water. As 
this belief is also current in Finland, it seems likely that 
this song to restore health might have been sung during 
the performance of such an act. 


An unfortunate mistress who has no one to herd her - 


cows asks a willow, an alder, a rowan, and a bird-cherry 
tree, to do the work for her, and menaces them with dire 
punishment should they refuse (7o 4). If a man cannot 
obtain the assistance he otherwise expected, he goes to a 
rock, to a boulder on a hill, for there is help in a hill, there 
are supplies in Hiisi’s castle (65). 


358 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Precedents. 


As will be seen below, when we come to examine the 
structure of the Magic Songs, there are a multitude of 
instances in which the exorcist or other reciter of charms 
tells a short story, the incidents of which have reference 
to what he wishes to do or to get. By implication this is 
used as a precedent why a similar event should happen 
again. Butin seven instances a previous event is explicitly 
cited as a precedent and reason why something analogous 
should again occur. In a couple of charms against in- 
juries from spells, after narrating how formerly the Creator 
freed moons and suns, released men with swords, horses 
with saddles, and priests with their parishioners, from mighty 
battle-fields, the exorcist adds: ‘ May He effect deliverance 
on this occasion, remove the harm wrought by magic, and 
dispel the spell-sent injury’ (42 a). After describing how 
Kuume formerly had enclosed the moon in an iron barn, 
and the sun in a mountain of steel, and how Kapo had 
released them, the exorcist continues, ‘So I too now 
release this man from the spell-brought harm of villagers, 
enchantments of the long-haired ones, charms spoken by 
the women-kind. Just as the son of the sun escaped when 
freed by Pdivadtar, so may this person too escape when 
freed by me’ (42 4). An exorcist relates that formerly the 
solid gates of a castle moved, its iron hinges shook, the 
copper hills quaked, the earth was shaken out of joint 
and the sky riven into holes at the coming of the dour of 
God, when help from the Lord approached. So he asks 
the Disease—here spoken of as an uninvited shape, an evil 
one—why it does not move and withdraw before an dour 
has elapsed (8 c¢). After recounting how father Lempo 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 359 


had received a cut, and mother Lempo and all the 
Lempos had cut themselves with their own knives, and 
stating that their veins were afterwards knotted up, the 
wizard summoned to stop the hemorrhage exclaims, ‘So 
why not this vein too? why is the blood not stopped, the 
deadly cataract not plugged?’ (55 4.) A charm for 
making a vapour-bath to heal some malady begins with the 
statement that the gods above and the earth-matrons down 
below have baths that are heated up, new rooms that give 
forth whirls of smoke, and this is used as a reason for steam 
being given off on the present occasion, of such quality 
that it will serve as an ointment for injuries and an em- 
brocation for wounds (87 a). A hunter after reciting his 
misfortunes asks, ‘Why was the great Creator wroth, the 
giver of game enraged, that he never gives at all? He fed 
the tribe, gave the race to drink, he nourished the first 
ancestor, so why does he not feed me too with the great 
morsels of the tribe, or with the titbits of the race?’ 
(89 ¢.) At the close of a brief charm to make bread 
rise, a despairing housewife cries to the yeast, ‘The sun 
and moon have visenx both, yet thou hast not begun to 
rise’ (74). 


Blessing and Cursing. 


The exorcist did not often have recourse to blessing, 
though on one occasion he says: ‘Whoever without envy 
looks, may Jesus bless him so that he shall honeyed eyes 
possess, shall wend his way with a honeyed mind’ (3 2). 
He was stronger in curses. In a charm to guard against 
envy he says: ‘Whoever looks with jealousy, may his 
eyes shed blood, let them run with rheum; into his eyes 


360 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


may the lashes grow, as thick as a hatchet-haft, a bow- 
string long; may these pour blood along and across his 
cheeks’ (3 a). ‘Whoever looks with an envious glance, 
may the slag of Hiisi fill his eyes, the soot of Hiisi soil 
his face, may a fiery bung plug up his mouth, may 
Lempo’s lock clinch fast his jaws, may his mouth get 
overgrown with moss, the root of his tongue be broken 
off, may his head dry into stone and skin grow on the top’ 
(3 5). ‘If envious persons look, if cock-eyed people pry, 
may a branch tear out their eyes; may a withered fir-tree 
grow, an iron-branched tree, before the envious person's 
house, throw out thick shoots, on which he shall fix his eyes, 
that unless set free he won’t get free during the space 
of earthly time’ (3 ¢). Or the exorcist wishes that the 
bloody cloak of Huisi, that takes five men to lift, may 
be bound round the heads of jealous, envious, prying 
people, so that they may neither see nor hear (3 ¢). 
An exorcist hopes that for any one that repeats his 
private spells, ‘the root of his tongue may be twisted 
round and his hair rubbed off’ (4 a). ‘Whoever hath 
bewitchment used, on him may death bewitchment use; 
may his tongue rot off, his mouth get overgrown with 
moss’ (4 4). After consigning all sorts of necromancers 
and warlocks to. the mighty Rutja Rapids, the exorcist 
wishes they may there fall asleep till the grass grows 
through their heads, shoulders, and tall hats (14 ¢). Or 
after banishing a spirit of disease to the violent Vuoksi 
Rapids he says: ‘If thou raise thy head from there, or 
exalt thy snout, may Ukko pain thy head with sharply 
pointed needles or with iron hail’ (17 f). ‘May all the 
sorcerers in dells, through their own arrows, come to 
nought ; those that use witchcraft—through their knives; 


— 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 361 


diviners—through their tools of steel; all other strong 
men through their strength’ (2 d@). ‘May all the 
spells that sorcerers cast, all things that the seers see, 
return to their proper homes; may they cast their spells 
upon themselves, over their children sing their charms ; 
may they destroy their families, may they dishonour kith 
and kin’ (14 2). An exorcist addresses a poor frog in 
language like this: ‘If thou raise thy head from there, 
may thy shins be smashed, thy thighs be rent, may thy 
marrow be withdrawn, from which an ointment will be 
cooked and unguents be prepared’ (97). In @ charm 
against bears: ‘May the forest bear be choked with a 
honey ball in its mouth, so that its jaws won’t open up, 
that its teeth won’t come apart, that its tongue sha’n’t 
freely wag’ (122 a). 

Sometimes flattering words were used. The spirit of 
the grave is thus addressed: ‘Kindly Kalma, lovely 
Kalma, Kalma of the fair complexion’ (24). Gout or 
heartburn: ‘Good Gout, thou lovely Gout, Mary’s sweet 
Gout, depart!’ (30.) The spirit of pain and sickness: 
‘Good mistress, Kivutar, distinguished woman, Vammotar’ 
(128 ¢), or ‘Lovely old wife of pains, good mistress 
Kivutar’ (128 ¢). A hornet: ‘O hornet, thou complaisant 
man, don’t shoot thine arrows forth’ (19 4). A snake: 
‘My sweetheart, my wee bird, my beauty, my wee duck!’ 
(75.) An ermine: ‘Furred beauty of the winter-time, 
dear little hen of fields run wild, flower dwelling at the 
root of firs’ (73). In raising steam to make a vapour- 
bath: ‘O welcome, welcome, my dear Steam, my darling 
Steam, my darling Warmth, thou steam of wood, dear 
water’s warmth, old Vainimdinen’s sweat!’ (87 ¢.) 


I 2A 


362 PRE- AND PROTO-HISTORIC FINNS 


Offerings, Worship. 


In former times, as the Finns did not expect to get 
benefits gratis, they made offerings of various kinds to their 
divinities to propitiate them, and sometimes to harmful 
spirits to induce them to desist. In later times the offerings 
were very small, and when a hunter speaks of the gold 
and silver that he is offering to the forest deity, it probably 
means that he has scraped a little silver off a silver coin, 
or at most has laid a small silver coin or two at the foot 
of a tree. A trapper tells Kunnotar and the golden 
woman Ka4rehetir, the divinity of foxes, to cease melting 
gold and silver, as he is putting bits of gold and silver into 
her bowl. The gold is as old as the moon, the silver as 
old as the sun, and was brought by his father from the 
wars when the speaker was a child (173 a). The mistress 
of Metsola and the Forest’s golden king are asked by a 
hunter to enter upon an exchange of gold and silver. 
The ‘gold’ of Metsola is more coloured and darker, that 
of the hunter is more glistening (173 4). A hunter asks 
the master and mistress of Tapio’s farm to make an 
exchange of gold and silver. His gold is as old as the 
moon, his silver as old as the sun, and is Swedish silver 
brought from Tornio after a battle (173 ¢). Another hunter 
requests the mistress of the Forest and its golden king 
to take his gold and silver, and to give theirs, as it will 
be for the benefit of Tapio’s farm, and will give delight to 
Metsola (173 2). A disconsolate hunter laments that the 
Forest does not care for his silver or ask for his gold (89 ¢). 

Sometimes the offerings were of food. <A _ trapper 
implores Kuippana, the king of the forest, to take a fancy 
to and approve of his salt and groats, and to give instead 


BELIEFS OF THE WEST FINNS 363 


his ‘sweet rye cakes’ and ‘groats,’ Ze. game (153 a). 
Kuutar (Moon’s daughter) and Padivatar (Sun’s daughter) 
are requested by a hunter to bake a suet cake, a honeyed 
bannock, with which he may propitiate the Forest when he 
goes hunting (139 4). A trapper invites Tapio to take a 
fancy to his groats and salt (153 4). If Para brings good 
luck he is to get a calf as a reward (153 @). A man asks 
Water and Water’s mistress to make him well, as he prays 
with chosen words, and gives blood and salt as offerings 
to appease and reconcile them (157 ¢). Chaff in the eye is 
invited to take a fancy to the sea in exchange for pleasant 
fat (45 5). 

The references to worship are very rare, but they are 
worth noting. A hunter declares that he does not worship 
boulder stones, or praise a stone, or hunt on holy days 
and Sabbaths. Other men’s offerings of gold, silver, and 
tin are not more glittering than his, and if they say a 
prayer he brings more solid offerings, and says the best 
of prayers to the donors that are best (89 @). Another 
hunter does not bow down to firs, but bows to the 
‘flowers’ of a fir, #.e. to squirrels (72 5). A third hunter 
prays for ‘hoofs and feet,’ and will not give thanks for 
a stone or prostrate himself for stumps, or serve for 
willows (139 7). 

A stone where festivities of some sort, no doubt partly 
of a religious nature, were held, is referred to in the ex- 
pression ‘ Jesus’ stone of joy, the Creator’s rock of sports’ 


(203 4). 


END OF VOL. I. 


Printed by T. and A. Constaste, Printers to Her Majesty 
at the Edinbergh University Press 


THE GRIMM LIBRARY 


A Series of Folk-Lore Monographs under the general editorship 
of Mr. ALFRED Nutr. In crown 8vo volumes, elegantly 
printed at the Constable Press, on laid paper, half-bound in 
art linen, edges uncut. Limited issue. 


GEORGIAN FOLK-TALES. Translated by MARJORY WARDROP. 
Pp. xii+175. 5s. net. 


THE LEGEND OF PERSEUS. By EDWIN SIDNEY HARTLAND, 
F.S.A. 
Vow. I. THE SUPERNATURAL BIRTH. Pp. xxxiv+228. 
7s. 6d. net. 
VoL. II. THE LIFE-TOKEN. Pp. vill+445. 12s. 6d. net. 
VoL. III. ANDROMEDA. MEDUSA. Pp. xxxvii+225. 7s. 6d. 
net. 


THE VOYAGE OF BRAN, SON OF FEBAL. Edited by 
KUNO MEYER. With Essays upon the Happy Otherworld 
in Irish Myth, and upon the Celtic Doctrine of Rebirth, by 
ALFRED NUTT. 

VoL, I. THE HAPPy OTHERWORLD. Pp. xvii+ 331. 108. 6d. 
net. 

VoL. II. THE CELTIC DOCTRINE OF REBIRTH. Pp. xii+ 352. 
Ios. 6d. net. 


THE LEGEND OF SIR GAWAIN. Studies upon its Original 
Scope and Significance, by JESSIE L. WESTON. Pp. xiv+117. 
4s. net. | 


(TURN OVER 


- —0—0UltCt 


The volumes hitherto issued in the Grimm Library have been 
cordially welcomed alike by folk-lore students and by the most 
representative organs of the general press. 


The following expressions of opinion may be cited :— 


Concerning Mr. HARTLAND’S ‘LEGEND OF PERSEUS. 


The Antiquary.—‘ Folk-lore, treated as it is in the scientific method employed 
in the present work, is raised at once to a high level of importance, and is full 
of possibilities in the near future.’ 


The Athenwum—‘A notable study in the early psychological history of 
man." 


The Academy.—‘ There will be agreement as to the skill with which be has 
disentangled a mass of valuable material.’ 


The Manchester Guardian.—‘A book that no one interested in the early 
history of religion in folk-lore or in anthropology can safely neglect. Probably 
the best book touching the study of folk-lore—that is, on the growth and develop- 
ment of primitive human ideas—published since the '‘ Golden Bough.”’ 


The Westminster Gasette.—‘Mr. Frazer’s ‘‘Golden Bough” began a new 
epoch in the modern treatment of mythology. . . . Mr. Hartland is one of our 
most learned and competent workers in this novel field, and he ably follows 
Mr. Frazer's footsteps.’ 


The Nation (New York).—‘A most scholarly and fascinating work. Those 
who have not followed the progress of similar investigations will be startled by 
its suggestiveness..’ 


The Speaker.—' Mr. Hartland writes with a scholar’s modesty and a scholar’s 
ease.’ 

The Literary World.—‘ We can find nothing but praise for this able and 
systematic inquiry into a subject fraught with interest to student and reader 
alike.’ 

Notes and Queries, in mentioning the issue of Vol. III.—‘ The ambitious and 
scholarly task of Mr. Hartland is now accomplished, and the world is the richer 
by an all-important contribution to comparative folk-lore.’ 


The Daily Chronicle.—‘A work which as an authoritative exposition of the 


anthropological exposition of folk-lore has taken its place by the side of Mr. 
Frazer's ‘‘Golden Bough.”’ 


Concerning ‘THE VOYAGE OF BRAN.’ 


Monsieur H. D’Arbois de Jubainville in the ‘Revue Celtique.’—‘Cuvre 
@‘une grande valeur scientifique et d’une lecture agréable.’ 


Monsieur H. Gaidoz in ‘ Mélusine.’—‘ Edition, tradition et commentaire philo- 
logique sont d'une critique irréprochable. ... M. Nutt est bien informé: ses 
matériaux sont pris aux meilleures sources: son exposition est nette et précise : 


son livre est une ceuvre d’histoire générale 4 la fois des croyances et des 
littératures.’ 


Monsieur Gaston Paris in ‘Romania.’—‘Trés savante étude . . . qui sera 


lue avec grand profit par tous ceux qui s’occupent de littérature comparée ou 
histoire religieuse.’ 


Professor Ernst Martin in the ‘Zeitechrift fir deutsches Alterthum.’— 
‘ Ueberall verwertet Nutt die besten und neuesten Hilfsmittel, aber er vermehrt 
auch selbststiindig das Material und zieht eine Reihe von Schltissen welche er 
methodisch begriindet und zugleich klar und fesselnd vortriigt.’ 


Professor F. York Powell in ‘Folk-Lore.’—‘ The most valuable contribution 


to the history of religion and religious ideas that, so far as my knowledge goes, 
last year gave us.’ 


Monsieur L. Marillier in the ‘Revue de l’Histoire des Religions.’—' M. Nutt 
aura rendu un éminent service en portant a la connaissance des mythologues des 
documents dont beaucoup malheureusement ne sont mis 4 profit que dans le 
cercle étroit des celtisants; il en aura rendu un plus grand encore en faisant avec 
tant de sureté critique et de solide érudition l'analyse et l'histoire des conceptions 
complexes qui y sont contenues.’ 


Notes and Queries.—‘ This notable contribution to the history of Celtic myth 
and religion.’ ; 


Manchester Guardian.—' The book is important, because it is a carefully 
reasoned constructive effort to get a working-theory of Aryan religious history.’ 


Inverness Northern Chronicle.—‘A reconstruction of pre-Christian Irish 
theology. . . . Professor Meyer's translations are admirable. .. . It is impossible 
to give in this notice an idea of Mr. Nutt’s painstaking gathering of materials, or 
of the scientific use he makes of them in the work of restoration.’ 


Modern Language Notes (Baltimore).—‘The field has been thoroughly 
examined for material, the material has been well and clearly worked over. The 
statements of fact are always fair; the reasoning is usually clear, forcible, and 
just, and the conclusions sane.’ 


Literature.—‘ Must for some time to come form the starting-point for future 
inquiry into the varying views of man about the life after death. 


The Nation (New York).—'‘Of Professor Meyer's part as editor and commen- 
tator, we can speak only in terms of the highest praise. . . . The same praise 
should be extended to Mr. Nutt’s disquisitions . . . which prove him to be a 
master of his complicated theme." 


Concerning ‘THE LEGEND OF SIR GAWAIN.’ 


Manchester Guardian.—‘A careful, readable, and suggestive study which 
adds substantially to the results obtained by Madden’s well-known book.’ 


Academy.—‘ Invaluable in clearing the path for a final survey of the tangled 
wood of Arthurian legend.’ 


LONDON: DAVID NUTT, 270 STRAND 


T"NARNY 


are 
ga 


: 47 RADCLIFFE COLLEGE, 
: CAMBRIDGE, MASS. 


& 


This book may be kept out a calendar month, subject to a 
fine of FIVE CENTS A DAY thereafter. 


peocz[aa. 8 


