
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



Hosted by Google 




Hosted by Google 



Thrice-Greatest Hermes 



Hosted by Google 



Hosted by Google 



Thrice-Greatest Hermes 

Studies in Hellenistic Theosophy 
and Gnosis 

Being a Translation of the Extant Sermons and 

Fragments of the Trismegistic Literature, with 

Prolegomena, Commentaries, and Notes 



By 
G. R. S. Mead 



Volume 11. — Sermons 



London and Benares 

The Theosophical Publishing Society 

1906 



Hosted by Google 



Hosted by Google 



Contents 

/. CORPUS HEBMETIGUM 
CORP. HERM. I. 

PAGE 

POEMANDEES, THE SHEPHEED OF MEN . 3-20 

Commentary — 

Of Vision and Apocalypsis , 20 

The Great and Little Man .23 

The Presence ........ 24 

The Vision of Creation . 25 

The Descent of the Logos 27 

The Revelation of the Pleroma 28 

The Second Emanation 33 

The Descent of Man 34 

The First Men . 37 

" Increase and Multiply " 38 

Love 39 

The Way of Deathlessness 39 

The Ascent of the Soul ,41 

The Eighth Sphere . 42 

The Three " Bodies " of the Buddha .... 44 

The Preaching of the Gnosis 47 

A Hymn of Praise and Prayer for the Gnosis . . 49 

The Name " Poimandres " 50 

The Good Shepherd 52 

V 



Hosted by Google 



VI 



CONTENTS 



CORP. HERM. (IL) 
THE GENEEAL SERMOK 



PAGE 

. 58 



CORP. HERM. IL (HI.) 

TO ASCLEPIUS . , 59-68 
Commentary — 

"An Introduction to the Gnosis of the Nature of All 

Things". ........ 68 

Space is a Plenum .....,, 70 

The Spouse of Deity . . . . . . .71 

Cod is Cause that Spirit is . . , . .71 

He who is without a Wife is Half a Man ... 73 



CORP. HERM. III. (IV.) 

THE SACRED SERMON 

Commentary — 

Text and Title .... 
The Trinity ..... 
From the System of the Nicolaitans 
The " Books of the Chaldseans " . 
The "Flood" .... 



75-77 



78 
78 
79 
81 
83 



CORP. HERM. IV. (V.) 
THE CUP OR MONAD 



85-91 



MEJSTAKl — - 

The Title ...... 


. 92 


The Baptism of the Mind 


. 93 


The Holy Grail ..... 


. 94 


The " Hating of the Body " . 


. 96 


The Gnosis and its Blessings . 


. 97 


The Ancient Path ... 


, 98 



Hosted by Google 



CONTENTS Vll 

CORP. HEEM. V. (VI.) 

PAGE 

THOUGH UNMANIFEST GOD IS 

MOST MANIFEST , . 99-106 
Commentary — 

The Title 106 

Maya 106 

The Higher Pantheism or Panmonism . . . .108 
Hymn to All-God . 108 



CORP. HERM. VI. (VII.) 

IN GOD ALONE IS GOOD AND 

ELSEWHERE NOWHERE . 110-114 
Commentary — 

The Title 115 

Dualism? .115 

God the Pleroma of Good 117 



CORP. HERM. VII. (VIII.) 

THE GREATEST ILL AMONG MEN IS 

IGNORANCE OF GOD . . 120-121 
Commentary — 

A Preaching 122 

The Probable Completion of an Oxyrhynchus Logion . 122 



CORP. HERM. VIII. (IX.) 

THAT NO ONE OF EXISTING THINGS 
DOTH PERISH, BUT MEN IN ERROR 
SPEAK OF THEIR CHANGES AS DE- 
STRUCTIONS AND AS DEATHS . 124-127 

Commentary — 

The Cosmos as " Second God " 127 

The Law of Apokatastasis 128 



Hosted by Google 



Vlll 



CONTENTS 



CORP. HERM. IX. (X.) 

PAGE 

ON THOUGHT AND SENSE . 129-136 



Commentary — 




Title and Ordering .... 


. 136 


" Sense-and-Thought " .... 


. 137 


" Those in Gnosis " . . . . 


, 137 


The True Gnostic .... 


138 


The Goal of the Gnosis .... 


. 139 


The Possibility of Knowing God . 


. 140 



CORP. HERM. X. (XL) 



THE KEY . . . 14] 


"158 


Commentary — 




The Consummation of the " General Sermons " , 


168 


The Will of God ....... 


. 160 


Of Gnosis and Ecsta^is ..... 


, 161 


Of Apotheosis ....,, 


. 163 


The Metamorphoses of the Soul ... 


163 


The Ladder of Being ..... 


165 


Concerning Transmigration ..... 


166 


Gnosis the Virtue of the Soul 


167 


The Vehicles of the Soul ..... 


167 


The Dual Soul ....... 


169 


"He who Stands". ...... 


170 


The Olympian Path ...» 


171 


" When Mind becomes a Daimon "' 


171 


The " Scourge " of the Christ .... 


173 


The Dispensation of the Universe .... 


173 



CORP. HERM. XL (XII.) 
MIND UNTO HERMES 



Commentary — 

Title and Form 
The ^on-Lore 
The Root of Form 



175-189 

. 190 
. 191 
. 193 



Hosted by Google 



CONTENTS IX 

FAGK 

" Become all Things " 194 

The Good's own Path 196 

Concerning India 197 



CORP. HERM. XII. (XIII.) 

ABOUT THE COMMON MIND . 199-212 

Commentary — 

The Sayings of the Good Daimon . . . .213 

Hermes and Basilides . . . . . . .215 

The Sermons on Fate 217 

Materiality and Corporality are Energies of God . . 218 



CORP. HERM. XIII. (XIV.) 

THE SECEET SERMON ON THE 

MOUNTAIN . . . 219-233 

The Secret Hymnody . . 230-232 

Commentary — 

Concerning the Title 234 

The Term " Apocryphon " 234 

The Three Stages of Probation 236 

The Mount of Initiation 238 

The Birth from Above 239 

The Virgin-Birth 240 

The Race of the Logos 241 

The Self-taught 242 

The New Creation 243 

The Way of Birth in God 244 

Of the Ten and the Twelve 245 

The Dawn of Cosmic Consciousness .... 249 

The Vow of Silence 250 

Of the Ogdoad 251 

A Hymn for Morning and for Evening Prayer . . 252 

A Theurgic Praise-giving 253 

" Through the Word " 255 



Hosted by Google 



CONTENTS 

CORP. HERM. XIV. (XV.) 
A LETTEE TO ASCLEPIUS 



PAGE 

257-263 



Commentary- 



Asclepius and Tat ........ 263 

Compare with " Mind unto Hermea "' . . . . 265 

The Good Husbandman ...,,. 265 



CORP. HERM. (XVI.) 

THE DEFINITIONS OF ASCLEPIUS UNTO 

KING AMMON. . . 266-276 
Commentary— 

The Title 277 

A Tradition Concerning the Trismegistic Literature . 278 

A Speculation as to Date ...... 281 

The Delineation of the Sun ...... 282 

Concerning the Daimones .....= 282 



CORP. HERM. (XVII.) 

OF ASCLEPIUS TO THE KING . 285-286 

Commentary — 

On the Adoration of Images .,..,. 286 



CORP. HERM. (XVIII.) 
THE ENCOMIUM OF KINGS 



Commentary — 

The Apology of a Poemandrist . 
Speculation as to Date . 
The Story of the Pythic Grasshopper 
The True King .... 
The Fellow-Rulers of the Height 



288-298 



298 
299 
300 
302 
302 



Hosted by Google 



CO:NrTENTS 



XI 



//. THE PERFECT SERMON; OR 

THE ASCLEPIUS . . 307-390 
Commentary — 



The Title 

The Old Latin Translation and the Greek Original 

Of the Writer and the Persons of the Dialogue 

The Doctrine of the Will of God . 

Concerning Spirit and the All-Sense 

The Prophetic Utterances .... 

The Proscription of the Worship of the Gods 

The Last Hope of the Religion of the Mind . 



390 
391 
393 
395 
396 
398 
399 
401 



Hosted by Google 



Hosted by Google 



Corpus Hermeticum 



VOL. II. 



Hosted by Google 



Hosted by Google 



COEPUS HEEMETICUM I. 



POEMANDKES, THE SHEPHERD 

OF MEN 

(Text: R. 328-338; P. 1-18; Pat. 5b-8.)i 

1. It chanced once on a time my mind was 
meditating on the things that are,^ my thought 
was raised to a great height, the senses of my 
body being held back — just as men are who are 
weighed down with sleep after a fill of food, or 
from fatigue of body. 

Methought a Being more than vast, in size 
beyond all bounds, called out my name and 
saith : What wouldst thou hear and see, and 
what hast thou in mind to learn and know ? 

2. And I do say : Who art thou ? 

He saith : I am Man-Shepherd,^ Mind of all- 

^ P. = Parthey (G. ), Hermetis Trismegisti Poemander (Berlin ; 
1854). Pat. = Patrizzi (F.), Nova de Universis Fhilosophia (Venice ; 
1593). 

^ TTipl tSov tvroiv. ^ UoifxdudpTis. 

3 



Hosted by Google 



4 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

masterhood ^ ; I know what thou desirest and 
I'm with thee everywhere. 

3. [And] I reply : I long to learn the things 
that are, and comprehend their nature, and 
know God. This is, I said, what I desire to 
hear. 

He answered back to me : Hold in thy mind 
all thou wouldst know, and I will teach thee. 

4. E'en with these words His aspect changed,^ 
and straightway, in the twinkling of an eye, all 
things were opened to me, and I see a Vision 
limitless, all things turned into Light,- — sweet, 
joyous [Light]. And I became transported as T 
gazed. 

But in a little while Darkness came settling 
down on part [of it], awesome and gloomy, 
coiling in sinuous folds,^ so that methought it 
like unto a snake.* 

And then the Darkness changed into some 
sort of a Moist Nature, tossed about beyond all 
power of words, belching out smoke as from a 

^ 6 TTjs aifdeuTias vovs. Tlie avdei/Tia was the summa potestas of 
aU tilings ; see R. 8, n. 1 ; and § 30 below. Gf. also C. H., xiii. 
(xiv.) 15. 

•^ (TKoXiMs io-Treipajj-evoj/. The sense is by no means certain. 
Menard translates " de forme sinueuse " ; Everard, " coming down 
obliquely " ; Chambers, ^* sinuously terminated." But c/. in the 
Sethian system "the sinuous Water" — that is, Darkness (see 
Hipp., Philos,^ V. 19). 

4 Cf. Hipp., Philos,, V. 9 (S. 170, 71) : "They say the Serpent 
is the Moist Essence." 



Hosted by Google 



PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 5 

fire, and groaning forth a wailing sound that 
beggars all description. 

[And] after that an outcry inarticulate came 
forth from it, as though it were a Voice of Fire. 

5. [Thereon] out of the Light . . . ^ a Holy 
Word (Logos) ^ descended on that Nature. And 
upwards to the height from the Moist Nature 
leaped forth pure Fire ; light was it, swift and 
active too. 

The Air, too, being light, followed after the 
Fire ; from out the Earth-and- Water rising up 
to Fire so that it seemed to hang therefrom. 

But Earth-and- Water stayed so mingled each 
with other, that Earth from Water no one could 
discern.^ Yet were they moved to hear by reason 
of the Spirit- Word (Logos) pervading them. 

6. Then saith to me Man-Shepherd : Didst 
understand this Vision what it means ? 

Nay ; that shall I know, I said. 

That Light, He said, am I, thy God, Mind, 
prior to Moist Nature which appeared from Dark- 
ness ; the Light- Word (Logos) [that appeared] 
from Mind is Son of God. 

^ A lacuna of six letters in the text. 

2 The idea of the Logos was tlie central concept of Hellenistic 
theology ; it was thns a word of many meanings, signifying 
chiefly Reason and Word, but also much else. I have accordingly 
throughout added the term Logos after the English equivalent 
most suitable to the context. 

3 Of. 11.^ vii. 99, as quoted by Apion in the chapter " Concerning 
the Mon " as Comment, on C. ff., xi. (xii.). 

Hosted by Google 



6 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

What then ? — say I. 

Know that what sees in thee ^ and hears is the 
Lord's Word (Logos) ; but Mind is Father-God. 
Not separate are they the one from other ; just 
in their union [rather] is it Life consists. 

Thanks be to Thee, I said. 

So, understand the Light [He answered], and 
make friends with it. 

7. And speaking thus He gazed for long into 
my eyes,^ so that I trembled at the look of Him. 

But when He raised His head, I see in Mind 
the Light, [but] now in Powers no man could 
number, and Cosmos ^ grown beyond all bounds, 
and that the Fire was compassed round about 
by a most mighty Power, and [now] subdued 
had come unto a stand. 

And when I saw these things I understood by 
reason of Man- Shepherd's Word (Logos). 

8. But as I was in great astonishment, He 
saith to me again : Thou didst behold in Mind 
the Archetypal Form whose being is before 
beginning without end. Thus spake to me 
Man-Shepherd. 

And 1 say : Whence then have Nature's 
elements their being ? 

To this He answer gives : From Will of God. 

5 That is, in vision. ^ 0/. 0. H., xi. (xii.) 6. 

•^ K6(f[xov. The word kosmos (world-order) means either " order " 
or " world " ; and in the original there is frequently a play upon 
the two meanings, as in the case of logos. 



Hosted by Google 



POEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 7 

[Nature ^] received the Word (Logos), and gazing 
on the Cosmos Beautiful^ did copy it, making 
herself into a cosmos, by means of her own 
elements and by the births of souls. 

9. And God-the-Mind, being male and female 
both, as Light and Life subsisting, brought 
forth another Mind to give things form, who, 
God as he was of Fire and Spirit,^ formed Seven 
Rulers who enclose the cosmos that the sense 
perceives/ Men call their ruling Fate.^ 

10. Straightway from out the downward 
elements God's Reason (Logos) ^ leaped up to 
Nature's pure formation, and was at-oned with 
the Formative Mind ; for it was co-essential 
with it.*^ And Nature's downward elements 
were thus left reason-less, so as to be pure matter. 

11. Then the Formative Mind ([at-oned] with 
Reason), he who surrounds the spheres and spins 
them with his whirl, set turning his formations, 
and let them turn from a beginning boundless 
unto an endless end. For that the circulation 

1 Nature and God's Will are identical. 

2 That is, the ideal world-order in the realms of reality. 
^ Presumably the Pure Air of § 3. 

* rhy alffOTjThy KScTfioy. The sensible or manifested world, our 
present universe, as distinguished from the ideal eternal universe, 
the type of all universes. 

^ elfjLapfievrj. 

^ The Logos which had previously descended into Nature. 
^ ofiooixriQs, usually translated " consubstantiar' ; but ovaia is 
" essence " and " being " rather than " substance." 

Hosted by Google 



8 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

of these [spheres] begins where it doth end, as 
Mind doth will. 

And from the downward elements Nature 
brought forth lives reason-less ; for He did not 
extend the Reason (Logos) [to them]. The 
Air brought forth things winged ; the Water 
things that swim, and Earth-and- Water one 
from another parted, as Mind willed. And 
from her bosom Earth produced what lives she 
had, four-footed things and reptiles, beasts wild 
and tame. 

12. But All-Father Mind, being Life and 
Light, did bring forth Man ^ co-equal to Himself, 
with whom He fell in love, as being His own 
child ; for he was beautiful beyond compare, 
the Image of his Sire. In very truth, God fell 
in love with His own Form ^ ; and on him did 
bestow all of His own formations. 

13. And when he gazed upon what the 
Enformer had created in the Father, [Man] too 
wished to enform ; and [so] assent was given 
him by the Father.^ 

Changing his state to the formative sphere,* 
in that he was to have his whole authority,^ he 

^ The Prototype, Cosmic, Ideal or Perfect Man. 
^ Or Beauty (^op0f/s). 

^ Of. The Gos'pel of Marij in the Akhniim Codex : " He nodded, 
and when He had thus nodded assent . . . ." (F. F, F.^ 586). 
* The Eighth Sphere bounding the Seven. 
'* For note on i^ova-la, see R. in loc. and 48, n. 3. 

Hosted by Google 



PCEMANJDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 9 

gazed upon his Brother's creatures/ They fell 
in love with him, and gave him each a share 
of his own ordering.^ 

And after that he had well-learned their 
essence and had become a sharer in their nature, 
he had a mind to break right through the 
Boundary of their spheres, and to subdue ^ the 
might of that which pressed upon the Fire.* 

14. So he who hath the whole authority o'er 
[all] the mortals in the cosmos and o'er its lives 
irrational, bent his face downwards through ^ the 
Harmony,® breaking right through its strength, 
and showed to downward Nature God's fair Form. 

And when she saw that Form of beauty which 
can never satiate, and him who [now] possessed 
within himself each single energy of [all seven] 
Rulers as well as God's [own] Form, she smiled 
with love ; for 'twas as though she'd seen the 
image of Man's fairest form upon her Water, his 
shadow on her Earth. 

1 That is the Seven Spheres fashioned by his Brothei-. 

2 rd^iSj rank or order. 

^ Or "wear down " («aTa7roi/Vat). The reading Karaporiarai, 
however, may be more correct ; " he had a mind to come to 
knowledge of" this Boundary or Ring Pass not. See R. 49, n. 1. 

4 Sc. the Mighty Power of § 9. 

s irap4Kvri^€u. Of. Cyril, a /., i. 33 (Frag, xiii.) ; R. 50 : " heugt 
sich . . . niederP But compare especially Plato, Phcedrus, 249 c, 
where he speaks of the soul " raising up her face (apanvxl/aa-a) to That 
which is." Cf. also Apion in Clement. Hom.y vi. 4, in Comment. 
0. jff., xi. (xii.). 

^ That is, the harmonious interplay, concord or system of the 
spheres ruled by the Rulers ; in other words, the cosmos of Fate. 

Hosted by Google 



10 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

He in his turn beholding the form like to 
himself, existing in her, in her Water, loved it 
and willed to live in it ; and with the will came 
act/ and [so] he vivified the form devoid of 
reason. 

And Nature took the object of her love and 
wound herself completely round him, and they 
were intermingled, for they were lovers. 

15. And this is why beyond all creatures on 
the earth man is twofold ; mortal because of 
body, but because of the essential Man immortal. 

Though deathless and possessed of sway o'er 
all, yet doth he suffer as a mortal doth, subject 
to Fate. 

Thus though above the Harmony, within the 
Harmony he hath become a slave. Though 
male-female," as from a Father male-female, and 
though he's sleepless from a sleepless [Sire], yet 
is he overcome [by sleep]. 

16. Thereon [I say: Teach on],' Mind of 
me, for I myself as well^ am amorous of the 
Word (Logos). 

The Shepherd said : This is the mystery kept 
hid until this day. 

1 eV6p76m, energy, and realization. 

2 That is " a-sexual " bnt having the potentiality of both sexes. 
■^ For the various suggestions for filling up this lacuna, see R. 

in loc. ; and for that of Keil, see R, 367. 
^ Sc. as well as Nature. 

Hosted by Google 



PGSMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 11 

Nature embraced by Man brought forth a 
wonder, oh so wonderful. For as he had the 
nature of the Concord ^ of the Seven, who, as I 
said to thee, [were made] of Fire and Spirit ^ — 
Nature delayed not, but immediately brought 
forth seven " men," in correspondence with the 
natures of the Seven, male-female and moving 
in the air.^ 

Thereon [I said] : Shepherd, ... ^ ; for 
now Fm filled with great desire and long to hear ; 
do not run oflF.^ 

The Shepherd said : Keep silence, for not as yet 
have I unrolled for thee the first discourse (logos), 

Lo ! I am still, I said. 

17. In such wise then, as I have said, the 
generation of these seven came to pass. Earth 
was as woman, her Water filled with longing ; 
ripeness she took from Fire, spirit from Mthev. 
Nature thus brought forth frames to suit the 
form of Man. 

And Man from Life and Light changed into 
soul and mind, — from Life to soul, from Light 
to mind. 

And thus continued all the sense-world's 



1 Harmony. 2 g^^ g 9^ 

3 fi^rapa-iovs, A term that must have a more definite meaning 
than the vague "sublime" by which it is generally translated. 

* For Keil's completion of the lacuna, see R. 368. 

^ jji^ cKTpf^X^, perhaps meaning diverge from the subject, or go 
too fast ; lit., it means " do not run away." 



Hosted by Google 



12 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

parts ^ until the period of their end and new 
beginnings. 

18. Now listen to the rest of the discourse 
(logos) which thou dost iong to hear. 

The period being ended, the bond that bound 
them all was loosened by God's Will. For all 
the animals being male-female, at the same time 
with man were loosed apart ; some became partly 
male, some in like fashion [partly] female. And 
straightway God spake by His Holy Word 
(Logos) : 

^' Increase ye in increasing, and multiply in 
multitude, ye creatures and creations all ; and 
man that hath Mind in him, let him learn to 
know that he himself is deathless, and that the 
cause of death is love,^ though Love is all." ^ 

19. When He said this, His Forethought* did 
by means of Fate and Harmony effect their 
couplings and their generations founded. And 
so all things were multiplied according to their 
kind. 

And he who thus hath learned to know himself, 
hath reached that Good which doth transcend 
abundance ; but he who through a love that 
leads astray, expends his love uporj his body, — 

1 That is, the parts of what Hermes elsewhere calls the " cosmic 
man.'' 

^ Of. U. H.j xvi. 16. "^ Omitting the tA before oyra. 

^ Trp6poia^ that is Nature as Sophia or Providence or Will. 

Hosted by Google 



PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 13 

he stays in Darkness wandering,^ and suffering 
through his senses things of Death. 

20. What is the so great fault, said I, the 
ignorant commit, that they should be deprived of 
deathlessness ? 

Thou seem'st, he said, thou, not to have 
given heed to what thou heardest. Did not I 
bid thee think ? 

Yea do I think, and I remember, and therefore 
give Thee thanks. 

If thou didst think [thereon], [said He], tell 
me : Why do they merit death who are in Death ? 

It is because the gloomy Darkness is the root 
and base of the material frame ; from it ^ came 
the Moist Nature ; from this ^ the body in the 
sense-world was composed ; and from this [body] 
Death doth the Water drain. 

21. Right was thy thought, thou ! But how 
doth ''he who knows himself, go unto Him," as 
God's Word {Logos) hath declared ? 

And I reply : the Father of the universals doth 
consist of Light and Life, and from Him Man 
was born. 

Thou sayest well, [thus] speaking. Light and 
Life is Father-God, and from Him Man was 
born. 

If then thou learnest that thou art thyself of 

* There is a word-play between TrKdvrjs and Tr\av(i>fM€vos, 
'^ Sc. Darkness. ^ 8c. The Moist Nature. 

Hosted by Google 



14 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

Life and Light, and that thou [only] happen st 
to be out of them, thou shalt return again to Life. 
Thus did Man- Shepherd speak. 

But tell me further, Mind of me, I cried, how 
shall / come to Life again .... for God doth 
say : '' The man who hath Mind in him, let him 
learn to know that he himself [is deathless]." 

22. Have not all men then Mind ? 

Thou sayest well, thou, thus speaking. I, 
Mind, myself am present with holy men and good, 
the pure and merciful, men who live piously. 

[To such] my presence doth become an aid, 
and straightway they gain gnosis of all things, 
and win the Father's love by their pure lives, 
and give Him thanks, invoking on Him blessings, 
and chanting hymns, intent on Him with ardent 
love. 

And ere they give the body up unto its proper 
death, they turn them with disgust from its 
sensations, from knowledge of what things they 
operate.^ Nay, it is I, the Mind, that will not 
let the operations which befall the body, work to 
their [natural] end. For being door-keeper 111 
close up [all] the entrances, and cut the mental 
actions off which base and evil energies induce. 

23. But to the Mind-less ones, the wicked and 
depraved, the envious and covetous, and those 
who murder do and love impiety, I am far off, 

^ 6t5(fT€s avTwv T^ ii/ipyfj/xaTa. 

Hosted by Google 



PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 15 

yielding my place to the Avenging Daimon, 
who sharpening the fire, tormenteth him and 
addeth fire to fire upon him, and rusheth on him 
through his senses, thus rendering him the readier 
for transgressions of the law, so that he meets with 
greater torment ; nor doth he ever cease to have 
desire for appetites inordinate, insatiately striving 
in the dark.^ 

24. Well hast thou taught me all, as I desired, 
Mind. And now, pray, tell me further of the 
nature of the Way Above as now it is [for me].^ 

To this Man-Shepherd said : When thy material 
body is to be dissolved, first thou surrenderest 
the body by itself unto the work of change, and 
thus the form thou hadst doth vanish, and thou 
surrenderest thy way of life,^ void of its energy, 
unto the Daimon.* The body's senses next pass 
back into their sources, becoming separate, and 
resurrect as energies ; and passion and desire ^ 
withdraw unto that nature which is void of 
reason. 

25. And thus it is that man doth speed his 
way thereafter upwards through the Harmony. 

1 The text of this paragraph is hopelessly confused in the MSS, 

'^ Trepl TTJs av6dov rrjs yivo/xeyrjs, 

3 rh 9idosj the " habitual " part of man, presumably way of life 
impressed by habit on the body ; or it may be " class " of life 
as in the Vision of Er. 

* Of. G. H., X. (xi.) 16. 

^ 6 Bvfihs Koi rj iirtOvfxUf — the masculine and feminine as positive 
and negative aspects of the " animal soul." 

Hosted by Google 



16 THRICE-GEEATEST HERMES 

To the first zone he gives the Energy of 
Growth and Waning ; unto the second [zone], 
Device of Evils [now] de-energized ^ ; unto the 
third, the Guile of the Desires de-energized ; 
unto the fourth, his Domineering Arrogance, 
[also] de-energized ; unto the fifth, unholy 
Daring and the Rashness of Audacity, de- 
energized ; unto the sixth, Striving for Wealth 
by evil means, deprived of its aggrandisement ; 
and to the seventh zone, Ensnaring Falsehood, 
de-energized.^ 

26. And then, with all the energizings of the 
Harmony stript from him, clothed in his proper 
Power, he cometh to that Nature which belongs 
unto the Eighth,^ and there with those-that-are 
hymneth the Father. 

They who are there welcome his coming there 
with joy ; and he, made like to them that 
sojourn there, doth further hear the Powers who 
are above the Nature that belongs unto the 
Eighth, singing their songs of praise to God in 
language of their own. 

And then they, in a band,* go to the Father 
home ; of their own selves they make surrender 
of themselves to Powers, and [thus] becoming- 
Powers they are in God. This the good end for 

^ av€v4pyrirov. ^ Gf. G. H.^ xiii. (xiv.) 7. 

" Gf, G. J£, xiii. (xiv.) 15. 

* TcC^ei, order, group, sc. of the Nine ; — the Father being the 
Ten, or consummation. 

Hosted by Google 



PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OP MEN 17 

those who have gained Gnosis — to be made one 
with God. 

Why shouldst thou then delay? Must it 
not be, since thou hast all received, that thou 
shouldst to the worthy point the way, in order 
that through thee the race of mortal kind may 
by [thy] God be saved ? 

27. This when He'd said, Man -Shepherd 
mingled with the Powers.^ 

But I, with thanks and blessings unto the 
Father of the universal [Powers], was freed, full 
of the power He had poured into me, and full of 
what He'd taught me of the nature of the All and 
of the loftiest Vision. 

And I began to preach to men the Beauty of 
Devotion and of Gnosis : 

ye people, earth-born folk, ye who have 
given yourselves to drunkenness and sleep and 
ignorance of God, be sober now, cease from your 
surfeit, cease to be glamoured by irrational 
sleep ^ ! 

28. And when they heard, they came with 
one accord. Whereon I say : 

1 Of. K. K., 25 : " Thus speaking God became Imperisliable 
Mind." 

2 Cf. the logos, " Jesus saith, I stood in the midst of the world, 
and in the flesh was I seen of them, and I found all men drunken, 
and none found I athirst among them, and my soul grieveth over 
the sons of men, because they are blind in heart." Sayings of Our 
Lord from an Early Greek Papyrus, Grenfell & Hunt (London ; 
1897). 



VOL. II. 



Hosted by Google 



18 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

Ye earth-born folk, why have ye given up 
yourselves to Death, while yet ye have the power 
of sharing Deathlessness ? Repent, ye, who 
walk with Error arm in arm and make of Ignor- 
ance the sharer of your board ; get ye from out 
the light of Darkness, and take your part in 
Deathlessness, forsake Destruction ! 

29. And some of them with jests upon their 
lips ^ departed [from me], abandoning themselves 
unto the Way of Death ; others entreated to be 
taught, casting themselves before my feet. 

But I made them arise, and I became a leader 
of the Race ^ towards home, teaching the words 
[logoi), how and in what way they shall be saved. 
I sowed in them the words (logoi) of wisdom ^ ; of 
Deathless Water were they given to drink.* 

And when even was come and all sun's beams 
began to set, I bade them all give thanks to 
God. And when they had brought to an end 
the giving of their thanks, each man returned to 
his own resting place. 

30. But I recorded in my heart Man -Shepherd's 
benefaction, and with my every hope fulfilled 
more than rejoiced. For body's sleep became 

1 Gf. P ,S. A., xii. 2. 

2 The Race of the Logos, of all who were conscious of the Logos 
in. their hearts, who had repented and were thus logoi. 

^ Gf. Mark iv. 4 : *' He who soweth soweth the Word {Logosy 
^ Gf. K. K., 1 — the drink given by Isis to Horus. 

Hosted by Google 



P(EM ANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 19 

the soul's awakening,^ and closing of the eyes — 
true vision, pregnant with Good my silence, and 
the utterance of my word {logos) begetting of 
good things. 

All this befell me from my Mind, that is Man- 
Shepherd, Word (Logos) of all masterhood,^ by 
whom being God-inspired I came unto the Plain 
of Truth. ^ Wherefore with all my soul and 
strength thanksgiving * give I unto Father-God. 

31. Holy art Thou, God, the universals' 
Father. 

Holy art Thou, God, whose Will perfects 
itself by means of its own Powers. 

Holy art Thou, God, who willeth to be 
known and art known by Thine own. 

Holy art Thou, who didst by Word (Logos) 
make to consist the things that are. 

Holy art Thou, of whom All-nature hath been 
made an Image. 

Holy art Thou, whose Form Nature hath never 
made. 

Holy art Thou, more powerful than all power. 

Holy art Thou, transcending all pre-eminence. 

Holy Thou art, Thou better than all praise. 

1 PTj^is^ lit. soberness, watchfulness, lucidity. 

2 See § 2 above. 

3 Gf. K. K. (Stob., Eg., i, 49 ; p. 459, 20, W.), and Damascius, 
in Phot., BibL, p. 337b, 23. 

* evXoytav, — a play on K6yos. 

Hosted by Google 



20 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

Accept my reason's ^ offerings pure, from soul 
and heart for aye stretched up to Thee, Thou 
unutterable, unspeakable, Whose Name naught 
but the Silence can express. 

32. Give ear to me who pray that I may ne'er 
of Gnosis fail, [Gnosis] which is our common 
being's nature ^ ; and fill me with Thy Power, and 
with this Grace [of Thine], that I may give the 
Light to those in ignorance of the Race, my 
Brethren, and Thy Sons. 

For this cause I believe, and I bear witness ; I 
go to Life and Light. Blessed art Thou, 
Father. Thy Man ^ would holy be as Thou art 
holy, e'en as Thou gavest him Thy full authority ^ 
[to be]. 



COMMENTAEY 

Of Vision and Apocalypsis 

The " Poemandres " treatise not only belongs to the 
most important type of the Trismegistic Hterature, but 
is also the most important document within that type. 
It constitutes, so to speak, the Ground-Gospel of the 
Poemandres Communities, in the form of a revelation 
or apocalypse received by the founder of the tradition, 

2 rrjs yvwcrecas rrjs Kar ovaiav rjfi&v^ " our being," that is, presum- 
ably, the " being " of man and God, the ^' being " which man shares 
with God. 

3 Gf. G, H,y xiii. (xiv.) 20. -* ^ov<riap. 



Hosted by Google 



PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 21 

that founder, however, being not a historical personage 
but the personification of a teaching-power or grade of 
spiritual illumination — in other words, of one who had 
reached the *' Hermes," or rather " Thrice-greatest," state 
of consciousness or enlightenment. 

This stage of enlightenment was characterized by a 
heightening of the spiritual intuition which made the 
mystic capable of receiving the first touch of cosmic 
consciousness, and of retaining it in his physical 
memory when he returned to the normal state. 

The setting forth of the teaching is thus naturally in 
the form of apocalyptic, and of apocalyptic of an ordered 
and logical nature ; for it purports to be a setting forth 
of the spiritual " Epopteia " of the Inner Mysteries, the 
Vision revealed by the Great Initiator or Master- 
Hierophant, Mind of all-masterhood. 

This Vision, as we are told by many seers and 
prophets of the time, was incapable of being set forth by 
** tongue of flesh" in its own proper terms, seeing that 
it transcended the consciousness of normal humanity. 
Being in itself a living, potent, intelligible reality, apart 
from all forms either material or intellectual in 
any way known to man, it pervaded his very being 
and made his whole nature respond to a new key of 
truth, or rather, vibrate in a higher octave, so to say, 
where all things, while remaining the same, received a 
new interpretation and intensity. 

The interpretation of this Vision, however, was 
conditioned by the ** matter " of each seer ; he it was 
who had to clothe the naked beauty of the Truth — 
as the Gnostic Marcus would have phrased it — with 
the fairest garment he himself possessed, the highest 
thoughts, the best science, the fairest traditions, the 
most grandiose imagination known to him. Thus it is 
that we have so many modes of expression among the 



Hosted by Google 



22 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

mystics of the time, so many varieties of spiritual 
experience — not because the experience itself was 
" other/' the experience was the " same " for all, but the 
speaking of it forth was conditioned by the religious 
and philosophical and scientific heredity of the seer. 

This element, then, is the basic fact in all such 
apocalyptic. It is, however, seldom that we meet with 
a document that has come to us straight from the hand 
of a seer writing down his own immediate experience 
without admixture ; for the delight of the Vision was 
not that it gave new facts or ideas of the same nature 
as those already in circulation, but that it threw light 
on existing traditions, and showed them forth as being 
parts of a whole. Once the man had come into touch 
with the Great Synthesis, there rushed into his mind 
innumerable passages of scripture, scraps of myths, 
fragments of cosmogenesis, logoi and logia, and symbols 
of all kinds that fitted naturally. These were not any 
special writer's monopoly, there was no copyright in 
them, they were all utterances of the same Logos, the 
Great Instructor of humanity. 

Thus the literature that was produced was anony- 
mous or pseudepigraphic. There was first of all a 
nucleus of personal vision and direct illumination, 
then a grouping of similar matter from various 
sources into a whole for didactic purposes. Nor was 
there any idea among these mystics and scripture- 
writers that the form once issued should become for 
ever stereotyped as inerrant; there were many re- 
censions and additions and interpolations. It was left 
to those without the sense of illumination to stereotype 
the forms and claim for them the inerrancy of verbal 
dictation by the Deity. Those who wrote the 
apocalypses from personal knowledge of vision could 
not make such claim for their scriptures, for they knew 



Hosted by Google 



PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OP MEN 23 

how they were written, and what was the nature of 
hearing and sight. 

We have accordingly to treat all such documents as 
natural human compositions, but while doing so, while 
on the one side analyzing them with microscopic 
attention as literary compositions, put together from 
other sources, over-written, redacted and interpolated, 
we have also, on the other, to bear in mind that this 
was not done by clever manipulators and literary 
charlatans, but by men who regarded such work as a 
holy and spiritual task, who endeavoured to arrange all 
under the inspiration of a sweet influence for good, 
who believed themselves under guidance in their 
selection of matter, and in recombining the best in 
other scriptures into a new whole that might prove 
still better for the purpose of further enlightenment 
suitable to their immediate environment. 

The " Poemandres " treatise is of this nature — that is 
to say, though we have not the original form before 
us, we have what was intended to be read as a single 
document. We shall accordingly endeavour in our 
comments not to allow the anomalies of its outer form 
to detract from our appreciation of its inner spirit, and 
yet, on the other hand, not to permit the beauty of much 
that is in it to blind us to the fact that the present 
form has evolved from simpler beginnings. 

The Great and Little Man 

1. In deep meditation the disciple reaches the con- 
summation of his efforts, and receives initiation from 
the Master of the masters, who is to confer upon him 
authority {e^ovcrlav — see § 32) to teach, that is, to be 
a master or a Hermes. 

2. That this Grand Master of the Inner Mysteries 



Hosted by Google 



24 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

was Man and Shepherd of men, the Very Self of men, 
has been amply shown in the Prolegomena, but the 
striking parallelism with the very wording of our text, 
the Great Man, the " Being more than vast,'' who tells 
the little man, that though for the first time he now 
knows his Greater Self, that Self has ever been " every- 
where with thee," is best shown by the beautiful logos 
from the Gospel of Eve (presumably an Egyptian gospel), 
which we have already quoted elsewhere ^ : 

^' I stood on a lofty mountain,^ and saw a gigantic 
Man and another, a dwarf; and I heard, as it were, 
a voice of thunder, and drew nigh for to hear ; and He 
spake unto me and said : I am thou, and thou art I ; 
and wheresoever thou mayest be, I am there.^ In all 
am I scattered, and whencesoever thou wiliest, thou 
gatherest Me ; and gathering Me, thou gatherest 
Thyself." 

The Peesencb 

3. The conditions of the seeing of the Holy Sight 
had been fulfilled by the disciple ; he had weaned 
himself from all lower desires. No longer, like the 
theurgist in the Hermes-invocations of the popular 
cult, does he pray for wealth and fame and cheerful 
countenance, and the rest; his one desire, his only 
will, is now to ''learn the things that are, and com- 
prehend their nature and know God." He craves for 
Gnosis, — Gnosis of Cosmos and its mysteries, Gnosis 

^ From Epiphaniiis, Mceres,^ xxvi. 3 ; see note to the first Hermes- 
Prayer (i. 11). 

2 Symbolical of a high state of consciousness, the Mount of 
Perfection. 

^ Cf. the Oxyrhynchus logion 5 : " Jesus saith : Wherever 
there are [two], they are not without God, and wherever there 
is one alone, I sav, I am with him." 



Hosted by Google 



PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 25 

of Nature, the Great Mother, and, finally, Gnosis of 
God, the Father of the worlds. This is the one 
question he "holds in his mind," his whole nature is 
concentrated into this one point of interrogation. 

It is to be noticed that we are not told, as in the 
Gospel of Em, that the seer stood, as it were, apart 
from himself, and saw his little self and Greater Self 
simultaneously. He is conscious of a Presence, of a 
Persona in the highest theological meaning of the 
word, who is not seen so much as felt, speaking to 
him Mind to mind; he hears this Presence rather 
than sees it. 

The Vision of Ckeation 

4. The first part of his mental question is : How 
came this cosmos into being? The answer is the 
changing of the Boundless Presence into *' Light, sweet 
joyous Light." He loses all sight of "all things" in 
his mind, the mental image he had formed of cosmos, 
and is plunged into the infinitude of Limitless Light 
and Joy, which transports him out of himself in 
highest ecstasy. 

But he has craved for Gnosis, not Joy and Light, but 
Wisdom, the understanding and reconciliation of the 
great Opposites, the Cross of all Manifestation. 

Therefore must he know the Mystery of Ignorance 
as well as that of Knowledge. Within the Infinitude 
of Light appears the Shadow of the Unknown, which 
translates itself to his consciousness as Darkness, — 
the Shadow of the Thrice-unknown Darkness, which, 
as Damascius tells us,^ was the First Principle of the 
Egyptians, the Ineffable Mystery, of which they *' said 
nothing,'' and of which our author says nothing. 

1 See note to the fifth Hermes-Prayer (v. 2). 

Hosted by Google 



26 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

This Darkness comes forth from within outwards to 
the disciple's consciousness, it spreads '* downwards " 
in sinuous folds like a Great Snake, symbolizing, 
presumably, the unknown, and to him unknowable, 
mysteries of the differentiation of the root of matter of 
the cosmos that was to be ; its motion was spiral, 
sinuous, unending vibrations, not yet confined into 
a sphere ; not yet ordered, but chaotic, in unceasing 
turmoil, a terrible contrast to the sweet peace of the 
Light, gradually changing from Dark Space or Spirit 
into a Fluid or Flowing Matter, or Moist Nature ; 
that is, presumably, what the Greek mystics would 
have called Ehea, the Primal Mother or Matter of 
the future universe. 

It wails and groans — that is, its motion is as yet 
unharmonized. In the terminology of the Sophia- 
my thus, it is the inchoate birth from the Sophia Above, 
in the Fullness, brought forth by herself alone, 
without her syzygy or consort. On account of its 
imperfection she wails and groans to the Father of 
All and His Perfections, that her Perfection may be 
sent to fashion her child, who is herself in manifestation, 
into a world of order, and eventually into a Perfection 
in its turn.^ 

The Primal Undifferentiated or Chaotic Sound, from 
the Darkness of its first state, gradually manifests itself 
under the brooding power of the Boundless Light, into 
less confused thunderings and murmurings, and finally 
reaches a stage symbolized by a " Cry," a " Voice of 
Fire," of Fire, not Light, expressing a need and want, 
longing for union with the Articulate Power or Cosmic 
Word. 

The three most primal stages thus seem to be 
symbolized by Darkness, Moist Essence, Fire. These 
1 Gf, F, F. F., 340, 341. 



Hosted by Google 



PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 27 

were not our differentiated elements, but the Primal 
Pre-cosmic Elements. 

The same idea, though in different forms, is met with 
in a system of the Gnosis preserved for us by the Old 
Latin translator of Irenseus,^ and also by Theodoret,^ 
who ascribes it to the Sethians, whom he says are also 
called Ophianae or Ophitse. Now Seth was Typhon or 
Darkness, Dark Light, and this Seth may very well 
have been symbolized as the Great Serpent of Darkness, 
as it is in our text; hence the name "Those of the 
Serpent," perhaps given them by their theological adver- 
saries (orthodox Jews and Christians). In this system 
the Primal Elements are given as Water, Darkness, 
Abyss, and Chaos. The Light was the Child of the 
supreme Trinity — the First Man, the Second Man, and 
the Holy Spirit or First "Woman. This Light the 
Jewish and Christian over-working of the original 
tradition called the Cosmic Christ. 

Thus the Fire of Desire, or Cry of the Darkness, 
was to be satisfied or checked or quenched by the 
Light's fashioning its inchoate substance into the 
cosmos ; and so in another Vision, preserved in a treatise 
of the same type, Hermes sees, by gazing "through 
the Master," the cosmos in its finished beauty, when all 
things in it are full of Light and nowhere is there Fire.^ 

The Descent of the Logos 

5. Upon this Cry for Light, into the Heart of the 
Dark-Moist-Fiery-Nature is dropped a Holy Word, the 
Seed of the future Cosmos. This Word is Articulate 
(its Limbs are perfect), Keasonable and Ordering. The 

1 Hmr,, I. XXX. (Stieren, i. 363 ff.)- 

2 HcBT., Fabk, i. 14. See F, F. F., pp. 188 ff. 

3 *'The Mind to Hermes," G, H,, xi. (xii.) 6, 7. 

Hosted by Google 



28 THRICE- GREATEST HERMES 

Cosmic Animal Nature is impregnated with the Light 
of the Supernal Eeason, which pervades its whole 
being. 

This pervading immediately effects an ordering of 
the Chaotic Elements into Pure Fire, Pure Air, and 
Pure Water-Earth. Moreover, it is to be gathered 
from the sequel that Nature saiu the Word and all 
his Beauty in her Fire and Air, but as yet only heard 
him in her Water-Earth. 

6. The Shepherd thus explains that Light ^ is really 
Mind, and Mind is God, — God prior to Nature, but 
not prior to Darkness. The Unity of Light and 
Darkness is a still higher Mystery. Light and Mind 
is the highest concept the disciple can yet form of God. 
The Light- Word, or emanation of Supernal Eeason, is 
Son of God, Son of Great Mind. 

The Eevelation of the Pleroma 

With the words '' What then ? " Eeitzenstein (p. 37) 
perceives that the sequence of the narrative is broken 
by a second vision, and is only resumed with § 9. 
This he regards as an interpolation of another form of 
cosmogenesis, into the one which is being described. 

It seems to me, however, that the breaking of the 
main narrative may be regarded as a necessary digres- 
sion rather than as an interpolation of foreign material- 
necessary in order to bring on to the scene the hitherto 
invisible Greatnesses, " within '' the Veil of Light, which 
constitute the Economy of the Pleroma. More had to 
be seen by the disciple before he was in a position to 
understand what he had so far seen. He must now 
unite with the Light, his previous seeing being that 
of its reflection, the logos within him. Not that this 
^ That is, the condition " seeing." 



Hosted by Google 



PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 29 

logos and Light (or Mind) are separate. They are in 
reality one, the Son is one with the Father in the state 
that transcends the opposites. The Logos apparently 
comes forth, yet it remains ever with the Father, and 
this coming forth and yet remaining constitutes its Life — 
in other words, it is an emanation. Thus Hermes is 
bidden to understand the Light as Life, and so make 
friends with it. 

7. Hitherto the Light had been one for him a sameness 
which his highest vision could not pierce, the Veil of 
Light that shut the Beauties, Perfections and Great- 
nesses of the Intelligible from the eyes of his mind. 
To pierce this veil a still more expanded power of 
sight had to be given him by the Master. The little 
word or light-spark within him is intensified by the 
Great Word of the Master, this Word being an Intel- 
ligible Utterance of the Mind, an intensification of 
being. 

He now sees and understands the countless Powers 
within the Light, which constitute the Intelligible 
Archetypal Form or Idea of all worlds. Between the 
special sensible cosmos of his prior vision and this 
Immensity was a Mighty Power, or Great Boundary 
(Horos),^ that encircled the elements of the sensible 
cosmos and held its Fire in check. 

8. In amazement he asks whence come these 
apparently disorderly and untamed elements of the 
new world in process that have to be subdued and 
separated from the Concord of the Perfection of 
the Powers? And the answer is that Chaos, too, 
has its being from God's Will. Discord and Concord, 
Chaos and Cosmos, are both of God. The Primal 
Elements are, as it were, the Passions of God's Will 
desiring Himself. It is Himself as Mother or Spouse 

1 Not Horus. 



Hosted by Google 



30 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

desiring Himself as Father. In other of the Tris- 
megistic tractates ^ this " Feminine Aspect " of Deity 
is called Wisdom and Nature and Generation and 
Isis. He is Wisdom as desiring Himself, — that Desire 
being the Primal Cause as Mother of the whole world- 
process, which is consummated by His Fullness uniting 
with His Desire or Wisdom, and so perfecting it. 

This is the whole burden of the Gnostic Sophia- 
mythus, which I have given very good reasons for 
believing derived its main element from Egypt.^ 
Curiously enough, Eeitzenstein (pp. 39, 40) quotes the 
two chapters (liii. and liv.) from Plutarch on which 
I base my conclusions, but he does not notice that in 
this respect the Christianized Gnosis is distinctly de- 
pendent on Egypt. 

And so Philo ^ also tells us that the Mother of All 
is Gnosis {iTncrrmr}), the very same name that Plutarch 
gives to Isis. 

The Mother, when thought of as without the Pleroma, 
is impregnated by the Word, which Basilides would 
have called the All-seed Potency of the Pleroma, 
endowed with all Powers, and sent forth as the seed 
of the sensible cosmos that is to be. The Mother in 
her higher Nature contemplates the Eternal Cosmos 
or Order of the Pleroma, and in her lower Nature 
copies its Beauties by means of the permutations and 
combinations of her elements and the generations and 
transformations of her lives or souls. 

This form of cosmogenesis Eeitzenstein (p. 46) 
regards as of a pantheistic nature, while the general 
narrative he holds to set forth a world-representation 
of a dualistic tendency. It is true, as he himself 

^ For references, see R, 39, n. 1 ,• also 44. 

2 Cf. my note on Plut., De Is. et Os., liv. 6, in the Prolegg. 

3 Ue Ehriet, § 30. 



Hosted by Google 



PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 31 

admits, that this blend of contradictory conceptions 
meets us frequently in Gnostic systems of a more or 
less contemporary date ; nevertheless he lays great 
stress upon this difference, and so insists upon an 
interpolation. 

In this he is confirmed (p. 39) by the fact that 
whereas § 9 speaks of God the Mind being male-female, 
we are in the second vision face to face with '' eine 
weiUiche Allgottheity' who stands next to the Highest 
God. 

I must, however, confess that these contradictions 
do not make so great an impression upon my mind as 
they seem to have done on the critical faculty of 
Professor Eeitzenstein. There is no system known to 
me, even of the most exclusive monotheism, into which 
dualism does not creep somehow or other at some 
stage ; it cannot be avoided, for it is in the nature 
of things. 

The dualism of our text is, however, by no means 
so very marked, for though it is not distinctly stated 
in § 4, it leaves it clearly to be inferred that the 
Darkness comes from the Light itself, for previously 
there was nothing but Light ; '* all things " had become 
Light to the eye of the seer. It is the mystery of the 
sad-eyed Serpent of Darkness wrapping itself round 
the lower limbs of the Light. 

It was, in my opinion, precisely for the sake of 
removing the thought of dualism that the seer is 
shown a still more intimate vision within the Light 
Veil, where all ideas of monotheism, dualism, tri theism, 
polytheism, and pantheism lose their formal distinctions 
in a Formless State, or, at any rate, in a State of Being 
where all are interblended with all. In describing it, 
the " tongue of flesh " has to use the familiar language 
of form, but every word employed has a new signifieauce ; 



Hosted by Google 



32 THRIOE-GREATEST HERMES 

for even the "tongue of angels" cannot describe it, 
or any of the '* tongues " of heaven ; He alone who 
speaks forth the Words of the One Tongue can 
express it. 

Whence this sublime conception of the Pleroma 
came, I do not know; it seems to me impossible to 
find a geographical origin for such things, as, indeed, 
it seems vain to seek a geographical origin for dualism 
and the rest. For the writer or writers of our tractate 
these ideas came from the nature of things, from the 
immediate experience of sight. 

The form of expression, of course, may be susceptible 
of a geographical treatment, but as yet I am not 
satisfied that any clear heredity has been made out 
for this supposed interpolation. The Feminine Divinity, 
next the Highest God, is not set over against that 
God, but is His own Will. He is in the Pleroma 
Vision as much and as little male and female as in 
the general narrative. He transcends all opposites 
and contains all opposites in Himself. 

What is clear, however, is that in the combination 
of both visions we have before us a simple and early 
form of the Gnosis which we meet with later in 
Christian over-workings, and especially in the very 
elaborate expositions of the Basilidian and Valentinian 
schools, the systems of which can, in their main 
elements, be paralleled and compared point by point 
with our treatise ; but this would be too lengthy a 
proceeding in our present study, for it would require 
a volume to itself in any way adequately to treat 
of it.i 

1 The reader, however, may be referred to the chapters on 
" The Basilidian Gnosis," ^' The Valentinian Movement," '^ Some 
Outlines of ^onology,'' and " The Sophia-Mythus," in F. F. F., 
pp. 253-357. 



Hosted by Google 



PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 33 

The Second Emanation 

9. We now return to the main narrative. Within 
the World-Egg, which was encircled by the Mighty- 
Power (the Gnostic Horos), there had already been 
developed three Cosmic Elements (not our mixed 
elements) — Fire, Air, and Water-Earth, This had 
been effected by the descent of the Cosmic Logos 
into the Primal Elements of Disorder. As the Logos 
descended. Fire and Air ascended, and the Logos 
remained in Water-Earth. This was the result of 
the First Outpouring from the Potency of the Pleroma, 
the First Word uttered by Mind. 

The Second Outpouring of Mind was of Mind no 
longer regarded as Light only, but as Light and Life, 
Male-Female. This emanation appeared as Enforming 
Mind — that is, the Fashioner or Former, Artificer or 
Demiurge of lives or souls ; it was the ensouling of 
the Ordered Elements of Nature with lives, whereby 
these Elements were drawn together into forms. 

The G-reat Mind, as Light and Life, reflected itself in 
the " pure formation '^ of Nature — that is to say, in Fire 
and Spirit (Air), Fire for Light and Spirit for Life, to 
further enform things. 

The Mighty Power or Self -limitation of Mind, 
the Boundary that no mortal can pass, marks off the 
formative area of the whole cosmos. This area, however, 
was by no means only the mixed sensible world 
(cosmos) which we perceive with our present physical 
senses. On the contrary, there are within it various 
orders (cosmoi) of the main cosmos. For the Ordering 
Mind, as the Enformer or Soul-fashioner, differentiates 
itself into seven Kuling Forms or Spheres which 
" enclose " the mixed sensible cosmos ; these spheres, 
therefore, must be of a psychic nature — that is to say, 

vol. II. 3 



Hosted by Google 



34 THRICE- GREATEST HERMES 

of a pure or subtle substance ; they are Forms of subtle 
matter endowed with reason. They constitute the 
Cosmic Engine of the fashioning of souls, or psychic 
natures, and of their perpetual transforming. Their 
energies and activities are those of Fate, or the ordered 
sequence of cause and effect, symbolized by spheres 
perpetually entering into themselves. 

10. In all the main phases there is to be observed 
the idea of a downward tendency followed by an 
upward. The Darkness descends ; it then transmutes 
itself and aspires abo ve in a Cry or Yearning for Light. 
The Word descends ; immediately the Fire and Air 
ascend. The Formative Mind descends ; immediately 
the Word ascends from the mixed Water-Earth — and 
at-ones itself with its co-essential emanation from the 
Father— to a space about the Seven, and thus leaves the 
still down-tending elements in the Element Water- 
Earth deprived of its immediate presence, after giving 
physical matter the initial impulse to order. This 
physical matter our author calls " pure matter,'' meaning 
thereby matter deprived of the immediate presence of 
Eeason. 

11. Hereupon from the impulse she has received 
Nature begins her physical enformation, develops her 
physical elements and bodies of irrational lives. 
Water-Earth divides into water and earth, and also 
air, for this air is clearly something different from the 
Spirit-Air that ascended; the lower air is one of the 
downward elements. 

The Descent of Man 

12. When this had been accomplished, there followed 
a Third Outpouring — the descent of Man, the con- 
summation of the whole Enformation of things, a still 



Hosted by Google 



PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHEED OF MEN 35 

more transcendenb manifestation of Mind, the One 
Form that contains all forms, His Very Image co- 
equal with Himself. He finally comes Himself to 
consummate and save the cosmos in the Form of Man — 
that is, to gather it to Himself and take it back into 
the Pleroma. 

^Nevertheless the Word and the Formative Mind and 
Man are not three different Persons ; they are all 
co-essential with each other and one with the Father, 
For the Word is co-essential with the Demiurgic Mind 
(§ 10), and the latter is Brother of Man (§ 13), and 
Man is co-equal with God (§ 12). 

13. And so Man, the Beloved, descends ; and in his 
descent he is clothed with all the powers of his Brother's 
creative energy, the creative energy of Life conjoined 
with rational Light. 

Having learned the lesson of the conformations and 
of the limitations of the Spheres, he desires to break 
right through the Great Boundary itself ; but to do this 
he must descend still further into matter. Before he 
can burst through upwards he must break through 
downwards. 

14. Accordingly he breaks through the Spheres down- 
wards, seeking his consort Nature below, and shows her 
his Divine Form radiant with all the energies bestowed 
on him by all the Powers above. 

And she in her great love wound herself round the 
image of this Form mirrored upon her water, and the 
shadow of it thrown upon her earth; just as the 
Darkness wound itself, like a Great Serpent, round the 
lower parts of the Light, so does Nature coil herself 
round the shadow and reflection of Man. Man is 
above, yet is he below ; man is free, yet is he bound — 
bound willingly in love for her who is himself. 

Eeitzenstein (pp. 47-49) is greatly puzzled with all 



Hosted by Google 



36 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

this, and seeks to distinguish several contradictory 
elements, presumably supposing that these elements 
are woven together into a literary patchwork from 
distinct traditions. I cannot myself follow him here 
with any clearness. Of course the writer or writers of 
our treatise did not discover new ideas or invent new 
terms; they used what was in their minds and the 
minds of their circle. It was, however, the weaving of 
it into a whole, not as a literary exercise, but as a 
setting forth in the most understandable terms with 
which they were acquainted of the " things seen/' that 
was their main interest. Those who had the " sight " 
would understand and appreciate their labours, those 
who had not would never understand, no matter what 
terms or what language were used. 

When, then, Eeitzenstein (p. 47) says that in § 11, in 
the bringing forth by Nature of irrational lives, there 
is a confusion of contradictory conceptions, he fails to 
see that JSTature is ever the World-Soul, the spouse of 
Mind; though Darkness she is spouse of Light. Un- 
aided she brings forth things irrational, a phase of that 
birth of I^ature by herself that is incomplete. 

So also in § 13, Eeitzenstein detects contradictory 
elements, which he ascribes to two different regions of 
ideas. He does not, however, perceive that though in 
one sentence the *' formations " are said to be those of 
the Father, and in the next those of the Brother, this is 
no real confusion, because the Formative Mind is the 
Father, enforming Himself in Himself; this self- 
energizing, when regarded by itself, may be spoken of as 
other than the Father, but is not really so. 

ISTor can I see that there is any real contradiction in 
the breaking through of the Spheres as though they 
were the product of an opposing Power to that of the 
Son. The Fate was certainly so regarded by men who 



Hosted by Google 



PCEM ANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 37 

were under its sway ; but our treatise is endeavouring 
precisely to give an insight into the state of things 
beyond the Fate, The burden of its teaching is that all 
these oppositions are really illusory ; man can transcend 
these limitations and come into the freedom of the 
Sons of God. Even the most terrible and fundamental 
oppositions are not really so, but all are Self-limitations 
of God's Will ; and man is Son of God co-equal with 
Him. 

The First Men 

16. Our treatise then describes the first appearance 
of man on earth, which it regards as a great mystery 
never before revealed, " the mystery kept hid until this 
day." This I take to mean that it had hitherto never 
been written about, but had been kept as a great 
secret. 

This secret was the doctrine that the first men, of 
which there were seven types, were hermaphrodites, 
and not only so, but lived in the air ; their frames were 
of fire and spirit, and not of the earth-water elements. 
The Celestial Man, or type of humanity, was gradually 
differentiating himself from his proper nature of Light 
and Life, and taking on bodies of fire and air, was 
changing into mind (Light-fire) and soul (Life-spirit). 

This presumably lasted for long periods of time, the 
lower animal forms gradually evolving to greater com- 
plexity as Nature strove to copy the '' Form " of Man, 
and Man devolving gradually until there was a union, 
and the human subtle form could find vehicles among 
the highest animal shapes. 

The first incarnate men appear to have been at first 
also hermaphrodite; and it must have been a time 
when everything was in a far greater state of flux than 
things are now. 



Hosted by Google 



S8 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

''Increase and Multiply" 

18. This period of pre-sexual or bi-sexual develop- 
ment having come to an end, the separation of the 
sexes took place. The commandment is given by 
the Word: "Increase ye in increasing and multiply 
in multitude " (av^dvecrOe ev av^r/aei koI TrXtjdvvecrQe 
€V TrXy'jOeL). 

It is true that this is reminiscent of the oft re- 
peated formula in the Greek Targum of Genesis, — 
avidvecrOe koI irXriQiivecrOe^ — but it is only slightly 
reminiscent, the main injunction being strengthened, 
and the rest of the logos being quite different from any- 
thing found in Genesis. As nothing else in the whole 
treatise can be referred to direct Hebrew influence, we 
must conclude that the formula was, so to speak, in the 
air, and has so crept into our treatise.^ 

It has, however, given rise to a diatribe copied on to 
the margin of one MS. — B. (Par. 1220)— by a later 
hand, and incorporated into the text of M. (Vat. 951). 
It is in B. ascribed to Psellus,^ who goes out of his way 
to stigmatize Hermes as a sorcerer and a plagiarist 
throughout of Moses ; in brief, the Devil is a thief of 
the Truth to lead men astray. In this we learn more 
about the limitation of the so-called "Prince of 
Philosophers " ^ than of aught else. 

1 Cf. Gen, i. 22 and 28, viii. 17, ix. 7, and xxxv. 11 (in the 
singular). 

2 See, however, Frag. XX., and R. 126, n. 1. Of. the same 
formula in C. IL, iii. (iv.) 3 (P. 32, 11), and R. 116, n. 2. 

^ And is printed in Boissonade's (V. G.) edition of Michael 
Psellus, I)e Operatione Dmmonum (Niirnberg, 1838), pp. 153, 154. 

* If, indeed, the Psellus of our scholion is the Younger Psellus 
(eleventh century) ; the De Op. Dcem.^ however, is ascribed by 
many to the Elder Psellus (ninth century). See, however, the 
section "The Original MS, of our Corpus" in ch. i. of the 
*' Prolegomena." 



Hosted by Google 



PCEM ANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 39 

19. This increasing and multiplying, the perpetual 
coupling of bodies, and the birth of new ones, is effected 
by the Fate, or Harmony of the Formative Spheres, the 
Engine of Birth, set under Forethought or Providence 
(irpovoia). This Pronoia can be none else than Nature 
herself as the Wisdom or Knowledge of God — in other 
words, His Will. 

Love 

The motive power of all is Love. If this Love 
manifests itself as Desire for things of Matter, the 
Lover stays in Darkness wandering ; if it becomes the 
Will to know Light, the Lover becomes the Knower of 
himself, and so eventually at-one with Good. 

20. But why should love of body merit Death — that 
is to say, make man mortal ? The disciple attempts 
an explanation from what he has seen. Although his 
answer is approved, the meaning is by no means clear. 

The physical body, or body in the sense-world, is 
composed of the Moist Nature, which in a subsequent 
phase remains as Water-Earth, and in a still subsequent 
phase divides itself into the elements of physical earth, 
water, and air. The dissolution of the combination of 
these elements is effected by Death — that is, Dark- 
ness, the Drainer of the Water, the Typhonean Power. 
Water must thus here symbolize the Osirian Power of 
fructification and holding together. The Moist Nature 
then seems to be diff'erentiated from the Darkness by 
the energizing of Light in its most primitive brooding. 
But seeing that the Light is also Life, the Darkness, 
which is posited as the ultimate opposite, is Death. 

The Way of Deathlessness 

21. The Way of Deathlessness is then considered. 
The disciple repeats his lesson, and the Master com- 



Hosted by Google 



40 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

mends him ; the Way Up is the Path of Self- 
knowledge. 

Still the disciple cannot believe that this is for him ; 
he cannot understand that Mind is in him, or rather is 
himself, in so much as Mind as Teacher seems to be 
without him. The play is on Mind and mind ; the one 
gives the cerfcitude of Immortality, the other is still 
bound by the illusion of Death. The disciple has not 
this certitude ; Mind, then, is not his. 

22. The Master then further explains the mystery. 
Gnosis must be preceded by moral purification ; there 
must be a turning-away before the Ee~turn can be 
accomplished. The whole nature must be changed. 
Yet every effort that the little man seems to make of 
his own striving is really the energizing of the Great 
Man. 

23. Those, however, who yield themselves to lower 
desires, drive the Mind away, and their appetites are 
only the more strengthened by the mind. 

The text of this paragraph is very corrupt, so that 
the exact sense of the original is not recoverable ; and 
this makes it all the more difficult to understand what 
is meant by the Avenging Daimon, the Counterpart of 
the Mind. This difficulty is increased by § 24, where 
we are told that the " way of life " {ro ^Oog) is at 
death surrendered to the Daimon. 

If, however, the reader will refer to the section on 
" The Vision of Er " (in the Miscellanea of the " Pro- 
legomena"), which in my original MS. followed as a 
Digression on this passage, he will be put in contact 
with the Platonic view of the Daimon and " way of 
life"; in our treatise, however, the teaching is of a 
more intimate character, and must be taken in con- 
junction with C. R.j X. (xi.) 16 and 21, where we shall 
comment on it at further length. 



-Xj^t^ 



Hosted by Google 



PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OP MEN 41 

The Ascent of the Soul 

24. The subject of instruction is now the Way 
Above (apoSo9)j or ascent of the soul out of the body 
at death. 

The physical body is left to the work of change and 
dissolution. The life of integration and conservation 
ceases, and the life of disintegration begins. 

The form (etSog) thus vanishes, apparently from the 
man's consciousness ; that is to say, presumably, he is 
no longer clothed in the form of his physical body, but 
is apparently in some other vehicle ; the particular fixed 
form, or " way of life," or " habit," he wore on earth 
being handed over to the Daimon deprived of all energy, 
so that apparently it becomes an empty shell. 

The next sentence is a great puzzle, and I can only 
guess at the meaning. The senses which had previously 
been united by the mind become separate — that is, 
instead of a whole they become parts (juLepTj), they return 
to the natural animal state of sensation, and the animal 
part of man, or his vehicle of passion and desire, begins 
in its turn to disintegrate, the mind or reason (logos) 
being gradually separated from it, or, rather, its true 
nature showing forth in the man as he gradually strips 
off the irrational tendencies of the energies. 

25. Those irrational tendencies have their sources in 
the Harmony of the Fate-Sphere of seven subordinate 
spheres or zones; and in these zones he leaves his 
inharmonious propensities, deprived of their energy. 
For the Harmony is only evil apparently ; it is really 
the Engine of Justice and Necessity to readjust the 
foolish choice of the soul — that is, to purify its irra- 
tional desires, or those propensities in it that are not 
under the sway of right reason and philosophy. For a 
better understanding of the characteristics ascribed to 



Hosted by Google 



42 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

the ''seven spheres," we must "run off" into another 
Digression, which the reader will find relegated to 
ch- xii. of the '' Prolegomena," under the title " Con- 
cerning the Seven Zones and their Characteristics." 
This, then, having been taken as a direct commentary 
on § 25, we continue with the text of our treatise. 

The Eighth Sphere 

26. The soul of the initiated strips itself naked of the 
" garment of shame," the selfish energizings, and stands 
''clothed in its own power." This refers probably to 
the stripping off of the "carapace of selfhood," the 
garments woven by its vices, and the putting on ot 
the " wedding garment " of its virtues. 

This state of existence is called the Eighth,^ a state 
of comparative *' sameness " as transcending the zones 
of " difference." It is the Ogdoad of the Gnostics, the 
Jerusalem Above, the plane of the Ego in its own form, 
the natural state of " those-that-are." 

In another sense it may perhaps mean that the man, 
after passing through the phases of the lower mind, 
now enters within into the region of the pure mind, the 
Higher Ego, and there is at-oned with all the experi- 
ences of his past lives that are worthy of immortality, 
his virtuous energizings, — the "those-that-are," that 
perhaps constitute the " crown of mighty lives " sung 
of by the Pythian Oracle when celebrating the death 
of Plotinus.'^ 

In this state the man, who has freed himself from the 
necessity of reincarnation, hears the Song of the Powers 
above the Ogdoad — that is to say, in Gnostic terms, the 

1 Of. Com. on G. H., xiii. (xiv.) 14. 

2 Of. Porphyry, Plotini Vita, xxii., ed. Creiizer (Oxford, 1835) ; 
also Tlieosoph. Rev. (July 1898), p. 403. 



Hosted by Google 



PCEM ANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OP MEN 43 

Hymn of the ^ons of the Pler5ma. Such a man 
would have reached the consummation of his earthly 
pilgrimage, and be ready to pass on into the Christ- 
state, or, at any rate, the state of super-man. He would 
be the Victor who had won the right of investiture 
with the Kobe of Glory, and the dignity of the crown- 
ing with the Kingship of the Heavens. This Final 
Initiation is most beautifully set forth in the opening 
pages of the Pistis Sophia, and especially in the Song 
of the Powers (pp. 17 ff.), beginning with the words: 
" Come unto us, for we are thy fellow-members. We 
are all one with thee." 

The consummation of the mystery is that the 
alter- egos of the Individual Ego, or the sum total of 
purified personalities which in that state constitute 
its membership, or taxis, of their own selves surrender 
themselves to a fullness of union or a transcendency 
of separation, in which they become the powers or 
energies of a New Man, the true Son of Man ; they 
pass into a state where they each blend with all, 
and yet lose nothing of themselves, but rather find 
in this new union the consummation of all their 
powers. In this state of Sonship of the Divine they 
are no longer limited by bodies, nor even by partial 
souls or individual minds ; but, becoming Powers, they 
are not only in God, but one with the Divine Will — 
nay, in final consummation, God Himself. 

27. Of such a nature was the Shepherd ; He, too, was 
the Christ of God, the Son of the Father, who could take 
all forms to carry out the Divine Will. When the 
form, — even though that form might for the disciple 
take on the appearance of the cosmos itself, as he con- 
ceived it, — had served its purpose, the Shepherd once 
more " mingled with the Powers." 



Hosted by Google 



44 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

The Three "Bodies'' of the Buddha 

The Shepherd was a Christ for those who prefer the 
name of Christian Tradition, a Buddha for those who 
are more familiar with Eastern terms. And that this 
is so may be clearly seen by considering the so-called 
''three bodies" (triJcdyam) of a or the Buddha, for 
Buddhahood is a state beyond individuality in the 
separated sense in which we understand the term. 

In the Chinese Version of Ashvaghosha's now lost 
Sanskrit treatise, Maliayana'Shraddhotpadashastra}^ we 
read : 

''It is characteristic of all the Buddhas that they 
consider all sentient beings as their own self, and do not 
cling to their individual forms. How is this ? Because 
they know truthfully that all sentient beings as well 
as their own self come from one and the same Suchness, 
and no distinction can be established among them." 

" All Tathagatas are the Dharmakaya ^ itself, are 
the highest truth (paramdiihasatya) itself, and have 
nothing to do with conditionality (sainvrittisatya) and 
compulsory actions ; whereas the seeing, hearing, etc., of 
the sentient being diversify the Activity^ of Tathagatas. 

" Now this Activity has a twofold aspect. 

" The first depends on the phenomena-particularizing 
consciousness by means of which the Activity is conceived 
by the minds of all who fall short of the state of a 
Bodhisattva in their various degrees. This aspect is 
called the Body of Transformation (Nirmanakaya). 

" But as the beings of this class do not know that the 

^ Ashvaghosha^s Discourse on the Awakening of Faith in the 
Mahay ana. Translated for tlie first time from the Chinese 
Version by Teitaro Suzuki (Chicago, 1900). Mahay ana means 
the " Great Vehicle" of Buddhism. 

2 Lit. Body of the Law. 

3 The italics are mine throughout. 



Hosted by Google 



PCEM ANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 45 

Body of Transformation is merely the shadow [or rejiec- 
tioTi] of their own evolving consciousness, they imagine it 
comes from some external sources, and so they give it a 
corporeal limitation. But the Body of Transformation 
[or what amounts to the same thing, the Dharmakaya] 
has nothing to do with Limitation or measurement." 

That is to say, a Buddha can only communicate with 
such minds by means of a form, that form being really 
that of their own most highly evolved consciousness. 
There are, however, others who have the consciousness 
of the *' formless " state, but have not yet reached the 
Nirvanic Consciousness. These in this system are 
called Bodhisattvas. 

** The second aspect [of the Dharmakaya] depends on 
the activity-consciousness {karmavijndna), by means of 
which the Activity is conceived by the minds of the 
Bodhisattvas while passing from their first aspiration 
(chittotpdda) stage up to the height of Bodhisattva-hood. 
This is called the Body of Bliss (Sambhogakaya) " (pp. 
100, 101). 

We have used the term "formless state" in the 
penultimate paragraph to signify the states of conscious- 
ness in " worlds " called Arupa ; but these are only 
" formless '* for consciousness which has not reached the 
Bodhisattva level — presumably the Buddhic plane of 
Neo-theosophical nomenclature. 

For *'this Body has infinite forms. The form has 
infinite attributes. The Attribute has infinite excel- 
lencies. And the accompanying reward of Bodhisattvas 
— that is, the region where they are predestined to be 
born — also has infinite merits and ornamentations. 
Manifesting itself everywhere, the Body of Bliss is 
infinite, boundless, limitless, unintermittent, directly 
coming forth from the Mind" (p. 101). 

The older Chinese Version says : "It is boundless, 



Hosted by Google 



46 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

cannot be exhausted, is free from the signs of limita- 
tion. Manifesting itself wherever it should manifest 
itself, it always exists by itself and is never destroyed " 
(p. 101, n. 2). 

In other words, one who has reached the Mrvanic 
Consciousness — that is to say, a Master — can teach or 
be active on " planes " that are as yet unmanifest to us 
ordinary folk ; these " planes," however, even when the 
disciple is conscious of them, are conditioned by the 
self-limitation of his own imperfection. The Vehicles 
of this Activity are called Dharmakaya, Sambhogakaya 
and Mrmanakaya ; and the limitation of their Activity 
is determined on the side of the disciple by the degree 
of his ability to function consciously in those states 
which are known in Neo-theosophical nomenclature 
respectively as those of Atman, Buddhi and Higher 
Manas, or, in more general terms, those of the divine, 
spiritual and human aspects of the self. 

In the first degree of conscious discipleship, then, the 
Master communicates with His disciples and teaches 
them by means of the Mrmanakaya ; that is to say. He 
quickens the highest form of consciousness or conception 
of masterhood they have so far attained to — taking the 
form of their greatest love, perhaps, as they have known 
Him in the tiesh, or as He has been told of as existing 
in the flesh, but not His own-form, which would tran- 
scend their consciousness. 

The next stage is when the disciple learns to tran- 
scend his own "egoity," in the ordinary sense of the 
word ; this does not mean to say that his true in- 
dividuality is destroyed, but instead of being tied down 
to one ego-vehicle, he has gained the power of manifest- 
ing himself wherever and however he will, at any 
moment of time; in brief, the power of self-generation 
on the plane of egoity, in that he has reached a higher 

Hosted by Google 



PCEMANBRESj THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 47 

state which is free from the limitations of a single line 
of egoity. 

He now begins to realise in the very nature of his 
being that the " Self is in all and all in the Self." Such 
a disciple, or Bodhisattva, is taught by the Master in this 
state of being, and the Kaya which he supplies for the 
energizing of his beloved Father is perfectly unintelli- 
gible to us, and can only be described as an expanded 
consciousness of utmost sympathy and compassion, which 
not only strives to blend with the Life of all beings, 
but also with the One Being in the world for him, the 
Beloved. Such a sensing of the Master's Presence is 
called the Sambhogakaya of the Master, His Body of 
Bliss. 

There is a still higher Perfection, the Dharmakaya, or 
Own-Nature of Masterhood. But how should the dim 
mind of one who is Without imagine the condition of 
One who is not only Within, but who combines both 
the Without and the Within in the Transcendent Unity 
of the Perfect Fullness ? 



The Preaching of the Gnosis 

27. With the exposition of the Consummation of the 
Teaching and the return to earth of the consciousness 
of the Seer, our treatise breaks off into a graphic 
instruction of how the Gnosis is to be utilized. The 
Wisdom is no man's property ; he who receives it 
holds it in trust for the benefit of the world-folk. 

I am, however, inclined to believe that §§ 27 to 29 
are a later interpolation, and that the treatise originally 
ran straight on after the conclusion of the Shepherd's 
Instruction with the words : *' But I recorded in my 
heart the Shepherd's benefaction " (§ 30). 

Until the end of S 26 we have moved in the 



Hosted by Google 



48 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

atmosphere of an inner intimate personal instruction, 
set forth in a form evidently intended only for the few ; 
indeed, as we find in other treatises emphatic injunctions 
to keep the teaching secret, we cannot but conclude that 
the oldest and most authoritative document of the 
school was guarded with the same secrecy. The general 
impression created by the instruction is not only that 
it itself is the consummation and reward of a strict and 
stern probation, and not a sermon to be preached on 
the house-tops, but also that those who followed that 
way were not propagandists, but rather members of a 
select philosophic community. 

With § 27, however, all is changed ; we are 
introduced to the picture of a man burning with 
enthusiasm to communicate, if not the direct teaching 
itself, at any rate the knowledge of its existence and 
saving power to all without distinction. In a few 
graphic sentences the history of the fortunes of this 
propagandist endeavour is sketched. An appeal is 
made of the most uncompromising nature; it is a 
clarion call to repentance, and we seem to be moving 
in an atmosphere that is Hebrew ratber than Greek, 
prophetical rather than philosophical. 

It would seem almost that this propagandist phase 
had been forced upon the community rather than that 
it was natural to it ; something seems to have occurred 
which obliged it to enter the arena of general life and 
proclaim its existence publicly. What this compulsion 
was we have no means of determining with any 
exactitude, for the historical indications are very 
obscure. If we were to conjecture that it was the 
vigorous preaching of nascent Christianity which 
wrought this change, we should, I think, be taking 
part for whole, for prior to Christianity there was the 
most energetic propaganda made by the Jews, the 



Hosted by Google 



PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 49 

intensity of which may be estimated by the phrase 
" Ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte/* and 
the nature of which may be most clearly seen in the 
propaganda of the Sibylline writers, with whose diction 
the appeals to the " earth-born folk " in our text may 
be aptly compared, while the prayer at sunset may be 
paralleled with the prayers of the Essenes and 
Therapeuts. 

On the other hand, the tradition of the Gnosis and 
Saving Faith preached by our Poemandrists is distinctly 
not Hebrew; it is a philosophizing of other materials 
— materials which, as we have seen, were also partly 
used by Jewish and Christian mystics, and adapted to 
their own special traditions. 

We thus see that at the time when Christianity came 
to birth there were many rival traditions contending 
for general recognition, all of them offering instruction 
in the Gnosis and hopes of Salvation, and I myself 
believe that all of them were partial manifestations of 
the impartial Quickening of the Spiritual Life which 
was at that time more abundantly poured forth than 
ever before or after in the Western world. 

With § 30, if my conjecture of an interpolation is 
correct, the original treatise is continued, and we are 
told the nature of the awakening of the spiritual 
consciousness which has come to the new-born disciple. 

Henceforth all things are new for him, they all 
have new meanings. He has become a man, instead 
of a " procession of fate " ; he has reached the *' Plain of 
Truth." In Christian terms the Christ has been born 
in his heart consciously. 

A Hymn of Praise and Pkayer for the Gnosis 

31. The treatise is concluded with a most noble 
hymn, in which the further growth and effort of the 



VOL. 11. 



Hosted by Google 



50 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

man m spirit is set forth. Henceforth his effort will 
be to become like unto the Father Himself, to pass 
from Sonship into the Perfection of perfection, Identity 
or At-one-ment with the Father. 

The sentence, '' That I may give the Light to those 
in ignorance of the Eace, my Brethren and Thy Sons," 
seems to me to be either an interpolation, showing the 
same tendency as that of the propagandist section, or an 
indication that the whole hymn was added at the same 
time as the propagandist paragraphs, for the treatise 
proper seems to end naturally and consistently in the 
Hellenistic form of the tradition with the words, "I 
reached the Plain of Truth." ^ 

The Name " Poimandres '' 

Many have already remarked that the name *' Poi- 
mandres " is formed irregularly in Greek, and this has 
led to an interesting speculation by Granger, who 
writes : 

"While, however, the name Poimandres does not 
answer to any Greek original, it is a close transliteration 
of a Coptic phrase. In the dialect of Upper Egypt 
p^m^nHre means ' the witness.' That the Coptic 
article [p'^] should be treated as part of the name itself 
is not unusual ; compare the name Pior? Such a title 
corresponds very closely in style with the titles of 
other works of this same period — for example, the True 
Word of Celsus, or the Perfect Word, which is an 
alternative title of the Asclepius, The term Poemandres, 
therefore, on this supposition, contains an allusion to 

^ It is to be noticed that the Hymn is a Song of Holiness. 
*' Holy art thou " is nine times repeated— -most probably in- 
tentionally. This was noticed long ago by Casaubon. See R. 
58, n. 3. 

'^ Palladius, Hist. Laus.. 89. 



Hosted by Google 



PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 51 

the widely spread legend of Hermes as witness,^ a 
legend which is verified for ns from several sources. 
But the writer has adapted the details to his purpose. 
Hermes is not himself the witness, but the herald of 
the witness/'^ 

Granger then propounds the very strange theory, 
contradicted by all the phenomena and opposed to 
every authority, that the Coptic Gnostic works of the 
Askew and Bruce Codices were originally composed in 
Coptic with the adoption of Greek technical terms, 
whereas they are manifestly translations from the Greek. 
He, however, continues : 

"There seems no adequate reason why such works 
may not have been composed in Coptic. The Egyptian 
Gnostic writings of the third century exhibit the 
same qualities of style as the Coptic biographies and 
apocalypses of the fourth and following centuries. 
And so I am prepared to believe that the Foemandres 
may have been first composed in Coptic. Or shall we 
say that the work was current from the first in both 
languages ? " ^ 

We should say that the last guess is most highly 
improbable, and only denotes the indecision of the 
writer. The original "Foemandres'* may very well 
have been composed not in Coptic but in Demotic ; but 
the reasons given by Granger, as based on the pheno- 
mena of the Gnostic Coptic writings, are not to be 
seriously considered. Nevertheless, the name "Poi- 
mandres '' may be a Greek transliteration of an Egyptian 
name, though we hardly think that " The Witness *' 

1 G. has just referred to the story of Hermes being witness for 
Horns when indicted on a charge of bastardy by Typhon, as 
related in Phitarcli. 

2 Granger (F.), "The Poemandres of Hermes Trismegistns," 
/. Th. Stud., vol. v., no. 191, p. 400. 

^ Ibid.,^, 401. 



Hosted by Google 



52 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

will suit the theme. In any case " Man-Shepherd " 
was certainly the idea conveyed to the I^on- Egyptian 
by the name, however philologically unsound its form 
may be in Greek. 

The Goon Shepherd 

It has been no part of our task to attempt to trace 
the Hermes-idea along the line of pure Greek descent, 
for this would have led us too far from our immediate 
subject. There is, however, one element of that tradi- 
tion which is of great interest, and to which we may 
draw the attention of the reader in passing. The 
beautiful idea of the Christ as the " Good Shepherd " 
is familiar to every Christian child. Why the Christ 
is the Shepherd of all men is shown us by this first 
of our marvellous treatises. In it we have the 
universal doctrine apart from any historical dogma, 
the eternal truth of an ever-recurring fact, and not 
the exaggeration of one instance of it. 

The representation of Christ as the Good Shepherd 
was one of the earliest efforts of Christian art; but 
the prototype was far earlier than Christianity— in 
fact, it was exceedingly archaic. Statues of Hermes 
Kriophoros, or Hermes with a ram or lamb standing 
beside him, or in his arms, or on his shoulder, were 
one of the most favourite subjects for the chisel in 
Greece. We have specimens dating to the archaic 
period of Greek art.^ Hermes in these archaic statues 
has a pointed cap, and not the winged head-dress and 
sandals of later art. This type in all probability goes 
back to Chaldsean symbolic art, to the bearers of the 
twelve ** signs of the zodiac," the "sacred animals.'' 
These were, in one human correspondence, the twelve 

^ See Rosclier's Lexikon^ art. " Hermes." " Hermes in der 
Kimst ''™*' Periode des Archaismus." 



Hosted by Google 



POEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 53 

septs or classes of priests. Here we see that the Greek 
tradition itself was not pure Aryan even in its so- 
called archaic period. Chaldaea had given of her 
wisdom to post-diluvian Greece, even as she had 
perchance been in relation with Greece before the 
" flood." Here, then, we have another element in the 
Hermes-idea. In fact, nowhere do we find a pure line 
of tradition ; in every religion there are blendings and 
have been blendings. There was unconscious syncretism 
(and conscious also) long before the days of Alexandria, 
for unconscious syncretism is as old as race-blendings. 
Even as all men are kin, so are popular cults related; and 
even as the religion of nobler souls is of one paternity, 
so are the theosophies of all religions from one source. 

One of the greatest secrets of the innermost initiated 
circles was the grand fact that all the great religions 
had their roots in one mother soil. And it was the 
spreading of the consciousness of this stupendous 
truth which subsequently — after the initial period 
of scepticism of the Alexandrian schools — gave rise to 
the many conscious attempts to synthesise the various 
phases of religion, and make " symphonies " of apparently 
contradictory philosophical tenets. Modern research, 
which is essentially critical and analytical, and rarely 
synthetical, classifies all these attempts under the 
term " syncretism," a word which it invariably uses in 
a depreciatory sense, as characterising the blending of 
absolutely incompatible elements in the most uncritical 
fashion. But when the pendulum swings once more 
towards the side of synthesis, as it must do in the 
coming years — for we are but repeating to-day in 
greater detail what happened in the early centuries — 
then scholarship will once more recognise the unity 
of religion under the diversity of creeds and return 
to the old doctrine of the mysteries. 



Hosted by Google 



54 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

In connection with the ''Good Shepherd '* glyph, 
it will be useful to quote from Granger's instructive 
exposition on the subject,^ where he writes: 

" Since the identification of Jesus with Hermes took 
place in circles which formed part of the Christian 
community,^ we shall not be surprised to find that 
one of the leading types of Christian art, the Good 
Shepherd, was immediately adopted from a current 
representation of the Greek Hermes.^ As we see 
from Hippolytus {Refut., v. 7), the Gnostics were 
especially interested in Hermes as Hermes Logins, a 
type which was increasingly frequent in later Greek 
art. And this epithet was connected by them with 
the conception of Jesus as the Logos, l^ow another 
type of Hermes, the Kriophoros, seemed to bring 
together Jesus as the Logos and Jesus as the Good 
Shepherd. These representations of Jesus begin in 
the second century; and so they correspond in order 
of time with the appearance of the Gospel according to 
the Egyptians^ and of those Gnostic compositions which 
largely depend upon it.* 

''Another fact leads us to think that the figure of 

1 0^. ciL^ pp. 408 ft'. 

2 G. seems here to be referring to the Naassene Document, 
but without any suspicion apparently of its composite character, 

■' See Sittl, Klassische Kunstarchaologie^ 777, 809, 819. 

^ G. here again refers apparently to the Naassene Docu- 
ments, which, however, did not depend on the Gospel according 
to the Egyptians^ as we have shown ; nor have we any sure 
ground for dating this widespread mystic gospel of Egypt as 
being of the second century rather than of the first. G. (j). 411) 
suggests that the scene of the Gospel of the Egijptians was on top 
of the Mount of Olives after the resurrection, which may very 
well be the case, and that the title of G. if., xiii. (xiv.), 
"The Secret Sermon on the Mountain," has reference to this 
gospel, which is by no means probable, for our sermon keeps 
entirely within its own tradition in its setting. 



Hosted by Google 



PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 55 

the Good Shepherd had its roots in a previous tradition. 
' It is probable that there were no statues before the 
age of Constantino, except the Good Shepherd.' ^ We 
must therefore add Hermes to the list of pagan types 
which were taken over for its own purpose by the 
rising Christian art. 

*' Moreover, we are enabled to advance one step 
further the long-standing controversy as to the portraits 
of Jesus. Since the figure of the Good Shepherd is 
borrowed from Greek sculpture, it cannot be used as 
evidence for the earliest conceptions about the appear- 
ance of Jesus. And so the arguments of Farrar and 
others fall to the ground, in so far as they take the 
presence of this type to show that there was no genuine 
tradition of Christ's appearance.^ 

*' We are now in a position to throw a little further 
light upon the famous inscription of Abercius. The 
inscription speaks of a Shepherd — ' Who f eedeth on the 
plains His flock of sheep, and hath great eyes that gaze 
forth every way. For He did teach me [how to under- 
stand and] scriptures worthy to believe.'^ 

"The Shepherd, whose great eyes look in every 
direction, is no other than Hermes treated as a 
symbol of Christ. And so some of the arguments 
which may be directed against the Christian character 
of this inscription, and to which Harnack> attaches 
an exaggerated weight, are turned aside." 

With all of this may be compared what we have 

1 Lowrie, Christian Art and Archceology, p. 290. 

2 Taken in connection with the above quotation from Lowrie, 
we should say that it disposes of the whole contention. And for 
further corroboration of this view we would refer the reader to 
the Acts of John. 

3 G. gives the Greek text only, omitting the first line, which 
runs : " The disciple of the Pure Shepherd." C/. R. 115. 

4 Gf, Glass. Rev., ix. 297. 



Hosted by Google 



56 THRICE- GREATEST HERMES 

already written in the Prolegomena on " The Popular 
Symbolic Eepresentation of the Shepherd" in the 
chapter on " ' Hermas ' and ' Hermes.' '' 

Compare also the Hymn to Attis in the ISTaassene 
tradition, where he is invoked *' as Pan, as Bacchus, as 
Shepherd of bright stars." This is the macrocosmic 
side of the microcosmic mystery. 

We should also not forget the interesting grouping 
on a Christian lamp ^ and gem,^ which goes back very 
probably to the third century.^ It represents the Christ 
as the Good Shepherd, after the Hermes type, with a 
lamb on his shoulder. Above his head are the Seven 
'Tlanets," the Lords of the Fate, and in addition the 
Sun and Moon on either side, as is frequently the case in 
Mithraic representations. Eound his feet seven lambs ^ 
crowd, symbolical of the *' seven peoples," one under 
each " planet." Moreover, on the right is Noah's dove 
and ark, and Jonah being swallowed by the whale, 
while on the left is Jonah again, vomited on to the 
land and peacefully resting beneath the shade of the 
miraculous gourd-tree. 

This seems to me to be a symbol of the mysteries, 
a glyph of rebirth. The lambs are the purified lower 
nature of the man, the purest essence of which is 
exalted to the head of the Great Man. This purified 
''little man" is swallowed by the Cosmic Fish, the 
Great Mother, the Womb of the Almighty, and the 
man is born again to rest under his own tree in the 
Paradise of the Further Shore. 

It is also of interest to note that the Hermetic 
colonies already planted in Mesopotamia, in the earliest 

' Garucci, Storia delta Arte christianay vi. tav. 474 ; Perret, 
Catacomhes de Rome^ tab. 1*7, no. 5. 
" Ferret, ibid., tab. 16, no. 80 
•^ R. 113. The gem has only six. 



Hosted by Google 



PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 57 

Islamic times of which the Arabian writers tell us, 
called their head the '' Shepherd." ^ 

From all of which we conclude that the Good 
Shepherd was one of the leading ideas of Hellenistic 
theology. 

^ Cf. Chwolsohn (D.), Die Ssabier und der SsahismuSy ii. 628. 
Of, R. 166 ff. 



Hosted by Google 



COEPUS HEEMETICUM (II.) 



THE GENERAL SERMON 

(The title only is preserved in our Corpus, the 
text having disappeared with the loss of a quire 
or quires before the parent copy came into the 
hands of Psellus.) 



* 


* 


* 


* 


*- 


* 


* 


7JC 


* 


*- 


* 


* 


* 


* 


* 


* 


* 


* 


* 


* 


■«■ 


-*• 


* 


*- 


* 


* 


* 


* 


*- 


* 


* 


■K- 


*- 


* 


-Jti 



58 



Hosted by Google 



CORPUS HERMETICUM II. (III.) 



TO ASCLEPIUS 

(Text: P. 19-30; Pat. 18b-20.) 

***** 

1. Hermes} All that is moved, Asclepius, is 
it not moved in something and hy something ? 

Asclepius. Assuredly. 

Her, And must not that in which it's moved 
be greater than the moved ? 

Asc, It must. 

Her, Mover, again, has greater power than 
moved ? 

Asc, It has, of course. 

Her, The nature, furthermore, of that in 
which it's moved must be quite other from the 
nature of the moved ? 

Asc. It must completely. 

2. Her, Is not, again, this cosmos vast, [so 
vast] that than it there exists no body greater ? 

1 From here tiU the end of § 4 is quoted by Stobaeus, Phys.^ 
xviii. 2 ; G. pp. 147-149 ; W. 157, 6 fF. 

59 



Hosted by Google 



60 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

Asc, Assuredly. 

Her. And massive too, for it is crammed with 
multitudes of other mighty frames, nay rather 
all the other bodies that there are ? 

Asc. It is. 

Her, And yet the cosmos is a body ? 

Asc. It is a body. 

Her. And one that's moved ? 

3. Asc. Assuredly. 

Her. Of what size, then, must be the space 
in which it's moved ; and of what kind [must 
be] the nature [of that space] ? Must it not 
be far vaster [than the cosmos], in order that 
it may be able to find room for its continued 
course, so that the moved may not be cramped 
for want of room and lose its motion ? 

Asc. Something, Thrice-greatest one, it needs 
must be, immensely vast. 

4, Her. And of what nature? Must it not 
be, Asclepius, of just the contrary? And is not 
contrary to body bodiless ? 

Asc. Agreed. 

Her. Space, then, is bodiless. But bodi- 
less must either be some godlike thing or God 
[Himself]. And by '* some godlike thing " I 
mean no more the generable but the ingener- 
able.^ 

^ That is, beyond genesis, the universe of becoming, or the 
fciensible universe. 

Hosted by Google 



TO ASCLEPIUS 61 

5. If, then, space be some godlike thing, it is 
substantial ^ ; but if *tis God [Himself], it tran- 
scends substance. But it is to be thought of 
otherwise [than God], and in this way. 

God is first "thinkable"^ for us, not for 
Himself, for that the thing that's thought doth 
fall beneath the thinker s sense. God then can 
not be '* thinkable" unto Himself, in that He's 
thought of by Himself as being nothing else 
than what He thinks. But He is ''something 
else " for us, and so He's thought of by us. 

6. If space is, therefore, to be thought, [it 
should] not, [then, be thought as] God, but 
space. If God is also to be thought, [He should] 
not [be conceived] as space, but energy that can 
contain [all space]. 

Further,^ all that is moved is moved not in 
the moved but in the stable. And that which 
moves [another] is of course stationary, for 'tis 
impossible that it should move with it. 

Asc, How is it, then, that things down here, 
Thrice-greatest one, are moved with those that 
are [already] moved ? For thou hast said * the 
errant spheres were moved by the inerrant one. 

Her, This is not, Asclepius, a moving 
with, but one against; they are not moved with 

^ ova-to^es. 2 Qr inteUigible. 

' From here till the end of § 9 (exclusive of the last sentence) is 
quoted by Stobaeus, Phys., xix. 2 ; G. pp, 154-157 ; W. 163, 14 ff. 
* Sc, in some previous sermon. 

Hosted by Google 



62 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

one another, but one against the other. It is 
this contrariety which turneth the resistance of 
their motion into rest. For that resistance is 
the rest of motion. 

7. Hence, too, the errant spheres, being moved 
contrarily to the inerrant one, are moved by one 
another by mutual contrariety, [and also] by the 
stable one through contrariety itself. And this 
can otherwise not be. 

The Bears ^ up there, which neither set nor 
rise, think^st thou they rest or move ? 

Asc, They move. Thrice-greatest one. 

Her, And what their motion, my Asclepius ? 

Asc. Motion that turns for ever round the 
same. 

Her. But revolution — motion round same — 
is fixed by rest. For '' round-the-same" doth 
stop '' beyond-same." '' Beyond-same '' then, 
being stopped, if it be steadied in "round-same" 
— the contrary stands firm, being rendered ever 
stable by its contrariety. 

8. Of this ril give thee here on earth an 
instance, which the eye can see. Eegard the 
animals down here, — a man, for instance, 
swimming ! The water moves, yet the resist- 
ance of his hands and feet give him stability, 
so that he is not borne along with it, nor sunk 
thereby. 

^ Sc. Ursa Major and Ursa Minor. 

Hosted by Google 



TO ASCLEPIUS 63 

Asc. Thou hast, Thrice-greatest one, adduced 
a most clear instance. 

Her. All motion, then, is caused in station 
and by station. 

The motion, therefore, of the cosmos (and of 
every other hylic animal^) will not be caused 
by things exterior to the cosmos, but by things 
interior [outward] to the exterior — such [things] 
as soul, or spirit, or some such other thing 
in corporal. 

'Tis not its body that doth move the living 
thing in it ; nay, not even the whole [body of 
the universe a lesser] body e'en though there 
be no life in it.^ 

9. Asc, What meanest thou by this, Thrice- 
greatest one ? Is it not bodies, then, that 
move the stock and stone and all the other 
things inanimate ? 

Her. By no means, Asclepius. The some- 
thing-in-the-body, the that-which-moves the 
thing inanimate, this surely's not a body, for 
that it moves the two of them — both body of 
the lifter and the lifted ? So that a thing that*s 
lifeless will not move a lifeless thing. That 
which doth move [another thing] is animate, in 
that it is the mover. 

Thou seest, then, how heavy laden is the soul, 

^ That is, living material organism. 
2 That is, in the lesser body. 

Hosted by Google 



64 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

for it alone doth lift two bodies. That things, 
moreover, moved are moved in something as well 
as moved by something is clear. 

10. Asc, Yea,^ Thrice-greatest one, things 
moved must needs be moved in something void.^ 

Her, Thou sayest well, [my] Asclepius ! ^ 
For naught of things that are is void. Alone the 
' * is-not " 's void [and] stranger to subsistence. For 
that which is subsistent can never change to void.* 

Asc, Are there, then, Thrice-greatest one, 
no such things as an empty cask, for instance, 
and an empty jar, a cup and vat, and other 
things like unto them ? 

Her. Alack, Asclepius, for thy far-wandering 
from the truth ! Think'st thou that things 
most full and most replete are void ? 

11. Asc, How meanest thou. Thrice-greatest 
one ? 

Her, Is not air body ? 
Asc, It is. 

1 For a criticism of Partheys text of the following three 
paragraphs, see R., pp. 209, 300. Parthey had uncritically 
conflated the text of our Corpus and the readings of Stobaeus, in 
ignorance that he had before him two different recensions of the 
same text, I follow Reitzenstein. 

2 Cf. P. S. A,, xxxiii. 1. 

^ From here to the end of § 12 is quoted by Stobseus, P%s., 
xviii. 3 ; G. pp. 149-150 ; W. 158, 13 ff. 

* The variant in Stobaeus reads : " No single thing of things 

that are is void by reason of the [very nature of] subsistence. 

The 4s' could not be *is' were it not full of subsistence 

[itself]." The rest of the variants need not be noted in 

ranslation. 

Hosted by Google 



TO ASCLEPIUS 65 

Her. And doth this body not pervade all 
things, and so, pervading, fill them? And 
** body " ; doth body not consist from blending 
of the *'four"? Full, then, of air are all thou 
call est void ; and if of air, then of the '* four." ^ 

Further, of this the converse follows, that all 
thou callest full are void — of air ; for that they 
have their space filled out with other bodies, and, 
therefore, are not able to receive the air therein. 
These, then, which thou dost say are void, they 
should be hollow named, not void ; for they not 
only are, but they are full of air and spirit. 

12. Asc, Thy argument (Zog'o^), Thrice-greatest 
one, is not to be gainsaid ; air is a body. 
Further, it is this body which doth pervade all 
things, and so, pervading, fill them. What are 
we, then, to call that space in which the all doth 
move? 

Her. The Bodiless, Asclepius. 

Asc, What, then, is Bodiless ? 

Her. 'Tis Mind and Reason {Logos), whole 
out of whole, all self-embracing, free from all 
body, from all error free, unsensible to body and 
untouchable, self stayed in self, containing all, 
preserving those that are, whose rays, to use a 

1 The physical elements — earth, air, water and fire — were 
supposed to be severally combinations of the Primal Elements, 
Earth, Air, Water and Fire, one Element dominating in each. 
Thns our air would consist of a proportion of all four Great Ele- 
ments, but would have Air predominant in it ; and so for the rest. 

VOL. II. 5 

Hosted by Google 



66 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

likeness, are Good, Truths Light beyond light, 
the Archetype of soul. 

Asc. What, then, is God ? 

1 3. jHer. Not any one of these is He ; for He 
it is that causeth them to be, both all and each 
and every thing of all that are. Nor hath He 
left a thing beside that is-not ; but they are all 
from things-that-are and not from things-that- 
are-not. For that the things-that-are-not have 
naturally no power of being anything, but rather 
have the nature of the inability-to-be. And, 
conversely, the things-that-are have not the 
nature of some time not-being. 

14. Asc, What say'st thou ever, then, God is ? 
Her, God, therefore, is not Mind, but Cause 

that the Mind is ; God is not Spirit, but Cause 
that Spirit is ; God is not Light, but Cause that 
the Light is. Hence should one honour God with 
these two names [the Good and Father] — names 
which pertain to Him alone and no one else. 

For no one of the other so-called gods, no one 
of men, or daimones, can be in any measure 
Good, but God alone ; and He is Good alone 
and nothing else. The rest of things are 
separable all from the Good's nature ; for [all 
the rest] are soul and body, which, have no space 
that can contain ^ the Good. 

1 In the original tliere is a word-play — x^P'o-'^^^ (separable) and 
XO}pr}(rai (contain) — which is impossible to reproduce in translation. 

Hosted by Google 



TO ASCLEPIUS 67 

15. For that as miglity is the Greatness of the 
Good as is the Being of all things that are — 
both bodies and things bodiless, things sensible 
and intelligible things. Call not thou, therefore, 
aught else Good, for thou would'st impious be ; 
nor anything at all at any time call God but 
Good alone, for so thou would'st again be 
impious. 

16. Though, then, the Good is spoken of by 
all, it is not understood by all, what thing it is. 
Not only, then, is God not understood by all, 
but both unto the gods and some of men they 
out of ignorance do give the name of Good, 
though they can never either be or become 
Good. For they are very different from God, 
while Good can never be distinguished from 
Him, for that God is the same as Good. 

The rest of the immortal ones are natheless 
honoured with the name of God, and spoken of 
as gods ; but God is Good not out of courtesy 
but out of nature. For that God's nature and 
the Good is one ; one is the kind of both, from 
which all other kinds [proceed]. 

The Good is He who gives all things and 
naught receives.^ God, then, doth give all 
things and receive naught. God, then, is Good, 
and Good is God. 

17. The other name of God is Father, again 

1 Of. G. H., X. (xi.) 3 : 'Tis " He alone who taketh naught." 

Hosted by Google 



68 THRICE- GREATEST HERMES 

because He is the that-which-maketh all The 
part of father is to make. 

Wherefore child-making is a very great and a 
most pious thing in life for them who think 
aright, and to leave life on earth without a child 
a very great misfortune and impiety ; and he 
who hath no child is punished by the daimons 
after death. 

And this the punishment : that that man^s 
soul who hath no child, shall be condemned unto 
a body with neither man^s nor woman's nature^ 
a thing accurst benea-th the sun. 

Wherefore, Asclepius, let not your sympathies 
be with the man who hath no child, but rather 
pity his mishap, knowing what punishment 
abides for him. 

Let all that has been said, then, be to thee, 
Asclepius, an introduction to the gnosis of the 
nature of all things. 



COMMENTAKY 

*'An Introduction to the Gnosis of the Nature 
OF ALL Things" 

This treatise has no precise title, for, as we have 
already seen in treating of the make-up of the Corpus, 
the traditional title, " Of Hermes to Tat, the General 
Sermon," found in all the MSS., cannot apply to our 



Hosted by Google 



TO ASCLEPIUS 69 

tractate, which is addressed to Asclepius, and from 
which Stobseus quotes under the general title, "Of 
Hermes, from the [Sermons] to Asclepius." 

The supposition, however, that Sermon (II.) has 
dropped out from the parent copy of our Corpus, owing 
to the loss of one or more quires or quaternions, explains 
those phenomena so admirably, that it has only to be 
brought forward, as it has been by Keitzenstein, to 
carry conviction. 

It is a curious fact, however, that Stobseus starts 
his quotations from this treatise precisely with the 
same words with which our text begins ; nevertheless 
these words plunge us so immediately into a secondary 
subject, that Eeitzenstein thinks there may have been 
a more general introduction which Johannes may very 
well have omitted. 

That, however, the lost pages of our Corpus should 
have contained such an introduction, broken at precisely 
the very same point to a word, would seem to be a 
coincidence the reverse of probable ; nevertheless the 
treatise itself purports to be a very formal one, for 
we learn from the concluding words (§ 17) that it 
was intended to be **An Introduction to the Gnosis 
{TTpoyvcocrla) of the Nature of All Things." 

We are, therefore, driven to conclude that, in spite 
of a most improbable coincidence, the beginning may 
have been lost, and that we have therefore to regret the 
loss not only of the whole of the '' General Sermon " to 
Tat, but also of the introduction to the '* Introduction 
to the Gnosis " addressed to Asclepius, and therewith, in 
all probability, some precious indications of how *' Tat " 
and " Asclepius " are to be precisely defined. 

Parthey's conflated title (p. 19) from the MSS., and 
Stobseus, " Of Hermes the Thrice-greatest, the General 
Sermon to Asclepius," must therefore be definitely 



Hosted by Google 



70 THRICE-GK,EATEST HERMES 

abandoned, and, in lieu of the lost general title, we 
must be content with the simple heading, ''To 
Asclepius." 

Space is a Plenum 

The subject is that of the Fullness of Being or the 
Plenum of things. Space is a Plenum,— -the funda- 
mental concept of modern scientijfic speculation. 

Asclepius, however, must guard himself against the 
confusion of Space with God ; for God is not Space, 
but Cause thereof, — the True Transcendency of '* that 
which can contain all things" (§ 6). 

'' In Him we move. " '' All that is moved is moved 
in what is stable," or ''in Him who stands" (ep eorrwrt) ; 
where it is to be noticed that the term, " He who 
stands," is found in Philo, and is made much of in 
Gnostic tradition, especially in the so-called Simonian 
Gnosis, for in The Great Announcement, from which 
Hippolytus has preserved some passages, the Logos is 
called "He who stands" or "Pie who has stood, 
stands and will stand," ^ This is the aspect of the 
Keason of things that holds and compacts all together, 
the Stock or Pillar of Immobility, the opposite aspect 
being that of the Separator or Divider ; the two 
together forming the Cross of Manifestation, the 
resolution of the Sphere of Sameness. 

The World-Soul is in perpetual motion ; this per- 
petual motion is ordered and reduced to a cosmos and 
harmony of motion by the introduction into it, by 
means of the Eeason, of the root-forms of motion 
(mentioned in the Timceus and elsewhere) ; — up, down ; 
right, left; front, back; in, out; round, — and no-motion. 

All bodies are essentially inert ; it is the soul that 
moves them, either immediately or mediately (§ 9). 
1 R., p. 305, also makes a brief reference to this. 



Hosted by Google 



TO ASCLEPIUS 71 

What the precise meaning of § 10 may be I cannot 
say; the tradition of the original text was variable, 
showing that the copyists had difficulty with it. As, 
however, the doctrine throughout is that of a Plenum 
(as, indeed, it is elsewhere in the Trismegistic writings), 
I can only suppose that the instructor of " Asclepius " 
was endeavouring to clinch his point by arguing that the 
only Void was the " is-not " or non-being ; now as non- 
being cannot possibly ''exist," there can he no such 
thing as Void. 

The Spouse of Deity 

That, then, in which " the All doth move," in which 
all things "live and move and have their being," is 
the Bodiless; in other words, the Mind or Eeason of 
God, the Logos, — who, as Philo tells us, is the Place of 
God, — that is, Infinite Space itself, the Container of all 
things, the very Spouse of Deity. Spouse or Son, it 
matters not; that in which all moves and lives and 
breathes is Wisdom, Good and Truth, the ^on of seons, 
Light of light. Life of life, the Archetype of Soul 
itself (§ 12). 

God is Cause that Spirit is 

**God, then, is not Spirit," ^ much less *'a spirit," ^ 
" but Cause that Spirit is " ; for God is " Good alone." 
Therefore : '' Call not thou aught else Good." 

And now let us turn to F. C. Conybeare's important 
criticism of Matt. xix. 17 = Mk. x. 18 = Lk. xviii. 19, 
in the first number of The Hilibert Journal^ where he 

1 Gf. Joh. iv. 24 : "iryeO^a b 0€(^s." 

2 As the A V. has it erroneously. 

3 See his article, " Three Early Doctrinal Modifications of the 
Text of the Gospels," in The Hibhert Journal (Oct. 1902), pp. 98- 
113. J. R. Wilkinson's few remarks (FT. J"., Ap. 1903, pp. 575, 



Hosted by Google 



72 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

brings forward very strong evidence that the original 
reading was: ''Gall thou me not Good; One only is 
Good, God the Father," — a reading known to Marcion, 
the Clementine HomilieSy Athanasius, Didymus, Tatian, 
and Origen (the two last inferentialiy). 

If we compare this with our text, " Call not thou, 
therefore, aught else Good, for thou would'st impious be ; 
nor any thing at all at any time call Good but God alone," 
and " He is Good alone and nothing else," — we cannot 
fail to be struck with the precise similarity of the 
phrasing and blend of ideas. 

If, further, we take this in connection with the still 
more striking contrast, "God is not Spirit," with the 
Johannine "God is Spirit," we might at first sight 
almost persuade ourselves that our treatise had these 
Christian declarations immediately in mind. But the 
general phenomena of similarity of diction and idea of 
the Trismegistic literature with those of the JSTew Testa- 
ment documents is so much more satisfactorily explained 
by the fact that both literatures use mainly the common 
Hellenistic theological phrases of the time, that we need 
not distress ourselves with any suggestions either of 
plagiarism or of direct controversy. 

Doubtless the declaration, " God is Spirit," was a 
commonplace among the religio -philosophical circles of 
the time, and Hermes is here simply refining on a 
common idea. The reading, '' Call thou not me Good,'' 
which appears to have been preserved mainly in Gnostic 
tradition, may also as easily have come from a similar 
general idea that the One and Only One was Good alone. 

It is, moreover, of special interest to notice that the 
second clause of the Marcionite reading runs : " There 
is one [only] Good, God the Father," while in our 

576) on Conybeare's criticism of this synoptic passage do not seem 
to me to he of any weight. 

Hosted by Google 



TO ASCLEPIUS 73 

treatise the two names of God are given as Good and 
Father; and so we read (§ 16): "God, then, is Good, 
and Good is God "; and immediately after (§ 17) : " The 
other name of God is Father/' ^ 

Striking, however, as are those coincidences, we are 
nevertheless wholly unpersuaded that there was any 
immediate literary contact between those two sets of 
Scripture. All that can be said is that their literary 
similarities are due to a common theological language 
and their many points of contact in ideas to a generally 
common atmosphere of theological conceptions. 

He Who is Without a Wife is Half a Man 

Again, the doctrine of the duty to beget children (§ 17) 
seems at first sight to be an interpolation by a Jewish 
editor, the Jews holding that "he who is without a 
wife is half a man." We must, however, remember 
that the Egyptian priests were married, and that the 
rule with them, as with the Pythagoreans, was that a 
man should first of all discharge his duty to society and 
live the " practical," " political " or " social " life, before 
retiring into the life of contemplation. He must first 
beget children, not only that the race might be 
continued, but also that bodies might be supplied by 
parents devoted to the ideal of the religious or 
philosophic life, so that advanced souls might find birth 
in favourable conditions, and so the Order be continued. 

This also is the ancient rule laid down by the Manu 
of the Aryan Hindus in the Mdnava Dharma Shdstra. 
The duties of the householder station of life (Grihastha 
ashrama) must first be performed, before the parents 
can retire to the contemplative life (Vanaprastha 

1 Of, the expression, "God, Father and the Good," G. H., x. 
(xi.) 1. 



Hosted by Google 



74 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

ashrama). In special cases, however, exceptions could 
be made. 

It may then be that Asclepius stands for those pupils 
who were still living the married life. 

The scribe of the thirteenth century, Codex B. 
(Parisinus, 1220), has laconically written on the margin 
of this paragraph the single word " nonsense " {<p\vapla) ; 
he was presumably a monk. 



Hosted by Google 



COEPUS HEEMETICUM III. (IV.) 



THE SACRED SERMON 

Of Hermes 

(Text : p. 31-33 ; Pat. 8b-.9.) 

1. The Glory of all things is God, Godhead and 
Godly Nature. Source of the things that are is 
God, who is both Mind and Nature, — yea Matter, 
the Wisdom that reveals all things. Source 
[too] is Godhead, — yea Nature, Energy, Neces- 
sity, and End, and Making-new-again.^ 

Darkness that knew no bounds was in Abyss, 
and Water [too] and subtle Breath intelligent ; 
these were by Power of God in Chaos. 

Then Holy Light arose ; and there collected 
'neath Dry Space ^ from out Moist Essence 

1 Cf. P. S. A., xxvi. 2. 

^ Lit. '* Sand " ; this presumably refers to tbe Light, and would 
thus mean " within the area or sphere of Light " — that is to say, 
manifestation. The " Moist Essence " is apparently the Water of 
Chaos, or primal substance. 

75 



Hosted by Google 



76 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

Elements ; and all the Gods do separate things 
out from fecund Nature. 

2. All things being undefined and yet un~ 
wrought, the light things were assigned unto the 
height, the heavy ones had their foundations laid 
down underneath the moist part of Dry Space/ 
the universal things being bounded off by Fire 
and hanged in Breath to keep them up. 

And ^ Heaven was seen in seven circles ; its 
Gods were visible in forms of stars with all their 
signs ; while Nature had her members made 
articulate together with the Gods in her. And 
[Heaven's] periphery revolved in cyclic course, 
borne on by Breath of God. 

3. And every God by his own proper power 
brought forth what was appointed him. Thus 
there arose four-footed beasts, and creeping things, 
and those that in the water dwell, and things 
with wings, and everything that beareth seed, 
and grass, and shoot of every flower, all having 
in themselves seed of again-becoming.^ 

And they selected out * the births ^ of men for 
gnosis of the works of God and attestation of the 
energy of Nature ; the multitude of men for 

1 iy0' vyp§ &A*i^^; presumably the "Water'' of space. The 
heavy things are apparently primaeval or cosmic " Earth." 

2 The emended text from here to the end of the first sentence 
of § 3 is given by R. 47, n. 1. 

3 Or " reincarnation " {iraKiyyiv^a-ias). 

^ iariTip/jLoXSyovif. " r^s yiyearfis. 

Hosted by Google 



THE SACRED SERMON 77 

lordship over all beneath the Heaven and gnosis 
of its blessings, that they might increase in 
increasing and multiply in multitude, and every 
soul infleshed by revolution of the Cyclic Gods, 
for observation of the marvels of the Heaven 
and Heaven's Gods' revolution, and of the works 
of God and energy of Nature, for tokens of its 
blessings, for gnosis of the power of God, that 
they might know the fates that follow good and 
evil [deeds] and learn the cunning work of all 
good arts. 

4. [Thus] there begins their living and their 
growing wise, according to the fate appointed by 
the revolution of the Cyclic Gods, and their 
deceasing for this end. 

And there shall be memorials mighty of their 
handiworks upon the earth, leaving dim trace 
behind when cycles are renewed. 

For every birth of flesh ensouled, and of the 
fruit of seed, and every handiwork, though it 
decay, shall of necessity renew itself, both by the 
renovation of the Gods and by the turning-round 
of Nature's rhythmic wheel. 

For that whereas the Godhead is Nature's ever- 
making-new-again the cosmic mixture, Nature 
herself is also co-established in that Godhead. 



Hosted by Google 



78 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

COMMENTAEY 

Text and Title 

The text seems to be very corrupt, and at one time I 
thought it incomplete ; but it may very well end with 
the reference to the mighty deeds of the men of old. 

The title " Sacred Sermon " would lead us to expect 
something of a special nature, something that would 
constitute a basis of doctrine. For we hear of the 
'' Sacred Sermon " of Orpheus, and of the " Sacred 
Sermon " of Pythagoras, and are told that they formed 
the most sacred deposits of these two mystic schools 
respectively, and were regarded with special reverence ; 
they thus seem to have been looked upon in some 
fashion as containing the groundwork of these systems. 

And this is precisely what we find with our treatise ; 
it is to a large extent a summary of the general ideas 
of the *' Shepherd '' cosmogony adapted to the needs of 
a simpler formularization. 

When, however, Eeitzenstein (p. 193) refers to this 
treatise cursorily as the preaching of some prophet or 
other which has been transferred to Hermes by the 
Eedactor of our Corpus, he suggests that we are dealing 
with a doctrine foreign to the cosmogonical ideas of 
the " Shepherd." It is, indeed, true that if we compare 
the data of the two treatises together, detail by detail, 
we shall find strong contradictions ; but the general 
" feel " of both is the same, the general atmosphere is 
identical. 

The Trinity 

Prefixed to the cosmogenesis is a formal theological 
procem, the precise meaning of which escapes me 
because of its almost mnemonic nature ; it is, indeed 



Hosted by Google 



THE SACRED SERMON 79 

quite in sutra style. There appears, however, to be a 
distinct trinitarian ^ idea lurking in the first sentence, 
the trinity consisting of God (o Geo?) and Godhead 
(to Oeiov) and Nature {rj ^vcrigy The Glory or Power 
of all things is this Divine Trinity. The Source (or 
Beginning), the End and the Ever-renewing of all things 
are owing to this Triad. All three seem to be almost 
interchangeable terms. The Godhead is the Mind of 
God, Godly Nature is the Wisdom of God. Again, at 
the end of the sermon (§ 4) we are told that the God- 
head (or that which is Divine) is '' Nature's ever-making- 
new-again the cosmic mixture." Godhead in operation is 
Nature, while at the same time Nature is co-established 
in Godhead, and both are one in God, the Source of all. 

The cosmogenesis begins with the grandiose image : 
" Darkness that knew no bounds was in Abyss." 

We have already, in commenting on " Darkness " in 
the '' Poemandres " treatise, referred, in explanation, 
to a Gnostic tradition in which the Primal Elements 
appear as Water, Darkness, Abyss, and Chaos, and have 
given some reason for ascribing the form of this tradition 
to Egypt — that is, Archaic Egypt, a parallel tradition 
to the Sumerian, both derived from a still more Archaic 
source. 

From the System of the Nicolaitans 

If, now, we turn to Epiphanius (remembering that he 
picked up what he knew or thought he knew about the 
Gnostics in Egypt), we shall find that he has preserved 
from another Gnostic system an even more striking 
parallel with our text. 

The Bishop of Salauiis is denouncing the Nicolaitans,^ 
who for him were the earliest Christian Gnostics, there 

1 Not, of course, in a technical Christian sense, 
^ Adv. Hmr.y xxv. 1-5, 



Hosted by Google 



80 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

being very numerous and various sects of them, all 
deriving from a certain Mcolaus, whom Epiphanius 
would have us believe to have been one of the first 
seven deacons of the Church. 

If, in reality, however, the Nicola'itans = the Balaam- 
ites of early Talmudic Rabbinism,^ then the original 
Mcolaitans were the earliest Christians, for " Balaam- 
ites" was the Eabbinical by-name of the followers of 
Balaam (Bileam) = Jeschu, and Balaam = Nicolaos, in 
Hebrew and Greek respectively. 

Curiously enough, moreover, in the paragraph (§ 4) 
before the one from which we are going to quote, 
Epiphanius ascribes the use of the mystic words, 
''Kaulakau Kaulakau," to the Mcolaitans, words 
which we have, with high probability, shown in the 
chapter '' Myth of Man in the Mysteries" (§ 16 J., end) 
to have been used by a Jewish Gnostic of the time of 
Philo, writing in an Egyptian environment, and dealing 
with the Man-tradition, which is one of the main 
elements of the " Poemandres " doctrine. All of which 
carries us back to the dawn of Christianity. 

Speaking, then, of these Mcolaitans, Epiphanius 
writes (xxv. 6) : 

" Others of them, again, plaster together empty names, 
saying: There was Darkness and Abyss (^vdog) and 
Water ; and Spirit in the midst of them made separa- 
tion of them." ^ 

Here we have precisely the same elements as in our 
text for the foundation of a cosmogonical representation. 
What precise relationship these various traditions may 
have had to one another we cannot say with any 
certainty ; but what we can say is that the writer or 

1 See D, J. L., p. 188, where this identification is worked out 
with some probability. 

-' Ed. Dindorf (Leipzig, 1859), ii. 35, 36. 



Hosted by Google 



THE SACRED SERMON 81 

writers of our treatise are dealing with a material 
common to themselves, to pre - Christian Jewish 
Gnosticism and the earliest forms of the Christian 
Gnosis. 

The "Books of the Chald^eans" 

The sentence (in § 2), " All things being undefined 
and yet un wrought (aKaraarKevda-rcov)'' is also to be 
noticed, and, together with the opening sentence of 
the cosmogony, compared with the LXX. version of 
Gen. i. 2 : 

'* And the earth was invisible and as yet un wrought 
(aKarao-KevacTTOff), and Darkness was upon the Abyss, 
and the Spirit of God was borne upon the Water." 

Are we, then, to suppose that our Trismegistic writer 
based himself directly upon this famous *' oracle" of 
Jewish Scripture ? 

The Jewish Gnostics would doubtless do so in their 
commentaries ; but the phenomena of the Christianized 
Jewish Gnostic systems persuade us rather that these 
Gnostic Jews did not derive their ideas directly from 
the text of their national Scripture, but from what we 
may call parallel traditions of an esoteric nature. We 
shall see later on, when treating of Zosimus, that there 
were translations of the Chaldaean sacred books in the 
Alexandrian Library, and we cannot but believe that 
the general ideas of Chaldaean cosmogony were familiar 
to all the learned of the time. For Chaldsea and Egypt 
were regarded as the two most wisdom-loving nations 
of antiquity, the two most sacred lands. What wonder, 
then, that Chaldaean and Egyptian ideas should be 
blended together, and turned out into a "scientific" 
whole, by the spirit of Greek " philosophizing," in our 
treatises ? 

I would therefore conclude that both here, and in 

VOL. II. 6 



Hosted by Google 



82 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

the repetition of the formula, "increase in increasing 
and multiply in multitude" (§ 3), from the 'Toemandres '' 
treatise (| 18), the similarities are not due to direct 
plagiarism, but to the fact that such logoi were " in the 
air." 1 would also suggest that the somewhat peculiar 
term a/caracr/ceiJacrTo? was not original with the Greek 
Targum of Genesis, first made at Alexandria some 
250 years B.C., but that it was rather taken from the 
theological and philosophical language of the day and 
used by the Hebrew translators ; that, in brief, in the 
LXX. translation already we have to take into account 
the strong influence of the technology of Hellenistic 
theology. 

With regard to the whole of our treatise, I would 
suggest that we have the heads of topics which were 
to be subsequently explained and commented upon, 
rather than a didactic treatise setting forth a clear 
teaching. Like the proem, the cosmogenesis itself is 
straitly condensed, so condensed that the indications 
are too vague for us to form any clear mental picture 
of the process that is suggested. We have nothing but 
a series of headings that may have meant something 
very definite to the writer— may, in fact, have summed 
up for him a whole body of doctrine — but which for us, 
in our ignorance of detail, can have but little precise 
meaning. 

To add to our difficulties, the text, as we have already 
said, appears to be very faulty. It is very probable 
that owing to its original brevity, copyists and readers 
would be tempted to gloss it in the interests of 
what would appear to them greater clearness; these 
glosses creeping into the text later on would, since 
the gloss-makers did not know the original scheme, 
blurr rather than elucidate the mother-text— and hence 
our tears. 



Hosted by Google 



THE SACRED SERMON 83 

The most striking doctrine in the exposition is that 
of Eenewal or Making-new-again {avaveoiarLg). All 
animal and vegetable forms contain in themselves *' the 
seed of again-becoming " {to cnrepfxa rri^ iraXiyyevecrla^). 
I do not think that this is intended simply to mean 
that the individual is continued in the species ; for we 
read that " every birth of flesh ensouled . . . shall of 
necessity renew itself {avaveinQYiarerai)" The doctrine 
that is preached is, therefore, that of palingenesis or 
" re-incarnation " ; the renewal on the karmic wheel of 
birth-and-death ((pva-ewg kvkXov evapiOjuLiov Spoixruxa). 

The " Flood '' 

The last point to which we need call the reader's 
attention is the sentence: "And there shall be 
memorials mighty of their handiworks upon the 
earth, leaving dim trace behind when cycles are 
renewed." 

The thought of the writer is evidently turned back 
towards the past, to a time when a mighty race, devoted 
to growth in wisdom, lived on earth and left great 
monuments of their wisdom in the work of their hands, 
dim traces of which were to be seen " in the renewal of 
the times." This seems to me to be a clear reference 
to the general belief of the time (commonly, though 
erroneously, called Stoic) that there were alternate 
periods of destruction, by fire and water, and of renewal. 
In Egypt the common belief, as we have pointed out 
elsewhere, was that the last destruction had been by 
water and flood. Before this Flood our author believed 
there had been a mighty race of Egyptians, the race of 
the First Hermes, and that some dim traces of the 
mighty works of this bygone wisdom-loving civilization 
were still to be seen. 



Hosted by Google 



84 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

I am, myself, strongly inclined to believe in this 
tradition ; and I have sometimes speculated as to the 
possibility of there being buried beneath one or more 
of the pyramids the remains of some prehistoric build- 
ings (perhaps also of pyramid-shape) that have survived 
the " Flood." 



Hosted by Google 



CORPUS HEEMETTCUM IV. (V.) 



THE CUP OR MONAD 

Of Hermes to Tat 

(Text : P. 34-40 ; Pat. 26b-27.) 

1. Hermes. With Eeason (Logos), not with 
hands, did the World-maker ^ make the universal 
World ^ ; so that thou thus shouldst think of Him 
as everywhere and ever-being, the Author of all 
things, and One and Only, who by His Will ^ all 
beings hath created. 

This Body of Him is a thing no man can 
touch, or see, or measure, a Body inextensible, 
like to no other frame. 'Tis neither Fire nor 
Water, Air nor Breath*; yet all of them come 
from it.'^ Now being Good He willed to conse- 
crate this [Body] to Himself alone, and set its 
Earth in order and adorn it.^ 

^ 6 Srjfitovpyds. ^ rhy irdpra KOfffxov. 

^ ei\y}(Tis. * Perhaps meaning ^Ether. 

•'» Gf. G. K, xiii. (xiv.) 6. 

^ KotrfjLTjcraij — the whole is a play on the word Kocfxos {kosmos\ 
which means " order," " ornament," and " world." I have tried 

85 



Hosted by Google 



86 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

2. So down [to Earth] He sent the Cosmos ^ 
of this Frame Divine,^ — man, a life that cannot 
die, and yet a life that dies. And o'er [all 
other] lives and over Cosmos [too], did man 
excel by reason of the Reason (Logos) and the 
Mind. For contemplator of God's works did 
man become ; he marvelled and did strive to 
know their Author. 

3. Reason (Logos) indeed, Tat, among all 
men hath He distributed, but Mind not yet ; not 
that He grudgeth any, for grudging cometh not 
from Him,^ but hath its place below, within the 
souls of men who have no Mind. 

Tat. Why then did God, father, not on all 
bestow a share of Mind ? 

He7\ He willed, my son, to have it set up 
in the midst for souls, just as it were a prize. 

4. Tat. And where hath He had it set up ? 
IIe7\^ He filled a mighty Cup^ with it, and 

sent it down, joining a Herald [to it], to whom 
He gave command to make this proclamation 
to the hearts of men : 

to retain it in English by using both meanings. The three pre- 
ceding sentences, from " This Body " onwards, are quoted by 
Stobgeus, Phys., I. ii. 30 ; G. i. 26 ; W. 38, 10 ff., under the head- 
ing " Of Hermes." 

1 That is, " Order." 

'^ That is, the Body of God ; the One Element. 

> Of. G. H., V. (vi.) 2. 

i A critical text of most of these two paragraphs is given, R, 
214, n. 1. 

'^ Kparrjpaf lit. a crater or mixing-bowl. 



Hosted by Google 



THE CtJP OR MONAD 87 

Baptize ^ thyself with this Cup's baptism, what 
heart can do so, thou that hast faith thou canst 
ascend to Him that hath sent down the Cup, 
thou that dost know for what thou didst come 
into being ! 

As many then as understood the Herald's 
tidings and doused themselves in Mind, became 
partakers in the Gnosis ; and when they had 
*' received the Mind" they were made "perfect 
men." 

But they who do not understand the tidings, 
these, since they possess the aid of Reason [only] 
and not Mind, are ignorant wherefor they have 
come into being and whereby, 

5. The senses of such men are like irrational 
creatures' ; and as their [whole] make-up is in 
their feelings and their impulses,^ they fail in all 
appreciation of^ those things which really are 
worth contemplation. These centre all their 
thought upon the pleasures of the body and its 
appetites, in the belief that for its sake man hath 
come into being. 

But they who have received some portion 
of God's gift,* these, Tat, if we judge by their 
deeds, have from Death's bonds won their release ; 
for they embrace in their own Mind all things, 

1 The meaning of this term is not to " sprinkle " with water, 
but to "plunge the whole body " into water. 
^ Kol iv dvfitfi Koi eV op7p t^v Kpatriv ^xopres. 
^ Lit. " they do not wonder at." * Sc. the Mind. 

Hosted by Google 



88 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

things on the earth, things in the heaven, and 
things above the heaven,— if there be aught.^ 
And having raised themselves so far they sight 
the Good ; and having sighted It, they look 
upon their sojourn here as a mischance ; and in 
disdain of all, both things in body and the 
bodiless, they speed their way unto that One 
and Only One. 

6. This is, Tat, the Gnosis of the Mind, 
Vision of things Divine; God-knowledge is it, 
for the Cup is God's. 

Tat. Father, 1, too, would be baptized. 

Her, Unless thou first shalt hate thy Body, 
son, thou canst not love thy Self. But if thou 
lov'st thy Self thou shalt have Mind, and having 
Mind thou shalt share in the Gnosis. 

Tat Father, what dost thou mean ? 

Her. It is not possible, my son, to give 
thyself to both, — I mean to things that perish 
and to things divine. For seeing that existing 
things are twain. Body and Bodiless, in which 
the perishing and the divine are understood, the 
man who hath the will to choose is left the 
choice of one or other ; for it can never be the 
twain should meet. And in those souls to 
whom the choice is left, the waning of the one 
causes the other's growth to show itself. 

^ Cf. C. E. xi. (xii.) 19 : '* And contemplate what is beyond~-if 
there be aiiglxt beyond the Cosmos." 

Hosted by Google 



THE CUP OR MONAD 89 

7. Now the choosing of the Better not only 
proves a lot most fair for him who makes the 
choice, seeing it makes the man a God, but 
also shows his piety to God. Whereas the 
[choosing] of the Worse, although it doth 
destroy the " man/* it only doth disturb God's 
harmony to this extent, that as processions pass 
by in the middle of the way, without being able 
to do anything but take the road from others, 
so do such men move in procession through the 
world led by their bodies' pleasures.^ 

8. This being so, Tat, what comes from 
God hath been and will be ours ; but that which 
is dependent on ourselves, let this press onward 
and have no delay ; for 'tis not God, 'tis we 
who are the cause of evil things, preferring them 
to good. 

Thou see'st, son, how many are the bodies 
through which we have to pass, how many are 
the choirs of daimones, how vast the system of 
the star-courses ^ [through which our Path doth 
lie], to hasten to the One and Only God. 

For to the Good there is no other shore ^; 
It hath no bounds ; It is without an end ; and 

1 Critical text of simile is also given by B. 102, n. 2. Quoted 
by Zosimus in § " On the Anthropos Doctrine." 

2 Koi (Tvvix^iav KoL dp6/j.ovs atrrepwy, — tlie Septenary Spheres or 
" Cyclic Gods" ; for the (rvex^ta (lit. continuity) is evidently the 
same as the apfioylat Harmony, Concord, System. 

2 aBid$aTou, — lit. not to be crossed, not to be forded. 

Hosted by Google 



90 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

for Itself It is without beginning, too, though 
unto us it seemeth to have one—the Gnosis. 

9. Therefore to It Gnosis is no beginning ; 
rather is it [that Gnosis doth afford] to us the 
first beginning of Its being known. 

Let us lay hold, therefore, of the beginning, 
and quickly speed through all [we have to pass]. 

Tis very hard, to leave the things we have 
grown used to, which meet our gaze on every 
side, and turn ourselves back to the Old Old 
[Path]. 

Appearances delight us, whereas things which 
appear not make their believing hard. 

Now evils are the more apparent things, 
whereas the Good can never show Itself unto 
the eyes, for It hath neither form nor figure. 

Therefore the Good is like Itself alone, and 
unlike all things else ; for 'tis impossible that 
That which hath no body should make Itself 
apparent to a body. 

10. The '' Like s " superiority to the '' Unlike '' 
and the '' Unlike's " ^ inferiority unto the '' Like " 
consists in this : 

The Oneness ^ being Source ^ and Eoot of all, 
is in all things as Root and Source. Without 
[this] Source is naught ; whereas the Source 
[Itself] is from naught but Itself, since It is 

^ Reading witli B., rod avo^oiov. 

- /uoi'tisj—the Monad, that is the Good. -^ Or, Beginning. 

Hosted by Google 



THE CUP OR MONAD 91 

Source of all the rest. It is Itself Its Source, 
since It may have no other Source. 

The Oneness then being Source, containeth 
every number, but is contained by none ; engen- 
dereth every number, but is engendered by no 
other one. 

11. Now all that is engendered is imperfect, 
it is divisible, to increase subject and to decrease ; 
but with the Perfect [One] none of these things 
doth hold. Now that which is increasable in- 
creases from the Oneness, but succumbs through 
its own feebleness when it no longer can contain 
the One. 

And now, Tat, God's Image ^ hath been 
sketched for thee, as far as it can be ^ ; and if 
thou wilt attentively dwell on it and observe it 
with thy heart's eyes, believe me, son, thoult 
find the Path that leads above ; nay, that Image 
shall become thy Guide ^ itself, because the Sight 
[Divine] hath this peculiar [charm], it holdeth 
fast and draweth unto it those who succeed in 
opening their eyes, just as, they say, the magnet 
[draweth] iron.* 

1 The Universal Cosmos or Monad. 

2 The above sentences, beginning with " The Oneness," second 
paragraph of § 10, are quoted by Stobseus, Phys., I. x. 15 ; 
G. pp. 116, 117; W. 127, 6 ff . ; under the heading, "Of 
Hermes." 

3 Cf, G. if., vii. (viii.) 2 ; ix. (x.) 10 ; x. (xi.) 21 ; K. 23, n. 5. 

* This simile is also used in the Naassene Document, and in 
Plutarch, On Isis a7id Osiris^ where I have noticed it. 

Hosted by Google 



92 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

COMMENT AEY 

The Title 

This beautiful little treatise, in which the great 
principles of the Gnosis are set forth so clearly and 
lucidly by the philosopher-mystic who penned it so 
many centuries ago, bears a double, or rather a triple, 
title: "Of Hermes to Tat: The Cup or Monad [or 
Oneness]." ^ The double title, however, is but a choice of 
names, for The Cup is The Oneness, — -The One Element,^ 
the '' Body " of God, which is the Cause of all bodies 
and yet itself is bodiless ; in other words, the Monad 
is the Intelligible Cosmos itself, God's Image, elsewhere 
called His Alone-begotten Son. 

That this idea of a Cup or Mixing-bowl (Crater), in 
the symbolic sense of an all -containing receptacle, in 
which all the elements were blended together, and in 
the metaphysical sense of a transcendent Unity, the 
source of all things measurable and numberable, was 
one of the main doctrines of the Trismegistic tradition, is 
plain from the Poemandrist Zosimiis, who refers especially 
to this Cup as the symbol of Spiritual Baptism — that is, 
the plunging of the whole nature into the Great Ocean 
of Spirit or Mind, so that the man becomes irradiate with 
Life and illumined with Light. 

Eor a consideration of this Crater or Cup symbolism 
I must refer the reader to the chapter so entitled in 
the "Prolegomena"; it there being shown that in all 
probability it was transmitted along the Orphic line 

5 See R. 193. Unfortunately, though he twice quotes from 
our treatise, Stob^us adds nothing to our knowledge of the title, 
since he prefixes his extracts with the simple heading, "Of 
Hermes." 

2 Which is to be equated, I believe, " meta-physically " with the 
Quintessence or ^ther. 



Hosted by Google 



THE CUP OR MONAD 93 

of tradition, though doubtless the Egyptian had some 
similar ideas. 

Our treatise should be read in the closest connection 
with G, H., xi. (xiL), "The Mind to Hermes," which 
is its '' esoteric " counterpart. What is here set forth 
for Tat by Hermes is there imparted to Hermes by the 
Mind ; what is here set forth for the probationer or 
" hearer" is there set forth for the advanced disciple or 
*' seer " ; or, to use Mystery terms, what is here told 
to the Mystes is there revealed to the Epopt. Thus, 
then, the Tat-instruction begins. 

The Baptism of the Mind 

1. All things are made by Eeason, the Formative 
Energy of the Mind. The Ideal Cosmos, or World- 
Order, is the Divine Body. 

2. Earth is the sensible Cosmos ; on Earth man, the 
image of the Image, or Eeason, of God rules. The 
purpose of man is thus to become the con tempi a tor 
(Oear^i) of the works of God ; it is by the " wonder " 
aroused in him by the sight of these marvels that he 
will rise eventually into a knowledge of God Himself. 
This '* wonder" is, then, the beginning of the True 
Philosophy or God-knowledge (^ tov Oeov Karavofjarig). 

3. All men have in them "reason" (the ray of the 
Eeason or Logos), but as yet few have " Mind." This 
" mind " is the true Son of Mind, it is the real mariy 
the perfect man, self-conscious of his Self. This true 
Self-consciousness is the prize set up for souls to win : 
the crown of humanity, the Christ-state (or, at any rate, 
the super-man or true man state). 

The Christ-Baptism is the plunging of the whole 
nature into the Mind-filled Cup, — the Pleroma of the 
Divine Being whose Body and Mind are one, — for is 



Hosted by Google 



94 THRICE-GEEATEST HERMES 

not the Cup the Body of God, ** consecrated unto Himself 
alone" (§ 1), the Universal Body of all things? 

The Holy Grail 

It would be fascinating to speculate on what con- 
nection this Cup of Initiation may have had with the 
Mystic Eucharist, and the Original of the later Grail- 
tradition, which a great master of music and song has 
in our days made to live again in undying melody, and 
so restored it to its more universal significance. How 
Wagner sensed the marvel of the wondrous Vision 
with a poet's intuition may be seen from his own 
words : 

" To the enraptured gaze of one longing for celestial 
love, the clear blue atmosphere of heaven seems at first 
to condense itself into a wonderful, scarcely perceptible, 
but dazzlingly beautiful Vision. Then with gradually 
increasing precision the wonder-working angelic host 
is delineated in infinitely delicate outlines, as, conveying 
the holy vessel in its midst, it insensibly descends from 
the blazing heights of heaven. As the vision grows 
more and more distinct, . . . the heart throbs with the 
pain of ecstasy ; . . . and when at last the Grail shows 
itself in the marvel of undraped reality, . . . the 
beholder's brain reels — he falls down in a state of 
adoring annihilation. . , . With chaste rejoicing the 
angelic host then returns to the heavenly height, fading 
away into the nothingness whence it first emanated." 

But for the Seers of the Gnosis there was a more 
intimate realization, for they were bidden to cast aside 
all hesitation and fearlessly to plunge themselves into 
the very Cup Itself, the Ocean of Divine Love and 
Wisdom. 

This was the Proclamation or Preaching (K^pvy/uLo), 



Hosted by Google 



THE CUP OR MONAD 95 

or Good Tidings, of the Herald of God to men, to those 
who had the Living Faith they could " ascend to Him 
who had sent down the Cup," God's Greatest Gift. 

By such a Baptism as this, not by a symbolic 
sprinkling with water, is it that man is to be redeemed. 
This is the consummation of man's earthly pilgrimage, 
the realization of the '' Gnosis of the Mind, Vision of 
things Divine ; God- knowledge is it ; for the Cup is 
God's/' 

The '' Hating of the Body " 

6. In § 6 we have given us a discipline of the 
mystic way, the '' hating of the body," which is by no 
means to be taken literally. 

A misunderstanding of this discipline led many of 
the mystics of the time (and, for a matter of that, has 
led most of the mystics of all time) to the false belief 
that the body (or matter generally) was the source of 
evil. Hence we have all the mortifications and chastise- 
ments of the flesh which the monkish spirit introduced 
into Christendom, and which persist in some quarters 
even to our own day. Against this the Common Sense 
of Christianity as a general religion, basing itself on 
the general utterances of the Christ, has ever protested. 

Our mystic philosopher, in urging his disciples to 
hate the body, apparently does so because they are in 
the first stages of awakening, and so far have not got 
the " Mind " active in them. 

In taking the first steps there must be developed a 
consciousness of the strong antithesis of good and evil, 
of love and hate, in order that the will of the disciple 
may be strengthened towards the good and weakened 
towards the bad. 

When, however, his will is halanced between the 
two, when he as easily wills good as evil, then, and 



Hosted by Google 



96 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

not till then, is he prepared to learn the further great 
lesson: that real wisdom consists in balance, in the 
Middle Way ; that nothing is evil in itself — the Body 
is as honourable in its own sphere, as absolutely 
necessary and indispensable, as is the Mind in its. 

He learns the great secret that to have one's thoughts 
always in heaven is as erroneous as to have them always 
on earth ; that there is a higher mode of existence, when 
the things of heaven and earth are within each other, 
and not apart. 

As the Introduction to The Book of the Great Logos 
according to the Mystery has it: 

'' Jesus saith : Blessed is the man who knoweth this 
Word {Logos)y and hath brought down the Heaven and 
borne up the Earth and raised it Heavenwards." ^ 

Heaven and Earth must kiss each other for this 
consummation, this truly Sacred Marriage. 

And yet in the third Synoptic (xvi. 25, 26) we read : 

'' Jesus saith : If any man come unto Me, and hate 
not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and 
brethren and sisters, yea, and his own soul also, he 
cannot be My disciple. " 

Here we have precisely the same word '' hate " (/iiia-et) 
as in our text. That, however, this " dark saying " was 
interpreted in a mystical sense by Gnostic tradition, 
as by no means referring to physical parents but to 
the past causes of our imperfections,^ I have already 
pointed out on several occasions ^ ; we may therefore 

^ Codex Brucianiis ; see F. F. F., p. 520. 

^ Cf. the Pistis Sophia, 341-343, where the text is given as : 
*^ He who shall not leave father and mother to follow after Me 
is not worthy of Me," and explained by the Saviour to mean : 
" Ye shall leave your Parents the Rulers, that ye may be Children 
of the First Everlasting Mystery." 

'^ See, for instance, Extracts from the " Vdhan " (London, 1904), 
pp. 374-376. 

Hosted by Google 



THE CUP OR MONAD 97 

conclude that in a gnostic teaching, such as is our 
treatise, the terms " hate " and " body " are not to be 
literally interpreted. 

8. And that this is so may be seen from the declaration 
in § 8 : " For 'tis not God, 'tis we who are the cause of evil 
things, fref erring them to good " ; — where the cause of 
evil iB not assigned to the body but to man's own choice. 
And finally, to clinch our contention, we would refer the 
reader to the Sermon to Asclepius, G. H., vi. (vii.) 6 : 

" Such are the things that men call good and beauti- 
ful, Asclepius — things which we cannot flee or hate.'' 

The Gnosis and its Blessings 

9. In § 9 we have to notice the phrase : '* Therefore to 
It Gnosis is no beginning ; rather is it that Gnosis doth 
afford to us the first beginning of Its heing known'' \ 
and compare it with the logos quoted by the Jewish 
commentator in the Naassene Document (§ 25) : " The 
Beginning of Perfection is Gnosis of Man, but Gnosis 
of God is Perfect Perfection." 

The claim for the Gnosis is therefore a modest one. 
The Gnosis is not an end in itself ; it is but the begin- 
ning of the True Knowledge of God. They who receive 
the Baptism of the Mind are made " perfect men," not 
Perfect ; not until they have received this touch of the 
Christ-consciousness have they reached true manhood. 

Those who have received this Baptism know why 
they have come into being, — the purpose of life. They 
become consciously immortal; they know they are 
deathless, they do not only believe it ; their immortality 
is no longer a belief, it is a. fact of knowledge. 

They have won their freedom from Death and Fate, 
and know the real constitution of the cosmos up to the 
Threshold of the Good, the Plain of Truth— that is to 

VOL. 11. 7 



Hosted by Google 



98 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

say, presumably in Buddhist terms, as far as the 
Mrvanic state of consciousness. Not yet, however, 
have they entered Nirvana — that is to say, become one 
with the Logos. They have seen the Sight or Vision 
of Nirvana, but not entered into the Promised Land, 
that *' Blessed Space," which, as Basilides tells us, " can 
neither be conceived of nor characterized by any word." ^ 
The Vision is an earnest of what they may be. They 
have become Gods, it is true, already, or, in other words, 
enjoy the same freedom and consciousness as the Gods 
or Angels, but there is a still more transcendent state, 
when they will be at-oned with Deity Himself. 

The Ancient Path 

Hard as it is to leave the ''things we have grown 
used to," the things habitual, it must be done if we are 
to enter into the Way of the Gnosis. But no new Path 
is this, no going forth into new lands (though it may 
have all the appearance of being so). The entrance on 
the Path of the Gnosis is a Going-Home, it is a Eeturn 
— ^a Turning-Back (a True Eepentance). " We must 
turn ourselves back unto the Old Old Way " (to, iraXaia 
KOI apxoica). 

And for the followers of the Doctrine of Thrice- 
greatest Hermes, this Old Old Path could have meant 
nothing but the Archaic Wisdom of Ancient Egypt. 
The Wisdom of Egypt was thus the Gnosis. 

1 See F, F. F., p. 261. 



Hosted by Google 



COEPUS HEEMETICUM V. (VL) 



THOUGH UNMANIFEST GOD IS 
MOST MANIFEST 

Of Hermes to his Son Tat 

(Text: P. 41-48; Pat. 12b-13b.) 

1. I WILL recount for thee this sermon (logos) 
too, Tat, that thou may'st cease to be without 
the mysteries of the God beyond all name.^ 
And mark thou well how That which to the 
many seems unmanifest, will grow most manifest 
for thee. 

Now were It manifest, It would not be. For 
all that is made manifest is subject to becoming, 
for it hath been made manifest. But the Un- 
manifest for ever is, for It doth not desire to be 
made manifest. It ever is, and maketh manifest 
all other things. 

Being Himself unmanifest, as ever being and 
ever making - manifest, Himself is not made 

1 Cy. § 8 end, and § 9 beginning. 
99 

Hosted by Google 



100 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

manifest. God is not made Himself ; by think- 
ing-manifest,^ He thinketh all things manifest. 

Now '' thinking-manifest " deals with things 
made alone, for thinking-manifest is nothing else 
than making. 

2. He, then, alone who is not made, 'tis clear, 
is both bej^ond all power of thinking-manifest, 
and is unmanifest. 

ilnd as He thinketh all things manifest, He 
manifests through all things and in all, and most 
of all in whatsoever things He wills to manifest. 

Do thou, then. Tat, my son, pray first unto 
our Lord and Father, the One-and-Only One, 
from whom the One^ doth come, to show His 
mercy unto thee, in order that thou mayest have 
the power to catch a thought of this so mighty 
God, one single beam of Him to shine into thy 
thinking. For thought alone ''sees" the Un- 
manifest, in that it is itself unmanifest. 

If, then, thou hast the power, He will, Tat, 
manifest to thy mind's eyes. The Lord be- 
grudgeth not Himself to anything, but mani- 
fests Himself through the whole world. 

Thou hast the power of taking thought, of 
seeing it and grasping it in thy own " hands,'* 
and gazing face to face upon God's Image.^ But 

^ eV (pavTacrlq. — that is to say, by thinking into manifestation. 
2 Presumably the Manifested God ; the One-and-Only One 
being the Unmanifested, the God beyond all name. 
^' The Intelligible Cosmos. 

Hosted by Google 



THOUGH UNMANIFEST GOD IS MOST MANIFEST 101 

if what is within thee even is unmanifest to thee, 
how, then, shall He Himself who is within thy self 
be manifest for thee by means of [outer] eyes ? 

3. But if thou wouldst '*see" Him, bethink thee 
of the sun, bethink thee of moon's course, bethink 
thee of the order of the stars. Who is the One 
who watcheth o'er that order? For every order 
hath its boundaries marked out by place and 
number. 

The sun's the greatest god of gods in heaven ; 
to whom all of the heavenly gods give place 
as unto king and master. And he, this so-great 
one, he greater than the earth and sea, endures 
to have above him circling smaller stars than 
him. Out of respect to Whom, or out of fear of 
Whom, my son, [doth he do this] ? 

Nor like nor equal is the course each of these 
stars describes in heaven. Who [then] is He 
who marketh out the manner of their course and 
its extent ? 

4. The Bear up there that turneth round 
itself, and carries round the whole cosmos with 
it — Who is the owner of this instrument ? Who 
He who hath set round the sea its bounds ? 
Who He who hath set on its seat the earth ? 

For, Tat, there is someone who is the Maker 
and the Lord of all these things. It could not 
be that number, place and measure could be 
kept without someone to make them. No order 

Hosted by Google 



102 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

whatsoever could be made by that which lacketh 
place and lacketh measure ; nay, even this ^ is 
not without a lord, my son. For if the orderless 
lacks something, in that it is not lord of order s 
path, it also is beneath a lord — the one who 
hath not yet ordained it order. 

5. Would it were possible for thee to get thee 
wings, and soar into the air, and, poised midway 
^tween earth and heaven, behold the earth's 
solidity, the sea's fluidity (the flowings of its 
streams), the spaciousness of air, fire's swiftness, 
[and] the coursing of the stars, the swiftness 
of heaven's circuit round them [all] ! 

Most blessed sight were it, my son, to see all 
these beneath one sway— the motionless in 
motion, and the unmanifest made manifest ; 
whereby is made this order of the cosmos and 
the cosmos which we see of order. 

6. If thou would'st see Him too through things 
that suffer death,^ both on the earth and in the 
deep,^ think of a man's being fashioned in the 
womb, my son, and strictly scrutinize the art of 
Him who fashions him, and learn who fashioneth 
this fair and godly image of the Man/ 

^ Namely, that wliicli lacketli place, number, and order ; that 
is, disorder, chaos. 

'^ As opposed to the immortal world-order. 

^ (y. § 9 below, where it almost seems to mean " water." 

^ The Heavenly Man of " The Shepherd" treatise ; man is the 
image of The Man, the Logos or Image of God, This and the 
following passage is referred to by Lactantins, D. Institt., ii. 10. 

Hosted by Google 



THOUGH UNMANIFEST GOD IS MOST MANIFEST 103 

Who [then] is He who traceth out the circles 
of the eyes ; who He who boreth out the nostrils 
and the ears ; who He who openeth [the portal 
of] the mouth ; who He who doth stretch out 
and tie the nerves ; who He who channels out 
the veins ; who He who hardeneth the bones ; 
who He who covereth the flesh with skin ; who 
He who separates the fingers and the joints; 
who He who widens out a treading for the feet ; 
who He who diggeth out the ducts ; who He 
who spreadeth out the spleen ; who He who 
shapeth heart like to a pyramid ; who He who 
setteth ribs together ; who He who wideneth the 
liver out ; who He who maketh lungs like to a 
sponge ; who He who maketh belly stretch so 
much ; who He who doth make prominent the 
parts most honourable, so that they may be seen, 
while hiding out of sight those of least honour ? 

7. Behold how many arts [employed] on one 
material, how many labours on one single sketch ; 
and all exceeding fair, and all in perfect measure, 
yet all diversified ! Who made them all ? What 
mother, or what sire, save God alone, unmanifest, 
who hath made all things by His Will ? 

8. And no one saith a statue or a picture 
comes to be without a sculptor or [without] a 
painter ; doth [then] such workmanship as this 
exist without a Worker ? What depth of blind- 
ness, what deep impiety, what depth of ignorance ! 

Hosted by Google 



104 THEICE-GREATEST HERMES 

See, [then] thou ne'er, son Tat, deprivest works 
of Worker ! 

Nay, rather is He greater than all names, so 
great is He, the Father of them all.^ For verily 
He is the Only One ; and this His work, to be a 
father. 

9. So, if thou forcest me somewhat too bold, 
to speak, His being is conceiving of all things 
and making [them].^ 

And as without its maker it is impossible that 
anything should be, so ever is He not unless He 
ever makes all things, in heaven, in air, in earth, 
in deep, in all of cosmos, in every part that is 
and that is not of everything. For there is 
naught in all the world that is not He. 

He is Himself, both things that are and things 
that are not. The things that are He hath 
made manifest, He keepeth things that are not 
in Himself. 

10. He is the God beyond all name ; He the 
unmanifest, He the most manifest ; He whom 
the mind [alone] can contemplate, He visible 
unto the eyes [as well] ; He is the one of no 
body, the one of many bodies, nay, rather He of 
every body. 

Nauoflit is there which He is not. For all are 



*&■' 



^ The translation of this sentence is conjectural ; for the text is 
Dot only corrupt, but there appears to be a lacuna in it. 
-^ The male and female energies of the Divine Parent. 



Hosted by Google 



THOUGH UNMANIFEST GOD IS MOST MANIFEST 105 

He and He is all.^ And for this cause hath He 
all names, in that they are one Father's. And 
for this cause hath He Himself no name, in that 
He's Father of [them] all.^ 

Who, then, may sing Thee praise of Thee, or 
[praise] to Thee ? 

Whither, again, am I to turn my eyos to sing 
Thy praise ; above, below, within, without ? 

There is no way, no place [is there] about 
Thee, nor any other thing of things that are. 

All [are] in Thee ; all [are] from Thee, Thou 
who givest all and takest naught, for Thou hast 
all and naught is there Thou hast not. 

11. And when, Father, shall I hymn Thee? 
For none can seize Thy hour or time. 

For what, again, shall I sing hymn ? For 
things that Thou hast made, or things Thou hast 
not ? For things Thou hast made manifest, or 
things Thou hast concealed ? 

How,^ further, shall I hymn Thee ? As being 
of myself ? As having something of mine own ? 
As being other ? 

For that Thou art whatever I may be ; Thou 
art whatever I may do ; Thou art whatever I 
may speak. 

For Thou art all, and there is nothing else 

^ For emended reading, see B. 244. 

'^ That is, of all names. For the following, c/. P. 8. A., xxxi. 3 

3 Text from here on given in R. 68, n. 4. 

Hosted by Google 



106 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

which Thou art not. Thou art all that which 
doth exist, and Thou art what doth not exist, — 
Mind when Thou thinkest, and Father when 
Thou niakest, and God when Thou dost energize, 
and Good and Maker of all things. 

(For that the subtler part of matter is the air, 
of air the soul, of soul the mind, and of mind 
God.) 



COMMENTAEY 

The Title 

The redactor of our Corpus must have taken this 
sermon from some collection of " Those to Tat," for it 
begins '' koi rovSe croi top Aoyov." One other sermon 
at least, then, must have preceded it ; but whether it 
was our C. H., iv. (v.), " The Cup,'' or the lost 0, H, (ii.), 
" The General Sermon," it is impossible to say. 

The sermon bears no title proper, and the enunciation 
of the subject, which stands in its place, is derived from 
the second sentence of the treatise itself, and has plainly 
been superscribed by some later Byzantine editor. 

Maya 

The opening paragraphs of this fine tractate are very 
difficult to render into English in any way that can 
preserve the subtle shades of meaning of the Greek. 
As this subtle word-play has been entirely missed by 
all previous translators, I have made a rough attempt 
to preserve it by using the somewhat clumsy term 
" manifest." The word-play in Greek may be seen 



Hosted by Google 



THOUGH UNMANIFEST GOD IS MOST MANIFEST 107 

from the following list of the original terms taken in 
the order of their occurrence: a(pave<Sy (pavepwrarov, 
€/j,^av€^, (patv6/ji€i/ov, ecfxlvrj, a(pavi9, ^av^vat, (pavepa, 
a(pav}]gy ^avepoop, (pavepovTaiy (pavTaarlaj ^avraarioop, 
(pavTacria, atpaPTaariacTog Kai a^avrjg, ^avracricovj (pat- 
veraij ^avtjuai^ These all occur in § 1 and the first two 
lines of § 2. 

I have translated (j>avTacrLa by '* thinking-manifest/' 
seeing that it is the power by which an object is made 
apparent or manifest. The doctrine is the same as that 
of the Vedanta philosophy, the Maya of the Vedanta- 
vadins. Maya is generally translated *' illusion," but 
this is not a good equivalent, for it comes from the root 
ma, to make or measure. The Logos is called in the 
Vedanta, Mayin (masc), the Maker, Measurer, or 
Creator, and His Power, or Shakti, is Maya (fem.). It 
is the Power of the Divine Thought, and so far from 
being illusion in any ordinary sense of the word, is 
very real for us, and is only non-real as compared 
to the Logos Himself, the One Eeality in the highest 
philosophical sense of the term. 

The idea is magnificently summed up for us in a 
logos of Phdsilampes,^ quoted by the redactor of the 
Untitled Apocalyjpse of the Codex Brucianus, which runs 
as follows : 

"Through Him is that-which-really-is and that- 
which-really-is-not, through which the Hidden-which- 
really-is and the Manifest-which-really-is-not exists." 

Also compare Hippolytus' summary of the " Simonian" 
Gnosis : 

" Of this Twofold Nature he calls the one side the 
Hidden and the other the Manifest, saying that the 
concealed [parts] of the Fire are hidden in the manifest, 
and the manifest produced by the concealed. . . . 
' Perhaps a by-name of Basilides ; see F. F. F., p, 554. 



Hosted by Google 



108 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

'' And the manifest side of the Fire has all things in 
itself which a man can perceive of things visible, or 
which he unconsciously fails to perceive. Whereas the 
hia.-'en side is everything that we can conceive as 
intelligible, ... or which a man fails to conceive." ^ 

2. " The Lord begrudgeth not Himself to any thing." 
Compare this with 0, H., iv. (v.) 3 : '' Not that He 
grudgeth any, for grudging cometh not from Him '' ; 
and compare both with the saying of Plato in the 
Timceus (29 e) : 

" He was Good, and to the Good there can never at 
any time be any grudging of aught.'' 

The Higher Pantheism or Panmonism 

10. With the soul-satisfying pantheism of | 10 we 
may with interest compare the address to the Logos in 
The Martyrdom of Peter, which still retains many 
Gnostic elements. 

*' Thou that art to be understood by spirit alone 1 
Thou art my father. Thou my mother, Thou my brother, 
Thou my friend, Thou my servant. Thou my master. 
Thou art the all, and all is in Thee. Yea, all that is, is 
Thou ; and there is nothing else that is but Thee 
alone ! " ^ 

Hymn to All-God 

The treatise ends with one of the most magnificent 
Hymns to God ever written in any language— a hymn 
which some foolish copyist has spoilt by tagging on to 
it the gloss of a reader noted on the margin of the 
MS. from which our scribe copied. 

1 Hipp., Philos., vi. 9 ; see my Simon Magus (London, 1892), 
p. 13. 

^ Lipsiiis (R. A.) and Bonnet (M.), Acta Apostolorum Apocrypha 
(Leipzig, 1893), i. 98. 



Hosted by Google 



THOUGH UNMANIFEST GOD IS MOST MANIFEST 109 

With the sentence : *' All are in Thee, all are from 
Thee/' compare the Naassene Hymn (quoted in Hip- 
polytus' Introduction, in " The Myth of Man ") : 

^'^From Thee' is Father, and ^Through Thee,' 
Mother, — the two Immortal Names, Parents of ^^ons, 
O Thou who hast the Heaven for Thy City, Man of 
Mighty Names ! " 



Hosted by Google 



COEPUS HERMETICUM VI. (VIL) 



IN GOD ALONE IS GOOD AND 
ELSEWHERE NOWHERE 

(Text: P. 48-53; Pat. Ua-15a.) 

1. Good, Asclepius, is in none else save God 
alone ; nay, rather, Good is God Himself 
eternally. 

If it be so, [Good] must be essence, from 
every kind of motion and becoming free (though 
naught is free from It), possessed of stable 
energy around Itself, never too little, nor too 
much, an ever-full supply. [Though] one, yet 
[is It] source of all ; for what supplieth all is 
Good. When I, moreover, say [supplieth] 
altogether [all], it is for ever Good. But this 
belongs to no one else save God alone. 

For He stands not in need of any thing, so 
that desiring it He should be bad ; nor can a 
single thing of things that are be lost to Him, 
on losing which He should be pained ; for pain 
is part of bad. 



110 



Hosted by Google 



IN GOD ALONE IS GOOD 111 

Nor is there aught superior to Him, that He 
should be subdued by it ; nor any peer to Him 
to do Him wrong, or [so that] He should fall 
in love on its account ; nor aught that gives 
no ear to Him, whereat He should grow angry ; 
nor wiser aught, for Him to envy. 

2. Now as all these are non-existent in His 
being, what is there left but Good alone ? 

For just as naught of bad is to be found in 
such transcendent Being, so too in no one of the 
rest will Good be found. 

For in them all are all the other things^ — 
both in the little and the great, both in each 
severally and in this living one^ that's greater 
than them all and mightiest [of them]. 

For things subject to birth ^ abound in passions, 
birth in itself being passible. But where there's 
passion, nowhere is there Good ; and where is 
Good, nowhere a single passion. For where is 
day, nowhere is night; and where is night, 
day is nowhere. 

Wherefore in genesis the Good can never he, 
but only be in the ingenerate. 

But seeing that the sharing in all things hath 
been bestowed on matter, so doth it share in 
Good. 



1 That is, tilings not Good. 

2 Or animal ; that is, cosmos as a single life or living creature, 
•^ Or genesis. 



Hosted by Google 



112 THRICE GREATEST HERMES 

In this way is the Cosmos good ; that, in so 
far as it doth make all things, as far as making 
goes it's Good, but in all other things it is not 
Good. For it's both passible and subject unto 
motion, and maker of things passible. 

3. Whereas in man by greater or by less of 
bad is good determined. For what is not too 
bad down here, is good ; and good down here 
is the least part of bad. 

It cannot, therefore, be that good down here 
should be quite clean of bad, for down here 
good is fouled with bad ; and being fouled, it 
stays no longer good, and staying not it changes 
into bad. 

In God alone, is, therefore. Good, or rather 
Good is God Himself. 

So then, Asclepius, the name alone of Good 
is found in men, the thing itself nowhere [in 
them], for this can never be. 

For no material body doth contain It,— a 
thing ^ bound on all sides by bad, by labours, 
pains, desires and passions, by error and by 
foolish thoughts. 

And greatest ill of all, Asclepius, is that each 
of these things that have been said above, is 
thought down here to be the greatest good. 

And what is still an even greater ill, is belly- 
lust, the error that doth lead the band of all 

^ tic. fclie body. 

Hosted by Google 



IN GOD ALONE IS GOOD 113 

the other ills — the thing that makes us turn 
down here from Good. 

4. And I, for my own part, give thanks to 
God, that He hath cast it in my mind about 
the Gnosis of the Good, that it can never be 
It^ should be in the world. ^ For that the 
world is ** fullness"^ of the bad, but God of 
Good, and Good of God. 

The excellencies of the Beautiful are round the 
very essence [of the Good] ; nay, they do seem 
too pure, too unalloyed ; perchance 'tis they 
that are themselves Its essences. 

For one may dare to say, Asclepius, — if essence, 
sooth, He have — God's essence is the Beautiful ; 
the Beautiful is further also Good. 

There is no Good that can be got from objects 
in the world. For all the things that fall 
beneath the eye are image-things and pictures 
as it were ; while those that do not meet [the 
eye are the realities*], especially the [essence] 
of the Beautiful and Good. 

Just as the eye cannot see God, so can it not 
behold the Beautiful and Good. For that they 
are integral parts of God, wedded to Him alone, 
inseparate familiars, most beloved, with whom 
God is Himself in love, or they with God. 

1 Sc, the Good. ^ Cosmos. 

2 Or pleroma. The " world " is the pleroma of evil, but 
•* God " the pleroma of good. 

^ A lacuna imf ortunately occurs here in the text. 



70L. II. 



Hosted by Google 



114 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

5. If thou canst God conceive, thou shalt 
conceive the Beautiful and Good, transcending 
Light, made lighter than the Light by God. 
That Beauty is beyond compare, inimitate that 
Good, e'en as God is Himself. 

As, then, thou dost conceive of God, conceive 
the Beautiful and Good. For they cannot be 
joined with aught of other things that live, since 
they can never be divorced from God. 

Seek'st thou for God, thou seekest for the 
Beautiful. One is the Path that leadeth unto 
It— Devotion joined with Gnosis. 

6. And thus it is that they who do not know 
and do not tread Devotion's Path, do dare to 
call man beautiful and good, though he have 
ne'er e'en in his visions seen a whit that's Good, 
but is enwrapped with every kind of bad, and 
thinks the bad is good, and thus doth make 
unceasing use of it, and even feareth that it 
should be ta'en from him, so straining every 
nerve not only to preserve but even to 
increase it. 

Such are the things that men call good and 
beautiful, Asclepius, — things which we cannot 
flee or hate ; for hardest thing of all is that 
we've need of them and cannot live without 
them. 



Hosted by Google 



TN GOD ALONE IS GOOD 115 



COMMENTARY 

The Title 

This sermon, which bears no proper title, but has been 
headed by some editor with the enunciation of the 
subject taken from the opening sentence of the treatise 
itself, belongs to the Asclepius-group. 

Eeitzenstein (p. 194) thinks that this tractate and 
the previous Asclepius-Dialogue — C. H., ii. (iii.) — may 
very well have formed part of the same collection of 
Asclepiana. 

Dualism ? 

The teaching of our sermon is apparently dualistic ; 
but is it not only formally so, and as an exercise to 
raise the thought of the pupil away from the " things 
he has grown used to''? For at the end Hermes 
declares : 

" Such are the things that men call good and beauti- 
ful, Asclepius — things which we cannot flee or hate ; for 
hardest thing of all is that we've need of them and 
cannot live without them." 

This is a clear advance on the formal Tat-teaching 
as to "hating" the body given in C, H., iv. (v.) 6, and 
points clearly to an instruction in which the cosmos 
was not regarded as the pleroma of bad, in spite of the 
formal and emphatic statement in § 4 : 

" o yap Koorjiiog TrXTjpcojUid cctti TrJ9 KaKtag,^' 

Moreover, if we turn to 0. IL, ix. (x.), 4 — another 
treatise of Hermes to Asclepius, and curiously enough 
having as superscription almost the same proposition 
as heads our present treatise — we read : 

" Xooplou yap avrtjg [KaKiag] ^ yrjj ovx o KocrjuLogf m 
evLOL TTori ipovcri ^Xacriprj/uLovvreg*^* 



Hosted by Google 



116 THRIOE-GEEATEST HERMES 

''Bad's place is earth, and not the world, as some 
will sometimes say with impious tongue." 

Here we have a formal denial in an Asclepius- 
tractate of the formal proposition in our Asclepius- 
sermon. 

The cosmos is not evil ; it is the beautiful world- 
order. Evil is a thing connected with the earth ; there 
is no such thing as a TrXrjpcoiua of evil ; evil has at best 
only a x'^p'-ov- They who say such things blaspheme. 

This is strong language, and there seems no other 
conclusion to be drawn from it but that there were 
various schools within the Trismegistic tradition, and 
that they wrangled theologically together. 

Is it, however, possible that the Hermes of our 
treatise is only speaking metaphorically, so that he 
may intensify the ideal of the Good, and that he was 
subsequently taken as speaking literally ? For he 
must have known that the Cosmos was regarded as the 
Son of Godjjcar excellence, the fairest and best-beloved 
of all, God's Very Image. 

On the other hand, we know that in the Trisme- 
gistic doctrine the "cosmic man" was opposed to the 
'' essential man," that, in fact, the term " cosmic " was 
used in the nomenclature of the time in a theological as 
well as in a philosophical sense. This was especially 
the case in Christianity. Many instances could be cited 
from the New Testament documents ; and we have also 
a striking example of the use of " cosmos " in this sense 
in the second logion of the First Oxyrhynchus Fragment: 

'' Jesus saith : Except ye fast to the world (tov 
KocriuLov), ye shall in no wise find the Kingdom of God." 

As, moreover, we nowhere else find mention of a 
" pleroma of evil, " we may permissibly conclude that it 
is here not intended to be taken literally, but only as 
a metaphorical expression. 



Hosted by Google 



IN GOD ALONE IS GOOD 117 

God the Pleroma of Good 

"God is the Pleroma of Good, and Good is the 
Pleroma of God." 

And so, speaking of the Triumphant Christ as the 
Cosmic Logos, Paul writes : 

"And Him hath He (God) given as Head over all 
things unto the Church,^ which is His Body — the 
Fullness (Pleroma) of Him who doth fulfil all things in 
all/"^ 

The thought-atmosphere in which the idea of the 
'' Church " as the Pleroma arose may be sampled from 
Philo, De Frcem. et Fcen., § xi. (M. ii. 418, p. 920; 
Ki. V. 232): 

" And thus the soul, becoming a Pleroma of virtues 
by means of the three best [blessings] — nature, instruc- 
tion (mathesis) and practice (asMsis)^ — leaving no 
vacant spot in her for entrance of aught else, brings 
unto birth a perfect number, — her two hexads of 
sons, a miniature and copy of the circle of the types 
of life,^ for the improvement of the things down 
here. 

" This is the House * that naught can harm, the perfect 
and continual in the public scriptures, and also in the 
secret meanings of the mystic ones, — the House that 
won the prize, as I have said, of lordship o*er the tribes 
of its [own] race.'' 

" It was thus from this House in course of time, as 
it increased and became populous, that well-regulated 
cities were established, yea, disciplines of wisdom and 
of righteousness and holiness, in which the transmuta- 

1 Ti? iKKK-nffic^, that is, the Spiritual Body of the " Elect." 
-^ Eph. i. 23. Gf. Col. ii. 19 : '' In Him dwelleth the whole 
Fullness of the Godhead as in a body." 

3 Kc. the Zodiac. * Sc. of God. 



Hosted by Google 



118 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

tion duLeTaTTolw^^) ^^ ^^e rest of virtue was sought 
out in manner worthy of so high a work. " 

In the Trismegistic tradition, however, the idea is 
simpler, as we learn from " The Definitions of Asclepius/* 
a E. (xvi.) 3 : 

" For that the Fullness of all things is One and is in 
One,-— -this latter One not coming as a second One, but 
both being One. . . . 

''For should one try to separate what seems to be 
both All and One and Same from One,— he will be 
found to take his epithet of 'All' from the idea of 
multitude and not from that of fullness (pleroma),— 
which is impossible ; for if he put All for the One, he 
will destroy the All." 

Nevertheless, the Pleroma ^ of Life is more specially 
the Cosmos as the Son of God — that is, as the Logos, 
Thus in G. H., xii. (xiii.) 15, we read : 

'' Matter is one ; and the World-order (Cosmos), as 
a whole, — the Mighty God and Image of the Mightier 
One, both with Him unified, and the Conserver of the 
Will and Order of the Father, — is Life's Fullness 
(Plerdma). . . . 

"How then, son, could there be in the God,—- - 
the Image of the Father, the Plenitude (Pleroma) of 
Life,^ — dead things?" 

And again in (7. H., ix. (x.) 7 : 

"For [Cosmos] being a most wise Breath, bestows 
their qualities on bodies together with the one Pleroma 
—that of Life." 

5. This Pleroma of God is the Good and Beautiful. 
The Path to this True Good is one of balance, — for it 

1 Cf. Jolin i. 16 : " Of His Fullness we have all received, and 
grace on grace." 

2 Cf, John 1.4: '^ In Him was Life and the Life was the Light 
of men." 



Hosted by Google 



IN GOB ALONE IS GOOD 119 

is the Way of Devotion united unto Gnosis — in 
Sanskrit terms, the Bhakti-Marga and Jnana-Marga 
combined.^ 

6. Finally we learn, though inferentially, that things 
are not bad in themselves; the evil is that men are 
content with the little goods they have and cling 
desperately to these, in ignorance of the greater 
blessings to which they could attain, did they but open 
their spiritual eyes for the True Vision of the Good. 
For even the psychic visions of the soul, in spite of 
their beauty, give man no hint of that Most Blessed 
Sight of All. 

1 Compare G. H"., i. 2*7 : " And I began to preach to men the 
beauty of Devotion and of Gnosis." 



Hosted by Google 



COEPUS HEEMETIOUM VII. (VIIL) 



THE GREATEST ILL AMONG MEN 

IS IGNORANCE OF GOD 

(Text: P. 54, 55; Pat. 18a.) 

L Whither stumble ye, sots, who have sopped 
up the wine of ignorance unmixed, and can so far 
not carry it that ye already even spew it forth ? 

Stay ye, be sober, gaze upwards with the 
[true] eyes of the heart ! And if ye cannot all, 
yet ye at least who can ! 

For that the ill of ignorance doth pour o'er all 
the earth and overwhelm the soul that's battened 
down within the body, preventing it from fetch- 
ing port within Salvation's harbours. 

2. Be then not carried ojEf by the fierce flood, 
but using the shore-current,"^ ye who can, make 
for Salvation's port, and, harbouring there, seek 
ye for one to take you by the hand and lead 
you '^ unto Gnosis' gates. 

^ Lit. back or up-current. 

'^ Of, a K, iv. (v.) 11 ; ix. (X.) 10 ; x (xi.) 2 ; R. 23, n. 5. 



I'iO 



Hosted by Google 



THE GREATEST ILL IS IGNORANCE OF GOD 121 

Where shines clear Light, of every darkness 
clean ; where not a single soul is drunk, but 
sober all they gaze with their hearts' eyes on 
Him who willeth to be seen. 

No ear can hear Him, nor can eye see Him, 
nor tongue speak of Him, but [only] mind and 
heart. 

But first thou must tear off from thee the cloak 
which thou dost wear, — the web of ignorance, 
the ground of bad, corruption's chain, the cara- 
pace of darkness, the living death, sensation's 
corpse, the tomb thou carriest with thee, the 
robber in thy house, who through the things he 
loveth, hateth thee, and through the things he 
hateth, bears thee malice. 

3. Such is the hateful cloak thou wearest, — 
that throttles thee [and holds thee] down to it, 
in order that thou may'st not gaze above, and, 
having seen the Beauty of the Truth, and Good 
that dwells therein, detest the bad of it ; having 
found out the plot that it hath schemed against 
thee, by making void of sense those seeming 
things which men think senses. 

For that it hath with mass of matter blocked 
them up and crammed them full of loathsome 
lust, so that thou may'st not hear about the 
things that thou should'st hear, nor see the 
things that thou should'st see. 



Hosted by Google 



122 THRICE-GREATl^ST HERMES 

COMMENTAEY 

A Pkeaching 

There is little to be said about this powerful appeal to 
cease from the drunkenness of physical sensations and 
to awaken to the Light. 

Eeitzenstein (p. 194) calls it a ^' Propheteni^redigt'' 
and says that nowhere in the MSS. is it ascribed to 
Hermes ; by which he can only mean that it bears no 
other superscription than the descriptive sentence which 
heads it. 

The style and spirit remind us not so much of 
G, H., iii. (iv.), as Eeitzenstein (p. 206, 1) suggests, as 
of the interpolated or superadded passages in the 
" Pcemandres " treatise (§ 27): 

"0 ye people, earthborn folk, ye who have given 
yourselves to drunkenness, and sleep, and ignorance, 
be sober now, cease from your surfeit, cease to be 
glamoured by irrational sleep ! " 

Did this sentence give rise to our little sermon ; or 
is the sentence a summary of the preaching ? Or do 
both sentence and sermon come from a common stock ? 

The Probable Completion of an 
oxyrhynchus logion 

The last hypothesis seems to be the most satisfactory 
choice; and we may compare what would appear to 
be a familiar figure of speech among such communities 
with logion 3 of the First Oxyrhynchus Fragment : 

" Jesus saith : I stood in the midst of the world {rod 
Koor/jLov), and in the flesh did I appear unto them ; and 
I found all men drunken, and none found I athirst 
among them ; and my soul grieveth over the souls of 



Hosted by Google 



THE GREATEST ILL IS IGNORANCE OF GOD 123 

men, because they are blind in their heart and see 
not . . . '' 

Can we fill up the missing word from our sermon ? 

" But sober all they gaze with their hearts' eyes on 
Him who willeth to be seen." 

The missing word seems, therefore, to be " God." 

The Gospel that is preached is the Beauty of the 
Gnosis, — ^'' the Beauty of the Truth and Good that dwells 
therein " ; just as in G, -ff., i. 27 : 

"And I began to preach to men the Beauty of 
Devotion and of the Gnosis." 

The tempest-tossed on the Sea of Ignorance are to 
make for the Harbour of Salvation — evidently some 
great organization devoted to the holy life ; therein 
they must seek for one who knows, who can take them 
by the hand and lead them unto the Gates of the 
Gnosis. 

This suggests that the organization consisted of a 
general body, within which were grades of instruction ; 
the many were striving for illumination, some few had 
reached it. 



Hosted by Google 



COEPUS HEEMETICUM VIII. (IX.) 

THAT NO ONE OF EXISTING 
THINGS DOTH PERISH, BUT 
MEN IN ERROR SPEAK OF 
THEIR CHANGES AS DESTRUC- 
TIONS AND AS DEATHS 

[Of Hermes to Tat] 

(Text : P. 56-59 ; Pat. 48a, 48b.) 

1. ^Hermes.] Concerning 8oul and Body, son, 
we now must speak ; in what way Soul is death- 
less, and whence comes the activity ^ in com- 
posing and dissolving Body. 

For there's no death for aught of things [that 
are] ; the thought [this] word conve5^s, is either 
void of fact, or [simply] by the knocking off a 
syllable what is called '' death," doth stand for 
'^deathless."' 

'^ The text is obscure, and the translations without exception 
make nonsense of it. Some words seem to be missing. 

124 

Hosted by Google 



NO ONE OF EXISTING THINGS DOTH PERISH 125 

For death is of destruction, and nothing in 
the Cosmos is destroyed. For if Cosmos is 
second God, a life ^ that cannot die, it cannot be 
that any part of this immortal life should die. 
All things in Cosmos are parts of Cosmos, and 
most of all is man, the rational animal, 

2. For truly first of all, eternal and tran- 
scending birth, is God the universals' Maker. 
Second is he ''after His image," Cosmos, 
brought into being by Him, sustained and fed by 
Him, made deathless, as by his own Sire, living 
for aye, as ever free from death. 

Now that which ever-liveth, differs from the 
Eternal ; for He ^ hath not been brought to being 
hy anotheT, and even if He have been brought to 
being, He hath not been brought into being by 
Himself, but ever is brought into being. 

For the Eternal, in that It is eternal, is the all. 
The Father is Himself eternal of Himself, but 
Cosmos hath become eternal and immortal by 
the Father. 

3. And of the matter stored beneath it,^ the 
Father made of it a universal body, and packing 
it together made it spherical — wrapping it round 
the life * — [a sphere] which is immortal in itself, 
and that doth make materiality eternal. 

1 Living thing, "animal." 2 g^. the Eternal. 

^ Sc, beneath the cosmos, world-order or universe. 
* The text here seems to me to be very faulty ; for iroi6vf void, 
I read C^*>^t Cvo" In such unintelligible phrases as avr^ rh woidy, 

Hosted by Google 



126 THRICE- GREATEST HERMES 

But He, the Father, lull-filled with His ideas, 
did sow the lives ^ into the sphere, and shut them 
in as in a cave, willing to order forth ^ the life 
with every kind of living. 

So He with deathlessness enclosed the uni- 
versal body, that matter might not wish to 
separate itself from body^s composition, and so 
dissolve into its own [original] unorder. 

For matter, son, when it was yet incorporate, 
was in unorder. x4.nd it doth still retain down 
here this [nature of unorder] enveloping the rest 
of the small lives ^ — that increase-and-decrease 
which men call death. 

4. It is round earthly lives that this unorder 
doth exist. For that the bodies of the heavenly 
ones preserve one order allotted to them from 
the Father as their rule * ; and it is by the restora- 
tion^ of each one [of them] this order is pre- 
served indissolute.^ 

The ''restoration" then of bodies on the earth 



and rh /a€t' aifTov Trot6v, the writer is evidently dealing witli the 
Cosmos as the one life, the avr6(cpov, from which all other lives 
are derived ; and if he did not write avr6C(^ov^ he assuredly wrote 
((^ov. He wrote sense and not the nonsense of the present text. 

1 Be. the great lives or so-called heavenly " bodies." 

2 Or beautify. 

^ As distinguished from the great lives or animals, the so-called 
heavenly '' bodies." 

^' r^p apx'hv,—ov source or principle. 

'"' airoKardaraaiSy a term used of the cyclic return of stars to their 
original positions. 

^ If we may be permitted to coin a neologism. 



Hosted by Google 



NO ONE OF EXISTING THINGS DOTH PERISH 127 

is [thus their] composition, whereas their dissolu- 
tion restores them to those bodies which can 
never be dissolved, that is to say, which know 
no death. Privation, thus, of sense is brought 
about, not loss of bodies. 

5. Now the third life — Man, after the image 
of the Cosmos made, [and] having mind, after 
the Fathers will, beyond all earthly lives — not 
only doth have feeling with the second God, but 
also hath conception of the first ; for of the one 
'tis sensible as of a body, while of the other it 
conceives as bodiless and the Good Mind. 

Tat. Doth then this life not perish ? 

Her, Hush, son! and understand what God, 
what Cosmos [is], what is a life that cannot die, 
and what a life subject to dissolution. 

Yea, understand the Cosmos is by God and in 
God ; but Man by Cosmos and in Cosmos. 

The source and limit and the constitution of 
all things is God. 



COMMENTAEY 

The Cosmos as "Second God" 

The superscription enunciates the nature of the 
treatise. It is evidently taken from the Dialogues to 
Tat, and originally formed part of some General Dis- 
sertation or of a collection of Dissertations. 

It formed part of an instruction in which the Cosmos 



Hosted by Google 



128 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

was treated of as '' Second God/' as we find it also in 
Philo ^ ; but just as Philo guards against any idea of 
duality, so does our treatise when it ends with the 
words (§ 5) : 

'* The source and limit and the constitution of all 
things is God." 

The Great Body of the Cosmos, the Sphere or Perfect 
Form, the root of all forms, seems to be bounded by 
the idea of the ^Eon or Eternity, or Deathlessness. It 
is, as it were, the Cave or Womb of all things in genesis, 
centred in the Pleroma of ideas, the Intelligible Cosmos, 
which is full-filled with the ideas of God (§ 3). 

The Law of Apokatastasis 

The eternal order and life of Cosmos is preserved by 
the law of apokatastasis or restoration (§ 4), the law of 
ever-becoming, and cyclic renewal, the making-new- 
again (apavecoa-i?) of C, H,, iii. (iv.) 1. 

There is no question of loss of body, — this is an 
illusion ; there is a privation of sense, a going into 
latency of some particular phase of consciousness. 

There are then Great Lives — God, Cosmos, Man. 
Cosmos is made in the image of God, Man in the image 
of Cosmos. Therefore has Man sense and mind ; by 
the former he is "in sympathy with" the Cosmos, as 
Body by the latter he is conscious of God as Mind, — 
that is the Bodiless. Or as we might phrase it, by 
sense Man knows the Sensible Cosmos, by mind the 
Intelligible Cosmos, the Good Mind ; for God is Source 
and Limit and the Constitution of all things—the 
Cosmos, both Intelligible and Sensible, included. 

I Leg. Alley., § 21 ; M. i. 82 ; P. 1103 (Ri. i 113) ; Qumt Sol, 
i. (quoted by Euseb., Prcep. Evang., vii. 13). See in tlie " Prolego- 
mena," " Pliilo Concerning the Logos/' 



Hosted by Google 



COEPUS HEEMETICUM IX. (X.) 



ON THOUGHT AND SENSE 

That the Beautiful and Good is in God 
ONLY and Elsewhere Nowhere 

(Text: P. 60-67; Pat. 14, 15.) 

1. I GAVE the Perfect Sermon {Logos) yester- 
day, Asclepius ; to-day I think it right, as sequel 
thereunto, to go through point by point the 
Sermon about Sense. 

Now sense and thought do seem to differ, in 
that the former has to do with matter, the latter 
has to do with substance. But unto me both 
seem to be at-one and not to differ — in men I 
mean. In other lives ^ sense is at-oned with 
nature, but in men thought. 

Now mind doth differ just as much from 
thought as God doth from divinity. For that 
divinity by God doth come to be, and by mind 
thought, the sister of the word (logos) ^ and 

1 Or animals. 

2 There is here the usual play on the meanings, reason, word, 
sermon or sacred discourse. 

VOL. II. 129 9 



Hosted by Google 



130 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

instruments of one another. For neither doth 
the word (logos) find utterance without thought, 
nor is thought manifested without word. 

2. So sense and thought both flow together 
into man, as though they were entwined with 
one another. For neither without sensing can 
one think, nor without thinking sense. 

But it is possible [they say] to think a thing 
apart from sense, as those who fancy sights in 
dreams. But unto me it seems that both of 
these activities occur in dream-sight, and sense 
doth pass out of the -sleeping to the waking 
state. 

For man is separated into soul and body, and 
only when the two sides of his sense agree 
together, does utterance of its thought con- 
ceived, by mind take place. 

3. For it is mind that doth conceive all 
thoughts — good thoughts when it receives the 
seeds from God, their contraries when [it re- 
ceiveth them] from one of the daimonials ; no 
part of Cosmos being free of daimon, who 
stealthily doth creep into the daimon who's 
illumined by God's Light,^ and sow in him the 
seed of its own energj^ 

And mind conceives the seed thus sown, 

1 That is to say man, or ratlier tlie ego in man. The translators 
seem to make nonsense of this passage through rejecting the 
original reading. 

Hosted by Google 



ON THOUGHT AND SENSE 131 

adultery, murder, parricide, [and] sacrilege, 
impiety, [and] strangling, casting down preci- 
pices, and all such other deeds as are the work 
of evil daimones. 

4. The seeds of God, 'tis true, are few, but 
vast and fair, and good — virtue and self-control, 
devotion. Devotion is God-gnosis ; and he who 
knoweth God, being filled with all good things, 
thinks godly thoughts and not thoughts like the 
many [think]. 

For this cause they who Gnostic are,^ please 
not the many, nor the many them. They are 
thought mad and laughed at ^ ; they're hated and 
despised, and sometimes even put to death. 

For we did say^ that bad must needs dwell 
here on earth, where 'tis in its own place. Its 
place is earth, and not Cosmos, as some will 
sometimes say with impious tongue. 

But he who is a devotee of God, will bear 
with all — once he has sensed the Gnosis. For 
such an one all things, e'en though they be for 
others bad, are for him good ; deliberately he 
doth refer them all unto the Gnosis. And, 
thing most marvellous, 'tis he alone who maketh 
bad things good. 

5. But I return once more to the Discourse 

1 ol iv yvdxrt:!. 6vr€s, lit. they who are in Gnosis. 

2 Gf. Plat., Phcedr.j 249 D : The wisdom-lover " is admonished 
by the many as thouglT*he were beside himself." 

^ Sc. in some other sermon. 

Hosted by Google 



132 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

(Logos) on Sense. That sense doth share with 
thought in man, doth constitute him man. But 
'tis not [every] man, as I have said, who benefits 
by thought ; for this man is materia], that other 
one substantial. 

For the material man, as I have said, [con- 
sorting] with the bad, doth have his seed of 
thought from daimons ; while the substantial 
men [consorting] with the Good, are saved by 
God. 

Now God is Maker of all things, and in His 
making. He maketh all [at last] like to Himself; 
but they, while they're becoming-^ good by 
exercise of their activity, are unproductive 
things. 

It is the working of the Cosmic Course ^ that 
maketh their becomings what they are, befouling 
some of them with bad and others of them 
making clean with good. 

For Cosmos, too, Asclepius, possesseth sense- 
and-thought peculiar to itself, not like to that of 

1 Or being made. 

'^ It is difficult to bring out the full delicacy of wording of the 
original in translation. First God's ultimate intention is stated 
to be the making all things like ((ijnoia) Himself ; this is the great 
sameness of union with Him. But meantime while this making, 
creating or becoming, is going on, these imperfections cannot 
produce— that is, become creators in their turn ; they are unpro- 
ductive (^0opa). That which is the instrument of God's making 
is the cosmic course ((popd). We are finally (§ 7) told that it is 
bodies which are the cause of difference or diversity (eV dia^opa), 
the opposite pole, so to speak, to the likeness {(ifioia) with God, 

Hosted by Google 



ON THOUGHT AND SENSE 133 

man ; 'tis not so manifold, but as it were a 
better and a simpler one, 

6. The single sense-and-thought of Cosmos is 
to make all things, and make them back into 
itself again, as Organ of the Will of God, so 
organised that it, receiving all the seeds into 
itself from God, and keeping them within itself, 
may make all manifest, and [then] dissolving 
them, make them all new again ; and thus, like 
a Good Gardener of Life, things that have been 
dissolved, it taketh to itself, and giveth them 
renewal once again. 

There is no thing to which it gives not life ; but 
taking all unto itself it makes them live, and is at 
the same time the Place of Life and its Creator. 

7. Now bodies matter [-made] are in diversity. 
Some are of earth, of water some, some are of 
air, and some of fire. 

But they are all composed ; some are more 
[composite], and some are simpler. The heavier 
ones are more [composed], the lighter less so. 

It is the speed of Cosmos' Course that works 
the manifoldness of the kinds of births. For 
being a most swift Breath, it doth bestow their 
qualities on bodies together with the One 
Pleroma — that of Life. 

8. God, then, is Sire of Cosmos ; Cosmos, of 
[all] in Cosmos. And Cosmos is God's Son ; but 
things in Cosmos are by Cosmos. 

Hosted by Google 



134 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

And properly hath it been called Cosmos 
[Order] ; for that it orders ^ all with their diversity 
of birth, with its not leaving aught without its 
life, with the unweariedness of its activity, the 
speed of its necessity, the composition of its 
elements, and order of its creatures. 

The same, then, of necessity and of propriety 
should have the name of Order. 

The sense-and- thought, then, of all lives doth 
come into them from without, inbreathed by 
what contains [them all] ; whereas Cosmos 
receives them once for all together with its 
coming into being, and keeps them as a gift from 
God. 

9. But God is not, as some suppose, beyond 
the reach of sense-and-thought. It is through 
superstition men thus impiously speak. 

For all the things that are, Asclepius, all are 
in God, are brought by God to be, and do 
depend on Him — both things that act through 
bodies, and things that through soul-substance 
make [other things] to move, and things that 
make things live by means of spirit, and things 
that take unto themselves the things that are 
worn out. 

And rightly so ; nay, I would rather say, 
He doth not have these things ; but I speak 
forth the truth, He is them all Himself He 

^ Or adorns. 

Hosted by Google 



ON THOUGHT AND SENSE 135 

doth not get them from without, but gives them 
out [from Him]. 

This is God's sense-and-thought, ever to move 
all things. And never time shall be when e'en a 
whit of things that are shall cease; and when 
I say " a whit of things that are," I mean a whit 
of God. For things that are, God hath ; nor 
aught [is there] without Him, nor [is] He without 
aught. 

1 0. These things should seem to thee, Asclepius, 
if thou dost understand them, true ; but if thou 
dost not understand, things not to be believed. 

To understand is to believe, to not believe is 
not to understand. 

My word (logos) doth go before [thee] ^ to the 
truth. But mighty is the mind, and when it 
hath been led by word up to a certain point, it 
hath the power to come before [thee ^] to the 
truth. 

And having thought o'er all these things, and 
found them consonant with those which have 
already been translated by the reason, it ^ hath 
[e'en now] believed, and found its rest in that 
Fair Faith. 

To those, then, who by God['s good aid] do 
understand the things that have been said [by 

1 Cf. a H,, iv. (v.) 11 ; vii. (viii.) 2 : x. (xi.) 21 ; R. 23, n. 5. 

2 That is, presumably, before tlie pupil of the Gnosis is 
conscious of it in his physical brain. 

•^ Sc. the mind. 

Hosted by Google 



136 THRICE-GEEATEST HERMES 

us] above, they're credible ; but unto those who 
understand them not, incredible. 

Let so much, then, suffice on thought-and- 
sense. 



COMMENTARY 

Title and Ordering 

This treatise bears a double title :— '^ On Thought 
and Sense/' and " That the Beautiful and Good is in 
God only/' The former heading is clearly taken from 
the concluding words: "Let so much then suffice on 
thought-and-sense " ; whereas the introductory sentence 
speaks of the Sermon on Sense only. The latter head- 
ing seems to be a thoughtless repetition of the title 
of 0, H., vi. (vii.). 

The opening words : " I gave the Perfect Sermon 
yesterday, Asclepius," inform us not only that we have 
to do with an Asclepius Dialogue, but also that our 
sermon followed directly on the ''Perfect Sermon," a 
Latin version of which has fortunately been preserved 
to us.^ 

It is, therefore, of very great interest to find that 
Lactantius,^ in quoting a sentence from our treatise 
(§ 4) — " Devotion is God-gnosis ''—continues with the 
words : " Asclepius, his hearer, has also explained the 
same idea at greater length in the Perfect Sermon." 

A For it would, of course, be absurd to suppose that tbe '' Perfect 
Sermon" could in any way be thought to indicate G. If., vi. (vii.), 
the last Asclepius Dialogue in our Corpus ; especially when our 
sermon (§ 4) directly combats the teaching of Q. H.^ vi. 

3 Div. Institt., ii. 15 (Ed. Fritz.^ i. 106) ; cf. also v. 14. 



Hosted by Google 



ON THOUGHT AND SENSE 137 

Lactantius had, therefore, a collection before him 
in which these two sermons stood in close connection. 

Eeitzenstein (p. 195) thinks that our sermon must 
be an extract from a longer one, because he cannot 
bring himself to believe that so short a treatise could 
have been found in immediate connection (as the 
opening words suggest) with so lengthy and detailed 
a tractate as the " Perfect Sermon." This may be so ; 
and yet the formal beginning and ending of our sermon 
would seem to suggest that we are dealing with a 
complete tractate and not with an extract. 

" Sense-and-Thought " 

The doctrine that in men " sense - and - thought " 
together constitutes human '' sense '' throws some light 
on the meaning of the term " sense " as used elsewhere 
in the Trismegistic literature, where we should expect 
to find " mind " employed, and that, too, in the sense 
of the higher mind. 

Normal human " thought," then, is, so to say, sensible, 
entirely bound up in sense-impressions ; it is the mind 
alone that can soar beyond the senses, for it alone can 
be " illumined by God's Light " (§ 3). 

The mind is, as it were, a womb or woman, that can 
be impregnated either by the " Seeds of God " or by the 
" Daimonial Energy " ; she thus conceives and brings 
forth virtues or vices. 

All of this is precisely the same doctrine as Philo 
preaches, as may be seen by the passages we have 
quoted in the " Prolegomena '' on the subject of the 
'* Sacred Marriage." 

Those in Gnosis 

The Seeds of God are Virtue and Self-control and 
Devotion or Piety; and Devotion in its true sense 



Hosted by Google 



138 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

is God-gnosis, or Knowledge of God. The Gnostics, 
then, " they who are in Gnosis "-—a curious expression — 
because of their natural divorcement from the " world " 
'' please not the many, nor the many them/' 

"They are thought mad and laughed at; they're 
hated and despised, and sometimes even put to death." 

Mark the impersonal note, the calm laying down of 
the causes of misunderstanding between the " many " 
and the "few"; and compare this with the more 
personal note of the saying underlying the following 
Synoptic accommodations : 

" Blessed are ye when men hate you and excommuni- 
cate you, and revile and expel your Name as evil, for 
the Son of Man's sake " (Luke vi. 22). 

" Blessed are ye when men revile you and persecute 
you and say all evil against you, lying, for My sake " 
(Matt. V. 11). 

It is clear, at least it seems so to me, that '' Luke " 
has kept closer to the original, and that that original 
was addressed not only to the members of a community, 
but to those who had been cast forth from some other 
community " for the sake of the Son of Man " — that is, 
because of the immediate inspiration of the Logos, 
which doubtless did not pay sufficient attention to the 
prejudices of the *' many " of that community. 

" Matthew," on the contrary, seems to have adapted 
the Saying for general purposes and the necessities of 
the Cult of Jesus.^ 

The True Gnostic 

Excellent also is the doctrine that the true " Gnostic," 
the man who is consciously growing into the stature of 

^ E,. (p. 213, 1) brings this passage of our sermon into connection 
with some assumed persecution of the Pcemandres communities 
in the course of the fourth century ; but I cannot myself see tbe 
sUghtest ground for such an assumption. 



Hosted by Google 



ON THOUGHT AND SENSE 139 

the Christ, the true " Devotee of God/' " will bear with 
all," for he is beginning to know the Eeason of things. 

" For such an one all things, e'en though they be for 
others bad, are for him good ; deliberately he doth 
refer them all unto the Gnosis." 

He sees the Good, he sees God, in all things. He 
is the true Alchemist. For ''thing most marvellous, 
'tis he alone who maketh bad things good " ; by 
spiritual alchemy he transmutes the evil of the world to 
good ; he drains the '' cup of bitterness " unto the dregs, 
and transmutes it into the pure Water of Life. 

In every Man, then, there are two " men," the material 
(or hylic) and the substantial (or spiritual, ovcricoSr]^). 

Evil, however, is not a permanent thing; it is but 
the process of " becoming good," the productive side of 
things (§ 5). 

The Goal of the Gnosis 

It is difficult to bring out the delicacy of the wording 
of the original in translation. First God's ultimate 
intention is stated to be the making of all things like 
unto (ojULota) Himself ; the world-process is to be ulti- 
mately consummated in the Great Sameness of Union 
with Him. But meantime while this making, creating 
or becoming, or transformation, is going on, the imper- 
fections cannot produce, that is, become creators in their 
turn ; they are unproductive {a(f)opa). That which is 
the instrument or organ of God's making is the Cosmic 
Course {<popd). We are finally (§7) told that the 
differences of bodies are conditioned by the speed of 
this Cosmic Course ; therefore the opposite poles, Other 
and Same, are both ultimately referable to Cosmos, the 
Likeness of God. 

The end to be achieved is to develop the ** sense-and- 
thought " of the Cosmos, the One Sense, not manifold, 



Hosted by Google 



140 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

but simple. This is the deliberate working with the 
Will of God, the Cosmic Will, the perpetual renewing 
of all things {avavG(jocn<s). 

The Cosmos, then, as the Logos of God, is the Good 
Gardener of Life ; it is both the place of Life and its 
Creator — that is to say, both female and male, both 
Mother and Father. 

The Possibility of Knowing God 

But the Cosmos is not apart from God, nor even in 
God ; God does not have Cosmos as a possession, but is 
Cosmos and all therein (§ 9). Cosmos is Son of God, 
His Very Self (§ 8). 

Therefore we can learn to know somewhat of the 
nature of God by sense and thought, for, '' God is not, 
as some suppose, beyond the reach of sense and thought " 
((haiG-OtjTog Kal avorjTO^) ; that is, God does not entirely 
transcend sense and thought, for God is all things. 

''As some suppose" doubtless refers again to the 
" blasphemers " of § 4 — that is, the apparently dualistic 
doctrine set forth in 0, H.^ vi. (vii.).^ 

And so, finally, we learn that Faith, in the true sense, 
is a certitude of the mind, or of true manhood. " To 
understand is to believe" (§ 10). Gnosis and not belief 
is the Fair Faith. 

Compare with this the " Perfect Sermon," x. 1 : 

" The reason for a thesis such as this, my Asclepius, 
I would that thou should'st grasp, not only with the 
keen attention of thy soul, but also with its living power 
as well. 

'' For 'tis a reason that most men cannot believe ; the 
Perfect and the True are to be grasped by the more holy 
minds. " 

1 Reitzenstein (p. 171, 2) compares this doctrine of the insensi- 
bihty and mcognizability of God with the Sabsean Gnosis. 



Hosted by Google 



CORPUS HEEMETICUM X. (XL) 



THE KEY 

Of Thrice-Greatest Hermes 

(Text : P, 67-84 ; Pat. 9b~12.) 

1. Hermes, My yesterday's discourse (logos) 
I did devote to thee, Asclepius, and so 'tis 
[only] right I should devote to-day's to Tat ; 
and this the more because 'tis the abridgment 
of the General Sermons (Logoi) which he has 
had addressed to him. 

'' God, Father and the Good," then, Tat, hath ^ 
the same nature, or more exactly, energy. 

For nature is a predicate of growth, and used 
of things that change, both mobile and immobile, 
that is to say, both human and divine, each one 
of which He willeth into being, 

1 The three are only different names for one idea ; the verb is 
in the singular in the Greek. Of. C. H., ii. (iii.) 16 and 17 : 
" Good then is God and God is Good " ; and " The other name of 
God is Father." 

141 

Hosted by Google 



142 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

But energy consists in something else, as we 
have shown in treating of the rest, both things 
divine and human things ^ ; which thing we 
ought to have in mind when treating of the 
Good.^ 

2, God's energy is then His Will ; further 
His essence is to will the being of all things. 
For what is '' God and Father and the Good " 
but the to he of all that are not yet? Nay, 
subsistence ^ self of everything that is ;— this, 
then, is God, this Father, this the Good ; to Him 
is added naught of all the rest. 

And though the Cosmos, that is to say the 
Sun, is also sire himself to them that share in 
him ; yet so far is he not the cause of good 
unto the lives, he is not even of their living. 

So that e'en if he be a sire, he is entirely 
so by the compulsion of the Good's Good-will, 
apart from which nor being nor becoming could 
e'er be. 

3. x4gain, the parent is the children's cause, 
both on the father's and the mother's side,* only 
by sharing in^ the Good's desire [that doth 
pour] through the Sun. It is the Good which 
doeth the creating. 

And such a power can be possessed by no one 

1 That is to say, presumably, in the General Sermons. 

2 Lit. of this. 3 ovapli^. Gf. C. if., xvi. 4. 
* Lit. both with regard to seed and nourishment. 

'' Lit. taking. 



Hosted by Google 



THE KEY 143 

else than Him alone who taheth naught/ but 
wills all things to be ; I will not, Tat, say 
makes. 

For that the maker is defective for long periods 
(in which he sometimes makes, and sometimes 
doth not make) both in the quality and in the 
quantity [of what he makes] ; in that he some- 
times maketh them so many and such like, and 
sometimes the reverse. 

But **God and Father and the Good" is 
[cause] for all to be. So are at least these 
things for who can see, 

4. For It doth will to be, and It is both Itself 
and most of all by reason of^ Itself. Indeed 
all other things beside are just because of It ; 
for the distinctive feature of the Good is '' that 
it should be known." Such is the Good, Tat. 

Tat Thou hast, father, filled us so fulP of 
this so good and fairest Sight, that thereby my 
mind's eye hath now become for me almost a 
thing to worship. 

For that the Vision of the Good doth not, 
like the sun's beam, fire-like blaze on the eyes 
and make them close ; nay, on the contrary, it 
shineth forth and maketh to increase the seeing * 
of the eye, as far as e'er a man hath the capacity 

1 Of. G. H,, ii. (iii.) 16 : "The Good is He who gives all things 
and naught receives." 

2 Lit. for. 

^ 4ir\r)pa}(ras, — reminding us of irX'fipwfxa. 4 Lit. light. 

Hosted by Google 



144 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

to hold the inflow of the radiance that the mind 
alone can see. 

Not only does it come more swiftly down to 
us, but it does us no harm, and is instinct with 
all immortal life. 

5. They who are able to drink in a somewhat 
more than others of this Sight, ofttimes from 
out the body fall asleep into this fairest Spectacle, 
as was the case with Uranus and Cronus, our 
forebears.-'^ May this be our lot too, father 
mine ! 

Her. Yea, may it be, my son ! But as it 
is, we are not jet strung to the Vision, and 
not as yet have we the power our mind's eye to 
unfold and gaze upon the Beauty of the Good- 
Beauty that naught can e'er corrupt or any 
comprehend. 

For [only] then wilt thou upon It gaze when 
thou canst say no word concerniMg It. For 
Gnosis of the Good is holy silence and a giving 
holiday to every sense. 

6. For neither can he who perceiveth It, 
perceive aught else ; nor he who gazeth on It, 
gaze on aught else ; nor hear aught else, nor 
stir his body any way. Staying his body's 
every sense and every motion he stayeth still. 

And shining then all round his mind, It shines 

^ See Lact., D. Institt., i. 11 ; P. S. A., xi. 4, xxxvii. 3 ; and 
Ex. i. 4, 



Hosted by Google 



THE KEY 145 

through his whole soul, and draws it out of 
body, transforming all of him to essence. 

For it is possible, my son, that a man's soul 
should be made like to God, e'en while it still 
is in a body, if it doth contemplate the Beauty 
of the Good. 

7. Tat Made like to God ! What dost thou, 
father, mean ? 

Her. Of every soul apart are transformations, 
son. 

Tat, What meanest thou ? Apart ! 

Her} Didst thou not, in the General Sermons, 
hear that from One Soul — the All-soul — come 
all these souls which are made to revolve in all 
the cosmos, as though divided off? 

Of these souls, then, it is that there are many 
changes, some to a happier lot and some to 
[just] the contrary of this. 

Thus some that were once creeping things 
change into things that in the water dwell, the 
souls of water things change to earth-dwellers, 
those that live on the earth change into things 
with wings, and souls that live in air change 
into men, while human souls reach the first step 
of deathlessness changed into daimones. 

And so they circle to the choir of the Inerrant 
Gods ; for of the Gods there are two choirs, the 

^ From here to end of § 8 is quoted by Stobaeus, Phys.^ I. xli. 
48 (G. i. 429, 430 ; W. 416, 18 fF.). 

VOL. II. 10 

Hosted by Google 



146 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

one Inerrant, and the other Errant. And this 
is the most perfect glory of the soul. 

8. But if a soul on entering in the body of a 
man persisteth in its vice,^ it neither tasteth 
deathlessness nor shareth in the Good ; but 
speeding back again it turns into the path that 
leads to creeping things. This is the sentence 
of the vicious soul. 

And the soul's vice is ignorance.-^ For that 
the soul who hath no knowledge of the things 
that are, or knowledge of their nature, or of 
Good, is blinded by the body's passions and 
tossed about. 

This wretched soul, not knowing what she is, 
becomes the slave of bodies of strange form in 
sorry plight, bearing the body as a load ; not 
as the ruler, but the ruled. This [ignorance] 
is the soul's vice. 

9. But on the other hand the virtue of the 
soul is Gnosis. For he who knows, he good and 
pious is, and still while on the earth ^ divine. 
TaL But who is such an one, father mine ? 
Her, He who doth not say much or lend 
his ear to much. For he who spendeth time 
in arguing and hearing arguments, doth shadow- 

2 Gf, a K, xii. (xiii.) 3 : « The great iU of the soul is Godless- 
nes8 " ; also below § 20 : '' What greater chastisement of any 
human soul can there be, son, than lack of piety !■ " 

" Lit. already. 

Hosted by Google 



THE KEY 147 

fight. For "God, the Father and the Good," 
is not to be obtained by speech or hearing. 

And yet though this is so, there are in all 
the beings senses, in that they cannot without 
senses he. 

But Gnosis is far different from sense. For 
sense is brought about by that which hath the 
mastery o'er us, while Gnosis is the end of 
science,^ and science is God's gift. 

10. All science is incorporal, the instrument 
it uses being the mind, just as the mind employs 
the body. 

Both then come into bodies, [I mean] both 
things that are cognizable by mind alone and 
things material.^ For all things must consist 
out of antithesis and contrariety ; and this can 
otherwise not be. 

Tat, Who then is this material God of whom 
thou speakest ? 

Her, Cosmos is beautiful^ but is not good ^ — 
for that it is material and freely passible * ; and 
though it is the first of all things passible, yet 
is it in the second rank of being and wanting 
in itself. 

And though it never hath itself its birth in 
time, but ever is, yet is its being in becoming, 

^ i-mo'r-fjfi'ns, 2 Or hylic. 

3 Bute/. P. 6^^.,xxvii. 1. 

^ That is capable of suffering, or impressionable by agencies 
other than itself. 

Hosted by Google 



148 ^rHRIOE-GREATEST HERMES 

becoming for all time the genesis of qualities 
and quantities ; for it is mobile and all material 
motion's genesis.^ 

11, It is intelligible^ rest that moves material 
motion in this way,^ since Cosmos is a sphere— 
that is to say, a head. And naught of head 
above's material, as naught of feet below's in- 
telligible/ but all material. 

And head itself moved in a sphere-like way — - 
that is to say, as head should move,^ is mind. 

All then that are united to the ''tissue" of 
this ''head" (in which® is soul) are in their 
nature free from death,— just as when body hath 
been made in soul, are things that have more soul 
than body. 

Whereas those things which are at greater 
distance from this " tissue '' — there, where are 
things which have a greater share of body than 
of soul-™are by their nature subject unto death. 

The whole, however, is a life ; so that the 
universe consists of both the hylic and of the 
intelligible.^ 

12. Again, the Cosmos is the first of living 

1 Genesis and becoming are botli y^p^ins in Greek. 

2 Noetic as opposed to hylic— ttie antithesis and contrariety 
mentioned above. 

3 Namely the ever-becoming of genesis. 

* Or mental, in the sense of being of tlie same nature as the mind. 
•'' K^cfyaXiKws. <^' 111 which " tissue," 

^ §§ 12, 13 are quoted by Stobeeus, Phys., I. xxxix. 9 (G. i. 307 ; 
W. 350, 13 ff.). 

Hosted by Google 



THE KEY 149 

things, while man is second after it, though first 
of things subject to death. 

Man hath the same ensouling power in him 
as all the rest of living things ^ ; yet is he not only 
not good, but even evil,^ for that he's subject 
unto death.^ 

For though the Cosmos also is not good in 
that it suffers motion, it is not evil, in that it 
is not subject unto death. But man, in that 
he's subject both to motion and to death, is evil* 

13. Now then the principles^ of man are this- 
wise vehicled : mind in the reason (logos), the 
reason in the soul, soul in the spirit,^ [^i^d] spirit 
in the body. 

Spirit pervading [body]^ by means of veins 
and arteries and blood, bestows upon the living 
creature motion, and as it were doth bear it in 
a way. 

For this cause some do think the soul is blood, 
in that they do mistake its nature, not knowing 
that [at death] it is the spirit that must first 

1 That is to say, the world-system itself and all the globes in it. 

2 Of. Ex. i. 11 and 15. 

•"^ Whereas the system and its globes are regarded as practically 
immortal. 

'* Reitzenstein (p. 40, 1) gives a revised text of the major part 
of this utterance of Hermes, from " Cosmos is beautiful " onwards, 
but unfortunately he omits just the most obscure sentences in it. 

^ Lit. a man's soul, where ^vx^ is used in a general sense, and 
not in the particular sense applied to it in the category which 
immediately follows. 

*^ TcviVfxari. ^ Gf. P. S. A., vi. 4. 



Hosted by Google 



150 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

withdraw into the soul, whereon the blood con- 
geals and veins and arteries are emptied, and 
then the living creature is withdrawn ; and this 
is body's death. 

14. Now from One Source^ all things depend ; 
while Source [dependeth] from the One and Only 
[One], Source is, moreover, moved to become 
Source again ; whereas the One standeth per- 
petually and is not moved. 

Three then are they : '' God, the Father and 
the Good," Cosmos and man. 

God doth contain Cosmos ; Cosmos [con- 
taineth] man. Cosmos is e'er God's Son, man 
as it were Cosmos's child. 

15. Not that, however, God ignoreth man; 
nay, right well doth He know him, and willeth to 
be known. 

This is the sole salvation for a man — God's 
Gnosis. This is the Way Up to the Mount. ^ 

By Him alone the soul becometh good, not 
whiles is good, whiles evil, but [good] out of 
necessity. 

Tat What dost thou mean, Thrice-greatest 
one? 

He7\ Behold an infant's soul, my son, that 
is not yet cut off,^ because its body is still small 
and not as yet come unto its full bulk/ 

' apxh- ^ Lit. to Olympus. -^ Sc, from the world-soul. 

'^ Of. the instructive exposition of Basilides in F. F. F., pp. 274 f. 

Hosted by Google 



THE KEY 151 

Tat. How? 

Her. A thing of beauty altogether is [such 
a soul] to see, not yet befouled by body's 
passions, still all but hanging from the Cosmic 
Soul! 

But when the body grows in bulk and draweth 
down the soul into its mass, then doth the soul 
cut off itself and bring upon itself forgetfulness, 
and no more shareth in the Beautiful and Good. 
And this forgetfulness becometh vice. 

16. It is the same for them who go out from 
the body. 

For when the soul withdraws into itself, the 
spirit doth contract itself within the blood, and 
soul within the spirit.^ And then the mind, 
stript of its wrappings, and naturally divine, 
taking unto itself a fiery body, doth traverse 
every space, after abandoning the soul unto its 
judgment and whatever chastisement it hath 
deserved. 

Tat.'^ What dost thou, father, mean by this ? 
The mind is parted from the soul and soul from 

1 This is generally translated *' the spirit is contracted into the 
blood, and the soul into the spirit," but such a translation con- 
tradicts § 13, where we are told that " the spirit withdraws into 
the soul" at death. It seems to mean that the spirit passes 
tvithin, out of the blood, and the soul is then clothed in a spirit- 
vesture, or borne in a spirit- vehicle. 

2 From here to the end of § 18 is quoted by Stobseus, PMjs., 
xl. 3 (G. i. 312, 313 ; W. 310, 25 fF.) ; only the dialogue is ascribed 
in error to Asclepius and Tat and not to Hermes and Tat. 

Hosted by Google 



152 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

spirit? Whereas thou said'st the soul was the 
mind's vesture, and the soul's the spirit. 

17. Her, The hearer, son, should think with 
him who speaks and breathe with him ^ ; nay, 
he should have a hearing subtler than the voice 
of him who speaks. 

It is, son, in a body made of earth that this 
arrangement of the vestures comes to pass. 
For in a body made of earth it is impossible the 
mind should take its seat itself by its own self 
in nakedness. 

For neither is it possible on the one hand the 
earthy body should contain such immortality, nor 
on the other that so great a virtue should endure 
a body passible in such close contact with it. It 
taketh, then, the soul for as it were an envelope. 

And soul itself, being too a thing divine, doth 
use the spirit as its envelope, while spirit doth 
pervade the living creature. 

18. When then the mind doth free itself from 
the earth- body, it straightway putteth on its 
proper robe of fire, with which it could not 
dwell in an earth-body. 

For earth doth not bear fire ; for it is all set 
in a blaze even by a small spark. And for this 
cause is water poured round earth, to be a guard 
and wall, to keep the blazing of the fire away. 

But mind, the swiftest thing of all divine out- 
1 Gf. P. R A., X. 1. 

Hosted by Google 



THE KEY 153 

thinkings, and swifter than all elements, hath 
for its body fire. 

For mind being builder^ doth use the fire as 
tool for the construction of all things — the Mind 
of all [for the construction] of all things, but 
that of man only for things on earth. 

Stript of its fire the mind on earth cannot 
make things divine, for it is human in its 
dispensation.^ 

19. The soul in man, however, — not every 
soul, but one that pious is — is a daimonic some- 
thing and divine. 

And such a soul when from the body freed, if 
it have fought the fight of piety — the fight of 
piety is to know God and to do wrong to no man 
— such soul becomes entirely mind. 

Whereas the impious soul remains in its own 
essence, chastised by its own self, and seeking 
for an earthy body where to enter, if only it be 
human. 

For that no other body can contain a human 
soul ; nor is it right that any human soul should 
fall into the body of a thing that doth possess 
no reason. For that the law of God is this : to 
guard the human soul from such tremendous 
outrage.^ 

1 BTjfjLtovpyds, ^ rfi tioiKiiffet, i.e. in its economy. 

3 This paragraph is quoted by Stobaens, Phys., xli. 49 (Gr. i. 
430, 431 ; W. 417, 15 ff.). For the idea, cf. P. S. A., xxxii. 2. 

Hosted by Google 



154 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

20. Tat, How father, then, is a man's soul 
chastised ? 

Her. What greater chastisement of any human 
soul can there be, son, than lack of piety ? 
What fire has so fierce flame as lack of piety ? 
What ravenous beast so mauls the body as lack 
of piety the very soul 1 

Dost thou not see what hosts of ills the 
impious soul doth bear ? 

It shrieks and screams : I burn ; I am ablaze ; 
1 know not what to cry or do ; ah, wretched 
me, I am devoured by all the ills that compass 
me about ; alack, poor me, I neither see nor hear ! 

Such are the cries wrung from a soul chastised ; 
not, as the many think, and thou, son, dost 
suppose, that a [man's] soul, passing from body, 
is changed into a beast. 

Such is a very grave mistake, for that the 
way a soul doth suflFer chastisement is this : 

21. When mind becomes a daimon, the law 
requires that it should take a fiery body to 
execute the services of God ; and entering in 
the soul most impious it scourgeth it with whips 
made of its sins. 

And then the impious soul, scourged with its 
sins, is plunged in murders, outrage, blasphemy, 
in violence of all kinds, and all the other things 
whereby mankind is wronged.^ 

1 Cf. P. /S. A.^ XXV. 4 and xxviii. 1. 

Hosted by Google 



THE KEY 155 

But on the pious soul the mind doth mount 
and guide it ^ to the Gnosis' Light. And such a 
soul doth never tire in songs of praise [to God] 
and pouring blessing on all men, and doing 
good in word and deed to all, in imitation of 
its Sire.*^ 

22. Wherefore, my son, thou shouldst give 
praise to God and pray that thou mayst have thy 
mind Good [Mind]. It is, then, to a better state 
the soul doth pass ; it cannot to a worse. 

Further ^ there is an intercourse * of souls ; 
those of the gods have intercourse with those of 
men, and those of men with souls of creatures 
which possess no reason. 

The higher, further, have in charge the lower ; 
the gods look after men, men after animals 
irrational,^ while God hath charge of all ; for 
He is higher than them all and all are less 
than He. 

Cosmos is subject, then, to God, man to the 
Cosmos, and irrationals to man. But God is o'er 
them all, and God contains them alL 

God's rays, to use a figure, are His energies ; 
the Cosmos's are natures ; the arts and sciences 
are man's. ^^ 

1 Of. a H., iv. (v.) n ; vii. (viii.) 11 ; ix. (x.) 10 ; R. 23, n. 5. 
^ Namely, the Good. 

"' From liere to the end is quoted by Stobseus, Phys.^ I. xxxix. 8 
(G. i. 305-307 ; W. 303, 14 fF.). 
^ Koipccvla. Of. P. & A.J xxiii. L 
5 Gf. P. S. A., V. 1. « Cf. Ex. viii. 1. 

Hosted by Google 



156 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

The energies act through the Cosmos, thence 
through the nature-rays of Cosmos upon man ; 
the nature-rays [act] through the elements ; man 
[acteth] through the sciences and arts. 

23. This is the dispensation ^ of the universe, 
depending from the nature of the One, pervading 
[all things] through the Mind, than which ^ is 
naught diviner or of greater energy ; and naught 
a greater means for the at-oning men to gods 
and gods to men. 

He, [Mind,] is the Good Daimon. Blessed the 
soul that is most filled with Him, and wretched ^ 
is the soul that's empty of the Mind. 

Tat, Father, what dost thou mean, again ? 

Her} Dost think then, son, that every soul 
hath the Good [Mind]1 For 'tis of Him we 
speak, not of the mind in service ^ of which we 
just were speaking, the mind sent down for [the 
soul's] chastisement. 

24. For soul without the mind '' can neither 
speak nor act."^ For oftentimes the mind doth 
leave the soul, and at that time the soul nor sees 

1 BioUrio-tSj compare § 19. 

2 Sc. the Mind. 

^ KaKodai/xcoVj as oppOSed to o ayadhs Saificai/, It is impossible to 
reproduce the original word-play in translation. 

^ Stobaeus (Gaisford) here reads " A." — that is, Asclepius. 

^> Tov virrjperiKovj compare § 21, "the services of God" (r&s rod 
06oO vtr-np^alas) ; that is to say, Hermes speaks of the Universal 
Mind and not of the mind in man. 

^ A quotation from the ancient gnomic poet Theognis (v. 177). 
Theognis lived c. 570-490 B.C. 

Hosted by Google 



THE KEY 157 

nor understands, but is just like a thing that 
hath no reason. Such is the power of mind. 

Yet doth it not endure a sluggish ^ soul, but 
leaveth such a soul tied to the body and bound 
tight down by it. Such soul, my son, doth not 
have Mind ; and therefore such an one should 
not be called a man} For that man is a thing- 
of-life ^ divine ; man is not measured with the 
rest of lives of things upon the earth, but with 
the lives above in heaven, who are called gods. 

Nay more, if we must boldly speak the truth, 
the true " man " is e'en higher than the gods, or 
at the [very] least the gods and men are every 
whit in power each with the other equal. 

25. For no one of the gods in heaven shall 
come down on the earth, o'er-stepping heaven's 
limit ; whereas man doth mount up to heaven 
and measure it ; he knows what things of it are 
high, what things are low, and learns precisely 
all things else besides. And greater thing than 
all ; without e'en quitting earth, he doth ascend 
above. So vast a sweep doth he possess of 
ecstasy.* 

1 vurpas, —? vcoOpas. Everard translates " an idle or lazy soul," 
in his usual slipshod fashion of inserting doubles ; Parthey gives 
'Hnertem animam" ; Menard, ^H^dme vicieuse^^ ; Chambers, 
"inert." Several of the old editors omit the entire sentence. 

2 Cf. Philo, De Som., § 20 ; M. i. 639 ; P. 584 (Ri. iii. 241) : 
" not for those who are called men, but for those who are truly so." 

2 Or animal. 

4 iKorrdo-^wsy lit. extension, or consciousness. 

Hosted by Google 



158 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

For this cause can a man dare say that man 
on earth is god subject to death, while god in 
heaven is man from death immune. 

Wherefore the dispensation of all things is 
brought about hy means of^ these, the twain — 
Cosmos and Man ^ — but hy ^ the One. 



COMMENTAKY 

The Consummation of the ''General Sermons" 

What " yesterday's sermon," which Hermes addressed 
to Asclepius, may have been, we have no means of 
deciding. The similarity of the phrase with the 
opening words of G, H., ix. (x.) is noticeable, and points, 
perhaps, to a collection of Sermons to Asclepius and 
Tat strung together in some chronological order, as 
delivered day by day. If this be the fact, however, we 
must assume that such introductions were prefixed by 
the editor of that collection. 

''The Key of Thrice-greatest Hermes" must have 
been considered one of the most remarkable documents 
of the school, for, as we have already mentioned in the 
case of " The Cup " treatise, the apocryphal " Books of 
Moses " plagiarize the title.* 

That it was an important treatise may also be seen 
from the fact that Stobaeus reproduces no less than five 
extracts from it under the title, '' From the [Sermons] 
of Hermes to Tat," or simply " Of Hermes." Strangely 
enough in ttvo cases (xxxix. 8 and xl. 3) Stobseus makes 

' Bid. 2 Of. p. S, A., X. 3. 

■' iW. ' R. 182, 3 ; 190, 2. 



Hosted by Google 



THE KEY 159 

the persons of the dialogue Asclepius and Tat; this, 
however, must be a mistake, for it contradicts his own 
headings, it contradicts the nature of the sermon, it 
contradicts the supposed introduction of the editor of 
the collection from whom the redactor of our Corpus has 
taken his text, and it contradicts Chalcidius, who quotes 
from our treatise as a treatise of Hermes.^ 

Nevertheless, in spite of the importance of the 
treatise, it purports to be an epitome,^ an abridgment 
of the " General Sermons" (ol yeviKol Xoyoiy addressed 
to Tat. 

The sermon itself, however, has by no means the 
appearance of being an abridgment; on the contrary, 
it is one of the most complete and fundamental 
expositions that we have. 

I would, therefore, suggest that the general reference 
in the words, "as we have shown in treating of the 
rest" (§ 1), and the precise reference to *'The General 
Sermons," in § 7, have originated this wording of the 
introduction with the editor of the collection of 
Asclepius and Tat Sermons which I have previously 
supposed. It is a gloss of the editor and no part of the 
original text. 

If this argument holds good, " The Key," instead of 

1 Chalcid., Comment, in Timceum (ed. Fabric), p. 350. 

2 Compare also the introduction to 0. H., xvi. (see R. 191, 1) ; 
and also Ex. i. 16 and Comment. 

3 (y. § 7, below ; G. E., xiii. (xiv.) 1 ; and Exs. ix. 1 and xviii. 1. 
The title must be so translated, I think, in spite of the fact that in 
the introductory words of the above treatise the term is imme- 
diately followed by the antithesis "rebirth" (TraXiyyevcaria), as 
though the Sermons were on birth or genesis (76i/c(ris),— which, 
as we know from the Naassene Document, was the subject of 
the Lesser Mysteries, whereas Rebirth was that of the Greater. 
Everard gives " in the general speeches " ; Parthey, '* in com- 
munibus " ; Menard, " dans les discours generaux " ; Chambers, " in 
the Generalities." 



Hosted by Google 



160 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

being an epitome, is a further teaching that presupposes 
a prior instruction already given in **The General 
Sermons," and so stands out as a more intimate 
exposition of the inward doctrine of the higher grades 
of the school. 

Eeitzenstein (p. 461) would have it that the doctrine 
of Sermons, ix. (x.) and x. (xi.), is a mediate one between 
the dualism of vi. (vii.) and the pronounced pantheistic 
mysticism of v. (vi.) and xi. (xii.) ; but I should fancy 
that these labels, even if they are correctly attached, 
would not represent such overwhelming contradictions 
to the Trismegistic doctors as they appear to do to their 
modern critics. There were different points of view ; 
there were different grades of instruction; every 
doctrine had more truth in it at the proper time and 
in the right place. In any case this sermon is one of 
the most beautiful tractates preserved to us. 



The Will of God 

1. Our treatise begins with the statement that the 
universe and all therein is due to the Energy or 
Effective Working of God — that is to say, His Will. 
This Will is immutable and constant — the Law of 
the universe. 

How subtly these philosophers in their most intimate 
circles used these terms may be seen from the Gnostic 
Doctor, Basilides, who writes : 

''N"aught was, — neither matter, nor substance, nor 
voidness of substance, nor simplicity, nor impossibility 
of composition, nor inconceptibility, nor impercepti- 
bility, neither man, nor angel [Hermetice, daimon], nor 
God ; in fine, neither anything at all for which man has 
ever found a name, nor any operation which falls within 
the range either of his perception or conception. 



Hosted by Google 



THE KEY 161 

" Such, or rather far more removed from the power 
of man's comprehension, was the state of Non-Being, 
when the Deity beyond Being, without thinking, or 
feeling, or determining, or choosing, or being compelled, 
or desiring, willed to create universality." 

" When I use the term will," writes Basilides, " I do 
so merely to suggest the idea of an operation tran- 
scending all volition, thought, or sensible action." ^ 

2. God's Energy, or Self-realization, is, then. His 
Will (deXfjcTL^); His Essence (ova-la) or Substance is 
" to will the being of all things " ; in brief, He is the 
Very Subsistence (vTrap^K^) of all — a term which 
subsequently came into great prominence in the later 
Platonic philosophy. 

3. In § 3 we have a clear distinction drawn between 
the transcendent idea of God as Creator or Wilier, and 
the ordinary conception of God as Maker or Fabricator 
or Demiurge — a distinction that meets us in almost 
every Gnostic system. In our treatise, however, there 
is no setting of the one idea over against the other in 
any sense of antagonism. It is only stated that the 
self-operation of Deity transcends all such limited con- 
ceptions as that of a Maker or Fabricator. 

Of Gnosis and Ecstasis 

4. The distinctive feature of God as the Good, or 
the Desirable, the Supreme Consummation, is '' that 
He should be known " (to ypcopi^ea-Oat) ; in other 
words, the science of all sciences is the Gnosis of 
God. 

5. The Vision Glorious, the One Sight, is next spoken 
of under the simile of the shining of a Eay of the Light 

1 Hipp., PhUos., vii. 21 (ed. D. and S., p. 358) ; F. F. F., pp. 
257, 258. 

VOL, II. 11 



Hosted by Google 



162 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

and Life of the Spiritual Sun into the mind. This con- 
summation of Ecstasis/ we are told, was a transcending 
of the limitations of body, and was a faculty possessed 
by the forebears (irpoyovoi) of the " race " into which 
Hermes and now Tat are being born ; these ancestors 
are mentioned under symbolic Greek names, evidently 
a substitute for Egyptian ones, for the reference is 
clearly to the priesthood of some past civilization of 
the Mle Land. At the same time, it can be referred to 
certain grades of super-men, regarded as gods, who had 
reached to certain stages of celestial dignity.^ 

To this idea of ancient Masters of the Gnosis in 
Egypt, Lactantius refers as follows : 

" And so it appears that he [Cronus] was not born 
from Heaven (which is impossible), but from that man 
who was called Uranus ; and that this is so, Trismegistus 
bears witness, when, in stating that there have been 
very few in whom the perfect science has been found, 
he mentioned in their number Uranus, Cronus, and 
Hermes his kinsfolk."-^ 

Lactantius seems to be somewhat under the fascina- 
tion of the theory of Euhemerus, and has no credence in 
the Heaven-born, in spite of the Christ Birth. We, 
however, learn from him that he knew of a statement 
by Hermes in this connection in which, besides Uranus 
and Cronus, an ancient Hermes was mentioned. ISTow 
in our treatise this is not the case, and Tat and not 
Hermes is the speaker ; whereas in P. S. A., xxxvii., 
where Hermes speaks of his progenitor Hermes, no 

1 Of. § 25, where ecstasis is explained as an extension of con- 
sciousness,~a certain " greatness " (fxeyedos), 

2 See the ^' Chart of Orphic Cosmogony," facing p. 87 of my 
Orpheus (London, 1896), where Uranus and Cronus are referred 
to the two lower of the three Noetic "planes" transcending the 
Sensible Universe. 

'^ JJiv, InstiU., i 11 (eel. Fritz., i. 29, 30). 



Hosted by Google 



THE KEY 163 

mention is made of Uranus and Cronus. Therefore 
Laetantius refers to a lost treatise of Hermes. 

Of Apotheosis 

6. The nature of Ecstasy is then further explained ; it 
is the fruit of meditation or contemplation, the con- 
summation of the Theoretic Life. 

" The Gnosis of the Good is holy silence and a giving 
holiday (KaTapyla) to every sense." 

The Holy Silence reminds us of the Sige of the 
Christian Gnostics ; here, however, instead of the 
Mother-^on of Cosmos, it is used in the sense of the 
pure mother-nature of the little cosmos of man, the 
divine womb that brings to birth the true man. 

With this may be compared 0. H., xiii. (xiv.) 2 : 

" Wisdom conceived by mind in silence, such is the 
matter and the womb from out which man is born, and 
the true Good the seed." 

It is hardly necessary to add that this is the Yoga 
of the Upanishads. Indeed, the first part of § 6 might 
be taken word for word from those sublime treatises 
of Vaidik theosophy, and shows how identical is the 
thought of those who have first-hand experience of the 
higher consciousness. 

" For it is possible, my son, that a man's soul should be 
made like to God (aTroOewO^j^ai), e'en while it still is in 
a body, if it doth contemplate the Beauty of the Good." 

This is the " deification " (aTrofleWt?), or '' apotheosis " 
of a man ; he becomes like unto God, in that he becomes 
a god. The Beauty of the Good is the Cosmic Order ; 
and the mode of this meditation was to bring the soul 
into sympathy with the Cosmic Soul. 

The Metamorphoses of the Soul 
7. The secret of this divine operation (or theurgy) is 
based upon the fact that the soul can be transformed 



Hosted by Google 



164 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

into every likeness. The Great Likeness of God is the 
Cosmic Order, the making oneself into this Likeness is 
the supreme transformation or transfiguration of the 
soul. 

The separated or individual soul is in perpetual 
pilgrimage, revolving on the wheel of transformation. 
This doctrine was shared in by many other faiths, and 
it was also Egyptian. 

In this connection we may refer instructively to Hippo- 
lytus' quotations from the Naassene Document (§ 3 S.): 

"And they^ say that the soul is very difficult to 
discover, and hard to understand ; for it never remains 
of the same appearance, or form, or in the same state, 
so that we can describe it by a general type, or com- 
prehend it by an essential quality." 

On this Hippolytus comments : 

"These variegated metamorphoses they^ have laid 
down in the Gospel superscribed 'According to the 
Egyptians.' " 

The Gosfel according to the Egyptians is lost, with the 
exception of a few fragments. We, however, here learn 
that it described the metamorphoses of the soul. It 
was a Gospel having its origin in Egypt and suited to 
Egyptian modes of thought. It follows, therefore, that 
the doctrine of the soul's transformation was Egyptian.^ 

1 The quotation is from the text of the Hellenistic Commentator, 
who is referring to the Chaldeans. 

2 The Gnostics Hippolytus calls the Naassenes. 

•^ Reitzenstein (p. 22, 2) says that it was in error that the 
Greeks stated tlie Egyptians believed in metempsychosis ; in 
this I believe that Reitzenstein is himself in error. The Egyptians 
at any rate demonstrably believed in soul metamorphosis ; and 
when we find people who lived in Egypt teaching this metamor- 
phosis in connection with metempsychosis, it is but natural to 
conclude that the Greeks, who were in. touch with the living 
tradition of Egypt, knew more about the matter than modern 
scepticism. 



Hosted by Google 



THE KEY 165 

The Ladder of Being 

The Hermetic doctrine of the evohition of the soul, 
by means of multitudinous transformations, is character- 
ised by certain main moments, for in the course of it it 
passes through definite stages of existence designated as 
animal, human, daimonic, and god-like ; there being, 
further, two grades of being within the choir of gods— 
the errant and inerrant. The final stage is the most 
perfect glory (So^cx) or power of the soul. 

With all of this there is a strikingly exact parallel of 
ideas in the Pauline Letters. 

" But some one will say : How do the dead rise, and 
with what body do they come [? back] ? 

'* Thou foohsh one ! That which thou so west is not 
made quick unless it die. 

"And that which thou sowest — 'tis not the body 
that shall be thou sowest, but a naked grain of wheat 
or of one of the other seeds.^ 

" 'Tis God that gives to it ^ a body as he will,— yea 
to every one of the seeds its proper body. 

'' Not every flesh is the same flesh ; but there is one 
of men, another flesh of beasts, another flesh of birds, 
and another of fishes. 

"There are also bodies celestial, as well as bodies 
terrestrial. But the glory of the celestial [bodies] is 
one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another. 

" [And of the former] the glory of the sun is one, and 
the glory of the moon is another, and [yet] another is 
the glory of the stars ; for star differeth from star in 
glory. 

" So also is the resurrection of the dead. '' " 

1 Tlie " grain of mustard seed " — " wheat" if a good body comes 
therefrom, "tares" if an imperfect growth results. 

2 Sc, the soul as grain. ^ 1 Cor. xv 35-42. 



Hosted by Google 



166 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

And by "resurrection of the dead," I believe that 
Paul meant what all the instructed of the time meant — 
namely, the *' reaching the first step of deathlessness/' as 
Hermes has it in our treatise. The death or vice of the 
soul is ignorance, the virtue or life of the soul is Gnosis. 

" For he who knows, he good and pious is, and still 
while on the earth, divine." 



Concerning Transmigration 

8. With § 8, however, we are confronted with 
what appears to be a great difficulty. Hermes here 
seems to teach distinctly that a vicious (that is, an 
ignorant) soul, one who has not attained to Gnosis, goes 
back to attachment to animal bodies, while in §| 19 ff., 
he at great length denies that a human soul can 
possibly do so. Is there any solution of this apparently 
complete self-contradiction in one and the same treatise ? 

Far as I am from desiring to play the apologist for 
any scripture, I am prevented from appending an 
impatient "No" to this query, for the following 
considerations : 

In the first place, Hermes in § 8 is speaking of the 
vicious or ignorant soul, while in § 19 he is speaking 
not only of the " human '' soul, but of the human soul 
that hath the Good Mind (§ 23); whereas the ignorant 
soul " doth not have Mind, and, therefore, such an one 
should not be called a man " (§ 24). Here, then, we 
have a fundamental distinction in souls incarnated into 
the " body of a man " (§ 8) ; they are of two classes. 

The doctrine of § 8 applies to one class, the doctrine 
of § 19 to another. 

Metempsychosis, in the sense of continued revolu- 
tion on the wheel of life and death, is only for 
him who "persisteth in his vice" — that is to say, is 



Hosted by Google 



THE KEY 167 

still ignorant. Gnosis thus means the freedom from 
samsara^ to use a common Rrahmanical and Buddhistic 
term. 

The ignorant soul does not see the Light, being 
" blinded by the body's passions, and tossed about " ; 
this is the "turmoil" of which Plato speaks in the 
Timceus. 

And here I must refer the reader to "Plato Con- 
cerning Metempsychosis," in the "Prolegomena," a 
chapter which I have written mainly in elucidation of 
the problems raised by our treatise. 

Gnosis the Virtue of the Soul 

9. So much, then, for the soul which persisteth in its 
vice or ignorance ; but the virtue of the soul is Gnosis. 

"For he who knows, he good and pious is, and 
still while on the earth, divine.'' 

This is precisely the same idea as that of the Jivan- 
mukta in Indian theosophy — namely, the man who has 
reached Mukti or Liberation while still living in the 
body. 

Hermes thus proceeds to distinguish Gnosis, the end 
of human science, from sense or opinion. Gnosis is the 
apotheosis of the mind, its immediate perception of the 
things-that-are — namely, the Intelligible Cosmos. 

11. The Sensible or Hylic Cosmos is then explained, 
and also the nature of man, and his relationship to 
the Cosmos and God. 

The Vehicles of the Soul 

13. The vehicles of man's " Soul " are then categorized 
{}J^vxh <5e avOpcoirov ox^iTat top Tpoirov tovtov), the 
Soul being here used in the sense of the Self, and as 
distinguished from the " soul " in the category. They are 



Hosted by Google 



168 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

as follows, one within the other, in the sense of being 
respectively more intimate to the true nature of man : 

Mind (vovg) ; reason (Xoyog) ; soul (yjrvxv) j spirit 
( TrvevjuLo) ; body {crwjuLa). 

The remarkable similarity of this category with the 
psychology of the Upanishads cannot fail to strike the 
student of those mother-treatises of Vaidik theosophy. 
Ihus we read in the Kathopanishad^ I. iii. 10, 11 : 

'* Beyond the senses are the rudiments ^ ; beyond the 
rudiments impulsive mind; beyond the mind, the 
reason ; beyond the reason, the Great Self. 

'' Beyond the Great, the Increate ^ ; beyond the 
Increate, the Man ^ ; beyond the Man, not any thing ; 
That is the goal; That is the final end." 

The analogy is striking. Body = gross elements ; 
spirit = subtle elements ; soul = impulsive mind 
{manas) ; reason = reason {iuddhi ^) ; Mind = the Great 
(Mahat); Source (axpv) = ^^^ Increate; the One and 
Only (to eV koi jul6pov) = the Man. 

These so-called " vehicles," " envelopes," or '' sheaths " 
(koshas)^ are elsewhere given in the Upanishads as : 
anna-may a-kosha — that is, the kosha composed of, or 
resulting from, food (body) ; prdna-maya~k. , of life 
(spirit) ; mano-maya-k., of impulse (soul) ; vijndna- 
maya-k.j of discrimination (reason); dnanda~maya-k,, 
of bliss (Mind). 

" Spirit " is thus seen to correspond to life {prdna) ; 
it is that which " bestows upon the living creature 
motion, and, as it were, doth bear it " {i.e. support it) 
" in a way" (§ 13). It is not Life, but individualized 

' The subtler elements. 

2 Avyakta, undifFerentiated cosmic substance. 

•' P'urusha^ the True Man. 

* The manas and huddhi of the Upanishads are not to be con- 
founded with these terms as at present employed in modern 
Theosophical literature. 



Hosted by Google 



THE KEY 169 

life, and in the Aupanishad literature is differentiated 
into five modes, which may be almost translated as 
etheric currents or modes of motion in the body.^ 

The quotation from Proclus in " Plato Concerning 
Metempsychosis," will have sufficiently shown that 
this " life " is of the same nature as the animal life. 
It is that principle of soul which man shares with the 
animals. 

The Dual Soul 

And here we may refer to Jamblichus {De Myst., 
viii. 6), when referring to the *' Hermaic writings '' he 
says : 

*' Man has two souls, as these writings say. The one 
is from the first Mind, and partakes also of the power 
of the Creator, while the other, the soul under constraint, 
comes from the revolution of the celestial [spheres] ; into 
the latter the former, the soul that is the seer of God,^ 
insinuates itself at a later period. 

*' This being so, the soul that descends into us from 
the worlds [or spheres] keeps time with the circuit of 
these worlds, while the soul from the Mind existing in 
us in an intelligible fashion is free from the whirl of 
genesis; by this the bonds of Destiny are burst 
asunder ; by this the Path up to the Gods whom 
mind alone can see is brought to birth; by such a 
life as this is that Great Art Divine, which leads us 
up to That beyond the spheres of genesis, brought to 
its consummation." 

Hermes in our treatise is, however, more precise as to 
the so-called *' vehicles " or " souls," for he writes (§ 17) : 

"Mind taketh, then, the soul for, as it were, an 

1 Gf, K. ir., 44, 45, Comment. 

2 Of. G. H.y ix. (x.) 3 : "The daimon who's illumined by God's 
Light." 



Hosted by Google 



170 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

envelope. And soul itself being, too, a thing divine,^ 
doth use the spirit as its envelope, while spirit doth 
pervade the living creature." ^ 



^*He Who Stands" 

The Supreme Principle of all, the One and Only One, 
who *'standeth perpetually" (§ 14), is the Intelhgible 
Logos {rj vo7]Th o-rda-i^y cf. § 11), the o ecrrm of the 
Christianized Gnosis, as seen especially in the Simonian 
Great Announcement. He is the Cause of the perpetual 
motion of the Hylic Cosmos. Compare this with the 
following passage of Numenius : 

" Now there are two modes of life, the first of the 
First and the second of the Second God. For it is 
evident that the First God should be standing (ea-Tw^), 
and the Second, on the contrary, moved. The First, 
then, is occupied about things intelligible, and the 
Second about things intelligible and sensible. 

*' Marvel not that I say this ; for thou shalt hear 
what is still more marvellous. For I say that it is 
not the motion that appertains to the Second, but the 
rest that pertains to the First, which is the innate 
' motion ' from which both their cosmic order and their 
eternal community and their preservation [or salvation] 
is poured forth on things universal." ^ 

1 That is, being logos, as from the Creator or Second Mind. 

^ Of. Exx. iv. 2 ; xv. 2 ; xix. 3 ; and Frag, xviii. 
Quoted by Eusebius, Prcep. Evcmg., XT. xviii. 20, 21 (539 b), 
ed. Dindorf (Leipzig, 1867), ii. 41. We do not know Niimenius' 
date, but it was probably about the first half of the first century 
A.D. Though Numenius is almost invariably designated as a 
Pythagorean, he was rather a universaHst, for his object was not 
only to trace the doctrines of Plato up to Pythagoras, but to show 
that they were not at variance with the doctrines and mysteries 
of the Brahmans, Jews, Magi and Egyptians. 



Hosted by Google 



THE KEY 171 

The Olympian Path 

15. In § 15 the Gnosis is again declared to be the 
only Path of Salvation or Safety.^ It is the Way Up 
to the Mount,^ the Olympian Path. 

The term Eleusis was also interpreted as Anabasis, 
or the Way Up.^ Compare the Jewish commentator 
in the ]N"aa8sene Document (§ 27) : 

"First is the Mystery called 'Eleusis' and 'Anak- 
toreion' — Eleusis because we come from Above, ^ 
streaming down from Adamas,^ . . . and Anaktoreion 
from ' Eeturning Above. ' " 

*'When Mind becomes a Daimon'' 

16. The next main doctrine touched on is one of 
immense importance, for it gives us the inner teach- 
ing which illuminates the " dark saying " in the 
"Poemandres" (§ 24), when treating of the Way Up 
(avoSog) : 

"And thou surrenderest thy way of life unto the 
daimon." 

For in our treatise Hermes tells us that at death : 

"The mind stript of its wrappings, and naturally 
divine, taking unto itself a fiery body, doth traverse 
every space, after abandoning the soul unto its 
judgment and whatever chastisement it hath deserved." 

The key to this is the sentence (§ 21) : 

"When mind becomes a daimon, the law requires 
that it should take a fiery body to execute the services 
of God." 

^ Cf. the passage from Jamblichus quoted above. 

2 Gf. a K, xiii. (xiv.) 1 : " The Passing o'er the Mount." 

3 Cf. G. H., i. 24. 

* Eleusis meaning Coming, Advent. 
^ The Man or Mind. 



Hosted by Google 



172 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

At death, the mind, of its own nature, perforce 
becomes a " servant of God," a Therapeut ^ ; the man is 
his own judge and his own chastizer. 

The " fire of hell " is then but the reflection of the light 
of the mind ; it is the burning remorse of a mind that 
now sees the inevitable results of every selfish action — 
thought, word, and deed ; that each of these comes 
inevitably back on the sender forth of it. 

The soul, thus, lives out (and that too in the most 
realistic fashion, it realizes the actuality of the law in 
all its most minute details) the inevitable consequences 
of its past vicious deeds in body. 

Here we have the hint of a psychology and of an 
inner teaching that persuades us there was a profound 
wisdom at the back of the intermediate instruction of 
these schools. 

Compare this most reasonable theory of after-death 
"illumination" with the crudities of the eternal 
torment idea of popular religion with which we are so 
familiar, and reflect on what a ''falling off" there has 
been from the Gnosis of the early days. 

And what is the " fiery body " of the mind but the 
ray-like or starry vehicle of the man, the avyoeiSh h 
aa-TpoetSh of Philoponus ? ^ 

This is the true " Astral Body " of a man, and not 
the "watery vesture" which is referred to under the 
term in modern nomenclature. 

This is the true Body of Purification, that burns up 
all impurities, and in the light of the conflagration 
burns into man the memory of the Gnosis. 

The soul is thus '' chastised by its own self " ; and 
if Hermes had taught us nothing else, he would have 
amply deserved the gratitude of humanity, and the title 

^ Cy. § 23 : " The mind in service.'' 
'^ See my Orpheus, pp. 292 IT. 



Hosted by Google 



THE KEY 173 

of Thrice-greatest. Yet is "Hermes" no single man, 
but a mind illuminated by the Mind. 

The "Scourge" of the Christ 

21. So then " the impious soul, scourged with its 
own sins, is plunged in murders, outrage, blasphemy, 
in violence of all kinds, and all the other things whereby 
mankind is wronged." 

This is the "scourge" by which the Christ drives 
the unworthy out of His Temple. It does not mean 
that the soul is driven into doing these things, but that 
it is made to realize or suffer them — the consequences 
of its prior misdeeds. Whatever wrong it has done to 
its fellows, such it suffers, in the realization of its true 
nature, whereby the Light of Gnosis brings into amazing 
contrast the darkness or ignorance of its past actions.^ 

The Dispensation of the Universe 

22. And so Hermes explains the nature of " the 
dispensation of the universe " — the interlinking of the 
grades of being from God downwards — the intercourse 
or communion of souls. 

God, Cosmos and Man are grades of being. Each is 
a sun, as it were, in their operations, or powers or rays. 
God's rays are His energies or self -realizing operations; 
those of Cosmos are the natures of things, those of 
Man are the arts and sciences. 

This communion or intercourse of higher with lower 
natures is to be realized on the side of man by the 
consummation of the sacred marriage, whereby man 
becomes a god, and finally God. 

He only is blessed who is filled with God — that is to 

1 With this compare the function of the Mind on the soul in 
incarnation, as described in G. H., xii. (xiii.) 4. 



Hosted by Google 



174 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

say, the true Gnostic who has received the consecra- 
tion of the Fullness or Pleroma.^ 

Whereas the soul that is empty of God is deprived 
of that Fullness, cut off from it, and so empty of the 
Mind. This is the state of Emptiness (/ceVco/ia) or In- 
sufficiency {varrepyjjULa). 

24. Such souls, says Hermes, should not be called 
men. For a true man is not only equal to a god, but 
even higher than the gods. Such a man we should, in 
Christian nomenclature, call a Christ — one animated 
or illuminated by the Mind or Spirit of God. 

1 Gf. John i. 16 : " Of His Fullness have we all received.'^ 



Hosted by Google 



COEPITS HEEMETICUM XL (XII.) 



MIND UNTO HERMES 

(Text : P. 85-99 ; Pat. 20b-.23.) 

1. Mind. Master this sermon (logos), ^ then, 
Thrice-greatest Hermes, and bear in mind the 
spoken words ; and as it hath come unto Me to 
speak, I will no more delay. 

Hermes, As many men say many things, 
and these diverse, about the All and Good, I 
have not learned the truth. Make it, then, clear 
to me, Master mine ! For I can trust the 
explanation of these things, which comes from 
Thee alone. 

2. Mind. Hear [then], My son, how standeth 
God and All. 

God; Mon^; Cosmos; Time; Becoming.^ 

God maketh -^on ; Mon, Cosmos ; Cosmos, 
Time ; and Time, Becoming. 

^ Or thy reason. 

2 Eternity ; the ideal world, beyond time. Of, P. S, A., xxx., 
xxxi. 

3 Genesis. 

175 

Hosted by Google 



176 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

The Good, — the Beautiful, Wisdom, Blessed- 
ness,— -is essence, as it were,^ of God ; of Mon, 
Sameness ^ ; of Cosmos, Order ; of Time, Change ; 
and of Becoming, Life and Death. 

The energies of God are Mind and Soul ; of 
^on, lastingness ^ and deathlessness ; of Cosmos, 
restoration and the opposite thereof*; of Time, 
increase and decrease ; and of Becoming, quality. 

Mon is, then, in God ; Cosmos, in ^on ; in 
Cosmos, Time ; in Time, Becoming. 

^on stands firm round God ; Cosmos is 
moved in ^on ; Time hath its limits ^ in the 
Cosmos ; Becoming doth become in Time. 

3. The source,^ therefore, of all is God ; their 
essence, ^on ; their matter, Cosmos. 

God's power is Mon ; Mon^s work is Cosmos 
— which never hath become, yet ever doth 
become by Mon. 

Therefore will Cosmos never be destroyed, for 
JEon's indestructible ; nor doth a whit of things 
in Cosmos perish, for Cosmos is enwrapped by 
Mon round on every side. 

Her. But God's Wisdom — what is that ? 

Mind. The Good and Beautiful, and Blessed- 
ness, and Virtue's all, and iEon. 

1 That is to say, the term " ess-ence " cannot really be applied 
to God, for He is beyond " 6e-ing." 

2 Or identity. ^ Or duration. 

^ ai^raTTOKardffTacns. ^ Or iff accomplished. 

Hosted by Google 



MIND UNTO HEBMES 177 

Mon, then, ordereth^ [Cosmos], imparting 
deathlessness and lastingness to matter. 

4. For its^ becoming doth depend on Mon, 
as Mon doth on God. 

Now Genesis^ and Time, in Heaven and on 
the Earth, are of two natures. 

In Heaven they are unchangeable and inde- 
structible, but on the Earth they're subject unto 
change and to destruction. 

Further, the ^on's soul is God ; the Cosmos' 
soul is ^on ; the Earth's soul. Heaven. 

And God's in Mind ; and Mind, in Soul ; 
and Soul, in Matter ; and all of them through 
Mon. 

But all this Body/ in which are all the bodies, 
is full of Soul ; and Soul is full of Mind, and 
[Mind] of God. 

It^ fills it® from within, and from without 
encircles it, making the All to live. 

Without, this vast and perfect Life '^ [encircles] 
Cosmos ; within, it fills [it with] all lives ^ ; 
above, in Heaven, continuing in sameness ; be- 
low, on Earth, changing becoming. 

5. And ^on doth preserve this [Cosmos], 
or by Necessity, or by Foreknowledge, or by 



1 Or 


adorneth. 


2 Sc, 


Matter's 


Becoming or 


Genesis. 


3 Or 


Becoming. 










4 Sc. 


Cosmos. 






'> Sc. 


Soul. 


6 Sc. 


Body, of Universe or Cosmos. 






^ Or Animal ; that is, 


Soul. 




^ Or animals. 


VOL 


. 11. 








12 



Hosted by Google 



178 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

Nature, or by whatever else a man supposes 
or shall suppose. And all is this, — God 
energizing. 

The Energy of God. is Power that naught can 
e'er surpass, a Power with which no one can 
make comparison of any human thing at all, or 
any thing divine. 

Wherefore, Hermes, never think that aught 
of things above or things below is like to God, 
for thou wilt fall from truth. For naught is like 
to That which hath no like, and is Alone and 
One. 

And do not ever think that any other can 
possibly possess His power ; for what apart from 
Him is there of life, and deathlessness and 
change of quality? For what else should He 
make ^ ? 

God's not inactive,^ since all things [then] 
would lack activity ; for all are full of God. 

But neither in the Cosmos anywhere, nor in 
aught else, is there inaction. For that ''in- 
action" is a name that cannot be applied to 
either what doth make or what is made.^ 

6. But all things must be made ; both ever 

^ Sc. tliaii fhose wliich are Himself. 

- apySs. There is a word-play in the terms epyoi/ (work), 
iuepycov (working in, energizing), ipepy-fjs (active, energetic), 
ipepy^ta (in- working, activity), and apy6s (not- working, inactive, 
idle), apyia (inactivity, idleness), which it is impossible to bring 
out fully in English. 

•' Or Avhat becomes. 

Hosted by Google 



MIND UNTO HERMES 179 

made, and also in accordance with the influence 
of every space. ^ 

For He who makes, is in them all ; not 
stablished in some one of them, nor making one 
thing only, but making all. 

For being Power, He energiseth in the things 
He makes and is not independent of them, — 
although the things He makes are subject to Him. 

Now gaze through Me^ upon the Cosmos 
that's now subject to thy sight ; regard its 
Beauty carefully — Body in pure perfection, 
though one than which there's no more ancient 
one, ever in prime of life, and ever-young, nay, 
rather, in even fuller and yet fuller prime ! 

7. Behold, again, the seven subject Worlds^; 
ordered ^ by JEon's order,^ and with their varied 
course full-filling JEon ! 

[See how] all things [are] full of light, and 
nowhere [is there] fire ; for 'tis the love and 
blending of the contraries and the dissimilars 

1 This seems to mean, that all things in the world of genesis 
(making, creating, or becoming) have their root-activity, first 
from the sameness of becoming of the one sphere or space, and 
then their differentiated activity from the seven spheres, spaces, 
or planes, which are the instruments of God in the differentiation 
of the Cosmos. 

2 Mind — i.e. with the mind's eye, or spiritual sight, or by the 
help of the Master's illuminating power. Gf. G. H., i. 7 and 
xiii. (xiv.) 11. 

3 KSa-fMovs, cosmoi or world-orders. 
* Or adorned, or made beautiful. 

5 The order of the Mon (Eternity, the Spiritual Space), 
aeonian or everlasting order. 



Hosted by Google 



180 THRIOE-GREATEST HERMES 

that doth give birth to light down shining by 
the energy of God/ the Father of all good, the 
Leader of all order, and Ruler of the seven 
world-orderings ! 

[Behold] the Moon, forerunner of them all, 
the instrument of nature, and the transmuter of 
its lower matter ! 

[Look at] the Earth set in the midst of All, 
foundation of the Cosmos Beautiful, feeder and 
nurse of things on Earth ! 

And contemplate the multitude of deathless 
lives, how great it is, and that of lives subject 
to death ; and midway, between both, immortal 
[lives] and mortal, [see thou] the circling 
Moon. 

8. And all are full of Soul, and all are moved 
by it, each in its proper way ; some round the 
Heaven, others around the Earth ; [see] how the 
right [move] not unto left, nor yet the left unto 
the right; nor the above below, nor the below 
above. 

x4.nd that all these are subject unto Genesis,^ 
My dearest Hermes, thou hast no longer need 
to learn of Me. For that they bodies are, have 
souls, and they are moved. 

But 'tis impossible for them to come together 
into one without some one to bring them [all] 

1 The text from "Now gaze . . ." to liere is given in R. 36, 
11. 1. ^ Or becoming. 

Hosted by Google 



MIND UNTO HERMES 181 

together. It must, then, be that such a one as 
this must be some one who's wholly One. 

9. For as the many motions of them [all] 
are different, and as their bodies are not like, yet 
has one speed been ordered for them all, it is 
impossible that there should be two or more 
makers for them. 

For that one single order is not kept among 
"the many"; but rivalry will follow of the 
weaker with the stronger, and they will strive. 

And if the maker of the lives that suffer 
change and death, should be another,^ he would 
desire to make the deathless ones as well ; just 
as the maker of the deathless ones, [to make the 
lives] that suffer death. 

But come ! if there be two,^ — if Matter's one, 
and Soul is one, in whose hands would there be 
the distribution^ for the making? Again, if 
both of them have some of it, in whose hands 
may there be the greater part ? 

10. But thus conceive it, then; that every 
living body doth consist of soul and matter, 
whether [that body be] of an immortal, or a 
mortal, or an irrational [life]. 

For that all living bodies are ensouled ; 
whereas, upon the other hand, those that live 
not, are matter by itself. 

^ From the maker of the immortals. 2 ^^^ makers. 

3 Sc. of matter and life. 

Hosted by Google 



182 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

And, in like fashion, Soul when in its self is, 
after its own maker, cause of life ; but the cause 
of all life is He who makes the things that can- 
not die. 

Her. How, then, is it that, first, lives subject 
unto death are other than the deathless ones ? 
And, next, how is it that that Life which knows 
no death, and maketh deathlessness, doth not 
make animals immortal ? 

11. Mind. First, that there is some one who 
does these things, is clear ; and, next, that He 
is also One, is very manifest. For, also, Soul is 
one, and Life is one, and Matter one. 

Her, But who is He ? 

Mind, Who may it other be than the One 
God ? Whom else should it beseem to put Soul 
into lives but God alone ? One, then, is God. 

It would indeed be most ridiculous, if when 
thou dost confess the Cosmos to be one, Sun 
one, Moon one, and Godhead ^ one, thou shouldst 
wish God Himself to be some one or other of a 
number ! 

12. All things, therefore, He makes, in many 
[ways]. And what great thing is it for God to 
make life, soul, and deathlessness, and change, 
when thou [thyself] dost do ^ so many things ? 

For thou dost see, and speak, and hear, and 

^ Or Divinity. 

'^ Or make ; a play on the double meaning of the Gi-eek verb. 



Hosted by Google 



MIND UNTO HERMES 183 

smell, and taste, and touch, and walk, and think, 
and breathe. And it is not one man who smells, 
a second one who speaks, a third who touches, 
another one who smells, another one who walks, 
another one who thinks, and [yet] another one 
who breathes. But one is he who doth all these. 

And yet no one of these could be apart from 
God. For just as, shouldst thou cease from^ 
these, thou wouldst no longer be a living thing, 
so also, should God cease from them (a thing 
not law to say), no longer is He God. 

13. For if it hath been show^n that no thing can 
inactive^ be, how much less God ? For if there's 
aught He doth not make (if it be law to say), 
He is imperfect. But if He is not only not 
inactive, but perfect [God], then He doth make 
all things. 

Give thou thyself to Me, My Hermes, for a 
little while,^ and thou shalt understand more 
easily how that God's work is one, in order that 
all things may be — that are being made, or once 
have been, or that are going to be made. And 
this * is, My beloved. Life ; this is the Beautiful ; 
this is the Good ; this, God. 



^ Lit. become inactive of {KarapynB^s). 

2 A word has here dropped out in the text, which I have 
supplied by apyhv (inactive), and not by the usual conjecture 
"apart from God." 

3 Gf. P. S. A., iii. 1 : " Now lend to me the whole of thee/' 
* Sc. work, doing, making, or creating. 



Hosted by Google 



184 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

14. And if thou wouldst in practice ^ under- 
stand [this work], behold what taketh place with 
thee desiring to beget. Yet this is not like unto 
that, for He doth not enjoy. 

For that indeed He hath no other one to share 
in what He works, for working by Himself, He 
ever is at work, Himself being what He doth.^ 
For did He separate Himself from it,^ all things 
would [then] collapse, and all must die, Life 
ceasing. 

But if all things are lives, and also Life is 
one ; then, one is God. And, furthermore, if 
all are lives, both those in Heaven and those on 
Earth, and One Life in them all is made to be 
by God, and God is it ^— then, all are made by 
God. 

Life is the making- one of Mind and Soul ; 
accordingly Death is not the destruction of those 
that are at-oned,^ but the dissolving of their 
union. 

15. Mon, moreover, is God's image; Cosmos 
[is] JEon's ; the Sun, of Cosmos ; and Man, [the 
image] of the Sun. 

The people call change death, because the 
body is dissolved, and life, when it's dissolved, 
withdraws to the unmanifest. But in this 

1 epycp, in deed, in work. - Or makes. 

^ Sc. His work, or creation. ^ Viz., this Life. 

^' That h, Mind and Soul, sc. the Logos and World-Soul, or 
ego and animal poul. 



Hosted by Google 



MIND UNTO HERMES 185 

sermon (logos), Hermes, my beloved, as thou 
dost hear, I say the Cosmos also suffers change, 
— for that a part of it each day is made to 
be in the unmanifest, — yet it is ne'er dis- 
solved. 

These are the passions of the Cosmos — revolv- 
ings and concealments ; revolving is conversion 
and concealment renovation. 

16. The Cosmos is all-formed, — not having 
forms external to itself, but changing them 
itself within itself. Since, then, Cosmos is made 
to be all-formed, what may its maker be ? For 
that, on the one hand. He should not be void of 
all form ; and, on the other hand, if He's all- 
formed. He wall be like the Cosmos. Whereas, 
again, has He a single form, He will thereby be 
less than Cosmos. 

What, then, say we He is ? — that we may 
not bring round our sermon (logos) into doubt ; 
for naught that mind conceives of God is 
doubtful. 

He, then, hath one idea,^ which is His own 
alone, which doth not fall beneath the sight, 
being bodiless, and [yet] by means of bodies 
manifesteth all [ideas]. ^ And marvel not that 
there's a bodiless idea. 

17. For it is like the form of reason (logos) ^ 

1 The root of form ; used also loosely in Greek to denote form . 
- Or form?. ^ Or idea of the sermon. 

Hosted by Google 



186 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

and mountain- tops in pictures.^ For they 
appear to stand out strongly from the rest, but 
really are quite smooth and flat. 

And now consider what is said more boldly, 
but more truly ! 

Just as man cannot live apart from Life, so 
neither can God live without [His] doing good.^ 
For this is as it were the life and motion as it 
were of God — to move all things and make them 
live. 

18. Now some of the things said ^ should bear 
a sense peculiar to themselves. So understand, 
for instance, what I'm going to say. 

All are in God, [but] not as lying in a place. 
For place is both a body and immovable, and 
things that lie do not have motion. 

Now things lie one way in the bodiless, 
another way in being made manifest. 

Think, [then,] of Him who doth contain them 
all ; and think, that than the bodiless naught is 
more comprehensive, or swifter, or more potent, 
but it is the most comprehensive, the swiftest, 
and most potent of them all. 

19. And, thus, think from thyself, and bid 

' KoX iv rats ypa<f>a7s axpc^petat. All the translators talk of 
"margins" in MSS., and make entire nonsense of the passage. 
I can find absolutely no authority for translating aKpdcp^iai 
margins. 

'^ Or making the Grood ; that is, .^Eon. 

•' Or points of the sermon. 

Hosted by Google 



MIND UNTO HERMES 187 

thy soul go unto any land ; and there more 
quickly than thy bidding will it be. And bid it 
journey oceanwards ; and there, again, imme- 
diately 'twill be, not as if passing on from place 
to place, but as if being there. 

And bid it also mount to heaven ; and it will 
need no wings, nor will aught hinder it, nor fire 
of sun, nor sether, nor vortex-swirl,^ nor bodies 
of the other stars ; but, cutting through them 
all, it will soar up to the last Body [of them all].^ 
And shouldst thou will to break through this as 
well, and contemplate what is beyond — if there 
be aught beyond the Cosmos^; it is permitted 
thee. 

20. Behold what power, what swiftness, thou 
dost have ! And canst thou do all of these 
things, and God not [do themj ? 

Then, in this way know * God ; as having all 
things in Himself as thoughts, the whole Cosmos 
itself 

If, then, thou dost not make thyself like unto 
God, thou canst not know Him. For like is 
knowable to like [alone]. 

Make, [then,] thyself to grow to the same 
stature as the Greatness which transcends all 

1 7j SipT}, presumably the vortex or " whorl " of the solar system 
(c/ "Vision of Er"). 

2 Sc. the body or limit of the whole cosmos. 

^ Of, G. JET., iv. (v.) 5 : "And things above the heaven— if there 
be aught." 4 Qr think. 

Hosted by Google 



188 THRIOE-GREATEST HERMES 

measure ; leap forth from every body ; tran- 
scend all Time ; become Eternity ^ ; and [thus] 
shalt thou know God. 

Conceiving nothing is impossible unto thyself, 
think thyself deathless and able to know all, — 
all arts, all sciences, the way of every life.^ 

Become more lofty than all height, and lower 
than all depth. Collect into thyself all senses 
of [all] creatures, — of fire, [and] water, dry and 
moist. Think that thou art at the same time in 
every place,— in earth, in sea, in sky ; not yet 
begotten, in the womb, young, old, [and] dead, 
in after-death conditions.^ 

And if thou knowest all these things at once,* 
' — times, places, doings, qualities, and quantities ; 
thou canst know God.^ 

2L But if thou lockest up thy soul within thy 
body, and dost debase it, saying : I nothing 
know ; I nothing can ; 1 fear the sea ; 1 cannot 
scale the sky ; I know not who I was, who I shall 
be ; — what is there [then] between [thy] God 
and thee ? 

For thou canst know naught of things beauti- 
ful and good so long as thou dost love thy body 
and art bad. 

^ Lit. -^on, '^ iravrhs ((aov ^dos, — or nature of every animal. 

3 Of. a H., xiii. (xiv.) 11. 
'^ Or art simultaneously conscious of. 

"" A critical text from "Make, tlien, thy self' to here is given 
by R., p. 238. 

Hosted by Google 



iMIND ITNTO HERMES 189 

The greatest bad there is, is not to know 
God's Good ^ ; but to be able to know [Good], 
and will, and hope, is a Straight Way, the 
Good's own [Path], both leading there and 
easy.^ 

If thou but sett'st thy foot thereon, 'twill 
meet thee everywhere, 'twill everywhere be seen, 
both where and when thou dost expect it not, — 
waking, sleeping, sailing, journeying, by night, 
by day, speaking, [and] saying naught. For 
there is naught that is not image of the Good. 

22. Her, Is God unseen ? 

Mind, Hush ! Who is more manifest than 
He ? For this one reason hath He made all 
things, that through them all thou mayest see 
Him. 

This is the Good of God, this [is] His Virtue, 
— that He may be made manifest through all.^ 

For naught's unseen^ even of things that are 
without a body. Mind sees itself* in thinking, 
God in making.^ 

So far these things have been made manifest 
to thee, Thrice- greatest one ! Eeflect on all the 
rest in the same way within thyself, and thou 
shalt not be led astray. 

1 rh e^Top — lit. the Godly, or Divine. 

2 Gf. Ex. 1. 4. 

^ The preceding question and answer is quoted with very slight 
verbal variants by Cyril, Contra Julianum, ii. 52. 

^ Or is seen. ^ Or doing. 

Hosted by Google 



190 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

COMMENTAEY 

Title and Form 

The title in the MSS. is simply '' Mind to Hermes." 
When, therefore, Cyril, in quoting the first three para- 
graphs of § 22 of our treatise, says that Hermes wrote 
these words *' to his own mind/' ^ he is evidently 
either a very careless reader,^ or had not seen at first 
hand the treatise from which he quotes. 

From its contents, moreover, it is very evident that 
our treatise, as far as its form is concerned, looks back 
to the '' Poemandres " as the type of instruction to 
Hermes (or to a Hermes). 

This highly authoritative form of enunciating doctrine 
was evidently chosen because it was desired to impart 
a more intimate instruction than that of the '' General 
Sermons " and the like,— to wit, the inculcation of the 
^Eon-doctrine, in connection with the marvellous 
doctrine of At-one-ment with all things which con- 
stitutes the Path of the Good. The doctrine is no 
longer ''Become (or make thyself like) Cosmos," but 
'' Become ^on"(§ 20). 

Now it is remarkable that the instruction given in 
our treatise by the Mind to Hermes is, almost point 
for point, the " esoteric " teaching of which the Sermon 
of Hermes to Tat, entitled the '' Cup or Monad " — (J, H., 
iv. (v.)-— is the " exoteric " form. 

That the instruction in these Trismegistic schools of 
initiation was divided into grades is manifest on all 
sides ; and, therefore, nothing is more natural than to 
find these two sermons standing in such intimate re- 
lations to one another as to doctrine, the one containing 

^ 0. Jul., ii. 52 ; ed. Migne, col. 580 B. 
- Gf, R. 128, i. ; 196, 3. 



Hosted by Google 



MIND UNTO HERMES 191 

the more intimate and advanced explanation of the 
more general instruction of the other. 

And that this inner instruction on the "Cup" 
doctrine must have been thought to be of very great 
value, is evident when we reflect that '* The Cup" 
sermon was one of the most famous of all the treatises 
of Hermes, for, as we have seen, its title was worth 
being plagiarized, and the Baptism of the Cup, of which 
it treated, constituted the goal of the endeavour of the 
disciples of the School, as Zosimus tells us. 

Mystically, then, the main interest of our treatise 
centres in the doctrine of the At-one-ment (as the 
inner consummation of the Baptism in the Cup or 
Monad), to which the -<3Eon-idea is but a formal intro- 
duction ; historically, however, the introduction of the 
iEon-idea presents itself as a critical problem, for the 
term is not found in the " Poemandres," and, therefore, 
presumably was not used in the earliest documents of 
the School. 

The iEoN-LoRE 

When, then, did this ^on-idea impose itself upon 
the older form of tradition of the Trismegistic schools ? 
This is a most important question ; for if we can in 
any way answer it, we shall be in a position to assign 
a terminus ad quern for the earlier forms of Hermetic 
doctrine. 

The answer to the question seems to me to be 
involved in the supposition that the iEon-doc trine 
must have influenced " Hermeticism '* at more or 
less the same date as that at which it influenced 
'* Gnosticism." 

Now "Gnosticism," in its Christianized forms, is 
practically never found without the iEon-lore. 

The earliest forms of Christian Gnosis referred to 



Hosted by Google 



192 THRIOE-GREATEST HERMES 

by the later Patristic hseresiologists are bound up with 
^onology. Not only so, but the very earliest reference 
to Gnosticism by any Christian writer presupposes 
the ^on-doctrine, and uses it in illustration of the 
spiritual state of the writer.^ 

The widespread influence of the ^on-doctrine can 
thus be traced back to at least the origins of Christianity. 

Now as the Gnosis existed before any Christian form 
of it was developed, the question of the date when 
the ^on-doctrine was introduced into it must be 
referred to pre-Christian times. 

Andj indeed, the very simple character of the ^Eon- 
lore in our treatise,^ as compared with the mind- 
bewildering complexity and transcendency of first and 
second century Christian Gnosticism, is all in favour 
of an early date for its introduction into " Her- 
meticism," which is only another name for " Gnosticism " 
of a preponderatingly Hellenic form. 

If this line of reasoning holds good, we have in it 
a very strong presumption that the older forms of the 
Trismegistic treatises were pre-Christian. 

And that this is so may be seen by the absolute 
identity of the teaching of our treatise (§2) with that 
of Philo, when he writes : 

^' But God is the Artificer of Time as well. For He 
is Father of its Father; and Time's Father is the 
Cosmos, which manifests its motion in the genesis 
of Time. . . . 

" This [Cosmos] then, the Younger Son, the Sensible, 
being set a-moving, has caused Time's nature to appear 

^ Namely, Paul in his Letters, which are the earliest of all 
Christian documents. See my article, " Some Notes on the 
Gnostics," in The Nineteenth Gentunj and After (Nov. 1902), pp. 
822-835 ; and D. /. L., pp. 353 IF. 

^ Perhaps the clearest exposition is to be found in P. S. A.j 
XXX. and xxxi. 



Hosted by Google 



MIND UNTO HERMES 193 

and disappear ; so that there nothing is which future 
is with God, who has the very Bounds of Time subject 
to Him. For 'tis not Time, but Time's Archetype and 
Paradigm, Eternity (or ^on), which is His Life.^ 
But in Eternity naught is past, and naught is future, 
but all is present only." ^ 

This passage of Philo is of the utmost importance 
for estimating the date of our treatises; for not only 
does it prove that the oldest forms of the Trismegistic 
literature were pre-Christian, but it further persuades 
us that our treatise, which belongs to a later type of 
this literature, may be dated as contemporary with 
Philo. 

Chapter xi. in the Prolegomena, "Concerning the 
^on-Doctrine,'' should be taken in close connection 
with this treatise, for it is not only introductory to it, 
but frequently refers directly to it. 

For the rest, it is not necessary to attempt any 
detailed comments, since the instruction of the writer 
is clear enough for any careful reader to follow with 
ease after making himself acquainted with the general 
ideas in the preceding treatises. One or two notes on 
special points, however, may be attempted. 

The Egot of Form 

Thus in § 16, the sentence: *'The Cosmos is all- 
formed ('7rai/ToVo/o0o9), — not having forms external to 
itself, but changing them itself within itself," — reminds 
us of P. S, A., xix. 3: "The 'Thirty-six' who have 
the name of Horoscopes are in the self-same space as 
the fixed stars; of these the essence-chief, or prince, 

1 Of. G. H., i, 6 ; the Union of the Logos and Mind — or First- 
Born Son and Father — is Life ; they are united in ^Eon. 

2 Quod Deus Im,, § 6 ; M. i. 27V ; P. 298 (Ri. ii. 72, 73). 

VOL. II. 13 



Hosted by Google 



194 THRICE-GREATE8T HERMES 

is he whom they call Pantomorph, or Omniform 
(7ravT6iiiop(pog,vel omniformis), who tashioneth the various 
forms for various species '' ; and also of P. S. A,, xxxv. : 
" But they are changed as many times as there are 
moments in the hour of that revolving circle in which 
abides that God whom we have called All-form." 

Compare also G. H., xiii. (xiv.) 12, where, speaking 
of the "Circle of the types of life," Hermes says it 
is ''composed of elements, twelve in number, but of 
one nature, an omniform idea." 

With this compare Hermes-Prayer iv., addressed 
to Thoth as the Logos: 

''Thee I invoke alone, thou who alone in all the 
Cosmos dost impose order on gods and men, who dost 
transform thyself in holy forms, making to be from 
things that are not, and from the things that are, 
making the not to be." 

But the main interest of our treatise is not that 
the Intelligible Cosmos or Logos can create and destroy 
and transmute all forms at will, but that man as the 
microcosm has potential in him this great magic power. 

"Become all Things" 

The daring instruction given to Hermes in §§ 19 
and 20 is distinctly a discipline of the Egyptian Wisdom ; 
for though it is here set forth plainly and without 
circumlocution, as a straightforward intimate instruction, 
stripped of all mysterious hints or hesitating subter- 
fuges,^ it is clearly in the same circle of ideas of which 
popular Egyptian theurgy had some inkling. But 
whereas the philosopher-mystic was bidden to do this 
for himself of his own volition and achievement, the 
theurgist had to beg some god to do it for him. 

1 Or, as the writer of the Pistis Sophia would say, eV TrappTjo-to:, 
^' face to face without a parable," 



Hosted by Google 



MIND UNTO HERMES 195 

Thus in the same Prayer, to which we have already 
referred, we read (§§ 2, 3): 

''0 holy Thoth, the true sight of whose face none 
of the gods endures ! Make me to be in every creature's 
name [or * true form '], — wolf, dog, or lion, fire, tree, 
or vulture, wall, or water, or what thou will'st, for 
thou art able so to do." 

So also in F. S. A., vii., we have the same idea, for 
certainly the phrasing of the sentences suggests some- 
thing beyond the ordinary powers of the mind or 
imagination. 

''He mingles with the elements by reason of the 
swiftness of his mind. He plunges into the sea's 
depths by means of its profundity. He puts his values 
on all things. 

" Heaven does not seem too high for him ; for it is 
measured by the wisdom of his mind as though it were 
quite near. 

*'No darkness of the air obstructs the penetration 
of his mind. No density of earth impedes his work. 
ISFo depth of water blunts his sight. 

" Though still the same, yet is he all, and everywhere 
is he the same." 

It is indeed a marvellous "yoga" system that is 
sketched for us in our treatise. There is no question 
here of abstraction or negation, but a courageous identi- 
fication or At-one-ment of oneself with all that lives and 
breathes. This is the Path of the Gnosis, the Way to 
Know God. 

In other words, man is to copy his prototype, the Mind, 
and just as the Mind or Man, in the '* Poemandres " 
treatise, ''had a mind to break right through the 
Boundary of the spheres" (§ 13), so is our philosopher 
bidden to " soar up to the Last Body of them all " (§ 19), 
that Last Body being the One Element of Cosmos itself. 



Hosted by Google 



196 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

''And shouldst thou will to break through this as 
well, and contemplate what is beyond~if there be 
aught beyond the Cosmos; it is permitted thee/' 

That the hard and fast distinctions which modern 
commentators would draw between words, in con- 
sidering these mystical treatises, would have been 
laughed at by the writers of them, is amply manifested 
when the writer with enthusiastic fervour bursts forth : 

" Then in this way know God, as having in Himself 
as thoughts the whole Cosmos itself. 

" If, then, thou dost not make thyself like unto God,^ 
thou canst not know Him.^ For like is knowable to 
like [alone]. Make, then, thyself to grow to the 
same stature as the Greatness which transcends all 
measure; leap forth from every body; transcend all 
time; become Eternity; and thus shalt thou know 
God." 

Every body or space must be transcended, even the 
Body of Cosmos itself ; for the man must grow into the 
" stature of the Greatness that transcends all measure," 
that is, the intelligible superspatial Pleroma, the ^on 
as the Logos and Paradigm of Cosmos. And every 
time and all Time must also be transcended; for the 
man must become Eternity-— that is, the Mon as the 
Paradigm of Time. 

The Good's Own Path 

In no scripture that I know is this Path more 
admirably set forth — the Good's own Path. All things, 
all spaces, and all times have to be realized as being 
within oneself simultaneously; if this is realized or 
known, not only imagined, then a man becomes a true 
Knower of God, a Gnostic. 

^ Sc. as Cosmos. - 8c. as Father of this Only Son, 

Hosted by Google 



MIND UNTO HERMES 197 

Nor has ever a truer sentence been written than the 
wonderful words concerning this Path to the Supreme : 

''If thou but sett'st thy foot thereon, 'twill meet 
thee everywhere, 'twill everywhere be seen, both 
where and when thou dost expect it not — waking, 
sleeping, sailing, journeying, by night, by day, speaking, 
and saying naught. For there is naught that is not 
image of the Good/' 

Concerning India 

In conclusion, I would only point out that if for 
the hopeless reading in the first sentence of § 19 we 
were to take Patrizzi's emendation, which has been 
adopted by Parthey, we should have the interesting 
sentence : 

" And, thus, think from thyself, and bid thy soul go 
unto India." 

If this should be the original reading, it is remark- 
able fchat India should have been selected of all places. 
We know, however, from a study of what is known of 
the life of Apollonius of Tyana, that this "Gnostic" 
philosopher made an enormous propaganda of Indian 
ideas among the philosophic and mystic communities 
and schools of the first century. Apollonius must 
have known something, perhaps a great deal, concern- 
ing the siddhis acquired by yo^o^-practices. At any 
rate, we find his biographer Philostratus making him 
write the following letter to his Eastern hosts on his 
return from India : 

" I came to you by land and ye have given me the 
sea ; nay, rather, by sharing with me your wisdom ye 
have given me power to travel through heaven. These 
things will I bring back to the mind of the Greeks, and 
I will hold converse with you as though ye were 



Hosted by Google 



198 THRTCE-GREATEST HERMES 

present, if it be that I have not drunk of the Cup of 
Tantalus in vain." ^ 

That an intensely great interest was taken in Indian 
ideas at Alexandria is shown by the fact that we find 
Plotinus himself in 242 starting off with the expedition 
of Gordian to the East in the hope of coming in contact 
with the Indian Wisdom. 

But all these considerations, though interesting in 
themselves, do not immediately concern us, unless we 
are subjectively persuaded that the emendation of 
Patrizzi is firmly established. Should, however, this 
reading in any way be confirmed by objective evidence, 
we should have to reconsider the question of date by 
the light of it, though, I fear, with little chance of any 
definite result. For though the propaganda of Indian 
ideas by ApoUonius could not have begun prior to the 
middle of the first century, we have in this fact no 
very sure criterion, for " India " must have been in the 
air, and strongly in the air, even prior to ApoUonius' 
visit to India, or why should he have been induced to 
make so long and dangerous a journey? Indeed, 
'* India " had been in the air ever since the expedition 
of Alexander — that is, from the beginning of the 
Alexandrian period — the second quarter of the fourth 
century B.C. onwards. 

1 Pliilos., Vit Ap., iii. 51. Of. my ApoUonius of Tyana, the 
Philosopher Reformer of the First Century A.D, (London, 1901), 
p. 88. 



Hosted by Google 



COEPUS HEKMETICUM XII. (XIII.) 



ABOUT THE COMMON MIND 

Of Hermes to Tat 

(Text: P. 99-113; Pat. 23b~25b.) 

1 Hermes, The Mind, Tat, is of God's very 
essence — (if such a thing as essence of God ^ 
there be) — and what that is, it and it only knows 
precisely. 

The Mind, then, is not separated off from 
God's essentiality, but is united unto it, as light 
to sun. 

This Mind in men is God, and for this cause 
some of mankind are gods, and their humanity is 
nigh unto divinity. 

For the Good Daimon said : '* Gods are im- 
mortal men, and men are mortal gods." 

2. But in irrational lives Mind is their nature. 
For where is Soul, there too is Mind ; just as 
where Life, there is there also Soul. 

* That is, if we can use sucli a term with respect to God. 
199 

Hosted by Google 



200 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

But in irrational lives their soul is life devoid 
of mind ^ ; for Mind is the in- worker of the souls 
of men for good ; — He works on them for their 
own good. 

In lives irrational He doth co-operate with 
each one's nature ; but in the souls of men He 
counteracteth them. 

For every soul, when it becomes embodied, 
is instantly depraved by pleasure and by 
pain. 

For in a compound body, just like juices, pain 
and pleasure seethe, and into them the soul, on 
entering in, is plunged.^ 

3. O'er whatsoever souls the Mind doth, then, 
preside, to these it showeth its own light, by 
acting counter to their prepossessions, just as 
a good physician doth upon the body pre- 
possessed by sickness, pain inflict, burning or 
lancing it for sake of health. 

In just the selfsame way the Mind inflicteth 
pain upon the soul, to rescue it from pleasure, 
whence comes its every ill. 

The great ill of the soul is godlessness^ ; then 

^ That is, of the mind manifested in man as distinguished from 
the general Mind. 

■^ aOedr-ns. Gf. 0. H., X. (xi.) 8, 9 : " And the soul's vice is ignor- 
ance " ; and § 20 : " What greater chastisement of any human soul, 
can there be, son, than lack of piety?" The only way of 
salvation from the bonds of Fate is thus " piety " or ^* godliness.'' 
See R, 102, 1, for references. 



Hosted by Google 



ABOUT THE COMMON MIND 201 

followetli fancy ^ for all evil things and nothing 
good. 

So, then, Mind counteracting it doth work 
good on the soul, as the physician health upon 
the body. 

4. But whatsoever human souls have not the 
Mind as pilot, they share in the same fate as 
souls of lives irrational. 

For [Mind] becomes co-worker with them, 
giving full play to the desires towards which 
[such souls] are borne, — [desires] that from the 
rush of lust strain after the irrational ; [so that 
such human souls,] just like irrational animals, 
cease not irrationally to rage and lust, nor ever 
are they satiate of ills. 

For passions and irrational desires are ills ex- 
ceeding great; and over these God hath set up the 
Mind to play the part of judge and executioner. 

5. Tat In that case, father mine, the teaching 
(logos) as to Fate,^ which previously thou didst 
explain to me, risks to be over-set. 

For that if it be absolutely fated for a man to 
fornicate, or commit sacrilege, or do some other 
evil deed, why is he punished, — when he hath 
done the deed from Fate's necessity ? 

Her. All works, my son, are Fate's; and 
without Fate naught of things corporal — or good, 
or ill — can come to pass. 

^ S6^a, ^ Heimarmeiie. 

Hosted by Google 



202 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

But it is fated too, that he who doeth ill, shall 
suffer. And for this cause he doth it— that he 
may suffer what he suffereth, because he did it. 

6. But for the moment, [Tat,] let be the 
teaching (logos) as to vice and Fate, for we have 
spoken of these things in other [of our sermons] ; 
but now our teaching (logos) is about the Mind : 
—what Mind can do, and how it is [so] different, 
—in men being such and such, and in irrational 
lives [so] changed ; and [then] again that in 
irrational lives it is not of a beneficial nature, 
while that in men it quencheth out the wrathful 
and the lustful elements. 

Of men, again, we must class some as led by- 
reason, and others as unreasoning. 

7. But all men are subject to Fate, and 
genesis and change, for these ^ are the begin- 
ning and the end of Fate. 

And though all men do suffer fated things, 
those led by reason (those whom we said the 
Mind doth guide) do not endure like suffering 
with the rest ; but, since they Ve freed them- 
selves from viciousness, not being bad, they do 
not suffer bad. 

TaL How meanest thou again, my father? 
Is not the fornicator bad ; the murderer bad ; 
and [so with] all the rest ? 

Her, [I meant not that ;] but that the 

1 8c. genesis and change. 

Hosted by Google 



ABOUT THE COMMON MIND 203 

Mind -led man, my son, though not a fornicator, 
will suffer just as though he had committed 
fornication, and though he be no murderer, as 
though he had committed murder. 

The quality of change he can no more escape 
than that of genesis. 

But it is possible for one who hath the Mind, 
to free himself from vice. 

8. Wherefore Tve ever heard, my son. Good 
Daimon also say — (and had He set it down in 
written words, He would have greatly helped 
the race of men ; for He alone, my son, doth 
truly, as the First-born God, gazing upon all 
things, give voice to words (logoi) divine) — yea, 
once I heard Him say : 

'' All things are one, and most of all the 
bodies which the mind alone perceives. Our 
life is owing to [God's] Energy and Power and 
iEon. His Mind is Good, so is His Soul as well. 
And this being so, intelligible things know 
naught of separation. So, then, Mind, being 
Ruler of all things, and being Soul of God, can 
do whatever it wills." 

9. So do thou understand, and carry back this 
word (logos) unto the question thou didst ask 
before, — I mean about Mind^s Fate. 

For if thou dost with accuracy, son, eliminate 
[all] captious arguments (logoi), thou wilt dis- 
cover that of very truth the Mind, the Soul 

Hosted by Google 



204 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

of God, doth rule o'er all— o'er Fate, and Law, 
and all things else ; and nothing is impossible to 
it, — neither o'er Fate to set a human soul,^ nor 
under Fate to set [a soul] neglectful of what 
comes to pass. Let this so far suffice from the 
Good Daimon's most good [words].^ 

Tat Yea, [words] divinely spoken, father 
mine, truly and helpfully. But further still 
explain me this. 

10. Thou said'st that Mind in lives irrational 
worked in them as [their] nature, co-working 
with their impulses. 

But impulses of lives irrational, as I do think, 
are passions. 

Now if the Mind co-worketh with [these] 
impulses, and if the impulses of [lives] irrational 
be passions, then is Mind also passion, taking its 
colour from the passions. 

Her, Well put, my son ! Thou questionest 
right nobly, and it is just that I as well should 
answer [nobly]. 

11. All things incorporal when in a body are 
subject unto passion, and in the proper sense 
they are [themselves] all passions. 

For every thing that moves [another] is in- 
corporal ; while every thing that's moved is 
body. 

J (y. Lact., D. J., ii. 15. 

2 The critical text of this paragraph iw given R. 78. 

Hosted by Google 



ABOUT THE COMMON MIND 205 

Incorporals are further moved by Mind, and 
movement's passion. 

Both, then, are subject unto passion — both 
mover and the moved, the former being ruler 
and the latter ruled. 

But when a man hath freed himself from 
body, then is he also freed from passion. 

But, more precisely, son, naught is impassible, 
but all are passible. 

Yet passion differeth from passibility; for 
that the one is active, while the other's passive. 

Incorporals ^ moreover act upon themselves, for 
either they are motionless ^ or they are moved ; 
but whichsoever it be, it's passion. 

But bodies are invariably acted on, and there- 
fore are they passible. 

Do not, then, let terms trouble thee ; action 
and passion are both the selfsame thing. To 
use the fairer sounding term, however, does no 
harm. 

12. Tat Most clearly hast thou, father mine, 
set forth the teaching (logos). 

Her, Consider this as well, my son ; that 
these two things God hath bestowed on man 
beyond all mortal lives — both mind and speech 

^ Reading audofxara for crd^jAara, 

2 The words I have translated by " act," " active " and " action," 
may be more literally rendered by "energize," "energic" and 
" energy." The " motionless " has " energy " because it is the cause 
of motion to that which it moves. 

Hosted by Google 



206 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

(logos) equal to immortality. He hath the mind 
for knowing God and uttered speech (logos) for 
eulogy of Him.^ 

And if one useth these for what he ought, 
hell differ not a whit from the immortals.^ 
Nay, rather, on departing from the body, he 
will be guided by the twain unto the Choir of 
Gods and Blessed Ones. 

13. Tat. Why, father mine ! — do not the other 
lives make use of speech (logos) ? 

Her. Nay, son ; but use of voice ; speech is 
far different from voice. For speech is general 
among all men, while voice doth differ in each 
class of living thing. 

Tat. But with men also, father mine, according 
to each race, speech differs. 

Her. Yea, son, but man is one ; so also 
speech is one and is interpreted, and it is found 
the same in Egypt, and in Persia, and in Greece. 

Thou seemest, son, to be in ignorance of 
Reason's (Logos)^ worth and greatness. For 
that the Blessed God, Good Daimon, hath de- 
clared : 

'' Soul is in Body, Mind in Soul ; but Reason 
(Logos) is in Mind, and Mind in God ; and God 
is Father of [all] these." 

1 Following the emendation of R. 

2 The critical text of the above paragraphs is given R. 156, n. 6. 

3 It is impossible to bring out the word-play of the original in 
English ; and so the double meaning is lost. 

Hosted by Google 



ABOUT THE COMMON MIND 207 

14. The Reason, then, is the Mind's image, 
and Mind God's [image]; while Body is [the 
image] of the Form ; and Form [the image] of 
the Soul. 

The subtlest part of Matter is, then, Air ; of 
Air, Soul ; of Soul, Mind ; and of Mind, God.^ 

And God surroundeth all and permeateth all ^ ; 
while Mind surroundeth Soul, Soul Air, Air 
Matter. 

Necessity^ and Providence and Nature are 
instruments of Cosmos and of Matter s ordering ; 
while of intelligible things each is Essence, and 
Sameness is their Essence. 

But of the Bodies^ of the Cosmos each is 
many ; for through possessing Sameness, [these] 
composed Bodies, though they do change from 
one into another of themselves, do natheless ever 
keep the incorruption of their Sameness. 

15. Whereas in all the rest of composed 
bodies, of each there is a certain number ; for 
without number structure cannot be, or com- 
position, or decomposition. 

Now it is units that give birth to number and 
increase it, and, being decomposed, are taken 
back again into themselves. 

1 This sentence is tagged on to the end of C. H.j v. (vi.) by some 
scribe. 

2 Cf. § 20 below. 

^ Eeading aydyKri for &vdyKr) ; see § 21 below. 
* Sc. the elements. 

Hosted by Google 



208 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

Matter is one ; and this whole Cosmos — the 
mighty God and image of the mightier One, 
both with Him unified, and the conserver of 
the Will and Order of the Father— is filled full 
of Life/ 

Naught is there in it throughout the whole of 
Mon, the Father s [everlasting] Re-establishment,^ 
—nor of the whole, nor of its parts, — which doth 
not live. 

For not a single thing that's dead, hath been, 
or is, or shall be in [this] Cosmos. 

For that the Father willed it should have 
Life as long as it should be. Wherefore it needs 
must be a God. 

16. How, then, son, could there be in the 
God, the image of the Father,^ in the plenitude * 
of Life — dead things ^ ? 

For that death is corruption, and corruption is 
destruction. 

How then could any part of that which knoweth 
no corruption be corrupted, or any whit of him 
the God destroyed ? 

Tat. Do they not, then, my father, die — the 
lives in it, that are its parts ? 

IIe7\ Hush, son ! — led into error by the term 
in use for what takes place. 

1 Lit. a Pleroma of Life. ^ aTroKardo-Tacris. 

'^ Reading irarphs for iravrSs. * Pleroma. 

^ A critical text of the last five paragraphs is given R. 25, n. 1. 

Hosted by Google 



ABOUT THE COMMON MIND 209 

They do not die, my son, but are dissolved as 
compound bodies. 

Now dissolution is not death, but dissolution 
of a compound ; it is dissolved not so that it may 
be destroyed, but that it may become renewed. 

For what is the activity of life ? Is it not 
motion ? What then in Cosmos is there that 
hath no motion ? Naught is there, son ! 

17. Tat Doth not Earth even, father, seem 
to thee to have no motion ? 

Her, Nay, son ; but rather that she is the 
only thing which, though in very rapid motion, 
is also stable. 

For how would it not be a thing to laugh at, 
that the Nurse of all should have no motion, 
when she engenders and brings forth all things ? 

For 'tis impossible that without motion one 
who doth engender, should do so. 

That thou shouldst ask if the fourth part ^ is 
not inert, is most ridiculous ; for that the body 
which doth have no motion, gives sign of nothing 
but inertia. 

18. Know, therefore, generally, my son, that 
all that is in Cosmos is being moved for decrease 
or for increase. 

Now that which is kept moving, also lives ; 
but there is no necessity that that which lives, 
should be all same. 

^ Sc. element. 
VOL. II. 14 

Hosted by Google 



210 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

For being simultaneous, the Cosmos, as a 
whole, is not subject to change, my son, but all 
its parts are subject unto it ; yet naught [of it] 
is subject to corruption, or destroyed. 

It is the terms employed that confuse men. 
For 'tis not genesis that constituteth life, but 'tis 
sensation ; it is not change that constituteth 
death, but 'tis forgetfulness. 

Since, then, these things are so, they are im- 
mortal all,— Matter, [and] Life, [and] Spirit, 
Mind [and] Soul, of which whatever liveth, is 
composed. 

19. Whatever then doth live, oweth its im- 
mortality unto the Mind, and most of all doth 
man, he who is both recipient of God, and co- 
essential with Him. 

For with this life alone doth God consort ; by 
visions in the night, by tokens in the day, and 
by all things doth He foretell the future unto 
him, — ^by birds, by inward parts, by wind, 
by tree. 

Wherefore doth man lay claim to know things 
past, things present and to come. 

20. Observe this, too, my son ; that each one 
of the other lives inhabiteth one portion of the 
Cosmos, — aquatic creatures water, terrene earth, 
and aery creatures air ; while man doth use all 
these, — earth, water, air, [and] fire ; he seeth 
heaven, too, and doth contact it with [his] sense. 

Hosted by Google 



ABOUT THE COMMON MIND 211 

But God surroundeth all, and permeateth all/ 
for He is energy and power ; and it is nothing 
difl&cult, my son, to conceive God. 

21. But if thou wouldst Him also contemplate, 
behold the ordering of the Cosmos, and [see] the 
orderly behaviour of its ordering ; behold thou 
the Necessity of things made manifest, and [see] 
the Providence of things become and things 
becoming ; behold how Matter is all-full of Life ; 
[behold] this so great God in movement, with all 
the good and noble [ones] — gods, daimones and 
men ! 

Tat, But these are purely energies, father 
mine ! 

Her, If, then, they're purely energies, my 
son, — by whom, then, are they energized except 
by God? 

Or art thou ignorant, that just as Heaven, 
Earth, Water, Air, are parts of Cosmos, in 
just the selfsame way Gods parts are Life 
and Immortality, [and] Energy, and Spirit, and 
Necessity, and Providence, and Nature, Soul, 
and Mind, and the Duration^ of all these that 
is called Good ? 

And there is naught of things that have be- 
come, or are becoming, in which God is not. 

22. TaL Is He in Matter, father, then ? 
Her. Matter, my son, is separate from God, 

1 (y. § 14 above. ' Sc, Mon, 

Hosted by Google 



212 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

in order that thou may'st attribute unto it 
the quality of space. But what thing else than 
mass-^ think'st thou it is, if it's not energized? 
Whereas if it be energized, by whom is it made 
so ? For energies, we said, are parts of God. 

By whom are, then, all lives enlivened ? By 
whom are things immortal made immortal ? By 
whom changed things made changeable ? 

And whether thou dost speak of Matter, or of 
Body, or of Essence, know that these too are 
energies of God ; and that materiality is Matter s 
energy, that corporality is Bodies' energy, and 
that essentiality doth constitute the energy of 
Essence ; and this is God — the All. 

23. And in the All is naught that is not God. 
Wherefore nor size, nor space, nor quality, nor 
form, nor time, surroundeth God ; for He is All, 
and All surroundeth all, and permeateth all. 

Unto this Reason (Logos), son, thy adoration 
and thy worship pay. There is one way alone 
to worship God ; [it is] not to be bad.*^ 

1 Probably in tbe sense of "quantity." 

2 Lactantius, D. J., vi. 25, translates the last two sentences into 
Latin, with the strange remark that Hermes so spake in treating 
"About Justice." See the following Commentary on § 6, and 
Ex. xi. 



Hosted by Google 



ABOUT THE COMMON MIND 213 

COMMENTAKY 

The Sayings of the Good Daimon 

This Sermon has as its subject the Common or General 
Mind — Great Mind, Good Mind, Good Daimon. For 
Mind, as we are told (§ 2), is the Benefactor of men 
(evepyirrjg avBpwiroov)) He is the Good Shepherd, the 
Good Husbandman, the Good Physician, as He is called 
in different tractates. 

From a critical standpoint, the point of greatest 
interest is that our Hermes in no less than three 
places (§§ 1, 8, 13) quotes certain Sayings of the 
Good Daimon. 

Now the first of these quotations (§ 1) — " Gods are 
immortal men, and men are mortal Gods" — is one of 
the most cited Sayings of Heracleitus.^ Hermes, how- 
ever, does not mean to say that Heracleitus was 
Agothodaimon, but that Heracleitus was the mouth- 
piece of the Good Mind when he uttered this *' word " 
{logos), 

Nor was this the opinion of Hermes only ; it was 
the belief apparently of Heracleitus himself when he 
declared : 

" Not because you hear me say so, but because you 
hear the Reason (Logos) so declare, is it wise to confess 
that All are One." ^ 

At any rate the term Logos, as used by Heracleitus, 
in connection with such a declaration, is taken by 
Hippolytus^ to mean the All-pervading Eeason, and 
not the normal reason of man. 

What, then, is our surprise to find the second of 

1 Diels, 62 ; Bywater, 67 ; Fairbanks, 67 (p. 40), which see for 
references to ancient authors who quote it. 

2 Diels, 50 ; Bywater, 1 ; Fairbanks, 1 (p. 24). 

3 Philos., ix. 9. 



Hosted by Google 



214 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

Hermes' quotations of a Saying of the Good Daimon 
qualified by the words (§ 8) ; " And had He set it down 
in written words " or " in writing/' when that quotation 
"begins with the words : " All are One " ^ — the root- 
formula of Heracleitus. 

Such Sayings of Heracleitus must have been the 
common property of all the philosophers of the time and 
of their pupils. But the quotation of Hermes does not 
end with the formula of Heracleitus ; it continues, how 
far exactly it is difficult to determine. Eeitzenstein 
(p. 127) would apparently make it end with the word 
*' ^on, " but I am inclined to think it goes to the end 
of § 8. In either case it includes the term '' -^on." 

If, now, we turn to the third quotation from the 
Sayings of the Good Daimon (§ 13), we are at once 
struck with its remarkable resemblance to the form of 
teaching in G. H., xi. (xii.) 4. Though there is no 
precise verbal agreement, there is a striking identity of 
style of formula. 

In our treatise, however, the Saying is used in 
authoritative illustration of the meaning of the Eeason 
{Logos), whereas in the " Mind to Hermes," — that is, in 
the Sermon of the Good Daimon Himself to Hermes — 
Eeason is omitted. Mind and Eeason being there tran- 
scended by ^on and Mind. 

Moreover, the whole style of what follows this quota- 
tion in our treatise is exactly the same as the style of 
instruction in C. H., xi. (xii,) — short categorical 
formulae; and, further, the previous quotation (§ 8) 
contains the key-word ^on, which characterizes the 
teaching of the '' Mind to Hermes.'' 

I therefore conclude that our Hermes is using a more 

1 Gf, a. II., X. (xi.) 25, and xvi. ("Definitions of Asclepius'^ 3 ; 
for references to the Magical and Alchemical literature, see R. 
39, 1 ; 106, 5 ; 127, 3. 



Hosted by Google 



ABOUT THE COMMON MIND 215 

intimate instruction, known only to the Hermes-grade, 
and not published for the Tat-degree; and that this 
is the meaning of his saying that it has not been 
written down. He means simply that it has not 
yet been allowed to be published for those in the 
Tat-stage. 

There were, then, other treatises now lost of the same 
type as that of the " Mind to Hermes " ; in them there 
were quotations from the Sayings of Heracleitus ; the 
" Obscure Philosopher " being regarded as one who had 
come into direct contact with the Logos or Mind, and 
as one, therefore, who spoke with the authority of direct 
revelation. 

Hermes and Basilides 

The next point of critical interest is the sentence 
in §7: 

*' I meant not that, but that the Mind-led man, my 
son, though not a fornicator, will suffer just as though 
he had committed fornication, and though he be no 
murderer, as though he had committed murder." 

If we now turn to the quotation which Clement of 
Alexandria ^ gives us from Book XXIII. of the Exegetica 
of Basilides, we read : 

*' For just as the babe, who, although it hath done no 
wrong previously, or actively committed any sin, yet 
hath the capacity of sin in it, — whenever it is sub- 
jected to suffering, is advantaged and reaps many 
benefits, which otherwise are difficult to gain ; in just 
the selfsame way is it, that although a perfect man 
may not have sinned in act, and yet doth suffer pains, 
he suffereth them in just the selfsame fashion as a 
babe; having within himself the tendency to sin, but 
refusing to embrace the opportunity to sin, he doth not 

1 8trom,, IV. xii., § 82 (P. 600 ; S. 217) ; Dindorf., ii. 363. 



Hosted by Google 



216 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

sin. So that even for such a man as this we ought not 
to suppose the incapacity for sin. 

" For just as it is the will to commit fornication that 
constitutes the fornicator, even though he does not 
find the opportunity of actually committing fornica- 
tion, and the will to commit murder that constitutes 
the murderer, although he may not be actually able to 
effect his purpose ; so also in the case of the ' sinless ' 
man I mean, if I see him suffering, even if he has 
actually done no sin, I shall say he is evil by his 
'Will to sin. For I will say anything rather than that 
Providence is evil." ^ 

Providence, as in our treatise, is here the instrument 
of the Good (§ 14), of the Will of God ; it is the will of 
man that is the source of evil, as we learn from 0. H., 
iv. (v.) 8 : *' For 'tis not God, 'tis we who are the cause 
of evil things, preferring them to good." 

In our treatise, then, the very same problem is 
treated as in the JExegetica of Basilides. Hermes 
speaks of the " Mind-led man," the " man who has the 
Logos in him " ; Basilides speaks of the " perfect man." 
So also in C. H., iv. (v.) 4, the "perfect man" is he 
who has " received the Mind." 

The ideas of Hermes and of Basilides are practically 
identical ; the words of both are strikingly similar 
when they cite fornication and murder as typical 
sins, and these and no others. 

Compare again with this idea of the babe in Basilides 
the words of Hermes in C, H., x. (xi.) 15 : 

'' Behold an infant's soul, my son, that is not yet cut 
off, because its body is still small and not as yet come 
xmto its full bulk. ... A thing of beauty altogether 
is such a soul to see, not yet befouled with body's 
passions, still all but hanging from the Cosmic Soul," 

1 See F. F. F., 274, 275. 



Hosted by Google 



ABOUT THE COMMON MIND 217 

And with this compare what Hippolytus ^ tells us of 
Valentinus : 

" Valentinus says that he once saw a babe that had 
only just been born, and that he proceeded to question 
it to find out who it was. And the babe replied and 
said it was the Logos." 

And also the Psalm of Valentinus quoted by the 
same heresiologist ^ : 

All things depending from Spirit I see ; 

All things supported by Spirit I view ; 

Flesh from Soul depending ; 

Soul by Air supported ; 

Air from iEther hanging ; 

Fruits borne of the Deep ; 

Babe borne of the Womb. 

Here, then, as in other instances, we have intimate 
points of contact between the Hermetic and Christian 
Gnosis. Is there, however, any question of direct 
plagiarism ? I think not ; but that the Christian 
doctors and the Hermetic philosophers were both in 
contact with the same body of inner teaching. 

4. With the action of the Mind on the soul in 
incarnation (§ 4) compare C, H., x, (xi.), 18, 19, where 
the office of the Mind in respect to the soul out of 
incarnation is graphically described. 

The Sermons on Fate 

6. In § 6 Hermes tells us that he has already spoken 
about Fate in others of his Sermons; while in §§14 
and 21 he three times refers to ISTecessity and Providence. 

In this connection it is to be noticed that Lactantius 
(D. /., vi. 25), in quoting the last two sentences of our 

1 Philos., vi. 42 (D. and S., 302) ; F. F. F,, p. 306. 

2 Philos.j vi. 37 (D. and S., 290) ; see emended text in Hilgenfeld 
(A.), Die Ketzergeschichte des Urchristenthwns (Leipzig, 1884), 
p. 304 ; F. F. F., p. 307. 



Hosted by Google 



218 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

treatise, says that he takes them from a Sermon by 
Hermes ^* On Justice." 

Now, Stobaeus has preserved for us an Extract (xi.) 
from a Sermon dealing with Justice, Providence, 
Necessity and Fate; also an Extract (x.) from a 
Sermon of Hermes to Tat dealing with Fate, and 
ending with the words: *'Such is the Sermon on the 
rule of Providence, Necessity and Fate/' We have 
also an Extract (xiii.) " Of Hermes from the Books to 
Ammon," entitled "Of the General Economy," which 
deals with Providence, Necessity and Fate. 

There were, then, according to Hermes, already 
existing not one but several Sermons on Fate, and, as 
we learn from Stobseus, not only in the Tat-literature 
but also in the Ammon-literature. It seems, then, 
probable that in the collection used by Lactantius the 
Tat-Sermons on Fate immediately preceded our treatise, 
and that one of these sermons (the one immediately 
preceding our treatise, presumably) was entitled " On 
Justice," thus confirming the title I have prefixed to the 
Stobaeus Extract xi. 

Materiality and Corporality are Energies of God 

22. Finally, in § 22 it has to be noticed that with the 
express teaching that Matter and Body are so far from 
being evil that they are Energies of God — His materi- 
ality and corporality — the charge of dualism against 
our philosophers must for ever be abandoned. Their 
doctrine was that of pan-monism ; and, therefore, 
wherever we find signs of dualism, or even distinct 
statements of an indabitably dualistic nature, we must 
understand that this was a formal convenience for the 
better insistence upon the need of strenuous exertion 
to solve the mystery of the opposites, rather than an 
essential doctrine of the Gnosis. 



Hosted by Google 



COEPUS HEKMETICUM XIII. (XIV.) 



THE SECRET SEEMON ON THE 
MOUNTAIN 

Concerning Rebirth and the Promise 
OF Silence 

Op Thrice-greatest Hermes unto Tat 

HIS Son 

(Text: R. 339-348; P. 114-128; Pat. 15b-17b.) 

1. Tat, [Now] in the General Sermons/ father, 
thou didst speak in riddles most unclear, con- 
versing on Divinity ; and when thou saidst no 
man could e'er be saved before Rebirth,^ thy 
meaning thou didst hide. 

Further, when I became thy Suppliant, in 
Wending up the Mount,^ after thou hadst con- 
versed with me, and when I longed to learn the 
Sermon {Logos) on Rebirth (for this beyond all 

^ ev Tots y€piKo7s. Gf, G. H., X. (xi.) 1 and 7. 
'^ 7ra\iyy(V€(rla. 

s Reading exl ttjs tov opovs fxcra^da-ews with P., and not Kara- 
^da-eoos with R. Gf. G. H., X. (xi.) 15 ; Jamb., D. M., viii. 6. 

219 



Hosted by Google 



220 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

other things is just the thing I know not), thou 
saidst, that thou wouldst give it me— '^ when 
thou shalt have become a stranger to the world." ^ 

Wherefore I got me ready and made the 
thought in me a stranger ^ to the world-illusion. 

And now do thou fill up the things that fall 
short ^ in me with what thou saidst would give 
me the tradition * of Rebirth, setting it forth in 
speech or in the secret way. 

I know not, Thrice-greatest one, from out 
what matter and what womb Man comes to 
birth, or of what seed.^ 

2. Hermes. Wisdom that understands^ in 
silence ^ [such is the matter and the womb from 
out which Man is born], and the True Good the 
seed. 

Tat. Who is the sower, father ? For I am 
altogether at a loss. 

Her. It is the Will of God, my son. 

Tat. And of what kind is he that is begotten, 
father ? For I have no share of that essence in 



KOCflOV. 

'■^ Reading airT^WoTpiooara with the majority of the editors, and 
not the a'n"f}Bpi(ra of R. 

■' Tct v(rT€p7}jjLaTa avatvXy]p(affov, 

^ Trapa^ovvai^ the word Used for the giving of this lesson or inner 
instruction is the technical term for the *' handing on'^ of a 
doctrine or being initiated into it. 

•'' B.'s reading would make this refer to Herme.s : " I know not 
from what womb thou com'st to birth," But the whole instruc- 
tion seems to favour the usually accepted reading. 

^ tTo<j>U vo€pd. " Of. G. IL, X. (xi.) 5. 



Hosted by Google 



THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 221 

me, which doth transcend the senses.^ The one 
that is begot will be another one from God, 
God's Son ? 

Her. All in all, out of all powers composed. 

Tat, Thou tellest me a riddle, father, and dost 
not speak as father unto son. 

Her. This Race,^ my son, is never taught ; 
but when He willeth it, its memory is restored 
by God. 

3. Tat, Thou sayest things impossible, 
father, things that are forced. Hence answers 
would I have direct unto these things. Am I 
a son strange to my father's race ? 

Keep it not, father, back from me. I am a 
true-born son ; explain to me the manner of 
Rebirth. 

Her, What may I say, my son ? I can but 
tell thee tlds. Whene'er I see within myself the 
Simple Vision^ brought to birth out of God's 
mercy,* I have passed through myself into a 
Body that can never die. And now I am not 
what I was before ; but I am born in Mind. 

The way to do this is not taught, and it can- 
not be seen by the compounded^ element by 
means of which thou seest. 

^ rr\s 6V ifxol oixrias rijs yorjrrjs. ^ Cf, Ex. i. 3, 

3 &TrKa(rTov, that is to say, not made up, non-fictitious, not com- 
pounded ; that is, simple — the opposite of compounded. 

* Cf. below, § 7 : the man " who hath been taken pity on by 
God " ; and also § 10. ^ iT\a(Tr6v, 

Hosted by Google 



222 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

Yea, I liave had my former composed form 
dismembered for me. 1 am no longer touched, 
yet have I touch ; I have dimension too ; and 
[yet] am I a stranger to them now. 

Thou seest me with eyes, my son ; but what 
I am thou dost not understand [even] with 
fullest strain of bod)^ and of sight. 

4. Tat, Into fierce frenzy and mind-fury hast 
thou plunged me, father, for now no longer do 
I see myself. 

Her, I would, my son, that thou hadst e'en 
passed right through thyself, as they who dream 
in sleep yet sleepless. 

Tat, Tell me this too ! Who is the author ^ 
of Eebirth ? 

Her, The Son of God, the One Man, by 
God's Will. 

5. Tat, Now hast thou brought me, father, 
unto pure stupefaction. 

Arrested from the senses which I had before, 
. . . , '"^ ; for [now] I see thy Greatness identical 
with thy distinctive form. \ 

Her, Even in this thou art untrue ^ ; the 
mortal form doth change with every day. 'Tis 
turned by time to growth and waning, as being 
an untrue thing.* 

6. Tat. What then is true, Thrice-greatest One ? 

^ y(:vf:aiovpy6s, ^ ^ lacuna unfortunately follows. 

'' if/6?;Sj;. ^ COS rpeudos. 

Hosted by Google 



THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 223 

Her, That which is never troubled, son, 
which cannot be defined ; that which no colour 
hath, nor any figure, which is not turned, which 
hath no garment, which giveth light ; that which 
is comprehensible unto itself [alone], which doth 
not suffer change ; that which no body can 
contain.^ 

Tat In very truth I lose my reason, father. 
Just when I thought to be made wise by thee, I 
find the senses of this mind of mine blocked up. 

Her. Thus is it, son : That which is upward 
borne like fire, yet is borne down like earth, 
that which is moist like water, yet blows like 
air,^ how shalt thou this perceive with sense — 
the that which is not solid nor yet moist, which 
naught can bind or loose, of which in power 
and energy alone can man have any notion, — 
and even then it wants a man who can ^ perceive 
the Way of Birth in God ^ ? 

7. Tat 1 am incapable of this, father, then ? 

Her, Nay, God forbid, my son ! Withdraw 
into thyself, and it will come ; will^ and it 
comes to pass ; throw out of work the body's 
senses, and thy Divinity shall come to birth ; 
purge from thyself the brutish torments — things 
of matter. 

Tat I have tormentors then in me, father ? 

1 Gf. P. S. A., xxxi. 3. 2 cf. a H., iv. (v.) 1. 

^ Retaining the reading deo/mvov Se rod Bvya/jL^yov. 
* r^v iy de^ yeveffiv — cf. § 10. 

Hosted by Google 



224 THRIOE-GREATEST HERMES 

Her, Ay, no few, my son ; nay, fearful ones 
and manifold. 

Tat I do not know them, father. 

Her, Torment the first is this Not-knowing,^ 
son; the second one is Grief; the third, In- 
temperance ; the fourth, Concupiscence ; the 
fifth, Unrighteousness ; the sixth is Avarice ; 
the seventh, Error ^; the eighth is Envy; the 
ninth, Guile ^; the tenth is Anger; eleventh, 
Rashness ; the twelfth is Malice. 

These are in number twelve ; but under them 
are many more, my son ; and creeping through 
the prison of the body * they force the man that's 
placed within ^ to suff*er in his senses. But they 
depart (although not all at once) from him who 
hath been taken pity on by God ^ ; and this it 
is which constitutes the manner of Rebirth. And 
. . . . ^ the Reason [Logos), 

8. And now, my son, be still and solemn 
silence keep ! Thus shall the mercy that flows 
on us from God not cease. 

Henceforth rejoice, son, for by the Powers 
of God thou art being purified for the articula- 
tion of the Reason (Logos), 

^ &ypoia. '^ airciTTj. '^ BSkos. 

* Of. G,E., xvi. 15. ^ iuSLdOiTou. 

^ Gf. above, § 3 : " brought to birth out of God's mercy " ; and 
also § 10. 

"* A lacuna in the text. 

Hosted by Google 



THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 225 

Gnosis of God jhath come to us, and when 
this comes, my son, Not-knowing is cast out. 

Gnosis of Joy hath come to us, and on its 
coming, son, Sorrow will flee away to them 
who give it room. The Power that follows Joy 
do I invoke, thy Self-control. Power most 
sweet ! Let us most gladly bid it welcome, 
son ! How with its coming doth it chase 
Intemperance away ! 

9. Now fourth, on Continence I call, the Power 
against Desire. 

. . . . ^ This step, my son, is Righteousness' 
firm seat. For without judgment^ see how 
she hath chased Unrighteousness away. We 
are made righteous, son, by the departure of 
Unrighteousness. 

Power sixth I call to us, — that against Avarice, 
Sharing- with -all. ^ 

And now that Avarice is gone, I call on Truth. 
And Error flees, and Truth is with us. 

See how [the measure of] the Good is full, my 

1 SometHng has liere evidently fallen out in the text. 

^ xaypU Kpiff^cas. If, however, we must read /crtVews with 
the majority of the editors, I cannot understand the various 
translations. Everard gives *' without labour " ; Parthey, " nulla 
contentione^^ ; Menard, "mm combat'^; Chambers, *' without 
contention." I would, therefore, render it : " See how she hath 
chased out Unrighteousness without a home " ; for it seems to 
me that in x^p^^ Krio-ews we have the exact antithesis of 'ddpaa-fxa. 
Righteousness has here her firm seat or abode, and Unrighteous- 
ness is thus naturally without a home. 

'' KOLvooviav. 

VOL. II. 15 



Hosted by Google 



226 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

son, upon Truth's coming. For Envy hath gone 
from us ; and unto Truth is joined the Good as 
well, with Life and Light. 

And now no more doth any torment of the 
Darkness venture nigh, but vanquished [all] 
have fled with whirring wings. 

10. Thou knowest [now], my son, the manner 
of Rebirth. And when the Ten is come, my son, 
that driveth out the Twelve, the Birth in under- 
standing^ is complete, and by this Birth we are 
made into Gods. 

Who then doth by His mercy gain this Birth 
in God, abandoning the body's senses, knows 
himself [to be of Light and Life ^] and that he 
doth consist of these, and [thus] is filled with 
Bliss. 

11. Tat ^j God made steadfast, father, no 
longer with the sight my eyes afford I look on 
things, but with the energy the Mind doth give 
me through the Powers.^ 

In heaven am I, in earth, in water, air ; I am 
in animals, in plants ; Tm in the womb, before 
the womb, after the womb ; Fm everywhere ! 

But further tell me this : How are the 
torments of the Darkness, when they are twelve 
in number, driven out by the ten Powers ? 
What is the way of it. Thrice-greatest one ? 

' voepa ycpeo-is, lit., intellectual birth. 
'^ Completed from C. II, i. 22. 

■' TTj Bia dipdfxiwp poTjTiKTj iuipy^ia. 

Hosted by Google 



THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 227 

12. Her, This dwelling-place'^ through which 
we have just passed, my son, is constituted from 
the circle of the types-of-life, this being com- 
posed of elements, twelve in number, but of one 
nature, an omniform ^ idea. For man's delusion 
there are disunions ^ in them, son, while in their 
action they are one. Not only can we never 
part Eashness from Wrath ; they cannot even 
be distinguished. 

According to right reason (logos), then, they * 
naturally withdraw once and for all, in as much 
as they are chased out by no less than ten 
powers, that is, the Ten. 

For, son, the Ten is that which giveth birth 
to souls. And Life and Light are unified there, 
where the One hath being from the Spirit. 
According then to reason (logos) the One contains 
the Ten, the Ten the One. 

13. Tat Father, I see the All, I see myself in 
Mind. 

Her, This is, my son, Rebirth — no more to 
look on things from body's view-point (a thing 
three ways in space extended),^ . . .^ though this 
Sermon (Logos) on Rebirth, on which I did not 

1 o-KTivos, — tent or tabernacle of the human soul. Cf. below, 
§15. 

2 Cf. commentary on C. H.^ xi. (xii.) IG. 
2 Zia(vyaX — the Opposite of (rvCvyiai. 

4 That is, the Twelve. 

-' As opposed to some other dimension, presumably. 

^ Some words are evidently missing. 

Hosted by Google 



228 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

comment ^ ; — in order that we may not be 
calumniators ^ of the All unto the multitude, to 
whom indeed the God Himself doth will we 
should not. 

14. Tat Tell me, father: This Body which 
is made up of the Powers, is it at any time 
dissolved ? 

Her, Hush, [son] ! Speak not of things 
impossible, else wilt thou sin and thy Mind's eye 
be quenched. 

The natural body which our sense perceives is 
far removed from this essential birth. 

The first must be dissolved, the last can never 
be ; the first must die, the last death cannot touch. 

Dost thou not know thou hast been born a 
God, Son of the One, even as I myself? 

15. Tat, I would, father, hear the Praise- 
giving with hymn which thou didst say thou 
heardest then when thou wert at the Eight [the 
Ogdoad] of Powers. 

Tier. Just as the Shepherd did foretell [1 
should], my son, [when I came to] the Eight.^ 

Well dost thou haste to '' strike thy tent," * for 
thou hast been made pure. 

1 See § 1. 

^ SiaiSoAof, compare § 22. The lacuna probably contained some 
reference to keeping silence. 

^ Of. a H,, i. 26. 

^ Xvcrai rh aKr^vos. Gf. above, § 12. Tlie meaning is generally 
to free oneself from the trammels of the body. Compare the 
Pythian Oracle concerning Plotinns : "But now since thou hast 

Hosted by Google 



THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 229 

The Shepherd, Mind of all masterhood/ hath 
not passed on to me more than hath been writ 
down, for full well did He know that I should of 
myself be able to learn all, and hear what I 
should wish, and see all things. 

He left to me the making of fair things ^ ; 
wherefore the Powers within me, e'en as they 
are in all,^ break into song. 

1 6. TaL Father, I wish to hear ; I long to 
know these things. 

Her. Be still, my son ; hear the Praise-giving 
now that keeps [the soul] in tune, Hymn of 
Re- birth — a hymn I would not have thought 
fit so readily to tell, had'st thou not reached 
the end of all 

Wherefore this is not taught, but is kept hid 
in silence. 

Thus then, my son, stand in a place uncovered 
to the sky, facing the southern wind,* about the 
sinking of the setting sun, and make thy worship ; 
so in like manner too when he doth rise, with 
face to the east wind. 

Now, son, be still ! 

struck thy tent and left the tomb of thy daimonic soul " {vvp 5' 

Sre 8^ (TKrjvos yuev eXvtraOf crrifxa S' 6Aeii|/as ^vx^s datf^ovlrjs). Porphyry, 
Plotini Vita, xxii. ; cf. Ex. vii. 3 ; Ex. iii. 1. 

1 Gf. a H., i. 2. 

2 Sc. psalms and praise-giving. 
^ Sc. prophets. 

* Also used of the south-west quarter. The " south wind " is 
thought to have extended from SSE. to W. 

Hosted by Google 



230 thrice -greatest hermes 

The Secri:t Hymnody 

17. Let every nature of the World receive the 
utterance of my hymn ! 

Open thou Earth ! Let every bolt of the 
Abyss be drawn for me. Stir not, ye Trees ! 

I am about to hymn creation's Lord, both All 
and One. 

Ye Heaveus open, and ye Winds stay still ; 
[and] let God's deathless Sphere receive my 
word (logos) ! 

For I will sing the praise of Him who founded 
all; who fixed the Earth, and hung up Heaven, 
and gave command that Ocean should afford 
sweet water [to the Earth], to both those jDarts 
that are inhabited and those that are not, for 
the support and use of every man ; who made 
the Fire to shine for gods and men for every act. 

Let us together all give praise to Him, sublime 
above the Heavens, of every nature Lord ! 

'Tis He who is the Eye of Mind ; may He 
accept the praise of these my Powders ! 

18. Ye Powers that are within me, hymn the 
One and All ; sing with my Will, Powers all that 
are within me ! 

blessed Gnosis, by thee illumined, hymning 
through thee the Light that mind alone can see,^ 
I joy in Joy of Mind. 

^ rh POffrhv 4^ws. 

Hosted by Google 



THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 231 

Sing with me praises all ye Powers ! 

Sing praise, my Self-control; sing thou 
through me, my Righteousness, the praises of 
the Righteous ; sing thou, my Sharing-all, the 
praises of the All ; through me sing, Truth, 
Truth's praises ! 

Sing thou, Good, the Good ! Life and 
Light, from us to you our praises flow ! 

Father, I give Thee thanks, to Thee Thou 
Energy of all my Powers ; I give Thee thanks, 
God, Thou Power of all my Energies ! 

19. Thy Reason {Logos) sings through me Thy 
praises. Take back through me the All into 
[Thy] Reason — [my] reasonable oblation ^ ! 

Thus cry the Powers in me. They sing Thy 
praise, Thou All ; they do Thy Will. 

From Thee Thy WiU^ to Thee the AIL 
Receive from all their reasonable oblation. The 
All that is in us, Life, preserve ; Light 
illumine it ; God in-spirit it.^ 

It is Thy Mind that plays the Shepherd'^ to 
Thy Word,^ Thou Creator, Bestower of the 
Spirit [upon all].^ 

1 Of. below, § 2J . 

2 Cf. P. S. /I., Comment, and E. 39, n. L 

3 The Spirit being Light and Life. 

^ TToifxaivei, acts as a shepherd or feeds ; PcBmandres is thus the 
Shepherd of men or the feeder of men, He who gives them the 
heavenly food. 

^ The Word or Reason or true Man in man. 

** irviV(xaT0<p6pe Z'nfuovpy^. 

Hosted by Google 



232 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

20. [For] Thou art God; Thy Man^ thus 
cries to Thee through Fire, through Air, through 
Earth, through Water, [and] through Spirit, 
through Thy creatures. 

'Tis from Thy ^on I have found Praise-giving ; 
and in Thy Will,^ the object of my search, have 
I found rest. 

TaL By thy good pleasure ^ have I seen this 
Praise-giving being sung,^ father ; I have set 
it in my Cosmos too. 

Her, Say in the Cosmos that thy mind alone 
can see, my son. 

Tat, Yea, father, in the Cosmos that the mind 
alone can see ; for I have been made able by thy 
Hymn, and by thy Praise-giving my mind hath 
been illumined. Bat further I myself as well 
would from my natural mind send praise-giving 
to God. 

21. Her, But not unheedfuUy, my son. 

Tat. Ay. What I behold in mind, that do I 
say. 

To thee, thou Parent of my Bringing into 
Birth, as unto God I, Tat, send reasonable offer- 
ings.^ God and Father, thou art the Lord, 
thou art the Mind. Receive from me oblations 

1 Gf. G, H., I 32. 2 ^ovA-^. ^ e4\rif^a. 

^ Gf., for instance, The Ascension of Isaiah, i. 6 : " In the 
twentieth year of the reign of Hezekiah, Isaiah had seen the 
words of this prophecy." — Charles' Trans. (London, 1900), p. 5. 

'' Gf. above, § 18. 

Hosted by Google 



THE SECRET SEEMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 233 

reasonable as thou would'st wish ; for by thy 
Will all things have been perfected. 

Her. Send thon oblation, son, acceptable to 
God, the Sire of all ; but add, my son, too, 
*' through the Word '' [Logos), 

Tat. I give thee, father, thanks for showing 
me to sing such hymns. 

22. Her. Happy am I, my son, that thou 
hast brought the good fruits forth of Truth, 
products that cannot die. 

x4nd now that thou hast learnt this lesson 
from me, make promise to keep silence -^ on thy 
virtue, and to no soul, my son, make known the 
handing on to thee the manner of Rebirth, that 
we may not be thought to be calumniators.^ 

And now we both of us have given heed 
sufficiently, both I the speaker and the hearer 
thou. 

In Mind ^ hast thou become a Knower of thy- 
self and of our [common] Sire. 

1 Gf. P. 8. A., xxxii. 4. 

•^ Bid$oKoh slanderers, calumniators ; compare § 13 ; also Ex. 
i. 16. 

"^ vocp&s. 



Hosted by Google 



234 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

COMMENTAKY 

Concerning the Title 

'' The Secret Sermon on the Mountain " is the main 
title given in all the MSS., with the exception of A ; 
the subsidiary contents-title is evidently derived from 
the same edition to which we owe the other contents- 
titles preserved in our Corpus. Keitzenstein (p. 193), 
however, thinks that the main title has arisen by 
mistake. What the mistake is he does not tell us; 
perhaps he means that in our Sermon there is no 
mention of '' On a Mountain," but rather, as in | 1, if 
we accept his reading, of '' Doion a Mountain." But 
in this we cannot follow him ; for the whole teaching 
is precisely ''On the Mount "—to the top of which 
Tat has now come. For the '' Mountain " was symbolic 
of stages of inner development, and in § 9 we are tokl 
precisely : '' This step (the fifth) is Eighteousness' firm 
seat," — showing that the Mountain was conceived as an 
ascent or stair of steps as is so often seen in Egyptian 
frescoes. 

The Term Apocryphon 

Again, with regard to the title, the term " Secret '' 
(aTTOKpvcpos — apocryphal) is used in its original sense 
of hidden away, meaning esoteric or not put into circu- 
lation, as applied to a logos or sermon, or a collection 
of logoi or sayings. 

A logos in this sense had very much the same meaning 
for our Ancients as the Sanskrit viahd-vdkyam {" great 
saying") has to-day for an Indian theosophist who 
applies the term to the great mystical utterances of 
the Upanishads ; such as : '' That art thou " (Tat tvam 
asi), etc. 

In classical antiquity these logoi or logia were 



Hosted by Google 



THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 235 

regarded as words of wisdom, and were the most sacred 
legacies of the sages to humanity. These oracular 
utterances were frequently collected together, and even 
prior to the days of syncretism formed the most sacred 
" deposits " (SiaOfJKai) of various nations ; the same 
term being subsequently given to the Christian Bible. 

Thus Herodotus calls Onomacritus, the first collector 
of the archaic Orphic Hymns, a '' depository of oracles " 
(SiaOerrjv xpw^(^^)y — the word carrying the meaning of 
•'' one who arranges," corresponding exactly to the term 
Vyasa in Sanskrit, the supposed " author " of the 
Mahdhhdrata. 

Sach collections of logoi or logia were then generally 
called *' deposits," the word also sometimes bearing the 
meaning of " testaments " as containing the expression 
of the Divine will or dispensation. The same term is 
used by Strabo (x. 482) of the Laws of Lycurgus ; it 
was also applied by the Orphics and Pythagoreans to 
such sacred laws ^ ; while Ecclesiastical writers subse- 
quently used it in reference to the Canonical Books. ^ 

The Orphics and Pythagoreans also called these 
collections " sacred utterances " (lepol Xoyoi) ; and even 
Clement of Alexandria refers to such a saying of 
Orpheus as *' that truly sacred utterance " (top ovrm 
lepov \6yov). 

That such collections were kept secret is not sur- 
prising ; indeed, such must have been the case from 
time immemorial. But even on the ground of purely 
Greek and Roman history, we are not without infor- 
mation of collections of oracles carefully guarded as the 
secret scriptures or bibles of nations. 

Cicero^ speaks of such a bible of the Veii. The 
Athenians, in the time of the Kings, possessed a similar 

1 Grotius, ap. Jablonski, ii. 397 ; Lobeck, Aglaoph., p. 714. 
^ Eiiseb., Ghron., 99 a. 3 jpg j)i^^^ i 44. 



Hosted by Google 



236 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

bible of logia'^; and Dinarchus^ tells us that the 
safety of the State depended on this secret scripture 
{airoppTjTOvg SiaOrJKag), 

These occult sayings (aTroOepra eirr]) are further 
called by Suidas {s.v.) " withdrawn volumes " (iSiSXla 
avaKexoopijKOTo) — that is to say, books withdrawn from 
public perusal, or, in other words, apocryphal, hidden or 
secret {aTroKpv^a). 

And not only was this the case with the ancient 
writings themselves, but also with the commentaries 
upon them, and by degrees with everything referring 
to them, until finally we find Themistius the rhetorician, 
in the fourth century, speaking of that " mass of 
Archaic wisdom not open to the public or in general 
circulation, but scarce and occult." ^ 

We have, therefore, translated the term by '' secret " 
as conveying the proper meaning of the epithet in the 
title, and not by " apocryphal," a word that nowadays 
connotes the judgment of a theological canon. 

The Three Stages of Probation 

1. In the first paragraph Tat definitely refers to 
three Stages of Probation, before he is deemed fit to 
hear the Sermon on Kebirth. 

(i) First there is the General or Preliminary In- 
struction contained in a collection of discourses called 
the General Sermons (TeviKol Aoyot). 

(ii) Next is the Stage where Tat becomes the 
Suppliant of Hermes, a stage characterized by Con- 
versation or Dialogue (SLaXexOrjvaL) ; that is to say, 
Tat was allowed to ask questions. This is further 

1 Herod., v. 90. 

2 Or, c. Demos., 91, 20. 

^ Or., iv. 60 : '* (rr7(pos apxa^as (ro((>ias, ov Koiurjs ovSe iv fteV* kvKlv- 
doviJ.evr]S aXXk (XTraviov koI aTroOerov, 



Hosted by Google 



THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 237 

symbolically described by a phrase, cttI rrjg rov opovg 
/xeraiSaVece?, which is difficult to translate, but which 
seems to mean either Passing up, or Wending up, the 
Mountain, or Wending over the Mountain. That is 
to say, that Hermes was gradually leading Tat to the 
top of the Mountain, in plain words, as far as his 
normal intellect could carry him ; the Top of the 
Mountain representing the highest point of unaided 
mental faculty. 

This stage was, I believe, represented by the collec- 
tion of Sermons to Tat, or Dialogues with Tat, known 
as the Aie^oSiKol Aoyoi — a term somewhat difficult to 
translate precisely. 

The fundamental meaning of Sie^oSog is a "way 
through and out," a "pathway" or "passage," or 
" means of escape." It thus comes to mean the course 
of a narrative, or a detailed narrative, exposition, dis- 
cussion. Hence also a " passage " of Scripture. As set 
over against yeviKog (General), therefore, Sie^oSiKog 
would mean Detailed or Expository; but at the same 
time it would to the Greek ear suggest the meaning 
of the Means of Escape or the Way out of Ignorance. 

(iii) The third Stage is that of Moral and Mental 
Purification. "Wherefore I got me ready and made 
the thought (to (/)p6vr]jULa) in me a stranger to the 
world-illusion" (rij? tov koct/ulov airaTri^) — the Error 
that in § 7 sums up the first six vices, and is in § 9 
driven out by Truth. 

Stage ii. may have been technically known as that 
of the Suppliant, though, of course, of this we cannot 
be sure. In any case the term must be considered in 
close connection with Philo's treatise On the Contem- 
plative Life, which, as Conybeare tells us, most probably 
formed Book IV. of Philo's voluminous work, or rather 
apology, De Legatione, The alternative title of this 



Hosted by Google 



238 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

work was The Suppliants, By '' Suppliant '' Philo tells 
us he means *' one who has fled to God and taken refuge 
with Him." ^ 

Here, however, the term is used in a narrower sense, 
as adapted to the personal relationship of disciple to 
master, who, during the time of probation, stands to 
him as the representative of God. The master is his 
spiritual father, the image of God the Father.^ 

The Holy Mount of Initiation 

As to the symbolic use of the term Mountain, I 
need hardly remind my readers that it was perhaps 
the most common figure employed in the apocalypses 
of the time. Instances come immediately crowding 
into the mind, such as the '' Mount of Galilee " in the 
Askew and Bruce Gnostic Codices, on which all the great 
initiations and rites are performed by the Kisen Lord ; 
or the Mount Tabor ^ of The Gospel according to the 
Eehretvs, '' My Mother the Holy Spirit took me by one 
of the hairs of the head and carried me unto Mount 
Tabor''; or in the Acts of John, where the Vision 
of the Spiritual Crucifixion is shown to John on the 
Mount ; or in The Gospel of Eve, where the Vision of 
the Great and Little Man is seen on the Mount ; or 
in The Shepherd of Hernias, where the Angel of Eepentr 
ance bears off Hermas to the Mount of Arcadia, etc. 
In every case the Mountain is no physical mountain, 
but the height of contemplation, an interior state of 
spiritual consciousness. 

Stage iii., again, is of interest because of the terms in 

1 Be Sac. Ah. et 0., i. 186, 33. 
^ See tlie praise-giving of Tat, § 21. 

^ "The Mountain of Liglit," the traditional scene of the Trans- 
figuration. 



Hosted by Google 



THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 239 

which it is described ; they may be compared with the 
same teaching in the Behnesa logos : 

Jesus saith : '' Except ye fast to the world, ye shall 
in nowise find the Kingdom of God/' 

Again, in Tat's prayer for the consummation of his 
probation : *' And now do thou fill up the things that 
fall short in me " (ra varT€p7]jULara avairXripwa'ov)^ it 
should be noticed that we have the well-known technical 
terms of the Christianized Gnosis, the Pleroma and 
Hysterema, or Fullness and Insufficiency. 

The Birth from Above 

The time has come for Tat to receive, through his 
master, the touch of the true Mind-consciousness, the 
Christ is to be born in his heart, the light of the Pleroma 
is to shine into his inmost being. It is to be a Kew 
Birth, a Eegeneration (ira\iyy€V€cn<s), or Ee-birth {ava- 
yevvw^?)> i^ ^^^ sense of being born from Above {avwOev). 

Compare John iii. 3: "Amen, Amen, I say unto 
thee; Except a man be born from Above, he cannot 
see the Kingdom of God." And also 7: "Marvel 
not that I said unto thee, Ye {'pl.) must be born 
from Above," — where the comment on a prior saying, 
'' Ye must be born from Above," formally unsuited to 
the scheme of a dialogue between Jeschu and Kabbi 
Nakdimon, reveals the work of the Haggadist. 

So also in 1 Pet. i. 22, 23 : *' Having made your 
souls holy by hearkening to the Truth ^ . . . being 
Ee-born {avayeyevvr^iixevoL) not from the seed of destruc- 
tion, but from the Seed that cannot be destroyed, through 
the Word ^ {Logos) of God, who lives and endures." ^ 

1 Precisely as did Tat. 

2 Gf. precisely the same formula in our treatise, § 21. 

^ That is, of God as JEon and God as Life, which is the union 
of God as Mind and Logos. 



Hosted by Google 



240 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

These passages from the New Testament Scriptures 
are not, of course, cited to show any dependence of our 
Hermetic authors on the New Testament writers ; but 
simply to show how they mutually explain one another. 
For indeed the doctrine of the New Birth and of the 
Sacred Marriage was beyond all else the crowning 
mystery of the Spiritual Way for all the mystic schools 
of the time.^ 

The Virgin Birth 

2. The secret that Tat would learn is the Mystery 
of the Birth from the Virgin Womb — the Birth of 
Man, the Great Mystery of Kegeneration. Many 
illustrations of the meaning of this pivot-doctrine of 
the Christian teaching might be quoted from Gnostic 
writings, but it will be sufficient to remind the reader 
of what the Jewish Commentator in the Naassene 
Document (§ 28) has written in contrasting the Great 
Mysteries (or the heavenly ones) with the Little 
Mysteries (those of fleshly generation). Speaking of the 
Mysteries of Eegeneration, he writes : 

'' For this is the Gate of Heaven, and this is the 
House of God, where the Good God dwells alone ; into 
which no impure [man] shall come, but it is kept under 
guard for the spiritual alone,— where when they come, 
they must cast away their garments, and all become 
bridegrooms, obtaining their true manhood, through the 
Virginal Spirit. For this is the Virgin big with child, 
conceiving and bearing a Son/' 

And to this the Christian Commentator adds : — 
*' not psychic, not fleshly, but a blessed JEon of ^ons." 

^ The antiquity of the ideas connected with this spiritual 
mystery may be seen from what Reitzenstein (pp. 227 S.) has to 
say concerning mystic arwova-ia or congress ; of it, as perhaps of 
nothing so mucli in the world, may it be said corruptio optimi pessiona. 



Hosted by Google 



THE SECRET vSERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 241 

The Jewish Commentator uses the language of Philo, 
who, as we have shown, centred his ideas round the 
conception of the Sacred Marriage and the Virginal 
Spirit. 

So, too, does our treatise. The Womb is Silence, the 
silence of contemplation, the image of the Great Silence 
the Mother of the ^ons in many a Christianized 
Gnostic System ; the Matter is Wisdom ; the ^on's 
coming to consciousness in man is the Birth of Man 
the Son of God ; and the Seed is the Good or Logos 
sown by the Will of the Father. This is the Birth of the 
Christ in man, the Great Mystery that awaits us when 
we have made ourselves strangers to the world-illusion. 

Is this Son then, asks Tat, other than God ? No, 
answers Hermes ; it is the Mystery of Sameness, not 
of Difference ; it is the Plerdma, not the Insufficiency, — 
" All in all, out of all powers composed," the Common 
Fruit of the Pleroma, as the Valentinians would have 
expressed it 

The Kace of the Logos 

It is a Eace, not an individual ; it is We and no longer 
I.^ This is the Eace of the Logos ; the Self-taught Eace 
of Philo ; or, as Hermes says : " This Eace, my son, is 
never taught, but when He willeth it, its memory is 
restored by God.'' 

This is the avd/uLVi^ari^ of Pythagoras and Plato, — the 
regaining of the consciousness of the Divine State ; it 
must be self-perceived. And so Philo tells us : 

** But as for the Eace of Devotees who are taught ever 
more and more to see, let them strive for the intuition 
of That-which-is ; let them transcend the sun which 
men perceive [and gaze upon the Light beyond, the 

1 Compare the Song of the Powers in Fistis Sophia (pp. 16, 17), 
where the " We " alternates with the " I." 

VOL. 11. 16 



Hosted by Google 



242 THRICE -GREATEST HERMEB 

True Sun or Logos], nor ever leave this rank which 
leads to Perfect Blessedness. 'Now they who betake 
themselves to the [Divine] Service, [do so] not because 
of any custom, or some one's advice or appeal, but are 
carried away by Heavenly Love." ^ 

They are of the Kace of Elxai, the Hidden Power 
or Holy Spirit, the Spouse of lexai, the Hidden Lord or 
Logos. ^ 

The Self-taught 

3. Hermes cannot teach to Tat this Birth in words, 
even as Isis is not permitted to declare it openly to 
Horus (K K, 36) : 

" I may not tell the story of this Birth ; for it is not 
permitted to describe the origin of thy descent, 
Horus, son of mighty power, lest afterward the Way-of- 
Birth of the immortal Gods should be known unto men " 
—that is, the Mystery of the Birth of Horus. 

Hermes can only guide Tat towards the realisation of 
the Blessed Sight, by putting himself into that sublime 
state of consciousness, so that Tat, so to speak, bathes, or 
is baptized in, his master's spiritual presence, the Cup 
of the Mind. This, as we have seen already from 
several treatises, was the way of transmission of the 
Power of the powers, the true Laying-on of Hands. 

Hermes describes the change that takes place in 
himself when he passes into the higher spiritual con- 
sciousness. He seems to ''pass through himself — to 
'' involve " himself, as it is said somewhere in the 
Mahabharata of the Kishis — " into a Body that can 
never die." that is, into a, or rather the, Essential or 
Cosmic Body,^ that embraces the cosmos within it. The 

I D, V. a, M. 473, 10 ; P. 891. 

^ See D. /. L., pp. 374, 375. 

■'' Of. R. 52. But compare especially § 6, and G, if., iv. (v.) 1. 



Hosted by Google 



THE SECRET SERMOK ON THE MOUNTAIN 243 

way to do this is not taught, for it cannot be under- 
stood from any sensible experience, the outer physical 
form of the adept remaining as it was before. It is 
an inner change. The Birth of a Christ is the striking 
of a new keynote ; everything remains apparently as it 
was before, but all things receive a new interpretation. 

No physical sight, even of the greatest intensity, 
can penetrate the Veil of this Mystery. 

" Thou seest me with eyes, my son ; but what I am 
thou dost not understand." 

With this compare the marvellous Kitual of Initia- 
tion in The Ads of John : 

" Who I am thou shalt know when I depart.^ What 
I am seen to be, that am I not ; but what I am, thou 
shalt see when thou comest." ^ 

None but those who have reached the Christ-state 
can know it ; no teaching will avail to explain its 
manner and its mysteries. It must be realized. 

The New Ckeation 

4. But Tat, who has *'made himself ready," is 
becoming quickened by the power of his master. His 
spiritual senses are being born ; already he is losing 
touch with the physical; he no longer sees himself. 
But this is not enough ; he must not only be able to 
lose consciousness of his physical body, and see and 
hear as though with the mind alone, but he must 
"invert" himself, pass right through himself, and no 
longer see things as without him, but all things as 
within him. 

Ail this is a New Creation to be accomplished in the 
man himself. The Author or Genesiurge of Ee-birth, as 

1 That is, when the Presence is withdrawn, — by contrast. 
^ Texts and Studies j V. i. 14. 



Hosted by Google 



244 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

contrasted with the Maker or Demiurge of Birth, is 
the One Man, the Logos, the Energic Eeason and Will 
of God ; the one is the Creator of the Immortal Body, 
the other is the Maker of the mortal frame. 

The Way of Birth in God 

5. The reading of the next sentence is faulty, and 
it is impossible to extract the correct meaning. The 
" Greatness " (to aiyeOog) and '' distinctive form " 
(X(jtpaKrrip) are terms familiar enough to us in Christian 
Gnostic writings.^ Greatness connotes the same idea 
as ^on ; " character " or " distinctive form " or " rank " 
is generally the impression from a typical original, 
and here stands for the form by which a man is 
recognised. 

6. Hermes then proceeds to describe the nature of 
this Greatness or ^on, or Sameness, manifested in differ- 
ence. It is, alchemically speaking, the One Element, 
which can only be comprehended by one Born in God — 
that is, by a God. 

7. The way of this Birth is then described as a 
de-energizing, or throwing out of work of the body's 
senses, with a corresponding energizing of the One 
Sense, the ^onic Consciousness ; or as a purging out of 

^ The term "Greatness," however, is probably of Egyptian 
derivation. In the Papyrus Lisinger, written somewhere during 
the last half of the first century b,c. and first half of the first 
century A.D., according to Spiegelberg, God^s Wisdom and Provi- 
dence are praised (coll. xxxv,, xxxvi.). The superscription of 
this section runs : " The Four-and-Twentieth Teaching : The 
Instruction : Learn the Greatness of God, that thou mayest let 
it come into thine heart " (xxxv. 17) ; and later on : " He knoweth 
the Blasphemer who thinketh wickedness, He knoweth the Pious 
with the Greatness of God in his heart. The tongue, before even 
it is questioned — its words God knoweth " (xxxvi. 3-5). This is 
further explained by the sentence : " Thoth is heart and tongue 
of the Pious ; lo ! his house is God ! " (xxxv. 19). R. 237, 



Hosted by Google 



THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 245 

the tendencies of the lower nature, and replacing them 
by the energies of the Divine Powers. 

This is the Mystery of Eepentance (juLeravoia), not a 
change of mind only, but a change throughout the 
whole nature ; all things in the man turn towards God. 

The forces or energies of the soul have no direction 
in themselves ; it is the will of man that can turn them 
'' downwards '' or " upwards," so that they become vices 
or virtues. 

Of the Ten and the Twelve 

8. But not only does Hermes set forth a formal 
exposition of this Eepentance in terms of the conquest 
and driving out of the Horde of Vices by the Company 
of Virtues, but at the same time he performs an 
efficacious theurgic rite of invocation whereby he 
enables Tat to realize the instruction in immediate 
experience. 

The Virtues that Hermes invokes are not abstractions, 
but definite substantial powers ; they are, in fact, the 
"filling up" of Tat's "insufficiency"; in other words, 
they are what the Christian Gnostics would have called 
the Mons of the Pleroma. 

Behind all there is a definite scheme of numbering. 
There is a Twelve and a Ten and a Seven and a Three 
and a One. 

The Torments of the Darkness are the Twelve ; they 
are not torments in themselves, but only for him who 
is in Error. They are Twelve yet are they one, for 
though they are " pantomorph " or " omniform," yet are 
they of one nature ; the Twelve are thus conditioned 
by the main irrational "types of life," or animal 
natures, — the so-called zodiac. 

These divisions are not, however, fundamental, they 
are solely for man's delusion or error ; in action they 



Hosted by Google 



246 THRICE- GREATEST HERMES 

are one — that is, they keep man in Error or Ignorance. 
Thus they can be regarded as one, or two, or three, or 
four, or six ; and so combined and recombined. 

Twelve, then, is the nature of the '' animal soul " in 
man — the number of his going-forth into externality. 
This out-going is arrested when man repents, and turns 
himself to return, to go within; the cosmogonical is 
transformed by the soteriological ; the '' enformation 
according to substance " gives place to the " enformation 
according to gnosis." As Ignorance characterized the 
Twelve, so does Gnosis characterize the Ten, the Perfect 
IsTumber or Number of Perfection. 

The Going-forth was that of the multiplication of 
species — Twelve (3x4 or 2x6); the Keturn is Ten, 
that is the Seven and the Three ; and Seven is addition 
(3 + 4) and not multiplication. 

Multiplication seems here to mean the generation, by 
two parents, of things of the same kind and power; 
while addition signifies the intensification of the same 
nature to a higher power. 

The Ten is '' that which giveth birth to souls '' — that 
is, human souls ; and not only human souls, but, in its 
consummation, to divine souls. 

It may, perhaps, be of interest here to set down 
vsimple lists of the vices and virtues as given in our 
treatise, and to append to them the list of vices in C. IT,, 
i. 24 and 26. 



1. 


Not-knowing. 


1. 


Gnosis. 


2. 


Grief. 


2. 


Joy. 


3. 


Intemperance. 


o. 


Self-control. 


4. 


Concupiscence. 


4. 


Continence. 


5. 


Unrighteousness. 


5. 


Kighteousness. 


6. 


Avarice. 


6. 


Sharing-with-all. 


7. 


Error. 


7. 


Truth. 


8. 


Envy. 







Hosted by Google 



THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 247 



9. Guile. 


8. 


. The Good. 


10. Anger. 


9. 


, Life. 


11. Eashness. 


10. 


Light. 


12. Malice. 






1. Growth and Waning. 




First Zone. 


2. Device of Evils. 




Second Zone. 


3. Guile of the Desires. 




Third Zone. 


4. Arrogance. 




Fourth Zone. 


5. Daring and Rashness. 




Fifth Zone. 


6. Getting Wealth. 




Sixth Zone. 


7. Falsehood. 




Seventh Zone. 


8. Those-that-are. 




Eighth. 


9. The Powers in a band. 




Ninth. 


LO. The Father. 




Tenth. 



It is at once seen that the first seven virtues are 
arranged so as to be the direct antitheses of the first 
seven vices. The root of the Twelve is Ignorance ; 
indeed, all the Twelve are permutations of Ignorance. 
They seem to be twelve, whereas they are but one in 
nature ; again, not only are they twelve, but manifold 

(§ 12). 

Thus, for instance, Eashness and Wrath or Anger 
are but one, and so of the rest ; the permutations are 
infinite. This may be seen from the septenary classifi- 
cation in '' The Shepherd " treatise, where we have : 
Guile of the Desires (3), a combination of Guile (9) 
and Desire or Concupiscence (4) ; Device of Evils (2), a 
combination of Guile (9) and Malice (12) ; Unholy 
Daring and Rashness (5), a combination of Unrighteous- 
ness (5) and Eashness (11) ; Getting Wealth by evil 
means (6), a combination of Guile (9) and Avarice (6). 
So also just as Anger (10) and Eashness (11) are one, 
so are Envy (8) and Avarice (6) but aspects of the same 



Hosted by Google 



248 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

thing ; and so again Intemperance (3) and Concu- 
piscence or J3esire (4), Grief (2) and Ignorance (1), etc. 

All are summed up in Ignorance, or Error, just as 
the seven virtues are summed up in Gnosis or Truth."*^ 
And just as Ignorance is the source of vice, so is Know- 
ledge or Gnosis the beginning of Truth. Gnosis is 
not the end but the beginning of the Path, the end of it 
is God or the Good. 

The difference between the " Poemandres '' arrange- 
ment and the categories of our treatise is conditioned 
by the fact that in the former the process of transforma- 
tion in the case of a good man after death is described, 
whereas in the latter the Way of Rebirth in a living 
man is set forth. 

That the Virtues (and Vices, therefore) were cate- 
gorized according to the fundamental numbers of the 
Gnosis may be seen in most systems of Christian 
Gnostic seonology ; indeed, it was a common plan of 
the general Gnostic theosophy of the time. In our 
treatise we have set forth the manner of the immediate 
practical ethical realization of what might be taken by 
a superficial student of Gnostic seonology as an empty 
schematology of purely metaphysical abstractions.^ 
These things, however, meant everything to the 
Gnostic; they were fullnesses— no abstractions, but 
transcendent realities. 

So also in the Bhej^herd of Hernias (Vis. iii. 8, 7), just 
as in our treatise, we are presented with the Vision of 
a Band of seven Women, each the mother of the next, 
seven Virtues, called : Faith, Continence, Simplicity, 
Freedom-from-malice, Seriousness, Gnosis (e7rtcrT?yM>?)? 
Love. 

And not only do we have the Seven, but also the 

^ Cf, F. S. A., xxix, 2. 

^ The usual way, indeed, in which it is taken. 



Hosted by Google 



THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 249 

Twelve, twelve Maidens (Sim. xv. 1-3): Faith, Con- 
tinence, Power, Long-suffering, Simplicity, Freedom- 
from-malice, Chastity, Joyfulness, Truth, Understanding, 
Concord, Love. 

To these are opposed twelve Women in dark robes : 
Infidelity, Incontinence, Disobedience, Error, Grief, 
Depravity, Wantonness, Quickness-to-wrath, Falsehood, 
Folly, Slander, Hate. 

Zosimus also speaks of the Twelve Fates (Mocpai) 
of Death, and associates them with the Passions.^ 

But, indeed, the subject is infinite, for it is the con- 
summation of all right endeavour and all true progress 
in humanity. We must, then, leave it for the present, 
to avoid running to too great length in these comments. 
Sufficient for the moment to point to the fact that the 
Ten is not only the Wedding Garment of Purity, but 
also the Eobe of Power or Glory. In its consummation 
also it is the Garment of the Christ, the One Robe 
without seam throughout, for the Ten contains the One, 
and the One contains the Ten. 

The Dawn of Cosmic Consciousness 

13. The result of this Potent Invocation of the Powers, 
— that is to say, the realization of the full meaning of 
the sacred rite which consummates itself in the con- 
sciousness of Hermes, and so communicates itself in 
some measure to Tat,^ — is that Tat begins to " see " ; '' I 
see the All, I see myself in Mind." 

'' In heaven am I, in earth, in water, air ; I am in 
animals, in plants ; I'm in the womb, before the womb, 
after the womb, — Vm everywhere" (§ 11). 

Compare this with 0. H., xi. (xii.) 22, where Hermes 
is himself being taught by Mind : 

** Collect into thyself all senses of all creatures, — of 

1 Berthelot, 244 ; R. 214. 2 Qf^ q ff^^ i 7 . ^i. (ixi.) 6. 



Hosted by Google 



250 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

fire, and water, dry and moist. Think that thou art at 
the same time in every place, in earth, in sea, in sky ; 
not yet begotten, in the womb, young, old and dead, 
in after-death conditions/' 

This is, as we have seen, a pure Egyptian formula, 
and connotes the opening of the ''cosmic conscious- 
ness/' 

This consciousness, whatever else it may be, is a 
transcending of our three-dimensional limitation of con- 
sciousness, — that of the " body's view-point, — a thing 
three ways in space extended/' 

The Vow of Silence 

The mystery of this ISTew Birth in consciousness is 
to be kept secret; therefore Hermes has not com- 
mented on it, presumably in the Expository Sermons ; 
moreover, it must even now be kept secret (§ 22), and 
therefore is the treatise a Secret Sermon. The reason 
for this is given both here and in | 22 : " That we 
may not be thought to be calumniators" (Sid^oXoi), 
by the Many or Unknowing. What may be the precise 
meaning of this phrase I do not know, and can only 
speculate. 

Those who had reached the full grade of Hermes 
are to keep silence on their '* virtue" or power (§ 22) ; 
they were never to boast of their Gnosis. If they did, 
it would only bring the Gnosis into contempt ; for they 
would still appear as ordinary men, would probably 
often say and do things, when they were not in the 
higher state of consciousness, which fell below the 
standard of their high ideals, and so they would be 
slanderers or calumniators of the Gnosis before the 
world. 

14. The IsTew Birth is further characterized as the 
Essential Birth (jj ovcricloSr]g yivecng) ; it was the birth of 



Hosted by Google 



THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 251 

the Essential Man, the God, Son of the One, to which 
other treatises refer. ^ 

Of the Ogdoad 

15. Tat now desires to hear the Praise-giving of the 
Powers, which only those can sing who have reached 
the stage called Eighth, or the Ogdoad; this is the 
state above the Harmony or the Hebdomad of Fate 
{C. H., i. 26). The man is now free and no longer a 
slave. It is the power of prophetic hymnody, for the 
man now hears the True Harmony of things and is 
above the Concatenation of Difference ; it is the state 
" that keeps the soul in tune." He who has reached 
this height can ever sing in tune ; it is the state of the 
Hearer of the Eternal Praise-giving, and those who 
reach it can express it infinitely, each in his own 
fashion. 

The idea of the Ogdoad is represented in many a 
Christian Gnostic system, especially in the Valentinian 
tradition, which has many Egyptian elements in it. 

So we read in the Excerpts from Theodotus appended 
to the writings of Clement of Alexandria : 

" Him whom the Mother ^ brings to birth, she leadeth 
unto Death and to the world ; but him whom Christ 
brings to rebirth, He change th into Life, unto the 
Ogdoad." 3 

Many were the names given to the Ogdoad by the 
Christian Gnostics, — such as the Jerusalem Above, 
Wisdom, the Land flowing with milk and honey, the 
Holy Spirit, the Land of the Lord, the Mesotes. 

These terms were, however, with the exception of 
the last, Jewish synonyms; the term Ogdoad itself 

1 Cf. P. 8. A., vii. 2. 

^ Sc. the Lower Mother, Nature. 

^ Exx. ex Theodot, § 80 (ed. Dindorf, iii. 463). 



Hosted by Google 



252 THRIOE-GREATEST HERME8 

was in all probability Egyptian. Thus in one of the 
Magic Papyri we read : 

''Having known the power of the book, thou shalt 
hide it, my son. For in it there is stored the Authentic 
ISTame, which is the Fame Ogdoad, — ^He who doth order 
and doth regulate all things," ^ 

A Hymn for Morning and for Evening Prayer 

16. The Hymn that follows is to be kept secret— that 
is to say, it is to be taken by Tat as an example of the 
form of prayer he is now to use in his private devotions, 
and is therefore probably intended to replace some 
other form of prayer which he had hitherto been using, 
as was the custom in such communities. 

The instruction to use it at sunset and sunrise, in the 
open air, reminds us of the appended passages to " The 
Shepherd" treatise, where we read (§ 29): 

'' And when even was come and all sun's beams 
began to set, I bade them all give thanks to God." '' 

Compare also what Philo tells us of the Therapeuts : 

" Twice a day, at dawn and even, they are accustomed 
to offer up prayers; as the sun rises praying for the 
sunshine, the real Sunshine, that their minds may be 
filled with Heavenly Light, and as it sets praying that 
their soul, completely lightened of the lust of tlie senses 
and sensations, may withdraw to its own Congregation 
and Council-chamber, there to track out Truth." -^ 

So also Apollonius of Tyana is said to have prayed 
and meditated three times a day : at daybreak (Phil., 
F. A., vi. 10, 18; vii. 31), at mid-day (vii. 10), and at 

^ Leyden Papyrus W. S., 139, 45 (Leemans) ; cf. also ibid., 141, 
5 ; R. 54. For further comments on the Ogdoad, see Commentary 
on C. H., i. 26. 

"^ Of. also P. S, A., xli. 1. 

•5 D, V. (/., M. ii. 475 ; P. 893. 



Hosted by Google 



THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 253 

sundown (viii. 13); and with regard to "keeping 
silence on their virtue," we are told of the Later 
Pythagoreans, of whom he was so conspicuous an 
example : 

" In particular they kept the rule of silence regarding 
the Divine Service [that is, the Gnosis]. For they 
heard within them many Divine and unspeakable 
things on which it would have been difficult for them 
to keep silence, had they not first learned that it was 
just this Silence which spoke to them " (i. 1).^ 

And so the Hymn has to be heard in silence; all 
earthly sounds must be stilled for the Heavenly 
Harmony to be heard. 

17. It is to be noticed that in four out of the five 
MSS. the title '* Secret Hymnody " is followed by the 
indication " Logos IV." 

Eeitzenstein (p. 345, n. 21) thinks that the three 
prior " Logoi " were : 

I. " Holy art Thou, O God"— (7. H,, i. 31, 32. 
11. '' The Glory of all things is God ''—C. H,, iii. (iv.). 

TIL '* Whither stumble ye, sots ? "—(7. H,, vii. (viii.). 

The latter two, however, are not hymns; the only 
other hymn in our Corpus being : 

" Who then may sing Thee praise of Thee ? " — G. H,y 
V. (vi.) 10, 11. 

Our Hymn is a Hymn to the Sun, it is true, but to 
the Spiritual Sun, not the physical orb of day. It is to 
the Eye of Mind that these orisons are addressed — to 
the All-seeing Light. 

N"or is this Eulogy a formal Te Deum, but a potent 
theurgic Praise-giving. All nature is to thrill with the 
joy of this thankfulness. 

Most beautiful is this Song of Praise, all of it, but 
we would specially call attention to the words : 
1 See my Apollonius of Tyana, pp. 123 and 120. 



Hosted by Google 



254 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

"Thy Eeason sings through me Thy praises. Take 
back through me the All into Thy Reason— my reason- 
able oblation ^ ! From Thee Thy Will ; to Thee the All ! " 

The Outbreathing of the Universe through the 
Reason or Logos ^ is the manifestation or realisation of 
the Will of God. The Logos is Son, Will is Mother 
and God Father. 

The Inbreathing of the Universe is through Man 
(" Thy Man thus cries to Thee/' § 20) : " Take back 
through Me the All." This is accomplished in the first 
instance by the sacrifice of the reason, of man's small 
limited reason, to the Great Reason of things. 

And yet the All, the Universe itself, is not some- 
thing other than God ; it is all God. 

" From Thee Thy Will " ; Thou art the Source of all. 
" To Thee the All"; Thou art the End of all, the Desirable 
One, The Good. 

Compare with this the Hymn in the Jewish deposit 
of the Naassene Document : 

" From Thee is Father, and Through Thee Mother,-— 
the two Immortal Names, Parents of ^ons, Thou 
who hast the Heaven for thy City, Man of Mighty 
Names ! " 

Also notice : " The All that is in us, Life, preserve ; 
Light, illumine it ; God, in-spirit it ! " And com- 
pare it with § 12, where we are told : " While Life and 
Light are unified there, where the One hath being from 
the Spirit." 

1 Gf. 1 Pet. ii. 5: "Ye also as living stones are built up, a 
spiritual house for holy service, to offer up spiritual oblations 
acceptable to God through Jesus Christ," And also Kom. xii. 1 : 
" I beseech you, therefore, brethren, to present your bodies as a 
living oblation, holy, well-pleasing unto God,— your reasonable 
service." 

2 Hesychius in his Lexicon defines Logos as the "Cause of 
Activity," or that which underlies action,-—^ rov dpd/xaros V7r6decns. 



Hosted by Google 



THE SECRET SERMON ON THE MOUNTAIN 255 

The Prayer is for the Baptism of Light — Illumination 
by the Gnosis ^ ; this was the Dowsing in the Mind of 
" The Cup " treatise, even as true Baptism in primitive 
Christianity was called Illumination or ^oorta-juog. 

"Through the Word" 

21. Tat now feels himself impelled to utter praises 
himself. He says what he feels. His master has given 
him the impulse, has made the conditions for him 
whereby he is conceived as a Child of Grod, a Prophet. 
But as yet he is not grown into the stature of a true 
Seer. His higher nature has received the germ, but this 
must have time to develop, and only gradually will its 
power descend into his lower mind. 

At present his thankfulness is poured forth to his 
master, who has performed the theurgic rite of 
initiation ('' All things have been perfected ") for 
him. 

But Hermes restrains him ; it is not to the master 
that his thanks are due, but to God. And if he cannot 
as yet give thanks direct to God, then let him send 
those thanks — "acceptable oblations" — to God "Through 
the Word." 

And that this was and is the practice of universal 
Christendom requires no pointing out; — the most 
striking parallel to the wording of our treatise being 
1 Pet. ii. 5 : " Spiritual oblations acceptable to God 
through Jesus Christ." 

Tat has now passed from the rank of Hearer to that 
of Knower; he is now a true Gnostic: "Thou hast 
become a Knower of thyself, and of our Sire." 

Compare logos 2 of the latest found Sayings at 
Oxyrliynchus : 

* Compare yvwcns ayia, 0(»Tto-6f h atrh <tov (§ 18) ; <pcoTi(€ 0c6s (§ 19) ; 
irrKpdlfTKrTai fiov 6 vovs (§ 21). 



Hosted by Google 



256 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

*' (Strive therefore ?) to know yourselves, and ye 
shall know ye are Sons of the (almighty ?) Father ; 
(and ?) ye shall know that ye are in (the City of 
God ? 1), and ye are (the City ? 2). " 

1 Sc. the Ogdoad. 

^ Cf. 1. Pet. ii. 5 : *' Ye are built up as hving stones, a spiritual 
house for service." 



Hosted by Google 



CORPUS HEEMETICUM XIV. (XV.) 



[A LETTER] OF THRICE- 
GREATEST HERMES TO ASCLEPIUS 

Unto Asglepius Good Health of Soul!^ 

(Text: P. 128-134; Pat. 49, 50.) 

1. Since in thy absence my son Tat desired 
to learn the nature of the things that are, and 
would not let me hold it over, as [natural to] 
a younger son fresh come to gnosis of the 
[teachings] on each single point, — I was com- 
pelled to tell [him] more, in order that the 
contemplation^ [of them] might be the easier 
for him to follow, 

1 ed (ppovfTip. I do not know the exact meaning of this ex- 
pression. Everard translates " to be truly wise " ; Parthey, 
" rede sapere,^^ following Patrizzi ; Menard, ** sagesse " ; Chambers, 
"to be rightly wise." I would suggest that ed (ppoveTLv was the 
form used among these disciples of the Inner Way for the usual 
xaipeiv. Instead of wishing one another happiness, they wished 
each other wisdom, good thought, right thinking, good health 
of soul. 

^ 0e(0pia. 

VOL. II, 257 17 



Hosted by Google 



258 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

I would, then, choosing out the chiefest heads 
of what was said, write them in brief to thee, 
explaining them more mystic-ly/ as unto one of 
greater age and one well versed in Nature. 

2. If all things manifest have been and are 
being made, and made things are not made by 
their own selves but by another ; [if] made 
things are the many, — -nay more, are all things 
manifest and all things different and not alike ; 
and things that are being made are being made 
by other [than themselves] ;— there is some one 
who makes these things ; and He cannot be made, 
but is more ancient than the things that can. 

For things that can be made, I say, are made 
by other [than themselves] ; but of the things 
that owe their being to their being made, it is 
impossible that anything should be more ancient 
than them all, save only That which is not able 
to be made. 

3. So He is both Supreme, and One, and 
Only, the truly wise in all, as having naught 
more ancient [than Himself]. 

For He doth rule o'er both the number, size 
and difference of things that are being made, 
and o'er the continuity of their making [too]. 

Again, things makeable are seeable; but He 
cannot be seen. 

1 That is to say, more fully and profoundly, as to one more 
advanced in the mystic science. 

Hosted by Google 



LETTER OF HERMES TO ASOLEPIUS 259 

For for this cause He maketh, — that He may 
not be able to be seen. 

He, therefore, ever maketh ^ ; and therefore 
can He ne'er be seen. 

To comprehend Him thus is meet ; and com- 
prehending, [it is meet] to marvel ; and mar- 
velling, to count oneself as blessed, as having 
learnt to know one's Sire. 

4. For what is sweeter than one's own true 
Sire ? Who, then, is He ; and how shall we 
learn how to know Him? 

Is it not right to dedicate to Him alone the 
name of God, or that of Maker, or of Father, 
or rather [all] the three ; — God for His Power, 
and Maker for His Energy, and Father for 
His Good ? 

Now Power doth differ from the things which 
are being made ; while Energy consisteth in 
all things being made. 

Wherefore we ought to put away verbosity 
and foolish talk, and understand these two — 
the made and Maker. For that of them there 
is no middle [term] ; there is no third. 

5. Wherefore in all that thou conceivest, in 
all thou hearest, these two recall to mind ; and 
think all things are they, reckoning as doubtful 
naught, nor of the things above, nor of the 
things below, neither of things divine, nor things 

1 Gf. a H., xvi. 18. 

Hosted by Google 



260 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

that suffer change or things that are in 
obscuration/ 

For all things are [these] twain, Maker and 
made, and 'tis impossible that one should be 
without the other ; for neither is it possible 
that *' Maker " should exist without the *' made/' 
for each of them is one and the same thing. 

Wherefore 'tis no more possible for one from 
other to be parted, than self from self. 

6. Now if the Maker is naught else but That 
which makes, Alone, Simple, Uncompound, it 
needs must do this [making] to Itself, — to Which 
its Maker's making is " its being made." ^ 

And as to all that's being made, — it cannot be 

1 rwu iu fjLvx^. I do not know wliat is tlie exact meaning of 
this expression. Everard translates " tilings tliat are in darkness 
or secret " ; Partliey, " quce sunt in abdito " ; Menard, " dans Us 
'profondeurs'*^ ; Ckambers, "those in secrecy." I suggest that the 
technical term /xvx^s, signifying generally a shnt-in or locked-up 
place {conclave, as Damascins translates it), is to be referred, 
along the line of Platonic and Pythagorean tradition, to Phere- 
cydes. Porpliyry (De Antro Nymph., c. 31) tells us that the 
synonyms "juuxot (chambers 1), recesses (or pits), caverns, doors, 
gates ^^ were used by Pherecydes as symbolical expressions to 
signify " the geneses and apogeneses of souls," whatever these terms 
may mean exactly. The "birth" and "decease" of a soul, in 
this connection, presumably mean its coming into the world of 
genesis out of the womb of the World-soul, and its reception 
back again into the bosom of the great Mother. If this be so, 
our text would seem to indicate that things are in two states, — 
in a state of change (that is, in the active condition), and again 
in a passive condition, in the state which Indian philosophers 
call laya or pralaya. See for the /xvxoi of Pherecydes Sturz's 
Pherecydis FragmeMta, pp. 43 ff. (Leipzig, 1824). 

^ Or genesis. 



Hosted by Google 



LETTER OE HERMES TO ASCLEPIUS 261 

[so made] by being made by its own self ; but it 
must needs be made by being made by other. 
Without the *' Maker'' ''made'' is neither made 
nor is ; for that the one without the other doth 
lose its proper nature by deprivation of that 
other. 

If/ then, all things have been admitted to be 
two, — the " that which is being made " and " that 
which makes," — [all then] are one in union of 
these, — the ''that which leadeth" and the "that 
which followeth," 

The making God is "that which leadeth"; 
the " that which is being made," whate'er it be, 
the "that which followeth," 

7. And do not thou be chary of things made 
because of their variety, from fear of attribution 
of a low estate and lack of glory unto God. 

For that His Glory's one, — to make all things ; 
and this is as it were God's Body, — the making 
[of them].^ 

But by the Maker's self naught is there 
thought or bad or base. 

These things are passions which accompany 
the making process, as rust doth brass and filth 
doth body ; but neither doth the brass-smith 

1 From here to the end of the sermon, with the exception of the 
final sentences of § 7 and § 10, and the third sentence of § 9, and 
with a few very slight verbal variants, is quoted by Cyril, Contra 
Julianum, ii. 64 (Migne, col. 598 d). 

2 Of. a H., xvi. 18. 



Hosted by Google 



262 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

make the rust, nor the begetters of the body 
filth, nor God [make] evil. 

It is continuance in the state of being made ^ 
that makes them lose, as though it were, their 
bloom ; and 'tis because of this God hath made 
change, as though it were the making clean of 
genesis. 

8. Is it, then, possible for one and the same 
painter man to make both heaven, and gods, and 
earth, and sea, and men, and all the animals, and 
lifeless things, and trees, and yet impossible for 
God to make all things ? 

What monstrous lack of understanding ; what 
want of knowledge as to God ! ^ 

For such the strangest lot of all do suffer ; for 
though they say they worship piously and sing 
the praise of God, yet by their not ascribing unto 
Him the making of all things, they know not God ; 
and, added unto this not-knowing, they're guilty 
even of the worst impiety to Him — passions to 
Him attributing, or arrogance, or impotency. 

For if He doth not make all things, from 
arrogance He doth not make, or not being able, 
— which is impiety [to think]. 

9. One Passion hath God only — Good ; and 
He who's Good, is neither arrogant nor impotent. 

For this is God — the Good, which hath all 
power of making all. 

^ Or genesis. 

Hosted by Google 



LETTER OF HERMES TO ASOLEPIUS 263 

And all that can be made is made by God, — 
that is, by [Him who is] the Good and who can 
make all things/ 

But would'st thou learn how He doth make, 
and how things made are made, thou may'st do so. 

10. Behold a very fair and most resemblant 
image — a husbandman casting the seed into the 
ground; here wheat, there barley, and there 
[again] some other of the seeds ! 

Behold one and the same man planting the 
vine, the apple, and [all] other trees ! 

In just the selfsame way doth God sow 
Immortality in Heaven, and Change on Earth, 
and Life and Motion in the universe. 

These are not many, but few and easy to be 
numbered ; for four in all are they, — and God 
Himself and Genesis, in whom are all that are. 



COMMENTAEY 

ASCLEPIUS AND TAT 

Fabricius, in his BiUiotheca G-rmm^ says that the 
title should be '* On the Nature of the All," and that he 
has recovered it from Cyril, (7. J%1., ii, but I cannot 
verify this statement. 

The form of this treatise is different from any of the 

1 This sentence, which appears to be very tautological, is omitted 
by Cyril. 

2 Ed. Harles (4th ed.), vol. i. lib. i. cap. vii. 

Hosted by Google 



264 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

preceding, being that of a letter. It evidently belongs 
to the Asclepius-Tat type of tradition, as in G. H., x. 
(xi.) : '' My yesterday's discourse I did devote to thee, 
Asclepius, and so 'tis only right I should devote 
to-day's to Tat." 

The distinction drawn between Tat and Asclepius is 
of interest; Tat is the younger, — who has only "just 
come to Gnosis of the teaching on each single point." 
Can this mean that he has only just been permitted 
to share in the *' Expository Sermons" or "Detailed 
Discourses " ? It is probable, for C. H., x. (xi.) 1, 
continues : ** And this the more because 'tis the abridg- 
ment (epitome) of the General Sermons which he has 
had addressed to him." 

Asclepius is older, and already iinamjiJLwv ri^g (pvareoog 
—well- versed in the study of Nature. 

What may be the exact significance underlying these 
personifications it is very difficult to say ; but the same 
facts, whatever they may have been, are clearly 
referred to in K K (Stob., Ucl, i. 49 ; p. 386, 24 W.)'; 
especially the later accession of " Asclepius " to the 
School, and the fact that " Tat," because of his too 
great "youth," could not have handed on to him the 
tradition of the complete or all-perfect contemplation 
(6\oTeXi]g Oeoopla) — that is, of the mathesis or gnosis, or, 
in other words, the "learning of the things that are, 
the contemplating of their nature and the knowing 
God " (C, H., i. 3) ; or the " being taught the nature of 
the all and the Supreme Vision " {ihicL, 27). 

This view of the tradition of the School seems to 
clash entirely with the other view set forth in 0. H,, 
xiii. (xiv.), where Tat has handed on to him the 
" manner of Eebirth," but a probable explanation has 
already been attempted in the "Prolegomena," chap, 
xvi. : " The Disciples of Thrice-greatest Hermes." 

Hosted by Google 



LETTEE OF HERMES TO ASCLEPIUS 265 

Compare with "Mind unto Hermes" 

The treatise itself requires little commentary; the 
similarity of its doctrine, however, with that of the 
"Mind unto Hermes" is remarkable. For instance, 
compare the last sentence of § 7 of our treatise with 
C. H,, xi. (xii.) 14 : " For that indeed He hath no other 
one to share in what He works, for working by Him- 
self, He ever is at work, Himself being what He doth." 

Compare also the first sentence of § 8 with C. II., xi. 
(xii.) 20 : " Behold what power, what swiftness thou 
dost have ! And canst thou do all of these things, and 
God not do them ? " 

The Good Husbandman 

With the Good Husbandman "image" (§ 10) com- 
pare : 

" Come unto me. Good Husbandman, Good Daimon, 
Harpocrates, Chnouphis . . . who rollest down the 
stream of Nilus,i and minglest with the Sea ... as 
man with woman." ^ 

And in the Alchemical literature : 

"[Come then], and coming contemplate, enquire of 
Acharantus (?), the Husbandman, and learn of Him, 
what is it that is sown, and what that which is reaped ; 
and thou shalt learn that he who soweth corn shall 
reap corn also, and he who soweth barley shall in like 
manner reap barley." ^ 

So also Zosimus in the " Book Concerning the Logos " : 

" And that I tell thee truth, I call to witness Hermes, 
when he says: Go unto Achaab (?), the Husbandman, 
and thou shalt learn that he who soweth corn gives 
birth to corn." ^ 

1 The Heavenly River of fructifying essence. 

2 Abhandl. d. Berl Akad, (1865), p. 120, 26 ; R. 143. 

^ Berthelot, p. 30. ^ Bertlielot, p. 89. 



Hosted by Google 



COEPUS HEEMETICUM (XVI.) 



THE DEFINITIONS OF ASCLEPIUS 
UNTO KING AMMON 

The Perfect Sermon op Asclepius 
UNTO the King 

(Text : K. 348-354 ; Pat. at end.i) 

1. Great is the sermon {logos) which I send to 
thee, King — the summing up and digest, as 
it were, of all the rest. 

For it is not composed to suit the many's pre- 
judice, since it contains much that refuteth them. 

Nay, it will seem to thee as well to contradict 
sometimes my sermons too. 

Hermes, my master, in many a conversation, 
both when alone, and sometimes, too, when Tat 
was there, has said, that unto those who come 
across my books, their composition will seem 
most simple and [most] clear; but, on the 
contrary, as 'tis unclear, and has the [inner] 

^ At the end after P. S. A.^ but the pages are unnumbered. 
266 

Hosted by Google 



DEFINITIONS OF ASCLEPIUS TO KING AMMON 267 

meaning of its words concealed, it will be still 
unclearer, when, afterwards, the Greeks will 
want to turn our tongue into their own, — 
for this will be a very great distorting and 
obscuring of [even] what has been [already] 
written, 

2. Turned into our own native tongue,^ the 
sermon (logos) keepeth clear the meaning^ of 
the words ilogoi) [at any rate]. 

For that its very quality of sound, the [very] 
power of the Egyptian names, have in themselves 
the bringing into act of what is said. 

As far as, then, thou canst, King — (and thou 
canst [do] all things) — keep [this] our sermon 
from translation ; in order that such mighty 
mysteries may not come to the Greeks, and 
the disdainful speech of Greece, with [all] its 
looseness, and its surface beauty,^ so to speak, 
take all the strength out of ^ the solemn and the 
strong — the energetic ^ speech of Names. 

The Greeks, King, have novel words, energic 
of " argumentation '' [only] ; and thus is the 
philosophizing of the Greeks — the noise of words. 

But we do not use words ; but we use sounds 
full-filled with deeds. 

1 This presumably means from the hieroglyphic into the 
demotic — t^ irarp^c^ dia\€KT({> ipurjuevSfi^vos, 

2 Lit. the mind. ^ q^^ perhaps, smartness. 
* Make jejune, so to say — i^ir-nKov iroi-ficrr}. 

^ That is, " words of power," words that do things. 

Hosted by Google 



268 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

3. Thus, then, will I begin the sermon by 
invocation unto God, the nniversals' Lord and 
Maker, [their] Sire, and [their] Encompasser ; 
who though being All is One,^ and though being 
One is All ; for that the Fullness of all things is 
One, and [is] in One, this latter One not coming 
as a second [One], but both being One. 

And this is the idea ^ that I would have thee 
keep, through the whole study of our sermon. 
Sire! 

For should one try to separate what seems 
to be both All and One and Same from One, — 
he will be found to take^ his epithet of ^' AH" 
from [the idea of] multitude, and not from [that 
of] fullness * — which is impossible ; for if he part 
All from the One, he will destroy the AIL^ 

For all things must be One — if they indeed 
are One. Yea, they are One ; and they shall 
never cease being One — in order that the Fullness 
may not be destroyed. 



4. See then in Earth a host of founts of Water 
and of Fire forth-spirting in its midmost parts ; 
in one and the same [space all] the three 

1 Of. R. 127, 3 ; and P. S. A., i. 1. 2 Lit. niind. 

^ The construction is very elliptical ; eKSe^ayuez/os simply. 
* That is, completeness, perfection, — TrKrip^^aros, 
•'' Of. Plato, 8o'ph., 259 D, E. 



Hosted by Google 



DEFINITIONS OF ASCLEPIUS TO KING AMMON 269 

natures visible — of Fire, and Water, and of 
Earth, depending from one Eoot/ 

Whence, too, it ^ is believed to be the Treasury ^ 
of every matter. It sendeth forth of its * abun- 
dance, and in the place [of what it sendeth forth] 
receiveth the subsistence from ahoyeJ' 

For thus the Demiurge^ — I mean the Sun — 
eternally doth order Heaven and Earth, pouring 
down Essence,^ and taking Matter up, drawing 
both round Himself and to Himself all things, 
and from Himself giving all things to all. 

For He it is whose goodly energies extend not 
only through the Heaven and the Air, but also 
onto Earth, right down unto the lowest Depth 
and the Abyss. 

6. And if there be an Essence which the mind 
alone can grasp,^ this is his Substance,^ the 
reservoir ^^ of which would be His Light. 

1 Cf. P, 8. A., iv. 1. 2 sc. Earth. 

^ A magazine, a store-liouse, — rafiie7ou. The term "treasure" 
{drjo-avpos) is found in most lavish use in the Greek -Coptic 
Gnostic works, and also in Christian Gnostic literature and 
Jewish Apocalyptic. * Sc. matter's. 

'^ T^v dvcodev virap^iv, — hyparxis, substance or subsistence, a word 
of frequent use and highly technical meaning with the last of the 
Neo-Platonists, especially with Proclus. Cf. G, H., x. (xi.) 2. 

6 Of, P. S. A., xxix. 4. 

7 Lit. bringing or drawing down ; Kardy^iy—deducere, elicere — 
used frequently of magic arts. 

^ jyorjr^ ovala—intelligibiUs essentia. 

^ oyKos = moles, mass, bulk, volume ; in later philosophy it 
means "atom," and may mean so here, of course in the philo- 
sophical and mystic and not in the jDliysical sense. 

10 vTTodox'fi = receptaculum. 



Hosted by Google 



270 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

But whence this [Substance] doth arise, or 
floweth forth, He, [and He] only, knows. 



Or rather, in space and nature, He is near 
unto Himself . , . though as He is not seen by 
us, . . . understand [Him] by conjecture/ 

7. The spectacle of Him, however, is not left 
unto conjecture ; nay [for] His very rays,'^ in 
greatest splendour, shine all round on all the 
Cosmos that doth lie above and lie below. 

For He is stablished in the midst, wreathed 
with the Cosmos,^ and just as a good charioteer, 
He safely drives the cosmic team,* and holds 
them in unto Himself,^ lest they should run away 
in dire disorder. 

The reins are Life, and Soul, and Spirit, 
Deathlessness, and Genesis. 

1 The text is very corrupt. Patrizzi translates : " Vel qida ipso 
loco, et nahira jprope se ipsiim existens, non a nobis conspicitur cogit 
nos per conjecturas intelligere "■ — which certainly does not represent 
the Greek. Menard conjectures brilliantly but in entire emanci- 
pation from the text : " Pour comprendre par induction ce qui se 
derobe a notre vue, il faudrait etre pres de lui et analogue a sa 
ncuture." Reitzenstein discovers two lacunas in the text, but does 
not attempt to fill them. As the text stands, then, all attempt at 
translation seems hopeless. 

2 Lit. his very sight, — ahr^ t] 6\pis, that is, his rays, 6xl/is being 
used of the visual rays which were supposed by the science of the 
time to proceed from the eyes. Cf. Ex. vii. 4. 

3 Wearing the Cosmos as a wreath or crown ; the visible sun 
being regarded as a " head." See " The Perfect Sermon." 

^ Lit. car or chariot — app.a. 

^ Lit. binds it to himself — apad-fjo-as its eavr6y. 



Hosted by Google 



DEFINITIONS OF ASCLEPIUS TO KING AMMON 271 

He lets it, then, drive [round] not far off from 
Himself — nay, if the truth be said, together with 
Himself. 

8. And in this way He operates ^ all things. 
To the immortals He distributeth perpetual 

permanence ; and with the upper hemisphere of 
His own Light — all that he sends above from out 
His other side,^ [the side of him] which looks to 
Heaven — He nourisheth the deathless parts of 
Cosmos. 

But with that side that sendeth down [its 
Light], and shineth round all of the hemisphere ^ 
of Water, and of Earth, and Air, He vivifieth, 
and by births and changes keepeth in movement 
to and fro the animals* in these [the lower] parts 
of Cosmos. . . . 

9. He changes them in spiral fashion, and 
doth transform them into one another, genus 
to genus, species into species, their mutual 
changes into one another being balanced — -just 
as He does when He doth deal with the Great 
Bodies. 

For in the case of every body, [its] perma- 
nence [consists in] transformation. 

In case of an immortal one, there is no 

2 Lit. part. 

3 KVTos — d, hollow, vase, or vessel. 

4 That is, those lives subject to death, as opposed to the 
immortals. 

Hosted by Google 



272 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

dissolution ; but when it is a mortal one, it 
is accompanied with dissolution.^ 

And this is how the deathless body doth differ 
from the mortal, and how the mortal one doth 
differ from the deathless. 

10. Moreover, as His Light's continuous, so is 
His Power of giving Life to lives continuous, 
and not to be brought to an end in space or 
in abundance. 

For there are many choirs of daimons round 
Him, like unto hosts of very various kinds ; who 
though they dwell with mortals, yet are not far 
from the immortals ; but having as their lot from 
here unto the spaces of the Gods,^ they watch 
o'er the affairs of men, and work out things 
appointed by the Gods — by means of storms, 
whirlwinds and hurricanes, by transmutations 
wrought by fire and shakings of the earth, ^ with 
famines also and with wars requiting [man's] 
impiety, — for this is in man's case the greatest 
ill against the Gods. 

11. For that the duty of the Gods is to give 
benefits; the duty of mankind is to give worship*; 
the duty of the daimons is to give requital. 

For as to all the other things men do, through 

1 Compare " Sermon to Tat," I. (Menard). Of. Stob., Eel, i. 61 ; 
274, 24 W. 

^ Lit. " the land of these " — that is, of the immortals. 

3 Gf. Ex. ix. 5. 

4 Or, to be pious. Gf. P. S. A., ix. 1. 

Hosted by Google 



DEFINITIONS OF ASCLEPIUS TO KING AMMON 273 

error, or foolhardiness, or by necessity, which 
they call Fate/ or ignorance — these are not held 
requitable among the Gods ; impiety alone is 
guilty at their bar. 

12. The Sun is the preserver ^ and the nurse 
of every class. ^ 

And just as the Intelligible World,^ holding 
the Sensible in its embrace, fills it [all] full, 
distending it with forms of every kind and 
every shape — so, too, the Sun distendeth all in 
Cosmos, affording births to all, and strengtheneth 
them. 

When they are weary or they fail, He takes 
them in His arms again. 

13. And under Him is ranged the choir of 
daimons — or, rather, choirs ; for these are multi- 
tudinous and very varied, ranked underneath the 
groups of Stars,^ in equal number with each one 
of them. 

So, marshalled in their ranks, they are the 
ministers of each one of the Stars, being in their 
natures good, and bad, that is, in their activities 
(for that a daimon's essence is activity) ; while 

3 Or genus. ^ Or Cosmos. 

^ virh ras rSoi/ aa-repcau trXivdiSas. 7rKip6ls = ir\ij/6lop, and is used of 
any rectangular figure, and also of groups of stars as in Eratosth. 
apud Strab., II. i. 35 ; v. 36 (Lex. Sophocles) ; compare at ray 
-KKivOCoiv vTroypa<paij the fields, or spaces, into which the Augurs 
divided the heavens, templa^ or regiones coeli (Lex. Liddell and 
Scott). 

VOL. 11. 18 

Hosted by Google 



274 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

some of them are [of] mixed [natures], good and 
bad. 

14. To all of these has been allotted the 
authority o'er things upon the Earth ; and it 
is they who bring about the multifold confusion 
of the turmoils on the Earth — for states and 
nations generally, and for each individual 
separately. 

For they do shape our souls like to themselves, 
and set them moving with them, — obsessing 
nerves, and marrow, veins and arteries, the 
brain itself, down to the very heart. ^ 

15. For on each one of us being born and 
made alive, the daimons take hold on us — those 
[daimones] who are in service at that moment [of 
the wheel] of Genesis, who are ranged under 
each one of the Stars. ^ 

For that these change at every moment ; they 
do not stay the same, but circle back again. 

These, then, descending through the body ^ to 
the two parts ^ of the soul, set it^ awhirling, 
each one towards its own activity. 

But the soul's rational part is set above the 
lordship of the daimons— designed to be receptacle 
of God. 

1 Lit. viscera. 2 Qf, P. S, A., xxxv. 2. 

3 Of. G. H., xiii. (xiv.) 7. 

4 The two irrational parts, " passion " and " desire " {BvjjLbs and 

^ The soul. 

Hosted by Google 



DEFINITIONS OF ASCLEPIUS TO KING AMMON 275 

16. Who then doth have a Ray shining upon 
him through the Sun within his rational part — 
and these in all are few — on them the daimons 
do not act ; for no one of the daimons or of Gods 
has any power against one Ray of God. 

As for the rest, they are all led and driven, 
soul and body, by the daimons — loving and 
hating the activities of these. 

The reason (logos), [then,] is not the love that 
is deceived and that deceives.^ 

The daimons, therefore, exercise the whole of 
this terrene economy,^ using our bodies as [their] 
instruments. 

And this economy Hermes has called 
Heimarmene.^ 

17. The World Intelligible,^ then, depends 
from God ; the Sensible from the Intelligible 
[World]. 

The Sun, through the Intelligible and the 
Sensible Cosmos, pours forth abundantly the 
stream from God of Good, — that is, the 
demiurgic operation. 

And round the Sun are the Eight Spheres, 
dependent from Him — the [Sphere] of the 

1 This Eros is the lower love (c/. G, JEf., i. 18 : " love, the cause 
of death "), not the Divine Love who inspires Hermes in " The 
Perfect Sermon" and who is mentioned C. JT., xviii. 14. 

^ dt0lK7}(nv. 

3 Or, Fate ; cf. 0. iT., i. 9 ; and P. S. A., xix. 
* Or, Intelligible Cosmos. 

Hosted by Google 



276 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

Non-wandering Ones, the Six [Spheres] of the 
Wanderers, and one Circumterrene. 

And from the Spheres depend the daimones ; 
and from these, men. 

And thus all things and all [of them] depend 
from God/ 

18. Wherefore God is the Sire of all; the 
Sun s [their] Demiurge ; the Cosmos is the 
instrument of demiurgic operation. 

Intelligible Essence regulateth Heaven ; and 
Heaven, the Gods ; the daimones, ranked under- 
neath the Gods, regulate men. 

This is the host^ of Gods and daimones.^ 

Through these God makes all things for His 
own self. 

And all [of them] are parts of God ; and if 
they all [are] parts — then, God is all. 

Thus, making all, He makes Himself; nor 
ever can He cease [His making], for He Him- 
self is ceaseless.* 

Just, then, as God doth have no end and no 
beginning, so doth His making have no end 
and no beginning. "^ 



1 Of. p. S. A., iv. 1 n. • and xix. 

^ Or army, or hierarcliy. Compare the "soldier" degree of 
tlie Mitliriaca. 

••^ Gf, G. K, X. (xi.) 22 ; and P. S, A., v. 1. 

4 Gf G. H,, xiv. (xv.), 7 and 6. 

•'' See Commentary to Frag. iv. (Lact., D, /., ii. 15). 



Hosted by Google 



DEFINITIONS OF ASCLEPIUS TO KINO AMMON 277 

COMMENTARY 

Concerning the Title 

Patrizzi has run (xvi.) and (xvii.) together, under the 
title "Definitionsof Asclepius — Book!., "though he clearly 
saw that (xvii.) did not belong to (xvi.) by his remark, 
" videntuT seqiientia ex alio lihro sum'pta" He also heads 
(xvii.) 1-10 " Definitions of Asclepius — Book II.," and 
11-16 "D. of A.— Book III.," though the contents 
have evidently nothing to do with such a title. 

In the MSS. a later hand has added to the general 
title a catalogue of contents as follows : 

"Of God; Matter; Evil; Fate; the Sun; Intelli- 
gible Essence ; Divine Essence ; Man ; the Economy of 
the Pleroma; the Seven Stars; the Man after the 
Likeness"^ — for which largely irrelevant list Patrizzi 
substitutes the title : " Of the Sun and Daimons. " 

Eeitzenstein (p. 192) is of opinion that this contents- 
list, and also the similar headings in (xviii.), are due to 
some Byzantine scribe, who also foolishly interpolated 
(xvii). 

But even to (xvi.) the title " Definitions of Asclepius " 
seems very inappropriate ; while, on the other hand, we 
find Lactantius (i>. /., ii. 5), in referring to the 
"incursions of daimones," claiming that it was a 
doctrine also of Hermes, and adding: 

" Asclepius, his hearer, has also explained the same 
idea at greater length in that ' Perfect Sermon ' which 
he wrote to the King." 

This is quite definite, and the authority of Lactantius 
should perhaps be preferred to that of the MSS., but 
as the title would clash with "The Perfect Sermon" 
of Hermes to Asclepius, and as Lactantius may just 



1 R. 348 11. 



Hosted by Google 



278 THKICE-GREATEST HERMES 

possibly mean " in that initiatory sermon,"- — the term 
'perfedus being used in a general and not in an appel- 
lative sense, — I have kept the traditional title and 
placed that of Lactantius second. 

A Tradition Concerning the Trismegistic 
Literature 

1. Like " The Key" — C. H., x. (xi.) — of Hermes, our 
treatise is an Epitome ^ ; Asclepius has previously 
written a number of Sermons to the King. 

The reference to the "Conversations" between Hermes 
and Asclepius and Tat, sometimes when both the latter 
were present and sometimes with Asclepius alone, 
presupposes the existence of this class of Dialogue, and 
indicates that the Correspondence of Asclepius with the 
King is a later deposit of our literature.^ 

This literary activity of Asclepius is claimed in the 
introduction to be authorized by Hermes, and, moreover, 
purports to have been originally written in Demotic 
Egyptian. In other words, the writer would have us 
believe that the Greek is a translation from Egyptian. 
This it clearly is not ; and we can only conclude that 
the "prophecy" as to direct translation is a literary 
fiction of our author. 

2. On the other hand, it is highly probable that our 
author was in contact with a living tradition, to the 
effect that the Hermes-teaching was originally Egyptian, 
and that this was "interpreted" into Greek — that is, 
into Greek modes of thought, rather than " translated " 
in the ordinary sense into Greek. 

In any case, the contempt shown by our author for 
the Greek language and "philosophizing," and his 

1 Of. also Ex. i. 16, and Comment. 

'^' This deduction, however, has to be modified by the view we 
hold as to the authorship of the introduction. See Comment., § 5. 



Hosted by Google 



DEFINITIONS OF ASCLEPIUS TO KING AMMON 279 

admiration for Hieroglyphic Egyptian as a "language 
of the Gods" — a magical tongue, that by its mantric 
power compelled the understanding of the hearer, by 
putting him in sympathy with the ideas pictured by 
the ideograms, or sounded forth by the "names of 
power " ^ — show that he was not only not a Greek, but 
also no lover of Greek Philosophy. 

This is exceedingly puzzling, seeing not only that the 
majority of the writers of our tractates are plainly 
deep students and lovers of Plato, but also that the 
author of our tractate himself also writes very much in 
the same style as they do. 

All of this seems to indicate that in his introduction 
he was using for his own purposes some tradition about 
the ancient Thoth-literature that was current in his 
time. A form of this tradition was also made use of 
by Philo of Byblus in the first century, when he makes 
the Phoenician priest Sanchuniathon discover the origin 
of the Phoenician cosmogony and mystery-teaching in 
the Books of Taautos, "whom the Egyptian called 
Thdyth, the Alexandrians Thoth, and the Greeks 
changed into Hermes." 

Sanchuniathon, he says, "having come across the 
secret writings that had been discovered and brought 
from the shrines of the Temples of Ammon, — com- 
positions which were not known to all, — practised by 
himself the science {rnv juLaOrja-cv) of all things." ^ 

Philo also professes to quote from one of the earliest 
priests of Phoenicia, a certain Thabion, who is said 
apparently to have got his information from a writing 
of the Seven Kabiri, and of Asclepius, the pupil of 
Taautos. This Thabion asserted that Taautos was 
made King of Egypt by Kronos — that is, Ammon. ^ 

1 Gf. R. 269. 2 jip^ Euseb., Prcep. Ev., I. ix. 29. 

3 Ibid., I. X. 38, 39. 



Hosted by Google 



280 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

Here we are evidently in contact with certain 
traditions with regard to Thoth-Hermes, his ancestors 
and pupils, and secret writings. Presumably many 
such traditions were floating about, and were used 
according to the fancy and taste of Hellenistic writers 
for their own purposes. 

But there was also another tradition concerning a 
certain King Ammon, used in one form by Jamblichus, 
when he writes : 

" It was Hermes who first taught this Path [sc. the 
Way up to God]. And Bitys,^ the Prophet, translated 
[his teachings concerning it] for King Ammon, dis- 
covering them in the inner temple in an inscription in 
the sacred characters at Sais in Egypt." ^ 

What our author and Jamblichus have in common is 
that there were certain secret teachings of Hermes in 
the Sacred Language of Ancient Egypt hidden away in 
the inner shrines of the temples, and that these were 
translated into the current Egyptian language of the 
time for a certain Kino^ Ammon. 

o 

It must, then, have been some tradition of this kind 
that our author or writer had in mind ; he would have 
it believed that he was writing in the style or according 
to the model of a certain literature. 

Who this King Ammon was can only be guessed at ; 
but to my mind it is probable that the " translations " 
of Bitys were made in connection with the translation 
activity of Manetho for King Ptolemy, and this trans- 
lation was into Greek. Our author, however, would 
refer it to some Egyptain King, and so seek to invoke 
the authority of a high antiquity for the treatise he 
was putting into circulation. 

1 Of. Zosimns (§ 8). 2 p^ j^y^^^^ ^m ^ 



Hosted by Google 



DEFINITIONS OF ASCLEPIUS TO KING AMMON 281 

A Speculation as to Date 

5. What seems to differentiate our treatise from the 
rest of the tractates, is the prominence its author gives 
to the doctrine of the Sun as Demiurgic Orderer of all 
things. This so to speak pantheistic form of Sun- 
worship is peculiarly Egyptian.^ 

Now if we remember the disdainful way in which 
Greek " philosophizing " is spoken of in the introduction, 
we may be tempted to take the sentence, "And if 
there be any essence which the mind alone can grasp " 
(§ 6), as a somewhat patronizing reference to the 
Intelligible World of Greek Philosophy, as also the 
analogy in § 12 ; but when we turn to §§17 and 18 
the exposition fully adopts the doctrine of the Intelli- 
gible and Sensible Worlds. This is so irreconcilable 
a contradiction that one is almost compelled to believe 
that the introduction is by another hand altogether, 
and that our sermon proper begins with § 3. 

But even so, the sermon is addressed to some King 
or other — ''The Perfect Sermon to the King" of 
Lactantius — without any further qualification. Who, 
however, this King may have been historically must 
remain a matter of pure conjecture. 

7. When, then, Keitzenstein, pointing to § 7, says that 
the symbolism of the Sun as a charioteer wearing a 
crown of rays corresponds with that of the pictures of 
the Aurelian Sun-god, and adds further it is the 
Eoman Empire-god of the third century, we are quite 
prepared to acknowledge a similarity of symbolism. 
But if it is intended to suggest that, therefore, we are 
to date our document by this similarity, it must be 
admitted that the indications are far too vague; for 
the symbolism of the Sun as the ray-crowned charioteer 

1 Cy. K. 198, 1 ; and also Comment on § 17 below. 



Hosted by Google 



282 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

is fundamental with the cult of Mithras, and is found 
in Greece long before the Aurelian period. 

The Delineation of the Sun 

It is interesting, however, here to notice that the 
Sun is " wreathed with cosmos,'' and to compare this 
with the passage concerning the Macro-prosopus in the 
Untitled Apocalyiose of the Coptic Gnostic Codex 
Brucianus, and especially with the sentence : 

'^ The Hair of His Head is the number of the Hidden 
Worlds, and the Outline of His Face is the Type of 
the ^ons."i 

In this Untitled Apocalypse there is a strong Egyptian 
under-colouring ; that, however, the idea of a crown of 
powers was pre-eminently Egyptian may be seen from 
many a passage in the Pistis Sophia. 

8. It is also of interest to notice that the delineation 
of the Sun in § 8 reminds us of the Orphic Phanes, 
especially the reference to the two hemispheres above 
and below, — the two parts of the Egg in Orphic 
symbolism. 

9. The hint that the sun-life runs in some sort of 
spiral or serpentine fashion in animals, and that this 
also is the case with the Great Bodies or Celestial 
Animals, is of interest. 

Concerning the Daimones 

10. Our author then proceeds to set forth his doctrine 
of the daimones or ministers of the Gods, who are 
assigned to the lower hemisphere of operation, from 
the Earth to the Sun, the Gods presumably occupying 
the higher hemisphere of activity. These daimones are 
what a Hindu or Buddhist would call karmic agents, 
for they are all connected with what is called the Fate- 

1 F. F. F„ 549. 



Hosted by Google 



DEFINITIONS OF ASCLEPIUS TO KING AMMON 283 

Sphere, the Instrument or the Wheel of Genesis, or 
Samsara. 

15. These daimones rule over the lower energies of 
the soul; the higher energy or rational part of the 
soul is set above them, and is designed to be the 
" receptacle of God," — or rather of His Eay, — the Mind 
proper. 

16. With § 16 compare the remarkable passage in 
one of the Letters ofValentinus: 

"One [alone] is Good, whose free utterance is His 
manifestation through His Son; it is by Him alone 
that the heart can become pure, when every evil essence 
has been expelled from it. 

" Now its purity is prevented by the many essences 
which take up their abode in it, for each of them 
accomplishes its own deeds, outraging it in divers 
fashions with unseemly lusts. 

"As far as I can see, the heart seems to receive 
somewhat the same treatment as an inn [or caravan- 
serai], which has holes and gaps made in its walls, and 
is frequently filled with dung, men living filthily in it 
and taking no care of the place as being someone else's 
property. Thus is it with the heart so long as it has 
no care taken of it, ever unclean and the abode of many 
daimons. 

" But when the Alone Good Father hath regard unto 
it, it is sanctified and shineth with light ; and he who 
possesseth such a heart is so blessed that ' he shall see 
God.*"i 

The language of Valentinus is remarkably like that 
of our treatises ; Valentinus himself was an Egyptian. 

1 Quoted by Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom., II. xx. 114 ; 
P. 489 (ed. Dindorf, ii. 219). See for further critical text, 
Hilgenfeld (A.), Ketzergesch. d. Urchrist, p. 296; F, F. F,, 300, 
301. 



Hosted by Google 



284 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

17. Entirely Egyptian also is the Scheme of 
Dependency given in § 17, as we have already pointed 
out on several occasions, quoting from a Hymn of 
Valentinus. 

The sentence: ''Wherefore God is the Sire of all; 
the Sun's [their] Demiurge" — distinctly contradicts 
Keitzenstein's (p. 198, 1) statement that the Sun in our 
treatise is worshipped as the All-god. The Sun is He 
" by whom all things are made," — the Creative Logos 
of God.i 

19. The treatise is evidently incomplete; if, however, 
we turn to the contents-title given at the beginning of 
these comments we can gain but little information as 
to what is missing, for the contents there given do not 
in any but the vaguest fashion correspond to the 
substance of our treatise, nor do the subjects treated of 
come in the same order as in the contents-heading. 
The Divine Essence, Man, the Economy of the Pleroma 
and the Man after the Likeness, which are clearly not 
treated of in our text, may then have been treated in 
the missing portion of our tractate ; but this is all we 
can say. 

1 Cf. P. S. A., xxix. 5. 



Hosted by Google 



COKPUS HERMETICUM (XVII.) 



[OF ASCLEPIUS TO THE KING] 

(Text : R. 354 ; Pat. at end of last piece.) 






Asclepius, If thou dost think [of it], King, 
even of bodies there are things bodiless/ 

The King, What [are they]? — (asked the 
King.) 

Asc. The bodies that appear in mirrors — do 
they not seem then to have no body ? 

The King. It is so, Asclepius^ ; thou thinkest 
like a God ^ ! — (the King replied.) 

1 Cf. Plat., Soph., 229 D, 240 a, 246 b. 

2 The corrector of B has changed the name Asclepius into 
Tat, as he has everywhere in 0. H., ii. (iii.) ; E. 193, 1. 

285 

Hosted by Google 



286 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

Asc, There are things bodiless as well as 
these ; for instance, forms ^ — do not they seem 
to thee to have no body, but to appear in 
bodies not only of the things which are ensouled, 
but also of those which are not ensouled ? 

The King, Thou sayest well, Asclepius. 

AsC' Thus, [then,] there are reflexions of 
things bodiless on bodies, and of bodies too 
upon things bodiless — that is to say, [reflexions] 
of the Sensible on the Intelligible World, and 
of the [World] Intelligible on the Sensible. 

Wherefore, pay worship to the images, 
King, since they too have their forms as from 
the World Intelligible. 

(Thereon His Majesty arose and said :) 

The King. It is the hour,^ Prophet, to see 
about the comfort of our guests. To-morrow, 
[then,] will we resume our sacred converse.^ 



COMMENTAEY 

On the Adoration of Images 

The loss of the end of the previous sermon, and also 
the loss of almost the whole of (xvii.), is to be accounted 
for by the falling out of one or more quires from the 
original MS. of our Corpus,* a phenomenon similar 
to that already remarked in the case of C. H., ii. (iii). 

1 Or ideas. 2 Qf^ piat., Soph., 241 b. 

'^ e€0\oyr]a-o/x€y. * E. 198. 



Hosted by Google 



OF ASCLEPIUS TO THE KING 287 

And that this is the fact is brought out interestingly 
by the note of Keitzenstein (p. 193, 1) — namely, that 
one of the correctors of one of the copies (Paris MS.) 
of this faulty original has precisely in these two places 
changed the name Asclepius into Tat. He was puzzled, 
and thought that his '* correction " would set matters 
right ; as a matter of fact, however, it only adds to the 
confusion. 

What the main subject of our treatise may have been 
we can hardly conjecture; part of it, however, must 
have been devoted to an explanation of the rationale 
of image-adoration, — "Wherefore pay worship to the 
images, King," — of which we hear so much in P. S, A. 

These symbolic images of the Gods are said to have 
their " forms " (iSeag) in sympathetic relation with the 
Intelligible World. These are mutual " reflections," the 
one of the other. 

Now as the Ka of the God was thought to have 
immediate relation with the image-symbol of the God, 
and the Gods were of the Intelligible World, — the 
statues of the Gods were thought to be images of the 
Image in some special way; they were regarded as 
providing a straight path or line of connection between 
Earth and Heaven, just as a man who made himself 
like to the Man after the Likeness became in himself a 
Way Up. 



Hosted by Google 



COEPUS HEKMETICUM (XVIII.) 



[THE ENCOMIUM OF KINGS] 

(About the Soul's being hindered by the 
Passion op the Body) 

(Text: R. 355-360; Pat. at end.) 

1. [Now] in the case of those professing the 
harmonious art of muse-like melody — if, when 
the piece is played, the discord of the instruments 
doth hinder their intent, its rendering becomes 
ridiculous. 

For when his instruments are quite too weak 
for what's required of them, the music-artist 
needs must be laughed at by the audience. 

For He, with all good will, gives of His art 
unweariedly ; they blame the [artist's j weakness. 

He then who is the Natural Musician-God, 
not only in His making of the harmony of His 
[celestial] songs, but also in His sending forth 
the rhythm of the melody of His own song[s] 



288 



Hosted by Google 



THE ENCOMIUM OF KINGS 289 

right down unto the separate instruments,^ is, 
as God, never wearied. 

For that with God there is no growing 
weary. 

2. So, then, if ever a musician desires to enter 
into the highest contest of his art he can — 
when now the trumpeters have rendered the 
same phrase of the [composer's] skill, and after- 
wards the flautists played the sweet notes of 
the melody upon their instruments,^ and they 
complete the music of the piece with pipe and 
plectrum — [if any thing goes wrong,] one ^ does 
not lay the blame upon the inspiration * of the 
music-maker. 

Nay, [by no means,] — to him one renders the 
respect that is his due ; one blames the falseness 
of the instrument, in that it has become a 
hindrance to those who are most excellent — 
embarrassing the maker of the music in [the 
execution of] his melody, and robbing those 
who listen of the sweetness of the song. 

3. In like way also, in our case, let no one of 

^ &xpt rS)v Kark fiepos opydvcov, — that is, to " parts " as Opposed 
to " wholes " ; " wholes " signifying generally noumenal or 
celestial essences, ^* parts" meaning the separate existences of 
the phenomenal or sensible world. 

^ &pTi 5e KOI avArjrSJu rots fjLeXiKoTs rh rTJs fxeXoidias Xiyvphu ipyacra- 
^ivwv. — I do not know what this means exactly. Menard 
translates : quand Us joueurs de JlMe ont exprime les finesses de la 
melodie ; Patrizzi gives : melicis organis melodice dulcedinem. 

2 Or perhaps " he," meaning the judge of the contest. 

VOL. -11, 19 

Hosted by Google 



290 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

our audience for the weakness that inheres in 
body, blame impiously our Race/ 

Nay, let him know God is Unwearied Spirit ^ 
— for ever in the self-same way possessed of 
His own science, unceasing in His joyous gifts, 
the self-same benefits bestowing everywhere. 

4. And if the Pheidias — the Demiurge — -is not 
responded to, by lack of matter to perfect His 
skilfulness, although for His own part the Artist 
has done all he can, let us not lay the blame 
on Him. 

But let us, [rather,] blame the weakness of 
the string,^ in that, because it is too slack 
or is too tight, it mars the rhythm of the 
harmony. 

5. So when it is that the mischance occurs by 
reason of the instrument, no one doth blame 
the Artist. 

Nay, [more ;] the worse the instrument doth 
chance to be, the more the Artist gains in 
reputation by the frequency with which his 
hand doth strike the proper note,"^ and more 
the love the listeners pour upon that Music- 

^ The Race of the Prophets, or Gnostics — the Race of the Logos. 
2 Referring to the " inspiration " or " breath " above, — ws 

cLKdfxaTov fxev iam irpev/xa 6 Beos. Compare John iv. 24 ; Ttv^vfjLa 

b de6s — God is Sj)irit. 

''' The metaphor has become somewhat mixed by the intro- 
duction of Pheidias, who was a " musician ^' in marble and ivory 
and gold, and not on strings and pipes. 

* rrjs KpoiKTicos iroWdKis irphs rhv rduou €fnr€a'ov(r7}9<, 

Hosted by Google 



THE ENCOMIUM OF KINGS 291 

maker, without ^ the slightest thought of blaming 
him. 

So will we too, most noble [Sirs], set our 
own lyre in tune again, within, with the 
Musician ! 

6. Nay, I have seen one of the artist-folk ^ — 
although he had no power of playing on the lyre 
— when once he had been trained for the right 
noble theme, make frequent use of his own self 
as instrument, and tune the service of his string 
by means of mysteries, so that the listeners 
were amazed at how he turned necessitude into 
magnificence.^ 

Of course you know the story of the harper 
who won the favour of the God who is the 
president of music- work. 

[One day,] when he was playing for a prize, 
and when the breaking of a string became a 
hindrance to him in the contest, the favour of 
the Better One supplied him with another 
string, and placed within his grasp the boon 
of fame. 

A grasshopper was made to settle on his lyre, 
through the foreknowledge of the Better One, 

^ Reading exovns for ecrxof. 

2 Meaning presumably prophets. 

3 It is difficult to follow the exact meaning of some of the 
writer's rhetorical sentences, even if our text is sound ; here, how- 
ever, the text, even after passing through Reitzenstein's hands, is 
still very halting, and so I venture on this translation with all 
hesitation. 

Hosted by Google 



292 THRICE-GKEATEST HERMES 

and [so] fill in the melody in substitution of the 
[broken] string.^ 

And so by mending of his string the harper's 
grief was stayed, and fame of victory was won. 

7. And this I feel is my own case, most noble 
[Sirs] ! 

For but just now I seemed to make confession 
of my want of strength, and play the weakling 
for a little while ; but now, by virtue of the 
strength of [that] Superior One, as though my 
song about the King had been perfected [by 
Him, I seem] to wake my muse. 

For, you must know, the end of [this] our 
duty will be the glorious fame of Kings, and the 
good-will of our discourse (logos) [will occupy 
itself] about the triumphs which they win. 

Come then, let us make haste ! For that the 
singer willeth it, and hath attuned his lyre ^ for 
this ; nay more, more sweetly will he play, 
more fitly will he sing, as he has for his song the 
greater subjects of his theme. 

8. Since, then, he^ has the [stringing] of his 
lyre tuned specially to Kings, and has the key 

1 The song of tlie cicala was so pleasant to the ear of the 
Ancients, that we frequently find it used in poetry as a simile for 
sweet sounds. Plato calls the grasshoppers the " prophets of the 
Muses." 

2 For the idea of the prophet being the lyre of God, cf. 
Montanus {ap. Epiphan., Hcer., xlviii. 4). See also the references 
to Philo given by R. 204, n. 1 . 

3 Sc, the singer. 

Hosted by Google 



THE ENCOMIUM OP KINGS 293 

of laudatory songs, and as his goal the Eoyal 
praises, let him first raise himself unto the 
highest King — the God of wholes. 

Beginning, [then,] his song from the above, 
he, [thus,] in second place, descends to those 
after His likeness who hold the sceptre's power ^ ; 
since Kings themselves, indeed, prefer the 
[topics] of the song should step by step descend 
from the above, and where they have their 
[gifts of] victory presided o'er for them, thence 
should their hopes be led in orderly succession. 

9. Let, then, the singer start with God, the 
greatest King of wholes, who is for ever free from 
death, both everlasting and possessed of [all] the 
might of everlastingness, the Glorious Victor, the 
very first, from whom all victories descend to 
those who in succession do succeed to victory.^ 

10. Our sermon (logos) then, doth hasten to 
descend to [Kingly] praises and to the Presidents 
of common weal and peace, the Kings — whose 
lordship in most ancient times was placed upon 
the highest pinnacle by God Supreme ; for 
whom the prizes have already been prepared 
even before their prowess in the war ; of whom 
the trophies have been raised even before the 
shock of conflict. 

For whom it is appointed not only to be 
Kings but also to be best. 

1 Gf, K. K., 39 if. 2 But see Plasberg's reading. R. 370. 

Hosted by Google 



294 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

At whom, before they even stir, the foreign 
land ^ doth quake. 



(About the Blessing of the Better [One] 
AND Praising of the King) 

11. But now our theme (logos) doth hasten 
on to blend its end with its beginnings- — with 
blessing of the Better [One] ^ ; and then to 
make a final end of its discourse (logos) on those 
divinest Kings who give us the [great] prize of 
peace. 

For just as we began [by treating] of the 
Better [One] and of the Power Above, so let us 
make the end bend round again unto the same — 
the Better [One]. 

Just as the Sun, the nurse of all the things 
that grow, on his first rising, gathers unto 
himself the first-fruits of their yield with his 
most mighty hands, using his rays as though it 
were for plucking off their fruits— yea, [for] 
his rays are [truly] hands for him who plucketh 
first the most ambrosial [essences] of plants — so, 
too, should we, beginning from the Better [One], 
and [thus] recipient of His wisdom's stream, and 
turning it upon the garden of our souls above 



'■^ rov KpeirTovosy — that is God, or the inner God, as in the last 
section. 



Hosted by Google 



THE ENCOMIUM OF KINGS 295 

the heavens/ — we should [direct and] train 
these [streams] of blessing back again unto their 
source, [blessing] whose entire power of ger- 
mination [in us] He hath Himself poured into us. 

12. 'Tis fit ten thousand tongues and voices 
should be used to send His blessings back again 
unto the all -pure God, who is the Father of our 
souls ; and though we cannot utter what is fit — 
for we are [far] unequal to the task — [yet will 
we say what best we can]. 

For Babes just born have not the strength to 
sing their Father's glory as it should be sung ; 
but they give proper thanks for them, according 
to their strength, and meet with pardon for 
their feebleness.^ 

Nay, it is rather that God's glory doth consist 
in this [one] very thing — that He is greater 
than His children ; and that the prelude and the 
source, the middle and the end, of blessings, is 
to confess the Father to be infinitely puissant 
and never knowing what a limit means. 

13. So is it, too, in the King's case. 

For that we men, as though we were the 
children of the King, feel it our natural duty to 
give praise to him. Still must we ask for pardon 
[for our insufficiency], e'en though 'tis granted 
by our Sire before we [even] ask. 

^ els ra rjfierepa rwv ^vx^v virepovpdvia (fivrd. 
2 Lit. " in this." 

Hosted by Google 



296 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

And as it cannot be the Sire will turn from 
Babes new-born because they are so weak, but 
rather will rejoice when they begin to recognise 
[his love] ^— so also will the Gnosis of the all 
[rejoice], which doth distribute life to all, and 
power of giving blessing back to God, which He 
hath given [us]. 

14. For God, being Good, and having in Him- 
self eternally the limit of His own eternal fitness, 
and being deathless, and containing in Himself 
that lot of that inheritance that cannot come 
unto an end, and [thus] for ever ever-flowing 
from out that energy of His, He doth send 
tidings to this world down here [to urge us] to 
the rendering of praise that brings us home 
again. ^ 

With Him,^ therefore, is there no difference 
with one another ; there is no partiality ^ with 
Him. 

But they are one in Thought. One is the 
Prescience ^ of all. They have one Mind — their 
Father. 

One is the Sense that's active through them— 

1 Lit. "at tlieir recognition,'^ — eTrl rrjs iTriyvcoo-^oos — a play on 
epignosis and gnosis^ and a parallel between the wisdom of God 
and the royal knowledge of the King. 

^ €fs t6v^^ Thv Kbff^ov irap^x^^ """V a,7rayye\iav els diao'coo'TiK'^i/ 
ev(f>'rj}ji.iau, — where it may be possible to connect aTrayy^Kia with 
the familiar evayyeXiov. 

'^ iKeiare, '^ rh aKKorrp6<ra\\ov. 

^ trpSyvoocTLS. 



Hosted by Google 



THE ENCOMIUM OF KINGS 297 

their passion for each other.^ 'Tis Love ^ Himself 
who worketh the one harmony of all. 

15. Thus, therefore, let us sing the praise 
of God. 

Nay, rather, let us [first] descend to those 
who have received their sceptres from Him. 

For that we ought to make beginning with 
our Kings, and so by practising ourselves on 
them, accustom us to songs of praise, and train 
ourselves in pious service to the Better [One]. 

[We ought] to make the very first beginnings 
of our exercise of praise begin from him,^ and 
through him exercise the practice [of our praise], 
that so there may be in us both the exercising 
of our piety towards God, and of our praise to 
Kings. 

16. For that we ought to make return to 
them, in that they have extended the prosperity 
of such great peace to us. 

It is the virtue of the King, nay, 'bis his name 
alone, that doth establish peace. 

He has his name of King because he levelleth 
the summits of dissension with his smooth tread,* 
and is the lord of reason (logos) that [makes] for 
peace. 

And in as much, in sooth, as he hath made 

^ rh its a\\ii\ovs (pihrpoy, 

2 6 epws, — the Higher Love. ^ Sc. the King. 

* The word-play between /Sacrt^eus and ^daret xda, is unrepro- 
ducible in English. 

Hosted by Google 



298 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

himself the natural protector of the kingdom 
which is not his native land,^ his very name [is 
made] the sign of peace. 

For that, indeed, you know, the appellation 
of the King has frequently at once restrained 
the foe. 

Nay, more, the very statues of the King are 
peaceful harbours for those most tempest-tossed. 

The likeness of the King alone has to appear 
to win the victory, and to assure to all the 
citizens freedom from hurt and fear. 



COMMENTAEY 

The Apology of a Pcemandrist 

This, the last piece in our Corpus, differs so greatly 
Doth in style and form of contents from tlie rest of our 
sermons, that we are plainly dealing with a different 
order of endeavour. 

The style is for the most part so very artificial and 
forced, that we are conscious of labour and effort, and 
sometimes of such obscurity as to make a clear render- 
ing almost impossible. The contents are of the nature 
of an elaborate set Eulogy of Kings. 

Whether or not this concluding piece ever bore a 
proper title it is impossible to say, for the existing head- 
ings are plainly added by a later redactor,^ — as we 

'^ In fact, are due to the first hand in B D M. See R. 355, 1 ; 
358, 12. 

Hosted by Google 



THE ENCOMIOM OF KINGS 299 

have already seen in a number of other instances. I 
have therefore ventured to superscribe as the main 
title " The Encomium of Kings," ^ and have placed the 
contents-headings in parentheses. 

Eeitzenstein, in his analysis of the Corpus, concludes 
(p. 207) that this Eulogy was appended to the collection 
of treatises by the original redactor, or collector. 

He was an Egyptian Ehetor, who was a follower of 
the Trismegistic tradition, and his object in making the 
collection was mainly to show the Eulers of the Empire 
that not only w^as there nothing in the Hermes religion 
that could excite their suspicion, but that, on the 
contrary, it was in its most fundamental teachings 
admirably calculated to inculcate Loyalty to the Eulers 
of the Empire's destinies. 

It is, indeed, to this " Apology," so to speak, that we 
owe the good fortune of the preservation of our 
Corpus. 

Speculations as to Date 

Who the " most noble [Sirs] "of |§ 5 and 7, to whom 
the Eulogy is immediately addressed, may be, is difficult 
to determine, for though the subject is the " Encomium 
of Kings " in general, some actual King was evidently 
in the mind of the writer when he penned § 16. 
Perhaps the '' most noble " may have been the high 
officials of Egypt. 

The lost conclusion of our Encomium, for our actual 
text is evidently incomplete, may have given clearer 
indications of the Emperor for whose ultimate perusal 
the Eulogy was intended. As it is, the indications are 
of the vaguest. 

Eeitzenstein, however, is of opinion (pp. 207, 208) 
that the indications in § 16 best suit the reign of 

1 See § 15 — 7) Trphs robs Baffixias ev<firifjLla — and compare note to 
Clem. Alex., iii., in "Fragments from the Fathers." 

Hosted by Google 



300 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

Diocletian (imp. 285-305 a.d.); but he is aware that, 
as far as these are concerned, an earlier date is not 
excluded (p. 208). It is only when he has treated, in 
his Addenda (pp. 371-374), the Encomium as an 
example of later Greek " art-prose," or rhythmic prose, 
the scheme of the accentuation of which has been of 
late years carefully studied, especially by Meyer and 
Wilamowitz, that he comes definitely to the conclusion 
that the external form of our Khetor's effort fits 
precisely the time of Diocletian's Triumph, 302 a.d. I 
cannot, however, say that I am convinced by his 
arguments. 

The strained and elaborate introduction (|| 1-5) 
needs no further comment ; no doubt it is very " fine 
writing,'' but it is difficult to pin some of it down to 
any precise meaning in translation. 

The Story of the Pythic Grasshopper 

6. With § 6, however, our interest is awakened, for 
it reminds us of the famous Introduction to the Pro- 
trepticus, or Exhortation to the Greeks, of Clement of 
Alexandria, when he says : 

" I could tell thee also of another — brother to these ^ 
— story and singer, of Eunomus the Locrian and the 
Pythic grasshopper. 

"At Pytho there was gathered together a solemn 
assembly of Greeks to celebrate the Death of the 
Serpent, with Eunomus to sing the funeral song of 
the beast. 

" Whether his song was a hymn or a dirge I cannot 
say; anyhow, there was a contest, and Eunomus had 
to harp it in the heat of the day, when the grass- 
hoppers, warmed by the sun, were singing underneath 
the leaves along the hills. 

1 Amphion, Arioii and Orpheus. 



Hosted by Google 



THE ENCOMIUM OF KINGS 301 

"They were singing not to the Serpent, the dead 
thing, but to God the All-wise, a song of unrestrained 
mode far better than the modes of Eunomus. 

"A cord breaks for the Locrian; the grasshopper 
flies on to the yoke; it chirped on the harp as on a 
branch; and the minstrel, modulating to the song of 
the grasshopper, filled up the missing string. 

" It was not that the grasshopper was attracted by 
the song of Eunomus, as the story would have it, setting 
up a brazen statue at Pytho of Eunomus, harp and all, 
and his helper in the contest ; it flew on naturally and 
sung naturally. The Greeks, however, thought it played 
the music." ^ 

This passage shows that the story referred to by 
our author was well known, so well known indeed that 
Clement takes it as a text for a naturalistic explanation 
of Hellenic miracle. No literary dependence, however, 
of one or the other can be entertained, for the similarity 
of the " Trji/ v€vpav aveTrXripwcrev avrcp " of our text and 
the " o (pSo<s Trjv XeiTTOvcrav aveirXripeocre \opSrjv " of 
Clement is far too slight a link to bear the weight 
of any argument of this nature.^ 

11. There is evidently a lacuna after § 10, and, 
judging by the opening words of § 11, it must be of 
some length, for the Praise of Kings so far is of a very 
brief description. 

It is also of interest to notice how much easier the 
style of our author is when he treats of the Praises of 
God ; his words seem to come far more easily, as 
though he had a subject to deal with with which 
he was more familiar, as, indeed, he ought to have 
been if he had studied the treatises he has collected 
together. 

1 Clem. Al., Prot., i. 1 ; P. 2 (ed. Dindorf, i. 2). 

2 Of. R. 205, 206. 



Hosted by Google 



302 thrice-greatest hermes 

The Tkue King 

13. The idea that all his subjects are the children of 
the King is Egyptian ; or, rather, it is the tradition of 
all nations who believed in Divine Kings. The true 
King was he who, so to speak, contained all his subjects 
within himself ; they were all " members," or, as we 
should say, cells, of his true Body. The nation was the 
King ; the victory of the nation was ascribed to the 
virtue of the King.^ 

The Fellow-Eulers of the Height 

14. The last three sentences of § 14 Eeitzenstein 
(p. 208) would take as referring to the Kings under 
the suzerainty of the Emperor, who were bound to 
him by a common bond of love, in order that he may 
the more insist on the Diocletian date.'^ I would, 
however, refer the idea to the ideal of harmony and 
unity of the Beings of the Intelligible World, as 
described, for instance, by Plotinus, when he writes : 

" They see themselves in others. For all things are 
transparent, and there is nothing dark or resisting, and 
everyone is manifest to everyone internally, and all 
things are made manifest ; for light is manifest to 
light. For everyone has all things in himself, and again 
sees in another all things, so that all things are every- 
where, and all in all, and each in all, and infinite the 
glory. For each of them is great, since the small also 
is great. And the sun there is all the stars, and, again, 
each and all are the sun. In each, one thing is pre- 
eminent above the rest, but it also shows forth all." ^ 

1 This belief, indeed, is the power of the Japanese in our own 
day. 

2 He thus, apparently, would take the ewreto-e as referring to these 
subject kings and rulers. 

'^ En., V. viii. 4. 



Hosted by Google 



THE ENCOMIUM OF KINGS 303 

Compare this also with the intuition of the seer in 
The Untitled Apocalypse of the Codex Brucianus : 

''Their Crowns send forth Eays; the Brilliancy of 
their Bodies is as the life of the Space into which they 
are come ; the Word {Logos) that comes out of their 
mouth is Eternal Life, and the Light that comes forth 
from their Eyes is Kest for them ; the Movement of 
their Hands is their Flight to the Space out of which 
they are come, and their Gazing on their own Faces is 
Knowledge of themselves ; their Giving to themselves 
is a repeated Eeturn, and the Stretching out of their 
Hands establishes them ; the Hearing of their Ears is 
the Perception in their Heart ; and the Union of their 
Limbs is the Ingathering of Israel ; their Holding to 
one another is their Fortification in the Logos." ^ 

This is the Egyptian counterpart of the Plotinian 
Ecstasis ; and Plotinus was by birth an Egyptian. 

1 F. F. F., 557. 



Hosted by Google 



Hosted by Google 



II 

The Perfect Sermon 



VOL. II. 20 

Hosted by Google 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 

Or the Asclepius 

(Text : The Greek original is lost, and only a Latin 
version remains to us. I use the text of Hildebrand 
(G. F.), Z. Apuleii Opera Omnia ex Fide Optimorum 
Codicum (Leipzig, 1842), Pars IL, pp. 279-334 ; but 
have very occasionally preferred the text in Patrizzi's 
N'ova de Universis Fhilosophia (Venice, 1593), or of 
the Bipontine edition of Appuleius, Lticii Apuleji 
Madaurensis Flatonici Fhilosophi Opera (Biponti, 1788), 
pp. 285-325.) 

I 

1.^ [L M.^] [Trismegistus.'] God, Asclepius, 
hath brought thee unto us that thou mayest hear 
a Godly sermon,^ a sermon such as well may seem 
of all the previous ones weVe [either] uttered, 
or with which weVe been inspired by the Divine, 
more Godly than the piety of [ordinary] faith. 

1 I have added numbers to the paragraphs for greater con- 
venience of reference. 

^ Menard has divided the treatise into fifteen parts, which T 
have thus distinguished ; the numbering of the chapters are those 
usually found. 

3 Or, a sermon about the Gods. 
307 



Hosted by Google 



308 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

If thou with eye of intellect^ shalt see this 
Word^ thou shalt in thy whole mind be filled 
quite full of all things good. 

If that, indeed, the ''many" be the ''good/' 
and not the " one/' in which are " all." Indeed 
the difference between the two is found in their 
agreement, — "All" is of "One"^ or "One" is 
"All." So closely bound is each to other, that 
neither can be parted from its mate. 

But this with diligent attention shalt thou 
learn from out the sermon that shall follow [this]. 

But do thou, Asclepius, go forth a moment 
and call in the one who is to hear.^ 

(And when he had come in, Asclepius proposed 
that Ammon too should be allowed to come. 
Thereon Thrice-greatest said :) 

[Tris.]^ There is no cause why Ammon should 
be kept away from us. For we remember how we 
have ourselves set down in writing many things 
to his address,^ as though unto a son most dear 
and most beloved, of physics many things, of 
ethics [too] as many as could be. 

It is, however, with thy name I will inscribe 
this treatise. 

1 IntelUgens. 

2 Reason or sermon or logos ; cf. iii. and below : " For that the 
Reason," etc. 

^ But ii. 1, referring again to this idea, has the reading : " * AH ' 
is ' One.' " Cf. G. H., xvi. 3 ; and also xx. 2 below. 

* This, as we shall see later on, is Tat. See xxxii. below. 
•'"' Lit. to his name. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 309 

But call, I prithee, no one else but Ammon, 
lest a most pious sermon on a so great theme be 
spoilt by the admission of the multitude. 

For 'tis the mark of an unpious mind to 
publish to the knowledge of the crowd a 
tractate brimming o'er with the full Greatness 
of Divinity. 

(When Ammon too had come within the holy 
place, and when the sacred group of four was 
now complete with piety and with God's goodly 
presence — to them, sunk in fit silence reverently, 
their souls and minds pendent on Hermes' lips, 
thus Love^ Divine began to speak.) 

II 

1. [jTWs.] The soul of every man, [my] 
Asclepius, is deathless ; yet not all in like fashion, 
but some in one way or [one] time, some in 
another. 

Asc. Is not, then, Thrice -greatest one, each 
soul of one [and the same] quality ? 

Tris. How quickly hast thou fallen, 
Asclepius, from reason's true sobriety ! 

Did not I say that ^^AU" is ^^One," and 
*' One" is^' All,"^ in as much as all things have 

1 Giipido ; without doubt Eros in the lost original ; cf, xxi. 1 
below ; and Frag, xviii. 

2 This, as we have already noted, is a variant of the reading 
in i., where we find "omma unius esse^^ ("all" is of "one") 
and not "owma imum esse" ("all" is "one"). 

Hosted by Google 



310 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

been in the Creator before they were created. 
Nor is He called unfitly '^AU/' in that His 
members are the '' All." 

Therefore, in all this argument, see that thou 
keep in mind Him who is '' One "-" AH," or 
who Himself is maker of the "All." 

2. All things descend from Heaven to Earth, 
to Water and to Air. 

'Tis Fire alone, in that it is borne upwards, 
giveth life ; that which [is carried] downwards 
[is] subservient to Fire. 

Further, whatever doth descend from the 
above, begetteth ; what floweth upwards, 
nourisheth. 

'Tis Earth alone, in that it resteth on itself, 
that is Receiver of all things, and [also] the 
Restorer of all genera that it receives. 

This Whole,nherefore, as thou rememberest,^ 
in that it is of all,^ — in other words, all things, 
embraced by nature under '' Soul " and " World," 
are in [perpetual] flux, so varied by the multi- 
form equality of all their forms, that countless 
kinds of well-distinguished qualities may be 
discerned, yet with this bond of union, that all 
should seem as One, and from '' One" '' AU."^ 

1 Sc. the Cosmos. 

''^ Presumably from some previous sermon. 

'^ That is, Cosmos. 

'^ The Latin of this paragraph is very obscure. 

Hosted by Google 



3 



THE PERFECT SERMON 311 

III 

1. That, then, from which the whole Cosmos 
is formed, consisteth of Four Elements — Fire, 
Water, Earth, and Air ; Cosmos [itself is] one, 
[its] Soul [is] one, and God is one. 

Now lend to me the whole of thee,^ —all that 
thou can'st in mind, all that thou skilFst in 
penetration. 

For that the Reason ^ of Divinity may not be 
known except by an intention of the senses like 
to it.' 

'Tis * likest to the torrent's flood, down-dashing 
headlong from above with all-devouring tide ; 
so that it comes about, that by the swiftness 
of its speed it is too quick for our attention, 
not only for the hearers, but also for the very 
teachers.^ 

2. [11. M.] Heaven, then, God Sensible, is the 

1 Gf, G. H., xi. (xii.) 15: "Give thou thyself to Me, My 
Hermes, for a little while." 

^ Ratio — that is, Logos, 

^ Lit. divine — that is, by a concentration like to the singleness 
of the Godhead. 

4 That is, " This Reason is." 

^ ^^Quo efficitur ut intentionem nostram . . . celeri velocitate 
praetereaV^ Compare with this the description of the instruction 
of the Therapeuts in Philo's famous tractate, De Vita Gontem- 
plativa, 901 P., 483 M.— Conybeare's text, p. 117 (Oxford ; 1895) : 
"For when in giving an interpretation, one continues to speak 
rapidly without pausing for breath, the mind of the hearers is 
left behind, unable to keep -ap the pace" — 6 tup aKpoca^epoov vovs 
arvpofxapTiTv d5ui/Twi/ varepi^ei. 



Hosted by Google 



312 THRIOE-GREATEST HERMES 

director of all bodies ; bodies' increasings and 
decreasings are ruled by Sun and Moon. 

But He who is the Ruler of the Heaven, and 
of its Soul as well, and of all things within the 
Cosmos, — He is God, who is the Maker of all 
things. 

For from all those that have been said above,^ 
o'er which the same God rules, there fioweth 
forth a flood of all things streaming through the 
Cosmos and the Soul, of every class and kind, 
throughout the Nature of [all] things. 

The Cosmos hath, moreover, been prepared by 
God as the receptacle of forms of every kind.^ 

Forth-thinking Nature by these kinds of 
things. He hath extended Cosmos unto Heaven 
by means of the Four Elements, — all to give 
pleasure to the eye of God. 



IV 

1. And all dependent from Above ^ are sub- 
divided into species in the fashion^ which I 
am to tell. 

1 This seems to refer to the Elements. 

2 Omniformium specierum. 

^ Omnia autem desuper pendentia. Compare with this the 
famous Psalm of Valentius, " All things depending from Spirit I 
see" — TrdvTa Kpefxd/xei/a irvivixari ySAeTTw — Hippolytus, Philos,^ vi. 37. 
For revised text see Hilgenfeld's (A.) Ketzergeschichte, p. 304 
(Leipzig, 1884), and for a translation, my Fragments of a Faith 
Forgotten, p, 307 (London ; 1900). See also end of xix. 4 below, 
and 0. if., xvi. 17. 'J Ge)ierii. 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 313 

The genera of all things company with their 
own species ; so that the genus is a class in its 
entirety, the species is part of a genus. 

The genus of the Gods will, therefore, make 
the species of the Gods out of itself. 

In like way, too, the genus of the daimons, 
and of men, likewise of birds, and of all [animals] 
the Cosmos doth contain within itself, brings 
into being species like itself. 

There is besides a genus other than the 
animal, — a genus, or indeed a soul, in that it's 
not without sensation, — in consequence of which 
it both finds happiness in suitable conditions, 
and pines and spoils in adverse ones ; — I mean 
[the class] of all things on the earth which owe 
their life to the sound state of roots and shoots, 
of which the various kinds are scattered through 
the length and breadth of Earth. 

2. The Heaven itself is full of God. The genera 
we have just mentioned, therefore, occupy up to 
the spaces of all things whose species are immortal. 

For that a species is part of a genus, — as 
man, for instance, of mankind, — and that a part 
must follow its own class's quality. 

From which it comes to pass that though all 
genera are deathless^ all species are not so. 

The genus of Divinity is in itself and in its 
species ^ [also] deathless. 

1 That is, the Gods. 

Hosted by Google 



314 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

As for the genera of other things, — as to their 
genus, they [too] are everlasting ; [for] though 
[the genus] perish in its species, yet it persists 
through its fecundity in being born. And for 
this cause its species are beneath the sway of 
death ; so that man mortal is, mankind immortal. 

V 

1. And yet the species of all genera are inter- 
blended with all genera ; some ^ which have 
previously been made, some which are made 
from these. 

The latter, then, which are being made, — 
either by Gods, or daimons, or by men, — are 
species all most closely like to their own several 
genera. 

For that it is impossible that bodies should be 
formed without the will of God ; or species be con- 
figured without the help of daimons ; or animals 
be taught and trained without the help of men.^ 

2. Whoever of the daimons, then, transcending 
their own genus, are, by chance, united with a 
species,^ by reason of the neighbourhood of any 
species of the Godlike class,— -these are considered 
like to Gods.* 

^ Sc, species. 

2 Of. C. iT., xvi. 18, for the hierarchy of Gods and daimones ; 
and for the " intercourse of souls," C. H.^ x. (xi.) 22. 
^ That is, one of the immortal species, or a God. 
* That is, they become Gods. 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 315 

Whereas those species of the daimons which 
continue in the quality of their own class, — 
these love men's rational nature [and occupy 
themselves with men], and are called daimons 
proper. 

Likewise is it the case with men, or more 
so even. Diverse and multiform, the species of 
mankind. And coming in itself from the 
association spoken of above, it of necessity doth 
bring about a multitude of combinations of all 
other species and almost of all things. 

3. Wherefore doth man draw nigh unto the 
Gods, if he have joined himself unto the Gods 
with Godlike piety by reason of his mind, 
whereby he is joined to the Gods; and [nigh] 
unto the daimons, in that he is joined unto 
them [as well]. 

Whereas those men who are contented with 
the mediocrity of their own class, and the 
remaining species of mankind, will be like those 
unto the species of whose class they've joined 
themselves.^ 

VI 

1. [III. M.] It is for reasons such as these, 
Asclepius, man is a mighty wonder, — an animal 
meet for our worship and for our respect. 

1 A suggestion of man's attraction to the various species of the 
animal nature. 

Hosted by Google 



316 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

For he doth pass into God's Nature/ as though 
himself were God. This genus [also] knows the 
genus of the daimons, as though man knew he 
had a [common] origin with them. He thinketh 
little of the part of human nature in him, from 
confidence in the divineness of [his] other 
part. 

How much more happy is the blend of human 
nature [than of all the rest] ! Joined to the 
Gods by his cognate divinity, a man looks down 
upon the part of him by means of which he's 
common with the Earth. 

The rest of things to which he knows he's kin, 
by [reason of] the heavenly order [in him], he 
binds unto himself with bonds of love ; and thus 
he turns his gaze to Heaven. 

2. So, then, [man] hath his place in the more 
blessed station of the Midst ; so that he loves 
[all] those below himself, and in his turn is loved 
by those above. 

He tills the Earth. He mingles with the 
Elements by reason of the swiftness of his mind. 
He plunges into the Sea's depths by means of 
its^ profundity. He puts his values on all 
things. 

Heaven seems not too high for him ; for it is 



1 TMs contradicts somewliat the more careful wording of 
C. H., X. (xi.) 1, wliere the term Energy is preferred. 
^ Sc. the mind's. 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 317 

measured by the wisdom of his mind as though 
it were quite near. 

No darkness of the Air obstructs the penetra- 
tion of his mind. No density of Earth impedes 
his work. No depth of Water blunts his sight. | 

[Though still] the same [yet] is he all, and 
everywhere is he the same. 

3. Of all these genera, those [species] which 
are animal have [many] roots, which stretch 
from the above below,^ whereas those which are 
stationary^ — these from [one] living root send 
forth a wood of branching greenery up from 
below into the upper parts. 

Moreover, some of them are nourished with a 
two-fold form of food, while others with a single 
form. 

Twain are the forms of food — for soul and 
body, of which [all] animals consist. Their soul 
is nourished by the ever-restless motion of the 
World ^; their bodies have their growth from 

1 Gf. G. H., xi. (xii.) la 

2 Compare with this the symbolism of the "fire-tree" and the 
" rootage " of the seons, in the " Simonian " system of the Gnosis, 
taken by Hippolytus from the document entitled The Great 
Announcement (Hipp., Philos., vi. 9 and 18). Also the common 
figure of the Ashvattha tree of Indo- Aryan mythology ; for 
instance, in the Kathopanishad^ II. vi. 1 : " The old, old tree that 
sees no morrow's dawn, [stands] roots up, branches down" (see 
Mead and Chattopadhyaya's Uioanishads^ i. 74 — London ; 1896). 
Ashvatthah = a-shvah4ha, that is, " which stands not till to-morrow." 
The idea is that the world -tree (samsdravriksha) never lasts till 
to-morrow, for all things are perpetually changing. 

^ Lit. non-animal. ^ Or Cosmos. 

Hosted by Google 



318 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

foods [drawn] from the water and the earth of 
the inferior world. ^ 

Spirit,^ with which they ^ all are filled, being 
interblended with the rest/ doth make them 
live ; sense being added, and also reason in the 
case of man — which hath been given to man 
alone as a fifth part out of the sether. 

Of all the living things^ [Grod] doth adorn, 
extend, exalt, the sense of man alone unto the 
understanding of the Reason of Divinity.^ 

But since I am impressed to speak concerning 
Sense, I will a little further on set forth for you 
the sermon on this [point] ; for that it is most 
holy, and [most] mighty, not less than in the 
Reason of Divinity itself. 

VII 

1. But now ril finish for you what I have 
begun. For I was speaking at the start of union 
with the Gods, by which men only ^ consciously 
enjoy ^ the Gods' regard,-~-I mean whatever men 
have won such rapture that they have obtained 
a share of that Divine Sense of intelligence which 

1 Cy. xi. 2. 

^ Cf. G. H., X. (xi.) 13, and Commentary tliereon. 

3 That is, animal bodies. 

^ Presumably the rest of the Earth elements. 

^' Lit. animals. 

^ Lit, the Divine Reason, Ratio, or Logos. 

^ So. of the animals. Gf. xviii. 1 below. 

^ Per-fruuntuT. Gf., for the idea, xxii. 1 below. 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 319 

is the most^ Divine of Senses, found in God and 
in man's reason. 

Asc, Are not the senses of all men. Thrice- 
greatest one, the same ? 

Tris. Nay, [my] Asclepius, all have not won 
true reason ^ ; but wildly rushing in pursuit of 
[reason's] counterfeit,^ they never see the thing 
itself, and are deceived. And this breeds evil in 
their minds, and [thus] transforms the best of 
animals into the nature of a beast and manners 
of the brutes. 

2. But as to Sense and all things similar, I 
will set forth the whole discourse when [I explain] 
concerning Spirit. 

For man is the sole animal that is twofold. 
One part of him is simple : the [man] "essential,"* 
as say the Greeks, but which we call the '* form 
of the Divine Similitude." 

He also is fourfold : that which the Greeks 
call '* hylic," ^ [but] which we call ''cosmic"; 
of which is made the corporal part, in which is 
vestured what we just have said is the divine in 
man,^ — in which the godhead of the Mind alone, 

1 Lit. more. 

2 Cf, a H., X. (xi.) 23, 24 ; iv. (v.) 3 ; and ix. 3 below. 
•''' Lit. image. 

* The Greek term ovo-icxjBtjs is here retained. Gf. viii. 2 below. 
•' The Greek vXiKhv being retained in the Latin. 
« Cf. G. H"., xvi. 15. 



Hosted by Google 



320 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

together with its kin, that is the Pure Mind's 
senses, findeth home and rest, its self with its 
own self, as though shut in the body's walls. 

3. [IV. M.] Asc. What, then, Thrice-greatest 
one, has caused it that man should be planted in 
the world, and should not pass his life in highest 
happiness in that part [of the universe] where 
there is God ? 

[Tris.'] Rightly thou questionest, [my] 
Asclepius ! And we pray God that He bestow 
on us the power of setting forth this reason ; 
since everything depends upon His Will, and 
specially those things that are set forth about 
the Highest Whole, the Reason that's the object 
of our present argument. Hear, then, Asclepius ! 

vin 

1. The Lord and Maker of all things, whom 
we call rightly God, when from Himself He 
made the second [God], the Visible and Sensible,^ 
— I call him Sensible not that He hath sensation 
in Himself (for as to this, whether or no He 
have himself sensation, we will some other time 
declare), but that He is the object of the senses 
of those who see ; — when, then. He made Him 
first, but second to Himself, and that He seemed 

* Sc. the Logos as Cosmos. Of. xxxi. 1 below. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 321 

to Him [most] fair, as one filled to the full with 
goodness of all things, He fell in love with Him 
as being part of His Divinity/ 

2. Accordingly, in that He was so mighty 
and so fair, He willed that some one else should 
have the power to contemplate the One He had 
made from Himself. And thereon He made 
man, — the imitator of His Reason and His Love.^ 

The Will of God is in itself complete accom- 
plishment ; inasmuch as together with His having 
willed, in one and the same time He hath brought 
it to full accomplishment. 

And so, when He perceived that the 
*' essential"^ [^^^] could not be lover* of 
all things, unless He clothed him in a cosmic 
carapace, He shut him in within a house of 
body, — and ordered it that all [men] should be 
so, — from either nature making him a single 
blend and fair-proportioned mixture. 

^ The Greek original of this passage is quoted by Lactantius, 
Div. Institt.^ iv. 6, and runs as follows in Fritzsche's (O. F.) text 
(Leipzig, 1842) : 

'' The Lord and Maker of all things (whom 'tis our custom to 
call God) when He had made the second God, the Visible and 
Sensible, — I call him Sensible not that He hath sensation in 
Himself (for as to this, whether or no He have himself sensation, 
we will some other time enquire), but that He is object of senses 
and of mind ; — when, then, He'd made Him first, and One and 
Only, He seemed to Him most fair, and filled quite full of all 
things good. At Him He marvelled, and loved Him altogether 
as His Son." With the last words, cf. Plat., Tim., 37 d. 

2 Diligentice. 

3 The Greek ovcridoSTis being again, as in vii. 2, retained in the 
Latin. Of. 0. if., i. 15 and ix. (x.) 5. * Diligentem, 

VOL. n. 21 



Hosted by Google 



322 THRIOE-GREATEST HERMES 

3. Therefore hath He made man of soul and 
body, — that is, of an eternal and a mortal nature ; 
so that an animal thus blended can content his 
dual origin, — admire and worship things in 
heaven, and cultivate and govern things on 
earth.^ 

By mortal things ^ I do not mean the water or 
the earth [themselves], for these are two of the 
[immortal] elements that nature hath made 
subject unto men, — but [either] things that are 
by men, or [that are] in or from them ^ ; such 
as the cultivation of the earth itself, pastures, 
[and] buildings, harbours, voyagings, intercom- 
munications, mutual services, which are the 
firmest bonds of men between themselves and 
that part of the Cosmos which consists [indeed] 
of water and of earth, [but is] the Cosmos' 
terrene part, — which is preserved by knowledge 
and the use of arts and sciences ; without which 
[things] God willeth not Cosmos should be 
complete.* 

1 This sentence is also quoted by Lactantius (JJiv. Institt., vii. 13) 
in the original Greek, which reads : 

" From the two natures, the deathless and the mortal, He made 
one nature,^ — ^that of man, one and the selfsame thing. And 
having made the selfsame [man] both somehow deathless and 
also somehow mortal, He brought him [forth], and set him up 
betwixt the godlike and inmiortal nature and the mortal ; that 
seeing all he might wonder at all." 

2 That is, the "things on earth." 

■^ That is, the two elements mentioned. 

* The above paragraph seems to have been very imperfectly 
translated into Latin. 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 323 

In that necessity doth follow what seems good 
to God ; performance waits upon His wilL 

Nor is it credible that that which once hath 
pleased Him, will become unpleasing unto God ; 
since He hath known both what will be, and 
what will please Him, long before. 

IX 

1. [V. M.] But, Asclepius, I see that thou 
with swift desire of mind art in a hurry to be 
told how man can have a love and worship of 
the Heaven, or of the things that are therein. 
Hear, thcD, Asclepius ! 

The love of God and Heaven, together with 
all them that are therein, is one perpetual act 
of worship.^ 

No other thing ensouled, of Gods or animals, 
can do this thing, save man alone. ^ 'Tis in the 
admiration, adoration, [and] the praise of men, 
and [in their] acts of worship, that Heaven and 
Heaven's hosts find their delight. 

2. Nor is it without cause the Muses' choir 
hath been sent down by Highest Deity unto the 
host of men ; in order that, forsooth, the terrene 
world should not seem too uncultured, had it 
lacked the charm of measures, but rather that 
with songs and praise of men accompanied with 

1 Una est obsequiorum frequentatio. Gf. Ex. i. 3. 

2 Gf, G. H,, xvi. 11 : " The duty of mankind is to give worship." 

Hosted by Google 



324 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

music/ He might be lauded, — -He who alone is 
all, or is the Sire of all ; and so not even on the 
earths,'-^ should there have been an absence of the 
sweetness of the harmony of heavenly praise. 

3. Some, then, though they be very few, 
endowed with the Pure Mind,^ have been en- 
trusted with the sacred charge of contemplating 
Heaven. 

Whereas those men who, from the two-fold 
blending of their nature, have not as yet with- 
drawn their inner reason from their body's mass,* 
these are appointed for the study of the elements, 
and [all] that is below them. 

4. Thus man s an animal ; yet not indeed less 
potent in that he/s partly mortal, but rather 
doth he seem to be all the more fit and efficacious 
for reaching Certain Eeason, since he has had 
mortality bestowed on him as well. 

For it is plain he could not have sustained 
the strain of both, unless he had been formed 
out of both natures,^ so that he could possess 
the powers of cultivating Earthly things and 
loving Heaven. 

1 Musicatis ; or perhaps " Muse-inspired " ; a word which, like 
so many others, occurs only in the Latin of this treatise. 

2 In terris, pi. ^ Cf. vii. 1 and 2 above. 

'^ The reading is '•Hnteriorem intelligentiam mole corporis 
resederuntj^' of which I can make nothing ; resedenmt is evidently 
an error. 

■'' There is here a " double " in the text, which the editor has 
not removed. 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 325 

X 

1. The Reason of a thesis such as this, [my] 
Asclepius, I would that thou should'st grasp, not 
only with the keen attention of thy soul, but 
also with its living power ^ [as well]. 

For 'tis a Reason that most men cannot 
believe ; the Perfect and the True are to be 
grasped by the more holy minds. ^ Hence, then, 
will I begin. 

2. [VI. M.] The Lord of the Eternity^ is 
the first God ; the second's Cosmos ; man is the 
third.' 

God is the Maker of the Cosmos and of all the 
things therein ; at the same time He ruleth ^ 
all, with man himself, [who is] the ruler of the 
compound thing ^; the whole of which man 
taking on himself, doth make of it the proper 
care of his own love, in order that the two of 
them, himself and Cosmos, may be an ornament 
each unto other ; so that from this divine com- 
post of man, '' World '' seems most fitly called 
'' Cosmos " ^ in Greek. 

3. He knows himself ; he knows the World as 

1 Vivacitate. Of, G. H.^ x. (xi.) 17 ; and xix. 1 below. 

2 Of. 0. IL, ix. (x.) 10. 

3 That is, the Mon. Of. xxx. 1 below. ^ Of. Ex. i. 8. 
'^ Reading guhernat for guhernando. 

^ That is, the compost, or " cosmic " part of himself, apparently, 
of V. 2. 

7 The original Greek K6(Tfxos is here retained in the Latin ; it 
means " order, adornment, ornament," as well as " world." 



Hosted by Google 



3 



326 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

well/ So that he recollects, indeed, what is 
convenient to his own parts. He calls to mind 
what he must use, that they may be of service to 
himself ; giving the greatest praise and thanks to 
God, His Image ^ reverencing, — not ignorant that 
he is, too, God's image the second [one ] ; for that 
there are two images of God — Cosmos and man. 

4. So that it comes to pass that, since man's 
is a single structure, — in that part [of him] 
which doth consist of Soul, and Sense, of Spirit, 
and of Reason, he's divine ; so that he seems to 
have the power to mount from as it were the 
higher elements into the Heaven. 

But in his cosmic part, which is composed of 
fire, and water, and of air, he stayeth mortal on 
the Earth, — lest he should leave all things com- 
mitted to his care forsaken and bereft. 

Thus human kind is made in one part deathless, 
and in the other part subject to death while in a 
body. 

XI 

1. Now of that dual nature, — that is to say of 
man, — there is a chief capacity. [And that is] 
piety, which goodness follows after. 

^ The idea is that man i.s a microcosm ; lie is, as to his bodies, 
''cosmic" (^^mundamts homo^^), for his vehicles are made of the 
elements; he is thus in these an image or seed (microco^n) of 
the universe, the macrocosm. 

'^ Sc. Cosmos. Of, xxxi. 1 below. 

^ Cf. G. iT., X. (xi.) 25, last sentence. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 327 

[And] this [capacity] then, and then only, 
seems to be perfected, if it be fortified with 
virtue of despising all desires for alien things. 

For alien from every part of kinship with the 
Gods ^ are all things on the Earth, whatever are 
possessed from bodily desires, — to which we 
rightly give the name '* possessions,'' in that they 
are not born with us, but later on begin to be 
possessed by us ; wherefore we call them by the 
name possessions.^ 

2. All such things, then, are alien from man, 
— even his body. So that we can despise not 
only what we long for, but also that from which 
the vice of longing comes to us. 

For just as far as the increase of reason leads 
our^ soul, so far one should be man; in order 
that by contemplating the divine, one should 
look down upon, and disregard the mortal part, 
which hath been joined to him, through the 
necessity of helping on the lower ^ world. 

3. For that, in order that a man should be 
complete in either part, observe that he hath 

'^ Ah omnibus divinm cognationis partibus. 

2 This seems somewhat tautological. The first clause runs : 
" qucecunqiie Urrena corporali cupiditate possidentur ; quce merito 
possessionem nomine nuncwparikirJ^ This Latin word-play seems 
almost to suggest that we are dealing with an embellishment of 
the translator ; it may, however, have stood in the original. Cf. 
xii. 2 below. 

2 Lit. my. 

* Reading inferioris for interioris^ as immediately below in § 3. 
Gf, vi. 3, last sentence. 

Hosted by Google 



328 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

been composed of elements of either part in sets 
of four; — with hands, and feet, both of them 
pairs, and with the other ^ members of his body, 
by means of which he may do service to the 
lower (that is to say the terrene) world. 

And to these parts [are added other] four ; — 
of sense, and soul, of memory, and foresight, by 
means of which he may become acquainted with 
the rest of things divine, and judge of them. 

Hence it is brought about that man in- 
vestigates the difierences and qualities, effects 
and quantities of things, with critical research ; 
yet, as he is held back with the too heavy weight 
of body's imperfection, he cannot properly descry 
the causes of the nature of [all] things which 
[really] are the true ones. 

4. Man, then, being thus created and composed, 
and to such ministry and service set by Highest 
God, — man, by his keeping suitably the world 
in proper order, [and] by his piously adoring 
God, in both becomingly and suitably obeying 
God's Good Will, — [man being] such as this, 
with what reward think'st thou he should be 
recompensed ? 

If that, indeed, — since Cosmos is God's work, 
— he who preserves and adds on to its beauty 

1 This seems very loose indeed ; the text or the Latin translation 
is probably at fault, unless the *' other members" are supposed to 
be grouped in sets of double pairs. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 329 

by his love, joins his own work unto God's 
Will ; when he with toil and care doth fashion 
out the species ^ (which He hath made [already] 
with His Divine Intent), with help of his own 
body ; — with what reward think'st thou he 
should be recompensed, unless it be with that 
with which our forebears ^ have been blest ? 

5. That this may be the pleasure of God^s 
Love, such is our prayer for you, devoted ones. 

In other words, may He, when ye have served 
your time, and have put off the world's restraint, 
and freed yourselves from deathly bonds, restore 
you pure and holy to the nature of your higher 
self,^ that is of the Divine ! 

XII 

1. Asc. Rightly and truly, Thrice-greatest 
one, thou speakest. This is the prize for those 
who piously subordinate their lives to God and 
live to help the world. 

Tris. [To those], however, who have lived 
in other fashion impiously, — [to them] both is 
return to Heaven denied, and there's appointed 
them migration into other bodies ^ unworthy of 
a holy soul and base ; so that, as this discourse 

1 Singular — that is, the species in the Cosmos, according to the 
type in the Divine Mind. 

^ Cf. G. iT., X. (xi.) 5 ; Lact., D. L.i.ll; and xxxvii. 3 below. 
Lit. part. * In corporalia . . . migratio. 

Hosted by Google 



330 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

of ours will show,^ souls in their life on earth 
run risk of losing hope of future immortality. 

2. But [all of this] doth seem to some beyond 
belief ; a tale to others ; to others [yet again], 
perchance, a subject for their mirth.^ 

For in this life in body, it is a pleasant thing 
— the pleasure that one gets from one's 
possessions.^ 'Tis for this cause that spite, in 
envy of its [hope of] immortality, doth clap 
the soul in prison,^ as they say, and keep it 
down, so that it stays in that part of itself in 
which it's mortal, nor suffers it to know the 
part of its divinity. 

3. For I will tell thee, as though it were 
prophetic-ly,^ that no one after us^ shall have 
the Single Love, the Love of wisdom-loving,^ 
which consists in Gnosis of Divinity alone, — 
[the practice of] perpetual contemplation and 
of holy piety. For that the many do confound 
philosophy with multifarious reasoning.^ 

1 The Latin here does not construe. 

^ Gf, G. H., i. 29 ; also xxv. 3 below. 

^ Gf,xi.l above. "^ Obtorto . . . collo. 

'^ Ego enim iibi quasi 2orcedivinans dixero. Notice the dixero^— 
the '' prophetic " tense, if we may be permitted to coin a term to 
characterize this use, which reminds us so strongly of the 
"Sibylline" literature and tlie allied prophetic centonism of 
the time. 

*^* Gf. Ex. ix. 8, and xiv. 1 below. 

'^ Lit. philosophy. Gf. in Philo, J). V. 6% tlie " Heaveuiy 
Love " with which the Therapeuts were " afire with God." Gf. 
xiv. 1, and Ex. i. 3. 

8 Gf. G. H,, xvi. 2. 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 331 

Asc. Why is it, then, the many make 
philosophy so hard to grasp ; or wherefore is 
it they confound this thing with multifarious 
reasoning ? 

XIII 

1. Tris. 'Tisinthis way,Asclepius; — by mixing 
it, by means of subtle expositions, with divers 
sciences not easy to be grasped, — such as arith- 
metic, and music, and geometry. 

But Pure Philosophy, which doth depend on 
godly piety alone, should only so far occupy 
itself with other arts, that it may [know how to] 
appreciate the working out in numbers of the 
fore-appointed stations of the stars when they 
return, and of the course of their procession. 

Let her, moreover, know how to appreciate the 
Earth's dimensions, its qualities and quantities, 
the Water s depths, the strength of Fire, and 
the effects and nature of all these. [And so] 
let her give worship and give praise unto the 
Art and Mind of God. 

2. As for [true] Music, — to know this is 
naught else than to have knowledge of the order 
of all things, and whatsoe'er God's Reason 
hath decreed. 

For that the order of each several thing 
when set together in one [key] for all, by 
means of skilful reason, will make, as 'twere, 

Hosted by Google 



332 THRICE -GREATEST HERMES 

the sweetest and the truest harmony with God's 
[own] Song.^ 

XIV 

1. Asc, Who, therefore, will the men be 
after us '^ ? 

Tris. They will be led astray by sophists' 
cleverness, and turned from True Philosophy, 
— the Pure and Holy [Love], 

For that to worship God with single mind 
and soul, and reverence the things that He hath 
made, and to give thanks unto His Will, which 
is the only thing quite full of Good, — this is 
Philosophy unsullied by the soul's rough 
curiousness. 

But of this subject let what has been said 
so far suffice. 

2. [Vn. M.] And now let us begin to treat 
of Spirit and such things. 

There was first God and Matter,^ which we in 
Greek ^ believe [to be] the Cosmos ; and Spirit 
was with Cosmos, or Spirit was in Cosmos, but 
not in like way as in God '' ; nor were there 

^ Gf. "Heaven's Imrmonious song" in xxviii. 11 below. 

2 Gf. xii. 3 above, and notes. 

^ The Greek vXtj is here retained by the translator. ^ Grmce. 

■' The Latin translation is confused. The original seems to have 
stated that Spirit and Cosmos (or Matter) were as yet one^ or 
Spirit-Matter. 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 333 

things [as yet] from which the Cosmos [comes 
to birth] in God. 

They were not ; just for the very reason that 
they were not, but were as yet in that [condition] 
whence they have had their birth. ^ 

For those things only are not called in- 
generable which have not yet been born, but 
[also] those which lack the fertilizing power of 
generating, so that from them naught can be 
born. 

And so whatever things there are that have 
in them the power of generating, — these two are 
generable, [that is to say,] from which birth can 
take place, though they be born from their own 
selves [alone]. For there's no question that from 
those born from themselves birth can with ease 
take place, since from them all are born. 

3. God, then, the everlasting, God the eternal, 
nor can be born, nor could He have been born. 
That^ is. That was, That shall be ever. This, 
therefore, is God's Nature — all from itself 
[alone]. 

But Matter ^ (or the Nature of the Cosmos) * 
and Spirit, although they do not seem to be 
things born from any source/ yet in themselves 

1 That is, presumably, they were in potentiality. 2 jiq^,^ 

2 Again Uat? in the Latin text. 

4 Of, "Matter or Cosmos" of xvii. 2. 

^ Principio, "beginning" ; the same word as that used in the 
Vulgate translation of the Proem of the fourth Gospel. 

Hosted by Google 



334 THRICE-CmEATEST HERMES 

possess the power of generation and of generating, 
— the nature of fecundity. 

For the beginning^ [t^^ly] i^ i^^ [j^^^ that] 
quality of nature which possesses in itself the 
power and matter both of conception and of 
birth.^ This,^ then, without conception of 
another, is generable of its own self 

XV 

1. But, on the other hand, [whereas] those 
things which only have the power of bringing 
forth by blending with another nature, are thus 
to be distinguished, this Space of Cosmos,* with 
those that are in it, seems not to have been 
born, in that [the Cosmos] has in it undoubtedly 
all Nature's potency.^ 

By ''Space" I mean that in which are all 
things. For all these things could not have 
been had Space not been, to hold them all. 
Since for all things that there have been, must 
be provided Space. 

For neither could the qualities nor quantities, 
nor the positions, nor [yet] the operations, be dis- 
tinguished of those things which are no ivhere. 

^ Initium. 

2 This seems to make it clear that the idea ''Cosmos" is 
regarded under the dual concept of Spirit-Matter. 
^ Be. Primal Nature, or Spirit- Matter. 
^ Cf. XXX. 1, and xxxiv. 1 below. 
•^ The Latin construction is very faulty. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 335 

2. So then the Cosmos, also, though not born, 
still has in it the births ^ of all ; in that, indeed, 
it doth afford for all of them most fecund wombs 
for their conception. 

It, therefore, is the sum of [all that] quality of 
Matter which hath creative potency, although it 
hath not been [itself] created. 

And, seeing that [this] quality of Matter is in 
its nature [simple] productiveness ; so the same 
[source] produces bad as well [as good]. 

XVI 

1. I have not, therefore, Asclepius and 
Ammon, said what many say, that God could 
not excise and banish evil from the Scheme ^ of 
Things ; — to whom no answer need at all be 
given. Yet for your sakes I will continue what 
I have begun, and give a reason. 

They say that God ought to have freed the 
World from bad in every way ; for so much is 
it^ in the World, that it doth seem to be as 
though it were one of its limbs. 

This was foreseen by Highest God and [due] 
provision made, as much as ever could have been 
in reason made, then when He thought it proper 
to endow the minds of men with sense,^ and 
science and intelligence. 

1 Naturas. ^ Lit. nature. ^ Sc. evil or bad. 

■* Presumably meaning the higher sense. 



Hosted by Google 



336 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

2. For it is by these things alone whereby we 
stand above the rest of animals, that we are able 
to avoid the snares and crimes of ill. 

For he who shall on sight have turned from 
them, before he hath become immeshed in them, 
—he is a man protected by divine intelligence 
and [godly] prudence. 

For that the ground -work of [true] science 
doth consist of the top-stones of virtue. 

3. It is by Spirit that all things are governed 
in the Cosmos, and made quick, — Spirit made 
subject to the Will of Highest God, as though 
it were an engine or machine. 

So far, then, [only] let Him be by us con- 
ceived, — as Him who is conceivable by mind 
alone, who is called Highest God, the Ruler 
and Director of God Sensible,^ — of Him who 
in Himself includes all Space, all Substance, and 
all Matter, of things producing and begetting, 
and all whatever is, however great it be. 

xvn 

1. It is by Spirit that all species in the 
Cosmos are [or] moved or ruled, — each one 
according to its proper nature given it by God. 

Matter,^ or Cosmos, on the other hand, is that 
which holds all things, — the field of motion,^ and 

1 That is, Cosmos. ^ Again vAv. ^ Agitatio. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 337 

the that which crowds together ^ all ; of which 
God is the Ruler, distributing unto all cosmic 
things all that is requisite to each. 

It is with Spirit that He fills all things, 
according to the quality of each one's nature. 

2. [Now,] seeing that the hollow roundness^ 
of the Cosmos is borne round into the fashion 
of a sphere ; by reason of its [very] quality or 
form, it never can be altogether visible unto 
itself. 

So that, however high a place in it thou 
shouldest choose for looking down below, thou 
could'st not see from it what is at bottom, 
because in many places it confronts [the senses], 
and so is thought to have the quality [of being 
visible throughout].^ 

For it is solely owing to the forms of species, 
with images of which it seems insculpted, that 
it is thought [to be] as though 'twere visible 
[throughout] ; but as a fact 'tis ever to itself 
invisible. 

3. Wherefore, its bottom, or its [lowest] part, 
if [such a] place there be within a sphere, is 
called in Greek a-eides ^ ; since that eidein ^ in 



2 Cava rotunditas — that is, presumably, concavity. 

3 Propter quod muUis locis instat, qualitatemque habere creditur. 
The Latin translation is evidently faulty. Menard omits the 
sentence entirely, as he so often does when there is difficulty. 

* 'A-6t5^s — that is, " Invisible" ; that is, Hades ('AtS^s or "AStjs). 
^ et5€ii/ — ? tSeTv. 

VOL. n. 22 



Hosted by Google 



338 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

Greek means *' seeing/' — which '^ being-seen " 
the sphere's beginning^ lacks. 

Hence, too, the species have the name eideai^^ 
since they're of form we cannot see. 

Therefore, in that they are deprived of '' being- 
seen," in Greek they are called Hades ; in that 
they are at bottom ^ of the sphere, they're called 
in Latin Inferi, 

These, then, are principal and prior,* and, as 
it were, the sources and the heads of all the 
things which are in them,^ through them, or 
from them. 

xvin 

L Asc. All things, then, in themselves (as 
thou, Thrice-greatest one, dost say) are cosmic 
[principles] (as I should say) of all the species 
which are in them, [or] as it were, the sum and 
substance of each one of them.^ 

Tris. So Cosmos, then, doth nourish bodies ; 
the Spirit, souls ; the [Higher] Sense (with 
which Celestial Gift mankind alone is blest) ^ 
doth, feed the mind. 

^ Primuon spherce ; tlie top or bottom presuma1)ly, or periphery, 
of the world-sjDhere. 

^ etSeai — ? tSeai — that is, forms, species, — but also used of the 
highest species, viewed as " ideas." 

3 Sc. at the centre. 

^ Or principles and priorities (antiquiora). 

■' Sc. the "ideas." 

^' The Latin text is hopeless. ^ Of. vii. i. 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 339 

And [these are] not all men, but [they are] 
few, whose minds are of such quality that they 
can be receptive of so great a blessing. 

2. For as the World's illumined by the Sun, 
so is the mind of man illumined by that Light ; 
nay, in [still] fuller measure. 

For whatsoever thing the Sun doth shine 
upon, it is anon, by interjection of the Earth or 
Moon, or by the intervention of the night, 
robbed of its light. 

But once the [Higher] Sense hath been com- 
mingled with the soul of man, there is at-one- 
ment from the happy union of the blending 
of their natures ; so that minds of this kind 
are never more held fast in errors of the 
darkness. 

Wherefore, with reason have they said the 
[Higher] Senses are the souls of Gods ; to which 
I add : not of all Gods, but of the great ones 
[only] ; nay, even of the principles of these. 

XIX 

1. [Vni. M.] Asc. What dost thou call. 
Thrice-greatest one, the heads of things, or 
sources of beginnings? 

Tris, Great are the mysteries which I reveal 
to thee, divine the secrets I disclose ; and so I 

Hosted by Google 



340 THRIOE-GREATEST HERMES 

make beginning of this thing ^ with prayers for 
Heaven's favour. 

The hierarchies ^ of Gods are numerous ; and 
of them all one class is called the Noumenal,^ 
the other [class] the Sensible.* 

The former are called Noumenal, not for the 
reason that they're thought to lie beyond our^ 
senses ; for these are just the Gods we sense 
more truly than the ones we call the visible, — 
just as our argument will prove, and thou, if 
thou attend, wilt be made fit to see. 

For that a lofty reasoning, and much more 
one that is too godlike for the mental grasp of 
[average] men, if that the speaker's words are 
not received^ with more attentive service of 
the ears, — will fly and flovv^ beyond them ; or 
rather will flow back [again], and mingle with 
the streams of its own source.^ 

2. There are, then, [certain] Gods who are 
the principals ^ of all the species. 

1 Initium facio ; or perhaps perform the sacred rite, or give 
initiation. 

2 Genera. 

^ IntelUgibilis (= ol vo'nroi) ; lit. that which can be known by 
intellect (alone). 

^ Sensibilis (= ot alo-dTjroi) ; lit. that which can be known by 
the senses. 

•' That is, the *' Sense " of those who have reached the " Tris- 
megistic " grade, though of course beyond the range of the normal 
senses. 

^ The text is faulty. 

7 Gf. X. 1 above ,• and C. H,, x. (xi.) 17. 

^ Principes. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 341 

Next there come those whose essence ^ is their 
principal. These are the Sensible, each similar 
to its own dual source,^ who by their sensibility ^ 
affect all things, — the one part through the 
other part [in each] making to shine the proper 
work of every single one. 

Of Heaven, — or of whatsoe'er it be that is 
embraced within the term, — the essence-chief* 
is Zeus ; for 'tis through Heaven that Zeus gives 
life to all. 

Sun's essence-chief is light ; for the good gift 
of light is poured on us through the Sun's 
disk. 

3. The *' Thirty-six," who have the name of 
Horoscopes,^ are in the [self] same space as the 
Fixed Stars ; of these the essence-chief, or prince, 
is he whom they call Pantomorph, or Omniform,^ 
who fashioneth the various forms for various 
species. 

The ''Seven" who are called spheres, have 
essence-chiefs, that is, [have each] their proper 
rulers, whom they call [all together] Fortune 
and Heimarmene,*^ whereby all things are changed 

1 The Greek original ovcria being retained. 

2 That is, presumably, essence and sensibility. 

^ That is, presumably, their power of affecting the senses. 

4 The Greek ovaridpxvs is retained in the Latin. 

^ Horoscopi (== o^poo-kSttoi) ; generally called Decans ; cf. Ex. 
ix., where the Decans are explained. 

^ UavrSjxop^ov vel omniformem ; see xxxv. below ; also 0. H., 
xi. (xii.) 16, Comment. "^ That is. Fate, itfiap/neyrj. 



Hosted by Google 



342 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

by nature's law ; perpetual stability being varied 
with incessant motion.-^ 

The Air, moreover, is the engine, or machine, 
through which all things are made — (there is, 
however, an essence-chief of this, a second [Air]) 
—mortal from mortal things and things like 
these.^ 

4. These hierarchies of Gods, then, being thus 
and [in this way] related,^ from bottom unto top, 
are [also] thus connected with each other, and 
tend towards themselves ; so mortal things are 
bound to mortal, things sensible to sensible. 

The whole of [this grand scale of] Rulership, 
however, seems to Him [who is] the Highest 
Lord, either to be not many things, or rather 
[to be] one. 

For that from One all things depending,* and 
flowing down from it, — when they are seen as 

1 Quoted in the original Greek by loan. Lauren tins Lydus, 
De Mensibus, iv. 7 ; Wiinscli (LeijDzig, 1898), p. 70, 22 ; as 
follows : " And Hermes is witness in his [book], called ' The 
Perfect Sermon,' when saying : * They that are called the Seven 
Spheres have a Source that is called Fortune or Fate, which 
changes all things and suffers them not to remain in the same 
[conditions].' " The quotation is continued without a break ; the 
rest of it, however, corresponds to nothing in our context, but is 
somewhat similar to ch. xxxix, 1,2. 

2 That is, the region of things subject to death. The text is 
faulty. Gf. with this "engine" the "cylinder" of the K. K. 
Fragments (10). 

'•^ Ah iwjO ad summum se admoventihus ; for admoventibus compare 
" genus admotmn superis,^^ Silius Italicus, viii. 295. 
'* Cf. iv. 1 above, and the note. 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 343 

separate, they're thought to be as many as they 
possibly can be ; but in their union it is one 
[thing], or rather two, from which all things are 
made ; — that is, from Matter, by means of which 
the other things are made, and by the Will of 
Him, by nod of whom they're brought to pass. 

XX 

1. Asc, Is this again the reason, Thrice- 
greatest one ? 

Tris. It is, Asclepius. For God's the Father 
or the Lord of all, or whatsoever else may be 
the name by which He's named more holily 
and piously by men, — which should be set apart 
among ourselves for sake of our intelligence. 

For if we contemplate this so transcendent 
God, we shall not make Him definite by any of 
these names. 

For if a [spoken] word ^ is this : — a sound 
proceeding from the air, when struck by breath,^ 
denoting the whole will, perchance, of man, or 
else the [higher] sense, which by good chance a 
man perceives by means of mind, when out of 
[all his] senses,^ — a name the stuff of which, 

1 Vox (=name), presumably Xoyos in the original; a play 
on "word" and "reason," but also referring to the mysterious 
" name " of a person. 

^ Spiritu, or spirit. 

^ Ex sensihus = presumably, in ecstasis. 

Hosted by Google 



344 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

made of a syllable or two, has so been limited 
and pondered, that it might serve in man as 
necessary link between the voice and ear ; — thus 
[must] the Name of God in full consist of Sense, 
and Spirit, and of Air, and of all things in them, 
or through, or with them.^ 

2. Indeed, I have no hope that the Creator of 
the whole of Greatness, the Father and the Lord 
of all the things [that are], could ever have one 
name, even although it should be made up of a 
multitude — He who cannot be named, or rather 
He who can be called by every name. 

For He, indeed, is One and All ^ ; so that it 
needs must be that all things should be called 
by the same name as His, or He Himself called 
by the names of all. 

3. He, then, alone, yet all-complete in the 
fertility of either sex, ever with child of His own 
Will, doth ever bring to birth whatever He hath 
willed to procreate. 

His Will is the All-goodness, which also is the 
Goodness of all things, born from the nature of 
His own Divinity, — in order that all things may 
be, just as they all have been, and that hence- 
forth the nature of being born from their own 
selves may be sufficient to all things that will 
be born. 

^ The text of this paragraph is very unsatisfactory, 
^ Of. i. 1 above. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 345 

Let this, then, be the reason given thee, 
Asclepius, wherefore and how all things are made 
of either sex. 

XXI 

1. Asc. Thou speak'st of God, then, Thrice- 
greatest one? 

Tris. Not only God, Asclepius, but all things 
living and inanimate. For 'tis impossible that 
any of the things that are should be unfruitful. 

For if fecundity should be removed from all 
the things that are, it could not be that they 
should be for ever what they are. 1 mean that 
Nature,^ Sense, and Cosmos, have in themselves 
the power of being born,^ and of preserving all 
things that are born. 

For either sex is full of procreation ; and of 
each one there is a union, or, — what^s more 
true, — a unity incomprehensible ; which you 
may rightly call Eros^ or Aphrodite, or both 
[names]. 

2. This, then, is truer than all truth, and 
plainer than what the mind ['s eye] perceives ; — 
that from that Universal God of Universal 
Nature all other things for evermore have found, 
and had bestowed on them, the mystery of 

1 Here, presumably, meaning hyle. '^ Naturam again. 

3 Of, 1, 2, above. 

Hosted by Google 



346 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

bringing forth ; in which there is innate the 
sweetest Charity, [and] Joy, [and] Merriment, 
Longing, and Love Divine. 

We might have had to tell the mighty power 
and the compulsion of this mystery, if it had 
not been able to be known by every one from 
personal experience, by observation of himself. 

3. For if thou should'st regard that supreme 
[point] of time when . . . -^ the one nature doth 
pour forth the young into the other one, and 
when the other greedily absorbs [it] from the 
first, and hides it [ever] deeper [in itself] ; — then, 
at that time, out of their common congress, 
females attain the nature of the males, males 
weary grow with female listlessness. 

And so the consummation of this mystery, so 
sweet and requisite, is wrought in secret ; lest, 
owing to the vulgar jests of ignorance, the deity 
of either sex should be compelled to blush at 
natural congress, — and much more still, if it 
should be subjected to the sight of impious folk. 

XXII 

1. The pious are not numerous, however ; nay, 
they are very few, so that they may be counted 
even in the world. ^ 

Whence it doth come about, that in the many 

1 Quo ex crehro attritu prurimus ut . . . . ^^ Gf. Ex. i. 16. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 347 

bad inheres, through defect of the Gnosis and 
Discernment of the things that are. 

For that it is from the intelligence of God- 
like Eeason/ by which all things are ordered, 
there come to birth contempt and remedy of 
vice throughout the world. 

But when unknowingness and ignorance per- 
sist, all vicious things wax strong, and plague 
the soul with wounds incurable ; so that, infected 
with them, and in vitiated, it swells up, as though 
it were with poisons, — except for those who 
know the Discipline of souls and highest Cure 
of intellect. 

2. So, then, although it may do good to few 
alone, 'tis proper to develope and explain this 
thesis : — wherefore Divinity hath deigned to 
share His science and intelligence with men 
alone. Give ear, accordingly ! 



When God, [our] Sire and Lord, made man, after 
the Gods, out of an equal mixture of a less pure 
cosmic part and a divine, — it [naturally] came 
to pass the imperfections^ of the cosmic part 
remained commingled with [our] frames, and 
other ones^ [as well], by reason of the food 
and sustenance we have out of necessity in 
common with all lives ^ ; by reason of which 

1 Cf, vii. 1 above. ^ Vitia ; lit. vices. 

3 Sc. imperfections. * Lit. animals. 

Hosted by Google 



348 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

things it needs must be that the desires, and 
passions, and other vices, of the mind should 
occup)^ the souls of human kind. 

3. As for the Gods, in as much as they had 
been made of Nature's fairest^ part, and have 
no need of the supports of reason and of 
discipline,^ — although, indeed, their deathless- 
ness, the very strength of being ever of one 
single age, stands in this case for prudence and 
for science, — still, for the sake of reason's unity, 
instead of science and of intellect (so that the 
Gods should not be strange to these), — He, by 
His everlasting law, decreed for them an order,^ 
circumscribed by the necessity of law. 

While as for man, He doth distinguish him 
from all the other animals by reason and by 
discipline alone ; by means of which men 
can remove and separate their bodies' vices, — 
He helping them to hope and eiffort after 
deathlessness. 

4. In fine. He hath made man both good and 
able to share in immortal life, — out of two 
natures, [one] mortal, [one] divine. 

And just because he is thus fashioned by the 
Will of God, it is appointed that man should be 
superior both to the Gods, who have been made 

1 Mundissima — that is, most cosmic, or '' adorned." 

2 Or science. 

'^ Ordinem — that is, Cosmos. Compare this also with the idea 
of the Gnostic Horos which '* surrounds" the Plerdma. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 349 

of an immortal nature only, and also to all mortal 
things. 

It is because of this that man, being joined 
unto the Gods by kinsmanship, doth reverence 
them with piety and holy mind ; while, on their 
side, the Gods with pious sympathy regard and 
guard all things of men. 

XXIII 

1. But this can only be averred of a few men 
endowed with pious minds. Still, of the rest, 
the vicious folk, we ought to say no word, for 
fear a very sacred sermon should be spoiled by 
thinking of them. 

[IX. M.] And ^ since our sermon treats of the 
relationship and intercourse ^ of men and Gods, — 
learn, Asclepius, the power and strength of man ! 

[Our] Lord and Father, or what is Highest 
God, — as He's Creator of the Gods in Heaven, 
so man's the maker of the gods who, in the 
temples, suffer man's approach, and who not 
only have light poured on them, but who send 
forth [their] light [on all] ; not only does a man 
go forward towards the God[s], but also he 
confirms the Gods [on earth].^ 

1 This sentence and the first half of the next, down to " suffer 
man's approach," is quoted word for word in Latin by Augustine, 
De Civitate Dei, xxiii. 2 cf. (7. JET., x. (xi.) 22. 

3 The Latin translation of this paragraph seems confused. 

Hosted by Google 



350 THRICE-^GREATEST HERMES 

Art thou surprised, Asclepius ; nay is it not 
that even thou dost not believe ? 

2. AsG. I am amazed. Thrice -greatest one ; 
but willingly I give assent to [all] thy words. 
I judge that man most blest who hath attained 
so great felicity. 

Tris, And rightly so ; [for] he deserves our 
wonder, in that he is the greatest of them all. 

As for the genus of the Gods in Heaven, — 
'tis plain from the commixture^ of them all, 
that it has been made pregnant from the fairest 
part of nature,^ and that the only signs [by 
which they are discerned] are, as it were, before 
all else their heads. ^ 

3. Whereas the species of the gods which 
humankind constructs is fashioned out of either 
nature,— out of that nature which is more ancient 
and far more divine, and out of that which is in 
men ; that is, out of the stuff of which they have 
been made and are configured, not only in their 
heads alone, but also in each limb and their 
whole frame. 

And * so mankind, in imaging Divinity, stays 

^ This is, apparently, the "star stuff" of which their bodies 
are made. 

2 Be mundissima ]j)arte naturm esse prwgnatum — whatever that 
means ; but cf. p. 348, n. 1. 

3 Of. a H., X. (xi.) 10, 11. 

4 This sentence, together with the first five sentences of the 
next chapter, down to the words "and constant worship," are 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 351 

mindful of the nature and the source of its 
own self. 

So that, just as [our] Sire and Lord did make 
the Gods seonian, that they might be like Him ; 
so hath mankind configured its own gods ac- 
cording to the likeness of the look of its own self.^ 

XXIV 

1. Asc, Thou dost not mean their statues, 
dost thou, Thrice- greatest one? 

Tris, [I mean their] statues, Asclepius, — 
dost thou not see how much thou even, doubtest ? 
— statues, ensouled with sense, and filled with 
spirit, which work such mighty and such [strange] 
results, — statues which can foresee what is to 
come, and which perchance can prophesy, fore- 
telling things by dreams and many other ways, 
— [statues] that take their strength away from 
men, or cure their sorrow, if they do so deserve. 

Dost thou not know, Asclepius, that Egypt 
is the image of the Heaven '^ ; or, what is truer 
still, the transference, or the descent, of all that 
are in governance or exercise in Heaven ? And 
if more truly [still] it must be said, — this land 
of ours is Shrine of all the World. 

quoted in Latin with two or three slight verbal variants by 
Augustine, De Gimtate Dei, xxiii. 

1 Gf. XXX vii. 2 below. 2 qy^ Comment, on K, K., 46-48. 

Hosted by Google 



352 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

2. Further, in that 'tis fitting that the prudent 
should know all before, it is not right ye should 
be ignorant of this. 

The time will come when Egypt will appear 
to have in vain served the Divinity with pious 
mind and constant worship ^ ; and all its holy 
cult will fall to nothingness and be in vain. 

For that Divinity is now about to hasten 
back from Earth to Heaven, and Egypt shall be 
left ; and Earth, which was the seat of pious 
cults, shall be bereft and widowed of the presence 
of the Gods. 

And foreigners shall fill this region and this 
land ; and there shall be not only the neglect 
of pious cults, but — what is still more painful, 
■ — as though enacted by the laws, a penalty shall 
be decreed against the practice of [our] pious 
cults and worship of the Gods — [entire] pro- 
scription of them. 

3. Then shall this holiest land, seat of [our] 
shrines and temples, be choked with tombs 
and corpses.^ 

Egypt, Egypt, of thy pious cults tales only 
will remain, as far beyond belief for thy own 
sons [as for the rest of men] ; words only will 
be left cut on thy stones, thy pious deeds 
recounting ! 

1 Augustine's quotation ends liere, 

^ Sepulchrorum erit mortuorumque plenissima. This sentence is 
quoted verbatim by Augustine, De Oivitate De% xxvi. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 353 

And Egypt will be made the home of Scyth ^ 
or Indian, or some one like to them, — that is 
a foreign neighbour." 

Ay, for the Godly company^ shall mount 
again to Heaven, and their forsaken worshippers 
shall all die out ; and Egypt, thus bereft of 
God and man, shall be abandoned. 

4. And now I speak to thee, River, holiest 
[Stream] ! I tell thee what will be. With 
bloody torrents shalt thou overflow thy banks. 
Not only shall thy streams divine be stained 
with blood ; but they shall all flow over [with 
the same]. 

The tale of tombs shall far exceed the [number 
of the] quick ; and the surviving remnant shall 
be Egyptians in their tongue alone, but in their 
actions foreigners. 

XXV 

1. Why dost thou weep, Asclepius? Nay, 
more than this, by far more wretched, — Egypt 
herself shall be impelled and stained with 
greater ills. 

For she, the Holy [Land], and once deservedly 

^ Compare Colossians iii. 11 : "Where there is neither Greek 
nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbariany Scythian^ 
bond nor free : but Christ is all, and in all." 

2 Vicina harharia ; lit. a neighbouring foreign country. Com- 
pare this with the previous note. It is strange the two, Scyth 
and barbarian, coming twice together. 

2 Divinitas. 

VOL. II. 23 

Hosted by Google 



354 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

the most beloved by God, by reason of her pious 
service of the Gods on earth, — she, the sole 
colony^ of holiness, and teacher of religion [on 
the earth], shall be the type of all that is most 
barbarous. 

And then, out of our loathing for mankind, 
the World will seem no more deserving of our 
wonder and our praise. 

All this good thing,^-~~-than which there has 
been fairer naught that can be seen, nor is there 
anything, nor will there [ever] be, — will be in 
jeopardy. 

2. And it will prove a burden unto men; 
and on account of this they will despise and 
cease to love this Cosmos as a whole, — the 
changeless work of God ; the glorious construction 
of the Good, comprised of multifold variety of 
forms ; the engine of God's Will, supporting 
His own work ungrudgingly ; the multitudinous 
whole massed in a unity of all, that should be 
reverenced, praised and loved, — by them at 
least who have the eyes to see. 

^ Deductio ; the technical term for leading out a colony from 
the metroiiolis or mother city. Compare Philo, De Vita Con- 
templativa, P. 892, M. 474 (Conybeare, p. 58) : " In Egypt there 
are crowds of them [the Therapeiits] in every province, or nome 
as they call it, and especially at Alexandria. For they who are 
in every way the most highly advanced, lead out a colony 
(airoiKiav (rT€AKoprai\ as it Were to the Therapeutic father-land " ; 
and also the numerous parallel passages cited by Conybeare from 
Philo's other writings. 

^^ Sc. the Cosmos. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 355 

For Darkness will be set before the Light, 
and Death will be thought preferable to Life. 
No one will raise his eyes to Heaven ; the pious 
man will be considered mad, the impious a 
sage ; the frenzied held as strong, the worst as 
best. 

3. For soul, and all concerning it, — whereby 
it doth presume that either it hath been born 
deathless, or that it will attain to deathlessness, 
according to the argument I have set forth for 
you, — [all this] will be considered not only 
food for sport,^ but even vanity. 

Nay, [if ye will] believe me, the penalty of 
death shall be decreed to him who shall devote 
himself to the Religion of the Mind. 

New statutes shall come into force, a novel 
law ; naught [that is] sacred, nothing pious, 
naught that is worthy of the Heaven, or Gods 
in Heaven, shall [e'er] be heard, or [even] 
mentally believed. 

4. The sorrowful departure of the Gods from 
men takes place ; bad angels ^ only stay, who 
mingled with humanity will lay their hands on 
them, and drive the wretched folk to every ill 
of recklessness, — to wars, and robberies, deceits, 

1 Gf. xii. 2 above. 

2 Nocentes angeli, — usually daimoues in our tractates ; still, as 
Lactantius (D. J., ii. 15) says that Hermes calls the daimones 
" evil angels " (ayyeXovs 7rovr]pobs\ he most probably took it from 
the Greek^original of our sermon. 

Hosted by Google 



356 THRICE- GREATEST HERMES 

and all those things that are opposed to the 
souFs nature.^ 

Then shall the Earth no longer hold together ; 
the Sea no longer shall be sailed upon ; nor 
shall the Heaven continue with the Courses of 
the Stars, nor the Star- course in Heaven. 

The voice of every God ^ shall cease in the 
[Great] Silence that no one can break ; the 
fruits of Earth shall rot ; nay, Earth no longer 
shall bring forth ; and Air itself shall faint in 
that sad listlessness. 

XXVI 

L This, when it comes, shall be the World's 
old age, impiety, — irregularity, and lack of 
rationality in all good things. 

And when these things all come to pass, 
Asclepius, — then He, [our] Lord and Sire, God 
First in power, and Ruler of the One God 
[Visible],^ in check of crime, and calling error 
back from the corruption of all things unto 
good manners and to deeds spontaneous with 
His Will (that is to say God's Goodness), — 
ending all ill, by either washing it away with 
water-flood, or burning it away with fire, or 
by the means of pestilent diseases, spread 

1 Cf. G. m, X. (xi.) 21. 

2 Omnis vox divina ; or, perhaps, the " whole Word of God." 

3 That is, Cosmos. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 357 

throughout all hostile lands, — God will recall 
the Cosmos to its ancient form^; so that the 
World itself shall seem meet to be worshipped 
and admired ; and God, the Maker and Restorer 
of so vast a work, be sung by the humanity 
who shall be then, with ceaseless heraldings of 
praise and [hymns of] blessing. 

2. For this [Re-] birth of Cosmos is the making 
new ^ of all good things, and the most holy and 
most pious bringing-back again of Nature's self, 
by means of a set course of time, — of Nature, 
which was without beginning, and which is 
without an end. For that God's Will hath no 
beginning ; and, in that 'tis the same and as it 
is, it is without an end. 

Asc. Because God's Nature's the Determina- 
tion ^ of the Will. Determination is the Highest 
Good ; is it not so. Thrice-greatest one ? 

1 The above passage is cited in the original Greek by Lactantius 
(D. J., vii. 8) as from the " Perfect Sermon " of Hermes. As we 
might expect from what had been already said on this subject, 
it differs from our Latin translation, and runs as follows : 

"Now when these things shall be as I have said, Asclepius, 
then will [our] Lord and Sire, the God and Maker of the First 
and the One God, look down on what is done, and making firm 
His Will, that is the Good, against disorder, — recalling error, 
and cleaning out the bad, either by washing it away with water- 
flood, or burning it away with swiftest fire, or forcibly expelling 
it with war and famine, — will bring again His Cosmos to its 
former state, and so achieve its Restoration." 

2 Gf. a. H., iii. (iv.) 1. 

3 Consilium — ^ovKi}. 



Hosted by Google 



358 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

3. Tris. Asclepius, Will is Determination's 
child ; nay, willing in itself comes from the Will. 

Not that He willeth aught desiring it ; for 
that He is the Fullness of all things, and wills 
what things He has. 

He thus wills all good things, and has all that 
He wills. Nay, rather, He doth think and will 
all good. 

This, then, is God ; the World of Good's His 
Image 

XXVII 

1. Asc. [Is Cosmos] good, Thrice-greatest one ? 

Tris. ['Tis] good,^ as I will teach thee, 
Asclepius. 

For just as God is the Apportioner and Steward 
of good things to all the species, or [more cor- 
rectly] genera, which are in Cosmos, — that is to 
say, of Sense,^ and Soul, and Life, — so Cosmos 
is the giver and bestower of all things which 
seem unto [us] mortals good ;— that is to say, the 
alternation of its parts, of seasonable fruits, 
birth, growth, maturity, and things like these. 

And for this cause God doth transcend the 
height of highest Heaven, extending everywhere, 
and doth behold all things on every side. 

1 This seems b> formal contradiction of G. H., x. (xi.) 10, but is 
not really so. 

2 Meaning higher sense, presumably ; reading senst(,s for sensibus. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 359 

2. Beyond the Heaven starless Space doth 
stretch, stranger to every thing possessed of 
body. 

The Dispensator who's between the Heaven 
and Earth, is Ruler of the Space which we call 
Zeus [Above]. 

The Earth and Sea is ruled by Zeus Below ^ ; 
he is the Nourisher of mortal lives, and of fruit- 
bearing [trees]. 

It is by reason of the powers of all of these ^ 
that fruits, and trees, and earth, grow green. 

The powers and energies of [all] the other 
[Gods] will be distributed through all the things 
that are. 

3. Yea, they who rule the earth shall be dis- 
tributed [through all the lands], and [finally] be 
gathered in a state,^ — at top of Egypt's upper 
part,*~-which shall be founded towards the set- 
ting sun, and to which all the mortal race shall 
speed. 

Asc, But now, just at this moment, where 
are they, Thrice-greatest one ? 

Tris, They're gathered in a very large com- 

1 Jufiter Plutonius. Menard suggests ^^ Zeus souterrain 
(Sarapis ?) " ; the original was probably Zeus Aidoneus. 

2 It is not clear who " these " are ; perhaps all that have so far 
been mentioned, but this does not seem satisfactory. Doubtless 
the Latin translation is, as usual, at fault. 

^ Or city. ^ In summo Mgypti initio. 

Hosted by Google 



360 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

munity/ upon the Libyan Hill.^ And now 
enough concerning this hath been declared. 

4. [X. M.] But now the question as to death- 
lessness or as to death must be discussed. 

The expectation and the fear of death torture 
the multitude, who do not know True Eeason. 

Now death is brought about by dissolution 
of the body, wearied out with toil, and of the 
number, when complete, by which the body's 
members are arranged into a single engine for 
the purposes of life. The body dies, when it 
no longer can support the life - powers ^ of a 
man. 

This, then, is death, — the body's dissolution, 
and the disappearance of corporeal sense. "^ 

As to this death anxiety is needless. But 
there's another [death] which no man can 

1 Givitate. 

2 In monte Lihyco ; lit. on a (or the) Libycan, or Libyan or 
African Hill or Mount. Compare with this xxxvii, below. 

^ Vitalia. 

4 This passage is quoted in the original Greek by Stobaeus, 
Florilegium, cxx. 27 (G. iii. 464 ; M. iv. 105, 106 ; Pat. 45, under 
title " Death"), under the heading " Of Hermes from the [Sermons] 
to Asclepius." It runs as follows : 

" Now must we speak of death. For death affrights the many 
as the greatest of all ills, in ignorance of fact. Death is the dis- 
solution of the toiling frame. For when the 'number' of the 
body's joints becomes complete,— the basis of the body's jointing 
being number, — that body dies ; [that is,] when it no longer can 
support the man. And this is death, — the body's dissolution and 
the disappearance of corporeal sense." 

The directness and the sturdy vigour of the Greek original has 
clearly lost much in the rhetorical paraphrasing of the Latin 
translator. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 361 

escape/ but which the ignorance and unbelief of 
man think little of. 

5. Asc. What is it, Thrice-greatest one, that 
men know nothing of, or disbelieve that it can be ? 

Tris. So, lend thy ear, Asclepius ! 



XXVIII 

1. When, [then,] the souFs departure from 
the body shall take place, — then shall the judg- 
ment and the weighing of its merit pass into its 
highest daimon's power. ^ 

And when he sees it pious is and just, — he 
suffers it to rest in spots appropriate to it. 

But if he find it soiled with stains of evil 
deeds, and fouled with vice, — he drives it from 
Above into the Depths, and hands it o'er to 
warring hurricanes and vortices of Air, of Fire, 
and Water. ^ 

1 Necessaria. 2 (y; a K, x. (xi.) 21. 

2 The substance of these two sentences is contained in a 
" quotation " from the Greek by J. Laurentius Lydus, De Mensibus, 
iv. 149 (Wiinsch, 16*7, 15) : "According to the Egyptian Hermes 
who, in what is called * The Perfect Sermon,' says as follows : 
' But such souls as transgress the norm of piety, when they do 
leave their body, are handed over to the daimones and carried 
downwards through the air, cast forth as from a sling into the zones 
of fire and hail, which poets call Pyriphlegethon and Tartarus.' " 
That this is a "quotation," however, I doubt very much, for if 
we compare it with D. M., iv. 31 (W. 90, 24), which very faintly 
echoes the teaching of our chaps, iv., v., xxvii., we shall find that 



Hosted by Google 



362 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

2. 'Twixt Heaven and Earth, npon the waves 
of Cosmos, is it dragged in contrary directions, 
for ever racked with ceaseless pains ^ ; so that 
in this its deathless nature doth afflict the 
soul, in that because of its unceasing sense, it 
hath the yoke of ceaseless torture set upon its 
neck. 

Know, then, that we should dread, and be 

Tartarus and Pyriphlegetlion are entirely due to Laurentius 
himself. The passage runs as follows : 

" For the Egyptian Hermes, in his Sermon called Perfect, says 
that the Avenging of the daimones, being present in matter itself, 
chastise the human part [of us] according as it has deserved ; 
while the Purifying ones confined to the air purify the souls 
after death that are trying to soar aloft, [conducting them] round 
the haily and fiery zones of the air, which the poets and Plato 
himself in the Phcedo call Tartarus and Pyriphlegethon ; while 
the Saving ones again, stationed in the lunar space, save the souls." 
Cf. Ex. ix. 6. 

^ Menard here quotes a couple of lines from Empedocles (c. 
494-434 B.C.), cited by Plutarch, but without giving any reference. 
They are from the famous passage beginning ecmy avdy Ktis xpVf^a. 
K,r.K, (369-382), of which the following is Fairbanks' translation. 
See Fairbanks (A.), The First Philosophers of Greece (London, 
1898), p. 205 : 

" There is an utterance of Necessity, an ancient decree of the 
Gods, eternal, sealed fast with broad oaths : Whenever any one 
defiles his body sinfully with bloody gore or perjures himself in 
regard to wrongdoing, — one of those spirits who are heir to long 
life (daifiooJ/, o'ire fiaKpaicoi/es XcXdxacri ^io7o), — thrice ten thousand 
seasons shall he wander apart from the blessed, being born mean- 
while in all sorts of mortal forms ((pvofi^vov ■jravro'ia 5m xP^Vou 
iXBea dv7]rcov) changing one bitter path of life for another. For 
mighty Air pursues him Seaward, and Sea spews him forth on 
the threshold of Earth, and Earth casts him into the rays of the 
unwearied Sun, and Sun into the eddies of Air : one receives 
him from the other, and all hate him. One of these now am I 
too, a fugitive from the gods and a wanderer, at the mercy of 
raging Strife." 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 363 

afraid, and [ever] be upon our guard, lest we 
should be entangled in these [toils]. 

For those who do not now believe, will after 
their misdeeds be driven to believe, by facts not 
words, by actual sufferings of punishment and 
not by threats. 

3. Asc, The faults of men are not, then, 
punished, Thrice-greatest one, by law of man 
alone ? 

Tris. In the first place, Asclepius, all things 
on Earth must die. 

Further, those things which live by reason of 
a body, and which do cease from living by 
reason of the same, — all these, according to the 
merits of this life, or its demerits, find due 
[rewards or] punishments. 

[And as to punishments] they're all the more 
severe, if in their life [their misdeeds] chance to 
have been hidden, till their death.^ For [then] 
they will be made full conscious of all things 
by the divinity, just as they are, according to 
the shades of punishment allotted to their crimes. 

^ Gf. the Vision of Thespesius (Aridaeus) in Plutarch, De Sera 
Numinis Vindicta : " Thus he had to see that the shades of 
notorious criminals who had been punished in earth-life were 
not so hardly dealt with . . . ; whereas those who had passed their 
lives in undetected vice, under cloak and show of virtue, were 
hemmed in by the retributory agents, and forced with labour and 
pain to turn their souls inside out." 



Hosted by Google 



364 THRICI^OREATEST HERMES 

XXIX 

1. Asc. And these deserve [still] greater 
punishments, Thrice-greatest one? 

Tris, [Assuredly;] for those condemned by 
laws of man do lose their life by violence, so 
that [all] men may see they have not yielded 
up their soul to pay the debt of nature, but 
have received the penalty of their deserts. 

Upon the other hand, the righteous man finds 
his defence in serving God and deepest piety. 
For God doth guard such men from every ill.^ 

2. Yea, He who is the Sire of all, [our] Lord, 
and who alone is all, doth love to show Himself 
to all. 

It is not by the place where he may be, nor 
by the quality which he may have, nor by the 
greatness which he may possess, but by the 
mind's intelligence alone, that He doth shed 
His light on man, — [on him] who shakes the 
clouds of Error from his soul, and sights the 
brilliancy of Truth, ^ mingling himself with the 
All-sense of the Divine Intelligence ; through 
love^ of which he wins his freedom from that 
part of him o'er which Death rules, and has the 

1 Compare the Fragment quoted in Greek by Lactantius, D. L, 
ii. 15, and by Cyril, G. /., iv. 130. 

^ Of. xiii. (xiv.) 7-9, Comment. ^ (Jf. xii. 3 above. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 365 

seed of the assurance of his future Deathlessness 
implanted in him. 

3. This, then, is how the good will differ from 
the bad. Each several one will shine in piety, 
in sanctity, in prudence, in worship, and in 
service of [our] God, and see True Eeason, as 
though [he looked at it] with [corporal] eyes; 
and each will by the confidence of his belief 
excel all other men, as by its light the Sun the 
other stars. ^ 

For that it is not so much by the greatness 
of his light as by his holiness and his divinity, 
the Sun himself lights up the other stars.^ 

Yea, [my] Asclepius, thou should'st regard him 
as the second God,^ ruling all things, and giving 
light to all things living in the Cosmos, whether 
ensouled or unensouled. 

For if the Cosmos is a living thing, and if it 
has been, and it is, and will be ever-living, — 
naught in the Cosmos is subject to death. 

For of an ever-living thing, it is [the same] 
of every part which is ; [that is,] that 'tis 
[as ever-living] as it is [itself]; and in the 
World itself [which is] for everyone, and at the 
self-same time an ever-living thing of life, — in 
it there is no place for death/ 

5. And so he ^ should be the full store of 

1 Astris. 2 Stellas. ^ Cf. 0. H., xvi. 5. fF. 

^ The text of this paragraph is very corrupt. 



^ That is, the Sun. 



Hosted by Google 



366 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

life and deathlessness ; if that it needs must be 
that he should live for ever. 

And so the Sun, just as the Cosmos, lasts for 
aye. So is he, too, for ever ruler of [all] vital 
powers, or of [our] whole vitality ; he is their 
ruler, or the one who gives them out. 

God, then, is the eternal ruler of all living 
things, or vital functions, that are in the World. 
He is the everlasting giver- forth of Life itself.^ 

Once for all [time] He hath bestowed Life on 
all vital powers ; He further doth preserve them 
by a law that lasts for evermore, as I will [now] 
explain. 

XXX 

1. For in the very Life of the Eternity^ is 
Cosmos moved ; and in the very Bverlastingness '^ 
of Life [itself] is Cosmic Space/ 

On which account it^ shall not stop at any 
time, nor shall it be destroyed ; for that its very 
Kself is palisaded^ round about, and bound to- 
gether as it were, by Living's Sempiternity. 

^ See Comment on G. H., xvi. 17. 

'^ Mternitatis, doubtless cdSivos in the original Greek, — that is, 
the ^Eon ; c/. x. 2 above. For the general iEon-doctrine, see chap, 
xi. in the Prolegomena, and xxxii, 1 below. 

^^ jEternitate ; ^on again. 

^ Lit. the Space of Cosmos ; cf. xv. 1 above. ^ Sc. Cosmos. 

^ Gircumvallatus et quasi constrictus. Compare with this the 
idea of the Horos or Boundary in the seonology of "Them of 
Valentinus," as set forth by Hippolytus (Philosophumena^ vi. 31) : 

" Moreover that the formlessness of the Abortion should finally 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 367 

Cosmos is [thus] Life-giver unto all that 
are in it, and is the Space of all that are in 
governance beneath the Sun. 

The motion of the Cosmos in itself consisteth 
of a two-fold energy. 'Tis vivified itself from 
the without by the Eternity/ and vivifies all 
things that are within, making all different, 
by numbers and by times, fixed and appointed 
[for them]. 

2. Now Time's distinguished on the Earth by 
quality of air, by variation of its heat and cold ; 
in Heaven by the returnings of the stars to the 
same spots, the revolution of their course in 
Time. 

And while the Cosmos is the home ^ of Time,^ 
it is kept green [itself] by reason of Time's course 
and motion. 

Time, on the other hand, is kept by regulation. 
Order and Time effect renewal of all things which 
are in Cosmos by means of alternation. 

3. [XL M.] All things, then, being thus, 

never again make itself visible to the perfect iEons, tlie Father 
Himself also sent forth the additional emanation of a single ^on, 
the Cross [or Stock, rhv a-TavpSv], which being created great, as 
[the creature] of the great and perfect Father, and emanated to 
be the Guard and Wall of protection [lit. Paling or Stockade — 
XCLpdtcoDjua, the Roman vallum'] of the ^ons, constitutes the 
Boundary ('6pos) of the Pleroma, holding the thirty iEons together 
within itself. For these [thirty] are they which form the divine 
creation." See F. F, F, p. 342. 

1 That is, the Mon. ^ Beceptaculum. 

3 Of. a. H., xi. (xii.) 2. 

Hosted by Google 



368 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

there's nothing stable, nothing fixed, nothing 
immoveable, of things that are being born, in 
Heaven or on the Earth. 

Immoveable ^ [is] God alone, and rightly [He] 
alone ; for He Himself is in Himself, and by 
Himself, and round Himself, completely full 
and perfect. 

He is His own immoveable stability. Nor by 
the pressure of some other one can He be moved, 
nor in the space [of anyone], 

4. For in Him are all [spaces], and He Him- 
self alone is in them all ; unless someone should 
venture to assert that God's own motion s in 
Eternity^; nay, rather, it is just Immoveable 
Eternity itself, back into which the motion of 
all times is funded, and out of which the motion 
of all times takes its beginning, 

XXXI 

1, God, then, hath [ever] been unchanging,^ 
and ever, in like fashion, with Himself hath 
the Eternity consisted, — having within itself 
Cosmos ingenerate, which we correctly call 
[God] Sensible.^ 

Of that [transcendent] Deity this Image ^ hath 
been made, — Cosmos the imitator of Eternity. 

^ Tliat is, changeless. ^ That is, again, in the Mon. 

•' Stabilis. * (y, viii. 1 above. 

-'■' Of. X. 3 above. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 369 

Time, further, hath the strength and nature 
of its own stability, in spite of its being in 
perpetual motion, — from its necessity of [ever] 
from itself reverting to itself. 

2. And so, although Eternity is stable, motion- 
less, and fixed, still, seeing that the movement 
of [this] Time (which is subject to motion) is 
ever being recalled into Eternity, — and for that 
reason Time's mobility is circular, — it comes to 
pass that the Eternity itself, although in its own 
self, is motionless, [yet] on account of Time, in 
which it is — (and it ^5 in it), — it seems to be in 
movement as all motion. 

So that it comes to pass, that both Eternity's 
stability becometh moved, and Time's mobility 
becometh stable. 

So may we ever hold that God Himself is 
moved into Himself by [ever-] same transcendency 
of motion.^ 

For that stability is in His vastness motion 
motionless ; for by His vastness is [His] law 
exempt from change.^ 

3. That, then, which so transcends, which is 
not subject unto sense, [which is] beyond all 
bounds, [and which] cannot be grasped, — That 

1 Eadem immoMUtate, The whole is an endeavour to at-one 
the "Platonic" root-opposites "same" {rabrSv) and "other" 
{edr€pov) — the "Self" and the "not-Self," sat-asat, atmdndtman, 
of the Upanishads. 

2 Lit. motionless. 

VOL. 11. 24 

Hosted by Google 



370 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

transcends all appraisement; That cannot be 
supported, nor borne up, nor can it be tracked 
out/ 

For where, and when, and whence, and how, 
and what, He is, — is known to none."^ For He's 
borne up by [His] supreme stability, and His 
stability is in Himself [alone], — w^hether [this 
mystery] be God, or the Eternity, or both, or 
one in other, or both in either. 

4. And for this cause, just as Eternity tran- 
scends the bounds of Time ; so Time [itself], in that 
it cannot have bounds set to it by number^ or by 
change, or by the period of the revolution of 
some second [kind of Time], — -is of the nature 
of Eternity. 

Both, then, seem boundless, both eternal. 
And so stability, though naturally fixed, yet 
seeing that it can sustain the things that are in 
motion, — because of all the good it does by 
reason of its firmness, deservedly doth hold the 
chiefest place. 

XXXII 

1. The principals of all that are, are, therefore, 
God and ^on.^ 

The Cosmos, on the other hand, in that 'tis 
moveable, is not a principal/ 

^ Of, G. H.y xiii. (xiv.) 6 ; also xxxiv. 3 below. 
^ Compare the Hymn in G. JT., v. (vi.) 10, 11. 
■' Or Eternity. ^ Lit. does not hold the chief place. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 371 

For its mobility exceeds its own stability by 
treating the immoveable fixation as the law of 
everlasting movement. 

The Whole Sense/ then, of the Divinity, 
though like [to Him] in its own self immove- 
able, doth set itself in motion within its own 
stability. 

'Tis holy, incorruptible, and everlasting, and 
if there can be any better attribute to give to it, 
['tis its], — Eternity of God supreme, in Truth 
itself subsisting, the Fullness of all things, of 
Sense, and of the whole of Science, consisting, 
so to say, with God.^ 

2. The Cosmic Sense is the container^ of all 
sensibles, [all] species, and [all] sciences. 

The human [higher sense consists] in the 
retentiveness of memory, in that it can recall 
all things that it hath done. 

1 a/. § 3 below. 

2 Gonsistensy ut ita dixerim, cum deo. Is there possibly here 
underlying the Latin consistens cum deo the expanded form of the 
peculiar and elliptical irphs rhv dchy of the Proem to the Fourth 
Gospel (the apud deum of the Vulgate) ? This was explained by 
the Gnostic Ptolemy, somewhere about the middle of the second 
century, as " at-one-ment with God," in his exegesis of the opening 
words, which he glosses as : " The at-one-ment with each other, 
together with their at-one-ment with the Father" (^ vphs awijXovs 
afji^a Kal 7] irphs rhv irarcpa eVwtns). So that the first verse of the 
Proem would run : '^ In the Beginning was the Logos, and the 
Logos was (one) with God ; yea, the Logos was God. He was in 
the Beginning (one) with God" — 1 consistens cum deo. See 
Irenseus, Ref. Om, Hcer., I. viii. 5 -— Stieren (Leipzig ,• 1853), i. 102 ; 
also F. F. F., p. 388. 

^ Or receptacle. 

Hosted by Google 



372 THRICE-GKEATEST HERMES 

For only just as far as the man-animal has the 
divinity of Sense ^ descended ; in that God hath 
not willed the highest Sense divine should be 
commingled with the rest of animals ; lest it 
should blush for shame ^ on being mingled with 
the other lives. 

For whatsoever be the quality, or the extent, 
of the intelligence of a man's Sense, the whole of 
it consists in power of recollecting what is past. 

It is through his retentiveness of memory, 
that man s been made the ruler of the earth. 

3. Now the intelligence of Nature ^ can be won 
by quality of Cosmic Sense, — from all the things 
in Cosmos which sense can perceive. 

Concerning [this'] Eternity, which is the second 
[one],-™- the Sense of this we get from out the 
senses' Cosmos, and we discern its quality [by 
the same means]. 

But the intelligence of Quality [itself], the 
''Whatness" of the Sense of God Supreme, is 
Truth alone, — of which [pure] Truth not even 
the most tenuous sketch, or [faintest] shade, in 
Cosmos is discerned. 

For where is aught [of it] discerned by 
measurement of times, — wherein are seen un- 
truths, and births [-and-deaths], and errors ? 

^ That is, the divine or higher sense, connected with memory 
in its beginnings and with the Platonic "reminiscence" (the 
Pythagorean mathesis) in its maturity. 

-^ Gf. a H., X. (xi.) 19. 3 Tj^at is, Cosmos. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 373 

4. Thou seest, then, Asclepius, on what we are 
[already] founded, with what we occupy our- 
selves, and after what we dare to strive. 

But unto Thee, God most high, I give my 
thanks, in that Thou hast enlightened me with 
Light to see Divinity ! 

And ye, Tat, Asclepius and Ammon, in 
silence hide the mysteries divine within the 
secret places of your hearts,^ and breathe no 
word of their concealment*! 

5. Now in our case the intellect doth dijSTer 
from the sense in this, — that by the mind's 
extension intellect can reach to the intelligence 
and the discernment of the quality of Cosmic 
Sense. 

The Intellect of Cosmos, on the other hand, 
extends to the Eternity and to the Gnosis of the 
Gods who are above itself.^ 

And thus it comes to pass for men, that we 
perceive the things in Heaven, as it were through 
a mist, as far as the condition of the human 
sense allows. 

'Tis true that the extension [of the mind] 
which we possess for the survey of such tran- 
scendent things, is very narrow [still] ; but [it 

1 Lit. breasts. 2 (y (^ jj ^ xiii. (xiv.) 22. 

•^ The super-cosmic Gods, or beings of the Intelligible Cosmos ; 
tbe ^ons of the Gnostics. 

Hosted by Google 



374 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

will be] most ample when it shall perceive with 
the felicity of [true] self-consciousness. 



XXXIII 

1. [XIL M.] Now on the subject of a " Void," ^ 
—which seems to almost all a thing of vast 
importance, — I hold the following view. 

Naught is, naught could have been, naught 
ever will be void. 

For all the members of the Cosmos are com- 
pletely full ; so that Cosmos itself is full and 
[quite] complete with bodies, diverse in quality 
and form, possessing each its proper kind and 
size. 

And of these bodies — one's greater than 
another, or another's less than is another, by 
difference of strength and size. 

Of course, the stronger of them are more 
easily perceived, just as the larger [are]. The 
lesser ones, however, or the more minute, can 
scarcely be perceived, or not at all — -those which 
we know are things [at all] by sense of touch 
alone. 

Whence many come to think they are not 
bodies, and that there are void spaces, — which 
is impossible. 

2. So also [for the Space] which is called 

1 Gf. a H., xi. (xil). 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 375 

Extra-cosmic, — if there be any (which I do not 
believe), — [then] is it filled by Him with things 
Intelligible, that is things of like nature with 
His own Divinity ; just as this Cosmos which is 
called the Sensible, is fully filled with bodies 
and with animals, consonant with its proper 
nature and its quality ; — [bodies] the proper 
shape of which we do not all behold, but [see] 
some large beyond their proper measure, some 
very small ; either because of the great space 
which lies between [them and ourselves], or else 
because our sight is dull ; so that they seem to 
us to be minute, or by the multitude are thought 
not to exist at all, because of their too great 
tenuity. 

I mean the daimones, who, I believe, have 
their abode with us, and heroes, who abide 
between the purest part of air above us and 
the earth, — where it is ever cloudless, and no 
[movement from the] motion of a single star 
[disturbs the peace]. 

3. Because of this, Asclepius, thou shalt call 
nothing void ; unless thou wilt declare of what 
that's void, which thou dost say is void; — for 
instance, void of fire, of water, or things like 
to these. 

For if it should fall out, that it should seem 
that anything is able to be void of things like 
these, — though that which seemeth void be little 

Hosted by Google 



376 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

or be big, it still cannot be void of spirit and 
of air. 

XXXIV 

1, In like way must we also talk concerning 
'' Space/' •*■ — a term which by itself is void of 
'' sense." ^ 

For Space seems what it is from that of which 
it is [the space]. For if the qualifying ^ word is 
cut away, the sense is maimed. 

Wherefore we shall [more] rightly say the 
space of water, space of fire, or [space] of things 
like these. 

For as it is impossible that aught be void ; so 
is Space also in itself not possible to be dis- 
tinguished what it is. 

For if you postulate a space without that 
[thing] of which it is [the space], it will appear 
to be void space, — which I do not believe exists 
in Cosmos. 

2. If nothing, then, is void, so also Space by 
its own self does not show what it is unless you 
add to it lengths, breadths [and depths], — just 
as you add the proper marks* unto men's 
bodies. 

These things, then, being thus, Asclepius, and 
ye who are with [him], — know the Intelligible 

^ Gf. XV. 1 above. ^ Intelledu caret. 

'^ Prifwipale, — lit. principal. 

* Signa ; characteristics, presumably. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 377 

Cosmos (that is, [the one] which is discerned by 
contemplation of the mind alone) is bodiless ; 
nor can aught corporal be mingled with its 
nature, — [by corporal I mean] what can be 
known by quality, by quantity, and numbers. 
For there is nothing of this kind in that. 

3. This Cosmos, then, which is called Sensible, 
is the receptacle of all things sensible, — of species, 
qualities, or bodies. 

But not a single one of these can quicken 
without God. For God is all, and by Him [are] 
all things, and all [are] of His Will. 

For that He is all Goodness, Fitness, Wisdom, 
unchangeable, — that can be sensed and under- 
stood by His own self alone. 

Without Him naught hath been, nor is, nor 
will be. 

4. For all things are from Him, in Him, and 
through Him, — both multitudinous qualities, and 
mighty quantities, and magnitudes exceeding 
every means of measurement, and species of all 
forms ; — which things, if thou should'st under- 
stand, Asclepius, thou wilt give thanks to God. 

And if thou should'st observe it ^ as a whole, 
thou wilt be taught, by means of the True 
Reason, that Cosmos in itself is knowable to 
sense,^ and that all things in it are wrapped 

1 Sc. the Cosmos. 

'^ Sensihilem ; probably referring to the sensus par excellence ; 
that is, the higher or cosmic sense. 

Hosted by Google 



378 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

as in a vesture by that Higher Cosmos ^ [spoken 
of above], 

XXXV 

1. Now every single class of living thing,^ 
Asclepius, of whatsoever kind, or it be mortal 
or be rational, whether it be endowed with soul, 
or be without one, just as each has its class,^ so 
does each several [class] have images of its own 
class. 

And though each separate class of animal has 
in it every form of its own class, still in the 
selfsame [kind of] form the units differ from 
each other. 

And so although the class of men is of one 
kind, so that a man can be distinguished by his 
[general] look, still individual men within the 
sameness of their [common] form do differ from 
each other. 

2. For the idea * which is divine, is bodiless, 
and is whatever is grasped by the mind. 

So that although these two,^ from which the 
general form and body are derived, are bodiless, 
it is impossible that any single form should be 
produced exactly like another, — because the 

1 That is, the Intelligible Cosmos ; presumably the Mon. 

2 Animalium. s Qqyius. 
^ Species ; meaning here apparently the genus or class. 

^ Apparently the idea and mind. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 379 

moments of the hours and points of inclination 
[when they're born] are different. 

But they are changed as many times as there 
are moments in the hour of that revolving Circle 
in which abides that God whom we have called 
All-formed.^ 

3. The species,^ then, persists, as frequently 
producing from itself as many images, and as 
diverse, as there are moments in the Cosmic 
Revolution,^ — a Cosmos which doth [ever] change 
in revolution. But the idea * [itself] is neither 
changed nor turned. 

So are the forms of every single genus 
permanent, [and yet] dissimilar in the same 
[general] form. 

XXXVI 

1. Asc. And does the Cosmos have a species, 
Thrice-greatest one ? 

Tris, Dost not thou see, Asclepius, that all 
has been explained to thee as though to one 
asleep ? 

For what is Cosmos, or of what doth it 
consist, if not of all things born ? 

This,^ then, you may assert of heaven, and 

1 Of. C. J?., xi. (xii.) 16 ; and C jEf., xvi. 15 ; also xix. 3 above, 
and xxxvi. 2 below. 

2 That is, apparently, tbe " divine species," or idea, tbe genus. 
^ Of. xl. 3 below. * Species. 
5 That is, that there are genera embracing many species. 

Hosted by Google 



380 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

earth, and elements. For though the other 
things possess more frequent change of species, 
[still even] heaven , [by its] becoming moist, or 
dry, or cold, or hot, or clear, or dull, [all] in 
one kind^ of heaven, — these [too] are frequent 
changes into species.^ 

2. Earth hath, moreover, always many changes 
in its species; — both when she brings forth 
fruits, and when she also nourishes her bringings- 
forth with the return of all the fruits ; the 
diverse qualities and quantities of air, its 
stoppings and its Sowings ^ ; and before all the 
qualities of trees, of flowers, and berries, of 
scents, of savours — species. 

Fire [also] brings about most numerous con- 
versions, and divine. For these are all-formed 
images of Sun and Moon * ; they're, as it were, 
like our own mirrors, which with their emulous 
resplendence give us back the likenesses of our 
own images. 

XXXVII 

1. [XIII. M.] But' now let this sufiice 
about such things ; and let us once again return 

1 Specie. 

2 The construction is here confused and elliptical. 
^ This clause seems to be out of place. 

'^ Presumably of the ideal Sun and Moon ; for " all-formed," 
cf. XXXV. 2 above. 

^ The first six paragraphs of this chapter are quoted in Latin, 
with two slight verbal variants, by Augustine, I)e Civitate Deiy 
xxiv., xxvi. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 381 

to man and reason, — gift divine, from which 
man has the name of rational animal. 

Less to be wondered at are the things said 
of man, — though they are [still] to be admired. 
Nay, of all marvels that which wins our wonder 
[most] is that man has been able to find out 
the nature of the Gods and bring it into play. 

2. Since, then, our earliest progenitors were 
in great error,^ — seeing they had no rational 
faith about the Gods, and that they paid no 
heed unto their cult and holy worship, — they 
chanced upon an art whereby they made Gods 
[for themselves].^ 

To this invention they conjoined a power that 
suited it, [derived] from cosmic nature ; and 
blending these together, since souls they could 
not make, [they set about] evoking daimons' 
souls or those of angels ; [and thus] attached 
them to their sacred images and holy mysteries, 
so that the statues should, by means of these, 
possess the powers of doing good and the 
reverse. 

3. For thy forebear, Asclepius, the first dis- 
coverer of medicine, to whom there is a temple 

1 Menard thinks lie can distinguish the hand of a Christian 
scribe in this sentence, which he translates with great freedom, 
" qui ^egaraient dans Vincreduliter A more careful translation, 
however, does not seem to favour this hypothesis. Hermes says 
simply that primitive mankind were ignorant of the Gods, and 
so in error. 

2 That is, images. Gf. xxx. above ; and G. H.^ xvii. 

Hosted by Google 



382 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

hallowed on Libya's Mount/ hard by the shore 
of crocodiles,^ in which his cosmic man ^ reposes, 
that is to say his body ; for that the rest 
[of him], or better still, the whole (if that a 
man when wholly [plunged] in consciousness 
of life,* be better), hath gone back home to 
heaven, — still furnishing, [but] now by his 
divinity, the sick with all the remedies which 
he was wont in days gone by to give by art of 
medicine. 

4. Hermes, which is the name of my forebear, 
whose home is in a place called after him,^ doth 
aid and guard all mortal [men] who come to him 
from every side.^ 

As for Osiris [spouse] ; how many are the 
blessings that we know Isis bestows when she's 
propitious ; how many does she injure when she's 
wrath ! 

For that the terrene and the cosmic Gods are 

^ Cf. xxvii. 3 above. 

^ In monte Libyce circa littus crocodilorum. Does this refer to 
a Crocodilopolis {KpoKo^dXoov ttSms, Ptol., iv. 5, § 65) ? And if so, 
to which of these cities, for there were several ? The best known 
of these is Arsinoe in the Faiyyiim ; but there was also another 
down south, in the Thebaid, on the W. bank of the Nile, lat. 
25° 6', of which remains are still visible at Embeshanda, on the 
verge of the Libyan desert. See Smith's Diet, of Qh. and Rom. 
Geography (London, 1878), sub voc. 

2 Presumably his mummy. 

^ In sensu vitm. 

^ Hermopolis therefore (compare Lact., B. Institt., i. 6) ; that 
is to say, Hermopolis Magna (Epixov Tr^xts /xeydxr}), the modern 
Eshmun, on the left bank of the Nile, about lat. 2T 4'. 

^ To get wisdom. Augustine's quotation ends here. 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 383 

easily enraged, in that they are created and 
composed of the two natures. 

5. And for this cause it comes to pass that 
these are called the *' sacred animals" by the 
Egyptians, and that each several state ^ gives 
service to the souls of those whose souls have 
been made holy,^ while they were still alive ; so 
that [the several states] are governed by the 
laws [of their peculiar sacred animals], and called 
after their names. 

It is because of this, Asclepius, those [animals] 
which are considered by some states deserving 
of their worship, in others are thought otherwise ; 
and on account of this the states of the Egyptians 
wage with each other frequent war. 

XXXVIII 

1. Asc. And of what nature, Thrice-greatest 
one, may be the quality of those who are con- 
sidered terrene Gods ? 

Tris, It doth consist, Asclepius, of plants, 
and stones, and spices, which contain the nature 
of [their own] divinity. 

And for this cause they are delighted with 
repeated sacrifice, with hymns, and lauds, and 

1 Or city. For the animal cult of the Egyptians, see Plutarch, 
De Is. et Os.j Ixxii. ff. 

2 Or consecrated. 

Hosted by Google 



384 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

sweetest sounds, tuned to the key of Heaven's 
harmonious song.^ 

2. So that what is of heavenly nature,^ being 
drawn down into the images by means of 
heavenly use and practices, may be enabled to 
endure with joy the nature of mankind, and 
sojourn with it for long periods of time. 

Thus is it that man is the maker of the Gods. 

3. But do not, Asclepius, 1 pray thee, think 
the doings of the terrene Gods are the result of 
chance. 

The heavenly Gods dwell in the heights of 
Heaven, each filling up and watching o'er the 
rank he hath received ; whereas these Gods of 
ours,'^ each in its way, — by looking after certain 
things, foretelling others by oracles and prophecy, 
foreseeing others, and duly helping them along, 
— act as allies of men, as though they were our 
relatives and friends. 

XXXIX 

1. [XIY.M.] Asc. What part of the economy,* 
Thrice-greatest one, does the Heimarmene, or 
Fate, then occupy? For do not the celestial 
Gods rule over generals^; the terrene occupy 
particulars ? 

^ Cy. " God's song " in xiii. 2 above. 

2 Namely, the nature of the Gods. 

" The terrene Gods ; the daimones of 0. i/,, xvi. 14. 

* Rationis ; lit. reason. " Oatholicorum, 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 385 

Tris» That which we call Heimarmene, As- 
clepius, is the necessity of all things that 
are born/ bound ever to themselves with inter- 
linked enchainments. 

This, then, is either the effector of all things, 
or it is highest God, or what is made the second 
God by God Himself, — or else the discipline ^ of 
all things both in heaven and on earth, established 
by the laws of the Divine. 

2. And so these twain, Fate and Necessity, 
are bound to one another mutually by insepar- 
able cohesion.^ 

The former of them, the Heimarmene, gives 
birth to the beginnings of all things ; Necessity 
compels the end of [all] depending from these 
principals. 

On these doth Order follow, that is their 
warp-and-woof, and Time's arrangement for the 
perfecting of [all] things. For there is naught 
without the interblend of Order.* 

1 Or borne, quce geruntur, ^ Disciplina = ? gnosis. 

3 Glutino. 

* Of. J. Laurentius Lydus, De Mensihus, iv. 7 (Wtinsch, 70) ; the 
rest of tlie quotation following on what has been already quoted 
in the note to xix. 3. The Greek is either a vevj much shortened 
form or the Latin a very much expanded one, for the former 
may be translated as follows : " And Fate is also fated Activity 
(or Energy), or God Himself, or the Order that doth follow that 
Activity set over all things in the heaven and all things on the 
earth, together with Necessity. The former (Fate) gives birth to 
the very beginnings of things, the latter compels the ends also to 
come into existence. And on them there follow Order and Law, 
and there is naught that's orderless." Of. Ex. i. 15, and Ex. xi. 1. 
VOL. XL 25 



Hosted by Google 



386 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

That Cosmos ^ is made perfect in all things ; 
for Cosmos' self is vehicled ^ in Order, or totally 
consists of Order. 



XL 

1. So, then, these three, Fate, [and] Necessity, 
[and] Order, are most immediately effected by 
God's Will, who rules the Cosmos by Plis Law 
and by His Holy Reason. 

From these, accordingly, all willing or not- 
willing is altogether foreign, according to God's 
WiU.^ 

They are not moved by wrath nor swayed by 
favour, but are the instruments of the Eternal 
Reason's self-compulsion, which is [the Reason] 
of Eternity,* that never can be turned aside, or 
changed, or be destroyed. 

2. First, then, is Fate, which, as it were, by 
casting in the seed, supplies the embryo of all 
that are to be. 

Follows Necessity, whereby they all are forcibly 
compelled unto their end. 

Third, Order [comes], preserving warp-and- 
woof of [all] the things which Fate and [which] 
Necessity arrange.^ 

1 Mundus ^^GOsmoBf meaning also order in Greek. 

2 Gestatur. ^ Divinitus. * That is, the Alon. 

^ Fate thus seems to be regarded as the Creator, Order as the 
Preserver, and Necessity as the Destroyer or Regenerator. 



Hosted by Google 



THE PEKFECT SERMON 387 

This, then, is the Eternity, which neither doth 
begin nor cease to be, which, fixed by law un- 
changeable, abides in the unceasing motion of 
its course. 

3. It rises and it sets, by turns, throughout 
its limbs ^ ; so that by reason of Time's changes 
it often rises with the very limbs with which it 
[once] had set. 

For [its] sphericity, — its law of revolution,^ — 
is of this nature, that all things are so straitly 
joined to their own selves, that no one knoweth 
what is the beginning of their revolution ^ ; since 
they appear for ever all to go before and follow 
after their own selves. 

Good and bad issues,* [therefore,] are com- 
mingled in all cosmic things. 

4. [XV. M.] And now it hath been told you 
on each several point, — as man hath power [to 
tell], and God hath willed it and permitted it. 

This, then, alone remains that we should do, 
— bless God and give Him praise ; and so return 
to taking thought for body ['s comfort]. 

For now sufficiently have we been filled with 
feast of mind by our discourse on sacred things.^ 

1 Membra ; that is, parts, presumably constellations. 

2 Cf. XXXV. 3 below. 

^ Voluhilitatis ; that is, their turning into themselves ; the 
symbol of which was the serpent swallowing its tail. 
^ Evenius etfors. 
^ Of. the conclusion of C. H., xvii. 



Hosted by Google 



388 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

XLI 

1. Now when they came forth from the holy 
place/ they turned their faces towards the 
south ^ when they began their prayers to God. 

For when the sun is setting, should anyone 
desire to pray to Grod, he ought to turn him 
thitherwards ^ ; so also at the rising of the same, 
unto that spot which lies beneath the sun/ 

As they were just beginning to recite the 
prayer, Asclepius did whisper : 

[x45c.] Let us suggest to father, Tat, — what 
he did bid us do,^ — that we should say our 
prayer to God with added incense and with 
unguents. 

Whom when Thrice-greatest heard, he grew 
distressed and said : 

2. [Tris,~] Nay, nay, Asclepius; speak more 
propitious words ! For this is like to profana- 
tion of [our] sacred rites, — when thou dost pray 
to God, to offer incense and the rest 

For naught is there of which He stands in 
need, in that He is all things, or all are in Him. 

1 De adyto ; " down from," literally. 

2 This is apparently an error for south- west or west. 

2 That is, to the setting sun or the west. Of. O.K., xiii. (xiv.) 
16, Comment. 
4 Suhsolanus, lying beneath the sun ; that is to say, eastern. 
^ Cf. xxxviii. 1 above. 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 389 

But let US worship, pouring forth our thanks. 
For this is the best incense in God's sight, — 
when thanks are given to Him by men/ 

3. [We give] Thee grace, Thou highest [and] 
most excellent ! For by Thy Grace we have 
received the so great Light of Thy own Gnosis. 

holy Name, fit [Name] to be adored, 
Name unique, by which the Only God ^ is to be 
blest through worship of [our] Sire, — [of Thee] 
who deignest to afford to all a Father's piety, 
and care, and love, and whatsoever virtue is 
more sweet [than these], endowing [us] with 
sense, [and] reason, [and] intelligence; — with 
sense that we may feel Thee ; with reason that 
we may track Thee out from the appearances of 
things ^ ; with means of recognition that we may 
joy in knowing Thee. 

4. Saved by Thy Power divine, let us rejoice 
that Thou hast shown Thyself to us in all Thy 
Fullness. Let us rejoice that Thou hast deigned 
to consecrate us, [still] entombed in bodies, to 
Eternity. 

For this is the sole festival of praise worthy 
of man, — to know Thy Majesty. 

We have known Thee ; yea, by the Single 
Sense of our intelligence, we have perceived 

1 For the three preceding paragraphs, see Lact., D. J., vi. 25. 

2 The Cosmos, presumably, as the One God. 

3 Suspiaonibus ; hints, perhaps, and so phenomena. 

Hosted by Google 



390 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

Thy Light supreme, — Thou true Life of life, 
Fecund Womb that giveth birth to every 
nature ! 

5. We have known Thee, Thou completely 
filled with the Conception from Thyself of 
Universal Nature ! 

We have known Thee, Thou Eternal 
Constancy ! 

For in the whole of this our prayer in worship 
of Thy Good, this favour only of Thy Goodness 
do we crave ; — that Thou wilt keep us constant 
in our Love of knowing Thee,^ and let us ne'er 
be cut off from this kind of Life. 

With this desire we [now] betake us to [our] 
pure and fleshless meal.^ 



COMMENTARY 

The Title 

The titles in the Latin MSS. vary. The heading 
preferred by Hildebrand is " Asclepius, or a Dialogue 
of Thrice-greatest Hermes " ; while in the Bipontine 
edition, the title stands : " Thrice- greatest Hermes Con- 
cerning the Nature of the Gods ; A Sermon addressed 
to Asclepius." Menard, the French translator, prefers : 
" A Sermon of Initiation, or Asclepius." 

The treatise begins with a transparent gloss, in all 
probability originally the marginal note of some scribe, 
1 Or of Thy Gnosis. 2 Coenam, 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 391 

or student, which has improperly crept into the text. 
It runs : '' This Asclepius is my Sun-god " ; that is 
to say, apparently : " This Sermon ' Asclepius ' has 
illumined me " ; from which it is evident that the title 
lying before the scribe was " Asclepius " simply, as may 
be seen from § 2 : "It is, however, with thy name I will 
inscribe this treatise." Stobaeus, moreover, in quoting 
from the original Greek (of xxvii. 4), heads his extract 
simply, " Of Hermes from the [Sermons] to Asclepius." 

On the other hand, the Church Father Lactantius, 
writing at the beginning of the fourth century, and 
quoting from the Greek original, says twice, categorically 
(D. /., iv. 6 and vii. 8) : " Hermes in illo lihro qui \6yog 
reXeiog inscrihitur^^ ; that is, *' Hermes in the Book 
entitled 'The Perfect Sermon,' or *The Sermon of 
Initiation ' " ; while Johannes Laurentius Lydus on 
three occasions quotes from this " Perfect Sermon " of 
Hermes, and on each occasion so names it. 

I have accordingly preferred this as the main title, 
and added " The Asclepius " as an alternative. 

The Old Latin Translation and the Greek 
Original 

Of the Greek original we have quotations or 
references by Lactantius (see viii. 1 and 3; xxv. 4: 
xxvi. 1 ; xli. 2), Johannes Laurentius Lydus (see 
xix. 3 ; xxviii. 1 ; xxxix. 1, 2), and Stobaeus (see 
xxvii. 4). 

If we compare these Greek quotations with our 
Latin translation, we shall find, not only that the Latin 
is an exceedingly free rendering of the Greek, showing 
many expansions and contractions, and often missing 
the sense of the original, but also that even in Greek 
there were probably several recensions of the same text.^ 
1 See R. 195, 2. 



Hosted by Google 



392 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

Indeed, the free rendering of our translation is of 
such a nature that it is impossible to base upon it any 
certain conclusions as to the date of the original or its 
precise worth in the history of religion.^ 

That, however, our Latin translation is an ancient 
one is proved by Augustine's verbal quotations from it 
(see xxiii. 1 ; xxiii. 3-xxiv. 2 ; xxiv. 3 ; xxvii. 1-4). 
It was thus in existence about 400 a.d. at least.^ 

Tradition, however, has assigned to it a far higher 
antiquity, attributing it to no less distinguished a 
writer than Appuleius, and so referring it to the first 
half of the second century. 

This attribution has, of course, for long been 
questioned by modern criticism, and Eeitzenstein, 
though he does not discuss the subject, accepts the 
adverse verdict and refers us to a " Pseudo-Appuleius." 

Hildebrand, whose minute acquaintance with 
Appuleius' peculiar style and neologisms is a guarantee 
of his competence, has thoroughly gone into the matter ; 
and though he sums up against tradition, it is in a 
half-hearted way. The translation, if not by Appuleius, 
is at any rate in old African Latin, and there is nothing 
in the style which absolutely forbids the possibility 
of its being by the author of The Golden Ass and the 
initiate of Isis. The strongest point, other than philo- 
logical, against tradition is that Augustine does not say 
the translation was by Appuleius; but this seems to 
me to be unworthy of serious consideration. 

It is, of course, difficult to turn possibilities into 
probabilities, but I see no reason why the Greek 
original of our Sermon should not be assigned to the 

1 The so-founded opinions of Bernays and Zeller are char- 
acterized by Reitzenstein (p. 195) as of as httle value as the 
opinions which made the whole of our hterature dependent on 
New Platonism. 

'' Augustine's date is 354-430 a.d. 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 393 

earlier Hermes-Asclepian dialogues as well as to any 
others. That it was one of the most famous is evident 
by its wide quotation, and by the fact that several 
recensions of the Greek text were in circulation. 

Of the Writer and the Persons of the Dialogue 

The Latin translator retains a number of the original 
Greek technical terms, and if we could only rely on 
his translation giving us the substance of the original 
in all cases, we should be presented in several passages 
with phenomena which would persuade us that the 
writer of the original intended his readers to think he 
was an Egyptian, and that his native nomenclature 
was other than Greek, as is also the case in G. H. (xvi.). 

For instance, in vii. 2, " the man ' essential,' ^ as say 
the Greeks,'' — but this may be a gloss of the Latin 
translator. 

Again, in x. 2 : *' So that . . . ^ World ' seems most 
fitly called ' Cosmos ' in Greek," — which seems to be 
the original. 

Yet again, the '' multifarious reasoning " of xii. 3 
reminds us strongly of "the philosophizing of the 
Greeks — the noise of words," in G. H., xvi. 2. 

On the other hand, the phrase, " which we in Greek 
{grcece) believe to be the Cosmos," would seem to make 
the original author forget his Egyptian role. 

While '' its bottom ... is called in Greek A-eides," 
coupled with " in Greek they are called Hades ... in 
Latin Inferi " (xvii. 3), may be assigned to a gloss of 
the translator. 

In xxiv. 1, however, the sentence, "Dost thou not 

know, Asclepius, that Egypt is the image of the Heaven ? 

. . . This land of ours is shrine of the whole world " 

— coupled with the rest of the chapter, and Ch. xxv. 

1 Cf, G. H., xiii. (xiv.) 14 



Hosted by Google 



394 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

— could hardly have been written by a Greek. In 
xxviii. 1, moreover, the "weighing of the merit" of 
the soul is strongly Egyptian, and so with the image 
and animal-cult. 

As to the persons of the dialogue, I would suggest 
that originally the sermon was addressed to Asclepius 
alone, and that the slight narrative indications were 
added later to adapt it to wider circles. 

The chief disciple is evidently Asclepius ; he it is 
who is already " well versed in Nature," according to 
C. H., xiv. (xv.) 1 ; that is to say, he has progressed 
beyond the stage of Hearer, for he questions Hermes, 
whereas Tat does not ask questions, but listens only, 
he is "the one who is to hear" (i. 1). To them is 
added Ammon on the proposal of Asclepius; and 
Amnion is admitted on the ground that he had already 
had much 'written to him, but apparently had not yet 
been admitted to oral teaching. 

The teaching is delivered in solemn surroundings in 
the holy place or shrine (i. 2), and teacher and pupils 
constitute the '' sacred four." Hermes teaches in a 
state of exaltation; the place is filled with ''God's 
goodly presence," and ''Love Divine" instructs them, 
through Hermes' lips, in answer to the Pure and Single 
Love of Philosophy in their hearts {cf, xii. 3 ; xiv. 1). 

The same hand that wrote the warning against 
revealing the sermon to others in i. 2 also probably 
wrote : " And ye, O Tat, Asclepius and Ammon, in 
silence hide the mysteries divine within the secret 
places of your hearts, and breathe no word of their 
concealment ! " (xxxii. 4) ; he also, presumably, glossed 
"Asclepius" (xxxiv. 2) with "and ye who are with 
him," and added the naive whisper of Asclepius to 
Tat (xli. 1). 

This redactor (if our analysis is correct), moreover, 

Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 395 

was a member of a select ^ ascetic community, judging 
at any rate by his last sentence (xli. 5) ; in which case 
Ammon can hardly be equated with any King Ammon, 
but must be taken as standing for some grade of the 
community. I would suggest that this grade was similar 
to that of the Exoterici of the Pythagoreans or the outer 
circles of the Essenes, of which the members still lived 
in the world, but received instruction. In this case, 
however, the '* we " of the last sentence would have to 
be taken as referring to Asclepius and Tat, and not to 
Ammon. 

As to the dependence of our sermon on the rest of 
the literature, I find more points of contact between 
it and C, H., x. (xi), ''The Key" sermon addressed 
to Tat ; none of the references, however, which I have 
given in the notes, show any literal dependence. 

The Doctrine of the Will of God 

In the general doctrine the stress laid on the concept 
of the Will of God 2 is to be specially noticed. This 
Will seems to be almost personified, and is, of course, 
a fundamental doctrine of the Trismegistic religio- 
philosophy.^ 

In xxvi. 1 it is identified with the Goodness* of 
God, and the Nature of God.'' But what it seems to 
correspond to most nearly is the Mon or Eternity-idea 
which is set forth very clearly in xxx.-xxxii. — in fact, 
more clearly than anywhere else in the Trismegistic 

1 (Jf. for references to the " few," xxii. 1 ; xxiii. 1 ; xxxiv. 3 ; 
xl. 1. 

2 Cf. vii. 3 ; viii. 2 ; xi. 4 ; xiv. 1 ; xvi. 3 ; xix. 4 ; xx. 3 ; 
xxii. 4 ; xxv. 2 ; xxvi. 1, 2 and 3. 

3 Gf. especially G. H.^ iv. (v.) 1 ; x. (xi.) i. 

* In the Greek text of Lactantius this is " the Good." 
6 Gf. vi. 1 ; XIV. 3. 



Hosted by Google 



396 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

literature. God and ^on are the sources of all things ; 
and ^on is " the Eternity of God, in Truth itself sub- 
sisting, the Fullness of all things" (xxxii. 1). The 
Will of God is thus the ^on or Pleroma, the Wisdom, 
the Energy, the Spouse of the Supreme. 

This Will rules Cosmos with Law and Holy Eeason 
(xL); Cosmos being the Order of things involved in 
Fate and Necessity the instruments of the Divine Will.^ 

Our sermon is also characterized by the frequent 
use it makes of the terms Spirit and Sense. 

Concerning Spirit and the All-Sense 

The Spirit is evidently Cosmic Life (vi. 4 ; xxvii. 1) 
and individual life (x. 4).^ The exposition of it begins 
with xiv. 2 ; Spirit and Matter, or the Nature of the 
Cosmos (xiv. 3), are practically regarded as the Positive 
and Negative, or Masculine and Feminine Energies of 
the Divine. 

Spirit is the Kuler (xvii. 1) of all things in Cosmos 
or Nature ; it is the immediate Instrument of the Will 
of God (xvi. 3) ; and is, indeed, loosely identified with 
that Will (xix. 4) ; while in still looser fashion Spirit 
seems to be symbolized by " Heaven " and the Sensible 
Cosmos by " Earth '' (xix. 2). 

It is very probable that this doctrine of Spirit as 
Divine Breath is fundamentally Egyptian, and owes 
nothing to immediate Semitic influence. However this 
may be, the use of the term Sense, as apparently in 
some way superior to Keason (vi. 4 ; x. 4), is very 
striking, and, as in some cases opposed to the exaltation 
of the Eeason found elsewhere in our tractates, under 
the influence of this leading idea of Greek philosophy, 
discloses an Egyptian point of view. 

1 Gf. also a H., xiii. (xiv.) 19, 20, and E. 39, n. 1. 

2 Of. G. H.f X. (xi.) 13, and Commentary. 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 397 

We have already noticed this use of the term in 
some of our tractates, but in our present sermon it is 
brought into great prominence. This Sense is not the 
differentiated senses, but a Unit or Cosmic Sense. 

It is " the Divine Sense of intelligence,'' and is found 
only in God and in man's reason (vii. 1 ; xxxii. 2). 

It is the " Higher Sense (with which Celestial Gift 
mankind alone is blest) " — characterized as the " feeder 
of the mind " (xviii. 1) ; yet on the other hand this 
" Higher Sense " is that " which by good chance a man 
perceives by mind, when out of all his senses." 

This Sense is in some fashion closely connected 
with Nature and Cosmos (xxi. 1) ; through it man 
"disciplines his soul," and "cures his intellect," thus 
gaining "intelligence of God-like Eeason" (xxii. 1), and 
finally " mingling himself with the All-sense of the 
Divine Intelligence " (xxix. 2). 

This All-sense is the same as the " Whole Sense of 
Divinity," and is the Likeness of God ; it is " in its own 
self immoveable," and yet " doth set itself in motion 
within its own stability " (xxxii. 1). Man must make 
himself like unto this Likeness. 

This Likeness is evidently the ^on or Intelligible 
Cosmos ; for the " Cosmic Sense is the Container of 
all sensibles" (xxxii. 2). 

In man its chief normal characteristic is the reten- 
tiveness of memory, " through which man is made 
ruler of the Earth" (xxxii. 2). This Sense is then 
man's continuum, the germ of everlastingness in him, 
the root-ground of consciousness (xxxii. 3), the Single 
Sense of the intelligence (xli. 4), which is fully brought 
to birth only when a man " is wholly plunged in con- 
sciousness of life (in sensu vitce)'' (xxxvii. 3), — the 
"spiritual life" of the Christian Gnostics. 

The fact that we have only a translation to deal with 



Hosted by Google 



398 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

prevents us laying too much stress on details, but the 
general idea is clear enough ; so too with the rest of 
this, the longest of our sermons, we must be content 
to refer only to general points, the chief of which are 
the " prophetic " utterances. 

The Pkophetic Utterances 

These present us with problems of very great 
difficulty, and, so far, I have neither seen any solution 
nor has any occurred to me. 

So much work has been done on contemporary pro- 
phetic utterances of this nature, especially on the 
Sibylline Literature, that it may be said that the 
scholastic mind has reached certain general criteria 
with regard to such pronouncements — the chief of 
which is that the hypothesis of genuine prophecy is not 
to be entertained. 

In the Sibylline literature, indeed, this is clearly 
established; for much of it consists of traditional 
history written in the prophetical tense, so to say; 
when the history comes to an end the date of the 
"prophetical" writer is at once detected, for all that 
follows has no longer any relation to historical events. 

In the case of our '' prophecies," however, we have 
nothing of this nature to guide us. All we can say is 
that they seem to have been written, most probably, at a 
time when the Trismegistic communities were being 
persecuted 

That this was in the course of the fourth century, 
however, as Keitzenstein (p. 213) supposes, seems to 
me to be, so far, destitute of any sure objective con- 
firmation ; it not only compels us to suppose that the 
prophecies are later interpolations (which they may 
possibly be), but that these interpolations are later than 
Lactantius; whereas there is every probability that 



Hosted by Google 



THE PERFECT SERMON 399 

the Church Father had the text of them before him,^ 
and his date is the beginning of the fourth century. 

On the other hand, Zosimus, writing somewhere about 
the end of the third and beginning of the fourth century, 
breathes no word of persecution, and leads us to suppose 
that the community was still flourishing. We are thus 
still in the gravest uncertainty. 

The first of our ''prophecies" is in xii. 3: ''For I 
will tell thee as though it were propheticly " — addressed 
to Asclepius, and, therefore, probably not due to the 
redactor who we have supposed added the narrative 
sentences. 

The lament of the writer is that " the Single Love, 
the Love of Pure Philosophy," is fast disappearing 
from the world ; he can hardly have had Christianity 
in mind when writing these words, for he contrasts the 
" Pure Philosophy " with " multifarious reasoning " and 
" divers sciences," and the latter can hardly be said to 
be characteristic of General Christianity. 

If, however, his words may be said to include also 
Gnostic Christianity, then he was clearly not in sym- 
pathy with it ; but this can hardly be the case, seeing 
that the resemblances between the Trismegistic and 
Christian Gnosis are of a very intimate nature. 

The Proscription of the Worship of the Gods 

Turning next to xxiv. 2, we meet with the clear 
statement that the worship of the Gods will be legally 
proscribed by the " barbarian " masters of Egypt (also 
XXV. 3). 

Such a general proscription in this emphatic sense 
took place in Egypt only with the destruction of the 
Serapeum by the Christians themselves in 389 a.d. 

1 See XXV. 4, and note. 



Hosted by Google 



Hosted by Google 



