Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2019  with  funding  from 
Kahle/Austin  Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/centralcaribsOOOOfara 


Apalaii  Headdress 


UNIVERSITY  OF  PENNSYLVANIA 

THE  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM 


ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS 

Vol.  X 


THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


BY 

WILLIAM  CURTIS  "FARABEE 


//  p 

£3$0>! 


<CLQ 


1/ 


PHILADELPHIA 

PUBLISHED  BY  THE  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM 


1924 


V 


a 


e  ^  sL 


•  • 


* 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 


PREFACE  .  9 

GEOGRAPHICAL  ENVIRONMENT .  n 

MACUSIS .  ,3 

WAIWAIS . ,53 

WAIWES . 182 

PARUKUTUS . i83 

CHIKENAS . ,94 

KATAWIANS . i97 

TONEYENAS . i98 

DIAUS . i99 

WAKERAS  . 212 

KUMAYENAS . 214 

URUKUENAS . 217 

APALAI  IS . 220 

MARACA  TRIBES . 242 

Zaparas . 242 

Azumaras  . 242 

PORO  KOTOS . 245 

OTHER  TRIBES . 250 

SOMATIC  CHARACTERS . 253 

MAP . 278 

BIBLIOGRAPHY . 280 

INDEX  .  .  ! . 282 


(3) 


♦ 


PLATES 


Frontispiece. 

Appalaii  Head  Dress 

Plate 

I. 

The  Savannah  Country  of  British  Guiana 

Plate 

II. 

Macusi  Interior  of  Work  House 

Plate 

III. 

Macusi  Mission  Choir 

Macusi  Women  and  Children 

Plate 

IV. 

Macusi  Interior 

Macusi  Woman  Grating  Cassava 

Waiwai 

Plate 

V. 

Macusi 

Plate 

VI. 

Macusi 

Plate 

VII. 

Waiwai  Family  in  Their  Hammocks 

Plate 

VIII. 

Waiwai  Chiefs 

Plate 

IX. 

Waiwai  Men 

Plate 

X. 

Waiwai  Pounding  Poison  Vine  in  the  River 
to  Kill  Fish 

Waiwai  Woman  Spinning 

Waiwai  Man  Making  a  Bow 

Plate 

XI. 

Waiwai  Breaking  Poison  for  Fish 

Waiwai  Trap  for  Wild  Pigs 

Waiwai  Dance 

Plate 

XII. 

Waiwai 

Plate 

XIII. 

Parukutu  Chief 

Parukutu  Girls 

Plate 

XIV. 

Parukutu 

Plate 

XV. 

Parukutu 

Plate 

XVI. 

Waiwe 

Diau 

Plate 

XVII. 

Porokoto 

Chikena 

Tonayena 

Azumara 

Zapara 

Chikena 

Katawian 

Tonayena 


(5) 


6 


UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


Plate 

XVIII. 

Kumayena 

Urukuena 

Plate 

XIX. 

Apalaii  War  Chief’s  Ceremonial  Dress 

Plate 

XX. 

Apalaii  Wasp  Frame  in  Form  of  a 
Jaguar 

Plate 

XXI. 

Apalaii  Apron 

Plate 

XXII. 

Apalaii  Ceremonial  Club  with  Figures 
Representing  Mythical  Apalaii 
Forest  Monsters 

Plate 

XXIII. 

Apalaii  Trays 

Waiwai  Sieve 

Plate 

XXIV. 

Macusi  Carrying  Basket 

Apalaii  Carrying  Basket 

Plate 

XXV. 

Macusi  Beaded  Aprons 

Plate 

XXVI. 

Waiwai  Woman’s  Loin  Apron 

Plate 

XXVII. 

Waiwai  Head  Dress 

Plate 

XXVIII. 

Waiwai  Head  Dress 

Plate 

XXIX. 

Waiwai  Combs 

Plate 

XXX. 

Waiwai  Men’s  Belts 

Plate 

XXXI. 

Waiwai  Hair  Tubes 

Plate 

XXXII. 

Waiwai  Ear  Ornaments 

Plate 

XXXIII. 

Waiwai  Case  for  Poisoned  Arrow 
Points 

Plate 

XXXIV. 

Waiwai  Trinket  Baskets 

Waiwai  Storage  Basket 

Plate 

XXXV. 

Waiwai  Musical  Instruments 

Waiwai  Knives  of  Peccary  Tusk 

Plate 

XXXVI. 

Waiwai  Stools 

Plate 

XXXVII. 

Waiwai  Cassava  Grater 

Waiwai  Wooden  Mortar 

Plate 

XXXVIII. 

Waiwai  Ceremonial  Clubs 

Plate 

XXXIX. 

Waiwai  Body  Painting 

Plate 

XL 

Waiwai  Face  Painting 

NOTICE 


Dr.  Farabee  completed  the  text  of  this  volume  in  Decem¬ 
ber,  1921.  During  his  absence  on  the  Museum’s  expedition  in 
South  America  in  the  following  year  the  book  was  in  press. 
Upon  his  return  in  the  spring  of  1923,  Dr.  Farabee  was  so  ill 
that  he  was  unable  to  give  his  attention  to  the  proofs  or  the 
preparation  of  the  plates.  His  continued  illness  has  made  it 
seem  desirable  to  see  the  book  through  the  press  without  his 
supervision.  The  reading  of  the  proofs,  the  preparation  of 
the  plates  and  the  making  of  the  index  were  tasks  that  fell  to 
others  in  the  Museum.  That  this  work  has  been  well  and 
thoroughly  done  is  not  doubtful,  but  to  the  student  making  use 
of  the  volume  I  desire  to  make  it  known  that  Dr.  Farabee  had 
no  opportunity  of  reading  the  proofs  or  preparing  the  plates  or 
supervising  the  publication. 

G.  B.  Gordon, 

Director. 


■ 


PREFACE 


The  material  here  presented  was  collected  by  the  University 
Museum’s  South  American  Expedition,  1913-1916.  The  work 
was  done  under  the  supervision  of  Dr.  G.  B.  Gordon,  Director 
of  the  Museum,  and  with  the  assistance  in  the  field  of  Mr. 
John  Ogilvie,  Sr.  Joaquin  Albuquerque  and  Dr.  Franklin  H. 
Church. 

The  Carib  tribes,  whose  language,  culture  and  somatic 
characters  were  investigated,  are  in  contact  with  numerous 
other  tribes  whom  we  visited  and  whose  history  we  have  recorded 
in  Vol.  IX  of  the  Museum’s  Anthropological  Publications  under 
the  title  of  The  Central  Arawaks.  Many  similarities  of  cul¬ 
ture  will  be  observed  among  the  tribes  of  these  two  linguistic 
stocks — similarities  which  may  be  due  in  part  to  contact  and 
in  part  to  the  influence  of  environment. 

As  this  is  the  first  time  that  any  detailed  account  of  these 
tribes  has  been  attempted,  no  doubt  many  mistakes  have  been 
made  which  will  await  the  correction  of  future  students.  Some 
of  the  tribes  had  not  been  visited  before,  some  had  been  located 
on  maps  by  hearsay,  while  some  had  not  been  known  even  by 
name.  The  lack  of  interpreters  at  times  rendered  the  work 
difficult  and  accounts  for  the  brevity  of  discussion  in  certain 
parts. 

The  data  concerning  the  interior  tribes  are  based  entirely 
upon  personal  observation  by  the  members  of  the  expedition. 
The  material  from  the  Macusis  was  obtained  very  largely  from 
Mr.  Christopher  Davis,  a  man  educated  in  the  mission  schools 
of  Demarara,  who  had  been  living  with  the  Macusis  for  fifteen 
years  in  the  capacity  of  a  voluntary  religious  teacher. 

Besides  doing  the  usual  ethnological  work,  the  expedition 
made  a  map  of  the  region  through  which  it  passed,  washed  the 
streams  for  gold  (nothing  of  value  was  found),  made  natural 

(9) 


10  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

history  collections  and  secured  many  rare  live  animals  and 
birds  for  the  Philadelphia  Zoological  Gardens. 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  acknowledge  my  obligations  to  the 
following  persons  who  contributed  so  much  to  the  success  of 
the  expedition:  To  Dr.  G.  B.  Gordon;  to  the  President  and 
Board  of  Managers  for  their  liberal  support  and  hearty  coopera¬ 
tion;  to  Mr.  H.  P.  C.  Melville,  Magistrate  and  Protector  of 
Indians,  for  valuable  information  and  assistance;  to  Christopher 
Davis  for  information  and  services  as  interpreter  among  the 
Macusis;  to  our  four  Arawak  Indians,  who  traveled  with  us  for 
six  months,  for  faithful  service;  and  especially  to  Mr.  John 
Ogilvie,  whose  intimate  knowledge  of  jungle  travel  made  pos¬ 
sible  our  journey  to  the  interior  tribes,  for  companionship  and 
assistance  in  every  part  of  the  work. 

William  Curtis  Farabee 


December  16,  1921 


GEOGRAPHICAL  ENVIRONMENT 


The  Carib  tribes  under  discussion  are  divided  geographically 
into  two  groups;  those  of  the  open  savannah  and  those  of  the 
forests.  The  Macusi,  the  largest  of  the  tribes,  occupies  the 
northern  part  of  the  great  savannah  which  reaches  from  the 
banks  of  the  Essiquibo  River  nearly  to  the  Venezuelan  boundary 
and  from  the  Amazon  forests  to  the  foot  of  the  Pakaraima 
range  of  mountains;  or  in  its  greatest  extension  from  about 
58JA0  to  63°  W.  Long,  and  from  1JA0  to  4 jT°  N.  Lat.  It  is 
an  undulating  plain  dotted  with  roundtopped  grasscovered 
mountains  and  islands  of  forest  growth.  Three  short  ranges 
of  mountains  are  somewhat  forest  clad:  the  Kanuku,  between 
the  Rupununi  and  the  Takutu;  the  Moon,  between  the  head 
waters  of  the  Takutu  and  the  Branco,  and  the  Mocajahi,  south  of 
a  river  by  the  same  name  which  enters  the  Branco  from  the  west. 

This  plain  at  its  highest  part  between  the  Rupununi  and 
the  Takutu  stands  at  an  elevation  of  six  or  seven  hundred  feet 
and  is  interrupted  by  numerous  depressions  which  become  lakes 
during  the  wet  season.  The  waters  of  these  lakes  evaporate 
during  the  dry  season,  leaving  behind  great  meadows  with 
narrow  streams  whose  courses  are  marked  by  lines  of  aeta  palms 
which  give  beauty  to  the  scenery.  One  of  the  depressions  was 
the  mythical  Lake  Amucu  on  whose  shores  stood  the  Golden 
City,  El  Dorado,  of  the  Spaniards. 

There  are  two  short  periods  of  the  rains,  in  December  and 
June,  with  a  fall  of  sixty  inches  in  the  eastern  and  forty  two 
in  the  western  sections,  three  fourths  of  which  falls  in  the 
latter  season.  The  rivers  cease  to  flow  during  the  long  dry 
seasons  and  thus  confine  the  fish  in  deep  pools  in  the  bends  of 
the  rivers  where  the  Indians  obtain  them  by  poisoning  the 
water.  When  the  luxurious  grass  of  the  savannah  becomes  dry, 
it  is  burned  to  kill  the  rattlesnakes  and  to  drive  the  game  in 
the  direction  of  the  hunters. 


(ID 


12  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS.,  VOL.  X 

The  presence  of  a  never  failing  spring  or  a  water  hole 
determines  the  site  of  the  village  which  is  usually  located  in  the 
open  savannah  a  short  distance  from  the  water  supply.  The 
people  may  be  called  agriculturists  although  they  add  variety 
to  their  food  supply  by  hunting  and  fishing.  Their  fields  are 
located  in  the  nearby  forests.  Cassava  is  the  main  crop  but 
other  vegetables  and  fruits  are  also  grown.  Deer  may  be 
stalked  in  the  savannah  and  birds  and  monkeys  shot  in  the 
forest. 

The  other  group  of  tribes  is  found  in  the  depths  of  the 
forests  along  the  Acarai  Mountains  and  the  head  streams  of 
the  rivers  on  both  sides  where  the  rainfall  is  greater,  agriculture 
more  difficult  and  game  more  plentiful.  The  natives  here 
depend  more  upon  hunting  and  fishing  and  less  upon  cultiva¬ 
tion  for  their  food  supply  than  do  their  relatives  of  the  plains. 
The  effect  of  these  differences  in  environment  upon  the  culture 
and  physical  development  of  the  two  groups  will  be  observed 
as  we  proceed  from  tribe  to  tribe. 

The  principal  neighbors  of  these  two  groups  are  corre¬ 
sponding  groups  of  Arawak  tribes  who  are  living  under  exactly 
the  same  physical  conditions. 


THE  MACUSIS1 


The  first  visitors  to  the  Macusi  country  were  the  Dutch 
traders  who  made  their  way  up  the  Essiquibo  River  to  the 
plains  south  of  the  Pakaraima  Mountains  early  in  the  eighteenth 
century  but  the  first  name  we  have  associated  with  the  region 
is  that  of  the  German  surgeon,  Nicholas  Horstman,  who  was 
sent  by  the  Dutch  West  India  Company,  in  1738,  to  find  a 
passage  from  the  Essiquibo  to  the  Amazon  and  incidentally  to 
discover  the  city  of  El  Dorado.  He  successfully  crossed  the 
divide  and  reached  the  Negro,  where  he  deserted  the  Dutch 
cause  and  remained  with  the  Portuguese.  The  map  he  made 
of  the  region  traversed  he  gave  to  La  Condamine  and  it  was 
published  ten  years  later  by  d’Anville  in  the  first  great  map  of 
South  America.2  At  that  time  the  Macusis  occupied  the  region 
north  of  the  Kanuku  Mountains  and  the  Takutu  River. 

The  best  early  account  of  the  Rio  Branco  region  was  written 
about  1814  by  a  Portuguese  priest,  Andre  Fernandes  de  Sousa, 
who  gives  the  following  list  of  fifteen  Indian  tribes  living  near 
that  river;  Uapixana,  Paraviana,  Sapara,  Uatarai,  Paracoana, 
Caixana,  Macuxi,  Uayca,  Porocoto,  Atanayru,  Uayuru,  Tapicari, 
Chaperu,  Atyai  and  Caripuna.  These  tribes  were  then  in  com¬ 
munication  with  the  Dutch,  “crossing  by  a  short  day’s  journey 
the  isthmus  which  separates  the  Itacutu  from  the  Ripanuni.” 
This  same  route  was  used  by  Col.  Barata  in  carrying  dispatches 
to  Surinam  in  1793. 

Johann  Natterer  visited  the  Rio  Branco  in  1832  and  wrote 
a  good  account  of  the  region  but  his  ethnological  report  has 
been  hopelessly  lost  with  the  exception  of  his  Macusi  vocabulary 
published  by  Martius. 


1  Makuschi,  Macoushi,  Macuchi,  Macuxi. 

2J.  A.  J.  de  Villiera,  Roy.  Geog.  Jour.,  May,  191 1. 

( 13) 


14  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


In  1835,  when  Robert  Schomburgk  first  visited  Southern 
British  Guiana,  he  found  some  three  thousand  Macusis  in  the 
same  territory  they  occupied  when  first  reported  by  the  Dutch. 
He  described  the  Macusis  as  the  most  beautiful  Indians  of 
Guiana,  possessing  rich  voices,  fluent  speech,  cleanly  habits, 
good  morals  and  a  love  of  order. 

Appun,1  Im  Thurn  and  Coudreau2  in  turn  visited  the  Rio 
Branco  region  and  gave  some  account  of  the  Macusis  whom 
they  found  still  occupying  the  same  old  territory  where  they 
may  be  found  today  holding  their  own  against  the  time  now 
not  far  distant  when  the  coming  of  a  railroad  will  open  up  their 
beautiful  country  to  the  white  race,  and  when  that  time  arrives 
the  newcomers  will  find  the  Macusis  a  delightful  people,  ready 
and  willing  to  cooperate  in  any  worthy  enterprise. 

At  present  there  are  no  Macusi  villages  east  of  the  Rupununi 
nor  south  of  the  Seriri  Mountains  in  Guiana.  Their  largest 
villages  are  in  the  Kanuku  Mountains  and  in  the  region  of 
Lake  Amucu.  In  Brazil  their  villages  are  found  for  the  most 
part  between  the  Takutu  and  the  Uraracuera  Rivers  and  the 
high  mountains  to  the  north.  Within  this  area  there  is  one 
large  Wapisiana  village  on  the  Majari  River.  The  Arecunas, 
a  very  closely  related  Carib  tribe,  live  to  the  north  of  the 
Macusis  and  the  Wapisiana  Arawaks  to  the  south.  At  present 
the  Macusis  are  living  in  peace  with  their  neighbors.  Formerly 
they  were  preyed  upon  by  the  Caribs  proper  and  the  Arecunas, 
who  captured  and  sold  them  as  slaves  to  the  whites  in  Surinam. 
The  hatred  engendered  by  former  wars  still  persists  between 
them  and  the  Wapisianas.  While  these  two  tribes  regard  each 
other  with  suspicion  they  carry  on  trade  with  as  little  contact 
as  possible. 


1  Manuscript  published  by  Lieut.  Smyth,  Jour.  Roy.  Geog.  Soc.,  Vol.  6,  1836,  pp.  11-23. 

2  See  bibliography. 


FARABEE - THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


15 


MATERIAL  CULTURE 

Houses 

» 

1  he  Macusi  house  may  be  square,  round  or  elliptical;  very 
small  or  very  large;  built  to  accommodate  one  family  only  or 
sufficiently  large  to  furnish  accommodation  for  a  dozen  families. 
The  size  of  a  man’s  house  depends  not  so  much  on  the  size  of 
his  family  as  it  does  upon  the  sex  of  the  children.  When  a 
daughter  marries  she  brings  her  husband  home  with  her  to  live 
in  her  father’s  house.  If  there  are  many  daughters,  a  very 
large  house  will  be  needed  to  protect  the  new  families.  If  all 
are  sons  they  will  eventually  leave  home  and  a  small  house  will 
suffice  for  the  present.  The  houses  are  grouped  in  villages 
without  any  regularly  laid  out  plan;  they  stand  near  together 
as  at  Puerueta  or  far  apart  on  either  side  of  a  stream  as  at 
Napikeri.  The  village  is  usually  located  on  high  land  in  the 
open  savannah  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  a  stream  and  a  long 
distance  from  their  cultivated  fields,  but  sometimes  it  is  found 
on  a  stream  with  cultivated  fields  about  the  houses  as  at  Napi¬ 
keri.  The  high  savannah  location  is  more  hygienic  and  more 
comfortable;  there  is  more  air  and  fewer  flies  and  mosquitoes. 

The  walls  of  the  houses  are  of  palm  leaves,  bark  or  adobe 
and  closely  built  for  protection  against  insects  and  the  cold  winds 
which  come  down  from  the  mountains  during  the  dry  season. 
The  tight  wall  serves  the  more  important  purpose  of  keeping 
out  the  kenaimas,  or  evil  geniuses,  who  are  always  lurking  about 
at  night  endeavoring  to  injure  or  to  kill  anyone  found  unpro¬ 
tected.  The  walls  of  rectangular  houses  are  usually  made  of 
adobe  and  are  higher  than  the  walls  of  the  other  types  of  houses. 
Horizontal  poles  are  lashed  firmly  to  the  wall  posts  about  eight 
inches  apart,  and  withes,  a  half  inch  thick  and  as  long  as  the 
height  of  the  wall,  are  woven  in  between  these  poles  in  regular 
wickerwork  fashion  six  inches  apart.  The  adobe  which  has 
been  mixed  with  the  feet  in  a  hole  near  the  house  is  then  applied 
on  both  sides  making  a  smooth  wall  six  inches  thick. 


16  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


The  bark  walls  are  usually  about  five  feet  high.  The  posts 
supporting  the  roof  carry  three  horizontal  stringers  firmly  lashed 
at  the  required  heights.  The  heavy  bark  of  the  tirikir  tree 
(Hymenaca  courbaril),  is  cut  in  sections,  set  on  end  inside  and 
lashed  to  the  stringers,  thus  making  a  tight,  smooth  wall  irom 
door  to  door. 

The  framework  of  the  house  depends  upon  the  size  and 
type  of  house  desired.  A  small  round  house  has  the  centre  pole 
only,  whereas  the  same  type  forty  feet  high  and  forty  feet  in 
diameter  has  in  addition  six  interior  posts  supporting  the  roof 
and  thirteen  wall  posts.  The  odd  number  comes  from  having 


two  posts  at  the  single  door.  All  the  posts  are  forked  or  notched 
at  the  top  to  receive  the  plate  and  are  set  three  feet  deep.  Near 
the  top  of  the  roof  a  binding  pole  is  lashed  underneath  the 
main  rafters.  Additional  short  rafters  are  lashed  between  the 
two  plates.  The  roof  of  the  round  house  is  always  much  steeper 
than  that  of  any  other  type  of  house.  The  rectangular  house  is 
of  simple  construction  having  the  four  corner  posts  with  one  or 
more  as  needed  between  on  the  sides  and  the  two  higher  end 
posts  to  carry  the  ridge  pole. 

There  are  two  types  of  frames  for  the  elliptical  houses,  one 
having  a  very  low  wall  and  the  other  a  very  high  wall.  A  large 
communal  house  48  feet  long  and  24  feet  wide  having  a  seven 
foot  wall  would  have  eight  wall  posts  six  inches  in  diameter 
with  two  principal  posts  eight  inches  in  diameter,  20  feet 
high  and  12  feet  apart,  located  near  the  foci  of  the  ellipse. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


17 


The  two  principal  posts  are  forked  at  the  top  to  receive  the 
ridge  pole  which  is  allowed  to  project  about  four  feet  beyond 
its  supports.  The  wall  posts  support  four  cross  beams,  the 
two  interior  ones  being  lashed  in  the  middle  to  the  principal 
posts.  The  other  beams  have  no  middle  support.  The  plates 
rest  upon  the  ends  of  the  beams.  The  four  end  rafters  are 
heavier  and  have  cross  poles  three  feet  from  the  top  to  support 
the  end  rafters.  This  leaves  a  small  open  gable  which  is  pro¬ 
tected  by  the  projecting  plate  and  its  covering  and  allows  the 
smoke  to  escape.  The  roof  is  made  of  the  leaves  of  the  cokerite 
palm  ( Maximiliana  regia)  with  the  fronds  laid  horizontally. 

Another  type  of  house  with  a  wall  four  or  five  feet  high 
has  six  principal  posts  fifteen  feet  high,  three  on  a  side  ten  feet 
apart.  These  carry  two  plates.  The  long  rafters  from  the 
walls  are  lashed  to  these  plates  and  to  their  opposite  pairs  at 
the  top.  Plate  VI,  K  shows  a  house  of  this  type  with  bark  walls. 
One  house  at  Kazawing  was  built  on  posts  five  feet  above  the 
ground  and  floored  with  chouta  palm  planks.  There  was  a  clay 
fireplace  built  in  one  corner  on  the  floor.  At  the  end,  the  roof 
projected  six  feet,  covering  the  mortar  and  grinding  place  and 
the  steps  which  were  made  of  notched  poles  with  crossbars  in 
notches.  This  style  seems  to  be  an  innovation  here  although 
common  among  the  Pano  of  the  upper  Amazon. 

Besides  these  dwelling  houses  there  are  always  small  work 
houses  nearby  where  corn  is  ground  in  the  mortar  and  farina  is 
manufactured  from  the  cassava.  It  is  a  place  where  all  the 
rough  work  of  the  household  is  performed.  Plate  II  gives  a 
very  good  idea  of  the  furnishings  of  such  a  house.  There  will 
be  found  the  mortar  set  in  the  ground,  the  long  pole  pestle,  the 
great  cooking  pots  for  making  drink,  the  cassava  graters, 
strainers,  sieves,  baking  pan  or  oven,  and  the  supply  of  wood 
and  water. 

All  the  large  houses  have  two  doors,  one  at  each  end, 
feet  wide;  one  for  men  and  the  other  for  women,  but  in  many 
instances  only  the  east  door  is  in  use.  The  smaller  houses  have 


18  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

only  one  door  which  may  be  at  the  end  or  on  the  side. .  The 
doors  of  the  large  houses  have  bark  or  plank  jambs  1 5  inches 
wide.  The  movable  door  of  leaves  or  bark  is  lifted  and  set 
into  place  at  night  to  prevent  the  entrance  of  mosquitoes  and 
kenaimas.  For  the  same  reason,  earth  is  thrown  up  against  the 
wall  on  the  outside.  No  crevice  is  left  open;  thus  the  interior 
of  the  house  is  so  dark  that  the  small  black  flies,  which  at  cer¬ 
tain  seasons  of  the  year  are  such  a  pest,  will  not  enter. 

The  roof  is  made  of  palm  leaves  of  different  species.  The 
rafters  on  the  large  houses  are  placed  2  feet  apart,  .the  fronds 
of  the  cokerite  palm  {M aximiliana  regia )  are  laid  horizontally  and 
lashed  to  the  rafters  instead  of  laths.  When  the  aeta  palm 
( Mauritia  flexuosa )  is  to  be  used  the  rafters  are  placed  farther 
apart  and  laths  are  used.  In  making  this  kind  of  roof  a  part 
of  the  leafstalk  is  bent  down  and  hooked  over  the  lath,  thus 
doing  away  with  the  necessity  of  tying. 

The  Interior 

No  partitions  separate  the  apartments  of  different  families 
in  the  communal  houses.  Each  family  has  its  own  private 
section  where  the  hammocks  are  hung  from  posts  and  cross 
beams  and  the  individual  things  are  kept.  Each  woman  has 
her  own  little  fireplace  made  of  three  stones  near  the  outer  wall 
where  she  does  the  family  cooking  and  where  she  keeps  her  food, 
bowls,  gourds  for  carrying  water,  and  a  small  supply  of  firewood 
which  may  be  needed  on  cold  nights. 

The  interior  of  the  house  is  dark  and  gloomy.  There  are 
no  windows  and  all  the  light  must  come  through  the  open  door, 
the  smokeholes  and  the  joints  of  the  bark  wall.  The  smoke 
from  the  numerous  fires  has  blackened  the  roof  and  the  frame¬ 
work.  The  floor  has  become  hard  and  smooth  from  the  con¬ 
stant  tread  of  bare  feet.  The  soil  was  removed  before  the  house 
was  built  but  no  other  preparation  for  the  floor  was  made. 
The  floors  are  kept  remarkably  clean ;  no  refuse  being  allowed 
to  collect  around  the  walls  nor  in  the  common  central  portion. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


19 


The  rough  work,  such  as  preparing  cassava  roots  and  removing 
the  husks  from  corn,  is  done  either  in  the  open  or  in  the  small 
work  house. 

The  furnishings  consist  of  stools  and  hammocks.  There  are 
three  types  of  stools;  a  turtle  shell  with  a  large  hole  cut  in  the 
back  to  prevent  its  rolling  over,  a  stump  with  three  roots  and 
the  half  of  a  hollow  log  which  has  the  sides  cut  away  to  leave 
handles  at  the  ends.  When  a  visitor  enters  a  house  upon  invi¬ 
tation  he  is  asked  to  sit  in  a  hammock,  the  best  of  the  numerous 
ones  which  are  always  swinging  from  post  to  beam.  When  not 
at  work,  the  men  are  often  found  resting  in  their  hammocks 
because  the  interior  is  cool  and  more  particularly  because  of  the 
protection  from  the  small  flies. 

The  house  is  the  storage  place  for  all  food  and  personal 
belongings.  When  corn  is  ripe  the  ears  are  plucked  and  the 
husks  tied  together  in  bunches  of  a  dozen  or  more  ears.  These 
bunches  are  then  hung  on  cross  beams  out  of  the  way  until 
needed.  Large  ears  are  selected  and  hung  in  the  most  secure 
place  to  be  used  for  seed  at  the  next  planting  season.  Bananas 
are  cut  from  the  bunches  in  hands  and  strung  between  the 
rafters  to  ripen.  Gourds  and  baskets  hang  from  the  rafters  and 
beams.  The  baskets  may  contain  trinkets,  raw  cotton,  spin¬ 
ning  outfit  or  nuts  and  fruit.  Poles  are  often  placed  across  the 
beams  to  form  platforms  upon  which  all  kinds  of  things  are 
stored.  The  bows  and  arrows  are  stuck  into  the  roof  as  are  so 
many  other  things,  or  they  may  be  laid  upon  the  platform,  but 
the  long  blow  gun  must  not  be  so  carelessly  put  away  because  it 
may  easily  warp,  twist  or  bend  out  of  adjustment.  It  must  be 
suspended  by  the  end  from  the  ridgepole.  Sticks  with  many 
forks  for  supports  are  hung  from  the  roof.  They  are  convenient 
for  hanging  up  food  out  of  the  way  of  the  dogs  which  have  the 
freedom  of  the  house. 

Utensils 

The  larger  utensils,  such  as  those  used  in  connection  with 
making  meal,  farina  and  cassava  bread,  drink  for  festivals, 
weaving  of  hammocks,  etc.,  are  kept  in  the  work  houses  or  in 


20  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM— ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

the  centre  of  the  large  house  for  use  in  common.  Only  the 
smaller  things  are  individual.  The  loom  is  a  very  simple  affair 
composed  of  two  upright  poles  with  two  mortises  near  the  top 
and  one  at  the  bottom  for  cross  poles  which  are  separated  the 
proper  distance  for  the  length  of  the  hammock.  The  mortar 
used  for  grinding  corn  is  a  log  of  wood  set  deep  into  the  hard 
ground.  It  has  a  slight  depression  in  the  top  and  a  hole  about 
5  inches  in  diameter  extending  to  a  depth  of  15  inches.  The 
pestle  is  a  pole  of  hard  wood  10  feet  long  having  a  tapering 
point.  The  grinding  is  done,  not  by  pounding,  but  by  pressing 
the  grain  against  the  side  of  the  mortar  and  revolving  the 
pestle.  When  the  grain  is  pulverized  the  pestle  is  removed  and 
the  meal  taken  out  with  the  hand.  As  :he  minding  proceeds 
the  meal  has  a  tendency  to  work  up  between  the  pestle  and  the 
sides  of  the  mortar,  hence  the  depression  at  the  top  of  the 
mortar  to  prevent  the  meal  from  falling  on  the  ground.  A 
woman  can  grind  a  quart  of  corn  into  the  finest  kind  of  meal  in 
ten  minutes.  It  is  an  easier  and  a  more  rapid  method  of  grinding 
than  that  in  which  the  pestle  is  lifted  and  the  grain  pulverized 
by  pounding.  The  woman  grinding  usually  stands  on  one  foot 
with  the  other  braced  against  the  top  of  the  mortar.  She 
moistens  her  hands  with  saliva  to  prevent  them  from  slipping 
on  the  pestle. 

The  principal  food  plant  is  the  bitter  cassava  (. Manihot 
utilissima )  which  is  native  to  tropical  America.  It  cannot  be 
used  as  a  vegetable  because  it  contains  a  poisonous  principle, 
hydrocyanic  acid,  which  the  Indians  have  learned  to  extract  and 
to  drive  off  by  roasting  or  baking.  To  extract  the  poisonous 
juices  the  roots  of  the  plant  must  first  be  reduced  to  a  pulp. 
This  is  accomplished  by  means  of  a  grater  made  by  driving  small 
sharp  stones  of  porphyry  into  a  soft  board.  The  board,  2)4 
feet  long,  1  foot  wide  and  2  inches  thick,  is  cut  from  the  broad 
flat  root  of  the  A spidospermum  excelsum.  Holes  are  made  with 
a  bone  awl,  the  stones  driven  in  with  a  wooden  mallet  and  the 
whole  surface  covered  with  pitch  ( Ceroxylon  andicola )  to  fasten 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


21 


the  stones  more  securely  and  to  fill  up  the  pores  of  the  wood. 
The  best  graters  are  made  by  the  Waiwais  south  of  the  Acarai 
Mountains.  The  Macusis  obtain  them  by  barter  from  the 
Wapisianas  who  get  them  from  the  Tarumas  who  are  neighbors 
of  the  Waiwais.  An  enterprising  Taruma  trader  living  among 
the  Wapisianas  married  a  Waiwai  girl  who  is  a  good  grater 
maker  and  through  her  industry  he  supplies  a  large  market. 

The  carapace  of  a  turtle  ( Emys  tracaxa )  or  the  leaf  stock 
of  the  aeta  palm  ( Mauritia  flexuosa )  is  used  as  a  receptacle  in 
the  grating  of  cassava.  (Plate  IV,  B.)  Large  wooden  troughs 
are  used  to  hold  the  pulp  of  the  grated  cassava  until  it  is  pressed 
and  also  to  hold  the  stored  drinks.  The  Macusi  women  stand 
up  and  hold  the  grater  against  their  thighs  while  grating  the 
cassava  but  the  Waiwais  sit  on  the  ground  and  hold  the  grater 
between  their  legs.  The  pulp  falls  on  banana  leaves.  They 
use  the  sieve  also  while  sitting  on  the  ground  but  the  sieve 
stands  up  on  a  framework  of  its  own  and  rests  on  a  circular  mat. 

The  wickerwoven  cylindrical  press  which  is  six  or  eight 
feet  long  and  about  six  inches  in  diameter  is  made  of  closely 
plaited  splints  from  the  fronds  of  the  long  leaves  of  the  cokerite 
palm  (Maximiliana  regia).  These  different  splints  are  con¬ 
tinued  beyond  the  body  of  the  press  and  plaited  into  two  loops. 
The  one  at  the  top  is  so  made  that  it  leaves  the  end  of  the  press 
open  while  the  bottom  one  closes  the  end  of  the  press.  When 
the  press  is  filled  with  pulp  it  is  hung  up  on  a  house  beam  or  a 
forked  pole  set  for  the  purpose,  and  a  lever  is  thrust  through  the 
loop  at  the  bottom  for  the  application  of  pressure.  This  press, 
which  acts  on  the  principle  of  the  “Siamese  link,’’  is  one  of  the 
most  ingenious  and  most  important  inventions  made  by  any 
primitive  people.  It  was  not  by  chance  or  happy  accident 
that  the  invention  was  hit  upon.  The  possibilities  of  the  use 
of  this  poisonous  plant  for  food  purposes  was  discovered  and 
the  press  was  invented  for  a  very  definite  purpose.  It  was  not 
an  adaptation  of  something  already  in  use  to  a  new  purpose,  but 
a  direct  invention  of  a  new  device  for  a  new  service. 


22  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

For  the  removal  of  the  woody  fibre  from  the  cassava  pulp, 
a  sieve,  made  by  plaiting  splints  of  palm  fronds,  is  in  use.  They 
are  usually  square  with  the  sides  raised  by  tying  small  sticks 
along  the  sides.  Covers  for  pack  baskets  and  trays  for  bread 
are  made  in  the  same  way,  but  are  usually  oval  or  circular  in 
form.  After  the  pulp  has  been  rubbed  through  the  sieve  it  is 
ready  to  be  baked  into  great  flat  cakes  fifteen  inches  in  diameter 
and  a  quarter  of  an  inch  thick  on  an  oven  or  baking  pan. 
The  pan,  2  feet  in  diameter  and  2  inches  thick,  is  made  of  clay 
and  has  the  edges  turned  up  so  it  may  be  used  for  making  farina 
as  well.  It  stands  on  three  stones  or  adobe  supports  eight  or 
ten  inches  high,  while  room  is  left  between  the  supports  for 
firewood.  As  baking  requires  a  quick  hot  fire,  small  wood  is 
used  instead  of  the  larger  logs  which  make  a  better  fire  for 
boiling.  Metal  pans  are  now  being  introduced  for  making 
farina. 

Basketry 

Besides  the  cassava  presses,  sieves  and  bread  trays,  which 
may  be  considered  basketry  work,  there  are  many  other  types. 
The  most  important  of  these  is  the  pack  basket.  It  is  used  for 
all  kinds  of  heavy  work,  such  as  carrying  firewood,  ears  of  corn 
and  cassava  roots  from  the  fields  and  nuts  and  fruit  from  the 
forests.  It  is  also  used  for  carrying  personal  baggage  on  the 
trail.  The  rougher  examples  are  made  of  split  lianas  and  the 
finer  ones  of  the  splints  of  palm  fronds.  They  are  made  in  the 
form  of  a  Sioux  baby  cradle,  but  are  carried  with  the  closed  end 
down.  The  flat  side  which  rests  against  the  back  is  made  secure 
by  a  framework  of  four  small  rods,  two  of  which  project  below 
the  basket  and  serve  for  supports  when  the  basket  is  removed. 
The  basket  is  filled  while  in  a  reclining  position  and  a  cord  is 
laced  back  and  forth  across  the  open  side.  A  flat  piece  of  closely 
woven  basketry  or  leaves  may  be  used  to  cover  the  contents  and 
to  protect  them  from  the  rain.  Men  and  women  carry  with  a 
tump  line  made  of  the  inner  bark  of  a  small  cakaralli  tree 
(. Secythis  ollaria).  The  line  is  secured  one  third  way  down  the 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


23 


framework  of  the  basket  and  is  so  short  that  it  keeps  the  load 
well  up  on  the  back.  (Plate  XI I,  G.) 

While  no  fine  baskets  are  made  by  any  of  the  tropical  tribes 
they  are  all  expert  at  making  rough  baskets  for  temporary  use. 
For  fish,  game  or  fruit  a  basket  of  the  required  size  is  made  of 
a  single  leaf  in  a  few  minutes.  The  material  is  always  at  hand 
in  the  forest  and  it  is  much  easier  to  make  a  new  basket  if  one 
is  needed  than  to  carry  one  along;  hence  there  are  few  baskets 
of  any  value  except  the  small  telescopic  shoulder  baskets  used 
by  the  men  for  carrying  their  trinkets.  A  special  basket  is 
made  for  the  storage  of  farina.  It  is  loosely  woven  of  palm 
frond  splints  in  the  form  of  a  truncated  cone  and  made  to  stand 
on  the  small  end.  It  is  lined  with  leaves  to  prevent  the  farina 
from  sifting  through,  and  when  filled  is  covered  with  leaves  and 
splints  firmly  interlaced  over  the  top.  Put  away  in  this  form 
in  a  dry  place  the  farina  will  keep  indefinitely. 

I  he  women  make  a  rough  narrow  mouthed  basket  without 
a  lid  for  their  own  little  trinkets.  It  is  always  seen  hanging 
along  the  wall  near  the  fireplace.  The  men  spend  considerable 
time  and  skill  in  making  their  trinket  boxes  or  shoulder  baskets 
which  they  carry  with  them  on  all  occasions.  The  splints  are 
made  of  the  maranta  plant;  scraped  until  perfectly  smooth  and 
regular  and  bleached  or  stained  black  as  desired.  These  two 
colored  splints  are  woven  to  produce  various  geometrical  or 
animal  forms.  I  he  lid  is  made  to  telescope  the  basket  and 
often  it  alone  is  decorated.  F'or  carrying  over  the  shoulder,  a 
fine  cord,  fastened  underneath,  passes  around  the  ends  and 
through  the  lid.  The  baskets  are  often  decorated  with  tufts  of 
bright  feathers.  When  visiting,  a  man  always  carries  this 
basket  in  which  may  be  found  his  toilet  articles,  his  ornaments, 
his  mending  things,  and  small  objects  for  trade.  Upon  arrival 
at  a  neighboring  village,  a  man  takes  a  bath,  paints  his  body 
and  puts  on  his  ornaments.  These  baskets  are  bartered  from 
tribe  to  tribe.  The  Waiwais  make  the  best  ones  (Plate 
XXXIV.) 


24  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

Pottery 

The  Macusis  make  no  fine  pottery  but  their  cooking  and 
storage  pots  are  well  made  and  more  beautiful  in  form  than 
those  of  any  other  of  the  tropical  tribes.  There  is  no  good 
potter’s  clay  in  the  savannah  country,  but  if  there  were  there 
is  little  use  for  it,  because  the  calabash  takes  the  place  of 
pottery  vessels  and  serves  the  purpose  much  better.  It  is  light, 
durable  and  ready  at  hand.  The  coiling  process  is  used  in 
making  pottery.  Fillets  of  clay  are  laid  on  m  successive  layers, 
pressed  down  with  the  fingers  and  smoothed  inside  and  out  by 
rubbing  with  a  pebble  and  a  piece  of  calabash.  The  clay  is 
tempered  with  ashes.  The  vessel  is  fired  in  the  open.  For  a 
large  pot,  a  shallow  hole  is  dug,  the  pot  placed  inside  bottom 
upward  and  a  fire  built  over  it.  While  the  pot  is  still  hot, 
cassava  juice  is  poured  over  it  to  fill  up  the  pores.  1  he  large 
pots  for  storing  or  ripening  drink  may  hold  as  much  as  twenty 
gallons.  They  are  set  against  the  main  posts  in  the  middle  of 
the  large  house  for  protection. 

Water  is  carried  and  stored  in  large  gourds  capable  of  holding 
six  quarts.  The  gourd  is  carried  on  the  shoulder  and  held  there 
by  placing  the  fingers  in  the  hole  at  the  top.  Small  gourds  for 
carrying  water  on  the  trail  have  holes  on  the  side  of  the  neck 
but  the  large  ones  have  the  whole  end  of  the  neck  cut  off.  Dip¬ 
pers  and  all  bowls  for  food  or  drink  are  made  of  the  half  shell 
of  the  calabash  fruit  ( Crescentia  cujete). 

Spinning  and  Weaving 

Cotton  is  found  growing  about  all  the  villages,  not  in  planted 
and  cultivated  fields,  but  individual  trees  or  small  groups  here 
and  there  where  they  are  protected.  The  trees  are  perennial 
and  grow  to  a  height  of  eight  or  ten  feet.  The  women  do  every¬ 
thing  in  connection  with  collecting,  spinning  and  weaving  cotton, 
while  the  men  make  strings  and  larger  cords  of  other  fibres.  The 
cotton  is  collected  and  stored  away  to  dry  in  small  leaf-lined 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


25 


baskets  which  are  suspended  from  the  roof  near  the  ridge  pole. 
As  needed  the  cotton  is  seeded  by  hand  and  the  little  pads  of 
cotton  from  the  separate  bolls  are  pulled  out  into  long  loose 
bands  which  are  now  ready  to  spin.  A  band  is  wound  around 
the  left  wrist,  one  end  being  fastened  to  the  small  hook  of  the 
spindle,  which  is  spun  by  rolling  it  with  the  right  hand  down¬ 
ward  along  the  right  thigh.  While  the  spindle  revolves  the 
thickness  of  the  thread  is  regulated  with  the  right  hand.  If 
the  woman  is  standing  as  in  Plate  X,  B,  she  lifts  her  right  leg 
and  rolls  the  spindle  along  her  thigh.  She  prefers  to  stand  or 
to  sit  on  a  high  seat  in  order  to  give  more  room  for  the  suspended 
spindle  to  revolve.  The  finished  thread  is  wound  around  the 
spindle  above  the  whorl  until  it  is  full.  Then  small  balls  are 
made  and  rolled  up  in  leaves  for  safe  keeping  until  sufficient 
thread  for  a  hammock,  breech  cloth  or  baby  carrier  has  been 
spun.  For  making  hammocks  larger  threads  are  needed  so  the 
threads  from  two  balls  are  united  and  spun  together.  Flat 
work  baskets  are  used  to  hold  cotton  spindles  and  balls  of  yarn. 

The  Macusis  were,  no  doubt,  the  first  of  the  savannah  tribes 
to  spin  cotton  and  make  cotton  hammocks.  The  Wapisianas, 
who  now  make  the  best  hammocks,  say  they  learned  to  spin 
from  the  Macusis  in  rather  recent  times.  The  Macusis  learned 
the  art  from  the  Arecunas.  The  endless  warp  thread  is  wound 
round  and  round  the  loom  frame  in  a  horizontal  position.  The 
loom  is  then  turned  over,  making  the  warp  run  from  top  to  bot¬ 
tom,  and  stood  up  against  the  side  of  the  house.  The  weaver 
sits  on  the  ground  and  puts  the  woof  threads  through  from  side 
to  side  by  hand.  The  loom  has  been  described.  No  shuttle 
is  used,  nor  batten,  but  a  chain  is  sometimes  used  to 
lift  the  outer  warp  threads.  The  hammock,  instead  of 
having  solidly  woven  woof  threads,  has  a  number  of  equidis¬ 
tant  crossbars  consisting  of  only  three  entwined  threads. 
In  smaller  hammocks  aeta  palm  fibre  ( Mauritia  flexuosa )  is 
often  used  for  the  warp  and  cotton  for  the  woof.  Palm  fibre 
was  in  common  use  for  making  hammocks  throughout  the 


26  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


Guiana  regions  before  the  introduction  of  cotton  spinning,  as  it 
is  today  by  all  the  forest  tribes.  Both  types  are  still  found  in 
many  places.  When  the  body  of  the  hammock  is  finished, 
scale  lines  made  of  heavier  cords  are  threaded  through  the  loops 
of  the  warp  threads  at  the  two  ends.  The  outer  loop  of  the 
scale  lines  is  bound  and  well  wrapped  to  prevent  wear.  The  rope 
for  swinging  the  hammock  is  made  of  aeta  palm  fibre  or  of  the 
fibre  of  the  Ananas  by  the  men.  The  comfort  of  the  hammock 
depends  much  upon  the  proper  length  of  the  scale  lines  and  the 
care  with  which  they  are  arranged.  The  cotton  hammocks 
made  by  the  savannah  Indians,  Arawak  and  Carib,  are  the 
most  serviceable  as  well  as  the  most  comfortable  and  convenient 
of  any  made  by  any  people  known  to  me.  Hammocks  are  some¬ 
times  made  for  dogs  by  tying  the  ends  of  a  broad  piece  of  bark 
and  suspending  it  with  a  rope. 

Cotton  is  used  also  in  weaving  loin  cloths  for  men.  These 
are  from  one  to  two  yards  long  and  about  eight  inches  in  width. 
They  are  worn  between  the  legs  and  suspended  back  and  front 
over  a  plaited  belt.  The  Waiwais  usually  wear  a  longer  cloth 
which  is  made  to  serve  as  a  belt  as  well.  To  put  it  on,  the  man 
holds  one  end  under  his  chin,  passes  the  other  back  between 
his  legs  around  in  front  over  his  right  hip,  back  over  the  left 
and  fastens  it  behind  with  a  regular  timber  hitch  leaving  eight 
or  ten  inches  free  to  fall  down  over  the  left  hip.  The  front  is 
then  folded  down  near  to  the  knees  and  attached  by  the  tassels 
which  are  allowed  to  hang  down  in  front  on  either  side  of  the 
cloth.  Extra  ornaments  are  often  attached  to  the  cloth  or  worn 
as  a  separate  string  tied  over  the  cloth.  Baby  carriers,  endless 
bands  eight  or  ten  inches  wide,  are  woven  of  cotton  on  a  peculiar 
loom  made  of  four  crossed  sticks.  Carriers  are  sometimes  made 
of  bark.  They  are  worn  over  the  shoulder,  the  child  sitting  in 
the  loop  with  his  feet  hanging  in  front  of  his  mother’s  hip. 
Her  back  is  thus  left  free  for  the  pack  basket  which  is  suspended 
from  a  bark  or  woven  tump  line  over  her  forehead.  Endless 
bands  an  inch  wide  are  woven  over  pliable  sticks  and  worn  on 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


27 


the  head  by  young  women  of  marriageable  age  at  their  dances. 
More  interesting  and  more  difficult  to  weave  are  the  leg  bands 
or  anklets  from  one  to  two  inches  wide  woven  in  place.  The 
whole  bands  in  the  collection  were  woven  around  a  stick  of 
wood.  A  very  different  type  of  weaving  is  that  used  in  making 
the  women  s  beaded  aprons.  A  small  loom,  made  of  one  bent 
stick  held  in  place  by  a  crossbar  is  strung  with  the  warp  threads. 
The  woof  is  a  string  of  small  beads  of  different  colors  so  strung 
that  they  form  the  designs  of  the  apron.  The  loin  or  back 
apron  is  woven  in  the  same  fashion.  This  loom  and  the  apron 
also  are  developed  from  the  old  style  of  apron,  still  worn  by 
small  girls,  made  of  a  fringe  of  suspended  cotton  strings. 

The  spindle  in  use  is  made  of  a  stick  of  hard  wood  from 
ten  to  fifteen  inches  long  having  a  small  hook  at  the  top.  Six 
inches  from  the  lower  end  is  the  whorl,  a  disc  of  stone,  shell  or 
pottery  two  inches  in  diameter,  which  holds  the  thread  in  place 
as  it  is  wound  around  the  spindle  and  adds  to  the  momentum 
of  the  spindle  when  spinning. 

Strings  are  needed  for  a  great  variety  of  purposes.  Cotton 
is  used  for  the  softer,  finer  threads  and  for  weaving  hammocks, 
baby  carriers  and  breech  cloths.  The  twisted  fibre  of  the  aeta 
palm  ( Mauritia  flexuosa),  which  grows  abundantly  in  the  low¬ 
lands,  is  used  for  making  bags,  nets  and  hammocks.  Fish  lines, 
strong  cords  and  bow  strings  a^e  made  from  ixtle  grass  ( Bromelia 
sylvestns )  and  a  variety  of  Ananas  which  grows  on  high  land. 
The  aeta  palm  fibre  is  taken  from  the  young  leaf  which  grows 
inclosed  in  a  spike  from  the  centre  of  the  tree.  The  outer 
rough  skin  is  torn  off  by  rubbing  it  at  the  end  and  separating 
it  from  the  fibre.  To  twist  the  fibres  into  strings  of  the  desired 
size  requires  skill  and  long  patient  practice.  The  required 
number  of  fibres  are  held  by  the  upper  end  in  the  left  hand  and 
across  the  bare  right  thigh.  They  are  then  rolled  along  the 
thigh  with  the  right  hand  so  that  each  strand  twists  separately; 
then  by  a  backward  roll  these  strands  are  made  to  twist  about 
each  other  into  a  single  thread.  When  heavier  cords  or  lines 


28  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

are  required  two,  three  or  more  of  these  threads  are  twisted 
together  in  the  same  manner.  The  leaf  of  the  ixtle  is  broad 
and  heavy,  with  a  tough  skin.  To  free  the  fibre,  the  leaf  is 
soaked  in  water  and  beaten  over  a  rock  until  the  pulp  is  softened 
and  the  fibre  freed.  The  fibre  is  then  washed  and  dried  in  the 
sun  for  a  few  days,  when  it  is  ready  for  use.  The  fibre  of  the 
Ananas  is  finer  and  softer  but  very  strong,  while  the  skin  covering 
and  pulp  are  soft.  At  the  height  of  a  man’s  head,  a  heavy  cord 
with  a  loose  double  slip  knot  is  tied  around  a  small  tree  or  house 
post.  The  leaf  is  split  along  the  midrib  from  the  bottom  nearly 
to  the  top.  The  end  of  the  leaf  is  put  through  the  slip  knot 
in  such  a  way  that  each  side  of  the  loop  tightens  on  a  half  of 
the  leaf.  The  man,  taking  the  tip  of  the  leaf  in  his  hands,  gives 
it  a  sudden  jerk  which  forces  the  leaf  through  the  loop.  The 
cord  strips  off  all  the  soft  parts  and  allows  only  the  strong 
fibres  to  pass  through.  If  the  jerk  is  too  violent  the  fibres 
break  off  at  the  top.  A  slow  pull  tightens  the  knot  on  the 
fibre  and  it  cannot  be  pulled  through.  After  skill  has  been 
acquired  the  leaves  can  be  run  through  quite  rapidly.  The 
fibre  is  washed  and  dried  in  the  sun  until  properly  bleached 
and  cured.  This  makes  the  strongest  and  smoothest  cord  of 
any  of  the  fibres.  The  men  collect  the  materials,  make  all  the 
strings  and  cords  and  manufacture  all  the  nets  while  the  women 
do  the  spinning  and  weaving.  Women  weave  the  hammocks, 
but  the  men  make  the  ropes  to  swing  them:  women  make  the 
breech  cloths,  but  the  men  make  the  belts.  Schomburgk  refers 
to  belts  made  of  human  hair  and  monkey  hair,  but  none  are  in 
use  today.  Round  and  flat  belts  are  now  plaited  of  strips  of 
bast  or  vine.  Bandoleers  are  made  of  several  loosely  spun 
cotton  cords  or  hair  cords  and  worn  as  ornaments  instead  of 
long  strings  of  seed  necklaces.  Schomburgk  may  have  seen 
these  used  as  belts. 

The  forest  provides  ready  made  splendid  substitutes  for 
the  manufactured  cords  in  the  pliant  stems  of  a  great  variety 
of  lianas  or  creepers  known  locally  under  the  general  term  bush 


FARABEE - THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


29 


rope.  ’  A  bush  rope  may  be  the  size  of  a  thread  or  a  six  inch 
cable;  it  may  be  one  foot  or  a  hundred  feet  in  length.  With  it 
you  may  tie  a  bandage  on  your  toe  or  haul  your  canoe;  suspend 
your  pipe  bag  or  hang  a  horse.  One  must  learn  how  to  pull 
down  a  bush  rope  because  it  requires  some  skill  and  manipu¬ 
lation.  Suppose  a  bush  rope  is  hanging  from  a  branch  fifty 
feet  from  the  ground.  It  would  be  impossible  for  a  man  to 
pull  it  down  by  a  direct  pull;  so  he  twists  it,  keeping  it  tight 
meanwhile,  then  pulls  hard  and  suddenly  slackens  it  to  allow 
the  twist  to  run  to  the  top  of  the  rope  where  it  kinks.  Just  at 
the  instant  the  kink  forms  he  gives  the  rope  a  violent  jerk  and 
breaks  it  off.  These  bush  ropes  are  used  to  tie  the  framework 
of  the  house  together,  to  tie  the  roof  and  the  sidewalls  on,  to 
make  traps  and  snares  and  baskets.  The  water  from  one  slakes 
the  thirst  of  the  hunter  while  that  of  another  is  used  to  poison 
fish.  No  other  forest  product  supplies  so  many  wants. 

Agriculture 

The  open  savannah  land  is  not  suitable  for  cultivation 
without  irrigation  because  the  hot  sun  and  the  winds  of  the  dry 
seasons  take  up  the  'moisture,  leaving  the  ground  parched  and 
baked  before  the  rains  come  again.  The  fields  are  usually  made 
at  some  distance  from  the  village  in  the  depths  of  the  forest 
where  the  soil  is  rich  and  the  moisture  retained  by  the  protec¬ 
tion  of  the  surrounding  trees.  During  the  dry  season  the  trees 
and  underbrush  are  cut  down  and  allowed  to  remain  where  they 
fall.  When  the  leaves  and  bark  have  dried  out  the  whole  place 
is  burned  over  and  all  the  smaller  branches  consumed.  The 
blackened  trunks  with  their  interlocking  branches  are  allowed 
to  remain  where  they  fell.  No  attempt  is  made  to  roll  them 
together  and  burn  them  for  a  very  good  reason  which  will 
appear  later.  By  this  method  of  burning  a  layer  of  ashes  is 
left  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  field  which  adds  to  the  fertility 
of  the  soil.  The  bark  on  the  logs  is  partially  burned.  The 
remainder  later  falls  off  and  is  decomposed  where  it  falls.  This 


30 


UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM— ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


method  of  clearing  differs  from  the  two  methods  used  in  North 
America  in  frontier  days.  1  he  frontiersman  either  cut  down  all 
the  trees,  collected  them  into  great  heaps  and  burned  them,  or 
he  left  the  large  trees  standing  and  girdled  them.  The  Carib 
Indian  method  is  better  for  his  country  at  least.  The  fallen 
logs  hold  the  moisture  and  interfere  very  little  with  his  style  of 
cultivation.  His  corn,  which  needs  more  moisture  than  cas¬ 
sava,  he  plants  along  the  logs  where  the  ashes  and  the  decom¬ 
posing  bark  make  the  soil  more  fertile  as  well.  For  these 
reasons  he  is  willing  to  cut  down  the  trees  which  will  not  be 
decomposed  before  he  must  desert  the  field  on  account  of  the 
rank  growth  of  weeds  and  other  filth  and  make  a  new  field. 
The  fallen  logs  also  furnish  good  pathways  through  the  cassava 
fields— an  Indian  thoroughly  enjoys  walking  on  a  log. 

In  preparing  the  field  for  planting,  no  plows  or  hoes  are 
used  to  turn  over  the  soil.  Neither  agriculture  nor  horticulture 
is  the  proper  term  to  use  in  connection  with  the  cultivation  of 
the  soil  in  these  regions.  The  fields  are  new  and  roots  are 
plentiful.  Hence  a  sharpened  stick  is  the  best  implement  that 
can  be  used  in  breaking  up  the  hard  soil  between  the  roots. 
The  Indians  now  have  some  hoes  and  have  adjusted  iron  points 
to  their  sticks  but  in  some  places  they  still  use  the  old  form 
of  stick.  Hills  two  and  a  half  feet  in  diameter  and  eight  inches 
high  are  dug  up  about  five  feet  apart  into  which  five  or  six 
stems  of  the  cassava  plant  are  inserted  in  a  slanting  position 
to  a  depth  of  a  foot  or  more.  Planting  for  the  most  part  is 
done  just  at  the  beginning  of  the  rainy  season  in  May  or  June. 
This  is  also  the  season  for  making  farina,  which  is  stored  away 
in  baskets.  The  old  plants  are  pulled  up  by  their  roots.  Stems 
of  these  old  plants,  from  two  to  three  feet  in  length,  are  used 
in  planting  the  new  field.  It  is  customary  to  replant  the  old 
field  by  inserting  stems  in  the  old  hills  as  the  cassava  is  used 
out;  thus  with  little  labor  the  field  is  kept  full  and  growing. 
But  this  system  soon  exhausts  the  immediate  soil  while  other 
rank  vegetation  takes  possession  between  the  hills.  Very  little 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


31 


cultivating  is  ever  done  after  the  first  planting  gets  a  good 
start.  For  a  few  months  the  weeds  are  pulled  from  the  hills 
and  the-  young  shoots  stripped  from  the  stumps,  but  by  the 
time  the  plants  are  six  months  old  they  have  attained  a  height 
of  five  feet  and  their  spreading  leafy  branches  cover  the  ground 
and  their  shade  holds  the  moisture.  The  days  and  nights  are 
of  equal  length,  so  the  hot  sun  of  the  dry  season  has  no  bad 
effect  upon  the  growing  plants.  By  this  time  the  corn  and 
sweet  potatoes,  which  are  planted  with  the  cassava,  have  rip¬ 
ened  and  gone,  leaving  the  cassava  in  complete  possession. 
The  Indians  understand  the  value  of  careful  selection  of  new 
seed.  They  make  long  journeys  to  get  new  varieties. 

When  the  cassava  is  eight  months  old  it  is  ready  for  use. 
Bread  is  often  made  of  younger  roots  but  it  is  not  nourishing 
because  it  is  composed  largely  of  fibre  with  little  pulp;  the  best 
age  is  from  eight  to  fourteen  months.  After  this  period  the  roots 
tend  to  harden  and  become  woody.  Sometimes  two  fields  of 
cassava  are  planted;  one  before  the  June  rains  and  the  other 
before  the  December  rains.  All  other  crops  are  planted  in  May 
because  the  June  rains  are  longer  continued  and  the  plants  get 
a  better  start  for  the  dry  season.  It  very  often  happens  that 
little  rain  falls  in  December  and  the  November  planting  fails 
for  want  of  moisture. 

The  sweet  cassava  ( Manihot  palmata  aipi )  is  used  as  a 
vegetable  to  some  extent  and  is  planted  in  the  same  field  with 
the  poisonous  variety. 

For  many  reasons  cassava  is  the  best  food  plant  for  the 
tropics.  It  requires  less  moisture  than  corn.  Its  roots  extend 
deep  into  the  earth  and  its  spreading  branches  make  a  dense 
shade  which  prevents  evaporation  of  moisture  from  the  soil 
during  the  long  dry  season.  It  grows  from  cuttings,  may  be 
planted  twice  a  year,  may  be  used  at  any  time,  does  not  die  out 
at  the  end  of  the  season,  and  gives  the  whole  crop  for  use.  It 
is  a  poisonous  plant  which  animals,  birds  and  insects  neither  eat 
nor  destroy.  Besides,  it  is  less  difficult  to  prepare  and  more 
convenient  for  use  than  corn  or  wheat. 


32 


UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


Corn,  beans,  melons,  squashes,  pumpkins,  sweet  potatoes 
and  sugar  cane  are  all  planted  to  some  extent  in  the  same  field 
with  the  cassava.  Corn  is  planted  along  the  logs  where  it  gets 
the  advantage  of  enriched  soil  and  preserved  moisture.  Potatoes 
are  planted  a  few  hills  together  in  the  best  soil.  Cane  is  planted 
on  the  lowest  ground;  it  grows  best  there,  while  cassava  grows 
best  on  higher  ground.  Tobacco,  peppers,  pineapples  and 
pumpkins  are  planted  without  regularity  or  grouping;  while 
bananas,  cashews  (. Anacardium  occidentale )  and  the  papaya 
(i Carica  papaya)  are  scattered  here  and  there  about  the  field. 

Thus  the  field  is  planted  with  reference  to  its  later  abandon¬ 
ment.  After  three  years  of  replanting  cassava  in  the  same 
hills  the  soil  becomes  exhausted  and  weeds,  grass  and  shrubs 
take  possession  of  the  field.  Of  the  great  profusion  of  plants 
the  two  most  conspicuous  are  the  ant  wood  ( Cecropia  peltata) 
and  several  varieties  of  the  passion  flower  ( Passiflora  laurifolia). 
These  mat  themselves  together  so  that  it  is  next  to  impossible 
to  make  a  passage  way  through  them.  The  fruit  trees  hold 
out  against  the  encroaching  forest  for  a  time,  and  the  natives 
return  for  the  fruit.  It  is  a  dangerous  undertaking,  however, 
because  an  old  field  is  a  favorite  place  for  poisonous  snakes,  and 
the  millions  of  ants  from  their  homes  in  the  hollow  stems  of 
the  ant  wood  make  one’s  life  miserable. 

Harvest  time  extends  the  year  round  for  cassava  and  sugar 
cane  as  they  know  no  season.  Corn  when  ripe  must  be  col¬ 
lected  before  the  next  rains  begin.  Men  set  up  some  posts 
with  cross  bars  in  the  field  as  a  drying  frame;  then  they  pull 
off  the  ears  and  tie  the  husks  together  in  pairs,  while  the  women 
carry  them  in  and  hang  them  on  the  frame.  When  dry  the 
corn  is  carried  to  the  house  where  it  is  hung  up  on  the  cross¬ 
beams.  Men  usually  cut  and  carry  in  the  sugar  cane,  while 
the  women  pull  up  and  carry  in  the  cassava  as  it  is  needed. 
Men  clear  the  fields,  assist  in  burning  and  planting,  but  the 
women  take  care  of  the  scanty  cultivation. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRA!.  CARIBS 


33 


Food 

I  he  Macusis  live  more  by  agriculture  than  by  hunting  and 
fishing.  They  are  fond  of  game  and  make  long  hunting  journeys 
into  the  forests.  At  certain  seasons  of  the  year  they  catch  fish 
by  poisoning  the  pools  along  the  river.  Fruits  and  nuts  are 
eaten  raw,  but  all  meat  and  vegetables  are  cooked  by  boiling, 
baking  or  roasting.  Meat  is  preserved  for  four  or  five  days  by 
roasting  and  smoking  it  continually  on  a  barbecue.  For  the 
most  part,  meat  is  boiled  because  the  people  prize  the  soup 
quite  as  much  as  the  meat  itself.  The  soup  is  used  for  soaking 
the  dry  hard  bread  or  for  mixing  with  farina. 

All  the  native  animals  except  the  jaguar,  puma,  anteater 
and  sloth  are  used  for  food.  Monkey  meat  is  preferred  to  all 
other.  The  big  black  maicasapa  is  the  best  and  the  red  howler 
(■ Mycetes  seniculus )  second.  Then  in  turn  come  the  birds, 
turtles,  animals  and  insects.  The  native  stalks  the  savannah 
deer  ( Cervus  savannarum )  and  shoots  it  with  the  bow  and  arrow. 
The  small  red  forest  deer  ( Cervus  humilus )  is  also  prized.  Two 
varieties  of  peccary  are  common  in  the  forests;  the  Dicotyles 
labiatus  is  found  in  large  droves  and  the  small  one  (D.  torquatus ) 
in  small  groups.  Both  are  good  eating,  particularly  so  when 
half  grown.  Many  are  kept  as  pets  about  the  house  but  they 
have  not  been  domesticated.  The  coarse  flesh  of  the  tapir 
{Tapiris  terrestris )  which  is  better  than  poor  beef,  is  greatly 
prized.  I  he  capybara  ( Hydrochoerus  capybara),  the  largest  of 
all  the  rodents,  is  occasionally  eaten  under  necessity,  but  the 
agouti  ( Dasyprocta  aguti)  and  the  paca  ( Coelogenys  paca )  are 
always  eaten.  The  large  lizard  ( Iguana  tuberculata )  is  consid¬ 
ered  as  good  as  a  bird. 

The  larger  birds,  with  the  exception  of  the  falcons,  vultures 
and  now  domestic  fowls,  which  are  considered  unclean,  are 
regularly  eaten.  All  the  toucans,  parrots  and  doves  are  difficult 
to  catch  or  to  kill,  but  the  curassow  ( Crax  alector),  maroudi 
( Penelope  pipile),  trumpeter  (P sophia  crepitans)  and  the  maam 
(' Tinamotis  elegans)  are  easily  shot  with  the  bow  and  arrow 


34  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM— ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

because  they  come  when  called  by  the  Indians,  who  are  perfect 
imitators.  The  whistling  ducks  ( Anas  autumnahs)  are  numerous 
in  the  lakes  in  the  wet  season.  The  muscovy  ( Cainna  moschata) 
occurs,  but  not  in  great  numbers.  The  great  negrocope  (Tan¬ 
talus  loculator)  is  seldom  eaten,  but  the  jabiru  (Mycteria  amen- 
cana )  is  considered  as  good  as  duck.  The  small  herons  are  so 
poor  they  are  not  eaten.  Domestic  fowls  are  now  common,  but 
desired  only  because  the  cocks  crow  in  the  early  morning. 

Two  varieties  of  land  tortoises,  the  small  one  ( Testudo  tabu- 
lata )  so  common  in  the  savannah,  and  a  large  one  that  lives  in 
the  forest,  and  water  turtles  ( Emys  tracaxa )  are  greatly  sought 
after  on  account  of  their  delicate  flesh.  They  are  usually 
roasted  whole  in  the  shell.  The  savannah  tortoise  is  difficult  to 
find  in  the  grass,  but  when  the  ground  is  burnt  over  they  may 
be  seen  and  collected  in  large  numbers.  The  forest  variety 
may  be  tracked  in  the  leaves  -and  caught.  The  turtles  are 
caught  on  sand-bars  along  the  river  when  they  go  out  at  night 
to  lay  their  eggs.  The  soft  shelled  eggs  of  the  tracaxa  are  about 
the  size  of  pigeons’  eggs  and  may  be  eaten  raw  or  cooked.  They 
have  good  food  value,  the  granular  yolk  being  very  rich  in  oil. 
Fifteen  to  twenty  eggs  are  found  together  in  one  nest.  All 
birds’  eggs  found  in  the  forest  are  eaten  regardless  of  the  stage 
of  incubation. 

When  other  food  is  scarce,  insects  are  eaten.  The  large 
grub  of  the  palm  beetle  (Calandra  palmarum )  is  greatly  prized 
by  all  who  have  made  its  acquaintance.  Wasps’  nests  are 
robbed  of  the  grubs,  which  are  fried  or  parched. 

Wild  game  is  not  plentiful  in  the  savannah,  but  there  are 
many  fish  in  the  rivers  and  the  Macusis  have  learned  to  capture 
them  in  large  numbers  by  poisoning  the  pools  during  the  dr\ 
season.  When  freshly  caught  the  fish  are  boiled  and  the  soup 
used  for  soaking  the  bread.  When  they  are  taken  in  large 
numbers  at  a  poisoning  they  are  roasted  on  a  great  barbecue 
and  carried  home,  where  they  are  kept  over  the  fire  and  smoked. 
There  are  a  great  many  varieties  of  fish  and  all  are  eaten,  but 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CAR’BS 


35 


the  most  prized  are  the  following:  arapaima  ( Sudis  gigas), 
aimara  ( Erythmus  macrodon) ,  pirai  ( Sarasalmus  piraya),  pacu 
( Myletus  pacu),  electric  eel  ( Gymnotus  electricus)  and  even  the 
stingray  ( Trigon  hystrix). 

The  Macusis  eat  salt  and  often  rub  it  on  the  meat  before  it 
is  dried.  They  formerly  obtained  their  salt  from  the  Wapisianas, 
who  evaporated  the  water  which  collected  in  shallow  pools  about 
the  foot  of  Mount  Seriri.  Many  of  the  Carib  tribes  of  the  interior 
forests  use  no  salt. 

The  principal  food  of  all  the  central  Carib  tribes,  and  the 
Arawaks  of  the  region  as  well,  is  the  flour  and  bread  made  from 
the  roots  of  the  bitter  cassava  plant  (M amhot  utilissiwia )  which 
is  common  throughout  tropical  America.  It  is  a  perennial  with 
a  slender  stem  six  feet  high  and  long  spreading  leaves  which 
cover  the  ground  between  the  hills  with  a  dense  shade.  Its 
tapering  roots  six  inches  in  diameter  and  eighteen  inches  long 
at  maturity  contain  a  milky  juice  which  holds  in  solution  a 
poisonous  principle  known  as  hydrocyanic  acid.  It  cannot 
therefore  be  used  as  a  vegetable,  but  the  Indians  have  learned 
how  to  extract  the  juice  and  to  drive  off  the  poison  by  heat. 
The  roots  must  first  be  reduced  to  a  pulp  by  grating  or  rasping 
on  an  instrument  ingeniously  made  for  the  purpose. 

The  manufacture  of  farina  or  the  baking  of  bread  is  a 
laborious  undertaking.  The  cassava  roots  are  pulled  up,  carried 
home,  peeled,  washed  and  grated  by  the  women.  The  grater 
and  the  other  necessary  implements  have  already  been  described 
on  page  2 1 .  One  end  of  the  grater  is  placed  in  a  large  receptacle, 
usually  a  leaf  stock  or  turtle  shell,  while  the  other  end  rests 
against  the  thighs  of  the  operator,  who,  grasping  a  root  in  each 
hand,  rubs  them  up  and  down  over  the  angular  stones  of  the 
grater,  reducing  them  to  pulp.  This  pulp  is  then  forced  into 
the  upper  end  of  the  cylindrical  press,  which  has  been  expanded 
to  its  greatest  size,  thus  shortening  it  to  half  its  former  length. 
The  press  is  then  hung  on  the  end  of  a  beam  or  the  fork  of  a 
pole  set  for  the  purpose  and  a  lever  passed  through  the  loop  at 


36  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM— ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

the  lower  closed  end  of  the  press.  A  woman  sits  on  the  end 
of  the  lever,  thus  stretching  the  press  downwards  and  con¬ 
tracting  its  sides.  The  poisonous  juice  is  forced  out  through 
the  wickerwork  sides  of  the  press  and  runs  down  into  a  bowl 
at  the  bottom.  The  longer  the  weight  is  applied,  the  drier  # 
the  pulp  in  the  press  becomes,  but  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  is 
sufficient  for  all  requirements. 

When  the  weight  is  removed  the  press  expands  and  releases 
the  solid  cylinder  of  dry  cassava  about  six  inches  in  diameter, 
which  looks  like  the  core  of  a  diamond  drill.  The  pulp  is 
broken  up  and  rubbed  through  a  coarse  sieve  to  remove  the 
particles  of  woody  fibre.  It  is  now  ready  for  baking  or  for  mak¬ 
ing  into  farina.  When  bread  is  to  be  baked,  a  very  hot  fire  is 
made  of  small  dry  wood,  and  a  thin  layer  of  cassava  is  spread 
over  the  entire  surface  of  the  oven  or  baking  pan.  A  fan  made 
of  a  palm  leaf  (. Astrocaryum  tucumoides )  is  used  to  spread  the 
cassava  on  the  pan  and  to  turn  the  large  cake  when  one  side 
has  been  baked.  The  edge  of  the  cake  is  smoothed  and  rounded 
with  a  small  wooden  paddle.  When  the  bread  is  first  baked,  it 
is  rather  soft,  but  after  it  has  dried  in  the  sun  on  the  house  roof 
for  a  few  hours  it  becomes  so  hard  that  it  must  be  moistened 
when  eaten.  It  will  keep  for  months  if  stored  in  a  dry  place 
where  mold  will  not  form.  While  not  palatable,  this  kind  of 
bread  contains  high  food  value  and  one  soon  learns  to  eat  it 
with  relish. 

It  would  appear  that  the  Caribs  and  the  Arawaks  of  this 
region  learned  the  manufacture  of  farina  from  the  Brazilian 
Indians  in  comparatively  recent  times.  The  step  from  making 
bread  to  making  farina  is  not  a  difficult  one.  If  the  pulp  on 
the  baking  pan  is  stirred  and  broken  up  into  small  particles 
and  cooked  or  baked  for  a  longer  time  it  becomes  brown  and 
parched.  In  this  state  it  is  called  farina.  The  oven  for  making 
farina  should  be  larger,  with  upturned  edge,  making  the  oven 
two  or  three  inches  deep.  The  sifted  cassava  pulp  is  spread 
over  the  hot  oven  and  stirred  constantly  to  prevent  it  from 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


37 


sticking  to  the  bottom  and  burning.  After  it  is  thoroughly 
cooked  it  is  allowed  to  cool  and  then  stored  away  in  small 
conical  baskets  for  future  use.  When  made  in  this  way  it  is  called 
white  farina.  Another  variety,  called  yellow  or  water  farina,  is 
made  by  the  same  process  except  that  the  roots  are  allowed  to 
soak  three  or  four  days  in  water  before  they  are  grated.  For 
the  trail,  farina  is  a  most  desirable  food  to  carry.  It  has  been 
thoroughly  cooked  and  can  be  eaten  dry,  mixed  with  cold  water 
or  soup  of  any  kind.  It  is  preferred  to  bread  because  it  can 
be  mixed  and  eaten  with  so  many  things — with  meat  and  fish, 
pumpkins,  squashes,  palm  nut  and  other  kinds  of  drink. 

Among  the  Macusis,  corn  is  the  second  most  important 
food.  It  may  be  roasted  in  the  ear  before  it  matures,  parched, 
made  into  hominy  or  ground  in  the  mortar  as  already  described. 
It  is  seldom  made  into  bread  by  itself  but  is  mixed  with  cassava, 
thus  greatly  improving  the  otherwise  tasteless  cassava  bread. 
Nuts  and  seeds  of  various  kinds  are  gathered  and  eaten.  They 
are  sometimes  mixed  with  the  cassava,  when  it  is  young  and 
weak,  to  give  it  body  and  strength.  The  Brazil  nut  ( Bertholletia 
excelsa )  is  eaten  raw  and  greatly  appreciated.  It  is  pounded  in 
a  mortar  to  extract  the  oil  which  is  used  on  the  hair  and  on  the 
body.  The  meal  is  mixed  with  cassava  and  made  into  bread 
or  it  may  be  mixed  with  mashed  sweet  potatoes  and  made  into 
a  most  delicious  potato  bread.  In  extracting  the  oil  a  small 
press  like  the  one  used  for  cassava  is  used.  Pumpkins  and 
squashes  are  cooked  with  the  meat  or  mashed  and  mixed  with 
farina.  Sweet  potatoes  are  boiled  and  eaten  cold,  roasted  or 
baked  with  nuts.  Peppers  of  various  kinds  are  used  for  flavor¬ 
ing.  Sugar  cane  is  used  for  making  drink  or  chewed  for  food. 
A  very  good  press  has  been  invented  for  extracting  the  cane 
juice  for  making  drink.  Watermelons  and  muskmelons  are 
eaten  raw. 

If  the  diet  is  confined  entirely  to  cassava  bread  or  farina  it 
tends  to  distend  the  stomach,  particularly  among  the  children. 
As  the  children  grow  older,  or  with  a  change  of  diet,  the  condi¬ 
tion  disappears. 


38  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

Fruits  form  a  large  part  of  the  diet.  Bananas  are  the  most 
important,  the  plantains  are  known  but  not  depended  upon. 
The  cashew  (Anacardium  occidentale) ,  the  pineapple  ( Ananas 
ananas )  and  the  papaya  ( Carica  papaya )  are  all  eaten  raw,  when 
ripe,  and  used  in  making  drinks.  The  nut  of  the  cashew  is 
roasted  and  greatly  prized.  The  papaya  fruit  or  leaves  are 
cooked  with  tough  meat  to  make  it  tender.  Of  the  wild  fruits 
the  abiu  ( Achras  cainito),  the  guava  ( Psidium  pomiferum )  and 
the  imbira  are  the  best.  The  abiu  grows  on  a  very  high  tree 
in  the  forest,  while  the  guava  grows  on  small  bushes  along  the 
rivers  in  the  savannah.  The  small  fruit  of  the  rubber  tree 
(. Mimusops  balata )  is  delicious  but  difficult  to  collect  without 
cutting  off  the  limbs — a  method  our  expedition  used  in  getting 
the  abiu  when  in  dire  need  of  food.  The  fruit  of  the  bulucush 
palm  is  cut  open  and  the  milk  dried  for  soup.  The  heart  of  the 
manicole  palm  ( Euterpe  exorrhi^a)  is  eaten  either  raw  or  cooked. 
It  has  little  food  value,  reminding  one  somewhat  of  cabbage. 
There  are  a  number  of  palm  fruits  used  for  making  drinks,  but 
they  contain  such  a  small  amount  of  pulp  that  they  are  seldom 
eaten  raw. 

Fire  is  made  by  rubbing  two  sticks  together  in  the  form  of 
a  chisel  and  groove.  The  chisel  is  held  at  an  angle  between  the 
hands  and  rubbed  violently  back  and  forth  along  the  groove 
until  the  wood  particles  thus  produced  glow  with  heat,  when 
they  are  blown  into  a  flame.  Fire  is  kept  burning  in  every 
house,  so  it  is  not  often  that  fire  has  to  be  made.  The  Macusis 
now  have  matches  and  few  of  them  know  how  to  make  fire  by 
the  old  method.  For  kindling  fire  quickly  when  wood  is  damp 
or  for  making  a  light  about  camp,  they  use  the  resin  from  the 
acaiara  or  konima  tree  ( Idea  heptaphylla).  It  burns  slowly; 
a  lump  two  inches  square  and  an  inch  thick  would  give  a  good 
light  for  an  hour.  When  eating  our  dinner  at  night  in  the  forest 
we  often  depended  upon  the  konima  tree  for  light.  The  resin 
is  found  at  the  root  of  the  tree  in  hard  lumps. 


FARABEE - THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


39 


Manufacture  of  Drinks 

The  most  important  drinks  made  by  the  Macusis  are  those 
used  at  certain  dances  or  drinking  bouts  which  take  place  upon 
all  unusual  or  important  occasions.  The  greatest  dance  is  the 
paricari,  and  the  best  drink  is  made  for  that  dance  and  bears 
its  name.  The  Arawaks  call  the  drink  parikara  and  the  coast 
Caribs  call  it  paiwari.  It  is  manufactured  in  a  similar  way  and 
used  for  a  similar  purpose  among  all  the  tribes.  It  is  not  always 
kept  in  stock  because  it  is  difficult  to  make.  To  manufacture  it 
the  ordinary  cassava  bread  is  made  a  little  thicker  than  usual 
and  while  still  hot  is  dipped  quickly  into  cold  water.  A  bed  of 
banana  leaves  covered  with  cassava  leaves  is  made  on  the  floor 
in  a  dark  corner  of  the  house.  The  hot  moistened  bread  is  then 
spread  out  in  layers,  six  feet  across,  until  the  mass  is  about  two 
inches  thick,  the  whole  is  then  covered  with  banana  leaves. 
After  four  days,  when  the  leaves  are  removed  the  mass  of  bread 
has  undergone  fermentation  and  is  twice  its  former  bulk.  Its 
whole  surface  is  covered  with  a  thick  heavy  white  mold.  It  is 
now  ready  to  be  broken  up  and  stored  in  large  pots  where  it 
remains  for  two  more  days  to  complete  fermentation.  A  small 
canoe  or  a  great  trough  made  for  the  purpose  is  placed  in  the 
middle  of  the  dancing  ground,  which  is  usually  the  centre  of  a 
large  house,  the  fermented  bread  transferred  to  it  and  water 
added  to  suit  the  taste  of  the  expert  manufacturer.  At  the  dance, 
a  girl  is  placed  in  charge  of  the  drink,  and  after  straining  it 
through  a  small  basket  she  passes  it  to  the  head  man,  who  serves 
it  to  the  dancers.  It  is  mildly  intoxicating  and  men  often  drink 
enough  to  feel  its  effect.  Women  drink  it  also  but  never  to 
excess.  The  observer  is  astonished  at  the  amount  the  men  can 
drink.  They  have  the  ability  also  of  emptying  the  stomach  at 
will  and  filling  it  again.  After  some  hours  a  drinking  bout  or 
dance  of  this  sort  becomes  a  disgusting  spectacle.  Apparently 
there  are  no  evil  effects  produced  by  the  drink.  When  the  dance 
is  over,  the  men  immediately  go  to  sleep  and  wake  up  hungry, 
but  as  well  as  usual. 


40  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

Another  drink  is  made  for  the  paiwai  dance  and  is  called 
by  the  same  name.  Cassava  bread  is  made  twice  its  ordinary 
thickness  and  baked  on  both  sides  until  it  is  black  and  charred. 
While  it  is  still  hot,  it  is  rolled  up  in  green  banana  leaves  and 
stored  away  on  the  cross  beams  of  the  house.  At  the  end  of  a 
week,  it  is  taken  down  and  unrolled,  when  it  is  found  to  be 
covered  with  a  heavy  mold.  It  is  then  broken  up  and  mixed 
with  water  and  casiri,  or  cassava  juice.  It  is  now  the  consistency 
of  thick  soup  and  somewhat  intoxicating.  It  is  used  at  the  pai¬ 
wai  dance  in  much  the  same  way  that  the  paricari  is  used. 
These  two  drinks  are  made  for  special  occasions  and  are  not  on 
hand  at  other  times. 

The  yaposa,  however,  is  always  found  in  the  large  storage 
drink  pot  which  stands  against  one  of  the  main  house  posts.  It 
is  made  of  the  ordinary  cassava  bread  without  fermentation  in 
mold.  A  portion  of  the  bread  is  chewed  and  the  whole  mixed 
with  water.  In  three  days  the  drink  has  reached  its  best  stage; 
by  the  fourth  day  it  has  become  too  sour  to  drink.  Upon  one’s 
arrival  at  any  village,  he  is  immediately  offered  a  drink  of 
yaposa  which  he  finds  most  refreshing  and  even  palatable,  until 
he  learns  of  its  manufacture — when  it  is  too  late,  he  has  acquired 
the  appetite. 

The  Macusis  make  a  variety  of  drinks  from  fresh  ripe  fruit. 
They  never  drink  water  except  when  on  the  trail.  The  pulpy 
covering  of  various  palm  seeds  is  extracted  and  mixed  with 
water,  making  a  thick  liquid  which  may  be  drunk  or  eaten  with 
farina.  The  best  of  all  the  palm  drinks,  at  least  to  the  white 
man’s  taste,  is  the  assaii  ( Euterpe  oleracis),  but  the  most  common 
is  the  bacaba  (. Enocarpus  distichus).  The  awara  (A strocaryuna 
tucuneoides) ,  aeta  ( Mauritia  flexuosa)  and  the  cokerite  ( Maxi - 
miliaria  regia )  are  also  used.  Wild  pineapples,  cashews  and 
bananas  are  crushed  and  mixed  with  water  to  drink. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


41 


Eating  and  Drinking 

The  Indians  eat  less  than  a  white  man  at  their  regular 
meals,  but  they  eat  more  between  meals  and  upon  special  occa¬ 
sions  when  food  is  plentiful.  When  at  work  on  the  trail  they 
eat  three  times  a  day:  a  small  amount  at  daybreak,  a  good 
meal  about  eleven  o’clock  and  another  good  meal  at  dark.  Men 
and  women  do  not  eat  together,  even  at  home  alone.  Men  and 
boys  eat  first  and  then  the  women  and  girls  remove  the  pots 
and  eat  what  remains.  At  home,  the  wife  brings  bread  and  the 
cooking  pot,  containing  meat  and  soup,  and  places  them  in  front 
of  her  husband,  who  is  seated  on  a  stool.  He  soaks  some  bread 
in  the  soup,  turns  away  from  the  pot  and  eats  the  moistened 
bread,  then  turns  back  for  more.  The  boys  eat  with  the  father. 
If  there  are  no  children  the  wife  may  eat  at  the  same  time  her 
husband  does  and  out  of  the  same  pot,  but  she  must  eat  standing. 
When  she  eats  alone  or  in  company  with  other  women  she  sits 
on  her  heels  or  on  a  stool. 

When  several  strangers  appear  at  a  village,  all  the  women 
bring  out  food,  the  chief  invites  the  visitors  to  eat  and  he  eats 
with  them.  All  squat  around  the  food,  those  near  soak  their 
bread  and  then  move  back  without  rising  to  make  room  for 
others  and  the  process  is  repeated  until  all  are  satisfied.  The 
meat  at  the  bottom  of  the  pot  is  eaten  with  the  fingers  after  the 
soup  has  been  consumed.  Women  in  the  party  are  taken  inside 
to  eat  with  the  women  and  girls  of  the  village.  Choice  food  is 
often  selected  for  visitors,  particularly  fruit  and  nuts.  Fruit  is 
eaten  at  the  end  of  the  meal.  When  strangers  arrive  the  women 
bring  the  yaposa  drink  at  once  and  immediately  prepare 
some  food.  No  word  of  greeting  is  offered  with  the  drink  and 
no  word  of  thanks  returned  with  the  empty  bowl.  Any  empty 
receptacle  must  be  returned  by  the  individual  to  whom  it  was 
first  presented. 


42  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — -ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


Hunting 

The  Macusis  are  primarily  agriculturists.  Each  man  makes 
his  own  field  and  depends  upon  that  for  his  main  support,  but 
the  chase  supplements  and  gives  variety  to  the  diet.  Men 
enjoy  hunting  and  fishing  and  observe  certain  rites  to  secure 
the  assistance  of  the  spirits  in  their  success.  There  is  a  partic¬ 
ular  charm  or  bina  for  each  animal,  which  makes  its  capture 
certain.  A  root,  leaf  or  other  object  may  suggest  some  part  of 
an  animal  and  be  used  in  its  capture,  or  the  actual  part  itself, 
as  the  heart,  head  or  bone  may  be  carried  as  an  amulet. 

A  special  charm  is  needed  for  the  hunter  of  the  savannah 
deer  because  it  is  difficult  to  approach  in  the  open.  It  takes 
fright  at  the  scent  or  movement  of  the  hunter,  hence  he  must 
hunt  up  the  wind  and  remain  motionless  when  the  deer 
lifts  its  head.  Only  those  who  have  the  special  charm  are  able 
to  call  the  deer  or  to  walk  up  and  shoot  it  with  the  bow  and 
arrow.  The  would  be  hunter  selects  the  leaves  of  a  certain 
caladium  and  macerates  them  in  water.  The  leaf  has  a  fancied 
resemblance  to  the  ear  of  the  deer.  Then  he  makes  four  thongs 
from  the  fibre  of  the  aeta  palm,  two  small  thin  ones  and  two  as 
large  as  a  lead  pencil  and  three  feet  long.  One  end  of  the  thong 
is  tapered  to  a  fine  thread.  When  all  are  ready  the  thongs  are 
soaked  in  the  solution,  and  the  hunter,  taking  the  fine  thread, 
passes  it  back  through  the  nasal  passage  and  pulls  it  out  through 
his  mouth — the  small  thongs  first  and  then  the  large  ones 
through  each  nostril.  These  thongs  are  then  tied  to  a  stick 
and  hung  up  in  the  house  as  evidence  that  the  man  has  per¬ 
formed  the  ceremonies  which  make  him  a  deer  hunter. 

The  forest  tribes  depend  much  more  upon  the  chase  than  the 
savannah  tribes  do.  They  pay  more  attention  also  to  breeding 
and  taking  care  of  hunting  dogs.  When  not  hunting  the  dogs 
are  kept  tied  on  platforms  and  never  allowed  to  run  about  the 
house  on  account  of  the  danger  from  jiggers  (. Pulex  penetrans), 
the  small  insects  which  burrow  under  the  skin  near  the  toe  nails 
and  make  the  dogs’  toes  sore.  These  jiggers  infest  the  dust 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


43 


about  the  village  and  cause  a  great  deal  of  suffering  among  men 
and  animals.  We  were  constantly  removing  jiggers  from  our 
own  bare  toes.  The  women  have  most  care  of  the  dogs.  They 
take  them  from  their  platforms  and  carry  them  under  their 
arms  to  the  creek  each  day  for  a  bath.  Morning  and  evening 
they  carry  them  away  from  the  house  and  turn  them  loose  for  a 
run,  but  gather  them  under  their  arms  again  to  carry  them 
back  to  their  platforms.  By  this  method  the  dogs’  feet  are 
kept  out  of  the  dust  of  the  village,  and  free  from  the  jiggers. 
The  short  rope  with  which  the  dog  is  tied  has  a  stick  in  the 
middle  part  to  prevent  the  dog  from  chewing  the  rope.  Dogs 
have  binas  as  well  as  men  but  they  do  not  select  them  for  them¬ 
selves.  If  a  dog  is  lazy  or  unable  to  scent  the  trail,  ants  are 
allowed  to  sting  him.  The  hunter,  unless  he  is  going  far  from 
home,  does  not  take  his  dogs  with  him.  He  carries  a  bamboo 
horn,  which  can  be  heard  a  long  distance,  and  sounds  certain 
signals  when  he  encounters  game.  Dogs  are  most  useful  in 
hunting  the  peccary  and  the  tapir. 

When  the  hunter  finds  peccaries  he  sounds  his  horn,  two 
blasts  about  ten  seconds  apart;  then,  following  in  the  direction 
the  game  is  going,  he  continues  to  blow  two  blasts  each  at 
frequent  intervals  so  the  men  at  the  village  may  know  which 
way  to  run  with  the  dogs.  All  the  men  and  all  the  dogs  rush 
through  the  forest  at  great  speed.  The  dogs  are  not  released 
until  the  men  have  killed  all  the  peccaries  possible  with  their 
spears  and  bows  and  arrows.  By  this  time  the  herd  of  half  a 
dozen  or  half  a  hundred  has  been  scattered  in  all  directions. 
The  dogs  chase  individual  ones  into  hollow  logs,  tree  trunks  or 
holes  in  the  ground.  Sometimes  one  or  more  may  take  refuge 
between  the  great  flat  roots  of  a  tree  and  turn  to  defend  them¬ 
selves.  The  dogs  are  afraid  to  make  an  attack,  but  hold  them 
at  bay  until  the  men  arrive  and  dispatch  them  with  a  spear. 
When  the  peccary  ( Dicotyles  torquatus )  takes  to  a  hole  in  the 
ground,  which  he  happens  to  find  in  his  flight,  the  men  fasten 
the  opening  with  sticks  or  logs  to  prevent  his  escape  and  then 


44  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM 


ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


make  a  very  ingenious  trap.  About  a  dozen  small  poles  are  cut 
six  or  eight  feet  long  and  tied  or  woven  together  in  the  shape 
of  a  long  funnel  which  tapers  from  a  size  sufficiently  large  to 
admit  the  peccary  to  six  inches  at  the  other  end.  The  large 
end  is  placed  at  the  hole  while  the  other  is  lifted  up  and  tied 
to  the  crossed  poles.  The  fastenings  are  then  removed  and  the 
peccary  makes  a  rush  for  freedom  but  his  legs  go  through  between 
the  poles  and  he  finds  himself  helpless.  He  attempts  to  get 
back,  but  one  man  blocks  the  way  while  another  hits  him  on 
the  head  with  the  end  of  a  pole  and  kills  him.  This  is  a  very 
effective  trap  which  never  fails  because  the  peccary  always 
comes  out  at  once.  This  trap  is  used  by  all  the  Carib  and 
Arawak  tribes  in  the  region  (Plate  XI,  B). 

When  the  hunter  arouses  a  tapir  ( Tapirus  terrestris )  from 
his  lair,  he  sounds  his  horn  giving  three  blasts  at  intervals  of 
ten  seconds  and  repeats  them  within  a  few  minutes  to  tell  the 
listeners  the  direction  the  tapir  is  traveling.  The  tapir  feeds 
late  in  the  evening  and  at  night  and  lies  down  during  the  day 
wherever  he  happens  to  be  when  light  overtakes  him.  When 
aroused  in  the  daytime  he  makes  a  wild  rush  through  the  thick 
forest  in  the  direction  of  the  river.  He  has  a  regular  run  where 
he  crosses  a  low  divide  or  where  he  is  accustomed  to  go  to  drink 
and  bathe.  These  crossings  are  known  to  the  hunter  and  when 
his  horn  sounds  the  direction  the  tapir  is  going  the  men  at  the 
village  run  with  the  dogs  for  one  of  these  crossings.  The  dogs 
chase  the  tapir  to  a  water  hole  where  they  surround  him  until 
the  hunter  kills  him  with  a  spear  or  bow  and  arrow.  The  tapir 
has  no  defense;  he  therefore  runs  for  a  safe  place.  He  is  an 
excellent  swimmer  and  diver,  so  he  attempts  to  reach  deep 
water,  where  he  is  safe  from  his  enemies.  Deer  are  hunted  with 
dogs  in  the  same  way  and  they,  like  the  tapir,  take  to  the  water. 

Traps  and  snares  are  used  to  catch  some  of  the  smaller 
animals  and  birds.  A  beehive  trap  is  made  to  catch  birds. 
Seeds  are  scattered  under  the  trap,  and  when  the  boy  on  watch 
sees  a  bird  enter  he  pulls  a  string,  which  releases  the  support 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


45 


and  allows  the  trap  to  fall.  Animals  have  runways  which  they 
habitually  travel.  A  loop  is  so  placed  in  the  runway  that 
the  head  of  the  animal  passes  through  the  loop.  The  loop  cord 
is  attached  to  a  stout  pole  which  is  bent  over  and  held  by  a 
trigger.  The  weight  of  the  moving  animal  springs  the  trap 
and  releases  the  pole,  which  lifts  him  from  the  ground.  A  net 
is  sometimes  stretched  across  the  runway  of  deer  and  the  grass 
set  on  fire.  The  frightened  deer  run  into  the  net  and  are  killed 
by  men  in  hiding.  Iguanas  or  lizards  ( Iguana  tuber culata)  sun 
themselves  by  climbing  on  the  bushes  or  on  rocks  along  the  rivers. 
The  Indian  from  his  canoe  shoots  them  with  a  special  kind  of 
bone-tipped  arrow  having  a  lateral  projecting  barb.  When  the 
iguana  falls  into  the  water  the  arrow  reveals  his  location.  Deer, 
peccaries,  monkeys  and  birds  even  in  the  forests  are  sometimes 
driven  to  a  hill  top  where  they  are  killed  by  men  in  hiding. 

The  Indians  are  not  particularly  good  shots  with  their  bows 
and  arrows  at  long  range,  but  they  are  such  experts  at  stalking 
the  game  or  at  imitating  the  calls  of  all  creatures  that  they 
succeed  in  getting  near  enough  to  kill  at  short  range.  The 
deer,  peccary  and  tapir  must  be  hunted,  because  they  do  not 
always  respond  to  the  call.  On  one  occasion,  we  saw  a  young 
tapir  crossing  the  river  and  our  boys  called  it  back  and  killed 
it,  but  old  tapirs  will  not  answer  the  whistle.  The  native  knows 
all  the  characteristics  as  well  as  the  calls.  Some  animals  will 
follow  a  call,  while  others  will  answer  but  will  not  follow.  Some 
answer  a  call  only  when  they  themselves  are  calling;  others  will 
follow  up  a  response  when  they  are  calling;  while  others  will 
follow  a  call  without  responding.  Some  respond  and  follow 
only  when  the  flock  is  scattered.  Some  respond  and  come 
alone,  while  others  respond  and  bring  the  flock  with  them. 

The  monkey  is  always  willing  to  answer  and  to  follow  up 
a  call,  but  he  is  cautious  at  times  and  leaves  his  companions 
behind.  He  is  very  tenacious  of  life  and  difficult  to  dislodge 
from  the  branches  of  a  tree.  When  transfixed  with  an  arrow, 
he  may  hold  on  until  the  Indian  climbs  up  and  kills  him.  We 


46  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

sat  down  to  wait  for  one  to  fall  that  had  been  mortally  wounded, 
but  while  we  watched  an  eagle  happened  along  and  carried  it 
off.  At  another  time  I  shot  a  curassow,  which  fell  behind  a 
large  log,  and  a  jaguar  gathered  it  up  and  ran  away.  The 
trumpet  birds  ( Psophia  crepitans )  feed  on  the  ground,  for  most 
part,  in  small  flocks.  They  answer  the  call,  but  they  take 
fright  easily;  hence  it  is  necessary  to  build  a  blind  of  leaf\ 
branches  before  beginning  to  call.  When  the  birds  are  within 
twenty  feet,  the  man  shoots  one;  the  flight  of  the  arrow  makes 
no  noise;  the  cry  of  the  wounded  bird  brings  the  flock  together 
where  a  number  may  be  killed.  The  male  curassow  ( Crax 
alector )  crows  just  at  the  break  of  day  before  leaving  the  roost 
and  again  about  the  middle  of  the  forenoon,  or  rather  these  are 
his  principal  crowing  times  on  dry  days.  The  hunter  gives  the 
answering  call  of  the  female  and  waits  for  the  male,  who  comes 
at  once  bringing  his  flock  with  him.  Several  may  be  killed  with 
the  bow  and  arrow  before  they  take  flight.  With  a  gun  a  man 
may  shoot  three  or  four  times  before  they  run  or  fly  out  of 
range.  For  the  white  man,  the  best  game  of  the  forest  is  the 
maam  ( Imamus ) ;  the  white  meat  of  the  breast  is  most  delicious. 
When,  at  dusk,  the  hunter  hears  its  call,  he  goes  after  it  repeating 
its  call  at  regular  intervals  until  he  comes  up  to  it.  The  maroudi 
( Penelope  pipile)  is  also  greatly  prized  for  food  and  as  a  pet. 
The  green  parrots  are  very  good  eating,  but  they  feed  in  the 
tops  of  tall  trees  and  they  have  excellent  eyesight;  besides, 
they  post  a  sentry  when  feeding,  hence  they  are  very  difficult 
to  shoot.  Other  birds  are  often  found  feeding  with  these  par¬ 
rots,  and  I  have  wondered  if  it  were  not  for  their  protection. 
The  parrots  are  very  noisy  except  when  feeding,  but  they  are 
wasteful  feeders  and  the  ground  under  the  tree  is  always  littered 
with  the  fallen  fragments,  thus  revealing  their  presence.  The 
hunter  hides  under  the  tree  before  the  parrots  come,  and  with 
his  poisoned  darts  ready  he  awaits  their  arrival.  They  come  first 
into  the  top  of  the  tree,  and  when  the  sentry  is  satisfied  that  all  is 
well,  they  move  down  to  the  lower  branches,  where  the  hunter 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


47 


picks  them  oft  one  by  one  until  he  is  satisfied.  The  arrow,  the 
size  of  an  old  fashioned  knitting  needle,  makes  no  noise  if  it 
misses,  and  it  it  hits  its  mark  the  bird  soon  drops  off  without 
making  any  outcry.  If  it  were  possible  for  the  hunter  to  use 
the  bow  and  arrow  the  twang  of  the  bowstring  would  be  suffi¬ 
cient  to  frighten  the  birds  away.  The  macaws  ( Ara  macac,  Ara 
mtlitaris  and  Ara  ararauna )  are  greatly  prized  for  their  long 
feathers  of  beautiful  red,  green,  yellow  and  blue  colors.  These 
birds  frequent  the  tops  of  the  tallest  trees.  There  the  hunter 
builds  a  blind  and  awaits  their  coming.  He  sometimes  uses  a 
pet  macaw  as  a  decoy. 

Fishing 

The  Macusis  catch  fish  with  a  variety  of  traps,  a  net  or  a 
hook  and  kill  them  with  the  bow  and  arrow  or  vegetable  poisons. 
The  method  depends  upon  the  kind  of  fish,  the  season  and  the 
water.  1  he  bait  depends  upon  the  appetite  of  the  particular 
fish  desired;  if  you  want  pacu  you  use  fruit;  if  another  you 
use  leaves,  insects,  worms,  flesh  of  animal,  bird,  or  fish.  The 
pacu  (. Myletus  paca )  feeds  largely  upon  the  fruit  of  the  yellow 
plum  ( Spondias  My  rob  alarms)  during  its  season,  which  happens 
to  coincide  with  the  high  water.  The  fish  cannot  be  seen  in 
the  yellow  water,  so  the  Indian  climbs  to  an  overhanging  branch 
of  a  tree  and  drops  fruit  into  the  water.  When  the  fish  rises  to 
the  bait  it  is  shot  with  an  arrow  attached  to  a  string  for  retrieving 
it.  The  pacu  in  the  dry  season  is  found  only  in  the  rapids, 
where  he  is  shot  with  the  same  arrow  attached  to  a  string. 
During  the  rains  he  is  found  all  along  the  river.  The  dip  net  is 
used  along  the  banks  of  the  river  when  the  water  is  high  and  at 
a  poisoning  to  gather  up  the  dead  fish.  The  net  is  ten  or  twelve 
inches  in  diameter  and  from  one  to  two  feet  in  length.  It  may 
be  used  also  for  landing  hooked  fish,  but  the  more  common 
method  in  landing  a  big  fish  is  to  shoot  an  arrow  into  it.  The 
most  savage  fish  known  to  South  American  waters,  is  the  pirai 
(. Serasalmus  piraya),  a  short,  deep  bodied  fish,  from  a  foot  to 
eighteen  inches  in  length,  having  very  sharp  saw  edged  teeth. 


48  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

It  cannot  be  taken  with  the  hook,  so  a  very  ingenious  trap  is 
used  to  catch  it.1  This  trap  is  used  by  all  Arawak  and 
Carib  tribes  in  the  forest  region.  The  trap  consists  of  a  funnel 
shaped  basket  attached  to  a  spring  pole.  A  number  of  split 
sticks,  thirty  inches  long,  are  woven  together  with  split  bush 
rope  making  a  basket  ten  inches  wide  at  one  end  and  tapering 
to  a  point  at  the  other.  The  mouth  of  the  basket  is  fastened 
to  the  spring  pole  with  two  cords  about  three  feet  long.  The 
pole  is  bent  down  and  the  basket  is  placed  below  a  projecting 
pole  or  prepared  framework  to  keep  it  under  water,  where  it 
is  held  in  a  horizontal  position  by  a  third  cord  attached  to  the 
spring  pole  and  the  trigger  stick.  The  bait  attached  to  the 
trigger  hangs  down  in  the  middle  of  the  trap.  When  the  fish 
coming  up  stream  strikes  the  bait,  the  trigger  releases  the  pole 
and  the  trap  is  pulled  forward  and  upward  out  of  the  water. 
The  electric  eel  ( Gymnotus  eledricus )  and  the  stingray  ( Trigon 
hystrix )  are  also  eaten.  The  aimara  ( Erythinus  macrodon )  and 
the  arapaima  (Sudis  gigas)  are  both  good  large  fish;  the 
arapaima  weighs  fifty  pounds  or  more.  The  aimara  has  very 
sharp  teeth  and  a  savage  disposition.  The  Indians  are  afraid 
to  fish  from  a  canoe  because  the  aimara  when  hooked  offers  no 
resistance — cannot  be  felt  on  the  hook  when  pulling  the  line  in — 
but  when  near  the  surface  he  jumps  for  the  fisherman’s  hands. 
They  fish  from  a  rock  or  the  river  bank  and  keep  a  club  at  hand 
with  which  to  kill  the  fish  when  he  comes  out  of  the  water. 

The  simplest  trap  found  everywhere  is  made  by  building  a 
dam  across  the  river,  where  the  fish,  coming  into  it,  cannot  get 
out.  A  dam  is  sometimes  built  at  a  small  waterfall  in  such  a 
way  that  the  channel  is  restricted  to  a  narrow  opening  into 
which  a  funnel  shaped  trap  is  placed.  The  fish  are  thus  forced 
into  the  trap.  If  the  trap  is  made  double,2  with  the  inside 
funnel  so  woven  that  the  fish  may  pass  through  but  can¬ 
not  return,  it  may  be  set  anywhere  in  rapid  water.  The  end 


1  Farabee,  W.  C.  The  Central  Arawaks,  Anthropological  Publications,  Vol.  IX,  Fig.  6. 

2  Ibid.,  Fig.  4. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


49 


may  be  untied  to  remove  the  fish.  The  trap1  is  a  simple 
affair,  made  ot  sticks  two  and  a  halt  feet  long,  in  the  form  of  a 
truncated  cone.  It  is  carried  into  the  pool  and  planted  down 
on  the  bottom.  The  fish  are  removed  at  once  from  the  top  by 
hand.  1  raps  are  in  use  partially  because  the  pirai  with  his 
sharp  teeth  cuts  the  line  and  makes  it  difficult  to  fish  with  the 
hook. 

During  the  dry  season  the  fish  remain  in  the  great  pools 
along  the  river  and  refuse  to  take  the  hook.  The  Macusis,  like 
the  \\  apisianas,  have  learned  to  catch  the  fish  by  poisoning  the 
water  of  the  pools.  The  poison  liana  is  collected  in  the  forest, 
sometimes  at  a  distance  of  two  or  three  days’  journey  and  car¬ 
ried  to  the  pool,  where  it  is  pounded  on  the  rocks  to  reduce  it 
to  pulp.  The  amount  needed  depends  upon  the  kind  of  poison, 
the  size  of  the  pool  and  the  amount  of  water.  One  hundred 
pounds  of  the  best  poison  pulp  would  be  sufficient  to  poison  a 
pool  six  feet  deep,  fifty  feet  wide  and  one  hundred  feet  long. 
Everything  is  made  ready  the  day  before  the  poisoning  is  to 
take  place.  It  the  pool  is  a  long  way  from  the  village  every¬ 
body  goes  along  and  camps  there.  Barbecues  are  built  and 
firewood  gathered  to  roast  the  fish  before  they  are  carried  to  the 
village.  Baskets  are  made  to  use  in  collecting  the  fish. 

I  he  day  of  the  poisoning,  the  men  go  to  the  pool  under  the 
direction  of  a  head  man,  who  has  full  charge  and  gives  direc¬ 
tions  to  the  men  who  carry  the  poison  and  to  the  whole  group 
when  the  dead  fish  are  being  collected.  The  baskets  of  poison 
pulp  are  soused  up  and  down  in  the  water  and  then  held  up  to 
allow  the  poison  to  drain  out.  Then  they  are  taken  back  to  the 
rock  where  the  pulp  is  pounded  for  a  time  and  taken  back  to 
the  water.  The  fish  soon  feel  the  effect  of  the  poison  and  rush 
about  in  a  vain  endeavor  to  escape  the  discomfort,  but  it 
requires  an  hour  or  more  to  kill  all  the  fish.  The  pirai,  or  any 
other  vicious  fish,  is  speared  at  once  and  thrown  out  bv  the  men 


1  Ibid.,  Fig.  5. 


50  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

with  the  poison.  When  the  man  in  charge  is  satisfied  that  the 
fish  are  all  dead  he  gives  the  signal  and  everybody  rushes  in 
and  gathers  up  all  the  fish  he  can  find.  A  large  pool  will  yield 
five  or  six  hundred  pounds  of  fish.  The  whole  performance  has 
taken  about  two 'hours.  The  rest  of  the  day  is  consumed  in 
cleaning  and  barbecuing  the  fish  and  at  night  a  great  feast  is 
held.  The  following  day  the  remaining  fish  are  packed  up  and 
carried  to  the  village,  where  they  are  kept  smoked  until  they 
are  used.  Many  pools  are  thus  robbed  of  every  fish  they  con¬ 
tain  every  dry  season.  One  observing  this  complete  destruction 
wonders  why  the  fish  are  not  exterminated  in  the  whole  river. 
The  secret  is  that  the  pools  in  the  lower  reaches  of  the  rivers 
are  so  large  that  they  cannot  be  poisoned  and  thus  the  fish  are 
preserved  and  the  rivers  restocked  when  the  rains  return. 

The  interior  tribes  living  along  the  head  streams  practice 
different  methods.  The  fish  are  smaller  and  more  difficult  to 
shoot  or  to  secure  in  traps.  The  pirai  cuts  the  line  so  these 
people  never  fish  with  the  hook.  They  use  a  trap  to  catch 
the  pirai,  but  make  no  other  traps.  The  streams  continue 
to  How  throughout  the  dry  season,  and  the  fish  are  on  the  move. 
However,  the  natives  poison  the  streams  and  have  just  as  much 
fun  catching  the  small  fish  as  their  kinsmen  on  the  larger  rivers 
have  in  catching  large  ones.  On  January  i,  iQ!4>  we  attended 
our  first  fish  poisoning  with  the  Waiwais.  Two  days  before, 
the  bush  rope,  aiya,  was  cut  and  carried  to  the  village,  where 
mallets  were  made  for  reducing  it  to  pulp.  All  the  next  da\ 
was  spent  by  five  or  six  men  in  pounding  the  rope  into  fine 
shreds  and  collecting  it  into  baskets — in  all  about  ten  bushels 
weighing  between  three  and  four  hundred  pounds.  Plate 
XI,  A  shows  the  method  used  and  the  size  of  the  bush  rope. 
At  daybreak,  New  Year’s  morning,  everybody  started  for  the 
river  three  hours’  journey  away.  1  he  first  thing,  after  the 
loads  of  pulp  were  deposited  on  the  river  bank,  was  to  make 
baskets  of  leaves  to  hold  the  small  fish.  The  larger  fish  were 
strung  on  a  cord  or  bush  rope  over  the  shoulder.  The  place 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


51 


selected  for  the  poisoning  was  the  deepest  pool  on  the  river. 
Some  of  the  men  took  the  poison  into  the  rapids  just  above  the 
pool  and  continued  to  pound  it  and  to  roll  it  about  in  the  water 
(Plate  X,  A).  Other  younger  men  arranged  themselves  down 
stream  to  spear  the  vicious  fish  and  those  first  affected  by  the 
poison.  At  the  end  of  fifteen  minutes  the  fish  were  coming  to 
the  surface  half  stupefied;  if  touched,  they  would  dart  away 
for  an  instant  and  then  float,  but  after  half  an  hour  all  the  fish 
were  quite  dead.  When  the  chief  gave  the  signal,  all  made  a 
wild  rush  to  see  who  could  get  the  most  fish.  After  fifteen 
minutes  of  the  most  exciting  scramble  of  my  experience,  I 
found  my  camera  on  the  tripod  commanding  the  view,  but  no 
one  had  exposed  a  plate — we  were  too  busy  fishing.  Large 
fish  were  killed  two  hundred  yards  down  stream,  and  small 
ones,  six  inches  long  or  less,  for  a  half  mile  down;  but  below 
this  they  were  unaffected.  Some  poisons  appear  to  stupefy  the 
fish  only,  but  this  one  kills  them  outright.  Two  or  three  hours 
after  the  poisoning  we  found  dead  fish  floating  on  the  surface  a 
mile  and  a  half  below  the  poisoned  pool. 

Very  few  poisons  are  used  by  the  forest  tribes;  possibly 
because  the  variety  used  above,  aiya  (. Muller  a  maniliformis) , 
is  so  plentiful  and  so  effective  that  others  are  not  needed.  This 
variety  is  the  kind  most  desired  by  the  Macusis  for  poisoning 
pools,  but  it  grows  a  long  distance  away.  The  Wapisianas  call 
it  aical  and  class  it  as  their  best  poison.  It  is  a  bush  rope  or 
liana  which  grows  to  the  thickness  of  six  or  eight  inches.  The 
stem  and  roots  are  used.  It  is  more  valuable  also  because  it 
may  be  stored  for  several  days  without  losing  its  strength.  It 
is  often  an  article  of  trade  from  tribe  to  tribe.  "  Kowui  ( Lon - 
chocarpus  densiflorus ),  a  bush  rope,  is  used  at  times.  The  roots 
and  the  outer  bark  only  contain  the  poison.  A  dark  flat  bush 
rope,  called  pici,  is  sometimes  used  although  not  so  good  as 
either  of  the  above.  Four  shrubs  are  known:  Kunani  ( Tepb - 
rosia  toxicaria),  leaves  and  seeds  used;  kunapari  ( Clibadium 
asperum),  leaves  and  seeds  used;  tcukuya  and  haya  are  shrubs 


52  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

whose  leaves  only  are  used.  The  curale  ( Strychnos  toxifera ) 
poison  is  not  used  in  shooting  fish  or  in  poisoning  the  pools, 
but  is  reserved  for  the  blow  gun  darts  and  arrow  points. 


Hunting  Implements 

Indian  implements  of  the  chase  are  always  well  made  and 
well  adapted  for  their  uses.  Each  man,  when  it  is  possible  to 
get  the  materials,  makes  his  own  implements.  It  is  sometimes 
necessary  for  him  to  get  certain  things  by  barter,  not  because 
he  could  not  manufacture  them,  but  because  the  best  materials 
are  not  available.  An  Indian  is  a  successful  hunter,  not  because 
he  is  a  wonderful  marksman,  but  because  he  knows  so  perfectly 
the  habits  and  instincts  of  the  game  he  pursues.  He  knows 
their  haunts  and  lies  in  wait,  stalks  into  their  presence  or  calls 
them  within  easy  range.  He  has  a  particular  arrow  or  spear 
for  each  species. 

The  best  bows  are  made  of  purple  heart  ( Capaifera  pubi- 
floris)  or  the  stiff  central  part  of  the  letterwood  ( Piratinera 
Guianensis) .  A  tree  two  feet  in  diameter  will  yield  a  stick  six 
inches  in  diameter,  from  which  bows  can  be  made.  The  bows 
were  formerly  worked  down  into  the  desired  shape  and  size 
with  knives  made  from  peccaries  teeth  (Plate  XXXV,  C).  The 
forest  tribes  continue  to  use  these  knives  in  making  their  bows. 
The  bow  is  finished  with  the  rough  leaf  of  the  savannah  tree 
( Curatella  Americana )  and  polished  by  hand  with  the  oil  pre¬ 
pared  from  the  nuts  of  the  crabwood  tree  ( Carapa  Guianensis). 
The  bow,  seven  feet  long,  an  inch  across  the  back  and  an  inch 
deep,  is  very  stiff  and  must  not  be  flexed  too  far.  When  the 
bow  is  relaxed  it  is  perfectly  straight.  I  he  middle  of  the  bow 
is  wrapped  with  fine  cotton  thread  for  about  six  inches  and  is 
decorated  with  tufts  of  feathers.  The  surplus  string  is  wound 
around  the  lower  end  of  the  bow.  To  tighten  the  string  for 
immediate  use,  it  is  slipped  from  one  end,  given  a  few  twists 
and  replaced,  the  bow  being  flexed  by  pressure  against  the  knee. 
The  Waiwais  make  the  best  bows  of  all  the  tribes.  Arawak  as 
well  as  Carib  tribes  secure  Waiwai  bows  by  barter. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


53 


All  tribes  make  the  same  general  type  of  arrow.  They 
have  no  flint,  hence  their  arrows  are  tipped  with  bone  or  wood. 
The  arrow  shaft  is  made  from  the  flower  stock  of  the  wild  cane 
0 Gynoecium  saccharinum),  which  grows  plentifully  along  some 
of  the  rivers.  The  foreshaft  of  hard  wood  is  inserted  into  the 
reed  shaft  which  is  compressed  for  an  inch  or  two  by  using  a 
cord  with  a  stick  tied  at  each  end.  One  end  is  held  by  the 
hand  and  the  other  between  the  toes.  The  cord  is  wrapped 
once  around  the  shaft  and  pulled  tight  while  the  shaft  is  rolled 
up  and  down  the  string  and  pressed  firmly  around  the  fore¬ 
shaft.  Then  a  waxed  thread  is  wound  about  the  shaft  to  hold 
it  in  place.  If  no  point  is  to  be  attached  the  end  of  the  fore¬ 
shaft  is  pointed  and  barbed.  A  bone  point  may  be  so  attached 
that  the  upper  end  projects  and  serves  for  a  barb.  A  flat  or  a 
curved  bamboo  point  may  be  attached  to  the  shaft  or  to  the 
foreshaft.  The  foreshaft  may  be  made  with  a  socket  for  a 
poisoned  wooden  point  eight  or  ten  inches  long.  And  again 
there  may  be  a  socket  for  the  harpoon  head.  The  foreshaft 
may  end  in  a  large  blunt  point  or  it  may  have  four  very  short 
sticks  tied  about  it  to  prevent  penetration.  The  feathering  is 
done  with  considerable  care.  Cotton  threads  of  different  colors 
are  woven  into  designs  which  distinguish  the  workmanship  of 
the  makers.  Some  of  the  harpoon  arrows  are  not  feathered. 
The  thread  for  wrapping  the  shaft  is  waxed  with  the  pitch  of 
the  Ceroxylon  andicola  mixed  with  beeswax  and  powdered  char¬ 
coal.  Care  must  be  taken  lest  too  much  beeswax  should  destroy 
the  adhesive  quality  of  the  wax.  It  is  stored  in  bamboo  joints 
and  used  for  covering  arrow  cases  and  blow  guns,  repairing 
implements  and  canoes. 

Spears  are  used  for  killing  animals  at  close  quarters — 
jaguars,  tapirs  and  peccaries  when  the  dogs  are  holding  them  at 
bay.  The  spears  are  made  from  purpleheart  or  other  hard 
woods.  They  are  about  eight  feet  in  length  and  have  a  long, 
tapering  square  head.  Most  arrows  may  be  used  for  different 
purposes  but  many  are  made  for  one  primary  purpose.  The 
arrow  with  a  long  barbed  foreshaft  may  be  used  to  kill  birds, 


L — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


54  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM 


monkeys  or  fish.  The  large  arrows  with  long  bamboo  points 
are  used  for  deer,  tapir,  jaguar  and  man  in  warfare.  The  har¬ 
poon  with  toggle  head  is  used  only  for  large  fish.  The  blunt 
points  and  those  with  slight  penetration  are  used  for  land 

birds  only. 

The  Indians  of  this  region  know  the  use  of  many  poisons 
in  killing  fish,  but  for  killing  animals  on  land  only  one  poison 
was  in  common  use — and  that  was  curari,  urari,  ourali  or 
wourari  according  to  the  person  pronouncing  the  word.  It  is 
known  to  many  tribes,  who  get  it  by  barter  from  others  who 
make  it.  The  ingredients  differ  from  tribe  to  tribe  but  all  the 
formulae  contain  the  bark  of  a  creeper  ( Strychnos  toxifera ) 
which  is  the  most  active  principle.  This  plant  grows  abun¬ 
dantly  in  the  Kanuku  Mountains,  where  the  Macusis  have  a 
monoply  of  its  use.  They  manufacture  the  poison  and  exchange 
it  with  surrounding  tribes  to  their  own  great  advantage.  The 
Wapisianas  and  Arecunas  depend  upon  them  for  their  whole 
supply.  Even  with  this  demand  comparatively  little  is  made 
because  it  is  so  deadly  that  small  amounts  only  are  needed. 
Both  Waterton  and  Schomburgk  witnessed  its  manufacture  and 
both  performed  many  experiments  to  determine  the  exact  effect 
of  the  poison.  It  apparently  paralyzes  the  nerves  of  the  volun¬ 
tary  muscles.  With  a  blow  gun  dart,  Waterton  killed  a  chicken 
in  five  minutes  and  an  ox  in  twenty  five  minutes  with  three 
peccary  arrows.  The  properties  of  this  curious  poison  are  not 
fully  understood  by  the  outside  world.  The  formula  which 
Richard  Schomburgk  saw  used  may  be  of  interest:1 


Bark  and  albumen  of  Urari  plant  ( Strychnos  toxifera ) . 
Bark  and  albumen  of  Yakki  ( Strychnos  Scbomburgkii)  . 
Bark  and  albumen  of  Arimaru  ( Strychnos  cogens )  .... 

Bark  of  Tarireng . 

Bark  of  Wokarimo . 

Root  of  Tarireng . 

Tararemu . 

Caramu  ( Cissus  Sp.?) . 

Manacu  wood .  . 


2  lbs. 
Va  lb. 
K  lb- 
yA  ib. 
K  lb- 


>2  oz. 
? 

? 


1  Reisen  in  British  Guiana,  p.  450. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


55 


Only  a  few  men  know  how  to  manufacture  the  poison,  and 
these  go  about  it  with  great  ceremony  and  secrecy.  I  did  not 
witness  the  ceremony  but  learned  from  others  about  it.  A  new 
leaf  shelter  is  first  built.  A  new  pot  must  be  made  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  boiling  the  ingredients.  The  water  must  be  brought 
from  a  clear  stream  some  distance  away,  and  the  vessel  must  be 
set  down  at  frequent  intervals  because  a  bird  shot  with  a  poi¬ 
soned  arrow  will  fly  only  as  far  as  the  water  was  carried  at  one 
time.  The  maker  must  keep  his  own  fire  and  while  tending  it 
must  blow  into  the  boiling  pot  at  certain  intervals.  When  the 
ingredients  are  all  boiled  for  the  proper  length*  of  time,  they 
are  strained  through  a  new  press.  The  juice  is  then  boiled  for 
twenty  four  hours  or  until  it  is  the  consistency  of  vaseline  and 
dark  brown  in  color.  It  is  then  stored  away  in  small  gourds 
for  three  or  four  days,  when  it  is  ready  for  use.  If  the  poison 
is  allowed  to  dry  on  the  dart  it  becomes  useless,  hence  it  is  that 
the  darts  and  the  arrow  points  are  carried  with  their  ends  jn 
the  poison,  and  are  not  taken  out  until  needed  for  immediate 
use.  When  the  poison  becomes  dry  in  its  container  it  can  be 
freshened  by  mixing  with  it  some  fresh  cassava  juice.  Little 
danger  need  be  feared  from  handling  poisoned  arrows  in  mu¬ 
seums.  Even  if  the  poison  were  active  the  small  amount  one 
would  receive  from  the  prick  of  a  dart  would  do  him  little  harm. 
The  whole  amount  on  a  fresh  blow  gun  dart,  which  is  sufficient 
to  kill  a  chicken  in  five  minutes,  would  not  be  a  grave  danger 
for  a  man.  To  kill  a  peccary,  the  arrow  point  must  break  off 
and  remain  in  the  wound  thereby  preventing  bleeding  and  insur¬ 
ing  the  absorption  of  all  the  poison.  An  accidental  prick  from 
such  a  point  would  not  be  very  dangerous  to  man.  I  mention 
these  things  because  one  hears  so  much  of  the  great  danger 
from  such  sources.  The  reason  we  hear  these  startling  things 
is  because  we  have  not  advanced  beyond  the  primitive  man’s 
ideas  of  the  mystery  surrounding  poisons.  We  easily  believe 
extravagant  stories  concerning  deadly  insects,  deadly  snakes 
and  deadly  poisons. 


56 


UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


Detachable  poisoned  points,  eight  inches  long,  are  used 
primarily  for  killing  peccaries.  The  point  is  made  to  fit  loosely 
in  the  socket  of  the  arrow  shaft  so  that  it  will  remain  in  the 
wound  and  allow  the  shaft  to  drop  to  the  ground.  If  the  point 
were  firmly  attached,  the  arrow  would  be  caught  in  the  brush 
and  pulled  out,  leaving  an  open  bleeding  wound  which  would 
allow  all  the  poison  to  escape.  The  arrow  point  is  notched  in 
several  places  so  it  may  break  off  in  the  deep  wound.  These 
points  are  carried  in  a  small  bamboo  joint  which  contains  the 
curari  poison  in  the  bottom  and  is  covered  with  a  close-fitting 
cap  of  tapir  skin.  This  is  so  near  air  tight  that  the  poison  will 
remain  moist  and  active  for  a  long  time.  I  he  points  must 
remain  in  the  poison  until  needed  for  use. 

The  most  mysterious  and  awe  inspiring  weapon  in  the  world 
is  the  blow  gun.  It  is  found  among  most  of  the  forest  tribes  in 
eastern  South  America,  in  the  Antilles  and  among  the  Cherokee, 
Iroquois  and  Muskogean  tribes  of  North  America.  Its  occur¬ 
rence  in  Asia  has  led  some  extremist  to  conclude  that  this  is 
another  evidence  of  contact,  but  the  instrument  is  such  a  simple 
one  that  we  may  safely  assume  an  independent  invention.  A 
hollow  reed  is  in  itself  an  invitation  to  blow  through  it.  A 
pellet  of  any  kind  might  well  be  the  first  missile.  It  is  one  of 
the  simplest  of  useful  inventions.  The  blow  gun  is  by  no  means 
the  most  useful  of  Indian  weapons.  Its  use  is  restricted  to 
birds  and  small  climbing  mammals.  The  ^larts  do  not  carry 
sufficient  poison  to  be  effective  in  killing  big  game.  However, 
it  justifies  itself  for  the  suggested  uses.  Birds  of  every  kind 
feed  in  quiet  and  fly  away  at  the  slightest  suggestive  noise.  In 
a  tree  top  they  are  small  targets;  a  miss  with  an  ordinary  arrow 
would  frighten  the  whole  flock,  but  the  dart  is  noiseless,  and, 
besides,  the  shock  from  it  is  so  slight  that  the  bird  struck  utters 
no  cry  before  dropping  from  sight  to  the  ground.  The  monkey 
is  most  difficult  to  get  down — he  has  so  many  hands  to  cling 
with.  When  wounded  with  an  arrow  he  finds  a  secure  place  in 
the  fork  of  a  tree  from  which  he  cannot  be  dislodged;  but  when 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIRS 


57 


hit  with  a  dart  he  remains  quiet  until  he  drops  from  the  limb 
to  the  earth.  1  he  gun  is  used  also  to  get  birds  for  pets.  A 
small  amount  of  poison  is  used,  and,  when  the  bird  drops,  the 
dart  is  removed  and  salt  rubbed  into  the  wound.  It  is  generally 
stated  that  salt  is  the  only  antidote  known  for  curari. 

The  Macusis  secure  the  reeds  for  their  blow  guns  from  the 
Arecunas  who  get  them  near  the  head  waters  of  the  Orinoco, 
where  they  grow  in  abundance.  The  inside  section  of  the  gun 
is  made  of  the  first  joint  of  a  small  bamboolike  reed  ( Arun - 
dinaria  Schomburgkii),  a  half  inch  in  diameter,  which  grows  per¬ 
fectly  straight  between  nodes,  ten  feet  or  more  apart.  This 
tube,  after  it  has  been  carefully  cured  to  prevent  warping,  is 
placed  inside  the  stem  of  a  palm  (Ireartia  setigera )  to  prevent 
warping  and  to  add  strength  and  endurance.  Sometimes  the 
guns  are  secured  in  this  form,  and  they  may  be  so  used;  but  the 
better  and  more  common  method  is  to  cover  the  gun  with  pitch 
and  wind  it  with  bark  or  split  lianas.  While  the  reeds  are  uni¬ 
form  in  thickness  the  gun  is  wound  heavier  at  the  butt  and 
tapering  to  the  point,  thus  making  it  better  balanced  when  in 
use.  The  Wapisiana  guns  have  a  mouthpiece  of  palm  nut  or 
spool  shaped  hard  wood,  but  the  Macusi  guns  are  plain,  with 
an  enlarged  funnel  shaped  opening  made  by  cutting  away  the 
end  of  the  reeds.  All  blow  guns  have  the  so  called  sights 
which  are  mere  indications  to  show  which  side  of  the  gun  to 
hold  uppermost.  The  long  tube,  when  held  out  from  one  end 
in  a  horizontal  position,  always  has  a  weaker  side  which  allows 
it  to  bend.  If  this  weaker  side  is  held  uppermost  the  gun  will 
be  straight.  The  “sights,”  usually  made  of  one  or  two  agouti 
teeth  ( Dasyprocta  agouti )  set  in  wax,  are  always  fixed  on  the 
weaker  side  of  the  barrel,  a  foot  or  two  from  the  butt.  The 
gun  is  useless  if  allowed  to  warp,  hence  it  is  never  stood  up  on 
end  or  laid  across  beams,  but  is  suspended  from  the  ridge  pole 
by  the  small  end. 

The  blow  gun  darts,  ten  inches  long  and  the  size  of  knitting 
needles,  are  made  from  the  midrib  of  the  cokerite  palm  ( Maxi - 


58  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


miliana  regia )  and  carried  in  a  wicker  woven  quiver,  which  is 
coated  with  karamana  wax  and  covered  with  a  tapir  skin  cap. 
Attached  to  the  quiver,  there  is  a  jawbone  of  the  pirai  ( Serras - 
almus  piraya )  and  a  small  basket  for  carrying  silk  cotton  ( Eri - 
odendron).  The  quiver  contains  curari  poison  at  the  bottom, 
into  which  the  ends  of  the  darts  are  placed.  When  a  man  is 
ready  to  use  his  gun,  he  takes  out  a  dart,  rolls  it  between  the 
teeth  of  the  pirai  to  cut  it  half  in  two  so  the  end  will  break  off 
in  the  wound,  takes  a  small  tuft  of  cotton  from  the  basket  and 
rolls  it  around  the  dry  end  of  the  dart  to  fill  the  bore  of  the  gun. 
The  arrow  is  then  inserted  in  the  butt  of  the  gun  and  with  a 
sudden  explosive  puff  is  shot  noiselessly  to  the  distance  of  a 
hundred  feet  with  considerable  accuracy.  One  great  advantage 
of  the  poisoned  dart  is  that  it  need  not  hit  a  vital  part. 

The  blo\v  gun  is  never  used  in  warfare — the  story  teller  and 
the  Sunday  newspaper  traveler  notwithstanding.  Neither  is 
the  poisoned  peccary  arrow  used  in  warfare.  1  he  one  arrow 
made  and  used  for  that  purpose  is  the  large  bamboo  pointed 
arrow.  It  is  more  deadly  than  any  other  because  it  contains 
some  poison  and  it  makes  a  large,  ragged,  crescent  shaped 
wound  which  bleeds  profusely.  All  the  traditions  point  to  the 
arrow  as  the  primary  war  implement  used  among  both  Arawak 
and  Carib  tribes. 

There  are  three  stories  which  belong  to  the  South  American 
tropical  travelers  and  story  tellers.  The  traveler  is  in  constant 
danger  of  losing  his  life;  (i)  by  being  attacked  by  Indians  with 
blow  guns;  (2)  by  eating  birds,  monkeys  and  peccaries  shot 
with  poisoned  arrows;  and  (3)  by  drinking  the  water  of  a  river 
below  a  fish  poisoning.  No  traveler  ever  was  in  any  danger 
from  any  of  these  causes.  If  an  Indian  wished  to  kill  an  objec¬ 
tionable  traveler  he  would  use  more  direct  methods  and  more 
effective  implements.  The  small  amount  of  poison  one  would 
get  from  eating  a  bird  or  animal  killed  with  a  dart  or  arrow 
point  could  be  eaten  with  impunity.  One  would  not  be  foolish 
enough  to  drink  the  water  in  the  pool  at  a  poisoning,  but  he 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


59 


might  drink  from  the  river  immediately  below  without  danger 
an  hour  later.  The  poison  goes  to  the  bottom  of  the  river 
because  its  specific  gravity  is  greater  than  that  of  water.  A 
surface  poison  would  kill  no  fish. 

Division  of  Labor 

The  duties  of  all  individuals  in  a  Macusi  village  are  fairly 
well  established  by  custom  and  on  the  whole  equally  divided 
between  the  sexes  and  along  perfectly  natural  lines.  The  male 
members  of  society,  men  and  the  boys  old  enough  to  leave  their 
mothers  care,  do  the  hunting  and  fishing  and  all  the  heavier 
work  in  clearing  their  fields.  The  men  select  the  location,  clear 
the  land  and  build  the  house.  In  making  a  field  the  men  first 
cut  the  underbrush,  then  fell  the  large  trees,  but  the  women 
assist  in  the  burning.  The  men  go  to  some  neighboring  or  even 
remote  village  to  obtain  cassava  cuttings  for  the  new  fields. 
They  dig  up  the  hills,  but  the  women  carry  the  cuttings  from 
the  canoe  and  plant  them.  All  work  together  in  planting  corn, 
potatoes,  squashes  and  sugar  cane,  but  the  women  take  care  of 
what  little  is  done  in  the  way  of  cultivation  and  in  gathering 
these  vegetables  for  cooking  before  the  final  harvest,  when  the 
men  assist.  Their  fields  usually  are  a  long  way  from  the  village, 
making  the  gathering  of  daily  food  very  laborious  for  the  women. 

Men  use  the  dogs  in  hunting,  but  the  women  care  for  them 
at  other  times.  Men  gather  the  fish  poisons,  prepare  them  and 
poison  the  water,  but  the  women  dress  and  barbecue  the  fish 
and  carry  them  home  in  their  pack  baskets.  Men  make  their 
bows  and  arrows,  blow  guns,  snares  and  traps.  Men  are  the 
traders  and  often  make  long  journeys  on  foot  or  by  canoe,  but 
women  often  accompany  their  husbands  to  pack  on  foot  or  to 
steer  the  canoe  if  traveling  by  water.  Women  gather  the  food 
from  the  fields  and  forests,  cook  it  and  serve  it  to  their  husbands 
and  sons.  They  carry  water  from  the  river  and  make  the  drink. 
They  gather  the  cotton,  spin  it  and  weave  it  into  cloth  and 

• 

hammocks.  Women  among  all  tribes  appear  to  the  white 


60  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

visitor  as  burden  bearers  and  hard  laborers  because  they  are 
so  busy  cooking  while  the  men  are  visiting.  If  the  visitor,  how¬ 
ever,  should  accompany  a  hunting  party  to  a  distant  mountain, 
enter  into  the  chase,  kill  his  125  lb.  peccary  late  in  the  afternoon 
and  carry  it  back  to  the  village,  he  would  agree  that  hunting 
for  one’s  food  is  very  much  like  work.  The  Indians  are  very 
well  satisfied  with  the  present  arrangements  and  desire  only  to 
have  them  continue. 

SOCIAL  CULTURE 
Clothing  and  Ornamentation 

The  Macusis  have  been  for  so  long  a  time  in  contact  with 
whites  that  they  have  learned  to  use  the  white  man’s  clothing 
to  some  extent.  The  men  wear  trousers  and  the  women  skirts 
when  they  go  away  from  home,  and  they  may  even  add  shirts 
and  waists,  but  at  home  they  all  prefer  their  own  native  dress. 
The  interior  tribes  have  nothing  of  outside  manufacture.  Chil¬ 
dren  everywhere  go  about  with  only  a  necklace  until  they  are 
six  or  eight  years  of  age.  The  girls  are  first  to  dress;  they  put 
on  a  fringe  of  cotton  strings,  and  as  they  grow  older  they  make 
for  themselves  beaded  aprons.  In  earlier  times  the  women  all 
wore  the  fringe  of  strings.  When  they  got  beads  it  was  a  very 
simple  matter  to  string  them  and  to  weave  them  using  the 
fringe  strings  as  warp.  The  hint  may  have  come  from  an  out¬ 
side  source  or  from  the  custom  of  wearing  colored  seeds  and 
nuts.  Many  of  their  bead  aprons  have  fringes  of  nuts  and  seeds. 
The  size  of  the  apron  varies  with  the  age  of  the  wearer  until  in 
adult  age  it  is  about  twelve  by  fifteen  inches.  The  different 
colored  beads  are  woven  into  most  beautiful  geometric  designs, 
all  of  which  may  be  traced  directly  to  natural  forms.  In  many 
cases  a  stranger  can  recognize  the  animal  form  at  a  glance 
(Plate  XXV).  In  many  cases  the  body  of  the  apron  is  in 
plain  color,  while  the  borders  are  ornamented  with  fragments  of 
realistic  designs.  Sometimes  the  aprons  have  fringes  of  nuts  or 
seeds  which  serve  as  ornaments  and  also  as  rattles,  making 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


61 


tinkling  sounds  at  every  step  as  the  thighs  strike  the  apron  in 
walking  or  in  dancing.  As  there  is  considerable  traffic  in  aprons 
it  is  difficult  to  determine  the  preferences  of  individuals  or 
tribes.  1  he  choice  of  colors  depends  more  upon  the  available 
supply  than  the  tastes  of  individuals.  The  Waiwai  women 
prefer  white  beads  for  the  body  of  the  apron  and  blue  ones  for 
the  narrow  borders  at  top  and  bottom.  The  Macusis  prefer 
the  apron  entirely  plain  or  covered  with  a  single  repeated  design. 
The  Diaus  and  the  Waiwais  often  wear  longer  aprons  with  fringes 
of  nuts.  The  women  of  the  forest  tribes  often  wear  at  their 
dances  a  beaded  back  ornament,  ten  inches  high  and  a  foot  in 
length,  made  with  sticks  attached  along  the  ends  to  hold  it  in 
position.  It  is  ornamented  with  feathers  and  attached  to  the 
apron  string.  Plate  XII,  F  shows  a  Waiwai  woman  wearing 
the  back  ornament  and  the  long  apron.  The  apron  string  is 
worn  so  tight  that  it  becomes  deeply  imbedded  in  the  flesh. 

The  men  wear  a  loin  cloth  made  of  cotton  woven  in  a  strip 
five  or  six  feet  in  length  and  six  or  eight  inches  wide  with  loose 
threads  or  long  tassels  left  at  the  ends.  The  cloth  is  passed 
between  the  legs  and  the  ends  suspended  before  and  behind  over 
a  tight-fitting  belt  of  jaguar  skin.  The  tasseled  ends  are  usually 
tucked  up  at  the  sides.  Cloths  for  everyday  wear  are  shorter 
and  lack  the  tassels.  Among  some  of  the  tribes  a  bov  receives 
his  first  loin  cloth  at  his  puberty  ceremony  (Cf.  Apalaii).  The 
Indians  are  in  the  habit  of  coloring  their  bodies  with  a  paint 
made  of  oil  and  the  red  pulp  surrounding  the  seeds  of  the  an- 
natto  tree  ( Bixa  orellana).  A  mass  of  paint  is  rubbed  between 
the  palms  and  smeared  over  the  body.  A  dye  is  made  of  the 
pulp  of  the  same  plant  mixed  with  the  gum  of  Idea  heptaphylla 
for  coloring  loin  cloths  and  hammocks.  The  Macusis,  for 
ordinary  wear,  use  red  cloth  obtained  from  the  whites.  The 
belts  are  made  of  strips  of  jaguar  skin,  plaited  liana  splits,  or 
of  the  inner  bark  of  the  cakaralli  tree  ( Lecythis  ollaria).  This 
bark  is  sometimes  used  for  baby  carriers,  small  hammocks  and 
tump  lines. 


62  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

The  Macusis,  when  traveling  in  the  savannah  on  stony 
trails,  wear  sandals  made  of  the  leaf  stock  of  the  aeta  palm 
(. Mauritia  flexuosa )  or. of  the  thick  hide  of  the  tapir.  The 
sandal  is  roughly  cut  with  square  toe  and  heel  and  wide  enough 
to  protect  the  sides  of  the  foot.  The  sandal  is  securely  fastened 
by  thongs,  which  pass  through  slits  at  the  sides  of  the  foot 
around  the  heel  and  between  the  great  and  second  toes. 
The  interior  tribes  do  not  use  sandals  because  their  forest 
trails  are  shaded  and  leaf  covered.  Neither  are  they  found  in 
the  savannahs  during  the  wet  season  when  they  would  be  useless 
on  the  slippery  ground.  They  are  of  more  value  as  a  protection 
from  the  heat  of  the  sun  baked  trail  than  from  the  stony  soil, 
particularly  so  where  there  are  frequent  streams  to  be  forded 
and  the  soles  of  the  feet  become  cooled  and  softened  by  the 
water.  At  such  times,  without  sandals  to  put  on  after  the 
crossing,  the  feet  are  torn  and  blistered  and  the  traveler  is  soon 
disabled.  The  leaf  stock  sandal  is  easily  made,  but  quickly 
worn  out.  It  is  preferred  to  the  tapir  skin  sandal  in  some 
respects;  it  does  not  slip  on  wet  ground,  and,  being  thicker,  it 
protects  the  feet  from  feeling  the  pebbles.  The  use  of  the 
sandal  is  widely  distributed  in  South  America  outside  the 
Amazon  Valley.  Some  doubt  has  been  cast  upon  Ortiguera’s 
statement  that  sandals  were  used  by  the  Indians  on  the  large 
island  at  the  mouth  of  the  Amazon  in  the  sixteenth  century, 
but  the  story  was  probably  true  because  the  eastern  half  of  the 
island  (Marajo),  was  an  open  savannah  whose  hot,  stony  trails 
would  necessitate  some  protection  for  the  feet.  The  western  or 
up  river  part  of  the  island  is  alluvial  and  forested. 

Ornaments  attached  to,  or  worn  on,  the  body  are  much 
alike  in  both  sexes.  Men  and  women  wear  seed  and  bead  neck¬ 
laces,  and  bandoleers;  strands  of  beads  wound  around  the  upper 
arm  and  above  the  calf  of  the  leg;  shell  ear  ornaments  with 
necklace  and  pendants  and  lower  lip  plugs  with  pendants 
attached.  The  women  wear  wristlets  on  both  arms,  and  anklets 
woven  in  place,  d  he  men  wear  wristlets  on  the  right  arm  but 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


63 


not  on  the  lei t  on  account  of  its  interference  with  the  bowstring. 
1  hey  sometimes  wear  armbands  of  bark  or  palm  leaf  decorated 
with  beads  and  leathers.  Only  occasionally  do  the  men  wear 
anklets,  and  then  they  are  the  removable  type,  either  woven 
with  drawstrings  or  strands  of  beads  wrapped  around  the  ankles. 
The  bandoleer  of  monkeys’  hair  is  given  to  the  Apalaii  boy  at 
the  conclusion  of  his  puberty  ordeal.  The  men  have  the  septum 
of  the  nose  perforated  for  wearing  sticks  with  feathers  attached 
at  their  dances.  Ear  ornaments  of  shell,  bone  or  teeth  are 
usually  attached  to  a  plug,  which  is  joined  from  the  back  to  a 
corresponding  plug  in  the  other  ear  by  a  plain  string  or  beaded 
strings  under  the  chin.  There  are  attached  to  the  plug  also 
pendants  of  beaded  strings  with  tufts  of  feathers  at  the  ends. 
The  lip  plug  has  similar  pendants.  The  photographs  (Plates 
XXIX-XXXII),  give  a  very  good  idea  of  the  personal  orna¬ 
ments  worn  by  both  sexes  on  ceremonial  occasions. 

The  hair  is  worn  long  by  both  men  and  women  among  all 
the  tribes  except  the  Macusi  whose  men  are  now  beginning  to 
cut  their  hair  in  the  prevailing  white  man  fashion.  At  puberty 
the  men  of  the  forest  tribes  cut  their  hair  in  front  and  put  up 
the  rest  in  beautifully  decorated  bamboo  tubes  from  six  to 
fifteen  inches  in  length,  which  are  allowed  to  hang  down  their 
backs.  The  hair  is  first  oiled,  combed  and  wrapped  in  a  long 
queue;  then  the  tube  is  slipped  up  over  the  hair  and  held  in 
place  by  the  hair  string.  The  white  down  of  the  harpi  eagle  is 
sprinkled  over  the  hair  at  festival  times.  The  men  are  proud 
of  their  long  hair  and  take  exceedingly  good  care  of  it,  dressing 
it  every  day  with  Brazil  nut  oil,  which  they  carry  at  all  times 
in  their  toilet  cases.  The  women  give  less  attention  to  their 
toilet.  They  wear  their  hair  loose  over  their  shoulders  and 
frequently  have  it  cut  across  in  front  to  keep  it  out  of  their 
eyes.  At  puberty  girls  cut  their  hair  in  front  and  put  on  a 
head  band  of  cotton,  woven  over  four  bent  splints,  with  streamers 
hanging  down  the  back.  The  combs  in  use  (Plate  XXIX)  are 
made  by  setting  the  hard  wood  teeth  in  a  slit  in  the  leg  bone 


64  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


of  a  bird.  The  comb  is  from  four  to  six  inches  wide  and  the 
teeth  are  about  two  inches  long.  The  hollow  bone  is  filled 
with  wax,  the  ends  of  the  teeth  imbedded  in  the  wax,  fine  cotton 
or  fibre  thread  is  interwoven  with  the  teeth  for  an  inch,  and 
then  a  clamp  of  two  small  sticks  firmly  attached  to  all  the  teeth 
and  to  the  bone  above.  Thus  the  teeth  are  secured  in  place  and 
strengthened.  The  bone  back  is  carved  at  the  ends  and  deco¬ 
rated  with  bright  red  and  yellow  leathers. 

The  body  is  not  mutilated  for  ornamental  purposes.  I  he 
ears,  nose  and  lip  are  pierced  for  wearing  ornaments.  Formerly 
both  men  and  women  pulled  out  their  eyebrows  and  put  on  a 
line  of  black  paint  instead.  Now  they  have  scissors  and  razors 
and  either  cut  or  shave  the  eyebrows  because  they  interfere 
with  clear  vision.  The  neighboring  Wapisianas  shave  off  their 
eyebrows  for  the  sake  of  beauty.  They  sometimes  leave. a 
thin  line  a  quarter  of  an  inch  wide.  1  he  Macusis  pull  out  the 
scattering  hairs  on  the  face,  but  leave  them  on  the  upper  lip. 
Some  have  fair  mustaches,  which,  however,  are  never  thick  and 
heavy.  The  front  teeth  are  often  filed  to  a  point  with  the  idea 
of  preserving  them.  The  girls  who  are  selected  to  chew  the 
corn  or  cassava  bread  in  making  drinks  have  three  radiating 
lines  tattooed  at  the  corners  of  their  mouths.  Fine  lines  are 
pricked  in  the  skin  with  thorns  and  a  mixture  of  calcined  cas¬ 
sava  bread  and  wild  honey  rubbed  in.  The  sides  of  the  tongue 
are  scraped  and  rubbed  with  the  same  mixture.  It  is  an  honor 
to  be  selected  as  a  chewer  and  the  tattooing  serves  as  a  dis¬ 
tinguishing  mark,  but  it  all  appears  to  be  most  important  in 
rendering  the  drink  sweeter  to  the  taste.  There  is  no  other 
tattooing,  but  the  whole  body  is  sometimes  covered  with  intri¬ 
cate  geometrical  painted  designs  which,  so  far  as  we  were  able 
to  learn,  have  no  significance  in  themselves.  The  individual 
design  may  be  that  of  a  conventionalized  animal  or  plant  but 
in  body  decoration  it  is  used  for  the  sake  of  beauty  only.  Frag¬ 
ments  of  designs  are  used  to  fill  up  irregular  spaces.  Two  girls 
were  painted  up  for  us  and  we  took  their  photographs  but  un- 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


65 


fortunately  that  one  particular  roll  of  films  was  spoiled  and  the 
designs  lost.  The  plates  show  a  number  of  the  face  paintings. 
The  body  is  often  covered  with  the  reddish  yellow  paint  made 
trom  the  fruit  of  the  annatto  tree.  The  red  lines  on  the  face 
are  made  with  annatto,  the  yellow  lines  with  an  extract  of  the 
leaves  of  Bigona  chicka  and  the  black  ones  with  the  juice  of  the 
Gempa  Americana. 

As  it  often  happens  in  civilized  society,  well  developed 
young  men  or  women  with  good  looks  and  fine  physique,  pride 
themselves  upon  their  appearance  and  greatly  appreciate  the 
admiration  of  their  fellows  and  members  of  the  opposite  sex. 
It  was  the  daily  habit  of  the  two  young  men  to  take  a  bath 
in  the  river  upon  arising  in  the  morning;  cover  their 
bodies  with  paint;  oil,  comb  and  decorate  their  hair;  paint 
designs  upon  their  faces  (with  daily  differences)  and  put  on 
their  ornaments.  The  performance  would  consume  an  hour  at 
least.  In  the  evening  before  retiring  they  would  take  a  bath 
and  wash  off  all  the  paint.  If  they  were  going  hunting  they  did 
not  dress  until  after  they  had  returned  and  had  taken  another 
bath.  When  on  the  trail  our  men  would  stop  before  entering  a 
village,  bathe  and  dress  up  generally.  The  young  unmarried 
women  of  the  village  painted  their  faces  and  put  on  their  beads 
every  day  when  they  were  not  at  work.  The  attempt  to  pre¬ 
sent  a  pleasing  appearance  and  to  make  a  favorable  impression 
was  always  in  evidence  at  their  dances.  The  married  men  and 
women  at  such  times,  while  keeping  themselves  presentable,  did 
not  give  so  much  attention  to  decoration.  ’A  mother  would 
loan  her  ornaments  to  her  daughter  and  go  without  herself. 
Practically  all  the  beads  in  the  village  were  loaded  upon  the 
three  Parukutu  girls  in  Plate  XIII. 

Music 

The  Macusi  are  said  to  have  the  greatest  love  for  music  of 
all  the  tribes  in  the  Guiana  region.  Their  songs  are  borrowed 
by  other  tribes.  A  few  years  ago  a  mission  was  established  at 


66  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM— ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

Upikari  and  a  small  chapel  built.  One  day  when  I  was  passmg 
the  chapel,  1  heard  music  inside  and  went  in.  The  choir  (Plate 
111)  consisting  of  two  boys  and  two  girls,  with  a  boy  at  the 
small  organ,  was  practicing  hymns  for  the  next  day’s  service. 
They  were  singing  English  hymns,  having  learned  to  read  the 
words,  but  without  knowing  their  meaning.  Not  one  of  them 
could  answer  my  questions  in  English.  We  attended  a  service 
at  Tirka  and  greatly  enjoyed  the  singing  which  was  taken  part 
in  by  all  present.  For  their  dances,  they  have  a  man  sing  a 
solo  part  with  improvised  words,  and  all  men  and  women  join 
in  the  chorus.  The  leader  of  the  chorus  emphasizes  the  rhythm 
by  the  use  of  a  rattle  made  by  attaching  a  string  of  nuts 
with  open  ends  ( Thevetia  nereifolia )  to  a  staff.  The  flutes 
made  of  the  leg  bone  of  the  jaguar  are  not  used  in  making 
music  for  the  dance,  but  these  and  the  bamboo  flutes  are  played 
by  anyone  for  his  own  amusement.  The  flutes  are  often  deco¬ 
rated  with  incised  geometric  designs.  The  bone  flute  is  usually 
made  of  the  femur  of  a  full  grown  jaguar.  The  epiphysis  is  cut 
away,  the  fibrous  parts  removed  and  the  end  filled  with  kara- 
mana  wax  as  a  stop.  An  oval  notch  is  cut  in  the  edge  on  the 
popliteal  surface  for  a  lip.  The  bone  is  cut  away  between  the 
neck  and  the  trochanter  to  the  hollow  and  three  holes  drilled 
about  an  inch  and  a  quarter  apart  in  the  posterior  side  of  the 
bone.  The  great  trochanter  and  the  head  are  perforated  for  the 
suspension  of  a  number  of  cotton  cords.  At  the  other  end 
cotton  thread  is  wound  around  the  bone  securing  other  cotton 
cords,  which  hang  as  a  decoration.  The  bamboo  flutes  are  end 
blown,  the  open  end  being  pressed  against  the  lower  lip  to  form 
the  stop.  Three  or  sometimes  four  holes  are  burned  through 
with  a  firestick.  The  end  may  be  lei  t  open  or  cut  off  at  the 
node  and  a  slit  cut  on  each  side  above.  These  flutes  are  some¬ 
times  decorated  with  burnt  lines  radiating  from  the  holes  or 
with  engraved  designs.  Another  variety  of  flute  has  a  reed 
made  of  a  bird  bone  thrust  through  the  node  of  the  flute.  The 
flutes  of  the  Apalaii  are  all  side  blown  and  thus  differ  from  those 
of  other  Carib  tribes. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


67 


The  Dance 

The  Macusis  greatly  enjoy  the  dance.  They  dance  to  cele¬ 
brate  any  event — the  visit  of  friends,  a  successful  hunt,  the 
successful  ending  of  any  undertaking;  or,  lacking  an  event  or 
proper  undertaking,  they  invite  their  neighbors  for  a  friendly 
dance  so  they  may  become  better  acquainted,  or  they  dance  at 
all  times  when  there  is  an  abundance  of  food.  After  a  fish  poi¬ 
soning,  or  upon  the  return  of  a  hunting  party  that  has  gone  far 
into  the  forest,  when  a  man  builds  a  house  or  makes  a  field, 
when  young  men  want  wives  or  when  young  women  want  hus¬ 
bands,  a  dance  is  arranged  to  call  attention  to  the  particular 
event  or  desire.  All  dances  are  more  or  less  drinking  bouts,  and 
often  the  drink  gives  name  to  the  dance. 

The  paricari  dance  is  the  most  elaborate  and  the  most 
important  of  their  dances.  This  is  a  kind  of  double  dance,  the 
invited  guests  taking  the  part  of  the  paricari  and  the  hosts  the 
part  of  the  tukui.  The  name  paricari  is  that  of  a  small  red 
headed  bird  ( Phoenicocircus  carnifex )  and  tukui  is  the  name  of 
a  humming  bird  ( Topa\a  pella).  These  birds  are  in  no  sense 
totems;  but  1  was  unable  to  learn  why  the  names  were  used. 
The  drink  used  at  this  dance  is  called  paricari  also.  The  tukui 
dance  around  in  a  small  circle  singing  and  dancing  to  the  rhythm 
of  the  tuwi,  or  string  of  beads  attached  to  a  staff,  while  the 
paricari  dance  around  a  circle  on  the  outside  of  the  tukui,  sing¬ 
ing  and  dancing  to  their  own  independent  music.  The  head 
man  of  the  village  leads  the  tukui  and  carries  the  rattle  staff, 
and  the  visiting  head  man  leads  the  paricari  dancers.  The 
leader  is  followed  by  two  women,  each  having  a  hand  on  one  of 
his  shoulders.  The  other  dancers  follow  in  pairs,  the  man  a 
little  in  advance  and  the  woman  with  her  left  hand  on  his  right 
shoulder  all  facing  the  centre.  As  they  advance  a  step  toward 
the  centre  and  retreat  the  woman  changes  and  places  her  right 
hand  on  her  partner’s  left  shoulder;  then  they  move  to 
their  right  four  steps.  T  hus  they  continue  around  the  circle 
from  right  to  left.  The  rhythm  is  emphasized  by  throwing  the 


68  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM— ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

weight  of  the  body  forward  with  each  step.  The  tukui,  m 
expression  of  their  welcome,  make  a  lot  of  noise  with  panpipes 
and  drums. 

The  drink,  paricari,  is  kept  in  a  large  trough  or  a  canoe  m 
the  middle  of  the  house.  The  dancers  move  around  this  recep¬ 
tacle  for  a  time  until  the  leader  of  the  tukui  suddenly  ends  his 
song  with  a  yell  in  a  high  key  and  stops.  The  girl  in  charge  of 
the  drink  takes  a  sip  from  a  large  calabash  bowl  and  passes  it 
to  the  leader  of  the  paricari,  the  visiting  head  man,  who  takes 
a  drink  and  passes  it  along  the  line  to  the  others.  Another  bowl 
is  given  to  the  leader  of  the  tukui  who  likewise  drinks  and  passes 
drink  to  the  other  dancers.  When  all  are  refreshed  the  women 
select  new  partners  and  the  dance  starts  off  again.  The  method 
of  selection  is  interesting.  The  woman,  at  the  signal  given  by 
the  leader  with  a  shake  of  his  rattle,  places  her  hand  on  the 
shoulder  of  her  desired  partner,  who  immediately  steps  into 
place.  After  the  first  dance  the  visiting  women  select  their 
partners  from  the  tukui  and  dance  with  them.  As  the  dance 
and  the  drinking  go  on,  some  are  overcome  and  drop  out  while 
the  others  mix  up  in  the  general  dance.  The  drink  is  slightly 
intoxicating,  but  would  have  little  effect  if  it  were  not  for  the 
fact  that  the  men  drink  such  enormous  quantities  of  it.  The 
men  have  the  happy  faculty  of  bringing  up  the  liquor  soon  after 
it  has  been  drunk  and  the  alcohol  has  been  absorbed.  1  he 
women  never  drink  to  excess. 

When  it  has  been  decided  to  hold  a  paricari  dance,  the  head 
man  sends,  to  the  villages  he  wishes  to  invite,  messengers  who 
carry  knotted  cords,  or  quipus,  with  knots  corresponding  to  the 
number  of  intervening  days.  The  time  must  be  fixed  several 
days  in  advance  in  order  to  allow  time  for  the  preparation  ol 
food  and  drink.  As  the  dance  usually  continues  for  several 
days,  or  until  all  the  drink  has  been  consumed,  it  is  necessary 
for  the  visitors  to  bring  with  them  all  the  members  of  the  family 
together  with  all  the  family  pets.  As  the  visitors  arrive  by 
villages  the  day  before  the  dance  is  scheduled  to  begin,  they 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


69 


blow  their  reed  flutes  to  announce  their  presence.  They  ad¬ 
vance  into  the  village  and  the  head  man  goes  into  the  house,  to 
the  hammock  of  the  head  man  of  the  village,  and  says  “I  am 
here.''  The  man  in  the  hammock  responds  "ugh,”  and  the 
first  speaker  goes  on  to  tell  the  interesting  news  from  his  people. 
He  then  takes  a  seat  on  a  stool  and  a  woman  gives  him  a  cala¬ 
bash  of  cassava  soup,  while  the  next  man  is  being  received  in 
the  same  manner.  When  all  have  been  received  and  refreshed 
they  are  shown  where  to  sling  their  hammocks.  The  women  go 
directly  to  the  women’s  door  and  are  received  by  the  women 
without  ceremony.  During  the  reception  the  host  has  not 
moved  from  his  hammock  nor  looked  at  his  visitors  but  when 
the  visiting  head  man  has  taken  his  hammock  the  host  goes  and 
sits  by  him  and  engages  him  in  conversation.  He  talks  with¬ 
out  a  break  for  fifteen  minutes  or  so  and  then  allows  his  visitor 
to  talk  in  the  same  manner.  As  the  talk  goes  on  the  listener 
grunts  assent  at  regular  intervals,  and  at  the  conclusion  each 
grunts  in  turn  three  or  four  times  in  diminishing  tones;  at  last 
all  is  quiet.  The  whole  thing  appears  to  be  a  formal  ritual  gone 
through  with  in  unnatural  tones  and  expressions.  After  a  brief 
interval,  they  talk  in  a  perfectly  normal  way,  asking  and  an¬ 
swering  questions. 

There  are  three  other  dances.  One,  called  warepang, 
takes  place  in  the  daytime,  and  only  the  one  village  takes  part. 
It  is  a  very  informal  affair,  in  which  anyone  may  be  the  leader. 
The  rattle,  mara,  a  gourd  with  seeds  inside  and  a  stick  through 
it,  is  used  not  to  keep  time  for  the  dancers  but  as  a  signal  to 
give  directions.  One  shake  means  to  advance,  two  to  turn  to 
the  right,  three  to  stop  and  four  to  turn  around.  The  mawari 
is  the  dance  with  the  evil  spirit.  The  people  dance  with  him 
and  sing  songs,  saying  that  he  is  present,  but  he  is  unseen.  The 
dancers  may  partake  of  any  kind  of  drink;  no  special  kind  is 
required  as  in  the  paricari  dance,  but  no  drink  is  offered  to  or 
for  the  evil  spirit.  Even  though  there  is  no  direct  worship  or 
offering,  it  would  appear  that  this  dance  in  recognition  of  the 


70  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

evil  spirit  is  a  direct  attempt  to  avert  his  ill  will.  The  third 
dance,  called  kaka,  is  much  like  the  warepang  except  for  the 
method  of  selecting  the  leader  of  the  dance.  A  strong  man  is 
selected  to  defend  the  entrance  to  the  house.  The  men  taking 
part  line  up  at  a  distance  and  make  a  run  for  the  door  when 
they  are  caught  by  the  defender.  A  wrestle  ensues;  if  the 
defender  is  successful  in  lifting  both  his  antagonist  s  feet  from 
the  ground  at. once,  he  is  the  winner  and  receives  the  next  comer. 
The  one  who  succeeds  in  lifting  the  defender’s  feet  from  the 
ground,  thrusts  him  aside  and  enters  the  house,  where  a  woman 
throws  soaked  cassava  bread  in  his  face  and  thus  marks  him  for 
the  leader  of  the  dance. 

Games 

There  are  no  games  for  adults  except  the  wrestling  at  the 
kaka  dance.  Small  boys  use  their  bows  and  arrows  shooting 
at  all  kinds  of  small  animals  or  insects,  but  I  never  saw  them 
shoot  at  a  stationary  artificial  target.  They  often  stand  in 
line  and  shoot  at  a  round  piece  of  soft  wood  or  any  round  thing 
that  a  companion  rolls  along  in  front  of  them.  No  score  is  kept 
of  hits  or  misses.  The  boys  make  and  use  an  interesting  kind 
of  toy  catapult.  A  forked  stick,  somewhat  larger  than  the 
stick  of  the  bean  shooter  of  our  own  boyhood,  has  a  string 
wrapped  around  the  prongs  sufficiently  tight  to  draw  them 
nearer  together.  A  thread  is  wound  around  these  strings, 
bringing  them  together.  A  dart  the  size  of  a  knitting  needle  is 
made  of  hard  wood  and  the  sharpened  end  pushed  through 
between  the  strings  from  the  back  and  the  other  end  carried 
over  the  front  to  the  handle  on  the  other  side,  thus  tightening 
the  strings  and  bringing  the  prongs  nearer  together.  The  cata¬ 
pult  is  now  loaded  and  ready  to  shoot.  When  the  butt  of  the 
dart  is  released,  the  flexed  prongs  straighten  and  the  dart  is 
hurled  away  to  a  distance  of  several  feet.  The  idea  is  to  shoot 
at  some  soft  object  at  the  proper  distance,  about  six  feet,  to 
allow  the  dart  to  turn  over  and  stick  fast  with  the  sharp  point. 
It  is  a  very  ingenious  toy  and  as  far  as  I  am  aware  unknown 
outside  the  Caribs. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


71 


Political  Organization 

At  present  there  is  no  chief  over  the  whole  Macusi  tribe, 
and  it  may  be  doubted  if  there  ever  was  one  such.  There  are 
now  three  heads  of  authority:  the  head  man  who  has  political 
oversight  of  the  village,  the  medicine  man  who  watches  over 
the  health  of  the  people,  and  the  father  whose  will  is  respected 
by  his  family.  The  head  man  has  no  formal  authority,  but 
because  of  his  good  judgment,  his  success  as  a  hunter  and  his 
influence  in  forming  public  opinion,  he  is  treated  with  deference 
by  all  the  men  of  his  village.  He  gives  advice  on  all  kinds  of 
questions  affecting  individuals,  families  or  the  village  as  a  whole. 
He  settles  disputes,  organizes  hunting  parties  and  fish  poisonings. 
He  may  cooperate  with  head  men  from  other  villages  and  may 
unite  with  them  against  a  common  enemy  in  warfare.  He 
secures  his  position  by  common  consent  and  continues  to  hold 
it  by  public  opinion.  His  task  is  an  easy  one  because  of  the 
moral  character  of  the  Indians.  From  childhood  they  are 
taught  respect  for  their  superiors,  regard  for  the  rights  of  their 
fellows  and  the  sacredness  of  traditions,  ff  hey  appear  to  have 
an  innate  dread  of  adverse  criticism.  The  one  duty,  then,  of 
the  head  man  is  to  assist  in  forming  a  healthy  public  opinion. 
There  are  no  definite  punishments  for  particular  crimes.  The 
taking  of  food  that  does  not  belong  to  one  is  not  regarded  as 
stealing,  yet  he  is  asked  to  repay  in  kind.  Women  sometimes 
take  things  from  each  other,  but  when  found  out  they  are  asked 
to  make  payment.  I  he  killing  of  a  member  of  a  family  starts 
a  family  feud,  which  is  handed  down  from  father  to  son.  The 
head  man  is  not  concerned  in  cases  of  this  kind.  It  must 
be  said  that  there  is  very  little  crime  of  any  kind  committed 
among  them. 

1  he  father  is  absolute  master  of  his  household.  The  chil¬ 
dren  are  taught  to  obey  without  demonstration.  The  grown-up 
sons  respect  the  wishes  of  their  father  until  they  are  married  and 
go  away  from  the  old  home.  I  he  daughter  brings  to  live  in 
her  father’s  house  a  husband  who  willingly  submits  to  the  will 


72  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

of  his  father  in  law.  This  does  not  mean  that  the  father  is 
domineering,  but  that  his  expressed  wishes  are  respected.  He 
counsels  with  his  family  and  gives  advice. 

Medicine  Men 

The  medicine  man,  or  piazong,  is  the  religious  head  of  the 
village  and  the  controller  of  all  kinds  of  spirits.  Sickness  and 
disabilities  of  every  sort  are  due  to  the  evil  influence  of  a  medi¬ 
cine  man  in  some  other  village.  These  influences,  or  evil  spirits, 
must  be  discovered  and  dispelled  by  the  medicine  man  of  the 
afflicted  village.  Pains  are  due  to  the  presence  of  foreign  ob¬ 
jects  in  the  body  of  the  patient,  but  the  object  need  not  be  a 
material  object.  A  natural  material  object,  as  a  thorn,  may 
enter  the  body  and  cause  pain;  this  is  a  daily  occurrence.  An 
unknown  object  may  be  in  the  form  of  a  spirit  and  as  such 
mav  be  sent  into  the  body  from  a  distance  by  one  piazong  and 
expelled  by  another.  The  principal  duty  of  the  piazong  is  to 
discover  and  to  drive  away  these  foreign  spirits.  However,  he 
does  minister  to  the  material  needs  of  the  patient  by  performing 
slight  operations  and  by  giving  medicine.  He  does  not  attempt 
to  defend  the  people  against  the  attacks  of  evil  spirits,  but  he  is 
their  only  hope  when  they  are  attacked;  hence  his  very  great 
influence  in  the  tribe.  He  is  reverenced  and  at  the  same  time 
feared  because  he  himself  has  the  power  to  send  evil  spirits  into 
their  bodies  and  leave  them  there  to  spoil  and  to  destroy.  His 
labors  are  very  remunerative  since  no  one  would  dare  refuse  him 
anything  he  asked  for  his  services. 

The  office  of  piazong  in  former  times  was  hereditary,  but 
apparently  it  is  not  so  today.  A  boy  is  selected  by  the  piazong 
and  put  through  a  certain  amount  of  practical  training.  He  is 
taught  the  manufacture  of  the  few  medicines  used.  1  he  herbs 
used  may  grow  at  a  great  distance  in  the  savannah  or  forest; 
he  must  know  the  plants  and  their  locality.  He  is  taught  the 
traditions  of  the  tribe,  for  he  must  pass  them  on.  He  must 
learn  the  methods  of  his  profession  and  the  proper  use  of  his 


FARABEE— THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


73 


voice  in  exorcising  spirits.  He  must  become  a  real  ventriloquist 
who  can  imitate  the  calls  of  all  the  animals  and  birds  as  they 
approach  and  retreat  when  they  are  called. 

The  piazong’s  methods  of  procedure  vary  to  some  extent 
with  the  illness  of  the  patient.  1  had  no  opportunity  to  witness 
a  performance,  but  Mr.  Christopher  Davis,  my  informant,  was 
treated  for  fever  in  his  own  house  by  the  piazong  of  Tirka.  The 
work  must  be  done  in  absolute  darkness  and  quiet  so  the  patient 
may  hear  the  spirit  depart.  Only  two  things  are  necessary  in 
the  preparation:  first  some  leaf  tobacco  must  be  soaked  for  a 
time  in  water  and  then  the  juice  squeezed  out  by  hand  into  a 
calabash;  then  two  large  bunches  of  the  leaves  of  a  shrub  called 
tcipuyeyare  must  be  brought  in  and  placed  on  the  ground 
near  the  calabash  of  tobacco  juice.  The  first  sound  Davis 
heard  was  that  of  the  piazong  gurgling  the  tobacco  juice  and 
spitting  it  out.  Then  began  a  series  of  discordant  yells  and  calls 
and  the  flutter  of  the  leaves  high  up  toward  the  roof,  and  then 
they  were  brought  down  hard  with  a  thump  on  the  ground. 
The  piazong  stamped  his  foot  and  said  the  spirit  of  the  bird 
had  come.  He  questioned  the  bird  but  could  get  no  informa¬ 
tion,  so  with  a  rush  and  flutter  of  the  leaves  it  went  away.  The 
gurgling  of  tobacco  juice  and  the  yells  and  calls  were  repeated 
and  other  birds  and  animals  came,  were  questioned  and  sent 
away.  After  some  hours,  the  right  spirit  was  found  and  per¬ 
suaded  to  leave  the  man  and  allow  him  to  get  well.  While 
shaking  the  leaves  to  represent  the  coming  of  the  spirit  the 
piazong  sang  a  song  asking  the  spirit  to  come  and  tell  him  the 
cause  of  the  trouble.  When  it  was  all  over  the  piazong  told 
Davis  that  he  would  get  well  very  soon. 

The  success  of  the  piazong’s  treatment  depends  very  largely 
upon  his  diagnosis.  He  had  no  specific  for  the  fever,  so  the 
best  he  could  do  was  to  call  in  the  spirits.  At  another  time  when 
a  sick  man  came  to  him  he  made  a  drink,  blew  upon  it,  said  a 
ritual  over  it  and  gave  it  to  the  patient  to  drink.  If  a  child 
has  worms  he  gives  it  a  tea,  called  ronai,  made  of  the  bark 


74 


UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


of  a  tree  by  the  same  name.  For  a  pain  in  the  stomach  or 
bowels,  he  scrapes  the  seeds  of  the  kamara  and  makes  a  tea. 
For  headache,  he  folds  up  the  skin  over  the  temple  and  per¬ 
forates  it  with  the  spine  of  the  stingray  causing  profuse  bleeding. 
For  cuts,  bruises  and  sores  he  makes  a  salve  by  scraping  the 
pulp  of  the  kartama  seeds.  And  to  prevent  the  bite  of  the  vicious 
pirai  fish,  he  chews  the  seeds  of  the  pua  and  rubs  the  salve  on 
his  legs.  He  is  able  to  produce  abortion,  if  for  any  reason  chil¬ 
dren  are  undesired,  by  giving  the  patient  a  drug,  the  contents 
of  which  are  guarded  with  great  secrecy.  He  prevents  con¬ 
ception  by  blowing  upon  a  drink  and  repeating  a  certain  formula. 
No  doubt  he  was  acquainted  with  other  remedies  but  1  did  not 
remain  long  in  his  village  and  saw  very  little  sickness.  1  he 
piazong  not  only  cures  diseases  and  expels  evil  spirits  sent  by 
an  enemy  piazong,  but  he  has  power  to  send  spirits  and  to 
cause  sickness  and  death  at  a  distance  or  among  his  own  people. 
He  may  be  employed  by  one  party  to  inflict  punishment  upon 
another.  He  makes  a  drink,  performs  his  incantations  over  it 
and  gives  it  to  the  victim  to  diink,  or  he  may  only  blow  upon 
the  drink.  The  victim  swells  up  and  dies  or  his  flesh  falls  off. 
The  piazong  is  so  feared  by  his  people  that  they  are  willing  to 
give  him  anything  he  demands  for  his  services.  He  therefore  has 
the  best  of  everything  with  very  little  labor,  and  is  sometimes 
inclined  to  impose  upon  his  patients.  It  will  be  noted  that  he 
is  a  wise  man  and  his  practice  most  intelligent.  He  does  not 
depend  upon  magic  alone  to  perform  his  cures,  but  uses  herbs 
and  practical  methods  when  possible.  He  recognizes  incurable 
diseases  and  attributes  them  to  the  kenaima  over  whom  he 
acknowledges  he  has  no  control. 

The  Kenaima 

The  kenaimas  are  little  people  who  live  in  the  depths  of 
the  forest  and  come  out  at  night  to  attack  people— to  kill  them 
outright  or  to  inflict  some  punishment  upon  them  which  will 
eventually  cause  their  death.  They  may  be  hiding  in  lonely 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


75 


places  waiting  an  opportunity  to  spring  upon  a  passing  victim. 
They  are  real  men,  not  spirits,  but  they  can  do  things  that 
other  men  cannot  do.  No  man  ever  saw  one  of  these  kenaimas; 
they  are  known  only  by  what  they  accomplish.  They  never 
attack  a  man  except  when  he  is  alone.  Therefore  a  man  never 
travels  alone,  hunts  alone,  nor  even  goes  out  of  his  house  alone 
at  night  for  any  purpose.  The  reason  the  kenaima  will  not 
attack  two  people  is  because  they  must  not  be  seen,  not  because 
they  are  afraid.  Another  peculiarity  about  the  kenaima,  a  very 
significant  one,  is  that  he  never  draws  blood  nor  leaves  visible 
sign  of  his  attack.  The  victim  always  dies  in  three  days.  There 
is  no  cure.  The  things  the  kenaima  does  to  his  victim  are  very 
interesting.  He  catches  him,  throws  him  down  and  pierces  his 
tongue  with  a  poisoned  stick,  which  causes  it  to  swell  up  so  he 
cannot  speak  plainly.  The  victim  goes  home  and  dies  in  three 
days.  Or,  he  throws  his  victim  down,  presses  out’  the  end  of 
the  intestine  and  pricks  it  or  ties  it  up  so  there  can  be  no  evacu¬ 
ation,  or,  he  may  simply  wrestle  with  the  victim  causing  an 
irritation  of  the  skin.  In  every  case  the  victim  dies  in  three 
days.  No  wonder  the  kenaimas  are  feared  above  all  things. 
The  piazong  has  no  power  over  the  kenaimas  and  may  himself 
be  attacked  by  them. 

A  man  never  dies  a  natural  death,  he  is  always  killed  either 
by  the  kenaimas  or  the  evil  spirits  sent  by  the  piazong  of  an 
enemy  tribe.  Most  tribes  have  traditional  enemies  who  are 
blamed  for  all  the  ills  of  the  tribe,  but  sometimes  they  employ 
a  method  of  divination  to  determine  the  guilty  tribe.  Schom- 
burgk1  records  the  case  of  a  Macusi  boy  who  had  died  and  his 
family  attempted  to  determine  the  guilty  parties.  The  father 
cut  off  the  thumbs  and  little  fingers,  the  great  and  little  toes 
and  the  heels  of  the  corpse  and  placed  them  in  a  new  pot  filled 
with  water.  A  fire  was  built  under  the  pot  and  as  the  water 
began  to  boil  the  bubbles  threw  out  one  of  the  pieces  in  the 
direction  of  the  guilty  parties.  I  was  unable  to  find  any  such 


1  Reisen  in  British  Guiana,  Vol.  I,  p.  158. 


76  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM— ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

method  in  use  today.  All  punishments  of  such  nature  are  in 
the  hands  of  the  afflicted  family.  The  methods  are  then,  to 
some  extent,  individual,  and  it  might  well  be  that  this  particular 
method  was  not  in  common  use. 

Puberty  Ceremonies 

The  Macusis  have  no  formal  puberty  ceremonies  for  either 
boys  or  girls,  but  the  girls  cut  their  hair  short  and  wear  a  white 
band  of  cotton  around  the  head  for  two  months.  They  are  not 
allowed  to  work  nor  to  eat  any  meat  or  fish  shot  with  an  arrow. 
During  the  catamenial  period  girls  and  married  women  remain 
in  seclusion,  remove  all  beads  and  ornaments,  eat  no  meat,  nor 
fish  shot  with  an  arrow,  and  wives  bake  no  bread  for  their 

husbands. 

Marriage 

In  their  marriage  relations  the  Macusi  are  exogamous  and 
monogamous.  A  boy  marries  his  cross  cousin,  either  his 
father’s  sister’s  daughter  or  his  mother’s  brother’s  daughter, 
and  goes  to  live  with  his  wife  in  her  mother’s  house.  He  be¬ 
comes  for  a  time  a  servant  of  his  father  in  law.  A  boy  has  the 
free  choice  within  the  limited  eligible  group  of  girl  cousins. 
When  he  has  made  his  selection,  his  father  arranges  with  the 
girl’s  father  for  the  marriage.  The  boy  must  show  that  he  is 
able  to  provide  for  a  family  by  bringing  in  a  large  amount  of 
game  for  the  marriage  feast.  The  two  families  together  prepare 
the  food  and  drink  and  invite  the  other  members  of  the  village 
to  assist  in  the  celebration.  1  he  feast  and  dance  are  held  in 
the  girl’s  village  and  only  the  boy’s  immediate  family  are  in¬ 
vited.  There  is  no  public  ceremony  of  any  kind  but  toward 
the  end  of  the  dance  the  boy  and  girl  withdraw  from  the  group 
of  dancers  and  consummate  the  marriage  alone.1  They  return 
and  enter  the  girl’s  home  where  they  take  up  their  abode.  They 

1  According  to  1m  Thurn,  this  formerly  took  place  in  public.  (Among  the  Indians  of 
Guiana,  p.  222.) 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


77 


become  a  separate  family  but  the  boy  devotes  himself  to  the 
service  of  his  father  in  law  until  a  child  is  born,  when  they  may 
move  away  to  a  home  of  their  own.  They  may  build  a  house 
in  the  same  village  or  move  some  distance  away  and  build  alone. 

1  his  submission  to  the  father  in  law  would  seem  to  be  in 
the  nature  of  a  payment  for  his  daughter.  Marriage  usually 
takes  place  at  the  end  of  the  rainy  season,  which  is  also  the 
planting  season.  In  order  to  provide  for  his  own  home,  the 
boy  makes  a  clearing  tor  himself  before  his  marriage.  The 
building  of  a  house  is  a  simple  matter,  but  the  clearing  and 
planting  of  a  field  is  a  great  labor,  which  must  be  accomplished 
at  the  proper  season.  As  the  boy  must  go  to  work  for  his  father 
in  law  at  once  when  he  is  married,  he  must  have  his  own  pro¬ 
vision  made  beforehand.  The  work  the  boy  is  usually  called 
upon  to  do,  is  the  clearing  of  a  new  field.  The  whole  arrange¬ 
ment  is  a  most  excellent  one,  as  it  gives  the  new  couple  a  home 
for  eight  or  ten  months  while  their  own  fields  are  growing. 

Childbirth 

All  the  tribes  understand  the  physiological  facts  about  con¬ 
ception  and  the  length  of  the  period  of  gestation,  therefore  a 
pregnant  woman  is  not  regarded  as  unclean  or  in  any  way  to 
be  avoided.  ‘When  the  prospective  mother  feels  the  time  for 
parturition  has  arrived,  she  retires  alone  to  the  bush  or  to  a 
secluded  spot  where  in  a  kneeling  position  she  gives  birth  to  the 
child.  After  delivery  she  calls  to  an  assistant  who  brings  warm 
water  to  bathe  the  child.'  The  umbilical  cord  is  tied  with  a 
cotton  thread,  cut  with  a  bamboo  knife,  and  the  end  cauterized 
with  a  coal  of  fire.  *  The  assistant  hangs  the  placenta  in  a  tree; 
it  must  not  be  buried.  The  mother  bathes  herself  and  returns 
to  the  house  with  the  child.  She  must  not  do  any  hard  labor  for 
a  few  days,  but  does  not  take  to  her  hammock.  The  women 
here,  living  in  natural  conditions,  seem  to  suffer  very  little; 
they  go  on  doing  their  ordinary  work  up  to  the  very  time  of 
delivery  and  after  a  few  hours  are  at  work  again.  On  the  Apini- 


78  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM - ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

wau  we  met  a  Diau  man  who  had  brought  a  message  from  the 
Diaus,  ten  days  away,  to  the  Parikutus  inviting  them  to  a  great 
feast  and  dance.  The  man  had  his  wife  with  him  as  his  only 
companion.  The  night  before  they  arrived,  they  stopped  on 
the  river  bank  as  usual  and  built  a  little  leaf  shelter.  During 
the  night  his  wife  gave  birth  to  a  child  and  at  daybreak  they 
were  on  their  way  again,  the  wife  steering  the  canoe  as  before. 

The  child  is  cradled  in  an  ordinary  hammock,  or  a  small 
one  made  of  bark  or  fibre  for  the  purpose,  and  when  old  enough 
to  sit  up  it  is  placed  on  a  mat  on  the  floor.  While  working 
about  the  house  the  mother  carries  the  baby  sitting  astride  her 
hip  or  in  a  broad  band  or  bandoleer  of  bark  or  woven  cotton 
(see  Plate  111).  The  child  sits  in  the  loop  in  front  of  the  mother’s 
left  arm  with  its  legs  together  against  her  side.  A  great  deal 
of  affection  is  bestowed  upon  the  children  by  both  parents,  but 
they  are  not  spoiled  by  overindulgence.  The  children  nurse 
until  they  are  three  or  four  years  old  when  they  begin  the  labor 
which  belongs  to  their  sex.  A  boy  goes  with  his  father  on  his 
journey  or  to  his  work  in  the  field,  while  a  girl  assists  her  mother 
in  her  work  about  the  house,  peeling  cassava  roots  or  carrying 
firewood.  Boys  and  girls  never  play  together  nor  work  together. 
One  seldom  sees  girls  at  play,  but  boys  are  often  found  together 
shooting  at  insects  or  birds  with  their  bows  and  arrows. 
Children  are  taught  respect  for  their  elders,  and  it  is  rare  indeed 
that  they  need  reproof.  1  never  saw  a  child  punished  nor  one 
misbehave  in  the  company  of  older  people. 

Couvade 

Couvade  is  that  curious  custom,  occurring  sporadically  in 
different  parts  of  the  world,  which  compels  a  father  to  take  his 
bed  for  a  period  after  his  wife  has  given  birth  to  a  child.  For 
a  month  the  Macusi  father  must  confine  himself  to  his  ham¬ 
mock  and  restrict  his  diet  to  certain  articles  of  food.  He  must 
do  no  hard  labor,  nor  kill  any  large  animal;  particularly  he 
must  not  kill  a  snake  or  an  anteater  for  a  year.  He  must  not 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


79 


shoot  any  animal,  bird  or  fish,  nor  is  he  allowed  to  eat  game  so 
killed  by  another.  He  may  catch  fish  with  a  hook  or  catch 
them  with  his  hands.  He  is  therefore  confined  to  a  fish,  fruit 
and  vegetable  diet.  This  is  quite  enough  ordinarily  when  the 
birth  takes  place  at  home,  but  when  one  is  on  a  journey  or 
visiting  he  may  have  difficulty  in  getting  enough  to  eat.  We 
had  an  opportunity  to  observe  the  Diau,  whose  child  was  born 
while  on  a  journey,  for  we  lived  and  traveled  with  him  about  a 
month.  We  all  got  on  well  at  the  Parikutu  village,  for  these 
people  had  a  great  field  of  sugar  cane  and  everyone  spent  the 
day  chewing.  1  hey  had  no  cassava  old  enough  to  use  in  mak¬ 
ing  bread,  so  when  we  started  on  our  eleven  days’  journey  with 
the  Diau  the  best  we  could  do  for  food  was  to  fill  our  canoes  with 
sugar  cane,  which  would  last  only  a  few  days.  On  the  way  we 
killed  plenty  of  monkeys,  birds  and  other  game,  but  found 
only  a  few  nuts,  a  little  of  the  fruit  of  the  abiu  and  a 
few  fish.  Our  poor  guide,  the  Diau,  nearly  starved,  got  thin, 
weak  and  useless.  When  we  arrived  at  the  first  of  his  villages 
he  was  unable  to  go  on  with  us  two  days  farther  to  his  own 
home  and  sent  a  friend  instead.  His  taboo  would  not  allow 
him  to  eat  any  of  our  game  shot  with  a  gun  or  bow  and  arrow 
although  we  had  plenty.  He  and  his  Parikutu  companion  spent 
all  their  time  fishing  and  looking  for  fruit  and  nuts,  while  we 
were  hunting.  If  he  had  been  in  his  own  village  when  the  child 
was  born  he  would  have  spent  the  month  in  his  hammock  eating 
the  prescribed  food  which  was  brought  to  him;  as  he  was  away 
from  home  he  worked  in  the  canoe  and  sought  his  own  food, 
yet  he  would  have  starved  rather  than  eat  the  forbidden  food. 
At  another  time  two  Waiwais  went  with  us  for  seven  days  and 
had  great  difficulty  in  getting  enough  to  eat  for  the  same  reason. 
They  refused  to  eat  with  us  and  the  other  Waiwais.  When  the 
men  were  ready  to  return  to  their  village  these  two,  who  had 
babies  at  home,  seeded  some  fresh  wild  cotton,  soaked  it  in 
water  and  then  rubbed  the  wet  cotton  on  the  legs  and  arms  of 
the  three  strong  young  men  and  a  boy  at  the  village  and  on 


80  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

Ogilvie  and  me  but  not  on  our  Wapisiana  boys  nor  the  old  men 
at  the  village.  This  cotton  they  would  carry  home  and  rub  over 
the  bodies  of  their  boys  so  that  they  might  grow  into  strong 
healthy  men.  We  were  often  unable  to  employ  men  because 
they  could  not  disregard  the  obligations  of  keeping  the  couvade. 
We  thus  learned  to  appreciate  the  force,  even  if  we  could  not 
understand  the  meaning,  of  this  curious  custom.  When  one 
studies  such  a  custom  at  long  range,  he  is  sure  to  say  to  himself 
that  he  could  easily  understand  its  significance  and  work  out 
its  origin  if  he  could  only  see  it  in  operation.  When  we  sud¬ 
denly  realized  that  we  were  in  the  midst  of  it,  we  found  our¬ 
selves  utterly  unable  to  form  a  complete  conception  of  its  inner 
meaning  because  the  people  practicing  it  had  no  notion  of  its 
origin,  meaning  or  effect  upon  their  own  lives  or  that  of  their 
offspring.  They  adhere  to  the  inherited  custom  without  ques¬ 
tion.  They  are  responsible  for  keeping  it  only,  not  for  the  insti¬ 
tution  of  it  or  the  effect  of  its  keeping  upon  society.  They  say 
the  custom  is  kept  up  for  the  physical  wellbeing  of  the  child. 
They  seem  to  think  there  is  some  mysterious  physical  relation 
existing  between  the  father  and  the  child.  The  mother’s  rela¬ 
tion  to  the  child  is  quite  natural  and  obvious,  but  the  father’s 
relation  is  most  mysterious  from  the  very  beginning.  If  you 
ask  a  man  why  he  will  not  eat  meat,  he  says  he  does  not  know 
or  that  it  would  harm  the  child.  If  you  ask  him  how  or  why  it 
would  injure  the  child,  he  does  not  attempt  to  answer.  He  only 
knows  that  any  infringement  of  the  regulations  of  the  couvade 
causes  the  child  to  suffer. 

Names  and  Kinship  Terms 

The  Macusis  address  each  other  in  terms  of  relationship 
within  the  family  group.  A  child  is  called  a  child,  little  brother 
or  sister,  and  is  not  named  until  some  act  or  peculiarity  calls 
attention  to  the  individual  and  fixes  the  name.  Some  mental 
or  physical  resemblance  to  an  animal  gives  a  man  the  name  of 
the  animal:  A  man  was  called  waipingpana  because  his  ears 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


81 


had  some  of  the  peculiarities  of  a  deer’s  ears;  a  fat  man,  kiwang, 
a  peccary;  an  awkward  fellow,  jaremakwita,  falling  down;  a 
woman,  emiwariyangong,  mother  of  bad  children;  a  girl,  tangsa, 
a  growing  girl. 

A  man  calls  his  cousin  wife  onobu  when  he  is  first  married, 
but  after  she  has  given  birth  to  a  child,  he  calls  her  waraiyorang, 
mother  ot  sons,  or  wuriyang,  mother  of  daughters,  or  mureyam- 
aissang,  mother  of  children.  A  father  calls  his  boy  umu,  my 
son,  a  mother  calls  him  waraiyo,  male  child.  Men  and  women 
call  their  grandchildren  upa,  regardless  of  sex.  A  man  calls  his 
sisters’  daughters,  patse,  or  daughters  in  law,  whether  or  not  he 
has  a  son  who  will  marry  or  has  married  one  of  them,  and  he 
calls  his  sisters’  sons  paito,  or  sons  in  law  but  his  brothers’  sons 
he  calls  umun.  A  woman  calls  her  brothers’  sons  wanafu,  or 
eligible  to  marry  my  daughter.  A  boy  calls  his  father’s  sisters  ' 
wana  or  mother  in  law,  not  mamai,  aunt;  but  if  he  marries 
outside  the  cross  cousin  group  he  calls  his  mother  in  law  mamai, 
aunt.  A  boy  calls  all  his  girl  cross  cousins  ewuruci,  or  girls  to 
marry;  and  their  brothers  he  calls  yaku,  or  brother  in  law. 
His  own  sisters  and  the  other  girl  cousins  he  calls  by  the  same 
name,  un,  and  they  call  each  other  un.  Men  not  brothers  who 
marry  sisters  call  each  other  yaku,  or  brother  in  law,  even  if 
they  are  cousins. 

Death 

Man  should  live  forever  if  it  were  not  for  the  kenaimas  and 
evil  spirits  which  lurk  about  and  kill  him  whenever  opportunity 
offers.  When  anyone  dies  he  is  usually  buried  at  a  distance 
from  the  house  without  any  ceremony;  but  an  old  man  is  some¬ 
times  buried  in  the  floor  of  his  house  and  the  place  vacated. 
One  dies  in  his  hammock  and  is  carried  in  it  on  a  pole  to  his 
burial  place.  The  grave  is  sometimes  lined  with  bark  and 
bows,  arrows  and  other  personal  belongings  buried  with  the 
body.  The  immediate  relatives  take  charge  of  the  burial. 
They  never  touch  the  corpse,  as  there  is  no  need  for  it,  but  they 
are  not  especially  afraid  of  the  dead.  When  a  husband  dies 


82  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM— ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

his  widow,  if  her  father  is  not  living,  goes  with  her  children  to 
the  home  of  her  brother  or  sister.  She  may  marry  again  soon 
and  take  or  leave  the  children  as  is  most  convenient.  Children 

are  always  an  asset.  .  . 

Death  ends  all;  dying  is  finishing;  there  is  nothing  more. 

Yet  there  is  a  spirit  of  the  dead  person,  called  katumba,  which 
lingers  for  a  time  after  death  and  then  disappears.  The  soul  of 
living  man  is  called  tekatong. 

Mourning 

When  a  wife  dies  her  husband  shows  no  signs  of  grief,  but 
he  may  leave  the  place  and  build  another  house.  When  a 
husband  dies,  his  wife  removes  all  her  ornaments  for  a  short 
time  and  spends  some  time  in  quiet  weeping.  As  all  Indians 
are  reticent  it  is  impossible  to  determine  the  amount  of  the 
grief  which  they  do  not  outwardly  exhibit.  When  we  were 
visiting  a  Parikutu  village  on  the  Apiniwau,  we  witnessed  a 
wailing  for  the  dead.  Some  man  had  recently  died,  and  the 
chief  told  the  men  who  came  with  us  about  it.  The  same 
method  is  in  practice  among  all  the  interior  Carib  tribes.  When 
a  man  dies  there  is  wailing  every  evening  for  several  days.  1  hen 
for  several  months,  whenever  a  visitor,  friend  or  relative  comes 
to  the  village,  the  death  is  spoken  of  and  the  wailing  begins. 
The  chief  or  some  other  man  tells  of  the  death  and  recites  the 
story  of  the  man’s  life,  his  good  deeds  and  how  much  he  is 
missed.  All  work  stops,  the  women  sit  in  their  hammocks  and 
weep,  while  the  men  wail  and  cry  aloud.  The  speaker  begins 
calmly  in  a  low  voice  but  as  the  feelings  are  aroused  his  voice 
rises  and  increases  in  fervor  spurred  on  by  the  growing  emotions 
excited  in  his  hearers  and  the  responses  from  the  wailers,  until 
the  forests  take  up  the  echo  and  the  whole  place  is  filled  with 
the  volume  of  sound.  At  the  end  of  twenty  minutes  it  stops  in 
deathly  stillness.  Slowly  the  women  dry  their  eyes,  crawl  out 
of  their  hammocks  and  go  back  to  work,  while  the  men  in  a 
few  minutes  resume  their  talk  of  other  things.  It  is  a  most 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


83 


impressive  ceremony,  mournful  yet  musical  and  soothing.  While 
1  listened  it  sounded  strangely  familiar,  and  then  I  remembered 
a  negro  funeral  I  once  attended  in  the  Mississippi  Delta  and  I 
fancied  I  could  hear  the  voice  of  the  preacher  praying  for  the 
soul  of  the  departed  and  the  women  weeping  and  the  men 
shouting  “Amen;  bless  the  Lord,”  etc. ;  it  was  exactly  the  same 
kind  of  thing. 

Creation 

In  the  beginning  the  world  was  full  of  bad  men.  Two 
brothers,  entcekerang  the  elder,  and  anike,  called  the  jester, 
seeing  the  evil  of  the  men  turned  them  to  stones.  They  may 
be  seen  today  scattered  here  and  there  over  the  savannah  and 
in  the  mountains. 

The  two  brothers  needed  food.  They  caught  an  acouri 
(Dasyprocata  acouchi )  and  found  on  his  teeth,  the  stains  of  all 
kinds  of  fruits  and  nuts.  1  hey  asked  him  where  he  got  these 
things,  but  he  would  not  tell  them.  So  they  asked  the  squirrel 
C Sciurus  aestuans )  to  watch  the  acouri  and  see  where  he  went 
for  food.  He  did  as  he  was  requested  and  after  a  time  he  saw 
the  acouri  go  to  a  very  large  tree  under  which  the  ground  was 
covered  with  every  kind  of  fruit  and  vegetable.  The  squirrel 
climbed  the  tree  and  saw  all  these  things  growing  on  the  tree 
in  great  abundance.  He  returned  to  the  two  brothers  and 
reported  what  he  had  discovered.  They  sent  him  back  to  bring 
home  some  of  the  fruits  and  other  things  for  their  observation. 
He  was  afraid,  but  finally  went  and  brought  fragments  of  many 
things,  and  the  brothers,  seeing  these,  believed.  They  then 
requested  the  squirrel  to  take  them  to  the  tree,  that  they  might 
see  it  also.  He  did  so,  and  they  were  greatly  pleased  to  find  so 
many  good  things  all  growing  on  one  tree.  They  decided  to 
cut  the  tree  down  so  they  could  get  all  these  things  to  plant  and 
to  grow  for  themselves  because  they  had  no  cultivated  food 
plants.  The  two  brothers  set  to  work  with  their  stone  axes  to 
fell  the  tree,  one  cutting  on  each  side.  The  younger  brother 
said,  “Tree,  be  hard  on  my  elder  brother’s  side,”  and  it  was  so. 
Then  he  asked  his  elder  brother  how  he  was  getting  on,  and  the 


84  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

elder  brother  answered,  “The  tree  is  so  hard  I  cannot  cut  it  at 
all.”  As  he  said  this  he  stopped  working  and  looked  around 
on  his  younger  brother’s  side.  To  his  surprise  he  found  a  great 
notch  cut  and  said  to  his  younger  brother,  “Let  me  cut  on  your 
side  and  you  cut  on  mine,”  and  it  was  so.  The  younger  brother 
said,  “Tree  be  hard  on  my  elder  brother’s  side,”  and  it  was  so. 
At  last,  however,  the  tree  was  cut  down.  Before  they  began 
to  cut  down  the  tree  they  made  a  great  mat  to  cover  all  the 
ground  under  the  spreading  branches  of  the  great  tree  to  catch 
all  the  fruit,  vegetables,  nuts  and  things  when  the  tree  fell. 
From  the  indicated  size,  the  mat  must  have  been  five  or  six 
hundred  feet  across  its  diameter.  After  the  tree  fell  they 
gathered  and  planted  all  the  fruits,  vegetables,  nuts  and  edible 
things  they  have  today. 

The  Flood 

The  great  tree  contained  water  also  and  when  they  cut  it 
down  the  water  flowed  out  and  covered  the  whole  world.  The 
water  got  deeper  and  deeper  so  the  two  brothers,  to  save  them¬ 
selves,  climbed  two  miritci  palm  trees  (Mauritia  jiexuosa)^  As 
the  water  increased  the  palm  trees  grew  higher  and  higher, 
always  keeping  just  above  the  flood.  The  two  brothers  ate  the 
palm  fruit  and  threw  the  seeds  up  through  the  leaves  and  they 
fell  into  the  water  thus  building  up  the  land.  The  water  sub¬ 
sided  and  withdrew  to  the  lakes  and  the  trees  shortened  to  then- 
present  height.  The  flood  covered  the  mountains  and  lasted 
twenty  days.  When  the  two  brothers  cut  down  the  tree,  the 
younger  brother  said,  just  as  it  was  falling,  Sun,  quit  shining, 
and  it  was  immediately  dark.  After  the  flood  had  subsided 
and  the  two  brothers  had  come  down  from  the  palm  trees,  the 
younger  brother  said,  “Sun,  shine,”  and  it  has  been  shining  ever 
since. 

Origin  of  Fish 

There  were  no  fish  in  the  lakes  or  rivers,  and  the  two 
brothers  wanted  fish.  The  younger  brother  said  to  his  elder 
brother.  “Let  us  poison  this  pool;  there  are  no  fish  in  it.  You 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


85 


go  down  to  the  other  end  and  poison  it  there,  and  I  will  poison 
it  here.”  The  elder  brother  went  to  the  other  end  of  the  pool 
and  as  he  stepped  into  it  to  poison  the  water,  the  younger 
brother  said  pirai  ( Serasalmo  mger),  go  down  and  bite  my 
brother,  and  he  did  so.  1  he  elder  brother  said  to  his  younger 
brother,  h  ou  said  there  were  no  fish  in  the  pool,  and  here  1  am 
bitten  by  a  pirai.”  Then  the  younger  brother  said,  “Electric 
eel  (Gymnotus  electricus),  go  down  and  shock  my  brother,”  and 
he  did  so.  I  hus  fish  came  to  the  pools. 

Disappearance  of  the  Two  Brothers 

Alter  a  long  time  the  two  brothers  went  away.  They  heard 
the  sound  of  a  conch  shell  blowing  and  followed  after  the  sound 
down  the  Essiquibo  to  a  place  now  called  Pairakaira,  where 
they  built  the  great  rock  falls.  There  remain  today  in  an 
enormous  rock  the  footprints  of  the  two  brothers  marking  the 
spot  from  which  they  left  the  world.  The  footprints  are  still 
visible  and  the  rock  is  known  today  as  the  jumping  stone. 

CATS’  CRADLES1 

1  he  Macusis,  like  the  neighboring  Wapisianas  and  many 
other  Indians,  amuse  themselves  by  making  string  figures  in  the 
forms  of  animals  or  other  natural  objects.  Many  of  the  forms 
found  here  are  common  in  other  parts  of  the  world  and  bear 
similar  names.  I  he  exact  method  of  manipulating  the  string 
may  differ  in  a  definite  case,  while  the  resultant  form  may  be 
identical.  I  he  nomenclature  used  in  making  these  records  is 
adapted  from  that  devised  by  Drs.  Rivers  and  Haddon.  As 
is  well  known  to  every  worker,  it  is  sometimes  very  difficult  to 
describe  the  movements  so  explicitly  that  another  may  work 
them  out  correctly.  A  string  over  the  finger  is  called  a  loop; 


1  For  other  cats’  cradles  from  British  Guiana  see  (i)  W.  E.  Roth,  Revue  des  Etudes 
Ethnographiques  et  Sociologiques,  1908,  p.  193.  (2)  Frank  E.  Lutz,  Anthropological  Papers, 

Amer.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XII,  Pt.  1,  1912.  (3)  W.  C.  Farabee,  Anth.  Pub.  University 

Museum,  Vol.  IX,  pp.  123-131,  1918. 


86  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM— ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


one  on  the  thumb  side  of  the  hand  is  radial;  one  on  the  little 
finger  side  is  ulnar;  one  across  the  back  ot  the  hand  is  dorsa  , 
the  loop  nearest  the  tip  of  the  finger  is  distal,  and  the  one 
nearest  the  hand  is  proximal.  No  words,  stories  or  songs  are 
used  to  accompany  the  movements  of  the  hands,  1  he  frequent 
shifting  of  loops  from  the  fingers  of  one  hand  to  the  correspond¬ 
ing  fingers  of  the  other  seems  to  be  characteristic  of  Arawak 
and  Carib  cats’  cradles. 

i.  Waitai,  Fish  Trap 


Place  string  over  backs  of  both  hands.  Take  up  with  the 

lips  the  centre  of  the  ulnar 
string  from  the  proximal 
side;  take  up  on  the  back 
of  the  right  little  finger  the 
left  hand  section  and  on 
the  back  of  the  left  little 
finger  the  right  hand  sec¬ 
tion;  release  the  lips  and 
extend.  Take  loops  off 
backs  of  hands  and  place 
them  on  corresponding  in¬ 
dex  fingers.  Take  up  with 
backs  of  thumbs  the  radial 
little  finger  strings  over 
index  strings.  Place  prox¬ 
imal  index  string  over  the 
thumb  also.  Pass  the  prox¬ 
imal  radial  thumb  string 
over  the  thumbs  to  the 
palmar  side.  Insert  index 
fingers  into  the  triangles 
adjoining  the  thumb  loops, 
release  the  little  fingers, 
rotate  the  wrists  inward 

Fig.  2. — Waitai,  Fish  Trap.  Macusi  and  extend.  (Fig.  2.) 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


87 


Parkinson  found  the  same  thing  among  the  Yoruba  of  West 
Africa;  Cunnington  found  it  in  Central  Africa;  Haddon,  in 
South  Africa;  and  I  among  the  Wapisianas  of  the  Guianas  and 
the  Waiwais. 

2.  WATisA,'a  Fly 

Place  the  string  twice  around  the  neck.  Take  the  right- 
hand  string  on  right  thumb  and  little  finger  and  left  hand  string 
on  left  thumb  and  little  finger.  Take  up  palm  strings  on  backs 
of  opposite  indexes.  Pass  the  head  through  between  the  index 
strings  from  the  proximal  side.  Release  all  but  the  little  fingers 
and  extend.  1 1  comes  off  the  neck.  This  was  found  by  Cunning- 
ton  in  Central  Africa,  by  Haddon  in  Uganda  and  Rhodesia  and 
by  myself  among  the  Arawaks.  The  foot  or  some  other  object 
may  be  used  in  place  of  the  head. 

3-  Pacangera,  Two  Baskets 

Place  loop  over  thumbs  and  little  fingers  of  both  hands. 
Take  up  from  the  distal  side  the  left  hand  palmar  string  with 
the  hook  of  the  right  index;  twist  half  way  around  to  the  right 
and  place  the  loop  over  the  left  little  finger  and  thumb.  In  the 
same  manner  take  up  the  right  hand  palmar  string  and  place 
over  the  right  little  finger  and  thumb.  Take  up  on  right  index 
and  third  finger  the  left  thumb  and  little  finger  loops  from  the 
proximal  side.  In  the  same  manner  take  up  on  left  index  and 
third  finger,  the  right  thumb  and  little  finger  loops  through  the 
right  index  and  third  finger  loops.  Throw  over  in  the  palm  and 
release  the  proximal  thumb  and  the  proximal  little  finger  strings. 
Take  up  on  backs  of  right  index  and  third  finger  the  loops  of 
the  left  index  and  third  finger.  Take  up  on  backs  of  left  index 
and  third  finger  the  original  loops  of  right  index  and  third 
finger  over  the  new  loops.  Extend,  and  the  result  is  a  basket¬ 
like  figure  in  each  hand  with  loop  around  all  except  the  ring 
fingers. 

This  figure  is  found  also  among  the  eastern  Arawaks. 


88  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


4.  Rocebibu 

Place  loop  back  between  index  and  third  finger  of  left  hand; 
bring  the  loop  forward  over  the  ends  of  these  two  fingers  and 
make  an  extra  loop  around  them.  Pull  up  through  the  loop 
from  the  distal  side  the  index  string  and  loop  it  around  the 


thumb;  in  the  same  manner  loop  the  third  finger  string  around 
the  little  finger.  Pull  over  to  the  palm  and  release  the  index 
and  third  finger  loops.  Draw  tight  the  two  original  strings, 
and  the  resultant  figure  is  a  square  in  the  middle  of  the  palm 
(Fig.  3). 

5.  Aratawaii,  Howling  Monkey’s  Jaw 

Place  string  as  simple  loops  around  both  wrists.  Pass  the 
radial  string  back  between  the  thumb  and  index  and  the  ulnar 
string  back  between  the  third  and  ring  fingers  of  left  hand. 
Bring  both  strings  forward  between  index  and  third  finger. 
Place  index  string  over  thumb  and  third  finger  string  over  little 
finger.  Take  up  index  palm  string  from  the  proximal  side  on 
index  of  right  hand  and  the  third  finger  palm  string  on  the  third 


FARABF.E — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


89 


finger  of  the  right  hand.  Bring  over  and  release  the  left  wrist 
loop.  Place  index  and  third  finger  loops  of  right  hand  on  cor¬ 
responding  fingers  of  left  hand.  Bring  over  and  release  original 
index  and  third  finger  loops.  Transfer  index  and  third  finger 
loops  of  left  hand  to  the  corresponding  fingers  of  the  right  hand 
and  draw  out.  As  seen  from  the  side  it  resembles  the  heavy 
head  and  neck  of  the  howling  monkey  ( Mycetes  seniculus ) 
(Fig-  4)- 

This  one  is  found  also  among  the  Arawaks  in  the  Guianas 
under  a  name  with  the  same  meaning,  and  also  among  the 
Waiwais. 


6.  Moroi,  Spider’s  Web 

Place  strings  between  the  sec¬ 
ond  and  third  fingers  of  the  left 
hand;  bring  loop  over  these  two 
fingers  to  the  palm;  do  the  same 
with  corresponding  fingers  of  the 
right  hand  being  careful  to  keep 
strings  straight.  Take  up  the 
loop  of  the  left  second  and  third 
fingers  on  the  backs  of  the  cor¬ 
responding  fingers  of  the  right 
hand;  take  up  the  original  loops 
of  the  right  hand  on  the  backs  of 
the  corresponding  fingers  of  the 
left  hand  and  draw  out.  Have  an 
assistant  throw  a  new  string  over 
this  form  allowing  the  loose  ends 
to  hang  down  on  both  sides;  pass 
the  new  string  through  the  four 
finger  loops;  with  downward  move¬ 
ment  of  second  and  third  fingers 
of  both  hands,  take  new  string  on 
hooks  of  fingers,  thus  releasing 
the  original  string.  Have  the  as- 


Jaw.  Macusi 


90  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


sistant  take  the  left  hand  loops  and  draw  out  in  the  form  of 
spider’s  nest  (Fig.  5). 

This  is  found  under  the  name  of  spider’s  web  among  the 
Wapisianas. 


7.  Moa,  a  Grub  for  Fish  Bait 

Hold  left  hand  with  palm  in  a  vertical  position.  Hang  the 
loop  over  the  thumb  allowing  the  strings  to  fall  down  the  palmar 
and  dorsal  sides  of  the  hand.  Pass  the  right  index  from  the 
proximal  side  beneath  the  palmar  string,  hook  the  dorsal  string 
from  the  distal  side,  bring  it  through  between  the  thumb  and 
index,  give  it  a  right  hand  twist  and  place  the  loop  over  the  left 
index.  Draw  tight  the  pendant  strings.  Again  pass  the  right 
index  beneath  the  palmar  string  and  between  the  index  and  third 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


91 


finger,  hook  it  over  the  dorsal  string,  bring  it  forward,  twist  as 
before,  and  place  the  loop  over  the  third  finger.  In  the  same 
manner  place  loops  over  the  ring  and  little  fingers.  Remove 
the  loop  from  the  thumb  and  with  the  right  hand  pull  the  palmar 
string.  All  the  fingers  are  released. 

1  his  trick  is  found  among  the  eastern  Arawaks,  the  Ma- 
cheyengas  on  the  Urubamba  in  Peru,  past  Africa  (Cunnington), 
West  Africa  (Parkinson),  Torres  Straits  (Haddon),  Alaska 
Eskimo  and  Plains  Indians  (Jayne). 

8.  Owamginto,  a  Double  Basket1 

Loops  over  little  fingers  and  thumbs.  Take  up  from  the 
distal  side  the  left  hand  palmar  string  with  the  hook  of  the  right 
index.  Twist  half  around  to  the  right  and  place  the  loop  over 
the  left  thumb  and  little  finger.  Take  up  the  right  palmar 
string  and  place  in  the  same  way  over  right  thumb  and  little 
finger.  Take  up  on  right  index  and  third  finger  the  left  thumb 
and  little  finger  loops  from  the  proximal  side.  In  the  same 
way  take  up  on  the  left  index  and  third  finger,  the  right  thumb 
and  little  finger  loops  within  the  right  index  and  third  finger 
loops.  Throw  over  and  release  the  proximal  thumb  and  the 
proximal  little  finger  strings.  Take  up  on  backs  of  right  index 
and  third  finger  the  loops  of  left  index  and  third  finger.  Take 
up  on  back  of  left  index  and  third  finger  the  original  loop  of 
right  index  and  third  finger  over  the  new  loops.  Extend,  and 
the  result  is  a  similar  basket  figure  in  each  hand. 

9.  Kefulikaco,  Mouse  in  a  T  rap 

Hold  left  hand  with  thumb  uppermost.  Hang  the  string 
over  the  thumb,  letting  the  loop  fall  down  the  palmar  and 
dorsal  sides  of  the  hand.  Pass  the  right  index  beneath  the 
palmar  string  and  between  the  thumb  and  index;  then  around 
the  pendant  dorsal  string,  bringing  it  through  between  the 


]Those  following  were  obtained  from  the  Waiwais. 


92  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


thumb  and  index.  Give  the  loop  a  right  hand  twist,  place  it 
over  the  left  index  and  pull  tight  the  pendant  string.  Again 
pass  the  right  index  beneath  the  pendant  palmar  string  and 
between  the  index  and  the  middle  fingers,  hook  it  over  the 
dorsal  string,  bring  it  forward,  twist  as  before,  and  place  over 
the  middle  finger.  In  the  same  way  make  loops  over  the  ring 
and  little  fingers.  Remove  the  thumb  loop  and  with  the  right 
hand  pull  the  palmar  string.  All  the  fingers  are  released. 

This  trick  is  found  sporadically  all  over  the  world;  in 
Africa,  Asia,  Philippines,  Eskimo,  Plains  Indians  and  many 
South  American  tribes. 

io.  Kamile,  Two  Fishes  Together 

Loops  over  little  fingers.  Take  up  on  thumbs  the  ulnar 
little  finger  string  distal  to  radial  string.  Take  up  palm  strings 
from  proximal  side  on  indexes.  Release  thumbs.  Pass  thumbs 
distal  to  index  strings  and  take  up  on  backs  of  thumbs  the 
radial  little  finger  string.  Place  index  loop  over  thumbs  also. 
Transfer  proximal  thumb  loop  over  tip  of  thumb  to  palmar  side. 
Place  each  index  into  its  triangle  on  palmar  side  of  each  thumb 
from  the  distal  side,  release  little  fingers,  rotate  wrists  and  ex¬ 
tend,  holding  figure  on  thumbs  and  indexes.  Two  figures  result. 
Found  among  the  Arawaks  and  by  Cunnington  in  Central 
Africa. 

n.  Mimu  sakualitilite,  a  House 

Place  loop  over  back  of  left  hand ;  pass  back  between  thumb 
and  index  and  third  and  fourth  fingers;  bring  forward  between 
second  and  third  fingers;  place  third  finger  string  back  of  little 
finger  and  the  other  string  back  of  thumb  without  twisting. 
Take  up  the  two  original  palm  strings  on  the  backs  of  the  second 
and  third  fingers  of  right  hand.  Take  up  these  second  and  third 
finger  loops  on  the  backs  of  the  corresponding  fingers  of  the  left 
hand.  Take  up  the  original  second  and  third  finger  loops  of 
the  left  hand  on  the  backs  of  corresponding  fingers  of  the  right 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


93 


hand.  Bring  over  the  string  from  the  hack  of  the  left  hand  and 
pull  out.  These  remain  a  loop  around  the  second  and  third 
fingers  of  the  right  hand,  each  loop  holding  midway  between 
the  hands  two  other  loops.  The  string  from  the  back  of  the 
left  hand  remains  around  all  strings  near  the  bottom. 

12.  Mimu,  a  Big  House 

Place  string  over  back  of  left  hand;  twist  to  the  right  and 
pass  back  between  first  and  second  and  third  and  fourth  fingers; 
bring  forward  between  the  second  and  third  fingers  and  pass 
back  of  the  first  and  little  fingers.  Take  up  the  two  original 
palm  strings  on  the  backs  of  the  second  and  third  fingers  of  the 
right  hand;  take  up  these  second  and  third  finger  loops  on  the 
backs  of  the  corresponding  fingers  of  the  left  hand.  Take  up 
the  original  second  and  third  strings  on  the  backs  of  the  cor¬ 
responding  fingers  of  the  right  hand.  Bring  over  the  loop  from 
the  back  of  the  left  hand  and  pull  out.  Three  remains  a  cir¬ 
cular  house  with  a  string  around  the  bottom  holding  the  rafter 
strings.  This  differs  somewhat  from  the  Wapisiana  house. 

13.  Kamalili,  a  Beaded  Ornament 

Place  loop  over  backs  of  both  hands.  Take  up  the  right- 
hand  ulnar  string  from  the  inside  of  the  radial  string  with  hook 
of  little  finger  and  let  it  pass  back  of  little  finger  of  left  hand. 
Take  up  the  palm  little  finger  string  on  the  back  of  little  finger 
of  right  hand.  Take  loops  from  wrists  and  place  them  over 
corresponding  indexes.  Take  up  on  backs  of  thumbs  the  near 
little  finger  string.  Pass  index  loops  over  thumbs  also.  Bring 
over  and  release  thumb  loops.  Place  tips  of  indexes  in  the 
triangles  inside  of  thumbs  but  outside  of  thumb  strings.  Turn 
palms  outward  releasing  the  little  fingers.  There  remain  two 
horizontal  strings  with  five  cross  strings. 


94  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


14.  Watciwatci,  Two  Little  Turtles 

Place  loop  over  left  wrist.  Pass  back  between  thumb  and 
index  and  third  and  fourth  fingers;  bring  forward  between 
second  and  third  fingers,  and  take  the  long  loop  on  the  back  of 
the  right  hand.  Take  up  on  the  backs  of  the  second  and  third 
fingers  of  the  right  hand  the  first  and  second  and  the  third  and 
little  finger  strings,  Bring  over  to  the  palm  the  loop  from  the 
back  of  the  right  hand.  Take  up  loop  of  the  second  and  third 
fingers  of  the  right  hand  on  the  backs  of  corresponding  fingers 
of  the  left  hand.  Bring  over  the  original  second  and  third 
finger  loops  of  the  left  hand  and  release.  Take  up  the  second 
and  third  loop  of  the  left  hand  on  the  back  of  the  corresponding 
fingers  of  the  right  hand  and  draw  out.  Two  circles  will  slide 
up  the  two  long  strings  toward  the  right  hand. 

15.  Tcekawa,  a  Crab 

Place  the  string  back  of  the  thumb  and  little  finger  but  in 
front  of  the  other  fingers,  the  same  with  both  hands.  Take  up 
palm  strings  with  a  hook  and  inward  twist  of  the  indexes.  Take 
the  thumb  loops  on  the  little  fingers.  Place  the  big  toe  between 
the  little  finger  loop  and  release  the  little  fingers.  Draw  out 
with  indexes  and  a  knot  is  securely  tied  around  the  toe. 

16.  Footo,  a  Clam 

Place  the  string  around  both  wrists.  Pass  back  between 
the  thumb  and  index  and  the  third  and  fourth  fingers.  Place 
thumb  and  index  string  over  the  little  finger  and  the  third  and 
little  finger  string  over  the  thumb.  Do  the  same  with  the  other 
hand.  Place  the  second  and  third  finger  loops  of  the  right  hand 
on  the  corresponding  fingers  of  the  left  hand.  Take  up  the 
original  second  and  third  finger  loops  of  the  left  hand  on  the 
backs  of  the  corresponding  fingers  of  the  right  hand.  Draw 
out,  and  an  equilateral  triangle  remains  between  the  hands. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


95 


17.  Maiyosi,  a  Spider 

Place  the  string  over  backs  of  both  hands.  Pass  back 
between  thumb  and  index  and  third  and  fourth  fingers  of  left 
hand,  bring  forward  between  second  and  third  fingers,  place 
third  and  fifth  string  over  thumb  and  thumb  and  index  string 
over  little  finger.  Take  up  on  backs  of  second  and  third  fingers 
of  the  right  hand  the  thumb  and  third  finger  string  and  the 
second  and  little  finger  string.  Bring  over  and  release  the  right 
hand  back  string.  Place  loops  of  the  second  and  third  fingers 
ot  the  right  hand  over  corresponding  fingers  of  the  left  hand. 
Bring  over  and  release  the  original  second  and  third  finger  loops. 
Take  up  the  remaining  second  and  third  finger  loops  on  the  backs 
of  the  corresponding  fingers  of  the  right  hand  and  draw  out. 

18.  Watiwelito,,  Sex  Organ 

Place  the  string  over  back  of  left  wrist.  Pass  back  between 
the  thumb  and  the  index  and  the  third  and  fourth  fingers,  and 
bring  forward  between  the  second  and  third.  Place  left  string 
back  of  the  thumb  and  the  right  string  back  of  the  little  finger. 
Take  up  thumb  and  index  and  third  and  little  finger  strings  on 
the  backs  of  the  second  and  third  fingers  of  the  right  hand. 
Bring  over  and  release  the  left  hand  back  string.  Take  up  the 
loops  of  the  second  and  third  of  the  right  hand  on  the  corre¬ 
sponding  fingers  of  the  left  hand.  Bring  over  and  release  the 
original  second  and  third  finger  loops.  Take  up  the  remaining 
loops  on  the  corresponding  fingers  of  the  right  hand.  Draw 
out  and  a  diamond  shaped  figure  remains  in  the  middle. 

19.  Malkanuni,  the  Six-o’clock  Beetle 

Place  the  string  over  the  left  wrist.  Pass  radial  string 
back  between  the  second  and  third  fingers  and  the  ulnar  string 
between  the  thumb  and  index.  Take  up  the  radial  string  in  the 
palm  with  a  hook  of  the  right  index,  twist  inward  and  place  the 
loop  over  the  left  index.  Bring  long  loop  forward,  leaving  it 


UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


around  the  thumb,  and  remove  the  other  string  from  between 
the  second  and  third  to  between  the  fourth  and  little  fingers. 
Take  up  the  thumb  and  little  finger  strings  on  the  backs  of  the 
second  and  third  fingers  of  the  right  hand.  Bring  over  back  of 
left  hand  loop  to  the  palm.  Release  index  loop  and  draw  out 
holding  the  index  loop  in  the  mouth  until  tight  when  this  loop 
stands  up. 

20.  Fotcokwa,  a  Drink 

Place  a  loop  over  the  thumb  of  the  left  hand.  Place  near 
string  around  the  second  and  the  other  around  the  third  finger 
of  the  left  hand  and  the  near  one  around  the  fourth  finger.  Take 
long  loop  on  back  of  little  finger  of  right  hand,  l  ake  palm 
string  of  the  third  finger  of  the  left  hand  on  the  back  of  the 
fourth  finger  of  the  right  hand;  the  palm  string  of  left  second 
on  the  back  of  right  third  and  that  of  left  one  on  the  back  of 
right  second.  Remove  the  loop  of  left  four  to  left  five,  that  of 
right  second  to  first,  third  to  second  and  fourth  to  third.  Take 
up  inside  little  finger  strings  on  the  backs  of  the  thumbs  and  the 
inside  thumb  strings  on  the  backs  of  the  little  fingers.  Place 
the  second  and  third  fingers  of  each  hand  down  through  the 
triangles  made  by  the  strings  around  these  fingers  and  take  on 
the  hooks  of  these  fingers  the  double  strings.  Turn  palms  out¬ 
ward,  releasing  all  other  strings  and  draw  out. 

The  fish  trap  and  the  howling  monkey’s  jaw  are  the  same 
as  those  bearing  similar  names  among  the  Macusis. 

LANGUAGE 

The  linguistic  material  here  recorded  was  secured  almost 
entirely  from  Mr.  Christopher  Davis,  an  educated  Englishman 
from  Demarara  who  for  fifteen  years  had  been  living  among  the 
Macusis.  He  was  married  to  a  Macusi  woman  and  had  three 
children;  the  eldest  of  whom,  a  girl  of  fourteen,  speaks  English 
perfectly.  With  the  aid  of  his  wife  and  daughter  Davis  had 
translated  many  selections  from  the  Bible  and  many  passages 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


97 


from  the  Prayer  Book.  Every  Sunday  he  held  services  in  the 
church  erected  for  the  purpose  by  the  Indians.  1  attended  one 
of  his  meetings  and  was  impressed  with  the  attitude  of  the 
Indians  toward  the  new  religion.  Davis  read  translated  pas¬ 
sages  from  the  Bible,  gave  a  short  address  in  which  he  made 
application  of  the  lessons  read  to  the  daily  life  of  the  people 
and  closed  with  a  song  service.  The  Macusis  greatly  enjoy 
music  and  sing  the  English  hymns,  using  the  English  words 
without  understanding  them.  Some  fifty  or  sixty  men,  women 
and  children  were  present  and  all  gave  close  attention  to  what 
Davis  had  to  sav,  but  the  spirited  way  in  which  they  sang  gave 
me  the  impression  they  came  to  enjoy  the  music.  Davis  was 
the  only  Englishman  in  the  colony  who  could  speak  the  Macusi 
language.  I  planned  to  return  to  his  village  and  record  the 
remainder  of  his  translations,  with  notes  on  the  use  of  the  lan¬ 
guage,  but  my  trail  led  to  the  interior  and  down  the  Corentine 
instead. 


Key 

to  the  Phonetic  System 

a 

as  in  father 

ai  as  in  oz'sle 

a 

hot 

au  “  bow 

a 

“  oil 

oi  “  oil 

e 

fete 

c  “  iZ?ip 

e 

m^t 

tc  “  chain 

i 

pzque 

hw  “  when 

\ 

pzn 

kw  “  quake 

0 

note 

h  “  canon 

6 

not 

a’a,  i’i  as  broken  vowels 

u 

role 

a.i,  a.u,  o.i  as  individual 

u 

“  but 

Personal  Pronouns 

I . 

. lire 

you .  . 

he.  .  .  . 

. mukera 

she. . . 

. mukera 

it ... . 

. murere 

we.  .  . 

. ana 

you . . . 

. aiyamura 

they. . . 

. injamura 

98  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

Possessive  Pronouns 

u,  upapai . my  head 

a,  ateya . your  hand 

i,  ipu . his  foot 

ana,  anate . our  house 


my . 
your 
his. . 
our. 


nljnc . ure  murerer 

vours . amuramurerer 

his  . mukeramurerer 

. . ana  muererer 

t heirs . enjenang  yemane  murerer 


Demonstrative  Pronouns 


this  (m.) . miseri 

this  (/.) . seri 

this  (w.) . seni 

that  (m.) . mekeri 

that  (/.) . mukeri 

that  in.) . rnereri 

that,  remote . tcene 


Comparison  of  Adjectives 


good . wakube 

better . wakubefumbe 

best . wakubefumberu 

bad . eribe 

Worse . eribefumbe 

worst . eribefumberu 

long . kosang 

longer . kosangmukera  etendairo 

longest . kosangmukera  toendairo  fugero 

heavy . amuine 

heavier . amuineseni  entendairo 

heaviest . amuenesenikong  endairo  fugero 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


99 


Plurals 

Nouns  are  made  plural  by  adding  te,  kong,  gong,  zang 
manate  or  yamu  to  the  singular  form,  as: 


mdn . waraiyo 

men . waraiyokong 

woman . urisang 

women . urisangyamu 

do§ . arimaraka 

do§s . arimarakayamu 

,isk . moro 

fish  (pi.) . moroyamu 

tree . yeye 

trees . yeyekong 

stone .  tjr 

stones . tirkong 


Plurality  is  expressed  also  by  repetition  as  cilicili,  the  beads 
of  a  necklace. 

Gender 

Nouns  are  not  regularly  grouped  with  reference  to  gram¬ 
matical  gender  but  sex  endings  are  used  as  follows: 

Masculine . waraiyobe 

Feminine . uribemang 

A  male  dog  is  arimarakawaraiyobe. 

A  female  dog  is  arimarakauribemang. 


Colors — emenu 

'I  he  Macusis  are  experts  at  matching  tints  and  have  the 
following  names  for  the  common  colors: 


white . 

white  (pale) 

blue . 

green  . 

yellow . 

red . 

purple . 

pink . 

brown . 

black . 


aimotung 

amotung 

engatung 

rora 

kosaimotung 

cuiyu 

epopiyu 

waiaiyu 

carapuyu 

urikutung 


100  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM 


L — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


Personal  Names 


Aiyukante . 

Kiwang . 

Timui . 

Waikingpana .... 
Waikingpanayung 
Yaremakwita.  . . 
Azumerata 

Kazawing . 

Uyamoni 

Teberu . 

emiwariyangong.  . 


.The  chief 
pork  or  fat 
.  to  stoop 
ear  of  a  deer 
.  ear  of  an  old  deer 
falling  down 

.  (chief) 

.  (chief) 

.mother  of  the  evil  ones 


An  infant  is  called  child,  brother  or  sister  and  does  not 
receive  an  individual  name  until  some  peculiarity  of  appearance 
or  manner  has  been  observed. 


Names  of  Places 

Bononi 

iwita — at  the  creek 
Kazawing 

mutura — on  the  hill 
napikiri 

Okaituna — at  the  river 

Puerueta 

Rupononi 

Tirka— like  stone.— tir,  stone;  ka,  like  or  having 
Tirkaping— mountain  overlooking  tirka. — ping,  forehead 
Upikari — end  of  a  hill. — pika,  to  pick  off 
wu — on  the  mountain 

yani  at  the  spring  NUMERALS 


1.  tiwing 

2.  sagonv 

3.  seremu 

4.  sakrebuna 

5.  miatoiking 

6.  tiwingmiabunatimotai 

7.  sagonymiabunatimotai 

8.  seremumiabunatimotai 

9.  sakrebunamiabunatimotai 

10.  miatiminaure 


11.  tiwingpubunatimotai 

12.  sagonypubonatimotai 

13.  seremupubonatimotai 

14.  sakrebunapubonatimotai 

15.  putoikingtimotai 

16.  tiwingpuratwitimotai 

17.  sagonypuratwitimotai 

18.  seremupuratwitimotai 

19.  sakrebunapuratwitimotai 

20.  tiwingpemongong 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


101 


1  he  meaning  ol  the  words  for  the  numerals  from  one  to  four 
is  not  understood.  Five  is  made  up  of  mia,  fingers  and  toiking, 
on  one  side;  that  is,  all  the  fingers  on  the  right  hand  have  been 
counted  beginning  with  the  little  finger.  Six  is  tiwing,  one;  mia, 
finger;  buna,  on  and  timotai,  to  put;  that  is;  one,  the  thumb,  is 
added  to  the  other  hand.  Seven,  eight  and  nine  add  two,  three 
and  four  by  the  same  method.  Ten  is  mia,  fingers  and  timmaure, 
all.  Eleven  is  tiwing,  one;  pu,  foot;  buna,  on;  timotai,  to  put. 
The  words  for  twelve,  thirteen  and  fourteen  are  made  up  in  like 
manner;  in  fifteen  the  foot  is  put  on  one  side  and  in  the  other 
numbers  up  to  twenty  one,  two,  three  and  four  are  added  to  the 
puratwi,  or  other  foot.  Twenty  is  one  person. 

Phrases 

1.  Uyung  uschang  nere 

My  father  my  mother  and 

2.  Wakube  uwutisi  wani 

good  My  sister  is 

3.  cimerika  pe  upi  wani 

little  My  brother  is 

4.  perangbu  mukere  wuri  wani 

sick  That  woman  is 

5.  umu  miseri 

my  son  This  (is) 

6.  uyenge  seri 

my  daughter  This  (is) 

7.  upi  seni 

my  field  This  (is) 

8.  uyung  mang  yenebe 

My  father  (present  state)  sick  (Is)? 

9.  onongze  ayeyiwu 

Which  your  house  (is) 

10.  Onongze  itekung  arimaraka 

Which  your  domestic  dog  (is)? 

11.  tarako  kenangure 

hat  with  me  (I  have) 


102  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


12.  tarako  kenaug  amure 

hat  with  you  (Have)? 


My  father  is  in  the  house 

13.  uta  ta  papa  mang 

house  in  father  is 

I  see  a  man  and  a  woman 

14.  warayo  ramafo  we  serere  urineri 

man  see  persons  now  woman 

The  dogs  bark  at  night 

15.  aremaraka  yamu  seura  futi  awarungya 

dogs  (plural)  bark  (plural)  night 

The  jaguar  was  killed 

16.  kaikuci  iwabu  toya  iwuzabe  kaikuci  wamabu 

jaguar  killed  they  was 

The  man  was  sick 

17.  parangbu  mukera  waraiyo  wamabu 

sick  he  man  was 


He  is  a  sick  man 

18  parangbu  kung  mukera  waraiyo 

sick  with  he  man 

John  killed  a  deer 

19.  waiking  wufu  Johnya 

deer  killed  John 

John  saw  three  jaguars 

20.  seriwa  kaikuci  yanu  eramabu  Johnya 

three  jaguars  saw  John  » 


I  have  two  hats 


2  1  . 

sakanang 

uyarako 

two 

my  hat 

1  am  looking  at  a  man  and  a 

woman 

22. 

waraiyo 

ramaiya 

serere 

man 

looking  at 

now 

Are  you  hungry? 

23- 

iwangbe 

manang 

manati 

hungry 

are 

you  (pi.) 

Are  you  thirsty? 

24. 

animbai 

manang 

drink  want 

you 

urineri 

woman 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


103 


The  father  loves  his  son 

25-  yung  wana  timu  yapurubu 

father  son  his  loves 

He  gave  the  woman  a  stone 

26.  tirke  uri  irebabuiya 

stone  woman  gave  he 
He  gave  the  fowl  to  John 

27.  kariwinake  waraiyo  refabuiya  John 

fowl  (masculine)  gave  he 

The  ground  is  very  rough 

28.  arairabutafe  pata  mang 

rough  ground  (present  tense) 

The  hill  is  very  high 

29.  kowuni  fuguru  muteru 

high  very  hill 

Jane  is  larger  than  Mary 

30.  Mary  yendai  Jane  wane  okaipe 

more  than  is  large 

It  pleases  me 

31.  uwakerebe  ramafo  wai 

please  see  me 

It  makes  me  glad 

32.  unwakemaiya 

I  want  it 

33.  merere  yuse  wai 

it  want  me 

John  sees  you 

34.  Johnya  ayerama  formang 

John  you  sees  (sing.) 

I  shall  tell  him 

35.  karame  kiuteseti  ipei 

tell  (fut)  to  him 

Give  them  to  her 

36.  mukeru  ibia  to  antikei 

her  them  give 

Who  is  it? 

37.  anebenai 

who  is 


104  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — -ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


What  do  you  want? 

38.  u  yuse  manang 

what  want  (singular) 

Who  told  you? 

39.  ania  muerer  karimukfonai 

who  that  tell 

Which  arrow  do  you  want? 

40.  onong  yeka  peru  usuana  amerer 

which  like  arrow  want  you 

Where  are  you  going? 

41.  anongpata  ate  amuerer 

where  going  you 

Why  does  he  not  come? 

42.  onongbe  aiepu  bura  manang 

why  he  comes  not  (sing.) 

Where  did  he  go? 

43.  anongpata  uitombonai 

where  he  go  (question) 

Go  before  me 

44.  urape  miare 

me  before  go  * 

Come  after  me 

45.  uenaire  acike 

me  after  come 
Shall  1  tell  you? 

46.  karamekuya 

tell  you 

TEXTS 


Saint  John,  Fourth  Chapter,  Beginning  with  the  Forty 

Sixth  Verse 


46.  Moro 

ipeku  waraio 

wanibe 

tiwing, 

parangbe 

their 

great  man 

was 

one 

sick 

imu  wanibe 

Capernaum 

pona. 

his  son  was 

Capernaum 

on 

47.  Judea 

fai  Jesus 

ipupe 

:  Galilee 

pona 

etatuiyafe 

Judea 

from  Jesus 

came 

Galilee 

on 

heard  he  when 

ibia  atebe, 

yenai  iya 

nere 

ipe 

aiitobe,  imu 

near  him  went, 

ask  he 

and 

to  him 

that  he  may  come  his  son 

FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


105 


puripanaloheiya  kaima;  aminge  bura  assamanda  kufu 

to  heal  him  say  far  not  you  die 

wanibe  yening. 

was  because 


48. 

Mereri  yai  tabe  Jesus  ya  ipe, 

panebe 

tobangke 

that  time  said  Jesus 

to  him 

signs 

wonder 

pokombe  ramasa  avanakong 

bura  wani  ya, 

yapura 

with 

see  ye 

not  is 

if 

believe 

ayanakong  bura  wani. 

ye 

not  is 

49. 

Mekeri  ipekure  waraio 

ya  tabe 

ipe, 

acikeye 

that  great  man 

said 

to  him 

come  thou 

umu  samanda  arape. 

my  son 

dies  before 

50. 

Jesus  ya  tabe  ipe, 

atake 

ayemari 

tawure; 

Jesus  said  to  him 

go  thou 

your  path 

way 

enneng 

amu  koma  nafomang. 

Makere 

waraio 

ya  Jesus 

alive 

your  son  lives  at  the  present 

that 

man 

Jesus 

maimu 

yafurube  inekaremekebe  ipe, 

temarita  weri 

word  believed  that  he  told  to  him  his  way 

alebe  nere. 


went  and 


51.  Mekeri  utebe  tane  ipaitori  tonnomg  ya  poribe, 

that  you  go  while  his  servants  found 

karimekebe  toya  nere  ipe,  enneng  amu  komanafomong. 

told  them  and  to  him  alive  your  son  lives  at  present 


52.  Merere 

that 


yai 

time  (hour) 


upuribomube  biatebe. 


his  health  to  turn 


began. 


pe,  karamafofaiiya 

about  ask  he 

Komombura  tabe 

Yesterday  said 


tope 

of  them 

toya  ipe, 

they  to  him 


asagonymiabunatimotai  ekomima  eturumukabe. 


(at)  seven 


fever 


loosened 


53.  Yung  nifutube  merere  rema  merere  ya  rema 


father 

knew  that 

same 

that  in  same 

Jesus  ya 

tabe 

ipe  enneng 

amu 

komanafomang; 

Jesus 

said 

to  him  alive 

your  son 

lives  at  present 

yafurubuia 

nere 

tomarere,  tammonoware  itewe  nere. 

believed  he 

and 

himself 

all 

others  and 

54.  inere 

sagony  tabangke 

serere 

Jesus  nikubube, 

again  two  wonder  this  Jesus  did 

Judea  pata  bai  ipakesabe  Galilee  pona. 


Judea  place  from  he  came  out  when  Galilee  on 


106  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


St.  John,  Chapter  4 

46.  .  .  .  And  there  was  a  certain  nobleman,  whose  son 
was  sick  at  Capernaum. 

47.  When  he  heard  that  Jesus  was  come  out  of  Judea  into 
Galilee,  he  went  unto  him,  and  besought  him  that  he  would 
come  down,  and  heal  his  son;  for  he  was  at  the  point  of  death. 

48.  Then  Jesus  said  unto  him,  Except  ye  see  signs  and 
wonders,  ye  will  not  believe. 

49.  The  nobleman  saith  unto  him,  Sir,  come  down  ere  my 
child  die. 

50.  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  Go  thy  way;  thy  son  liveth. 
And  the  man  believed  the  word  that  Jesus  had  spoken  unto 
him,  and  he  went  his  way. 

51.  And  as  he  was  now  going  down,  his  servants  met  him, 
and  told  him,  saying,  Thy  son  liveth. 

52.  Then  enquired  he  of  them  the  hour  when  he  began  to 
amend.  And  they  said  unto  him,  Yesterday  at  the  seventh 
hour  the  fever  left  him. 

53.  So  the  father  knew  that  it  was  at  the  same  hour,  in  the 
which  Jesus  said  unto  him,  Thy  son  liveth;  and  himself  believed 
and  his  whole  house. 

54.  This  is  again  the  second  miracle  that  Jesus  did,  when  he 
was  come  out  of  Judea  into  Galilee. 


1.  Paul 

Paul 

lonianyamu 

lonians 

epotori 

master 

wane 

is 

winafai 

side  from 


Thessalonians,  First  Chapter 
metefo  Silvanus,  metefo  Timotheus 


after 

churchi 

church 


Silvanus 

bia  God 


near 

ya 


Jesus  Christ 

Jesus  Christ 

abianakong,  more 

you  near  ye  peace 

ana  epotori  Jesus 

we  master  Jesus 


Ihessa- 

after  Timotheus  Thessa 

ya  yung  mani  ana 

God  father  is  we 

mani  nere;  tinakongmaku 

is  and  mercy 

nere,  anayunggung  God 

and  we  father  of  us  God 

Christ  winafai  nere. 

Christ  side  from  and 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


107 


Uwa  tatoke  irebatobe  ana  ya,  God  bia  konoro 

thanks  say  with  he  gives  we  God  near  always 

tamonowore  aivamore  tongbe  ayesabotekong  ana  ya  ana 

y°u  far  you  mention  all  we  we 

epurema  gureta; 

pray  among  (in) 


3.  Embengena  komamu  tiwamura 

mindful  we  live  forget 

eseiyakama  moruntake  ayewanggong 

strength  with  your  hearts 


work 

eseiyakamato 

work 

ana  epetori 

we  Master 

yaire  nere 

in  view  and 


bura 

not 

wane, 

is 


aiyamoro 

you 

ewakemato 

like 


aiyamere  neri, 

you  and 

Jesus  Christ 

Jesus  Christ 


embeng  akomamukong  nere 

mindful  live  and 

ya  ana  yunggong  ana  yenu 

we  father  of  us  all  God  I 


4.  Ewewakumabukong  uyakonnong 

you  loved  brothers 

God  wimong,  futu  ana  ya  tane 

God  side  know  we  while 


ituze  wane  yening 

want  is  because 


5.  Wake  ana  ekare  ipuke  abia  nakong  maing  be 

good  we  message  came  you  near  all  word  is 

siking  bura,  meruntake  nere,  waki  ekatong  yai  .nere, 

only  nor  strength  with  and  good  spirit  through  and 

tuke  embeng  ena  gureta  nere;  futa  ayanakong  ana 

much  hope  fall  in  (among)  and  know  ye  all  we 

waraiokong  yeruru  wambu  guretanakong  aiyamoro  wenai 

men  custom  we  were  among  you  your  sake 

6.  Ana  wenaire  enasakong  ya  nere,  ana  epotori 

we  follow  turn  (fsll)  and  we  master 

wenaire  nere  maing  ya  pija  yanakong  tane  tuke 

follow  and  word  catch  you  while  much 

tarimateng  gureta,  taucimba  pokombe  waku  ekatong  wine 

ill  treatment  among  joy  with  good  spirit  side 

7.  Mowani  aivamore  wanibe  apambenakong  tamono- 

S0  is  you  were  you  like  all 

wore  ya  purenonggong  etobe  Macedoniapong  Achaia- 

believers  to  be  Macedonia  people  Achaia 

pong  nere 

people  and 


108  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

8.  Aiyamore  winufai  ana  epotori  God  maimu  etunge 

you  side  from  we  master  God  word  sound 

epakabu  Macedonia  pona  niking  bura  nere  tize  nere 

it  came  out  Macedonia  on  only  nor  and  but  and 

weruntake  uyewuringgong  God  perwane  atawenonggasa 

strength  with  your  hearts  God  to  is  spread 

tamonoworoe  pata  pona;  merere  yening  ana  sewumatotong 

all  place  on  that  because  we  speaking  for 

bura  wane 

not  is 

9.  Inggamore  ya  tiwarirenakong  abianakong  ana  ewonze 

they  (those)  themselves  you  near  we  get  in 

yeruru  ana  wine  yembosa,  onong  wani  nere  ikuzakong  bia 

(manner)  way  we  side  show  how  is  and  images  near 

bai  eratebekong  ennemang  God  bia  yairerong  God  bia 

from  turned  ye  living  (alive)  God  near  right  (true)  God  near 

tanutobe  nere 

serve  and 

10.  I  mu  nemetobu  nere  kawinebai  inimuzakabe 

his  son  wait  and  sky  side  from  raised 

samandang  bia  bai,  Jesus  wane  ana  imokazang  sakoro 

dead  near  from  Jesus  is  we  he  took  out  wrath 

ipu  bia  bai 

to  come  near  from 

Thessalonians,  Chapter  i 

1.  Paul  and  Silvanus  and  Timotheus,  unto  the  church  of 
the  Thessalonians  which  is  in  God  the  Father,  and  in  the  Lord 
jesus  Christ;  Grace  be  unto  you,  and  peace,  from  God  our 
Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

2.  We  give  thanks  to  God  always  for  you  all,  making  men¬ 
tion  of  you  in  our  prayers; 

3.  Remembering  without  ceasing  your  work  of  faith,  and 
labor  of  love,  and  patience  of  hope  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in 
the  sight  of  God  and  our  Father: 

4.  Knowing  brethren  beloved,  your  election  of  God. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


109 


5.  For  our  gospel  came  not  unto  you  in  word  only,  but  also 
in  power,  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  in  much  assurance;  as  ye 
know  what  manner  of  men  we  were  among  you  for  your  sakes. 

6.  And  ye  became  followers  of  us,  and  of  the  Lord,  having 
received  the  word  in  much  affliction;  with  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

7.  So  that  you  were  ensamples  to  all  that  believe  in  Mace¬ 
donia  and  Achaia. 

8.  For  from  you  sounded  out  the  word  of  the  Lord  not  only 
in  Macedonia  and  Achaia  but  also  in  every  place  your  faith  to 
Godward  is  spread  abroad;  so  that  we  need  not  to  speak  any¬ 
thing. 

9.  For  they  themselves  show  us  what  manner  of  entering 
in  we  had  unto  you,  and  how  ye  turned  to  God  from  idols  to 
serve  the  living  and  true  God. 

10.  And  to  wait  for  his  son  from  heaven,  whom  he  raised 
from  the  dead,  even  Jesus,  which  delivered  us  from  the  wrath 
to  come. 

Apostles’  Creed 

Lre  yapurefowai  God  yungbe  tamonowore  imeruntari 

I  believe  God  father  is  all  is  strong 

ka  kufubuia  nong  nere;  ure  yapurefowai  Jesus  Christ  nere 

heaven  made  he  earth  and  I  believe  Jesus  Christ  and 

tiwinang  niking  imu  ana  epotori.  Wake  yekatong  winong 

one  only  his  son  we  master  Holy  (good)  spirit  side 

yempobe  amanong  Mary  ya  tarimatebe  toya  Pontius  Pilate 

born  virgin  Mary  illtreated  them  Pontius  Pilate 

yon.  Arefube  pakenang  pona,  asamandabe,  yunatebe  nere, 

under  Hung  across  on  you  died  buried  and 

samandazang  pata  ya  antebe;  teseremuwane  iweyuyai 

dead  place  in  descend  third  day  time 

inere  tisamandabe  bia  bai  ewemuzakabe,  ka  ya  enukube, 

again  his  death  near  from  he  got  up  Heaven  in  went  up 

erentesa  nere,  merunte  fuguru  Yung  God  merunte  eteya  po; 

sits  now  and  strong  very  father  God  strong  his  hand  on 


110  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


merere  pata  bai  aipetong  euneanggong  yefuzu  samandazang 

that  place  from  he  came  will  living  to  judge  (know)  dead 

nere. 

and 

Ure  yapurefowai  wake  itekatong;  tamonowore  wake  Church 

I  believe  good  spirit  all  good  Church 

kaitcerenggong;  wake  timurukumbanggong  mo  tuwezanang- 

even  (agreeing)  good  those  that  gather  together  quiet  state 

gong;  erire  rumakatotongbe,  teza  awomutong,  euneunga- 

sin  loose  for  when  body  to  arise  alive  you  live  for 

komanamutong  nere  ewetikatong  pefung.  Amen. 

and  to  finish  for  is  not  Amen. 

Apostles’  Creed 

I  believe  in  God  the  Father  Almighty,  maker  of  heaven  and 
earth: 

And  in  Jesus  Christ  his  only  Son  our  Lord,  Who  was  con¬ 
ceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  Born  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  Suffered 
under  Pontius  Pilate,  Was  crucified,  dead  and  buried.  He 
descended  into  hell;  The  third  day  he  rose  again  from  the  dead; 
He  ascended  into  heaven,  And  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God 
the  Father  Almighty;  From  thence  he  shall  come  to  judge  the 
quick  and  the  dead. 

1  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost;  the  holy  Catholic  Church; 
The  Communion  of  Saints;  The  Forgiveness  of  Sins;  The 

Resurrection  of  the  body;  And  the  Life  everlasting.  Amen. 

Absolution — Iramakato 

Tomonoweri  merunti  God  ana  epotore  Jesus  Christ  yung 

all  strong  God  our  master  Jesus  Christ  father 

ya  erire  kuningye  samanda  yuze  buru  wane,  erire  tingka- 

evil  doer  die  want  not  be  evil  he  did 

fubakong  bia  bai  erate  yuze  niking  wane,  enneng  akomantobe. 

by  from  turn  want  rather  is  alive  to  live. 

Merunte  tiribeiya  commandment  nere  ti  dominirikong 

strong  gives  he  commandment  and  his  ministers 

bia  karimetobe  asatobe  toya  nere  pemongong  bia  etiakamasa 

to  tell  repeat  them  and  his  people  near  change 


FARABEE - THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS  111 

tana  to  erirekong  bia  bai  to  kuzaia  irumakaning  nere;  inafe 

while  them  evil  near  from  them  does  he  he  forgives  and  indeed 

wane  tamonowere  tiekamazang  zammaning  omatang  bia 

is  all  changed  those  pity  dissemble  near 

bai  wake  timaimu  emenukesa  yafure  tefonggong  kuzaia  erire 

from  good  his  word  written  believe  those  does  he  evil 

bia  bai  merereyening  aze  nakong  yairerong  ti  ekamantolong 

near  from  that  because  come  all  right  will  change  for 

yenatobe  ana  ya  ipe  ana  refatobia  wake  tikatong  ke, 

ask  we  to  him  we  give  he  good  his  spirit  with 

ekongreze  kufu  ana  ya  serere  iwakiribe;  tikeng,  wakebe  ana 

what  anything  do  we  now  he  glad  pure  good  we 

komantobe  tere  bai;  ewetikesabe  ana  itobe  tiwarire  ataucimba 

live  here  from  finish  we  to  come  himself  joy 

gereta  Jesus  Christ  ana  epotoria  yai. 

among  Jesus  Christ  we  master  through 

Absolution 

Almighty  God,  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 
desireth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but  rather  that  he  may  turn 
from  his  wickedness,  and  live;  and  hath  given  power,  and 
commandment,  to  his  ministers,  to  declare  and  pronounce  to 
his  people,  being  penitent,  the  Absolution  and  Remission  of 
their  sins;  he  pardoneth  and  absolveth  all  those  who  truly 
repent,  and  unfeignedly  believe  his  holy  gospel.  Wherefore  let 
us  beseech  him,  to  grant  us  true  repentance,  and  his  Holy 
Spirit,  that  those  things  may  please  him,  which  we  do  at  this 
present;  and  that  the  rest  of  our  life  hereafter  may  be  pure, 
and  holy;  so  that  at  last  we  may  come  to  his  eternal  joy ;  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 


Morning  Prayer1 

Erire  waraio  ya,  erire  tiwarere  tingka  fube  bia  bai 

evil  man  evil  himself  the  king  does  near  from 

eratesabe  ipatabe  ereye  kufuia  yairerong  yawerong  nere, 

turn  when  in  place  of  what  (any)  does  he  truth  according  and 


1  The  English  Prayer  Book  was  used  for  text. 


112  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

ennengbe  itekatong  poikatetobeia  tiyakamate  aminggebura 

alive  (be)  his  soul  help  will  be  change  ye  far  not 

ka  pata  wani  yening. 

heaven  place  is  because. 

Uwakiritonnong  fuguru  uyakonnong,  wakemaing 

my  love  very  brothers  good  words 

emenukasa  tuke  ipata  pona  ana  yewanggong  yarimaning 

written  many  its  place  on  we  hearts  move 

eputobe  karimetobe  nere  erireakong  ana  erirekong  erire 

to  know  ask  and  evils  many  we  evils  evil 

tuwezinggong  neri;  tiomatai  bura,  to  sonanzebura  nere 

habits  of  and  jesting  not  them  hide  not  and 

kawune  ana  yunggong  tamonoware  imeruntari  God 

high  we  father  all  strength  God 

yembata  kaitcere; 

face  before 

Karimetonggongbe  to  tize  tunombe  tize  nommairong  tize, 

to  tell  for  them  ought  slow  (state  of)  lowly  (state  of) 

yuningbe  yewanggong  ke,  yaiwurong  ke  nere,  tiwinare 

hearing  hearts  with  accord  with  and  once 

ana  tirumakatatong  patobe  ana  ya,  tikomambe  tiwezingwaku 

we  things  loosed  find  we  long  stop  habits  good 

God  yai  wezanima  yai  neri.  Konoro  tunombe  ana  erirekong 

God  through  mercy  through  and  always  slow  we  evils 

ana  iwarerong  fututobe  ana  ya  God  yembata  kaitcere; 

we  ourselves  of  know  we  God  face  even 

merere  fuguru  Kubai  tize  ana  murukunte  satane  uwa 

that  very  do  ought  we  gather  while  thanks 

tatoke  irebatabe  nere,  okaipe  irebasa  yapijibe  ana  ya. 

them  with  give  will  and  large  he  gives  (gave)  receive  we 

iteiya  wine  fainong  tonyebe  make  fuguru  ikubutong  titabe, 

his  hand  side  from  far  good  very  do  for  give 

wake  fuguru  imaimu  etatobe  nere,  ekongreze  karamafoba 

good  very  his  word  to  hear  and  anything  ask  may 

ituze  wani  kaitcere  ana  yesa  tombe,  ana  yekatong  tombe 

want  is  even  we  body  far  we  spirit  far 

nere.  Merere  yening  yenawyn  apegenakong,  ayekaramafokong 

and  that  because  beg  1  ye  all  ye  ask  all 

uyu  nere,  owaropo  tare  wanekong  ure  pokombe 

me  and  how  many  here  are  me  with 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


113 


tikenang  ayewanggong  ke,  tenombe  amaimu  ke  nere 

Pure  _  hearts  with  slow  your  word  with  and 

kewene  tinakong  maka  yaponope  uwenaire  augkute. 

high  mercy  throw  seat  after  me  say 


Morning  Prayer 

\\  hen  the  wicked  man  turneth  away  from  his  wickedness 
that  he  hath  committed,  and  doeth  that  which  is  lawful  and 
right,  he  shall  save  his  soul  alive. 

Repent  ye;  for  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  is  at  hand. 

Dearly  beloved  brethren,  the  Scripture  moveth  us  in 
sundry  places  to  acknowledge  and  confess  our  manifold  sins 
and  wickedness;  and  that  we  should  not  dissemble  nor  cloak 
them  before  the  face  of  Almighty  God  our  heavenly  Father; 
but  confess  them  with  an  humble,  lowly,  penitent  and  obedient 
heart;  to  the  end  that  we  may  obtain  forgiveness  of  the  same 
by  his  infinite  goodness  and  mercy.  And  although  we  ought  at 
all  times  humbly  to  acknowledge  our  sins  before  God;  yet 
ought  we  most  chiefly  so  to  do,  when  we  assemble  and  meet 
together  to  render  thanks  for  the  great  benefits  that  we  have 
received  at  his  hands,  to  set  forth  his  most  worthy  praise,  to 
hear  his  most  holy  word,  and  to  ask  those  things  which  are 
requisite  and  necessary,  as  well  for  the  body  as  the  soul.  Where¬ 
fore  I  pray  and  beseech  you,  as  many  as  are  here  present,  to 
accompany  me  with  a  pure  heart  and  humble  voice,  unto  the 
throne  of  the  heavenly  grace,  saying  after  me; 

Te  Deum  Laudamus 

1.  Ana  expurema  ape  God;  ayeputefoana  mang  amere 

we  praise  thee  God;  acknowledge 

ana  epotori. 

master 

2.  Tomonoware  nong  kaitcere  tepurema  zing  amere; 

all  earth 

yung  tikomambere  turvezing. 

Father  everlasting 


114  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

3.  Apu  tamonoware  Angels  yamum  karawana  fomang 

To  thee  all  Angels 

meruntatke;  ka  tamonoware  meruntaking  nere  yawonggong. 

heaven  all  powers  are  therein 

4.  Apu  atinafomu  pe  fung  erawanafomang;  Cherubim 

To  thee  Cherubim 

Seraphim. 

and  Seraphim 

5.  Wakube,  wakube,  wakube;  seyananong  epotori  God. 

Holy  holy  holy  master  God 

6.  Ka,  nong  nere  enlafegurong  ipuku  fugufru;  ayewo  keke. 

Heaven  and  earth  are 

7.  Enwoke  itakonnong  Apostlic  amu  ya;  epurema. 

glorious  company  praise 

8.  Wake  itambakong  prophet  yamu  ya  apu  epurema. 

good  fellowship  thee  praise 

9.  Amporizang  inonggong  martyr  yamu  ya;  apu  epurema. 

noble  army  praise 

10.  Wakti  Church  tomanowore  pata  kaitcare;  ayefuning. 

holy  all  world  acknowledge 

11.  Yung;  ipe  kure  buguru  tuwezing  awetikatong  pefung. 

Father 

12.  Amere  tipoinamazing  yairerong  amu  tiwinnangre. 

thou  son  only 

13.  Waku  itekatong  neric;  yafurenong. 

holy  (Ghost)  also  are  comforter 

14.  Enwoke  King;  amere  Christ. 

glorious  0 

15.  Amere  tikomambere  tuwezing;  yung  mumube. 

thou  everlasting  father 

16.  Mere  yai  yanuma  aya  ya  apona,  waraio  paika- 

man 

tetongbe:  unewang  maribii  pefung  emanong  weneku. 

17.  Merere  yai  ikebe  samandang  yefoi  epakabu;  amere 
anetara  pekabe  ka  pata,  tamonoware  yafurenang  bia. 

18.  Amere  God  emainong  iteiya  po  erentasa;  yung 
enwakeya. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


115 


19.  Ya  purufu  ana  mangamere  aipetong  ana  efuze. 

20.  Merere  yening  ana  sena  apu  apaitoritonnong 
poikatafa;  tomakasa  aya  yening  pai  kataning  amunuke. 

21.  Toya  ikubu  ikuge  amere  motuwezanang  pokombe; 
tikomambu  (here)  tuwezing  euwokeya. 

22.  Uyepatori  apemongonno  paikateke:  wake  antuke  neri 
ana  numutonggong  pona. 

23.  To  yendai  eke;  toyanungge  nere  tikomambere. 

24.  Weikaitcere,  ana  ya  ayanuna  fubomang. 

25.  Ana  nere  ekena  ayesepe;  tikomambere  tuwezing 
pata  ewetikatong  perfung. 

26.  Uyepootori  ana  ya  ayekramatobomang;  ana  kutobe 
any  a  serere  weiyai  erire  bia  bai. 

27.  Uyepotori,  zanimake  ana  pona;  zanimaka  ana  pona. 

28.  Wyepotori,  tewe  ewezanima  iweyumake  ana  pona; 
embing  aya  ana  weto  pambe. 

29.  Wyepotori,  embeng  eto  urea  ya;  tewe  ure  atakama- 
tombe  tuwezig  pefung. 

Te  Deum  Laudamus 

1.  We  praise  thee,  O  God;  we  acknowledge  thee  to  be  the 
Lord. 

2.  All  the  earth  doth  worship  thee;  the  father  everlasting. 

3.  To  thee  all  Angels  cry  aloud;  the  Heavens,  and  all  the 
powers  therein. 

4.  To  thee  Cherubim,  and  Seraphim;  continually  do  cry. 

5.  Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  Lord  God  of  Sabaoth; 

6.  Heaven  and  earth  are  full  of  the  Majesty:  of  thy  Glory. 

7.  The  glorious  company  of  the  Apostles:  praise  thee. 

8.  The  goodly  fellowship  of  the  Prophets:  praise  thee. 


116  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

9.  The  noble  army  of  Martyrs:  praise  thee. 

10.  The  holy  Church  throughout  all  the  world:  doth 
acknowledge  thee; 

1 1.  The  father:  of  an  infinite  majesty; 

12.  Thine  honorable,  true:  and  only  Son; 

13.  Also  the  Holy  Ghost:  the  Comforter. 

14.  Thou  art  the  King  of  Glory:  O  Christ. 

15.  Thou  art  the  everlasting  Son:  of  the  Father. 

16.  When  thou  tookest  upon  thee  to  deliver  man;  thou 
didst  not  abhor  the  Virgin’s  womb. 

17.  When  thou  hadst  overcome  the  sharpness  of  death; 
thou  didst  open  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  to  all  believers. 

18.  Thou  sittest  at  the  right  hand  of  God:  in  the  glory  of 
the  Father. 

19.  We  believe  that  thou  shalt  come:  to  be  our  judge. 

20.  We  therefore  pray  thee,  help  thy  servants:  whom 
thou  hast  redeemed  with  thy  precious  blood. 

21.  Make  them  to  be  numbered  with  thy  saints:  in  glory 
everlasting. 

22.  O  Lord,  save  thy  people:  and  bless  thine  heritage. 

23.  Govern  them:  and  lift  them  up  forever. 

24.  Day  by  day:  we  magnify  thee. 

25.  And  we  worship  thy  Name:  ever,  world  without  end. 

26.  Vouchsafe,  O  Lord:  to  keep  us  this  day  without  sin. 

27.  O  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us:  have  mercy  upon  us. 

28.  O  Lord,  let  thy  mercy  lighten  upon  us:  as  our  trust 
is  in  thee. 

29.  O  Lord,  in  thee  have  I  trusted:  let  me  never  be  con¬ 
founded. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


117 


The  Lord’s  Prayer 

Ana 

We 

yenafomang 


to  come 


Patore  wane  puremato 
yunggong  kapo,  wakebe  ayese  wanima 

father  of  us  heaven  good  your  name  is  your 

Ayuzeweto  konikabe  nong  bo,  kapo 


You  want  to  be  made  earth  on  sky  on  you  ar 

kaitcere.  Sereripe  ana  yekaritong  antake  ana  bia  eweyuyai 


made 


earth 


apata 

place 

awane 

you  are 


near 


evenness  now  is  (to-day)  we  food  for  give  we 

Ana  erire  irumakake  ana  pe  ana  yombakong 

we  sin  loose  thou  we  to  we  others 

ana  ya  pambe.  Pakonomato  gureta  ana 

we  like  temptation  among  (in)  we 

bura:  erire  wine  bai  niking  ana  inabuku. 

not  sin  side  from  but  we  turn  back 

pata,  merunte,  enwake,  ewetikatong  fefung,  mowanire. 

place  strength  glory  (brightness)  finish  for  is  not 


daily 

erire  erumaka 

sin  loosed 

yengrakatobe 

to  lead 

Ayamoni  fe 

yours 


is 


amen 


Responses 

1.  Ana  epitori,  ana  yepikong  etarapukake. 

we  master  we  lips  open 

2.  Ana  muta  nere  ayepure  matony  yembotake. 

we  mouth  and  you  praise  for  show 

3.  God  kanebe  fuguru  ana  paikateke. 

God  quickly  very  us  help  thou 

4.  Ana  epotori,  kanebe  ana  paikateke. 

We  master  quickly  us  help  thou 

Responses 

1.  O  Lord,  open  thou  our  lips. 

2.  And  our  mouth  shall  show  forth  thy  praise. 

3.  O  God,  make  speed  to  save  us. 

4.  O  Lord,  make  haste  to  help  us. 

The  Confession — Karimeketong 

Merunte  fugururu  ezanimabe  ana  yunggung  yawere  bura 
ana  mang,  kabara  pombe  nere  ana  ataza  ayemari  bia  bai. 
Yawere  bura  nere,  ana  yewang  sena  ming  gambo  many.  Wake 
fuguru  ayezeru  mutanabe  ana  mang.  Tewe  ikubai  tiza  ewe 


118  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

ku  fube,  bura  tiza  irumakabe  ana  ya  mang;  ine  ekubai  buru 
tize  merere  kufube  ana  ya  mang;  merere  yening  puria  bura  ana 
ya  mang.  Erire  fuguru  ana  wane,  tize  mapona  zanimake  ana 
epoton.  Ana  erire  mokake  ape  karimeke  ana  ya  tane.  Erire 
kufube  ana  mang  merere  yening  ana  sewang  konoma  ana 
kurantanabutong  anteke  pemonggong  bia  tiri  anya  ta  aya 
netakini  pambe  Jesus  Christ  ana  epaton  yai.  Mekere  yai  nere 
ana  irebake  ana  komantobe  tarebai,  wakebere,  yairerong  more 
nere,  wakebe  ayese  euwake  titabe  abia  ana  zammanmg  ana 
yungong. 

The  Confession 

Almighty  and  most  merciful  Father;  We  have  erred,  and 
strayed  from  thy  ways  like  lost  sheep.  We  have  followed  too 
much  the  devices  and  desires  of  our  own  hearts.  We  have 
offended  against  thy  holy  laws.  We  have  left  undone  those 
things  which  we  ought  to  have  done;  And  we  have  done  those 
things  which  we  ought  not  to  have  done;  And  there  is  no  health 
in  us.  But,  thou,  O  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  miserable 
offenders.  Spare  thou  them,  O  God,  which  confess  their  faults. 
Restore  thou  them  that  are  penitent;  According  to  thy  prom¬ 
ises  declared  unto  mankind  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  And 
grant,  O  most  merciful  Father,  for  his  sake;  That  we  may  here¬ 
after  live  a  godly,  righteous,  and  sober  life,  to  the  glory  of  thy 
holy  Name. 

Gloria — Enwake  wane 

Enwake  itung  bia  wane  |  imu  |  nere:  wake  ijtekajtong! 
neri.  Ipatebe  wanebe,  serere  wane,  komana  |  tombe  |  nere 
pata  ewetikajtong  pejfung  ajmen.  Patori  wani  kufutong 
wakube  antute.  Palori  wani  ese  ekufu  wakube. 

Venite 

1.  Acite,  tewe  serenggantobenakong  ana  epatori  pe;  tewe 
ana  yewang  taucimba  ana  poikatajning  me|runte  |  pe. 

2.  Tewe  ana  ipe  etembata  kaitcere,  uwa  tatake  irebatobe. 
Ana  wakiri  yembatobe  ana  ya  nere  ipe  Psalms  ke. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


119 


3.  Ana  epotori  wane  yening,  epeku  God  pe,  epeku  kingbe 
nere,  tamonowarong  God  yamu  ebainong. 

4.  1  amonowrongnong  epiforonggong  ite  iya  yawonggong; 
muturukong  meruntakong  iwarerong  nere. 

5-  Parana  iwarerong,  ingkafube  neri:  amunenong  koni- 
kabeia  nere  iteiya  kongke. 

6.  Acite,  tewe  tesenunze  nere,  puremanto  benakong:  tize 
muyupe  nere  ana  kuning  ye,  ana  epatori  yemba  to  Kaitcere. 

7.  Mekerere  ana  epatori  ana  God  pe:  ana  kanante  ipe- 
monggono  ipata  po,  ka  bara  nere  iteiya  winong. 

8.  Sererepe  unaimu  etaza  anya  nakong  ya,  awewonggong 
samanaze  bura;  amatabe  tane,  pakonomabe  yai  nere  iteipona 
pambe. 

9.  Ayung  tonnonggong  ya  upako  nomabe;  wye  futube 
toya  useiya  kamakong  eramabe  to  ya  nere. 

10.  Asagony  pemonggong  tumong  kusambe,  serire  mung- 
geci  ya,  wyewang  konoma  bu  tabowai;  serere  pemonggong 
yewang  ya  yawe.  Re  bura  senaming  gambomang,  wveruru 
tize  efututoya  bura  wane. 

1  1.  lope  ukoroimafe,  umaimu  soro  |  kabejuya:  uyengguvu 
gureta,  to  ewomu  |  sereke  j  bura  |  mang. 

Venite 

1.  O  come,  let  us  sing  unto  the  Lord:  let  us  heartily  rejoice 
in  the  strength  of  our  salvation. 

2.  Let  us  come  before  his  presence  with  thanksgiving:  and 
show  ourselves  glad  in  him  with  psalms. 

5.  For  the  Lord  is  a  great  God:  and  a  great  King  above  all 
gods. 

4.  In  his  hand  are  all  the  corners  of  the  earth;  and  the 
strength  of  the  hills  is  his  also. 


120  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

5.  The  sea  is  his,  and  he  made  it:  and  his  hands  prepared 
the  dry  land. 

6.  O  come,  let  us  worship  and  fall  down:  and  kneel  before 
the  Lord  our  Maker. 

7.  For  he  is  the  Lord  our  God,  and  we  are  the  people  of  his 
pasture,  and  the  sheep  of  his  hand. 

8.  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts; 
as  in  the  provocation,  and  as  in  the  day  of  the  temptation  in  the 
wilderness : 

9.  When  your  fathers  tempted  me:  proved  me:  and  saw 
my  works. 

10.  Forty  years  long  was  1  grieved  with  this  generation, 
and  said:  It  is  a  people  that  do  err  in  their  hearts,  for  they  have 
not  known  my  ways. 

1 1.  Unto  whom  1  sware  in  my  wrath:  that  they  should  not 
enter  into  my  rest. 

Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son:  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghost;  as  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and  ever  shall  be, 
world  without  end.  Amen. 


VOCABULARY 

English — Macusi 


about . 

absolution .... 

accord  . 

according.  .  .  . 

after . 

again . 

aguti . 

alive . 

all . 

alligator . 

all  varieties .  .  . 

all  ye . 

already . 

always . 

amen . 

among . 

among  you 

anaconda . 

and . 

answer . 

ant . 

anus . 

anything . 

apron  . 

are  you . 

arise . 

arm . 

arm  band . 

arrow . 

arrow,  poison. . 
arrow,  poisoned 

ask . 

ask  all . 

ask,  may . 

aunt . 

awake . 


pe 

.  iramakato 
.  .  yaiwurong 
. .  yawerong 
.  naire 
.  ineri 
akuri 
enneng 
timinaure 
. kuratu 
tukangong 
.apegenakong 
.inanibe 
. konoro 
mowanire 
. gereta 

guretanakong 
.  u.i 
nere 
ukuya 
mika 
.ubipa 
.ekongreze 
.  moka 

manang,  awane 
.  a  worn  u  tong 
uyemeku 
.yapotari 
peru 
urali 
kunua 

karimetobe,  yenai 

ayekaramafokong 

karamafoba 

mamai 

ennemang 


(121) 


122  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


baby,  baby  carrier .  . 

back . 

bad . 

banana . 

bark . 

basket . 

basket  made  of  reeds 

be . 

beard  . 

because  . 

before . 

began . 

beg . 

behind . 

being . 

believe . 

believe,  1 . 

believed,  1 . 

believed,  he . 

believers . 

belly . 

better . 

best . 

bird . 

black . 

blind . 

blood . 

blow  gun . 

blue . 

blue,  sky . 

body . 

hook . 

horn . 

bow . 

bowstring . 

bread,  masticated  .  . 

breath  . 

breast . 

brother . 

brother . 

brother,  elder . 


wini 

umpo 

.eribe 

paruru 

.seura 

tcumba,  kawapa 
.muma 
.  iwuza,  etobe 
uyeko 
.yening 
rape 
biatebe 
.yenauya 
.pendanarenota 
.betiza 
.yafure 
.yapurefowai 
.yafurube 
.yafurubuina 
.purenoaggong 
ulota 

.wakubefumbe 

.wakubefumberu 

paricari 

pawai 

.tenaban 

.mong 

.kura 

engatung 

urikutung 

teza 

.tambita 

.yempobe 

uyurapai 

karia 

.yaposa 

itetecing 

mana 

.upi 

.mori 

entcekSrang 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


123 


brother  in  law 
brother,  little. 

brothers . 

brown . 

build . 

buried . 

burn . 

but . 

buttock . 


.yakuru,  yaku 
.anike 

.uyakonnong 
.  carapiyu 
.ima.ukauya 
.yunatebe 
.aranabua 
.  sete,  tize 
umaka 


calabash . 

came . 

came  he . 

canoe  bark .... 
canoe,  dugout . 

capabara . 

carrying  basket 

cassava . 

catch  you . 

cat’s  cradle. . . . 

change . 

changed  those 

cheek . 

chest . 

chest . 

child . 

chin . 

cigarette  . 

circle . 

circle . 

cloud . 

cloud . 

col  d  . 

cold . 

color . 

come . 

come,  to . 

coming . 

compassion. . .  . 

cool . 

corn . 


aihi 
ipupe 
aipetong 
.kanaua 
.  kulial 
.warui 
.daruana 
.  kitcire 

.pijayanakong 
.  leokadio 
.etiakamasa 
.  tiekamazang 
upita 
uprota 
.ukadumba 
.mure 
.uyetamu 
.seura 
.  kaz 
wing 

. katurufu 
.  turupu 
.  kome 
.  kumike 
emenu 

.yenafomang,  wipu,  aze 
.  ipu 

.  maikong 
.  wezanima 
.enuking 
anai 


124  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


cousin .  . 
cow .  .  .  . 
creator . 
creek .  . . 
curasow 
custom . 


.ewurci 

.paca 

.entcekerang 

.iwuita 

.powis 

.yeruru 


daily . 

dance  (v.) . 

dance . 

dance,  society . 

dark . 

daughter  . 

daughter  (mother’s) 
daughter  in  law. .  . . 

dawn . 

day . 

daytime . 

dead . 

dead,  the . 

deaf . 

death,  his . 

deep . 

deer . 

descend . 

devil  dance . 

did . 

die,  to . 

dig . 

dirty . 

dissemble . 

distant . 

do . 

doer . 

dog . 

dog,  hunting . . 

door . 

door . 

dove . 

down  (n.) . 

down . 


eweyuyai 

uariban 

warepang 

paucas 

awanung 

uyenge 

unre 

patse 

eremapuya 

renai 

iweyuyai 

katumba 

samandazang 

panaban 

tisamandabe 

tunewong 

waiking 

antebe 

emawari 

nikubube 

samanda 

yakauya 

aiku 

omatang 

armnge 

kufu 

kuningye 

arimaraka 

pukung 

manata 

pendanare 

akuka 

toko 

makwita 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


125 


drink  («.) . 

drink  (v.) . 

drink,  black.  . . 
drink,  cassava . 

drum . 

dry . 


.anim 
.  yenereuya 
paiwai 
.yaposa 
.sambura 
konobin 


iai . upana 

ear  lobe . upananta 

earth . pata 

east . weipakawaina 

eat . entamakan 

eight . seremumiabunatimotai 

elbow . uzemu 

even . kaitcere 

evenness . kaitcere 

evil . erire 

evil  genius . kenaima 

evil  one .  emiwary 

evils . erirekong 

except . n  iking 

eye . uyenu 

eyebrow . uyenutcipu 

eyelash ...  . uyenusipo 

face . yenibata 

fall . ena 

fall  (v.) . enakufu 

far . tom  be 

fat . kiwang 

father . yung 

father  of  us . yunggong 

fear . apowai 

feces . uwa 

female . uribemang 

fever . ekomima 

field . upi 

find . patobe 

finger . mia 

finger  nail . ungatcapipe 

finish . ewetikesabe 


126  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


finish . 

lire . 

fire . 

firewood . 

fish . 

fish  net . 

fish,  pirai  . 

fish  poison . 

fish  poison,  bark  of  vine 
fish  poison,  bush  rope, . 

fish  poison,  shrub . 

fish  poison,  shrub . 

fish  poison,  shrub . 

fish  trap . 

five . 

flesh . 

floor . 

flow . . . 

flute,  bamboo . 

flute,  jaguar  bone . 

fly,  pium . 

follow . 

food . 

foot . 

for . 

forehead  . 

forest . 

forever . 

forget . 

forgive . 

found . 

four . 

fowl . 

fox . 

frog . 

from . 

future  . 


.ewetikatong 

.apo 

.apu 

apo 

moro 

.kami 

arai 

.aiya 

.kowui 

pici 

.tcukuya 

.kunapari 

.kunani 

.waita 

.miatoiking 

.upuni 

.kawumbang 

aparu 

kaikara 

.atcinari 

nunka 

.wenaire 

.yekaritong 

.upu 

.matony 

.ping 

•yu 

.inepari 
.tiwamura 
ikubutongtitabe 
.  poribe 
.sakrebuna 
kariwinake 
makong 
.  puretku 
.  bai 

. keuteseti 


game . 

game,  forest . 
gather . 


kamo 

aka 

murukunte 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


127 


get  in  we , 

get  up . 

girl,  growing. 

give . 

give . 

glad  he . 

glory . 

go . 

going . 

good . 

good,  the 
gourd  rattle, 
grandchild .  .  . 
grandmother, 
great,  the.  . . 

great . 

great  rock. . . 
great  tree .  . . 

green . 

ground . 


.  ewonze 
ewemuzakabe 
tangsa 
.  anike 
antikei 
iwakiribe 
enwake 
ute 
ate 
make 
wakube 
mara 
upa 
koko 
ipekure 
ipeku 
pirakaira 
waiyakaiye 
sora 
pata 


habit . 

hair . 

hammock . 

hand . 

hat . 

hat . 

have . 

he . 

head . 

head  band  of  cotton 

head  man . 

heal . 

health . 

hear . 

hearing . 

heart . 

heaven  . 

heavy . 

heel . 

help . 

her . 


,  tiwezing 
usipo 
auta 
.  teya 
aro 

.tarako 

ubia 

iya 

upapai 
aro 
.  imo 
.  puripan 
upuribomube 
.etatobe 
.yuningbe 
.yewang 
.  kapo 
.  amunine 
.  utana 
.poikate 
.  ibia 


128  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


here . 

hide . 

high . 

hill . 

him . 

himself . 

hip . 

his . 

holy . 

hope . 

horizon . 

horse . 

hot . 

house . 

house,  your.  . 

how . 

humming  bird 

hung . 

hungry . 


.tare 
.sonanze 
.  kowuni 
.muteru 
.ipe 

.tiwarire 

.utci 

.ti 

.wake 

.embeng 

.kaz 

.  kaware 

.anibe 

.ute 

.  ayeyiwu 
.  aonong 
.tukui 
.arifube 
.iwangbe 


1 . 

if . 

ill  treatment 

images . 

in . 

indeed . 

in  front  of.  . 
in  place  of .  . 

iron . 

is . 

island . 

it . 


,ure 

,ya 

.tarimateng 

.ikuzakong 

.ta 

.inafe 

.kaitcere 

.ipalabe 

.tcipirari 

.wane 

.yano 

.  merere 


jaguar . 
jester. . 
jesting, 
joy.. . . 
judge. . 


kaikuci 

anike 

tiomatai 

taucimba 

yefuzu 


kill . iweuya 

killed . iwabu 

knee 


uzenm 


FARABEE— THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


129 


,  .fw . nifutube 

kmfe . taura 

know . fun. 

lar§e . okaipe 

|ead . vengrakatobe 

leaf---. . ;;••• . hari 

lea\es  for  medicine  man . tcipuyeyare 

^ . uyemata 

leg  band . sabra 

k§kt . a’akare 

light  weight . k.ku 

jlke . yeka,  pambe 

lpS . yepikong 

1,lle . cimerika 

kve . ukamamu 

kv*n§ . ennemang 

living  thing . yamu 

lizard . iwo 

i°n§ . ammge 

lon§  time . kosang 

i°ok . eramuya 

i°ose . irumakake 

loosen . rumaka 

i°use . a  rung 

loves,  he . yapurubu 

i°ve . wakiriton 

lowly . nommairong 

macaw . kararawa 

made,  he . kufubuia 

male . waraiyole 

man . waraiyo 

manner . yeruru 

many . tuke 

masculine . waraiyo 

master . epotori 

me . uri 

medicine  man . piai 

medicine,  of  seeds . pua 

medicine,  stomach . kamara 


130  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


medicine,  worm .... 

men . 

mention . 

mercy . 

message . 

mindful . 

mine . 

ministers . 

monkey,  black . 

monkey,  howling. . . 

moon . 

morning . 

mother . 

mother . 

mother  in  law . 

mother  of  children  .  . 
mother  of  daughters 

mother  of  sons . 

more  than . 

mountain . 

mouse . 

mouth . 

mouth . 

move . 

much . 

mv . 


.  ronai 

.  waraiokong 
ayesabote 
tinakong 
ekare 
.embeng 
uremurerer 
.dommirikong 
.witire 
arata 
.kapoi 
.penane 
.ucang 
.mamai 
.wana 

.  mureyamais’sang 
.wuriyang 
.waraiyorang 
.yendai 
terkapfng 
moa 
muta 
unda 
.yarima 
tuke 
.u 


name . 

name  of  chief. .  . . 

navel . 

near . 

neck . 

necklace . 

necklace  of  beads . 
necklace  of  seeds, 
necklace  of  teeth . 

nephew . 

nephew,  to  marry 

night . 

night . 

nine . 


. ayese 

.  teberti 
.uponi 
bia 
.ume 
.akulye 
.wawi 
.  cilicil  i 
.  momo 
umuri 
.  wanafu 
.  repatabu 
awarunya 

.  sakrebunamiabunatimotai 


FARABEE— THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


131 


nipple . 

no . 

nose . 

nose  string.  .  . . 

not . 

not . 

now .... 

now . 

of . 

old . 

old  man .  .  . 
old  woman  . 

on . 

on  all  fours. 

once . 

one . 

one  side. . . . 

only . 

open . 

other . 

ought . 

ours . 

ourselves . . . 


yung 

akiton 

aketon 

nusandong 

pona 

.  waineribu 

tiwinare 

tiwing 

toiking 

niking 

etarapukake 

ratwi 

tize 

anamuere 

uwarerong 


paca . 

paint . 

pale  white 

palm . 

parrakeet . 
parrot 

past . 

path . 

peace . 

penis . 

people 
peppers.  . . 
person . .  . . 
persons .  . . 
pink . 

pity . 


.urana 
.  imenikouya 
.  amutung 
patcangera 
.  titike 
woroke 
bu 

ayemari 

more 

umele 

pong 

pimi 

pemongong 

we 

waiaiya 

zanimanmg 


132  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


apata 

kazawing 

uwakerebe 

pika 

futi,  yamu 
sa 

ayepure 

epurema 

mang 

nafomang 

tikeng 

epopiyu 

timotai 


quickly . 

quiet . 

quiver . 

rain . 

rainbow . 

rib . 

river . 

rabbit . 

rain . 

raised,  he ...  . 

rather . 

rattle,  ground 
rattle,  nut. . . . 
rattle  of  seeds 

receive . 

record  string. 

red . 

repeat . 

right . 

river . 

roof . 

root . 

rough . 

run . 


kono 

.nong 

urata 

.yauna 

.akuri 

.kono 

.inimuzakabi 

.niking 

.mara 

.kiwi 

.tuwi 

.yapijibe 

.wekui 

.cuiyu 

.asatobe 

.yairerong 

.okaituna 

. nekata 

.  jari 

.arairabutafe 

.katimreure 


.kanebe 

mo 

meye 


place  . 

place  name. . 

please . 

pluck . 

plural . 

potato . 

praise . 

pray . 

present . 

present  time 

pure . 

purple . 

put . 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


133 


said . 

sake . 

salve . 

same . 

sand . 

sandal . 

sandbar . 

say . 

saw . 

scrotum . 

season,  dry. . 
season,  wet . . . 

seat . 

second  person 

see . 

seek . 

servants . 

serve . 

seven . 

shadow . 

she . 

shoot . 

shoulder.  .  .  . 

show . 

sick . 

side . 

sign . 

singular . 

sister . 

sit . 

sits . 

six . 

skin . 

skull . 

sky . 

sleep . 

slow . 

smoke . 

so . 

son . 

son  in  law . 


.  tabe 
.  .wenai 
.  .katama 
.  trema 
.  .ska 
. .pucaza 
.  .  skapon 
. .  kaku 

.  .yamu  eramabu 
.  .uyimu 
.  .weiyai 
. .  konoyai 
.  .yaponope 
.  .  ku 
. .  rama 

.  yenai,  karimelobe 
.  .  ipaitori 
.  .tamitobe 

.  .  sagonymiabunatimotai 
.  .  ina 
.  mukera 
.iweuya 
umota 
.yembotake 
.parangbe,  yenebe 
.wine 
panebe 

.manang,  formang 
.wiri,  uwutisi 
.erata 
.rentesa 

.  tiwingmiabunatimotai 
.upipo 
.papairupa 
ka 

.  uwetungserere,  wetung 
.tunombe 
.werito 
.mo 
.umu 
paito 


134  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


soul . tekatong 

sound . etunge 

speaking . sewumatatong 

spider’s  web . • . moroi 

spindle  whorl . P^eri 

spirit  . katong,  makui 

spirit,  evil . kenaima 

spread . atawenonggasa 

spring . yani 

star,  large . kaiwuno 

star,  small . cirika 

state  of  being . mang 

stingray . tcipari 

stone . ter,  terka 

stoop . timui 

stop . tikomambe 

storm . waranapi 

strength . merunte 

string  figure . aratawaii 

strong . merunte 

sun . wei 

sun  at  450 . yawempona 

sun  overhead . enakatapaire 

sunrise . penana 

sun  setting . ewumo 

tapir . weira 

tell . karame 

temptation . pakonomato 

ten . miatiminauria 

termites . muna 

thanks . uwa 

that . muerer 

their . moro 

theirs . injenangyemanemurerer 

them . to 

themselves . tiwarirenakong 

these . senikong 

they . toya 

thing . tingka 

things . tiruma 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


135 


third . 

this . 

thorn . 

those . 

those,  remote. 

three . 

throat . 

through . 

throw . 

time . 

to . 

tobacco . 

today . 

toe . 

tongue . 

took . 

tooth . 

treat . 

tree . 

true,  truth  .  .  . 

turn . 

twenty . 

twilight . 

two . 


.teseremuwana 

.seni 

.tuku 

muerekong 
.tcenikong 
.seremu 
.tore 
.yai 
.maka 
.yai 
.pe,  bia 
.  kawai 
.sereripe 
.itcepepalu 
.unu 

.imokazang 

.uye 

.tarimatebe 
.  yeye 
.yairerong 
.erate 

.  tiwingpermonogong 
.patabu 

.sagoni 


uncle . 
under 
up.  .  . 
urine . 


papai 

•  yon 

.ikanima 

.uzu 


vagina, 
venus. . 
very . . . 
view. . . 
village, 
virgin  . 
vulture 


.umone 
.  kaiwona 
.fuguru 
.yaire 
eute 

amanong 

.watu 


wait . nemetobu 

walk . asareure 

want . yuse,  fai 


136  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

was .  . wanabe 

water . tuna 

way . yeruru 

way . ema 

we . ana 

went . . . alebe 

west . weiwomuwina 

what . ereye 

when . be 

where . anongpata 

which . onong,  onongze 

while . . tane 

while . aimotung 

who . ane 

why . onongbe 

wife . onobu 

will  be . tobeia 

wind . simang 

with . he 

without . kong 

woman . urisang,  uri 

wonder . .tabangke 

word . maimu 

work . eseiyakama 

world . nong 

worse . eribefumbe 

worst . eribefumiberu 

wrath . sakaro 

wrist . jenawekada 

written . emenukesa 

yellow . kosaimatung 

yes . . . ina 

yesterday . komombura 

you . aiyamove,  amura 

you  (pi.) . manatai 

young . manong 

your . aiyamoro 

yours . ayamoni 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


137 


Macusi — English 


a’akare . light 

a’hi . calabash 

aiku . dirty 

aimotung . white 

aiya . fish  poison 

aiyamore . you 

aiyamoro . your 

aka . game 

aketon . old  man 

akiton . . old 

akuka . dove 

akulye . necklace 

akuri . aguti 

alebe . went 

amanong . virgin 

aminge . long 

amuine . heavy 

amura . you 

amutung . pale  white 

ana . we 

anai . corn 

anamuere . ours 

ane . .  .who 

anibe . hot 

anike . give 

anike . little  brother,  jester 

anim  (n.) . drink 

aminge . distant 

anongpata . where 

antebe . descend 

antikei . give  (imp.) 

aparu . flow 

apata . . . place 

apegenakong . all  ye 

apo . firewood 

apowai . fear 

apu . fire 

arai . fish,  pirai 

arairabutafe . rough 


138  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


aranabua . 

arata . . 

aratawaii . 

arawai . 

arifube . 

arimaraka . 

aro . 

aro . 

arong . 

asareure . 

asatobe . 

atawenonggasa .  . 

atcinari . 

ate . 

auta . 

awane . 

awanung . 

awarunya . 

awomutong . 

ayamoni . 

ayekaramafokong 

ayemari . 

ayepure . 

ayesabote . 

ayese . 

ayeyiwu . 


burn 

monkey,  howling 

string  figure 

now 

hung 

dog 

.head  band,  cotton 

hat 

.louse 

.walk 

repeat 

spread 

flute,  jaguar  bone 

going 

hammock 

are,  you 

dark 

night 

arise 

.yours 

.ask  all 

.path 

.praise 

.mention 

.name 

.house,  your 


bai. . .  . 

be . 

betiza . 
bia.  . .  . 
biatebe 
bu . . .  . 
bura. . 


want 

when 

being 

near  to 

began,  it 

past 

not 


carapiyu . brown 

carapiyu . brown 

cilicili . seed  necklace 

cimerika . little 

cirika . star,  small 

cuiya . red 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS  139 

cimerika . little 

c'r*^a . star,  small 

cuiyu . . 

daruana . carrying  basket 

dominirikong . ministers 

ekormna . fever 

ekongreze . anything 

ema . way 

emawari . devil  dance 

embeng . mindful,  hope 

emenu . color 

emenukesa . written 

emiwary . . evil  one 

ena . fall 

enakatapaire . sun  overhead 

enakufu  (t>.) . fall 

angatung . blue 

ennemang . living,  alive 

entamakan . eat 

entcekeramg . older  brother,  creator 

enuking . coal 

enwake . glory 

epopiyu . purple 

epotori . master 

epurema . pray 

eramuya . look 

erata . sit 

erate . turn 

eremapuya . dawn 

ereye . what 

eribe . bad 

eribefumbe . worse 

eribefumberu . worst 

erire . evil 

erirekong . evils 

eseiyakama . . . work 

etarapukake . open 

etatobe . hear 

eitakamasa . change 


140  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


etobe . 

etunge . 

eturumukabe 

eute . 

ewemuzakabe 
ewetikatong. 
ewetikesabe.  , 
eweyuyai 

ewonze . 

ewumo . 

evvurci . 


formang . 

fiicmrii  . 

. is 

. singular 

futi . 

fntii  . 

. plural 

. know 

orprpta  . among 

guretanakong . 

. among  you 

haxj  . 

. leaf 

ibia  . 

. her 

ikanima . 

ikubutongtitabe . 

ikuzakong . 

imaukauya . 

imenikouya . 

imo  . 

. forgive 

. images 

. build 

. paint 

. head  man 

imokazang . . 

ina  . 

. took 

. yes 

ina.  . 

. shadow 

inafe . . . 

inanibe . 

inepari . 

. 

. indeed 

. already 

. forever 

. .  .again 

inimuzakabe . 

injenangyemanemurerer . 

ipaitori . 

ipalabe . 

. raised,  he 

. theirs 

. servants 

. in  place  of 

.be 

.sound 
.  loosened 
.village 
•  get  up 
.finish 
.finish 
.daily 
.get 

.setting  sun 
.cousin 


FARABEE— THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


141 


|Pe . him 

|p£ku . great 

ipekure . the  great 

'Pu . come,  to 

ipupe . came 

iramakato . absolution 

irumaka . loosen 

irumakake . loose 

itcepepaln . toe 

itetecing . breath 

iwabu . killed 

iwakiribe . glad  he  is 

iwangbe . hungry 

iwarerong . ourselves 

iweuya . kill,  shoot 

iweyuyai . daytime 

iwo . lizard 

iwuita . creek 

iwuza . be 

iya . he 

jari . root 

jenawikada . wrist 

ka . sky 

kaikara . flute,  bamboo 

kaikuci . jaguar 

kaitcere . in  front 

kaitcere . even,  evenness 

kaiwona . venus 

kaiwuno . star,  large 

kaku . . sav 

kamara . medicine,  stomach 

kami . fish  net 

kamo . game 

kanaua . canoe 

kanebe . quickly 

kapo . heaven 

kapoi . moon 

karamafoba . ask,  may 

karame . tell 


142  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — -ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

kararawa . macaw 

karia . bowstring 

karimetobe . seek 

kariwinake . fowl 

karne . no 

kartama . salve 

kasamifu’uya . ask 

katama . salve 

katimreure . run 

katSng . spirit 

katumba . dead 

katurufu . cloud 

kawai . tobacco 

kawapa . basket 

kaware . horse 

kawumbang . floor 

kaz . horizon,  circle 

kazawing . place  name 

ke . with 

kenaima . spirit,  evil 

keuteseti . future 

kitcire . cassava 

kiwang . . fat 

kiwi . nut  rattle 

koko . grandmother 

komombura . yesterday 

kone . cold 

kong . . . without 

kono . rain 

konobin . dry 

konoro . always 

konoyai . season,  wet 

kosaimatung . yellow 

kosang . long,  time 

kowui . fish  poison,  bark  of  vine 

kowuni . high 

ku . second  person 

kufu . second  person 

kufubina . made,  he 

kufuia . does  he 

kulial . canoe,  dugout 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS  143 

kumara . medicine  for  bowels 

kumike . cold 

kunani . fish  poison 

kunapari . fish  poison,  shrub 

kuningye . . doer 

kunua . arrow,  poisoned 

kura . blow  gun 

kuratu . alligator 

kusa . nose  string 

taku . light  weight 

leokadio . cat’s  cradle 

« 

maikong . coming 

maimu . word 

maka . throw 

make . good 

makong . fox 

makui . spirit 

makwita . down 

mamai . mother,  aunt 

mana . breast 

manang . singular 

manang . are  you 

manata . door 

manati . you 

mang . is,  present,  state  of  being 

manong . young 

mara . gourd  rattle 

matony . for 

merere . it 

merunte . strong 

meye . quiver 

mia . finger 

miatiminauria . ten 

miatoiking . five 

mika . ant 

mo . so 

mo . quiet 

moa . mouse 

moka . apron 


144  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


momo . 

mong . 

more . 

mori . 

moro . 

moro . 

moroi . 

mowanire . 

muerer . 

muerekong . 

mukera . 

muma . 

muna . 

mure . 

mureyamais’sang 

murukunte . 

muta . 

muteru . 


.  .necklace  of  teeth 
.  blood 
.  .peace 
. .brother 
.  .their 
.  .fish 

,  .spider’s  web 
.amen 
.that 
.those 
.she 

•.reed  basket 

.termites 

.child 

.mother  of  children 

.gather 

.month 

.hill 


nafomatig.  . 

naire . 

nekata . 

nemetobu .  . 

nere . 

nifutube .  .  . 

niking . 

niking . 

nikubube. . . 
nommairong 

nong . 

nong . 

nota . 

numka . 

nusandong. . 


present  time 

after 

roof 

wait 

and 

knew 

rather 

only,  except 

did 

lowly 

world 

rainbow 

behind 

fly,  pium 

old  woman 


okai. .  . . 
okaipe. . 
okaituna 
omatang 
onobu . . 
onong. . 


not 

large 

river 

dissemble 

wife 

how 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


145 


onortg.  . 
onongbe 
onongze 
otcinari . 


which 
why 
which 
flute,  bone 


paca . 

pairakaira. . . 

paito . 

paiwai . 

pakonomato. . 

pambe . . 

panaban . 

panebe . 

papai . 

papairupa. . .  . 

parangbe . 

paricari . 

paruru . 

pata . 

patabu . 

patcangera . . . 

patobe . 

patse . 

paucas . 

pawai . 

pe . 

pemongong. . . 

penana . 

penane . 

pendanare 

pendanarenota 

peru . 

piai . 

pici . 

pijayanakong. . 

pika . 

pimi . 

Ping . 

pirakaira . 

plari . 

poikate . 


.  .cow 

. . great  rock 
.  .son  in  law 
.  .drink,  black 
.  .temptation 
,  .like 
.deaf 
•sign 
.uncle 
.skull 
.sick 

.bird  with  red  head 

.banana 

.ground,  earth 

.twilight 

.palm 

.find 

.daughter  in  law 

.dance  society 

.black 

.to,  about 

.person 

.sunrise 

.morning 

.door 

.behind  the  door 
arrow 

medicine  man 

fish  poison,  flat  bush  rope 

catch  you 

pluck 

peppers 

forehead 

great  rock 

spindle  whorl 

help 


146  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


on 

people 

found 

curasow 

medicine,  of  seeds 
sandal 

seed  dance  rattle 

dog,  hunting 

believers 

frog 

heal 


rama . see 

rape . before 

ratwi . other 

rema . same 

renai . day 

rentesa . sits 

repatabu . night 

ronai . medicine,  worm 

. . potato 

sabro . leg  band 

sagoni . two 

sagommiabunatimotai . seven 

sakoro . wrath 

sakrebuna . four 

sakrebunamiabunatimotai . nine 

samanda . die,  to 

samandazang . dead,  the 

sambura . drum 

seni . this 

senikong . these 

seremu . three 

seremumiabunatimotai . eight 

serere . now 

sereripe . today 

sete . but 

seura . bark 

sewumatotong . speaking 

simang . wind 


pona . 

pong . 

poribe . 

powis . 

pua . 

pucaza . 

puiroi . 

pukung . 

purenoag’gong 

puretku . 

puripan . 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


147 


S^a . sand 

skapon . sandbar 

sonanze . hide 

sora . green 

*a . in 

tabangke . wonder 

tabe . said 

tambita . book 

tamonowore . all 

tane . while 

tangsa . girl,  growing 

tanutobe . serve 

tarako . hat 

tare . here 

tarimatebe . treat 

tarimateng . ill  treatment 

taucimba . joy 

taura . knife 

tcenikong . those,  remote 

tcipari . stingray 

tcipirari . iron 

tcipuyeyare . medicine  man’s  leaves 

tcukuya . fish  poison,  shrub 

tcumba . basket 

teberu . name  of  chief 

tekatong . soul 

tenaban . blind 

ter . stone 

terka . rock 

terkaping . mountain 

teseremuwana . third 

teya . hand 

teza . body 

ti . his 

tiekamazang . changed  those 

tikeng . pure 

tikomambe . stop 

timotai . put 

timinaure . all 

timui . stoop 


148  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL. 


timakong . 

tingka . 

tiomatai . 

tiriki . 

tiruma . 

tisamandabe . 

tiwamura . 

tiwarire . 

tiwarirenakong . 

tiwezing . 

tiwinare . 

tiwing . 

tiwingmiabunatimotai 
tiwingpemongong. .  . . 

tize . 

to . 

tobeia . 

toiking . 

toko . 

tom  be . 

tore . 

toya . 

tukangong . 

tuke . 

tuku . 

tukui . 

tuna . 

tunewong . 

tunombe . 

turupu . 

tuwi . 


.mercy 

.thing 

.jesting 

.parrakeet 

.things 

.death,  his 

.forget 

.himself 

.themselves 

.habit 

.once 

.one 

.six 

.twenty 
.ought 
.them 
.will  be 
.one  side 
.down 
.far 
.threat 
.them,  they 
.all  varieties 
.many,  much 
thorn 

.humming  bird 

.water 

.deep 

.slow 

.cloud 

.rattle  of  seeds^ 


u . 

uariban .  . . 

ubia . 

ubipa . 

ucang. . . . 

ui . 

ukadumba 
ukamamu . 
ukuya . . . . 


.my 

.dance 

.have 

.anus 

.mother 

anaconda 

.chest 

.live 

.answer 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


149 


ulota . 

umaka . 

umanate 

ume . 

umele . 

umone . 

umota . 

umpo . 

umu . 

umuri . 

unda . 

ungatcapipe. 

unre . 

unu . 

upa . 

upana . 

upananta . . . 

upapai . 

upi . 

up! . 

upipo . 

upita . 

uponi . 

uprota . 

upu . 

upuni . 

upuribomube 

urali . 

urana . 

urata . 

ure . 

uremurerer. . 

uri . 

uri . 

uribemang.  . 
urikutung.  . . 

urisang . 

usipo . 

utana . 

utci .  .  . . . 

ute . 


.belly 

.buttock 

.nipple 

.neck 

.penis 

.vagina 

.shoulder 

.back 

.son 

.nephew 
.mouth 
.fingernail 
daughter,  mothers 
.tongue 
.grandchild 
ear 

ear  lobe 

head 

brother 

field 

skin 

cheek 

navel 

chest 

foot 

flesh 

health 

.  arrow  poison 

paca 

ribs 

1 

mine 

woman 

me 

female 

blue,  sky 

woman 

hair 

heel 

hip 

house 


150  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


ute . 

uwa . 

uwa . 

uwakerebe .  .  . 
uwetungserere 

uwutisi . 

uyakin’nong. . 

uye . 

uyeko . 

uyemata . 

uyemeku . 

uyenge . 

uyenu . 

uyenusipo. . .  . 
uyenutcipu. .  . 

uyetamu . 

uyimu . 

uyuna . 

uyurapai . 

uzemu . 

uzemu . 

uzu . 


•go 

.feces 

.thanks 

.please 

.sleep 

.sister 

.brothers 

.tooth 

. beard 

.leg 

.arm 

.daughter 

.eye 

.eye  lash 

.eyebrow 

.chin 

.scrotum 

.nose 

.bow 

.elbow 

.knee 

.urine 


waiaiya . 

waiking . 

waineribu . 

waita . 

waiyakaiye . 

wake . 

wakiriton . 

wakube . 

wakubefumbe.  . 
wakubefumberu 

wana . 

wanafu . 

wane . 

wanube . 

waraiokong.  .  .  . 

waraiya . 

waranapi . 

warepang . 


pink 

deer 

all  fours 

fish  trap 

great  tree  of  life 

holy 

love 

good 

better 

best 

mother  in  law 
nephew,  to  marry 
is 

was 

men 

masculine 

storm 

dance 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


151 


wariyo . 

wariyobe . 

wariyorang. .  . 

watu . 

warui . 

wawi . 

we . 

wei . 

weipakawina . 

weira . 

weiwomuwina 

weiyai . 

wekui . 

wenai . 

wenaire . 

werito . 

wetung . 

wezanima.  . .  . 

wine . 

wini . 

wipu . 

wiri . 

witiri . 

woroke . 

wuriyang.  .  .  . 


.man 

.male 

.mother  of  sons 
vulture 
.capabara 
.bead  necklace 
.persons 
.sun 
.east 
tapir 
west 

season,  dry 
record  string 
sake 

follow,  we 

smoke 

sleep 

compassion 

side 

baby,  baby  carrier 

come 

sister 

black  monkey 
parrot 

mother  of  daughter 


ya . 

yafure  . 

yafurube . 

yafurubuia 

yai . 

vai . 

yai  re . 

yairerong . 

yaiwurong.  .  .  . 

yakauya . 

yakuru . 

yamu . 

yamu . 

yamu  eramabu 
yani . 


if 

believe 

believed 

believed 

time 

through 

view 

right,  truth 

accord 

dig 

brother  in  law 
plural 

living  thing 

saw 

spring 


152  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


yano . 

yapijibe . 

yaponope . 

yaposa . 

yapurefowai 

yapurubu . 

yarima . 

yauna . 

yawempona 

yawerong . 

yefuzu . 

yeka . 

yekaritong . 

yembata . 

yembotake . 

yempobe . 

yenafomang.  . .  . 

yenai . 

yenauya . 

yendai . 

yenebe . 

yenereuya  ( v .)  . 

yening . 

yenrakatobe  ( v .) 

yepikong . 

yepotari . 

yeruru . 

yewang . 

yeye . 

yon . . . 

yu . 

yumatebe . 

yunmgbe . 

yung . 

yung . 

yunggong . 

yuse . . 


island 

receive 

seat 

masticate,  bread,  drink 

believe 

loves  he 

move 

river 

sun  at  450 
according 
to  judge 
like 
food 
face 
show 
born 
come 
seek 
.beg 

more  than 
.sick 
drink 
because 
lead 
.lips 

. bracelet 

.custom,  manner 
.heart 
.tree 
.under 
.forest 
.buried 
hearing 
.father 
.of 

.father  of  us 
.want 


zanimanlng 


pity 


WAIWAIS1 


The  Waiwais  were  first  seen  by  Schomburgk2  on  December 
1  5>  1 837,  while  on  his  journey  to  the  sources  of  the  Essiquibo. 
He  visited  three  of  their  villages,  one  sixteen  miles  from  the 
Essiquibo  and  the  others  across  the  Acarai  Mountains  to  the 
south  and  west.  They  were  next  seen  in  1 884  by  Coudreau,3  who 
passed  through  their  western  village  on  his  hasty  trip  through 
the  virgin  forests.  Neither  of  these  travellers  gives  us  much 
information  about  the  people  or  their  culture.  One  says  they 
were  “filthy  dirty,’’  and  the  other  “une  belle  race.”  Our  first 
information  of  real  value  concerning  the  tribe  came  from  John 
Ogilvie  who  visited  two  villages  in  1910  for  the  purpose  of  making 
photographs  and  ethnological  collections  for  Harvard  University. 
It  was  his  collection  that  inspired  our  Museum  expedition  to 
undertake  a  journey  under  his  guidance  to  the  Waiwai  country 
at  the  end  of  1913.4  The  map  at  the  close  of  this  volume  will 
show  the  route  of  travel  and  the  location  of  Waiwai  and  other 
villages. 

Our  party  left  Dada  Nawa,  Melville’s  home  on  the  Rupu- 
nuni,  November  19th,  and  carried  across  to  the  landing  on  the 
Cuduwini  where  we  took  canoes  for  the  Taruma  country  on  the 
Essiquibo. 

At  the  second  Taruma  village  we  fell  in  with  Kiwinik,  the 
Waiwai  chief  from  Wakakulud  on  the  Kamacoko,  or  Blood 
Creek,  an  eastern  branch  of  the  Essiquibo  some  three  or  four 
days  up  river.  T  he  chief  was  making  a  new  field  and  had  come 
down  to  the  Tarumas  to  get  cassava  cuttings  to  plant.  One  of 
his  three  wives  (see  Plate  XII,  H),  was  the  daughter  of  the 
Taruma  chief,  and  hence  the  two  tribes  were  very  friendly.  We 


1  Woyawai,  Ouayeoue. 

2  J.  R.  Geog.  Sec.,  Vol.  VI,  p.  ri. 

3  Etudes  sur  les  Guayanes  et  I’Amazonie,  Vol.  2,  p.  278. 

4  For  account  of  journey  see  Bull.  Geog.  Soc.  of  Phila.,  Vol.  XV,  No.  2,  1917. 

(153) 


154  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

told  him  of  our  plan  to  visit  his  people  and  the  villages  east  of 
the  Acarai  Mountains  and  asked  him  to  go  with  us  and  furnish 
some  men.  He  was  quite  willing  to  go,  but  his  field  was  cleared 
and  the  cuttings  were  ready  and  must  be  planted  at  once  or  they 
would  spoil.  We  offered  to  help  with  the  planting.  As  there 
were  already  fifteen  Indians  in  our  party  and  five  Tarumas  would 
join  him  if  he  would  go,  he  immediately  agreed  to  the  plan. 
They  loaded  the  cassava  cuttings  in  two  Taruma  canoes,  the 
chief  and  his  youngest  wife  took  passage  with  us  in  our  large 
canoe,  and  we  set  out. 

When  we  arrived  at  Kiwinik’s  village  we  found  one  tem¬ 
porary  house  and  two  small  shelters  occupied  by  three  men, 
four  women  and  a  boy  of  ten  or  twelve  years.  The  chief  had 
cleared  some  three  acres  with  his  own  hands  and  we  could 
appreciate  what  it  meant  to  him  for  twenty  four  men  to  join 
together  in  the  planting.  The  women  carried  the  cuttings  to 
the  field  and  distributed  them,  while  the  men  dug  up  the  hills 
with  sharp  sticks  and  planted  the  cassava.  The  greater  part  of 
the  field  was  planted  in  cassava,  the  poisonous  variety,  as  the 
interior  tribes  have  no  sweet  cassava.  Corn  was  planted  along 
the  sides  of  the  logs;  ten  or  a  dozen  pineapples  were  planted 
together  where  there  had  been  a  big  fire;  yams  were  scattered 
here  and  there,  two  or  four  hills  together,  with  poles  for  the 
vines  to  climb  (other  tribes  allow  vines  to  cover  the  ground); 
some  sugar  cane  was  planted  in  the  lowest  ground,  and  a  few 
plantain  and  banana  trees  scattered  about  in  the  blackest  soil. 
There  were  three  varieties  of  bananas;  a  red  one,  a  yellow  one 
with  yellow  inside  and  a  yellow  one  with  white  inside.  The 
second  is  a  worthless  kind  of  thing,  always  has  a  wilted  appear¬ 
ance,  and  the  skin  is  never  plump  and  full. 

By  three  o’clock  the  first  day  the  work  was  done  and  we 
moved  up  stream  about  six  miles,  where  we  prepared  to  leave 
the  river  for  the  long  walk  over  the  mountains.  The  next 
morning,  Saturday,  December  20th,  was  very  cold;  many  of 
the  boys  built  fires  under  their  hammocks.  The  temperature 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CAR1BS 


155 


of  the  air  was  68°  and  that  of  the  water  in  the  small  creek  710. 
The  forenoon  was  spent  in  making  carrying  baskets  and  at 
noon  we  started  on  a  poorly  marked  trail  leading  up  the  valley 
of  the  Kamacoko  toward  the  south.  Monday  at  nine  found 
us  on  the  summit  of  Mount  Harrison,  the  highest  point  in  the 
Acarai  range  which  marks  the  divide  between  the  waters  of 
the  Essiquibo  and  the  Amazon,  at  an  elevation  of  1600  feet. 
We  turned  eastward  and  in  an  hour  reached  the  Yaiimu,  one 
of  the  head  streams  of  the  Trombetas  River.  Continuing  we 
crossed  several  mountains  from  1000  to  1500  feet  high;  forded 
the  Howrokoa  (Caterpillar),  the  Kunuu  (sun)  and  many  smaller 
streams  and  at  five  o’clock  on  December  23d  we  arrived  at 
Malitili  on  the  bank  of  the  Kafaiyaua  or  Armadilla  River.  The 
distance  from  the  Essiquibo  was  about  sixty  miles  as  we  traveled. 

The  village  is  called  Inago  by  the  Tarumas,  and  Koropa- 
tinauaua  by  the  Wapisianas,  meaning  rising  or  high  ground; 
literally,  an  ant  hill  in  the  elbow  of  the  river,  which  really  gives 
the  best  idea  of  the  location.  The  village,  consisting  of  one 
conical  house  and  six  small  square  houses  without  walls  built 
in  a  group  on  the  high  bank,  was  flanked  by  a  cleared  field  of 
eight  or  ten  acres,  about  half  planted  in  cassava  and  the  rest 
being  prepared  for  planting.  This  was  the  ideal  place  for 
cassava,  which  grows  best  on  high  land  in  clay  soil  rather  than 
in  the  black  land  of  the  river  bottom.  There  were  other  fields 
at  some  distance  from  the  village  where  bananas,  papayas  and 
cashews  were  growing.  New  fields  were  being  made  because 
several  Parukutus  had  recently  come  to  join  the  Waiwais  in  the 
village.  It  was  necessary  for  our  men  to  stay  for  a  few  days 
to  rest  before  returning.  We  had  had  thirty  four  days  of 
continuous  hard  labor,  and  I  am  glad  to  say  that  not  one  of  us 
had  been  sick  or  disabled  during  the  whole  journey.  We  were 
a  large  party  to  drop  upon  any  village  to  be  fed;  fifteen  Wap¬ 
isianas,  five  Tarumas,  four  visiting  Waiwais  and  four  whites. 
Fortunately  a  drove  of  wild  peccaries  came  near  the  house  the 
second  day  and  our  men  killed  seven  of  them. 


156  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

We  were  anxious  to  have  messengers  go  to  the  Mapidians, 
four  days’  journey  away,  and  invite  them  to  come  to  see  us. 
The  chief  took  one  man  and  made  the  journey  for  us,  but  upon 
the  condition  that  we  work  in  the  field  while  he  was  gone.  So 
whites  and  Indians  worked  for  our  chief  and  for  our  daily 
bread  for  a  week. 

When  we  reached  the  village,  our  Waiwai  chief  guide  and 
another  Waiwai  went  in  advance  of  the  pack  train,  and,  when 
near  enough  to  hear  the  voices  of  the  people  at  the  village,  the 
chief  gave  a  loud  yell  to  announce  our  coming.  Proper  custom 
requires  one  on  entering  or  leaving  a  village  to  blow  a  flute  but 
we  had  no  flutes  in  our  party.  Some  of  the  Indians  were  in  the 
fields,  others  were  hunting,  but  all  turned  up  soon  and  all  showed 
a  little  surprise  at  seeing  such  a  large  party  of  strangers.  It 
was  the  first  time  that  white  men  had  ever  visited  this  village. 
Ogilvie  had  visited  the  old  village  a  short  distance  away,  and 
many  of  the  people  present  had  seen  him,  but  never  before  had 
they  seen  so  many  men  at  one  time.  They  at  once  did  the 
customary  thing — brought  stools  (Plate  XXXVI)  for  the 
whites  and  the  visiting  chief.  When  we  sat  down,  the  boys  with 
their  packs  sat  down  on  logs  or  on  the  ground.  All  the  men 
and  boys  of  the  village  came  and  sat  or  stood  near.  There  was 
no  noise,  confusion  or  excitement.  Our  visiting  chief  told  the 
chief  of  the  village  all  he  knew  about  us,  who  we  were,  where 
we  came  from,  where  we  were  going  and  what  our  desires  were. 
The  chief  asked  him  many  questions,  and  when  he  was  satisfied 
he  went  to  the  door  of  his  house  where  all  the  women  had 
gathered  with  his  two  wives  and  told  them  all  that  he  had 
learned  about  us.  So  far  no  one  had  spoken  except  the  two 
chiefs.  Apparently  everything  was  quite  satisfactory,  and 
now  the  men  began  to  talk  among  themselves  and  with  our 
men.  Very  soon  the  women  brought  out  four  large  bowls  of 
drink,  each  containing  about  six  quarts  and  set  them  on  the 
ground  near  the  chief.  When  all  were  ready  the  chief  took  up 
the  bowls  one  after  another  and  gave  them  to  our  chief  and  he 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


157 


passed  them  on  to  us  and  to  our  men,  holding  the  bowl  while 
we  drank.  After  we  had  rested  and  refreshed  ourselves  for  a 
half-hour  or  more  the  chief  sent  his  men  along  with  ours  to 
clear  a  camping  place  for  us  across  the  river  in  front  of  the 
village. 

Waiwai  women  make  the  best  cassava  graters  in  the  whole 
region,  and  their  graters  are  used  even  among  the  Wapisianas 
and  Macusis  of  the  savannah.  A  board  about  2x/2  feet  long 
and  i  foot  wide  is  cut  from  the  broad  root  of  the  Aspidospermum 
excelsum,  allowed  to  cure  well  and  one  side  set  with  small  angular 
pieces  of  porphyry.  The  board  is  first  laid  out  by  drawing 


Fig.  6.— Cassava  Grater.  Waiwai 


lines  around  the  quadrangle  the  desired  size  and  then  across 
one  diagonal  filling  up  the  angles  with  parallel  lines  a  quarter 
of  an  inch  apart.  Small  holes  are  then  made  with  the  sharp 
point  of  a  bone  awl  and  the  bits  of  stone  driven  in.  One  end 
is  finished  half  way  and  the  board  turned  for  the  other  half, 
thus  finishing  in  the  middle.  The  whole  surface  is  now  covered 
with  pitch  to  secure  the  stone  and  to  fill  the  pores  of  the  wood. 
Grater  making  constitutes  a  real  industry  among  these  people. 

The  Dance 

When  we  arrived,  the  villagers  were  making  ready  to 
celebrate  a  dance  in  honor  of  the  visiting  Parukutu  people,  who 
had  already  accepted  an  invitation  to  take  up  their  abode  with 


158  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM - ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

the  Waiwais.  Our  coming  in  such  large  numbers  caused  some 
interruption  and  change  in  their  plans,  twenty  eight  hungry 
visitors  must  be  fed  before  anybody  would  think  of  dancing. 
Courtesy  required  that  strangers  should  receive  first  attention. 
The  dance  was  postponed  until  after  our  camp  had  been  made 
and  we  had  rested,  bathed  and  eaten  a  good  supper. 

Just  at  dusk  the  chief  came  to  our  camp  and  asked  us  to 
come  to  the  dance,  which  was  to  begin  immediately.  We  all 
went  and  sat  on  stools  and  logs  around  the  dancing  ground,  a 
smooth  space  between  the  houses  and  in  front  of  the  chiefs 
house.  None  of  our  Tarumas  or  Wapisianas  took  part  because 
they  did  not  know  the  dance.  At  the  beginning,  four  women 
and  three  girls  went  to  the  middle  of  the  ground,  caught  hands 
with  fingers  interlaced  and  began  to  dance  in  a  circle.  The 
leader  carried  a  small  rattle  and  all  sang  in  a  low  voice.  Then 
four  men  and  four  boys  formed  and  danced  in  a  circle  around 
outside  the  circle  of  female  dancers.  The  leader  carried  a  gourd 
rattle  for  keeping  time,  and  all  sang  in  loud  voice  the  same  tune 
the  women  were  singing  but  not  in  unison.  Both  circles  moved 
contra-clockwise,  advancing  and  retreating  as  they  danced,  but 
entirely  independent  of  each  other — like  two  rings  at  a  circus, 
except  that  here  one  ring  was  inside  the  other.  The  rhythm 
was  emphasized  with  the  rattle  and  a  slight  emphasis  with  the 
right  foot.  The  men  varied  their  music  by  allowing  the  leader 
to  sing  alone  at  times,  while  the  others  would  blow  peculiar 
great  trumpets  and  a  flute  of  jaguar  bone;  then  all  would  join 
in  the  chorus.  All  danced  slowly  about  once  around  the  circle, 
or  until  a  certain  place  in  the  music  was  reached,  when  they  took 
a  side  step  and  moved  back  the  circle  sidewise  for  about  a  fourth 
of  the  distance,  then  they  moved  on  as  before.  At  the  stop  in 
the  circle,  as  the  retreat  began,  there  was  a  marked  bow  or 
curtsy,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  next  advance  there  was 
decided  emphasis  placed  upon  the  first  step  and  the  body  was 
thrust  forward.  After  singing  through,  as  indicated  by  the 
music  as  recorded  below,  the  men  would  end  up  with  a  yell  on  a 
high  key,  and  begin  all  over  again. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


159 


Before  the  dance  began  two  young  women  took  their  places 
in  the  centre  of  the  inner  circle,  holding  large  bowls  of  drink. 
At  the  end  of  three  songs  the  men  stopped  dancing  and  the  girls 
brought  the  drink  to  the  leader  first  and  then  to  the  others  down 
the  line.  While  the  men  were  drinking,  the  women  danced 
around  a  small  circle  at  one  side;  and  while  they  were  drinking, 
the  men  danced  at  the  other  side  of  the  ground.  Then  the 
double  dance  was  resumed  as  before.  And  so  the  dancing  and 
the  drinking  continued  for  two  and  a  half  hours.  From  time 


Sung  by  Waiwais  in  Their  Dances 


to  time  one  dancer  would  drop  out  and  another  would  take  the 
vacant  place,  later  on  the  children  dropped  out  for  good  and 
others  came  in. 

After  the  dance  had  gone  on  for  some  time  and  the  first 
drinks  had  been  served,  two  clowns  suddenly  appeared  and 
performed  their  own  dance  up  and  down  on  one  side  of  the 
dancing  ground.  Each  carried  a  tortoise  shell  resonator  and 
a  shrill  whistle.  The  under  lip  of  the  shell  was  coated  with 
black  pitch,  which,  when  struck  a  glancing  blow  with  the  heel 
of  the  right  hand,  adhered  sufficiently  to  cause  the  lip  to  vibrate 
and  to  produce  a  loud  chirping  sound.  The  whistle  was  blown 
on  the  accented  beat  and  the  resonator  struck  on  the  after  beat. 


160  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

The  whistles  were  of  different  sizes  and  tones,  as  were  also  the 
tortoise  shells.  Each  performer  danced  vigorously  in  his  own 
time  making  all  the  noise  and  antic  movements  possible;  one 
behind  the  other  for  ten  yards,  then  facing  each  other,  one 
dancing  backward  and  the  other  forward,  each  with  hollow 
back,  lifting  knees  high  in  the  air  as  if  doing  a  negro  cakewalk. 
Finally  they  were  given  drink  which  kept  them  quiet  for  a  few 
minutes  only.  The  regular  dancers  paid  no  attention  to  them 
but  the  observers  laughed  heartily  at  their  antics. 

The  women  danced  in  their  ordinary  dress  and  without  any 
special  ornaments  or  decoration.  Their  hair,  usually  hanging 
over  their  shoulders,  was  tied  in  a  knot  behind  the  head.  The 
men  and  boys  wore  mantles  of  aeta  palm  leaves  reaching  from 
the  shoulders  to  their  knees  and  headdresses  of  the  same  material 
with  fringes  of  inner  leaves  of  the  same  palm  hanging  down  over 
their  shoulders.  The  leader  carried  a  rattle  in  one  hand  and  a 
ceremonial  club  in  the  other,  the  man  next  to  him  carried  an 
arrow  and  bone  whistle,  the  next  a  decorated  club,  and  all  the 
others  carried  the  trumpets  which  they  blew  constantly  when 
not  singing.  These  trumpets  were  made  of  the  inner  bark  of  the 
cakaralli  tree  ( Secythis  ollaria )  by  winding  a  band  of  bark  in  a 
coil  three  feet  long,  one  inch  in  diameter  at  the  mouth  and  four 
inches  at  the  bottom.  The  band  was  held  from  uncoiling  by 
tying  four  ribs  of  palm  fronds  lengthwise. 

When  the  Waiwai  dance  ended  the  men  of  our  party  were 
asked  to  give  an  exhibition  of  a  Wapisiana  dance.  They 
hesitated,  saying  they  could  not  dance  without  their  women 
folk,  that  the  women  were  good  singers  but  the  men  in  our 
party  were  not,  etc.,  but  finally  said  they  would  do  their  best 
under  the  circumstances.  They  did  well,  but  I  fear  they  felt 
far  short  of  the  standard  set  by  our  hosts,  who  looked  on  with 
great  interest  and  enjoyment.  It  was  really  a  great  event  in 
their  lives.  We  persuaded  the  Waiwais  to  repeat  their  dance 
the  next  day  so  that  I  might  get  some  photographs.  (Plate 
XI,  C.) 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


161 


Drinks 

The  Waiwais  make  two  varieties  of  intoxicating  drink 
which  are  used  at  their  principal  dances.  One  of  the  drinks  is 
practically  the  same  as  the  Wapisiana  paricari  and  manufactured 
in  the  same  way.  The  ordinary  cassava  bread  is  taken  when 
fresh  and  hot,  placed  in  a  basket  and  dipped  in  cold  water.  The 
soggy  bread  is  then  spread  out  in  a  layer  two  inches  thick  and 
five  or  six  feet  across,  on  palm  leaves  or  banana  leaves  which 
have  been  laid  on  the  ground  floor  in  the  darkest  part  of  the 
house.  As  the  layers  are  put  down  they  are  sprinkled  with  the 
pulverized  leaves  of  a  certain  shrub.  When  enough  bread  has 
been  used  the  whole  bed  is  covered  with  palm  leaves  and  allowed 
to  remain  for  four  or  five  days.  The  layers  of  bread  have 
fermented  until  they  are  double  their  former  thickness  and 
covered  with  a  heavy  white  mold.  The  bread  is  very  soft  and 
sweet  at  this  stage  and  small  quantities  are  eaten.  The  rest 
is  mashed  up  with  water  and  stored  in  large  bowls  for  two  or 
three  days,  when  it  becomes  completely  fermented  and  is  mildly 
intoxicating.  It  is  weakened  with  water  to  suit  the  taste,  and 
the  particles  of  bread  strained  out  by  means  of  a  small  basket. 
This  drink  is  not  so  pleasant  to  the  taste  nor  so  intoxicating  as 
the  chichi  made  of  cassava  and  corn  by  the  Conebos  on  the 
Ucayali. 

The  drink  used  on  ordinary  occasions  is  made  of  the  common 
cassava  bread,  a  portion  of  which  is  chewed  and  the  whole 
mixed  with  water.  It  may  be  drunk  on  the  second  day  but 
is  at  its  best  on  the  third  when  it  is  usually  consumed.  This  is 
the  drink  the  visitor  is  always  offered  when  he  enters  a  village. 
It  is  very  refreshing  and  pleasant  to  the  taste.  Fortunately 
the  traveler  develops  an  appetite  for  it  before  he  learns  of  its 
manufacture. 

They  make  a  number  of  unfermented  drinks  by  using 
strained  cassava  juice  or  crushed  fruits.  The  fleshy  covering 
of  the  seeds  of  several  varieties  of  palm  is  used  in  making  a 
thick,  heavy  drink.  The  ripe  fruits  are  soaked  in  water  and 


162  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


rubbed  between  the  hands  until  the  seeds  are  freed.  The  seeds 
and  coarse  particles  are  strained  out  and  the  drink  is  ready  to 
use.  This  is  really  more  of  a  food  than  a  drink  and  is  very 
nourishing.  The  bacaba  ( Enocarpus  distichus )  and  assaii 
( Euterpe  oleracis )  are  most  desired  and  most  abundant. 

Drink  Etiquette 

The  chief  serves  visiting  chiefs  and  passes  the  first  bowls 
to  others  to  serve.  When  the  chief  serves  you  he  brings  a  large 
bowl  which  he  continues  to  hold  while  you  take  hold  of  the  bowl 
also  and  drink  its  contents  without  removing  your  lips.  When 
he  passes  the  bowl  for  you  to  drink  you  may  drink  and  pass  it 
on  but  the  bowl  must  always  come  back  for  you  to  pass  to  the 
chief.  Large  bowls  are  often  placed  in  front  of  the  house  and 
everybody  invited  to  help  himself.  When  one  drinks  he  may 
set  the  bowl  down  or  pass  it  to  another  who  has  approached. 
All  the  drink  was  made  in  the  chief’s  house  and  it  became  a 
sloppy  place.  Women  bring  out  the  bowls  but  never  serve  the 
drink  except  to  men  when  they  are  dancing.  When  we  were 
about  to  leave  the  village  the  women  worked  hard  for  three 
days  making  bread  for  us  to  take  on  our  journey,  but  the  chief 
had  a  lot  of  it  made  up  in  drink  saying  that  we  could  not  possibly 
eat  so  much  bread.  They  themselves  carry  very  little  food 
when  travelling. 

Quipu  and  Record  Sticks 

In  earlier  times,  when  the  Waiwais  gave  a  great  dance  and 
drinking  bout,  they  sent  a  courier  to  the  Tarumas  with  an 
invitation  in  the  form  of  a  bunch  of  knotted  strings.  A  number 
of  strings  made  of  aeta  palm  fibre  were  tied  together  at  one  end; 
one  string  for  each  Taruma  invited,  and  each  string  contained 
as  many  knots  as  there  were  days  intervening  between  the  day 
the  messenger  set  out  until  the  day  the  dance  should  begin.  A 
group  of  knots,  equal  to  the  number  of  days  the  messenger  was 
on  the  way,  were  dyed  a  certain  color;  another  group  of  knots, 
equal  to  the  number  of  days  necessary  for  the  Tarumus  to  make 


FARABEE - THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


163 


preparations  for  the  journey,  were  dyed  another  color  and  a 
third  group  equal  for  the  journey  to  the  Waiwai  village  were 
dyed  still  another  color.  1  he  last  knot  on  the  string  marked 
the  day  for  the  beginning  of  the  dance.  The  whole  lot  of  strings 
were  delivered  by  the  messenger  to  the  chief  of  the  Tarumas, 
who  distributed  them  to  the  persons  invited.  The  messenger 
carried  a  separate  string  for  himself  and  untied  a  knot  each  day. 
A  similar  string  was  kept  by  the  Waiwai  chief  who  untied  a 
knot  each  day  until  the  party  arrived.  The  messenger  might 
return  after  a  suitable  rest  or  he  might  remain  and  go  along 
with  the  Tarumas. 

As  the  dance  would  last  for  several  days,  it  was  necessary 
for  the  Waiwais  to  know  how  many  guests  they  should  have 
in  order  to  provide  sufficient  food  for  them.  Therefore  they 
sent  individual  invitations  rather  than  a  general  invitation  to 
the  whole  tribe  of  Tarumas.  This  method  also  made  the 
Taruma  chief  responsible  for  the  persons  he  brought  with  him, 
that  is,  the  strings  were  all  sent  to  him  and  he  distributed  them 
as  far  as  they  would  go. 

When  we  visited  the  Parukutu  village  on  the  Apiniwau, 
we  met  there  a  Diau  messenger  who  came  to  invite  the  Paru- 
kutus  to  a  dance  at  his  village.  He  carried  a  single  string  of 
knots  and  untied  one  each  day.  When  the  time  arrived  to  go, 
we  went  with  him  and  a  young  Parukutu,  the  only  one  who 
went  from  the  village.  We  spent  eleven  days  on  the  way  and 
arrived  one  day  before  the  conclusion  of  the  dance  just  as  the 
messenger  had  planned  for  us  to  do. 

Hunting  and  Fishing 

The  Waiwais  and  all  the  other  forest  tribes  have  good  fields, 
but  depend  more  upon  the  chase  for  food  than  do  the  Macusis 
of  the  savannah.  There  are  here  the  same  division  of  labor  and 
the  same  cultural  elements  found  among  the  Macusis.  The 
Waiwais  hunt  or  work  in  the  morning  and  lie  in  their  hammocks 
in  the  heat  of  the  day.  We  had  been  working  with  the  chief 


164  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTEIROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

all  morning,  getting  language  and  customs;  he  stopped  short 
and,  looking  up  at  the  sky,  said,  “The  sun  is  high;  it  is  time 
to  take  our  rest.”  The  men  go  hunting  before  day  and  are 
usually  back  before  noon  with  plenty  of  game.  The  dogs  are 
kept  tied  on  platforms  high  above  the  ground  and  are  taken 
out  to  the  forest  after  peccaries  or  tapir  have  been  sighted  as 
already  described.  The  streams  are  so  small  there  are  no  large 
fish,  hence  the  fish  hook  and  bow  and  arrow  are  not  much  used 
for  fishing,  but  the  streams  are  poisoned  instead.  The  forest 
Indians  care  less  for  fish  than  for  game.  The  bows  used  by  the 
Waiwais  are  longer  and  stronger  than  those  used  by  the  Macusis 
or  Wapisianas.  While  hunting  they  carry  the  bow  and  arrows 
in  the  left  hand,  with  free  end  of  the  bow  and  the  points  of  the 
arrows  forward.  The  surplus  string  is  wound  around  the  end 
of  the  bow  which  is  held  down  when  shooting.  They  hold  the 
bow  in  a  vertical  position,  and  pull  with  three  fingers  on  the 
string,  holding  the  arrow  between  the  thumb  and  index.  The 
Wapisianas  pull  with  the  thumb  and  index  finger  only. 

Nearly  all  the  interior  tribes  have  a  few  chickens,  but  they 
are  not  eaten  because  they  are  unclean.  They  are  kept  solely 
as  song  birds.  The  people  enjoy  hearing  them  crow  in  the  early 
morning.  At  one  village  we  found  three  cocks  and  one  hen,  at 
another  one  of  each,  at  another  three  cocks  only.  When  the 
cocks  crow  the  people  waken  up,  talk  a  few  minutes  and  go  to 
sleep  again.  The  curassow  crows  at  about  the  same  time,  but 
he  cannot  be  heard  at  a  distance,  so  the  hunter  uses  the  domestic 
cock  for  an  alarm. 

Houses 

The  large  communal  house  was  66  feet  in  diameter,  a  perfect 
cone,  60  feet  high  to  the  apex.  The  centre  pole  continued  35 
feet  above  the  house  and  was  topped  with  a  Brazil  nut.  Two 
feet  above  the  top  of  the  house  a  canopy  5  feet  in  diameter, 
attached  to  the  pole,  covered  the  smoke  hole  in  the  roof.  The 
framework  was  interesting  and  unlike  any  other  met  with  among 
any  of  the  tribes,  yet  1  imagined  it  was  the  ancient  type.  There 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


165 


was  a  centre  pole  95  feet  high,  six  main  supports  in  a  circle  18 
feet  from  the  wall  and  20  feet  high,  with  notched  tops  to  carry 
the  circular  plate,  and  seventeen  outer  supports  4  feet  from  the 
wall  and  8  feet  high  to  carry  the  lower  plate.  The  poles  used 
for  the  plates  had  been  split  and  bent  to  form  perfect  circles. 
Twenty  eight  main  rafters  were  lashed  firmly  to  the  centre 
pole  and  to  the  two  plates,  while  an  equal  number  were  lashed 
between  the  plates,  all  extending  to  within  5  feet  of  the  ground. 
Laths  were  tied  to  the  rafters  2  feet  apart.  The  wall  was  sup¬ 
ported  by  small  poles  set  into  the  ground  2^2  feet  apart  and  tied 
to  the  lower  lath.  To  these  two  bush  ropes  or  vines  were  tied 
two  feet  apart.  The  wall  was  then  made  by  tying  upright  palm 
leaves  to  the  bush  ropes.  The  roof  was  made  of  palm  leaves  laid 
up  and  down  with  the  leaves  of  the  fronds  all  bent  to  one  side. 
It  was  begun  at  the  bottom,  the  leaves  reaching  up  over  three 
laths.  The  second  course  overlapped  the  lower  3  feet. 

There  were  two  doors,  one  on  the  east  and  the  other  on  the 
west.  The  one  on  the  west  was  for  the  women  particularly, 
while  the  other  was  used  by  both  sexes  because  the  guest  house 
was  thirty  yards  east  of  the  main  house,  and  it  was  necessary 
for  the  women  to  carry  out  food  and  drink  for  the  guests.  The 
doors  were  2  feet  wide  and  5  feet  high,  covered  -at  times  with 
loose  palm  leaves. 

The  peculiar  feature  is  yet  to  be  noted.  The  centre  pole, 
having  served  its  purpose  in  the  construction  of  the  house,  was 
cut  off  nine  feet  from  the  ground  floor  and  decorated  with  a 
design.  The  removal  of  the  pole  made  available  the  whole 
central  portion  of  the  floor  as  a  general  workshop  for  the 
women.  There  were  no  partitions,  but  each  family  had  its 
own  section  with  its  own  fireplace,  swinging  rack  for  food, 
hammock  posts,  and  against  the  wall  its  own  dog  platform. 

The  visitors’  house  was  used  also  as  a  workshop  for  the  men. 
It  was  20  feet  in  diameter  and  18  feet  high,  without  side  walls. 
Visiting  women  were  always  entertained  in  the  big  house. 

In  the  present  new  village  there  is  one  round  house  for  the 
chief  and  his  two  wives  and  a  number  of  small  shelters  without 


166  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


side  walls  for  the  other  families.  There  is  no  visitors’  house, 
so  it  was  necessary  for  us  to  camp  in  the  forest,  where  we  could 
have  the  trees  for  hanging  our  hammocks.  As  it  was  the  dry 
season  it  did  not  matter. 

All  refuse  about  the  house  is  gathered  up  and  placed  on  a 
dump  ten  yards  away  where  it  is  burnt  at  irregular  intervals. 
By  this  method  the  village  is  kept  in  fairly  good  condition. 

The  Arts 

The  Waiwais  decorate  their  bodies  with  color  and  ornaments 
without  special  significance.  The  body  is  usually  painted  all 
over  with  a  dull  brick  red  paint,  while  the  face  is  not  painted  in 
solid  color,  but  only  in  the  proper  designs  in  a  much  lighter  shade 
of  red.  These  designs  are  the  same  as  those  found  on  ceremonial 
clubs,  baskets,  knife  handles,  whistles  and  beaded  aprons. 
They  have  no  relation  to  a  totem  of  the  tribe  or  a  personal 
protector  of  the  individual.  The  same  man  may  from  time  to 
time  use  any  or  all  of  the  designs.  They  seem  to  have  no  sig¬ 
nificance  other  than  to  satisfy  the  individual  taste  for  beauty. 
The  designs  have  their  origin  in  nature,  in  the  peculiar  markings 
of  animals  or  plants.  The  women  do  not  paint  the  face  except 
on  special  occasions.  Among  the  Waiwais  there  was  one  fine 
looking  young  fellow  who  was  very  proud  of  his  physical  appear¬ 
ance.  Every  morning  after  taking  his  bath,  except  when  he  was 
going  to  work  or  to  hunt,  he  would  oil  and  comb  his  beautiful 
long  hair,  twenty  eight  inches  in  length,  and  slip  on  his  well¬ 
decorated  hair  tube;  then  he  would  paint  his  face  with  a  variety 
of  designs.  In  the  evening  he  would  wash  it  all  off  and  in  the 
morning  put  on  other  designs,  so  changing  his  appearance  that 
it  was  difficult  to  recognize  him.  He  used  more  paint  than  all  the 
others  combined.  The  Waiwai  chief  and  one  of  the  Parukutus 
were  usually  painted.  The  Parukutu  and  the  Diau  women 
used  more  paint  than  those  of  other  tribes,  but  here  again  it 
was  a  matter  of  the  better  looking  ones  who  paid  most  attention 
to  personal  decoration.  It  often  happened  that  these  young 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


167 


women  were  the  ones  selected  to  chew  the  cassava  for  making 
their  intoxicating  drinks  and  they  wore  the  permanent  tattoo 
marks  at  the  corners  of  the  mouth.  In  Plate  XL  a  number 
of  the  face  paintings  have  been  grouped  for  study  in  con¬ 
nection  with  the  original  drawings  in  Fig.  7,  and  the  copied 
designs  in  Fig.  8. 

One  day  when  I  was  making  rough  sketches  of  houses  and 
designs  on  various  objects  about  the  village,  I  noticed  a  boy 
who  seemed  greatly  interested.  He  had  never  seen  a  pencil  or 
book  before  but  he  apparently  appreciated  the  fact  that  I  was 
doing  a  very  poor  job  and  was  anxious  to  help  me  out.  So  I 
gave  him  a  note  book  and  a  pencil  which  he  immediately  began 
to  use.  He  did  not  recognize  the  value  of  the  round  point  of 
the  pencil  but  used  it  as  he  used  a  splint  of  bamboo  in  laying  on 
face  designs,  that  is,  by  drawing  the  point  along  after  the  slanted 
pencil.  After  several  hours  of  intermittent  work,  extending 
over  three  days,  and  consultation  with  others,  he  succeeded  in 
making  some  thirty  drawings.  About  half  of  the  more  char¬ 
acteristic  ones  are  reproduced  in  Fig.  7.  Many  of  these  will 
be  recognized  at  once  as  animals.  His  drawings  show  the 
common  difficulties  that  all  peoples  have  experienced  when 
attempting  to  reproduce  animal  forms.  The  distinguishing 
features  of  some  may  be  viewed  best  in  profile  and  others  in 
the  dorsal  aspect.  Some  animals  possess  characteristics  of  form 
or  color  markings  which  serve  best  for  their  identification. 
Plants  and  many  other  things  in  nature  are  most  accurately 
described  by  using  their  peculiarity  of  form  or  feature. 

In  Fig.  7  are  reproduced  a  number  of  the  boy’s  original 
drawings  along  with  his  names  for  them.  One  who  is  acquainted 
with  the  objects  will  at  once  recognize  them.  It  is  interesting 
to  note  that  the  figures,  although  drawn  with  a  pointed  pencil, 
are  all  angular.  This  fact  together  with  the  cross  hatching  of 
some  of  the  objects  would  indicate  that  he  drew  from  his  memory 
of  the  figures  as  they  appeared  in  basketry  rather  than  from 
sight  of  the  objects  in  life.  As  it  would  be  difficult  to  distinguish 


Fig.  7. — Original  Drawings,  Waiwai 


1 .  — Jaguar 

2. — Squirrel 

3. — Dog 

4.  — Howling  monkey 

5.  — Great  sloth 

6.  — Scorpion 

7.  — Lizard 

8.  — Lines  on  a  small  sloth 


9. — Acouri 

10.  — Frog 

1 1 .  — Fish  tails 

12.  — Fly’s  eyes 

13.  — Wasp’s  nest 

14.  — Bamboo 

1 3. — Palm  leaf 
16. — Palm  leaf 


--I  Lg  L-| 


P1  S  cd 


rEJrHJrEJ 


6 


10 


U\ 


.u] 


.Ml 


m 


Lfl 


Ln 


-p 

czr 

|fJ 

N 

cz 

N 

n 


8 


10 


12 


or 


or 


rD 

ns 

rH 

c 

_ 

r 

1 

13 


14 


Fig.  8. — -Designs  Copied  from  Various  Objects  Among  Many  Tribes 

1.  — Small  sloth  design.  Beaded  apron.  Apalaii 

2.  — Small  sloth  design.  Beaded  apron.  Apalaii 

3.  — Acouri  design.  Beaded  apron.  Apalaii 

4.  — Wasp’s  nest  design.  Beaded  apron.  Apalaii 

5.  — Bamboo  design.  Beaded  apron.  Wapisiana 

6.  — Great  sloth  design.  Painted  stool.,  Waiwai 

7.  — -Small  sloth  design.  Painted  flute.  Wapisiana 

8.  — Bamboo  design.  Beaded  apron.  Diau 

9.  — Acouri  and  small  sloth  designs.  Painted  on  knife  handle.  Waiwai 

10.  — Lizard  design.  Palm  leaf  fan.  Apalaii 

1 1.  — Lizard  design.  Painted  on  bark  arm  band.  Waiwai 

12. — Palm  leaf  design.  Beaded  apron.  Apalaii 

13.  —  Bamboo  design.  Margin  of  basket.  Ataroi 

14.  — Lizard  design.  Carved  on  wooden  club.  Waiwai 

15.  — Combined  design.  Painted  centre  pole  in  house.  Waiwai 


170  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

the  forms  of  some  of  the  animals,  a  characteristic  part  or  color 
marking  was  used  instead;  a  fly’s  eyes,  an  ant’s  jaws,  an  alli¬ 
gator’s  scales,  fish  spines,  a  peccary’s  ribs  and  the  color  patterns 
of  the  acouri,  sloth,  snakes,  palms,  bamboos  and  canes. 

Many  of  these  designs  appear  in  recognizable  form  woven 
into  men’s  trinket  baskets,  carrying  baskets,  trays  and  sieves; 
carved  and  painted  on  knife  handles,  whistles,  clubs,  stools  and 
mortars;  and  woven  in  women’s  bead  aprons  and  combs. 
The  relation  between  warp  and  woof  render  it  impossible  to 
make  curved  lines  or  diagonals  except  in  step  patterns.  The 
figures  are  thus  compelled  to  assume  rectangular  forms  which 
make  it  impossible  to  reproduce  realistic  objects  true  to  nature. 
Distinguishing  features  must  be  exaggerated  in  order  to  insure 
the  proper  interpretation. 

The  aprons  worn  by  the  women  have  designs  worked  out 
in  different  colored  beads.  The  Macusis  seem  to  prefer  the 
apron  entirely  covered  with  a  single  design.  Plate  XXV,  A 
shows  the  repeated  doubleheaded  scorpion  design.  The  in¬ 
terior  tribes  prefer  the  body  of  the  apron  plain  with  running 
border  designs.  Plate  XXV,  B  has  a  wasp’s  nest  design  top 
and  bottom,  while  Plate  XXI  has  a  palm  leaf  design  at  top  and 
a  double  line  of  designs  at  the  bottom,  composed  of  the  small 
sloth  and  the  wasp’s  nest  patterns. 

Fig.  8  contains  fifteen  of  the  more  common  designs 
selected  from  the  decoration  of  things  in  common  use.  By 
comparing  these  designs  with  the  original  drawings  in  Fig.  7 
it  will  be  seen  that  many  of  them  are  the  repeated  fragments 
of  the  originals.  Sometimes  the  design  is  modified  to  fit  the 
surface  of  the  object  to  be  decorated.  The  cross  hatching 
indicative  of  basketry  origin  often  persists  in  carvings  on  cere¬ 
monial  clubs,  whistles  and  knife  handles.  Usually  a  single 
design  is  repeated  in  a  continuous  border,  but  occasionally  a 
figure  is  composed  of  a  combination  of  several  designs  as  in 
No.  15,  Fig.  8,  which  was  copied  from  a  painted  design  on  the 
centre  pole  in  a  large  Waiwai  house.  Many  of  these  same 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


171 


realistic  designs  are  used  in  personal  decoration  as  shown  in 
the  portraits. 

All  the  designs  used  by  these  interior  tribes  had  their  origin 
in  realism,  and  many  of  them  were  used  first  in  basketry  and 
later  copied  directly  for  use  on  other  objects.  Each  individual 
adorned  his  own  productions;  art  had  not  become  specialized 
in  the  hands  of  a  few  who  excelled  in  it.  Men  and  women  used 
the  same  designs  in  personal  decoration  and  on  their  belongings. 
There  is  no  evidence  of  fetishism  or  totemism,  neither  ancestor 
nor  animal  worship.  Religion  was  undeveloped  and  simple  in 
form,  hence  art  lacked  its  greatest  inspiration.  The  tribes  lived 
far  apart  and  had  little  stimulating  contact  with  their  neighbors. 
Their  art  had  hardly  passed  the  physical  aspect  in  which  pleas¬ 
urable  sensations  are  produced  by  the  harmony  of  lines  and  the 
blending  of  colors.  Art  was  applied  to  the  person  for  embel¬ 
lishment  and  to  the  few  articles  in  daily  use  for  ornament. 
Their  bodies  were  decorated  with  color  and  their  objects  orna¬ 
mented  with  designs  without  any  special  significance. 

The  art  is  in  such  an  early  stage  of  development  that  all  the 
steps  in  its  evolution  can  be  directly  traced  with  certainty. 
Realism,  conventionalism,  symbolism  and  geometric  designs 
are  all  present,  and  separate  elements  are  often  used  for  purely 
artistic  purposes.  The  fundamental  ideas  underlying  the  signifi¬ 
cance  of  all  designs  are  remembered,  and  traced  to  natural 
forms.  This  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  and  important  cases 
on  record  proving  the  origin  of  art  from  realism. 

The  Dead 

The  Waiwais  and  the  other  forest  tribes  cremate  the  dead. 
When  anyone  dies  the  relatives  and  friends  take  the  body  in  its 
hammock  hung  on  a  pole,  carry  it  away  into  the  forest,  build  a 
heap  of  logs  and  brush,  lay  the  body  on  top  and  set  fire  to  the 
heap.  When  the  fire  has  burned  out  they  gather  up  the  ashes 
and  fragments  of  bones  in  a  large  drink  pot,  cover  it  with  a  bowl 
and  leave  it  on  the  site  without  other  covering;  or  a  hole  is  dug 


172  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


in  the  centre  of  the  heap  of  ashes,  the  fragments  of  bones  thrown 
in  and  a  large  pot  turned  upside  down  over  them.  Sometimes 
palm  leaves  are  thrown  over  the  heap  of  ashes  and  a  pot 
inverted  above  the  charred  bones.  Personal  things  are  burned 
with  the  dead:  A  man’s  ornaments,  necklaces,  shoulder  basket, 
containing  comb,  paint,  knife  and  arrow  making  implements; 
his  breech  cloth  and  hammock  are  all  placed  with  the  body  but 
his  bows  and  arrows  are  broken  and  thrown  away  in  the  forest. 
A  woman’s  ornaments,  her  work  basket,  containing  spindle 
whorls  and  implements  for  making  pottery,  her  aprons  and 
hammock  are  burned  with  her  but  her  cooking  pots,  food  bowls, 
water  jars  and  calabashes  are  broken  and  the  fragments  scattered. 

The  people  would  never  die  if  it  were  not  for  enemy  spirits 
in  the  shape  of  Kenaimas  or  for  the  influence  of  the  medicine 
men  of  enemy  tribes.  The  enemy  may  only  touch  them  or 
blow  upon  them  or  anything  belonging  to  them  to  cause  sickness 
and  death.  Hammocks  are  put  away  when  not  in  use.  A 
wornout  carrying  basket  is  never  thrown  away,  it  is  burned  so 
the  enemy  cannot  blow  upon  it  and  cause  backache.  On  our 
journey  when  it  became  necessary  to  make  new  baskets  the  old 
ones  were  very  carefully  burned.  The  loose  hair  combings  are 
cut  up  fine  and  scattered  away  from  the  village. 

Origin  of  the  Race 

All  the  interior  tribes  have  variants  of  the  same  story  of  the 
origin  of  the  human  race.  Two  brothers  were  living  together 
in  the  interior  of  the  forests  on  what  is  now  known  as  the  Cala¬ 
bash  River,  the  Bonawau,  a  branch  of  the  Apiniwau  at  the  head¬ 
waters  of  the  Trombetas.  The  brothers  believed  there  was  a 
woman  in  a  certain  pool  in  the  Bonawau  and  they  went  together 
in  a  boat  to  fish  for  her.  They  used  for  hooks  the  lower  jaw¬ 
bone  of  the  pacu  ( myletus  pacu),  cut  off  and  sharpened  on  one 
side.  They  fished  for  many  hours  without  success;  the  elder 
brother,  becoming  weary,  fell  asleep,  and  while  he  slept  the 
younger  brother  caught  the  woman,  took  her  to  his  leaf  shelter 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


173 


and  returned  to  the  boat  before  his  brother  awoke.  Now  it 
happened  that  the  elder  brother  had  a  fish  trap,  of  the  funnel 
type,  set  just  below  a  fall  between  two  pools  in  the  river.  Every 
morning  he  went  to  the  trap,  but  something  had  been  there 
before  he  arrived  and  had  removed  the  fish.  So  he  placed 
a  screech  owl  on  top  of  the  trap  to  watch  for  the  thief.  Many 
fish  fell  into  the  trap  and  just  before  daybreak  some  strange 
animal  somewhat  resembling  a  man  came  along  to  the  trap  and 
removed  the  fish,  but  before  doing  so  it  hung  the  crown  or 
headdress  it  was  wearing  on  the  top  of  the  trap  not  noticing  the 
owl.  The  crown  went  right  over  the  owl’s  head  and  he  promptly 
flew  away  with  it  to  the  elder  brother  and  told  him  what  he 
had  seen  and  what  had  happened.  From  the  owl’s  account,  the 
elder  brother  knew  that  the  animal  was  the  woman  for  whom 
they  had  been  fishing  and  he  was  very  anxious  to  find  her  and 
to  have  her  for  himself.  He  thought  she  would  come  at  once  for 
her  crown  and  follow  after  him  in  order  to  get  it.  He  took 
the  crown  and  went  across  country  to  a  mountain  top  and 
from  there  started  up  into  the  sky.  The  woman  came  in  search 
of  her  crown.  Some  people  in  a  village  told  her  that  some  one 
carrying  her  crown  had  gone  up  above.  She  followed  up  into 
the  sky  and  after  passing  two  villages  where  the  people  told 
her  they  had  seen  some  one  carrying  her  crown,  she  finally 
came  to  a  village  where  she  found  the  elder  brother  with  her 
crown.  The  elder  brother  caught  her,  made  her  his  wife  and 
brought  her  back  to  the  forests  where  they  became  the  pro¬ 
genitors  of  the  present  race  of  Indians. 

The  Sacrifice  of  the  Maiden 

The  trail  between  the  Waiwai  villages  passed  by  a  small 
lake  a  half  mile  wide  and  a  mile  long,  in  the  depths  of  the 
forest  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  Acarai  Mountains.  Some 
time  before  our  visit  there  had  been  a  great  forest  fire  which 
had  killed  all  the  trees  around  the  lake  and  to  a  long  distance 
along  the  valley  to  the  west.  The  large  trees  had  fallen  in  such 


174  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

profusion  that  we  had  difficulty  in  crossing  above  the  lake. 
The  men  lost  the  trail  and  had  great  trouble  to  find  it  again 
on  the  other  side.  The  ground  was  so  soft  we  had  to  walk  on 
the  tree  trunks.  There  were  some  ducks  in  the  lake  and  we 
tried  in  vain  to  get  them.  That  night,  at  our  camp,  we  were 
talking  about  all  the  series  of  troubles  and  ill  luck  we  had 
had  in  passing  the  lake.  Then  the  Waiwais  told  us  that  it  was 
due  to  the  evil  spirit  of  the  lake.  A  long  time  ago  this  spirit 
killed  people  and  it  was  dangerous  to  go  near  the  lake.  So 
many  of  the  Waiwais  were  killed  that  it  seemed  the  whole  tribe 
would  soon  be  destroyed.  They  called  upon  the  spirit  to  see 
what  could  be  done  to  save  their  people.  The  spirit  told  them 
he  would  kill  no  more  people  if  they  would  sacrifice  to  him  their 
most  beautiful  young  woman.  They  selected  a  beautiful 
virgin  and  threw  her  into  the  lake  where  she  still  lives  with  the 
evil  spirit.  None  of  the  Waiwais  have  been  killed  since  then, 
and  they  travel  around  the  lake  without  fear  of  harm. 

Paiufon  Mountain 

A  long  time  ago  the  Karap  Indians,  who  lived  far  to  the 
southwest  of  the  Waiwais,  made  an  expedition  against  the 
Waiwais  for  the  purpose  of  securing  women  and  slaves.  The 
Waiwais  were  overcome  and  driven  from  their  country.  A  few 
of  them,  however,  escaped  by  climbing  up  the  steep  side  of 
Paiufon,  a  mountain  considered  too  steep  for  anyone  to  scale. 
The  Karaps,  thinking  they  had  killed  or  captured  all  the  Wai¬ 
wais,  went  away  to  their  own  country.  The  Waiwais  left  on 
the  top  of  the  mountain  built  a  house  and  cleared  a  field  there. 
They  got  their  water  from  a  stream  on  the  northeast  side  of  the 
mountain.  Many  seasons  afterward  some  Karaps,  when  passing 
by  the  mountain,  heard  the  sound  of  whistles  from  the  top  and 
thus  they  learned  that  some  Waiwais  had  escaped  them.  They 
at  once  came  in  large  numbers  and  made  an  attack  but  the 
Waiwais,  having  such  a  strong  position,  finally  succeeded  in 
driving  the  Karaps  off  with  great  loss.  Since  then  the  Waiwais 


FARABF.E — THE  CENTRAL  CARIES 


175 


have  never  been  attacked  by  any  people,  and  they  look  upon 
Mount  Paiufon  as  their  deliverer. 

On  December  29,  1913,  John  Ogilvie  and  I,  accompanied 
by  one  Ataroi,  one  T aruma,  two  Wapisianas,  one  Parukutu  and 
five  Waiwais  climbed  Paiufon  Mountain  and  secured  a  mag¬ 
nificent  view  of  the  whole  region  except  to  the  northward.  The 
round  point,  thirty  feet  across,  stands  up  about  1200  feet  above 
the  general  level  of  the  surrounding  country.  In  front  there 
is  a  vertical  rock  wall,  impossible  to  scale,  while  at  the  back  there 
is  a  steep  slope  extending  to  the  plain  a  mile  away.  We  were 
unable  to  find  any  evidence  of  a  house  site  or  extended  occupa¬ 
tion  on  the  mountain;  yet  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  Waiwais 
took  refuge  there  and  defended  themselves  against  their  enemies. 
It  is  the  highest  mountain  in  the  neighborhood  and  the  only  one 
with  steep  sides.  It  is  the  only  one  distinguished  with  a  name. 
We  could  see  eight  others  a  thousand  feet  or  more  high,  but  the 
Waiwais  with  us  had  no  names  for  them.  They  pointed  out 
the  direction  of  a  trail  which  led  from  their  village,  six  days’ 
journey,  to  the  Trombetas  River.  We  could  see  a  line  of  moun¬ 
tains  extending  north  and  south  beyond  the  Trombetas.  We 
talked  of  taking  the  trail  to  the  river,  but  the  Indians  said  no 
one  lived  along  the  river  because  there  were  so  many  rapids 
they  could  not  travel  in  canoes,  and  the  country  was  too  moun¬ 
tainous.  They  would  not  go  with  us. 

The  Wooden  Whistles 

A  long  time  ago  some  men  were  hunting  in  the  mountains 
far  away  from  home  and  they  heard  a  peculiar  whistling  noise 
which  they  could  not  understand.  They  were  so  frightened 
they  could  not  go  on  and  learn  the  cause  of  it.  At  other  times 
other  hunters  heard  the  noise  and  were  afraid.  At  last  a  medi¬ 
cine  man,  a  piaima,  said  he  would  go  and  see  what  it  was  that 
made  the  noise.  He  went  alone  and  after  several  days  returned, 
saying  that  he  had  found  a  peculiar  wooden  whistle  in  the  moun¬ 
tains  which  made  a  most  remarkable  sound.  He  made  a  whistle 


176  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


like  the  one  he  had  seen.  It  was  the  first  musical  instrument 
the  Waiwais  ever  had  (see  Plate  XXXV,  A).  It  is  no  longer 
in  use,  and  no  one  knows  how  to  play  it.  Ogilvie  found  a  part 
of  one  at  a  deserted  house,  and  one  of  the  old  men  knew  what 
it  was  and  had  some  made  for  us.  It  is  made  of  a  solid  kidney¬ 
shaped  block  of  wood  by  cutting  a  deep  hole  in  the  side,  drilling 
a  tongue  hole  to  the  edge  and  covering  the  hole  in  the  side 
with  the  end  of  a  gourd  as  a  sounding  box. 


yw — a 

tffci 

^  V 


^6 


J) 


X 


Fig.  9. — Waiwai  Whistles 


Future  of  the  Tribe 

There  are  only  five  pure  blood  Waiwais  remaining;  the 
chief  and  one  of  his  wives  on  the  British  side  of  the  Acarai  Moun¬ 
tains  and  the  chief  and  two  boys  on  the  Brazilian  side.  The 
village  on  the  British  side  has  three  men,  one  boy  and  four 
women.  The  chief  has  taken  a  wife  from  the  Tarumas  and  he 
will  soon  become  the  chief  of  the  Tarumas.  Thus  the  Waiwais 
will  disappear  and  all  will  be  known  as  Tarumas.  On  the 
Brazilian  side  there  are  in  the  village  nine  men,  eleven  boys, 
six  women  and  eight  girls.  All  the  women  and  girls  are  Paru- 
kutus  so  the  present  generation  will  see  the  end  of  pure  blood 
Waiwais,  but  the  village  with  the  other  Parukutus  coming  in 
will  continue  to  be  known  as  Waiwais.  The  only  possibility 
for  the  birth  of  another  pure  blood  is  with  the  chief  and  his 
wife  on  the  British  side  but  their  offspring  in  the  future  are 
most  likely  to  be  known  as  Tarumas. 


VOCABULARY 

English — Waiwai 


acouri . 

acouri,  small 

aguti . 

alligator.  .  .  . 
anaconda . .  . 
ant  bear.  . . . 
ant’s  jaws. . . 
ant’s  nest .  . . 

anus . 

arm . 

armpit . 

aunt . 


.hakli 

.fackiemiteu 
.packi 
.  watawa 
.  malikatoiko 
.  hama’atci 
.tikwiyonato 
.  so’oro 
.  boloko 
.kepa’ala 
.keyalele 
.yememe 


back . 

bamboo . 

bank  of  river . 
basket,  double 

beetle . 

belly . 

blood . 

braid . 

breast . 

brother . 

bushmaster . . . 
buttock . 


bacele 

waratapi 

tcewawa 

owamginto 

matkanum 

dasesele 

kamacoko 

watwammito 

menatele 

tciwu 

kilinu 

kekunu 


capabara . 

cheek . 

chief . 

child . 

chin . 

clam . 

crab . 

curassow . 

curassow,  barred 


.yewe’ela 
. ketale 
.kiwmik 
.likomo 
ketotcele 
.fo’oto 
tcekawa 
.powici 
.watcinama 


(177) 


178  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


daughter 
deer. .  . . 
deer,  red 


mafia 

pickalo 

koaso 


eagle .  . . 

ear . 

eye . 

eyebrow 


yai’imu 

penale 

keulu 

kebicelola 


father . 

finger . 

fish,  pirai .... 
fish  spines. . .  . 
fish,  tiger.  .  .  . 

fish  trap . 

fish  tail . 

fish  tail  design 

flies . 

foot . 

frog,  green .  .  . 
frog,  tree . 


afafamutha 

kemoretce 

tambari 

wanakaka 

hailasi 

kamili 

ma’ati 

malkolohedmo 
tamatausa 
. ketale 
.  kramoto 
.kidufapa 


grandfather 
granite 
guam . 


walito 

to’onale  tokono 
kuyui 


hair . 

hair,  pubic . 

hand . 

head . 

house . 

house,  communal . 


kepotce 

botci 

ketamomito 

kekamasewe 

mafaliku 

miumu 


jaguar . tcefali 

jaguar,  black . kamara 

jaguar,  spotted . kama’ara 


leg . 

lip . 

lizard,  small 


keholeho 

ketatciwitca 

irapa 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


179 


maam . 

male . 

man . 

man,  old . 

man,  young.  .  . 

maruda . 

moon . 

monkey,  howler 

mother . 

mother,  grand . 
mouse  trap . 


potowa 

kelokomo 

ta’ata 

wali’ilomoto 

kalihamtcau 

marata 

mu’uni 

cifula 

yememe 

ca’atca 

kefulikatco 


nail,  finger 

neck . 

nose . 


kemacesbau 

kehwemule 

kewanale 


otter . waiyawaiya 

otter,  small . saro’oro 


paca . 

palm  leaf . 

palm  leaf  mark . 

peccary  rib . 

penis . 

person . 

powis  jaw . 

pulse . 

puma . 


wi’ibya 

kuroheli 

tcenitamoyam 

fakiautcito 

ku’uno 

ta’ata 

fauyicoyali 

kemikenalcolo 

kosowari 


sand . 

scar . 

scorpion .  .  . 
shallow.  . .  . 
shoulder. .  . 

side . 

sister . 

sloth . 

sloth  design 
sloth  spots . 

son . 

spider . 

squirrel 


hacawa 

kesefalontai 

tcikidi 

penafi 

kumhe 

kawitce 

wa’atci 

tcoholi 

wayimatum 

waiyamamoli 

wahali 

maiyosi 

kamarama 


180  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


stars: 

A.  Grus. . . 
Betelgeux. 
Canopus . . 
Fomalhaut 

Mars . 

Orion . 

Pleiades.  . 

Sirius . 

stone . 

stranger . 

sun . 


cikili 

foinalu 

swaitsfai 

kanakiluli 

waiuiwa 

waiyam 

tciyakoimu 

fuiton 

tokono 

pawana 

kamu 


tapir . 

testicles . 

thigh . 

toad . 

toe,  great 

tongue . 

tooth . 

tortoise . 

tortoise,  small 
turtle . 


.yaiyapu 

.kemuru 

.pete 

.kulukilina 

.keherolehemato 

.kenole 

.keyole 

.waci 

.maiyawaka 

.waiyam 


umbilicus . konoetwe 

uncle . ta’am 


vagina . muna 

vulture . kuru’um 


wasp’s  nest. . . . 

water . 

woman . 

woman,  old .  .  . 
woman,  young, 
wooden  whistle 

worm . 

wrist . 


komalimetceu 

tuna 

wa’acam 

notcokomoto 

ema’asa 

horonto 

kalyiwa 

kemekana 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


181 


NUMERALS 

I. 

tcauoni 

12.  kehilolotakanaiyasoka 

2. 

asa’aka 

13.  hetcemikekelo 

3- 

tcorohoko 

14.  hesa’ake 

4- 

takanaiyasoka 

15.  oholyehemakamolyi 

5- 

kamolyi 

16.  hetcemahola 

6. 

tcetcoki 

1 7.  hesa’akaholola 

7- 

hetcemikamolyi 

18.  fanatili 

8. 

hetcemimuka 

19.  ohorolopanato 

9- 

tematosa 

20.  tcowenecaholola 

IO. 

yamela 

21.  anolahahorola 

1 1. 

kehilolofone 

In  counting,  the  Waiwais  always  begin  with  the  index  of  the 
right  hand,  count  down  to  the  little  finger  and  go  back  to  the 
thumb  of  the  right  hand  then  pass  over  to  the  thumb  of  the  left 
hand  and  count  down  the  fingers.  If  more  than  ten  objects  are 
to  be  counted,  they  begin  with  the  great  toe  of  the  right  foot, 
count  to  the  little  toe  and  then  go  over  to  the  great  toe  of  the 
left  foot  and  down  to  the  little  toe.  If  you  ask  a  man  how  many 
fish  he  caught  he  would  hold  up  his  index  of  right  hand  and  say 
tcauoni  for  one;  if  he  had  caught  seven  he  would  not  hold  up 
the  index  of  his  left  hand  but  would  count  over  his  fingers  to  the 
index  of  his  left  hand.  If  the  chief  wishes  to  send  a  man  to  the 
forest  to  cut  palm  leaves  for  the  roof  of  his  house,  he  does  not 
say  the  word  for  twenty  but  counts  over  all  his  fingers  and  toes 
while  the  man  looks  on. 


WAIWES  or  KUTCIFIANAS 

The  home  of  the  Waiwe  tribe  is  on  the  Trombetas  River 
below  the  mouth  of  the  Apiniwau.  We  saw  only  two  members 
of  the  tribe;  two  brothers  whose  father  brought  them  up  the 
Puduwau  or  Black  River  when  they  were  small  boys.  Their 
home  village  was  attacked  by  an  enemy  tribe,  and  all  the  inhab¬ 
itants  killed  except  the  father  and  these  two  boys,  who  fled 
from  the  country.  The  Waiwe  language  very  closely  resembles 
that  of  the  Waiwais.  The  two  men  had  forgotten  their  for¬ 
mer  culture  and  beliefs,  in  the  lapse  of  time  and  their  associa¬ 
tion  with  other  tribes.  One  of  them  (Plate  XVI),  married 
a  Mapidian  woman  and  is  the  chief  of  a  small  group  com¬ 
posed  of  Mapidians  and  Parukutus  living  on  the  Puduwau 
River.  The  Mapidians  call  the  Waiwe,  Kutcifiana. 


(182) 


PARUKUTUS 

All  the  Parukutus  formerly  lived  to  the  southeast  of  the 
\\  aiwais,  and  many  live  there  yet,  but  most  of  them  have  moved 
northward  among  the  Mapidians  (Arawaks),  with  whom  they 
are  on  friendly  terms.  Their  small  villages  are  widely  scattered 
about  the  head  of  the  Puduwau  and  on  the  Apiniwau  Rivers. 
They  are  linguistically  very  closely  related  to  the  Waiwais,  as 
will  be  seen  by  comparing  their  vocabularies.  In  physical 
appearance  and  in  culture  the  two  tribes  can  hardly  be  dis¬ 
tinguished.  Two  men  with  the  roughest  features  encountered 
in  the  whole  forest  area  were  Parukutus  (Plate  XV,  F  and  G),  but 
other  men  and  women  have  as  smooth  and  regular  features  as 
any  of  the  tribes. 

At  the  first  village  we  encountered,  eight  days  after  leaving 
the  Waiwais,  where  a  number  of  Parukutus  are  taking  up  their 
abode,  there  was  one  family  living  with  some  Mapidians,  an  old 
man,  his  wife  and  one  son.  They  had  very  little  about  them 
of  any  value,  nothing  to  exchange.  The  man  had  one  fish  hook 
only,  but  fortunately  for  him  now  he  had  several  years  before 
sold  a  dog  to  one  of  the  party  travelling  with  us.  It  was  the  first 
time  they  had  met  since  the  transaction  and  our  boy  immediately 
discharged  his  debt  by  giving  the  old  man  some  fish  hooks,  beads 
and  trinkets  he  had  received  from  us.  The  old  man  acted  as 
our  guide  to  the  next  village,  and  thus  earned  a  payment  which 
will  keep  him  happy  the  rest  of  his  life. 

The  Parukutu  chief  at  Tcara  Nawa  on  the  Kaitcana  River 
appeared  to  be  the  oldest  man  any  of  us  had  ever  seen  (Plate 
XIII,  A).  His  eyes  were  dim,  his  teeth  were  gone,  and  his 
thin  skin  hung  in  flabby  folds  from  his  stooping  frame,  but  his 
fine  hair  was  only  streaked  with  gray.  He  had  been  a  noted 
medicine  man  and  still  remained  a  greatly  respected  chief. 
He  tottered  about  with  the  support  of  a  tall  staff  and  took  a 
deep  interest  in  us,  our  clothing,  and  all  the  new  things  we 

(183) 


184  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


carried,  such  as  the  magnet,  compass,  binoculars,  sextant,  mer¬ 
cury,  camera,  pedometer  and  watches.  He  had  never  seen 
white  men  before  nor  heard  of  such  things  as  ours.  Our  visit 
must  have  given  him  a  new  lease  on  life;  at  least  it  gave  him 
something  to  think  about  for  the  rest  of  his  numbered  days. 

None  of  the  forest  tribes  visited  used  salt,  and  not  one  of 
the  people  cared  for  it  or  would  eat  it  with  the  exception  of  the 
old  chief  of  Tcara  Nawa.  He  had  a  few  sweet  potatoes,  not 
sufficient  for  all  of  us  so  he  divided  with  me.  I  ate  mine  with 
salt  and  offered  the  old  man  some.  To  my  surprise  he  liked  it 
and  every  day  came  hobbling  out  to  share  the  potatoes  and  salt 
with  me.  Salt  was  the  only  article  of  diet  we  were  able  to  carry. 

Tcara  Nawa  is  made  up  of  the  remnant  of  a  large  group  of 
Parukutus  who  came  from  the  southeast  and  settled  along  the 
lower  course  of  the  Kaitcana  River  a  very  long  time  ago.  They 
came  into  contact  here  with  a  very  warlike  tribe,  the  Chikena, 
who  finally  drove  them  up  to  the  head  waters  of  the  river.  The 
two  peoples  became  hated  enemies,  killing  each  other  at  sight, 
until  now  there  are  very  few  left  of  either  tribe. 

The  final  destruction  of  the  old  chiefs  village  was  accom¬ 
plished  by  a  more  distant  tribe  of  Chikenas,who  came  to  extermi¬ 
nate  them  because  they  had  blown  an  epidemic  of  sickness  upon 
the  Chikena  village  and  caused  the  death  of  many  of  their  people. 
When  the  Chikenas  came  to  the  river  they  found  the  Parukutu 
village  temporarily  uninhabited,  but  knowing  which  way  the 
occupants  had  gone  they  went  up  river  to  where  it  was  very 
narrow  and  awaited  their  return.  Their  plan  was  to  shoot  from 
ambush,  kill  all  the  men  and  carry  off  the  women  and  children. 

It  so  happened  that  the  Parukutus  who  had  gone  up  river 
visiting  did  not  all  return  together.  The  chief  and  his  family 
remained  behind  for  three  days,  while  four  men  and  three  women 
with  one  small  baby  went  on  in  advance.  When  they  reached 
the  ambush  of  the  Chikenas,  the  four  men  were  killed  with  the 
first  volley  of  arrows  but  the  women,  unhurt,  attempted  to  make 
their  escape.  The  woman  with  the  baby  crossed  to  the  opposite 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


185 


side  of  the  river  where  a  man  followed  her.  She  put  down  the 
baby  and  when  the  man  attempted  to  take  her  she  hit  him  with 
a  club  and  broke  his  arm  but  he  still  clung  to  her  and  she  struck 
him  across  the  other  arm  and  broke  it  also.  He  called  for  help. 
Two  men  came  and  shot  the  woman  with  arrows  until  they  had 
killed  her.  I  hen  they  took  the  club  the  woman  had  used  in 
breaking  the  man  s  arms  and  killed  the  baby.  One  of  the  other 
women  fought  so  fiercely  they  had  to  kill  her;  while  the  third 
was  overpowered  and  carried  away  to  be  the  wife  of  one  of  her 
captors.  After  burning  the  village  the  party  returned  to  its 
home  in  the  interior,  having  destroyed,  as  they  thought,  the 
source  of  all  their  suffering. 

When  the  old  chief  and  his  family  started  to  return  to  their 
village  and  came  to  the  narrow  passage  in  the  river  they  saw 
there  some  king  vultures  and  a  great  many  others  of  the  common 
variety  and  wondered  what  brought  them  there.  They  got  the 
odor  from  the  dead  bodies  and  found  a  dead  man  with  two  arrows 
through  his  body,  another  lying  dead  on  the  rocks  and  the 
skeleton  of  another  in  the  river  where  the  fish  had  devoured  his 
flesh.  They  turned  away  from  the  horrible  sight  and  returned 
to  the  friends  with  whom  they  had  been  visiting  without  going 
on  to  see  the  destruction  of  their  homes. 

A  brother  of  one  of  the  murdered  women,  who  lived  far 
down  the  Apiniwau,  was  expected  to  marry  the  daughter  of  the 
old  Parukutu  chief.  He  happened  to  come  up  to  pay  a  visit  to 
the  chief  just  a  few  days  after  the  massacre,  and  when  he  found 
the  village  in  ruins  and  the  skeletons  of  his  friends  strewn  along 
the  river  he  was  so  distressed  that  he  went  away  never  to  return. 
The  chief  continues  to  speak  of  him  as  his  son  in  law. 

Meanwhile  the  feud  goes  on.  The  Parukutus  were  suspi¬ 
cious  of  the  Chikenas  from  the  beginning  of  their  contact. 
They  feared  they  would  blow  upon  them  and  cause  some  kind 
of  ailment;  hence,  in  order  to  test  their  friendship  when  they 
came  together  to  trade,  they  always  required  the  Chikenas  to 
engage  in  a  wrestling  bout.  Excitement  ran  high  at  one  of  these 


186  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

matches  and  the  Parukutu  contestant  unintentionally  killed 
his  adversary.  Since  then  the  tribes  have  never  met  to  trade, 
and  kill  one  another  when  possible.  The  last  Chikena  to  be 
killed  had  lived  only  a  short  distance  below  Tcara  Nawa.  I 
spent  a  night  at  his  old  place  while  waiting  for  Ogilvie  and  our 
boys  to  catch  up  with  the  canoes.  I  had  gone  across  country 
with  some  Indians  to  hunt.  Fleas  had  taken  possession  of  the 
house,  compelling  us,  when  we  rushed  in  for  shelter  from  a  fierce 
storm,  to  rush  out  again  and  to  build  our  own  shelters. 

We  thought  our  guides  expected  to  follow  down  the  Kait- 
cana  to  the  Apiniwau  but  after  three  days  we  came  to  a  short 
bend  in  the  river  where  we  buried  our  bark  canoes  out  of  sight 
in  the  deep  water,  got  away  into  the  forest  without  leaving  a 
trace  on  the  bank  and  crossed  the  mountain  to  the  Ponama 
River,  where  we  made  other  canoes  and  went  down  to  the 
Apiniwau.  We  had  reached  the  region  of  their  old  enemies  and 
it  was  unsafe  to  go  into  their  territory. 

Minai  Ulud 

At  the  mouth  of  the  Ponama  on  the  Apiniwau  we  found 
some  very  well  built  small  houses  and  evidence  that  a  party  had 
spent  the  night  there  very  recently.  Our  guide  had  not  visited 
this  region  for  many  years  but  was  sure  the  old  Parukutu  village 
was  just  above  us  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  river.  We  found 
the  abandoned  place  grown  up  in  good  sized  trees.  There  was 
no  way  to  determine  whether  the  people  had  moved  up  stream 
or  down,  but  we  soon  discovered  that  the  party  which  had 
camped  at  the  Ponama  was  travelling  up  river  and  that  it  had 
not  returned.  They  were  carrying  sugar  cane  for  food,  and  the 
chewed  pulp  was  scattered  over  the  rocks  at  the  rapids.  When 
an  Indian  reaches  a  portage,  he  unloads  and  takes  his  canoe 
.over  first,  then  carries  over  his  baggage  and  places  it  in  the 
canoe.  Any  refuse  is  thus  left  at  the  unloading  place  and  it  was 
easy  for  us  to  tell  that  the  party  was  going  up  stream  and  that 
it  had  not  returned.  The  amount  of  bleaching  of  the  chewed 
cane  told  us  how  recently  it  had  been  thrown  away. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


187 


We  knew  thus  that  somebody  was  not  far  away  and  we 
followed  up.  We  came  first  to  the  unoccupied  Katawian  village, 
then  an  abandoned  village  and  clearing  of  the  Parukutus,  but 
the  evening  of  the  third  day  we  found  the  village  of  Mina  Ulud 
on  the  left  bank  of  the  river.  Lat.  i°  23'  N.,  Long.  570  8'  W., 
elevation  500  feet. 

Our  Reception 

It  had  been  our  custom  when  nearing  a  village  to  stop  and 
allow  our  guide  to  go  in  alone  and  tell  the  people  strangers  were 
coming.  The  rest  of  us  would  have  a  bath  and  clean  up.  The 
boys  would  smear  their  bodies,  paint  designs  on  their  faces,  oil 
and  comb  their  hair,  while  the  best  Ogilvie  and  I  could  do  was 
to  shave  and  put  on  clean  clothes.  We  always  envied  the 
Indians  their  neat  appearance  at  such  times.  When  the  guide 
would  return  after  an  absence  of  an  hour  or  more  he  would  lead 
us  in.  Each  would  gather  up  a  club  for  the  dogs  and  when  we 
neared  the  houses  our  guide  would  blow  his  flute,  made  of 
jaguar  bone,  if  he  had  one,  and  we  would  all  give  a  loud  yell. 
The  dogs  gave  the  only  response.  We  would  line  up  in  front 
of  the  chief’s  door  with  our  packs  on  our  backs.  The  chief 
would  then  come  to  greet  us,  after  which  we  could  take  off  our 
packs  and  sit  down.  Then  all  the  other  members  of  the  tribe 
would  come  and  say  a  word  of  greeting  which  amounted  to  about 
the  same  as  our  own  "How  do  you  do?"  The  women  would 
very  soon  set  out  some  refreshing  drink,  and  later,  after  we  had 
been  taken  to  the  men’s  house  where  we  put  up  our  hammocks, 
they  would  each  bring  out  a  bowl  of  food.  Some  places  the  men 
of  the  village  would  join  us;  at  others  we  ate  first.  Etiquette 
required  one  to  squat  at  the  food  bowl,  help  himself,  move  back 
without  rising  and  up  again  if  he  wished  more,  and  when  he  had 
finished  to  rise.  Any  food  served  to  one  must  be  eaten  or  carried 
away.  Our  Wapisiana  boys,  quick  to  recognize  the  proper 
observances,  often  prevented  us  from  making  mistakes.  After 
the  first  meal  at  Tcara  Nawa,  I  attempted  to  rise  from  the  food 
bowl  when  my  boy  touched  my  arm  and  called  my  attention  to 
some  fruit  I  was  leaving  behind. 


188  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

Many  times  a  village  is  built  on  some  side  stream  near  the 
river  or  a  short  distance  back  from  the  river  bank.  One  might 
easily  pass  the  entrance  to  a  village  without  noticing  it.  So  it 
was  necessary  for  us  to  have  a  canoe  follow  each  bank  and  look 
for  entrance  and  landings.  Our  guide  was  in  advance  and 
sighted  some  people  ahead.  He  signalled  us  to  cover  and  went 
on  to  the  landing  place.  We  waited  for  a  short  time  and  then 
went  in.  The  village  was  some  two  hundred  yards  back,  with  a 
trail  leading  through  the  dense  forest.  As  we  came  out  of  the 
trail  into  the  village  we  found  eight  men  lined  up  with  their  bows 
and  arrows  ready  to  shoot,  and  in  front  of  them  the  chief  with  a 
large  highly  polished  knife  in  his  hand.  It  was  a  most  for¬ 
midable  looking  array  of  men  and  arms.  We  had  taken  the  pre¬ 
caution  to  leave  behind  in  the  canoes  our  guns  and  bows  and 
arrows.  The  chief  with  his  knife  waved  us  aside  to  some  logs, 
where  we  sat  with  our  backs  down  the  hill,  facing  the  men. 
Everybody  seemed  wildly  excited.  The  dogs  were  barking, 
the  children  crying  and  the  women  running  about  talking  fast 
and  loud,  but  the  men  never  said  a  word  nor  took  their  eyes 
from  us  nor  put  down  their  bows.  The  chief  alone  showed 
composure.  The  chief  did  not  come  forward  to  greet  us  accord¬ 
ing  to  custom,  but  instead  he  sent  his  two  daughters  one  after 
the  other  to  greet  us.  Each  one  stopped  just  a  moment  in  front 
of  each  of  us  and  gave  the  usual  greeting,  while  the  men  with 
their  arrows,  looked  on  ready  to  do  their  whole  duty  if  any  false 
move  were  made  on  our  part.  When  the  dogs  quieted  down, 
our  guide,  whom  the  chief  had  visited  about  a  year  before, 
began  to  tell  the  chief  all  about  us,  that  we  had  come  through 
the  other  tribes  and  that  we  were  all  right.  After  a  while  the 
chief  sent  a  man  to  get  some  sugar  cane  for  us  to  chew.  Another 
was  sent  to  meet  the  hunters  who  were  coming  home.  Thus 
notified  of  our  presence  they  came  in  without  nervousness  and 
sat  down  in  front  of  us  while  the  chief  told  them  about  us,  point¬ 
ing  at  us  with  his  big  bright  knife,  as  he  spoke  of  the  one  and 
the  other. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


189 


At  the  end  of  two  hours  the  women  had  made  two  cakes  of 
cassava  bread  and  boiled  a  monkey  which  they  brought  to  us. 
When  we  had  finished  they  brought  another  pot  and  some  bread 
to  our  three  guides.  Toward  evening  the  men  sat  down  and 
laid  their  bows  and  arrows  aside.  The  chief  told  us  where  we 
could  camp,  and  our  boys  cleared  away  the  brush  and  put  up 
our  shelters  near  the  river.  Seven  men  came  down  from  the 
clearing  bringing  dry  wood  for  our  fires  and  sat  about  until 
after  dark  greatly  interested  in  us  and  everything  we  had. 

Mourning 

We  had  brought  with  us  a  half  blood  Taruma  whose  father 
had  been  with  Schomburgk  when  he  descended  the  Apiniwau 
in  1843  and  had  remained  with  the  Parukutus.  Fortunately 
for  us  his  father  had  taught  him  to  speak  Taruma  and  our  Tar¬ 
uma  boy,  Cyk  Tow,  could  speak  with  him.  As  boys  this  man 
and  the  Parukutu  chief  had  been  great  friends,  they  soon  became 
very  intimate  and  spent  all  their  time  together. 

Shortly  after  dark  we  heard  a  most  peculiar  noise  coming 
from  the  direction  of  the  village.  It  reminded  me  at  once  of  my 
boyhood  days  when  I  used  to  attend  negro  camp  meetings  and 
heard  the  preacher  praying  with  all  the  brethren  joining  in  at 
intervals.  Coming  so  soon  after  our  spectacular  reception,  I 
must  say  that  I  was  more  than  interested.  We  soon  understood 
it  all — the  Indians  were  wailing  for  the  dead.  It  was  one  of  the 
most  impressive  ceremonies  I  have  ever  witnessed. 

It  is  the  custom  among  all  these  tribes  to  mourn  publicly 
for  their  dead,  not  only  at  the  time  of  the  death  and  burial,  but 
for  a  long  time  thereafter.  When  any  friend  comes  along  they 
tell  him  of  the  death  of  the  member  of  the  tribe.  All  work  stops, 
the  women  sit  in  their  hammocks  quietly  crying,  while  the  chief 
or  some  intimate  friend  recites  the  story  of  the  death  in  great 
detail  and  tells  what  a  good  person  he  was  and  how  much  he 
is  missed.  All  the  men  wail  and  cry  aloud.  As  we  heard  it  in 
the  night  at  our  distance  it  was  most  mournful,  yet  at  the  same 


190  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


time  very  musical.  It  continued  for  twenty  minutes  and  stopped 
suddenly;  the  women  turned  to  their  work  again  and  the  men 
began  to  talk  of  other  things.  It  was  the  presence  of  this 
old  friend  that  started  them  off.  I  was  for  once  at  least  glad  he 
came  along.  I  had  heard  the  wailing  of  a  few  before,  but  this 
was  the  only  time  I  ever  witnessed  a  whole  village  taking  part 
in  the  ceremony. 

Sick  Child 

One  evening  we  chanced  to  see  a  method  of  treating  the 
sick.  A  mother  brought  a  child  about  a  year  old  to  the  chief  to 
be  cured  of  some  ailment  which  seemed  to  be  a  mild  congestion 
of  the  lungs.  After  looking  the  child  over  the  chief  gave  direc¬ 
tions  for  others  to  put  stones  in  the  fire,  to  bring  an  empty  cook¬ 
ing  pot  and  a  gourd  of  water.  He  lighted  a  long  cigarette  which 
he  smoked  vigorously,  blowing  the  smoke  through  his  hand 
upon  the  head  of  the  child.  Occasionally  he  would  open  his 
mouth  wide  and  blow  saliva  over  the  head  and  upper  part  of  the 
body  and  finish  by  blowing  noisily;  shoo,  shoo,  shoo.  Then  he 
sang  for  a  few  minutes  a  low  soothing  song;  went  over  the  child 
with  a  palm  leaf  brush;  blew  more  smoke;  took  two  small 
pebbles  from  his  shoulder  basket  and  rolled  them  under  his 
palm  over  the  child’s  chest  and  back,  chanting  his  incantation 
all  the  while.  When  the  stones  in  the  fire  were  hot  he  put  them 
in  an  empty  cooking  pot,  poured  water  on  them  and  held  the 
child  in  the  steam.  Two  men  and  the  mother  kept  busy  chant¬ 
ing  and  fanning  the  steam  with  their  hands  against  the  child, 
ending  the  effort  with  the  same  shoo,  shoo,  shoo.  Then  the 
chief  poured  warm  water  over  the  child,  smoked  upon  it  again 
and  the  mother  took  it  away  to  her  hammock.  The  whole  per¬ 
formance  lasted  two  hours.  I  thought  at  the  time  if  the  child 
could  survive  the  treatment  he  would  probably  recover,  but  we 
left  the  next  morning  and  did  not  learn  the  outcome. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


191 


POLYANDRIA 

The  father  of  the  sick  child  had  expected  to  go  away  with 
us  but  when  the  child  took  sick  he  said  he  must  remain  at  home. 
Then  we  learned  that  he  and  his  brother  were  living  with  the 
same  woman  in  a  house  by  themselves.  This  was  the  only  case 
of  polyandria  we  heard  of  among  the  interior  tribes.  Ogilvie 
said  that  he  had  observed  two  brothers  living  with  one  woman 
among  the  Wapisianas.  There  is  a  scarcity  of  women  among 
the  Parukutus  and  this  fact  served  us  a  good  turn.  It  was 
eleven  days  to  the  Diau  village  we  wished  to  visit — a  long  journey 
for  a  return  trip.  A  fine  looking  young  fellow  volunteered  to  go 
with  us  because  he  wanted  a  wife  and  there  was  no  one  eligible 
for  him  among  his  own  people.  He  had  been  given  a  little  girl 
but  she  was  too  young  to  be  married  for  several  years  yet.  He 
went  with  us  and  we  hope  he  was  successful  in  finding  a  desirable 
mate. 

Departure 

We  found  nothing  new  in  the  way  of  material  culture  among 
the  Parukutus  at  Minai  Ulud.  They  had  good  bows  and  arrows 
but  nothing  else  worth  carrying  away.  Their  pottery  was  rough 
and  undecorated,  their  baskets  of  the  roughest  patterns,  and 
their  houses  were  mere  shelters  with  no  evidence  that  anything 
better  was  contemplated.  At  their  old  village  they  had  had 
the  usual  large  round  communal  house  and  a  visitors’  house 
near  by.  We  remained  for  several  days  making  observations, 
taking  photographs  and  physical  measurements.  The  people 
after  the  first  introduction  were  very  kind  to  us.  Their  cassava 
was  too  young  for  making  good  bread,  but  they  had  plenty  of 
sugar  cane  which  the  chief  sent  to  our  camp  in  abundance  and 
for  which  he  would  not  accept  payment.  However,  when  we 
were  ready  to  leave  for  our  long  journey  to  the  Diaus,  he  had 
his  men  fill  our  canoes  with  every  stick  they  would  hold  and 
accepted  payment  for  it.  We  had  eaten  many  times  that  amount 
while  we  were  in  camp,  but  then  we  were  his  guests  and  must 
accept  his  hospitality.  The  chief  also  exchanged  two  good 
canoes  for  our  old  ones  accepting  the  difference  in  value. 


VOCABULARY 

English — Parukutu 


apron . keweyon 

apron,  loin . katami 

arm . oyafula 

ashes . wesualuma 

baking  pan . elyafo 

bark  design . . waiyama 

bark  ornament . wauku 

basket . . . yamata 

basket,  design . kamali 

basket  design,  inner . halamato 

basket,  pack . kumbiyati 

basket,  shoulder . pakali 

bead . cau 

beard . . oyatoitci 

bread . . . tcoola 

cheek . . ofetalika 

chin . oyatatcile 

cigarette . ileyamato 

cooking  pot . helyamo 

cotton . maula 

cotton  string . -  •  maulama 

dog . cefia’ali 

ear . walwau 

ear . ofanali 

eye . oyoola 

fan,  fire . oyafomsa 

fire . witu 

firestone . oloowa 

foot . oftati 

foot,  sole . otcohale 

forehead . . oyefilituk 

flute . wawarari 

flute,  double . matawi 

(192) 


FARABEE - THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


193 


hair . 

hair,  body . 

hair  in  queue 
hammock,  cotton 
hammock,  fibre . . 
hammock  string. 

hand . 

hand,  palm . 

house . 

knee . 

knife.  .  / . 

knife,  tusk . 

lap  breech  cloth . . 

legband . 

leg,  lower . 

leg,  upper . 

lip,  lower . 

lip,  upper . 

nail . . 

nose .  * . 

salt . 

sieve . 

stool . 

strainer . 

sugar . 

teeth  . 

tobacco . 

toe . 

tongue . 

wood  tick . 


.  .omosta 
.  .oyakotci 
.  .  kilitcitci 
.  .liweitai 
,  .cilao 
.  .akokiwa 
.oyamayelida 
.oyamuklila 
.mimu 

oyasagul 

.jakeri 

maliya 

maula’anola 

.holyafoloka 

.ohilyafu 

.ofeitu 

.omatafitcu 

.ofalolitcu 

.oyamacicen 
.  oyowanali 

.wa’ahu 
.towa 
mileli 
.  kwasi 
.  waimimu 

.koyali 

.komacalili 

.ayalicucen 

.kamaculi 


komacpa 


CHIKENAS 

The  Chikenas  live  below  the  Parukutus  on  the  Kaitcana 
River  and  in  the  interior  to  the  southward.  Their  blood  feud 
with  the  Parukutus  has  already  been  described.  They  appear 
to  be  very  warlike,  as  they  recently  destroyed  the  whole  village 
of  Katawians  on  the  Apiniwau.  One  man  was  away  from  home 
and  thus  escaped.  We  saw  three  members  of  the  tribe  at  Mina 
Ulud,  one  man  and  two  women,  from  whom  we  obtained  the 
short  vocabulary  here  recorded.  From  the  language,  physical 
type  and  culture  the  Chikenas  would  appear  to  be  very  closel\ 
related  to  the  Parukutus.  (See  Plate  XVII,  B  and  F.) 


(194) 


VOCABULARY 

English — Chi  ken  a 


arm . yaholi 

arrow . klaho 

arrow  shaft . pelawa 

aunt . kiu 


hack . wikaru 

breast . prohulu 

bow . plagma 

boy . milemigona 


cane . 

canoe . 

cassava  bread 

chest . 

child . 


palemitana 

wiyehi 

aiha  tekenama 

wirohulu 

imeli 


daughter . miles! 

dog . awali 


ear . penali 

eye . yanunru 


father.  .  . 
finger  nail 
fingers. .  . 

fire . 

foot . 


yumu 

yamaskita 

yamiyeli 

wihala 

pohuya 


grandfather . amu 

grandmother . wi 


hair . 

hammock 

hand 


pohotci 

maura 

yameliyam 


leg . yacila 

lips . yaspili 


man. .  . 
moon . . 
mother 


soto 

imno 

isano 


(195) 


196  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


nose . 

paddle. .  . 
patella . . . 
plantain . 

shoulder . 

side . 

sole . 

son . 

starch .  .  . 
sun . 

thigh.  . . 
toes 

tongue. . 
tooth . . . 

uncle.  . . 


yinare 

tanaklo 

samulu 

halulu 

motalu 

karana 

pohuyawana 

mileli 

taci 

sesi 

solipeta 
pohuyalana 
nubu 
.  yoli 

.wohiki 


water. . 
woman 


tuna 

wolesa 


1.  winali 

2.  asaga 

3.  sorawau 

4.  misolo 

5.  inmo,  soloni 

6.  inmowinali 


Numerals 

7.  inmonasala 

8.  misolosaga 
q.  misolinmo 

10.  soloninmonasala 
15.  inmosorawau 
20.  misolinmo 


KATAWIANS 

The  Katawians  are  said  to  be  a  sub  tribe  of  the  Parukutus 
and  live  just  below  them  on  the  Apiniwau.  They  speak  a 
dialect  of  the  same  language  and  have  the  same  culture.  We 
saw  but  one  man  and  he  was  so  different  in  appearance  that  he 
at  once  attracted  our  attention.  He  had  the  best  carriage  and 
the  best  physical  development  of  all  the  men  we  saw  on  our 
journey.  He  had  a  broad  very  deep  chest,  broad  lower  face, 
broad  frontal  and  long  head  (Plate  XVII,  F).  His  wife  was 
a  Chikena.  His  physical  measurements  will  |be  found  in  the 
tables. 


(197) 


TONAYENAS 

At  Mina  Ulud  on  the  Apiniwau  we  found  a  young  man  with 
his  wife  and  baby  who  had  come  from  the  region  east  of  the 
Honawau  River  a  long  time  ago.  He  had  forgotten  his  former 
language  which  he  said  was  entirely  unlike  Parukutu.  His 
peculiar  appearance  led  to  our  inquiries  about  him.  He  had 
a  very  flat  upper  face,  broad  nose,  thick  lips  and  projecting 
face — all  negro  characteristics  yet  he  was  not  negroid  in  color 
or  appearance.  His  wife  (Plate  XVII,  C)  had  a  very  narrow 
lower  face. 


(  198) 


THE  DIAUS 

At  the  second  Indian  village  after  crossing  the  Acarai 
Mountains  into  Brazil  we  found  a  knife  bearing  the  name  of  a 
French  maker.  This  informed  us  at  once  that  the  trade  route 
led  across  the  divide  to  French  Guiana,  whereas  we  had  hoped 
it  would  lead  to  the  Amazon  River  by  way  of  the  Trombetas. 
When  we  asked  the  Indians  where  the  knife  came  from  and  who 
made  it,  they  told  us  the  Diaus  made  it  and  that  they  lived  a 
very  long  distance  to  the  northeastward,  but  no  one  had  ever 
seen  a  Diau.  As  we  travelled  from  one  village  and  tribe  to 
another  we  heard  more  and  more  about  the  Diaus,  the  people 
who  made  all  knives,  beads  and  everything  they  possessed  of 
foreign  manufacture.  One  old  Parukutu  had  travelled  a  whole 
moon  in  an  attempt  to  reach  the  country  of  the  Diaus.  We 
asked  him  to  go  with  us,  but  he  declined  saying  he  would  die  of 
old  age  before  we  could  reach  them.  At  last  when  we  arrived 
at  the  Parukutu  village  on  the  Apiniwau  we  found  five  Diaus — - 
two  men,  two  women  and  a  baby.  They  had  come  to  invite 
the  Parukutus  to  a  dance  at  their  principal  village  eleven  days’ 
journey  away.  That  is,  the  men  and  women  came  for  that 
purpose;  the  baby  was  born  en  route;  but  it  should  be  added 
he  did  not  delay  the  journey.  The  four  camped  on  the  river 
bank  one  night,  and  in  the  morning  five  were  ready  to  push  off 
at  the  usual  time. 

The  first  thing  we  asked  the  Diaus  was,  “Do  your  people 
make  these  beads  and  knives?”  They  said,  “No,  we  get  them 
from  an  old  trader  who  comes  to  our  dance  every  year  from  his 
home  a  moon  toward  the  rising  sun;  his  people  make  them.” 
They  told  us  we  could  spend  a  few  days  there  and  then  have  time 
to  reach  the  dance  before  the  trader  returned.  They  had 
brought  with  them  a  knotted  string  and  were  untying  a  knot 
each  day  so  they  knew  just  how  many  days  were  left.  One  of 
the  men  volunteered  to  take  us  to  his  home.  The  others 

(199) 


200  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


remained  behind  to  finish  their  visit  and  to  return  at  their 
leisure.  A  young  Parukutu  went  along  with  the  Diau  in  his 
canoe. 

TCALIO 

From  the  Parukutu  village  we  descended  the  Apiniwau, 
for  four  days,  ascended  the  Honawau1  and  the  Iliau  seven  days 
to  the  first  Diau  village,  Tcalio,  or  bamboo  place,  where  we 
arrived  March  5,  1914.  A  short  distance  below  the  landing  we 
passed  a  large  newly  planted  clearing  with  several  small  shelters. 

Tcalio  is  built  on  high  land  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the 
river,  in  the  midst  of  an  old  clearing  which  is  now  overgrown 
and  no  longer  cultivated.  This  village  consists  of  four  large 
shelters  and  four  well-made  round  houses.  The  largest  one, 
25  feet  in  diameter  and  25  feet  high,  had  a  canopy  covering  the 
smoke  hole  and  an  inverted  cooking  pot  closely  fitting  around 
the  pole  over  it;  high  above,  on  top  of  the  pole  was  the  usual 
Brazil  nut.  All  the  houses  were  covered  with  palm  leaves 
running  vertically. 

While  we  were  making  camp  at  the  river  our  Diau  com¬ 
panion  went  up  to  the  village  and  told  the  chief  about  us.  As 
soon  as  our  camp  was  finished  we  joined  the  Diau  and  the 
Parukutu,  entered  the  village  and  lined  up  in  the  middle  of  the 
plaza.  The  old  chief  was  very  infirm  and  came  out  slowly 
leaning  on  two  staves,  talking  as  he  came.  As  he  stopped  in 
front  of  us  he  put  out  his  hand  for  a  long  shake  saying  “me  kum 
bai.”  The  three  women  also  came  and  shook  hands  but  the 
two  other  men  only  spoke  a  word  of  greeting.  The  four  children 
came  with  their  mothers,  but  were  too  timid  to  shake  hands 
although  their  mothers  tried  to  persuade  them  to  do  so.  All 
the  other  occupants  of  the  village  were  away  at  the  dance.  This 
was  the  first  time  that  any  of  the  Indians  offered  to  shake  hands 


1  The  mouth  of  the  Honawau  is  in  Lat.  1  0  8'  N.,  Long.  56°  41'  W.  and  at  an  elevation  of  460 
feet.  Below  the  mouth  of  the  Honawau  the  river  is  called  Kaphu.  At  five  different  places 
along  the  Honawau,  we  found  petroglyphs,  the  first  we  had  seen  since  leaving  the  Essiquibo. 
See  “Some  South  American  Petroglyphs,”  Holmes  Anniversary  Volume,  Washington,  1916,  p.  91. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


201 


with  us  and  was  evidence  that  some  one  of  the  tribe  had  been 
in  contact  with  the  negro  rubber  gatherers  over  in  the  Guianas. 

Greetings  over,  we  applied  ourselves  to  the  food  which  had 
been  brought  out  before  we  arrived.  While  on  the  journey 
Ogilvie  and  1  usually  sat  down  together  to  eat,  while  our  four 
boys  sat  apart.  1  his  had  been  noticed,  and  here  for  the  first 
time  a  separate  bowl  with  other  food  had  been  prepared  for  us 
a  little  removed  from  the  others.  When  we  were  leaving  for 
camp  they  gave  us  some  cassava  bread  and  Brazil  nuts  to  carry 
away.  Later  the  boy  brought  bread  and  bananas  to  camp. 

Evidently  this  was  a  very  old  village.  The  central  plaza 
was  kept  clean,  but  the  forest  had  reclaimed  the  fields  and  trees, 
and  vines  were  growing  close  against  the  houses.  We  found 
little  of  particular  interest.  We  met  the  same  courtesy  here 
we  had  met  all  along  the  way.  The  material  culture  was  the 
same.  Their  cooking  pots  and  drink  bowls  were  rough  and 
undecorated.  The  hammocks  were  made  of  palm  fibre  and  the 
baby  carriers  of  bark.  The  dogs  were  the  poorest  lot  we  had 
seen,  but  we  later  learned  that  the  best  ones  had  gone  along  to 
the  dance.  There  were  three  roosters  and  one  hen  but  no  other 
pets.  As  in  other  places  the  chickens  were  kept  as  song  birds — 
neither  flesh  nor  eggs  were  eaten.  The  food  supply  consisted  of 
cassava,  plantains,  bananas  and  papayas.  There  were  no 
potatoes,  sugar  cane,  beans,  or  squashes.  It  is  interesting  to 
note  that  we  found  the  common  commercial  variety  of  banana 
at  the  Waiwe  village  on  the  Pudawau  but  nowhere  else. 

TCAL1FONA1 

One  of  the  Diau  men  who  had  gone  to  the  next  village  to 
tell  the  people  gathered  there  for  the  great  dance  that  we  were 
coming  returned  to  pilot  us  over.  Our  Diau  companion  was 
suffering  from  an  outbreak  of  boils  and  unable  to  go  with  us. 
We  were  sorry,  because  he  was  a  good  fellow  and  had  expressed 
a  desire  to  continue  with  us  to  the  Wakeras  in  the  east.  The 


1Tcalifona  is  in  Lat.  i°  50'  N.,  Long.  56°  42'  W.,  with  an  elevation  of  600  feet. 


202  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


three  other  Diaus  and  the  Parukutu  went  along  to  Tcalifono  on 
the  Itoto  River,  a  branch  of  the  Walakioku,  where  we  arrived 
the  second  day.  As  the  chief  already  knew  that  we  were  coming, 
we  marched  into  the  central  plaza  without  announcement.  The 
chief  and  four  principal  men  came  to  greet  us,  offering  their  right 
hands  and  holding  on  for  a  long  time.  Then  every  man  came 
and  shook  hands,  with  a  word  of  greeting.  The  women,  pre¬ 
ceded  by  the  chief’s  wife,  came  along  and  shook  hands  also. 
They  had  us  sit  down  on  a  low  log  in  the  hot  sun,  while  all  the 
people  came  about  to  see  us.  Drink  was  furnished  immediately, 
and  a  little  later  plenty  of  food.  The  people  showed  no  excite¬ 
ment  but  more  curiosity  than  any  others  we  met.  They  looked 
us  over  and  talked  about  us  and  our  possessions  for  the  rest  of 
the  afternoon  and  then  came  to  our  camp  in  the  evening  to  see 
us  there. 

It  was  impossible  for  us  to  tell  how  many  belonged  to  the 
village  but  there  were  present  twenty  one  men,  fourteen  women, 
eight  children  and  fifty  one  dogs,  but  no  roosters.  There  were 
three  circular  houses  and  one  square  one  besides  the  common 
drink  house,  built  around  an  open  space  one  hundred  feet  across. 
The  chief’s  house,  forty  feet  in  diameter  and  twenty  feet  high, 
had  thatch  reaching  to  the  ground  while  the  others  were  set  on 
posts  five  feet  high.  The  visitors’  house,  where  we  were  enter¬ 
tained,  was  a  hundred  yards  away.  The  village  was  surrounded 
by  a  great  clearing  of  fifty  acres  or  more,  all  planted  but  under 
very  poor  cultivation. 

Dress  and  ornament  here  were  practically  the  same  as  among 
the  Parukutus.  The  men  wore  the  breech  cloth  and  tucked  it 
up  on  the  right  side  as  the  Parukutus  on  the  Apiniwau  do. 
They  wore  the  narrow  woven  leg  band  above  the  calf  and  a 
coil  of  palm  leaf  as  an  anklet;  bead  necklace  and  armlets  and 
Brazil  nut  bracelets  on  the  right  wrist.  The  left  wrist  among 
all  the  tribes  was  left  free  because  a  bracelet  would  interfere 
with  the  bowstring.  There  were  many  white  shirt  buttons 
worn  on  the  strings  with  the  beads.  Women  may  wear  about 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


203 


the  same  bead  ornaments  as  the  men,  but  few  take  the  trouble 
to  do  so.  They  wear  the  beaded  apron  with  a  fringe  of  nuts. 
The  hair  of  both  sexes  is  cut  across  in  front  and  allowed  to  hang 
loose  down  the  back.  A  few  men  wear  the  queue  or  hair  tube 
and  take  proper  care  of  their  hair,  oiling  and  combing  it  regularly. 
Both  sexes  paint  the  body  red  all  over,  and  the  men  sometimes 
paint  designs  on  their  faces  and  bodies.  Their  cooking  pots 
and  drink  bowls  were  crude  and  undecorated.  The  old  trader 
who  had  been  to  see  the  Negroes  had  his  hair  cut  and  wore  a  felt 
hat,  and  a  shirt  with  the  sleeves  tied  around  his  neck  and  the 
tail  hanging  down  his  back. 


Drinks 

The  Diaus  make  the  same  fermented  drinks  by  the  same 
methods  as  already  described  among  the  Waiwais.  For  this 
great  dance  it  was  necessary  to  make  it  in  very  large  quantities 


and  store  it  until  ready  for  use.  Two  logs  had  been  hollowed 
out  to  hold  about  a  hundred  gallons  each.  One  was  filled  and 
covered  with  leaves  then  three  days  later  the  other  was  filled 
as  the  first  one  was  ready  for  use.  The  logs  were  raised  on  a 
framework  in  a  little  house  built  for  the  purpose.  The  amount 
of  drink  used  was  amazing,  as  was  also  the  ability  of  the  men  to 
throw  it  up  at  will  and  drink  more. 

Dance 

The  dance  had  been  going  on  for  ten  days  or  more  when 
we  arrived  but  continued  with  enthusiasm  for  two  nights  longer. 
It  was  threatening  rain  the  first  night,  and  we  did  not  go  down 


204  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


until  we  had  heard  the  dance  going  on.  We  arrived  just  in  time 
to  be  caught  for  an  hour  in  a  thunderstorm.  We  ran  into  a 
large  house  where  there  were  seven  fires  going.  Most  of  the 
women  were  in  their  hammocks  while  the  men  were  sitting 
about  in  small  groups  talking  and  laughing  quietly.  When  the 
rain  was  over  we  returned  to  our  hammocks  as  it  was  too  late 
and  too  wet  to  continue  the  dance.  March  9th  was  a  beautiful 
moonlight  night  and  we  were  on  hand  early  for  the  dance.  We 
sat  about  the  plaza  or  dance  ground  for  a  long  time.  Then  the 
women  brought  two  large  drink  pots  holding  about  three  gallons 
each  and  placed  them  in  the  centre  of  the  plaza.  After  another 
long  wait  the  master  of  ceremonies,  who  was  not  the  chief, 
walked  to  the  centre  and  gave  several  loud  inarticulate  yells. 
A  man  came  and  sat  on  the  north  side  of  one  of  the  bowls  of 
drink  and  a  woman  came  and  sat  facing  him  on  the  other  side 
of  the  bowl.  Each  assisted  the  other  in  holding  the  bowl  for  a 
drink.  In  like  manner  another  man  and  woman  came  to  the 
other  bowl,  the  man  this  time  on  the  south  side.  Seven  women 
came  and  stood  around  the  second  pot.  Three  men  carrying  a 
pole  twenty  feet  long  now  came  in  from  the  north  and  rushed 
around  the  plaza  with  yells  and  shrill  whistles,  stopped  at  the 
north  and  turned  the  other  way  singing  while  the  leader  kept 
time  with  a  small  gourd  rattle.  Another  man  joined  the  group 
carrying  a  ceremonial  club  on  his  shoulder  and  smoking  a  ciga¬ 
rette  fifteen  inches  long.  The  other  two  men  carried  clubs  as 
staffs  and  sang,  accentuating  the  rhythm  with  a  heavy  thump 
of  the  right  foot  on  the  ground.  They  advanced,  then  retreated 
with  side-steps  and  advanced  again.  While  they  were  dancing 
men  and  women  came  to  drink,  the  two  guardians  of  the  bowl 
holding  it  up  for  them.  The  dancers  would  advance  toward  the 
drink  and  retreat,  at  last  the  leader  would  go  with  the  end  of 
the  pole  to  the  bowl  and  drink  while  the  others  sang  and  drank 
in  turn.  When  both  bowls  were  empty  the  dance  stopped  until 
they  were  filled  again  from  the  reserve  supply  stored  in  the 
troughs.  Next  time  four  men  holding  the  pole  rushed  around 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


205 


the  plaza  and  were  joined  by  two  more  men  and  seven  women; 
the  men  holding  with  the  left  hand,  the  women  with  the  right. 
Then  a  large  man  appeared,  smoking  a  long  cigarette  and  carry¬ 
ing  a  staff.  He  acted  as  a  clown  and  followed  behind  the  dancers 
with  the  pole.  At  intervals  the  leader  would  turn  quickly  with 
the  pole  and  chase  the  clown.  The  men  assisted  the  leader, 
while  the  women  tried  to  protect  the  clown.  The  long  pole  with 
the  women  holding  on  one  side  made  quick  movements  rather 
difficult,  and  the  clown  was  never  caught;  yet  he  had  many 
narrow  and  noisy  escapes.  The  leader  appeared  very  thirsty 
and  would  often  advance  to  the  pots  for  a  drink,  but  rush  away 
after  the  clown  before  he  or  the  women  could  drink.  Then  he 
would  rush  into  a  house,  the  clown  always  following;  if  they 
found  nothing  to  drink  they  soon  backed  out  and  rushed  away 
at  the  clown,  the  drink  pots  or  into  another  house.  Once  they 
found  some  drink  and  the  women  were  able  to  pass  some  back 
to  the  clown  before  the  leader  could  prevent  it.  Once  when  the 
leader  charged  the  clown  and  was  on  the  point  of  catching  him 
two  women  caught  hold  of  the  leader  but  were  dragged  loose  as 
he  rushed.  Occasionally  the  dancers  would  cross  or  dance  on 
the  sounding  board.  The  leader  carried  a  gourd  rattle  for  keep¬ 
ing  time  to  the  music  and  the  dance.  The  men  and  women  all 
sang  while  they  were  dancing  and  while  standing  at  the  drink 
bowls.  I  he  women  all  wore  the  bell  nut  aprons  which  assisted 
in  keeping  the  rhythm  and  added  to  the  music.  The  men  wore 
the  same  kind  of  feather  headdress  and  other  ornaments  as  we 
found  the  Waiwais  wearing  in  their  dances.  In  another  half- 
hour  the  drink  in  the  bowls  was  exhausted,  and  the  dance 
stopped.  Neither  the  clown  nor  the  group  of  women  joined  in 
the  third  dance  but  stood  together  near  the  drink.  About  ten- 
thirty  the  leader,  showing  weariness,  stopped  the  dance  and  all 
retired  for  the  night.  As  we  had  no  interpreter  we  could  not 
understand  the  whole  performance. 


206  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


Dancing  Board 

There  were  two  dancing  boards  set  in  the  plaza  near  to¬ 
gether,  one  six  feet  across,  the  other  about  half  the  size.  The 
large  one  had  been  set  recently.  The  notch,  which  is  found  in 
all  of  them,  was  six  inches  square,  opening  into  a  hole  three  feet 
deep.  The  board  was  made  of  the  flat  root  of  a  tree,  hewn  down 
until  it  was  two  inches  thick.  The  sound  produced  when  dancing 
or  wrestling  upon  it  could  be  heard  for  a  long  distance.  Our 
Parukutu  companion  had  his  whipping  and  wrestling  match  the 
first  evening  after  we  arrived.  As  our  boys  were  travelling 
through  and  not  stopping  over  they  were  not  expected  to  show 
their  good  will  by  wrestling. 


Sung  by  the  Diaus  in  Their  Dances 


d.c. 


Music 


The  Diaus  are  not  much  given  to  music.  Both  men  and 
women  sing  at  their  dances  but  we  heard  no  music  at  any  other 
time.  Words  were  used  but  there  appeared  to  be  a  great  many 
nonsense  syllables,  often  the  music  was  simply  hummed  in  a 
low  voice. 


FARABEE - THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


207 


We  have  no  photographs  from  Tcalifona  fit  to  publish.  Our 
plates  and  films  were  more  than  a  year  old,  and  besides  we  were 
unable  to  develop  the  plates  for  several  days,  when  they  were 
found  practically  worthless.  A  word  about  photography  may 
be  of  interest  to  those  who  work  in  tropical  fields.  We  carried 
our  plates  and  films  in  sealed  tins,  opened  them  as  needed  and 
developed  them  the  same  night.  We  used  hardener  in  develop¬ 
ing  and  fixing  bath  but  the  water  was  sometimes  so  warm  the 
gelatin  would  slip  off  when  the  plate  was  set  up  to  dry  and  it 
became  necessary  to  dry  the  plates  over  the  fire.  Some  of  the 
best  photographs  here  published  were  made  from  Ensign  films 
a  year  old.  After  costly  experiment  we  found  the  Hammer  and 
Wratten  and  Wainwright  plates  the  best  for  tropical  use.  We 
got  satisfactory  results  with  Hammer  plates  that  had  been  for 
three  years  in  Para  at  the  mouth  of  the  Amazon,  but  they  were 
unsealed,  exposed  and  developed  the  same  day. 


VOCABULARY 

English — Diau 

Adam’s  apple . 

arm . 

arm,  upper . 

arrow . 

arrow,  poisoned . 

axe . 


yilala 

yipudi 

yifodi 

peru 

klaho 

wawu 


baby  carrier 

back . 

bamboo .... 

basket . 

bead . 

beads . 

beard . 

bell . 

belly . 

book . 

bow . 

bowl . 

breast . 

breech  cloth 
Brazil  nut . . 

breath . 

buttock. . .  . 
button . 


.wmibu 

.yingadl 

.tcalio 

.wapa 

.kalala 

.tcamera 

.yehoti 

.urouro 

.viwageru 

.tambita 

.urapa 

.felete 

.yimanitiri 

.maulu 

.toka 

.yiyentibodi 
.  yihotigiri 
.  konopu 


calabash . kaliwa 

calabash  tree .  . kadiwa 

cane . pelema 

canoe . kanau 

capabara . kamenari 

cassava  press . matadi 

cheek . yifihot 

chest . yiropidi 

cigarette  wrapper . tigu 

comb . hankai 


(203) 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


209 


cooking  pot . 

curari . 

curassow. .  . . 

dance  (n.) . . . 
dance  (i>.) 
dance  board. 

dog . 

done . 

door . 

drink . 

drink  bowl .  . 

ear . 

ear  ornament 

eye . 

eyebrow.  .  . . 
eyelash . 

feast . 

finger . 

finger-nail . . . 

fire . 

fish  hook. . . . 

fly . 

foot . 

forehead  . 

gum . 

hair,  body. . . . 
hair,  head 
hammock .  . .  . 

hand . 

heart . 

hole . 

house . 

knee . 

knife . 

knuckle . 

leg . 

leg  band . 

lip . 

lizard . 


.kaidi 

.urarini 

.oko 

idika 

tiwai 

.tepa 

.yeki 

.naka 

.yateli 

.komu 

.maka 

.pana 

.kui 

.yenoro 

.vevairi 

.yenahote 

.kasiri 

.yiwaigetogo 

.yiwaidi 

.mato 

.kewi 

.sedi 

.yipu 

.yifeti 

.palata 

.waki 

.yipotabodi 

waitupi 

yiyadi 

yidedi 

yota 

muramura 

yiwadena 

malya 

yewegito 

yidafadi 

kaluta 

yifidi 


wana 


210  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


macaw . 

match . 

malleolus . 

man . 

mirror . 

mouth . 

mouth  organ .... 

neck . 

negro . 

nose . 

paca . 

pack  basket . 

paddle . 

palm . 

paper . 

paper . 

path . 

pencil . . 

penis . 

penknife . 

pirai,  fish . 

pin . 

pitch . 

plantain  . 

plantain,  ripe. .  . 

poison  box . 

pulse . 

razor . 

salt . 

salutation . 

salutation,  reply 

scissors . 

seat . 

shoulder . 

side . 

sieve . 

sieve,  high . 

sing . 

sleep . 


. kalaliwai 

. mato 

. yimanugo 

. asega 

. weni 

.  . .  .  yentali 
. kemkemino 

. yipomidi 

. meker 

. ona 

. paku 

. katadi 

. por  or  poi 

. yinyalifidi 

. pampita 

. tampiro 

. aima 

. idika 

. yirokili,  yiloki 

. apenikeremitci 

. poni 

. akutca 

. mani 

. aparuru 

. aparurukaina 

. yama 

. yiyamdi 

. kelimitcie 

. tcatu 

. tunaiyena 

. katauyena 

. tcarata 

. mukuti 

. yiwateri 

. yiauteri 

. manari 

. manadi 

. ademi 

. maniyemba 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  C.ARIBS  21! 

smoke  (w.) . alenta 

smoke  ( v .) . tiga,  tigatiga 

snore . tania 

s°le . yita 

starch . pankufa 

stars: 

Aldebaran . otoiramita 

Canis  minor . adima 

Canopus . rutula 

Capella . yanema 

Gemini . tcidiga 

Mars . manati 

Orion . yero  widie 

Pleiades . mumu 

Pointers . iwana 

Procyon . mawa 

Southern  Cross . . . makwi 

stone . tebu 

sun . wi 

tapir . paii 

themselves . makeromati 

thigh . yipetir! 

throat . \  . yifihoti 

tobacco . . . teka 

tobacco  wrapper . komatcu 

toes . yipuyipu 

toe-nail . yihuyaki 

tooth . ■ . iye 

tongue . yinolidi 

,  toucan . ' . yabiku 

tree . awa 

trough,  drink . kudiyeli 

umbilicus . yiponi 

water . . tuna 

what  is  it . kine 

wife . amari 

woman . kufeyu 

woman,  married . werli 

wrist . yimegano 

yawn . tcentipui 

yell . pelekola 


THE  WAKERAS 

The  old  trader  we  met  at  the  Diau  dance  said  his  tribe,  the 
Wakeras,  lived  twenty  eight  days’,  or  a  moon’s  journey,  to  the 
northeast.  He  invited  us  to  go  home  with  him  and  we  started 
to  do  so  when  the  dance  was  over,  but  he  travelled  very  slowly, 
and  the  fifth  day  one  of  his  wives  became  sick  with  fever.  He 
decided  to  camp  at  an  old  field  for  a  few  days  until  she  recovered. 
As  our  medicine  was  about  gone  and  we  were  also  having  fever, 
we  thought  it  best  for  us  to  get  out  of  the  country  the  quickest 
way  possible. 

The  second  day  from  Tcalifona  we  crossed  the  low  divide 
between  what  proved  to  be  the  Corentine  and  the  Amazon  in 
Lat.  i°  55'  N.  and  Long.  56°  45'  W.,  at  an  elevation  of  about 
700  feet.  The  old  trader  kept  telling  us  along  the  way,  of  a  hole 
in  the  forest,  and  we  thought  he  meant  a  lake;  but  when  we 
reached  it  we  were  surprised  to  find  a  fiat  outcrop  of  granite  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  across  right  on  top  of  the  divide.  We  should 
like  to  recommend  that  this  be  made  the  corner  between  the 
two  Guianas  and  Brazil.  As  Ogilvie  and  I  were  the  first  whites 
to  cross  the  divide  at  this  point  we  named  the  rock  Farogle. 
The  distance  from  the  canoe  landings  on  the  two  sides  ol  the 
divide  is  about  four  days  on  foot  over  rolling  land  not  more  than 
a  hundred  feet  high.  I  shall  never  forget  the  day  we  crossed 
the  divide — it  was  the  day  of  my  first  attack  of  fever.  As  1 
walked  along  carrying  my  pack  my  teeth  chattered  until  one 
would  have  thought  1  was  crossing  the  Andes  and  suffering 
from  cold  and  siroche. 

We  camped  on  a  small  stream  which  was  flowing  north. 
Our  guide  said  it  went  on  in  that  direction  forever  and  never 
came  back;  that  it  flowed  into  a  river  so  large  the  eagles  and 
parrots  could  not  fly  across  it  and  that  its  water  was  so  thick 
a  canoe  could  not  be  paddled  in  it  until  the  sun  was  high.  We 
asked  him  if  he  had  ever  seen  the  river;  he  replied,  “No,  all 

(212) 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


213 


the  rivers  I  ever  saw  had  another  side  to  them,  but  this  one 
has  no  other  side.” 

We  built  two  bark  canoes  and  for  twenty  six  days  worked' 
our  way  down  the  difficult  and  dangerous  rapids  until  we  met 
some  negroes  below  the  Great  Falls  who  gave  us  some  rice  and 
beans  and  told  us  that  we  were  descending  the  Corentine  River. 


KUMAYENAS 

The  Kumayenas  live  on  the  Karape  River,  an  eastern 
branch  of  the  Cutari  or  Upper  Corentine,  called  Sipahwim  by 
the  natives. 

A  dead  tree  had  fallen  across  the  mouth  of  the  Karape  and 
we  should  have  passed  without  noticing  the  river  but  for  the 
fact  that  one  of  our  boys  observed  some  vines  hanging  from  a 
branch  into  the  water  in  an  unnatural  way.  Upon  investigation 
we  found  two  bark  canoes  lying  on  the  bottom  of  the  river. 
Thinking  there  must  be  a  village  near  we  entered  the  river  and 
after  going  a  short  distance  found  an  old  camping  site  and  a 
trail  leading  away  into  the  forest.  Following  the  trail  for  three 
hours  we  came  to  a  village  of  several  houses  occupied  by  five 
men,  five  women  and  two  children.  This  was  the  worst  looking 
outfit  of  houses,  dogs  and  people  we  saw  anywhere.  The  houses 
were  mere  tumble  down  shelters  in  an  old  grown  up  field.  The 
people  had  no  cassava  or  bananas  and  no  stored  food  of  any  kind 
except  a  few  nuts.  The  men  wore  ragged  breech  cloths  and  the 
women,  with  one  exception,  had  only  fragments  of  aprons.  They 

had  no  ornaments  of  any  kind. 

There  were  trails  leading  farther  into  the  forest  where  there 
must  have  been  other  villages  but  we  did  not  have  time  to  visit 
them.  This  we  thought  might  be  the  stopping  place  on  the  way 
to  the  river,  but  why  are  the  people  so  poor?  We  could  not 
speak  their  language  and  hence  got  no  information  concerning 
them  other  than  what  we  could  observe.  We  camped  over 
night,  took  photographs,  made  physical  measurements  and  got 
a  short  vocabulary. 

These  people  had  not  been  visited  before  so  far  as  we  know. 
Schomburgk  says  he  found  no  Indians  in  this  region.  See 
Plate  XVIII,  A-C  and  tables  of  measurements. 


(214) 


VOCABULARY 

English — Kumayena 

arm . yipadi 

back . yimotadi 

belR . yimonidi 

buttock . yikono 

calabash . moda 

ehest . yiropudi 

ohm . yiramata 

curassow . oka 

d°g . kaikwi 

ear . ' . pana 

eye . . . unu 

finger-nail . yimoiti 

bre . mato 

foot . yipuru 

hair,  body . yami 

hair,  head . putuba 

hair,  lip . ahoti 

hair,  pubic . amu 

hammock . aiketci 

hand . yinyadi 

index  finger . yinabili 

leg . yidaDadi 

lip . yipolili 

little  finger . akamidi 

moon . nuna 

mouth . yingoli 

neck . yitari 

nose . auna 

pack  basket 

ring  finger. . 


river 


(215) 


katodi 

akoroni 

supariwini 


216  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


. montadi 

. vautadi 

. manadi 

ciPpn  . wanuni 

tI,nrp  . tania  apera 

sole . 

. vitadi 

. uwi 

teeth  . 

thigh . 

third  finger . 

throat . 

. yipetidi 

. akoro 

. yidoli 

thumb . 

. itamiru 

tobacco . 

. akamidi 

toe-nail . 

tongue . 

. yimadi 

. yinodidi 

water  . 

. tuna 

whitp  man  . 

. pananakidi 

wife  . 

. wedi 

woman . unami 

URUKUENAS 

At  the  Kumayena  village  on  the  Karape  River  in  Dutch 
Guiana  we  found  two  men  and  two  women  who  belonged  to  the 
Urukuena  tribe  of  the  more  remote  interior.  From  a  com¬ 
parison  of  the  vocabularies  obtained  it  would  appear  that  these 
two  tribes  are  very  closely  related  linguistically.  We  were 
unable  to  get  any  names  for  the  numerals.  When  counting 
they  touch  each  finger  and  say  wanina.  Leaves  were  counted 
in  the  same  way,  the  number  of  leaves  corresponding  to  the 
number  of  fingers  but  only  one  word  used  for  the  whole  process. 

We  were  impressed  with  the  powers  of  concentration 
exhibited  by  the  older  man.  The  dogs  had  announced  our 
presence  and  we  had  yelled,  as  is  the  custom  many  places,  so 
they  knew  even  before  they  saw  us  there  were  a  half  dozen 
in  our  party.  The  first  shelter  we  passed  as  we  entered  the 
village  was  occupied  by  this  man.  He  was  engaged  in  making 
a  pack  basket  and  continued  his  work,  without  even  glancing 
up,  until  it  was  finished  a  half  hour  later,  when  he  displayed  a 
proper  interest  in  us.  He  had  not  seen  a  white  man  before. 

To  an  outsider  these  two  couples  would  appear  to  be  wrongly 
mated;  the  old  man  has  a  young  wife  while  the  wife  of  the  young 
man  is  old  enough  to  be  his  grandmother.  This  woman  was  the 
only  one  we  saw  in  the  interior  who  had  short  hair.  Her  young 
husband  has  beautiful  fine  wavy  hair.  The  extraction  of  the 
eyebrows  gives  the  men  a  peculiar  expression,  as  it  tends  to 
emphasize  rather  than  to  conceal  their  very  prominent  super¬ 
ciliary  ridges,  and  this  renders  them  rather  ferocious  in  appear¬ 
ance  (Plates  XVI II,  B-D). 


(  217  ) 


VOCABULARY 

English — Urukuena 


arm . 

arm,  lower.  .  . 

baby  carrier . . 

belly . 

Brazil  nut. . .  . 
bread,  cassava 
buttock . 

canoe . 

cheek . 

chest . 

chin . 

curassow . 

dog . 

ear . 

eyebrow . 

finger . 

fire . 

foot . 

hair . 

hammock .  . .  . 

hand . 

house . 

knee . 


.yipudi 

.yimeguna 

.  tanatap 
.  yiwagoli 
.toka 
.turukS 
.piputulf 

. kanowa 
.yimbatali 
.  yirobili 
.yinamatili 
.  tiyokoki 

.tukuge 

.yipanada 

.yinaidl 

.yiuya 

.mato 

.yipuru 

potuba 
.  tikakS 
.denyarikidi 
murumuru 

. .  yiwedenall 


leg . , . yiedi 

lips . yiepide 


moon . nunage 

mouth . yinko 


nail . yimoidi 

neck . yipemoli 

nose . yiona 


one 


wanina 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CAR1BS 


219 


packbasket 
paddle. .  . . 
plantain . .  . 


terataiga 

pokwita 

tiaborurake 


shoulder, 
sleep 
sun . 


yimotadi 

namayemba 

uwi 


thigh.  . 
throat . 
tobacco 
toes . .  . 
tongue, 
tooth. . 
trail. .  . 


yibeti 

yiro 

tega 

yifuigedi 

yinolida 

yieda 

temake 


water 


akomoki 


APALAIIS 

I  had  hoped  to  visit  the  Apalaii  Indians  on  the  Paru  River 
and  made  an  attempt  to  do  so,  but  it  proved  the  wrong  time  of 
year  to  travel  on  that  river.  As  it  was  impossible  for  me  to 
return  at  the  proper  time,  that  is,  when  the  rubber  men  were 
going  up  as  far  as  the  falls,  I  arranged  with  Mr.  C.  N.  Unckle, 
an  ethnologist  temporarily  associated  with  the  Goeldi  Museum, 
to  have  him  visit  the  Apalaii,  make  collections  and  study  their 
culture.  The  following  account  is  based  upon  his  report. 

Mr.  Unckle  joined  the  rubber  gatherers  on  the  Paru  and 
spent  the  whole  month  of  August  in  reaching  the  first  Indian 
village,  where  he  remained  for  six  weeks  living,  travelling  and 
trading  with  the  natives.  He  suffered  severely  from  lack  of 
food  and  from  fever  but  was  unable  to  leave  until  the  rubber 
men  returned  to  carry  him  out.  He  reached  Para  more  dead 
than  alive  but  with  a  splendid  collection  which  he  had  made 
during  the  early  days  of  his  visit.  Thanks  to  the  Indians  who 
accompanied  him  down  river  the  collections  were  saved  in  a 
perfect  condition.  The  delicate  specimens  of  pottery  were 
wrapped  and  tied  up  in  palm  leaves  so  perfectly  that  not  a 
single  one  was  broken.  The  great  feather  headdress  was 
demounted  and  the  feathers  placed  in  bamboo  joints  to  protect 
them  from  the  insects  and  the  elements.  While  Mr.  Unckle  was 
not  able  to  travel  among  many  villages  or  to  see  many  of  their 
ceremonies  he  made  a  very  good  representative  collection  of 
their  handiwork  and  recorded  much  of  their  language,  customs 
and  traditions.  He  greatly  regretted  that  his  photographs 
were  a  complete  failure,  due  to  climatic  conditions  and  illness. 
The  photograph  in  the  Museum  Journal,  Vol.  X,  No.  40, 
showing  house  types,  is  the  only  one  of  ethnological  value 
saved. 

Mr.  Unckle  was  the  third  scientific  traveller  to  visit  the 
Apalaii.  Mr.  J.  Crevaux  went  across  from  French  Guiana  and 

(220) 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIES 


221 


down  the  Paru  in  1883,  ar>d  Mr.  C.  H.  de  Goeje  in  1906  went  up 
the  Tapanahona  and  down  the  Paru,  but  neither  of  them  gives 
much  information  concerning  the  people  they  met  on  the  way. 

The  Apalaii  occupy  the  middle  course  of  the  Paru  River  for 
a  degree  or  more  on  either  side  of  the  equator.  In  earlier  days 
they  came  down  to  the  Amazon,  but  the  presence  of  the  rubber 
man  has  driven  them  beyond  the  first  falls.  Their  nearest 
neighbors  on  the  north,  or  up  river,  are  the  Roucouyenne,  who 
are  also  members  of  the  same  great  Carib  stock.  No  one  has 
travelled  across  country  through  northern  Brazil,  hence  it  is 
not  definitely  known  what  tribes  occupy  the  territory  in  the 
interior  away  from  the  rivers.  Here  is  a  splendid  opportunity 
for  some  one  to  do  a  very  important  piece  of  exploration— to 
follow  the  equator  from  the  Rio  Branco  to  the  Jary  and  thence 
northeast  to  the  mouth  of  the  Oyapock — a  distance  of  a  thou¬ 
sand  miles.  There  are  reports  of  great  savannahs,  but  no  one 
knows  their  location  or  extent.  A  few  years  ago  a  concession 
for  several  million  acres  was  obtained  from  the  government  and 
a  great  company  formed  to  stock  the  lands  with  cattle.  A 
party  of  engineers  was  sent  into  the  region  at  great  expense  to 
survey  and  mark  out  the  boundaries,  but  the  savannah  could 
not  be  found. 

I  shall  not  attempt  to  do  more  than  to  describe  the  speci¬ 
mens  here  illustrated  and  to  give  some  account  of  the  ceremonies 
in  which  they  are  used.  The  great  feather  headdress  (Frontis¬ 
piece)  is  used  by  the  medicine  man  in  ceremonial  dances  in 
which  he  performs  the  leading  part.  It  is  worn  also  by  the 
war  chief  and  by  the  initiate  during  a  part  of  his  puberty  cere¬ 
mony.  Plate  XIX  shows  the  war  chief  in  full  costume  ready 
to  lead  a  band  of  warriors  in  a  dance  preparatory  to  setting  out 
on  a  raid  or  in  the  celebration  of  a  victory. 

The  foundation  of  the  headdress  is  a  rather  crudely  woven' 
high  hat  made  of  arrow  reeds  and  palm  frond  splints.  As  the 
hat  is  entirely  covered  with  feathers  its  structure  is  unimportant 
except  that  it  must  be  sufficiently  strong  to  carry  the  long 


222  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

feathers.  There  are  nine  bands  of  small  feathers  around  the 
hat.  The  feathers  of  each  band  are  strung  or  woven  on  cotton 
cords  and  tied  around  the  hat  in  proper  position.  The  long 
feathers  at  the  top  are  fitted  into  a  reed  which  runs  along  the 
top  of  the  hat.  At  the  conclusion  of  a  dance  or  other  ceremony 
in  which  it  is  used  the  headdress  is  dismantled  and  the  feathers 
stored  in  joints  of  bamboo  for  protection  against  the  elements 
and  destroying  insects.  These  headdresses  are  considered  very 
valuable  by  the  Indians  because  of  the  difficulty  in  collecting 
the  feathers  and  the  time  and  skill  required  in  making  them  up. 

The  long  red  feathers  are  plucked  from  the  tail  of  the 
great  macaw;  the  white  streamers  at  the  top  are  made  of 
eagles’  down;  the  ornamented  sticks  attached  to  the  long 
feathers  are  covered  with  feathers  from  the  humming  bird;  the 
pendants  attached  to  these  are  of  beetles’  wings.  The  first  band 
of  white  below  is  made  of  feathers  from  the  harpy  eagle;  the 
black  band,  from  the  curassow;  the  yellow,  from  the  oriole; 
the  green,  from  the  parrot;  the  yellow  and  red  from  the 
macaw;  the  red,  from  the  macaw;  and  the  white  bands  around 
the  brim  are  of  feathers  from  the  eagle  and  the  egret.  None  of 
the  feathers  are  artificially  colored. 

The  streamers  of  the  headdress  and  the  cloak  of  the  chief 
are  made  of  strips  of  bark  dyed  black  with  the  juice  of  the 
genipa.  The  great  macaw  is  the  most  difficult  creature  of  any 
in  the  forest  for  the  Indian  to  capture.  It  flies  high  and  alights 
on  the  topmost  bough  of  the  tallest  tree.  When  it  feeds  it 
plants  a  sentry  for  its  protection.  To  capture  it  the  Indian 
builds  a  blind  in  the  top  of  a  tree  and  secretes  himself  there 
until  the  macaw  alights,  when  he  shoots  it  with  a  blow  gun  and 
poisoned  arrow. 

Ordeals 

The  puberty  ceremony  is  an  endurance  test  required  of 
boys  before  they  can  be  admitted  to  the  company  of  men  or 
take  part  in  the  councils  of  the  tribe.  The  ceremony,  which 
lasts  for  twenty  four  hours,  is  usually  taken  part  in  by  three  or 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


223 


four  boys  at  a  time.  Some  are  unable  to  endure  the  test  and  fall 
out  to  try  again  at  another  time.  At  daybreak  the  boys,  un¬ 
adorned,  with  staffs  of  arrow  reeds  in  hand,  gather  under  the 
direction  of  the  medicine  man.  They  partake  of  some  food 
which  has  been  especially  prepared  for  them,  and  just  at  sun¬ 
rise,  which  on  the  equator  comes  very  soon  after  the  first 
streaks  of  light,  they  repair  to  the  dance  ground  where  they 
sing  and  dance  the  whole  day  through  without  rest  or  refresh¬ 
ment.  During  the  day  the  medicine  man  and  his  assistants 
make  up  the  large  headdresses,  make  the  wasp  frame  (Plate 
XX),  and  fill  it  with  live  wasps.  At  the  setting  of  the  sun,  the 
boys  who  have  endured  the  strenuous  dance  present  them¬ 
selves  before  the  medicine  man  who  applies  the  wasp  frame  to 
their  chests,  backs,  arms  and  legs.  Those  who  scream  or  who 
betray  any  visible  signs  of  suffering  when  they  are  stung  are  not 
allowed  to  continue  the  ordeal.  Those  who  have  been  brave 
and  have  not  revealed  their  sufferings,  put  on  the  great  head¬ 
dress  and,  carrying  a  flute  in  the  left  hand  and  a  dance  arrow 
in  the  right,  proceed  to  the  dance  ground  where  they  dance 
around  one  behind  the  other  over  the  dancing  board,  blowing 
their  flutes  and  waving  their  dance  arrows  until  finally  about 
midnight  they  fall  exhausted  on  the  ground.  They  attempt  to 
rise  and  continue,  but  others  surround  them  with  mats  and  palm 
leaves  and  compel  them  to  lie  on  the  ground  until  the  medicine 
man  gives  the  signal  for  them  to  jump  into  the  river  for  a  bath. 
When  they  return  the  medicine  man  gives  each  his  first  loin 
cloth,  cuts  off  his  hair  over  the  forehead  and  decorates  him  with 
strings  of  beads  and  a  bandoleer  of  monkey’s  hair. 

The  preparation  of  the  dancing  ground  is  interesting,  but 
common  among  east  Carib  tribes.  A  large  plank  is  made  from 
the  flat  root  of  a  tree  and  placed  over  a  deep  hole  in  the  ground 
in  which  a  sacred  bundle  has  been  deposited.  The  board  is 
then  covered  with  clay,  thus  making  a  hollow  sounding  dance 
ground.  The  sound  of  the  dancing  feet  may  be  heard  a  long 
distance  and  adds  rhythm  to  the  music  of  the  flute.  The  board 


224  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

thus  serves  the  purpose  of  a  drum,  but  this  is  not  its  primary 
function.  It  is  used  as  a  method  of  communication  with  the 
deity  to  notify  him  that  the  dance  is  in  progress. 

The  flute1  used  in  the  dance,  is  made  of  a  hollow  bam¬ 
boo  joint  wound  with  cotton  and  having  a  reed  made  of  a  bird 
bone  inserted  through  the  septum  at  the  lower  end.  A  deco¬ 
rated  calabash  attached  at  the  reed  end  serves  as  a  resonator. 
They  have  other  flutes  closed  with  wax  at  the  upper  end  and 
blown  with  the  mouth  at  a  lateral  hole.  The  hunter’s  horn  is 
made  of  a  joint  of  bamboo  two  inches  in  diameter  and  ten  inches 
long.  It  is  blown  through  a  square  lateral  hole  and  may  be 
heard  a  long  distance.  The  number  of  blasts  informs  other 
hunters  what  kind  of  game  has  been  discovered. 

The  wasp  frame  is  usually  constructed  in  the  form  of  an 
animal,  bird  or  fish.  The  central  part,  six  by  eight  inches,  which 
contains  the  wasps,  is  made  of  wicker  work  of  soft  material. 
The  heads  of  about  a  hundred  wasps  are  passed  through  the 
splints  or  at  the  interstices.  In  this  uncomfortable  position 
the  wasps  are  ready  to  sting  upon  the  slightest  provocation. 
The  other  parts  of  the  frame  are  covered  with  feathers  of  various 
colors  in  order  to  make  the  animal  appear  as  realistic  as  possible. 
Instead  of  wasps,  large  black  stinging  ants  are  sometimes  used 
for  the  same  purpose.  The  exact  distinction  in  the  applications 
of  the  two  insects  is  not  understood.  Ants  are  used  to  sting 
certain  parts  of  the  body,  while  wasps  are  used  for  other  parts; 
ants  in  some  ceremonies  and  wasps  in  others.  There  may  be 
some  sentimental  reasons  for  the  distinctions  in  use,  or  the 
stings  may  produce  different  effects  upon  the  parts  of  the  body 
to  which  they  are  applied.  The  sting  of  either  the  ant  or  the 
wasp  is  more  painful  than  that  of  our  domestic  honey  bee,  hence 
it  requires  considerable  courage  to  submit  to  the  ordeal  of  being 
stung  by  one  hundred  of  these  vicious  insects  all  at  once  and  to 
have  it  repeated  on  five  or  six  parts  of  the  body.  Little  wonder 
that  some  cry  aloud  with  pain. 


1  Museum  Journal,  Vol.  X,  Plate  VIII. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


225 


Marriage 

A  young  man  cannot  marry  until  he  has  successfully  passed 
the  puberty  ordeals  and  thus  has  become  a  man.  More  than 
this,  however,  is  required  of  him.  He  must  give  satisfactory 
evidence  that  he  will  be  able  to  support  a  family.  If  he  is  not 
a  good  shot  with  the  bow  and  arrow  he  will  not  be  able  to  kill 
game  and  fish  enough  to  supplement  their  vegetable  diet. 
Therefore  he  is  required  to  pass  the  target  test.  He  stands 
with  his  back  turned  and  throws  cassava  pellets  at  a  circle 
drawn  upon  a  piece  of  wood.  If  he  does  not  hit  the  centre  of 
the  circle  three  times  in  succession  he  must  repeat  the  whole 
endurance  test  and  try  his  skill  again  or  remain  a  celibate.  In 
some  tribes  the  girl’s  father  tests  the  boy’s  ability  with  the  bow 
by  compelling  him  to  shoot  an  arrow  from  the  bow  of  a  rapidly 
moving  canoe  into  a  bird’s  nest  or  a  woodpecker’s  hole  in  a 
dead  tree.  If  the  boy  should  fail  he  is  allowed  another  oppor¬ 
tunity  at  a  later  date. 

A  girl  must  also  undergo  certain  puberty  ordeals  and  en¬ 
durance  tests  before  marriage.  At  the  first  appearance  of 
puberty  she  must  fast  in  seclusion  for  three  days,  during  which 
time  she  is  not  allowed  to  talk.  She  must  not  eat  meat  for  a 
month.  When  her  fast  is  concluded  her  body  is  scarified  with 
the  sharp  teeth  of  some  animal  or  fish  and  she  is  allowed  to 
wear  an  apron1  for  the  first  time.  She  is  now  ready  to  begin 
the  courtship,  in  which  she  takes  the  initiative.  She  uses 
certain  binas  or  charms  to  stimulate  mutual  affection.  By 
rubbing  her  hands  and  face  with  a  particular  caladium  she 
causes  her  favorite  young  man  to  think  well  of  her.  A  woman 
may  use  the  same  charm  to  prevent  her  husband  from  forgetting 
her  while  he  is  absent  on  a  long  journey. 

When  a  girl  has  reason  to  believe  that  a  certain  young  man 
cares  for  her,  she  presents  him  with  food  and  drink  and  places 
firewood  near  his  hammock.  If  he  accepts  these  offerings  he 


1  Ibid.,  Fig  43. 


226  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

thereby  accepts  the  girl  for  his  wife  but  she  must  submit  to  the 
ant  and  wasp  ordeal  before  she  can  go  to  live  with  him.  Her 
mother  applies  the  ants  to  her  chest,  arms  and  legs  and  the 
wasps  to  her  forehead.  If  she  shows  signs  of  suffering  she 
must  repeat  the  ordeal  at  another  time.  If  she  passes  the  ordeal 
satisfactorily,  a  feast  and  dance  are  given  in  her  honor.  She 
does  not  join  in  the  dance  but  occupies  a  stool  in  a  prominent 
place  where  she  receives  the  admiration  of  all  present.  She 
now  becomes  the  wife  of  the  young  man  without  further 
ceremony. 

Medicine  Man 

These  ant  and  wasp  frames  are  used  also  by  the  medicine 
men  for  remedial  purposes,  especially  for  relieving  acute  pain 
by  the  application  of  the  stings  to  the  ailing  part.  Whether  or 
not  the  sting  has  a  direct  curative  value  it  at  least  serves  the 
purpose  of  a  very  strong  counter  irritant.  Its  best  use  is  for 
rheumatism  and  for  stiffness  after  overexertion.  We  have  a 
belief  among  ourselves  that  the  sting  of  the  honey  bee  is  good 
for  rheumatism. 

The  duties,  powers  and  performance  of  the  medicine  man 
are  the  most  varied  of  any  individual  in  any  society.  He  is 
the  teacher  and  guide  of  his  people.  There  is  nothing  that  he 
cannot  do  or  that  he  does  not  know  in  the  natural  or  spiritual 
realm.  His  chief  duty  is  to  counteract  the  evil  designs  of  hostile 
spirits.  He  is  reverenced  and  feared  by  the  community  and 
consequently  enjoys  more  liberty  and  exercises  more  real  power 
than  any  other  member. 

The  office  is  hereditary,  the  medicine  man  selecting  one  of 
his  sons  for  his  successor.  The  boy  must  undergo  a  long  period 
of  education  and  training.  He  must  become  proficient  in  the 
natural  history  of  the  region;  he  must  know  the  habits  of 
animals  and  the  properties  of  plants;  he  must  know  and  imitate 
the  cries  and  calls  of  animals  and  birds.  He  must  learn  the 
technique  of  the  practice  of  his  profession,  the  proper  chants  for 
the  invocation  of  the  spirits  and  the  methods  of  the  interpre- 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


227 


tation  of  dreams.  He  must  fast  and  endure  pain  with  indiffer¬ 
ence.  He  must  submit  to  an  ordeal  which  may  result  in  his 
death.  That  is,  he  is  required  to  drink  a  prescribed  amount  of 
tobacco  juice,  which  produces  convulsions.  In  the  trance  so 
produced  he  sees  spirits  and  converses  with  them  and  by  them 
is  accepted  as  a  spirit  doctor. 

In  the  practice  of  his  profession  the  medicine  man  is  sincere 
and  believes  as  implicitly  in  his  powers  as  do  the  common  mem¬ 
bers  of  the  tribe.  He  may  not  always  be  able  to  exorcise  an  evil 
spirit  or  to  counteract  the  evil  designs  of  certain  spirits.  The 
spirit  may  be  too  powerful  for  him,  or  the  influence  of  a  rival 
medicine  man  may  be  too  great.  He  has  one  recourse  in  the 
case  of  sickness  in  his  tribe.  He  can  send  an  evil  charm  upon 
the  tribe  of  his  rival  who  is  responsible  for  the  particular  disease. 
The  charm  is  sent  upon  a  woman  who  is  always  recognized  by 
her  own  tribe  and  may  be  punished  or  even  killed  by  them 
because  of  their  fear  of  the  charm. 

When  a  person  is  sick  and  the  application  of  common 
remedies  has  failed  to  produce  a  cure,  some  member  of  the 
patient’s  family  approaches  the  medicine  man,  tells  him  about 
the  case  and  requests  him  to  visit  the  patient  and  attempt  a 
cure.  At  the  same  time  he  offers  the  medicine  man  a  cigarette 
made  for  the  occasion.  If  he  accepts  it  he  thereby  agrees  to 
make  the  visit.  He  will  not  accept  pay  for  his  services  until 
the  patient  is  cured.  This  differs  from  our  practice,  but  the 
next  item  agrees  perfectly.  He  fixes  his  fee  according  to  the 
patient’s  ability  to  pay.  Since  he  does  no  manual  labor,  he 
accepts  as  pay,  food  and  other  necessaries  of  life.  In  an  extreme 
case  he  may  even  receive  a  young  girl  on  account.  The  number 
of  his  wives  is  limited  only  by  his  means  of  supporting  them. 

When  a  medicine  man  dies  he  is  buried,  and  the  spirit 
remains  within  the  body  for  consultation  by  other  medicine 
men.  The  body  does  not  undergo  dissolution  but  remains  flesh, 
as  in  life.  The  body  and  the  spirit  become  immortal. 


728  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

The  frames  are  used  for  still  another  purpose  which  is 
somewhat  obscure.  When  an  important  man  of  recognized 
strength,  courage,  or  ability  makes  a  visit  to  a  village  a  frame 
is  brought  out  and  he  is  asked  to  apply  it  to  the  different  parts 
of  the  body  of  all  the  inhabitants,  men,  women  and  children  alike. 

A  question  arises  as  to  the  real  significance  of  the  use  of 
the  ant  and  wasp  frames.  Among  the  Carib  tribes  the  frame 
is  usually  in  the  form  of  an  animal,  bird,  or  fish,  and  one  is 
naturally  inclined  to  think  that  it  may  have  some  totemic 
significance.  This  probability  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  that 
among  the  Wapisianas,  a  nearby  Arawak  tribe,  the  medicine 
man  utters  a  little  prayer  to  some  animal  when  he  applies  the 
frame,  which,  however,  is  not  in  the  form  of  an  animal.  He 
may  say  “Be  as  bold  as  the  jaguar”  or  “Be  as  free  from  fever 
as  the  black  monkey”  or  addressing  the  deity,  “You  have 
power  to  keep  the  monkey  well;  now  make  this  patient  well.” 
As  already  stated,  some  noteworthy  person  may  apply  the  frame 
and  he  may  be  a  stranger  who  knows  nothing  whatever  about 
the  use  of  the  frame.  Is  the  efficacy  in  the  effect  of  the  stinging, 
in  the  animal  represented,  in  the  person  making  the  application, 
or  in  the  petition  to  deity?  Does  the  initiate  receive  the  strength 
and  courage  of  the  particular  animal  to  withstand  the  ordeal, 
or  is  it  the  character  of  the  person  making  the  application  that 
he  receives?  The  ideas  in  the  mind  of  the  Indian  seem  some¬ 
what  confused  on  this  point.  Any  one  or  all  of  these  ideas  may 
be  present  at  a  particular  performance. 

The  Apalaii  believe  that  these  ordeals  render  the  parents 
skilful  and  industrious  and  insure  the  birth  of  strong  robust 
children.  We  can  easily  agree  with  them.  The  weak  of  body 
or  mind  cannot  pass  the  endurance  test  and  hence  are  unable  to 
marry  and  perpetuate  their  weaknesses.  The  obligation  of 
publicly  enduring  severe  bodily  pain  without  showing  signs  of 
suffering  certainly  demonstrates  strength  of  character  and  has 
a  real  value  in  the  development  of  the  race. 


FARABEE - THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


229 


aunt . 

boy . 

brother . 

child . 

companion .... 

consort . 

father . 

friend . 

girl . 

grandchild .... 
grandfather. .  . 
grandmother.  .  . 

man . 

mother . 

neighbor . 

old  man . 

old  woman . 

people . 

stepfather . 

stepmother . 

sister . 

son . 

uncle . 

wife . 

woman . 

young  woman .  . 
younger  brother 
younger  sister.  . 


English-Apalaii 

7  he  Family 

. apiri 

. udasimano 

. urui 

. imuguru 

. dakorom 

. in  id 

. jumi 

. jepe 

. wetamano 

. inoti  upari 

. inoti 

. tamu 

. arutau 

. aia 

. sepo 

. tampo 

. nupome 

. eno 

. imeritamuru 

. imerinote 

. dumokara 

. koko 

. pipi 

. ipiti 

. nupotoma 

. poito 

. jakorone 

. patie 


Parts  of  the  Body 

arm . 

armpit . 

armpit  hair . 

auditory  canal . . 

back . 

backbone . 

beard . 


apu 

ada’ata 

ada’atcipo 

panaulare 

mipa 

mipakana 

jarotiri 


230  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


belly . 

blood . 

body . 

breast . 

brow . 

calf  of  leg . 

cuticle . 

ear . 

elbow . 

eye . 

eyebrow 
eyelashes. . . . 

eyelid . 

face . 

finger,  little, 
finger  nail. . . 

fish . 

foot . . 

fore  arm 

gums . 

hair . 

hair  of  hand. 

hand . 

head . 

heart . 

heel . 

instep  . 

knee . 

knuckle . 

lips . 

lobe . 

mouth . 

nape  of  neck 

navel . 

neck . 

nipple . 

nose . 

palm . 

patella . 

pubic  hair. . . 
pulse . 


.waku 

.munu 

.oko 

.puroro 

.opi 

.asipuno 

.peti 

.pana 

.aporitci 

.onu 

.osepitcipokanko 

.opitcipo 

.opipo 

.peri 

.omamugura 

.omatciporo 

.ipi’ipiri 

.pupu 

.ome’etciri 

.depuno 

.osepo 

.ipoti 

.oma 

.opupo 

.  isoroinari 

.pitakumo 

.pupumupari 

.osekumu 

.omeku 

.patapipo 

.panemuru 

.mita 

.pimi 

.pono 

.oma 

.manat! 

.  auna 

.omarari 

.arikina 

.imerekango 

.tuanko 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


"  231 


rib . 

shoulder.  .  . 

side . 

skeleton 

sole . 

sole . 

suckle . 

tendon . 

throat . 

thumb . 

toe,  great .  . 
toe,  little. . . 
toe-nail .  . .  . 

tongue . 

tooth . 

vein . 

vision . 

wing  of  nose 
wrist . 


oropa 

mota 

oriti 

apopakuri 

asimo 

pupu  ran 

su’usu 

piramiti 

osinamu 

omadumi 

pupu  dumi 

pupu  muguru 

pepetcipoto 

nuru 

derl 

miti 

omi 

orame 

ometukutuko 


baldness.  . 

fever . 

fever,  high 
headache. . 
hiccough . . 
influenza. . 
shiver.  .  .  . 
sickness. . . 

sigh . 

sneeze.  . . . 


merekweme 

otcirono 

atciro’ononko 

dupu’upiri  jetuno 

sekiauko 

muritano 

oneko 

jetuno 

jetaino 

aciwego 


Animals 


angouti . akuri 

ant  eater,  large . merimo 

ant  eater,  small . meri 

bat . dari 

capabara . kapiara 

deer,  red . kapau 

deer,  savannah . iarito 

hog . aruru 

jaguar,  black . arikitci 


232  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


jaguar,  spotted .  . 

mouse . 

oscelot . 

otter,  large . 

otter,  small . 

paca . 

peccary,  ring.  .  . . 
peccary,  white  lip 

puma . 

tamandua . 

tapir . 

tortoise . 

turtle,  large . 

turtle,  small . 


kaikutci 

mupo 

marakaia 

awawa 

dukine 

kurimau 

poinoko 

pakira 

.kapaumano 

meritcimo 

.matcipuri 

.karatci 

.morura 

.nimotuko 


bird . 

cormorant .  .  . 

curassow . 

duck  w . 

eagle . 

egg . 

hawk . 

hawk,  chicken 
hawk,  white.  . 

maam . 

macaw,  green, 
macaw,  red . . . 

maguary . 

nest . 

nigercoot . 

owl . 

owl,  horned .  . 
owl,  screech .  . 

parikeet . 

parrot . 

parrot,  green . 

toucan . 

vulture . 

vulture,  king. 

wing . 

woodpecker.  . 


Birds 

. torono 

. muramura 

. oko 

. oropono 

. piano 

. imo 

. tciwi 

. tiautiau 

. kumarako 

. mau 

. aripira 

. kinoro 

. akarara 

. imoni 

. kirima 

. kuku 

. pupuri 

. kurau 

. kurikura 

. parawa 

. parawaimo 

. karau 

. kurumu 

. morarai 

. aporiri 

. parutaparu 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CAR1BS 


233 


Reptiles 

alligator . 

anaconda . 

bushmaster . 

jaboty . 

lizard . 

matamata,  turtle . 

snail . 

toad . 

tracaja . 

tree  toad . 

turtle . 


iakare 

aramari 

jurukuku 

kuripupo 

duana 

.matamata 

okoi 

kuto,  mawa 
kurara 
kwakwa 
purupuru 


Fish 

fish . 

pacu . 

pirai . 

piraracu . 

trout . 

tucunare . 


kana 

paku 

pone 

pirarara 

epi’ipiri 

tukunare 


Insects 

butterfly . 

earthworm . 

flea . 

grub . 

mosquito . 

moth . 

pium . 

sand  fly . 

wasp . 

yellow  wasp . 


pTrimoko 

mukuku 

moromoro 

oroko 

masako 

arawe 

piu 

tciko 

arimene 

paraku 


Plants 


abiu . 

bacaba 
bamboo. . . . 
banana. . . . 
banana,  red 


maraiarl 

airiki 

kurimuri 

paruru 

manau 


234  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


bark . erupi 

bast . wempipirf 

cassava . WU1 

corn  . ; . atcinase 

cotton . . mauru 

fruit . epere 

genepapa . kurupo 

grass . jerikosuru 

moss . nonopoti 

orange . naraja 

papaya . mamau 

peppers . aitcl 

pineapple . nana 

potato . naP* 

pumpkin . iromo 

sap . ekuru 

stem . doko 

tobacco . rue 

tree . . wewe 

Numerals 

,  sen][  6.  ioponataputikasitoiro 

2.  asakoro  7-  oma  dumo  kapuna 

3.  oseru’au  10.  oma  mositoro 

4.  asakoro  pan!  20.  pupume  omame 

5.  omametone 

all . Pimg 

end . etipM 

enough . tarona 

half . pimepiri 

little . akoipiri 

much . tuke 

Colors 

blac^ . . tcinamutume 

blue . tcinakulume 

brown . aradume 

golden . deweme 

gray . temeremere 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


235 


orange 
red . . . 
white. 


ararame 

tcinime 

karimutume 


Adjectives 

hitter . ituno 

blind . tcitanko 

c°ld . kwenime 

dead . orinonka 

deep . due 

good . ' . kure 

hard . tumpore 

heavy . omatcino 

high . kai 

hot . atcitune 

large . dumo 

light . dodome 

l°ng . mosa 

l°w . . . toroame 

new . kurane 

old . kakato 

round . merimi 

short . amanoko 

sick . kurepiri 

small . dumokara 

strong . otikanko 

tame . . . denopiri 

tired . .  itaino 

wet . tatcikure 

whole . etororo 

wise . duaro 


ashes . 

black  earth 
blue  sky.  . 

clay . 

clear  water 

cliff . 

cloud . 


Natural  Objects 


aruno 

tcinimano 

eduedumi 

tawa 

tunetcine 

sokome 

kapu  mereru 


236  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


.  .  .karanato 

. imepiri 

. .  .  tatcaitawa 

. apasakii 

. nono 

. apoto 

....  sikisikimako 

. sukako 

.  .apotodukanko 

. newe 

. .  .  .tororokane 

. itutaka 

. mime 

. orame 

. amato 

. tcirikango 

.  .  .pakaimo 

. nuno 

.  .  .osepunemeato  nunS 

. nuno  picika 

. koko 

. erurukane 

. scipepmi 

. osema 

.  puripurikane 

. orino 

.... konopo 

. .  .  .okokuri 

rainy  season . . 

. . .  konopotenko 

.  .  .dumo 

.  .  .iamunu 

. .  .  .iporiri 

. .  .  .sawano 

. sauto 

. ona 

. tunepi 

. udeno 

. moporokawa 

. kapu 

. aitcukarane 

FARABEE - THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


237 


star . 

star,  falling.  . 

stone . 

storm . 

sun . 

sun  over  head 

sunrise . 

sunset . 

thunder . 

thunder  storm 

water . 

waterfall . 

wind . 

yellow  earth . . 
zenith . 


cirikweto 

nepukanu 

topu 

konomeru 

tcitci 

tcicirudeno 

tcitcipiri 

tcitci  tuntanto 

togane 

takaragane 

tuna 

tirikane 

aioaiwepS 

ndoro 

akurum 


'Nouns 

arm  feathers . 

arrow . 

arrow  feathers . 

arrow  foreshaft . 

arrow  notch . 

arrow  point . 

arrow  shaft . 

auger . 

axe . 

axe  blade . 

baby-carrier . 

bandoleer,  cotton . 

bandoleer,  monkey  hair . 

barbecue . 

barb  of  hook . 

basket . 

bird  house . 

blade . 

bow . 

bow . 

bow,  back  of . 

bow,  belly  of . 

bowstring . 

breakfast . 


patcikf 

piru 

aporiri 

emako 

akinakatopo 

taipi 

mutise 

trade 

wiwi 

wiwipuru 

tupoda 

amariarf 

arawipoti 

mamiri 

ipotiri 

arumakano 

pupomano 

doka 

kanawapotiri 

taki 

depupiri 

atikiri 

amiti 

kokoro  atoutade 


238  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


broom . 

calking . 

camera . 

canoe,  bark . 

canoe,  dug  out . 

cassava . 

cassava  press . 

club . 

club  handle . 

club  head . 

cotton . 

crown  of  feathers .  . 

curari . 

dog  house . 

drill . 

drink  bowl . 

ear  feathers . 

ear  pendants . 

eye  of  hook . 

fan . 

farina  basket . 

field . 

fieldmouse . 

file . 

finger  ring . 

fire  drill . 

fire  drill  shaft . 

fire  drill  string. 

fish . 

fisherman . 

fishhook . 

floor . 

floor  mat . 

flute,  bamboo . 

flute,  bone . . 

flute,  of  five  holes . 
flute,  of  three  holes 

food . 

go  to  the  field . 

grater . 

grave . 


sapi 

iari 

eku’utopo 

kanawa 

kanawadumo 

wui 

matapi 

kaparu 

dopopiri 

roko 

mauru 

samarero 

urari 

japa 

sikisikimako 

aripo 

panapoti 

panasere 

atekiri 

anapomo 

aruto 

tupito 

re  re 

1  V  Vi  V/  *J 

kirikiri 

omatau 

apoto  ematopo 

piru 

jatciri 

kananino 

okeri 

oka 

kaitoko 

v  y  w 

epiri 

rue 

kujukujori 

arararuina 

rutopo 

otuno 

tupita  akononko 
wai 

.tonese 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


239 


hammock . 

hammock  ropes 

handle . 

headdress . 

hearth . 

house . 

house,  dance .  . 
house,  oval .... 

juice . 

key . . 

kitchen . 

ladder . 

leg  band . 

loop  of  press .  .  . 

machette . 

mat . 

mirror . 

mortar . 

nail . 

oar . 

pack  basket . . . 

panpipes . 

path . 

pencil . 

pestle . 

pin . 

pipe . 

pitch . 

potter’s  clay. . . 

powder . 

rim  of  bowl .  .  . 

row . 

rudder . 

saw . 

scissors . 

screw . 

seat . 

shot . 

shoulder  basket 

small  pen . 

social  gathering 


atuato 

kotuatakanko 

ipanare 

oroko 

ononto 

tapui 

dumo 

takwaikemo 

wui 

sawi 

kuri  wupomano 
opi 

mauru 

nonoiti 

tapema 

upatopo 

osene 

ako 

prego 

mara 

orokoine 

kuripupo 

osema 

osepo 

akoaine 

iawi 

kachimbo 

mani 

tomeri 

urupara 

ipotari 

kaianko 

apokuita 

serote 

saipe 

iapi 

inepuru 

tcumbo 

parasi 

kaipiri 

itumekupirT 


240  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


soup . 

spin . 

spindle . 

spindle  whorl . 

spoon . 

starch  . 

stool . 

supper . 

tapioca . 

thread . 

tinder . 

torch . 

torch  light .  .  . 
turtle  pen.  . .  . 

twist . 

village . 

village  square 
whetstone. . .  , 


takaka 

epoinko 

kuira 

kuitaderi 

kuie 

okoipuno 
epaitopo 
akoni  atoutade 
imuri 

maurutaburn 

utukango 

artu 

ikarankako 

tirakamano 

kuitaburu 

pata' 

.tutumanka 

.tcimari 


Pronouns 


. iwi' 

. amoro' 

y0U  . 

. mose 

wo  . 

. mosamo 

. mokT 

you 

mine 

. icuko 

. ratowi 

yours 

his . 

. ekaro 

Verbs 


bathe . ipuse 

be . taromana 

bring . tune  enaiko 

bury . akanko 

carry . tuoko 

cut . ikeoko 

dream . asorinonko 

drill . sikistkimako 

drink . tosema 

eat . no.ino 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


241 


fall . nepukano 

find . eporinko 

fish . kananino 

give . saro 

go . itaka 

hunt . . arakanese 

make . grunonko 

pull . esirimako 

row . kaianko 

see . gnainko 

sing . itanko 

sleep . nenongase 

speak . otorunko 

spin . ipoinko 

strike . nona’akanko 

suck . supinko 

twist . . kuitaburu 

wish . isase' 

work . eraunonkS 


MARACA  TRIBES 

In  Northwestern  Brazil  there  are  two  great  tribes,  the 
Wapisiana  and  the  Macusi,  who  belong  to  the  Arawak  and  Carib 
linguistic  stocks  respectively.  On  the  Maraca  River,  a  branch 
of  the  Uraracuera,  there  are  found  some  remnants  of  former 
Carib  tribes:  the  Zaparas,  the  Azumaras  and  the  Porokotos. 
While  little  is  known  of  their  culture  and  language  it  seems 
desirable  to  record  what  we  have  collected  because,  in  all  three 
cases,  pure  bloods  disappear  with  the  present  generation  and  no 
one  will  remain  who  has  any  information  or  interest  concerning 
them. 

ZAPARAS 

The  Zaparas  formerly  lived  in  the  highland  about  the  head¬ 
waters  of  the  Uraracuera  River,  but  more  recently  the  remnant 
of  the  tribe  moved  south  of  the  Maraca  River,  where  the  few 
who  remain  still  live.  Some  time  about  1900  an  epidemic  of 
smallpox  carried  off  all  but  a  few,  who  afterward  lived  among 
the  Macusis.  Today  only  three  full  blood  individuals  remain, 
a  woman  and  her  two  sons.  One  of  the  boys  (Plate  XVII,  E) 
speaks  Portuguese,  the  other  speaks  Macusi,  but  the  mother 
speaks  only  her  own  language,  which  is  very  closely  related  to 
Macusi.  There  is  a  tradition  that  the  Zaparas  originated  from 
a  cross  between  Arecunas  and  Macusis. 

AZUMARAS 

On  the  Maraca  River  we  met  an  Indian  (Plate  XVII,  D) 
who  said  he  belonged  to  the  Azumara  tribe  and  that  he  and 
his  brother  had  been  brought  when  small  boys  to  this  region. 
Neither  he  nor  the  man  whose  servant  he  was  knew  where  he 
formerly  lived  or  from  what  direction  he  came.  Fortunately 
the  two  brothers  had  remembered  something  of  their  own  lan¬ 
guage  which  is  easily  recognized  as  belonging  to  the  Carib 

(242) 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


243 


stock.  I  he  two  men  were  the  lightest  in  color  of  any  Indians 
we  met  in  South  America.  But  for  a  slight  yellowish  tone  they 
could  pass  for  whites.  They  differed  in  physiognomy  also  from 
the  Macusis,  and  the  other  tribes  in  the  region.  They  had 
forgotten  all  about  their  former  culture  and  their  people. 


arm . 

arrow . 

arrow  feathers 
arrow  knob . . . 
arrow  point .  . 
arrow  shaft . . . 

baby . 

back . 

banana . 

bow . 

bowstring.  . .  . 

brother . 

capabara . 

cassava . 

cat . 

chest . 

chin . 

cormorant . 

curassow . 

daughter . 

deer,  red . 

deer,  savannah 

dog . 

duck . 

earth  . 

elbow . 

eye . 

eyebrow . 

eyelash . 

face . 

father . 

finger-nail . 

fingers . 


English — Azumara 

. yahili 

. hulya 

. hulyahilumu 

. hulyanakata 

. hulya 

. hulyamiti 

. bubuasaino 

. umakali 

. ratana 

. uraha 

. urahadawali 

. kaiba 

. haluina 

. tere 

. paka 

. yolohulu 

. ihetamaru 

. hauihi 

. hauisi 

. wilici 

. kusali 

. wiki 

. kule 

. miciwaku 

. nona 

. yahiyaba 

. yenuru 

. ihacibu 

. iencibawa 

. iheli 

. haku 

. ilyolo 

. yamutiri 


244  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


fire . 

fish . 

fish,  pirai .  . 

foot . 

fox . 

hair . 

hair,  body. . 

hand . 

head . 

heel . 

husband . .  . 

joint . 

knee . 

leg . 

lip . 

man . 

moon . 

mother.  .  . 

mouth . 

nose . 

otter . 

paca . 

palm,  hand 
papaya . . . 
parakeet . . 
parrot .... 
peccary .  . . 
plantain . . 
potato. .  . . 

rain . 

rice . 

river . 

shoulder. . 

side . 

sister . 

sky . 

snake . 

sole . 

son . 

star . 

string . 


.wadok 

.dunakwali 

.arata 

.ikuhuru 

.maikau 

.ubetcubawa 

.yaiciba 

.yamuru 

.uhuba 

.ilakumu 

.iya 

.yamuhalakata 
.yaukumulu 
.ihele 
.yebiri 
.toto 
.nuna 
.naku 
.  .umatali 
.  .unari 
.  .tsaro 
.  .wamuli 
.  .iyamura 
.  .kauyima 
.  .tuwano 
. . doro 
.  .hiya 
.  .raianta 
.  .saku 
.  .konahak 
.  .hawati 
.  .tuna 
.  .umatati 
.  .yawaba 
.  .iwaliciri 
.  .kahu 
.  .oki 

.  .ikuhulali 
. .  iyeli 
.  .kiriku 
.  .dawali 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


245 


sun .... 
tapir.  . 
thigh.  . 
tobacco 
toe .... 
toe-nail 
tongue, 
tooth. . 
turtle. . 
water. . 
wife . .  . 
woman . 


.viyu 
.waliali 
.  imiti 
.kawi 
ikuzuri 
ikuhiba 
.inuru 
.  iluli 
.warara 
.tuna 
.ihili 
.huti 


1.  tuine 

2.  asare 

3.  asalua 

4.  asalihene 

5.  amatobatera 

6.  amatoyetoikeza 

7.  setuine’ambatera 

8.  asare’amatoyetoikeza 

9.  asaluasiare 

10.  serua 

11.  asarehene 


Numerals 

12.  ausatatuwali 

13.  kotonatoikeze 

14.  asare 

15.  asalua  amatolebatera 

16.  salhene 

17.  kutabatera 

18.  katonatoikeze 

19.  asare 

20.  asalhene  uhutoterohale 

21.  tatuine 
25.  duine 


The  Azumaras  begin  by  counting  the  little  finger  of  the 
right  hand  first,  then  count  up  to  the  thumb,  pass  over  to  the 
thumb  of  the  left  hand  and  down  to  the  little  finger.  Similarly 
in  counting  the  toes  they  begin  with  the  little  toe  of  the  right 
foot  and  count  over  to  the  little  toe  of  the  left  foot.  They  count 
objects  and  touch  their  fingers  and  toes  in  the  same  order. 
The  numbers  for  corresponding  fingers  and  toes  sometimes  have 
similar  names. 

PORO KOTOS 

The  Porokotos  formerly  lived  on  the  so  called  island  of 
Maraca.  The  maps  of  Northern  Brazil  show  a  very  large  island 
in  the  Uraracuera  River  which  is  surrounded  on  the  south  by 


246  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

the  Maraca  River.  No  one  has  ever  been  around  the  island 
and  there  is  no  evidence  that  a  branch  of  the  Maraca  enters 
the  Uraracuera  above  the  island.  We  ascended  the  Maraca 
farther  than  it  had  previously  been  explored  and  were  inclined 
to  think  it  an  independent  river.  Besides,  the  Maca  Indians 
come  down  the  Maraca  River  every  year  to  trade  but  never 
come  down  the  Uraracuera  which  would  be  a  much  shorter 
journey  to  a  trading  place. 

The  people  lived  on  the  first  Parana  above  the  mouth  of  the 
Maraca.  Smallpox  and  other  diseases  had  reduced  their 
numbers  to  about  a  dozen  in  1904.  They  were  known  as  the 
most  industrious  and  most  tractable  of  all  the  tribes  in  the 
region;  hence  they  were  desired  as  servants  by  every  one  who 
had  heard  of  them.  A  few  years  ago,  a  man  in  Manaos  sent 
word  to  a  friend  on  the  Uraracuera  asking  him  to  get  an  Indian 
girl  and  send  her  down  to  the  city.  His  friend  sent  his  brother 
and  another  man  to  the  Porokotos  to  see  if  they  could  find  a 
desirable  girl.  It  was  not  intended  by  any  one  that  force  should 
be  used.  The  men  found  a  girl,  but  in  their  efforts  to  persuade 
her  to  go  with  them  a  fight  ensued  and  the  man  in  charge  was 
shot  through  the  body  with  an  arrow.  His  companion  deserted 
him  but  was  followed  and  killed  by  the  Indians.  He  managed 
to  get  into  his  canoe  and  push  out  into  the  river  away  from 
danger.  The  arrow  projected  on  both  sides  of  his  body  and 
could  not  be  extracted  so  he  cut  off  both  ends  of  it  and  then 
paddled  his  canoe  down  river  to  his  brother’s  home,  where  he 
soon  died.  The  authorities  arrested  six  Porokotos,  all  the  men 
of  the  tribe  and  started  with  them  to  Manaos  for  trial,  but  on 
the  way  three  escaped  and  the  other  three  were  killed.  Those 
who  escaped  died  of  fever  and  exposure  on  the  way  across 
coming  home.  Now  only  three  women  remain  and  they  are 
living  among  the  Macusis  (Plate  XVII,  A). 

Their  language,  as  will  be  observed,  is  a  dialect  of  the 
Carib  stock  and  closely  related  to  Macusi.  This  may  be  the 
same  tribe  that  Schomburgk  found  in  the  highlands  of  the  north 
and  called  Purigotos. 


FARABF.E — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


24 


arm . 

arrow . 

arrow  feathers, 
arrow  knob . . . 
arrow  point .  .  . 
arrow  shaft .  .  . 

baby . 

back . 

banana . 

bow . 

bowstring . 

brother . 

capabara . 

cassava . 

cat . 

chest . 

chin . 

curassow . 

daughter . 

deer,  red . 

deer,  savannah 

dog . 

duck . 

earth . 

elbow . 

eye . 

eyebrow . 

eyelash . 

face . 

father . 

finger . 

finger-nail . 

fire . 

fish . 

fish,  pirai . 

foot . 

fox . 

hair . 

hand . 


English — Porokoto 


.auyemekung 
poya 
. poyaro 
.powalimi 
.ponatika 
.  poyami 
.Iakra 
aumpai 
paruru 
.  powale 
powateliwang 
auyakano 
.  kapiwa 
.  kele 
paka 

auputelipu 

.aupitamu 

pauihi 

.wilihwe 

sari 

waiking 

kulu 

maiwa 

nono 

auplezi 

auyenu 

aurama 

aunoflatcepa 

aupi 

ame 

auyenda 

auyendapipu 

apoto 

asapu 

araha 

utai 

maikang 

aupupiyipa 

auyendamipai 


248  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM 


I — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


head . 

heel . 

husband. . . 

jaguar . 

knee . 

leg . 

lip . 

man . 

moon . 

mother.  .  .  . 

mouth . 

nose . 

otter . 

paca . 

palm,  hand 
papaya . . . 
parrot .... 
peccary . . . 
potato. . . . 

rain . 

rice . 

river ...... 

shoulder.  . 

side . 

sister . 

sky . 

snake . 

sole . 

son . 

star . 

sun . 

tapir . 

thigh . 

tobacco . . . 

toe . 

tongue. . . . 

tooth . 

turtle . 

water . 

wife . 

woman .  .  . 


.  .  aubupwu 
.  .auyipamunete 
.  .  unyok 
.  .  .  kaikusi 
.  .  auwisemu 
.  . .  auwarekwai 
.  .  auyepi 
.  . . nobu 
.  .  nano 
.  .  ame 
.  .  .au’untang 
.  .  .auyonung 
.  .  .mupawa 
.  .  .walamuli 
.  .  auyendara 
.  .  papada 
. .  .  urauu 
. .  . .  piyinku 
. .  .  .laku 
. .  . . konopo 
. .  . .  awati 
. .  .  .paruyama 
. .  .  .aumutel 
. .  .  .auyurakiyepu 
. .  .  .tiko 
. .  .  .ka’a 
. .  .  kainiahii 
. .  . .utaira 
. .  .  .unre 
. .  . .  tiliku 
....  wei 
. .  .  .wayali 
. .  .  .auyurarekwai 
....  kawaii 
. .  .  .utaipipwii 
. .  .  .au’unu 
. .  .  .au’uyu 
. .  .  .warara 
...  .tuna 

. wilihwe 

. wilihwewili 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


249 


Numerals 


1.  aleini 

2.  iniperkuru 

3.  iniale 

4.  inialenula 

5.  aliniamipai 

6.  awienayu 

7.  ininiaperkula 

8.  ayayendawa 

9.  nayendawamepone 

10.  salileka 


1 1 .  utaiyung 

12.  utaiyungtarung 

13.  utaiyukataiyung 

14.  iniperkurung 

15.  utaimiperku 

16.  utaiyungatolo 

17.  perkurung 

18.  ale 

19.  perurungmi 

20.  mipai 


The  Porokoto  begin  counting  with  the  thumb  of  the  left 
hand  then,  after  the  fingers  are  counted,  the  thumb  of  the  right 
hand,  the  great  toe  of  the  right  foot  and  the  great  toe  of  the 
left  foot.  In  counting  grains  of  corn,  each  grain  was  moved 
separately  and  at  the  same  time  the  corresponding  finger  or  toe 
was  touched  and  the  number  given. 

One  is  sometimes  expressed  by  ini  alone.  The  meaning  of 
the  first  four  numerals  is  not  understood;  five,  aliniamipai,  is 
aleini,  one  and  amipai,  hand;  six  and  seven  are  unknown;  eight 
and  nine  are  made  up  of  yenda,  finger  and  additional  particles; 
ten  is  unknown;  eleven  is  the  great  toe  of  the  right  foot  and 
bears  its  name,  utai,  foot  and  yung,  father;  seven,  fourteen, 
seventeen  and  nineteen  are  made  up  of  perku,  a  part  of  two, 
with  prefixes  and  postfixes;  sixteen  is  the  great  toe  of  the  left 
foot  with  the  syllable  atolo  added;  eighteen  would  seem  to  be 
incomplete;  twenty  is  a  part  of  the  word  for  hand  but  it  prob¬ 
ably  means  person  when  used  alone. 


OTHER  TRIBES 

Many  mistakes  have  been  made  in  the  past  by  travellers 
who  have  located  on  their  maps  the  positions  of  tribes  they  did 
not  visit  and  about  whom  they  knew  nothing  more  than  the 
name  and  the  general  direction  of  their  territory.  Tribes  speak¬ 
ing  different  languages  often  have  different  names  for  the  same 
tribe,  so  the  name  the  traveller  gives  to  a  tribe  depends  upon 
the  direction  of  his  approach.  Many  times  distinct  tribes  bear 
the  same  name  because  they  happen  to  have  something  in 
common:  they  may  use  poison  or  paint  or  live  on  a  mountain 
or  along  a  river;  hence  they  are  poison  people,  paint  people, 
hill  people  and  river  or  water  people.  Thus  there  has  been 
brought  about  much  confusion  in  regard  to  the  names  and 
locations  of  many  South  American  tribes.  1  shall  give  the 
names  of  some  twenty  tribes  without  attempting  to  locate 
them  on  the  map.  The  Diaus  say  there  are  six  tribes  living  to 
the  east  of  their  territory:  Arimianas,  Kalicinas,  Okumianas, 
Paraivianas,  Pianokotas,  Uricuanas  and  Waiweanas. 

The  Waiwais  speak  of  three  tribes  to  the  south  and  south¬ 
east  of  them.  The  Pauyaiden  who  live  to  the  southeast  speak 
a  dialect  of  the  Waiwai  language.  The  Cileus  live  far  down 
the  Trombetas  and  speak  a  distinct  language.  They  have  the 
custom  also  of  wrestling  on  the  sunken  sounding  board  in  the 
dancing  ground.  Two  men  face  each  other  standing  on  the 
board  and  strike  each  other  with  whips  until  one  throws  away 
his  whip  and  clutches  his  opponent.  The  proper  hold  is  right 
arm  over  left  shoulder  and  left  arm  under  right  arm  of  opponent 
grasping  waist  band  of  breech  cloth.  The  contestants  either 
try  to  throw  each  other  down  or  to  lift  each  other  off  the  ground. 
The  Bili  tribe  lives  in  the  savannah  not  far  from  the  Cileus. 
They  have  an  ornament  for  the  mouth  which  is  described  as 
being  like  a  bridle  bit.  The  Tarapidians  live  lower  down  the 
Trombetas. 


(250) 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


251 


The  Apalaii  give  the  names  of  the  following  neighboring 
tribes.  Those  marked  with  an  asterisk  are  friendly:  Ajana, 
Arikiana*,  Duanapuku*,  Kaikutciana*,  Ojapi,  Pianoi*,  Rou- 
couyenne,  Tirijo  and  Upurui.  The  Waiwes  say  the  Karaps 
formerly  lived  far  to  the  southwest  of  them. 

SCHOMBURGK 

The  only  other  man  who  had  visited  any  part  of  the  interior 
we  traversed  was  Richard  Schomburgk,  who,  in  1843,  crossed 
from  the  Essiquibo  to  the  Apini,  descended  that  river  to  the 
Wanamu,  which  he  followed  to  its  source,  crossed  the  Acarai 
„  Mountains  and  came  down  the  Corentine.  He  gives  the  names 
of  tribes  visited  on  the  way  but  tells  us  very  little  about  them 
or  their  culture.  At  the  head  of  the  Apini  he  found  the  Mao- 
pityans  but  refers  to  no  other  tribe  except  the  Zurumatas,  a 
branch  of  the  Pianoghotos.  On  the  Wanamu  his  Maopityan 
Indians  were  attacked  by  the  Pianoghotos.  He  passed  by  a 
village  of  the  Orokoyauna  or  Papagei  Indians,  who  were  the 
terror  of  all  other  tribes  and  went  on  to  the  Drios  on  the  Cutari, 
where  he  built  bark  canoes  and  descended  that  river  for  twenty 
six  days  without  meeting  any  one. 

We  found  Mapidians  in  the  interior  but  none  on  the 
Apiniwau.  Near  where  Schomburgk  found  Zurumatas  we  found 
the  Parukutus.  On  the  Wanamu  we  found  no  one  living,  but  on 
the  divide,  where  he  speaks  of  Pianoghotos,  we  found  Diaus, 
and  on  the  Cutari,  where  he  found  Drios,  we  found  no  one 
living. 

Schomburgk1  locates  on  his  map  a  Barokoto  village  south 
of  the  equator  on  the  Dara  Kityu  River,  the  Paroghotto  terri¬ 
tory  to  the  east  and  the  Tunayanna  extending  to  the  Kaphu 
River  or  Trombetas.  He  did  not  visit  this  territory  but  heard 
of  these  two  tribes.  It  would  appear  that  these  tribes  have 
moved  to  the  northeast  and  are  the  same  as  our  Parukutu  and 


1  Reisen  in  British-Guiana  in  dem  Jahren  1840-1844,  Leipzig,  1848. 


252  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

Toneyena,  that  the  Maopityans  have  moved  to  the  southeast 
and  that  the  Pianoghoto  and  the  Drio  have  moved  to  the  east¬ 
ward.  In  1884  Coudreau1  crossed  the  Acarai  Mountains  from 
British  Guiana,  visited  a  Moonpidienne  village,  and  an  Ouayeoue 
village  and  returned.  His  map  shows  the  location  of  all  the 
tribes  reported  in  the  whole  region  in  every  direction  but  he 
visited  only  two  of  them.  Northeast  of  the  Apini  River  he 
shows  a  tribe  of  Yaous  in  the  highlands.  These  no  doubt  are 
the  same  as  our  Diaus  who  have  moved  eastward  along  the 
highlands  and  displaced  the  Pianoghotos  of  Schomburgk. 

The  Drios  cannot  be  the  same  as  the  Diaus  because  Schom¬ 
burgk  says  the  Drios  tattooed  the  body  all  over,  whereas  the 
Diaus  tattoo  lines  at  the  corners  of  the  mouth  only.  Neither 
can  the  Pianoghotos  be  the  Parukutus  because  the  women  of 
the  first,  according  to  Schomburgk,  wear  their  hair  short, 
whereas  the  women  of  the  second  wear  theirs  long.  It  is  hardly 
likely  that  two  such  important  customs  have  been  changed 
without  any  contact  whatever  with  the  outside  world. 

Schomburgk  did  us  one  kind  turn.  He  took  with  him 
from  the  Essiquibo  River  a  young  Taruma,  whom  he  left  behind 
on  the  lower  Apiniwau  River.  The  boy  made  his  way  south¬ 
ward,  married  a  Parukutu  woman  and  remained  in  the  country. 
He  taught  his  children  to  speak  Taruma  (Arawak)  while  his 
wife  taught  them  Parukutu  (Carib).  On  our  journey  we  fell  in 
with  one  of  his  sons  who  was  greatly  pleased  to  act  as  inter¬ 
preter  and  to  accompany  us  to  the  next  village. 


1  Etudes  sur  les  Guayanes  el  L’Amazonie  par  Henri  A.  Coudreau,  Paris,  1887. 


SOMATIC  CHARACTERISTICS 

The  value  of  descriptive  characters  is  largely  negligible 
because  of  unsatisfactory  standards  and  the  great  range  of 
personal  estimation  of  differences  in  unmeasurable  magnitudes. 
It  is  dangerous  for  even  an  experienced  observer  to  speak  in 
general  terms,  yet  some  description  is  often  essential. 

From  the  photographs  and  physical  measurements  it  will 
be  seen  that  the  people  here  described,  both  men  and  women, 
are  well  developed  but  neither  excessively  fat  nor  noticeably 
muscular.  They  have  smooth  regular  features  on  the  whole 
and  are  comely  in  appearance.  The  forest  tribes  are  the  most 
attractive  Indians  in  physical  aspect,  as  well  as  in  manners, 
that  we  have  ever  encountered  anywhere.  They  are  always 
neat  and  scrupulously  clean  in  their  habits  of  life.  \  hey  bathe 
frequently,  men,  women  and  children  all  going  to  bathe  together 
once  or  twice  a  day.  The  dogs  are  bathed  and  the  houses  kept 
clean  of  rubbish  and  free  from  evil  odors. 

Their  eyes  are  medium  in  size,  very  dark  and  sparkling. 
The  eyeslits  are  horizontal  among  all  the  tribes  with  the  excep¬ 
tion  of  a  few  individuals,  noticeably  the  Diau  girl  (Plate  XVI, 
D-G)  and  one  Parukutu  man,  who  have  eyes  with  a  decided 
slant.  The  conjunctiva  is  yellowish  in  the  adult.  The  eye¬ 
brows  are  carefully  extracted  by  both  sexes  because  they  inter¬ 
fere  with  the  vision.  Sometimes  the  brows  are  painted  black  on 
account  of  the  appearance.  The  supraorbital  ridges  are  not 
highly  developed  in  the  men,  but  show  more  than  is  customary 
because  of  the  absence  of  the  brows.  The  nose  is  straight  in  out¬ 
line  with  a  medium  bridge  and  root.  The  wings  in  some  cases  are 
quite  broad,  the  normally  horizontal  septum  is  usually  pierced 
for  the  passing  of  feathers.  The  lips,  never  thin,  are  often  quite 
heavy  and  sometimes  protruding,  but  the  face  is  never  prog¬ 
nathous.  The  mouth  is  small  or  medium.  The  chin  is  rounded, 
never  square  or  receding.  The  lower  iaw  is  not  prominent,  but 

(253) 


254  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

the  molar  bone  is  sometimes  prominent,  as  among  some  of  the 
Parukutus  (see  Plate  XV,  F-G).  The  teeth  on  the  whole  are 
very  badly  decayed.  They  appear  to  be  worse  among  the 
women  than  the  men.  Macusi  girls  of  fifteen  have  as  a  rule  lost 
their  two  upper  middle  incisors,  these  seem  to  go  first,  then  the 
molars  and  lastly  the  lower  incisors.  They  frequently  file  the 
upper  teeth  in  the  hope  of  saving  them  and  it  does  seem  to 
prevent  decay  to  some  extent.  The  ear  in  relation  to  the 
length  of  the  face  is  longer  than  among  whites.  The  ear  is 
rounding  and  stands  close  to  the  head;  the  helix  is  thin  and 
rolled  inward;  the  lobe  is  free  and  pendant  and  usually  pierced 
in  both  sexes. 

The  head  is  free  from  any  kind  of  deformation  whatever. 
It  is  carried  in  an  easy  erect  position,  when  walking  or  standing, 
as  will  be  observed  from  the  photographs.  The  hair  on  the 
head  is  lustrous  black,  abundant,  fine  and  often  wavy,  particu¬ 
larly  among  the  forest  tribes  (see  Plate  XVI II,  B-D).  The  Paru- 
kutu  in  Plate  XIII,  A  was  the  oldest  man  we  had  ever  seen, 
but  he  had  only  a  few  gray  hairs.  No  baldness  was  observed. 
The  hair  is  worn  long  by  both  sexes  and  well  cared  for  by  oiling 
and  combing.  The  women  part  their  hair  in  the  middle  and 
allow  it  to  fall  free  over  the  shoulders  and  down  the  back  or 
tied  in  a  knot  at  the  nape  of  the  neck.  They  usually  cut  the 
hair  over  the  eyes  and  allow  it  to  come  down  well  over  the 
forehead.  The  men  usually  part  the  hair  over  the  head  from 
ear  to  ear,  comb  one  part  forward  and  cut  it  across  over  the 
eyebrows;  the  other  part  is  wound  with  a  string  and  then  con¬ 
fined  in  a  decorated  bamboo  tube  which  hangs  down  the  back. 
The  men’s  hair  was  longer  than  the  women’s.  There  is  no 
body  hair  except  on  the  pubis  of  the  men  and  there  it  is  very 
scant.  It  is  possible  that  the  women  extract  the  little  pubic 
hair  they  have  but  we  were  assured  by  the  men  in  the  interior 
that  the  women  never  have  any  pubic  hair.  Two  Waiwai 
married  men  told  us  that  the  women  did  not  extract  the  hair; 
that  there  were  only  two  women,  the  chief’s  mother  and  another 


FARABEE - THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


255 


old  woman,  who  had  any  hairs  and  they  not  more  than  ten  each. 
These  women  were  spoken  of  as  baby  monkeys  of  the  red  howler 
species  ( Mycetes  seniculus )  because  these  monkeys  at  birth  are 
bald  with  the  exception  of  a  few  scattering  hairs. 

The  Indian’s  senses  of  sight  and  hearing  are  highly  de¬ 
veloped  but  possibly  no  more  acute  than  is  found  among  white 
men  who  are  hunters.  I  was  never  aware  of  any  superiority 
in  their  sense  organs  over  our  own.  They  might  see  and  get 
more  game  than  we  could,  but  if  so  it  was  because  they,  from 
their  training,  knew  better  where  to  look  for  it.  Careful  obser¬ 
vations  are  sometimes  of  more  value  than  direct  scientific  tests 
of  eyesight.  Keeness  of  sense  is  largely  a  matter  of  careful 
attention.  You  are  walking  behind  an  Indian  on  a  trail,  he 
stops  suddenly,  you  have  not  heard  or  seen  anything,  but  he 
points  through  the  leaves  to  the  top  of  a  tall  tree  and  whispers 
“Green  parrot.”  You  look  and  see  a  bird — it  might  be  a  crow 
as  far  as  you  can  tell.  You  say,  “What  wonderful  eyesight!”— 
not  that  at  all.  He  noticed  fresh  seeds  in  the  trail,  he  knew  the 
parrot  eats  that  fruit,  he  looked  straight  above  and  saw  the  bird 
feeding.  Or  your  Indian  stops,  listens,  gives  a  low  call  and 
gets  an  answer  from  a  certain  variety  of  curassow,  he  continues 
to  call  until  the  bird  comes  within  twenty  feet  of  him,  when  he 
shoots  it  with  his  bow  and  arrow.  You  say,  “How  wonderful!” 
— you  had  not  heard  the  call  of  the  bird  in  the  beginning — 
neither  had  the  Indian.  He  knew  that  particular  bird  haunted 
that  kind  of  forest  and  gave  the  first  call  to  learn  if  any  were 
in  hearing.  In  some  such  fashion  nine-tenths  of  the  stories 
concerning  the  superior  senses  of  primitive  peoples  may  be 
explained. 

The  ability  properly  to  orient  oneself  may  be  thought  of 
as  the  sense  of  location,  but  when  analyzed  it  is  reduced  to 
education  and  attention.  The  Indian  always  knows  the  way 
home,  while  the  white  companion  is  likely  to  get  lost.  On  a 
dark  day  in  the  dense  level  forest  jungle  of  the  tropics  there  is 
nothing  to  guide  the  stranger,  and  he  is  surprised  to  find  the 
Indian  is  able  to  make  his  way  back  to  camp. 


256  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

The  Carib  tribes  in  the  forest  are  lighter  in  color  than  the 
Macusi  of  the  savannah  and  lighter  than  the  neighboring 
Arawaks.  No  scale  color  that  1  have  ever  found  will  match 
the  skin  color  of  the  Indians  of  the  forest;  they  are  lighter  than 
anv  of  the  North  American  tribes  with  whom  I  am  acquainted. 
Their  light  color  may  be  due  to  their  life  in  the  dark  forests, 
or  to  the  custom  of  covering  their  bodies  with  red  paint,  or  to 

a  combination  of  both.  . 

Men  and  women  have  great  endurance  in  travelling  on  the 

trail  or  in  the  canoe.  The  women  are  accustomed  to  carry 
heavy  loads  of  corn  or  cassava  from  the  fields  to  the  house,  so 
thev  carry  the  same  load  as  the  men  in  a  pack  tram.  Any  one 
will  travel  from  fifteen  to  twenty  miles  a  day  and  carry  fifty 
or  sixty  pounds.  On  one  of  our  journeys  we  were  compelled 
by  lack  of  water  to  make  fifty  four  miles  according  to  my  pe¬ 
dometer  in  two  days,  from  the  Yupukari  on  the  Rupunum  to 
the  Mission  on  the  Takutu.  The  Macusis  are  stronger  and 
more  rugged  than  their  Wapisiana  neighbors.  They  walk  with 
a  quick  step,  the  feet  straight  and  hands  swinging,  palms  to 
thighs.  They  like  to  travel  fast  and  camp  early.  When  the 
shelter  has  been  made  a  bath  is  taken  before  the  dinner  is  pre¬ 
pared.  As  soon  as  the  meal  is  over,  they  retire  to  their  ham¬ 
mocks  and  are  soon  asleep.  The  tump  line  is  used  when  packing 
heavv  burdens  and  this,  no  doubt,  accounts  for  the  erect  atti¬ 
tude  and  good  carriage  of  all  these  people.  Men  and  women 
assume  different  postures  when  at  rest.  Men  habitually  squat 
on  their  heels  while  the  women  sit  flat  on  the  ground,  usually 
with  one  knee  bent  and  the  foot  close  between  the  thighs. 
Men  sometimes  stand  on  one  foot  with  the  other  held  against 
the  opposite  leg  close  above  the  knee.  Both  sexes  squat  to 

urinate. 

Abnormal  persons  are  very  rare  among  them.  No  case  ot 
albinism  was  ever  reported.  The  Macusis  destroy  by  strangu¬ 
lation  any  child  born  with  marked  deformity.  Christie  in 
fifteen  years  had  observed  one  feeble  minded,  one  mute  and  one 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CAR!BS 


257 


deaf  person;  one  woman  with  only  one  breast;  one  woman 
lacking  the  caudal  vertebrae;  one  pair  of  twins.  No  ill  luck 
or  evil  omen  is  attached  to  the  birth  of  twins. 

Artificial  deformation  is  not  practiced  except  the  perforation 
of  the  lower  lips,  the  nose  and  the  ears.  The  head  is  not  de¬ 
formed.  There  is  no  circumcision  nor  ceremonial  breaking  of 
the  hymen.  Among  the  Waiwais,  the  men  wear  a  cord  around 
the  body  which  supports  the  left  half  of  the  scrotum.  In  the 
beginning  it  may  have  been  designed  to  support  the  heavy  side 
but  it  is  worn  now  regardless  of  necessity.  I  discovered  it  while 
bathing  with  them;  one  man  who  did  not  wear  the  support 
said  he  had  put  one  on  but  it  was  so  uncomfortable  he  had  never 
tried  it  again. 

Measurements  Explained 

The  measurements  are  the  ones  usually  taken  by  field 
workers  but  some  explanation  of  landmarks  seems  desirable  in 
order  to  avoid  confusion  in  comparative  study.  It  is  usually 
easy  enough  to  handle  primitive  people,  after  their  confidence 
is  once  gained,  so  long  as  it  is  not  necessary  to  touch  the  person 
of  the  subject.  But  it  is  a  very  delicate  matter  to  take  mea¬ 
surements  and  to  touch  the  body  with  strange  cold  instruments, 
particularly  so  with  people  who  are  so  cautious  that  they  throw 
away  the  first  object  given  them  and  accept  the  second  or 
throw  away  the  first  food  and  then  immediately  ask  for  more. 
We  always  took  measurements  of  some  of  our  companions  first 
and  afterward  it  was  not  difficult  to  persuade  some  one  about 
the  same  height  to  stand  up  for  comparison.  After  the  men  had 
been  measured  we  would  ask  the  chief  about  measuring  the 
women;  if  he  hesitated  or  the  women  were  timid  or  bashful 
we  did  not  urge  them  at  the  time  but  usually  were  able  to  get 
them  later. 

Our  work  was  facilitated  also  by  having  men  with  us  from 
the  last  village  visited  who  told  of  all  our  doings  there.  My 
own  height  is  nearly  a  foot  greater  than  that  of  the  average 
man  among  these  tribes  and  their  tallest  men  often  would  stand 


258  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

up  by  my  side  to  measure  my  height  then  we  would  get  the 
measuring  rod.  The  operation  required  great  care  because 
there  were  no  facilities;  no  floors,  chairs,  boxes  or  proper  stools. 
The  .  sitting  height,  difficult  to  take  with  accuracy  under  the 
best  auspices,  was  most  unsatisfactory.  The  other  measure¬ 
ments  were  taken  with  more  than  ordinary  precision  because  the 
people  wore  no  clothing  except  the  breech  clout  and  apron. 
The  strength  of  the  hands  was  not  accurately  recorded  because 
the  dynamometer  was  so  wide  the  people  were  unable  to  get  a 
satisfactory  grip  on  it. 

Landmarks 

Age:  approximate.  All  measured  were  adults. 

Height  to  shoulder:  acromial  of  right  shoulder. 

Span:  maximum  arm  reach. 

Arm  length:  height  to  shoulder  minus  height  to  third  finger. 
Breadth  of  shoulders:  biacromial. 

Chest  measurements:  at  level  of  nipples. 

Breadth  of  hips:  biiliac. 

Length  of  left  cubit:  over  the  elbow  to  tip  of  medius. 

Length  of  left  third  finger:  over  the  joint. 

Length  of  left  hand:  line  of  thenar  and  hypothenar  eminences 
to  end  of  medius. 

Breadth  of  the  hand:  across  the  knuckles. 

Breadth  of  foot:  maximum  at  right  angles  to  the  length. 

Length  of  head:  glabello-occipital. 

Breadth  of  head:  maximum. 

Minimum  frontal:  diameter  between  the  temporal  crests. 
Breadth,  bizygomatic:  maximum  upper  face  diameter. 

Breadth,  bigonial:  diameter  between  angles  of  the  lower  jaw. 
Height,  menton-crinion:  from  the  lowest  point  of  the  chin  to  the 
hair  line. 

Height  of  nose:  from  the  nasal  septum  to  nasion. 

Breadth  of  nose:  over  the  alae. 

Respiration  and  pulse:  taken  by  medical  doctor  with  subject 
sitting  at  rest. 


Measurements1 


TABLE  1— MACUSI 


Males 


Age . 

Height . 

Height  to  right  shoulder . 

Height  to  third  finger . 

Height  sitting . 

Span . 

Arm  length . 

Breadth  of  shoulders . . . 

Breadth  of  chest . 

Depth  of  chest . 

Breadth  of  hips . 

Length  of  cubit . 

Length  of  third  finger . 

Length  of  hand . 

Breadth  of  hand . 

Length  of  foot . 

Breadth  of  foot . 

Length  of  head . 

Breadth  of  head . 

Minimum  frontal . 

Breadth,  bizygomatic . 

Breadth,  bigonial . 

Height,  menton-crinion . 

Height,  menton-nasion . 

Height,  prosthyon-nasion . 

Height  of  nose . 

Breadth  of  nose . 

Breadth,  ocular . 

Breadth  of  mouth . 

Height  of  right  ear . 

Grip,  right  hand . 

Grip,  left  hand . 

Respiration . 

Pulse . 

Indices: 

Height  sitting  -  height . 

Span  -  height . 

Arm  -  height . 

Cubit  -  height . 

Foot -height . 

Breadth  shoulder  -  height . 

Breadth  hips  -  breadth  shoulders . . 

Chest . 

Hand . 

Foot . 

Cephalic . 

Bizygomatic  -  breadth  head . 

Bigonial  -  bizygomatic . 

Upper  facial . 

Lower  facial . 

Total  facial . 

Nasal . 


1  j 

No.  1 

No.  2 

No.  3 

1 

No.  4 

No.  5 

No.  6 

No.  7 

No.  8 

No.  9 

No.  10 

No.  11 

No.  12 

No.  13 

No.  14 

23 

35 

25 

25 

30 

40 

40 

35 

30 

30 

35 

35 

40 

1507 

1599 

1507 

1571 

1570 

1516 

1550 

1584 

1526 

1616 

1591 

1576 

1486 

. .  1335 

1261 

1306 

1317 

1287 

1291 

1249 

1286 

1300 

1252 

1330 

1270 

1277 

1225 

. .  618 

628 

630 

645 

630 

594 

643 

595 

616 

635 

fins 

810 

837 

815 

841 

820 

780 

780 

835 

795 

860 

820 

833 

771 

1547 

1684 

1590 

1623 

1715 

1646 

1659 

1700 

1609 

1708 

1708 

1636 

1568 

633 

676 

672 

657 

654 

643 

705 

636 

642 

620 

.  369 

350 

357 

360 

364 

378 

348 

353 

356 

337 

385 

380 

356 

340 

.  290 

304 

303 

280 

290 

314 

270 

292 

285 

280 

302 

307 

285 

287 

.  236 

231 

209 

209 

227 

227 

215 

213 

213 

209 

232 

241 

225 

221 

308 

298 

313 

296 

304 

308 

292 

287 

303 

282 

303 

315 

320 

290 

452 

419 

450 

430 

439 

452 

436 

445 

460 

438 

467 

452 

430 

410 

104 

103 

107 

97 

101 

107 

101 

104 

105 

101 

111 

110 

107 

100 

167 

177 

160 

168 

180 

171 

167 

181 

173 

180 

180 

170 

166 

84 

77 

73 

70 

75 

78 

79 

80 

83 

75 

90 

89 

81 

79 

250 

237 

244 

232 

230 

257 

239 

242 

259 

249 

253 

257 

260 

223 

97 

104 

98 

83 

100 

94 

96 

106 

108 

94 

103 

110 

109 

98 

185 

182 

182 

173 

190 

180 

177 

180 

182 

183 

187 

197 

197 

176 

152 

143 

153 

141 

153 

151 

145 

142 

146 

150 

155 

147 

148 

150 

100 

104 

104 

92 

107 

107 

104 

102 

106 

106 

105 

102 

110 

104 

140 

140 

147 

131 

146 

141 

135 

135 

138 

136 

141 

146 

140 

141 

107 

110 

102 

95 

103 

107 

104 

102 

101 

106 

109 

103 

115 

108 

170 

177 

187 

165 

193 

195 

176 

172 

174 

163 

197 

176 

173 

177 

.  114 

121 

118 

110 

109 

65 

72 

77 

64 

75 

78 

69 

72 

73 

74 

76 

75 

74 

69 

43 

48 

50 

46 

48 

55 

44 

47 

52 

49 

51 

53 

49 

47 

43 

43 

45 

34 

37 

41 

41 

47 

37 

43 

48 

44 

41 

66 

68 

68 

58 

68 

68 

61 

68 

71 

63 

69 

74 

66 

59 

55 

59 

50 

48 

55 

55 

59 

57 

47 

51 

57 

60 

59 

63 

60 

69 

63 

56 

67 

73 

59 

62 

60 

66 

60 

64 

59 

59 

.  132 

100 

110 

125 

90 

125 

100 

120 

100 

70 

20 

20 

20 

96 

60 

52 

50.8 

53.7 

52.3 

54.1 

53.5 

52.2 

51.4 

50.3 

52.7 

52.1 

53.2 

51.5 

52.9 

51.9 

104 

103 

105 

101 

103 

109 

108 

107 

107 

106 

105 

107 

104 

105 

44.4 

42.0 

42.2 

44.5 

41.8 

43.1 

41.5 

44.5 

41.7 

40.7 

41.7 

28.0 

27.8 

28.1 

28,5 

27.9 

28.8 

28.7 

28.7 

29.0 

28.7 

28.9 

28.4 

27.3 

27.6 

15.5 

15.7 

15.2 

15.4 

14.7 

16.3 

15.7 

15.6 

16.3 

16.3 

15.6 

16.1 

16.5 

15.0 

22.9 

23.2 

22.3 

23.9 

23.2 

24.0 

22.9 

22.8 

22.4 

22.1 

23.2 

23.8 

22.6 

23.5 

83.5 

85.1 

87.7 

80.0 

83.5 

81 .5 

83.9 

81.3 

85.1 

83.7 

78.7 

82.9 

89.9 

83.1 

81,4 

69.0 

74.0 

78.3 

72.3 

79.6 

72.9 

74.7 

74.7 

76.8 

78.5 

78.9 

77.0 

48.0 

46.1 

41.3 

43.8 

44.6 

43.3 

46.2 

47.9 

45.8 

43.3 

50.0 

49.4 

47.7 

47.5 

38.8 

44.6 

40.1 

35.8 

43.5 

36.1 

40.1 

43.8 

41.8 

37.8 

40.7 

42.8 

41.9 

42.1 

81.7 

78.6 

84.1 

81.5 

80.5 

83.9 

81.9 

78.9 

80.2 

82.0 

82.9 

74.6 

75.1 

85.2 

92.1 

97.9 

92.9 

95.4 

93.4 

93.1 

95.1 

94.5 

90.7 

91.0 

99.3 

94.6 

94.0 

76.4 

78.6 

69.4 

72.5 

70.6 

75.9 

77.0 

75.6 

73.2 

77.9 

77.3 

70.6 

82.1 

76.6 

46.4 

51.4 

52.4 

48.9 

51.4 

55.3 

51.1 

53.3 

52.9 

54.4 

53.9 

51.4 

52.8 

46.9 

93.8 

90.1 

87.3 

91.4 

99.1 

82.3 

79.1 

78.6 

79.4 

75.6 

72.3 

76.7 

78.4 

79.3 

83.4 

71.6 

82.9 

80.9 

79.6 

100.0 

89.5 

90.0 

73.9 

77.1 

74.6 

93.2 

00.0  | 

75.5 

84.3 

90,6 

89.8 

87.2 

1  All  measurements  are  in  millimeters. 


(259) 


260 


UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


TABLE  2.— MACUSI,  Continued 


Males 

No.  15 

No.  16 

No.  17 

No.  18 

1 

No.  19 

1 

No.  20 

1 

No.  21 

1 

No.  22 

CO 

CM 

6 

Z 

No.  24 

1 

No.  25 

No.  26 

CM 

d 

Z 

|  No.  28 

1 

Height  to  right  shoulder . 

Height  to  third  finger . 

Height  sitting . 

50 

1616 

1345 

643 

860 

1750 

702 

40 

1606 

1325 

635 

838 

1688 

660 

25 

161. 

1350 

6.0 

837 

1757 

720 

35 

1.86 

1214 

585 

807 

1565 

629 

25 

1577 

1294 

630 

836 

1669 

664 

30 

1566 

1282 

584 

834 

1648 

698 

25 

1560 

1282 

561 

785 

1658 

721 

382 

40 

1613 

1338 

630 

826 

1688 

708 

40 

1522 

1256 

556 

765 

1654 

700 

35 

1430 

1162 

543 

784 

1490 

619 

22 

1601 

1341 

637 

795 

1646 

704 

368 

20 

1523 

1248 

570 

770 

1567 

678 

335 

264 

215 

294 

430 

100 

163 

80 

237 

30 

1475 

1189 

540 

758 

1520 

649 

357 

35 

1611 

1341 

610 

780 

1672 

731 

384 

382 

357 

377 

342 

376 

361 

300 

223 

310 

444 

105 

170 

84 

254 

107 

188 

146 

100 

131 

308 

281  | 
233  | 
281 
411 

101 

164 

81 

237 

99 

182 

151 

106 

138 

112 

172 

117 

76 

322 

228 

287 

260 

300 

263 

273 

265 

303 

235 

221 

236 

212 

214 

234 

227 

321 

330 

317 

329 

298 

310 

313 

327 

297 

455 

462 

446 

473 

414 

438 

446 

448 

103 

110 

104 

114 

100 

101 

104 

110 

164 

75 

235 

173 

80 

248 

94 

190 

140 

110 

138 

118 

178 

124 

75 

53 

42 

68 

52 

63 

105 

105 

20 

76 

177 

174 

187 

161 

166 

163 

175 

84 

77 

88 

80 

83 

84 

82 

254 

242 

256 

240 

241 

246 

^53 

101 

101 

107 

110 

104 

101 

103 

182 

178 

183 

176 

188 

178 

190 

197 

195 

150 

143 

158 

151 

151 

155 

151 

145 

98 

137 

105 

172 

115 

69 

52 

38 

57 

58 
65 
75 

80 

18 

74 

102 

96 

104 

103 

118 

120 

110 

145 

133 

146 

142 

142 

144 

143 

107 

106 

157 

105 

99 

110 

108 

115 

120 

116 

108 

178 

195 

178 

185 

178 

182 

180 

173 

119 

71 

46 

128 

117 

121 

108 

117 

113 

111 

117 

75 

73 

75 

69 

67 

71 

68 

78 

43 

48 

46 

52 

47 

46 

54 

47 

56 

43 

38 

66 

54 

63 

42 

38 

41 

40 

38 

42 

45 

69 

63 

64 

61 

65 

55 

68 

64 

58 

53 

54 

63 

54 

57 

55 

54 

58 

60 

60 

72 

64 

64 

61 

64 

62 

61 

63 

110 

105 

160 

85 

130 

110 

120 

100 

80 

110 

140 

83 

130 

95 

110 

95 

20 

26 

24 

18 

20 

26 

24 

24 

80 

56 

72 

72 

56 

66 

82 

76 

Indices: 

53.2 

52.1 

51.2 

54.3 

53.1 

53.2 

50.3 

51.2 

50.3 

54.8 

104 

43.4 

27.7 

16.1 

24.7 

49.7 

103 

50.6 

103 

51.4 

48.4 

108 

105 

109 

105 

106 

105 

106 

104 

108 

45.9 

44.0 

27.8 

16.1 

45.3 

43.4 

41.1 

44.6 

42.3 

42.1 

44.5 

46.2 

43.8 

28.6 

27.7 

29.3 

27.8 

27.7 

28.5 

28.7 

27.5 

28.6 

Zij.o 

15.1 

15.7 

15.1 

15.8 

16.1 

15.3 

15.4 

16.2 

15  .8 

15  .4 

23.8 
83.6 

70.8 

24.2 

22.2 

23.3 

23.0 

23.8 

23.1 

24.0 

23.4 

24.7 

87.1 

80.3 

87.8 

81.4 

78.7 

82.9 

Breadth  hips  -  breadth  shoulders  . 

86.4 

81.9 

88.8 

83.0 

87.3 

78.7 

87.1 

77.6 

82.5 

78.4 

86.7 

82.1 

85.5 

74.9 

82.0 

74.3 

78.8 

74.0 

45.7 

39.1 

1  79.7 

78  .0 

77.1 

47.5 

44.2 

47.6 

50.0 

50.0 

51.5 

46.9 

49  .4 

49  .6 

37  Q 

39.8 

41.8 

41.8 

45.8 

43.2 

41  0 

40.7 

42.1 

82.9 

89.7 

73  7 

.  82.0 

81.3 

84.0 

84.8 

79.5 

78.7 

77.4 

83  .0 

.  96.7 

93.0 

92.4 

94.0 

94.0 

92.9 

94.7 

84.0 

94.5 

81.2 

48.6 

97.4 
84.1 

95.4 

80.3 

49.2 

99.1 

84. 

81.2 

55.1 

85.5 

.  72.4 

74.4 

75.3 

83.1 

81.0 

83.3 

81.1 

82.4 

76.6 

76.4 

.  51.8 

54.9 

51.8 

48.6 

47.2 

49.3 

47.3 

59.5 

50.3 

50.7 

95.1 

.  81.2 

84.6 

90.9 

100.0 

98.3 

106.2 

104.5 

92.1 

91.3 

90.0 

80.9 
j  84.8 

.  74.3 

74.7 

78.9 

79.7 

78.0 

80.0 

82.6 

73.1 

80.0 

.  87.5 

82.6 

78.8 

85.1 

82.6 

77.8 

95.7 

76.1 

73.1 

FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


261 


TABLE  3.— MACUSI,  Conducted 


Males 

No.  29 

No.  30 

No.  31 

No.  32 

No.  33 

Average 

a 

a 

a 

3 

S 

Minimum 

| 

<D 

bfl 

P 

c3 

« 

Average  of 

Forest  Tribes 

Age . 

35 

26 

20 

50 

Height . 

1561 

1551 

1560 

1616 

1430 

186 

1589 

Height  to  right  shoulder . 

1283 

1278 

1284 

1345 

1162 

183 

1312 

Height  to  third  finger . 

558 

£95 

607 

665 

540 

125 

Height  sitting . 

806 

790 

810 

860 

758 

102 

814 

Span . 

1626 

1618 

1643 

1757 

1490 

267 

1654 

Arm  length . 

725 

683 

676 

731 

619 

112 

Breadth  of  shoulders . 

376 

355 

363 

384 

335 

49 

350 

Breadth  of  chest . 

285 

296 

287 

322 

263 

59 

278 

Depth  of  chest . 

216 

230 

224 

241 

209 

32 

216 

Breadth  of  hips . 

305 

317 

306 

330 

277 

53 

294 

Length  of  cubit . 

447 

435 

441 

473 

397 

76 

445 

Length  of  third  finger . 

108 

98 

104 

114 

95 

19 

105 

Length  of  hand . 

168 

163 

170 

187 

151 

36 

174 

Breadth  of  hand . 

82 

81 

80 

89 

70 

19 

81 

Length  of  foot . 

226 

244 

244 

260 

223 

37 

244 

Breadth  of  foot . 

105 

100 

101 

109 

83 

26 

98 

Length  of  head . 

198 

183 

185 

184 

178 

184 

198 

173 

25 

181 

Breadth  of  head . 

151 

153 

146 

145 

146 

148 

158 

140 

18 

147 

Minimum  frontal . 

105 

108 

105 

120 

92 

28 

106 

Breadth,  bizygomatic . 

136 

140 

140 

147 

131 

16 

137 

Breadth,  bigonial . 

112 

105 

108 

120 

95 

15 

104 

Height,  menton-crinion . 

194 

180 

178 

197 

157 

40 

Height,  menton-nasion . 

123 

112 

116 

128 

107 

21 

Height,  prosthyon-nasion . 

83 

69 

72 

83 

64 

19 

71 

Height  of  nose . 

51 

49 

49 

56 

43 

13 

48 

Breadth  of  nose . 

46 

43 

41 

48 

34 

14 

39 

Breadth,  ocular . 

74 

73 

66 

74 

55 

19 

65 

Breadth  of  mouth . 

55 

46 

54 

63 

46 

17 

53 

Height  of  right  ear . 

61 

64 

63 

73 

56 

17 

64 

Grip,  right  hand . 

100 

105 

104 

160 

60 

100 

81 

Grip,  left  hand . 

100 

75 

95 

140 

60 

80 

76 

Respiration . 

16 

18 

20 

26 

14 

12 

60 

76 

.  . 

70 

96 

50 

46 

Indices: 

Height  sitting  -  height . 

53.2 

50.9 

52.0 

54.8 

48.4 

6.4 

51.2 

Span  -  height . 

103 

107 

105 

109 

101 

8 

104 

Arm  -  height . 

46.4 

44  0 

43.4 

46.4 

41.1 

5.3 

Cubit  -  height . 

29.4 

28.0 

28.2. 

29.4 

27.3 

2.1 

Foot -height . 

14  9 

15.7 

15.6 

16.5 

14.7 

1.8 

Breadth  shoulder  -  height . 

24.7 

22.2 

23.3 

24.7 

22.1 

2.6 

Breadth  hips  -  breadth  shoulders . 

80.9 

89.3 

84.3 

89.9 

78.0 

11.9 

84.0 

Chest . 

75,8 

77.7 

78.0 

83.0 

69.0 

14.0 

77.7 

Hand . 

48.8 

49.7 

47.3 

51.5 

41.3 

10.2 

46.4 

Foot . 

45.3 

40.9 

41  3 

45  8 

35.8 

10.0 

40.1 

Cephalic . 

76.3 

83.6 

78.9 

77.8 

81.4 

81  0 

85.2 

73.7 

11 .5 

81.2 

Bizygomatic  -  breadth  head . 

91.5 

93.4 

99.3 

84.0 

15.3 

93.2 

Bigonial  -  bizygomatic . 

82.4 

75.0 

77.5 

85.5 

69.4 

16.1 

75.8 

Upper  facial . 

61.0 

49.3 

51.7 

61 .0 

46.4 

14.6 

51.9 

Lower  facial . 

91.0 

93.7 

93  0 

106.2 

81.2 

25.0 

Total  facial . 

70.1 

77.8 

78.6 

84.6 

70  1 

14.5 

Nasal . 

90.2 

87.8 

83.7 

100.0 

71.7 

39.3 

82.5 

262 


UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


TABLE  4.— PARUKUTU 


Males 

No.  1 

No.  2 

No.  3 

No.  4 

No.  5 

No.  6 

No.  7 

No.  8 

No.  9 

No.  10 

Average 

40 

33 

22 

22 

40 

45 

35 

55 

25 

26 

1579 

1634 

1586 

1553 

1525 

1523 

1570 

1618 

1618 

1587 

1581 

Height  to  shoulder . 

1382 

850 

1322 

793 

1267 

816 

1241 

787 

750 

796 

864 

825 

813 

825 

1303 

812 

1737 

1639 

1563 

1609 

1580 

1610 

1708 

1702 

1689 

1664 

1650 

351 

358 

336 

337 

345 

291 

282 

256 

285 

278 

213 

225 

203 

210 

213 

301 

283 

263 

289 

284 

474 

450 

411 

432 

442 

112 

108 

94 

102 

104 

182 

175 

165 

175 

172 

79 

77 

76 

76 

77 

252 

235 

227 

242 

239 

98 

91 

95 

92 

94 

184 

175 

182 

183 

183 

178 

176 

178 

176 

180 

180 

148 

145 

145 

147 

152 

144 

145 

146 

141 

151 

146 

102 

106 

106 

105 

103 

107 

98 

105 

103 

107 

104 

141 

135 

132 

131 

136 

135 

132 

136 

133 

133 

134 

102 

102 

106 

98 

98 

103 

103 

103 

110 

102 

102 

74 

70 

72 

65 

63 

62 

71 

78 

72 

70 

70 

54 

50 

49 

44 

47 

47 

47 

54 

51 

46 

49 

40 

39 

40 

39 

42 

40 

42 

45 

39 

38 

40 

61 

71 

66 

69 

67 

65 

61 

62 

61 

67 

65 

55 

54 

51 

•  56 

58 

50 

53 

56 

48 

48 

53 

67 

62 

63 

56 

63 

68 

63 

135 

110 

70 

85 

85 

80 

80 

70 

90 

90 

89 

105 

110 

70 

80 

85 

60 

80 

65 

80 

90 

83 

52.2 

51.4. 

52.0 

50.0 

52.5 

51.6 

49.2 

50.7 

53.4 

50.9 

51.2 

107 

103 

100 

106 

104 

103 

105 

105 

106 

105 

104 

29.0 

28.3 

26.4 

28.3 

28.0 

15.4 

14.8 

14.6 

15.8 

15.1 

21.4 

22.6 

21.7 

22.1 

21.9 

82.4 

85.8 

79.6 

78.3 

85.8 

76.6 

Chpst.  . 

73.2 

80.4 

79.3 

73.7 

43.4 

44.0 

49.0 

46.3 

45.7 

38.9 

38.7 

41.9 

38.0 

39.4 

80.4 

82.9 

79.7 

80.3 

83.1 

80.9 

82.4 

82.0 

80.1 

83.9 

81.6 

95.3 

93.1 

91  1 

89.1 

89.5 

93.8 

91.0 

93.2 

94.3 

88.1 

91.8 

72.3 

75.6 

80.3 

74.8 

72.1 

76.3 

78.0 

75.7 

82.7 

76.7 

75.2 

52.5 

51.9 

54.6 

49.6 

46.3 

45.9 

53.8 

57.3 

54.1 

52.6 

51.9 

74.1 

78.0 

81 .6 

88.6 

89.4 

85.1 

89.4 

83.3 

76.5 

82.6 

82.9 

FARABEE— THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


263 


Males 


Age . 

Height . 

Height  to  shoulder . 

Height  sitting . 

Span . 

Breadth  of  shoulders . 

Breadth  of  chest . 

Depth  of  chest . 

Breadth  of  hips . 

Length  of  cubit . 

Length  of  third  finger . 

Length  of  hand . . 

Breadth  of  hand . 

Length  of  foot . 

Breadth  of  foot . 

Length  of  head . 

Breadth  of  head . 

Minimum  frontal . 

Breadth,  bizygomatic . 

Breadth,  bigonial . 

Height,  pro3thyon-nasion . 

Height  of  nose . 

Breadth  of  nose . 

Breadth,  ocular . 

Breadth  of  mouth . 

Height  of  right  ear . 

Grip,  right  hand . 

Grip,  left  hand . 

Respiration . 


35 

1595 


805 

1752 


184 

151 

114 

138 

111 

73 

48 

41 

66 

50 

70 

80 


Pulse 


Indices: 

Height  sitting  -  height . 

Span  -  height . 

Cubit  -  height . 

Foot  -  height . 

Breadth  shoulder  -  height .  , . 

Breadth  hips  -  breadth  shoulder. .  .  . 

Chest . 

Hand . 

Foot . 

Cephalic . 

Bizygomatic  -  breadth  head . 

Bigonial  -  bizygomatic . 

Upper  facial . . 

Nasal . 


50.5 

109 


82.1 

91.4 

80.4 
52.9 

85.4 


TABLE  5.— DIAU 


1 

No.  2  ■ 

No.  3 

No.  4 

o 

No.  6 

No.  7 

oo 

d 

No.  9 

No.  10 

No.  11 

No.  12 

No.  13 

Average 

22 

55 

30 

27 

30 

26 

40 

40 

40 

50 

30 

26 

1616 

1695 

1537 

1615 

1552 

1606 

1606 

1537 

1568 

1587 

1593 

1600 

1595 

787 

836 

790 

838 

787 

845 

799 

813 

793 

787 

775 

838 

807 

1676 

1765 

1600 

1715 

1562 

1587 

1702 

1524 

1651 

1695 

1657 

1661 

1660 

178 

186 

183 

188 

173 

183 

188 

176 

177 

182 

176 

175 

181 

136 

146 

147 

148 

153 

148 

155 

146 

145 

145 

151 

139 

147 

103 

105 

104 

105 

105 

109 

114 

111 

105 

103 

110 

103 

107 

128 

145 

139 

142 

140 

133 

143 

139 

135 

138 

138 

132 

138 

98 

108 

106 

103 

105 

107 

112 

102 

106 

110 

107 

101 

106 

69 

88 

66 

77 

70 

70 

75 

66 

72 

73 

68 

74 

72 

46 

57 

47 

51 

45 

47 

52 

45 

48 

50 

46 

46 

48 

33 

45 

38 

34 

35 

38 

44 

42 

37 

42 

38 

36 

39 

63 

71 

61 

64 

66 

65 

72 

68 

64 

66 

64 

66 

44 

60 

52 

46 

53 

48 

55 

58 

47 

48 

52 

51 

51 

75 

60 

40 

60 

50 

105 

50 

85 

55 

60 

65 

35 

61 

65 

50 

20 

50 

45 

85 

40 

75 

60 

55 

80 

20 

56 

48.7 

49.3 

51.3 

50.9 

50.7 

52.6 

49.8 

52.8 

50.6 

49.6 

48.7 

52.4 

50.6 

104 

104 

104 

104 

101 

106 

99 

105 

107 

104 

104 

104 

76.4 

78.4 

80.3 

78.7 

88.4 

80.9 

82.5 

83.0 

81.9 

79.7 

85.8 

79.4 

81.4 

94.1 

99.3 

94.6 

91.5 

89.9 

95.2 

93.1 

95.2 

91.4 

95.0 

93.7 

76.6 

74.5 

76.3 

72.5 

75  0 

80.5 

78.3 

73.4 

78.5 

79.7 

77.5 

76.5 

76.9 

53.9 

60.7 

47.8 

54.2 

50.0 

52.6 

52.5 

42.5 

53.3 

52.9 

49.3 

56.1 

52.2 

71.7 

79.0 

80.9 

66.7 

77.8 

80.9 

84.6 

93.3 

77.1 

84.0 

82.6 

78.3 

80.2 

264 


UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

TABLE  6 


Waiwai 

CcMAYENA 

Urucuena 

Cat- 

f  ANA 

Males 

6 

£ 

o 

£ 

CO 

6 

o 

0 3 
b 0 

<v 

> 

< 

6 

<M 

6 

CO 

o 

03 

bfl 

c3 

P 

< 

o 

<M 

d 

03 

bfl 

C3 

03 

> 

o 

33 

1562 

35 

1564 

25 

1615 

21 

1610 

1588 

25 

1588 

40 

1588 

30 

1649 

1608 

30 

1550 

40 

1608 

1579 

35 

1582 

1320 

1327 

1342 

1331 

1330 

885 

841 

795 

832 

1648 

814 

1628 

798 

792 

855 

843 

822 

819 

821 

1617 

1628 

1627 

1702 

1688 

1661 

1605 

1660 

1695 

1653 

1608 

310 

350 

373 

351 

354 

277 

230 

270 

275 

291 

280 

279 

220 

216 

216 

223 

219 

300 

301 

312 

302 

304 

426 

103 

166 

82 

243 

95 

176 

143 

105 

140 

441 

440 

450 

462 

448 

100 

107 

110 

110 

107 

172 

170 

181 

184 

177 

80 

82 

86 

86 

84 

251 

249 

248 

244 

248 

100 

100 

106 

101 

102 

193 

180 

187 

179 

186 

184 

189 

185 

177 

172 

183 

177 

145 

146 

151 

147 

147 

141 

142 

150 

144 

154 

152 

153 

103 

101 

107 

102 

103 

103 

109 

105 

106 

103 

112 

108 

134 

132 

142 

136 

136 

132 

133 

146 

137 

149 

143 

146 

98 

98 

105 

106 

102 

101 

103 

106 

103 

115 

108 

112 

105 

73 

65 

70 

73 

70 

69 

72 

74 

72 

83 

70 

77 

68 

49 

46 

49 

46 

48 

45 

50 

53 

49 

52 

46 

49 

48 

40 

40 

40 

43 

41 

38 

36 

45 

40 

45 

39 

42 

39 

70 

57 

64 

67 

67 

64 

66 

63 

65 

61 

63 

66 

63 

65 

51 

54 

58 

54 

54 

54 

53 

60 

56 

53 

49 

51 

65 

63 

68 

62 

65 

110 

100 

59 

90 

115 

105 

105 

104 

85 

90 

80 

85 

90 

120 

90 

100 

105 

100 

99 

80 

80 

80 

80 

80 

90 

85 

120 

Indices: 

51.1 

50.6 

52.8 

52.6 

51.7 

51.5 

51.7 

53.6 

52.3 

51 .3 

51.4 

51.4 

102 

105 

105 

105 

105 

105 

101 

105 

103 

103 

104 

103 

103 

88.2 

85.5 

83.7 

86.1 

85.8 

83.0 

81.5 

78.6 

74.3 

79  6 

78.4 

46.3 

48.2 

47.5 

46.7 

47.2 

49.4 

38  8 

40.1 

42.7 

41.4 

40.8 

84.4 

82.1 

38  .f 

81.6 

78.0 

82.1 

77.8 

79.8 

79.7 

82.6 

82.0 

81.4 

79  8 

81 .5 

91.8 

91.0 

94.0 

92.5 

92.3 

93.6 

93.7 

97.3 

94.8 

96.8 

94.1 

95 .4 

97  .< 

73.1 

74.2 

73.9 

77.9 

74.8 

76.5 

77.4 

72.6 

75.5 

77.2 

75 .5 

76.3 

75  .< 

54.5 

49.2 

49.3 

53.7 

51.6 

52.3 

54.1 

49.3 

51.9 

55.7 

49.0 

52.3 

48. 

81.6 

86.9 

81 .6 

83.5 

85.6 

84.4 

72  0 

84.9 

80.4 

86  5 

84.8 

85.7 

81 . 

1 

1 

FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


265 


TABLE  7 


Males 

Chikena  No.  1 

Toneyena  No.  1 

6 

S3 

g 

< 

£ 

Azumara  No.  1 

1 

1  Zapara  No.  1 

Maximum 

1  . 

Minimum 

Range 

10  Parukutus 

Comp 

m 

3 

OJ 

5 

CO 

ARISON 

CO 

O 

3  Cumayenas  > 

3RAGES 

ej 

c! 

v 

3 

o 

3 

Ol 

33  Macusis 

Age . 

22 

25 

25 

40 

30 

Height . 

1633 

1568 

1585 

1574 

1612 

1695 

1523 

172 

1579 

1595 

1588 

1608 

1579 

1560 

Height  to  shoulder. . . 

1275 

1322 

1382 

1241 

141 

1303 

1330 

1284 

Height  sitting . 

838 

800 

789 

823 

885 

750 

135 

812 

807 

822 

841 

814 

810 

Span . 

1752 

1615 

1674 

1620 

1705 

1765 

1524 

241 

1650 

1660 

1661 

1653 

1628 

1643 

Breadth  of  shoulders. . . 

345 

382 

358 

336 

22 

345 

354 

363 

Breadth  of  chest . 

272 

320 

291 

256 

35 

278 

279 

287 

Depth  of  chest . 

229 

236 

225 

203 

22 

213 

219 

224 

Breadth  of  hips . 

298 

326 

312 

263 

49 

284 

304 

306 

Length  of  cubit . 

453 

462 

474 

411 

63 

442 

448 

441 

Length  of  third  finger . 

105 

100 

112 

94 

18 

104 

107 

104 

Length  of  hand . 

174 

184 

184 

170 

14 

172 

177 

170 

Breadth  of  hand . 

81 

88 

86 

76 

10 

77 

84 

80 

Length  of  foot . 

252 

264 

252 

227 

25 

239 

248 

244 

Breadth  of  foot . 

103 

105 

106 

91 

15 

94 

102 

101 

Length  of  head . 

180 

180 

180 

177 

182 

193 

173 

20 

180 

181 

185 

177 

187 

184 

Breadth  of  head . 

148 

147 

149 

138 

150 

155 

141 

14 

146 

147 

147 

144 

153 

148 

Minimum  frontal . 

105 

107 

106 

105 

102 

114 

98 

16 

104 

107 

103 

106 

108 

Breadth,  bizygomatic . 

134 

132 

135 

140 

136 

149 

128 

21 

134 

138 

136 

137 

146 

140 

Breadth,  bigonial . 

105 

98 

100 

100 

102 

115 

98 

17 

102 

106 

102 

103 

112 

108 

Height,  prosthyon-nasion . 

75 

64 

70 

75 

70 

88 

62 

26 

70 

72 

70 

72 

77 

72 

Height  of  nose . 

53 

43 

46 

52 

50 

57 

44 

13 

49 

48 

48 

49 

49 

49 

Breadth  of  nose . 

43 

42 

40 

38 

45 

45 

33 

12 

40 

39 

41 

40 

42 

41 

Breadth,  ocular . 

61 

64 

63 

68 

52 

72 

61 

11 

65 

66 

66 

63 

65 

66 

Breadth  of  mouth . 

56 

51 

49 

60 

65 

58 

47 

11 

53 

51 

54 

56 

51 

54 

Height  of  right  ear . 

66 

65 

68 

56 

12 

63 

Grip,  right  hand . 

105 

80 

65 

90 

110 

120 

35 

85 

89 

61 

104 

85 

100 

104 

Grip,  left  hand . 

80 

90 

60 

85 

105 

120 

20 

100 

83 

56 

99 

80 

85 

95 

Respiration . 

.... 

Pulse . 

Indices: 

Height  sitting  -  height . 

51.3 

51.0 

53.6 

48.7 

4.9 

51.4 

50.6 

51.7 

52.3 

51.4 

52.0 

Span  -  height . 

107 

103 

106 

103 

106 

109 

99 

10 

104 

104 

105 

103 

103 

105 

Cubit  -  height . 

29.0 

26.4 

2.6 

28.0 

28.2 

15  8 

14  6 

1  2 

15  1 

Breadth  shoulder  -  height  . 

22.6 

21.4 

1.2 

21.9 

Breadth  hips  -  breadth  shoulder. . . 

76.7 

83.8 

88.2 

79.6 

8.6 

82.4 

85.8 

84.3 

Chest . 

84.2 

73.8 

83.0 

73.2 

9.8 

76.6 

78.4 

78.0 

Hand . 

46.6 

47.8 

49.4 

43.4 

6.0 

45.7 

47.2 

47.3 

Foot . 

40.9 

39.8 

42.7 

38.0 

4.7* 

39.4 

40.8 

41.3 

Cephalic . 

82.2 

81.7 

82.8 

78.0 

82.4 

85.8 

76.4 

9.4 

81.6 

81.4 

79.8 

81.4 

82.1 

81.0 

Bizygomatic  -  breadth  head . 

90.5 

89.8 

90.6 

90.7 

99.3 

88.1 

11.2 

91.8 

93.7 

92.3 

94.8 

95.4 

93,4 

Bigonial  -  bizygomatic . 

78.3 

73.5 

74.1 

71,4 

75.0 

82.7 

72.1 

10.6 

75.2 

76.9 

74.8 

75.5 

76.3 

77.5 

Upper  facial . 

56.0 

48.5 

51.8 

53.5 

52.2 

60.7 

42.5 

18.2 

51.9 

52.2 

51.6 

51.9 

52.3 

51.7 

Lower  facial . 

93.0 

Total  facial . 

78.6 

Nasal . 

81.1 

97.7 

71.7 

90.0 

97.7 

71.7 

26.0 

82.9 

80.2 

85.6 

80.4 

85.7 

82.5 

266 


UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


TABLE  8.— MACUSI 


Females 

No.  1 

No.  2 

No.  3 

No.  4 

j  No.  5 

1 

No.  6 

|  No.  7 

1 

No.  8 

No.  9 

© 

6 

Jz; 

1  , 

|  Average 

1 

1  Maximum 

1 

|  Minimum 

1 

Range 

21 

23 

50 

25 

22 

30 

40 

21 

45 

40 

Height . 

1409 

1412 

1502 

1442 

1365 

1432 

1456 

1440 

1443 

1376 

1428 

1502 

1376 

126 

Height  to  shoulder . 

1138 

1144 

1196 

1154 

1098 

1150 

1177 

1182 

1190 

1115 

1154 

1196 

1098 

98 

Height  to  third  finger . 

515 

565 

585 

524 

510 

508 

564 

615 

565 

542 

549 

615 

508 

107 

Height  sitting . 

760 

716 

750 

768 

713 

714 

795 

788 

745 

740 

749 

795 

713 

82 

Span . 

1544 

1513 

1569 

1534 

1436 

1600 

1515 

1490 

1550 

1426 

1519 

1600 

1426 

174 

Arm  length . 

613 

579 

611 

630 

588 

642 

613 

567 

625 

573 

604 

642 

573 

69 

Breadth  of  shoulders . 

338 

324 

327 

337 

307 

332 

342 

319 

340 

317 

328 

342 

307 

35 

Breadth  of  hips . 

296 

292 

307 

302 

251 

303 

309 

294 

292 

294 

309 

251 

58 

Length  of  cubit . 

390 

390 

420 

397 

387 

423 

397 

405 

411 

388 

401 

420 

388 

32 

Length  of  third  finger . 

94 

91 

101 

96 

92 

102 

99 

97 

102 

90 

98 

102 

90 

12 

Length  of  hand . 

159 

154 

166 

164 

150 

170 

160 

160 

164 

150 

160 

170 

150 

20 

Breadth  of  hand . 

71 

65 

73 

70 

65 

68 

73 

74 

70 

75 

70 

75 

65 

10 

Length  of  foot . 

220 

226 

236 

232 

214 

230 

220 

232 

217 

214 

224 

236 

214 

22 

Breadth  of  foot . 

84 

82 

94 

92 

79 

86 

95 

91 

89 

90 

88 

95 

82 

13 

Length  of  head . 

175 

162 

175 

182 

162 

175 

175 

172 

176 

170 

172 

182 

162 

20 

Breadth  of  head . 

145 

135 

143 

155 

142 

142 

147 

140 

150 

148 

144 

155 

135 

20 

Minimum  frontal . 

102 

102 

98 

104 

98 

96 

102 

102 

101 

106 

101 

106 

96 

10 

Breadth,  bizygomatic . 

122 

127 

132 

136 

126 

130 

134 

129 

130 

132 

130 

136 

122 

14 

Breadth,  bigonial . 

100 

102 

104 

106 

92 

100 

107 

105 

101 

103 

102 

107 

92 

15 

Height,  menton-crinion . 

168 

152 

162 

163 

167 

171 

160 

158 

173 

118 

162 

173 

148 

25 

Height,  menton-nasion . 

109 

100 

110 

107 

104 

112 

102 

108 

111 

93 

106 

112 

93 

■  19 

Height,  prosthyon-nasion . 

68 

59 

69 

66 

63 

72 

64 

68 

69 

59 

66 

72 

59 

13 

Height  of  no3e . 

44 

41 

46 

48 

40 

49 

43 

47 

48 

38 

44 

49 

38 

11 

Breadth  of  nose . 

38 

34 

36 

38 

29 

38 

37 

33 

41 

37 

36 

41 

29 

12 

Breadth,  ocular . 

66 

62 

59 

68 

63 

57 

65 

63 

66 

60 

63 

68 

57 

11 

Breadth  of  mouth . 

50 

44 

48 

55 

40 

52 

49 

46 

51 

58 

50 

58 

40 

18 

Height  of  right  ear . 

55 

55 

59 

57 

57 

65 

58 

54 

56 

59 

58 

65 

54 

11 

Grip,  right  hand . 

Grip,  left  hand . 

Indices: 

Height  sitting  -  height . 

53.5 

54.3 

50.1 

53.0 

52.2 

50.1 

54.2 

54.3 

51.6 

53.8 

52.7 

54.3 

50.1 

4.2 

Span  -  height . 

109 

107 

105 

106 

105 

111 

104 

103 

108 

103 

106 

111 

103 

8 

Arm  -  height . 

43.5 

41.0 

40.7 

43.7 

43.1 

43.6 

42.1 

39.0 

43.3 

42.3 

42.2 

43.7 

39.0 

4.7 

Cubit  -  height . 

27.6 

27.6 

27.8 

28.2 

28.3 

29.5 

27.2 

27.1 

28.4 

28.2 

28.0 

29.5 

27.1 

2.4 

Foot  -  height . 

16.0 

16.0 

16.0 

16.0 

15.1 

16.0 

15.3 

16.0 

15.2 

16.0 

15.7 

16.0 

15.0 

1. 

Breadth  shoulders  -  height . 

24.0 

22.9 

21.7 

23.4 

22.5 

23.2 

23.5 

22.2 

23.5 

23.0 

23.0 

24.0 

21.7 

2.3 

Breadth  hip3  -  breadth  shoulders . . . 

87.6 

90.1 

93.9 

89  6 

81.8 

90.7 

90.3 

92.1 

85.9 

89.1 

93.9 

81.8 

12.1 

Hand . 

44.6 

42.2 

43.9 

42.7 

43.3 

40.0 

45.6 

46.3 

42.7 

48.6 

43.9 

48.6 

40  0 

8.6 

Foot . 

38.2 

36.3 

39.8 

39.6 

37.4 

43.4 

39.2 

41.0 

42.0 

39.4 

43.4 

36.3 

7.1 

Cephalic . 

82.8 

83.3 

81.7 

85.1 

87.6 

81  1 

84.0 

81.3 

85.2 

87.1 

84.0 

87.6 

81.3 

6.3 

Bizygomatic  -  breadth  head . 

84.1 

94.1 

92.3 

87.7 

88.7 

91.6 

91.2 

92.1 

86.7 

89.2 

89.9 

94.1 

86.7 

7.4 

Bigonial  -  bizygomatic . 

81.9 

80.3 

78.8 

77.9 

73.0 

76.9 

79.8 

81.4 

77.7 

78.0 

78.5 

81.9 

73.0 

11.9 

Upper  facial . 

55.7 

46.5 

52.3 

48.2 

50.0 

55.4 

47.7 

52.7 

53.0 

44.7 

50.6 

55.7 

44.7 

11.0 

Nasal . 

86.4 

82.9 

78.3 

79.2 

72.5 

77.6 

86.1 

70.2 

85.4 

97.4 

81.6 

97.4 

70.2 

27.2 

No.  11 

No.  12 

No.  13 

1 

Length  of  head . 

.  169 

170 

170 

Additional: 

Breadth  of  head . 

.  141 

146 

143 

[  Cephalic  index . 

.  83.4 

85.9 

84.1 

FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


267 


TABLE  9 


Females 

Pahakutu 

CuMAYENA 

Waiwai 

o 

CM 

6 

CO 

o 

£ 

o 

£ 

o 

CD 

bO 

c3 

CD 

> 

o 

£ 

CH 

o 

£ 

CO 

o 

o> 

bD 

cj 

<d 

> 

< 

o 

sz; 

CM 

o 

5z; 

a> 

bO 

o8 

CD 

> 

Age . 

22 

20 

40 

25 

25 

45 

50 

35 

25 

30 

Height . 

1527 

1460 

1453 

1453 

1488 

1473 

1410 

1416 

1400 

1409 

1497 

1390 

1444 

Height  to  shoulder . 

1221 

1196 

1191 

1204 

1275 

1134 

1205 

Height  to  third  finger . 

Height  sitting . 

775 

698 

730 

769 

767 

748 

720 

724 

757 

734 

739 

713 

726 

Span . 

1612 

1485 

1556 

1523 

1528 

1541 

1445 

1451 

1471 

1456 

1556 

1428 

1492 

Ann  length . 

Breadth  of  shoulders . 

312 

307 

330 

316 

334 

293 

313 

Breadth  of  hips . 

295 

283 

300 

289 

291 

286 

289 

Length  of  cubit . 

460 

399 

385 

429 

411 

385 

398 

Length  of  third  finger . 

95 

98 

94 

96 

97 

90 

94 

Length  of  hand . 

155 

154 

157 

155 

162 

154 

1  fjg 

Breadth  of  hand . 

67 

65 

73 

68 

71 

70 

71 

Length  of  foot . 

220 

213 

211 

215 

220 

200 

210 

Breadth  of  foot . 

81 

80 

86 

82 

81 

85 

Length  of  head . 

173 

170 

173 

166 

179 

172 

178 

170 

170 

173 

174 

176 

175 

Breadth  of  head . 

147 

148 

143 

141 

147 

145 

136 

138 

140 

138 

144 

139 

142 

Minimum  frontal . 

108 

110 

99 

100 

100 

103 

100 

105 

107 

104 

103 

98 

100 

Breadth,  bizygomatic . 

134 

137 

129 

121 

132 

130 

127 

131 

129 

129 

132 

123 

128 

Breadth,  bigonial . 

100 

107 

102 

96 

98 

101 

97 

96 

95 

96 

103 

88 

96 

Height,  menton-nasion . 

Height,  prosthyon-nasion . 

69 

64 

67 

63 

69 

66 

64 

61 

65 

63 

61 

59 

60 

Height  of  nose . 

46 

44 

46 

41 

46 

45 

48 

45 

42 

45 

42 

39 

41 

Breadth  of  nose . 

38 

37 

34 

33 

36 

36 

35 

36 

36 

36 

36 

38 

37 

Breadth,  ocular . 

65 

66 

68 

63 

64 

65 

67 

63 

62 

64 

68 

64 

66 

Breadth  of  mouth . 

50 

45 

51 

42 

50 

48 

51 

53 

47 

50 

46 

52 

49 

58 

56 

54 

55 

59 

54 

57 

Grip,  right  hand . 

80 

75 

35 

30 

80 

60 

65 

55 

55 

58 

75 

65 

70 

Grip,  left  hand . 

85 

70 

55 

45 

65 

64 

50 

55 

70 

58 

65 

60 

63 

Indices: 

Height  sitting  -  height . 

50.7 

47.8 

50.2 

52.9 

51.7 

50.7 

49.3 

51.3 

50.3 

Span  -  height . 

106 

102 

106 

105 

103 

104 

103 

103 

105 

104 

104 

103 

104 

Arm  -  height . 

Cubit  -  height . 

31.6 

27.3 

24.5 

27.8 

15.1 

14.6 

14.2 

14.9 

14.6 

14.3 

14.5 

Breadth  shoulders  -  height . 

21.5 

21.1 

22.2 

21.6 

22.5 

21.1 

21.8 

94.5 

92.1 

90.9 

92.5 

87.1 

97.6 

92.4 

Hand . 

43.2 

42.2 

46.5 

43.9 

43.8 

45.5 

44.7 

Foot . 

36.8 

37.5 

40.8 

38.4 

38.2 

42.5 

40.4 

Cephalic . . 

85.0 

87.1 

82.7 

84.9 

84.9 

76.4 

81.2 

82.4 

80.0 

82.8 

79.0 

80.9 

Bizygomatic  -  breadth  head . 

91.2 

92.6 

90.2 

85.8 

90.0 

83.4 

94.9 

92.1 

90.1 

91.7 

88.5 

90.2 

Bigonial  -  bizygomatic . 

74.6 

78.1 

79.1 

79.3 

77.8 

76.4 

73.3 

73.6 

74.4 

78.0 

71.5 

74.7 

Upper  facial . 

51.5 

47.7 

51.9 

52.1 

50.8 

50.1 

46.6 

50.4 

49.0 

46.2 

48.0 

47.1 

Nasal . 

82.6 

84.1 

73.9 

80.5 

80.3 

72.9 

80.0 

85.7 

79.2 

85.7 

97.4 

91.5 

268 


UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


TABLE  10 


Females 

Urucuana 

Chikena 

Diau 

Cat- 

YANA 

PoRCKOTO 

Average  Forest  Tribes 

(28)  General  Average 

6 

£ 

<M 

6 

Jz; 

O) 

bO 

e3 

a> 

> 

< 

d 

£ 

o 

Z 

a> 

bfl 

cS 

H 

> 

< 

o 

£ 

O 

£ 

vH 

o 

CM 

o 

& 

<D 

I 

b 

> 

25 

25 

45 

30 

40 

25 

50 

30 

1408 

1466 

1437 

1466 

1536 

1501 

1549 

1563 

1460 

1556 

1508 

1467 

1452 

Height  to  shoulder . 

1220 

1266 

1243 

1204 

1171 

Height  to  third  finger . 

578 

615 

597 

Height  sitting . 

748 

762 

755 

730 

814 

772 

825 

767 

832 

800 

751 

746 

Span . 

1472 

1521 

1499 

1472 

1536 

1508 

1636 

1645 

1500 

1585 

1544 

1522 

1520 

Arm  length . 

Breadth  of  shoulders . 

377 

330 

355 

343 

326 

327 

Breadth  of  hips . 

311 

338 

325 

289 

292 

Length  of  cubit . 

444 

391 

422 

407 

421 

408 

Length  of  third  finger . 

100 

94 

97 

96 

96 

96 

Length  of  hand . 

175 

153 

162 

158 

159 

160 

Breadth  of  hand . 

79 

71 

78 

75 

70 

70 

Length  of  foot . 

241 

222 

231 

227 

218 

222 

Breadth  of  foot . 

93 

86 

87 

87 

83 

86 

167 

167 

167 

176 

175 

176 

177 

178 

162 

176 

169 

173 

172 

Breadth  of  head . 

141 

141 

141 

135 

141 

138 

143 

146 

137 

142 

140 

142 

143 

103 

105 

104 

104 

105 

105 

100 

107 

105 

116 

111 

104 

102 

Breadth,  bizygomatic . 

130 

132 

131 

127 

132 

128 

131 

134 

135 

138 

137 

130 

130 

Breadth,  bigonial . 

103 

98 

101 

96 

100 

98 

98 

99 

103 

102 

103 

99 

100 

163 

175 

169 

104 

114 

109 

.... 

Height,  prosthyon-nasion . 

68 

63 

66 

64 

58 

61 

69 

69 

75 

67 

71 

65 

'  65 

Height  of  nose . 

43 

45 

44 

44 

40 

42 

45 

49 

45 

52 

49 

44 

44 

Breadth  of  nose . 

34 

36 

35 

38 

36 

37 

33 

36 

36 

41 

39 

36 

36 

Breadth,  ocular . 

62 

63 

63 

66 

65 

66 

62 

64 

64 

73 

69 

65 

64 

Breadth  of  mouth . 

47 

48 

48 

48 

52 

50 

49 

48 

50 

54 

.52 

49 

49 

57 

61 

66 

64 

56 

57 

Grip,  right  hand . 

55 

45 

50 

45 

75 

60 

30 

90 

•80 

95 

88 

60 

Grip,  left  hand . 

45 

50 

48 

45 

70 

58 

30 

115 

65 

75 

70 

57 

Indices: 

Height  sitting  -  height . 

50 .6 

51 .8 

Span  -  height . 

105 

104 

104 

101 

100 

101 

106 

105 

103 

102 

103 

104 

105 

.... 

Cubit  -  height . 

27.8 

27.9 

14.5 

15.3 

21.7 

22.5 

Breadth  hips  -  breadth  shoulders . 

87.6 

85.9 

86.7 

91.6 

90.1 

45.1 

46.5 

48.2 

47.3 

44.7 

44.2 

38.6 

38.7 

37.7 

38.2 

39.1 

39.3 

84.4 

84.4 

84.4 

76.7 

80.6 

78.7 

80.8 

82.0 

84.1 

86.7 

82.4 

82.0 

83.0 

Bizygomatic  -  breadth  head . 

92.2 

93.6 

92.9 

94.1 

93.6 

93.9 

91.6 

91.8 

98.5 

97.2 

97.9 

91.2 

90.6 

79.2 

75.0 

77.1 

75.6 

75.8 

75.7 

74.8 

73.9 

76.3 

73.9 

75.1 

75.9 

76.9 

52.3 

47.7 

50.0 

50.4 

43.9 

48.2 

52.7 

51.5 

55.6 

48.6 

52.1 

49.7 

50.0 

Nasal . 

79.1 

80.0 

79.5 

86.4 

90.0 

88.2 

73.7 

73.5 

80.0 

78.9 

79.5 

81.6 

81.6 

FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


269 


Females 


Age . 

Height . . . 

Height  to  shoulder .  .  .  . 

Height  to  third  finger . .  ... 

Height  sitting . 

Span . * . 

Arm  length . .  . . . . 

Breadth  of  shoulders . 

Breadth  of  chest . 

Depth  of  chest . 

Breadth  of  hips . 

Length  of  cubit . 

Length  of  third  finger . 

Length  of  hand . 

Breadth  of  hand . 

Length  of  foot . 

Breadth  of  foot . 

Length  of  head . 

Breadth  of  head . 

Minimum  frontal . 

Breadth,  bizygomatic . . 

Breadth,  bigonial . 

Height,  menton-crinion . 

Height,  menton-nasion . 

Height,  prosthyon-nasion . 

Height  of  nose . 

Breadth  of  nose . 

Breadth,  ocular . 

Breadth  of  mouth . . 

Height  of  right  ear . 

Grip,  right  hand . 

Grip,  left  hand . 

Indices: 

Height  sitting  -  height . 

Span  -  height . 

Arm  -  height . 

Cubit  -  height . 

Foot  -  height . 

Breadth  shoulders  -  height _ 

Breadth  hips  -  breadth  shoulders 

Hand . 

Foot . . 

Cephalic . 

Bizygomatic  -  breadth  head . 

Bigonial  -  bizygomatic . 

Upper  facial . 

Nasal . 


TABLE  11.— COMPARISON  OF  AVERAGES 


Average  Savannah 
Females,  Carib 

Average  Forest 
Females,  Carib 

Average  Savannah 

Males,  Carib 

Average,  Forest 

Males,  Carib 

Average  Savannah 

Males,  Arawak 

Average  Forest 

Males,  Arawak 

Average  Total 

62  Male  Caribs 

Average  Total 

32  Male  Arawaks 

1428 

1467 

+39 

1560 

1589 

+29 

1573 

1606 

1577 

1594 

+  17 

1154 

1204 

+50 

1284 

1312 

+28 

1276 

1291 

1305 

+14 

549 

607 

607 

607 

604 

-3 

749 

751 

+2 

810 

814 

+4 

816 

817 

815 

819 

-7 

1519 

1522 

+3 

1643 

1654 

+11 

1662 

1680 

1649 

1671 

+22 

604 

676 

681 

676 

705 

+29 

328 

326 

-2 

363 

350 

-13 

369 

360 

368 

+8 

287 

278 

295 

285 

297 

+  12 

224 

216 

223 

223 

227 

+4 

294 

289 

-5 

306 

294 

-12 

305 

304 

307 

+3 

401 

421 

+20 

441 

445 

+3 

443 

442 

442 

0 

96 

96 

0 

104 

105 

+1 

104 

104 

105 

+1 

160 

159 

-1 

170 

174 

+4 

172 

171 

173 

+2 

70 

70 

0 

80 

81 

+1 

83 

81 

81 

0 

224 

218 

-6 

244 

244 

0 

250 

244 

249 

+5 

88 

83 

-5 

101 

98 

-3 

102 

101 

101 

0 

172 

173 

+1 

184 

181 

-3 

187 

184 

182 

185 

+3 

144 

142 

-2 

148 

147 

-1 

148 

148 

148 

148 

0 

101 

104 

+3 

105 

105 

0 

109 

105 

105 

106 

+1 

130 

130 

0 

140 

137 

-3 

140 

139 

138 

139 

+1 

102 

99 

-3 

108 

104 

-4 

111 

106 

106 

107 

+1 

162 

178 

176 

178 

181 

+3 

66 

65 

-1 

72 

71 

-1 

70 

74 

72 

73 

+  1 

44 

44 

0 

49 

48 

-1 

48 

49 

49 

48 

-1 

36 

36 

0 

41 

39 

-2 

42 

41 

40 

41 

+1 

63 

65 

+2 

66 

65 

-1 

67 

67 

66 

67 

+1 

50 

49 

-1 

54 

53 

-1 

56 

55 

53 

55 

+2 

58 

56 

-2 

63 

64 

+1 

61 

63 

63 

62 

-1 

60 

104 

81 

-23 

113 

100 

89 

101 

+  12 

57 

95 

76 

-19 

100 

84 

83 

89 

+6 

52.7 

50.6 

52.0 

51.2 

51.9 

50.8 

51.6 

51.4 

106 

104 

105 

104 

106 

105 

105 

105 

42.2 

43.4 

43.5 

43.4 

44.6 

28.0 

27.8 

28.2 

28.3 

28.2 

27.8 

15.7 

14.5 

15.6 

16.2 

15,6 

15.9 

23.0 

21 .7 

23.3 

23.3 

23.3 

23.1 

89.1 

91.6 

84.3 

84,0 

82,8 

84.0 

83.3 

43.9 

44.7 

47.3 

46.4 

48.5 

47.1 

46.7 

39  4 

39  1 

41  3 

40  1 

41  0 

41  1 

83.5 

82.0 

80.5 

81.2 

79.1 

80.4 

81.2 

80.0 

89.9 

91.2 

93.4 

93.2 

94.7 

94.5 

93.3 

94.0 

78.5 

75.9 

77.5 

75.8 

79.1 

76.1 

76.3 

76.9 

50.6 

49.7 

51.7 

51.9 

50.2 

52.0 

51 .8 

52.5 

81.6 

81.6 

83.7 

82.5 

85.9 

84.2 

83.0 

84.6 

270  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


Comparison  of  Measurements 

The  most  interesting  results  obtained  from  a  study  of  the 
physical  measurements  are  the  very  marked  differences  existing 
between  the  forest  and  the  savannah  tribes.  The  forest  tribes 
are  taller,  have  longer  legs  and  arms,  more  slender  bodies,  smaller 
faces  and  heads  than  their  relatives  in  the  savannahs;  and  this 
applies  to  both  sexes. 

This  observation  leads  us  to  examine  the  neighboring 
Arawak  tribes  of  the  forests  and  the  savannah,  where  we  find 
the  same  thing  true  to  about  the  same  extent. 

Height 

Table  11  gives  a  comparison  of  all  the  measurements,  with 
differences  indicated  in  adjoining  columns  by  +  and  -  signs. 

Table  12  shows  the  difference  in  height  between  the  males 
of  the  two  groups  to  be  29  mm.  and  between  the  females  39  mm. 
Table  13  shows  a  corresponding  difference  in  height  of  33  mm. 
and  26  mm.  among  the  Arawaks. 


TABLE  12.— HEIGHT,  CARIBS 


Tribes 

Number 

Males 

Number 

Females 

Sex 

Difference 

36 

1589 

10 

1467 

122 

Savannah . 

33 

1560 

16 

1428 

132 

Difference . 

29 

39 

TABLE  13.— HEIGHT,  ARAWAKS 


Tribes 

Number 

Males 

Number 

Females 

Sex 

Difference 

19 

1606 

15 

1478 

128 

9 

1573 

1 

1452 

121 

33 

26 

When  a  comparison  is  made  between  the  Arawak  and  Carib 
stocks  of  the  two  localities  it  is  seen  by  Tables  14  and  1 5  that  the 
stock  differences  are  greater  than  the  locality  differences;  that 
is,  the  forest  Caribs  more  nearly  resemble  the  forest  Arawaks 
than  they  do  the  savannah  Caribs.  Again,  the  same  thing  holds 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


271 


true  for  both  sexes.  The  difference  between  the  forest  Caribs 
and  the  forest  Arawaks  is  17  mm.,  while  the  difference  between 
the  forest  Caribs  and  the  savannah  Caribs  is  28  mm.  for  males 
and  1 1  mm.  and  39  mm.  respectively  for  females. 


TABLE  14.— HEIGHT,  MALES 


Stocks 

Number 

Forest 

Number 

Savannah 

Stock 

Difference 

Arawak . 

19 

1606 

9 

1573 

33 

Carib . 

36 

1589 

33 

1560 

29 

Locality . 

17 

13 

Difference . 

TABLE  15.— HEIGHT.  FEMALES 


Stocks 

Number 

Forest 

Number 

Savannah 

Stock 

Difference 

Arawak . 

15 

1478 

1 

1452 

26 

Carib . 

19 

1467 

9 

1428 

39 

Locality . . 

11 

24 

Difference . 

In  Table  16  the  height  of  all  the  Caribs  is  compared  with 
that  of  all  the  Arawaks  revealing  a  difference  in  favor  of  the 
Arawak  males  of  17  mm.  and  of  the  females  of  27  mm. 


TABLE  16.— HEIGHT,  TOTALS 


Stocks 

Number 

Males 

Number 

Females 

Sex 

Difference 

Arawak . 

32 

1594 

18 

1479 

115 

69 

1577 

28 

1452 

125 

Difference . 

17 

27 

The  Trunk 

The  measurements  of  the  trunk  are  even  more  interesting 
than  those  alreadv  considered.  The  differences  between  the 

j 

two  groups  are  greater  than  the  differences  in  height  would 
indicate.  Unfortunately,  the  height  to  the  sternal  notch  was 
not  taken,  so  it  is  not  possible  to  get  the  length  of  the  trunk. 

Table  17  shows  the  sitting  height,  which  is  a  very  difficult 
measurement  to  take  with  great  accuracy  where  there  are  no 


272  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

floors,  boxes  or  chairs.  The  small  differences  of  4  mm.  and 
2  mm.  between  the  groups  is  due,  no  doubt,  to  the  longer  necks 
of  the  forest  tribes  rather  than  to  the  length  of  their  bodies. 


TABLE  17 


Tribes 

Height  Sitting 

Leg  Length 

Arm  Length 

Males 

Females 

Males 

Females 

Males 

Females 

814 

751 

775 

716 

652 

598 

810 

749 

750 

679 

640 

595 

4 

2 

25 

37 

12 

3 

In  Table  18,  where  we  get  the  most  exact  measurements,  as 
in  the  breadth  of  the  shoulders  and  the  hips,  we  find  the  unex¬ 
pectedly  large  difference  of  13  mm.  and  12  mm.  The  differences 
of  9  mm.  and  8  mm.  in  the  breadth  and  depth  of  the  chest  are 
not  great,  but  they  correspond  perfectly  with  the  other  differ¬ 
ences.  The  difference  between  the  chest  differences  is  only 
1  mm.,  which  is  the  same  exactly  as  that  between  the  shoulder 
and  hip  differences.  This  would  indicate  that  the  two  groups 
have  bodies  of  the  same  form,  differing  only  in  size.  The 
shoulder  and  hip  measurements  of  females  show  the  same 
relative  differences  as  already  observed  for  the  males. 


TABLE  18.— TRUNK 


Tribes 

Number 

Breadth, 

Shoulders 

Breadth, 

Chest 

Depth, 

Chest 

Breadth, 

Hips 

Breadth, 

Shoulders 

Breadth, 

Hips 

36 

350 

278 

216 

294 

326 

289 

Savannah . 

33 

363 

287 

224 

306 

328 

294 

Difference . 

-13 

-9 

-8 

-12 

-2 

— 5 

The  Limbs 

We  should  naturally  expect  to  find  the  taller  group  with 
longer  limbs.  Nearly  ail  the  difference  in  height  is  due  to  the 
longer  legs  of  the  forest  tribes.  In  Table  17  the  leg  length  is 
determined  by  subtracting  the  sitting  height  from  the  stature 
and  the  arm  length  by  subtracting  the  breadth  of  shoulders  from 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


273 


the  span.  These  are  not  exact  measurements  of  the  limbs  but 
they  are  just  as  valuable  for  comparative  purposes.  The  arm 
length  in  the  large  table  was  a  direct  measurement;  that  is, 
the  difference  between  the  height  to  the  shoulder  and  the  height 
to  the  third  finger.  The  difference  in  leg  length  for  males  is 
25  mm.  and  for  females  37  mm.  The  difference  in  arm  length 
for  males  is  12  mm.  and  for  females  3  mm.  The  hands  of  the 
two  groups  are  nearly  the  same  size  with  the  exception  that 
the  length  in  the  male  forest  group  is  4  mm.  longer.  The  feet 
of  the  two  male  groups  are  the  same  length,  but  the  breadth  of 
the  savannah  group  is  3  mm.  greater.  The  females  of  the 
savannah  group  have  feet  6  mm.  longer  and  5  mm.  broader 
than  those  of  the  forest  group.  This  spreading  out  of  the  feet 
may  be  due  to  the  great  amount  of  walking  done  by  the  savannah 
group.  They  do  more  walking  simply  because  the  open  grass 
country  is  inviting. 

The  span  or  arm  reach  among  the  forest  group  is  not  so 
great  in  proportion  to  the  height  as  it  is  among  the  savannah 
group,  although  it  is  actually  greater  by  11  mm.  and  3  mm.; 
the  ratio  in  the  forest  group  is  104  in  bath  sexes,  while  it  is 
105  and  106  in  the  other  group.  The  ratio  among  the  North 
American  Sioux  of  both  sexes  is  105,  while  104  is  normal  among 
Europeans. 

The  Head  and  Face 

All  the  head,  face  and  nose  measurements  of  the  forest 
group  are  less  than  those  of  the  savannah  group.  The  length 
of  the  head  is  3  mm.  shorter,  the  breadth  1  mm.  less;  the 
breadth  of  the  upper  face  is  less  by  3  mm.,  the  lower  face  by 
4  mm.,  the  height  by  1  mm.,  the  height  of  the  nose  by  1  mm. 
and  the  breadth  by  2  mm.  See  Tables  19  and  20.  These  dif¬ 
ferences  are  not  great,  but  they  are  all  on  the  one  side  and  they 
are  about  what  should  be  expected  among  normal  unrelated 
groups  having  the  same  differences  in  stature.  The  smaller 
head  and  body  accompany  the  greater  stature.  Table  21  shows 
that  the  same  differences  hold  true  for  the  two  Arawak  groups. 


2  74  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


TABLE  19.— HEAD 


Tribes 

Number 

Length 

Breadth 

Minimum 

Frontal 

36 

181 

147 

105 

33 

184 

148 

105 

-3 

-1 

0 

TABLE  20.— FACE 


Bigonial 

Height 

Height, 

Breadth, 

Tribes 

Number 

Bizygomatic 

Nose 

Nose 

36 

137 

104 

71 

48 

39 

33 

140 

108 

72 

49 

41 

-3 

-4 

-1 

-1 

-2 

Table  21.— head  and  face,  arawak 


Tribes 

Number 

Head 

Length 

Head 

Breadth 

Bizygomatic 

Bigonial 

19 

181 

148 

139 

106 

9 

187 

148 

140 

lit 

-3 

0 

-1 

-5 

— 

The  strength  of  the  forearm,  as  revealed  in  the  hand  grip, 
is  greater  among  the  savannah  tribes  of  Caribs  and  Arawaks 
alike.  In  every  group  the  right  hand  is  stronger  than  the  left 
as  would  be  expected  among  a  right-handed  people.  Very  few 
left-handed  individuals  were  found.  The  differences  between 
the  two  groups  are  for  the  Caribs  right  hand  23,  left  19,  and  for 
the  Arawaks  right  13  and  left  16.  The  total  difference  in  favor 
of  the  Arawaks  is  12  for  the  right  hand  and  6  for  the  left.  The 
savannah  tribes  do  more  work  with  their  hands,  in  connection 
with  agriculture  and  canoeing,  than  forest  tribes  do  and  thus 
develop  more  strength  in  their  forearms. 

Sex  Differences 

Some  of  the  sex  differences  between  the  two  groups  are 
worth  noting.  In  stature,  the  difference  between  males  and 
females  of  the  forests  is  122  mm.,  while  the  corresponding 
difference  in  the  other,  which  is  the  shorter  group,  is  132  mm. 
The  difference  in  the  forest  group  of  the  Arawaks  is  28  mm. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


275 


To  express  the  difference  in  comparable  terms  with  other 
peoples,  the  stature  of  the  forest  females  is  92.3%  of  the  stature 
of  the  males,  while  that  of  the  savannah  females  is  91.5%.  It 
may  be  well,  for  the  sake  of  better  understanding  these  sex 
differences,  to  compare  them  with  the  tall  North  American 
Sioux.  The  average  height  of  the  Carib  groups  is  1577  mm. 
for  males  and  1452  mm.  for  females,  showing  a  sex  difference  of 
125  mm.  or  92.7%.  The  height  for  the  Sioux  is  1724  mm.  and 
1600  mm.  respectively.  The  sex  difference  among  these  people 
of  much  greater  height  is  124  mm.  or  92.8%. 

The  sex  difference  in  the  span  is  129  mm.  but  the  ratio  of 
span  to  stature  is  the  same  in  both  sexes,  or  105.  Among  the 
Arawaks  the  ratio  is  104.9  f°r  males  and  104  for  females.  Among 
the  Sioux  105.2  for  males  and  105.3  f°r  females.  Among  normal 
Europeans  the  ratio  is  104  for  both  sexes. 

The  most  obvious  sex  differences  are  those  of  the  breadth 
of  the  shoulders  and  hips.  As  the  people  wear  no  clothing 
over  these  parts  the  measurements  were  accurately  taken  and 
are  of  extreme  value.  The  savannah  people  had  broader 
shoulders  and  hips  than  those  of  the  forest,  but  the  differences 
between  the  females  of  the  two  groups  were  very  small,  only 
2  mm.  and  5  mm.,  while  the  differences  between  the  males  were 
13  mm.  and  12  mm.  The  average  sex  difference  was  33  mm. 
for  the  shoulders  and  12  mm.  for  the  hips.  The  females,  there¬ 
fore,  have  relatively  narrower  shoulders  and  very  much  broader 
hips  than  the  males.  The  ratio  of  shoulders  to  stature  for  males 
is  22.8  and  for  females  22.4,  but  the  ratios  of  hips  to  stature  are 
19.2  and  20.1  respectively. 

There  are  also  marked  sex  differences  in  the  measurements 
of  the  head  and  face  and  particularly  in  the  ratios  of  length  to 
breadth.  The  difference  in  length  of  head  is  10  mm.,  of  breadth 
5  mm.,  and  in  cephalic  index  1.8.  The  corresponding  differences 
in  the  Arawaks  are  10  mm.,  6  mm.  and  1.1,  while  among  the 
Sioux,  they  are  7.4  mm.,  4.2  mm.  and  0.9.  The  Carib  and 
Arawak  women  have  shorter  and  rounder  heads  than  the  men, 


276  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

a  difference  much  greater  than  that  due  to  the  development  of 

the  superciliary  ridges  in  men. 

The  sex  difference  in  physiognomic  height  of  face  (from 
hair  line  to  chin)  is  16  mm.,  breadth  8  mm.,  breadth  of  jaws 
6  mm.  The  Arawak  sex  differences  are:  height  16  mm.,  breadth 
io  mm.  and  jaws  1 1  mm.  And  those  of  the  Sioux  are:  height 
10.5  mm.  and  breadth  6.3  mm.  The  women  have  lower  and 
more  oval  faces  than  the  men. 

The  nose  is  noticeably  narrower  among  the  women  than 
among  the  men.  The  difference  in  height  is  5  mm.,  in  breadth 
4  mm.  and  this  results  in  a  difference  of  1.4  in  the  nasal  index. 
There  is  even  a  greater  sex  difference  among  the  Arawaks; 
height  3  mm.,  breadth  6  mm.  and  index  6.0.  Among  the  Sioux, 
the  differences  are  3.1  mm.,  2.5  mm.  and  0.8  respectively. 

When  the  Sioux  were  selected  for  comparison  in  this  study, 
it  was  done  because  this  tribe  is  well  known  to  the  reader. 
But  the  comparison  brings  out  a  most  interesting  fact.  In 
every  case  above  mentioned,  the  sex  differences  are  greater 
among  the  short  Carib  tribes  than  among  the  tall  Sioux.  1  he 
sex  difference  among  the  Arawak  tribes  is  practically  the  same 
as  among  the  Caribs. 


Causes  for  Differences 

It  becomes  necessary  to  account,  as  far  as  possible,  for  the 
differences  in  the  physical  development  between  the  forest  and 
savannah  groups.  The  differences  cannot  be  due  to  contact  or 
miscegination  with  outside  tribes  of  different  physique.  The 
forest  tribes  were  in  contact  with  one  another  and  with  other 
Carib  tribes  and  to  some  extent  with  forest  Arawaks.  The  same 
thing  is  true  with  the  savannah  tribes;  they  were  surrounded 
with  other  Caribs  and  came  into  touch  with  Arawaks  of  the 
savannah.  The  causes  must  be  traced  directly  to  the  influence 
of  the  environment  with  all  that  such  a  statement  implies. 

The  two  regions  occupied  by  these  groups  of  peoples,  while 
not  far  removed  from  each  other,  are  very  different  in  many 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARfBS 


277 


respects  which  directly  or  indirectly  affect  the  life  of  man.  One 
is  a  level  grassy  plain  dotted  here  and  there  with  isolated  moun¬ 
tains,  while  the  other  has  a  dense  forest  covering  its  rolling 
hills  about  the  head  streams  and  along  the  divide  between  two 
drainage  systems.  The  character  of  the  soil  and  the  amount 
of  rainfall  affect  the  development  of  agriculture.  The  different 
elements  in  the  food  supply  of  the  two  groups  are  practically 
the  same  but  differ  greatly  in  proportions,  and  herein  may  be 
found  the  causes  for  the  differences  in  the  physical  development 
of  the  groups.  The  one  staple  food  for  the  whole  region  is 
cassava.  In  the  savannah,  this  is  supplemented  by  corn, 
squashes,  fish  and  a  little  wild  game,  while  in  the  forest,  cassava 
and  game  are  depended  upon  almost  entirely.  Cultivation  in 
the  forest  is  more  difficult  than  in  the  borders  of  the  savannah 
because  of  greater  rainfall  and  ranker  growth  of  annoying  vege¬ 
tation;  there  is  also  a  greater  amount  of  wild  game,  hence  the 
forest  people  depend  less  upon  agriculture  and  more  upon  hunting 
than  do  the  people  of  the  savannahs.  The  whole  question  then 
may  be  one  of  diet  alone.  The  subject  is  worthy  of  a  more 
careful  study  by  a  competent  medical  man  and  dietitian. 


278  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

THE  MAP 

Our  attempts  at  astronomical  observation  served  us  a  good 
purpose  all  along  our  way.  Among  the  rubber  gatherers  and 
traders  in  the  outside  country  we  were  given  credit  for  superior 
wisdom  because  we  knew  the  stars,  could  fix  our  position  by 
them  and  could  calculate  the  direction  and  distances  between 
stations.  The  taking  of  observations  attracted  the  attention 
of  the  Indians,  and  1  was  able  to  get  much  star  lore  that  1 
should  have  missed  otherwise.  Our  instruments  also  were  of 
interest  to  the  Indians.  The  magnet,  compass  and  watch  were 
understood  without  difficulty;  that  is,  they  soon  discovered 
that  only  certain  things  were  attracted  by  the  magnet,  that  the 
compass  always  pointed  in  one  direction  and  that  the  hour 
hand  of  the  watch  always  pointed  at  the  sun.  They  had  no 
use  for  these  things;  they  always  knew  their  directions  and 
could  tell  the  time  of  day  by  looking  at  the  sun.  Our  binoculars, 
however,  were  greatly  appreciated.  When  the  moon  was  in  its 
early  or  late  phases  a  whole  village  would  sit  by  the  hour, 
passing  the  binoculars  back  and  forth,  observing  the  mountains 
of  the  moon.  They  could  not  understand  why  I  took  obser¬ 
vations  of  the  stars  and  not  of  the  moon,  yet  they  knew  the 
moon  was  nearer  to  the  earth  and  that  it  ran  in  a  wobbly  course. 

The  accompanying  map  is  based  upon  materials  obtained 
and  observations  made  on  our  journey.  Along  the  rivers  we 
made  traverses  by  the  use  of  a  watch  and  a  Brunton  compass, 
and  when  travelling  across  country  we  used  a  pedometer,  watch 
and  compass.  These  traverses  were  checked  by  some  four 
hundred  observations  of  the  sun  and  thirty  different  stars. 
This  statement  is  made  to  call  attention  to  the  difficulty  one 
encounters  in  using  a  sextant  in  the  tropics.  The  sun  cannot 
be  used  at  midday  for  latitude,  and  in  the  forest  at  night  one 
must  pick  up  any  star  that  happens  to  be  showing  through  the 
foliage.  At  the  Indian  villages  we  made  halts  of  several  days’ 
duration,  allowing  me  to  determine  the  rate  of  my  time.  I  was 
able  to  check  up  with  established  stations  at  both  ends  of  our 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


279 


long  journey  through  the  interior.  Mr.  H.  P.  C.  Melville  and 
Mr.  C.  W.  Anderson  fixed  the  position  of  Dada  Nawa,  and 
Anderson  and  Dutch  engineers  at  different  times  had  fixed  the 
position  of  the  mouth  of  the  New  River  on  the  Corentine.  Our 
latitudes  are  accurate,  but  the  longitudes  are  only  fair  approxi¬ 
mations,  yet  the  probabilities  are  that  our  map  will  not  be  im¬ 
proved  upon  for  another  generation.  The  map  shows  the  route 
followed  by  our  expedition,  the  location  of  the  sacred  lake  of 
the  early  Spaniards,  Amucu,  the  group  of  sacred  mountains  of 
the  Atarois  and  Wapisianas  and  the  location  of  Indian  villages. 

It  may  be  well  to  call  attention  to  some  mistakes  in  the 
earlier  maps  of  the  Corentine  River  region.  Maps  as  late  as 
1910  show  the  Corentine  flowing  due  west  for  fifteen  or  twenty 
miles  to  join  the  New  River,  which  is  flowing  northwest.  The 
New  is  represented  as  the  larger  river  and  its  course  continued 
by  the  Corentine  for  ten  miles.  The  fact  is  that  the  Corentine 
is  the  larger  river  and  the  New  enters  from  the  west  at  a  point 
where  the  Corentine  has  just  changed  its  course  to  a  little  east 
of  north  and  this  course  is  continued  for  fifteen  miles  to  the 
mouth  of  the  Lucie  River.  The  Corentine  is  the  straightest 
river  I  have  ever  traversed.  If  a  line  were  drawn  from  Cutari 
Landing  at  the  head  of  canoe  navigation  Lat.  20  N.  to  the  west 
side  of  the  Wanotobo  Cataract,  Great  Falls,  the  last  of  the 
great  rapids  Lat.  4^°  N.,  it  would  not  be  ten  miles  from  the 
river  at  any  point.  The  Dutch  use  the  name  Corentine  to  the 
junction  of  the  New  River  and  call  the  upper  river  Coeroene. 
The  Indians  say  the  Sipaliwini  is  the  longest  branch  of  the 
Corentine;  if  so  then  it  must  be  regarded  as  the  source  of  the 
Corentine  and  the  international  boundary.  It  would  be  well 
for  Brazil  and  the  Guianas  to  delimit  their  interior  boundaries 
before  valuable  discoveries  make  the  task  more  difficult. 


280  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Appun,  Carl  Ferdinand 

1.  Unter  den  Tropen,  Bd.  11.  Jena,  1871. 

2.  Ausland,  Jahrgange,  1869-71-72. 

Brett,  W.  H.,  Rev. 

Indian  Missions  in  Guiana.  London,  1851. 

Coudreau,  Henri  A. 

La  France  Equinoxiale.  Paris,  1887. 

Coudreau,  O. 

1.  Voyage  a  la  Mapuera.  Paris,  1903. 

2.  Voyage  au  Rio  Curua.  Paris,  1903. 

Crevaux,  J. 

1.  Bibliotheque  Linguistique  Americaine,  Tome  VI 1 1.  Paris,  1882. 

2.  Voyages  dans  l’Amerique  du  Sud.  Paris,  1883. 

Goeje,  C.  H.  de 

Beitrage  zur  Volkerkunde  von  Surinam.  Int.  Archiv.  fur  Ethnog. 
Bd.  XIX,  pp.  1-34.  Leiden,  1908. 

Grupe  y  Thode,  G. 

liber  den  Rio  Branco  und  die  anwohnenden  Indianer.  Globus,  Bd.  57, 
251-254.  Braunschweig,  1890. 

Hillhouse,  William 

Notices  of  the  Indians  Settled  in  the  Interior  of  British  Guiana.  Jour. 
Royal  Geog.  Soc.,  Vol.  II,  pp.  227-249.  London,  1832. 

Huebner,  George 

Ovalledo  Rio  Branco.  Manaos,  1906. 

Im  Thurn,  Everard  Ferdinand 

Among  the  Indians  of  Guiana.  London,  1883. 

Joest,  W. 

Ethnographisches  und  Verwandtes  aus  Guayana.  Leiden,  1893. 

Koch-Grunberg,  Theodor,  und  Hubner,  Georg 

Die  Makuschi  und  Wapischiana.  Zeitschrift  fur  Ethnologie  V,  1-44, 
1908. 

Koch-Grunberg,  Theodor 

Reise  durch  Nordbrasilien  zum  Orinoco.  Ibid.,  s.  448,  Vol.  45,  1913. 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


281 


Martius,  Carl  Friedrich  Ph.  Von 

i  .  Beitrage  zur  Ethnographic  und  Sprachenkunde  Amerikas,  zumal 
Brasiliens.  Leipzig,  1867. 

2.  On  the  State  of  Civil  and  Natural  Rights  among  the  Aboriginal 
Inhabitants  of  Brazil.  Jour.  Royal  Geog.  Soc.,  Vol.  II,  pp.  191-227. 
London,  1832. 

Pitou,  L.  A. 

Voyage  a  Cayenne.  2  vols.  Paris,  1807. 

Roth,  Walter  E.,  M.D. 

Animism  and  Folklore  of  the  Guiana  Indians.  30th  An.  Rept.  Bu. 
Amer.  Eth.,  pp.’  103-386,  1908-1909. 

SCHOMBURGK,  RlCHARD 

Reisen  in  Britisch-Guiana  in  den  Jahren  1840-1844,  2  vols.  Leipzig, 
1848. 

SCHOMBURGK,  ROBERT  HERMANN 

1.  Report  on  the  Third  Expedition  into  the  Interior  of  Guayana.  Jour. 

Royal  Geog.  Soc.,  Vol.  VI.,  pp.  224-284.  London,  1836. 

2.  Journey  to  the  Sources  of  the  Essiquibo.  Ibid.,  Vol.  X,  pp.  1 59-190, 

1841 . 

3.  Visit  to  the  Sources  of  the  Takutu.  Ibid.,  Vol.  XIII,  pp.  18-75,  1843. 

4.  Reisen  in  Guiana  und  am  Orinoko  wahrend  der  Jahre  1835-1839. 

Leipzig,  1841. 

5.  Comparative  Vocabulary  of  Eighteen  Languages  and  Dialects  of 

Indian  Tribes  Inhabiting  Guiana.  London,  1848. 

Smith,  Lieutenant,  R.  N. 

Account  of  the  Rivers  Amazon  and  Negro  from  Recent  Observations. 
Jour.  Royal  Geog.  Soc.,  Vol.  VI,  pp.  II-23.  London,  1836. 

Stradelli,  E. 

1.  Rio  Branco.  Boll,  della  Soc.  Geog.  Ital.  Roma,  Marzo-Aprile,  1899. 

2.  L'Uaupes  et  gli  Uaupes.  Ibid.,  Maggio,  1890. 

Ule,  E. 

Unter  den  Indianern  am  Rio  Branco  in  Nordbrasilien.  Zeitsch.  fur 
Ethnog.  s.  278,  Vol.  XLV,  1913. 

Valliere,  J.  A.  J.  de 

Jour.  Royal  Geog.  Soc.  May,  1911. 

Waterton,  Charles 

Wanderings  in  South  America.  London,  1878. 


INDEX 


abiu,  38,  79 
abnormalities,  256 
abortion,  74 

Absolution,  in  Macusi  language, 

1 10  ff. 

Acarai  Mts.,  12,  21,  153,  155,  >73* 
176,  199,  25.1,  252 
acaiara  tree,  resin  of,  38 
acouri,  83,  178;  pattern,  170 
adobe,  walls,  15;  oven,  22 
aeta  palm:  dish,  21;  food,  40; 
hammock,  25;  mantle,  160; 
quipu,  162;  roof,  18;  rope,  26; 
sandals,  62;  string,  27;  thong,  42 
Africa,  cat’s  cradle  in,  91  ff. 
agouti,  33;  teeth,  57 
agriculture,  30  ff.;  59,  274;  Ma¬ 
cusi,  12,  29 
aical  poison,  5 1 
aimara,  35,  48 
ainke,  83 
aiya  poison,  50  ff. 

Ajana  tribe,  25 1 

Alaska  Eskimo,  cat’s  cradles,  91 

albinism,  256 

albumin  poison,  54 

alligator  scales,  170 

Amazon,  155,  199,207,212;  forest, 

1 1 

ambush,  184 

Amucu,  Lake,  11,  14,  279 
amulet,  hunting,  42 
ananas,  rope  fibre,  26,  28 
ancestor  worship,  171 
Anderson,  C.  W.,  279 
Andes  Mts.,  212 

animals,  60,  78;  acouri,  83,  178; 
agouti,  33,  57;  anteater,  33,  78; 
capybara,  33;  deer,  12,  33,  44, 
54,  81 ;  dogs,  26,  42  ff.,  59,  164  ff., 
183,  187  ff.,  201  ff.,  214,  217,  253; 
iguana,  45;  jaguar,  33, 46, 53,  228; 
lizards,  33,  45;  monkey,  12,  33, 
45,  54,  56,  79,  189,  228,  255 ;  paca, 
33;  peccary,  33,  43,  52  ff.,  60, 
155,  184,  170;  puma,  33;  sloth, 
33,  170;  squirrel,  83;  tapir,  33, 
44,  53  ff.,  56,  58,  62,  164;  turtle, 
19,  21,  33  ff.,  94 


animal  drawings,  167;  forms,  23, 
60,  64;  worship,  171 
anklets,  cotton,  27,  62  ff.;  palm 
leaf,  202 

annatto  tree,  61 ;  paint,  65 
ant,  32;  bina,  43;  hill,  155;  jaw, 
170;  in  wasp  frame,  224,  226 
anteater,  33,  78 
antidote,  poison,  57 
Antilles,  blow  gun  in,  56 
antwood,  32 

Apalaii  bandoleer,  63;  flute,  66; 

tribe,  220  ff.,  25  1 
Apini  River,  25 1  ff. 

Apiniwau  River,  78,  82,  163,  172, 
182,  183,  185  ff.,  189,  194,  197  ff., 
202,  25 1  ff. 

Apostles’  Creed  in  Macusi,  109  ff. 
Appun,  14 

aprons,  225,  258;  burial  of,  172; 
Diau,  203,  205;  Kumayenas, 

214;  Macusi,  27,  60,  61 ;  Waiwai, 
166,  170 

arapaima  fish,  35,  48 
Aratawaii,  cqf’s  cradle,  88 
Arawak  arrow,  58;  cat’s  cradles, 
87,  89,  91;  drink,  39;  fish  trap, 
48;  food,  35  ff.;  hammock,  12, 
26;  peccary  trap,  44;  tribe,  183, 
228,  242,  252,  256,  270,  273 
Arecuna,  hammock,  25;  location, 
14;  poison,  54;  reeds,  57;  tribe, 
242 

Arikiana  tribe,  25 1 
arimaru,  54 
Arimiana  tribe,  250 
Armadilla  River,  155 
arm  bands,  63 
armlet,  202 

arrow,  52  ff.,  76,  246;  bone-tip,  45; 
dance,  160;  in  puberty  ceremony, 
223;  reeds,  221;  Waiwai,  164 
(see  bow) 

art,  166  ff.,  1 71  (see  decoration) 
artist,  native,  167 
ashes,  fertilizer,  29 
Asia,  blow  gun  in,  56;  cat’s  cradle 
in,  92 

assaii,  40,  162 
(282) 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


283 


assistants,  medicine  man’s,  223 

astronomical  observations,  278 

Atanayru  tribe,  13 

Ataroi  tribe,  175,  279 

attention,  255 

Atyai  tribe,  13 

awara,  40 

awl,  bone,  20,  157 

axe,  stone,  83 

Azumara  tribe,  242  ff. 

baby  carrier,  bark,  61,  78,  201; 

cotton,  25  ff. 
bacaba,  40,  162 
back  ornament,  61 
bags,  string,  27 
baggage,  22,  186 
bait,  47  ff.,  90 

baking,  cassava,  20,  22,  33,  35  ff. ; 

oven  or  pan,  17,  22,  36;  taboo,  40 
baldness,  254 

bamboo:  arrow  case,  56;  color 
pattern,  170;  flute,  66,  224; 

horn,  43,  224;  hair  tube,  63, 
254;  joint  case,  220,  222;  knife, 
77;  point,  53,  54,  58;  splint,  167 
bamboo  place,  200 
banana:  drink,  39,  40;  food,  38, 
201,  214;  leaves,  39  ff.,  161; 
planting,  32;  storage,  19;  varie¬ 
ties,  1 54  ff. 

bandoleers,  62  ff.,  223;  baby  carrier, 
78;  cotton,  28 
Barata,  Col.,  13 

barbecue,  33  ff.;  at  fish  poisoning, 
49  ff-.  59 

bark:  arm  bands,  63;  baby  carrier, 
78,  201 ;  belts,  61 ;  blow  gun,  57; 
canoe,  186,  213  ff.,  251;  cloak, 
222;  cradle,  78;  dog  hammock, 
26;  doors,  18;  grave,  81;  nouse- 
walls,  15;  poison,  51,  54;  tea,  73; 
trumpet,  160;  tump  line,  22 
Barokoto  tribe,  25  1 
baskets:  for  blow  gun  equipment, 
58;  cat’s  cradle,  87,  91;  carry¬ 
ing,  155;  covers,  22  ff. ;  drink, 

1 6 1 ;  fishing,  49  ff.;  fish  trap,  48; 
Macusi,  22  ff.;  Parukutu,  191 ; 


pack,  59;  storage,  19,  25,  37; 
strainer,  39;  trinket,  23,  170; 
Urukuena,  217;  Waiwai,  166  ff.; 
woman’s,  172;  work,  25 
bathing,  23,  65,  166,  187,  223,  253, 
256;  dogs,  43,  253 
batten,  25 

beads,  60,  62  ff.,  166,  170,  223; 
Diau,  199;  necklace,  202,  trade 
in,  183  (see  also  aprons) 
beans,  32,  201,  213,  224 
beams,  Macusi  house,  17,  21,  40 
bee,  224,  226 
beehive  trap,  44 
beeswax,  53 

beetles,  34,  222;  in  cat’s  cradle,  95 

beliefs  (see  superstition) 

bell  nut  apron,  205 

belts,  26,  28,  61 

Bible  in  Macusi,  96 

Bibliography,  280  ff. 

Bili  tribe,  250 

bina,  55,  79;  dog,  43;  courtship, 
225;  hunting,  42 
binding  pole,  Macusi  house,  16 
binoculars,  184,  278 
birds,  53,  67,  78  ff.;  chickens,  164, 
201  ff.;  curassow,  33,  46,  164, 
222,  255;  doves,  33;  ducks,  34, 
174;  eagle,  63,  212,  222;  heron, 
34;  humming  bird,  67,  222;jabiru, 
34;  maam,  33,  46;  macaw,  47, 
222;  maroudi,  33,  46;  muscovy, 
34;  negrocope,  34;  oriole,  222; 
owl,  173;  parrot,  33,  46,  47,  212, 
222,  255;  toucan,  33;  trumpeter, 
33,  46;  tukui,  67;  woodpecker, 
225;  bone,  63  ff.,  224;  food,  33; 
shooting,  56;  spirit,  73;  traps,  44 
birth,  199 
Black  River,  182 

bleaching,  186;  ananas  fibre,  28; 

basket  splints,  23 
blinds,  bird,  46,  222 
Blood  Creek,  1 53 

blow  gun,  52  ff.,  54,  222;  manufac¬ 
ture,  56  ff. ;  storage  of,  19  (see 
dart) 

body  coloring:  Macusi,  61,  64  ff.; 


284  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


Waiwai,  1 66,  293;  forest  tribes, 
256;  mutilation,  64;  oil,  37,  187 
boiling:  divination,  75;  meat  and 
fish,  22,  33;  monkey,  189;  poison, 

55 

boils,  201 
bolls  of  cotton,  25 
Bonawau  River,  172 
bone:  arrowtip,  53;  awl,  20,  157; 
comb,  64;  ear  ornament,  63; 
flute,  66,  158,  187,  224;  whistle, 
160 

borders  (see  decoration) 
boundaries,  1 1,  221,  279 
bout,  drinking,  39,  67 
bows,  33  ff.,  42  ff .,  188,  225;  burial 
•  of,  81  ff.;  at  death,  172;  games, 
70,  78  ff.;  manufacture,  52  ff., 
58;  Parukutu,  191;  storage,  19; 
strings,  27;  Waiwai,  164  (see 
arrow) 

bowls,  24;  drink,  68,  156,  159,  162, 
203  ff.;  food,  187,  201;  funeral, 

1 71  ff.;  storage,  161 
boys,  63;  ordeal,  222  ff. 
bracelet,  202 

Branco  River  (see  Rio  Branco) 
bravery,  223 

Brazil,  14,  199,  212,  242,  245,  279; 
Indians,  36;  nuts,  37,  63,  164, 
200,  201,  202 

bread,  33,  35,  64,  70,  76,  79,  161  ff., 
189,  191,201  (see  cassava) 
breech  cloth,  25  ff.,  61, 223,  250,  258; 
burial  of,  172;  Diau,  202;  Kum- 
ayena,  214 
breeding  dogs,  42 
bridle  bit,  form  of  lip  plug,  250 
British  Guiana,  14,  252 
brush,  palm  leaf,  190 
Brunton  compass,  278 
bulucush  palm,  38 
burial,  81  ff.,  189  ff.;  of  medicine 
man,  227 
buttons,  202 

bush  rope,  29,  48;  poison,  50,  165 
(see  liana) 


cabbage,  38 
Caixana  tribe,  13 

cakaralli  bark:  belt,  61;  trumpet, 
160;  tump  line,  22 
cake,  cassava,  22,  189 
cakewalk,  160 

calabash:  bowl,  68,  69,  73;  at  burial, 
172;  in  flute,  224;  instead  of 
pottery,  24 
Calabash,  River,  172 
caladium  charm,  42,  225 
call  (see  imitation  of  call) 
camera,  51,  184 

camp,  157,  166,  174,  189,  200,  201, 
214;  at  poisoning,  49 
camp  meetings,  189 
canes,  32;  pattern,  170  (see  sugar 
cane) 

canoe,  59,  78  ff.,  154,  186,  188,  191, 
200,  213,  214,  225,  246,  251,  256, 
274;  for  fishing,  48;  repair  of  53; 
for  storage  of  drink,  39,  68 
canopy,  roof,  164,  200 
captives,  185 
capybara,  33 
caramu,  54 
Caripuna  tribe,  1 3 
carrying  band,  78 
carving,  170;  comb,  64;  flute,  66 
cashews,  40,  155;  nut,  38;  plant¬ 
ing,  32 

casiri,  40 

cassava,  12,  191,  214,  256,  277; 
chewers,  64,  167;  cuttings,  59, 
153  ff.;  drink,  39,  1 6.1 ;  farina, 
17;  flour,  35,  37;  graters,  20  ff., 
157;  juice,  24,  53;  plant,  31; 
planting,  30;  pellets,  225;  soup, 
69 

catapult,  70 
cat’s  cradles,  85  ff. 
cattle,  221 
celibate,  225 

center  pole,  Waiwai  house,  165,  170 
ceremonial,  63;  club,  160,  204; 
objects,  166 

ceremonies,  220,  221,  257;  burial, 
81  ff.,  189  ff.,  227;  deer  hunter, 
42;  mourning,  82,  1 89  fF. ;  poison 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


285 


making,  55;  puberty,  61,  76,  221 
ff.  (see  bina;  customs) 
chain  weaving,  25 
chants,  226  (see  singing;  song) 
chapel,  66 
Chapern  tribe,  13 
charcoal,  53 
charm  (see  bina) 

Cherokee  blow  gun,  56 
chewing  cassava,  64,  167,  40;  cane, 
79 

chichi,  161 

chickens,  34,  164,  201  ff. ;  poisoned, 
54 

chief,  22i  ff.,  257;  Diau,  200,  202; 
Macusi,  71;  medicine  man,  190; 
Parukutu,  82,  181  ff.;  Taruma, 
153;  Waiwai,  153  ff.,  156,  162, 
165  ff.,  176 

Chikena  tribe,  184,  194,  197 
childbirth,  77 

children,  60,  71,  78,  82,  159,  188, 
200 

chin,  253 
chisel,  fire,  38 
choir,  66 

chorus,  66,  1 58  (see  singing) 
chouta  palm  floor,  1 7 
Christianity,  96  ff. 

Christie,  256 

cigarette,  190,  204  ff.,  227 
Cileus  tribe,  250 
circumcision,  256 
clam,  cat’s  cradle,  94 
clay  baking  pan,  22;  dancing 
ground,  223;  fireplace,  17;  pot¬ 
ter’s,  24 

cleanliness,  253;  Macusi,  14 
clearing,  200,  202;  fields,  29  ff.,  59, 
77 

cloak,  222 
cloth,  59,  61 

clothing,  221,  275;  Macusi,  60  ff. 

(see  costume,  ornament) 
clowns,  1 59,  205 

club:  ceremonial,  160,  204;  for  dogs, 
187;  fishing,  48;  Waiwai,  166, 
170;  war,  185 
cocks,  34 


Coeroene,  279 

coiling  process,  pottery,  24 

cokerite  palm,  cassava  press,  21; 

dart,  57;  drink,  40;  roof,  17  ff. 
collections,  Apalaii,  220 
color,  60,  61,  65,  162,  1 66,  178,  203, 
222,  224  ff.,  256 

comb  manufacture,  63  ff. ;  burial 
of,  172;  Waiwai,  170;  use  of,. 
166,  187,  203,  254 
commercial  banana,  201 
communal  house,  20,  164,  191,  201 
comparative  study,  257 
comparison,  measurements,  270 
compass,  184,  278 
concentration,  217 
conception,  74,  77 
concession,  land,  221 
conch  shell,  85 
cone  basket,  23 
Conebo  tribe,  161 
Confession  in  Macusi,  117 
conjunctiva,  253 
consultation,  medicine  men,  227 
contact,  60,  1 71 
conventional,  art,  171 
conversation,  69 
convulsions,  227 

cooking,  18,  24,  33,  190,  200,  203 
cord  (see  string) 

Corentine  river,  97,  212,  214,  251 
279 

corn,  22,  154,  249,  277;  chewers, 
64;  cultivation,  30  ff.;  drink, 
161;  husking,  19;  grinding,  17; 
Macusi,  37;  mortar,  20 
costume,  60  ff.,  221;  Diau,  202; 

dance,  160  (see  clothing) 
cotton  baby  carrier,  78;  on  comb, 
64;  headband,  63,  76;  loin  cloth, 
61;  raw,  24;  seed  charm,  79; 
silk  gathering,  58  ff.;  string,  52, 
60,  66;  storage,  19;  weaving,  27 
Coudreau,  14,  153,  252 
councils,  222 

counting,  181,  217,  245,  249;  Ma¬ 
cusi,  1 01  (see  vocabulary) 
courage,  228 

courtesy,  201  (see  customs) 


286  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


courtship,  225 
cousins,  marriage  of,  76 
couvade,  78 

covers:  arrowcase,  56;  basket,  22; 

dart  case,  58;  tray,  22 
crab,  cat’s  cradle,  94 
crabwood,  52 
cradle,  78;  cat’s,  85  ff. 

Creation,  legend  of,  83 
creeper,  bark  poison,  54 
cremation,  171 
Crevaux,  J.,  220 
crime,  71 

Cuduwini  River,  133 
cultivation  of  fields,  30  ff. 
culture:  elements  of  Waiwai,  163; 
differences,  12;  material  at  Tca- 
lio,  201 

Cunnington,  187  ff. 
curale  poison,  52 
curari  poison,  54,  55,  58 
curassow,  33,  46,  164,  222,  253 
curiosity,  202 

customs,  156,  158;  burial,  81  ff., 

1 71  ff.,  189,  227;  couvade,  78  ff.; 
drinking,  41  ff.,  162  ff.,  203  ff. ; 
eating,  41  ff.,  187,  201;  greeting, 
187,  188,  200,  202;  labor,  59  ff.; 
marriage,  15,  76,  153,  165,  225  ff.; 
mourning,  82  ff.,  189  ff.;  visiting, 
19,  23,  40  ff.,  69,  82,  156  ff.,  162 
ff.,  165,  187,  191;  wrestling,  70, 
75,  185,  206,  250  (see  games; 
ceremonies) 

Cutari,  214,  251,  279 
cuttings,  cassava,  31,  59,  153  ff. 

Cyk  Tow,  189 

Dada  Nawa,  279 
dam  trap,  48 

dance,  Diau,  199  ff.,  203;  Macusi, 
39,  61,  65  ff.;  marriage,  76,  78; 
ordeals,  221,  226;  Waiwai,  1 57  ff. 
dancing  board,  205,  223;  ground, 
39,  158,  200  ff.,  223,  250 
danger:  from  poison  darts,  55;  to 
traveller  in  tropics,  58 
d’Anville,  13 
Dara  Kityu  River,  251 


darts,  52,  54,  57  ff.,  70 
Davis,  Christopher,  73,  96 
deafness,  256 
death,  75,  81  ff.,  171,  189 
decoration:  arrow,  53;  basket,  23; 
body,  60,  63  ff.,  166,  1 91,  203; 
bow,  52;  for  dances,  160,  222  ff.; 
flute,  66,  224;  house  pole,  165 
(see  design) 
decoy,  47 

deer,  12,  54,  81;  food,  33;  hunting, 
44  ff. 

deformation,  254,  256 
de  Goeje,  C.  H.,  221 
deity,  224,  228 
Deniarara,  96 

design,  23;  arrows,  33;  aprons,  27, 
60  ff.;  body  paint,  64  ff.;  face, 
203;  flute,  66;  Waiwai,  165  ff., 
170,  1 71 

de  Sousa,  Andre  Fernandes,  13 
developing  photographs,  207 
development  of  race,  228 
dialect,  197 

Diau,  78,  1 9 1 ,  199  ff.,  202  ff.,  206, 
250,  253;  apron,  61;  messenger, 
163;  paint,  166 
diet,  76,  79,  277 

differences:  environment,  12;  causes 
of  tribal,  276 
dip  net,  47 
dippers,  24 

Disappearance  of  Two  Brothers, 
legend,  85  ff. 
disease,  74,  242,  246 
distention  of  stomach  from  diet,  37 
division  of  labor,  59,  163  (see 

customs) 
divination,  75 

dogs,  26,  165,  183,  187  ff.,  201  ff., 
217;  care  of,  59,  253;  hunting, 
42  ff.;  Waiwai,  164  ff.;  Kuma- 
yena,  214 

domestic  fowls,  34,  54,  164,  201  ff. 
doves,  33 

doors,  house,  16  ff.,  165 
drawings,  original,  167 
dress  (see  costume,  ornament) 
dried  meat,  35 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIES 


287 


drink:  courtship,  225;  dance,  159 
ff. ;  Diau,  201  ff. ;  Macusi,  37  ff., 
59,  67;  medicine,  73  ff.;  tobacco, 
227;  visitors,  156,  187;  Waiwai, 
1 61,  167 

drinks:  assau,  40,  162;  awara,  40; 
bacaba,  40,  162;  banana,  39,  40; 
cashew,  38,  40;  cassava,  39,  161; 
chichi,  1 6 1 ;  corn,  161;  kamara 
tea,  74;  paiwai,  40;  palm  seed, 
40,  161;  papaya,  38;  paricari, 
39,  1 61 ;  pineapple,  38;  40; 

ronai,  73;  tobacco,  227;  yaposa, 

4° 

drink  house,  202 
drinking-bout,  67,  162 
Drios,  25 1 
drums,  68,  224 
drying  frame,  corn,  32 
Duanapuku  tribe,  251 
ducks,  34,  174 
dump,  village,  166 
Dutch,  279;  traders,  13,  14;  West 
India  Co.,  13 

dye:  annatto,  61;  genipa,  222,  on 
quipus,  162  (see  paint) 
dynamometer,  258 

eagle,  46,  63,  212,  222 
ear,  254;  ornaments,  62  ff. 
eating  (see  customs) 
education,  226,  255 
eel  (see  electric  eel) 
eggs,  34 
egret,  222 
el  Dorado,  1 1 
electric  eel,  35,  48,  85 
elevation,  11,  155,  175,  187,212 
emiwariyangong,  81 
engineers,  221,  279 
Ensign  films,  207 
enteekerang,  83 
environment,  Carib,  11,  276 
Eskimo,  cat’s  cradle,  91  ff. 

Essiquibo  River,  1 1,  13,  85,  153,  155, 
251  ff. 

ethnological  report,  13 
ethnologist,  220 
etiquette  (see  customs) 


equator,  221,  223,  251 
ethics,  71 
Europeans,  275 

evil  spirits,  15,  69,  72,  81,  172,  174 

evolution,  art,  171 

ewuruci,  81 

exogamy,  76 

exorcism,  73 

expedition,  38,  279 

exploration,  13,  221 

eyebrows,  plucked,  64,  217,  253 

eyes,  253 

face,  273;  paintings,  65,  1 66,  187, 
203 

falcon,  33 
falls,  85,  220  ff. 

family,  71,  77,  225;  accommodation 
of,  15,  18,  165 
fan,  36 

farina:  manufacture,  17,  22  ff.,  35 
ff.,  40;  storage,  23 
Farogle,  212 
fasting,  225,  227 
fatherhood,  71 
father-in-law,  76,  225 
feast:  at  dance,  78;  fish  poisoning, 
30;  at  marriage,  76;  ordeals,  226 
feathers:  on  arrows,  53;  back  orna¬ 
ment,  61;  comb,  64;  decoration, 
23,  52,  63;  in  headdress,  205,  220, 
222;  in  nose,  253;  on  wasp  frame, 
224 

features,  253 
feeblemindedness,  256 
feet,  273 
felt  hat,  203 

fermented  drinks,  39  ff.,  161  ff.,  203 
festival,  63  (see  ceremony) 
fetishism,  171 

feud,  71,  184  ff.,  194  (see  warfare) 
fever,  73,  212,  220,  228,  246 
fibre:  ananas,  28;  cassava,  22; 

cord,  24,  42;  cradle,  78 
fields,  12,  15,  24,  79,  135  ff.,  163, 
174,  201,  214,  256  ff. ;  camp  at, 
212;  clearing,  67,  153,  cultiva¬ 
tion  of,  29  ff. 
filing  teeth,  64 


288  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


films,  207 

fire,  154,  173,  190,  204;  making,  38; 
at  poison  making,  55;  places,  17, 
18,  23,  165;  stick,  66;  wood,  17, 
18,  225 

firing  pottery,  24 

fish,  11,23;  aimara,  35,  48;  arapai- 
ma,  35,48;  eel,  35,  48,  85;  pacu, 
35,  47,  172;  perai,  47,  74- 
pirai,  35,  47,  49,  58,  74,  85;  sting¬ 
ray,  35,48;  cat’s  cradle,  92;  hook, 
164,  172,  183;  lines,  27;  Macusi, 
34  ff.,  48  ff.,  84;  185,  277;  poi¬ 
soning,  34;  spine,  170;  trap,  48, 
173 

fishing,  12,  33  ff.,  59,  79,  163  ff. 
fleas,  186 
flies,  18 
flint,  53 

Flood,  legend  of,  84  ff. 
floors,  18 
flour,  35 

flutes,  66,  69,  156,  158,  187,  223  ff. 
fly:  cat’s  cradle,  87;  eye,  170 
food,  12,  33  ff.,  37  ff.,  76,  201  ff., 
220,  257,  277;  bowls,  24,  187; 
in  courtship,  225;  gathering,  59; 
in  ordeal,  223;  rack,  165 
Footo,  cat’s  cradle,  94 
forearm,  274 

forest  tribes,  26,  42,  51  ff.,  61,  63, 
184,  253  ff.,  270 

forked  stick:  pole,  21;  cassava 
press,  35 
formula,  54,  74 
Fotcokwa,  cat’s  cradle,  96 
framework:  cassava  sieve,  21 ;  corn 
drying,  52;  drink  receptacle,  203; 
loom,  25;  Macusi  house,  16; 
pack  basket,  22;  trap,  48; 
Waiwai  house,  164 
French,  199 
fried  food,  34 

fringe,  60,  160;  aprons,  27,  203 
fruits,  22  ff.,  33,  83,  187;  abiu,  38, 
79;  annatto,  65;  banana,  38; 
bulucush,  38;  calabash,  24,  68 
ff.,  73,  172,  224;  cashew,  32,  38, 
40,  155;  casiri,  40;  guava,  38; 


imbira,  38;  manicole  palm,  38; 
melon,  32,  37;  papaya,  32,  38, 
155,  201;  pepper,  32;  pineapple, 
32,  38,  154;  plantain,  38,  154, 
201;  plum,  47;  rubber  tree,  38; 
watermelon,  37;  yam,  154 
furnishing  house,  19;  workhouse,  17 
future,  Waiwai,  176 

gable,  Macusi  house,  17 
game,  1 1  ff.,  23,  76,  79 
games,  1 1,  12,  70  ff.,  255,  277 
genipa  dye,  222 

geographical  environment,  1 1  ff. 

geometric  design,  23,  60,  64,  171 

girls,  63;  ordeal,  225 

Gloria,  in  Macusi,  1 18 

granite  outcrop,  212 

grass,  savannah,  1 1 

graters:  cassava,  17,  20  ff.,  35; 

manufacture  of,  157 
grave,  181  ff. 

Great  Falls,  213,  279 
greeting  (see  customs) 
grinding  corn,  17,20;  place,  17 
groove,  fire,  38 
grub,  34;  cat’s  cradle,  90 
Goeldi  Museum,  220 
gourds,  18,  19,  190;  rattle,  69,  158, 
204  ff.;  for  poison,  55;  whistle, 

1 76 

guava,  38 

Guiana,  26,  65,  201,  212,  279; 
British,  14,  252;  French,  199, 
220 

guide,  56,  183,  186  ff.,  201,  212,  226 

gum,  61 

gun,  46,  79 

Haddon,  D.,  85  ff. 
hair:  bandoleer,  63;  belts,  28; 
combings,  172;  cut,  223,  252;  of 
old  man,  183;  oil,  37;  style,  63, 
76,  166,  187,  203,  217,  254; 
tubes,  166,  203 

hammocks:  burial  of,  171  ff. ;  cradle, 
78;  colored,  61,  69;  dog,  26,  59; 
hanging,  17  ff.,  187,  189,  190,  201, 
204,  225,  256;  fires  under,  154; 


FARABF.E — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


289 


loom,2o;  manufacture,  25;  posts, 
165 

Hammer  plates,  207 

hands:  of  bananas,  19;  grip,  274; 

shake,  200,  202;  strength,  258 
handles,  knife,  170 
harpoon  head,  53  ff. 
harpy,  63,  222 
harvest,  32,  59 
hat,  221 
haya,  51 

head,  273;  band,  27,  63,  76;  dress, 
160,  173,  205,  220;  man,  39,  49; 
67  ff„  71,82 
hearing,  255 
height,  258,  270 
herbs,  72 

hereditary  office,  72,  226 
herons,  34 
hoe,  30 
hominy,  37 

Honawau  River,  198,  200 
honey,  64 

hook,  fish,  47,  79,  164,  172,  183 
horn,  hunting,  43,  222 
Horstman,  Nicholas,  13 
hospitality  (see  visiting) 
house:  Apalaii,  220;  building,  59, 
67,  77,  82,  174,  1 81 ;  cat’s  cradle, 
92  ff.;  cleaning,  253;  Kumayena, 
214;  Macusi,  15  ff.,  150,  155  flf.; 
at  Minai  Ulud,  186  ff.;  Paru- 
kutu,  191 ;  at  Tcalio,  200;  at  Tca- 
lifona,  202;  Waiwai,  164,  ff.,  170 
hunting,  12,  33,  42  ff.,  44  ff.,  156, 
163  ff.,  186,  188,  224;  dogs,  42 
ff.;  horn,  43  ff.,  65,  67,  71,  224; 
implements,  52  ff. 
hydrocyanic  acid,  cassava,  20,  35 
hymns,  66 

iguanas,  45 
Ilian  River,  200 
imbira,  38 

imitation  calls,  34,  45,  52,  73,  226 
immortality,  82,  227 
implements:  arrow  and  pottery 
manufacture,  172;  hunting,  52 
ff.;  digging,  30 


lm  Thurn,  14 

Inago,  155 
incantation,  190 
industry,  228,  246 
insects:  bee,  224,  226;  beetle,  222; 
flea,  186;  fly,  18,  170;  grub,  34; 
mosquito,  18;  scorpion,  170- 
spider,  89,  95;  bait,  47,  70,  78; 
protection  vs.,  15,  220,  222 
instruments:  astronomical,  278; 

musical,  66  ff.,  156,  158  ff.,  \66 
170,  175  ff-,  187,  204,  223  ff. 
interior  tribes,  50,  60,  62,  82,  1 54, 
164,  170,  1 9 1,  221 

interpreter,  205,  252;  of  dreams, 
227 

intoxicating  drinks,  39,  161,  167 
invention:  blow  gun,  56;  cassava 
press,  2 1 

invitations,  67  ff.,  76,  78,  156,  162 
ff.,  199  (see  customs) 
iron  points,  digging  sticks,  30 
Iroquois,  blowgun  among,  56 
irrigation,  29 
Itacuta  River,  13 
Itoto  River,  202 
ixtle  fibre  string,  27  ff. 

jabiru,  34 

jaguar,  33,  46,  53  ff.,  228;  bone 
flute,  66,  158,  187;  skin  belt,  61 
jar,  water,  1 72 
jaremakwita,  81 
Jary  River,  22 1 
jaw,  253 
Jayne,  91  ff. 
jiggers,  42 

journey:  by  chief,  156;  for  cuttings, 
59;  length  of,  256;  for  poison,  49 
ff.;  for  trade,  59;  taboo  on,  79 
jumping  stone,  85 

Kafaiyana  River,  155 
Kaikutciana  tribe,  251 
Kaitcana  River,  183  ff.,  186,  194 
kaka,  70 

Kalicina  tribe,  250 
Kamacoko  River,  153,  155 
Kamalili  cat’s  cradle,  93 


290  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM 


— ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


Kanuku  Mts.,  11,  13,  H>  54 

Kaphu  River,  251 

karamana  wax,  58,  66 

Karap  tribe,  251 

Karape  River,  214 

kartama  seeds,  74 

Katawian  tribe,  197;  village,  187 

katumba,  82 

Kefulikaco  cat’s  cradle,  91 
Kenaima,  74  ff.,  81,  172;  protec¬ 
tion  vs.,  15,  18 
Kiwang,  81 
kinship  terms,  80 
Kiwinik,  153,  154 

knives,  170,  188;  burial  of,  172; 
Diau,  199;  peccary  tooth,  52; 
Waiwai,  1 66 
konima  tree,  light,  38 
Koropatinauaua,  155 
Kowui,  51 

Kumayena  tribe,  214 
kunapari,  51 
Kunuu  River,  155 
kunani,  51 

Kutcifiana  tribe,  182 

labor,  59  ff.,  163 

La  Condamine,  13 

Lake  Amucu,  1 1,  279 

lakes,  1 1,  84,  173  ff. 

landing,  canoe,  153,  188,  200,  212 

landmarks,  physical  measurements, 

257  ff- 

language,  96  ff.,  177  ff-,  182  ff-  (see 
vocabulary) 

latitude  and  longitude,  187,  212,  278 
leader:  chorus,  66;  dance,  69  ff., 

1 59,  204 

leaves:  bait,  47;  charm,  42;  poison, 
51  ff.;  shelter,  55,  78  (see  banana; 
palm) 

left  handed,  274 
leg  band:  cotton,  27;  Diau,  202 
legends,  83  ff.,  172  ff. 
letterwood  for  bows,  52 
lever,  for  cassava  press,  21,35 
lianas:  baskets,  22;  belts,  61;  on 
blow  gun,  57;  poison,  49,  51; 
strings,  28  ff. 


limbs,  272 

lips,  253;  plugs,  62 

lizards,  33,  45  ,  . 

log:  drink  receptacle,  203;  path,  30 

loin  cloth  (see  breech  clout) 

looms,  20,  25  ff. 

loop  snares,  45  . 

Lord’s  Prayer  in  Macusi,  1 17  ft. 
lore,  star,  278 
Lucie  River,  279 

maam,  33,  46 
Maca  tribe,  246 
macaw,  47,  222 
Macheyenga  tribe,  91 
Macusi,  1 1  ff.,  163,  242,  256;  apron, 
170;  bow,  164;  graters,  151, 
houses,  1 5 
Macuxi,  13 
magnet,  184,  278 
maicasapa,  33 
Maiyosi  cat’s  cradle,  95 
Majari  River,  14 
Malitili,  155 

Malkanuni  cat’s  cradle,  95 
mallet,  wooden,  20,  50 
mamai,  81 
manacu  wood,  54 
manaos,  246 
manicole  palm,  38 
manners,  253 
mantle,  aeta  palm,  160 
manufacture:  drinks,  39  ff.,  591 
farina,  35;  hunting  implements, 
52  ff.;  medicine,  72  ff.;  poison, 

54  ff- 

Maopityan  tribe,  251 
maps,  13,  245,  250,  252,  278  ff. 
Mapidian  tribe,  156,  182,  183,  251 
mara,  69 

Maraca,  245;  island,  241;  river, 
242;  tribes,  242  ff. 

Marajo,  62 

maranta  splint  basket,  23 
maroudi,  33,  46 
marriage,  15,  76,  225  ff. 

Martius,  13 
matches,  use  of,  38 
material  culture,  15,  201 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


291 


massacre,  185 
mats,  21,  78,  84,  223 
mawari,  69 
meadows,  1 1 

meals,  37,  41 ;  corn  meal,  20 
measurements,  253,  257  ff. 
meat:  eating  of,  41;  Macusi  uses, 
33  ff.;  taboo,  76 

medicine,  72  ff.,  190,  212;  man, 
71  ff.,  172,  175,  183,  221  ff.,  223, 
226 

melon,  32,  37 

Melville,  H.  P.  C.,  153,  279 
men:  costume,  60  ff.,  160,  202; 
door,  17;  decoration,  1 7 1 ;  house, 
187;  measurements,  257;  work, 
24,  32,  59  ff.,  154 
mercury,  184 

messengers,  68,  78,  156,  162,  227 
metal  baking  pan,  22 
milk,  palm,  38 

Mimisakualitilite  cat’s  cradle,  92 
Minai  Ulud,  186,  194,  198 
Minu  cat’s  cradle,  93 
miritci  palm,  84 
miscegination,  276 
missions,  65,  96  ff. 

Moa  cat’s  cradle,  90 
Mocajahi  River,  1 1 ;  Mountains,  1 1 
molar  bone,  254 
mold,  39  ff. 

monkey,  12,  79,  228,  255;  cat’s 
cradle,  88;  hair  bandoleer,  63, 
223;  hair  belt,  28;  hunting,  43, 
54,  56;  food,  33,  189 
monogamy,  76 
moon,  204,  278;  mts.,  1 1 
Moonpidienne  tribe,  252 
morality,  Macusi,  14,  71 
Morning  Prayer  in  Macusi,  1 1 1  ff. 
Moroi  cat’s  cradle,  89 
mortar:  corn,  20,  37;  place,  17; 

Waiwai,  170 
mortise  on  loom,  20 
mosquitoes,  18 
Mt.  Harrison,  155 
Mt.  Seriri,  35 

mountains,  83  ff.,  277;  Acarai,  12, 
21,  153,  155,  173,  176,  199,  251, 


252;  Andes,  212;  Harrison,  155; 
Kanuku,  11,  13  ff.,  54;  Paiufon, 
174;  Pakaraima,  1 1 ,  13;  Seriri, 
14;  sacred,  279 
mourning,  82,  189  ff. 

Mouse  cat’s  cradle,  91 
mouth,  253 
mureyamaissang,  81 
muscovy  duck,  34 
muscularity,  253 

music,  65  ff.,  158  ff.,  206  (see  dance, 
singing) 

musical  instruments,  66  ff.,  156, 
1 58  ff.,  166,  170,  175  ff.,  187,  204, 
223  ff. 

muskmelons,  37 

Muskogean  Indians,  blow  gun,  56 

mustaches,  64 

mute,  256 

mutilation,  64 

murder,  71 

names,  80 
Napikeri,  1  5 
native  artist,  167 
Natterer,  Johann,  13 
natural  history,  226;  form  in  art, 
60 

neatness,  253 
neck,  272 

necklace,  28,  60,  62,  172,  202 

negro,  201,  203,  213 

Negro  River,  13 

negrocope,  34 

negroid  type,  198 

nest,  turtle,  34 

net,  27;  dip,  47;  snare,  45 

New  River,  279 

nonsense  syllables,  206 

North  American  Sioux,  273,  275 

nose,  253;  orna'ments,  63 

nursing,  78 

nuts,  22,  38,  79,  214;  Brazil,  37,  63, 
164,  200,  201  ff.;  cashew,  38; 
crabwood,  52;  palm,  57;  as  food, 
33,37,41;  fringe,  203;  ornament, 
60;  rattle,  66;  storage,  83 


29 2  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


observation,  astronomical,  278 
Ogilvie,  John,  80,  153,  156,  175  ff., 
186  ff.,  1 9 1 ,  201,  212 
oil,  brazil  nut,  37;  crabwood,  52; 
hair,  63  ff.,  166,  187,  203,  254; 
paint,  61 ;  turtle  egg,  34 
Ojapi  tribe,  25 1 
Okumiana  tribe,  250 
Ouayeoue  tribe,  252 
onobu,  81 

operation,  medical,  72 
ordeal,  63,  222,  226  ff. 
organ,  66 
orientation,  253 

origin:  couvade,  80;  design,  166, 

1 71 ;  fish,  84;  men,  172 
oriole,  222 
Orinoco  River,  57 

ornament:  Apalaii,  221  ff. ;  Bili, 
250  ff;  dance,  160,  205;  Diau, 
202;  at  death,  172;  on  loin  cloth, 
23,  26,  76,  82;  Macusi,  60  ff.; 
Waiwai,  166  (see  decoration,  de¬ 
sign,  etc.) 

Orokoyauna  tribe,  251 
Ortiguera,  62 
Ouayeoue  tribe,  252 
oven,  baking,  17,  22 
over  exertion,  226 
Owamginto,  cat’s  cradle,  91 
owl,  173 
ox,  poisoned,  54 
Oyapock  River,  221 

paca,  33 

Pacangera  cat’s  cradle,  87 

pack,  187;  basket,  22,  26,  217; 

train,  1 56,  256 
pacu,  35,  47,  172 
paddle,  baking,  36 
paint,  250;  body,  23,  61, 64  ff.,  166, 
203,  256;  burial,  172;  eyebrows, 
64;  face,  187;  house  pole,  170 
Pairakaira,  85 
paito,  81 

Paiufon  Mt.,  1 74  ff. 
paiwai,  dance  and  drink,  40 
paiwari  (see  paricari) 

Pakaraima  Mts.,  11,13 


palm,  170;  beetle,  34;  design,  170; 
fibre,  25,  162,  201;  leaf  brush, 
190;  leaf  basket,  22;  leaf  arm- 
lets,  63;  leaf  anklet,  202;  leaf  in 
burial,  172;  leaf  dish,  21;  leaf 
fan,  36;  leaf  on  houses,  15,  18, 
200;  leaf  uses,  161,  181,220,223; 
nut,  37,  57;  seed  drink,  40,  161; 
splints,  160,  221 
pan,  metal,  17,  22 
Pano  tribe,  17 
panpipes,  68 
Papagei  tribe,  251 
papaya,  32,  38,  1  55,  201 
Para,  207 

Paracoana  tribe,  13 

Parana  River,  246 

Paraviana  tribe,  13 

Paraiviana  tribe,  250 

parched  farina,  36;  corn,  37;  food,  34 

paricari  dance,  39,  67;  drink,  39,  161 

parikara  (see  paricari) 

Parkinson,  87  ff. 

Paroghotto  tribe,  251 
parrot,  33,  46  ff.,  212,  222,  253 
Paru  River,  220  ff. 

Parukutu  tribe,  65,  78  ff.,  82,  155, 
157,  163,  166,  175  ff.,  182  ff.. 
189,  1 9 1 ,  194,  197  ff.,  202,  251  ff. 
passion  flower,  32 
patse,  81 

pattern,  170  (see  design) 

Pauyaiden  tribe,  250 
pay:  medicine,  227;  services,  227, 
wife,  77 

peaceful  tribes,  14,  251 
pebbles:  medicine,  190;  pottery,  24 
peccary:  arrow,  54,  81 ;  food,  33,  60, 
135,'  164;  hunting,  43,  53,  55; 
rib,  170;  poisoned,  55;  tooth,  52 
pedometer,  184,  278 
pellets,  cassava,  225 
pendants,  62  ff.  (see  ornament) 
peppers,  32,  37 

perforation  of  lip,  256;  nose,  253 
Peru,  cat’s  cradle  in,  91 
pestle,  17,  20 

pets,  68;  birds,  34,  57,  164, .201  ff., 
peccary,  33;  maroudi,  46 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


293 


Philippines,  cat’s  cradle  in,  92 
phonetic  system,  97 
photographs,  160,  191,207,214,220, 
253  ff. 

physical:  appearance  of  Parukutu, 
183;  differences,  12,  243;  meas¬ 
urements,  1 9 1 ,  197,  214; ‘type, 
194,  197  ff. 
piaima,  175 

Pianoghoto  tribe,  250  ff. 

Pianoi  tribe,  25 1 
piazong,  72 
pici,  5  1 

pigeon  eggs,  34 

pineapple,  32,  38,  154:  drink,  40 
pirai,  35,  47,  49,  58,  74,  85 
pitch:  on  arrow,  53;  on  blow  gun, 
57;  on  grater,  20,  157;  on  reso- 
nater,  159 

Plains  Indians,  cat’s  cradle,  91  ff. 
plaiting:  belt,  26,  28,  61;  cassava 
press,  21 

plantain,  38,  1 54,  201 
planting,  30  ff.,  59,  77,  154,  202 
plants:  antwood,  32;  genipa,  222; 
gourd  (see  calabash);  haya,  51; 
ixtle,  27;  karamana,  58,  66; 
kowui,  51;  kunapari,  51;  kunani, 
51;  maranta,  23;  pici,  51;  pua, 
74;  tcipuyeyere,  73  (see  cassava, 
vegetables,  etc.) 
plate,  Macusi  house,  16  ff. 
plates,  photographic,  207 
play,  78  (see  games) 
plaza,  200  ff.,  204  (see  dancing 
ground) 
plow,  30 

plug,  ear  and  lip,  62  ff. 
plum,  47 
points,  arrow,  53 

poison,  47,  54,  250;  arrow,  53,  55  ff., 
58,  222;  in  cassava,  20,  35;  con¬ 
tainer,  55  ff.;  dart,  46;  formula, 
54;  gathering,  59;  Kenaima,  175; 
tciukuya,  5 1 

poisoning  fish,  11,  29,  33  ff.,  47,  49, 
67,  71,  84,  164 

poles:  dance,  204;  house,  15  ff., 
164  ff.;  vines,  1  54 


political  organization,  Macusi,  71 
polyandria,  191 
Ponama  River,  186 
Porocoto  tribe  (see  Porokoto) 
porphyry,  20,  157 
portage,  186 
Portugese,  13,  242 
Porokoto  tribe,  242,  245  ff. 
postures,  256 

potato,  32,  201;  bread,  37;  plant¬ 
ing,  59;  sweet,  31,  32,  37,  184 
pots,  189;  cooking,  17,24,41,  172, 
190,  200  ff.,  203;  divination,  75; 
drink,  171,  204;  eating,  41,  189; 
manufacture  of,  24;  poison  mak¬ 
ing,  55;  storage,  24,  39 
pottery:  Apalaii,  220;  Macusi,  24; 

Parukutu,  191;  whorl,  27 
prayer,  228;  Book  in  Macusi,  96 
press:  cassava,  21,  35;  nut,  37; 

poison,  55;  sugarcane,  37 
prognathism,  253 
pua,  seed  salve,  14 
puberty:  ceremony,  61,  76,  221  ff.; 
ordeal,  63,  225 

public:  opinion,  71;  ceremony,  76 
Puduwau  River,  182  ff.,  201 
Puerueta,  1  5 

pulp:  cassava,  20  ff.,  36;  poison,  49 

puma,  33 

pumpkin,  32,  37 

punishment,  71,  74,  76,  227 

Purigoto  tribe,  246 

purpleheart:  bows,  52;  spears,  53 

queue,  hair,  63,  213 
quipus,  68,  162,  199 
quiver,  dart,  58 

rack,  food,  163 

rafters:  Macusi,  15,  18;  Waiwai, 
165 

raid,  221 

railroad,  coming  of,  14 
rainfall,  1 1,  277 

rattle:  on  apron,  60;  dance,  66,  69, 
158,  160;  gourd,  204  ff.;  snakes, 
1 1 ;  staff,  67 
raw  cotton,  16 


294  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


razors,  64 
red  howler,  33 

reeds:  arrow,  221  ff.;  flute,  69; 
gun,  57 

realism,  60,  171,  224 
refuse,  166 

relation:  of  language,  246;  tribal, 
183,194,197,217,242 
religion,  72,  83,  224,  171  ff.,  228 
(see  superstition) 
resin,  fire,  38 

resonator:  calabash,  224;  tortoise 
shell,  159 

Responses,  Macusi,  1 1 7 
rest,  163  ff. 
rheumatism,  226 

rhythm,  67,  1 58  (see  dance,  singing) 
rice,  213 

ridgepole,  Macusi  house,  16  ff.,  19, 
25.  57 

Rio  Branco,  1 1,  13  ff.,  221 
Ripanuni  River,  13 
rites:  hunting,  42;  visiting,  41  (see 
ceremonies,  customs) 
ritual:  medicine,  73;  welcome,  69 
Rivers,  Dr.,  85 

rivers,  278;  Amazon,  155,  199,  207, 
212;  Apini,  251  ff.;  Armadilla, 
155;  Black,  182;  Blood  Creek, 
153;  Bonawau,  172;  Branco,  11, 
13  ff.,  221;  Calabash,  172;  Co- 
rentine,  97,  212,  214,  251,  279; 
Cuduwini,  153;  Cutari,  214,  25 1, 
279;  Dara  Kityu,  251;  Essi- 
quibo,  1 1,  13,  85,  153,  155,  231 
ft.;  Honawau,  198,  200;  How- 
rokoa,  155;  lliau,  200;  Itacutu, 
13;  Itoto,  202;  Jary,  221;  Kafai- 
yana,  155;  Kaitcana,  183  ff.,  186, 
194;  Karape,  214;  Kamakoho, 
153,  155;  Kaphu,  251;  Kunuu, 
155;  Lucie,  279;  Majari,  14; 
Mocajahi,  11;  Negro,  13;  New, 
279;  Orinoco,  57;  Oyapock,  221; 
Parana,  246;  Paru,  220  ff.;  Po- 
nama,  186;  Puduwau,  182  ff., 
201;  Ripanuni,  13;  Rupununi, 
13,  14,  153,  256;  Sipaliwini,  214, 
279;  Takutu,  13,  14,  256;  Tapa- 


nahona,  221;  Trombetas,  155, 
172,  175,  182,  199,  250,  251; 
Ucayali,  161;  Uraracuera,  14,242, 
245;  Yaiimu,  155;  Yupukari, 
256;  Wananui,  251;  Yaiimu, 
155;  Yupukari,  256 
roasting:  cassava,  20;  corn,  37; 
fish,  49;  meat,  33;  nut,  38;  tur¬ 
tle,  34  (see  barbecue) 

Rocebibu  cat’s  cradle,  88 
ronai  tea,  73 

Roucouyenne  tribe,  221,  251 
roof,  16,  164,  200 
roots:  cassava,  22,  30;  poison,  54 
rubber:  men,  201,  220,  221,  278; 
tree,  38 

run,  animal,  44  ff. 

Rupununi  Mts.,  11,  14;  River,  153, 
256 

sacred:  bundle,  223;  lake,  279; 

tradition,  71 
sacrifice  of  maiden,  173 
Saint  John,  Macusi  text,  104 
salt:  antidote,  57;  Macusi  use,  35; 

Parukutu,  184 
sandals,  62 
sanitation,  166,  253 
Sapara,  13 

savannah:  deer,  33,  42;  tree,  52; 

tribes,  25  ff.,  42,  270 
scale  line,  hammock,  26 
scarcity  of  women,  191 
scarification,  225 

Schomburgk,  Robert,  14,  28,  58,  75, 
153,  189,  214,  246,  251  ff. 
scientific  tests,  255 
scissors,  64 
scorpion,  design,  170 
seasons:  dry,  11,  15,  29,  34,  47,  49, 
166;  wet,  11,  30,  47,  62,  77; 
planting,  19 

seeds,  84,  255;  bait,  44;  food,  37; 
medicine,  74;  necklaces,  28,  62; 
ornament,  60,  62;  paint,  61; 
planting,  19,  31;  rattle,  69 
seeding  cotton,  25 
senses,  development  of,  255 
sentry,  parrot,  46,  222 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


295 


Seriri  Mts.,  14 
sex  differences,  274  ff. 
sextant,  184,  278 

shell  ornaments,  62  ff.;  conch,  85; 

resonater,  159;  whorl,  27 
shelters,  55,  78,  154,  165,  172,  186, 
189,  1 9 1 ,  200,  256 
shirts,  60,  203 

shooting:  games,  70;  manner  of,  164 
shoulder  basket,  23,  172,  190 
shrub,  161 
shuttle,  25 
Siamese  link,  2 1 

sickness,  72  ff.,  155,  184,  190 ff.,  201, 
226  ff. 

sieve,  cassava,  17,  21  ff.,  36,  170 
sight,  gun,  57 

signal,  188,  223;  dancing,  68  ff.; 

hunting,  43  ff.,  224;  fishing,  51 
significance:  art,  64,  1 66,  171;  cou- 
vade,  80;  wasp  frame,  228 
sincerity,  medicine  man,  227 
singing,  66,  73,  97,  158,  190,  204  ff„ 
223,  226,  (see  dance) 

Sioux  baby  cradle,  form  of,  22 
Sipaliwini  River,  214,  279 
siroche,  212 

site,  village,  1 1,  15,  188 

skin:  jaguar,  61;  tapir,  56,  58,  62 

skirts,  60 

slaves,  185 

sloth  design,  33,  170 

smallpox,  242,  246 

smoke  hole,  18,  200 

smoking:  cigarette',  190,  204 ff.,  227; 

fish,  34,  50;  meat,  33,  204 
snake,  1 1 ,  32,  78,  170 
snares,  29,  44  ff.,  59 
social  culture,  Macusi,  60 
soil,  29,  1 54  ff.,  227 
solo  singing,  66 
somatic  characteristics,  253  ff. 
song:  borrowing,  65;  Diau,  206;  to 
evil  spirit,  69;  of  piazong,  73 
sounding  board,  204,  254  (see  danc¬ 
ing  board) 

soup,  37  ff.;  cassava,  69;  fish  and 
meat,  33  ff.;  manner  of  eating, 
41 ;  palm,  38 


Spaniards,  279 

spears,  43;  fish,  49,  51;  manufac¬ 
ture  of,  52  ff. 
speech,  Macusi,  14 
spider  web,  cat’s  cradle,  89,  95 
spindle,  24,  27,  172 
spinning:  Arecuna,  25;  cotton,  24 
ff.,  59;  Macusi,  24  ff.;  outfits,  19 
spirits,  72;  hunting,  42;  evil,  15, 
69,  81,  172,  174,  226 
spring,  12 ;  pole,  48 
squashes,  32,  37,  201, 277;  planting, 
59 

squirrel,  83 

staff,  66,  183,  200,  204  ff.,  223 
stain  on  basket  splints,  23 
stalking  game,  42,  45 
star  lore,  278 
stations,  time,  278 
stealing,  71 
steam,  use  of,  190 
steps  in  house,  17 

sticks:  digging,  30,  134;  hooked, 
19;  poisoned,  75 
stingray,  35,  48,  74 
stork,  22 1 

stone,  157,  190;  axe,  83;  fireplace, 
18;  men,  83;  oven  support,  22; 
whorl,  27 

stool,  19,  41,  69,  157  ff.,  170,  226, 
241 

storage,  19;  beeswax,  53;  bowls, 
161;  bows  and  arrows,  19;  corn, 
19;  cotton,  24;  drink,  40;  farina, 
23>  3°>  37i  f°°d,  19,  214;  gourds, 
55;  poison,  55;  pots,  24,  39 
storms,  186,  204 

strainers:  cassava,  17;  drink,  39, 

161 

strangulation,  256 
streamers,  63,  222 
string,  162  ff.,  199,  234;  aeta  fibre, 
27;  apron,  61;  arrow,  53 ;  bow, 
52,  164;  catapult,  70;  comb,  64; 
cotton,  24,  27,  222,  224,  etc.;  ear 
plug,  63;  fish,  50;  fish  trap,  48; 
flute,  66;  fringe,  60;  ixtle  fibre, 
27  ff.;  pack  basket,  22;  quipu, 
68,  162  ff.;  trinket  basket,  23 


296  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


stringers,  house  building,  15 
sugar  cane,  32,  37,  59,  79,  i54>  '86, 
188,  1 9 1,  201 

superstition:  couvade,  79;  death, 
81  ff.,  172,  227;  hunting,  42; 
Kenaimas,  74;  placenta,  77; 
poison,  55;  sickness,  72,  184; 

spirits,  15:  twins,  257;  wasp 
frame,  226  ff. 
support,  pack  basket,  22 
supraorbital  ridges,  253 
survey,  221 

Surinam,  slavery  in,  14 
sweet:  cassava,  31,  154;  potatoes, 
31  ff.,  37,  184 
symbolism,  art,  171 

tables,  measurement,  260  ff. 

Takutu  Mts.,  11;  River,  13  ff.,  256 
Tapanahona  River,  221 
Tapicari  tribe,  13 

tapir,  53  ff.,  164;  food,  33;  hunting, 
44;  skin,  56,  58,  62 
Tarapidians,  250 
target,  70;  test,  225 
Tarireng  bark,  54 

Taruma  tribe,  21 ,  153,  155,  158,  162, 
175,  176,  189,  252 
tassels,  26,  61 

taboo,  77,  78  ff.,  164,  167,  201,  225; 

food,  33,  76 
tangsa,  81 
tattoo,  64,  167,  252 
Tcalifona,  201 
Tcalio,  200 

Tcara  Nawa,  183  ft'.,  187 
Tcekawa  cat’s  cradle,  94 
tcukuya  poison,  5 1 
teacher,  226 

Te  Deum  in  Macusi,  1 13  ff. 
teeth,  254;  animal,  225;  comb,  63 
ff.;  filing,  64;  gun,  57;  knife,  52; 
ornaments,  63 
tekatong,  82 
telescopic  baskets,  23 
temperament,  71 
temperature,  155 
tempering  clay,  24 


tests:  marriage,  76;  scientific,  255; 
target,  225 

texts:  Macusi,  104  ft.;  Absolution, 
uoff.;  Apostles’  Creed,  109  ff.; 
Confession,  117;  Gloria,  118; 
Laudamus,  1 1 3  ff . ;  Lord’s  Prayer, 

1 17;  Morning  Prayer,  1 1 1  ff.;  Re¬ 
sponses,  1 17;  St.  John  IV.,  46-54, 
104  ff.;  Thessalonians  I,  106  ff.; 
Venite,  1 18 
thatch,  202 
theft,  71 

thread  (see  cotton  string) 
timber  hitch,  26 
Tirijo  tribe,  25 1 
tirikir  tree  bark,  16 
Tirka,  66,  73 

tobacco,  32,  73;  drink,  227 

toggle  head,  harpoon,  54 

toilet  cases,  23,  63 

1'onayena  tribe,  198,  252 

tongue  scraping,  64 

Torres  Straits,  cat’s  cradle  in,  91 

tortoise,  159,  catching,  34;  shell, 

1  59 

totem,  67,  166,  1 71 ,  228 
toucans,  33 
toy  catapult,  70 
tracaxa,  34 

trade,  23,  59,  191,  246;  aprons,  61; 
cloth,  61;  Diau,  199;  enemy 
tribes,  185;  hunting  implements, 
52;  Macusi-Wapisiana,  14; 
poison,  51,  54;  trinkets,  183 
trader,  59,  199,  203,  212,  278 
tradition,  72,  80 

trail,  22,  37,  62,  65,  155,  173  ff.,  188, 
214,  255  ff. 
trance,  227 

traps,  29,  59,  170;  fishing,  44,  47 
ff.,  86;  mouse,  91 ;  peccary,  44 
travellers’  mistakes,  58 
tray,  170;  covers,  22 
tree  roots,  223 

trees:  abiu,  38,  79;  acaiara,  38; 
aeta  palm,  11,  18,  21,  25  ff.,  40, 
42,  62,  160,  162;  annatto  palm, 
61,  65;  awara,  40;  bacaba,  40; 
162;  bamboo,  43,  53  ff.,  56,  58, 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CAR1BS 


297 


63,  66,  77,  167,  170,  220,  224,  254; 
banana,  19,  32,  38  ff.,  154,  161, 

201,  214;  bulucush  palm,  38; 
cakaralli,  22,  61,  160;  caladium, 
42,225;  chouta  palm,  17;  coker- 
ite,  17,  21,  40,  57;  cotton,  19,  24, 
27,  52,  58,  60  ff.,  76,  78  ff. ;  crab- 
wood,  52;  konima,  38;  manicole 
palm,  38;  miritci  palm,  84; 
rubber,  38;  tirikir,  16 

tribes,  13,  221,  250  ff.;  Ajana,  251; 
Apalaii,  63,  66,  220,  251;  Ara- 
wak,  12,  26,  35,  39,  44,  48,  58, 
87,  89,  91,  183,  228,  242,  252,  256, 
270,  273;  Arecuna,  14,  25,  54,  57, 
242;  Arikiana,  251;  Arimiana, 
250;  Atanayru,  13;  Atarois,  175, 
279;  Atyai,  13;  Azumara,  242 
ff. ;  Barokoto,  251;  Bili,  250; 
Caixana,  13;  Caripuna,  13;  Cha- 
pern,  13;  Chikena,  184,  194,  197; 
Cileus,  250;  Conebo,  161;  Diau, 
61,  78,  163,  166,  191,  199  ff.,  202 
ff.,  206,  250,  253;  Drios,  251; 
Duanapuku,  251;  Kaikutciana, 
251;  Kalicina,  250;  Karap,  251; 
Katawian,  187,  197;  Kumayena, 
214;  Kutcifiana,  182;  Macusi, 
11  ff.,  163  ff.,  170,  242,  256; 
Macuxi  (see  Macusi);  Machey- 
enga,  91;  Maopityans,  25 1 ;  Ma- 
pidian,  156,  182,  183,  251; 

Maraca,  242  ff. ;  Moonpidienne, 
252;  Okwmiana,  250;  Oroko- 
yauna,  251;  Ouayeoue,  252; 
Ojapi,  251;  Pano,  17;  Papagei, 
251;  Paracoana,  13;  Paraviana, 
13;  Paraiviana,  250;  Parukutu, 
65,  78  ff.,  82,  155,  157,  163,  166, 
175,  182  ff.,  189,  1 9 1 ,  194,  197  ff., 

202,  251  ff. ;  Paroghotto,  251; 
Pauyaiden,  250;  Pianoghoto,  250 
ff.,  Pianoi,  251;  Porokoto,  242, 
245  ff.;  Purigoto,  246;  Roucou- 
yenne,  221,  251;  Sapara,  13; 
Tapicari,  13;  Tarapidian,  250; 
Taruma,  21,  153,  155,  158,  162, 
175  ff.,  189,  252;  Tirijo,  251; 
Tonayena,  198,  252;  Tunayanna, 


251;  Uapixana,  13;  Uatarai,  13; 
Uaya,  13;  Uayuru,  13;  Upurui, 
251;  Uricuana,  250;  Urukuena, 
217;  Waiwai,  21,  50,  52,  61,  79, 
87,  89,  153  ff.,  182  ff.,  203,  205, 
250,  254,  257;  Waiwe,  182,  201, 
251;  Waiweana,  250;  Wapisiana, 
14,  25,  35,  49,  51,  54,  57,  64,  80, 
85,  87,  90,  155,  157  ff.,  160  ff., 
164,  175,  187,  191,  228,  242,  256, 
279;  Yaou,  252;  Zapara,  242; 
Zurumata,  251;  comparison  of, 
270;  confusion  of,  250;  connec¬ 
tion  of,  183,  194,  197,  217,  242; 
friendly,  14,  251;  forest,  26,  42, 
51  ff.,  61,  63,  184,  253  ff.,  270; 
interior,  50,  60,  62,  82,  154,  164, 
170,  1 9 1,  221 
trigger  stick,  48 

trinkets:  exchange,  183;  storage, 
19;  baskets,  23,  170 
Trombetas  River,  155,  172,  175,  182, 
199,  250,  251 
trough,  39,  68,  203  ff. 
trousers,  60 
trumpet,  158,  160 
trumpeter  birds,  33,  46 
trunk,  271 

tube,  bamboo,  63,  254 
tukui,  67 

tump  line,  22,  26,  61,  256 
Tunayanna,  251 

turtle:  cat’s  cradle,  94;  catching, 
34;  as  food,  33;  shell  bowl,  21, 
35;  stool,  19 
tuwi,  67 
twins,  256 

Uapixana  tribe,  13 
Uatarai  tribe,  13 
Uaya  tribe,  13 
Uayuru  tribe,  13 
Ucayli  River,  16 1 
umuri,  81 
umu,  81 

Uncle,  C.  N.,  220 
upa,  81 
Upikari,  66 
Upurui  tribe,  25  1 


298  UNIVERSITY  MUSEUM — ANTHROPOLOGICAL  PUBLICATIONS,  VOL.  X 


urari  (see  curari) 

Uraracuera  River,  14,  242,  245 
uri,  81 

Uricuana  tribe,  250 
urn,  funeral,  171 
urubamba,  91 
Urukuena  tribe,  217 
utensils,  Macusi,  19 

vanity,  individual,  65,  166 
variety:  food,  12;  seeds,  31 
vegetables:  beans,  32,  201,  213,  224: 
cabbage,  38;  cassava  (see  cas¬ 
sava);  cane,  32,  37,  59,  79,  I54> 
186,  188,  1 9 1, 201 ;  corn  (seecorn) ; 
hominy,  37;  potato,  31  ff.,  37,  59> 
184,  201;  pumpkin,  32,  37;  rice, 
213;  squash,  32,  37,  59,  201,  277 
Venezuelan  boundary,  1 1 
Venite,  in  Macusi,  1 18 
ventriloquist,  73 
victory,  221 

village,  14  ff.,  49,  59,  i55>  164,  183 
ff.,  189,  199  ff.,  214,  257,  278  ff.; 
site,  12,  188 

vines,  201,  21 1 ;  belt,  28,  165 
vision,  253,  255 

visiting,  19,  60,  158,  162,  185,  228; 
dance,  67  ff.;  house,  163,  191, 
202  (see  customs) 
voice,  Macusi,  14 

vocabulary,  214;  Apalaii,  229  ff.; 
Azumara,  243  ff.;  Chikena,  195 
ff.;  Diau,  208  ff.;  Kumayena, 
215  ff.;  Macusi,  97  ff.;  Natterer’s 
13;  Parikutu,  192  ff. ;  Porokoto, 
247  ff.;  Urukuena,  218  ff.;  Wai- 
wai,  177  ff. 
vultures,  33,  185 

waists,  60 

Waitai,  cat’s  cradle,  86 
Waitiwelito,  cat’s  cradle,  95 
Waiwai  tribe,  153  ff.,  182  ff.,  250, 
254,  257;  aprons,  61;  bow,  52; 
cat’s  cradle,  87,  89;  couvade,  79; 
dance,  205;  drink,  203;  graters, 
21;  poisoning,  50;  trinket  basket, 

23 


WaiwS  tribe,  182,201,251 
Waiweana  tribe,  250 
Wainwright  plates,  207 
waipingpana,  80 
Wakakulud,  153 
Wakera  tribe,  201,  212  ff. 
walk,  256 
walls,  Macusi,  16 
wana,  81 
Wanafu,  81 
Wananui  River,  25 1 
Wanotobo  Cataract,  279 
Wapisiana  tribe,  80,  158,  175,  187, 
242,  256,  279;  bow,  164;  cat’s 
cradle,  85,  87,  90;  dance,  160; 
drink,  161;  eyebrows,  64;  fish¬ 
ing,  49,  51;  graters,  157;  gun, 
57;  hammocks,  25;  in  Macusi 
land,  14;  poison,  54;  name,  155; 
trade,  35;  Polyandria,  191;  wasp 
frame,  228 
waraiyo,  81 
waraiyorang,  81 
warepang,  69 
war  chief,  271 

warfare,  58,  71,  182,  184,  194,  246 
wasp  frame,  223  ff.,  226,  228;  grub, 

34 

wasp  nest  design,  170 
watch,  184,  278 
Wateiwatci  cat’s  cradle,  94 
water:  carrying,  24,  59;  drinking, 
40;  fall,  48;  farina,  37;  gourd, 
18,  24,  190;  hole,  12;  melon,  37; 
in  poison,  55 
Waterton,  54 
Watisa  cat’s  cradle,  87 
wax:  comb,  64;  on  flute,  224;  on 
gun,  57;  thread,  53;  on  quiver, 
58 

weaving,  24  ff.;  Macusi,  59 
wheat,  31 
whipping,  206 
whips,  250 

whistle,  159  ff.,  175,  204;  cere¬ 
monial  Waiwai,  166,  170;  legend 

of,  174 

whistling  duck,  34 
whorls,  25,  27;  burial  of,  172 


FARABEE — THE  CENTRAL  CARIBS 


299 


wickerwork:  houses,  15;  quiver, 
58;  press,  21, 36;  wasp  frame,  224 
widow,  82 

wild  cane,  53;  cotton,  79;  game, 
34;  honey,  64 
winds,  1 5 

withes,  in  house  building,  15 
wives,  number  of,  153,  165,  227 
wokarimo  bark,  54 
women:  costume,  60;  166  flf.,  202 
flf.;  dance,  160;  door,  17,  165; 
decoration,  166,  171;  duties,  41, 
43,  162;  measuring,  257;  scarc¬ 
ity  of,  1 91;  work,  20,  23  ff.,  32, 
35.  59  flf.,  154,  256 
wood,  225;  mallet,  20;  paddle,  36; 

pecker,  225;  trough,  21 
workhouse,  17,  19,  165 
worm,  bait,  47 


worship,  animal,  171 
wourari  (see  curari) 

Wratten  plates,  207 
wrestling,  70,  75,  185,  206,  250 
wristlets,  62 
wuriyang,  81 

Yakki,  54 
Yaku,  81 

Yaiimu  River,  155 
yams,  154 
Yaou  tribe,  252 
yaposa  drink,  40  flf. 
yellow  farina,  37;  plum,  47 
Yoruba,  87 
Yupukari  River,  256 

Zapara  tribe,  242 
Zurumata  tribe,  251 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X  PLATE  I 


THE  SAVANNAH  COUNTY  OF  BRITISH  GUIANA 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  II 


INTERIOR  OF  WORKHOUSE 


MACUSI 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  III 


A-MACUSI  MISSION  CHOIR 
B-MACUSI  WOMENAND  CHILDREN 


ANTHR.  PUB.  U N IV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  IV 


A-MACUSI  INTERIOR 

B-MACUSI  WOMAN  GRATING  CASSAVA 
C-D-E-F- WAI WAI 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  V 


MACUSI 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  VI 


MACUSI 


FAMILY  IN  THEIR  HAMMOCKS 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  VIII 


WAIWAI  CHIEFS 


/ 


ANTHR.  PUB.  U N IV.  MUSEUM.  VOL. 


WAIWAI  MEN 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  X 


C 


A  —  POUNDING  POISON  VEIN  IN  THE  RIVER  TO  KILL  FISH 
B— WOMAN  SPINNING 
C-MAN  MAKING  A  BOW 


WAIWAI 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XI 


C 

A-BREAKING  POISON  FOR  FISH 
B-TRAP  FORWILD  PIGS 
C- DANCE 


WAIWAI 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XII 


WAIWAI 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XIII 


B 

A  -CHIEF 
B-GIRLS 


PARUKUTU 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XIV 


A-1 


C-1 


/ 

f 

k 

E-2 


A-2 


PARUKUTU 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XV 


PARUKUTU 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


WAIWE  D-E-F-G  DIAU 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XVII 


A- POROKOTO 
B-CHIKENA 
C-TONAYENA 
D  — AZUMARA 


E -ZAPARA 

F-CHIKENA  (L)  KATAWIAN  (R) 
G -TONAYENA 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XVIII 


D 


A  -  C-KUMAYENA 
B  -  D- URUKUENA 


B 


4  \V 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XIX 


WAR  CHIEF'S  CEREMONIAL  DRESS 
APALAII 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X  PLATE  XX 


WASP  FRAME  IN  FORM  OF  A  JAGUAR 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


i  SagifeSB ‘&i'A  i  vSUU  i '.  1 V  WV.V5 


ttiaxii  iui  iitiiinuiiii  onmiilli)  i  it  • 
tjsliuui  iMminni)ixurnmh>i:i)  '  ■  ' 
ij»umiiiinlliiiiuuniiiuuiii  ii  •  .  •  i 
i  tx*t  n  imuiuiiMniK  >  i  i 

iJiuiiiijwiiijiJijiiiiiTi  m.  ■  >.  ■ 

inxiinmi;>*!iu)>n  ixi  i  ?  ■  ' 

rSjixix  1 1>  >  tt  *i«j  »•>•’*>>• »  riji  Jixiitri; .  *. 

«  lil i i f{| ;  :n\ ! ??  ?  ill .  i  \  ■-  VmM  1  ifhflp, : ;  V 

SKit  ?ii «  H  i  "  Vi  UJ  fff  i  I?  J  J  (P  ’ :  [ 

\  fHiff  nniii  in  IhjfSi  i  > ; 

if  i)  iiiihlhnvJ-  h 

:  ||  1 1  i  f k  1 1  If  l  i  i  !  i  J  ;  i  1  i  {  i J  r }  j  !  }  f  l  H  h  if } '  f  } 

Mflpi  ifcippf 

Sill  if  ;  Illflll  i 


z 

o 

cc 

Q_ 

< 


APALAII 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XXII 


liVlfti 


i  mmm 


WmM 

rnfAWlSS 


!a|K« 

Im&Wm 

M&Xm 


Wm3; 


Pi 

Mi 

nl 

tel 


mmm 


mm 

WgipM 


WM 

wSVVK 

vi'Sxv'a 

,  'XOOv  v>  T 


»W»W 


*HWW 


ii'immiiii 


ira®Kra! 


WtKlCTraHTilfi 


CEREMONIAL  CLUB  WITH  FIGURES  REPRESENTING 
MYTHICAL  FOREST  MONSTERS 


A  PA  LA 1 1 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XXIII 


A  —  APALAII  TRAYS 
B-WAIWAI  SIEVE 


tw&aSamnmmmm 


\ 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XXIV 


CARRYING  BASKET 
MACUSI 


CARRYING  BASKET 
APALAII 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XXV 


Ifjgfg 

>lli  tii 


B 


BEADED  APRONS 


MACUSI 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XXVI 


WOMAN'S  LOIN  APRON 


WA I W  A I 


. 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XXVII 


HEADDRESS 


WAIWAI 


✓ 


V 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XXVIII 


HEADDRESS 


WAIWAI 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


WAIWAI 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


MEN’S  BELTS 


» 


•» 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XXXI 


HAIR  TUBES 


WA1WAI 


'  \J| 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XXXII 


EAR  ORNAMENTS 


WAIWAI 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV,  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XXXIII 


CASE  FOR  POISONED  ARROW  POINTS 


WAIWAI 


\ 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XXXIV 


A-C-TRINKET  BASKETS 
B-STORAGE  BASKETS 


WAIWAI 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XXXV 


A-B  — MUSICAL  INSTRUMENTS 
C-KNIVES  OF  PECCARY  TUSK 


WAIWAI 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XXXVI 


STOOLS 


WAIWAI 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X  PLATE  XXXVII 


CASSAVA  GRATER  WOODEN  MORTAR 


ANTHR.  PUB.UNIV.  MUSEUM.  VOL.  X 


PLATE  XXXVIII 


CEREMONIAL  CLUBS 
WAIWAI 


PLATE  XXXIX 


Waiwai  Body  Painting 


PLATE  XL 


Waiwai  Face  Painting 


DATE  DUE  /  DATE  DE  RETOUR 


MAR  ; 

9  1996 

DEC 

}  6  IWO 

- Utv 

wrrt 

3  2011 

38-297 


CARR  MCLEAN 


