SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION—BUREAU OF ETHNOLOGY, 


ETHNOLOGY 


OF THE 


UNGAVA DISTRICT, HUDSON BAY TERRITORY. 


By LUCIEN M. TURNER. 


CONTENTS. 


Introduction 
Fort Chimo and the surrounding region 
Climate.... 
Auroras. .. 


Mammals 2.2.2 2... eee cece eee eee cee cree eee teen teat teen eens 
Birds... 00.0 2 eee cece ee cee ee cece en cence eens crete cnet teens ne eee 
The native inhabitants of the country—general sketch 
The Eskimo 
MALTY 6 «C0018 1): ert ee aS a rare arr 
Special account of the people around Fort Chimo 

The Koksoagmyut 
Physical characteristics 
Diseases . . 
Marriage 
Children 
Burial customs. .................--2- 
Religion 
Outdoor lite 
Tattooing. 
Clothing... 
Dwellings 
Household articles... . 
Food and its preparation 
Tobaceo and snutt 
Means of transportation 

By water 
On land oa 

Weapons and other hunting implements. ...........--...-.--.-++-+- 
Hunting 


Miscellaneous implements. - 
Amusements . . 


Story-telling and folklore 
Origin of the Innuit .............2-...--- 
The coming of the white people 
Origin of living things on the earth and in the water 
Origin of the guillemots 
Origin of the raven 
Origin of the quadrangular spots on the loou’s back. 
Origin of the gulls............-.---.-------5-- 
Origin of the hawks -... 
Origin of the swallow .... 


11 bru—t1 


162 CONTENTS, 


Special account of the people around Port Chimno—Continued. 
The Koksoagmyut—Continued, 

Story-telling and folklore—Continued, Page. 
Phe hare . : 263 
Phe wolf, ‘ aa ere tere 268 
208 
Origin of mosquitoes .. : yas 201 
Story of the man and his tox w ife. Pen Stereos 264 
The rivals. ‘ : er 204 
The jealous man ere ee oe 201 
Story of the orphan boy Kates Sesrse Wearcemcaee seme hs 265 
The origin of the sun, moon, and stare. ja} e sce wines 266 
Auroras.... aaa ein ature : : 266 
The sky ee eee 266 
The winds jements 267 
The Nenenot or‘ Naskopie” wis 267 
Principal characteristios ......... we 267 
Clothing wigeeee : 281 
Preparation of the skins fore lothing akesiee be : 202 
Dwellings .. ere 2O8 
Sweat houses .... Se nitide esas owes 300 
Honsehold utensils, ete 2.2.0... vanessa a diariedele, waete s808 800 
Tobacco and pipes .... ae bse. Siegert ees 802 
Means of transportation ... 804 
By water bare 6 eareigiai Sele wile ebjers. & Sib SAR RESTS Hes 804 
By land eas : 808 
Weapous sins Siaisce,tig-eDielle Saialoeeie Sue VES wEe KON sdSeatevsseeBeceees OLE 
Hunting.. ‘ 316 
Miscellaneous imple ments, tools, ete... : 317 
Amusements .. : , ar 820 
Festivals . cnt isin cide » ao BWe aie: a Si ie vieraGrecs 322 
Folklore... COLES ba Celene 327 
Story of the wolverine and the brant nivon 827 
Story of the wolverine . 327 
The deer and the squirrel Eda Aertel e 5 iGe . 3828 
The young man who went to live with the deer sie 3U8 
The wolt’s daughter going to seek her lover. ... ey 330 
The devil punishing a liar... i. i ie cose 338 
A wolverine destroys his sister... .. : Sdiets'e dis 333 
The rabbit and the frog. Set 3834 
The wolverine and the rock 7 336 
Creation of people by the wolverine and the muskrat ss 338 
Origin of the whitish spot on the throat of the marten . 88x 
The Indian and his beaver wife ae : 339 
The venturesome hare whe seteeacnege O40 
The spirit guiding a child left by its parents. . . 312 
Fate of two Indian men .... ; Visdugkeseweeviaess, O40 
The starving wolverine . oie 345 
Phe starving Indians : weecesee 849 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Page 

Plate XXXVI, View on Koksoak River. ind 170 
XXAVIL. Eskimo tent Stl eeenaeetre® Vaal 
XXXVIID, Stone tobacco pipes. ..... 802 
XXXINX. Birchbark canoe, Nenenot B04 

XL. Nenenot snowshoe—" swallow-tail” ee 308 

XLII. Nenenot snowshoe—" beaver-tail” Apne Arie 310 

XLII. Nenenot snowshoe—' round-end”. . 31Z 

XLII. Doll, Indian woman, full dress, Nenenot ; Ieee 826 


Fig. 21. Eskimo grave - are Lieos eyey ek Uae ceases be 192 
22, Magie doll... 244. paar beses ee .. 197 

28, Belt of magie doll .... ! badd ota do eilederaese 108 

. Talisman attached to magic doll Sata saseee » LOD 

25, ‘Talisman , TEE ere . ae odes dpeses 199 

. Talisman. ; hey. Wateeoare 1) 

IT, Talisman... 02.20.22. 002. ee .. 200 


. Eskimo woman’s amulet ey 201 
. Eskimo birdskin cap..@.....-.. 209 
“skimo man’s deerskin coat (front)... .....------ 210 
Sskimo man’s deerskin coat (back) .... sé. dtuapuicaees \ OLd 
Sskimo man's sealskin coat (front) PR eR 212 


Sskimo man's sealskin coat (side. . paeileaee 2138 
iskimo woman's deerskin coat.... 2... . es Pit 
Sskimo woman's deerskin coat... ....-. eokadee nbs 215 

i» Eskimo woman's deerskin coat 4a63 215 
. Eskimo woman’s deerskin coat sevesssee 216 
. Eskimo woman's sealskin cout 216 
. Eskimo woman's deerskin coat 217 
. Back view of same . a3. 217 
. Eskimo boots. ....-. 21s 
2iy 

219 

. Long waterproof sealskin mitten is 220 
. Waterproof gut frock 3 221 
. Snow gogyles—tront........-- St 222 
. Snow goggies—rear 2238 
. Deserted Eskimo snowhouses near Fort Chimo 224 
. Soapstone lump, Koksoagmyut 229 
. Soapstone lanp, Koksoagmyut 220 
. Soapstone lamp, Koksoagmyut ee 229 
2, Frame for drying mittens. ..........-.2. 0-222. 0-22-22 eee eee eee ee 230 
3, Soapstone kettle 230 
Soapstone kettle 231 


164 


Fig. 55, 
56, Sealskin bucket 


ee 


. Bow, 


. Arrow, 


. Ivory needle case, Koksoagmyut . ‘ 
. Sealskin needle cushion, with thimble, Koksoagnsy Ut... 


zn 


. Eskimo dol], woman. 


. Nenenot woman in full winter dress... .. 
. Sealskin headband, 
2. Skin scraper (front), Nenenot 
. Skin seraper (side), Nenenot . 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 


Wooden dish 
Sealskin cup ..-.... 0... -0565 
Tobacco pouch ... 
Eskimo Umiak 
Dog whip.. 

Kast Main Eskimo (bac k) 
Kast Main Eskimo (side) 
East Main Eskimo . 
Kast Main Eskimo 
East Main Eskimo . 
ase, Kast Main Eskimo. 


Bow, 
Arrow, 


Arrow, 
Bow e 


. Hand spear tor killing seals, from kaink, Koksoak. 


Toggle head for hand spear 


. Sealskin tloat. 


Ivory snow knife, “Koksoagmynt 
Back-serateher, Koksoagmyut 
Ivory needle case, Koksoagmyut 


“Cup and ball,” Koksoagmyut....... 
Football and driver, Koksoagmyut. 
Dominoes, Hudson strait Eskimo. 
Eskimo doll, 
Eskime doll, 


man. 
woman... 


Eskimo doll, woman 
Eskimo violin . 
Birds carved in ivory. s 


Hinman tigure carved in ivory 


. Indian medicine lodge 


Indian amulet of bearskin 


87. Indian buekskin coat, man's (front) 

88. Indian buckskin coat, man's (back ) 

80, Detailof pattern painted on Indian garment. 

90, Detailof pattern painted on deemskin robe....000. 22... 
91. Indian buekskin leggings. 00000 0.2... eee eee eee eee 
O2, Indian mocensinge 2.0... 2... cece cece cece ences soee ces 
93, Indian mittens . 2.2.0... 2... 2.2... eee eee e eee 

M4, Beaded headband, Nenenot 

5, Man's winter coat (front). .00000 0.2... 02-2220. 

96, Man's winter coat (back) 

97, Detail of ornamentation 2.0.2.0... .......---. 

Ws, Man's winter coat, with hood. ....0. 0.0.0.2... ....-... 
90, Man’s winter coat, with hood oo. 2.2.0... 2.2.0... ..--. 


Nenenot 


. Skin-cleaning tool, Nenenot 
. Skin-cleaning tool (iron-bladed), 
Paint stick, Nenenot . 


Paint stick, Nenenot 


Paint stick, Nenenot 


Mage, 
281 


psp 


DRY] 
vst 
bas i) 
2u 
26 
246 
247 


247 
247 
248 
249 
250 
20 


Dstt} 


‘ 
2H 


ond 
ond 
204 
on6 

256 
207 
YON 
258 
vay 
va 
vn 
200 
260 
271 


or 


wi 
281 
282 
2a? 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 165 


Page 
FiG.110, Paint stick, Nenenot ....... idesaderenens . 207 
111. Paint cup, Nenenot. 0.0.66. cece cee eee eee ee teen en eee eeen eens . 207 
112, Paint cup, Nenenot... 2.0.6. cece ce eee ee cece ee eee cee eee eee e ene es 207 
118, Paint cup, Nemenot. 0.0.0.6 cece eee eee eee e eee e eee cee e teens tie 
114. Nenenot Indian tent... 00000000. cee eee eee eee eee eee ee nees BES 
115, Wooden bucket, Nenenot.........66 cece cece ee eee eens 301 
116, Birehbark basket, Nenenot .... 0... 0.60 e cece eee ee cee ee cee 401 
117. Birehbark basket, Nenenot.. 0... 0... e626 cece eee eee eee ; 301 
L1X, Stone pestle, Nenenot . PTVITHTIP ETC ee ee 302 
119. Wooden spoon or ladle, Nenenot. sage 802 
120. Wooden spoon or ladle, Nenenot 802 
121, Wooden spoon or ladle, Nenenot CRE SURSEE MTOR EOL RUE 803 
122. Wooden spoon or ladle, Nenenot 3803 
123. Stone tobacco pipe ..... 304 
124. Pipe cleaner, Nenenot 804 
125, Spoon for applying grease to canoe. ....-.. 306 
126, Toboggan, Nenenot, side view... . Gian 307 
127. Toboggan, Nenenot, from above Gives soeatenutescde. BOT 
128, Nenenot snowshoe, single bar 2... 00.2.6 666. eee eee eee 8OR 
120, Nenenot snowshoe, single bar 300 
130, Snowshoe needle, Nenenot ease esewiee'e .. 810 
131. Wooden snowshoe, Little Whale river .... 0.0.0... -.620.0 0000-00002. BIL 
182, Bow, Nenenot pak aBDi. nes sig Ven ne riegiee ee nmiecs 312 
138. Arrow, Nenenot .... 0... 2. cece eee cee cece e eee ee eeeees 313 
134, Arrow, Nenenot 2 . 8 
135, Arrow, Nenenot...... 0... 6-000 eee eee e eee 313 
136. Arrow, Nenenot . Via Pits be weebesas SesMEApeeteneeen terewican OLE 
137. Deer lance, Nenenot. pee CTT eee Te TT eT) 
138, White whale spear, L ttle W “hy se: PIVOP sccccce ce wesewen ese sie 314 
139, Point of white whale spear enlarged 34 
140. Reindeer snare, Nenenot 5 stele ecatia, Aiea inks 315 
141. Crooked knife, Nenenot 317 
142. Awl, Nenenot Neleliane dis <aceems 31x 
143, Snow shovel, Nene ectiavae dt eettacen, 2Ole 
144. Ice scoop, Nenenot 318 
145. 31 
146, C , wi re } ‘ieaner 320 
147, rds for w i's 320 
148, Swimming board CAEP SES Sees e B585 321 
149, Fishhook and line 321 
150. Cup and ball, Nenenot .. odd 
151. Drum, Nenenot ...... Pot ddiiee ics ale eeanelncssaehiscehelewspeniouwe “Oak 
152. Drum, Little W hale river 825 
153, Rattle, Nenenot S26 
154. Target, reindeer, buck 326 
155. Target, reindeer, doe 326 


ETHNOLOGY OF THE UNGAVA DISTRICT, HUD- 
SON BAY TERRITORY. 


By Lucten M, TURNER. 


(Epitep by Joun Murpocit,) 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ungava bay is on the northern coast of old Labrador—the last great 
bight of the strait between the ocean and the mouth of Hudson bay. 
Its chief attuent is Koksoak or South river, which is several hundred 
miles long and takes its rise in a picturesque festoonery of lakes looped 
through the highlands half way down to Quebee. 


FORT CHIMO AND THE SURROUNDING REGION, 


Fort Chimo is in longitude 68° 16/ west of Greenwich and latitude 
58° 8’ north. The post is on the right bank of the Koksoak river, 
about 27 miles from its mouth. The elevation of the level tract on 
which the houses are situated is but a few feet above high-water mark, 
The location was selected on account of its comparative dryness, and 
also because the river affords a safer anchorage in that vicinity than 
lower down, 

The early Moravian missionaries, long betore established on the At- 
lantic coast, desired to extend their labors for the conversion of the 
Eskimo to their teachings, About the year 1825 a vessel ascended the 
Koksoak river for the purpose of selecting a new missionary station, 
Nearly opposite Fort Chimo is a beacon, yet standing, erected by the 
people of that vessel, Their reception among the natives was) such 
that they gave a glowing account of it on their return, The tudson 
Bay Company immediately took steps to erect a trading post upon the 
river, and a small party was sent in the year 1831 from Moose Factory 
to establish a trading post where the trade would appear to promise 
future development. The men remained there, obtaining a precarious 
subsistence, as the vessel delivering them supplies visited that place 
only once in two years. Their houses were simple, consisting of a 
single structure tor the official in charge, another for the servants, and 
two more for the storage of goods. A palisade was erected around the 

107 


168 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


houses to prevent the intrusion of the natives, Indians and Eskimo, 
who were so lately at war with each other that the rancorous feeling 
had not subsided and might break out afresh at any moment without 
warning. The remnants of, the palisade were yet visible in 1882. The 
establishment of this trading post had a pacifying intluence upon the 
natives, who soon found they could do better by procuring the many 
valuable fur-bearing animals than by engaging in a bloody strife, which 
the traders always deprecate and endeavor to prevent or suppress. 
Atter many trials to establish an overland communication with the 
stations on Hamilton inlet, it was found to be impracticable, and in 1843 
tle station was abandoned. 

John MLean, in a work entitled “Twenty-five Years in the Hudson’s 
Bay Territory,”! gives an account of that portion of the country that 
came under his knowledge from the year 1838 to 1843, 

In the year 1866 the steamer Labrador was built and sent with a 
party to reestablish the post at Fort Chimo. Since 1866 the post has 
been a paying station, and in later years a good profit has been made. 

Fort Chimo is the chief trading station of the Ungava district. The 
Ungava district proper is the area embraced by the watershed whose 
euttlow drains into Ungava bay. The castern boundary is formed by 
the foothills on the west side of the coast range, which is the western 
limit of Labrador. This range has a trend northwest and southeast to 
latitude 60°, where it makes a somewhat abrupt angle and pursues a 
nearly north course, terminating with Cape Chidley and the Buttons, 
the latter a low group of islets some 7 miles north of the cape. 
The southern boundary is the * Height of Land,” near latitude 55°, 
This region is estimated to be trom 1,000 to 3,000 feet above sea level, 
The greater portion of it is comparatively level, and on its surtace are 
innumerable lakes of various sizes, some of which are quite large. The 
western boundary is not so well known in the southern part of the 
region, as it has been seldom traversed. It seems to be a high eleva- 
tion extending toward the north-northwest, as numerous streams run 
from the southwest and west toward the central or Koksoak valley, 
Eskimo who have traversed the region many times report that the eleva- 
ted land abruptly ends near 58° 80/, and that there is formed a wide 
swuinny tract, estimated to be about 80 miles wide, which opens to the 
northeast and southwest. The northwestern portion of the district 
is a great area abounding in abrupt hills and precipitous mountains of 
various heights.. These heights, estimated to range no higher than 
2,600 feet, terminate abruptly on the western end of the strait, and 
the nuiverous islands in that portion of the water are, doubtless, peaks 
of this same range continuing to the northwest. 

It will be thus seen that the district of Ungava is a huge amphi- 
theater opening to the north. The interior of the district is excess- 
ively varied by ridges and spurs of greater or less elevation, The 


''Two vols. in one, London, 1849. 


TURNER.] THE HEIGHT OF LAND. 169 


farther south one travels, the higher and more irregularly disposed 
are the hills and mountains. These spurs are usually parallel to the 
main ranges, although isolated spurs occur which extend at right 
angles to the main range. The tops of the higher elevations are coy- 
ered with snow for the entire year. The summits of the lower ones are 
shrouded with snow as early as the lst of September, and by the Ist 
of October the snow line descends nearly to their bases, The lower 
lands are full of swampy tracts, lakes, and ponds, . 

The more elevated regions are totally destitute of vegetation, except 
the tripe des roches, which gives to the hills a somber color, anything 
but inspiring. Fully three-fourths of the more elevated region is, with 
the exception of black lichens, barren rock, Everywhere is the evi- 
dence of long continued glacial action, The southern exposures of all 
the hills show the same character of wearing, and, in many instances, a 
tine polish on the rocks forming their bases. This smoothness extends 
nearly to the summits of the higher peaks. These again are somewhat 
rougher and often broken into jagged, angular fragments, frequently 
of immense size. The more moderate elevations are usually rounded 
summits on whose higher portions may be found huge bowlders of rock 
having a different character from that upon which they rest, proving 
that they were carried there by masses of ice in the glacial ages. The 
northern extremity of all the ridges and spurs indicate that the glacial 
sheet moved to the north-northwest, for these portions of the rocks are 
so jagged and sharp edged as to appear to have been broken but yes- 
terday. 

The rivers of this district are numerous and several are of great size, 
although but two of them are navigable for more than 100 miles, and 
this only for boats of light draft. 

The river usually known as George's river (Kan‘gik¢lua‘luksoak) is 
the largest on the eastern side, This stream takes its rise about lat- 
itude 55° and pursues a moderately tortuous course nearly northward 
and falls into the eastern side of Ungava Bay. It has a wide bay-like 
mouth narrowing rapidly at the mouth proper, Swift rapids are formed 
here on account of an island near the center. Beyond this the river 
expands and has an average width of half a mile for a distance of about 
18 miles where the river bends eastward and forms rapids for over 
2 miles, It is navigable for the steamer Labrador only about 12 miles. 
Beyond the rapids it runs tolerably smooth and deep for nearly 40 
miles and thence to the source is a series of rapids and falls, rendering 
portages frequent, and making it utterly impracticable foreven a heavy 
skiff to ascend beyond 70 miles from the mouth, Indians assert that 
high falls oecur about 150 miles from the mouth of the George's river. 
The water is said to fall from a terrific height, almost perpendicularly, 
and it causes the ground to tremble so that the thundering noise may 
be heard for more than a day’s journey from it. 

The tide at the mouth of George’s river rises 53 feet, and at the 


170 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


Anchorage, opposite the newly established station of lort George, 
some 12 miles from its mouth, 42 teet. 

Whale river is the next important river toward the east, Off the 
mouth of this river isa huge island, locally known as Big island, This 
high island extends parallel to the course of the river, und a reef, con. 
necting its upper end with the mainland, becomes dry at low water, 
The course of Whale river is not well known, About 40 miles up this 
stream it suddenly contracts and becomes a mere creek, forming the 
outlet of a large lake, whose position is not satisfactorily determined, 
It is to the banks of this lake that certain families of the Indians re- 
pair for summer fishing. 

The next large river is the Koksoak, This stream is the largest in 
the district. It takes its rise from lakes situated on the plateau— 
the «Height of Land,’—and pursues a course having a general 
direction north-northeast. On emerging from the lake it) is rather 
small, but forks and unites again about 40 miles below. The current is 
is sluggicu at the upper end, and the eastern branch is so narrow that 
the Indians have to part the overhanging alders and willows to afford 
their canoes a passage. This braneh is said to be the shorter way to 
the lake and is not so difficult to ascend, the eastern branch being 
shallow and containing a number of rapids. 

Below the junction of the branches the river rapidly becomes larger 
and contains several very high falls, below which the river flows north- 
west for a couple of hundred yards and then curves to the north-north- 
east for a distance of 5 miles. This portion is only about 700 feet wide. 
It then turns abruptly westward and rushes swiftly through a narrow 
gorge only 200 teet wide for a distance of about 7 miles. This course is 
noted for severa: rapids, through whieh a boat can not make its way 
Without great ditticulty, At the end of this 7-mile run the river again 
bends abruptly to the east, and continues that course with little north. 
ing until the last bend, some 65 miles below, is reached, At the lower 
end of the 7-mile run the ledges and reefs are too numerous to count. 
From this place to the mouth of the Lareh river the Koksoak is ob- 
structed by islands, bars, and = shoals. Below these, however, it 
becomes quite broad, until nearly opposite the high point or promontory 
below the mouth of the Lareh (PL XXXVI). Prom this leeality it is mo- 
notonous till the last bend is reached, some 4 miles above Fort (Chime, 
where it suddenly turns to the north and pursues thai d:veetion to the 
sea with little variation, At the last bend, however, a large island, 
locally known as Big island, not only obstructs but ends mavigation 
for boats drawing over 6 feet. Small boats, such as skitfs and native 
boats, ascend to the lower end of 7-mile run, The principal obstrue- 
tion to travel in any kind of vessel in’ the Koksoak from) Big island 
to the mouth of the Larely river is the presence of two falls or rapids 
about 40 miles trom Fort Chimo., 

The extreme rise and fall of the tide at the mouth of the river is 62 


3A 


“‘wQAIh WWOCWOYMW NO 


s 
m 
2 
° 
2 
x 
fe} 
x 
wv 
fe) 
> 
x 
2 
< 
m 
2 


ADOIONHL3 30 NV3"UNS 


1HO0d3H TVONNY HINZART9 


IAKKK “Td 


TURNER. | AROUND FORT CHIMO. 171 


feet 3 inches, The usual rise and fall is from 8 to 12 feet less, depend. 
ing on the stage of the river. At Fort Chimo the tide rises as much 
as 31 feet. The backwater is held in check as far as the upper rapids 
in a common stage of water, and during a high rise in the month of 
June the water is “backed” some 3 miles beyond the upper rapids. 

The branches of the Koksoak river are few and unimportant. The 
larger tributary is the Larch river, [tis a rapid and almost wnnavi- 
gable stream of variable depth, mostly shallow, and 100 to nearly 400 
yards wide, i 

At about 40 miles from its mouth the Larch forks, the lower or 
southwest fork draining the eastern sides of the same mountains whose 
western slopes are drained by the Little Whale river. This southwest 
fork of the Larch river is quite small and searely capable of being 
ascended, although it may, with great caution, be descended. This 
is the course followed by the Little Whale river Indians when they 
traverse the country to join the Naskopies of the Koksoak valley. 
The northwest branch of the Larch is still smaller and is reported to 
issue from the swampy tract of land in about latitude 58° 30’, 

The next large river is the Leaf. Its mouth is about 34 miles north- 
west of Fort Chimo, and it flows into a peculiarly shaped bay named 
Tass‘iyak, or “like a lake.” The length of the river proper is estimated 
to be but 40 miles, flowing trom a very long and narrow lake, having its 
longer axis extending southwestward and draining the greater part of 
the swampy tract lying in latitude 58° 30’, The southwestern portion 
of this tract is merely an area covered with innumerable small lakes so 
intimately connected by short water courses that it is difficult to 
determine whether water or land constitutes the greater part of the 
area. The rivers to the west are of less importance and drain the 
rugged area forming the northwestern portion of the district, or that 
part lying uncer the western third of Hudson strait. 

The principal portion of Hudson strait that came under my observa- 
tion is Ungava bay. This bay is a pocket-shaped body of water lying 
south of the strait and toward its eastern end, Soundings in various 
portions of this bay indicate a depth of 28 to 70 fathoms tor the centrai 
area. The bottom appears to be uniformly the washings from the fresh- 
water streams. The extreme tides of Hudson strait tend to produce 
the most violent currents in this bay, Opposite the entrance of Leat 
river bay is a whirlpool of considerable size, which causes much trouble 
to navigation. It is safe enough at high water but very dangerous at 
half-tide. 

The large island known as Akpatok lies in such a position as to 
break much of the current along the south side of the middle of the 
strait, but to give additional force to the currents at either end. This 
island is about 100 miles long and has an average width of 1S miles. 
It is the largest island in the strait proper. 

The coast line of the northwest portion of the mainland is imperfeetly 


172 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


known, as is the western coast forming the eastern shore of Hudson 
bay. Navigation in any portion of Hudson strait is attended with 
much danger, not alone from the tremendous energy of the tides but 
also from the quantity of ice to be found at all times. During the 
months of August and Sept «mber the strait is comparatively free from 
large fields of ice, but after that date the harbors, coves, and other 
anchorages are apt to be frozen up ina single night. 


CLIMATE, 


The temperature is controlled by the direction of the wind. The 
warmest winds are southeast, south, and southwest during the sum- 
mer, The northeast winds bring (if backing) fog, rain, or snow; the 
north wind is usually cold and disposed to disperse the clouds. The 
northwest wind is always very cold in winter and chilly in summer, 
Westerly winds are moderate in winter and summer, The southerly 
winds are warm at all seasons if blowing hard, but very cold if blowing 
lightly in winter. [ think the coldest light winds of the winter are 
trom a point little west of south. They are doubtless due to the cold 
trom the elevated region—the Height of Land. 

The greatest amount of cloudiness oceurs in the spring and fall; 
rather less in July and August, and least during December, January, 
and February. The average cloudiness for the entire year is not less 
than eighty-two hundredths of the visible sky. 

Sleet falls mostly from the middle of September to the beginning of 
December. Snow then succeeds it and continues to be the only form 
of precipitation until the middle of April, when sleet and snow fall 
until the first rain sets in. The season of rain is very erratic. It may 
rain by the first of May, but rarely does. Snow falls every month in 
the year; the 2d of July and the 6th of August were the dates farthest 
apart for this form of precipitation. The character of the rain is usually 
moderate to hard for the summer showers; although several notable 
exceptions of abundant dashes occur during late June and all of July. 
The August and September rains are usually light to moderate, but 
often persistent for several days. The snowfalls are light to heavy in 
character, rarely, however, lasting more than twenty-four hours, The 
sleet is usually precipitated in severe squalls, The lower grounds are 
permanently covered with snow by the Ist of December, this covering 
remaining until the 10th of June. At the latter date only the heavier 
drifts and the snow of the ravines remain, It entirely disappears by 
the last of July at all elevations no higher than that of Fort Chimo, 

The higher hills retain snow until the last of August, but none is to 
be seen in the vicinity of Fort Chimo after that date. By the middle 
of September snow again covers the tops of the distant high hills. 

Fogs rarely occur so far inland as Fort Chimo. Those occurring are 
in July and August. At times they are very dense; and, as they form 
during the earliest hours of the day, they are usually dissipated by 4 


TURNER. | CLIMATE AND VEGETATION. 173 


to 7 a.m, While the ice is setting in the river, and driven back and 
forth by the tides, huge volumes of steam arise from the inky water 
and are spread over the land by the light winds prevaiing at that sea- 
son, This moisture deposited on the bushes and trees forms a most 


beautiful sight. 
AURORAS, 


Auroras may be seen on most of the clear nights of the year. The 
month of June is, on account of its light nights, the only month in 
which an aurora is not observable. 


VEGETATION, 


The northern limit of trees on the Labrador coast is in latitude 57°, 
Here the conifers are stunted and straggling. Beyond the coast range 

they attain a slightly higher altitude and thence continue to a point 

about thirty miles north of the mouth of George’s river. On the west- 

ern side of the mouth of this river the trees are pushed back 15 to 20 

miles from the sea, At the mouth of Whale river, the trees attain a 

height of 30 to 50 feet on the eastern (right) bank and within 2 miles 

of the shore. On the left bank the trees do not approach to within 10 

to 15 miles of the coast. At the mouth of False river they form a 
triangular extension and attain considerabie size, due in great measure 

to the peculiar formation of a huge amphitheater whose north wall 

serves as an admirable protection against the cold winds from the bay. 

On the western side of False river the tree line extends in a south- 

westerly direction across the Koksoak and to the banks of the Leaf 
river nearly at its source from the large lake. From the south side of 
this lake the trees are very much scattered and attain inconsiderable 
size, scarcely titted for other uses than fuel. 

A line from this lake sou ‘iwest to the eastern shore of Hudson 
bay forms the northern limit of trees for the northwest portion of 
the region, The people (Eskimo only) who dwell north of this line are 
dependent upon the stunted willows and alders, growing in the deeper 
ravines and valleys having a southern exposure. Large pieces of wood 
are much sought for by the Eskimo of the northwest portion, for use 
in constructing their kaiaks, umiaks and paddles, as well as spear 
shatts and smaller requirements for which the distorted stems of wil- 
low and alder will not suffice. 

South of the line given us the northern limit of trees the growth 
slowly attains greater size and extension of area. The timber north of 
the Height of Land is comparatively small, the spruce and larch rarely 
attaining a size greater than 12 to 15 inches at the ground and rapidly 
tapering up tor 2 feet or so above the surface. Above the height of 2 
feet the stems slowly taper and, in a few instances, produce symmet- 
rical stems for more than 15 feet. The trees growing within 40 miles 
of Fort Chimo seldom exceed 10 inches in diameter, and of the larger 


174 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


trunks the logs are selected to form the material from which the walls 
ofall the buildings at that place are constructed, 

The alders, willows, and a few other bushes attain a greater or less 
size, depending upon the situation and amount of protection afforded, 
I have seen as large stems of these shrubs growing within a mile of 
Fort Chimo as T have seen at either Davis inlet or Rigolet. 

The flowering plants ave sparsely scattered over the northern areas, 
and then only in most suitable soils, ‘The ground remains frozen from 
the last of October—earlier some seasons—to the last of May, or even 
into the middle of June. The appearance of the annuals is sudden, 
and they rapidly attain their full size and quickly tall betore the chill- 
ing winds of autumn. 


ANIMAL LIFE, 
MAMMALS, 


The marine mammals alone appear to be well known, but the number 
of cetaceans can certainly be increased above the number usttally re- 
ported inhabiting the waters immediately bordering upon the region. 

The phocids are best known tor the reason that off the shores of 
southeast Labrador the pursuit. of species of this family is carried on 
each spring to an extent probably surpassing that anywhere else on the 
face of the globe, 

At the mouth of Little Whale river, the white whale is tatzen to the 
number of 500 each year, although the capture is steadily decreasing. 
The Indians here do the greater part of the labor of driving, killing, 
Having, and preserving them, At Fort Chimo another station for the 
pursuit of white whales is carried on. Here the Eskimo do the driving 
and killing, while the Indians pertorm the labor of removing the blub- 
ber and rendering it fit for the oil tanks into which it is placed to put 
it beyond the aetion of the weather, The skin of the white whale is 
tanned and converted into a leather of remarkably good quality, espe- 
cially noted tor being nearly waterproot, 

Of the land mammals, the reindeer is probably the most abundant 
ofall, [tis tound in immense numbers in certain localities, and forms 
for many of the inhabitants the principal souree of subsistence, while 
to nearly all the residents its skins are absolutely necessary to pro- 
tect them trom the severity of the winter. 

The black, white and brown bears are common enough in their re- 
spective areas, The former rarely ranges beyond the woodlands, never 
being round so far north as Fort Chimo, The white bear is common in 
the northern portions bordering the sea and is occasionally found as far 
south as the strait of Belleisle, to which it has been carried on icebergs 
or fields of ice, Akpatok island and the vicinity of Cape Chidley are 
reported to be localities infested with these brutes, The brown or bar- 
ren-ground bear appears to be restricted to a narrow area and is not 


WURNER.| ANIMAL LIFE. 175 


plentiful, yet is common enough to keep the Indian in wholsome dread 
of its vicious disposition when enraged. 

The smaller mammals oceur in greater or less abundance according 
to the quality and quantity of food to be obtained, The wolves, foxes, 
and wolverines ave pretty evenly distributed throughout the region. 
The hares are found in the wooded tracts tor the smaller species and on 
the barren regions for the larger species. 


BIRDS. 


The actual residents were accertained to be less than twenty species 
for the northern portion of the Ungava district. 

Of the actual residents the two species of the genus Lagopus ave the 
most abundant of all birds in the region, and form an important article 
of food for all ‘asses of people inhabiting the district. The winter ex- 
erts an important influence on the sinaller resident species. During the 
winter of 188283 the number of the four species obtained of the genus 
Acanthis was almost incredible. Their notes might be heard at any time 
during that season, which was cold, though regularly so, and aot spe- 
cially stormy. [In the winter of 188384 not a single individual was ob- 
served trom the middle of November to the last of March, The same 
remarks may wellapply to the white-winged erossbill (Lovia leucopterd), 
which was very abundant the first winter, but during the last winter a 
very small flock only was observed and these were apparently vagrants. 

Among the water birds, certain species which were expected to occur 
were conspicuously absent. The character of the country forbids them 
rearing their young, as there is little to feed upon; and only a few 
breed in the immediate vicinity of Fort Chimo, Among the gulls, 
Larus argentatis smithsonianus is certainly the only one breeding in 
abundance within Ungava bay. Of the terns, the Arctic tern (Sterna 
paradisen) was: the only one ascertained to breed in Hudson strait. I 
aim not certain that they do breed there every year, Although [ saw 
them in early July, 1883, under conditions that led me to believe that 
they were on their way to their nests, yet it was not until 1884 that a 
number of eggs were secured near that locality. 

Of the smaller waders, but two species were actually ascertained to 
breed in the vieinity of Fort Chimo, yet two or thre® other species were 
observed under such circumstances as to leave no doubt that they also 
breed there, 


‘HE NATIVE INHABITANTS OF THE COUNTRY— GENERAL 
SKETCH. 


THE ESKIMO, 

The northern portions of the coast of the region under consideration 
are inhabited by the Eskimo, who designate themselves, as usual, by 
the term “Innuit,” people (plural of innuls, ‘a person”), That they 
have been much moditied by contact with the whites is not to be doubted, 


176 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


and it is equally certain that their language is constantly undergoing 
modifications to suit the purposes of the missionary and trader, who, 
not being able to pronounce the ditheult guttural speech of these people, 
require them to conform to their own pronunciation, The region inhab. 
ited by the Innuit is strictly littoral, Their distribution falls properly 
into three subdivisions, due to the three subtribal distinetions which 
they maintain among themselves. The first sv’: ivision embraces all 
the Innuit dwelling on the Labrador coast pr: and along the south 
side of Hudson strait to the mouth of Lee © er, whieh tlows into 
Ungava bay. 

These people apply the term Si hi’ ni myut to themselves and are thus 
known by the other subdivisions, This term is derived from Si hi! 
nik, the sun,and the latter part of the word, meaning people (literally 
“those that dwell at or in”); hence, people of the sun, sunny side, be- 
cause the sun shines on them first. At the present time these people 
are contined to the seashore and the adjacent islands, to which they 
repair for seals and other food. South of Haniilton inlet [ could learn 
of but one of these people. 

The Innuit of pure blood do not begin to appear until the missionary 
station of Hopedale is reached, Here a number of families dwell, 
although mostly at the instigation of the missionaries. Between this 
station and Hebron are several other Moravian missionary stations, at 
each of which dwell a greater or less number of pure Innuit, North 
of Hebron to Cape Chidley there are but few families, some seven in 
all, embracing a population of less than 40 souls, On the west side of 
Cape Chidley, as far as the mouth of George’s river, only about eight 
families live. These with the George’s river Innuit comprise less than 
50 individuals, There is a stretch of coast bordering Ungava bay, 
from George’s river to the Koksoak river, which is uninhabited. 

The Koksoak river people inelude only four or tive families and num- 
ber less than 30 souls. The next people are those dwelling at the 
mouth of Leaf river, but they are more properly to be considered under 
the next subdivision. 

The exact number of the Sihinimyut could not be detinitely deter 
mined, They are subdivided into a number of small communities, 
each bearing a ntme compounded of the name of their home and 
myut, “the people of” 

The inhabitants of Cape Chidley are known as Ki lin‘ig myut, from 
the word ki link, wounded, cut, incised, lacerated; hence, serrated, on 
account of the character of the rough rocks and mountains, 

The natives of George’s river are known as Kan/gtik¢luauksoag- 
myut; those of the Koksoak river are known as Koksoagmyut. 

The second subdivision includes the Innuit dwelling on the area 
lying between the mouth of Leaf river, thence northward, and along 
the south side of Hudson strait. Their western and southern limit 
extends to about latitude 60°, 


TURNER.) 


The 
They 
Ta ha 
guishe 
These 
ers, W 
toms 
custo} 
in wh 
range 
along 
Fort 
distri 

Th 
sledg 
ing t 
amm 
baece 
persc 
to bi 
tione 
trade 
are t 
Thos 
falls 
trad 
ern 
to tl 
of e 
way 
the 
cow 

wee 

tra 
fur: 
am 
the 
of 
! 
the 
inf 
the 

mi 

M: 

me 

Tl 


TURNER.) THE PEOPLE. 177 


These Innuit are known by the other subdivisions as Ta hd4g myut. 
They apply the same term to themselves, The word is derived from 
Ta hak, a shadow; hence people of the shade or shadow as distin- 
guished from the Sf hi’ nt myut, or people of the light or sunshine. 
These people are but little influenced by contact with the white trad. 
ers, Whoapply to them the term “ Northerners.” Their habits and cus- 
toms are primitive, and many appear to be entirely distinct from the 
customs of their neighbors south and east. The character of the region 
in which they dwell is very rugged. Huge mountain spurs and short 
ranges ramify in every direction, forming deep valleys and ravines, 
along which these people must travel to reach the trading station of 
Fort Chimo of the Ungava district, or else to Fort George of the Moose 
district. 

The distance to the former is so great that only three, four, or five 
sledges are annually sent to the trading post for |" 3 purpose of convey- 
ing the furs and other more valuable commodities to be bartered for 
ammunition, guns, knives, files and other kinds of hardware, and to- 
bacco, Certain persons are selected from the various camps who have 
personally made the trip and know the trail, These are commissioned 
to barter the furs of each individual for special articles, which are men- 
tioned and impressed upon the mind of the man who is to effect the 
trade. The principal furs are those of the various foxes, Among them 
are to be found the best class of silver foxes, and wolverenes and wolves. 
Those to be sent are procured the previous winter, and when the snow 
falls in November or early December the line of sleds starts out for the 
trading post. The sled which represents the wants of the more west- 
ern of these Innuit speeds to where the second may be, and they repair 
to the place of meeting with the third, and thus by traversing the line 
of coast the arctic caravan is made up. Provisions are supplied by the 
wayside, and when all is in readiness a southern course is traveled until 
the frozen morasses on the south of the hills are reached. Thence the 
course is toward Leaf river and across to Fort Chimo. By the last 
week of April or the first week of May the visitors are expected at the 
trading post. They usually bring with them about two-fifths of all the 
furs obtained in the distriet; indeed, the quantity often exceeds this 
amount. They seldom remain longer than the time needed to complete 
their bartering, as the rapidly melting snow warns them that each day 
of delay adds to their labor in returning. 

The homeward journey is more frequently made along the coast, as 
there the snow is certain to remain longer upon the ground, It is not 
infrequent that these travelers experience warm weather, which detains 
them so long that they do not reach the end of their journey until the 
middle of the summer or even until the beginning of the next winter. 
Many of the Innuit whe accompany these parties have never seen white 
men until they arrive at Fort Chimo; women are often of the party. 
These people are usually tall and of fine physique, The men are larger 

11 eTH—12 


178 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


than the average white man, while the women compare favorably in 
stature with the women of medium height in other countries, 

They have quite different customs from those of their present neigh- 
bors. Their language is dialectically distinct; about as much so as 
the Malimyut differ from the Kaviagmyut of Norton Sound, Alaska, 
The Tahagmyut have a rather harsh tone; their gutturals are deeper 
and the vowels usually rather more prolonged, They are much given 
to amusement and still retain many of the old games, which the Sahi‘nt- 
myut have forgotten or no longer engage in, Their dead are treated 
with no ceremony, They simply lash the limbs of the deceased to the 
body and expose the corpse to the elements, removing it, however, from 
immediate sight of the camp, Old and infirm people are treated with 
severity, and when dependent upon others for their food they are sum- 
marily disposed of by strangulation or left to perish when the camp is 
moved, 

Women are held in little respect, although the men are very jealous 
of the favors of their wives, and incontinence on the part of the latter 
is certain to be more or less severely punished, The male offender, if 
notoriously persistent in his efforts to obtain forbidden favors, is 
usually killed by the injured lover or husband, 

Gambling is carried on to such a degree among both sexes that even 
their own lives are staked upon the issue of a game, The winner often 
obtains the wife of his opponent, and holds her until some tempting 
offer is made for her return, The only article they possess is frequently 
wagered, and when they lose they are greeted with derision, The women, 
especially, stake their only garment rather than be without opportunity 
to ay. The usual game is played with a number of flattened pieces 
of walrus ivory. On one side are a number of dots forming various 
erude designs, which have received names from their fancied resem- 
blance to other objects. These must be matched. The game some- 
what resembles dominoes, and whether it is original with these Innuit 
I was unable to conclude. They stoutly maintain that it originated 
with themselves. I suspect, however, it had its origin in the imitation 
of some one who had observed the playing of dominoes on board of 
some of the whaling vessels visiting these waters. 

For other amusements these Innuit indulge in a number of tests of 
personal strength, such as wrestling and leaping. 

Feasts are held at stated times in huge structures built of snow blocks. 
The exact signification of these feasts was rot learned, owing to the 
limited stay these people made each year at Fort Chimo. Their dress 
consists of the skins of seals and reindeer. The sealskins are worn 
during rainy weather and by those who are in the canoe or kaiak. The 
skirts of their garments are ornamented with an edging of ivory pieces 
cut into a pear-shape, having a small hole pierced through the smaller 
end, 

These pieces of ivory, often to the number of many scores, give a 


TURNER, | 


peculi 
differs 
soles § 
sole, \ 
strips 
taken 
This j 
short 
foot f 
tion ¢ 
The 
shore 
Th 
they 
distr 
jourr 
uabl 
In la 
their 
quit 
unus 
the | 
and 
that 
intlu 
othe 
of p 
are 
for | 
1, 
my 
lane 
The 
Inn 
A 
wo! 
Ch 
no! 
the 
I 
A 
the 
ou 
wil 
to 
{rc 


TURNER. | THE PEOPLE, 179 


peculiar rattle as the wearer walks along. Their boots are noticeably 
different from those made by the Koksoak river people, inasmuch as the 
soles are often made with strips of sealskin thongs sewed on a false 
sole, which is attached to the under surface of the sole proper, The 
strips of thong are tacked on by a stout stitch, then a short loop is 
taken up, and another stitch sews a portion of the remainder of the strip. 
This is continued until the entire under surface consists of a series of 
short loops, which, when in contact with the smooth ice, prevents the 
foot from slipping. This sort of footgear is not made in any other por- 
tion of the district. 

The third subdivision comprises the Innuit dwelling on the eastern 
shore of Hudson bay, between latitudes 58° and 58°, 

The number of these Innuit could not be detinitely ascertained, as 
they trade, for the most part, at Fort George, belonging to the Moose 
district. Hach year, however, a party of less than a dozen indiviuals 

journey to Fort Chimo for the purpose of bartering furs and other val- 
uables, Those who come to Fort Chimo are usually the same each year, 
In language they differ greatly from the Koksoak Innuit, inasmuch as 
their speech is very rapid and much harsher. Many of the words are 
quite dissimilar, and even where the word has the same sound it is not 
unusual that it has a meaning more or less different from that used by 
the Koksoak Innuit. As these people have been long under the advice 
and teachings of the missionary society of London, it is to be expected 
that they, especially those nearer the trading station, are more or less 
influenced by its teachings. Their customs differ somewhat from the 
other Innuit, though this is due in a great measure to the impossibility 
of procuring the necessary food, and skins for garments, unless they 
are constantly scouring the plains and hills for reindeer or the shore 
for seals and other marine creatures. 

These people are called by their neighbors and themselves I’tivi! 
myut, Iti‘vik signifies the other, farther, distant side (of a portion of 
land); hence, the word Itivimyut means people of the other side. 
The northern Itivimyut are probably the most superstitious of all the 
Innuit dwelling in the region under consideration, 

Although the missionaries have devoted considerable energy to the 
work of converting these people, and though many of them protess 
Christianity, these professions prove on examination to be merely 
nominal, As soon as the converts are beyond the teacher's intluence, 
they return to the shaman for guidance. 

In the spring of 1883 a party of these people visited Fort Chimo, 
A great number of the Koksoak people were ill, some 30 miles above 
the station. The visitors had among them a shaman renowned through- 
out the land. He, with the connivance of two or three of the people 
with whom he stopped, began some of the most astonishing intrigues 
to dispel the evil spirit afflicting the people. Several men were parted 

from their wives, and these were compelled to dwell with other men 


180 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


who were at the bottom of the conspiracy. Other couples had to flee 
from that place to prevent being Jlivorced, at least temporarily. After 
a time the visitors descended to Fort Chimo, and while the bartering 

yas going on the shaman announced his conversion to Christianity, 
and vowed never again to return to practicing shamanism. On the 
return of the harried fugitives they passed the camp of the Koksoak 
river people, where they had a few days before been the guests, and 
stole their supplies of reindeer meat and other valuable property, even 
attempting to purloin a Kaiak; and they had proceeded many miles 
thence before they were overtaken and compelled to relinquish the 
stolen. property. They were seen some months after by some Tahag- 
myut, to whom they stated their fear of returning among the Koksoak 
people. A more plausible scamp does not dwell in those regions than 
this shaian, whose name is Sapa. His power over the spirit control- 
ling the reindeer is widely believed in and invoked by the other sha- 
mans, who feel incapable of turning the heads of the deer and thus 
compelling them to wander in the desired direction. 

Among these people only have I heard of a son who took his mother 
as a wife, and when the sentiment of the community compelled him to 
discard her he took two other women, who were so persecuted by the 
mother that they believed themselves to be wholly under her influence, 
She even caused them to believe they were ill, and when they actually 
did become so they both died. 

In former years the Innuit extended entirely around the shore of 
Hudson bay. Now there is a very wide gap, extending from the 
vicinity of Fort George, on the eastern coast, to the vicinity of Fort 
Churchill, on the western coast. At the present time the Innuit 
oceupy the areas designated in these remarks. That they formerly 
extended along the Atlantic coast far to the south of their present 
limit is attested by an abundance of. facts. 

The Innuit of the eastern shore of Hudson bay, the Itivimyut, 
informed me that the Innuit dwelling on the islands of Hudson bay, 
more or less remote from the mainland to the east, are termed Ki’gik- 
tag/myut, or island people. They relate that those islanders have 
quite different customs from the mainland people, inasmuch as their 
clothing consists of the skins of seals and dogs, rarely of reindeer 
skins, as the latter are procurable only when one of their number 
comes to the shore to trade for such articles as can not: be obtained on 
his locality. The spear, kaiak, bow and arrow are used, and they 
have but little knowledge of firearms, These people are represented 
as often being driven to greatest extremity for food. It is said that 
their language differs considerably from that of their neighbors. 

The Innuit, as a rule, are peaceful and mild-tempered, except when 
aroused by jealousy. They are, however, quick enough to resent an 
insult or avenge an injury. They form a permanent attachment for 
the white man who deals honestly and truthfully with them, but 


TURNER. 


if he 
suspi 
Th 
given 
arduc 


Th 
grou 
(1) 
ries, 
Gulf 
They 
barte 
In 
Thei 
vari 
TI 
ratic 
appt 
deer 
mue 
cipa 
T 
to p 
mer 
(Fo 
diti 
line 
T 
wol 
are 
pro 
am 
reg 
the 
uni 
the 
In 
the 
me 
de 
th 
fre 


th 
mi 


TURNER.) THE INDIANS. 181 


if he attempts any deception or trickery they are certain to be ever 
suspicious of him, and it, is difficult to regain their favor. 

Their courage and ability are not to be doubted, and when they are 
given a due amount of encouragement they will perform the most 
arduous tasks without complaint. 


THE INDIANS. 


The Indian inhabitants of this region may be divided into three 
groups, differing but slightly in speech, and even less in habits. 

(1) The Mountaineers, “Montagnais” of the early Jesuit missiona- 
ries, roam over the areas south of the Hamilton inlet and as far as the 
Gulf of St. Lawrence. Their western limits are imperfectly known. 
They trade at all the stations along the accessible coast. Many of them 
barter at Rigolet and Northwest river. 

In customs they differ little from the Indians to the north of them. 
Their means of subsistence are the flesh of reindeer, porcupines, and 
various birds, such as geese, dueks, ptarmigan, and grouse, 

The habits of the reindeer in this portion of the country are very er- 
ratie. They are often absent from large tracts for several years, and 
appearing in abundance when littleexpected. The seareity of the rein- 
deer renders the food supply quite precarious; hence, the Indians rely 
much upon the flesh of the porcupine, hare and birds for their prin- 
cipal food, 

Their clothing is of the tanned skin of the deer when they are able 
to procure it. As nearly all the skins of the reindeer are used for gar- 
ments. few are prepared for other purposes ; hence the northern stations 
(Fort Chimo) furnish great numbers of these skins in the parehment con- 
dition to be purchased by the Mountaineers, who cut them into fine 
lines for snowshoe netting and other purposes. 

They procure the furs of marten, mink, fur beaver, muskrats, lynxes, 
wolverines, wolves, and foxes. A considerable number of black bears 
are also obtained by these Indians. By the barter of these furs they 
procure the articles made necessary by the advent of the white people 
among them, They are quiet and peaceable. Many of them profess a 
regard for the teachings of the Roman missionaries, who have visited 
them more or less frequently for over a hundred and fifty years. T was 
unable to obtain the term by which they distinguish themselves from 
their neighbors. That they are later comers in the region than the 
Innuit is attested by the bloody warfare formerly carried on between 
them, of which many proofs yet exist. The Mountaineers applied to the 
more northern Indians the term of reproach,  Naskopie.” This word 
denotes the coutempt the Mountaineers felt for the Naskopies when 
the latter failed to fulfill their promise to assist in driving the Innuit 
from the country. 

It was impossible to obtain a satisfactory estimate of the numbers of 
the Mountaineers, My stay in their vicinity was too short to learn as 
much about them as was desired. 


182 


THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


(2) The Indians dwelling to the southwest of the Ungava district 
differ rather more than the Mountaineers, in their speech, from the In- 
dians of the Ungava district. They average, for both sexes, slightly 
taller than the Naskopies. The men are spare, and have small limbs 
and extremities. The cheek bones are also more prominent, although 
this is partly due to the thin visage. The women are disposed to be 
stout, and in the older women there is a decided tendency to corpulence. 
The complexion, too, is considerably darker, The men wear long hair, 
usually cut so as to fall just upon the shoulders, The hair of the women 


is quite heavy, and is worn either in braids or done up in folds upon the 
side of the head. 
In their personal habits they are much more tidy than their eastern 
relations. Their dress differs but little from that of their neighbors. pr 
The women dress in cloth made of material procured from the traders, ais 
and some of these appear respectable enough when so dressed. They 
have been so long in contact with the white people at Moose Factory, cw 
some of whom had brought their wives from home with them, that the ny 
women have imitated the dress of the latter. Certain of these women oF 
are skillful in working fancy articles. The men occupy their time in : 
hunting and fishing. The reindeer have in recent years become so Mt 
searce in the vicinity of Fort George that many of the Indians have left of 
that locality and journeyed to the eastward, dwelling in proximity to 
the Naskopies. or even with them. m 
Both sexes are mild and sedate, although the women are exceedingly 15 
garrulous when well acquainted, t 
These Indians are often employed to assist in the capture of the a 
white whale, which ascends the lower portions of the larger streams of re 
that district. They are the only Indians whom I have seen eating the 
Hesh and blubber of these whales, The Naskopies will not touch it, y. 
declaring it to be too fat. The fins and tail are portions highly prized E 
while they are helping render out the blubber of these whales at Fort U 
Chimo. C 
A point of great dissimilarity between the Naskopies and the Little t 
Whale river Indians is that the bireh-bark canoe of the latter is much ! 
more turned up at each end, producing a craft well adapted to -the 


swift currents of the rivers. The occupants are skillful boatmen, and 
will fearlessly face wind and wave that would appall the heart of the 
Naskopie. Sails are sometimes erected ina single canoe, At times 
two canoes are lashed together and a sail spread from a single mast, 
This double boat is very convenient for the traveler. These people 
are strongly addicted to the practice of polygamy; and while they are 
Christians externally, they are so only as long as they are within the 
reach of the missionary. 

Among those who had come to dwell in the Ungava district were 
several who had, because of the opportunity, taken two wives. The 
missionary, EK. J. Peck, suddenly appeared among them as he was on 


TURNER. ] THE HABITS OF THE INDIANS. 183 


his way to London. On learning of the conduct of the people he gave 
them a sound rating and besought them to relinquish the practice. 
‘They assented, and sent the second wives away until the missionary 
was out of the country, and then they took them back. 

Girls are often taken as wives before they attain puberty, and for this 
reason they seldom have large families. Two, three, or four children 
form the usual number for each family. They are satisfied if the first 
child is «male; and to the mother who delivers only female children a 
term of contempt is often applied. The women appear to be well 
treated, and occasional laxity of morals is not noticed among them so 
long as it is not notorious. 

Their beliefs and traditions were not learned by me, on account of the 
presence of these people at Fort Chimo when other labors occupied my 
entire time. 

Their purchases are made with furs of the same kinds as those pro- 
cured in the Ungaya district. The black bear is procured in great 
numbers by these Indians. They preserve the under lip, dressed and 
ornamented with beads and strips of cloth, asa trophy of their prowess. 

The harpoon used in striking the white whale of their rivers is an 
implement doubtless peculiar to those people, and much resembles that 
of the Innuit. 

(3) The third division of Indians includes those dwelling for the 
most part in the Ungava district. The total number of these Indians 
is about 350. They apply the term Ne né not—true, ideal men— 
to themselves, although known by the epithet Naskopie, which was 
applied to them by the Mountaineers of the southeastern portion of the 
region, 

They differ slightly in customs from their neighbors, but their speech 
is somewhat different, being very rapidly uttered and with most sin- 
gular inflections of the voice. A conversation may be begun in the 
usual tone, and in a moment changed to that of a whining or petulant 
child. It is impossible for the white man to imitate this abrupt inflec- 
tion, which appears to be more common among the males than the 
females. During ordinary conversation one would erroneously sup 
pose, from the vehemence of gesture, that the speaker was angry. 
They are much more demonstrative than their neighbors, often shout- 
ing at the full strength of their voices when an ordinary tone would 
apparently suttice. That their voice is penetrating may be inferred 
from the fact that during quiet days it is not unusual for parties to con- 
verse from cpposite sides of the Koksoak river, at Fort Chimo, where 
the river is nearly a mile and a half wide, 

As certain words are spoken in a voice scarcely louder than a whis- 
per, | did not believe it possible that they could understand each other 
at so great a distance, until I saw the people on the opposite shore 
doing what they were bidden by those with me. 

When the women get together it is amusing to observe the eagerness 


184 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


of the old crones endeavoring to make their voices heard above the 
rest. The clerk, while trading with them, often teases them uutil the 
entire number turn their voices on him, and the only relief he has is to 
expel them all from the store and admit one or two at a time, while the 
remainder throng the windows and shout at the top of their voices. 

During the spring, when tlocks of Canada geese are winging their 
way northward, the Indians will imitate their notes so closely that the 
birds do not discover the source until too late. Some of the party 
make one note, while the others imitate the other note, It seldom fails 
to beguile the geese to the spot. 

Owing to the impossibility of getting a reliable person to teach me 
the language of these people TL was able to procure but few words, 
The number obtained, however, is sufticient to prove that the people 
of this region, excluding the Innuit and whites, belong to the Cree 
branch. The Mountaineers and Little Whale river Indians belong to 
the same stock, and the difference in their language is due wholly to 
environment, 

The Indians and Innuit of this region are more or less directly in 
centact. At Fort Chimo it is especially so, Here, as elsewhere, they 
do not intermix, an Indian never taking an Innuit wife or the Innuit 
taking a squaw for a wife. [ knew of one instance where a Naskopie 
went to dwell with some Innuit camped near the mouth of the Kok- 
soak, but after remaining away for a few days he returned to his own 
people. ‘ 


SPECIAL ACCOUNT OF THE PEOPLE AROUND FORT CHIMO. 
THE KOKSOAGMYUT, 


The Eskimo with whom I was brought in contact at Fort Chimo were 
those belonging to that immediate vicinity. They term themselves 
Koksoagmyut, or people of the Koksoak or Big river. 

The people who apply this name to themselves do not number more 
than a seore and a half. There are but four families, and among these 
are some who belong to other localities, but now dwell with he Kok 
soaugmyut, ‘They consider themselves a part of the people dwelling as 
far to the north as the western end of Akpatok island, and to the east 
as far as George’s river. The Eskimo dwelling between those points 
have similar habits, and range indiscriminately over the hunting 
grounds of that locality, seldom going farther southward than the con- 
auence of the Larch river or the North river with the Koksoak. 

Among these few natives now inhabiting the Koksoak valley we tind 
the men to be above the stature usually ascribed to the kskimo, All 
but one of the adulu males are above 5 feet 8 inches, The smallest 
man is little more than 54 feet tall, Allare well proportioned and pre- 
sent an exceptionally good physique. The females are also well pro. 
portioned, and, in fact, appear to compare well with females of civilized 


TURN 


cou 
bot 
catd 
var 
of 
In 
shi 
lim 
bot 
ott 
sli 
n 
rul 
sm 


TURNER. | AROUND FORT CHIM). 185 


countries as far as their stature is concerned, The lower extremities of 
both sexes really are shorter than the genera: appearance would indi- 
cate, and thus the body is somewhat longer. The great individual 
variation in the proportional length of the legs is doubtless the result 
of the way infants are carried in the hood on the backs of the mothers, 
In this constrained pusition the limbs were obliged to conform to the 
shape of the body on which the child, in a manner, grew. While the 
limbs are not decidedly curved, yet they are not so nearly under the 
body as those of the whites. In walking, theinner edges of the feet 
often touch each other, and, in a manner, tend to cause the boots to 
slip outward on the feet. 

The head, hands, and feet appear fairly proportioned; although, as a 
rule, they have small hands and feet. The females have proportionally 
smaller feet than hands, The head may seem larger than it really is, 
on account of the flattened features of the face. 

The average nose is larvze and flat, and the prominence of this organ 
is often diminished by the wide cheeks and overhanging forehead, In 
most cases the chin projects less than the nose. The average face is 
round and flat, but there are exceptions, as I have seen one or two 
persons whose faces were a regular oval, and with the exception of the 
flat front, seen from a side view, were as well formed as one will meet 
among other people. 

The skin has the same differences of color as among white people, 
The greater number of people are moderately dark, but this depends 
very greatly on the season of the vear. IT have not seen any white 
people so much changed as these are by the exposure to the summer 
sunshine, In the winter they cre confined to their huts and bleach to 
a lighter color, A couple of weeks’ exposure renders them scarcely re- 
cognizable as the same person®, ‘Lhe young children are usually lighter 
than the adults, although some are quite dark. The hair is coarse, 
long and abundant, and always straight. 

The few half-breeds seen at Fort Chimo are the young children of 
the male servants of the company, who have in two instances taken 
full-blooded Eskimo wemen for wives and who were married by the 
agent of the company. These children are quite pretty, the male fa- 
voring the mother and the girl resembling the father. With these, as 
with the children of natives, mucit depends on the cleanliness of the 
person, The soot and other filth accumulating on their faces and 
hands, seldom washed, of course modifies the appearance of the ex- 
posed portions of the body. Some of the girls would be attractive 
enough if a copious amount of water was used to remove the ridges of 
dirt which are too plainly visible. The hands are often much disfig- 
ured from numerous cuts and bruises, which, when healed over, leave 
a heightened sear of a whitish color quite different in color from the 
surrounding tissue and often presenting an unsightly appearance, 

By the time puberty is attained the girls quickly change, and in a few 


186 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


years begin to show the result of their arduous life by the appearance 
of wrinkles, haggardness, and general breaking down, which, although 
it may progress slowly, is seldom recovered from. 

Like the rest of the Innuit, the Koksoagmyut are usually peaceful 
and mild tempered, Among themselves aftrays are of rare occurrence, 
Jealousy arouses the worst passions, and the murder of the offender is 
generally the result. When a person becomes so bad in character that 
the community will no longer tolerate his presence he is forbidden to 
enter the huts, partake of food, or hold any intercouvse with the rest. 
Nevertheless, as long as he threatens no one’s life, but little attention 
is paid to him, Should he be guilty of a murder, several men watch 
their opportunity to surprise him and put him to death, usually by ston- 
ing, The executioners make no concealment of their action. and are 
supported by public opinion in the community. 

In the case of a premeditated murder, it is the duty of the next of 
kin to avenge the deed, though years may pass, while the murderer 
pursues his usual occupations undisturbed, before an opportunity 
occurs to the relative for taking him by surprise. Sometimes the victim 
is not overcome and turns upon the assailant and kills him, The man, 
now guilty of two murders, is suffered to live only at the pleasure of 
the people, who soon decree his death. That murder is not approved, 
either by the individual or the community, is well attested by the fact 
that the island of Akpatok is now tabooed since the murder of part of 
the crew of a wrecked vessel, who camped on that island. Such a ter- 
rible scene was too much, even for them; and now not a soul visits 
that locality, lest the ghosts of the vietims should appear and suppli- 
cate relief from the natives, who have not the proper offerings to make 
to appease them. 

Aged people who have no relatives on whom they may depend for 
subsistence are often quietly put to death, When an old woman, for 
instance, becomes a burden to the community it is usual for her to be 
negleeted until so weak from want of food that she will be unable to 
keep up with the people, who suddenly are seized with a desire to 
remove to a distant locality. If she regains their camp, well for her; 
otherwise, she struggles along until exhausted and soon perishes. 
Sometimes three or four of the males retrace their steps to recover a 
lost whip or a forgotten ammunition bag, They rarely go farther than 
where they find the helpless person, and if their track be followed it 
will be found that the corpse has stones piled around it and is bound 
with thongs. 

An old woman at Fort Chimo had but one eye, and this was con- 
tinually sore and very annoying to the people with whom she lived, 
They proposed to strangle her to relieve her from her misery. The 
next morning the eye was much better and the proposed cure was 
postponed. 

Cases of suicide are not rare, considering the few people of that 


TURN! 


la 
are 

app 
A 
whi 
qua 
hon 
the 
ent 
out 
rea 
tion 
I 
bee 
oth 
dri 
pei 


TURNER. ] DISEASES, 187 


weality. Pitching themselves from a cliff or producing strangulation 
are toe usual methods, Sometimes a gun is used, Remorse and dis- 
appointed love are the only causes of suicide. 

A man discovered, during a period of great scarcity or food, that 
while he went in quest of food his wife had secretly stored away a 
quantity of fish and ate of them during his absence only. Coming 
home unexpectedly, he caught her eating and she endeavored to secrete 
the remainder. He quietly went out of the snow hut and blocked up the 
entrance. She inquired why he did so. His rep) was for her to come 
out and she would discover why it was done. His tone was not at all 
reassuring, She remained within the hut and perished from starva- 
tion, knowing she would be killed if she went out. 

Instances are reported where, in times of great scarcity, families have 
been driven to cannibalism after eating their dogs and the clothing and 
other articles made of skins, Unlueky or disliked women are often 
driven from the camp, and such must journey until they find relief or 
perish by the wayside. 


DISEASES, 


The principal diseases trom whie': these people suffer are pulmonary 
troubles, chietly arising from their filthy manner of living in crowded 
huts, too ill ventilated to allow the escape of the odors emanating from 
their own bodies and from accumulations of slowly decomposing animal 
food, All openings must be closed as quickly as possible in order to 
economize the heat within, for when once chilled it is difticult to restore 
the house to the proper degree of warmth. An Eskimo would always 
prefer to ereet a new hut of snow rather than pass the night in one 
which has been deserted for only a single night if the doorway has not 
been tightly closed with a block of snow. 

Within the walls, reeking with the exhalations of various putrid mat- 
ters, the people breathe and rebreathe the air filled with poisonous 
gases; so fully one-half of the Eskimo die of pulmonary troubles. The 
other prevailing diseases are those causing devitalization of the blood, 
such as scurvy. Sores break out on the shoulders, elbows, knees, and 
ankles, The ravages of these diseases proceed at an astonishing rate, 
soon carrying off the afflieted person, 

The means of relief usually employed are those which the shaman (or 
conjurer, as he is locally known) is able to effeet by working on the im- 
agination of the sick, who is in this condition easily influenced. The 
will power of both the patient and shaman is stretched to its utmost 
tension, and as faith with them, as with many others of fairer skins, 
often produces more of the relief than the ministrations of drugs or 
dratts, the cure is effected, or else the shaman, like the physician, 
has not the devil on his side. 

The magnitude of the disease is generally measured by the amount 
of the patient’s worldly wealth. 


188 THE HUDSON RAY ESKIMO, 


MARRIAGE, 


A woman is married as scon after puberty as a male comes along 
who has the requisite physical strength to force her to become his wife. 
Many of the females are taken before that period, and the result is that 
few children are born to sueh unions and the children are zenerally 
weakly. 

The ceremony between the couples is quite simple. The sanction of 
the parents is sometimes obtained by favor or else bought by making 
certain presents of skins, furs, and other valuables to the father and 
mother, The girlis sometimes asked for her consent, and, if unwilling, 
otten enlists the sympathy of the mother, and the affair is postponed to 
amore favorable opportunity, or till the suitor becomes disgusted with 
her and takes somebody else, 

If the parents are not living, the brothers or sisters must be favora- 
ble to the union, There is often so much intriguing in vhese matters 
that the exact truth ean seldom be ascertained, 

Where all obstacles are removed and only the girl refuses, it is not 
long before she disappears mysteriously to remain out for two or three 
nights with her best female friend, who thoroughly sympathizes with 
her. They return, and before long she is abducted by her lover, and 
they remain away until she proves to be thoroughly subjected to his 
will, I knew of an instance where a girl was tied in a snow house for 
a period of two weeks, and not allowed to go out. She finally sub- 
mitted, and they returned with the other couple, who were less obstrep- 
erous, and doubtless went along to help their male friend and com- 
panion, The woman left her husband in the course of two or three 
weeks, and when he was asked about it he acknowledged that she had 
pulled nearly all the hair from his head and showed numerous bruises 
where she had struck him. This same woman was afterward tied to a 
sled to make her accompany the man she subsequently chose as her 
husband, who wished her to go to another part of the country, It was 
a lively time, some of the old women pushing her and persuading, the 
younger ones doing all in their power to obstruct her, Children are 
often mated at an early age, and I have known of several instances 
where two friends, desirous of cementing their ties of fellowship, engage 
that their children yet unborn shall be mated. In such instances the 
children are always recognized as married, and they are allowed by the 
parents to be so called. T knew a small boy of less than seven years 
who always addressed a girl of apparently a year older as his wife. 

The marviageable age ofthe female varies greatly, although puberty 
takes place early, I have known of achild of fourteen having children, 
Theard of a half-breed girl, on the Labrador coast, who beeame a 
mother vw few months after the age of thirteen. 

Monogamy is generally the rule, but as there are so many counteract- 
ing influences it is seldom that a man keeps a wife for a number of 

years, Jealousy resulting trom a laxity of morals produces so much 


TURNER 


disag 
little 
In 
posit! 
Ma 
as su 
girl « 
gitim 
devo 
Th 
mos 
of aw 
man 
W 
wife. 
her | 
her | 
wite 
is Se 
pros 
fami 
hou 
prod 
eno 
bett 
him 
T 
Kol 
fro1 
ter« 
s 
SO 
con 
chi 
lea 
int 
is 
he) 
un 


TURNER.) MARRIAGE. 189 


disagreement that one or the other of the parties usually leave with 
little ceremony. 

In rare instances, where there is a compatibility of temper and a Uis- 
position to continence, the pair remain together for life. 

Many of the girls bear children before they are taken for wives, but 
as such incidents do not destroy the respectability of the mother the 
girl does not experience any difficulty in procuring «© husband.  Ile- 
gitimate children are usually taken care of by some aged woman, who 
devotes to it all her energies and affections. 

The number of children born varies greatly, for, although these Eski- 
mos are not a prolifie race, a couple may occasionally claim parentage 
of as many as ten children, Two or three is the usual number, and 
many die in early childhood. 

When the family is prosperous the husband often takes a second 
wife, either with or without the approval of the first, who knows that 
her household duties will be lessened, but knows also that the favors of 
her husband will have to be divided with the second wife. The second 
wife is often the cause of the first wife’s leaving, though sometimes she 
is sent away herself. Three or four wives are sometimes attained by a 
prosperous man, and one instance was known where the head of the 
family had no less than five wives. The occupation of a single snow 
house by two or three wives brings them into close intimacy and often 
produces quarreling, The man hears but little of it, as he is strong 
enough to settle their dificulties without ceremony, and in a manner 
better adapted to create respect: for brute strength than affection for 
him. 

The females outnumber the males, but the relationship among the 
Koksoagmyut is now so close that many of the males seek their wives 
from other localities. This, of course, connects distant people, and in- 
terchange of the natives of both sexes is common, 

Separation of couples is effected in a simple manner, The one who 
so desires leaves with little ceremony, but is sometimes sought for and 
compelled to return, Wives are often taken for a period, and an ex- 
change of wives is frequent, either party being often happy to be re- 
leased for a time, and returning without concern. There is so much 
intriguing and scandal-mongering among these people that a woman 
is often compelled by the sentiment of the community to relinquish 
her choice and join another who has bribed a conjurer to decide that 

until she comes to live with him a certain person will not be relieved 
from the evil spirit now tormenting him with disease. 

The only way for the couple against whom such a plot has been laid 
to escape separation is for them to flee to another locality and remain 
there until the person gets well or dies, whereupon the conjurer declares 
it was their cohabitation as man and wife which afflicted the invalid. 
A designing woman will often cause a man to cast of the legal wite 

to whom he is much attached and come and live with her. In such in- 


190 TH HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


stances the former wife seldom resents the intrusion upon her affections 

and rights but occasionally gives the other a severe thrashing and an 
injunction to look to herself lest she be discarded also, The children 
of the cast-off woman are frequently taken by her and they go to live 
with her relatives as menials on whom devolve the labor of severest 
kinds, she being glad to obtain the refuse of the hovel to support her 
life in order that her children may be well taken care of. 

Some wives are considered as very “unlucky” and a er trial are 
cast off to shift for themselves, A woman who has obtained the reputa- 
tion of being unlucky for her husband is eschewed by all the men lest 
she work some charm on them, 

In social relations the head of the family comes first, and the oldest 
son second, the other sons followin” according to respective ages, 

The sons of the first wife, if there be more than one wife, take pre- 
cedence over those of the second or third wife. It may be that a 
man has lost lis tirst wife and takes another. The sons of these two 
ave considered as those of one wife so far as their relation to each 
other is concerned, When the father becomes superanuated or his 
sons are old enough to e..able him to live without exertion, the man- 
agement of affairs devolves on the eldest son, and to the second is 
delegated the seeond place. Each may be occupied in different affairs, 
but the elder alone chooses what he himself shall do, 

If the father live to a great age, and some of the men certainly at- 
tain the age of more than 80 years, he may have great grandchildren 
about him, and these never fail to show respect for their ancestor, 

All this family may dwell in a single tent, or in two or more tents, 
Where the leader directs, there they all repair, although each one 
who is at the head of a family may be left to employ himself as he may 
prefer. These sons, with their wives anc children, form a community, 
which may have other persons added to it, namely, the persons who 
are related to the wives of the sons, There may be but one community 
in a locality, and this is locally known to the white people as the “ gang” 
of the head man. 

Families whose members have decreased in number by death or bs 
marriage may seek the companionship of one of these communities for 
protection, The new arrival at once acknowledges his dependence and 
is, in a manner, under the influence, if not control, of the leader of the 
community which he joins. 


DREN. 


A new born babe must not be washed until six or eight hours have 
elapsed. It is then placed to the breast and rarely gets any water to 
drink until old enough to help itself to it. 

The child may be named while yet in utero. There being no dis- 
tinctions for sex in names the appellation can scarcely be amiss. Sey- 
eral names may be acquired from the most trivial circumstances, Old 


TURN! 


name 
appli 
Le 
neve 
flict 
to o 
thei 
are | 
seld 
A 
acci 
thy 
est | 
tive 
am 
chu 
foot 
bed 
roll 
to \ 
A 
spil 
the 
am 
am 
for 
ces 
in 
the 


th 
ar 
th 
ol 


TURNER.) CHILDREN. 191 


names may be discarded and new names substituted or certain names 
applied by certain people and not used by others, 

Love for offspring is of the deepest and purest character. [ have 
never seen a disrespectful Eskimo child, Mothers and fathers never in- 
flict corporal punishment on their children, for these are early taught 
to obey, or rather they are quick to perceive that their parents are 
their protectors and to them they must go for assistance. Orphan girls 
are taken as nurses for small children, and the nurse so employed has 
seldom any trouble in controlling the child. 

Among young children at play the greatest harmony prevails. An 
accident resulting in sufficient harm to cause tears obtains the sympa- 
thy of all, who strive to appease the injured child by offers of the great- 
est share of the game, the little fellow often smiling with the prospee- 
tive pleasure while the tears yet course down his begrimed cheeks, In 
a moment all is forgotten and joyous shouts sound merrily as the 
chubby youngsters of both sexes redouble their exertion in playing 
football or building toy houses in the newly fallen snow, where, on the 
bed of snow within the wall of the hut, the doll of ivory, wood or rags 
rolled into its semblance, plays the part of hostess whom they pretend 
to visit and with whom they converse. 

Among the younger boys and girls, of 10 or 12, there is a great 
spirit of cheerful rivalry, to prove their ability to secure such food as 
they are able to capture. If they can procure enough to purchase some 
ammunition with which to kill ptarmigan they soon have a certain 
amount of credit. This enables them to provide some coveted luxury 
for their parents, who, of course, aid and encourage them to become sue- 
cessful hunters. Within the huts the girls display their skill by sew- 
ing fragments of cloth into garments for dolls or striving to patch 
their tattered clothes, 

The older boys look with contempt upon these childish occupations 
and, to show their superiority, often torment the younger ones until 
the father or mother compels them to desist. Pranks of various kinds 
are played upon each other and they often exhibit great cunning in 
their devices to annoy. These boys are able to accompany their elders 
on hunting trips and run ahead of the team of dogs attached to the sled- 


BURIAL CUSTOMS, 


When a person dies the body is prepared by binding it with cords, 
the knees being drawn up and the heels placed against the body. The 
arms are tied down, and a covering of deerskin or sealskin is wrapped 
around the body and fastened. The nearest relatives on approach of 
death remove the invalid to the outside of the house, for if he shoulddie 
within he must not be carried out of the door but through a hole cutin 
the side wall, and it must then be carefully closed to prevent the spirit 
of the person from returning. The body is exposed in the open air 
along the side of a large rock, or taken to the shore or hilltop, where 


192 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


stones of different sizes are piled around it to prevent the birds and ani- 
mals trom getting at it. (See Fig, 21.) [tis considered a great offense 
if a dog be seen eating the tlesh from a body, In case of a beloved 
child dying it is sometimes taken with the people to whom it belonged 
if they start for another locality before decomposition has progressed 
too far. 


Fig, 21, Eskimo grava. 


The dying person resigns himself to fate with great calmness, Dur. 
ing illness, even though it be of most painful character, complaint is 
seldom heard; and so great is fortitude that the severest paroxysms 
of pain rarely produce even a movement of the muscles of the coun. 
tenance, 

The friends often exhibit.an excessive amount of grief, but only in 
exceptional instances is much weeping indulged in. The loss of a 
husband often ertails great har v.ips on the wife and small children, 
who eke out a scanty living by the aid of others who are scarcely able 
to maintain themselves. 

These people have an idea of a future state and believe that death 
is merely the separation of the soul and the material body, The spir- 
its of the soul go either up to the sky, “keluk,” when they are called 
Kelugmyut, or down into the earth, “Nuna,” and are called ** Nuna- 
myut.” These two classes of spirits can hold communication with each 
other. 

The place to which the soul goes depends on the conduct of the per- 
son on earth and especially on the manner of his death, Those who 
have died by violence or starvation and women who die in childbirth 
are supposed to go to the region above, where, though not absolutely in 


TURNER 


want 
Alld 
of Ge 
who 
If 
the | 
the 
and 
bace 
Arti 
to cl 
dee 
imm 
is it 
shir 
posi 
arti 
com 
Ss 
hig 
alot 
the 
car 
sou 
pil 

\ 

do 
eve 
ing 
of 
Es 


TURNER, | RELIGION, 193 


want, they still lack many of ihe luxuries enjoyed by the Nunamyut, 
All desire to go to the lower region and afterwards enjoy the pleasure 
of communicating with the living, which privilege is denied to those 
who go above, 

If death result from natural causes the spirit is supposed to dwell on 
the earth after having undergone a probation of four years rest in 
the grave. During this time the grave may be visited and food offered 
and songs sung, and the offering, consisting of oil and flesh, with to- 
bacco for smoking and chewing, is consumed by the living at the grave. 
Articles of clothing may also be deposited near the grave for the spirit 
to clothe itself after the garments have disappeared in the process of 
decay. It is customary to place such articles as may be deemed of 
immediate use for the departed soul in the grave at the time the body 
is interred, Ammunition, gun, kaiak and its appurtenances, with a 
shirt, gloves, knife, and a cup from which to drink are usually so de- 
posited, The spirit of the dead man appropriates the spirits of these 
articles as soon as they decay. It is often said when an article be- 
comes lost that so-and-so (mentioning his name), has taken it, 

Some of the people prefer to expose their dead on the flat top of a 
high point extending into the water. The remains of others are placed 
along the shore and covered with rocks, while still others are taken to 
the smooth ridges on which may nearly always be found a huge bowlder 
carried by glacial action and deposited there. Here generally on the 
south side the body is placed on the bare rocky ridge and stones are 
piled around and upon it. 

While these people have but little fear of the dead man’s bones they 
do not approve of their being disturbed by others, The Indians, how- 
ever, are known to rifle the graves of Eskimo to obtain the guns, cloth- 
ing, ete., which the relatives of the deceased have placed there, 

There are no such elaborate ceremonies pertaining to the festivals 
of the dead among the people of Hudson strait as obtain among the 
Eskimo of Alaska. 


RELIGION, 


Among these people there is no such person as chief; yet there is a 
recognized leader who is influenced by another, and this last is the con- 
jurer or medicine-man, These two persons determine among themselves 
what shall be done. It sometimes happens that slight differences of 
opinion on the proper course to pursue collectively will cause them to 
go in different directions to meet after a few months’ separation, by 
which time all is forgotten and former relations are resumed. 

All the affairs of life are supposed to be under the control of spirits, 
each of which rules over a certain element, and all of which are under 
the direction of a greater spirit. Each person is supposed to be at- 
tended by a special guardian who 18s malignart in character, ever ready 
to seize upon the least occasion to work harm upon the individual whom 

11 ETH——13 


194 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


it accompanies, As this is an evil spirit its good offices and assistance 

“an be obtained by propitiation only. The person strives to keep the 

good will of the evil spirit by offerings of food, water, and clothing. 

The spirit is often in a material form in the shape of a doll, carried 
somewhere about the person. If it is wanted to insure success in the 
chase, it is carried in the bag containing the ammunition. 

When an individual fails to overcome the obstacles in his path the 
misfortune is attributed to the evil wrought by his attending spirit, 
whose good will must be invoked, If the spirit prove stubborn and re- 
luctant to grant the needed assistance the person sometimes becomes 
angry with it and inflicts a serious chastisement upon it, deprives it of 
food, or strips it of its garments, until after a time it proves less refrac- 
tory and yields obedience to its master. It often happens that the 
person is unable to control the influence of the evil-disposed spirit and 
the only way is to give it to some person without his knowledge. The 
latter becomes immediately under the control of the spirit, and the 
former, released from its baleful effects, is able successfully to prose- 
cute the affairs of life. In the course of time the person generally re- 
lents and takes back the spirit he gave to another. The person on 
whom the spirit has been imposed should know nothing of it lest he 
should refuse to accept it. It is often given in the form of a bundle of 
clothing. It is supposed that if in hunting somebody merely takes the 
bag to hang it up the influence will pass to him. The spirit is sup- 
posed to be able to exert its influence only when carried by some ob- 
ject having life. Hence the person may cast it away for a time, and 
during that period it remains inert. 

Besides this class of spirits, there are the spirits of the sea, the 
land, the sky (for be it understood that the Eskimo know nothing of 
the air), the winds, the clouds, and everything in nature. Every cove 
of the seashore, every point, island, and prominent rock has its guard- 
ian spirit. All are of the malignant type and to be propitiated only 
by acceptable offerings from persons who desire to visit the locality 
where it is supposed to reside. Of course some of the spirits are more 
powerful than others, and these are more to be dreaded than those 
able to inflict less harm. 

These minor spirits are under the control of the great spirit, whose 
name is “Tung ak.” This one great spirit is more powerful than all 
the rest besides, The lesser spirits are immediately under his control 
and ever ready to obey his command, The shaman (or conjurer) alone 
is supposed to be able to deal with the Tung ak. While the shaman 
does not profess to be superior to the Tung ak, he is able to enlist his 
assistance and thus be able to control all the undertakings his protes- 
sion may call for, 

This Tung ak is nothing more or less than death, which ever seeks 
to torment and harass the lives of people that their spirits may go to 
dwell with him. 


TURNER, 


Al 
had a 
ill an 
their 
ment, 
roam 
mine 

Tu 
their 
prov 
and 
child 
Fam 
child 

Pe 
of T 
from 
pow 
acco 
less 
tion 
to h 
pose 
goil 
him 
gre 
spa 
fort 
sec] 
" 
for 
4 | 
he 
rec 
pli: 
to « 
the 
wil 
sto 
he 
tat 
is 
afl 
oft 
A 


TURNER.] RELIGION. 195 


A legend related of the origin of the Tung ak is as follows: A father 
had a son and daughter whom he loved very much. The children fell 
il and at last died, although the father did all in his power to alleviate 
their sufferings, showing his kindness and attentions to the last mo- 
ment. At their death the father became changed to a vicious spirit, 
roaming the world to destroy any person whom he might meet, deter- 
mined that, as his dear children died, none others should live. 

Tung ak visits people of all ages, constantly placing obstacles in 
their pathway to prevent the accomplishment of their desires, and 
provoking them beyond endurance so as to cause them to become ill 
and die and go to live with him. Tung ak no longer knows his own 
children and imagines all persons that he meets to be his children. 
Famine, disease, and death are sent abroad to search for these lost 
children. 

People at last: began to devise some means of thwarting the designs 
of Tung ak and discovered that a period of fasting and abstinence 
from contact with other people endowed a person with supernatural 
powers and enabled him to learn the secrets of Tung ak, This is 
accomplished by repairing to some lonely spot, where for a greater or 
less period the hermit abstains from food or water until the imagina- 
tion is so worked upon that he believes himself imbued with the power 
to heal the sick and control all the destinies of life. Tung ak is sup- 
posed to stand near and reveal these things while the person is under- 
going the test. When the person sees the evil one ready to seize upon 
him if he fails in the self-imposed task to become an “Angekok” or 
great one, he is much frightened and beseeches the terrible visitor to 
spare his life and give him the power to relieve his people from mis- 
fortune. Tung ak then takes pity on him, and imparts to him the 
secret of preserving life, or driving out the evil which causes death. 

This is still the process by which the would-be shaman fits himself 
tor his supernatural duties. 

The newly fledged angekok returns to his people and relates what 
he has seen and what he has done, The listeners are awed by the 
recitals of the sufferings and ordeal, and he is now ready to accom- 
plish his mission, When his services are required he is crafty enough 
to demand sufficient compensation, and frankly states that the greater 
the pay the greater the good bestowed. A native racked with pain 
will gladly part with all of his worldly possessions in order to be re- 
stored to health. 

The shaman is blindfolded, or else has a covering thrown over his 
head to prevent his countenance from being seen during the incan- 
tation. The patient lies on the ground before him and when the shaman 
is worked up to the proper state of frenzy he prostrates himselfupon the 
afflicted person and begins to chase the evil fromits seat. The patient 
often receives blows and jerks sufliciently hard to dislocate the joints. 
As the spell progresses the shaman utters the most hideous noises, 


196 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


shouting here and there as the evil flees to another portion of the body, 
seeking a retreat from which the shaman shall be unable to dislodge 
it. After a time victory is declared; the operator cleims to have the 
disease under his control, and although it should escape and make 
itself again felt in the patient, the shaman continues until the person 
either gets well or dies. If the former, the reputation of the shaman 
is increased proportionally to the payment bestowed by the afflicted 
one. If he dies, however, the conjurer simply refers his failure to the in- 
terference of somethiig which was beyond his control. This may have 
been the influence of anything the shaman may at the moment think 
of, such as a sudden appearance in the changing auroras, a fall of 
show, or a dog knocking down something outside of the house. If the 
people deny that the dog did the act, the shaman replies that the dog 
Was the instrument in the hands of a spirit which escaped him. Any 
little incident is sufticient to thwart: the success of his manipulations, 
If any person be the subject of the shamaw’s displeasure he or she 
must undergo some sort of punishment or do an act of penance for the 
interference, It is not unusual to see a person with the harness of a 
dog on his back. This is worn to relieve him or somebody else of 
a spell of the evil spirit. The tail of a living dog is often eut from its 
body in order that the fresh blood may be cast upon the ground to be 
seen by the spirit who has caused the harm, and thus he may be ap- 
peased, Numerous mutilations are inflicted upon animals at the coin- 
mand of the conjurer, who must be consulted on nearly all the important 
undertakings of life in order that he may manage the spirits which will 
insure success. 

The implicit belief in these personages is wonderful, Almost every 
person who can do anything not fully understood by others has more 
or less reputation as a shaman. 

Some men, by observation, become skilled in weather lore, and get 
a great reputation for supernatural knowledge of the future weather. 
Others again are famous for suggesting charms to insure success in 
hunting, and, in fact, the occasions for consulting the conjurer are prac- 
tically innumerable. One special qualification of a good shaman is the 
ability to attract large numbers of deer or other game into the region 
where he and his friends are hunting. 

Some of these shamans are superior hunters and, as their experience 
teaches them the habits of the deer, they know at any season exactly 
where the animals are and can anticipate their future movements, in- 
tluenced greatly by the weather. Thus the prophet is able to estimate 
the proximity or remoteness of the various herds of stragglers from the 
main body of deer which were in the locality during the preceding fall 
months. These hunters have not only a local reputation but are 
known as far as the people have any means of communication. 

In order to cause the deer to move toward the locality where they 
may be desired the shaman will erect, on a pole placed in a favorable 


TURNE! 


posit 
will 
aphe 
of ti 
iz 


elab 


TURNER.] THE 'TALISMANS. 197 


famous hunter and conjurer. The image 
Jerson as conjurer and the various par- 
olling the movements 


position, an image of some 
will represent the power of the ] 


aphernalia attached to the image assist in contr 


of the animals. 
I obtained one of these objects at Fort Chimo. 


elaborate and requires a detailed description. 


(Fig. 22.) It is quite 
It is intended to repre- 


Fig. 22. Magie doll. 


, shore of Hudson bay. 


sent a celebrated conjurer living on the easter! 
putation as a hunter 


He occasionally visited Fort Chimo where his re 
had preceded him. His name is Sa‘pa. 

Ife is dressed in a complete suit of the woolen stuff ¢ 
at Fort Chimo, trimmed with black and with faney tartar 


alled “ strouds” 
1 gartering. In 


198 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


the belt of polar-bear skin (kak-enng/-unt) (Fig. 23) are hung strings 
of colored beads and various amulets, These are, first, a wooden doll 
(Fig. 24) (inug’wak, a little man) lung to the belt so that he faces out- 
ward and is always on the alert; then, two bits of wood (agéwak) (Fig. 


25) to which hang strands of beads and lead drops; next, a string of 


three bullets (lig. 26) to symbolize the readiness of the hunter when 
game approaches; and, last, a semicircular piece of wood ornamented 
with strings of beads (Fig. 27). 

This last is called the tu-a/-vi-tok, or hastener. The hunter holds it 
in his hand when he sights the game, and the tighter he grasps it the 


Fig, 28. Belt of magic doll. 


faster he is supposed to get over the ground. It is supposed that by 
the use of this one may be able to travel faster than the wind and not 
even touch the earth over which he passes with such incredible speed 
that he overtakes the deer in a moment. The entire affair, as it hung 
on the pole, was called tung wa/gn e/nog ang’, or a materialization of a 
Tung ak. 

This object hung there for several days until I thought it had served 
its purpose and could now afford to change ownership. The local con- 


TURN} 


jure 
hap 
nin; 
7T 
me! 
ma 
sol 
oft 
chi 


TURNER. } THE TALISMANS. 199 


jurer was thus compelled to invoke the assistance of another. [am 
happy to add that the deer did come, and in thousands, actually run- 
ning among the houses of the station. 

The shaman of the community possesses great influence over its 
members. He very frequently decides the course to be pursued by 
man and wife in their relations with each other, and, conspiring with 
some evil old woman who loves to show preference for a young man, he 
otten decrees that husband or wife shall be cast off. 

If the person become ill the wife is often accused of working some 
charm on her husband in order that she may enjoy the favors of another. 


Fia, 25. Talisman. 


hoo AY CAIRN 
Fa, 24. Talisman attached Wa, 26. Taltemen 


to magic doll. 
A woman whose husband had recently died was espoused by nother 
who soor aiter became violently ill. She nursed him with the ereatest 
assiduity until he convalesced, At this period his mother, with the 
advice of some old hags, decreed that she had been the sole cause of 
her husband’s illness and must leave the tent. Her things were pitched 
out and she was compelled to journey in quest of her relatives. 

Another illustration came under my notice. 

A widow was taken to wite by a Koksoak Eskimo. He was soon 
taken violently ill and she was aeeused by the shaman of being the 
cause of it, as the spirit of her deceased husband was jealous. Unless 
she were cast off the Koksoak man would never recover, It was then 


6) 


200 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


also found that unless the wife of another man should desert him and 
become the wife of aman who already had two of this woman’s sisters 
as wives the sick man would die. The woman and her husband 
escaped divoree by fleeing from the camp, 

The shaman may do about as he pleases with the marriage ties, 
which oftener consist of sealskin thongs than respect and love. Many 
old hags have acquired g-eat repu- 
tations for being able to interpret 
dreams, Aninstance of dream in- 
terpretation, which also illustrates 
how a person may acquire a new 
name, came under my observation, 
A woman, sitting alone, heard a 
noise like the rapping of someone 
at the door desiring admittance. 
She said, “Come in.” No one ap- 
peared, and she inquired of the 
girl who ected as nurse for her 
child if anyone had knocked at 
the door, A negative answer was 
given, Further questioning of a 
white man, who was asleep near 
by, revealed that he had made no 
such sound, The woman knew 

Fia. 27. Talisman. that no man had died within the 
place and sv his spirit could not be seeking admittance. She went 
to an old woman and related the affair, and was informed that it was 
the rapping of her brother, who had died suddenly some two years 
betore, She must go home and prepare a cup of tea, with a slice of 
bread, and give it to the nurse, as her brother, Nakvak (the one who 
died) was hungry and wanted food. She especially enjoined upon the 
woman that the girl must now be known as Nakvak (meaning found”) 
and that through her the dead would procure the food which, although 
it subserves a good purpose in nourishing the living, tends, by its ac- 
companying spirit, to allay the pangs of hunger in the dead. 

As [ have already said, everything in the world is believed tu have 
its attendant spirit. The spirits of the lower animals are like those of 
men, but of an inferior order. As these spirits, of course, can not be 
destroyed by killing the animals, the Eskimo believe that no amount 
of slavoghter can realy decrease the numbers of the game, 

A great spirit controls the reindeer, He dwells in a huge cavern 
near the end of Cape Chidley. He obtains and controls the spirit of 
every deer which is slain or dies, and it depends on his good will whether 
the people shall obtain future supplies, The form of the spirit is that 
of a huge white bear. The shaman has the power to prevail upon the 
spirit to send the deer to the people who are represented as suffering 


TURN 


for 
ofte 
peo 
last 
of t 
dog 
col 
for 
the 
to 
pec 
spi 


TURNER. } AMULETS. 201 


for want of food. The spirit is informed that the people have in no way 
offended him, as the shaman, as a mediator between the spirit and the 
people, has taken great care that the past food was all eaten and that 
last spring, when the female deer were returning to him to be delivered 
of their young, none of the young (or fastal) deer were devoured by the 
dogs. After much incantation the shaman announces that the spirit 
condescends to supply the people with spirits of the deer in a material 
form and that soon an abundance will be in the land. He enjoins upon 
the people to slay and thus obtain the approval of the spirit, which loves 
to see good people enjoy an abundance, knowing that so fong as the 
people refrain from feeding their dogs with the unborn young, the 
spirits of the deer will in time return again to his guardianship. 

Certain parts of the first deer killed must be eaten raw, others dis- 
carded, and others must be eaten cooked. The dogs must not be al- 
lowed to taste of the tlesh, and not until an abundance has been ob- 
tained must they be allowed to gnaw at the leg bones, lest the guardian 
spirit of the deer be offended and refuse to send further supplies. If 
by some misfortune the dogs get at the meat, a piece of the offending 
dog’s tail is cut off or his ear is cropped to allow a flow of blood, 

Ceremonies of some kind attend the capture of the first slain animal 
of all the more important kinds. [ unfortunately had no opportunity 
of witnessing many of these ceremonies, 

As a natural consequence of the superstitious beliefs that T have de- 
scribed, the use of amulets is universal, Some charms are worn to 
ward off the attacks of evil-disposed spirits. Other charms are worn as 
remembrances of deceased relatives. These have the form of a head- 
less doll depending trom some portion of the garment worn on the up- 
per part of the body. 

As inany of their personal names are derived from 
natural objects, it is usual for the person to wear a 
little image of the object for which he is named or a 
portion of it; for example, a wing of the bird, or a bit 
of the animal’s skin. This is supposed to gratify the 
spirit of the object. Strange or curious objects never 
before seen are sometimes considered to bring sue- 
cess to the finder 

Two articles selected from my colleetion will illus- 
trate different forms of amulets. The first, No. 8018, 
isa little wooden model of a kaiak., The other (3090, 
Fig, 28) was worn on the back of a woman’s coat. It 
is a small block of wood carved into four human 
he Js, These heads represent four famous conjurers 
noted for their skill in driving away diseases. The — Flo. 28, Eskimo wo. 
woman, who came from the eastern shore of Hudson's PS NE 
bay, was troubled with rheumatism and wore this charm from time to 
time as she felt the twinges of pain. She assured me that the pain 


202 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


always disappeared ina few hours when she wore it. It was with the 
greatest difficulty that [ persuaded her to part with it. She was, how- 
ever, about to return home, and could get another there. 


OUTDOOR LIFE, 


The Eskimo acquire an extended knowledge of the country by early 
accompanying their parents on hunting trips, and as they have to rely 
upon memory alone, they must be observant and carefully mark the 
surroundings trom all the views afforded. The faculty of memory is 
thus cultivated to an astonishing degree, and seldom fails, even in the 
most severe weather, to insure safety for the individual. I knew a 
native stick his ramrod in the ground among scattered stalks of grass 
which attained the height of the red, yet after several hours he found 
the spot again without the least hesitation. Every rise of land, every 
curve of a stream, every cove in the seashore, has a name descriptive 
of something connected with it, and these names are known to all who 
have occasion to visit the place. Though the aspect of the land is 
entirely changed by the mantle of snow which covers all the smaller 
objeets, a hunter will go straight to the place where the carcass of 4 
single deer was cached many months before on the open beach. The 
Eskimo are faithful guides, and when contidence is shown to be reposed 
in them they take a pride in leading the party by the best route. In 
traveling by night they use the north star for the guide. Experience 
teaches them to foretell the weather, and some reliance may be placed 
on their predictions, 

Their knowledge of the seasons is also wonderful. The year begins 
when the sun has reached its lowest point, that is, at the winter 
solstice, and summer begins with the summer solstice. They recognize 
the arrival of the solstices by the bearing of the sun with reference to 
certain tixed landmarks, 

The seasons have distinetive names, and these are again subdivided 
into a great number, of which there are more during the warmer 
weather than during the winter. The reason for this is obvious: so 
many changes are going on during the summer and so few during the 
winter. The principal events are the return of the sun, always a 
signal of joy to the people; the lengthening of the day; the warm 
weather in March when the sun has attained sufticient height to make 
his rays less slanting and thus be more fervent; the melting of the 
snow; the breaking up of the ice; the open water; the time of birth 
o* various seals; the advent of exotic birds; the nesting of gulls, 
eiders, and other native birds; the arrival of white whales and the 
whaling season; salmon fishing; the ripening of salmonberries and 
other species of edibles; the time of reindeer crossing the river; the 
trapping of fur-bearing animals and hunting on land and water for 
food, Bach of these periods has a special name applied to it, although 
several may overlap cach other, The appearance of mosquitoes, sand- 


TURNER.) OUTDOOR LIFE. 203 


flies, and horseflies are marked by dates anticipated with eu. -.aerable 
apprehension of annoyance. 

In order to sketch the annual routine of life, I will begin with the 
breaking up of the ice in spring. The Koksoak river breaks its ice 
about the last of May. This period, however, may vary as much as 
ten days earlier and twenty days later than the date specified. The 
ice in Ungava bay, into which that river flows, must be free from the 
greater portion of the shore ice before the river ice can push its way 
out to sea. The winds alone influence the bay ice, and the character 
of the weather toward the head waters of the river determines its time 
of breaking. 

The Eskimo has naturally a keen perception of the signs in the sky 
and is often able to predict with certainty the effects of the preceding 
weather. When the season has sufficiently advanced all the belong- 
ings of each family are put together and transported down the river on 
sleds to where the ice has not yet gone from the mouth of the river. 
It is very seldom that the river ice extends down so far. To the edge 
of the ice the tent and dogs, with the umiak, kaiak, and other personal 
property, are taken and then stored on shore until the out: ide ice is 
free, 

The men wander along the beach or inland hunting fev reindeer, 
ptarmigan, hares, and other land game. The edge of the water is 
searched for waterfowl of various kinds which appear earliest. Some 
venturesome seals appear. In the course of a few days the ice ia the 
river breaks up and the shore ice of the bay is free; and if there is a 
favorable wind it soon permits the umiak to be put into the water, 
where, by easy stages, depending on the weather, the quantity of tloat- 
ing ice, and the food supp)v, the hunters creep alongshore to the object- 
ive point, be it either east or wert of the Koksoak, Sometimes the party 
divide, some going in one direction and others in another, 

The men seek tor seals, hunting in the kaiak, the women and chil- 
dren searching the islets and coves for anything edible. As soon as 
the season arrives for the various gulls, eiders, and other sea birds to 
nest the women and children are in high glee. Every spot is carefully 
exatiined, and every accessible nest of a bird is robbed of its contents. 
By the 25th of June the people have exhausted the supply of eggs from 
the last situations visited and now think of returning, as the birds have 
again deposited eggs and the seals are becoming scarcer. 

The Eskimo arrange to assist the company to drive white whales 
when the season arrives. This is as soon as they appear in the river at 
a sufficient distance up to warrant that the measures pursued will not 
drive them out of the fresh water, for if they left they would not soon 
return. The date usually fixed upon is about the 12th of ‘uly. The 
natives are summoned, and a large sailboat or the smali steam launch 
is sent along the coast to the place where the people were expected 
to arrive the 5th of the month. The natives are brought to the 


204 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


whaling station, where they encamp, to await the setting of the nets 
forming the sides of the inclosure into which the whales are to be driven. 

The natives spear the whales in the pound, drag them ashore, skin 
them, and heip take the oil and skins to the post, some eight miles 
farther up the river. 

The same natives who engaged in the whaling are employed to attend 
the nets for salmon, which arrive av variable dates from the 25th of 
July to the 1st of September. Two or more adult male Eskimo, with 
their relatives, occupy a certain locality, generally known by the name 
of the person in charge of that season’s work. The place is occupied 
until the runs of the fish are over, when it is time for the natives to be 
up the river to spear reindeer which cross the river, 

This hunting lasts until the deer have begun to rut and the males have 
lost the fat from the smallof the back. Theseason is now so far advanced 
that the ice is already forming along the shore, and unless the hunter 
intends to remain in that locality he would better begin to descend the 
river to a place nearer the sea. The river may freeze in a single night 
and the umiak be unable to withstand the constant strain of the sharp- 
edged cakes of floating ice. 

The head of the family decides where the winter is to be passed and 
moves thither with his party at once. Here he has a few weeks of rest 
trom the season’s labors, or spends the time constructing a sled for the 
winter journeys he may havein view, The snow has now fallen so that a 
show house may be constructed and winter quarters taken up, A num- 
ber of steel traps are procured to be set for foxes and other fur-bearing 
animals. The ptarmigans arrive in large flocks and are eagerly hunted 
for their flesh and feathers. The birds are either consumed for food or 
sold to the company, which pays 64 cents for four, and purchases the 
body feathers of the birds at the rate of 4 pounds of the feathers for 
25 cents. 

The Eskimo soon consume the amount of deer meat they brought with 
them on their return and subsist on the flesh of the ptarmigan until the 
ice is firm enough to allow the sleds to be used to transport to the 
present camp meat of animals slain in the fal. 

The traps are visited and the furs are sold to the company in ex- 
change for flour, tea, sugar, molasses, biscuit, clothing, aud ammuni- 
tion. Hunting excursions are made to various localities for stray bands 
of deer that have become separated from the larger herds, 

The white men employés of the company have been engaged in cut- 
ting wood for the next year’s fuel, and the Eskimo with their dog teams 
are hired to haul it to the bank, where it may be tloated down in 
rafts when the river opens. 

Thus passes the year in the life of the Eskimo of the immediate 
vicinity of Fort Chimo, Some of the Koksoagmyut do not engage. in 
these occupations, Some go to another locality to live by themselves; 
others do not work or hunt, because it is not their nature to do so. 


ot 


Dae 


TURNER, | OUTDOOR LIFE. 205 


In all undertakings for themselves they deliberate long, with much 
hesitation and apparent reluctance, before they decide upon the line of 
action, They consult each other and weigh the advantages of this over 
that locality for game, and speculate on whether they will be afflicted 
with illness of themselves or family. When the resolution is finally 
made to journey to a certain place, only the most serious obstacles can 
thwart their purpose. 

At all seasons of the year the women have their allotted duties, which 
they perform without hesitation. They bring the wood and the water, 
and the food from the field, if it is not too distant, in which case the 
men go after it with the dog teams. The women also fashion the skins 
into clothing and other articles, and do the cooking. After a hunt of 
several days’ duration the husband’s appearance is anxiously awaited, 
as is indicated by the family scanning the direction whence he is ex- 
pected. The load is taken from the sled or boat and the incidents of 
the chase recited to the ever ready listeners. 

In the early spriag the women are busily engaged in making boots 
for summer wear. The skins of the seals have been prepared the fall 
betore and stored away until wanted. The method of tanning the 
skins is the same for each species, differing only in its size and weight. 

Certain large vessels made of wood or metal, chietly the latter, as 
they are easily procured from the traders, are used to hold a liquid, 
which is from time to time added to. When a sufficient amount is 
collected it is allowed to ferment. During the interval the skin of the 
seal is cleansed trom fat and flesh, The hair has been removed by 
shaving it off or by pulling it out. The skin is then dressed with an 
instrument designed for that purpose, made of ivory, deerhorn, stone, 
or even a piece of tin Set in the end of a stout stick several inches 
long. The skin is held in the hand and the chisel-shaped implement 
is repeatedly pushed from the person and against a portion of the 
skin until that part becomes pliable and soft enough to work. — It is 
further softened by rubbing between the hands with a motion similar 
to that of the washerwoman rubbing clothing of the wash. Any por- 
tion of the skin which will not readily yield to this manipulation is 
chewed with the front teeth until it is reduced to the required plia- 
bility. After this operation has been completed the skin is soaked in 
the liquid, which has now ripened to a sufticient degree to be effective. 

In this it is laid for a period lasting from several hours to two or three 
days. The skin is now taken out and dried, The subsequent opera- 
tion of softening is similar to that just described, and is final. It is 
now ready to be cut into the required shape for the various articles for 
which it is intonded. If itis designed for boots for a man, the measure 
of the height of the leg is taken, The length and width of the sole is 
measured by the hand, stretching so far and then bending down the 
long or middle finger until the length is measured. The width of one, 
two, or more fingers is sometimes used in addition to the span. The 


206 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


length is thus marked and the skin folded over so as to have it doubled, 
The knife used in cutting is shaped like the round knife used by the 
harness-maker or shoemaker, 

There is in our collection a wooden model of this form of knife (No. 
3022), which nowadays always has a blade of metal. Formerly slate, 
flint, or ivory was used for these blades, 

The instrument is always pushed by the person using it. The eye 
alone guides the knife, except on work for a white man, and then greater 
care is exercised and marks employed indicating the required size, 
This round knife is called (lo. 

Another important duty of the women is taking care of the family 
boots. When a pair of boots has been worn for some time, during a 
few hours in warm weather they absorb moisture and become nearly 
half an inch thick on the soles, When taken off they must be turned 
inside out and dried, then chewed and scraped by some old woman, 
who is only too glad to have the work for the two or three biscuit she 
inay receive as pay. Any leak or hole is stitched, and when the sole 
has holes worn through it, it is patched by sewing a piece on the under 
side, The thread used in sewing the boots is selected from the best 
strips of sinew from the reindeer or seal. 

Some women excel in boot-making, and at some seasons do nothing 
but make boots, while the others in return prepare the other garments: 
When the time comes in spring for making sealskin clothes, the women 
must not sew on any piece of deerskin which has not yet been sewed, 
lest the seals take offense and desert the locality which has been selected 
for the spring seal hunt, to which all the people look forward with long- 
ing, that they may obtain a supply of food different from that which 
they have had during the long winter months, As there can be no 
harm in killing a deer at this season, the flesh may be used, but the 
skin must be cast away. 

As betore stated, the entire family accompany the expeditions; and 
as the females are often the more numerous portion of the population, 
they row the umiak at their leisure, now and then stopping to have a 
few hours’ run on shore and again embarking. While thus journey- 
ing they are at times a sleepy crowd, until something ahead attracts 
attention; then all become animated, pursuing the object, if it be a half: 
fledged bird, until it is captured. Great amusement is thus afforded 
for the time, after which they relapse until some excitement again 
arouses them from their apparent lethargy. At the camp the men go 
in quest of larger game, leaving the women and children, who search 
the shore for any living creature they may find, destroying all tiat 
comes in their way. Smoking, eating, and sleeping occupy them until 
they arrive at a locality where food is abundant. There they earnestly 
strive to slay all that comes within reach, and thus often obtain much 
more than they require, and the remainder is left to putrefy on the 
rocks, The women do the skinning of the seals and birds obtained on 


TURNER, | TATTOOING, 207 


this trip. The skins of birds are removed in a peculiar manner, The 
wings are cut off at the body, and through the incision all the flesh and 
bones are taken out, The skin is then turned inside out, The grease 
is removed by scraping and chewing. The skin is dried and preserved 
for wear on the feet or for the purpose of cleansing the hands, which 
have become soiled with blood or other offal in skinning large game. 

When the season arrives for hunting the reindeer for their skins, 
with which to make clothing for winter, the women help to prepare the 
flesh and bring the wood and water for the camp, while the men are 
ever on the alert for the herds of deer on the land or evossing the 
water. The women hang the skins over poles until the greater portion 
of the animal matter is dry, when they roll them up amd store them 
away until the party is ready to return to the permanent camp for the 
winter. Here the skins collected are carefully examined and suitable 
ones selected for winter garments. 

The skins are moistened with water and the adherent fleshy parti- 
cles are removed with a knife. They are then roughly seraped and 
again wetted, this time with urine, which is supposed to render them 
more pliable. The operation is practically the same as that of tanning 
sealskins. The hair is, of course, left on the skin. When the skins 
are finally dry and worked to the required pliability, they are cut into 
shape for the various articles of apparel, The thread used in sewing 
is Siuply a strip of sinew of the proper size, The fibers are separated 
b; splitting off a sufticient amount, and with the finger nail the strip is 
freed from all knots or smaller strands which would prevent drawing 
through the needle holes, The thread for this purpose is never twisted 
or plaited, The needle is one procured from the trader, Smal! bone 
needles, infitations of these, are sometimes used. In former years the 
bone needle was the only means of carrying the thread, but this has 
now, except in the rarest instances, been entirely superseded by one 
of metal, 

The thimble is simply a piece of stiff sealskin sewed into a ring 
half an inch wide to slip on the tirst finger, and has the same name as 
that member. Ln sewing of all kinds the needle is pointed toward the 
operator, The knife used in cutting skins is the same as that  pre- 
viously described, Scissors are not adapted to cutting a skin which 
retains the fur, So far as my observations goes, scissors are used only 
for cutting textile fabrics procured from the store. 

In the use of a knife women acquire a wonderous dexterity, guiding 
it to the desired curve with much skill, or using the heel of the blade 
to remove strips which may need trimming off, 


TATTOOING, 


In former years the women were fancifully tattooed with curved 
lines and rows of dots on the face, neck, and arms, and on the legs up 
to mid-thigh, This custom, however, fell into disuse because some 


208 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


shaman declared that a prevailing misfortune was the result of the tat- 
tooing. At present the tattooing is confined to a few single dots on 
the body and face. When a girl arrives at puberty she is taken to a 
secluded locality by some old woman versed in the art and stripped 
of her clothing. A small quantity of half-charred lamp wick of moss is 
mixed with oil from the lamp. A needle is used to prick the skin, and 
the pasty substance is smeared over the wound, The blood mixes with 
it, and in a day or two a dark-bluish spot alone is left. The operation 

ontinues four days. When the girl returns to the tent it is known 
that she has begun to menstruate, A menstruating woman must not 
wear the lower garments she does at other times. The hind flap of her 
coat must be turned up and stitched to the back of the garment, Her 
right hand must be half-gloved, or, in other words, the first two joints 
of each finger of that hand must be uncovered. The lett hand also re- 
mains uncovered, She must not touch certain skins and food which 
at that particular season are in use. 


CLOTHING, 


Like most Eskimo, the Koksoagmyut are clothed almost entirely 
in the skins of animals, though the men now wear breeches of mole- 
skin, duck, jeans, or denim procured from the trading sv.‘e. Reindeer- 
skin is the favorite inaterial for clothing, though skins of the dif: 
ferent seals are also used. The usual garments are a hooded frock, 
of ditferent shapes for the sexes, with breeches and boots, The latter 
are of various shapes for different weather, and there are many pat- 
terns of mittens, Rain frocks of seal entrail are also worn over the 
furs in stormy weather. Some of the people are very tidy and keep 
their clothing in a respectable condition, Others are careless and 
often present a most filthy sight. The aged and orphans, unless the 
latter be adopted by some well-to-do person, must often be content 
with the cast-off apparel of their more fortunate fellow-beings, 

The hair of the skins wears off in those places most liable to be 
in contact with other objects. The elbows, wrists, and knees often are 
without a vestige of hair on the clothing. The skin wears through 
and then is patched with any kind of a piece, which often presents a 
ludicrous appearance. 

The young boys and girls are dressed alike, and the females do not 
wear the garments of the adults until they arrive at puberty. It isa 
ludicrous sight to witness some of the little ones scarcely able to walk 
dressed in heavy deerskin clothing, which makes them appear as 
thick as they are tall, They exhibit about the same amount of pride 
of their new suits as the civilized boy does, They are now able to go 
out into the severest weather, and seem to delightin rolling around in 
the snow. 

Invants at the breast, so small as to be carried in the mother’s 
hood, are often dressed in skins of the reindeer fawns, The garment 


TURNER. | CLOTHING. 209 


for these isa kind of “combination,” the trousers and body sewed 
together and cut down the back to enable the infant to get them on. 
A cap of calico or other cloth and a pair of skin stockings completes 
the suit. 

Both men and women wear, as an additional protection for their feet 
in cold weather, a pair or two of short stockings, locally known as 
“duties,” from the name of the material of which they are made, 
These “duftles” are cut into the form of a slipper and incase the 
stockings of the feet. Over these are worn the moccasins, made of 
tanned and smoked deerskin. The Eskimo women are not adepts in 
making moccasins; a few only can form a well-titting pair. They 
often employ the Indian women to make them, and, in return, give a 
pair of sealskin boots, which the Indian is unable to make, but highly 
prizes for summer wear in the swamps, 

The Koksoagmyut do not wear caps, 
the hood of the frocks being the only 
head covering. There is, however, in 
my collection a cap obtained from one 
of the so-called “Northerners,” who 
‘ame to Fort Chimo to trade, This 
rap (No. 8242, Fig. 29) was evidently 
copied from some white man’s cap. 
The tront and crown of the cap are 
made of guillemot and sea-pigeon 
skins, and the sealskin neekpiece also 
is lined with these skins, so that when 
it is turned up the whole cap seems to 
be made of bird skins, 

We may now proceed to the deserip- 
tion of the different garments in de- 
tail. 

The coat worn.by the men and boys, 
and by the girls until they arrive at womanhood, has the form of a 
loose shirt, seldom reaching more than 2 or 3 inches below the hips, 
and often barely covering the hips. The neck hole is large enough to 
admit the head into the hood, which may be thrown back or worn over 
the head in place of a cap. 

The Innuit of the southern shore of the western end of Hudson Strait 
often cut the coat open in front as far up as the breast (Figs, 30 and 
31, No, 8224). The favorite material for these coats is the skin of the 
reindeer, three good-sized skins being required to make a full sized coat 
for a man, Coats made of light summer skins are used as under 
clothing in winter and for the only body clothing in summer, The 
skin of the harp seal (Phoca granlandica) is also used for coats, but only 
when the supply of reindeerskin runs short, or when a man can afford 
to have an extra coat to wear in wet weather, It is not a very good 

IL eri—l4t 


Fig, 29. Eskimo birdskin cap, 


210 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


material for clothing, as the skin is roughly tanned, and no amount of 
working will render it more than moderately pliable. Figs. 382 and 33 
represent a sealsktn coat. These coats are often trimmed round the 
edges with fringes of deerskin 2 or 3 inches wide, or little pendants of 
ivory, 


Fig, 80. Eskimo man's deerskin coat (front) 


The collection contains eleven of these coats, Nos, 8221, 3498-3500, 
and 3558 of deerskin, and Nos, 8228, 8533-3537 of sealskin. 

The peculiar shape of the woman's coat is best understood by refer 
ence to the accompanying figures (Figs. $4, 35, 36, 37 and 88), The 
enormous hood is used for carrying the infant. When sitting, the 
female usually disposes the front flap so that it will lie spread upon 
the thighs, or else pushes it between her legs, while the hind flap is 
either thrown aside or sat upon, 

It is not unusual for the women to display considerable taste in 
ornamenting their garments, using the steel-gray pelt of the harp seal 
to contrast with the black of the harbor seal, and soon, The edges of 
the hood and sleeves are frequently trimmed with skin from a dark 


TURNER, } CLOTHING, 211 


colored young dog, or a strip of polar bear skin, whose long white hairs 
shed the rain better than those of any other mammal. 

It is not rare to tind loops of sinew or of sealskin attached to the 
breast or back of a woman’s garments. These are for tying small arti- 
cles, such asa needle case or a snult-bag, to the clothing for convenience 
and to prevent loss, 

A peculiar style of ornamentation is shown in Fig. 39 and 40, No, 
3005, a woman’s coat from Fort Chimo, The front of the skirt is fringed 


Fig, 31, Eskimo man's deerskin coat (back.) 


with little lead drops, bean-shaped in the upper row and pear-shaped 
inthe lower, and pierced so that they can be sewed on. These lead 
drops are furnished by the trader at the price of about a cent anda 
half each, in trade. The trimming of this frock cost, therefore, about 
#4. The tour objects dangling from the front of the frock are pewter 
spoon-bowls, Across the breastis a fringe of short strings of different 
colored beads, red, black, yellow, white, and blue. Jingling ornaments 
are much prized, 


212 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


The tin tags from plug tobacco are eagerly sought for, perforated 
and attached in pendant strands 3 or 4 inches long to sealskin strips 
and thus serve the place of beads, I saw one woman who certainly 
had not less than a thousand of these tags jingling as she walked. I 
have also seen coins of various countries attached te the arms and 
dress. One coin was Brazilian, another Spanish, a". several were 


2 
Fig. 32. Eskimo man’s sealskin coat (front). 

English. Coins of the provinces were quite numerous, These were 

all doubtless obtained trom the sailors who annually visit the place, in 

exchange for little trinkets prepared by the men and women, 

The collection contains five of these coats, Nos, 3005, 3225-3227 of 
deerskin, and 3504 of sealskin, The last is a very elaborate garment, 
made of handsomely contrasted pieces of the skin of two kinds of 
seals, the harbor seal and the harp seal, arranged in a neat pattern, 

It ix not common to come across &@ garment of this kind, asx the 
skins of the proper or desired kinds are sometimes hard to obtain. 


TURNER.] WOMEN’S GARMENTS, 213 


The woman may be several years in getting the right kind and may 
have effected many exchanges betore being suited with the quality and 
color, The darkest skins of the Ka sig yak (harbor seal) are highly 
prized by both sexes, The women 
set the higher value upon them. 
The men wear two styles of leg coy. 
ering, namely, breeches like a white 
mans, but not open in front, and 
reaching but a short distance below 
the knees, or trousers ending in 
stocking feet. Sometimes in very 
cold weather these trousers may be 
worn under the breeches, Both 
breeches and trousers are very 
short-waisted, Long stockings of 
short-haired deerskin with the hair 
in are also worn, The women in 
winter wear breeches made of deer- 
skin fastened around the hips by 
means of a drawstring and extend- 
ing down the legs to where the tops 
of the boots will cover them a few 
inches. Some of the women wear 
trousers which reach only to the up- 
per part of the thighs and are con- 
tinuous with the boot which covers 
the foot, though in that case a pair 
of half-boots are added to protect 
tie feet. The hips are covered with 
breeches which descend low enough 
on the thigh to be covered by the 
leggings. This style of apparel for 
the lower portion of the body is Fi, 33.—Eskimo man’s sealskin coat (side). 
often extravagantly patched with various colored pieces of white and 
dark strips of skin from the abdomen and sides of the reindeer. 
When new and not soiled they are quite attractive and often contrast 
well with the tastefully ornamented coat. 

The long boots or leggings are removed when dirty work is to be 
done, Thus, skins to be scraped and dressed are held against the 
bare leg. 

The leggings also serve as pockets to hold various kinds of little 
things, like knives, tobacco, and so on. 

A person rarely owns more than a single pair of breeches; eon- 
sequently I was unable to obtain any for the collection, 

The boots and shoes are of different materials and somewhat differ 
ent patterns for different seasons of the year, All have moccasin 


214 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


soles of stout material turned up an ineh or two all rownd the foot, a 
tongue covering the top of the foot, joined to a broad heel band which 
passes round behind the ankle, Then the logs are either made long 
enough to reach to the knee or else almost to the ankle. These half. 
boots are worn over the fur stockings in warm weather, or outside the 


Fig. 34, Eskimo woman's deerskm coat. 


long boots in very severe weather. Indian moceasins are also worn, 


sometimes over 9 pair of inside shoes and sometimes as inside shoes. 
For thick waterproof soles the skin of the beaver or the harp seal is 
used. The former wears the better, White whale skin is also used 


TURNER.) WOMEN’S GARMENTS, * 215 


for indoor shoes, or for shoes to be worn in cold dry weather; the skins 
of the smaller seals are ur ‘d, sometimes with the flesh side out and the 


hair in, sometimes with the grain side out. These thinner skins are 


comparatively wacerproof if the black epidermis is allowed to remain 


Fia. 35. Eskimo woman's deerskin coat. Fig, 36, Eskimo women’s deerskin coat 
on. The beautiful ereamy-white leather, made by allowing the skin to 
ferment until hair and epidermis are seraped off together and then 
stretching the skin and exposing it to dry cold air, does not resist 
water at all, and ean only be used for soles in perteetly dry weather, 

Buekskin soles are also used to enable the wearer to walk better 
with snowshoes on, as the feet are not so liable to slip or clog with 


216 THK HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


snow as they would be if the footing were of sealskin. This latter has 
also another serious disadvantage, If itis very cold it does not permit 
the moisture trom the feet to pass out as it freezes, rendering the boot 
stif¥ and slippery on the snowshoe, while the buekskin is porous and 
readily allows the moisture to escape, 


FIG. 27, Eskimo women’s deerskin coat ek) Fig, 88.—Eskimo woman's deerskin coat (side). 


The tongue and heel band are generally made of tanned sealskin, 
contrasting colors being often used. The legs are of sealskin, with the 
hair on, or of reindeer skin. 

The figures represent a pair of sealskin boots with buckskin feet 
(Fig. 41) and a pair of half boots with white sealskin soles, black seal 


TURNER.) WOMEN’S GARMENTS. 217 


skin vongue and heelstrap, and buckskin tops (Fig. 42). The tanned 
and smoked reindeer skin for these tops was purchased from the Nas- 
copie Indians, 

A peculiar style of shoe (Fig. 43), of which L collected four pairs, is 
used by the so-called “Northerners,” who derive most of their subsist: 
ence from the sea in winter, and who constantly have to travel on the 
ice, which is often very slippery. To prevent slipping, narrow strips of 


vn Pi 


Fig. 30.—Eskimo woman's deerskin coat. Fic. 40, Backside of same. 
sealskin are sewed upon a piece of leather, which makes an undersole 
for the shoe, in the manner shown in tie figure. 

One end of the strip is first sewed to the subsole and the strip pushed 
up into a loop and stitched again, and so on till a piece is made big 
enough to cover the sole of the shoe, to which it is sewed. These ice 
shoes are worn over the ordinary waterproof boots. 

As I have already said, these boots are all made by the women, The 
‘ole is cut out by eye and is broadly elliptical in shape, somewhat 
yp Mnted at the toe and heel. The leg is formed of a single piece, so that 


218 THE HUDSON KAY ESKIMO, 


there is but one seam; the tongue or piece to cover the instep may 
or may not be a separate piece, If it is, the leg seam comes in front; if 
it forms one piece with the leg piece, the seam is behind, When the 
leg is sewed up and the tongue properly inserted the sole is sewed on, 
It is tacked at the heel, toe, and once on opposite sides of the foot, to 
the upper. The sewing of the sole to the upper is generally begun at 
the side of the seam and continued around. Perpendicular creases 
atthe heel, and more numerously around the toes, take up the slack of 
the sole and are carefully worked in. The making of this part of the 
shoe is most difficult, for unless it is well sewed it is liable to admit 
water, The creases or “ gathers” are stitched through -and -hrough 
with a stout thread, which holds them in place while the operation 
proceeds, and which besides has a tendency to prevent the gathers 
trom breaking down, The heel, which comes well up the back of the 
boot, is stiffened by means of several threads sewed perpendicularly, 
and as they are drawn shorter than the skin, they prevent the heel from 
falling and thus getting “run down.” 

The seams of the boots, which are turned inside out duriag the opera- 
tion, are so arranged on the edges that one will overlap and be tacked 
with close stitches over the rest of the seam, This is done not Gnly tor 
comfort when the boot becomes dry and hard while being worn, but also 
to take the strain from the stitches which hold the edges together. The 
value of a pair of boots depends much on the care bestowed in tanning 
and in sewing. 

The hands are protected by mit- 
tens of different materials. Fur or 
hair mittens are worn only in dry 
weather, as the hair would retain too 
much moisture, 


are divided into two classes: the 
noble and the inferior beasts. The 
skins of the former are used, though 
not exclusively, by the men, while 
the latter may be worn only by the 
women, Noman would debase him. 
self by wearing a particle of the fur 
j of the hare or of the white fox; the 
cave Wen tia setae skins of these timid creatures are 
reserved for the women alone, Either 
sex may wear the skins of all other mammals, except at certain times, 
under restrictions imposed by superstition. 

The women wear mittens of hare or fox skin, with palms of sealskin 
or Indian-tanned bird’s skin, Reindeer skin with the hair on is also used 
for mittens. The heavy skin from the body is selected for the sake of 
warmth, Wien these mittens are to be used when driving dogs the 
palm is made of sealskin, to enable the wearer to get a firm grasp on 


TURNE 


the 


Among the Innuit the mammals 


ditfe 
speck 
tens 
bear 


TURNER. ] WOMEN’S GARMENTS. 19 


the whip handle. The skin of the deer’s forelegs, which has hair ofa 
different character from that on the body, also makes excellent mittens, 
specially suited for handling snow in building the snow huts. Mit- 
tens are sometimes fringed round the wrist with a strip of white 
bearskin to keep out the wind, 


Fra, 42. Bakices shoes 


All mittens have such short thumbs that they are very inconvenient 
fora white man, who habitu- 
ally holds his thumb spread 
away from the palin, whereas 
the Innuit usually keep the 
thumb apposed to the palm. 
The wrists of the mitten also 
are so short that considerable 
of the wrist is often exposed. 
The sleeves of the jacket are 
generally fringed with wolf or 
dog skin to protect this ex- 
posed portion of the wrist. 

Similar mittens of black 
sealskin are also worn by the 
men during damp weather, or 
when handling objects which 
would easily soil a pair of 
furred mittens. I have never 
seen a woman wear this kind 
of covering for the hand, It appears to be exelusively worn by the men. 

The men who engage in the late fall seal hunting protect their hands 
with waterproof gauntlets, whieh reach well up over the forearm. 
These keep the hands from being wet by the spray and by the drip 


Fia, 43. Tee-shoes, Hudson strait Eskimo, 


220) THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


from the paddle, Fig, 44, No, 90074, represents one of these long 
mittens, made of black tanned 
sealskin, and edged with a strip 
of hairy sealskin over an inch 
wide, The back or upper por- 
tion of the mitten is made of 
au single piece of black skin, the 
edge of which is) crimped and 
turned under to protect the tin- 
gers, The palm is a separate 
piece, joined tothe back piece, and 
on it is a projecting part to form 
theinner halfofthe thumb, The 
outer half of the thumb and the 
under side of the forearm are 
made of a single piece, stitched 
tothe palm portion and that which 
covers the back of the hand and 
arm, so that, including the edging 
of hairy skin, there are only four 
pieces of skin entering into the 
make of a pair of these mittens, 
They are worn only by the men, 
and only when they are engaged 
in work where the hands would be immersed in water during cold 
weather, As the skin from which they are made is the same as that 
used for water-tight boots, it is obvious that no moisture can touch 
the skin of the hand. 

For protection from rain and wet they wear over their other clothes 
a waterproof hooded frock (Fig. 45) made of seal entrails, preferably 
the intestines of the bearded seal (Krignathus barbatus). The intes- 
tines of animals killed in October are considered the best for this pur- 
pose. They then are not so fat and require less dressing to clean them, 
The contents are removed and they are filled with water and thor- 
oughly washed out, The fat and other fleshy matter adhering are re- 
moved by means of a knife used as a seraper, This being done, the in- 
testine is inflated with air and strung along the tops of the rocks to dry, 
When dry it is carefully tlattened and rolled into tight bundles, like a 
spool of ribbon, and laid away until wanted. 

When required for use it is split longitudinally, and when spread 
open is of variable width from 3 to 5 inches, depending on the size of 
the animal. The edges of the strips are examined and any uneven por- 
tions are cut off, making the strip of uniform width. There are three 
separate pieces ina garment—the body and hood as one and the sleeves 
as two, Sometimes the sleeves are made first and sometimes the body 
is sewed first, and of this latter portion the hood is first formed, Strips 


Fig. 44, Long waterproof sealskin mitten, 


TULMNY 


are 
outs 
of a 
larl 
fron 
or i 
Core 
ter 
till 
wit} 


runnr’s.] CLOTHING, 221 


are sewed edge to edge with the exterior of the intestine to form the 


outside of the garment, The edge is turned down, so as to leave a width 
of a third of an inch, and turned to the right; the other strip is simi: 
larly folded, but turned to the left and laid on the other strip, Sinew 
from the back of a reindeer or from a seal is made into threads a yard 
or more in length and of the thickness of medium-sized wrapping 
cord. The needle ix usually of a number 3 or 4 in size or of less diame- 
ter than the thread in order that the thread shall the more effectually 
fill up the hole made by the needle, The two strips are then sewed 
with stitches about nine to the inch, through and through, in & man- 


: Be: 


: - 
+ 


eg ae 


’ 


: P 
Ree eat eed 2 to 


perth; 


y? 


- 


Fic. 45, Waterproof gutfrock. 


ner, L believe, termed: running stitches. When a sutlicient length is 


obtained a third strip is added, and so on until the required number of 
perpendicular strips form a sufficient width to surround the body, The 
outer edges are then joined and the body of the garment is complete. 
Portions are cut out and the hood assumes the desired 
bling a nighteap attached to the body of anightgown. T 
sewed in a similar manner and aftixed to the body of the garment. The 
ums run perpendicularly and not around the body in a spiral manner 
arments made by the natives of Alaska for similar purposes, 
e garmeut are 


shape, resem 
he sleeves are 


Sei 
as ing 
The edge of the hood, the wrists, and the bottom of th 


222 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


strengthened by means of thin strips of sealskin sewed on the outside 
of those parts where they are most liable to be torn, The garment is 
worn during wet weather or while in the kaiak traveling ona rough sea, 
The bottom of the garment is tied around the hoop of the kaiak in 
which the wearer sits and thus effectually sheds the water from the 
body, except the face, and keeps it from entering the kaiak. 

Sometimes a drawstring closes the hood tightly around the face and 
prevents the spray from entering. The string is usually tied at the top 
of the hood, in which case it is rather difficult to untie. 

When not in use the material must be well oiled and rolled up or it 
will become so stiff that it can not be worn until it has been relaxed by 
dipping in water, The sinew with which it is sewed swells when wet 
and tightens the seams. 

There is great difference in the length of the garments worn by the 
eastern and the western Eskimo as well as in the manner of arranging 
the strips of which they are made. The one worn by the people of 
Hudson strait: scarcely reaches to the hips of the wearer and is long 
enough only to tie around the hoop of the kaiak, The ones worn by 
the Eskimo of Northern sound, Alaska, falls to the knees, and those 
made by the Aleuts are so long that they interfere with the feet in walk- 
ing. The material prepared by the eastern natives is not so good, as 
it is coarser and stiffer than that of the sea lion (Humatopias stelleri), 
used by the natives of Alaska, 


The weight of one of these garments when dry scarcely exceeds 6 or 
7 ounces, 

To protect the eyes from the glare of the snow, which is especially 
trying when the sun is still low in early spring, snow goggles are 
worn made to admit the light only through a narrow slit. (igs, 46, 


Fig, 46. Suow goggles—front, 


and 47.) Nos, 3186, 3187, 3188, 3189, 3190, 3191, 3192, 3193, 3197, 3198, 
3199, 8200, and 3201 in the collection show such snow goggles made of 
wood. A somewhat curved piece of wood is fashioned to fit the face 
over the eyes; a notch is titted for the nose to rest in, The lower side 


TURNER. } EYE-PROTECTORS. 223 


is about half an inch thick, forming a flat surface. The front is perpen- 
dicular and blackened with soot or gunpowder mixed with oil and ap- 
plied to darken the front surface to absorb the light of the sun’s rays. 
Above this is « ledge of half an inch projecting over the narrow longi 
tudinal slit through which the wearer may look. This projection is 
sometimes not blackened on the underside, and where wood is scarce it 
is left off altogether. Within, on the side next to the eyes, it is usually 


7. Snow-gogglea—rear. 


gouged out to allow the eyelashes free movement. A piece of sealskin 
is aflixed at each end and either tied in a knot over the head to hold 
the wood in position, or else a wider strip of skin is slit and one portion F 
worn on the top of the head while the other fits the back of the head 

to prevent the goggles trom falling off when the wearer stoops down. 


DWELLINGS, 


The winter dwellings of the Eskimo of Hudson strait consist of the 
usual form of snow house. In this connection I may as well state that 
the popular impression that the snow house described by Arctic travel 
ers is the only thing to be called an ighi is quite erroneous, The word 
“iglw” is as fully generic in the Eskimo language as the word house” 
is in the English language. The correct term, as applied by the Eskimo, 
to the snow house used as a dwelling is “ig 1 ge ak” (Fig. 48.) 

The first requisite for a snow house is snow, It must be of sutlicient 
depth and possess certain well-detined qualities. The snow may fall, 
but until it has acquired sufficient depth for the siz. of blocks required 
and firmness enough for strength to withstand the superposed weight of 
the structure it is useless, An instrument termed snowknife (piinik), 
shaped like a short sword, is used for the purpose of cutting the blocks, 
The Eskimo seeks a place where the insertion of the knife into the bed 
of snow will prove that the snow is in the proper condition, He must 


224 ‘THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


then cut out a block of a size convenient to be lifted. This is usually 
rejected as it may be irregular or broken. Additional blocks, in size 
from 8 to 10 inches thick, 2 feet wide, and slightly more in length are 
cut by a motion much resembling the act of sawing, cutting the depth 
of the blade, The knife then cuts the bottom off squarely and the 
block is lifted out, the builder standing where the frst blocks were cut 
from. The blocks are arranged on the bank of snow around the pit in 
which the man stands. The first block usually is somewhat triangular 


Fiu. 48. Deserted Eskimo snow houses, near Fort Chimo. 


in shape for a purpose hereafter mentioned. The second block is cut 
out and placed near the first, the end clipped with the knife to allow 
the first joint to be close together, A third block is eut and placed by 
the end of the second, [t will now be seen that the line of blocks is not 
straight, but curved concavely within, Additional blocks are cut and 
placed end to end with each ocaer until the first one laid is reached. 
Here a longer block is cut to lay upon the inclined side of the triangu 
lar-shaped block first used and so placed as to “break” the joints, and 
thus render the structure more stable, Additional blocks are placed 
on the first row, and as the operation proceeds it will be seen that the 
blocks lie in a spiral form, gradually drawing in as the structure rises, 
forming a dome-shaped wall of snow. The key block at the top is 
carefully cut to fit the aperture and inserted trom the outside by the 
assistance of another person, All the joints are carefully stopped up 
with spawls of snow or with snow crushed between the hands and 
forced within the crevices, 

The floor of the snow house is the bed of snow from which the build- 


TURNER. | DWELLINGS. 225 


ing material was taken, The door is cut by taking blocks of snow 
from under the bottom row of the foundation blocks. A trench is 
made, and along the side of it the blocks are placed. An arched cov- 
ering of the material forms a sheltered passageway to the door. 

When the snow house is to be occupied for a considerable time the 
doorway may have walls of snow blocks piled as high as the shoulders, 
with the top left open. This shields the entrance from wind and drift- 
ing snow. Various forms of entrance are constructed, often very tor- 
tuous; and when made a refuge by the numerous dogs they are not 
pleasant: paths along which to creep on hands and knees, for a panic 
may seize some cowardly canine and all the dogs struggle to get sud- 
denly out into the open air. Vicious animals often wait until a white 
man gets about half way through the entry and then make a sudden 
assault on him, 

The interior of the house is arranged according to the number of 
persons inhabiting it. 

A raised bed, on which to sit during the day and sleep during the 
night, is formed either by leaving a part of the snow-bank or else by 
bringing in blocks and arranging them as a solid mass. On this are 
spread bows of spruce, or dry grass, if obtainable, otherwise fine twigs 
of willow or alder, and over these heavy reindeer or bear skins are 
thrown. On these bed-skins are laid other softer skins of reindeer, 
with which to cover the person on retiring to sleep. A windos, is 
sometimes set in the side of the structure toward the sun, This is 
simply a piece of thick, clear ice, from a lake, set in the wall of the 
dome. It admits light, although itis generally light enough during 
the day within the snow-house unless the walls be built) particularly 
thick, but great thiekness in certain situations becomes necessary lest 
the winds and drifting snow wear away the sides of the structure, 
‘ausing it to admit the cold or tumble down, Around the outside of 
the hut is sometimes built a protecting wall of snow blocks, two or 
three feet high, to prevent the drifting snow from wearing away the 
side of the dwelling. A storm of a single night’s duration is often 
suflicient to destroy a house. 

The interior walls, in severe weather, become coated with frost films 
from the breath, ete,, condensing and crystallizing on the inside of the 
dome and often) presenting by the lamplight a brilliant show of 
myriads of retleeting surfaces scintillating with greater luster than 
skillfully set gems, 

If the roof is not carefully shaped it is liable to eave in from. the 
heat within softening the snow, especially in moderate weather, and 
then the entire structure falls, 

Where the owner of the house has considerable possessions which 
must be protected from the dogs and the weather, a similar structure 
is prepared alongside of the dwelling and often connected with it by 

11 ETH 15 


226 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


means of a communicating passage way. An exterior opening may be 
rneaude and closed with a block of snow. The larger articles, such as 
bags of oil and bundles of skins, are put inside before the walls are up, 
if intended to be stored for some time. 

As | have slept in these snow-houses I can assert that, while very 
uncomfortable, they afford a protection which can not be dispensed 
with, When the doorway is open they soon become very cold, and 
when closed upon several persons the heat becomes intolerable. Odors 
from the food remain long after the remnants are disposed of, and 
where one has been occupied for a long period the accumulation of 
refuse becomes so great that a new structure is indispensable in order 
to get rid of it. All the work of the different: members of the family 
is performed within the walls. The skins of animals are dressed and 
tanned there. The offal of game and the hair from = dressed skins 
mingle in one mass, which soon putrefies and creates such a stench 
that only an Eskimo with most obtuse sense of smell could inhabit the 
place, 

When spring comes the huts begin to melt and in the course of a 
few warm days fall down. [f the weather is too inclement to permit 
askin tent to be oceupied, the first hole in the wall may be patched 
with a deerskin but this will afford very limited protection from the 
cold of nights, vor, however warm the days, the nights will, until late 
in May, be so cold that only the older individuals withstand the 
cold. 

When the strueture falls, melted by sun or rain, the miserable 
eccupants must erect: temporary shelter of deerskin or cloth on the 
bare rocky ridges. Those too poor to own a skin tent have often but 
a blanket of deerskin, stretched over three or four poles, set to shelter 
them from the chilly northerly winds usually prevailing at that season. 

Here they must sojourn until the ice breaks from the shores of the 
coves and bays, enabling the hunters to procure seals from the sea. 
Along the shores one may often find camping sites of these poor wan- 
derers searching thronzh the day for food and at night camping under 
the lee of a wall of rock with litth other covering than that worn dur- 
ing the'day and this often soaked with spray or rain. 

Improvidence and indolence result in the most cruel privations 
toward the end of winter. Many who are too weak and emaciated 
from lack of food to pursue the chase to gain a living starve before 
reaching the sea and are left to perish. 

When the season is more advanced, and the weather warm enough, 
those who are industrious and provident cnough to be the possessors 
of sealskin tents, move into them for the season. 

The skin tent (Pl. xxxvii) is usually made of the skins of the largest 
square flipper seals, those too heavy for any other purpose or not nee- 
essary for other uses, 


I etek Ree ee ee 


BUREAJ OF ETHNOLOGY ELEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PL. XXXVII 


ESKIMO TENT. 


TURNER. | THE TENT. 227 


The number of skins necessary to form a tent varies with the size 
required, Generally as many as ten to fifteen are used, and such a 
tent will accommodate a good sized family. 

The hair is seldom removed from the skin, which is simply stretched 
asit comes from the animal and freed from fat and fleshy particles, 
The edges are trimmed and a suflicient number of skins are sewed to- 
gether to form a length for one side of the tent. The length of the in- 
dividual skins makes the height of the tent, A similar width is pre- 
pared for the opposite side, The two pieces meet at the rear of the 
structure and are there tied to the poles. A separate piece forms the 
door and may be thrown one side when a person enters or goes out. 
The poles of the tent are arranged as follows: Two pairs of poles are 
joined near the ends with stout thongs and erected with the lower ends 
spread to the proper width, forming the ends of the tent, on which the 
ridgepole is laid, A’ single pole is now placed near each end of the 
ridgepole, resting on the upright pairs, to prevent lateral motion. 
Two more such braces are placed on each side and spread so as to give 
a somewhat rounded end to the tent. Near the middle of the ridge- 
pole is a pair of shorter poles leaning against it to prevent the weight 
of the sides trom bending the ridgepole. It will be seen that eleven 
poles are necessary to support a long tent, as the skins are very heavy. 
The skins and poles can be transported when the umiak is able to 
carry them, 

In ease of continued rains the skins are placed so as nearly to meet 
over the ridge and additional skins cover the space left between the 
edges. When the tent is to be taken down the two widths are folded 
over, each by itself, and then rolied into a compact bundle by begin- 
hing ateach end and folding toward the center, leaving sufficient space 
between the rolls for a person to get his head and shoulders in. Two 
persons, one for each roll, now assist the carrier, who kneels, bows his 
head, and places the load on his head and shoulders. The two assist 
him to rise and the heavy load is taken to the uimniak and placed in the 
bottom for ballast. The shorter poles are first laid in on the ribs of 
the boat to keep the skins from the water should any seep throug) the 
seams. ‘The second bundle of tenting is laid on the first. 

The tent of skins is the usual shelter during the season from the first 
rain until a sufticient fall of snow occurs in the early winter from which 
to construct an ight gheak. 

The interior of the skin tent is necessarily quite roomy on eecount 
of the number of occupants. The farther end often has a stick of 
timber laid aevoss the floor, and behind this is the bedding for the owner, 
his wives, and children, A man who is able toowna tent of this ehar- 
acter is also wealthy enough to have two or more wives. Along the 
remainder of the sides within lie the other occupants, either in groups 
or singly, depending on the degree of relationship existing between 


228 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


them. Guests and others temporarily abiding with the host are as- 
signed any portion of the tent that the host may choose to select, usu- 
ally, if great honor is to be shown, the place lately oceapied by himself. 
The central portion is reserved fora fireplace for cooking and heating 
purposes, [n this structure is carried on all manner of work incidental 
to the season, The tent is taken from place to place by means of the 
umiak when the food supply of a locality is exhausted or another re 
gion promises greater abundance, 

All these summer occupations require a number of persons to success- 
fully prosecute them, hence the number dwelling in one tent is not 
oftcn detrimental, as the adults walk along the shore to drag the boat 

svlieve it from their weight. 

The owner of a tent is considered an important individual, and his 

is retained by every means. A period of illness may cause him 
Lo fose a'this belongings and then on recovery he has to start life 
anew. > eral seasons may elapse before a suflicient number of skins 
will be procured for him to make a tent, and this is immovable without 
a boat to transport it, for when a sled might be used tor that purpose 
thers is always enough snow from which to erect a shelter. 

Yuring the winter the skins are stored away on posts erected for the 
rarpose, or on piles of rocks where the various species of small animals 
will not destroy them by eating holes in the oily skin, © Mice and ermines 
are very destructive to these skins, often causing sad havoc ina short 
time. By the spring the owner may be miles away from the scene of 
the previous autumnal hunt and be unable to go after the tent, which, 
with the summer rain and decay, becomes useless, imposing the severe 
task <f collecting skins for a second tent. 

In former times these people inhabited permanent winter houses 
like those used by the Eskimo elsewhere, as is shown by the rains of 
sod and stone houses to be seen in various parts of the country, 
These appear to have had walls of stone built up to support. the roof 
timbers, with the interstices filled up with turf or earth. From the de- 
pression remaining in the inside of these ruins, the floor seems to have 
been excavated to a greater or less depth. 

The present inhabitants relate that their ancestors dwelt in’ these 
huts, but can not explain why they were deserted, or why such i 
structures are not erected at the present day. 


HOUSEHOLD ARTICLES, 


There is very little in these dwellings that can be called furniture, E 
besides the bed places already referred to. The other articles requisite 
for housekeeping consist of a lamp of soapstone, kettles to hang over 
it, a frame suspended above the lamp for drying various articles, and 
sundry wooden bowls, buckets, and cups, besides similar vessels made 
of sealskin, 


aap, pe eg 


PURNER: | HOUSEHOLD ARTICLES. 229 


The lamp (poqila), which is the only source of heat and light in the 
snow house, is, roughly speaking, a large shallow bowl of soapstone 


Fig. 49. Soapstone lamp, Koksoagmyut, 


filled with oil, which is burned by means of a wick of moss, arranged 


round one edge of the bowl. 
The material from which these lamps are made occurs in isolated 


Fig, 50, Soapste: rr, xoksoagmyut. 
bowlders on the surface of the ground at various places in the region. j 


These bowlders are often of great size. 

The general form of these lamps, which will be best understood from 
the’ figures (Figs. 49, 50, 51), is nearly always the same, the variations 
being apparently due to the lack of matezial. The cavity for holding 
the oil varies in capacity, according to the size of the lamp, from half a 
pint to nearly three quarts. It is, however, never filled to the brim, 


Fic, 51, Soapstone lamp, Koksoagmyut. 


ee en 


: for fear it should run over. The consumption of oil depends upon the 
: number of wicks lighted at once, and also on the character of the 
wick. 

The wick in general use is prepared from a kind of moss, which 
grows in large patches close to the ground, the stalks rising perpen- 


POAME NIRS: 


230 ' THE HUDSON BAY ESKIWO, 


dicularly, and the whole so matted together that it may be eut into any 
desired form. From these patches pieces are cut an inch or two wide, 
a third of an ineh thiek and two or three inches in length, and laid 


Fig. 52. Frame for drying mittens, 


away todry, When one ef these is to be used the woman squeezes 
the fibers together with her teeth, trims it, and sets it: in the oil, and 
lights it. The light trom one of these wicks is nearly equal to that of 
aninch wick fed with a good quality of kerosene. Theheatis very great, 


BiG. 53, Soapstone kettle, 


For cooking, a larger wick isused,or two of the smaller ones set side by 
side. Over the lamp is placed 2 trame tor drying wet boots, mittens, 
and such things. Fig. 52 represents one of these (No, 3048), which is 
aw semicirele or bow of wood with the ends fastened toa straight piece 
of wood. Across these strands of sineworsealskin forms a sort of net 


1URNER.| HOUSEHOLD ARTICLES, 231 


ting having large meshes, On this rests the article to be dried, Un- 
der this is a support formed of two sharp pointed pegs which are stuck 
into the snow forming the side of the hut. On the outer end of these 
is fastened, or laid across them, a piece of wood, The shape of the 
support is that ofa long staple with square corners, In some instances 
the pegs form only a wide V-shape, and the frame for supporting the 
articles laid directly on this, A bloek of wood hollowed out to receive 
the convex bottom of the lamp is sometimes used to support the latter, 

In former times cocking over these lamps was universally performed 
in kettles of soapstone, in which cooking was also done by putting 


Fic, 54. Soapstone kettle, 


heated stones into the water, These soapstone kettles are, however, 
quite superseded by utensils of civilized manufacture, [, however, sue- 
ceeded in collecting two full-sized stone kettles, and one little one, made 
for a child's toy. The figures (Figs. 53, 54) show the shape of these ves 


Fra. 55. Wooden dish, 


sels sufficiently well. The handles are made of strips of whalebone, 
The larger kettle (No. 3179) is nearly 13 inches long, and will hold nearly 
a gallon. They were made of diflerent capacities in former times, vary- 
ing from about a pint toa full gallon, 

Oblong shallow dishes (pu ghu/-tak) for holding oil or food are carved 


from larch knots, The figure (Fig. 55) represents a model of one of 


nae a as ces Mee 


232 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


these, Buekets and cups of various sizes for holding water and other 
fluids are made of tanned seal skin sewed with sinew, The sides of the 
bueket are a strip of seal skin bent into a ring, 

with a round piece of seal skin sewed on for a 

bottom, Sometimes a seal-skin bail is added, 

or a wooden handle sewed to the lips of the 

cup, making it into a dipper (Figs, 56, 57.) 

Wooden baskets are made in a similar fashion 

strip of spruce 

wood is bent near 

ly circular, The 

ends of the strip 

are fastened with 

fine iron wire. The 

bottom is a sepa 

rate piece and has 

h ; arim or edge for 

Vig, 56, Sealskin bucket, Fic, 57, Sealskin cup. the upper part to 
set on, and is held in place by means of small wooden pegs driven 
through and into the bottom, 

The capacity of these vessels is seldom more than a couple of quarts, 
and generally less, They are principally used to ladle water into the 
cooking kettles, All these vessels of native manufacture are being 
rapidly displaced by tin cups and small kettles, 


FOOD AND ITS PREPARATION 


Under certain conditions a great portion of their food is eaten raw, 
but it is invariably cooked when it conveniently can be, Frozen food 
is consumed in great quantities. [have seen them strip and devour 
the back, fat, and flesh from the body of a deer while the tibers were yet 
quivering, The entrails of many species of birds are taken from the 
body and, while yet warm, swallowed much after the manner of swallow. 
ing an oyster, The eggs which have been incubated to an advanced 
degree are as eagerly devoured as those quite fresh, 

The deer meat, killed the previous fall and frozen for three or four 
mouths, is cut into huge chunks and gnawed with as much satisfac 
tion as though it was the finest pastry. On such occasions [have seen 
the person appointed to chop up the frozen meat scatter the pieces 
among the expectant crowd with as little ceremony‘as that of throwing 
ears of corn to the hogs in apen, Fora change the frozen pieces of 
meat are sometimes warmed or thawed before the fire, 

The blood of the deer is often mixed with the halfdigested mass of 
food in the stomach of the animal, and the stomach, with its contents, 
with the addition of the blood, eaten raw or boiled, Sometimes it is 
laid aside to ferment and then frozen and eaten in this condition, 


TURNER, } FOOD AND ITS PREPARATION, 233 


Strips of fat froma seal and the blood of the animal are put into a 
kettle and heated, The oily liquid is eaten with the greatest relish. 
Seal oil is used for food in about the same manner as we use syrups, 
Years of almost daily intercourse with these people have failed to show 
the ability of any person to drink seal ov whale oil without illness 
resulting, They never drink pure oil under any circumstances, ex- 
cept as a laxative. The statement often made that these people 
drink oil as food is simply preposterous, Such statements doubtless 
arose from seeing other preparations of foo! having an abundance of 
oilupon them, Lean tlesh is often dipped into oil and then eaten, If 
partaken of without oil in as great quantities as these people require, 
a torpid condition of the liver and alimentary canal results, and they 
thus employ the pure oil to relieve themselves, 

Vegetable food is little used exceptin the vicinity of the trading sta 
tions. Those accustomed to the use of flour, bread, peas, beans, and 
rice are very fondof them, and often express regret that they will be 
deprived of them when on their hunting expeditions. 

Native plants afford little help as food. During the season when the 
various berries are ripe all the people gorge themselves. They have a 
special fondness for the akpik (Rubus chamomorts). The sun searcely 
reddens the side of these berries, locally known as “bake apple,” be- 
fore the children scour the tracts where they grow, and eat of the half: 
ripened fruit with as much relish asthe civilized boy does the fruit pur 
loined from a neighbor's orchard, Other berries contribute their share 
as food, 

When on trips the women often gather a few green herbs and put 
t-eminakettle of water and make an infusion in lieu of tea, They 
are fond of tea, coffee, and sugar. Molasses is eaten alone or with 
something dipped in it. 

The Eskimo drink often and astonishing quantities of water at a 
time, If the weather be very cold they often drink the water which 
has been heated on a tire, asserting that the hot water does not weaken 
them as mueh as cold water would do, 

When aseal has been killed and is being brought to camp, the 
hunter signifies his success froma distance, and those in camp raise a 
joyous shout. The animal is drawn ashore and skinned. The tlesh is 
devoured raw as the process goes on, or may be divided, certain  por- 
tions being given the different persons. The blood is collected, and 
when the meat is boiled it is mixed with the hot liquid and = forms a 
nutritious dish, eagerly devoured be both adults and young. The 
children revel in this dish to aw sacritice of cleanliness. 

The feast is continued until the tlesh has been devoured and the peo- 
ple gorged to their utmost capacity. Stories are told and general 
good humor prevails, The different species of fish which frequent the 
shallow waters of the bays are used as food, 


234 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 
TOBACCO AND SNUFF, 


All the adults are addicted to the use of tobaceo, both for smoking 
and chewing and in the form of snuff, although it is not everyone 
that uses tobacco in all three ways. 

The plug tobacco, used for smoking and chewing, is carried ina 
small pouch of seal skin attached to the belt, which keeps it from being 
dampened by perspiration or rain, Watehes are also carried in the 
same receptacle. Fig. 58 (No, 74485) is sueh a bag, made of hairy 
seal skin. The edges alone are trimmed with lighter colored strips of 
seal skin, A’ string holds the mouth of the bag together after it is 
rolled up. A loop at one corner enables the bearer to aftix it to his 
belt when traveling to avoid the necessity of opening the bag in which 
he usually carries stich small things. 

Leaf tobacco is preferred for the preparation of snuff, but as this is 
not always to be had plug is often used. This is shredded up and 


ea 
- aa 


tH) { 
! 4 1 


dusty 
a 
TY o Sx 
wes, a 


F1a. 58. Tobacco pouch, 


dried, and when dry enough is reduced to a powder by inelosing a 
quantity ina fold of seal skin and pounding it with a stone or stick. 

Snuff is kept ino a purse-shaped bag, closed at the mouth with a 
thong. To it is attached a little spoon made of ivory. Various forms 
of this implement are made, The general appearance is that of a eom- 
mon spoon, of which the ends and sides of the bow] are cut off. At 
the end of the handle is a slight depression for containing the snuff, 
which is held firmly against the ovifice of the nostril and inhaled by a 
sudden indrawing of the breath while the thumb of the other hand 
closes the opposite nostril, 

The old women appear more addicted to the use of snuff than any 
of the men. The effect of inhaling the strong snuffis quickly shown 
in the face, It seems to affect people more than the use of tobacco in 
any other way. 


rUPNER. | MEANS OF TRANSPORTATION, 235 


MEANS OF TRANSPORTATION, 
BY WATER, 


The principal means of conveyance by water with the Eskimo of 
Hudson strait, is the umiak, referred to by most writers as the woman’s 
boat. This appellation is not more applicable than would be the term 
family boat. The women use the boat alone only on rare occasions, and 
then in quiet water and for short distances, Men are nearly always in 
it, and under the guidance of one of these, the boat is used for long 
journeys, 

The form of the umiak, in the region under consideration, differs 
greatly from that of the Eskimo of Bering sea. (See Fig. 59, from a 
model.) 

The size of the boat is variable according to the means of the builder 
and the size of the family to be conveyed in it. The length of the keel 
is from 10 to 25 feet, Over all the length is 1 or 2 feet greater than on 
the keel. It will be thus seen that the ends are nearly perpendicular. 
It is difficult to determine et the first glance which is the bow and which 
the stern, so nearly alike ave they. They only ditter in the former be- 
ing somewhat wider at the upper edge or rail. 


Fig. 59. Eskimo umiak, 


The keel is a straight piece of wood hewed from a single stick, nearly 
4 inches square, The stem and stern posts are nearly alike, the latter 
having but little slope, and are eut from curved or crooked stems of 
trees, A tree may be toind, which, when hewed, will form the stern- 
post and keel in one length. Otherwise the fore and aft posts have 
places eut out for the insertion of the respective ends of the keel, and 
are fastened firmly by stout thongs of sealskin thrust through holes 
bored in the wood and ingeniously lashed, As the bottom of the 
umiak is flat the sides of the bottom are formed of square rails of sutti- 
cient length and given the desired spread, They are held at the ends 
by being joined to the keel. Crosspieces notehed at the ends separate 
the bottom rails and are steadied in position by being notched so as 
to sit on the square keel, On the ends of the crosspieces is laid a see- 
ond rail which prevents them from rising and serves to strengthen the 
ends of the ribs, which are set alternately with the crosspieces of the 


236 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


keel. The ribs are attached to the lower or bottom rail by means of 
sealskin lashing, Along the upper ends of the ribs is placed a longer 
rail of smaller diameter and usually shaved round. This rail is usually 
set half its diameter into rounded notches of the upper ends of the ribs 
and fastened by thongs. Within and below the top rail is a shorter rail, 
generally smaller than the upper, tied by thongs to the ribs and posts 
tore and aft. A wide board projecting several inches on each side of 
the stern serves as a seat for the steersman. The ends of the top rails 
are laid over this board and attached to it. A similar board is placed 
at the forward end or bow, but is, of course, longer as that end is the 
wider of the two. 

Three to five thwarts, serving as seats for the oceupants, are placed 
at proper intervals, having theiv ends resting on the inside top rail. 
One of these thwarts also serves to steady the mast, which is stepped 
into the keel and lashed to the thwart, 

On the side of the boat and resting on the top rail are pieces of wood 
firmly lashed. A notch, or rowlock, is cut into them to serve as rests 
for the heavy oars, The oars are held into the noteh by means of loops 
of stout thong, the ends of the loops passing each other, one from for- 
ward and the other from aft, and through both of the loop ends the in- 
ner end of the oar is thrust. The loops serve to hold the oar when not 
in use, otherwise it would float away; yet the position of them allows 
the oars to lie alongside in the water, The oars are heavy and as much as 
10 feet long for a large uniak. The women generally run the boat and 
are assisted by the younger men of the party who may not be walking 
along the shore. Two or more females sit side by side and if they be 
insutticient a third person faces them and assists in the labor. It is a 
favorite place for a young man with his sweetheart. The steersman 
sits on the after board and attends to the helm and sail when the latter 
isinuse, The sail is a nearly square sheet of cloth spread by a yard 
across the top. The lower corners have each a rope which the helms- 
man holds, A fair wind only can be used to advantage as the oomiak, 
trom its flat bottom, is unable to go to windward. With a breeze nearly 
att they ean be made to sail at a good speed, 

The covering of the umiak is made of skins of the largest seals, 
The skins are freed from hair and all adhering flesh and fat, and 
stretched to their utmost tension, 

They are then cut into the proper shape and sewed together. The 
edge of one skin overlaps that of the other and the lap is then tacked 
over the shorter edge and attached to the other skin so as to form two 
seams at each junction. 

Those portions which are to cover the bottom are sewed with special 
care, as the seams are liable to be strained in shoving the boat over the 
oars when it is taken from the water at each camp. When skins are 
sewed side to side in sutlicient number to fit the length of the frame 


TURNER.] MEANS OF T.:ANSPORTATION. 237 


they are lifted around it and temporarily placed in position. The 
superfluous portions are cut out or additional pieces put in until it 
fits properly on the frame. Holes, 3 or 4 inches apart, are cut in the 
edges of the skin and stout thongs are passed through these and over 
the top rail to the inner rail, All the strength of the individual is now 
applied to draw the skin over the top rail, Being wet it readily stretches, 
and when the entire covering is drawn sufficiently tight the lashing 
around the rail is permanently fastened, The boat is then turned keel 
up to dry, If the skin has been properly cut and stretched it sounds 
like a drum when struck. 

When in use the greatest cave must be exercised to prevent contact 
with rocks, but in shallow water it frequently happens that a hole is 
cut in the skin of the boat, when the rent must be patched with a piece 
of skin. During the wiater months the umiak is placed on steging of 
posts to protect it from the ravages of mice and other animals, 

Journeys of considerable length are undertaken in’ these boats. A 
large family, or two or more families, may remove to a distance to try 
their fortunes. They always stop at night and during bad weather, 
an che journey is accomplished by easy stages. All the portable 
possessions of the family are taken in these boats, which are often 
loaded to such a degree that the older people have to walk along the 
shores and only go into the umiak to relieve some one who desires to 
walk. Where the beach is good a tracking line is attached to the bow 
and those on shore drag the boat along. The dogs which accompany 
the party are sometimes harnessed and made to pull. The tracking 
line is called into requisition whenever a trip is made up a river to the 
hunting grounds for reindeer, 

The kaiak or skin eanoe used by the Eskimo of Hudson strait oe- 
longs to the Greenland type. [tis quite diiierent from that used by 
the natives of Alaska. These boats vary from 18 to 26 feet in length; 
the greatest widih, one-third of the distance att the hole where the 
rower sits, being one-seventh to one-ninth of the entire length of the 
kaiak. The ends are sharp, the prow much more acute than the 
stern, The bottom is quite flat and the frame for the keel and sides 
at the bottom is arranged similarly to that of the umiak. ‘The prow 
is simply an extension of the keel and slopes above the water toa 
height nearly double that of the stern, The slope of the stern is 
gradual and short. The side timbers at the bottom have the upper 
surface gouged so as to allow the lower ends of the nearly perpendicu- 
lar ribs to rest in the groove, The ribs extend across the bottom, rest- 
ing on the side timber and keel. Their upper ends are inserted in the 
upper rail, which extends the entire length of the kaiak, The upper 
rails are held apart by crosspieces of different lengths, aecording to 
position, On the top of these upper crosspieces 1s laid w piece which 
extends to the nose of the kaiak. A. similar, but shorter one, is laid 


238 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


from the hole where the rower sits to the stern of the kaiak. The hole 
for his body is placed between a pairof crossbars where the equilibrium 
will be best maintained. The hoop of wood which outlines the hole is 
yaviable in shape, but resembles half of a short ellipse, the posterior of 
which is slightly curved to fit the back of the rower, dust forward of 
the seat the upper surface of the canoe is somewhat elevated by the 
curvature of the crossbars, and it thus enables the rower to have 
greater freedom for his limbs than he otherwise would, This partieu- 
lary part, the elevation just forward of him, alone resembles any portion 
of the kaiaks used by the Alaskan Eskimo, and of these, only the sub- 
tribes in the vieinity of Bering strait [and thence to Point Barrow.—J, 
M.| have that part of the Kaiak so fashioned, With that exception the 
top of the Tudson strait kaiak is tlat on the top. dust forward of the 
hatch, two or three stout thongs are sewed to the outer edge of each 
side of the boat and extend across the top. A similar thong is placed 
behind. Under these thongs are placed the paddle, also the spears, 
and other hunting gear, Small game is sometimes tied to these, 

The outtit, consisting of spears and their appurtenances, properly be- 
longs with the kaiak, Of these implements, there are different kinds, 
depending on the game and the season of the year, As the kaiak is 
used only during the seasons of open water it is laid aside during the 
winter. 

TI remember an instance occurring opposite Port Chimo., A kaiak 
had been lett until the ice in the river was firm enough to enable the 
vessel to be brought over on it to the station, One day a woman de- 
elared that she could see a wolf tearing the skin from the frame. It 
was scarcely credited, but in the course of tialfan hour the wolf started 
across towards the post. [ft was met and showed some disposition to 
attack, but was shot. T watched to see where the men went to look at 
the kaiak, and when they reached the place L was astounded that the 
woman could discern even the kaiak at suelo a distanee, 

The spear used for white whales and large seals consists of a wooden 
shaft of Gor sS feet we ength, having a projection on the side, made of 
ivory and shamed Uke the finof a tish. This finsshaped piece rests 
against the forcinzer while the remainder of the hand grasps. the 
shaft. The lower end of the shaft terminates ina piece of bone or ivory 
of L tolg inches in diameter, (Fig. 67.) A socket is made in the end of 
the bone portion, and the wooden shaft is nicely fitted into it and fas- 
tened either by thongs or rivets. At the fartherend of the bone head is 
a thimble-shaped hole gouged out, and into this a short piece of straight 
bone or ivory is fitted, having the ends so shaped that they will work 
smoothly into the hole at the end of the bone head of the spear. The 
farther end of this bone shaft is so shaped that it will work into the 


bone or ivory portion of the piece into which the spear point is fastened. 
The point is shown in the accompanying figure (Fig. 68) and is not 


TURNER.) THE KAIAK. 239 


much varied in general shape. There are two joints between the spear 
point and the bone shaft head. This enables the spear-point to  be- 
come easily detached when the game is pierced. If this were not. so, 
the bone or ivory would soon break with the violent motions of the 
animal, and the implement would be rendered useless until repaired. 
Thongs connect the various parts together, also connecting them with 
the main shaft of the spear. A long line, usually left lying in’ a coil 
just in front of the hunter, gives ample scope for play until the animal 
is exhausted, If the sea is rough or the hunter unable to cope with 
the quarry, the float, to be described below, is thrown over and the 
seal or whale allowed to take its course, the hunter following and en- 
deavoring to harass the animal as much as possible, giving it a stab 
with the hand spear whenever oecasion offers, 

In addition to the whale wr seal smear, the hand spear, float, and 
paddle, the kaiaker may have a woedlen shat, on the end of which are 
three prongs of barbed iron. #8eh prong 8 te 10 inches Jong, and set in 
the form of a divergent trideee. With ‘hisampilement, small seals and 
the white-coated young are killed. Birds. too, are sometimes speared 
with this trident. 

The hand board, orimplement with which «ertaim spears are hurled, 
is a piece of wood of such shege the desertion will give but little 
idea of its form. It dsabout 14 ieetveetiowre, lat, and eas a groove on on 
side into which the rear end of thee spew shalt pests and is supported 
by the three fingers of the hand wile the: iw wer tits inte a hob 
cut through the board, of the shape i aveenmmodete that digit. The tiy 
of the finger rests against the shett 
are ewt along the side of the howd te enable 
posities to give a firm grasp on thie me oF ot the boar 
thumb turns over so o4 to lie dinpeetihy «at uly it 
the other lingers e the spear the wey siea { motions 
the arm is drawn back and raised wm yernpendicntlarhy W 
reaches that position the metion sampeetied anf the lingers ice 
implement hel) ne t he vreoeve. ‘Tave imam oareer 1 Ow 
and the spear reeevered if the objeet? li» ser beer 
aim was good the spear remains atteehed te oe struggling 
find the hand ‘oard is quickly placed ander © 
across the topot the kaiak., The pad = he 
ready for instant use. 

The paddle is quite heaws and of ibvte tery beans tree | nar 
row blades, which are altermetely dipped tite he . 1 @ee of 
the paddle requires some praetice belore one becomes a ed fe it. 
When in use the paddle rests on the edge of the oo ie the 
rim of the hatch, and moves alon it in the motion 

As the paddle dips into the ver the dripping ottte es the 
clothing to become wet. Te obviate this, these people tw a we of 


240 HE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


plaited rope or skin to slip nearly to the beginning of the blade. This 
eauses the dripping to fall outside of the kaiak; and in cold weather is 
very necessary, unless heavy mittens of tanned sealskin be \yorn, 

An implement used for hooking into the body of a sunken sea’ or 
whale is made in the following manner; A > pieceof wood is prepared 
about 8 feet long and three-fourths of an inch thick, having a width of 
anineh and a half. The lower end of this hasa strong hook made of 
stout iron setintoit. Along the inner edge of the wooden shaft two 
or three notches are cut. The end near the person has a V-shaped 
notch cut into it. This is used tor all the purposes of « boat hook, and 
also to retrieve a sunken animal, A weight is attached to near the 
hook end to keep the shaft perpendicular in the water. A line of sufli- 
cientlength is attached to it. The hunter has marked the locality, and 
with the hook “feels” the bottom tor the game. When found the hook 
is jerked into the skin and the object brought to the surface, The 
statfis very necessary while the kalak is being moved through nar- 
row channels among the ice fields, [t is, in fact, available in many in- 
stances where the paddle would, from its length, be useless, The kaiak 
outfit would be incomplete without the hook. 

A young man starts out in life witha gun and ammunition with 
which to proctwe game, Tf he has the energy to become a successful 
hunter he will soon be able to make a kaiak, and thus procure the 
marine mammals whose skins will afford a covering for an umiak and 
in the course of time additional skins for a tent, These possessions 
usually come in the order laid down, and when they are all procured he 
is generaliy able to have others under his direction assist in transport- 
ing them from place to place; and thus he becomes the head of a gens 
or family, including bis brothers and. sisters with their husbands, 
wives, and children. These usually nove in a body wherever the head 
may dictate, and all their possessions accompany them on the journey. 
Brethers often live together and own the tent and umiak, the re 
mainder of the household affairs being considered as individual prop- 
erty and not to be used by all without permission, 

Some of the men are too improvident to prepare these skins when 
they have the opportunity, and thus they are unable to own a kaiak, 
which prevents them from providing themselves with the umiak and 
tent. These persons must live wits others or dwell by themselves and 


pass a miserable existence, scarcely noticed by their fellows even dur- 


ing a season of abundance. 

The collection contains one full-sized katak, with all its fittings, and 
their models, including a toy kaiak cut froma walrus tusk, The model 
is just 9 inches long and quite perfect in-form, The double-bladed 
paddle accompanying is made from the same material, and is six inches 
long, 


ON LAND 


The universal means of transportation on land is the sled, drawn by 


TURNER. | TRAVELING ON LAND. 241 


dogs. The munber of dogs used to draw a sled varies according to 
the distance to be traveled, the character of the country, the condition 
of the animals, and the weight of the load to be drawn, From one to 
twenty dogs may be used. The common team for general purposes is 
seven or nine animals, 

The method of constructing sleds differs slightly in different parts of 
the region, and then only where the material may be difficult to obtain 
or a heavy sled may not be needed, A tree of a suitable size is 
selected, generally larch, because of its greater strength. although 
somewhat heavier than the spruce, 

It is necessary, for greater strength, that each runner be of a single 
piece of timber, The length of the runner is from 12 to lo feet; the 
height varies from 10 to 12 inches. The piece mus: be as nearly free 
from knots and crossgrain as possible, for these defects render the 
wood very brittle during cold weather, The runners are roughly hewn 
at the place where originally cut, and, when needed, they are brought 
to the temporary camping place of the Eskimo, aud there dressed with 
plane and saw to the required form, The bottom of the runner is 
usnally 2s to 3 inches thiek, gradually becoming thinner by one-half an 
inch to an inch toward the top. This enables the sled to make a wider 
track at the bottom and encounter less friction of the runner sides 
against the snow crust. The curve at the forward end ts long and 
very gradual, There may be as mueh as 3 feet of the curved part, 
whieh rises above the level of the lower edge of the runner, This 
enables the sled to creep easily over any obstruction, The runners are 
now placed parallel, separated by a distance of 14 to 16 inches, and on 
these are fastened crossbars 3 inches wide, of sufficient length to 
allow about an inch to project over the outer edge of each runner, 
Near the ends of these slats is cut a notch on each edge. Sometimes 
a hole is also bored through the slat between the notches. These are 
for the purpose of fastening the slats to the runners. A suflicient 
number having been prepared, and placed Lor 2 inches apart, they are 
now laid on the flat top of the runner, Toles are bored through the 
top of the runner to correspond with the holes and notehes of the slats. 
Through these and over the slats a stout piece of heavy sealskin line 
is threaded, and soon through and over the slats and runner until it is 
firmly fastened, The line must be well soaked in water to render it 
flexible and allow it to stretch, otherwise the joints where if was tied 
would soon work loose. The line shrinks while drying, and draws as 
tight as though made of the best iron, No metal is used, for the 
reason tuat it would snap as easily as chalk during cold) weather. 
The use of the thongs in binding the slats to the runners allows free 
dom to the motion of the sled when passing over inequalities of sur- 
face, where a rigidity of the sled would soon cause it to break. The 
bottom of the runuer is shod with iron brought by the traders tor that 

Ll wriu——16 


242 THE TEE DSON BAY ESKIMO. 


purpose. ft is simply extraewide hoop-rvon and of a width to fit. Tt is 
fastened on with screws, the heads of which are countersunk, 

Another kind of shoe is put on when traveling in very cold weather. 
A swimpy track is searehed for sot of halfdecomposed vegetation 


and pure limits, as nearly free from sand and gravel as possible. Et 


HSE possess COPhun qualities or it may not have the requisite strength— 
meh, PE presume, as mortar often requires to be tempered with more 
ortess line or sand when it is too rieh or too poor, Phe Eskimo tem. 
pers his amortar with the almost impalpable soil found under the larger 
spreadiag trees of the forest, [tts the slowly decomposed vegetation 
fellen from branches and tranks. The manner of preparing itis as 
follows; A harge kettle is partially tilled with the material and heated 
to the Goiling pomt, being constantly stirred, and while yet cool 
ehough wil coarse stieks, grass blades, pebbles, ete., are carefully re 
moved as the fingers discover them in working the mortar. The sled 
is turned over with the bottom of the runner up. The mud is now 
apphed by the hands, a couple of pounds being taken and pressed on 
the rupner, whieh has previettsly been wetted.  Phis process of adding 
to the runner is continued tnitilit attains an additional depth of 3 ord 
Inches and a width of 6 te oO mehes, Tt now resembles the railot a 
stiirway., When it has been thorongldy gone over to ill up any in 
equalities the sled is set aside in order that the mud may freeze solid, 
The sled must be handled with eare, as the least jaror jolt will break 
the setting” mud, After it is frozen the owner takes a plane and 
plines it down to the proper shape and smoothness, [tis somewhat 
diflienté to deseribe the shape in words, unless it be compared to the 
upper partof the To rathot a vailroad inverted—neither rounded nor that, 
but oso fashioned as to give the best bearing surface with the least 
frietion, When the plane dias finished its work the color of the mud 
isavich chestnut brown, Phe builder now takes water in his mouth 
and spirts it ina spray along the mad, As soon as the water touches 
the rumner it ietist be spread evenly with a hand ineased ina mitten of 
remndeer skin, rubbing back and forth until the runner looks like a bar 
of black ghiss. The sled is then ready for use, Great care is necessary 
to avoid rocks or stones, as these cut the polished mud aud voughen it. 
If a sudden lureheauses a portion of the mud to drop out the piece is 
frozen on again by means of water, or if ernmbled a piece of tee is eut 
to the shape and caused to adhere oy water freezing it to the runner, 

It is notoften that one may find a sled shod with bone, as is Cle 
eustom with the Eskimo farther north, and especially farther west. 
The only instanee where PE have seen bone used was by some of the 
people trom the western extremity of Hudson strait. ‘These had onls 
a portion of the curve anda partof the runner shod with bene and 
pleces of veindeer horn, secured to the rimner by means of pegs, 

The greatest objection to the use of mud is that oa few hours of 
Warmth may cause it to foosen and render it worthless, ‘Phe polish 


PUnRNEAR. | THE DOG SLED, 243 


suffers when traveling over rough ice, and especially where sand has 
drifted from some exposed bank to the surface of the snow. This 
causes very hard pulling, and soon roughens the running surface of the 
sled, To repair such damage the native stops, at a convenient place, 
to obtain water, which is: spirted on the runner and rubbed evenly 
until it acquires a thiekness of one-eighth of an ineh. This coating of 
ice may last for the entire day of travel where the “roads” are good, 

The harness for the dogs consists of two large nooses, placed one 
above the other, These are joined by two perpendicular straps of 4 or 
S inches in length at a suflicient distance from the end to allow the 
head of the dog to pass through so that one noose will lie along the 
back and the other between the forelegs. At the rear ends of the 
nhooses is a long thong of the heaviest sealskin of variable length 
depending on the position or place the dog is to have in’ the team, 
The body harness is made of sealskin, with or without the hair on, 
stout canvas, or other material which may be convenient. Thin un- 
dressed sealskin makes the best harness, and is not so liable to chate 
the neck of the animal ‘The trace attached to each dog is‘generally of 
stout sealskin thong cut three-eighths of an inch wide, and the corners 
are carefully pared until the trace in form resembles a hoop for a small 
keg, The trace varies from 10 to 80 feet in length, and is attached to 
a longer but much stouter thong of heavier sealskin or walrus hide 
prepared in the form described tor the trace, The thong to which all 
of the traces of variable lengths are fastened is termed the * bridle.” 
The bridle has, usually, a piece of ivory, called “togele,” at the end 
farthest from the sled. A few inches back of the toggle is a short 
piece of stout thong plaited in the bridle end. This thong has a slit 
cut in the farther end. Tt is passed through slits cat in the end of each 
trace and then looped on the togele, Tt will now be understood that 
the traces all start from one place, but their different lengths give dif: 
ferent positions to the dogs of the team: so that they may move freely 
among rough pieces of ice without interfering with each other. This 
has some advantages, but if necessitates watching the traces as they 
are liable to catch around any projection above the surtace, 

The bridles are also of varying lengths, from 15 to 40 feet. The rear 
end has two stout thongs plaited into it, forming a loop for each thong. 
These are known as the © yoke.” and are looped over toggles, one on 
each inner side of the runner, 

Any load to be carried on the sled is usually placed so as not to pro- 


ject much over the side, for in deep snow, with a crust too weak to sup- 


port the weight, it would simply act as a drag and seriously impede 
travel if not entirely stop it. The load must also be distributed to the 
best advantage along the sled so as not io have too great a weight at 
either the tront or rear, although generally a heavier portion is placed 
behind to allow the sled to steer or follow, The runners are so low 


244 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


that the sled seldom upsets unless the ice is very rough, in which ease 
it often requires (wo men to attend to it, another to tree the traces from 
obstructions, and a fourth to lead or drive the dogs, A smaller num. 
ber render traveling under such conditions very tedious, 

The driver is always armed with a whip (Fig. 60), There appear 
to be as many kinds of whips as there are individuals using them, 
Each whip characterizes, in a manner, the person who makes it. A 


Ta ees, 


LAE ge 


Fig, 60) Dog whip. 


great amount of ingenuity is expended in preparing the lash, whieh is 
simply indescribable. The handle of the whip is from 9 to LL inehes in 
length and shaped somewhat like the handle of a sword without the 
guard, A stout loop of thong is atlixed to the stoek above where the 
hand grasps it. This loop is thrown over the wrist to prevent: the 
weight of the whip drawing the stock from the hand and also to retain 
the whip when it is allowed to trail behind. 

At the farther end of the stock a portion of the wood is cut out to 


TURNER. | MANAGEMENT OF DOG TEAM, 


ilow the insertion of the end of the lash which is fastened by means 
of finer thongs, The butt end of the lash is five-sixteenths of an ineh 
thick and nearly 2 inches wide, It is composed of eight heavy thongs 
plaited in a peculiar manner, depending on the number of thongs used 
and the fancy of the maker, The thongs are plaited by inserting the 
end of each thong through a succession of slits cut at the proper dis- 
tance and so matted together that it is dificult to determine the “run” 
of the thong. The size decreases from the handle by dropping out a 
strand until at 18 inches from the stock only four thongs are left, and 
these form a square plait for a foot in length. This square form is sue- 
ceeded by only two thongs which make a tlat plait of 2 feet in length, 
At the end of this a simple piece of heavy thong completes the lash, 
The length of a whip may be as much as 35 feet, weighing 3 or 4 pounds, 
Some of the natives acquire a surprising dexterity with this formidable 
weapon, often being able to snip the ear of a particular dog at a distance 
of the length of the whip. [have known them to snap the head trom 
wv ptarmigan sitting along the path of the team. Children practice 
with the whip as soon as they can manage it. 

The Eskimo dog fears nothing but the whiplash, They attack each 
other with savage ferocity, and several dogs may be engaged in ter- 
rifie battles, yet the swish of a whip or even a stick thrown hurtling 
through the air is sutticient to cause them to slink off in abject terror, 
whining piteously in fear of the expected lash. 

The weight or load put upon a sled may be as much as 1,200 pounds, 
The character of the road alone determines the weight, number of 
dogs, and rate of travel, The latter may average over a smooth sur- 
face 5S miles hourly for twelve hours continuously, excluding the few min- 
utes given the dogs to * blow” (rest), ete. TL knew an instance where 
three men with empty sled and seven dogs traveled 94 miles in eighteen 
hours. IT have gone 19 miles in three hours; and again TE have known 
only 3 or ft miles to be made in ten hours, through rough ice or deep, 
newly fallen snow. 

The disposition and condition of the dogs chietly determines the num. 
ber attached to the sled. With these animals there is the sume differ: 
ence as is to be found in horses or other beasts of dratt. Some are 
energetic and well-behaved; others as stubborn or lazy as is possible. 
Strange dogs in the team are liable to be pitched upon by all the others 
and with the long traces ensues such an entanglement of lines, dogs, 
and flying snow as is difficult to coneeive. The good qualities of the 
dyiver are manifested by his ability in keeping the dogs in order and 
showing promptness in separating them when quarreling. Fighting 
among the dogs ean always be prevented bv the driver keeping the 
dogs in proper position. 


gS 
KI, G \o 
Y9, Wy V7 Wg YX . 
yp SY Or <& 
Ws yy Ye < ee } 
~ oy <& ov 
Sf be <“¥ 
2s FEFF AL fe 
=a Ijgas 2 | | : 
< © daa =H] . g a 
ae an ee nO 
fe ell =I 8) tp 
=u sa ea oe a. 
as 
Ny 
o ‘ 
> éx as ~ 
AGS “% he as NN 
xs x» G he N a hs 
> od “OnE 


246 


THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


WEAPONS AND OTHER HUNTING IMPLEMENTS, 


These people are now provided with firearms, which have entirely 
superseded the bow and arrow. 

The bow formerly used in this region appears to have been similar 
to the one obtained from a party of Kast Main Innuit, who made their 


2 
4 
J 
<a 
tal 
Zt 


Bow. 


Fic. 61.— 


on the back. 


East Main Eskimo (side). 


FiG. 62.—TBow. 


way to Fort Chimo. This bow has aceord- 
ingly been figured and described (Pigs, 61 
and 62—90137). 

It is made of lareh wood and has a baek- 
ing of eight double strands of twisted sinew. 
This sinew is in one piece sixteen times the 
length of the bow. One end is looped and 
passed over one “nock” of the bow and car- 
ried back and forth from nock to noek eight 
times. This backing has two turns of twist 
put in from the middle to increase its elas- 
ticity, and is lashed to the middle of the bow 
with a stout thong of reindeer skin. The 
bowstring is of twisted sinew with a loop at 
each end, 

With this bow were seven arrows. Three 
of these are for shooting reindeer and wolves, 
They have an iron point set in a short tore- 
shaft of reindeer antler, and a wooden shaft 
about 16 inches long (Pig. 63). Three more 
are pointed with large nails, one of which 
has been beaten to a chisel-shaped point 
(Figs. 64 and 65), They are intended for 
large game at short range, or for small 
game, such as hares and ptarmigan, These 
six arrows are feathered with the tail feath- 
ers of the raven. The last arrow is a sim- 
ple shaft, without feathering or head, and is 
intended for small game, such as a wood 
hare crouching under a spruce tree, or the 
little ved squirrel on the top of a low tree. 

In drawing the bow, the Innuit invariably 
hold) the arrow between the middle two tin- 
gers of the right hand, and the string is 
drawn with all four fingers, and released by 
straightening them, 

The bow and arrows are carried in) bow 
case and quiver fastened together and slung 


Fig. 66 represents a model (No, 8257) of such a bow ease, 
The bow case is made of buckskin and is of suflicient length to con 


PURNER.] HUNTING IMPLEMENTS, 247 


tain the bow, excepting the extreme end, which is left projecting for 
convenience in handling. The case is tied around the bow at the 
projecting end. The quiver is attached to 
the bow case and contains two models of ar- 
rows for shooting large game. The arrows 
are tipped with leaf-shaped pieces of tin. 
They are feathered with portions of feathers 
apparently taken from the tail of a raven. 
The mouth of the quiver is also drawn up 
with astring to prevent the loss of arrows. 
I have not seen the Eskimo of Hudson strait 
use such a cover for their bows and arrows, 
but the opportunities to observe them are 
very limited, as few are used. [am led to 
conclude that only the poorer individuals of 
either locality have the bow and arrow at 
the present day. 

T have already described the large harpoon 
used for striking white whales and large seals 
from the kaiak. A short-head spear (ig 67, 
No, 90164) is used for dispatching wounded 
seals or white whales, or for killing white 
whales when they have been driven into a 
shallow arm of the sea when the tide ebbs 
and leaves them partly uncovered, Tt has a 
short wooden shatt with a ferrule of ivory, 
holding a short ivory loose shaft, kept in place 
by thongs, on which is mounted a togele head 
like that used on the big harpoon, The Tine 
is either attached to the kaiak or to a small 
float made of the intlated intestine or skin of 
aseal The togele heads for these spears are 
made of ivory, and fitted with iron blades 
(Fig. 68) TE have already reterred to the 
large sealskin float in describing the katak. 

Fie, 60 (No. 8531) is such a large sealskin 


Wie: 
SN 


= sy 


We 


nO 


float or ava tuk. The skin is removed from 
the body by skinning around the gums and 
carefully taking out all the tlesh and bones 
throngh this orifice, As the operation pro 
ceeds the skin is turned back and at the 
completion of the work is inside out, The 
flesh side, now the exterior, is carefully 
seraped to free it from all tleshy matter, Phe 
hind flippers are cut off at the ankle and the 


Uv 


skin either sewed or stouthy wrapped with) pris. 63, 64, and 65.— Arrows, East 
thong. The fore flippers are usually lett at Main Eakin 


248 TILE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


tached to the skin after the flesh has been scraped from them, The 
skin is now inflated with air and hung up to dry. Ina few hours it 
is turned with the hairy side out and again inflated 
for awhile. The mouth and all other openings in the 
skin are carefully sewed up. A large button of ivory, 
shaped much like a pulley, nearly 2 inches in diame- 
ter, is put where the mouth of the skin is and a por- 
tion of the skin carefully wrapped around it, thongs 
of sealskin tightening the moist skin in the groove of 
the mouthpiece. This piece has a hole about one-third 
of an inch in diameter bored through it. The hind 
flippers and tail have a stick of 2 or 8inches in length 
placed within the skin and are then firmly bound 
around the stick, which serves to stop upany hole and 
also to furnish a handle by which to drag or hold the 
float. The hole in the mouth-piece is plugged with a 
stopper of wood. When the float is wanted for use 
the skin is inflated, When inflated the tloat has a 
diameter about two-thirds the length. If it is to be 
attached to a tracking line the float is fastened by 
the stick, which is secured within the skin of the 
hind flippers and dragged backwards. The function 
of the float in this instance is to prevent the tracking 
line from becoming “fouled” among the rocks and 
stones of the beach along which the line runs in tow- 
ing a boat (or umiak). Ino a similar manner it is 
affixed to the harpoon line used for large marine 
mammals, suchas the white whale and the larger 
species of seals. This float not only retards the flight 
of the speared animal, but it serves to mark the spot 
where it sinks, for at certain seasons the seals: sink 
as soonas they die. A speared animal always sinks 
more quickly than one shot dead with a ball, probably 
because its struggles are more prolonged in the first 
instance and exhaustion of breath is more complete, 
The hair of the animal whose skin is intended tora 
float is sometimes scraped off before the skin is re 
moved from the body, otherwise it may be left until 
the skin is partly dry and then be shaved off. The 
* aanner of loosening the hair is similar to that used 
haat ok Wael by butchers of hogs, only that the boiling water is 
poured on and a small pateh of hair pulled off at a 
time, instead of submerging the entire animal, The hair froin the green 
skin aust be carefully pulled out or else the black scurf adhering will 
de detached and thus render the skin less nearly waterproof, 
The skins or bags used tor holding oil and fat are prepared in a sim- 


TURNER.) HUNTING, 249 


ilar manner, excepting that the hair is left on the skin and the hairy 
side left within, The oil and fat are putin the skin at the posterior end 
and it is then tied up like a float. The 

largest sealskins are used for oilbags, 

and may contain as much as 800 pounds 

of fat or oil, 

When a sack of oil is sold the bag is 
usually returned to the seller, who again 
fills it with oil or converts the skin into 
bootlegs or soles, The leather having 
become thoroughly impregnated with 
the oil makes the best for wear, often 
resisting moisture for three or four 
days of continuous wet, 

Betore leaving the subject. of weap- 
ons and their accessories, bimiay men- 
tion No, 8069, a small pouch made of 
thick sealskin, ‘Phe shape is somewhat 
like that of a leg of mutton. This is 
used for carrying gun caps. The neck 
is only large enough to permit one cap 
to fall out ata time, 

HUNTING Fic. 67.—Hand spear for killing seals from 

IT have already referred brietly to the ea Las 
various methods of taking seals, white whales, and other game, while 
deseribing the boats, spears, and other apparatus used in their pursuit. 

The most important hunt of the year, however, comes in the autumn, 
when the reindeer are migrating in large herds and crossing the rivers. 
The deer are wanted) now for their flesh for food and their skins for 
clothing. Everything necessary for the chase is taken in the umiak, 
or, perhaps, a whaleboat, to a locality convenient to where the animals 
cross over, Here the tent is pitched, and a eaimp is made, The hunt 
ers scour the neighboring land) for herds of reindeer, whieh are seen 
running about under the impulse to seek the opposite sex. As they 
arrive from different directions, those of one sex mist ¢ross the river. 
Since the temales furnish the lighter skins for clothing, and the males 
the greater amount of meat and a heavier skin for various purposes, 
deer of both sexes are equally useful. 

A band of three or four, or as many as a hundred, may be sighted 
slowly winding their way through the openings of the timbered areas 
on the opposite side of the river, The native with telescope, or binocular 
in focus, observes their movements until they pause a moment on the 
bank and then plunge quickly into the water, where they keep well 
together until the opposite shore is reached. Here, if undisturbed,, 
they will stand to allow the water to drip from their bodies, and then 
will walk slowly along to a convenient place to climb the bank and 


250 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


penetrate the strip of woods or bushes and emerge into the open coun- 
try beyond, As soon as the native sees the deer everything is put in 
readiness on the kaiak, and with 
quick strokes of the double-bladed 
paddle he is behind and below the 
now terrified animals, They rear 
and plunge in frantic confusion, 
endeavoring to escape their most 
dreaded foe. The hunter ealmly 
drives the herd through the water 
as the shepherd does his tloek on 
land. Those disposed to break 
away are rounded up and driven 
back. The greatest care must be 
exercised not to let the animals 
get below the kaiak, or they will 
swim faster with the stream than 
the hunter can paddle. As there 
are, generally, two or more kaiaks, 
itis an easy matter for the men 
to drive the animals wherever 
they desire. When the camp is 
above, the deer are driven diag- 


onally across so as to make then 
come out near the camp. Tf he 
site is below, the animals are 
wllowed to drop down to a con 
verment place. These maneuvers 
depend on the wind, as the sense 
of smell of the deer is very acute 
at this season, and the seent of the camp, if deteeted, would throw the 
animals into such terror that the greater number would escape. 


Togulehead for land spear 


Vic. 69 —Sealskin float. 


When near the plaice the hunter takes his deer spear, which isexaetly 
like the one used by the Indians, and quietly stabs the animal ina 


TURNER. ] HUNTING DEER. 251 


vital spot, endeavoring so to wound the beast that it will have only 
enough strength to enable it to attain the shallow water or shore, and 
not to wander off. Among the hundreds of times [ have had the 
opportunity to witness this, T never knew a deer wounded with the 
spear to turn back to swim in the direction from which it came, They 
appear to dread the water, and strive most frantically to regain the 
land where, if mortally wounded, they stand; the limbs gradually 
diverging to sustain their trembling body; the eyes gazing piteously 
at the foe, wio often mocks their dying struggles, or pitches a stone 
at their quivering legs to make them fall. A convulsive struggle as 
the blood fills the internal cavity, a sudden pitch, and the life is gone 
without sigh or groan. As many of the herd as can be speared are 
quickly dispatched and the entire number secured if possible. [t is 
supposed that the ones which return to the shore whence they came 
give the alarm and frighten other arrivals away from the starting 
point. The hunters strive to prevent their return, and will often allow 
two, near the camp, to escape in order to pursue the retreating animal, 

Those which have been killed and are lying in the water are dragged 
on land and skinned. The pelt is taken offas that of a beef is when 
skinned by a butcher, The ears and the skin of the head are left on. 
The body is opened and the viscera are removed. The intestines are 
freed from the fat; the stomach is cleansed of the greater portion of its 
contents, and the blood which collected within the cavity is scooped up 
with the hands and ladled into that receptacle; and both are reserved 
for food, ‘Phe heart and liver are taken to the camp, where they help 
to forma variety in the animal food of these people. Other portions of 
the flesh are also consumed. The sinew, which lies along the lumbar 
region just below the superticial museles, is exposed by a cut, and with 
the point of'a kuite or tip of the finger loosened from its adherent flesh. 
Oneend, ustually the forward end, is detached and a stout thong tied to 
it, and itis jerked from its attachment by a vigorous pull. Et requires 
awstroug person to remove this tendon trom the body of a lean animal. 
A stroke of the kuite trees the wide layer of sinew from blood and 
particles of flesh. This is now laid aside for awhile, then washed to 
fice it from the blood, which would stain it dark in color and also tend 
to diminish the strength of the fibers by rotting them. [tis now spread 
out and allowed to dry. The body is cut across the sinall of the back 
and laid aside, The head is severed trom the neck and discarded it 


there be no portion of the horns which is needed to serve some purpose, 
such as a handle fora knife or other tool Tf the head be that of a 
young deer it is often taken to the camp and put into a pot and boiled 
in the condition in whieh it comes from the field. When cooked for a 
long time it becomes very soft; the muscles of the jaw being reduced 
to aw semigehlitinous condition, whieh makes an excellent article of 
food, 


The tongue is invariably taken out entire, and is considered the 


THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


greatest delicacy, either frozen, raw or cooked, or dried and smoked. 
In thet a tongue from the reindeer is good at any time or condition. 

The hindquarters are seldom separated, but are placed within the 
thoracic cavity, and either cached near the scene of slaughter or placed 
on the kaiak and taken to a spot where others are deposited from which 
supplies may be taken when the food tor the winter is required, 

Here and there along the bank will be placed the body of a single 
deer, sometimes two or three, which have been killed too far from the 
present camp for the hunter to bring them home, These spots are 
marked or remembered by some visible surrounding, lest the deep 
snows of winter obscure the locality, and often the place can not be 
found when wanted, The cache in which the tlesh is deposited is 
simply a few stones or bowlders laid on the ground and the meat put 
upon them, A rude sort of wall is made by piling stones upon the 
meat until it is hidden from the ravages of ravens, gulls, foxes, wolves, 
and the detested wolverine, 

As soon as the hunter considers that the deer of that) particular 
locality have ceased to cross, he will repair to another station and go 
through the same process, The deer which are first slain, when the 
hunting season arrives, and the weather is still so warm that the tlies 
and decomposition ruin the meat, are reserved for supplies of dog food, 


MISCELLANEOUS IMPLEMENTS, 


Ihave already, in the earlier pages of this paper, referred to various 
tools and implements, 

In addition to these, the Koksoagmyut have comparatively few tools, 

In former ages stoneand ivory were fashioned into crude implements 
for the purposes which are now better and more quickly served by in- 
struments of iron or steel, 

These people have now been so long in more or less direct contact 
with traders who have supplied them with these necessaries that it is 
rare to find one of the knives used in former times, Certain operations, 


however, are even to this day better performed with a knife made of 


ivory. The ice from the kaiak bottom or the sides of the boat may 
best be removed by means of an ivory knife, resembling a snow knife 
but shorter, The steel knife is always kept sharp and if'so used would, 
on the unyielding, frozen skin-eovering of those vessels, quickly cut a 
hole. The Eskimo living remote from the trading stations use a snow 
knife made from the task of aw walrus or the main stem of the reindeer 
antler, 

That steel or iron is deemed an improvement on the former materiais 
from which cutting instruments were made is shown by the crude 
means now employed. Tf the person has not a knife an unused spear: 
head, having an iron point, is often employed instead for skinning ani- 
mals and dressing the skins, 

Stone heads for weapons of all kinds have been discarded. [vory 


\ 


TURNER: | MISCELLANEOUS IMPLEMENTS, 23 


spears are at times used but these only when the hunter is close to the 
prey. 
Some of the men have acquired considerable skill in tashioning iron 
into the required shape, They eagerly stand around wnyone who may 
be at work, and evince the greatest curiosity in anything 
new, 

The collection contains two of the snow knives referred 
to above, No, 3067 is a large snow knite, made from the 
lower portion of the main stem of the horn of the male rein- 
deer, [tis simply half of the split horn with the middle 
scooped out, The length is 12 inches. This form of instru- 
ment is used more especially to smooth down the inequali- 
ties of the blocks of snow after being placed in position. 
No, 3140 (Fig. 70) isa large snow knife made 
of walrus ivory, It is 13 inehes long and 
nearly 2 inches wide for the greater part of 
the blade, which terminates ino a reunded 
point. The instrument has two edges, and in 
general appearances resembles a double-edged 
Roman sword, The handle is cut to fit to the 
hand. 

Among other peculiar implements collected 
is one represented in Fig, 71 (No, 8555), whieh 
is a“ back-scrateher.” This instrument con- 
sists of a shaft made trom alimb of a larch 
tree, [tis t7 inches long and about three- 
fourths of an inch through, flattened to less 
than half an ineh and tapering toward the 
end to be heldin the hand. On the lower end 
is adish-shaped piece of reinder horn, two and 

_ & one-eighth inches long and seven-eighths of 
Pano xnite, wn inch wide, Through the center of the 
Keksoun set niece of horn an oblong hole has been cut for 
the insertion of the shatt or handle, The edges of the 
horn piece are sharp as can be made, This piece is one- 
third of an inch thick, and having the sharp edge up is 
convenient for thrusting down the back to serateh one’s 
self'in places where the hand could not reach on aecount 
of thick deerskin clothing, The Eskimo name of the in- 
strument is ku-iné-wtik, or that which removes lice, 
The steel needles obtained from the traders are kept in 
a little ivory receptacle of various shapes, two of whieh eadaeagk: 
are shown in Figs. 72 and 73. PRR RN TU ts 
This is hollow and filled with any sphagnum moss. One end is per- 
manently closed by a wooden or ivory plug, held in by little pegs. The 
plug in the other eud is easily taken out. The needle ease is usually 


254 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


piereed to receive a loop by whieh it may be hung tothe belt or the 
workbiag. 
Needles are also kept in a kind of small cushion (Fig. 74) made of 


Ivory needle case. ia. 73. Ivory needle ease, 
Koksouguiyut Koksoagmyut 


sealskin, elaborately ornamented with beads and stuffed with sphagnum 
moss. ‘The cushion is pertorated around the edge to receive the needles, 
Which would not easily go 
through the tough skin, 
Accompanying one of 
these needle cushions in 
the collection is one of 
the old-fashioned = thim 
— bles suchasare stillused, 
> although metal thimbles 
are preferred, [tis sim 
ply a strip of sealskin 
sewed into a ring large 
enough to fit the foretin 
ger, and is usually at- 
tached to the needle 
cushion by a thong with an ivory toggle on the end, to prevent the 
thimble from slipping off. 
Small articles used in sewing, such as scraps of shin, needle cases, 


Fig. 74.—Sealskin needle cushion, with thimble, Koksoagmyut 


sinew thread, thimbles, ete, are carried in sma'l bags of deerskin, which 
are often elaborately ornamented with beads of various colors, like the 
specimen in the collection, No. 304%, 


AMUSEMENTS, 


Notwithstanding the fact that these people have had their lot cast 
upon the frozen shores of the sea, they appear happy and contented 
and loath to leave the land of their birth. Although it is a constant 


TURNER. | AMUSEMENTS, 2hh 


struggle amidst the terrible storms of a region where for eight months 
in the year the soil is frozen and the few warm days of summer bring 
forth wa scanty vegetation, yet so strong is their love for these inhos:- 
pitable shores that the absent pine for a return and soon lose their hold 
on lite if they are not able to do so, 

During the intervals between the haunts and when food is still plen- 
tif, the Eskimo divert themselves with games of various kinds of their 
own. They are also quick to adopt other games which require outdoor 
exercise, 

Football calls out everybody, trom the aged and bent mother of a 
numerous fiumily to the toddling youngster scarcely able to do more than 
waddle under the burden of his heavy deerskin clothes, Wrestling 
among the men is indulged in for hours at a time, The opponents 
remove all their supertlious garments, seize each other around the 
waist and lock hands behind each other's backs. ‘The feet ave spread 
widely apart and each endeavors to draw, by the strength of the arms 
one, the back of his opponent into a curve and thus bring him off lis 
feet. Then with a lift he is quiekly thrown that on his back. The fall 
must be such that the head touches the ground. Where the contestants 
are nearly matched the struggle may continue so long that one of them 
gives up from exhaustion, The feet are never used for tripping, Sueh 
wv procedure would soon cause the witnesses to stop the strugele, 

The Eskimo and Indians often engage in comparative tests of their 
strength ino wrestling, The Eskimo prove the better men in these 
engagements, Throwing stones at a mark is a sport tor the younger 
men, some of whom acquire surprising dexterity. 

Ifa pack of playing-cards can be obtained they engage in’ games 
which they have learned from the white people and teach each other, 
Small stakes are laid on the result of the game, The women appear to 
exhibit a greater passion for gambling than the men do. They will 
wager the last article of clothing on their persons till the loser appears 
in a nude condition before spectators, Then the winner will usually 
return at least a part of the clothing, with an injunetion to play more 
and lose less. 

The young girls often play the game of taking an object and secret- 
ing it within the closed hand. Another is called upon to guess the con- 
tents. She makes inquiries as to the size, color, ete., of the object. 
From the answers she gradually guesses what the thing is. 

A favorite game, something like eup and ball, is played with the 
following implements: A- piece of ivory is shaped into the form of an 
elongate cone and has two deep notehes or steps cut from one side 
(Fig. 75), In the one next the base are bored a uumber of small holes 
and one or two holes in the upper step. The apex has a single hole, 
On the opposite side of the base two holes are made obliquely, that they 
will meet, and through them is threaded a short piece of thong. To 
the other end of the thong is attached a peg of ivory, about 4 inches 


PAG THE ILUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


long, ‘The game is that the person holding the plaything shall, by a 

dextrous swing of the ball, eatel it upon the ivory peg held in the hand, 

The person engiges to catch ita certain number of times in succession, 

and oon failure to 

do so allows the 

Opponent totry her 

skill, The skullof 

whare is often sub 

stituted for the 

ivory “ball,” and a 

few — perforations 

we made in the 

walls of the skull 

Fig, 75.—Cup and ball, Koksoagmyut to receive the peg, 

It requires a great amount of practice to catch the ball,as the string is 

so short that one must be quick to thrust the peg in betore it deseribes 
the part of a small cirele, 

The children sometimes use a stick or other sharp-pointed instrument 
to make a series of straight lines in the newly fallen snow and at the 
same time repeat certain gibberish, This was ot first very confusing 
to me, but a woman repeated the words 
and —F guessed from her deseription 
where the idea sprang from, 

These people had heard of the teach 
ings of the Labrador missionaries (Mo 
ravians), all of whom are Germans, 
and as the Eskimo of that coast use 
the German numerals in preference to 
their own, the natives of that region 
have at some time repeated the names 
of those numerals to certain of the 
Hudson strait people and they have 
taught each other, 

The names of the German mumerals 
as sounded by the Koksoagmyut are 
ws follows, The numbers are one to 
fifteen, consecutively: 

Ai; chu vaii; ta aii; pia’ lag pi 
li pi; tsék sis tsé pas; ak ta; nai na; 
tse nas di lu pik; chu vai lu puk; ta 
lak sina; pi tk’ sina,and pi lip! sina, 


I have already referred to the game F10,78.—Hootball ani driver, Kok. 


of football as played by these people. 

Fig. 76 represents the football (No. 3070) and the whip for driving 
it. The Eskimo are very fond of this game, All the people of every 
age, from the toddling infant to the aged female with bended back, love 


TURNER, | GAMES, 257 


to urge the wat uk todk, as the ball is termed,  TMhe size of the ball 
varies from 3 to 7 inches in diameter, They have not yet arrived 
wt perfection in making w spherical form for the ball, but it is often 
inoapple shape, Tt is made by taking a piece of buekskin, or 
sealskin, and cutting it into aw cireular form, then gathering the 
edges and stufling the cavity with dvy moss or feathers, A circular 
piece of skin is then inserted to tll the space which is left by the incom- 
plete gatherings. This ball is very light and is driven either by a blow 
trom the foot or else by a whip of peculiar construction, This whip 
consists of aw handle of wood 8 to 12 inches in length, To prevent it 
trom slipping out of the hand when the blow is struck, a stout thong 
of sealskin is made into the form of a long loop which is passed over 
the hand and tightens around the wrist. To the farther end of the 
Whiphandleare at- ; 

tached a mumber ns a 

of stout thongs of be cH seh ae 

heavy — sealskin, 

These thongs have 

their ends tied 

around the handle 

and thus form a 

number of loops of 

12 to 20 inches in 

length. These ave 

then tied together 

at the bottom in 

order to give them 


g reater wei g ht Pia. 77.—Dominoes, Hudson Strait Eskimo. 


when the ball is struck by them. A> lusty Eskimo will often send the 
ball over a hundred yards through the air with such force as to knock 
a person down, 

At Fort Chimo the game is plaved during the late winter afternoons 
when the temperature is 80° or 40° below zero, Tt is exciting and 
vigorous play where a large crowd joins in the game, 

Sometimes the ball is in the form of two irregular hemispheres joined 
together, making a sphere which can be rolled only in’ a certain di- 
rection, It is very awkward and produces much confusion by its 
erratic course. Nos, 3461, 8287, and 3460 are footballs of the pattern 
tirst described. 

The Innuit who come trom the western end of Hudson strait, the so- 
salled “Northerners,” have aw game which they play with sets of pieces 
of ivory cut into irregular shapes, and marked on one face with spots 
arranged in different patterns (Fig. 77). The number of pieces in a set 
varies from 60 to M48, The name of the set is A ma zu/a lat, and 
somewhat resembles our game of dominoes, 

The game is played in the following manner: Pwo or more persons, 

ll brH 17 


258 THE 


HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


according to the namber of pieces in the set, sit down and pile the 
pieces before them, One of the players mixes the pieces together in 


plain view of the others, 


1G, 78.—Eskimo doll, man 


When this is done he calls them to take the 
pieces, Kach person endeavors to obtain a 
half or third of the number if there be two 
or three players. The one who mixed up the 
pieces lays down a piece and calls his oppo- 
nent to mateh it with a piece having a simi- 
lar design, Tf this can not be done by any 
of the players the first has to mateh it and 
the game continues until one of the persons 
has exhausted all of the pieces taken by him, 
The pieces are designed in’ pairs, having 
hames such as Ka mid tik (sled), Waiak (ea 
nee), Kalé sak (navel), Ama zut (many), a 
tansik (1), Ma kok (2), Ping a sut (3), Si ta 
mit (4), and Ta li mat (5). Nach of the 
names above must be matched with a piece 
of similar kind, although the other end of the 
piece may be of a dif- 
erent design. vA Nam- 
utik may be matehed 
with an Amazut if 
the latter has not a 
line or bar cut across 
it; if it has the bar its 
must be matehed with 
an Amazut. 

This game is known 


to the people of the Ungava district, but those 
only who have learned it from the Northerners 
are able to play it. The northern Eskimo stake 
the last article they possess on the issue of the 
game, Their wives are disposed of temporarily, 
and often are totally relinquished to the vietor, 
T have heard that the wives so disposed of often 
sit down and win themselves back to their formet 
owners, 

The little girls play with dolls like civilized 
children, and build little snow huts, where they 
have all their playthings and play at keeping 
house, The collection contains cleven dolls, most 


of them elaborately and accurately dressed, as  F1c.79.—Eskimo doll, woman. 
shown by the illustrations (Figs, 78, 79, 80, 81) and large quantities of 


doll clothing, 


The only musical instrument whieh LE observed among tnese people 
‘ baal 


the 
Yin 
the 
ina 
two 
the 
ppo- 
ie 
any 
and 
SOULS 
vita. 
vine 
(ea 

ry, it 
i tit 
the 
iece 


‘the 


an, 


sof 


ple 


TURNER. | ART. 259 


was a violin of their own manutieture, made, of course, in imitation 
of those they had see used by the whites. Its form is) sufliciently 
well shown by the figure (ig, 82), and is 
made of bireh or spruce, and the two 
strings are of coarse, loosely twisted sinew, 
The bow has a strip of whalebone in place 
of horsehair, and is) resined with spruce 
gum, This fiddle is held) across the Tap 
when played. 

The old) woman ot 
Whom TL procured the 
instrument was able to 
play several airs—such 
as they sing among 
themselves, Twas sur 
prised at the facility 
with which she made 
the various notes on 
such a crude imitation 
of a violin. 


ALT. 


Art is but) slightly 
developed among these 
people. Their weapons 
and other implements 
are never adorned with 
carvings of animals 
and other natural ob- 


PG. 80.—-Eskimo dol, jeets or with conven- 


. tees | 
woman. Pig. 81. Eskimo doll woman 


tional patterns, as is 
the case inso great adegree among the Eskimo of Alaska. Phey are, 
however, not devoid) of artistic skill, as is shown by the good taste 


aa ont 
ae 
ereetereeeas 


ace / 


ia. 82.— Eskime violin, 
oiten exhibited in the trimming of their garments, and also by the dolls, 
which Thave already referred to and figured, 


260 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


The collection also contains several small ivory carvings, which 
possess considerable artistic merit. Among these, the small ob- 
jects, (Fig. 83), collected from 
the so-called Northerners, rep- 
resent various waterfowl cut from 
pieces of walrus ivory. The vari- 
ous species thus carved are loons, 
ducks, geese, sea pigeons, and 
murres, One represents a female 
cider with two young mounted 
upon her back, It is readily 
discerned, in most instances, 
what position and action of the 
bird was intended to be repre- 
sented. The last shows in the 
plainest possible manner that 
the loon is just starting to swim 
from an object which has given 
it alarm. 

These carvings are fashioned 
from the tusks of the walrus or 
the teeth of various large mam- 
mals, and are simply tests of the 
skill of the worker, who prepares 
them as toys for the children, 
Notwithstanding the assertions 
of others, who elim to have 

Fic, 83.—Birds carved in ivory. knowledge of it, I must. state 
that on no occasion have E seen or heard, while wmong these people, of 
these objects being used in any game, 

In addition to these we have a very 
artistic figure of a polar bear, and 
two human figures, 1} inches long 
(Irig. S4), representing tattooed wo- 
men, and two carvings representing 
bags of oil. 


STORY-TELLING AND FOLK LORE, 


Like all other Eskimo, the Kok- 
soagmnyut are exceedingly fond of 
story-telling. Sitting in the hut, en- 
gaged in their evening work, the old 
men tell what they have seen and 

Fic, 64.—Human figure, carved in ivory, heard, The old women relate the his. 
tory of the people of former days, depending entirely on memory, often 
interspersed with recitations apparently foreign to the thread of the 


TURNER. ] FOLK LORE. 261 


legcnd, The younger members sit with staring eyes and countenances 
which show their wondering interest in the narration. Far into the 
night the droning tone of her voice continues reciting the events of the 
past until one by one the listeners drowsily drop to sleep in the posi- 
tion they last assumed. 

[ was fortunately able to collect a number of these ancient legendary 
stories, some of them of considerable length. 

Origin of the Innuit—A man was created from nothing. Tt was 
summer and he journeyed until he found a woman in another land, 
The two became man and wife, and from them sprang all the people 
dwelling there. [It is extremely difficult to get the native to go beyond 
the immediate vicinity in which he lives while relating these stories 
and legends. They invariably maintain that it was “here” that the 
event took place. | 

The Coming of the White People—The Eskimo were on the verge of 
starvation and had eaten nearly all their food. They saw that in a few 
more days death would come. The greatest Tungaksoak or great 
Tung ak determined to bring relief and prophesied that people having 
light hair and white skins would come in an immense tmiak., He 
placed a young puppy ona chip and another on an old sealskin boot, 
and set them adrift on the water. The puppies drifted in different 
directions, and in the course of time the one on the chip returned and 
brought with it the Indians. A long time after that, when the people 
had nearly forgotten the other puppy, a strange white object like an 
iceberg came directly toward the shore. Ina few moments the puppy, 
how a@ man, announced that the people had come with many curious 
things in their vessel, The man immediately became a dog. 

Origin of living things on the earth and in the water.—A long time ago 
aman who was eutting down a tree observed that the chips continued 
in motion as they fell from the blows. ‘Chose that fell into the water 
became the inhabitants of the water. Those that fell on the land be- 
came the various animals and in time were made the food of mankind, 
(This was the version given me by a person living at Fort Chimo.) 
Another person from farther west gave the following account of the ori- 
gin of the living things of the earth: Previous to a time when water 
covered the earth the people lived on such food as they could always 
find prepared for them in abundance, They did not know of any ani- 
mals at that time on the land or in the water. The water finally went 
away and the seaweeds became trees, shrubs, bushes, and grass, The 
long seaweeds were the trees and the smaller kinds became the bushes 
and grass. The grass, however, was in some manner put in various 
places by a walrus at a later date than the appearance of the trees, 

A weman who had lost her husband lived among strangers. As they 
desived to change the place of their habitation, they resolved to journey 
to another point of land at a distance, The woman who was depending 
on charity had become a burden of which they wished to rid themselves, 


THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


So they put all their belongings into the umiak and when they were 
on the way they seized the woman and cast her overboard. She strug: 
gled to regain the side of the boat, and when she seized it, the others cut 
off her fingers which fell into the water and changed to seals, walrus, 
whales, and white bears, The woman in her despair, screamed her de- 
termination to have revenge for the cruelty perpetrated upon her, The 
thumb became a walrus, the first finger a seal, and the middle finger a 
white bear, When the former two animals see a man they try to es- 
cape lest they be served as the woman was. 

The white bear lives both on the land and in the sea, but when he 
perceives a man revengeful feelings fill him, and he determines to de- 
stroy the person who he thinks mutilated the woman from whose finger 
he sprang. 

Origin of the quillemots.—While some children were playing on the 
level top of a high cliff overhanging the sea, the older children watched 
the younger ones lest they should fall down the bluff. Below them the 
sea was covered with ice, and the strip along the shore had not yet 
loosened to permit the seals to approach. Soon afterward a wide 
crack opened and the water was filled with seals, but the children did 
not observe them, The wind was cold, and the children romped in 
high glee, encouraging each other to greater exertion ino their sports 
and shouted at the top of their voices. The men saw the seals and 
hastened to the shore to put their kaiaks into the water to pursue 
them. At this the children increased their shouts, which frightened 
the seals till they dived out of sight. One of the men was angry, and 
exclaimed to the others, «1 wish the cliff would) topple over and bury 
those noisy children for searing the seals.” In a moment the cliff 
tipped over and the poor children tell among the fragments of huge 
rocks and stones at the bottom, Tere they were changed into guille- 
mots or sea-pigeons, with red feet, and even to this day they thus 
dwell among the debris at the feot of cliffs next to the water of the sea, 

Origin of the raven.—The raven was a man, who, while other people 
were collecting their household property preparatory to removing to 
another locality, ealled to them that they had forgotten to bring the 
lower blanket of deerskin used fora bed. This skin in the Eskimo lan- 
guage is called kak. The man used the word so often that they told 
him to get it himself! He hurried so much that he was changed into 
a raven, and now uses that sound for his note, Even to this day when 
the camp is being removed the raven flies over and shouts “Kak! 
kak!" ov, inother words, “Do not forget the blanket.” 

Origin of the quadrangular spots on the loows baek.—A man had two 
children that he wished might resemble each other, He painted the 
one (loon) with a white breast and square spots on the back. The 
other (raven) saw how comical the loon appeared, and laughed so mueh 
that the loon became ashamed and escaped to the water, where it 


always presents its white breast in order to hide the spots of the back 


TURNER. ] FOLK LORE. 263 


which caused so much ridicule. The raven eluded the attempt to be 
painted in like manner, and stoutly refused to come near, 

Origin of the gully.—Some people in a boat desired to go around a 
point of land which projected far into the water, As the water there 
was always ina violent commotion under the end of the point which 
terminated ina high cliff some of the women were requested to walk 
over the neck of land. One of them got out with her childven in order 
to lighten the boat. She was directed to go over the place, and they 
promised to wait for heron the other side, The people in the boat 
had gone so far that their voices, giving the direction, became indis- 
tinct. The poor woman became confused and suspected they wanted 
to desert her. She remained about the cliff, constantly crying the last 
words she heard, She ultimately changed into a gull, and now shouts 
only the sound like “go over, goover, over, ove,” ete, 

Origin of the hawks —Among the people of a village was a woman 
who was noted for the shortness of her neck, She was so constantly 
teased and tormented about it that she often sat for hours on the edge 
of high places. She changed into a hawk, and now when she sees 
anyone she immediately exclaims, heat keat keal who, who, who 
was it that cried ‘short neck 2?” 

Origin of the swallow.—Some small children, who were extraordi- 
navily wise, were playing at building toy houses on the edge of a high 
cliff near the village in which they dwelt. ‘They were envied for their 
wisdom, and to them was given the mame *Zulugagnak,” or, like a 
raven, Which was supposed to know all the past and future, While 
these children were thus amusing themselves they were changed into 
small birds, which did not forget their last occupation, and even to 
this day they come to the cliffs, near the camps of the people, and 
build houses of mud, whieh they aflix to the side of the rock, Even 
the raven does not molest them, and the Eskimo children love to 
watch the swallow build his ighugiak of mud. 

The hare.-—The hare was a child who was so ill treated and abused 
by the other people, because it hal long ears, that tt went to dwell by 
itself. When it sees anyone the ears are laid down on the back, for, if 
it hears the shout of a person, it thinks they are talking of its long 
ears. Tt has no tail, because it did not formerly have one. 

The wolf was a poor woman, who had so many children that she 
could not tind enough for them to eat. They became so gaunt and 
hungry that they were changed into wolves, constantly roaming over 
the land seeking food, The ery of the mother may be heard as she 
strives to console her hungry children, saying that food in plenty will 
soon be found. 

Lice ave supposed to drop from the body of a huge spirit, dwelling 
in the regions above, who was punished by having these pests cop 
stantly torment him, In his rage to free himself the Tice dropped 
down upon the people who condemned him to this punishment, 


264 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


Origin of mosquitoes—A man had a wife who was negligent and 
failed to scrape his skin clothing properly when he returned from his 
expeditions. He endeavored to persuade her to mend her ways and 
do as a wife should do. She was agin directed to remove the accu- 
mulated layer of dirt from the man’s coat. She petulantly took the 
garment and cleaned it in such a slovenly way that when the husband 
discovered the condition of the coat he took some of the dirt from it 
and flung it after her, The particles changed into mosquitoes, and now 
(in spring), When the warm days come and the women have the labor of 
cleaning clothes to perform, the insects gather around them, and the 
women are thus reminded of the slovenly wife and what befel her. 

Story of the man and his fox wifee—A hunter who lived by himself 
found when he returned to the place after an absence that it had been 
visited and everything put in order as a dutiful wife should do, This 
happened so often with no visible signs of tracks that the man deter- 
mined to watch and see who would scrape his skin clothing and boots, 
hang them out to dry, and cook nice hot food ready to be eaten when 
he returned, One day he went away as though going off on a hunt, 
but secreted himself so as to observe the entrance of anything into the 
house, After a while he saw a fox enter. He suspected that the fox 
was after food, He quietly slipped up to the house and on entering 
saw ainost beautiful woman dressed in skin clothing of wondrous make. 
Within the house, on a line, hung the skin of a fox, The man inquired 
if it was she who had done these things. She replied that she was his 
wife and it was her duty to do them, hoping that she had performed 
her labor in a manner satisfactory to him. 

After they had lived together a short time the husband detected a 
musky odor about the house and inquired of her what it was. She 
replied that she emitted the odor and if he was going to find fault with 
her for it she would leave. She dashed off her clothing and, resuming 
the skin of the fox, slipped quietly away and has never been disposed 
to visit aman since that time. 

The following is a story obtained trom Labrador: 

The rivals—Between two men there existed keen rivalry. Kaeh 
asserted himself to be the stronger and endeavored to prove himself 
superior to the other, One of them declared his ability to form: an 
island where none had hitherto existed. He pieked up an immense 
rock and hurled it into the sea where it became an island, The other, 
With his foot, pushed it so hard that it landed on the top of another 
island lying far beyond, The mark of the footprint is visible to this 
day, and that place is now known as Tu kik’ tok, 

The jealous man —A man tell in love with two women and was so 
jealous of them that he would not permit them to look upon others, 
much jess speak to them. The women finally wearied of the restric 


tions placed upon them and resolved to desert the man, They fled 
along the coast witil they were faint from hunger, At length they 


TURNER. | FOLK LORE, 265 


came upon the body of a whale cast on the shore, Here they deter- 
mined to dwell for atime. The man sought for the women in every 
possible place with no success, A conjurer was consulted, and after 
much deliberation, he told the deserted man to journey to a place 
where he would find the carcass of a whale and to secrete himself in 
the vicinity and watch for the women. He started out accordingly 
and before long had the pleasure of seeing the two women, They 
detected the man hastening toward them and tried to secrete them- 
selves until he should get by. He seized one of them, however, and 
bound her with thougs. The other was less disposed to submit, and 
the man put out her eyes to deprive her of the privilege of looking at 
any man, They remained about that locality for some time, and 
various animals of the land came to the carcass to feast upon the re- 
mains. The man caught a great number of foxes and other valuable 
furs and after a time returned to the camp whence he came. 

Story of the orphan boy—A small boy, who had neither father, 
mother, nor any living relatives, was dwelling with some people who 
maltreated him in every way their fancy could suggest. He was kept 
in the entry way to the hut, like a dog, and was permitted to eat only 
of the skin of walrus when they had it to give him. At other times they 
would throw to him what they themselves would not eat. They for- 
bade him to have a knife with which to cut his food, and he was com- 
pelled to gnaw the bones like a dog. A little girl, the daughter of the 
head of the family with whom he lived, would secretly take to him a 
kniie with which to divide the tough skin of the walrus. She also car- 
ried food of better quality to hima when she could do so clandestinely. 
These kind attentions pleased tii very much, and made him long for 
an opportenity to eseape. But how was he to better his condition 
when the hand of everybody was raised against him on account of his 
treatment at home? The little girl who had so often befriended him 
could not assist him to escape from such a life. He endeavored to lay 
a plan, but it came to naught. There seemed no help for him, One 
hight he abandoned all hope and threw himself on the ground in des- 
pair, While there he gazed at the bright moon, and the more intently 
his gaze was fixed upon it the more he thought he discerned the face 
ofamaninit, and at last he eried to the man to come and help him 


eseape trom his miserable life. The man came down from the moon 


and gave the poor boy a frightful beating, but the more he was beaten 
the larger he seemed to grow. After awhile he became so strong that 
he could handle a large reck as easily as he had hitherto handled a 
little stone. A large, round bowlder from the beach was no more to 
him than a bullet held in the hand of a strong man. 

The moon man then told the boy that he was large enough to take 
care of himself and do as he pleased with the people who had treated 
him so badly. With this the two parted, and the moon man went to 
his hole in the sky, while the boy walked along the beach picking up 


266 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


rocks and tossing them along the shore until the character of the waters 
edge was entirely changed, When the boy arrived at the hut it was 
daylight, for he had tarried so long on the beach testing his strength 
that the night had slipped away. 

The people were terrified when they saw to what enormous propor: 
tions the abused boy had grown, He became frenzied the instant he 
saw his former persecutors, and seizing first one and then the other in 
his hands dashed them against the rocks, The blood and brains ran 
in streams. One of the men, seeing his doom, begeed for his lite and 
promised his kaiak, spears, sled, and wife if he should be spared, The 
enraged boy continued the slaughter until only the little girl who had 
so often befriended him was left. She became his wife, and in the 
course of a few hours the man, whose name was Kou jé yuk, became 
of a natural size again and passed his life in comfort. 

This story was obtained from a man from Labrador, The Eskimo 
assert that this occurred near Ohak (often pronounced Okak), now a 
mnissionary station, They show the rock, which a little imagination 
gives the appearance of having dried blood and brains still upon it. 

The origin of the sun, moon, and stars,—At a time when darkness 
covered the eartha girl was nightly visited by some one whose identity 
she could not discover, She determined to find out who it could be. 
She mixed some soot with oil and painted her breast with it. The next 
time she discovered, to her horror, that her brother hada black circle 
of soot around his mouth, She upbraided him and he denied it. The 
father and mother were very angry and scolded the pair so severely 
that the son fled from their presence, The daughter seized a brand 
from the tire and pursued him, He ran to the sky to avoid her but she 
flew after him, The man changed into the moon and the girl who bore 
the torch became the sun, The sparks that tlew from the brand became 
the stars. The sunis constantly pursuing the moon, whieh keeps in 
the darkness to avoid being discovered, When an eclipse oceurs they 
are supposed to meet, 

Auroras.—Auroras are believed to be the torches held in the hands 
of spirits seeking the souls of those who have just died, to lead) them 
over the abyss terminating the edge of the world. A narrow pathway 
leads across it to the land of brightness and plenty, where disease and 
pain are no more, and where food of all kinds is always ready in abun 
dance. To this place none but the dead and the raven ean go. When 
the spirits wish to communicate with the people of the earth they make 
a whistling noise and the earth people answer only in a whispering 
tone, The Eskimo say that they are able to call the aurora and con- 


verse with it. They send messages to the dead through these spirits. 
The sky.—The sky is supposed to be an immense dome, of hard ma- 
terial, reared over the earth, long from east to west and shorter from 
north to south, The edges of the land and sea are bounded by high, 
precipitous sides, shelving outward or sloping inward to prevent any- 


TURY TR. | FOLK LORE. 267 


thing living on the earth trom going to the region beyond, There is 
the source of light and heat. The dome of the sky is very cold, and at 
times covered with crystals of frost whieh fall in the form of snow or 
frost films to the earth, and then the sky becomes clear, The clouds 
are supposed to be large bags of water, controlled by two ola women 
who run with them aeross the sky, and as the water escapes from the 
sens it falls in the form of rain to the earth. The thunder is’ their 
voice and the lightning is their toreh, Tf a spark falls from this on 
anyone he dies and goes to the region above. 

The winds, —At each of the corners of the earth there dwells an im- 
nense but invincible spirit, whose head is many times larger than all 
the remainder of his body. When he breathes the wind blows and 
his breath is felt. Some breathe violent storms and others gentle 
zephyrs. The male spirits dwell at the north, northeast, uorthwest, 
and west. ‘The females dwell at the remaining points, and each princi: 
pal spirit has innumerable intermediate and less powerful attendants. 


THE NENENOT OR “ NASKOPIE,” 


The [Indians of the Ungava district are locally known as Naskopie, 
aterm of reproach applied to them by the mountaineers (the Montagnais 
of the early Jesuit missionaries) during the earlier days when the 
former acted falsely in one of their concerted struggles with the Eskimo 
of the eastern coast. 

The name given to themselves is Nenenot, a word meaning true, or 
ideal red men. ‘To the west of these people dwell a branch of the tribe 
along the east shore of Hudson bay, To the southeast dwell the moun- 
tauineers, 

The western people differ greatly in customs and many words of 
their language from the Nenenots. The mountaineers differ but little 
in their customs, and only in speech as much as would be expected 
trom the different leeality in which they dwell, 

These three tribes havedistinet boundaries, beyond which they seldom 
wander, Of late years, however, a gradual intlix of the western people 
has poured into the Ungava district, dne to the decrease of the food 
supply along that portion of the eastern coast of Hudson bay. 

The Nenenots appear, from the best information FE could obtain on the 
subject, to have been driven to their present location during the wars 
waged against them by the Lroquois in times long gone by aad remem- 
bered only in tradition. 


They assert that their original home was ina country to the west, 
north of an immense river, and toward the east lay an enormous body 
of salt water. The former was supposed to be the St. Lawrence river 
and the latter to be Hudsoa bay. When they came to their present 
place they say that they found Eskimo alone, and these only along the 
coast. They area branch of the Cree stock, as their language clearly 
indicates, 


268 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


Many years ago war was waged upon them by the people whose 
name is remembered with terror even to this day. Most cruel atrocities 
were perpetrated, and in despair they fled trom the land of their fathers, 
where they had lived as a numerous people, and were pursued by their 
merciless foes until but a remnant reached what is now knowr os the 
“Height of Land.” 

Being now driven to a strange land, where they found erous 
Eskimo on all sides, only a few years elapsed before they roached 
too greatly upon the land which the Eskimo had always held, Con- 
tention and struggles arose, culminating in a disposition to fight, and 
in the course of time desultory warture, carried on by single combat or 
organized raids, This lasted for many years, even after the advent of 
the white men as traders along the coast. Some of the battles were 
attended with great slaughter on both sides, The Eskimo seldom ven- 
tured far from the coast on their raids, but fought bravely when at- 
tacked on their own ground, In most instances they outwitted the 
Indians by decoying them into ambush, and killing great numbers of 
them. Within the present century they have been more peaceably 
disposed toward each other. Since the arrival of the white men at 
various points along the coast these troubles have ceased, and the 
Indians and Eskimo are now on intimate terms; not that either party 
have any special regard for the new comers, but they have a mutual 
fear of each other, and the white man now engages their entire atten- 
tion. 

In the early struggles the Indian found the Eskimo to be a sturdy 
Opponent, possessed of greater endurance and perseverance than him- 
self. After the conclusion of the troubles they withdrew to their pres- 
ent haunts. and now wander indiscriminately over the land, although 
the Eskimo seldom ventures far into the interior unless it be along the 
valley of some large stream, ‘They even camp alongside of each other, 
and aged Indian men and women, who have been left behind the parties 
of young people who are in quest of fur-bearing animals during the 
winter months, are only too glad to have a camp of jolly Eskimo near 
at hand, With them they ean live as parasites until their hosts are 
exhausted of supplies, or until they move to another locality to relieve 
themselves of the importunities of their unbidden guests. 

The Indian is not the physical superior of the Eskimo. It is true 
they are more expert on snowshoes, because the snowshoes belong to 
their mode of life. They are used by the Eskimo only when they can be 
purchased by barter from the Indian. The Eskimo snowshoe is merely 
a rude imitation of the form used by the neighboring Indians. In the 
canoe the Indian is at home; so also is the Eskimo in the kaiak, which 
braves the severest weather and the roughest water, on which the In- 
dian would only gaze in dread and never venture. 

Ability to endure fatigue is less in the Indian than the Eskimo, who 
accomplishes by patient persistence what the Indian desires to do in a 


PURNER. | THE NENENO'T, 269 


hurry. [have not observed Indians carry such heavy loads as those 
borne on the shoulders of Eskimo, who, with ease, ascended a hill of 
such abrupt steepness that an unencumbered person climbed it: with 
difficulty, Several Eskimo men ascended this hill, each with a barrel 
of tlour on bis shoulders, 

The Indian is able to withstand the etfeet of cold as well as the 
Eskimo. The clothing of the latter is certainly better adapted to pro- 
tect against cold. Un times of scarcity of food the Eskimo is able to 
go without food for anumber of days and yet perform a considerable 
amount of physical labor, while the Indian would require food on the 
second or third day, and refuse to move until it had been furnished, 

In comparison witha white man under the same conditions the na- 
tives of either class would soon show signs of infeviorit: and under 
prolonged exertion but few, even of the Eskimo, would endure the 
strain. The principal strength of these people is shown in their sue- 
cess in the chase. 

The children are obedient to their parents, who seldom ever chastise 
them. Disrespect to parents is unknown, and in their intercourse with 
each other there are no clashings during youth. Not until the jeal- 
ousies awakened under the stimulus of their sexual instincts arouse 
their passions do they begin to show enmity and hatred toward each 
other. 

The males evidently exhibit jealousy to a less degree than the oppo- 
site sex. The men, after a protracted absence from each other, often 
embrace and shed tears of joy at meeting, The women are less demen- 
strative. 

The number of children born exceeds the number of deaths, Mor. 
tility appeared to be low for the two years | was near these people. 
The prevailing diseases are of the lungs and bowels. The lung dis- 
eases are induced by constant exposure to extremes of wet and cold 
and the inhalation of foul air laden with terebinthine odors, arising 
from the resinous woods used for fuel, Changes of the wind blowing 
in at the door cause the interior to become filled with smoke, which is 
endured rather than admit the cold air from without. 

Abstinence from fresh food for a long time, with dry meat only to 
subsist upon, is often broken by the sudden capture of deer. This 
affords an opportunity for gorging until the digestive organs are weak 
ened and serious complications arise. It is quite probable that gluttony 
directly produces half of the illnesses that occur among these people, 
The insufficiency of clothing does not apparently intluence health, as 
they seem utterly regardless of exposure, and long continued dwelling 
in the tents probably induces nearly, if not quite, all the other ills affliet- 

jing them. Indolent weers and scrofulous complications are frequent, 
but only in few instances are of such character as to prevent their tol- 
lowing their usual occupations. During illness they are stolid, and 
appear to suffer intense pain without the twitching of a muscle. When 


THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


death approaches it has but little terror, and is awaited with indifter 
ence, 

The remedies employed are only those afforded by the beating of the 
drum and the mumblings of the shaman, who claims to have control of 
the spirit whieh causes all disease and death, They are, however, 
firm believers in the efficacy of potions compounded by the white 
trader, who is fully as ignorant of the disease as the subject himself is, 
Otten aw harmless mixture of red ink, red pepper, ginger, or other pun 
gent substance is given, with a multiplicity cf confusing directions, be- 
wildering the messenger dispatched for relief, who, in repeating them, 
often makes mistakes and advises that the whole quantity be swallowed, 
The effect is sometimes magical, and the patient recovers, Powders 
ave rubbed over the seat of pain and liniments swallowed with avidity, 
Strange as it may seem, they often report good effeets, and ravely fail 
toask for more of the same kind, Both sexes attain a great age—in 
some instances certainly living over seventy years. Some assert that 
they were well advanced in years betore the white men came in 1827, 

The marriage ceremony is simply a consent to live together, obtained 
by request if possible, and by foree, if necessary, The man takes a 
wile as soon as he considers himself able to support one, When the 
ceremony is to be undertaken the consent of the girls parents or near 
est relatives is sought, and by holding out tempting inducements in 
the form of presents, the suitor wins them to his favor, The consent of 
the girl, if she has not vet been married is, of course, granted, if she 
desires to comply with the wishes of her relatives. If not, the pros 
pective husband is wiftormed that they can do nothing to turn her heart, 
The matter is understood, and in a short time she is taken forcibly to 
his or his father’s tent. The tie binding the couple is very loose, and 
on the least provocation may be dissolved by either party, Continence 
on the part of either wite or husband is unusual, and only notorious 
incontinence is sufticient to cause the offender to be put away. Their 
sexual relations are very loose among themselves, but their immorality 
is contined to their own people, To take a second, a third, or evena 
fourth wife, is not uncommon, but the additional wives are taken prin 
cipally for the purpose of performing labor imposed by the energy of a 
suecessfulhunter, [tisonly he wealthy mea who can afford a plurality 
of wives, ‘The several wives often dweil in the same tent, but as jeal- 
ousies frequently arise they resort to fighting among themselves to 
settle their differences, The husband looks on calmly until matters 
go too far, When he interferes the women are sure of being soundly 
thrashed. A woman, however, often assails her husband, and in some 
instances gives him an unmereiful pounding, much to the amusement 
of the bystanders, who encourage her to do her best. The man is a 
subject for ridicule for weeks afterwards, Wither sex can endure being 
beaten, but not being laughed at. They rarely forgive a white man who 
laughs at their discomfiture, An amusing incident occurred within a 


TURNER, | THE NENENOT, 271 


stone’s throw of Fort Chimo, An Indian had his clothing stripped 
from him by his enraged wife, She then tore the tent from the poles, 
leaving him naked, She took their property to the canoe, which she 
paddled several miles up the stream, He followed along the bank 
until she relented, wherenpon their former relations were resumed, as 
though nothing had disturbed the harmony of their lite. The man was 
so severely plagued by his comrades that for many days he searcely 
showed his head out of the tent. Rivalry for the favor of a woman or 
mut is occasionally the source of serious affrays, An instance was re- 
lated to me where two men sought the hand of a woman, and to settle 
which should have her, they determined to goin their canoes to the 
lake near by and fight with their deer spears, One of the men was 
killed and the other thereupon obtained the woman, who is now living. 

The sexes have their special hibors, Women perform the drudgery 
and bring home the food slain by their husbands, fetching wood and 
water, tanning the skins, and making them into clothing, The labor 
of erecting the tents and hauling the sleds when on their journey dur- 
ing the winter falls upon them, and, in fiet, they perform the greater 
partof the manuallabor.  ‘Phey ave considered inferior to the men, and in 
their social lite they soon show the etfeets of the hardships they un- 
dergo, 

The females arrive at puberty at the age of bor 15, and are taken 
us Wives at even an earlier age. So early ave they taken in marriage 
that before they are 80 years of age they often appear as though they 
were 50, Some ot them are hideously ugly, and are so begrimed with 
smoke trom the resinous wood used for fuel and with tilth that it is 
purely guesswork to even approximate their age, The women appear 
to be exempted from the curse of Eve, and deliver their children with 
as little concern as is exhibited among the brutes, ‘Phe child is not 
lowed to receive nourishment until the third day, and no water must 
touch its body. The intunt is swaddled in wrappings of skins and 
cloths, Sphagnuta moss is used next the body and changed every other 
day. They begin to walk at an early age, and this is, doubtless, the 
principal cause of the bowing of the legs so eften observed. The girls 
are neglected and the boys given every advantage, The latter soon 
discover their importance and rarely fail to show their domineering 
ways to the other sex, 

It is quite rare that twins are born, Tt is not usual for a mother to 
have more than tour children, although as many as six or eight may be 
born, As the paternal origin is often obscure, the person having that 
woman as wife at the time of the child's birth is supposed to be its 
father. 

The mortuary customs of the Naskopie were but imperfectly learned, 
for when a death occurred at the trading station the body was buried 
like a white man’s, A shallow grave was dug ina sandy soil, as this 
offered less trouble in digging, and the body placed in a rudely con- 


272 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


structed coffin and covered with dirt. A small branch from a tree was 
piaced at the head of the grave, but with what signification T could 
not saustretorily determine, [received the reply that the white men 
put) something at the head of their graves, and so do the Indians, 

Away from the post the Indians suspend their dead from the 
branches of trees, if the ground be frozen too hard to excavate, and 
endeavor to return in the following summer and inter the body, A 
person who has distinguished himself among the people is often buried 
where the fire has been long continued within the tent and thawed the 
ground to a sufilcient depth to cover the body. The tent is then re- 
moved to another location, The Indians have not that dread of a 
corpse which is shown so plainly among the Eskimo. The former have 
been known to strip the clothing from recently deceased) Eskimo, and 
it is not infrequent for them to appropriate the gun or other implement 
placed by the side of a dead Innuit. 

In response to my inquiry how they disposed of their dead in former 
ages, TL obtained evidence that seatfold burial and suspension from trees 
were formerly practiced and that subterranean burials were introduced 
by the missionaries. 

The dead are mourned for according to the position they oceupied in 
life, a favorite child often causing an alarming grief in the mother who 
mourns for many days, constantly bemoaning her Joss and reminding 
the listeners of the traits in the child’s nature so well remembered, 
The body is taken to the place of final rest by the friends, the relations 
seldom accompanying it. 

The life of these people is a constant struggle to obtain food and 
raiment. Nothing, however unimportant, is done without much delib 
ation and repeated consultation with friends. 

They are also guided to a great extent by their dreams, for they im- 
agine thatin the night they are indirect communication with the spirits 
which watch over theirdaily oceupations, Certain persons obtain much 
repown in divining the dreams and these are consulted with the great- 
est confidence. The drum is brought into use, and during its tumult 
the person passes into a state of stupor or trance and ina few mo- 
ments arouses himself to reveal the meaning of the other’s dream. 

Superstition holds these people in its terzible sway and everything 
not understood is attributed to the working of one of the numerous 
spirits. 

Every object, however simple, appears to have its patron. spirit, 
which, in order that it may perform its services for the welfare of the 
people, must be propitiated with offerings most pleasing and acceptable 
to it. The rule seems to be that all spirits are by nature bad, and 
must be propitiated to secure their favor, Maeh person has a patron 
spirit, and these must always be placated lest misfortune come. These 
spirits assume an infinite variety of forms, and to know just what form 
it assumed when it intlicted its baneful effects, the shamans or medicine 


TURNER, | RELIGION, 273 


men must be consulted. These are supposed to be in direct contact 
with such spirits. The spirit will appear only in the darkness of the 
conjuring house, and then permit itself to be appeased by some atone- 
ment made by the attlicted, which can be made known only through the 
Shaman, He alone indicates the course to be pursued, and his direc 
tions, to be explicitly followed, are often so confusing and impossible 
that the person fails to perform them, All these minor spirits are under 
the control of a single great spirit having its dwelling in the sky, aterm 
as illimitable with those people as with ourselves, 

Kach animal has its protective spirit, which is inferior to those of 
man. The soul, if such expression may be used, of all animals is inde- 
structible, and is capable of reappearing again and again as often as 
the material form is destroyed. There are spirits of beasts, birds, fishes, 
insects, and plants. Each of these has a home to which it returns after 
death, which is simplyavcessation of that period of its material form, 
and each may be recalled at the willof the shaman. Tf an animal be 
killed it does not decrease the number of that species, for it still exists, 
although ina different form. 

The Canada jay is supposed to inform the various animals of the ap- 
proach of Indians, and these rarely fail to kill the jay wherever found, 

A species of mouse is supposed to have such dread of man that it 
dies the instant if wanders near the track of a person. They often find 
these tiny creatures near the path, and believe them to be unable to 
cross it, 

As the dusk of eve draws near, the silent tlitting of the common short- 
eared owl (.Asio accipitrinus), and the hawk owl (Swrnia funeria), 
attracted by the sounds of the camp, creates direst contusion. The 
announcement of its presence causes the entire assemblage of people 
to be alert and hastily suspend some unworn garment, that the bird 
may perceive it and thus know that the people are not so poor in their 
worldly possessions as the spirit Wiq/-ti-qu may think; as it only 
annoys people who are too poor to have extra garments. As this 
short-eared owl frequents only the lower lands, the Indians assert that 
they are compelled to select the higher points of land as their camping 
sites in order to escape from him, 

The shaman, as T have already said, is believed to be able to control 
wl these different spirits by his magie art, and to foretell the future, 
but he must be concealed: from view while carrying on his mysterious 
performances, Tlence a special structure must be ereeted in which the 
shaman goes through various contortions of body until in a state of 
exhaustion and while in that weakened condition he fancies these 
things which have such wonderful hold on the minds of the people. 

The tent (Fig. 85) is high and of small diameter. Every crack and 
crevice in the tent is carefully closed to exclude even the least ray of 
light. 

When within it, the shaman begins his operations by groaning and 

11 ETH-——18 


274 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


gradually increasing the pitch of voice until his screeching can be 
heard a great distance. The din of the drum adds confusion to the 
ceremony. This goes on until the shaman announces the appearance 
of the spirit with winom he desires tocommune, He implores the spirit 
to grant the request, and in the course of time informs the people out- 
side that he has sueceeded in securing the services of the spirit. All 
within becomes quiet and only whisperings are heard, 

The spirit promises to fulfill the obligation he has undertaken, and the 
conjuror throws ever the tent and states the result of the interview, 
This result is always favorable, as his reputation depends upon its hap- 
pening. Any untoward circumstance, such as a person turning over a 
stone or breaking a twig from a bush while traveling, is sufficient cause 
to break the spell, and the blame can be laid on the shoulders of sueh 


Fig. 85.—Indian medicine lodge. 


an offender, If the request be not granted within the stipulated time 
as announced by the shaman at the end of the ceremony, some one is 
certain to have been the cause of displeasing the spirit, who now with 
holds the favor until reparation for the offense is made. The conjurer 
is not slow to make some one do penance while he himself is gaining 
time, as he takes good care not to attempt anything out of season, 

When an Indian kills one of the larger and tiercer wild beasts it is 
customary to reserve a portion of the skin or other part of the body as 
a memento of the deed. 

These mementos are sacredly kept to show the prowess of the 
hunter and at the same time they serve as a token of the wealth pro- 
cured by bartering the pelt of the animal to the trader. The wolf, 
bear, and wolverine are considered worthy of remembrance, and of the 


TURNER. ] OCCUPATIONS, 275 


first and last mentioned animals a claw or a tip of an ear may serve as 
a souvenir. 

The under lip of the bear (Fig. 86) is the portion preserved. The 
skin is cut off and spread flat to dry. The flesh side of the skin is 
painted with powdered hematite 
mixed with water or oil. 

The outer edges or lips are orna- 
mented with a single row of many- 
colored beads. At the apex or mid- 
de of the lip is attached a pendant 
in the form of a fish. The fish is 3 
or 4 inches long, made of cloth and 
has a rowf beads extending around 
the entire circumference of the 
‘ength of the body. 

These mementos are procured with 
great difficulty from the inimter who 
has risked his life in the struggles 
attending the capture of the beasts, 
for the barren-ground bear of that 
region is nota timid creature like 
the black bear; and unless the \ 
hunter is well prepared for the ani Fig. 86,—Indian amulet of bearskin. 
mal he would do well to let it alone. 

The occupations of the sexes are so numerous that a detailed account 
done would suffice, as the various seasons have their regular routine la- 
bors besides those unexpectedly appearing. In the spring the Indians 
of both sexes come to the post of Fort Chino to trade their winter's hunt 
of fur-bearing animals, About the middle of Mareh word is brought 
thatthe camp of old men and women with a number of children, lett 
from the parties scattered in all directions during the previous tall, are 
slowly approaching the post. They come by easy stages, camping 
here and there fora day or two, but striving to be near about the time 
that the earlier parties come in to trade. These latter stragele along 
from the middle of April to the last of May, those who had ascended 
the streams to the headwaters often not arriving until after the breaking 
of the tee in the river, which may be as late asthe thot June. When 
they collect at the post they have an opportunity to meet after a sepa- 
ration of months and enjoy a period of vest. The trading of their furs 
and other articles continues slowly until the parties have made their 
selections of guns, ammunition, tobacco, and cloths, a quantity of flour, 
biscuit, peas, beans, rice, and sugar, Molasses is purchased in enor- 
mous yuantities, a hogshead of 90 gallons suflicing for ouly three or 
four days’ trade, Other articles of varied character, from needles and 
beads to calico and cloth, are bought by the women, 

The parties receive the allowance given in advance for the prosecu- 


276 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


tion of the ensuing winter’s hunt, after which they are relied onto raft 
down the supply of wood cut by the white men for the next winter's 
supply of fuel. This consumes the season until the middle of July. 
Stragelers are out even later. The men, meantime, select the locality 
where they will remain for the sunmmer and fall, The winter is to be 
oceupied in getting furs. Each head of a party announces his intended 
location and the parties gradually leave the post for their destination, 
Some of the Indians in former years were employed to assist the salmon 
fishing, but they proved to beunreliable, either through fear of the turbu- 
lent waters of the Koksoak or inattention to their task. They were 
easily allured from the nets by the appearance of any game, and as 
the tides in that river do not wait even for an Indian, serious losses 
resulted from carelessness. Hence their places in later years are filled 
by Eskimo, who are better adapted to the work. 

The various parties disperse in different directions in order that the 
entire district may afford its products for their benefit. The Indians 
know the habits of the animals in those regions so well that they are 
sure, if they go to a particular locality, to find the game they are in 
quest off 

The reindeer provides them with the greater part of their food and 
the skins of these animals afford them clothing. 

Although their food consists of reindeer, ptarmigan, fish, and other 
gaine, the deer is their main reliance, and when without it, however 
great the abundance of ether food, they consider themselves starving, 

The deer are procured in several ways, the principal of which is by 
the use of the lance or spear, In the months of September and Octo- 
tober they collect: from various directions, During the spring the 
females had repaired to the treeless hills and mountains of the Cape 


Chidley region to bring forth their young on those elevations in early 


June or late May. After the young lave become of good size the 
mothers lead them to certain localities whither the males, having gone 
in an opposite direction, also return, They meet somewhere wlong the 
banks of the NKoksoak river, usually near the contluence of that river 
with the North or Lareh, While thousands of these animals are. con- 
gregated on each bank small herds are continually swimming baek and 
forth, impelled by the sexual instinet. The hair of the young animals 
is now in excellent condition for making skin garments. The females 
are thin, not yet having recovered from the exhaustion of furnishing 
food tor their young and material for the new set of antlers, whieh ap- 
pear immediately after the birth of the fiwns. The skin is, however, 
in tolerable condition, especially in late October. The back of the 
male is now covered with a large mass of fat huown as “back fat.” 
This deposit is about 1 to 14 inches thick by 2 feet broad and 20 inches 
long. The males are full of vigor and in the best possible condition 
at this season, as the antlers have become dry and cease to draw upon 
the animal for material to supply their immense growth, 


TURNER, | HUNTING, 277 


The hunting parties, always on the alert for the herds of deer which 
are hastening to the assembling place, follow them up, and in the 
course of time conjecture at what point they will congregate. Here 
they establish camps and intercept the deer when crossing the streams, 
The canoes are held in readiness, while the hunters sean the opposite 
hillsides for deer filing along the narrow paths through the forests and 
bushes towards the river bank. Arrived there, the deer, after a mo- 
ment’s pause, eagerly take to the water, boldly swimming as they 
quarter down stream with the current. The animals swim high in the 
water, scarcely more than a third of the body immersed. They move 
compactly, ina crowd, their antlers appearing at a distance like 
the branches of a tree tloating with the current. The Indian crouches 
low and speeds for the canoe. Silently it is pushed into the water, 
and two or three rowers take their places within, Rapid but noise- 
less strokes given by sturdy arms soon bring the boat below and to the 
rear of the body of deer, who are now thrown into the greatest conster- 
nation as they perceive their most dreaded) foe suddenly by their site. 
The deer endeavor to retreat, but the men are between them and the 
shore. ‘The oecupants of the canoe now drive the deer quartering up 
stream and toward the shore where the camp is situated, Should 
they, by some mistake on the part of the hunters, start downstream, 
they are certain to be separated, and swim so rapidly that unless 
there be two canoes they wiil, for the most part, eseape. If the 
herd is well kept together they may be driven at the will of the pur- 
suer, He strives to direet them to sueh spot that when the ¢hrust 
with the spear is given only sufficient vitality will be lett to enable 
the stricken animal to regain the shore, When the spear tenches the 
vital part, the animal plunges forward and the instrument is withdrawn, 
A hurried thrust: pierces another vietim, until all the herd, if small, 
may be slain. The wounded animal now feels the internal cavity tilling 
with blood, and seeks the nearest land whereon its ebbing strength 
seareely allows it} to stand. A> few wistful turns of the head to the 
right ov left, a sudden spreading of its limbs to support the swaying 
body, a plunge forward—the convulsive struggles that mark the end. 
If the band is large, some generally eseape. Some may be so wounded 
that they plunge into the bushes perhaps but a few yards and there 
lie and die, furnishing food for the beasts and birds of prey. 

The careases of the deer ave stripped of skins and fat and the viscera 
are removed, The fat is laid one side, that from the intestines being 
also reserved tor future rendering. 

The skinsare taken to the camp. and piled up. Those which are not 
to be tanned immediately are hung over poles to dry, the tlesh side 
turned upwards. 

The meat is stripped from the bones and taken to the tents, where it 
is exposed to the smoke and hot air over the tire and quickly dried, 
Some of the Indians are so expert in stripping the tlesh from the skele- 


278 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


ton that the exact form or outlines of the animal are preserved in the 
process of drying, The drying flesh acquires a very dark brown color 
from the smoke and blood left within the tissues. Certain portions of 
the dry meat, especially those from the flanks and abdominal walls, 
are quite palatable; they are crisp, and have a rich nutty flavor, The 
intercostal muscles are also choice portions, while some ot the flesh from 
the haunches is dry and nearly tasteless, The back fat is often dvied 
and smoked, but acquires a disagreeable rancid taste. 

The long bones are cracked and the marrow extracted. This sub- 
stance is the most highly prized portion of the animal, and in seasons 
of plenty the deer are often slaughtered for the marrow alone. The fat 
is placed in pots or kettles and rendered over a tire. Tt is then poured 
into another vessel to cool, and forms a valuable article of trade and a 
necessity for food, and is also required in the process of tanning the 
skins. 

The bones containing the marrow are cracked and placed in a kettle, 
hung over a slow fire, and the substance melted. The marrow brings 
a higher price than the tallow, and is esteemed a choice article of food, 
The heads are thrown to one side until the decomposing brain is wanted 
to bemixed with the semi-putrid liver forthe purpose of tanning the skins, 
When the flesh has dried sufliciently it is taken down and put into 
packages of about thirty pounds’ weight each. These bundles are 
enveloped in the parchment like subexcaneous tissue, and stored away 
until they are needed for food. A species of mold attacks the tlesh if 
it is not frequently inspected and dried, but as it is harmless, i¢ does 
not injure the meat. Indians for weeks ata time subsist entirely on 
this dried meat. They also have a season of plenty when the female 
deer and the bucks of less than two years are on their way to the Cape 
Chidley region, Here the females bring forth their young unmolested 
by the old) bucks and also less annoyed by the myriads of mosquitoes 
which throng the lower parts of the country. 

The crossing place of the females and young bucks isat or near Fort 
Chimo at least each alternate year. About the 5th to the 10th of May 
the assembled Indians anxiously await the coming of the game, — In 
the course of a few days the welcome ery of * Deer!” is heard, and the 
camp immediately becomes a scene of great excitement—men hurrying 
to vet their guns and ammunition, women shouting the direction of the 
game, and children running to the higher eminences to watch the herds. 

The men endeavor to occupy a narrow defile, where the herd will pass 
between the hills to the level land beyond. Some station themselves ai 
the top of the ravine, while the swiftest runners hasten to the head of 
the detile to lie in ambush until the deer, urged from behind, rush past, 
to be met with a volley of balls from all sides. Panie seizes the ani- 
mals, and wherever they turn an Indian confronts them, Until the 
deer recover from their paralysis, and once more obey their instinct to 
escape, numbers of them stand quietly waiting to be slaughtered; 


TURNER. | HUNTING DEER. 279 


others walk unconcernedly about, seemingly deprived of the power of 
flight. The Indians hurriedly close upon them, and in a few minutes 
the entire herd is destroyed or dispersed in all directions. 

The guns used on this occasion are the cheapest kind of muzzle-load- 
ing single-barreled shotguns, The balls used are of such size that they 
will drop to the bottom of the chamber, No patching is used, and a 
jar on the ground is deemed suflicient to settle the ball upon the pow- 
der, The employment of a ramrod would require too much time, as 
the Indian is actuated by the Cesire to kill as many as possible in the 
shortest time. They do not use the necessary care in loading their 
euns, and often the ball becomes lodged in the chamber and the gun 
bursts when fired. When shooting downhill the ball often rolls out. 
It is surprising that so few fatal accidents occur, A quantity of pow- 
der is poured directly into the gun from its receptacle, the ball dropped 
down, and a cap taken from between the fingers, where it was placed 
for convenience, Hunters often practice the motions of rapid loading 
and firing. They are remarkably expert, surpassing the iskimo in this, 
though the Eskimo is tir the better marksman, 

A third method pursued is that of snaring the deer. 

A plan adopted to capture deer in the winter is as follows: A herd 
of deer is discovered, and men and women put on their snowshoes. 
The deer are surrounded and driven into a snowbank many feet deep, 
in which the affvighted animals plunge until they nearly bury them- 
selves. The hunters, armed with the lance, pursue them and kill them. 
This means of procuring deer is only adopted when the herd is near a 
convenient showbank of proper depth. The snow falling in the winter 
collects in gullies and ravines, and only in seasons where there has been 
an abundance of snow will it attain suflicient depth to serve the pur- 
pose, 

Smaller game, such as ducks, geese, ptarmigan, hares, rabbits, por- 
cupines, beavers, and an oceasional lynx, afford variety of food. Ptar- 
migan are slaughtered by thonsands, Hundreds of pounds of their 
feathers annually purchase small trinkets for the Indian women, and 
during this season it is unusual to see a woman without some feathers 
of these birds adhering to her clothing or hair. 

The women and men annually destroy thousands of the eggs and 
young of these birds, Rabbits and hares, too, fall beneath the arrow 
or shotgun. Poreupines are more common toward the sources of the 
streams falling into Hudson Strait. They are found in trees, from 
which they gnaw the bark and terminal portions of the branches for 
food, The porcupine must be carefully cleaned lest the flesh be untit 
for food. The hair and spines are removed by scorching or by pouring 
hot water over the body, 

Of the carnivorous mammals the lynx ‘only is eaten, and this when 


other food is scarce, Bears are so rare that they form but an unimn- 


28() THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


portant portion of the Indian’s diet. Wolverines, wolves, and foxes 
are never eaten, 

Fish of various kinds are plentiful. The lakes and streams abound 
with salmon in summer, and trout, white fish, suekers, and a few less 
common species are eagerly sought for food, Fish are caught with the 
hook or net. Fishing through holes in the ice atfords an ample supply 
of tine trout, and the net set along the shore upon the disappearance 
of the ice is sure to reap a rich haul of white fish, suckers, and trout, 

In the preparation of the food little care is exercised to prevent its 
coming in contact with objectionable substances, The deer meat is 
laid upon the stones of the beach and particles of grit imbed them- 
selves in the substance, The flesh for cooking is often dropped into 
the vessels in which the tallow or marrow is being rendered, Neither 
children nor adults have any regular periods of eating, but appear to 
be always hungry. [tis thus not unusual to see a filthy child thrust 
its hand into the cooling fat to Gotain a choice portion of meat as it 
settles to the bottom, 

The d-y meat is often pounded into a coarse powder by means of 
stone or metal pestles. The meat is placed upon a smooth, hard stone 
for this purpose, The ligaments are picked out, and when a suflicient 
quantity has been prepared itis put into baskets or bags and stored 
away for future use. The cracked bones from which the marrow was 
extracted are calcined and reduced to powder and used as an absorbent 
of the fat from the skins in the process of tanning. 

The unborn young of the reindeer, taken from the mother in the 
spring, are considered a prime delicacy by Indians, as well as Mskimo, 
The eggs of various species of birds are eagerly sought for, and it mat 
ters little whether they are fresh or far advanced in incubation, The 
embryo bird, with the attached yolk of the egg, is swallowed) with 
infinite gusto. The Indian seldom eats raw flesh unless dried meat be 
excepted, 

Enough has been written concerning the reindeer to show that with- 
out it the very existence of the Indian would be imperiled. Both food 
and clothing, the prime necessities of life, are obtained from. the 
animal, and its numbers do not seem to decrease with the merciless or 
thoughtless slaughter. Hundreds of careases are never utilized. I 
counted 173 carcases on one side of the river in going a distance of 
about 80 miles, and when T came to their camps I saw incredible piles 
of meat and skins going to waste. The winter months are occupied 
by men in hunting the various fur-bearing animals, the principal of 
which are white, red, cross, and black or silver foxes, martens, minks, 
wolverines, wolves, muskrats, and beavers: these are abundant. Few 
lynxes and bear are obtained. A considerable number of others are 
found in this region and afford tine skins. 

Steel traps are generally set, various sizes of traps being used for the 
different animals. A great number of otter and beaver are shot in the 


TURNER. | CLOTHING, 281 


water, Deadfalls consisting of a log of wood set upon figure-4 triggers 
arely fail to kill mink and marten, The lynx is usually taken by means 
of a snare with the loop over a circle of low pegs surrounding the tongue 
of the figure-4 set of triggers. The spring, usually a lithe sapling, 
is strong enough to litt the forelegs of the animal from the ground when 
the noose encircles its neck. 

The Indian conceives the wolverine to be an animal embodying all 
the cunning and mischief that can be contained in the skin of a beast, 
To its cunning is added great. bodily strength, enabling this medium- 
sized animal to accomplish destruction apparently much beyond its 
strength. 

Every other animal in the 
forests where it dweils prefers 
to give it the path rather than 
engage ino struggle with it. 

When seized in a trap a wol- 
verine offers aw sturdy resist- 
ance, Even a fiumished wolf, 
tomy personal knowledge, will ? 
stand and look at it, but not 
attempt to cope with it. In 
this particular instance, how- £2 
ever, the wolf may have con- 
sidered the predicament of the 
wolverine another means of 
strategy employed by that ani- | 
mal to entrap the wolf, and so 
deemed it wise to remain ata 
respectful distance, 

very form of torture which 
the Indian mind is capable of 
conceiving is) inflicted upon 
this animal when it is eap- 
tured, All manner of vile 
names and reproaches are ap- 
plied to it. The Indian enjoys 
relating how he singed its fur 
off, broke its bones, and. tor- 
mented it in many ways, as it a 
slowly expired under his hand. Fa. 87,—Indian buckskin coat, man's (front), 


CLOTHING, 


The apparel worn by the Ungava Indians is quite distinet for the 
different sexes. The method of preparing the skins for the manufae- 
ture of garments is the same, but the forms of the garments for the 
sexes are so different as to require special consideration, 


QR” THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


The garments worn by the men differ somewhat awecording to the 
season of the year, for the extremes of climate are very great. The 
clothing of the men con- 
sists of w cout, breeches, 
leggings, moccasins, 
gloves or mittens, and cap 
or headdress, 

The coat consists of the 
skins of the reindeer 
tanned into a thoroughly 
pliable condition by the 
process to be described 
presently, 

The shape of the gar. 
ment worn in stummer 
(Figs. 87 and 88) is some 
What similar to that ofa 
trock coat, but without the 
tails. The back is) cut 
from a single skin and the 
skirt cut up from below, 
Into this is inserted a 
piece of sufticient width 
to allow movement of the 
lower limbs. The sides 
are from the second skin, 
split down the middle of 
the back and sewed to the 
skin, forming the back of 
the garment. The back 
skin forms the covering 
for the top of the shoulders and extends to the collar seam, ‘The 
side skins form the front and neck of the garment. The sleeves are 
made of a third skin, and tre- 
quently have a roll or cuff to 
increase the length, if’ neces- 
sary. The collar is merely a 
strip of skin sewed to the 
neck. It is usually turned 
down, The front is usually 
open, and if made to be closed 
it is held in position by a belt 
or gaudily colored scart’ of 
woolen or cotton purchased 
trom the trader, 

The seams of the clothing are always sewed with sinew like that 
used by the Eskimo, There are but two seams which run the entire 


—_ 


a¥si=77) 


Fig, 88..-Indian buckskin coat, man's (back), 


Fra. 89.—Detail of pattern painted on Indian garments. 


TURNER] CLOTHING, 283 


length of the coat, and these are the side seams, The seam at the 
skirt, the armhole, sleeve, and collar are the shorter ones, The coat is 
always more or less ornamented with extravagant painted designs, 
The colors and other materials used for painting these designs will be 
described in another connection, as well as the manner of applying 
them. 

The patterns of these de- 
signs will be best understood 
by reference to the figures, 
which show some of them in 
detail (Figs. 89, 90), 

The colors used often pre- 
sent startling combinations 
of red, blue, yellow, and 
brown, The portions of the 
garments upon which these 
colors are phiced are’ the 
front edges of the opening 
of the coat, the wrists, and 
rings around the arms or 
sleeves, the skirt and pyra- 
mid-shaped designs over the hips. The piece intended to widen the 
skirt behind is always entirely covered with a design of some kind, 
Over the outside of the 
seams a line of paint is 
always applied, nearly 
always ofa red or brown 
color, 

Frequently a series of 
quadrate blotches or 
squares produced — by 
variously colored lines 
runs from the apex of 
the piece inserted in the 
skirt to the collar, 

The length of the coat 
is such as toreach tothe 
middle of the thigh. The 
coverings tor the lower 
limbs and for the hips 
are quite distinet. For 
the hips the garment is 
a sort of breeches of 
which the legs are so 
short as only to cover 
the upper portion of the Fio. 91.—Indian buckskin leggings. 
thigh. The breeches are held in place by means of a drawstring in front. 


FG, 90,—Detail of pattern painted on deerskin robe, 


284 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


A pair of these breeches is never ornamented with paint, as they are 
usually not exposed to view, 

A nair of leggings extends from the upper portion of the thigh to the 
ankles, The leggings (Fig. 91) are each made of a single piece some- 
What in the form of a narrow bag open at each end, They are hela in 
position by means of a string attached in front and fastened to the 
upper portions of the breeches, The seam is on the outer side of the 
leggings and along it is sewed a strip of deerskin having the edges cut 
into fringe. The leggings are painted in much the same fashion as the 
cout, ‘ 

The moceasins (Mig. 92) are rarely ornamented, except with beads on 
the tongue or else with a strip of red, blue, or black cloth, 

In the construction of a moccasin the measure of the foot is taken if 
it is intended for a person of importance or if the maker attempts todo 
skillful work, The sole is cut out first in the shape of a parallelogram, 
The edges ave turned up and creases made ardund that portion of the 
deerskin which surrounds the toes and aw part of the side of the foot, 


Fig. 92. —Tndian moccasins 


The creases are made perpendicular in order to take up a portion of 
the siack of the skin, They are held 1 position by a stout sinew thread 
run through each one and around to ‘be other side to prevent them 
from separating and thus ** bagging ” over the toes, This is the most 
particular part of the work and on these stitches depend the skill of 
the maker. The sides of the foot and heel are not creased as the heel- 
seam takes up the slack for the posterior portion of the moceasin. 

The tongue of the moccasin is a piece cut into a shape resembling 
that member with the tip of it over the toes. This is sewed to the 
edges of the creases, and between it and the creases is often sewed 
a narrow welt of skin or cloth, The supertluous edges of the slipper: 
shaped shoe are now trimmed off, and the top, or portion to cover the 
ankle, is sewed on, This portion is a long narrow strip of inferior 
skin of sufficient size to overlap in front and to come well above the 
ankles. It is left open like the tops of laced shoes, Just below, or at 
the edge of the tops, a long thong of deerskin is inserted through sev. 
eral holes, which allows it to pass around the heel and below the 


y ure 


» the 
pine. 
in 
» the 
the 
Pout 
‘the 


son 


pn if 
‘i do 
ram, 
the 
foot, 


TURNER, | CLOTIUNG, 285 


ankles, bringing the ends in front over the tongue, The ends of the 
tops ave laid carefully over one another and wrapped round by the 
ends of the thongs whieh hold the moccasins on the feet, 

Certain portions of the skin make better footwear than other parts, 
The neck skin is too thick and sti! to allow the creases around the 
toes to be properly made; the thinks are too thing while the neek is 
useful for the tongues, the sides for the bottoms, and the thanks and 
portions of the back, searved by the grubs infesting the animal, for 
the tops ane strings, 

Moceasins for young children often have a seam parallel with the 
toes and the creasing is thus obviated, ‘Those for wearing in the tent 
or in the dry vieinity of the camp have no tops and are held to the 
foot by means of a drawstring, 

As most of the strain in 

walking comes upon the 
tongue, and this portion is 
ustially ornamented, it: is 
necessary that it should be 
of a good quality of leather, 
A piece of black, blue, or 
red cloth is generally laid 
over the tongue for orna- 
ment, There is sometimes 
bead work on this portion, 
but as these people are not 
skillful in the art of dispos- 
ing the many colored beads 
they are not much used tor 
that purpose, 

A single deerskin will 
make tive to seven pairs of 
moceasins foran adult, and 
as they last but two or 
three weeks as many as tit 
teen to twenty-five pairs Pia, Talian mittens 
are necessary for each adult. 

The hands are protected with mittens (Pig. 93) made of smoked deer- 
skin. The skin is folded, and along the fold the shape of the mitten is 
cut so as to leave a part by whieh the two pieces are joined, and the 
edges formed in the cutting ave sewed together, The thumb is made 
as follows: A tongueshaped piece is cut out of the palm and the base 
of that piece is left as the part to form the under or inner covering for 
the thumb, A piece is now trimmed that will tit the place cut out and 
the two parts sewed together, 

The thamb of the Indian is, asa rule, shorter than that of the white 
man, and a pair of native-made mittens are quite uncomtortable until 


286 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


the thumb portion has been recut and sewed. The wrists of the mit- 
tens are often gaudily ornamented with strips of red or black cloth, 
Designs of simple character, such as lines and cross lines producing 
lattice-work figures, are frequently painted on the back of the mitten, 
Beads in rows and zigzag lines ornament the wrist, and strands of 
beads are pendant from the outside seams. The strands are often 
tipped with tassels of variegated woolen threads. The mittens intended 
for severe weather are often lined with the thin skin of a faetal rein- 
deer, which has short, soft hair, Great exertion often causes the hands 
to perspire and moisten the hair, and this freezes the instant the mit 
ten is removed from the hand, and is liable to freeze the fingers 
within it. 

The head-dress of the men for the summer is often a large cotton 
handkerchiet wound turban-fashion around the head to prevent) the 
long hair trom blowing over the face. These handkerchiets are of the 
most gaudy patterns, and if they are not worn a simple thong of deer- 


Fig, 94.—-Beaded headband, Nenenot. 


skin serves the purpose, The girls and newly married) wives often 
make bands of beads, some of which are quite attractively designed, 
for their lovers or husbands, These bands are about an ineh wide and 
several inches long. The ends are lengthened with strips of skin, The 
band is placed over the forehead and tied by the strings behind, These 
headbands are generally the most intricate designs of bead work which 
these Indians display (Hig. 94). 

A cap of deerskin is often worn, but if always seems to bein the way, 
and is used mostly in wet weather, A piece of stiff deerskin is some- 
times made into the shape of a visor of a cap and worn over the eyes 
during the spring when the glare of the sun on the snow produces such 
distressing inflammation of the eyes, It is fastened to the head by 
means of straps tied behind, The greater part of the men prefer to go 
without head covering. Some who are able and love a display of faney 
colors have a cap made of red cloth and ornamented with beads worked 
into extravagant patterns, The cap is a high conieal affair, and from 
the weight of beads upon it often falls to one side of the head, 


mit- 
loth. 
cing 
tten, 
s of 
ftten 
ded 
‘cine 
nds 
mit 

COLS 


fton 
the 
the 
eer. 


ten 
ed, 
ind 
Nhe 
ese 


ich 


TA) 
Nes 
yes 
ich 
by 
vo 
cy 
ed 


ym 


Sha iM eas i 


‘This sometimes serves 


TURNER. | CLOTHING, 287 


The winter coat (Figs. 95, 96) worn by the males is of different 
pattern from that worn in summer, and is made of skins with the hair 
inside, 

Two skins, one of which forms the back of the coat the other the 
front, are sewed by side seams running from the armpit to the bottom 
of the skirt. On the shoulder a seam runs to the neck on each side, 
the back skin extending high enough to form the neck while the other 
skin reaches to the neck in front, Here it is slightly cut out or slit for 
a distance of several inches to allow the insertion of the head through 
the neck hole. 

Sometimes a y- 
shaped) piece is in- 
serted into the slit at 
the front of the neck, 
To widen the skirts a 
similar shaped piece 
is let into the middle 
of the back skins or 
it may be put between 
the side seams for the 
same purpose, The 
bottom of the skirt is 
decorated, (Fig. 97.) 

At the back of the 
neck a piece about 8 
inches square is at- 
tached to the garment, 


asa collar, and) some- 
times it gives addi- 
tional protection bya 
double thickness to 
the shoulders, very 
often the first part to 
feel the effect of the 
Piercing winds. 

A tew of the coats for winter have a hood attached to them (Fig. 98, 
99) sewed on the back of the neek, which when drawn over the head 
serves af once as cap and protection, 

The collar and hood are invariably made from the skins on the sides 
of the head of the deer, If two or more head skins are required they 
are sewed into the form of the deers head. The collar is ornamented 
with fringes cut from the edges of the skin, Sometimes the interseap- 
ular protection is cut into three or four points, each one of which is the 
cheek skin of a deer, and sewed only a portion of the length, the re- 
mainder being lett free and terminating with a series of long strands or 
fringes, The sleeves of these garments have nothing peculiar about them, 


BiG. 95,—Man's winter cout (front). 


288 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


As the Indian is always in the vicinity of the herds of deer it is an 
easy matter for him to obtain the skins when in best condition, and 
from the finer skins su- 
perior garments are 
made, The shape of the 
Indiaws coat is not so 
well adapted to afford 
protection as that of the 
Eskimo; hence, the white 
men inthis region invari- 
ably adopt the clothing 
of the latter in’ cold 
weather, 

Indians eagerly accept 
any cast off garment 
which a white man has 
worn, and they often 
procure the clothing of: 
fered tor trade, Trousers 
are in much demand, 
Coats are deemed great 
prizes, especially in the 
wet seasons when the 
moisture would certainly 
ruin their own clothing 
by causing the hair to 
fill off or totally destroy 
the shape of the tanned 


skin garments. J’or underclothing the Indian man uses an additional 
; . > 


Fig. 96.—Man's winter cout (back), 


suit of ovedi- 

nary clothing 

or else dons a 

shirt pro- 

anaansipeoeaanooe cured from 
encanta eae ata eareeneeeeentns gee eceeceeneeoea the trader. 
Drawers are 
rarely worn, 
That these 
people are lit- 


tle suscepti- 

ble to. the ef: 

fects of cold 

may be in- 

ferred from 

F1G, 97.—Detail of ornamentation, the fact that 

have seen them come to the trading post of Fort Chimo in the mid- 


TURNER.] CLOTHING, 289 


dle of winter when the thermometer had not registered higher than 20° 
below zero for weeks, with no protection for their legs except a pair of 
old buckskin leggings so short that the bottom did not reach within 3 
or 4 inches of the dilapidated moceasins, The feet were, so far as 
could be wscertained, chiefly protected by a w ‘apping of old baling 
cloth covered with a pair of moe ‘“asins Which no white man would have 
been seen wearing. I observed also that no additional clothing was 
purchased for the return trip. 
The garments worn 
by the women in the 
warmer season consists 
of thin dresses of calico 
purchased from the 
traders, Thin shawls 
serve to protect. the 
head and shoulders, 
The feet are incased in 
moccasins. Some of 
the women are able to 
purchase dresses of 
cloth, and these are cut 
intoa semblance of the 
dresses worn by the 
women of civilized 
countries. It is not 
rare to see a woman 
wearing a skirt made 
rom the tanned skin 
of the deer, The lower 
portions of the skirt 
are often fancifully or- 
hamented with lines 
and stripes of paint of 
various colors, extend. : : 
ing entirely around the La rreeTN i te 
garment. A piece of Ni x 
baling cloth is often 
fashioned into a skirt and worn, 
The females appear to be less susceptible to the sudden changes of 
the summer weather than the men, At least they exhibit less concern 
about the thickness of their apparel. It is not unusual to see a woman 
Whose only clothing appears to be a thin dress of ealico, During the 
winter the women dress in the most comfortable skins (Fig, 100), blankets, 
shawls, comforts, leggings. and moccasins. During exceptionally severe 
weather, they appear as traveling wardrobes, doubtless carrying their 
all on their back, and in some instances presenting a most comical ap- 
11 bh TH--—19 


FiG. 98.—Man’s winter coat, with hood. 


Eoeeieeteeysegeet eee 


290 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


pearance as, loaded with clothing of most miscellaneous character, they 
waddle over the snow. The winter cap is similar to that worn Ly the 
men, but is not so peaked, Jt is an object on which they expend a 
great amount of labor. The material is usually a kind of cloth locally 
known as Hudson bay cloth, either red, dark blue, light blue, or black. 
The caps of the men and women are usually made from the better 
grades of this cloth, while the dresses of the womer and the leggings 
of the men are of the inferior grades. 

If the cap is to be all one color, in which case it is always red, the 
cloth is cut in two pieces only, and put together so as to produce a cup- 
shape. Sometimes 
five or six pieces are 
cut from two or three 
different colors of 
cloth and the strips 
sewed together. 
Over the seams 
white tape is sewed 
to set off the colors. 
In the center of the 
strip is a rosette, 
cross, or other de- 
sign worked with 
beads, and around 
the rim rows of 
beads variously ar- 
ranged. 

The body is cov- 
ered with a heavy 
robe made of two 
deerskins sewed to- 
gether. This robe 
is often plain, and 
when ornamented 
designs are painted 
only on the bottom 
of the skirt. These 
robes are always of 
skins with the hair 
Fic, 99.—Man's winter coat, with hood. on. The flesh side 


ee 


is often rubbed with red ocher while the extreme edge may be painted 3 
with a narrow stripe of the same mixed with the viscid matter ob- a 
tained from the roe of a species of fish, The edge stripe of paint is 2 
always of a darker brown than the other colors from the admixture of q 
that substance with the earth. a 


This garment is put upon the body in a manner impossible to describe 


TURNER.] CLOTHING. 291 


and diflicult to understand even when witnessed, [tis held together 
by small loops of sinew or deerskin, A belt around the waist keeps 
it up. 

The women also wear in winter a sleeveless gown reaching little below 
the knees and as high as the chin, The sleeves are put on separately, 
like leggings. They are usually made of red or black cloth, 

The gown is often extravagantly decorated with paint. The tlesh 
side of the skin is rubbed with red ocher, on whieh are painted in de- 
scribable designs. A strip of deerskin dotted with beads borders the 
gown, and from the edge of the strip hang strings of these ornaments, 
terminating in variously colored tassels of thread, 

The leggings of the women differ 
from those of the men. They extend 
higher and the bottoms cover the tops 
of the moccasins, They are made of 
skin or cloth, the latter black or red. 
To cut out a pair of leggings requires 
skill. The cloth is doubled and then 
cut nearly ina circular form, A size 
sufficient to fit the limb is sewed up 
leaving the crescent-shaped remainder 
a flapping ornament, The “wings” are 
often edged with cloth of a different 
color and on the outer border rows of 
beads complete the decoration, The 
two crescents are lett free, and as the 
wind separates them they tlap most 
fantastically. They are always worn 
so as to be on the outer side of the legs, 
The bottoms of the leggings are heavily 
loaded with numerous rows of fancy 
beads. 

Moceasins are alike for both sexes. 

As additional protection from cold 
the shoulders are covered with a man 
tle of soft skins from young deer. pia... Nenenot woman in full winter 
Blankets purchased from the traders ee ' 
are also sometimes thrown over the shoulders or around the waist. 

Children are clad like adults, excepting that their apparel is less 
sarefully made and they often present a disgusting appearance, with 
their clothing glazed with filth and glistening with vermin. 

Infants usually have their garments made in tne “combination” 
form, The cap forms a separate piece and is fitted so closely that it is 
not removed until the growth of the head bursts the material of which 
the cap is made. 

When traveling men and women smoke or snut® a good deal, To- 


a0 


292 


THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


bacco and a few other necessary articles are carried in a bag known as 


“fire bag.” 


often quite tastefully ornamented. 
The detailed figures which [ have presented show much better than 
any description the designs used in ornamenting their clothing. Some 


These are made of cloth and trimmed with beads, and are 


Fi. 101,—Sealskin headband. Nenenot 


of the patterns are rude copies of the designs found upon cheap hand- 
kerchiets, scarts, and other printed fabrics, 
“LT have already spoken of the headbands worked for the men by their 


Fig. lor. 
(front). 


Skin scraper 
Nenenot. 


Fra, 108, 
(hack). 


Skin scraper 
Nenenot, 


PREPARATION OF THE 


vives and sweethearts. Suchia 
headband, made of sealskin pro- 
cured from the Eskimo, is shown 
in Fig. 101 (No, 3449). The 
headband is used to support the 
weight of a load carried on the 
back, relieving the strain on the 
shoulders and making it easier 
to breathe. The band passes 
over the forehead to the back, 
where it is attached to the load. 

Various forms of these head- 
bands or portage straps are 
made, Sometimes a piece of 
birch bark is placed under the 
strap where it touches the fore- 
head. It is said that the bark 
does not become wet from the 
moisture induced by the se- 
vere exertion and thus burn the 
head, 


SKINS FOR CLOTHING, 


Having now given a general description of the clothing of the Nene- 


as 
ve 


aun 
mec 


nd- 


1eir 
hoa 
rO- 
WH 
Phe 
the 
the 
the 
sier 
SCS 
wk, 
rad, 
aud- 
are 
of 
the 
ore- 
unk 
the 
se- 
the 


Che- 


TURNER. } PREPARATION OF SKINS, 293 


not, | may proceed to describe the process of preparing the skins of 
which this clothing is made. The skins of the deer, which are to be 
converted into buckskin and parchment, are Jaid to one side ina heap, 
just as they came from the bodies of the animals or after they have 
gone through a process to be subsequently described. 

When the skins have laid in this heap for several days decomposi- 
tion sets in and loosens the hair so it will readily pull out. When the 
pelt is ready for scraping it is thrown over a round stick of wood some 
8or 4 inches in diameter and 3 or 4 feet long, one end of which rests 
on the ground while the other is pressed 
against the abdomen of the weman who 
is doing the work. Then she takes a 
tool like a spoke shave (Figs, 102, 103, 
No, 3162) made from the radius of the 
deer, by cutting a slice off the middle 
part of the back of the bone, so as to 
make a sharp edge while the untouched 
ends serve for handles, and with this 
scrapes off the loosened hair. 

The sharp edge of the bone instru- 
ment coming against the hairs pushes 
or pulls them out but does not cut the 
skin. 

The flesh side of the pelt is now 
worked to free it from particles of flesh 
and blood, together with as much of 
the moisture in the skin as may be 
hastily done, for if the person has a 
great number of skins to attend to she 
must work rapidly lest they decompose 
too much and putrefy, 

Where the hunter has great success 
in killing deer many of the skins are lett 
untouched because there is no one to at- 
tend to them and they are thus wasted. 

When the pelts of the deer or other 
large animals have been taken trom the 
carcass: they are allowed to dry with 
the adherent fle‘), fat, and ligaments until a convenient opportunity 
occurs to remove those portions from the skin, which must be moistened 
to permit them to be more readily scraped off. If the fresh skins are 
to be cleaned immediately, they are operated upon in the same man- 
ner as those previously dried. All the skins of fur-bearing animals and 
those furnishing skins for clothing and other purposes must be scraped, 
otherwise they would soon be soiled by the intiltration of the fat among 
the hairs. 


Fig. 104. —Skingtleaning tool. Nenenot. 


294 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


To remove the adherent particles on the tlesh side of the skin a pe- 
culiar instrument has been devised. The tibia, or large bone of the 
hind leg of the reindeer, is used for this purpose (Fig. 104), The pe- 
culiar shape of the bone renders it particularly well adapted to form a 
combination of saw, chisel, and gouge at the same time, The lower 

portion of the bone is cut squarely off! A part 
of one side of the remainder is cut soas to leave 
one side (the inner side of the bone) in the shape 
of a chisel, having either a straight edge or else 
slightly rounded. On this edge are cut a num- 
ber of fine notches, which give the edge of the 
instrument a serrated form. Some of the bones 
have a spatula-shaped piece of iron or steel cut 
with the serrations upon it and the metal piece 
set in the cavity of the bone. If the leg of a deer 
is not convenient a wooden handle shaped like 
the long handle of a mortising chisel is fashioned, 
and to it is attixed the metal point by means of 
stout lashings (Fig. 105), Around the upper por- 
tion of the wooden shaft a notch or groove is cut, 
and in this is tied a stout thong in such manner 
as to form a loop to prevent the hand from slip- 
ping down the smooth bone when the blow is 
struck, 

The manner of using this instrument is peculiar 
and effective. The skin is thrown, with the flesh 
side up, over a stake 2 or 3 feet high driven 
firmly into the ground. The person kneels down 
before the stake, and when the skin is placed so 
as to afford a convenient portion to begin upon, 
an edge is taken between the fingers of the left 
hand and lifted slightly from the ground, A blow 
is given with the tool which separates the sub- 

Pid. 105, Skineleaning tool Cutaneous tissue, and by rightly directed blows 
iron-bladed, Nenenot ; » : : 

this may be separated from the skin entire, 

The skin is then laid aside for further working. The subcutaneous 

tissue is washed and dried, after which it is used for a variety of pur- 
poses, such os coverings for bundles of dried meat and other articles, 

The skin is worked over with this instrument to free it from a portion 
of its moisture and is now ready to receive the tanning material which 
consists of a mixture of putrefying brain, liver, and fat. They some- 
times soak the skin in wine, which is reputed to add greatly to the last- 
ing qualities of the leather, but the odor of that liquid lasts as long as 
the skin. 

The tuning material is laid on the flesh side of the skin in a thin 
layer and by rubbing with the hands it is well worked in, Several 


EEN io 


Si haascnaae cabs 


TURNER. | PREPARATION OF SKINS. 295 


hours or days elapse and the superfluous matter is scraped off. The 
skin is then scraped and rubbed between the hands, the harder portions 
with a scraper resembling a small scoop, until all the skin is worked 
into a pliable condition, [f the skin is yet too oily a quantity of pow- 
dered chalk, clay, calcined bone, or even tlour, is thoroughly rubbed 
over it to absorb any fatty matter yet remaining. 

The skins having the hair on, for clothing, or those intended for 
buckskin, are treated in this inanner. Those intended for parchment 
are simply rubbed with a quantity of fat, and then allowed to dry in 
that condition, being of a yellowish or pale glue color, 

Where a great number of skins haveto be prepared, and some of the 
more energetic men haveas many as two or three hundred buekskins and 
parchment skins for tie spring trade, a constant application to this 
labor is necessary in order to prepare them in season, This, in a man- 
ner, accounts for the number of wives which an energetic or w salthy 
man may have in order that the products of the chase falling to his 
share may be promptly attended to. 

When the skins intended for sale are selected) they are bundled w, 
and covered with parchment skins or the subeutaneous tissue. 

The skins intended for use among themselves are generally inferior 
grades, such as those cut in the skinning process, or else those obtain- 
ed in the earlier or the later part of the season. 

A species of gad tly infests the deer, puncturing the skin on both 
sides of the spine, and depositing within the wound an ege which in 
time is transformed into a grub or larva. These larvie attain the size 
of the first joint of the little finger, and at the opening of the spring 
weather work their way through the skin and fall to the ground, where 
they undergo metamorphoses to become perfect insects. 

A single animal may have hundreds of these grubs eneysted beneath 
the skin, which, on their exit, leave a deep) suppurating cavity, which 
heals slowly. The skin torming the cicatrices does not have the same 
texture as the untouched portions, 

When the skin is dressed it reveals these scars, and of course, the 
value of the skin is diminished according to their number. The In- 
dian often endeavors to conceal them by rubbing tlour or chalk over 
chem. 

The season when the skins are in the best condition is from Septem- 
der to the middle of December, The freshly deposited eggs have not 
yet produced larvie of sufficient size to injure the skin, and the wounds 
produced by those dropping out in the month of May have healed and 
left the skin in condition. 

Certain skins intended for special purposes must be smoked. The 
process of smoking tends to render it less liable to injury from mois- 
ture. The pyroligneous vapors act as antiseptics and thus at least 
retard decomposition of those articles most exposed to wet. The tents 
and foot wear are always tanned with the smoke and this process is 


296 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


always subsequent to that of bringing the skins into the pliable condi: 
tion. 

The process adopted by these Indians in) smoking the deerskins is 
as follows: The woods are searched for rotten wood of a special 
character, It must be affected with a kind of dry rot: which renders 
the fibers of a spongy nature, This is procured and thoroughly dried, 

The skins to be smoked are 
selected and two of nearly 
the same size and condition 
are chosen, and sewed into 
the form of a bag with the 
Hid. 106.—Paint stick, Nenonot. hairy side within, The after 
portions of the skin are suspended trom a convenient pole and the head 
and neck portions lett free or open. To the edges of these is sewed a 
cloth, usually a piece of baling cloth, and this is also left open, The 
rotten wood is placed in a pan or vessel and as it: smol 
ders, never burning into a blaze, the pale, blue, pungent 
smoke is «allowed to ascend within the cavity of the 
deerskin bag. The cloth is merely to form a conduit for 
the smoke as the skin should not be too near the fire, 

As the process continues the skins are inspected be- 
tween the stitches of the sewing and when the opera- 
tion has progressed) sufficiently they are taken down. 
It will now be found that the surface has assumed a 
pale, clear brown color, the shade of which depends on 
the length of the exposure to the smoke, 

The cloth is removed and the skins are immediately 
folded, with the smoked. side within, and laid away for 
several days to season. If, however, the skin be left to 
the influence of the air the coloring matter immediately 
disappears leaving it of a color only slightly different 
from what it was before it was smoked. 

The sears, made by the larvie of the insects, do not 
“take” the smoke as well as the healthy portions and so present a 
pitted or scaly appearance, From the skins having an abundance of 
the scars are made the tents and inferior grades of moccasins and the 

tops of the betterclass of foot- 


en. j wear, 
RIN, : ’ The paints used tor decorating 
~ Be / 


the buekskin garments are ap- 
Fis, 108.—Paint stick. Nonenot. plied by means of bits of bone’ 
or horn of a peculiar shape best understood from the figures (Figs. 
106-110), 
Those with two, three or four tines are used for making the compli 
cated patterns of parallel lines, and are always made of antler, while 
the simple form is sometimes of wood, 


Fig. 107 


TURNER, | DECORATION, 297 


A block of wood with one or more bowl-shaped cavities cut in it (Pig. 
111) serves to hold the mixed paints, especially when several colors are 
to be used in succession, 

Small wooden bowls | 
are also) employed. 
(Figs. 112-113.) 

The pigments used 
are procured from dif’ 
erent sources, From the traders are obtained indigo in the erude con- 
dition or in the form of washing blue, vermilion in small buckskin bags, 
ane a few other colors. An abundance of red earth occurs in several 


Fig, 109,—Paint stick, Nenenot, 


localities. The pigments 
are reduced to the finest 
possible condition and 
kneaded with the fingers 
until ready tor the addi- 
tion of water often mixed 
with a slight quantity of oii or tallow, A tivorite vehicle for the paint 
is the prepared roe of a sucker (Catastomus) abounding in the waters of 
the district, The female fish are stripped of the mass of ova which is 
broken up in a vessel and 
the liquid strained through 
a coarse cloth, The color is ( 
afaint yellow which becomes 
deeper with age. The thuid 
is allowed to dry and when required for use is dissolved in water, It 
has then a semiviseid consistence and in this condition is mixed with 
the various pigments. When a yellowish color is desired the tish-egg 
preparation is applied alone. The albumen gives sufficient adhesive 
quality to the paint and produce a 
rich glaze, giving a good ettect to 
the otherwise dull colors, 

The process” of preparing the 
erude mineral colors is quite tedi- 
ous as the attrition is produced by 
rubbing the substance between two 
smooth stones, a little water ocea- 

sionally being added to hold the 

Fig. 12 —-Paint cup. Nenenot, particles together. The prepared 
paints are put in the vessels already described, and when ready for use 
a quantity is taken with the tinger and placed in the palm of the hand 
while the other fingers hold the instrument by which it is to be ap- 
plied. The paint stick is carefully drawn through the thin layer of paint 
spread on the other palm and a quantity, depending on the thickness 
of the layer, adheres to the edges of the appliance and by a carefully 
guided motion of the hand the lines desired are produced, The eye 


Fig. 110 — Paint stiek. Nenenort, 


intend —— beat! 


ae 
oe as 


Kia, 111.—Paint F up. Nenenot. 


298 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


one guides the drawing, however intricate it may be, The artist fre- 
quently attempts to imitate some of the delicate designs on a gaudy 
bandana handkerchief or some similar fabric, The principal source of 
the hematite is a lake near the headwaters of George's river where it 


Fig, 113.—Paint cup. Nenenot, 
occurs as a mass of disintegrated rock along the margin. The water 
has by freezing split great quantities from the mass and when there is 
a strong wind from the opposite direction the water is often lashed into 
a blood-red foam. 


DWELLINGS, 


The Nenenot live, both in summer and in winter, in deerskin tent, 
(see Fig, 114), which are constructed in the following manner: A suffi- 


\, sae Aa gas Lia: 


oie ee 


i 


akva. 


Fig. 114.—Nenenot Indian tent, 


cient number of small poles cut from the woods are deprived of their 
branches and brought tothe camp site. A location is selected and the 
poles are erected in a cirele, with tops leaning toward the center so as 
to form a cone LO to 14 feet in height, having a diameter at its base of 


= ~ 


ee 


TURNER, | DWELLINGS, 299 


from 10 to 18 feet, The skins forming the cover are those of the rein- 
deer, and those selected for this purpose are usually of an inferior 
grade, A suflicient number are sewed together to form a strip long 
enough to reach around the poles when set up. As the tents differ in 
size according to the number of people who occupy them, the skins 
sewed together may be from eight to twelve. The first strip is made 
for the lower part of the poles and is attached to them by means of 
strings fiustened within, A second strip is made to go around the ap- 
per part of the poles, and is, of course, correspondingly shorter, Tt is 
placed last so as to overlap the lower breadth and thus prevent rain 
and snow from blowing in, The door is usually made of one large skin 
or two smaller ones, It is tied to the poles at the upper corners and 
at the lower has a small log of wood as a weight to prevent it from 
lapping. The poles at the apex ave not covered and through them the 
smoke from the tire built in the center within ascends and finds exit. 

The interior of the tent is arranged to suit the occupants. The floor 
is usually covered with the branches of young spruce, and when care- 
fully laid these form an admirable protection from the cold ground and 
a sott carpeting, 

The women “to lay this tlooring display great taste, and certain of 
them are noted for their skill in disposing the branches, The center 
of the tent is reserved for the tire which is built there among a few 
stones, 

The oceupants arrange themselves according to the importance of the 
place they oceupy in the family, The owner or head man is always to 
be found on the side opposite the tire. This is considered a place of 
honor, to whieh all guests who are to be complimented are invited to 
wseat, 

The other members of the group arrange themselves along the sides 
of the tent, and those who have been adopted into the family oceupy 
positions next the doorway, 

Over the tire may be poles reaching across the tent, and on these will 
be suspended kettles and pots obtained from the traders, The cooking 
utensils are few in number, one vessel serving various purposes, 

The hunting gear and the skins of animals, together with the articles 
belonging to the females may be seen suspended trom various portions 
of the interior, Around the edges are the blankets of deerskin, and 
those bought from the traders, lying in disorder, The outer edge of 
the interior is slightly raised above the center, and affords a convenient 
slope for those who desire to sleep. The occupants always sleep with 
their feet toward the tireplace, around which there is no brush, lest it 
be set on fire during sleep and destroy the tent. 

They have regular hours for sleeping, but as these are only for a period 
of short duracon, it is not unusual to tind half the inmates asleep at 
any time a teng is visited, 

The preparation of the food appears to go on at all times, and there 


300 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


are no regular hours for partaking of their meals, as each person eats 
when convenient, The food is taken directly from the pot or kettle, 
and each one helps himself. Forks are not used, and the food is divided 
with a knife or torn with the fingers, 


SWEAT HOUSES, 


The Nenenot are in the habit of taking steam baths, for which pur- 
pose they use a suda‘ory or sweat house, constructed as follows: A 
number of tlexible poles of small size, usually willow or alder, which 
grow to sufticient size along the banks of the streams, are bent to form 
a hemispherical or dome-shaped strueture, which is covered with tent 
skins. A sandy locality is selected or one free from snow in winter, 
and a tierce fire is built. When it is well under way a number of stones 
are thrown into the fire to heat. When the heat is sutticient the tire is 
removed anc the structure is quickly ereeted over the hot stones and 
some one fron: the outside fastens down the edges of the tenting with 
stones to prevent the loss of heat. A kettle of water previously placed 
within the bath house is used to pour over the stones, when heat 
rises to a suffocating degree and produces the desired) perspiration, 
Water is not used to bathe in, though sometimes a slight quantity 1s 
poured upon the head only. The bather remains within the hut until 
the heat has nearly exhausted him. 

These baths are frequently taken, and often when he has just started 
ona journey the head of the family will be seized with a desire to have 
a bath. Everything must await this operation before the journey is 
resumed, 

An amusing incident oecurred at Fort Chimo in the spring of L882, 
That season the reindeer were extremely numerous at that place, as they 
were crossing to go to the northeast to drop the fawns. Often when 
the herds op. bands were panic stricken they rushed among the Indian 
tents, the houses of the station, and, in fact, everywhere, with yelping 
dogs and screaming women and children at their heels, An old) man 
and wife were in the sweat house at a time when a very large drove of 
the deer, in their frantic endeavors to escape their pursuers, headed 
directly for the bath. Some one screamed to the occupants to look out 
for the deer, The man and wife made their exit just asa score or more 
of the animals reached the spot. The man tore up the tenting of the 
bath house and whirled it in the air, while the old woman cut the most 
astonishing anties. The whole population witnessed the occurrence 
and did not fail to help increase the tumult, Signs of former sudatories 
are quite common along the paths where the Indians have traveled for 
many years. 

HOUSEHOLD UTENSILS, RTC. 


Rach household is supplied with sundry wooden vessels of various 
sizes (lig, 115) which serve for buckets for holding water and for drink- 


TURNER, | HOUSEHOLD UTENSILS. 


one-third of an inch thick. They 
are steamed and bent into ovoid 
or cirewlar forms and the ends 
of the strip overlapping. Then 
they are sewed with split roots | 
from those trees. A groove is 
cut near the lower edge and inte 
it is placed a dish-shaped piece 
of wood for a bottom. 

These vessels are identical in 
shape and funetion with those 


Fig. 116.—BRirehbark basket, Nenenot. 


ing berries, of which they are inordinately 
fond: and during that season it is a rarity 
to see a Woman or man without a mouth 
stained the peculiar blue color which these 
berries impart. 

Baskets of this shape frequently have a 
top of buckskin sewed to them, closed with 
a drawstring, as shown in Fig. 117 (No. 
3485). Such things serve to hold) trinkets 
and other small articles. 

Large objects are carried in’ bags, either 
long or basket-shaped, made of the skins of 
deer legs. The leg skins are seraped and bie. 1 


i 


301 


ing cups. They are made of strips of thin boards eut from spruce or 
from larch trees, the wider strips being as muchas six inches wide and 


Fig. 115.— Wooden bucket, Nenenot. 


manufactured by the Yukon river Indians of Alaska. 
They also use berry-dishes or baskets like Fig. 116 made from the 


bark of the spruce 
peeled in the spring 
of the year. At this 
time the dark is 
quite flexible and 
may be bent into 
the desired shape. 
The corners are 
sewed with coarse 
roots from the same 
tree and the rim is 
strengthened by a 
stcip of root sewed 
over and around it 
by means of a finer 


strand, These baskets serve a good purpose when the women are pick- 


“~ 


Birehbark basket, Nenenot, 


worked to a moderate degree of pliability and their edges sewed together 
until a suficient number have been joined to make the bag of the re- 


302 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


quired size, This bag is used to hold the clothing, furs, and other valu- 

ables. When on a trip they are invariably carried. If the journey be 

performed on foot the two ends are tied with a thong and the bag 
thrown over the shoulder. 

In preparing food stone pestles of various sizes were 
formerly used of the shape shown in Fig. 118. These 
pestles are now mostly out of date and superseded by 
cast-iron ones with steel faces, procured from the 
traders. The metal pounders, however, are so heavy 
that they are objectionable to people who have to 
make their burdens on the portages as light as pos- 
sible. 

Spoons to litt pieces of floating meat from the hot 
liquor in which it is cooked, are made of reindeer 
antler and of wood. The pattern of these spoons is 
shown in the figures (Fig. 119). One shape (No.3351, 

Fic. 118.—Stone pestle, Figs, 120, 121,122), was perhaps copied from a civil- 

manor. ized ladle, Pots are suspended over the fire with pot- 
hooks of reindeer antler hung up by a loop of thong. These pothooks 
are also made of wood. 


TOBACCO AND PIPES, 


Like all other Indians, 
these people are inordi- 
nately fond of tobacco 
for smoking, chewing, 
and snuff; the latter, 
however, is used only by 
aged individuals, espe- 
cially the females, whose 
countenances show the Fig. 119.—Wooden spoon or ladle, Nenenot. 
effect in a manner quite disgusting. The men consider & supply of to- 
bacco of as much importance as the supply of ammunition for the pros- 
ecution of the chase. The first 
request upon meeting an Indian 
is that you furnish him with a 
chew or a pipe full. Little satis- 
factory intercourse can be had 
with him until he is mollitied by 
a giftof tobacco, The first thing 
that an Indian receives when ar- 
riving at the trading post is a 
clay pipe and a plug of tobacco, The pint of molasses and the 
three or four hard biscuit (which have received the local name of 
‘Canadian padlock,” doubtless because they are so difficult to open), 
are of secondary consideration. When the spring arrivals are camped 


Fic, 120.—Wooden spoon or ladle, Nenenot, 


BUREAU OF ETHNOLOGY 


TURNER. | HOUSEHOLD UTENSILS. 303 


at the station it is not unusual for several to contribute a number of 
plugs of tobacco and a gallon of molasses. These are boiled together 
and then water is added to the mixture. This villainous compound is 
drunk until a state of stupefaction ensues, The muddled creature 
under the influence of that liquor seems like an idiot. The effect is 
terrible and does not wear away for several days. The pipes used for 
smoking are made of stone obtained from river pebbles, usually a fine- 
grained compact sandstone. The color of this stone varies fiom a dark 
reddish brown nearly the color _ 

of clotted blood to a lighter 

shade of that color. The red 

stones often have spots of every 

size and shape of a yellowish 

drab which torm a strange con- 

trast with the darker colors. 

The darker the stone the less ; 

spotting it will have. The best F1G, 121.—Wooden spoon or ladle, Nenenot. 

of all the pipes and those most valued ace of greenish sandstone having 
strata of darker colors which appear as beautiful graining when the 
pipe is cut into form and polished. 

Other pipes are of hard slate and very dark without markings. All 
the material is hard and the effect of the tire within renders them har- 
der and liable to crack if used in very cold weather. These pipes vary 
but little in shape (I have figured three-——P1. xxxvu1 and Fig, 123—to 
show the pattern), but there is considerable difference in size. The 
largest ones are made of the green stone, while the smaller ones are 
made of other stones. The 
stem is of spruce wood and is 
prepared by boring a small 
hele through the stick length- 
wise and whittling it down 
to the required size. It is 
from 4 to 8 inches long and is 
often ornamented with a band 
of many colored beads. 

The rough stone for a pipe 
is selected and chipped into crude form. The successive operations of 
wearing it down to the desired size are accomplished by means of a 
coarse file or a harder stone, The amount of labor bestowed upon a 
pipe consumes several days’ time before the final polish is given. 

The value set upon these pipes is according to the color of the stone, 
as much as the amount of labor expended in making them, They are 
always filthy, partly on account of the bad quality of tobacco used, 
The ashes and other aceumulations within are removed by means of a 
todkin-shaped instrument of bone or horn, The back of a broken horn 
comb is a favorite material for making a decorated pipe-cleaner (Fig. 


Fig, 122.—Wooden spoon or ladle, Nenenot. 


304 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


124), The ornamentations consist of erueitorm and quadrate tigures:on 
the handle. The tobaeco used for smoking is the commonest black 
plug of very inferior quality, soaked with molasses and licorice. ‘This 
moist tobacco is cut into pieces and a coal of fire placed upon it. They 
prefer this quality, and purchase the lighter and drier kinds onlyeto 
serve as kindling for the darker sort. 

They do not know how to brew or ferment liquors of any kind, ane 
as the importation of intoxicants is wisely prohibited, the native hase 
opportunity to indulge in his craving for liquors, the supply of whieh 
was plentiful in former years. A spruce beer is made by the servamts 
of the company for the holidays, and a taste is: sometimes given tera 


Fit. 123.—-Stone tobacco pipe Pia, 124.—Pipecleaner, Nenenot, 


favorite Indian, who is so easily atfected that a pint of this mild beer 
will send him reeling and happy to his tent, where it soon becomes 
known that beer is to be had. The importunities for drink are new so 
frequent, that the barrel must be emptied of its contents in order to 
avoid the coustant beggings for it, 


MEANS OF TRANSLORTATION, 
BY WATER 


All the Indians of this vegion use bireh-bark canoes, of the pattern 
shown in the figure (Pl. XXx1x, froma photograph; the collection also 
contains six wooden models of these canoes), The style of canoe used 
by the Little Whale river Indians of the eastern side of Hudson bay 
has very much more sheer at the bow and stern than those used in the 


acai Fae ai tc my 


nest 


Spee Sa: 


i eiaigtal ey ne 
Ans saat a) Ra ne 


SAIH MYOSWOW ‘LONONGN ‘RONDD YEwo_LUALIC 


Né3iivd wu 


BUREAU OF ETHNOLOGY 


ELEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PL. KAKIX 


BIRCH-BARK CANOE, NENENOT, KOKSOAK RIVER PATTERN 


TURNER. } TRANSPORTATION BY WATER. 805 


villey of the Koksoak, The canoe of each individual differs from others 
according to the perso:al taste or need of the maker. The requirements 
are that the canoe shall be able to transport himself and family, together 
with the household property, whenever it is desired to change camps. 
Some of the canoes are small, others large, often possessed by two or 
more individuals in common, 

These canoes ave constructed in the following manner: Trees are 
selected which when split will afford a number of straight-gramed 
slats free from knots, These slats are shaved to the required thick- 
ness and laid aside to season, They are 3 or 4 inches wide and less 
than one-third of an inch in thickness, The exterior or longitudinal 
strips are placed so that their edges will touch each other. The inside 
strips or ribs are placed about their own width apart, and of course are 
placed at right angles to the longitudinal slats. They are thinner than 
the side strips and become almost like shavings at the bow and stern, 
The two layers of slats form a kind of shell upon which the skin of 
bark tits tightly. The first process with the bark is to free it from the 
outside scaling layers; the next is to soak it for several days in fresh 
water to soften it; otherwise, when dry it would crack like an eggshell, 
When it has macerated a sufficient time it is taken out and laid over a 
form of clay or other earth, which has previously been roughly molded 
to the shape of the interior of the canoe. The bark is now sewed along 
the edges of the strips with roots of the spruce tree. These are long 
and tough, and resemble splits of rattan when properly prepared for 
the purpose by splitting and shaving with a knife. Various sizes of 
these roots are used for the different portions. The threads are also 
soaked in water until they become so flexible that they may be tied into 
aw knot without breaking. 

When the bark skin rudely contorms to the shape of the mold of 
earth, the rails or round strips of wood along the inner edge of the 
canoe are placed in position and the ends of the bark strips laid over 
it and sewed. A second rail is now laid upon the first and drawn 
down to it by means of the root thongs, A piece of wood is shaped tor 
the bow and one for the stern and inserted in position, and the end 
seams of the canoe are sewed over these pieces. 

The interior is then ready for the longitudinal strips, which are placed 
at the bottom first and gradually built up on each side until the rails 
are reached. The ribs or transverse strips are next placed in position. 
Five or more crosspieces, or thwarts, are fastened to the side rails to 
give stiffness to the sides and to prevent collapsing, and they may be 
set either below or above the rail. The greatest care must be exercised 
to give to both sides of the canoe the same shape and to have the keel 
evenly balanced. This is rudely regulated by the eye during the process 
of construction. After all the strips are put in, the boat is allowed 
to season and dry. This causes the bark to shrink, and while drying 
the whole is frequently inspected to discover any splits or cracks in 

11 ETH——20 


306 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


the bark, The Indian etten wets the canoe, lest it dry too rapidly and 
split under the tension. When the form and make are satisfactory the 
seams are smeared with a mixture of spruce gum (or resin bought from 
the traders’), mixed with seal oil to render it less easily broken, This 
mixture is while hot laid upon the dry surface with a small paddle, 

After the guin has seasoned for a day or so the canoe is put upon the 
water and tested for its speed and seaworthiness. All leaks and needed 
repairs are immediately attended to, and it is at length 
ready for use, 

Many persons have not the skill needed to coustruct 
wecanoe, and they employ those who have had experience 
and are known to build an excellent boat. 

There are two kinds of canoes in use among those In- 
dians, differing only in the shape of the stern and prow. 
The original form was nearly Hat along the rails and had 
the bow and stern but little turned up. Of later: years 
intercourse with some of their neighbors has induced 
them to modify the nearly straight edge canoe into an 
intermediate shape between their own and that of the 
Kast Main Indians, whose canoes are very much turned 
up, and are acknowledged to be fur superior vessels to 
those of the Ungava Indians. 

As the forests in the vicinity of Fort Chimo do not 
contain birch trees, and none are found until the head- 
waters of the Koksoak are reached, where they are too 
sinall to afford bark of suflicient size and thickness, the 
Indians are compelled to procure the bark from the 
traders, who import it from the St| Lawrence river and 
gulf stations to Fort Chimo, It comes in bundles large 
enough to cover a single canoe of moderate size. If a 
canoe is to be very large two bundles are required, The 

value of a black fox skin purchases a bundle of bark. 

During the spring months, while the weather is some- 
what warm, the men are engaged in preparing the strips 
and bark for the canoe which is to convey them up the 
river when the ice breaks and the river is open for navi- 
gation. 

The paddle has a single blade with a handle searcesy 
more than half the length of the paddle. [t is used with 
ae ae riers Poth hands, the strokes being given on alternate sides as 
canve, it glides through the water. 

When it is necessary that a portage be made the voyager takes the 
canoe upon his shoulders by letting one of the center thwarts rest on 
the back of the neck. The hands are thrown backward to hold up the 
end of the canoe from the ground. A headband, such as [ have already 
described, of birch bark or cloth, often fancifully ornamented with 


TURNER, } TRANSPORTATION BY WATER. 307 


nd beads, fits over the forehead and is attached to the sides of the canoe 
the by means of thongs, which prevent the canoe from slipping off the 
— shoulders as the porter quickly tray- 
his erses the narrow pathway through 
the trees and bushes, The ground 
the is often so uneven and rough that 
led long detours have to be made by the 
uth porter, while the rest of the party 
may gow shorter path to the place 
net where the canoe will again be placed 
nee in the water, A part of the neces 
sary equipments for a trip ina eanoe 
In- are pieces of bark, root threads, and 
OW gum to repair any damage resulting 
nad from an accidental contact with a 
wus stone or snag, 
ced Without the bireh-bark canoe the 
an Indian would have difficulty in ob- 
the taining his living, as it is even more 
ned necessary than the sled, and nearly 
5 to as useful as the snowshoe, 
The paddles used with these ca- 
not hoes are about 5 feet long, having a 
aul blade about 30 inches long and 44 
too wide. The handle terminates in a 
the sort of knob, The paddle referred 
the to, forapplying the gum and grease 
and to the seams of the canoe, has the 
ree shape of a tlattened spoon with 
it a rounded bowl (Fig. 125), The gum 
The 


is heated, and while hot. is poured 
along the seams and pressed into 
the interstices of the stitches with 
the paddle, When a patch is to be 
applied over a fracture or broken 
place in the bark, it may be made 
: to adhere by the sticky properties 
very q of the gum alone, if the distance to 
vith 4 be traveled is not great. A fire is 
then made and the wax heated; the 


q piece of bark is edged with the gun @ K Sra 
the a and pressed tirmly over the rent. & hae ht 
i on s A second coat is applied over the ak 
the 4 ai pad 


edges of the bark, after the first has 


ic; 
Ines 
rips 
the 
wwi- 


Sas 


FiG. 126.—Toboggan, Nenenot, Fa. 127,—Tobog- 


audy become cold. A few minutes suftice allo'viows a Aaa 
vith 


to repair an apparently alarming hole, 


308 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 
HY LAND, 


For carrying loads over the snow all the Indians of this region use 
large sleds (Figs, 126, 127) called ta-bas-kin, which is a word equiva. 
lent to the well known name “toboggan.” These sleds, as used among 
the Indians under consideration, differ very greatly in size according to 
the use for which they are designed, 

The method of construction is as follows: A: tree is selected as free 
from knots as possible and two boards of less than an ineh in thiekness 
are hewed or split from it, These boards are further dressed to the 
required thickness and width, ‘The tinal operation consists in shaving 
them down with a “crooked 
knife” to little more than half 
wn inch in thickness, One 
edge of each board is) then 
straightened and the two 
edges placed together, The 
length is rarely more than 
18 feet, The front end is 
steamed or heated ina kettle 
of hot water until the boards 
become flexible, The ends 
are turned up to the desired 
curve and then bent over at 
the end, where they are held 
In position by a transverse 
bar of wood, This) bar is 
slightly concave on the side 
hext the sled and gives the 
nose a curved shape. The 
curved portion of the front 
may rise as muchas 18 inches 
above the surface over which 
the sled travels. At the 
place where the curve begins a second transverse bar is placed, and 
at a distance behind it a third, fourth, and fifth bars are fastened, 
Sometimes an additional bar is to be found on the upper side of the bot- 
tom. ‘These bars are all fastened to the two bottom boards by means of 
thongs of parchment deerskin, and run through holes on the bottom 
boards, On the under side the thongs are let into places cut out between 
the two holes, so that the thongs will not be worn when passing over 
the snow. They are usually fastened in four places, one at each end of 
the bar and one on each side of the crevice between the edges of the 
two boards, From the nose of the first bar run a pair of very stout 
thongs or else twisted sinew, which are drawn tight enough to prevent 
the nose and curve from straightening out. From the end of the tirst 


Fig, 128,—Nenenot snowshoe, single bar 


DURE AU OF ETHNOLOGY ELEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT 


= PM 


» 
4 


£2, 
stars "7 


aoe 
sss 


4 


- 


s 


ayy 


NENENOT SNOWSHOE‘ SWALLOW-TAIL."' 


TURNER. } TRANSPORTATION BY LAND. 309 


bar to the last one on the heel of the sled is run a stout twisted thong 
under the end of each bar, which there has a notch cut on the under 
side for the line to pass through. This line serves to strengthen the 
sides and prevent the two boards trom slippiag past each other when 
passing over inequalities of the ground, At the ends or the first bar 
and connected with the side lines are two long stout thongs of twisted 
skin, often 25 feet long. These are used as traces, by which the sled is 
dragged, The shape of the bottom is often fashioned after all the re- 
mainder of the work has been done, The width of the nose is rarely 
more than 9 inches; at the first bar it is about 14 inches and as much 
as 18 inches between the first and second bars. From the widest part 
tothe heel it gradually narrows to a width of 5 to 7 inches. 

Two boards are used, as one of sufficient width could not be obtained 
from the forests of that region. Besides, a single board would certainly 
split, while two obviate this 
danger and render the sled less 
stiff, In) passing over rough 
places the sled must bend to 
conform to inequalities or else 
it would break. fn the con- 
struction of this vehicle the Tn- 
dian displays much skill and a 
perfect Knowledge of the re- 
quirements of the case, The 
load is placed so as to dispose 
the weight on that portion which 
will bear chiefly on the ground. 
The great length of the sled en- 
ables the person to guide it 
more readily. 

Whenona journey the younger 
women and the men drag: it 
along, When the men return 
to the station to trade they 
alone drag it. A small dog is 
sometimes hitched to it by a thong, but as the animal is so small and 
light, it affords but little assistance. The animal, however, would cer- 
tainly wander off in search of game along the track, and by being 
hitched to the sled is kept within bounds, 

All the household effects, consisting of tent, cooking utensils, cloth- 
ing, and other articles are placed on the sled when the people are 
changing camp. 

The Nenenot are skilled in the manufacture and use of snowshoes, 
of whieh four styles are used, viz: The “swallow-tail,” “beaver-tail,” 
Sround-end,” and “single bar” (Pigs. 128,129). /Phe frame is of wood, 
nearly an inch wide and half an ineh thick, usually in two pieces, joined 


Wateceaetse 
’ 
(cv tageniny 


310 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


by long lap splices wrapped with deerskin thongs, either at the sides 
or ends of the shoe. In the single-bar shoe the frame is on one slip, 
spliced at the toe. Birch is the favorite material for snowshoes, }ut is 
rarely to be had except by those Indians who ascend the Koksoak to its 
headwaters, so that spruce and larch are generally used, 

The arrangement of the toe and heel bars of the snow- 
shoes will be best understood from the figures. They are 
usually placed within the frame, and set in mortises in the 
inner side of the frame, before the wrapping of the ends of 
the frames has been drawn together; otherwise the bars 
cord not be placed in the holes to receive them. 

‘che netting is made of deerskin, with the hair removed, 
and allowed to dry into a condition usually known as pareh- 
ment. This is cut into strips of variable width, depending 
on the particular use for which it is wanted. 

A needle of bone, horn, or iron (Fig. 180) is used) for net- 
ting the snowshoes, The shape of the implement is flat and 
rounded at each point, to enable the needle to be used either 
backward or forward, The eye which carries the line is in 
the middle. Various sizes of needles are used for the dif: 
erent kinds of netting, of which the meshes differ greatly 
in size, 

The line is generally 10 to 20 feet in length, and when the 
netting is completed it somewhat resembles the seating of 
wv cane-bottomed chair. Hach individual varies his work 
according to fancy, but as the netting between the bars is 
made of coarser line, more compactly woven, there is less 
difference there than at the toe or heel. 

The netting of the toe is of finer line and meshes than 
the middle or between the bars; while that between the 
heel bar and heel of the snowshoe is finest of all. 

The netting between the bars holds the joints of the 
frames where they lap over each other, 

The toe and heel spaces of netting are held in place by 
the line passing under the threads which are wrapped 
around the bars from the netting between them, and again 
are fastened or slipped through loops of thread or line 

acti haat which are let through the frame of the snowshoe, 
shoe _nesille. Near the center of the toe-bar isa Space left in the netting 
between the bars to admit the toes of the wearer and allow 
them free action while walking. This space is semicircular and is in- 
clesed by several strands of line passing over the toe-bar and forming 
loops, Which have the diagonal lines of the netting passed around them 
and drawn tight. 
The snowshoe is held to the foot by a wide buckskin thong attached 
at the semicircular space back of the toe-bar, The ends must be far 


BURFAU OF ETHNOLOGY ELEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PL. XL 


NYT COV TOT 
ate 


«a 

- 
«2 
a 
4 


ey 
eee 
2 ey 


a ad; a oes: s 
9 ee 3 esas 


NENENOT SNOWSHOE “ BEAVER-TAIL." 


TURNER. SNOW SHOES. 311 


enough apart to admit the width of the foot as far as the toes, and 
must be then drawn down to prevent the foot from pushing too far 
forward and striking against the toe-bar. The loop passing over the 
toes must be slack enough to allow free movement of the foot. When 
the strap suits the foot it is passed around the heel of the wearer and 
tied sufficiently tight to give ease and comfort. If too tight, the 
weight soon presses the tendon of the heel. If too loose, it Crops down 
and the toe slips from under the toe band. 

The single-bar snowshoes are not much used, because they are some- 
what difficult to make. They are of two styles. One has the bar 
directly under the center of the foot. It is wide, and should be strong 
enough to sustain the weight of any wearer, The other style is where 
the single bar is at the front of the toes, which pattern differs from 


the “beaver-tail” style only in the absence of the heel bar. This 
pattern is considered the easiest of all to wear and walk in when once 
learned, The foot straps are exactly like those of the common kinds. 

The single bar in the middle of the snowshoe renders it a matter of 
great discomfort until one is accustomed to it, as the straps are simply 
loops for the toe and heel, This pattern has been already figured. 
The largest snowshoes measure as much as 28 inches across and 3 
feet in length. 

Some of the Indians acquire great expertness in the use of these snow- 
shoes, and are able to run quite rapidly with them, The width of the 
shoes causes one to straddle widely to allow one snowshoe to pass 
above and over the other, Care must be exercised that while bringing 
the rear foot forward the frame does not strike the ankle and produce 
a@ serious bruise, In ascending a hill the toe must elevate the snow- 


312 


shoe to a 


Fig, 132— Bow 
Nenenot. 


THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


vid a stumble, In descending the body must be thrown well 
back or a pitch heels over head ensues, and sometimes the 
frames strike the back of the head. 

To put them on the feet the foot must enter the loop from 
forward toward the rear, and when the loop is on the toot 
the latter must be turned within the loop and then passed 
under the toe band. 

Everybody wears snowshoes—men, women, and children, 
Without them travel in winter would) be an impossibility, 
and as the capture of furs is made in winter and the ground 
to be hunted over must of necessity be of great area, the 
snowshoe becomes a necessity as much as the canoe in sum- 
mer, 

I collected two peculiar pairs of snowshoes, made of tliat 
spruce boards (Fig. 131), Theyare shaped exactly like netted 
snowshoes of the © beaver tail” pattern,and the arrangement 
of the foot strap is the same as usual, 

They came from the Little Whale river Indians, who in 
formed me that they were worn on soft snow. 

In the spring of the year, when the snow is rapidly melted 
by sun, the netted snowshoes become clogged with slush, 
rendering the weight very fatiguing. Wooden snowshoes 
are admirably adapted for that season of the year, and may 
be made ina few hours, while the netted ones require sev- 
eral days’ assiduous labor, The Indians of the Koksoak val- 
ley do not use the wooden snowshoes, 


WEAPONS, 


In former times these Indians used the bow and arrow 
exclusively, but they have now nearly discarded these wea- 
pons for the guns which they procure from the traders. 

The bow and arrow is, however, still used to kill) ptarmi- 
gan, hares, and rabbits. The bow (Fig. 132) consists ofa 
piece of larch or spruce wood of 4 to 6 teet in length. It is 
only slightly narrower and thinner »f the ends, and nearly 
an inch thick and an inehand a half wide at the central por- 
tions. But little ingenuity is displayed in’ the construction 
of these weapons, They have considerable elasticity, and if 
broken it is easy to obtain a piece of wood from the forest and 
fashion another, The string is a strand of deerskin, twisted 
or rolled. It is rare to find a bow that has a single string. 

The arrows are usually 2 feet or 30 inches long, and feath- 
ered with three ptarmigan feathers. (igs. 133-136.) The 
head is usually an egg-shaped knob, terminiting in a slender 
point which soon breaks off, . 

This weapon is used for small game, as the cost of ammu- 
nition is too great to spend it upon game as readily procured 


BUR 


— >. 


Wy 


BUREAU OF 


ETHN 


ur 


ELEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT 


PL. 


mL 


NENENOT 


SNOWSHOE 


*“ROUND-END." 


TURNER. | WEAPONS, 3138 


by this cheaper method, The Indian is very expert in the use of the 
bow and arrow, and is able to knock over a ptarmigan or crouching 
hare every time at 25 yards, The force with which the arrow is pro- 
jected is astonishing. [have seen a ptarmigan rolled for many yards 
amid a perfect cloud of feathers when struck by the arrow. It often 
tears the entire side out of the bird. 

In former years the arrow did great execution among the deer in 
the water or deep snow banks among which they floundered when 
driven into them by the Indian who, on snowshoes, was able to travel 
where the deer saak nearly out of sight. 


Fig, 133,— Arrow, Fig, 14.— Arrow, Fig. 185, —Arrow, Fig, 136.—Arrow, 
Nenenot, Nenenot, Nenenot, Nenenot. 


Among the Indian boys it is yet a favorite amusement to shoot 
small birds with the bow and arrow Small crossbows also are used 
by children, They have doubtless been made after those brought by 
some white man, The children have great sport with these bows. 

The spear, already referred to, for killing the swimming reindeer, is 
shown in Fig. 187, The wooder shaft is 6 feet long, and the steel 
point, which is made of a tlat file beaten down to a quarter of an inch 
square, is 11 inches long. It is set into the end of the shaft and 
fastended by a whipping of sinew. 

The weapon is held by the hand in a manner peculiar as well as un- 
ecunfortable. The closed hand over the butt end of the weapon is so 


314 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


placed as to have the fingers upward and the outside of the hand 
toward the point, this rather awkward grasp enables the person to let 
go of the weapon in case of threatened disaster resulting 
trom amisdirected thrust. The collection also contains three 
models of deer spears, Nos, 3205-3207, These are often 
also used as arrows to shoot at larger game when the In- 
dian is out hunting ptarmigan, hares, and rabbits. A hun- 
gry wolverene or a famished wolf would prove trouble- 
some to kill with the blunt arrows. These models differ 
from the larger spear 
only in size, 
The Little Whale 
river Indians use a 
peculiar spear for kill- 
ing white whales. 
(Figs. 138,139), It is 
modeled after the Es- 
kimo harpoon, but has 
ho “loose shaft,” or 


Fig. 137,— Deer Fig. 188.—White whale spear, Fig, 139.—Point of white 
lance, Nenenot, Little Whale river. whale spear enlarged. 


rather, the fore shaft and loose shaft are in one piece, and has a ciren- 
lar wooden disk fitted to the butt of the shaft, which takes the place of 
the bladder float, and serves to impede the motions of the animal when 


TURNER.) WEAPONS. 815 


struck, Reindeer antler is substituted for the ivory of the Eskimo 
weapon, The blades are of copper or iron and riveted in, These 
spears are 8 or 10 feet long. 

The snare (lig, 140) forms one of the less important methods of 
procuring these animals, It is of parchment made from the skin of the 
reindeer cut into thin narrow thongs. Several of these strands, usually 
three, are plaited together to form «layer; and of these layers three 
are plaited together to form the snave line, It often is made, however, 
of three single strands cut somewhat wider and creased so that they will 
lie well when the three are plaited. The more strands the greater the 


WY 4 
N \ 
WSS 


flexibility of the line, but as there must be a certain amount of stiff 
ness to hold it in position the many strands must be woven more 
tightly together, The length varies from 10 to 20 feet, and at the 
end is a loop formed by turning the strands back and. splicing them. 
Through the loop the other end is passed, and the noose is made, 

When a herd of deer is discovered in a favorable locality the people 
of the vicinity are informed and hasty preparations are made. 

The effort is to cause the deer to pass through a narrow defile con- 
taining bushes. The snares are then placed in position by tying the 
free end of the line to a suitable tree and suspending the noose where 
the heads or antlers will become entangled. Some are placed so that 
when the foot is lifted the noose is carried along and tightens on it. 


316 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


The people surround the animals, and ata given signal shout and 
create the greatest din, to confuse the creatures, which plunge toward 
the place where the snares are set, One or two hunters concealed in 
that locality appear suddenly and further confuse the now panie- 
stricken animals, which rush in every direction before their foes, They 
become immeshed in the nooses and ere held until their throats are cut 
or they are choked by the cord, 

It frequently happens that two deer will be caught in asingle snare, 
The Indians assert that itis a most ludicrous sight to witness two 
sturdy bucks caught by the antlers ina single snare. They appear to 
accuse each other of the misfortune, and struggle terribly to free them. 
selves, Inthe animals which are strangled by the noose the congested 
blood distends the verns avd renders the flesh very dark, 

Previous to the general useof guns the snaring method was of greater 
importance than at the present day. ven now the Indian does not 
lose any opportunity of employing the snare, 

Some of the snares are made of tanned skin, which is softer and is 
often ornamented with strands of beads attached tothe end of the line, 
Some of them are colored red, with a mixture of vermilion and hematite 
earths, thinned with water, 


HUNTING, 


T have alrewly described the methods of hunting the reindeer and of 


capturing small game, 

The beaver is not plentiful in the Ungava district, and not until the 
headwaters of the Koksoak and the lakes near the souree of George's 
river are reached are they to be found at all, excepting occasional 
stragglers, 

The Indians have tew of the skins of this animal to sellat the trading 
post of Fort Chimo, 

The methods of capture differ in some respects from those elsewhere 
employed, 

The habits of the beaver are so well known that a statement of their 
manner of life is minecessary, 

The food supply north of latitude 55° is so limited in quality and 
quantity that the scarcity of the animals is due entirely to the absence 
of the food necessary for their existence, 

When the dams and structures made by the beaver are discovered 
the people devise means to capture it. 

If it is convenient to get at the holes leading to the structure, which 
are always under water so deep that it will not freeze to the bottom, 


they are closed with a stick of wood and an opening made in the top of 


the hut. The animal is then caught by the hind legs or tail and lifted 
out. It seldom attempts to defend itself at first. As soon as the hunter 
can do so he jerks the animal out, and with a blow on its head kills it. 
If he should pause for an instant from the time the hand is put on the 


TUNNEN, | HUNTING, B17 


animal until the death blow is given, that very instant he certainly 
will be bitten with teeth so sharp and powerful that the fingers may be 
snipped from the hand as though with a pair of shears, The wound 
thus intlicted is often very severe and difficult to heal, as the bite is 
not only cutting but crushing, 

Where the water can be drained from the pond or like 
in which the beavers’ hut is built, the Indians often leave 
it high and dry by damming off the supply and allowing 
the water to drain away, As soon as the house is out of 
water the oceupant emerges and is killed, Beavers are 
sometimes shot while sporting on the water during moon- 
light nights, 

Some of the animals are captured by means of a net of 
peculiar construction, This net is of fin, deerskin thongs 
netted into acirele nearly 2 feet in diameter, with meshes 
about anidneh square, The meshes in the outer row are 
threaded upon a stout thong of deerskin, in length about 
fourtimes the diameter of the net. This thong is now tied 
at the ends, and over one end thus tied is slipped a ving 
made of spruce root and wound with sinew to strengthen 
it. ‘This ring is about an ineh in diameter, only suflicient 
to allow freedom of the ends of the line, It is tastened 
to one of the meshes of the net in order to keep its place, 

Where the wate? is too deep and only a single beaver is 
in the lodge the vet is carefully spread over the mouth of 
the exit so phiced as to form a purse into which t' head 
and neck of the auimal will be thrust as it leave the hut, 
The mouth of the purse now tightens from the ring slip- 
ping along the string, and thus strangles the animal or 
else causes it to drown as it struggles to escape trom the 
tightening cord, 

The net is said to be a very eflective means of capturing 
the beaver and will succeed when it has become too wary 
to be shot on the surface of the water, 

The tlesh of the beaver is considered valuable food by 


these people. They prize it highly and prefer the tlesh rE yu 


of the female to that of the male. 


MISCELLANEOUS IMPLEMENTS, TOOLS, ETC. 


One of the most important tools used by the Neneno? is the “erooked” 
knife (Fig. M41). These instruments are made from steel tiles or knite 
blades, They are of various sizes depending on the amount of material 
at hand, The Indian takes a piece of metal and grinds one side of it 
flatand smooth; the other is edged like a drawing knife. The blade is 
now heated and bent to the desired curve. Some ave more bent than 
others and some have only the point bent to one side. The few left- 


318 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


handed persons have the blade formed to suit themselves. It is set in 
a handle curved from the user and bent upward like the blade. At the 
end of the handle is generally to be found a thong on which a wooden 
button is placed for attachment to the belt, as no man ever goes oft on 
a journey without this knife, however short may be the distance. 

The handle is held in the hand at right angles or across the body and 
invariable drawn toward the user, It is employed for all purposes of 
whittling or shaving wood and one would be surprised to observe what 
large strips will separate when started with this apparently frail blade. 


Fig, 143.—S8now shovel, — Fig. 144.—Lee-seoop, 
Fig. 142.--Awl, Nenenot, Nenenot Nenenot, 


The strips and slats of canoes, paddles, snowshoes, and in fact every- 
thing that can be cut from wood, are made with this knife. It requires 
much skill to guide the blade so as to cut the wood evenly; and to this 
end the thumb, which is placed upon the outer extremity of the handle, 
must steady the blade. The strain of the blade upon the handle is 
very great, and it must be securely held by mens of stout thongs 
wrapped around it. 

The crooked knife is a form of instrument in use among the Indians 
and Eskimo alike, and one of the tew implements which those widely 
differing people have in common, 


TURNER, | TOOLS. 319 


Awls (Fig. 142) are made of steel or iron. The back or spring ofa 
pocketknife or a portion of a small file appears to be the favorite mate- 
rial for forming them, They are usually chisel-shaped and have rectan- 
gular corners. The handle into which the metal is fastened is gen- 
erally of deer horn. The shape of the handle varies froma Y 
shape to that of a crescent. 

These tools are constantly required tor piercing holes in the 
various woods used in manufacture. Articles of simple con- 
struction the Indian prefers to make tor himself, rather than pay 
an extortionate price to the trader, He is able to accomplish re- 
markable results with rude tools of his own make. 

Snow shovels are made of wood and are much used, for dur- 
ing the winter, when the snows are constantly accumulating 
around the camps, the oceupants necessarily remove some to 
form a pathway from the door of their tent, and as snow forms 
an adinirable protection, it is thrown or banked up around their 
tents to prevent the wind from blowing under, In the spring 
nearly all the aged people carry one of the wooden shovels to 
clear away a path or as a help to walk while the slushy snow is 
so treacherous, Fig. 143 represents a common form of wooden 
snow shovel, These are often painted with vermillion or indigo. 

Fig. 144 shows a special form of snow shovel designed for 
cleaning the ice from the holes through which the people fish. It 
usually has a blade made from the brow antler or one of the 
broad palms from the horns of the reindeer, The horn portion 
is attached to’ the wooden shaft or handle by means of thongs 
running through holes bored for that purpose. 

The ice-picks (Fig. 145) used in times gone by were pieces of 
reindeer horn or bone, shaped like a narrow mortising chisel and 
attached to staffs of wood. The chisel or pick was fastened to 
the staff by means of stout thongs to prevent a side movement 
from the groove into which it was set. The upper end of the 
staff was at times shod with bone or horn so as to be available 
for » walking staff, 

The ice-pick of the present day has a piece of iron or steel 
substituted for the horn or bone; but, being heavy, it is not so 
often carried from place to place. An Indian will in an ineredi- 
bly short time pierce a hole through 3 feet thickness of ice with 
it. A white man can not equal them in this work. a 

Combs for the hair are purchased from the traders, They are highly 
prized and are kept in little birehbark bags. For Cleaning out the 
dirt which collects on the comb the tail of a porcupine is used. The 
needles or spines are picked out of the tail, leaving the stiff, coarse 
hairs, which serve the purpose of cleaning the eomb quite well, This 
tailis usually appended to the comb-case. 


320 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


The natives sometimes make wooden combs like the one shown in Fig, 
146, in imitation of those purchased. 

After a woman’s hair has been combed half of it is collected on each 
side of the head and rolled 
or wound up on small 
pieces of board (Fig. 147) 
similar in shape to the 
“winders” on which darn- 
ing or knitting cord is 
wrapped. Strands of 
beads are now placed 
upon these to hold the 
hair in place. 

A remarkable object is 
shown in Fig, 148, It is 
one of a pair of boards 
procured from one of the 
Little Whale river Indi- 
ans, by whom they are 
used to assist in swim- 
ming. One board is held 
in each hand and used as 
a paddle to push the 
swimmeralong, Indians 
able to swim are scarce. 
I have not seen these 
boards in use, and am not 
able personally to speak 
concerning their alleged 
function, 

The tish-hook shown in Fig, 149 has a barb of steel or iron, Tt is on 
the smaller hooks made of one of the ribs of the larger trout. 


Fia, 146,—Comb, with birekbark case and cleaner. 


AMUSEMENTS, 


The boys have no consideration for the females of their own age, but 
2 treat them as inferiors and tit 

SZ for nothing but to be subjects 

of almost constant annoyance 

and persecution. When a 

number of boys collect. they 

are sure to maltreat the wo- 

men, even those advanced in 

years, and appear to delight 

in any opportunity to sub- 

Fig, 147. Boards for woman's hair. ject them to the rudest mis- 
chief. Ifa woman ventures to peep from the tent in summer a shower 


TURNER. AMUSEMENTS. 821 


of water is sure to be flung on her by some boy. In winter snow- 
balling is equally annoying, and when parties of women go to the 
woods to get fuel the pack of boys is sure to waylay them as they 
return. If the boys can separate the women their fun is complete; 
their dresses are torn and their bundles of fuel scattered. They often 
retaliate, however, and strip the clothing from some unfortunate boy 
who is compelled to return to camp in a nude condition, much to the 


Fig, 148.—Swimming board. 


amusement of the people, This form of disgrace appears to be the most 
severe which can be inflicted upon a male; and the jokes to which he 
is afterward subjected keep him the object of ridicule for many days. 

Besides practical jokes upon women, running, jumping, wrestling, 
and practicing with the bow and other weapons suited vo their age, ap- 


pear to be the principal amusements of 
the boys. The girls have never been 
observed to play at games of any kind, 
Their chief occupation is to keep away 
trom the boys, While walking out the 
girls generally toss stones or chips in 
the air and strive to keep at least twe 
of them up at onee. The Eskimo often 
practice this also, and, as it appears to 
be a general source of amusement 
among the Innuit, | suspect that the 
Indian borrowed it from them, Wres 
tling appears to be the principal test 
for physical strength and severe con 
tests often engage the stronger individ 
uals. They wrestle in) the Eskimo 
fashion, and frequently indulge im 
trials of strength with these people. 
As would be expected, the stronger 
Eskimo are always the vietors. ATL these contests, whether among 
themselves or with the Eskime, are carried on with the best of good 
humor. 
I wrui—-vl 


Fi. 149. — Fishhook and line, 


322 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 
FESTIVALS. 


Feasts are given now and then to celebrate success in hunting and 
similar achievements. 

In 1883 LT was invited to attend a feast of furs to be given by one of 
the most energetic of the Indians, We repaired to the tents spread on 
the top of a high wall of rock a tew rods from my house. As I ap- 
proached the scene IT observed a tent of different construction. It was 
nearly oval at its base and had a diameter of about 18 feet and a length 
offabout 25 feet. The top was drawn to an apex resembling the com. 
mon roof of a house. The entrance to the structure faced southeast. 
On a pole, supported with one end on the apex of the tent and theother 
resting on a post, were numbers of skins of various animals—wolves, 
wolverine, beaver, otter, foxes, and muskrat, together with a number 
of the finest reindeer skins. The sound of the drum was heard within 
the structure and as | approached the door the noise ceased. [paused 
and was invited to enter. Immediately two old men next the drummer 
moved to one side and motioned me to sit down on the pile of deer- 
skins reserved for me. [t was evident that the feast had been in prog- 
ress for some time, Around the interior of the structure groups of men 
were idly disposed, some reclining and others standing. Not a word 
was spoken for some time, and this gave me opportunity to loos around, 
The tloor was covered with boughs from the neighboring spruce trees, 
arranged with unusual care, forming a soft carpeting for those seated 
within. [saw a number of piles of deerskins and several small heaps 
covered with cloth. To break the silence I inquired if the drum was 
tired. A smile greeted the inquiry. Immediately an old man came 
forward, tightened the snare of the drum, and arranged the string, sus- 
pending it from one of the tent poles at the proper height for use. He 
then dipped his fingers into a vessel of water. and sprinkled a few drops 
on the membrane of the drum-head to prevent it from breakiog ander 
the blows to be delivered. The performer then seized the drumstick 
with the right hand and gave the ‘aembrane a few taps; the transverse 
cord of twisted sinew, holding (ke svall eylinders of wood attached to 
it, repeated the vivration with tnere.sed emphasis, A song was begun 
and the drum beaten in rythin to the monotonous chant of o-ho, o-ho, 
ete. Three songs with tympanic accompaniment followed. The songs 
appeared alike and were easily learned. In the meanwhile the guests 
were treated to a strange-looking compound which had lain hidden be- 
neath one of the cloths and is known as ‘*pemmican.” [was solicited 
to accept a piece. The previously assembled guests had either brought 
their own bowls and saucers to eat from or else appropr ated: those 
available, Not to be at a loss, one of the young men remarked that he 
would find one. From among the accumulated filth around one of the 
center poles supporting the structure a bowl was produced, The man 
coolly took the handkerchief which was tied around his forehead to 
keep his matted hair from lis face and wiped out the interior of the 


TURNER. } FESTIVALS AND GAMES. 323 


bowl, and placing a piece of the pemmican within it, handed it to the 
attendant whose duty it was to offer it to me. 

I, however, found it quite inedible. Other guests constantly arrived 
and some departed, made happy by their share of this compound of 
rancid tallow and marrow with a due admixture of pounded dry meat 
of the reindeer. [ soon departed, and attempted to take the remnant 
of the pemmican with me. This was instantly forbidden, and informa- 
tion given me that by so doing [ should cause all the deer to desert the 
vicinity, and thus make the people starve. [ explained that such was 
not my desire, and after wishing continued prosperity and enjoyment, 
I made my way out. Twas then informed that the feast would con- 
tinue for a time, and wind up with an invitation to the women, who 
had hitherto been excluded, to come and eat the remnants left by the 
men. At the end of two days thereafter the feast coneluded and a 
dance took place. In this performance there was nothing remarkable. 
The men sang songs and kicked up thew heels, while the women 
shrugged their shoulders as they swayed their bodies from meht to 
left, and assumed various other postures, @lthou ch thei” lime were 
apparently kept in a rigid position, occasionally witering their plaudits 
as the men made humorous:compliments to Their gemerous West. 

This feast was given by one whe had beet @mamewelly suecesstiel in 
the capture of fur-bearing animals, and, to prewe hm wealth, cdisplhewed 
it betore the assemblage and gave wv feast in conmderatiiemot lis alilie 
Other feasts of a similar character ocenr, ame dither (ho 
special feature, 

The principal source of amusement with the meen i 
draughts or checkers. While the men are in the geet or 
awaiting the approach of bands of deer their id he mune 
over this game. Nerther humeet ro the sight ef @ 
distract them, so intently are they ybsorbed. 

The game is played as in civilization, with ons 
am not aware that wages ar Upon Los isstie,  ammeo® The en 
so expert that they would iin as skillful players dy amy pert 
world, 

Small boards that may be carried in the Lanting bea are Ueeer 
to while away the tedium of the long winter evenings bor 
of the tliekering tire of the dry limbs of sprice. Pa o th 
players engage, and are only disturbed een one their Gu 
panions starts from his sleep to relate a wendrous dpeain ape 
expounded by the listeners, who sit aghast af the revelations. 


They also have a game corresponding to “cmp and tall.” bw 
played with different implements from what the Mskime use, as 4 " 
seen by referring to Pig, 150, The hollow ex are made frowe Che 
terminal phalanges of the reindeer’s foot. The tail tied to the end of 
the thong is that ofa marten oraimink, ‘Che player holils the peg in one 
hand, and tossing up the bones tries to eatel the nearest: bone on che 


324 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


point of the peg. The object of the game is to catch the bone the 
greatest possible number of times. It is in no sense a gambling game, 

The only musical instrument used by these people is the drum or 
tambourine, which is of the form shown in Fig, 151, These drums vary 


Fig. 150.—Cup-aiud-ball, Nenenot 
in diameter from 22 to 26 inches, and are construeted as follows: The 
barrel is made of a thin slat of spruce, bent into a hoop, with the ends 
joined in a lap, spliced nearly 
a foot long, which length is 
sewed by four perpendicular 
seains, The stitches are made 
with deerskin thread put 
through perforations, near 
together, made with an awl, 
The next operation is to pre- 
pare for a head a thin’ rein- 
deer skin, which has been 
tanned, The skin is moist- 
ened and sewed so that all 
holes in it are closed, A nar- 
151.—Drum, Nenenot, row hoopof'a size to fit tightly 
over the barrel of the drum is made and the moist skin stretched over 
it. The edges of the skin are turned inward, and within this hoop is 
placed the barrel of the drum, 


TURNER. ] MUSIC AND GAMES, 825 


A second hoop, two or three times as wice as the first, is prepared 
and fitted over the barrel and head. It is pushed down as far as the 
elasticity of the mambrane will allow, or about half the width of the top 
hoop. Through the oiter hoop have been made a number of holes and 
corresponding but alternate holes made in the farther edge of the barrel 
of the drum, 

Through these holes a stout thong is threaded and passing from the 
edge of the barrel to the outer hoop is drawn so tightly as to push the 
inner hoop along the outer circumference of the barrel and thus tighten 
the membrane to the required degree. The outer hoop now projects an 
inch or more beyond the membrane and thus protects it from injury by 
careless handling. 

Across the membrane is stretched a sinew cord on which are strung, 
at right angles to the cord, «a number of barrels made from the quills 
of the wing feathers of the willow ptarmigan., Across the underside 
of the membrane is stretched 
a similar cord with quills. 
These serve the purpose of a 
snare on the drum. The stick 
used for beating the drum 
consists of a piece of reindeer 
horn cut so as to have a thin 
and narrow handle a foot in 
length and terminating in a 
knob more than an inch long 
avd as thick as the portion of 
horn permits. The drum is 
suspended from the poles of 
the tent by means of thongs, 
The performer tightens the snares, and sprinkles a few drops of water 
on the drumhead lest the blows, cause it to split under the strain. 
Nothing is done, nothing contemplated without sounding the drum, 
It is silent only when the people are asleep or on a tramp from one 
locality to another. 

Ifa person is ill the drum is beaten. [fa person is well the drum is 
beaten. If prosperous in the chase the drum is beaten; and if death 
has snatched a member from the community the drum is beaten to pre- 
vent his spirit from returning to torment the living. 

The drumbeat is) often) accompanied with singing which is the 
most discordant of all sounds supposed to be harmonious. 

The drums used by the Little Whale river Indians (Fig, 152, No, 


3223) differs greatly in construction from those made by the Ungava 


Pig. 162.—Drum, Little Whale river. 


Indians. The size is rarely so great, seldom exceeding 22 inches, 
These drums have two heads or membranes fitted on the barrel and 
secured: by means of a single hoop for each head. The two hoops are 
then connected by the tightening strings. 


826 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


The membranes are invariably made of deer skin in the parchment 
condition and not of tanned skins, The snares or thongs across the 
heads are finer and have pieces of wood instead of quills as “rattlers.” 
The drumstiek is a piece of 
reindeer horn cut as before 
described; or else, as if to 
add to the din, a gun-cap 
box is pierced through from 
side to side and a few peb- 
bles or shot placed within. 
A stick is then mserted in 
the hole through the box 
and the whole covered with 
buckskin to prevent separa 
tion of the lid and box, This 
makes a distracting noise. 

Rattles for the children (ig, 153) are made of a hoop of wood bent 
toa circular form and covered with two heads or membranes, Within 
it are placed a tew pebbles or shot, to produce a rattling sound when 


Fig. 133,—Rattle, Neneno’. 


Fig, 4. ~Parget. reindeer, buck. 


the membranes are dry, A cord attached to the circumference enables 
the rattle to be suspended from the tent-pole in front of the child for 
Whose amusement itis intended, Other toys are made for the children, 


Fra, 155. —Target, reindeer, doo 


but they were not easy for us to obtain. Pl xLiurrepresents a doll, 
dressed ina woman's full suit of clothes. The boys amuse themselves 
by shooting with blunt arrows at images of reindeer, bucks, does, and 
tawns, cut out of flat boards stuck up in the snow (Bigs, 154, 155), 


55 ne) Seis 


q 


BUREAU OF ETHNOLOGY 


DOLL, INDIAN 


ELEVENTH ANNUAL REPORT PL. XLII 


| 


i 
iy 


WOMAN, FULL DRESS, NENENOT 


YURNER, } FOLKLORE, 3827 
FOLK LOkM. 


During the long winter nights or during the periods of cold or in- 
clement weather in which the Indians may not venture out, they sit 
around the fire and relate stories intended for the instruction as well 
as enter ainment of the younger people, The older men have a great 
stock of these stories, and many of the women are noted for their ability 
in entertaining the children, who sit, with staring eyes and open mouth, 
in the arms of their parents or elders, 

The following stories came to me directly and not through the 
medium of another white person, and probably [ am the only white 
person who has heard some of them. IT have endeavored to give them 
as nearly in the form of the original as the differences between the 
English and the Indian languages will permit. 

Story of the wolverene and the brant.—A wolverene calling all the birds 
together addressed them thus: “Do you not know that [ am your 
brother? Come to me and I will dress you in feathers.” After having 
dressed them up he made wings for himself and said: ‘Now, brothers, 
let us fly.” The brant told the wolverene, “You must not look below 
while we are flying over the point of land when you hear a noise 
below. Take a turn when we take a turn.” 

The first turn they took the wolverene did not look below, but at the 
second turn they took, when they came over the point of land, the 
animal looked below when he heard the noise of the shouting Indians 
and down he came like & bundle of rags.! 

All the Indians ran up to him and exclaimed “There is a brant fallen 
down.” One of the old) Indian women got hold of him and began to 
pluck his feathers off, then to disembowel him. She of course smelled 
the horrible stench and exclaimed, “This goose is not fit to eat as it is 
already rotten!” She gave the carcass to one of the children to throw 
away. Another old woman came up and inquired, *Where did you 
throw the brant goose to? How could it be rotten? It is not long 
since it was killed.” The former old) woman replied to her, “Go and 
see, if you do not believe.” She went and found nothing but the dead 
wolverene. 

Story of the rwolverenu.—A wolverene was running along the sea- 
shore and perceived a number of geese, brant, ducks, and loons sitting 
in the water a short distance off. The wolverene addressing them said, 
“Come here, brothers. [have found a pretty bees’ nest. 1 will give it 
to you if you will come on shore and have a dance.” All the birds 
went on land. The wolverene said, “Let us have a dance and [will 
sing. Shut your eyes and do not open them until we are done dancing. 
He began to sing, ‘*A-ho/u-mua-hou-mu/-mu-htim’.” The last word was 


When the Indians perceive a flock of these brant they make a loud clamor, which frightens the 
birds so much that they lose their senses, fall to the ground and are thus killed. These birds are 
only seen in the spring migrations and then in great multitudes, while in the fall itis rare to see even 
a single individual, as they have a different return route than in spring. 


v 
Y I 


yj 


» 


rN 


G 


WEBSTER, N.Y. 14580 
(716) 872-4503 


ae 


2.5 
23 WEST MAIN STREET 


18 
1.6 


ll 
il 


= Wa 
1.4 


2 Hs 


| FY 


1.0 


ui 
125 


IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


”. X 
em nd x 
s, é SF wy 
@ 


328 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO 


so often repeated (accompanied with the act of the wolverene snip- 
ping off the heads of the birds) that the loon opened one eye and saw 
the headless ducks kicking. The loon ran to the water and exclaimed, 
“Our brother has killed us!” The wolverene ran after the loon but the 
loon dived under the water and came up a distance off and cried out, 
“A ho ho ho ho ho ho!” The wolverene screamed, “Hold your tongue, 
you red-eyed fowl.” The wolverene returned to where the ducks had 
been killed; plucked their feathers off and cleaned them; put them 
into a large kettle and boiled them. 

While attending to the cooking he saw a whisky-jack (Us! ka teon) 
(Perisoreus canadensis) tlying about. The wolverene took a firebrand 
and threw it at the bird, exclaiming, “You will be telling on me, you 
long-tongued bird!” The jay tlew away and told the Indians that 
“Our brother (wolverene) has killed a lot of dueks and has them 
cooked,” adding, “I think he is sleeping. PH) show you where he is if 
you will come.” The Indians replied, “We will go, for we are very 
hungry.” They went and found the wolverene asleep alongside the pot, 
The Indians ate all of the meat of the ducks. After they had finished 
the meat they put the bones back into the kettle and went away. The 
wolverene awakened after a time, took his dish and said to himself, 
“Now, I shall have my dinner.” He poured all the broth into his dish 
and found nothing but the bones remaining. In his surprise he said, 
“Surely, | have been sleeping along time; the meat is all boiled away.” 
The jay told him that he had told the Indians. The wolverene said, 
“Why did you tell? you stupid bird; [ was keeping a nice piece of fat 
for you.' You will not, now, get it for your impudence.” 

The deer and the squirrel.—A_ reindeer called all the mammals and 
birds together and announced that he would give names to all of them, 
When he came to name the squirrel he inquired of the little creature 
what name it would prefer. The squirrel replied that it would like to 
have the same name as the black bear. The reindeer smiled and in- 
formed the squirrel that it was too small to have the name of the bear. 
The squirrel began to ery and wept so long that his lower eyelids 
became white. 

The young man who went to live with the deer.—A young man one 
morning told his old father that he had dreamed the night before that 
a deer had asked him to come and live with them. The old father re- 
plied, “That is a good sign; you will kill many deer after that dream.” 
The young man went away to hunt, and while out he saw a large herd 
of deer, A young doe from the band ran up toward him, and he was 
about to fire at her when she said to him, “Do not fire, for my father 
has sent me to you. Please put up your arrows.” She came nearer 
and informed him that her father had sent her to ask him to come and 
live with the deer forever. 


IThe jay 18 well Known to be particularly fond of fat of any kind, hence the tempting morsel with. 
held was a source for future retlection. 


EAD UNE Se 


ft SNIPE I ee Se 


ware. 


1ip- 
Ww 
ed, 
the 
ut, 
ue, 
had 
em 


on) 
wd 
you 
hat 
em 
sif 
ery 
0t. 
hed 
The 
elf, 
ish 
uid, 
iy.” 
vid, 
‘fut 


and 
em, 
ure 
p to 

in- 
par, 
lids 


one 
hat 

re- 
m.” 
erd 
Was 
her 
wer 
and 


‘TURNER. | FOLKLORE. 329 


The young man inquired, ‘ How could T live with you when it is 
upon deer that I live? I live in a tent and can not live outside. T can 
not live without fire. I can not live without water.” The doe replied, 
“ We have plenty of fire, water, and meat; you will never want; you 
will live forever. Your father will never want, as there will be enough 
deer given to him.” The man consented to go with them. The doe 
pointed to a large hill and said, “That is our home.” She told him to 
leave his deerskin mantle, snowshoes, and arrows on the ground, but 
to keep the bow. As they were walking along they came to a big 
valley. She informed him that that was their path, The two went 
toward the steep hillside and found the ground to be covered with deer. 
Some of the deer were frightened when they saw the man coming, and 
started to run, The doe’s father said to the frightened deer, “ Do you 
not pity the poor Indians who have to hunt for their living while we do 
not?” When the young man and the doe came up, the father of the 
doe addressed the young man, asking if he was hungry. The man re- 
plied, “ Yes.” The father then gave him « piece of nice meat and some 
fat. After the man had finished eating the father inquired, “Is your 
father also hungry?” The son replied, ‘ Yes.” 

The old buek informed the young man that they would give the son’s 
father some deer to-morrow. After the young man had slept out one 
night ais father, in the morning, went out to look for his son, but 
found only his mantle, snowshoes, and arrows, which had been cast 
aside the day before, and also found the tracks in the valley icading to 
the home of the deer under the hill, The old man returned to his tent 
and told the other Indians that his son had gone away to live with the 
deer, The old man then said, “Let us make snares and we will yet 
take him, as he can not run as fast as the deer.” The Indians prepared 
a number of snare nooses and went to the valley to set them among the 
bushes on the path, The father of the young doe saw what was going 
on in the valley and told the rest, “Let us go and give the old man 
some deer.” He told the young man to come with them, The man re- 
plied that he could not accompany them, as he would be left behind in 
no time while they were running, The old buck instructed the young 
man to keep among the rest of the deer and he would not be left be- 
hind them, All the deer then went out to the valley. The young man 
kept among them; and as they were going through the bushes he 
heard the shouts of the Indians who were concealed behind them. 
The deer saw the snares and some of the animals fell into the nooses 
and were caught. The remainder, with the young man, were soon be- 
yond the snares. The Indians began to kill the deer which had been 
taken in the nooses, and when they had finished they found they had 
not captured the young man, They consulted together and decided to 
search among the tracks of the escaped deer to ascertain whether his 
foot-prints were among them, They found his track and also the mark 
of his bow as he had dragged it along in the snow. 


330 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


The young man’s father then said, “Let him go if he thinks he is 
able to live with the deer;” and the people returned to their tents. 

The wolf?s daughter going to seck her lover.—An old mother wolf one 
morning said to her daughter, “You must go and look for your lover or 
else we shall all starve to death, as your brothers can not kill any deer.” 
The daughter inquired of her mother, * Whois my lover?” The mother 
roplied, “The otter is your lover, He lives in the water. If you go to 
the narrows of the lake you will find him.” The daughter said she 
would go, So early in the morning she started off, and as she was go- 
ing along the shore of the lake she saw an open hole in the ice, and 
in the water the otter was sitting. The wolf went up to the otter, but 
the otter swam away and was going to dive, when the wolf said, “Do 
not dive and go away. My mother says you are my lover.” The otter 
asked, “ How can I be your lover when I live in the water?” The wolf 
replied, “ You can live on the land as well as in the water.” The otter 
answered back, T will not live on the land.” The wolf retorted, + You 
will have to live on the land, and if you do not come out TI shall smother 
you in the water.” The otter said, “ You can not smother me, for have 
a number of holes made in the lake ice.” The otter dove into the water 


and disappeared. The wolf began to howl dismally when the otter 
vanished, The wind began to blow and drifted the snow furiously. 
The snow fell into the otter’s breathing holes and filled them with 
slushy snow, which soon froze and completely stopped all the holes in 


the ice but one where the wolf was sitting. This hole was kept clear 
of snow and ice by the wolf scraping it out as fast as it collected. 
Soon she heard the otter going to the holes for breath, but when le 
came near the hole where the wolf was sitting she could hear him 
snutting for air, and she stood with open jaws ready to seize him when 
he should appear. The otter was nearly exhausted, so the wolf went 
off a little distance, and the otter came up to the surface of the water 
nearly out of breath. He crept out of the water and rolled himself in 
the dry snow to take the water off of his coat of fur and exclaimed to 
the wolf, «IT will live with you; I will live with you.” The wolf then 
addressed her lover and said, “Did I not tell you I would smother 
you?” The otter did not reply to this, but asked her, “ Have you got 
a piece of line?) Give it to me, and TF will go to catch some fish for you 
if you will go and prepare a tent.” The wolf drew out a piece of fishing 
line and handed it to the otter. The otter went down into the same 
hole in the ice whence he had come. He was gone some time, and in 
the meantime the wolf was busy inaking the tent, which was completed 
before the otter returned, Soon after, however, the otter came back to 
the hole with a long string of fish which he had killed and had them 
all strang on the line. He left the string of’ fish in the hole in the ice 
with one end of it fastened to the ice. The otter rolled himself in the 
snow te remove the water from his fur, and then went to the tent to tell 
his wife to go and get the fish which he had left in the hole in the ice, 


er 
olf 
er 
ou 
er 
ve 
fer 
ter 
ly. 
ith 

in 
ar 
ed. 
he 
im 
en 
pnt 
ter 
Pin 
| to 
1en 
her 
rot 
yOu 
ing 
me 
Lin 
ted 
r to 
em 
ice 
the 
tell 
ice, 


TURNER.) FOLKLORE. 331 


The wolf went and hauled up the line, which was full of fish, and began 
to devour so many that svon she could scarcely move. She hauled the 
remainder of the fish home to the tent. 

The otter was sleeping when she returned. She proceeded to clean 
the fish and put on a large kettle full of the fish to boil for supper. 
She then crept into bed with her husband, and the next morning she 
was delivered of a young otter and a young wolf. After the father and 
mother had taken their breakfast the latter sat with her head hanging 
down and seemed to be in a miserable mood. The otter inquired of the 
wife wolf, “What is the matter with you that you sitso quietly?” The 
wolf answered: “T wish | had some deerskins with which to make 
clothing for the children, How nicely [ should dress them!” The ot- 
ter replied: “Open the door and [ will show you where I get the 
deer.” It was yet early, and the otter went away to seek the deer. 
The otter saw a band of thirty deer, but had no gun with which to kill 
them, so he frightened them, and as they were running away he sprang 
at them each, and jumped through them from end to end. He killed 
all of them in this manner and then rolled in the snow to cleanse him- 
self, After that was done he wended his way home, and on arriving 
informed his wife (tor it was then a little after sunset) that on the mor- 
row she should go to bring home the deer he had killed, adding that 
she could follow his track, and thus find them. The wite had a big 
pot of fish cooked for him when he returned, and when he had finished 
his supper he went to bed. As soon as the wife suspected her husband 
to be asieep she went after the deer, and by hauling four at a time she 
soon lad them all brought, acd laid them before the tent. When that 
was finished she went to bed. [n the morning the otter told her to 
get up and make a tire, as she would have to go for the carcasses of 
the deer which he had killed the day before. The wife replied: “1 
have already brought them all home.” The otter asked her: “ How 
could you bring them home in the dark?” The wife answered: Look 
out through the door if you do not believe me.” The otter looked and 
saw the thirty deer all piled up before the door, He turned and looked 
at his wife, but made no remark, The wolf asked him: Why do you 
look at me, so hard?” The otter said: “I was wondering how you 
could get them home in such a short time.” The wolf said: “Come, 
and take your breakfast, tor you will have to help me skin the deer.” 
After they had finished eating their breakfast they began to skin the 
deer, and soon had them done. The wolf told her husband to make a 
stage or scaffold for the meat, adding that she would clean the skins. 
The otter prepared the stage, which in a short time was completed. 
The meat was placed on the stage and the skins hung up to dry around 
the tent. They then went in to take their supper. The wife was not 
in a talkative mood, and soon went to bed. The next morning the 
wolf hung her head down, and the otter seeing her again in such mood, 
inquired what was the matter with her that she should be so quiet. 


332 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


The wolf replied: “Tam thinking of my poor father and mother and 
brothers; [ suppose they will all be starved to death. My old father 
told me to tell you to put a mark on the middle of the lake so they 
would know where Iam.” The otter went to the middle of the lake and 
erected a pile as a mark by which the wolf's relations should know it. 
The brothers of th »tter’s wife were on the hill looking for the mark 
set up by their sister’s husband, and when they saw it they ex- 
claimed: “Our sister has saved us! our sister has saved us!” 
and ran back to their old father’s home to give him the joyful in- 
telligence that they had seen the mark put up by the husband of their 
sister, The old wolf then told his family that they would go and seek 
their sister and daughter to live with her and her husband. They 
P™ went to the hill by the lake, and from the top of it they saw the 
mark, and from it they followed the track of the otter until they 
saw the tent in the edge of the woods, They exclaimed: “There is 
our sister’s tent, for the deerskins are hanging outside. They raised 
such a joyful shout at the prospect before them, that the noise fright- 
ened some young otters (for the family had now become larger) which 
were playing outside, The little ones scampered in and hid them- 
selves behind their father’s back, The father inquired, “ What is the 
matter, that vou are so frightened?” The little ones replied: «We 
are running from the Hunger” (for that was the name they applied to 
the wolves), The mother replied: Perhaps they see my father, 
mother, and brothers coming.” The otter told his wife to go out and 
see. She complied, and when she opened the door they saw a row of 
gaunt wolves; nothing but skin and bones. The newcomers immedi- 
ately fell to, and began to devour the meat which was on the stage. 
The otter’s wife remonstrated, and said: **Do not be so greedy ; my 
husband is not a stingy man. IL take my meals when hes sleeping, 
and pretend not to eat much during the day.” They all went into the 
tent and the otter soon went to bed. When they thought he was 
asleep, they began to eat all the raw meat and. fish, and soon finished 
it. In the morning when the otter had awakened, he remarked to his 
wife: “I think your brothers will make a fool of me.” The wife 
asked: “What makes you think so?” The otter replied: “They 
look at me so hard, that I do not know where to turn my eyes.” After 
breakfast the otter and his wolf brothers went away to look for deer, 
They soon came upon a band of them, and the otter told the wolves 
to go and kill them. The wolves ran after the deer, but got only one 
of them, After the deer were frightened by the wolves, the otter 
sprang after the deer and soon killed every one of them in the same 
manner he had killed the others, He then cleaned himself in the dry 
snow and returned home. The wolves had started for the tent before 
the otter, so when the latter returned they asked the otter: “ How 
many deer did you kill?” The otter replied: “1 killed all that were 
in the band,” adding, “In the morning you will have to go for the 


-and 
ither 
they 
Pand 
rw it. 
mark 

ex- 
us!” 
ul in- 
their 
seek 
They 
w the 
they 
ere is 
aised 
hight- 
vhich 
them- 
is the 
“We 
ied to 
ither, 
t and 
ow of 
medi- 
stage. 
y; my 
ping, 
to the 
e Was 
ished 
to his 

wife 
They 
After 
deer, 
volves 
ly one 
otter 
same 
ie dry 
before 
‘How 
C were 
or the 


TURNER.) FOLKLORE, 333 


deer.” So everything was got ready for an early start and they all re- 
tired to bed. When they awakened in the morning, one of the wife’s 
brothers said to another: “Look at our otter brother; he has a white 
mouth.” The otter turned to his wife and said to her: “Did [ not 
tell you that your brothers would make a fool of me?” The otter then 
took his two otter children in his arms, and told his wife that she 
would have to make her living as best she could, as he would not live 
with her any more, that he was going away to leave her. He darted 
off to the lake, and disappeared under the ice, and was never seen 
again, 

The devil punishing a liar —A bear (mackwh) had two young cubs 
which she did not want to let know that summer had come, but kept 
them in the den and would not let them go out. The young ones con- 
tinually inquired if the summer had come, and repeated the question 
every time the mother returned from the outside, She invariably an- 
swered, “No.” Some days after she fellasleep, when she had returned 
from one of her trips, and while sleeping her mouth opened wide, The 
young ones said to each other: “Surely the summer is come, for there 
are green leaves in our mother’s mouth.” The mother had told her 
children how beautiful was the summer time, how green the trees, how 
juicy the plants, and how sweet the berries; so the cubs, impatient, 
while longing for summer that they might enjoy what was outside of 
their den, knew by the leaves in their mother’s mouth that she had de- 
ceived them, The older cub told the younger that they would slip out 
at the top of the den and go out while their mother was yet sleeping. 
They crept out and found the weather so fine and the surroundings so 
pleasant that they wandered some distance off by the time she wakened 
from her sleep. She ran out and called loudly for her children, seem- 
ingly surprised, and exclaimed: “ My sons, the summer has come; the 
summer has come.” The cubs hid when they heard their mother’s 
voice, She called to them until nightfall. The older cub said to his 
brother: “LT wish the devil (A-qan’) would hear her and kill her for 
telling us the summer had not come, and keeping us in the house so 
long when it was already pleasant outside.” 

The mother bear soon screamed to her sons: «The devil has heard 
me and is killing me.” 

The cubs heard the devil killing their mother with a stone, pounding 
her on the head. 

They became frightened and ran away. 

A wolverene destroys his sister—A wolverene having wandered far, 
tor several days without food, suddenly came upon a bear. The former, 
feeling very hungry, conceived the plan of destroying his larger prey 
by stratagem. The wolverene cautiously approached the bear and ex- 
Claimed: “Is that you, sister?” The bear turned around and saw the 
wolverene, but in a low tone, which the wolverene did not hear, said to 
herself: “I did not know that T had a brother,” so ran quickly away. 


334 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


The wolverene continued to seream: “ Come here, sister, our father has 
sent me to look for you. You were lost when you were «a little girl 
out picking berries.” Thus spoken to, the bear approached the sup- 
posed brother, who informed her that he knew of a place, on the hill 
there, where a lot of nice berries were ready for eating, saying: “ Do 
you not see the berries growing on that hill, sister?” The bear ans- 
wered: “TD can not see so great a distance.” So the two went up the 
hillside where the berries grew. When they arrived at the place, and 
it was some distance off, the bear asked: “How is it that your eyes are 
so good?” The wolverene replied: My father mashed a lot of eran- 
berries into my eyes and put me into a sweat house.” The bear said: 
‘“T wish my eyes were as good as yours.” The wolverene answered: 
“T will make your eyes as good as mine if you will gather a lot of 
cranberries while | prepare a sweat house.” The bear went to gather 
berries while the other prepared the house during her absence. The 
wolverene selected a stone having a sharp edge, which she concealed 
under the moss in the sweat house, while she procured a larger stone 
for the pillow. 

After the sweat house was completed the wolverene cried out: 
“Sister, the sweat house is finished!” The bear returned, bringing a 
quantity of berries. They both went into the sudatory, whereupon 
the wolverene instructed the bear to lie with her head upon the stone 
pillow, while he prepared the crushed berries to put in her eyes, He 
then said to her: * Now, sister, do not move; you may tind the berries 
will hurt the eves and make them very sore, but they will be better 
soon.” The wolverene tilled the bears eyes full of the sour berries, 
which made her exclaim: “ Brother, they are making my eyes very 
sore.” The wolverene answered: * You will find ‘hem the better for 
that. After I get your eyes full of the berries I will blow my breath 
on them.” After the eves of the bear were full of berries the wolver 
ene said: * You are too good to be a sister,” so he struck her on the 
head with the sharp-edged stone and cleft her skull between the eyes 
and. killed her. . 

The rabbit and the frog.—One day a rabbit was wandering among 
the hillsides, and at a short distance from him he observed a tent 
belonging to some Indians. Being timid he crept up to the side of 
the tent and peeped through a small hole, and saw inside of it a frog 
sitting near the fire. Phe rabbit seeing no danger accosted the frog 
thus: “Brother, what are you doing?” The frog replied: [am play- 
ing with the ashes. My brothers have gone off hunting and Tam here 
as I have a very sore leg and can not go far” The rabbit rejoined, 
*come with me and [ will keep you?” The frog answered, ‘T can aot 
walk as my leg is too sore.” The rabbit offered to carry the frog on 
his back. The rabbit took the frog and giving him a toss threw him 
on his back and said: © This is the way I will carry you.” So they 
started for the home of the rabbit, where, upon arriving, the rabbit 


r has 
le girl 
 SU})- 
e hill 
“Do 
r ans- 
ip the 
4, and 
es are 
cran- 
said: 
rered: 
lot of 
rather 
The 
‘ealed 
stone 


| out: 
ving a 
eupon 
stone 
. He 
eLTIES 
better 
erries, 
; very 
er for 
yreath 
olver: 
on the 
e eyes 


unong 
iu tent 


‘ide of 


a frog 
e frog 
i play- 
n here 
joined, 
an not 
rog on 
w him 
0 they 
rabbit 


TURNER. ] FOLKLORE. 335 


placed the frog inside of the tent while the former went out to look 
for something to eat. While seeking food the rabbit suddenly spied a 
smoke curling from among the willows which grew along the branch of 
the creek. He became frightened and started to run homeward exclaim. 
ing. “I have forgotten my crooked knife and I must go quickly to 
get it.” (This part, or what the rabbit says to himself, is sung as a 
song; with an attempt at imitation of the rabbit’s voice.) The rabbit 
ran hurriedly home and sprang into the tent, whereupon the frog ob. 
serving the fright of the other inquired, “ Brother, what is the matter 
that you are so excited?” The rabbit answered, “ I saw a large smoke.” 
“Where is it?” inquired the frog. The rabbit replied, “It is from 
among the willows along the creek that runs near by.” The frog 
began to laugh at the foolish fear of the rabbit and answered him that 
the smoke proceeded from the lodge of a family of beavers, and taunted 
the rabbit for being afraid of sueh a timid creature as a beaver when 
they are good to eat, adding that his own (frogs) brothers often carried 
him to the beavers’ houses to kill them when they were out of food; 
although his brothers could never kill any of them. 

The rabbit was pleased to hear the frog was such a great hunter, and 
gladly offered to carry the frog to the lodge of the beavers that some 
food could be procured. The frog accepted the offer and was carried to 
the creek bank. The rabbit then built a dam of stakes across the 
stream and below the lodges in order that the beavers should not 
escape, The frog then directed the rabbit to break into the top of the 
lodge so that the frog might get at the beavers to kill them. While 
the rabbit was breaking into the lodge of the beavers, the frog pur: 
posely loosened some of the stakes of the weir below in order to allow 
the beavers to escape, hoping that the rabbit would become angry at 
him for so doing, When the rabbit saw what mischief the frog had 
done, he took the frog and roughly shoved him under the ice into the 
water, This did not harm the frog as it could live under water as well 
as on land, but the rabbit did not know that, so he believed he had 
drowned his brother the frog. The rabbit then returned to his home, 
regretting he had acted so harshly and began to ery for his brother, 
The frog in the meanwhile, killed all of the beavers and tied them 
together on a string, then slowly crawled to the rabbit’s home with 
his burden on his back, The frog crept up to the tent but was 
afraid to enter so he began to play with the door tlap of the tent. to 
make a noise to attract the attention of the rabbit within. Finally he 
cried out to the rabbit, “ Brother, give me a piece of fire for Lam very 
cold.” The rabbit did not recognize the tired, weak voice of his brother 
frog, and, afraid Jest it be some enemy endeavoring to entice him from 
his home, picked up a piece of dead coal which had no fire on it and 
flung it outside. The frog then said, “Brother, there is no fire on this 
piece and Lean not cook my beavers with it.” The rabbit then ran out 
quickly and tenderly carried the frog inside, and immediately the latter 


336 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


began to moan and appear to suffer so much that the rabbit inquired 
what was the matter and asked if the beavers had bitten him, The 
trog said, “No, it was you who gave me such a hard push that you 
have hurt me in the side.’ The rabbit assured the frog that the injury 
was unintentionally caused. The frog then directed the rabbit to pre- 
pare and cook the beavers. The rabbit went out to fetch them but he 
began to eat and didnot stop until they were all devoured, After hav- 
ing finished eating them the rabbit went for a walk. Ere long he 
noticed a huge smoke curling from the farther end of a valley and be. 
coming greatly frightened he exclaimed, “TL have forgotten my crooked 
knife and I must go quickly to get it.” He dashed into his door in a 
terrible state of mind, The frog coolly inquired, **Whatis the matter 
that you are so scared?” The rabbit said, i have seen a great smoke 
at the farther end of the valley through which the creek runs.” The 
frog laughed loudly at his fear and said, “They are deer; my brothers 
often had me to kill them, as they could not kill any, when we had no 
meat.” The rabbit was delighted at that so he offered to carry the 
frog toward the place. The frog directed the rabbit to make a snow- 
shoe for the one foot of the frog. The rabbit soon had it made and 
gave it to his brother. The frog then said, “Carry me up towards the 
smoke.” The rabbit slung the frog on his back and away they went in 
the direction of the deer. The frog then told the rabbit to stand in one 
place and not to move while he (the frog) would work at the deer, and 
when he had finished he would call him up to the place, 

The frog killed all the deer in a very short time, skinned them, and 
stuck the head and neck of one of the deer into the snow so that it 
would be looking toward the place whence the rabbit would come, 
The frog then took the lungs of one of the deer and put it out to freeze. 
The cold turned the lungs white as tallow. The frog shouted for his 
brother rabbit to come quickly, When the rabbit eame bounding near 
he saw the eyes of the deer’s head staring at him in a queer manner; 
he was somuch alarmed that he exclaimed to the frog, “ Brother, hes. vs 
me.” Thefrog smiled and said, “I have killed him; he is dead; come 
on; Lhave a nice piece of fat saved tor you.” (It was the frozen lungs 
of the deer.) So he gave the rabbit a large piece and told him to eat 
it all and quickly, as it was better when frozen and fresh from the 
deer’s back. The rabbit greedily swallowed large portions and did not 
observe the deception. After a time they built a lodge or tent for the 
night. Some few hours after the tent was made the frozen steer lungs 
which the rabbit had eaten began to thaw and it made the rabbit so 
violently ill that he vomited continually the entire night. The frog 
had served him this trick as a punishment for having eaten all of the 
beaver meat two days before. 

The wolverene and the rock.—A wolverene was out walking on the 
hillside and came upon a large rock. The animal inquired of the 
rock, ** Was that you who was walking just now?” The rock replied, 


ed 
he 
ou 
ry 
re: 
he 
WV: 
he 
pe: 
ed 
1a 
ter 
ke 
‘he 
ers 
no 
the 
yW- 
md 
the 
tin 
One 
md 


uid 
tit, 
me, 
YAH 
his 
ear 
1eL; 
SUS 
ome 
gs 
eat 
the 
not 
the 
Ings 
it so 
frog 
the 


the 
the 
lied, 


TURNER, ] FOLKLORE, 337 


“No, Fean not move; hence | cannot walk.” The wolverene retorted 
that he had seen it walking, The rock quickly informed the wolverene 
that he uttered a falsehood, The wolverene remarked, “You need not 
speak in that manner for T have seen you walking.” The wolverene 
ran off a little distance and taunted the rock, challenging it to cateh 
him, The wolverene then approached the rock and having struck it 
with his paw, said, “See if you can cateh me” The rock answered, 
“1 can not run but [ean roll.” The wolverene began to laugh and 
said, “That is what [ want.” The wolverene ran away and the rock 
rolled after him, keeping just at his heels, The animal tinally began 
to tire and commenced to jump over sticks and stones until at last the 
rock was touching his heels, Atlast the wolverene tripped over a stick 
and fell, The rock rolled over on him and ceased to move when it 
came upon the hind parts of the wolverene, The animal screamed, “Get 
off, go away, you are hurting me; you are breaking my bones.” The 
rock remained motionless and replied, “You tormented me and had 
me run after you, so now [ shall not stir until some one takes me off” 

The wolverene replied, “TL have many brothers and [ shall call them,” 
Hecalled to the wolves and the foxes to come and remove the rock, 
These animals soon came up to where the rock was lying on the 
wolverene and they asked him, “How came you to get under the rock 2” 
The wolverene replied, “1T challenged the rock to cateh me and it 
rolled on me.” The wolves and foxes then told him that it served him 
right to be under the rock, They endeavored, after a time, to dis- 
place the rock but could not move it in the least. The wolverene then 
said, “Well, if you can not get me out FE shall call my other brother, 
the lightning and thunder.¥ So he began to call for the lightning 
to come to his aid. In a few moments a huge dark cloud came rush- 
ing from the southwest, and as it hurried up it made so much noise 
that it frightened the wolves and foxes, but they asked the lightning 
to take off the coat of the wolverene but not to harm his flesh, They 
then ran away. The lightning darted back to gather force and struck 
the rock, knocking it into small pieces and also completely stripped 
the skin from the back of the wolverene, tearing the skin into small 
pieces, The wolverene stood naked, but soon began to pick up the 
pieces of his coat and told the lightning, “ You need not have torn my 
coat when you had only the rock to strike. ” 

The wolverene gathered up his pieces of coat and said he would go 
to his sister, the frog, to have her sew them together, He repaired to 
the swamp where his sister dwelt and asked her to sew them, She 
did so. The wolverene took it up and told her she had not put it 
together properly and struck her on the head and knocked her flying 
into the water. Ho took up the coat and went to his younger sister, 
the mouse. He direeted her to sew his coat as it should be done, The 
mouse began to sew the pieces together and when it was done the 
wolverene carefully examined every seam and said, “You have sewed 

11 ETH——22 


338 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


it very well; you will live in the tall green grass in the summer and in 
grass houses in the winter,” The wolverene put on his coat and went 
away, 

Creation of people by the wolverene and the muskrat.—As w wolverene 
was wandering along the bank of a river he saw a muskrat swimming 
in the edge of the water, He accosted the latter animal with the in- 
quiry, "Who are you? Are you a man ora woman?? The muskrat 
answered, “Lam a woman.” The wolverene informed her that he 
would take her for a wife. The muskrat replied, “1 live in the water; 
how can | be your wife?” The wolverene told her that she could live 
on the land as well as in the water, The muskrat went up on the bank 
to where the wolverene was standing. They selected a place and 
she began to prepare a home for them, They ate their suppers and 
itired, Soon after a child was born, The wolverene informed his 
wife that it would be a white man and father of all the white people, 
When this child was born it made a natural exit, In due time asecond 
child was born which the wolverene decreed should be an Indian and 
the father of their kind, This child was born trom its mother’s mouth. 
Atter a time a third child was born, and the wolverene announced it to 
be an Eskimo and father of its kind. This child was born ab ano, In 
the natural course ot events a fourth child was born, and the wolverene 
decided it to be an Lroquois and father of its kind. This child was 
born from its mother’s nose. After a time a fifth child was born and 
the wolverene decreed it should be a Negro and father of its kind, This 
child was born from its mother’s ears. These children remained with 
their parents until they grew up. Their mother then called them to- 
gether and announced to them that they must separate, She sent 
them to different places of the land, and, in parting, directed them to 
vo to the white men whenever they were in need of anything, as the 
whites would have everything ready for them, 

Origin of the whitish spot on the throat of the marten —A man had a 
wife whom a marten fell in love with and endeavored to possess, 
Whenever the man would go away from his home the marten would 
enter, sit by the woman's side, and endeavor to entice her to leave her 
husband and go to live with him. One day the man returned unex- 
pectedly and caught the marten sitting by the side of his wite, The 
marten ran out. The man inquired of his wite what the marten wanted 
there, The woman replied that the marten was striving to induce her 
to desert him and become his own wife. 

The next time the man went off he told his wife to fill a kettle with 
water and put it on the fire to boil, The man went outside and 
secreted himself near the house. He soon saw the marten go into the 
house. 

The man stole quietly to the door of the house and listened to the 
marten, which was talking to his wife. The man sprang into the house 
and said: “Marten, what are you doing here, what are you trying to 


TURNER, | FOLKLORE, BSD 


do?” ‘The man seized the kettle of hot water and dashed it on the 
breast of the animal, The marten began to serateh his burning bosom 
and ran out into the woods; and because he was so severely hurt he 
now keeps in the densest forests, away from the sight of man. 

The Indian and his beaver wifee—One day an indian was hunting 
along the bank of a stream and in the distance saw a beaver’s louse, 
In a moment he perceived a beaver swimming toward him, Tle drew 
up and was onthe point of shooting it when the animal exclaimed, 
Do not shoot, [have something to say to you.” The Indian inquired, 
“What is it you have to say?” The beaver asked him, + Would you 
have me for a wife?” The Indian replied, “1 can not live in the water 
with you.” The beaver answered, “ You will not know you are living 
in the water, if you will follow me.” The Indian further remarked that 
he could not live on willows and other woods like a beaver, The beaver 
assured him that when eating them he would not think them to be 
willows, She added, “Ll have a nice house to live in.” The man ve 
plied, “My brother will be looking for me if Tcome in and he will not 
know where Lam, The beaver directed the man to take off his cloth 
ing and leave them on the bank and to follow her, ‘The Indian did as 
he was instrueted, As he was wading through the water he did not 
feel the water touching him; so they presently began to swim and soon 
reached the home of the beaver. The beaver told him as she pointed 
ahead, “There is my home, and you will tind it as good and comfort 
able as your own tent.” They both entered and she soon set before 
him some tood which he did not recognize as willow bark, After they 
had slept two nights his brother became alarmed and went to seareh 
for him, and soon found his track. In tollowing it up his brother came 
to where he had left his clothing on the bank of the stream, 

The brother was distressed at finding such things, so went sorrow 
fully back to the tent thinking that his brother had been drowned, and 
so told the other Indians when he arrived, With a heavy heart) he 
went to bed and in the morning he awakened and told his wite that he 
had dreamed his brother was living with a beaver, He told his wite 
to make some new clothing tor the lost brother as he would go and 
seek the haunts of the beavers to discover his brother. The man occu 
pied himself in making a pair of snowshoes, while the wite prepared 
the clothing. The next day she had the clothing done and he directed 
her to make them into small bundle as he would start on the seareh 
early the next morning, Other young men desired to accompany him 
on the search, but were advised to remain at home as their presence 
would prevent him from reaching the beaver’s retreat. Early in the 
morning he started off, taking the clothes and snowshoes with him, 
Atter some time he found the place where the beaver ad her house 
and in which he suspected his brother to be living, Tle went to work 
to make a dam across the stream so as to decrease the depth of water 
around the beaver’s house. The wite had borne two children to the 


340 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


husband by this time, and when the father had seen the water going 
trom their house he told the children: “Your uncle is coming and he 
is certain to kill you.” The water had soon gone down sutticiently to 
enable the man te cross the stream to where the house was situated. 

On arriving there he began pounding at the mud walls. The father 
told the children to go out or else the house would fall on them, The 
man outside quickly killed the two young ones. The wife knew she 
would soon be killed also, and atter they had heard the deathblows 
given to their children she said to her husband, “If you are sorry that 
IT am killed and ever want to see me again, keep the right hand and 
arm of my body; take off the skin and keep it about you.” In a few 
minutes the brother had begun again to tear out the sides of the lodge, 
The husband told her to go out, and that his love for her would make 
him keep her right hand, She then went out and was quickly killed 
with a stick. When this was done and the husband had heard it all 
he was very sorry for lus wife, Again the man began to destroy the 
rest of the house and soon had a large hole in the wall of one side, The 
husband then said to him, “What are you doing?) Youware making me 
very cold.” The brother replied, “TI have brought some warm clothing 
for you and you will not feel cold.” “Throw them in,” said the hus- 
band, “for TE am freezing.” He put on the clothes, and while he was 
doing it the brother noticed the hairs which had grown on the other's 
vack, but said nothing about it. The husband then satin his house 


until the other was near freezing to death, The brother then said to 


9 


him, Come with me; you ean not stay here.” The husband demanded, 
as a condition of returning, that the brother should never say anything 
to him to riake him angry if he went back, The brother promised 
him not to do so. They then started to return, the brother taking the 
bodies of the children and mother on his back, the husband walking 
ahead. They soon arrived at the home of their people. The brother 
threw dowa the beavers and directed his wife to skin them. The hus 
band of the Beaver asked for the right hand and arm of the beaver 
who had bo +. his wife. It was given to him. He got one of the other 
women to skin it, and told her to dry the skin and return it to him. 
Three nights after their return to their people a great many beavers 
were killed and a lerge kettle full of flesh was boiled for food. The 
people pressed the runaway brother to eat of the tlesh of the beavers, 
He informed them that if it was the flesh of a female beaver he would 
not eat it. They told him that the tlesh of the male beavers was all tin 
ished long ago. They foreed him to eat a large piece of meat, and when 
he had swallowed it they gave him more of it. The second piece was 
no sooner down is throat than a large river gushed from his. side. 
The Indian jumped into the river, while the rest ran away in terror 
and, as these latter looked down the river, they saw the man swimming 
by the side of his wife who had been a beaver. 

The venturesome haree—A hare, which had lost his parents, lived 


Sek keen) SiS 


eats 


TORNER.] FOLKLORE. 341 


with his grandmother. One day, feeling very hungry, for they were 
extremely poor, he asked his grandmother if he could set a net to 
cateh fish. The old woman laughed at the idea of a hare catching 
fish, but to humor him, she consented, for she was indulgent to him 
because he wis her only charge and looked forward to the time when 
he should be abie to support her by his own exertions, and not to rely 
on the scanty supplies which she was able to obtain. These were very 
meager, as she was infirm, and dreaded exposure. She then told him 
to go and set the net, but added that she had no fire to cook them 
with, even if he should cateh any. The hare promised to procure fire 
if he caught the fish. He went to set the net in a lake where he knew 
fish to be plentiful. The next morning he went to the net and found 
it to be so full of fish that he was unable to take it up. He lifted one 
end and saw there was a fish in every mesh of the net, Heshook 
out some of the fish and then drew out the net. Part of the fish were 
buried, and a large load taken home. He put the fish down 
outside of the tent, and went in. He told the old woman to clean the 
fish and that he would go across the river to the Indians’ tent and get 
the fire with which to cook them, The old) woman was speechless at 
such proposed rashness, but as he had been able to catch so many fish 
she refrained remarking on his contemplated project of obtaining fire in 
the face of such danger, While the old woman was cleaning the tish he 
went back after the net whieh he had put out to dry on the shore of the 
lake. 

He folded itup, placed it under his arm, and ran to the edge of the 
river which was far too wide to jump over, Tle used his cunning and 
assembled a number of whales. These animals came putting up the 
stream in obedience to his command, fle ordered them to arrange 
themselves side by side across the stream so that he could walk across 
on their backs. He most dreaded the Indians, but jumped into the 
water to wet his fur, This being done he sprang from one whale to 
another until he was safe on the opposite shore, He then laid down in 
the sand and bade the whales to disperse. Some Indian children soon 
came playing along the sandy bank and saw the hare lying there. 
One of the children picked up the hare and started home with it. 
When the boy arrived and told how he had obtained the hare he was 
directed to put it in the iron tent (kettle) where there was a bright tire 
crackling, 

The child put down the hare, upon which an old man told the boy to 
kill the hare. The hare was terribly frightened, but opened a part of 
one eye toascertain whether there was any place of exit beside the door. 
In the top of the tent he observed a large round hole. He then said 
to himself; «LE wish a spark of tire would fall on my net.” lustantly 
the brands rolled and a great spark fell on the net and began to burn 
it. The hare was afraid of the tire, so he sprang out of the hole in the 
apex of the tent. The Indians saw they had been outwitted by a hare, 


342 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO. 


and began to shout and pursue the animal, which attained such speed 
that when he came to the bank of the river he had not time to recall the 
whales. He gave an extraordinary Jeap and cleared the entire expanse 
of the water. He examined the net and found the fire smouldering. 
On arrival at his own home he said to his grandmother: “Did I not 
tell you T would get the tire?” The old woman ventured to inauire 
how he had crossed the river. He coolly informed her that he had 
jumped across, 

The spirit guiding a child left by its parents—An Indian and his 
wife had but one child, whieh was so infested with vermin that when 
the parents contemplated going to the tents of some distant friends 
the father advised the mother to leave the child behind. The next 
morning after the mother had taken down the tent the little boy asked 
her * Mother, are you not going to put on my moccasins?” the mother 
replied, «LT shall put them on after [have put on my snow-shoes.” The 
little boy said, “Surely yeu are not going to leave me!” She said, ‘*No;” 
but took Lofd of her sled and started off. The little boy cried out, 
“Mother, you are lee ving me,” and endeavored to overtake her in’ his 
bare feet; but the mother soon was out of sight. The little boy began 
to cry and retraced his steps to the tent place. There he cried until 
the spirit of a dead man came to him and asked, “Where is your 
mother?” The boy replied, “She has gone away and left me”) “& Why 
cid she leave you?” asked the old man. “Because I was so covered 
with lice.” replied the boy. The spirit said it would remove all of the 
tice but three. So it began to pick them off. After this was done the 
spiritasked, «© Where did your mother go?” The boy pointed out her 
track, The spirit ther said to the boy, * Would you like to go to your 
mother?” The boy answered, © Yes.” The spirit put the boy on his back 
and started in the path made by the sled of his mother, After a while 
they came toa tree and in looking at it the boy saw a poreupine sitting 
among the branches, The boy greatly desired to have the animal. 
So he said, “Grandfather, Pwish you would killthe porcupine.” The 
Jld nei answered, it will make too much smoke for me to kill it.” 
After a time they came across a hare whieh the boy again desired te 
have. To this the man assented. So he put the boy down in the snow 
and soon caught the hare and killed it. It was now becoming dark, 
se they made their camping place for the night. The spirit gave the 
boy the harecand told him to cook it. After the meat was cooked the 
boy asked the old man what parts of the animal he preferred. The 
old man said “Give me the fungs and kidneys.” The boy gave lai 
those parts and consumed the remainder himself. They laid down 
to sleep and in the morning they again started on the sled track. 
About noon they came to the tents of the Indians, and among them 
vos the tent of the father and mother of the little boy. The spirit 
placed) the boy down on the outside near the door of the mother’s tent 
and told hin to goin, The boy entered and saw his father and mother 


TURNER. | FOLKLORE, 3438 


sitting near the fire. The mother in astonishment said, “Husband, is 
this not our little boy whom we deserted at our latecamp?” = The 
husband asked the boy, “Who brought you here?” The little boy an- 
swered, “My grandfather.” The mother inquired, ‘Who is your grand- 
inther?” The father asked, “ Where is he now?” The boy replied, * He 
is sitting outside.” The father asked his wife to look outside and see 
if any one was there, The woman did so and informed him that “1 
see some one sitting there, but I do not know who it is.” The spirit re- 
plied, You should call me somebody when you are no one to leave your 
child to perish.” The husband directed his wife to invite the old man 
into the tent. 

The spirit declined to enter, The father then asked the son to tell 
him to comein. The boy went out and conducted the old man within 
the tent. The latter seated himself across the fire (this is intended to 
mean opposite the door but on the other side of the fire), They slept 
in the tent that night, and when the little boy awakened he found all the 
people preparing to snare deer, The people asked the little boy to ac- 
company them. He did so, and when he was ready to start he asked 
the old man what part of the deer he should bring home for him. The 
old man replied that he would enjoy the lungs better than any other 
part. The boy promised to bring a quantity for him on his return in 
theeevening. Toward evening the boy returned loaded with choice 
bits for the old man who had conducted him to his father and mother, 
While outside of the tent he called te the old) man, saying that 
he had brought home some food for him. Hearing no reply he entered 
the tent, and not seeing the man he inquired of his mother where 
the person was. The mother announced that he had departed, but did 
not know where he had gone, It was late, but the boy resolved to rise 
early and follow his track. Te was up at daybreak, and finding the 
track followed it until he observed the spirit crossing a large lake 
which was frozen over. The boy cried out to the old man to wait for 
him. The spirit awaited his approach. The boy said to him, * Why 
did you go away when Thad promised you some choice tood 7 The 
spirit replied that. it could not dwell among living people, as it was 
only a spirit and that it was returning to its abode. The old man ad 
vised the boy to return to his people, The boy did so, but the next 
morning the desire to see the good old man seized the boy, and again 
he started to find him, The other people then tied the boy to a tree 
and he soon forgot his benefactor, 

Fate of tico Indian men.—Two Indian men who had gone off for the 
fall and winter’s hunt were living by themselves, They were very te 
successful in procuring furs and food, so that when the depths of win- 
ter had approached and the cold was intense they resolved to seek the 
camp of their friends, They were providec. with nothing but bows 
and arrows. The next morning they started off and tramped all day 
without seeing a living thing, They made their camp and lamented 


344 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


they had no tood, They tinally prepared to sleep, when one of them 
remarked to the other, “To-night I shall dream of porcupines.” They 
slept, and in the morning the one related that he had seen a lot of 
poreupines around the tent while he was dreaming. They determined 
to proceed, but the one finally thought if they would stop there for the 
day and succeeding night they would have all the poreupine meat they 
would want. They remained there that day, and in the middle of the 
night they were aroused by a noise which proved to be poreupines 
gnawing the bark from the tent poles. The one man said, “Slip out 
and kill some with a stick ;” but added, “Go out in your bare feet.” 
He went out barefooted and killed two or three, and dashed back into 
the tent with his feet nearly frozen, He stuck his feet into the hot 
ashes and told the other man to bring in the animals. The ether man 
did so, and began to prepare the flesh for cooking. They ate one of 
the porcupines, and by daylight were ready to begin their journey, 
They went idly along, shooting their arrows in sport at anything they 
could see. They continued this amusement until near sunset, when 
one exclaimed, “My arrow has struck something; see, it is moving.” 
The other replied, “What can it be, when it is sticking only in the 
snow?” The other said he would try and tind out what it was, He 
cautiously examined, and found when he began to dig it out that the 
arrow had entered the den of a bear, So they scratched away the 
show and soon saw a long, black hair sticking out of the hole. He 
jumped back and exclaimed, “It is some sort of animal with black 
hair.” The other replied, “Let us try and get it out. It may be good 
toeat.” They tinally drove the bear out and soon killed it. They be- 
gan toskin it, which was soon done, One of the men then said, “It 
is too big and ugly to eat; let us leave it.” The other, however, cut 
off a large piece of fat and put it on the sled. They then prepared 
theircamp, and when morning came they started off and traveled all 
day. When night came they made their camp and soon had a huge 
fire burning, One of the men hung the piece of fat over the tire and 
the oil soon dripped into the fire. [It created such a nice smell that 
one of them said, * Let us taste the fat; it may be good to eat.” They 
tasted it and found it so good that they rated each other soundly for 
being so foolish as to leave such nice flesh so far behind them. They 
resolved to return for it. So they returned for the carcass of the bear, 
which was tar behind them, and as it had tasted so good they de- 
termined to lose no time in starting, They went immediately, although 
it was now dark and very cold, They came to the place where it had 
been left and discovered that the wolves and foxes had eaten all the 
meat, leaving nothing but the bones, They were very angry, and be- 
gan to lay the blame each on the other for having left it. They re- 
gretted they had left such meat for wolves and = foxes, They de- 
termined to proceed to where they had camped the third time, On 
the way they became very thirsty, and, stopping at a creek to drink, 


TURNER. | FOLKLORE. 345 


they drank so long that their lips froze to the ice of the water hole, 
and they miserably perished by freezing. 

The starving wolverene.—On the approach of winter a wolverene, 
which had been so idle during the summer that he had failed, to store 
up a supply of provisions for himself, his wife, and children, began to 
feel the pangs of hunger. The cold days and snowstorms were now at 
hand. The father one day told his wife that he would go and try to 
discover the place where his brothers, the wolves, were passing the 
winter and from them he would endeavor to procure some food, The 
wifedesired him not to remain away long, else the children would starve 
to death. He assured her that he would be gone no longer than four 
days, and made preparations to start early on the succeeding morning. 
In the morning he started and continued his journey until near night- 
fall, when he came to the bank ofa river. On looking at the ice which 
covered its surface he descried a pack of wolves ascending the river at 
arapid rate. Behind these were four others, which were running ata 
leisurely gait. He soon overtook the latter group, and was perceived 
by one of these old wolves, which remarked to the others, ‘*There is our 
brother, the wolverene, coming.” The animal soon joined the wolves 
and told them that he was starving, and asked for food, The wolves re- 
plied that they had none, but that the wolves in advance were on the 
track of some deer and would soon have some, The wolverene inquired 
where they would camp for the night. They told him to continue with 
them on the track of the others until they came to a mark on the river 
bank. The wolves, accompanied by the wolverene, continued their way 
until one of the old wolves called attention to the sign on the bank and 
proposed they should go up to it and await the return of the others, 
They went upand began to gather green twigs to make a clean tloor 
in the bottom of the tent. This was no sooner done than the young 
woives (the hunters) returned and began to put up the tent poles. The 
old wolves said they themselves would soon have the tent covering in 
place. The wolverene was astonished at what he saw and wondered 
whence they would) procure the tenting and = tire. The old wolves 
laughed as they observed his curiosity, and one of them remarked, 
“Our brother wonders where you will get the tent cover from.” The 
wolverene replied, “1 did uot say that; [only said my brothers will 
soon have up a nice and comtortable tent for me.” The wolves then 
sent him off to collect some dry brush with which to make a fire. 
When he returned the tent was already on the poles, He stood outside 
holding the brushin hisarms. One of the wolves told him to bring the 
wood inside the tent. Heentered and gave the brush to one of the young 
wolves (the leader of the hunters), The leader placed the brush in posi- 
tion to create a good fire, and while that was being done the wolverene 
wondered how they would start the tire. One of the old wolves re- 
marked, “Our brother wonders where and how you will get the fire.” 
He made no reply, as one of the young wolves (the leader) took up akettle 


346 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


and went outside to get some snow to melt for water, and returned with 
it full of snow. He set the kettle down and sprang quickly over the 
pile of brush and it started into a blaze in an instant. It was now 
an opportunity for the wolverene to wonder whence should come the 
supply of meat to boil. One of the old wolves said, “Our brother 
wonders where you will get some meat to cook for supper.” One of 
the young wolves went out and brought in a brisket of deers meat. 
As soon as the wolverene saw the meat he asserted that he did not 
wonder about the source of the supply of meat, but that he only wished 
there was some meat ready for cooking. The meat was cut up and 
placed in the kettle and when it was ready it was served out, The 
choicest portions were selected for the wolverene and placed betore 
him with the injunetion to eat all of it. He endeavored to consume it, 
but the quantity was too great even for him, He, having finished his 
meal, was about to place the remainder on one of the poles when a 
wolf, observing his action, told him not to place it there or else the 
meat would change into bark. He then laid it down on a piece of 
clean brushwood and when he suspected the eyes of the wolves were 
not turned toward him he stealthily inserted the portion of meat be: 
tween the tenting and the pole. The wolves saw his action and in a 
few minutes the wolverene became very sleepy and soon retired, One 
of the wolves carefully displaced the meat from the pole, where the 
wolverene had put it, and thrust in its stead a piece of bark. In the 
morning when the wolverene awakened his first thought was of the 
remnant of food. He veached up for it and found nothing but the piece 
of bark. The wolves were on the alert and one of them said, ‘Did I 
not tell you it would change into bark if you put the meat in that 
place?” The wolverene hung his head and answered, ‘ Yes,” and 
again laid down to sleep. By the time he awakened the wolves had a 
second kettle of meat cooked. They desired the wolverene to arise 
and eat his breakfast. The leader told him to hasten with his meal, as 
he had discovered some fresh deer tracks. The wolverene thought he 
would watch how they broke camp and see where they put the tent- 
ings. He went offa tew steps and while his back was turned the tent 
disappeared and he failed to discover where it was secreted. The juni- 
mals then started off, the young ones taking the lead while the four 
old ones and the wolverene followed leisurely behind. After they had 
crossed the river the wolverene began to wonder where they would 
halt for the night. One of the old wolves told him they must follow 
the track of the leader and they would come to the sign made for the 
site of the camp. They continued for the entire day, but just before 
sundown they came across the bones of a freshly killed deer from whieh 
every vestige of meat had been removed, apparently eaten by wolves; 
so the wolverene thought he would stand a poor chance of getting a 
supper if that was the way they were going to act. The party con 
tinued on the track and soon came upon the mark for the tent. site. 


TURNER. | FOLKLORE, 347 


The wolverene was glad to rest, but sat down and began to look ahead 
in the distance for the returning hunters, After a few minutes he 
looked around and saw the tent standing there, The wolves then sent 
the wolverene for dry brush, while they gathered green branches for 
the tent floor, He brought so small a quantity that it would not 
suflice, The young wolves returned at the same time and they 
directed him to again procure some brush, When he returned he 
found they had stripped all the fat off of the deer meat, al- 
though, he had not seen them bring any when they returned, and 
placed it around the inside edges of the tent, The brush was put 
down and again the leader jumped over it and a bright, crackling tire 
started up. The wolves then said to themselves in a low tone of voice: 
“Let us go outside and see what our brother will do when he is left 
alone with the fat.” They went outside and immediately the wolverene 
selected the nicest and largest piece of tat and began to swallow it 
The wolves at the same moment inquired of him: “Brother, are there 
any holes in the tent cover?” His mouth was so full, in his haste to 
swallow the fat, that it nearly choked him, They repeated their in- 
quiry and the wolverene gasped out the answer, “yes.” The wolves 
then said: “Let us go inside.” The wolverene sprang away from the 
fat and sat down by the fire. They put ona large kettle of meat and 
soon had their supper ready. They gave the wolverene all the fattest 
portions they could find, Having eaten so much of the frozen fat he 
became. so violently ill, when the hot food melted the cold fat in his 
stomach, that he vomited a long time, and was so weak that he became 
chilly and shivered so much that he could not sleep. He asked for a 
blanket, but one of the wolves placed his own bushy tail on the body 
of the wolverene to keep him warm, The wolverene shook it off and 
exclaimed: “1 do not want your foui-smelling tail for a blanket.” So 
the wolf gave} 1a nice and. soft skin blanket to sleep under. When 
he awakened ie announced his intention to retu. a to his family, as they 
would soon be dead from hunger, One of the old wolves directed the 
younger ones to make up a sledload of meat for the wolverene to take 
home with him. The wolf did so, but made the load so large and long 
that the wolverene could not see the rear end of the sled. When it 
was ready they told him of it, and, as he was about to start. he requested 
they would give him some tire, as he could not make any without. 
The leader asked how many nights he would be on the journey home- 
ward. He answered, three nights. The wolf told him to lie down in 
the snow. [le did so and the wolf jumped over his body three times, 
but strietly enjoined upon him not to look back at the sled as he was 
going along. The wolverene promised he would comply with his in- 
structions. After the animal had started and got some little distance 
from the camp of the wolves he thought of the peculiarly strange things 
he had witnessed while among those animals; and, to test himself, he 
concluded to try the method of making a tire, He stopped, eathered 


848 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


a quantity of dry brush and placed it as he had seen the wolves arrange 
it. He then sprang over it and a huge Maze gave evidence of the 
power within him, Ile was so astonished that he resolved to cump 
there, He melted some snow and drank the water and retired to rest, 
without having looked at the sled. The next morning he started carly 
and made his camp before sunset, as he was very tired. He gathered 
some brush and made the tire by jumping over the pile of fuel. His 
supper was only some melted snow which he drank and retired, Inthe 
merning he started to continue his journey homeward and still had not 
seen the sled which he was dragging, As he was ready to start he 
was so contident of his ability to create fire that he threw away his 
flint and steel. He traveled all day until toward sunset he was so 
fatigued that he concluded to make his camp for the night, He was so 
elated with his newly acquired faculty of making fire that he eagerly 
gathered a great quantity of dried twigs and branches, until a large 
heap was before him, He jumped over it, and turned round to see 
the tlames creep up and watch the sparks fly. There was not a sign of 
a blaze or a spark to meet his gaze. He again jumped over it, and 
again, until he was so exhausted that he could not clear the top of 
the pile, and at last he knoeked the top of it over, as his failing 
strength did not enable him to avoid it. The only thing left for him 
to do was to return for his tlint and steel, which he had so exultingly 
thrown aside, The animal berated himself soundly for having done 
such a silly trick, Not having seen the sled he was surprised to tind 
how quickly he regained the site of the camp of the previous night, 
Having recovered his tlint and steel he returned, and soon had a tire 
started; but it was now near daylight. He resolved to start on his 
journey as soon as he had some water melted for a drink, He began 
to think how quickly he had made the trip for his tlint and steel, 
and concluded that the great length of the sled had been purposely 
nade to cause him unnecessary fatigue, as it could not be so very 
heavy, or else that he must be extraordinarily strong. He determined 
to examine it, and did so. He could not see the farther end of the 
load. He tlattered himself that he was so very strong, and concluded 
to continue his journey. Heattempted to start the sled, and found 
he could not move it in the least. He upbraided himself for permitting 
his curiosity to get the better of his sense. He removed a portion of 
dry meat and a bundle of fat, and made them into a load to carry on 
his back. He placed the remainder on a stage, and was about ready 
to start homeward to his wife and children, whom he believed must be 
by this time nearly dead trom starvation, 

He put the pack of meat on his back and set out. That evening he 
awrived at his home, and as soon as his wife heard him her heart was 
glad. Tle entered and informed the family that he had brought home 
w quantity of meat and fat, and had procured so much as to be unable 
to carry it all at once, His wife begged him to feteh her a piece of 


TURNER. | FOLKLORE. 849 


meat, as she was nearly starved. He went out and brought in a large 
piece of fat. The wife devoured such a quantity of it that she became 
very ill, and suffered all through the night. fn the morning the wol- 
verene stated he would return for the meat which he had stqred away 
the previous day. He started in the early morning, so as to return by 
daylight. 

As soon as the wolverene looked upon the sled loaded with meat 
the spell was broken, One of the old wolves ordered the young wolves 
to go and destroy the meat and fat which the wolverene had left on 
the stage. They eagerly set out on the track of the sled, and soon 
saw the staging where the wolverene had stored the remainder of the 
food. When they came up to it they fell to and devoured all but a few 
scraps of it. The wolves then went away, and in a few hours the wol- 
verene returned, He saw whe! had happened and exclaimed : “ My 
brothers have ruined me! My brothers have ruined me!” He knew it 
had been done because he bad looked back at the sled, although 
strictly enjoined upon not to do so under any circumstance, He gath- 
ered up the fragments which the wolves had left and returned home. 
Wher he arrived there he informed his wife that his brothers had 
yuined him, because they had eaten all the meat which he had stored 
away While out hunting. 

The starving Indians.—A band of Indians, who had neglected to store 
away a supply of food fora time of scarcity, were upon the point of 
starvation. An old man who lived at a little distance from the eamp- 
ing place of the band, had wisdom to lay by a good store of dry meat 
and a number of cakes of fat, so that he had an abundance while the 
other improvident people were nearly fumished, They applied to him, 
begging for food, but they were refused the least morsel, One day, 
however, an old man came to him asking for food for his children, The 
man gave him a small piece of meat. When the man’s children ate 
this food they began to cry for more. The mother told her little boy to 
stop erying. He persisted in his clamor until his mother asked him: 
“Why do you not go to the old U/ sets kwa né po?” (the name means 
One whose neck wrinkles into folds when he sits down). This old 
man heard the mother tell her child to go to him, and muttered to him- 
self, “That is just what [ want.” 

The little boy went to the old man’s tent door, and lifting aside the 
Hlap,said: “1 want tocome in.” He went inand the old man addressed 
the boy by hisown name, saying: Whatdoyou want. 1 sets kwa ne po?” 
in such a kindly voice that the boy felt assured, The boy said: ‘1 
am very hungry and want some food.” The old man inquired in an 
astonished voice: “Hungry? and your meat falling down from the 
stage?” The old man bade the boy sit down, while he went out to the 
stage and selected some choice portions and brought them into the tent 
and gave them to the boy. The old man then asked the boy if he had 
wsister. The boy said that he had a father, mother, and one sister, 


850 THE HUDSON BAY ESKIMO, 


Atter the boy had finished eating, the old man directed the boy to 
come with him and see the meat stages. They went out and the old 
man said: “Now, go home and tell your father that all of this food will 
belong to you if he will give me his daughter.” The little boy went 
home and repeated what the old man had said. The father signified 
his willingness to give his daughter in marriage to the old man, The 
boy returned to the old man and stated that his father was willing to 
give away his daughter. The old man immediately went out, took some 
meat and fat from the stage, and then cooked three large kettles of foot 
When this was done he selected a suit of clothing for a man and two 
suits for women. He placed the nicer one of the latter near lis own 
seat, and the other two suits directly on the opposite side of the fire. 
place (the place of honor in the tent). He then told the little boy to 
call all the Indians, adding: There is your father’s coat, your mother’s 
dress, and your sister's dress, Tell your parents to sit where they see 
the clothing,” pointing to the clothes intended for them, and the 
sister to sit near the old man, pointing to his own place. The boy ran 
out and apprised the people, together with his own relations, The boy 
returned to the old man’s tent before the guests arrived. The boy's 
father came tirst, and the boy said: “Father, there is your coat.” The 
mother then entered, and the boy said: Mother, there is your dress.” 
The sister then entered, and the boy pomted to the dress, saying: “Sis 
ter, there is your dress,” All the other Indians then came in and seated 
themselves, They took two kettles of meat and broke the fat into 
pieces and feasted until all was consumed, The old man helped his 
wife, her father, mother, and brother to the contents of the other kettle. 
When all the food was finished the old man said to the boy, “U/ séts 
kwa né po, go and set your deer snares.” The old man went with him 
to find a suitable place. They could tind only the tracks of deer made 
several days previously, They, however, set thirty snares and returned 
home. The next morning they all went to the snares and found a deer 
in each one. The people began to skin the deer and soon had a lot of 
meat ready for cooking. They began to feast, and continued until all 
was done. By this time a season of abundance had arrived. 


